
geometric formulas
Formulas for area A, perimeter P, circumference C, volume V:
Rectangle	
Box
A 5 l„	
V 5 l„h
P 5 2l 1 2„	
„
l
h
l
„
Triangle	
Pyramid
A 5 1
2 bh	
V 5 1
3 ha2	
h
b
a
a
h
Circle	
Sphere
A 5 pr2	
V 5 4
3 pr3	
C 5 2pr	
A 5 4pr2
r
r
Cylinder	
Cone
V 5 pr2h	
V 5 1
3 pr2h
h
h
r
r
heron’s formula
Area 5 !s1s 2 a2 1s 2 b2 1s 2 c2
where s 5 a 1 b 1 c
2
exponents and radicals
x mx n 5 x m1n
1 x m2n 5 x mn
1 xy2n 5 x ny n
x1/n 5 !
n x
!
n xy 5 !
n x !
n y
"
m !
n x 5 "
n !
m x 5 !
n
m x
special products
1 x 1 y 2 2 5 x2 1 2xy 1 y2
1 x 2 y 2 2 5 x2 2 2xy 1 y2
1 x 1 y 2 3 5 x3 1 3x2y 1 3xy2 1 y3
1 x 2 y 2 3 5 x3 2 3x2y 1 3xy2 2 y3
FACtORING formulas
x2 2 y2 5 1 x 1 y 2 1 x 2 y 2
x2 1 2xy 1 y2 5 1 x 1 y 2 2
x2 2 2xy 1 y2 5 1 x 2 y 2 2
x3 1 y3 5 1 x 1 y 2 1 x2 2 xy 1 y2 2
x3 2 y3 5 1 x 2 y 2 1 x2 1 xy 1 y2 2
QUADRATIC FORMULA
If ax2 1 bx 1 c 5 0, then
x 5 2b 6 "b2 2 4ac
2a
inequalities and absolute value
If a , b and b , c, then a , c.
If a , b, then a 1 c , b 1 c.
If a , b and c . 0, then ca , cb.
If a , b and c , 0, then ca . cb.
If a . 0, then
0  x 0  5 a    means    x 5 a    or    x 5 2a.
0  x 0  , a    means    2a , x , a.
0  x 0  . a    means    x . a    or    x , 2a.
b
B
C
A
a
c
xm
xn 5 xm2n
x2n 5 1
xn
a x
y b
n
5 xn
yn
xm/n 5 !
n xm 5 1 !
n x2 m
Å
n x
y 5 !
n x
!
n y
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

distance and midpoint formulas
Distance between P11 x1, y1 2  and P21 x2, y2 2 :
d 5 "1x2 2 x12 2 1 1y2 2 y12 2
Midpoint of P1P2:    a x1 1 x2
2
, y1 1 y2
2
b
lines 
Slope of line through 	
m 5 y2 2 y1
x2 2 x1
 
P11 x1, y1 2  and P21 x2, y2 2
Point-slope equation of line 	
y 2 y1 5 m 1 x 2 x1 2
through P11 x1, y1 2  with slope m
Slope-intercept equation of 	
y 5 mx 1 b 
line with slope m and y-intercept b
Two-intercept equation of line	
x
a 1 y
b 5 1
with x-intercept a and y-intercept b
logarithms
y 5 loga x    means    a y 5 x
loga a x 5 x	
a loga x 5 x
loga 1 5 0	
loga a 5 1
log x 5 log10 x	
ln x 5 loge x
loga xy 5 loga x 1 loga y	
logaa}x
y
}b 5 loga x 2 loga y
loga xb 5 b loga x	
logb x 5 loga x
loga b
exponential and logarithmic functions
0
1
y=a˛
0<a<1
0
1
y=a˛
a>1
1
y=loga x
a>1
0
y=loga x
0<a<1
1
0
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
Graphs of Functions
Linear functions:    f1x2 5 mx 1 b
Ï=b
b
x
y
        Ï=mx+b
b
x
y
Power functions:    f1x2 5 x n
Ï=≈
x
y
       
Ï=x£
x
y
Root functions:    f1x2 5 !
n x
Ï=œ∑x
x
y
       
Ï=£œ∑x
x
y
Reciprocal functions:    f1x2 5 1/x n
Ï=1
x
x
y
       
Ï= 1
≈
x
y
Absolute value function	
Greatest integer function
Ï=|x|
x
y
       
Ï=“ x‘
1
1
x
y
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

polar coordinates
x
y
0
r
¨
x
y
P(x, y)
P(r, ¨)
Sums of powers of integers
a
n
k51
1 5 n	
a
n
k51
k 5
n1n 1 12
2
a
n
k51
k2 5
n1n 1 12 12n 1 12
6
	
a
n
k51
k3 5
n21n 1 12 2
4
the derivative
The average rate of change of f between a and b is
 
f1b2 2 f1a2
b 2 a
The derivative of f at a is
 fr1a2 5 lim
xSa 
f1x2 2 f1a2
x 2 a
 fr1a2 5 lim
hS0 
f1a 1 h2 2 f1a2
h
area under the graph of f
The area under the graph of f on the interval 3a, b4  is the 
limit of the sum of the areas of approximating rectangles
A 5 lim
nS` a
n
k51
f1xk2  Dx
where
D x 5 b 2 a
n
xk 5 a 1 k Dx
Complex Numbers
For the complex number z 5 a 1 bi
    the conjugate is z 5 a 2 bi
    the modulus is 0  z 0 5 "a2 1 b2
    the argument is u, where tan u 5 b/a
Re
Im
bi
0
|z|
a+bi
¨
a
Polar form of a complex number
For z 5 a 1 bi, the polar form is
z 5 r1cos u 1 i sin u2
where r 5 0  z 0  is the modulus of z and u is the argument of z
De Moivre’s Theorem
zn 5 3r1cos u 1 i sin u2 4 n 5 rn1cos nu 1 i sin nu2
 !
n z 5 3r1cos u 1 i sin u24 1/n
 5 r1/na cos u 1 2kp
n
1 i sin u 1 2kp
n
b
where k 5 0, 1, 2, . . . , n 2 1
rotation of axes
0
P(x, y)
P(X, Y)
Y
X
ƒ
x
y
Rotation of axes formulas
x 5 X cos f 2 Y sin f       
y 5 X sin f 1 Y cos f
Angle-of-rotation formula for conic sections
To eliminate the xy-term in the equation
Ax2 1 Bxy 1 Cy2 1 Dx 1 Ey 1 F 5 0
rotate the axis by the angle f that satisfies
cot 2f 5 }
A 2
B
 C
}
0
a
b
x⁄
x¤
x‹
xk-1
xk
Îx
f(xk)
x
y
x 5 r cos u
y 5 r sin u
r2 5 x2 1 y2
tan u 5 y
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

seventh edition
Precalculus
mathematics for calculus
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

James Stewart received his MS 
from Stanford University and his PhD 
from the University of Toronto. He did 
research at the University of London 
and was influenced by the famous 
mathematician George Polya at Stan-
ford University. Stewart is Professor 
Emeritus at McMaster University and 
is currently Professor of Mathematics 
at the University of Toronto. His re-
search field is harmonic analysis and 
the connections between mathemat-
ics and music. James Stewart is the 
author of a bestselling calculus text-
book series published by Cengage 
Learning, including Calculus, Calculus: 
Early Transcendentals, and Calculus: 
Concepts and Contexts; a series of pre-
calculus texts; and a series of high-
school mathematics textbooks.
Lothar Redlin grew up on Van-
couver Island, received a Bachelor of 
Science degree from the University of 
Victoria, and received a PhD from  
McMaster University in 1978. He sub-
sequently did research and taught at 
the University of Washington, the 
University of Waterloo, and California 
State University, Long Beach. He is  
currently Professor of Mathematics at 
The Pennsylvania State University, 
Abington Campus. His research field 
is topology.
Saleem Watson received his 
Bachelor of Science degree from  
Andrews University in Michigan. He 
did graduate studies at Dalhousie  
University and McMaster University, 
where he received his PhD in 1978.  
He subsequently did research at the 
Mathematics Institute of the Univer-
sity of Warsaw in Poland. He also 
taught at The Pennsylvania State Uni-
versity. He is currently Professor of 
Mathematics at California State Uni-
versity, Long Beach. His research field 
is functional analysis.
Stewart, Redlin, and Watson have also published College Algebra, Trigonometry, Algebra and Trigonometry, and (with  
Phyllis Panman) College Algebra: Concepts and Contexts.
The cover photograph shows a bridge in Valencia, Spain, de-
signed by the Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava. The bridge 
leads to the Agora Stadium, also designed by Calatrava, which 
was completed in 2009 to host the Valencia Open tennis tourna-
ment. Calatrava has always been very interested in how mathe-
matics can help him realize the buildings he imagines. As a 
young student, he taught himself descriptive geometry from 
books in order to represent three-dimensional objects in two  
dimensions. Trained as both an engineer and an architect, he 
wrote a doctoral thesis in 1981 entitled “On the Foldability of 
Space Frames,” which is filled with mathematics, especially geo-
metric transformations. His strength as an engineer enables him 
to be daring in his architecture.
About the Cover
about the
authors
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SEVENTH edition
Precalculus
mathematics for calculus
James Stewart 
McMaster University and University of Toronto
Lothar Redlin 
The Pennsylvania State University
Saleem Watson 
California State University, Long Beach
With the assistance of Phyllis Panman
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Precalculus: Mathematics for Calculus, 
Seventh Edition
James Stewart, Lothar Redlin, Saleem Watson
Product Director: Richard Stratton
Product Manager: Gary Whalen
Content Developer: Stacy Green
Associate Content Developer: Samantha Lugtu
Product Assistant: Katharine Werring
Media Developer: Lynh Pham
Senior Marketing Manager: Mark Linton
Content Project Manager: Jennifer Risden
Art Director: Vernon Boes
Manufacturing Planner: Rebecca Cross
Production Service: Martha Emry BookCraft
Photo Researcher: Lumina Datamatics Ltd.
Text Researcher: Lumina Datamatics Ltd.
Copy Editor: Barbara Willette
Illustrator: Precision Graphics; Graphic World, 
Inc.
Text Designer: Diane Beasley
Cover Designer: Cheryl Carrington
Cover Image: AWL Images/Masterfile
Compositor: Graphic World, Inc.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at  
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706.
For permission to use material from this text or product,  
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.  
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
© 2016, 2012 Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein 
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means 
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, 
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, 
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014948805
Student Edition:
ISBN: 978-1-305-07175-9
Loose-leaf Edition:
ISBN: 978-1-305-58602-4
Cengage Learning 
20 Channel Center Street 
Boston, MA 02210 
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with 
office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom, 
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at  
www.cengage.com/global.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, 
Ltd.
To learn more about Cengage Learning Solutions, visit www.cengage.com.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred 
online store www.cengagebrain.com.
Printed in the United States of America 
Print Number: 01  Print Year: 2014
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
WCN: 02-200-203

contents
Preface  x
To the Student  xvii
Prologue: Principles of Problem Solving  P1
		
chapter 1	 Fundamentals	
1
	
	
Chapter Overview  1   
	
1.1	
Real Numbers  2
	
1.2	
Exponents and Radicals  13
	
1.3	
Algebraic Expressions  25
	
1.4	
Rational Expressions  36
	
1.5	
Equations  45
	
1.6	
Complex Numbers  59
	
1.7	
Modeling with Equations  65
	
1.8	
Inequalities  81
	
1.9	
The Coordinate Plane; Graphs of Equations; Circles  92
	
1.10	
Lines  106
	
1.11	
Solving Equations and Inequalities Graphically  117
	
1.12	
Modeling Variation  122
	
	
Chapter 1 Review  130
	
	
Chapter 1 Test  137
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Fitting Lines to Data  139
		
chapter 2	 Functions	
147
	
	
Chapter Overview  147
	
2.1	
Functions  148
	
2.2	
Graphs of Functions  159
	
2.3	
Getting Information from the Graph of a Function  170
	
2.4	
Average Rate of Change of a Function  183
	
2.5	
Linear Functions and Models  190
	
2.6	
Transformations of Functions  198
	
2.7	
Combining Functions  210
	
2.8	
One-to-One Functions and Their Inverses  219
	
	
Chapter 2 Review  229
	
	
Chapter 2 Test  235
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Modeling with Functions  237
v
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

vi 
Contents
		
chapter 3	 Polynomial and Rational Functions	
245
	
	
Chapter Overview  245
	
3.1	
Quadratic Functions and Models  246
	
3.2	
Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs  254
	
3.3	
Dividing Polynomials  269
	
3.4	
Real Zeros of Polynomials  275
	
3.5	
Complex Zeros and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  287
	
3.6	
Rational Functions  295
	
3.7	
Polynomial and Rational Inequalities  311
	
	
Chapter 3 Review  317
	
	
Chapter 3 Test  323
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Fitting Polynomial Curves to Data  325
		
chapter 4	 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions	
329
	
	
Chapter Overview  329
	
4.1	
Exponential Functions  330
	
4.2	
The Natural Exponential Function  338
	
4.3	
Logarithmic Functions  344
	
4.4	
Laws of Logarithms  354
	
4.5	
Exponential and Logarithmic Equations  360
	
4.6	
Modeling with Exponential Functions  370
	
4.7	
Logarithmic Scales  381
	
	
Chapter 4 Review  386
	
	
Chapter 4 Test  391
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Fitting Exponential and Power Curves to Data  392
	
	
Cumulative Review Test: Chapters 2, 3, and 4   (Website)
		
chapter 5	 Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach	 401
	
	
Chapter Overview  401
	
5.1	
The Unit Circle  402
	
5.2	
Trigonometric Functions of Real Numbers  409
	
5.3	
Trigonometric Graphs  419
	
5.4	
More Trigonometric Graphs  432
	
5.5	
Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Their Graphs  439
	
5.6	
Modeling Harmonic Motion  445
	
	
Chapter 5 Review  460
	
	
Chapter 5 Test  465
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Fitting Sinusoidal Curves to Data  466
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Contents  vii
		
chapter 6	 Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle  
Approach	
471
	
	
Chapter Overview  471
	
6.1	
Angle Measure  472
	
6.2	
Trigonometry of Right Triangles  482
	
6.3	
Trigonometric Functions of Angles  491
	
6.4	
Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Right Triangles  501
	
6.5	
The Law of Sines  508
	
6.6	
The Law of Cosines  516
	
	
Chapter 6 Review  524
	
	
Chapter 6 Test  531
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Surveying  533
		
chapter 7	 Analytic Trigonometry	
537
	
	
Chapter Overview  537
	
7.1	
Trigonometric Identities  538
	
7.2	
Addition and Subtraction Formulas  545
	
7.3	
Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Product-Sum Formulas  553
	
7.4	
Basic Trigonometric Equations  564
	
7.5	
More Trigonometric Equations  570
	
	
Chapter 7 Review  576
	
	
Chapter 7 Test  580
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Traveling and Standing Waves  581
	
	
Cumulative Review Test: Chapters 5, 6, and 7   (Website)
		
chapter 8	 Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations	
587
	
	
Chapter Overview  587
	
8.1	
Polar Coordinates  588
	
8.2	
Graphs of Polar Equations  594
	
8.3	
Polar Form of Complex Numbers; De Moivre’s Theorem  602
	
8.4	
Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  611
	
	
Chapter 8 Review  620
	
	
Chapter 8 Test  624
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  The Path of a Projectile  625
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

viii 
Contents
		
chapter 9	 Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions	
629
	
	
Chapter Overview  629
	
9.1	
Vectors in Two Dimensions  630
	
9.2	
The Dot Product  639
	
9.3	
Three-Dimensional Coordinate Geometry  647
	
9.4	
Vectors in Three Dimensions  653
	
9.5	
The Cross Product  659
	
9.6	
Equations of Lines and Planes  666
	
	
Chapter 9 Review  670	
	
	
Chapter 9 Test  675	
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Vector Fields  676
	
	
Cumulative Review Test: Chapters 8 and 9   (Website)
		
chapter 10	 Systems of Equations and Inequalities	
679
	
	
Chapter Overview  679
	
10.1	
Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables  680
	
10.2	
Systems of Linear Equations in Several Variables  690
	
10.3	
Matrices and Systems of Linear Equations  699
	
10.4	
The Algebra of Matrices  712
	
10.5	
Inverses of Matrices and Matrix Equations  724
	
10.6	
Determinants and Cramer’s Rule  734
	
10.7	
Partial Fractions  745
	
10.8	
Systems of Nonlinear Equations  751
	
10.9	
Systems of Inequalities  756
	
	
Chapter 10 Review  766
	
	
Chapter 10 Test  773
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Linear Programming  775
		
chapter 11	 Conic Sections	
781
	
	
Chapter Overview  781
	
11.1	
Parabolas  782
	
11.2	
Ellipses  790
	
11.3	
Hyperbolas  799
	
11.4	
Shifted Conics  807
	
11.5	
Rotation of Axes  816
	
11.6	
Polar Equations of Conics  824
	
	
Chapter 11 Review  831
	
	
Chapter 11 Test  835
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Conics in Architecture  836
	
	
Cumulative Review Test: Chapters 10 and 11   (Website)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Contents  ix
		
chapter 12	 Sequences and Series	
841
	
	
Chapter Overview  841
	
12.1	
Sequences and Summation Notation  842
	
12.2	
Arithmetic Sequences  853
	
12.3	
Geometric Sequences  858
	
12.4	
Mathematics of Finance  867
	
12.5	
Mathematical Induction  873
	
12.6	
The Binomial Theorem  879
	
	
Chapter 12 Review  887
	
	
Chapter 12 Test  892
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Modeling with Recursive Sequences  893
		
chapter 13	 Limits: A Preview of Calculus	
897
	
	
Chapter Overview  897
	
13.1	
Finding Limits Numerically and Graphically  898
	
13.2	
Finding Limits Algebraically  906
	
13.3	
Tangent Lines and Derivatives  914
	
13.4	
Limits at Infinity; Limits of Sequences  924
	
13.5	
Areas  931
	
	
Chapter 13 Review  940
	
	
Chapter 13 Test  943
	
■	
FOCUS ON MODELING  Interpretations of Area  944
	
	
Cumulative Review Test: Chapters 12 and 13  (Website)
APPENDIX A Geometry Review  949
APPENDIX B Calculations and Significant Figures  (Website)
APPENDIX C Graphing with a Graphing Calculator  (Website)
APPENDIX D Using the TI-83/84 Graphing Calculator  (Website)
ANSWERS  A1
INDEX  I1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

What do students really need to know to be prepared for calculus? What tools do in-
structors really need to assist their students in preparing for calculus? These two ques-
tions have motivated the writing of this book.
To be prepared for calculus a student needs not only technical skill but also a clear 
understanding of concepts. Indeed, conceptual understanding and technical skill go 
hand in hand, each reinforcing the other. A student also needs to gain an appreciation 
for the power and utility of mathematics in modeling the real world. Every feature of 
this textbook is devoted to fostering these goals.
In this Seventh Edition our objective is to further enhance the effectiveness of the 
book as an instructional tool for teachers and as a learning tool for students. Many of 
the changes in this edition are a result of suggestions we received from instructors and 
students who are using the current edition; others are a result of insights we have gained 
from our own teaching. Some chapters have been reorganized and rewritten, new sec-
tions have been added (as described below), the review material at the end of each 
chapter has been substantially expanded, and exercise sets have been enhanced to fur-
ther focus on the main concepts of precalculus. In all these changes and numerous 
others (small and large) we have retained the main features that have contributed to the 
success of this book.
New to the Seventh Edition
■	 Exercises  More than 20% of the exercises are new, and groups of exercises now 
have headings that identify the type of exercise. New Skills Plus exercises in 
most sections contain more challenging exercises that require students to extend 
and synthesize concepts.
■	 Review Material  The review material at the end of each chapter now includes a 
summary of Properties and Formulas and a new Concept Check. Each Concept 
Check provides a step-by-step review of all the main concepts and applications 
of the chapter. Answers to the Concept Check questions are on tear-out sheets at 
the back of the book.
■	 Discovery Projects  References to Discovery Projects, including brief descrip-
tions of the content of each project, are located in boxes where appropriate in 
each chapter. These boxes highlight the applications of precalculus in many dif-
ferent real-world contexts. (The projects are located at the book companion  
website: www.stewartmath.com.)
■	 Geometry Review  A new Appendix A contains a review of the main concepts of 
geometry used in this book, including similarity and the Pythagorean Theorem.
■	 CHAPTER 1 Fundamentals  This chapter now contains two new sections. Section 
1.6, “Complex Numbers” (formerly in Chapter 3), has been moved here. Section 
1.12, “Modeling Variation,” is now also in this chapter.
■	 CHAPTER 2 Functions  This chapter now includes the new Section 2.5, “Linear 
Functions and Models.” This section highlights the connection between the slope 
of a line and the rate of change of a linear function. These two interpretations of 
slope help prepare students for the concept of the derivative in calculus.
■	 CHAPTER 3 Polynomial and Rational Functions  This chapter now includes the new 
Section 3.7, “Polynomial and Rational Inequalities.” Section 3.6, “Rational Func-
tions,” has a new subsection on rational functions with “holes.” The sections on 
complex numbers and on variation have been moved to Chapter 1.
PREFACE
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface  xi
■	 CHAPTER 4 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions  The chapter now includes two 
sections on the applications of these functions. Section 4.6, “Modeling with 
Exponential Functions,” focuses on modeling growth and decay, Newton’s Law 
of Cooling, and other such applications. Section 4.7, “Logarithmic Scales,”  
covers the concept of a logarithmic scale with applications involving the pH, 
Richter, and decibel scales.
■	 CHAPTER 5 Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  This chapter includes a 
new subsection on the concept of phase shift as used in modeling harmonic 
motion.
■	 CHAPTER 10 Systems of Equations and Inequalities  The material on systems of 
inequalities has been rewritten to emphasize the steps used in graphing the solu-
tion of a system of inequalities.
Teaching with the Help of This Book
We are keenly aware that good teaching comes in many forms and that there are many 
different approaches to teaching and learning the concepts and skills of precalculus. 
The organization and exposition of the topics in this book are designed to accommodate 
different teaching and learning styles. In particular, each topic is presented algebra-
ically, graphically, numerically, and verbally, with emphasis on the relationships be-
tween these different representations. The following are some special features that can 
be used to complement different teaching and learning styles:
Exercise Sets  The most important way to foster conceptual understanding and hone 
technical skill is through the problems that the instructor assigns. To that end we have 
provided a wide selection of exercises.
■	 Concept Exercises  These exercises ask students to use mathematical language to 
state fundamental facts about the topics of each section.
■	 Skills Exercises  These exercises reinforce and provide practice with all the learn-
ing objectives of each section. They comprise the core of each exercise set.
■	 Skills Plus Exercises  The Skills Plus exercises contain challenging problems that 
often require the synthesis of previously learned material with new concepts.
■	 Applications Exercises  We have included substantial applied problems from 
many different real-world contexts. We believe that these exercises will capture 
students’ interest.
■	 Discovery, Writing, and Group Learning  Each exercise set ends with a block of 
exercises labeled Discuss ■ Discover ■ Prove ■ Write. These exercises are 
designed to encourage students to experiment, preferably in groups, with the con-
cepts developed in the section and then to write about what they have learned 
rather than simply looking for the answer. New Prove exercises highlight the 
importance of deriving a formula.
■	 Now Try Exercise . . .  At the end of each example in the text the student is 
directed to one or more similar exercises in the section that help to reinforce the 
concepts and skills developed in that example.
■	 Check Your Answer  Students are encouraged to check whether an answer they 
obtained is reasonable. This is emphasized throughout the text in numerous 
Check Your Answer sidebars that accompany the examples (see, for instance, 
pages 54 and 71).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xii 
Preface
A Complete Review Chapter  We have included an extensive review chapter pri-
marily as a handy reference for the basic concepts that are preliminary to this course.
■	 Chapter 1 Fundamentals  This is the review chapter; it contains the fundamen-
tal concepts from algebra and analytic geometry that a student needs in order to 
begin a precalculus course. As much or as little of this chapter can be covered in 
class as needed, depending on the background of the students.
■	 Chapter 1 Test  The test at the end of Chapter 1 is designed as a diagnostic test 
for determining what parts of this review chapter need to be taught. It also serves 
to help students gauge exactly what topics they need to review.
Flexible Approach to Trigonometry  The trigonometry chapters of this text have 
been written so that either the right triangle approach or the unit circle approach may 
be taught first. Putting these two approaches in different chapters, each with its relevant 
applications, helps to clarify the purpose of each approach. The chapters introducing 
trigonometry are as follows.
■	 Chapter 5 Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  This chapter introduces 
trigonometry through the unit circle approach. This approach emphasizes that the 
trigonometric functions are functions of real numbers, just like the polynomial 
and exponential functions with which students are already familiar.
■	 Chapter 6 Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach  This chapter intro-
duces trigonometry through the right triangle approach. This approach builds on 
the foundation of a conventional high-school course in trigonometry.
Another way to teach trigonometry is to intertwine the two approaches. Some instruc-
tors teach this material in the following order: Sections 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 
5.6, 6.4, 6.5, and 6.6. Our organization makes it easy to do this without obscuring the fact 
that the two approaches involve distinct representations of the same functions.
Graphing Calculators and Computers  We make use of graphing calculators and 
computers in examples and exercises throughout the book. Our calculator-oriented 
examples are always preceded by examples in which students must graph or calculate 
by hand so that they can understand precisely what the calculator is doing when they 
later use it to simplify the routine, mechanical part of their work. The graphing calcula-
tor sections, subsections, examples, and exercises, all marked with the special symbol 
, are optional and may be omitted without loss of continuity.
■	 Using a Graphing Calculator  General guidelines on using graphing calculators 
and a quick reference guide to using TI-83/84 calculators are available at the 
book companion website: www.stewartmath.com.
■	 Graphing, Regression, Matrix Algebra  Graphing calculators are used throughout 
the text to graph and analyze functions, families of functions, and sequences; to 
calculate and graph regression curves; to perform matrix algebra; to graph linear 
inequalities; and other powerful uses.
■	 Simple Programs  We exploit the programming capabilities of a graphing calcu-
lator to simulate real-life situations, to sum series, or to compute the terms of a 
recursive sequence (see, for instance, pages 628, 896, and 939).
Focus on Modeling  The theme of modeling has been used throughout to unify and 
clarify the many applications of precalculus. We have made a special effort to clarify 
the essential process of translating problems from English into the language of mathe-
matics (see pages 238 and 686).
■	 Constructing Models  There are many applied problems throughout the book in 
which students are given a model to analyze (see, for instance, page 250). But 
the material on modeling, in which students are required to construct mathemati-
cal models, has been organized into clearly defined sections and subsections (see, 
for instance, pages 370, 445, and 685).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface  xiii
■	 Focus on Modeling  Each chapter concludes with a Focus on Modeling section. 
The first such section, after Chapter 1, introduces the basic idea of modeling a 
real-life situation by fitting lines to data (linear regression). Other sections pre­
sent ways in which polynomial, exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric 
functions, and systems of inequalities can all be used to model familiar phenom-
ena from the sciences and from everyday life (see, for instance, pages 325, 392, 
and 466).
Review Sections and Chapter Tests  Each chapter ends with an extensive review 
section that includes the following.
■	 Properties and Formulas  The Properties and Formulas at the end of each chap-
ter contains a summary of the main formulas and procedures of the chapter (see, 
for instance, pages 386 and 460).
■	 Concept Check and Concept Check Answers  The Concept Check at the end of 
each chapter is designed to get the students to think about and explain each con-
cept presented in the chapter and then to use the concept in a given problem. 
This provides a step-by-step review of all the main concepts in a chapter (see, for 
instance, pages 230, 319, and 769). Answers to the Concept Check questions are 
on tear-out sheets at the back of the book.
■	 Review Exercises  The Review Exercises at the end of each chapter recapitulate 
the basic concepts and skills of the chapter and include exercises that combine 
the different ideas learned in the chapter.
■	 Chapter Test  Each review section concludes with a Chapter Test designed to 
help students gauge their progress.
■	 Cumulative Review Tests  Cumulative Review Tests following selected chapters 
are available at the book companion website. These tests contain problems that 
combine skills and concepts from the preceding chapters. The problems are 
designed to highlight the connections between the topics in these related chapters. 
■	 Answers  Brief answers to odd-numbered exercises in each section (including 
the review exercises) and to all questions in the Concepts exercises and Chapter 
Tests, are given in the back of the book.
Mathematical Vignettes  Throughout the book we make use of the margins to pro-
vide historical notes, key insights, or applications of mathematics in the modern world. 
These serve to enliven the material and show that mathematics is an important, vital 
activity and that even at this elementary level it is fundamental to everyday life.
■	 Mathematical Vignettes  These vignettes include biographies of interesting math-
ematicians and often include a key insight that the mathematician discovered 
(see, for instance, the vignettes on Viète, page 50; Salt Lake City, page 93; and 
radiocarbon dating, page 367).
■	 Mathematics in the Modern World  This is a series of vignettes that emphasize the 
central role of mathematics in current advances in technology and the sciences 
(see, for instance, pages 302, 753, and 784).
Book Companion Website  A website that accompanies this book is located at 
www.stewartmath.com. The site includes many useful resources for teaching precal-
culus, including the following. 
■	 Discovery Projects  Discovery Projects for each chapter are available at the book 
companion website. The projects are referenced in the text in the appropriate sec-
tions. Each project provides a challenging yet accessible set of activities that 
enable students (perhaps working in groups) to explore in greater depth an inter-
esting aspect of the topic they have just learned (see, for instance, the Discovery 
Projects Visualizing a Formula, Relations and Functions, Will the Species  
Survive?, and Computer Graphics I and II, referenced on pages 29, 163, 719, 
738, and 820).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xiv 
Preface
■	 Focus on Problem Solving  Several Focus on Problem Solving sections are avail-
able on the website. Each such section highlights one of the problem-solving 
principles introduced in the Prologue and includes several challenging problems 
(see for instance Recognizing Patterns, Using Analogy, Introducing Something 
Extra, Taking Cases, and Working Backward).
■	 Cumulative Review Tests  Cumulative Review Tests following Chapters 4, 7, 9, 
11, and 13 are available on the website.
■	 Appendix B: Calculations and Significant Figures  This appendix, available at the 
book companion website, contains guidelines for rounding when working with 
approximate values.
■	 Appendix C: Graphing with a Graphing Calculator  This appendix, available at the 
book companion website, includes general guidelines on graphing with a graph-
ing calculator as well as guidelines on how to avoid common graphing pitfalls.
■	 Appendix D: Using the TI-83/84 Graphing Calculator  In this appendix, available at 
the book companion website, we provide simple, easy-to-follow, step-by-step 
instructions for using the TI-83/84 graphing calculators. 
Acknowledgments
We feel fortunate that all those involved in the production of this book have worked 
with exceptional energy, intense dedication, and passionate interest. It is surprising how 
many people are essential in the production of a mathematics textbook, including con-
tent editors, reviewers, faculty colleagues, production editors, copy editors, permissions 
editors, solutions and accuracy checkers, artists, photo researchers, text designers, 
typesetters, compositors, proofreaders, printers, and many more. We thank them all. We 
particularly mention the following.
Reviewers for the Sixth Edition  Raji Baradwaj, UMBC; Chris Herman, Lorain 
County Community College; Irina Kloumova, Sacramento City College; Jim McCleery, 
Skagit Valley College, Whidbey Island Campus; Sally S. Shao, Cleveland State Uni-
versity; David Slutzky, Gainesville State College; Edward Stumpf, Central Carolina 
Community College; Ricardo Teixeira, University of Texas at Austin; Taixi Xu, 
Southern Polytechnic State University; and Anna Wlodarczyk, Florida International 
University.
Reviewers for the Seventh Edition  Mary Ann Teel, University of North Texas; 
Natalia Kravtsova, The Ohio State University; Belle Sigal, Wake Technical Commu-
nity College; Charity S. Turner, The Ohio State University; Yu-ing Hargett, Jefferson 
State Community College–Alabama; Alicia Serfaty de Markus, Miami Dade College; 
Cathleen Zucco-Teveloff, Rider University; Minal Vora, East Georgia State College; 
Sutandra Sarkar, Georgia State University; Jennifer Denson, Hillsborough Community 
College; Candice L. Ridlon, University of Maryland Eastern Shore; Alin Stancu, Co-
lumbus State University; Frances Tishkevich, Massachusetts Maritime Academy; Phil 
Veer, Johnson County Community College; Cathleen Zucco-Teveloff, Rider Univer-
sity; Phillip Miller, Indiana University–Southeast; Mildred Vernia, Indiana University–
Southeast; Thurai Kugan, John Jay College–CUNY.
We are grateful to our colleagues who continually share with us their insights into 
teaching mathematics. We especially thank Robert Mena at California State University, 
Long Beach; we benefited from his many insights into mathematics and its history. We 
thank Cecilia McVoy at Penn State Abington for her helpful suggestions. We thank 
Andrew Bulman-Fleming for writing the Solutions Manual and Doug Shaw at the Uni-
versity of Northern Iowa for writing the Instructor Guide and the Study Guide. We are 
very grateful to Frances Gulick at the University of Maryland for checking the accuracy 
of the entire manuscript and doing each and every exercise; her many suggestions and 
corrections have contributed greatly to the accuracy and consistency of the contents of 
this book.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface  xv
We thank Martha Emry, our production service and art editor; her energy, devotion, 
and experience are essential components in the creation of this book. We are grateful 
for her remarkable ability to instantly recall, when needed, any detail of the entire 
manuscript as well as her extraordinary ability to simultaneously manage several inter-
dependent editing tracks. We thank Barbara Willette, our copy editor, for her attention 
to every detail in the manuscript and for ensuring a consistent, appropriate style 
throughout the book. We thank our designer, Diane Beasley, for the elegant and appro-
priate design for the interior of the book. We thank Graphic World for their attractive 
and accurate graphs and Precision Graphics for bringing many of our illustrations to 
life. We thank our compositors at Graphic World for ensuring a balanced and coherent 
look for each page of the book.
At Cengage Learning we thank Jennifer Risden, content project manager, for her 
professional management of the production of the book. We thank Lynh Pham, media 
developer, for his expert handling of many technical issues, including the creation of 
the book companion website. We thank Vernon Boes, art director, for his capable ad-
ministration of the design of the book. We thank Mark Linton, marketing manager, for 
helping bring the book to the attention of those who may wish to use it in their classes.
We particularly thank our developmental editor, Stacy Green, for skillfully guiding 
and facilitating every aspect of the creation of this book. Her interest in the book, her 
familiarity with the entire manuscript, and her almost instant responses to our many 
queries have made the writing of the book an even more enjoyable experience for us.
Above all we thank our acquisitions editor, Gary Whalen. His vast editorial experi-
ence, his extensive knowledge of current issues in the teaching of mathematics, his skill 
in managing the resources needed to enhance this book, and his deep interest in math-
ematics textbooks have been invaluable assets in the creation of this book.
Ancillaries
Instructor Resources
Instructor Companion Site
Everything you need for your course in one place! This collection of book-specific 
lecture and class tools is available online via www.cengage.com/login. Access and 
download PowerPoint presentations, images, instructor’s manual, and more.
Complete Solutions Manual
The Complete Solutions Manual provides worked-out solutions to all of the problems 
in the text. Located on the companion website.
Test Bank
The Test Bank provides chapter tests and final exams, along with answer keys. Located 
on the companion website.
Instructor’s Guide
The Instructor’s Guide contains points to stress, suggested time to allot, text discussion 
topics, core materials for lecture, workshop/discussion suggestions, group work exer-
cises in a form suitable for handout, and suggested homework problems. Located on the 
companion website.
Lesson Plans
The Lesson Plans provides suggestions for activities and lessons with notes on time 
allotment in order to ensure timeliness and efficiency during class. Located on the com-
panion website.
Cengage Learning Testing Powered by Cognero  
(ISBN-10: 1-305-25853-3; ISBN-13: 978-1-305-25853-2)
CLT is a flexible online system that allows you to author, edit, and manage test bank 
content; create multiple test versions in an instant; and deliver tests from your LMS, your 
classroom or wherever you want. This is available online via www.cengage.com/login.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xvi 
Preface
Enhanced WebAssign
Printed Access Card: 978-1-285-85833-3
Instant Access Code: 978-1-285-85831-9
Enhanced WebAssign combines exceptional mathematics content with the most power-
ful online homework solution, WebAssign®. Enhanced WebAssign engages students 
with immediate feedback, rich tutorial content, and an interactive, fully customizable 
eBook, Cengage YouBook, to help students to develop a deeper conceptual understand-
ing of their subject matter.
Student Resources
Student Solutions Manual (ISBN-10: 1-305-25361-2; ISBN-13: 978-1-305-25361-2)
The Student Solutions Manual contains fully worked-out solutions to all of the odd-
numbered exercises in the text, giving students a way to check their answers and ensure 
that they took the correct steps to arrive at an answer.
Study Guide (ISBN-10: 1-305-25363-9; ISBN-13: 978-1-305-25363-6)
The Study Guide reinforces student understanding with detailed explanations, worked-out 
examples, and practice problems. It also lists key ideas to master and builds problem-
solving skills. There is a section in the Study Guide corresponding to each section in the 
text.
Note-Taking Guide (ISBN-10: 1-305-25383-3; ISBN-13: 978-1-305-25383-4)
The Note-Taking Guide is an innovative study aid that helps students develop a section-
by-section summary of key concepts.
Text-Specific DVDs (ISBN-10: 1-305-25400-7; ISBN-13: 978-1-305-25400-8)
The Text-Specific DVDs include new learning objective–based lecture videos. These 
DVDs provide comprehensive coverage of the course—along with additional explana-
tions of concepts, sample problems, and applications—to help students review essential 
topics.
CengageBrain.com
To access additional course materials, please visit www.cengagebrain.com. At the 
CengageBrain.com home page, search for the ISBN of your title (from the back cover 
of your book) using the search box at the top of the page. This will take you to the 
product page where these resources can be found.
Enhanced WebAssign
Printed Access Card: 978-1-285-85833-3
Instant Access Code: 978-1-285-85831-9
Enhanced WebAssign combines exceptional mathematics content with the most power-
ful online homework solution, WebAssign. Enhanced WebAssign engages students 
with immediate feedback, rich tutorial content, and an interactive, fully customizable 
eBook, Cengage YouBook, helping students to develop a deeper conceptual understand-
ing of the subject matter.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This textbook was written for you to use as a guide to mastering precalculus mathemat-
ics. Here are some suggestions to help you get the most out of your course.
First of all, you should read the appropriate section of text before you attempt your 
homework problems. Reading a mathematics text is quite different from reading a 
novel, a newspaper, or even another textbook. You may find that you have to reread a 
passage several times before you understand it. Pay special attention to the examples, 
and work them out yourself with pencil and paper as you read. Then do the linked ex-
ercises referred to in “Now Try Exercise . . .” at the end of each example. With this kind 
of preparation you will be able to do your homework much more quickly and with more 
understanding.
Don’t make the mistake of trying to memorize every single rule or fact you may 
come across. Mathematics doesn’t consist simply of memorization. Mathematics is a 
problem-solving art, not just a collection of facts. To master the subject you must solve 
problems—lots of problems. Do as many of the exercises as you can. Be sure to write 
your solutions in a logical, step-by-step fashion. Don’t give up on a problem if you can’t 
solve it right away. Try to understand the problem more clearly—reread it thoughtfully 
and relate it to what you have learned from your teacher and from the examples in the 
text. Struggle with it until you solve it. Once you have done this a few times you will 
begin to understand what mathematics is really all about.
Answers to the odd-numbered exercises, as well as all the answers (even and odd) 
to the concept exercises and chapter tests, appear at the back of the book. If your answer 
differs from the one given, don’t immediately assume that you are wrong. There may 
be a calculation that connects the two answers and makes both correct. For example, if 
you get 1/1 !2 2 12  but the answer given is 1 1 !2, your answer is correct, because 
you can multiply both numerator and denominator of your answer by !2 1 1 to 
change it to the given answer. In rounding approximate answers, follow the guidelines 
in Appendix B: Calculations and Significant Figures.
The symbol 
 is used to warn against committing an error. We have placed this 
symbol in the margin to point out situations where we have found that many of our 
students make the same mistake.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used throughout the text.
xvii
TO THE STUDENT
cm	
centimeter
dB	
decibel
F	
farad
ft	
foot
g	
gram
gal	
gallon
h	
hour
H	
henry
Hz	
Hertz
in.	
inch
J	
Joule
kcal	
kilocalorie
kg	
kilogram
km	
kilometer
kPa	
kilopascal
L	
liter
lb	
pound
lm	
lumen
M	
mole of solute
	
  per liter of  
solution
m	
meter
mg	
milligram
MHz	
megahertz
mi	
mile
min	
minute
mL	
milliliter
mm	
millimeter
N	
Newton
qt	
quart
oz	
ounce
s	
second
V	
ohm
V	
volt
W	
watt
yd	
yard
yr	
year
°C	
degree Celsius
°F	
degree Fahrenheit
K	
Kelvin
⇒	
implies
⇔	
is equivalent to
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The ability to solve problems is a highly prized skill in many aspects of our lives; it is 
certainly an important part of any mathematics course. There are no hard and fast rules 
that will ensure success in solving problems. However, in this Prologue we outline some 
general steps in the problem-solving process and we give principles that are useful in 
solving certain types of problems. These steps and principles are just common sense made 
explicit. They have been adapted from George Polya’s insightful book How To Solve It.
1. Understand the Problem
The ﬁrst step is to read the problem and make sure that you understand it. Ask yourself 
the following questions:
What is the unknown?
What are the given quantities?
What are the given conditions?
For many problems it is useful to
draw a diagram
and identify the given and required quantities on the diagram. Usually, it is necessary to
introduce suitable notation
In choosing symbols for the unknown quantities, we often use letters such as a, b, c, m, 
n, x, and y, but in some cases it helps to use initials as suggestive symbols, for instance, 
V for volume or t for time.
2. Think of a Plan
Find a connection between the given information and the unknown that enables you to 
calculate the unknown. It often helps to ask yourself explicitly: “How can I relate the 
given to the unknown?” If you don’t see a connection immediately, the following ideas 
may be helpful in devising a plan.
■  Try to Recognize Something Familiar
Relate the given situation to previous knowledge. Look at the unknown and try to recall 
a more familiar problem that has a similar unknown.
■  Try to Recognize Patterns
Certain problems are solved by recognizing that some kind of pattern is occurring. The 
pattern could be geometric, numerical, or algebraic. If you can see regularity or repeti-
tion in a problem, then you might be able to guess what the pattern is and then prove it.
■  Use Analogy
Try to think of an analogous problem, that is, a similar or related problem but one that 
is easier than the original. If you can solve the similar, simpler problem, then it might 
give you the clues you need to solve the original, more difﬁcult one. For instance, if a 
problem involves very large numbers, you could ﬁrst try a similar problem with smaller 
numbers. Or if the problem is in three-dimensional geometry, you could look for some-
thing similar in two-dimensional geometry. Or if the problem you start with is a general 
one, you could ﬁrst try a special case.
P1
prologue
principles of problem solving
AP Images
George Polya (1887–1985) is famous 
among mathematicians for his ideas on 
problem solving. His lectures on problem 
solving ­at Stanford University attracted 
overﬂow crowds whom he held on the 
edges of their seats, leading them to dis-
cover solutions for themselves. He was 
able to do this because of his deep 
insight into the psychology of problem 
solving. His well-known book How To 
Solve It has been translated into 15 lan-
guages. He said that Euler (see page 63) 
was unique among great mathematicians 
because he explained how he found his 
results. Polya often said to his students 
and colleagues, “Yes, I see that your proof 
is correct, but how did you discover it?” In 
the preface to How To Solve It, Polya 
writes, “A great discovery solves a great 
problem but there is a grain of discovery 
in the solution of any problem. Your 
problem may be modest; but if it chal-
lenges your curiosity and brings into play 
your inventive faculties, and if you solve 
it by your own means, you may experi-
ence the tension and enjoy the triumph 
of discovery.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P2 
Prologue
■  Introduce Something Extra
You might sometimes need to introduce something new—an auxiliary aid—to make the 
connection between the given and the unknown. For instance, in a problem for which a 
­diagram is useful, the auxiliary aid could be a new line drawn in the diagram. In a more 
algebraic problem the aid could be a new unknown that relates to the original unknown.
■  Take Cases
You might sometimes have to split a problem into several cases and give a different 
argument for each case. For instance, we often have to use this strategy in dealing with 
absolute value.
■  Work Backward
Sometimes it is useful to imagine that your problem is solved and work backward, step 
by step, until you arrive at the given data. Then you might be able to reverse your steps 
and thereby construct a solution to the original problem. This procedure is commonly 
used in solving equations. For instance, in solving the equation 3x  5  7, we suppose 
that x is a number that satisﬁes 3x  5  7 and work backward. We add 5 to each side 
of the equation and then divide each side by 3 to get x  4. Since each of these steps 
can be reversed, we have solved the problem.
■  Establish Subgoals
In a complex problem it is often useful to set subgoals (in which the desired situation 
is only partially fulﬁlled). If you can attain or accomplish these subgoals, then you 
might be able to build on them to reach your ﬁnal goal.
■  Indirect Reasoning
Sometimes it is appropriate to attack a problem indirectly. In using proof by contradic-
tion to prove that P implies Q, we assume that P is true and Q is false and try to see 
why this cannot happen. Somehow we have to use this information and arrive at a 
contradiction to what we absolutely know is true.
■  Mathematical Induction
In proving statements that involve a positive integer n, it is frequently helpful to use the 
Principle of Mathematical Induction, which is discussed in Section 12.5.
3. Carry Out the Plan
In Step 2, a plan was devised. In carrying out that plan, you must check each stage of 
the plan and write the details that prove that each stage is correct.
4. Look Back
Having completed your solution, it is wise to look back over it, partly to see whether 
any errors have been made and partly to see whether you can discover an easier way to 
solve the problem. Looking back also familiarizes you with the method of solution, 
which may be useful for solving a future problem. Descartes said, “Every problem that 
I solved became a rule which served afterwards to solve other problems.”
We illustrate some of these principles of problem solving with an example.
Problem  ■  Average Speed
A driver sets out on a journey. For the ﬁrst half of the distance, she drives at the  
leisurely pace of 30 mi/h; during the second half she drives 60 mi/h. What is her  
average speed on this trip?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Prologue  P3
Thinking About the Problem
It is tempting to take the average of the speeds and say that the average speed 
for the entire trip is
30 60
2
45 mi/h
But is this simple-minded approach really correct?
Let’s look at an easily calculated special case. Suppose that the total distance 
traveled is 120 mi. Since the ﬁrst 60 mi is traveled at 30 mi/h, it takes 2 h. The  
second 60 mi is traveled at 60 mi/h, so it takes one hour. Thus, the total time is  
2  1  3 hours and the average speed is
120
3
40 mi/h
So our guess of 45 mi/h was wrong.
SOLUTION
We need to look more carefully at the meaning of average speed. It is deﬁned as
average speed distance traveled
time elapsed
Let d be the distance traveled on each half of the trip. Let t1 and t2 be the times taken 
for the ﬁrst and second halves of the trip. Now we can write down the information we 
have been given. For the ﬁrst half of the trip we have
30 d
t1
and for the second half we have
60 d
t2
Now we identify the quantity that we are asked to ﬁnd:
average speed for entire trip total distance
total time

2d
t1 t2
To calculate this quantity, we need to know t1 and t2, so we solve the above equations 
for these times:
t1 d
30  t2 d
60
Now we have the ingredients needed to calculate the desired quantity:
 average speed 
2d
t1 t2

2d
d
30 d
60
 
6012d2
60 a d
30 d
60 b
   
Multiply numerator and 
denominator by 60
 
120d
2d d 120d
3d
40
So the average speed for the entire trip is 40 mi/h.	
■
Try a special case.  ▶
 Understand the problem.  ▶
 Introduce notation.  ▶
 State what is given.  ▶
 Identify the unknown.  ▶
Connect the given
 with the unknown.  ▶
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P4 
Prologue
Problems
	 1.	 Distance, Time, and Speed    An old car has to travel a 2-mile route, uphill and down. 
Because it is so old, the car can climb the ﬁrst mile—the ascent—no faster than an average 
speed of 15 mi/h. How fast does the car have to travel the second mile—on the descent it 
can go faster, of course—to achieve an average speed of 30 mi/h for the trip?
	 2.	 Comparing Discounts    Which price is better for the buyer, a 40% discount or two suc-
cessive discounts of 20%?
	 3.	 Cutting up a Wire    A piece of wire is bent as shown in the ﬁgure. You can see that one 
cut through the wire produces four pieces and two parallel cuts produce seven pieces. How 
many pieces will be produced by 142 parallel cuts? Write a formula for the number of 
pieces produced by n parallel cuts.
	 4.	 Amoeba Propagation    An amoeba propagates by simple division; each split takes  
3 minutes to complete. When such an amoeba is put into a glass container with a nutrient 
ﬂuid, the container is full of amoebas in one hour. How long would it take for the con-
tainer to be ﬁlled if we start with not one amoeba, but two?
	 5.	 Batting Averages    Player A has a higher batting average than player B for the ﬁrst half 
of the baseball season. Player A also has a higher batting average than player B for the 
second half of the season. Is it necessarily true that player A has a higher batting average 
than player B for the entire season?
	 6.	 Coffee and Cream    A spoonful of cream is taken from a pitcher of cream and put into a 
cup of coffee. The coffee is stirred. Then a spoonful of this mixture is put into the pitcher 
of cream. Is there now more cream in the coffee cup or more coffee in the pitcher of 
cream?
	 7.	 Wrapping the World    A ribbon is tied tightly around the earth at the equator. How 
much more ribbon would you need if you raised the ribbon 1 ft above the equator every-
where? (You don’t need to know the radius of the earth to solve this problem.)
	 8.	 Ending Up Where You Started    A woman starts at a point P on the earth’s surface and 
walks 1 mi south, then 1 mi east, then 1 mi north, and ﬁnds herself back at P, the starting 
point. Describe all points P for which this is possible.    [Hint: There are infinitely many 
such points, all but one of which lie in Antarctica.]
Bettmann/Corbis
Don’t feel bad if you can’t solve these prob-
lems right away. Problems 1 and 4 were 
sent to Albert Einstein by his friend 
Wertheimer. Einstein (and his friend Bucky) 
enjoyed the problems and wrote back to 
Wertheimer. Here is part of his reply:
Your letter gave us a lot of amuse-
ment. The ﬁrst intelligence test 
fooled both of us (Bucky and me). 
Only on working it out did I no-
tice that no time is available for 
the downhill run! Mr. Bucky was 
also taken in by the second exam-
ple, but I was not. Such drolleries 
show us how stupid we are!
(See Mathematical Intelligencer, Spring 
1990, page 41.)
Many more problems and examples that highlight different problem-solving principles are 
available at the book companion website: www.stewartmath.com. You can try them as 
you progress through the book.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this first chapter we review the real numbers, equations, and the 
coordinate plane. You are probably already familiar with these concepts, 
but it is helpful to get a fresh look at how these ideas work together to 
solve problems and model (or describe) real-world situations.
In the Focus on Modeling at the end of the chapter we learn how to find 
linear trends in data and how to use these trends to make predictions about 
the future.
1
Fundamentals
1
  1.1	 Real Numbers
  1.2	 Exponents and Radicals
  1.3	 Algebraic Expressions
  1.4	 Rational Expressions
  1.5	 Equations
  1.6	 Complex Numbers
  1.7	 Modeling with Equations
  1.8	 Inequalities
  1.9	 The Coordinate Plane; 
Graphs of Equations; 
Circles
1.10	 Lines
1.11	 Solving Equations and 
Inequalities Graphically
1.12	 Modeling Variation 
Focus on Modeling
	
Fitting Lines to Data
Blend Images/Alamy
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
In the real world we use numbers to measure and compare different quantities. For ex-
ample, we measure temperature, length, height, weight, blood pressure, distance, speed, 
acceleration, energy, force, angles, age, cost, and so on. Figure 1 illustrates some situa-
tions in which numbers are used. Numbers also allow us to express relationships between 
different quantities—for example, relationships between the radius and volume of a ball, 
between miles driven and gas used, or between education level and starting salary.
Figure 1  Measuring with real numbers
Count
Length
Speed
Weight
© Monkey Business Images/
Shutterstock.com
© bikeriderlondon/Shutterstock.com
© Oleksiy Mark/Shutterstock.com
© Aleph Studio/Shutterstock.com
■  Real Numbers
Let’s review the types of numbers that make up the real number system. We start with 
the natural numbers:
1, 2, 3, 4, . . .
The integers consist of the natural numbers together with their negatives and 0:
. . . , 3, 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .
We construct the rational numbers by taking ratios of integers. Thus any rational 
number r can be expressed as
r m
n
where m and n are integers and n ? 0. Examples are
1
2  3
7  46 46
1  0.17 17
100
(Recall that division by 0 is always ruled out, so expressions like 3
0 and 0
0 are undeﬁned.) 
There are also real numbers, such as !2, that cannot be expressed as a ratio of integers 
and are therefore called irrational numbers. It can be shown, with varying degrees of 
difﬁculty, that these numbers are also irrational:
!3   !5   !
3 2   p   3
p2
The set of all real numbers is usually denoted by the symbol . When we use the 
word number without qualiﬁcation, we will mean “real number.” Figure 2 is a diagram 
of the types of real numbers that we work with in this book.
Every real number has a decimal representation. If the number is rational, then its 
corresponding decimal is repeating. For example,
 1
2 0.5000. . . 0.50
   
2
3 0.66666. . . 0.6
 157
495 0.3171717. . . 0.317   
9
7 1.285714285714. . . 1.285714
1.1 
Real Numbers
■  Real Numbers  ■  Properties of Real Numbers  ■  Addition and Subtraction  ■  Multiplication 
and Division  ■  The Real Line  ■  Sets and Intervals  ■  Absolute Value and Distance
The different types of real numbers 
were invented to meet speciﬁc needs. 
For example, natural numbers are 
needed for counting, negative numbers 
for describing debt or below-zero tem-
peratures, rational numbers for concepts 
like “half a gallon of milk,” and irratio-
nal numbers for measuring certain dis-
tances, like the diagonal of a square.
1
2
46,  0.17,  0.6,  0.317
,
œ3
. . . ,  3,  2,  1,  0,  1,  2,  3, . . .
Rational numbers
Irrational numbers
Integers
Natural numbers
,
3
7
- ,
,
œ5
,
,
œ2
π
π2
3
3
–
–
—
Figure 2  The real number system
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.1  ■  Real Numbers  3
(The bar indicates that the sequence of digits repeats forever.) If the number is irratio-
nal, the decimal representation is nonrepeating:
!2 1.414213562373095. . .   p 3.141592653589793. . .
If we stop the decimal expansion of any number at a certain place, we get an approxi-
mation to the number. For instance, we can write
p 3.14159265
where the symbol  is read “is approximately equal to.” The more decimal places we 
retain, the better our approximation.
■  Properties of Real Numbers
We all know that 2  3  3  2, and 5  7  7  5, and 513  87  87  513, and so 
on. In algebra we express all these (inﬁnitely many) facts by writing
a b b a
where a and b stand for any two numbers. In other words, “a  b  b  a” is a concise 
way of saying that “when we add two numbers, the order of addition doesn’t matter.” 
This fact is called the Commutative Property of addition. From our experience with 
numbers we know that the properties in the following box are also valid.
Properties of Real Numbers
Property	
Example	
Description
Commutative Properties
a b b a	
7 3 3 7	
When we add two numbers, order doesn’t matter.
ab ba	
3 # 5 5 # 3	
When we multiply two numbers, order doesn’t  
matter.
Associative Properties
1a b2 c a 1b c2 	
12 42 7 2 14 72 	
When we add three numbers, it doesn’t matter 
which two we add ﬁrst.
1ab2c a1bc2 	
13 # 72 # 5 3 # 17 # 52 	
When we multiply three numbers, it doesn’t  
matter which two we multiply ﬁrst.
Distributive Property
a1b c2 ab ac	
2 # 13 52 2 # 3 2 # 5	
When we multiply a number by a sum of two 
1b c2a ab ac	
13 52 # 2 2 # 3 2 # 5	
numbers, we get the same result as we get if we  
	
	
	
multiply the number by each of the terms and then 
add the results.
The Distributive Property applies whenever we multiply a number by a sum.  
Figure 3 explains why this property works for the case in which all the numbers are 
positive integers, but the property is true for any real numbers a, b, and c.
2(3+5)
2#3
2#5
Figure 3  The Distributive Property
A repeating decimal such as
x 3.5474747. . .
is a rational number. To convert it to a 
ratio of two integers, we write
 1000x 3547.47474747. . .
   10x 
35.47474747. . .
 990x 3512.0
Thus x 3512
990 . (The idea is to multiply 
x by appropriate powers of 10 and then 
subtract to eliminate the repeating part.)
The Distributive Property is crucial  
because it describes the way addition 
and multiplication interact with each 
other.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 1  ■  Using the Distributive Property
(a)	  21x 32 2 # x 2 # 3	
Distributive Property
	 	
 2x 6	
Simplify
(b)	  1a b2 1x y2 1a b2x 1a b2y	
Distributive Property
	 	
 1ax bx2 1ay by2 	
Distributive Property
	 	
 ax bx ay by	
Associative Property of Addition
	 	 In the last step we removed the parentheses because, according to the  
Associative Property, the order of addition doesn’t matter.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
■  Addition and Subtraction
The number 0 is special for addition; it is called the additive identity because  
a  0  a for any real number a. Every real number a has a negative, a, that satisﬁes 
a 1a2 0. Subtraction is the operation that undoes addition; to subtract a number 
from another, we simply add the negative of that number. By deﬁnition
a b a 1b2
To combine real numbers involving negatives, we use the following properties.
Properties of Negatives
Property	
Example
1.	 112a a	
1125 5
2.	 1a2 a	
152 5
3.	 1a2b a1b2 1ab2 	
1527 5172 15 # 72
4.	 1a2 1b2 ab	
142 132 4 # 3
5.	 1a b2 a b	
13 52 3 5
6.	 1a b2 b a	
15 82 8 5
Property 6 states the intuitive fact that a  b and b  a are negatives of each other. 
Property 5 is often used with more than two terms:
1a b c2 a b c
Example 2  ■  Using Properties of Negatives
Let x, y, and z be real numbers.
(a)	 1x 22 x 2	
Property 5: (a  b)  a  b 
(b)	 1x y z2 x y 1z2 	
Property 5: (a  b)  a  b 
	 	
 x y z	
Property 2: (a)  a
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
s
  Don’t assume that a is a negative 
number. Whether a is negative or 
positive depends on the value of a. For 
example, if a  5, then a  5, a 
negative number, but if a  5, then 
a 152 5 (Property 2), a pos-
itive number.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.1  ■  Real Numbers  5
■  Multiplication and Division
The number 1 is special for multiplication; it is called the multiplicative identity because 
a # 1 a for any real number a. Every nonzero real number a has an inverse, 1/a, that 
satisﬁes a # 11/a2 1. Division is the operation that undoes multiplication; to divide by 
a number, we multiply by the inverse of that number. If b ? 0, then, by deﬁnition,
a 4 b a # 1
b
We write a # 11/b2  as simply a/b. We refer to a/b as the quotient of a and b or as the 
fraction a over b; a is the numerator and b is the denominator (or divisor). To com-
bine real numbers using the operation of division, we use the following properties.
Properties of Fractions
Property	
Example	
Description
1.	 a
b # c
d ac
bd	
2
3 # 5
7 2 # 5
3 # 7 10
21	
When multiplying fractions, multiply numerators 
and denominators.
2.	 a
b 4 c
d a
b # d
c	
2
3 4 5
7 2
3 # 7
5 14
15	
When dividing fractions, invert the divisor and 
multiply. 
3.	 a
c b
c a b
c
	
2
5 7
5 2 7
5
9
5	
When adding fractions with the same denomina-
tor, add the numerators. 
4.	 a
b c
d ad bc
bd
	
2
5 3
7 2 # 7 3 # 5
35
29
35	
When adding fractions with different denomi-
nators, ﬁnd a common denominator. Then add the 
numerators. 
5.	 ac
bc a
b	
2 # 5
3 # 5 2
3	
Cancel numbers that are common factors in 
numerator and denominator.
6.	 If a
b c
d, then ad bc	
2
3 6
9, so 2 # 9 3 # 6	
Cross-multiply.
When adding fractions with different denominators, we don’t usually use Prop­erty 4. 
Instead we rewrite the fractions so that they have the smallest possible common denomina-
tor (often smaller than the product of the denominators), and then we use Property 3. This 
denominator is the Least Common Denominator (LCD) described in the next example.
Example 3  ■  Using the LCD to Add Fractions
Evaluate: 
5
36 
7
120
Solution    Factoring each denominator into prime factors gives
36 22 # 32  and  120 23 # 3 # 5
We ﬁnd the least common denominator (LCD) by forming the product of all the prime 
factors that occur in these factorizations, using the highest power of each prime factor. 
Thus the LCD is 23 # 32 # 5 360. So
	
 5
36 
7
120 5 # 10
36 # 10 
7 # 3
120 # 3
        Use common denominator
	
 50
360 21
360 71
360
        Property 3: Adding fractions with the  
same denominator
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
■  The Real Line
The real numbers can be represented by points on a line, as shown in Figure 4. The 
positive direction (toward the right) is indicated by an arrow. We choose an arbitrary 
reference point O, called the origin, which corresponds to the real number 0. Given any 
convenient unit of measurement, each positive number x is represented by the point on 
the line a distance of x units to the right of the origin, and each negative number x is 
represented by the point x units to the left of the origin. The number associated with the 
point P is called the coordinate of P, and the line is then called a coordinate line, or a 
real number line, or simply a real line. Often we identify the point with its coordinate 
and think of a number as being a point on the real line.
0
_1
_2
_3
_4
_5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
1
4
1
8
0.3∑
2
œ∑3
œ∑5
π
4.9999
4.5
4.4
4.2
4.3
1
16
_
_ 2
_2.63
_3.1725
_4.7
_4.9
_4.85
œ∑
œ∑
Figure 4  The real line
The real numbers are ordered. We say that a is less than b and write a b if  
b  a is a positive number. Geometrically, this means that a lies to the left of b on  
the number line. Equivalently, we can say that b is greater than a and write b  a. The 
symbol a b 1or b a2  means that either a  b or a  b and is read “a is less than 
or equal to b.” For instance, the following are true inequalities (see Figure 5):
7 7.4 7.5            p 3            !2 2            2 2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
_1
_2
_3
_4
œ∑2
7.4 7.5
_π
Figure 5
■  Sets and Intervals
A set is a collection of objects, and these objects are called the elements of the set. If S 
is a set, the notation a  S means that a is an element of S, and b o S means that b is not 
an element of S. For example, if Z represents the set of integers, then 3  Z but p o Z.
Some sets can be described by listing their elements within braces. For instance, the 
set A that consists of all positive integers less than 7 can be written as
A 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 66
We could also write A in set-builder notation as
A 5x 0  x is an integer and 0 x 76
which is read “A is the set of all x such that x is an integer and 0  x  7.”
Discovery Project
Real Numbers in the Real World
Real-world measurements always involve units. For example, we usually mea-
sure distance in feet, miles, centimeters, or kilometers. Some measurements 
involve different types of units. For example, speed is measured in miles per 
hour or meters per second. We often need to convert a measurement from one 
type of unit to another. In this project we explore different types of units used 
for different purposes and how to convert from one type of unit to another. You 
can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.1  ■  Real Numbers  7
If S and T are sets, then their union S  T is the set that consists of all elements that 
are in S or T (or in both). The intersection of S and T is the set S  T consisting of all 
elements that are in both S and T. In other words, S  T is the common part of S and 
T. The empty set, denoted by , is the set that contains no element.
Example 4  ■  Union and Intersection of Sets
If S  51, 2, 3, 4, 56, T  54, 5, 6, 76, and V  56, 7, 86, ﬁnd the sets S  T, S  T,  
and S  V.
Solution
	
 S T 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 76        All elements in S or T
	
 S T 54, 56
        Elements common to both S and T
	
 S V 
        S and V have no element in common
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
Certain sets of real numbers, called intervals, occur frequently in calculus and corre-
spond geometrically to line segments. If a  b, then the open interval from a to b con-
sists of all numbers between a and b and is denoted 1a,  b2. The closed interval from a to 
b includes the endpoints and is denoted 3a,  b4. Using set-builder notation, we can write
1a,  b2 5x 0  a x b6   3a,  b4 5x 0  a x b6
Note that parentheses 1  2  in the interval notation and open circles on the graph in  
Figure 6 indicate that endpoints are excluded from the interval, whereas square brackets 
3  4 and solid circles in Figure 7 indicate that the endpoints are included. Intervals may 
also include one endpoint but not the other, or they may extend inﬁnitely far in one 
direction or both. The following table lists the possible types of intervals.
Notation
Set description
Graph
1a,  b2
5x 0  a x b6
a
b
a
b
a
b
a
b
a
a
b
b
3a,  b4
5x 0  a x b6
3a,  b2
5x 0  a x b6
1a,  b4
5x 0  a x b6
1a,  ` 2
5x 0  a x6
3a,  ` 2
5x 0  a x6
1`,  b2
5x 0  x b6
1`,  b4
5x 0  x b6
1`,  ` 2
R (set of all real numbers)
Example 5  ■  Graphing Intervals
Express each interval in terms of inequalities, and then graph the interval.
(a)	 31,  22 5x 0  1 x 26
(b)	 31.5,  44 5x 0  1.5 x 46
(c)	 13,  `2 5x 0  3 x6
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
	
T
 
64748
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
 14243  123
	
S	
V
_3
0
1.5
4
0
_1
2
0
a
b
Figure 6  The open interval 1a,  b2
a
b
Figure 7  The closed interval 3a,  b4
The symbol q (“inﬁnity”) does not 
stand for a number. The notation 1a,  ` 2 , 
for instance, simply indicates that the 
interval has no endpoint on the right  
but extends inﬁnitely far in the positive  
direction.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 6  ■  Finding Unions and Intersections of Intervals
Graph each set.
(a)  11,  32 32,  74      (b)  11,  32 32,  74
Solution
(a)	 The intersection of two intervals consists of the numbers that are in both  
intervals. Therefore
 11,  32 32,  74 5x 0  1 x 3 and 2 x 76
  5x 0  2 x 36 32,  32
	 	 This set is illustrated in Figure 8.
(b)	 The union of two intervals consists of the numbers that are in either one  
interval or the other (or both). Therefore
 11,  32 32,  74 5x 0  1 x 3 or 2 x 76
  5x 0  1 x 76 11,  74
	 	 This set is illustrated in Figure 9.
3
0
1
7
0
2
3
0
2
(1, 3)
[2, 7]
[2, 3)
Figure 8  11,  32 32,  74 32,  32
3
0
1
7
0
2
1
0
7
(1, 3)
[2, 7]
(1, 7]
Figure 9  11,  32 32,  74 11,  74
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
■  Absolute Value and Distance
The absolute value of a number a, denoted by 0  a 0 , is the distance from a to 0 on  
the real number line (see Figure 10). Distance is always positive or zero, so we have 
0  a 0 0 for every number a. Remembering that a is positive when a is negative, we 
have the following deﬁnition.
Definition of Absolute Value
If a is a real number, then the absolute value of a is
0 a 0 e
a
if a 0
a
if a 0
Example 7  ■  Evaluating Absolute Values of Numbers
(a)	 0  3 0 3
(b)	 0  3 0 132 3
(c)	 0  0 0 0
(d)	 0  3 p 0 13 p2 p 3  1since 3 p 1 3 p 02
Now Try Exercise 67	
■
5
0
_3
| 5 |=5
| _3 |=3
Figure 10
No Smallest or Largest Number  
in an Open Interval
Any interval contains inﬁnitely many 
numbers—every point on the graph of 
an interval corresponds to a real number. 
In the closed interval 30,   1 4 , the smallest 
number is 0 and the largest is 1, but the 
open interval 10,   1 2  contains no small­
est or largest number. To see this, note 
that 0.01 is close to zero, but 0.001 is 
closer, 0.0001 is closer yet, and so on. We 
can always ﬁnd a number in the interval 
10,   1 2  closer to zero than any given 
number. Since 0 itself is not in the inter­
val, the interval contains no smallest 
number. Similarly, 0.99 is close to 1, but 
0.999 is closer, 0.9999 closer yet, and so 
on. Since 1 itself is not in the interval, the 
interval has no largest number.
0.1
0
0.01
0.01
0
0.001
0.0001
0.001
0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.1  ■  Real Numbers  9
When working with absolute values, we use the following properties.
Properties of Absolute Value
Property	
Example	
Description
1.	 0  a 0 0	
0  3 0 3 0	
The absolute value of a number is always positive or 
zero.
2.	 0  a 0 0  a 0 	
0  5 0 0  5 0 	
A number and its negative have the same absolute 
value.
3.	 0  ab 0 0  a 0 0  b 0 	
0  2 # 5 0 0  2 0 0  5 0 	
The absolute value of a product is the product of the 
absolute values.
4.	 `  a
b
 ` 
0  a 0
0  b 0 	
`  12
3
 ` 
0  12 0
0  3 0 	
The absolute value of a quotient is the quotient of the 
absolute values.
5.	 0  a b 0 0  a 0 0  b 0 	
0 3 5 0 0 3 0 0  5 0 	
Triangle Inequality
What is the distance on the real line between the numbers 2 and 11? From  
Figure 11 we see that the distance is 13. We arrive at this by ﬁnding either 
0  11 122  0 13 or 0  122 11 0 13. From this observation we make the fol-
lowing deﬁnition (see Figure 12).
11
0
_2
13
b
a
| b-a |
Figure 11
Figure 12  Length of a line  
segment is 0  b a 0
Distance between Points on the Real Line
If a and b are real numbers, then the distance between the points a and b on the 
real line is
d1a, b2 0  b a 0
From Property 6 of negatives it follows that
0  b a 0 0  a b 0
This conﬁrms that, as we would expect, the distance from a to b is the same as the 
distance from b to a.
Example 8  ■  Distance Between Points on the Real Line
The distance between the numbers 8 and 2 is
d1a,  b2 0  2 182 0 0  10 0 10
We can check this calculation geometrically, as shown in Figure 13.
Now Try Exercise 75	
■
2
0
_8
10
Figure 13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Concepts
	 1.	 Give an example of each of the following:
(a)	 A natural number
(b)	 An integer that is not a natural number
(c)	 A rational number that is not an integer
(d)	 An irrational number
	 2.	 Complete each statement and name the property of real 
­numbers you have used.
(a)	 ab  
 
  ; 
 
 Property 
(b)	 a  1b  c2  
 
  ; 
 
 Property 
(c)	 a1b  c2  
 
  ; 
 
 Property
	 3.	 Express the set of real numbers between but not including 2 
and 7 as follows.
(a)	 In set-builder notation: 
 
(b)	 In interval notation: 
 
	 4.	 The symbol 0  x 0  stands for the 
 
 of the number x. 
If x is not 0, then the sign of 0  x 0  is always 
 
  .
	 5.	 The distance between a and b on the real line is d 1a, b2 
 
  . So the distance between 5 and 2 is 
 
  .
6–8  ■  Yes or No? If No, give a reason. Assume that a and b are 
nonzero real numbers. 
	 6.	 (a)	 Is the sum of two rational numbers always a rational 
number?
(b)	 Is the sum of two irrational numbers always an irrational 
number?
	 7.	 (a)	 Is a b equal to b a?
(b)	 Is 21a 52  equal to 2a 10?
	 8.	 (a)	 Is the distance between any two different real numbers 
always positive?
(b)	 Is the distance between a and b the same as the distance 
between b and a?
Skills
9–10  ■  Real Numbers    List the elements of the given set that are
(a)	 natural numbers
(b)	 integers
(c)	 rational numbers
(d)	 irrational numbers
	 9.	 E1.5, 0, 5
2, !7, 2.71, p, 3.14, 100, 8F
	10.	 E1.3, 1.3333. . . , !5, 5.34, 500, 12
3, !16, 246
579, 20
5 F
11–18  ■  Properties of Real Numbers    State the property of real 
numbers being used.
	11.	 3 7 7 3
	12.	 412 32 12 324
	13.	 1x 2y2 3z x 12y 3z2
	14.	 21A B2 2A 2B
	15.	 15x 123 15x 3
	16.	 1x a2 1x b2 1x a2x 1x a2b
	17.	 2x13 y2 13 y22x
	18.	 71a b c2 71a b2 7c
19–22  ■  Properties of Real Numbers    Rewrite the expression 
using the given property of real numbers.
19.	 Commutative Property of Addition,    x 3 
20.	 Associative Property of Multiplication,    713x2 
21.	 Distributive Property, 
41A B2 
22.	 Distributive Property, 
5x 5y 
23–28  ■  Properties of Real Numbers    Use properties of real 
numbers to write the expression without parentheses.
23.	 31x y2 	
24.	 1a b28
25.	 412m2 	
26.	 4
316y2
27.	  5
212x 4y2 	
28.	 13a2 1b c 2d2
29–32  ■  Arithmetic Operations    Perform the indicated 
operations.
29.	 (a)	
3
10 4
15	
(b)	 1
4 1
5
30.	 (a)	 2
3 3
5	
(b)	 1 5
8 1
6
31.	 (a)	 2
3A6 3
2B	
(b)	 A3 1
4B A1 4
5B
32.	 (a)	 2
2
3

2
3
2	
(b)	
2
5 1
2
1
10 3
15
33–34  ■  Inequalities    Place the correct symbol (, , or ) in 
the space.
33.	 (a)  3 
 
7
2	
(b)	 3 
  7
2	
(c)	 3.5 
 
7
2
34.	 (a)	 2
3 
 0.67	
(b)	 2
3 
 0.67
(c)	 0  0.67 0  
 0  0.67 0
35–38  ■  Inequalities    State whether each inequality is true or 
false.
35.	 (a)	 3 4	
(b)	 3 4
36.	 (a)	 !3 1.7325	
(b)	 1.732 !3
37.	 (a)	 10
2 5	
(b)	 6
10 5
6
38.	 (a)	
7
11 8
13	
(b)	 3
5 3
4
39–40  ■  Inequalities    Write each statement in terms of 
inequalities.
39.	 (a)	 x is positive.
(b)	 t is less than 4.
(c)	 a is greater than or equal to p.
(d)	 x is less than 1
3 and is greater than 25.
(e)	 The distance from p to 3 is at most 5.
1.1  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.1  ■  Real Numbers  11
40.	 (a)	 y is negative.
(b)	 z is greater than 1.
(c)	 b is at most 8.
(d)	 „ is positive and is less than or equal to 17.
(e)	 y is at least 2 units from p.
41–44  ■  Sets    Find the indicated set if
A 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 76        B 52, 4, 6, 86
C 57, 8, 9, 106
41.	 (a)	 A  B	
(b)	 A  B
42.	 (a)	 B  C	
(b)	 B  C
43.	 (a)	 A  C	
(b)	 A  C
44.	 (a)	 A  B  C	
(b)	 A  B  C
45–46  ■  Sets    Find the indicated set if
A 5x 0  x 26        B 5x 0  x 46
C 5x 0  1 x 56
45.	 (a)	 B  C	
(b)	 B  C
46.	 (a)	 A  C	
(b)	 A  B
47–52  ■  Intervals    Express the interval in terms of inequalities, 
and then graph the interval.
47.	 13,  02 	
48.	 12,  84
49.	 32,  82 	
50.	 C6,   1
2D
51.	 32,  ` 2 	
52.	 1`,  12
53–58  ■  Intervals    Express the inequality in interval notation, 
and then graph the corresponding interval.
53.	 x  1	
54.	 1  x  2
55.	 2  x  1	
56.	 x  5
57.	 x  1	
58.	 5  x  2
59–60  ■  Intervals    Express each set in interval notation.
59.	 (a)  	
5
_3
0
(b)	
5
−3
0
60.	 (a)	
2
0
(b)	
−2
0
61–66  ■  Intervals    Graph the set.
61.	 12,  02 11,  12 	
62.	 12,  02 11,  12
63.	 34,  64 30,  82 	
64.	 34,  62 30,  82
65.	 1`,  42 14,  ` 2 	
66.	 1`,  64 12,  102
67–72  ■  Absolute Value    Evaluate each expression.
67.	 (a)	 0  100 0 	
(b)	 0  73 0
68.	 (a)	 0  !5 5 0 	
(b)	 0  10 p 0
69.	 (a)	
 @ 0 6 0 0  4  0 @	
(b)	
1
0  1 0
70.	 (a)	
 @  2 0  12  0 @	
(b)	 1 @  1 0  1 0 @
71.	 (a)	 0  122 # 6 0 	
(b)	 0  A 1
3B 1152  0
72.	 (a)	 `  6
24
 ` 	
(b)	 `  7 12
12 7
 `
73–76  ■  Distance    Find the distance between the given 
numbers.
73.	
3
2
1
_3 _2 _1
0
74.	
3
2
1
_3 _2 _1
0
75.	 (a)	 2 and 17	
(b)	 3 and 21	
(c)	 11
8  and  3
10
76.	 (a)	
7
15 and  1
21	
(b)	 38 and 57	
(c)	 2.6 and 1.8
SKILLS Plus
77–78  ■  Repeating Decimal    Express each repeating decimal as 
a fraction. (See the margin note on page 3.)
77.	 (a)	 0.7	
(b)	 0.28	
(c)	 0.57
78.	 (a)	 5.23	
(b)	 1.37	
(c)	 2.135
79–82  ■  Simplifying Absolute Value    Express the quantity with-
out using absolute value.
79.	 0  p 3 0 	
80.	 0  1 !2 0
81.	 0  a b 0 , where a b
82.	 a b 0  a b 0 , where a b
83–84  ■  Signs of Numbers    Let a, b, and c be real numbers 
such that a 0, b 0, and c 0. Find the sign of each 
expression.
83.	 (a)  a	
(b)	 bc	
(c)	 a b	
(d)	 ab ac
84.	 (a)  b	
(b)	 a bc	
(c)	 c a	
(d)	 ab2
Applications
85.	 Area of a Garden    Mary’s backyard vegetable garden mea-
sures 20 ft by 30 ft, so its area is 20  30  600 ft 2.  
She decides to make it longer, as shown in the ﬁgure, so  
that the area increases to A 20130 x2 . Which property 
of real numbers tells us that the new area can also be written  
A  600  20x?
x
30 ft
20 ft
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
86.	 Temperature Variation    The bar graph shows the daily high 
temperatures for Omak, Washington, and Geneseo, New 
York, during a certain week in June. Let TO represent the 
temperature in Omak and TG the temperature in Geneseo. 
Calculate TO TG and 0  TO TG 0  for each day shown. 
Which of these two values gives more information?
80
Omak, WA
Geneseo, NY
75
70
65
Sun
Mon
Tue
Wed
Day
Daily high
temperature (*F)
Thu
Fri
Sat
87.	 Mailing a Package    The post ofﬁce will accept only  
packages for which the length plus the “girth” (distance 
around) is no more than 108 in. Thus for the package in the 
ﬁgure, we must have
L 21x y2 108
(a)	 Will the post ofﬁce accept a package that is 6 in. wide,  
8 in. deep, and 5 ft long? What about a package that 
measures 2 ft by 2 ft by 4 ft?
(b)	 What is the greatest acceptable length for a package that 
has a square base measuring 9 in. by 9 in.?
6 in.
L
8 in.
5 ft=60 in.
x
y
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
88.	 DISCUSS:  Sums and Products of Rational and Irrational  
Numbers    Explain why the sum, the difference, and the 
product of two rational numbers are rational numbers. Is the 
product of two irrational numbers necessarily irrational? 
What about the sum?
89.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Combining Rational and Irrational 
Numbers    Is 1
2 !2 rational or irrational? Is 1
2 # !2 ratio-
nal or irrational? Experiment with sums and products of other 
rational and irrational numbers. Prove the following.
(a)	 The sum of a rational number r and an irrational number 
t is irrational. 
(b)	 The product of a rational number r and an irrational 
number t is irrational. 
[Hint: For part (a), suppose that r t is a rational number q, 
that is, r t q. Show that this leads to a contradiction. 
Use similar reasoning for part (b).]
90.	 DISCOVER:  Limiting Behavior of Reciprocals    Complete the 
tables. What happens to the size of the fraction 1/x as x gets 
large? As x gets small?
	 x
1/x
1.0
0.5
0.1
0.01
0.001
	 x
1/x
      1
      2
    10
  100
1000
91.	 Discover:  Locating Irrational Numbers on the Real Line     
Using the figures below, explain how to locate the point !2 
on a number line. Can you locate !5 by a similar method? 
How can the circle shown in the figure help us to locate p on 
a number line? List some other irrational numbers that you 
can locate on a number line.
0
1
0
π
1
1
œ∑2
2
92.	 Prove:  Maximum and Minimum Formulas    Let max1a,  b2  
denote the maximum and min1a,  b2  denote the minimum of 
the real numbers a and b. For example, max12,  52 5 and 
min11,  22 2. 
(a)	 Prove that max1a,  b2 
a b 0  a b 0
2
.
(b)	 Prove that min1a,  b2 
a b 0  a b 0
2
. 
[Hint: Take cases and write these expressions without abso-
lute values. See Exercises 81 and 82.]
93.	 Write:  Real Numbers in the Real World    Write a paragraph 
describing different real-world situations in which you would 
use natural numbers, integers, rational numbers, and irratio-
nal numbers. Give examples for each type of situation.
94.	 Discuss:  Commutative and Noncommutative Operations     
We have learned that addition and multiplication are both 
commutative operations.
(a)	 Is subtraction commutative?
(b)	 Is division of nonzero real numbers commutative?
(c)	 Are the actions of putting on your socks and putting on 
your shoes commutative?
(d)	 Are the actions of putting on your hat and putting on 
your coat commutative?
(e)	 Are the actions of washing laundry and drying it 
commutative?
95.	 PROVE:  Triangle Inequality    We prove Property 5 of abso-
lute values, the Triangle Inequality:
0  x y 0 0  x 0 0  y 0
(a)	 Verify that the Triangle Inequality holds for x 2 and 
y 3, for x 2 and y 3, and for x 2 and 
y 3.
(b)	 Prove that the Triangle Inequality is true for all real num-
bers x and y.  [Hint: Take cases.]
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.2  ■  Exponents and Radicals  13
1.2 
Exponents and Radicals
■  Integer Exponents  ■  Rules for Working with Exponents  ■  Scientific Notation   
■  Radicals  ■  Rational Exponents  ■  Rationalizing the Denominator; Standard Form
In this section we give meaning to expressions such as am/n in which the exponent m/n 
is a rational number. To do this, we need to recall some facts about integer exponents, 
radicals, and nth roots.
■  Integer Exponents
A product of identical numbers is usually written in exponential notation. For example, 
5 # 5 # 5 is written as 53. In general, we have the following deﬁnition.
Exponential Notation
If a is any real number and n is a positive integer, then the nth power of a is
an a # a # . . . # a
 
1442443
	
n factors
The number a is called the base, and n is called the exponent.
Example 1  ■  Exponential Notation
(a)	 A1
2B
5 A1
2BA1
2BA1
2BA1
2BA1
2B 1
32
(b)	 132 4 132 # 132 # 132 # 132 81
(c)	 34 13 # 3 # 3 # 32 81
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
We can state several useful rules for working with exponential notation. To discover 
the rule for multiplication, we multiply 54 by 52:
54 # 52  15 # 5 # 5 # 5215 # 52  5 # 5 # 5 # 5 # 5 # 5  56  542
	
144424443 123 
1444442444443
	
4 factors	 2 factors	
6 factors
It appears that to multiply two powers of the same base, we add their exponents. In 
general, for any real number a and any positive integers m and n, we have
aman  1a # a # . . . # a2 1a # a # . . . # a2   a # a # a # . . . # a  amn
	
144424443 1442443 
144424443
	
m factors	
n factors	
m  n factors
Thus aman  amn.
We would like this rule to be true even when m and n are 0 or negative integers. For 
instance, we must have
20 # 23 203 23
But this can happen only if 20  1. Likewise, we want to have
54 # 54 54142 544 50 1
and this will be true if 54  1/54. These observations lead to the following deﬁnition.
  Note the distinction between  
132 4 and 34. In 132 4 the exponent 
applies to 3, but in 34 the exponent 
applies only to 3.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Zero and Negative Exponents
If a ? 0 is a real number and n is a positive integer, then
a0 1        and        an 1
an
Example 2  ■  Zero and Negative Exponents
(a)	 A4
7B
0 1
(b)	 x1 1
x1 1
x
(c)	 122 3 
1
122 3 1
8  1
8
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
■  Rules for Working with Exponents
Familiarity with the following rules is essential for our work with exponents and bases. 
In the table the bases a and b are real numbers, and the exponents m and n are integers.
Laws of Exponents
Law	
Example	
Description
1.	 aman  amn	
32 # 35  325  37	
To multiply two powers of the same number, add the exponents.
2.	 am
an amn	
35
32 352 33	
To divide two powers of the same number, subtract the exponents.
3.	 1am2 n amn	
1322 5 32#5 310	
To raise a power to a new power, multiply the exponents.
4.	 1ab2 n anbn	
13 # 42 2 32 # 42	
To raise a product to a power, raise each factor to the power.
5.	 a a
b b
n
an
bn	
a 3
4 b
2
32
42	
To raise a quotient to a power, raise both numerator and denominator 
to the power.
6.  a a
b b
n
a b
a b
n
	 a 3
4 b
2
a 4
3 b
2
	
To raise a fraction to a negative power, invert the fraction and change 
the sign of the exponent. 
7.  an
bm bm
an 	
32
45 45
32	
To move a number raised to a power from numerator to denominator 
or from denominator to numerator, change the sign of the exponent.
Proof of Law 3    If m and n are positive integers, we have
	
1am2 n  1a # a # . . . # a2 n
	
1444442444443
	
m factors
	
 1a # a # . . . # a2 1a # a # . . . # a2  . . .  1a # a # . . . # a2
	
1444442444443 1444442444443 
1444442444443
	
m factors	
m factors	
m factors
	
144444444444424444444444443
	
n groups of factors
	
 a # a # . . . # a  amn
	
1442443
	
mn factors
The cases for which m  0 or n  0 can be proved by using the deﬁnition of negative  
exponents.	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.2  ■  Exponents and Radicals  15
Proof of Law 4    If n is a positive integer, we have
1ab2 n  1ab2 1ab2  . . .  1ab2  1a # a # . . . # a2 # 1b # b # . . . # b2  anbn
	
144424443 
1442443 
1442443
	
n factors	
n factors	
n factors
Here we have used the Commutative and Associative Properties repeatedly. If n  0,  
Law 4 can be proved by using the deﬁnition of negative exponents.	
■
You are asked to prove Laws 2, 5, 6, and 7 in Exercises 108 and 109.
Example 3  ■  Using Laws of Exponents
(a)	 x4x7 x47 x11	
Law 1: aman  amn
(b)	 y4y7 y47 y3 1
y3	
Law 1: aman  amn
(c)	 c9
c5 c95 c4	
Law 2: am
an   amn
(d)	 1b42 5 b4#5 b20	
Law 3: 1 am 2 n  amn
(e)	 13x2 3 33x3 27x3	
Law 4: 1 ab 2 n  anbn
(f)	 a x
2 b
5
x5
25 x5
32	
Law 5: a a
b b
n
an
bn
Now Try Exercises 29, 31, and 33	
■
Example 4  ■  Simplifying Expressions with Exponents
Simplify:
(a)	 12a3b22 13ab42 3      (b)  a x
y b
3
a y2x
z b
4
Solution
(a)	  12a3b22 13ab42 3 12a3b22 333a31b42 34	
Law 4: 1 ab 2 n  anbn
	 	
  12a3b22 127a3b122 	
Law 3: 1 am 2 n  amn
	 	
  122 1272a3a3b2b12 	
Group factors with the same base
	 	
  54a6b14
	
Law 1: aman  amn
(b)	  a x
y b
3
a y2x
z b
4
x3
y3 
1y22 4x4
z4
	
Laws 5 and 4
	 	
  x3
y3 y8x4
z4 	
Law 3
	 	
  1x3x42 a y8
y3 b 1
z4	
Group factors with the same base
	 	
  x7y5
z4 	
Laws 1 and 2
Now Try Exercises 35 and 39	
■
When simplifying an expression, you will ﬁnd that many different methods will lead 
to the same result; you should feel free to use any of the rules of exponents to arrive at 
your own method. In the next example we see how to simplify expressions with nega-
tive exponents.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 5  ■  Simplifying Expressions with Negative Exponents
Eliminate negative exponents, and simplify each expression.
(a)	 6st4
2s2t2      (b)  a y
3z3 b
2
Solution
(a)	 We use Law 7, which allows us to move a number raised to a power from the 
numerator to the denominator (or vice versa) by changing the sign of the exponent.
	
 6st4
2s2t2 6ss2
2t2t4    Law 7
	
  3s3
t6
    Law 1
(b)	 We use Law 6, which allows us to change the sign of the exponent of a fraction 
by inverting the fraction.
	
 a y
3z3 b
2
a 3z3
y b
2
        Law 6
	
  9z6
y2
        Laws 5 and 4
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
■  Scientific Notation
Scientists use exponential notation as a compact way of writing very large numbers and 
very small numbers. For example, the nearest star beyond the sun, Proxima Centauri, is 
approximately 40,000,000,000,000 km away. The mass of a hydrogen atom is about 
0.00000000000000000000000166 g. Such numbers are difﬁcult to read and to write, so 
scientists usually express them in scientiﬁc notation.
Scientific Notation
A positive number x is said to be written in scientiﬁc notation if it is expressed 
as follows:
x a 10n  where 1 a 10 and n is an integer
For instance, when we state that the distance to the star Proxima Centauri is  
4  1013 km, the positive exponent 13 indicates that the decimal point should be moved 
13 places to the right:
	
4 1013 40,000,000,000,000
When we state that the mass of a hydrogen atom is 1.66  1024 g, the exponent 24 
indicates that the decimal point should be moved 24 places to the left:
	
1.66 1024 0.00000000000000000000000166
Move decimal point 13 places to the right
Move decimal point 24 places to the left
t4 moves to denominator 
and becomes t4
s2 moves to numerator 
and becomes s2
Although we are often unaware of its 
presence, mathematics permeates nearly 
every aspect of life in the modern world. 
With the advent of modern technology, 
mathematics plays an ever greater role in 
our lives. Today you were probably awak­
ened by a digital alarm clock, sent a text, 
surfed the Internet, watched HDTV or a 
streaming video, listened to music on 
your cell phone, drove a car with digitally 
controlled fuel injection, then fell asleep 
in a room whose temperature is con­
trolled by a digital thermostat. In each of 
these activities mathematics is crucially 
involved. In general, a property such as 
the intensity or frequency of sound, the 
oxygen level in the exhaust emission from 
a car, the colors in an image, or the tem­
perature in your bedroom is transformed 
into sequences of numbers by sophisti­
cated mathematical algorithms. These 
numerical data, which usually consist of 
many millions of bits (the digits 0 and 1), 
are then transmitted and reinterpreted. 
Dealing with such huge amounts of data 
was not feasible until the invention of 
computers, machines whose logical proc­
esses were invented by mathematicians.
The contributions of mathematics in 
the modern world are not limited to tech­
nological advances. The logical processes of 
mathematics are now used to analyze com­
plex problems in the social, political, and 
life sciences in new and surprising ways. 
Advances in mathematics continue to be 
made, some of the most exciting of these 
just within the past decade.
In other Mathematics in the Modern 
World, we will describe in more detail how 
mathematics affects all of us in our every­
day activities.
Mathematics in the Modern World
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.2  ■  Exponents and Radicals  17
Example 6  ■  Changing from Decimal to Scientiﬁc Notation
Write each number in scientiﬁc notation.
(a)	 56,920      (b)  0.000093
SOLUTION 
(a)	 56,920  5.692  104                (b)  0.000093  9.3  105
	
123 
123
	
4 places	
5 places
Now Try Exercise 83	
■
Example 7  ■  Changing from Scientiﬁc Notation to Decimal Notation
Write each number in decimal notation.
(a)	 6.97 109      (b)  4.6271 106
SOLUTION 
(a)	 6.97  109  6,970,000,000	
Move decimal 9 places to the right
	
1442443
	
9 places
(b)	 4.6271  106  0.0000046271	
Move decimal 6 places to the left
	
14243
	
6 places
Now Try Exercise 85	
■
Scientiﬁc notation is often used on a calculator to display a very large or very small 
number. For instance, if we use a calculator to square the number 1,111,111, the display 
panel may show (depending on the calculator model) the approximation
1.234568 12     or   
1.234568 e12
Here the ﬁnal digits indicate the power of 10, and we interpret the result as
1.234568 1012
Example 8  ■  Calculating with Scientiﬁc Notation
If a  0.00046, b  1.697  1022, and c  2.91  1018, use a calculator to approxi-
mate the quotient ab/c.
Solution    We could enter the data using scientiﬁc notation, or we could use laws of 
exponents as follows:
 ab
c 
14.6 1042 11.697 10222
2.91 1018
  
14.62 11.6972
2.91
1042218
 2.7 1036
We state the answer rounded to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures because the least accurate of 
the given numbers is stated to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
Now Try Exercises 89 and 91	
■
■  Radicals
We know what 2n means whenever n is an integer. To give meaning to a power, such as 
24/5, whose exponent is a rational number, we need to discuss radicals.
To use scientiﬁc notation on a calcula-
tor, press the key labeled EE  or  
EXP  or eex  to enter the exponent.  
For example, to enter the number  
3.629  1015 on a TI-83 or TI-84 cal-
culator, we enter
3.629  2nd  ee   15
and the display reads
3.629e15
For guidelines on working with signifi-
cant figures, see Appendix B, Calcula-
tions and Significant Figures. Go to 
www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
The symbol !  means “the positive square root of.” Thus
!a  b        means        b2  a        and        b  0
Since a  b2  0, the symbol !a makes sense only when a  0. For instance,
!9 3  because  32 9  and  3 0
Square roots are special cases of nth roots. The nth root of x is the number that, when 
raised to the nth power, gives x.
Definition of nth Root
If n is any positive integer, then the principal nth root of a is deﬁned as 
follows:
!
n a b  means  bn a
If n is even, we must have a  0 and b  0.
For example,
!
4 81 3     because  34 81  and  3 0
!
3 8 2  because  122 3 8
But !8, !
4 8, and !
6 8 are not deﬁned. (For instance, !8 is not deﬁned  
because the square of every real number is nonnegative.)
Notice that
"42 !16 4  but  "142 2 !16 4 0  4 0
So the equation "a2 a is not always true; it is true only when a  0. However, we 
can always write "a2 0  a 0 . This last equation is true not only for square roots, but 
for any even root. This and other rules used in working with nth roots are listed in the 
following box. In each property we assume that all the given roots exist.
Properties of nth Roots
Property	
Example
1.  "
n ab "
n a "
n b	
!
3 8 # 27 !
3 8!
3 27 122 132 6
2.  Å
n a
b "
n a
"
n b
	
Å
4 16
81 !
4 16
!
4 81
2
3
3.	 #
m !
n a 3
mn
a
_
	
#!
3 729 !
6 729 3
4.	 "
n an a    if n is odd	
"
3 152 3 5, "
5 25 2
5.	 "
n an 0  a 0     if n is even	
"
4 132 4 0  3 0 3
Example 9  ■  Simplifying Expressions Involving nth Roots
(a)	  "
3 x4 "
3 x3x	
Factor out the largest cube
	
	
  "
3 x3
 "
3 x	
Property 1: !
3 ab !
3 a!
3 b
	
	
  x"
3 x	
Property 4: "
3 a3 a
It is true that the number 9 has two 
square roots, 3 and 3, but the nota-
tion !9 is reserved for the positive 
square root of 9 (sometimes called the 
principal square root of 9). If we want 
the negative root, we must write !9, 
which is 3.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.2  ■  Exponents and Radicals  19
(b)	  "
4 81x8y4 "
4 81 "
4 x8
 "
4 y4	
Property 1: "
4 abc "
4 a "
4 b "
4 c
	
	
  3"
4 1x22 4 0  y 0 	
Property 5: "
4 a4 0  a 0
	
	
  3x2 0  y 0 	
Property 5: "
4 a4 0  a 0 , 0  x2
 0 x2
Now Try Exercises 45 and 47	
■
It is frequently useful to combine like radicals in an expression such as 2!3 5!3. 
This can be done by using the Distributive Property. For example,
2!3 5!3 12 52 !3 7!3
The next example further illustrates this process.
Example 10  ■  Combining Radicals
(a)	  !32 !200 !16 # 2 !100 # 2	
Factor out the largest squares
	
  !16!2 !100!2	
Property 1: !ab !a!b
	
  4!2 10!2 14!2	
Distributive Property
(b)	 If b  0, then
	
 "25b "b3 "25 "b "b2
 "b	
Property 1: !ab !a!b
	
  5!b b!b	
Property 5, b  0
	
  15 b2 !b	
Distributive Property
(c)	  "49x2 49 "491x2 12 	
Factor out the perfect square
	
 7"x2 1	
Property 1: !ab !a !b
Now Try Exercises 49, 51, and 53	
■
■  Rational Exponents
To deﬁne what is meant by a rational exponent or, equivalently, a fractional exponent 
such as a1/3, we need to use radicals. To give meaning to the symbol a1/n in a way that 
is consistent with the Laws of Exponents, we would have to have
1a1/n2 n a11/n2n a1 a
So by the deﬁnition of nth root,
a1/n !
n a
In general, we deﬁne rational exponents as follows.
Definition of Rational Exponents
For any rational exponent m/n in lowest terms, where m and n are integers and  
n  0, we deﬁne
am/n 1 !
n a2 m  or equivalently  am/n "
n am
If n is even, then we require that a  0.
With this deﬁnition it can be proved that the Laws of Exponents also hold for ratio-
nal exponents.
  Avoid making the following error:
!a b !a !b
For instance, if we let a  9 and  
b  16, then we see the error:
 !9 16 0 !9 !16
 !25 0 3 4
 5 0 7    Wrong!
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 11  ■  Using the Deﬁnition of Rational Exponents
(a)	 41/2 !4 2
(b)	 82/3 1 !
3 82 2 22 4        Alternative solution: 82/3 "
3 82 "
3 64 4
(c)	 1251/3 
1
1251/3 
1
!
3 125
1
5
Now Try Exercises 55 and 57	
■
Example 12  ■  Using the Laws of Exponents with Rational Exponents
(a)	 a1/3a7/3 a8/3	
Law 1: aman  amn
(b)	 a2/5a7/5
a3/5
a2/57/53/5 a6/5	
Law 1, Law 2: am
an amn
(c)	 12a3b42 3/2 23/21a32 3/21b42 3/2	
Law 4: 1abc2 n anbncn
	
 1 !22 3a313/22b413/22	
Law 3: 1am2 n amn 
	
 2!2a9/2b6
(d)	  a 2x3/4
y1/3 b
3
a y4
x1/2 b 
231x3/42 3
1 y1/32 3 # 1 y4x1/22	
Laws 5, 4, and 7
	
 8x9/4
y # y4x1/2
	
Law 3
	
 8x11/4y3
	
Laws 1 and 2
Now Try Exercises 61, 63, 67, and 69	
■
Example 13  ■  Simplifying by Writing Radicals as Rational Exponents
(a) 
1
"
3 x4 1
x4/3 x4/3	
Deﬁnition of rational and negative exponents
(b)	  12!x2 13!
3 x2 12x1/22 13x1/32
	
Deﬁnition of rational exponents
	
  6x1/21/3 6x5/6	
Law 1
(c)	  #x"x 1xx1/22 1/2	
Deﬁnition of rational exponents
	
  1x3/22 1/2	
Law 1
	
  x3/4	
Law 3
Now Try Exercises 73 and 77	
■
■  Rationalizing the Denominator; Standard Form
It is often useful to eliminate the radical in a denominator by multiplying both numera-
tor and denominator by an appropriate expression. This procedure is called rational-
izing the denominator. If the denominator is of the form !a, we multiply numerator 
and denominator by !a. In doing this we multiply the given quantity by 1, so we do 
not change its value. For instance,
1
!a 
1
!a # 1 
1
!a # !a
!a !a
a
Note that the denominator in the last fraction contains no radical. In general, if the  
denominator is of the form "
n am with m  n, then multiplying the numerator and  
denominator by "
n anm will rationalize the denominator, because (for a  0)
"
n am
 "
n anm "
n amnm "
n an a
Diophantus lived in Alexandria about 
250 a.d. His book Arithmetica is considered 
the first book on algebra. In it he gives 
methods for finding integer solutions of 
algebraic equations. Arithmetica was read 
and studied for more than a thousand 
years. Fermat (see page 117) made some 
of his most important discoveries while 
studying this book. Diophantus’ major 
contribution is the use of symbols to stand 
for the unknowns in a problem. Although 
his symbolism is not as simple as what  
we use today, it was a major advance  
over writing everything in words. In 
Diophantus’ notation the equation
x5 7x2 8x 5 24
is written
Kga%h
c
gzM°eiskd
Our modern algebraic notation did not 
come into common use until the 17th 
century.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.2  ■  Exponents and Radicals  21
A fractional expression whose denominator contains no radicals is said to be in 
standard form.
Example 14  ■  Rationalizing Denominators
Put each fractional expression into standard form by rationalizing the denominator. 
(a) 	 2
!3      (b) 
1
!
3 5
      (c)  Ä
7 1
a2
Solution
(a)	  2
!3 
2
!3 # !3
!3
	
Multiply by !3
!3
	 	
 2!3
3
	
!3 # !3 3
(b)	
1
"
3 5

1
"
3 5 # "
3 52
"
3 52	
Multiply by "
3 52
"
3 52
	 	
 "
3 25
5
	
"
3 5 # "
3 52 "
3 53 5
(c)	  Ä
7 1
a2 
1
"
7 a2
	
Property 2: Ä
n a
b !
n a
!
n b
	 	
 
1
"
7 a2 # "
7 a5
"
7 a5	
Multiply by "
7 a5
"
7 a5
	 	
 "
7 a5
a
	
"
7 a2 # "
7 a5 a
Now Try Exercises 79 and 81	
■
This equals 1
Concepts
	 1.  (a)	 Using exponential notation, we can write the product  
5 # 5 # 5 # 5 # 5 # 5 as 
 
  .
(b)	 In the expression 34 the number 3 is called the 
 
  ,  
and the number 4 is called the 
 
  .
	 2.	 (a)	 When we multiply two powers with the same base, we 
 
 the exponents. So 34 # 35  
 
  .
(b)	 When we divide two powers with the same base, we 
 
 the exponents. So 35
32
  
 
  .
	 3.	 (a)	 Using exponential notation, we can write "
3 5 as 
 
  .
(b)	 Using radicals, we can write 51/2 as 
 
  . 
(c)	 Is there a difference between "52 and 1 !52 2? Explain.
	 4.	 Explain what 43/2 means, then calculate 43/2 in two different 
ways:
141/22
  
 
        or        1432
  
 
	 5.	 Explain how we rationalize a denominator, then complete the 
following steps to rationalize 1
!3:
	 	
1
!3 
1
!3 # f
a a
f
	 6.	 Find the missing power in the following calculation:  
51/3 # 5
  5. 
7–8  ■  Yes or No? If No, give a reason.
	 7.	 (a)	 Is the expression A2
3B2 equal to 3
4?
(b)	 Is there a difference between 152 4 and 54?
	 8.	 (a)	 Is the expression 1x22 3 equal tox5?
(b)	 Is the expression 12x42 3 equal to 2x12? 
(c)	 Is the expression "4a2 equal to 2a?
(d)	 Is the expression "a2 4 equal to a 2?
1.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Skills
9–16  ■  Radicals and Exponents    Write each radical expression 
using exponents, and each exponential expression using radicals.
Radical expression	
Exponential expression
	 9.	 	
1
!3	
10.	 	
"
3 72	
11.	 	
	
42/3
12.	 	
	
103/2
13.	 	
"
5 53	
14.	 	
	
21.5
15.	 	
	
a2/5
16.	 	
1
"x5	
17–28  ■  Radicals and Exponents    Evaluate each expression.
17.	 (a)	 26	
(b)	 122 6	
(c)	 A1
5B
2 # 132 3
18.	 (a)	 152 3 	
(b)	 53	
(c)	 152 2 # A2
5B
2
19.	 (a)	 A5
3B
0 # 21	
(b)	 23
30 	
(c)	 A2
3B
2
20.	 (a)	 23 # 122 0	
(b)	 23 # 122 0	
(c)	 A3
5 B
3
21.	 (a)	 53 # 5	
(b)	 54 # 52	
(c)	 1222 3
22.	 (a)	 38 # 35 	
(b)	 107
104	
(c)	 1352 4
23.	 (a)	 3!
3 16	
(b)	 !18
!81	
(c)	 #
27
4
24.	 (a)	 2!
3 81	
(b)	 !18
!25	
(c)	 #
12
49
25.	 (a)	 !3 !15	
(b)	 !48
!3 	
(c)	 !
3 24 !
3 18
26.	 (a)	 !10 !32	
(b)	 !54
!6 	
(c)	 !
3 15 !
3 75
27.	 (a)	 !132
!3 	
(b)	 !
3 2 !
3 32	
(c)	 #
4 1
4  #
4 1
64
28.	 (a)	 #
5 1
8  #
5 1
4	
(b)	 #
6 1
2 !
6 128	
(c)	
!
3 4
!
3 108
29–34  ■  Exponents    Simplify each expression, and eliminate 
any negative exponents.
29.	 (a)	 x3 # x4	
(b)  12y22 3	
(c)	 y2y7
30.	 (a)	 y5 # y2	
(b)	 18x2 2	
(c)	 x4x3
31.	 (a)	 x5 # x3	
(b)	 „2„4„5	
(c)	 x16
x10
32.	 (a)	 y2 # y5	
(b)	 z5z3z4	
(c)	 y7y0
y10
33.	 (a)	 a9a2
a
	
(b)	 1a2a42 3	
(c)	 a x
2 b
3
15x62
34.	 (a)	 z2z4
z3z1	
(b)	 12a3a22 4	
(c)	 13z22 312z32
35–44  ■  Exponents    Simplify each expression, and eliminate 
any negative exponents.
35.	 (a)	 13x3y22 12y32 	
(b)	 15„2z22 21z32
36.	 (a)	 18m2n42 A1
2 n2B	
(b)	 13a4b22 31a2b12
37.	 (a)	 x2y1
x5 	
(b)	 a a3
2b2 b
3
38.	 (a)	 y2z3
y1 	
(b)	 a x3y2
x3y2 b
2
39.	 (a)	 a a2
b b
5
a a3b2
c3 b
3
	
(b)	
1u1√22 2
1u3√22 3
40.	 (a)	 a x4z2
4y5 b a 2x3y2
z3
b
2
	
(b)	
1rs22 3
1r3s22 2
41.	 (a)	 8a3b4
2a5b5	
(b)	 a
y
5x2 b
3
42.	 (a)	 5xy2
x1y3	
(b)	 a 2a1b
a2b3 b
3
43.	 (a)	 a 3a
b3 b
1
	
(b)	 a q1r1s2
r5sq8 b
1
44.	 (a)	 a s2t4
5s1t b
2
	
(b)	 a xy2z3
x2y3z4 b
3
45–48  ■  Radicals    Simplify the expression.  Assume that the 
letters denote any positive real numbers.
45.	 (a)	 "
4 x4	
(b)	 "
4 16x8
46.	 (a)	 "
5 x10	
(b)	 "
3 x3y6
47.	 (a)	 "
6 64a6b7	
(b)	 "
3 a2b "
3 64a4b
48.	 (a)	 "
4 x4y2z2	
(b)	 #
3 "64x6
49–54  ■  Radical Expressions    Simplify the expression.
49.	 (a)	 !32 !18	
(b)	 !75 !48
50.	 (a)	 !125 !45	
(b)	 !
3 54 !
3 16
51.	 (a)	 "9a3 "a	
(b)	 "16x "x5
52.	 (a)	 "
3 x4 !
3 8x	
(b)	 4"18rt3 5"32r3t5
53.	 (a)	 "81x2 81	
(b)	 "36x2 36y2
54.	 (a)	 "27a2 63a	
(b)	 "75t 100t2
55–60  ■  Rational Exponents    Evaluate each expression.
55.	 (a)	 161/4	
(b)	 81/3	
(c)	 91/2
56.	 (a)	 271/3	
(b)	 182 1/3	
(c)	 A1
8B
1/3
57.	 (a)	 322/5	
(b)	 A4
9B
1/2	
(c)	 A16
81B
3/4
58.	 (a)	 1252/3	
(b)	 A25
64B
3/2	
(c)	 274/3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.2  ■  Exponents and Radicals  23
59.	 (a)	 52/3 # 51/3	
(b)	 33/5
32/5	
(c)	 1 !
3 42 3
60.	 (a)	 32/7 # 312/7	
(b)	 72/3
75/3	
(c)	 1 !
5 62 10
61–70  ■  Rational Exponents    Simplify the expression and elim-
inate any negative exponent(s). Assume that all letters denote pos-
itive numbers.
61.	 (a)	 x3/4x5/4	
(b)	 y2/3y4/3
62.	 (a)	 14b2 1/218b1/42 	
(b)	 13a3/42 215a1/22
63.	 (a)	 „4/3„2/3
„1/3
	
(b)	
a5/412a3/42 3
a1/4
64.	 (a)	 18y32 2/3	
(b)	 1u4√62 1/3
65.	 (a)	 18a6b3/22 2/3	
(b)	 14a6b82 3/2
66.	 (a)	 1x5y1/32 3/5	
(b)	 14r8s1/22 1/2132s5/42 1/5
67.	 (a)	
18s3t32 2/3
1s4t82 1/4	
(b)	
132x5y3/22 2/5
1x5/3y2/32 3/5
68.	 (a)	 a x8y4
16y4/3 b
1/4
	
(b)	 a 4s3t4
s2t9/2 b
1/2
69.	 (a)	 a x3/2
y1/2 b
4
a x2
y3 b 	
(b)	 a 4y3z2/3
x1/2
b
2
a x3y6
8z4 b
1/3
70.	 (a)	 a a1/6b3
x1y b
3
a x2b1
a3/2y1/3 b 	 (b)	
19st2 3/2
127s3t42 2/3 a 3s2
4t1/3 b
1
71–78  ■  Radicals    Simplify the expression, and eliminate any neg-
ative exponents(s). Assume that all letters denote positive numbers.
71.	 (a)	 "x3	
(b)	 "
5 x6
	72.	 (a)	 "x5	
(b)	 "
4 x6
73.	 (a)	 "
6 y5
  "
3 y2	
(b)	 A5!
3 x BA2!
4 x B
74.	 (a)	 "
4 b3
  "b	
(b)	 A2"a BA"
3 a2
 B
75.	 (a)	 "4st3
  "
6 s3t2	
(b)	 "
4 x7
"
4 x3
76.	 (a)	 "
5 x3y2
   
10
"x4y16	
(b)	 "
3 8x2
!x
77.	 (a)	 "
3 y!y	
(b)	 Å
16u3√
u√5
78.	 (a)	 #s"s3	
(b)	 Å
3 54x2y4
2x5y
79–82  ■  Rationalize    Put each fractional expression into stan-
dard form by rationalizing the denominator. 
79.	 (a)	
1
!6	
(b)	 #
3
2	
(c)	 9
!
4 2
80.	 (a)	 12
!3	
(b)	 #
12
5 	
(c)	
8
"
3 52
81.	 (a)	
1
!5x	
(b)	 Ä
x
5	
(c)	 Ä
5 1
x3
82.	 (a)	 Ä
s
3t	
(b)	
a
"
6 b2	
(c)	 1
c3/5
83–84  ■  Scientific Notation    Write each number in scientiﬁc  
notation.
83.	 (a)	 69,300,000	
(b)	 7,200,000,000,000
(c)	 0.000028536	
(d)	 0.0001213
84.	 (a)	 129,540,000	
(b)	 7,259,000,000
(c)	 0.0000000014	
(d)	 0.0007029
85–86  ■  Decimal Notation    Write each number in decimal  
notation.
85.	 (a)	 3.19  105	
(b)	 2.721  108
(c)	 2.670  1028	
(d)	 9.999  1029
86.	 (a)	 7.1  1014	
(b)	 6  1012
(c)	 8.55  1023	
(d)	 6.257  10210
87–88  ■  Scientific Notation    Write the number indicated in each 
statement in scientiﬁc notation.
87.	 (a)	 A light-year, the distance that light travels in one year, is 
about 5,900,000,000,000 mi.
(b)	 The diameter of an electron is about 0.0000000000004 cm.
(c)	 A drop of water contains more than 33 billion billion  
molecules.
88.	 (a)	 The distance from the earth to the sun is about  
93 million miles.
(b)	 The mass of an oxygen molecule is about 
0.000000000000000000000053 g.
(c)	 The mass of the earth is about  
5,970,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 kg.
89–94  ■  Scientific Notation    Use scientiﬁc notation, the Laws 
of Exponents, and a calculator to perform the indicated opera-
tions. State your answer rounded to the number of signiﬁcant dig-
its indicated by the given data.
89.	 17.2 1092 11.806 10122
90.	 11.062 10242 18.61 10192
91.	
1.295643 109
13.610 10172 12.511 1062
92.	
173.12 11.6341 10282
0.0000000019
93.	
10.00001622 10.015822
1594,621,0002 10.00582 	
94.	
13.542 1062 9
15.05 1042 12
SKILLS Plus
95.	 Let a, b, and c be real numbers with a  0, b  0, and  
c  0. Determine the sign of each expression.
(a)  b5	
(b)	 b10	
(c)	 ab2c3
(d)  1b a2 3	
(e)	 1b a2 4	
(f)	 a3c3
b6c6
96.	 Comparing Roots    Without using a calculator, determine 
which number is larger in each pair.
(a)	 21/2 or 21/3	
(b)	 A1
2B
1/2 or A1
2B
1/3
(c)	 71/4 or 41/3	
(d)	 !
3 5 or !3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Applications
  97.	 Distance to the Nearest Star    Proxima Centauri, the star 
nearest to our solar system, is 4.3 light-years away. Use the 
information in Exercise 87(a) to express this distance in 
miles.
  98.	 Speed of Light    The speed of light is about 186,000 mi/s. 
Use the information in Exercise 88(a) to ﬁnd how long it 
takes for a light ray from the sun to reach the earth.
  99.	 Volume of the Oceans    The average ocean depth is  
3.7  103 m, and the area of the oceans is 3.6  1014 m2. 
What is the total volume of the ocean in liters? (One cubic 
meter contains 1000 liters.)
100.	 National Debt    As of July 2013, the population of the 
United States was 3.164 108, and the national debt was 
1.674 1013 dollars. How much was each person’s share 
of the debt?
[Source: U.S. Census Bureau and U.S. Department of  
Treasury] 
	101.	 Number of Molecules    A sealed room in a hospital, measur-
ing 5 m wide, 10 m long, and 3 m high, is ﬁlled with pure 
oxygen. One cubic meter contains 1000 L, and 22.4 L of any 
gas contains 6.02  1023 molecules (Avogadro’s number). 
How many molecules of oxygen are there in the room?
102.	 How Far Can You See?    Because of the curvature of the 
earth, the maximum distance D that you can see from the 
top of a tall building of height h is estimated by the  
formula
D "2rh h2
	
	 where r  3960 mi is the radius of the earth and D and h 
are also measured in miles. How far can you see from the 
observation deck of the Toronto CN Tower, 1135 ft above 
the ground?
r
CN Tower
103.	 Speed of a Skidding Car    Police use the formula 
s "30fd to estimate the speed s (in mi/h) at which  
a car is traveling if it skids d feet after the brakes are 
applied suddenly. The number f is the coefﬁcient  
of friction of the road, which is a measure of the  
“slipperiness” of the road. The table gives some  
typical estimates for f.
Tar
Concrete
Gravel
Dry
1.0
0.8
0.2
Wet
0.5
0.4
0.1
(a)	 If a car skids 65 ft on wet concrete, how fast was it 
moving when the brakes were applied?
(b)	 If a car is traveling at 50 mi/h, how far will it skid on 
wet tar?
104.	 Distance from the Earth to the Sun    It follows from  
Kepler’s Third Law of planetary motion that the average 
distance from a planet to the sun (in meters) is
d a GM
4p2 b
1/3
T 2/3
	
	 where M  1.99  1030 kg is the mass of the sun,  
G  6.67  1011 N # m2/kg2 is the gravitational con-
stant, and T is the period of the planet’s orbit (in  
seconds). Use the fact that the period of the earth’s  
orbit is about 365.25 days to ﬁnd the distance from the 
earth to the sun.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
105.	 Discuss:  How Big is a Billion?    If you had a million (106) 
dollars in a suitcase, and you spent a thousand (103) dollars 
each day, how many years would it take you to use all the 
money? Spending at the same rate, how many years would 
it take you to empty a suitcase ﬁlled with a billion (109) 
dollars?
106.	 Discuss:  Easy Powers that Look Hard    Calculate these 
expressions in your head. Use the Laws of Exponents to 
help you.
	
(a)  185
95 	
(b)  206 # 10.52 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.3  ■  Algebraic Expressions  25
107.	 DISCOVER:  Limiting Behavior of Powers    Complete the fol-
lowing tables. What happens to the nth root of 2 as n gets 
large? What about the nth root of 1
2?
	 n
A1
2B
1/n
1
2
5
10
100
	 n
21/n
    1
    2
    5
  10
100
	
	 Construct a similar table for n1/n. What happens to the nth 
root of n as n gets large?
108.	 PROVE:  Laws of Exponents    Prove the following Laws of 
Exponents for the case in which m and n are positive inte-
gers and m n. 
(a)	 Law 2: am
an amn	
(b)	 Law 5: a a
b b
n
an
bn
109.	 PROVE:  Laws of Exponents    Prove the following Laws of 
Exponents.
(a)	 Law 6: a a
b b
n
bn
an	
(b)	 Law 7: an
bm bm
an
1.3 
Algebraic Expressions
■  Adding and Subtracting Polynomials  ■  Multiplying Algebraic Expressions   
■  Special Product Formulas  ■  Factoring Common Factors  ■  Factoring Trinomials   
■  Special Factoring Formulas  ■  Factoring by Grouping Terms
A variable is a letter that can represent any number from a given set of numbers. If we 
start with variables, such as x, y, and z, and some real numbers and combine them using 
addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, powers, and roots, we obtain an alge-
braic expression. Here are some examples:
2x2 3x 4   !x 10   y 2z
y2 4
A monomial is an expression of the form ax k, where a is a real number and k is a 
nonnegative integer. A binomial is a sum of two monomials and a trinomial is a sum 
of three monomials. In general, a sum of monomials is called a polynomial. For ex-
ample, the ﬁrst expression listed above is a polynomial, but the other two are not.
Polynomials
A polynomial in the variable x is an expression of the form
a n x n an1xn1 . . . a1x a0
where a0, a1, . . . , an are real numbers, and n is a nonnegative integer. If an ? 0, 
then the polynomial has degree n. The monomials a kx k that make up the poly-
nomial are called the terms of the polynomial.
Note that the degree of a polynomial is the highest power of the variable that appears 
in the polynomial.
Polynomial
Type
Terms
Degree
2x 2  3x  4
trinomial
2x 2, 3x, 4
2
x 8  5x
binomial
x 8, 5x
8
8  x  x 2  1
2 x3
four terms
 1
2 x3, x 2, x, 3
3
5x  1
binomial
5x, 1
1
9x 5
monomial
9x 5
5
6
monomial
6
0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
■  Adding and Subtracting Polynomials
We add and subtract polynomials using the properties of real numbers that were dis-
cussed in Section 1.1. The idea is to combine like terms (that is, terms with the same 
variables raised to the same powers) using the Distributive Property. For instance,
5x7 3x7 15 32x7 8x7
In subtracting polynomials, we have to remember that if a minus sign precedes an ex-
pression in parentheses, then the sign of every term within the parentheses is changed 
when we remove the parentheses:
1b c2 b c
[This is simply a case of the Distributive Property, a1b c2 ab ac, with a  1.]
Example 1  ■  Adding and Subtracting Polynomials
(a)	 Find the sum 1x3 6x2 2x 42 1x3 5x2 7x2 .
(b)	 Find the difference 1x3 6x2 2x 42 1x3 5x2 7x2 .
Solution
(a)	 1x3 6x2 2x 42 1x3 5x2 7x2
	 	           1x3 x32 16x2 5x22 12x 7x2 4	
Group like terms
	 	           2x3 x2 5x 4	
Combine like terms
(b)	 1x3 6x2 2x 42 1x3 5x2 7x2
	 	           x3 6x2 2x 4 x3 5x2 7x	
Distributive Property
	 	           1x3 x32 16x2 5x22 12x 7x2 4	
Group like terms
	 	           11x2 9x 4	
Combine like terms
Now Try Exercises 17 and 19	
■
■  Multiplying Algebraic Expressions
To ﬁnd the product of polynomials or other algebraic expressions, we need to use the 
Distributive Property repeatedly. In particular, using it three times on the product of two 
binomials, we get
1a b2 1c d2 a1c d2 b1c d2 ac ad bc bd
This says that we multiply the two factors by multiplying each term in one factor by 
each term in the other factor and adding these products. Schematically, we have
1a b2 1c d2 ac ad bc bd
	
↑	
↑	
↑	
↑
	
F	
O	
I	
L
In general, we can multiply two algebraic expressions by using the Distributive 
Property and the Laws of Exponents.
Example 2  ■  Multiplying Binomials Using FOIL
	
12x 12 13x 52 6x2 10x 3x 5        Distributive Property
	
↑	
↑	
↑	
↑
	
F	
O	
I	
L
	
 6x2 7x 5
        Combine like terms
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
Distributive Property
ac bc 1a b2c
The acronym FOIL helps us remember 
that the product of two binomials is the 
sum of the products of the First terms, 
the Outer terms, the Inner terms, and 
the Last terms.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.3  ■  Algebraic Expressions  27
When we multiply trinomials or other polynomials with more terms, we use the 
Distributive Property. It is also helpful to arrange our work in table form. The next ex-
ample illustrates both methods.
Example 3  ■  Multiplying Polynomials
Find the product:    12x 32 1x2 5x 42  
Solution 1:  Using the Distributive Property
12x 32 1x2 5x 42 2x1x2 5x 42 31x2 5x 42
	
Distributive Property
 12x # x2 2x # 5x 2x # 42 13 # x2 3 # 5x 3 # 42	
Distributive Property
 12x3 10x2 8x2 13x2 15x 122
	
Laws of Exponents
 2x3 7x2 7x 12
	
Combine like terms
Solution 2:  Using Table Form
	
 x2 5x 4
	
 
2x 3
	
 3x2 15x 12        Multiply x2  5x  4 by 3
	
 2x3 10x2 8x
        Multiply x2  5x  4 by 2x
	
 2x3 7x2 7x 12        Add like terms
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
■  Special Product Formulas
Certain types of products occur so frequently that you should memorize them. You can 
verify the following formulas by performing the multiplications.
Special Product Formulas
If A and B are any real numbers or algebraic expressions, then
1.	 1A B2 1A B2 A2 B2	
Sum and difference of same terms
2.	 1A B2 2 A2 2AB B2	
Square of a sum
3.	 1A B2 2 A2 2AB B2	
Square of a difference
4.	 1A B2 3 A3 3A2B 3AB2 B3	
Cube of a sum
5.	 1A B2 3 A3 3A2B 3AB2 B3	
Cube of a difference
The key idea in using these formulas (or any other formula in algebra) is the  
Principle of Substitution: We may substitute any algebraic expression for any letter in 
a formula. For example, to ﬁnd 1x2 y32 2 we use Product Formula 2, substituting x 2 
for A and y 3 for B, to get
1x2 y32 2 1x22 2 21x22 1 y32 1 y32 2
1A B2 2	  	  A2 	  	
2AB 	  	 B2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 4  ■  Using the Special Product Formulas
Use the Special Product Formulas to ﬁnd each product.
(a)	 13x 52 2      (b)  1x2 22 3
Solution
(a)	 Substituting A  3x and B  5 in Product Formula 2, we get
13x 52 2 13x2 2 213x2 152 52 9x2 30x 25
(b)	 Substituting A  x 2 and B  2 in Product Formula 5, we get
 1x2 22 3 1x22 3 31x22 2122 31x22 122 2 23
  x6 6x4 12x2 8
Now Try Exercises 31 and 43	
■
Example 5  ■  Using the Special Product Formulas
Find each product.
(a)	 12x !y2 12x !y2       (b)  1x y 12 1x y 12
Solution
(a)	 Substituting A  2x and B  !y in Product Formula 1, we get
12x !y2 12x !y2 12x2 2 1 !y2 2 4x2 y
(b)	 If we group x  y together and think of this as one algebraic expression, we can 
use Product Formula 1 with A  x  y and B  1.
 1x y 12 1x y 12 31x y2 14 31x y2 14
 1x y2 2 12
        Product Formula 1
 x2 2xy y2 1
        Product Formula 2
Now Try Exercises 57 and 61	
■
■  Factoring Common Factors
We use the Distributive Property to expand algebraic expressions. We sometimes need 
to reverse this process (again using the Distributive Property) by factoring an expres-
sion as a product of simpler ones. For example, we can write
	
x2 4 1x 22 1x 22
	
We say that x  2 and x  2 are factors of x 2  4.
The easiest type of factoring occurs when the terms have a common factor.
Example 6  ■  Factoring Out Common Factors
Factor each expression.
(a)	 3x2 6x    (b)  8x4y2 6x3y3 2xy4    (c)  12x 42 1x 32 51x 32
Solution
(a)	 The greatest common factor of the terms 3x 2 and 6x is 3x, so we have
3x2 6x 3x 1x 22
Check Your Answer
Multiplying gives
3x1x 22 3x2 6x  ✓
Changing Words, Sound, and 
Pictures into Numbers
Pictures, sound, and text are routinely 
transmitted from one place to another 
via the Internet, fax machines, or 
modems. How can such things be trans­
mitted through telephone wires? The  
key to doing this is to change them into 
numbers or bits (the digits 0 or 1). It’s 
easy to see how to change text to  
numbers. For example, we could use  
the correspondence A  00000001,  
B  00000010, C  00000011,  
D  00000100, E  00000101, and  
so on. The word “BED” then becomes 
000000100000010100000100. By reading 
the digits in groups of eight, it is possible 
to translate this number back to the word 
“BED.”
Changing sound to bits is more com­
plicated. A sound wave can be graphed 
on an oscilloscope or a computer. The 
graph is then broken down mathemati­
cally into simpler components corre­
sponding to the different frequencies of 
the original sound. (A branch of mathe­
matics called Fourier analysis is used 
here.) The intensity of each component is 
a number, and the original sound can be 
reconstructed from these numbers. For 
example, music is stored on a CD as a 
sequence of bits; it may look like 
101010001010010100101010 10000010 
11110101000101011. . . . (One second of 
music requires 1.5 million bits!) The CD 
player reconstructs the music from the 
numbers on the CD.
Changing pictures into numbers 
involves expressing the color and bright­
ness of each dot (or pixel) into a number. 
This is done very efﬁciently using a 
branch of mathematics called wavelet 
theory. The FBI uses wavelets as a com­
pact way to store the millions of 
ﬁngerprints they need on ﬁle.
Mathematics in the Modern World
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.3  ■  Algebraic Expressions  29
(b)	 We note that
8, 6, and 2 have the greatest common factor 2
x 4, x 3, and x have the greatest common factor x
y 2, y 3, and y 4 have the greatest common factor y 2
	 	 So the greatest common factor of the three terms in the polynomial is 2xy 2, and we 
have
 8x4y2 6x3y3 2xy4 12xy22 14x32 12xy22 13x2y2 12xy22 1y22
  2xy214x3 3x2y y22
(c)	 The two terms have the common factor x  3.
 12x 42 1x 32 51x 32 312x 42 541x 32    Distributive Property
  12x 12 1x 32
    Simplify
Now Try Exercises 63, 65, and 67	
■
■  Factoring Trinomials
To factor a trinomial of the form x 2  bx  c, we note that
1x r2 1x s2 x2 1r s2x rs
so we need to choose numbers r and s so that r  s  b and rs  c.
Example 7  ■  Factoring x2 bx c by Trial and Error
Factor:    x 2  7x  12
Solution    We need to ﬁnd two integers whose product is 12 and whose sum is 7. By 
trial and error we ﬁnd that the two integers are 3 and 4. Thus the factorization is
x2 7x 12 1x 32 1x 42
	
	
factors of 12
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
To factor a trinomial of the form ax2  bx  c with a ? 1, we look for factors of  
the form px  r and qx  s:
ax2 bx c 1 px r2 1qx s2 pqx2 1 ps qr2x rs
Therefore we try to ﬁnd numbers p, q, r, and s such that pq  a, rs  c, ps  qr  b. 
If these numbers are all integers, then we will have a limited number of possibilities to 
try for p, q, r, and s.
Discovery Project
Visualizing a Formula
Many of the Special Product Formulas in this section can be “seen” as geomet-
rical facts about length, area, and volume. For example, the formula about the 
square of a sum can be interpreted to be about areas of squares and rectangles. 
The ancient Greeks always interpreted algebraic formulas in terms of geometric 
figures. Such figures give us special insight into how these formulas work. You 
can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
ab
b™
a™
b
a
ab
a
b
Check Your Answer
Multiplying gives
2xy214x3 3x2y y22
   
8x4y2 6x3y3 2xy4  ✓
Check Your Answer
Multiplying gives
1x 32 1x 42 x2 7x 12  ✓
	
factors of a
	
↓	
↓
ax 2  bx  c  Ópx  rÔÓqx  sÔ
	
↑	
↑
	
factors of c
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 8  ■  Factoring ax2 bx c by Trial and Error
Factor:    6x 2  7x  5
Solution    We can factor 6 as 6 # 1 or 3 # 2, and 5 as 5 # 1 or 5 # 112 . By trying 
these possibilities, we arrive at the factorization
	
factors of 6
	
6x2 7x 5 13x 52 12x 12
	
	
factors of 5
Now Try Exercise 71	
■
Example 9  ■  Recognizing the Form of an Expression
Factor each expression.
(a)	 x2 2x 3      (b)  15a 12 2 215a 12 3
Solution
(a)	 x2 2x 3 1x 32 1x 12     Trial and error
(b)	 This expression is of the form
2  2 
  3
	 	 where 
 represents 5a  1. This is the same form as the expression in part (a), 
so it will factor as 1
  321
  12.
1 5a  1 22  21 5a  1 2  3  31 5a  1 2  34 31 5a  1 2  14
	
 15a  22 15a  22
Now Try Exercise 75	
■
■  Special Factoring Formulas
Some special algebraic expressions can be factored by using the following formulas. 
The ﬁrst three are simply Special Product Formulas written backward.
Special Factoring Formulas
Formula	
Name
1.	 A2 B2 1A B2 1A B2 	
Difference of squares
2.	 A2 2AB B2 1A B2 2	
Perfect square
3.	 A2 2AB B2 1A B2 2	
Perfect square
4.	 A3 B3 1A B2 1A2 AB B22 	
Difference of cubes
5.	 A3 B3 1A B2 1A2 AB B22 	
Sum of cubes
Example 10  ■  Factoring Differences of Squares
Factor each expression.
(a)	 4x2 25            (b)  1x y2 2 z2
Check Your Answer
Multiplying gives
13x 5212x 12 6x2 7x 5 ✓
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.3  ■  Algebraic Expressions  31
Solution
(a)	 Using the Difference of Squares Formula with A  2x and B  5, we have
4x2 25 12x2 2 52 12x 52 12x 52
(b)	 We use the Difference of Squares Formula with A  x  y and B  z.
1x y2 2 z2 1x y z2 1x y z2
Now Try Exercises 77 and 111	
■
A trinomial is a perfect square if it is of the form
A2 2AB B2        or        A2 2AB B2
So we recognize a perfect square if the middle term (2AB or 2AB) is plus or minus 
twice the product of the square roots of the outer two terms.
Example 11  ■  Recognizing Perfect Squares
Factor each trinomial.
(a)	 x2 6x 9            (b)  4x2 4xy y2
Solution
(a)	 Here A  x and B  3, so 2AB 2 # x # 3 6x. Since the middle term is 6x, the 
trinomial is a perfect square. By the Perfect Square Formula we have
x2 6x 9 1x 32 2
(b)	 Here A  2x and B  y, so 2AB 2 # 2x # y 4xy. Since the middle term is 
4xy, the trinomial is a perfect square. By the Perfect Square Formula we have
4x2 4xy y2 12x y2 2
Now Try Exercises 107 and 109	
■
Example 12  ■  Factoring Differences and Sums of Cubes
Factor each polynomial.
(a)	 27x3 1            (b)  x6 8
Solution
(a)	 Using the Difference of Cubes Formula with A  3x and B  1, we get
 27x3 1 13x2 3 13 13x 12 313x2 2 13x2 112 124
  13x 12 19x2 3x 12
(b)	 Using the Sum of Cubes Formula with A  x 2 and B  2, we have
x6 8 1x22 3 23 1x2 22 1x4 2x2 42
Now Try Exercises 79 and 81	
■
When we factor an expression, the result can sometimes be factored further. In gen-
eral, we ﬁrst factor out common factors, then inspect the result to see whether it can be 
factored by any of the other methods of this section. We repeat this process until we 
have factored the expression completely.
A2      B2      (A    B)(A  B)
Terms and Factors
When we multiply two numbers 
together, each of the numbers is called 
a factor of the product. When we add 
two numbers together, each number is 
called a term of the sum. 
	
2 3	
2 3
If a factor is common to each term of 
an expression we can factor it out. The 
following expression has two terms. 
	
ax 2ay
Each term contains the factor a, so we 
can factor a out and write the expres-
sion as 
ax 2ay a1x 2y2
Factors
Terms
a is a factor 
of each term
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 13  ■  Factoring an Expression Completely
Factor each expression completely.
(a)	 2x4 8x2            (b)  x5y2 xy6
Solution
(a)	 We ﬁrst factor out the power of x with the smallest exponent.
	
 2x4 8x2 2x21x2 42
        Common factor is 2x 2
	
  2x21x 22 1x 22        Factor x 2  4 as a difference of squares
(b)	 We ﬁrst factor out the powers of x and y with the smallest exponents.
	  x5y2 xy6 xy21x4 y42
        Common factor is xy 2
	
  xy21x2 y22 1x2 y22
        Factor x 4  y 4 as a difference of squares
	
  xy21x2 y22 1x y2 1x y2        Factor x 2  y 2 as a difference of squares
Now Try Exercises 117 and 119	
■
In the next example we factor out variables with fractional exponents. This type of 
factoring occurs in calculus.
Example 14  ■  Factoring Expressions with Fractional Exponents
Factor each expression.
(a)	 3x3/2 9x1/2 6x1/2      (b)  12 x2 2/3x 12 x2 1/3
Solution
(a)	 Factor out the power of x with the smallest exponent, that is, x1/2.
	  3x3/2 9x1/2 6x1/2 3x1/21x2 3x 22         Factor out 3x1/2
	
  3x1/21x 12 1x 22        Factor the quadratic x2 3x 2
(b)	 Factor out the power of 2  x with the smallest exponent, that is, 12 x2 2/3.
	
 12 x2 2/3x 12 x2 1/3 12 x2 2/33x 12 x2 4        Factor out 12 x2 2/3
	
  12 x2 2/312 2x2
        Simplify
	
  212 x2 2/311 x2
        Factor out 2
Check Your Answers
To see that you have factored correctly, multiply using the Laws of Exponents.
(a)	 3x1/21x2 3x 22 	
(b)	 12 x2 2/33x 12 x2 4
	
  3x3/2 9x1/2 6x1/2  ✓	
	
  12 x2 2/3x 12 x2 1/3  ✓
Now Try Exercises 93 and 95	
■
■  Factoring by Grouping Terms
Polynomials with at least four terms can sometimes be factored by grouping terms. The 
following example illustrates the idea.
Example 15  ■  Factoring by Grouping
Factor each polynomial.
(a)	 x3 x2 4x 4            (b)  x3 2x2 9x 18
To factor out x1/2 from x 3/2, we  
subtract exponents:
x3/2 x1/21x3/211/222
  x1/21x3/21/22
  x1/21x22
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.3  ■  Algebraic Expressions  33
Solution
(a)	  x3 x2 4x 4 1x3 x22 14x 42
        Group terms
	 	
  x21x 12 41x 12
        Factor out common factors
	 	
  1x2 42 1x 12
        Factor x  1 from each term
(b)	  x3 2x2 9x 18 1x3 2x22 19x 182        Group terms
	 	
 x21x 22 91x 22
        Factor common factors
	 	
 1x2 92 1x 22
        Factor 1x 22 from each term
	 	
 1x 32 1x 32 1x 22         Factor completely
Now Try Exercises 85 and 121	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 Consider the polynomial 2x 5  6x 4  4x 3.
(a)	 How many terms does this polynomial have? 
 
	
List the terms: 
 
  .
(b)	 What factor is common to each term? 
 
	
	Factor the polynomial: 2x 5  6x 4  4x 3  
 
  .
	 2.	 To factor the trinomial x2  7x  10, we look for two ­integers 
	 	 whose product is 
 
 and whose sum is 
 
  .
	 	 These integers are 
 
 and 
 
  , so the trinomial
	 	 factors as 
 
  .
	 3.	 The greatest common factor in the expression 3x3 x2 is 
 
  , and the expression factors as 
 1 
  
 2.
	 4.	 The Special Product Formula for the “square of a sum” is 
	 	 1A  B22  
 
  . 
	 	 So 12x  322  
 
  .
	 5.	 The Special Product Formula for the “product of the sum and 
	 	 difference of terms” is 1A  B21A  B2  
 
  .
	 	 So 15  x215  x2  
 
  .
	 6.	 The Special Factoring Formula for the “difference of squares” 
	 	 is A2  B 2  
 
  . So 4x 2  25 factors as 
 
  .
	 7.	 The Special Factoring Formula for a “perfect square” is 
	 	 A2  2AB  B2  
 
  . So x 2  10x  25
	 	 factors as 
 
  .
	 8.	 Yes or No? If No, give a reason.
(a)	 Is the expression 1x 52 2 equal to x2 25?
(b)	 When you expand 1x a2 2, where a ? 0, do you get 
three terms?
(c)	 Is the expression 1x 52 1x 52  equal to x2 25?
(d)	 When you expand 1x a2 1x a2 , where a ? 0, do 
you get two terms?
Skills
9–14  ■  Polynomials    Complete the following table by stating 
whether the polynomial is a monomial, binomial, or trinomial; 
then list its terms and state its degree.
Polynomial	
Type	
Terms	
Degree
	 9.  5x3 6	
	
	
10.  2x2 5x 3	
	
	
11.  8	
	
	
12.  1
2 x7	
	
	
13.  x  x 2  x 3  x 4	
	
	
14.  !2x !3	
	
	
15–24  ■  Polynomials    Find the sum, difference, or product.
15.	 112x 72 15x 122 	
16.	 15 3x2 12x 82
17.	 12x2 3x 12 13x2 5x 42
18.	 13x2 x 12 12x2 3x 52
19.	 15x3 4x2 3x2 1x2 7x 22
20.	 31x 12 41x 22
21.	 812x 52 71x 92
22.	 41x2 3x 52 31x2 2x 12
23.	 212 5t2 t21t 12 1t4 12
24.	 513t 42 1t2 22 2t1t 32
25–30  ■  Using FOIL    Multiply the algebraic expressions using 
the FOIL method and simplify.
25.	 13t 22 17t 42 	
26.	 14s 1212s 52
27.	 13x 52 12x 12 	
28.	 17y 3212y 12
29.	 1x 3y2 12x y2 	
30.	 14x 5y213x y2
1.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
31–46  ■  Using Special Product Formulas    Multiply the algebraic 
expressions using a Special Product Formula and simplify.
31.	 15x 12 2	
32.	 12 7y2 2
33.	 12u √2 2	
34.	 1x 3y2 2
35.	 12x 3y2 2	
36.	 1r 2s2 2
37.	 1x 621x 62 	
38.	 15 y2 15 y2
39.	 13x 4213x 42 	
40.	 12y 52 12y 52
41.	 1 !x 221 !x 22 	
42.	 1 !y !22 1 !y !22
43.	 1y 22 3	
44.	 1x 32 3
45.	 11 2r2 3	
46.	 13 2y2 3
47–62  ■  Multiplying Algebraic Expressions    Perform the indi-
cated operations and simplify.
47.	 1x 221x2 2x 32 	
48.	 1x 12 12x2 x 12
49.	 12x 521x2 x 12 	
50.	 11 2x2 1x2 3x 12
51.	 !x1x !x2 	
52.	 x3/21 !x 1/ !x2
53.	 y1/31y2/3 y5/32 	
54.	 x1/412x3/4 x1/42
55.	 1x2 a221x2 a22 	
56.	 1x1/2 y1/22 1x1/2 y1/22
57.	 1 !a b21 !a b2
	58.	 1"h2 1 12 1"h2 1 12
59.	 11x 12 x22 1 1x 12 x22 	
60.	 1x 12 x22 2 1x 12 x22 2
61.	 12x y 32 12x y 32 	
62.	 1x y z2 1x y z2
63–68  ■  Factoring Common Factor    Factor out the common  
factor.
63.	 2x3 x	
64.	 3x4 6x3 x2
65.	 y1y 62 91y 62 	
66.	 1z 22 2 51z 22
67.	 2x2y 6xy2 3xy	
68.	 7x4y2 14xy3 21xy4
69–76  ■  Factoring Trinomials    Factor the trinomial.
69.	 x2 8x 7	
70.	 x2 4x 5
71.	 8x2 14x 15	
72.	 6y2 11y 21
73.	 3x2 16x 5	
74.	 5x2 7x 6
75.	 13x 22 2 813x 22 12
76.	 21a b2 2 51a b2 3
77–84  ■  Using Special Factoring Formulas    Use a Special Factor-
ing Formula to factor the expression.
77.	 9a2 16	
78.	 1x 32 2 4
79.	 27x3 y3	
80.	 a3 b6
81.	 8s3 125t3	
82.	 1 1000y3
83.	 x2 12x 36	
84.	 16z2 24z 9
85–90  ■  Factoring by Grouping    Factor the expression by 
grouping terms.
  85.	 x 3  4x 2  x  4	
  86.	 3x 3  x 2  6x  2
  87.	 5x3 x2 5x 1	
  88.	 18x3 9x2 2x 1
  89.	 x 3  x 2  x  1	
  90.	 x 5  x 4  x  1
91–96  ■  Fractional Exponents    Factor the expression completely. 
Begin by factoring out the lowest power of each common factor.
  91.	 x5/2 x1/2	
  92.	 3x1/2 4x1/2 x3/2
  93.	 x3/2 2x1/2 x1/2	
  94.	 1x 12 7/2 1x 12 3/2
  95.	 1x2 12 1/2 21x2 12 1/2	
  96.	 x1/21x 12 1/2 x1/21x 12 1/2
97–126  ■  Factoring Completely    Factor the expression completely.
  97.	 12x3 18x	
  98.	 30x3 15x4
  99.	 x2 2x 8	
100.	 x2 14x 48
101.	 2x2 5x 3	
102.	 2x2 7x 4
103.	 9x2 36x 45	
104.	 8x2 10x 3
105.	 49 4y2	
106.	 4t2 9s2
107.	 t2 6t 9	
108.	 x2 10x 25
109.	 4x2 4xy y2	
110.	 r2 6rs 9s2
111.	 1a b2 2 1a b2 2	
112.	 a1 1
x b
2
a1 1
x b
2
113.	 x21x2 12 91x2 12 	
114.	 1a2 12b2 41a2 12
115.	 8x3 125	
116.	 x6 64
117.	 x3 2x2 x	
118.	 3x3 27x
119.	 x4y3 x2y5	
120.	 18y3x2 2xy4
121.	 3x3 x2 12x 4	
122.	 9x3 18x2 x 2
123.	 1x 12 1x 22 2 1x 12 21x 22 	
124.	 y41y 22 3 y51y 22 4
125.	 1a2 12 2 71a2 12 10	
126.	 1a2 2a2 2 21a2 2a2 3
127–130  ■  Factoring Completely    Factor the expression com-
pletely. (This type of expression arises in calculus when using the 
“Product Rule.”)
127.  51x2 42 412x2 1x 22 4 1x2 42 5142 1x 22 3
128.  312x 12 2122 1x 32 1/2 12x 12 3A1
2B1x 32 1/2
129.  1x2 32 1/3 2
3 x21x2 32 4/3
130.  1
2 x1/213x 42 1/2 3
2 x1/213x 42 1/2
SKILLS Plus
131–132  ■  Verifying Identities    Show that the following identi-
ties hold.
131.	 (a)  ab 1
2 31a b2 2 1a2 b224
(b)	 1a2 b22 2 1a2 b22 2 4a2b2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.3  ■  Algebraic Expressions  35
132.	 1a2 b22 1c2 d22 1ac bd2 2 1ad bc2 2
133.	 Factoring Completely  Factor the following expression 
completely: 4a2c2 1a2 b2 c22 2.
134.	 Factoring x 4 ax 2 b    A trinomial of the form  
x4  ax2  b can sometimes be factored easily. For exam­ple, 
x4 3x2 4 1x2 42 1x2 12
	
	 But x 4  3x 2  4 cannot be factored in this way. Instead, 
we can use the following method.
 x4 3x2 4 1x4 4x2 42 x2
        Add and  
subtract x 2
  1x2 22 2 x2
        Factor perfect  
square
  31x2 22 x4 31x2 22 x4        Difference of 
squares
  1x2 x 22 1x2 x 22
	
	 Factor the following, using whichever method is appropriate.
(a)	 x 4  x 2  2	
(b)	 x 4  2x 2  9
(c)	 x 4  4x 2  16	
(d)	 x 4  2x 2  1
Applications
135.	 Volume of Concrete    A culvert is constructed out of large 
cylindrical shells cast in concrete, as shown in the ﬁgure. 
Using the formula for the volume of a cylinder given on the 
inside front cover of this book, explain why the volume of 
the cylindrical shell is
V pR2h pr2h
	
	 Factor to show that
V 2p # average radius # height # thickness
	
	 Use the “unrolled” diagram to explain why this makes sense 
geometrically.
r
R
h
h
136.	 Mowing a Field    A 
square ﬁeld in a certain 
state park is mowed 
around the edges every 
week. The rest of the 
ﬁeld is kept unmowed 
to serve as a habitat for 
birds and small animals 
(see the ﬁgure). The 
ﬁeld measures b feet by 
b feet, and the mowed 
strip is x feet wide.
(a)	 Explain why the 
area of the mowed portion is b2 1b 2x2 2.
(b)	 Factor the expression in part (a) to show that the area of 
the mowed portion is also 4x1b x2 .
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
137.	 DISCOVER:  Degree of a Sum or Product of Polynomials     
Make up several pairs of polynomials, then calculate  
the sum and product of each pair. On the basis of your 
experiments and observations, answer the following  
questions.
(a)	 How is the degree of the product related to the degrees 
of the original polynomials?
(b)	 How is the degree of the sum related to the degrees of 
the original polynomials?
138.	 DISCUSS:  The Power of Algebraic Formulas    Use the Dif-
ference of Squares Formula A2 B2 1A B2 1A B2  to 
evaluate the following differences of squares in your head. 
Make up more such expressions that you can do in your 
head.
(a)	 5282 5272
(b)	 1222 1202
(c)	 10202 10102
139.	 DISCUSS:  The Power of Algebraic Formulas    Use the  
Special Product Formula 1A B2 1A B2 A2 B2 to 
evaluate the following products of numbers in your head. 
Make up more such products that you can do in your  
head.
(a)	 501 # 499
(b)	 79 # 61
(c)	 2007 # 1993
140.	 DISCOVER:  Differences of Even Powers
(a)	 Factor the expressions completely: A4  B 4 and  
A6  B 6.
(b)	 Verify that 18,335  124  74 and that  
2,868,335  126  76.
(c)	 Use the results of parts (a) and (b) to factor the  
integers 18,335 and 2,868,335. Then show that in 
both of these factorizations, all the factors are prime 
numbers.
141.	 DISCOVER:  Factoring An 1
(a)	 Verify the following formulas by expanding and simpli-
fying the right-hand side.
	
 A2 1 1A 12 1A 12
	
 A3 1 1A 12 1A2 A 12
	
 A4 1 1A 12 1A3 A2 A 12
(b)	 On the basis of the pattern displayed in this list, how do 
you think A5 1 would factor? Verify your conjecture. 
Now generalize the pattern you have observed to obtain 
a factoring formula for An 1, where n is a positive 
integer.
142.	 PROVE:  Special Factoring Formulas    Prove the following 
formulas by expanding the right-hand side.	
(a)	 Difference of Cubes: 
A3 B3 1A B2 1A2 AB B22
(b)	 Sum of Cubes:   
A3 B3 1A B2 1A2 AB B22
x
x
b
b
x
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
1.4 
Rational Expressions
■  The Domain of an Algebraic Expression  ■  Simplifying Rational Expressions  ■  Multiplying 
and Dividing Rational Expressions  ■  Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions  ■  Compound 
Fractions  ■  Rationalizing the Denominator or the Numerator  ■  Avoiding Common Errors
A quotient of two algebraic expressions is called a fractional expression. Here are 
some examples:
2x
x 1     
y 2
y2 4     
x3 x
x2 5x 6     
x
"x2 1
A rational expression is a fractional expression in which both the numerator and the 
denominator are polynomials. For example, the first three expressions in the above 
list are rational expressions, but the fourth is not, since its denominator contains a 
radical. In this section we learn how to perform algebraic operations on rational ex-
pressions.
■  The Domain of an Algebraic Expression
In general, an algebraic expression may not be defined for all values of the variable. 
The domain of an algebraic expression is the set of real numbers that the variable is 
permitted to have. The table in the margin gives some basic expressions and their 
domains.
Example 1  ■  Finding the Domain of an Expression
Find the domains of the following expressions.
(a)  2x2 3x 1      (b) 
x
x 2 5x 6      (c) 
!x
x 5
Solution
(a)	 This polynomial is defined for every x. Thus the domain is the set  of real  
numbers.
(b)	 We first factor the denominator.
x
x 2 5x 6 
x
1x 22 1x 32
Denominator would be 0 if  
x  2 or x  3
	 	 Since the denominator is zero when x  2 or 3, the expression is not defined for 
these numbers. The domain is 5x 0  x ? 2 and x ? 36.
(c)	 For the numerator to be defined, we must have x  0. Also, we cannot divide by 
zero, so x ? 5.
!x
x 5
	 	 Thus the domain is 5x 0  x 0 and x ? 56.
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
Must have x  0  
to take square root
Denominator would  
be 0 if x  5
Expression
Domain
1
x
5x 0  x ? 06
!x
5x 0  x 06
1
!x
5x 0  x 06
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.4  ■  Rational Expressions  37
■  Simplifying Rational Expressions
To simplify rational expressions, we factor both numerator and denominator and use 
the following property of fractions:
AC
BC A
B
This allows us to cancel common factors from the numerator and denominator.
Example 2  ■  Simplifying Rational Expressions by Cancellation
Simplify:   
x2 1
x2 x 2
Solution
	
 x2 1
x2 x 2 
1x 12 1x 12
1x 12 1x 22         Factor
	
  x 1
x 2
        Cancel common factors
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
■  Multiplying and Dividing Rational Expressions
To multiply rational expressions, we use the following property of fractions:
A
B # C
D AC
BD
This says that to multiply two fractions, we multiply their numerators and multiply their 
denominators.
Example 3  ■  Multiplying Rational Expressions
Perform the indicated multiplication and simplify:    x2 2x 3
x2 8x 16 # 3x 12
x 1
Solution    We first factor.
 x2 2x 3
x2 8x 16 # 3x 12
x 1

1x 12 1x 32
1x 42 2
# 31x 42
x 1         Factor
  
31x 12 1x 32 1x 42
1x 12 1x 42 2
        Property of fractions
  
31x 32
x 4
        Cancel common 
factors
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
  We can’t cancel the x 2’s in 
x2 1
x2 x 2 because x 2 is not a factor.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
To divide rational expressions, we use the following property of fractions:
A
B 4 C
D A
B # D
C
This says that to divide a fraction by another fraction, we invert the divisor and 
multiply.
Example 4  ■  Dividing Rational Expressions
Perform the indicated division and simplify:    x 4
x2 4 4 x2 3x 4
x2 5x 6
Solution
 x 4
x2 4 4 x2 3x 4
x2 5x 6 x 4
x 2 4 # x2 5x 6
x2 3x 4
        Invert and multiply
  
1x 42 1x 22 1x 32
1x 22 1x 22 1x 42 1x 12         Factor
  
x 3
1x 22 1x 12
        Cancel common 
factors
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
■  Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions
To add or subtract rational expressions, we first find a common denominator and 
then use the following property of fractions:
A
C B
C A B
C
Although any common denominator will work, it is best to use the least common de-
nominator (LCD) as explained in Section 1.1. The LCD is found by factoring each 
denominator and taking the product of the distinct factors, using the highest power that 
appears in any of the factors.
Example 5  ■  Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions
Perform the indicated operations and simplify.
(a) 
3
x 1 
x
x 2            (b) 
1
x2 1 
2
1x 12 2
Solution
(a)	 Here the LCD is simply the product 1x 12 1x 22 .
	
 3
x 1 
x
x 2 
31x 22
1x 12 1x 22 
x1x 12
1x 12 1x 22 	
Write fractions using 
LCD
	
  3x 6 x2 x
1x 12 1x 22
	
Add fractions
	
  x2 2x 6
1x 12 1x 22
	
Combine terms in 
numerator
  Avoid making the following error:
A
B C  A
B A
C
For instance, if we let A  2, B  1, 
and C  1, then we see the error:
	
 2
1 1 0 2
1 2
1
	
 2
2 0 2 2
	
 1 0 4    Wrong!
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.4  ■  Rational Expressions  39
(b)	 The LCD of x2 1 1x 12 1x 12  and 1x 12 2 is 1x 12 1x 12 2.
	
 
1
x2 1 
2
1x 12 2 
1
1x 12 1x 12 
2
1x 12 2        Factor
	
  
1x 12 21x 12
1x 12 1x 12 2
        Combine fractions  
using LCD
	
  x 1 2x 2
1x 12 1x 12 2
        Distributive Property
	
  
3 x
1x 12 1x 12 2
        Combine terms in  
numerator
Now Try Exercises 43 and 45	
■
■  Compound Fractions
A compound fraction is a fraction in which the numerator, the denominator, or both, 
are themselves fractional expressions.
Example 6  ■  Simplifying a Compound Fraction
Simplify:   
x
y 1
1 y
x
Solution 1    We combine the terms in the numerator into a single fraction. We do the 
same in the denominator. Then we invert and multiply.
 
x
y 1
1 y
x

x y
y
x y
x
x y
y
#
x
x y
  
x1x y2
y1x y2
Error-Correcting  
Codes
The pictures sent back by the 
Pathﬁnder spacecraft from 
the surface of Mars on July 4, 
1997, were astoundingly clear. 
But few viewing these pic­
tures were aware of the com­
plex mathematics used to 
accomplish that feat. The dis­
tance to Mars is enormous, and the background noise (or static) is many 
times stronger than the original signal emitted by the spacecraft. So when 
scientists receive the signal, it is full of errors. To get a clear picture, the 
errors must be found and corrected. This same problem of errors is routinely 
encountered in transmitting bank records when you use an ATM machine 
or voice when you are talking on the telephone.
To understand how errors are found and corrected, we must ﬁrst 
understand that to transmit pictures, sound, or text, we transform them 
into bits (the digits 0 or 1; see page 28). To help the receiver recognize 
Mathematics in the Modern World
errors, the message is “coded” by inserting additional bits. For example, 
suppose you want to transmit the message “10100.” A very simple-
minded code is as follows: Send each digit a million times. The person 
receiving the message reads it in blocks of a million digits. If the ﬁrst block 
is mostly 1’s, he concludes that you are probably trying to transmit a 1, 
and so on. To say that this code is not efﬁcient is a bit of an understate­
ment; it requires sending a million times more data than the original mes­
sage. Another method inserts “check digits.” For example, for each block 
of eight digits insert a ninth digit; the inserted digit is 0 if there is an even 
number of 1’s in the block and 1 if there is an odd number. So if a single 
digit is wrong (a 0 changed to a 1 or vice versa), the check digits allow us 
to recognize that an error has occurred. This method does not tell us 
where the error is, so we can’t correct it. Modern error-correcting codes 
use interesting mathematical algorithms that require inserting relatively 
few digits but that allow the receiver to not only recognize, but also cor­
rect, errors. The ﬁrst error-correcting code was developed in the 1940s by 
Richard Hamming at MIT. It is interesting to note that the English lan­
guage has a built-in error correcting mechanism; to test it, try reading this 
error-laden sentence:  Gve mo libty ox giv ne deth.
Courtesy of NASA
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Solution 2    We find the LCD of all the fractions in the expression, then multiply  
numerator and denominator by it. In this example the LCD of all the fractions is xy.  
Thus
	
 
x
y 1
1 y
x

x
y 1
1 y
x
# xy
xy        Multiply numerator 
and denominator by xy
	
  x 2 xy
xy y2
        Simplify
	
  
x1x y2
y1x y2         Factor
Now Try Exercises 59 and 65	
■
The next two examples show situations in calculus that require the ability to work 
with fractional expressions.
Example 7  ■  Simplifying a Compound Fraction
Simplify:   
1
a h 1
a
h
Solution    We begin by combining the fractions in the numerator using a common  
denominator.
 
1
a h 1
a
h

a 1a h2
a1a h2
h
    Combine fractions in the 
­numerator
  
a 1a h2
a1a h2 # 1
h    Property 2 of fractions (invert 
divisor and multiply)
  a a h
a1a h2 # 1
h
    Distributive Property
  
h
a1a h2 # 1
h
    Simplify
  
1
a1a h2
    Property 5 of fractions 
(cancel common factors)
Now Try Exercise 73	
■
Example 8  ■  Simplifying a Compound Fraction
Simplify:   
11 x22 1/2 x211 x22 1/2
1 x2
Solution 1    Factor 11 x22 1/2 from the numerator.
 
11 x22 1/2 x211 x22 1/2
1 x2

11 x22 1/2311 x22 x24
1 x2
  
11 x22 1/2
1 x2

1
11 x22 3/2
We can also simplify by multiplying 
the numerator and the denominator by 
a1a h2 .
Factor out the power of 1  x2 with  
the smallest exponent, in this case 
11 x22 1/2.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.4  ■  Rational Expressions  41
Solution 2    Since 11 x22 1/2 1/11 x22 1/2 is a fraction, we can clear all frac-
tions by multiplying numerator and denominator by 11 x22 1/2.
 
11 x22 1/2 x211 x22 1/2
1 x2
 
11 x22 1/2 x211 x22 1/2
1 x2
# 11 x22 1/2
11 x22 1/2
  
11 x22 x2
11 x22 3/2

1
11 x22 3/2
Now Try Exercise 81	
■
■  Rationalizing the Denominator or the Numerator
If a fraction has a denominator of the form A B !C, we can rationalize the denomi-
nator by multiplying numerator and denominator by the conjugate radical A B !C. 
This works because, by Special Product Formula 1 in Section 1.3, the product of the 
denominator and its conjugate radical does not contain a radical:
1A B !C 2 1A B !C 2 A2 B2C
Example 9  ■  Rationalizing the Denominator
Rationalize the denominator:   
1
1 !2
Solution    We multiply both the numerator and the denominator by the conjugate 
radical of 1 !2, which is 1 !2.
 
1
1 !2 
1
1 !2 # 1 !2
1 !2
	
Multiply numerator and 
­denominator by the 
conjugate radical
  1 !2
12 1 !22 2	
Special Product Formula 1
  1 !2
1 2
1 !2
1
!2 1
Now Try Exercise 85	
■
Example 10  ■  Rationalizing the Numerator
Rationalize the numerator:    !4 h 2
h
Solution    We multiply numerator and denominator by the conjugate radical 
!4 h 2.
 !4 h 2
h
!4 h 2
h
# !4 h 2
!4 h 2
       
Multiply numerator and 
­denominator by the 
conjugate radical
  
1 !4 h2 2 22
h1 !4 h 22
        Special Product Formula 1
  
4 h 4
h1 !4 h 22
  
h
h1 !4 h 22 
1
!4 h 2
        Property 5 of fractions  
(cancel common factors)
Now Try Exercise 91	
■
Special Product Formula 1
1A B2 1A B2 A2 B2
Special Product Formula 1
1A B2 1A B2 A2 B2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
■  Avoiding Common Errors
Don’t make the mistake of applying properties of multiplication to the operation of addition. 
Many of the common errors in algebra involve doing just that. The following table states 
several properties of multiplication and illustrates the error in applying them to addition.
Correct multiplication property
Common error with addition
1a # b2 2 a2 # b2
1a b2 2 a2 b2
!a # b !a !b 1a, b 02
!a b !a !b
"a2 # b2 a # b    1a, b 02
"a2 b2 a b
1
a # 1
b 
1
a # b
1
a 1
b 
1
a b
ab
a b
a b
a
b
a1 # b1 1a # b2 1
a1 b1 1a b2 1
To verify that the equations in the right-hand column are wrong, simply substitute 
numbers for a and b and calculate each side. For example, if we take a 2 and b 2 
in the fourth error, we get different values for the left- and right-hand sides:
1
a 1
b 1
2 1
2 1       
1
a b 
1
2 2 1
4
	
Left-hand side	
Right-hand side
Since 1 ? 1
4, the stated equation is wrong. You should similarly convince yourself of the 
error in each of the other equations. (See Exercises 101 and 102.)
Concepts
	 1.	 Which of the following are rational expressions?
(a)	
3x
x2 1            (b)  !x 1
2x 3             (c) 
x 1x2 12 
x 3
	 2.	 To simplify a rational expression, we cancel factors that are 
	 	 common to the 
 
 and 
 
  . So the expression 
1x 12 1x 22
1x 32 1x 22  
	 	 simpliﬁes to 
 
  .
	 3.	 To multiply two rational expressions, we multiply their
	 	
 
 together and multiply their 
 
 together. 
	 	 So 
2
x 1 #
x
x 3 is the same as 
 
  .
	 4.	 Consider the expression 1
x 
2
x 1 
x
1x 12 2.
(a)	 How many terms does this expression have?
(b)	 Find the least common denominator of all the terms.
(c)	 Perform the addition and simplify. 
5–6  ■  Yes or No? If No, give a reason. (Disregard any value that 
makes a denominator zero.)
	 5.	 (a)	 Is the expression 
x1x 12
1x 12 2  equal to 
x
x 1? 
(b)	 Is the expression "x2 25 equal to x 5? 
	 6.	 (a)	 Is the expression 3 a
3
 equal to 1 a
3? 
(b)	 Is the expression 
2
4 x equal to 1
2 2
x? 
Skills
7–14  ■  Domain    Find the domain of the expression.
	 7.	 4x2  10x  3	
  8.	 x 4  x 3  9x
	 9.	 x2 1
x 3 	
10.	 2t2 5
3t 6
	11.	 !x 3	
12.	
1
!x 1
	13.	
x2 1
x2 x 2	
14.	 !2x
x 1
1.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.4  ■  Rational Expressions  43
15–24  ■  Simplify    Simplify the rational expression.
	15.	
51x 32 12x 12
101x 32 2
	
16.	
41x2 12
121x 22 1x 12
	17.	 x 2
x2 4	
18.	 x2 x 2
x2 1
19.	 x2 5x 6
x2 8x 15	
20.	 x2 x 12
x2 5x 6
21.	 y2 y
y2 1	
22.	 y2 3y 18
2y2 7y 3
23.	 2x3 x2 6x
2x2 7x 6 	
24.	 1 x2
x3 1
25–38  ■  Multiply or Divide    Perform the multiplication or divi-
sion and simplify.
25.	
4x
x2 4 # x 2
16x 	
26.	 x2 25
x2 16 # x 4
x 5
27.	 x2 2x 15
x2 25
# x 5
x 2	
28.	 x2 2x 3
x2 2x 3 #  3 x
3 x
29.	 t 3
t2 9 # t 3
t2 9	
30.	 x2 x 6
x2 2x #
x3 x2
x2 2x 3
31.	 x2 7x 12
x2 3x 2 # x2 5x 6
x2 6x 9
32.	 x2 2xy y2
x2 y2
# 2x2 xy y2
x2 xy 2y2
33.	
x 3
4x2 9 4 x2 7x 12
2x2 7x 15
	34.	
2x 1
2x2 x 15 4 6x2 x 2
x 3
35.	
x3
x 1
 
x
x2 2x 1
 
	
36.	
2x2 3x 2
x2 1
 2x2 5x 2
x2 x 2
 
	37.	 x/y
z 		
38.	 x
y/z
39–58  ■  Add or Subtract    Perform the addition or subtraction 
and simplify.
39.	 1 
1
x 3	
40.	 3x 2
x 1 2
41.	
1
x 5 
2
x 3	
42.	
1
x 1 
1
x 1
43.	
3
x 1 
1
x 2	
44.	
x
x 4 
3
x 6
	45.	
5
2x 3 
3
12x 32 2	
46.	
x
1x 12 2 
2
x 1
47.	 u 1 
u
u 1	
48.	 2
a2 3
ab 4
b2
49.	 1
x2 
1
x2 x	
50.	 1
x 1
x2 1
x3
51.	
2
x 3 
1
x2 7x 12	
52.	
x
x2 4 
1
x 2
53.	
1
x 3 
1
x2 9
54.	
x
x2 x 2 
2
x2 5x 4
55.	 2
x 
3
x 1 
4
x2 x
56.	
x
x2 x 6 
1
x 2 
2
x 3
57.	
1
x2 3x 2 
1
x2 2x 3
58.	
1
x 1 
2
1x 12 2 
3
x2 1
59–72  ■  Compound Fractions    Simplify the compound frac-
tional expression.
59.	
1 1
x
1
x 2
	
60.	
1 2
y
3
y 1
	61.	
1 
1
x 2
1 
1
x 2
	
62.	
1 
1
c 1
1 
1
c 1
	63.	
1
x 1 
1
x 3
x 1
	
64.	
x 3
x 4 x 2
x 1
x 3
	65.	
x x
y
y y
x
	
66.	
x y
x
y x
y
 
67.	
x
y y
x
1
x2 1
y2
	
68.	 x 
y
x
y y
x
69.	 x2 y2
x1 y1	
70.	 x1 y1
1x y2 1
	71.	 1 
1
1 1
x
	
72.	 1 
1
1 
1
1 x
73–78  ■  Expressions Found in Calculus    Simplify the fractional 
expression. (Expressions like these arise in calculus.)
73.	
1
1 x h 
1
1 x
h
	
74.	
1
!x h 
1
!x
h
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
	75.	
1
1x h2 2 1
x2
h
76.	
1x h2 3 71x h2 1x3 7x2
h
77.	 Å1 a
x
"1 x2 b
2
	
78.	 Å1 ax3 1
4x3 b
2
79–84  ■  Expressions Found in Calculus    Simplify the expres-
sion. (This type of expression arises in calculus when using the 
“quotient rule.”)
79.	
31x 22 21x 32 2 1x 22 3122 1x 32
1x 32 4
80.	
2x1x 62 4 x2142 1x 62 3
1x 62 8
	81.	
211 x2 1/2 x11 x2 1/2
x 1
	82.	
11 x22 1/2 x211 x22 1/2
1 x2
	83.	
311 x2 1/3 x11 x2 2/3
11 x2 2/3
	84.	
17 3x2 1/2 3
2 x17 3x2 1/2
7 3x
85–90  ■  Rationalize Denominator    Rationalize the denominator.
	85.	
1
5 !3	
86.	
3
2 !5
	87.	
2
!2 !7	
88.	
1
!x 1
	89.	
y
!3 !y	
90.	
21x y2
!x !y
91–96  ■  Rationalize Numerator    Rationalize the numerator.
	91.	 1 !5
3
	
92.	 !3 !5
2
	93.	 !r !2
5
	
94.	 !x !x h
h!x !x h
	95.	 "x2 1 x	
96.	 !x 1 !x
Applications
	97.	 Electrical Resistance    If two electrical resistors with  
resistances R1 and R2 are connected in parallel (see the 
ﬁgure), then the total resistance R is given by
R 
1
1
R1
1
R2
(a)	 Simplify the expression for R.
(b)	 If R1  10 ohms and R2  20 ohms, what is the total  
resistance R?
R⁄
R™ 
	 98.	 Average Cost    A clothing manufacturer ﬁnds that the cost 
of producing x shirts is 500  6x  0.01x2 dollars.
(a)	 Explain why the average cost per shirt is given by the 
rational expression
A 500 6x 0.01x2
x
(b)	 Complete the table by calculating the average cost per 
shirt for the given values of x.
x
Average cost
10
20
50
100
200
500
1000
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	 99.	 DISCOVER:  Limiting Behavior of a Rational Expression    The 
rational expression
x2 9
x 3
	
	 is not deﬁned for x  3. Complete the tables, and determine 
what value the expression approaches as x gets closer and 
closer to 3. Why is this reasonable? Factor the numerator of 
the expression and simplify to see why.
x
x2 9
x 3
2.80
2.90
2.95
2.99
2.999
x
x2 9
x 3
3.20
3.10
3.05
3.01
3.001
	100.	 DISCUSS  ■  WRITE:  Is This Rationalization?    In the expres-
sion 2/ !x we would eliminate the radical if we were to 
square both numerator and denominator. Is this the same 
thing as rationalizing the denominator? Explain.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.5  ■  Equations  45
	101.	 DISCUSS:  Algebraic Errors    The left-hand column of the 
table lists some common algebraic errors. In each case, give 
an example using numbers that shows that the formula is 
not valid. An example of this type, which shows that a state-
ment is false, is called a counterexample.
Algebraic errors
Counterexample
1
a 1
b 
1
a b
1
2 1
2 ?
1
2 2
1a b2 2 a2 b2
"a2 b2 a b
a b
a
b
a
a b 1
b
am
an am/n
	102.	 DISCUSS:  Algebraic Errors    Determine whether the given 
equation is true for all values of the variables. If not, give a 
counterexample. (Disregard any value that makes a denomi-
nator zero.) 
(a)	 5 a
5
1 a
5	
(b)	 x 1
y 1 x
y
(c)	
x
x y 
1
1 y	
(d)	 2a a
b b 2a
2b
(e)	 a
b  a
b	
(f)	 1 x x2
x
1
x 1 x
	103.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Values of a Rational Expression     
Consider the expression
x 1
x
	
	 for x 0.
(a)	 Fill in the table, and try other values for x. What do you 
think is the smallest possible value for this expression?
x
1
3
1
2
9
10
99
100
x 1
x
(b)	 Prove that for x 0,
x 1
x 2
[Hint: Multiply by x, move terms to one side, and then fac-
tor to arrive at a true statement. Note that each step you 
made is reversible.]
An equation is a statement that two mathematical expressions are equal. For example,
3 5 8
is an equation. Most equations that we study in algebra contain variables, which are 
symbols (usually letters) that stand for numbers. In the equation
4x 7 19
the letter x is the variable. We think of x as the “unknown” in the equation, and our goal 
is to ﬁnd the value of x that makes the equation true. The values of the unknown that 
make the equation true are called the solutions or roots of the equation, and the process 
of ﬁnding the solutions is called solving the equation.
Two equations with exactly the same solutions are called equivalent equations. To 
solve an equation, we try to ﬁnd a simpler, equivalent equation in which the variable 
stands alone on one side of the “equal” sign. Here are the properties that we use to solve 
an equation. (In these properties, A, B, and C stand for any algebraic expressions, and 
the symbol 3 means “is equivalent to.”)
1.5 
Equations
■  Solving Linear Equations  ■  Solving Quadratic Equations  ■  Other Types of Equations
x  3 is a solution of the equation  
4x  7  19, because substituting  
x  3 makes the equation true:
4132 7 19    ✓
x  3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Properties of Equality
Property	
Description
1.  A  B    3    A  C  B  C	
Adding the same quantity to both sides of 
an equation gives an equivalent equation.
2.  A  B    3    CA  CB    (C ? 0)	
Multiplying both sides of an equation 
by the same nonzero quantity gives an 
equivalent equation.
These properties require that you perform the same operation on both sides of an 
equation when solving it. Thus if we say “add 7” when solving an equation, that is 
just a short way of saying “add 7 to each side of the equation.”
■  Solving Linear Equations
The simplest type of equation is a linear equation, or ﬁrst-degree equation, which is an 
equation in which each term is either a constant or a nonzero multiple of the variable.
Linear Equations
A linear equation in one variable is an equation equivalent to one of the form
ax b 0
where a and b are real numbers and x is the variable.
Here are some examples that illustrate the difference between linear and nonlinear 
equations.
	
Linear equations	
Nonlinear equations
	
4x 5 3	
x2 2x 8
	
2x 1
2 x 7	
!x 6x 0
	
x 6 x
3	
3
x 2x 1
Example 1  ■  Solving a Linear Equation
Solve the equation 7x  4  3x  8.
Solution    We solve this by changing it to an equivalent equation with all terms that 
have the variable x on one side and all constant terms on the other.
 7x 4 3x 8
        Given equation
 17x 42 4 13x 82 4
        Add 4
 7x 3x 12
        Simplify
 7x 3x 13x 122 3x        Subtract 3x
 4x 12
        Simplify
 1
4 # 4x 1
4 # 12
        Multiply by 1
4
 x 3
        Simplify
Not linear; contains the  
reciprocal of the variable
Not linear; contains the 
square of the variable
Not linear; contains the 
square root of the variable
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.5  ■  Equations  47
Check Your Answer
 x 3: 	
 LHS 7132 4	
 RHS 3132 8
	
	
  17
	
  17
 LHS RHS  ✓	
Because it is important to CHECK 
YOUR ANSWER, we do this in many 
of our examples. In these checks, LHS 
stands for “left-hand side” and RHS 
stands for “right-hand side” of the  
original equation.
x  3
x  3
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Many formulas in the sciences involve several variables, and it is often necessary to 
express one of the variables in terms of the others. In the next example we solve for a 
variable in Newton’s Law of Gravity.
Example 2  ■  Solving for One Variable in Terms of Others
Solve for the variable M in the equation
F G  mM
r 2
Solution    Although this equation involves more than one variable, we solve it as 
usual by isolating M on one side and treating the other variables as we would 
numbers.
 F a Gm
r 2 b M
    Factor M from RHS
 a r 2
Gm b F a r 2
Gm b a Gm
r 2 b M    Multiply by reciprocal of Gm
r 2
 r 2F
Gm M
    Simplify
The solution is M r 2F
Gm.
Now Try Exercise 31	
■
Example 3  ■  Solving for One Variable in Terms of Others
The surface area A of the closed rectangular box shown in Figure 1 can be calculated 
from the length l, the width „, and the height h according to the formula
A 2l„ 2„h 2lh
Solve for „ in terms of the other variables in this equation.
Solution    Although this equation involves more than one variable, we solve it as 
usual by isolating „ on one side, treating the other variables as we would numbers.
	
 A 12l„ 2„h2 2lh	
Collect terms involving „
	
 A 2lh 2l„ 2„h
	
Subtract 2lh
	
 A 2lh 12l 2h2„
	
Factor „ from RHS
	
 A 2lh
2l 2h „
	
Divide by 2l  2h
The solution is „ A 2lh
2l 2h .
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
This is Newton’s Law of Gravity. It 
gives the gravitational force F between 
two masses m and M that are a distance 
r apart. The constant G is the universal 
gravitational constant.
h
l
„
Figure 1  A closed rectangular box
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
■  Solving Quadratic Equations
Linear equations are ﬁrst-degree equations like 2x  1  5 or 4  3x  2. Quadratic 
equations are second-degree equations like x2  2x  3  0 or 2x2  3  5x.
Quadratic Equations
A quadratic equation is an equation of the form
ax2 bx c 0
where a, b, and c are real numbers with a ? 0.
Quadratic Equations
 x2 2x 8 0
 3x 10 4x2
 1
2  x2 1
3  x 1
6 0
Some quadratic equations can be solved by factoring and using the following basic 
property of real numbers.
Zero-Product Property
AB 0  if and only if  A 0 or B 0
This means that if we can factor the left-hand side of a quadratic (or other) equation, 
then we can solve it by setting each factor equal to 0 in turn. This method works only 
when the right-hand side of the equation is 0.
Example 4  ■  Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring
Find all real solutions of the equation x2  5x  24.
Solution    We must ﬁrst rewrite the equation so that the right-hand side is 0.
	
 
 x2 5x 24
	
 
 x2 5x 24 0
        Subtract 24
	
 
 1x 32 1x 82 0
        Factor
	
 x 3 0  or   x 8 0
        Zero-Product Property
	
 x 3   
 x 8        Solve
The solutions are x  3 and x  8.
Now Try Exercise 45	
■
Do you see why one side of the equation must be 0 in Example 4? Factoring the 
equation as x1x 52 24 does not help us ﬁnd the solutions, since 24 can be factored 
in inﬁnitely many ways, such as 6 # 4, 1
2 # 48, A2
5B # 1602 , and so on.
A quadratic equation of the form x 2  c  0, where c is a positive constant, factors 
as 1x !c 2 1x !c 2 0, so the solutions are x !c and x !c. We often 
abbreviate this as x !c.
Solving a Simple Quadratic Equation
The solutions of the equation x 2  c are x !c and x !c.
Check Your Answers
x 3:
132 2 5132 9 15 24    ✓
x 8:
182 2 5182 64 40 24    ✓
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.5  ■  Equations  49
Example 5  ■  Solving Simple Quadratics
Find all real solutions of each equation.
(a)	 x2 5            (b)  1x 42 2 5
Solution
(a)	 From the principle in the preceding box we get x  !5.
(b)	 We can take the square root of each side of this equation as well.
	
 1x 42 2 5
	
 x 4  !5
	
Take the square root
	
 x 4 !5	
Add 4
The solutions are x 4 !5 and x 4 !5.
Now Try Exercises 53 and 55	
■
As we saw in Example 5, if a quadratic equation is of the form 1x a2 2 c, then we 
can solve it by taking the square root of each side. In an equation of this form, the left-hand 
side is a perfect square: the square of a linear expression in x. So if a quadratic equation 
does not factor readily, then we can solve it using the technique of completing the square. 
This means that we add a constant to an expression to make it a perfect square. For ex-
ample, to make x2  6x a perfect square, we must add 9, since x2 6x 9 1x 32 2.
Completing the Square
To make x 2  bx a perfect square, add a b
2 b
2
, the square of half the coefﬁcient 
of x. This gives the perfect square
x2 bx a b
2 b
2
a x b
2 b
2
Example 6  ■  Solving Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square
Find all real solutions of each equation.
(a)	 x2  8x  13  0            (b)  3x2  12x  6  0
Solution
(a)	  x2 8x 13 0	
Given equation
	 	
 x2 8x 13	
Subtract 13
	 	  x2 8x 16 13 16	
Complete the square: add a 8
2 b
2
16
	 	
 1x 42 2 3	
Perfect square
	 	
 x 4  !3	
Take square root
	 	
 x 4 !3	
Add 4
(b)	 After subtracting 6 from each side of the equation, we must factor the coefﬁcient 
of x 2 (the 3) from the left side to put the equation in the correct form for complet-
ing the square.
	
 3x2 12x 6 0
        Given equation
	
 3x2 12x 6        Subtract 6
	
 31x2 4x2 6        Factor 3 from LHS
	 	 Now we complete the square by adding 122 2 4 inside the parentheses. Since 
everything inside the parentheses is multiplied by 3, this means that we are  
See page 31 for how to recognize when 
a quadratic expression is a perfect 
square.
Completing the Square
The area of the blue region is
x2 2a b
2 bx x2 bx
Add a small square of area 1b/22 2 to 
“complete” the square.
x
x
b
2
b
2
  When completing the square, 
make sure the coefﬁcient of x 2 is 1. If 
it isn’t, you must factor this coefﬁcient 
from both terms that contain x:
ax2 bx aa x2 b
a
 xb
Then complete the square inside the 
parentheses. Remember that the term 
added inside the parentheses is multi-
plied by a.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
actually adding 3 # 4 12 to the left side of the equation. Thus we must add 12 
to the right side as well.
 31x2 4x 42 6 3 # 4        Complete the square: add 4
 31x 22 2 6
        Perfect square
 1x 22 2 2
        Divide by 3
 x 2 !2
        Take square root
 x 2 !2
        Add 2
Now Try Exercises 57 and 61	
■
We can use the technique of completing the square to derive a formula for the roots 
of the general quadratic equation ax 2  bx  c  0.
The quadratic formula
The roots of the quadratic equation ax 2  bx  c  0, where a ? 0, are
x b "b2 4ac
2a
Proof    First, we divide each side of the equation by a and move the constant to the 
right side, giving
x2 b
a
 x  c
a        Divide by a
We now complete the square by adding 1b/2a2 2 to each side of the equation:
 x2 b
a
 x a b
2a b
2
 c
a a b
2a b
2
    Complete the square: Add a b
2a b
2
 a x b
2a b
2
4ac b2
4a2
    Perfect square
 x b
2a  "b2 4ac
2a
    Take square root
 x b "b2 4ac
2a
    Subtract b
2a
■
The Quadratic Formula could be used to solve the equations in Examples 4 and 6. 
You should carry out the details of these calculations.
François Viète (1540–1603) had a suc­
cessful political career before taking up 
mathematics late in life. He became one of 
the most famous French mathematicians 
of the 16th century. Viète introduced a 
new level of abstraction in algebra by 
using letters to stand for known quantities 
in an equation. Before Viète’s time, each 
equation had to be solved on its own. For 
instance, the quadratic equations
 3x2 2x 8 0
 5x2 6x 4 0
had to be solved separately by completing the square. Viète’s idea was to 
consider all quadratic equations at once by writing
ax2 bx c 0
where a, b, and c are known quantities. Thus he made it possible to write a 
formula (in this case the quadratic formula) involving a, b, and c that can 
be used to solve all such equations in one fell swoop.
Viète’s mathematical genius proved quite valuable during a war 
between France and Spain. To communicate with their troops, the Span­
iards used a complicated code that Viète managed to decipher. Unaware of 
Viète’s accomplishment, the Spanish king, Philip II, protested to the Pope, 
claiming that the French were using witchcraft to read his messages.
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs 
Division [LC-USZ62-62123]
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.5  ■  Equations  51
Example 7  ■  Using the Quadratic Formula
Find all real solutions of each equation.
(a)	 3x 2  5x  1  0      (b)  4x 2  12x  9  0      (c)  x 2  2x  2  0
Solution
(a)	 In this quadratic equation a  3, b  5, and c  1.
	
b  5
3x2 5x 1 0
	
a  3 
c  1
	 	 By the Quadratic Formula,
x 
152 "152 2 4132 112
2132
5 !37
6
	 	 If approximations are desired, we can use a calculator to obtain
x 5 !37
6
1.8471  and  x 5 !37
6
0.1805
(b)	 Using the Quadratic Formula with a  4, b  12, and c  9 gives
x 
12 "1122 2 4 # 4 # 9
2 # 4
12 0
8
 3
2
	 	 This equation has only one solution, x  3
2.
(c)	 Using the Quadratic Formula with a  1, b  2, and c  2 gives
x 2 "22 4 # 2
2
2 !4
2
2 2!1
2
1 !1
	 	 Since the square of any real number is nonnegative, !1 is undeﬁned in the real 
number system. The equation has no real solution.
Now Try Exercises 67, 73, and 77	
■
In the next section we study the complex number system, in which the square roots 
of negative numbers do exist. The equation in Example 7(c) does have solutions in the 
complex number system.
The quantity b 2  4ac that appears under the square root sign in the quadratic for-
mula is called the discriminant of the equation ax 2  bx  c  0 and is given the 
symbol D. If D  0, then "b2 4ac is undeﬁned, and the quadratic equation has no 
real solution, as in Example 7(c). If D  0, then the equation has only one real solution, 
as in Example 7(b). Finally, if D  0, then the equation has two distinct real solutions, 
as in Example 7(a). The following box summarizes these observations.
The Discriminant
The discriminant of the general quadratic equation ax2 bx c 0  1a ? 02  
is D  b2  4ac.
1.	 If D  0, then the equation has two distinct real solutions.
2.	 If D  0, then the equation has exactly one real solution.
3.	 If D  0, then the equation has no real solution.
Another Method
 4x2 12x 9 0
 12x 32 2 0
 2x 3 0
 x  3
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 8  ■  Using the Discriminant
Use the discriminant to determine how many real solutions each equation has.
(a)	 x2  4x  1  0      (b)  4x2  12x  9  0      (c)  1
3 x2 2x 4 0
Solution
(a)	 The discriminant is D 42 4112 112 20 0, so the equation has two dis-
tinct real solutions.
(b)	 The discriminant is D 1122 2 4 # 4 # 9 0, so the equation has exactly one 
real solution.
(c)	 The discriminant is D 122 2 4A1
3B4  4
3 0, so the equation has no real 
solution.
Now Try Exercises 81, 83, and 85	
■
Now let’s consider a real-life situation that can be modeled by a quadratic equation.
Example 9  ■  The Path of a Projectile
An object thrown or ﬁred straight upward at an initial speed of √0 ft/s will reach a 
height of h feet after t seconds, where h and t are related by the formula
h 16t 2 √0t
Suppose that a bullet is shot straight upward with an initial speed of 800 ft/s. Its path 
is shown in Figure 2.
(a)	 When does the bullet fall back to ground level?
(b)	 When does it reach a height of 6400 ft?
(c)	 When does it reach a height of 2 mi?
(d)	 How high is the highest point the bullet reaches?
Solution    Since the initial speed in this case is √0  800 ft/s, the formula is
h 16t 2 800t
(a)	 Ground level corresponds to h  0, so we must solve the equation
	
 0 16t 2 800t	
Set h  0
	
 0 16t1t 502 	
Factor
	 	 Thus t  0 or t  50. This means the bullet starts 1t 02  at ground level and  
returns to ground level after 50 s.
(b)	 Setting h  6400 gives the equation
	
 6400 16t 2 800t	
Set h  6400
	
 16t 2 800t 6400 0
	
All terms to LHS
	
 t 2 50t 400 0
	
Divide by 16
	
 1t 102 1t 402 0
	
Factor
	
t 10  or  t 40	
Solve
	 	 The bullet reaches 6400 ft after 10 s (on its ascent) and again after 40 s (on its  
descent to earth).
(c)	 Two miles is 2  5280  10,560 ft.
	
 10,560 16t2 800t	
Set h  10,560
	
 16t2 800t 10,560 0
	
All terms to LHS
	
 t2 50t 660 0
	
Divide by 16
This formula depends on the fact that 
acceleration due to gravity is constant 
near the earth’s surface. Here we  
neglect the effect of air resistance.
h
descent
ascent
Figure 2
6400 ft
2 mi
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.5  ■  Equations  53
	 	 The discriminant of this equation is D 1502 2 416602 140, which is 
negative. Thus the equation has no real solution. The bullet never reaches a height 
of 2 mi.
(d)	 Each height the bullet reaches is attained twice, once on its ascent and once on its 
descent. The only exception is the highest point of its path, which is reached only 
once. This means that for the highest value of h, the following equation has only 
one solution for t:
	
 h 16t2 800t
 16t2 800t h 0
    All terms to LHS
	 	 This in turn means that the discriminant D of the equation is 0, so
 D 18002 2 41162h 0
 640,000 64h 0
 h 10,000
	 	 The maximum height reached is 10,000 ft.
Now Try Exercise 129	
■
■  Other Types of Equations
So far we have learned how to solve linear and quadratic equations. Now we study other 
types of equations, including those that involve higher powers, fractional expressions, 
and radicals.
When we solve an equation that involves fractional expressions or radicals, we must 
be especially careful to check our final answers. The next two examples demonstrate 
why.
Example 10  ■  An Equation Involving Fractional Expressions
Solve the equation 3
x 
2
x 3 
12
x2 9.
Solution    We eliminate the denominators by multiplying each side by the lowest 
common denominator. 
 a 3
x 
2
x 3 b x 1x2 92 
12
x2 9
 x 1x2 92 	
Multiply by LCD,  x1x2 92
 31x2 92 2x1x 32 12x
	
Expand
 3x2 27 2x2 6x 12x
	
Expand LHS
 x2 6x 27 12x
	
Add like terms on LHS
 x2 6x 27 0
	
Add 12x
 1x 32 1x 92 0
	
Factor
 x 3 0    or     x 9 0
	
Zero-Product Property
 x 3          
 x 9	
Solve
We must check our answer because multiplying by an expression that contains the 
variable can introduce extraneous solutions. From Check Your Answers we see that the 
only solution is x 9.
Now Try Exercise 89	
■
10,000 ft
Check Your Answers
x 3:
 LHS 3
3 
2
3 3 undefined
 RHS 
12
32 9 undefined    ✗
x 9:
 LHS 3
9 
2
9 3  1
6
 RHS 
12
192 2 9  1
6
 LHS RHS  ✓
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 11  ■  An Equation Involving a Radical
Solve the equation 2x 1 !2 x.
Solution    To eliminate the square root, we ﬁrst isolate it on one side of the equal 
sign, then square.
 2x 1  !2 x	
Subtract 1
 12x 12 2 2 x
	
Square each side
 4x2 4x 1 2 x
	
Expand LHS
 4x2 3x 1 0
	
Add 2  x
 14x 12 1x 12 0
	
Factor
 4x 1 0  or   x 1 0	
Zero-Product Property
 x  1
4   
 x 1	
Solve
The values x  1
4 and x  1 are only potential solutions. We must check them  
to see whether they satisfy the original equation. From Check Your Answers we see 
that x  1
4 is a solution but x  1 is not. The only solution is x  1
4.
Now Try Exercise 97	
■
When we solve an equation, we may end up with one or more extraneous solutions, 
that is, potential solutions that do not satisfy the original equation. In Example 10 the 
value x 3 is an extraneous solution, and in Example 11 the value x 1 is an extrane-
ous solution. In the case of equations involving fractional expressions, potential solutions 
may be undefined in the original equation and hence become extraneous solutions. In the 
case of equations involving radicals, extraneous solutions may be introduced when we 
square each side of an equation because the operation of squaring can turn a false equation 
into a true one. For example, 1 ? 1, but 112 2 12. Thus the squared equation may 
be true for more values of the variable than the original equation. That is why you must 
always check your answers to make sure that each satisﬁes the original equation.
An equation of the form aW 2  bW  c  0, where W is an algebraic expression, 
is an equation of quadratic type. We solve equations of quadratic type by substituting 
for the algebraic expression, as we see in the next two examples.
Example 12  ■  A Fourth-Degree Equation of Quadratic Type
Find all solutions of the equation x 4  8x2  8  0.
Solution    If we set W  x2, then we get a quadratic equation in the new variable W.
	
 1x22 2 8x2 8 0	
Write x4 as 1x22 2
	
 W 2 8W 8 0	
Let W  x2
	
 W 
182 "182 2 4 # 8
2
4 2!2	
Quadratic Formula
	
 x2 4 2 !2
	
W  x2
	
 x  "4 2 !2
	
Take square roots
So there are four solutions:
"4 2 !2     
"4 2 !2     
 "4 2 !2     
 "4 2 !2
Using a calculator, we obtain the approximations x  2.61, 1.08, 2.61, 1.08.
Now Try Exercise 103	
■
Check Your AnswerS
x  1
4:
 LHS 2A 1
4B  1
2
 RHS 1 "2 A 1
4B
  1 "9
4
  1 3
2  1
2
 LHS RHS    ✓
x 1:
 LHS 2112 2
 RHS 1 !2 1
  1 1 0
 LHS ? RHS    ✗
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.5  ■  Equations  55
Example 13  ■  An Equation Involving Fractional Powers
Find all solutions of the equation x1/3  x1/6  2  0.
Solution    This equation is of quadratic type because if we let W  x1/6, then 
W 2 1x1/62 2 x1/3.
	
 
 x1/3 x1/6 2 0
	
 
 W 2 W 2 0
	
Let W  x1/6
	
 
 1W 12 1W 22 0
	
Factor
	
 W 1 0  or   W 2 0
	
Zero-Product Property
 W 1   
 W 2
	
Solve
 x1/6 1   
 x1/6 2
	
W  x1/6
	
 x 16 1   
 x 122 6 64	
Take the 6th power
From Check Your Answers we see that x  1 is a solution but x  64 is not. The only 
solution is x  1.
Check Your Answers
x 1:	
x 64:
     LHS 11/3 11/6 2 0	
 
 LHS 641/3 641/6 2
	
 
  4 2 2 4
     RHS 0
	
 
 RHS 0
     LHS RHS  ✓	
 
 LHS ? RHS    ✗
Now Try Exercise 107	
■
When solving an absolute value equation, we use the following property
0  X 0 C  is equivalent to 
X C  or 
X C
where X is any algebraic expression. This property says that to solve an absolute value 
equation, we must solve two separate equations.
Example 14  ■  An Absolute Value Equation
Solve the equation 0  2x 5 0 3.
Solution    By the deﬁnition of absolute value, 0  2x 5 0 3 is equivalent to
 2x 5 3  or   2x 5 3
 2x 8   
 2x 2
 x 4   
 x 1
The solutions are x  1, x  4.
Now Try Exercise 113	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 Yes or No? If No, give a reason.
(a)	 When you add the same number to each side of an equa-
tion, do you always get an equivalent equation?
(b)	 When you multiply each side of an equation by the same 
nonzero number, do you always get an equivalent equation?
(c)	 When you square each side of an equation, do you 
always get an equivalent equation?
1.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
	 2.	 What is a logical first step in solving the equation?
(a)	 1x 52 2 64	
(b)	 1x 52 2 5 64
(c)	 x2 x 2
	 3.	 Explain how you would use each method to solve the equa-
tion x2 4x 5 0.
(a)	 By factoring: 
 
(b)	 By completing the square: 
 
(c)	 By using the Quadratic Formula: 
 
	 4.	 (a)	 The solutions of the equation x21x 42 0 are 
 
  .
(b)	 To solve the equation x3 4x2 0, we 
 
 the 
left-hand side.
	 5.	 Solve the equation !2x x 0 by doing the following 
steps.
(a)	 Isolate the radical: 
 
  .
(b)	 Square both sides: 
 
  .
(c)	 The solutions of the resulting quadratic equation are  
	
 
  .
(d)	 The solution(s) that satisfy the original equation are 
	
 
  .
	 6.	 The equation 1x 12 2 51x 12 6 0 is of 
 
 
	 	 type. To solve the equation, we set W  
 
  . The result-
	 	 ing quadratic equation is 
 
  .
	 7.	 To eliminate the denominators in the equation 
	 	 3
x 
5
x 2 2, we multiply each side by the lowest 
	 	 common denominator 
 
 to get the 
	 	 equivalent equation 
 
  .
	 8.	 To eliminate the square root in the equation 
	 	 2x 1 !x 1, we 
 
 each side to get
	 	 the equation 
 
  .
skills
9–12  ■  Solution?    Determine whether the given value is a solu-
tion of the equation.
	 9.	 4x  7  9x  3
(a)	 x  2	
(b)	 x  2
	10.	 1 32 13 x2 4 4x 16 x2
(a)	 x  2	
(b)	 x  4
	11.	 1
x 
1
x 4 1	
12.	
x3/2
x 6 x 8
(a)	 x  2    (b)  x  4	
(a)	 x  4    (b)  x  8
13–30  ■  Linear Equations    The given equation is either linear or 
equivalent to a linear equation. Solve the equation.
	13.	 5x 6 14	
14.	 3x 4 7 
	15.	 1
2 x 8 1	
16.	 3 1
3 x 5
	17.	 x 3 4x	
18.	 2x 3 7 3x 
19.	 x
3 2 5
3
 x 7	
20.	 2
5 x 1 3
10 x 3
21.	 211 x2 311 2x2 5
22.	 2
3
 y 1
2
 1y 32 y 1
4
23.	 x 1
3 x 1
2 x 5 0	
24.	 2x x
2 x 1
4
6x
	25.	 1
x 4
3x 1	
26.	 2x 1
x 2 4
5
27.	
3
x 1 1
2 
1
3x 3	
28.	
4
x 1 
2
x 1 
35
x2 1
29.	 1t 42 2 1t 42 2 32	
30.	 !3 x !12 x 5
!3
31–44  ■  Solving for a Variable    Solve the equation for the indi-
cated variable.
31.	 PV  nRT;    for R	
32.	 F G  mM
r2 ;    for m
33.	 P  2l  2„;    for „ 
34.	 1
R 1
R1
1
R2
;    for R1
35.	 ax b
cx d 2;    for x
36.	 a 23b 31c x2 4 6;    for x
37.	 a2x 1a 12 1a 12x;    for x
38.	 a 1
b
a 1
b
b 1
a
;    for a
39.	 V 1
3pr2h;    for r	
40.	 F G  mM
r2 ;    for r
41.	 a 2  b 2  c 2;    for b	
42.	 A Pa1 
i
100 b
2
;    for i
43.	 h 1
2gt2 √0t;    for t	
44.	 S 
n1n 12
2
;    for n
45–56  ■  Solving by Factoring    Find all real solutions of the 
equation by factoring.
45.	 x2  x  12  0	
46.	 x2  3x  4  0
47.	 x2  7x  12  0	
48.	 x2  8x  12  0
49.	 4x2  4x  15  0	
50.	 2y2  7y  3  0
51.	 3x2  5x  2	
52.	 6x1x 12 21 x
53.	 2x2 8	
54.	 3x2 27 0
55.	 12x 52 2 81	
56.	 15x 12 2 3 10 
57–64  ■  Completing the Square    Find all real solutions of the 
equation by completing the square.
57.	 x2 2x 5 0	
58.	 x2 4x 2 0
	59.	 x2 6x 11 0	
60.	 x2 3x 7
4 0
	61.	 2x2 8x 1 0	
62.	 3x2 6x 1 0
	63.	 4x2 x 0	
64.	 x 2 3
4x 1
8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.5  ■  Equations  57
65–80  ■  Quadratic Equations    Find all real solutions of the  
quadratic equation.
	 65.	 x2 2x 15 0	
66.	 x2 5x 6 0
	 67.	 x2 13x 42 0	
68.	 x2 10x 600 0 
	 69.	 2x2 x 3 0	
70.	 3x2 7x 4 0
	 71.	 3x2 6x 5 0	
72.	 x2 6x 1 0
	 73.	 9x2 12x 4 0	
74.	 4x2 4x 1 0 
	 75.	 4x2 16x 9 0	
76.	 0 x2 4x 1
	 77.	 7x2 2x 4 0	
78.	 „2 31„ 12  
	 79.	 10y2 16y 5 0	
80.	 25x2 70x 49 0
81–86  ■  Discriminant    Use the discriminant to determine the 
number of real solutions of the equation. Do not solve the equation.
	 81.	 x2 6x  1  0	
82.	 3x2  6x  9
	 83.	 x2  2.20x  1.21  0	
84.	 x2  2.21x  1.21  0
	 85.	 4x2 5x 13
8 0	
86.	 x2 rx s 0 1s 02
87–116  ■  Other Equations    Find all real solutions of the equation.
	 87.	
x2
x 100 50	
88.	
1
x 1 2
x2 0
	 89.	
1
x 1 
1
x 2 5
4	
90.	 x 5
x 2 
5
x 2 
28
x2 4
	 91.	 10
x 
12
x 3 4 0	
92.	
x
2x 7 x 1
x 3 1
	 93.	 5 !4x 3	
94.	 !8x 1 3
	 95.	 !2x 1 !3x 5	
96.	 !3 x "x2 1
  97.	 !2x 1 1 x	
98.	 !5 x 1 x 2
  99.	 2x !x 1 8	
100.	 x !9 3x 0
	101.	 !3x 1 2 !x 1	 102.	 !1 x !1 x 2
103.	 x 4  13x2  40  0	
104.	 x 4  5x2  4  0
105.	 2x 4  4x2  1  0	
106.	 x 6  2x 3  3  0
107.	 x 4/3  5x2/3  6  0	
108.	 !x 3!
4 x 4 0
109.	 41x 12 1/2 51x 12 3/2 1x 12 5/2 0
110.	 x1/2  3x1/2  10x3/2
111.	 x1/2  3x1/3  3x1/6  9	
112.	 x 5!x 6 0
113.	 0 3x 5 0   1	
114.	 0 2x 0   3	
115.	 0 x 4 0   0.01	
116.	 0 x 6 0   1
Skills Plus
117–122  ■  More on Solving Equations    Find all real solutions of 
the equation.
	117.	 1
x 3 4
x 2 4
x 0	
118.	 4x4  16x2  4  0
	119.	 "!x 5 x 5	
120.	 "
3 4x 2 4x x
	121.	 x 2!x 3 1x 32 3/2	
122.	 "11 x 2 
2
"11 x 2 1
123–126  ■  More on Solving Equations    Solve the equation for 
the variable x. The constants a and b represent positive real  
numbers.
	123.	 x4 5ax2 4a2 0	
124.	 a3x3 b3 0
	125.	 !x a !x a !2!x 6
	126.	 !x a!
3 x b!
6 x ab 0
Applications
127–128  ■  Falling-Body Problems    Suppose an object is 
dropped from a height h0 above the ground. Then its height after  
t seconds is given by h  16t 2  h0, where h is measured in 
feet. Use this information to solve the problem.
127.	 If a ball is dropped from 288 ft above the ground, how long 
does it take to reach ground level?
128.	 A ball is dropped from the top of a building 96 ft tall.
(a)	 How long will it take to fall half the distance to ground 
level?
(b)	 How long will it take to fall to ground level?
129–130  ■  Falling-Body Problems    Use the formula  
h  16t2  √0t discussed in Example 9.
129.	 A ball is thrown straight upward at an initial speed of  
√0  40 ft/s.
(a)	 When does the ball reach a height of 24 ft?
(b)	 When does it reach a height of 48 ft?
(c)	 What is the greatest height reached by the ball?
(d)	 When does the ball reach the highest point of its  
path?
(e)	 When does the ball hit the ground?
130.	 How fast would a ball have to be thrown upward to reach a 
maximum height of 100 ft?    [Hint: Use the discriminant of 
the equation 16t 2  √0t  h  0.]
131.	 Shrinkage in Concrete Beams    As concrete dries, it 
shrinks—the higher the water content, the greater the 
shrinkage. If a concrete beam has a water content of  
„ kg/m3, then it will shrink by a factor
S 0.032„ 2.5
10,000
	
	 where S is the fraction of the original beam length that  
disappears due to shrinkage.
(a)	 A beam 12.025 m long is cast in concrete that contains 
250 kg/m3 water. What is the shrinkage factor S? How 
long will the beam be when it has dried?
(b)	 A beam is 10.014 m long when wet. We want it to 
shrink to 10.009 m, so the shrinkage factor should be  
S  0.00050. What water content will provide this 
amount of shrinkage?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
132.	 The Lens Equation    If F is the focal length of a convex lens 
and an object is placed at a distance x from the lens, then its 
image will be at a distance y from the lens, where F, x, and 
y are related by the lens equation
1
F 1
x 1
y
	
	 Suppose that a lens has a focal length of 4.8 cm and that the 
image of an object is 4 cm closer to the lens than the object 
itself. How far from the lens is the object?
133.	 Fish Population    The ﬁsh population in a certain lake rises 
and falls according to the formula
F 1000130 17t t22
	
	 Here F is the number of ﬁsh at time t, where t is measured 
in years since January 1, 2002, when the ﬁsh population 
was ﬁrst estimated.
(a)	 	On what date will the ﬁsh population again be the same 
as it was on January 1, 2002?
(b)	 	By what date will all the ﬁsh in the lake have died?
134.	 Fish Population    A large pond is stocked with ﬁsh.  
The ﬁsh population P is modeled by the formula 
P 3t 10 !t 140, where t is the number of days 
since the ﬁsh were ﬁrst introduced into the pond. How 
many days will it take for the ﬁsh population to reach 500?
135.	 Proﬁt    A small-appliance manufacturer ﬁnds that the  
proﬁt P (in dollars) generated by producing x microwave 
ovens per week is given by the formula P 1
10 x 1300 x2 , 
provided that 0  x  200. How many ovens must be 
manufactured in a given week to generate a proﬁt of 
$1250?
136.	 Gravity    If an imaginary line segment is drawn between 
the centers of the earth and the moon, then the net gravita-
tional force F acting on an object situated on this line seg-
ment is
F K
x2 
0.012K
1239 x2 2
	
	 where K  0 is a constant and x is the distance of the object 
from the center of the earth, measured in thousands of 
miles. How far from the center of the earth is the “dead 
spot” where no net gravitational force acts upon the object? 
(Express your answer to the nearest thousand miles.)
x
137.	 Depth of a Well    One method for determining the depth of 
a well is to drop a stone into it and then measure the time it 
takes until the splash is heard. If d is the depth of the well 
(in feet) and t1 the time (in seconds) it takes for the stone to 
fall, then d 16t2
1, so t1 !d/4. Now if t2 is the time it 
takes for the sound to travel back up, then d  1090t2 
because the speed of sound is 1090 ft/s. So t2  d/1090. 
Thus the total time elapsed between dropping the stone and 
hearing the splash is
t1 t2 !d
4

d
1090
	
	 How deep is the well if this total time is 3 s?
t¤= d
1090
Time
sound
rises:
Time
stone
falls:
t⁄=œ∑d
4
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
138.	 DISCUSS:  A Family of Equations    The equation
3x k 5 kx k 1
	
	 is really a family of equations, because for each value of k, 
we get a different equation with the unknown x. The letter k 
is called a parameter for this family. What value should we 
pick for k to make the given value of x a solution of the 
resulting equation?
(a)	 	x  0      (b)  x  1      (c)  x  2
139.	 DISCUSS:  Proof That 0  1?    The following steps appear 
to give equivalent equations, which seem to prove that  
1  0. Find the error.
	
 x 1
	
Given
	
 x2 x
	
Multiply by x
	
 x2 x 0
	
Subtract x
	
 x1x 12 0
	
Factor
	
 
x1x 12
x 1

0
x 1	
Divide by x  1
	
 x 0
	
Simplify
	
 1 0
	
Given x  1
140.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Relationship Between Solutions and 
Coefficients    The Quadratic Formula gives us the solutions 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.6  ■  Complex Numbers  59
of a quadratic equation from its coefficients.  We can also 
obtain the coefficients from the solutions.
(a)	 Find the solutions of the equation x2 9x 20 0, 
and show that the product of the solutions is the con-
stant term 20 and the sum of the solutions is 9, the neg-
ative of the coefficient of x.
(b)	 Show that the same relationship between solutions and 
coefficients holds for the following equations:
x2 2x 8 0
x2 4x 2 0
(c)	 Use the Quadratic Formula to prove that in general, if 
the equation x2 bx c 0 has solutions r1 and r2, 
then c r1r2 and b 1r1 r22 .
141.	 DISCUSS:  Solving an Equation in Different Ways    We have 
learned several different ways to solve an equation in this 
section. Some equations can be tackled by more than one 
method. For example, the equation x !x 2 0 is of 
quadratic type. We can solve it by letting !x u and  
x  u 2, and factoring. Or we could solve for !x, square 
each side, and then solve the resulting quadratic equation. 
Solve the following equations using both methods indicated, 
and show that you get the same ﬁnal answers.
(a)	 x !x 2 0    quadratic type; solve for the  
radical, and square
(b)	
12
1x 32 2 
10
x 3 1 0    quadratic type; multiply 
by LCD
1.6 
Complex Numbers
■  Arithmetic Operations on Complex Numbers  ■  Square Roots of Negative Numbers   
■  Complex Solutions of Quadratic Equations
In Section 1.5 we saw that if the discriminant of a quadratic equation is negative, the 
equation has no real solution. For example, the equation
x 2 4 0
has no real solution. If we try to solve this equation, we get x 2  4, so
x !4
But this is impossible, since the square of any real number is positive. [For example, 
122 2 4, a positive number.] Thus negative numbers don’t have real square roots.
To make it possible to solve all quadratic equations, mathematicians invented an 
expanded number system, called the complex number system. First they deﬁned the new 
number
i !1
This means that i 2  1. A complex number is then a number of the form a  bi, 
where a and b are real numbers.
Definition of Complex Numbers
A complex number is an expression of the form
a bi
where a and b are real numbers and i 2  1. The real part of this complex 
number is a, and the imaginary part is b. Two complex numbers are equal if 
and only if their real parts are equal and their imaginary parts are equal.
Note that both the real and imaginary parts of a complex number are real numbers.
See the note on Cardano (page 292) for 
an example of how complex numbers 
are used to ﬁnd real solutions of poly-
nomial equations.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 1  ■  Complex Numbers
The following are examples of complex numbers.
	
3 4i	
Real part 3, imaginary part 4
	
1
2 2
3i	
Real part 1
2, imaginary part  2
3
	
6i	
Real part 0, imaginary part 6
	
7	
Real part 7, imaginary part 0
Now Try Exercises 7 and 11	
■
A number such as 6i, which has real part 0, is called a pure imaginary number. A 
real number such as 7 can be thought of as a complex number with imaginary part 0.
In the complex number system every quadratic equation has solutions. The numbers 
2i and 2i are solutions of x2  4 because
12i2 2 2 2i 2 4112 4  and  12i2 2 122 2i 2 4112 4
Although we use the term imaginary in this context, imaginary numbers should not be 
thought of as any less “real” (in the ordinary rather than the mathematical sense of that 
word) than negative numbers or irrational numbers. All numbers (except possibly the 
positive integers) are creations of the human mind—the numbers 1 and !2 as well as 
the number i. We study complex numbers because they complete, in a useful and elegant 
fashion, our study of the solutions of equations. In fact, imaginary numbers are useful not 
only in algebra and mathematics, but in the other sciences as well. To give just one ex-
ample, in electrical theory the reactance of a circuit is a quantity whose measure is an 
imaginary number.
■  Arithmetic Operations on Complex Numbers
Complex numbers are added, subtracted, multiplied, and divided just as we would any 
number of the form a b !c. The only difference that we need to keep in mind is that  
i 2  1. Thus the following calculations are valid.
	  1a bi2 1c di2 ac 1ad bc2i bdi 2
	
Multiply and collect like terms
	
  ac 1ad bc2i bd112	
i 2  1
	
  1ac bd2 1ad bc2i
	
Combine real and imaginary parts
We therefore deﬁne the sum, difference, and product of complex numbers as follows.
Adding, Subtracting, and Multiplying Complex Numbers
Definition	
Description
Addition
1a bi2 1c di2 1a c2 1b d2i	
To add complex numbers, add the real parts and the  
imaginary parts.
Subtraction
1a bi2 1c di2 1a c2 1b d2i	
To subtract complex numbers, subtract the real 
parts and the imaginary parts.
Multiplication
1a bi2 # 1c di2 1ac bd2 1ad bc2i	
Multiply complex numbers like binomials, using  
i 2  1.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.6  ■  Complex Numbers  61
Example 2  ■  Adding, Subtracting, and Multiplying Complex Numbers
Express the following in the form a  bi.
(a)	 13 5i2 14 2i2 	
(b)	 13 5i2 14 2i2
(c)	 13 5i2 14 2i2 	
(d)	 i 23
SOLUTION
(a)	 According to the deﬁnition, we add the real parts and we add the imaginary parts:
13 5i2 14 2i2 13 42 15 22i 7 3i
(b)	 13 5i2 14 2i2 13 42 35 122 4i 1 7i
(c)	 13 5i2 14 2i2 33 # 4 5122 4 33122 5 # 44i 22 14i
(d)	 i 23 i 221 1i 22 11i 112 11i 112i i
Now Try Exercises 19, 23, 29, and 47	
■
Division of complex numbers is much like rationalizing the denominator of a radi­cal 
expression, which we considered in Section 1.2. For the complex number z  a  bi 
we deﬁne its complex conjugate to be z a bi. Note that
z # z 1a bi2 1a bi2 a 2 b 2
So the product of a complex number and its conjugate is always a nonnegative real 
number. We use this property to divide complex numbers.
Dividing Complex Numbers
To simplify the quotient a bi
c di, multiply the numerator and the denominator 
by the complex conjugate of the denominator:
a bi
c di a a bi
c di b a c di
c di b 
1ac bd2 1bc ad2i
c2 d 2
Rather than memorizing this entire formula, it is easier to just remember the ﬁrst step 
and then multiply out the numerator and the denominator as usual.
Example 3  ■  Dividing Complex Numbers
Express the following in the form a  bi.
(a)	 3 5i
1 2i                (b)  7 3i
4i
SOLUTION    We multiply both the numerator and denominator by the complex con­
jugate of the denominator to make the new denominator a real number.
(a)	 The complex conjugate of 1  2i is 1 2i 1 2i. Therefore
3 5i
1 2i a 3 5i
1 2i b a 1 2i
1 2i b 7 11i
5
 7
5 11
5
  i
(b)	 The complex conjugate of 4i is 4i. Therefore
7 3i
4i
a 7 3i
4i
b a 4i
4i b 12 28i
16
3
4 7
4
  i
Now Try Exercises 39 and 43	
■
Graphing calculators can perform arith-
metic operations on complex numbers.
(3+5i)+(4-2i)
7+3i
(3+5i)*(4-2i)
22+14i
Complex Conjugates
Number
Conjugate
3  2i
3  2i
1  i
1  i
4i
4i
5
5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
■  Square Roots of Negative Numbers
Just as every positive real number r has two square roots 1!r and !r2, every nega-
tive number has two square roots as well. If r is a negative number, then its square 
roots are i !r, because 1i !r2 2 i2r r and 1i !r2 2 112 2i2r r.
Square Roots of Negative Numbers
If r is negative, then the principal square root of r is
!r i !r
The two square roots of r are i !r and i !r.
We usually write i !b instead of !b i to avoid confusion with !bi.
Example 4  ■  Square Roots of Negative Numbers
(a)	 !1 i !1 i            (b)  !16 i !16 4i            (c)  !3 i !3
Now Try Exercises 53 and 55	
■
Special care must be taken in performing calculations that involve square roots of 
negative numbers. Although !a # !b !ab when a and b are positive, this is not 
true when both are negative. For example,
!2 # !3 i !2 # i !3 i2
 !6 !6
but	
!122 132 !6
so	
!2 # !3 !122 132
When multiplying radicals of negative numbers, express them ﬁrst in the form i !r 
(where r  0) to avoid possible errors of this type.
Example 5  ■  Using Square Roots of Negative Numbers
Evaluate 1 !12 !32 13 !42 , and express the result in the form a  bi.
SOLUTION
 1 !12 !32 13 !42 1 !12 i !32 13 i !42
  12 !3 i !32 13 2i2
  16 !3 2 !32 i12 # 2 !3 3 !32
  8 !3 i !3
Now Try Exercise 57	
■
■  Complex Solutions of Quadratic Equations
We have already seen that if a ? 0, then the solutions of the quadratic equation  
ax2  bx  c  0 are
x b "b2 4ac
2a
If b 2  4ac  0, then the equation has no real solution. But in the complex number 
system this equation will always have solutions, because negative numbers have square 
roots in this expanded setting.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.6  ■  Complex Numbers  63
Example 6  ■  Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions
Solve each equation.
(a)	 x2  9  0                (b)  x2  4x  5  0
SOLUTION
(a)	 The equation x2  9  0 means x2  9, so
x !9 i !9 3i
	 	 The solutions are therefore 3i and 3i.
(b)	 By the Quadratic Formula we have
 x 4 "42 4 # 5
2
  4 !4
2
  4 2i
2
2 i
	 	 So the solutions are 2  i and 2  i.
Now Try Exercises 61 and 63	
■
We see from Example 6 that if a quadratic equation with real coefficients has com-
plex solutions, then these solutions are complex conjugates of each other. So if a  bi 
is a solution, then a  bi is also a solution.
Example 7  ■  Complex Conjugates as Solutions of a Quadratic
Show that the solutions of the equation
4x2 24x 37 0
are complex conjugates of each other.
SOLUTION    We use the Quadratic Formula to get
 x 
24 "1242 2 4142 1372
2142
  24 !16
8
24 4i
8
3 1
2
 i
So the solutions are 3 1
2i and 3 1
2i, and these are complex conjugates.
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
concepts
	 1.	 The imaginary number i has the property that i 2   
  .
	 2.	 For the complex number 3  4i the real part is  
  , 
	 	 and the imaginary part is  
  .
	 3.	 (a)	 The complex conjugate of 3  4i is 3 4i   
  .
(b)	 13 4i2 13 4i2  
  .
	 4.	 If 3 4i is a solution of a quadratic equation with real
	 	 coefficients, then  
 is also a solution of the equation.
5–6  ■  Yes or No? If No, give a reason.
	 5.	 Is every real number also a complex number?
	 6.	 Is the sum of a complex number and its complex conjugate a 
real number?
1.6  Exercises
Library of Congress Prints and  
Photographs Division
Leonhard EuleR  (1707–1783) was 
born in Basel, Switzerland, the son of a 
pastor. When Euler was 13, his father 
sent him to the University at Basel to 
study theology, but Euler soon 
decided to devote himself to the sci­
ences. Besides theology he studied 
mathematics, medicine, astronomy, 
physics, and Asian languages. It is said 
that Euler could calculate as effort­
lessly as “men breathe or as eagles ﬂy.” 
One hundred years before Euler,  
Fermat (see page 117) had conjec­
tured that 2 2 n 1  is a prime number 
for all n. The ﬁrst ﬁve of these num­
bers are 5, 17, 257, 65537, and 
4,294,967,297. It is easy to show that 
the ﬁrst four are prime. The ﬁfth was 
also thought to be prime until Euler, 
with his phenomenal calculating abil­
ity, showed that it is the product 
641  6,700,417 and so is not prime. 
Euler published more than any other 
mathematician in history. His col­
lected works comprise 75 large vol­
umes. Although he was blind for the 
last 17 years of his life, he continued 
to work and publish. In his writings he 
popularized the use of the symbols p, 
e, and i, which you will ﬁnd in this 
textbook. One of Euler’s most lasting 
contributions is his development of 
complex numbers.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Skills
7–16  ■  Real and Imaginary Parts    Find the real and imaginary 
parts of the complex number.
	 7.	 5  7i	
  8.	 6  4i
	 9.	 2 5i
3
	
10.	 4 7i
2
	11.	 3	
	
12.	  1
2
	13.	  2
3i	
14.	 i !3
	15.	 !3 !4	
16.	 2 !5
17–26  ■  Sums and Differences    Evaluate the sum or difference, 
and write the result in the form a bi.
17.	 13 2i2 5i	
18.	 3i 12 3i2
	19.	 15 3i2 14 7i2 	
20.	 13 4i2 12 5i2  
	21.	 16 6i2 19 i2 	
22.	 13 2i2 A5 1
3iB
	23.	 A7 1
2 iB A5 3
2 iB	
24.	 14 i2 12 5i2
	25.	 112 8i2 17 4i2 	
26.	 6i 14 i2
27–36  ■  Products    Evaluate the product, and write the result in 
the form a bi.
	27.	 411 2i2 	
28.	 213 4i2
	29.	 17 i214 2i2 	
30.	 15 3i2 11 i2
	31.	 16 5i212 3i2 	
32.	 12 i2 13 7i2
33.	 12 5i212 5i2 	
34.	 13 7i2 13 7i2  
35.	 12 5i2 2	
36.	 13 7i2 2 
37–46  ■  Quotients    Evaluate the quotient, and write the result 
in the form a bi.
	37.	 1
i 	 	
38.	
1
1 i
	39.	 2 3i
1 2i	
40.	 5 i
3 4i
	41.	
10i
1 2i	
42.	 12 3i2 1 
	
	43.	 4 6i
3i
	
44.	 3 5i
15i
	45.	
1
1 i 
1
1 i	
46.	
11 2i2 13 i2
2 i
47–52  ■  Powers    Evaluate the power, and write the result in the 
form a bi.
47.	 i 3	 	
48.	 i 10
	49.	 13i2 5	
50.	 12i2 4
	51.	 i 1000	
52.	 i 1002
53–60  ■  Radical Expressions    Evaluate the radical expression, 
and express the result in the form a bi.
	53.	 !49	
54.	 Ä
81
16
	55.	 !3 !12	
56.	 "1
3 !27
	57.	 13 !52 11 !12 	
58.	 1 !3 !42 1 !6 !82
59.	 2 !8
1 !2	
60.	
!36
!2 !9
61–72  ■  Quadratic Equations    Find all solutions of the equation 
and express them in the form a bi.
	61.	 x 2  49  0	
62.	 3x2 1 0
	63.	 x2 x 2 0 	
64.	 x 2  2x  2  0
	65.	 x2 3x 7 0 	
66.	 x 2  6x  10  0
	67.	 x 2  x  1  0	
68.	 x 2  3x  3  0
	69.	 2x 2  2x  1  0	
70.	 t 3 3
t 0
	71.	 6x 2  12x  7  0	
72.	 x 2 1
2  x 1 0
Skills Plus
73–76  ■  Conjugates    Evaluate the given expression for 
z 3 4i and „ 5 2i.
73.	 z „	
74.	 z „
75.	 z # z		
76.	 z # „
77–84  ■  Conjugates    Recall that the symbol z represents the 
complex conjugate of z. If z  a  bi and „  c  di, show that 
each statement is true.
	77.	 z „ z „	
78.	 z„ z # „
	79.	 1z2 2 z2	
80.	 z z
	81.	 z z is a real number.
	82.	 z z is a pure imaginary number.
83.	 z # z is a real number.
	84.	 z z if and only if z is real.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	85.	 PROVE:  Complex Conjugate Roots    Suppose that the equa-
tion ax 2  bx  c  0 has real coefﬁcients and complex 
roots. Why must the roots be complex conjugates of each 
other?  [Hint: Think about how you would ﬁnd the roots 
using the Quadratic Formula.]
	86.	 DISCUSS:  Powers of i    Calculate the ﬁrst 12 powers of i, that 
is, i, i 2, i 3, . . . , i12. Do you notice a pattern? Explain how you 
would calculate any whole number power of i, using the pat-
tern that you have discovered. Use this procedure to calculate 
i 4446.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.7  ■  Modeling with Equations  65
1.7 
Modeling with Equations
■  Making and Using Models  ■  Problems About Interest  ■  Problems About Area  
or Length  ■  Problems About Mixtures  ■  Problems About the Time Needed to Do a Job   
■  Problems About Distance, Rate, and Time 
In this section a mathematical model is an equation that describes a real-world object 
or process. Modeling is the process of finding such equations. Once the model or equa-
tion has been found, it is then used to obtain information about the thing being modeled. 
The process is described in the diagram in the margin. In this section we learn how to 
make and use models to solve real-world problems.
■  Making and Using Models
We will use the following guidelines to help us set up equations that model situations 
described in words. To show how the guidelines can help you to set up equations, we 
note them as we work each example in this section.
guidelines for modeling with equations
1.	 Identify the Variable.    Identify the quantity that the problem asks you to 
find. This quantity can usually be determined by a careful reading of the 
question that is posed at the end of the problem. Then introduce notation 
for the variable (call it x or some other letter).
2.	 Translate from Words to Algebra.    Read each sentence in the problem again, 
and express all the quantities mentioned in the problem in terms of the vari-
able you defined in Step 1. To organize this information, it is sometimes 
helpful to draw a diagram or make a table.
3.	 Set Up the Model.    Find the crucial fact in the problem that gives a relation-
ship between the expressions you listed in Step 2. Set up an equation (or 
model) that expresses this relationship.
4.	 Solve the Equation and Check Your Answer.    Solve the equation, check your 
answer, and express it as a sentence that answers the question posed in the 
problem.
The following example illustrates how these guidelines are used to translate a “word 
problem” into the language of algebra.
Example 1  ■  Renting a Car
A car rental company charges $30 a day and 15¢ a mile for renting a car. Helen rents 
a car for two days, and her bill comes to $108. How many miles did she drive?
SOLUTION  Identify the variable.    We are asked to find the number of miles Helen has 
driven. So we let
x number of miles driven
Translate from words to algebra.    Now we translate all the information given in the 
prob­lem into the language of algebra.
In Words 
In Algebra
Number of miles driven 
x
Mileage cost (at $0.15 per mile) 
0.15x
Daily cost (at $30 per day) 
21302
Make a model
Use the model
Model
Real
world
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Set up the model.    Now we set up the model.
mileage cost
  
daily cost
  
total cost
	
0.15x 21302 108
Solve.    ­Now we solve for x.
	
 0.15x 48
        Subtract 60
	
 x 48
0.15        Divide by 0.15
	
 x 320         Calculator
Helen drove her rental car 320 miles.
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
In the examples and exercises that follow, we construct equations that model problems 
in many different real-life situations.
■  Problems About Interest
When you borrow money from a bank or when a bank “borrows” your money by keep-
ing it for you in a savings account, the borrower in each case must pay for the privilege 
of using the money. The fee that is paid is called interest. The most basic type of inter-
est is simple interest, which is just an annual percentage of the total amount borrowed 
or deposited. The amount of a loan or deposit is called the principal P. The annual 
percentage paid for the use of this money is the interest rate r. We will use the variable 
t to stand for the number of years that the money is on deposit and the variable I to stand 
for the total interest earned. The following simple interest formula gives the amount 
of interest I earned when a principal P is deposited for t years at an interest rate r. 
I  Prt
When using this formula, remember to convert r from a percentage to a decimal. For 
example, in decimal form, 5% is 0.05. So at an interest rate of 5%, the interest paid on 
a $1000 deposit over a 3-year period is I Prt 100010.052 132 $150.
Example 2  ■  Interest on an Investment
Mary inherits $100,000 and invests it in two certificates of deposit. One certificate 
pays 6% and the other pays 41
2% simple interest annually. If Mary’s total interest is 
$5025 per year, how much money is invested at each rate?
Check Your Answer
total cost mileage cost daily cost
 0.1513202 21302
 108  ✓
Discovery Project
Equations Through the Ages
Equations have always been important in solving real-world problems. Very old 
manuscripts from Babylon, Egypt, India, and China show that ancient peoples 
used equations to solve real-world problems that they encountered. In this proj-
ect we discover that they also solved equations just for fun or for practice. You 
can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© iStockphoto.com/Holger Mette
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.7  ■  Modeling with Equations  67
SOLUTION  Identify the variable.    The problem asks for the amount she has invested 
at each rate. So we let
x the amount invested at 6%
Translate from words to algebra.    Since Mary’s total inheritance is $100,000, it fol-
lows that she invested 100,000  x at 4 1
2%. We translate all the information given 
into the language of algebra.
In Words 
In Algebra
Amount invested at 6%
x
Amount invested at 4 1
2%
100,000  x
Interest earned at 6%
0.06x
Interest earned at 4 1
2%
0.0451100,000 x2
Set up the model.    We use the fact that Mary’s total interest is $5025 to set up the 
model.
interest at 6%   interest at 4 1
2%   
total interest
	
 0.06x 0.0451100,000 x2 5025
Solve.    Now we solve for x.
	
 0.06x 4500 0.045x 5025	
Distributive Property
	
 0.015x 4500 5025	
Combine the x-terms
	
 0.015x 525	
Subtract 4500
	
 x 525
0.015 35,000	
Divide by 0.015
So Mary has invested $35,000 at 6% and the remaining $65,000 at 4 1
2%.
Check Your Answer
 total interest 6% of $35,000 4 1
2% of $65,000
 $2100 $2925 $5025  ✓
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
■  Problems About Area or Length
When we use algebra to model a physical situation, we must sometimes use basic for-
mulas from geometry. For example, we may need a formula for an area or a perimeter, 
or the formula that relates the sides of similar triangles, or the Pythagorean Theorem. 
Most of these formulas are listed in the front endpapers of this book. The next two 
examples use these geometric formulas to solve some real-world problems.
Example 3  ■  Dimensions of a Garden
A square garden has a walkway 3 ft wide around its outer edge, as shown in Figure 1. 
If the area of the entire garden, including the walkway, is 18,000 ft2, what are the 
dimensions of the planted area?
SOLUTION  Identify the variable.    We are asked to ﬁnd the length and width of the 
planted area. So we let
x the length of the planted area
x
3 ft
3 ft
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Translate from words to algebra.    Next, translate the information from Figure 1 into 
the language of algebra.
In Words 
In Algebra
Length of planted area
x
Length of entire garden 
x  6
Area of entire garden 
1x  622
Set up the model.    We now set up the model.
area of entire garden
18,000 ft2
 5 
	
 1x 62 2 18,000
Solve.    Now we solve for x.
	
 x 6 !18,000
        Take square roots
	
 x !18,000 6        Subtract 6
	
 x 128
The planted area of the garden is about 128 ft by 128 ft.
Now Try Exercise 49	
■
Example 4  ■  Dimensions of a Building Lot
A rectangular building lot is 8 ft longer than it is wide and has an area of 2900 ft2. 
Find the dimensions of the lot.
Solution  Identify the variable.    We are asked to find the width and length of the 
lot. So let
„ width of lot
Translate from words to algebra.    Then we translate the information given in the 
problem into the language of algebra (see Figure 2).
In Words 
In Algebra
Width of lot
„
Length of Lot
„ 8
Set up the model.    Now we set up the model.
width 
of lot
  
length 
of lot
  area 
of lot
	
 „1„ 82 2900
Solve.    Now we solve for „.
 „ 2 8„ 2900    Expand
 „ 2 8„ 2900 0
    Subtract 2900
 1„ 502 1„ 582 0
    Factor
 „ 50  or  „ 58     Zero-Product Property
Since the width of the lot must be a positive number, we conclude that „  50 ft. The 
length of the lot is „  8  50  8  58 ft.
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
„
„+8
FIGURE 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.7  ■  Modeling with Equations  69
Example 5  ■  Determining the Height of a Building  
Using Similar Triangles
A man who is 6 ft tall wishes to find the height of a certain four-story building. He 
measures its shadow and finds it to be 28 ft long, while his own shadow is 31
2 ft long. 
How tall is the building?
SOLUTION  Identify the variable.    The problem asks for the height of the building.  
So let
h the height of the building
Translate from words to algebra.    We use the fact that the triangles in Figure 3 are 
similar. Recall that for any pair of similar triangles the ratios of corresponding sides are 
equal. Now we translate these observations into the language of algebra.
In Words 
In Algebra
Height of building 
h
Ratio of height to base in large triangle 
h
28
Ratio of height to base in small triangle
6
3.5
Figure 3
h
3    ft
1
2
28 ft
6 ft
Set up the model.    Since the large and small triangles are similar, we get the equation
	
ratio of height to 
base in large triangle
 
 
ratio of height to 
base in small triangle
	
 h
28 6
3.5        Multiply by 28
Solve.    Now we solve for h.
	
 h 6 # 28
3.5
48        Multiply by 28
So the building is 48 ft tall.
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
■  Problems About Mixtures
Many real-world problems involve mixing different types of substances. For exam-
ple, construction workers may mix cement, gravel, and sand; fruit juice from con-
centrate may involve mixing different types of juices. Problems involving mixtures 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
and concentrations make use of the fact that if an amount x of a substance is dis-
solved in a solution with volume V, then the concentration C of the substance is 
given by
C x
V
So if 10 g of sugar is dissolved in 5 L of water, then the sugar concentration is C  10/5 
 2 g/L. Solving a mixture problem usually requires us to analyze the amount x of the 
substance that is in the solution. When we solve for x in this equation, we see that x  CV. 
Note that in many mixture problems the concentration C is expressed as a percentage, as 
in the next example.
Example 6  ■  Mixtures and Concentration
A manufacturer of soft drinks advertises their orange soda as “naturally ﬂavored,” 
although it contains only 5% orange juice. A new federal regulation stipulates that to 
be called “natural,” a drink must contain at least 10% fruit juice. How much pure 
orange juice must this manufacturer add to 900 gal of orange soda to conform to the 
new regulation?
Solution  Identify the variable.    The problem asks for the amount of pure orange 
juice to be added. So let
x the amount 1in gallons2 of pure orange juice to be added
Translate from words to algebra.    In any problem of this type—in which two differ-
ent substances are to be mixed—drawing a diagram helps us to organize the given 
information (see Figure 4).
The information in the figure can be translated into the language of algebra, as 
follows.
In Words 
In Algebra
Amount of orange juice to be added
x
Amount of the mixture
900 x
Amount of orange juice in the ﬁrst vat
0.0519002 45
Amount of orange juice in the second vat
1 # x x
Amount of orange juice in the mixture
0.101900 x2


100% juice
5% juice
10% juice
Volume
Amount of
orange juice
900 gallons
5% of 900 gallons
=45 gallons
 x gallons
 100% of x gallons
=x gallons 
900+x gallons
10% of (900+x) gallons
=0.1(900+x) gallons 
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.7  ■  Modeling with Equations  71
Set up the model.    To set up the model, we use the fact that the total amount of orange 
juice in the mixture is equal to the orange juice in the ﬁrst two vats.
amount of  
orange juice 
in first vat
 

 
amount of 
orange juice 
in second vat
 

 
amount of 
orange juice 
in mixture
	
 45 x 0.11900 x2 	
From Figure 4
Solve.    Now we solve for x.
 45 x 90 0.1x        Distributive Property
 0.9x 45
        Subtract 0.1x and 45
 x 45
0.9 50         Divide by 0.9
The manufacturer should add 50 gal of pure orange juice to the soda.
Check Your Answer
 amount of juice before mixing 5% of 900 gal 50 gal pure juice
 45 gal 50 gal 95 gal
 amount of juice after mixing 10% of 950 gal 95 gal
Amounts are equal.  ✓
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
■  Problems About the Time Needed to Do a Job
When solving a problem that involves determining how long it takes several workers to 
complete a job, we use the fact that if a person or machine takes H time units to com-
plete the task, then in one time unit the fraction of the task that has been completed is 
1/H. For example, if a worker takes 5 hours to mow a lawn, then in 1 hour the worker 
will mow 1/5 of the lawn.
Example 7  ■  Time Needed to Do a Job
Because of an anticipated heavy rainstorm, the water level in a reservoir must be low-
ered by 1 ft. Opening spillway A lowers the level by this amount in 4 hours, whereas 
opening the smaller spillway B does the job in 6 hours. How long will it take to lower 
the water level by 1 ft if both spillways are opened?
SOLUTION  Identify the variable.    We are asked to ﬁnd the time needed to lower the 
level by 1 ft if both spillways are open. So let
 x the time 1in hours2 it takes to lower the water level
 by 1 ft if both spillways are open
Translate from words to algebra.    Finding an equation relating x to the other quantities 
in this problem is not easy. Certainly x is not simply 4  6, because that would mean 
that together the two spillways require longer to lower the water level than either 
A
B
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
spillway alone. Instead, we look at the fraction of the job that can be done in 1 hour 
by each spillway.
In Words 
In Algebra
Time it takes to lower level 1 ft with A and B together
x h
Distance A lowers level in 1 h
1
4 ft
Distance B lowers level in 1 h
1
6 ft
Distance A and B together lower levels in 1 h
1
x ft
Set up the model.    Now we set up the model.
fraction done by A   fraction done by B   fraction done by both
	
 1
4 1
6 1
x
Solve.    Now we solve for x.
 3x 2x 12        Multiply by the LCD, 12x
 5x 12        Add
 x 12
5         Divide by 5
It will take 2 2
5 hours, or 2 h 24 min, to lower the water level by 1 ft if both spillways 
are open.
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
■  Problems About Distance, Rate, and Time
The next example deals with distance, rate (speed), and time. The formula to keep in 
mind here is
distance  rate  time
where the rate is either the constant speed or average speed of a moving object. For 
example, driving at 60 mi/h for 4 hours takes you a distance of 60 # 4 240 mi.
Example 8  ■  A Distance-Speed-Time Problem
A jet ﬂew from New York to Los Angeles, a distance of 4200 km. The speed for the 
return trip was 100 km/h faster than the outbound speed. If the total trip took 13 hours 
of flying time, what was the jet’s speed from New York to Los Angeles?
Solution  Identify the variable.    We are asked for the speed of the jet from New York 
to Los Angeles. So let
	
 s speed from New York to Los Angeles
Then	
 s 100 speed from Los Angeles to New York
Translate from words to algebra.    Now we organize the information in a table.  
We ﬁll in the “Distance” column ﬁrst, since we know that the cities are 4200 km 
apart. Then we ﬁll in the “Speed” column, since we have expressed both speeds 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.7  ■  Modeling with Equations  73
(rates) in terms of the variable s. Finally, we calculate the entries for the “Time” col-
umn, using
time distance
rate
Distance (km)
Speed (km/h)
Time (h)
N.Y. to L.A.
4200
s
4200
s
L.A. to N.Y.
4200
s  100
4200
s 100
Set up the model.    The total trip took 13 hours, so we have the model
time from 
N.Y. to L.A.
 
 
time from 
L.A. to N.Y.
 
  total 
time
	
 4200
s

4200
s 100 13
Solve.    Multiplying by the common denominator, s1s 1002 , we get
 42001s 1002 4200s 13s1s 1002
 8400s 420,000 13s2 1300s
 0 13s2 7100s 420,000
Although this equation does factor, with numbers this large it is probably quicker to 
use the Quadratic Formula and a calculator.
 s 
7100 "171002 2 41132 1420,0002
21132
  7100 8500
26
 s 600  or  s 1400
26
53.8
Since s represents speed, we reject the negative answer and conclude that the jet’s 
speed from New York to Los Angeles was 600 km/h.
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
Example 9  ■  Energy Expended in Bird Flight
Ornithologists have determined that some species of birds tend to avoid ﬂights over 
large bodies of water during daylight hours, because air generally rises over land and 
falls over water in the daytime, so ﬂying over water requires more energy. A bird is 
released from point A on an island, 5 mi from B, the nearest point on a straight shore-
line. The bird ﬂies to a point C on the shoreline and then ﬂies along the shoreline to 
its nesting area D, as shown in Figure 5. Suppose the bird has 170 kcal of energy 
reserves. It uses 10 kcal/mi ﬂying over land and 14 kcal/mi ﬂying over water.
(a)	 Where should the point C be located so that the bird uses exactly 170 kcal of 
energy during its ﬂight?
(b)	 Does the bird have enough energy reserves to ﬂy directly from A to D?
C
D
island
5 mi
nesting
area
B
12 mi
A
x
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Solution
(a)	 Identify the variable.    We are asked to ﬁnd the location of C. So let
x distance from B to C
	 	 Translate from words to algebra.    From the ﬁgure, and from the fact that
energy used energy per mile miles flown
	 	 we determine the following:
In Words 
In Algebra
Distance from B to C
x
Distance ﬂown over water (from A to C)
"x2 25
Pythagorean Theorem
Distance ﬂown over land (from C to D)
12  x
Energy used over water
14"x2 25
Energy used over land
10112 x2
	 	 Set up the model.    Now we set up the model.
total energy 
used
 
 
energy used 
over water
 
 
energy used 
over land
	
170 14"x2 25 10112 x2
	 	 Solve.    To solve this equation, we eliminate the square root by ﬁrst bringing all 
other terms to the left of the equal sign and then squaring each side.
	
 170 10112 x2 14"x2 25
	
Isolate square-root term  
on RHS
	
 50 10x 14"x2 25
	
Simplify LHS
	
 150 10x2 2 1142 21x2 252
	
Square each side
	
 2500 1000x 100x2 196x2 4900
	
Expand
	
 0 96x2 1000x 2400	
Move all terms to RHS
	 	 This equation could be factored, but because the numbers are so large, it is easier 
to use the Quadratic Formula and a calculator.
 x 
1000 "110002 2 41962 124002
21962
 1000 280
192
6 2
3 or 3 3
4
	 	 Point C should be either 6 2
3 mi or 3 3
4 mi from B so that the bird uses exactly  
170 kcal of energy during its ﬂight.
(b)	 By the Pythagorean Theorem the length of the route directly from A to D  
is "52 122 13 mi, so the energy the bird requires for that route is  
14  13  182 kcal. This is more energy than the bird has available, so it can’t  
use this route.
Now Try Exercise 85	
■
See Appendix A, Geometry Review, for 
the Pythagorean Theorem.
Bhaskara (born 1114) was an Indian 
mathematician, astronomer, and astrolo­
ger. Among his many accomplishments 
was an ingenious proof of the Pythago­
rean Theorem. (See Focus on Problem 
Solving 5, Problem 12, at the book com­
panion website www.stewartmath.
com.) His important mathematical book 
Lilavati [The Beautiful] consists of alge­
bra problems posed in the form of stories 
to his daughter Lilavati. Many of the 
problems begin “Oh beautiful maiden, 
suppose . . .”  The story is told that using 
astrology, Bhaskara had determined that 
great misfortune would befall his daugh­
ter if she married at any time other than 
at a certain hour of a certain day. On her 
wedding day, as she was anxiously 
watching the water clock, a pearl fell 
unnoticed from her headdress. It stopped 
the ﬂow of water in the clock, causing 
her to miss the opportune moment for 
marriage. Bhaskara’s Lilavati was written 
to console her.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.7  ■  Modeling with Equations  75
concepts
	 1.	 Explain in your own words what it means for an equation to 
model a real-world situation, and give an example.
	 2.	 In the formula I 5 Prt for simple interest, P stands for 
	 	
 
  , r for  
  , and t for  
  .
	 3.	 Give a formula for the area of the geometric figure.
(a)	 A square of side x:    A 5  
  .
(b)	 A rectangle of length l and width „:    A 5  
  .
(c)	 A circle of radius r:    A 5  
  .
	 4.	 Balsamic vinegar contains 5% acetic acid, so a 32-oz bottle 
	 	 of balsamic vinegar contains  
 ounces of acetic acid. 
	 5.	 A painter paints a wall in x hours, so the fraction of the wall 
	 	 that she paints in 1 hour is  
  .
	 6.	 The formula d  rt models the distance d traveled by an 
object moving at the constant rate r in time t. Find formulas 
for the following quantities.
r   
        t   
skills
7–20  ■  Using Variables    Express the given quantity in terms of 
the indicated variable.
	 7.	 The sum of three consecutive integers;    n  ﬁrst integer of 
the three
	 8.	 The sum of three consecutive integers;    n  middle integer 
of the three
	 9.	 The sum of three consecutive even integers;    n  first inte-
ger of the three
	10.	 The sum of the squares of two consecutive integers;     
n  first integer of the two
	11.	 The average of three test scores if the ﬁrst two scores are  
78 and 82;    s  third test score
	12.	 The average of four quiz scores if each of the ﬁrst three 
scores is 8;    q   fourth quiz score
	13.	 The interest obtained after 1 year on an investment at 2 1
2% 
simple interest per year;    x  number of dollars ­invested
	14.	 The total rent paid for an apartment if the rent is $795 a 
month;    n  number of months
	15.	 The area (in ft2) of a rectangle that is four times as long as it 
is wide;    „  width of the rectangle (in ft)
	16.	 The perimeter (in cm) of a rectangle that is 6 cm longer than 
it is wide;    „  width of the rectangle (in cm)
17.	 The time (in hours) it takes to travel a given distance at  
55 mi/h;    d  given distance (in mi)
	18.	 The distance (in mi) that a car travels in 45 min;    s  speed 
of the car (in mi/h)
19.	 The concentration (in oz/gal) of salt in a mixture of 3 gal of 
brine containing 25 oz of salt to which some pure water has 
been added;    x  volume of pure water added (in gal)
20.	 The value (in cents) of the change in a purse that contains 
twice as many nickels as pennies, four more dimes than  
nickels, and as many quarters as dimes and nickels com-
bined;    p  number of pennies 
applications
	21.	 Renting a Truck    A rental company charges $65 a day and 
20 cents a mile for renting a truck. Michael rented a truck for  
3 days, and his bill came to $275. How many miles did he drive? 
	22.	 Cell Phone Costs    A cell phone company charges a monthly 
fee of $10 for the first 1000 text messages and 10 cents for 
each additional text message. Miriam’s bill for text messages 
for the month of June is $38.50. How many text messages 
did she send that month?
	23.	 Average    Linh has obtained scores of 82, 75, and 71 on her 
midterm algebra exams. If the final exam counts twice as 
much as a midterm, what score must she make on her final 
exam to get an average score of 80? (Assume that the maxi-
mum possible score on each test is 100.)
	24.	 Average    In a class of 25 students, the average score is 84.  
Six students in the class each received a maximum score of 
100, and three students each received a score of 60. What is 
the average score of the remaining students?
	25.	 Investments    Phyllis invested $12,000, a portion earning a sim-
ple interest rate of 4 1
2% per year and the rest earning a rate of 
4% per year. After 1 year the total interest earned on these invest-
ments was $525. How much money did she invest at each rate?
	26.	 Investments    If Ben invests $4000 at 4% interest per year, 
how much additional money must he invest at 5 1
2% annual 
interest to ensure that the interest he receives each year is  
4 1
2% of the total amount invested?
	27.	 Investments    What annual rate of interest would you have to 
earn on an investment of $3500 to ensure receiving $262.50 
interest after 1 year?
	28.	 Investments    Jack invests $1000 at a certain annual interest 
rate, and he invests another $2000 at an annual rate that is 
one-half percent higher. If he receives a total of $190 interest 
in 1 year, at what rate is the $1000 invested?
	29.	 Salaries    An executive in an engineering ﬁrm earns a 
monthly salary plus a Christmas bonus of $8500. If she earns 
a total of $97,300 per year, what is her monthly salary?
	30.	 Salaries    A woman earns 15% more than her husband. 
Together they make $69,875 per year. What is the husband’s 
annual salary?
	31.	 Overtime Pay    Helen earns $7.50 an hour at her job, but if 
she works more than 35 hours in a week, she is paid 1 1
2 times 
her regular salary for the overtime hours worked. One week 
her gross pay was $352.50. How many overtime hours did 
she work that week?
1.7  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
	32.	 Labor Costs    A plumber and his assistant work together to 
replace the pipes in an old house. The plumber charges $45 an 
hour for his own labor and $25 an hour for his assistant’s 
labor. The plumber works twice as long as his assistant on this 
job, and the labor charge on the ﬁnal bill is $4025. How long 
did the plumber and his assistant work on this job?
	33.	 A Riddle    A movie star, unwilling to give his age, posed the 
following riddle to a gossip columnist: “Seven years ago, I 
was eleven times as old as my daughter. Now I am four times 
as old as she is.” How old is the movie star?
	34.	 Career Home Runs    During his major league career, Hank 
Aaron hit 41 more home runs than Babe Ruth hit during his 
career. Together they hit 1469 home runs. How many home 
runs did Babe Ruth hit?
	35.	 Value of Coins    A change purse contains an equal number of 
pennies, nickels, and dimes. The total value of the coins is 
$1.44. How many coins of each type does the purse contain?
	36.	 Value of Coins    Mary has $3.00 in nickels, dimes, and quarters. 
If she has twice as many dimes as quarters and ﬁve more nick-
els than dimes, how many coins of each type does she have?
	37.	 Length of a Garden    A rectangular garden is 25 ft wide. If its 
area is 1125 ft 2, what is the length of the garden?
25 ft
x ft
	38.	 Width of a Pasture    A pasture is twice as long as it is wide. 
Its area is 115,200 ft 2. How wide is the pasture?
	39.	 Dimensions of a Lot    A square plot of land has a building  
60 ft long and 40 ft wide at one corner. The rest of the land out-
side the building forms a parking lot. If the parking lot has area 
12,000 ft2, what are the dimensions of the entire plot of land?
	40.	 Dimensions of a Lot    A half-acre building lot is ﬁve times as 
long as it is wide. What are its dimensions?  
[Note: 1 acre  43,560 ft 2.]
41.	 Dimensions of a Garden    A rectangular garden is 10 ft longer 
than it is wide. Its area is 875 ft2. What are its dimensions?
42.	 Dimensions of a Room    A rectangular bedroom is  
7 ft longer than it is wide. Its area is 228 ft 2. What is the 
width of the room?
43.	 Dimensions of a Garden    A farmer has a rectangular garden 
plot surrounded by 200 ft of fence. Find the length and width 
of the garden if its area is 2400 ft 2.
perimeter=200 ft
44.	 Dimensions of a Lot    A parcel of land is 6 ft longer than it is 
wide. Each diagonal from one corner to the opposite corner 
is 174 ft long. What are the dimensions of the parcel?
45.	 Dimensions of a Lot    A rectangular parcel of land is  
50 ft wide. The length of a diagonal between opposite cor-
ners is 10 ft more than the length of the parcel. What is the 
length of the parcel?
46.	 Dimensions of a Track    A running track has the shape shown 
in the ﬁgure, with straight sides and semicircular ends. If the 
length of the track is 440 yd and the two straight parts are 
each 110 yd long, what is the radius of the semicircular parts 
(to the nearest yard)?
110 yd
r
47.	 Length and Area    Find the length x in the ﬁgure. The area of 
the shaded region is given.
x
x
6 cm
10 cm
area=144 cm2
   
x
x
13 in.
14 in.
area=160 in2
48.	 Length and Area    Find the length y in the ﬁgure. The area of 
the shaded region is given.
y
area=120 in2
y
y
    
y
y
1 cm
area=1200 cm2
	49.	 Framing a Painting    Ali paints with watercolors on a sheet of 
paper 20 in. wide by 15 in. high. He then places this sheet on 
a mat so that a uniformly wide strip of the mat shows all 
around the picture. The perimeter of the mat is 102 in. How 
wide is the strip of the mat showing around the picture?
.
.
x
20 in
15 in
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.7  ■  Modeling with Equations  77
	50.	 Dimensions of a Poster    A poster has a rectangular printed 
area 100 cm by 140 cm and a blank strip of uniform width 
around the edges. The perimeter of the poster is 11
2 times the 
perimeter of the printed area. What is the width of the blank 
strip?
100 cm
140 cm
x
x
51.	 Reach of a Ladder    A 19 1
2-foot ladder leans against  
a building. The base of the ladder is 7 1
2 ft from the building. 
How high up the building does the ladder reach?
19
ft
2
1
7
ft
2
1
52.	 Height of a Flagpole    A ﬂagpole is secured on opposite sides 
by two guy wires, each of which is 5 ft longer than the pole. 
The distance between the points where the wires are ﬁxed  
to the ground is equal to the length of one guy wire. How tall 
is the ﬂagpole (to the nearest inch)?
	53.	 Length of a Shadow    A man is walking away from  
a lamppost with a light source 6 m above the ground. The 
man is 2 m tall. How long is the man’s shadow when he is 
10 m from the lamppost?    [Hint: Use similar triangles.]
6 m
2 m
x
10 m
	54.	 Height of a Tree    A woodcutter determines the height of a 
tall tree by ﬁrst measuring a smaller one 125 ft away, then 
moving so that his eyes are in the line of sight along the tops 
of the trees and measuring how far he is standing from the 
small tree (see the ﬁgure). Suppose the small tree is 20 ft tall, 
the man is 25 ft from the small tree, and his eye level is 5 ft 
above the ground. How tall is the taller tree?
25 ft
125 ft
5 ft
20 ft
  
	55.	 Mixture Problem    What amount of a 60% acid solution must 
be mixed with a 30% solution to produce 300 mL of a 50% 
solution?
	56.	 Mixture Problem    What amount of pure acid must be added 
to 300 mL of a 50% acid solution to produce a 60% acid 
­solution?
	57.	 Mixture Problem    A jeweler has ﬁve rings, each weigh- 
ing 18 g, made of an alloy of 10% silver and 90% gold.  
She decides to melt down the rings and add enough silver  
to reduce the gold content to 75%. How much silver should 
she add?
	58.	 Mixture Problem    A pot contains 6 L of brine at a concentra-
tion of 120 g/L. How much of the water should be boiled off 
to increase the concentration to 200 g/L?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
	59.	 Mixture Problem    The radiator in a car is ﬁlled with a solu-
tion of 60% antifreeze and 40% water. The manufacturer of 
the antifreeze suggests that for summer driving, optimal cool-
ing of the engine is obtained with only 50% antifreeze. If the 
capacity of the radiator is 3.6 L, how much coolant should be 
drained and replaced with water to reduce the antifreeze con-
centration to the recommended level?
	60.	 Mixture Problem    A health clinic uses a solution of bleach to 
sterilize petri dishes in which cultures are grown. The steril-
ization tank contains 100 gal of a solution of 2% ordinary 
household bleach mixed with pure distilled water. New 
research indicates that the concentration of bleach should be 
5% for complete sterilization. How much of the solution 
should be drained and replaced with bleach to increase the 
bleach content to the recommended level?
	61.	 Mixture Problem    A bottle contains 750 mL of fruit punch 
with a concentration of 50% pure fruit juice. Jill drinks  
100 mL of the punch and then reﬁlls the bottle with an equal 
amount of a cheaper brand of punch. If the concentration of 
juice in the bottle is now reduced to 48%, what was the con-
centration in the punch that Jill added?
	62.	 Mixture Problem    A merchant blends tea that sells for $3.00  
an ounce with tea that sells for $2.75 an ounce to produce 80 oz 
of a mixture that sells for $2.90 an ounce. How many ounces  
of each type of tea does the merchant use in the blend?
	63.	 Sharing a Job    Candy and Tim share a paper route. It takes 
Candy 70 min to deliver all the papers, and it takes Tim 80 min. 
How long does it take the two when they work ­together?
	64.	 Sharing a Job    Stan and Hilda can mow the lawn in  
40 min if they work together. If Hilda works twice as fast as 
Stan, how long does it take Stan to mow the lawn alone?
	65.	 Sharing a Job    Betty and Karen have been hired to paint the 
houses in a new development. Working together, the women 
can paint a house in two-thirds the time that it takes Karen 
working alone. Betty takes 6 h to paint a house alone. How 
long does it take Karen to paint a house working alone?
	66.	 Sharing a Job    Next-door neighbors Bob and Jim use hoses 
from both houses to ﬁll Bob’s swimming pool. They know 
that it takes 18 h using both hoses. They also know that 
Bob’s hose, used alone, takes 20% less time than Jim’s hose 
alone. How much time is required to ﬁll the pool by each 
hose alone?
67.	 Sharing a Job    Henry and Irene working together can wash 
all the windows of their house in 1 h 48 min. Working alone, 
it takes Henry 1 1
2 h more than Irene to do the job. How long 
does it take each person working alone to wash all the win-
dows?
68.	 Sharing a Job    Jack, Kay, and Lynn deliver advertising ﬂyers 
in a small town. If each person works alone, it takes Jack 4 h 
to deliver all the ﬂyers, and it takes Lynn 1 h longer than it 
takes Kay. Working together, they can deliver all the ﬂyers in 
40% of the time it takes Kay working alone. How long does 
it take Kay to deliver all the ﬂyers alone?
	69.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    Wendy took a trip from Daven-
port to Omaha, a distance of 300 mi. She traveled part of the 
way by bus, which arrived at the train station just in time for 
Wendy to complete her journey by train. The bus averaged  
40 mi/h, and the train averaged 60 mi/h. The entire trip took 
5 1
2 h. How long did Wendy spend on the train?
	70.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    Two cyclists, 90 mi apart, start 
riding toward each other at the same time. One cycles twice 
as fast as the other. If they meet 2 h later, at what average 
speed is each cyclist traveling?
	71.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    A pilot ﬂew a jet from Montreal 
to Los Angeles, a distance of 2500 mi. On the return trip, the 
average speed was 20% faster than the outbound speed. The 
round-trip took 9 h 10 min. What was the speed from Mon-
treal to Los Angeles?
	72.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    A woman driving a car 14 ft long 
is passing a truck 30 ft long. The truck is traveling at 50 mi/h. 
How fast must the woman drive her car so that she can pass 
the truck completely in 6 s, from the position shown in ﬁgure 
(a) to the position shown in ﬁgure (b)?    [Hint: Use feet and 
seconds instead of miles and hours.]
50 mi/h
(a)
50 mi/h
(b)
73.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    A salesman drives from Ajax to 
Barrington, a distance of 120 mi, at a steady speed. He then 
increases his speed by 10 mi/h to drive the 150 mi from Bar-
rington to Collins. If the second leg of his trip took 6 min 
more time than the ﬁrst leg, how fast was he driving between 
Ajax and Barrington?
74.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    Kiran drove from Tortula to Cac-
tus, a distance of 250 mi. She increased her speed by 10 mi/h for 
the 360-mi trip from Cactus to Dry Junction. If the total trip took 
11 h, what was her speed from Tortula to Cactus?
75.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    It took a crew 2 h 40 min to row 
6 km upstream and back again. If the rate of ﬂow of the 
stream was 3 km/h, what was the rowing speed of the crew in 
still water?
76.	 Speed of a Boat    Two ﬁshing boats depart a harbor at the 
same time, one traveling east, the other south. The eastbound 
boat travels at a speed 3 mi/h faster than the southbound 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.7  ■  Modeling with Equations  79
boat. After 2 h the boats are 30 mi apart. Find the speed of 
the southbound boat.
N
30 mi
S
E
W
77.	 Law of the Lever    The ﬁgure shows a lever system, similar to 
a seesaw that you might ﬁnd in a children’s playground. For 
the system to balance, the product of the weight and its dis-
tance from the fulcrum must be the same on each side; that is,
	
„1x1 „2 x 2
	 	 This equation is called the law of the lever and was ﬁrst dis-
covered by Archimedes (see page 787).
	 	     A woman and her son are playing on a seesaw. The boy is 
at one end, 8 ft from the fulcrum. If the son weighs 100 lb 
and the mother weighs 125 lb, where should the woman sit 
so that the seesaw is balanced?
„⁄
„¤
x⁄
x¤
	78.	 Law of the Lever    A plank 30 ft long rests on top of a ﬂat-
roofed building, with 5 ft of the plank projecting over the 
edge, as shown in the ﬁgure. A worker weighing 240 lb sits 
on one end of the plank. What is the largest weight that can 
be hung on the projecting end of the plank if it is to remain 
in balance? (Use the law of the lever stated in Exercise 77.)
5 ft
79.	 Dimensions of a Box    A large plywood box has a volume of 
180 ft3. Its length is 9 ft greater than its height, and its width 
is 4 ft less than its height. What are the dimensions of the 
box?
x+9
x
x-4
80.	 Radius of a Sphere    A jeweler has three small solid spheres 
made of gold, of radius 2 mm, 3 mm, and 4 mm. He decides 
to melt these down and make just one sphere out of them. 
What will the radius of this larger sphere be?
81.	 Dimensions of a Box    A box with a square base and no top is 
to be made from a square piece of cardboard by cutting 4-in. 
squares from each corner and folding up the sides, as shown 
in the ﬁgure. The box is to hold 100 in3. How big a piece of 
cardboard is needed?
4 in.
4 in.
82.	 Dimensions of a Can    A cylindrical can has a volume  
of 40p cm3 and is 10 cm tall. What is its diameter?     
[Hint: Use the volume formula listed on the inside front 
cover of this book.]
10 cm
83.	 Radius of a Tank    A spherical tank has a capacity of  
750 gallons. Using the fact that one gallon is about  
0.1337 ft3, ﬁnd the radius of the tank (to the nearest hun-
dredth of a foot).
84.	 Dimensions of a Lot    A city lot has the shape of a right trian-
gle whose hypotenuse is 7 ft longer than one of the other 
sides. The perimeter of the lot is 392 ft. How long is each 
side of the lot?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
	85.	 Construction Costs    The town of Foxton lies 10 mi north of 
an abandoned east-west road that runs through Grimley, as 
shown in the ﬁgure. The point on the abandoned road closest 
to Foxton is 40 mi from Grimley. County ofﬁcials are about 
to build a new road connecting the two towns. They have 
determined that restoring the old road would cost $100,000 
per mile, whereas building a new road would cost $200,000 
per mile. How much of the abandoned road should be used 
(as indicated in the ﬁgure) if the ofﬁcials intend to spend 
exactly $6.8 million? Would it cost less than this amount to 
build a new road connecting the towns directly?
Abandoned road
40 mi
Grimley
New
road
10 mi
oxton
F
86.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    A boardwalk is parallel to and  
210 ft inland from a straight shoreline. A sandy beach lies 
between the boardwalk and the shoreline. A man is standing 
on the boardwalk, exactly 750 ft across the sand from his 
beach umbrella, which is right at the shoreline. The man walks 
4 ft/s on the boardwalk and 2 ft/s on the sand. How far should 
he walk on the boardwalk before veering off onto the sand if 
he wishes to reach his umbrella in exactly 4 min 45 s?
210 ft
boardwalk
750 ft
87.	 Volume of Grain    Grain is falling from a chute onto  
the ground, forming a conical pile whose diameter is always 
three times its height. How high is the pile (to the nearest  
hundredth of a foot) when it contains 1000 ft3 of grain?
88.	 Computer Monitors    Two computer monitors sitting side by 
side on a shelf in an appliance store have the same screen 
height. One has a screen that is 7 in. wider than it is high.  The 
other has a wider screen that is 1.8 times as wide as it is high.  
The diagonal measure of the wider screen is 3 in. more than the 
diagonal measure of the smaller screen.  What is the height of 
the screens, correct to the nearest 0.1 in.?
	89.	 Dimensions of a Structure    A storage bin for corn consists of 
a cylindrical section made of wire mesh, surmounted by a 
conical tin roof, as shown in the ﬁgure. The height of the roof 
is one-third the height of the entire structure. If the total vol-
ume of the structure is 1400p ft 3 and its radius is 10 ft, what 
is its height?    [Hint: Use the volume formulas listed on the 
inside front cover of this book.]
h
10 ft
h
1
3
90.	 Comparing Areas    A wire 360 in. long is cut into two pieces. 
One piece is formed into a square, and the other is formed 
into a circle. If the two ﬁgures have the same area, what are 
the lengths of the two pieces of wire (to the nearest tenth of 
an inch)?
	91.	 An Ancient Chinese Problem    This problem is taken from a 
Chinese mathematics textbook called Chui-chang suan-shu, 
or Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art, which was writ-
ten about 250 b.c.
A 10-ft-long stem of bamboo is broken in such a way 
that its tip touches the ground 3 ft from the base of the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.8  ■  Inequalities  81
stem, as shown in the ﬁgure. What is the height of the 
break?
[Hint: Use the Pythagorean Theorem.]
3 ft
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
92.	 WRITE:  Historical Research    Read the biographical notes on 
Pythagoras (page 241), Euclid (page 542), and Archimedes  
(page 787). Choose one of these mathematicians, and ﬁnd out 
more about him from the library or on the Internet. Write a 
short essay on your ﬁndings. Include both biographical infor-
mation and a description of the mathematics for which he is 
famous.
	93.	 WRITE:  Real-world Equations    In this section we learned how 
to translate words into algebra. In this exercise we try to find 
real-world situations that could correspond to an algebraic 
equation. For instance, the equation A 1x y2/2 could 
model the average amount of money in two bank accounts, 
where x represents the amount in one account and y the amount 
in the other. Write a story that could correspond to the given 
equation, stating what the variables represent.
(a)	 C 20,000 4.50x
(b)	 A „ 1„ 102
(c)	 C 10.50x 11.75y
94.	 DISCUSS:  A Babylonian Quadratic Equation    The ancient 
Babylonians knew how to solve quadratic equations. Here is 
a problem from a cuneiform tablet found in a Babylonian 
school dating back to about 2000 b.c.
I have a reed, I know not its length. I broke from it one 
cubit, and it ﬁt 60 times along the length of my ﬁeld. I 
restored to the reed what I had broken off, and it ﬁt  
30 times along the width of my ﬁeld. The area of my  
ﬁeld is 375 square nindas. What was the original length  
of the reed?
	 Solve this problem. Use the fact that 1 ninda  12 cubits.
1.8 
Inequalities
■  Solving Linear Inequalities  ■  Solving Nonlinear Inequalities  ■  Absolute Value 
Inequalities  ■  Modeling with Inequalities
Some problems in algebra lead to inequalities instead of equations. An inequality looks 
just like an equation, except that in the place of the equal sign is one of the symbols, , 
, , or . Here is an example of an inequality:
4x 7 19
The table in the margin shows that some numbers satisfy the inequality and some num-
bers don’t.
To solve an inequality that contains a variable means to ﬁnd all values of the  
variable that make the inequality true. Unlike an equation, an inequality generally  
has inﬁnitely many solutions, which form an interval or a union of intervals on the 
real line. The following illustration shows how an inequality differs from its corre­
sponding equation:
	
Solution	
Graph
Equation:	
4x  7  19	
x  3	
0
3
0
3
Inequality:	
4x  7  19	
x  3
To solve inequalities, we use the following rules to isolate the variable on one side 
of the inequality sign. These rules tell us when two inequalities are equivalent (the 
symbol 3 means “is equivalent to”). In these rules the symbols A, B, and C stand for 
real numbers or algebraic expressions. Here we state the rules for inequalities involving 
the symbol , but they apply to all four inequality symbols.
x
4x  7 " 19
1
11  19    ✓
2
15  19    ✓
3
19  19    ✓
4
23  19   ✗
5
27  19   ✗
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Rules for Inequalities
Rule	
Description
1.	 A B 3 A C B C	
Adding the same quantity to each side of an inequality gives 
an equivalent inequality.
2.	 A B 3 A C B C	
Subtracting the same quantity from each side of an inequal-
ity gives an equivalent inequality.
3.	 If C 0,    then    A B 3 CA CB	
Multiplying each side of an inequality by the same positive 
quantity gives an equivalent inequality.
4.	 If C 0,    then    A B 3 CA CB	
Multiplying each side of an inequality by the same negative 
quantity reverses the direction of the inequality.
5.	 If A 0    and    B 0, 	
Taking reciprocals of each side of an inequality involving 
then    A B 3 1
A 1
B	
positive quantities reverses the direction of the inequality.
6.	 If A B    and    C D,	
Inequalities can be added. 
then    A C B D
7.	 If A B and B C, then A C	
Inequality is transitive.
Pay special attention to Rules 3 and 4. Rule 3 says that we can multiply (or divide) 
each side of an inequality by a positive number, but Rule 4 says that if we multiply each 
side of an inequality by a negative number, then we reverse the direction of the inequal-
ity. For example, if we start with the inequality
3 5
and multiply by 2, we get
6 10
but if we multiply by 2, we get
6 10
■  Solving Linear Inequalities
An inequality is linear if each term is constant or a multiple of the variable. To solve a 
linear inequality, we isolate the variable on one side of the inequality sign.
Example 1  ■  Solving a Linear Inequality
Solve the inequality 3x  9x  4, and sketch the solution set.
Solution
 3x 9x 4
	
Given inequality
 3x 9x 9x 4 9x	
Subtract 9x
 6x 4
	
Simplify
 1 1
6B16x2 A1
6B142
	
Multiply by  1
6 and reverse inequality
 x  2
3
	
Simplify
The solution set consists of all numbers greater than  2
3. In other words the solution 
of the inequality is the interval A 2
3, `B. It is graphed in Figure 1.
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
Multiplying by the negative number 
1
6 reverses the direction of the 
inequality.
0
_ 2
3
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.8  ■  Inequalities  83
Example 2  ■  Solving a Pair of Simultaneous Inequalities
Solve the inequalities 4  3x  2  13.
Solution    The solution set consists of all values of x that satisfy both of the inequal-
ities 4  3x  2 and 3x  2  13. Using Rules 1 and 3, we see that the following 
inequalities are equivalent:
4 3x 2 13	
Given inequality
6 3x 15	
Add 2
2 x 5	
Divide by 3
Therefore the solution set is 32,  52 , as shown in Figure 2.
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
■  Solving Nonlinear Inequalities
To solve inequalities involving squares and other powers of the variable, we use factor-
ing, together with the following principle.
The Sign of a Product or Quotient
■	 If a product or a quotient has an even number of negative factors, then its 
value is positive.
■	 If a product or a quotient has an odd number of negative factors, then its 
value is negative.
For example, to solve the inequality x2 5x 6, we first move all terms to the 
left-hand side and factor to get
1x 22 1x 32 0
This form of the inequality says that the product 1x 22 1x 32  must be negative or 
zero, so to solve the inequality, we must determine where each factor is negative or 
positive (because the sign of a product depends on the sign of the factors). The details 
are explained in Example 3, in which we use the following guidelines.
guidelines for Solving Nonlinear Inequalities
1.	 Move All Terms to One Side.    If necessary, rewrite the inequality so that all 
nonzero terms appear on one side of the inequality sign. If the nonzero side 
of the inequality involves quotients, bring them to a common ­denominator.
2.	 Factor.    Factor the nonzero side of the inequality.
3.	 Find the Intervals.    Determine the values for which each factor is zero. 
These numbers will divide the real line into intervals. List the intervals that 
are determined by these numbers.
4.	 Make a Table or Diagram.    Use test values to make a table or diagram of the 
signs of each factor on each interval. In the last row of the table determine 
the sign of the product (or quotient) of these factors.
5.	 Solve.    Use the sign table to find the intervals on which the inequality is sat-
isfied.  Check whether the endpoints of these intervals satisfy the inequality. 
(This may happen if the inequality involves  or .)
Figure 2
0
2
5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
The factoring technique that is described in these guidelines works only if all non-
zero terms appear on one side of the inequality symbol. If the inequality is not written 
in this form, ﬁrst rewrite it, as indicated in Step 1.
Example 3  ■  Solving a Quadratic Inequality
Solve the inequality x2 5x 6.
Solution    We will follow the guidelines given above.
Move all terms to one side.    We move all the terms to the left-hand side.
 x2 5x 6        Given inequality
 x2 5x 6 0
        Subtract 5x, add 6
Factor.    Factoring the left-hand side of the inequality, we get
 1x 22 1x 32 0        Factor
Find the intervals.    The factors of the left-hand side are x 2 and x 3. These 
factors are zero when x is 2 and 3, respectively. As shown in Figure 3, the numbers 2 
and 3 divide the real line into the three intervals
1`, 22, 12, 32, 13, `2
The factors x  2 and x  3 change sign only at 2 and 3, respectively. So these fac-
tors maintain their sign on each of these three intervals.
Make a table or diagram.    To determine the sign of each factor on each of the inter-
vals that we found, we use test values. We choose a number inside each interval and 
check the sign of the factors x  2 and x  3 at the number we chose. For the interval 
1`, 22 , let’s choose the test value 1 (see Figure 4). Substituting 1 for x in the factors  
x  2 and x  3, we get
x 2 1 2 1 0
x 3 1 3 2 0
So both factors are negative on this interval. Notice that we need to check only one 
test value for each interval because the factors x  2 and x  3 do not change sign on 
any of the three intervals we found.
Using the test values x 2 1
2 and x  4 for the intervals 12, 32 and 13, `2 (see  
Figure 4), respectively, we construct the following sign table. The ﬁnal row of the table is 
obtained from the fact that the expression in the last row is the product of the two factors.
Interval
x`, 2c
x2, 3c
x3, `c
Sign of x  2
Sign of x  3






Sign of xx 2cxx 3c



If you prefer, you can represent this information on a real line, as in the following 
sign diagram. The vertical lines indicate the points at which the real line is divided into 
intervals:
Sign of x-2
Sign of x-3
Sign of (x-2)(x-3)
2
3
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
0
3
(_`, 2)
(2, 3)
(3, `)
2
Figure 3
Figure 4
2
0
3
Test value
x = 1
Test value
x = 4
Test value
x=2 1
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.8  ■  Inequalities  85
Solve.    We read from the table or the diagram that 1x 22 1x 32  is negative on the 
interval 12, 32 . You can check that the endpoints 2 and 3 satisfy the inequality, so the 
solution is
5x 0  2 x 36 32, 34
The solution is illustrated in Figure 5.
Now Try Exercise 43	
■
Example 4  ■  Solving an Inequality with Repeated Factors
Solve the inequality x1x 12 21x 32 0.
Solution    All nonzero terms are already on one side of the inequality, and the non-
zero side of the inequality is already factored. So we begin by finding the intervals for 
this inequality.
Find the intervals.    The factors of the left-hand side are x, 1x 12 2, and x  3. These 
are zero when x  0, 1, 3. These numbers divide the real line into the intervals
1`, 02, 10, 12, 11, 32, 13, `2
Make a diagram.    We make the following diagram, using test points to determine the 
sign of each factor in each interval.
Sign of x
Sign of (x-1)2
Sign of (x-3) 
Sign of x(x-1)2(x-3)
0
+
+
-
-
-
+
-
+
+
-
-
3
+
+
+
+
+
1
Solve.    From the diagram we see that the inequality is satisfied on the intervals 10, 12  
and 11, 32 . Since this inequality involves ,, the endpoints of the intervals do not sat-
isfy the inequality. So the solution set is the union of these two intervals:
10, 12 11, 32
The solution set is graphed in Figure 6.
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
Example 5  ■  Solving an Inequality Involving a Quotient
Solve the inequality 1 x
1 x 1.
SOLUTION  Move all terms to one side.    We move the terms to the left-hand side and 
simplify using a common denominator.
 1 x
1 x 1        Given inequality
 1 x
1 x 1 0        Subtract 1
 1 x
1 x 1 x
1 x 0        Common denominator 1 – x
 1 x 1 x
1 x
0        Combine the fractions
 2x
1 x 0        Simplify
Figure 5
2
0
3
Figure 6
3 
1 
0
  It is tempting to simply multiply 
both sides of the inequality by 1  x 
(as you would if this were an equa-
tion). But this ­doesn’t work because we 
don’t know whether 1  x is positive 
or negative, so we can’t tell whether 
the inequality needs to be reversed. 
(See Exercise 127.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Find the intervals.    The factors of the left-hand side are 2x and 1  x. These are 
zero when x is 0 and 1. These numbers divide the real line into the intervals
1`, 02, 10, 12, 11, `2
Make a diagram.    We make the following diagram using test points to determine the 
sign of each factor in each interval.
Sign of 2x
Sign of 1-x
Sign of 
0
1
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
+
+
2x
1-x
Solve.    From the diagram we see that the inequality is satisfied on the interval 10, 12 . 
Checking the endpoints, we see that 0 satisfies the inequality but 1 does not (because 
the quotient in the inequality is not defined at 1). So the solution set is the interval
30, 12
The solution set is graphed in Figure 7.
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
Example 5 shows that we should always check the endpoints of the solution set to 
see whether they satisfy the original inequality.
■  Absolute Value Inequalities
We use the following properties to solve inequalities that involve absolute value.
Properties of Absolute Value Inequalities
Inequality	
Equivalent form	
Graph
1.	 0  x 0 c	
c  x  c	
0
_c
c
0
_c
c
0
_c
c
0
_c
c
2.	 0  x 0 c	
c  x  c
3.	 0  x 0 c	
x  c    or    c  x
4.	 0  x 0 c	
x  c    or    c  x
These properties hold when x is 
replaced by any algebraic expression.  
(In the graphs we assume that c  0.)
These properties can be proved using the deﬁnition of absolute value. To prove Prop-
erty 1, for example, note that the inequality 0  x 0 c says that the distance from x to 0 
is less than c, and from Figure 8 you can see that this is true if and only if x is between 
c and c.
Example 6  ■  Solving an Absolute Value Inequality
Solve the inequality 0  x 5 0 2.
Solution 1    The inequality 0  x 5 0 2 is equivalent to
 2 x 5 2        Property 1
 3 x 7
        Add 5
The solution set is the open interval 13,  72 .
Figure 7
0
1
Figure 8
_c
0
x
c
c
c
| x|
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.8  ■  Inequalities  87
Solution 2    Geometrically, the solution set consists of all numbers x whose distance 
from 5 is less than 2. From Figure 9 we see that this is the interval 13, 72 .
Now Try Exercise 81	
■
Example 7  ■  Solving an Absolute Value Inequality
Solve the inequality 0  3x 2 0 4.
Solution    By Property 4 the inequality 0  3x 2 0 4 is equivalent to
 3x 2 4  or   3x 2 4
 3x 2
 3x 6        Subtract 2
 x 2
3
 x 2        Divide by 3
So the solution set is
Ex 0  x 2    or    x 2
3F A`,  2D C 2
3,  `B
The set is graphed in Figure 10.
Now Try Exercise 83	
■
■  Modeling with Inequalities
Modeling real-life problems frequently leads to inequalities because we are often inter-
ested in determining when one quantity is more (or less) than another.
Example 8  ■  Carnival Tickets
A carnival has two plans for tickets.
Plan A:    $5 entrance fee and 25¢ each ride
Plan B:    $2 entrance fee and 50¢ each ride
How many rides would you have to take for Plan A to be less expensive than  
Plan B?
Solution  Identify the variable.    We are asked for the number of rides for which 
Plan A is less expensive than Plan B. So let
x number of rides
Translate from words to algebra.    The information in the problem may be  
organized as follows.
In Words
In Algebra
Number of rides
x
Cost with Plan A
5  0.25x
Cost with Plan B
2  0.50x
Set up the model.    Now we set up the model.
cost with 
Plan A
 
  cost with 
Plan B
 
	
5 0.25x 2 0.50x
Figure 9
0
2
3
5
7
2
0
_2
2
3
Figure 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Solve.    Now we solve for x.
 3 0.25x 0.50x        Subtract 2
 3 0.25x        Subtract 0.25x
 12 x
        Divide by 0.25
So if you plan to take more than 12 rides, Plan A is less expensive.
Now Try Exercise 111	
■
Example 9  ■  Relationship Between Fahrenheit and Celsius Scales
The instructions on a bottle of medicine indicate that the bottle should be stored at a 
temperature between 5 °C and 30 °C. What range of temperatures does this correspond 
to on the Fahrenheit scale?
Solution    The relationship between degrees Celsius (C) and degrees Fahrenheit (F) 
is given by the equation C 5
9 1F 322 . Expressing the statement on the bottle in 
terms of inequalities, we have
5 C 30
So the corresponding Fahrenheit temperatures satisfy the inequalities
 5 5
9 1F 322 30    Substitute C 5
9 1F 322
 9
5 # 5 F 32 9
5 # 30     Multiply by 9
5
 9 F 32 54
    Simplify
 9 32 F 54 32
    Add 32
 41 F 86
    Simplify
The medicine should be stored at a temperature between 41 °F and 86 °F.
Now Try Exercise 109	
■
C
5
30
F
41
86
*
*
Concepts
	 1.	 Fill in the blank with an appropriate inequality sign.
(a)	 If x  5, then x  3  
 2.
(b)	 If x  5, then 3x  
 15.
(c)	 If x  2, then 3x  
 6.
(d)	 If x  2, then x  
 2.
	 2.	 To solve the nonlinear inequality x 1
x 2 0, we first observe 
	 	 that the numbers  
 and  
 are zeros of the numerator 
and denominator. These numbers divide the real line into 
three intervals. Complete the table.
Interval
Sign of x 1
Sign of x 2
Sign of xx 1c/xx 2c
	 	 Do any of the endpoints fail to satisfy the inequality? If so, 
	 	 which one(s)?  
  . The solution of the inequality is 
	 	
 
  .
	 3.	 (a)	 The solution of the inequality 0  x 0 3 is the interval 
	 	 	
 
  .
(b)	 The solution of the inequality 0  x 0 3 is a union of two 
	
		intervals  
 
  .
	 4.	 (a)	 The set of all points on the real line whose distance from 
zero is less than 3 can be described by the absolute value 
	 	 	
inequality 0  x 0   
  .
(b)	 The set of all points on the real line whose distance from 
zero is greater than 3 can be described by the absolute 
	
value inequality 0  x 0   
  .
	 5.	 Yes or No? If No, give an example.
(a)	 If x1x 12 0, does it follow that x is positive? 
(b)	 If x1x 12 5, does it follow that x 5? 
	 6.	 What is a logical first step in solving the inequality?
(a)	 3x 7      (b)  5x 2 1      (c)  0  3x 2 0 8
1.8  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.8  ■  Inequalities  89
skills
7–12  ■  Solutions?    Let S 55, 1, 0, 2
3, 5
6, 1, !5, 3, 56. 
Determine which elements of S satisfy the inequality.
	 7.	 2 3x 1
3	
  8.	 1 2x 5x
	 9.	 1  2x  4  7	
10.	 2  3  x  2
	11.	 1
x 1
2	
12.	 x 2  2  4
13–36  ■  Linear Inequalities    Solve the linear inequality. Express 
the solution using interval notation and graph the solution set.
	13.	 2x  7	
14.	 4x  10
15.	 2x  5  3	
16.	 3x  11  5
	17.	 7  x  5	
18.	 5  3x  16
	19.	 2x 1 1 , 0	
20.	 0 , 5 2 2x
21.	 4x 7 8 9x	
22.	 5 3x 8x 7
23.	 1
2x 2
3 2	
24.	 2
5x 1 1
5 2x
25.	 1
3x 2 1
6x 1	
26.	 2
3 1
2x 1
6 x
27.	 4 3x 11 8x2 	
28.	 217x 32 12x 16
29.	 2  x  5  4	
30.	 5  3x  4  14
31.	 1  2x  5  7	
32.	 1  3x  4  16
33.	 2  8  2x  1	
34.	 3 3x 7 1
2
35.	 1
6 2x 13
12
2
3	
36.	  1
2 4 3x
5
1
4
37–58  ■  Nonlinear Inequalities    Solve the nonlinear inequality. 
Express the solution using interval notation and graph the solu-
tion set.
37.	 1x 22 1x 32 0	
38.	 1x 52 1x 42 0
39.	 x12x 72 0	
40.	 x12 3x2 0
41.	 x 2  3x  18  0	
42.	 x 2  5x  6  0
43.	 2x 2  x  1	
44.	 x 2  x  2
45.	 3x 2  3x  2x 2  4	
46.	 5x 2  3x  3x 2  2
47.	 x2 31x 62 	
48.	 x 2  2x  3
49.	 x 2  4	
50.	 x 2  9
51.	 1x 22 1x 12 1x 32 0
	52.	 1x 52 1x 22 1x 12 0
	53.	 1x 42 1x 22 2 0	
54.	 1x 32 21x 12 0
	55.	 1x 32 21x 22 1x 52 0
	56.	 4x21x2 92 0
57.	 x 3  4x  0	
58.	 16x  x 3
59–74  ■  Inequalities Involving Quotients    Solve the nonlinear 
inequality. Express the solution using interval notation, and graph 
the solution set.
59.	 x 3
x 1 0	
60.	 2x 6
x 2 0
61.	
x
x 1 3	
62.	 x 4
2x 1 5
	 63.	 2x 1
x 5 3	
64.	 3 x
3 x 1
	 65.	 4
x x	
66.	
x
x 1 3x
	 67.	 1 
2
x 1 2
x	
68.	
3
x 1 4
x 1
	 69.	
6
x 1 6
x 1	
70.	 x
2 
5
x 1 4
	 71.	 x 2
x 3 x 1
x 2	
72.	
1
x 1 
1
x 2 0
	 73.	 x 4  x 2	
74.	 x 5  x 2
75–90  ■  Absolute Value Inequalities    Solve the absolute value 
inequality. Express the answer using interval notation and graph 
the solution set.
	 75.	 0  5x 0 20	
76.	 0  16x 0 8
	 77.	 0  2x 0   7	
78.	 1
2 0  x 0 1
	 79.	 0  x 5 0   3	
80.	 0  x 1 0   1
	 81.	 0  3x 2 0 4	
82.	 0  5x 2 0 8
	 83.	 0  3x 2 0 5	
84.	 0  8x 3 0 12 
	 85.	 `  x 2
3
 ` 2	
86.	 `  x 1
2
 ` 4
	 87.	 0  x 6 0   0.001	
88.	 3  0  2x 4 0   1
	 89.	 8  0  2x 1 0   6	
90.	 7 0  x 2 0   5  4
91–94  ■  Absolute Value Inequalities    A phrase describing a set 
of real numbers is given. Express the phrase as an inequality 
involving an absolute value.
	 91.	 All real numbers x less than 3 units from 0
	 92.	 All real numbers x more than 2 units from 0
	 93.	 All real numbers x at least 5 units from 7
	 94.	 All real numbers x at most 4 units from 2
95–100  ■  Absolute Value Inequalities    A set of real numbers is 
graphed. Find an inequality involving an absolute value that 
describes the set.
  95.	
0
1
3
5
2
4
_3
_4
_5
_2 _1
  96.	
0
1
3
5
2
4
_3
_4
_5
_2 _1
  97.	
0
1
3
5
2
4
_3
_4
_5
_2 _1
  98.	
0
1
3
5
2
4
_3
_4
_5
_2 _1
  99.	
0
1
3
5
2
4
_3
_4
_5
_2 _1
100.	
0
1
3
5
2
4
_3
_4
_5
_2 _1
101–104  ■  Domain    Determine the values of the variable for 
which the expression is deﬁned as a real number.
	101.	 "x2 9	
102.	 "x2 5x 50
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
	103.	 a
1
x2 3x 10 b
1/2
	
104.	 Ä
4 1 x
2 x
SKILLS Plus
105–108  ■  Inequalities    Solve the inequality for x. Assume that 
a, b, and c are positive constants.
105.	 a1bx c2 bc	
106.	 a bx c 2a
107.	 a 0  bx c 0 d 4a	
108.	 `  bx c
a
 ` 5a
applications
	109.	 Temperature Scales    Use the relationship between C and F 
given in Example 9 to find the interval on the Fahrenheit 
scale corresponding to the temperature range 20  C  30.
	110.	 Temperature Scales    What interval on the Celsius scale 
corresponds to the temperature range 50  F  95?
	111.	 Car Rental Cost    A car rental company offers two plans for 
renting a car.
	 	
Plan A:    $30 per day and 10¢ per mile
	 	
Plan B:    $50 per day with free unlimited mileage
	
	 For what range of miles will Plan B save you money?
	112.	 International Plans    A phone service provider offers two 
international plans.
	 	
Plan A:    $25 per month and 5¢ per minute
	 	
Plan B:    $5 per month and 12¢ per minute
	
	 For what range of minutes of international calls would  
Plan B be financially advantageous?
	113.	 Driving Cost    It is estimated that the annual cost of  
driving a certain new car is given by the formula
C 0.35m 2200
	
	 where m represents the number of miles driven per year and 
C is the cost in dollars. Jane has purchased such a car and 
decides to budget between $6400 and $7100 for next year’s 
driving costs. What is the corresponding range of miles that 
she can drive her new car?
	114.	 Air Temperature    As dry air moves upward, it expands and, 
in so doing, cools at a rate of about 1°C for each 100-m 
rise, up to about 12 km.
(a)	 If the ground temperature is 20 °C, write a formula for 
the temperature at height h.
(b)	 What range of temperatures can be expected if a plane 
takes off and reaches a maximum height of 5 km?
	115.	 Airline Ticket Price    A charter airline finds that on its 
­Saturday flights from Philadelphia to London all 120 seats  
will be sold if the ticket price is $200. However, for each  
$3 increase in ticket price, the number of seats sold 
decreases by one.
(a)	 Find a formula for the number of seats sold if the ticket 
price is P dollars.
(b)	 Over a certain period the number of seats sold for this 
flight ranged between 90 and 115. What was the corre-
sponding range of ticket prices?
	116.	 Accuracy of a Scale    A coffee merchant sells a customer  
3 lb of Hawaiian Kona at $6.50 per pound. The merchant’s 
scale is accurate to within 0.03 lb. By how much could 
the customer have been overcharged or undercharged 
because of possible inaccuracy in the scale? 
	117.	 Gravity    The gravitational force F exerted by the earth on 
an object having a mass of 100 kg is given by the equation
F 4,000,000
d2
	
	 where d is the distance (in km) of the object from the center 
of the earth, and the force F is measured in newtons (N). For 
what distances will the gravitational force exerted by the 
earth on this object be between 0.0004 N and 0.01 N?
	118.	 Bonfire Temperature    In the vicinity of a bonfire the 
­temperature T in C at a distance of x meters from the cen-
ter of the fire was given by
T 600,000
x 2 300
	
	 At what range of distances from the fire’s center was the 
temperature less than 500C?
	119.	 Falling Ball    Using calculus, it can be shown that if a ball is 
thrown upward with an initial velocity of 16 ft/s from the 
top of a building 128 ft high, then its height h above the 
ground t seconds later will be
h 128 16t 16t 2
	
	 During what time interval will the ball be at least 32 ft 
above the ground?
	120.	 Gas Mileage    The gas mileage g (measured in mi/gal) for  
a particular vehicle, driven at √ mi/h, is given by the formula  
g  10  0.9√  0.01√2, as long as √ is between 10 mi/h 
and 75 mi/h. For what range of speeds is the vehicle’s mile-
age 30 mi/gal or better?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.8  ■  Inequalities  91
	121.	 Stopping Distance    For a certain model of car the distance 
d required to stop the vehicle if it is traveling at √ mi/h is 
given by the formula
d √√2
20
	
	 where d is measured in feet. Kerry wants her stopping dis-
tance not to exceed 240 ft. At what range of speeds can she 
travel?
240 ft
	122.	 Manufacturer’s Profit    If a manufacturer sells x units of a cer-
tain product, revenue R and cost C (in dollars) are given by
 R 20x
 C 2000 8x 0.0025x 2
	
	 Use the fact that
profit revenue cost
	
	 to determine how many units the manufacturer should sell 
to enjoy a profit of at least $2400.
	123.	 Fencing a Garden    A determined gardener has 120 ft of 
deer-resistant fence. She wants to enclose a rectangular veg-
etable garden in her backyard, and she wants the area that is 
enclosed to be at least 800 ft 2. What range of values is pos-
sible for the length of her garden?
124.	 Thickness of a Laminate    A company manufactures  
industrial laminates (thin nylon-based sheets) of thickness 
0.020 in., with a tolerance of 0.003 in.
(a)	 Find an inequality involving absolute values that 
describes the range of possible thickness for the laminate.
(b)	 Solve the inequality you found in part (a).
0.020 in.
125.	 Range of Height    The average height of adult males is  
68.2 in., and 95% of adult males have height h that satisfies 
the inequality
`  h 68.2
2.9
 ` 2
	
	 Solve the inequality to find the range of heights.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
126.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  Do Powers Preserve Order?     
If a  b, is a 2  b 2? (Check both positive and negative val-
ues for a and b.) If a  b, is a 3  b 3? On the basis of your 
observations, state a general rule about the relationship 
between a n and b n when a  b and n is a positive integer.
127.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  What’s Wrong Here?    It is tempt-
ing to try to solve an inequality like an equation. For 
instance, we might try to solve 1  3/x by multiplying both 
sides by x, to get x  3, so the solution would be 1`,  32 . 
But that’s wrong; for example, x  1 lies in this interval 
but does not satisfy the original inequality. Explain why this 
method doesn’t work (think about the sign of x). Then solve 
the inequality correctly.
128.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  Using Distances to Solve Absolute 
Value Inequalities    Recall that 0  a b 0  is the distance 
between a and b on the number line. For any number x, 
what do 0  x 1 0  and 0  x 3 0  represent? Use this inter-
pretation to solve the inequality 0  x 1 0 0  x 3 0  geo-
metrically. In general, if a  b, what is the solution of the 
inequality 0  x a 0 0  x b 0 ?
129–130  ■  PROVE:  Inequalities    Use the properties of inequali-
ties to prove the following inequalities.
	129.	 Rule 6 for Inequalities: If a, b, c, and d are any real num-
bers such that a b and c d, then a c b d. 
[Hint: Use Rule 1 to show that a c b c and 
b c b d. Use Rule 7.]
	130.	 If a, b, c, and d are positive numbers such that a
b c
d, then 
	
	 a
b a c
b d c
d.  [Hint: Show that ad
b a c a and 
	
	 a c cb
d c.]
	131.	 PROVE:  Arithmetic-Geometric Mean Inequality     
If a1, a2, . . . , an are nonnegative numbers, then their 
	
	 arithmetic mean is a1 a2 . . . an
n
, and their geometric 
	
	 mean is "
n a1a2 . . . an. The arithmetic-geometric mean 
inequality states that the geometric mean is always less than 
or equal to the arithmetic mean. In this problem we prove 
this in the case of two numbers x and y. 
(a)	 If x and y are nonnegative and x y, then x2 y2.   
[Hint: First use Rule 3 of Inequalities to show that 
x2 xy and xy y2.]
(b)	 Prove the arithmetic-geometric mean inequality 
!xy x y
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

92 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
1.9  The Coordinate Plane; Graphs of Equations; Circles
■  The Coordinate Plane  ■  The Distance and Midpoint Formulas  ■  Graphs of Equations  
in Two Variables  ■  Intercepts  ■  Circles  ■  Symmetry
The coordinate plane is the link between algebra and geometry. In the coordinate plane 
we can draw graphs of algebraic equations. The graphs, in turn, allow us to “see” the 
relationship between the variables in the equation. In this section we study the coordinate 
plane.
■  The Coordinate Plane
Just as points on a line can be identiﬁed with real numbers to form the coordinate 
line, points in a plane can be identiﬁed with ordered pairs of numbers to form the 
coordinate plane or Cartesian plane. To do this, we draw two perpendicular real 
lines that intersect at 0 on each line. Usually, one line is horizontal with positive 
direction to the right and is called the x-axis; the other line is vertical with positive 
direction upward and is called the y-axis. The point of intersection of the x-axis and 
the y-axis is the origin O, and the two axes divide the plane into four quadrants, 
labeled I, II, III, and IV in Figure 1. (The points on the coordinate axes are not as-
signed to any quadrant.)
y
x
P (a, b)
O
b
a
II
III
I
IV
Figure 1
1
1
y
x
0
)
)
(_2, 2)
(5, 0)
(1, 3)
(2, _4)
(_3, _2)
Figure 2
Any point P in the coordinate plane can be located by a unique ordered pair of 
numbers 1a,  b2 , as shown in Figure 1. The ﬁrst number a is called the x-coordinate of 
P; the second number b is called the y-coordinate of P. We can think of the coordinates 
of P as its “address,” because they specify its location in the plane. Several points are 
labeled with their coordinates in Figure 2.
Example 1  ■  Graphing Regions in the Coordinate Plane
Describe and sketch the regions given by each set.
(a)	 51x,  y2  0  x 06            (b)  51x,  y2  0  y 16            (c)  51x,  y2  @ 0  y 0 16
Solution
(a)	 The points whose x-coordinates are 0 or positive lie on the y-axis or to the right 
of it, as shown in Figure 3(a).
(b)	 The set of all points with y-coordinate 1 is a horizontal line one unit above the  
x-axis, as shown in Figure 3(b).
The Cartesian plane is named in honor 
of the French mathematician René  
Descartes (1596–1650), although  
another Frenchman, Pierre Fermat 
(1601–1665), also invented the princi-
ples of coordinate geometry at the 
same time. (See their biographies on 
pages 201 and 117.)
Although the notation for a point 1a,  b2
is the same as the notation for an open 
interval 1a,  b2 , the context should make 
clear which meaning is intended.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.9  ■  The Coordinate Plane; Graphs of Equations; Circles  93
(c)	 Recall from Section 1.8 that
0  y 0 1  if and only if  1 y 1
	 	 So the given region consists of those points in the plane whose y-coordinates lie 
between 1 and 1. Thus the region consists of all points that lie between (but not 
on) the horizontal lines y  1 and y  1. These lines are shown as broken lines in 
Figure 3(c) to indicate that the points on these lines are not in the set.
y
x
0
(a)  x≥0
y
x
0
(b)  y=1
y
x
0
y=1
y=_1
(c)  | y |<1
Figure 3
Now Try Exercises 15 and 17	
■
■  The Distance and Midpoint Formulas
We now ﬁnd a formula for the distance d1A, B2  between two points A1x1,  y12  and 
B1x2,  y22  in the plane. Recall from Section 1.1 that the distance between points a  
and b on a number line is d1a, b2 0  b a 0 . So from Figure 4 we see that the  
distance between the points A1x1,  y12  and C1x2,  y12  on a horizontal line must be 
0  x2 x1 0 , and the distance between B1x2,  y22  and C1x2,  y12  on a vertical line must 
be 0  y2 y1 0 .
| y¤-y⁄ |
| x¤-x⁄ |
A(x⁄, y⁄)
B(x¤, y¤)
d (A, B)
C(x¤, y⁄)
y
x
0
x⁄
x
y⁄
y
Figure 4
Since triangle ABC is a right triangle, the Pythagorean Theorem gives
d1A, B2 " 0  x2 x1 0 2 0  y2 y1 0 2 "1x2 x12 2 1y2 y12 2
Distance Formula
The distance between the points A1x1,  y12  and B1x2,  y22  in the plane is
d1A, B2 "1x2 x12 2 1y2 y12 2
Coordinates as Addresses
The coordinates of a point in the  
xy-plane uniquely determine its location. 
We can think of the coordinates as the 
“address” of the point. In Salt Lake City, 
Utah, the addresses of most buildings are 
in fact expressed as coordinates. The city 
is divided into quadrants with Main 
Street as the vertical (North-South) axis 
and S. Temple Street as the horizontal 
(East-West) axis. An address such as
1760 W 
 
2100 S
indicates a location 17.6 blocks west  
of Main Street and 21 blocks south of  
S. Temple Street. (This is the address of 
the main post ofﬁce in Salt Lake City.) 
With this logical system it is possible for 
someone unfamiliar with the city to 
locate any address immediately, as easily 
as one locates a point in the coordinate 
plane.
S. Temple St.
9th South St.
13th South St.
17th South St.
21st South St.
Post Office
1760 W 2100 S
500 North St.
7th East St.
Main St.
300 West St.
900 West St.
1700 West St.
4th South St.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 2  ■  Applying the Distance Formula
Which of the points P11,  22  or Q18,  92  is closer to the point A15,  32 ?
Solution    By the Distance Formula we have
 d1P, A2 "15 12 2 33 122 4 2 "42 52 !41
 d1Q, A2 "15 82 2 13 92 2 "132 2 162 2 !45
This shows that d1P, A2 d1Q, A2 , so P is closer to A (see Figure 5).
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
Now let’s ﬁnd the coordinates 1x,  y2  of the midpoint M of the line segment that joins 
the point A1x1,  y12  to the point B1x2,  y22 . In Figure 6 notice that triangles APM and 
MQB are congruent because d1A, M2 d1M, B2  and the corresponding angles are 
equal. It follows that d1A, P2 d1M, Q2 , so
x x1 x2 x
Solving this equation for x, we get 2x  x1  x2, so x x1 x2
2
. Similarly, 
y y1 y2
2
.
y
x
0
x-x⁄
x¤-x
A(x⁄, y⁄)
M(x, y)
B(x¤, y¤)
P
Q
Midpoint
Figure 6
Midpoint Formula
The midpoint of the line segment from A1x1,  y12  to B1x2,  y22  is
a x1 x2
2
, y1 y2
2
b
Example 3  ■  Applying the Midpoint Formula
Show that the quadrilateral with vertices P11,  22 , Q14,  42 , R15,  92 , and S12,  72  is a 
parallelogram by proving that its two diagonals bisect each other.
Solution    If the two diagonals have the same midpoint, then they must bisect each 
other. The midpoint of the diagonal PR is
a 1 5
2
, 2 9
2
b a 3, 11
2 b
y
x
0
2
4
8
4
6
8
_2
Q(8, 9)
P(1, _2)
A(5, 3)
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.9  ■  The Coordinate Plane; Graphs of Equations; Circles  95
and the midpoint of the diagonal QS is
a 4 2
2
, 4 7
2
b a 3, 11
2 b
so each diagonal bisects the other, as shown in Figure 7. (A theorem from elementary 
geometry states that the quadrilateral is therefore a parallelogram.)
Now Try Exercise 49	
■
■  Graphs of Equations in Two Variables
An equation in two variables, such as y  x 2  1, expresses a relationship between 
two quantities. A point 1x,  y2  satisﬁes the equation if it makes the equation true when 
the values for x and y are substituted into the equation. For example, the point 13,  102  
satisﬁes the equation y  x 2  1 because 10  32  1, but the point 11,  32  does not, 
because 3 ? 12  1.
The Graph of an Equation
The graph of an equation in x and y is the set of all points 1x,  y2  in the coordi-
nate plane that satisfy the equation.
The graph of an equation is a curve, so to graph an equation, we plot as many points 
as we can, then connect them by a smooth curve.
Example 4  ■  Sketching a Graph by Plotting Points
Sketch the graph of the equation 2x  y  3.
Solution    We first solve the given equation for y to get
y 2x 3
This helps us calculate the y-coordinates in the following table.
x
y  2x  3
xx, yc
1
5
11,  52
   0
3
10,  32
   1
1
11,  12
   2
    1
12,  12
   3
    3
13,  32
   4
    5
14,  52
Of course, there are infinitely many points on the graph, and it is impossible to plot 
all of them. But the more points we plot, the better we can imagine what the graph 
represented by the equation looks like. We plot the points we found in Figure 8; 
they appear to lie on a line. So we complete the graph by joining the points by a 
line. (In Section 1.10 we verify that the graph of an equation of this type is indeed  
a line.)
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
Fundamental Principle  
of Analytic Geometry
A point 1x,  y2  lies on the graph of an 
equation if and only if its coordinates 
satisfy the equation.
P
Q
R
S
y
x
0
4
4
8
Figure 7
y
x
0
4
y=2x-3
4
Figure 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 5  ■  Sketching a Graph by Plotting Points
Sketch the graph of the equation y  x 2  2.
Solution    We find some of the points that satisfy the equation in the following table. 
In Figure 9 we plot these points and then connect them by a smooth curve. A curve 
with this shape is called a parabola.
x
y  x2  2
xx, yc
3
   7
13,  72
2
   2
12,  22
1
1
11,  12
0
2
10,  22
1
1
11,  12
2
   2
12,  22
3
7
13,  72
Now Try Exercise 57	
■
Example 6  ■  Graphing an Absolute Value Equation
Sketch the graph of the equation y  0 x 0 .
Solution    We make a table of values:
x
y  0 x 0
xx, yc
3
3
13,  32
2
2
12,  22
1
1
11,  12
0
0
10,  02
1
1
11,  12
2
2
12,  22
3
3
13,  32
In Figure 10 we plot these points and use them to sketch the graph of the equation.
Now Try Exercise 59	
■
We can use a graphing calculator to graph equations. A graphing calculator draws 
the graph of an equation by plotting points, just as we would do by hand. 
Example 7  ■  Graphing an Equation with a Graphing Calculator
Use a graphing calculator to graph the following equation in the viewing rectangle 
35,  54 by 31,  24.
y 
1
1 x2
Solution    The graph is shown in Figure 11.
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
■  Intercepts
The x-coordinates of the points where a graph intersects the x-axis are called the 
x-intercepts of the graph and are obtained by setting y  0 in the equation of  
the graph. The y-coordinates of the points where a graph intersects the y-axis are called 
A detailed discussion of parabolas and 
their geometric properties is presented 
in Sections 3.1 and 11.1.
See Appendix C, Graphing with a 
Graphing Calculator, for general 
guidelines on using a graphing  
calculator. See Appendix D, Using the 
TI-83/84 Graphing Calculator, for  
specific graphing instructions. Go to 
www.stewartmath.com.
y
x
_
0
y=≈-2
4
4
4
Figure 9
y
x
_
0
y=| x |
2
4
4
4
2
_2
Figure 10
Figure 11  Graph of y 
1
1 x2
2
_1
_5
5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.9  ■  The Coordinate Plane; Graphs of Equations; Circles  97
the y-intercepts of the graph and are obtained by setting x  0 in the equation of  
the graph.
Definition of Intercepts
Intercepts	
How to find them	
Where they are on the graph
x-intercepts:	
	
y
x
0
y
x
0
The x-coordinates of points where the 	
Set y  0 and 	
 
graph of an equation intersects the x-axis	
solve for x
y-intercepts:
The y-coordinates of points where the 	
Set x  0 and  
graph of an equation intersects the y-axis	
solve for y
Example 8  ■  Finding Intercepts
Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of the equation y  x 2  2.
Solution    To find the x-intercepts, we set y  0 and solve for x. Thus
 0 x2 2    Set y  0
 x2 2
    Add 2 to each side
 x !2     Take the square root
The x-intercepts are !2 and !2.
To find the y-intercepts, we set x  0 and solve for y. Thus
 y 0 2 2    Set x  0
 y 2
The y-intercept is 2.
The graph of this equation was sketched in Example 5. It is repeated in Figure 12 
with the x- and y-intercepts labeled.
Now Try Exercise 71	
■
■  Circles
So far, we have discussed how to find the graph of an equation in x and y. The converse 
problem is to find an equation of a graph, that is, an equation that represents a given 
curve in the xy-plane. Such an equation is satisfied by the coordinates of the points on 
the curve and by no other point. This is the other half of the fundamental principle of 
analytic geometry as formulated by Descartes and Fermat. The idea is that if a geomet-
ric curve can be represented by an algebraic equation, then the rules of algebra can be 
used to analyze the curve.
As an example of this type of problem, let’s find the equation of a circle with  
radius r and center 1h, k2 . By definition the circle is the set of all points P1x, y2  whose 
y
x
2
_2
0
_2
2
y=≈-2
y-intercept
x-intercepts
Figure 12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
distance from the center C1h, k2  is r (see Figure 13). Thus P is on the circle if and only 
if d1P, C2 r. From the distance formula we have
"1x h2 2 1 y k2 2 r
 1x h2 2 1 y k2 2 r2        Square each side
This is the desired equation.
Equation of a Circle
An equation of the circle with center 1h, k2  and radius r is
1x h2 2 1 y k2 2 r2
This is called the standard form for the equation of the circle. If the center of 
the circle is the origin 10, 02 , then the equation is
x2 y2 r2
Example 9  ■  Graphing a Circle
Graph each equation.
(a)	 x 2  y 2  25            (b)  1x 22 2 1 y 12 2 25
Solution
(a)	 Rewriting the equation as x 2  y 2  5 2, we see that this is an equation of the  
circle of radius 5 centered at the origin. Its graph is shown in Figure 14.
(b)	 Rewriting the equation as 1x 22 2 1 y 12 2 52, we see that this is an equa-
tion of the circle of radius 5 centered at 12, 12. Its graph is shown in Figure 15.
5
5
y
x
≈+¥=25
0
(2, _1)
y
x
(x-2)™+(y+1)™=25
0
Figure 14
Figure 15
Now Try Exercises 83 and 85	
■
Example 10  ■  Finding an Equation of a Circle
(a)	 Find an equation of the circle with radius 3 and center 12,  52 .
(b)	 Find an equation of the circle that has the points P11,  82  and Q15,  62  as the  
endpoints of a diameter.
Solution
(a)	 Using the equation of a circle with r  3, h  2, and k  5, we obtain
1x 22 2 1 y 52 2 9
	 	 The graph is shown in Figure 16.
r
y
x
0
C(h, k)
P(x, y)
Figure 13
Figure 16
(x-2)™+(y+5)™=9
y
x
2
0
(2, _5)
_2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.9  ■  The Coordinate Plane; Graphs of Equations; Circles  99
(b)	 We first observe that the center is the midpoint of the diameter PQ, so by the  
Midpoint Formula the center is
a 1 5
2
, 8 6
2
b 13, 12
	 	 The radius r is the distance from P to the center, so by the Distance Formula
r2 13 12 2 11 82 2 22 172 2 53
	 	 Therefore the equation of the circle is
1x 32 2 1 y 12 2 53
	 	 The graph is shown in Figure 17.
Now Try Exercises 89 and 93	
■
Let’s expand the equation of the circle in the preceding example.
 1x 32 2 1 y 12 2 53        Standard form
x2 6x 9 y2 2y 1 53        Expand the squares
 x2 6x y2 2y 43        Subtract 10 to get expanded form
Suppose we are given the equation of a circle in expanded form. Then to find its center 
and radius, we must put the equation back in standard form. That means that we must 
reverse the steps in the preceding calculation, and to do that, we need to know what to 
add to an expression like x 2  6x to make it a perfect square—that is, we need to com-
plete the square, as in the next example.
Example 11  ■  Identifying an Equation of a Circle
Show that the equation x2  y2  2x  6y  7  0 represents a circle, and find the 
center and radius of the circle.
Solution    We first group the x-terms and y-terms. Then we complete the square 
within each grouping. That is, we complete the square for x2  2x by adding 
A1
2 # 2B2 1, and we complete the square for y2  6y by adding C1
2 # 162 D 2 9.
 1x2 2x
2 1 y2 6y
2 7
	
Group terms
1x2 2x 12 1 y2 6y 92 7 1 9	
Complete the square by  
adding 1 and 9 to each side
 1x 12 2 1 y 32 2 3
	
Factor and simplify
Comparing this equation with the standard equation of a circle, we see that h  1,  
k  3, and r !3, so the given equation represents a circle with center 11,  32 and 
radius !3.
Now Try Exercise 99	
■
■  Symmetry
Figure 18 shows the graph of y  x2. Notice that the part of the graph to the left of 
the y-axis is the mirror image of the part to the right of the y-axis. The reason is that 
if the point 1x, y2  is on the graph, then so is 1x, y2 , and these points are reflections 
of each other about the y-axis. In this situation we say that the graph is symmetric 
with respect to the y-axis. Similarly, we say that a graph is symmetric with respect 
to the x-axis if whenever the point 1x, y2  is on the graph, then so is 1x, y2 . A graph 
is symmetric with respect to the origin if whenever 1x, y2  is on the graph, so is 
1x, y2 . (We often say symmetric “about” instead of “with respect to.”)
Completing the square is used in many 
contexts in algebra. In Section 1.5 we 
used completing the square to solve 
quadratic equations.
  We must add the same numbers to 
each side to maintain equality.
(x-3)™+(y-1)™=53
P(1, 8)
Q(5, _6)
(3, 1)
y
x
0
Figure 17
(x, y)
(_x, y)
y
x
1
0
1
y=≈
Figure 18
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Types of Symmetry
Symmetry	
Test 	
Graph	
Property of Graph
With respect 	
Replace y by y. The 	
	
Graph is unchanged  
to the x-axis	
resulting equation is 	
	
when reﬂected about the  
	
equivalent to the original	
	
x-axis. See Figures 14  
	
one.	
	
and 19.
With respect 	
Replace x by x. The 	
	
Graph is unchanged  
to the y-axis	
resulting equation is 	
	
when reﬂected about the  
	
equivalent to the original	
	
y-axis. See Figures 9, 
	
one.	
	
10, 11, 12, 14, and 18.
With respect 	
Replace x by x and y 	
	
Graph is unchanged  
to the origin	
by y. The resulting 	
	
when rotated 180  
	
equation is equivalent to	
	
about the origin. 
	
the original one.	
	
See Figures 14 and 20.
The remaining examples in this section show how symmetry helps us to sketch the 
graphs of equations.
Example 12  ■  Using Symmetry to Sketch a Graph
Test the equation x  y2 for symmetry and sketch the graph.
Solution    If y is replaced by 2y in the equation x  y2, we get
x 1y2 2        Replace y by y
x y2
        Simplify
and so the equation is equivalent to the original one. Therefore the graph is sym-
metric about the x-axis. But changing x to x gives the equation x  y 2, which is 
not equivalent to the original equation, so the graph is not symmetric about the 
y-axis.
We use the symmetry about the x-axis to sketch the graph by ﬁrst plotting 
points just for y  0 and then reﬂecting the graph about the x-axis, as shown in 
Figure 19.
y
x  y2
xx, yc
0
0
10,  02
1
1
11,  12
2
4
14,  22
3
9
19,  32
Now Try Exercises 105 and 111	
■
(x, y)
(x, _y)
y
x
0
(x, y)
(_x, y)
y
x
0
(x, y)
(_x, _y)
y
x
0
y
x
4
x=¥
(9, 3)
(0, 0)
4
(4, 2)
(1, 1)
Figure 19
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.9  ■  The Coordinate Plane; Graphs of Equations; Circles  101
Example 13  ■  Testing an Equation for Symmetry
Test the equation y  x3  9x for symmetry.
Solution    If we replace x by x and y by y in the equation, we get
y 1x2 3 91x2        Replace x by x and y by y
y x3 9x
        Simplify
 y x3 9x
        Multiply by 1
and so the equation is equivalent to the original one. This means that the graph is 
symmetric with respect to the origin, as shown in Figure 20.
Now Try Exercise 107	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 The point that is 3 units to the right of the y-axis and 5 units 
	 	 below the x-axis has coordinates 1
 
  , 
 
 2  .
	 2.	 The distance between the points 1a, b2 and 1c, d2 is 
	 	
 
  . So the distance between 11, 22 
	 	 and 17, 102 is 
 
  .
	 3.	 The point midway between 1a, b2 and 1c, d 2 is 
 
  . 
	 	 So the point midway between 11, 22 and 17, 102 is 
 
  . 
	 4.	 If the point 12,  32  is on the graph of an equation in x and y, 
then the equation is satisfied when we replace x by
	 	
 
 and y by  
  . Is the point 12,  32  on the 
graph of the equation 2y x 1? Complete the table, and 
sketch a graph.
x
y
xx, yc
2
1
0
1
2
y
x
0
1
1
	 5.	 (a)	 To find the x-intercept(s) of the graph of an equation, 
	 	 	
we set 
 
 equal to 0 and solve for 
 
  . 
	 	 	
So the x-intercept of 2y  x  1 is 
 
  .
(b)	 To find the y-intercept(s) of the graph of an equation, 
	 	 	
we set 
 
 equal to 0 and solve for 
 
  . 
	 	 	
So the y-intercept of 2y  x  1 is 
 
  .
	 6.	 The graph of the equation 1x 122  1y  222  9 is a circle 
	 	 with center (
 
  , 
 
2 and radius 
 
  .
	 7.	 (a)	 If a graph is symmetric with respect to the x-axis and 
	 	 	
1a, b2 is on the graph, then 1 
  ,  
2 is also on the 
graph.
(b)	 If a graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis and 
	 	 	
1a, b2 is on the graph, then 1 
  ,  
2 is also on the 
graph.
(c)	 If a graph is symmetric about the origin and 1a, b2 is on 
	 	 	
the graph, then 1 
  ,  
2 is also on the graph.
	 8.	 The graph of an equation is shown below.
(a)	 The x-intercept(s) are  
  , and the y-intercept(s) 
	 	 	
are  
  .
(b)	 The graph is symmetric about the  
  
(x-axis/y-axis/origin).
y
x
0
1
1
9–10  ■  Yes or No? If No, give a reason.
	 9.	 If the graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to both 
the x- and y-axes, is it necessarily symmetric with respect to 
the origin?
	10.	 If the graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the 
origin, is it necessarily symmetric with respect to the x- or 
y-axes?
1.9  Exercises
y
x
2
y=x£-9x
0
20
(1.5, _10.125)
4
_2
_20
(2.5, _6.875)
Figure 20
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
skills
11–12  ■  Points in a Coordinate Plane    Refer to the figure below.
	11.	 Find the coordinates of the points shown.
	12.	 List the points that lie in Quadrants I and III.
y
x
0
B
A
C
D
E
G
F
H
1
1
13–14  ■  Points in a Coordinate Plane    Plot the given points in a 
coordinate plane.
	13.	 10, 52 , 11, 02 , 11, 22 , A1
2, 2
3B
	14.	 15, 02 , 12, 02 , 12.6, 1.32 , 12.5, 3.52
15–20  ■  Sketching Regions    Sketch the region given by the set.
	15.	 (a)	 51x, y2 0  x 26	
(b)	 51x, y2 0  y 26
	16.	 (a)	 51x, y2 0  y 36	
(b)	 51x, y2 0  x 46
	17.	 (a)	 51x, y2 0  3 x 36	
(b)	 51x, y2  @ 0  x 0 26
	18.	 (a)	 51x, y2 0  0 y 26	
(b)	 51x, y2  @ 0  y 0 26
	19.	 (a)	 51x, y2 0  2 x 2 and y 16
(b)	 51x, y2 0  xy 06
	20.	 (a)	 51x, y2  @ 0  x 0 1 and 0  y 0 36
(b)	 51x, y2 0  xy 06
21–24  ■  Distance and Midpoint    A pair of points is graphed.  
(a) Find the distance between them. (b) Find the midpoint of the 
segment that joins them.
	21.	
0
y
x
1
1
	 22.	
0
y
x
1
1
	23.	
0
y
x
1
2
	
24.	
0
y
x
1
1
25–30  ■  Distance and Midpoint    A pair of points is given. (a) Plot 
the points in a coordinate plane. (b) Find the distance between them. 
(c) Find the midpoint of the segment that joins them.
	25.	 10,  82 , 16,  162 	
26.	 12,  52 , 110,  02
	27.	 13, 22 , 14, 52 	
28.	 11, 12 , 16, 32
29.	 16,  22 , 16,  22 	
30.	 10,  62 , 15,  02
31–34  ■  Area    In these exercises we find the areas of plane  
figures.
31.	 Draw the rectangle with vertices A11, 32 , B15,  32 , C11,  32 , 
and D15,  32  on a coordinate plane. Find the area of the  
rectangle.
32.	 Draw the parallelogram with vertices A11,  22 , B15,  22 , 
C13,  62 , and D17,  62  on a coordinate plane. Find the area  
of the parallelogram.
33.	 Plot the points A11,  02 , B15,  02 , C14,  32 , and D12,  32  on a  
coordinate plane. Draw the segments AB, BC, CD, and DA. 
What kind of quadrilateral is ABCD, and what is its area?
34.	 Plot the points P15,  12 , Q10,  62 , and R15,  12  on a coordi-
nate plane. Where must the point S be located so that the 
quadrilateral PQRS is a square? Find the area of this square.
35–39  ■  Distance Formula    In these exercises we use the  
Distance Formula.
35.	 Which of the points A16,  72  or B15,  82  is closer to the 
­origin?
36.	 Which of the points C16,  32  or D13,  02  is closer to the 
point E12,  12 ?
37.	 Which of the points P13,  12  or Q11,  32  is closer to the 
point R11,  12 ?
38.	 (a)  Show that the points 17,  32  and 13,  72  are the same  
distance from the origin.
(b)	 Show that the points 1a,  b2  and 1b,  a2  are the same  
distance from the origin.
39.	 Show that the triangle with vertices A10,  22 , B13,  12 , and 
C14,  32  is isosceles.
40.	 Area of Triangle    Find the area of the triangle shown in the 
ﬁgure.
y
x
0
2
2
4
6
8
4
_2
_2
C
B
A
41–42  ■  Pythagorean Theorem    In these exercises we use the 
converse of the Pythagorean Theorem (Appendix A) to show that 
the given triangle is a right triangle.
41.	 Refer to triangle ABC in the ﬁgure below.
(a)	 Show that triangle ABC is a right triangle by using the 
converse of the Pythagorean Theorem.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.9  ■  The Coordinate Plane; Graphs of Equations; Circles  103
(b)	 Find the area of triangle ABC.
y
x
0
2
2
4
6
_2
_4
_2
B
A
C
42.	 Show that the triangle with vertices A16,  72 , B111,  32 , 
and C12,  22  is a right triangle by using the converse of the 
Pythagorean Theorem. Find the area of the triangle.
43–45  ■  Distance Formula    In these exercises we use the Dis-
tance Formula.
43.	 Show that the points A12,  92 , B14,  62 , C11,  02 , and 
D15,  32  are the vertices of a square.
44.	 Show that the points A11,  32 , B13,  112 , and C15,  152  are 
collinear by showing that d1A, B2 d1B, C2 d1A, C2 .
45.	 Find a point on the y-axis that is equidistant from the points 
15,  52  and 11,  12 .
46–50  ■  Distance and Midpoint Formulas    In these exercises we 
use the Distance Formula and the Midpoint Formula.
46.	 Find the lengths of the medians of the triangle with vertices 
A11,  02 , B13,  62 , and C18,  22 . (A median is a line segment 
from a vertex to the midpoint of the opposite side.)
47.	 Plot the points P11,  42 , Q11,  12 , and R14,  22  on a  
coordinate plane. Where should the point S be located so  
that the ﬁgure PQRS is a parallelogram?
48.	 If M16,  82  is the midpoint of the line segment AB and if A 
has coordinates 12,  32 , ﬁnd the coordinates of B.
49.	 (a)  Sketch the parallelogram with vertices A12,  12 , 
B14,  22 , C17,  72 , and D11, 42 .
(b)  Find the midpoints of the diagonals of this  
parallelogram.
(c)  From part (b) show that the diagonals bisect each  
other.
50.	 The point M in the ﬁgure is the midpoint of the line  
segment AB. Show that M is equidistant from the vertices  
of triangle ABC.
y
x
C(0, 0)
A(a, 0)
M
B(0, b)
51–54  ■  Points on a Graph?    Determine whether the given 
points are on the graph of the equation.
51.	 x 2y 1 0; 10,  02,  11,  02,  11,  12
52.	 y1x2 12 1; 11,  12, A1,  1
2B, A1,   1
2B
53.	 x2 xy y2 4; 10,  22, 11,  22, 12,  22
54.	 x2 y2 1; 10,  12,  a 1
!2,  1
!2 b, a !3
2 ,  1
2 b
55–60  ■  Graphing Equations    Make a table of values, and 
sketch the graph of the equation. 
	55.	 4x 5y 40	
56.	 3x 5y 30
	57.	 y x2 4	
58.	 y 3 x2
	59.	 y 0  x 0 1	
60.	 y 0  x 1 0
61–64  ■  Graphing Equations    Use a graphing calculator to 
graph the equation in the given viewing rectangle.
	61.	 y 0.01x3 x2 5; 
3100, 1504  by 32000, 20004
	62.	 y !12x 17; 
30, 104  by 30, 204
	63.	 y 
x
x2 25; 
350, 504  by 30.2, 0.24
	64.	 y x4 4x3; 
34, 64  by 350, 1004
65–70  ■  Graphing Equations    Make a table of values, and 
sketch the graph of the equation. Find the x- and y-intercepts, and 
test for symmetry.
	65.	 (a)	 2x y 6	
(b)	 y 1x 12 2
	66.	 (a)	 x 4y 8	
(b)	 y x2 3
	67.	 (a)	 y !x 1	
(b)	 y 0  x 0
	68.	 (a)	 y 3 !x	
(b)	 x 0  y 0
	69.	 (a)	 y "4 x2	
(b)	 x y3 2y
	70.	 (a)	 y "4 x2	
(b)	 x y3
71–74  ■  Intercepts    Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of 
the equation.
	71.	 (a)	 y x 6	
(b)	 y x2 5
	72.	 (a)	 4x2 25y2 100	
(b)	 x2 xy 3y 1
	73.	 (a)	 9x2 4y2 36	
(b)	 y 2xy 4x 1
	74.	 (a)	 y "x2 16	
(b)	 y "64 x3
75–78  ■  Intercepts    An equation and its graph are given. Find 
the x- and y-intercepts.
75.	 y 4x x2	
76.	 x2
9 y2
4 1
y
x
0
1
1
	
y
x
0
1
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
77.	 x4 y2 xy 16	
78.	 x2 y3 x2y2 64
y
x
0
1
1
	
y
x
0
2
2
79–82  ■  Graphing Equations    An equation is given. (a) Use a 
graphing calculator to graph the equation in the given viewing 
rectangle. (b) Find the x- and y-intercepts from the graph. (c) Ver-
ify your answers to part (b) algebraically (from the equation).
	79.	 y x3 x2; 
32, 24  by 31, 14
	80.	 y x4 2x3; 
32, 34  by 33, 34
	81.	 y  
2
x2 1; 
35, 54  by 33, 14
	82.	 y "
3 1 x2; 
35, 54  by 35, 34
83–88  ■  Graphing Circles    Find the center and radius of the cir-
cle, and sketch its graph.
83.	 x2  y2  9	
84.	 x2  y2  5
85.	 x2 1y 42 2 1	
86.	 1x 12 2 y2 9
87.	 1x 32 2 1y 42 2 25 	 88.	 1x 12 2 1y 22 2 36
89–96  ■  Equations of Circles    Find an equation of the circle that 
satisfies the given conditions.
89.	 Center 12,  12 ;    radius 3
	90.	 Center 11,  42 ;    radius 8
	91.	 Center at the origin;    passes through 14,  72
	92.	 Center 11, 52 ;    passes through 14, 62
	93.	 Endpoints of a diameter are P11,  12  and Q15,  92
	94.	 Endpoints of a diameter are P11, 32  and Q17, 52
	95.	 Center 17,  32 ;    tangent to the x-axis
	96.	 Circle lies in the first quadrant, tangent to both x- and 
y-axes;    radius 5
97–98  ■  Equations of Circles    Find the equation of the circle 
shown in the figure.
	97.	 	
	
	
98.	
	 	
y
x
0
2
2
_2
	
y
x
0
2
2
_2
99–104  ■  Equations of Circles    Show that the equation repre-
sents a circle, and find the center and radius of the circle.
	99.	 x2 y2 4x 6y 12 0
100.	 x2  y2  6y  2  0
101.	 x2 y2 1
2 x 1
2 y 1
8
102.	 x2 y2 1
2 x 2y 1
16 0
103.	 2x2  2y2  3x  0
104.	 3x2  3y2  6x  y  0
105–110  ■  Symmetry    Test the equation for symmetry.
105.	 y  x4  x2	
106.	 x  y4  y2
107.	 x2y2  xy  1	
108.	 x4y4  x2y2  1
109.	 y  x3  10x	
110.	 y x2 0  x 0
111–114  ■  Symmetry    Complete the graph using the given sym-
metry property.
111.	 Symmetric with respect 	
112.	 Symmetric with respect  
to the y-axis	
	 	to the x-axis
	 	
y=
1
1+≈
y
x
0
	
¥-≈=1
y
x
0
113.	 Symmetric with respect	
114.	 Symmetric with respect  
to the origin	
	 	to the origin
	 	
y=
x
1+≈
y
x
0
	
y= 1
x£
y
x
0
skills plus
115–116  ■  Graphing Regions    Sketch the region given by the set.
115.	 51x, y2  0  x2 y2 16
116.	 51x, y2  0  x2 y2 46
117.	 Area of a Region    Find the area of the region that lies out-
side the circle x 2  y 2  4 but inside the circle
x2 y2 4y 12 0
118.	 Area of a Region    Sketch the region in the coordinate plane 
that satisfies both the inequalities x 2  y 2  9 and 
y  0  x 0 . What is the area of this region?
119.	 Shifting the Coordinate Plane    Suppose that each point  
in the coordinate plane is shifted 3 units to the right and  
2 units upward.
(a)	 The point 15,  32  is shifted to what new point?
(b)	 The point 1a, b2  is shifted to what new point?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.9  ■  The Coordinate Plane; Graphs of Equations; Circles  105
(c)	 What point is shifted to 13,  42 ?
(d)	 Triangle ABC in the ﬁgure has been shifted to triangle 
ABC. Find the coordinates of the points A, B, and C.
A'
B'
C '
0
y
x
A(_5, _1)
C(2, 1)
B(_3, 2)
120.	 Reﬂecting in the Coordinate Plane    Suppose that the y-axis 
acts as a mirror that reﬂects each point to the right of it into 
a point to the left of it.
(a)	 The point 13,  72  is reﬂected to what point?
(b)	 The point 1a, b2  is reﬂected to what point?
(c)	 What point is reﬂected to 14,  12 ?
(d)	 Triangle ABC in the ﬁgure is reﬂected to triangle ABC. 
Find the coordinates of the points A, B, and C.
A'
B'
C '
0
y
x
A(3, 3)
C(1, _4)
B(6, 1)
121.	 Making a Graph Symmetric    The graph shown in the ﬁgure 
is not symmetric about the x-axis, the y-axis, or the origin. 
Add more line segments to the graph so that it exhibits the 
indicated symmetry. In each case, add as little as possible.
(a)	 Symmetry about the x-axis
(b)	 Symmetry about the y-axis
(c)	 Symmetry about the origin
y
x
0
1
1
Applications
122.  Distances in a City    A city has streets that run north  
and south and avenues that run east and west, all equally 
spaced. Streets and avenues are numbered sequentially, as 
shown in the ﬁgure. The walking distance between points A 
and B is 7 blocks—that is, 3 blocks east and 4 blocks north. 
To ﬁnd the straight-line distance d, we must use the Dis-
tance Formula.
(a)	 Find the straight-line distance (in blocks) between  
A and B.
(b)	 Find the walking distance and the straight-line distance 
between the corner of 4th St. and 2nd Ave. and the cor-
ner of 11th St. and 26th Ave.
(c)	 What must be true about the points P and Q if the 
walking distance between P and Q equals the straight-
line distance between P and Q?
B
A
d
3 blocks
7th Ave.
6th Ave.
5th Ave.
4th Ave.
3rd Ave.
2nd Ave.
1st Ave.
1st St.
2nd St.
3rd St.
4th St.
5th St.
4 blocks
N
S
E
W
123.  Halfway Point    Two friends live in the city described in 
Exercise 122, one at the corner of 3rd St. and 7th Ave., the 
other at the corner of 27th St. and 17th Ave. They frequently 
meet at a coffee shop halfway between their homes.
(a)	 At what intersection is the coffee shop located?
(b)	 How far must each of them walk to get to the coffee shop?
124.	 Orbit of a Satellite    A satellite is in orbit around the moon. 
A coordinate plane containing the orbit is set up with the 
center of the moon at the origin, as shown in the graph, 
with distances measured in megameters (Mm). The equation 
of the satellite’s orbit is
1x 32 2
25
y2
16 1
(a)	 From the graph, determine the closest and the farthest 
that the satellite gets to the center of the moon.
(b)	 There are two points in the orbit with y-coordinates  
2. Find the x-coordinates of these points, and determine 
their distances to the center of the moon.
2
y
x
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
125.	 WRITE:  Completing a Line Segment    Plot the points 
M16,  82  and A12,  32  on a coordinate plane. If M is the mid-
point of the line segment AB, ﬁnd the coordinates of B. 
Write a brief description of the steps you took to ﬁnd B and 
your reasons for taking them.
126.	 WRITE:  Completing a Parallelogram    Plot the points 
P10, 32 , Q12, 22 , and R15, 32  on a coordinate plane. Where 
should the point S be located so that the ﬁgure PQRS is a 
parallelogram? Write a brief description of the steps you 
took and your reasons for taking them.
127.	 DISCOVER:  Circle, Point, or Empty Set?    Complete the 
squares in the general equation x2  ax  y2  by  c  0, 
and simplify the result as much as possible. Under what 
conditions on the coefﬁcients a, b, and c does this equation 
represent a circle? A single point? The empty set? In the 
case in which the equation does represent a circle, ﬁnd its 
center and ­radius.
1.10 
Lines
■  The Slope of a Line  ■  Point-Slope Form of the Equation of a Line  ■  Slope-Intercept  
Form of the Equation of a Line  ■  Vertical and Horizontal Lines  ■  General Equation  
of a Line  ■  Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
In this section we ﬁnd equations for straight lines lying in a coordinate plane. The equations 
will depend on how the line is inclined, so we begin by discussing the concept of slope.
■  The Slope of a Line
We ﬁrst need a way to measure the “steepness” of a line, or how quickly it rises  
(or falls) as we move from left to right. We deﬁne run to be the distance we move to the 
right and rise to be the corresponding distance that the line rises (or falls). The slope of 
a line is the ratio of rise to run:
slope rise
run
Figure 1 shows situations in which slope is important. Carpenters use the term pitch for 
the slope of a roof or a staircase; the term grade is used for the slope of a road.
100
8
1
3
1
12
Slope of a ramp
Pitch of a roof
Grade of a road
Slope= 1
12
Slope=1
3
Slope= 8
100
Figure 1
If a line lies in a coordinate plane, then the run is the change in the x-coordinate and 
the rise is the corresponding change in the y-coordinate between any two points on the 
line (see Figure 2). This gives us the following deﬁnition of slope.
y
x
0
1
2
Rise:
Run
y
x
0
1
2
Rise:
Run
change in
y-coordinate
(negative)
change in
y-coordinate
(positive)
Figure 2   
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.10  ■  Lines  107
Slope of a line
The slope m of a nonvertical line that passes through the points A1x1, y12  and 
B1x2, y22  is
	
m rise
run y2 y1
x2 x1
The slope of a vertical line is not deﬁned.
The slope is independent of which two points are chosen on the line. We can see that 
this is true from the similar triangles in Figure 3.
y2 y1
x2 x1
yr2 yr1
xr2 xr1
y
x
0
A'(x'⁄, y'⁄)
y'¤-y'⁄
x'¤-x'⁄
A(x⁄, y⁄)
y¤-y⁄ (rise)
x¤-x⁄ (run)
B(x¤, y¤)
B'(x'¤, y'¤)
Figure 3
The figures in the box below show several lines labeled with their slopes. Notice that 
lines with positive slope slant upward to the right, whereas lines with negative slope 
slant downward to the right. The steepest lines are those for which the absolute value 
of the slope is the largest; a horizontal line has slope 0. The slope of a vertical line is 
undefined (it has a 0 denominator), so we say that a vertical line has no slope.
Slope of a line
Positive Slope	
Negative Slope	
Zero Slope	
No Slope
y
x
0
y
0
x
y
x
0
y
x
0
Example 1  ■  Finding the Slope of a Line Through Two Points
Find the slope of the line that passes through the points P12,  12  and Q18,  52 .
SOLUTION    Since any two different points determine a line, only one line passes 
through these two points. From the deﬁnition the slope is
m y2 y1
x2 x1
5 1
8 2 4
6 2
3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
This says that for every 3 units we move to the right, the line rises 2 units. The line is 
drawn in Figure 4.
x
y
(
Q
P 2, 1
(8, 5)
)
Figure 4
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
■  Point-Slope Form of the Equation of a Line
Now let’s ﬁnd the equation of the line that passes through a given point P1x1,  y12  and 
has slope m. A point P1x, y2  with x ? x1 lies on this line if and only if the slope of the 
line through P1 and P is equal to m (see Figure 5), that is,
y y1
x x1
m
This equation can be rewritten in the form y y1 m1x x12 ; note that the equation 
is also satisﬁed when x  x1 and y  y1. Therefore it is an equation of the given line.
Point-Slope form of the equation of a line
An equation of the line that passes through the point 1x1, y12  and has slope m is
y y1 m1x x12
Example 2  ■  Finding an Equation of a Line with Given Point  
and Slope
(a)	 Find an equation of the line through 11,  32  with slope  1
2.
(b)	 Sketch the line.
SOLUTION
(a)	 Using the point-slope form with m 1
2, x1 1, and y1  3, we obtain an  
equation of the line as
 y 3 1
21x 12    Slope m 1
2, point 11, 32
 2y 6 x 1
    Multiply by 2
 x 2y 5 0
    Rearrange
(b)	 The fact that the slope is 1
2 tells us that when we move to the right 2 units, the  
line drops 1 unit. This enables us to sketch the line in Figure 6.
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
Run x – x⁄
Rise
y – y⁄
0
x
y
P⁄(x⁄, y⁄)
P(x, y)
Figure 5
0
x
y
(1, _3)
3
1
Run=2
Rise=_1
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.10  ■  Lines  109
Example 3  ■  Finding an Equation of a Line Through  
Two Given Points
Find an equation of the line through the points 11,  22  and 13,  42 .
SOLUTION    The slope of the line is
m 4 2
3 112  6
4  3
2
Using the point-slope form with x1  1 and y1  2, we obtain
 y 2 3
21x 12    Slope m 3
2, point 11, 22
 2y 4 3x 3     Multiply by 2
 3x 2y 1 0
    Rearrange
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
■  Slope-Intercept Form of the Equation of a Line
Suppose a nonvertical line has slope m and y-intercept b (see Figure 7). This means that 
the line intersects the y-axis at the point 10,  b2 , so the point-slope form of the equation 
of the line, with x  0 and y  b, becomes
y b m1x 02
This simpliﬁes to y  mx  b, which is called the slope-intercept form of the equation 
of a line.
Slope-intercept form of the equation of a line
An equation of the line that has slope m and y-intercept b is
y mx b
Example 4  ■  Lines in Slope-Intercept Form
(a)	 Find an equation of the line with slope 3 and y-intercept 2.
(b)	 Find the slope and y-intercept of the line 3y  2x  1.
SOLUTION
(a)	 Since m  3 and b  2, from the slope-intercept form of the equation of a line  
we get
y 3x 2
(b)	 We ﬁrst write the equation in the form y  mx  b.
 3y 2x 1
 3y 2x 1    Add 2x
 y 2
3 x 1
3     Divide by 3
	 	 From the slope-intercept form of the equation of a line, we see that the slope is 
m 2
3 and the y-intercept is b 1
3.
Now Try Exercises 23 and 61	
■
We can use either point, 11,  22  or 
13,  42 , in the point-slope equation. 
We will end up with the same ﬁnal 
­answer.
y 2
3 x 1
3
Slope
y-intercept
(0, b)
y=mx+b
0
x
y
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
■  Vertical and Horizontal Lines
If a line is horizontal, its slope is m  0, so its equation is y  b, where b is the  
y-intercept (see Figure 8). A vertical line does not have a slope, but we can write its 
equation as x  a, where a is the x-intercept, because the x-coordinate of every point 
on the line is a.
vertical and horizontal lines
■	 An equation of the vertical line through 1a,  b2  is x  a.
■	 An equation of the horizontal line through 1a,  b2  is y  b.
Example 5  ■  Vertical and Horizontal Lines
(a)	 An equation for the vertical line through 13, 52  is x  3.
(b)	 The graph of the equation x  3 is a vertical line with x-intercept 3.
(c)	 An equation for the horizontal line through 18, 22  is y  2.
(d)	 The graph of the equation y  2 is a horizontal line with y-intercept 2.
The lines are graphed in Figure 9.
Now Try Exercises 35, 37, 63, and 65	
■
■  General Equation of a Line
A linear equation in the variables x and y is an equation of the form
Ax By C 0
where A, B, and C are constants and A and B are not both 0. An equation of a line is a 
linear equation:
■	 A nonvertical line has the equation y  mx  b or mx  y  b  0, which is a  
linear equation with A  m, B  1, and C  b.
■	 A vertical line has the equation x  a or x  a  0, which is a linear equation 
with A  1, B  0, and C  a.
	 Conversely, the graph of a linear equation is a line.
■	 If B ? 0, the equation becomes
y  A
B
 x C
B        Divide by B
	 and this is the slope-intercept form of the equation of a line (with m  A/B and  
b  C/B).
■	 If B  0, the equation becomes
Ax C 0        Set B = 0
	 or x  C/A, which represents a vertical line.
We have proved the following.
General Equation of a line
The graph of every linear equation
Ax By C 0        (A, B not both zero)
is a line. Conversely, every line is the graph of a linear equation.
b
y=b
0
x=a
(a, b)
a
x
y
Figure 8
y
x
2
x=3
0
2
4
_2
y=_2
Figure 9
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.10  ■  Lines  111
Example 6  ■  Graphing a Linear Equation
Sketch the graph of the equation 2x  3y  12  0.
SOLUTION 1    Since the equation is linear, its graph is a line. To draw the graph, it is 
enough to ﬁnd any two points on the line. The intercepts are the easiest points to ﬁnd.
x-intercept: Substitute y 0, to get 2x 12 0, so x 6
y-intercept: Substitute x 0, to get 3y 12 0, so y 4
With these points we can sketch the graph in Figure 10.
SOLUTION 2    We write the equation in slope-intercept form.
 2x 3y 12 0
 2x 3y 12
    Add 12
 3y 2x 12    Subtract 2x
 y 2
3 x 4
    Divide by –3
This equation is in the form y  mx  b, so the slope is m 2
3 and the y-intercept is  
b  4. To sketch the graph, we plot the y-intercept and then move 3 units to the 
right and 2 units up as shown in Figure 11.
Figure 10
y
x
2x-3y-12=0
0
(0, _4)
(6, 0)
1
1
2x-3y-12=0
y
x
0
(0, _4)
1
1
3
2
Figure 11
Now Try Exercise 67	
■
■  Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
Since slope measures the steepness of a line, it seems reasonable that parallel lines 
should have the same slope. In fact, we can prove this.
Parallel Lines
Two nonvertical lines are parallel if and only if they have the same slope.
Proof    Let the lines l1 and l2 in Figure 12 have slopes m1 and m2. If the lines are par-
allel, then the right triangles ABC and DEF are similar, so
m1 
d1B, C2
d1A, C2 
d1E, F2
d1D, F2 m2
Conversely, if the slopes are equal, then the triangles will be similar, so  
BAC EDF and the lines are parallel.	
■
l¤
l⁄
y
x
D
F
E
A
C
B
Figure 12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
Example 7  ■  Finding an Equation of a Line Parallel  
to a Given Line
Find an equation of the line through the point 15,  22  that is parallel to the line 
4x 6y 5 0.
SOLUTION    First we write the equation of the given line in slope-intercept form.
 4x 6y 5 0
 6y 4x 5    Subtract 4x + 5
 y 2
3 x 5
6     Divide by 6
So the line has slope m  2
3. Since the required line is parallel to the given line, it 
also has slope m  2
3. From the point-slope form of the equation of a line we get
 y 2 2
31x 52    Slope m = 2
3, point 15,  22
 3y 6 2x 10     Multiply by 3
 2x 3y 16 0
    Rearrange
Thus an equation of the required line is 2x  3y  16  0.
Now Try Exercise 43	
■
The condition for perpendicular lines is not as obvious as that for parallel lines.
Perpendicular Lines
Two lines with slopes m1 and m2 are perpendicular if and only if m1m2 1, 
that is, their slopes are negative reciprocals:
m2  1
m1
Also, a horizontal line (slope 0) is perpendicular to a vertical line (no slope).
Proof    In Figure 13 we show two lines intersecting at the origin. (If the lines inter-
sect at some other point, we consider lines parallel to these that intersect at the origin. 
These lines have the same slopes as the original lines.)
If the lines l1 and l2 have slopes m1 and m2, then their equations are y  m1x and  
y  m2x. Notice that A11,  m12  lies on l1 and B11,  m22  lies on l2. By the Pythagorean 
Theorem and its converse (see Appendix A) OA  OB if and only if
3d1O, A2 4 2 3d1O, B2 4 2 3d1A, B2 4 2
By the Distance Formula this becomes
	
 112 m2
12 112 m2
22 11 12 2 1m2 m12 2
	
 2 m2
1 m2
2 m2
2 2m1m2 m2
1
	
 2 2m1m2
	
 m1m2 1

■
Example 8  ■  Perpendicular Lines
Show that the points P13,  32, Q18,  172 , and R111,  52  are the vertices of a right triangle.
y
x
A(1, m⁄)
B(1, m¤)
l⁄
l¤
O
Figure 13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.10  ■  Lines  113
Solution    The slopes of the lines containing PR and QR are, respectively,
m1 5 3
11 3 1
4  and  m2 5 17
11 8 4
Since m1m2  1, these lines are perpendicular, so PQR is a right triangle. It is 
sketched in Figure 14.
Now Try Exercise 81	
■
Example 9  ■  Finding an Equation of a Line Perpendicular  
to a Given Line
Find an equation of the line that is perpendicular to the line 4x 6y 5 0 and 
passes through the origin.
SOLUTION    In Example 7 we found that the slope of the line 4x 6y 5 0 is  
 2
3. Thus the slope of a perpendicular line is the negative reciprocal, that is, 3
2. Since 
the required line passes through 10,  02 , the point-slope form gives
	
 y 0 3
21x 02        Slope m = 3
2, point 10,  02
	
 y 3
2 x
        Simplify
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
Example 10  ■  Graphing a Family of Lines
Use a graphing calculator to graph the family of lines
y 0.5x b
for b  2, 1, 0, 1, 2. What property do the lines share?
SOLUTION    We use a graphing calculator to graph the lines in the viewing rectangle 
36,  64 by 36,  64. The graphs are shown in Figure 15. The lines all have the same 
slope, so they are parallel.
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
Example 11  ■  Application: Interpreting Slope
A swimming pool is being filled with a hose. The water depth y (in feet) in the pool t 
hours after the hose is turned on is given by 
y 1.5t 2
(a)	 Find the slope and y-intercept of the graph of this equation.
(b)	 What do the slope and y-intercept represent?
SOLUTION
(a)	 This is the equation of a line with slope 1.5 and y-intercept 2. 
(b)	 The slope represents an increase of 1.5 ft. in water depth for every hour. The  
y-intercept indicates that the water depth was 2 ft. at the time the hose was  
turned on.
Now Try Exercise 87	
■
y
x
0
3
5
17
3
8
11
R
Q
P
Figure 14
6
_6
_6
6
Figure 15  y  0.5x  b
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
concepts
	 1.	 We find the “steepness,” or slope, of a line passing through 
two points by dividing the difference in the  
-coordinates 
of these points by the difference in the  
-coordinates. So 
the line passing through the points 10, 12 and 12, 52 has slope 
 
  .
	 2.	 A line has the equation y 3x 2.
(a)	 This line has slope  
  .
(b)	 Any line parallel to this line has slope  
  .
(c)	 Any line perpendicular to this line has slope  
 
  .
	 3.	 The point-slope form of the equation of the line with slope 
	 	 3 passing through the point 11, 22 is  
  .
	 4.	 For the linear equation 2x 3y 12 0, the x-intercept is 
	 	
 
 and the y-intercept is  
  . The equation in 
	 	 slope-intercept form is y  
  . The slope 
	 	 of the graph of this equation is  
  .
	 5.	 The slope of a horizontal line is  
  . The equation 
	 	 of the horizontal line passing through 12, 32 is  
  .
	 6.	 The slope of a vertical line is  
  . The equation of 
	 	 the vertical line passing through 12, 32 is  
  .
	 7.	 Yes or No? If No, give a reason.
(a)	 Is the graph of y 3 a horizontal line?
(b)	 Is the graph of x 3 a vertical line?
(c)	 Does a line perpendicular to a horizontal line have  
slope 0?
(d)	 Does a line perpendicular to a vertical line have  
slope 0?
	 8.	 Sketch a graph of the lines y 3 and x 3. Are the 
lines perpendicular?
skills
9–16  ■  Slope    Find the slope of the line through P and Q.
	 9.	 P11, 22, Q10, 02
	10.	 P10, 02, Q13, 12
	11.	 P12, 22, Q17, 12
	12.	 P15, 12, Q13, 22
	13.	 P15, 42, Q10, 42
	14.	 P14, 32, Q11, 12
	15.	 P110, 22, Q16, 52
	16.	 P13, 22, Q16, 22
	17.	 Slope    Find the slopes of the lines l1, l2, l3, and l4 in the 
ﬁgure below.
l‹
l¤
l⁄
l›
x
y
0
_2
_2
2
1
18.	 Slope
(a)	 Sketch lines through 10,  02  with slopes 1, 0, 1
2, 2,  
and 1.
(b)	 Sketch lines through 10,  02   with slopes 1
3, 1
2,  1
3, and 3.
19–22  ■  Equations of Lines    Find an equation for the line whose 
graph is sketched.
19.	
0
1
3
5
_2
1
3
x
y
	
20.	
x
y
0
2
_3
3
21.	
x
y
0
1
3
_3
1
	
22.	
_
x
y
0
1
4
_3
1
23–50  ■  Finding Equations of Lines    Find an equation of the 
line that satisﬁes the given conditions.
23.	 Slope 3;    y-intercept 2
24.	 Slope 2
5;    y-intercept 4
	25.	 Through 12,  32 ;    slope 5
26.	 Through 12,  42 ;    slope 1
27.	 Through 11,  72 ;    slope 2
3
28.	 Through 13,  52 ;    slope  7
2
29.	 Through 12,  12  and 11,  62
1.10  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.10  ■  Lines  115
30.	 Through 11,  22  and 14,  32
31.	 Through 12, 52  and 11, 32
32.	 Through 11, 72  and 14, 72
33.	 x-intercept 1;    y-intercept 3
34.	 x-intercept 8;    y-intercept 6
35.	 Through 11,  32 ;    slope 0
36.	 Through 11,  42 ;    slope undefined
37.	 Through 12,  12 ;    slope undefined
38.	 Through 15,  12 ;    slope 0
39.	 Through 11, 22 ;    parallel to the line y 3x 5
40.	 Through 13, 22 ;    perpendicular to the line y 1
2 x 7
41.	 Through 14,  52 ;    parallel to the x-axis
42.	 Through 14,  52 ;    parallel to the y-axis
43.	 Through 11,  62 ;    parallel to the line x  2y  6
44.	 y-intercept 6;    parallel to the line 2x  3y  4  0
45.	 Through 11,  22 ;    parallel to the line x  5
46.	 Through 12,  62 ;    perpendicular to the line y  1
	47.	 Through 11,  22 ;    perpendicular to the line  
2x  5y  8  0
48.	 Through A1
2,   2
3B;    perpendicular to the line 4x  8y  1
49.	 Through 11,  72 ;    parallel to the line passing through 12,  52  
and 12,  12
50.	 Through 12,  112 ;    perpendicular to the line passing 
through 11,  12  and 15,  12
51.	 Finding Equations of Lines and Graphing   
(a)	 Sketch the line with slope 3
2 that passes through the point 
12,  12 .
(b)	 Find an equation for this line.
52.	 Finding Equations of Lines and Graphing   
(a)  Sketch the line with slope 2 that passes through the 
point 14,  12 .
(b)	 Find an equation for this line.
53–56  ■  Families of Lines    Use a graphing device to graph the 
given family of lines in the same viewing rectangle. What do the 
lines have in common?
53.	 y  2x  b    for b  0, 1, 3, 6
54.	 y  mx  3    for m  0, 0.25, 0.75, 1.5
55.	 y m1x 32     for m  0, 0.25, 0.75, 1.5
56.	 y 2 m1x 32     for m  0, 0.5, 1, 2, 6
57–66  ■  Using Slopes and y-Intercepts to Graph Lines    Find the 
slope and y-intercept of the line, and draw its graph.
57.	 y 3 x	
58.	 y 2
3 x 2
59.	 2x y 7	
60.	 2x  5y  0
	61.	 4x  5y  10	
62.	 3x  4y  12
63.	 y  4	
64.	 x  5
	65.	 x  3	
66.	 y  2
67–72  ■  Using x- and y-Intercepts to Graph Lines    Find the x- 
and y-intercepts of the line, and draw its graph.
	67.	 5x 2y 10 0	
68.	 6x 7y 42 0
69.	 1
2 x 1
3 y 1 0	
70.	 1
3 x 1
5 y 2 0
71.	 y 6x 4	
72.	 y 4x 10
73–78  ■  Parallel and Perpendicular Lines    The equations of two 
lines are given. Determine whether the lines are parallel, perpen-
dicular, or neither.
73.	 y 2x 3;    2y 4x 5 0
74.	 y 1
2 x 4;    2x 4y 1
75.	 3x 4y 4;    4x 3y 5
76.	 2x 3y 10;    3y 2x 7 0
77.	 7x 3y 2;    9y 21x 1
78.	 6y 2x 5;    2y 6x 1
Skills Plus
79–82  ■  Using Slopes    Verify the given geometric property.
79.	 Use slopes to show that A11,  12, B17,  42, C15,  102 , and 
D11,  72  are vertices of a parallelogram.
80.	 Use slopes to show that A13,  12, B13,  32 , and C19,  82   
are vertices of a right triangle.
81.	 Use slopes to show that A11,  12, B111,  32, C110,  82 , and 
D10,  62  are vertices of a rectangle.
82.	 Use slopes to determine whether the given points are collin-
ear (lie on a line).
(a)	 11,  12, 13,   92, 16,  212
(b)	 11,  32, 11,  72, 14,  152
83.	 Perpendicular Bisector    Find an equation of the perpendicu-
lar bisector of the line segment joining the points A11,  42  and 
B17,  22 .
84.	 Area of a Triangle    Find the area of the triangle formed by 
the coordinate axes and the line
2y 3x 6 0
85.	 Two-Intercept Form
(a)	 Show that if the x- and y-intercepts of a line are nonzero 
numbers a and b, then the equation of the line can be 
written in the form
x
a y
b 1
	
This is called the two-intercept form of the equation of 
a line.
(b)	 Use part (a) to ﬁnd an equation of the line whose  
x-intercept is 6 and whose y-intercept is 8.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
86.	 Tangent Line to a Circle
(a)	 Find an equation for the line tangent to the circle  
x 2  y 2  25 at the point 13,  42 . (See the ﬁgure.)
(b)	 At what other point on the circle will a tangent line be  
parallel to the tangent line in part (a)?
(3, _4)
0
x
y
applications
87.	 Global Warming    Some scientists believe that the average 
surface temperature of the world has been rising steadily. The 
average surface temperature can be modeled by
T  0.02t  15.0
	 	 where T is temperature in C and t is years since 1950.
(a)	 What do the slope and T-intercept represent?
(b)	 Use the equation to predict the average global surface  
temperature in 2050.
88.	 Drug Dosages    If the recommended adult dosage for a drug 
is D (in mg), then to determine the appropriate dosage c for a 
child of age a, pharmacists use the equation
c 0.0417D1a 12
	 	 Suppose the dosage for an adult is 200 mg.
(a)	 Find the slope. What does it represent?
(b)	 What is the dosage for a newborn?
89.	 Flea Market    The manager of a weekend ﬂea market knows 
from past experience that if she charges x dollars for a rental 
space at the ﬂea market, then the number y of spaces she can 
rent is given by the equation y  200  4x.
(a)	 Sketch a graph of this linear equation. (Remember that 
the rental charge per space and the number of spaces 
rented must both be nonnegative quantities.)
(b)	 What do the slope, the y-intercept, and the x-intercept of 
the graph represent?
90.	 Production Cost    A small-appliance manufacturer ﬁnds that 
if he produces x toaster ovens in a month, his production cost 
is given by the equation
y 6x 3000
	 	 (where y is measured in dollars).
(a)	 Sketch a graph of this linear equation.
(b)	 What do the slope and y-intercept of the graph represent?
91.	 Temperature Scales    The relationship between the  
Fahrenheit (F) and Celsius (C) temperature scales is given  
by the equation F 9
5 C 32.
(a)	 Complete the table to compare the two scales at the 
given values.
(b)	 Find the temperature at which the scales agree.  
[Hint: Suppose that a is the temperature at which the 
scales agree. Set F  a and C  a. Then solve for a.]
C
F
30
20
10
     0
50
68
86
92.	 Crickets and Temperature    Biologists have observed that the 
chirping rate of crickets of a certain species is related to tem-
perature, and the relationship appears to be very nearly  
linear. A cricket produces 120 chirps per minute at 70F and 
168 chirps per minute at 80F.
(a)	 Find the linear equation that relates the temperature t and 
the number of chirps per minute n.
(b)	 If the crickets are chirping at 150 chirps per minute,  
estimate the temperature.
93.	 Depreciation    A small business buys a computer for 
$4000. After 4 years the value of the computer is expected 
to be $200. For accounting purposes the business uses lin-
ear depreciation to assess the value of the computer at a 
given time. This means that if V is the value of the com-
puter at time t, then a linear equation is used to relate V 
and t.
(a)	 Find a linear equation that relates V and t.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of this linear equation.
(c)	 What do the slope and V-intercept of the graph  
represent?
(d)	 Find the depreciated value of the computer 3 years from 
the date of purchase.
94.	 Pressure and Depth    At the surface of the ocean the water 
pressure is the same as the air pressure above the water,  
15 lb/in2. Below the surface the water pressure increases by 
4.34 lb/in2 for every 10 ft of descent.
(a)	 Find an equation for the relationship between pressure 
and depth below the ocean surface.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of this linear equation.
(c)	 What do the slope and y-intercept of the graph  
represent?
(d)	 At what depth is the pressure 100 lb/in2?
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
95.	 DISCUSS:  What Does the Slope Mean?    Suppose that the 
graph of the outdoor temperature over a certain period of 
time is a line. How is the weather changing if the slope of the 
line is positive? If it is negative? If it is zero?
96.	 DISCUSS:  Collinear Points    Suppose that you are given the 
coordinates of three points in the plane and you want to see 
whether they lie on the same line. How can you do this using 
slopes? Using the Distance Formula? Can you think of another 
method? 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.11  ■  Solving Equations and Inequalities Graphically  117
1.11 
Solving Equations and Inequalities Graphically
■  Solving Equations Graphically  ■  Solving Inequalities Graphically
In Section 1.5 we learned how to solve equations by the algebraic method. In this 
method we view x as an unknown and then use the rules of algebra to “hunt it down,” 
by isolating it on one side of the equation. In Section 1.8 we solved inequalities by this 
same method. 
Sometimes an equation or inequality may be difficult or impossible to solve algebra-
ically. In this case we use the graphical method. In this method we view x as a variable 
and sketch an appropriate graph. We can then obtain an approximate solution from the 
graph. 
■  Solving Equations Graphically
To solve a one-variable equation such as 3x 5 0 graphically, we first draw a graph 
of the two-variable equation y 3x 5 obtained by setting the nonzero side of the 
equation equal to a variable y. The solutions of the given equation are the values of x 
for which y is equal to zero. That is, the solutions are the x-intercepts of the graph. The 
following describes the method.
Solving an Equation
Algebraic Method	
Graphical Method
Use the rules of algebra to isolate 	
Move all terms to one side, and set equal 
the unknown x on one side of the	
to y. Graph the resulting equation, and
equation.	
ﬁnd the x-intercepts.
Example:	  3x 4 1	
Example:	  3x 4 1
	
	
 3x 5
        Add 4	
	
 3x 5 0
	
	
 x 5
3
        Divide by 3	
Set y 3x 5 and graph. From the
The solution is x 5
3.	
graph we see that the solution is x 1.7
y
x
1
0
2
xÅ1.7
Solution:  
The advantage of the algebraic method is that it gives exact answers. Also, the pro-
cess of unraveling the equation to arrive at the answer helps us to understand the alge-
braic structure of the equation. On the other hand, for many equations it is difﬁcult or 
impossible to isolate x.
Pierre de Fermat (1601–1665) 
was a French lawyer who became 
interested in mathematics at the age 
of 30. Because of his job as a magis­
trate, Fermat had little time to write 
complete proofs of his discoveries 
and ­often wrote them in the margin 
of whatever book he was reading at 
the time. After his death his copy  
of Diophantus’ Arithmetica (see 
page 20) was found to contain a par­
ticularly tantalizing comment. Where Diophantus discusses the solutions 
of x2 y2 z2 Ófor example, x  3, y  4, and z  5Ô, Fermat states in 
Bettmann/Corbis
the margin that for n  3 there are no natural number solutions to the 
equation xn yn zn. In other words, it’s impossible for a cube to 
equal the sum of two cubes, a fourth power to equal the sum of two 
fourth powers, and so on. Fermat writes, “I have discovered a truly won­
derful proof for this but the margin is too small to contain it.” All the 
other margin comments in Fermat’s copy of Arithmetica have been 
proved. This one, however, remained unproved, and it came to be known 
as “Fermat’s Last Theorem.”
In 1994, Andrew Wiles of Princeton University announced a proof of  
Fermat’s Last Theorem, an astounding 350 years after it was conjectured.  
His proof is one of the most widely reported mathematical results in the 
popular press.
“Algebra is a merry science,” Uncle 
Jakob would say. “We go hunting for a 
little animal whose name we don’t 
know, so we call it x. When we bag our 
game we pounce on it and give it its 
right name.”
Albert Einstein
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
The graphical method gives a numerical approximation to the answer. This is an ad-
vantage when a numerical answer is desired. (For example, an engineer might ﬁnd an 
answer expressed as x  2.6 more immediately useful than x !7.) Also, graphing an 
equation helps us to visualize how the solution is related to other values of the variable.
Example 1  ■  Solving a Quadratic Equation Algebraically  
and Graphically
Find all real solutions of the quadratic equation. Use the algebraic method and the 
graphical method.
(a)	 x 2  4x  2  0            (b)  x 2  4x  4  0            (c)  x 2  4x  6  0
SOLUTION 1:  Algebraic
You can check that the Quadratic Formula gives the following solutions.
(a)	 There are two real solutions, x 2 !2 and x 2 !2.
(b)	 There is one real solution, x 2.
(c)	 There is no real solution. (The two complex solutions are x 2 !2i and 
x 2 !2i.)
SOLUTION 2:  Graphical
We use a graphing calculator to graph the equations y x2 4x 2, 
y x2 4x 4, and y x2 4x 6 in Figure 1. By determining the x-intercepts 
of the graphs, we find the following solutions.
(a)	 The two x-intercepts give the two solutions x 0.6 and x 3.4. 
(b)	 The one x-intercept gives the one solution x 2.
(c)	 There is no x-intercept, so the equation has no real solutions.
10
_5
_1
5
(a) y=≈-4x+2
(b) y=≈-4x+4
(c) y=≈-4x+6
10
_5
_1
5
10
_5
_1
5
Figure 1
Now Try Exercises 9, 11, and 15	
■
The graphs in Figure 1 show visually why a quadratic equation may have two solu­
tions, one solution, or no real solution. We proved this fact algebraically in Section 1.5 
when we studied the discriminant.
Alan Turing (1912–1954) was at the center of 
two pivotal events of the 20th century: World 
War II and the invention of computers. At the age 
of 23 Turing made his mark on mathematics by 
solving an important problem in the foundations 
of mathematics that had been posed by David 
Hilbert at the 1928 International Congress of 
Mathematicians (see page 735). In this research 
he invented a theoretical machine, now called a  
Turing machine, which was the inspiration for 
Science Source
modern digital computers. During World War II Turing was in charge of the 
British effort to decipher secret German codes. His complete success in this 
endeavor played a decisive role in the Allies’ victory. To carry out the numer­
ous logical steps that are required to break a coded message, Turing devel­
oped decision procedures similar to modern computer programs. After the 
war he helped to develop the ﬁrst electronic computers in Britain. He also 
did pioneering work on artiﬁcial intelligence and computer models of bio­
logical processes. At the age of 42 Turing died of poisoning after eating an 
apple that had mysteriously been laced with cyanide.
The Discovery Project referenced on 
page 276 describes a numerical method 
for solving equations.
The Quadratic Formula is discussed on 
page 50.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.11  ■  Solving Equations and Inequalities Graphically  119
Example 2  ■  Another Graphical Method
Solve the equation algebraically and graphically:    5  3x  8x  20
SOLUTION 1:  Algebraic
 5 3x 8x 20
    Given equation
 3x 8x 25
    Subtract 5
 11x 25
    Subtract 8x
 x 25
11 2 3
11    Divide by –11 and simplify
SOLUTION 2:  Graphical
We could move all terms to one side of the equal sign, set the result equal to y, and 
graph the resulting equation. But to avoid all this algebra, we use a graphing calculator 
to graph the two equations instead:
y1 5 3x  and  y2 8x 20
The solution of the original equation will be the value of x that makes y1 equal to y2; 
that is, the solution is the x-coordinate of the intersection point of the two graphs. 
Using the trace  feature or the intersect command on a graphing calculator, we 
see from Figure 2 that the solution is x  2.27.
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
In the next example we use the graphical method to solve an equation that is ex-
tremely difﬁcult to solve algebraically.
Example 3  ■  Solving an Equation in an Interval
Solve the equation
x3 6x2 9x !x
in the interval 31,  64.
SOLUTION    We are asked to ﬁnd all solutions x that satisfy 1  x  6, so we use a 
graphing calculator to graph the equation in a viewing rectangle for which the  
x-values are restricted to this interval.
	
 x3 6x2 9x !x        Given equation
	
 x3 6x2 9x !x 0
        Subtract !x
Figure 3 shows the graph of the equation y x3 6x2 9x !x in the viewing 
rectangle 31, 64 by 35, 54. There are two x-intercepts in this viewing rectangle; zoom-
ing in, we see that the solutions are x  2.18 and x  3.72.
(a)
(b)
5
_5
1
6
Zero
X=3.7200502   Y=0
5
_5
1
6
Zero
X=2.1767162   Y=0
Figure 3
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
We can also use the zero command  
to ﬁnd the solutions, as shown in  
Figures 3(a) and 3(b).
10
_25
_1
3
y⁄=5-3x
y¤=8x-20
Intersection
X=2.2727723   Y=-1.818182
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
The equation in Example 3 actually has four solutions. You are asked to ﬁnd the 
other two in Exercise 46.
■  Solving Inequalities Graphically
To solve a one-variable inequality such as 3x 5 0 graphically, we first draw a 
graph of the two-variable equation y 3x 5 obtained by setting the nonzero side of 
the inequality equal to a variable y. The solutions of the given inequality are the values 
of x for which y is greater than or equal to 0. That is, the solutions are the values of x 
for which the graph is above the x-axis.
Solving an INEQUALITY
Algebraic Method	
Graphical Method
Use the rules of algebra to isolate 	
Move all terms to one side, and set equal 
the unknown x on one side of the	
to y. Graph the resulting equation, and
inequality.	 	
ﬁnd the values of x where the graph is  
Example:	  3x 4 1	
above or on the x-axis.
	
	
 3x 5
        Add 4	
Example:	  3x 4 1
	
	
 x 5
3
        Divide by 3	
	
 3x 5 0
	
	
The solution is C5
3, `B.	
Set y 3x 5 and graph. From the graph
	
	
we see that the solution is 31.7, `2 .
y
x
1
0
2
[1.7, `)
Solution:  
Example 4  ■  Solving an Inequality Graphically
Solve the inequality x2 5x 6 0 graphically.
SOLUTION    This inequality was solved algebraically in Example 3 of Section 1.8. To 
solve the inequality graphically, we use a graphing calculator to draw the graph of 
y x2 5x 6
Our goal is to find those values of x for which y 0. These are simply the x-values 
for which the graph lies below the x-axis. From the graph in Figure 4 we see that the 
solution of the inequality is the interval 32, 34.
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
Example 5  ■  Solving an Inequality Graphically
Solve the inequality 3.7x2  1.3x  1.9  2.0  1.4x.
SOLUTION    We use a graphing calculator to graph the equations
y1 3.7x2 1.3x 1.9  and  y2 2.0 1.4x
The graphs are shown in Figure 5. We are interested in those values of x for which  
y1  y2; these are points for which the graph of y2 lies on or above the graph of y1. To 
determine the appropriate interval, we look for the x-coordinates of points where the 
graphs intersect. We conclude that the solution is (approximately) the interval 
31.45, 0.724.
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
Example 6  ■  Solving an Inequality Graphically
Solve the inequality x3  5x2  8.
10
_2
_1
5
Figure 4
5
_3
_3
3
y⁄
y¤
Figure 5
y1  3.7x2  1.3x  1.9
y2  2.0  1.4x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.11  ■  Solving Equations and Inequalities Graphically  121
SOLUTION    We write the inequality as
x3 5x2 8 0
and then graph the equation
y x3 5x2 8
in the viewing rectangle 36, 64 by 315, 154, as shown in Figure 6. The solution  
of the inequality consists of those intervals on which the graph lies on or above the  
x-axis. By moving the cursor to the x-intercepts, we ﬁnd that, rounded to one decimal 
place, the solution is 31.1, 1.54 34.6. `2 .
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
15
_15
_6
6
Figure 6  x 3  5x 2  8  0
concepts
	 1.	 The solutions of the equation x2  2x  3  0 are the 
	 	
 
-intercepts of the graph of y  x2  2x  3.
	 2.	 The solutions of the inequality x2  2x  3  0 are the 
x-coordinates of the points on the graph of y  x2  2x  3 
	 	 that lie 
 
 the x-axis.
	 3.	 The figure shows a graph of y  x 4  3x3  x2  3x. 
Use the graph to do the following.
(a)	 Find the solutions of the equation x4 3x3 x2 3x 0.
(b)	 Find the solutions of the inequality x4 3x3 x2 3x 0.
4
3
2
1
-1
2
y
8
6
4
2
-2
-4
-6
-8
x
 
y=x4-3x3-x2+3x
	 4.	 The figure shows the graphs of y  5x  x2 and y  4. Use 
the graphs to do the following.
(a)	 Find the solutions of the equation 5x  x2  4.
(b)	 Find the solutions of the inequality 5x  x2  4.
6
5
4
3
2
1
-1
y
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
-1
-2
x
y=5x-x2
y=4
skills
5–16  ■  Equations    Solve the equation both algebraically and 
graphically.
  5.	 x  4  5x  12	
  6.	 1
2 x 3 6 2x
  7.	 2
x 1
2x 7	
  8.	
4
x 2 6
2x 
5
2x 4
  9.	 x 2  32  0	
10.	 x 3  16  0
11.	 x 2  9  0	
12.	 x 2  3  2x
13.	 16x 4  625	
14.	 2x 5  243  0
15.	 1x 52 4 80 0	
16.	 61x 22 5 64
17–24  ■  Equations    Solve the equation graphically in the given 
interval. State each answer rounded to two decimals.
17.	 x2  7x  12  0;    30, 64
18.	 x2  0.75x  0.125  0;    32, 24
19.	 x3  6x2  11x  6  0;    3 1, 44
20.	 16x3  16x2  x  1;    32, 24
21.	 x !x 1 0;    31, 54
22.	 1 !x "1 x2;    31, 54
23.	 x 1/3  x  0;    3 3, 34
24.	 x 1/2  x 1/3  x  0;    31, 54
25–28  ■  Equations    Use the graphical method to solve the 
equation in the indicated exercise from Section 1.5.
25.	 Exercise 97.	
26.	 Exercise 98.
27.	 Exercise 105.	
28.	 Exercise 106.
29–32  ■  Equations    Find all real solutions of the equation, 
rounded to two decimals.
29.	 x3  2x2  x  1  0	
30.	 x 4  8x2  2  0
31.	 x1x 12 1x 22 1
6 x	
32.	 x 4  16  x3
33–40  ■  Inequalities    Find the solutions of the inequality by draw-
ing appropriate graphs. State each answer rounded to two decimals.
33.	 x2  3x  10	
34.	 0.5x2  0.875x  0.25
35.	 x3  11x  6x 2  6	
36.	 16x3  24x2  9x  1
1.11  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
37.	 x 1/3  x	
38.	 "0.5x2 1 2 0  x 0
39.	 1x 12 2 1x 12 2	
40.	 1x 12 2 x3
41–44  ■  Inequalities    Use the graphical method to solve the 
inequality in the indicated exercise from Section 1.8.
41.	 Exercise 45.	
42.	 Exercise 46.
43.	 Exercise 55.	
44.	 Exercise 56.
Skills plus
45.	 Another Graphical Method    In Example 2 we solved the 
equation 5 3x 8x 20 by drawing graphs of two equa-
tions.  Solve the equation by drawing a graph of only one 
equation. Compare your answer to the one obtained in  
Example 2.
46.	 Finding More Solutions    In Example 3 we found two solu-
tions of the equation x3 6x2 9x !x in the interval 
31, 64 . Find two more solutions, rounded to two decimals.
applications
47.	 Estimating Proﬁt    An appliance manufacturer estimates that 
the proﬁt y (in dollars) generated by producing x cooktops 
per month is given by the equation
y 10x 0.5x2 0.001x3 5000
	 	 where 0  x  450.
(a)	 Graph the equation.
(b)	 How many cooktops must be produced to begin  
generating a proﬁt?
(c)	 For what range of values of x is the company’s proﬁt 
greater than $15,000?
48.	 How Far Can You See?    If you stand on a ship in a calm sea, 
then your height x (in ft) above sea level is related to the far-
thest distance y (in mi) that you can see by the equation
y Å1.5x a
x
5280 b
2
(a)	 Graph the equation for 0  x  100.
(b)	 How high up do you have to be to be able to see 10 mi?
x
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
49.	 WRITE:  Algebraic and Graphical Solution Methods    Write a 
short essay comparing the algebraic and graphical methods 
for solving equations. Make up your own examples to illus-
trate the advantages and disadvantages of each method.
50.	 DISCUSS:  Enter Equations Carefully    A student wishes to 
graph the equations
y x1/3  and  y 
x
x 4
	 	 on the same screen, so he enters the following information 
into his calculator:
Y1 X^1/3   Y2 X/X4
	 	 The calculator graphs two lines instead of the equations he 
wanted. What went wrong?
1.12 
Modeling Variation
■  Direct Variation  ■  Inverse Variation  ■  Combining Different Types of Variation 
When scientists talk about a mathematical model for a real-world phenomenon, they 
often mean a function that describes the dependence of one physical quantity on 
another. For instance, the model may describe the population of an animal species 
as a function of time or the pressure of a gas as a function of its volume. In this sec-
tion we study a kind of modeling that occurs frequently in the sciences, called 
variation.
■  Direct Variation
One type of variation is called direct variation; it occurs when one quantity is a con-
stant multiple of the other. We use a function of the form f1x2 kx to model this  
dependence.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.12  ■  Modeling Variation  123
Direct Variation
If the quantities x and y are related by an equation
	
y kx
for some constant k ? 0, we say that y varies directly as x, or y is directly 
proportional to x, or simply y is proportional to x. The constant k is called the 
constant of proportionality.
Recall that the graph of an equation of the form y  mx  b is a line with slope m 
and y-intercept b. So the graph of an equation y  kx that describes direct variation is 
a line with slope k and y-intercept 0 (see Figure 1).
Example 1  ■  Direct Variation
During a thunderstorm you see the lightning before you hear the thunder because 
light travels much faster than sound. The distance between you and the storm varies 
directly as the time interval between the lightning and the thunder.
(a)	 Suppose that the thunder from a storm 5400 ft away takes 5 s to reach you.  
Determine the constant of proportionality, and write the equation for the 
variation.
(b)	 Sketch the graph of this equation. What does the constant of proportionality 
represent?
(c)	 If the time interval between the lightning and thunder is now 8 s, how far away is 
the storm?
SOLUTION
(a)	 Let d be the distance from you to the storm, and let t be the length of the time 
interval. We are given that d varies directly as t, so
d kt
	 	 where k is a constant. To ﬁnd k, we use the fact that t  5 when d  5400.  
Substituting these values in the equation, we get
 5400 k152
    Substitute
 k 5400
5
1080    Solve for k
	 	 Substituting this value of k in the equation for d, we obtain
d 1080t
	 	 as the equation for d as a function of t.
(b)	 The graph of the equation d  1080t is a line through the origin with slope 1080  
and is shown in Figure 2. The constant k  1080 is the approximate speed of 
sound (in ft/s).
(c)	 When t  8, we have
d 1080 # 8 8640
	 	 So the storm is 8640 ft  1.6 mi away.
Now Try Exercises 19 and 35	
■
0
k
1
y=kx
(k>0)
y
x
Figure 1
t
d
0
1000
1
(5, 5400)
(8, 8640)
y=1080t
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
■  Inverse Variation
Another function that is frequently used in mathematical modeling is f(x)  k/x, where 
k is a constant.
Inverse Variation
If the quantities x and y are related by the equation
y k
x
for some constant k ? 0, we say that y is inversely proportional to x or y var-
ies inversely as x. The constant k is called the constant of proportionality.
The graph of y  k/x for x  0 is shown in Figure 3 for the case k  0. It gives a 
picture of what happens when y is inversely proportional to x.
Example 2  ■  Inverse Variation
Boyle’s Law states that when a sample of gas is compressed at a constant tempera-
ture, the pressure of the gas is inversely proportional to the volume of the gas.
(a)	 Suppose the pressure of a sample of air that occupies 0.106 m3 at 25C is 50 kPa. 
Find the constant of proportionality, and write the equation that expresses the 
inverse proportionality. Sketch a graph of this equation.
(b)	 If the sample expands to a volume of 0.3 m3, ﬁnd the new pressure.
SOLUTION
(a)	 Let P be the pressure of the sample of gas, and let V be its volume. Then, by the 
deﬁnition of inverse proportionality, we have
P k
V
	 	 where k is a constant. To ﬁnd k, we use the fact that P  50 when V  0.106.  
Substituting these values in the equation, we get
	
 50 
k
0.106
    Substitute
	
 k 1502 10.1062 5.3    Solve for k
	 	 Putting this value of k in the equation for P, we have
P 5.3
V
	 	 Since V represents volume (which is never negative), we sketch the part of the 
graph for which V 0 only. The graph is shown in Figure 4.
(b)	 When V  0.3, we have
P 5.3
0.3 17.7
	 	 So the new pressure is about 17.7 kPa.
Now Try Exercises 21 and 43	
■
0
y=
(k>0)
k
x
y
x
Figure 3  Inverse variation
V
P
0
10
0.1
1.0
P=
(0.106, 50)
5.3
V
(0.3, 17.7)
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.12  ■  Modeling Variation  125
■  Combining Different Types of Variation
In the sciences, relationships between three or more variables are common, and any 
combination of the different types of proportionality that we have discussed is possible. 
For example, if the quantities x, y, and z are related by the equation 
z kxy
then we say that z is proportional to the product of x and y. We can also express this 
relationship by saying that z varies jointly as x and y or that z is jointly proportional 
to x and y. If the quantities x, y, and z are related by the equation 
z k x
y
we say that z is proportional to x and inversely proportional to y or that z varies 
directly as x and inversely as y.
Example 3  ■  Combining Variations
The apparent brightness B of a light source (measured in W/m2) is directly  
proportional to the luminosity L (measured in W) of the light source and inversely 
proportional to the square of the distance d from the light source (measured in 
meters). 
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this variation.
(b)	 If the distance is doubled, by what factor will the brightness change? 
(c)	 If the distance is cut in half and the luminosity is tripled, by what factor will the 
brightness change? 
SOLUTION
(a)	 Since B is directly proportional to L and inversely proportional to d2, we have 
B k L
d 2        Brightness at distance d and luminosity L
	 	 where k is a constant.
(b)	 To obtain the brightness at double the distance, we replace d by 2d in the equa-
tion we obtained in part (a).
B k 
L
12d2 2 1
4 a k L
d 2 b         Brightness at distance 2d
	 	 Comparing this expression with that obtained in part (a), we see that the bright-
ness is 1
4 of the original brightness.
Discovery Project
Proportionality: Shape and Size
Many real-world quantities are related by proportionalities. We use the propor-
tionality symbol ~ to express proportionalities in the natural world. For exam-
ple, for animals of the same shape, the skin area and volume are proportional, 
in different ways, to the length of the animal. In one situation we use propor-
tionality to determine how a frog’s size relates to its sensitivity to pollutants in 
the environment. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© LuckyKeeper/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
(c)	 To obtain the brightness at half the distance d and triple the luminosity L, we 
replace d by d/2 and L by 3L in the equation we obtained in part (a).
B k 3L
A1
2  dB2 3
1
4
a k L
d 2 b 12a k L
d 2 b         Brightness at distance 1
2 d and luminosity 3L
	 	 Comparing this expression with that obtained in part (a), we see that the bright-
ness is 12 times the original brightness.
Now Try Exercises 23 and 45	
■
The relationship between apparent brightness, actual brightness (or luminosity), and 
distance is used in estimating distances to stars (see Exercise 56).
Example 4  ■  Newton’s Law of Gravity
Newton’s Law of Gravity says that two objects with masses m1 and m2 attract each 
other with a force F that is jointly proportional to their masses and inversely propor-
tional to the square of the distance r between the objects. Express Newton’s Law of 
Gravity as an equation.
SOLUTION    Using the deﬁnitions of joint and inverse variation and the traditional  
notation G for the gravitational constant of proportionality, we have
F G  m1m2
r 2
Now Try Exercises 31 and 37	
■
If m1 and m2 are ﬁxed masses, then the gravitational force between them is F  C/r2 
(where C  Gm1m2 is a constant). Figure 5 shows the graph of this equation for r  0 
with C  1. Observe how the gravitational attraction decreases with increasing dis­tance.
Like the Law of Gravity, many laws of nature are inverse square laws. There is a 
geometric reason for this. Imagine a force or energy originating from a point source and 
spreading its influence equally in all directions, just like the light source in Example 3 
or the gravitational force exerted by a planet in Example 4. The influence of the force or 
energy at a distance r from the source is spread out over the surface of a sphere of radius 
r, which has area A 4pr2 (see Figure 6). So the intensity I at a distance r from the 
source is the source strength S divided by the area A of the sphere:
I 
S
4pr2 k
r2
where k is the constant S/14p2 . Thus point sources of light, sound, gravity, electromag-
netic fields, and radiation must all obey inverse square laws, simply because of the 
geometry of space.
Figure 6  Energy from a point source S
S
r = 2
r = 3
r = 1
1.5
0
5
Figure 5  Graph of F 1
r 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.12  ■  Modeling Variation  127
concepts
	 1.	 If the quantities x and y are related by the equation y 3x,
	 	 then we say that y is  
  
 
	 	 to x and the constant of  
 is 3.
	 2.	 If the quantities x and y are related by the equation y 3
x, 
	 	 then we say that y is  
  
 
	 	 to x and the constant of  
 is 3.
	 3.	 If the quantities x, y, and z are related by the equation z 3  x
y, 
	 	 then we say that z is  
  
 
	 	 to x and  
  
 to y.
	 4.	 If z is directly proportional to the product of x and y and if  
z is 10 when x is 4 and y is 5, then x, y, and z are related by 
the equation z 5  
  .
5–6  ■  In each equation, is y directly proportional, inversely  
proportional, or not proportional to x?
	 5.	 (a)	 y 3x	
(b)	 y 3x 1
	 6.	 (a)	 y 
3
x 1	
(b)	 y 3
x
skills
7–18  ■  Equations of Proportionality    Write an equation that 
expresses the statement.
	 7.	 T varies directly as x.
	 8.	 P is directly proportional to „.
	 9.	 √ is inversely proportional to z.
	10.	 „ is proportional to the product of m and n.
	11.	 y is proportional to s and inversely proportional to t.
	12.	 P varies inversely as T.
	13.	 z is proportional to the square root of y.
	14.	 A is proportional to the square of x and inversely proportional 
to the cube of t.
	15.	 V is proportional to the product of l, „, and h.
16.	 S is proportional to the product of the squares of r and u.
17.	 R is proportional to the product of the squares of P and t and 
inversely proportional to the cube of b.
18.	 A is jointly proportional to the square roots of x and y.
19–30  ■  Constants of Proportionality    Express the statement as 
an equation. Use the given information to ﬁnd the constant of 
proportionality.
19.	 y is directly proportional to x. If x  6, then y  42.
20.	 „ is inversely proportional to t. If t 8, then „ 3.
	21.	 A varies inversely as r. If r 3, then A 7.
	22.	 P is directly proportional to T. If T  300, then P  20.
23.	 A is directly proportional to x and inversely proportional to t. 
If x 7 and t 3, then A 42.
24.	 S is proportional to the product of p and q. If p  4 and  
q  5, then S  180.
25.	 W is inversely proportional to the square of r. If r  6, then  
W  10.
26.	 t is proportional to the product of x and y and inversely pro-
portional to r. If x  2, y  3, and r  12, then t  25.
27.	 C is jointly proportional to l, „, and h. If l  „  h  2, 
then C  128.
28.	 H is jointly proportional to the squares of l and „. If l  2 
and „ 1
3, then H  36.
29.	 R is inversely proportional to the square root of x. If 
x 121, then R 2.5.
30.	 M is jointly proportional to a, b, and c and inversely propor-
tional to d. If a and d have the same value and if b and c are 
both 2, then M  128.
31–34  ■  Proportionality    A statement describing the relation-
ship between the variables x, y, and z is given. (a) Express the 
statement as an equation of proportionality. (b) If x is tripled and 
y is doubled, by what factor does z change? (See Example 3.)
31.	 z varies directly as the cube of x and inversely as the square of y.
32.	 z is directly proportional to the square of x and inversely pro-
portional to the fourth power of y. 
33.	 z is jointly proportional to the cube of x and the fifth power of y.
34.	 z is inversely proportional to the square of x and the cube of y.
applications
35.	 Hooke’s Law    Hooke’s Law states that the force needed to 
keep a spring stretched x units beyond its natural length is  
directly proportional to x. Here the constant of proportional-
ity is called the spring constant.
(a)	 Write Hooke’s Law as an equation.
(b)	 If a spring has a natural length of 5 cm and a force of  
30 N is required to maintain the spring stretched to a 
length of 9 cm, find the spring constant.
(c)	 What force is needed to keep the spring stretched to a 
length of 11 cm?
5 cm
1.12  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
36.	 Printing Costs    The cost C of printing a magazine is jointly 
proportional to the number of pages p in the magazine and 
the number of magazines printed m.
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this joint variation.
(b)	 Find the constant of proportionality if the printing cost is 
$60,000 for 4000 copies of a 120-page magazine.
(c)	 How much would the printing cost be for 5000 copies of 
a 92-page magazine?
37.	 Power from a Windmill    The power P that can be obtained 
from a windmill is directly proportional to the cube of the 
wind speed s.
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this variation.
(b)	 Find the constant of proportionality for a windmill that 
produces 96 watts of power when the wind is blowing at 
20 mi/h.
(c)	 How much power will this windmill produce if the wind 
speed increases to 30 mi/h?
38.	 Power Needed to Propel a Boat    The power P (measured in 
horsepower, hp) needed to propel a boat is directly propor-
tional to the cube of the speed s.
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this variation.
(b)	 Find the constant of proportionality for a boat that needs 
an 80-hp engine to propel the boat at 10 knots.
(c)	 How much power is needed to drive this boat at 15 knots?
39.	 Stopping Distance    The stopping distance D of a car after 
the brakes have been applied varies directly as the square of 
the speed s. A certain car traveling at 40 mi/h can stop in  
150 ft. What is the maximum speed it can be traveling if it 
needs to stop in 200 ft?
40.	 Aerodynamic Lift    The lift L on an airplane wing at takeoff 
varies jointly as the square of the speed s of the plane and the 
area A of its wings. A plane with a wing area of 500 ft2  
traveling at 50 mi/h experiences a lift of 1700 lb. How much 
lift would a plane with a wing area of 600 ft2 traveling at  
40 mi/h experience?
Lift
41.	 Drag Force on a Boat    The drag force F on a boat is jointly pro-
portional to the wetted surface area A on the hull and the square 
of the speed s of the boat. A boat experiences a drag force of 
220 lb when traveling at 5 mi/h with a wetted surface area of  
40 ft2. How fast must a boat be traveling if it has 28 ft2 of  
wetted surface area and is experiencing a drag force of 175 lb?
42.	 Kepler’s Third Law    Kepler’s Third Law of planetary motion 
states that the square of the period T of a planet (the time it 
takes for the planet to make a complete revolution about the 
sun) is directly proportional to the cube of its average dis-
tance d from the sun.
(a)	 Express Kepler’s Third Law as an equation.
(b)	 Find the constant of proportionality by using the fact that 
for our planet the period is about 365 days and the aver-
age distance is about 93 million miles.
(c)	 The planet Neptune is about 2.79  10 9 mi from the sun. 
Find the period of Neptune.
	43.	 Ideal Gas Law    The pressure P of a sample of gas is directly 
proportional to the temperature T and inversely proportional 
to the volume V.
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this variation.
(b)	 Find the constant of proportionality if 100 L of gas 
exerts a pressure of 33.2 kPa at a temperature of 400 K 
(absolute temperature measured on the Kelvin scale).
(c)	 If the temperature is increased to 500 K and the volume 
is decreased to 80 L, what is the pressure of the gas?
44.	 Skidding in a Curve    A car is traveling on a curve that forms 
a circular arc. The force F needed to keep the car from skid-
ding is jointly proportional to the weight „ of the car and the 
square of its speed s and is inversely proportional to the 
radius r of the curve.
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this variation.
(b)	 A car weighing 1600 lb travels around a curve at  
60 mi/h. The next car to round this curve weighs 2500 lb 
and requires the same force as the ﬁrst car to keep from 
skidding. How fast is the second car traveling?
45.	 Loudness of Sound    The loudness L of a sound (measured in 
decibels, dB) is inversely proportional to the square of the 
distance d from the source of the sound.
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this variation.
(b)	 Find the constant of proportionality if a person 10 ft 
from a lawn mower experiences a sound level of 70 dB.
(c)	 If the distance in part (b) is doubled, by what factor is 
the loudness changed?
(d)	 If the distance in part (b) is cut in half, by what factor is 
the loudness changed?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1.12  ■  Modeling Variation  129
46.	 A Jet of Water    The power P of a jet of water is jointly pro-
portional to the cross-sectional area A of the jet and to the 
cube of the velocity √.  
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this variation.
(b)	 If the velocity is doubled and the cross-sectional area is 
halved, by what factor is the power changed?
(c)	 If the velocity is halved and the cross-sectional area is 
tripled, by what factor is the power changed?
	47.	 Electrical Resistance    The resistance R of a wire varies  
directly as its length L and inversely as the square of its  
diameter d.
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this joint variation.
(b)	 Find the constant of proportionality if a wire 1.2 m  
long and 0.005 m in diameter has a resistance of  
140 ohms.
(c)	 Find the resistance of a wire made of the same material 
that is 3 m long and has a diameter of 0.008 m.
(d)	 If the diameter is doubled and the length is tripled, by 
what factor is the resistance changed?
48.	 Growing Cabbages    In the short growing season of the 
Canadian arctic territory of Nunavut, some gardeners ﬁnd it 
possible to grow gigantic cabbages in the midnight sun.  
Assume that the ﬁnal size of a cabbage is proportional to  
the amount of nutrients it receives and inversely proportional  
to the number of other cabbages surrounding it. A cabbage 
that received 20 oz of nutrients and had 12 other cabbages 
around it grew to 30 lb. What size would it grow to if it  
received 10 oz of nutrients and had only 5 cabbage  
“neighbors”?
49.	 Radiation Energy    The total radiation energy E emitted  
by a heated surface per unit area varies as the fourth  
power of its absolute temperature T. The temperature is  
6000 K at the surface of the sun and 300 K at the surface  
of the earth.
(a)	 How many times more radiation energy per unit area is 
produced by the sun than by the earth?
(b)	 The radius of the earth is 3960 mi, and the radius of the 
sun is 435,000 mi. How many times more total radiation 
does the sun emit than the earth?
50.	 Value of a Lot    The value of a building lot on Galiano Island 
is jointly proportional to its area and the quantity of water pro-
duced by a well on the property. A 200 ft by 300 ft lot has a 
well producing 10 gal of water per minute and is valued at 
$48,000. What is the value of a 400 ft by 400 ft lot if the well 
on the lot produces 4 gal of water per minute?
51.	 Law of the Pendulum    The period of a pendulum (the time 
elapsed during one complete swing of the pendulum) varies 
directly with the square root of the length of the pendulum.
(a)	 Express this relationship by writing an equation.
(b)	 To double the period, how would we have to change the 
length l?
l
52.	 Heat of a Campﬁre    The heat experienced by a hiker at a 
campﬁre is proportional to the amount of wood on the ﬁre 
and inversely proportional to the cube of his distance from 
the ﬁre. If the hiker is 20 ft from the ﬁre and someone dou-
bles the amount of wood burning, how far from the ﬁre 
would he have to be so that he feels the same heat as  
before?
x
53.	 Frequency of Vibration    The frequency f of vibration of a 
violin string is inversely proportional to its length L. The  
constant of proportionality k is positive and depends on the  
tension and density of the string.
(a)	 Write an equation that represents this variation.
(b)	 What effect does doubling the length of the string have 
on the frequency of its vibration?
54.	 Spread of a Disease    The rate r at which a disease spreads  
in a population of size P is jointly proportional to the number x 
of infected people and the number P  x who are not infected. 
An infection erupts in a small town that has population  
P  5000.
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses r as a function of x.
(b)	 Compare the rate of spread of this infection when  
10 people are infected to the rate of spread when  
1000 people are infected. Which rate is larger? By  
what factor?
(c)	 Calculate the rate of spread when the entire population is 
infected. Why does this answer make intuitive sense?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
55–56  ■  Combining Variations    Solve the problem using the 
relationship between brightness B, luminosity L, and distance d 
derived in Example 3. The proportionality constant is k 0.080.
55.	 Brightness of a Star    The luminosity of a star is 
L 2.5 1026 W, and its distance from the earth is 
d 2.4 1019 m. How bright does the star appear on the 
earth?
56.	 Distance to a Star    The luminosity of a star is 
L 5.8 1030 W, and its brightness as viewed from the 
earth is B 8.2 1016 W/m2. Find the distance of the star 
from the earth.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
57.	 DISCUSS:  Is Proportionality Everything?    A great many 
laws of physics and chemistry are expressible as proportion-
alities. Give at least one example of a function that occurs in 
the sciences that is not a proportionality.
Properties of Real Numbers (p. 3)
Commutative:    a  b  b  a
	
ab  ba
Associative:	 1a b2 c a 1b c2
	
1ab2c a1bc2
Distributive:    a1b c2 ab ac
Absolute Value (pp. 8–9)
0 a 0 ea
if a 0
a
if a 0
0 ab 0 0 a 0 0 b 0
` a
b ` 
0 a 0
0 b 0
Distance between a and b:
d1a, b2 0 b a 0
Exponents (p. 14)
aman amn
am
an amn
1am2 n amn
1ab2 n anbn
a a
b b
n
an
bn
Radicals (p. 18)
"
n a b means bn a
"
n ab "
n a "
n b
Å
n a
b "
n a
"
n b
"
m !
n a !
mna
am/n "
n am
If n is odd, then "
n an a.
If n is even, then "
n an 0  a 0 .
Special Product Formulas (p. 27)
Sum and difference of same terms:
1A  B21A  B2  A2  B2
Square of a sum or difference:
1A  B2 2  A2  2AB  B2
1A  B2 2  A2  2AB  B2
Cube of a sum or difference:
1A  B2 3  A3  3A2B  3AB2  B3
1A  B2 3  A3  3A2B  3AB2  B3
Special Factoring Formulas (p. 30)
Difference of squares:
A2  B2  1A  B21A  B2
Perfect squares:
A2  2AB  B2  1A  B2 2
A2  2AB  B2  1A  B2 2
Sum or difference of cubes:
A3  B3  1A  B21A2  AB  B22
A3  B3  1A  B21A2  AB  B22
Rational Expressions (pp. 37–38)
We can cancel common factors:
AC
BC A
B
To multiply two fractions, we multiply their numerators together 
and their denominators together:
A
B C
D AC
BD
To divide fractions, we invert the divisor and multiply:
A
B 4 C
D A
B D
C
To add fractions, we ﬁnd a common denominator:
A
C B
C A B
C
■  Properties and Formulas
Chapter 1  ■  Review
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1  ■  Review  131
Properties of Equality (p. 46)
A B 3 A C B C
A B 3 CA CB 1C ? 02
Linear Equations (p. 46)
A linear equation is an equation of the form ax  b  0
Zero-Product Property (p. 48)
If AB  0, then A  0 or B  0.
Completing the Square (p. 49)
To make x2 bx a perfect square, add a b
2 b
2
. This gives the 
perfect square
x2 bx ab
2 b
2
ax b
2 b
2
Quadratic Formula (p. 50)
A quadratic equation is an equation of the form
ax2 bx c 0
Its solutions are given by the Quadratic ­Formula:
x b "b2 4ac
2a
The discriminant is D  b2 4ac.
If D  0, the equation has two real solutions.
If D  0, the equation has one solution.
If D  0, the equation has two complex solutions.
Complex Numbers (pp. 59–61)
A complex number is a number of the form a  bi, where 
i !1.
The complex conjugate of a  bi is
a bi a bi
To multiply complex numbers, treat them as binomials and use 
i 2 1 to simplify the result.
To divide complex numbers, multiply numerator and denominator 
by the complex conjugate of the denominator:
a bi
c di a a bi
c di b # a c di
c di b 
1a bi2 1c di2
c 2 d 2
Inequalities (p. 82)
Adding the same quantity to each side of an inequality gives an 
equivalent inequality:
A B 3 A C B C
Multiplying each side of an inequality by the same positive 
quantity gives an equivalent inequality. Multiplying each side by 
the same negative quantity reverses the direction of the 
inequality:
If C  0, then A B 3 CA CB
If C  0, then A B 3 CA CB
Absolute Value Inequalities (p. 86)
To solve absolute value inequalities, we use
 0 x 0 C 3 C x C
 0 x 0 C 3 x C or x C­
The Distance Formula (p. 93)
The distance between the points A1x1, y12 and B1x2, y22  is
d1A, B2 "1x1 x22 2 1y1 y22 2
The Midpoint Formula (p. 94)
The midpoint of the line segment from A1x1, y12 to B1x2, y22  is
a x1 x2
2
, y1 y2
2
b
Intercepts (p. 97)
To find the x-intercepts of the graph of an equation, set y 0 
and solve for x.
To find the y-intercepts of the graph of an equation, set x 0 
and solve for y.
Circles (p. 98)
The circle with center (0, 0) and radius r has equation
x2 y2 r2
The circle with center (h, k) and radius r has equation
1x h2 2 1y k2 2 r2
Symmetry (p. 100)
The graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the 
x-axis if the equation remains unchanged when y is replaced  
by y.
The graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the 
y-axis if the equation remains unchanged when x is replaced  
by x.
The graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the  
origin if the equation remains unchanged when x is replaced by 
x and y by y.
Slope of a Line (p. 107)
The slope of the nonvertical line that contains the points A1x1, y12  
and B1x2, y22  is
m rise
run y2 y1
x2 x1 
Equations of Lines (pp. 108–110)
If a line has slope m, has y-intercept b, and contains the point 
1x1, y12 , then:
  the point-slope form of its equation is
y y1 m1x x12
  the slope-intercept form of its equation is
y mx b
The equation of any line can be expressed in the general form
Ax By C 0
(where A and B can’t both be 0). 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
■  Concept check
	 1.	 (a)	 What does the set of natural numbers consist of? What 
does the set of integers consist of? Give an example of 
an integer that is not a natural number.
(b)	 What does the set of rational numbers consist of? Give 
an example of a rational number that is not an integer.
(c)	 What does the set of irrational numbers consist of? Give 
an example of an irrational number.
(d)	 What does the set of real numbers consist of? 
	 2.	 A property of real numbers is given. State the property and 
give an example in which the property is used.
	
(i)	 Commutative Property
	
(ii)	 Associative Property
	
(iii)	 Distributive Property
	 3.	 Explain the difference between the open interval 1a, b2  and 
the closed interval 3a, b4. Give an example of an interval that 
is neither open nor closed.
	 4.	 Give the formula for finding the distance between two real 
numbers a and b. Use the formula to find the distance 
between 103 and 52.
	 5.	 Suppose a ? 0 is any real number.
(a)	 In the expression an, which is the base and which is the 
exponent?
(b)	 What does an mean if n is a positive integer? What does 
65 mean?
(c)	 What does an mean if n is a positive integer? What 
does 32 mean?
(d)	 What does an mean if n is zero? 
(e)	 If m and n are positive integers, what does am/n mean? 
What does 43/2 mean?
	 6.	 State the first five Laws of Exponents. Give examples in 
which you would use each law.
	 7.	 When you multiply two powers of the same number, what 
should you do with the exponents? When you raise a power 
to a new power, what should you do with the exponents? 
	 8.	 (a)	 What does !
n a b mean? 
(b)	 Is it true that "a2 is equal to 0  a 0 ? Try values for a that 
are positive and negative.
(c)	 How many real nth roots does a positive real number 
have if n is even? If n is odd?
(d)	 Is !
4 2 a real number? Is !
3 2 a real number? Explain 
why or why not.
	 9.	 Explain the steps involved in rationalizing a denominator. 
What is the logical first step in rationalizing the denominator 
of the expression 5
!3?
	10.	 Explain the difference between expanding an expression and 
factoring an expression. 
	11.	 State the Special Product Formulas used for expanding the 
given expression. 
	
(i)	 1a b2 2	
(ii)	 1a b2 2	
(iii)	 1a b2 3
	
(iv)	 1a b2 3	
(v)	 1a b2 1a b2
	 	 Use the appropriate formula to expand 1x 52 2 and 
1x 52 1x 52 .
	12.	 State the following Special Factoring Formulas. 
	
(i)	 Difference of Squares
	
(ii)	 Perfect Square
	
(iii)	 Sum of Cubes
	 	 Use the appropriate formula to factor x2 9.
	13.	 If the numerator and the denominator of a rational expression 
have a common factor, how would you simplify the expres-
sion? Simplify the expression x2 x
x 1 .
	14.	 Explain the following.
(a)	 How to multiply and divide rational expressions. 
(b)	 How to add and subtract rational expressions. 
(c)	 What LCD do we use to perform the addition in the 
­expression 
3
x 1 
5
x 2?
	15.	 What is the logical first step in rationalizing the denominator 
of 
3
1 !x?
	16.	 What is the difference between an algebraic expression and 
an equation? Give examples.
	17.	 Write the general form of each type of equation.
	
(i)	 Linear equation
	
(ii)	 Quadratic equation
Vertical and Horizontal Lines (p. 110)
The vertical line containing the point 1a, b2  has the  
equation x a.
The horizontal line containing the point 1a, b2  has the  
equation y b.
Parallel and Perpendicular Lines (pp. 111–112)
Two lines with slopes m1 and m2 are
  parallel if and only if m1 m2
  perpendicular if and only if m1m2 1
Variation (pp. 123–124)
If y is directly proportional to x, then
y kx
If y is inversely proportional to x, then
y k
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1  ■  Review  133
	18.	 What are the three ways to solve a quadratic equation? 
	19.	 State the Zero-Product Property. Use the property to solve the 
equation x1x 12 0.
	20.	 What do you need to add to ax2 bx  to complete the 
square? Complete the square for the expression x2 6x. 
	21.	 State the Quadratic Formula for the quadratic equation 
ax2 bx c 0, and use it to solve the equation 
x2 6x 1 0.
	22.	 What is the discriminant of the quadratic equation 
ax2 bx c 0? Find the discriminant of 
2x2 3x 5 0. How many real solutions does this  
equation have?
	23.	 What is the logical first step in solving the equation 
!x 1 x 3? Why is it important to check your 
answers when solving equations of this type? 
	24.	 What is a complex number? Give an example of a complex 
number, and identify the real and imaginary parts.
	25.	 What is the complex conjugate of a complex number a bi? 
	26.	 (a)	 How do you add complex numbers? 
(b)	 How do you multiply 13 5i2 12 i2 ? 
(c)	 Is 13 i2 13 i2  a real number? 
(d)	 How do you simplify the quotient 13 5i2/13 i2 ?
	27.	 State the guidelines for modeling with equations. 
	28.	 Explain how to solve the given type of problem.
(a)	 Linear inequality: 2x 1
(b)	 Nonlinear inequality: 1x 12 1x 42 0
(c)	 Absolute value equation: 0  2x 5 0 7
(d)	 Absolute value inequality: 0  2x 5 0 7
	29.	 (a)	 In the coordinate plane, what is the horizontal axis called 
and what is the vertical axis called?
(b)	 To graph an ordered pair of numbers 1x,  y2 , you need the 
coordinate plane. For the point 12,  32 , which is the 
x-coordinate and which is the y-coordinate?
(c)	 For an equation in the variables x and y, how do you 
determine whether a given point is on the graph? Is the 
point 15,  32  on the graph of the equation y 2x 1?
	30.	 (a)	 What is the formula for finding the distance between the 
points 1x1,  y12  and 1x2,  y22 ?
(b)	 What is the formula to finding the midpoint between 
1x1,  y12  and 1x2,  y22 ?
	31.	 How do you find x-intercepts and y-intercepts of a graph of 
an equation?
	32.	 (a)	 Write an equation of the circle with center 1h,  k2  and 
radius r. 
(b)	 Find the equation of the circle with center 12,  12  and 
radius 3.
	33.	 (a)	 How do you test whether the graph of an equation is 
symmetric with respect to the (i) x-axis, (ii) y-axis, and 
(iii) origin?
(b)	 What type of symmetry does the graph of the equation
xy2 y2x2 3x have?
	34.	 (a)	 What is the slope of a line? How do you compute the 
slope of the line through the points 11,  42 and 11,  22?
(b)	 How do you find the slope and y-intercept of the line 
6x 3y 12? 
(c)	 How do you write the equation for a line that has slope 3 
and passes through the point 11,  22 ?
	35.	 Give an equation of a vertical line and of a horizontal line 
that passes through the point 12,  32 .
	36.	 State the general equation of a line.
	37.	 Given lines with slopes m1 and m2, explain how you can tell 
whether the lines are (i) parallel, (ii) perpendicular.
	38.	 How do you solve an equation (i) algebraically?  
(ii) graphically? 
	39.	 How do you solve an inequality (i) algebraically?  
(ii) graphically? 
	40.	 Write an equation that expresses each relationship.
(a)	 y is directly proportional to x.
(b)	 y is inversely proportional to x.
(c)	 z is jointly proportional to x and y.
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
1–4  ■  Properties of Real Numbers    State the property of real 
numbers being used.
	 1.	 3x  2y  2y  3x
	 2.	 1a b2 1a b2 1a b2 1a b2
	 3.	 41a b2 4a 4b
	 4.	 1A 12 1x y2 1A 12x 1A 12y
5–6  ■  Intervals    Express the interval in terms of inequalities, 
and then graph the interval.
	 5.	 32,  62 	
  6.	 1`,  44
7–8  ■  Intervals    Express the inequality in interval notation, and 
then graph the corresponding interval.
	 7.	 x  5	
  8.	 1  x  5
■  exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
9–16  ■  Evaluate    Evaluate the expression.
	 9.	 @  1 0 4 0 @	
10. 5  @  10  0  4 0 @
11.	 21/281/2 	
12.	 23  32
	13.	 2161/3	
14.	 642/3
	15.	 !242
!2 	
16.	 !2 !50
17–20  ■  Radicals and Exponents    Simplify the expression.
	17.	 (a)	 1a22 31a3b2 21b32 4	
(b)	 13xy22 3A2
3 x1yB
2
	18.	 (a)	
x212x2 4
x3
	
(b)	 a r2s4/3
r1/3s
b
6
	19.	 (a)	 "
3 1x3y2 2y4	
(b)	 "x2y4
	20.	 (a)	 8r1/2s3
2r2s4 	
(b)	 a ab2c3
2a3b4 b
2
21–24  ■  Scientific Notation    These exercises involve scientific 
notation.
21.	 Write the number 78,250,000,000 in scientiﬁc notation.
22.	 Write the number 2.08  108 in ordinary decimal notation.
23.	 If a  0.00000293, b  1.582  1014, and c  2.8064  1012, 
use a calculator to approximate the number ab/c.
24.	 If your heart beats 80 times per minute and you live to be  
90 years old, estimate the number of times your heart beats 
during your lifetime. State your answer in scientiﬁc ­notation.
25–38  ■  Factoring    Factor the expression completely.
	25.	 x2 5x 14	
26.	 12x2 10x 8
	27.	 x4  2x2  1	
28.	 12x2y4  3xy 5  9x3y2
	29.	 16 4t2	
30.	 2y6  32y2
	31.	 x6  1	
32.	 16a4b2 2ab5
	33.	 3x1/2 2x1/2 5x3/2	
34.	 7x3/2 8x1/2 x1/2
	35.	 4x3  8x2  3x  6	
36.	 „3 3„2 4„ 12
37.	 1a b2 2 31a b2 10	
	38.	 1x 22 2 71x 22 6
39–50  ■  Operations with Algebraic Expressions    Perform the 
indicated operations and simplify.
39.	 12y 7212y 72
40.	 11 x212 x2 13 x2 13 x2
41.	 x21x 22 x1x 22 2
42.	 !x 1 !x 12 12!x 12
43.	 x2 2x 3
x2 8x 16 #  3x 12
x 1
44.	 x2 2x 15
x2 6x 5 4 x2 x 12
x2 1
45.	 2
x 
1
x 2 
3
1x 22 2	
46.	
1
x 2 
1
x2 4 
2
x2 x 2
47.	
1
x 1
2
x 2 	
48.	
1
x 
1
x 1
1
x 
1
x 1
49.	
!6
!3 !2 1rationalize the denominator2
50.	 "x h !x
h
 1rationalize the numerator2
51–54  ■  Rationalizing    Rationalize the denominator and 
simplify.
51.	
1
!11	
52.	
3
!6
53.	
10
!2 1	
54.	 !x 2
!x 2
55–70  ■  Solving Equations    Find all real solutions of the 
equation.
55.	 7x  6  4x  9	
56.	 8  2x  14  x
57.	 x 1
x 1 
3x
3x 6	
58.	 1x 22 2 1x 42 2
59.	 x 2  9x  14  0	
60.	 x2  24x  144  0
61.	 2x2  x  1	
62.	 3x2  5x  2  0
63.	 4x3  25x  0	
64.	 x3  2x2  5x  10  0
65.	 3x2  4x  1  0	
66.	 1
x 
2
x 1 3
67.	
x
x 2 
1
x 2 
8
x2 4
68.	 x4  8x2  9  0
69.	 0  x 7 0 4	
70.	 0  2x 5 0 9
71–74  ■  Complex Numbers    Evaluate the expression and write 
in the form a  bi.
71.	 (a)	 12 3i2 11 4i2 	
(b)	 12 i2 13 2i2
72.	 (a)	 13 6i2 16 4i2 	
(b)	 4i12 1
2i2
73.	 (a)	 4 2i
2 i 	
(b)	 11 !1211 !12
74.	 (a)	 8 3i
4 3i	
(b)	 !10 # !40
75–80  ■  Real and Complex Solutions    Find all real and complex 
solutions of the equation.
75.	 x2 16 0	
76.	 x2 12
77.	 x2 6x 10 0	
78.	 2x2 3x 2 0
79.	 x4 256 0	
80.	 x3 2x2 4x 8 0
81.	 Mixtures    The owner of a store sells raisins for $3.20 per 
pound and nuts for $2.40 per pound. He decides to mix the 
raisins and nuts and sell 50 lb of the mixture for $2.72 per 
pound. What quantities of raisins and nuts should he use?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1  ■  Review  135
	 82.	 Distance and Time    Anthony leaves Kingstown at 2:00 p.m. 
and drives to Queensville, 160 mi distant, at 45 mi/h. At  
2:15 p.m. Helen leaves Queensville and drives to Kingstown 
at 40 mi/h. At what time do they pass each other on the road?
	 83.	 Distance and Time    A woman cycles 8 mi/h faster than she 
runs. Every morning she cycles 4 mi and runs 2 1
2 mi, for a 
total of one hour of exercise. How fast does she run?
	 84.	 Geometry    The hypotenuse of a right triangle has length  
20 cm. The sum of the lengths of the other two sides is  
28 cm. Find the lengths of the other two sides of the triangle.
	 85.	 Doing the Job    Abbie paints twice as fast as Beth and three 
times as fast as Cathie. If it takes them 60 min to paint a liv-
ing room with all three working together, how long would it 
take Abbie if she worked alone?
	 86.	 Dimensions of a Garden    A homeowner wishes to fence in 
three adjoining garden plots, one for each of her children, as 
shown in the ﬁgure. If each plot is to be 80 ft2 in area and 
she has 88 ft of fencing material at hand, what dimensions 
should each plot have?
87–94  ■  Inequalities    Solve the inequality. Express the solution 
using interval notation and graph the solution set on the real num-
ber line.
	 87.	 3x  2  11	
88.	 1  2x  5  3
	 89.	 x 2  4x  12  0	
90.	 x 2  1
	 91.	 x 4
x2 4 0	
92.	
5
x3 x2 4x 4 0
	 93.	 0  x 5 0 3	
94.	 0  x 4 0 0.02
95–96  ■  Coordinate Plane    Two points P and Q are given.  
(a) Plot P and Q on a coordinate plane. (b) Find the distance 
from P to Q. (c) Find the midpoint of the segment PQ. (d) Sketch 
the line determined by P and Q, and ﬁnd its equation in slope-
intercept form. (e) Sketch the circle that passes through Q and has 
center P, and ﬁnd the equation of this circle.
	 95.	 P12,  02, Q15,  122 	
96.	 P17,  12, Q12,  112
97–98  ■  Graphing Regions    Sketch the region given by the set.
	 97.	 51x, y2  0  4 x 4 and 2 y 26
	 98.	 51x, y2  0  x 4 or y 26
	 99.	 Distance Formula    Which of the points A14,  42  or B15,  32  
is closer to the point C11,  32 ?
100–102  ■  Circles    In these exercises we find equations of circles.
	100.	 Find an equation of the circle that has center 12,  52  and 
radius !2.
	101.	 Find an equation of the circle that has center 15,  12  and 
passes through the origin.
	102.	 Find an equation of the circle that contains the points 
P12,  32  and Q11,  82  and has the midpoint of the segment 
PQ as its center.
103–106  ■  Circles    (a) Complete the square to determine 
whether the equation represents a circle or a point or has no 
graph. (b) If the equation is that of a circle, find its center and 
radius, and sketch its graph.
	103.	 x2  y2  2x  6y  9  0
	104.	 2x2  2y2  2x  8y  1
2
	105.	 x2  y2  72  12x
	106.	 x2  y2  6x  10y  34  0
107–112  ■  Graphing Equations    Sketch the graph of the equa-
tion by making a table and plotting points.
	107.	 y  2  3x	
108.	 2x  y  1  0
	109.	 y  16  x 2	
110.	 8x  y2  0
	111.	 x !y	
112.	 y "1 x2
113–118  ■  Symmetry and Intercepts    (a) Test the equation  
for symmetry with respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, and the  
origin. (b) Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of the 
equation.
	113.	 y 9 x2	
114.	 6x y2 36
	115.	 x2 1y 12 2 1	
116.	 9x2 16y2 144
	117.	 x2 4xy y2 1	
118.	 x3 xy2 5
119–122  ■  Graphing Equations    (a) Use a graphing device to 
graph the equation in an appropriate viewing rectangle. (b) Use 
the graph to find the x- and y-intercepts.
	119.	 y  x2  6x	
120.	 y !5 x
121.	 y  x3  4x2  5x	
122.	 x2
4 y2 1
123–130  ■  Lines    A description of a line is given. (a) Find an 
equation for the line in slope-intercept form. (b) Find an equation 
for the line in general form. (c) Graph the line.
123.	 The line that has slope 2 and y-intercept 6
124.	 The line that has slope 1
2 and passes through the point  
16,  32
125.	 The line that passes through the points 11,  62  and 
12,  42
126.	 The line that has x-intercept 4 and y-intercept 12
127.	 The vertical line that passes through the point 13,  22
128.	 The horizontal line with y-intercept 5
129.	 The line that passes through the origin and is parallel to the 
line containing 12,  42  and 14,  42
130.	 The line that passes through the point 11,  72  and is perpen-
dicular to the line x 3y 16 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Fundamentals
131.	 Stretching a Spring    Hooke’s Law states that if a weight „ 
is attached to a hanging spring, then the stretched length s 
of the spring is linearly related to „. For a particular spring 
we have
s 0.3„ 2.5
	
	 where s is measured in inches and „ in pounds.
(a)	 What do the slope and s-intercept in this equation  
represent?
(b)	 How long is the spring when a 5-lb weight is  
attached?
132.	 Annual Salary    Margarita is hired by an accounting ﬁrm at 
a salary of $60,000 per year. Three years later her annual 
salary has increased to $70,500. Assume that her salary 
increases linearly.
(a)	 Find an equation that relates her annual salary S  
and the number of years t that she has worked for the 
ﬁrm.
(b)	 What do the slope and S-intercept of her salary equation 
represent?
(c)	 What will her salary be after 12 years with the ﬁrm?
133–138  ■  Equations and Inequalities    Graphs of the equations 
y x2 4x and y x 6 are given. Use the graphs to solve 
the equation or inequality.
y
x
0
1
2
y=x+6
y=≈-4x
133.	 x2 4x x 6	
134.	 x2 4x 0
135.	 x2 4x x 6	
136.	 x2 4x x 6
137.	 x2 4x 0	
138.	 x2 4x 0
139–142  ■  Equations    Solve the equation graphically.
139.	 x 2  4x  2x  7	
140.	 !x 4 x 2 5
141.	 x 4  9x 2  x  9	
142.	 * 0  x 3 0 5  * 2
143–146  ■  Inequalities    Solve the inequality graphically.
143.	 4x  3  x 2	
144.	 x 3  4x 2  5x  2
145.	 x 4 4x 2 1
2 x 1	
146.	 0  x 2 16 0 10 0
147–148  ■  Circles and Lines    Find equations for the circle and 
the line in the ﬁgure.
147. 
y
x
0
(_5, 12)
	 148.	
(8, 1)
y
x
0
5
5
149.	 Variation    Suppose that M varies directly as z, and  
M  120 when z 15. Write an equation that expresses 
this variation.
150.	 Variation    Suppose that z is inversely proportional to y, and 
that z 12 when y  16. Write an equation that expresses 
z in terms of y.
151.	 Light Intensity    The intensity of illumination I from a light 
varies inversely as the square of the distance d from the 
light.
(a)	 Write this statement as an equation.
(b)	 Determine the constant of proportionality if it is known 
that a lamp has an intensity of 1000 candles at a dis-
tance of 8 m.
(c)	 What is the intensity of this lamp at a distance of 20 m?
152.	 Vibrating String    The frequency of a vibrating string under 
constant tension is inversely proportional to its length. If a 
violin string 12 inches long vibrates 440 times per second, 
to what length must it be shortened to vibrate 660 times per  
second?
153.	 Terminal Velocity    The terminal velocity of a parachutist is 
directly proportional to the square root of his weight. A 
160-lb parachutist attains a terminal velocity of 9 mi/h. 
What is the terminal velocity for a parachutist weighing  
240 lb?
154.	 Range of a Projectile    The maximum range of a projectile 
is directly proportional to the square of its velocity. A base-
ball pitcher throws a ball at 60 mi/h, with a maximum range 
of 242 ft. What is his maximum range if he throws the ball 
at 70 mi/h?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

137
	 1.	 (a)	 Graph the intervals 15,  34  and 12,  ` 2  on the real number line.
(b)	 Express the inequalities x  3 and 1  x  4 in interval notation.
(c)	 Find the distance between 7 and 9 on the real number line.
	 2.	 Evaluate each expression.
(a)	 132 4	
(b)  34	
(c)  34	
(d)  523
521	
(e)  a 2
3 b
2
	
(f)  163/4
	 3.	 Write each number in scientiﬁc notation.
(a)	 186,000,000,000	
(b)	 0.0000003965
	 4.	 Simplify each expression. Write your ﬁnal answer without negative exponents.
(a)	 !200 !32	
(b)  13a3b32 14ab22 2	
(c)  a 3x3/2y3
x2y1/2 b
2
(d)	 x2 3x 2
x2 x 2 	
(e) 
x2
x2 4 x 1
x 2	
(f) 
y
x x
y
1
y 1
x
	 5.	 Rationalize the denominator and simplify:   
!10
!5 2
	 6.	 Perform the indicated operations and simplify.
(a)	 31x 62 412x 52 	
(b)	 1x 32 14x 52 	
(c)	 1 !a !b21 !a !b2
(d)	 12x 32 2	
(e)	 1x 22 3
	 7.	 Factor each expression completely.
(a)	 4x2  25	
(b)	 2x2  5x  12	
(c)	 x3  3x2  4x  12
(d)	 x4  27x	
(e)	 3x3/2  9x1/2  6x1/2	
(f)	 x3y  4xy
	 8.	 Find all real solutions.
(a)	 x 5 14 1
2 x	
(b)	
2x
x 1 2x 1
x
	
(c)	 x2 x  12  0
(d)	 2x2  4x  1  0	
(e)	 #3 "x 5 2	
(f)	 x4  3x2  2  0
(g)	 3 0 x 4 0 10
	 9.	 Perform the indicated operations, and write the result in the form a  bi.
(a)	 13 2i2 14 3i2 	
(b)	 13 2i2 14 3i2
(c)	 13 2i2 14 3i2 	
(d)	 3 2i
4 3i
(e)	 i 48	
(f)	 1 !2 !22 1 !8 !22
	10.	 Find all real and complex solutions of the equation 2x2 4x 3 0. 
	11.	 Mary drove from Amity to Belleville at a speed of 50 mi/h. On the way back, she  
drove at 60 mi/h. The total trip took 4 2
5 h of driving time. Find the distance between these 
two cities.
	12.	 A rectangular parcel of land is 70 ft longer than it is wide. Each diagonal between opposite 
corners is 130 ft. What are the dimensions of the parcel?
	13.	 Solve each inequality. Write the answer using interval notation, and sketch the solution on 
the real number line.
(a)	 4  5  3x  17	
(b)  x1x 12 1x 22 0
(c)	 0 x 4 0 3	
(d)  2x 3
x 1 1
CHAPTER 1
TEST
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138 
CHAPTER 1  ■  Test
14.	 A bottle of medicine is to be stored at a temperature between 5C and 10C. What range 
does this correspond to on the Fahrenheit scale?    [Note: Fahrenheit (F) and Celsius (C) 
temperatures satisfy the relation C 5
91F 322 .]
15.	 For what values of x is the expression "6x x2 deﬁned as a real number?
16.	 (a)  Plot the points P10,  32 , Q13,  02 , and R16,  32  in the coordinate plane. Where must the 
point S be located so that PQRS is a square?
(b)	 Find the area of PQRS.
17.	 (a)	 Sketch the graph of y  x2  4.
(b)	 Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph.
(c)	 Is the graph symmetric about the x-axis, the y-axis, or the origin?
18.	 Let P13, 12  and Q15, 62  be two points in the coordinate plane.
(a)	 Plot P and Q in the coordinate plane.
(b)	 Find the distance between P and Q.
(c)	 Find the midpoint of the segment PQ.
(d)	 Find the slope of the line that contains P and Q.
(e)	 Find the perpendicular bisector of the line that contains P and Q.
(f)	 Find an equation for the circle for which the segment PQ is a diameter.
19.	 Find the center and radius of each circle, and sketch its graph.
(a)	 x2  y2  25	
(b)  1x 22 2 1 y 12 2 9	
(c)  x2  6x  y2  2y  6  0
20.	 Write the linear equation 2x  3y  15 in slope-intercept form, and sketch its graph. What 
are the slope and y-intercept?
21.	 Find an equation for the line with the given property.
(a)	 It passes through the point 13,  62  and is parallel to the line 3x  y  10  0.
(b)	 It has x-intercept 6 and y-intercept 4.
22.	 A geologist measures the temperature T (in C) of the soil at various depths below the sur-
face and ﬁnds that at a depth of x cm, the temperature is given by T  0.08x  4.
(a)	 What is the temperature at a depth of 1 m (100 cm)?
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the linear equation.
(c)	 What do the slope, the x-intercept, and T-intercept of the graph represent?
23.	 Solve the equation and the inequality graphically.
(a)	 x3  9x  1  0	
(b)  x2  1  0 x 1 0
24.	 The maximum weight M that can be supported by a beam is jointly proportional to its 
width „ and the square of its height h and inversely proportional to its length L.
(a)	 Write an equation that expresses this proportionality.
(b)	 Determine the constant of proportionality if a beam 4 in. wide, 6 in. high, and 12 ft 
long can support a weight of 4800 lb.
(c)	 If a 10-ft beam made of the same material is 3 in. wide and 10 in. high, what is the 
maximum weight it can support?
L
„
h
If you had difﬁculty with any of these problems, you may wish to review the section of this chapter indicated below.
Problem	
Section	
Problem	
Section
1	
Section 1.1	
13, 14, 15	
Section 1.8
2, 3, 4(a), 4(b), 4(c)	
Section 1.2	
23	
Section 1.11
4(d), 4(e), 4(f), 5	
Section 1.4	
16, 17, 18(a), 18(b)	
Section 1.9
6, 7	
Section 1.3	
18(c), 18(d)	
Section 1.10
8	
Section 1.5	
18(e), 18(f), 19	
Section 1.9
9, 10	
Section 1.6	
20, 21, 22	
Section 1.10
11, 12	
Section 1.7	
24	
Section 1.12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

139
A model is a representation of an object or process. For example, a toy Ferrari is a 
model of the actual car; a road map is a model of the streets in a city. A mathematical 
model is a mathematical representation (usually an equation) of an object or process. 
Once a mathematical model has been made, it can be used to obtain useful information 
or make predictions about the thing being modeled. The process is described in the 
diagram in the margin. In these Focus on Modeling sections we explore different ways 
in which mathematics is used to model real-world phenomena.
■  The Line That Best Fits the Data
In Section 1.10 we used linear equations to model relationships between varying 
quantities. In practice, such relationships are discovered by collecting data. But real-
world data seldom fall into a precise line. The scatter plot in Figure 1(a) shows the 
result of a study on childhood obesity. The graph plots the body mass index (BMI) 
versus the number of hours of television watched per day for 25 adolescent subjects. 
Of course, we would not expect the data to be exactly linear as in Figure 1(b). But 
there is a linear trend indicated by the blue line in Figure 1(a): The more hours a 
subject watches TV, the higher the BMI. In this section we learn how to find the line 
that best fits the data.
h 
BMI 
0 
10 
20 
30 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
h 
BMI 
0 
10 
20 
30 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Figure 1
	
(a) Line of best fit	
(b) Line fits data exactly
Table 1 gives the nationwide infant mortality rate for the period from 1950 to 2000. 
The rate is the number of infants who die before reaching their first birthday, out of 
every 1000 live births.
x 
y 
0 
10 
20 
30 
10 
20 30 
40 50 
Figure 2  U.S. infant mortality rate
Table 1
U.S. Infant Mortality
Year
Rate
1950
29.2
1960
26.0
1970
20.0
1980
12.6
1990
  9.2
2000
  6.9
The scatter plot in Figure 2 shows that the data lie roughly on a straight line. We can 
try to fit a line visually to approximate the data points, but since the data aren’t exactly 
Make a model
Use the model
Model
Real
world
Fitting Lines to Data
	
FOCUS ON MODELING
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140 
Focus on Modeling
linear, there are many lines that might seem to work. Figure 3 shows two attempts at 
“eyeballing” a line to fit the data.
x 
y 
0 
10 
20 
30 
10 
20 30 
40 50 
Figure 3  Visual attempts to fit  
line to data
Of all the lines that run through these data points, there is one that “best” fits the 
data, in the sense that it provides the most accurate linear model for the data. We now 
describe how to find this line.
It seems reasonable that the line of best fit is the line that is as close as possible to 
all the data points. This is the line for which the sum of the vertical distances from the 
data points to the line is as small as possible (see Figure 4). For technical reasons it is 
better to use the line where the sum of the squares of these distances is smallest. This 
is called the regression line. The formula for the regression line is found by using cal-
culus, but fortunately, the formula is programmed into most graphing calculators. In 
Example 1 we see how to use a TI-83 calculator to find the regression line for the infant 
mortality data described above. (The process for other calculators is similar.)
Example 1  ■  Regression Line for U.S. Infant Mortality Rates
(a)	 Find the regression line for the infant mortality data in Table 1.
(b)	 Graph the regression line on a scatter plot of the data.
(c)	 Use the regression line to estimate the infant mortality rates in 1995 and 2006.
Solution   
(a)  To find the regression line using a TI-83 calculator, we must first enter the data 
into the lists L1 and L2, which are accessed by pressing the stat  key and select-
ing Edit. Figure 5 shows the calculator screen after the data have been entered. 
(Note that we are letting x  0 correspond to the year 1950 so that x  50 corre-
sponds to 2000. This makes the equations easier to work with.) We then press the 
stat  key again and select Calc, then 4:LinReg(ax+b), which ­provides the 
output shown in Figure 6(a). This tells us that the regression line is
y 0.48x 29.4
	
Here x represents the number of years since 1950, and y represents the corre-
sponding infant mortality rate.
(b)	 The scatter plot and the regression line have been plotted on a graphing calculator 
screen in Figure 6(b).
x
y
0
Figure 4  Distance from the data 
points to the line
L1
0
29.2
10
26
20
20
30
12.6
40
9.2
50
6.9
-------
-------
L2
L2(7)=
L3
1
Figure 5  Entering the data
y=ax+b
a=-.4837142857
b=29.40952381
LinReg
30 
0
55
(b)
(a)
Scatter plot and regression line
Output of the LinReg 
command
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Lines to Data  141
(c)	 The year 1995 is 45 years after 1950, so substituting 45 for x, we find that  
y 0.481452 29.4 7.8. So the infant mortality rate in 1995 was about 7.8. 
Similarly, substituting 56 for x, we find that the infant mortality rate predicted for 
2006 was about 0.481562 29.4 2.5.
■
An Internet search shows that the actual infant mortality rate was 7.6 in 1995 and 6.4 
in 2006. So the regression line is fairly accurate for 1995 (the actual rate was slightly 
lower than the predicted rate), but it is considerably off for 2006 (the actual rate was 
more than twice the predicted rate). The reason is that infant mortality in the United 
States stopped declining and actually started rising in 2002, for the first time in more 
than a century. This shows that we have to be very careful about extrapolating linear 
models outside the domain over which the data are spread.
■  Examples of Regression Analysis
Since the modern Olympic Games began in 1896, achievements in track and field 
events have been improving steadily. One example in which the winning records have 
shown an upward linear trend is the pole vault. Pole vaulting began in the northern 
Netherlands as a practical activity: When traveling from village to village, people 
would vault across the many canals that crisscrossed the area to avoid having to go out 
of their way to find a bridge. Households maintained a supply of wooden poles of 
lengths appropriate for each member of the family. Pole vaulting for height rather than 
distance became a collegiate track and field event in the mid-1800s and was one of the 
events in the first modern Olympics. In the next example we find a linear model for the 
gold-medal-winning records in the men’s Olympic pole vault.
Example 2  ■  Regression Line for Olympic Pole Vault Records
Table 2 gives the men’s Olympic pole vault records up to 2008.
(a)	 Find the regression line for the data.
(b)	 Make a scatter plot of the data, and graph the regression line. Does the regression 
line appear to be a suitable model for the data?
(c)	 What does the slope of the regression line represent?
(d)	 Use the model to predict the winning pole vault height for the 2012 Olympics.
Renaud Lavillenie, 2012 
Olympic gold medal winner, 
men’s pole vault
Leo Mason sports photos/Alamy
Table 2
Men’s Olympic Pole Vault Records
Year
x
Gold medalist
Height (m)
Year
x
Gold medalist
Height (m)
1896
4
William Hoyt, USA
3.30
1960
60
Don Bragg, USA
4.70
1900
0
Irving Baxter, USA
3.30
1964
64
Fred Hansen, USA
5.10
1904
4
Charles Dvorak, USA
3.50
1968
68
Bob Seagren, USA
5.40
1906
6
Fernand Gonder, France
3.50
1972
72
W. Nordwig, E. Germany
5.64
1908
8
A. Gilbert, E. Cook, USA
3.71
1976
76
Tadeusz Slusarski, Poland
5.64
1912
12
Harry Babcock, USA
3.95
1980
80
W. Kozakiewicz, Poland
5.78
1920
20
Frank Foss, USA
4.09
1984
84
Pierre Quinon, France
5.75
1924
24
Lee Barnes, USA
3.95
1988
88
Sergei Bubka, USSR
5.90
1928
28
Sabin Can, USA
4.20
1992
92
M. Tarassob, Unified Team
5.87
1932
32
William Miller, USA
4.31
1996
96
Jean Jaffione, France
5.92
1936
36
Earle Meadows, USA
4.35
2000
100
Nick Hysong, USA
5.90
1948
48
Guinn Smith, USA
4.30
2004
104
Timothy Mack, USA
5.95
1952
52
Robert Richards, USA
4.55
2008
108
Steven Hooker, Australia
5.96
1956
56
Robert Richards, USA
4.56
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142 
Focus on Modeling
SOLUTION
(a)	 Let x  year  1900, so 1896 corresponds to x  4, 1900 to x  0, and so on.  
Using a calculator, we find the following regression line:
y 0.0260x 3.42
(b)	 The scatter plot and the regression line are shown in Figure 7. The regression line  
appears to be a good model for the data.
(c)	 The slope is the average rate of increase in the pole vault record per year. So on  
average, the pole vault record increased by 0.0266 m/year.
y
4
2
20
40
60
80
100
0
x
Height
(m)
Years since 1900
6
Figure 7  Scatter plot and regres­sion line for pole vault 
data
(d)	 The year 2012 corresponds to x  112 in our model. The model gives
 y 0.026011122 3.42
 6.33
	
So the model predicts that in 2012 the winning pole vault would be 6.33 m.
■
At the 2012 Olympics in London, England, the men’s Olympic gold medal in the 
pole vault was won by Renaud Lavillenie of France, with a vault of 5.97 m. Although 
this height set an Olympic record, it was considerably lower than the 6.33 m predicted 
by the model of Example 2. In Problem 10 we find a regression line for the pole vault 
data from 1972 to 2008. Do the problem to see whether this restricted set of more recent 
data provides a better predictor for the 2012 record.
Is a linear model really appropriate for the data of Example 2? In subsequent Focus 
on Modeling sections we study regression models that use other types of functions, and 
we learn how to choose the best model for a given set of data.
In the next example we see how linear regression is used in medical research to in-
vestigate potential causes of diseases such as cancer.
Example 3  ■  Regression Line for Links Between  
Asbestos and Cancer
When laboratory rats are exposed to asbestos fibers, some of the rats develop lung tu-
mors. Table 3 lists the results of several experiments by different scientists.
(a)	 Find the regression line for the data.
(b)	 Make a scatter plot and graph the regression line. Does the regression line appear 
to be a suitable model for the data?
(c)	 What does the y-intercept of the regression line represent?
y=ax+b
a=.0265652857
b=3.400989881
LinReg
Output of the LinReg
function on the TI-83
Table 3
Asbestos–Tumor Data
Asbestos 
exposure 
(fibers/mL)
Percent that 
develop 
lung tumors
    50
  2
  400
  6
  500
  5
  900
10
1100
26
1600
42
1800
37
2000
28
3000
50
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Lines to Data  143
SOLUTION   
(a)  Using a calculator, we find the following regression line (see Figure 8(a)):
y 0.0177x 0.5405
(b)  The scatter plot and regression line are graphed in Figure 8(b). The regression 
line appears to be a reasonable model for the data.
y=ax+b
a=.0177212141
b=.5404689256
LinReg
55
3100
(b)
(a)
Scatter plot and regression line
Output of the LinReg command
0
Figure 8  Linear regression for the 
asbestos–tumor data
(c)	 The y-intercept is the percentage of rats that develop tumors when no asbestos 
fibers are present. In other words, this is the percentage that normally develop 
lung tumors (for reasons other than asbestos).
■
■  How Good Is the Fit? The Correlation Coefficient
For any given set of two-variable data it is always possible to find a regression line, even 
if the data points do not tend to lie on a line and even if the variables don’t seem to be re-
lated at all. Look at the three scatter plots in Figure 9. In the first scatter plot, the data points 
lie close to a line. In the second plot, there is still a linear trend but the points are more 
scattered. In the third plot there doesn’t seem to be any trend at all, linear or otherwise.
A graphing calculator can give us a regression line for each of these scatter plots. 
But how well do these lines represent or “fit” the data? To answer this question, stat-
isticians have invented the correlation coefficient, usually denoted r. The correlation 
coefficient is a number between 1 and 1 that measures how closely the data follow 
the regression line—or, in other words, how strongly the variables are correlated. 
Many graphing calculators give the value of r when they compute a regression line. 
If r is close to 1 or 1, then the variables are strongly correlated—that is, the scatter 
plot follows the regression line closely. If r is close to 0, then the variables are weakly 
correlated or not correlated at all. (The sign of r depends on the slope of the regres-
sion line.) The correlation coefficients of the scatter plots in Figure 9 are indicated on 
the graphs. For the first plot, r is close to 1 because the data are very close to linear. 
The second plot also has a relatively large r, but it is not as large as the first, because 
the data, while fairly linear, are more diffuse. The third plot has an r close to 0, since 
there is virtually no linear trend in the data.
There are no hard and fast rules for deciding what values of r are sufficient for deciding 
that a linear correlation is “significant.” The correlation coefficient is only a rough guide 
in helping us decide how much faith to put into a given regression line. In Example 1 the 
correlation coefficient is 0.99, indicating a very high level of correlation, so we can 
safely say that the drop in infant mortality rates from 1950 to 2000 was strongly linear. 
(The value of r is negative, since infant mortality trended down over this period.) In  
Example 3 the correlation coefficient is 0.92, which also indicates a strong correlation 
between the variables. So exposure to asbestos is clearly associated with the growth of 
lung tumors in rats. Does this mean that asbestos causes lung cancer?
If two variables are correlated, it does not necessarily mean that a change in one 
variable causes a change in the other. For example, the mathematician John Allen 
Paulos points out that shoe size is strongly correlated to mathematics scores among 
schoolchildren. Does this mean that big feet cause high math scores? Certainly not—
Eric and David Hosking/Terra/Corbis
y
x
y
x
r=0.98
y
x
r=0.84
r=0.09
Figure 9
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144 
Focus on Modeling
both shoe size and math skills increase independently as children get older. So it is 
important not to jump to conclusions: Correlation and causation are not the same thing. 
You can explore this topic further in Discovery Project: Correlation and Causation at  
www.stewartmath.com. Correlation is a useful tool in bringing important cause-and-
effect relationships to light; but to prove causation, we must explain the mechanism by 
which one variable affects the other. For example, the link between smoking and lung 
cancer was observed as a correlation long before science found the mechanism through 
which smoking causes lung cancer.
Problems
	 1.	 Femur Length and Height    Anthropologists use a linear model that relates femur length to 
height. The model allows an anthropologist to determine the height of an individual when 
only a partial skeleton (including the femur) is found. In this problem we find the model by 
analyzing the data on femur length and height for the eight males given in the table.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find and graph a linear function that models the data.
(c)	 An anthropologist finds a femur of length 58 cm. How tall was the person?
Femur length 
(cm)
Height 
(cm)
50.1
178.5
48.3
173.6
45.2
164.8
44.7
163.7
44.5
168.3
42.7
165.0
39.5
155.4
38.0
155.8
	 2.	 Demand for Soft Drinks    A convenience store manager notices that sales of soft drinks 
are higher on hotter days, so he assembles the data in the table.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find and graph a linear function that models the data.
(c)	 Use the model to predict soft drink sales if the temperature is 95F.
High temperature (°F)
Number of cans sold
55
340
58
335
64
410
68
460
70
450
75
610
80
735
84
780
	 3.	 Tree Diameter and Age    To estimate ages of trees, forest rangers use a linear model 
that relates tree diameter to age. The model is useful because tree diameter is much easier 
to measure than tree age (which requires special tools for extracting a representative cross 
section of the tree and counting the rings). To find the model, use the data in the table, 
which were collected for a certain variety of oaks.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find and graph a linear function that models the data.
(c)	 Use the model to estimate the age of an oak whose diameter is 18 in.
Femur
Diameter (in.)
Age (years)
  2.5
15
  4.0
24
  6.0
32
  8.0
56
  9.0
49
  9.5
76
12.5
90
15.5
89
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Lines to Data  145
	 4.	 Carbon Dioxide Levels    The Mauna Loa Observatory, located on the island of Hawaii, 
has been monitoring carbon dioxide (CO2) levels in the atmosphere since 1958. The table 
lists the average annual CO2 levels measured in parts per million (ppm) from 1990 to 2012.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find and graph the regression line. 
(c)	 Use the linear model in part (b) to estimate the CO2 level in the atmosphere in 2011. 
Compare your answer with the actual CO2 level of 391.6 that was measured in 2011.
Year
CO2 level (ppm)
1990
354.4
1992
356.4
1994
358.8
1996
362.6
1998
366.7
2000
369.5
2002
373.2
2004
377.5
2006
381.9
2008
385.6
2010
389.9
2012
393.8
Source: Mauna Loa Observatory
	 5.	 Temperature and Chirping Crickets    Biologists have observed that the chirping rate of 
crickets of a certain species appears to be related to temperature. The table in the margin 
shows the chirping rates for various temperatures.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find and graph the regression line.
(c)	 Use the linear model in part (b) to estimate the chirping rate at 100F.
	 6.	 Extent of Arctic Sea Ice    The National Snow and Ice Data Center monitors the amount 
of ice in the Arctic year round. The table below gives approximate values for the sea ice 
extent in millions of square kilometers from 1986 to 2012, in two-year intervals.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find and graph the regression line. 
(c)	 Use the linear model in part (b) to estimate the ice extent in the year 2016.
Year
Ice extent  
(million km2)
Year
Ice extent  
(million km2)
1986
7.5
2000
6.3
1988
7.5
2002
6.0
1990
6.2
2004
6.0
1992
7.5
2006
5.9
1994
7.2
2008
4.7
1996
7.9
2010
4.9
1998
6.6
2012
3.6
Source: National Snow and Ice Data Center
	 7.	 Mosquito Prevalence    The table in the margin lists the relative abundance of mosqui-
toes (as measured by the mosquito positive rate) versus the flow rate (measured as a per-
centage of maximum flow) of canal networks in Saga City, Japan.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find and graph the regression line.
(c)	 Use the linear model in part (b) to estimate the mosquito positive rate if the canal flow 
is 70% of maximum.
Temperature 
(°F)
Chirping rate 
(chirps/min)
50
  20
55
  46
60
  79
65
  91
70
113
75
140
80
173
85
198
90
211
Flow rate  
(%)
Mosquito positive 
rate (%)
    0
22
  10
16
  40
12
  60
11
  90
  6
100
  2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146 
Focus on Modeling
	 8.	 Noise and Intelligibility    Audiologists study the intelligibility of spoken sentences un-
der different noise levels. Intelligibility, the MRT score, is measured as the percent of a 
spoken sentence that the listener can decipher at a certain noise level in decibels (dB). The 
table shows the results of one such test.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find and graph the regression line.
(c)	 Find the correlation coefficient. Is a linear model appropriate?
(d)	 Use the linear model in part (b) to estimate the intelligibility of a sentence at a 94-dB 
noise level.
	 9.	 Life Expectancy    The average life expectancy in the United States has been rising 
steadily over the past few decades, as shown in the table.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find and graph the regression line.
(c)	 Use the linear model you found in part (b) to predict the life expectancy in the year  
2006.
(d)	 Search the Internet or your campus library to find the actual 2006 average life expec-
tancy. Compare to your answer in part (c).
	10.	 Olympic Pole Vault    The graph in Figure 7 indicates that in recent years the winning 
Olympic men’s pole vault height has fallen below the value predicted by the regression line 
in Example 2. This might have occurred because when the pole vault was a new event, 
there was much room for improvement in vaulters’ performances, whereas now even the 
best training can produce only incremental advances. Let’s see whether concentrating on 
more recent results gives a better predictor of future records.
(a)	 Use the data in Table 2 (page 141) to complete the table of winning pole vault heights 
shown in the margin. (Note that we are using x  0 to correspond to the year 1972, 
where this restricted data set ­begins.)
(b)	 Find the regression line for the data in part (a).
(c)	 Plot the data and the regression line on the same axes. Does the regression line seem to 
provide a good model for the data?
(d)	 What does the regression line predict as the winning pole vault height for the 2012 
Olympics? Compare this predicted value to the actual 2012 winning height of 5.97 m, 
as described on page 141. Has this new regression line provided a better prediction 
than the line in Example 2?
	11.	 Shoe Size and Height    Do you think that shoe size and height are correlated? Find out 
by surveying the shoe sizes and heights of people in your class. (Of course, the data for 
men and women should be separate.) Find the correlation coefficient.
	12.	 Demand for Candy Bars    In this problem you will determine a linear demand equation 
that describes the demand for candy bars in your class. Survey your classmates to deter-
mine what price they would be willing to pay for a candy bar. Your survey form might look 
like the sample to the left.
(a)	 Make a table of the number of respondents who answered “yes” at each price level.
(b)	 Make a scatter plot of your data.
(c)	 Find and graph the regression line y mp b, which gives the number of responents 
y who would buy a candy bar if the price were p cents. This is the demand equation. 
Why is the slope m negative?
(d)	 What is the p-intercept of the demand equation? What does this intercept tell you 
about pricing candy bars?
Noise level  
(dB)
MRT score  
(%)
  80
99
  84
91
  88
84
  92
70
  96
47
100
23
104
11
Year
Life expectancy
1920
54.1
1930
59.7
1940
62.9
1950
68.2
1960
69.7
1970
70.8
1980
73.7
1990
75.4
2000
76.9
Year
x
Height (m)
1972
0
5.64
1976
4
1980
8
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
2008
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

﻿  ■ 
 ﻿ 147
A function is a rule that describes how one quantity depends on another. 
Many real-world situations follow precise rules, so they can be modeled 
by functions. For example, there is a rule that relates the distance a 
skydiver falls to the time he or she has been falling. So the distance 
traveled by the skydiver is a function of time. Knowing this function 
model allows skydivers to determine when to open their parachute. In this 
chapter we study functions and their graphs, as well as many real-world 
applications of functions. In the Focus on Modeling at the end of the 
chapter we explore different real-world situations that can be modeled by 
functions.
147
Functions
2
2.1	 Functions
2.2	 Graphs of Functions
2.3	 Getting Information from 
the Graph of a Function
2.4	 Average Rate of Change  
of a Function
2.5	 Linear Functions and 
Models
2.6	 Transformations of 
Functions
2.7	 Combining Functions
2.8	 One-to-One Functions  
and Their Inverses
Focus on Modeling
	
Modeling with Functions
© iStockphoto.com/Jeff McDonald
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

148 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
2.1 
Functions
■  Functions All Around Us  ■  Definition of Function  ■  Evaluating a Function   
■  The Domain of a Function  ■  Four Ways to Represent a Function
In this section we explore the idea of a function and then give the mathematical defini-
tion of function.
■  Functions All Around Us
In nearly every physical phenomenon we observe that one quantity depends on another. 
For example, your height depends on your age, the temperature depends on the date, 
the cost of mailing a package depends on its weight (see Figure 1). We use the term 
function to describe this dependence of one quantity on another. That is, we say the 
following:
■	 Height is a function of age.
■	 Temperature is a function of date.
■	 Cost of mailing a package is a function of weight.
The U.S. Post Office uses a simple rule to determine the cost of mailing a ﬁrst-class 
parcel on the basis of its weight. But it’s not so easy to describe the rule that relates 
height to age or the rule that relates temperature to date.
Temperature is a function of date.
Postage is a function of weight.
Date
* F
0
40
60
80
100
5
10
15
20
25
30
„ (ounces)
0 < „≤1
4 < „≤5
5 < „≤6
3 < „≤4
1 < „≤2
2 < „≤3
2014 Postage (dollars)
0.98
1.82
2.03
1.61
1.19
1.40
Height is a function of age.
Height
(in feet)
Age (in years)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
5
10
15
20
25
Daily high temperature
Columbia, MO, May 2010
Figure 1
Can you think of other functions? Here are some more examples:
■	 The area of a circle is a function of its radius.
■	 The number of bacteria in a culture is a function of time.
■	 The weight of an astronaut is a function of her elevation.
■	 The price of a commodity is a function of the demand for that commodity.
The rule that describes how the area A of a circle depends on its radius r is given by 
the formula A  pr 2. Even when a precise rule or formula describing a function is not 
available, we can still describe the function by a graph. For example, when you turn on 
a hot water faucet, the temperature of the water depends on how long the water has been 
running. So we can say:
■	 The temperature of water from the faucet is a function of time.
Figure 2 shows a rough graph of the temperature T of the water as a function of the time 
t that has elapsed since the faucet was turned on. The graph shows that the initial tem-
perature of the water is close to room temperature. When the water from the hot water 
tank reaches the faucet, the water’s temperature T increases quickly. In the next phase, 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.1  ■  Functions  149
T is constant at the temperature of the water in the tank. When the tank is drained, T 
decreases to the temperature of the cold water supply.
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
T (°F)
0
t
Figure 2  Graph of water temperature T as a  
function of time t
■  Deﬁnition of Function
A function is a rule. To talk about a function, we need to give it a name. We will use 
letters such as f, g, h, . . . to represent functions. For example, we can use the letter f 
to represent a rule as follows:
“f ”  is the rule  “square the number”
When we write f122, we mean “apply the rule f to the number 2.” Applying the rule gives 
f122 22 4. Similarly, f132 32 9, f142 42 16, and in general f1x2 x2.
Definition of a Function
A function f is a rule that assigns to each element x in a set A exactly one  
element, called f1x2, in a set B.
We usually consider functions for which the sets A and B are sets of real numbers. 
The symbol f1x2 is read “f of x” or “f at x” and is called the value of f at x, or the 
image of x under f. The set A is called the domain of the function. The range of f is 
the set of all possible values of f1x2 as x varies throughout the domain, that is,
range of f 5f1x2 0  x [  A6
The symbol that represents an arbitrary number in the domain of a function f is 
called an independent variable. The symbol that represents a number in the range of 
f is called a dependent variable. So if we write y  f1x2, then x is the independent 
variable and y is the dependent variable.
It is helpful to think of a function as a machine (see Figure 3). If x is in the domain 
of the function f, then when x enters the machine, it is accepted as an input and the 
machine produces an output f1x2 according to the rule of the function. Thus we can 
think of the domain as the set of all possible inputs and the range as the set of all pos-
sible outputs.
Figure 3  Machine diagram of f
f
x
input
Ï
output
Another way to picture a function f is by an arrow diagram as in Figure 4(a). Each 
arrow associates an input from A to the corresponding output in B. Since a function 
We have previously used letters to 
stand for numbers. Here we do some-
thing quite different: We use letters  
to represent rules.
The !0  key on your calculator is a 
good example of a function as a 
machine. First you input x into the  
display. Then you press the key labeled 
!0 . (On most graphing calculators 
the order of these operations is 
reversed.) If x  0, then x is not in the 
domain of this function; that is, x is not 
an acceptable input, and the calculator 
will indicate an error. If x  0, then an 
approximation to !x appears in the 
display, correct to a certain number of 
decimal places. (Thus the !0  key on 
your calculator is not quite the same as 
the exact mathematical function f 
defined by f1x2 !x.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
associates exactly one output to each input, the diagram in Figure 4(a) represents a 
function but the diagram in Figure 4(b) does not represent a function.
Figure 4  Arrow diagrams
20
30
40
B
Outputs
Inputs
f
A
1
2
3
4
(a) Function
30
40
50
B
Outputs
Inputs
A
1
10
20
2
3
4
(b) Not a function
Example 1  ■  Analyzing a Function
A function f is deﬁned by the formula
f1x2 x2 4
(a)	 Express in words how f acts on the input x to produce the output f1x2.
(b)	 Evaluate f132, f122, and f1 !52 .
(c)	 Find the domain and range of f.
(d)	 Draw a machine diagram for f.
Solution
(a)	 The formula tells us that f ﬁrst squares the input x and then adds 4 to the result.  
So f is the function
“square, then add 4”
(b)	 The values of f are found by substituting for x in the formula f1x2 x2 4.
	
f132 32 4 13
	
Replace x by 3
	
f122 122 2 4 8 	
Replace x by –2
	
f1 !52 1 !52 2 4 9	
Replace x by !5
(c)	 The domain of f consists of all possible inputs for f. Since we can evaluate the 
formula f1x2 x2 4 for every real number x, the domain of f is the set R of 
all real numbers.
	 	   The range of f consists of all possible outputs of f. Because x2 0 for all real 
numbers x, we have x2 4 4, so for every output of f we have f1x2  4. Thus  
the range of f is 5y 0  y 46 34, `2 .
(d)	 A machine diagram for f is shown in Figure 5.
Now Try Exercises 11, 15, 19, and 51	
■
■  Evaluating a Function
In the definition of a function the independent variable x plays the role of a placeholder. 
For example, the function f1x2 3x2 x 5 can be thought of as
f1jj2 3 # jj 2 jj 5
To evaluate f at a number, we substitute the number for the placeholder.
square and
add 4
x
input
x2+4
output
3
13
_2
8
square and
add 4
square and
add 4
Figure 5  Machine diagram
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.1  ■  Functions  151
Example 2  ■  Evaluating a Function
Let f1x2 3x2 x 5. Evaluate each function value.
(a)	 f122            (b)  f102            (c)  f142            (d)  fA1
2B
Solution    To evaluate f at a number, we substitute the number for x in the definition 
of f.
(a)	 f122 3 # 122 2 122 5 5
(b)	 f102 3 # 02 0 5 5
(c)	 f142 3 # 142 2 4 5 47
(d)	 fA
 1 
2B 3 # A
 1 
2B
2

 1 
2 5 15
4
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
Example 3  ■  A Piecewise Defined Function
A cell phone plan costs $39 a month. The plan includes 2 gigabytes (GB) of free data 
and charges $15 per gigabyte for any additional data used. The monthly charges are a 
function of the number of gigabytes of data used, given by
C1x2 b39
if 0 x 2
39 151x 22
if x 2
Find C10.52 , C122 , and C142 .
Solution    Remember that a function is a rule. Here is how we apply the rule for this 
function. First we look at the value of the input, x. If 0 x 2, then the value of C1x2  
is 39. On the other hand, if x 2, then the value of C1x2 is 39 151x 22.
Since 0.5 2, we have C10.52 39.
Since 2 2, we have C122 39.
Since 4 2, we have C142 39 1514 22 69.
Thus the plan charges $39 for 0.5 GB, $39 for 2 GB, and $69 for 4 GB.
Now Try Exercises 31 and 85	
■
From Examples 2 and 3 we see that the values of a function can change from one 
input to another. The net change in the value of a function f as the input changes from 
a to b (where a b) is given by 
f1b2 f1a2
The next example illustrates this concept.
Example 4  ■  Finding Net Change
Let f1x2 x2. Find the net change in the value of f between the given inputs. 
(a)	 From 1 to 3      (b)  From 2 to 2
Solution  
(a)	 The net change is f132 f112 9 1 8.
(b)	 The net change is f122 f122 4 4 0.
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
A piecewise defined function is 
defined by different formulas on differ-
ent parts of its domain. The function C  
of Example 3 is piecewise defined.
The values of the function in Example 
4 decrease and then increase between 
2 and 2, but the net change from 2 
to 2 is 0 because f122  and f122  have 
the same value. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Example 5  ■  Evaluating a Function
If f1x2 2x2 3x 1, evaluate the following.
(a)	 f1a2       (b)  f1a2       (c)  f1a h2       (d) 
f1a h2 f1a2
h
, h ? 0
Solution
(a)	 f1a2 2a2 3a 1
(b)	 f1a2 21a2 2 31a2 1 2a2 3a 1
(c)	  f1a h2 21a h2 2 31a h2 1
	 	
 21a2 2ah h22 31a h2 1
	 	
 2a2 4ah 2h2 3a 3h 1
(d)	 Using the results from parts (c) and (a), we have
 
f1a h2 f 1a2
h

12a2 4ah 2h2 3a 3h 12 12a2 3a 12
h
 4ah 2h2 3h
h
4a 2h 3
Now Try Exercise 43	
■
A table of values for a function is a table with two headings, one for inputs and one 
for the corresponding outputs. A table of values helps us to analyze a function numeri-
cally, as in the next example.
Example 6  ■  The Weight of an Astronaut
If an astronaut weighs 130 lb on the surface of the earth, then her weight when she is 
h miles above the earth is given by the function
„1h2 130a
3960
3960 h b
2
(a)	 What is her weight when she is 100 mi above the earth?
(b)	 Construct a table of values for the function „ that gives her weight at heights 
from 0 to 500 mi. What do you conclude from the table?
(c)	 Find the net change in the astronaut’s weight from ground level to a height of 
500 mi.
Solution
(a)	 We want the value of the function „ when h  100; that is, we must calculate „11002:
„11002 130a
3960
3960 100 b
2
123.67
	 	 So at a height of 100 mi she weighs about 124 lb.
(b)	 The table gives the astronaut’s weight, rounded to the nearest pound, at 100-mi  
increments. The values in the table are calculated as in part (a).
h
„xhc
    0
130
100
124
200
118
300
112
400
107
500
102
Expressions like the one in part (d) of 
Example 5 occur frequently in calcu-
lus; they are called difference quotients,  
and they represent the average change  
in the value of f between x  a and  
x  a  h.
The weight of an object on or near the 
earth is the gravitational force that the 
earth exerts on it. When in orbit around 
the earth, an astronaut experiences the 
sensation of “weightlessness” because 
the centripetal force that keeps her in 
orbit is exactly the same as the gravita-
tional pull of the earth.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.1  ■  Functions  153
	 	 The table indicates that the higher the astronaut travels, the less she
	 	 weighs.
(c)	 The net change in the astronaut’s weight from h 0 to h 500 is
„15002 „102 102 130 28
	 	 The negative sign indicates that the astronaut’s weight decreased by about  
28 lb.
Now Try Exercise 79	
■
■  The Domain of a Function
Recall that the domain of a function is the set of all inputs for the function. The domain 
of a function may be stated explicitly. For example, if we write
f1x2 x2  0 x 5
then the domain is the set of all real numbers x for which 0  x  5. If the function is 
given by an algebraic expression and the domain is not stated explicitly, then by con-
vention the domain of the function is the domain of the algebraic expression—that is, 
the set of all real numbers for which the expression is defined as a real number. For 
example, consider the functions
f1x2 
1
x 4  g1x2 !x
The function f is not defined at x  4, so its domain is 5x 0  x ? 46. The function g is 
not defined for negative x, so its domain is 5x 0  x 06.
Example 7  ■  Finding Domains of Functions
Find the domain of each function.
(a)	 f1x2 
1
x2 x            (b)  g1x2 "9 x2            (c)  h1t2 
t
!t 1
Solution
(a)	 A rational expression is not defined when the denominator is 0. Since
f1x2 
1
x2 x 
1
x1x 12
	 	 we see that f1x2 is not defined when x  0 or x  1. Thus the domain of f is
5x 0  x ? 0, x ? 16
	 	 The domain may also be written in interval notation as
1 `, 02 < 10, 12 < 11, `2
(b)	 We can’t take the square root of a negative number, so we must have 9 x2 0.  
Using the methods of Section 1.8, we can solve this inequality to find that  
3  x  3. Thus the domain of g is
5x 0  3 x 36 33, 34
(c)	 We can’t take the square root of a negative number, and we can’t divide by 0, so 
we must have t  1  0, that is, t   1. So the domain of h is
5t  0  t 16 11, `2
Now Try Exercises 55, 59, and 69	
■
Domains of algebraic expressions are 
discussed on page 36.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
■  Four Ways to Represent a Function
To help us understand what a function is, we have used machine and arrow diagrams. 
We can describe a specific function in the following four ways:
■	 verbally (by a description in words)
■	 algebraically (by an explicit formula)
■	 visually (by a graph)
■	 numerically (by a table of values)
A single function may be represented in all four ways, and it is often useful to go 
from one representation to another to gain insight into the function. However, certain 
functions are described more naturally by one method than by the others. An ex-
ample of a verbal description is the following rule for converting between tempera-
ture scales:
“To ﬁnd the Fahrenheit equivalent of a Celsius temperature, 
multiply the Celsius temperature by 9
5, then add 32.”
In Example 8 we see how to describe this verbal rule or function algebraically, graphi-
cally, and numerically. A useful representation of the area of a circle as a function of its 
radius is the algebraic formula
A1r2 pr 2
The graph produced by a seismograph (see the box below) is a visual representation of 
the vertical acceleration function a1t2 of the ground during an earthquake. As a ­final 
example, consider the function C1„2, which is described verbally as “the cost of mailing 
a large first-class letter with weight „.” The most convenient way of describing this 
function is numerically—that is, using a table of values.
We will be using all four representations of functions throughout this book. We sum-
marize them in the following box.
four ways to represent a function
Verbal  Using words:
“To convert from Celsius to Fahrenheit, multiply  
the Celsius temperature by 
 9 
5, then add 32.”
Relation between Celsius and Fahrenheit 
temperature scales
Algebraic  Using a formula:
A1r2 pr2
Area of a circle
Visual  Using a graph:
Vertical acceleration during an earthquake
Numerical  Using a table of values:
„ (ounces)
Cx„c (dollars)
0  „  1
$0.98
1  „  2
$1.19
2  „  3
$1.40
3  „  4
$1.61
4  „  5
$1.82
o
o
Cost of mailing a large ﬁrst-class envelope
(cm/s2)
t (s)
Source: California Department of
Mines and Geology
5
50
50
10
15
20
25
a
100
30
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.1  ■  Functions  155
Example 8  ■  Representing a Function Verbally, Algebraically, 
Numerically, and Graphically
Let F1C2  be the Fahrenheit temperature corresponding to the Celsius temperature C. 
(Thus F is the function that converts Celsius inputs to Fahrenheit outputs.) The box 
on page 154 gives a verbal description of this function. Find ways to represent this 
function
(a)	 Algebraically (using a formula)
(b)	 Numerically (using a table of values)
(c)	 Visually (using a graph)
Solution
(a)	 The verbal description tells us that we should ﬁrst multiply the input C by 
 9 
5 and 
then add 32 to the result. So we get
F1C2 
 9 
5  C 32
(b)	 We use the algebraic formula for F that we found in part (a) to construct a table 
of values:
C (Celsius)
F (Fahrenheit)
10
  14
0
  32
10
  50
20
  68
30
  86
40
104
(c)	 We use the points tabulated in part (b) to help us draw the graph of this function 
in Figure 6.
Now Try Exercise 73	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 If f1x2 x3 1, then
(a)	 the value of f at x 1 is f1  
2 
 
   .
(b)	 the value of f at x 2 is f1  
2 
 
  .
(c)	 the net change in the value of f between x 1 and 
	
x 2 is f1  
2 f1  
2 
 
  .
	 2.	 For a function f, the set of all possible inputs is called the 
	 	
 
 of f, and the set of all possible outputs is called
	 	 the  
 of f.
	 3.	 (a)	 Which of the following functions have 5 in their domain?
f1x2 x2 3x            g1x2 x 5
x
            h1x2 !x 10
(b)	 For the functions from part (a) that do have 5 in their 
domain, ﬁnd the value of the function at 5.
	 4.	 A function is given algebraically by the formula  
f1x2 1x 42 2 3. Complete these other ways to  
represent f:
(a)	 Verbal: “Subtract 4, then  
 and  
  .
(b)	 Numerical:
x
fxxc
0
19
2
4
6
2.1  Exercises
C
40
F
100
50
20
0
Figure 6  Celsius and Fahrenheit
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	 5.	 A function f is a rule that assigns to each element x in a set A 
	 	 exactly 
 
 element(s) called f1x2  in a set B. Which of 
the following tables defines y as a function of x? 
(i)	 		
(ii) 
	
x
y
1
5
2
7
3
6
4
8
	
x
y
1
5
1
7
2
6
3
8
	 6.	 Yes or No? If No, give a reason. Let f be a function. 
(a)	 Is it possible that f112 5 and f122 5?
(b)	 Is it possible that f112 5 and f112 6?
skills
7–10  ■  Function Notation    Express the rule in function nota-
tion. (For example, the rule “square, then subtract 5” is expressed 
as the function f1x2 x2 5.)
	 7.	 Multiply by 3, then subtract 5
	 8.	 Square, then add 2
	 9.	 Subtract 1, then square
	10.	 Add 1, take the square root, then divide by 6
11–14  ■  Functions in Words    Express the function (or rule) in 
words.
	11.	 f1x2 2x 3	
12.	 g1x2 x 2
3
13.	 h1x2 51x 12 	
14.	 k1x2 x2 4
3
15–16  ■  Machine Diagram    Draw a machine diagram for the 
function.
	15.	 f1x2 !x 1	
16.	 f1x2 
3
x 2
17–18  ■  Table of Values    Complete the table.
	17.	 f1x2 21x 12 2	
18.	 g1x2 0  2x 3 0
	 	
x
fxxc
1
0
1
2
3
	
	
x
gxxc
3
2
0
1
3
19–30  ■  Evaluating Functions    Evaluate the function at the  
indicated values.
	19.	 f1x2 x2 6;    f132, f132, f102, fA1
2B
	20.	 f1x2 x3 2x;    f122, f112, f102, fA 1
 2 B
	21.	 f1x2 1 2x
3
; 
	 	 f122, f122, fA1
2B, f1a2, f1a2, f1a 12
22.	 h1x2 x2 4
5
; 
	 	 h122, h122, h1a2, h1x2, h1a 22, hA !xB
	23.	 f1x2 x2 2x; 
	 	 f102, f132, f132, f1a2, f1x2, f a1
ab
	24.	 h1t2 t 1
t ; 
	 	 h112, h122, hA
 1 
2B, h1x 12, ha 1
x b
	25.	 g1x2 1 x
1 x; 
	 	 g122, g112, gA
 1 
2B, g1a2, g1a 12, g1x2 12
	26.	 g1t2 t 2
t 2; 
	 	 g122, g122, g102, g1a2, g1a2 22, g1a 12
	27.	 k1x2 x2 2x 3; 
	 	 k102, k122, k122, kA !2B, k1a 22, k1x2, k1x22
28.	 k1x2 2x3 3x2; 
	 	 k102, k132, k132, kA1
2B, kAa
2B, k1x2, k1x32
	29.	 f1x2 2 0  x 1 0 ;
	 	 f122, f102, f A 1
 2 B, f122, f1x 12, f1x2 22
	30.	 f1x2 
0  x 0
x ;
	 	 f122, f112, f102, f152, f1x22, f a 1
x b
31–34  ■  Piecewise Defined Functions    Evaluate the piecewise 
defined function at the indicated values.
31.	 f1x2 ex2
if x 0
x 1
if x 0
	 	 f122, f112, f102, f112, f122
	32.	 f1x2 e5
if x 2
2x 3
if x 2
	 	 f132, f102, f122, f132, f152
	33.	 f1x2 •
x2 2x
if x 1
x
if 1 x 1
1
if x 1
	 	 f142, fA
 3 
2B, f112, f102, f1252
	34.	 f1x2 •
3x
if x 0
x 1
if 0 x 2
1x 22 2
if x 2
	 	 f152, f102, f112, f122, f152
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.1  ■  Functions  157
35–38  ■  Evaluating Functions    Use the function to evaluate the 
indicated expressions and simplify.
	35.	 f1x2 x2 1; f1x 22, f1x2 f122
	36.	 f1x2 3x 1; f12x2, 2f1x2
	37.	 f1x2 x 4; f1x22, 1f1x22 2
	38.	 f1x2 6x 18; f a x
3 b, 
f1x2
3
39–42  ■  Net Change    Find the net change in the value of the 
function between the given inputs.
	39.	 f 1x2 3x 2;    from 1 to 5
	40.	 f 1x2 4 5x;    from 3 to 5
	41.	 g1t2 1 t2;    from 2 to 5
	42.	 h1t2 t2 5;    from 3 to 6
43–50  ■  Difference Quotient    Find f1a2, f1a h2 , and the  
difference quotient 
f1a h2 f1a2
h
, where h ? 0.
	43.	 f1x2 5 2x	
44.	 f1x2 3x2 2
	45.	 f1x2 5	
46.	 f1x2 
1
x 1
	47.	 f1x2 
x
x 1	
48.	 f1x2 
2x
x 1
	49.	 f1x2 3 5x 4x2	
50.	 f1x2 x3
51–54  ■  Domain and Range    Find the domain and range of the 
function.
	51.	 f1x2 3x	
52.	 f1x2 5x2 4
	53.	 f1x2 3x, 2 x 6
54.	 f1x2 5x2 4, 0 x 2
55–72  ■  Domain    Find the domain of the function.
55.	 f1x2 
1
x 3	
56.	 f1x2 
1
3x 6
	57.	 f1x2 x 2
x2 1	
58.	 f1x2 
x4
x2 x 6
	59.	 f1t2 !t 1	
60.	 g1t2 "t2 9
	61.	 f1t2 !
3 t 1	
62.	 g1x2 !7 3x
	63.	 f1x2 !1 2x	
64.	 g1x2 "x2 4
	65.	 g1x2 !2 x
3 x 	
66.	 g1x2 
!x
2x2 x 1
	67.	 g1x2 "
4 x2 6x	
68.	 g1x2 "x2 2x 8
	69.	 f1x2 
3
!x 4	
70.	 f1x2 
x2
!6 x
	71.	 f1x2 
1x 12 2
!2x 1	
72.	 f1x2 
x
"
4 9 x2
73–76  ■  Four Ways to Represent a Function    A verbal descrip-
tion of a function is given. Find (a) algebraic, (b) numerical, and  
(c) graphical representations for the function.
	73.	 To evaluate f1x2, divide the input by 3 and add 
 2 
3 to the result.
	74.	 To evaluate g1x2 , subtract 4 from the input and multiply the  
result by 
 3 
4.
	75.	 Let T1x2  be the amount of sales tax charged in Lemon 
County on a purchase of x dollars. To ﬁnd the tax, take 8% of 
the purchase price.
	76.	 Let V1d2  be the volume of a sphere of diameter d. To ﬁnd the 
volume, take the cube of the diameter, then multiply by p 
and divide by 6.
skills Plus
77–78  ■  Domain and Range    Find the domain and range of f. 
	77.	 f1x2 b1
if x is rational
5
if x is irrational
78.	 f1x2 b1
if x is rational
5x
if x is irrational
applications
	79.	 Torricelli’s Law    A tank holds 50 gal of water, which drains 
from a leak at the bottom, causing the tank to empty in  
20 min. The tank drains faster when it is nearly full because 
the pressure on the leak is greater. Torricelli’s Law gives the 
volume of water remaining in the tank after t minutes as
V1t2 50a1 t
20 b
2  0 t 20
(a)	 Find V102  and V1202 .
(b)	 What do your answers to part (a) represent?
(c)	 Make a table of values of V1t2  for t  0, 5, 10, 15, 20.
(d)	 Find the net change in the volume V as t changes from  
0 min to 20 min.
	80.	 Area of a Sphere    The surface area S of a sphere is a func-
tion of its radius r given by
S1r2 4pr 2
(a)	 Find S122 and S132.
(b)	 What do your answers in part (a) represent?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

158 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	81.	 Relativity    According to the Theory of Relativity, the length 
L of an object is a function of its velocity √ with respect to an 
observer. For an object whose length at rest is 10 m, the func-
tion is given by
L1√2 10 Å1 √2
c2
	 	 where c is the speed of light (300,000 km/s).
(a)	 Find L10.5c2, L10.75c2 , and L10.9c2 .
(b)	 How does the length of an object change as its velocity  
increases?
	82.	 Pupil Size    When the brightness x of a light source is 
increased, the eye reacts by decreasing the radius R of the 
pupil. The dependence of R on x is given by the function
R1x2 Å
13 7x0.4
1 4x0.4
	 	 where R is measured in millimeters and x is measured in  
appropriate units of brightness.
(a)	 Find R112, R1102 , and R11002 .
(b)	 Make a table of values of R1x2 .
(c)	 Find the net change in the radius R as x changes from  
10 to 100.
R
	83.	 Blood Flow    As blood moves through a vein or an artery, its 
velocity √ is greatest along the central axis and decreases as 
the distance r from the central axis increases (see the figure). 
The formula that gives √ as a function of r is called the law 
of laminar flow. For an artery with radius 0.5 cm, the rela-
tionship between √ (in cm/s) and r (in cm) is given by the 
function
√1r2 18,50010.25 r 22  0 r 0.5
(a)	 Find √10.12  and √10.42 .
(b)	 What do your answers to part (a) tell you about the flow  
of blood in this artery?
(c)	 Make a table of values of √1r2  for r  0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3,  
0.4, 0.5.
(d)	 Find the net change in the velocity √ as r changes from 
0.1 cm to 0.5 cm.
0.5 cm
r
	84.	 How Far Can You See?    Because of the curvature of the earth, 
the maximum distance D that you can see from the top of a 
tall building or from an airplane at height h is given by  
the function
D1h2 "2rh h2
	 	 where r  3960 mi is the radius of the earth and D and h are 
measured in miles.
(a)	 Find D10.12  and D10.22 .
(b)	 How far can you see from the observation deck of  
Toronto’s CN Tower, 1135 ft above the ground?
(c)	 Commercial aircraft fly at an altitude of about 7 mi.  
How far can the pilot see?
(d)	 Find the net change in the value of distance D as  
h changes from 1135 ft to 7 mi.
	85.	 Income Tax    In a certain country, income tax T is assessed  
according to the following function of income x:
T1x2 •
0
if 0 x 10,000
0.08x
if 10,000 x 20,000
1600 0.15x
if 20,000 x
(a)	 Find T15,0002, T112,0002 , and T125,0002 .
(b)	 What do your answers in part (a) represent?
	86.	 Internet Purchases    An Internet bookstore charges $15 ship-
ping for orders under $100 but provides free shipping for 
orders of $100 or more. The cost C of an order is a function 
of the total price x of the books purchased, given by
C1x2 ex 15
if x 100
x
if x 100
(a)	 Find C1752, C1902, C11002 , and C11052 .
(b)	 What do your answers in part (a) represent?
	87.	 Cost of a Hotel Stay    A hotel chain charges $75 each night 
for the first two nights and $50 for each additional night’s 
stay. The total cost T is a function of the number of nights x 
that a guest stays.
(a)	 Complete the expressions in the following piecewise  
defined function.
T1x2 ejjjj
if 0 x 2
jjjj
if x 2
(b)	 Find T122 , T132 , and T152 .
(c)	 What do your answers in part (b) represent?
	88.	 Speeding Tickets    In a certain state the maximum speed per-
mitted on freeways is 65 mi/h, and the minimum is 40 mi/h. 
The fine F for violating these limits is $15 for every mile 
above the maximum or below the minimum.
(a)	 Complete the expressions in the following piecewise 
defined function, where x is the speed at which you are 
driving.
F1x2 •
jjjj
if 0 x 40
jjjj
if 40 x 65
jjjj
if x 65
(b)	 Find F1302 , F1502 , and F1752 .
(c)	 What do your answers in part (b) represent?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.2  ■  Graphs of Functions  159
	89.	 Height of Grass    A home owner mows the lawn every 
Wednesday afternoon. Sketch a rough graph of the height of 
the grass as a function of time over the course of a four-week 
period beginning on a Sunday.
	90.	 Temperature Change    You place a frozen pie in an oven and 
bake it for an hour. Then you take the pie out and let it cool 
before eating it. Sketch a rough graph of the temperature of 
the pie as a function of time.
	91.	 Daily Temperature Change    Temperature readings T (in °F) 
were recorded every 2 hours from midnight to noon in 
Atlanta, Georgia, on March 18, 2014. The time t was mea-
sured in hours from midnight. Sketch a rough graph of T as a 
function of t.
t
  0
  2
  4
  6
  8
10
12
T
58
57
53
50
51
57
61
	92.	 Population Growth    The population P (in thousands) of  
San Jose, California, from 1980 to 2010 is shown in the 
table. (Midyear estimates are given.) Draw a rough graph of 
P as a function of time t.
t
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
P
629
714
782
825
895
901
946
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
discuss 
■ 
discover 
■ 
prove 
■  write
	93.	 Discuss:  Examples of Functions    At the beginning of this 
section we discussed three examples of everyday, ordinary 
functions: Height is a function of age, temperature is a func-
tion of date, and postage cost is a function of weight. Give 
three other examples of functions from everyday life.
	94.	 Discuss:  Four Ways to Represent a Function    In the box on 
page 154 we represented four different functions verbally, alge-
braically, visually, and numerically. Think of a function that can 
be represented in all four ways, and give the four representations.
	95.	 Discuss:  Piecewise Defined Functions    In Exercises 85–88 
we worked with real-world situations modeled by piecewise 
defined functions. Find other examples of real-world situa-
tions that can be modeled by piecewise defined functions, 
and express the models in function notation.
2.2 
Graphs of Functions
■  Graphing Functions by Plotting Points  ■  Graphing Functions with a Graphing 
Calculator  ■  Graphing Piecewise Defined Functions  ■  The Vertical Line Test: Which Graphs 
Represent Functions?  ■  Which Equations Represent Functions?
The most important way to visualize a function is through its graph. In this section we 
investigate in more detail the concept of graphing functions.
■  Graphing Functions by Plotting Points
To graph a function f, we plot the points 1x, f1x22  in a coordinate plane. In other words, 
we plot the points 1x, y2  whose x-coordinate is an input and whose y-coordinate is the 
corresponding output of the function.
The Graph of a Function
If f is a function with domain A, then the graph of f is the set of ordered pairs
51x, f1x22 0  x [ A6
plotted in a coordinate plane. In other words, the graph of f is the set of all 
points 1x, y2  such that y f1x2 ; that is, the graph of f is the graph of the equa-
tion y f1x2 .
The graph of a function f gives a picture of the behavior or “life history” of the func-
tion. We can read the value of f1x2 from the graph as being the height of the graph above 
the point x (see Figure 1).
y
x
f(1)
0
2
f(2)
Ï
1
x
Óx, ÏÔ
Figure 1  The height of the graph 
above the point x is the value of f1x2 .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
A function f of the form f1x2  mx  b is called a linear function because its graph  
is the graph of the equation y  mx  b, which represents a line with slope m and  
y-intercept b. A special case of a linear function occurs when the slope is m  0. The func-
tion f1x2  b, where b is a given number, is called a constant function because all its 
values are the same number, namely, b. Its graph is the horizontal line y  b. Figure 2 
shows the graphs of the constant function f1x2  3 and the linear function f1x2  2x  1.
The constant function Ï=3
The linear function Ï=2x+1
y
x
0
1
1
y=2x+1
y
x
0
2
4
6
_2
2
4
y=3
Figure 2
Functions of the form f1x2 xn are called power functions, and functions of the 
formf1x2 x1/n are called root functions. In the next example we graph two power 
functions and a root function.
Example 1  ■  Graphing Functions by Plotting Points
Sketch graphs of the following functions.
(a)	 f1x2 x2            (b)  g1x2 x3            (c)  h1x2 !x
Solution    We ﬁrst make a table of values. Then we plot the points given by the  
table and join them by a smooth curve to obtain the graph. The graphs are sketched  
in Figure 3.
x
fxxc 5 x2
0
0

 1 
2
 1 
4
1
1
2
4
3
9
x
gxxc 5 x3
0
0
 1 
2
1
 8 
1
1
2
8
 
 1 
2
 1
 8 
1
1
2
8
x
hxxc 5 !x
0
0
1
1
2
!2
3
!3
4
2
5
!5
(a) Ï=≈
y
x
0
3
3
(1, 1)
(2, 4)
(_1, 1)
(_2, 4)
!_   ,    @
1
2
1
4
!   ,    @
1
2
1
4
y=≈
(b) ˝=x£
y
x
1
(1, 1
(1, 1)
(2,
)
)
(2, 8)
(_1, _1)
(_2, _8)
2
y=x£
(c) h(x)= x
y
x
1
1
0
y= x
2
(4, 2)
Figure 3
Now Try Exercises 9, 15, and 19	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.2  ■  Graphs of Functions  161
■  Graphing Functions with a Graphing Calculator
A convenient way to graph a function is to use a graphing calculator. To graph the func-
tion f, we use a calculator to graph the equation y f1x2 .
Example 2  ■  Graphing a Function with a Graphing Calculator
Use a graphing calculator to graph the function f1x2 x3 8x2 in an appropriate 
viewing rectangle.
Solution    To graph the function f1x2 x3 8x2, we must graph the equation 
y  x3  8x2. On the TI-83 graphing calculator the default viewing rectangle gives 
the graph in Figure 4(a). But this graph appears to spill over the top and bottom of the 
screen. We need to expand the vertical axis to get a better representation of the graph. 
The viewing rectangle 34, 104 by 3100, 1004 gives a more complete picture of the 
graph, as shown in Figure 4(b).
10
_10
100
_100
_10
10
(a)
_4
10
(b)
Figure 4  Graphing the function  
f1x2 x3 8x2
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
Example 3  ■  A Family of Power Functions
(a)	 Graph the functions f1x2  x n for n  2, 4, and 6 in the viewing rectangle 32, 24  
by 31, 34.
(b)	 Graph the functions f1x2  x n for n  1, 3, and 5 in the viewing rectangle 32, 24  
by 32, 24.
(c)	 What conclusions can you draw from these graphs?
Solution    To graph the function f1x2  x n, we graph the equation y  x n. The 
graphs for parts (a) and (b) are shown in Figure 5.
2
2
2
2
x∞
x£
x
3
1
2
2
x§
x¢
x™
(a) Even powers of x
(b) Odd powers of x
Figure 5  A family of power  
functions: f1x2  x n
(c)	 We see that the general shape of the graph of f1x2 xn depends on whether n is 
even or odd.
If n is even, the graph of f1x2 xn is similar to the parabola y x2.
If n is odd, the graph of f1x2 xn is similar to that of y x3.
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
See Appendix C, Graphing with a 
Graphing Calculator, for general 
guidelines on using a graphing calcula-
tor. See Appendix D, Using the  
TI-83/84 Graphing Calculator, for  
specific instructions. Go to  
www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Notice from Figure 5 that as n increases, the graph of y  x n becomes ﬂatter near 0 
and steeper when x  1. When 0  x  1, the lower powers of x are the “bigger” func-
tions. But when x  1, the higher powers of x are the dominant functions.
■  Graphing Piecewise Deﬁned Functions
A piecewise deﬁned function is deﬁned by different formulas on different parts of its 
domain. As you might expect, the graph of such a function consists of separate pieces.
Example 4  ■  Graph of a Piecewise Defined Function
Sketch the graph of the function
f1x2 ex2
if x 1
2x 1
if x 1
Solution    If x  1, then f1x2 x2, so the part of the graph to the left of x  1 co­incides 
with the graph of y x2, which we sketched in Figure 3. If x  1, then f1x2  2x  1,  
so the part of the graph to the right of x  1 coincides with the line y  2x  1, which we 
graphed in Figure 2. This enables us to sketch the graph in Figure 6.
The solid dot at 11, 12 indicates that this point is included in the graph; the open 
dot at 11, 32 indicates that this point is excluded from the graph.
Figure 6 
f1x2 ex2
if x 1
2x 1
if x 1
y
x
0
1
1
f(x)  ≈
if x  1
f(x)  2x  1
if x  1
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
Example 5  ■  Graph of the Absolute Value Function
Sketch a graph of the absolute value function f1x2 0  x 0 .
Solution    Recall that
0  x 0 ex
if x 0
x
if x 0
Using the same method as in Example 4, we note that the graph of f coincides with 
the line y  x to the right of the y-axis and coincides with the line y  x to the left 
of the y-axis (see Figure 7).
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
The greatest integer function is deﬁned by
“x‘ greatest integer less than or equal to x
For example, “ 2‘ 2, “2.3‘ 2, “1.999‘ 1, “0.002‘ 0, “3.5‘ 4, and  
“0.5‘ 1.
On many graphing calculators the 
graph in Figure 6 can be produced by 
using the logical functions in the cal­
culator. For example, on the TI-83 the 
following equation gives the required 
graph:
Y11X12X21X1212X12
5
1
2
2
(To avoid the extraneous vertical line 
between the two parts of the graph, put 
the calculator in Dot mode.) 
Figure 7  Graph of f1x2 0  x 0
y
x
0
1
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.2  ■  Graphs of Functions  163
Example 6  ■  Graph of the Greatest Integer Function
Sketch a graph of f1x2 “x‘.
Solution    The table shows the values of f for some values of x. Note that f1x2  is 
constant between consecutive integers, so the graph between integers is a horizontal 
line segment, as shown in Figure 8.
y
x
0
1
1
Figure 8  The greatest integer  
function, y “x‘
x
“x‘
(
(
2  x  1
2
1  x  0
1
0  x  1
0
1  x  2
1
2  x  3
2
(
(
	
■
The greatest integer function is an example of a step function. The next example 
gives a real-world example of a step function.
Example 7  ■  The Cost Function for a Global Data Plan
A global data plan costs $25 a month for the first 100 megabytes and $20 for each 
additional 100 megabytes (or portion thereof). Draw a graph of the cost C (in dollars) 
as a function of the number of megabytes x used per month.
Solution    Let C1x2  be the cost of using x megabytes of data in a month. Since 
x 0, the domain of the function is 30, `2 . From the given information we have 
 C1x2 25
  if 0 x 100
 C1x2 25 20 45
  if 100 x 200
 C1x2 25 21202 65  if 200 x 300
 C1x2 25 31202 85  if 300 x 400
	
( 	
(
The graph is shown in Figure 9.
Now Try Exercise 83	
■
Discovery Project
Relations and Functions
Many real-world relationships are functions, but many are not. For example, the 
rule that assigns to each student his or her school ID number is a function. But 
what about the rule that assigns to each date those persons born in Chicago on 
that date? Do you see why this “relation” is not a function? A set of ordered 
pairs is called a relation. In this project we explore the question of which rela-
tions are functions. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© Zurijeta/Shutterstock.com
C
x
0
100
20
Figure 9  Cost of data usage 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
A function is called continuous if its graph has no “breaks” or “holes.” The func-
tions in Examples 1, 2, 3, and 5 are continuous; the functions in Examples 4, 6, and 7 
are not continuous.
■  The Vertical Line Test: Which Graphs Represent 
Functions?
The graph of a function is a curve in the xy-plane. But the question arises: Which curves 
in the xy-plane are graphs of functions? This is answered by the following test.
The Vertical Line Test
A curve in the coordinate plane is the graph of a function if and only if no ver-
tical line intersects the curve more than once.
We can see from Figure 10 why the Vertical Line Test is true. If each vertical line  
x  a intersects a curve only once at 1a, b2, then exactly one functional value is deﬁned 
by f1a2  b. But if a line x  a intersects the curve twice, at 1a, b2 and at 1a, c2, then 
the curve cannot represent a function because a function cannot assign two different 
values to a.
y
x
0
a
x=a
(a, b)
y
x
0
a
x=a
(a, b)
(a, c)
Graph of a function
Not a graph of a function
Figure 10  Vertical Line Test
Example 8  ■  Using the Vertical Line Test
Using the Vertical Line Test, we see that the curves in parts (b) and (c) of Figure 11 
represent functions, whereas those in parts (a) and (d) do not.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
y
x
0
y
x
0
y
x
0
y
x
0
Figure 11
Now Try Exercise 51	
■
■  Which Equations Represent Functions?
Any equation in the variables x and y deﬁnes a relationship between these variables. For 
example, the equation
y x2 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.2  ■  Graphs of Functions  165
deﬁnes a relationship between y and x. Does this equation deﬁne y as a function of x? 
To ﬁnd out, we solve for y and get
y  x2        Equation form
We see that the equation deﬁnes a rule, or function, that gives one value of y for each 
value of x. We can express this rule in function notation as
f1x2  x2        Function form
But not every equation deﬁnes y as a function of x, as the following example shows.
Example 9  ■  Equations That Deﬁne Functions
Does the equation deﬁne y as a function of x?
(a)	 y  x2  2                (b)  x2  y2  4
Solution
(a)	 Solving for y in terms of x gives
 y x2 2
 y x2 2        Add x2
	 	 The last equation is a rule that gives one value of y for each value of x, so it 
deﬁnes y as a function of x. We can write the function as f1x2  x2  2.
(b)	 We try to solve for y in terms of x.
 x2 y2 4
       
 y2 4 x2
        Subtract x2
 y "4 x2        Take square roots
	
The last equation gives two values of y for a given value of x. Thus the equation 
does not deﬁne y as a function of x.
Now Try Exercises 57 and 61	
■
The graphs of the equations in Example 9 are shown in Figure 12. The Vertical Line 
Test shows graphically that the equation in Example 9(a) deﬁnes a function but the 
equation in Example 9(b) does not.
(a)
(b)
y
x
0
1
1
y-≈=2
y
x
0
1
1
≈+¥=4
Figure 12
BBVA/NOTIMEX/Newscom
Donald Knuth was born in  
Milwaukee in 1938 and is Professor  
Emeritus of Computer Science at  
Stanford University. When Knuth was a 
high school student, he became fasci-
nated with graphs of functions and labo-
riously drew many hundreds of them 
because he wanted to see the behavior of 
a great variety of functions. (Today, of 
course, it is far easier to use computers 
and graphing calculators to do this.) 
While still a graduate student at Caltech, 
he started writing a monumental series 
of books entitled The Art of Computer 
Programming. 
Knuth is famous for his invention of 
TEX, a system of computer-assisted typeset-
ting. This system was used in the prepara-
tion of the manuscript for this textbook.
Knuth has received numerous honors, 
among them election as an associate of the 
French Academy of Sciences, and as a Fel-
low of the Royal Society. President Carter 
awarded him the National Medal of Science 
in 1979.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
The following box shows the graphs of some functions that you will see frequently 
in this book.
some functions and their graphs
Linear functions
f 1x2 mx b
Power functions
f 1x2 xn
Root functions
f1x2 !
n x
Reciprocal functions
f 1x2 1
xn
Absolute value function	
Greatest integer function
f 1x2 0  x 0 	
f1x2 “x‘
x
y
Ï=|x|
x
y
Ï=“x‘
1
1
x
y
x
y
Ï=1
x
Ï= 1
≈
x
y
x
y
Ï= 1
x¢
Ï= 1
x£
Ï= x
Ï=£ x
Ï=¢ x
Ï=∞x
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
Ï=≈
Ï=x3
Ï=x4
Ï=x5
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
Ï=b
Ï=mx+b
b
x
y
b
x
y
concepts
	 1.	 To graph the function f, we plot the points (x,  
2  in  
a coordinate plane. To graph f1x2 x2 2, we plot the 
	 	 points (x,  
). So the point (3,  
) is on the 
	 	 graph of f. The height of the graph of f above the x-axis 
2.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.2  ■  Graphs of Functions  167
	 	 when x  3 is  
  . Complete the table, and sketch a 
graph of f.
y
x
0
1
1
x
fxxc
xx, yc
2
1
0
1
2
	 2.	 If f142 10 then the point 1 4,  
2  is on the graph of f.
	 3.	 If the point 13, 72 is on the graph of f, then f132  
  .
	 4.	 Match the function with its graph.
(a)	 f1x2  x2	
	
(b)	 f1x2  x3
(c)	 f1x2 !x	
	
(d)	 f1x2 0  x 0
I 
y 
x 
0 
1 
1 
II 
y 
x 
0 
1 
1 
III 
y 
x 
0 
1 
1 
IV 
y 
x 
0 
1 
1 
skills
5–28  ■  Graphing Functions    Sketch a graph of the function by 
ﬁrst making a table of values.
	 5.	 f 1x2 x 2	
  6.	 f 1x2 4 2x
	 7.	 f1x2 x 3, 3 x 3
	 8.	 f1x2 x 3
2
, 0 x 5
	 9.	 f1x2 x2	
10.	 f1x2 x2 4
	11.	 g1x2 1x 12 2	
12.	 g1x2 x2 2x 1
	13.	 r 1x2 3x4	
14.	 r 1x2 1 x4
	15.	 g1x2 x3 8	
16.	 g1x2 1x 12 3
	17.	 k1x2 !
3 x	
18.	 k1x2  !
3 x
19.	 f1x2 1 !x	
20.	 f1x2 !x 2
	21.	 C1t2 1
t2	
22.	 C1t2  
1
t 1
23.	 H1x2 0  2x 0 	
24.	 H1x2 0  x 1 0
	25.	 G1x2 0  x 0 x	
26.	 G1x2 0  x 0 x
	27.	 f1x2 0  2x 2 0 	
28.	 f1x2 
x
0  x 0
29–32  ■  Graphing Functions    Graph the function in each of the 
given viewing rectangles, and select the one that produces the 
most appropriate graph of the function.
29.	 f1x2 8x x2
(a)	 35, 54 by 35, 54
(b)	 310, 104 by 310, 104
(c)	 32, 104 by 35, 204
(d)	 310, 104 by 3100, 1004
	30.	 g1x2 x2 x 20
(a)	 32, 24 by 35, 54
(b)	 310, 104 by 310, 104
(c)	 37, 74 by 325, 204
(d)	 310, 104 by 3100, 1004
	31.	 h1x2 x3 5x 4
(a)	 32, 24 by 32, 24
(b)	 33, 34 by 310, 104
(c)	 33, 34 by 310, 54
(d)	 310, 104 by 310, 104
	32.	 k1x2 
1
 32  x4 x2 2
(a)	 31, 14 by 31, 14
(b)	 32, 24 by 32, 24
(c)	 35, 54 by 35, 54
(d)	 310, 104 by 310, 104
33–46  ■  Graphing Piecewise Defined Functions    Sketch a graph 
of the piecewise deﬁned function.
	33.	 f1x2 e0
if x 2
1
if x 2
	34.	 f1x2 e1
if x 1
x 1
if x 1
35.	 f1x2 e3
if x 2
x 1
if x 2
	36.	 f1x2 e1 x
if x 2
5
if x 2
	37.	 f1x2 ex
if x 0
x 1
if x 0
	38.	 f1x2 e2x 3
if x 1
3 x
if x 1
	39.	 f1x2 •
1
if x 1
1
if 1 x 1
1
if x 1
	40.	 f1x2 •
1
if x 1
x
if 1 x 1
1
if x 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	41.	 f1x2 e2
if x 1
x2
if x 1
	42.	 f1x2 e1 x2
if x 2
x
if x 2
	43.	 f1x2 b0
if 0  x 0 2
3
if 0  x 0 2
	44.	 f1x2 bx2
if 0  x 0 1
1
if 0  x 0 1
	45.	 f1x2 •
4
if x 2
x2
if 2 x 2
x 6
if x 2
	46.	 f1x2 •
x
if x 0
9 x2
if 0 x 3
x 3
if x 3
47–48  ■  Graphing Piecewise Defined Functions    Use a graphing 
device to draw a graph of the piecewise deﬁned function. (See the 
margin note on page 162.)
	47.	 f1x2 ex 2
if x 1
x2
if x 1
	48.	 f1x2 e2x x2
if x 1
1x 12 3
if x 1
49–50  ■  Finding Piecewise Defined Functions    A graph of a 
piecewise deﬁned function is given. Find a formula for the func-
tion in the indicated form.
	49.	
y
x
0
2
2
 f1x2 •
jjjj
if x 2
jjjj
if 2 x 2
jjjj
if x 2
	50.	
y
x
0
1
2
 f1x2 •
jjjj
if x 1
jjjj
if 1 x 2
jjjj
if x 2
51–52  ■  Vertical Line Test    Use the Vertical Line Test to deter-
mine whether the curve is a graph of a function of x.
51.	 (a)	 	
(b) 
(c)	 		
(d) 
	52.	 (a)	 	
(b) 
(c)	 		
(d) 
53–56  ■  Vertical Line Test: Domain and Range    Use the Vertical 
Line Test to determine whether the curve is a graph of a function 
of x. If it is, state the domain and range of the function.
	53.	
y
x
0
2
2
	 54.	
y
x
0
3
2
	55.	
y
x
0
3
1
	 56.	
y
x
0
2
2
57–68  ■  Equations That Define Functions    Determine whether 
the equation deﬁnes y as a function of x. (See Example 9.)
57.	 3x 5y 7	
58.	 3x2 y 5
	59.	 x y2	
60.	 x2 1y 12 2 4
61.	 2x 4y2 3	
62.	 2x2 4y2 3
	63.	 2xy 5y2 4	
64.	 !y x 5
	65.	 2 0  x 0 y 0	
66.	 2x 0  y 0 0
	67.	 x  y3	
68.	 x  y4
y
x
0
y
x
0
y
x
0
y
x
0
y
x
0
y
x
0
y
x
0
y
x
0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.2  ■  Graphs of Functions  169
69–74  ■  Families of Functions    A family of functions is given. 
In parts (a) and (b) graph all the given members of the family in 
the viewing rectangle indicated. In part (c) state the conclusions 
that you can make from your graphs.
	69.	 f1x2 x2 c
(a)	 c  0, 2, 4, 6;    35, 54 by 310, 104
(b)	 c  0, 2, 4, 6;    35, 54 by 310, 104
(c)	 How does the value of c affect the graph?
	70.	 f1x2 1x c2 2
(a)	 c  0, 1, 2, 3;    35, 54 by 310, 104
(b)	 c  0, 1, 2, 3;    35, 54 by 310, 104
(c)	 How does the value of c affect the graph?
	71.	 f1x2 1x c2 3
(a)	 c  0, 2, 4, 6;    310, 104 by 310, 104
(b)	 c  0, 2, 4, 6;    310, 104 by 310, 104
(c)	 How does the value of c affect the graph?
	72.	 f1x2 cx2
(a)	 c 1, 
 1 
2, 2, 4;    35, 54 by 310, 104
(b)	 c 1, 1, 
 1 
2, 2;    35, 54 by 310, 104
(c)	 How does the value of c affect the graph?
	73.	 f1x2 xc
(a)	 c 
 1 
2, 
 1 
4, 
 1 
6;    31, 44 by 31, 34
(b)	 c 1, 1
3, 1
5;    33, 34 by 32, 24
(c)	 How does the value of c affect the graph?
	74.	 f1x2 1
xn
(a)	 n  1, 3;    33, 34 by 33, 34
(b)	 n  2, 4;    33, 34 by 33, 34
(c)	 How does the value of n affect the graph?
Skills Plus
75–78  ■  Finding Functions for Certain Curves    Find a function 
whose graph is the given curve.
	75.	 The line segment joining the points (2, 1) and (4, 6)
	76.	 The line segment joining the points (3, 2) and (6, 3)
	77.	 The top half of the circle x2 y2 9
	78.	 The bottom half of the circle x2 y2 9
applications
	79.	 Weather Balloon    As a weather balloon is inﬂated, the  
thickness T of its rubber skin is related to the radius of the 
balloon by
T1r2 0.5
r2
	 	 where T and r are measured in centimeters. Graph the func-
tion T for values of r between 10 and 100.
	80.	 Power from a Wind Turbine    The power produced by a  
wind turbine depends on the speed of the wind. If a windmill 
has blades 3 meters long, then the power P produced by the 
turbine is modeled by
P1√2 14.1√3
	 	 where P is measured in watts (W) and √ is measured in 
meters per second (m/s). Graph the function P for wind 
speeds between 1 m/s and 10 m/s.
81.	 Utility Rates    Westside Energy charges its electric customers 
a base rate of $6.00 per month, plus 10¢ per kilowatt-hour 
(kWh) for the ﬁrst 300 kWh used and 6¢ per kWh for all 
usage over 300 kWh. Suppose a customer uses x kWh of 
electricity in one month.
(a)	 Express the monthly cost E as a piecewise defined  
function of x.
(b)	 Graph the function E for 0  x  600.
	82.	 Taxicab Function    A taxi company charges $2.00 for the ﬁrst 
mile (or part of a mile) and 20 cents for each succeeding 
tenth of a mile (or part). Express the cost C (in dollars) of a 
ride as a piecewise defined function of the distance x traveled 
(in miles) for 0  x  2, and sketch a graph of this function.
	83.	 Postage Rates    The 2014 domestic postage rate for ﬁrst-
class letters weighing 3.5 oz or less is 49 cents for the ﬁrst 
ounce (or less), plus 21 cents for each additional ounce (or 
part of an ounce). Express the postage P as a piecewise  
defined function of the weight x of a letter, with 0  x  3.5, 
and sketch a graph of this function.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	84.	 Discover:  When Does a Graph Represent a Function?    For 
every integer n, the graph of the equation y xn is the graph 
of a function, namely f1x2 xn. Explain why the graph of  
x y2 is not the graph of a function of x. Is the graph of  
x y3 the graph of a function of x? If so, of what function 
of x is it the graph? Determine for what integers n the graph 
of x yn is a graph of a function of x.
	85.	 Discuss:  Step Functions    In Example 7 and Exercises 82 
and 83 we are given functions whose graphs consist of hori-
zontal line segments. Such functions are often called step 
functions, because their graphs look like stairs. Give some 
other examples of step functions that arise in everyday life.
	86.	 Discover:  Stretched Step Functions    Sketch graphs of the 
functions f1x2 “x‘, g1x2 “2x‘, and h1x2 “3x‘ on sepa-
rate graphs. How are the graphs related? If n is a positive 
integer, what does a graph of k1x2 “nx‘ look like?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	87.	 Discover:  Graph of the Absolute Value of a Function
(a)	 Draw graphs of the functions
f1x2 x2 x 6
	
and	
g1x2 0 x2 x 6 0
	
	How are the graphs of f and g related?
(b)	 Draw graphs of the functions f1x2 x4 6x2 and 
g1x2 0 x4 6x2 0 . How are the graphs of f and g 
related?
(c)	 In general, if g1x2 0 f1x2 0 , how are the graphs of f 
and g related? Draw graphs to illustrate your answer.
2.3 
Getting Information from the Graph of a Function
■  Values of a Function; Domain and Range  ■  Comparing Function Values: Solving Equations 
and Inequalities Graphically  ■  Increasing and Decreasing Functions  ■  Local Maximum  
and Minimum Values of a Function
Many properties of a function are more easily obtained from a graph than from the rule 
that describes the function. We will see in this section how a graph tells us whether the 
values of a function are increasing or decreasing and also where the maximum and 
minimum values of a function are.
■  Values of a Function; Domain and Range
A complete graph of a function contains all the information about a function, because 
the graph tells us which input values correspond to which output values. To analyze the 
graph of a function, we must keep in mind that the height of the graph is the value of 
the function. So we can read off the values of a function from its graph.
Example 1  ■  Finding the Values of a Function from a Graph
The function T graphed in Figure 1 gives the temperature between noon and 6:00 p.m. 
at a certain weather station.
(a)	 Find T112 , T132 , and T152 .
(b)	 Which is larger, T122  or T142 ?
(c)	 Find the value(s) of x for which T1x2   25.
(d)	 Find the value(s) of x for which T1x2   25.
(e)	 Find the net change in temperature from 1 p.m. to 3 p.m.
Solution
(a)	 T112 is the temperature at 1:00 p.m. It is represented by the height of the graph 
above the x-axis at x  1. Thus T112 25. Similarly, T132  30 and T152  20.
(b)	 Since the graph is higher at x  2 than at x  4, it follows that T122 is larger than T142.
(c)	 The height of the graph is 25 when x is 1 and when x is 4. In other words, the 
temperature is 25 at 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(d)	 The graph is higher than 25 for x between 1 and 4. In other words, the tempera-
ture was 25 or greater between 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(e)	 The net change in temperature is
T132 T112 30 25 5
	 	 So there was a net increase of 5°F from 1 p.m. to 3 p.m.
Now Try Exercises 7 and 55	
■
Net change is defined on page 151.
x
T (*F) 
0
10
20
30
40
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 1  Temperature function
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.3  ■  Getting Information from the Graph of a Function  171
The graph of a function helps us to picture the domain and range of the function on 
the x-axis and y-axis, as shown in the box below.
DOMAIN AND RANGE FROM A GRAPH
The domain and range of a function y f1x2  can be obtained from a graph of 
f as shown in the figure. The domain is the set of all x-values for which f is 
defined, and the range is all the corresponding y-values.
y
x
0
Domain
Range
y=Ï
Example 2  ■  Finding the Domain and Range from a Graph
(a)	 Use a graphing calculator to draw the graph of f1x2 "4 x2.
(b)	 Find the domain and range of f.
Solution
(a)	 The graph is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2  Graph of f1x2 "4 x2
2
Domain=[_2, 2]
0
_2
Range=[0, 2]
(b)	 From the graph in Figure 2 we see that the domain is 32, 24 and the range  
is 30, 24.
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
■  Comparing Function Values: Solving Equations  
and Inequalities Graphically
We can compare the values of two functions f and g visually by drawing their graphs. 
The points at which the graphs intersect are the points where the values of the two func-
tions are equal. So the solutions of the equation f1x2 g1x2  are the values of x at 
which the two graphs intersect. The points at which the graph of g is higher than the 
graph of f are the points where the values of g are greater than the values of f. So the 
solutions of the inequality f1x2 g1x2  are the values of x at which the graph of g is 
higher than the graph of f. 
See Appendix C, Graphing with a 
Graphing Calculator, for guidelines  
on using a graphing calculator. See  
Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84  
Graphing Calculator, for specific 
graphing instructions. Go to  
www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
SOLVING EQUATIONS AND INEQUALITIES GRAPHICALLY
The solution(s) of the equation f1x2 g1x2  are the values of x where the 
graphs of f and g intersect. 
The solution(s) of the inequality f1x2 g1x2  are the values of x where the 
graph of g is higher than the graph of f.
x
0
a
b
g
f
The solutions of Ï=g(x)
are the values a and b.
x
0
a
y
y
b
g
f
The solution of Ï<g(x)
is the interval (a, b).
We can use these observations to solve equations and inequalities graphically, as the 
next example illustrates.
Example 3  ■  Solving Graphically
Solve the given equation or inequality graphically.
(a)	 2x2 3 5x 6
(b)	 2x2 3 5x 6
(c)	 2x2 3 5x 6
Solution    We first define functions f and g that correspond to the left-hand side and 
to the right-hand side of the equation or inequality. So we define 
f1x2 2x2 3    and   
g1x2 5x 6
Next, we sketch graphs of f and g on the same set of axes. 
(a)	 The given equation is equivalent to f1x2 g1x2 . From the graph in Figure 3(a) 
we see that the solutions of the equation are  x 0.5 and x 3.
(b)	 The given inequality is equivalent to f1x2 g1x2 . From the graph in Figure 3(b) 
we see that the solution is the interval 30.5, 34. 
(c)	 The given inequality is equivalent to f1x2 g1x2 . From the graph in Figure 3(c) 
we see that the solution is 1`, 0.52 < 13, `2 .
Figure 3  Graphs of f1x2 2x2 3 and g1x2 5x 6
(a) Solution: x=_0.5, 3
(b) Solution: [_0.5, 3]
f(x)=2x™+3
g(x)=5x+6
y
x
1
0
30
20
10
(c) Solution: (_`, _0.5)  (3, `)
f(x)=2x™+3
g(x)=5x+6
y
x
1
0
30
20
10
f(x)=2x™+3
g(x)=5x+6
y
x
1
0
30
20
10
Now Try Exercises 9 and 23	
■
You can also solve the equations and 
inequalities algebraically. Check that 
your solutions match the solutions we 
obtained graphically.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.3  ■  Getting Information from the Graph of a Function  173
To solve an equation graphically, we can first move all terms to one side of the equa-
tion and then graph the function that corresponds to the nonzero side of the equation. 
In this case the solutions of the equation are the x-intercepts of the graph. We can use 
this same method to solve inequalities graphically, as the following example shows.
Example 4  ■  Solving Graphically
Solve the given equation or inequality graphically.
(a)	 x3 6 2x2 5x
(b)	 x3 6 2x2 5x
Solution    We first move all terms to one side to obtain an equivalent equation (or 
inequality). For the equation in part (a) we obtain
x3 2x2 5x 6 0    Move terms to LHS
Then we define a function f by  
f1x2 x3 2x2 5x 6    Define f 
Next, we use a graphing calculator to graph f, as shown in Figure 4.  
(a)	 The given equation is the same as f1x2 0, so the solutions are the x-intercepts 
of the graph. From Figure 4(a) we see that the solutions are x 2, x 1, and 
x 3.
(b)	 The given inequality is the same as f1x2 0, so the solutions are the x-values at 
which the graph of f is on or above the x-axis. From Figure 4(b) we see the solu-
tion is 32, 14 < 33, `4. 
Figure 4  Graphs of 
f1x2 x3 2x2 5x 6
(a) Solution: x=_2, 1, 3
y
x
1
0
10
(b) Solution: 3_2, 14  33, `4
y
x
1
0
10
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
■  Increasing and Decreasing Functions
It is very useful to know where the graph of a function rises and where it falls. The 
graph shown in Figure 5 rises, falls, then rises again as we move from left to right: It 
rises from A to B, falls from B to C, and rises again from C to D. The function f is said 
to be increasing when its graph rises and decreasing when its graph falls.
y
x
0
a
y=Ï
b
c
d
A
B
C
D
f is increasing
f is increasing
f is decreasing
Figure 5  f is increasing on 1a, b2 
and 1c, d2; f is decreasing on 1b, c2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

174 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
We have the following deﬁnition.
Definition of Increasing and Decreasing Functions
f is increasing on an interval I if f1x12 f1x22  whenever x1 x2 in I.
f is decreasing on an interval I if f1x12 f1x22  whenever x1 x2 in I.
f(
x⁄)
x2)
x2)
f
f(x⁄)
f(
f
y
x
0
x⁄
x2
f(
y
x
0
x⁄
x2
f is increasing
f is decreasing
Example 5  ■  Intervals on Which a Function Increases  
or Decreases
The graph in Figure 6 gives the weight W of a person at age x. Determine the inter-
vals on which the function W is increasing and on which it is decreasing.
x (yr) 
W (lb) 
0
50
100
150
200
10
20 30
40 50 60
70 80
Figure 6  Weight as a function of age
Solution    The function W is increasing on 10, 252  and 135, 402 . It is decreasing on  
140, 502 . The function W is constant (neither increasing nor decreasing) on 125, 352
and 150, 802 . This means that the person gained weight until age 25, then gained 
weight again between ages 35 and 40. He lost weight between ages 40 and 50.
Now Try Exercise 57	
■
By convention we write the intervals on which a function is increasing or decreasing 
as open intervals. (It would also be true to say that the function is increasing or decreas-
ing on the corresponding closed interval. So for instance, it is also correct to say that 
the function W in Example 5 is decreasing on 340, 504.)
Example 6  ■  Finding Intervals on Which a Function Increases  
or Decreases
(a)	 Sketch a graph of the function f1x2 12x2 4x3 3x4.
(b)	 Find the domain and range of f.
(c)	 Find the intervals on which f is increasing and on which f is decreasing.
From the definition we see that a func-
tion increases or decreases on an inter-
val. It does not make sense to apply 
these definitions at a single point.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.3  ■  Getting Information from the Graph of a Function  175
Solution
(a)	 We use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph in Figure 7.
(b)	 The domain of f is R because f is deﬁned for all real numbers. Using the trace  
feature on the calculator, we ﬁnd that the highest value is f122  32. So the range  
of f is 1`, 324.
(c)	 From the graph we see that f is increasing on the intervals 1`, 12  and 10, 22 
and is decreasing on 11, 02 and 12, `2.
40 
40
2.5
3.5 
Figure 7  Graph of 
f1x2 12x2 4x3 3x4
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
Example 7  ■  Finding Intervals Where a Function  
Increases and Decreases
(a)	 Sketch the graph of the function f1x2 x2/3.
(b)	 Find the domain and range of the function.
(c)	 Find the intervals on which f is increasing and on which f is decreasing.
Solution
(a)	 We use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph in Figure 8.
(b)	 From the graph we observe that the domain of f is R and the range is 30, `2.
(c)	 From the graph we see that f is decreasing on 1`, 02  and increasing on 10, `2 .
Figure 8  Graph of f1x2 x2/3
10
1
20
20
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
■  Local Maximum and Minimum Values of a Function
Finding the largest or smallest values of a function is important in many applications. 
For example, if a function represents revenue or proﬁt, then we are interested in its 
maximum value. For a function that represents cost, we would want to ﬁnd its minimum 
value. (See Focus on Modeling: Modeling with Functions on pages 237–244 for many 
such examples.) We can easily ﬁnd these values from the graph of a function. We ﬁrst 
deﬁne what we mean by a local maximum or minimum.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Local Maxima and Minima of a Function
1.	 The function value f1a2 is a local maximum value of f if 
f1a2  f1x2    when x is near a
(This means that f1a2  f1x2 for all x in some open interval  
containing a.) In this case we say that f has a local maximum  
at x  a.
2.	 The function value f1a2 is a local minimum value of f if 
f1a2  f1x2    when x is near a
(This means that f1a2  f1x2 for all x in some open interval  
containing a.) In this case we say that f has a local minimum  
at x  a.
y 
x 
f 
Local maximum point
Local minimum point
0 
We can ﬁnd the local maximum and minimum values of a function using a graphing  
calculator. If there is a viewing rectangle such that the point 1a, f1a22 is the highest point 
on the graph of f within the viewing rectangle (not on the edge), then the number f1a2 
is a local maximum value of f (see Figure 9). Notice that f1a2  f1x2 for all numbers 
x that are close to a.
x
y
0
a
b
Local minimum
value f(b)
Local maximum
value f(a)
Figure 9
Similarly, if there is a viewing rectangle such that the point 1b, f1b22 is the lowest 
point on the graph of f within the viewing rectangle, then the number f1b2 is a local 
minimum value of f. In this case f1b2  f1x2 for all numbers x that are close to b.
Example 8  ■  Finding Local Maxima and Minima from a Graph
Find the local maximum and minimum values of the function f1x2  x3  8x  1, 
rounded to three decimal places.
Solution    The graph of f is shown in Figure 10. There appears to be one local maxi-
mum between x  2 and x  1, and one local minimum between x  1 and x  2.
20
_20
_5
5
Figure 10  Graph of  
f1x2  x3  8x  1
Let’s ﬁnd the coordinates of the local maximum point ﬁrst. We zoom in to enlarge 
the area near this point, as shown in Figure 11. Using the trace  feature on the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.3  ■  Getting Information from the Graph of a Function  177
graphing device, we move the cursor along the curve and observe how the y-coordinates 
change. The local maximum value of y is 9.709, and this value occurs when x is 
1.633, correct to three decimal places.
We locate the minimum value in a similar fashion. By zooming in to the viewing  
rectangle shown in Figure 12, we ﬁnd that the local minimum value is about 7.709, 
and this value occurs when x  1.633.
_1.7
9.71
9.7_1.6
1.6
_7.7
_7.71
1.7
Figure 11
Figure 12
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
The maximum and minimum commands on a TI-83 or TI-84 calculator provide an-
other method for ﬁnding extreme values of functions. We use this method in the next 
example.
Example 9  ■  A Model for Managing Traffic
A highway engineer develops a formula to estimate the number of cars that can safely 
travel a particular highway at a given speed. She assumes that each car is 17 ft long, 
travels at a speed of x mi/h, and follows the car in front of it at the safe following dis-
tance for that speed. She finds that the number N of cars that can pass a given point 
per minute is modeled by the function
N1x2 
88x
17 17a x
20 b
2
Graph the function in the viewing rectangle 30, 1004 by 30, 604.
(a)	 Find the intervals on which the function N is increasing and on which it is  
decreasing.
(b)	 Find the maximum value of N. What is the maximum carrying capacity of the 
road, and at what speed is it achieved? 
See the Discovery Project referenced in 
Chapter 3, on page 295, for how this 
model is obtained.
Discovery Project
Every Graph Tells a Story
A graph can often describe a real-world “story” much more quickly and effec-
tively than many words. For example, the stock market crash of 1929 is effec-
tively described by a graph of the Dow Jones Industrial Average. No words are 
needed to convey the message in the cartoon shown here. In this project we 
describe, or tell the story that corresponds to, a given graph as well as make 
graphs that correspond to a real-world “story.” You can find the project at  
www.stewartmath.com.
Dave Carpenter/www.CartoonStock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Solution    The graph is shown in Figure 13(a).
(a)	 From the graph we see that the function N is increasing on 10, 202 and decreasing 
on 120, `2 .
(b)	 There appears to be a maximum between x 19 and x 21. Using the  
maximum command, as shown in Figure 13(b), we see that the maximum value 
of N is about 51.78, and it occurs when x is 20. So the maximum carrying capac-
ity is about 52 cars per minute at a speed of 20 mi/h.
Figure 13  Highway capacity at 
speed x
100
(b)
60
100
(a)
60
0
0
Maximum
X=20.000004   Y=51.764706
Now Try Exercise 65	
■
See Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for specific  
instructions on using the maximum  
command. Go to www. 
stewartmath.com.
concepts
1–5  ■  The function f graphed below is defined by a polyno-
mial expression of degree 4. Use the graph to solve the 
exercises.
f 
0 
3 
3 
x
y 
	 1.	 To ﬁnd a function value f1a2  from the graph of f, we ﬁnd 
the height of the graph above the x-axis at x    
  .  
From the graph of f we see that f132  
 and 
f112  
  . The net change in f between x  1 and x  3 
is f1  
2 f1  
2  
  .
	 2.	 The domain of the function f is all the  
-values of the points 
on the graph, and the range is all the corresponding  
-values. 
From the graph of f we see that the domain of f is the interval 
 
 and the range of f is the interval  
  .
	 3.	 (a)	 If f is increasing on an interval, then the y-values of the 
points on the graph  
 as the x-values increase. 
From the graph of f we see that f is increasing on the 
intervals  
 and  
  .
(b)	 If f is decreasing on an interval, then the y-values of the 
points on the graph  
 as the x-values increase. 
From the graph of f we see that f is decreasing on the 
intervals  
 and  
  .
	 4.	 (a)	 A function value f1a2 is a local maximum value of f  
if f1a2  is the  
 value of f on some open  
interval containing a. From the graph of f we see that  
there are two local maximum values of f: One local  
maximum is  
  , and it occurs when x 2;  
the other local maximum is  
  , and it occurs 
when x  
  .
(b)	 The function value f1a2  is a local minimum value of f if 
f1a2  is the  
 value of f on some open interval  
containing a. From the graph of f we see that there is 
one local minimum value of f. The local minimum value 
is  
  , and it occurs when x  
  . 
	 5.	 The solutions of the equation f1x2 0 are the  
 
-intercepts of the graph of f. The solution of the 
inequality f1x2 0 is the set of x-values at which the  
graph of f is on or above the  
-axis. From the graph  
of f we find that the solutions of the equation f1x2 0 are 
x  
 and x  
  , and the solution of the inequality 
f1x2 0 is  
  .
	 6.	 (a)	 To solve the equation 2x 1 x 4 graphically, we 
graph the functions f1x2  
 and 
g1x2  
 on the same set of axes and 
2.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.3  ■  Getting Information from the Graph of a Function  179
determine the values of x at which the graphs of f and g 
intersect. Graph f and g below, and use the graphs to 
solve the equation. The solution is x  
  .
1
x
y
0
1
(b)	 To solve the inequality 2x 1 x 4 graphically, 
we graph the functions f1x2  
 and 
g1x2  
 on the same set of axes and 
find the values of x at which the graph of g is 
 
 (higher/lower) than the graph of f. 
From the graphs in part (a) we see that the solution of 
the inequality is the interval 1  
  ,  
2.
skills
	 7.	 Values of a Function    The graph of a function h is given.
(a)	 Find h122, h102, h122, and h132.
(b)	 Find the domain and range of h.
(c)	 Find the values of x for which h1x2  3.
(d)	 Find the values of x for which h1x2  3.
(e)	 Find the net change in h between x  3 and x  3.
_3
3
x
y
0
3
h
	 8.	 Values of a Function    The graph of a function g is given.
(a)	 Find g142, g122, g102, g122, and g142.
(b)	 Find the domain and range of g.
(c)	 Find the values of x for which g1x2 3. 
(d)	 Estimate the values of x for which g1x2 0.
(e)	 Find the net change in g between x 1 and x 2.
x
y
0
3
g
_3
3
	 9.	 Solving Equations and Inequalities Graphically    Graphs of 
the functions f and g are given.
(a)	 Which is larger, f102 or g(02?
(b)	 Which is larger, f132 or g132?
(c)	 For which values of x is f1x2  g1x2?
(d)	 Find the values of x for which f1x2 g1x2 .
(e)	 Find the values of x for which f1x2 g1x2 .
_2
2
x
y
0
2
_2
f
g
	10.	 Solving Equations and Inequalities Graphically    Graphs of 
the functions f and g are given.
(a)	 Which is larger, f162  or g162 ?
(b)	 Which is larger, f132  or g132 ?
(c)	 Find the values of x for which f1x2 g1x2 . 
(d)	 Find the values of x for which f1x2 g1x2 .
(e)	 Find the values of x for which f1x2 g1x2 .
1
g
0
x
1
y
f
11–16  ■  Domain and Range from a Graph    A function f is 
given. (a) Sketch a graph of f. (b) Use the graph to find the 
domain and range of f.
	11.	 f1x2 2x 3	
12.	 f1x2 3x 2
	13.	 f1x2 x 2, 2 x 5	
14.	 f1x2 4 2x, 1 x 4
	15.	 f1x2 x2 1, 3 x 3
	16.	 f1x2 3 x2, 3 x 3
17–22  ■  Finding Domain and Range Graphically    A function f 
is given. (a) Use a graphing calculator to draw the graph of f.  
(b) Find the domain and range of f from the graph.
	17.	 f 1x2 x2 4x 3	
18.	 f 1x2 x2 2x 1
	19.	 f1x2 !x 1	
20.	 f1x2 !x 2
	21.	 f1x2 "16 x2	
22.	 f1x2 "25 x2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
23–26  ■  Solving Equations and Inequalities Graphically     
Solve the given equation or inequality graphically. 
	23.	 (a)  x 2 4 x	
(b)	 x 2 4 x
	24.	 (a)  2x 3 3x 7	
(b)	 2x 3 3x 7
	25.	 (a)  x2 2 x	
(b)	 x2 2 x
	26.	 (a)  x2 3 4x	
(b)  x2 3 4x
27–30  ■  Solving Equations and Inequalities Graphically    Solve 
the given equation or inequality graphically. State your answers 
rounded to two decimals.
27.	 (a)	 x3 3x2 x2 3x 7	
(b)	 x3 3x2 x2 3x 7
28.	 (a)	 5x2 x3 x2 3x 4
(b)	 5x2 x3 x2 3x 4
29.	 (a)	 16x3 16x2 x 1	
(b)  16x3 16x2 x 1
30.	 (a)	 1 !x "x2 1	
(b)  1 !x "x2 1
31–34  ■  Increasing and Decreasing    The graph of a function f 
is given. Use the graph to estimate the following. (a) The domain 
and range of f. (b) The intervals on which f is increasing and on 
which f is decreasing.
	31.	
y
x
0
1
1
	
32.	
y
x
0
1
1
	33.	
y
x
0
1
1
	
34.	
y
x
1
1
35–42  ■  Increasing and Decreasing    A function f is given.  
(a) Use a graphing calculator to draw the graph of f. (b) Find the 
domain and range of f. (c) State approximately the intervals on 
which f is increasing and on which f is decreasing.
35.	 f1x2  x2  5x	
36.	 f1x2  x3  4x
	37.	 f1x2  2x3  3x2  12x	
38.	 f1x2  x4  16x2
	39.	 f1x2  x3  2x2  x  2
	40.	 f1x2  x4  4x3  2x2  4x  3
41.	 f1x2 x2/5
42.	 f1x2 4 x2/3
43–46  ■  Local Maximum and Minimum Values    The graph of  
a function f is given. Use the graph to estimate the following.  
(a) All the local maximum and minimum values of the function 
and the value of x at which each occurs. (b) The intervals on 
which the function is increasing and on which the function is 
decreasing.
	43.	 	
	
44.
1
1
0
x
y
	
 
1
1
0
x
y
	45.	 	
	
46.	
1
1
0
x
y
 	
1
1
0
x
y
47–54  ■  Local Maximum and Minimum Values    A function is 
given. (a) Find all the local maximum and minimum values of the 
function and the value of x at which each occurs. State each 
answer rounded to two decimal places. (b) Find the intervals on 
which the function is increasing and on which the function is 
decreasing. State each answer rounded to two decimal places.
	47.	 f 1x2  x 3  x
	48.	 f 1x2  3  x  x 2  x 3
	49.	 g1x2  x4  2x 3  11x 2
	50.	 g1x2  x5  8x 3  20x
	51.	 U1x2 x!6 x	
52.	 U1x2 x"x x2
	53.	 V1x2 1 x2
x3
	
54.	 V1x2 
1
x2 x 1
applications
	55.	 Power Consumption    The ﬁgure shows the power consump-
tion in San Francisco for a day in September (P is measured 
in megawatts; t is measured in hours starting at midnight).
(a)	 What was the power consumption at 6:00 a.m.?  
At 6:00 p.m.?
(b)	 When was the power consumption the lowest?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.3  ■  Getting Information from the Graph of a Function  181
(c)	 When was the power consumption the highest?
(d)	 Find the net change in the power consumption from  
9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
­
P (MW)
0
18
15
12
9
6
3
t (h)
21
400
600
800
200
Source: Paciﬁc Gas & Electric
	56.	 Earthquake    The graph shows the vertical acceleration of 
the ground from the 1994 Northridge earthquake in Los 
Angeles, as measured by a seismograph. (Here t represents 
the time in seconds.)
(a)	 At what time t did the earthquake ﬁrst make noticeable 
movements of the earth?
(b)	 At what time t did the earthquake seem to end?
(c)	 At what time t was the maximum intensity of the earth-
quake reached?
Source: California Department of
Mines and Geology
5
50
50
10 15
20 25
a
(cm/s2)
t (s) 
100
30
57.	 Weight Function    The graph gives the weight W of a person 
at age x.
(a)	 Determine the intervals on which the function W is 
increasing and those on which it is decreasing.
(b)	 What do you think happened when this person was  
30 years old?
(c)	 Find the net change in the person’s weight W from age 
10 to age 20.
0
150
100
50
10
200
W (lb)
20
30
40
50
60
70 x (yr)
	58.	 Distance Function    The graph gives a sales representative’s 
distance from his home as a function of time on a certain day.
(a)	 Determine the time intervals on which his distance from 
home was increasing and those on which it was 
decreasing.
(b)	 Describe in words what the graph indicates about his  
travels on this day.
(c)	 Find the net change in his distance from home between 
noon and 1:00 p.m.
8 A.M.
10
NOON
2
4
6 P.M.
Time (hours)
Distance
from home
(miles)
	59.	 Changing Water Levels    The graph shows the depth of water 
W in a reservoir over a one-year period as a function of the 
number of days x since the beginning of the year.
(a)	 Determine the intervals on which the function W is 
increasing and on which it is decreasing.
(b)	 At what value of x does W achieve a local maximum?  
A local minimum?
(c)	 Find the net change in the depth W from 100 days to  
300 days.
x (days) 
W (ft) 
0
25
50
75
100
100
200
300
	60.	 Population Growth and Decline    The graph shows the popu-
lation P in a small industrial city from 1950 to 2000. The 
variable x represents the number of years since 1950.
(a)	 Determine the intervals on which the function P is 
increasing and on which it is decreasing.
(b)	 What was the maximum population, and in what year 
was it attained?
(c)	 Find the net change in the population P from 1970 to 1990.
x (yr) 
P
(thousands) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	61.	 Hurdle Race    Three runners compete in a 100-meter hurdle 
race. The graph depicts the distance run as a function of time 
for each runner. Describe in words what the graph tells you 
about this race. Who won the race? Did each runner ﬁnish 
the race? What do you think happened to Runner B?
100
y (m)
0
20
t (s)
A
B
C
	62.	 Gravity Near the Moon    We can use Newton’s Law of  
Gravity to measure the gravitational attraction between the 
moon and an algebra student in a spaceship located a dis-
tance x above the moon’s surface:
F1x2 350
x2
	 	 Here F is measured in newtons (N), and x is measured in mil-
lions of meters.
(a)	 Graph the function F for values of x between 0 and 10.
(b)	 Use the graph to describe the behavior of the gravita-
tional attraction F as the distance x increases.
	63.	 Radii of Stars    Astronomers infer the radii of stars using the 
Stefan Boltzmann Law:
E1T2 15.67 1082T 4
	 	 where E is the energy radiated per unit of surface area  
measured in watts (W) and T is the absolute temperature 
measured in kelvins (K). 
(a)	 Graph the function E for temperatures T between 100 K 
and 300 K. 
(b)	 Use the graph to describe the change in energy E as the 
temperature T increases.
	64.	 Volume of Water    Between 0°C and 30°C, the volume V (in 
cubic centimeters) of 1 kg of water at a temperature T is 
given by the formula
V  999.87  0.06426T  0.0085043T 2  0.0000679T 3
	 	 Find the temperature at which the volume of 1 kg of water is  
a minimum.
[Source: Physics, by D. Halliday and R. Resnick]
	65.	 Migrating Fish    A ﬁsh swims at a speed √ relative to the  
water, against a current of 5 mi/h. Using a mathematical 
model of energy expenditure, it can be shown that the total 
energy E required to swim a distance of 10 mi is given by
E1√2 2.73√3
 10
√5
	 	 Biologists believe that migrating ﬁsh try to minimize the total 
energy required to swim a ﬁxed distance. Find the value of √ 
that minimizes energy required.
[Note:  This result has been veriﬁed; migrating ﬁsh swim against 
a current at a speed 50% greater than the speed of the current.]
	66.	 Coughing    When a foreign object that is lodged in the tra-
chea (windpipe) forces a person to cough, the diaphragm 
thrusts upward, causing an increase in pressure in the lungs. 
At the same time, the trachea contracts, causing the expelled 
air to move faster and increasing the pressure on the foreign 
object. According to a mathematical model of coughing, the 
velocity √ (in cm/s) of the airstream through an average- 
sized person’s trachea is related to the radius r of the trachea 
(in cm) by the function
√1r2 3.211 r2r2  1
2 r 1
	 	 Determine the value of r for which √ is a maximum.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	67.	 DISCUSS:  Functions That Are Always Increasing or Decreasing  
Sketch rough graphs of functions that are deﬁned for all real 
numbers and that exhibit the indicated behavior (or explain 
why the behavior is impossible).
(a)	 f is always increasing, and f1x2 0 for all x
(b)	 f is always decreasing, and f1x2 0 for all x
(c)	 f is always increasing, and f1x2 0 for all x
(d)	 f is always decreasing, and f1x2 0 for all x
	68.	 DISCUSS:  Maximum and Minimum Values    In Example 9 we 
saw a real-world situation in which the maximum value of a 
function is important. Name several other everyday situations 
in which a maximum or minimum value is important.
	69.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  Minimizing a Distance    When we 
seek a minimum or maximum value of a function, it is some-
times easier to work with a simpler function instead.
(a)	 Suppose 
g1x2 !f 1x2
	
where f1x2   0 for all x. Explain why the local minima 
and maxima of f and g occur at the same values of x.
(b)	 Let g1x2  be the distance between the point 13, 02  and  
the point 1x, x22  on the graph of the parabola y  x2. 
Express g as a function of x.
(c)	 Find the minimum value of the function g that you found 
in part (b). Use the principle described in part (a) to sim-
plify your work.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.4  ■  Average Rate of Change of a Function  183
2.4 
Average Rate of Change of a Function
■  Average Rate of Change  ■  Linear Functions Have Constant Rate of Change
Functions are often used to model changing quantities. In this section we learn how to 
ﬁnd the rate at which the values of a function change as the input variable changes.
■  Average Rate of Change
We are all familiar with the concept of speed: If you drive a distance of 120 miles in  
2 hours, then your average speed, or rate of travel, is 120 mi
2 h
60 mi/h. Now suppose you 
take a car trip and record the distance that you travel every few minutes. The distance s 
you have traveled is a function of the time t:
s1t2  total distance traveled at time t
We graph the function s as shown in Figure 1. The graph shows that you have traveled 
a total of 50 miles after 1 hour, 75 miles after 2 hours, 140 miles after 3 hours, and so 
on. To ﬁnd your average speed between any two points on the trip, we divide the dis-
tance traveled by the time elapsed.
s (mi)
200
100
1
2
3
4
0
t (h) 
3 h
150 mi
Figure 1  Average speed
Let’s calculate your average speed between 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. The time 
elapsed is 4  1  3 hours. To ﬁnd the distance you traveled, we subtract the distance 
at 1:00 p.m. from the distance at 4:00 p.m., that is, 200  50  150 mi. Thus your 
average speed is
average speed distance traveled
time elapsed
150 mi
3 h
50 mi/h
The average speed that we have just calculated can be expressed by using function nota-
tion:
average speed 
s142 s112
4 1
200 50
3
50 mi/h
Note that the average speed is different over different time intervals. For example, be-
tween 2:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. we ﬁnd that
average speed 
s132 s122
3 2
140 75
1
65 mi/h
Finding average rates of change is important in many contexts. For instance, we 
might be interested in knowing how quickly the air temperature is dropping as a storm 
­approaches or how fast revenues are increasing from the sale of a new product. So we 
need to know how to determine the average rate of change of the functions that model 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
these quantities. In fact, the concept of average rate of change can be deﬁned for any 
­function.
average rate of change
The average rate of change of the function y f1x2 between x  a and x  b is
average rate of change change in y
change in x 
f1b2 f1a2
b a
The average rate of change is the slope of the secant line between x  a and x  b 
on the graph of f, that is, the line that passes through 1a, f1a22 and 1b, f1b22.
f(a)
y=Ï
y
x
0
f(b)
a
b
b-a
f(b)-f(a)
average rate of change=f(b)-f(a)
b-a
In the expression for average rate of change, the numerator f1b2 f1a2  is the net 
change in the value of f between x a and x b (see page 151).
Example 1  ■  Calculating the Average Rate of Change
For the function f1x2 1x 32 2, whose graph is shown in Figure 2, ﬁnd the net 
change and the average rate of change between the following points:
(a)	 x  1 and x  3                (b)  x  4 and x  7
Solution
(a)	  Net change f132 f112 	
Deﬁnition
	 	
 13 32 2 11 32 2	
Use f1x2 1x 32 2
	 	
 4
	
Calculate
	 	  Average rate of change 
f132 f112
3 1
	
Deﬁnition
	 	
 4
2 2
	
Calculate
(b)	  Net change f 172 f 142
	
Deﬁnition
	 	
 17 32 2 14 32 2	
Use f1x2 1x 32 2
	 	
 15
	
Calculate
	 	  Average rate of change 
f172 f142
7 4
	
Deﬁnition
	 	
 15
3 5
	
Calculate
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
x
y
0
1
16
9
1
3
4
7
Figure 2  f1x2 1x 32 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.4  ■  Average Rate of Change of a Function  185
Example 2  ■  Average Speed of a Falling Object
If an object is dropped from a high cliff or a tall building, then the distance it has 
fallen ­after t seconds is given by the function d1t2 16t2. Find its average speed 
(average rate of change) over the following intervals:
(a)	 Between 1 s and 5 s                (b)  Between t  a and t  a  h
Solution
(a)	  Average rate of change 
d152 d112
5 1
	
Deﬁnition
	 	
 
16152 2 16112 2
5 1
	
Use d1t2 16t2
	 	
 400 16
4
	
Calculate
	 	
 96 ft/s	
Calculate
(b)	  Average rate of change 
d1a h2 d1a2
1a h2 a
	
Deﬁnition
	 	
 
161a h2 2 161a2 2
1a h2 a
	
Use d1t2 16t2
	 	
 
161a2 2ah h2 a22
h
	
Expand and factor 16
	 	
 
1612ah h22
h
	
Simplify numerator
	 	
 
16h12a h2
h
	
Factor h
	 	
 1612a h2 	
Simplify
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
The average rate of change calculated in Example 2(b) is known as a difference quo-
tient. In calculus we use difference quotients to calculate instantaneous rates of change. 
An example of an instantaneous rate of change is the speed shown on the speedometer of 
your car. This changes from one instant to the next as your car’s speed changes.
The graphs in Figure 3 show that if a function is increasing on an interval, then the 
average rate of change between any two points is positive, whereas if a function is 
­decreasing on an interval, then the average rate of change between any two points is 
­negative.
y
x
0
a
b
Slope>0
y=Ï
ƒ increasing
Average rate of change positive
ƒ decreasing
Average rate of change negative
y
x
0
a
b
Slope<0
y=Ï
Figure 3
d(t)=16t2
Function: In t seconds the stone
falls 16t2 ft.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Example 3  ■  Average Rate of Temperature Change
The table in the margin gives the outdoor temperatures observed by a science student 
on a spring day. Draw a graph of the data, and ﬁnd the average rate of change of tem-
perature between the following times:
(a)	 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(b)	 1:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m.
(c)	 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Solution    A graph of the temperature data is shown in Figure 4. Let t represent time, 
measured in hours since midnight (so, for example, 2:00 p.m. corresponds to t  14). 
­Deﬁne the function F by
F1t2  temperature at time t
(a)	 Average rate of change 
F192 F182
9 8
40 38
9 8
2
	 	 The average rate of change was 2°F per hour.
F
60
50
40
30
8
10
0
 h
70
12
14
16
18
Figure 4 
(b)	 Average rate of change 
F1152 F1132
15 13
67 62
2
2.5
	 	 The average rate of change was 2.5°F per hour.
(c)	 Average rate of change 
F1192 F1162
19 16
51 64
3
4.3
	 	 The average rate of change was about 4.3°F per hour during this time interval. 
The negative sign indicates that the temperature was dropping.
Now Try Exercise 31	
■
Time
Temperature (°F)
  8:00 a.m.
38
  9:00 a.m.
40
10:00 a.m.
44
11:00 a.m.
50
12:00 noon
56
  1:00 p.m.
62
  2:00 p.m.
66
  3:00 p.m.
67
  4:00 p.m.
64
  5:00 p.m.
58
  6:00 p.m.
55
  7:00 p.m.
51
Temperature at 8:00 a.m.
Temperature at 9:00 a.m.
Discovery Project
When Rates of Change Change
In the real world, rates of change often themselves change.  A statement like 
“inflation is rising, but at a slower rate” involves a change of a rate of change. 
When you drive your car, your speed (rate of change of distance) increases 
when you accelerate and decreases when you decelerate. From Example 4 we 
see that functions whose graph is a line (linear functions) have constant rate of 
change. In this project we explore how the shape of a graph corresponds to a 
changing rate of change. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© Lisa S./Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.4  ■  Average Rate of Change of a Function  187
■  Linear Functions Have Constant Rate of Change
Recall that a function of the form f1x2 mx b is a linear function (see page 160). 
Its graph is a line with slope m. On the other hand, if a function f has constant rate of 
change, then it must be a linear function. (You are asked to prove these facts in Exer-
cises 51 and 52 in Section 2.5.) In general, the average rate of change of a linear func-
tion between any two points is the constant m. In the next example we find the average 
rate of change for a particular linear function.
Example 4  ■  Linear Functions Have Constant Rate of Change
Let f1x2 3x 5. Find the average rate of change of f between the following 
points.
(a)	 x  0 and x  1           
(b)	 x  3 and x  7           
(c)	 x  a and x  a  h
What conclusion can you draw from your answers?
Solution
(a)	  Average rate of change 
f112 f102
1 0

13 # 1 52 13 # 0 52
1
	 	
 
122 152
1
3
(b)	  Average rate of change 
f172 f132
7 3

13 # 7 52 13 # 3 52
4
	 	
 16 4
4
3
(c)	  Average rate of change 
f1a h2 f1a2
1a h2 a

331a h2 54 33a 54
h
	 	
 3a 3h 5 3a 5
h
3h
h 3
It appears that the average rate of change is always 3 for this function. In fact,  
part (c) proves that the rate of change between any two arbitrary points x  a and  
x  a  h is 3.
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
concepts
	 1.	 If you travel 100 miles in two hours, then your average speed 
for the trip is
average speed  
   
	 2.	 The average rate of change of a function f between x a 
and x b is
average rate of change  
	 3.	 The average rate of change of the function f1x2 x2 
between x 1 and x 5 is
average rate of change  
   
	 4.	 (a)	 The average rate of change of a function f between 
x a and x b is the slope of the  
 line 
between 1a, f1a22  and 1b, f1b22 .
(b)	 The average rate of change of the linear function 
f1x2 3x 5 between any two points is  
  .
2.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
5–6  ■  Yes or No? If No, give a reason.
	 5.	 (a)	 Is the average rate of change of a function between 
x a and x b the slope of the secant line through 
1a, f1a22  and 1b, f1b22 ?
(b)	 Is the average rate of change of a linear function the 
same for all intervals?
	 6.	 (a)	 Can the average rate of change of an increasing function 
ever be negative?
(b)	 If the average rate of change of a function between 
x a and x b is negative, then is the function  
necessarily decreasing on the interval 1a, b2 ?
skills
7–10  ■  Net Change and Average Rate of Change    The graph  
of a function is given. Determine (a) the net change and (b) the 
average rate of change between the indicated points on the 
graph.
	 7.	
y
x
0
1
1
3
5
4
	
8.	
2
4
y
x
0
1
5
	 9.	
y
0
x
1
5
6
	
10.	
y
0
5
2
4
_1
x
11–24  ■  Net Change and Average Rate of Change    A function is 
given. Determine (a) the net change and (b) the average rate of 
change between the given values of the variable.
	11.	 f1x2 3x 2 ; x 2, x 3
	12.	 r 1t2 3 1
3 t;    t 3, t 6
	13.	 h1t2 t 3
2;    t 4, t 1
	14.	 g1x2 2 2
3 x;    x 3, x 2
	15.	 h1t2 2t2 t;    t 3, t 6
	16.	 f1z2 1 3z2 ; z 2, z 0
	17.	 f1x2 x3 4x2 ; x 0, x 10
	18.	 g1t2 t4 t3 t2; 
t 2, t 2
	19.	 f1t2 5t2; 
t 3, t 3 h
	20.	 f1x2 1 3x2; 
x 2, x 2 h
	21.	 g1x2 1
x
 ; x 1, x a
	22.	 g1x2 
2
x 1
 ; x 0, x h
	23.	 f1t2 2
t
 ; t a, t a h
	24.	 f1t2 !t ; t a, t a h
25–26  ■  Average Rate of Change of a Linear Function     
A linear function is given. (a) Find the average rate of change of 
the function between x a and x a h. (b) Show that the 
average rate of change is the same as the slope of the line.
25.	 f1x2 1
2 x 3	
26.	 g1x2 4x 2
skills Plus
	27.	 Average Rate of Change    The graphs of the functions f and 
g are shown. The function 
 
 1f or g2  has a greater aver-
age rate of change between x 0 and x 1. The function 
 
 1f or g2  has a greater average rate of change between 
x 1 and x 2. The functions f and g have the same  
average rate of change between x   
 and x   
  .
1
1
0
x
y
f
g
	28.	 Average Rate of Change    Graphs of the functions f, g, and h 
are shown below. What can you say about the average rate of 
change of each function on the successive intervals 
30, 14, 31, 24, 32, 34, . . .?
1
1
0
f
x
1
1
0
x
1
1
0
x
g
h
y
y
y
applications
	29.	 Changing Water Levels    The graph shows the depth of water W 
in a reservoir over a one-year period as a function of the num-
ber of days x since the beginning of the year. What was the 
average rate of change of W between x  100 and x  200?
x (days) 
W (ft) 
0
25
50
75
100
100
200
300
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.4  ■  Average Rate of Change of a Function  189
	30.	 Population Growth and Decline    The graph shows the 
­population P in a small industrial city from 1950 to 2000.  
The variable x represents the number of years since 1950.
(a)	 What was the average rate of change of P between  
x  20 and x  40?
(b)	 Interpret the value of the average rate of change that you 
found in part (a).
x (yr) 
P
(thousands) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
	31.	 Population Growth and Decline    The table gives the popula-
tion in a small coastal community for the period 1997–2006. 
Figures shown are for January 1 in each year.
(a)	 What was the average rate of change of population  
between 1998 and 2001?
(b)	 What was the average rate of change of population  
between 2002 and 2004?
(c)	 For what period of time was the population increasing?
(d)	 For what period of time was the population decreasing?
Year
Population
1997
   624
1998
   856
1999
1,336
2000
1,578
2001
1,591
2002
1,483
2003
   994
2004
   826
2005
   801
2006
   745
	32.	 Running Speed    A man is running around a circular track 
that is 200 m in circumference. An observer uses a stopwatch 
to record the runner’s time at the end of each lap, obtaining 
the data in the following table.
(a)	 What was the man’s average speed (rate) between 68 s 
and 152 s?
(b)	 What was the man’s average speed between 263 s and 412 s?
(c)	 Calculate the man’s speed for each lap. Is he slowing 
down, speeding up, or neither?
Time (s)
Distance (m)
  32
  200
  68
  400
108
  600
152
  800
203
1000
263
1200
335
1400
412
1600
	33.	 DVD Player Sales    The table shows the number of DVD play-
ers sold in a small electronics store in the years 2003–2013.
Year
DVD players sold
2003
495
2004
513
2005
410
2006
402
2007
520
2008
580
2009
631
2010
719
2011
624
2012
582
2013
635
(a)	 What was the average rate of change of sales between 
2003 and 2013?
(b)	 What was the average rate of change of sales between 
2003 and 2004?
(c)	 What was the average rate of change of sales between 
2004 and 2005?
(d)	 Between which two successive years did DVD player 
sales increase most quickly? Decrease most quickly?
	34.	 Book Collection    Between 1980 and 2000 a rare book collec-
tor purchased books for his collection at the rate of 40 books 
per year. Use this information to complete the ­following 
table. (Note that not every year is given in the table.)
Year
Number of books
Year
Number of books
1980
  420
1995
1981
  460
1997
1982
1998
1985
1999
1990
2000
1220
1992
	35.	 Cooling Soup    When a bowl of hot soup is left in a room, 
the soup eventually cools down to room temperature. The 
temperature T of the soup is a function of time t. The table 
below gives the ­tempera­ture (in °F) of a bowl of soup t min-
utes after it was set on the table. Find the average rate of 
change of the temperature of the soup over the ﬁrst 20 min-
utes and over the next 20 minutes. During which interval did 
the soup cool off more quickly?
t (min)
T (°F)
t (min)
T (°F)
0
200
  35
94
5
172
  40
89
10
150
  50
81
15
133
  60
77
20
119
  90
72
25
108
120
70
30
100
150
70
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	36.	 Farms in the United States    The graph gives the number of 
farms in the United States from 1850 to 2000. 
(a)	 Estimate the average rate of change in the number of 
farms between (i) 1860 and 1890 and (ii) 1950 and 1970.
(b)	 In which decade did the number of farms experience the 
greatest average rate of decline?
y
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
1860
1900
1940
1980
x
	37.	 Three-Way Tie    A downhill skiing race ends in a three-way 
tie for first place. The graph shows distance as a function of 
time for each of the three winners, A, B, and C.
(a)	 Find the average speed for each skier
(b)	 Describe the differences between the ways in which the 
three participants skied the race.
t (s) 
d (m) 
0
50
100
5
A
C
10
B
	38.	 Speed Skating    Two speed skaters, A and B, are racing in 
a 500-m event. The graph shows the distance they have 
traveled as a function of the time from the start of the 
race.
(a)	 Who won the race?
(b)	 Find the average speed during the first 10 s for each  
skater.
(c)	 Find the average speed during the last 15 s for each  
skater.
0
10
A
B
100
500
d (m)
t (s)
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	39.	 Discover:  Limiting Behavior of Average Speed    An object 
is dropped from a high cliff, and the distance (in feet) it has 
fallen after t seconds is given by the function d1t2 16t2. 
Complete the table to find the average speed during the given 
time intervals. Use the table to determine what value the 
average speed approaches as the time intervals get smaller 
and smaller. Is it reasonable to say that this value is the speed 
of the object at the instant t 3? Explain.
t 5 a
t 5 b
Average speed 5
dxbc dxac
b a
3
3.5
3
3.1
3
3.01
3
3.001
3
3.0001
2.5 
Linear Functions and Models
■  Linear Functions  ■  Slope and Rate of Change  ■  Making and Using Linear Models
In this section we study the simplest functions that can be expressed by an algebraic  
expression: linear functions. 
■  Linear Functions
Recall that a linear function is a function of the form f1x2 ax b. So in the expres-
sion defining a linear function the variable occurs to the first power only. We can also 
express a linear function in equation form as y ax b. From Section 1.10 we know 
that the graph of this equation is a line with slope a and y-intercept b. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.5  ■  Linear Functions and Models  191
LINEAR FUNCTIONS
A linear function is a function of the form f1x2 ax b.
The graph of a linear function is a line with slope a and y-intercept b.
Example 1  ■  Identifying Linear Functions
Determine whether the given function is linear. If the function is linear, express the 
function in the form f1x2 ax b.
(a)	 f1x2 2 3x	
(b)  g1x2 311 2x2
(c)	 h1x2 x14 3x2  	
(d)  k1x2 1 5x
4
Solution
(a)	 We have f1x2 2 3x 3x 2. So f is a linear function in which a is 3 and b is 2.
(b)	 We have g1x2 311 2x2 6x 3. So g is a linear function in which a is 
6 and b is 3.
(c)	 We have h1x2 x14 3x2 4x 3x2, which is not a linear function because 
the variable x is squared in the second term of the expression for h.
(d)	 We have k1x2 1 5x
4
 5
4
 x 1
4. So k is a linear function in which a is 5
4
	
and b is 1
4.
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
Example 2  ■  Graphing a Linear Function
Let f be the linear function defined by f1x2 3x 2.
(a)	 Make a table of values, and sketch a graph.
(b)	 What is the slope of the graph of f?
Solution  
(a)	 A table of values is shown in the margin. Since f is a linear function, its graph is 
a line. So to obtain the graph of f, we plot any two points from the table and 
draw the straight line that contains the points. We use the points 11, 52  and 
14, 142 . The graph is the line shown in Figure 1. You can check that the other 
points in the table of values also lie on the line.
(b)	 Using the points given in Figure 1, we see that the slope is 
slope 14 5
4 1 3
	 	 So the slope is 3.
Figure 1  Graph of the linear  
function f1x2 3x 2
4
1
(1, 5)
(4, 14)
0
x
y
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
x
fxxc
22
24
21
21
0
2
1
5
2
8
3
11
4
14
5
17
From the box at the top of this page, 
you can see that the slope of the graph 
of f1x2 3x 2 is 3.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
■  Slope and Rate of Change
Let f1x2 ax b be a linear function. If x1 and x2 are two different values for x and 
if y1 f1x12  and y2 f1x22 , then the points 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22  lie on the graph of f. 
From the definitions of slope and average rate of change we have 
slope y2 y1
x2 x1

f1x22 f1x12
x2 x1
average rate of change
From Section 1.10 we know that the slope of a linear function is the same between any 
two points. From the above equation we conclude that the average rate of change of a 
linear function is the same between any two points. Moreover, the average rate of 
change is equal to the slope (see Exercise 51). Since the average rate of change of a 
linear function is the same between any two points, it is simply called the rate of 
change.
SLOPE AND RATE OF CHANGE
For the linear function f1x2 ax b, the slope of the graph of f and the rate 
of change of f are both equal to a, the coefficient of x.
a slope of graph of f rate of change of f
The difference between “slope” and “rate of change” is simply a difference in point 
of view. For example, to describe how a reservoir fills up over time, it is natural to talk 
about the rate at which the water level is rising, but we can also think of the slope of 
the graph of the water level (see Example 3). To describe the steepness of a staircase, it 
is natural to talk about the slope of the trim board of the staircase, but we can also think 
of the rate at which the stairs rise (see Example 5).
Example 3  ■  Slope and Rate of Change
A dam is built on a river to create a reservoir. The water level f1t2  in the reservoir at 
time t is given by 
f1t2 4.5t 28
where t is the number of years since the dam was constructed and f1t2  is measured  
in feet.
(a)	 Sketch a graph of f. 
(b)	 What is the slope of the graph?
(c)	 At what rate is the water level in the reservoir changing?
Solution  
(a)	 A graph of f is shown in Figure 2.
(b)	 The graph is a line with slope 4.5, the coefficient of t.
(c)	 The rate of change of f is 4.5, the coefficient of t. Since time t is measured in 
years and the water level f1t2  is measured in feet, the water level in the reservoir 
is changing at the rate of 4.5 ft per year. Since this rate of change is positive, the 
water level is rising.
Now Try Exercises 19 and 39	
■
In Exercise 52 we prove that all func-
tions with constant rate of change are 
linear. 
Figure 2  Water level as a function 
of time
y
t
0
10
1
f(t)=4.5t+28
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.5  ■  Linear Functions and Models  193
■  Making and Using Linear Models
When a linear function is used to model the relationship between two quantities, the 
slope of the graph of the function is the rate of change of the one quantity with respect 
to the other. For example, the graph in Figure 3(a) gives the amount of gas in a tank that 
is being filled. The slope between the indicated points is
a 6 gal
3 min 2 gal/min
The slope is the rate at which the tank is being filled, 2 gal per minute. In Figure 3(b) 
the tank is being drained at the rate of 0.03 gal per minute, and the slope is 0.03. 
Figure 3  Amount of gas as a function of time
0
9
6
3
18
15
12
2
4
Time (min)
Volume of gas (gal)
6
8
9
1
3
5
7
y
x
6 gal
3 min
0
9
6
3
18
15
12
Time (min)
Volume of gas (gal)
20
100
200
y
x
_3 gal
100 min
(a) Tank filled at 2 gal/min
Slope of line is 2
(b) Tank drained at 0.03 gal/min
Slope of line is _0.03
In the following examples we model real-world situations using linear functions. In 
each of these examples the model involves a constant rate of change (or a constant slope).
Example 4  ■  Making a Linear Model from a Rate of Change
Water is being pumped into a swimming pool at the rate of 5 gal per min. Initially, the 
pool contains 200 gal of water. 
(a)	 Find a linear function V that models the volume of water in the pool at any time t.
(b)	 If the pool has a capacity of 600 gal, how long does it take to completely fill the 
pool?
Solution  
(a)	 We need to find a linear function 
V1t2 at b
	 	 that models the volume V1t2  of water in the pool after t minutes. The rate of 
change of volume is 5 gal per min, so a 5. Since the pool contains 200 gal to 
begin with, we have V102 a # 0 b 200, so b 200. Now that we know a 
and b, we get the model 
V1t2 5t 200
(b)	 We want to find the time t at which V1t2 600. So we need to solve the equation  
600 5t 200
	
Solving for t, we get t 80. So it takes 80 min to fill the pool.
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
There are 200 gallons of water in  
the pool at time t 0.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Example 5  ■  Making a Linear Model from a Slope
In Figure 4 we have placed a staircase in a coordinate plane, with the origin at the bot-
tom left corner. The red line in the figure is the edge of the trim board of the staircase.
(a)	 Find a linear function H that models the height of the trim board above the floor.
(b)	 If the space available to build a staircase is 11 ft wide, how high does the stair-
case reach?  
Solution  
(a)	 We need to find a function 
H1x2 ax b
	 	 that models the red line in the figure. First we find the value of a, the slope of the 
line. From Figure 4 we see that two points on the line are 112, 162  and 136, 322 , 
so the slope is 
a 32 16
36 12 2
3
	 	 Another way to find the slope is to observe that each of the steps is 8 in. high (the 
rise) and 12 in. deep (the run), so the slope of the line is 8
12 2
3. From Figure 4 
we see that the y-intercept is 8, so b 8. So the model we want is 
H1x2 2
3 x 8
(b)	 Since 11 ft is 132 in., we need to evaluate the function H when x is 132.  We have 
H11322 2
3 11322 8 96
	 	 So the staircase reaches a height of 96 in., or 8 ft. 
Now Try Exercise 43	
■
Example 6  ■  Making Linear Models Involving Speed
John and Mary are driving westward along I-76 at constant speeds. The graphs in Fig-
ure 5 show the distance y (in miles) that they have traveled from Philadelphia at time 
x (in hours), where x 0 corresponds to noon. (Note that at noon John has already 
traveled 150 mi.)
(a)	 At what speeds are John and Mary traveling? Who is traveling faster, and how 
does this show up in the graph?
(b)	 Find functions that model the distances that John and Mary have traveled as func-
tions of x.
(c)	 How far will John and Mary have traveled at 5:00 p.m.?
(d)	 For what time period is Mary behind John? Will Mary overtake John? If so, at 
what time? 
Solution  
(a)	 From the graph we see that John has traveled 250 mi at 2:00 p.m. and 350 mi at 
4:00 p.m. The speed is the rate of change of distance with respect to time. So the 
speed is the slope of the graph. Therefore John’s speed is
350 mi 250 mi
4 h 2 h
50 mi/h        John’s speed
	 	 Mary has traveled 150 mi at 2:00 p.m. and 300 mi at 4:00 p.m., so we calculate 
Mary’s speed to be
300 mi 150 mi
4 h 2 h
75 mi/h        Mary’s speed
(12, 16)
12
24
36
48
60
8
16
24
32
40
(36, 32)
0
x (in.)
y (in.)
Figure 4  Slope of a staircase
x
y
0
100
200
300
400
1
2
3
4
Mary
John
Figure 5  John and Mary's trips
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.5  ■  Linear Functions and Models  195
	 	 Mary is traveling faster than John. We can see this from the graph because Mary’s 
line is steeper (has a greater slope) than John’s line.
(b)	 Let f1x2  be the distance John has traveled at time x. Since the speed (average rate 
of change) is constant, it follows that f is a linear function. Thus we can write f 
in the form f1x2 ax b. From part (a) we know that the slope a is 50, and 
from the graph we see that the y-intercept b is 150. Thus the distance that John 
has traveled at time x is modeled by the linear function
f1x2 50x 150        Model for John’s distance
	 	 Similarly, Mary is traveling at 75 mi/h, and the y-intercept of her graph is 0. Thus 
the distance she has traveled at time x is modeled by the linear function
g1x2 75x        Model for Mary’s distance
(c)	 Replacing x by 5 in the models that we obtained in part (b), we find that at  
5:00 p.m. John has traveled f152 50152 150 400 mi and Mary has trav-
eled g152 75152 375 mi.
(d)	 Mary overtakes John at the time when each has traveled the same distance, that 
is, at the time x when f1x2 g1x2 . So we must solve the equation 
50x 150 75x        John's distance Mary's distance
	 	 Solving this equation, we get x 6. So Mary overtakes John after 6 h, that is, at 
6:00 p.m. We can confirm our solution graphically by drawing the graphs of f and 
g on a larger domain as shown in Figure 6. The graphs intersect when x 6. 
From the graph we see that the graph of Mary’s trip is below the graph of John’s 
trip from x 0 to x 6, so Mary is behind John from noon until 6:00 p.m.
Now Try Exercise 45	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 Let f be a function with constant rate of change. Then
(a)	 f is a  
 function and f is of the form 
	
	f1x2  
 x   
  .
(b)	 The graph of f is a  
  .
	 2.	 Let f be the linear function f1x2 5x 7  .
(a)	 The rate of change of f is  
  .
(b)	 The graph of f is a  
 with slope  
 and 
	
	y-intercept  
  .
3–4  ■  A swimming pool is being filled. The graph shows the 
number of gallons y in the pool after x minutes.
10
0
1
Time (min)
Volume of
water (gal)
x
y
	 3.	 What is the slope of the graph?
	 4.	 At what rate is the pool being filled?
	 5.	 If a linear function has positive rate of change, does its graph 
slope upward or downward? 
	 6.	 Is f1x2 3 a linear function? If so, what are the slope and 
the rate of change?
Skills
7–14  ■  Identifying Linear Functions    Determine whether the 
given function is linear. If the function is linear, express the func-
tion in the form f1x2 ax b.
	 7.	 f1x2 3 1
3 x	
  8.	 f1x2 2 4x
	 9.	 f1x2 x 14 x2 	
10.	 f1x2 !x 1
	11.	 f1x2 x 1
5
	
12.	 f1x2 2x 3
x
	13.	 f1x2 1x 12 2	
14.	 f1x2 1
2 13x 12
15–18  ■  Graphing Linear Functions    For the given linear func-
tion, make a table of values and sketch its graph. What is the 
slope of the graph?
	15.	 f1x2 2x 5	
16.	 g1x2 4 2x
	17.	 r 1t2 2
3 t 2	
18.	 h1t2 1
2 3
4 t
2.5  Exercises
y
x
0
100
200
300
400
500
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
John
Mary
Figure 6  John and Mary’s trips
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
19–26  ■  Slope and Rate of Change    A linear function is given. 
(a) Sketch the graph. (b) Find the slope of the graph. (c) Find the 
rate of change of the function.
	19.	 f1x2 2x 6	
20.	 g1z2 3z 9
	21.	 h1t2 0.5t 2	
22.	 s1„2 0.2„ 6
	23.	 √ 1t2 10
3  t 20	
24.	 A1r2 2
3 r 1
	25.	 f1t2 3
2 t 2	
26.	 g1x2 5
4 x 10
27–30  ■  Linear Functions Given Verbally    A verbal description 
of a linear function f is given. Express the function f in the form 
f1x2 ax b.
	27.	 The linear function f has rate of change 3 and initial value 1.
	28.	 The linear function g has rate of change 12 and initial 
value 100.
	29.	 The graph of the linear function h has slope 1
2 and y-intercept 3.
	30.	 The graph of the linear function k has slope 4
5 and  
y-intercept 2.
31–32  ■  Linear Functions Given Numerically    A table of values 
for a linear function f is given. (a) Find the rate of change of f. 
(b) Express f in the form f1x2 ax b
	31.	
x
fxxc
0
  7
2
10
4
13
6
16
8
19
	
32. 
x
fxxc
23
11
0
2
2
24
5
213
7
219
33–36  ■  Linear Functions Given Graphically    The graph of a  
linear function f is given. (a) Find the rate of change of f.  
(b) Express f in the form f1x2 ax b.
	33.	
2
5
0
x
1
y
	 34.	
2
1
0
y
x
	35.	
11
1
0
y
x
	 36.	
1
2
0
y
x
Skills Plus
	37.	 Families of Linear Functions    Graph f1x2 ax for a 1
2, 
a 1, and a 2, all on the same set of axes. How does 
increasing the value of a affect the graph of f? What about 
the rate of change of f?
	38.	 Families of Linear Functions    Graph f1x2 x b for 
b 1
2, b 1, and b 2, all on the same set of axes. How 
does increasing the value of b affect the graph of f? What 
about the rate of change of f?
Applications
	39.	 Landfill    The amount of trash in a county landfill is modeled 
by the function 
T1x2 150x 32,000
	 	 where x is the number of years since 1996 and T1x2  is mea-
sured in thousands of tons.
(a)	 Sketch a graph of T. 
(b)	 What is the slope of the graph?
(c)	 At what rate is the amount of trash in the landfill increas-
ing per year?
	40.	 Copper Mining    The amount of copper ore produced from a 
copper mine in Arizona is modeled by the function
f1x2 200 32x
	 	 where x is the number of years since 2005 and f1x2  is mea-
sured in thousands of tons.
(a)	 Sketch a graph of f. 
(b)	 What is the slope of the graph?
(c)	 At what rate is the amount of ore produced changing?
	41.	 Weather Balloon    Weather balloons are filled with hydrogen 
and released at various sites to measure and transmit data 
about conditions such as air pressure and temperature. A 
weather balloon is filled with hydrogen at the rate of 0.5 ft3/s. 
Initially, the balloon contains 2 ft3 of hydrogen.
(a)	 Find a linear function V that models the volume of 
hydrogen in the balloon at any time t.
(b)	 If the balloon has a capacity of 15 ft3, how long does it 
take to completely fill the balloon?
	42.	 Filling a Pond    A large koi pond is filled from a garden hose 
at the rate of 10 gal/min. Initially, the pond contains 300 gal 
of water.
(a)	 Find a linear function V that models the volume of water 
in the pond at any time t.
(b)	 If the pond has a capacity of 1300 gal, how long does it 
take to completely fill the pond?
	43.	 Wheelchair Ramp    A local diner must build a wheelchair 
ramp to provide handicap access to the restaurant. Federal 
building codes require that a wheelchair ramp must have a 
maximum rise of 1 in. for every horizontal distance of 12 in.  
(a)	 What is the maximum allowable slope for a wheelchair 
ramp? Assuming that the ramp has maximum rise, find a 
linear function H that models the height of the ramp above 
the ground as a function of the horizontal distance x.
(b)	 If the space available to build a ramp is 150 in. wide, 
how high does the ramp reach? 
	44.	 Mountain Biking    Meilin and Brianna are avid mountain  
bikers. On a spring day they cycle down straight roads with 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.5  ■  Linear Functions and Models  197
steep grades. The graphs give a representation of the eleva-
tion of the road on which each of them cycles. Find the grade 
of each road. 
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
2000
6000
Brianna
Meilin
Horizontal distance (ft)
Elevation
(ft)
10,000
14,000
0
y
x
	45.	 Commute to Work    Jade and her roommate Jari commute to 
work each morning, traveling west on I-10. One morning 
Jade left for work at 6:50 a.m., but Jari left 10 minutes later. 
Both drove at a constant speed. The following graphs show 
the distance (in miles) each of them has traveled on I-10 at 
time t (in minutes), where t 0 is 7:00 a.m.
(a)	 Use the graph to decide which of them is traveling 
faster. 
(b)	 Find the speed (in mi/h) at which each of them is 
driving.
(c)	 Find linear functions f and g that model the distances 
that Jade and Jari travel as functions of t (in minutes).
20
10
30
2
4
6
8
Jade
Jari
Time since 7:00 A.M. (min)
Distance
traveled (mi)
10
12
(6, 7)
(6, 16)
0
t
y
	46.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    Jacqueline leaves Detroit at  
2:00 p.m. and drives at a constant speed, traveling west  
on I-90. She passes Ann Arbor, 40 mi from Detroit, at  
2:50 p.m.
(a)	 Find a linear function d that models the distance (in mi) 
she has traveled after t min.
(b)	 Draw a graph of d. What is the slope of this line?
(c)	 At what speed (in mi/h) is Jacqueline traveling? 
	47.	 Grade of Road    West of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Route 
40 eastbound is straight and makes a steep descent toward the 
city. The highway has a 6% grade, which means that its slope 
is 6
100.  Driving on this road, you notice from elevation 
signs that you have descended a distance of 1000 ft. What is 
the change in your horizontal distance in miles?
	48.	 Sedimentation    Devils Lake, North Dakota, has a layer of 
sedimentation at the bottom of the lake that increases every 
year. The depth of the sediment layer is modeled by the 
function
D1x2 20 0.24x
	 	 where x is the number of years since 1980 and D1x2  is mea-
sured in centimeters.
(a)	 Sketch a graph of D.
(b)	 What is the slope of the graph?
(c)	 At what rate (in cm) is the sediment layer increasing per 
year?
	49.	 Cost of Driving    The monthly cost of driving a car depends 
on the number of miles driven. Lynn found that in May her 
driving cost was $380 for 480 mi and in June her cost was 
$460 for 800 mi. Assume that there is a linear relationship 
between the monthly cost C of driving a car and the distance 
x driven.
(a)	 Find a linear function C that models the cost of driving  
x miles per month.
(b)	 Draw a graph of C. What is the slope of this line?
(c)	 At what rate does Lynn’s cost increase for every addi-
tional mile she drives?
	50.	 Manufacturing Cost    The manager of a furniture factory 
finds that it costs $2200 to produce 100 chairs in one day and 
$4800 to produce 300 chairs in one day.
(a)	 Assuming that the relationship between cost and the 
number of chairs produced is linear, find a linear func-
tion C that models the cost of producing x chairs in  
one day.
(b)	 Draw a graph of C. What is the slope of this line?
(c)	 At what rate does the factory’s cost increase for every 
additional chair produced?
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	51.	 Prove:  Linear Functions Have Constant Rate of Change     
Suppose that f1x2 ax b is a linear function. 
(a)	 Use the definition of the average rate of change of a 
function to calculate the average rate of change of f 
between any two real numbers x1 and x2.
(b)	 Use your calculation in part (a) to show that the average 
rate of change of f is the same as the slope a.
	52.	 Prove:  Functions with Constant Rate of Change Are Linear     
Suppose that the function f has the same average rate of 
change c between any two points. 
(a)	 Find the average rate of change of f between the points 
a and x to show that 
c 
f1x2 f1a2
x a
(b)	 Rearrange the equation in part (a) to show that 
f1x2 cx 1f1a2 ca2
	
How does this show that f is a linear function? What is 
the slope, and what is the y-intercept?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
2.6  Transformations of Functions
■  Vertical Shifting  ■  Horizontal Shifting  ■  Reflecting Graphs  ■  Vertical Stretching  
and Shrinking  ■  Horizontal Stretching and Shrinking  ■  Even and Odd Functions
In this section we study how certain transformations of a function affect its graph. This 
will give us a better understanding of how to graph functions. The transformations that 
we study are shifting, reﬂecting, and stretching.
■  Vertical Shifting
Adding a constant to a function shifts its graph vertically: upward if the constant is 
positive and downward if it is negative.
In general, suppose we know the graph of y f1x2 . How do we obtain from it the 
graphs of
y f1x2 c  and  y f1x2 c  1c 02
The y-coordinate of each point on the graph of y f1x2 c is c units above the  
y-coordinate of the corresponding point on the graph of y f1x2 . So we obtain the 
graph of y f1x2 c simply by shifting the graph of y f1x2  upward c units. 
Similarly, we obtain the graph of y f1x2 c by shifting the graph of y f1x2  
downward c units.
Vertical Shifts of Graphs
Suppose c  0.
To graph y f1x2 c, shift the graph of y f1x2  upward c units.
To graph y f1x2 c, shift the graph of y f1x2  downward c units.
c
y
x
0
c
y
x
0
y=f(x)+c
y=f(x)-c
y=f(x)
y=f(x)
Example 1  ■  Vertical Shifts of Graphs
Use the graph of f1x2 x2 to sketch the graph of each function.
(a)	 g1x2 x2 3                (b)  h1x2 x2 2
Solution    The function f1x2 x2 was graphed in Example 1(a), Section 2.2. It is 
sketched again in Figure 1.
(a)	 Observe that
g1x2 x2 3 f1x2 3
	 	 So the y-coordinate of each point on the graph of g is 3 units above the 
correspond­ing point on the graph of f. This means that to graph g, we shift the 
graph of f upward 3 units, as in Figure 1.
Recall that the graph of the function f 
is the same as the graph of the equation 
y f1x2 .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.6  ■  Transformations of Functions  199
(b)	 Similarly, to graph h we shift the graph of f downward 2 units, as shown in  
Figure 1.
x
y
0
2
2
f(x)=≈
h(x)=≈ – 2
g(x)=≈+3
Figure 1
Now Try Exercises 29 and 31	
■
■  Horizontal Shifting
Suppose that we know the graph of y f1x2 . How do we use it to obtain the graphs of
y f1x c2  and  y f1x c2  1c 02
The value of f1x c2  at x is the same as the value of f1x2  at x  c. Since x  c is c 
units to the left of x, it follows that the graph of y f1x c2  is just the graph of 
y f1x2  shifted to the right c units. Similar reasoning shows that the graph of 
y f1x c2  is the graph of y f1x2  shifted to the left c units. The following box 
summarizes these facts.
Horizontal Shifts of Graphs
Suppose c  0.
To graph y f1x c2 , shift the graph of y f1x2  to the right c units.
To graph y f1x c2 , shift the graph of y f1x2  to the left c units.
y=Ï
y=f(x-c)
c
y
x
0
y=Ï
y=f(x+c)
c
y
x
0
Example 2  ■  Horizontal Shifts of Graphs
Use the graph of f1x2 x2 to sketch the graph of each function.
(a)	 g1x2 1x 42 2      (b)  h1x2 1x 22 2
SOLUTION
(a)	 To graph g, we shift the graph of f to the left 4 units.
(b)	 To graph h, we shift the graph of f to the right 2 units.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
The graphs of g and h are sketched in Figure 2.
Figure 2
1
y
1
x
_4
0
™
g(x)=(x + 4)2
h(x)=(x – 2)2
f(x)=x2
Now Try Exercises 33 and 35	
■
Example 3  ■  Combining Horizontal and Vertical Shifts
Sketch the graph of f1x2 !x 3 4.
SOLUTION    We start with the graph of y !x (Example 1(c), Section 2.2) and shift 
it to the right 3 units to obtain the graph of y !x 3. Then we shift the resulting 
graph upward 4 units to obtain the graph of f1x2 !x 3 4 shown in Figure 3.
y
x
0
3
4
x – 3 + 4
f(x)=
(3, 4)
x – 3
y=
x
y=
Figure 3
Now Try Exercise 45	
■
■  Reﬂecting Graphs
Suppose we know the graph of y f1x2 . How do we use it to obtain the graphs of 
y f1x2  and y f1x2 ? The y-coordinate of each point on the graph of y f1x2  
is simply the negative of the y-coordinate of the corresponding point on the graph of 
y f1x2 . So the desired graph is the reﬂection of the graph of y f1x2  in the x-axis. 
On the other hand, the value of y f1x2  at x is the same as the value of y f1x2  at 
Discovery Project
Transformation Stories
If a real-world situation, or “story,” is modeled by a function, how does trans-
forming the function change the story? For example, if the distance traveled on 
a road trip is modeled by a function, then how does shifting or stretching the 
function change the story of the trip? How does changing the story of the trip 
transform the function that models the trip? In this project we explore some 
real-world stories and transformations of these stories.  You can find the project 
at www.stewartmath.com.
© TFoxFoto/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.6  ■  Transformations of Functions  201
x, so the desired graph here is the reﬂection of the graph of y f1x2  in the y-axis. 
The following box summarizes these observations.
reflecting graphs
To graph y f1x2 , reﬂect the graph of y f1x2  in the x-axis.
To graph y f1x2 , reﬂect the graph of y f1x2  in the y-axis.
y=Ï
y
x
0
y=_Ï
y
x
0
y=f(_x)
y=Ï
Example 4  ■  Reﬂecting Graphs
Sketch the graph of each function.
(a)	 f1x2 x2                (b)  g1x2 !x
SOLUTION
(a)	 We start with the graph of y  x2. The graph of f1x2 x2 is the graph of  
y  x2 reﬂected in the x-axis (see Figure 4).
(b)	 We start with the graph of y !x (Example 1(c) in Section 2.2). The graph of 
g1x2 !x is the graph of y !x reﬂected in the y-axis (see Figure 5). Note 
that the domain of the function g1x2 !x is 5x 0  x 06.
Figure 5
y
x
g(x)= _x
0
1
1
x
y=
Now Try Exercises 37 and 39	
■
y
x
y=x™
f(x)=_x™
2
2
Figure 4
René Descartes (1596–1650) was 
born in the town of La Haye in  
southern France. From an early age 
Descartes liked mathematics because 
of “the certainty of its results and the 
clarity of its reasoning.” He believed 
that to arrive at truth, one must begin 
by doubting everything, including 
one’s own existence; this led him to 
formulate perhaps the best-known 
sentence in all of philosophy: “I think, 
therefore I am.” In his book Discourse on Method he described what is 
now called the Cartesian plane. This idea of combining algebra and 
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs 
Division
geometry enabled mathematicians for the ﬁrst time to graph functions 
and thus “see” the equations they were studying. The philosopher John 
Stuart Mill called this invention “the greatest single step ever made in 
the progress of the exact sciences.” Descartes liked to get up late and 
spend the morning in bed thinking and writing. He invented the coordi-
nate plane while lying in bed watching a ﬂy crawl on the ceiling, rea-
soning that he could describe the ­exact location of the ﬂy by knowing 
its distance from two ­perpendicular walls. In 1649 Descartes became 
the tutor of Queen Christina of Sweden. She liked her lessons at  
5 o’clock in the morning, when, she said, her mind was sharpest. How-
ever, the change from his usual habits and the ice-cold library where 
they studied proved too much for Descartes. In February 1650, after just 
two months of this, he caught pneumonia and died.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
■  Vertical Stretching and Shrinking
Suppose we know the graph of y f1x2 . How do we use it to obtain the graph of 
y cf1x2 ? The y-coordinate of y cf1x2  at x is the same as the corresponding  
­y-coordinate of y f1x2  multiplied by c. Multiplying the y-coordinates by c has the 
effect of vertically stretching or shrinking the graph by a factor of c (if c . 0).
Vertical Stretching and shrinking of Graphs
To graph y cf1x2 :
If c  1, stretch the graph of y f1x2  vertically by a factor of c.
If 0  c  1, shrink the graph of y f1x2  vertically by a factor of c.
y=Ï
y
x
0
y=c Ï
y=Ï
c>1
0<c<1
y
x
0
y=c Ï
Example 5  ■  Vertical Stretching and Shrinking of Graphs
Use the graph of f1x2 x2 to sketch the graph of each function.
(a)	 g1x2 3x2                (b)  h1x2 1
3 x2
SOLUTION
(a)	 The graph of g is obtained by multiplying the y-coordinate of each point on the 
graph of f by 3. That is, to obtain the graph of g, we stretch the graph of f verti-
cally by a factor of 3. The result is the narrowest parabola in Figure 6.
(b)	 The graph of h is obtained by multiplying the y-coordinate of each point on  
the graph of f by 1
3. That is, to obtain the graph of h, we shrink the graph of f 
­vertically by a factor of 1
3. The result is the widest parabola in Figure 6.
Now Try Exercises 41 and 43	
■
We illustrate the effect of combining shifts, reﬂections, and stretching in the follow-
ing example.
y
x
0
1
4
1
3
h(x)= x2
f(x)=x2
g(x)=3x2
Figure 6
Computers
For centuries machines have 
been designed to perform 
speciﬁc tasks. For example, a 
washing machine washes 
clothes, a weaving machine 
weaves cloth, an adding 
machine adds numbers, and 
so on. The computer has changed all that.
The computer is a machine that does nothing—until it is given 
instructions on what to do. So your computer can play games, draw pic-
tures, or calculate p to a million decimal places; it all depends on what 
program (or instructions) you give the computer. The computer can do all 
Mathematics in the Modern World
this because it is able to accept instructions and logically change those 
instructions based on incoming data. This versatility makes computers 
useful in nearly every aspect of human endeavor.
The idea of a computer was described theoretically in the 1940s by the 
mathematician Allan Turing (see page 118) in what he called a universal 
machine. In 1945 the mathematician John Von Neumann, extending  
Turing’s ideas, built one of the ﬁrst electronic computers.
Mathematicians continue to develop new theoretical bases for the 
design of computers. The heart of the computer is the “chip,” which is 
capable of processing logical instructions. To get an idea of the chip’s 
complexity, consider that the Pentium chip has over 3.5 million logic 
circuits!
© Peter Gudella/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.6  ■  Transformations of Functions  203
Example 6  ■  Combining Shifting, Stretching, and Reﬂecting
Sketch the graph of the function f1x2 1 21x 32 2.
SOLUTION    Starting with the graph of y x2, we ﬁrst shift to the right 3 units to get 
the graph of y 1x 32 2. Then we reﬂect in the x-axis and stretch by a factor of 2 
to get the graph of y 21x 32 2. Finally, we shift upward 1 unit to get the graph 
of f1x2 1 21x 32 2 shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7
y
x
1
1
0
(3, 1)
f(x)=1 – 2(x – 3)2
y=–2(x – 3)2
y=(x – 3)2
y=≈
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
■  Horizontal Stretching and Shrinking
Now we consider horizontal shrinking and stretching of graphs. If we know the graph 
of y f1x2 , then how is the graph of y f1cx2  related to it? The y-coordinate of 
y f1cx2  at x is the same as the y-coordinate of y f1x2  at cx. Thus the x-coordinates 
in the graph of y f1x2  correspond to the x-coordinates in the graph of y f1cx2  
multiplied by c. Looking at this the other way around, we see that the x-coordinates in 
the graph of y f1cx2  are the x-coordinates in the graph of y f1x2  multiplied by 
1/c. In other words, to change the graph of y f1x2  to the graph of y f1cx2 , we 
must shrink (or stretch) the graph horizontally by a factor of 1/c (if c . 0), as summa-
rized in the following box.
Horizontal Shrinking and Stretching of Graphs
To graph y f1cx2 :
If c  1, shrink the graph of y f1x2  horizontally by a factor of 1/c.
If 0  c  1, stretch the graph of y f1x2  horizontally by a factor of 1/c.
y=Ï
y
x
0
y=f(cx)
y=Ï
y
x
0
y=f(cx)
c>1
0<c<1
Note that the shifts and stretches follow 
the normal order of operations when 
evaluating the function. In particular, 
the upward shift must be performed 
last.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Example 7  ■  Horizontal Stretching and Shrinking of Graphs
The graph of y f1x2  is shown in Figure 8. Sketch the graph of each function.
(a)	 y f12x2                 (b)  y fA1
2 xB
Figure 8  y f1x2
y
x
0
1
1
Solution    Using the principles described on page 203, we (a) shrink the graph hori-
zontally by the factor 1
2 to obtain the graph in Figure 9, and (b) stretch the graph hori-
zontally by the factor 2 to obtain the graph in Figure 10.
y
x
0
1
1
1
2
Figure 9  y f12x2
y
x
0
1
1
2
_1
Figure 10  y fA1
2 xB
Now Try Exercise 71	
■
■  Even and Odd Functions
If a function f satisﬁes f1x2 f1x2  for every number x in its domain, then f is called 
an even function. For instance, the function f1x2 x2 is even because
f1x2 1x2 2 112 2x2 x2 f1x2
The graph of an even function is symmetric with respect to the y-axis (see Figure 11). 
This means that if we have plotted the graph of f for x  0, then we can obtain the 
entire graph simply by reﬂecting this portion in the y-axis.
If f satisﬁes f1x2 f1x2  for every number x in its domain, then f is called an 
odd function. For example, the function f1x2 x 3 is odd because
f1x2 1x2 3 112 3x3 x3 f1x2
The graph of an odd function is symmetric about the origin (see Figure 12). If we have 
plotted the graph of f for x  0, then we can obtain the entire graph by rotating this 
portion through 180° about the origin. (This is equivalent to reﬂecting ﬁrst in the x-axis 
and then in the y-axis.)
Figure 11  f1x2 x2 is an even 
function.
y
x
Ï=x™
0
x
_x
Figure 12  f1x2 x3 is an odd 
function.
0
y
x
Ï=x£
x
_x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.6  ■  Transformations of Functions  205
Even and Odd Functions
Let f be a function.
f is even if f1x2 f1x2  for all x in the domain of f.
f is odd if f1x2 f1x2  for all x in the domain of f.
y
x
0
The graph of an even function is
symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
The graph of an odd function is
symmetric with respect to the origin.
_x
x
Ï
f(_x)
y
x
_x
x
0
Ï
f(_x)
Example 8  ■  Even and Odd Functions
Determine whether the functions are even, odd, or neither even nor odd.
(a)	 f1x2 x5 x
(b)	 g1x2 1 x4
(c)	 h1x2 2x x2
Solution
(a)	  f1x2 1x2 5 1x2
	 	
 x5 x 1x5 x2
	 	
 f1x2
	 	 Therefore f is an odd function.
(b)	 g1x2 1 1x2 4 1 x4 g1x2
	 	 So g is even.
(c)	 h 1x2 21x2 1x2 2 2x x2
	 	 Since h1x2 ? h1x2  and h1x2 ? h1x2 , we conclude that h is neither even  
nor odd.
Now Try Exercises 83, 85, and 87	
■
The graphs of the functions in Example 8 are shown in Figure 13. The graph of f is 
symmetric about the origin, and the graph of g is symmetric about the y-axis. The graph 
of h is not symmetric about either the y-axis or the origin.
(a)
(b)
(c)
2.5
_2.5
_1.75
1.75
Ï=x∞+x
2.5
_2.5
_2
2
˝=1-x¢
2.5
_2.5
_1
3
h(x)=2x-x™
Figure 13
INTERFOTO/Alamy
Sonya Kovalevsky (1850–1891) is 
considered the most important woman 
mathematician of the 19th century. She 
was born in Moscow to an aristocratic 
family. While a child, she was exposed to 
the principles of calculus in a very 
unusual fashion: Her bedroom was tem-
porarily wallpapered with the pages of a 
calculus book. She later wrote that she 
“spent many hours in front of that wall, 
trying to understand it.” Since Russian law 
forbade women from studying in univer-
sities, she entered a marriage of conve-
nience, which allowed her to travel to 
Germany and obtain a doctorate in math-
ematics from the University of Göttingen. 
She eventually was awarded a full profes-
sorship at the University of Stockholm, 
where she taught for eight years before 
dying in an inﬂuenza epidemic at the age 
of 41. Her research was instrumental in 
helping to put the ideas and applications 
of functions and calculus on a sound and 
logical foundation. She received many 
accolades and prizes for her research 
work.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
concepts
1–2  ■  Fill in the blank with the appropriate direction (left, right, 
up, or down).
	 1.	 (a)	 The graph of y f1x2 3 is obtained from the graph 
	
of y f1x2  by shifting  
 3 units.
(b)	 The graph of y f1x 32  is obtained from the graph 
	
of y f1x2  by shifting  
 3 units.
	 2.	 (a)	 The graph of y f1x2 3 is obtained from the graph 
	
of y f1x2  by shifting  
 3 units.
(b)	 The graph of y f1x 32  is obtained from the graph 
	
of y f1x2  by shifting  
 3 units.
	 3.	 Fill in the blank with the appropriate axis (x-axis or y-axis).
(a)	 The graph of y f1x2  is obtained from the graph of 
	
y f1x2  by reﬂecting in the  
  .
(b)	 The graph of y f1x2  is obtained from the graph of 
	
y f1x2  by reﬂecting in the  
  .
	 4.	 A graph of a function f is given. Match each equation with 
one of the graphs labeled I–IV.
(a)	 f 1x2 2	
(b)	 f 1x 32
(c)	 f 1x 22 	
(d)	 f 1x2 4
y
x
f
1
1
I
III
II
IV
0
	 5.	 If a function f is an even function, then what type of symme-
try does the graph of f have?
	 6.	 If a function f is an odd function, then what type of symme-
try does the graph of f have?
skills
7–18  ■  Describing Transformations    Suppose the graph of f is 
given. Describe how the graph of each function can be obtained 
from the graph of f.
	 7.	 (a)	 f1x2 1	
(b)	 f1x 22
	 8.	 (a)	 f1x 52 	
(b)	 f1x2 4
	 9.	 (a)	 f1x2 	
(b)	 3f1x2
	10.	 (a)	 f1x2 	
(b)	 1
3 f1x2
	11.	 (a)	 y f 1x 52 2	
(b)	 y f 1x 12 1
	12.	 (a)	 y f 1x 32 2	
(b)	 y f 1x 72 3
	13.	 (a)	 y f 1x2 5	
(b)	 y 3f 1x2 5
14.	 (a)	 1 f1x2 	
(b)  2 1
5 f1x2
15.	 (a)	 2f1x 52 1	
(b)  1
4 f1x 32 5
16.	 (a)	 1
3 f1x 22 5	
(b)  4f1x 12 3
17.	 (a)	 y f 14x2 	
(b)	 y f A1
4 xB
18.	 (a)	 y f 12x2 1	
(b)	 y 2f A1
2 xB
19–22  ■  Describing Transformations    Explain how the graph of g 
is obtained from the graph of f.
	19.	 (a)	 f1x2 x2, g1x2 1x 22 2
(b)	 f1x2 x2, g1x2 x2 2
	20.	 (a)	 f1x2 x3, g1x2 1x 42 3
(b)	 f1x2 x3, g1x2 x3 4
	21.	 (a)	 f1x2 0  x 0 , g1x2 0  x 2 0 2
(b)	 f1x2 0  x 0 , g1x2 0  x 2 0 2
	22.	 (a)	 f1x2 !x, g1x2 !x 1
(b)	 f1x2 !x, g1x2 !x 1
	23.	 Graphing Transformations    Use the graph of y x2 in Fig-
ure 4 to graph the ­following.
(a)	 g1x2 x2 1	
(b)	 g1x2 1x 12 2
(c)	 g1x2 x2	
(d)	 g1x2 1x 12 2 3
	24.	 Graphing Transformations    Use the graph of y !x in Fig-
ure 5 to graph the ­following.
(a)	 g1x2 !x 2	
(b)	 g1x2 !x 1
(c)	 g1x2 !x 2 2	
(d)	 g1x2 !x 1
25–28  ■  Identifying Transformations    Match the graph with the 
function. (See the graph of y 0  x 0  on page 96.)
	25.	 y 0  x 1 0 	
26.	 y 0  x 1 0
	27.	 y 0  x 0 1	
28.	 y 0  x 0
I
y
x
0
2
2
y
x
0
2
2
II
y
x
0
2
2
y
x
0
2
2
III
IV
2.6  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.6  ■  Transformations of Functions  207
29–52  ■  Graphing Transformations    Sketch the graph of the 
function, not by plotting points, but by starting with the graph of 
a standard function and applying transformations.
	29.	 f1x2 x2 3	
30.	 f1x2 x2 4
31.	 f1x2 0  x 0 1	
32.	 f1x2 !x 1
33.	 f1x2 1x 52 2	
34.	 f1x2 1x 12 2
35.	 f1x2 0  x 2 0 	
36.	 f1x2 !x 4
37.	 f1x2 x3	
38.	 f1x2 0  x 0
39.	 y !
4 x	
40.	 y !
3 x
41.	 y 1
4 x2	
42.	 y 5!x
43.	 y 3 0  x 0 	
44.	 y 1
2 0  x 0
45.	 y 1x 32 2 5	
46.	 y !x 4 3
47.	 y 3 1
2 1x 12 2	
48.	 y 2 !x 1
	49.	 y 0  x 2 0 2	
50.	 y 2 0  x 0
	51.	 y 1
2 !x 4 3	
52.	 y 3 21x 12 2
53–62  ■  Finding Equations for Transformations    A function f is 
given, and the indicated transformations are applied to its graph 
(in the given order). Write an equation for the ﬁnal transformed 
graph.
	53.	 f1x2 x2; shift downward 3 units
	54.	 f1x2 x3; shift upward 5 units
	55.	 f1x2 !x; shift 2 units to the left
	56.	 f1x2 !
3 x; shift 1 unit to the right
	57.	 f1x2 0  x 0 ; shift 2 units to the left and shift downward  
5 units
	58.	 f1x2 0  x 0 ; reflect in the x-axis, shift 4 units to the right, 
and shift upward 3 units. 
	59.	 f1x2 !
4 x; reﬂect in the y-axis and shift upward 1 unit
	60.	 f1x2 x2; shift 2 units to the left and reﬂect in the x-axis 
	61.	 f1x2 x2; stretch vertically by a factor of 2, shift downward  
2 units, and shift 3 units to the right
	62.	 f1x2 0  x 0 ; shrink vertically by a factor of 1
 2 , shift to the 
left 1 unit, and shift upward 3 units
63–68  ■  Finding Formulas for Transformations    The graphs of f 
and g are given. Find a formula for the function g.
	63.	
x
y
g
f(x)=x2
1
1
0
	64.	
x
y
1
1
0
g
f(x)=x3
	65.	
1
1
0
x
y
g
f(x)=|x|
	66.	
1
0
x
y
g
f(x)=|x|
2
	67.	
0
1
1
x
y
g
f(x)= x
	
68.	
0
x
y
g
f(x)=x2
2
2
69–70  ■  Identifying Transformations    The graph of y f1x2  is 
given. Match each equation with its graph.
	69.	 (a)	 y f1x 42 	
(b)	 y f1x2 3
(c)	 y 2f1x 62 	
(d)	 y f12x2
y
x
3
3
_3
_3
_6
6
6




Ï
0
	70.	 (a)	 y 1
3f1x2 	
(b)	 y f1x 42
(c)	 y f1x 42 3	
(d)	 y f1x2
y
x
3
3
_3
_3
_6
6
6




Ï
0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
71–74  ■  Graphing Transformations    The graph of a function f 
is given. Sketch the graphs of the following transformations of f.
	71.	 (a)	 y f1x 22 	
(b)	 y f1x2 2
(c)	 y 2f1x2 	
(d)	 y f1x2 3
(e)	 y f1x2 	
(f)	 y 1
2f1x 12
0
2
2
x
f
y
	72.	 (a)	 y f1x 12 	
(b)	 y f1x2
(c)	 y f1x 22 	
(d)	 y f1x2 2
(e)	 y f1x2 	
(f)	 y 2f1x2
0
2
2
x
y
f
	73.	 (a)	 y f12x2 	
(b)	 y fA1
2 xB
x
y
1
1
0
f
	74.	 (a)	 y f13x2 	
(b)	 y fA1
3 xB
y
x
f
0
3
_3
_1
1
75–76  ■  Graphing Transformations    Use the graph of f1x2 “x‘ 
described on page 163 to graph the indicated function.
	75.	 y “2x‘	
76.	 y “ 1
4  x‘
77–80  ■  Graphing Transformations    Graph the functions on the 
same screen using the given viewing rectangle. How is each graph 
related to the graph in part (a)?
	77.	 Viewing rectangle 3 8, 8 4  by 3 2, 8 4
(a)	 y !
4 x	
(b)	 y !
4 x 5
(c)	 y 2!
4 x 5	
(d)	 y 4 2!
4 x 5
	78.	 Viewing rectangle 3 8, 8 4  by 3 6, 6 4
(a)	 y 0  x 0 	
(b)	 y 0  x 0
(c)	 y 3 0  x 0 	
(d)	 y 3 0  x 5 0
	79.	 Viewing rectangle 3 4, 6 4  by 3 4, 4 4
(a)	 y x6	
(b)	 y 1
3 x6
(c)	 y  1
3 x6	
(d)	 y  1
3 1x 42 6
	80.	 Viewing rectangle 3 6, 6 4  by 3 4, 4 4
(a)	 y 
1
!x	
(b)	 y 
1
!x 3
(c)	 y 
1
2 !x 3	
(d)	 y 
1
2 !x 3 3
81–82  ■  Graphing Transformations    If f1x2 "2x x2, 
graph the following functions in the viewing rectangle 35, 54 by 
34, 44. How is each graph related to the graph in part (a)?
	81.	 (a)	 y f1x2         (b)  y f12x2         (c)  y f A1
2 xB
	82.	 (a)	 y f1x2 	
(b)	 y f1x2
(c)	 y f1x2 	
(d)	 y f12x2
(e)	 y fA 1
2 xB
83–90  ■  Even and Odd Functions    Determine whether the func-
tion f is even, odd, or neither. If f is even or odd, use symmetry to 
sketch its graph.
83.	 f1x2 x4	
84.  f1x2 x3
85.	 f1x2 x2 x	
86.  f1x2 x4 4x2
87.	 f1x2 x3 x	
88.	 f1x2 3x3 2x2 1
	89.	 f1x2 1 !
3 x	
90.  f1x2 x 1
x
skills Plus
91–92  ■  Graphing Even and Odd Functions    The graph of a 
function deﬁned for x  0 is given. ­Complete the graph for x  0 
to make (a) an even function and (b) an odd function.
	91.	
x
y
1
1
0
	
92. 
x
y
1
1
0
93–94  ■  Graphing the Absolute Value of a Function    These 
exercises show how the graph of y 0  f1x2  0  is obtained from 
the graph of y f1x2 .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.6  ■  Transformations of Functions  209
	93.	 The graphs of f1x2 x2 4 and g1x2 0  x2 4 0  are 
shown. Explain how the graph of g is obtained from the 
graph of f.
y
x
2
4
_2
8
0
_4
˝=|≈-4|
y
x
2
4
_2
_4
8
0
Ï=≈-4
	94.	 The graph of f1x2 x4 4x2 is shown. Use this graph to 
sketch the graph of g1x2 0  x4 4x2
 0 .
1
3
2
4
_1
_3
_4
y
x
95–96  ■  Graphing the Absolute Value of a Function    Sketch the 
graph of each function.
	95.	 (a)	 f1x2 4x x2	
(b)  g1x2 0  4x x2
 0
	96.	 (a)	 f1x2 x3	
(b)  g1x2 0  x3
 0
applications
	97.	 Bungee Jumping    Luisa goes bungee jumping from a 500-ft-
high bridge. The graph shows Luisa’s height h1t2  (in ft) after 
t seconds.
(a)	 Describe in words what the graph indicates about Luisa’s 
bungee jump.
(b)	 Suppose Luisa goes bungee jumping from a 400-ft-high 
bridge. Sketch a new graph that shows Luisa’s height 
H1t2  after t seconds.
(c)	 What transformation must be performed on the function 
h to obtain the function H? Express the function H in 
terms of h.
t (s)
y (ft)
500
4
0
	 98.	 Swimming Laps    Miyuki practices swimming laps with her 
team. The function y f1t2  graphed below gives her dis-
tance (in meters) from the starting edge of the pool t sec-
onds after she starts her laps.
(a)	 Describe in words Miyuki’s swim practice. What is her 
average speed for the first 30 s?
(b)	 Graph the function y 1.2f1t2 . How is the graph of 
the new function related to the graph of the original 
function?
(c)	 What is Miyuki’s new average speed for the first  
30 s?
t (s)
d (m)
50
30
0
	 99.	 Field Trip    A class of fourth graders walks to a park on a 
field trip. The function y f1t2  graphed below gives their 
distance from school (in ft) t minutes after they left school.
(a)	 What is the average speed going to the park? How long 
was the class at the park? How far away is the park?
(b)	 Graph the function y 0.5f1t2 . How is the graph of 
the new function related to the graph of the original 
function? What is the average speed going to the new 
park? How far away is the new park?
(c)	 Graph the function y f1t 102 . How is the graph of 
the new function related to the graph of the original 
function? How does the field trip descibed by this func-
tion differ from the original trip?
t (min)
d (ft)
200
10
0
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
100–101  ■  Discuss:  Obtaining Transformations    Can the func-
tion g be obtained from f by transformations? If so, describe the 
transformations needed.
100.	 The functions f and g are described algebraically as 
follows: 
f1x2 1x 22 2   
g1x2 1x 22 2 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
101.	 The functions f and g are described graphically in the figure.
x
y
g
f
0
1
1
102.	 Discuss:  Sums of Even and Odd Functions    If f and g are 
both even functions, is f g necessarily even? If both are 
odd, is their sum necessarily odd? What can you say about 
the sum if one is odd and one is even? In each case, prove 
your answer.
103.	 Discuss:  Products of Even and Odd Functions    Answer the 
same questions as in Exercise 102, except this time consider 
the product of f and g instead of the sum.
104.	 Discuss:  Even and Odd Power Functions    What must be 
true about the integer n if the function
f1x2 x n
	
	 is an even function? If it is an odd function? Why do you 
think the names “even” and “odd” were chosen for these 
function properties?
2.7 
Combining Functions
■  Sums, Differences, Products, and Quotients  ■  Composition of Functions   
■  Applications of Composition
In this section we study different ways to combine functions to make new functions.
■  Sums, Differences, Products, and Quotients
Two functions f and g can be combined to form new functions f g, f g, fg, and 
f/g in a manner similar to the way we add, subtract, multiply, and divide real numbers. 
For example, we deﬁne the function f g by
1f g2 1x2 f1x2 g1x2
The new function f g is called the sum of the functions f and g; its value at x is 
f1x2 g1x2 . Of course, the sum on the right-hand side makes sense only if both 
f1x2  and g1x2  are deﬁned, that is, if x belongs to the domain of f and also to the 
domain of g. So if the domain of f is A and the domain of g is B, then the domain of 
f g is the intersection of these domains, that is, A > B. Similarly, we can deﬁne 
the difference f g, the product fg, and the quotient f/g of the functions f and g. 
Their domains are A > B, but in the case of the quotient we must remember not to 
divide by 0.
Algebra of Functions
Let f and g be functions with domains A and B. Then the functions f g,  
f g, fg, and f/g are deﬁned as follows.
 1f g2 1x2 f1x2 g1x2    Domain A > B
 1f g2 1x2 f1x2 g1x2    Domain A > B
 1fg2 1x2 f1x2g1x2
    Domain A > B
 a f
g b 1x2 
f1x2
g1x2
      Domain 5x [ A > B 0  g1x2 ? 06
The sum of f and g is deﬁned by
1f g2 1x2 f1x2 g1x2
The name of the new function is  
“f  g.” So this  sign stands for the 
operation of addition of functions.  
The  sign on the right side, however, 
stands for addition of the numbers f1x2  
and g1x2 .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.7  ■  Combining Functions  211
Example 1  ■  Combinations of Functions and Their Domains
Let f1x2 
1
x 2 and g1x2 !x.
(a)	 Find the functions f g, f g, fg, and f/g and their domains.
(b)	 Find 1f g2 142, 1f g2 142, 1fg2 142 , and 1f/g2 142 .
Solution
(a)	 The domain of f is 5x 0  x ? 26, and the domain of g is 5x 0  x 06. The  
intersection of the domains of f and g is
5x 0  x 0 and x ? 26 30, 22 < 12, `2
	 	 Thus we have
 1f g2 1x2 f1x2 g1x2 
1
x 2 !x	
Domain 5x 0  x 0 and x ? 26
 1f g2 1x2 f1x2 g1x2 
1
x 2 !x	
Domain 5x 0  x 0 and x ? 26
 1fg2 1x2 f1x2g1x2 
!x
x 2	
Domain 5x 0  x 0 and x ? 26
 a f
g b 1x2 
f1x2
g1x2 
1
1x 22 !x
	
Domain 5x 0  x 0 and x ? 26
	 	 Note that in the domain of f/g we exclude 0 because g102 0.
(b)	 Each of these values exist because x  4 is in the domain of each  
function:
 1f g2 142 f142 g142 
1
4 2 !4 5
2
 1f g2 142 f142 g142 
1
4 2 !4  3
2
 1fg2 142 f142g142 a
1
4 2 b  !4 1
 a f
g b 142 
f142
g142 
1
14 22  !4 1
4
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
To divide fractions, invert the  
denominator and multiply:
 
1/1x 22
!x

1/1x 22
!x/1
  
1
x 2 # 1
!x
  
1
1x 22 !x
Discovery Project
Iteration and Chaos
The iterates of a function f at a point x are the numbers f1x2 , f1f1x22 , 
f1f1f1x222 , and so on. We examine iterates of the logistic function, which mod-
els the population of a species with limited potential for growth (such as lizards 
on an island or fish in a pond). Iterates of the model can help us to predict 
whether the population will eventually stabilize or whether it will fluctuate  
chaotically. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© Mr. Green/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
The graph of the function f g can be obtained from the graphs of f and g by 
graphical addition. This means that we add corresponding y-coordinates, as illustrated 
in the next example.
Example 2  ■  Using Graphical Addition
The graphs of f and g are shown in Figure 1. Use graphical addition to graph the 
function f g.
Solution    We obtain the graph of f g by “graphically adding” the value of f1x2  
to g1x2  as shown in Figure 2. This is implemented by copying the line segment PQ 
on top of PR to obtain the point S on the graph of f g.
y
x
P
f(x)
g(x)
y=(f+g)(x)
y=˝
y=Ï
f(x)
S
R
Q
Figure 2  Graphical addition
y
x
y=˝
y=Ï
Figure 1
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
■  Composition of Functions
Now let’s consider a very important way of combining two functions to get a new 
function. Suppose f1x2 !x and g1x2 x2 1. We may deﬁne a new function  
h as
h1x2 f1g1x22 f1x2 12 "x2 1
The function h is made up of the functions f and g in an interesting way: Given a number 
x, we ﬁrst apply the function g to it, then apply f to the result. In this case, f is the rule 
“take the square root,” g is the rule “square, then add 1,” and h is the rule “square, then 
add 1, then take the square root.” In other words, we get the rule h by applying the rule g 
and then the rule f. Figure 3 shows a machine diagram for h.
g
x
input
f
≈+1
output
x2+1 
Figure 3  The h machine is composed of the g machine (ﬁrst) and 
then the f machine.
In general, given any two functions f and g, we start with a number x in the domain 
of g and ﬁnd its image g1x2 . If this number g1x2  is in the domain of f, we can then 
calculate the value of f1g1x22 . The result is a new function h1x2 f1g1x22  that is ob-
tained by substituting g into f. It is called the composition (or composite) of f and g and 
is denoted by f g (“f composed with g”).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.7  ■  Combining Functions  213
Composition of Functions
Given two functions f and g, the composite function f g (also called the 
composition of f and g) is deﬁned by
1f g2 1x2 f1g1x22
The domain of f g is the set of all x in the domain of g such that g1x2  is in the 
domain of f. In other words, 1f g2 1x2  is deﬁned whenever both g1x2  and f1g1x22  are 
deﬁned. We can picture f g using an arrow diagram (Figure 4).
Figure 4  Arrow diagram for f g
x
g(x)
fÓ˝Ô
g
f
f$g
Example 3  ■  Finding the Composition of Functions
Let f1x2 x2 and g1x2 x 3.
(a)	 Find the functions f g and g f and their domains.
(b)	 Find 1f g2 152  and 1g f2 172 .
Solution
(a)	 We have
	
1f g2 1x2 f1g1x22
	
Deﬁnition of f g
	
  f1x 32	
Deﬁnition of g
	
  1x 32 2 	
Deﬁnition of f
and	
 1g f2 1x2 g1f1x22
	
Deﬁnition of g f
	
  g1x22
	
Deﬁnition of f
	
  x2 3
	
Deﬁnition of g
	 	 The domains of both f  g and g  f are R.
(b)	 We have
 1f g2 152 f1g1522 f122 22 4
 1g f2 172 g1f1722 g1492 49 3 46
Now Try Exercises 27 and 49	
■
You can see from Example 3 that, in general, f g ? g f. Remember that the 
notation f g means that the function g is applied ﬁrst and then f is applied  
second.
In Example 3, f is the rule “square,”  
and g is the rule “subtract 3.” The  
function f  g ﬁrst subtracts 3 and then 
squares; the function g  f ﬁrst squares 
and then subtracts 3.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Example 4  ■  Finding the Composition of Functions
If f1x2 !x and g1x2 !2 x, ﬁnd the following functions and their domains.
(a)  f g            (b)  g f            (c)  f f            (d)  g g
Solution
(a)	  1f g2 1x2 f1g1x22
	
Deﬁnition of f g
	 	
 f1 !2 x2	
Deﬁnition of g
	 	
 "!2 x 	
Deﬁnition of f
	 	
 !
4 2 x
	 	 The domain of f g is 5x 0  2 x 06 5x 0  x 26 1`,  24.
(b)	 1g f2 1x2 g1f1x22
	
Deﬁnition of g  f
	 	
 g1 !x2
	
Deﬁnition of f
	 	
  "2 !x	
Deﬁnition of g
	 	 For !x to be deﬁned, we must have x 0. For "2 !x to be deﬁned, we 
must have 2 !x 0, that is, !x 2, or x 4. Thus we have 0 x 4, so 
the domain of g f is the closed interval 30, 44.
(c)	  1f f2 1x2 f1f1x22	
Deﬁnition of f  f
	 	
 f1 !x2 	
Deﬁnition of f
	 	
 "!x 	
Deﬁnition of f
	 	
 !
4 x
	 	 The domain of f f is 30,  `2 .
(d)	 1g g2 1x2 g1g1x22
	
Deﬁnition of g  g
	 	
 g1 !2 x2
	
Deﬁnition of g
	 	
 "2 !2 x	
Deﬁnition of g
	 	 This expression is deﬁned when both 2 x 0 and 2 !2 x 0. The ﬁrst 
inequality means x 2, and the second is equivalent to !2 x 2, or 
2 x 4, or x 2. Thus 2 x 2, so the domain of g g is 32, 24.
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
It is possible to take the composition of three or more functions. For instance, the 
composite function f g h is found by ﬁrst applying h, then g, and then f as 
follows:
1f g h2 1x2 f1g1h1x222
Example 5  ■  A Composition of Three Functions
Find f g h if f1x2 x/1x 12, g1x2 x10, and h1x2 x 3.
Solution
 1f g h2 1x2 f1g1h1x222
	
Deﬁnition of f  g  h
  f1g1x 322
	
Deﬁnition of h
  f11x 32 102
	
Deﬁnition of g
  
1x 32 10
1x 32 10 1	
Deﬁnition of f
Now Try Exercise 59	
■
The graphs of f and g of Example 4, as 
well as those of f  g, g  f, f  f, and  
g  g, are shown below. These graphs 
indicate that the operation of composi-
tion can produce functions that are quite 
different from the original functions.
f$g
g$f
f$f
g$g
f
g
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.7  ■  Combining Functions  215
So far, we have used composition to build complicated functions from simpler ones. 
But in calculus it is useful to be able to “decompose” a complicated function into sim-
pler ones, as shown in the following example.
Example 6  ■  Recognizing a Composition of Functions
Given F1x2 !
4 x 9, ﬁnd functions f and g such that F f g.
Solution    Since the formula for F says to ﬁrst add 9 and then take the fourth root, we let
g1x2 x 9  and  f1x2 !
4 x
Then
 1f g2 1x2 f1g1x22
        Deﬁnition of f  g
  f1x 92        Deﬁnition of g
  !
4 x 9         Deﬁnition of f
  F1x2
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
■  Applications of Composition
When working with functions that model real-world situations, we name the variables us-
ing letters that suggest the quantity being modeled. We may use t for time, d for distance, 
V for volume, and so on. For example, if air is being pumped into a balloon, then the radius 
R of the balloon is a function of the volume V of air pumped into the balloon, say, 
R f1V2. Also the volume V is a function of the time t that the pump has been working, 
say, V g1t2. It follows that the radius R is a function of the time t given by R f1g1t22.
Example 7  ■  An Application of Composition of Functions
A ship is traveling at 20 mi/h parallel to a straight shoreline. The ship is 5 mi from 
shore. It passes a lighthouse at noon.
(a)	 Express the distance s between the lighthouse and the ship as a function of d, the 
distance the ship has traveled since noon; that is, ﬁnd f so that s f1d2 .
(b)	 Express d as a function of t, the time elapsed since noon; that is, ﬁnd g so that 
d g1t2 .
(c)	 Find f g. What does this function represent?
Solution    We ﬁrst draw a diagram as in Figure 5.
(a)	 We can relate the distances s and d by the Pythagorean Theorem. Thus s can be 
expressed as a function of d by
s f1d2 "25 d 2
(b)	 Since the ship is traveling at 20 mi/h, the distance d it has traveled is a function 
of t as follows:
d g1t2 20t
(c)	 We have
 1f g2 1t2 f1g1t22
    Deﬁnition of f g
  f120t2
    Deﬁnition of g
  "25 120t2 2    Deﬁnition of f
	 	 The function f g gives the distance of the ship from the lighthouse as a function  
of time.
Now Try Exercise 77	
■
5 mi
time=noon
time=t
s
d
Figure 5
distance rate time
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
concepts
	 1.	 From the graphs of f and g in the ﬁgure, we ﬁnd
1f g2122  
        1f g2 122  
1fg2 122 
 
	
a f
g b 122 
 
0 
2 
2
x 
g 
f 
y 
	 2.	 By deﬁnition, 1f g2 1x2  
  . So if g122 5 and 
	 	 f152 12, then 1f g2 122   
  .
	 3.	 If the rule of the function f is “add one” and the rule of the 
function g is “multiply by 2,” then the rule of f g is 
	 	 “ 
  ,” 
	 	 and the rule of g f  is
	 	 “ 
  .”
	 4.	 We can express the functions in Exercise 3 algebraically as 
f1x2  
	
g1x2  
1f g21x2  
	
1g f2 1x2 
 
5–6  ■  Let f and g be functions.
	 5.	 (a)	 The function 1f g2 1x2  is defined for all values of x 
	 	 	
that are in the domains of both  
 and  
  . 
(b)	 The function1fg2 1x2  is defined for all values of x that are 
in the domains of both  
 and  
  .
(c)	 The function 1f/g2 1x2  is defined for all values of x that 
are in the domains of both  
 and  
  , and 
g1x2  is not equal to  
  . 
	 6.	 The composition 1f g2 1x2  is defined for all values of x for 
which x is in the domain of  
 and g1x2  is in the 
domain of  
  .
skills
7–16  ■  Combining Functions    Find f g, f g, fg, and f/g 
and their domains.
	 7.	 f 1x2 x,    g1x2 2x	
  8.	 f 1x2 x,    g1x2 !x
	 9.	 f1x2 x2 x, 
g1x2 x2	
10.	 f1x2 3 x2, 
g1x2 x2 4
	11.	 f1x2 5 x, 
g1x2 x2 3x
	12.	 f1x2 x2 2x,    g1x2 3x2 1
	13.	 f1x2 "25 x2, 
g1x2 !x 3
14.	 f1x2 "16 x2, 
g1x2 "x2 1
	15.	 f1x2 2
x,    g1x2 
4
x 4
	16.	 f1x2 
2
x 1,    g1x2 
x
x 1
17–20  ■  Domain    Find the domain of the function.
	17.	 f1x2 !x !3 x	
18.	 f1x2 !x 4 !1 x
x
	19.	 h1x2 1x 32 1/4	
20.	 k1x2 !x 3
x 1
21–22  ■  Graphical Addition    Use graphical addition to sketch 
the graph of f g.
	21.	
0
f
g
x
y
	
22.	
0
f
g
x
y
23–26  ■  Graphical Addition    Draw the graphs of f, g, and 
f g on a common screen to illustrate graphical addition.
	23.	 f1x2 !1 x,    g1x2 !1 x
24.	 f1x2 x2,    g1x2 !x
	25.	 f1x2 x2,    g1x2 1
3x3
	26.	 f1x2 !
4 1 x,    g1x2 Å1 x2
9
27–32  ■  Evaluating Composition of Functions    Use 
f1x2 2x 3 and g1x2 4 x2 to evaluate the expression.
27.	 (a)	 f1g1022 	
(b)  g1f1022
28.	 (a)	 f1f1222 	
(b)  g1g1322
29.	 (a)	 1f g2 122 	
(b)  1g f2 122
30.	 (a)	 1f f2 112 	
(b)  1g g2 112
	31.	 (a)	 1f g2 1x2 	
(b)	 1g f2 1x2
	32.	 (a)	 1f f 2 1x2 	
(b)	 1g g2 1x2
2.7  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.7  ■  Combining Functions  217
33–38  ■  Composition Using a Graph    Use the given graphs of f 
and g to evaluate the ­expression.
x
y
0
f
g
2
2
	33.	 f1g1222 	
34.	 g1f1022
	35.	 1g f2 142 	
36.	 1f g2 102
	37.	 1g g2 122 	
38.	 1f f2 142
39–46  ■  Composition Using a Table    Use the table to evaluate 
the expression.
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
fxxc
2
3
5
1
6
3
gxxc
3
5
6
2
1
4
	39.	 f1g1222 	
40.	 g1f1222
	41.	 f1f1122 	
42.	 g1g1222
	43.	 1f g2 162 	
44.	 1g f2 122
	45. 1f f2 152 	
46.	 1g g2 122
47–58  ■  Composition of Functions    Find the functions f g, 
g f, f f, and g g and their domains.
	47.	 f1x2 2x 3,    g1x2 4x 1
	48.	 f1x2 6x 5,    g1x2 x
2
49.	 f 1x2 x2,    g1x2 x 1
	50.	 f1x2 x3 2,    g1x2 !
3 x
	51.	 f1x2 1
x,    g1x2 2x 4
	52.	 f1x2 x2,    g1x2 !x 3
	53.	 f1x2 0  x 0 ,    g1x2 2x 3
	54.	 f1x2 x 4,    g1x2 0  x 4 0
55.	 f1x2 
x
x 1,    g1x2 2x 1
	56.	 f1x2 
1
!x,    g1x2 x2 4x
	57.	 f1x2 
x
x 1,    g1x2 1
x
	58.	 f1x2 2
x,    g1x2 
x
x 2
59–62  ■  Composition of Three Functions    Find f g h.
59.	 f1x2 x 1,    g1x2 !x,    h1x2 x 1
	60.	 f1x2 1
x,    g1x2 x3,    h1x2 x2 2
	61.	 f1x2 x4 1,    g1x2 x 5,    h1x2 !x
	62.	 f1x2 !x,    g1x2 
x
x 1,    h1x2 !
3 x
63–68  ■  Expressing a Function as a Composition    Express the 
function in the form f g.
63.	 F1x2 1x 92 5	
64.	 F1x2 !x 1
	65.	 G1x2 
x2
x2 4	
66.	 G1x2 
1
x 3
	67.	 H1x2 0  1 x3
 0 	
68.	 H1x2 #1 !x
69–72  ■  Expressing a Function as a Composition    Express the 
function in the form f g h.
	69.	 F1x2 
1
x2 1	
70.	 F1x2 #
3 !x 1
	71.	 G1x2 14 !
3 x2 9	
72.	 G1x2 
2
13 !x2 2
skills plus
73.	 Composing Linear Functions    The graphs of the functions
f1x2 m1x b1
g1x2 m2x b2
	 	 are lines with slopes m1 and m2, respectively. Is the graph of 
f g a line? If so, what is its slope?
74.	 Solving an Equation for an Unknown Function    Suppose that
g1x2 2x 1
h1x2 4x2 4x 7
	 	 Find a function f such that f g h. (Think about what 
operations you would have to perform on the formula for g 
to end up with the formula for h.) Now suppose that
f1x2 3x 5
h1x2 3x2 3x 2
	 	 Use the same sort of reasoning to ﬁnd a function g such that 
f g h.
applications
75–76  ■  Revenue, Cost, and Proﬁt    A print shop makes  
bumper stickers for election campaigns. If x stickers are ordered 
(where x 10,000), then the price per bumper sticker is 
0.15 0.000002x dollars, and the total cost of producing the 
order is 0.095x 0.0000005x2 dollars.
	75.	 Use the fact that
revenue    price per item    number of items sold
	 	 to express R1x2 , the revenue from an order of x stickers, as a 
product of two functions of x.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	76.	 Use the fact that 
proﬁt   revenue   
cost
	 	 to express P1x2 , the proﬁt on an order of x stickers, as a dif-
ference of two functions of x.
	77.	 Area of a Ripple    A stone is dropped in a lake, creating a  
circular ripple that travels outward at a speed of 60 cm/s.
(a)	 Find a function g that models the radius as a function of 
time.
(b)	 Find a function f that models the area of the circle as a 
function of the radius.
(c)	 Find f g. What does this function represent?
	78.	 Inﬂating a Balloon    A spherical balloon is being inﬂated. 
The radius of the balloon is increasing at the rate of 1 cm/s.
(a)	 Find a function f that models the radius as a function of 
time.
(b)	 Find a function g that models the volume as a function 
of the radius.
(c)	 Find g f. What does this function represent?
	79.	 Area of a Balloon    A spherical weather balloon is being 
inﬂated. The radius of the balloon is increasing at the rate of  
2 cm/s. Express the surface area of the balloon as a function 
of time t (in seconds).
	80.	 Multiple Discounts    You have a $50 coupon from the manu-
facturer that is good for the purchase of a cell phone. The 
store where you are purchasing your cell phone is offering a 
20% discount on all cell phones. Let x represent the regular 
price of the cell phone.
(a)	 Suppose only the 20% discount applies. Find a function 
f that models the purchase price of the cell phone as a 
function of the regular price x.
(b)	 Suppose only the $50 coupon applies. Find a function g 
that models the purchase price of the cell phone as a 
function of the sticker price x.
(c)	 If you can use the coupon and the discount, then the pur-
chase price is either 1f g2 1x2  or 1g f2 1x2 , depending 
on the order in which they are applied to the price. Find 
both 1f g2 1x2  and 1g f2 1x2 . Which composition gives 
the lower price?
	81.	 Multiple Discounts    An appliance dealer advertises a  
10% discount on all his washing machines. In addition, the 
manufacturer offers a $100 rebate on the purchase of a  
washing machine. Let x represent the sticker price of the 
­washing machine.
(a)	 Suppose only the 10% discount applies. Find a function 
f that models the purchase price of the washer as a func-
tion of the sticker price x.
(b)	 Suppose only the $100 rebate applies. Find a function g 
that models the purchase price of the washer as a func-
tion of the sticker price x.
(c)	 Find f g and g f. What do these functions represent? 
Which is the better deal?
	82.	 Airplane Trajectory    An airplane is ﬂying at a speed of  
350 mi/h at an altitude of one mile. The plane passes directly 
above a radar station at time t  0.
(a)	 Express the distance s (in miles) between the plane and 
the radar station as a function of the horizontal distance 
d (in miles) that the plane has ﬂown.
(b)	 Express d as a function of the time t (in hours) that the 
plane has ﬂown.
(c)	 Use composition to express s as a function of t.
s
d
1 mi 
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	83.	 DISCOVER:  Compound Interest    A savings account earns 
5% interest compounded annually. If you invest x dollars in 
such an account, then the amount A1x2  of the investment 
after one year is the ­initial investment plus 5%; that is, 
A1x2 x 0.05x 1.05x 
	 	 Find
A A
A A A
A A A A
	 	 What do these compositions represent? Find a formula for 
what you get when you compose n copies of A.
	84.	 DISCUSS:  Compositions of Odd and Even Functions     
Suppose that
h f g
	 	 If g is an even function, is h necessarily even? If g is odd, is  
h odd? What if g is odd and f is odd? What if g is odd and  
f is even?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.8  ■  One-to-One Functions and Their Inverses  219
2.8 
One-to-One Functions and Their Inverses
■  One-to-One Functions  ■  The Inverse of a Function  ■  Finding the Inverse of a Function   
■  Graphing the Inverse of a Function  ■  Applications of Inverse Functions
The inverse of a function is a rule that acts on the output of the function and produces 
the corresponding input. So the inverse “undoes” or reverses what the function has 
done. Not all functions have inverses; those that do are called one-to-one.
■  One-to-One Functions
Let’s compare the functions f and g whose arrow diagrams are shown in Figure 1. Note 
that f never takes on the same value twice (any two numbers in A have different im-
ages), whereas g does take on the same value twice (both 2 and 3 have the same image, 
4). In symbols, g122 g132  but f1x12 ? f1x22  whenever x1 ? x2. Functions that have 
this latter property are called one-to-one.
10
7
4
2
B
f is one-to-one
f
A
4
3
2
1
10
4
2
B
g is not one-to-one
g
A
4
3
2
1
Figure 1
DeFInition of a One-to-one Function
A function with domain A is called a one-to-one function if no two elements 
of A have the same image, that is,
f1x12 ? f1x22 whenever x1 ? x2
An equivalent way of writing the condition for a one-to-one function is this:
If f 1x12 f 1x22, then x1 x2.
If a horizontal line intersects the graph of f at more than one point, then we see from 
Figure 2 that there are numbers x1 ? x2 such that f1x12 f1x22 . This means that f is 
not one-to-one. Therefore we have the following geometric method for determining 
whether a function is one-to-one.
Horizontal Line Test
A function is one-to-one if and only if no horizontal line intersects its graph 
more than once.
y
x
x⁄
y=Ï
0
x¤
f(x⁄)
f(x¤)
Figure 2  This function is not  
one-to-one because f1x12 f1x22.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Example 1  ■  Deciding Whether a Function Is One-to-One
Is the function f1x2 x3 one-to-one?
Solution 1    If x1 ? x2, then x3
1 ? x3
2 (two different numbers cannot have the same 
cube). Therefore f1x2 x3 is one-to-one.
Solution 2    From Figure 3 we see that no horizontal line intersects the graph of 
f1x2 x3 more than once. Therefore by the Horizontal Line Test, f is one-to-one.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
Notice that the function f of Example 1 is increasing and is also one-to-one. In fact, it 
can be proved that every increasing function and every decreasing function is one-to-one.
Example 2  ■  Deciding Whether a Function Is One-to-One
Is the function g1x2 x2 one-to-one?
Solution 1    This function is not one-to-one because, for instance,
g112 1  and  g112 1
so 1 and 1 have the same image.
Solution 2    From Figure 4 we see that there are horizontal lines that intersect the 
graph of g more than once. Therefore by the Horizontal Line Test, g is not one-to-one.
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Although the function g in Example 2 is not one-to-one, it is possible to restrict its 
domain so that the resulting function is one-to-one. In fact, if we deﬁne
h1x2 x2  x 0
then h is one-to-one, as you can see from Figure 5 and the Horizontal Line Test.
Example 3  ■  Showing That a Function Is One-to-One
Show that the function f1x2 3x 4 is one-to-one.
Solution    Suppose there are numbers x1 and x2 such that f1x12 f1x22. Then
 3x1 4 3x2 4    Suppose f 1x12 f 1x22
 3x1 3x2
    Subtract 4
 x1 x2
    Divide by 3
Therefore f is one-to-one.
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
■  The Inverse of a Function
One-to-one functions are important because they are precisely the functions that pos-
sess inverse functions according to the following deﬁnition.
DeFInition of the Inverse of a Function
Let f be a one-to-one function with domain A and range B. Then its inverse 
function f1 has domain B and range A and is deﬁned by
f11y2 x 3 f 1x2 y
for any y in B.
1
y
x
0
1
Figure 3  f1x2 x3 is one-to-one.
y
x
1
0
1
Figure 4  g1x2 x2 is not  
one-to-one.
y
x
1
0
1
Figure 5  h1x2 x2 1x 02 is  
one-to-one.
y=Ï
B
A
x
f
f_1
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.8  ■  One-to-One Functions and Their Inverses  221
This deﬁnition says that if f takes x to y, then f 1 takes y back to x. (If f were not 
one-to-one, then f 1 would not be deﬁned uniquely.) The arrow diagram in Figure 6 
indicates that f 1 reverses the effect of f. From the deﬁnition we have
 domain of f 1 range of f
 range of f 1 domain of f
Example 4  ■  Finding f 1 for Speciﬁc Values
If f112 5, f132 7, and f182 10, ﬁnd f 1152, f 1172 , and f 11102 .
Solution    From the deﬁnition of f 1 we have
 f1152 1 because f112 5
 f1172 3 because f132 7
 f11102 8 because f182 10
Figure 7 shows how f1 reverses the effect of f in this case.
B
5
7
_10
f
A
1
3
8
A
1
3
8
f_1
B
5
7
_10
Figure 7
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
Example 5  ■  Finding Values of an Inverse Function
We can find specific values of an inverse function from a table or graph of the func-
tion itself.  
(a)	 The table below gives values of a function h. From the table we see that 
h1182 3, h11122 4, and h1132 6.
(b)	 A graph of a function f is shown in Figure 8. From the graph we see that 
f 1152 7 and f 1132 4.
x
0
1
3
5
1
4
7
f
y
Figure 8  Finding values of f1 
from a graph of f
Finding values of h1 
from a table of h
x
hxxc
2
  5
3
  8
4
12
5
  1
6
  3
7
15
Now Try Exercises 29 and 31	
■
  Don’t mistake the 1 in f 1 for 
an exponent.
f11x2 does not mean 1
f1x2
The reciprocal 1/f1x2  is written as 
1f1x22 1.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
By deﬁnition the inverse function f 1 undoes what f does: If we start with x, apply 
f, and then apply f 1, we arrive back at x, where we started. Similarly, f undoes what 
f 1 does. In general, any function that reverses the effect of f in this way must be the 
inverse of f. These observations are expressed precisely as follows.
Inverse Function Property
Let f be a one-to-one function with domain A and range B. The inverse function 
f 1 satisﬁes the following cancellation properties:
f11f1x22 x for every x in A
f1f11x22 x for every x in B
Conversely, any function f 1 satisfying these equations is the inverse of f.
These properties indicate that f is the inverse function of f 1, so we say that f and 
f 1 are inverses of each other.
Example 6  ■  Verifying That Two Functions Are Inverses
Show that f1x2 x3 and g1x2 x1/3 are inverses of each other.
Solution    Note that the domain and range of both f and g are R. We have
 g1f1x22 g1x32 1x32 1/3 x
 f1g1x22 f1x1/32 1x1/32 3 x
So by the Property of Inverse Functions, f and g are inverses of each other. These 
equations simply say that the cube function and the cube root function, when com-
posed, cancel each other.
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
■  Finding the Inverse of a Function
Now let’s examine how we compute inverse functions. We ﬁrst observe from the 
deﬁnition of f 1 that
y f1x2 3 f 11
 y2 x
So if y f1x2  and if we are able to solve this equation for x in terms of y, then we must 
have x f 11 y2 . If we then interchange x and y, we have y f 11x2 , which is the 
desired equation.
How to Find the Inverse of a One-to-One Function
1.	 Write y f1x2.
2.	 Solve this equation for x in terms of y (if possible).
3.	 Interchange x and y. The resulting equation is y f 11x2 .
Note that Steps 2 and 3 can be reversed. In other words, we can interchange x and y 
ﬁrst and then solve for y in terms of x.
Example 7  ■  Finding the Inverse of a Function
Find the inverse of the function f1x2 3x 2.
Solution    First we write y f1x2 .
y 3x 2
In Example 7 note how f 1 reverses  
the effect of f. The function f is the  
rule “Multiply by 3, then subtract 2,” 
whereas f 1 is the rule “Add 2, then 
­divide by 3.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.8  ■  One-to-One Functions and Their Inverses  223
Then we solve this equation for x:
 3x y 2    Add 2
 x y 2
3
    Divide by 3
Finally, we interchange x and y:
y x 2
3
Therefore, the inverse function is f 11x2 x 2
3
.
Now Try Exercise 49	
■
Example 8  ■  Finding the Inverse of a Function
Find the inverse of the function f1x2 x5 3
2
.
Solution    We ﬁrst write y 1x5 32/2 and solve for x.
 y x5 3
2
    Equation deﬁning function
 2y x5 3
    Multiply by 2
 x5 2y 3
    Add 3 (and switch sides)
 x 12y 32 1/5    Take ﬁfth root of each side
Then we interchange x and y to get y 12x 32 1/5. Therefore the inverse function is 
f 11x2 12x 32 1/5.
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
A rational function is a function defined by a rational expression. In the next ex-
ample we find the inverse of a rational function.
Example 9  ■  Finding the Inverse of a Rational Function 
Find the inverse of the function f 1x2 2x 3
x 1 .
Solution    We first write y 12x 32/1x 12 and solve for x.
 y 2x 3
x 1     Equation defining function
 y1x 12 2x 3    Multiply by x  1
 yx y 2x 3    Expand
 yx 2x y 3     Bring x-terms to LHS
 x1y 22 y 3     Factor x
 x y 3
y 2     Divide by y  2
Therefore the inverse function is f  11x2 x 3
x 2.
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
In Example 8 note how f1 reverses 
the effect of f. The function f is the 
rule “Take the ﬁfth power, subtract 3, 
then divide by 2,” whereas f1 is the 
rule “Multiply by 2, add 3, then take 
the ﬁfth root.”
Rational functions are studied in  
Section 3.6.
Check Your Answer
We use the Inverse Function Property:
 f 11f1x22 f 113x 22
 
13x 22 2
3
 3x
3 x
 f1f 11x22 fax 2
3
b
 3ax 2
3
b 2
 x 2 2 x  ✓
Check Your Answer
We use the Inverse Function Property:
 f 11f1x22 f 1 a x5 3
2
b
 c 2a x5 3
2
b 3d
1/5
 1x5 3 32 1/5
 1x52 1/5 x
 f1f 11x22 f112x 32 1/52
 
312x 32 1/54 5 3
2
 2x 3 3
2
 2x
2 x  ✓
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
■  Graphing the Inverse of a Function
The principle of interchanging x and y to ﬁnd the inverse function also gives us a method 
for obtaining the graph of f 1 from the graph of f. If f1a2 b, then f 11b2 a. Thus 
the point 1a, b2 is on the graph of f if and only if the point 1b, a2 is on the graph of f 1. 
But we get the point 1b, a2 from the point 1a, b2 by reﬂecting in the line y  x (see 
Figure 9). Therefore, as Figure 10 illustrates, the following is true.
The graph of f1 is obtained by reﬂecting the graph of f in the line y  x.
y=x
(b, a)
(a, b)
y
x
y=x
f
f _¡
y
x
Figure 9
Figure 10
Example 10  ■  Graphing the Inverse of a Function
(a)	 Sketch the graph of f1x2 !x 2.
(b)	 Use the graph of f to sketch the graph of f 1.
(c)	 Find an equation for f 1.
Solution
(a)	 Using the transformations from Section 2.6, we sketch the graph of y !x 2 
by plotting the graph of the function y !x (Example 1(c) in Section 2.2) and 
shifting it to the right 2 units.
(b)	 The graph of f 1 is obtained from the graph of f in part (a) by reﬂecting it in the 
line y  x, as shown in Figure 11.
(c)	 Solve y !x 2 for x, noting that y  0.
 !x 2 y
 x 2 y2
    Square each side
 x y2 2  y 0    Add 2
	 	 Interchange x and y, as follows:
y x2 2  x 0
	
Thus	
 f 11x2 x2 2  x 0
	
This expression shows that the graph of f 1 is the right half of the parabola  
y  x2  2, and from the graph shown in Figure 11 this seems reasonable.
Now Try Exercise 73	
■
■  Applications of Inverse Functions
When working with functions that model real-world situations, we name the variables 
using letters that suggest the quantity being modeled. For instance we may use t  
for time, d for distance, V for volume, and so on. When using inverse functions, we 
y
x
2
2
y=f–¡(x)
y=Ï= x-2
y=x
Figure 11
In Example 10 note how f 1 reverses 
the effect of f. The function f is the 
rule “Subtract 2, then take the square 
root,” whereas f 1 is the rule “Square, 
then add 2.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.8  ■  One-to-One Functions and Their Inverses  225
follow this convention. For example, suppose that the variable R is a function of the 
variable N, say, R f1N2 . Then f 11R2 N. So the function f 1 defines N as a 
function of R.
Example 11  ■  An Inverse Function
At a local pizza parlor the daily special is $12 for a plain cheese pizza plus $2 for 
each additional topping. 
(a)	 Find a function f that models the price of a pizza with n toppings.
(b)	 Find the inverse of the function f. What does f 1 represent?
(c)	 If a pizza costs $22, how many toppings does it have?
Solution    Note that the price p of a pizza is a function of the number n of 
toppings.
(a)	 The price of a pizza with n toppings is given by the function 
f1n2 12 2n
(b)	 To find the inverse function, we first write p f1n2 , where we use the letter p 
instead of our usual y because f1n2  is the price of the pizza. We have 
p 12 2n
	 	 Next we solve for n:
 p 12 2n
 p 12 2n
 n p 12
2
	 	 So n f 11p2 p 12
2
. The function f 1 gives the number n of toppings for a 
pizza with price p. 
(c)	 We have n f 11222 122 122/2 5. So the pizza has five toppings.
Now Try Exercise 93	
■
concepts
	 1.	 A function f is one-to-one if different inputs produce 
 
 outputs. You can tell from the graph that a function 
is one-to-one by using the  
 Test.
	 2.	 (a)	 For a function to have an inverse, it must be  
  . 
So which one of the following functions has an inverse?
f1x2 x2  g1x2 x3
(b)	 What is the inverse of the function that you chose in  
part (a)?
	 3.	 A function f has the following verbal description: “Multiply 
by 3, add 5, and then take the third power of the result.”
(a)	 Write a verbal description for f 1.
(b)	 Find algebraic formulas that express f and f 1 in terms 
of the input x.
	 4.	 A graph of a function f is given. Does f have an inverse? If 
so, find f 1112   
 and f 1132   
  .
0
1
1
f
x
y
	 5.	 If the point 13, 42 is on the graph of the function f, then the 
	 	 point 1  
  ,  
2  is on the graph of f 1.
2.8  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	 6.	 True or false?
(a)	 If f has an inverse, then f 11x2  is always the same  
as 1
f1x2 .
(b)	 If f has an inverse, then f 11f1x22 x.
skills
7–12  ■  One-to-One Function?    A graph of a function f is given. 
Determine whether f is one-to-one.
	 7.	
y
x
0
	
8.	
y
x
0
	 9.	
y
x
0
	
10.	
y
x
0
	11.	
y
x
0
	
12.	
y
x
0
13–24  ■  One-to-One Function?    Determine whether the func-
tion is one-to-one.
	13.	 f1x2 2x 4	
14.	 f1x2 3x 2
	15.	 g1x2 !x	
16.	 g1x2 0  x 0
	17.	 h1x2 x2 2x	
18.	 h1x2 x3 8
	19.	 f1x2 x4 5	
	20.	 f1x2 x4 5, 0 x 2
	21.	 r 1t2 t6 3, 
0 t 5
	22.	 r 1t2 t4 1
	23.	 f1x2 1
x2	
24.	 f1x2 1
x
25–28  ■  Finding Values of an Inverse Function    Assume that f is 
a one-to-one function.
	25.	 (a)	 If f122 7, ﬁnd f1172 .
(b)	 If f1132 1, ﬁnd f112 .
	26.	 (a)	 If f152 18, ﬁnd f11182 .
(b)	 If f 1142 2, ﬁnd f122 .
	27.	 If f1x2 5 2x, ﬁnd f1132 .
	28.	 If g1x2 x2 4x with x  2, ﬁnd g1152 .
29–30  ■  Finding Values of an Inverse from a Graph    A graph of 
a function is given. Use the graph to find the indicated values.
	29.	 (a)	 f 1122             (b)  f 1152             (c)  f 1162
0
4
4
f
y
x
	30.	 (a)	 g1122             (b)  g1152             (c)  g1162
0
4
4
g
y
x
31–36  ■  Finding Values of an Inverse Using a Table    A table of 
values for a one-to-one function is given. Find the indicated 
values.
	31.	 f 1152 	
32.	 f 1102
	33.	 f 11f1122 	
34.	 f1f 11622
	35.	 f 11f
 11122 	
36.	 f 11f
 11022
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
fxxc
4
6
2
5
0
1
37–48  ■  Inverse Function Property    Use the Inverse Function 
Property to show that f and g are inverses of each other.
	37.	 f1x2 x 6; g1x2 x 6
	38.	 f1x2 3x; g1x2 x
3
	39.	 f1x2 3x 4; 
g1x2 x 4
3
	40.	 f1x2 2 5x; 
g1x2 2 x
5
	41.	 f1x2 1
x; g1x2 1
x	
42.	 f1x2 x5; g1x2 !
5 x
	43.	 f1x2 x2 9, 
x 0; 
g1x2 !x 9, 
x 9
	44.	 f1x2 x3 1; g1x2 1x 12 1/3
	45.	 f1x2 
1
x 1;    g1x2 1
x 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 2.8  ■  One-to-One Functions and Their Inverses  227
	46.	 f1x2 "4 x2, 0 x 2;
	 	 g1x2 "4 x2, 0 x 2
	47.	 f1x2 x 2
x 2;    g1x2 2x 2
x 1
	48.	 f 1x2 x 5
3x 4;    g1x2 5 4x
1 3x
49–70  ■  Finding Inverse Functions    Find the inverse function  
of f.
	49.	 f1x2 3x 5	
50.	 f1x2 7 5x
	51.	 f1x2 5 4x3	
52.	 f1x2 3x3 8
	53.	 f1x2 
1
x 2	
54.	 f1x2 x 2
x 2
	55.	 f 1x2 
x
x 4	
56.	 f 1x2 
3x
x 2
57.	 f 1x2 2x 5
x 7 	
58.	 f 1x2 4x 2
3x 1
	59.	 f1x2 2x 3
1 5x	
60.	 f1x2 3 4x
8x 1
	61.	 f1x2 4 x2, x 0	
62.	 f1x2 x2 x, x  1
2
	63.	 f1x2 x6, 
x 0	
64.	 f1x2 1
x2, 
x 0
	65.	 f1x2 2 x3
5
	
66.	 f1x2 1x5 62 7
	67.	 f1x2 !5 8x	
68.	 f1x2 2 !3 x
	69.	 f1x2 2 !
3 x
	70.	 f1x2 "4 x2, 
0 x 2
71–74  ■  Graph of an Inverse Function    A function f is given. 
(a) Sketch the graph of f. (b) Use the graph of f to sketch the 
graph of f 1. (c) Find f 1.
	71.	 f1x2 3x 6	
72.	 f1x2 16 x2, x 0
	73.	 f1x2 !x 1	
74.	 f1x2 x3 1
75–80  ■  One-to-One Functions from a Graph    Draw the graph 
of f, and use it to determine whether the function is one-to-one.
	75.	 f1x2 x3 x	
76.	 f1x2 x3 x
	77.	 f1x2 x 12
x 6 	
78.	 f1x2 "x3 4x 1
	79.	 f1x2 0  x 0 0  x 6 0 	
80.	 f1x2 x # 0  x 0
81–84  ■  Finding Inverse Functions    A one-to-one function is 
given. (a) Find the inverse of the function. (b) Graph both the 
function and its inverse on the same screen to verify that the 
graphs are reﬂections of each other in the line y  x.
	81.	 f1x2 2 x	
82.	 f 1x2 2 1
2 x
	83.	 g1x2 !x 3	
84.	 g1x2 x2 1, x 0
85–88  ■  Restricting the Domain    The given function is not  
one-to-one. Restrict its domain so that the resulting function is 
one-to-one. Find the inverse of the function with the restricted 
domain. (There is more than one correct answer.)
	85.	 f1x2 4 x2	
86.	 g1x2 1x 12 2
	 	
x
0
1
1
y
	
	
y
x
0
1
1
	87.	 h1x2 1x 22 2	
88.	 k1x2 0  x 3 0
	 	
y
x
0
_1
1
	
	
y
x
0
1
1
89–90  ■  Graph of an Inverse Function    Use the graph of f to 
sketch the graph of f1.
89.	
x
y
0
1
1
	
90.	
x
y
0
1
1
Skills Plus
91–92  ■  Functions That Are Their Own Inverse    If a function f 
is its own inverse, then the graph of f is symmetric about the line 
y x. (a) Graph the given function. (b) Does the graph indicate 
that f and f 1 are the same function? (c) Find the function f 1. 
Use your result to verify your answer to part (b).
91.	 f1x2 1
x	
92.	 f1x2 x 3
x 1
applications
	93.	 Pizza Cost    Marcello’s Pizza charges a base price of $16 for 
a large pizza plus $1.50 for each additional topping. 
(a)	 Find a function f that models the price of a pizza with  
n toppings.
(b)	 Find the inverse of the function f. What does f 1  
represent?
(c)	 If a pizza costs $25, how many toppings does it have?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	94.	 Fee for Service    For his services, a private investigator 
requires a $500 retainer fee plus $80 per hour. Let x represent 
the number of hours the investigator spends working on a 
case.
(a)	 Find a function f that models the investigator’s fee as a 
function of x.
(b)	 Find f 1. What does f 1 represent?
(c)	 Find f 1112202. What does your answer represent?
	95.	 Torricelli’s Law    A tank holds 100 gallons of water, which 
drains from a leak at the bottom, causing the tank to empty in 
40 minutes. According to Torricelli’s Law, the volume V of 
water remaining in the tank after t min is given by the 
function
V f1t2 100 a 1 t
40 b
2
(a)	 Find f 1. What does f 1 represent?
(b)	 Find f 11152. What does your answer represent?
	96.	 Blood Flow    As blood moves through a vein or artery, its 
­velocity √ is greatest along the central axis and decreases as  
the distance r from the central axis increases (see the ﬁgure 
­below). For an artery with radius 0.5 cm, √ (in cm/s) is given 
as a function of r (in cm) by
√g1r2 18,50010.25 r 22
(a)	 Find g1. What does g1 represent?
(b)	 Find g11302. What does your answer represent?
r
	97.	 Demand Function    The amount of a commodity that  
is sold is called the demand for the commodity. The 
demand D for a certain commodity is a function of the 
price given by
D f1 p2 3p 150
(a)	 Find f 1. What does f 1 represent?
(b)	 Find f 11302. What does your answer represent?
	98.	 Temperature Scales    The relationship between the Fahren-
heit (F) and Celsius (C) scales is given by
F g1C2 9
5 C 32
(a)	 Find g1. What does g1 represent?
(b)	 Find g11862. What does your answer represent?
	99.	 Exchange Rates    The relative value of currencies ﬂuctuates 
every day. When this problem was written, one Canadian dol-
lar was worth 0.9766 U.S. dollars.
(a)	 Find a function f that gives the U.S. dollar value f1x2  of  
x Canadian dollars.
(b)	 Find f 1. What does f 1 represent?
(c)	 How much Canadian money would $12,250 in U.S. cur-
rency be worth?
100.	 Income Tax    In a certain country the tax on incomes less 
than or equal to €20,000 is 10%. For incomes that are more 
than €20,000 the tax is €2000 plus 20% of the amount over 
€20,000.
(a)	 Find a function f that gives the income tax on an  
income x. Express f as a piecewise deﬁned function.
(b)	 Find f 1. What does f 1 represent?
(c)	 How much income would require paying a tax of 
€10,000?
101.	 Multiple Discounts    A car dealership advertises a 15% dis-
count on all its new cars. In addition, the manufacturer 
offers a $1000 rebate on the purchase of a new car. Let x 
represent the sticker price of the car.
(a)	 Suppose that only the 15% discount applies. Find a  
function f that models the purchase price of the car as a 
function of the sticker price x.
(b)	 Suppose that only the $1000 rebate applies. Find a  
function g that models the purchase price of the car as a 
function of the sticker price x.
(c)	 Find a formula for H  f  g.
(d)	 Find H1. What does H1 represent?
(e)	 Find H1113,0002. What does your answer represent?
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
102.	 DISCUSS:  Determining When a Linear Function Has an 
Inverse    For the linear function f1x2 mx b to be  
one-to-one, what must be true about its slope? If it is one-
to-one, ﬁnd its inverse. Is the inverse linear? If so, what is 
its slope?
103.	 DISCUSS:  Finding an Inverse “in Your Head”    In the margin 
notes in this section we pointed out that the inverse of a 
function can be found by simply reversing the operations 
that make up the function. For instance, in Example 7 we 
saw that the inverse of
f1x2 3x 2  is  f 11x2 x 2
3
	
	 because the “reverse” of “Multiply by 3 and subtract 2” is 
“Add 2 and divide by 3.” Use the same procedure to ﬁnd the 
­inverse of the following functions.
(a)	 f1x2 2x 1
5
	
(b)	 f1x2 3 1
x
(c)	 f1x2 "x3 2	
(d)	 f1x2 12x 52 3
	
	 Now consider another function:
f1x2 x3 2x 6
	
	 Is it possible to use the same sort of simple reversal of oper-
ations to ﬁnd the inverse of this function? If so, do it. If not, 
explain what is different about this function that makes this 
task difﬁcult.
104.	 PROVE:  The Identity Function    The function I1x2 x is 
called the identity function. Show that for any function f 
we have f I f, I f f, and f f1 f1 f I. 
(This means that the identity function I behaves for func-
tions and composition just the way the number 1 behaves 
for real numbers and multiplication.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2  ■  Review  229
105.	 DISCUSS:  Solving an Equation for an Unknown Function     
In ­Exercises 69–72 of Section 2.7 you were asked to solve 
equations in which the unknowns are functions. Now that 
we know about inverses and the identity function (see Exer-
cise 104), we can use algebra to solve such equations. For 
instance, to solve f g h for the unknown function f, we 
perform the following steps:
 f g h	
Problem: Solve for f
 f g g1 h g1	
Compose with g1 on the right
 f I h g1	
Because g  g1 5 I
 f h g1	
Because f  I 5 f
	
	 So the solution is f h g1. Use this technique to solve 
the equation f g h for the indicated unknown function.
(a)	 Solve for f, where g1x2 2x 1 and 
h1x2 4x2 4x 7.
(b)	 Solve for g, where f1x2 3x 5 and 
­h1x2 3x2 3x 2.
Function Notation (p. 149)
If a function is given by the formula y f1x2 , then x is the inde-
pendent variable and denotes the input; y is the dependent vari-
able and denotes the output; the domain is the set of all possible 
inputs x; the range is the set of all possible outputs y.
Net Change (p. 151)
The net change in the value of the function f between x  a and  
x  b is 
net change f1b2 f1a2
The Graph of a Function (p. 159)
The graph of a function f is the graph of the equation y f1x2  
that deﬁnes f.
The Vertical Line Test (p. 164)
A curve in the coordinate plane is the graph of a function if and 
only if no vertical line intersects the graph more than once.
Increasing and Decreasing Functions (p. 174)
A function f is increasing on an interval if f1x12 f1x22  when-
ever x1 x2 in the interval.
A function f is decreasing on an interval if f1x12 f1x22  when-
ever x1 x2 in the interval.
Local Maximum and Minimum Values (p. 176)
The function value f1a2  is a local maximum value of the func-
tion f if f1a2 f1x2  for all x near a. In this case we also say that 
f has a local maximum at x  a. 
The function value f1b2  is a local minimum value of the func-
tion f if f1b2 f1x2  for all x near b. In this case we also say that 
f has a local minimum at x  b.
Average Rate of Change (p. 184)
The average rate of change of the function f between x  a  
and x  b is the slope of the secant line between 1a, f1a22  and  
1b, f1b22 :
average rate of change 
f1b2 f 1a2
b a
Linear Functions (pp. 191–192)
A linear function is a function of the form f1x2 ax b. The 
graph of f is a line with slope a and y-intercept b. The average 
rate of change of f has the constant value a between any two 
points.
a slope of graph of f rate of change of f 
Vertical and Horizontal Shifts of Graphs (pp. 198–199)
Let c be a positive constant.
To graph y f1x2 c, shift the graph of y f1x2  upward by  
c units.
To graph y f1x2 c, shift the graph of y f1x2  downward 
by c units.
To graph y f1x c2 , shift the graph of y f1x2  to the right 
by c units.
To graph y f1x c2 , shift the graph of y f1x2  to the left 
by c units.
Reﬂecting Graphs (p. 201)
To graph y f1x2 , reﬂect the graph of y f1x2  in the  
x-axis.
To graph y f1x2 , reﬂect the graph of y f1x2  in the  
y-axis.
Vertical and Horizontal Stretching and Shrinking 
of Graphs (pp. 202, 203)
If c 1, then to graph y cf1x2 , stretch the graph of y f1x2  
vertically by a factor of c.
If 0 c 1, then to graph y cf1x2 , shrink the graph of 
y f1x2  vertically by a factor of c.
If c 1, then to graph y f1cx2 , shrink the graph of y f1x2  
horizontally by a factor of 1/c.
If 0 c 1, then to graph y f1cx2 , stretch the graph of 
y f1x2  horizontally by a factor of 1/c.
■  Properties and Formulas
Chapter 2  ■  Review
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
Even and Odd Functions (p. 204)
A function f is
    even if f1x2 f1x2
    odd if f1x2 f1x2
for every x in the domain of f.
Composition of Functions (p. 213)
Given two functions f and g, the composition of f and g is the 
function f g deﬁned by
1f g2 1x2 f1g1x22
The domain of f g is the set of all x for which both g1x2  and 
f1g1x22  are deﬁned.
One-to-One Functions (p. 219)
A function f is one-to-one if f1x12 ? f1x22  whenever x1 and x2 
are different elements of the domain of f.
Horizontal Line Test (p. 219)
 A function is one-to-one if and only if no horizontal line inter-
sects its graph more than once.
Inverse of a Function (p. 220)
Let f be a one-to-one function with domain A and range B.
The inverse of f is the function f1 deﬁned by
f11
 y2 x 3 f1x2 y
The inverse function f1 has domain B and range A.
The functions f and f1 satisfy the following ­cancellation 
­properties:
 f11f1x22 x for every x in A
 f1f11x22 x for every x in B
	 1.	 Define each concept.
(a)	 Function
(b)	 Domain and range of a function
(c)	 Graph of a function
(d)	 Independent and dependent variables 
	 2.	 Describe the four ways of representing a function.
	 3.	 Sketch graphs of the following functions by hand.
(a)	 f1x2 x2	
(b)	 g1x2 x3
(c)	 h1x2 0  x 0 	
(d)	 k1x2 !x
	 4.	 What is a piecewise defined function? Give an example.
	 5.	 (a)	 What is the Vertical Line Test, and what is it used for?
(b)	 What is the Horizontal Line Test, and what is it used for?
	 6.	 Define each concept, and give an example of each.
(a)	 Increasing function
(b)	 Decreasing function
(c)	 Constant function
	 7.	 Suppose we know that the point 13, 52  is a point on the graph 
of a function f. Explain how to find f132  and f 1152 .
	 8.	 What does it mean to say that f142  is a local maximum value 
of f?
	 9.	 Explain how to find the average rate of change of a function 
f between x a and x b.
	10.	 (a)	 What is the slope of a linear function? How do you find 
it? What is the rate of change of a linear function?
(b)	 Is the rate of change of a linear function constant? 
Explain.
(c)	 Give an example of a linear function, and sketch its 
graph.
	11.	 Suppose the graph of  a function f is given. Write an equa-
tion for each of the graphs that are obtained from the graph 
of f as follows.
(a)	 Shift upward 3 units
(b)	 Shift downward 3 units
(c)	 Shift 3 units to the right
(d)	 Shift 3 units to the left
(e)	 Reflect in the x-axis
(f)	 Reflect in the y-axis
(g)	 Stretch vertically by a factor of 3
(h)	 Shrink vertically by a factor of 1
3
(i)	 Shrink horizontally by a factor of 1
3
(j)	 Stretch horizontally by a factor of 3
	12.	 (a)	 What is an even function? How can you tell that a func-
tion is even by looking at its graph? Give an example of 
an even function.
(b)	 What is an odd function? How can you tell that a func-
tion is odd by looking at its graph? Give an example of 
an odd function.
	13.	 Suppose that f has domain A and g has domain B. What are 
the domains of the following functions?
(a)	 Domain of f g
(b)	 Domain of fg
(c)	 Domain of f/g
	14.	 (a)	 How is the composition function f g defined? What is 
its domain? 
(b)	 If g1a2 b and f1b2 c, then explain how to find 
1f g2 1a2 .
■  Concept check
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2  ■  Review  231
1–2  ■  Function Notation    A verbal description of a function f is 
given. Find a formula that expresses f in function notation.
	 1.	 “Square, then subtract 5.”
	 2.	 “Divide by 2, then add 9.”
3–4  ■  Function in Words    A formula for a function f is given. 
Give a verbal description of the function.
	 3.	 f1x2 31x 102 	
  4.	 f1x2 !6x 10
5–6  ■  Table of Values    Complete the table of values for the 
given function.
	 5.	 g1x2 x2 4x	
  6.	 h1x2 3x2 2x 5
	 	
x
gxxc
1
0
1
2
3
	
	
x
hxxc
2
1
0
1
2
	 7.	 Printing Cost    A publisher estimates that the cost C(x) of 
printing a run of x copies of a certain mathematics textbook 
is given by the function C1x2 5000 30x 0.001x2.
(a)	 Find C(1000) and C(10,000).
(b)	 What do your answers in part (a) represent?
(c)	 Find C(0). What does this number represent?
(d)	 Find the net change and the average rate of change of the 
cost C between x 1000 and x 10,000.
	 8.	 Earnings    Reynalda works as a salesperson in the electronics 
division of a department store. She earns a base weekly sal-
ary plus a commission based on the retail price of the goods 
she has sold. If she sells x dollars worth of goods in a week, 
her earnings for that week are given by the function 
E1x2 400 0.03x.
(a)	 Find E(2000) and E(15,000).
(b)	 What do your answers in part (a) represent?
(c)	 Find E(0). What does this number represent?
(d)	 Find the net change and the average rate of change of her 
earnings E between x 2000 and x 15,000.
(e)	 From the formula for E, determine what percentage  
Reynalda earns on the goods that she sells.
9–10  ■  Evaluating Functions    Evaluate the function at the indi-
cated values.
	 9.	 f1x2 x2 4x 6; 
f102 , f122 , f122 , f1a2 , f1a2 , 
f1x 12 , f12x2
	10.	 f1x2 4 !3x 6;  f152, f192, f1a 22, f1x2, f1x22
	11.	 Functions Given by a Graph    Which of the following ﬁgures 
are graphs of functions? Which of the functions are one-to-one?
(a)	
y
x
0
	
(b)	
y
x
0
(c)	
y
x
0
	
(d)	
y
x
0
	12.	 Getting Information from a Graph    A graph of a function f 
is given.
(a)	 Find f 122  and f122 .
(b)	 Find the net change and the average rate of change of f 
between x  2 and x  2.
(c)	 Find the domain and range of f.
(d)	 On what intervals is f increasing? On what intervals is f 
decreasing?
(e)	 What are the local maximum values of f?
(f)	 Is f one-to-one?
x
y
0
2
2
f
■  EXERCISES
	15.	 (a)	 What is a one-to-one function?
(b)	 How can you tell from the graph of a function whether it 
is one-to-one?
(c)	 Suppose that f is a one-to-one function with domain A 
and range B. How is the inverse function f 1 defined? 
What are the domain and range of f 1? 
(d)	 If you are given a formula for f, how do you find a  
formula for f 1? Find the inverse of the function 
f 1x2 2x.
(e)	 If you are given a graph of f, how do you find a graph of 
the inverse function f 1?
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
13–14  ■  Domain and Range    Find the domain and range of the 
function.
	13.	 f1x2 !x 3	
14.	 F1t2 t2 2t 5
15–22  ■  Domain    Find the domain of the function.
	15.	 f1x2 7x 15	
16.	 f1x2 2x 1
2x 1
	17.	 f1x2 !x 4	
18.	 f1x2 3x 
2
!x 1
	19.	 f1x2 1
x 
1
x 1 
1
x 2	
20.	 g1x2 2x2 5x 3
2x2 5x 3
	21.	 h1x2 !4 x "x2 1	
22.  f1x2 !
3 2x 1
!
3 2x 2
23–38  ■  Graphing Functions    Sketch a graph of the function. 
Use transformations of functions whenever possible.
	23.	 f1x2 1 2x
	24.	 f1x2 1
31x 52, 2 x 8
	25.	 f1x2 3x2	
26.	 f1x2 1
4 x2
	27.	 f1x2 2x2 1	
28.	 f1x2 1x 12 4
	29.	 f1x2 1 !x	
30.	 f1x2 1 !x 2
	31.	 f1x2 1
2 x3	
32.	 f1x2 !
3 x
	33.	 f1x2 0  x 0 	
34.	 f1x2 0  x 1 0
	35.	 f1x2  1
x2	
36.	 f1x2 
1
1x 12 3
	37.	 f1x2 e1 x
 if x 0
1
 if x 0	
	38.	 f1x2 c
x
if x 0
x2
if 0 x 2
1
if x 2
39–42  ■  Equations That Represent Functions    Determine 
whether the equation deﬁnes y as a function of x.
	39.	 x y2 14	
40.	 3x !y 8
	41.	 x3 y3 27	
42.	 2x y4 16
43–44  ■  Graphing Functions    Determine which viewing rectan-
gle produces the most appropriate graph of the function.
	43.	 f1x2 6x3 15x2 4x 1
	
(i)	 32, 24 by 32, 24
	
(ii)	 38, 84 by 38, 84
	
(iii)	 34, 44 by 312, 124
	
(iv)	 3100, 1004 by 3100, 1004
	44.	 f1x2 "100 x3.
	
(i)	 34, 44 by 34, 44
	
(ii)	 310, 104 by 310, 104
	
(iii)	 310, 104 by 310, 404
	
(iv)	 3100, 1004 by 3100, 1004
45–48  ■  Domain and Range from a Graph    A function f is 
given. (a) Use a graphing calculator to draw the graph of f.  
(b) Find the domain and range of f from the graph.
	45.	 f1x2 "9 x2
	46.	 f1x2 "x2 3
	47.	 f1x2 "x3 4x 1
	48.	 f1x2 x4 x3 x2 3x 6
49–50  ■  Getting Information from a Graph    Draw a graph of the 
function f, and determine the intervals on which f is increasing 
and on which f is decreasing.
	49.	 f1x2 x3 4x2	
50.	 f1x2 0  x4 16 0
51–56  ■  Net Change and Average Rate of Change    A function is 
given (either numerically, graphically, or algebraically). Find the 
net change and the average rate of change of the function 
between the indicated values.
	51.	 Between x 4 and 	
52.	 Between x 10 and 
	 	 x 8	
	
x 30
	 	
x
fxxc
2
14
4
12
6
12
8
  8
10
  6
	
	
x
gxxc
  0
25
10
5
20
2
30
30
40
0
	53.	 Between x 1 and 	
54.	 Between x 1 and  
x 2	
	
x 3
	 	
f
y
x
0
1
2

g
y
x
0
1
1
	55.	 f1x2 x2 2x;  between x 1 and x 4
	56.	 g1x2 1x 12 2;  between x a and x a h
57–58  ■  Linear?    Determine whether the given function is 
linear.
	57.	 f1x2 12 3x2 2	
58.	 g1x2 x 3
5
59–60  ■  Linear Functions    A linear function is given.  
(a) Sketch a graph of the function. (b) What is the slope of the 
graph? (c) What is the rate of change of the function?
	59.	 f1x2 3x 2	
60.	 g1x2 3 1
2 x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2  ■  Review  233
61–66  ■  Linear Functions    A linear function is described either 
verbally, numerically, or graphically. Express f in the form 
f1x2 ax b.
	61.	 The function has rate of change 2 and initial value 3.
	62.	 The graph of the function has slope 1
2 and y-intercept 1.
	63.	
x
fxxc
0
  3
1
  5
2
  7
3
  9
4
11
	
64.	
x
fxxc
0
6
2
5.5
4
5
6
4.5
8
4
	65.	
2
2
0
y
x
	 66.	
0
2
1
y
x
	67.	 Population    The population of a planned seaside community in 
Florida is given by the function P1t2 3000 200t 0.1t2, 
where t represents the number of years since the community 
was incorporated in 1985.
(a)	 Find P1102  and P1202. What do these values represent?
(b)	 Find the average rate of change of P between t  10 and  
t  20. What does this number represent?
	68.	 Retirement Savings    Ella is saving for her retirement by 
making regular deposits into a 401(k) plan. As her salary 
rises, she ﬁnds that she can deposit increasing amounts  
each year. Between 1995 and 2008 the annual amount (in  
dollars) that she deposited was given by the function 
D1t2 3500 15t2, where t represents the year of the 
deposit measured from the start of the plan (so 1995 corre-
sponds to t  0, 1996 corresponds to t  1, and so on).
(a)	 Find D102  and D1152 . What do these values represent?
(b)	 Assuming that her deposits continue to be modeled by 
the function D, in what year will she deposit $17,000?
(c)	 Find the average rate of change of D between t  0 and  
t  15. What does this number represent?
69–70  ■  Average Rate of Change    A function f is given. (a) Find 
the average rate of change of f between x  0 and x  2, and the 
average rate of change of f between x  15 and x  50. (b) Were 
the two average rates of change that you found in part (a) the 
same? (c) Is the function linear? If so, what is its rate of change?
	69.	 f1x2 1
2 x 6	
70.	 f1x2 8 3x
	71.	 Transformations    Suppose the graph of f is given. Describe 
how the graphs of the following functions can be obtained 
from the graph of f.
(a)	 y f1x2 8	
(b)	 y f1x 82
(c)	 y 1 2f1x2 	
(d)	 y f1x 22 2
(e)	 y f1x2 	
(f)	 y f1x2
(g)	 y f1x2 	
(h)	 y f 11x2
	72.	 Transformations    The graph of f is given. Draw the graphs 
of the following functions.
(a)	 y f1x 22  	
(b)	 y f1x2
(c)	 y 3 f1x2 	
(d)	 y 1
2f1x2 1
(e)	 y f 11x2  	
(f)	 y f1x2
y
x
0
1
1
	73.	 Even and Odd Functions    Determine whether f is even, odd, 
or neither.
(a)	 f1x2 2x5 3x2 2	
(b)	 f1x2 x3 x7
(c)	 f1x2 1 x2
1 x2	
(d)	 f1x2 
1
x 2
	74.	 Even and Odd Functions    Determine whether the function in 
the ﬁgure is even, odd, or neither.
(a)	 		
(b)
(c)	 		
(d)
	
y
x
0
0
y
x
y
x
0
y
x
0
75–78  ■  Local Maxima and Minima    Find the local maximum 
and minimum values of the function and the values of x at which 
they occur. State each answer rounded to two decimal places.
	75.	 g1x2 2x2 4x 5
	76.	 f1x2 1 x x2
	77.	 f1x2 3.3 1.6x 2.5x3
	78.	 f1x2 x2/316 x2 1/3
	79.	 Maximum Height of Projectile    A stone is thrown upward 
from the top of a building. Its height (in feet) above the 
ground after t seconds is given by 
h1t2 16t2 48t 32
	 	 What maximum height does it reach?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Functions
	80.	 Maximum Profit    The proﬁt P (in dollars) generated by sell-
ing x units of a certain commodity is given by
P1x2 1500 12x 0.0004x2
	 	 What is the maximum proﬁt, and how many units must be 
sold to generate it?
81–82  ■  Graphical Addition    Two functions, f and g, are given. 
Draw graphs of f, g, and f  g on the same graphing calculator 
screen to illustrate the concept of graphical addition.
	81.	 f1x2 x 2, g1x2 x2
	82.	 f1x2 x2 1, g1x2 3 x2
	83.	 Combining Functions    If f1x2 x2 3x 2 and 
g1x2 4 3x, ﬁnd the following functions.
(a)	 f  g	
(b)	f  g	
(c)	 fg
(d)	 f/g	
(e)	 f g	
(f)	 g f
	84.	 If f1x2 1 x2 and g1x2 !x 1, ﬁnd the following.
(a)	 f g	
(b)	 g f	
(c)	 1f g2 122
(d)	 1f f2 122 	
(e)	 f g f	
(f)	 g f g
85–86  ■  Composition of Functions    Find the functions 
f g, g f, f f, and g g and their domains.
	85.	 f1x2 3x 1, g1x2 2x x2
	86.	 f1x2 !x, g1x2 
2
x 4
	87.	 Finding a Composition    Find f g h, where 
f1x2 !1 x, g1x2 1 x2, and h1x2 1 !x.
	88.	 Finding a Composition    If T1x2 
1
"1 !x
, ﬁnd func-
tions f, g, and h such that f g h T.
89–94  ■  One-to-One Functions    Determine whether the func-
tion is one-to-one.
	89.	 f1x2 3 x3	
90.	 g1x2 2 2x x2
	91.	 h1x2 1
x4	
92.	 r1x2 2 !x 3
	93.	 p1x2 3.3 1.6x 2.5x3
94.	 q1x2 3.3 1.6x 2.5x3
95–98  ■  Finding Inverse Functions    Find the inverse of the 
function.
	 95.	 f1x2 3x 2	
96.	 f1x2 2x 1
3
	 97.	 f1x2 1x 12 3	
98.	 f1x2 1 !
5 x 2
99–100  ■  Inverse Functions from a Graph    A graph of a func-
tion f is given. Does f have an inverse? If so, find f 1102  and 
f 1142 .
	 99.	 	
	
100.	
	
	
0
1
1
f
x
y
	
	
0
1
1
f
x
y
101.	 Graphing Inverse Functions   
(a)	 Sketch a graph of the function
f1x2 x2 4  x 0
(b)	 Use part (a) to sketch the graph of f1.
(c)	 Find an equation for f1.
102.	 Graphing Inverse Functions   
(a)	 Show that the function f1x2 1 !
4 x is one-to-one.
(b)	 Sketch the graph of f.
(c)	 Use part (b) to sketch the graph of f1.
(d)	 Find an equation for f1.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

235
	 1.	 Which of the following are graphs of functions? If the graph is that of a function, is it 
one-to-one?
(a)	
y
x
0
	
(b) 
y
x
0
(c)	
y
x
	
(d) 
y
x
0
		
	 2.	 Let f1x2 
!x
x 1.
(a)	 Evaluate f102 , f122 , and f1a 22 .
(b)	 Find the domain of f.
(c)	 What is the average rate of change of f between x 2 and x 10?
	 3.	 A function f has the following verbal description: “Subtract 2, then cube the result.”
(a)	 Find a formula that expresses f algebraically.
(b)	 Make a table of values of f, for the inputs 1, 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4.
(c)	 Sketch a graph of f, using the table of values from part (b) to help you.
(d)	 How do we know that f has an inverse? Give a verbal description for f 1.
(e)	 Find a formula that expresses f 1 algebraically.
	 4.	 A graph of a function f is given in the margin.
(a)	 Find the local minimum and maximum values of f and the values of x at which they occur.
(b)	 Find the intervals on which f is increasing and on which f is decreasing.
	 5.	 A school fund-raising group sells chocolate bars to help ﬁnance a swimming pool for  
their physical education program. The group ﬁnds that when they set their price at x dollars 
per bar (where 0 x 5), their total sales revenue (in dollars) is given by the function 
R1x2 500x2 3000x.
(a)	 Evaluate R122  and R142 . What do these values represent?
(b)	 Use a graphing calculator to draw a graph of R. What does the graph tell us about  
what happens to revenue as the price increases from 0 to 5 dollars?
(c)	 What is the maximum revenue, and at what price is it achieved?
	 6.	 Determine the net change and the average rate of change for the function f1t2 t2 2t  
between t 2 and t 2 h.
	 7.	 Let f1x2 1x 52 2 and g1x2 1 5x.
(a)	 Only one of the two functions f and g is linear. Which one is linear, and why is the 
other one not linear?
(b)	 Sketch a graph of each function.
(c)	 What is the rate of change of the linear function?
	 8.	 (a)	 Sketch the graph of the function f1x2 x3.
(b)	 Use part (a) to graph the function g1x2 1x 12 3 2.
	 9.	 (a)	 How is the graph of y f1x 32 2 obtained from the graph of f?
(b)	 How is the graph of y f1x2  obtained from the graph of f?
CHAPTER 2
TEST
y
x
f
1
2
0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236 
CHAPTER 2  ■  Test
	10.	 Let f1x2 b1 x
if x 1
2x 1
if x 1
(a)	 Evaluate f122  and f112 .
(b)	 Sketch the graph of f.
	11.	 If f1x2 x2 x 1 and g1x2 x 3, ﬁnd the following.
(a)	 f g	
(b)	 f g	
(c)	 f g	
(d)  g f
(e)	 f1g1222 	
(f)	 g1f1222 	
(g)	 g g g
	12.	 Determine whether the function is one-to-one.
(a)	 f1x2 x3 1	
(b)	 g1x2 0  x 1 0
	13.	 Use the Inverse Function Property to show that f1x2 
1
x 2 is the inverse of 
g1x2 1
x 2.
	14.	 Find the inverse function of f1x2 x 3
2x 5.
	15.	 (a)	 If f1x2 !3 x, ﬁnd the inverse function f 1.
(b)	 Sketch the graphs of f and f 1 on the same coordinate axes.
16–21  ■  A graph of a function f is given below.
	16.	 Find the domain and range of f.
	17.	 Find f102  and f142 .
	18.	 Graph f1x 22  and f1x2 2.
	19.	 Find the net change and the average rate of change of f between x  2 and  
x  6.
	20.	 Find f 1112  and f 1132 .
21.	 Sketch the graph of f 1.
x
y
0
1
1
f
	22.	 Let f1x2 3x4 14x2 5x 3.
(a)	 Draw the graph of f in an appropriate viewing rectangle.
(b)	 Is f one-to-one?
(c)	 Find the local maximum and minimum values of f and the values of x at which they  
occur. State each answer correct to two decimal places.
(d)	 Use the graph to determine the range of f.
(e)	 Find the intervals on which f is increasing and on which f is decreasing.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

237
Many of the processes that are studied in the physical and social sciences involve un-
derstanding how one quantity varies with respect to another. Finding a function that 
describes the dependence of one quantity on another is called modeling. For example, 
a biologist observes that the number of bacteria in a certain culture increases with time. 
He tries to model this phenomenon by ﬁnding the precise function (or rule) that relates 
the bacteria population to the elapsed time.
In this Focus on Modeling we will learn how to ﬁnd models that can be constructed 
using geometric or algebraic properties of the object under study. Once the model is 
found, we use it to analyze and predict properties of the object or process being studied.
■  Modeling with Functions
We begin by giving some general guidelines for making a function model.
guidelines for modeling with Functions
1.	 Express the Model in Words.    Identify the quantity you want to model, and 
express it, in words, as a function of the other quantities in the problem.
2.	 Choose the Variable.    Identify all the variables that are used to express the 
function in Step 1. Assign a symbol, such as x, to one variable, and express 
the other variables in terms of this symbol.
3.	 Set up the Model.    Express the function in the language of algebra by writing 
it as a function of the single variable chosen in Step 2.
4.	 Use the Model.    Use the function to answer the questions posed in the prob-
lem. (To ﬁnd a maximum or a minimum, use the methods described in Sec- 
tion 2.3.)
Example 1  ■  Fencing a Garden
A gardener has 140 feet of fencing to fence in a rectangular vegetable garden.
(a)	 Find a function that models the area of the garden she can fence.
(b)	 For what range of widths is the area greater than 825 ft2?
(c)	 Can she fence a garden with area 1250 ft2?
(d)	 Find the dimensions of the largest area she can fence.
Thinking About the Problem
If the gardener fences a plot with width 10 ft, then the length must be 60 ft, 
­because 10  10  60  60  140. So the area is
A width length 10 # 60 600 ft2
The table shows various choices for fencing the garden. We see that as the 
width increases, the fenced area increases, then decreases.
	Width	
Length	
Area
	 10	
60	
  600
	 20	
50	
1000
	 30	
40	
1200
	 40	
30	
1200
	 50	
20	
1000
	 60	
10	
  600
length
width
Modeling with Functions
	
FOCUS ON MODELING
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238 
Focus on Modeling
SOLUTION
(a)	 The model that we want is a function that gives the area she can fence.
Express the model in words.    We know that the area of a rectangular garden is
area
  
width
  
length
Choose the variable.    There are two varying quantities: width and length. Because the 
function we want depends on only one variable, we let
x width of the garden
Then we must express the length in terms of x. The perimeter is ﬁxed at 140 ft, so the 
length is determined once we choose the width. If we let the length be l, as in Figure 1, 
then 2x  2l  140, so l  70  x. We summarize these facts:
In Words 
In Algebra
Width
x
Length
70 2 x
Set up the model.    The model is the function A that gives the area of the garden for 
any width x.
area
  
width
  
length
	
 A1x2 x170 x2
	
 A1x2 70x x 2
The area that she can fence is modeled by the function A1x2 70x x 2.
Use the model.    We use the model to answer the questions in parts (b)–(d).
(b)	 We need to solve the inequality A1x2 825. To solve graphically, we graph  
y  70x  x2 and y  825 in the same viewing rectangle (see Figure 2). We see 
that 15  x  55.
(c)	 From Figure 3 we see that the graph of A1x2  always lies below the line  
y  1250, so an area of 1250 ft2 is never attained.
(d)	 We need to ﬁnd where the maximum value of the function A1x2 70x x2 
occurs. The function is graphed in Figure 4. Using the trace  feature on a 
graphing calculator, we ﬁnd that the function achieves its maximum value at 
x 35. So the maximum area that she can fence is that when the garden’s width 
is 35 ft and its length is 70 35 35 ft. The maximum area then is 
35 35 1225 ft2.
1500
_100
_5
75
y=70x-≈
y=825
1500
_100
_5
75
y=70x-≈
y=1250
Figure 2
Figure 3
1500 
_100 
_5 
75 
y=70x-x™ 
(35, 1225) 
Figure 4
	
■
Maximum values of functions are 
­discussed on page 176.
Figure 1
x
l
x
l
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Modeling with Functions  239
Example 2  ■  Minimizing the Metal in a Can
A manufacturer makes a metal can that holds 1 L (liter) of oil. What radius minimizes 
the amount of metal in the can?
Thinking About the Problem
To use the least amount of metal, we must minimize the surface area of the can, 
that is, the area of the top, bottom, and the sides. The area of the top and bottom 
is 2pr2 and the area of the sides is 2prh (see Figure 5), so the surface area of the 
can is
S 2pr 2 2prh
The radius and height of the can must be chosen so that the volume is ex-
actly 1 L, or 1000 cm3. If we want a small radius, say, r  3, then the height 
must be just tall enough to make the total volume 1000 cm3. In other words, we 
must have
 p132 2h 1000
    Volume of the can is pr2h
 h 1000
9p 35.37 cm    Solve for h
Now that we know the radius and height, we can ﬁnd the surface area of the can:
surface area 2p132 2 2p132 135.42 723.2 cm3
If we want a different radius, we can ﬁnd the corresponding height and surface 
area in a similar fashion.
h
r
2πr
h
r
r
Figure 5
SOLUTION    The model that we want is a function that gives the surface area of  
the can.
Express the model in words.    We know that for a cylindrical can
surface area    area of top and bottom    area of sides
Choose the variable.    There are two varying quantities: radius and height. Because 
the function we want depends on the radius, we let
r radius of can
Next, we must express the height in terms of the radius r. Because the volume of a 
cylindrical can is V  pr 2h and the volume must be 1000 cm3, we have
 pr 2h 1000    Volume of can is 1000 cm3
 h 1000
pr 2     Solve for h
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240 
Focus on Modeling
We can now express the areas of the top, bottom, and sides in terms of r only:
	
In Words	
In Algebra
	
Radius of can	
r
	
Height of can	
1000
pr 2
	
Area of top and bottom	
2pr 2
	
Area of sides (2prh)	
2pr a 1000
pr 2 b
Set up the model.    The model is the function S that gives the surface area of the can 
as a function of the radius r.
surface area    area of top and bottom    area of sides
	
 S1r2 2pr 2 2pr a 1000
pr 2 b
	
 S1r2 2pr 2 2000
r
Use the model.    We use the model to ﬁnd the minimum surface area of the can. We 
graph S in Figure 6 and zoom in on the minimum point to ﬁnd that the minimum 
value of S is about 554 cm2 and occurs when the radius is about 5.4 cm.
	
■
Problems
1–18  ■  In these problems you are asked to ﬁnd a function that models a real-life situation. Use 
the principles of modeling described in this Focus to help you.
	 1.	 Area    A rectangular building lot is three times as long as it is wide. Find a function that 
models its area A in terms of its width „.
	 2.	 Area    A poster is 10 in. longer than it is wide. Find a function that models its area A in 
terms of its width „.
	 3.	 Volume    A rectangular box has a square base. Its height is half the width of the base. 
Find a function that models its volume V in terms of its width „.
	 4.	 Volume    The height of a cylinder is four times its radius. Find a function that models the 
volume V of the cylinder in terms of its radius r.
	 5.	 Area    A rectangle has a perimeter of 20 ft. Find a function that models its area A in terms 
of the length x of one of its sides.
	 6.	 Perimeter    A rectangle has an area of 16 m2. Find a function that models its perimeter P 
in terms of the length x of one of its sides.
	 7.	 Area    Find a function that models the area A of an equilateral triangle in terms of the 
length x of one of its sides.
	 8.	 Area    Find a function that models the surface area S of a cube in terms of its volume V.
	 9.	 Radius    Find a function that models the radius r of a circle in terms of its area A.
	10.	 Area    Find a function that models the area A of a circle in terms of its circumference C.
	11.	 Area    A rectangular box with a volume of 60 ft3 has a square base. Find a function that 
models its surface area S in terms of the length x of one side of its base.
0
1000
15
Figure 6  S1r2 2pr 2 2000
r
 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Modeling with Functions  241
	12.	 Length    A woman 5 ft tall is standing near a street lamp that is 12 ft tall, as shown in the 
ﬁgure. Find a function that models the length L of her shadow in terms of her distance d 
from the base of the lamp.
L
d
12 ft
5 ft
	13.	 Distance    Two ships leave port at the same time. One sails south at 15 mi/h, and the 
other sails east at 20 mi/h. Find a function that models the distance D between the ships in 
terms of the time t (in hours) elapsed since their departure.
D
	14.	 Product    The sum of two positive numbers is 60. Find a function that models their prod-
uct P in terms of x, one of the numbers.
	15.	 Area    An isosceles triangle has a perimeter of 8 cm. Find a function that models its area 
A in terms of the length of its base b.
	16.	 Perimeter    A right triangle has one leg twice as long as the other. Find a function that 
­models its perimeter P in terms of the length x of the shorter leg.
	17.	 Area    A rectangle is inscribed in a semicircle of radius 10, as shown in the ﬁgure. Find a 
function that models the area A of the rectangle in terms of its height h.
h
h
10
A
	18.	 Height    The volume of a cone is 100 in3. Find a function that models the height h of the 
cone in terms of its radius r.
Pythagoras (circa 580–500 b.c.) 
founded a school in Croton in southern 
Italy, devoted to the study of arithmetic, 
geometry, music, and astronomy. The 
Pythagoreans, as they were called, were a 
secret society with peculiar rules and initi-
ation rites. They wrote nothing down and 
were not to reveal to anyone what they 
had learned from the Master. Although 
women were barred by law from attend-
ing public meetings, Pythagoras allowed 
women in his school, and his most famous 
student was Theano (whom he later 
married).
According to Aristotle, the Pythagore-
ans were convinced that “the principles of 
mathematics are the principles of all 
things.” Their motto was “Everything is 
Number,” by which they meant whole 
numbers. The outstanding contribution of 
Pythagoras is the theorem that bears his 
name: In a right triangle the area of the 
square on the hypotenuse is equal to the 
sum of the areas of the square on the 
other two sides.
c™=a™+b™
c
b
a
The converse of Pythagoras’s Theorem 
is also true; that is, a triangle whose sides a, 
b, and c satisfy a2  b2  c2 is a right 
triangle.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242 
Focus on Modeling
19–32  ■  In these problems you are asked to ﬁnd a function that models a real-life situation 
and then use the model to answer questions about the situation. Use the guidelines on page 237 
to help you.
	19.	 Maximizing a Product    Consider the following problem: Find two numbers whose sum 
is 19 and whose product is as large as possible.
(a)	 Experiment with the problem by making a table like the one following, showing the 
product of different pairs of numbers that add up to 19. On the basis of the evidence in 
your table, estimate the answer to the problem.
First number
Second number
Product
1
18
18
2
17
34
3
16
48
(
(
(
(b)	 Find a function that models the product in terms of one of the two numbers.
(c)	 Use your model to solve the problem, and compare with your answer to part (a).
	20.	 Minimizing a Sum     Find two positive numbers whose sum is 100 and the sum of whose 
squares is a minimum.
	21.	 Fencing a Field    Consider the following problem: A farmer has 2400 ft of fencing and 
wants to fence off a rectangular ﬁeld that borders a straight river. He does not need a fence 
along the river (see the ﬁgure). What are the dimensions of the ﬁeld of largest area that he 
can fence?
(a)	 Experiment with the problem by drawing several diagrams illustrating the situation. 
­Calculate the area of each conﬁguration, and use your results to estimate the dimen-
sions of the largest possible ﬁeld.
(b)	 Find a function that models the area of the ﬁeld in terms of one of its sides.
(c)	 Use your model to solve the problem, and compare with your answer to part (a).
	22.	 Dividing a Pen    A rancher with 750 ft of fencing wants to enclose a rectangular area and 
then divide it into four pens with fencing parallel to one side of the rectangle (see the 
ﬁgure).
(a)	 Find a function that models the total area of the four pens.
(b)	 Find the largest possible total area of the four pens.
	23.	 Fencing a Garden Plot    A property owner wants to fence a garden plot adjacent to a 
road, as shown in the ﬁgure. The fencing next to the road must be sturdier and costs $5 per 
foot, but the other fencing costs just $3 per foot. The garden is to have an area of 1200 ft2.
(a)	 Find a function that models the cost of fencing the garden.
(b)	 Find the garden dimensions that minimize the cost of fencing.
(c)	 If the owner has at most $600 to spend on fencing, ﬁnd the range of lengths he can 
fence along the road.
x
x
x
A
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Modeling with Functions  243
	24.	 Maximizing Area    A wire 10 cm long is cut into two pieces, one of length x and the 
other of length 10  x, as shown in the ﬁgure. Each piece is bent into the shape of a 
square.
(a)	 Find a function that models the total area enclosed by the two squares.
(b)	 Find the value of x that minimizes the total area of the two squares.
10 cm
x
10-x
	25.	 Light from a Window    A Norman window has the shape of a rectangle surmounted by a 
semicircle, as shown in the ﬁgure to the left. A Norman window with perimeter 30 ft is to 
be constructed.
(a)	 Find a function that models the area of the window.
(b)	 Find the dimensions of the window that admits the greatest amount of light.
	26.	 Volume of a Box    A box with an open top is to be constructed from a rectangular piece 
of cardboard with dimensions 12 in. by 20 in. by cutting out equal squares of side x at each 
corner and then folding up the sides (see the ﬁgure).
(a)	 Find a function that models the volume of the box.
(b)	 Find the values of x for which the volume is greater than 200 in3.
(c)	 Find the largest volume that such a box can have.
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
12 in.
20 in.
x
	27.	 Area of a Box    An open box with a square base is to have a volume of 12 ft3.
(a)	 Find a function that models the surface area of the box.
(b)	 Find the box dimensions that minimize the amount of material used.
	28.	 Inscribed Rectangle    Find the dimensions that give the largest area for the rectangle 
shown in the ﬁgure. Its base is on the x-axis, and its other two vertices are above the  
x-axis, lying on the parabola y  8  x2.
y=8-≈
0
(x, y)
x
y
	29.	 Minimizing Costs    A rancher wants to build a rectangular pen with an area of 100 m2.
(a)	 Find a function that models the length of fencing required.
(b)	 Find the pen dimensions that require the minimum amount of fencing.
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244 
Focus on Modeling
	30.	 Minimizing Time    A man stands at a point A on the bank of a straight river, 2 mi wide. 
To reach point B, 7 mi downstream on the opposite bank, he ﬁrst rows his boat to point P 
on the opposite bank and then walks the remaining distance x to B, as shown in the ﬁgure. 
He can row at a speed of 2 mi/h and walk at a speed of 5 mi/h.
(a)	 Find a function that models the time needed for the trip.
(b)	 Where should he land so that he reaches B as soon as possible?
A
P
B
7 mi
x
	31.	 Bird Flight    A bird is released from point A on an island, 5 mi from the nearest point B 
on a straight shoreline. The bird ﬂies to a point C on the shoreline and then ﬂies along the 
shoreline to its nesting area D (see the ﬁgure). Suppose the bird requires 10 kcal/mi of 
energy to ﬂy over land and 14 kcal/mi to ﬂy over water.
(a)	 Use the fact that
energy used energy per mile miles flown
	
to show that the total energy used by the bird is modeled by the function
E1x2 14"x2 25 10112 x2
(b)	 If the bird instinctively chooses a path that minimizes its energy expenditure, to what 
point does it ﬂy?
C
D
5 mi
nesting
area
B
12 mi
A
x
island
	32.	 Area of a Kite    A kite frame is to be made from six pieces of wood. The four pieces that 
form its border have been cut to the lengths indicated in the ﬁgure. Let x be as shown in 
the ﬁgure.
(a)	 Show that the area of the kite is given by the function
A1x2 xA"25 x2 "144 x2 B
(b)	 How long should each of the two crosspieces be to maximize the area of the kite?
12
5
x
x
12
5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Functions defined by polynomial expressions are called polynomial 
functions. The graphs of polynomial functions can have many peaks and 
valleys. This property makes them suitable models for many real-world 
situations. For example, a factory owner notices that if she increases the 
number of workers, productivity increases, but if there are too many 
workers, productivity begins to decrease. This situation is modeled by a 
polynomial function of degree 2 (a quadratic function). The growth of 
many animal species follows a predictable pattern, beginning with a period 
of rapid growth, followed by a period of slow growth and then a final 
growth spurt. This variability in growth is modeled by a polynomial of 
degree 3.
In the Focus on Modeling at the end of this chapter we explore different 
ways of using polynomial functions to model real-world situations.
245
Polynomial and Rational 
Functions
3
3.1	 Quadratic Functions  
and Models
3.2	 Polynomial Functions  
and Their Graphs
3.3	 Dividing Polynomials
3.4	 Real Zeros of Polynomials
3.5	 Complex Zeros and the 
Fundamental Theorem  
of Algebra
3.6	 Rational Functions
3.7	 Polynomial and Rational 
Inequalities
Focus on modeling
	
Fitting Polynomial Curves 
to Data
© Porojnicu Stelian/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
3.1 
Quadratic Functions and Models
■  Graphing Quadratic Functions Using the Standard Form  ■  Maximum and Minimum  
Values of Quadratic Functions  ■  Modeling with Quadratic Functions
A polynomial function is a function that is defined by a polynomial expression. So a 
polynomial function of degree n is a function of the form
P1x2 anxn an1xn1 . . . a1x a0  an ? 0
We have already studied polynomial functions of degree 0 and 1. These are functions of 
the form P1x2 a0 and P1x2 a1x a0, respectively, whose graphs are lines. In this 
section we study polynomial functions of degree 2. These are called quadratic functions.
Quadratic Functions
A quadratic function is a polynomial function of degree 2. So a quadratic 
function is a function of the form
f1x2 ax2 bx c  a ? 0
We see in this section how quadratic functions model many real-world phenomena. We 
begin by analyzing the graphs of quadratic functions.
■  Graphing Quadratic Functions Using the Standard Form
If we take a 1 and b c 0 in the quadratic function f1x2 ax2 bx c, we get 
the quadratic function f1x2 x2, whose graph is the parabola graphed in Example 1 of 
Section 2.2. In fact, the graph of any quadratic function is a parabola; it can be obtained 
from the graph of f1x2 x2 by the transformations given in Section 2.6.
Standard Form of a Quadratic Function
A quadratic function f1x2 ax2 bx c can be expressed in the standard form
f1x2 a1x h2 2 k
by completing the square. The graph of f is a parabola with vertex 1h,  k2 ; the 
parabola opens upward if a  0 or downward if a  0.
y
x
0
Ï=a(x-h)™+k,  a>0
y
x
0
Ï=a(x-h)™+k,  a<0
h
k
h
Vertex (h, k)
Vertex (h, k)
k
Example 1  ■  Standard Form of a Quadratic Function
Let f1x2 2x2 12x 13.
(a)	 Express f in standard form.
(b)	 Find the vertex and x- and y-intercepts of f.
(c)	 Sketch a graph of f.
(d)	 Find the domain and range of f.
Polynomial expressions are defined in 
Section 1.3.
For a geometric definition of parabolas, 
see Section 11.1.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.1  ■  Quadratic Functions and Models  247
Solution
(a)	 Since the coefficient of x2 is not 1, we must factor this coefficient from the terms 
involving x before we complete the square.
 f1x2 2x2 12x 13
 21x2 6x2 13
        Factor 2 from the x-terms
 21x2 6x 92 13 2 # 9        Complete the square: Add 9 inside 
parentheses, subtract 2 # 9 outside
 21x 32 2 5
        Factor and simplify
	 	 The standard form is f1x2 21x 32 2 5.
(b)	 From the standard form of f we can see that the vertex of f is 13, 52. The 
y-intercept is f102 13. To find the x-intercepts, we set f1x2 0 and solve the 
resulting equation. We can solve a quadratic equation by any of the methods we stud-
ied in Section 1.5. In this case we solve the equation by using the Quadratic Formula.
 0 2x2 12x 13
        Set f1x2 0
 x 12 !144 4 # 2 # 13
4
        Solve for x using the Quadratic Formula
 x 6 !10
2
        Simplify
	 	 Thus the x-intercepts are x A6 !10B/2. So the intercepts are approximately 
1.42 and 4.58.
(c)	 The standard form tells us that we get the graph of f by taking the parabola 
y x2, shifting it to the right 3 units, stretching it vertically by a factor of 2, and 
moving it downward 5 units. We sketch a graph of f in Figure 1, including the  
x- and y-intercepts found in part (b).
(d)	 The domain of f is the set of all real numbers 1, 2 . From the graph we see 
that the range of f is 35, 2 .
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
■  Maximum and Minimum Values of Quadratic Functions
If a quadratic function has vertex 1h,  k2 , then the function has a minimum value at the 
vertex if its graph opens upward and a maximum value at the vertex if its graph opens 
downward. For example, the function graphed in Figure 1 has minimum value 5 when 
x  3, since the ­vertex 13,  52  is the lowest point on the graph.
Maximum or Minimum Value of a Quadratic Function
Let f be a quadratic function with standard form f1x2 a1x h2 2 k. The 
maximum or minimum value of f occurs at x  h.
If a  0, then the minimum value of f is f1h2 k.
If a  0, then the maximum value of f is f1h2 k.
y
x
0
y
x
0
h
k
h
Minimum
Maximum
k
Ï=a(x-h)™+k, a>0
Ï=a(x-h)™+k, a<0
Completing the square is discussed  
in Section 1.5.
Figure 1  f1x2 2x2 12x 13 
y
x
Vertex (3, _5)
13
5
0
1
6
1.42
4.58
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

248 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Example 2  ■  Minimum Value of a Quadratic Function
Consider the quadratic function f1x2 5x2 30x 49.
(a)	 Express f in standard form.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of f.
(c)	 Find the minimum value of f.
Solution
(a)	 To express this quadratic function in standard form, we complete the square.
 f1x2 5x2 30x 49
  51x2 6x2 49
        Factor 5 from the x-terms
  51x2 6x 92 49 5 # 9        Complete the square: Add 9 inside 
parentheses, subtract 5  9 outside
  51x 32 2 4
        Factor and simplify
(b)	 The graph is a parabola that has its vertex at 13,  42  and opens upward, as 
sketched in Figure 2.
(c)	 Since the coefﬁcient of x2 is positive, f has a minimum value. The minimum 
value is f132 4.
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
Example 3  ■  Maximum Value of a Quadratic Function
Consider the quadratic function f1x2 x2 x 2.
(a)	 Express f in standard form.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of f.
(c)	 Find the maximum value of f.
Solution
(a)	 To express this quadratic function in standard form, we complete the square.
 f1x2 x2 x 2
  1x2 x2 2
        Factor 1 from the x-terms
  Ax2 x 1
4B 2 112 1
4        Complete the square: Add 1
4 inside 
parentheses, subtract 112 1
4 outside
  Ax 1
2B
2 9
4
        Factor and simplify
(b)	 From the standard form we see that the graph is a parabola that opens downward  
and has vertex A1
2,  9
4B. The graph of f is sketched in Figure 3.
y
x
1
1
0
!   ,    @
1
2
9
4
9
4
2
_1
Maximum value
Figure 3  Graph of 
f1x2 x2 x 2
(c)	 Since the coefﬁcient of x2 is negative, f has a maximum value, which is fA1
2B 9
4.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
In Example 3 you can check that the 
x-intercepts of the parabola are 21 and 
2. These are obtained by solving the 
equation f1x2 0.
y
x
3
4
Ï=5(x-3)™+4
(3, 4)
0
49
Minimum
value 4
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.1  ■  Quadratic Functions and Models  249
Expressing a quadratic function in standard form helps us to sketch its graph as well 
as to ﬁnd its maximum or minimum value. If we are interested only in ﬁnding the 
maximum or minimum value, then a formula is available for doing so. This formula is 
obtained by ­completing the square for the general quadratic function as follows.
 f1x2 ax2 bx c
  aa x2 b
a xb c
        Factor a from the x-terms
  aa x2 b
a x b2
4a2 b c aa b2
4a2 b        
Complete the square: Add b2
4a2 
inside parentheses, subtract 
a a b2
4a2 b  outside
  aa x b
2a b
2
c b2
4a
        Factor
This equation is in standard form with h b/12a2  and k c b2/14a2 . Since the 
maximum or minimum value occurs at x  h, we have the following result.
Maximum or Minimum Value of a Quadratic Function
The maximum or minimum value of a quadratic function f1x2 ax2 bx c 
occurs at
x  b
2a
If a  0, then the minimum value is f a b
2a b .
If a  0, then the maximum value is f a b
2a b .
Example 4  ■  Finding Maximum and Minimum Values  
of Quadratic Functions
Find the maximum or minimum value of each quadratic function.
(a)	 f1x2 x2 4x               
(b)	 g1x2 2x2 4x 5
Solution
(a)	 This is a quadratic function with a  1 and b  4. Thus the maximum or mini-
mum value occurs at
x  b
2a  4
2 # 1 2
	 	 Since a  0, the function has the minimum value
f122 122 2 4122 4
(b)	 This is a quadratic function with a  2 and b  4. Thus the maximum or mini-
mum value occurs at
x  b
2a  
4
2 # 122 1
	 	 Since a  0, the function has the maximum value
f112 2112 2 4112 5 3
Now Try Exercises 35 and 37	
■
1
_6
_2
4
The maximum value
occurs at x = 1.
4
_6
_5
2
The minimum value
occurs at x = _2.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
■  Modeling with Quadratic Functions
We study some examples of real-world phenomena that are modeled by quadratic func-
tions. These examples and the Applications exercises for this section show some of the 
variety of situations that are naturally modeled by quadratic functions.
Example 5  ■  Maximum Gas Mileage for a Car
Most cars get their best gas mileage when traveling at a relatively modest speed. The 
gas mileage M for a certain new car is modeled by the function
M1s2  1
28
 s2 3s 31  15 s 70
where s is the speed in mi/h and M is measured in mi/gal. What is the car’s best gas 
mileage, and at what speed is it attained?
Solution    The function M is a quadratic function with a 1
28 and b  3. Thus its 
maximum value occurs when
s  b
2a  
3
2A 1
28B 42
The maximum value is M1422  1
28 1422 2 31422 31 32. So the car’s best 
gas mileage is 32 mi/gal when it is traveling at 42 mi/h.
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
Example 6  ■  Maximizing Revenue from Ticket Sales
A hockey team plays in an arena that has a seating capacity of 15,000 spectators. 
With the ticket price set at $14, average attendance at recent games has been 9500. A 
market survey indicates that for each dollar the ticket price is lowered, the average 
attendance increases by 1000.
(a)	 Find a function that models the revenue in terms of ticket price. 
(b)	 Find the price that maximizes revenue from ticket sales.
(c)	 What ticket price is so high that no one attends and so no revenue is generated?
Solution 
(a)	 Express the model in words.    The model that we want is a function that gives 
the revenue for any ticket price:
revenue   ticket price   attendance
15
70
40
0
The maximum gas
mileage occurs at 42 mi/h.
Discovery Project
Torricelli’s Law
Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647) is best known for his invention of the 
barometer. He also discovered that the speed at which a fluid leaks from the 
bottom of a tank is related to the height of the fluid in the tank (a principle now 
called Torricelli’s Law). In this project we conduct a simple experiment to col-
lect data on the speed of water leaking through a hole in the bottom of a large 
soft-drink bottle. We then find an algebraic expression for Torricelli’s Law by 
fitting a quadratic function to the data we obtained. You can find the project at 
www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.1  ■  Quadratic Functions and Models  251
	 	 Choose the variable.    There are two varying quantities: ticket price and atten-
dance. Since the function we want depends on price, we let
x  ticket price
	 	 Next, we express attendance in terms of x.
In Words
In Algebra
Ticket price
x
Amount ticket price is lowered
14 x
Increase in attendance
1000114 x2
Attendance
9500 1000114 x2
	 	 Set up the model.    The model that we want is the function R that gives the reve-
nue for a given ticket price x.
revenue   ticket price   attendance
 R1x2 x 39500 1000114 x2 4
 R1x2 x123,500 1000x2
 R1x2 23,500x 1000x2
(b)	 Use the model.    Since R is a quadratic function with a 1000 and 
b 23,500, the maximum ­occurs at
x  b
2a  23,500
2110002 11.75
	 	 So a ticket price of $11.75 gives the maximum revenue. 
(c)	 Use the model.    We want to ﬁnd the ticket price for which R1x2 0.
 23,500x 1000x2 0        Set R1x2 0
 23.5x x2 0        Divide by 1000
 x123.5 x2 0        Factor 
	
x 0 or x 23.5	
Solve for x
	 	 So according to this model, a ticket price of $23.50 is just too high; at that price 
no one attends to watch this team play. (Of course, revenue is also zero if the 
ticket price is zero.) 
Now Try Exercise 65	
■
concepts
	 1.	 To put the quadratic function f1x2 ax2 bx c in  
standard form, we complete the  
  .
	 2.	 The quadratic function f1x2 a1x h2 2 k is in standard 
form.
(a)	 The graph of f is a parabola with vertex  
1 
  ,  
2.
(b)	 If a 0, the graph of f opens  
  . In this case 
f1h2 k is the  
 value of f.
(c)	 If a 0, the graph of f opens  
  . In this case 
f1h2 k is the  
 value of f.
	 3.	 The graph of f1x2 31x 22 2 6 is a parabola that opens 
 
  , with its vertex at 1 
  ,  
2, and f122 
 
 is the (minimum/maximum)  
 value of f.
	 4.	 The graph of f1x2 31x 22 2 6 is a parabola that 
opens  
  , with its vertex at 1 
  ,  
2, and 
f122  
 is the (minimum/maximum)  
 
value of f.
3.1  Exercises
150,000
25
0
Maximum attendance occurs  
when ticket price is $11.75. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
skills
5–8  ■  Graphs of Quadratic Functions    The graph of a quadratic 
function f is given. (a) Find the ­coordinates of the vertex and the 
x- and y-intercepts. (b) Find the maximum or minimum value of 
f. (c) Find the domain and range of f.
	 5.	 f1x2 x2 6x 5	
6.	
f1x2 1
2 x2 2x 6
	 	
1
1
0
x
y
 
5
1
0
x
y
	 7.	 f1x2 2x2 4x 1	
8.	 f1x2 3x2 6x 1
	 	
1
1
0
x
y
1
1
0
x
y
9–24  ■  Graphing Quadratic Functions    A quadratic function f is 
given. (a) Express f in standard form. (b) Find the vertex and x- 
and y-intercepts of f. (c) Sketch a graph of f. (d) Find the domain 
and range of f.
	 9.	 f1x2 x2 2x 3	
10.	 f1x2 x2 4x 1
	11.	 f1x2 x2 6x	
12.	 f1x2 x2 8x
	13.	 f1x2 3x2 6x	
14.	 f1x2 x2 10x
	15.	 f1x2 x2 4x 3	
16.	 f1x2 x2 2x 2
	17.	 f1x2 x2 6x 4	
18.	 f1x2 x2 4x 4
19.	 f1x2 2x2 4x 3	
20.	 f1x2 3x2 6x 2
21.	 f1x2 2x2 20x 57	
22.	 f1x2 2x2 12x 10
23.	 f1x2 4x2 12x 1	
24.	 f1x2 3x2 2x 2
25–34  ■  Maximum and Minimum Values    A quadratic function 
f is given. (a) Express f in standard form. (b) Sketch a graph of 
f. (c) Find the maximum or minimum value of f.
25.	 f1x2 x2 2x 1	
26.	 f1x2 x2 8x 8
27.	 f1x2 3x2 6x 1	
28.	 f1x2 5x2 30x 4
29.	 f1x2 x2 3x 3	
30.	 f1x2 1 6x x2
31.	 g1x2 3x2 12x 13	
32.	 g1x2 2x2 8x 11
33.	 h1x2 1 x x2	
34.	 h1x2 3 4x 4x2
35–44  ■  Formula for Maximum and Minimum Values     
Find the maximum or minimum value of the function.
35.	 f1x2 2x2 4x 1	
36.	 f1x2 3 4x x2
37.	 f1t2 3 80t 20t2	
38.	 f1x2 6x2 24x 100
39.	 f1s2 s2 1.2s 16	
40.	 g1x2 100x2 1500x
41.	 h1x2 1
2 x2 2x 6	
42.	 f1x2  x 2
3 2x 7
43.	 f1x2 3 x 1
2 x2	
44.	 g1x2 2x1x 42 7
45–46  ■  Maximum and Minimum Values    A quadratic function 
is given. (a) Use a graphing device to ﬁnd the maximum or mini-
mum value of the quadratic function f, rounded to two decimal 
places. (b) Find the exact maximum or minimum value of f, and 
compare it with your answer to part (a).
45.	 f1x2 x2 1.79x 3.21
46.	 f1x2 1 x !2x2
Skills plus
47–48  ■  Finding Quadratic Functions    Find a function f whose 
graph is a parabola with the given vertex and that passes through 
the given point.
	47.	 Vertex 12, 32 ;  point 13, 12
	48.	 Vertex 11, 52 ;  point 13, 72
	49.	 Maximum of a Fourth-Degree Polynomial    Find the maxi-
mum value of the function 
f1x2 3 4x2 x4
	 	 [Hint: Let t x2.]
	50.	 Minimum of a Sixth-Degree Polynomial    Find the minimum 
value of the function 
f1x2 2 16x3 4x6
	 	 [Hint: Let t x3.]
applications
	51.	 Height of a Ball    If a ball is thrown directly upward with a 
velocity of 40 ft/s, its height (in feet) after t seconds is given  
by y  40t  16t2. What is the maximum height attained by 
the ball?
	52.	 Path of a Ball    A ball is thrown across a playing ﬁeld from  
a height of 5 ft above the ground at an angle of 45º to the 
horizontal at a speed of 20 ft/s. It can be deduced from phys-
ical principles that the path of the ball is modeled by the 
function
y  32
1202 2 x2 x 5
	 	 where x is the distance in feet that the ball has traveled 
­horizontally.
(a)	 Find the maximum height attained by the ball.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.1  ■  Quadratic Functions and Models  253
(b)	 Find the horizontal distance the ball has traveled when it 
hits the ground.
x
5 ft
	53.	 Revenue    A manufacturer ﬁnds that the revenue generated 
by selling x units of a certain commodity is given by the 
function R1x2 80x 0.4x2, where the revenue R1x2  is 
measured in dollars. What is the maximum revenue, and how 
many units should be manufactured to obtain this maximum?
	54.	 Sales    A soft-drink vendor at a popular beach analyzes his 
sales records and ﬁnds that if he sells x cans of soda pop in 
one day, his proﬁt (in dollars) is given by
P1x2 0.001x2 3x 1800
	 	 What is his maximum proﬁt per day, and how many cans 
must he sell for maximum proﬁt?
	55.	 Advertising    The effectiveness of a television commercial 
depends on how many times a viewer watches it. After some 
experiments an advertising agency found that if the effective-
ness E is measured on a scale of 0 to 10, then
E1n2 2
3 n 1
90 n2
	 	 where n is the number of times a viewer watches a given 
commercial. For a commercial to have maximum effective-
ness, how many times should a viewer watch it?
	56.	 Pharmaceuticals    When a certain drug is taken orally,  
the concentration of the drug in the patient’s bloodstream  
after t minutes is given by C1t2 0.06t 0.0002t2, where  
0  t  240 and the concentration is measured in mg/L. 
When is the maximum serum concentration reached, and 
what is that maximum concentration?
	57.	 Agriculture    The number of apples produced by each tree in 
an apple orchard depends on how densely the trees are 
planted. If n trees are planted on an acre of land, then each 
tree produces 900  9n apples. So the number of apples  
produced per acre is
A1n2 n1900 9n2
	 	 How many trees should be planted per acre to obtain the 
maximum yield of apples?
	58.	 Agriculture    At a certain vineyard it is found that each grape 
vine produces about 10 lb of grapes in a season when about 
700 vines are planted per acre. For each additional vine that 
is planted, the production of each vine decreases by about  
1 percent. So the number of pounds of grapes produced per 
acre is modeled by
A1n2 1700 n2 110 0.01n2
	 	 where n is the number of additional vines planted. Find the 
number of vines that should be planted to maximize grape 
­production.
59–62  ■  Maxima and Minima    Use the formulas of this section 
to give an alternative ­solution to the indicated problem in Focus 
on Modeling: Modeling with Functions on pages 237–244.
	59.	 Problem 21	
60.	 Problem 22
	61.	 Problem 25	
62.	 Problem 24
	63.	 Fencing a Horse Corral    Carol has 2400 ft of fencing to fence 
in a rectangular horse corral.
(a)	 Find a function that models the area of the corral in 
terms of the width x of the corral.
(b)	 Find the dimensions of the rectangle that maximize the 
area of the corral.
x
1200 – x
	64.	 Making a Rain Gutter    A rain gutter is formed by bending up 
the sides of a 30-in.-wide rectangular metal sheet as shown in 
the figure.
(a)	 Find a function that models the cross-sectional area of 
the gutter in terms of x.
(b)	 Find the value of x that maximizes the cross-sectional 
area of the gutter.
(c)	 What is the maximum cross-sectional area for the gutter?
x
30 in.
	65.	 Stadium Revenue    A baseball team plays in a stadium that 
holds 55,000 spectators. With the ticket price at $10, the 
average attendance at recent games has been 27,000. A mar-
ket survey indicates that for every dollar the ticket price is 
lowered, attendance increases by 3000.
(a)	 Find a function that models the revenue in terms of ticket 
price.
(b)	 Find the price that maximizes revenue from ticket sales.
(c)	 What ticket price is so high that no revenue is generated?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

254 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
	66.	 Maximizing Profit    A community bird-watching society 
makes and sells simple bird feeders to raise money for its 
­conservation activities. The materials for each feeder cost $6, 
and the society sells an average of 20 per week at a price of 
$10 each. The society has been considering raising the price, 
so it conducts a survey and finds that for every dollar 
increase, it will lose 2 sales per week.
(a)	 Find a function that models weekly profit in terms of 
price per feeder.
(b)	 What price should the society charge for each feeder  
to maximize profits? What is the maximum weekly 
profit?
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	67.	 DISCOVER:  Vertex and x-Intercepts    We know that the graph 
of the quadratic function f1x2 1x m2 1x n2  is a parab-
ola. Sketch a rough graph of what such a parabola would 
look like. What are the x-intercepts of the graph of f? Can 
you tell from your graph the x-coordinate of the vertex in 
terms of m and n? (Use the symmetry of the parabola.) Con-
firm your answer by expanding and using the formulas of this 
section.
3.2 
Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs
■  Polynomial Functions  ■  Graphing Basic Polynomial Functions  ■  Graphs of Polynomial 
Functions: End Behavior  ■  Using Zeros to Graph Polynomials  ■  Shape of the Graph Near  
a Zero  ■  Local Maxima and Minima of Polynomials
■  Polynomial Functions
In this section we study polynomial functions of any degree. But before we work with 
polynomial functions, we must agree on some terminology.
Polynomial Functions
A polynomial function of degree n is a function of the form
P1x2 an x n an1xn1 . . . a1x a0
where n is a nonnegative integer and an ? 0.
The numbers a0, a1, a2, . . . , an are called the coefﬁcients of the polynomial. 
The number a0 is the constant coefﬁcient or constant term. 
The number an, the coefﬁcient of the highest power, is the leading coefﬁcient, 
and the term an xn is the leading term.
We often refer to polynomial functions simply as polynomials. The following poly-
nomial has degree 5, leading coefﬁcient 3, and constant term 6.
3x5 6x4 2x3 x2 7x 6
Degree 5
Leading 
coefficient 3
Leading term 3x5
Coefficients 3, 6, 2, 1, 7, and 6
Constant term 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.2  ■  Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs  255
The table lists some more examples of polynomials.
Polynomial
Degree
Leading term
Constant term
P1x2 4x 7
1
4x
7
P1x2 x2 x
2
x2
0
P1x2 2x3 6x2 10
3
2x3
10
P1x2 5x4 x 2
4
5x4
2
If a polynomial consists of just a single term, then it is called a monomial. For example, 
P1x2 x3 and Q1x2 6x5 are monomials.
■  Graphing Basic Polynomial Functions
The simplest polynomial functions are the monomials P1x2 xn, whose graphs are 
shown in Figure 1. As the ﬁgure suggests, the graph of P1x2 xn has the same general 
shape as the graph of y x2 when n is even and the same general shape as the graph 
of y x3 when n is odd. However, as the degree n becomes larger, the graphs become 
ﬂatter around the origin and steeper elsewhere.
Figure 1  Graphs of monomials
y
0
x
1
1
(e)  y=x∞
y
0
x
1
1
(d)  y=x¢
y
0
x
1
1
(c)  y=x£
y
0
x
1
1
(b)  y=≈
y
0
x
1
1
(a)  y=x
Example 1  ■  Transformations of Monomials
Sketch graphs of the following functions.
(a)	 P1x2 x3	
(b)  Q1x2 1x 22 4
(c)	 R1x2 2x5 4
Splines
Mathematics in the Modern World
adjusting the coefﬁcients of the polynomial (see Example 10,  
page 265).
Curves obtained in this way are called cubic splines. In modern com-
puter design programs, such as Adobe Illustrator or Microsoft Paint, a 
curve can be drawn by ﬁx­ing two points, then using the mouse to drag 
one or more anchor points. Moving the anchor points amounts to adjust-
ing the coefﬁ­cients of a cubic polynomial.
A spline is a long strip of wood that is curved while held ﬁxed at certain 
points. In the old days ship­builders used splines to create the curved 
shape of a boat’s hull. Splines are also used to make the curves of a 
piano, a violin, or the spout of a teapot.
Mathematicians discovered that the shapes of splines can be 
obtained by piecing together parts of polynomials. For example, the 
graph of a cubic polynomial can be made to ﬁt speciﬁed points by 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Solution    We use the graphs in Figure 1 and transform them using the techniques of 
Section 2.6.
(a)	 The graph of P1x2 x3 is the reﬂection of the graph of y x3 in the x-axis, as 
shown in Figure 2(a) below.
(b)	 The graph of Q1x2 1x 22 4 is the graph of y x4 shifted to the right 2 units, 
as shown in Figure 2(b).
(c)	 We begin with the graph of y x5. The graph of y 2x5 is obtained by stretch- 
ing the graph vertically and reﬂecting it in the x-axis (see the dashed blue graph 
in Figure 2(c)). Finally, the graph of R1x2 2x5 4 is obtained by shifting 
upward 4 units (see the red graph in Figure 2(c)).
y
0
x
Q(x)=(x-2)¢
8
16
2
4
y
0
x
1
1
P(x)=_x£
y
0
x
R(x)=_2x∞+4
4
8
1
_1
_2
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
■  Graphs of Polynomial Functions: End Behavior
The graphs of polynomials of degree 0 or 1 are lines (Sections 1.10 and 2.5), and the 
graphs of polynomials of degree 2 are parabolas (Section 3.1). The greater the degree 
of a polynomial, the more complicated its graph can be. However, the graph of a poly-
nomial function is continuous. This means that the graph has no breaks or holes (see 
Figure 3). Moreover, the graph of a polynomial function is a smooth curve; that is, it 
has no corners or sharp points (cusps) as shown in Figure 3.
Not the graph of a
polynomial function
y
y
y
x
x
x
break
hole
Not the graph of a
polynomial function
corner
cusp
Graph of a polynomial
function
smooth and
continuous
y
x
Graph of a polynomial
function
smooth and
continuous
Figure 3
The domain of a polynomial function is the set of all real numbers, so we can sketch 
only a small portion of the graph. However, for values of x outside the portion of the 
graph we have drawn, we can describe the behavior of the graph.
The end behavior of a polynomial is a description of what happens as x becomes 
large in the positive or negative direction. To describe end behavior, we use the follow-
ing arrow notation.
Symbol
Meaning
x S 
x goes to infinity; that is, x increases without bound
x S 
x goes to negative infinity; that is, x decreases without bound
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.2  ■  Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs  257
For example, the monomial y  x2 in Figure 1(b) has the following end behavior.
y S  as x S   and  y S  as x S 
The monomial y  x3 in Figure 1(c) has the following end behavior.
y S  as x S   and  y S  as x S 
For any polynomial the end behavior is determined by the term that contains the high-
est power of x, because when x is large, the other terms are relatively insigniﬁcant in 
size. The following box shows the four possible types of end behavior, based on the 
highest power and the sign of its coefﬁcient.
End Behavior of Polynomials
The end behavior of the polynomial P1x2 anxn an1xn1 . . . a1x a0 is determined by the degree n and the 
sign of the leading coefﬁcient an, as indicated in the following graphs.
	
P has odd degree	
P has even degree
y
0
x
y
0
x
y
0
x
y
0
x
y 
 ` as
x 
 `
y 
 ` as
x 
 _`
y 
 ` as
x 
 _`
y 
 ` as
x 
 `
y 
 _` as
x 
 `
y 
 _` as
x 
 `
y 
 _` as
x 
 _`
y 
 _` as
x 
 _`
	
Leading coefficient positive	
 Leading coefficient negative	
Leading coefficient positive	
Leading coefficient negative
Example 2  ■  End Behavior of a Polynomial
Determine the end behavior of the polynomial
P1x2 2x4 5x3 4x 7
Solution    The polynomial P has degree 4 and leading coefﬁcient 2. Thus P has 
even degree and negative leading coefﬁcient, so it has the following end behavior.
y S  as x S   and  y S  as x S 
The graph in Figure 4 illustrates the end behavior of P.
Figure 4  P1x2 2x4 5x3 4x 7
30
_50
_3
5
y
 _` as
x
 _`
y
 _` as
x
 `
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Example 3  ■  End Behavior of a Polynomial
(a)	 Determine the end behavior of the polynomial P1x2 3x5 5x3 2x.
(b)	 Confirm that P and its leading term Q1x2 3x5 have the same end behavior by 
graphing them together.
Solution
(a)	 Since P has odd degree and positive leading coefficient, it has the following end 
­behavior.
y S  as x S   and  y S  as x S 
(b)	 Figure 5 shows the graphs of P and Q in progressively larger viewing rectangles. 
The larger the viewing rectangle, the more the graphs look alike. This confirms 
that they have the same end behavior.
Now Try Exercise 45	
■
To see algebraically why P and Q in Example 3 have the same end behavior, factor 
P as follows and compare with Q.
 P1x2 3x5 a 1 5
3x2 2
3x4 b
       
 Q1x2 3x5
When x is large, the terms 5/13x22  and 2/13x42  are close to 0 (see Exercise 90 on  
page 12). So for large x we have
 P1x2 3x511 0 02   3x5 Q1x2
So when x is large, P and Q have approximately the same values. We can also see this 
­numerically by making a table like the one shown below.
x
Pxxc
Qxxc
15
    2,261,280
    2,278,125
30
  72,765,060
  72,900,000
50
936,875,100
937,500,000
By the same reasoning we can show that the end behavior of any polynomial is de-
termined by its leading term.
■  Using Zeros to Graph Polynomials
If P is a polynomial function, then c is called a zero of P if P1c2 0. In other words, 
the zeros of P are the solutions of the polynomial equation P1x2 0. Note that if 
P1c2 0, then the graph of P has an x-intercept at x  c, so the x-intercepts of the 
graph are the ­zeros of the function.
10,000
_10,000
_10
10
50
_50
_3
3
2
_2
_2
2
Q
P
1
_1
_1
1
Q
P
P
Q
P
Q
Figure 5   
 P1x2 3x5 5x3 2x
 Q1x2 3x5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.2  ■  Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs  259
Real Zeros of Polynomials
If P is a polynomial and c is a real number, then the following are equivalent:
1.  c is a zero of P.
2.  x  c is a solution of the equation P1x2 0.
3.  x  c is a factor of P1x2 .
4.  c is an x-intercept of the graph of P.
To find the zeros of a polynomial P, we factor and then use the Zero-Product Prop-
erty (see page 48). For example, to find the zeros of P1x2 x2 x 6, we factor P 
to get
P1x2 1x 22 1x 32
From this factored form we easily see that
1.	 2 is a zero of P.
2.	 x  2 is a solution of the equation x2  x  6  0.
3.	 x  2 is a factor of x2  x  6.
4.	 2 is an x-intercept of the graph of P.
The same facts are true for the other zero, 3.
The following theorem has many important consequences. (See, for instance, the 
Discovery Project referenced on page 276.) Here we use it to help us graph polynomial 
functions.
Intermediate Value Theorem for Polynomials
If P is a polynomial function and P1a2  and P1b2  have opposite signs, then 
there exists at least one value c between a and b for which P1c2 0.
We will not prove this theorem, but Figure 6 shows why it is intuitively plausible.
One important consequence of this theorem is that between any two successive ze­ros 
the values of a polynomial are either all positive or all negative. That is, between two suc-
cessive zeros the graph of a polynomial lies entirely above or entirely below the x-axis. To 
see why, suppose c1 and c2 are successive zeros of P. If P has both positive and negative 
values between c1 and c2, then by the Intermediate Value Theorem, P must have another 
zero between c1 and c2. But that’s not possible because c1 and c2 are successive zeros. This 
observation allows us to use the following guidelines to graph polynomial functions.
Guidelines for Graphing Polynomial Functions
1.	 Zeros.    Factor the polynomial to find all its real zeros; these are the  
x-intercepts of the graph.
2.	 Test Points.    Make a table of values for the polynomial. Include test points to 
determine whether the graph of the polynomial lies above or below the x-axis 
on the intervals determined by the zeros. Include the y-intercept in the table.
3.	 End Behavior.    Determine the end behavior of the polynomial.
4.	 Graph.    Plot the intercepts and other points you found in the table. Sketch 
a smooth curve that passes through these points and exhibits the required 
end ­behavior.
Figure 6
0
x
y
P(b)
P(a)
a
c
b
y=P(x)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Example 4  ■  Using Zeros to Graph a Polynomial Function
Sketch the graph of the polynomial function P1x2 1x 1 22 1x 12 1x 32 .
SOLUTION    The zeros are x  2, 1, and 3. These determine the intervals 1`,  22, 
12,  12 , 11,  32 , and 13,  `2 . Using test points in these intervals, we get the informa-
tion in the following sign diagram (see Section 1.8).
Sign of
P1x2 1x 1 22 1x 12 1x 32
Graph of P
_2
1
+
-
below
x-axis
above
x-axis
below
x-axis
above
x-axis
+
3
-
Test point
x = –3
P(–3) < 0
Test point
x = –1
P(–1) > 0
Test point
x = 2
P(2) < 0
Test point
x = 4
P(3) > 0
Plotting a few additional points and connecting them with a smooth curve helps us to 
complete the graph in Figure 7.
Test point →
Test point →
Test point →
Test point →
Figure 7  P1x2 1x 1 22 1x 12 1x 32
Test point
P(–1) > 0
Test point
P(4) > 0
Test point
P(2) < 0
Test point
P(–3) < 0
x
5
1
y
0
x
Pxxc
3
24
2
0
1
8
0
6
1
0
2
4
3
0
4
18
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Example 5  ■  Finding Zeros and Graphing a Polynomial Function
Let P1x2 x3 2x2 3x.
(a)	 Find the zeros of P.      (b)  Sketch a graph of P.
Solution 
(a)	 To ﬁnd the zeros, we factor completely.
 P1x2 x3 2x2 3x
  x1x2 2x 32         Factor x
  x1x 32 1x 1 12        Factor quadratic
	 	 Thus the zeros are x  0, x  3, and x  1.
(b)	 The x-intercepts are x  0, x  3, and x  1. The y-intercept is P102 0. We 
make a table of values of P1x2 , making sure that we choose test points between 
(and to the right and left of) successive zeros.
	 	     Since P is of odd degree and its leading coefﬁcient is positive, it has the fol-
lowing end behavior:
y S ` as x S `  and  y S ` as x S `
© 3DProfi/Shutterstock.com
Automotive Design
Computer-aided design (CAD) has com-
pletely changed the way in which car 
companies design and manufacture cars. 
Before the 1980s automotive engineers 
would build a full-scale “nuts and bolts” 
model of a proposed new car; this was 
really the only way to tell whether the 
design was feasible. Today automotive 
engineers build a mathematical model, 
one that exists only in the memory of a 
computer. The model incorporates all the 
main design features of the car. Certain 
polynomial curves, called splines (see 
page 255), are used in shaping the body 
of the car. The resulting “mathematical 
car” can be tested for structural stability, 
handling, aerodynamics, suspension 
response, and more. All this testing is 
done before a prototype is built. As you 
can imagine, CAD saves car manufactur-
ers millions of dollars each year. More 
importantly, CAD gives automotive engi-
neers far more ﬂexibility in design; 
desired changes can be created and 
tested within seconds. With the help of 
computer graphics, designers can see 
how good the “mathematical car” looks 
before they build the real one. Moreover, 
the mathematical car can be viewed from 
any perspective; it can be moved, 
rotated, or seen from the inside. These 
manipulations of the car on the com-
puter monitor translate mathematically 
into solving large systems of linear 
equations.
Mathematics in the Modern World
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.2  ■  Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs  261
	 	 We plot the points in the table and connect them by a smooth curve to complete 
the graph, as shown in Figure 8.
Test point →
Test point →
Test point →
Test point →
Figure 8  P1x2 x3 2x2 3x
x
Pxxc
2
10
1
0

 1
2
  7
8
0
0
1
4
2
6
3
0
4
20
y
0
x
1
5
Now Try Exercise 31	
■
Example 6  ■  Finding Zeros and Graphing a Polynomial Function
Let P1x2 2x4 x3 1 3x2.
(a)	 Find the zeros of P.      (b)  Sketch a graph of P.
Solution
(a)	 To ﬁnd the zeros, we factor completely.
 P1x2 2x4 x3 1 3x2
  x212x2 1 x 32
        Factor x2
  x212x 1 32 1x 12        Factor quadratic
	 	 Thus the zeros are x  0, x 3
2, and x  1.
(b)	 The x-intercepts are x  0, x 3
2, and x  1. The y-intercept is P102 0. We 
make a table of values of P1x2 , making sure that we choose test points between 
(and to the right and left of) successive zeros.
	 	     Since P is of even degree and its leading coefﬁcient is negative, it has the fol-
lowing end behavior.
y S ` as x S `  and  y S ` as x S `
	 	 We plot the points from the table and connect the points by a smooth curve to 
complete the graph in Figure 9.
y
0
x
1
2
_12
Figure 9  P1x2 2x4 x3 1 3x2
x
Pxxc
2
12
1.5
0
1
2
0.5
0.75
0
0
0.5
0.5
1
0
1.5
6.75
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
A table of values is most easily calcu-
lated by using a programmable cal­
culator or a graphing calculator. See 
Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 Graph-
ing Calculator, for specific instructions. 
Go to www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

262 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Example 7  ■  Finding Zeros and Graphing a Polynomial Function
Let P1x2 x3 2x2 4x 8.
(a)	 Find the zeros of P.      (b)  Sketch a graph of P.
Solution
(a)	 To ﬁnd the zeros, we factor completely.
 P1x2 x3 2x2 4x 8
  x21x 22 41x 22         Group and factor
  1x2 42 1x 22
        Factor x  2
  1x 22 1x 22 1x 22        Difference of squares
  1x 22 1x 22 2
        Simplify
	 	 Thus the zeros are x  2 and x  2.
(b)	 The x-intercepts are x  2 and x  2. The y-intercept is P102 8. The table 
gives additional values of P1x2 .
	 	     Since P is of odd degree and its leading coefﬁcient is positive, it has the fol-
lowing end behavior.
y S  as x S   and  y S  as x S 
	 	 We connect the points by a smooth curve to complete the graph in Figure 10.
y
0
x
1
5
Figure 10 
P1x2 x3 2x2 4x 8
x
Pxxc
3
25
2
0
1
9
0
8
1
3
2
0
3
5
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
■  Shape of the Graph Near a Zero
Although x  2 is a zero of the polynomial in Example 7, the graph does not cross the 
x-axis at the x-intercept 2. This is because the factor 1x 22 2 corresponding to that 
zero is raised to an even power, so it doesn’t change sign as we test points on either side 
of 2. In the same way the graph does not cross the x-axis at x  0 in Example 6.
Discovery Project
Bridge Science
If you want to build a bridge, how can you be sure that your bridge design is 
strong enough to support the cars that will drive over it? In this project we per-
form a simple experiment using paper “bridges” to collect data on the weight 
our bridges can support. We model the data with linear and power functions to 
determine which  model best fits the data. The model we obtain allows us to 
predict the strength of a large bridge before it is built. You can find the project 
at www.stewartmath.com. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.2  ■  Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs  263
In general, if c is a zero of P and the corresponding factor x  c occurs exactly m 
times in the factorization of P, then we say that c is a zero of multiplicity m. By con-
sidering test points on either side of the x-intercept c, we conclude that the graph 
crosses the x-axis at c if the multiplicity m is odd and does not cross the x-axis if m is 
even. Moreover, it can be shown by using calculus that near x  c the graph has the 
same general shape as the graph of y A1x c2 m.
Shape of the Graph Near a Zero of Multiplicity m
If c is a zero of P of multiplicity m, then the shape of the graph of P near c is as 
­follows.
Multiplicity of c	
Shape of the graph of P near the x-intercept c
m odd, m  1
	
OR
y
x
c
y
x
c
OR
y
x
c
y
x
c
m even, m  1
Example 8  ■  Graphing a Polynomial Function Using Its Zeros
Graph the polynomial P1x2 x41x 22 31x 12 2.
Solution    The zeros of P are 1, 0, and 2 with multiplicities 2, 4, and 3, ­respectively:
P1x2 x41x 22 31x 12 2
The zero 2 has odd multiplicity, so the graph crosses the x-axis at the x-intercept 2. 
But the zeros 0 and 1 have even multiplicity, so the graph does not cross the x-axis 
at the x-intercepts 0 and 1.
Since P is a polynomial of degree 9 and has positive leading coefﬁcient, it has the 
­following end behavior:
y S  as x S   and  y S  as x S 
With this information and a table of values we sketch the graph in Figure 11.
y
0
x
1
5
Even
multiplicities
Odd multiplicity
Figure 11  P1x2 x41x 22 31x 12 2
x
Pxxc
1.3
9.2
1
0
0.5
3.9
0
0
1
4
2
0
2.3
8.2
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
0 is a zero of 
multiplicity 4
2 is a zero of 
multiplicity 3
–1 is a zero of 
multiplicity 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
■  Local Maxima and Minima of Polynomials
Recall from Section 2.3 that if the point 1a, f1a22  is the highest point on the graph 
of f within some viewing rectangle, then f1a2  is a local maximum value of f, and if 
1b,  f1b22  is the lowest point on the graph of f within a viewing rectangle, then f1b2  
is a local minimum value (see Figure 12). We say that such a point 1a, f1a22  is a 
local maximum point on the graph and that 1b, f1b22  is a local minimum point. 
The local maximum and minimum points on the graph of a function are called its 
local extrema.
0
a
b
Ób, f(b)Ô
Local minimum point
Óa, f(a)Ô
Local maximum point
y=Ï
x
y
Figure 12
For a polynomial function the number of local extrema must be less than the degree, 
as the following principle indicates. (A proof of this principle requires calculus.)
Local Extrema of Polynomials
If P1x2 anxn an1xn1 . . . a1x a0 is a polynomial of degree n, then 
the graph of P has at most n  1 local extrema.
A polynomial of degree n may in fact have fewer than n  1 local extrema. For  
example, P1x2 x5 (graphed in Figure 1) has no local extrema, even though it is of 
degree 5. The preceding principle tells us only that a polynomial of degree n can have 
no more than n  1 local extrema.
Example 9  ■  The Number of Local Extrema
Graph the polynomial and determine how many local extrema it has.
(a)	 P11x2 x4 x3 16x2 4x 48
(b)	 P21x2 x5 3x4 5x3 15x2 4x 15       
(c)	 P31x2 7x4 3x2 10x
Solution    The graphs are shown in Figure 13.
(a)	 P1 has two local minimum points and one local maximum point, for a total of 
three local extrema.
(b)	 P2 has two local minimum points and two local maximum points, for a total of 
four local extrema.
(c)	 P3 has just one local extremum, a local minimum.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.2  ■  Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs  265
100
_100
_5
5
(a)
100
_100
_5
5
(b)
100
_100
_5
5
P⁄(x)=x¢+x£-16≈-4x+48
P¤(x)=x∞+3x¢-5x£-15≈+4x-15
P‹(x)=7x¢+3≈-10x
(c)
Figure 13
Now Try Exercises 65 and 67	
■
With a graphing calculator we can quickly draw the graphs of many functions at 
once, on the same viewing screen. This allows us to see how changing a value in the 
deﬁnition of the functions affects the shape of its graph. In the next example we apply 
this principle to a family of third-degree polynomials.
Example 10  ■  A Family of Polynomials
Sketch the family of polynomials P1x2 x3 cx2 for c  0, 1, 2, and 3. How does 
changing the value of c affect the graph?
Solution    The polynomials
P01x2 x3
            P11x2 x3 x2
P21x2 x3 2x2            P31x2 x3 3x2
are graphed in Figure 14. We see that increasing the value of c causes the graph to 
develop an increasingly deep “valley” to the right of the y-axis, creating a local maxi-
mum at the origin and a local minimum at a point in Quadrant IV. This local mini-
mum moves lower and farther to the right as c increases. To see why this happens, 
factor P1x2 x21x c2 . The polynomial P has zeros at 0 and c, and the larger c 
gets, the farther to the right the minimum between 0 and c will be.
Now Try Exercise 75	
■
10
_10
_2
4
c=0
c=1 c=2c=3
Figure 14  A family of polynomials 
P1x2 x3 cx2
concepts
	 1.	 Only one of the following graphs could be the graph of a 
polynomial function. Which one? Why are the others not 
graphs of polynomials?
I
y
x
II
y
x
III
y
x
IV
y
x
	 2.	 Describe the end behavior of each polynomial.
(a)	 y x3 8x2 2x 15
	
End behavior:    y S  
 
    as    x S 
	
	
y S   
    as    x S 
3.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
(b)	 y 2x4 12x 100
	
End behavior:	 y S  
 
    as    x S 
	
			
y S   
    as    x S 
	 3.	 If c is a zero of the polynomial P, then
(a)	 P1c2  
  .
(b)	 x c is a  
 of P1x2 .
(c)	 c is a(n)  
 -intercept of the graph of P.
	 4.	 Which of the following statements couldn’t possibly be true 
about the polynomial function P?
(a)	 P has degree 3, two local maxima, and two local minima.
(b)	 P has degree 3 and no local maxima or minima.
(c)	 P has degree 4, one local maximum, and no local 
minima.
skills
5–8  ■  Transformations of Monomials    Sketch the graph of each 
function by transforming the graph of an appropriate function of 
the form y  x n from Figure 1. Indicate all x- and y-intercepts on 
each graph.
	 5.	 (a)	 P1x2 x2 4	
(b)	 Q1x2 1x 42 2
(c)	 P1x2 2x2 3	
(d)	 P1x2 1x 22 2
	 6.	 (a)	 P1x2 x4 16	
(b)	 P1x2 1x 52 4
(c)	 P1x2 5x4 5	
(d)	 P1x2 1x 52 4
	 7.	 (a)	 P1x2 x3 8	
(b)	 Q1x2 x3 27
(c)	 R1x2 1x 22 3	
(d)	 S1x2 1
2 1x 12 3 4
	 8.	 (a)	 P1x2 1x 32 5	
(b)	 Q1x2 21x 32 5 64
(c)	 R1x2  1
2 1x 22 5	
(d)	 S1x2  1
2 1x 22 5 16
9–14  ■  End Behavior    A polynomial function is given.  
(a) Describe the end behavior of the polynomial function.  
(b) Match the polynomial function with one of the graphs I–VI.
	 9.	 P1x2 x1x2 42 	
10.	 Q1x2 x21x2 42
	11.	 R1x2 x5 5x3 4x	
12.	 S1x2 1
2 x6 2x4
	13.	 T1x2 x4 2x3	
14.	 U1x2 x3 2x2
I
II
y
x
0
1
1
y
x
0
1
1
III
IV
y
x
0
1
1
y
x
0
1
1
y
x
0
1
1
V
VI
y
x
0 1
1
15–30  ■  Graphing Factored Polynomials    Sketch the graph of 
the polynomial function. Make sure your graph shows all intercepts 
and exhibits the proper end behavior.
15.	 P1x2 1x 12 1x 22
16.	 P1x2 12 x2 1x 52
17.	 P1x2 x1x 32 1x 22
18.	 P1x2 x1x 32 1x 22
19.	 P1x2 12x 12 1x 12 1x 32
20.	 P1x2 1x 32 1x 22 13x 22
	21.	 P1x2 1x 22 1x 12 1x 22 1x 32
	22.	 P1x2 x1x 12 1x 12 12 x2
	23.	 P1x2 2x1x 22 2
	24.	 P1x2 1
5 x1x 52 2
	25.	 P1x2 1x 22 1x 12 212x 32
	26.	 P1x2 1x 12 21x 12 31x 22
	27.	 P1x2 1
12 1x 22 21x 32 2
	28.	 P1x2 1x 12 21x 22 3
	29.	 P1x2 x31x 22 1x 32 2
	30.	 P1x2 1x 32 21x 12 2
31–44  ■  Graphing Polynomials    Factor the polynomial and use 
the factored form to ﬁnd the zeros. Then sketch the graph.
31.	 P1x2 x3 x2 6x	
32.	 P1x2 x3 2x2 8x
33.	 P1x2 x3 x2 12x	
34.	 P1x2 2x3 x2 x
35.	 P1x2 x4 3x3 2x2	
36.	 P1x2 x5 9x3
37.	 P1x2 x3 x2 x 1
	38.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 4x 12
39.	 P1x2 2x3 x2 18x 9
40.	 P1x2 1
8 12x4 3x3 16x 242 2
41.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 8x 16
42.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 8x 16
43.	 P1x2 x4 3x2 4	
44.	 P1x2 x6 2x3 1
45–50  ■  End Behavior    Determine the end behavior of P. Com-
pare the graphs of P and Q in large and small viewing rectangles, 
as in Example 3(b).
45.	 P1x2 3x3 x2 5x 1; Q1x2 3x3
46.	 P1x2 1
8 x3 1
4 x2 12x; Q1x2 1
8 x3
47.	 P1x2 x4 7x2 5x 5; Q1x2 x4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.2  ■  Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs  267
48.	 P1x2 x5 2x2 x; Q1x2 x5
49.	 P1x2 x11 9x9; Q1x2 x11
50.	 P1x2 2x2 x12; Q1x2 x12
51–54  ■  Local Extrema    The graph of a polynomial function is 
given. From the graph, ﬁnd (a) the x- and y-intercepts, and (b) the 
coordinates of all ­local extrema.
51.	 P1x2 x2 4x	
52.	 P1x2 2
9 x3 x2
y
0
1
1
x
	
0
y
x
1
1
53.	 P1x2 1
2 x3 3
2 x 1	
54.	 P1x2 1
9 x4 4
9 x3
0
y
x
1
1
  	
0
y
x
2
1
55–62  ■  Local Extrema    Graph the polynomial in the given 
viewing rectangle. Find the coordinates of all local extrema. State 
each answer rounded to two decimal places. State the domain and 
range.
	55.	 y x2 8x,    34, 124 by 350, 304
	56.	 y x3 3x2,    32, 54 by 310, 104
	57.	 y x3 12x 9,    35, 54 by 330, 304
	58.	 y 2x3 3x2 12x 32,    35, 54 by 360, 304
	59.	 y x4 4x3,    35, 54 by 330, 304
	60.	 y x4 18x2 32,    35, 54 by 3100, 1004
	61.	 y 3x5 5x3 3,    33, 34 by 35, 104
	62.	 y x5 5x2 6,    33, 34 by 35, 104
63–72  ■  Number of Local Extrema    Graph the polynomial, and 
determine how many local maxima and minima it has.
	63.	 y 2x2 3x 5	
64.	 y x3 12x
65.	 y x3 x2 x	
66.	 y 6x3 3x 1
	67.	 y x4 5x2 4
	68.	 y 1.2x5 3.75x4 7x3 15x2 18x
69.	 y 1x 22 5 32	
70.	 y 1x2 22 3
71.	 y x8 3x4 x	
72.	 y 1
3 x7 17x2 7
73–78  ■  Families of Polynomials    Graph the family of polyno-
mials in the same viewing rectangle, using the given values of c. 
Explain how changing the value of c affects the graph.
73.	 P1x2 cx3; c 1, 2, 5, 1
2
74.	 P1x2 1x c2 4; c 1, 0, 1, 2
75.	 P1x2 x4 c; c 1, 0, 1, 2
76.	 P1x2 x3 cx; c 2, 0, 2, 4
77.	 P1x2 x4 cx; c 0, 1, 8, 27
78.	 P1x2 xc; c 1, 3, 5, 7
skills plus
	79.	 Intersection Points of Two Polynomials   
(a)	 On the same coordinate axes, sketch graphs (as accu-
rately as possible) of the functions
y x3 2x2 x 2  and  y x2 5x 2
(b)	 On the basis of your sketch in part (a), at how many 
points do the two graphs appear to intersect?
(c)	 Find the coordinates of all intersection points.
	80.	 Power Functions    Portions of the graphs of y  x2, y  x3, 
y  x4, y  x5, and y  x6 are plotted in the ﬁgures. Deter-
mine which function ­belongs to each graph.
y
0
x
1
1
y
0
x
1
1
	81.	 Odd and Even Functions    Recall that a function f is odd if 
f1x2 f1x2  or even if f1x2 f1x2  for all real x.
(a)	 Show that a polynomial P1x2  that contains only odd 
powers of x is an odd function.
(b)	 Show that a polynomial P1x2  that contains only even 
powers of x is an even function.
(c)	 Show that if a polynomial P1x2  contains both odd and  
even powers of x, then it is neither an odd nor an even 
function.
(d)	 Express the function
P1x2 x5 6x3 x2 2x 5
	
as the sum of an odd function and an even function.
	82.	 Number of Intercepts and Local Extrema   
(a)  How many x-intercepts and how many local extrema 
does the polynomial P1x2 x3 4x have?
(b)	 How many x-intercepts and how many local extrema 
does the polynomial Q1x2 x3 4x have?
(c)	 If a  0, how many x-intercepts and how many local 
extrema does each of the polynomials P1x2 x3 ax 
and Q1x2 x3 ax have? Explain your answer.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
83–86  ■  Local Extrema    These exercises involve local maxima 
and minima of polynomial functions. 
	83.	 (a)  Graph the function P1x2 1x 12 1x 32 1x 42  and 
ﬁnd all local extrema, correct to the nearest tenth.
(b)	 Graph the function
Q1x2 1x 12 1x 32 1x 42 5
	
and use your answers to part (a) to ﬁnd all local extrema, 
correct to the nearest tenth.
	84.	 (a)  Graph the function P1x2 1x 22 1x 42 1x 52  and 
determine how many local extrema it has.
(b)	 If a  b  c, explain why the function
P1x2 1x a2 1x b2 1x c2
	
must have two local extrema.
	85.	 Maximum Number of Local Extrema    What is the smallest 
possible degree that the polynomial whose graph is shown 
can have? Explain.
0
x
y
	86.	 Impossible Situation?    Is it possible for a polynomial to have 
two local maxima and no local minimum? Explain.
applications
	87.	 Market Research    A market analyst working for a small- 
appliance manufacturer ﬁnds that if the ﬁrm produces and  
sells x blenders annually, the total proﬁt (in dollars) is
P1x2 8x 0.3x2 0.0013x3 372
	 	 Graph the function P in an appropriate viewing rectangle and 
use the graph to answer the following questions.
(a)	 When just a few blenders are manufactured, the ﬁrm 
loses money (proﬁt is negative). (For example, 
P1102 263.3, so the ﬁrm loses $263.30 if it pro-
duces and sells only 10 blenders.) How many blenders 
must the ﬁrm produce to break even?
(b)	 Does proﬁt increase indeﬁnitely as more blenders are 
produced and sold? If not, what is the largest possible 
proﬁt the ﬁrm could have?
	88.	 Population Change    The rabbit population on a small island 
is observed to be given by the function
P1t2 120t 0.4t4 1000
	 	 where t is the time (in months) since observations of the  
island began.
(a)	 When is the maximum population attained, and what is 
that maximum population?
(b)	 When does the rabbit population disappear from the ­island?
t
P
0
	89.	 Volume of a Box    An open box is to be constructed from a 
piece of cardboard 20 cm by 40 cm by cutting squares of side 
length x from each corner and folding up the sides, as shown 
in the ﬁgure.
(a)	 Express the volume V of the box as a function of x.
(b)	 What is the domain of V? (Use the fact that length and 
volume must be positive.)
(c)	 Draw a graph of the function V, and use it to estimate the 
maximum volume for such a box.
20 cm
40 cm
x
x
	90.	 Volume of a Box    A cardboard box has a 
square base, with each edge of the base 
having length x inches, as shown in the 
ﬁgure. The total length of all 12 edges of 
the box is 144 in.
(a)	 Show that the volume of the box is 
given by the function 
V1x2 2x2118 x2 .
(b)	 What is the domain of V? (Use the 
fact that length and ­volume must be 
positive.)
(c)	 Draw a graph of the function V and 
use it to estimate the maximum vol-
ume for such a box.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	91.	 DISCOVER:  Graphs of Large Powers    Graph the functions  
y  x2, y  x3, y  x4, and y  x5, for 1  x  1, on  
the same coordinate axes. What do you think the graph of  
y x100 would look like on this same interval? What about  
y x101? Make a table of values to conﬁrm your answers.
	92.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  Possible Number of Local Extrema     
Is it possible for a third-degree polynomial to have exactly 
one local extremum? Can a fourth-degree polynomial have 
exactly two local extrema? How many local extrema can 
polynomials of third, fourth, ﬁfth, and sixth degree have? 
(Think about the end behavior of such polynomials.) Now 
give an example of a polynomial that has six local extrema.
x
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.3  ■  Dividing Polynomials  269
3.3 
Dividing Polynomials
■  Long Division of Polynomials  ■  Synthetic Division  ■  The Remainder  
and Factor Theorems
So far in this chapter we have been studying polynomial functions graphically. In this 
section we begin to study polynomials algebraically. Most of our work will be concerned 
with factoring polynomials, and to factor, we need to know how to divide polynomials.
■  Long Division of Polynomials
Dividing polynomials is much like the familiar process of dividing numbers. When we 
divide 38 by 7, the quotient is 5 and the remainder is 3. We write
38
7 5 3
7
To divide polynomials, we use long division, as follows.
Division Algorithm
If P1x2  and D1x2  are polynomials, with D1x2 ? 0, then there exist unique 
polynomials Q1x2  and R1x2 , where R1x2  is either 0 or of degree less than the 
degree of D1x2 , such that
P1x2
D1x2 Q1x2 
R1x2
D1x2       or     
P1x2 D1x2 # Q1x2 R1x2
The polynomials P1x2  and D1x2  are called the dividend and divisor, respec-
tively, Q1x2  is the quotient, and R1x2  is the remainder.
Dividend
Divisor
Quotient
Remainder
Example 1  ■  Long Division of Polynomials
Divide 6x2 26x 12 by x  4. Express the result in each of the two forms shown 
in the above box.
Solution    The dividend is 6x2 26x 12, and the divisor is x  4. We begin by 
arranging them as follows.
x 4q6x2 26x 12
Next we divide the leading term in the dividend by the leading term in the divisor to 
get the ﬁrst term of the quotient: 6x2/x 6x. Then we multiply the divisor by 6x and 
subtract the result from the dividend.
6x
x 4q6x2 26x 12
6x2 24x
2x 12
Dividend
Quotient
Remainder
Divisor
Divide leading terms: 6x2
x 6x
Multiply: 6x1x 42 6x2 24x
Subtract and “bring down” 12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
We repeat the process using the last line 2x  12 as the dividend.
	
6x 2oo
x 4q6x2 26x 12
6x2 24x
2x 12
2x 8
4	
The division process ends when the last line is of lesser degree than the divisor. The 
last line then contains the remainder, and the top line contains the quotient. The result 
of the division can be interpreted in either of two ways:
6x2 26x 12
x 4
6x 2 
4
x 4                or                6x2 26x 12 1x 42 16x 22 4
Now Try Exercises 3 and 9	
■
Example 2  ■  Long Division of Polynomials
Let P1x2 8x4 6x2 3x 1 and D1x2 2x2 x 2. Find polynomials Q1x2  
and R1x2  such that P1x2 D1x2 # Q1x2 R1x2 .
Solution    We use long division after ﬁrst inserting the term 0x3 into the dividend to 
ensure that the columns line up correctly.
4x2 2x
2x2 x 2q8x4 0x3 6x2 3x 1
8x4 4x3 8x2
4x3 2x2 3x
4x3 2x2 4x
7x 1
    Multiply divisor by 4x2
Subtract
Multiply divisor by 2x
Subtract
The process is complete at this point because 7x  1 is of lesser degree than the 
divisor 2x2 x 2. From the above long division we see that Q1x2 4x2 2x and 
R1x2 7x 1, so
8x4 6x2 3x 1 12x2 x 22 14x2 2x2 17x 12
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
■  Synthetic Division
Synthetic division is a quick method of dividing polynomials; it can be used when the 
divisor is of the form x  c. In synthetic division we write only the essential parts of 
the long division. Compare the following long and synthetic divisions, in which we 
divide 2x3 7x2 5 by x  3. (We’ll explain how to perform the synthetic division 
in Example 3.)
Divide leading terms: 2x
x
2
Multiply:  21x 42 2x 8
Subtract
Divide leading terms: 2x
x
2
Multiply:  21x 42 2x 8
Subtract
Dividend
Divisor
Quotient
Dividend
Quotient
Remainder
Remainder
Divisor
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.3  ■  Dividing Polynomials  271
Quotient
Remainder
Quotient
Remainder
3        2      7        0        5
	
	
6	
3	
9
	
2	
1	
3	
4
	
144424443
	
Long Division	
Synthetic Division
2x2 x 3
x 3q2x3 7x2 0x 5
2x3 6x2
x2 0x
x2 3x
3x 5
3x 9
4
Note that in synthetic division we abbreviate 2x3 7x2 5 by writing only the 
coefﬁcients: 2    7    0    5, and instead of x  3, we simply write 3. (Writing 3 instead 
of 3 allows us to add instead of subtract, but this changes the sign of all the numbers 
that appear in the gold boxes.)
The next example shows how synthetic division is performed.
Example 3  ■  Synthetic Division
Use synthetic division to divide 2x3 7x2 5 by x  3.
Solution    We begin by writing the appropriate coefﬁcients to represent the divisor 
and the dividend:
3   ∣    2        7        0        5
We bring down the 2, multiply 3  2  6, and write the result in the middle row. Then  
we add.
3
2
2
-7
0
5
6
-1
       
Multiply: 3 ? 2  6
Add: 7  6  1
We repeat this process of multiplying and then adding until the table is complete.
3
2
2
−7
−3
0
5
6
−3
−1
	
Multiply: 3112 3
Add: 0 132 3
3
2
2
−7
−3
−9
0
5
6
−3
−4
−1
Quotient
2x2 – x – 3
Remainder
–4
	
Multiply: 3132 9
Add: 5 192 4
From the last line of the synthetic division we see that the quotient is 2x2 x 3 
and the remainder is 4. Thus
2x3 7x2 5 1x 32 12x2 x 32 4
Now Try Exercise 31	
■
Dividend  
2x3 7x2 0x 5
Divisor x 2 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
■  The Remainder and Factor Theorems
The next theorem shows how synthetic division can be used to evaluate polynomials 
easily.
remainder theorem
If the polynomial P1x2 is divided by x  c, then the remainder is the value P1c2.
Proof    If the divisor in the Division Algorithm is of the form x  c for some real 
number c, then the remainder must be a constant (since the degree of the remainder is 
less than the degree of the divisor). If we call this constant r, then
P1x2 1x c2 # Q1x2 r
Replacing x by c in this equation, we get P1c2 1c c2 # Q1c2 r 0 r r, 
that is, P1c2  is the remainder r.	
■
Example 4  ■  Using the Remainder Theorem to Find the Value  
of a Polynomial
Let P1x2 3x5 5x4 4x3 7x 3.
(a)	 Find the quotient and remainder when P1x2  is divided by x  2.
(b)	 Use the Remainder Theorem to ﬁnd P122 .
SOLUTION
(a)	 Since x 2 x 122 , the synthetic division for this problem takes the  
following form:
 	
2    ∣    3    5    4    0    7    3               ,
	
	
6	
2	
4	 8	
2
	
3	 1	 2	
4	 1	
5
	 	 The quotient is 3x4 x3 2x2 4x 1, and the remainder is 5.
(b)	 By the Remainder Theorem, P122  is the remainder when P1x2  is divided by  
x  122  x  2. From part (a) the remainder is 5, so P122 5.
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
The next theorem says that zeros of polynomials correspond to factors. We used this 
fact in Section 3.2 to graph polynomials.
factor theorem
c is a zero of P if and only if x  c is a factor of P1x2 .
Proof    If P1x2  factors as P1x2 1x c2Q1x2 , then
P1c2 1c c2Q1c2 0 # Q1c2 0
Conversely, if P1c2 0, then by the Remainder Theorem
P1x2 1x c2Q1x2 0 1x c2Q1x2
so x  c is a factor of P1x2 .	
■
Remainder is 5,  
so P(22) 5 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.3  ■  Dividing Polynomials  273
Example 5  ■  Factoring a Polynomial Using the Factor Theorem
Let P1x2 x3 7x 6. Show that P112 0, and use this fact to factor P1x2  
completely.
Solution    Substituting, we see that P112 13 7 # 1 6 0. By the Factor  
Theorem this means that x  1 is a factor of P1x2 . Using synthetic or long division 
(shown in the margin), we see that
 P1x2 x3 7x 6
    Given polynomial
  1x 12 1x2 x 62
    See margin
  1x 12 1x 22 1x 32    Factor quadratic x2  x  6
Now Try Exercises 53 and 57	
■
Example 6  ■  Finding a Polynomial with Specified Zeros
Find a polynomial of degree four that has zeros 3, 0, 1, and 5, and the coefficient of 
x3 is 6.
Solution    By the Factor Theorem, x 132 , x 0, x 1, and x 5 must all be 
factors of the desired polynomial. Let
 P1x2 1x 32 1x 02 1x 12 1x 52
 x4 3x3 13x2 15x
The polynomial P1x2  is of degree 4 with the desired zeros, but the coefficient of x3 is 
3, not 6. Multiplication by a nonzero constant does not change the degree, so the 
desired polynomial is a constant multiple of P1x2 . If we multiply P1x2  by the con-
stant 2, we get
Q1x2 2x4 6x3 26x2 30x
which is a polynomial with all the desired properties.The polynomial Q is graphed in 
Figure 1. Note that the zeros of Q correspond to the x-intercepts of the graph.
Now Try Exercises 63 and 67	
■
1  ∣  1      0    7      6
	
	
1	
1	 6
	
1	
1	 6	
0
x2 x 6
x 1qx3 0x2 7x 6
x3 x2
x2 7x
x2 x
6x 6
6x 6
0
1
20
y
x
_3
5
FIGURE 1 
Q1x2 2x1x 32 1x 12 1x 52  
has zeros 3, 0, 1, and 5, and the  
coefficient of x3 is 6.
concepts
	 1.	 If we divide the polynomial P by the factor x c and we 
obtain the equation P1x2 1x c2Q1x2 R1x2, then we say 
that x c is the divisor, Q1x2  is the  
  , and R1x2  is 
the  
  .
	 2.	 (a)	 If we divide the polynomial P1x2  by the factor x c 
and we obtain a remainder of 0, then we know that c is a 
 
 of P.
(b)	 If we divide the polynomial P1x2  by the factor x c 
and we obtain a remainder of k, then we know that 
P1c2   
  .
skills
3–8  ■  Division of Polynomials    Two polynomials P and D are 
given. Use either synthetic or long division to divide P1x2  by 
D1x2 , and express the quotient P1x2/D1x2  in the form
P1x2
D1x2 Q1x2 
R1x2
D1x2
	 3.	 P1x2 2x2 5x 7,    D1x2 x 2
	 4.	 P1x2 3x3 9x2 5x 1,    D1x2 x 4
	 5.	 P1x2 4x2 3x 7,    D1x2 2x 1
	 6.	 P1x2 6x3 x2 12x 5,    D1x2 3x 4
	 7.	 P1x2 2x4 x3 9x2,    D1x2 x2 4
	 8.	 P1x2 2x5 x3 2x2 3x 5,    D1x2 x2 3x 1
3.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
9–14  ■  Division of Polynomials    Two polynomials P and D are 
given. Use either synthetic or long division to divide P1x2  by 
D1x2 , and express P in the form 
P1x2 D1x2 # Q1x2 R1x2
	 9.	 P1x2 x3 2x 6,    D1x2 x 1
	10.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 10x,    D1x2 x 3
	11.	 P1x2 2x3 3x2 2x,    D1x2 2x 3
	12.	 P1x2 4x3 7x 9,    D1x2 2x 1
	13.	 P1x2 8x4 4x3 6x2,    D1x2 2x2 1
	14.	 P1x2 27x5 9x4 3x2 3,    D1x2 3x2 3x 1
15–24  ■  Long Division of Polynomials    Find the quotient and 
remainder using long division.
	15.	 x2 3x 7
x 2
	
16.	 x3 2x2 x 1
x 3
	17.	 4x3 2x2 2x 3
2x 1
	
18.	 x3 3x2 4x 3
3x 6
	19.	 x3 2x 1
x2 x 3 	
20.	 x4 3x3 x 2
x2 5x 1
	21.	 6x3 2x2 22x
2x2 5
	
22.	 9x2 x 5
3x2 7x
	23.	 x6 x4 x2 1
x2 1
	
24.	 2x5 7x4 13
4x2 6x 8
25–38  ■  Synthetic Division of Polynomials    Find the quotient 
and remainder using synthetic ­division.
	25.	 2x2 5x 3
x 3
	
26.	 x2 x 4
x 1
	27.	 3x2 x
x 1 	
28.	 4x2 3
x 2
	29.	 x3 2x2 2x 1
x 2
	
30.	 3x3 12x2 9x 1
x 5
	31.	 x3 8x 2
x 3
	
32.	 x4 x3 x2 x 2
x 2
	33.	 x5 3x3 6
x 1
	
34.	 x3 9x2 27x 27
x 3
	35.	 2x 3 3x2 2x 1
x 1
2
	36.	 6x4 10x 3 5x2 x 1
x 2
3
	37.	 x 3 27
x 3 	
38.	 x4 16
x 2
39–51  ■  Remainder Theorem    Use synthetic division and the 
Remainder Theorem to evaluate P1c2 .
	39.	 P1x2 4x2 12x 5,    c  1
	40.	 P1x2 2x2 9x 1,    c 1
2
	41.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 7x 6,    c  2
	42.	 P1x2 x3 x2 x 5,    c  1
	43.	 P1x2 x3 2x2 7,    c  2
	44.	 P1x2 2x3 21x2 9x 200,    c  11
	45.	 P1x2 5x4 30x3 40x2 36x 14,    c  7
	46.	 P1x2 6x5 10x3 x 1,    c  2
	47.	 P1x2 x7 3x2 1,    c  3
	48.	 P1x2 2x6 7x5 40x4 7x2 10x 112,    c  3
	49.	 P1x2 3x3 4x2 2x 1,    c 2
3
	50.	 P1x2 x3 x 1,    c 1
4
	51.	 P1x2 x3 2x2 3x 8,    c  0.1
	52.	 Remainder Theorem    Let
 P1x2 6x7 40x6 16x5 200x4
  60x3 69x2 13x 139
	 	 Calculate P172  by (a) using synthetic division and (b) substi-
tuting x  7 into the polynomial and evaluating directly.
53–56  ■  Factor Theorem    Use the Factor Theorem to show that 
x  c is a factor of P1x2  for the given value(s) of c.
	53.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 3x 1,    c  1
	54.	 P1x2 x3 2x2 3x 10,    c  2
	55.	 P1x2 2x3 7x2 6x 5,    c 1
2
	56.	 P1x2 x4 3x3 16x2 27x 63,    c  3, 3
57–62  ■  Factor Theorem    Show that the given value(s) of c are 
zeros of P1x2 , and ﬁnd all other zeros of P1x2 .
	57.	 P1x2 x3 2x2 9x 18,    c 2
	58.	 P1x2 x3 5x2 2x 10,    c 5
	59.	 P1x2 x3 x2 11x 15,    c 3
	60.	 P1x2 3x4 x3 21x2 11x 6,    c 2, 1
3
	61.	 P1x2 3x4 8x3 14x2 31x 6,    c 2, 3
	62.	 P1x2 2x4 13x3 7x2 37x 15,    c 1, 3
63–66  ■  Finding a Polynomial with Specified Zeros    Find a 
polynomial of the speciﬁed degree that has the given zeros.
	63.	 Degree 3;    zeros 1, 1, 3
	64.	 Degree 4;    zeros 2, 0, 2, 4
	65.	 Degree 4;    zeros 1, 1, 3, 5
	66.	 Degree 5;    zeros 2, 1, 0, 1, 2
67–70  ■  Polynomials with Specified Zeros    Find a polynomial 
of the specified degree that satisfies the given conditions.
	67.	 Degree 4;  zeros 2, 0, 1, 3;  coefficient of x3 is 4
	68.	 Degree 4;  zeros 1, 0, 2, 1
2;  coefficient of x3 is 3
	69.	 Degree 4;  zeros 1, 1, !2;  integer coefficients and  
constant term 6
	70.	 Degree 5;  zeros 2, 1, 2, !5;  integer coefficients and 
constant term 40
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.4  ■  Real Zeros of Polynomials  275
skills plus
71–74  ■  Finding a Polynomial from a Graph    Find the polyno-
mial of the speciﬁed degree whose graph is shown.
	71.	 Degree 3	
72.	 Degree 3
	 	
0
y
x
1
1
	
0
y
x
1
1
	73.	 Degree 4	
74.	 Degree 4
	 	
0
y
x
1
1
	
0
y
x
1
1
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	75.	 DISCUSS:  Impossible Division?    Suppose you were asked to 
solve the following two problems on a test:
A.	 Find the remainder when 6x1000 17x562 12x 26 is 
divided by x  1.
B.	 Is x  1 a factor of x567 3x400 x9 2?
	 	 Obviously, it’s impossible to solve these problems by divid-
ing, because the polynomials are of such large degree. Use 
one or more of the theorems in this section to solve these 
problems without actually dividing.
	76.	 DISCOVER:  Nested Form of a Polynomial    Expand Q to 
prove that the polynomials P and Q are the same.
 P1x2 3x4 5x3 x2 3x 5
 Q1x2 1113x 52x 12x 32x 5
	 	 Try to evaluate P122  and Q122  in your head, using the  
forms given. Which is easier? Now write the polynomial 
R1x2 x5 2x4 3x3 2x2 3x 4 in “nested” form, 
like the polynomial Q. Use the nested form to ﬁnd R132  in  
your head.
	 	     Do you see how calculating with the nested form follows 
the same arithmetic steps as calculating the value of a poly-
nomial using synthetic division?
3.4 
Real Zeros of Polynomials
■  Rational Zeros of Polynomials  ■  Descartes’ Rule of Signs  ■  Upper and Lower  
Bounds Theorem  ■  Using Algebra and Graphing Devices to Solve Polynomial  
Equations
The Factor Theorem tells us that ﬁnding the zeros of a polynomial is really the same 
thing as factoring it into linear factors. In this section we study some algebraic methods 
that help us to ﬁnd the real zeros of a polynomial and thereby factor the polynomial. 
We begin with the rational zeros of a polynomial.
■  Rational Zeros of Polynomials
To help us understand the next theorem, let’s consider the polynomial
 P1x2 1x 22 1x 32 1x 42        Factored form
  x3 x2 14x 24
        Expanded form
From the factored form we see that the zeros of P are 2, 3, and 4. When the polyno-
mial is expanded, the constant 24 is obtained by multiplying 122 132 4. This 
means that the zeros of the polynomial are all factors of the constant term. The follow-
ing generalizes this observation.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
rational zeros theorem
If the polynomial P1x2 an  x  
n an1x n1 . . . a1x a0 has integer 
coefﬁcients (where an ? 0 and a0 ? 0), then every rational zero of P is of the form
p
q
where p and q are integers and 
p is a factor of the constant coefﬁcient a0
q is a factor of the leading coefﬁcient an
Proof    If p/q is a rational zero, in lowest terms, of the polynomial P, then we have
 an a p
q b
n
an1 a p
q b
n1
. . . a1 a p
q b a0 0
 an  pn an1  pn1q . . . a1pqn1 a0qn 0
    Multiply by qn
 p1an  pn1 an1  pn2q . . . a1qn12 a0qn    Subtract a0qn  
and factor LHS
Now p is a factor of the left side, so it must be a factor of the right side as well. Since 
p/q is in lowest terms, p and q have no factor in common, so p must be a factor of a0. 
A similar proof shows that q is a factor of an.	
■
We see from the Rational Zeros Theorem that if the leading coefﬁcient is 1 or 1, 
then the rational zeros must be factors of the constant term.
Example 1  ■  Using the Rational Zeros Theorem
Find the rational zeros of P1x2 x3 3x 2.
Solution    Since the leading coefﬁcient is 1, any rational zero must be a divisor of 
the constant term 2. So the possible rational zeros are 1 and 2. We test each of 
these possibilities.
 P112 112 3 3112 2 0
 P112 112 3 3112 2 4
 P122 122 3 3122 2 4
 P122 122 3 3122 2 0
The rational zeros of P are 1 and 2.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
Discovery Project
Zeroing in on a Zero
We have learned how to find the zeros of a polynomial function algebraically 
and graphically. In this project we investigate a numerical method for finding 
the zeros of a polynomial. With this method we can approximate the zeros of a 
polynomial to as many decimal places as we wish. The method involves finding 
smaller and smaller intervals that zoom in on a zero of a polynomial. You can 
find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
0.01
0
0.001
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.4  ■  Real Zeros of Polynomials  277
The following box explains how we use the Rational Zeros Theorem with synthetic 
division to factor a polynomial.
Finding the Rational Zeros of a Polynomial
1.	 List Possible Zeros.    List all possible rational zeros, using the Rational 
Zeros Theorem.
2.	 Divide.    Use synthetic division to evaluate the polynomial at each of the 
candidates for the rational zeros that you found in Step 1. When the 
remainder is 0, note the quotient you have obtained.
3.	 Repeat.    Repeat Steps 1 and 2 for the quotient. Stop when you reach a 
quotient that is quadratic or factors easily, and use the quadratic formula or 
factor to ﬁnd the remaining zeros.
Example 2  ■  Finding Rational Zeros
Write the polynomial P1x2 2x3 x2 13x 6 in factored form, and find all its 
zeros.
Solution    By the Rational Zeros Theorem the rational zeros of P are of the form
possible rational zero of P 
factor of constant term
factor of leading coefﬁcient
The constant term is 6 and the leading coefﬁcient is 2, so
possible rational zero of P factor of 6
factor of 2
The factors of 6 are 1, 2, 3, 6, and the factors of 2 are 1, 2. Thus the  
possible rational zeros of P are
1
1, 2
1, 3
1, 6
1, 1
2, 2
2, 3
2, 6
2
Simplifying the fractions and eliminating duplicates, we get the following list of  
possible rational zeros:
1, 2, 3, 6, 1
2, 3
2
To check which of these possible zeros actually are zeros, we need to evaluate  
P at each of these numbers. An efﬁcient way to do this is to use synthetic  
division.
	
Test whether 1 is a zero	
Test whether 2 is a zero
	
1    ∣  2    11    13    16	
2    ∣  2    11    13    6
	
	
	
2	
3	 10	
	
4	
10	 6
	
	
2	
3	
10	
4	
2	
5	
3	 0
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs 
Division
Evariste Galois (1811–1832) is one 
of the very few mathematicians to have 
an entire theory named in his honor. Not 
yet 21 when he died, he completely set-
tled the central problem in the theory of 
equations by describing a criterion that 
reveals whether a polynomial equation 
can be solved by algebraic operations. 
Galois was one of the greatest mathema-
ticians in the world at that time, although 
no one knew it but him. He repeatedly 
sent his work to the eminent mathemati-
cians Cauchy and Poisson, who either lost 
his letters or did not understand his 
ideas. Galois wrote in a terse style and 
included few details, which probably 
played a role in his failure to pass the 
entrance exams at the Ecole Polytech-
nique in Paris. A political radical, Galois 
spent several months in prison for his 
revolutionary activities. His brief life 
came to a tragic end when he was killed 
in a duel over a love affair. The night 
before his duel, fearing that he would 
die, Galois wrote down the essence of his 
ideas and entrusted them to his friend 
Auguste Chevalier. He concluded by writ-
ing “there will, I hope, be people who will 
ﬁnd it to their advantage to decipher all 
this mess.” The mathematician ­Camille 
Jordan did just that, 14 years later.
Remainder is not 0, 
so 1 is not a zero
Remainder is 0,  
so 2 is a zero
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
From the last synthetic division we see that 2 is a zero of P and that P factors as
 P1x2 2x3 x2 13x 6
        Given polynomial
  1x 22 12x2 5x 32         From synthetic division
  1x 22 12x 12 1x 32        Factor 2x2 5x 3
From the factored form we see that the zeros of P are 2, 
 1 
2, and –3.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
Example 3  ■  Using the Rational Zeros Theorem  
and the Quadratic Formula
Let P1x2 x4 5x3 5x2 23x 10.
(a)	 Find the zeros of P.      (b)  Sketch a graph of P.
SOLUTION
(a)	 The leading coefﬁcient of P is 1, so all the rational zeros are integers: They are 
divisors of the constant term 10. Thus the possible candidates are
1, 2, 5, 10
	 	 Using synthetic division (see the margin), we ﬁnd that 1 and 2 are not zeros but 
that 5 is a zero and that P factors as
x4 5x3 5x2 23x 10 1x 52 1x3 5x 22
	 	 We now try to factor the quotient x3  5x  2. Its possible zeros are the divisors 
of 2, namely,
1, 2
	 	 Since we already know that 1 and 2 are not zeros of the original polynomial P, 
we don’t need to try them again. Checking the remaining candidates, 1 and 2, 
we see that 2 is a zero (see the margin), and P factors as
 x4 5x3 5x2 23x 10 1x 52 1x3 5x 22
  1x 52 1x 22 1x2 2x 12
	 	 Now we use the Quadratic Formula to obtain the two remaining zeros of P:
x 
2 "122 2 4112 112
2
1 !2
	 	 The zeros of P are 5, 2, 1 !2, and 1 !2.
(b)	 Now that we know the zeros of P, we can use the methods of Section 3.2 to sketch 
the graph. If we want to use a graphing calculator instead, knowing the zeros allows 
us to choose an appropriate viewing rectangle—one that is wide enough to contain 
all the x-intercepts of P. Numerical approximations to the zeros of P are
5, 2, 2.4, 0.4
	 	 So in this case we choose the rectangle 33, 64 by 350, 504 and draw the graph 
shown in Figure 1.
Now Try Exercises 45 and 55	
■
■  Descartes’ Rule of Signs
In some cases, the following rule—discovered by the French philosopher and mathema-
tician René Descartes around 1637 (see page 201)—is helpful in eliminating candidates 
from lengthy lists of possible rational roots. To describe this rule, we need the concept 
1    ∣   1    5      5       23       10
	
	
1	
4	
9	
14
	1	
4	
9	
14	
24
2    ∣   1	 5	
5	
23	
10
	
	
2	
6	
22	
2
	1	 3	 11	
1	
12
5    ∣   1	 5	
5	
23	
10
	
	
5	
0	
25	 10
	1	
0	
5	
2	
0
2    ∣  1    0    5    2
	
	
2	
4	
2
	
1	 2	 1	
0
50
_50
_3
6
Figure 1 
P1x2 x4 5x3 5x2 23x 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.4  ■  Real Zeros of Polynomials  279
of variation in sign. If P1x2  is a polynomial with real coefﬁcients, written with descend-
ing powers of x (and omitting powers with coefﬁcient 0), then a variation in sign oc-
curs whenever adjacent coefﬁcients have opposite signs. For example,
P1x2 5x7 3x5 x4 2x2 x 3
has three variations in sign.
Descartes’ Rule of Signs
Let P be a polynomial with real coefﬁcients.
1.	 The number of positive real zeros of P1x2  either is equal to the number of 
variations in sign in P1x2  or is less than that by an even whole number.
2.	 The number of negative real zeros of P1x2  either is equal to the number of 
variations in sign in P1x2  or is less than that by an even whole number.
In Descartes’ Rule of Signs a zero with multiplicity m is counted m times. For ex-
ample, the polynomial P1x2 x2 2x 1 has two sign changes and has the positive 
zero x 1. But this zero is counted twice because it has multiplicity 2.
Example 4  ■  Using Descartes’ Rule
Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to determine the possible number of positive and nega-
tive real zeros of the polynomial
P1x2 3x6 4x5 3x3 x 3
Solution    The polynomial has one variation in sign, so it has one positive zero. Now
 P1x2 31x2 6 41x2 5 31x2 3 1x2 3
  3x6 4x5 3x3 x 3
So P1x2  has three variations in sign. Thus P1x2  has either three or one negative 
zero(s), making a total of either two or four real zeros.
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
■  Upper and Lower Bounds Theorem
We say that a is a lower bound and b is an upper bound for the zeros of a polynomial 
if every real zero c of the polynomial satisﬁes a  c  b. The next theorem helps us to 
ﬁnd such bounds for the zeros of a polynomial.
The Upper and Lower Bounds Theorem
Let P be a polynomial with real coefﬁcients.
1.	 If we divide P1x2  by x  b (with b  0) using synthetic division and if the 
row that contains the quotient and remainder has no negative entry, then b is 
an upper bound for the real zeros of P.
2.	 If we divide P1x2  by x  a (with a  0) using synthetic division and if the 
row that contains the quotient and remainder has entries that are alternately 
nonpositive and nonnegative, then a is a lower bound for the real zeros of P.
Multiplicity is discussed on page 263.
Polynomial
Variations  
in sign
x2  4x  1
0
2x3  x  6
1
x4  3x2  x  4
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
A proof of this theorem is suggested in Exercise 109. The phrase “alternately non-
positive and nonnegative” simply means that the signs of the numbers alternate, with 0 
considered to be positive or negative as required.
Example 5  ■  Upper and Lower Bounds for the Zeros of a Polynomial
Show that all the real zeros of the polynomial P1x2 x4 3x2 2x 5 lie 
between 3 and 2.
Solution    We divide P1x2  by x  2 and x  3 using synthetic division:
	
2    ∣    1      0    3      2    5	
3    ∣    1    0    3      2    5
	
	
2	
4	
2	
8	
	
	 3	
9	 18	
48
	
1	
2	
1	
4	
3	
	
1	 3	
6	 16	
43	
Entries  
alternate  
in sign
All entries 
nonnegative
By the Upper and Lower Bounds Theorem 3 is a lower bound and 2 is an upper 
bound for the zeros. Since neither 3 nor 2 is a zero (the remainders are not 0 in the 
division table), all the real zeros lie between these numbers.
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
Example 6  ■  A Lower Bound for the Zeros of a Polynomial
Show that all the real zeros of the polynomial P1x2 x4 4x3 3x2 7x 5 are 
greater than or equal to 4.
Solution    We divide P1x2  by x 4 using synthetic division:
	
4    ∣  1        4        3          7        5
	
	
4	
0	
12	
20
	
1	
0	
3	
5	
15
Since 0 can be considered either nonnegative or nonpositive, the entries alternate in 
sign. So 4 is a lower bound for the real zeros of P.
Now Try Exercise 73	
■
Example 7  ■  Factoring a Fifth-Degree Polynomial
Factor completely the polynomial
P1x2 2x5 5x4 8x3 14x2 6x 9
Solution    The possible rational zeros of P are  1
2, 1,  3
2, 3,  9
2, and 9. We 
check the positive candidates ﬁrst, beginning with the smallest:
	
1
2    ∣    2      5    8      14        6        9	
1    ∣     2  5    8    14        6      9
	
1	
3	
5
2	
33
4 	
9
8	
	
2	
7	
1	 15	 9
	
2	
6	
5	
33
2 	
9
4	
63
8 	
2	
7	 1	 15	
9	
0
1
2 is not a 
zero
P112 0
_3
2
0
Lower
bound
Upper
bound
All zeros
are between
_3 and 2
Alternately  
nonnegative and 
nonpositive
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.4  ■  Real Zeros of Polynomials  281
So 1 is a zero, and P1x2 1x 12 12x4 7x3 x2 15x 92 . We continue by 
factoring the quotient. We still have the same list of possible zeros except that 1
2 has 
been eliminated­.
	
1    ∣    2    7    1    15      9	
3
2    ∣  2    7    1    15    9
	
	
2	
9	
8	
7	
	
	
3	
15	
21	
9
	
2	
9	
8	
7	 16	
	
2	
10	
14	
6	
0	 PA3
2B 0,  
all entries 
nonnegative
1 is not a 
zero
We see that 3
2 is both a zero and an upper bound for the zeros of P1x2 , so we do not 
need to check any further for positive zeros, because all the remaining candidates are 
greater than 3
2.
 P1x2 1x 12 1x 3
22 12x3 10x2 14x 62        From synthetic division
  1x 12 12x 32 1x3 5x2 7x 32
        Factor 2 from last factor,  
multiply into second factor
By Descartes’ Rule of Signs, x3  5x2  7x  3 has no positive zero, so its only 
possible rational zeros are 1 and 3:
	
    1   ∣    1        5        7        3
	
	
1	
4	
3
	
1	
4	
3	
0
Therefore,
 P1x2 1x 12 12x 32 1x 12 1x2 4x 32        From synthetic division
  1x 12 12x 32 1x 12 21x 32
        Factor quadratic
This means that the zeros of P are 1, 3
2, 1, and 3. The graph of the polynomial is 
shown in Figure 2.
Now Try Exercise 81	
■
■  Using Algebra and Graphing Devices  
to Solve Polynomial Equations
In Section 1.11 we used graphing devices to solve equations graphically. We can now 
use the algebraic techniques that we’ve learned to select an appropriate viewing rect-
angle when solving a polynomial equation graphically.
Example 8  ■  Solving a Fourth-Degree Equation Graphically
Find all real solutions of the following equation, rounded to the nearest tenth:
3x4 4x3 7x2 2x 3 0
Solution    To solve the equation graphically, we graph
P1x2 3x4 4x3 7x2 2x 3
First we use the Upper and Lower Bounds Theorem to ﬁnd two numbers between 
which all the solutions must lie. This allows us to choose a viewing rectangle that is 
certain to contain all the x-intercepts of P. We use synthetic division and proceed by 
trial and error.
P112 0
We use the Upper and Lower Bounds 
Theorem to see where the solutions can  
be found.
9
40
_20
_4
2
Figure 2 
P1x2 2x55x48x3 14x26x9
 1x 12 12x 32 1x 12 21x 32
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

282 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
To ﬁnd an upper bound, we try the whole numbers, 1, 2, 3, . . . , as potential candi-
dates. We see that 2 is an upper bound for the solutions:
2    ∣    3        4        7        2        3
	
	
6	
20	
26	
48
	
3	
10	
13	
24	
45
Now we look for a lower bound, trying the numbers 1, 2, and 3 as potential 
candidates. We see that 3 is a lower bound for the solutions:
	
3    ∣  3        4      7        2        3
	
	
	
9	
15	
24	
78
	
	
3	
5	
8	
26	
75
Thus all the solutions lie between 3 and 2. So the viewing rectangle 33, 24 by  
320, 204 contains all the x-intercepts of P. The graph in Figure 3 has two x-intercepts, 
one between 3 and 2 and the other between 1 and 2. Zooming in, we ﬁnd that the 
solutions of the equation, to the nearest tenth, are 2.3 and 1.3.
Now Try Exercise 95	
■
Example 9  ■  Determining the Size of a Fuel Tank
A fuel tank consists of a cylindrical center section that is 4 ft long and two hemi-
spherical end sections, as shown in Figure 4. If the tank has a volume of 100 ft3, what 
is the radius r shown in the ﬁgure, rounded to the nearest hundredth of a foot?
Solution    Using the volume formula listed on the inside front cover of this book, we 
see that the volume of the cylindrical section of the tank is
p # r 2 # 4
The two hemispherical parts together form a complete sphere whose volume is
4
3 pr 3
Because the total volume of the tank is 100 ft3, we get the following equation:
4
3 pr3 4pr 2 100
A negative solution for r would be meaningless in this physical situation, and by 
substi­tution we can verify that r  3 leads to a tank that is over 226 ft3 in volume, 
much larger than the required 100 ft3. Thus we know the correct radius lies some-
where between 0 and 3 ft, so we use a viewing rectangle of 30, 34 by 350, 1504 to graph 
the function y 4
3 px3 4px 2, as shown in Figure 5. Since we want the value of this 
function to be 100, we also graph the horizontal line y  100 in the same viewing 
rectangle. The correct radius will be the x-coordinate of the point of intersection of 
the curve and the line. Using the cursor and zooming in, we see that at the point  
of intersection x  2.15, rounded to two decimal places. Thus the tank has a radius  
of about 2.15 ft.
Now Try Exercise 99	
■
Note that we also could have solved the equation in Example 9 by ﬁrst writing it as
4
3 pr3 4pr 2 100 0
and then ﬁnding the x-intercept of the function y 4
3 px3 4px 2 100.
All  
positive
Entries  
alternate  
in sign
Volume of a cylinder: V  pr 2h
Volume of a sphere: V 4
3  pr3
20
_20
_3
2
Figure 3 
y 3x4 4x3 7x2 2x 3
150
50
0
3
Figure 5   
y 4
3 px3 4px 2 and y  100
Figure 4
r
4 ft
r
4 ft
r
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.4  ■  Real Zeros of Polynomials  283
concepts
	 1.	 If the polynomial function
P1x2 anx n an1x n1 . . . a1x a0
	 	 has integer coefficients, then the only numbers that  
could ­possibly be rational zeros of P are all of the  
form p
q, where p is a factor of  
 and q is a  
factor of  
  . The possible rational zeros of 
P1x2 6x3 5x2 19x 10 are 
 
  .
	 2.	 Using Descartes’ Rule of Signs, we can tell that the  
polynomial P1x2 x5 3x4 2x3 x2 8x 8 has 
 
  ,  
  , or  
 positive real zeros and 
 
 negative real zeros.
	 3.	 True or False? If c is a real zero of the polynomial P, then all 
the other zeros of P are zeros of P1x2/1x c2.
	 4.	 True or False? If a is an upper bound for the real zeros of the 
polynomial P, then a is necessarily a lower bound for the 
real ­zeros of P.
skills
5–10  ■  Possible Rational Zeros    List all possible rational zeros 
given by the Rational Zeros Theorem (but don’t check to see 
which actually are zeros).
	 5.	 P1x2 x3 4x2 3
	 6.	 Q1x2 x4 3x3 6x 8
	 7.	 R1x2 2x5 3x3 4x2 8
	 8.	 S1x2 6x4 x2 2x 12
	 9.	 T1x2 4x4 2x2 7
	10.	 U1x2 12x5 6x3 2x 8
11–14  ■  Possible Rational Zeros    A polynomial function P and 
its graph are given. (a) List all possible rational zeros of P given 
by the Rational Zeros Theorem. (b) From the graph, determine 
which of the possible rational zeros actually turn out to be zeros.
	11.	 P1x2 5x3 x2 5x 1
0
1
y
x
1
	12.	 P1x2 3x3 4x2 x 2
0
y
x
1
1
	13.	 P1x2 2x4 9x3 9x2 x 3
0
y
x
1
1
14.	 P1x2 4x4 x3 4x 1
0
y
x
1
1
15–28  ■  Integer Zeros    All the real zeros of the given polyno-
mial are integers. Find the zeros, and write the polynomial in fac-
tored form.
	15.	 P1x2 x3 2x2 13x 10
	16.	 P1x2 x3 4x2 19x 14
17.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 4
18.	 P1x2 x3 3x 2
19.	 P1x2 x3 6x2 12x 8
20.	 P1x2 x3 12x2 48x 64
	21.	 P1x2 x3 19x 30
	22.	 P1x2 x3 11x2 8x 20
3.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

284 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
23.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 x 3
24.	 P1x2 x3 4x2 11x 30
25.	 P1x2 x4 5x2 4
26.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 3x2 8x 4
27.	 P1x2 x4 6x3 7x2 6x 8
28.	 P1x2 x4 x3 23x2 3x 90
29–44  ■  Rational Zeros    Find all rational zeros of the polyno-
mial, and write the polynomial in factored form.
29.	 P1x2 4x4 37x2 9
	30.	 P1x2 6x4 23x3 13x2 32x 16
31.	 P1x2 3x4 10x3 9x2 40x 12
32.	 P1x2 2x3 7x2 4x 4
33.	 P1x2 4x3 4x2 x 1
34.	 P1x2 2x3 3x2 2x 3
35.	 P1x2 4x3 7x 3
36.	 P1x2 12x3 25x2 x 2
	37.	 P1x2 24x3 10x2 13x 6
38.	 P1x2 12x3 20x2 x 3
39.	 P1x2 2x4 7x3 3x2 8x 4
40.	 P1x2 6x4 7x3 12x2 3x 2
41.	 P1x2 x5 3x4 9x3 31x2 36
42.	 P1x2 x5 4x4 3x3 22x2 4x 24
43.	 P1x2 3x5 14x4 14x3 36x2 43x 10
44.	 P1x2 2x6 3x5 13x4 29x3 27x2 32x 12
45–54  ■  Real Zeros of a Polynomial    Find all the real zeros of 
the polynomial. Use the Quadratic Formula if necessary, as in 
Example 3(a).
45.	 P1x2 3x3 5x2 2x 4
	46.	 P1x2 3x4 5x3 16x2 7x 15
47.	 P1x2 x4 6x3 4x2 15x 4
48.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 2x2 3x 2
49.	 P1x2 x4 7x3 14x2 3x 9
50.	 P1x2 x5 4x4 x3 10x2 2x 4
51.	 P1x2 4x3 6x2 1
52.	 P1x2 3x3 5x2 8x 2
53.	 P1x2 2x4 15x3 17x2 3x 1
54.	 P1x2 4x5 18x4 6x3 91x2 60x 9
55–62  ■  Real Zeros of a Polynomial    A polynomial P is given. 
(a) Find all the real zeros of P. (b) Sketch a graph of P.
55.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 4x 12
56.	 P1x2 x3 2x2 5x 6
57.	 P1x2 2x3 7x2 4x 4
58.	 P1x2 3x3 17x2 21x 9
59.	 P1x2 x4 5x3 6x2 4x 8
60.	 P1x2 x4 10x2 8x 8
61.	 P1x2 x5 x4 5x3 x2 8x 4
62.	 P1x2 x5 x4 6x3 14x2 11x 3
63–68  ■  Descartes’ Rule of Signs    Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs 
to determine how many positive and how many negative real 
zeros the polynomial can have. Then determine the possible total 
number of real zeros.
63.	 P1x2 x3 x2 x 3
64.	 P1x2 2x3 x2 4x 7
65.	 P1x2 2x6 5x4 x3 5x 1
66.	 P1x2 x4 x3 x2 x 12
67.	 P1x2 x5 4x3 x2 6x
68.	 P1x2 x8 x5 x4 x3 x2 x 1
69–76  ■  Upper and Lower Bounds    Show that the given values 
for a and b are lower and ­upper bounds for the real zeros of the 
polynomial.
69.	 P1x2 2x3 5x2 x 2; a 3, b 1
70.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 9x2 2x 8; a 3, b 5
71.	 P1x2 8x3 10x2 39x 9; a 3, b 2
72.	 P1x2 3x4 17x3 24x2 9x 1; a 0, b 6
73.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 3x2 5x 1; a 2, b 1
74.	 P1x2 x4 3x3 4x2 2x 7; a 4, b 2
75.	 P1x2 2x4 6x3 x2 2x 3; a 1, b 3
76.	 P1x2 3x4 5x3 2x2 x 1; a 1, b 2
77–80  ■  Upper and Lower Bounds    Find integers that are upper 
and lower bounds for the real zeros of the polynomial.
77.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 4
78.	 P1x2 2x3 3x2 8x 12
79.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 x2 9x 2
80.	 P1x2 x5 x4 1
81–86  ■  Zeros of a Polynomial    Find all rational zeros of the 
polynomial, and then ﬁnd the irrational zeros, if any. Whenever 
appropriate, use the Rational Zeros Theorem, the Upper and Lower 
Bounds Theorem, Descartes’ Rule of Signs, the Quadratic Formula, 
or other factoring techniques.
81.	 P1x2 2x4 3x3 4x2 3x 2
82.	 P1x2 2x4 15x3 31x2 20x 4
83.	 P1x2 4x4 21x2 5
84.	 P1x2 6x4 7x3 8x2 5x
85.	 P1x2 x5 7x4 9x3 23x2 50x 24
86.	 P1x2 8x5 14x4 22x3 57x2 35x 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.4  ■  Real Zeros of Polynomials  285
87–90  ■  Polynomials With No Rational Zeros    Show that the 
polynomial does not have any rational ­zeros.
	 87.	 P1x2 x3 x 2
	 88.	 P1x2 2x4 x3 x 2
	 89.	 P1x2 3x3 x2 6x 12
	 90.	 P1x2 x50 5x25 x2 1
91–94  ■  Verifying Zeros Using a Graphing Device    The real 
solutions of the given equation are rational. List all possible ratio-
nal roots using the Rational Zeros Theorem, and then graph the 
polynomial in the given viewing rectangle to determine which 
values are actually solutions. (All solutions can be seen in the 
given viewing rectangle.)
	 91.	 x3 3x2  4x  12  0;    34, 44 by 315, 154
	 92.	 x4  5x2  4  0;    34, 44 by 330, 304
	 93.	 2x4  5x3  14x2  5x  12  0;    32, 54 by 340, 404
	 94.	 3x3  8x2  5x  2  0;    33, 34 by 310, 104
95–98  ■  Finding Zeros Using a Graphing Device    Use a graphing 
device to ﬁnd all real solutions of the equation, rounded to two 
decimal places.
	 95.	 x4  x  4  0
	 96.	 2x3  8x2  9x  9  0
	 97.	 4.00x4  4.00x3  10.96x2  5.88x  9.09  0
	 98.	 x5  2.00x4  0.96x3  5.00x2  10.00x  4.80  0
applications
	 99.	 Volume of a Silo    A grain silo consists of a cylindrical 
main section and a hemispherical roof. If the total  
volume of the silo (including the part inside the roof  
section) is 15,000 ft3 and the cylindrical part is 30 ft tall, 
what is the radius of the silo, rounded to the nearest tenth 
of a foot?
30 ft
	100.	 Dimensions of a Lot    A rectangular parcel of land has an 
area of 5000 ft2. A diagonal between opposite corners is 
measured to be 10 ft longer than one side of the parcel. 
What are the dimensions of the land, rounded to the nearest 
foot?
x+10
x
	101.  Depth of Snowfall    Snow began falling at noon on Sunday. 
The amount of snow on the ground at a certain location at 
time t was given by the function
 h1t2 11.60t 12.41t 2 6.20t 3
 1.58t4 0.20t 5 0.01t 6
	
	 where t is measured in days from the start of the snowfall  
and h1t2  is the depth of snow in inches. Draw a graph of  
this function, and use your graph to answer the following  
questions.
(a)	 What happened shortly after noon on Tuesday?
(b)	 Was there ever more than 5 in. of snow on the ground? 
If so, on what day(s)?
(c)	 On what day and at what time (to the nearest hour) did 
the snow disappear completely?
102.  Volume of a Box    An open box with a volume of 1500 cm3  
is to be constructed by taking a piece of cardboard 20 cm by  
40 cm, cutting squares of side length x cm from each corner, 
and folding up the sides. Show that this can be done in two 
different ways, and ﬁnd the exact dimensions of the box in 
each case.
20 cm
40 cm
x
x
	103.  Volume of a Rocket    A rocket consists of a right circular 
cylinder of height 20 m surmounted by a cone whose height 
and diameter are equal and whose radius is the same as that 
of the cylindrical section. What should this radius be 
(rounded to two decimal places) if the total volume is to be 
500p/3 m3?
20 m
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

286 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
104.  Volume of a Box    A rectangular box with a volume of  
2 !2 ft3 has a square base as shown below. The diagonal of  
the box (between a pair of opposite corners) is 1 ft longer 
than each side of the base.
(a)	 If the base has sides of length x feet, show that
x6 2x5 x4 8 0
(b)	 Show that two different boxes satisfy the given condi-
tions. Find the dimensions in each case, rounded to the 
nearest hundredth of a foot.
x
x
105.  Girth of a Box    A box with a square base has length plus 
girth of 108 in. (Girth is the distance “around” the box.) 
What is the length of the box if its volume is 2200 in3?
b
l
b
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
106.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  How Many Real Zeros Can a Polyno-
mial Have?    Give ­examples of polynomials that have the 
following properties, or explain why it is impossible to ﬁnd 
such a polynomial.
(a)	 A polynomial of degree 3 that has no real zeros
(b)	 A polynomial of degree 4 that has no real zeros
(c)	 A polynomial of degree 3 that has three real zeros, only 
one of which is rational
(d)	 A polynomial of degree 4 that has four real zeros, none 
of which is rational
	
	 What must be true about the degree of a polynomial with 
integer coefﬁcients if it has no real zeros?
107.	 DISCUSS  ■  PROVE:  The Depressed Cubic    The most gen-
eral cubic (third-­degree) equation with rational coefﬁcients 
can be written as
x3 ax2 bx c 0
(a)	 Prove that if we replace x by X  a/3 and simplify, we 
end up with an equation that doesn’t have an X 2 term, 
that is, an equation of the form
X 3 pX q 0
	
This is called a depressed cubic, because we have 
“depressed” the quadratic term.
(b)	 Use the procedure described in part (a) to depress the 
equation x3  6x2  9x  4  0.
108.	 DISCUSS:  The Cubic Formula    The Quadratic Formula can 
be used to solve any quadratic (or second-degree) equation. 
You might have wondered whether similar formulas exist for 
cubic (third-­degree), quartic (fourth-degree), and higher-
degree equations. For the depressed cubic x3  px  q  0, 
Cardano (page 292) found the following formula for one 
solution:
x É
3 q
2 Å
q2
4 p3
27 É
3 q
2 Å
q2
4 p3
27
	
	 A formula for quartic equations was discovered by the Ital-
ian mathematician Ferrari in 1540. In 1824 the Norwegian 
mathematician Niels Henrik Abel proved that it is impossi-
ble to write a quintic formula, that is, a formula for ﬁfth-
degree equations. Finally, Galois (page 277) gave a criterion 
for determining which equations can be solved by a formula 
involving radicals.
	
	     Use the formula given above to ﬁnd a solution for the fol-
lowing equations. Then solve the equations using the meth-
ods you learned in this section. Which method is easier?
(a)	 x3  3x  2  0
(b)	 x3  27x  54  0
(c)	 x3  3x  4  0
	109.	 PROVE:  Upper and Lower Bounds Theorem    Let P1x2  be a 
polynomial with real coefﬁcients, and let b  0. Use the 
Division Algorithm to write
P1x2 1x b2 # Q1x2 r
	
	 Suppose that r  0 and that all the coefﬁcients in Q1x2  are  
nonnegative. Let z  b.
(a)	 Show that P1z2 0.
(b)	 Prove the ﬁrst part of the Upper and Lower Bounds 
­Theorem.
(c)	 Use the ﬁrst part of the Upper and Lower Bounds Theo-
rem to prove the second part.    [Hint: Show that if 
P1x2  satisﬁes the second part of the theorem, then 
P1x2  satisﬁes the ﬁrst part.]
	110.	 PROVE:  Number of Rational and Irrational Roots    Show 
that the equation
x5 x4 x3 5x2 12x 6 0
	
	 has exactly one rational root, and then prove that it must 
have either two or four irrational roots.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.5  ■  Complex Zeros and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  287
3.5 
Complex Zeros and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra
■  The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra and Complete Factorization  ■  Zeros and Their 
Multiplicities  ■  Complex Zeros Come in Conjugate Pairs  ■  Linear and Quadratic Factors
We have already seen that an nth-degree polynomial can have at most n real zeros. In the 
complex number system an nth-degree polynomial has exactly n zeros (counting multi-
plicity) and so can be factored into exactly n linear factors. This fact is a consequence of 
the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, which was proved by the German mathematician 
C. F. Gauss in 1799 (see page 290).
■  The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  
and Complete Factorization
The following theorem is the basis for much of our work in factoring polynomials and 
solving polynomial equations.
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra
Every polynomial
P1x2 an  x n an1x n1 . . . a1x a0  1n 1, an ? 02
with complex coefﬁcients has at least one complex zero.
Because any real number is also a complex number, the theorem applies to polyno-
mials with real coefﬁcients as well.
The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra and the Factor Theorem together show that a 
polynomial can be factored completely into linear factors, as we now prove.
Complete Factorization Theorem
If P1x2  is a polynomial of degree n  1, then there exist complex numbers  
a, c1, c2, . . . , cn (with a ? 0) such that
P1x2 a1x c12 1x c22 . . . 1x cn2
Proof    By the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, P has at least one zero. Let’s call  
it c1. By the Factor Theorem (see page 272), P1x2  can be factored as
P1x2 1x c12Q11x2
where Q11x2  is of degree n  1. Applying the Fundamental Theorem to the quotient 
Q11x2  gives us the factorization
P1x2 1x c12 1x c22Q21x2
where Q21x2  is of degree n  2 and c2 is a zero of Q11x2 . Continuing this process for 
n steps, we get a ﬁnal quotient Qn1x2  of degree 0, a nonzero constant that we will call 
a. This means that P has been factored as
	
P1x2 a1x c12 1x c22 c1x cn2 	
■
To actually ﬁnd the complex zeros of an nth-degree polynomial, we usually ﬁrst factor 
as much as possible, then use the Quadratic Formula on parts that we can’t factor further.
Complex numbers are discussed in 
Section 1.6.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

288 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Example 1  ■  Factoring a Polynomial Completely
Let P1x2 x3 3x2 x 3.
(a)	 Find all the zeros of P.
(b)	 Find the complete factorization of P.
Solution
(a)	 We ﬁrst factor P as follows.
 P1x2 x3 3x2 x 3
        Given
  x21x 32 1x 32        Group terms
  1x 32 1x2 12
        Factor x  3
	 	 We ﬁnd the zeros of P by setting each factor equal to 0:
P1x2 1x 32 1x2 12
	 	 Setting x  3  0, we see that x  3 is a zero. Setting x2  1  0, we get  
x2  1, so x  i. So the zeros of P are 3, i, and i.
(b)	 Since the zeros are 3, i, and i, the complete factorization of P is
 P1x2 1x 32 1x i2 3x 1i2 4
  1x 32 1x i2 1x i2
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
Example 2  ■  Factoring a Polynomial Completely
Let P1x2 x3 2x 4.
(a)	 Find all the zeros of P.
(b)	 Find the complete factorization of P.
Solution
(a)	 The possible rational zeros are the factors of 4, which are 1, 2, 4. Using 
synthetic division (see the margin), we ﬁnd that 2 is a zero, and the polynomial 
factors as
P1x2 1x 22 1x2 2x 22
	 	 To ﬁnd the zeros, we set each factor equal to 0. Of course, x  2  0 means that  
x  2. We use the Quadratic Formula to ﬁnd when the other factor is 0.
x2 2x 2 0    Set factor equal to 0
 x  2 !4 8
2
    Quadratic Formula
 x  2 2i
2
    Take square root
 x  1 i
    Simplify
	 	 So the zeros of P are 2, 1  i, and 1  i.
This factor is 0 when x  3
This factor is 0 when x  i or i
	
2    ∣	 1	
0	 2	
4
	
	 2	
4	 4
	
1	 2	 2	
0
This factor is 0 when x  2
Use the Quadratic Formula to 
find when this factor is 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.5  ■  Complex Zeros and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  289
(b)	 Since the zeros are 2, 1  i, and 1  i, the complete factorization of P is
 P1x2 3x 122 4 3x 11 i2 4 3x 11 i2 4
  1x 22 1x 1 i2 1x 1 i2
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
■  Zeros and Their Multiplicities
In the Complete Factorization Theorem the numbers c1, c2, . . . , cn are the zeros of P. 
These zeros need not all be different. If the factor x  c appears k times in the complete 
factorization of P1x2 , then we say that c is a zero of multiplicity k (see page 263). For 
example, the polynomial
P1x2 1x 12 31x 22 21x 32 5
has the following zeros:
1 1multiplicity 32  2 1multiplicity 22  3 1multiplicity 52
The polynomial P has the same number of zeros as its degree: It has degree 10 and has 
10 zeros, provided that we count multiplicities. This is true for all polynomials, as we 
prove in the following theorem.
Zeros Theorem
Every polynomial of degree n  1 has exactly n zeros, provided that a zero of 
multiplicity k is counted k times.
Proof    Let P be a polynomial of degree n. By the Complete Factorization  
Theorem
P1x2 a1x c12 1x c22 . . . 1x cn2
Now suppose that c is any given zero of P. Then
P1c2 a1c c12 1c c22 . . . 1c cn2 0
Thus by the Zero-Product Property, one of the factors c  ci must be 0, so c  ci  
for some i. It follows that P has exactly the n zeros c1, c2, . . . , cn.	
■
Example 3  ■  Factoring a Polynomial with Complex Zeros
Find the complete factorization and all ﬁve zeros of the polynomial
P1x2 3x5 24x3 48x
Solution    Since 3x is a common factor, we have
 P1x2 3x1x4 8x2 162
  3x1x2 42 2
This factor is 0 when x  0
This factor is 0 when  
x  2i or x  2i
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
To factor x2  4, note that 2i and 2i are zeros of this polynomial. Thus 
x2 4  1x 2i2 1x 2i2 , so
 P1x2 3x31x 2i2 1x 2i2 4 2
  3x1x 2i2 21x 2i2 2
The zeros of P are 0, 2i, and 2i. Since the factors x  2i and x  2i each occur 
twice in the complete factorization of P, the zeros 2i and 2i are of multiplicity 2 (or 
double zeros). Thus we have found all ﬁve zeros.
Now Try Exercise 31	
■
The following table gives further examples of polynomials with their complete fac-
torizations and zeros.
Degree
Polynomial
Zero(s)
Number of zeros
1
 P1x2 x 4
4
1
2
 P1x2 x2 10x 25
5 1multiplicity 22
2
  1x 52 1x 52
3
 P1x2 x3 x
0, i, i
3
  x1x i2 1x i2
4
 P1x2 x4 18x2 81
3i 1multiplicity 22,
4
  1x 3i2 21x 3i2 2
 3i 1multiplicity 22
5
 P1x2 x5 2x4 x3
0 1multiplicity 32,
5
  x31x 12 2
1 1multiplicity 22
Example 4  ■  Finding Polynomials with Speciﬁed Zeros
(a)	 Find a polynomial P1x2  of degree 4, with zeros i, i, 2, and 2, and with 
P132 25.
(b)	 Find a polynomial Q1x2  of degree 4, with zeros 2 and 0, where 2 is a zero of 
multiplicity 3.
Solution
(a)	 The required polynomial has the form
 P1x2 a1x i2 1x 1i22 1x 22 1x 1222
  a1x2 12 1x2 42
        Difference of squares
  a1x4 3x2 42
        Multiply
	 	 We know that P132 a134 3 # 32 42 50a 25, so a 1
2. Thus
P1x2 1
2 x4 3
2 x2 2
(b)	 We require
 Q1x2 a3x 122 4 31x 02
  a1x 22 3x
  a1x3 6x2 12x 82x         Special Product Formula 4 (Section 1.3)
  a1x 4 6x 3 12x2 8x2
0 is a zero of 
multiplicity 1
2i is a zero of 
multiplicity 2
2i is a zero of 
multiplicity 2
Historical/Corbis
Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) 
is considered the greatest mathematician 
of modern times. His contemporaries 
called him the “Prince of Mathematics.” 
He was born into a poor family; his father 
made a living as a mason. As a very small 
child, Gauss found a calculation error in 
his father’s accounts, the ﬁrst of many 
incidents that gave evidence of his math-
ematical precocity. (See also page 854.) 
At 19, Gauss demonstrated that the regu-
lar 17-sided polygon can be constructed 
with straight-edge and ­compass alone. 
This was remarkable because, since the 
time of Euclid, it had been thought that 
the only regular polygons constructible 
in this way were the triangle and penta-
gon. Because of this discovery Gauss 
decided to pursue a career in mathemat-
ics instead of languages, his other pas-
sion. In his doctoral dis­sertation, written 
at the age of 22, Gauss proved the  
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra: A 
polynomial of degree n with complex 
co­efﬁ­cients has n roots. His other ac­com­
plishments range over every branch of 
mathematics, as well as physics and 
astronomy.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.5  ■  Complex Zeros and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  291
	 	 Since we are given no information about Q other than its zeros and their multi-
plicity, we can choose any number for a. If we use a  1, we get
 Q1x2 x4 6x3 12x2 8x
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
Example 5  ■  Finding All the Zeros of a Polynomial
Find all four zeros of P1x2 3x4 2x3 x2 12x 4.
Solution    Using the Rational Zeros Theorem from Section 3.4, we obtain the follow-
ing list of possible rational zeros: 1, 2, 4, 1
3, 2
3, 4
3. Checking these using syn-
thetic division, we ﬁnd that 2 and  1
3 are zeros, and we get the following fac­torization.
 P1x2 3x4 2x3 x2 12x 4
  1x 22 13x3 4x2 7x 22         Factor x  2
  1x 22 Ax 1
3B13x2 3x 62        Factor x  1
3
  31x 22 Ax 1
3B1x2 x 22         Factor 3
The zeros of the quadratic factor are
x 1 !1 8
2
 1
2 i !7
2         Quadratic Formula
so the zeros of P1x2  are
2,  1
3,  1
2 i !7
2 , and  1
2 i !7
2
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
■  Complex Zeros Come in Conjugate Pairs
As you might have noticed from the examples so far, the complex zeros of polynomials 
with real coefﬁcients come in pairs. Whenever a  bi is a zero, its complex conjugate  
a  bi is also a zero.
Conjugate Zeros Theorem
If the polynomial P has real coefﬁcients and if the complex number z is a zero 
of P, then its complex conjugate z is also a zero of P.
Proof    Let
P1x2 an  x n an1x n1 . . . a1x a0
where each coefﬁcient is real. Suppose that P1z2 0. We must prove that P1z2 0. We 
use the facts that the complex conjugate of a sum of two complex numbers is the sum of 
the conjugates and that the conjugate of a product is the product of the conjugates.
 P1z2 an1z2 n an11z2 n1 . . . a1z a0
  an zn an1 zn1 . . . a1 z a0
        Because the coefﬁcients are real
  an  zn an1 zn1 . . . a1z a0
  anzn an1zn1 . . . a1z a0
  P1z2 0 0
This shows that z is also a zero of P(x), which proves the theorem.	
■
Figure 1 shows the graph of the polyno-
mial P in Example 5. The x-intercepts 
correspond to the real zeros of P. The 
imaginary zeros cannot be determined 
from the graph.
40
_20
_2
4
Figure 1 
P1x2 3x4 2x3 x2 12x 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Example 6  ■  A Polynomial with a Speciﬁed Complex Zero
Find a polynomial P1x2  of degree 3 that has integer coefﬁcients and zeros 1
2 and 
3  i.
Solution    Since 3  i is a zero, then so is 3  i by the Conjugate Zeros Theorem. 
This means that P1x2  must have the following form.
	
 P1x2 aAx 1
2B 3x 13 i2 4 3x 13 i2 4
	
  aAx 1
2B 31x 32 i4 31x 32 i4	
Regroup
	
  aAx 1
2B 31x 32 2 i 24
	
Difference of Squares Formula
	
  aAx 1
2B1x2 6x 102
	
Expand
	
  aAx3 
 13 
2
 x2 13x 5B	
Expand
To make all coefﬁcients integers, we set a  2 and get
P1x2 2x3 13x2 26x 10
Any other polynomial that satisﬁes the given requirements must be an integer multi-
ple of this one.
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
■  Linear and Quadratic Factors
We have seen that a polynomial factors completely into linear factors if we use complex 
numbers. If we don’t use complex numbers, then a polynomial with real coefﬁcients can 
always be factored into linear and quadratic factors. We use this property in Section 10.7 
when we study partial fractions. A quadratic polynomial with no real zeros is called  
irreducible over the real numbers. Such a polynomial cannot be factored without using 
complex numbers.
Linear and quadratic factors theorem
Every polynomial with real coefﬁcients can be factored into a product of linear 
and irreducible quadratic factors with real coefﬁcients.
Proof    We ﬁrst observe that if c  a  bi is a complex number, then
 1x c2 1x c2 3x 1a bi2 4 3x 1a bi2 4
  31x a2 bi4 31x a2 bi4
  1x a2 2 1bi2 2
  x2 2ax 1a2 b22
The last expression is a quadratic with real coefﬁcients.
Now, if P is a polynomial with real coefﬁcients, then by the Complete Factoriza-
tion Theorem
P1x2 a1x c12 1x c22 . . . 1x cn2
Since the complex roots occur in conjugate pairs, we can multiply the factors 
correspond­ing to each such pair to get a quadratic factor with real coefﬁcients. This  
results in P being factored into linear and irreducible quadratic factors.	
■
North Wind/North Wind Picture Archives
Gerolamo Cardano (1501–1576) is 
certainly one of the most colorful ﬁgures 
in the history of mathematics. He was the 
best-known physician in Europe in his 
day, yet throughout his life he was 
plagued by numerous maladies, includ-
ing ruptures, hemorrhoids, and an irratio-
nal fear of encountering rabid dogs. He 
was a doting father, but his beloved sons 
broke his heart—his favorite was eventu-
ally beheaded for murdering his own 
wife. Cardano was also a compulsive 
gambler; indeed, this vice might have 
driven him to write the Book on Games of 
Chance, the ﬁrst study of probability 
from a mathematical point of view.
In Cardano’s major mathematical 
work, the Ars Magna, he detailed the 
solution of the general third- and fourth-
degree polynomial equations. At the time 
of its publication, mathematicians were 
uncomfortable even with negative num-
bers, but Cardano’s formulas paved the 
way for the acceptance not just of nega-
tive numbers, but also of imaginary num-
bers, because they occurred naturally in 
solving polynomial equations. For exam-
ple, for the cubic equation
x3 15x 4 0
one of his formulas gives the solution
x "
3 2 !121 "
3 2 !121
(See page 286, Exercise 108.) This value 
for x actually turns out to be the integer 
4, yet to ﬁnd it, Cardano had to use the 
imaginary number !121 11i.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.5  ■  Complex Zeros and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  293
Example 7  ■  Factoring a Polynomial into Linear and Quadratic Factors
Let P1x2 x4 2x2 8.
(a)	 Factor P into linear and irreducible quadratic factors with real coefﬁcients.
(b)	 Factor P completely into linear factors with complex coefﬁcients.
Solution
(a)	 	
 P1x2 x4 2x2 8
	 	 	
  1x2 22 1x2 42
	 	 	
  1x !22 1x !22 1x2 42
	 	 The factor x2  4 is irreducible, since it has no real zeros.
(b)	 To get the complete factorization, we factor the remaining quadratic factor:
 P1x2 1x !22 1x !22 1x2 42
 
  1x !22 1x !22 1x 2i2 1x 2i2
Now Try Exercise 67	
■
concepts
	 1.	 The polynomial P1x2 5x21x 42 31x 72  has degree 
	 	
 
  . It has zeros 0, 4, and  
  . The zero 0 has 
	 	 multiplicity  
  , and the zero 4 has multiplicity 
	 	
 
  .
	 2.	 (a)  If a is a zero of the polynomial P, then  
 must 
be a factor of P(x).
	 	 (b)  If a is a zero of multiplicity m of the polynomial P, then 
	 	 	
 
 must be a factor of P(x) when we factor P 
­completely.
	 3.	 A polynomial of degree n 1 has exactly  
 zeros if 
a zero of multiplicity m is counted m times.
	 4.	 If the polynomial function P has real coefficients and if a bi 
	 	 is a zero of P, then  
 is also a zero of P. So if 3 i 
	 	 is a zero of P, then  
 is also a zero of P.
5–6  ■  True or False? If False, give a reason. 
	 5.	 Let P1x2 x4 1.
(a)	 The polynomial P has four complex zeros.
(b)	 The polynomial P can be factored into linear factors with 
complex coefficients.
(c)	 Some of the zeros of P are real.
	 6.	 Let P1x2 x3 x.
(a)	 The polynomial P has three real zeros.
(b)	 The polynomial P has at least one real zero.
(c)	 The polynomial P can be factored into linear factors with 
real coefficients.
skills
7–18  ■  Complete Factorization    A polynomial P is given.  
(a) Find all zeros of P, real and complex. (b) Factor P 
completely.
	 7.	 P1x2 x4 4x2	
  8.	 P1x2 x5 9x3
	 9.	 P1x2 x3 2x2 2x	
10.	 P1x2 x3 x2 x
	11.	 P1x2 x4 2x2 1	
12.	 P1x2 x4 x2 2
	13.	 P1x2 x4 16	
14.	 P1x2 x4 6x2 9
	15.	 P1x2 x3 8	
16.	 P1x2 x3 8
17.	 P1x2 x6 1	
18.	 P1x2 x6 7x3 8
19–36  ■  Complete Factorization    Factor the polynomial  
completely, and ﬁnd all its zeros. State the multiplicity of  
each zero.
19.	 P1x2 x2 25	
20.	 P1x2 4x2 9
21.	 Q1x2 x2 2x 2	
22.	 Q1x2 x2 8x 17
23.	 P1x2 x3 4x	
24.	 P1x2 x3 x2 x
25.	 Q1x2 x4 1	
26.	 Q1x2 x4 625
27.	 P1x2 16x4 81	
28.	 P1x2 x3 64
29.	 P1x2 x3 x2 9x 9	 30.	 P1x2 x6 729
31.	 Q1x2 x4 2x2 1	
32.	 Q1x2 x4 10x2 25
33.	 P1x2 x4 3x2 4	
34.	 P1x2 x5 7x3
35.	 P1x2 x5 6x3 9x	
36.	 P1x2 x6 16x3 64
3.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

294 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
37–46  ■  Finding a Polynomial with Specified Zeros    Find a 
polynomial with integer coefﬁcients that satisﬁes the given 
conditions.
	37.	 P has degree 2 and zeros 1  i and 1  i.
	38.	 P has degree 2 and zeros 1 i!2 and 1 i!2.
	39.	 Q has degree 3 and zeros 3, 2i, and 2i.
	40.	 Q has degree 3 and zeros 0 and i.
	41.	 P has degree 3 and zeros 2 and i.
	42.	 Q has degree 3 and zeros 3 and 1  i.
	43.	 R has degree 4 and zeros 1  2i and 1, with 1 a zero of  
multiplicity 2.
	44.	 S has degree 4 and zeros 2i and 3i.
	45.	 T has degree 4, zeros i and 1  i, and constant term 12.
	46.	 U has degree 5, zeros 1
2, 1, and i, and leading coefﬁcient 
4; the zero 1 has multiplicity 2.
47–64  ■  Finding Complex Zeros    Find all zeros of the 
polynomial.
47.	 P1x2 x 3 2x2 4x 8
48.	 P1x2 x3 7x2 17x 15
49.	 P1x2 x3 2x2 2x 1
50.	 P1x2 x3 7x2 18x 18
51.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 3x 2
52.	 P1x2 x3 x 6
53.	 P1x2 2x 3 7x2 12x 9
54.	 P1x2 2x 3 8x2 9x 9
55.	 P1x2 x4 x3 7x2 9x 18
56.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 2x2 2x 3
57.	 P1x2 x5 x4 7x3 7x2 12x 12
	58.	 P1x2 x5 x3 8x2 8    [Hint: Factor by grouping.]
59.	 P1x2 x4 6x3 13x2 24x 36
60.	 P1x2 x4 x2 2x 2
61.	 P1x2 4x4 4x3 5x2 4x 1
62.	 P1x2 4x4 2x3 2x2 3x 1
63.	 P1x2 x5 3x4 12x3 28x2 27x 9
64.	 P1x2 x5 2x4 2x3 4x2 x 2
65–70  ■  Linear and Quadratic Factors    A polynomial P is given. 
(a) Factor P into linear and irreducible quadratic factors with real 
coefﬁcients. (b) Factor P completely into linear factors with com-
plex coefﬁcients.
65.	 P1x2 x3 5x2 4x 20
66.	 P1x2 x3 2x 4	
67.	 P1x2 x4 8x2 9	
68.	 P1x2 x4 8x2 16
69.	 P1x2 x6 64	
70.	 P1x2 x5 16x
skills Plus
	71.	 Number of Real and Non-Real Solutions    By the Zeros Theo-
rem, every nth-degree polynomial equation has exactly n 
solutions (including possibly some that are repeated). Some 
of these may be real, and some may be non-real. Use a 
graphing device to determine how many real and non-real 
solutions each equation has.
(a)	 x4  2x3  11x2  12x  0
(b)	 x4  2x3  11x2  12x  5  0
(c)	 x4  2x3  11x2  12x  40  0
72–74  ■  Real and Non-Real Coefficients    So far, we have 
worked only with polynomials that have real coefﬁcients. These 
exercises involve polynomials with real and imaginary 
coefﬁcients.
	72.	 Find all solutions of the equation.
(a)	 2x  4i  1	
(b)  x2  ix  0
(c)	 x2  2ix  1  0	
(d)  ix2  2x  i  0
	73.	 (a)  Show that 2i and 1  i are both solutions of the equation
x2 11 i2x 12 2i2 0
	
but that their complex conjugates 2i and 1  i are not.
(b)	 Explain why the result of part (a) does not violate the 
Conjugate Zeros Theorem.
	74.	 (a)  Find the polynomial with real coefﬁcients of the smallest 
possible degree for which i and 1  i are zeros and in 
which the coefﬁcient of the highest power is 1.
(b)	 Find the polynomial with complex coefﬁcients of the 
smallest possible degree for which i and 1  i are zeros 
and in which the coefﬁcient of the highest power is 1.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	75.	 DISCUSS:  Polynomials of Odd Degree    The Conjugate Zeros 
Theorem says that the complex zeros of a polynomial with 
real coefﬁ­cients occur in complex conjugate pairs. Explain 
how this fact proves that a polynomial with real coefﬁcients 
and odd ­degree has at least one real zero.
	76.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  Roots of Unity    There are two 
square roots of 1, namely, 1 and 1. These are the solutions 
of x2  1. The fourth roots of 1 are the solutions of the equa-
tion x4  1 or x4  1  0. How many fourth roots of 1 are 
there? Find them. The cube roots of 1 are the solutions of the 
equation x3  1 or x3  1  0. How many cube roots of 1 
are there? Find them. How would you ﬁnd the sixth roots of 
1? How many are there? Make a conjecture about the number 
of nth roots of 1.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.6  ■  Rational Functions  295
3.6 
Rational Functions
■  Rational Functions and Asymptotes  ■  Transformations of y 1/x  ■  Asymptotes  
of Rational Functions  ■  Graphing Rational Functions  ■  Common Factors in Numerator  
and Denominator  ■  Slant Asymptotes and End Behavior  ■  Applications
A rational function is a function of the form
r1x2 
P1x2
Q1x2
where P and Q are polynomials. We assume that P1x2  and Q1x2  have no factor in com-
mon. Even though rational functions are constructed from polynomials, their graphs 
look quite different from the graphs of polynomial functions.
■  Rational Functions and Asymptotes
The domain of a rational function consists of all real numbers x except those for which 
the denominator is zero. When graphing a rational function, we must pay special atten-
tion to the behavior of the graph near those x-values. We begin by graphing a very 
simple rational function.
Example 1  ■  A Simple Rational Function
Graph the rational function f1x2 1/x, and state the domain and range.
Solution    The function f is not deﬁned for x  0. The following tables show that 
when x is close to zero, the value of 0 f1x2 0  is large, and the closer x gets to zero, the 
larger 0 f1x2 0  gets.
Approaching 0
Approaching 
Approaching 0
Approaching 
x
fxxc
0.1
10
0.01
100
0.00001
100,000
x
fxxc
0.1
10
0.01
100
0.00001
100,000
We describe this behavior in words and in symbols as follows. The ﬁrst table shows 
that as x approaches 0 from the left, the values of y f1x2  decrease without bound. 
In symbols,
f1x2 S  as x S 0    “y approaches negative inﬁnity 
as x approaches 0 from the left”
Domains of rational expressions are 
discussed in Section 1.4.
For positive real numbers,
 
1
BIG NUMBER small number
 
1
small number BIG NUMBER
Discovery Project
Managing Traffic
A highway engineer wants to determine the optimal safe driving speed for a road. 
The higher the speed limit, the more cars the road can accommodate, but safety 
requires a greater following distance at higher speeds. In this project we find a 
rational function that models the carrying capacity of a road at a given traffic 
speed.The model can be used to determine the speed limit at which the road has its 
maximum carrying capacity. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© silver-john/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
The second table shows that as x approaches 0 from the right, the values of f1x2  
increase without bound. In symbols,
f1x2 S  as x S 0    “y approaches inﬁnity as x  
approaches 0 from the right”
The next two tables show how f1x2  changes as 0  x 0  becomes large.
x
fxxc
10
0.1
100
0.01
100,000
0.00001
x
fxxc
10
0.1
100
0.01
100,000
0.00001
Approaching 
Approaching 0
Approaching 
Approaching 0
These tables show that as 0  x 0  becomes large, the value of f1x2  gets closer and closer 
to zero. We describe this situation in symbols by writing
	
f1x2 S 0 as x S   and  f1x2 S 0 as x S 
Using the information in these tables and plotting a few additional points, we obtain 
the graph shown in Figure 1.
x
2
2
y
0
f(x)      `
as x      0+
as x      0_
f(x)      0 as
x      `
f(x)      0 as
x      _`
f(x)      _`
Figure 1 
f1x2 1/x
x
fxxc 1/x
2
1
2
1
1
 1
2
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
2
The function f is defined for all values of x other than 0, so the domain is 5x 0  x ? 06. 
From the graph we see that the range is 5y 0  y ? 06.
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
In Example 1 we used the following arrow notation.
Symbol
Meaning
x → a
x approaches a from the left
x → a
x approaches a from the right
x → 
x goes to negative inﬁnity; that is, x decreases without bound
x → 
x goes to inﬁnity; that is, x increases without bound
The line x  0 is called a vertical asymptote of the graph in Figure 1, and the line  
y  0 is a horizontal asymptote. Informally speaking, an asymptote of a function is  
a line to which the graph of the function gets closer and closer as one travels along 
that line.
Obtaining the domain and range of a 
function from its graph is explained in 
Section 2.3, page 171.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.6  ■  Rational Functions  297
Definition of Vertical and Horizontal Asymptotes
1.	 The line x  a is a vertical asymptote of the function y f1x2  if y approaches ` as x approaches a from the right  
or left.
y      ` as x      a±
x
a
y
y      ` as x      a–
x
a
y
y      _` as x      a±
x
a
y
y      _` as x      a–
x
a
y
2.	 The line y  b is a horizontal asymptote of the function y f1x2  if y approaches b as x approaches `.
y      b as x      `
x
b
y
y      b as x      _`
x
b
y
A rational function has vertical asymptotes where the function is undeﬁned, that is, 
where the denominator is zero.
■  Transformations of y  1/x
A rational function of the form
r1x2 ax b
cx d
can be graphed by shifting, stretching, and/or reﬂecting the graph of f1x2 1/x shown 
in Figure 1, using the transformations studied in Section 2.6. (Such functions are called 
linear fractional transformations.)
Example 2  ■  Using Transformations to Graph Rational Functions
Graph each rational function, and state the domain and range.
(a)	 r1x2 
2
x 3                (b)  s1x2 3x 5
x 2
Solution
(a)	 Let f1x2 1/x. Then we can express r in terms of f as follows:
 r1x2 
2
x 3
  2a
1
x 3 b         Factor 2
  21f1x 322        Since f1x2 1/x
	 	 From this form we see that the graph of r is obtained from the graph of f by shifting 
3 units to the right and stretching vertically by a factor of 2. Thus r has vertical asymp-
tote x  3 and horizontal asymptote y  0. The graph of r is shown in Figure 2.
Recall that for a rational function 
R1x2 P1x2/Q1x2, we assume that 
P1x2  and Q1x2  have no factor in  
common.
Horizontal
asymptote
y = 0
Vertical
asymptote
x = 3
2
x-3
r(x)=
x
1
3
y
0
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
	 	 The function r is defined for all x other than 3, so the domain is 5x 0  x ? 36. From 
the graph we see that the range is 5y 0  y ? 06.
(b)	 Using long division (see the margin), we get s1x2 3 
1
x 2. Thus we can 
express s in terms of f as follows.
 s1x2 3 
1
x 2
   
1
x 2 3
        Rearrange terms
  f1x 22 3        Since f1x2 1/x
	 	 From this form we see that the graph of s is obtained from the graph of f by 
shifting 2 units to the left, reﬂecting in the x-axis, and shifting upward 3 units. 
Thus s has vertical asymptote x  2 and horizontal asymptote y  3. The graph 
of s is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3
x
3
y
0
_2
3x+5
x+2
s(x)=
Vertical asymptote
x = _2
Horizontal asymptote
y = 3
	 	  
The function s is defined for all x other than 2, so the domain is 5x 0  x ? 26. 
From the graph we see that the range is 5y 0  y ? 36.
Now Try Exercises 15 and 17	
■
■  Asymptotes of Rational Functions
The methods of Example 2 work only for simple rational functions. To graph more 
complicated ones, we need to take a closer look at the behavior of a rational function 
near its vertical and horizontal asymptotes.
Example 3  ■  Asymptotes of a Rational Function
Graph r1x2 2x2 4x 5
x2 2x 1 , and state the domain and range.
Solution
Vertical asymptote.    We ﬁrst factor the denominator
r1x2 2x2 4x 5
1x 12 2
The line x  1 is a vertical asymptote because the denominator of r is zero when 
x  1.
3
x 2q3x 5
3x 6
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.6  ■  Rational Functions  299
To see what the graph of r looks like near the vertical asymptote, we make tables 
of values for x-values to the left and to the right of 1. From the tables shown below 
we see that
y S  as x S 1  and  y S  as x S 1
	
x S 1	
x S 1
Approaching 1–
Approaching 
Approaching 1+
Approaching 
x
y
0
5
0.5
14
0.9
302
0.99
30,002
x
y
2
5
1.5
14
1.1
302
1.01
30,002
Thus near the vertical asymptote x  1, the graph of r has the shape shown in  
Figure 4.
Horizontal asymptote.    The horizontal asymptote is the value that y approaches as  
x S . To help us ﬁnd this value, we divide both numerator and denominator by 
x2, the highest power of x that appears in the expression:
y 2x2 4x 5
x2 2x 1 #
1
x2
1
x2

2 4
x 5
x2
1 2
x 1
x2
The fractional expressions 4
x, 5
x2, 2
x, and 1
x2 all approach 0 as x S  (see Exer- 
cise 90, Section 1.1, page 12). So as x S , we have
y 
2 4
x 5
x2
1 2
x 1
x2
  h   2 0 0
1 0 0 2
Thus the horizontal asymptote is the line y  2.
Since the graph must approach the horizontal asymptote, we can complete it as in 
­Figure 5.
Domain and range.    The function r is defined for all values of x other than 1, so the 
domain is 5x 0  x ? 16. From the graph we see that the range is 5y 0  y 26.
Now Try Exercise 45	
■
From Example 3 we see that the horizontal asymptote is determined by the leading 
coefﬁcients of the numerator and denominator, since after dividing through by x2 (the 
highest power of x), all other terms approach zero. In general, if r1x2 P1x2/Q1x2  and 
These terms approach 0
These terms approach 0
y      ` as
x      1–
y      ` as
x      1±
x
1
5
_1
1
2
y
0
Figure 4
x
1
5
−1
1
2
y
0
y      2 as
x      _`
y      2 as
x      `
Figure 5 
r1x2 2x2 4x 5
x2 2x 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
the degrees of P and Q are the same (both n, say), then dividing both numerator and 
denominator by x n shows that the horizontal asymptote is
y leading coefﬁcient of P
leading coefﬁcient of Q
The following box summarizes the procedure for ﬁnding asymptotes.
finding Asymptotes of Rational Functions
Let r be the rational function
r1x2 an  x n an1x n1 . . . a1x a0
bm  x m bm1x m1 . . . b1x b0
1.  The vertical asymptotes of r are the lines x  a, where a is a zero of the 
­denominator.
2.  (a)	 If n  m, then r has horizontal asymptote y  0.
	
(b)	 If n  m, then r has horizontal asymptote y an
bm
.
	
(c)	 If n  m, then r has no horizontal asymptote.
Example 4  ■  Asymptotes of a Rational Function
Find the vertical and horizontal asymptotes of r1x2 3x2 2x 1
2x2 3x 2.
Solution
Vertical asymptotes.    We ﬁrst factor
r1x2 
3x2 2x 1
12x 12 1x 22
The vertical asymptotes are the lines x 1
2 and x  2.
Horizontal asymptote.    The degrees of the numerator and denominator are the same,  
and
leading coefﬁcient of numerator
leading coefﬁcient of denominator 3
2
Thus the horizontal asymptote is the line y 3
2.
To conﬁrm our results, we graph r using a graphing calculator (see Figure 6).
Figure 6 
r1x2 3x2 2x 1
2x2 3x 2 
Graph is drawn using dot mode to 
avoid extraneous lines.
10
_10
_6
3
Now Try Exercises 33 and 35	
■
Recall that for a rational function 
R1x2 P1x2/Q1x2  we assume that 
P1x2  and Q1x2  have no factor in  
common. (See page 295.)
This factor is 0 
when x  1
2
This factor is 0 
when x  2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.6  ■  Rational Functions  301
■  Graphing Rational Functions
We have seen that asymptotes are important when graphing rational functions. In gen-
eral, we use the following guidelines to graph rational functions.
Sketching Graphs of Rational Functions
1.	 Factor.    Factor the numerator and denominator.
2.	 Intercepts.    Find the x-intercepts by determining the zeros of the numerator 
and the y-intercept from the value of the function at x  0.
3.	 Vertical Asymptotes.    Find the vertical asymptotes by determining the zeros 
of the denominator, and then see whether y S  or y S  on each side 
of each vertical asymptote by using test values.
4.	 Horizontal Asymptote.    Find the horizontal asymptote (if any), using the  
procedure described in the box on page 300.
5.	 Sketch the Graph.    Graph the information provided by the ﬁrst four steps. 
Then plot as many additional points as needed to ﬁll in the rest of the graph 
of the function.
A fraction is 0 only if its numerator  
is 0.
Example 5  ■  Graphing a Rational Function
Graph r1x2 2x2 7x 4
x2 x 2 , and state the domain and range.
Solution    We factor the numerator and denominator, ﬁnd the intercepts and as­ymp-
totes, and sketch the graph.
Factor.    y 
12x 12 1x 42
1x 12 1x 22
x-Intercepts.    The x-intercepts are the zeros of the numerator, x 1
2 and x  4.
y-Intercept.    To ﬁnd the y-intercept, we substitute x  0 into the original form of the 
function.
r102 
2102 2 7102 4
1022 102 2 4
2 2
The y-intercept is 2.
Vertical asymptotes.    The vertical asymptotes occur where the denominator is 0, 
that is, where the function is undeﬁned. From the factored form we see that the verti-
cal asymptotes are the lines x  1 and x  2.
Behavior near vertical asymptotes.    We need to know whether y S  or y S  on 
each side of each vertical asymptote. To determine the sign of y for x-values near the verti-
cal asymptotes, we use test values. For instance, as x S 1, we use a test value close to 
and to the left of 1 1x 0.9, say2 to check whether y is positive or negative to the left of  
x  1.
y 
1210.92 12 110.92 42
110.92 12 110.92 22   whose sign is  
12 12
12 12 1negative2
So y S  as x S 1. On the other hand, as x S 1, we use a test value close to 
and to the right of 1 1x 1.1, say2 , to get
y 
1211.12 12 111.12 42
111.12 12 111.12 22   whose sign is  
12 12
12 12 1positive2
When choosing test values, we must 
make sure that there is no x-intercept 
between the test point and the vertical 
asymptote.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
So y S  as x S 1. The other entries in the following table are calculated  
similarly.
As x S
2
2
1
1
the sign of y x2x 1cxx 1 4c
xx 1cxx 1 2c  is
1 2 1 2
1 2 1 2
1 2 1 2
1 2 1 2
1 2 1 2
1 2 1 2
1 21 2
1 21 2
so y S
`
`
`
`
Horizontal asymptote.    The degrees of the numerator and denominator are the  
same, and
leading coefﬁcient of numerator
leading coefﬁcient of denominator 2
1 2
Thus the horizontal asymptote is the line y  2.
Graph.    We use the information we have found, together with some additional val-
ues, to sketch the graph in Figure 7.
x
y
6
0.93
3
1.75
1
4.50
1.5
6.29
2
4.50
3
3.50
x
5
3
y
0
Figure 7 
r1x2 2x2 7x 4
x2 x 2
Domain and range.    The domain is 5x 0  x ? 1, x ? 26. From the graph we see that 
the range is all real numbers.
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
Example 6  ■  Graphing a Rational Function
Graph the rational function r 1x2 
x2 4
2x2 2x, and state the domain and range.
Solution  
Factor.    y 
1x 22 1x 22
2x1x 12
x-intercepts.    2 and 2, from x 2 0 and x 2 0
y-intercept.    None, because r102 is undefined
Vertical asymptotes.    x 0 and x 1, from the zeros of the denominator
Unbreakable Codes 
If you read spy novels, you know about 
secret codes and how the hero “breaks” 
the code. Today secret codes have a 
much more common use. Most of the 
information that is stored on computers 
is coded to prevent unauthorized use. For 
example, your banking records, medical 
records, and school records are coded. 
Many cellular and cordless phones code 
the signal carrying your voice so that no 
one can listen in. Fortunately, because of 
recent advances in mathematics, today’s 
codes are “unbreakable.”
Modern codes are based on a simple 
principle: Factoring is much harder than 
multiplying. For example, try multiplying  
78 and 93; now try factoring 9991. It 
takes a long time to factor 9991 because 
it is a product of two primes 97  103, so 
to factor it, we have to ﬁnd one of these 
primes. Now imagine trying to factor a 
number N that is the product of two 
primes p and q, each about 200 digits 
long. Even the fastest computers would 
take many millions of years to factor such 
a number! But the same computer would 
take less than a second to multiply two 
such numbers. This fact was used by Ron 
Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman 
in the 1970s to devise the RSA code. Their 
code uses an extremely large number to 
encode a message but requires us to 
know its factors to decode it. As you can 
see, such a code is practically 
unbreakable.
The RSA code is an example of a 
“public key encryption” code. In such 
codes, anyone can code a message using 
a publicly known procedure based on N, 
but to decode the message, they must 
know p and q, the factors of N. When the 
RSA code was developed, it was thought 
that a carefully selected 80-digit number 
would provide an unbreakable code. But 
interestingly, recent advances in the 
study of factoring have made much 
larger numbers necessary.
Mathematics in the Modern World
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.6  ■  Rational Functions  303
Behavior near vertical asymptote. 
As x S
1
1
0
0
the sign of y xx 1 2cxx 2c
2xxx 1 1c
 is
1 2 1 2
1 2 1 2
1 2 1 2
1 2 1 2
1 21 2
1 21 2
1 21 2
1 21 2
so y S
`
`
`
`
Horizontal asymptote.    y 1
2, because the degree of the numerator and the degree 
of the denominator are the same and
leading coefficient of numerator
leading coefficient of denominator 1
2
Graph.    We use the information we have found, together with some additional val-
ues, to sketch the graph in Figure 8.
x
y
0.9
17.72
0.5
7.50
0.45
7.67
0.4
8.00
0.3
9.31
0.1
22.17
x
10
1
y
0
Figure 8 
r1x2 
x2 4
2x2 2x
Domain and range.    The domain is 5x 0 x ? 0, x ? 16. From the graph we see that 
the range is 5x 0 x 1
2 or x 7.56.
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
Example 7  ■  Graphing a Rational Function
Graph r1x2 
5x 21
x2 10x 25, and state the domain and range.
Solution
Factor.    y 5x 21
1x 52 2
x-Intercept.     21
5 , from 5x  21  0
y-Intercept.    21
25, because  r102 
5 # 0 21
02 10 # 0 25
	
 21
25
Vertical asymptote.    x  5, from the zeros of the denominator
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Behavior near vertical asymptote.
As x S
5
5
the sign of y 5x 1 21
xx 1 5c 2 is
1 2
1 2 1 2
1 2
1 2 1 2
so y S
`
`
Horizontal asymptote.    y  0, because the degree of the numerator is less than the 
degree of the denominator
Graph.    We use the information we have found, together with some additional val-
ues, to sketch the graph in Figure 9.
x
y
15
0.5
10
1.2
3
1.5
1
1.0
3
0.6
5
0.5
10
0.3
x
1
5
y
0
Figure 9 
r1x2 
5x 21
x2 10x 25
Domain and range.    The domain is 5x 0  x ? 56. From the graph we see that the 
range is approximately the interval 1, 1.64 .
Now Try Exercise 59	
■
From the graph in Figure 9 we see that,  contrary to common misconception, a graph 
may cross a horizontal asymptote. The graph in Figure 9 crosses the x-axis (the hori-
zontal asymptote) from below, reaches a maximum value near x  3, and then ap-
proaches the x-axis from above as x S .
■  Common Factors in Numerator and Denominator
We have adopted the convention that the numerator and denominator of a rational func-
tion have no factor in common. If s1x2 p1x2/q1x2 and if p and q do have a factor in 
common, then we may cancel that factor, but only for those values of x for which that 
factor is not zero (because division by zero is not defined). Since s is not defined at those 
values of x, its graph has a “hole” at those points, as the following example illustrates. 
Example 8  ■  Common Factor in Numerator and Denominator
Graph the following functions.
(a)	 s1x2 x 3
x2 3x      (b)  t1x2 x3 2x2
x 2
Solution 
(a)	 We factor the numerator and denominator:
s1x2 x 3
x2 3x 
1x 32
x1x 32 1
x    for x ? 3
	 	 So s has the same graph as the rational function r1x2 1/x but with a “hole” 
when x is 3, as shown in Figure 10(a).  
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.6  ■  Rational Functions  305
(b)	 We factor the numerator and denominator: 
t1x2 x3 2x2
x 2

x21x 22
x 2
x2    for x ? 2
	 	 So the graph of t is the same as the graph of r 1x2 x2 but with a “hole” when x 
is 2, as shown in Figure 10(b).
Figure 10  Graphs with “holes”
(a) s(x)=1/x for x≠3
y
x
1
0
1
s is not defined
for x=3
(b) t(x)=x™ for x≠2
y
x
1
0
1
t is not
defined for
x=2
x-3
x™-3x
s(x)=
x£-2x™
x-2
t(x)=
Now Try  Exercise 63	
■
■  Slant Asymptotes and End Behavior
If r1x2 P1x2/Q1x2  is a rational function in which the degree of the numerator is one 
more than the degree of the denominator, we can use the Division Algorithm to express 
the function in the form
r1x2 ax b 
R1x2
Q1x2
where the degree of R is less than the degree of Q and a ? 0. This means that as  
x S , R1x2/Q1x2 S 0, so for large values of 0  x 0  the graph of y r1x2  approaches 
the graph of the line y  ax  b. In this situation we say that y  ax  b is a slant 
asymptote, or an oblique asymptote.
Example 9  ■  A Rational Function with a Slant Asymptote
Graph the rational function r1x2 x2 4x 5
x 3
.
Solution
Factor.    y 
1x 12 1x 52
x 3
x-Intercepts.    1 and 5, from x  1  0 and x  5  0
y-Intercept.    5
3, because r102 02 4 # 0 5
0 3
5
3
Vertical asymptote.    x  3, from the zero of the denominator
Behavior near vertical asymptote.    y S  as x S 3 and y S  as x S 3
Horizontal asymptote.    None, because the degree of the numerator is greater than 
the degree of the denominator
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Slant asymptote.    Since the degree of the numerator is one more than the degree of the 
denominator, the function has a slant asymptote. Dividing (see the margin), we obtain
r1x2 x 1 
8
x 3
Thus y  x  1 is the slant asymptote.
Graph.    We use the information we have found, together with some additional val-
ues, to sketch the graph in Figure 11.
x
y
2
1.4
1
4
2
9
4
5
6
2.33
Figure 11 
x
5
y
2
≈-4x-5
x-3
r(x)=
y=x-1
Slant
asymptote
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
So far, we have considered only horizontal and slant asymptotes as end behaviors for 
rational functions. In the next example we graph a function whose end behavior is like 
that of a parabola.
Example 10  ■  End Behavior of a Rational Function
Graph the rational function
r1x2 x3 2x2 3
x 2
and describe its end behavior.
Solution
Factor.    y 
1x 12 1x2 3x 32
x 2
x-Intercept.    1, from x  1  0 (The other factor in the numerator has no real 
­zeros.)
y-Intercept.     3
2, because r102 03 2 # 02 3
0 2
 3
2
Vertical asymptote.    x  2, from the zero of the denominator
Behavior near vertical asymptote.    y S  as x S 2 and y S  as x S 2
Horizontal asymptote.    None, because the degree of the numerator is greater than 
the degree of the denominator
End behavior.    Dividing (see the margin), we get
r1x2 x2 
3
x 2
This shows that the end behavior of r is like that of the parabola y  x2 because 
3/1x 22  is small when 0  x 0  is large. That is, 3/1x 22 S 0 as x S . This 
means that the graph of r will be close to the graph of y  x2 for large 0  x 0 .
x 1
x 3qx2 4x 5
x2 3x
x 5
x 3
8
x2
x 2qx3 2x2 0x 3
x3 2x2
3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.6  ■  Rational Functions  307
Graph.    In Figure 12(a) we graph r in a small viewing rectangle; we can see the 
intercepts, the vertical asymptotes, and the local minimum. In Figure 12(b) we graph 
r in a larger viewing rectangle; here the graph looks almost like the graph of a parab-
ola. In Figure 12(c) we graph both y r1x2  and y  x2; these graphs are very close 
to each other ­except near the vertical asymptote.
Now Try Exercise 77	
■
■  Applications
Rational functions occur frequently in scientiﬁc applications of algebra. In the next 
example we analyze the graph of a function from the theory of electricity.
Example 11  ■  Electrical Resistance
When two resistors with resistances R1 and R2 are connected in parallel, their com-
bined ­resistance R is given by the formula
R 
R1R2
R1 R2
Suppose that a ﬁxed 8-ohm resistor is connected in parallel with a variable resistor, as 
shown in Figure 13. If the resistance of the variable resistor is denoted by x, then the 
combined resistance R is a function of x. Graph R, and give a physical interpretation 
of the graph.
Solution    Substituting R1  8 and R2  x into the formula gives the function
R1x2 
8x
8 x
Since resistance cannot be negative, this function has physical meaning only when 
x  0. The function is graphed in Figure 14(a) using the viewing rectangle 30, 204 by 
30, 104. The function has no vertical asymptote when x is restricted to positive values. 
The combined resistance R increases as the variable resistance x increases. If we 
widen the viewing rect­angle to 30,1004 by 30, 104, we obtain the graph in Figure 14(b). 
For large x the combined resistance R levels off, getting closer and closer to the hori-
zontal asymptote R  8. No matter how large the variable resis­tance x, the combined 
resistance is never greater than 8 ohms.
Figure 14 
R1x2 
8x
8 x
10
0
20
(a)
10
0
100
(b)
Now Try Exercise 87	
■
20
_20
_4
4
(a)
200
_200
_30
30
(b)
20
_5
_8
8
(c)
y=≈
Figure 12 
r1x2 x3 2x2 3
x 2
x
8 ohms
Figure 13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
concepts
	 1.	 If the rational function y r1x2  has the vertical asymptote 
	 	 x 2, then as x S 2, either y S  
 or  
y S  
  .
	 2.	 If the rational function y r1x2  has the horizontal 
	 	 asymptote y 2, then y S  
 as x S .
3–6  ■  The following questions are about the rational function
r1x2 
1x 12 1x 22
1x 22 1x 32
	 3.	 The function r has x-intercepts  
 and  
  .
	 4.	 The function r has y-intercept  
  .
	 5.	 The function r has vertical asymptotes x   
 and 
	 	 x   
  .
	 6.	 The function r has horizontal asymptote y   
  .
7–8  ■  True or False? 
	 7.	 Let r1x2 
x2 x
1x 12 12x 42 . The graph of r has 
(a)	 vertical asymptote x 1.
(b)	 vertical asymptote x 2.
(c)	 horizontal asymptote y 1.
(d)	 horizontal asymptote y 1
2.
	 8.	 The graph of a rational function may cross a horizontal 
asymptote.
skills
9–12  ■  Table of Values    A rational function is given. (a) Com-
plete each table for the function. (b) Describe the behavior of the 
function near its vertical asymptote, based on Tables 1 and 2.  
(c) Determine the horizontal asymptote, based on Tables 3 and 4.
	
Table 1	
Table 2
	
x
rxxc
1.5
1.9
1.99
1.999
	
x
rxxc
2.5
2.1
2.01
2.001
	
Table 3	
Table 4
	
x
rxxc
    10
    50
  100
1000
	
x
rxxc
   10
    50
 100
1000
	 9.	 r1x2 
x
x 2	
10.	 r1x2 4x 1
x 2
	11.	 r1x2 3x 10
1x 22 2	
12.	 r1x2 3x2 1
1x 22 2
13–20  ■  Graphing Rational Functions Using Transformations     
Use transformations of the graph of y 1/x to graph the rational 
function, and state the domain and range, as in Example 2.
13.	 r1x2 
1
x 1	
14.	 r1x2 
1
x 4
15.	 s1x2 
3
x 1	
16.	 s1x2 
2
x 2
17.	 t1x2 2x 3
x 2 	
18.	 t1x2 3x 3
x 2
19.	 r1x2 x 2
x 3	
20.	 r1x2 2x 9
x 4
21–26  ■  Intercepts of Rational Functions    Find the x- and 
y-intercepts of the rational function.
	21.	 r1x2 x 1
x 4	
22.	 s1x2 
3x
x 5
	23.	 t1x2 x2 x 2
x 6
	
24.	 r1x2 
2
x2 3x 4
	25.	 r1x2 x2 9
x2
	
26.	 r1x2 x3 8
x2 4
27–30  ■  Getting Information from a Graph    From the graph, 
determine the x- and y-intercepts and the vertical and horizontal 
asymptotes.
27. 
y
x
0
4
4
  28. 
y
x
0
1
2
29. 
1
0
2
3
−3
y
x
  30. 
2
0
x
y
−4
4
−6
31–42  ■  Asymptotes    Find all horizontal and vertical asymp-
totes (if any).
31.	 r1x2 
5
x 2	
32.	 r1x2 2x 3
x 2 1
3.6  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.6  ■  Rational Functions  309
33.	 r1x2 3x 1
4x2 1	
34.	 r1x2 3x2 5x
x4 1
35.	 s1x2 
6x2 1
2x2 x 1	
36.	 s1x2 
8x2 1
4x2 2x 6
37.	 r1x2 
1x 12 12x 32
1x 22 14x 72 	
38.	 r1x2 
1x 32 1x 22
15x 12 12x 32
39.	 r1x2 
6x3 2
2x3 5x2 6x	
40.	 r1x2 
5x3
x3 2x2 5x
41.	 t1x2 x2 2
x 1 	
42.	 r1x2 x3 3x2
x2 4
43–62  ■  Graphing Rational Functions    Find the intercepts and 
asymptotes, and then sketch a graph of the rational function and 
state the domain and range. Use a graphing device to conﬁrm 
your answer.
43.	 r1x2 4x 4
x 2 	
44.	 r1x2 2x 6
6x 3
	45.	 r1x2 3x2 12x 13
x2 4x 4
	
46.	 r1x2 2x2 8x 9
x2 4x 4
47.	 r1x2 x2 8x 18
x2 8x 16 	
48.	 r1x2 x2 2x 3
2x2 4x 2
49.	 s1x2 
4x 8
1x 42 1x 12 	
50.	 s1x2 
6
x2 5x 6
51.	 s1x2 
2x 4
x2 x 2	
52.	 s1x2 
x 2
1x 32 1x 12
53.	 r1x2 
1x 12 1x 22
1x 12 1x 32 	
54.	 r1x2 2x2 10x 12
x2 x 6
	55.	 r1x2 2x2 2x 4
x2 x
	
56.	 r1x2 
3x2 6
x2 2x 3
	57.	 s1x2 x2 2x 1
x3 3x2
	
58.	 r1x2 x2 x 6
x2 3x
59.	 r1x2 x2 2x 1
x2 2x 1	
60.	 r1x2 
4x2
x2 2x 3
	61.	 r1x2 
5x2 5
x2 4x 4	
62.	 t1x2 
x3 x2
x3 3x 2
63–68  ■  Rational Functions with Holes    Find the factors  
that are common in the numerator and the denominator.  
Then find the intercepts and asymptotes, and sketch a graph  
of the rational function. State the domain and range of the 
function.
	63.	 r1x2 x2 4x 5
x2 x 2
	64.	 r1x2 
x2 3x 10
1x 12 1x 32 1x 52
	65.	 r1x2 x2 2x 3
x 1
	66.	 r1x2 x3 2x2 3x
x 3
	67.	 r1x2 x3 5x2 3x 9
x 1
 
[Hint: Check that x 1 is a factor of the numerator.]
	68.	 r1x2 
x2 4x 5
x3 7x2 10x
69–76  ■  Slant Asymptotes    Find the slant asymptote and the 
vertical asymptotes, and sketch a graph of the function.
69.	 r1x2 
x2
x 2	
70.	 r1x2 x2 2x
x 1
71.	 r1x2 x2 2x 8
x
	
72.	 r1x2 3x x2
2x 2
73.	 r1x2 x2 5x 4
x 3
	
74.	 r1x2 
x3 4
2x2 x 1
75.	 r1x2 x3 x2
x2 4 	
76.	 r1x2 2x3 2x
x2 1
skills plus
77–80  ■  End Behavior    Graph the rational function f, and deter-
mine all vertical asymptotes from your graph. Then graph f and g 
in a sufﬁciently large viewing rectangle to show that they have 
the same end ­behavior.
77.	 f1x2 2x2 6x 6
x 3
, g1x2 2x
78.	 f1x2 x3 6x2 5
x2 2x
, g1x2 x 4
79.	 f1x2 x3 2x2 16
x 2
, g1x2 x2
80.	 f1x2 x4 2x3 2x
1x 12 2
, g1x2 1 x2
81–86  ■  End Behavior    Graph the rational function, and ﬁnd all 
vertical asymptotes, x- and y-intercepts, and local extrema, cor-
rect to the nearest tenth. Then use long division to ﬁnd a polyno-
mial that has the same end behavior as the rational function, and 
graph both functions in a sufﬁciently large viewing rectangle to 
verify that the end behaviors of the polynomial and the rational 
function are the same.
81.	 y 2x2 5x
2x 3
82.	 y x4 3x3 x2 3x 3
x2 3x
83.	 y 
x 5
x3 1	
84.	 y 
x4
x2 2
85.	 r1x2 x4 3x3 6
x 3
	
86.	 r1x2 4 x2 x4
x2 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
applications
	87.	 Population Growth    Suppose that the rabbit population on 
Mr. Jenkins’ farm follows the formula
p1t2 3000t
t 1
	 	 where t  0 is the time (in months) since the beginning of 
the year.
(a)	 Draw a graph of the rabbit population.
(b)	 What eventually happens to the rabbit population?
	88.	 Drug Concentration    After a certain drug is injected into a 
patient, the concentration c of the drug in the bloodstream is 
monitored. At time t  0 (in minutes since the injection) the 
concentration (in mg/L) is given by
c1t2 
30t
t2 2
(a)	 Draw a graph of the drug concentration.
(b)	 What eventually happens to the concentration of drug in 
the bloodstream?
	89.	 Drug Concentration    A drug is administered to a patient, and 
the concentration of the drug in the bloodstream is moni-
tored. At time t  0 (in hours since giving the drug) the con-
centration (in mg/L) is given by
c1t2 
5t
t2 1
	 	 Graph the function c with a graphing device.
(a)	 What is the highest concentration of drug that is reached 
in the patient’s bloodstream?
(b)	 What happens to the drug concentration after a long 
period of time?
(c)	 How long does it take for the concentration to drop 
below 0.3 mg/L?
	90.	 Flight of a Rocket    Suppose a rocket is ﬁred upward from the 
surface of the earth with an initial velocity √ (measured in 
meters per second). Then the maximum height h (in meters) 
reached by the rocket is given by the function
h1√2 
R√ 2
2gR √ 2
	 	 where R  6.4  106 m is the radius of the earth and  
g  9.8 m/s2 is the acceleration due to gravity. Use a graph-
ing device to draw a graph of the function h. (Note that h and 
√ must both be positive, so the viewing rectangle need not 
contain negative values.) What does the vertical asymptote 
represent physically?
	91.	 The Doppler Effect    As a train moves toward an observer (see 
the ﬁgure), the pitch of its whistle sounds higher to the 
observer than it would if the train were at rest, because the 
crests of the sound waves are compressed closer together. This 
phenomenon is called the Doppler effect. The observed pitch 
P is a function of the speed √ of the train and is given by
P1√2 P0 a
s0
s0 √b
	 	 where P0 is the actual pitch of the whistle at the source and  
s0  332 m/s is the speed of sound in air. Suppose that a  
train has a whistle pitched at P0  440 Hz. Graph the func- 
tion y P1√2  using a graphing device. How can the vertical 
­asymptote of this function be interpreted physically?
	92.	 Focusing Distance    For a camera with a lens of ﬁxed focal 
length F to focus on an object located a distance x from the 
lens, the ﬁlm must be placed a distance y behind the lens, 
where F, x, and y are related by
1
x 1
y 1
F
	 	 (See the ﬁgure.) Suppose the camera has a 55-mm lens (F  55).
(a)	 Express y as a function of x, and graph the function.
(b)	 What happens to the focusing distance y as the object 
moves far away from the lens?
(c)	 What happens to the focusing distance y as the object 
moves close to the lens?
x 
F
y
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	93.	 DISCUSS:  Constructing a Rational Function from Its  
Asymptotes    Give an example of a rational function that 
has vertical asymptote x  3. Now give an example of one 
that has vertical asymptote x  3 and horizontal asymptote  
y  2. Now give an example of a rational function with 
vertical asymptotes x  1 and x  1, horizontal asymp-
tote y  0, and x-intercept 4.
	94.	 DISCUSS:  A Rational Function with No Asymptote    Explain 
how you can tell (without graphing it) that the function
r1x2 
x6 10
x4 8x2 15
	 	 has no x-intercept and no horizontal, vertical, or slant asymp-
tote. What is its end behavior?’
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.7  ■  Polynomial and Rational Inequalities  311
	95.	 DISCOVER:  Transformations of y  1/x2    In Example 2 we 
saw that some simple rational functions can be graphed by 
shifting, stretching, or reﬂecting the graph of y 1/x. In 
this exercise we consider rational functions that can be 
graphed by trans­forming the graph of y 1/x2.
(a)	 Graph the function
r1x2 
1
1x 22 2
	
	by transforming the graph of y 1/x2.
(b)	 Use long division and factoring to show that the function
s1x2 2x2 4x 5
x2 2x 1
	
	can be written as
s1x2 2 
3
1x 12 2
	
	Then graph s by transforming the graph of y 1/x2.
(c)	 One of the following functions can be graphed by trans-
forming the graph of y 1/x2; the other cannot. Use 
transformations to graph the one that can be, and explain 
why this method doesn’t work for the other one.
p1x2 
2 3x2
x2 4x 4   q1x2 12x 3x2
x2 4x 4
y
x
1
1
0
y= 1
≈
3.7 
Polynomial and Rational Inequalities
■  Polynomial Inequalities  ■  Rational Inequalities
In Section 1.8 we solved basic inequalities. In this section we solve more advanced 
inequalities by using the methods we learned in Section 3.4 for factoring and graphing 
polynomials. 
■  Polynomial Inequalities
An important consequence of the Intermediate Value Theorem (page 259) is that the 
values of a polynomial function P do not change sign between successive zeros. In other 
words, the values of P between successive zeros are either all positive or all negative. 
Graphically, this means that between successive x-intercepts, the graph of P is entirely 
above or entirely below the x-axis. Figure 1 illustrates this property of polynomials. This 
property of polynomials allows us to solve polynomial inequalities like P1x2 0 by 
finding the zeros of the polynomial and using test points between successive zeros to 
determine the intervals that satisfy the inequality. We use the following guidelines.
SOLVING POLYNOMIAL INEQUALITIES
1.	 Move All Terms to One Side.    Rewrite the inequality so that all nonzero 
terms appear on one side of the inequality symbol.
2.	 Factor the Polynomial.    Factor the polynomial into irreducible factors, and 
find the real zeros of the polynomial.
3.	 Find the Intervals.    List the intervals determined by the real zeros.
4.	 Make a Table or Diagram.    Use test values to make a table or diagram of the 
signs of each factor in each interval. In the last row of the table determine 
the sign of the polynomial on that interval. 
5.	 Solve.    Determine the solutions of the inequality from the last row of the 
table. Check whether the endpoints of these intervals satisfy the inequality. 
(This may happen if the inequality involves  or .)
Figure 1  P1x2 0 or P1x2 0 for x 
between successive zeros of P 
P(x)=4(x-2)(x+1)(x-0.5)(x+2)
y
x
1
0
20
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Example 1  ■  Solving a Polynomial Inequality
Solve the inequality 2x3 x2 6 13x.
Solution    We follow the preceding guidelines.
Move all terms to one side.    We move all terms to the left-hand side of the inequal-
ity to get 
2x3 x2 13x 6 0
The left-hand side is a polynomial.
Factor the polynomial.    This polynomial is factored in Example 2, Section 3.4, on 
page 277. We get
1x 22 12x 12 1x 32 0
The zeros of the polynomial are 3, 1
2, and 2.
Find the intervals.    The intervals determined by the zeros of the polynomial are
1, 32 , A3, 1
2B, A1
2, 2B, 12, 2
Make a table or diagram.    We make a diagram indicating the sign of each factor on 
each interval.
Sign of x-2
Sign of 2x-1
Sign of x  3 
Sign of (x-2)(2x-1)(x  3)
3
-
-
+
+
-
-
-
2
-
+
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
2
1
Solve.    From the diagram we see that the inequality is satisfied on the intervals 
A3, 1
2B and 12, 2 . Checking the endpoints, we see that 3, 1
2, and 2 satisfy the 
inequality, so the solution is  C3, 1
2 D < 32, 2 . The graph in Figure 2 confirms our 
solution.
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
Example 2  ■  Solving a Polynomial Inequality
Solve the inequality 3x4 x2 4 2x3 12x.
Solution    We follow the above guidelines.
Move all terms to one side.    We move all terms to the left-hand side of the inequal-
ity to get 
3x4 2x3 x2 12x 4 0
The left-hand side is a polynomial.
Factor the polynomial.    This polynomial is factored into linear and irreducible qua-
dratic factors in Example 5, Section 3.5, page 291. We get 
1x 22 13x 12 1x2 x 22 0
From the first two factors we obtain the zeros 2 and 1
3. The third factor has no real 
zeros. 
Figure 2
y
0
x
1
20
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.7  ■  Polynomial and Rational Inequalities  313
Find the intervals.    The intervals determined by the zeros of the polynomial are
A, 1
3B, A1
3, 2B, 12, 2
Make a table or diagram.    We make a sign diagram.

Sign of x-2
Sign of 3x 1
Sign of x2  x 2 
Sign of (x-2)(3x 1)(x2  x 2)
2
-
+
+
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
3
1
Solve.    From the diagram we see that the inequality is satisfied on the interval 
A1
3, 2B. You can check that the two endpoints do not satisfy the inequality, so the 
solution is  A1
3, 2B. The graph in Figure 3 confirms our solution.
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
■  Rational Inequalities
Unlike polynomial functions, rational functions are not necessarily continuous. The 
vertical asymptotes of a rational function r break up the graph into separate “branches.” 
So the intervals on which r does not change sign are determined by the vertical asymp-
totes as well as the zeros of r. This is the reason for the following definition: If 
r1x2 P1x2/Q1x2  is a rational function, the cut points of r are the values of x at which 
either P1x2 0 or Q1x2 0. In other words, the cut points of r are the zeros of the 
numerator and the zeros of the denominator (see Figure 4). So to solve a rational in-
equality like r1x2 0, we use test points between successive cut points to determine 
the intervals that satisfy the inequality. We use the following guidelines.
SOLVING RATIONAL INEQUALITIES
1.	 Move All Terms to One Side.    Rewrite the inequality so that all nonzero 
terms appear on one side of the inequality symbol. Bring all quotients to a 
common denominator. 
2.	 Factor Numerator and Denominator.    Factor the numerator and denominator 
into irreducible factors, and then find the cut points. 
3.	 Find the Intervals.    List the intervals determined by the cut points.
4.	 Make a Table or Diagram.    Use test values to make a table or diagram of the 
signs of each factor in each interval. In the last row of the table determine 
the sign of the rational function on that interval. 
5.	 Solve.    Determine the solution of the inequality from the last row of the 
table. Check whether the endpoints of these intervals satisfy the inequality. 
(This may happen if the inequality involves  or .)
Example 3  ■  Solving a Rational Inequality
Solve the inequality 
1 2x
x2 2x 3 1
Figure 3
y
0
x
1
10
Figure 4  r1x2 0 or r1x2 0 for x 
between successive cut points of r 
y
x
2
0
1
x-2
(x-4)(x+3)
r(x)=
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Solution    We follow the above guidelines.
Move all terms to one side.    We move all terms to the left-hand side of the 
inequality. 
 
1 2x
x2 2x 3 1 0        Move terms to LHS
 
11 2x2 1x2 2x 32
x2 2x 3
0        Common denominator
 
4 x2
x2 2x 3 0        Simplify
The left-hand side of the inequality is a rational function.
Factor numerator and denominator.    Factoring the numerator and denominator, we get
12 x2 12 x2
1x 32 1x 12 0
The zeros of the numerator are 2 and 2, and the zeros of the denominator are 1 
and 3, so the cut points are 2, 1, 2, and 3.
Find the intervals.    The intervals determined by the cut points are
1, 22 , 12, 12 , 11, 22 , 12, 32 ,13, 2
Make a table or diagram.    We make a sign diagram.
Sign of 2-x
Sign of 2 x
Sign of x  3 
(2-x)(2  x)
(x  3)(x  1)
2
2
Sign of x  1 
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
+
+
-
+
-
+
+
Sign of
1
3
-
+
+
-
+
Solve.    From the diagram we see that the inequality is satisfied on the intervals 
12, 12 and 12, 32. Checking the endpoints, we see that 2 and 2 satisfy the 
inequality, so the solution is  32, 12 < 32, 32. The graph in Figure 5 confirms our 
solution.
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
Example 4  ■  Solving a Rational Inequality
Solve the inequality 
x2 4x 3
x2 4x 5 0
Solution    Since all nonzero terms are already on one side of the inequality symbol, 
we begin by factoring.
Factor numerator and denominator.    Factoring the numerator and denominator, we get
1x 32 1x 12
1x 52 1x 12 0
The cut points are 1, 1, 3, and 5.
Figure 5
y
x
1
1
0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 3.7  ■  Polynomial and Rational Inequalities  315
Find the intervals.    The intervals determined by the cut points are
1, 12 , 11, 12 , 11, 32 , 13, 52 ,15, 2
Make a table or diagram.    We make a sign diagram.
Sign of x-5
Sign of x 3
Sign of x  1 
(x-3)(x  1)
(x  5)(x  1)
1
3
Sign of x  1 
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
-
+
-
-
+
+
-
+
-
+
+
-
+
Sign of
1
5
+
+
+
+
+
Solve.    From the diagram we see that the inequality is satisfied on the intervals 
1, 12, 11, 32,  and 15, 2. Checking the endpoints, we see that 1 and 3 satisfy the 
inequality, so the solution is 1, 12 < 31, 34 < 15, 2. The graph in Figure 6 con-
firms our solution.
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
We can also solve polynomial and rational inequalities graphically (see pages 120  
and 172). In the next example we graph each side of the inequality and compare the 
values of left- and right-hand sides graphically.
Example 5  ■  Solving a Rational Inequality Graphically
Two light sources are 10 m apart. One is three times as intense as the other. The light 
intensity L (in lux) at a point x meters from the weaker source is given by 
L1x2 10
x2 
30
110 x2 2
(See Figure 7.) Find the points at which the light intensity is 4 lux or less.
Solution    We need to solve the inequality 
10
x2 
30
110 x2 2 4
We solve the inequality graphically by graphing the two functions 
y1 10
x2 
30
110 x2 2    and   
y2 4
In this physical problem the possible values of x are between 0 and 10, so we graph 
the two functions in a viewing rectangle with x-values between 0 and 10, as shown in 
Figure 8. We want those values of x for which y1 y2. Zooming in (or using the 
intersect command), we find that the graphs intersect at x 1.67431  and at 
x 7.19272, and between these x-values the graph of y1 lies below the graph of y2. 
So the solution of the inequality is the interval 11.67, 7.192 , rounded to two decimal 
places. Thus the light intensity is less than or equal to 4 lux when the distance from 
the weaker source is between 1.67 m and 7.19 m.
Now Try Exercises 45 and 55	
■
See Appendix D, Using the  
TI-83/84 Graphing Calculator,  
for specific instructions. Go to  
www.stewartmath.com.
y
x
2
5
0
Figure 6
x
10-x
Figure 7
10
0
10
y⁄
y2
Figure 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

316 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Concepts
	 1.	 To solve a polynomial inequality, we factor the polynomial 
	 	 into irreducible factors and find all the real  
 of the 
polynomial. Then we find the intervals determined by the 
	 	 real  
 and use test points in each interval to find the 
sign of the polynomial on that interval. Let 
P1x2 x1x 22 1x 12 .
	 	 Fill in the diagram below to find the intervals on which 
P1x2 0. 
x
Sign of
x+2
x-1 
x(x+2)(x-1)
2
1
0
	 	 From the diagram above we see that P1x2 0 on the 
	 	 intervals  
 and  
  .
	 2.	 To solve a rational inequality, we factor the numerator and 
the denominator into irreducible factors. The cut points are 
	 	 the real  
 of the numerator and the real  
  
denominator. Then we find the intervals determined by the 
	 	
 
  
  , and we use test points to find the sign 
of the rational function on each interval. Let 
r1x2 
1x 22 1x 12
1x 32 1x 42
	 	 Fill in the diagram below to find the intervals on which 
r1x2 0.
x+2
Sign of
x-1
x-3 
(x+2)(x-1)
(x-3)(x+4)
4
1
x+4 
2
3
	 	 From the diagram we see that r1x2 0 on the intervals 
 
  ,  
  , and  
  .
Skills
3–16  ■  Polynomial Inequalities    Solve the inequality. 
	 3.	 1x 321x 52 12x 52 0	
	 4.	 1x 121x 22 1x 32 1x 42 0
	 5.	 1x 52 21x 32 1x 12 0	
	 6.	 12x 72 41x 12 31x 12 0
	 7.	 x3 4x2 4x 16	
  8.	 2x3 18x x2 9
	 9.	 2x3 x2 9 18x	
10.	 x4 3x3 x 3
	11.	 x4 7x2 18 0	
12.	 4x4 25x2 36 0
	13.	 x3 x2 17x 15 0	
	14.	 x4 3x3 3x2 3x 4 0
	15.	 x11 x22 3 711 x22 3	
16.	 x217 6x2 1
17–36  ■  Rational Inequalities    Solve the inequality. 
	17.	 x 1
x 10 0	
18.	 3x 7
x 2 0
	19.	
2x 5
x2 2x 35 0	
20.	 4x2 25
x2 9
0
	21.	
x
x2 2x 2 0	
22.	
x 1
2x2 4x 1 0
	23.	 x2 2x 3
3x2 7x 6 0	
24.	 x 1
x3 1 0
	25.	 x3 3x2 9x 27
x 4
0	
26.	 x2 16
x4 16 0
	27.	 x 3
2x 5 1	
28.	 1
x 
1
x 1 
2
x 2
	29.	 2 
1
1 x 3
x
	30.	
1
x 3 
1
x 2 
2x
x2 x 2
	31.	
1x 12 2
1x 12 1x 22 0	
32.	
x2 2x 1
x3 3x2 3x 1 0
	33.	
6
x 1 6
x 1	
34.	 x
2 
5
x 1 4
35.	 x 2
x 3 x 1
x 2	
36.	
1
x 1 
1
x 2 
1
x 3
37–40  ■  Graphs of Two Functions    Find all values of x for 
which the graph of f lies above the graph of g. 
	37.	 f1x2 x2; 
g1x2 3x 10	
38. f1x2 1
x; 
g1x2 
1
x 1
	39.	 f1x2 4x; 
g1x2 1
x	
40.	 f1x2 x2 x; 
g1x2 2
x
41–44  ■  Domain of a Function    Find the domain of the given 
function. 
	41.	 f1x2 "6 x x2	
42.	 g1x2 Å
5 x
5 x
	43.	 h1x2 "
4 x4 1	
44.	 f1x2 
1
"x4 5x2 4
3.7  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3  ■  Review  317
45–50  ■  Solving Inequalities Graphically    Use a graphing device 
to solve the inequality, as in Example 5. Express your answer 
using interval notation, with the endpoints of the intervals 
rounded to two decimals. 
	45.	 x3 2 2x2 2 5x 1 6 $ 0	
46.	 2x3 1 x2 2 8x 2 4 # 0
	47.	 2x3 2 3x 1 1 , 0	
48.	 x4 2 4x3 1 8x . 0
	49.	 5x4 , 8x3	
50.	 x5 1 x3 $ x2 1 6x
Skills Plus
51–52  ■  Rational Inequalities    Solve the inequality. (These 
exercises involve expressions that arise in calculus.)
	51.	
11 2 x2 2
!x
$ 4!x1x 2 12
	52.	 2
3 x21/31x 1 22 1/2 1 1
2 x2/31x 1 22 21/2 , 0
	53.	 General Polynomial Inequality    Solve the inequality 
1x 2 a2 1x 2 b2 1x 2 c2 1x 2 d2 $ 0
	 	 where a , b , c , d.
	54.	 General Rational Inequality    Solve the inequality 
x2 1 1a 2 b2x 2 ab
x 1 c
# 0
	 	 where 0 , a , b , c.
Applications
	55.	 Bonfire Temperature    In the vicinity of a bonfire the temper-
ature T (in °C) at a distance of x meters from the center of 
the fire is given by
T1x2 5 500,000
x2 1 400
	 	 At what range of distances from the fire’s center is the tem-
perature less than 3008C?
	56.	 Stopping Distance    For a certain model of car the distance d 
required to stop the vehicle if it is traveling at √ mi/h is given 
by the function
d1t2 5 √1 √2
25
	 	 where d is measured in feet. Kerry wants her stopping dis-
tance not to exceed 175 ft. At what range of speeds can she 
travel?
	57.	 Managing Traffic    A highway engineer develops a formula to 
estimate the number of cars that can safely travel a particular 
highway at a given speed. She finds that the number N of cars 
that can pass a given point per minute is modeled by the 
function
N1x2 5
88x
17 1 17a x
20 b
2
	 	 Graph the function in the viewing rectangle 30, 1004  by 
30, 604 . If the number of cars that pass by the given point 
is greater than 40, at what range of speeds can the cars 
travel?
	58.	 Estimating Solar Panel Profits    A solar panel manufacturer 
estimates that the profit y (in dollars) generated by producing 
x solar panels per month is given by the equation 
S1x2 5 8x 1 0.8x2 2 0.002x3 2 4000
	 	 Graph the function in the viewing rectangle 30, 4004  by 
3210,000, 20,0004 . For what range of values of x is the com-
pany’s profit greater than $12,000?
Quadratic Functions (pp. 246–251)
A quadratic function is a function of the form 
f1x2 5 ax2 1 bx 1 c
It can be expressed in the standard form
f1x2 5 a1x 2 h2 2 1 k
by completing the square.
The graph of a quadratic function in standard form is a parabola 
with vertex 1h, k2.
If a . 0, then the quadratic function f has the minimum value k 
at x 5 h 5 2b/12a2.
If a , 0, then the quadratic function f has the maximum value k 
at x 5 h 5 2b/12a2.
Polynomial Functions (p. 254)
A polynomial function of degree n is a function P of the form
P1x2 5 anx n 1 an21x n21 1 . . . 1 a1x 1 a0
(where an ? 0). The numbers ai are the coefficients of the poly-
nomial; an is the leading coefficient, and a0 is the constant coef-
ficient (or constant term).
The graph of a polynomial function is a smooth, continuous 
curve.
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 3  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Real Zeros of Polynomials (p. 259)
A zero of a polynomial P is a number c for which P1c2 0.  
The following are equivalent ways of describing real zeros of 
polynomials:
1.	 c is a real zero of P.
2.	 x c is a solution of the equation P1x2 0.
3.	 x c is a factor of P1x2.
4.	 c is an x-intercept of the graph of P.
Multiplicity of a Zero (pp. 262–263)
A zero c of a polynomial P has multiplicity m if m is the highest 
power for which 1x c2 m is a factor of P1x2.
Local Maxima and Minima (p. 264)
A polynomial function P of degree n has n 1 or fewer local 
­extrema (i.e., local maxima and minima).
Division of Polynomials (p. 269)
If P and D are any polynomials (with D1x2 ? 0), then we can 
divide P by D using either long division or (if D is linear) syn-
thetic division. The result of the division can be expressed in one 
of the following equivalent forms:
 P1x2 D1x2 # Q1x2 R1x2
 
P1x2
D1x2 Q1x2 
R1x2
D1x2
In this division, P is the dividend, D is the divisor, Q is the quo-
tient, and R is the remainder. When the division is continued to 
its completion, the degree of R will be less than the degree of D 
(or R1x2 0).
Remainder Theorem (p. 272)
When P1x2  is divided by the linear divisor D1x2 x c, the  
remainder is the constant P1c2 . So one way to evaluate a poly-
nomial function P at c is to use synthetic division to divide P1x2  
by x c and observe the value of the remainder.
Rational Zeros of Polynomials (pp. 275–277)
If the polynomial P given by
P1x2 anx n an1x n1 . . . a1x a0
has integer coefficients, then all the rational zeros of P have the 
form
x  p
q
where p is a divisor of the constant term a0 and q is a divisor of 
the leading coefficient an.
So to find all the rational zeros of a polynomial, we list all the 
possible rational zeros given by this principle and then check to 
see which actually are zeros by using synthetic division.
Descartes’ Rule of Signs (pp. 278–279)
Let P be a polynomial with real coefficients. Then:
The number of positive real zeros of P either is the number of 
changes of sign in the coefficients of P1x2  or is less than that by  
an even number.
The number of negative real zeros of P either is the number of 
changes of sign in the coefficients of P1x2  or is less than that  
by an even number.
Upper and Lower Bounds Theorem (p. 279)
Suppose we divide the polynomial P by the linear expression 
x c and arrive at the result
P1x2 1x c2 # Q1x2 r
If c 0 and the coefficients of Q, followed by r, are all nonnega-
tive, then c is an upper bound for the zeros of P.
If c 0 and the coefficients of Q, followed by r (including zero  
coefficients), are alternately nonnegative and nonpositive, then c 
is a lower bound for the zeros of P.
The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Complete 
Factorization, and the Zeros Theorem (p. 287)
Every polynomial P of degree n with complex coefficients has 
exactly n complex zeros, provided that each zero of multiplicity 
m is counted m times. P factors into n linear factors as follows:
P1x2 a1x c12 1x c22 # # # 1x cn2
where a is the leading coefficient of P and c1, c1, . . . , cn are the  
zeros of P.
Conjugate Zeros Theorem (p. 291)
If the polynomial P has real coefficients and if a bi is a zero of 
P, then its complex conjugate a bi is also a zero of P.
Linear and Quadratic Factors Theorem (p. 292)
Every polynomial with real coefficients can be factored into lin-
ear and irreducible quadratic factors with real coefficients.
Rational Functions (p. 295)
A rational function r is a quotient of polynomial functions:
r1x2 
P1x2
Q1x2
We generally assume that the polynomials P and Q have no fac-
tors in common.
Asymptotes (pp. 296–297)
The line x a is a vertical asymptote of the function y f1x2 if
y S     or    y S     as    x S a    or    x S a
The line y b is a horizontal asymptote of the function  
y f1x2  if
y S b    as    x S     or    x S 
Asymptotes of Rational Functions (pp. 298–300)
Let r1x2 
P1x2
Q1x2  be a rational function.
The vertical asymptotes of r are the lines x a where a is a  
zero of Q.
If the degree of P is less than the degree of Q, then the horizontal 
asymptote of r is the line y 0.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3  ■  Review  319
If the degrees of P and Q are the same, then the horizontal 
asymptote of r is the line y b, where
b leading coefficient of P
leading coefficient of Q
If the degree of P is greater than the degree of Q, then r has no  
horizontal asymptote.
Polynomial and Rational Inequalities (pp. 311, 313)
A polynomial inequality is an inequality of the form P1x2 0, 
where P is a polynomial. We solve P1x2 0 by finding the zeros 
of P and using test points between successive zeros to determine 
the intervals that satisfy the inequality.
A rational inequality is an inequality of the form r1x2 0, 
where 
r1x2 
P1x2
Q1x2
is a rational function. The cut points of r are the values of x at 
which either P1x2 0 or Q1x2 0. We solve r1x2 0 by using 
test points between successive cut points to determine the inter-
vals that satisfy the inequality.
	 1.	 (a)	 What is the degree of a quadratic function f? What is the 
standard form of a quadratic function? How do you put a 
quadratic function into standard form?
(b)	 The quadratic function f1x2 a1x h2 2 k is in stan-
dard form. The graph of f is a parabola. What is the ver-
tex of the graph of f? How do you determine whether 
f1h2 k is a minimum or a maximum value?
(c)	 Express f1x2 x2 4x 1 in standard form. Find the 
vertex of the graph and the maximum or minimum value 
of f.
	 2.	 (a)	 Give the general form of polynomial function P of 
degree n.
(b)	 What does it mean to say that c is a zero of P? Give two 
equivalent conditions that tell us that c is a zero of P.
	 3.	 Sketch graphs showing the possible end behaviors of polyno-
mials of odd degree and of even degree.
	 4.	 What steps do you follow to graph a polynomial function P?
	 5.	 (a)	 What is a local maximum point or local minimum point 
of a polynomial P?
(b)	 How many local extrema can a polynomial P of degree n 
have?
	 6.	 When we divide a polynomial P1x2  by a divisor D1x2, the 
Division Algorithm tells us that we can always obtain a quo-
tient Q1x2  and a remainder R1x2 . State the two forms in 
which the result of this division can be written.
	 7.	 (a)	 State the Remainder Theorem. 
(b)	 State the Factor Theorem. 
(c)	 State the Rational Zeros Theorem.
	 8.	 What steps would you take to find the rational zeros of a 
polynomial P?
	 9.	 Let P1x2 2x4 3x3 x 15.
(a)	 Explain how Descartes’ Rule of Signs is used to deter-
mine the possible number of positive and negative real 
roots of P.
(b)	 What does it mean to say that a is a lower bound and b is 
an upper bound for the zeros of a polynomial?
(c)	 Explain how the Upper and Lower Bounds Theorem is 
used to show that all the real zeros of P lie between 3 
and 3. 
	10.	 (a)	 State the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.
(b)	 State the Complete Factorization Theorem. 
(c)	 State the Zeros Theorem. 
(d)	 State the Conjugate Zeros Theorem. 
	11.	 (a)	 What is a rational function?
(b)	 What does it mean to say that x a is a vertical asymp-
tote of y f1x2 ?
(c)	 What does it mean to say that y b is a horizontal 
asymptote of y f1x2 ?
(d)	 Find the vertical and horizontal asymptotes of 
f1x2 5x2 3
x2 4
	12.	 (a)	 How do you find vertical asymptotes of rational 
functions? 
(b)	 Let s be the rational function 
s1x2 anxn an1xn1 . . . a1x a0
bmxm bm1xm1 . . . b1x b0
	
	How do you find the horizontal asymptote of s? 
	13.	 (a)	 Under what circumstances does a rational function have 
a slant asymptote? 
(b)	 How do you determine the end behavior of a rational 
function? 
	14.	 (a)	 Explain how to solve a polynomial inequality.
(b)	 What are the cut points of a rational function? Explain 
how to solve a rational inequality. 
(c)	 Solve the inequality x2 9 8x.
■  Concept check
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
1–4  ■  Graphs of Quadratic Functions    A quadratic function is 
given. (a) Express the function in standard form. (b) Graph the 
function.
	 1.	 f1x2 x2 6x 2	
  2.	 f1x2 2x2 8x 4
	 3.	 f1x2 1 10x x2	
  4.	 g1x2 2x2 12x
5–6  ■  Maximum and Minimum Values    Find the maximum or 
minimum value of the quadratic function.
	 5.	 f1x2 x2 3x 1	
  6.	 f1x2 3x2 18x 5
	 7.	 Height of a Stone    A stone is thrown upward from the top of 
a building. Its height (in feet) above the ground after t sec-
onds is given by the function h1t2 16t2 48t 32. 
What maximum height does the stone reach?
	 8.	 Profit    The profit P (in dollars) generated by selling x units 
of a certain commodity is given by the function
P1x2 1500 12x 0.004x2
	 	 What is the maximum profit, and how many units must be 
sold to generate it?
9–14  ■  Transformations of Monomials    Graph the polynomial 
by transforming an appropriate graph of the form y  x n. Show 
clearly all x- and y-intercepts.
	 9.	 P1x2 x3 64	
10.	 P1x2 2x3 16
	11.	 P1x2 21x 12 4 32	
12.	 P1x2 81 1x 32 4
	13.	 P1x2 32 1x 12 5	
14.	 P1x2 31x 22 5 96
15–18  ■  Graphing Polynomials in Factored Form    A polynomial 
function P is given. (a) Describe the end behavior. (b) Sketch a 
graph of P. Make sure your graph shows all intercepts.
15.	 P1x2 1x 32 1x 12 1x 52
16.	 P1x2 1x 52 1x2 92 1x 22
17.	 P1x2 1x 12 21x 42 1x 22 2
18.	 P1x2 x21x2 42 1x2 92
19–20  ■  Graphing Polynomials    A polynomial function P  
is given. (a) Determine the multiplicity of each zero of P.  
(b) Sketch a graph of P.
	19.	 P1x2 x31x 22 2	
20.	 P1x2 x1x 12 31x 12 2
21–24  ■  Graphing Polynomials    Use a graphing device to graph 
the polynomial. Find the x- and y-intercepts and the coordinates 
of all local extrema, correct to the nearest decimal. Describe the 
end behavior of the polynomial­.
	21.	 P1x2 x3 4x 1	
22.	 P1x2 2x 3 6x2 2
	23.	 P1x2 3x4 4x3 10x 1
	24.	 P1x2 x5 x4 7x3 x2 6x 3
	25.	 Strength of a Beam    The strength S of a wooden beam of 
width x and depth y is given by the formula S  13.8xy 2.  
A beam is to be cut from a log of diameter 10 in., as shown 
in the ﬁgure.
(a)	 Express the strength S of this beam as a function of x only.
(b)	 What is the domain of the function S?
(c)	 Draw a graph of S.
(d)	 What width will make the beam the strongest?
	26.	 Volume    A small shelter for delicate plants is to be con-
structed of thin plastic material. It will have square ends and a 
rectangular top and back, with an open bottom and front, as 
shown in the ﬁgure. The total area of the four plastic sides is to 
be 1200 in2.
(a)	 Express the volume V of the shelter as a function of the 
depth x.
(b)	 Draw a graph of V.
(c)	 What dimensions will maximize the volume of the 
shelter?
x
y
x
27–34  ■  Division of Polynomials    Find the quotient and 
remainder.
	27.	 x2 5x 2
x 3
	
28.	 3x2 x 5
x 2
	29. 2x3 x2 3x 4
x 5
	
30.	 x3 2x 4
x 7
	31.	 x4 8x2 2x 7
x 5
	
32.	 2x4 3x3 12
x 4
	33.	 2x3 x2 8x 15
x2 2x 1
	
34.	 x4 2x2 7x
x2 x 3
35–38  ■  Remainder Theorem    These exercises involve the 
Remainder Theorem.
	35.	 If P1x2 2x3 9x2 7x 13, find P152 .
	36.	 If Q1x2 x4 4x3 7x2 10x 15, find Q132 .
■  EXERCISES
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3  ■  Review  321
	37.	 What is the remainder when the polynomial 
P1x2 x500 6x101 x2 2x 4 is divided by x 1?
	38.	 What is the remainder when the polynomial 
Q1x2 x101 x4 2 is divided by x 1?
39–40  ■  Factor Theorem    Use the Factor Theorem to show that 
the statement in the exercise is true.
	39.	 Show that 1
2 is a zero of the polynomial
P1x2 2x4 x3 5x2 10x 4
	40.	 Show that x  4 is a factor of the polynomial
P1x2 x 5 4x 4 7x 3 23x2 23x 12
41–44  ■  Number of Possible Zeros    A polynomial P is given. 
(a) List all possible rational zeros (without testing to see  
whether they actually are zeros). (b) Determine the possible  
number of positive and negative real zeros using Descartes’  
Rule of Signs.
	41.	 P1x2 x 5 6x 3 x2 2x 18
	42.	 P1x2 6x4 3x3 x2 3x 4
	43.	 P1x2 3x7 x5 5x4 x3 8
	44.	 P1x2 6x10 2x8 5x3 2x2 12
45–52  ■  Finding Real Zeros and Graphing Polynomials    A poly-
nomial P is given. (a) Find all real zeros of P, and state their mul-
tiplicities. (b) Sketch the graph of P.
	45.	 P1x2 x3 16x	
46.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 4x
	47.	 P1x2 x4 x3 2x2	
48.	 P1x2 x4 5x2 4
49.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 7x2 8x 12	
	50.	 P1x2 x4 2x3 2x2 8x 8
	51.	 P1x2 2x 4 x 3 2x2 3x 2
	52.	 P1x2 9x5 21x4 10x3 6x2 3x 1
53–56  ■  Polynomials with Specified Zeros    Find a polynomial 
with real coefficients of the specified degree that satisfies the 
given conditions. 
	53.	 Degree 3;  zeros 1
2, 2, 3;  constant coefficient 12
	54.	 Degree 4;  zeros 4 (multiplicity 2) and 3i;  integer  
coefficients;  coefficient of x2  is 25 
	55.	 Complex Zeros of Polynomials    Does there exist a polyno-
mial of degree 4 with integer coefﬁcients that has zeros i, 2i, 
3i, and 4i? If so, ﬁnd it. If not, explain why.
	56.	 Polynomial with no Real Roots    Prove that the equation 
3x4 5x2 2 0 has no real root.
57–68  ■  Finding Real and Complex Zeros of Polynomials    Find 
all rational, irrational, and complex zeros (and state their multi-
plicities). Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs, the Upper and Lower 
Bounds Theorem, the Quadratic Formula, or other factoring tech-
niques to help you whenever possible.
57.	 P1x2 x3 x2 x 1	
58.	 P1x2 x3 8
59.	 P1x2 x3 3x2 13x 15
	60.	 P1x2 2x 3 5x2 6x 9
	61.	 P1x2 x4 6x3 17x2 28x 20
	62.	 P1x2 x4 7x3 9x2 17x 20
	63.	 P1x2 x5 3x4 x3 11x2 12x 4
	64.	 P1x2 x4 81
	65.	 P1x2 x6 64
	66.	 P1x2 18x3 3x2 4x 1
	67.	 P1x2 6x4 18x3 6x2 30x 36
	68.	 P1x2 x4 15x2 54
69–72  ■  Solving Polynomials Graphically    Use a graphing 
device to ﬁnd all real solutions of the equation.
	69.	 2x2 5x 3
	70.	 x3 x2 14x 24 0
	71.	 x4 3x3 3x2 9x 2 0
	72.	 x5 x 3
73–74  ■  Complete Factorization    A polynomial function P  
is given. Find all the real zeros of P, and factor P completely  
into linear and irreducible quadratic factors with real  
coefficients.
	73.  P1x2 x3 2x 4	
74.	 P1x2 x4 3x2 4
75–78  ■  Transformations of y 1/x    A rational function is 
given. (a) Find all vertical and horizontal asymptotes, all x- and 
y-intercepts, and state the domain and range. (b) Use transforma-
tions of the graph of y 1/x to sketch a graph of the rational 
function, and state the domain and range of r.
75.  r1x2 
3
x 4	
76.	 r1x2 
1
x 5
77.  r1x2 3x 4
x 1 	
78.	 r1x2 2x 5
x 2
79–84  ■  Graphing Rational Functions    Graph the rational func-
tion. Show clearly all x- and y-intercepts and asymptotes, and 
state the domain and range of r.
79.  r1x2 3x 12
x 1 	
80.	 r1x2 
1
1x 22 2
81.  r1x2 
x 2
x2 2x 8	
82.	 r1x2 x3 27
x 4
83.  r1x2 x2 9
2x2 1	
84.	 r1x2 2x2 6x 7
x 4
85–88  ■  Rational Functions with Holes    Find the common fac-
tors of the numerator and denominator of the rational function. 
Then find the intercepts and asymptotes, and sketch a graph. State 
the domain and range.
	85.	 r1x2 x2 5x 14
x 2
	86.	 r1x2 x3 3x2 10x
x 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

322 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Polynomial and Rational Functions
	87.	 r1x2 x2 3x 18
x2 8x 15
	88.r1x2 
x2 2x 15
x3 4x2 7x 10
89–92  ■  Graphing Rational Functions    Use a graphing device to 
analyze the graph of the rational function. Find all x- and 
y-intercepts and all vertical, horizontal, and slant asymptotes. If 
the function has no horizontal or slant asymptote, ﬁnd a polyno-
mial that has the same end behavior as the rational function.
	89.	 r1x2 x 3
2x 6	
  90.	 r1x2 2x 7
x2 9
	91.	 r1x2 
x3 8
x2 x 2	
  92.	 r1x2 2x 3 x2
x 1
93–96  ■  Polynomial Inequalities    Solve the inequality. 
	93.	 2x2 x 3	
  94.	 x3 3x2 4x 12 0
	95.	 x4 7x2 18 0	
  96.	 x8 17x4 16 0
97–100  ■  Rational Inequalities    Solve the inequality. 
	97.	
5
x3 x2 4x 4 0	
  98.	 3x 1
x 2 2
3
	99.	
1
x 2 
2
x 3 3
x	
100.	
1
x 2 
3
x 3 4
x
101–102  ■  Domain of a Function    Find the domain of the given 
function. 
	101.	 f1x2 "24 x 3x2	
102.	 g1x2 
1
"
4 x x4
103–104  ■  Solving Inequalities Graphically    Use a graphing 
device to solve the inequality. Express your answer using interval 
notation, with the endpoints of the intervals rounded to two 
decimals. 
	103.	 x4 x3 5x2 4x 5	
	104.	 x5 4x4 7x3 12x 2 0
	105.	 Application of Descartes’ Rule of Signs    We use  
Descartes’ Rule of Signs to show that a polynomial 
Q1x2 2x3 3x2 3x 4 has no positive real zeros.
(a)	 Show that 1 is a zero of the polynomial 
P1x2 2x4 5x3 x 4.
(b)	 Use the information from part (a) and Descartes’  
Rule of Signs to show that the polynomial 
Q1x2 2x3 3x2 3x 4 has no positive real  
zeros.    [Hint: Compare the coefficients of the latter 
polynomial to your synthetic division table from  
part (a).]
	106.	 Points of Intersection    Find the coordinates of all points of 
intersection of the graphs of 
y x4 x2 24x    and   
y 6x3 20
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

323
	 1.	 Express the quadratic function f1x2 x2 x 6 in standard form, and sketch its graph.
	 2.	 Find the maximum or minimum value of the quadratic function g1x2 2x2 6x 3.
	 3.	 A cannonball fired out to sea from a shore battery follows a parabolic trajectory given by 
the graph of the equation
h1x2 10x 0.01x2
	 	 where h1x2  is the height of the cannonball above the water when it has traveled a horizon-
tal distance of x feet.
(a)	 What is the maximum height that the cannonball reaches?
(b)	 How far does the cannonball travel horizontally before splashing into the water?
	 4.	 Graph the polynomial P1x2 1x 22 3 27, showing clearly all x- and y-intercepts.
	 5.	 (a)	 Use synthetic division to ﬁnd the quotient and remainder when x4 4x2 2x 5 is  
divided by x  2.
	 	 (b)	 Use long division to ﬁnd the quotient and remainder when 2x5 4x4 x3 x2 7 
is divided by 2x2 1.
	 6.	 Let P1x2 2x 3 5x2 4x 3.
(a)	 List all possible rational zeros of P.
(b)	 Find the complete factorization of P.
(c)	 Find the zeros of P.
(d)	 Sketch the graph of P.
	 7.	 Find all real and complex zeros of P1x2 x3 x2 4x 6.
	 8.	 Find the complete factorization of P1x2 x 4 2x 3 5x2 8x 4.
	 9.	 Find a fourth-degree polynomial with integer coefﬁcients that has zeros 3i and 1, with 
1 a zero of multiplicity 2.
	10.	 Let P1x2 2x 4 7x 3 x2 18x 3.
(a)	 Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to determine how many positive and how many negative 
real zeros P can have.
(b)	 Show that 4 is an upper bound and 1 is a lower bound for the real zeros of P.
(c)	 Draw a graph of P, and use it to estimate the real zeros of P, rounded to two decimal 
places.
(d)	 Find the coordinates of all local extrema of P, rounded to two decimals.
	11.	 Consider the following rational functions:
r 1x2 
2x 1
x2 x 2        s1x2 x3 27
x2 4          t1x2 x3 9x
x 2         u1x2 x2 x 6
x2 25         „1x2 x3 6x2 9x
x 3
(a)	 Which of these rational functions has a horizontal asymptote?
(b)	 Which of these functions has a slant asymptote?
(c)	 Which of these functions has no vertical asymptote?
(d)	 Which of these functions has a “hole”?
(e)	 What are the asymptotes of the function r1x2 ?
(f)	 Graph y u1x2 , showing clearly any asymptotes and x- and y-intercepts the function  
may have.
(g)	 Use long division to ﬁnd a polynomial P that has the same end behavior as t. Graph 
both P and t on the same screen to verify that they have the same end behavior.
h(x)
x
CHAPTER 3
TEST
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324 
CHAPTER 3  ■  Test
	12.	 Solve the rational inequality x 6 x
2x 5.
	13.	 Find the domain of the function f1x2 
1
"4 2x x2.
	14.	 (a)	 Choosing an appropriate viewing rectangle, graph the following function and find all 
its x-intercepts and local extrema, rounded to two decimals.
P1x2 x4 4x3 8x
(b)	 Use your graph from part (a) to solve the inequality 
x4 4x3 8x 0
		
Express your answer in interval form, with the endpoints rounded to two decimals.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

325
We have learned how to ﬁt a line to data (see Focus on Modeling, page 139). The line 
models the increasing or decreasing trend in the data. If the data exhibit more variabil-
ity, such as an increase followed by a decrease, then to model the data, we need to use 
a curve rather than a line. Figure 1 shows a scatter plot with three possible models that 
appear to ﬁt the data. Which model ﬁts the data best?
Figure 1
y
x
y
x
Linear model
Quadratic model
Cubic model
y
x
■  Polynomial Functions as Models
Polynomial functions are ideal for modeling data for which the scatter plot has peaks 
or valleys (that is, local maxima or minima). For example, if the data have a single peak 
as in Figure 2(a), then it may be appropriate to use a quadratic polynomial to model the 
data. The more peaks or valleys the data exhibit, the higher the degree of the polynomial 
needed to model the data (see Figure 2).
(a)
(b)
(c)
y
x
y
x
y
x
Figure 2
Graphing calculators are programmed to ﬁnd the polynomial of best ﬁt of a 
speciﬁed degree. As is the case for lines (see page 140), a polynomial of a given degree 
ﬁts the data best if the sum of the squares of the distances between the graph of the 
polynomial and the data points is minimized.
Example 1  ■  Rainfall and Crop Yield
Rain is essential for crops to grow, but too much rain can diminish crop yields. The 
data on the next page give rainfall and cotton yield per acre for several seasons in a 
certain county.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data. What degree polynomial seems appropriate for 
modeling the data?
(b)	 Use a graphing calculator to ﬁnd the polynomial of best ﬁt. Graph the polynomial 
on the scatter plot.
(c)	 Use the model that you found to estimate the yield if there are 25 in. of rainfall.
Fitting Polynomial Curves to Data
	
FOCUS ON MODELING
Dennis MacDonald/Alamy
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326 
Focus on Modeling
Season
Rainfall (in.)
Yield (kg/acre)
  1
23.3
5311
  2
20.1
4382
  3
18.1
3950
  4
12.5
3137
  5
30.9
5113
  6
33.6
4814
  7
35.8
3540
  8
15.5
3850
  9
27.6
5071
10
34.5
3881
SOLUTION
(a)	 The scatter plot is shown in Figure 3. The data appear to have a peak, so it is 
appropriate to model the data by a quadratic polynomial (degree 2).
Figure 3  Scatter plot of yield versus 
rainfall data
6000
1500
40
10
(b)	 Using a graphing calculator, we ﬁnd that the quadratic polynomial of best ﬁt is
y 12.6x2 651.5x 3283.2
	
The calculator output and the scatter plot, together with the graph of the quadratic 
model, are shown in Figure 4.
6000
1500
40
10
(a)
(b)
Figure 4
(c)	 Using the model with x  25, we get
y 12.61252 2 651.51252 3283.2 5129.3
	
We estimate the yield to be about 5130 kg/acre.

■
Example 2  ■  Length-at-Age Data for Fish
Otoliths (“earstones”) are tiny structures that are found in the heads of ﬁsh. Microscopic 
growth rings on the otoliths, not unlike growth rings on a tree, record the age of a ﬁsh. 
The following table gives the lengths of rock bass caught at different ages, as deter-
mined by the otoliths. Scientists have proposed a cubic polynomial to model this data.
(a)	 Use a graphing calculator to ﬁnd the cubic polynomial of best ﬁt for the data.
(b)	 Make a scatter plot of the data, and graph the polynomial from part (a).
(c)	 A ﬁsherman catches a rock bass 20 in. long. Use the model to estimate its age.
Otoliths for several fish species
Cod
Redfish
Hake
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Polynomial Curves to Data  327
Age (yr) 
Length (in.)
Age (yr) 
Length (in.)
1
  4.8
  9
18.2
2
  8.8
  9
17.1
2
  8.0
10
18.8
3
  7.9
10
19.5
4
11.9
11
18.9
5
14.4
12
21.7
6
14.1
12
21.9
6
15.8
13
23.8
7
15.6
14
26.9
8
17.8
14
25.1
SOLUTION
(a)	 Using a graphing calculator (see Figure 5(a)), we ﬁnd the cubic polynomial of  
best ﬁt:
y 0.0155x3 0.372x2 3.95x 1.21
(b)	 The scatter plot of the data and the cubic polynomial are graphed in Figure 5(b).
30
0
15
(a)
(b)
Figure 5
(c)	 Moving the cursor along the graph of the polynomial, we ﬁnd that y  20 when  
x  10.8. Thus the ﬁsh is about 11 years old.
■
Problems
	 1.	 Tire Inﬂation and Treadwear    Car tires need to be inﬂated properly. Overinﬂation or 
underinﬂation can cause premature treadwear. The data in the margin show tire life for dif-
ferent inﬂation values for a certain type of tire.
(a)	 Find the quadratic polynomial that best ﬁts the data.
(b)	 Draw a graph of the polynomial from part (a) together with a scatter plot of the data.
(c)	 Use your result from part (b) to estimate the pressure that gives the longest tire life.
	 2.	 Too Many Corn Plants per Acre?    The more corn a farmer plants per acre, the greater 
is the yield the farmer can expect, but only up to a point. Too many plants per acre can 
cause overcrowding and decrease yields. The data give crop yields per acre for various 
densities of corn plantings, as found by researchers at a university test farm.
(a)	 Find the quadratic polynomial that best ﬁts the data.
(b)	 Draw a graph of the polynomial from part (a) together with a scatter plot of the data.
(c)	 Use your result from part (b) to estimate the yield for 37,000 plants per acre.
Density (plants/acre)
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000
50,000
Crop yield (bushels/acre)
43
98
118
140
142
122
93
67
Pressure 
(lb/in2)
Tire life  
(mi)
26
50,000
28
66,000
31
78,000
35
81,000
38
74,000
42
70,000
45
59,000
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

328 
Focus on Modeling
	 3.	 How Fast Can You List Your Favorite Things?    If you are asked to make a list of objects in 
a certain category, how fast you can list them follows a predictable pattern. For example, if 
you try to name as many vegetables as you can, you’ll probably think of several right away—
for example, carrots, peas, beans, corn, and so on. Then after a pause you might think of ones 
you eat less frequently—perhaps zucchini, eggplant, and asparagus. Finally, a few more ex-
otic vegetables might come to mind—artichokes, jicama, bok choy, and the like. A psycholo-
gist performs this experiment on a number of subjects. The table below gives the average 
number of vegetables that the subjects named by a given number of seconds.
(a)	 Find the cubic polynomial that best ﬁts the data.
(b)	 Draw a graph of the polynomial from part (a) together with a scatter plot of the data.
(c)	 Use your result from part (b) to estimate the number of vegetables that subjects would 
be able to name in 40 s.
(d)	 According to the model, how long (to the nearest 0.1 s) would it take a person to name 
ﬁve vegetables?
Seconds
Number of 
vegetables
  1
  2
  2
  6
  5
10
10
12
15
14
20
15
25
18
30
21
	 4.	 Height of a Baseball    A baseball is thrown upward, and its height is measured at  
0.5-s intervals using a strobe light. The resulting data are given in the table.
(a)	 Draw a scatter plot of the data. What degree polynomial is appropriate for modeling  
the data?
(b)	 Find a polynomial model that best ﬁts the data, and graph it on the scatter plot.
(c)	 Find the times when the ball is 20 ft above the ground.
(d)	 What is the maximum height attained by the ball?
	 5.	 Torricelli’s Law    Water in a tank will ﬂow out of a small hole in the bottom faster when 
the tank is nearly full than when it is nearly empty. According to Torricelli’s Law, the 
height h1t2  of water remaining at time t is a quadratic function of t.
	
	     A certain tank is ﬁlled with water and allowed to drain. The height of the water is mea-
sured at different times as shown in the table.
(a)	 Find the quadratic polynomial that best ﬁts the data.
(b)	 Draw a graph of the polynomial from part (a) together with a scatter plot of the data.
(c)	 Use your graph from part (b) to estimate how long it takes for the tank to drain  
completely.
Time (min)
Height (ft)
  0
5.0
  4
3.1
  8
1.9
12
0.8
16
0.2
Time (s)
Height (ft)
0
4.2
0.5
26.1
1.0
40.1
1.5
46.0
2.0
43.9
2.5
33.7
3.0
15.8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this chapter we study exponential functions. These are functions like 
f1x2 2x, where the independent variable is in the exponent. Exponential 
functions are used in modeling many real-world phenomena, such as the 
growth of a population, the growth of an investment that earns compound 
interest, or the decay of a radioactive substance. Once an exponential 
model has been obtained, we can use the model to predict the size of a 
population, calculate the amount of an investment, or find the amount of a 
radioactive substance that remains. The inverse functions of exponential 
functions are called logarithmic functions. With exponential models and 
logarithmic functions we can answer questions such as these: When will 
my city be as crowded as the city street pictured here?  When will my 
bank account have a million dollars? When will radiation from a 
radioactive spill decay to a safe level?
In the Focus on Modeling at the end of the chapter we learn how to fit 
exponential and power curves to data.
329
Exponential and Logarithmic 
Functions
4
4.1	 Exponential Functions
4.2	 The Natural Exponential 
Function
4.3	 Logarithmic Functions
4.4	 Laws of Logarithms
4.5	 Exponential and 
Logarithmic Equations
4.6	 Modeling with Exponential 
Functions
4.7	 Logarithmic Scales
Focus on Modeling
	
Fitting Exponential and 
Power Curves to Data
© TonyV3112/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

330 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
4.1 
Exponential Functions
■  Exponential Functions  ■  Graphs of Exponential Functions  ■  Compound Interest
In this chapter we study a new class of functions called exponential functions. For ­example,
f1x2 2x
is an exponential function (with base 2). Notice how quickly the values of this function 
­increase.
 f132 23 8
 f1102 210 1024
 f1302 230 1,073,741,824
Compare this with the function g1x2 x2, where g1302 302 900. The point is that 
when the variable is in the exponent, even a small change in the variable can cause a 
dramatic change in the value of the function.
■  Exponential Functions
To study exponential functions, we must first define what we mean by the exponential 
expression ax when x is any real number. In Section 1.2 we deﬁned ax for a  0 and x 
a rational number, but we have not yet deﬁned irrational powers. So what is meant by 
5!3 or 2p? To deﬁne ax when x is irrational, we approximate x by rational numbers.
For example, since
!3 < 1.73205. . .
is an irrational number, we successively approximate a!3 by the following rational powers:
a1.7, a1.73, a1.732, a1.7320, a1.73205, . . .
Intuitively, we can see that these rational powers of a are getting closer and closer to 
a!3. It can be shown by using advanced mathematics that there is exactly one number 
that these powers approach. We deﬁne a!3 to be this number.
For example, using a calculator, we ﬁnd
 5!3 < 51.732
 < 16.2411. . .
The more decimal places of !3 we use in our calculation, the better our approximation 
of 5!3.
It can be proved that the Laws of Exponents are still true when the exponents are real 
numbers.
Exponential Functions
The exponential function with base a is deﬁned for all real numbers x by
f1x2 ax
where a 0 and a ? 1.
We assume that a 2 1 because the function f1x2 1x 1 is just a constant func-
tion. Here are some examples of exponential functions:
f1x2 2x  g1x2 3x  h1x2 10 x
The Laws of Exponents are listed on 
page 14.
Base 2
Base 3
Base 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.1  ■  Exponential Functions  331
Example 1  ■  Evaluating Exponential Functions
Let f1x2 3x, and evaluate the following:
(a)	 f152 	
(b)	 fA 2
3B
(c)	 f1p2 	
(d)	 fA !2B
Solution    We use a calculator to obtain the values of f.
	 	 	
Calculator keystrokes	
Output
(a)	 f152 35 243	
3  ^  5  enter 	
243
(b)	 fA 2
3B 32/3 < 0.4807	
3  ^  (  (_) 2   3  )  enter 	
0.4807498
(c)	 f1p2 3p < 31.544	
3  ^  p  enter 	
31.5442807
(d)	 fA!2B 3!2 < 4.7288	
3  ^  1  2  enter 	
4.7288043
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
■  Graphs of Exponential Functions
We ﬁrst graph exponential functions by plotting points. We will see that the graphs of 
such functions have an easily recognizable shape.
Example 2  ■  Graphing Exponential Functions by Plotting Points
Draw the graph of each function.
(a)	 f1x2 3x                (b)  g1x2 a 1
3 b
x
Solution    We calculate values of f1x2  and g1x2  and plot points to sketch the graphs 
in Figure 1.
x
fxxc 5 3x
gxxc 5 x
 1 
3c
x
3
	
1
 27 
	
27
2
	
1
 9 
	
9
1
	
1
 3 
	
3
0
	
1
	
1
1
	
3
	
1
 3 
2
	
9
	
1
 9 
3
	
27
	
1
 27 
0
x
y
1
1
y=3˛
y=!  @˛
1
3
Figure 1
Notice that
g1x2 a 1
3 b
x
1
3x 3x f1x2
so we could have obtained the graph of g from the graph of f by reﬂecting in the 
y-axis.
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Figure 2 shows the graphs of the family of exponential functions f1x2 ax for 
various values of the base a. All of these graphs pass through the point 10, 12  because 
Reﬂecting graphs is explained in  
Section 2.6.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

332 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
a0  1 for a 2 0. You can see from Figure 2 that there are two kinds of exponential 
functions: If 0  a  1, the exponential function decreases rapidly. If a  1, the func-
tion increases rapidly (see the margin note).
0
x
y
1
2
y=2˛
y=5˛
y=10˛
y=3˛
y=!  @˛
1
5
y=!  @˛
1
2
y=!  @˛
1
3
y=!  @˛
1
10
Figure 2  A family of exponential 
functions
The x-axis is a horizontal asymptote for the exponential function f1x2 ax. This is 
because when a 1, we have ax S 0 as x S `, and when 0 a 1, we have  
ax S 0 as x S ` (see Figure 2). Also, ax 0 for all x [ R, so the function f1x2 ax 
has domain R and range 10, `2. These observations are summarized in the following box.
Graphs of Exponential Functions
The exponential function
f1x2 ax  a 0, a ? 1
has domain R and range 10, `2 . The line y  0 (the x-axis) is a horizontal 
asymptote of f. The graph of f has one of the following shapes.
Ï=a˛ for a>1
Ï=a˛ for 0<a<1
0
x
y
(0, 1)
0
x
y
(0, 1)
Example 3  ■  Identifying Graphs of Exponential Functions
Find the exponential function f1x2 a x whose graph is given.
(a)  		
(b)
	
0
x
y
(2, 25)
5
_1
1
2
0
x
y
1
_3
1
8
!3,   @
3
To see just how quickly f1x2 2x  
increases, let’s perform the following 
thought experiment. Suppose we  
start with a piece of paper that is a 
thousandth of an inch thick, and we 
fold it in half 50 times. Each time we 
fold the paper, the thickness of the  
paper stack doubles, so the thickness  
of the resulting stack would be 
250/1000 inches. How thick do you 
think that is? It works out to be more 
than 17 million miles!
See Section 3.6, page 295, where the  
arrow notation used here is explained.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.1  ■  Exponential Functions  333
Solution
(a)	 Since f122 a2 25, we see that the base is a  5. So f1x2 5x.
(b)	 Since f132 a3 1
8, we see that the base is a 1
2. So f1x2 A1
2B
x.
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
In the next example we see how to graph certain functions, not by plotting points, 
but by taking the basic graphs of the exponential functions in Figure 2 and applying the 
shifting and reﬂecting transformations of Section 2.6.
Example 4  ■  Transformations of Exponential Functions
Use the graph of f1x2 2x to sketch the graph of each function. State the domain, 
range, and asymptote.
(a)	 g1x2 1 2x        (b)  h1x2 2x        (c)  k1x2 2x1
Solution
(a)	 To obtain the graph of g1x2 1 2x, we start with the graph of f1x2 2x and 
shift it upward 1 unit to get the graph shown in Figure 3(a). From the graph we 
see that the domain of g is the set R of real numbers, the range is the interval 
11,  `2 , and the line y 1 is a horizontal asymptote.
(b)	 Again we start with the graph of f1x2 2x, but here we reﬂect in the x-axis to 
get the graph of h1x2 2x shown in Figure 3(b). From the graph we see that 
the domain of h is the set R of all real numbers, the range is the interval 1`,  02 , 
and the line y 0 is a horizontal asymptote.
(c)	 This time we start with the graph of f1x2 2x and shift it to the right by 1 unit 
to get the graph of k1x2 2x1 shown in Figure 3(c). From the graph we see that 
the domain of k is the set R of all real numbers, the range is the interval 10,  `2 , 
and the line y 0 is a horizontal asymptote.
0
x
y
(c)
1
y=2˛
y=2˛–¡
1
1
0
x
y
(b)
1
y=2˛
y=_2˛
_1
0
x
y
y=2˛
(a)
1
y=1+2˛
2
Horizontal
asymptote
Figure 3
Now Try Exercises 27, 29, and 31	
■
Example 5  ■  Comparing Exponential and Power Functions
Compare the rates of growth of the exponential function f1x2 2x and the power  
function g1x2 x2 by drawing the graphs of both functions in the following viewing 
­rectangles.
(a)	 30, 34 by 30, 84             (b)  30, 64 by 30, 254             (c)  30, 204 by 30, 10004
Shifting and reﬂecting of graphs are  
explained in Section 2.6.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

334 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Solution
(a)	 Figure 4(a) shows that the graph of g1x2 x2 catches up with, and becomes 
higher than, the graph of f1x2 2x at x  2.
(b)	 The larger viewing rectangle in Figure 4(b) shows that the graph of f1x2 2x 
overtakes that of g1x2 x2 when x  4.
(c)	 Figure 4(c) gives a more global view and shows that when x is large, f1x2 2x is 
much larger than g1x2 x2.
8
0
3
(a)
˝=≈
Ï=2x
1000
0
20
(c)
˝=≈
Ï=2x
25
0
6
(b)
˝=≈
Ï=2x
Figure 4
Now Try Exercise 45	
■
■  Compound Interest
Exponential functions occur in calculating compound interest. If an amount of money 
P, called the principal, is invested at an interest rate i per time period, then after one 
time period the interest is Pi, and the amount A of money is
A P Pi P11 i2
If the interest is reinvested, then the new principal is P11 i2 , and the amount after 
another time period is A P11 i2 11 i2 P11 i2 2. Similarly, after a third time 
period the amount is A P11 i2 3. In general, after k periods the amount is
A P11 i2 k
Notice that this is an exponential function with base 1  i.
If the annual interest rate is r and if interest is compounded n times per year, then in 
each time period the interest rate is i  r/n, and there are nt time periods in t years. This 
leads to the following formula for the amount after t years.
Compound Interest
Compound interest is calculated by the formula
A1t2 Pa 1 r
n b
nt
where	
 A1t2 amount after t years
	
 P principal
	
 r interest rate per year
	
 n number of times interest is compounded per year
	
 t number of years
r is often referred to as the nominal  
annual interest rate.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.1  ■  Exponential Functions  335
Example 6  ■  Calculating Compound Interest
A sum of $1000 is invested at an interest rate of 12% per year. Find the amounts in  
the account after 3 years if interest is compounded annually, semiannually, quarterly, 
monthly, and daily.
Solution    We use the compound interest formula with P  $1000, r  0.12, and t  3.
Compounding
n
Amount after 3 years
Annual
    1
1000a1 0.12
1
b
1132
 
$1404.93
Semiannual
    2
1000a1 0.12
2
b
2132
 
$1418.52
Quarterly
    4
1000a1 0.12
4
b
4132
 
$1425.76
Monthly
  12
1000a1 0.12
12 b
12132  
$1430.77
Daily
365
1000a1 0.12
365 b
365132 
$1433.24
Now Try Exercise 57	
■
If an investment earns compound interest, then the annual percentage yield 
(APY) is the simple interest rate that yields the same amount at the end of one year.
Example 7  ■  Calculating the Annual Percentage Yield
Find the annual percentage yield for an investment that earns interest at a rate of  
6% per year, compounded daily.
SOLUTION    After one year, a principal P will grow to the amount
A Pa 1 0.06
365 b
365
P11.061832
The formula for simple interest is
A P11 r2
Comparing, we see that 1  r  1.06183, so r  0.06183. Thus the annual percent-
age yield is 6.183%.
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
Simple interest is studied in Section 1.7.
Discovery Project
So You Want to Be a Millionaire?
In this project we explore how rapidly the values of an exponential function 
increase by examining some real-world situations. For example, if you save a 
penny today, two pennies tomorrow, four pennies the next day, and so on, how 
long do you have to continue saving in this way before you  become a million-
aire? You can find out the surprising answer to this and other questions by com-
pleting this discovery project. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

336 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
concepts
	 1.	 The function f1x2 5x is an exponential function with base 
	 	
 
  ; f122  
  , f102  
  , 
	 	 f122  
  , and f162  
  .
	 2.	 Match the exponential function with one of the graphs 
labeled I, II, III, or IV, shown below.
(a)	 f1x2 2x	
(b)	 f1x2 2x           
(c)	 f1x2 2x	
(d)	 f 1x2 2x
I
y 
x 
0 
1 
2 
y
x
0
1
2
y 
x 
0 
1 
2
II
III
y
x
0
1
2
IV
	 3.	 (a)	 To obtain the graph of g1x2 2x 1, we start with
	 	 	
the graph of f 1x2 2x and shift it  
  
	
(upward/downward) 1 unit.
(b)	 To obtain the graph of h1x2 2x1, we start with the 
graph of f 1x2 2x and shift it to the  
 
(left/right) 1 unit.
	 4.	 In the formula A1t2 PA1 r
nB
nt for compound interest the 
	 	 letters P, r, n, and t stand for  
  ,  
  , 
	 	
 
  , and  
  , respectively, and 
	 	 A1t2  stands for  
  . So if $100 is invested at an  
interest rate of 6% compounded quarterly, then the amount 
	 	 after 2 years is  
  .
	 5.	 The exponential function f1x2 A1
2B
x has the 
	 	
 
 asymptote y  
  . This means 
	 	 that as x S `, we have A1
2B
x S  
  . 
	 6.	 The exponential function f1x2 A1
2B
x 3 has the 
	 	
 
 asymptote y  
  . This means 
	 	 that as x S `, we have A1
2B
x 3 S  
  .
skills
7–10  ■  Evaluating Exponential Functions    Use a calculator to 
evaluate the function at the indicated values. Round your answers 
to three decimals.
	 7.	 f1x2 4x; 
fA1
2B, fA !5B, f122, f10.32
	 8.	 f1x2 3x1; 
fA1
2B, f12.52, f112, fA1
4B
	 9.	 g1x2 A1
3B
x1; 
gA1
2B, gA !2B, g13.52, g11.42
	10.	 g1x2 A4
3B
3x; 
gA1
2B, gA !6B, g132, gA4
3B
11–16  ■  Graphing Exponential Functions    Sketch the graph of the 
function by making a table of values. Use a calculator if necessary.
	11.	 f1x2 2x	
12.	 g1x2 8x
	13.	 f1x2 A1
3B
x	
14.	 h1x2 11.12 x
	15.	 g1x2 311.32 x	
16.	 h1x2 2A1
4B
x
17–20  ■  Graphing Exponential Functions    Graph both functions 
on one set of axes.
	17.	 f1x2 2x and g1x2 2x
	18.	 f1x2 3x and g1x2 A1
3B
x
	19.	 f1x2 4x and g1x2 7x
	20.	 f1x2 A3
4B
x  and 
g1x2 1.5x
21–24  ■  Exponential Functions from a Graph    Find the expo-
nential function f1x2 ax whose graph is given.
	21.	 	
	
22.	 22.	
y
0
x
3
_3
1
(2, 9)
	
	
x
y
0
3
_3
1
5
!_1,   @ 1
	23.	 	
24.	
1
16
!2,    @
x
0
3
_3
y
1

x
y
0
3
1
_3
(_3, 8)
25–26  ■  Exponential Functions from a Graph    Match the expo-
nential function with one of the graphs labeled I or II.
	25.	 f1x2 5x1	
26.	 f1x2 5x 1
	
I
y
x
0
1
1
	
y
x
0
1
1
II
4.1  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.1  ■  Exponential Functions  337
27–40  ■  Graphing Exponential Functions    Graph the function, 
not by plotting points, but by starting from the graphs in Figure 2. 
State the domain, range, and ­asymptote.
	27.	 g1x2 2x 3	
28.	 h1x2 4 A1
2B
x
	29.	 f1x2 3x	
30.	 f1x2 10x
	31.	 f1x2 10x3	
32.	 g1x2 2x3
33.	 y 5x 1	
34.	 h1x2 6 3x
	35.	 y 2 A1
3B
x 	
36.	 y 5x 3
	37.	 h1x2 2x4 1	
38.	 y 3 10x1
39.	 g1x2 1 3x	
40.	 y 3 A1
5B
x
41–42  ■  Comparing Exponential Functions    In these exercises 
we compare the graphs of two exponential functions.
41.	 (a)	 Sketch the graphs of f1x2 2x and g1x2 312x2 .
(b)	 How are the graphs related?
	42.	 (a)	 Sketch the graphs of f1x2 9x/2 and g1x2 3x.
(b)	 Use the Laws of Exponents to explain the relationship  
between these graphs.
43–44  ■  Comparing Exponential and Power Functions    Com-
pare the graphs of the power function f and exponential function 
g by evaluating both of them for x 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, and 10. 
Then draw the graphs of f and g on the same set of axes.
	43.	 f1x2 x3; 
g1x2 3x 	
44.	 f1x2 x4; 
g1x2 4x 
45–46  ■  Comparing Exponential and Power Functions    In these 
exercises we use a graphing calculator to compare the rates of 
growth of the graphs of a power function and an exponential 
function.
	45.	 (a)	 Compare the rates of growth of the functions f1x2 2x 
and g1x2 x5 by drawing the graphs of both functions 
in the following viewing rectangles.
	
(i)	 30, 54 by 30, 204
	
(ii)	 30, 254 by 30, 1074
	
(iii)	 30, 504 by 30, 1084
(b)	 Find the solutions of the equation 2x x5, rounded to 
one decimal place.
	46.	 (a)	 Compare the rates of growth of the functions f1x2 3x 
and g1x2 x4 by drawing the graphs of both functions 
in the following viewing rectangles:
	
(i)	 34, 44 by 30, 204       
	
(ii)	 30, 104 by 30, 50004
	
(iii)	 30, 204 by 30, 1054
(b)	 Find the solutions of the equation 3x  x4, rounded to 
two decimal places.
Skills Plus
47–48  ■  Families of Functions    Draw graphs of the given family 
of functions for c  0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4. How are the graphs related?
	47.	 f1x2 c2x	
48.	 f1x2 2cx
49–50  ■  Getting Information from a Graph    Find, rounded to 
two decimal places, (a) the intervals on which the function is 
increasing or decreasing and (b) the range of the function.
	49.	 y 10xx2
	
50.	  y x2x
51–52  ■  Difference Quotients    These exercises involve a differ-
ence quotient for an exponential function.
	51.	 If f1x2 10x, show that 
f1x h2 f1x2
h
10x a 10h 1
h
b
	52.	 If f1x2 3x1, show that 
f1x h2 f1x2
h
3x1 a 3h 1
h
b
applications
53.	 Bacteria Growth    A bacteria culture contains 1500 bacteria 
initially and doubles every hour.
(a)	 Find a function N that models the number of bacteria 
after t hours.
(b)	 Find the number of bacteria after 24 hours.
	54.	 Mouse Population    A certain breed of mouse was introduced 
onto a small island with an initial population of 320 mice, 
and scientists estimate that the mouse population is doubling 
every year.  
(a)	 Find a function N that models the number of mice after  
t years.
(b)	 Estimate the mouse population after 8 years.
55–56  ■  Compound Interest    An investment of $5000 is depos-
ited into an account in which interest is compounded monthly. 
Complete the table by ﬁlling in the amounts to which the invest-
ment grows at the indicated times or interest rates.
	55.	 r  4%	
56.	 t  5 years
	
Time 
(years)
Amount
1
2
3
4
5
6
Rate 
per year
Amount
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
	57.	 Compound Interest    If $10,000 is invested at an interest rate 
of 3% per year, compounded semiannually, ﬁnd the value of 
the investment after the given number of years.
(a)	 5 years	
(b)	 10 years	
(c)  15 years
58.	 Compound Interest    If $2500 is invested at an interest rate 
of 2.5% per year, compounded daily, find the value of the 
investment after the given number of years.
(a)	 2 years	
(b)	 3 years	
(c)  6 years
59.	 Compound Interest    If $500 is invested at an interest rate of 
3.75% per year, compounded quarterly, find the value of the 
investment after the given number of years.
(a)	 1 year	
(b)	 2 years	
(c)  10 years
	60.	 Compound Interest    If $4000 is borrowed at a rate of 5.75% 
interest per year, compounded quarterly, ﬁnd the amount due 
at the end of the given number of years.
(a)	 4 years	
(b)	 6 years	
(c)  8 years
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

338 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
61–62  ■  Present Value    The present value of a sum of money 
is the amount that must be invested now, at a given rate of inter-
est, to produce the desired sum at a later date.
	61.	 Find the present value of $10,000 if interest is paid at a  
rate of 9% per year, compounded semiannually, for  
3 years.
	62.	 Find the present value of $100,000 if interest is paid  
at a rate of 8% per year, compounded monthly, for  
5 years.
	63.	 Annual Percentage Yield    Find the annual percentage  
yield for an investment that earns 8% per year, compounded 
monthly.
	64.	 Annual Percentage Yield    Find the annual percentage  
yield for an investment that earns 5 1
2% per year, compounded 
quarterly.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	65.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  Growth of an Exponential Function   
Suppose you are offered a job that lasts one month, and you 
are to be very well paid. Which of the following methods of 
payment is more proﬁtable for you?
(a)	 One million dollars at the end of the month
(b)	 Two cents on the ﬁrst day of the month, 4 cents on the 
second day, 8 cents on the third day, and, in general,  
2 n cents on the nth day
	66.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  The Height of the Graph of an  
Exponential Function    Your mathematics instructor asks  
you to sketch a graph of the exponential function
	 	
f1x2 2x
	 	 for x between 0 and 40, using a scale of 10 units to one inch. 
What are the dimensions of the sheet of paper you will need 
to sketch this graph?
4.2  The Natural Exponential Function
■  The Number e  ■  The Natural Exponential Function  ■  Continuously Compounded Interest
Any positive number can be used as a base for an exponential function. In this section 
we study the special base e, which is convenient for applications involving calculus. 
■  The Number e
The number e is deﬁned as the value that 11 1/n2 n approaches as n becomes large. 
(In calculus this idea is made more precise through the concept of a limit.) The table 
shows the values of the expression 11 1/n2 n for increasingly large values of n. 
n
a1 1 1
n b
n
1
2.00000
5
2.48832
10
2.59374
100
2.70481
1000
2.71692
10,000
2.71815
100,000
2.71827
1,000,000
2.71828
It appears that, rounded to ﬁve decimal places, e ^ 2.71828; in fact, the approximate 
value to 20 decimal places is
e < 2.71828182845904523536
It can be shown that e is an irrational number, so we cannot write its exact value in 
decimal form.
■  The Natural Exponential Function
The number e is the base for the natural exponential function. Why use such a strange 
base for an exponential function? It might seem at ﬁrst that a base such as 10 is easier 
to work with. We will see, however, that in certain applications the number e is the best 
The notation e was chosen by Leonhard 
Euler (see page 63), probably ­because it 
is the ﬁrst letter of the word exponential.
© iStockphoto.com/Kubrak78
The Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri, is 
shaped in the form of the graph of a com-
bination of exponential functions (not a 
parabola, as it might ﬁrst appear). 
Speciﬁcally, it is a catenary, which is the 
graph of an equation of the form
y a1ebx ebx2
(see Exercises 17 and 19). This shape was 
chosen because it is optimal for distribut-
ing the internal structural forces of the 
arch. Chains and cables suspended 
between two points (for example, the 
stretches of cable between pairs of tele-
phone poles) hang in the shape of a 
catenary.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.2  ■  The Natural Exponential Function  339
possible base. In this section we study how e occurs in the description of compound 
interest.
The Natural Exponential Function 
The natural exponential function is the exponential function
f1x2 e x
with base e. It is often referred to as the exponential function.
Since 2  e  3, the graph of the natural exponential function lies between the 
graphs of y 2x and y 3x, as shown in Figure 1.
Scientiﬁc calculators have a special key for the function f1x2 e x. We use this key 
in the next example.
Example 1  ■  Evaluating the Exponential Function
Evaluate each expression rounded to ﬁve decimal places.
(a)	 e3            (b)  2e0.53            (c)  e4.8
Solution    We use the e
x  key on a calculator to evaluate the exponential function.
(a)	 e3 ^ 20.08554      (b)  2e0.53 ^ 1.17721      (c)  e4.8 ^ 121.51042
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Example 2  ■  Graphing the Exponential Functions
Sketch the graph of each function. State the domain, range, and asymptote.
(a)	 f1x2 ex                (b)  g1x2 3e 0.5x
Solution
(a)	 We start with the graph of y  e x and reﬂect in the y-axis to obtain the graph of  
y  ex as in Figure 2. From the graph we see that the domain of f is the set R of 
all real numbers, the range is the interval 10, `2 , and the line y 0 is a horizon-
tal asymptote.
(b)	 We calculate several values, plot the resulting points, then connect the points with 
a smooth curve. The graph is shown in Figure 3. From the graph we see that the 
domain of g is the set R of all real numbers, the range is the interval 10, `2 , and 
the line y 0 is a horizontal asymptote.
Figure 3
0
x
y
3
3
y=3e0.5x
_3
6
9
12
x
fxxc 5 3e0.5x
3
  0.67
2
  1.10
1
  1.82
0
  3.00
1
  4.95
2
  8.15
3
13.45
Now Try Exercises 5 and 7	
■
0
x
y
1
y=3˛
1
y=2˛
y=e˛
Figure 1  Graph of the natural  
exponential function
0
x
y
1
1
y=e˛
y=e–˛
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

340 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Example 3  ■  An Exponential Model for the Spread of a Virus
An infectious disease begins to spread in a small city of population 10,000. After t days, 
the number of people who have succumbed to the virus is modeled by the function
√1t2 
10,000
5 1245e0.97t
(a)	 How many infected people are there initially (at time t  0)?
(b)	 Find the number of infected people after one day, two days, and ﬁve days.
(c)	 Graph the function √, and describe its behavior.
Solution
(a)	 Since √102 10,000/15 1245e02 10,000/1250 8, we conclude that 8 
people initially have the disease.
(b)	 Using a calculator, we evaluate √112, √122 , and √152  and then round off to obtain 
the following values.
Days
Infected people
1
  21
2
  54
5
678
(c)	 From the graph in Figure 4 we see that the number of infected people ﬁrst rises 
slowly, then rises quickly between day 3 and day 8, and then levels off when 
about 2000 people are infected.
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
The graph in Figure 4 is called a logistic curve or a logistic growth model. Curves 
like it occur frequently in the study of population growth. (See Exercises 27–30.)
■  Continuously Compounded Interest
In Example 6 of Section 4.1 we saw that the interest paid increases as the number of 
compounding periods n increases. Let’s see what happens as n increases indeﬁnitely. If 
we let m  n/r, then
A1t2 Pa 1 r
n b
nt
Pc a 1 r
n b
n/r
d
rt
Pc a 1 1
m b
m
d
rt
Recall that as m becomes large, the quantity 11 1/m2 m approaches the number e. 
Thus the amount approaches A  Pe rt. This expression gives the amount when the in-
terest is compounded at “every instant.”
Continuously Compounded Interest
Continuously compounded interest is calculated by the formula
A1t2 Pe rt
where     A1t2 amount after t years
	
 P principal
	
 r interest rate per year
	
 t number of years
3000
0
12
Figure 4 
√1t2 
10,000
5 1245e0.97t
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.2  ■  The Natural Exponential Function  341
Example 4  ■  Calculating Continuously Compounded Interest
Find the amount after 3 years if $1000 is invested at an interest rate of 12% per year, 
compounded continuously.
Solution    We use the formula for continuously compounded interest with P  $1000, 
r  0.12, and t  3 to get
A132 1000e10.1223 1000e0.36 $1433.33
Compare this amount with the amounts in Example 6 of Section 4.1.
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 The function f1x2 ex is called the  
 exponential 
	 	 function. The number e is approximately equal to  
  .
	 2.	 In the formula A1t2 Pert for continuously compound inter-
est, the letters P, r , and t stand for  
  ,  
  , and 
 
  , respectively, and A1t2  stands for  
  . So if 
	 	 $100 is invested at an interest rate of 6% compounded continu-
	 	 ously, then the amount after 2 years is  
  .
Skills
3–4  ■  Evaluating Exponential Functions    Use a calculator to 
evaluate the function at the indicated values. Round your answers 
to three decimals.
	 3.	 h1x2 ex; 
h112, h1p2, h132, hA !2 B
	 4.	 h1x2 e3x; 
hA1
3B, h11.52, h112, h1p2
5–6  ■  Graphing Exponential Functions    Complete the table of 
values, rounded to two decimal places, and sketch a graph of the 
function.
	 5. 
x
fxxc 5 1.5ex
2
1
0.5
0
0.5
1
2
	
6. 
x
fxxc 5 4e2x/3
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
7–16  ■  Graphing Exponential Functions    Graph the function, 
not by plotting points, but by starting from the graph of y ex in 
Figure 1. State the domain, range, and asymptote.
	 7.	 g1x2 2 ex	
  8.	 h1x2 ex 3
	 9.	 f1x2 ex	
10.	 y  1  ex
	11.	 y  ex  1	
12.	 f1x2 ex
	13.	 f1x2 ex2	
14.	 y  ex3  4
15.	 h1x2 e x1 3	
16.	 g1x2 ex1 2
Skills plus
	17.	 Hyperbolic Cosine Function    The hyperbolic cosine function 
is deﬁned by
cosh1x2 ex ex
2
(a)	 Sketch the graphs of the functions y 1
2 ex and y 1
2 ex 
on the same axes, and use graphical addition (see Sec- 
tion 2.7) to sketch the graph of y cosh1x2 .
(b)	 Use the definition to show that cosh(x)  cosh(x).
	18.	 Hyperbolic Sine Function    The hyperbolic sine function is 
deﬁned by
sinh1x2 ex ex
2
(a)	 Sketch the graph of this function using graphical addition 
as in Exercise 17.
(b)	 Use the definition to show that sinh(x)  sinh(x)
19.	 Families of Functions   
(a) Draw the graphs of the family of functions
f1x2 a
2
 1ex/a ex/a2
	
	for a  0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2.
(b)	 How does a larger value of a affect the graph?
20.	 The Definition of e    Illustrate the deﬁnition of the number e 
by graphing the curve y 11 1/x2 x and the line y  e on 
the same screen, using the viewing rectangle 30, 404 by 30, 44.
21–22  ■  Local Extrema    Find the local maximum and minimum 
values of the function and the value of x at which each occurs. 
State each answer rounded to two decimal places.
	21.	 g1x2 x x, x 0
	22.	 g1x2 ex e2x
4.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

342 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
applications
	23.	 Medical Drugs    When a certain medical drug is administered 
to a patient, the number of milligrams remaining in the 
­pa­tient’s bloodstream after t hours is modeled by
D1t2 50e0.2t
	 	 How many milligrams of the drug remain in the patient’s 
bloodstream after 3 hours?
	24.	 Radioactive Decay    A radioactive substance decays in such a 
way that the amount of mass remaining after t days is given 
by the function
m1t2 13e0.015t
	 	 where m1t2  is measured in kilograms.
(a)	 Find the mass at time t  0.
(b)	 How much of the mass remains after 45 days?
	25.	 Sky Diving    A sky diver jumps from a reasonable height 
above the ground. The air resistance she experiences is pro-
portional to her velocity, and the constant of proportionality 
is 0.2. It can be shown that the downward velocity of the sky 
diver at time t is given by
√1t2 18011 e0.2t2
	 	 where t is measured in seconds (s) and √1t2  is measured in 
feet per second (ft/s).
(a)	 Find the initial velocity of the sky diver.
(b)	 Find the velocity after 5 s and after 10 s.
(c)	 Draw a graph of the velocity function √1t2 .
(d)	 The maximum velocity of a falling object with wind 
resistance is called its terminal velocity. From the  
graph in part (c) ﬁnd the terminal velocity of this sky 
diver.
√(t)=180(1-e_º.™t)
	26.	 Mixtures and Concentrations    A 50-gal barrel is ﬁlled com-
pletely with pure water. Salt water with a concentration of 
0.3 lb/gal is then pumped into the barrel, and the resulting 
mixture overﬂows at the same rate. The amount of salt in the 
barrel at time t is given by
Q1t2 1511 e0.04t2
	 	 where t is measured in minutes and Q1t2  is measured in 
pounds.
(a)	 How much salt is in the barrel after 5 min?
(b)	 How much salt is in the barrel after 10 min?
(c)	 Draw a graph of the function Q1t2 .
(d)	 Use the graph in part (c) to determine the value that the 
amount of salt in the barrel approaches as t becomes 
large. Is this what you would expect?
Q(t)=15(1-e_º.º¢t)
	27.	 Logistic Growth    Animal populations are not capable of 
unrestricted growth because of limited habitat and food sup-
plies. Under such conditions the population follows a logistic 
growth model:
P1t2 
d
1 kect
	 	 where c, d, and k are positive constants. For a certain ﬁsh 
population in a small pond d  1200, k  11, c  0.2, and t 
is ­measured in years. The ﬁsh were introduced into the pond 
at time t  0.
(a)	 How many ﬁsh were originally put in the pond?
(b)	 Find the population after 10, 20, and 30 years.
(c)	 Evaluate P1t2  for large values of t. What value does the 
population approach as t S `? Does the graph shown 
conﬁrm your calculations?
t
P
0
10
20
40
30
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
	28.	 Bird Population    The population of a certain species of  
bird is limited by the type of habitat required for nesting.  
The population behaves according to the logistic growth 
model
n1t2 
5600
0.5 27.5e0.044t
	 	 where t is measured in years.
(a)	 Find the initial bird population.
(b)	 Draw a graph of the function n1t2 .
(c)	 What size does the population approach as time  
goes on?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.2  ■  The Natural Exponential Function  343
	29.	 World Population    The relative growth rate of world popula-
tion has been decreasing steadily in recent years. On the basis 
of this, some population models predict that world population 
will eventually stabilize at a level that the planet can support. 
One such logistic model is
P1t2 
73.2
6.1 5.9e0.02t
	 	 where t  0 is the year 2000 and population is measured in 
­billions.
(a)	 What world population does this model predict for the 
year 2200? For 2300?
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the function P for the years 2000 to 
2500.
(c)	 According to this model, what size does the world popu-
lation seem to approach as time goes on?
30.	 Tree Diameter    For a certain type of tree the diameter  
D (in feet) depends on the tree’s age t (in years) according  
to the logistic growth model
D1t2 
5.4
1 2.9e0.01t
	 	 Find the diameter of a 20-year-old tree.
t
D
0
100
700
300
500
5
4
3
2
1
31–32  ■  Compound Interest    An investment of $7000 is depos-
ited into an account in which interest is compounded continu-
ously. Complete the table by ﬁlling in the amounts to which the 
investment grows at the indicated times or interest rates.
	31.	 r  3%	
32.	 t  10 years
	 	
Time 
(years)
Amount
1
2
3
4
5
6
	
	
Rate  
per year
Amount
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
	33.	 Compound Interest    If $2000 is invested at an interest rate 
of 3.5% per year, compounded continuously, find the value  
of the investment after the given number of years.
(a)	 2 years       
(b)	 4 years       
(c)	 12 years
34.	 Compound Interest    If $3500 is invested at an interest rate 
of 6.25% per year, compounded continuously, find the value 
of the investment after the given number of years.
(a)	 3 years       
(b)	 6 years       
(c)	 9 years
35.	 Compound Interest    If $600 is invested at an interest rate  
of 2.5% per year, find the amount of the investment at the 
end of 10 years for the following compounding methods.
(a)	 Annually       
(b)	 Semiannually   
(c)	 Quarterly       
(d)	 Continuously
36.	 Compound Interest    If $8000 is invested in an account for 
which interest is compounded continuously, find the amount 
of the investment at the end of 12 years for the following 
interest rates.
(a)	 2%       
(b)	 3%       
(c)	 4.5%       
(d)	 7%
37.	 Compound Interest    Which of the given interest rates  
and compounding periods would provide the best 
investment?
(a)	 2 1
2% per year, compounded semiannually
(b)	 2 1
4% per year, compounded monthly
(c)	 2% per year, compounded continuously
38.	 Compound Interest    Which of the given interest rates  
and compounding periods would provide the better 
investment?
(a)	 5 1
8% per year, compounded semiannually
(b)	 5% per year, compounded continuously
39.	 Investment    A sum of $5000 is invested at an interest rate  
of 9% per year, compounded continuously.
(a)	 Find the value A1t2  of the investment after t years.
(b)	 Draw a graph of A1t2 .
(c)	 Use the graph of A1t2  to determine when this investment 
will amount to $25,000.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

344 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
4.3 
Logarithmic Functions
■  Logarithmic Functions  ■  Graphs of Logarithmic Functions  ■  Common Logarithms   
■  Natural Logarithms
In this section we study the inverses of exponential functions.
■  Logarithmic Functions
Every exponential function f1x2 ax, with a  0 and a 2 1, is a one-to-one function by 
the Horizontal Line Test (see Figure 1 for the case a  1) and therefore has an inverse 
function. The inverse function f 1 is called the logarithmic function with base a and is 
denoted by loga. Recall from Section 2.8 that f 1 is deﬁned by
f 11x2 y 3 f1y2 x
This leads to the following deﬁnition of the logarithmic function.
Definition of the Logarithmic Function
Let a be a positive number with a ? 1. The logarithmic function with base a, 
­denoted by loga, is deﬁned by
loga x y 3 ay x
So loga x is the exponent to which the base a must be raised to give x.
We read loga x  y as “log base a of  
x is y.”
When we use the deﬁnition of logarithms to switch back and forth between the 
logarithmic form loga x  y and the exponential form a y  x, it is helpful to notice 
that, in both forms, the base is the same.
Logarithmic form    Exponential form
	
loga x  y	
a y  x
Example 1  ■  Logarithmic and Exponential Forms
The logarithmic and exponential forms are equivalent equations: If one is true, then  
so is the other. So we can switch from one form to the other as in the following 
illustrations.
Logarithmic form
Exponential form
log10 100,000 5
105  100,000
log2 8 3
23  8
log2 A1
8B 3
23  1
8 
log5 s r
5r  s
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
By tradition the name of the logarith-
mic function is loga, not just a single 
letter. Also, we usually omit the paren-
theses in the function notation and 
write
loga1x2 loga x
Base
Exponent
Exponent
Base
0
x
y
f(x)=a˛,
a>1
Figure 1  f1x2 ax is  
one-to-one.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.3  ■  Logarithmic Functions  345
It is important to understand that loga x is an exponent. For example, the numbers in 
the right-hand column of the table in the margin are the logarithms (base 10) of the 
numbers in the left-hand column. This is the case for all bases, as the following example 
illustrates.
Example 2  ■  Evaluating Logarithms
(a)	 log10 1000  3	 because    103  1000
(b)	 log2 32  5	
because    25  32
(c)	 log10 0.1  1	 because    101  0.1
(d)	 log16 4 1
2	
because    161/2  4
Now Try Exercises 9 and 11	
■
When we apply the Inverse Function Property described on page 222 to f1x2 ax 
and f 11x2 loga x, we get
 loga1ax2 x  x [ R
 aloga x x  x 0
We list these and other properties of logarithms discussed in this section.
Properties of Logarithms
Property	
Reason
1.	 loga1  0	
We must raise a to the power 0 to get 1.
2.	 loga a  1	
We must raise a to the power 1 to get a.
3.	 loga ax  x	
We must raise a to the power x to get ax.
4.	 aloga x x	
loga x is the power to which a must be raised to get x.
Example 3  ■  Applying Properties of Logarithms
We illustrate the properties of logarithms when the base is 5.
log5 1 0     Property 1       
log5 5 1         Property 2
log5 58 8    Property 3       
5log5 12 12        Property 4
Now Try Exercises 25 and 31	
■
■  Graphs of Logarithmic Functions
Recall that if a one-to-one function f has domain A and range B, then its inverse function 
f1 has domain B and range A. Since the exponential function f1x2 ax with a 2 1 has 
domain R and range 10, `2, we conclude that its inverse function, f 11x2 loga x, has 
domain 10, `2 and range R.
The graph of f 11x2 loga x is obtained by reﬂecting the graph of f1x2 ax in the 
line y  x. Figure 2 shows the case a  1. The fact that y  a x (for a  1) is a very 
rapidly increasing function for x  0 implies that y loga x is a very slowly increasing 
function for x  1 (see Exercise 102).
Since loga 1  0, the x-intercept of the function y  loga x is 1. The y-axis is a ver-
tical asymptote of y loga x because loga x S ` as x S 0.
x
log10 x
104
4
103
3
102
2
10
1
  1
0
101
1
102
2
103
3
104
4
Inverse Function Property:
f11f1x22 x
f1f11x22 x
y=a˛,  a>1
y=loga x
y=x
x
y
1
1
Figure 2  Graph of the logarithmic 
function f1x2 loga x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

346 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Example 4  ■  Graphing a Logarithmic Function by Plotting Points
Sketch the graph of f1x2 log2 x.
SOLUTION    To make a table of values, we choose the x-values to be powers of 2 so 
that we can easily ﬁnd their logarithms. We plot these points and connect them with a 
smooth curve as in Figure 3.
x
log2 x
23
3
22
2
2
1
1
0
21
1
22
2
23
3
24
4
x
y
1
2
3
1
2
4
6
8
_1
_2
_3
_4
f(x)=log¤ x
Figure 3
Now Try Exercise 49	
■
Figure 4 shows the graphs of the family of logarithmic functions with bases 2, 3, 5, 
and 10. These graphs are drawn by reﬂecting the graphs of y 2x, y 3x, y 5x, and 
y 10x (see Figure 2 in Section 4.1) in the line y  x. We can also plot points as an 
aid to sketching these graphs, as illustrated in Example 4.
y=log2 x 
y=log‹ x 
y=logﬁ x 
y=log⁄‚ x 
0
x
y
1
1
Figure 4  A family of logarithmic 
functions
In the next two examples we graph logarithmic functions by starting with the basic 
graphs in Figure 4 and using the transformations of Section 2.6.
Example 5  ■  Reflecting Graphs of Logarithmic Functions
Sketch the graph of each function. State the domain, range, and asymptote.
(a)	 g1x2 log2 x      (b)  h1x2 log21x2
Solution
(a)	 We start with the graph of f1x2 log2 x and reﬂect in the x-axis to get the graph 
of g1x2 log2 x in Figure 5(a). From the graph we see that the domain of g is 
10, `2 , the range is the set R of all real numbers, and the line x 0 is a vertical 
asymptote.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.3  ■  Logarithmic Functions  347
(b)	 We start with the graph of f1x2 log2 x and reﬂect in the y-axis to get the graph 
of h1x2 log21x2  in Figure 5(b). From the graph we see that the domain of h 
is 1`, 02 , the range is the set R of all real numbers, and the line x 0 is a ver-
tical asymptote.
f(x)=log¤ x
f(x)=log¤ x
g(x)=_log¤ x
h(x)=log¤(_x)
(a)
x
y
1
1
1
0
(b)
_1
x
y
1
0
Figure 5
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
Example 6  ■  Shifting Graphs of Logarithmic Functions
Sketch the graph of each function. State the domain, range, and asymptote.
(a)	 g1x2 2 log5 x      (b)  h1x2 log101x 32
Solution
(a)	 The graph of g is obtained from the graph of f1x2 log5 x (Figure 4) by shifting 
­upward 2 units, as shown in Figure 6. From the graph we see that the domain of g 
is 10, `2 , the range is the set R of all real numbers, and the line x 0 is a verti-
cal asymptote.
3
0
x
y
1
1
2
g(x)=2+logﬁ x
f(x)=logﬁ x
Figure 6
(b)	 The graph of h is obtained from the graph of f1x2 log10 x (Figure 4) by shift-
ing to the right 3 units, as shown in Figure 7. From the graph we see that the 
domain of h is 13, `2 , the range is the set R of all real numbers, and the line 
x 3 is a vertical asymptote.
f(x)=log⁄‚ x
h(x)=log⁄‚(x-3)
1
0
x
y
4
1
Asymptote
x=3
Figure 7
Now Try Exercises 63 and 67	
■
Law Enforcement
Mathematics aids law enforcement in 
numerous and surprising ways, from the 
reconstruction of bullet trajectories to 
determining the time of death to calcu-
lating the probability that a DNA sample 
is from a particular person. One interest-
ing use is in the search for missing per-
sons. A person who has been missing for 
several years might look quite different 
from his or her most recent available 
photograph. This is particularly true if the 
missing person is a child. Have you ever 
wondered what you will look like 5, 10, or 
15 years from now?
Researchers have found that different 
parts of the body grow at different rates. 
For example, you have no doubt noticed 
that a baby’s head is much larger relative 
to its body than an adult’s. As another 
example, the ratio of arm length to 
height is 1
3 in a child but about 2
5 in an 
adult. By collecting data and analyzing 
the graphs, researchers are able to deter-
mine the functions that model growth. 
As in all growth phenomena, exponential 
and logarithmic functions play a crucial 
role. For instance, the formula that relates 
arm length l to height h is l  aekh where 
a and k are constants. By studying vari-
ous physical characteristics of a person, 
mathematical biologists model each 
characteristic by a function that de­scribes 
how it changes over time. Models of 
facial characteristics can be programmed 
into a computer to give a picture of how 
a person’s appearance changes over time. 
These pictures aid law enforcement 
agencies in locating missing ­persons.
Mathematics in the Modern World
Bettmann/CORBIS
Hulton-Deutsch Collection/
Historical/Corbis
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

348 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
■  Common Logarithms
We now study logarithms with base 10.
Common Logarithm
The logarithm with base 10 is called the common logarithm and is denoted by 
omitting the base:
log x log10 x
From the deﬁnition of logarithms we can easily ﬁnd that
log 10 1  and  log 100 2
But how do we ﬁnd log 50? We need to ﬁnd the exponent y such that 10 y  50. Clearly, 
1 is too small and 2 is too large. So
1 log 50 2
To get a better approximation, we can experiment to ﬁnd a power of 10 closer to 50. 
Fortunately, scientiﬁc calculators are equipped with a log  key that directly gives val-
ues of common logarithms.
Example 7  ■  Evaluating Common Logarithms
Use a calculator to ﬁnd appropriate values of f1x2 log x, and use the values to 
sketch the graph.
SOLUTION    We make a table of values, using a calculator to evaluate the function at 
those values of x that are not powers of 10. We plot those points and connect them by 
a smooth curve as in Figure 8.
x
log x
  0.01
2
  0.1
1
  0.5
0.301
  1
0
  4
0.602
  5
0.699
10
1
Figure 8
f(x)=log x
0
x
y
2
2
4
6
8
10
12
_1
1
Now Try Exercise 51	
■
Scientists model human response to stimuli (such as sound, light, or pressure) using 
logarithmic functions. For example, the intensity of a sound must be increased many-
fold before we “feel” that the loudness has simply doubled. The psychologist Gustav 
Fechner formulated the law as
S k loga I
I0
b
where S is the subjective intensity of the stimulus, I is the physical intensity of the 
stimulus, I0 stands for the threshold physical intensity, and k is a constant that is differ-
ent for each sensory stimulus.
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs 
Division
John NapieR (1550–1617) was a Scot-
tish landowner for whom mathematics 
was a hobby. We know him today 
because of his key invention: logarithms, 
which he published in 1614 under the 
title A Description of the Marvelous Rule of 
Logarithms. In Napier’s time, logarithms 
were used exclusively for simplifying 
complicated calculations. For example, to 
multiply two large numbers, we would 
write them as powers of 10. The expo-
nents are simply the logarithms of the 
numbers. For instance,
4532 57783
            < 103.65629 104.76180
             108.41809
            < 261,872,564
The idea is that multiplying powers of 
10 is easy (we simply add their exponents). 
Napier produced extensive tables giving 
the logarithms (or exponents) of numbers. 
Since the advent of calculators and com-
puters, logarithms are no longer used for 
this purpose. The logarithmic functions, 
however, have found many applications, 
some of which are described in this 
chapter.
Napier wrote on many topics. One of 
his most colorful works is a book entitled  
A Plaine Discovery of the Whole Revelation of 
Saint John, in which he predicted that the 
world would end in the year 1700.
Human response to sound and light  
intensity is logarithmic.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.3  ■  Logarithmic Functions  349
Example 8  ■  Common Logarithms and Sound
The perception of the loudness B (in decibels, dB) of a sound with physical intensity I 
(in W/m2) is given by
B 10  loga I
I0
b
where I0 is the physical intensity of a barely audible sound. Find the decibel level 
(loudness) of a sound whose physical intensity I is 100 times that of I0.
SOLUTION    We ﬁnd the decibel level B by using the fact that I  100I0.
 B 10  loga I
I0
b
        Deﬁnition of B
  10  loga 100I0
I0
b         I  100I0
  10  log 100
        Cancel I0
  10 # 2 20
        Deﬁnition of log
The loudness of the sound is 20 dB.
Now Try Exercise 97	
■
■  Natural Logarithms
Of all possible bases a for logarithms, it turns out that the most convenient choice for 
the purposes of calculus is the number e, which we deﬁned in Section 4.2.
Natural Logarithm
The logarithm with base e is called the natural logarithm and is denoted by ln:
ln x loge x
The natural logarithmic function y  ln x is the inverse function of the natural expo-
nential function y  e x. Both functions are graphed in Figure 9. By the deﬁnition of 
inverse functions we have
ln x y 3 ey x
If we substitute a  e and write “ln” for “loge” in the properties of logarithms men-
tioned earlier, we obtain the following properties of natural logarithms.
Properties of Natural Logarithms
Property	
Reason
1.	 ln 1  0	
We must raise e to the power 0 to get 1.
2.	 ln e  1	
We must raise e to the power 1 to get e.
3.	 ln e x  x	
We must raise e to the power x to get e x.
4.	 eln x  x	
ln x is the power to which e must be raised to get x.
We study the decibel scale in more  
detail in Section 4.7.
The notation ln is an abbreviation for 
the Latin name logarithmus naturalis.
Figure 9  Graph of the natural  
logarithmic function
y=x
y=e˛
y=ln x
x
y
1
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

350 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Calculators are equipped with an ln  key that directly gives the values of natural 
­logarithms.
Example 9  ■  Evaluating the Natural Logarithm Function
(a)	 ln e8  8	
Deﬁnition of natural logarithm
(b)	 lna 1
e 2 b ln e2 2	
Deﬁnition of natural logarithm
(c)	 ln 5 ^ 1.609	
Use ln  key on calculator
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
Example 10  ■  Finding the Domain of a Logarithmic Function
Find the domain of the function f1x2 ln14 x22 .
SOLUTION    As with any logarithmic function, ln x is deﬁned when x  0. Thus the 
domain of f is
 5x 0  4 x2 06 5x 0  x2 46 5x @ 0 x 0 26
  5x 0  2 x 26 12, 22
Now Try Exercise 73	
■
Example 11  ■  Drawing the Graph of a Logarithmic Function
Draw the graph of the function y x ln14 x22 , and use it to ﬁnd the asymptotes 
and local maximum and minimum values.
SOLUTION    As in Example 10 the domain of this function is the interval 12, 22, so 
we choose the viewing rectangle 33, 34 by 33, 34. The graph is shown in Figure 10, 
and from it we see that the lines x  2 and x  2 are vertical asymptotes.
3
_3
_3
3
Figure 10 
y x ln14 x22
Discovery Project
Orders of Magnitude
In this project we explore how to compare the sizes of real-world objects using 
logarithms. For example, how much bigger is an elephant than a flea? How much 
smaller is a man than a giant redwood? It is difficult to compare objects of such 
enormously varying sizes. In this project we learn how logarithms can be used to 
define the concept of “order of magnitude,” which provides a simple and mean-
ingful way of comparison. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© Mason Vranish/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.3  ■  Logarithmic Functions  351
concepts
	 1.	 log x is the exponent to which the base 10 must be raised to get
	 	
 
  . So we can complete the following table for log x.
x
103
102
101
100
101
102
103
101/2
log x
	 2.	 The function f1x2 log9 x is the logarithm function  
with base  
  . So f192  
  ,  
f112  
  , fA1
9B  
  , f1812  
  , 
and f132  
  .
	 3.	 (a)	 53  125, so log
  
	
	 (b)	 log5 25  2, so 
  
	 4.	 Match the logarithmic function with its graph.
(a)	 f1x2 log2  x	
(b)	 f1x2 log21x2        
(c)	 f1x2 log2 x	
(d)	 f 1x2 log21x2
I
y
x
0
2
1
II
y
x
0
2
1
IV
y
x
0
2
1
III
y
x
0
2
1
	 5.	 The natural logarithmic function f1x2 ln x has the  
 
 asymptote x  
  . 
	 6.	 The logarithmic function f1x2 ln1x 12 has the  
 
 asymptote x  
  . 
skills
7–8  ■  Logarithmic and Exponential Forms    Complete the table 
by ﬁnding the appropriate logarithmic or exponential form of the 
equation, as in Example 1.
	 7.	
Logarithmic 
form
Exponential  
form
log8 8 1
log8 64 2
82/3  4
83  512
log8A1
8B 1
82 1
64
	 8.	
Logarithmic 
form
Exponential  
form
43  64
log 4 2 1
2
43/2 8
log4A 1
16B 2
log4A1
2B 1
2
45/2 1
32
9–16  ■  Exponential Form    Express the equation in exponential 
form.
	 9.	 (a)  log3 81 4	
(b)	 log3 1 0
	10.	 (a)  log5A1
5B 1	
(b)	 log4 64 3
	11.	 (a)	 log8 2 1
3	
(b)	 log10 0.01 2
	12.	 (a)	 log5A 1
125B 3	
(b)	 log8 4 2
3
	13.	 (a)	 log3 5 x	
(b)	 log713y2 2
14.	 (a)	 log6 z 1	
(b)	 log10 3 2t
15.	 (a)	 ln 5 3y	
(b)	 ln1t 12 1
	16.	 (a)	 ln1x 12 2	
(b)	 ln1x 12 4
17–24  ■  Logarithmic Form    Express the equation in logarithmic 
form.
	17.	 (a)	 104 10,000	
(b)	 52 1
25
	18.	 (a)	 62 36	
(b)	 101 1
10
4.3  Exercises
The function has a local maximum point to the right of x  1 and a local minimum 
point to the left of x  1. By zooming in and tracing along the graph with the cur-
sor, we ﬁnd that the local maximum value is approximately 1.13 and this occurs when  
x ^ 1.15. Similarly (or by noticing that the function is odd), we ﬁnd that the local 
minimum value is about 1.13, and it occurs when x ^ 1.15.
Now Try Exercise 79	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	19.	 (a)	 81 1
8	
(b)	 23 1
8
	20.	 (a)	 43/2  0.125	
(b)	 73  343
21.	 (a)	 4x 70	
(b)	 35 „
22.	 (a)	 32x 10	
(b)	 104x 0.1
	23.	 (a)	 ex  2	
(b)	 e3  y
	24.	 (a)	 ex1  0.5	
(b)	 e0.5x  t
25–34  ■  Evaluating Logarithms    Evaluate the expression.
	25.	 (a)  log2 2	
(b)	 log5 1	
(c)	 log6 65
	26.	 (a)	 log3 37	
(b)	 log4 64	
(c)	 log5 125
	27.	 (a)	 log6 36	
(b)	 log9 81	
(c)	 log7 710
	28.	 (a)	 log2 32	
(b)	 log8 817	
(c)	 log6 1
	29.	 (a)	 log3A 1
 27 B	
(b)	 log10 !10	
(c)	 log5 0.2
	30.	 (a)	 log5 125	
(b)	 log 49 7	
(c)	 log9 !3
	31.	 (a)	 3log3 5	
(b)	 5log5 27	
(c)	 eln 10
32.	 (a)	 eln !3	
(b)	 eln11/p2	
(c)	 10log 13
	33.	 (a)	 log8 0.25	
(b)	 ln e4	
(c)	 ln11/e2
	34.	 (a)	 log4 !2	
(b)	 log4A1
2B	
(c)	 log4 8
35–44  ■  Logarithmic Equations    Use the deﬁnition of the loga-
rithmic function to ﬁnd x.
	35.	 (a)	 log4 x 3	
(b)	 log10 0.01 x
	36.	 (a)	 log3 x 2	
(b)	 log5 125 x
37.	 (a)	 ln x 3	
(b)	 ln e2 x
38.	 (a)	 ln x 1	
(b)	 ln11/e2 x
	39.	 (a)	 log7A 1
49B x	
(b)	 log2 x 5
	40.	 (a)	 log4 2  x	
(b)	 log4 x  2
	41.	 (a)	 log2A1
2B x	
(b)	 log10 x 3
42.	 (a)	 logx 1000  3	
(b)	 logx 25  2
	43.	 (a)	 logx 16  4	
(b)	 logx 8 3
2
	44.	 (a)	 logx 6 1
2	
(b)	 logx 3 1
3
45–48  ■  Evaluating Logarithms    Use a calculator to evaluate the 
expression, correct to four decimal places.
	45.	 (a)	 log 2	
(b)	 log 35.2	
(c)	 logA2
3B
	46.	 (a)	 log 50	
(b)	 log !2	
(c)	 log13 !22
	47.	 (a)	 ln 5	
(b)	 ln 25.3	
(c)	 ln11 !32
	48.	 (a)	 ln 27	
(b)	 ln 7.39	
(c)	 ln 54.6
49–52  ■  Graphing Logarithmic Functions    Sketch the graph of 
the function by plotting points.
	49.	 f1x2 log3 x	
50.	 g1x2 log4 x
	51.	 f1x2 2 log x	
52.	 g1x2 1 log x
53–56  ■  Finding Logarithmic Functions    Find the function of 
the form y  loga x whose graph is given.
	53.	
x
y
0
1
5
(5, 1)
1
	
54.	
0
x
y
1
!   , _1@
1
2
_1
1
55.	
0
x
y
1
3
1
!3,   @
1
2
	
56.	
0
x
y
1
9
6
3
(9, 2)
1
57–58  ■  Graphing Logarithmic Functions    Match the logarith-
mic function with one of the graphs ­labeled I or II.
	57.	 f1x2 2 ln x	
58.	 f1x2 ln1x 22
y
(1, 2)
x
0
1
2
I
	
II y
(3, 0)
x
1
3
0
x=2
	59.	 Graphing    Draw the graph of y  4x, then use it to draw the 
graph of y  log4 x.
	60.	 Graphing    Draw the graph of y  3x, then use it to draw the 
graph of y  log3 x.
61–72  ■  Graphing Logarithmic Functions    Graph the function, 
not by plotting points, but by starting from the graphs in Figures 
4 and 9. State the domain, range, and asymptote.
61.	 g1x2 log51x2 	
62.	 f1x2 log10 x
63.	 f1x2 log21x 42 	
64.	 g1x2 ln1x 22
65.	 h1x2 ln1x 52 	
66.	 g1x2 log61x 32
	67.	 y  2  log3 x	
68.	 y  1  log10 x
69.	 y log31x 12 2	
70.	 y 1 ln1x2
	71.	 y 0  ln x 0 	
72.	 y ln 0  x 0
73–78  ■  Domain    Find the domain of the function.
	73.	 f1x2 log101x 32 	
74.	 f1x2 log518 2x2
75.	 g1x2 log31x2 12 	
76.	 g1x2 ln1x x22
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.3  ■  Logarithmic Functions  353
	77.	 h1x2 ln x ln12 x2
	78.	 h1x2 !x 2 log5110 x2
79–84  ■  Graphing Logarithmic Functions    Draw the graph of 
the function in a suitable viewing rectangle, and use it to ﬁnd the 
domain, the asymptotes, and the local maximum and minimum 
values.
	79.	 y log1011 x22 	
80.	 y ln1x2 x2
	81.	 y x ln x	
82.	 y x1ln x2 2
	83.	 y ln x
x 	
84.	 y x log101x 102
skills plus
85–88  ■  Domain of a Composition    Find the functions f + g and 
g + f and their domains.
85.	 f1x2 2x,    g1x2 x 1	
86.	 f1x2 3x,  g1x2 x2 1
87.	 f1x2 log2 x, g1x2 x 2	
88.	 f1x2 log x, g1x2 x2
	89.	 Rates of Growth    Compare the rates of growth of the func-
tions f1x2 ln x and g1x2 !x by drawing their graphs on 
a common screen using the viewing rectangle 31, 304 by 
31, 64.
	90.	 Rates of Growth   
(a)  By drawing the graphs of the functions
f1x2 1 ln11 x2  and  g1x2 !x
	
	in a suitable viewing rectangle, show that even when a 
­logarithmic function starts out higher than a root func-
tion, it is ultimately overtaken by the root function.
(b)	 Find, rounded to two decimal places, the solutions of the 
equation !x 1 ln11 x2 .
91–92  ■  Family of Functions    A family of functions is given.  
(a) Draw graphs of the family for c  1, 2, 3, and 4. (b) How are 
the graphs in part (a) ­related?
	91.	 f1x2 log1cx2 	
92.	 f1x2 c log x
93–94  ■  Inverse Functions    A function f1x2  is given. (a) Find 
the domain of the function f. (b) Find the inverse function of f.
	93.	 f1x2 log21log10  x2 	
94.	 f1x2 ln1ln1ln x22
	95.	 Inverse Functions   
(a)	 Find the inverse of the function f1x2 
2x
1 2x.
(b)	 What is the domain of the inverse function?
applications
	96.	 Absorption of Light    A spectrophotometer measures the con-
centration of a sample dissolved in water by shining a light 
through it and recording the amount of light that emerges. In 
	
	 other words, if we know the amount of light that is absorbed, 
we can calculate the concentration of the sample. For a certain 
substance the concentration (in moles per liter, mol/L) is 
found by using the ­formula
C 2500 lna I
I0
b
	
	 where I0 is the intensity of the incident light and I is the  
intensity of light that emerges. Find the concentration of the 
substance if the intensity I is 70% of I0.
I0
I
	 97.	 Carbon Dating    The age of an ancient artifact can be deter-
mined by the amount of radioactive carbon-14 remaining in it. 
If D0 is the original amount of carbon-14 and D is the amount 
remaining, then the artifact’s age A (in years) is given by
A 8267 lna D
D0
b
	
	 Find the age of an object if the amount D of carbon-14 that  
remains in the object is 73% of the original amount D0.
	 98.	 Bacteria Colony    A certain strain of bacteria divides every  
3 hours. If a colony is started with 50 bacteria, then the time 
t (in hours) required for the colony to grow to N bacteria is 
given by
t 3 
log1N/502
log 2
	
	 Find the time required for the colony to grow to a million 
­bacteria.
	 99.	 Investment    The time required to double the amount of an 
investment at an interest rate r compounded continuously is 
given by
t ln 2
r
	
	 Find the time required to double an investment at 6%, 7%,  
and 8%.
	100.	 Charging a Battery    The rate at which a battery charges is 
slower the closer the battery is to its maximum charge C0. 
The time (in hours) required to charge a fully discharged 
battery to a charge C is given by
t k lna1 C
C0
b
	
	 where k is a positive constant that depends on the battery.  
For a certain battery, k  0.25. If this battery is fully dis-
charged, how long will it take to charge to 90% of its maxi-
mum charge C0?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

354 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	101.  Difﬁculty of a Task    The difﬁculty in “acquiring a target” 
(such as using your mouse to click on an icon on your  
computer screen) depends on the distance to the target and 
the size of the target. According to Fitts’s Law, the index of 
difﬁculty (ID) is given by
ID 
log12A/W2
log 2
	
	 where W is the width of the target and A is the distance to  
the center of the target. Compare the difﬁculty of clicking 
on an icon that is 5 mm wide to clicking on one that is  
10 mm wide. In each case, assume that the mouse is  
100 mm from the icon.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	102.	 DISCUSS:  The Height of the Graph of a Logarithmic Function 
Suppose that the graph of y  2x is drawn on a coordinate 
plane where the unit of measurement is an inch.
(a)	 Show that at a distance 2 ft to the right of the origin the 
height of the graph is about 265 mi.
(b)	 If the graph of y  log2 x is drawn on the same set of 
axes, how far to the right of the origin do we have to go 
before the height of the curve reaches 2 ft?
	103.	 DISCUSS:  The Googolplex    A googol is 10100, and a  
googolplex is 10googol. Find
log1log1googol22         and        log1log1log1googolplex222
	104.	 DISCUSS:  Comparing Logarithms    Which is larger, log4 17 
or log5 24? Explain your reasoning.
	105.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  The Number of Digits in an Integer   
Compare log 1000 to the number of digits in 1000. Do the 
same for 10,000. How many digits does any number 
between 1000 and 10,000 have? Between what two values 
must the common logarithm of such a number lie? Use your 
observations to explain why the number of digits in any 
positive integer x is “log x‘  1. (The symbol “n‘ is the 
greatest integer function deﬁned in Section 2.2.) How many 
digits does the number 2100 have?
4.4 
Laws of Logarithms
■  Laws of Logarithms  ■  Expanding and Combining Logarithmic Expressions   
■  Change of Base Formula
In this section we study properties of logarithms. These properties give logarithmic 
functions a wide range of applications, as we will see in Sections 4.6 and 4.7.
■  Laws of Logarithms
Since logarithms are exponents, the Laws of Exponents give rise to the Laws of 
Logarithms­.
Laws of Logarithms
Let a be a positive number, with a 2 1. Let A, B, and C be any real numbers with A  0 and B  0.
Law	
Description
1.  loga1AB2 loga A loga B	
The logarithm of a product of numbers is the sum of the logarithms of the 
numbers.
2.	 loga a A
B b loga A loga B	
The logarithm of a quotient of numbers is the difference of the logarithms of the 
numbers.
3.	 loga1AC 2 C loga A	
The logarithm of a power of a number is the exponent times the logarithm of the 
number.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.4  ■  Laws of Logarithms  355
Proof    We make use of the property loga ax  x from Section 4.3.
Law 1    Let loga A u and loga B √. When written in exponential form, these 
equations become
au A  and  a√B
Thus	
 loga1AB2 loga1aua√2 loga1au√2
  u √loga A loga B
Law 2    Using Law 1, we have
loga A loga c a A
B b Bd loga a A
B b loga B
so	
loga a A
B b loga A loga B
Law 3    Let loga A  u. Then au  A, so
	
loga1AC2 loga1au2 C loga1auC2 uC C loga A
■
Example 1  ■  Using the Laws of Logarithms to Evaluate Expressions
Evaluate each expression.
(a)	 log4 2  log4 32
(b)	 log2 80  log2 5
(c)	  1
3 log 8
SOLUTION
(a)	  log4 2 log4 32 log412 # 322 	
Law 1
	 	
  log4 64 3	
Because 64  43
(b)	  log2 80 log2 5 log2A
 80 
5 B
	
Law 2
	 	
  log2 16 4	
Because 16  24
(c)	   1
3 log 8 log 81/3	
Law 3
	 	
  logA1
2B
	
Property of negative exponents
	 	
 < 0.301 	
Calculator
Now Try Exercises 9, 11, and 13	
■
■  Expanding and Combining Logarithmic Expressions
The Laws of Logarithms allow us to write the logarithm of a product or a quotient as 
the sum or difference of logarithms. This process, called expanding a logarithmic ex-
pression, is ­illustrated in the next example.
Example 2  ■  Expanding Logarithmic Expressions
Use the Laws of Logarithms to expand each expression.
(a)	 log216x2             (b)  log51x3y62             (c)  lna ab
!
3 c
b
SOLUTION
(a)	 log216x2 log2 6 log2 x	
Law 1
(b)	  log51x3y62 log5 x3 log5 y6 	
Law 1
	 	
  3 log5 x 6 log5 y	
Law 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

356 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
(c)	  lna ab
!
3 c
b ln1ab2 ln !
3 c
	
Law 2
	 	
  ln a ln b ln c1/3	
Law 1
	 	
  ln a ln b 1
3 ln c 	
Law 3
Now Try Exercises 23, 31, and 37	
■
The Laws of Logarithms also allow us to reverse the process of expanding that was 
done in Example 2. That is, we can write sums and differences of logarithms as a single 
logarithm. This process, called combining logarithmic expressions, is illustrated in the 
next ­example.
Example 3  ■  Combining Logarithmic Expressions
Use the Laws of Logarithms to combine each expression into a single logarithm.
(a)	 3 log x 1
2 log1x 12
(b)	 3 ln s 1
2 ln t 4 ln1t2 12
SOLUTION
(a)	  3 log x 1
2 log1x 12 log x3 log1x 12 1/2        Law 3
	 	
  log1x31x 12 1/22
        Law 1
(b)	  3 ln s 1
2 ln t 4 ln1t 2 12 ln s3 ln t1/2 ln1t 2 12 4        Law 3
	 	
  ln1s3t1/22 ln1t 2 12 4
        Law 1
	 	
  lna
s3!t
1t 2 12 4 b
        Law 2
Now Try Exercises 51 and 53	
■
Warning    Although the Laws of Logarithms tell us how to compute the logarithm of a 
product or a quotient, there is no corresponding rule for the logarithm of a sum or a 
difference. For instance,
 loga1x y2 loga x loga y
In fact, we know that the right side is equal to loga1xy2 . Also, don’t improperly simplify 
quotients or powers of logarithms. For instance,
 log 6
log 2 log a 6
2 b  and  1log2 x2 3 3 log2 x
Logarithmic functions are used to model a variety of situations involving human 
behavior. One such behavior is how quickly we forget things we have learned. For ex-
ample, if you learn algebra at a certain performance level (say, 90% on a test) and then 
don’t use algebra for a while, how much will you retain after a week, a month, or a 
year? Hermann Ebbinghaus (1850–1909) studied this phenomenon and formulated the 
law described in the next example.
Example 4  ■  The Law of Forgetting
If a task is learned at a performance level P0, then after a time interval t the perfor-
mance level P satisﬁes
log P log P0 c log1t 12
where c is a constant that depends on the type of task and t is measured in months.
(a)	 Solve for P.
(b)	 If your score on a history test is 90, what score would you expect to get on a sim-
ilar test after two months? After a year? (Assume that c  0.2.)
Forgetting what we’ve learned depends 
on how long ago we learned it.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.4  ■  Laws of Logarithms  357
SOLUTION
(a)	 We ﬁrst combine the right-hand side.
 log P log P0 c log1t 12        Given equation
 log P log P0 log1t 12 c         Law 3
 log P log 
P0
1t 12 c
        Law 2
 P 
P0
1t 12 c
        Because log is one-to-one
(b)	 Here P0  90, c  0.2, and t is measured in months.
 In 2 months:   t 2   and   P 
90
12 12 0.2 < 72
 In 1 year:  
 t 12   and   P 
90
112 12 0.2 < 54
	 	 Your expected scores after 2 months and after 1 year are 72 and 54, 
respectively.
Now Try Exercise 73	
■
■  Change of Base Formula
For some purposes we ﬁnd it useful to change from logarithms in one base to loga-
rithms in another base. Suppose we are given loga x and want to ﬁnd logb x. Let
y logb x
We write this in exponential form and take the logarithm, with base a, of each side.
 by x
        Exponential form
 loga1b y2 loga x         Take loga of each side
 y loga b loga x         Law 3
 y loga x
loga b        Divide by loga b
This proves the following formula.
Change of Base Formula
logb x loga x
loga b
In particular, if we put x  a, then loga a  1, and this formula becomes
logb a 
1
loga b
We can now evaluate a logarithm to any base by using the Change of Base Formula 
to express the logarithm in terms of common logarithms or natural logarithms and then 
using a calculator.
We may write the Change of Base 
­Formula as
logb x a
1
loga b b loga x
So logb x is just a constant multiple  
of loga x; the constant is 
1
loga b.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

358 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Example 5  ■  Evaluating Logarithms with the Change  
of Base Formula
Use the Change of Base Formula and common or natural logarithms to evaluate each 
logarithm, rounded to ﬁve decimal places.
(a)	 log8 5                (b)  log9 20
SOLUTION
(a)	 We use the Change of Base Formula with b  8 and a  10:
log8 5 log10 5
log10 8 < 0.77398
(b)	 We use the Change of Base Formula with b  9 and a  e:
log9 20 ln 20
ln 9 < 1.36342
Now Try Exercises 59 and 61	
■
Example 6  ■  Using the Change of Base Formula to Graph 	 
a Logarithmic Function
Use a graphing calculator to graph f1x2 log6 x.
SOLUTION    Calculators don’t have a key for log6, so we use the Change of Base For-
mula to write
f1x2 log6 x ln x
ln 6
Since calculators do have an ln  key, we can enter this new form of the function and  
graph it. The graph is shown in Figure 1.
Now Try Exercise 67	
■
concepts
	 1.	 The logarithm of a product of two numbers is the same as
	 	 the  
 of the logarithms of these numbers. So 
	 	 log5125 # 1252  
   
  .
	 2.	 The logarithm of a quotient of two numbers is the same  
as the 
 
 of the logarithms of these numbers. So 
log5 A 25
125B   
   
  .
	 3.	 The logarithm of a number raised to a power is the same as  
the  
 times the logarithm of the number. So  
log5125102  
 #   
  .
	 4.	 We can expand loga x2y
z b  to get  
  .
	 5.	 We can combine 2 log x  log y  log z to get  
.
	 6.	 (a)	 Most calculators can find logarithms with base  
 
and base  
  . To find logarithms with different 
bases, we use the  
 Formula. To find 
log712, we write
log712 log     
log     <  
	 	 (b)	 Do we get the same answer if we perform the calculation 
in part (a) using ln in place of log?
7–8  ■  True or False?
	 7.	 (a)	 log1A B2  is the same as log A log B.
(b)	 log AB is the same as log A log B.
	 8.	 (a)	 log A
B is the same as log A log B.
(b)	 log A
log B is the same as log A log B.
4.4  Exercises
2
_1
0
36
FIGURE 1 
f1x2 log6 x ln x
ln 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.4  ■  Laws of Logarithms  359
skills
9–22  ■  Evaluating Logarithms    Use the Laws of Logarithms to 
evaluate the expression.
	 9.	 log 50 log 200	
10.	 log6 9 log6 24
	11.	 log2 60 log2 15	
12.	 log3 135 log3 45
	13.	 1
4 log3 81	
14.	  1
3 log3 27
	15.	 log5 !5	
16.	 log5 
1
!125
	17.	 log2 6  log215  log2 20
	18.	 log3 100  log3 18  log3 50
	19.	 log4 16100	
20.	 log2 833
	21.	 log1log 1010,0002 	
22.	 ln1ln ee2002
23–48  ■  Expanding Logarithmic Expressions    Use the Laws of 
Logarithms to expand the expression.
	23.	 log3 8x	
24.	 log6 7r
	25.	 log3 2xy	
26.	 log5 4st
27.	 ln a3	
28.	 log "t5
29.	 log21xy2 10	
30.	 ln !ab
	31.	 log21AB22 	
32.	 log3Ax !y B
	33.	 log3
2x
y 	
34.	 ln r
3s
35.	 log5 a 3x2
y3 b 	
36.	 log2 a s5
7t2 b
37.	 log3 "3x5
y
	
38.	 log y3
!2x
	39.	 loga x3y4
z6 b
	
40.	 loga a x2
yz3 b
41.	 ln "x4 2	
42.	 log "
3 x2 4
	43.	 lnax Ä
y
z b 	
44.	 ln 
3x2
1x 12 10
	45.	 log "
4 x2 y2	
46.	 loga
x
!
3 1 x
b
	47.	 log Å
x2 4
1x2 12 1x3 72 2	
48.	 log #x"y!z
49–58  ■  Combining Logarithmic Expressions    Use the Laws of 
Logarithms to combine the expression.
	49.	 log4 6 2 log4 7	
50.	 1
2 log2 5 2 log2 7
	51.	 2 log x 3 log1x 12
52.	 3 ln 2 2 ln x 1
2 ln1x 42
	53.	 4  log x 1
3  log1x2 12 2  log1x 12
	54.	 log51x2 12 log51x 12
	55.	 ln1a b2 ln1a b2 2  ln c
	56.	 21log5 x 2  log5 y 3 log5 z2
	57.	 1
3 log1x 22 3 1
23log x4 log1x2 x 62 24
	58.	 loga b  c loga d  r loga s
59–66  ■  Change of Base Formula    Use the Change of  
Base Formula and a calculator to evaluate the logarithm, 
rounded to six decimal places. Use either natural or common 
logarithms.
	59.	 log2 5	
60.	 log5 2
	61.	 log3 16	
62.	 log6 92
	63.	 log7 2.61	
64.	 log6 532
	65.	 log4 125	
66.	 log12 2.5
	67.	 Change of Base Formula    Use the Change of Base Formula 
to show that
log3 x ln x
ln 3
	 	 Then use this fact to draw the graph of the function 
f1x2 log3 x.
SKILLS Plus
	68.	 Families of Functions    Draw graphs of the family of func-
tions y  loga x for a  2, e, 5, and 10 on the same screen, 
using the viewing rectangle 30, 54 by 33, 34. How are these 
graphs related?
	69.	 Change of Base Formula    Use the Change of Base Formula 
to show that
log e 
1
ln 10
	70.	 Change of Base Formula    Simplify: 1log2 521log5 72
	71.	 A Logarithmic Identity    Show that 
ln1x "x2 12 ln1x "x2 12
applications
	72.	 Forgetting    Use the Law of Forgetting (Example 4) to esti-
mate a student’s score on a biology test two years after he got 
a score of 80 on a test covering the same material. Assume 
that c  0.3 and t is measured in months.
	73.	 Wealth Distribution    Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923) observed 
that most of the wealth of a country is owned by a few mem-
bers of the population. Pareto’s Principle is
log P log c k log W
	 	 where W is the wealth level (how much money a person has) 
and P is the number of people in the population having that 
much money.
(a)	 Solve the equation for P.
(b)	 Assume that k  2.1 and c  8000, and that W is mea-
sured in millions of dollars. Use part (a) to ﬁnd the num-
ber of people who have $2 million or more. How many 
people have $10 million or more?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

360 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	74.	 Biodiversity    Some biologists model the number of species S 
in a ﬁxed area A (such as an island) by the species-area 
relationship
log S log c k log A
	 	 where c and k are positive constants that depend on the type 
of species and habitat.
(a)	 Solve the equation for S.
(b)	 Use part (a) to show that if k  3, then doubling the area 
increases the number of species eightfold.
	75.	 Magnitude of Stars    The magnitude M of a star is a measure 
of how bright a star appears to the human eye. It is deﬁned 
by 
M 2.5 loga B
B0
b
	 	 where B is the actual brightness of the star and B0 is a 
constant.
(a)	 Expand the right-hand side of the equation.
(b)	 Use part (a) to show that the brighter a star, the less its 
magnitude.
(c)	 Betelgeuse is about 100 times brighter than Albiero. Use 
part (a) to show that Betelgeuse is 5 magnitudes less 
bright than Albiero.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	76.	 DISCUSS:  True or False?    Discuss each equation, and determine 
whether it is true for all possible values of the variables. (Ignore 
values of the variables for which any term is undeﬁned.)
(a)	 loga x
y b log x
log y
(b)	 log21x y2 log2 x log2 y
(c)	 log5 a a
b2 b log5 a 2 log5 b
(d)	 log 2z z log 2
(e)	 1log P2 1log Q2 log P log Q
(f)	 log a
log b log a log b
(g)	 1log272 x x log2 7
(h)	 loga aa a
(i)	 log1x y2 log x
log y
(j)	 lna 1
A b ln A
	77.	 DISCUSS:  Find the Error    What is wrong with the following 
argument?
 log 0.1 2 log 0.1
  log10.12 2
  log 0.01
 log 0.1 log 0.01
 0.1 0.01
	78.	 PROVE:  Shifting, Shrinking, and Stretching Graphs of  
Functions    Let f1x2 x2. Show that f12x2 4f1x2 , and 
explain how this shows that shrinking the graph of f horizon-
tally has the same effect as stretching it vertically. Then use 
the identities e2x  e2ex and ln12x2 ln 2 ln x to show 
that for g1x2 ex a horizontal shift is the same as a vertical 
stretch and for h1x2 ln x a horizontal shrinking is the same 
as a vertical shift.
4.5 
Exponential and Logarithmic Equations
■  Exponential Equations  ■  Logarithmic Equations  ■  Compound Interest
In this section we solve equations that involve exponential or logarithmic functions. The 
techniques that we develop here will be used in the next section for solving applied 
­problems.
■  Exponential Equations
An exponential equation is one in which the variable occurs in the exponent. Some 
exponential equations can be solved by using the fact that exponential functions are 
one-to-one. This means that 
ax ay 1 x y
We use this property in the next example. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.5  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Equations  361
Example 1  ■  Exponential Equations
Solve the exponential equation.
(a)	 5x 125            (b)  52x 5x1
SOLUTION
(a)	 We first express 125 as a power of 5 and then use the fact that the exponential 
function f1x2 5x is one-to-one.
 5x 125        Given equation
 5x 53         Because 125 53
 x 3
        One-to-one property
	 	 The solution is x 3.
(b)	 We first use the fact that the function f1x2 5x is one-to-one.
 52x 5x1         Given equation
 2x x 1        One-to-one property
 x 1
        Solve for x
	 	 The solution is x 1.
Now Try Exercises 3 and 7	
■
The equations in Example 1 were solved by comparing exponents. This method is 
not suitable for solving an equation like 5x 160 because 160 is not easily expressed 
as a power of the base 5. To solve such equations, we take the logarithm of each side 
and use Law 3 of logarithms to “bring down the exponent.” The following guidelines 
describe the process.
Guidelines for Solving Exponential Equations
1.	 Isolate the exponential expression on one side of the equation.
2.	 Take the logarithm of each side, then use the Laws of Logarithms to “bring 
down the exponent.”
3.	 Solve for the variable.
Example 2  ■  Solving an Exponential Equation
Consider the exponential equation 3x2 7. 
(a)	 Find the exact solution of the equation expressed in terms of logarithms.
(b)	 Use a calculator to find an approximation to the solution rounded to six decimal 
places.
Law 3: loga AC C loga A
Discovery Project
Super Origami
Origami is the traditional Japanese art of folding paper to create illustrations. In 
this project we explore some thought experiments about folding paper. Suppose 
that you fold a sheet of paper in half, then fold it in half again, and continue to 
fold the paper in half. How many folds are needed to obtain a mile-high stack 
of paper? To answer this question, we need to solve an exponential equation. In 
this project we use logarithms to answer this and other thought questions about 
folding paper. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

362 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
SOLUTION 
(a)	 We take the common logarithm of each side and use Law 3.
 3x2 7
    Given equation
 log13x22 log 7
    Take log of each side
 1x 22log 3 log 7
    Law 3 (bring down exponent)
 x 2 log 7
log 3
    Divide by log 3
 x log 7
log 3 2    Subtract 2
	 	 The exact solution is x log 7
log 3 2.
(b)	 Using a calculator, we find the decimal approximation x < 0.228756.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
Example 3  ■  Solving an Exponential Equation
Solve the equation 8e2x  20.
SOLUTION    We ﬁrst divide by 8 to isolate the exponential term on one side of the 
equation.
 8e2x 20
    Given equation
 e2x 20
8
    Divide by 8
 ln e2x ln 2.5    Take ln of each side
 2x ln 2.5    Property of ln
 x ln 2.5
2
    Divide by 2 (exact solution)
 < 0.458     Calculator (approximate solution)
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Example 4  ■  Solving an Exponential Equation Algebraically  
and Graphically
Solve the equation e32x  4 algebraically and graphically.
SOLUTION 1:  Algebraic
Since the base of the exponential term is e, we use natural logarithms to solve this 
­equation.
 e32x 4
    Given equation
 ln1e32x2 ln 4
    Take ln of each side
 3 2x ln 4
    Property of ln
 2x 3 ln 4
    Subtract 3
 x 1
213 ln 42 < 0.807    Multiply by  1
2
You should check that this answer satisﬁes the original equation.
We could have used natural logarithms 
instead of common logarithms. In  
fact, using the same steps, we get
x ln 7
ln 3 2 < 0.228756
Check Your Answer
Substituting x  0.228756 into the 
original equation and using a calcula-
tor, we get
310.22875622 < 7  ✓
Check Your Answer
Substituting x  0.458 into the original 
equation and using a calculator, we get
8e210.4582 < 20  ✓
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.5  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Equations  363
SOLUTION 2:  Graphical
We graph the equations y  e32x and y  4 in the same viewing rectangle as in  
Figure 1. The solutions occur where the graphs intersect. Zooming in on the point of  
intersection of the two graphs, we see that x ^ 0.81.
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
Example 5  ■  An Exponential Equation of Quadratic Type
Solve the equation e2x e x 6 0.
SOLUTION    To isolate the exponential term, we factor.
	
 e2x ex 6 0
	
Given equation
	
 1ex2 2 ex 6 0
	
Law of Exponents
	  1ex 32 1ex 22 0
	
Factor (a quadratic in ex)
 ex 3 0  or   ex 2 0
	
Zero-Product Property
 ex 3 
 ex 2
The equation e x  3 leads to x  ln 3. But the equation e x  2 has no solution 
because e x  0 for all x. Thus x  ln 3 ^ 1.0986 is the only solution. You should 
check that this answer satisﬁes the original equation.
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
Example 6  ■  An Equation Involving Exponential Functions
Solve the equation  3xex x2ex 0.
SOLUTION    First we factor the left side of the equation.
	
 3xex x2ex 0	
Given equation
	
 x13 x2ex 0	
Factor out common factors
	
 x13 x2 0	
Divide by ex (because ex 2 0)
	
x 0  or  3 x 0	
Zero-Product Property
Thus the solutions are x  0 and x  3.
Now Try Exercise 45	
■
■  Logarithmic Equations
A logarithmic equation is one in which a logarithm of the variable occurs. Some loga-
rithmic equations can be solved by using the fact that logarithmic functions are one-to-
one. This means that 
loga x loga y 1 x y
We use this property in the next example. 
Example 7  ■  Solving a Logarithmic Equation
Solve the equation log1x2 12 log1x 22 log1x 32 .
If we let „  ex, we get the quadratic 
equation
„2 „ 6 0
which factors as
1„ 32 1„ 22 0
5
0
2
y=4
y=e3_2x
Figure 1
Check Your Answer
x 0:
    3102e0 02e0 0  ✓
x  3:
 
3132e3 132 2e3
           9e3 9e3 0  ✓
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

364 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
SOLUTION    First we combine the logarithms on the right-hand side, and then we use 
the one-to-one property of logarithms.  
 log51x2 12 log51x 22 log51x 32        Given equation
 log51x2 12 log531x 22 1x 32 4
        Law 1: loga AB loga A loga B
 log51x2 12 log51x2 x 62
        Expand 
 x2 1 x2 x 6
        log is one-to-one (or raise 5 to each side)
 x 7
        Solve for x
The solution is x 7. (You can check that x 7 satisfies the original equation.)
Now Try Exercise 49	
■
The method of Example 7 is not suitable for solving an equation like log5 x 13 
because the right-hand side is not expressed as a logarithm (base 5). To solve such equa-
tions, we use the following guidelines.
Guidelines for Solving Logarithmic Equations
1.	 Isolate the logarithmic term on one side of the equation; you might ﬁrst 
need to combine the logarithmic terms.
2.	 Write the equation in exponential form (or raise the base to each side of the 
equation).
3.	 Solve for the variable.
Example 8  ■  Solving Logarithmic Equations
Solve each equation for x.
(a)	 ln x  8               
(b)	 log2125 x2 3
SOLUTION
(a)	 	
 ln x 8         Given equation
	 	 	
 x e8        Exponential form
	 	 Therefore x  e8 ^ 2981.
	 	     We can also solve this problem another way.
 ln x 8     Given equation
 eln x e8    Raise e to each side
 x e8    Property of ln
(b)	 The ﬁrst step is to rewrite the equation in exponential form.
 log2125 x2 3     Given equation
 25 x 23     Exponential form (or raise 2 to each side)
 25 x 8
 x 25 8 17
Now Try Exercises 55 and 59	
■
Check Your Answer
If x  17, we get
log2125 172 log2 8 3  ✓
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.5  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Equations  365
Example 9  ■  Solving a Logarithmic Equation
Solve the equation 4 3 log12x2 16.
SOLUTION    We ﬁrst isolate the logarithmic term. This allows us to write the equation 
in exponential form.
 4 3 log12x2 16
    Given equation
 3 log12x2 12
    Subtract 4
 log12x2 4
    Divide by 3
 2x 104     Exponential form (or raise 10 to each side)
 x 5000    Divide by 2
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
Example 10  ■  Solving a Logarithmic Equation Algebraically  
and Graphically
Solve the equation log1x 22 log1x 12 1 algebraically and graphically.
SOLUTION 1:  Algebraic
We ﬁrst combine the logarithmic terms, using the Laws of Logarithms.
 log31x 22 1x 12 4 1     Law 1
 1x 22 1x 12 10    Exponential form (or raise 10 to each side)
 x2 x 2 10    Expand left side
 x2 x 12 0     Subtract 10
 1x 42 1x 32 0     Factor
 x 4  or  x 3
We check these potential solutions in the original equation and ﬁnd that x  4 is 
not a solution (because logarithms of negative numbers are undeﬁned), but x  3 is a 
solution. (See Check Your Answers.)
SOLUTION 2:  Graphical
We ﬁrst move all terms to one side of the equation:
log1x 22 log1x 12 1 0
Then we graph
y log1x 22 log1x 12 1
as in Figure 2. The solutions are the x-intercepts of the graph. Thus the only solution 
is x ^ 3.
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
Example 11  ■  Solving a Logarithmic Equation Graphically
Solve the equation x2 2 ln1x 22 .
SOLUTION    We ﬁrst move all terms to one side of the equation.
x2 2 ln1x 22 0
Then we graph
y x2 2 ln1x 22
In Example 11 it’s not possible to iso-
late x algebraically, so we must solve 
the equation graphically.
Check Your Answer
If x  5000, we get
 4 3 log 2150002 4 3 log 10,000
  4 3142
  16  ✓
Check Your Answers
x  4:
log14 22 log14 12
 log122 log152
	
undeﬁned  ✗
x  3:
  log13 22 log13 12
   
 log 5 log 2 log15 # 22
   
 log 10 1  ✓
Figure 2
3
0
6
_3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
as in Figure 3. The solutions are the x-intercepts of the graph. Zooming in on the  
x-­intercepts, we see that there are two solutions:
x < 0.71  and  x < 1.60
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
Logarithmic equations are used in determining the amount of light that reaches 
various depths in a lake. (This information helps biologists to determine the types of 
life a lake can support.) As light passes through water (or other transparent materials 
such as glass or plastic), some of the light is absorbed. It’s easy to see that the murkier 
the water, the more light is absorbed. The exact relationship between light absorption 
and the distance light travels in a material is described in the next example.
Example 12  ■  Transparency of a Lake
If I0 and I denote the intensity of light before and after going through a material  
and x is the distance (in feet) the light travels in the material, then according to the 
Beer-­Lambert Law,
 1
k lna I
I0
b x
where k is a constant depending on the type of material.
(a)	 Solve the equation for I.
(b)	 For a certain lake k  0.025, and the light intensity is I0  14 lumens (lm). Find 
the light intensity at a depth of 20 ft.
SOLUTION
(a)	 We first isolate the logarithmic term.
  1
k lna I
I0
b x
    Given equation
 lna I
I0
b kx     Multiply by k
 I
I0
ekx
    Exponential form
 I I0ekx    Multiply by I0
(b)	 We ﬁnd I using the formula from part (a).
 I I0ekx
    From part (a)
  14e10.02521202    I0  14, k  0.025, x  20
 < 8.49
    Calculator
	 	 The light intensity at a depth of 20 ft is about 8.5 lm.
Now Try Exercise 99	
■
■  Compound Interest
Recall the formulas for interest that we found in Section 4.1. If a principal P is invested at 
an interest rate r for a period of t years, then the amount A of the investment is given by
 A P11 r2
    Simple interest (for one year)
 A1t2 Pa 1 r
n b
nt
    Interest compounded n times per year
 A1t2 Pe rt
    Interest compounded continuously
The intensity of light in a lake  
diminishes with depth.
2
_2
3
_2
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.5  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Equations  367
We can use logarithms to determine the time it takes for the principal to increase to 
a given amount.
Example 13  ■  Finding the Term for an Investment to Double
A sum of $5000 is invested at an interest rate of 5% per year. Find the time required for 
the money to double if the interest is compounded according to the following methods.
(a)	 Semiannually                  (b)  Continuously
SOLUTION
(a)	 We use the formula for compound interest with P  $5000, A1t2  $10,000,  
r  0.05, and n  2, and solve the resulting exponential equation for t.
 5000a 1 0.05
2
b
2t
10,000
   
P a1 r
n b
nt
A
 11.0252 2t 2
    Divide by 5000
 log 1.0252t log 2
    Take log of each side
 2t log 1.025 log 2
    Law 3 (bring down the exponent)
 t 
log 2
2 log 1.025    Divide by 2 log 1.025
 t < 14.04
    Calculator
	 	 The money will double in 14.04 years.
(b)	 We use the formula for continuously compounded interest with P  $5000, 
A1t2 $10,000, and r  0.05 and solve the resulting exponential equation for t.
 5000e0.05t 10,000    Pert  A
 e0.05t 2
    Divide by 5000
 ln e0.05t ln 2
    Take ln of each side
 0.05t ln 2
    Property of ln
 t ln 2
0.05
    Divide by 0.05
 t < 13.86     Calculator
	 	 The money will double in 13.86 years.
Now Try Exercise 89	
■
Example 14  ■  Time Required to Grow an Investment
A sum of $1000 is invested at an interest rate of 4% per year. Find the time required 
for the amount to grow to $4000 if interest is compounded continuously.
SOLUTION    We use the formula for continuously compounded interest with P  $1000, 
A1t2 $4000, and r  0.04 and solve the resulting exponential equation for t.
 1000e0.04t 4000     Pert  A
 e0.04t 4
    Divide by 1000
 0.04t ln 4     Take ln of each side
 t ln 4
0.04     Divide by 0.04
 t < 34.66    Calculator
The amount will be $4000 in about 34 years and 8 months.
Now Try Exercise 91	
■
Radiocarbon Dating is a method that 
archeologists use to determine the age of 
ancient objects. The carbon dioxide in 
the atmosphere always contains a ﬁxed 
fraction of radioactive carbon, carbon-14 
(14C), with a half-life of about 5730 years. 
Plants absorb carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere, which then makes its way to 
animals through the food chain. Thus, all 
living creatures contain the same ﬁxed 
proportions of 14C to nonradioactive 12C 
as the ­atmosphere.
After an organism dies, it stops assim-
ilating 14C, and the amount of 14C in it 
begins to decay exponentially. We can 
then determine the time that has elapsed 
since the death of the organism by mea-
suring the amount of 14C left in it.
For example, if a donkey bone con-
tains 73% as much 14C as a living donkey 
and it died t years ago, then by the for-
mula for radioactive decay (Section 4.6),
0.73 5 (1.00)e2(t ln 2)/5730
We solve this exponential equation to 
ﬁnd t < 2600, so the bone is about  
2600 years old.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
concepts
	 1.	 Let’s solve the exponential equation 2ex 50.
(a)	 First, we isolate ex to get the equivalent equation 
 
  .
(b)	 Next, we take ln of each side to get the equivalent
	
equation  
  .
(c)	 Now we use a calculator to find x <  
  .
	 2.	 Let’s solve the logarithmic equation 
log 3 log1x 22 log x
(a)	 First, we combine the logarithms on the LHS to get the 
	
equivalent equation  
  .
(b)	 Next, we use the fact that log is one-to-one to get the
	
equivalent equation  
  .
(c)	 Now we find x   
  .
skills
3–10  ■  Exponential Equations    Find the solution of the expo-
nential equation, as in Example 1.
	 3.	 5x1 125	
  4.	 e x2 e9
	 5.	 52x3 1	
  6.	 102x3 1
10
	 7.	 72x3 765x	
  8.	 e12x e3x5
	 9.	 6x21 61x2	
10.	 102x23 109x2
11–38  ■  Exponential Equations    (a) Find the exact solution of 
the exponential equation in terms of logarithms. (b) Use a calcu-
lator to find an approximation to the solution rounded to six deci-
mal places.
	11.	 10x 25	
12.	 10x 4
	13.	 e5x 10	
14.	 e0.4x 8
	15.	 21x 3	
16.	 32x1 5
	17.	 3ex 10	
18.	 2e12x 17
19.	 30011.0252 12t 1000	
20.	 1011.3752 10t 50
	21.	 e14x 2	
22.	 e35x 16
	23.	 257x 15	
24.	 23x 34
	25.	 3x/14 0.1	
26.	 5x/100 2
27.	 411 105x2 9	
28.	 215 3x12 100
29.	 8 e14x 20	
30.	 1 e4x1 20
31.	 4x 212x 50	
32.	 125x 53x1 200
	33.	 5x 4x1	
34.	 101x 6x
35.	 23x1 3x2	
36.	 7x/2 51x
	37.	
50
1 ex 4	
38.	
10
1 ex 2
39–44  ■  Exponential Equations of Quadratic Type    Solve the 
equation.
	39.	 e2x 3ex 2 0	
40.	 e2x e x 6 0
	41.	 e4x 4e2x 21 0	
42.	 34x 32x 6 0
43.	 2x 1012x2 3 0	
44.	 e x 15ex 8 0
45–48  ■  Equations Involving Exponential Functions    Solve the 
equation.
	45.	 x22x 2x 0	
46.	 x210x x10x 2110x2
47.	 4x3e3x 3x4e3x 0	
48.	 x2e x xe x e x 0
49–54  ■  Logarithmic Equations    Solve the logarithmic equation 
for x, as in Example 7.
	49.	 log x log1x 12 log14x2
50.	 log5  x log51x 12 log5 20
51.	 2 log x log 2 log13x 42
52.	 lnAx 1
2B ln 2 2 ln x
53.	 log2 3 log2 x log2 5 log21x 22
54.	 log41x 22 log4 3 log4 5 log412x 32
55–68  ■  Logarithmic Equations    Solve the logarithmic equation 
for x.
	55.	 ln x 10	
56.	 ln12 x2 1
	57.	 log x 2	
58.	 log1x 42 3
	59.	 log13x 52 2	
60.	 log312 x2 3
	61.	 4 log13 x2 3
	62.	 log21x2 x 22 2
	63.	 log2 x log21x 32 2
	64.	 log x log1x 32 1
65.	 log91x 52 log91x 32 1
66.	 ln1x 12 ln1x 22 1
67.	 log51x 12 log51x 12 2
	68.	 log31x 152 log31x 12 2
69–76  ■  Solving Equations Graphically    Use a graphing device 
to ﬁnd all solutions of the ­equation, rounded to two decimal 
places.
	69.	 ln x 3 x	
70.	 log x x2 2
	71.	 x3 x log1x 12 	
72.	 x ln14 x22
	73.	 e x x	
74.	 2x x 1
75.	 4x !x	
76.	 e x2 2 x3 x
77–78  ■  More Exponential and Logarithmic Equations    Solve 
the equation for x.
77.	 22/log5 x 1
16	
78.	 log21log3 x2 4
4.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.5  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Equations  369
skills plus
79–82  ■  Solving Inequalities    Solve the inequality.
	79.	 log1x 22 log19 x2 1
	80.	 3 # log2 x # 4
	81.	 2 10x 5
	82.	 x 2ex  2ex  0
83–86  ■  Inverse Functions    Find the inverse function of f.
83.	 f 1x2 22x
	84.	 f 1x2 3x1
85.	 f 1x2 log21x 12
	86.	 f 1x2 log 3x
87–88  ■  Special Logarithmic Equations    Find the value(s) of x 
for which the equation is true.
	87.	 log1x 32 log x log 3
	88.	 1log x2 3 3 log x
applications
	89.	 Compound Interest    A man invests $5000 in an account that 
pays 8.5% interest per year, compounded quarterly.
(a)	 Find the amount after 3 years.
(b)	 How long will it take for the investment to double?
	90.	 Compound Interest    A woman invests $6500 in an account 
that pays 6% interest per year, compounded continuously.
(a)	 What is the amount after 2 years?
(b)	 How long will it take for the amount to be $8000?
	91.	 Compound Interest    Find the time required for an invest-
ment of $5000 to grow to $8000 at an interest rate of 7.5% 
per year, compounded quarterly.
	92.	 Compound Interest    Nancy wants to invest $4000 in saving 
certiﬁcates that bear an interest rate of 9.75% per year, com-
pounded semiannually. How long a time period should she 
choose to save an amount of $5000?
	93.	 Doubling an Investment    How long will it take for an invest-
ment of $1000 to double in value if the interest rate is 8.5% 
per year, compounded continuously?
	94.	 Interest Rate    A sum of $1000 was invested for 4 years,  
and the interest was compounded semiannually. If this sum 
amounted to $1435.77 in the given time, what was the inter-
est rate?
	95.	 Radioactive Decay    A 15-g sample of radioactive iodine 
­decays in such a way that the mass remaining after  
t days is given by m1t2 15e0.087t, where m1t2  is  
measured in grams. After how many days are there only  
5 g remaining?
	96.	 Sky Diving    The velocity of a sky diver t seconds after 
­jumping is given by √1t2 8011 e0.2t2 . After how many 
seconds is the velocity 70 ft/s?
	 97.	 Fish Population    A small lake is stocked with a certain 
­species of ﬁsh. The ﬁsh population is modeled by the 
function
P 
10
1 4e0.8t
	
	 where P is the number of ﬁsh in thousands and t is  
measured in years since the lake was stocked.
(a)	 Find the ﬁsh population after 3 years.
(b)	 After how many years will the ﬁsh population reach 
5000 ﬁsh?
	 98.	 Transparency of a 
Lake    Environmental sci-
entists measure the inten-
sity of light at various 
depths in a lake to ﬁnd the 
“transparency” of the 
water. Certain levels of 
transparency are required 
for the biodiversity of the 
submerged macrophyte 
population. In a certain 
lake the intensity of light 
at depth x is given by
I 10e0.008x
	
	 where I is measured in lumens and x in feet.
(a)	 Find the intensity I at a depth of 30 ft.
(b)	 At what depth has the light intensity dropped to I  5?
	 99.	 Atmospheric Pressure    Atmospheric pressure P (in kilopas-
cals, kPa) at altitude h (in kilometers, km) is governed by 
the ­formula
lna P
P0
b  h
k
	
	 where k  7 and P0  100 kPa are constants.
(a)	 Solve the equation for P.
(b)	 Use part (a) to ﬁnd the pressure P at an altitude of  
4 km.
	100.	 Cooling an Engine    Suppose you’re driving your car on a 
cold winter day (20F outside) and the engine overheats (at 
about 220F). When you park, the engine begins to cool 
down. The temperature T of the engine t minutes after you 
park satisﬁes the equation
lna T 20
200
b 0.11t
(a)	 Solve the equation for T.
(b)	 Use part (a) to ﬁnd the temperature of the engine after  
20 min 1t  202.
	101.	 Electric Circuits    An electric circuit contains a battery that 
produces a voltage of 60 volts (V), a resistor with a resis­
tance of 13 ohms (), and an inductor with an inductance 
of 5 henrys (H), as shown in the ﬁgure on the following 
page. Using calculus, it can be shown that the current 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

370 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
I I1t2  (in amperes, A) t seconds after the switch is closed 
is I 60
1311 e13t/52 .
(a)	 Use this equation to express the time t as a function of 
the current I.
(b)	 After how many seconds is the current 2 A?
60 V
13 
5 H
Switch
	102.	 Learning Curve    A learning curve is a graph of a function 
P1t2  that measures the performance of someone learning a 
skill as a function of the training time t. At ﬁrst, the rate of 
learning is rapid. Then, as performance increases and 
approaches a maximal value M, the rate of learning 
decreases. It has been found that the function
P1t2 M Cekt
	
	 where k and C are positive constants and C  M is a rea-
sonable model for learning.
(a)	 Express the learning time t as a function of the per­
formance level P.
(b)	 For a pole-vaulter in training, the learning curve is  
given by
P1t2 20 14e0.024t
	
where P1t2  is the height he is able to pole-vault after 
t months. After how many months of training is he able 
to vault 12 ft?
(c)	 Draw a graph of the learning curve in part (b).
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	103.	 DISCUSS:  Estimating a Solution    Without actually solving 
the equation, ﬁnd two whole numbers between which the 
solution of 9x 20 must lie. Do the same for 9x 100. 
Explain how you reached your conclusions.
	104.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  A Surprising Equation    Take loga-
rithms to show that the equation
x1/log x 5
	
	 has no solution. For what values of k does the equation
x1/log x k
	
	 have a solution? What does this tell us about the graph of 
the function f1x2 x1/log x? Conﬁrm your answer using a 
graphing device.
	105.	 DISCUSS:  Disguised Equations    Each of these equations 
can be transformed into an equation of linear or quadratic 
type by applying the hint. Solve each equation.
(a)	 1x 12 log1x12 1001x 12
	
[Hint: Take log of each side.]
(b)	 log2 x log4 x log8 x 11
	
[Hint: Change all logs to base 2.]
(c)	 4x 2x1 3
	
[Hint: Write as a quadratic in 2x.]
4.6 
Modeling with Exponential Functions
■  Exponential Growth (Doubling Time)  ■  Exponential Growth (Relative Growth Rate)   
■  Radioactive Decay  ■  Newton’s Law of Cooling
Many processes that occur in nature, such as population growth, radioactive decay, heat 
diffusion, and numerous others, can be modeled by using exponential functions. In this 
section we study exponential models.
■  Exponential Growth (Doubling Time)
Suppose we start with a single bacterium, which divides every hour. After one hour we 
have 2 bacteria, after two hours we have 22 or 4 bacteria, after three hours we have 23 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.6  ■  Modeling with Exponential Functions  371
or 8 bacteria, and so on (see Figure 1). We see that we can model the bacteria population 
after t hours by f1t2 2t.
Figure 1  Bacteria population
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
If we start with 10 of these bacteria, then the population is modeled by f1t2 10 # 2t. 
A slower-growing strain of bacteria doubles every 3 hours; in this case the population 
is modeled by f1t2 10 # 2t/3. In general, we have the following.
Exponential Growth (Doubling Time)
If the initial size of a population is n0 and the doubling time is a, then the size 
of the population at time t is 
n1t2 n02t/a
where a and t are measured in the same time units (minutes, hours, days, years, 
and so on).
Example 1  ■  Bacteria Population 
Under ideal conditions a certain bacteria population doubles every three hours. Ini-
tially, there are 1000 bacteria in a colony.
(a)	 Find a model for the bacteria population after t hours.
(b)	 How many bacteria are in the colony after 15 hours?
(c)	 After how many hours will the bacteria count reach 100,000?
Solution  
(a)	 The population at time t is modeled by 
n1t2 1000 # 2t/3
	 	 where t is measured in hours.
(b)	 After 15 hours the number of bacteria is 
n1152 1000 # 215/3 32,000
(c)	 We set n1t2 100,000 in the model that we found in part (a) and solve the 
resulting exponential equation for t.
 100,000 1000 # 2t/3
        n1t2 1000 # 2t/3
 100 2t/3
        Divide by 1000
 log 100 log 2t/3
        Take log of each side
 2 t
3
  log 2
        Properties of log
 t 
6
log 2 < 19.93        Solve for t
	 	 The bacteria level reaches 100,000 in about 20 hours.
Now Try Exercise 1	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

372 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Example 2  ■  Rabbit Population 
A certain breed of rabbit was introduced onto a small island 8 months ago. The  
current rabbit population on the island is estimated to be 4100 and doubling every  
3 months. 
(a)	 What was the initial size of the rabbit population?
(b)	 Estimate the population 1 year after the rabbits were introduced to the island.
(c)	 Sketch a graph of the rabbit population.
Solution  
(a)	 The doubling time is a 3, so the population at time t is 
n1t2 n02t/3        Model
	 	 where n0 is the initial population. Since the population is 4100 when t is  
8 months, we have 
 n182 n028/3        From model
 4100 n028/3        Because n182 4100
 n0 4100
28/3         Divide by 28/3 and switch sides
 n0 < 645
        Calculator
	 	 Thus we estimate that 645 rabbits were introduced onto the island. 
(b)	 From part (a) we know that the initial population is n0 645, so we can model 
the population after t months by 
n1t2 645 # 2t/3        Model
	 	 After 1 year t 12, so
n1122 645 # 212/3 10,320
	 	 So after 1 year there would be about 10,000 rabbits.
(c)	 We first note that the domain is t $ 0. The graph is shown in Figure 2.
0
20
20,000
Figure 2  n1t2 645 # 2t/3
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
■  Exponential Growth (Relative Growth Rate)
We have used an exponential function with base 2 to model population growth (in terms 
of the doubling time). We could also model the same population with an exponential 
function with base 3 (in terms of the tripling time). In fact, we can find an exponential 
model with any base. If we use the base e, we get a population model in terms of the 
relative growth rate r: the rate of population growth expressed as a proportion of the 
population at any time. In this case r is the “instantaneous” growth rate. (In calculus  
the concept of instantaneous rate is given a precise meaning.) For instance, if r 0.02, 
then at any time t the growth rate is 2% of the population at time t.
The growth of a population with rela-
tive growth rate r is analogous to the 
growth of an investment with continu-
ously compounded interest rate r.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.6  ■  Modeling with Exponential Functions  373
Exponential Growth (Relative growth rate)
A population that experiences exponential growth increases according to the 
model
n1t2 n0e rt
where	
 n1t2 population at time t
	
 n0 initial size of the population
	
 r relative rate of growth (expressed as a proportion of the 
­population)
	
 t time
Notice that the formula for population growth is the same as that for continuously 
compounded interest. In fact, the same principle is at work in both cases: The growth 
of a population (or an investment) per time period is proportional to the size of  
the population (or the amount of the investment). A population of 1,000,000 will 
increase more in one year than a population of 1000; in exactly the same way, an 
investment of $1,000,000 will increase more in one year than an investment of 
$1000.
In the following examples we assume that the populations grow exponentially.
Example 3  ■  Predicting the Size of a Population
The initial bacterium count in a culture is 500. A biologist later makes a sample  
count of bacteria in the culture and ﬁnds that the relative rate of growth is 40%  
per hour.
(a)	 Find a function that models the number of bacteria after t hours.
(b)	 What is the estimated count after 10 hours?
(c)	 After how many hours will the bacteria count reach 80,000?
(d)	 Sketch a graph of the function n1t2 .
SOLUTION
(a)	 We use the exponential growth model with n0 500 and r  0.4 to get
n1t2 500e0.4t
	 	 where t is measured in hours.
(b)	 Using the function in part (a), we ﬁnd that the bacterium count after 10 hours is
n1102 500e0.4 1102 500e4 < 27,300
(c)	 We set n1t2 80,000 and solve the resulting exponential equation for t.
 80,000 500 # e0.4t
        n1t2 500 # e0.4t
 160 e0.4t
        Divide by 500
 ln 160 0.4t
        Take ln of each side
 t ln 160
0.4
< 12.68        Solve for t
	 	 The bacteria level reaches 80,000 in about 12.7 hours.
(d)	 The graph is shown in Figure 3.
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
0
5000
6
500
n(t)=500eº—¢‰
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Example 4  ■  Comparing Different Rates of Population Growth
In 2000 the population of the world was 6.1 billion, and the relative rate of growth 
was 1.4% per year. It is claimed that a rate of 1.0% per year would make a signiﬁcant 
­difference in the total population in just a few decades. Test this claim by estimating 
the population of the world in the year 2050 using a relative rate of growth of  
(a) 1.4% per year and (b) 1.0% per year.
Graph the population functions for the next 100 years for the two relative growth 
rates in the same viewing rectangle.
SOLUTION
(a)	 By the exponential growth model we have
n1t2 6.1e0.014t
	 	 where n1t2  is measured in billions and t is measured in years since 2000. Because 
the year 2050 is 50 years after 2000, we ﬁnd
n1502 6.1e0.014 1502 6.1e0.7 < 12.3
	 	 The estimated population in the year 2050 is about 12.3 billion.
(b)	 We use the function
 n1t2 6.1e0.010t
	 	 and ﬁnd
 n1502 6.1e0.010 1502 6.1e0.50 < 10.1
	 	 The estimated population in the year 2050 is about 10.1 billion.
The graphs in Figure 4 show that a small change in the relative rate of growth will, 
over time, make a large difference in population size.
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
Example 5  ■  Expressing a Model in Terms of e 
A culture starts with 10,000 bacteria, and the number doubles every 40 minutes.
(a)	 Find a function n1t2 n02t/a that models the number of bacteria after t hours.
(b)	 Find a function n1t2 n0ert that models the number of bacteria after t hours.
(c)	 Sketch a graph of the number of bacteria at time t.
Solution  
(a)	 The initial population is n0 10,000. The doubling time is a 40 min 2/3 h. 
Since 1/a 3/2 1.5, the model is
n1t2 10,000 # 21.5t
(b)	 The initial population is n0 10,000. We need to find the relative growth rate r. 
Since there are 20,000 bacteria when t 2/3 h, we have
 20,000 10,000er12/32
        n1t2 10,000ert
 2 er12/32
        Divide by 10,000
 ln 2 ln er12/32
        Take ln of each side
 ln 2 r12/32
        Property of ln
 r 3 ln 2
2
< 1.0397        Solve for r
	 	 Now that we know the relative growth rate r, we can find the model:
n1t2 10,000e1.0397t
The relative growth of world popula-
tion has been declining over the past 
few decades—from 2% in 1995 to 
1.1% in 2013.
Standing Room Only
The population of the world was about 
6.1 billion in 2000 and was increasing at 
1.4% per year. Assuming that each per-
son occupies an average of 4 ft2 of the 
surface of the earth, the exponential 
model for population growth projects 
that by the year 2801 there will be stand­
ing room only! (The total land surface 
area of the world is about 1.8  1015 ft2.)
30
0
100
n(t)=6.1e0.014t
n(t)=6.1e0.01t
FIGURE 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.6  ■  Modeling with Exponential Functions  375
(c)	 We can graph the model in part (a) or the one in part (b). The graphs are identi-
cal. See Figure 5.
FIGURE 5  Graphs of y 10,000 # 21.5t  
and y 10,000e1.0397t
0
4
500,000
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
■  Radioactive Decay
Radioactive substances decay by spontaneously emitting radiation. The rate of decay is 
proportional to the mass of the substance. This is analogous to population growth except that 
the mass decreases. Physicists express the rate of decay in terms of half-life, the time it takes 
for a sample of the substance to decay to half its original mass. For example, the half-life of 
radium-226 is 1600 years, so a 100-g sample decays to 50 g Aor 1
2 100 gB in 1600 years, 
then to 25 g Aor 1
2 1
2 100 gB in 3200 years, and so on. In general, for a radioactive 
substance with mass m0 and half-life h, the amount remaining at time t is modeled by
m1t2 m02t/h
where h and t are measured in the same time units (minutes, hours, days, years, and so on). 
To express this model in the form m1t2 m0ert, we need to find the relative decay 
rate r. Since h is the half-life, we have
 m1t2 m0ert         Model
 m0
2 m0erh        h is the half-life
 1
2 erh
        Divide by m0
 ln 1
2 rh
        Take ln of each side
 r ln 2
h
        Solve for r
This last equation allows us to ﬁnd the relative decay rate r from the half-life h.
The half-lives of radioactive elements 
vary from very long to very short. Here 
are some examples.
Element	
Half-life
Thorium-232	
14.5 billion years
Uranium-235	
4.5 billion years
Thorium-230	
80,000 years
Plutonium-239	
24,360 years
Carbon-14	
5,730 years
Radium-226	
1,600 years
Cesium-137	
30 years
Strontium-90	
28 years
Polonium-210	
140 days
Thorium-234	
25 days
Iodine-135	
8 days
Radon-222	
3.8 days
Lead-211	
3.6 minutes
Krypton-91	
10 seconds
Discovery Project
Modeling Radiation with Coins and Dice
Radioactive elements decay when their atoms spontaneously emit radiation  
and change into smaller, stable atoms. But if atoms decay randomly, how is  
it possible to find a function that models their behavior? We’ll try to answer  
this question by experimenting with randomly tossing coins and rolling dice. 
The experiments allow us to experience how a very large number of random 
events can result in predictable exponential results. You can find the project at 
www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

376 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Radioactive Decay Model
If m0 is the initial mass of a radioactive substance with half-life h, then the 
mass remaining at time t is modeled by the function
m1t2 m0ert
where  r ln 2
h  is the relative decay rate.
Example 6  ■  Radioactive Decay
Polonium-210 1 210Po2  has a half-life of 140 days. Suppose a sample of this  
substance has a mass of 300 mg.
(a)	 Find a function m1t2 m02t/h that models the mass remaining after  
t days.
(b)	 Find a function m1t2 m0ert that models the mass remaining after  
t days.
(c)	 Find the mass remaining after one year.
(d)	 How long will it take for the sample to decay to a mass of 200 mg?
(e)	 Draw a graph of the sample mass as a function of time.
SOLUTION
(a)	 We have m0 300 and h 140, so the amount remaining after t days is
m1t2 300 # 2t/140
(b)	 We have m0 300 and r ln 2/140 < 0.00495, so the amount remaining 
after t days is
m1t2 300 # e0.00495t
(c)	 We use the function we found in part (a) with t  365 (1 year):
m13652 300e0.0049513652 < 49.256
	 	 Thus approximately 49 mg of 210Po remains after 1 year.
(d)	 We use the function that we found in part (b) with m1t2 200 and solve the 
resulting exponential equation for t:
 300e0.00495t 200
   
m1t2 m0ert
 e0.00495t 2
3
    Divide by 300
 ln e0.00495t ln 2
3
    Take ln of each side
 0.00495t ln 2
3
    Property of ln
 t  
ln 2
3
0.00495    Solve for t
 t < 81.9
    Calculator
	 	 The time required for the sample to decay to 200 mg is about 82 days.
(e)	 We can graph the model in part (a) or the one in part (b). The graphs are identi-
cal. See Figure 6.
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
In parts (c) and (d) we can also use the 
model found in part (a). Check that the 
result is the same using either model.
0
50
m(t)=300 e_0.00495t
t
100
200
300
m(t)
Time (days)
Amount of ™¡ºPo (mg)
150
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.6  ■  Modeling with Exponential Functions  377
■  Newton’s Law of Cooling
Newton’s Law of Cooling states that the rate at which an object cools is proportional to 
the temperature difference between the object and its surroundings, provided that the 
temperature difference is not too large. By using calculus, the following model can be 
deduced from this law.
Newton’s Law of Cooling
If D0 is the initial temperature difference between an object and its surround-
ings, and if its surroundings have temperature Ts, then the temperature of the 
object at time t is modeled by the function
T1t2 Ts D0ekt
where k is a positive constant that depends on the type of object.
Example 7  ■  Newton’s Law of Cooling
A cup of coffee has a temperature of 200F and is placed in a room that has a temper-
ature of 70F. After 10 min the temperature of the coffee is 150F.
(a)	 Find a function that models the temperature of the coffee at time t.
(b)	 Find the temperature of the coffee after 15 min.
(c)	 After how long will the coffee have cooled to 100F?
(d)	 Illustrate by drawing a graph of the temperature function.
SOLUTION
(a)	 The temperature of the room is Ts  70F, and the initial temperature  
difference is
D0 200 70 130°F
	 	 So by Newton’s Law of Cooling, the temperature after t minutes is modeled by 
the function
T1t2 70 130ekt
	 	     We need to ﬁnd the constant k associated with this cup of coffee. To do  
this, we use the fact that when t  10, the temperature is T1102 150. So  
we have
 70 130e10k 150
   
Ts D0ekt T1t2
 130e10k 80
    Subtract 70
 e10k 8
13
    Divide by 130
 10k ln 8
13
    Take ln of each side
 k  1
10  ln 8
13    Solve for k
 k < 0.04855     Calculator
	 	 Substituting this value of k into the expression for T1t2 , we get
T1t2 70 130e0.04855t
(b)	 We use the function that we found in part (a) with t  15.
T1152 70 130e0.048551152 < 133°F
Joel W. Rogers/Encyclopedia/Corbis
Radioactive Waste
Harmful radioactive isotopes are pro-
duced whenever a nuclear reaction 
occurs, whether as the result of an atomic 
bomb test, a nuclear accident such as the 
one at Fukushima Daiichi in 2011, or the 
uneventful production of electricity at a 
nuclear power plant.
One radioactive material that is pro-
duced in atomic bombs is the isotope 
strontium-90 1 90Sr2, with a half-life of  
28 years. This is deposited like calcium in 
human bone tissue, where it can cause 
leukemia and other cancers. However, in 
the decades since atmospheric testing of 
nuclear weapons was halted, 90Sr levels in 
the environment have fallen to a level that 
no longer poses a threat to health.
Nuclear power plants produce 
­radioactive plutonium-239 1239Pu2, which 
has a half-life of 24,360 years. Because of 
its long half-life, 239Pu could pose a threat 
to the environment for thousands of years. 
So great care must be taken to dispose of 
it properly. The difﬁculty of ensuring the 
safety of the disposed radioactive waste is 
one reason that nuclear power plants 
remain controversial.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

378 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
(c)	 We use the function that we found in part (a) with T1t2 100 and solve the 
resulting exponential equation for t.
 70 130e0.04855t 100
   
Ts D0ekt T1t2
 130e0.04855t 30
    Subtract 70
 e0.04855t 3
13
    Divide by 130
 0.04855t ln 3
13
    Take ln of each side
 t 
ln 3
13
0.04855    Solve for t
 t < 30.2
    Calculator
	 	 The coffee will have cooled to 100F after about half an hour.
(d)	 The graph of the temperature function is sketched in Figure 7. Notice that the line  
t  70 is a horizontal asymptote. (Why?)
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
T=70+130e_0.04855t
70
0
10
20
30
40
200
T=70
t (min)
T (˚F)
Figure 7  Temperature of coffee  
after t minutes
applications
1–16  ■  Population Growth    These exercises use the population 
growth model.
	 1.	 Bacteria Culture    A certain culture of the bacterium Strepto-
coccus A initially has 10 bacteria and is observed to double 
every 1.5 hours.
(a)	 Find an exponential model n1t2 n02t/a for the number 
of bacteria in the culture after t hours.
(b)	 Estimate the number of bacteria after 35 hours.
(c)	 After how many hours will the bacteria count reach 
10,000?
© Sebastian Kaulitzki/Shutterstock.com
Streptococcus A  
112,000 magnification2
	 2.	 Bacteria Culture    A certain culture of the bacterium Rhodo-
bacter sphaeroides initially has 25 bacteria and is observed to 
double every 5 hours.
(a)	 Find an exponential model n1t2 n02t/a for the number 
of bacteria in the culture after t hours.
(b)	 Estimate the number of bacteria after 18 hours.
(c)	 After how many hours will the bacteria count reach  
1 million?
	 3.	 Squirrel Population    A grey squirrel population was intro-
duced in a certain county of Great Britain 30 years ago.  
Biologists observe that the population doubles every 6 years, 
and now the population is 100,000.
(a)	 What was the initial size of the squirrel population?
(b)	 Estimate the squirrel population 10 years from now.
(c)	 Sketch a graph of the squirrel population.
	 4.	 Bird Population    A certain species of bird was introduced in 
a certain county 25 years ago.  Biologists observe that the 
population doubles every 10 years, and now the population is 
13,000.
(a)	 What was the initial size of the bird population?
(b)	 Estimate the bird population 5 years from now.
(c)	 Sketch a graph of the bird population.
	 5.	 Fox Population    The fox population in a certain region has a 
relative growth rate of 8% per year. It is estimated that the 
population in 2013 was 18,000.
(a)	 Find a function n1t2 n0ert that models the population  
t years after 2013.
(b)	 Use the function from part (a) to estimate the fox popula-
tion in the year 2021.
(c)	 After how many years will the fox population reach 
25,000?
(d)	 Sketch a graph of the fox population function for the 
years 2013–2021.
4.6  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.6  ■  Modeling with Exponential Functions  379
	 6.	 Fish Population    The population of a certain species of fish 
has a relative growth rate of 1.2% per year. It is estimated 
that the population in 2010 was 12 million. 
(a)	 Find an exponential model n1t2 n0ert for the popula-
tion t years after 2010.
(b)	 Estimate the fish population in the year 2015.
(c)	 After how many years will the fish population reach  
14 million?
(d)	 Sketch a graph of the fish population.
	 7.	 Population of a Country    The population of a country has a 
relative growth rate of 3% per year. The government is trying 
to reduce the growth rate to 2%. The population in 2011 was 
approximately 110 million. Find the projected population for 
the year 2036 for the following conditions.
(a)	 The relative growth rate remains at 3% per year.
(b)	 The relative growth rate is reduced to 2% per year.
	 8.	 Bacteria Culture    It is observed that a certain bacteria culture 
has a relative growth rate of 12% per hour, but in the presence 
of an antibiotic the relative growth rate is reduced to 5% per 
hour.  The initial number of bacteria in the culture is 22. Find 
the projected population after 24 hours for the following 
conditions.
(a)	 No antibiotic is present, so the relative growth rate  
is 12%.
(b)	 An antibiotic is present in the culture, so the relative 
growth rate is reduced to 5%.
	 9.	 Population of a City    The population of a certain city was 
112,000 in 2014, and the observed doubling time for the pop-
ulation is 18 years. 
(a)	 Find an exponential model n1t2 n02t/a for the popula-
tion t years after 2014.
(b)	 Find an exponential model n1t2 n0ert for the popula-
tion t years after 2014.
(c)	 Sketch a graph of the population at time t.
(d)	 Estimate how long it takes the population to reach 
500,000.
	10.	 Bat Population    The bat population in a certain Midwestern 
county was 350,000 in 2012, and the observed doubling time 
for the population is 25 years. 
(a)	 Find an exponential model n1t2 n02t/a for the popula-
tion t years after 2012.
(b)	 Find an exponential model n1t2 n0ert for the popula-
tion t years after 2012.
(c)	 Sketch a graph of the population at time t.
(d)	 Estimate how long it takes the population to reach  
2 million.
	11.	 Deer Population    The graph shows the deer population in a 
Pennsylvania county between 2010 and 2014. Assume that 
the population grows exponentially.
(a)	 What was the deer population in 2010?
(b)	 Find a function that models the deer population t years 
­after 2010.
(c)	 What is the projected deer population in 2018?
(d)	 Estimate how long it takes the population to reach 
100,000.
Deer
population
0
1
2
4
3
10,000
t
n(t)
20,000
30,000
(4, 31,000)
Years since 2010
	12.	 Frog Population    Some bullfrogs were introduced into a small 
pond.  The graph shows the bullfrog population for the next few 
years.  Assume that the population grows exponentially.
(a)	 What was the initial bullfrog population?
(b)	 Find a function that models the bullfrog population  
t years since the bullfrogs were put into the pond.
(c)	 What is the projected bullfrog population after  
15 years?
(d)	 Estimate how long it takes the population to reach 
75,000.
400
500
300
200
100
2
3
4
0
t
700
(2, 225)
600
Frog
population
n
5
1
6
13.	 Bacteria Culture    A culture starts with 8600 bacteria. After  
1 hour the count is 10,000.
(a)	 Find a function that models the number of bacteria n1t2   
after t hours.
(b)	 Find the number of bacteria after 2 hours.
(c)	 After how many hours will the number of bacteria 
double?
	14.	 Bacteria Culture    The count in a culture of bacteria was 400 
after 2 hours and 25,600 after 6 hours.
(a)	 What is the relative rate of growth of the bacteria popula-
tion? Express your answer as a percentage.
(b)	 What was the initial size of the culture?
(c)	 Find a function that models the number of bacteria n1t2  
­after t hours.
(d)	 Find the number of bacteria after 4.5 hours.
(e)	 After how many hours will the number of bacteria reach 
50,000?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	15.	 Population of California    The population of California was 
29.76 million in 1990 and 33.87 million in 2000. Assume 
that the population grows exponentially.
(a)	 Find a function that models the population t years after 
1990.
(b)	 Find the time required for the population to double.
(c)	 Use the function from part (a) to predict the population 
of ­California in the year 2010. Look up California’s 
actual population in 2010, and compare.
	16.	 World Population    The population of the world was  
7.1 billion in 2013, and the observed relative growth rate was 
1.1% per year.
(a)	 Estimate how long it takes the population to double.
(b)	 Estimate how long it takes the population to triple.
17–24  ■  Radioactive Decay    These exercises use the radioactive 
decay model.
	17.	 Radioactive Radium    The half-life of radium-226 is 1600 
years. Suppose we have a 22-mg sample.
(a)	 Find a function m1t2 m02t/h that models the mass 
remaining after t years.
(b)	 Find a function m1t2 m0ert that models the mass 
remaining after t years.
(c)	 How much of the sample will remain after 4000 years?
(d)	 After how many years will only 18 mg of the sample  
remain?
18.	 Radioactive Cesium    The half-life of cesium-137 is  
30 years. Suppose we have a 10-g sample.
(a)	 Find a function m1t2 m02t/h that models the mass 
remaining after t years.
(b)	 Find a function m1t2 m0ert that models the mass 
remaining after t years.
(c)	 How much of the sample will remain after 80 years?
(d)	 After how many years will only 2 g of the sample 
remain?
	19.	 Radioactive Strontium    The half-life of strontium-90 is  
28 years. How long will it take a 50-mg sample to decay to a 
mass of 32 mg?
	20.	 Radioactive Radium    Radium-221 has a half-life of 30 s. 
How long will it take for 95% of a sample to decay?
	21.	 Finding Half-Life    If 250 mg of a radioactive element decays 
to 200 mg in 48 hours, ﬁnd the half-life of the element.
	22.	 Radioactive Radon    After 3 days a sample of radon-222 has 
decayed to 58% of its original amount.
(a)	 What is the half-life of radon-222?
(b)	 How long will it take the sample to decay to 20% of its 
original amount?
	23.	 Carbon-14 Dating    A wooden artifact from an ancient  
tomb contains 65% of the carbon-14 that is present in living 
trees. How long ago was the artifact made? (The half-life of 
carbon-14 is 5730 years.)
	24.	 Carbon-14 Dating    The burial cloth of an Egyptian mummy 
is estimated to contain 59% of the carbon-14 it contained 
originally. How long ago was the mummy buried? (The half-
life of carbon-14 is 5730 years.)
25–28  ■  Law of Cooling    These exercises use Newton’s Law of 
Cooling.
	25.	 Cooling Soup    A hot bowl of soup is served at a dinner 
party. It starts to cool according to Newton’s Law of Cooling, 
so its temperature at time t is given by
	 	 	
T1t2 65 145e0.05t
	 	 where t is measured in minutes and T is measured in F.
(a)	 What is the initial temperature of the soup?
(b)	 What is the temperature after 10 min?
(c)	 After how long will the temperature be 100F?
	26.	 Time of Death    Newton’s Law of Cooling is used in homicide 
investigations to determine the time of death. The normal 
body temperature is 98.6F. Immediately following death, the 
body begins to cool. It has been determined experimentally 
that the constant in Newton’s Law of Cooling is approxi-
mately k  0.1947, assuming that time is measured in hours. 
Suppose that the temperature of the surroundings is 60F.
(a)	 Find a function T1t2  that models the temperature t hours 
after death.
(b)	 If the temperature of the body is now 72F, how long ago 
was the time of death?
	27.	 Cooling Turkey    A roasted turkey is taken from an oven 
when its temperature has reached 185F and is placed on a 
table in a room where the temperature is 75F.
(a)	 If the temperature of the turkey is 150F after half an 
hour, what is its temperature after 45 min?
(b)	 After how many hours will the turkey cool to 100F?
	28.	 Boiling Water    A kettle full of water is brought to a boil in a 
room with temperature 20C. After 15 min the temperature of 
the water has decreased from 100C to 75C. Find the tem-
perature after another 10 min. Illustrate by graphing the tem-
perature function.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.7  ■  Logarithmic Scales  381
4.7 
Logarithmic Scales
■  The pH Scale  ■  The Richter Scale  ■  The Decibel Scale
When a physical quantity varies over a very large range, it is often convenient to take 
its logarithm in order to work with more manageable numbers. On a logarithmic scale, 
numbers are represented by their logarithms. For example, the table in the margin gives 
the weights W of some animals (in kilograms) and their logarithms (log W).
The weights (W) vary enormously, but on a logarithmic scale, the weights are rep-
resented by more manageable numbers (log W). Figure 1 shows that it is difficult to 
compare the weights W graphically but easy to compare them on a logarithmic scale. 
Figure 1  Weight graphed on the real 
line (top) and on a logarithmic scale 
(bottom)
0
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
Whale
Ant Elephant
200,000
1
2
3
4
5
6
_6
_5
_4
_3
_2
_1
We discuss three commonly used logarithmic scales:  the pH scale, which measures 
acidity; the Richter scale, which measures the ­intensity of earthquakes; and the decibel 
scale, which measures the loudness of sounds. Other quantities that are measured on 
logarithmic scales are light intensity, information ­capacity, and radiation.
■  The pH Scale
Chemists measured the acidity of a solution by giving its hydrogen ion concentration until 
Søren Peter Lauritz Sørensen, in 1909, proposed a more convenient measure. He deﬁned
pH log3H4
where 3H4 is the concentration of hydrogen ions measured in moles per liter (M). He 
did this to avoid very small numbers and negative exponents. For instance,
if        3H4 104 M,        then        pH log1011042 142 4
Solutions with a pH of 7 are deﬁned as neutral, those with pH  7 are acidic, and 
those with pH  7 are basic. Notice that when the pH increases by one unit, 3H4 
decreases by a factor of 10.
Example 1  ■  pH Scale and Hydrogen Ion Concentration
(a)	 The hydrogen ion concentration of a sample of human blood was measured to be 
3H4 3.16 108 M. Find the pH, and classify the blood as acidic or basic.
(b)	 The most acidic rainfall ever measured occurred in Scotland in 1974; its pH was 
2.4. Find the hydrogen ion concentration.
Animal
W (kg)
log W
Ant
0.000003
5.5
Elephant
4000
3.6
Whale
170,000
5.2
pH for Some Common  
Substances
Substance	
pH
Milk of magnesia	
10.5
Seawater	
8.0–8.4
Human blood	
7.3–7.5
Crackers	
7.0–8.5
Hominy	
6.9–7.9
Cow’s milk	
6.4–6.8
Spinach	
5.1–5.7
Tomatoes	
4.1–4.4
Oranges	
3.0–4.0
Apples	
2.9–3.3
Limes	
1.3–2.0
Battery acid	
1.0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
SOLUTION
(a)	 A calculator gives
pH log3H4 log13.16 1082 < 7.5
	 	 Since this is greater than 7, the blood is basic.
(b)	 To ﬁnd the hydrogen ion concentration, we need to solve for 3H4 in the loga-
rithmic equation
log3H4 pH
	 	 So we write it in exponential form:
3H4 10pH
	 	 In this case pH  2.4, so
3H4 102.4 < 4.0 103 M
Now Try Exercises 1 and 3	
■
■  The Richter Scale
In 1935 the American geologist Charles Richter (1900–1984) deﬁned the magnitude M 
of an earthquake to be
M log I
S
where I is the intensity of the earthquake (measured by the amplitude of a seismograph 
reading taken 100 km from the epicenter of the earthquake) and S is the intensity of a 
“standard” earthquake (whose amplitude is 1 micron  104 cm). (In practice, seismo-
graph stations may not be exactly 100 km from the epicenter, so appropriate adjust-
ments are made in calculating the magnitude of an earthquake.) The magnitude of a 
standard earthquake is
M log S
S log 1 0
Richter studied many earthquakes that occurred between 1900 and 1950. The largest 
had magnitude 8.9 on the Richter scale, and the smallest had magnitude 0. This corre-
sponds to a ratio of intensities of 800,000,000, so the Richter scale provides more 
Largest Earthquakes
Location	
Date	
Magnitude
Chile	
1960	
9.5
Alaska	
1964	
9.2
Japan	
2011	
9.1
Sumatra	
2004	
9.1
Kamchatka	
1952	
9.0
Chile	
2010	
8.8
Ecuador	
1906	
8.8
Alaska	
1965	
8.7
Alaska	
1957	
8.6
Sumatra	
2005	
8.6
Sumatra	
2012	
8.6
Tibet	
1950	
8.6
Indonesia	
1938	
8.5
Kamchatka	
1923	
8.5
Source: U.S. Geological Society
Discovery Project
The Even-Tempered Clavier
Poets, writers, philosophers, and even politicians have extolled the virtues of 
music—its beauty and its power to communicate emotion. But at the heart of 
music is a logarithmic scale. The tones that we are familiar with from our 
everyday listening can all be reproduced by the keys of a piano. The keys of a 
piano, in turn, are “evenly tempered” using a logarithmic scale. In this project 
we explore how exponential and logarithmic functions are used in properly tun-
ing a piano. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
Robert Vos/AFP/Getty Images
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.7  ■  Logarithmic Scales  383
manageable numbers to work with. For instance, an earthquake of magnitude 6 is ten 
times stronger than an earthquake of magnitude 5.
Example 2  ■  Magnitude and Intensity
(a)	 Find the magnitude of an earthquake that has an intensity of 3.75 (that is, the 
amplitude of the seismograph reading is 3.75 cm).
(b)	 An earthquake was measured to have a magnitude of 5.1 on the Richter scale. 
Find the intensity of the earthquake.
SOLUTION
(a)	 From the definition of magnitude we see that
M log I
S log 3.75
104 log 37500 < 4.6
	 	 Thus the magnitude is 4.6 on the Richter scale.
(b)	 To find the intensity, we need to solve for I in the logarithmic equation
M log I
S 
	 	 So we write it in exponential form:
10M I
S
	 	 In this case S 104 and M 5.1, so
 105.1 
I
104
        M 5.1, S 104
 11042 1105.12 I
        Multiply by 104
 I 101.1 < 12.6        Add exponents
	 	 Thus the intensity of the earthquake is about 12.6, which means that the ampli-
tude of the seismograph reading is about 12.6 cm.
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
Example 3  ■  Magnitude of Earthquakes
The 1906 earthquake in San Francisco had an estimated magnitude of 8.3 on the 
Richter scale. In the same year a powerful earthquake occurred on the Colombia-
Ecuador border that was four times as intense. What was the magnitude of the 
Colombia-Ecuador earthquake on the Richter scale?
SOLUTION    If I is the intensity of the San Francisco earthquake, then from the 
deﬁnition of magnitude we have
M log I
S 8.3
The intensity of the Colombia-Ecuador earthquake was 4I, so its magnitude was
M log 4I
S log 4 log I
S log 4 8.3 < 8.9
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
There are several other logarithmic 
scales used to calculate the magnitude 
of earthquakes. For instance, the U.S. 
Geological Survey uses the moment 
magnitude scale.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

384 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Example 4  ■  Intensity of Earthquakes
The 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake that shook San Francisco had a magnitude of 7.1 
on the Richter scale. How many times more intense was the 1906 earthquake (see  
Example 3) than the 1989 event?
SOLUTION    If I1 and I2 are the intensities of the 1906 and 1989 earthquakes, then we 
are required to ﬁnd I1/I2. To relate this to the deﬁnition of magnitude, we divide the 
numerator and denominator by S.
 log I1
I2
log I1/S
I2/S
    Divide numerator and denominator by S
  log I1
S log I2
S
    Law 2 of logarithms
  8.3 7.1 1.2    Deﬁnition of earthquake magnitude
Therefore
I1
I2
10log1I1/I22 101.2 < 16
The 1906 earthquake was about 16 times as intense as the 1989 earthquake.
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
■  The Decibel Scale
The ear is sensitive to an extremely wide range of sound intensities. We take as  
a reference intensity I0  1012 W/m2 (watts per square meter) at a frequency of  
1000 hertz, which measures a sound that is just barely audible (the threshold of 
­hearing). The psychological sensation of loudness varies with the logarithm of the 
intensity (the ­Weber-Fechner Law), so the decibel level B, measured in decibels (dB), 
is deﬁned as
B 10 log I
I0
The decibel level of the barely audible reference sound is
B 10 log I0
I0
10 log 1 0 dB
Example 5  ■  Decibel Level and Intensity
(a)	 Find the decibel level of a jet engine at takeoff if the intensity was measured at 
100 W/m2.
(b)	 Find the intensity level of a motorcycle engine at full throttle if the decibel level 
was measured at 90 dB.
SOLUTION
(a)	 From the definition of decibel level we see that
B 10 log I
I0
10 log 102
1012 10 log 1014 140 dB
	 	 Thus the decibel level is 140 dB.
Grant Smith/Corbis
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 4.7  ■  Logarithmic Scales  385
(b)	 To find the intensity, we need to solve for I in the logarithmic equation
 B 10 log I
I0
        Definition of decibel level
 B
10 log I log 1012        Divide by 10, I0 1012
 B
10 log I 12
        Definition of logarithm
B
10 12 log I
        Subtract 12
 log I 90
10 12 3         B 90
 I 103
        Exponential form
	 	 Thus the intensity is 103 W/m2.
Now Try Exercises 15 and 17	
■
The table in the margin lists decibel levels for some common sounds ranging from 
the threshold of human hearing to the jet takeoff of Example 5. The threshold of pain 
is about 120 dB.
The decibel levels of sounds that we 
can hear vary from very loud to very soft. 
Here are some examples of the decibel 
levels of commonly heard sounds.
Source of sound	
B (dB)
Jet takeoff	
140
Jackhammer	
130
Rock concert	
120
Subway	
100
Heavy trafﬁc	
80
Ordinary trafﬁc	
70
Normal conversation	
50
Whisper	
30
Rustling leaves	
10–20
Threshold of hearing	
0
applications
	 1.	 Finding pH    The hydrogen ion concentration of a sample of 
each substance is given. Calculate the pH of the substance.
(a)	 Lemon juice: 3H4 5.0 103 M
(b)	 Tomato juice: 3H4 3.2 104 M
(c)	 Seawater: 3H4 5.0 109 M
	 2.	 Finding pH    An unknown substance has a hydrogen ion con-
centration of 3H4 3.1 108 M. Find the pH and clas-
sify the substance as acidic or basic.
	 3.	 Ion Concentration    The pH reading of a sample of each sub-
stance is given. Calculate the hydrogen ion concentration of 
the substance.
(a)	 Vinegar: pH  3.0	
(b)	 Milk: pH  6.5
	 4.	 Ion Concentration    The pH reading of a glass of liquid is 
given. Find the hydrogen ion concentration of the liquid.
(a)	 Beer: pH  4.6	
(b)	 Water: pH  7.3
	 5.	 Finding pH    The hydrogen ion concentrations in cheeses 
range from 4.0  107 M to 1.6  105 M. Find the corre-
sponding range of pH readings.
	 6.	 Ion Concentration in Wine    The pH readings for wines vary 
from 2.8 to 3.8. Find the corresponding range of hydrogen 
ion concentrations.
	 7.	 pH of Wine    If the pH of a wine is too high, say, 4.0 or 
above, the wine becomes unstable and has a flat taste.
(a)	 A certain California red wine has a pH of 3.2, and a  
certain Italian white wine has a pH of 2.9. Find the  
corresponding hydrogen ion concentrations of the two 
wines.
(b)	 Which wine has the lower hydrogen ion concentration?
	 8.	 pH of Saliva    The pH of saliva is normally in the range of 
6.4 to 7.0. However, when a person is ill, the person’s saliva 
becomes more acidic.
(a)	 When Marco is sick, he tests the pH of his saliva and 
finds that it is 5.5. What is the hydrogen ion concentra-
tion of his saliva?
(b)	 Will the hydrogen ion concentration in Marco’s saliva 
increase or decrease as he gets better?
(c)	 After Marco recovers, he tests the pH of his saliva, and it 
is 6.5. Was the saliva more acidic or less acidic when he 
was sick?
	 9.	 Earthquake Magnitude and Intensity 
(a)	 Find the magnitude of an earthquake that has an intensity 
that is 31.25 (that is, the amplitude of the seismograph 
reading is 31.25 cm).
(b)	 An earthquake was measured to have a magnitude of  
4.8 on the Richter scale. Find the intensity of the 
earthquake.
4.7  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

386 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
10.	 Earthquake Magnitude and Intensity 
(a)	 Find the magnitude of an earthquake that has an intensity 
that is 72.1 (that is, the amplitude of the seismograph 
reading is 72.1 cm).
(b)	 An earthquake was measured to have a magnitude of 5.8 
on the Richter scale. Find the intensity of the earthquake.
	11.	 Earthquake Magnitudes    If one earthquake is 20 times as 
intense as another, how much larger is its magnitude on the 
Richter scale?
	12.	 Earthquake Magnitudes    The 1906 earthquake in San Fran-
cisco had a magnitude of 8.3 on the Richter scale. At the 
same time in Japan an earthquake with magnitude 4.9 caused 
only minor damage. How many times more intense was the 
San Francisco earthquake than the Japan earthquake? 
	13.	 Earthquake Magnitudes    The Japan earthquake of 2011 had 
a magnitude of 9.1 on the Richter scale. How many times 
more intense was this than the 1906 San Francisco earth-
quake? (See Exercise 12.)
	14.	 Earthquake Magnitudes    The Northridge, California, earth-
quake of 1994 had a magnitude of 6.8 on the Richter scale. A 
year later, a 7.2-magnitude earthquake struck Kobe, Japan. 
How many times more intense was the Kobe earthquake than 
the Northridge earthquake?
	15.	 Trafﬁc Noise    The intensity of the sound of trafﬁc at a busy 
intersection was measured at 2.0  105 W/m2. Find the 
decibel level.
16.	 Leaf Blower    The intensity of the sound from a certain leaf 
blower is measured at 3.2 102 W/m2. Find the decibel level.
	17.	 Hair Dryer    The decibel level of the sound from a certain hair 
dryer is measured at 70 dB. Find the intensity of the sound.
18.	 Subway Noise    The decibel level of the sound of a subway 
train was measured at 98 dB. Find the intensity in watts per 
square meter (W/m2).
19.	 Hearing Loss from MP3 Players    Recent research has shown 
that the use of earbud-style headphones packaged with MP3 
players can cause permanent hearing loss.
(a)	 The intensity of the sound from the speakers of a  
certain MP3 player (without earbuds) is measured at 
3.1 105 W/m2. Find the decibel level.
(b)	 If earbuds are used with the MP3 player in part (a), the 
decibel level is 95 dB. Find the intensity. 
(c)	 Find the ratio of the intensity of the sound from the MP3 
player with earbuds to that of the sound without earbuds.
20.	 Comparing Decibel Levels    The noise from a power mower 
was measured at 106 dB. The noise level at a rock concert 
was measured at 120 dB. Find the ratio of the intensity of the 
rock music to that of the power mower.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	21.	 PROVE:  Inverse Square Law for Sound    A law of physics 
states that the intensity of sound is inversely proportional to 
the square of the distance d from the source: I  k/d 2.
(a)	 Use this model and the equation
B 10 log I
I0
	
(described in this section) to show that the decibel levels 
B1 and B2 at distances d1 and d2 from a sound source are 
related by the equation
B2 B1 20 log d1
d2
(b)	 The intensity level at a rock concert is 120 dB at a dis-
tance 2 m from the speakers. Find the intensity level at a 
distance of 10 m.
Exponential Functions (pp. 330–332)
The exponential function f with base a (where a 0, a ? 1) is 
defined for all real numbers x by
f1x2 ax
The domain of f is R, and the range of f is 10, ` 2  The graph of f 
has one of the following shapes, depending on the value of a:
Ï=a˛ for a>1
Ï=a˛ for 0<a<1
0
x
y
(0, 1)
0
x
y
(0, 1)
The Natural Exponential Function (p. 339)
The natural exponential function is the exponential function 
with base e:
f1x2 ex
The number e is defined to be the number that the expression 
11 1/n2 n approaches as n S `. An approximate value for the  
irrational number e is
e < 2.7182818284590c
Compound Interest (pp. 334, 340)
If a principal P is invested in an account paying an annual interest 
rate r, compounded n times a year, then after t years the amount 
A1t2 in the account is
A1t2 P Q1 r
nR
nt
If the interest is compounded continuously, then the amount is
A1t2 Pert
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 4  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4  ■  Review  387
Logarithmic Functions (pp. 344–345)
The logarithmic function loga with base a (where a 0, a ? 1)  
is defined for x 0 by
loga x y 3 ay x
So loga x is the exponent to which the base a must be raised to  
give y.
The domain of loga is 10, ` 2 , and the range is R. For a 1, the 
graph of the function loga has the following shape:
x
y
0
1
y=loga x, a>1
Common and Natural Logarithms (pp. 348–349)
The logarithm function with base 10 is called the common 
­logarithm and is denoted log. So
log x log10  x
The logarithm function with base e is called the natural loga-
rithm and is denoted ln. So
ln x loge  x
Properties of Logarithms (pp. 345, 349)
1.  loga 1 0	
2.  loga a 1
3.  loga ax x	
4.  aloga x x
Laws of Logarithms (p. 354)
Let a be a logarithm base 1a 0, a ? 12, and let A, B, and C be 
any real numbers or algebraic expressions that represent real 
numbers, with A 0 and B 0. Then:
1.	 loga1AB2 loga A loga B
2.	 loga1A/B2 loga  A loga B
3.	 loga1AC2 C loga A
Change of Base Formula (p. 357)
logb x loga x
loga b
Guidelines for Solving Exponential Equations (p. 361)
1.	 Isolate the exponential term on one side of the equation.
2.	 Take the logarithm of each side, and use the Laws of Loga-
rithms to “bring down the exponent.”
3.	 Solve for the variable.
Guidelines for Solving Logarithmic Equations (p. 364)
1.	 Isolate the logarithmic term(s) on one side of the equation, and 
use the Laws of Logarithms to combine logarithmic terms if 
necessary.
2.	 Rewrite the equation in exponential form.
3.	 Solve for the variable.
Exponential Growth Model (p. 373)
A population experiences exponential growth if it can be mod-
eled by the exponential function
n1t2 n0ert
where n1t2  is the population at time t, n0 is the initial population 
(at time t = 0), and r is the relative growth rate (expressed as a 
proportion of the population).
Radioactive Decay Model (pp. 375–376)
If a radioactive substance with half-life h has initial mass m0, 
then at time t the mass m1t2  of the substance that remains is mod-
eled by the exponential function
m1t2 m0ert
where r ln 2
h .
Newton’s Law of Cooling (p. 377)
If an object has an initial temperature that is D0 degrees warmer 
than the surrounding temperature Ts, then at time t the tempera-
ture T1t2  of the object is modeled by the function
T1t2 Ts D0ekt
where the constant k 0 depends on the size and type of the object.
Logarithmic Scales (pp. 381–385)
The pH scale measures the acidity of a solution:
pH log3H4
The Richter scale measures the intensity of earthquakes:
M log  I
S
The decibel scale measures the intensity of sound:
B 10 log  I
I0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

388 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
■  Concept check
	 1.	 Let f be the exponential function with base a.
(a)	 Write an equation that defines f. 
(b)	 Write an equation for the exponential function f with 
base 3.
	 2.	 Let f be the exponential function f1x2 ax, where a 0.
(a)	 What is the domain of f?
(b)	 What is the range of f?
(c)	 Sketch graphs of f for the following cases.
	
(i)  a 1    (ii)  0 a 1
	 3.	 If x is large, which function grows faster, f1x2 2x or 
g1x2 x2?
	 4.	 (a)	 How is the number e defined?
(b)	 Give an approximate value of e, correct to four decimal 
places.
(c)	 What is the natural exponential function?
	 5.	 (a)	 How is loga x defined?
(b)	 Find log3 9.
(c)	 What is the natural logarithm?
(d)	 What is the common logarithm?
(e)	 Write the exponential form of the equation  
log7 49 2.
	 6.	 Let f be the logarithmic function f1x2 loga x.
(a)	 What is the domain of f?
(b)	 What is the range of f?
(c)	 Sketch a graph of the logarithmic function for the case 
that a 1.
	 7.	 State the three Laws of Logarithms.
	 8.	 (a)	 State the Change of Base Formula. 
(b)	 Find log7 30.
	 9.	 (a)	 What is an exponential equation?
(b)	 How do you solve an exponential equation?
(c)	 Solve for x: 2x 19
	10.	 (a)	 What is a logarithmic equation?
(b)	 How do you solve a logarithmic equation?
(c)	 Solve for x: 4 log3 x 7
	11.	 Suppose that an amount P is invested at an interest rate r and 
A1t2  is the amount of the investment after t years. Write a 
formula for A1t2  in the following cases.
(a)	 Interest is compounded n times per year.
(b)	 Interest is compounded continuously.
	12.	 Suppose that the initial size of a population is n0 and the 
population grows exponentially. Let n1t2  be the size of the 
population at time t. 
(a)	 Write a formula for n1t2  in terms of the doubling time a.
(b)	 Write a formula for n1t2  in terms of the relative growth 
rate r. 
	13.	 Suppose that the initial mass of a radioactive substance is m0 
and the half-life of the substance is h. Let m1t2  be the mass 
remaining at time t. 
(a)	 What is meant by the half-life h?
(b)	 Write a formula for m1t2  in terms of the half-life h.
(c)	 Write a formula for the relative decay rate r in terms of 
the half-life h.
(d)	 Write a formula for m1t2  in terms of the relative decay 
rate r. 
	14.	 Suppose that the initial temperature difference between an 
object and its surroundings is D0 and the surroundings have 
temperature Ts. Let T1t2  be the temperature at time t. State 
Newton’s Law of Cooling for T1t2 .
	15.	 What is a logarithmic scale? If we use a logarithmic scale 
with base 10, what do the following numbers correspond to 
on the logarithmic scale? 
(i)  100    (ii)  100,000    (iii)  0.0001
	16.	 (a)	 What does the pH scale measure?
(b)	 Define the pH of a substance with hydrogen ion concen-
tration of 3H4.
	17.	 (a)	 What does the Richter scale measure?
(b)	 Define the magnitude M of an earthquake in terms of the 
intensity I of the earthquake and the intensity S of a stan-
dard earthquake.  
	18.	 (a)	 What does the decibel scale measure?
(b)	 Define the decibel level B of a sound in terms of the 
intensity I of the sound and the intensity I0 of a barely 
audible sound. 
■  exercises
1–4  ■  Evaluating Exponential Functions    Use a calculator to 
find the indicated values of the exponential function, rounded to 
three decimal places.
	 1.	 f1x2 5x; f11.52, fA !2 B, f12.52
	 2.	 f1x2 3 # 2x; f12.22, fA !7 B, f15.52
	 3.	 g1x2 4e x2; g10.72, g112, g1p2
	 4.	 g1x2 7
4 e x1; g122, gA !3 B, g13.62
5–16  ■  Graphing Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     
Sketch the graph of the function. State the domain, range, and 
asymptote.
	  5.	 f1x2 3x2	
  6.	 f1x2 2x1
	 7.	 g1x2 3 2x	
  8.	 g1x2 5x 5
	 9.	 F1x2 ex1 1	
10.	 G1x2 e x1 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4  ■  Review  389
	11.	 f1x2 log31x 12 	
12.	 g1x2 log1x2
	13.	 f1x2 2 log2 x	
14.	 f1x2 3 log51x 42
	15.	 g1x2 2 ln  x	
16.	 g1x2 ln1x22
17–20  ■  Domain    Find the domain of the function.
	17.	 f1x2 10x2 log11 2x2 	
18.	 g1x2 log12 x x22
	19.	 h1x2 ln1x2 42 	
	20.	 k1x2 ln 0  x 0
21–24  ■  Exponential Form    Write the equation in exponential 
form.
	21.	 log21024 10	
22.	 log6 37 x
	23.	 log  x y	
24.	 ln c 17
25–28  ■  Logarithmic Form    Write the equation in logarithmic 
form.
	25.	 26 64	
26.	 491/2 1
7
	27.	 10x 74	
28.	 ek m
29–44  ■  Evaluating Logarithmic Expressions    Evaluate the 
expression without using a calculator.
	29.	 log2 128	
30.	 log8 1
	31.	 10log 45	
32.	 log 0.000001
	33.	 ln1e62 	
34.	 log4 8
	35.	 log3A 1
 27 B	
36.	 2log2 13
	37.	 log5!5	
38.	 e2 ln 7
	39.	 log 25 log 4	
40.	 log3 !243
	41.	 log2 1623	
42.	 log5 250 log5 2
	43.	 log8 6 log8 3 log8 2	
44.	 log log 10100
45–50  ■  Expanding Logarithmic Expressions    Expand the loga-
rithmic expression.
	45.	 log1AB2C32 	
46.	 log21x "x2 12
	47.	 ln Å
x2 1
x2 1	
48.	 loga
4x3
y21x 12 5 b
	49.	 log5 a
x211 5x2 3/2
"x3 x
b 	
50.	 lna
"
3 x4 12
1x 162  !x 3 b
51–56  ■  Combining Logarithmic Expressions    Combine into a 
single logarithm.
	51.	 log 6 4 log 2
	52.	 log x log1x2y2 3 log y
	53.	 3
2 log21x y2 2 log21x2 y22
	54.	 log5 2 log51x 12 1
3 log513x 72
	55.	 log1x 22 log1x 22 1
2 log1x2 42
	56.	 1
23ln1x 42 5 ln1x2 4x2 4
57–70  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Equations    Solve the 
equation. Find the exact solution if possible; otherwise, use a cal-
culator to approximate to two decimals.
	57.	 32x7 27	
58.	 54x 
1
125
	59.	 23x5 7	
60.	 1063x 18
	61.	 41x 32x5	
62.	 e3x/4 10
	63.	 x2e2x 2xe2x 8e2x	
64.	 32x 3x 6 0
65.	 log x log1x 12 log 12
66.	 ln1x 22 ln 3 ln15x 72
	67.	 log211 x2 4
68.	 ln12x 32 1 0
69.	 log31x 82 log3 x 2
	70.	 log81x 52 log81x 22 1	  
71–74  ■  Exponential Equations    Use a calculator to ﬁnd the 
solution of the equation, ­rounded to six decimal places.
	71.	 52x/3 0.63	
72.	 23x5 7
	73.	 52x1 34x1	
74.	 e15k 10,000
75–78  ■  Local Extrema and Asymptotes    Draw a graph of the 
function and use it to determine the asymptotes and the local 
maximum and minimum values.
	75.	 y e x/1x22	
76.	 y 10x 5x
	77.	 y log1x3 x2 	
78.	 y 2x2 ln x
79–80  ■  Solving Equations    Find the solutions of the equation, 
rounded to two decimal places.
	79.	 3 log  x 6 2x	
80.	 4 x2 e2x
81–82  ■  Solving Inequalities    Solve the inequality graphically.
	81.	 ln x x 2	
82.	 ex 4x2
	83.	 Increasing and Decreasing    Use a graph of 
f1x2 e x 3ex 4x to ﬁnd, approximately, the intervals 
on which f is increasing and on which f is ­decreasing.
	84.	 Equation of a Line    Find an equation of the line shown in the 
ﬁgure.
x
ea
y=ln x
y
0
85–88  ■  Change of Base    Use the Change of Base Formula to 
evaluate the logarithm, rounded to six decimal places.
	85.	 log4 15	
86.	 log7A3
4B
	87.	 log9 0.28	
88.	 log100 250
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

390 
CHAPTER 4  ■  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	  89.  Comparing Logarithms    Which is larger, log4 258 or  
log5 620?
	  90.  Inverse Function    Find the inverse of the function 
f1x2 23x, and state its domain and range.
	  91.  Compound Interest    If $12,000 is invested at an interest 
rate of 10% per year, ﬁnd the amount of the investment at 
the end of 3 years for each compounding method.
(a)	 Semiannually	
(b)	 Monthly
(c)	 Daily	
(d)	 Continuously
	  92.  Compound Interest    A sum of $5000 is invested at an inter-
est rate of 8 1
2% per year, compounded semiannually.
(a)	 Find the amount of the investment after 11
2 years.
(b)	 After what period of time will the investment amount 
to $7000?
(c)	 If interest were compounded continously instead of 
semiannually, how long would it take for the amount to 
grow to $7000?
	  93.  Compound Interest    A money market account pays  
5.2% annual interest, compounded daily. If $100,000 is 
invested in this account, how long will it take for the 
account to accumulate $10,000 in ­interest?
	  94.  Compound Interest    A retirement savings plan pays  
4.5% interest, compounded continuously. How long will it 
take for an investment in this plan to double?
95–96  ■  APY    Determine the annual percentage yield (APY) for  
the given nominal annual interest rate and compounding  
frequency.
	  95.	 4.25%;    daily
  96.	 3.2%;    monthly
	  97.	 Cat Population    The stray-cat population in a small town 
grows exponentially. In 1999 the town had 30 stray cats, 
and the relative growth rate was 15% per year.
(a)	 Find a function that models the stray-cat population 
n1t2  after t years.
(b)	 Find the projected population after 4 years.
(c)	 Find the number of years required for the stray-cat pop-
ulation to reach 500.
	  98.  Bacterial Growth    A culture contains 10,000 bacteria ini-
tially. After 1 hour the bacteria count is 25,000.
(a)	 Find the doubling period.
(b)	 Find the number of bacteria after 3 hours.
	  99.  Radioactive Decay    Uranium-234 has a half-life of  
2.7  105 years.
(a)	 Find the amount remaining from a 10-mg sample after a 
thousand years.
(b)	 How long will it take this sample to decompose until its 
mass is 7 mg?
	100.  Radioactive Decay    A sample of bismuth-210 decayed to 
33% of its original mass after 8 days.
(a)	 Find the half-life of this element.
(b)	 Find the mass remaining after 12 days.
	101.	 Radioactive Decay    The half-life of radium-226 is  
1590 years.
(a)	 If a sample has a mass of 150 mg, ﬁnd a function that 
models the mass that remains after t years.
(b)	 Find the mass that will remain after 1000 years.
(c)	 After how many years will only 50 mg remain?
	102.  Radioactive Decay    The half-life of palladium-100 is  
4 days. After 20 days a sample has been reduced to a mass 
of 0.375 g.
(a)	 What was the initial mass of the sample?
(b)	 Find a function that models the mass remaining after 
t days.
(c)	 What is the mass after 3 days?
(d)	 After how many days will only 0.15 g remain?
	103.	 Bird Population    The graph shows the population of a rare 
species of bird, where t represents years since 2009 and n1t2  
is measured in thousands.
(a)	 Find a function that models the bird population at time t 
in the form n1t2 n0e rt.
(b)	 What is the bird population expected to be in the year 
2020?
0
t
n(t)
4000
1
5
4
3
2
1000
2000
3000
Bird
population
Years since 2009
(5, 3200)
	104.  Law of Cooling    A car engine runs at a temperature of 
190F. When the engine is turned off, it cools according to 
Newton’s Law of Cooling with constant k  0.0341, where 
the time is measured in minutes. Find the time needed for 
the engine to cool to 90F if the surrounding temperature is 
60F.
	105.  pH    The hydrogen ion concentration of fresh egg whites 
was ­measured as
3H4 1.3 108 M
	
	 Find the pH, and classify the substance as acidic or basic.
	106.  pH    The pH of lime juice is 1.9. Find the hydrogen ion 
­concentration.
	107.  Richter Scale    If one earthquake has magnitude 6.5 on the 
Richter scale, what is the magnitude of another quake that is 
35 times as ­intense?
	108.  Decibel Scale    The drilling of a jackhammer was measured 
at 132 dB. The sound of whispering was measured at 28 dB. 
Find the ratio of the intensity of the drilling to that of the 
whispering.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

391
	 1.	 Sketch the graph of each function, and state its domain, range, and asymptote. Show the  
x- and y-intercepts on the graph.
(a)	 f1x2 2x 4	
(b)	 g1x2 log31x 32
	 2.	 Find the domain of the function.
(a)	 f1t2 ln12t 32 	
(b)	 g1x2 log1x2 12
	 3.	 (a)	 Write the equation 62x 25 in logarithmic form.
(b)	 Write the equation ln A  3 in exponential form.
	 4.	 Find the exact value of the expression.
(a)	 10log 36	
(b)	 ln e3	
(c)	 log3!27
(d)	 log2 80 log2 10	
(e)	 log8 4	
(f)	 log6 4 log6 9
	 5.	 Use the Laws of Logarithms to expand the expression.
(a)	 loga xy3
z2 b 	
(b)	 ln Ä
x
y	
(c)	 log  Ä
3
x 2
x41x2 42
	 6.	 Use the Laws of Logarithms to combine the expression into a single logarithm.
(a)	 log a 2 log b (b)  ln1x2 252 ln1x 52  (c)  log2 3 3 log2 x 1
2 log21x 12
	 7.	 Find the solution of the exponential equation, rounded to two decimal places.
(a)	 34x 3100      (b)  e3x2 ex2      (c)  5x/10 1 7      (d)  10x3 62x
	 8.	 Solve the logarithmic equation for x.
(a)	 log12x2 3	
(b)  log1x 12 log 2 log15x2
(c)	 5 ln13 x2 4	
(d)  log21x 22 log21x 12 2
	 9.	 Use the Change of Base Formula to evaluate log12 27.
	10.	 The initial size of a culture of bacteria is 1000. After 1 hour the bacteria count is 8000.
(a)	 Find a function n1t2 n0ert that models the population after t hours.
(b)	 Find the population after 1.5 hours.
(c)	 After how many hours will the number of bacteria reach 15,000?
(d)	 Sketch the graph of the population function.
	11.	 Suppose that $12,000 is invested in a savings account paying 5.6% interest per year.
(a)	 Write the formula for the amount in the account after t years if interest is compounded 
monthly.
(b)	 Find the amount in the account after 3 years if interest is compounded daily.
(c)	 How long will it take for the amount in the account to grow to $20,000 if interest is 
compounded continuously?
	12.	 The half-life of krypton-91 1 91Kr2  is 10 s. At time t = 0 a heavy canister contains 3 g of 
this radioactive gas.
(a)	 Find a function m1t2 m02t/h that models the amount of 91Kr remaining in the  
canister after t seconds.
(b)	 Find a function m1t2 m0ert that models the amount of 91Kr remaining in the  
canister after t seconds.
(c)	 How much 91Kr remains after 1 min?
(d)	 After how long will the amount of 91Kr remaining be reduced to 1 mg (1 microgram, 
or 106 g)?
	13.	 An earthquake measuring 6.4 on the Richter scale struck Japan in July 2007, causing 
extensive damage. Earlier that year, a minor earthquake measuring 3.1 on the Richter scale 
was felt in parts of Pennsylvania. How many times more intense was the Japanese earth-
quake than the Pennsylvania earthquake?
CHAPTER 4
TEST
A CUMULATIVE REVIEW TEST FOR CHAPTERS 2, 3, AND 4 CAN BE FOUND AT THE BOOK COMPANION WEBSITE: www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

392
In a previous Focus on Modeling (page 325) we learned that the shape of a scatter plot  
helps us to choose the type of curve to use in modeling data. The ﬁrst plot in Figure 1 
strongly suggests that a line be ﬁtted through it, and the second one points to a cubic 
polynomial. For the third plot it is tempting to ﬁt a second-degree polynomial. But what 
if an exponential curve ﬁts better? How do we decide this? In this section we learn how 
to ﬁt exponential and power curves to data and how to decide which type of curve ﬁts 
the data better. We also learn that for scatter plots like those in the last two plots in 
Figure 1, the data can be modeled by logarithmic or logistic functions.
Figure 1
■  Modeling with Exponential Functions
If a scatter plot shows that the data increase rapidly, we might want to model the data 
using an exponential model, that is, a function of the form
f1x2 Cekx
where C and k are constants. In the ﬁrst example we model world population by  
an exponential model. Recall from Section 4.6 that population tends to increase 
exponentially.
Example 1  ■  An Exponential Model for World Population
Table 1 gives the population of the world in the 20th century.
(a)	 Draw a scatter plot, and note that a linear model is not appropriate.
(b)	 Find an exponential function that models population growth.
(c)	 Draw a graph of the function that you found together with the scatter plot. How 
well does the model ﬁt the data?
(d)	 Use the model that you found to predict world population in the year 2020.
SOLUTION
(a)	 The scatter plot is shown in Figure 2. The plotted points do not appear to lie 
along a straight line, so a linear model is not appropriate.
Figure 2  Scatter plot of world population
2000
6500
0
1900
0
1900
2000
Fitting Exponential and Power Curves to Data
FOCUS ON MODELING
Table 1
World population
Year 
xtc
World population 
(P in millions)
1900
1650
1910
1750
1920
1860
1930
2070
1940
2300
1950
2520
1960
3020
1970
3700
1980
4450
1990
5300
2000
6060
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Exponential and Power Curves to Data  393
(b)  Using a graphing calculator and the ExpReg command (see Figure 3(a)), we get 
the exponential model
P1t2 10.00825432 # 11.01371862 t
	
This is a model of the form y  Cbt. To convert this to the form y  Cekt, we use 
the properties of exponentials and logarithms as follows.
 1.0137186t eln 1.0137186t         A 5 eln A
  et  ln  1.0137186        ln AB 5 B ln A
  e0.013625t
        ln 1.0137186 ^ 0.013625
	
Thus we can write the model as
P1t2 0.0082543e0.013625t
(c)	 From the graph in Figure 3(b) we see that the model appears to ﬁt the data fairly 
well. The period of relatively slow population growth is explained by the depres-
sion of the 1930s and the two world wars.
(a)
2000
6500
0
1900
(b)
Figure 3  Exponential model for world population
(d)	 The model predicts that the world population in 2020 will be
	
 P120202 0.0082543e10.0136252 120202
	
 < 7,405,400,000

■
■  Modeling with Power Functions
If the scatter plot of the data we are studying resembles the graph of y  ax2, y  ax1.32, 
or some other power function, then we seek a power model, that is, a function of the form
f1x2 ax n
where a is a positive constant and n is any real number.
In the next example we seek a power model for some astronomical data. In astron-
omy, distance in the solar system is often measured in astronomical units. An astro-
nomical unit (AU) is the mean distance from the earth to the sun. The period of a planet 
is the time it takes the planet to make a complete revolution around the sun (measured 
in earth years). In this example we derive the remarkable relationship, ﬁrst discovered 
by Johannes Kepler (see page 808), between the mean distance of a planet from the sun 
and its period.
Example 2  ■  A Power Model for Planetary Periods
Table 2 gives the mean distance d of each planet from the sun in astronomical units 
and its period T in years.
Mercury
Sun
Mars
Venus
Earth
Saturn
Jupiter
Chabruken/The Image Bank/Getty Images
The population of the world  
increases exponentially.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

394 
Focus on Modeling
(a)	 Sketch a scatter plot. Is a linear model appropriate?
(b)	 Find a power function that models the data.
(c)	 Draw a graph of the function you found and the scatter plot on the same graph. 
How well does the model ﬁt the data?
(d)	 Use the model that you found to calculate the period of an asteroid whose mean 
distance from the sun is 5 AU.
SOLUTION
(a)	 The scatter plot shown in Figure 4 indicates that the plotted points do not lie 
along a straight line, so a linear model is not appropriate.
Figure 4  Scatter plot  
of planetary data
45
260
0
(b)  Using a graphing calculator and the PwrReg command (see Figure 5(a)), we get 
the power model
T 1.000396d1.49966
	
If we round both the coefﬁcient and the exponent to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures, we 
can write the model as
T d1.5
	
This is the relationship discovered by Kepler (see page 808). Sir Isaac Newton  
(page 911) later used his Law of Gravity to derive this relationship theoretically, 
thereby providing strong scientiﬁc evidence that the Law of Gravity must be true.
(c)	 The graph is shown in Figure 5(b). The model appears to ﬁt the data very well.
(a)
(b)
45
260
0
Figure 5  Power model for  
planetary data
(d)	 In this case d  5 AU, so our model gives
T 1.00039 # 51.49966 < 11.22
	
The period of the asteroid is about 11.2 years.
■
■  Linearizing Data
We have used the shape of a scatter plot to decide which type of model to use: linear, 
exponential, or power. This works well if the data points lie on a straight line. But it’s 
difﬁcult to distinguish a scatter plot that is exponential from one that requires a power 
model. So to help decide which model to use, we can linearize the data, that is, apply 
Table 2
Distances and periods of the planets
Planet
d
T
Mercury
0.387
0.241
Venus
0.723
0.615
Earth
1.000
1.000
Mars
1.523
1.881
Jupiter
5.203
11.861
Saturn
9.541
29.457
Uranus
19.190
84.008
Neptune
30.086
164.784
Pluto*
39.507
248.350
*Pluto is a “dwarf planet.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Exponential and Power Curves to Data  395
a function that “straightens” the scatter plot. The inverse of the linearizing function is 
then an appropriate model. We now describe how to linearize data that can be modeled 
by exponential or power functions.
■  Linearizing Exponential Data
If we suspect that the data points 1x, y2  lie on an exponential curve y  Ce kx, then the 
points
1x, ln y2
should lie on a straight line. We can see this from the following calculations.
 ln y ln Cekx
        Assume that y 5 Cekx and take ln
  ln ekx ln C        Property of ln
  kx ln C
        Property of ln
To see that ln y is a linear function of x, let Y  ln y and A  ln C; then
Y kx A
We apply this technique to the world population data 1t, P2  to obtain the points 1t, ln P2  
in Table 3. The scatter plot of 1t, ln P2  in Figure 6, called a semi-log plot, shows that 
the linearized data lie approximately on a straight line, so an exponential model should 
be appropriate.
Figure 6  Semi-log  
plot of data in Table 3
2010
23
21
1900
■  Linearizing Power Data
If we suspect that the data points 1x,  y2  lie on a power curve y  ax n, then the points
1ln x, ln y2
should be on a straight line. We can see this from the following calculations.
 ln y ln axn
        Assume that y 5 axn and take ln
  ln a ln xn         Property of ln
  ln a n  ln x        Property of ln
To see that ln y is a linear function of ln x, let Y  ln y, X  ln x, and A  ln a; then
Y nX A
We apply this technique to the planetary data 1d, T2  in Table 2 to obtain the points 
1ln d, ln T2  in Table 4. The scatter plot of 1ln d, ln T2  in Figure 7, called a log-log plot, 
shows that the data lie on a straight line, so a power model seems appropriate.
Figure 7  Log-log plot 
of data in Table 4
4
6
_2
_2
Table 3
World population data
t
Population P 
(in millions)
ln P
1900
1650
21.224
1910
1750
21.283
1920
1860
21.344
1930
2070
21.451
1940
2300
21.556
1950
2520
21.648
1960
3020
21.829
1970
3700
22.032
1980
4450
22.216
1990
5300
22.391
2000
6060
22.525
Table 4
Log-log table
ln d
ln T
0.94933
1.4230
0.32435
0.48613
0
0
0.42068
0.6318
1.6492
2.4733
2.2556
3.3829
2.9544
4.4309
3.4041
5.1046
3.6765
5.5148
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

396 
Focus on Modeling
■  An Exponential or Power Model?
Suppose that a scatter plot of the data points 1x,  y2  shows a rapid increase. Should we 
use an exponential function or a power function to model the data? To help us decide, 
we draw two scatter plots: one for the points 1x, ln y2  and the other for the points 
1ln x, ln y2 . If the ﬁrst scatter plot appears to lie along a line, then an exponential model 
is appropriate. If the second plot appears to lie along a line, then a power model is ap-
propriate.
Example 3  ■  An Exponential or Power Model?
Data points 1x,  y2  are shown in Table 5.
(a)	 Draw a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Draw scatter plots of 1x, ln y2  and 1ln x, ln y2 .
(c)	 Is an exponential function or a power function appropriate for modeling this data?
(d)  Find an appropriate function to model the data.
SOLUTION
(a)	 The scatter plot of the data is shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8
0
11
140
(b)	 We use the values from Table 6 to graph the scatter plots in Figures 9 and 10.
Figure 9  Semi-log plot
11
6
0
Figure 10  Log-log plot
2.5
5
0
(c)	 The scatter plot of 1x, ln y2  in Figure 9 does not appear to be linear, so an expo-
nential model is not appropriate. On the other hand, the scatter plot of 1ln x, ln y2  
in Figure 10 is very nearly linear, so a power model is appropriate.
(d)	 Using the PwrReg command on a graphing calculator, we ﬁnd that the power 
function that best ﬁts the data point is
y 1.85x 1.82
	
The graph of this function and the original data points are shown in Figure 11.
■
Before graphing calculators and statistical software became common, exponential 
and power models for data were often constructed by ﬁrst ﬁnding a linear model for the 
linearized data. Then the model for the actual data was found by taking exponentials. 
For instance, if we ﬁnd that ln y  A ln x  B, then by taking exponentials we get the 
model y  eB # e A ln x, or y  Cx A (where C  eB). Special graphing paper called “log 
paper” or “log-log paper” was used to facilitate this process.
Table 5
x
y
  1
    2
  2
    6
  3
  14
  4
  22
  5
  34
  6
  46
  7
  64
  8
  80
  9
102
10
130
Figure 11
0
11
140
Table 6
x
ln x
ln y
  1
0
0.7
  2
0.7
1.8
  3
1.1
2.6
  4
1.4
3.1
  5
1.6
3.5
  6
1.8
3.8
  7
1.9
4.2
  8
2.1
4.4
  9
2.2
4.6
10
2.3
4.9
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Exponential and Power Curves to Data  397
■  Modeling with Logistic Functions
A logistic growth model is a function of the form
f1t2 
c
1 aebt
where a, b, and c are positive constants. Logistic functions are used to model popula-
tions where the growth is constrained by available resources. (See Exercises 27–30 of  
Section 4.2.)
Example 4  ■  Stocking a Pond with Catﬁsh
Much of the ﬁsh that is sold in supermarkets today is raised on commercial ﬁsh farms, 
not caught in the wild. A pond on one such farm is initially stocked with 1000 catﬁsh, 
and the ﬁsh population is then sampled at 15-week intervals to estimate its size. The 
population data are given in Table 7.
(a)	 Find an appropriate model for the data.
(b)	 Make a scatter plot of the data and graph the model that you found in part (a) on 
the scatter plot.
(c)	 How does the model predict that the ﬁsh population will change with time?
SOLUTION
(a)	 Since the catﬁsh population is restricted by its habitat (the pond), a logistic model 
is appropriate. Using the Logistic command on a calculator (see Figure 12(a)), 
we ﬁnd the following model for the catﬁsh population P1t2 :
P1t2 
7925
1 7.7e0.052t
Figure 12
0
(a)
(b)  Catfish population y = P(t)
180
9000
(b)	 The scatter plot and the logistic curve are shown in Figure 12(b).
(c)	 From the graph of P in Figure 12(b) we see that the catﬁsh population increases 
rapidly until about t  80 weeks. Then growth slows down, and at about t  120 
weeks the population levels off and remains more or less constant at slightly  
over 7900.
■
The behavior that is exhibited by the catﬁsh population in Example 4 is typical of 
­logistic growth. After a rapid growth phase, the population approaches a constant level 
called the carrying capacity of the environment. This occurs because as t S `, we 
have ebt → 0 (see Section 4.2), and so
P1t2 
c
1 aebt h  
c
1 0 c
Thus the carrying capacity is c.
Table 7
Week
Catﬁsh
    0
1000
  15
1500
  30
3300
  45
4400
  60
6100
  75
6900
  90
7100
105
7800
120
7900
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

398 
Focus on Modeling
Problems
	 1.	 U.S. Population    The U.S. Constitution requires a census every 10 years. The census 
data for 1790–2010 are given in the table.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Use a calculator to ﬁnd an exponential model for the data.
(c)	 Use your model to predict the population at the 2020 census.
(d)	 Use your model to estimate the population in 1965.
Year
Population 
(in millions)
Year
Population 
(in millions)
Year
Population 
(in millions)
1790
  3.9
1870
  38.6
1950
151.3
1800
  5.3
1880
  50.2
1960
179.3
1810
  7.2
1890
  63.0
1970
203.3
1820
  9.6
1900
  76.2
1980
226.5
1830
12.9
1910
  92.2
1990
248.7
1840
17.1
1920
106.0
2000
281.4
1850
23.2
1930
123.2
2010
308.7
1860
31.4
1940
132.2
	 2.	 A Falling Ball    In a physics experiment a lead ball is dropped from a height of 5 m. The 
students record the distance the ball has fallen every one-tenth of a second. (This can be 
done by using a camera and a strobe light.) Their data are shown in the margin.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Use a calculator to ﬁnd a power model.
(c)	 Use your model to predict how far a dropped ball would fall in 3 s.
	 3.	 Half-Life of Radioactive Iodine    A student is trying to determine the half-life of  
radioactive iodine-131. He measures the amount of iodine-131 in a sample solution every  
8 hours. His data are shown in the table below.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Use a calculator to ﬁnd an exponential model.
(c)	 Use your model to ﬁnd the half-life of iodine-131.
Time xhc
Amount of 131Ixgc
  0
4.80
  8
4.66
16
4.51
24
4.39
32
4.29
40
4.14
48
4.04
	 4.	 The Beer-Lambert Law    As sunlight passes through the waters of lakes and oceans, the 
light is absorbed, and the deeper it penetrates, the more its intensity diminishes. The light  
intensity I at depth x is given by the Beer-Lambert Law:
I I0ekx
	
	 where I0 is the light intensity at the surface and k is a constant that depends on the murki-
ness of the water (see page 366). A biologist uses a photometer to investigate light penetra-
tion in a northern lake, obtaining the data in the table.
Time 
(s) 
Distance 
(m)
0.1
0.048
0.2
0.197
0.3
0.441
0.4
0.882
0.5
1.227
0.6
1.765
0.7
2.401
0.8
3.136
0.9
3.969
1.0
4.902
Light intensity decreases exponentially 
with depth.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Exponential and Power Curves to Data  399
(a)	 Use a graphing calculator to ﬁnd an exponential function of the form given by the 
Beer-Lambert Law to model these data. What is the light intensity I0 at the surface on 
this day, and what is the “murkiness” constant k for this lake?    [Hint: If your calcula-
tor gives you a function of the form I  abx, convert this to the form you want using 
the identities bx eln 1bx 2 e x ln b. See Example 1(b).]
(b)	 Make a scatter plot of the data, and graph the function that you found in part (a) on 
your scatter plot.
(c)	 If the light intensity drops below 0.15 lumen (lm), a certain species of algae can’t sur-
vive because photosynthesis is impossible. Use your model from part (a) to determine 
the depth below which there is insufﬁcient light to support this algae.
Depth 
(ft)
Light intensity 
(lm)
Depth 
(ft)
Light intensity 
(lm)
  5
13.0
25
1.8
10
  7.6
30
1.1
15
  4.5
35
0.5
20
  2.7
40
0.3
	 5.	 Experimenting with “Forgetting” Curves    Every one of us is all too familiar with the phe-
nomenon of forgetting. Facts that we clearly understood at the time we ﬁrst learned them some­
times fade from our memory by the time the ﬁnal exam rolls around. Psychologists have pro-
posed several ways to model this process. One such model is Ebbinghaus’ Law of Forgetting, 
described on page 356. Other models use exponential or logarithmic functions. To develop her 
own model, a psychologist performs an experiment on a group of volunteers by asking them to 
memorize a list of 100 related words. She then tests how many of these words they can recall 
after various periods of time. The average results for the group are shown in the table.
(a)	 Use a graphing calculator to ﬁnd a power function of the form y  at b that models the 
average number of words y that the volunteers remember after t hours. Then ﬁnd an 
exponential function of the form y  abt to model the data.
(b)	 Make a scatter plot of the data, and graph both the functions that you found in part (a) 
on your scatter plot.
(c)	 Which of the two functions seems to provide the better model?
	 6.	 Modeling the Species-Area Relation    The table gives the areas of several caves in 
central Mexico and the number of bat species that live in each cave.*
(a)	 Find a power function that models the data.
(b)	 Draw a graph of the function you found in part (a) and a scatter plot of the data on the 
same graph. Does the model fit the data well?
(c)	 The cave called El Sapo near Puebla, Mexico, has a surface area of A  205 m2. Use 
the model to estimate the number of bat species you would expect to find in that cave.
Cave
Area xm2c
Number 
of species
La Escondida
  18
1
El Escorpion
  19
1
El Tigre
  58
1
Mision Imposible
  60
2
San Martin
128
5
El Arenal
187
4
La Ciudad
344
6
Virgen
511
7
Time
Words recalled
15 min
64.3
1 h
45.1
8 h
37.3
1 day
32.8
2 days
26.9
3 days
25.6
5 days
22.9
The number of different bat species 
in a cave is related to the size  
of the cave by a power function.
© ARENA Creative/Shutterstock.com
*A. K. Brunet and R. A. Medallin, “The Species-Area Relationship in Bat Assemblages of Tropical Caves.” 
Journal of Mammalogy, 82(4):1114–1122, 2001.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

400 
Focus on Modeling
	 7.	 Auto Exhaust Emissions    A study by the U.S. Ofﬁce of Science and Technology in 1972 es-
timated the cost of reducing automobile emissions by certain percentages. Find an exponential 
model that captures the “diminishing returns” trend of these data shown in the table below.
Reduction in 
emissions (%)
Cost per 
car ($)
50
  45
55
  55
60
  62
65
  70
70
  80
75
  90
80
100
85
200
90
375
95
600
	 8.	 Exponential or Power Model?    Data points 1x, y2  are shown in the table.
(a)	 Draw a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Draw scatter plots of 1x, ln y2  and 1ln x, ln y2 .
(c)	 Which is more appropriate for modeling this data: an exponential function or a power 
­function?
(d)	 Find an appropriate function to model the data.
x
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
y
0.08
0.12
0.18
0.25
0.36
0.52
0.73
1.06
	 9.	 Exponential or Power Model?    Data points 1x, y2  are shown in the table in the margin.
(a)	 Draw a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Draw scatter plots of 1x, ln y2  and 1ln x, ln y2 .
(c)	 Which is more appropriate for modeling this data: an exponential function or a power 
function?
(d)	 Find an appropriate function to model the data.
x
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
y
29
82
151
235
330
430
546
669
797
	10.	 Logistic Population Growth    The table and scatter plot give the population of black 
ﬂies in a closed laboratory container over an 18-day period.
(a)	 Use the Logistic command on your calculator to ﬁnd a logistic model for these data.
(b)	 Use the model to estimate the time when there were 400 ﬂies in the container.
400
300
200
100
4
6
8
0
t
Days
500
Number
of flies
N
10
2
12
14
16
18
Time 
(days) 
Number 
of ﬂies
  0
  10
  2
  25
  4
  66
  6
144
  8
262
10
374
12
446
16
492
18
498
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this chapter and the next we introduce two different but equivalent 
ways of viewing the trigonometric functions. One way is to view them as 
functions of real numbers (Chapter 5); the other is to view them as 
functions of angles (Chapter 6). The two approaches to trigonometry are 
independent of each other, so either Chapter 5 or Chapter 6 may be studied 
first. The applications of trigonometry are numerous, including signal 
processing, digital coding of music and videos, finding distances to stars, 
producing CAT scans for medical imaging, and many others. These 
applications are very diverse, and we need to study both approaches to 
trigonometry because the different approaches are required for different 
applications.
One of the main applications of trigonometry that we study in this 
chapter is periodic motion. If you’ve ever taken a Ferris wheel ride, then 
you know about periodic motion—that is, motion that repeats over and 
over. Periodic motion occurs often in nature, as in the daily rising and 
setting of the sun, the daily variation in tide levels, the vibrations of a leaf 
in the wind, and many more. We will see in this chapter how the 
trigonometric functions are used to model periodic motion. 
401
Trigonometric Functions:  
Unit Circle Approach 
5
5.1	 The Unit Circle
5.2	 Trigonometric Functions  
of Real Numbers
5.3	 Trigonometric Graphs
5.4	 More Trigonometric Graphs
5.5	 Inverse Trigonometric 
Functions and Their Graphs
5.6	 Modeling Harmonic Motion
Focus on Modeling
	
Fitting Sinusoidal Curves  
to Data
Doug Steakley/Lonely Planet Images/Getty Images
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

402 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
5.1  The Unit Circle
■  The Unit Circle  ■  Terminal Points on the Unit Circle  ■  The Reference Number
In this section we explore some properties of the circle of radius 1 centered at the origin. 
These properties are used in the next section to deﬁne the trigonometric functions.
■  The Unit Circle
The set of points at a distance 1 from the origin is a circle of radius 1 (see Figure 1). In 
Section 1.9 we learned that the equation of this circle is x2 y2 1.
The unit circle
The unit circle is the circle of radius 1 centered at the origin in the xy-plane. Its 
equation is
x2 y2 1
Example 1  ■  A Point on the Unit Circle
Show that the point Pa !3
3 ,  !6
3 b  is on the unit circle.
Solution    We need to show that this point satisﬁes the equation of the unit circle, 
that is, x2 y2 1. Since
a !3
3 b
2
a !6
3 b
2
3
9 6
9 1
P is on the unit circle.
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Example 2  ■  Locating a Point on the Unit Circle
The point PA !3/2, yB is on the unit circle in Quadrant IV. Find its y-coordinate.
Solution    Since the point is on the unit circle, we have
 a !3
2 b
2
y2 1
 y2 1 3
4 1
4
 y  1
2
Since the point is in Quadrant IV, its y-coordinate must be negative, so y  1
2.
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
■  Terminal Points on the Unit Circle
Suppose t is a real number. If t 0, let’s mark off a distance t along the unit circle, 
starting at the point 11,  02  and moving in a counterclockwise direction. If t 0, we 
mark off a distance 0  t 0  in a clockwise direction (Figure 2). In this way we arrive at a 
Circles are studied in Section 1.9,  
page 97.
y
x
0
1
≈+¥=1
Figure 1  The unit circle
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.1  ■  The Unit Circle  403
point P1x, y2  on the unit circle. The point P1x, y2  obtained in this way is called the 
terminal point determined by the real number t.
y
x
0
1
t<0
P(x, y)
y
x
0
1
t>0
P(x, y)
(a) Terminal point P 1x, y2  determined 
by t  0
(b) Terminal point P 1x, y2  determined 
by t  0
Figure 2
The circumference of the unit circle is C 2p112 2p. So if a point starts at 
11, 02  and moves counterclockwise all the way around the unit circle and returns to 
11, 02 , it travels a distance of 2p. To move halfway around the circle, it travels a dis-
tance of  1
2 12p2 p. To move a quarter of the distance around the circle, it travels a 
distance of  1
4 12p2 p/2. Where does the point end up when it travels these distances 
along the circle? From Figure 3 we see, for example, that when it travels a distance of 
p starting at 11, 02 , its terminal point is 11, 02 .
Example 3  ■  Finding Terminal Points
Find the terminal point on the unit circle determined by each real number t.
(a)	 t  3p            (b)  t  p            (c)  t  p
2
Solution    From Figure 4 we get the following:
(a)	 The terminal point determined by 3p is 11, 02 .
(b)	 The terminal point determined by p is 11, 02 .
(c)	 The terminal point determined by p/2 is 10, 12 .
y
x
0
1
P(_1, 0)
t=3π
y
x
0
1
P(_1, 0)
t=_π
y
x
0
1
P(0, _1)
t=_ π
2
Figure 4
Notice that different values of t can determine the same terminal point.
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
y
x
0
1
P(1, 0)
t=2π
y
x
0
1
P(0, _1)
t=3π
2
y
x
0
1
P(_1, 0)
t=π
P(0, 1)
y
x
0
1
t=π
2
Figure 3  Terminal  
points determined by 
t p
2, p, 3p
2 , and 2p
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

404 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
The terminal point P1x, y2  determined by t  p/4 is the same distance from 11, 02  
as from 10, 12  along the unit circle (see Figure 5).
x
0
1
t=π
4
P !     ,      @
œ∑2
2
œ∑2
2
y=x
y
Figure 5
Since the unit circle is symmetric with respect to the line y x, it follows that P 
lies on the line y x. So P is the point of intersection (in the Quadrant I) of the 
circle x2 y2 1 and the line y x. Substituting x for y in the equation of the 
circle, we get
 x2 x2 1
 2x2 1
        Combine like terms
 x2 1
2
        Divide by 2
 x  1
!2
        Take square roots
Since P is in the Quadrant I, x 1/ !2 and since y  x, we have y 1/ !2 also. Thus 
the terminal point determined by p/4 is
Pa 1
!2,  1
!2 b Pa !2
2 ,  !2
2 b
Similar methods can be used to ﬁnd the terminal points determined by t  p/6 and  
t  p/3 (see Exercises 61 and 62). Table 1 and Figure 6 give the terminal points for 
some special values of t.
œ∑2
2
y
x
0
0; (1, 0)
π
6 ; !     ,    @
œ∑3
2
1
2
; !     ,      @
œ∑2
2
; !   ,      @
œ∑3
2
1
2
π
4
π
3
; (0, 1)
π
2
Figure 6
Table 1
t
Terminal point 
determined by t
0
11, 02
p
6
A !3
2 , 1
2B
p
4
A !2
2 , !2
2 B
p
3
A1
2, !3
2 B
p
2
10, 12
Example 4  ■  Finding Terminal Points
Find the terminal point determined by each given real number t.
(a)	 t  p
4             (b)  t 3p
4             (c)  t  5p
6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.1  ■  The Unit Circle  405
Solution
(a)	 Let P be the terminal point determined by p/4, and let Q be the terminal point 
determined by p/4. From Figure 7(a) we see that the point P has the same coordi-
nates as Q except for sign. Since P is in Quadrant IV, its x-coordinate is positive 
and its y-coordinate is negative. Thus, the terminal point is PA !2/2, !2/2B.
Figure 7
y
x
0
1
Q!     ,    @
œ∑3
2
1
2
(c)
P
t=_5π
6
π
6
y
x
0
1
π
4
Q!     ,      @
œ∑2
2
œ∑2
2
t=3π
4
(b)
P
y
x
0
1
π
4
Q!     ,      @
œ∑2
2
œ∑2
2
t=_ π
4
(a)
P
(b)	 Let P be the terminal point determined by 3p/4, and let Q be the terminal point  
determined by p/4. From Figure 7(b) we see that the point P has the same coor-
dinates as Q except for sign. Since P is in Quadrant II, its x-coordinate is negative  
and its y-coordinate is positive. Thus the terminal point is PA!2/2, !2/2B.
(c)	 Let P be the terminal point determined by 5p/6, and let Q be the terminal point 
determined by p/6. From Figure 7(c) we see that the point P has the same coor-
dinates as Q except for sign. Since P is in Quadrant III, its coordinates are both 
negative. Thus the terminal point is PA!3/2,  1
2B.
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
■  The Reference Number
From Examples 3 and 4 we see that to ﬁnd a terminal point in any quadrant we need 
only know the “corresponding” terminal point in the ﬁrst quadrant. We use the idea of 
the reference number to help us ﬁnd terminal points.
Reference Number
Let t be a real number. The reference number t associated with t is the  
shortest distance along the unit circle between the terminal point determined by 
t and the x-axis.
Figure 8 shows that to ﬁnd the reference number t, it’s helpful to know the quadrant 
in which the terminal point determined by t lies. If the terminal point lies in Quadrant 
I or IV, where x is positive, we ﬁnd t by moving along the circle to the positive x-axis. 
If it lies in Quadrant II or III, where x is negative, we ﬁnd t by moving along the circle 
to the negative x-axis.
Figure 8  The reference number t for t
y
x
0
1
t
t
y
x
0
1
t
t
y
x
0
1
t
t
y
x
0
1
t=t
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

406 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Example 5  ■  Finding Reference Numbers
Find the reference number for each value of t.
(a)	 t 5p
6             (b)  t 7p
4             (c)  t  2p
3             (d)  t  5.80
Solution    From Figure 9 we ﬁnd the reference numbers as follows.
(a)	 t p 5p
6 p
6 	
(b)  t 2p 7p
4 p
4
(c)	 t p 2p
3 p
3 	
(d)  t 2p 5.80 < 0.48
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
Using Reference Numbers to Find Terminal Points
To ﬁnd the terminal point P determined by any value of t, we use the following 
steps:
1.	 Find the reference number t.
2.	 Find the terminal point Q1a, b2  determined by t.
3.	 The terminal point determined by t is P1a, b2 , where the signs are cho-
sen according to the quadrant in which this terminal point lies.
Example 6  ■  Using Reference Numbers to Find Terminal Points
Find the terminal point determined by each given real number t.
(a)	 t 5p
6             (b)  t 7p
4             (c)  t  2p
3
Solution    The reference numbers associated with these values of t were found in 
Example 5.
(a)	 The reference number is t p/6, which determines the terminal point A !3/2, 1
2B 
from Table 1. Since the terminal point determined by t is in Quadrant II, its  
x-coordinate is negative and its y-coordinate is positive. Thus the desired terminal 
point is
a  !3
2 ,  1
2 b
(b)	 The reference number is t p/4, which determines the terminal point 
A !2/2, !2/2B from Table 1. Since the terminal point is in Quadrant IV, its 
x-coordinate is positive and its y-coordinate is negative. Thus the desired terminal 
point is
a !2
2 ,  !2
2 b
0
1
t=π
3
t=_ 2π
3
y
x
0
1
t=5.80
tÅ0.48
0
1
t=π
4
t=7π
4
0
1
t=π
6
t=5π
6
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
y
x
y
x
y
x
Figure 9
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.1  ■  The Unit Circle  407
(c)	 The reference number is t p/3, which determines the terminal point A1
2, !3/2B 
from Table 1. Since the terminal point determined by t is in Quadrant III, its coor-
dinates are both negative. Thus the desired terminal point is
a  1
2,  !3
2 b
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
Since the circumference of the unit circle is 2p, the terminal point determined by t 
is the same as that determined by t  2p or t  2p. In general, we can add or subtract 
2p any number of times without changing the terminal point determined by t. We use 
this observation in the next example to ﬁnd terminal points for large t.
Example 7  ■  Finding the Terminal Point for Large t
Find the terminal point determined by t 29p
6 .
Solution    Since
t 29p
6
4p 5p
6
we see that the terminal point of t is the same as that of 5p/6 (that is, we subtract 
4p). So by Example 6(a) the terminal point is A!3/2,  1
2B. (See Figure 10.)
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 (a)	 The unit circle is the circle centered at  
 with 
	 	 	
radius  
  .
(b)	 The equation of the unit circle is  
  .
(c)	 Suppose the point P 1x, y2  is on the unit circle. Find the 
missing coordinate:
	
(i)	 P 11,
2 	
(ii)	 P 1
, 12        
	
(iii)	 P 11,
2 	
(iv)	 P 1
, 12
	 2.	 (a)	 If we mark off a distance t along the unit circle, starting 
at 11, 02  and moving in a counterclockwise direction, we 
	
arrive at the  
 point determined by t.
(b)	 The terminal points determined by /2, , /2, 2  
are  
  ,  
  ,  
  , and  
  ,  
respectively.
Skills
3–8  ■  Points on the Unit Circle    Show that the point is on the 
unit circle.
	 3.	 a 3
5,  4
5 b 	
  4.	 a 24
25,  7
25 b
	 5.	 a 3
4,  !7
4 b 	
  6.	 a 5
7,  2 !6
7
b
	 7.	 a !5
3 ,  2
3 b 	
  8.	 a !11
6 ,   5
6 b
9–14  ■  Points on the Unit Circle    Find the missing coordinate of 
P, using the fact that P lies on the unit circle in the given quadrant.
Coordinates	
Quadrant
	 9.	 PA 3
5,          B	
III
	10.	 PA         ,  7
 25 B	
IV
	11.	 PA         , 1
3B	
II
Coordinates	
Quadrant
12.	 PA2
5,          B	
I
13.	 PA        ,  2
7B	
IV
14.	 PA 2
3,          B	
II
15–20  ■  Points on the Unit Circle    The point P is on the unit  
circle. Find P1x, y2  from the given information.
	15.	 The x-coordinate of P is 5
13, and the y-coordinate is negative.
	16.	 The y-coordinate of P is  3
5, and the x-coordinate is positive.
5.1  Exercises
0
1
_!  
,  @
œ∑3
2
1
2
y
x
Figure 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

408 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
17.	 The y-coordinate of P is 2
3, and the x-coordinate is negative.
18.	 The x-coordinate of P is positive, and the y-coordinate of  
P is !5/5.
19.	 The x-coordinate of P is !2/3, and P lies below the x-axis.
20.	 The x-coordinate of P is  2
5, and P lies above the x-axis.
21–22  ■  Terminal Points    Find t and the terminal point deter-
mined by t for each point in the ﬁgure. In Exercise 21, t increases in 
increments of p/4; in Exercise 22, t increases in increments of p/6.
21.	 	
	
22.
x
y
1
_1
1
_1
π
4
t=   ;
!    ,     @
œ∑2
2
œ∑2
2
	
y
x
1
_1
1
_1
t=   ;
π
6
!    ,    @
œ∑3
2
1
2
23–36  ■  Terminal Points    Find the terminal point P1x, y2  on the 
unit circle determined by the given value of t.
23.	 t 4p	
24.	 t 3p
	25.	 t 3p
2 	
26.	 t 5p
2
	27.	 t  p
6 	
28.	 t 7p
6
	29.	 t 5p
4 	
30.	 t 4p
3
	31.	 t  7p
6 	
32.	 t 5p
3
	33.	 t  7p
4 	
34.	 t  4p
3
35.	 t  3p
4 	
36.	 t 11p
6
37–40  ■  Reference Numbers    Find the reference number for 
each value of t.
37.	 (a)	 t 4p
3 	
(b)	 t 5p
3
	 	 (c)	 t  7p
6 	
(d)	 t 3.5
38.	 (a)	 t 9p	
(b)	 t  5p
4
	 	 (c)	 t 25p
6 	
(d)	 t 4
39.	 (a)	 t 5p
7 	
(b)	 t  7p
9
	 	 (c)	 t  3	
(d)	 t  5
40.	 (a)	 t 11p
5 	
(b)	 t  9p
7
	 	 (c)	 t  6	
(d)	 t 7
41–54  ■  Terminal Points and Reference Numbers    Find (a) the 
reference number for each value of t and (b) the terminal point 
determined by t.
41.	 t 11p
6 	
42.	 t 2p
3
	43.	 t  4p
3 	
44.	 t 5p
3
45.	 t  2p
3 	
46.	 t  7p
6
47.	 t 13p
4 	
48.	 t 13p
6
49.	 t 41p
6 	
50.	 t 17p
4
51.	 t  11p
3 	
52.	 t 31p
6
53.	 t 16p
3 	
54.	 t  41p
4
55–58  ■  Terminal Points    The unit circle is graphed in the fig-
ure below. Use the ﬁgure to ﬁnd the terminal point determined by 
the real number t, with coordinates rounded to one decimal place.
55.	 t  1
56.	 t  2.5
57.	 t  1.1
58.	 t  4.2
Skills Plus
59.	 Terminal Points    Suppose that the terminal point determined 
by t is the point A3
5, 4
5B on the unit circle. Find the terminal 
point determined by each of the following.
(a)	 p  t	
(b)	 t       
(c)	 p  t	
(d)	 2p  t
60.	 Terminal Points    Suppose that the terminal point determined 
by t is the point A3
4, !7/4B on the unit circle. Find the termi-
nal point determined by each of the following.
(a)	 t	
(b)	 4p  t
(c)	 p  t	
(d)	 t  p
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
61.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Finding the Terminal Point for p/6     
Suppose the terminal point determined by t  p/6 is P1x, y2  
and the points Q and R are as shown in the ﬁgure. Why are 
y
x
0
0.5
0.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.2  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Real Numbers  409
the distances PQ and PR the same? Use this fact, together 
with the Distance Formula, to show that the coordinates of P 
satisfy the equation 2y "x2 1 y 12 2. Simplify this 
equation using the fact that x2 y2 1. Solve the simpliﬁed 
equation to ﬁnd P1x, y2 .
0
1
t=π
6
Q(x, _y)
P(x, y)
R(0, 1)
y
x
62.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Finding the Terminal Point for p/3     
Now that you know the terminal point determined by  
t  p/6, use symmetry to ﬁnd the terminal point determined 
by t  p/3 (see the ﬁgure). Explain your reasoning.
0
1
1
π
6
Q
P
y=x
t=π
3
π
6
y
x
5.2  Trigonometric Functions of Real Numbers
■  The Trigonometric Functions  ■  Values of the Trigonometric Functions   
■  Fundamental Identities
A function is a rule that assigns to each real number another real number. In this section 
we use properties of the unit circle from the preceding section to deﬁne the trigonomet-
ric functions.
■  The Trigonometric Functions
Recall that to ﬁnd the terminal point P1x, y2  for a given real number t, we move a  
distance 0  t 0  along the unit circle, starting at the point 11, 02 . We move in a counter-
clockwise direction if t is positive and in a clockwise direction if t is negative (see 
Figure 1). We now use the x- and y-coordinates of the point P1x, y2  to deﬁne several 
functions. For instance, we deﬁne the function called sine by assigning to each real 
number t the y-coordinate of the terminal point P1x, y2  determined by t. The functions 
cosine, tangent, cosecant, secant, and cotangent are also deﬁned by using the coordi-
nates of P1x, y2 .
Definition of the Trigonometric Functions
Let t be any real number and let P1x, y2  be the terminal point on the unit circle 
determined by t. We deﬁne
	
sin t y	
cos t x	
tan t y
x 1x ? 02
csc t 1
y 1 y ? 02    
sec t 1
x 1x ? 02    
cot t x
y 1 y ? 02
Because the trigonometric functions can be deﬁned in terms of the unit circle, they 
are sometimes called the circular functions.
0
1
t
P(x, y)
y
x
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

410 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Example 1  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions
Find the six trigonometric functions of each given real number t.
(a)	 t p
3             (b)  t p
2
Solution
(a)	 From Table 1 on page 404, we see that the terminal point determined by t  p/3  
is PA1
2, !3/2B. (See Figure 2.) Since the coordinates are x 1
2 and y !3/2, 
we have
sin  p
3 !3
2
     
cos  p
3 1
2     
tan  p
3 !3/2
1/2
!3
csc  p
3 2!3
3      
sec  p
3 2      
cot  p
3 
1/2
!3/2 !3
3
(b)	 The terminal point determined by p/2 is P10, 12 . (See Figure 3.) So
sin  p
2 1     
cos  p
2 0     
csc  p
2 1
1 1     
cot  p
2 0
1 0
	 	 But tan p/2 and sec p/2 are undeﬁned because x  0 appears in the denominator 
in each of their deﬁnitions.
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Some special values of the trigonometric functions are listed in the table below. This 
table is easily obtained from Table 1 of Section 5.1, together with the deﬁnitions of the 
trigonometric functions.
special values of the trigonometric functions
The following values of the trigonometric functions are obtained from the  
special terminal points. 
TABLE 1
t
sin t
cos t
tan t
csc t
sec t
cot t
0
0
1
0
—
1
—
p
6
1
2
!3
2
!3
3
2
2 !3
3
!3
p
4
!2
2
!2
2
1
!2
!2
1
p
3
!3
2
1
2
!3
2 !3
3
2
!3
3
p
2
1
0
—
1
—
0
œ∑2
2
y
x
0
0; (1, 0)
π
6 ; !     ,    @
œ∑3
2
1
2
; !     ,      @
œ∑2
2
; !   ,      @
œ∑3
2
1
2
π
4
π
3
; (0, 1)
π
2
Example 1 shows that some of the trigonometric functions fail to be deﬁned  
for certain real numbers. So we need to determine their domains. The functions sine and 
cosine are deﬁned for all values of t. Since the functions cotangent and cosecant have y 
in the denominator of their deﬁnitions, they are not deﬁned whenever the y-coordinate 
of the terminal point P1x, y2  determined by t is 0. This happens when t  np for any 
integer n, so their domains do not include these points. The functions tangent and secant 
have x in the denominator in their deﬁnitions, so they are not deﬁned whenever x  0. 
This happens when t 1p/22 np for any integer n.
0
1
P
y
x
t=π
3
!  ,     @
1
2
œ∑3
2
Figure 2
We can easily remember the sines 
and cosines of the basic angles by 
writing them in the form ! /2:
t
sin t
cos t
0
!0/2
!4/2
p/6
!1/2
!3/2
p/4
!2/2
!2/2
p/3
!3/2
!1/2
p/2
!4/2
!0/2
Figure 3
0
1
P(0, 1)
y
x
t=π
2
(text continues on page 412)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.2  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Real Numbers  411
If you have studied the trigonometry of right trian-
gles in Chapter 6, you are probably wondering how 
the sine and cosine of an angle relate to those of this 
section. To see how, let’s start with a right triangle, 
OPQ.
Right triangle OPQ
¨
O
P
Q
opp
adj
hyp
Place the triangle in the coordinate plane as 
shown, with angle u in standard position.
P'(x, y) is the terminal
point determined by t.
y
x
O
1
P'(x, y)
Q
P
¨
Q'
t
The point P(x, y) in the ﬁgure is the terminal 
point determined by t. Note that triangle OPQ is 
similar to the small triangle OPQ whose legs have 
lengths x and y.
Now, by the deﬁnition of the trigonometric func-
tions of the angle u we have
 sin u opp
hyp PQ
OP P rQ r
OP r
  y
1 y
 cos u adj
hyp OQ
OP OQ r
OP r
  x
1 x
By the deﬁnition of the trigonometric functions of 
the real number t, we have
sin t y  cos t x
Now, if u is measured in radians, then u  t  
(see the ﬁgure). So the trigonometric functions of 
the angle with radian measure u are exactly the 
same as the trigonometric functions deﬁned in 
terms of the terminal point determined by the real 
number t.
The radian measure
of angle ¨ is t.
y
x
O
1
P'(x, y)
t
¨
Why then study trigonometry in two different 
ways? Because different applications require that we 
view the trigonometric functions differently. (Com-
pare Section 5.6 with Sections 6.2, 6.5, and 6.6.)
Relationship to the Trigonometric  
Functions of Angles
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

412 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Domains of the Trigonometric Functions
Function	
Domain
sin, cos	
All real numbers
tan, sec	
All real numbers other than p
2 np for any integer n
cot, csc	
All real numbers other than np for any integer, n
■  Values of the Trigonometric Functions
To compute values of the trigonometric functions for any real number t, we ﬁrst deter-
mine their signs. The signs of the trigonometric functions depend on the quadrant in 
which the terminal point of t lies. For example, if the terminal point P1x, y2  determined 
by t lies in Quadrant III, then its coordinates are both negative. So sin t, cos t, csc t, and 
sec t are all negative, whereas tan t and cot t are positive. You can check the other entries 
in the following box.
Signs of the Trigonometric Functions
Quadrant	
Positive Functions	
Negative Functions
	
I	
all	
none
	
II	
sin, csc	
cos, sec, tan, cot
	
III	
tan, cot	
sin, csc, cos, sec
	
IV	
cos, sec	
sin, csc, tan, cot
For example cos12p/32 0 because the terminal point of t 2p/3 is in Quadrant II, 
whereas tan 4 0 because the terminal point of t 4 is in Quadrant III.
In Section 5.1 we used the reference number to ﬁnd the terminal point determined 
by a real number t. Since the trigonometric functions are deﬁned in terms of the 
coordinates of terminal points, we can use the reference number to ﬁnd values of  
the trigonometric functions. Suppose that t is the reference number for t. Then  
the terminal point of t has the same coordinates, except possibly for sign, as the 
terminal point of t. So the value of each trigonometric function at t is the same,  
except possibly for sign, as its value at t. We illustrate this procedure in the next 
example.
evaluating trigonometric functions for any real number
To find the values of the trigonometric functions for any real number t, we carry 
out the following steps.
1.	 Find the reference number. Find the reference number t associated with t.
2.	 Find the sign. Determine the sign of the trigonometric function of t by noting 
the quadrant in which the terminal point lies.
3.	 Find the value. The value of the trigonometric function of t is the same, 
except possibly for sign, as the value of the trigonometric function of t.
y
x
All
Sine
Cosine
Tangent
The following mnemonic device will 
help you remember which trigonometric 
functions are positive in each quadrant: 
All of them, Sine, Tangent, or Cosine.
You can remember this as “All  
Students Take Calculus.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.2  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Real Numbers  413
Example 2  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions
Find each value.
(a)	 cos 2p
3             (b)  tana p
3 b             (c)  sin 19p
4
Solution
(a)	 The reference number for 2p/3 is p/3 (see Figure 4(a)). Since the terminal point 
of 2p/3 is in Quadrant II, cos12p/32  is negative. Thus
cos 2p
3 cos p
3  1
2
(a)
t=2π
3
π
3
t=
0
t=19π
4
π
4
t=
(c)
0
(b)
π
3
t=
π
3
t=_
0
y
x
y
x
y
x
Figure 4
(b)	 The reference number for p/3 is p/3 (see Figure 4(b)). Since the terminal point 
of p/3 is in Quadrant IV, tan1p/32  is negative. Thus
tana p
3 b tan p
3 !3
(c)	 Since 119p/42 4p 3p/4, the terminal points determined by 19p/4 and 
3p/4 are the same. The reference number for 3p/4 is p/4 (see Figure 4(c)). Since 
the terminal point of 3p/4 is in Quadrant II, sin13p/42  is positive. Thus
sin 19p
4
sin 3p
4 sin p
4 !2
2
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
So far, we have been able to compute the values of the trigonometric functions only 
for certain values of t. In fact, we can compute the values of the trigonometric func-
tions whenever t is a multiple of p/6, p/4, p/3, and p/2. How can we compute the 
trigonometric functions for other values of t? For example, how can we ﬁnd sin1.5? 
One way is to carefully sketch a diagram and read the value (see Exercises 37–44); 
however, this method is not very accurate. Fortunately, programmed directly into 
scientiﬁc calculators are mathematical procedures (see the margin note on page 433) 
that ﬁnd the values of sine, cosine, and tangent correct to the number of digits in the 
Sign
Reference 
number
From Table 1  
(page 410)
Sign
Reference 
number
From Table 1  
(page 410)
Sign
Reference 
number
From Table 1  
(page 410)
Subtract 4p
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

414 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
display. The calculator must be put in radian mode to evaluate these functions. To ﬁnd 
values of cosecant, secant, and cotangent using a calculator, we need to use the follow-
ing reciprocal relations:
csc t 
1
sin t  sec t 
1
cos t  cot t 
1
tan t
These identities follow from the deﬁnitions of the trigonometric functions. For in-
stance, since sin t  y and csc t  1/y, we have csc t 1/y 1/1sin t2 . The others 
follow similarly.
Example 3  ■  Using a Calculator to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions
Using a calculator, find the following.
(a)	 sin 2.2      (b)  cos 1.1      (c)  cot 28      (d)  csc 0.98
Solution    Making sure our calculator is set to radian mode and rounding the results 
to six decimal places, we get
(a)	 sin 2.2 ^ 0.808496	
(b)	 cos 1.1 ^ 0.453596
(c)	 cot 28 
1
tan 28 < 3.553286	
(d)	 csc 0.98 
1
sin 0.98 < 1.204098
Now Try Exercises 39 and 41	
■
Let’s consider the relationship between the trigonometric functions of t and those of 
t. From Figure 5 we see that
 sin1t2 y sin t
 cos1t2 x cos t
 tan1t2 y
x  y
x tan t
These equations show that sine and tangent are odd functions, whereas cosine is an even 
function. It’s easy to see that the reciprocal of an even function is even and the recipro-
cal of an odd function is odd. This fact, together with the reciprocal relations, completes 
our knowledge of the even-odd properties for all the trigonometric functions.
Even-Odd Properties
Sine, cosecant, tangent, and cotangent are odd functions; cosine and secant are 
even functions.
 sin1t2 sin t    cos1t2 cos t    tan1t2 tan t
 csc1t2 csc t    sec1t2 sec t    cot1t2 cot t
Even and odd functions are deﬁned in 
Section 2.6.
Example 4  ■  Even and Odd Trigonometric Functions
Use the even-odd properties of the trigonometric functions to determine each value.
(a)	 sina p
6 b             (b)  cos a p
4 b
0
1
(x, y)
_t
t
y
_y
(x, _y)
x
y
x
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.2  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Real Numbers  415
Solution    By the even-odd properties and Table 1 on page 410, we have
(a)  sina p
6 b sin p
6  1
2	
Sine is odd
(b)  cos a p
4 b cos p
4 !2
2 	
Cosine is even
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
■  Fundamental Identities
The trigonometric functions are related to each other through equations called trigono-
metric identities. We give the most important ones in the following box.*
Fundamental Identities
Reciprocal Identities
csc t 
1
sin t   sec t 
1
cos t   cot t 
1
tan t   
tan t sin t
cos t   cot t cos t
sin t
Pythagorean Identities
sin2
 t cos2
 t 1   tan2
 t 1 sec2
 t   1 cot2
 t csc2
 t
Proof    The reciprocal identities follow immediately from the deﬁnitions on page 409. 
We now prove the Pythagorean identities. By deﬁnition cos t  x and sin t  y, where 
x and y are the coordinates of a point P1x, y2  on the unit circle. Since P1x, y2  is on 
the unit circle, we have x2 y2 1. Thus
sin2
 t cos2
 t 1
Dividing both sides by cos2
 t (provided that cos t 2 0), we get
 sin2
 t
cos2
 t cos2
 t
cos2
 t 
1
cos2
 t
 a sin t
cos t b
2
1 a
1
cos t b
2
 tan2
 t 1 sec2
 t
We have used the reciprocal identities sin t/cos t  tan t and 1/cos t  sec t. Simi-
larly, dividing both sides of the ﬁrst Pythagorean identity by sin2
 t (provided that 
sin t 2 0) gives us 1 cot2
 t csc2
 t.
■
As their name indicates, the fundamental identities play a central role in trigonom-
etry because we can use them to relate any trigonometric function to any other. So if we 
know the value of any one of the trigonometric functions at t, then we can ﬁnd the 
values of all the others at t.
Example 5  ■  Finding All Trigonometric Functions from the Value of One
If cos t 3
5 and t is in Quadrant IV, ﬁnd the values of all the trigonometric functions at t.
*We follow the usual convention of writing sin2
 t for 1sin t2 2. In general, we write sinn
 t for 1sin t2 n for all 
integers n except n  1. The superscript n  1 will be assigned another meaning in Section 5.5. Of 
course, the same convention applies to the other ﬁve trigonometric functions.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

416 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Solution    From the Pythagorean identities we have
 sin2
 t cos2
 t 1
 sin2
 t A3
5B
2 1
    Substitute cos t 3
5
 sin2
 t 1 9
25 16
25    Solve for sin2
 t
 sin t  4
5
    Take square roots
Since this point is in Quadrant IV, sin t is negative, so sin t  4
5. Now that we know 
both sin t and cos t, we can ﬁnd the values of the other trigonometric functions using 
the reciprocal identities.
 sin t  4
5
     
 cos t 3
5
     
 tan t sin t
cos t  4
5
3
5
 4
3
 csc t 
1
sin t  5
4     
 sec t 
1
cos t 5
3     
 cot t 
1
tan t  3
4
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
Example 6  ■  Writing One Trigonometric Function  
in Terms of Another
Write tan t in terms of cos t, where t is in Quadrant III.
Solution    Since tan t  sin t/cos t, we need to write sin t in terms of cos t. By the 
Pythagorean identities we have
 sin2
 t cos2
 t 1
 sin2
 t 1 cos2
 t
    Solve for sin2
 t
 sin t "1 cos2
 t    Take square roots
Since sin t is negative in Quadrant III, the negative sign applies here. Thus
tan t sin t
cos t "1 cos2
 t
cos t
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
The Value of p
The number p is the ratio of the circum-
ference of a circle to its diameter. It has 
been known since ancient times that this 
ratio is the same for all circles. The ﬁrst  
systematic effort to ﬁnd a numerical 
approximation for p was made by  
Archimedes (ca. 240 b.c.), who proved  
that 22
7 p 223
71  by ﬁnding the perime-
ters of regular polygons inscribed in and 
cir­cumscribed about a circle.
In about a.d. 480, the Chinese physicist 
Tsu Ch’ung-chih gave the approximation
p < 355
113 3.141592 . . .
which is correct to six decimals. This 
remained the most accurate estimation  
of p until the Dutch mathematician 
Adrianus Romanus (1593) used polygons 
with more than a billion sides to compute 
p correct to 15 decimals. In the 17th cen-
tury, mathematicians began to use inﬁnite 
series and trigonometric identities in the 
quest for p. The Englishman William 
Shanks spent 15 years (1858–1873) using 
these methods to compute p to 707 deci-
mals, but in 1946 it was found that his 
ﬁgures were wrong beginning with the 
528th decimal. Today, with the aid of com-
puters, mathematicians routinely deter-
mine p correct to millions of decimals. In 
fact, mathematicians have recently devel-
oped new algorithms that can be pro-
grammed into computers to calculate  
to many trillions of decimal places.
Concepts
	 1.	 Let P1x, y2  be the terminal point on the unit circle deter-
mined by t. Then sin t  
  , cos t  
  ,  
and tan t  
  .
	 2.	 If P1x, y2  is on the unit circle, then x2 y2  
  .  
So for all t we have sin2
 t cos2
 t  
  .
Skills
3–4  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions    Find sin t and cos t 
for the values of t whose terminal points are shown on the unit 
circle in the ﬁgure. In Exercise 3, t increases in increments of 
p/4; in Exercise 4, t increases in increments of p/6. (See Exer-
cises 21 and 22 in Section 5.1.)
	 3.	 	
	
4.
y
x
1
_1
1
_1
π
4
t=
	
y
x
1
_1
1
_1
π
6
t=
5.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.2  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Real Numbers  417
5–22  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions    Find the  
exact value of the trigonometric function at the given real 
number.
	 5.	 (a)  sin 7p
6 	
(b)	 cos 17p
6 	
(c)	 tan 7p
6
	 6.	 (a)  sin 5p
3 	
(b)	 cos 11p
3 	
(c)	 tan 5p
3
	 7.	 (a)  sin 11p
4 	
(b)	 sina p
4 b 	
(c)	 sin 5p
4
	 8.	 (a)  cos 19p
6 	
(b)	 cos a 7p
6 b 	
(c)	 cos a p
6 b
	 9.	 (a)  cos 3p
4 	
(b)	 cos 5p
4 	
(c)	 cos 7p
4
	10.	 (a)  sin 3p
4 	
(b)	 sin 5p
4 	
(c)	 sin 7p
4
	11.	 (a)  sin 7p
3 	
(b)	 csc 7p
3 	
(c)	 cot 7p
3
12.	 (a)  csc 5p
4 	
(b)	 sec 5p
4 	
(c)	 tan 5p
4
13.	 (a)  cos a p
3 b 	
(b)	 seca p
3 b 	
(c)	 sina p
3 b
14.	 (a)  tana p
4 b 	
(b)	 csca p
4 b 	
(c)	 cota p
4 b
15.	 (a)  cos a p
6 b 	
(b)	 csca p
3 b 	
(c)	 tana p
6 b
16.	 (a)  sina p
4 b 	
(b)	 seca p
4 b 	
(c)	 cota p
6 b
17.	 (a)  csc 7p
6 	
(b)	 seca p
6 b 	
(c)	 cota 5p
6 b
18.	 (a)  sec 3p
4 	
(b)	 cos a 2p
3 b 	
(c)	 tana 7p
6 b
19.	 (a)  sin 4p
3 	
(b)	 sec 11p
6 	
(c)	 cota p
3 b
20.	 (a)  csc 2p
3 	
(b)	 seca 5p
3 b 	
(c)	 cos a 10p
3 b
21.	 (a)  sin 13p	
(b)	 cos 14p	
(c)	 tan 15p
22.	 (a)  sin 25p
2 	
(b)	 cos 25p
2 	
(c)	 cot 25p
2
23–26  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions    Find the  
value of each of the six trigonometric functions (if it is deﬁned)  
at the given real number t. Use your answers to complete the 
table.
23.	 t  0	
24.	 t p
2
	25.	 t  p	
26.	 t 3p
2
t
sin t
cos t
tan t
csc t
sec t
cot t
0
0
1
undeﬁned
p
2
p
0
undeﬁned
3p
2
27–36  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions    The terminal 
point P1x, y2  determined by a real number t is given. Find sin t, 
cos t, and tan t.
27.	 a 3
5,  4
5 b 	
28.	 a 1
2, !3
2 b
29.	 a 1
3, 2!2
3
b 	
30.	 a 1
5,  2!6
5
b
31.	 a 6
7,  !13
7
b 	
32.	 a 40
41,  9
41 b
33.	 a 5
13,  12
13 b 	
34.	 a !5
5 ,  2 !5
5
b
35.	 a 20
29,  21
29 b 	
36.	 a 24
25,  7
25 b
37–44  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find an approxi-
mate value of the given trigonometric function by using (a) the 
ﬁgure and (b) a calculator. Compare the two values.
37.	 sin 1
38.	 cos 0.8
39.	 sin 1.2
	40.	 cos 5
41.	 tan 0.8
42.	 tan(1.3)
43.	 cos 4.1
44.	 sin(5.2)
y
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.5
0.5
45–48  ■  Sign of a Trigonometric Expression    Find the sign of 
the expression if the terminal point determined by t is in the given 
quadrant.
45.	 sin t cos t,    Quadrant II	
46.	 tan t sec t,    Quadrant IV
47.	 tan t  sin t
cot t
,    Quadrant III	
48.	 cos t sec t,    any quadrant
49–52  ■  Quadrant of a Terminal Point    From the information 
given, ﬁnd the quadrant in which the terminal point determined 
by t lies.
49.	 sin t  0 and cos t  0
	50.	 tan t  0 and sin t  0
51.	 csc t  0 and sec t  0
	52.	 cos t  0 and cot t  0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

418 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
53–62  ■  Writing One Trigonometric Expression in Terms of 
Another    Write the ﬁrst expression in terms of the second if the 
terminal point determined by t is in the given quadrant.
53.	 sin t, cos t;    Quadrant II	
54.	 cos t, sin t;    Quadrant IV
55.	 tan t, sin t;    Quadrant IV	
56.	 tan t, cos t;    Quadrant III
57.	 sec t, tan t;    Quadrant II	
58.	 csc t, cot t;    Quadrant III
59.	 tan t, sec t;    Quadrant III	
60.	 sin t, sec t;    Quadrant IV
61.	 tan2 t, sin t;    any quadrant
62.	 sec2 t sin2 t, cos t;    any quadrant
63–70  ■  Using the Pythagorean Identities    Find the values of 
the trigonometric functions of t from the given information.
63.	 sin t  4
5,  terminal point of t is in Quadrant IV
	64.	 cos t  7
25,  terminal point of t is in Quadrant III
65.	 sec t  3,    terminal point of t is in Quadrant IV
66.	 tan t 1
4,    terminal point of t is in Quadrant III
67.	 tan t  12
5 , 
sin t 0
	68.	 csc t 5, 
cos t 0
69.	 sin t  1
4,    sec t  0	
70.	 tan t  4,    csc t  0
Skills Plus
71–78  ■  Even and Odd Functions    Determine whether the func-
tion is even, odd, or neither. (See page 204 for the definitions of 
even and odd functions.)
71.	 f1x2 x2
  sin x	
72.	 f1x2 x2 cos 2x
73.	 f1x2 sin x cos x	
74.	 f1x2 sin x cos x
75.	 f1x2 0  x 0  cos x	
76.	 f1x2 x sin3
 x
77.	 f1x2 x3 cos x	
78.	 f1x2 cos1sin x2
Applications
79.	 Harmonic Motion    The displacement from equilibrium  
of an oscillating mass attached to a spring is given by 
y1t2 4 cos 3pt where y is measured in inches and t in  
seconds. Find the displacement at the times indicated in  
the table.
t
yxtc
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
y>0
y<0
Equilibrium, y=0
80.	 Circadian Rhythms    Everybody’s blood pressure  
varies over the course of the day. In a certain individual  
the resting diastolic blood pressure at time t is given by 
B1t2 80 7 sin1pt/122 , where t is measured in hours 
since midnight and B1t2  in mmHg (millimeters of mercury). 
Find this person’s resting diastolic blood pressure at
(a)	 6:00 a.m.    (b)  10:30 a.m.    (c)  Noon    (d)  8:00 p.m.
81.	 Electric Circuit    After the switch is closed in the circuit 
shown, the current t seconds later is I1t2 0.8e3t sin 10t. 
Find the current at the times (a) t  0.1 s and (b) t  0.5 s.
L  103 h
R  6 3 103 
C  9.17 mF
E  4.8 3 103 V
R
S
E
C
L
82.	 Bungee Jumping    A bungee jumper plummets from  
a high bridge to the river below and then bounces back  
over and over again. At time t seconds after her jump,  
her height H (in meters) above the river is given by 
H1t2 100 75et/20 cosAp
4  tB. Find her height at the times  
indicated in the table.
H
t
Hxtc
  0
  1
  2
  4
  6
  8
12
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
83.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Reduction Formulas    A reduction for-
mula is one that can be used to “reduce” the number of terms 
in the input for a trigonometric function. Explain how the 
ﬁgure shows that the following reduction formulas are valid:
sin1t p2 sin t  cos1t p2 cos t
tan1t p2 tan t
1
t
(_x, _y)
(x, y)
t+π
0
y
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.3  ■  Trigonometric Graphs  419
84.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  More Reduction Formulas    By the 
Angle-Side-Angle Theorem from elementary geometry,  
triangles CDO and AOB in the ﬁgure to the right are con-
gruent. Explain how this proves that if B has coordinates 
1x, y2 , then D has coordinates 1y, x2 . Then explain how 
the ﬁgure shows that the following reduction formulas are 
valid:
 sinat p
2 b cos t   
 cos at p
2 b sin t
 tanat p
2 b cot t
1
t
B(x, y)
D(_y, x)
A
O
C
t+π
2
y
x
5.3  Trigonometric Graphs
■  Graphs of Sine and Cosine  ■  Graphs of Transformations of Sine and Cosine   
■  Using Graphing Devices to Graph Trigonometric Functions
The graph of a function gives us a better idea of its behavior. So in this section we graph 
the sine and cosine functions and certain transformations of these functions. The other 
trigonometric functions are graphed in the next section.
■  Graphs of Sine and Cosine
To help us graph the sine and cosine functions, we ﬁrst observe that these functions 
repeat their values in a regular fashion. To see exactly how this happens, recall that  
the circumference of the unit circle is 2p. It follows that the terminal point P1x, y2  
determined by the real number t is the same as that determined by t  2p. Since  
the sine and cosine functions are deﬁned in terms of the coordinates of P1x, y2 , it fol-
lows that their values are unchanged by the addition of any integer multiple of 2p. In 
other words,
 sin1t 2np2 sin t    for any integer n
 cos1t 2np2 cos t   for any integer n
Thus the sine and cosine functions are periodic according to the following deﬁnition: 
A function f is periodic if there is a positive number p such that f1t p2 f1t2  
for every t. The least such positive number (if it exists) is the period of f. If f has 
period p, then the graph of f on any interval of length p is called one complete  
period of f.
Periodic Properties of Sine and Cosine
The functions sine and cosine have period 2p:
sin1t 2p2 sin t       cos1t 2p2 cos t
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

420 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
So the sine and cosine functions repeat their values in any interval of length 2p. To 
sketch their graphs, we ﬁrst graph one period. To sketch the graphs on the interval 
0  t  2p, we could try to make a table of values and use those points to draw the 
graph. Since no such table can be complete, let’s look more closely at the deﬁnitions of 
these functions.
Recall that sin t is the y-coordinate of the terminal point P1x, y2  on the unit circle 
determined by the real number t. How does the y-coordinate of this point vary as t in-
creases? It’s easy to see that the y-coordinate of P1x, y2  increases to 1, then decreases 
to 1 repeatedly as the point P1x, y2  travels around the unit circle. (See Figure 1.) In 
fact, as t increases from 0 to p/2, y  sin t increases from 0 to 1. As t increases from 
p/2 to p, the value of y  sin t decreases from 1 to 0. Table 1 shows the variation of 
the sine and cosine functions for t between 0 and 2p.
y
x
0
1
t‚
(ç t‚, ß t‚)
y
t
0
t‚
2π
y=ß t
Figure 1
To draw the graphs more accurately, we ﬁnd a few other values of sin t and cos t in 
Table 2. We could ﬁnd still other values with the aid of a calculator.
Table 2
t
0
p
6
p
3
p
2
2p
3
5p
6
p
7p
6
4p
3
3p
2
5p
3
11p
6
2p
sin t
0
1
2
!3
2
1
!3
2
1
2
  0
 1
2
 !3
2
1
 !3
2
 1
2
0
cos t
1
!3
2
1
2
0
 1
2
 !3
2
1
 !3
2
 1
2
  0
1
2
!3
2
1
Now we use this information to graph the functions sin t and cos t for t between  
0 and 2p in Figures 2 and 3. These are the graphs of one period. Using the fact that these 
functions are periodic with period 2p, we get their complete graphs by continuing the 
same pattern to the left and to the right in every successive interval of length 2p.
The graph of the sine function is symmetric with respect to the origin. This is as 
expected, since sine is an odd function. Since the cosine function is an even function, 
its graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
7π
6
y
t
0
One period of y=ß t
0≤t≤2π
1
_1
π
6
π
3
π
2
2π
3
5π
6 π
11π
6
2π
4π
3
3π
2
5π
3
y
t
0
1
_1
π
2π
4π
3π
_π
Period 2π
y=ß t
Graph of ß t
Figure 2
Table 1
t
sin t
cos t
0 S p
2
0 S 1
1 S 0
p
2 S p
1 S 0
0 S 1
p S 3p
2
0 S 1
1 S 0
3p
2 S 2p
1 S 0
0 S 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.3  ■  Trigonometric Graphs  421
7π
6
y
t
0
One period of y=ç t
0≤t≤2π
1
_1
π
6
π
3
π
2
2π
3
5π
6
π
11π
6
2π
4π
3
3π
2
5π
3
y
t
0
1
_1
π
2π
4π
3π
_π
Period 2π
y=ç t
Figure 3  Graph of cos t
■  Graphs of Transformations of Sine and Cosine
We now consider graphs of functions that are transformations of the sine and cosine 
functions. Thus, the graphing techniques of Section 2.6 are very useful here. The graphs 
we obtain are important for understanding applications to physical situations such as 
harmonic motion (see Section 5.6), but some of them are beautiful graphs that are in-
teresting in their own right.
It’s traditional to use the letter x to denote the variable in the domain of a function. 
So from here on we use the letter x and write y  sin x, y  cos x, y  tan x, and so on 
to denote these functions.
Example 1  ■  Cosine Curves
Sketch the graph of each function.
(a)	 f1x2 2 cos x            (b)  g1x2 cos x
Solution
(a)	 The graph of y  2  cos x is the same as the graph of y  cos x, but shifted up 
2 units (see Figure 4(a)).
(b)	 The graph of y  cos x in Figure 4(b) is the reﬂection of the graph of y  cos x 
in the x-axis.
y=ç x
˝
x
0
1
_1
π
2π
˝=_ç x
y=ç x
Ï
x
0
1
_1
π
2π
Ï=2+ç x
(a)
(b)
Figure 4
Now Try Exercises 5 and 7	
■
Let’s graph y 2 sin x. We start with the graph of y sin x and multiply the  
y-coordinate of each point by 2. This has the effect of stretching the graph vertically by 
a factor of 2. To graph y 1
2  sin x, we start with the graph of y  sin x and multiply 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

422 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
the y-coordinate of each point by 1
2. This has the effect of shrinking the graph vertically 
by a factor of 1
2 (see Figure 5).
y=   ß x
1
2
y
x
0
1
π
2π
y=2 ß x
_π
y=ß x
_2
2
3
Figure 5
In general, for the functions
y a sin x  and  y a cos x
the number 0  a 0  is called the amplitude and is the largest value these functions attain. 
Graphs of y  a sin x for several values of a are shown in Figure 6.
y
x
π
2π
y=3 ß x
_π
y=ß x
2
3
_3
y=_2 ß x
y=   ß x
1
2
Figure 6
Example 2  ■  Stretching a Cosine Curve
Find the amplitude of y  3 cos x, and sketch its graph.
Solution    The amplitude is 0  3 0 3, so the largest value the graph attains is  
3 and the smallest value is 3. To sketch the graph, we begin with the graph of 
y  cos x, stretch the graph vertically by a factor of 3, and reﬂect in the x-axis,  
arriving at the graph in Figure 7.
y
x
0
π
2π
y=_3 ç x
_π
y=ç x
2
3
_3
1
Figure 7
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
Since the sine and cosine functions have period 2p, the functions
y a sin kx  and  y a cos kx  1k 02
Vertical stretching and shrinking of 
graphs is discussed in Section 2.6.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.3  ■  Trigonometric Graphs  423
complete one period as kx varies from 0 to 2p, that is, for 0  kx  2p or for  
0  x  2p/k. So these functions complete one period as x varies between 0 and 2p/k 
and thus have period 2p/k. The graphs of these functions are called sine curves and 
cosine curves, respectively. (Collectively, sine and cosine curves are often referred to 
as sinusoidal curves.)
Sine and Cosine Curves
The sine and cosine curves
y a sin kx  and  y a cos kx  1k 02
have amplitude 0  a 0  and period 2p/k.
An appropriate interval on which to graph one complete period is 30, 2p/k4.
To see how the value of k affects the graph of y  sin kx, let’s graph the sine curve  
y  sin 2x. Since the period is 2p/2  p, the graph completes one period in the  
interval 0  x  p (see Figure 8(a)). For the sine curve y sin 1
2 x the period is 
2p 4 1
2 4p, so the graph completes one period in the interval 0  x  4p (see Fig-
ure 8(b)). We see that the effect is to shrink the graph horizontally if k  1 or to stretch 
the graph horizontally if k  1.
(a)
(b)
y
x
π
2π
_π
_1
3π
4π
_2π
1
y=ß    x
1
2
y
x
π
2π
_π
y=ß 2x
1
π
2
Figure 8
For comparison, in Figure 9 we show the graphs of one period of the sine curve  
y  a sin kx for several values of k.
Figure 9
y=a ß 2x
y=a ß    x
1
2
y=a ß    x
1
3
0
y
x
π
2π
_a
a
y=a ß x
4π
6π
3π
5π
Example 3  ■  Amplitude and Period
Find the amplitude and period of each function, and sketch its graph.
(a)	 y  4 cos 3x            (b)  y 2 sin  1
2 x
Solution
(a)	 We get the amplitude and period from the form of the function as follows.
y 4 cos 3x
	 	 The amplitude is 4, and the period is 2p/3. The graph is shown in Figure 10.
Horizontal stretching and shrinking of 
graphs is discussed in Section 2.6.
amplitude 0  a 0 4
period 2p
k 2p
3
π
y
x
0
y=4 ç 3x
π
6
π
2
2π
3
_4
4
_π
3
_π
2
π
3
7π
6
Figure 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

424 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
(b)	 For y 2 sin  1
2 x,
amplitude 0  a 0 0  2 0 2
period 2p
1
2
4p
	 	 The graph is shown in Figure 11.
Now Try Exercises 23 and 25	
■
The graphs of functions of the form y a sin k1x b2  and y a cos k1x b2  are 
simply sine and cosine curves shifted horizontally by an amount 0  b 0 . They are shifted 
to the right if b  0 or to the left if b  0. We summarize the properties of these func-
tions in the following box.
Shifted Sine and Cosine Curves
The sine and cosine curves
y a sin k1x b2  and  y a cos k1x b2  1k 02
have amplitude 0  a 0 , period 2p/k, and horizontal shift b.
An appropriate interval on which to graph one complete period is 
3b, b 12p/k2 4.
The phase shift of a sine curve is dis-
cussed in Section 5.6.
The graphs of y sina x p
3 b  and y sina x p
6 b  are shown in Figure 12.
y=ß!x+   @
π
6
11π
6
5π
6
_ π
6
y=ß x
y
x
π
2π
1
0
y
x
π
2π
1
y=ß!x-   @
π
3
π
3
4π
3
7π
3
0
y=ß x
Figure 12  Horizontal shifts of a sine 
curve
Example 4  ■  A Horizontally Shifted Sine Curve
Find the amplitude, period, and horizontal shift of y 3 sin 2a x p
4 b , and graph 
one complete period.
Solution    We get the amplitude, period, and horizontal shift from the form of the 
function as follows:
y 3 sin 2a x p
4 b
Since the horizontal shift is p/4 and the period is p, one complete period occurs 
on the interval
c p
4,  p
4 pd c p
4,  5p
4 d
amplitude 0  a 0 3
period 2p
k 2p
2 p
horizontal shift p
4 1to the right2
y
x
π
2π
_2
3π
4π
2
y=_2 ß   x
1
2
0
Figure 11
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.3  ■  Trigonometric Graphs  425
As an aid in sketching the graph, we divide this interval into four equal parts, then 
graph a sine curve with amplitude 3 as in Figure 13.
y
x
_3
π
3
π
4
π
2
3π
4
5π
4
y=3 ß 2!x-   @
π
4
Period π
Horizontal
shift
π
4
Amplitude 3
0
Figure 13
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
Example 5  ■  A Horizontally Shifted Cosine Curve
Find the amplitude, period, and horizontal shift of y 3
4 cos a 2x 2p
3 b , and graph 
one complete period.
Solution    We ﬁrst write this function in the form y a cos k1x b2 . To do this, 
we factor 2 from the expression 2x 2p
3  to get
y 3
4 cos 2c x a p
3 bd
Thus we have
amplitude 0  a 0 3
4
period 2p
k 2p
2 p
horizontal shift b  p
3         Shift p
3  to the left
From this information it follows that one period of this cosine curve begins at  
p/3 and ends at 1p/32 p 2p/3. To sketch the graph over the interval 
3p/3, 2p/34, we divide this interval into four equal parts and graph a cosine curve 
with amplitude 3
4 as shown in Figure 14.
5π
12
π
12
_
y
x
π
3
_
π
3
_
π
3
Period π
3
4
_ 3
4
Horizontal
shift
3
4
y=    ç!2x+     @
2π
3
0
2π
3
π
6
π
2
π
6
_
3
4
Amplitude
Figure 14
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
Here is another way to ﬁnd an appro-
priate interval on which to graph one 
complete period. Since the period  
of y  sin x is 2p, the function 
y 3 sin 2Ax p
4B will go through one 
complete period as 2Ax p
4B varies 
from 0 to 2p.
Start of period:	
End of period:
 2Ax p
4B 0	
 2Ax p
4B 2p
 x p
4 0	
 x p
4 p
 x p
4	
 x 5p
4
So we graph one period on the interval 
Cp
4, 5p
4 D .
We can also ﬁnd one complete period 
as follows:
Start of period:	
End of period:
 2x 2p
3 0	
 2x 2p
3 2p
 2x  2p
3 	
 2x 4p
3
 x  p
3	
 x 2p
3
So we graph one period on the interval 
C  p
3, 2p
3 D .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

426 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
■  Using Graphing Devices to Graph  
Trigonometric Functions
When using a graphing calculator or a computer to graph a function, it is important to 
choose the viewing rectangle carefully in order to produce a reasonable graph of the 
function. This is especially true for trigonometric functions; the next example shows 
that, if care is not taken, it’s easy to produce a very misleading graph of a trigonometric 
function.
Example 6  ■  Choosing the Viewing Rectangle
Graph the function f1x2 sin 50x in an appropriate viewing rectangle.
Solution    Figure 15(a) shows the graph of f produced by a graphing calculator 
using the viewing rectangle 312, 124 by 31.5, 1.54. At ﬁrst glance the graph 
appears to be reasonable. But if we change the viewing rectangle to the ones 
shown in Figure 15, the graphs look very different. Something strange is 
happening.
1.5
_1.5
_12
12
(a)
1.5
_1.5
_10
10
(b)
1.5
_1.5
_9
9
(c)
1.5
_1.5
_6
6
(d)
Figure 15  Graphs of f1x2 sin 50x in different viewing rectangles
To explain the big differences in appearance of these graphs and to ﬁnd an appro-
priate viewing rectangle, we need to ﬁnd the period of the function y  sin 50x.
period 2p
50 p
25 < 0.126
This suggests that we should deal only with small values of x in order to show just a 
few oscillations of the graph. If we choose the viewing rectangle 30.25, 0.254 by 
31.5, 1.54, we get the graph shown in Figure 16.
Now we see what went wrong in Figure 15. The oscillations of y  sin 50x are 
so rapid that when the calculator plots points and joins them, it misses most of the 
maximum and minimum points and therefore gives a very misleading impression of 
the graph.
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
See Appendix C, Graphing with  
a Graphing Calculator, for  
guidelines on choosing an  
appropriate viewing ­rectangle.  
Go to www.stewartmath.com.
The appearance of the graphs in  
Figure 15 depends on the machine 
used. The graphs you get with your 
own graphing device might not look 
like these ﬁgures, but they will also be 
quite inaccurate.
Figure 16  f1x2 sin 50x
1.5
_1.5
_0.25
0.25
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.3  ■  Trigonometric Graphs  427
Example 7  ■  A Sum of Sine and Cosine Curves
Graph f1x2 2 cos x, g1x2 sin 2x, and h1x2 2 cos x sin 2x on a common 
screen to illustrate the method of graphical addition.
Solution    Notice that h  f  g, so its graph is obtained by adding the cor­
responding y-coordinates of the graphs of f and g. The graphs of f, g, and h are 
shown in Figure 17.
3
_3
_ π
2
7π
2
y=2 ç x+ß 2x
y=ß 2x
y=2 ç x
Figure 17
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
Example 8  ■  A Cosine Curve with Variable Amplitude
Graph the functions y x2, y x2, and y x2 cos 6px on a common screen. 
Comment on and explain the relationship among the graphs.
Solution    Figure 18 shows all three graphs in the viewing rectangle 31.5, 1.54  
by 32, 24. It appears that the graph of y  x2 cos 6px lies between the graphs of the 
functions y x2 and y x2.
To understand this, recall that the values of cos 6px lie between 1 and 1, that is,
1 cos 6px 1
for all values of x. Multiplying the inequalities by x2 and noting that x2  0, we get
x2 x2 cos 6px x2
This explains why the functions y  x2 and y  x2 form a boundary for the graph 
of y x2 cos 6px. (Note that the graphs touch when cos 6px  1.)
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
Example 8 shows that the function y  x2 controls the amplitude of the graph of  
y x2 cos 6px. In general, if f1x2 a1x2 sin kx or f1x2 a1x2 cos kx, the function 
a determines how the amplitude of f varies, and the graph of f lies between the graphs 
of y a1x2  and y a1x2 . Here is another example.
The function h in Example 7 is periodic 
with period 2p. In general, functions that 
are sums of functions from the following 
list are periodic:
1, cos kx, cos 2kx, cos 3kx, . . .
sin kx, sin 2kx, sin 3kx, . . .
Although these functions appear to be 
special, they are actually fundamental to 
describing all periodic functions that 
arise in practice. The French mathemati-
cian J. B. J. Fourier (see page 546) discov-
ered that nearly every periodic function 
can be written as a sum (usually an 
inﬁnite sum) of these functions. This is 
remarkable because it means that any 
situation in which periodic variation 
occurs can be described mathematically 
using the functions sine and cosine. A 
modern application of Fourier’s discovery 
is the digital encoding of sound on com-
pact discs.
2
_2
_1.5
1.5
Figure 18  y x2 cos 6px
Discovery Project
Predator/Prey Models
Many animal populations fluctuate regularly in size and so can be modeled by 
trigonometric functions  Predicting population changes allows scientists to detect 
anomalies and take steps to protect a species. In this project we study the popula-
tion of a predator species and the population of its prey. If the prey is abundant, 
the predator population grows, but too many predators tend to deplete the prey. 
This results in a decrease in the predator population, then the prey population 
increases, and so on. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
Jeffrey Lepore/Science Source
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

428 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Example 9  ■  A Cosine Curve with Variable Amplitude
Graph the function f1x2 cos 2px cos 16px.
Solution    The graph is shown in Figure 19. Although it was drawn by a computer, 
we could have drawn it by hand, by ﬁrst sketching the boundary curves y  cos 2px 
and y  cos 2px. The graph of f is a cosine curve that lies between the graphs of 
these two functions.
y
x
0
1
1
_1
y=_ç 2πx
y=ç 2πx
Figure 19  f1x2 cos 2px  cos 16px
Now Try Exercise 71	
■
Example 10  ■  A Sine Curve with Decaying Amplitude
The function f1x2 sin x
x
 is important in calculus. Graph this function, and comment 
on its behavior when x is close to 0.
Solution    The viewing rectangle 315, 154 by 30.5, 1.54 shown in Figure 20(a) 
gives a good global view of the graph of f. The viewing rectangle 31, 14 by  
30.5, 1.54 in Figure 20(b) focuses on the behavior of f when x ^ 0. Notice that 
although f1x2  is not deﬁned when x  0 (in other words, 0 is not in the domain of f), 
the values of f seem to approach 1 when x gets close to 0. This fact is crucial in 
calculus.
(a)
1.5
_0.5
_15
15
(b)
1.5
_0.5
_1
1
Figure 20  f1x2 sin x
x
Now Try Exercise 81	
■
The function in Example 10 can be written as
f1x2 1
x
   sin x
and may thus be viewed as a sine function whose amplitude is controlled by the func-
tion a1x2 1/x.
AM and FM Radio
Radio transmissions consist of sound 
waves superimposed on a harmonic elec-
tromagnetic wave form called the carrier 
signal.
Sound wave
Carrier signal
There are two types of radio transmis-
sion, called amplitude modulation 
(AM) and frequency modulation (FM). 
In AM broadcasting, the sound wave 
changes, or modulates, the amplitude of 
the carrier, but the frequency remains 
unchanged.
AM signal
In FM broadcasting, the sound wave 
modulates the frequency, but the ampli-
tude remains the same.
FM signal
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.3  ■  Trigonometric Graphs  429
Concepts
	 1.	 If a function f is periodic with period p, then f1t p2 
 
 for every t. The trigonometric functions y sin x 
and y cos x are periodic, with period  
 and  
amplitude  
  . Sketch a graph of each function on  
the interval 30, 2p4 . 
0
1
2π
0
1
2π
	 2.	 To obtain the graph of y 5 sin x, we start with the  
graph of y sin x, then shift it 5 units  
 (upward/
downward). To obtain the graph of y cos x, we start with 
the  graph of y cos x, then reflect it in the  
-axis.
	 3.	 The sine and cosine curves y a sin kx and y a cos kx, 
k 0, have amplitude  
 and period  
  . The 
sine curve y 3 sin 2x has amplitude  
 and period 
 
  .
	 4.	 The sine curve y a sin k1x b2  has amplitude  
  , 
period  
  , and horizontal shift  
  . The sine 
curve y 4 sin 3Ax p
6B has amplitude  
  , period 
 
  , and horizontal shift  
  .
Skills
5–18  ■  Graphing Sine and Cosine Functions    Graph the 
function.
	 5.	 f1x2 2 sin x	
  6.	 f1x2 2 cos x
	 7.	 f1x2 sin x	
  8.	 f1x2 2 cos x
	 9.	 f1x2 2 sin x	
10.	 f1x2 1 cos x
	11.	 g1x2 3 cos x	
12.	 g1x2 2 sin x
	13.	 g1x2  1
2 sin x	
14.	 g1x2  2
3 cos x
15.	 g1x2 3 3 cos x	
16.	 g1x2 4 2 sin x
17.	 h1x2 0  cos x 0 	
18.	 h1x2 0  sin x 0
19–32  ■  Amplitude and Period    Find the amplitude and period 
of the function, and sketch its graph.
19.	 y  cos 2x	
20.	 y  sin 2x
21.	 y sin 3x	
22.	 y cos 4px
	23.	 y 2 cos 3px	
24.	 y 3 sin 6x
25.	 y 10 sin 1
2 x	
26.	 y 5 cos 1
4 x
27.	 y  1
3 cos 1
3 x	
28.	 y 4 sin12x2
29.	 y  2 sin 2px	
30.	 y  3 sin px
31.	 y 1 1
2 cos px	
32.	 y  2  cos 4px
33–46  ■  Horizontal Shifts    Find the amplitude, period, and hori-
zontal shift of the function, and graph one complete period.
33.	 y cos ax p
2 b 	
34.	 y 2 sinax p
3 b
35.	 y 2 sinax p
6 b 	
36.	 y 3 cos ax p
4 b
37.	 y 4 sin 2ax p
2 b 	
38.	 y sin 1
2
 ax p
4 b
39.	 y 5 cos a3x p
4 b 	
40.	 y 2 sina 2
3
 x p
6 b
41.	 y 1
2 1
2  cos a2x p
3 b 	 42.	 y 1 cos a3x p
2 b
43.	 y 3 cos pAx 1
2B	
44.	 y 3 2 sin 31x 12
45.	 y sin1p 3x2 	
46.	 y cos a p
2 xb
47–54  ■  Equations from a Graph    The graph of one complete 
period of a sine or cosine curve is given.
(a)	 Find the amplitude, period, and horizontal shift.
(b)	 Write an equation that represents the curve in the form
y a sin k1x b2  or  y a cos k1x b2
47.	 	
	
48.
	 	
y
x
π
2π
_4
4
0
	
	
_2
2
π
4
4
3π
0
y
x
49.	 	
	
50.
	 	
0
_ 3
2
3
2
π
6
π
2
y
x
	
	
y
_3
3
2π
4π
0
x
51.	 	
	
52.
	 	
y
x
_ 1
2
1
2
2π
3
_ π
3
0
	
	
0
_
_
1
10
1
10
π
4
π
4
y
x
5.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

430 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
53.	 	
	
54.
	 	
x
y
_4
4
1
1
2
_ 1
2
0
	
	
y
x
_ 1
4
1
4
3
4
5
_5
0
55–62  ■  Graphing Trigonometric Functions    Determine an 
appropriate viewing rectangle for each function, and use it to 
draw the graph.
55.	 f1x2 cos 100x	
56.	 f1x2 3 sin 120x
57.	 f1x2 sin1x/402 	
58.	 f1x2 cos1x/802
59.	 y  tan 25x	
60.	 y  csc 40x
61.	 y  sin2 20x	
62.	 y !tan 10px
63–66  ■  Graphical Addition    Graph f, g, and f  g on a com-
mon screen to illustrate graphical addition.
63.	 f1x2 x,    g1x2 sin x
64.	 f1x2 sin x,    g1x2 sin 2x
	65.	 f1x2 sin 3x,    g1x2 cos 1
2 x	 	
	66.	 f1x2 0.5 sin 5x,    g1x2 cos 2x
67–72  ■  Sine and Cosine Curves with Variable Amplitude     
Graph the three functions on a common screen. How are the 
graphs related?
67.	 y x2,    y x2,    y x2 sin x
68.	 y  x,    y  x,    y  x cos x
69.	 y !x,    y !x,    y !x sin 5px
70.	 y 
1
1 x2,    y  
1
1 x2,    y cos 2px
1 x2
71.	 y  cos 3px,    y  cos 3px,    y  cos 3px cos 21px
72.	 y  sin 2px,    y  sin 2px,    y  sin 2px sin 10px
Skills Plus
73–76  ■  Maxima and Minima    Find the maximum and mini-
mum values of the function.
	73.	 y  sin x  sin 2x
	74.	 y  x  2 sin x,  0  x  2p
	75.	 y  2 sin x  sin2x	
76.	 y 
cos x
2 sin x
77–80  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations Graphically    Find all 
solutions of the equation that lie in the interval 30, p4. State each 
answer rounded to two decimal places.
77.	 cos x  0.4	
78.	 tan x  2
79.	 csc x  3	
80.	 cos x  x
81–82  ■  Limiting Behavior of Trigonometric Functions    A func-
tion f is given.
(a)	 Is f even, odd, or neither?
(b)	 Find the x-intercepts of the graph of f.
(c)	 Graph f in an appropriate viewing rectangle.
(d)	 Describe the behavior of the function as x S `.
(e)	 Notice that f1x2  is not deﬁned when x  0. What happens as 
x approaches 0?
81.	 f1x2 1 cos x
x
	
82.	 f1x2 sin 4x
2x
Applications
83.	 Height of a Wave    As a wave passes by an offshore  
piling, the height of the water is modeled by the function
h1t2 3 cos a p
10
 tb
	 	 where h1t2  is the height in feet above mean sea level at time  
t seconds.
(a)	 Find the period of the wave.
(b)	 Find the wave height, that is, the vertical distance  
between the trough and the crest of the wave.
crest
trough
84.	 Sound Vibrations    A tuning fork is struck, producing a pure 
tone as its tines vibrate. The vibrations are modeled by the 
function
√1t2 0.7 sin1880pt2
	 	 where √1t2  is the displacement of the tines in millimeters at 
time t seconds.
(a)	 Find the period of the vibration.
(b)	 Find the frequency of the vibration, that is, the number 
of times the fork vibrates per second.
(c)	 Graph the function √.
85.	 Blood Pressure    Each time your heart beats, your blood pres-
sure ﬁrst increases and then decreases as the heart rests 
between beats. The maximum and minimum blood pressures 
are called the systolic and diastolic pressures, respectively. 
Your blood pressure reading is written as systolic/diastolic. 
A reading of 120/80 is considered normal.
	 	   A certain person’s blood pressure is modeled by the ­function
p1t2 115 25 sin1160pt2
	 	 where p1t2  is the pressure in mmHg (millimeters of mer-
cury), at time t measured in minutes.
(a)	 Find the period of p.
(b)	 Find the number of heartbeats per minute.
(c)	 Graph the function p.
(d)	 Find the blood pressure reading. How does this  
compare to normal blood pressure?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.3  ■  Trigonometric Graphs  431
86.	 Variable Stars    Variable stars are ones whose brightness var-
ies periodically. One of the most visible is R Leonis; its 
brightness is modeled by the function
b1t2 7.9 2.1 cos a p
156
 tb
	 	 where t is measured in days.
(a)	 Find the period of R Leonis.
(b)	 Find the maximum and minimum brightness.
(c)	 Graph the function b.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
87.	 DISCUSS:  Compositions Involving Trigonometric Functions     
This exercise explores the effect of the inner function g on a 
composite function y f1g1x22 .
(a)	 Graph the function y sin!x using the viewing  
rectangle 30, 4004 by 31.5, 1.54. In what ways does  
this graph differ from the graph of the sine function?
(b)	 Graph the function y sin1x22  using the viewing  
rectangle 35, 54 by 31.5, 1.54. In what ways does this 
graph differ from the graph of the sine function?
88.	 DISCUSS:  Periodic Functions I    Recall that a function f is peri-
odic if there is a positive number p such that f1t p2 f1t2  
for every t, and the least such p (if it exists) is the period of f. 
The graph of a function of period p looks the same on each 
interval of length p, so we can easily determine the period from 
the graph. Determine whether the function whose graph is 
shown is periodic; if it is periodic, ﬁnd the period.
(a)	
y
x
2
4
_2
_4
(b)	
y
x
2
4
6
8
10
(c)	
y
x
2
4
_2
_4
(d)	
y
x
_4
_2
2
4
6
8
89.	 DISCUSS:  Periodic Functions II    Use a graphing device to 
graph the following functions. From the graph, determine 
whether the function is periodic; if it is periodic, ﬁnd the 
period. (See page 163 for the deﬁnition of “x‘.)
(a)	 y 0  sin x 0 	
(b)	 y sin 0  x 0
(c)	 y 2cos x	
(d)	 y x “x‘
(e)	 y cos1sin x2 	
(f)	 y cos1x22
90.	 DISCUSS:  Sinusoidal Curves    The graph of y  sin x is the 
same as the graph of y  cos x shifted to the right p/2 units. 
So the sine curve y  sin x is also at the same time a cosine 
curve: y cos1x p
2 2 . In fact, any sine curve is also a 
cosine curve with a different horizontal shift, and any cosine 
curve is also a sine curve. Sine and cosine curves are collec-
tively referred to as sinusoidal. For the curve whose graph is 
shown, ﬁnd all possible ways of expressing it as a sine curve 
y a  sin1x b2  or as a cosine curve y a  cos1x b2 . 
Explain why you think you have found all possible choices 
for a and b in each case.
y
x
0
5
_5
π
2π
_π
5π
2
π
2
π
2
_
_ 3π
2
3π
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

432 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
5.4 
More Trigonometric Graphs
■  Graphs of Tangent, Cotangent, Secant, and Cosecant  ■  Graphs of Transformations  
of Tangent and Cotangent  ■  Graphs of Transformations of Cosecant and Secant
In this section we graph the tangent, cotangent, secant, and cosecant functions and 
transformations of these functions.
■  Graphs of Tangent, Cotangent, Secant, and Cosecant
We begin by stating the periodic properties of these functions. Recall that sine and co-
sine have period 2p. Since cosecant and secant are the reciprocals of sine and cosine, 
respectively, they also have period 2p (see Exercise 63). Tangent and cotangent, how-
ever, have period p (see Exercise 83 of Section 5.2).
Periodic Properties
The functions tangent and cotangent have period p:
tan1x p2 tan x   cot1x p2 cot x
The functions cosecant and secant have period 2p:
csc1x 2p2 csc x   sec1x 2p2 sec x
We ﬁrst sketch the graph of tangent. Since it has period p, we need only sketch the 
graph on any interval of length p and then repeat the pattern to the left and to the right. 
We sketch the graph on the interval 1p/2, p/22 . Since tan1p/22 and tan1p/22  aren’t 
deﬁned, we need to be careful in sketching the graph at points near p/2 and p/2.  
As x gets near p/2 through values less than p/2, the value of tan x becomes large. To 
see this, notice that as x gets close to p/2, cos x approaches 0 and sin x approaches 1 
and so tan x  sin x/cos x is large. A table of values of tan x for x close to p/2 
1<1.5707962  is shown in the margin.
So as x approaches p/2 from the left, the value of tan x increases without bound. 
We express this by writing
tan x S `  as  x S p
2

This is read “tan x approaches inﬁnity as x approaches p/2 from the left.”
In a similar way, as x approaches p/2 from the right, the value of tan x decreases 
without bound. We write this as
tan x S `  as  x S  p
2

This is read “tan x approaches negative inﬁnity as x approaches p/2 from the right.”
Thus the graph of y  tan x approaches the vertical lines x  p/2 and x  p/2. So 
these lines are vertical asymptotes. With the information we have so far, we sketch the 
graph of y  tan x for p/2  x  p/2 in Figure 1. The complete graph of tangent (see 
Arrow notation is discussed in  
Section 3.6.
Asymptotes are discussed in  
Section 3.6.
x
tan x
0
0
/6
0.58
/4
1.00
/3
1.73
1.4
5.80
1.5
14.10
1.55
48.08
1.57
1,255.77
1.5707
10,381.33
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.4  ■  More Trigonometric Graphs  433
Figure 5(a) on the next page) is now obtained by using the fact that tangent is periodic with 
period p.
π
3
π
2
y
x
0
1
π
6
π
4
1.4
π
2
_
Vertical
asymptote
Vertical
asymptote
Figure 1  One period of y  tan x
y
x
1
π
4
π
2
0
π
6
π
3
2π
3
3π
4
5π
6 3
0.14
π
Figure 2  One period of y  cot x
The function y  cot x is graphed on the interval 10, p2  by a similar analysis (see 
Figure 2). Since cot x is undeﬁned for x  np with n an integer, its complete graph (in 
Figure 5(b) on the next page) has vertical asymptotes at these values.
To graph the cosecant and secant functions, we use the reciprocal identities
csc x 
1
sin x  and  sec x 
1
cos x
So to graph y csc x, we take the reciprocals of the y-coordinates of the points of the 
graph of y  sin x. (See Figure 3.) Similarly, to graph y  sec x, we take the reciprocals 
of the y-coordinates of the points of the graph of y  cos x. (See Figure 4.)
y
x
1
π
2
0
3π
2
2π
π
y=ß x
Figure 3  One period of y  csc x
y
x
1
π
2
0
3π
2
2π
π
y=ç x
Figure 4  One period of y  sec x
Let’s consider more closely the graph of the function y csc x on the interval  
0  x  p. We need to examine the values of the function near 0 and p, since at these 
values sin x  0, and csc x is thus undeﬁned. We see that
csc x S `   as  x S 0
csc x S `   as  x S p
Thus the lines x  0 and x  p are vertical asymptotes. In the interval p  x  2p the 
graph is sketched in the same way. The values of csc x in that interval are the same as 
those in the interval 0  x  p except for sign (see Figure 3). The complete graph in 
Figure 5(c) is now obtained from the fact that the function cosecant is periodic with 
Evaluating Functions  
on a Calculator
How does your calculator evaluate sin t, 
cos t, et, ln t, !t, and other such func-
tions? One method is to approximate 
these functions by polynomials because 
polynomials are easy to evaluate. For 
example,
 sin t t t 3
3! t 5
5! t 7
7! . . .
 cos t 1 t 2
2! t 4
4! t 6
6! . . .
where n! 1 # 2 # 3 # . . . # n. These 
remarkable formulas were found by the 
British mathematician Brook Taylor  
(1685–1731). For instance, if we use the 
ﬁrst three terms of Taylor’s series to ﬁnd 
cos(0.4), we get
 cos 0.4 < 1 
10.42 2
2!

10.42 4
4!
 <  0.92106667
(Compare this with the value you get 
from your calculator.) The graph shows 
that the more terms of the series we use, 
the more closely the polynomials approx-
imate the function cos t.
y
t
0
5
_5
2
_1
y = 1 – t2
2!
y = 1 –
+
t2
2!
t4
4!
y = cos t
Mathematics in the Modern World
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

434 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
period 2p. Note that the graph has vertical asymptotes at the points where sin x  0, 
that is, at x  np, for n an integer.
y
x
π
2
0
3π
2
π
π
2
_
_π
3π
2
_
(a) y=† x
1
y
x
1
π
2
0
3π
2
π
π
2
_
_π
3π
2
_
(c) y= x
y
x
_1
π
2
0
3π
2
π
π
2
_
_π
3π
2
_
(d) y=˚ x
y
x
π
2
3π
2
π
2
_
3π
2
_
(b) y=ˇ x
1
0
π
_π
Figure 5
The graph of y  sec x is sketched in a similar manner. Observe that the domain of 
sec x is the set of all real numbers other than x 1p/22 np, for n an integer, so the 
graph has vertical asymptotes at those points. The complete graph is shown in Figure 5(d).
It is apparent that the graphs of y  tan x, y  cot x, and y  csc x are symmetric 
about the origin, whereas that of y  sec x is symmetric about the y-axis. This is be-
cause tangent, cotangent, and cosecant are odd functions, whereas secant is an even 
function.
■  Graphs of Transformations of Tangent and Cotangent 
We now consider graphs of transformations of the tangent and cotangent func­tions.
Example 1  ■  Graphing Tangent Curves
Graph each function.
(a)	 y  2 tan x            (b)  y  tan x
Solution    We ﬁrst graph y  tan x and then transform it as required.
(a)	 To graph y  2 tan x, we multiply the y-coordinate of each point on the graph  
of y  tan x by 2. The resulting graph is shown in Figure 6(a).
(b)	 The graph of y  tan x in Figure 6(b) is obtained from that of y  tan x by 
reﬂecting in the x-axis.
Now Try Exercises 9 and 11	
■
Figure 6
0
π
_π
_2
(a) y=2 † x
2
y=† x
0
π
_π
(b) y=_† x
1
y=† x
y
y
x
x
π
2
3π
2
π
2
_
3π
2
_
π
2
3π
2
π
2
_
3π
2
_
π
4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.4  ■  More Trigonometric Graphs  435
Since the tangent and cotangent functions have period p, the functions
y a tan kx  and  y a cot kx        1k 02
complete one period as kx varies from 0 to p, that is, for 0  kx  p. Solving this in-
equality, we get 0  x  p/k. So they each have period p/k.
Tangent and Cotangent Curves
The functions
y a tan kx  and  y a cot kx  1k 02
have period p/k.
Thus one complete period of the graphs of these functions occurs on any interval of 
length p/k. To sketch a complete period of these graphs, it’s convenient to select an 
interval between vertical asymptotes:
To graph one period of y  a tan kx, an appropriate interval is a p
2k,  p
2k b .
To graph one period of y  a cot kx, an appropriate interval is a 0,  p
k b .
Example 2  ■  Graphing Tangent Curves
Graph each function.
(a)	 y  tan 2x            (b)  y tan 2a x p
4 b
Solution
(a)	 The period is p/2 and an appropriate interval is 1p/4,  p/42 . The endpoints  
x  p/4 and x  p/4 are vertical asymptotes. Thus we graph one complete  
period of the function on 1p/4,  p/42 . The graph has the same shape as that of 
	 	 the tangent function but is shrunk horizontally by a factor of 1
2. We then repeat 
that portion of the graph to the left and to the right. See Figure 7(a).
(b)	 The graph is the same as that in part (a), but it is shifted to the right p/4, as 
shown in Figure 7(b).
y
x
π
4
3π
4
π
4
_
3π
4
_
(a) y=† 2x
1
π
8
π
2
π
2
_
y
x
π
4
0
3π
4
π
4
_
1
π
2
π
2
_
(b) y=† 2!x-   @
π
4
π
Figure 7
Now Try Exercises 19, 35, and 43	
■
Since y  tan x completes one period 
between x  p
2 and x p
2, the func-
tion y tan 21x p
4 2  completes one 
period as 21x p
4 2  varies from  p
2  
to p
2.
Start of period:	
End of period:
 21x p
4 2  p
2	
 21x p
4 2 p
2
 x p
4  p
4	
 x p
4 p
4
 x 0
	
 x p
2
So we graph one period on the  
interval 10, p
2 2 .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

436 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Example 3  ■  A Horizontally Shifted Cotangent Curve
Graph the function y 2 cota 3x p
4 b .
Solution    We first put the equation in the form y a cot k1x b2  by factoring 3 
from the expression 3x p
4 :
y 2 cota 3x p
4 b 2 cot 3a x p
12 b
Thus the graph is the same as that of y 2 cot 3x but is shifted to the right p/12. 
The period of y 2 cot 3x is p/3, and an appropriate interval for graphing one 
period is 10, p/32 . To get the corresponding interval for the desired graph, we shift 
this interval to the right p/12. So we have
a 0 p
12, p
3 p
12 b a p
12, 5p
12 b
Finally, we graph one period in the shape of cotangent on the interval 1p/12, 5p/122  
and repeat that portion of the graph to the left and to the right. (See Figure 8.) 
3π
4
7π
12
5π
12
y
x
π
4
π
4
π
12
_
π
12
_
2
Figure 8 
y 2 cota3x p
4 b
Now Try Exercises 37 and 47	
■
■  Graphs of Transformations of Cosecant and Secant
We have already observed that the cosecant and secant functions are the reciprocals of 
the sine and cosine functions. Thus the following result is the counterpart of the result 
for sine and cosine curves in Section 5.3.
Cosecant and Secant Curves
The functions
y a csc kx  and  y a sec kx  1k 02
have period 2p/k.
An appropriate interval on which to graph one complete period is 1 0, 2p/k 2 .
Example 4  ■  Graphing Cosecant Curves
Graph each function.
(a)	 y 1
2
  csc 2x            (b)  y 1
2
  csca 2x p
2 b
Since y cot x completes one period 
between x 0 and x p, the function 
y 2 cot A3x p
4B completes one 
period as 3x p
4 varies from 0 to p.
Start of period:	
End of period:
 3x p
4 0	
 3x p
4 p
 3x p
4 	
 3x 5p
4
 x p
12	
 x 5p
12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.4  ■  More Trigonometric Graphs  437
Solution
(a)	 The period is 2p/2  p. An appropriate interval is 30, p4, and the asymptotes 
occur in this interval whenever sin 2x  0. So the asymptotes in this interval are 
x  0, x  p/2, and x  p. With this information we sketch on the interval 30, p4 
a graph with the same general shape as that of one period of the cosecant func-
tion. The complete graph in Figure 9(a) is obtained by repeating this portion of 
the graph to the left and to the right.
(b)	 We ﬁrst write
y 1
2
  csca 2x p
2 b 1
2
  csc 2a x p
4 b
	 	 From this we see that the graph is the same as that in part (a) but shifted to the 
left p/4. The graph is shown in Figure 9(b).
1
2
(b) y=    !2x+   @
2
5π
4
y
x
π
π
4
π
4
_
3π
4
3π
4
_
5π
4
_
7π
4
1
2
(a) y=     2x
y
x
π
2
π
2
_
1
2
1
2
π
_π
2π
3π
2
_
Figure 9
Now Try Exercises 29 and 49	
■
Example 5  ■  Graphing a Secant Curve
Graph y 3 sec  1
2 x.
Solution    The period is 2p 4 1
2 4p. An appropriate interval is 30, 4p4, and the 
asymptotes occur in this interval wherever cos  1
2 x 0. Thus the asymptotes in this 
interval are x  p, x  3p. With this information we sketch on the interval 30, 4p4 
a graph with the same general shape as that of one period of the secant function. 
The complete graph in Figure 10 is obtained by repeating this portion of the graph 
to the left and to the right.
y
π
_2π
3
2π
4π
0
x
Figure 10 
y 3 sec  1
2 x
Now Try Exercises 31 and 51	
■
Since y  csc x completes one period 
between x  0 and x  2p, the func-
tion y 1
2 cscA2x p
2B completes one 
period as 2x p
2 varies from 0 to 2p.
Start of period:	
End of period:
 2x p
2 0
	
 2x p
2 2p
 2x  p
2	
 2x 3p
2
 x  p
4	
 x 3p
4
So we graph one period on the  
interval C p
4, 3p
4 D .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

438 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Concepts
	 1.	 The trigonometric function y tan x has period  
 
	 	 and asymptotes x  
  . Sketch a graph of this func-
tion on the interval 1p/2, p/22 . 
	 2.	 The trigonometric function y csc x has period  
 
	 	 and asymptotes x  
  . Sketch a graph of this func-
tion on the interval 1p, p2 . 
Skills
3–8  ■  Graphs of Trigonometric Functions    Match the trigono-
metric function with one of the graphs I–VI.
	 3.	 f1x2 tanax p
4 b 	
  4.	 f1x2 sec 2x
	 5.	 f1x2 cot 4x	
  6.	 f1x2 tan x
	 7.	 f1x2 2 sec x	
  8.	 f1x2 1 csc x
I
0
1
1
x
y
π
II
x
5π
4
3π
4
_
_
π
2
π
4
π
4
III
0
2
1
1
_2
x
y
IV
0
x
3π
2
3π
4
_
_
π
4
π
2
π
4
π
2
V
0
2
x
y
π
π
VI
0
x
3π
2
_
_
π
2
π
2
π
4
π
4
9–18  ■  Graphs of Trigonometric Functions    Find the period, and 
graph the function.
	 9.	 y 3 tan x	
10.	 y 3 tan x
	11.	 y 3
2 tan x	
12.	 y 3
4 tan x
13.	 y cot x	
14.	 y  2 cot x
15.	 y  2 csc x	
16.	 y 1
2 csc x
17.	 y  3 sec x	
18.	 y  3 sec x
19–34  ■  Graphs of Trigonometric Functions with Different  
Periods    Find the period, and graph the function.
	19.	 y tan 3x	
20.	 y tan 4x
	21.	 y 5 tan px	
22.	 y 3 tan 4px
	23.	 y 2 cot 3px	
24. y 3 cot 2px
25.	 y tan p
4
 x	
26.	 y cot p
2
 x
27.	 y  2 tan 3px	
28.	 y 2 tan p
2
 x
29.	 y csc 4x	
30.	 y  5 csc 3x
31.	 y  sec 2x	
32.	 y 1
2 sec14px2
33.	 y 5 csc 3p
2
 x	
34.	 y  5 sec 2px
35–60  ■  Graphs of Trigonometric Functions with Horizontal 
Shifts    Find the period, and graph the function.
35.	 y tanax p
4 b 	
36.	 y tanax p
4 b
37. y cotax p
4 b 	
38.	 y 2 cotax p
3 b
39. y cscax p
4 b 	
40.	 y secax p
4 b
41.	 y 1
2  secax p
6 b 	
42.	 y 3 cscax p
2 b
43.	 y tan 2ax p
3 b 	
44.	 y cota2x p
4 b
45.	 y 5 cota3x p
2 b 	
46.	 y 4 tan14x 2p2
47.	 y cota2x p
2 b 	
48.	 y 1
2  tan1px p2
49.	 y 2 cscapx p
3 b 	
50.	 y 3 seca 1
4
 x p
6 b
51.	 y sec 2ax p
4 b 	
52.	 y csc 2ax p
2 b
53.	 y 5 seca3x p
2 b 	
54.	 y 1
2  sec12px p2
55.	 y tana 2
3
 x p
6 b 	
56.	 y tan 1
2 ax p
4 b
5.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.5  ■  Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Their Graphs  439
57.	 y 3 sec pAx 1
2B	
58.	 y seca3x p
2 b
59.	 y 2 tana2x p
3 b 	
60.	 y 2 cot 13px 3p2
Applications
61.	 Lighthouse    The beam from a lighthouse completes one 
rotation every 2 min. At time t, the distance d shown in the 
ﬁgure below is
d1t2 3 tan pt
	 	 where t is measured in minutes and d in miles.
(a)	 Find d10.152, d10.252 , and d10.452 .
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the function d for 0 t 1
2.
(c)	 What happens to the distance d as t approaches 1
2?
3 mi
d
62.	 Length of a Shadow    On a day when the sun passes  
directly overhead at noon, a 6-ft-tall man casts a shadow of 
length
S1t2 6 `  cot p
12
  t `
	 	 where S is measured in feet and t is the number of hours 
since 6 a.m.
(a)	 Find the length of the shadow at 8:00 a.m., noon,  
2:00 p.m., and 5:45 p.m.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the function S for 0  t  12.
(c)	 From the graph, determine the values of t at which the 
length of the shadow equals the man’s height. To what 
time of day does each of these values correspond?
(d)	 Explain what happens to the shadow as the time  
approaches 6 p.m. (that is, as t S 12).
 S
 6 ft
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
63.	 PROVE:  Periodic Functions    (a)  Prove that if f is periodic 
with period p, then 1/f is also periodic with period p.
(b)	 Prove that cosecant and secant both have period 2p.
64.	 PROVE:  Periodic Functions    Prove that if f and g are peri-
odic with period p, then f/g is also periodic but its period 
could be smaller than p.
65.	 PROVE:  Reduction Formulas    Use the graphs in Figure 5 to 
explain why the following formulas are true.
tanax p
2 b cot x   
secax p
2 b csc x
5.5 
Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Their Graphs
■  The Inverse Sine Function  ■  The Inverse Cosine Function  ■  The Inverse Tangent 
Function  ■  The Inverse Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent Functions
Recall from Section 2.8 that the inverse of a function f is a function f 1 that reverses 
the rule of f. For a function to have an inverse, it must be one-to-one. Since the trigo-
nometric functions are not one-to-one, they do not have inverses. It is possible, how-
ever, to restrict the domains of the trigonometric functions in such a way that the result-
ing functions are one-to-one.
■  The Inverse Sine Function
Let’s first consider the sine function. There are many ways to restrict the domain of sine 
so that the new function is one-to-one. A natural way to do this is to restrict the domain 
to the interval 3p/2, p/24. The reason for this choice is that sine is one-to-one on this 
We study applications of inverse trigo-
nometric functions to triangles  
in Sections 6.4–6.6.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

440 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
interval and moreover attains each of the values in its range on this interval. From Fig-
ure 1 we see that sine is one-to-one on this restricted domain (by the Horizontal Line 
Test) and so has an inverse.
y
x
0
1
y=sin x, 
≤x≤
π
2
π
2
_
π
2
π
2
_
y
x
π
0
_1
2π
1
_π
y=ß x
_2π
Figure 1  Graphs of the sine function and the restricted sine function
We can now define an inverse sine function on this restricted domain. The graph of 
y sin1 x is shown in Figure 2; it is obtained by reflecting the graph of y sin x, 
p/2 x p/2, in the line y x.
Definition of the Inverse Sine Function
The inverse sine function is the function sin1 with domain 31, 14  and range 
3p/2, p/24  defined by
sin1 x y 3 sin y x
The inverse sine function is also called arcsine, denoted by arcsin.
Thus y sin1 x is the number in the interval 3p/2, p/24 whose sine is x. In other 
words, sin1sin1 x2 x. In fact, from the general properties of inverse functions stud-
ied in Section 2.8, we have the following cancellation properties. 
sin1sin1 x2 x    for    1 x 1
sin11sin x2 x    for     p
2 x p
2
Example 1  ■  Evaluating the Inverse Sine Function
Find each value.
(a)	 sin1 1
2            (b)  sin1 a  1
2 b             (c)  sin1 3
2
Solution 
(a)	 The number in the interval 3p/2, p/24 whose sine is 1
2 is p/6. Thus 
sin1 
 1
2 p/6.
(b)	 The number in the interval 3p/2, p/24 whose sine is  1
2 is p/6.  
Thus sin1A 1
2B p/6.
(c)	 Since 3
2 1, it is not in the domain of sin1 x, so sin1 3
2 is not  
defined.
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
y
x
0
1
y=sin–¡x
π
2
π
2
_
_1
Figure 2  Graph of y sin1 x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.5  ■  Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Their Graphs  441
Example 2  ■  Using a Calculator to Evaluate Inverse Sine
Find approximate values for (a) sin110.822  and (b) sin1
 1
3.
Solution 
We use a calculator to approximate these values. Using the SIN1, or INV SIN, or
ARC SIN key(s) on the calculator (with the calculator in radian mode), we get
(a)	 sin110.822 < 0.96141            (b)  sin1
 1
3 < 0.33984
Now Try Exercises 11 and 21	
■
When evaluating expressions involving sin1, we need to remember that the range 
of sin1 is the interval 3p/2, p/24.
Example 3  ■  Evaluating Expressions with Inverse Sine
Find each value.
(a)  sin1 a sin p
3 b             (b)  sin1 a sin 2p
3 b
Solution 
(a)	 Since p/3 is in the interval 3p/2, p/24, we can use the cancellation properties 
of inverse functions (page 440):
sin1 a sin p
3 b p
3         Cancellation property:  p
2 p
3 p
2
(b)	 We first evaluate the expression in the parentheses:
 sin1 a sin 2p
3 b sin1 a "3
2 b         Evaluate
 p
3
        Because sin  p
3 "3
2
Now Try Exercises 31 and 33	
■
■  The Inverse Cosine Function
If the domain of the cosine function is restricted to the interval 30, p4, the resulting 
function is one-to-one and so has an inverse. We choose this interval because on it, 
cosine attains each of its values exactly once (see Figure 3).
y
x
0
1
y=ç x,  0≤x≤π
π
_1
y
x
π
0
_1
2π
1
_π
y=ç x
_2π
Figure 3  Graphs of the cosine func-
tion and the restricted cosine function
Definition of the Inverse Cosine Function
The inverse cosine function is the function cos1 with domain 31, 14  and 
range 30, p4  defined by
cos1 x y 3 cos y x
The inverse cosine function is also called arccosine, denoted by arccos.
  Note: sin11sin x2 x only  
if  p
2 x p
2 .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

442 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Thus y cos1 x is the number in the interval 30, p4 whose cosine is x. The follow-
ing cancellation properties follow from the inverse function properties. 
cos1cos1 x2 x    for    1 x 1
cos11cos x2 x    for    0 x p
The graph of y cos1 x is shown in Figure 4; it is obtained by reflecting the graph of 
y cos x, 0 x p, in the line y x.
Example 4  ■  Evaluating the Inverse Cosine Function
Find each value.
(a)	 cos1 !3
2             (b)  cos1 0            (c)  cos1 a  1
2 b
Solution 
(a)	 The number in the interval 30, p4 whose cosine is !3/2 is p/6. Thus 
cos11 !3/22 p/6.
(b)	 The number in the interval 30, p4 whose cosine is 0 is p/2. Thus cos1 0 p/2.
(c)	 The number in the interval 30, p4 whose cosine is  1
2 is 2p/3. Thus 
cos1A 1
2B 2p/3. (The graph in Figure 4 shows that if 1 x 0, then 
cos1 x p/2.)
Now Try Exercises 5 and 13	
■
Example 5  ■  Evaluating Expressions with Inverse Cosine
Find each value.
(a)  cos1 a cos 2p
3 b             (b) cos1 a cos 5p
3 b
Solution 
(a)	 Since 2p/3 is in the interval 30, p4 we can use the above cancellation properties:
cos1 a cos 2p
3 b 2p
3         Cancellation property: 0 2p
3 p
(b)	 We first evaluate the expression in the parentheses:
 cos1 a cos 5p
3 b cos1 a 1
2 b         Evaluate
 p
3
        Because cos  p
3 1
2
Now Try Exercises 35 and 37	
■
■  The Inverse Tangent Function
We restrict the domain of the tangent function to the interval 1p/2, p/22  to obtain a 
one-to-one function.
  Note: cos11cos x2 x only  
if 0 x p.
Figure 4  Graph of y cos1 x
y
x
0
1
y=cos–¡x
π
_1
π
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.5  ■  Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Their Graphs  443
Definition of the Inverse Tangent Function
The inverse tangent function is the function tan1 with domain R and range 
1p/2, p/22  defined by
tan1 x y 3 tan y x
The inverse tangent function is also called arctangent, denoted by arctan.
Thus y tan1 x is the number in the interval 1p/2, p/22  whose tangent is x. The 
following cancellation properties follow from the inverse function properties. 
tan1tan1 x2 x    for    x [ R
tan11tan x2 x    for     p
2 x p
2
Figure 5 shows the graph of y tan x on the interval 1p/2, p/22  and the graph of 
its inverse function, y tan1 x.
Figure 5  Graphs of the restricted tan-
gent function and the inverse tangent 
function
y=† x,  _   <x<
π
2
π
2
y
x
π
2
0
3π
2
π
π
2
_
_π
3π
2
_
1
y=†–¡x
y
x
π
2
0
π
2
_
1
_1
Example 6  ■  Evaluating the Inverse Tangent Function
Find each value.
(a)	 tan1 1            (b)  tan1
 !3            (c)  tan11202
Solution 
(a)	 The number in the interval 1p/2, p/22  with tangent 1 is p/4. Thus 
tan1 1 p/4.
(b)	 The number in the interval 1p/2, p/22  with tangent !3 is p/3. Thus 
tan1
 !3 p/3.
(c)	 We use a calculator (in radian mode) to find that tan11202 < 1.52084.
Now Try Exercises 7 and 17	
■
■  The Inverse Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent Functions
To define the inverse functions of the secant, cosecant, and cotangent functions, we 
restrict the domain of each function to a set on which it is one-to-one and on which it 
attains all its values. Although any interval satisfying these criteria is appropriate, we 
choose to restrict the domains in a way that simplifies the choice of sign in computa-
tions involving inverse trigonometric functions. The choices we make are also appropri-
ate for calculus. This explains the seemingly strange restriction for the domains of the 
secant and cosecant functions. We end this section by displaying the graphs of the  
See Exercise 46 in Section 6.4  
(page 508) for a way of finding the  
values of these inverse trigonometric 
functions on a calculator.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

444 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
secant, cosecant, and cotangent functions with their restricted domains and the graphs 
of their inverse functions (Figures 6–8).
Figure 6  The inverse secant  
function
y
x
_1
0
π
y=˚–¡x
1
3π
2
π
2
y
x
_1
0
π
2π
y=˚ x,  0≤x<   , π≤x<3π
2
π
2
y
x
_1 0
π
y=–¡x
1
3π
2
π
2
y= x,  0<x≤   , π<x≤3π
2
π
2
y
1
0
x
π
2π
_π
Figure 7  The inverse cosecant  
function
Figure 8  The inverse cotangent  
function
y=ˇ x,  0<x<π
y=ˇ–¡x
y
x
π
2
0 1
_1
π
y
x
0
π
_π
1
2π
Concepts
	 1.	 (a)	 To define the inverse sine function, we restrict the domain 
of sine to the interval  
  . On this interval the 
sine function is one-to-one, and its inverse function sin1 
is defined by sin1 x y 3  sin  
   
  . For 
example, sin1 1
2  
 because sin  
   
  .
(b)	 To define the inverse cosine function, we restrict the 
domain of cosine to the interval  
  . On  
this interval the cosine function is one-to-one and its 
inverse function cos1 is defined by cos1 x y 3  
cos  
  
 
  . For example, cos1 1
2  
 
because cos  
  
 
  .
	 2.	 The cancellation property sin11sin x2 x is valid for x in the
	 	 interval  
  . Which of the following is not true?
	 (i)	 sin1 asin p
3 b p
3 	
(ii)	 sin1 asin 10p
3 b 10p
3
(iii)  sin1 asin a p
4 bb  p
4
Skills
3–10  ■  Evaluating Inverse Trigonometric Functions    Find the 
exact value of each expression, if it is defined.
	 3.	 (a)	 sin1 1	
(b)  sin1 !3
2 	
(c)  sin1 2
5.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.6  ■  Modeling Harmonic Motion  445
	 4.	 (a)	 sin1112 	
(b)  sin1 !2
2 	
(c)  sin1122
	 5.	 (a)	 cos1112 	
(b)  cos1 1
2	
(c)  cos1 a !3
2 b
	 6.	 (a)	 cos1
 !2
2 	
(b)  cos1 1	
(c)  cos1 a !2
2 b
	 7.	 (a)	 tan1112 	
(b)  tan1!3	
(c)  tan1  !3
3
	 8.	 (a)	 tan1 0	
(b)  tan11!32 	
(c)  tan1 a !3
3 b
	 9.	 (a)	 cos1A 1
2B	
(b)  sin1 a !2
2 b 	 (c)  tan1 1
10.	 (a)	 cos1 0	
(b)  sin1 0	
(c)  sin1A 1
2B
11–22  ■  Inverse Trigonometric Functions with a Calculator    Use 
a calculator to find an approximate value of each expression cor-
rect to five decimal places, if it is defined.
11.	 sin1 2
3	
12.	 sin1A 8
9B
13.	 cos1A 3
7B	
14.	 cos1A4
9B
15.	 cos110.927612 	
16.	 sin110.138442 	
17.	 tan1 10	
18.	 tan11262
19.	 tan111.234562 	
20.	 cos111.234562 	
21.	 sin110.257132 	
22.	 tan110.257132
23–48  ■  Simplifying Expressions Involving Trigonometric  
Functions    Find the exact value of the expression, if it is defined.
23.	 sinAsin1 1
4B	
24.	 cosAcos1 2
3B
25.	 tan1tan1 52 	
26.	 sin1sin1 52
27.	 sinAsin1 3
2B	
28.	 tanAtan1 3
2B
29.	 cos acos1 a 1
5 bb 	
30.	 sinasin1 a 3
4 bb
	31.	 sin1 asina p
4 bb 	
32.	 cos1 acos a p
4 bb
	33.	 sin1 asina 3p
4 bb 	
34.	 cos1 acos a 3p
4 bb
	35.	 cos1 acos a 5p
6 bb 	
36.	 sin1 asina 5p
6 bb
	37.	 cos1 acos a 7p
6 bb 	
38.	 sin1 asina 7p
6 bb
	39.	 tan1 atana p
4 bb 	
40.	 tan1 atana p
3 bb
41.	 tan1 atana 2p
3 bb 	
42.	 sin1 asina 11p
4 bb 	
43.	 tanAsin1 1
2B	
44.	 cos1sin1 02
45.	 cos asin1 !3
2 b 	
46.	 tanasin1 !2
2 b
47.	 sin1tan11122 	
48.	 sin1tan1A!3 BB
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
49–50  ■  PROVE:  Identities Involving Inverse Trigonometric 
Functions    (a) Graph the function and make a conjecture, and 
(b) prove that your conjecture is true.
49.	 y sin1 x cos1 x	
50.	 y tan1 x tan1 1
x
51.	 DISCUSS:  Two Different Compositions    Let f and g be the 
functions 
f 1x2 sin1sin1 x2
	 	 and	
g 1x2 sin11sin x2
	 	 By the cancellation properties, f 1x2 x and g1x2 x  
for suitable values of x. But these functions are not the 
same for all x. Graph both f and g to show how the func-
tions differ.  (Think carefully about the domain and range 
of sin1).
5.6 
Modeling Harmonic Motion
■  Simple Harmonic Motion  ■  Damped Harmonic Motion  ■  Phase and Phase Difference
Periodic behavior—behavior that repeats over and over again—is common in nature. 
Perhaps the most familiar example is the daily rising and setting of the sun, which re-
sults in the repetitive pattern of day, night, day, night, . . . . Another example is the daily 
variation of tide levels at the beach, which results in the repetitive pattern of high tide, 
low tide, high tide, low tide, . . . . Certain animal populations increase and decrease in 
a predictable periodic pattern: A large population exhausts the food supply, which 
causes the population to dwindle; this in turn results in a more plentiful food supply, 
which makes it possible for the population to increase; and the pattern then repeats over 
and over (see Discovery Project: Predator/Prey Models referenced on page 427).
Other common examples of periodic behavior involve motion that is caused by vi-
bration or oscillation. A mass suspended from a spring that has been compressed and 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

446 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
then allowed to vibrate vertically is a simple example. This back-and-forth motion also 
occurs in such diverse phenomena as sound waves, light waves, alternating electrical 
current, and pulsating stars, to name a few. In this section we consider the problem of 
modeling periodic behavior.
■  Simple Harmonic Motion
The trigonometric functions are ideally suited for modeling periodic behavior. A glance 
at the graphs of the sine and cosine functions, for instance, tells us that these functions 
themselves exhibit periodic behavior. Figure 1 shows the graph of y  sin t. If we think 
of t as time, we see that as time goes on, y  sin t increases and decreases over and over 
again. Figure 2 shows that the motion of a vibrating mass on a spring is modeled very 
accurately by y  sin t.
y
t
0
1
y=ß t
_1
t
(time)
P
O
Figure 1  y  sin t
Figure 2  Motion of a vibrating spring is  
modeled by y  sin t.
Notice that the mass returns to its original position over and over again. A cycle is 
one complete vibration of an object, so the mass in Figure 2 completes one cycle of its 
motion between O and P. Our observations about how the sine and cosine functions 
model periodic behavior are summarized in the following box.
Simple Harmonic Motion
If the equation describing the displacement y of an object at time t is
y a sin vt  or  y a cos vt
then the object is in simple harmonic motion. In this case,
amplitude 0  a 0     Maximum displacement of the object
period 2p
v
    Time required to complete one cycle
frequency v
2p     Number of cycles per unit of time
Notice that the functions
y a sin 2pnt  and  y a cos 2pnt
have frequency n, because 2pn/12p2 n. Since we can immediately read the fre-
quency from these equations, we often write equations of simple harmonic motion in 
this form.
The main difference between the two 
equations describing simple harmonic 
motion is the starting point. At t  0 
we get
y a sin v # 0 0
y a cos v # 0 a
In the ﬁrst case the motion “starts”  
with zero displacement, whereas in the 
second case the motion “starts” with 
the displacement at maximum (at the 
amplitude a).
The symbol v is the lowercase Greek 
letter “omega,” and n is the letter “nu.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.6  ■  Modeling Harmonic Motion  447
Example 1  ■  A Vibrating Spring
The displacement of a mass suspended by a spring is modeled by the function
y 10 sin 4pt
where y is measured in inches and t in seconds (see Figure 3).
(a)	 Find the amplitude, period, and frequency of the motion of the mass.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the displacement of the mass.
Solution
(a)	 From the formulas for amplitude, period, and frequency we get
amplitude 0  a 0 10 in.
period 2p
v 2p
4p 1
2
  s
frequency v
2p 4p
2p 2 cycles per second 1Hz2
(b)	 The graph of the displacement of the mass at time t is shown in Figure 4.
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
An important situation in which simple harmonic motion occurs is in the production 
of sound. Sound is produced by a regular variation in air pressure from the normal pres-
sure. If the pressure varies in simple harmonic motion, then a pure sound is produced. The 
tone of the sound depends on the frequency, and the loudness depends on the amplitude.
Example 2  ■  Vibrations of a Musical Note
A sousaphone player plays the note E and sustains the sound for some time. For a 
pure E the variation in pressure from normal air pressure is given by
V1t2 0.2 sin 80pt
where V is measured in pounds per square inch and t is measured in seconds.
(a)	 Find the amplitude, period, and frequency of V.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of V.
(c)	 If the player increases the loudness of the note, how does the equation for V 
change?
(d)	 If the player is playing the note incorrectly and it is a little ﬂat, how does the 
equation for V change?
Solution
(a)	 From the formulas for amplitude, period, and frequency we get
amplitude 0  0.2 0 0.2
period 2p
80p 1
40
frequency 80p
2p 40
(b)	 The graph of V is shown in Figure 5.
(c)	 If the player increases the loudness the amplitude increases. So the number 0.2 is 
replaced by a larger number.
(d)	 If the note is ﬂat, then the frequency is decreased. Thus the coefﬁcient of t is less 
than 80p.
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
Rest
position
y<0
y>0
Figure 3
y
t
0
10
y=10 ß 4πt
_10
1
1
2
2
3
2
Figure 4
y
t
(s)
0
0.2
y=0.2 ß 80πt
_0.2
1
2
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

448 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Example 3  ■  Modeling a Vibrating Spring
A mass is suspended from a spring. The spring is compressed a distance of 4 cm 
and then released. It is observed that the mass returns to the compressed position 
after 1
3 s.
(a)	 Find a function that models the displacement of the mass.
(b)	 Sketch the graph of the displacement of the mass.
Solution
(a)	 The motion of the mass is given by one of the equations for simple harmonic 
motion. The amplitude of the motion is 4 cm. Since this amplitude is reached 
at time t  0, an appropriate function that models the displacement is of the 
form
y a cos vt
	 	 Since the period is p 1
3, we can ﬁnd v from the following equation:
 period 2p
v
 1
3 2p
v    
Period 1
3
 v 6p    Solve for v
	 	 So the motion of the mass is modeled by the function
y 4 cos 6pt
	 	 where y is the displacement from the rest position at time t. Notice that when  
t  0, the displacement is y  4, as we expect.
(b)	 The graph of the displacement of the mass at time t is shown in Figure 6.
Now Try Exercises 17 and 47	
■
In general, the sine or cosine functions representing harmonic motion may be shifted 
horizontally or vertically. In this case the equations take the form
y a sin1v1t c22 b  or  y a cos1v1t c22 b
The vertical shift b indicates that the variation occurs around an average value b. The 
horizontal shift c indicates the position of the object at t  0. (See Figure 7.)
Figure 7
(a)
(b)
y
t
0
b-a
c
2π
Ò
c+
b
b+a
y=a ßÓÒ(t-c)Ô+b
y
t
0
b-a
c
2π
Ò
c+
b
b+a
y=a çÓÒ(t-c)Ô+b
Rest
position
4 cm
y
t
0
_4
4
1
12
1
6
1
4
1
3
y=4 ç 6πt
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.6  ■  Modeling Harmonic Motion  449
Example 4  ■  Modeling the Brightness of a Variable Star
A variable star is one whose brightness alternately increases and decreases. For the variable 
star Delta Cephei the time between periods of maximum brightness is 5.4 days. The average 
brightness (or magnitude) of the star is 4.0, and its brightness varies by 0.35 magnitude.
(a)	 Find a function that models the brightness of Delta Cephei as a function of time.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the brightness of Delta Cephei as a function of time.
Solution
(a)	 Let’s ﬁnd a function in the form
y a cos1v1t c22 b
	 	 The amplitude is the maximum variation from average brightness, so the ampli-
tude is a  0.35 magnitude. We are given that the period is 5.4 days, so
v 2p
5.4 < 1.16
	 	 Since the brightness varies from an average value of 4.0 magnitudes, the graph is 
shifted upward by b  4.0. If we take t  0 to be a time when the star is at maxi-
mum brightness, there is no horizontal shift, so c  0 (because a cosine curve 
achieves its maximum at t  0). Thus the function we want is
y 0.35 cos11.16t2 4.0
	 	 where t is the number of days from a time when the star is at maximum brightness.
(b)	 The graph is sketched in Figure 8.
Now Try Exercise 51	
■
The number of hours of daylight varies throughout the course of a year. In the North-
ern Hemisphere the longest day is June 21, and the shortest is December 21. The aver-
age length of daylight is 12 h, and the variation from this average depends on the lati-
tude. (For example, Fairbanks, Alaska, experiences more than 20 h of daylight on the 
longest day and less than 4 h on the shortest day!) The graph in Figure 9 shows the 
number of hours of daylight at different times of the year for various latitudes. It’s ap-
parent from the graph that the variation in hours of daylight is simple harmonic.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Mar. Apr. May June
July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.
Hours
60* N
50* N
40* N
30* N
20* N
Source: Lucia C. Harrison, Daylight, Twilight, Darkness and Time 
(New York: Silver, Burdett, 1935), page 40
Figure 9  Graph of the length of day-
light from March 21 through  
December 21 at various latitudes
y
   t
(days)
0
4.35
3.65
5.4
2.7
4.0
Figure 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

450 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Example 5  ■  Modeling the Number of Hours of Daylight
In Philadelphia (40N latitude) the longest day of the year has 14 h 50 min of day-
light, and the shortest day has 9 h 10 min of daylight.
(a)	 Find a function L that models the length of daylight as a function of t, the number 
of days from January 1.
(b)	 An astronomer needs at least 11 hours of darkness for a long exposure astronomi-
cal photograph. On what days of the year are such long exposures possible?
Solution
(a)	 We need to ﬁnd a function in the form
y a sin1v1t c22 b
	 	 whose graph is the 40N latitude curve in Figure 9. From the information given, 
we see that the amplitude is
a 1
2 A14 5
6 9 1
6B < 2.83 h
	 	 Since there are 365 days in a year, the period is 365, so
v 2p
365 < 0.0172
	 	 Since the average length of daylight is 12 h, the graph is shifted upward by 12, so  
b  12. Since the curve attains the average value (12) on March 21, the 80th day 
of the year, the curve is shifted 80 units to the right. Thus c  80. So a function 
that models the number of hours of daylight is
y 2.83 sin10.01721t 8022 12
	 	 where t is the number of days from January 1.
(b)	 A day has 24 h, so 11 h of night correspond to 13 h of daylight. So we need  
to solve the inequality y  13. To solve this inequality graphically, we graph 
y 2.83 sin 0.01721t 802 12 and y  13 on the same graph. From the  
graph in Figure 10 we see that there are fewer than 13 h of daylight between  
day 1 (January 1) and day 101 (April 11) and between day 241 (August 29) and 
day 365 (December 31).
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
Another situation in which simple harmonic motion occurs is in alternating current 
(ac) generators. Alternating current is produced when an armature rotates about its 
axis in a magnetic ﬁeld.
Figure 11 represents a simple version of such a generator. As the wire passes through 
the magnetic ﬁeld, a voltage E is generated in the wire. It can be shown that the voltage 
generated is given by
E1t2 E0 cos vt
where E0 is the maximum voltage produced (which depends on the strength of the 
magnetic ﬁeld) and v/12p2  is the number of revolutions per second of the armature 
(the frequency).
N 
Wi re 
Magnet s 
S 
Figure 11
15
0
365
t = 101
t = 241
Figure 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.6  ■  Modeling Harmonic Motion  451
Example 6  ■  Modeling Alternating Current
Ordinary 110-V household alternating current varies from 155 V to 155 V with a 
frequency of 60 Hz (cycles per second). Find an equation that describes this variation 
in voltage.
Solution    The variation in voltage is simple harmonic. Since the frequency is  
60 cycles per second, we have
v
2p 60  or  v 120p
Let’s take t  0 to be a time when the voltage is 155 V. Then
E1t2 a cos vt 155 cos 120pt
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
■  Damped Harmonic Motion
The spring in Figure 2 on page 446 is assumed to oscillate in a frictionless environment. 
In this hypothetical case the amplitude of the oscillation will not change. In the pres-
ence of friction, however, the motion of the spring eventually “dies down”; that is, the 
amplitude of the motion decreases with time. Motion of this type is called damped 
harmonic motion.
Damped harmonic motion
If the equation describing the displacement y of an object at time t is
y kect sin vt  or  y kect cos vt  1c 02
then the object is in damped harmonic motion. The constant c is the damping 
constant, k is the initial amplitude, and 2p/v is the period.*
Damped harmonic motion is simply harmonic motion for which the amplitude is 
governed by the function a1t2 kect. Figure 12 shows the difference between har-
monic motion and damped harmonic motion.
Example 7  ■  Modeling Damped Harmonic Motion
Two mass-spring systems are experiencing damped harmonic motion, both at  
0.5 cycles per second and both with an initial maximum displacement of 10 cm. The 
ﬁrst has a damping constant of 0.5, and the second has a damping constant of 0.1.
(a)	 Find functions of the form g1t2 kect cos vt to model the motion in each case.
(b)	 Graph the two functions you found in part (a). How do they differ?
Solution
(a)	 At time t  0 the displacement is 10 cm. Thus g102 kec #  0  cos1v # 02 k, so  
k  10. Also, the frequency is f  0.5 Hz, and since v  2pf (see page 446), we 
get v 2p10.52 p. Using the given damping constants, we ﬁnd that the 
motions of the two springs are given by the functions
g11t2 10e0.5t cos pt  and  g21t2 10e0.1t cos pt
Hz is the abbreviation for hertz. One 
hertz is one cycle per second.
Why do we say that household current is 
110 V when the maximum voltage pro-
duced is 155 V? From the symmetry of 
the cosine function we see that the aver-
age voltage produced is zero. This aver-
age value would be the same for all AC 
generators and so gives no information 
about the voltage generated. To obtain a 
more informative measure of voltage, 
engineers use the root-mean-square 
(RMS) method. It can be shown that the 
RMS voltage is 1/!2 times the maxi-
mum voltage. So for household current 
the RMS voltage is
155 3
1
!2 < 110 V
*In the case of damped harmonic motion the term quasi-period is often used instead of period because the 
motion is not actually periodic—it diminishes with time. However, we will continue to use the term period 
to avoid confusion.
(b) Damped harmonic motion:
y=e–t ß 8πt
Harmonic motion: y=ß 8πt
(a)
y
t
0
1
2
1
y
t
0
1
2
1
_a(t)=_e–t
a(t)=e–t
Figure 12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

452 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
(b)	 The functions g1 and g2 are graphed in Figure 13. From the graphs we see that in 
the ﬁrst case (where the damping constant is larger) the motion dies down 
quickly, whereas in the second case, perceptible motion continues much longer.
12
_12
15
 g⁄(t)=10 e–0.5t ç πt
_1
12
_12
15
g¤(t)=10 e–0.1t ç πt
_1
Figure 13
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
As Example 7 indicates, the larger the damping constant c, the quicker the oscillation 
dies down. When a guitar string is plucked and then allowed to vibrate freely, a point on 
that string undergoes damped harmonic motion. We hear the damping of the motion as 
the sound produced by the vibration of the string fades. How fast the damping of the 
string occurs (as measured by the size of the constant c) is a property of the size of the 
string and the material it is made of. Another example of damped harmonic motion is  
the motion that a shock absorber on a car undergoes when the car hits a bump in the road. 
In this case the shock absorber is engineered to damp the motion as quickly as possible 
(large c) and to have the frequency as small as possible (small v). On the other hand, the 
sound produced by a tuba player playing a note is undamped as long as the player can 
maintain the loudness of the note. The electromagnetic waves that produce light move 
in simple harmonic motion that is not damped.
Example 8  ■  A Vibrating Violin String
The G-string on a violin is pulled a distance of 0.5 cm above its rest position, then 
released and allowed to vibrate. The damping constant c for this string is determined 
to be 1.4. Suppose that the note produced is a pure G (frequency  200 Hz). Find an 
equation that describes the motion of the point at which the string was plucked.
Solution    Let P be the point at which the string was plucked. We will ﬁnd a function 
f1t2  that gives the distance at time t of the point P from its original rest position. 
Since the maximum displacement occurs at t  0, we ﬁnd an equation in the form
y kect cos vt
From this equation we see that f102 k. But we know that the original displacement 
of the string is 0.5 cm. Thus k  0.5. Since the frequency of the vibration is 200, we 
have v 2pf 2p12002 400p. Finally, since we know that the damping con-
stant is 1.4, we get
 f1t2 0.5e1.4t cos 400pt
Now Try Exercise 57	
■
Example 9  ■  Ripples on a Pond
A stone is dropped in a calm lake, causing waves to form. The up-and-down motion 
of a point on the surface of the water is modeled by damped harmonic motion. At 
some time the amplitude of the wave is measured, and 20 s later it is found that the 
amplitude has dropped to 1
10 of this value. Find the damping constant c.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.6  ■  Modeling Harmonic Motion  453
Solution    The amplitude is governed by the coefﬁcient kect in the equations for 
damped harmonic motion. Thus the amplitude at time t is kect, and 20 s later, it is 
kec1t202. So because the later value is 1
10 the earlier value, we have
kec1t202 1
10 kect
We now solve this equation for c. Canceling k and using the Laws of Exponents, we get
 ect # e20c 1
10 ect
 e20c 1
10
        Cancel ect
 e20c 10
        Take reciprocals
Taking the natural logarithm of each side gives
 20c ln1102
 c 1
20 ln1102 < 1
20 12.302 < 0.12
Thus the damping constant is c ^ 0.12.
Now Try Exercise 59	
■
■  Phase and Phase Difference
When two objects are moving in simple harmonic motion with the same frequency, it 
is often important to determine whether the objects are “moving together” or by how 
much their motions differ. Let’s consider a specific example.
Suppose that an object is rotating along the unit circle and the height y of the object 
at time t is given by y sin1kt b2 . When t 0, the height is y sin1b2 . This 
means that the motion “starts” at an angle b as shown in Figure 14. 
y
x
0
P
b
+
Q
y
x
0
b
k
b
k
b
k
2π
k
1
(a) Phase angle b
(b) Horizontal shift
Figure 14  Graph of y sin1kt b2
We can view the starting point in two ways: as the angle between P and Q on the 
unit circle or as the time required for P to “catch up” to Q. The angle b is called the 
phase (or phase angle). To find the time required, we factor out k:
y sin1kt b2 sin ka t b
k b
We see that P “catches up” to Q (that is, y 0) when t b/k. This last equation also 
shows that the graph in Figure 14(b) is shifted horizontally b/k (to the right) on the 
t-axis. The time b/k is called the lag time if b 0 (because P is behind, or lags, Q by 
b/k time units) and is called the lead time if b 0.
The phase angle b depends only on the 
starting position of the object and not 
on the frequency. The lag time does 
depend on the frequency.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

454 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Phase 
Any sine curve can be expressed in the following equivalent forms: 
y A sin1kt b2
        The phase is b. 
y A sin ka t b
k b         The horizontal shift is b
k. 
It is often important to know whether two waves with the same period (modeled by 
sine curves) are in phase or out of phase. For the curves 
y1 A sin1kt b2     and   
y2 A sin1kt c2
the phase difference between y1 and y2 is b c. If the phase difference is a multiple 
of 2p, the waves are in phase; otherwise, the waves are out of phase. If two sine curves 
are in phase, then their graphs coincide.
Example 10  ■  Finding Phase and Phase Difference
Objects are in harmonic motion modeled by the following curves:
y1 10 sina 3t p
6 b    
y2 10 sina 3t p
2 b    
y3 10 sina 3t 23p
6 b
(a)	 Find the amplitude, period, phase, and horizontal shift of the curve y1. 
(b)	 Find the phase difference between the curves y1 and y2. Are the two curves in 
phase? 
(c)	 Find the phase difference between the curves y1 and y3. Are the two curves in 
phase?
(d)	 Sketch all three curves on the same axes.
Solution  
(a)	 The amplitude is 10, the period is 2p/3, and the phase is p/6. To find the hori-
zontal shift, we factor: 
y1 10 sina 3t p
6 b 10 sin 3a t p
18 b
	 	 So the horizontal shift is p/18.
(b)	 The phase of y2 is p/2. So the phase difference is 
p
2 p
6 p
3
	 	 The phase difference is not a multiple of 2p, so the two curves are out of phase. 
(c)	 The phase of y3 is 23p/6. So the phase difference is 
p
6 a 23p
6 b 4p 212p2
	 	 The phase difference is a multiple of 2p, so the two curves are in phase.
(d)	 The graphs are shown in Figure 15. Notice that the curves y1 and y3 have the 
same graph because they are in phase.
Now Try Exercises 29 and 35	
■
Note that the phase difference depends 
on the order in which the functions are 
given.
_12
5
0
π
2
12
y¤=10 ß!3t-   @
π
6
y⁄=10 ß!3t-   @ and 
23π
6
y‹=10 ß!3t+       @
Figure 15
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.6  ■  Modeling Harmonic Motion  455
Example 11  ■  Using Phase
Ali, Brandon, and Carmen are sitting in a stopped Ferris wheel as shown in the figure 
in the margin. At time t 0 the Ferris wheel starts turning counterclockwise at the 
rate of 2 revolutions per minute. 
(a)	 Find sine curves that model the height of each rider above the center line of the 
Ferris wheel at any time t 0. 
(b)	 Find the phase difference between Brandon and Ali, between Ali and Carmen, 
and between Brandon and Carmen.
(c)	 Find the horizontal shift of Ali’s equation. What is Ali’s lead or lag time (relative 
to the red seat in the figure)?
Solution
(a)	 The motion of each rider is modeled by a function of the form  
y A sin1kt b2 . From the figure we see that the amplitude is A 5 m.  
Since the Ferris wheel makes two revolutions per minute, the period is  
1
2 min. So 
period 2p
k 1
2 min
	 	 It follows that k 4p. From the figure we see that each rider starts at a different 
phase. Let’s consider Ali and Brandon to be ahead of the red seat, and let’s con-
sider Carmen to be behind the red seat. So their phases are p/2, 3p/4, and 
p/4, respectively. The equations are as follows.
Ali
Brandon
Carmen
yA 5 sina4pt p
2 b
yB 5 sina4pt 3p
4 b
yC 5 sina4pt p
4 b
(b)	 The phase differences are as follows.
Ali and Brandon
Ali and Carmen
Brandon and Carmen
3p
4 p
2 p
4
p
2 a p
4 b 3p
4
3p
4 a p
4 b p
(c)	 The equation that models Ali’s position above the center line of the Ferris  
wheel was found in part (b). To find the horizontal shift, we factor Ali’s  
equation. 
 yA 5 sina 4pt p
2 b         Ali’s equation
 yA 5 sin 4pa t 1
8 b         Factor 4p
	 	 We see that the horizontal shift is 1
8 to the left. This means that Ali’s lead  
time is 1
8 of a minute (so she is 1
8 of a minute ahead of the red seat).
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
Brandon
Ali
Carmen
5 m
π
4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

456 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Concepts
	 1.	 For an object in simple harmonic motion with amplitude a 
and period 2p/v, find an equation that models the displace-
ment y at time t if 
(a)	 y 0 at time t 0: y  
  .
(b)	 y a at time t 0: y  
  .
	 2.	 For an object in damped harmonic motion with initial ampli-
tude a, period 2p/v, and damping constant c, find an equa-
tion that models the displacement y at time t if 
(a)	 y 0 at time t 0: y  
  .
	 	 (b)	 y a at time t 0: y  
  .
	 3.	 (a)	 For an object in harmonic motion modeled by 
y A sin1kt b2  the amplitude is  
  ,  
the period is  
  , and the phase is 
 
  . To find the horizontal shift, we factor out k 
to get y  
  . From this form of the equa-
tion we see that the horizontal shift is  
  .
(b)	 For an object in harmonic motion modeled by 
y 5 sin14t p2  the amplitude is  
  , the 
period is  
  , the phase is  
  , 
and the horizontal shift is  
  .
	 4.	 Objects A and B are in harmonic motion modeled by 
	 	 y 3 sin12t p2  and y 3 sina2t p
2 b . The phase of 
	 	 A is  
  , and the phase of B is  
  . 
The phase difference is  
  , so the objects are 
moving  
 (in phase/out of phase).
Skills
5–12  ■  Simple Harmonic Motion    The given function models 
the displacement of an object moving in simple harmonic 
motion.
(a)	 Find the amplitude, period, and frequency of the motion.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the displacement of the object over one 
complete period.
	 5.	 y  2 sin 3t	
  6.	 y 3 cos 1
2 t
	 7.	 y  cos 0.3t	
  8.	 y  2.4 sin 3.6t
	 9.	 y 0.25 cosa1.5t p
3 b 	 10.	 y  3
2 sin10.2t 1.42
	11.	 y 5 cosA2
3 t 3
4B	
12.	 y 1.6 sin1t 1.82
13–16  ■  Simple Harmonic Motion    Find a function that models 
the simple harmonic motion having the given properties. Assume 
that the displacement is zero at time t  0.
	13.	 amplitude 10 cm,    period 3 s
14.	 amplitude 24 ft,    period 2 min
15.	 amplitude 6 in.,    frequency 5/p Hz
16.	 amplitude 1.2 m,    frequency 0.5 Hz
17–20  ■  Simple Harmonic Motion    Find a function that models 
the simple harmonic motion having the given properties. Assume 
that the displacement is at its maximum at time t  0.
17.	 amplitude 60 ft,    period 0.5 min
18.	 amplitude 35 cm,    period 8 s
19.	 amplitude 2.4 m,    frequency 750 Hz
20.	 amplitude 6.25 in.,    frequency 60 Hz
21–28  ■  Damped Harmonic Motion    An initial amplitude k, 
damping constant c, and frequency f or period p are given. (Recall 
that frequency and period are related by the equation f  1/p.)
(a)  Find a function that models the damped harmonic  
motion. Use a function of the form y  kect cos vt in 
Exercises 21–24 and of the form y  kect sin vt in  
Exercises 25–28.
(b)  Graph the function.
21.	 k  2,    c  1.5,    f  3
22.	 k  15,    c  0.25,    f  0.6
23.	 k  100,    c  0.05,    p  4
24.	 k  0.75,    c  3,    p  3p
25.	 k  7,    c  10,    p  p/6
26.	 k  1,    c  1,    p  1
27.	 k  0.3,    c  0.2,    f  20
28.	 k  12,    c  0.01,    f  8
29–34  ■  Amplitude, Period, Phase, and Horizontal Shift    For 
each sine curve find the amplitude, period, phase, and horizontal 
shift. 
	29.	 y 5 sina2t p
2 b 	
30.	 y 10 sinat p
3 b
	31.	 y 100 sin15t p2 	
32.	 y 50 sina 1
2
 t p
5 b
	33.	 y 20 sin 2at p
4 b 	
34.	 y 8 sin 4at p
12 b
35–38  ■  Phase and Phase Difference    A pair of sine curves  
with the same period is given. (a) Find the phase of each curve. 
(b) Find the phase difference between the curves. (c) Determine 
whether the curves are in phase or out of phase. (d) Sketch both 
curves on the same axes.
	35.	 y1 10 sina3t p
2 b ;    y2 10 sina3t 5p
2 b
	36.	 y1 15 sina2t p
3 b ;    y2 15 sina2t p
6 b
5.6  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.6  ■  Modeling Harmonic Motion  457
	37.	 y1 80 sin 5at p
10 b ;    y2 80 sina5t p
3 b
	38.	 y1 20 sin 2at p
2 b ;    y2 20 sin 2at 3p
2 b
Applications
39.	 A Bobbing Cork    A cork ﬂoating in a lake is bobbing in sim-
ple harmonic motion. Its displacement above the bottom of 
the lake is modeled by
y 0.2 cos 20pt 8
	 	 where y is measured in meters and t is measured in minutes.
(a)	 Find the frequency of the motion of the cork.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of y.
(c)	 Find the maximum displacement of the cork above the 
lake bottom.
40.	 FM Radio Signals    The carrier wave for an FM radio signal is 
modeled by the function
y a sin12p19.15 3 1072t2
	 	 where t is measured in seconds. Find the period and fre-
quency of the carrier wave.
41.	 Blood Pressure    Each time your heart beats, your blood pres-
sure increases, then decreases as the heart rests between beats. 
A certain person’s blood pressure is modeled by the function
p1t2 115 25 sin1160pt2
	 	 where p1t2  is the pressure (in mmHg) at time t, measured in 
minutes.
(a)	 Find the amplitude, period, and frequency of p.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of p.
(c)	 If a person is exercising, his or her heart beats faster. 
How does this affect the period and frequency of p?
42.	 Predator Population Model    In a predator/prey model, the 
predator population is modeled by the function
y 900 cos 2t 8000
	 	 where t is measured in years.
(a)	 What is the maximum population?
(b)	 Find the length of time between successive periods of 
maximum population.
43.	 Mass-Spring System    A mass attached to a spring is moving 
up and down in simple harmonic motion. The graph gives its 
displacement d1t2  from equilibrium at time t. Express the 
function d in the form d1t2 a sin vt.
d(t)
t
0
_5
5
1
5
2
5
3
5
4
5
44.	 Tides    The graph shows the variation of the water level rela-
tive to mean sea level in Commencement Bay at Tacoma, 
Washington, for a particular 24-h period. Assuming that this 
variation is modeled by simple harmonic motion, ﬁnd an 
equation of the form y  a sin vt that describes the variation 
in water level as a function of the number of hours after 
midnight.
y
(feet)
t
(time)
MIDNIGHT
0
_6
6
6
12
6
12
3
9
MIDNIGHT
A.M.
P.M.
3
9
MIDNIGHT
Mean
sea level
45.	 Tides    The Bay of Fundy in Nova Scotia has the highest 
tides in the world. In one 12-h period the water starts at  
mean sea level, rises to 21 ft above, drops to 21 ft below, 
then returns to mean sea level. Assuming that the motion of 
the tides is simple harmonic, ﬁnd an equation that describes 
the height of the tide in the Bay of Fundy above mean sea 
level. Sketch a graph that shows the level of the tides over a 
12-h period.
46.	 Mass-Spring System    A mass suspended from a spring is 
pulled down a distance of 2 ft from its rest position, as shown 
in the ﬁgure. The mass is released at time t  0 and allowed 
to oscillate. If the mass returns to this position after 1 s, ﬁnd 
an equation that describes its motion.
Rest
position
2 ft
47.	 Mass-Spring System    A mass is suspended on a spring. 
The spring is compressed so that the mass is located  
5 cm above its rest position. The mass is released at  
time t  0 and allowed to oscillate. It is observed that  
the mass reaches its lowest point 1
2 s after it is released. 
Find an equation that describes the motion of the  
mass.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

458 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
48.	 Mass-Spring System    The frequency of oscillation of an 
object suspended on a spring depends on the stiffness k of the 
spring (called the spring constant) and the mass m of the 
object. If the spring is compressed a distance a and then 
allowed to oscillate, its displacement is given by
f1t2 a cos "k/m t
(a)	 A 10-g mass is suspended from a spring with stiffness  
k  3. If the spring is compressed a distance 5 cm and 
then released, ﬁnd the equation that describes the  
oscillation of the spring.
(b)	 Find a general formula for the frequency (in terms of  
k and m).
(c)	 How is the frequency affected if the mass is increased? Is 
the oscillation faster or slower?
(d)	 How is the frequency affected if a stiffer spring is used 
(larger k)? Is the oscillation faster or slower?
49.	 Ferris Wheel    A Ferris wheel has a radius of 10 m, and the 
bottom of the wheel passes 1 m above the ground. If the  
Ferris wheel makes one complete revolution every 20 s, ﬁnd 
an equation that gives the height above the ground of a per-
son on the Ferris wheel as a function of time.
10 m
1 m
50.	 Clock Pendulum    The pendulum in a grandfather clock makes 
one complete swing every 2 s. The maximum angle that the pen-
dulum makes with respect to its rest position is 10. We know 
from physical principles that the angle u between the pendulum 
and its rest position changes in simple harmonic fashion. Find an 
equation that describes the size of the angle u as a function of 
time. (Take t  0 to be a time when the pendulum is vertical.)
¨
51.	 Variable Stars    The variable star Zeta Gemini has a period of 
10 days. The average brightness of the star is 3.8 magnitudes, 
and the maximum variation from the average is 0.2 magni-
tude. Assuming that the variation in brightness is simple 
harmonic, ﬁnd an equation that gives the brightness of the 
star as a function of time.
52.	 Variable Stars    Astronomers believe that the radius of a variable 
star increases and decreases with the brightness of the star. The 
variable star Delta Cephei (Example 4) has an average radius of 
20 million miles and changes by a maximum of 1.5 million 
miles from this average during a single pulsation. Find an equa-
tion that describes the radius of this star as a function of time.
53.	 Biological Clocks    Circadian rhythms are biological processes 
that oscillate with a period of approximately 24 h. That is, a 
circadian rhythm is an internal daily biological clock. Blood 
pressure appears to follow such a rhythm. For a certain indi-
vidual the average resting blood pressure varies from a maxi-
mum of 100 mmHg at 2:00 p.m. to a minimum of 80 mmHg at 
2:00 a.m. Find a sine function of the form
f1t2 a sin1v1t c22 b
	 	 that models the blood pressure at time t, measured in hours 
from midnight.
12 A.M.
6 A.M.
12 P.M.
6 P.M.
12 A.M.
6 A.M.
110
100
90
80
70
Blood pressure (mmHg)
54.	 Electric Generator    The armature in an electric generator is 
rotating at the rate of 100 revolutions per second (rps). If the 
maximum voltage produced is 310 V, ﬁnd an equation that 
describes this variation in voltage. What is the RMS voltage? 
(See Example 6 and the margin note adjacent to it.)
55.	 Electric Generator    The graph shows an oscilloscope reading 
of the variation in voltage of an AC current produced by a 
simple generator.
(a)	 Find the maximum voltage produced.
(b)	 Find the frequency (cycles per second) of the generator.
(c)	 How many revolutions per second does the armature in 
the generator make?
(d)	 Find a formula that describes the variation in voltage as a 
function of time.
(volts)
_50
50
0.1
t)
(s)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 5.6  ■  Modeling Harmonic Motion  459
56.	 Doppler Effect    When a car with its horn blowing drives  
by an observer, the pitch of the horn seems higher as it 
approaches and lower as it recedes (see the ﬁgure below). 
This phenomenon is called the Doppler effect. If the sound 
source is moving at speed √ relative to the observer and if the 
speed of sound is √0, then the perceived frequency f is related 
to the actual frequency f0 as follows.
f f0 a
√0
√0 √b
	 	 We choose the minus sign if the source is moving toward the 
observer and the plus sign if it is moving away.
	 	     Suppose that a car drives at 110 ft/s past a woman standing 
on the shoulder of a highway, blowing its horn, which has a 
frequency of 500 Hz. Assume that the speed of sound is  
1130 ft/s. (This is the speed in dry air at 70F.)
(a)	 What are the frequencies of the sounds that the woman 
hears as the car approaches her and as it moves away 
from her?
(b)	 Let A be the amplitude of the sound. Find functions of 
the form
y A sin vt
	 	 	
that model the perceived sound as the car approaches the 
woman and as it recedes.
57.	 Motion of a Building    A strong gust of wind strikes a tall 
building, causing it to sway back and forth in damped har-
monic motion. The frequency of the oscillation is 0.5 cycle 
per second, and the damping constant is c  0.9. Find an 
equation that describes the motion of the building. (Assume 
that k  1, and take t  0 to be the instant when the gust of 
wind strikes the building.)
58.	 Shock Absorber    When a car hits a certain bump on the road, a 
shock absorber on the car is compressed a distance of 6 in., then 
released (see the ﬁgure). The shock absorber vibrates in damped 
harmonic motion with a frequency of 2 cycles per second. The 
damping constant for this particular shock absorber is 2.8.
(a)	 Find an equation that describes the displacement of the 
shock absorber from its rest position as a function of 
time. Take t  0 to be the instant that the shock absorber 
is released.
(b)	 How long does it take for the amplitude of the vibration 
to decrease to 0.5 in.?
59.	 Tuning Fork    A tuning fork is struck and oscillates in 
damped harmonic motion. The amplitude of the motion is 
measured, and 3 s later it is found that the amplitude has 
dropped to 1
4 of this value. Find the damping constant c for 
this tuning fork.
60.	 Guitar String    A guitar string is pulled at point P a distance 
of 3 cm above its rest position. It is then released and 
vibrates in damped harmonic motion with a frequency of  
165 cycles per second. After 2 s, it is observed that the ampli-
tude of the vibration at point P is 0.6 cm.
(a)	 Find the damping constant c.
(b)	 Find an equation that describes the position of point P 
above its rest position as a function of time. Take t  0 
to be the instant that the string is released.
	61.	 Two Fans    Electric fans A and B have radius 1 ft and, when 
switched on, rotate counterclockwise at the rate of 100 revo-
lutions per minute. Starting with the position shown in the 
figure, the fans are simultaneously switched on. 
(a)	 For each fan, find an equation that gives the height of the 
red dot (above the horizontal line shown) t minutes after 
the fans are switched on. 
(b)	 Are the fans rotating in phase? Through what angle 
should fan A be rotated counterclockwise in order that 
the two fans rotate in phase?
A
B
62.	 Alternating Current    Alternating current is produced when 
an armature rotates about its axis in a magnetic field, as 
shown in the figure. Generators A and B rotate counterclock-
wise at 60 Hz (cycles per second) and each generator pro-
duces a maximum of 50 V. The voltage for each generator is  
modeled by 
EA 50 sin1120pt2    
EB 50 sina120pt 5p
4 b
(a)	 Find the voltage phase for each generator, and find the 
phase difference.
(b)	 Are the generators producing voltage in phase? Through 
what angle should the armature in the second generator 
be rotated counterclockwise in order that the two genera-
tors produce voltage in phase?
N
Wire
Magnets
S
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

460 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
63.	 DISCUSS:  Phases of Sine    The phase of a sine curve
y sin1kt b2 represents a particular location on the graph 
of the sine function y sin t. Specifically, when t 0, we 
have y sin b, and this corresponds to the point 1b, sin b2  
on the graph of y sin t. Observe that each point on the 
graph of y sin t has different characteristics. For example, 
for t p/6, we have sin t 1
2 and the values of sine are 
increasing, whereas at t 5p/6, we also have sin t 1
2 but 
the values of sine are decreasing. So each point on the graph 
of sine corresponds to a different “phase” of a sine curve. 
Complete the descriptions for each label on the graph below. 
y
x
0
y
t
0
1
(11π/6, __)
________
(__, __)
________
(0, 0)
increasing
(__, __)
________
(7π/6, __)
________
(5π/6, __)
________
(π/6, __)
________
(__, __)
________
64.	 DISCUSS:  Phases of the Moon    During the course of a lunar 
cycle (about 1 month) the moon undergoes the familiar lunar 
phases. The phases of the moon are completely analogous to 
the phases of the sine function described in Exercise 63. The 
figure below shows some phases of the lunar cycle starting 
with a “new moon,” “waxing crescent moon,” “first quarter 
moon,” and so on. The next to last phase shown is a “waning 
crescent moon.” Give similar descriptions for the other 
phases of the moon shown in the figure. What are some 
events on the earth that follow a monthly cycle and are in 
phase with the lunar cycle? What are some events that are out 
of phase with the lunar cycle? 
The Unit Circle (p. 402)
The unit circle is the circle of radius 1 centered at (0, 0). The 
equation of the unit circle is x2 y2 1.
Terminal Points on the Unit Circle (pp. 402–404)
The terminal point P1x, y2  
determined by the real num-
ber t is the point obtained by 
traveling counterclockwise a 
distance t along the unit  
circle, starting at 11, 02 .
Special terminal points are 
listed in Table 1 on page 404.
The Reference Number (pp. 405–406)
The reference number associated with the real number t is the 
shortest distance along the unit circle between the terminal point 
determined by t and the x-axis.
The Trigonometric Functions (p. 409)
Let P1x, y2  be the terminal point on the unit circle determined by 
the real number t. Then for nonzero values of the denominator the 
trigonometric functions are defined as follows.
 sin t y    
 cos t x    
 tan t y
x
 csc t 1
y   
 sec t 1
x   
cot t x
y
Special Values of the Trigonometric Functions (p. 410)
The trigonometric functions have the following values at the spe-
cial values of t.
t
sin t
cos t
tan t
csc t
sec t
cot t
0
0
1
0
—
1
—
p
6
1
2
!3
2
!3
3
2
2 !3
3
!3
p
4
!2
2
!2
2
1
!2
!2
1
p
3
!3
2
1
2
!3
2 !3
3
2
!3
3
p
2
1
0
—
1
—
0
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 5  ■  REVIEW
y
x
0
1
t
P(x, y)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5  ■  Review  461
Basic Trigonometric Identities (pp. 414–415)
An identity is an equation that is true for all values of the vari-
able. The basic trigonometric identities are as follows.
Reciprocal Identities:
csc t 
1
sin t   
sec t 
1
cos t   
cot t 
1
tan t
Pythagorean Identities:
 sin2 t cos2 t 1
   
 tan2 t 1 sec2 t
 1 cot2 t csc2 t
Even-Odd Properties:
 sin1t2 sin t   
 cos1t2 cos t   
 tan1t2 tan t
 csc1t2 csc t   
 sec1t2 sec t   
 cot1t2 cot t
Periodic Properties (p. 419)
A function f is periodic if there is a positive number p such that 
f1x p2 f1x2  for every x. The least such p is called the 
period of f. The sine and cosine functions have period 2p, and 
the tangent function has period p. 
 sin1t 2p2 sin t
 cos1t 2p2 cos t
 tan1t p2 tan t
Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions (p. 420)
The graphs of sine and cosine have amplitude 1 and period 2p.
y
x
0
y=ß x
1
_1
π
2π
Period 2π
y
x
0
y=ç x
1
_1
π
2π
Period 2π
Amplitude 1, Period 2π
Graphs of Transformations of Sine and Cosine (p. 424)
y
x
0
a>0
a
_a
b
One period
Amplitude a, Period
, Horizontal shift b
2π
k
b+
y
x
0
a>0
a
_a
b
One period
2π
k
b+
2π
k
y=a ß k(x-b)   (k>0)
y=a ç k(x-b)   (k>0)
An appropriate interval on which to graph one complete period is 
3b, b 12p/k24.
Graphs of the Tangent and Cotangent Functions (pp. 434–435)
These functions have period p.
y=† x
y=ˇ x
y
x
π
2
0
π
π
2
_
_π
1
y
x
π
2
3π
2
π
2
_
1
0
π
To graph one period of y a tan kx, an appropriate interval is 
1p/2k, p/2k2 .
To graph one period of y a cot kx, an appropriate interval is 
10, p/k2 .
Graphs of the Cosecant and Secant Functions (pp. 436–437)
These functions have period 2p.
y
x
0
y= x
1
_1
π
2π
y=˚ x
y
x
0
1
_1
π
2π
To graph one period of y a csc kx, an appropriate interval is 
10, 2p/k2 .
To graph one period of y a sec kx, an appropriate interval is 
10, 2p/k2 .
Inverse Trigonometric Functions (pp. 440–443)
Inverse functions of the trigonometric functions are defined by 
restricting the domains as follows.
Function
Domain
Range
sin1
31, 14
C p
2, p
2D
cos1
31, 14
30, p4
tan1
1`, ` 2
A p
2, p
2B
The inverse trigonometric functions are defined as follows.
 sin1 x y 3 sin y x
 cos1 x y 3 cos y x
 tan1 x y 3 tan y x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

462 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
Graphs of these inverse functions are shown below.
y
x
0
1
_1
π
2
π
2
_
y
x
0
π
2
π
2
_
y
x
0
1
_1
π
2
π
y=ß–¡ x
y=†–¡ x
y=ç–¡ x
Harmonic Motion (p. 446)
An object is in simple harmonic motion if its displacement y at 
time t is modeled by y a sin vt or y a cos vt. In this case the 
amplitude is 0  a 0, the period is 2p/v, and the frequency is v/2p.
Damped Harmonic Motion (p. 451)
An object is in damped harmonic motion if its displacement y 
at time t is modeled by y kect sin vt or y kect cos vt, 
c 0. In this case c is the damping constant, k is the initial 
amplitude, and 2p/v is the period.
Phase (pp. 453–454)
Any sine curve can be expressed in the following equivalent 
forms:
y A sin1kt b2 ,  the phase is b
y A sin kat b
k b ,  the horizontal shift is b
k
The phase (or phase angle) b is the initial angular position of the 
motion. The number b/k is also called the lag time (b 0) or 
lead time (b 0).
Suppose that two objects are in harmonic motion with the same 
period modeled by 
y1 A sin1kt b2     and   
y2 A sin1kt c2
The phase difference between y1 and y2 is b c. The motions 
are “in phase” if the phase difference is a multiple of 2p; other-
wise, the motions are “out of phase.”
	 1.	 (a)	 What is the unit circle, and what is the equation of the 
unit circle?
(b)	 Use a diagram to explain what is meant by the terminal 
point P1x, y2  determined by t.
(c)	 Find the terminal point for t p
2.
(d)	 What is the reference number associated with t?
(e)	 Find the reference number and terminal point for 
	
t 7p
4 .
	 2.	 Let t be a real number, and let P1x, y2  be the terminal point 
determined by t.
(a)	 Write equations that define sin t, cos t, tan t, csc t, sec t, 
and cot t.
(b)	 In each of the four quadrants, identify the trigonometric 
functions that are positive.
(c)	 List the special values of sine, cosine, and tangent.
	 3.	 (a)	 Describe the steps we use to find the value of a trigono-
metric function at a real number t. 
(b)	 Find sin 5p
6 .
	 4.	 (a)	 What is a periodic function? 
(b)	 What are the periods of the six trigonometric functions?
(c)	 Find sin 19p
4 .
	 5.	 (a)	 What is an even function, and what is an odd function?
(b)	 Which trigonometric functions are even? Which are odd?
(c)	 If sin t 0.4, find sin1t2 .
(d)	 If cos s 0.7, find cos1s2 .
	 6.	 (a)	 State the reciprocal identities.
(b)	 State the Pythagorean identities.
	 7.	 (a)	 Graph the sine and cosine functions.
(b)	 What are the amplitude, period, and horizontal shift for 
the sine curve y a sin k1x b2  and for the cosine 
curve y a cos k1x b2 ?
(c)	 Find the amplitude, period, and horizontal shift of 
	
y 3 sina2x p
6 b.
	 8.	 (a)	 Graph the tangent and cotangent functions.
(b)	 For the curves y a tan kx and y a cot kx, state appro-
priate intervals to graph one complete period of each curve.
(c)	 Find an appropriate interval to graph one complete 
period of y 5 tan 3x.
	 9.	 (a)	 Graph the cosecant and secant functions.
(b)	 For the curves y a csc kx and y a sec kx, state 
appropriate intervals to graph one complete period of 
each curve.
(c)	 Find an appropriate interval to graph one period of 
y 3 csc 6x.
	10.	 (a)	 Define the inverse sine function, the inverse cosine func-
tion, and the inverse tangent function. 
(b)	 Find sin1 1
2, cos1 !2
2 , and tan11.
(c)	 For what values of x is the equation sin1sin1
 x2 x 
true? For what values of x is the equation 
sin11sin x2 x true?
	11.	 (a)	 What is simple harmonic motion?
(b)	 What is damped harmonic motion?
(c)	 Give real-world examples of harmonic motion.
■  CONCEPT CHECK
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5  ■  Review  463
	12.	 Suppose that an object is in simple harmonic motion given by 
	 	 y 5 sina2t p
3 b.
(a)	 Find the amplitude, period, and frequency. 
(b)	 Find the phase and the horizontal shift.
	13.	 Consider the following models of harmonic motion.
y1 5 sin12t 12    
y2 5 sin12t 32
	 	 Do both motions have the same frequency? What is the phase 
for each equation? What is the phase difference? Are the 
objects moving in phase or out of phase?
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
■  exercises
1–2  ■  Terminal Points    A point P1x, y2  is given. (a) Show that 
P is on the unit circle. (b) Suppose that P is the terminal point 
determined by t. Find sin t, cos t, and tan t.
	 1.	 P a !3
2 ,  1
2 b 	
  2.	 P a 3
5,  4
5 b
3–6  ■  Reference Number and Terminal Point    A real number t is 
given. (a) Find the reference number for t. (b) Find the terminal 
point P1x, y2  on the unit circle determined by t. (c) Find the six 
trigonometric functions of t.
	 3.  t 2p
3 	
  4.	 t 5p
3
	 5.  t  11p
4 	
  6.	 t  7p
6
7–16  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find the value of the 
trigonometric function. If possible, give the exact value; other-
wise, use a calculator to ﬁnd an approximate value rounded to 
ﬁve decimal places.
	 7.	 (a)  sin 3p
4 	
(b)	 cos 3p
4
	 8.	 (a)  tan p
3 	
(b)	 tana p
3 b
	 9.	 (a)  sin 1.1	
(b)	 cos 1.1
10.	 (a)  cos p
5 	
(b)	 cos a p
5 b
11.	 (a)  cos 9p
2 	
(b)	 sec 9p
2
12.	 (a)  sin p
7 	
(b)	 csc p
7
13.	 (a)  tan 5p
2 	
(b)	 cot 5p
2
14.	 (a)  sin 2p	
(b)	 csc 2p
15.	 (a)  tan 5p
6 	
(b)	 cot 5p
6
16.	 (a)  cos p
3 	
(b)	 sin p
6
17–20  ■  Fundamental Identities    Use the fundamental identities 
to write the ﬁrst expression in terms of the second.
17.	 tan t
cos t,    sin t	
18.	 tan2t sec t,    cos t
19.	 tan t,    sin t;    t in Quadrant IV
20.	 sec t,    sin t;    t in Quadrant II
21–24  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find the values  
of the remaining trigonometric functions at t from the given 
information.
21.	 sin t 5
13,    cos t  12
13
22.	 sin t  1
2,    cos t  0
23.	 cot t  1
2,    csc t !5/2
24.	 cos t  3
5,    tan t  0
25–28  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find the values of 
the trigonometric function of t from the given information. 
	25.	 sec t cot t; 
tan t 1
4,  terminal point for t in  
Quadrant III
	26.	 csc t sec t; 
sin t  8
17,  terminal point for t in  
Quadrant IV
	27.	 tan t sec t; 
cos t 3
5,  terminal point for t in  
Quadrant I
	28.	 sin2 t cos2 t; 
sec t 5,  terminal point for t in  
Quadrant II
29–36  ■  Horizontal Shifts    A trigonometric function is given. 
(a) Find the amplitude, period, and horizontal shift of the func-
tion. (b) Sketch the graph.
29.	 y 10 cos 1
2 x	
30.	 y  4 sin 2px
31.	 y sin 1
2 x	
32.	 y 2 sinax p
4 b
33.	 y  3 sin(2x  2)	
34.	 y cos 2ax p
2 b
35.	 y cos a p
2
 x p
6 b 	
36.	 y 10 sina2x p
2 b
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

464 
CHAPTER 5  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  
37–40  ■  Functions from a Graph    The graph of one period of a 
function of the form y a sin k1x b2  or y a cos k1x b2  is 
shown. Determine the function.
37.	
y
x
0
_5
5
π
4
π
2
	
38.	
y
x
0
(1, 2)
39.
x
y
0
1
3

1
3
2
3
1
2
1
2

	40.	
y
0
x
!_     , _4@
2π
3
41–48  ■  Graphing Trigonometric Functions    Find the period, 
and sketch the graph.
41.	 y  3 tan x	
42.	 y  tan px
43.	 y 2 cotax p
2 b 	
44.	 y seca 1
2
 x p
2 b
45.	 y 4 csc12x p2 	
46.	 y tanax p
6 b
47.	 y tana 1
2
 x p
8 b 	
48.	 y  4 sec 4px
49–52  ■  Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric 
Functions    Find the exact value of each expression, if it is defined.
49.	 sin1 1	
50.	 cos1A 1
2B
	51.	 sin1 asin 13p
6 b 	
52.	 tan acos1 a 1
2 bb
53–54  ■  Amplitude, Period, Phase, and Horizontal Shift    For each 
sine curve find the amplitude, period, phase, and horizontal shift. 
	53.	 y 100 sin 8at p
16 b 	
54.	 y 80 sin 3at p
2 b
55–56  ■  Phase and Phase Difference    A pair of sine curves  
with the same period is given. (a) Find the phase of each curve. 
(b) Find the phase difference between the curves. (c) Determine 
whether the curves are in phase or out of phase. (d) Sketch both 
curves on the same axes.
	55.	 y1 25 sin 3at p
2 b; 
y2 10 sina3t 5p
2 b
	56.	 y1 50 sina10t p
2 b; 
y2 50 sin 10at p
20 b
57–62  ■  Even and Odd Functions    A function is given. (a) Use 
a graphing device to graph the function. (b) Determine from the 
graph whether the function is periodic and, if so, determine the 
period. (c) Determine from the graph whether the function is odd, 
even, or neither.
57.	 y 0  cos x 0 	
58.	 y sin1cos x2
59.	 y cos120.1x2 	
60.	 y  1  2cosx
61.	 y 0  x 0  cos 3x	
62.	 y !x sin 3x, x 0
63–66  ■  Sine and Cosine Curves with Variable Amplitude     
Graph the three functions on a common screen. How are the 
graphs related?
63.	 y  x,    y  x,    y  x sin x
64.	 y  2x,    y  2x,    y  2x cos 4px
65.	 y  x,    y  sin 4x,    y  x  sin 4x
66.	 y  sin2 x,    y  cos2 x,    y  sin2 x  cos2 x
67–68  ■  Maxima and Minima    Find the maximum and mini-
mum values of the function.
67.	 y  cos x  sin 2x	
68.	 y  cos x  sin2 x
69-70  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations Graphically    Find all 
solutions of the equation that lie in the given interval. State each 
answer rounded to two decimal places.
	69.	 sin x 0.3; 
30, 2p4 	
70.	 cos 3x x; 
30, p4
71.	 Discover the Period of a Trigonometric Function    Let 
y1 cos1sin x2  and y2 sin1cos x2 .
(a)	 Graph y1 and y2 in the same viewing rectangle.
(b)	 Determine the period of each of these functions from its 
graph.
(c)	 Find an inequality between sin1cos x2  and cos1sin x2  
that is valid for all x.
72.	 Simple Harmonic Motion    A point P moving in simple har-
monic motion completes 8 cycles every second. If the ampli-
tude of the motion is 50 cm, ﬁnd an equation that describes 
the motion of P as a function of time. Assume that the point 
P is at its maximum displacement when t  0.
73.	 Simple Harmonic Motion    A mass suspended from a spring 
oscillates in simple harmonic motion at a frequency of  
4 cycles per second. The distance from the highest to the 
lowest point of the oscillation is 100 cm. Find an equation 
that describes the distance of the mass from its rest position 
as a function of time. Assume that the mass is at its lowest 
point when t  0.
74.	 Damped Harmonic Motion    The top ﬂoor of a building 
undergoes damped harmonic motion after a sudden brief 
earthquake. At time t  0 the displacement is at a maximum, 
16 cm from the normal position. The damping constant is  
c  0.72, and the building vibrates at 1.4 cycles per second.
(a)	 Find a function of the form y  kect cos vt to model the 
motion.
(b)	 Graph the function you found in part (a).
(c)	 What is the displacement at time t  10 s?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

465
	 1.	 The point P1x, y2  is on the unit circle in Quadrant IV. If x !11/6, ﬁnd y.
	 2.	 The point P in the ﬁgure at the left has y-coordinate 4
5. Find:
(a)	 sin t	
(b)	 cos t
(c)	 tan t	
(d)	 sec t
	 3.	 Find the exact value.
(a)	 sin 7p
6 	
(b)	 cos 13p
4
(c)	 tana 5p
3 b 	
(d)	 csc 3p
2
	 4.	 Express tan t in terms of sin t, if the terminal point determined by t is in Quadrant II.
	 5.	 If cos t  8
17 and if the terminal point determined by t is in Quadrant III, ﬁnd  
tan t cot t  csc t.
6–7  ■  A trigonometric function is given.
(a)	 Find the amplitude, period, phase, and horizontal shift of the function.
(b)	 Sketch the graph of one complete period.
	 6.	 y  5 cos 4x	
7.  y 2 sina 1
2
 x p
6 b
8–9  ■  Find the period, and graph the function.
	 8.	 y  csc 2x	
9.  y tana2x p
2 b
10.	 Find the exact value of each expression, if it is defined.
(a)	 tan1 1	
(b)	 cos1 a !3
2 b
(c)	 tan11tan 3p2 	
(d)	 cos1tan11!322
11.	 The graph shown at left is one period of a function of the form y a sin k1x b2 .  
Determine the function.
	12.	 The sine curves y1 30 sina6t p
2 b  and y2 30 sina6t p
3 b  have the same period.
(a)	 Find the phase of each curve. 
(b)	 Find the phase difference between y1 and y2. 
(c)	 Determine whether the curves are in phase or out of phase. 
(d)	 Sketch both curves on the same axes.
13.	 Let f1x2 cos x
1 x2
 .
(a)  Use a graphing device to graph f in an appropriate viewing rectangle.
(b)	 Determine from the graph if f is even, odd, or neither.
(c)	 Find the minimum and maximum values of f.
14.	 A mass suspended from a spring oscillates in simple harmonic motion. The mass com-
pletes 2 cycles every second, and the distance between the highest point and the lowest 
point of the oscillation is 10 cm. Find an equation of the form y  a sin vt that gives the 
distance of the mass from its rest position as a function of time.
15.	 An object is moving up and down in damped harmonic motion. Its displacement at time  
t  0 is 16 in.; this is its maximum displacement. The damping constant is c  0.1, and the 
frequency is 12 Hz.
(a)	 Find a function that models this motion.
(b)	 Graph the function.
y
x
0
2
_2
2π
3
π
3
_
CHAPTER 5
TEST
0
1
t
P
y
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

466
Fitting Sinusoidal Curves to Data
FOCUS ON MODELING
In previous Focus on Modeling sections, we learned how to fit linear, polynomial, ex-
ponential, and power models to data. Figure 1 shows some scatter plots of data. The 
scatter plots can help guide us in choosing an appropriate model. (Try to determine 
what type of function would best model the data in each graph.) If the scatter plot indi-
cates simple harmonic motion, then we might try to model the data with a sine or cosine 
function. The next example illustrates this process.
Figure 1
Example 1  ■  Modeling the Height of a Tide
The water depth in a narrow channel varies with the tides. Table 1 shows the water 
depth over a 12-h period. A scatter plot of the data is shown in Figure 2.
(a)	 Find a function that models the water depth with respect to time.
(b)	 If a boat needs at least 11 ft of water to cross the channel, during which times can 
it safely do so?
Table 1
Time
Depth (ft)
12:00 a.m.
  9.8
  1:00 a.m.
11.4
  2:00 a.m.
11.6
  3:00 a.m.
11.2
  4:00 a.m.
  9.6
  5:00 a.m.
  8.5
  6:00 a.m.
  6.5
  7:00 a.m.
  5.7
  8:00 a.m.
  5.4
  9:00 a.m.
  6.0
10:00 a.m.
  7.0
11:00 a.m.
  8.6
12:00 p.m.
10.0
Figure 2
12
y
9
6
3
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
t
(h)
(ft)
Solution
(a)	 The data appear to lie on a cosine (or sine) curve. But if we graph y  cos t  
on the same graph as the scatter plot, the result in Figure 3 is not even close to  
the data. To ﬁt the data, we need to adjust the vertical shift, amplitude, period, 
and phase shift of the cosine curve. In other words, we need to ﬁnd a function of 
the form
y a cos1v1t c22 b
	
We use the following steps, which are illustrated by the graphs in the margin on 
the next page.
12
y
9
6
3
2
4
6
8
10
0
t
(h)
12
(ft)
y=cos t
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Sinusoidal Curves to Data  467
■  Adjust the Vertical Shift  The vertical shift b is the average of the maximum 
and minimum values:
 b vertical shift
 1
2
 # 1maximum value minimum value2
 1
2
 111.6 5.42 8.5
■  Adjust the amplitude  The amplitude a is half of the difference between the 
maximum and minimum values:
 a amplitude
 1
2
 # 1maximum value minimum value2
 1
2
 111.6 5.42 3.1
■  Adjust the period  The time between consecutive maximum and minimum 
values is half of one period. Thus
 2p
v period
  2 # 1time of maximum value time of minimum value2
  218 22 12
	
Thus v  2p/12  0.52.
■  Adjust the horizontal shift  Since the maximum value of the data occurs at 
approximately t  2.0, it represents a cosine curve shifted 2 h to the right. So
 c phase shift
  time of maximum value
  2.0
■  The model  We have shown that a function that models the tides over the 
given time period is given by
y 3.1 cos10.521t 2.022 8.5
	
A graph of the function and the scatter plot are shown in Figure 4. It appears that 
the model we found is a good approximation to the data.
12
y
9
6
3
2
4
6
8
10
0
t
(h)
12
(ft)
y=3.1 cosÓ0.52(t-2.0)Ô+8.5
Figure 4
12
y
9
6
3
2
4
6
8
10
0
t
(h)
12
(ft)
y= cos t+8.5
12
y
9
6
3
2
4
6
8
10
0
t
(h)
12
(ft)
y=3.1 cos t+8.5
12
y
9
6
3
2
4
6
8
10
0
t
(h)
12
(ft)
y=3.1 cos(0.52 t)+8.5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

468 
Focus on Modeling
(b)	 We need to solve the inequality y  11. We solve this inequality graphically  
by graphing y 3.1 cos 0.521t 2.02 8.5 and y  11 on the same graph. 
From the graph in Figure 5 we see the water depth is higher than 11 ft between  
t ^ 0.8 and t ^ 3.2. This corresponds to the times 12:48 a.m. to 3:12 a.m.
13
0
12
t ~ 3.2
t ~ 0.8
~
~
Figure 5

■
In Example 1 we used the scatter plot to guide us in ﬁnding a cosine curve that gives 
an approximate model of the data. Some graphing calculators are capable of ﬁnding a 
sine or cosine curve that best ﬁts a given set of data points. The method these calculators 
use is similar to the method of ﬁnding a line of best ﬁt, as explained on page 140.
Example 2  ■  Fitting a Sine Curve to Data
(a)	 Use a graphing device to ﬁnd the sine curve that best ﬁts the depth of water data 
in Table 1 on page 466.
(b)	 Compare your result to the model found in Example 1.
Solution
(a)	 Using the data in Table 1 and the SinReg command on the TI-83 calculator, we 
get a function of the form
y a sin1bt c2 d
	
where
a 3.1     b 0.53
c 0.55   d 8.42
	
So the sine function that best ﬁts the data is
y 3.1 sin10.53t 0.552 8.42
(b)	 To compare this with the function in Example 1, we change the sine function to a 
cosine function by using the reduction formula sin u cos1u p/22 .
 y 3.1 sin10.53t 0.552 8.42
  3.1 cos a 0.53t 0.55 p
2 b 8.42        Reduction formula
  3.1 cos10.53t 1.022 8.42
  3.1 cos10.531t 1.9222 8.42
        Factor 0.53
Comparing this with the function we obtained in Example 1, we see that there are 
small differences in the coefﬁcients. In Figure 6 we graph a scatter plot of the  
data together with the sine function of best ﬁt.
■
In Example 1 we estimated the values of the amplitude, period, and shifts from the 
data. In Example 2 the calculator computed the sine curve that best ﬁts the data (that is, 
the curve that deviates least from the data as explained on page 140). The different ways 
of obtaining the model account for the differences in the functions.
For the TI-83 and TI-84 the command 
SinReg (for sine regression) ﬁnds the 
sine curve that best ﬁts the given data.
SinReg
y=a*sin(bx+c)+d
a=3.097877596
b=.5268322697
c=.5493035195
d=8.424021899
Output of the SinReg function  
on the TI-83.
12
y
9
6
3
2
4
6
8
10
0
t
(h)
12
(ft)
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Fitting Sinusoidal Curves to Data  469
Problems
1–4  ■  Modeling Periodic Data    A set of data is given.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find a cosine function of the form y a cos1v1t c22 b that models the data,  
as in Example 1.
(c)	 Graph the function you found in part (b) together with the scatter plot. How well does the 
curve ﬁt the data?
(d)	 Use a graphing calculator to ﬁnd the sine function that best ﬁts the data, as in  
Example 2.
(e)	 Compare the functions you found in parts (b) and (d). [Use the reduction formula 
sin u cos1u p/22 .]
1. 
t
y
  0
2.1
  2
1.1
  4
0.8
  6
2.1
  8
1.3
10
0.6
12
1.9
14
1.5
 
 
2. 
t
y
    0
190
  25
175
  50
155
  75
125
100
110
125
  95
150
105
175
120
200
140
225
165
250
185
275
200
300
195
325
185
350
165
 
 
3. 
t
y
0.1
21.1
0.2
23.6
0.3
24.5
0.4
21.7
0.5
17.5
0.6
12.0
0.7
5.6
0.8
2.2
0.9
1.0
1.0
3.5
1.1
7.6
1.2
13.2
1.3
18.4
1.4
23.0
1.5
25.1
 
 
4. 
t
y
0.0
0.56
0.5
0.45
1.0
0.29
1.5
0.13
2.0
0.05
2.5
0.10
3.0
0.02
3.5
0.12
4.0
0.26
4.5
0.43
5.0
0.54
5.5
0.63
6.0
0.59
	 5.	 Circadian Rhythms    Circadian rhythm (from the Latin circa—about, and diem—day) is 
the daily biological pattern by which body temperature, blood pressure, and other physio-
logical variables change. The data in the table below show typical changes in human body 
temperature over a 24-h period (t  0 corresponds to midnight).
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find a cosine curve that models the data (as in Example 1).
(c)	 Graph the function you found in part (b) together with the scatter plot.
(d)	 Use a graphing calculator to ﬁnd the sine curve that best ﬁts the data (as in  
Example 2).
Time
Body  
temperature (°C)
Time
Body  
temperature (°C)
  0
36.8
14
37.3
  2
36.7
16
37.4
  4
36.6
18
37.3
  6
36.7
20
37.2
  8
36.8
22
37.0
10
37.0
24
36.8
12
37.2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470 
Focus on Modeling
	 6.	 Predator Population    When two species interact in a predator/prey relationship, the 
populations of both species tend to vary in a sinusoidal fashion. (See Discovery Project: 
Predator/Prey Models referenced on page 427). In a certain midwestern county, the main 
food source for barn owls consists of ﬁeld mice and other small mammals. The table gives 
the population of barn owls in this county every July 1 over a 12-year period.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find a sine curve that models the data (as in Example 1).
(c)	 Graph the function you found in part (b) together with the scatter plot.
(d)	 Use a graphing calculator to ﬁnd the sine curve that best ﬁts the data (as in  
Example 2). Compare to your answer from part (b).
	 7.	 Salmon Survival    For reasons that are not yet fully understood, the number of ﬁngerling 
salmon that survive the trip from their riverbed spawning grounds to the open ocean varies 
approximately sinusoidally from year to year. The table shows the number of salmon that 
hatch in a certain British Columbia creek and then make their way to the Strait of Georgia. 
The data are given in thousands of ﬁngerlings, over a period of 16 years.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find a sine curve that models the data (as in Example 1).
(c)	 Graph the function you found in part (b) together with the scatter plot.
(d)	 Use a graphing calculator to ﬁnd the sine curve that best ﬁts the data (as in  
Example 2). Compare to your answer from part (b).
Year
Salmon (3 1000)
Year
Salmon (3 1000)
1985
43
1993
56
1986
36
1994
63
1987
27
1995
57
1988
23
1996
50
1989
26
1997
44
1990
33
1998
38
1991
43
1999
30
1992
50
2000
22
	 8.	 Sunspot Activity    Sunspots are relatively “cool” regions on the sun that appear as dark 
spots when observed through special solar ﬁlters. The number of sunspots varies in an  
11-year cycle. The table gives the average daily sunspot count for the years 1968–2012.
(a)	 Make a scatter plot of the data.
(b)	 Find a cosine curve that models the data (as in Example 1).
(c)	 Graph the function you found in part (b) together with the scatter plot.
(d)	 Use a graphing calculator to ﬁnd the sine curve that best ﬁts the data (as in Exam-
ple 2). Compare to your answer in part (b).
Year
Sunspots
Year
Sunspots
Year
Sunspots
Year
Sunspots
1968
106
1980
154
1991
145
2002
104
1969
105
1981
140
1992
  94
2003
  63
1970
104
1982
115
1993
  54
2004
  40
1971
  67
1983
  66
1994
  29
2005
  30
1972
  69
1984
  45
1995
  17
2006
  15
1973
  38
1985
  17
1996
    8
2007
    7
1974
  34
1986
  13
1997
  21
2008
    3
1975
  15
1987
  29
1998
  64
2009
    3
1976
  12
1988
100
1999
  93
2010
  16
1977
  27
1989
157
2000
119
2011
  56
1978
  92
1990
142
2001
111
2012
  58
1979
155
Source: Solar Influence Data Analysis Center, Belgium
Year
Owl population
  0
50
  1
62
  2
73
  3
80
  4
71
  5
60
  6
51
  7
43
  8
29
  9
20
10
28
11
41
12
49
Science Source
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Suppose we want to find the distance from the earth to the sun. Using a 
tape measure is obviously impractical, so we need something other than 
simple measurements to tackle this problem. Angles are easier to measure 
than distances. For example, we can find the angle formed by the sun, 
earth, and moon by simply pointing to the sun with one arm and to the 
moon with the other and estimating the angle between them. The key idea 
is to find relationships between angles and distances. So if we had a way 
of determining distances from angles, we would be able to find the 
distance to the sun without having to go there. The trigonometric functions 
that we study in this chapter provide us with just the tools we need. 
The trigonometric functions can be defined in two different but 
equivalent ways: as functions of real numbers (Chapter 5) or as functions 
of angles (Chapter 6). The two approaches are independent of each other, 
so either Chapter 5 or Chapter 6 may be studied first. We study both 
approaches because the different approaches are required for different 
applications.
471
Trigonometric Functions: 
Right Triangle Approach
6
6.1	 Angle Measure
6.2	 Trigonometry of Right 
Triangles
6.3	 Trigonometric Functions  
of Angles
6.4	 Inverse Trigonometric 
Functions and Right 
Triangles
6.5	 The Law of Sines
6.6	 The Law of Cosines
Focus on Modeling 
	
Surveying
john pacetti/Alamy
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

472 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
6.1 
Angle Measure
■  Angle Measure  ■  Angles in Standard Position  ■  Length of a Circular Arc   
■  Area of a Circular Sector  ■  Circular Motion
An angle AOB consists of two rays R1 and R2 with a common vertex O (see Figure 1). 
We often interpret an angle as a rotation of the ray R1 onto R2. In this case R1 is called 
the initial side, and R2 is called the terminal side of the angle. If the rota­tion is coun-
terclockwise, the angle is considered positive, and if the rotation is clock­wise, the angle 
is considered negative.
R⁄
R¤
terminal
side
Positive angle
initial side
A
B
O
R⁄
R¤
Negative angle
terminal side
initial side
A
B
O
Figure 1
■  Angle Measure
The measure of an angle is the amount of rotation about the vertex required to move R1 
onto R2. Intuitively, this is how much the angle “opens.” One unit of measurement for 
angles is the degree. An angle of measure 1 degree is formed by rotating the initial side 
1
360 of a complete revolution. In calculus and other branches of mathematics a more 
natural method of measuring angles is used: radian measure. The amount an angle opens 
is measured along the arc of a circle of radius 1 with its center at the vertex of the angle.
Definition of Radian Measure
If a circle of radius 1 is drawn with the vertex of an angle at its center, then the 
measure of this angle in radians (abbreviated rad) is the length of the arc that 
subtends the angle (see Figure 2).
The circumference of the circle of radius 1 is 2p, so a complete revolution has mea-
sure 2p rad, a straight angle has measure p rad, and a right angle has measure p/2 rad. 
An angle that is subtended by an arc of length 2 along the unit circle has radian measure 
2 (see Figure 3).
O
1
π rad
O
1
2 rad
1
1
O
1
rad
π
2
O
1
1 rad
Figure 3  Radian measure
Since a complete revolution measured in degrees is 360 and measured in radians is  
2p rad, we get the following simple relationship between these two methods of angle 
measurement.
¨
Radian
measure
of ¨
1
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.1  ■  Angle Measure  473
Relationship between Degrees and Radians
180° p rad  1 rad a 180
p b
°  1° p
180
  rad
1.	 To convert degrees to radians, multiply by p
180.
2.	 To convert radians to degrees, multiply by 180
p .
To get some idea of the size of a radian, notice that
1 rad 57.296°  and  1° 0.01745 rad
An angle u of measure 1 rad is shown in Figure 4.
Example 1  ■  Converting Between Radians and Degrees
(a)	 Express 60 in radians.          (b)  Express p
6  rad in degrees.
Solution    The relationship between degrees and radians gives
(a)	 60° 60a p
180 b  rad p
3
  rad
         
(b)  p
6
  rad a p
6 b a 180
p b 30°
Now Try Exercises 5 and 17	
■
A note on terminology: We often use a phrase such as “a 30 angle” to mean an 
angle whose measure is 30. Also, for an angle u we write u  30 or u  p/6 to mean 
the measure of u is 30 or p/6 rad. When no unit is given, the angle is assumed to be 
measured in radians.
■  Angles in Standard Position
An angle is in standard position if it is drawn in the xy-plane with its vertex at the 
origin and its initial side on the positive x-axis. Figure 5 gives examples of angles in 
standard position.
y
x
0
(a)
y
x
0
(b)
y
x
0
(d)
y
x
0
(c)
Figure 5  Angles in standard position
Two angles in standard position are coterminal if their sides coincide. In Figure 5 
the angles in (a) and (c) are coterminal.
Example 2  ■  Coterminal Angles
(a)	 Find angles that are coterminal with the angle u  30 in standard position.
(b)	 Find angles that are coterminal with the angle u p
3  in standard position.
¨
1
1
Measure of ¨=1 rad
Measure of ¨Å57.296*
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

474 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Solution
(a)	 To ﬁnd positive angles that are coterminal with u, we add any multiple of 360. 
Thus
30° 360° 390°  and  30° 720° 750°
	 	 are coterminal with u  30. To ﬁnd negative angles that are coterminal with u, 
we subtract any multiple of 360. Thus
30° 360° 330°  and  30° 720° 690°
	 	 are coterminal with u. (See Figure 6.)
y
x
0
_330*
y
x
0
390*
y
x
0
30*
Figure 6
(b)	 To ﬁnd positive angles that are coterminal with u, we add any multiple of 2p. 
Thus
p
3 2p 7p
3   and  p
3 4p 13p
3
	 	 are coterminal with u  p/3. To ﬁnd negative angles that are coterminal with u, 
we subtract any multiple of 2p. Thus
p
3 2p  5p
3   and  p
3 4p  11p
3
	 	 are coterminal with u. (See Figure 7.)
y
x
0
5π
3
_
7π
3
y
x
0
y
x
0
π
3
Figure 7
Now Try Exercises 29 and 31	
■
Example 3  ■  Coterminal Angles
Find an angle with measure between 0 and 360 that is coterminal with the angle of 
measure 1290 in standard position.
Solution    We can subtract 360 as many times as we wish from 1290, and the 
resulting angle will be coterminal with 1290. Thus 1290  360  930 is cotermi-
nal with 1290, and so is the angle 1290  2(360)  570.
To ﬁnd the angle we want between 0 and 360, we subtract 360 from 1290 as 
many times as necessary. An efﬁcient way to do this is to determine how many times 
360 goes into 1290, that is, divide 1290 by 360, and the remainder will be the angle 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.1  ■  Angle Measure  475
we are looking for. We see that 360 goes into 1290 three times with a remainder of 
210. Thus 210 is the desired angle (see Figure 8).
y
x
0
210*
y
x
0
1290*
Figure 8
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
■  Length of a Circular Arc
An angle whose radian measure is u is subtended by an arc that is the fraction u/12p2  
of the circumference of a circle. Thus in a circle of radius r the length s of an arc that 
subtends the angle u (see Figure 9) is
 s u
2p circumference of circle
  u
2p
  12pr2 ur
Length of a Circular Arc
In a circle of radius r the length s of an arc that subtends a central angle of  
u radians is
s r u
Solving for u, we get the important formula
u s
r
This formula allows us to deﬁne radian measure using a circle of any radius r: The ra-
dian measure of an angle u is s/r, where s is the length of the circular arc that subtends 
u in a circle of radius r (see Figure 10).
2 rad
r
r
r
1 rad
r
r
Figure 10  The radian measure of u is 
the number of “radiuses” that can ﬁt in 
the arc that subtends u; hence the term 
radian.
Example 4  ■  Arc Length and Angle Measure
(a)	 Find the length of an arc of a circle with radius 10 m that subtends a central 
angle of 30.
(b)	 A central angle u in a circle of radius 4 m is subtended by an arc of length 6 m. 
Find the measure of u in radians.
¨
s
r
Figure 9  s  ur
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

476 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Solution
(a)	 From Example 1(b) we see that 30  p/6 rad. So the length of the arc is
s r u 1102 p
6 5p
3
  m
(b)	 By the formula u  s/r we have
u s
r 6
4 3
2
  rad
Now Try Exercises 57 and 59	
■
■  Area of a Circular Sector
The area of a circle of radius r is A  pr 2. A sector of this circle with central angle u 
has an area that is the fraction u/12p2  of the area of the entire circle (see Figure 11). 
So the area of this sector is
 A u
2p area of circle
  u
2p 1pr 22 1
2
 r 2u
Area of a Circular Sector
In a circle of radius r the area A of a sector with a central angle of u radians is
A 1
2
 r2u
Example 5  ■  Area of a Sector
Find the area of a sector of a circle with central angle 60 if the radius of the circle  
is 3 m.
Solution    To use the formula for the area of a circular sector, we must ﬁnd the cen-
tral angle of the sector in radians: 60° 601p/1802 rad p/3 rad. Thus the area of 
the sector is
A 1
2
 r2u 1
2
 132 2 a p
3 b 3p
2
  m2
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
■  Circular Motion
Suppose a point moves along a circle as shown in Figure 12. There are two ways 
to describe the motion of the point: linear speed and angular speed. Linear speed is the 
rate at which the distance traveled is changing, so linear speed is the distance traveled 
divided by the time elapsed. Angular speed is the rate at which the central angle u is 
changing, so angular speed is the number of radians this angle changes divided by the 
time elapsed.
  The formula s  ru is true only 
when u is measured in radians.
  The formula A 1
2 r2u is true only 
when u is measured in radians.
¨
r
A
Figure 11   
A 1
2 r2u
¨
s
r
Figure 12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.1  ■  Angle Measure  477
Linear Speed and Angular Speed
Suppose a point moves along a circle of radius r and the ray from the center of 
the circle to the point traverses u radians in time t. Let s  ru be the distance 
the point travels in time t. Then the speed of the object is given by
Angular speed	
 v u
t
Linear speed	
 √s
t
Example 6  ■  Finding Linear and Angular Speed
A boy rotates a stone in a 3-ft-long sling at the rate of 15 revolutions every 10 sec-
onds. Find the angular and linear velocities of the stone.
Solution    In 10 s the angle u changes by 15 # 2p 30p rad. So the angular speed 
of the stone is
v u
t 30p rad
10 s
3p rad/s
The distance traveled by the stone in 10 s is s  15  2pr  15  2p  3  90p ft. So 
the linear speed of the stone is
√s
t 90p ft
10 s
9p ft/s
Now Try Exercise 85	
■
Notice that angular speed does not depend on the radius of the circle; it depends only 
on the angle u. However, if we know the angular speed v and the radius r, we can ﬁnd 
linear speed as follows: √s/t ru/t r1u/t2 rv.
Relationship between Linear and Angular Speed
If a point moves along a circle of radius r with angular speed v, then its linear 
speed √ is given by
√rv
Example 7  ■  Finding Linear Speed from Angular Speed
A woman is riding a bicycle whose wheels are 26 in. in diameter. If the wheels rotate 
at 125 revolutions per minute (rpm), ﬁnd the speed (in mi/h) at which she is traveling.
Solution    The angular speed of the wheels is 2p # 125 250p rad/min. Since the 
wheels have radius 13 in. (half the diameter), the linear speed is
√rv 13 # 250p 10,210.2 in./min
Since there are 12 inches per foot, 5280 feet per mile, and 60 minutes per hour, her 
speed in miles per hour is
 10,210.2 in./min 60 min/h
12 in./ft 5280 ft/mi
612,612 in./h
63,360 in./mi
  9.7 mi/h
Now Try Exercise 87	
■
The symbol v is the Greek letter 
“omega.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

478 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Concepts
	 1.	 (a)	 The radian measure of an angle u is the length of the
	 	 	
 
 that subtends the angle in a circle of radius 
	 	 	
 
  .
	 	 (b)	 To convert degrees to radians, we multiply by  
  .
	 	 (c)	 To convert radians to degrees, we multiply by  
  .
	 2.	 A central angle u is drawn in a circle of radius r, as in the 
figure below.
	 	 (a)	 The length of the arc subtended by u is s 
 
  .
	 	 (b)	 The area of the sector with central angle u is 
	 	 	
A 
 
  .
¨
r
s
A
	 3.	 Suppose a point moves along a circle with radius r as shown 
in the figure below. The point travels a distance s along the 
circle in time t. 
(a)	 The angular speed of the point is v   
     .
(b)	 The linear speed of the point is √     
  .
(c)	 The linear speed √ and the angular speed v are related by 
the equation √ 
  .
¨
s
r
	 4.	 Object A is traveling along a circle of radius 2, and Object B 
is traveling along a circle of radius 5. The objects have the 
same angular speed. Do the objects have the same linear 
speed? If not, which object has the greater linear speed?
Skills
5–16  ■  From Degrees to Radians    Find the radian measure of 
the angle with the given degree measure. Round your answer to 
three decimal places.
	 5.	 15	
  6.	 36	
  7.	 54	
  8.	 75
	 9.	 45	
10.	 30	
11.	 100	
12.	 200
	13.	 1000	
14.	 3600	
15.	 70	
16.	 150
17–28  ■  From Radians to Degrees    Find the degree measure of 
the angle with the given radian measure.
	17.	 5p
3 	
18.	 3p
4 	
19.	 5p
6
	20.	  3p
2 	
21.	 3	
22.	 2
	23.	 1.2	
24.	 3.4	
25.	 p
10
	26.	 5p
18 	
27.	  2p
15 	
28.	  13p
12
29–34  ■  Coterminal Angles    The measure of an angle in stan-
dard position is given. Find two positive angles and two negative 
angles that are coterminal with the given angle.
29.	 50	
30.	 135	
31.	 3p
4
	32.	 11p
6 	
33.	  p
4 	
34.	 45
35–40  ■  Coterminal Angles?    The measures of two angles in 
standard position are given. Determine whether the angles are 
coterminal.
35.	 70,    430	
36.	 30,    330
37.	 5p
6 , 17p
6 	
38.	 32p
3 , 11p
3
39.	 155,    875	
40.	 50,    340
41–46  ■  Finding a Coterminal Angle    Find an angle between 0 
and 360 that is coterminal with the given angle.
41.	 400°	
42.	 375°
	43.	 780°	
44.	 100
	45.	 800	
46.	 1270
47–52  ■  Finding a Coterminal Angle    Find an angle between 0 
and 2p that is coterminal with the given angle.
47.	 19p
6 	
48.	  5p
3 	
49.	 25p
	50.	 10	
51.	 17p
4 	
52.	 51p
2
53–62  ■  Circular Arcs    Find the length s of the circular arc, the 
radius r of the circle, or the central angle u, as indicated. 
53.	
9
s
5π
6
	
54.	
140*
5
s
6.1  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.1  ■  Angle Measure  479
55.	
¨
5
10 	
56.	
2 rad
r
8
57.	 Find the length s of the arc that subtends a central angle of 
measure 3 rad in a circle of radius 5 cm.
58.	 Find the length s of the arc that subtends a central angle of 
measure 40 in a circle of radius 12 m.
59.	 A central angle u in a circle of radius 9 m is subtended by  
an arc of length 14 m. Find the measure of u in degrees and 
radians.
60.	 An arc of length 15 ft subtends a central angle u in a circle 
of radius 9 ft. Find the measure of u in degrees and radians.
61.	 Find the radius r of the circle if an arc of length 15 m on the 
circle subtends a central angle of 5p/6.
62.	 Find the radius r of the circle if an arc of length 20 cm on the 
circle subtends a central angle of 50.
63–70  ■  Area of a Circular Sector     These exercises involve the 
formula for the area of a circular sector.
63.	 Find the area of the sector shown in each ﬁgure.
(a)	
80*
8
0.5 rad
10
64.	 Find the radius of each circle if the area of the sector  
is 12.
(a)	
0.7 rad
150*
65.	 Find the area of a sector with central angle 2p/3 rad in a  
circle of radius 10 m.
66.	 A sector of a circle has a central angle of 145. Find the area 
of the sector if the radius of the circle is 6 ft.
67.	 The area of a sector of a circle with a central angle of 140 is 
70 m2. Find the radius of the circle.
68.	 The area of a sector of a circle with a central angle of  
5p/12 rad is 20 m2. Find the radius of the circle.
69.	 A sector of a circle of radius 80 mi has an area of 1600 mi2. 
Find the central angle (in radians) of the sector.
70.	 The area of a circle is 600 m2. Find the area of a sector of 
this circle that subtends a central angle of 3 rad.
(b)
(b)
Skills Plus
71.	 Area of a Sector of a Circle    Three circles with radii 1, 2, and 
3 ft are externally tangent to one another, as shown in the 
ﬁgure. Find the area of the sector of the circle of radius 1 that 
is cut off by the line segments joining the center of that circle 
to the centers of the other two circles.
72.	 Comparing a Triangle and a Sector of a Circle    Two wood 
sticks and a metal rod, each of length 1, are connected to form 
a triangle with angle u1 at the point P, as shown in the first  
figure below. The rod is then bent to form an arc of a circle 
with center P, resulting in a smaller angle  u2 at the point P,  
as shown in the second figure. Find u1, u2, and u1 u2.
¨¤
¨⁄
P
1
1
1
P
1
1
1
73–74  ■  Clocks and Angles    In 1 h the minute hand on a clock 
moves through a complete circle, and the hour hand moves 
through 1
12 of a circle. 
12
1
2
3
6
9
10
4
5
7
8
11
12
1
2
3
6
10
4
5
7
8
11
9
12
1
2
3
6
9
10
4
5
7
8
11
73.	 Through how many radians do the minute hand and the hour 
hand move between 1:00 p.m. and 1:45 p.m. (on the same day)?
74.	 Through how many radians do the minute hand and the hour 
hand move between 1:00 p.m. and 6:45 p.m. (on the same day)?
Applications
75.	 Travel Distance    A car’s wheels are 28 in. in diameter. How 
far (in mi.) will the car travel if its wheels revolve 10,000 
times without slipping?
76.	 Wheel Revolutions    How many revolutions will a car wheel of 
diameter 30 in. make as the car travels a distance of one mile?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

480 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
77.	 Latitudes    Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Miami, Florida, lie 
approximately on the same meridian. Pittsburgh has a latitude 
of 40.5N, and Miami has a latitude of 25.5N. Find the dis-
tance between these two cities. (The radius of the earth is 
3960 mi.)
Pittsburgh
Miami
78.	 Latitudes    Memphis, Tennessee, and New Orleans, 
Louisiana, lie approximately on the same meridian. Memphis 
has a latitude of 35N, and New Orleans has a latitude of 
30N. Find the distance between these two cities. (The radius 
of the earth is 3960 mi.)
79.	 Orbit of the Earth    Find the distance that the earth travels in 
one day in its path around the sun. Assume that a year has 
365 days and that the path of the earth around the sun is a 
circle of radius 93 million miles.  [Note: The path of the 
earth around the sun is actually an ellipse with the sun at one 
focus (see Section 11.2). This ellipse, however, has very 
small eccentricity, so it is nearly circular.]
sun
80.	 Circumference of the Earth    The Greek mathematician  
Eratosthenes (ca. 276–195 b.c.) measured the circumference 
of the earth from the following observations. He noticed that 
on a certain day the sun shone directly down a deep well in 
Syene (modern Aswan). At the same time in Alexandria, 
500 miles north (on the same meridian), the rays of the sun 
shone at an angle of 7.2 to the zenith. Use this information 
and the ﬁgure to ﬁnd the radius and circumference of the 
earth.
Syene
Alexandria
Rays of sun
7.2*
500 mi
81.	 Nautical Miles    Find the distance along an arc on the surface 
of the earth that subtends a central angle of 1 minute 
11 minute 1
60  degree2 . This distance is called a nautical 
mile. (The radius of the earth is 3960 mi.)
82.	 Irrigation    An irrigation system uses a straight sprinkler pipe 
300 ft long that pivots around a central point as shown. 
Because of an obstacle the pipe is allowed to pivot through 
280 only. Find the area irrigated by this system.
280*
300 ft
83.	 Windshield Wipers    The top and bottom ends of a wind-
shield wiper blade are 34 in. and 14 in., respectively, from 
the pivot point. While in operation, the wiper sweeps through 
135. Find the area swept by the blade.
135*
34 in.
14 in.
84.	 The Tethered Cow    A cow is tethered by a 100-ft rope to the 
inside corner of an L-shaped building, as shown in the ﬁgure. 
Find the area that the cow can graze.
50 ft
60 ft
100 ft
50 ft
20 ft
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.1  ■  Angle Measure  481
85.	 Fan    A ceiling fan with 16-in. blades rotates at 45 rpm.
(a)	 Find the angular speed of the fan in rad/min.
(b)	 Find the linear speed of the tips of the blades in in./min.
86.	 Radial Saw    A radial saw has a blade with a 6-in. radius. 
Suppose that the blade spins at 1000 rpm.
(a)	 Find the angular speed of the blade in rad/min.
(b)	 Find the linear speed of the sawteeth in ft/s.
87.	 Winch    A winch of radius 2 ft is used to lift heavy loads.  
If the winch makes 8 revolutions every 15 s, ﬁnd the speed at 
which the load is rising.
88.	 Speed of a Car 
The wheels of a car have radius 11 in. and 
are rotating at 600 rpm. Find the speed of the car in mi/h.
89.	 Speed at the Equator 
The earth rotates about its axis once 
every 23 h 56 min 4 s, and the radius of the earth is 3960 mi. 
Find the linear speed of a point on the equator in mi/h.
90.	 Truck Wheels    A truck with 48-in.-diameter wheels is  
traveling at 50 mi/h.
(a)	 Find the angular speed of the wheels in rad/min.
(b)	 How many revolutions per minute do the wheels  
make?
91.	 Speed of a Current    To measure the speed of a current, scien-
tists place a paddle wheel in the stream and observe the rate 
at which it rotates. If the paddle wheel has radius 0.20 m and 
rotates at 100 rpm, ﬁnd the speed of the current in m/s.
92.	 Bicycle Wheel    The sprockets and chain of a bicycle are 
shown in the ﬁgure. The pedal sprocket has a radius of 4 in., 
the wheel sprocket a radius of 2 in., and the wheel a radius of 
13 in. The cyclist pedals at 40 rpm.
(a)	 Find the angular speed of the wheel sprocket.
(b)	 Find the speed of the bicycle. (Assume that the wheel 
turns at the same rate as the wheel sprocket.)
4 in.
2 in.
2 in.
13 in.
93.	 Conical Cup    A conical cup is made from a circular piece of 
paper with radius 6 cm by cutting out a sector and joining the 
edges as shown below. Suppose u  5p/3.
(a)	 Find the circumference C of the opening of the cup.
(b)	 Find the radius r of the opening of the cup.    [Hint: Use  
C  2pr.]
(c)	 Find the height h of the cup.    [Hint: Use the 
Pythagorean Theorem.]
(d)	 Find the volume of the cup.
6 cm
6 cm
6 cm
¨
h
r
94.	 Conical Cup    In this exercise we ﬁnd the volume of the coni-
cal cup in Exercise 93 for any angle u.
(a)	 Follow the steps in Exercise 93 to show that the volume 
of the cup as a function of u is
V1u2 9
p2
  u2"4p2 u2,  0 u 2p
(b)	 Graph the function V.
(c)	 For what angle u is the volume of the cup a maximum?
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
95.	 WRITE:  Different Ways of Measuring Angles    The custom of 
measuring angles using degrees, with 360 in a circle, dates 
back to the ancient Babylonians, who used a number system 
based on groups of 60. Another system of measuring angles 
divides the circle into 400 units, called grads. In this system 
a right angle is 100 grad, so this ﬁts in with our base 10 num-
ber system.
	 	     Write a short essay comparing the advantages and disad-
vantages of these two systems and the radian system of mea-
suring angles. Which system do you prefer? Why?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

482 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
6.2  Trigonometry of Right Triangles
■  Trigonometric Ratios  ■  Special Triangles; Calculators  ■  Applications of Trigonometry  
of Right Triangles
In this section we study certain ratios of the sides of right triangles, called trigonomet-
ric ratios, and give several applications.
■  Trigonometric Ratios
Consider a right triangle with u as one of its acute angles. The trigonometric ratios are 
deﬁned as follows (see Figure 1).
The Trigonometric Ratios
sin u 
opposite
hypotenuse   cos u 
adjacent
hypotenuse   tan u opposite
adjacent
csc u hypotenuse
opposite    sec u hypotenuse
adjacent    cot u adjacent
opposite
The symbols we use for these ratios are abbreviations for their full names: sine, cosine, 
tangent, cosecant, secant, cotangent. Since any two right triangles with angle u are 
similar, these ratios are the same, regardless of the size of the triangle; the trigonomet-
ric ratios depend only on the angle u (see Figure 2).
¨
4
3
5
ß ¨=3
5
¨
40
30
50
ß ¨=30
50
3
5
=
Figure 2
Example 1  ■  Finding Trigonometric Ratios
Find the six trigonometric ratios of the angle u in Figure 3.
Solution    By the definition of trigonometric ratios, we get
sin u 2
3   cos u !5
3    tan u 
2
!5
csc u 3
2   sec u 
3
!5   cot u !5
2
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Example 2  ■  Finding Trigonometric Ratios
If cos a 3
4, sketch a right triangle with acute angle a, and ﬁnd the other ﬁve trigo-
nometric ratios of a.
œ∑
3
2
¨
5
Figure 3
adjacent
opposite
hypotenuse
¨
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.2  ■  Trigonometry of Right Triangles  483
Solution    Since cos a is deﬁned as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse, 
we sketch a triangle with hypotenuse of length 4 and a side of length 3 adjacent to a. 
If the opposite side is x, then by the Pythagorean Theorem, 32 x2 42 or x2 7, 
so x !7. We then use the triangle in Figure 4 to ﬁnd the ratios.
sin a !7
4    cos a 3
4   tan a !7
3
csc a 
4
!7   sec a 4
3   cot a 
3
!7
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
■  Special Triangles; Calculators
There are special trigonometric ratios that can be calculated from certain triangles (which 
we call special triangles). We can also use a calculator to find trigonometric ratios.
Special Ratios    Certain right triangles have ratios that can be calculated easily from the 
Pythagorean Theorem. Since they are used frequently, we mention them here.
The ﬁrst triangle is obtained by drawing a diagonal in a square of side 1 (see  
Figure 5). By the Pythagorean Theorem this diagonal has length !2. The resulting 
triangle has angles 45, 45, and 90 (or p/4, p/4, and p/2). To get the second triangle, 
we start with an equilateral triangle ABC of side 2 and draw the perpendicular bisector 
DB of the base, as in Figure 6. By the Pythagorean Theorem the length of DB is !3. 
Since DB bisects angle ABC, we obtain a triangle with angles 30, 60, and 90 (or p/6, 
p/3, and p/2).
1
1
œ∑2
45*
45*
Figure 5
1
2
A
C
B
D
60*
œ∑3
30*
Figure 6
We can now use the special triangles in Figures 5 and 6 to calculate the trigonomet-
ric ratios for angles with measures 30, 45, and 60 (or p/6, p/4, and p/3). These are 
listed in the table below.
Special Values Of The Trigonometric Functions
The following values of the trigonometric functions are  
obtained from the special triangles. 
u in  
degrees
u in  
radians
sin u
cos u
tan u
csc u
sec u
cot u
0
0
0
1
0
—
1
—
30
p
6
1
2
!3
2
!3
3
2
2 !3
3
!3
45
p
4
!2
2
!2
2
1
!2
!2
1
60
p
3
!3
2
1
2
!3
2 !3
3
2
!3
3
90
p
2
1
0
—
1
—
0
1
1
œ∑2
45*
45*
1
2
60*
œ∑3
30*
Hipparchus (circa 140 b.c.) is consid-
ered the founder of trigonometry. He con-
structed tables for a function closely 
related to the modern sine function and 
evaluated for angles at half-degree inter-
vals. These are considered the ﬁrst trigo-
nometric tables. He used his tables mainly 
to calculate the paths of the planets 
through the heavens.
3
4
œ∑
å
7
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

484 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
It’s useful to remember these special trigonometric ratios because they occur often. 
Of course, they can be recalled easily if we remember the triangles from which they are 
obtained.
Using a Calculator    To ﬁnd the values of the trigonometric ratios for other angles, we use 
a calculator. Mathematical methods (called numerical methods) used in ﬁnding the trigo-
nometric ratios are programmed directly into scientiﬁc calculators. For instance, when the 
SIN  key is pressed, the calculator computes an approximation to the value of the sine of 
the given angle. Calculators give the values of sine, cosine, and tangent; the other ratios 
can be easily calculated from these by using the following reciprocal relations:
csc t 
1
sin t   sec t 
1
cos t   cot t 
1
tan t
You should check that these relations follow immediately from the deﬁnitions of the 
trigonometric ratios.
We follow the convention that when we write sin t, we mean the sine of the angle 
whose radian measure is t. For instance, sin 1 means the sine of the angle whose radian 
measure is 1. When using a calculator to ﬁnd an approximate value for this number, set 
your calculator to radian mode; you will ﬁnd that sin 1 0.841471. If you want to ﬁnd 
the sine of the angle whose measure is 1, set your calculator to degree mode; you will 
ﬁnd that sin 1° 0.0174524.
EXAMPLE 3  ■  Using a Calculator 
Using a calculator, find the following.
(a)	 tan 40      (b)  cos 20°      (c)  cot 14°      (d)  csc 80°
Solution    Making sure our calculator is set in degree mode and rounding the results 
to six decimal places, we get the following:
(a)	 tan 40° 0.839100	
(b)	 cos 20° 0.939693
(c)	 cot 14
1
tan 144.010781	
(d)	 csc 80
1
sin 801.015427
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
■  Applications of Trigonometry of Right Triangles
A triangle has six parts: three angles and three sides. To solve a triangle means to de-
termine all of its parts from the information known about the triangle, that is, to deter-
mine the lengths of the three sides and the measures of the three angles.
For an explanation of numerical meth-
ods, see the margin note on page 433.
Discovery Project
Similarity
Similarity of triangles is the basic concept underlying the definition of the  
trigonometric functions. The ratios of the sides of a triangle are the same as the 
corresponding ratios in any similar triangle. But the concept of similarity of  
figures applies to all shapes, not just triangles. In this project we explore how 
areas and volumes of similar figures are related. These relationships allow us to 
determine whether an ape the size of King Kong (that is, an ape similar to, but 
much larger than, a real ape) can actually exist. You can find the project at 
www.stewartmath.com.
Hulton Archive/Moviepix/Getty Images
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.2  ■  Trigonometry of Right Triangles  485
Example 4  ■  Solving a Right Triangle
Solve triangle ABC, shown in Figure 7.
Solution    It’s clear that B 60°. From Figure 7 we have
 sin 30° a
12
    Definition of sine
 a 12 sin 30°    Multiply by 12
 12A1
2B 6    Evaluate
Also from Figure 7 we have
 cos 30° b
12
    Definition of cosine
 b 12 cos 30
    Multiply by 12
 12a !3
2 b 6!3    Evaluate
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
Figure 8 shows that if we know the hypotenuse r and an acute angle u in a right 
triangle, then the legs a and b are given by
a r sin u  and  b r cos u
The ability to solve right triangles by using the trigonometric ratios is fundamental 
to many problems in navigation, surveying, astronomy, and the measurement of dis-
tances. The applications we consider in this section always involve right triangles, but 
as we will see in the next three sections, trigonometry is also useful in solving triangles 
that are not right triangles.
To discuss the next examples, we need some terminology. If an observer is looking 
at an object, then the line from the eye of the observer to the object is called the line of 
sight (Figure 9). If the object being observed is above the horizontal, then the angle 
between the line of sight and the horizontal is called the angle of elevation. If the object 
is below the horizontal, then the angle between the line of sight and the horizontal is 
called the angle of depression. In many of the examples and exercises in this chapter, 
angles of elevation and depression will be given for a hypothetical observer at ground 
level. If the line of sight follows a physical object, such as an inclined plane or a hill-
side, we use the term angle of inclination.
Angle of
elevation
Horizontal
Line of
sight
Angle of
depression
Horizontal
Line of
sight
Figure 9
The next example gives an important application of trigonometry to the problem of 
measurement: We measure the height of a tall tree without having to climb it! Although 
the example is simple, the result is fundamental to understanding how the trigonometric 
ratios are applied to such problems.
¨
a
r
b
Figure 8   
a  r sin u,  b  r cos u
30*
b
a
12
A
C
B
Figure 7
Aristarchus of Samos (310–230 
b.c.) was a famous Greek scientist, musi-
cian, astronomer, and geometer. He 
observed that the angle between the sun 
and moon can be measured directly (see 
the figure below). In his book On the Sizes 
and Distances of the Sun and the Moon he 
estimated the distance to the sun by 
observing that when the moon is exactly 
half full, the triangle formed by the sun, 
the moon, and the earth has a right 
angle at the moon. His method was simi-
lar to the one described in Exercise 67 in 
this section. Aristarchus was the ﬁrst to 
advance the theory that the earth and 
planets move around the sun, an idea 
that did not gain full acceptance until 
after the time of Copernicus, 1800 years 
later. For this reason Aristarchus is often 
called “the Copernicus of antiquity.”
¨
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

486 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Example 5  ■  Finding the Height of a Tree
A giant redwood tree casts a shadow 532 ft long. Find the height of the tree if the 
angle of elevation of the sun is 25.7.
Solution    Let the height of the tree be h. From Figure 10 we see that
 h
532 tan 25.7°
    Deﬁnition of tangent
 h 532 tan 25.7°
    Multiply by 532
  53210.481272 256    Use a calculator
Therefore the height of the tree is about 256 ft.
532 ft
h
25.7*
Figure 10
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
Example 6  ■  A Problem Involving Right Triangles
From a point on the ground 500 ft from the base of a building, an observer ﬁnds that 
the angle of elevation to the top of the building is 24 and that the angle of elevation 
to the top of a ﬂagpole atop the building is 27. Find the height of the building and 
the length of the ﬂagpole.
Solution    Figure 11 illustrates the situation. The height of the building is found in 
the same way that we found the height of the tree in Example 4.
 h
500 tan 24°
    Deﬁnition of tangent
 h 500 tan 24°
    Multiply by 500
  50010.44522 223    Use a calculator
The height of the building is approximately 223 ft.
To ﬁnd the length of the ﬂagpole, let’s ﬁrst ﬁnd the height from the ground to the 
top of the pole.
 k
500 tan 27°
    Deﬁnition of tangent
 k 500 tan 27°     Multiply by 500
 50010.50952    Use a calculator
 255
To ﬁnd the length of the ﬂagpole, we subtract h from k. So the length of the pole is 
approximately 255  223  32 ft.
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
Thales of Miletus (circa 625–547 b.c.) 
is the legendary founder of Greek geom-
etry. It is said that he calculated the 
height of a Greek column by comparing 
the length of the shadow of his staff with 
that of the column. Using properties of 
similar triangles, he argued that the ratio 
of the height h of the column to the 
height h of his staff was equal to the 
ratio of the length s of the column’s 
shadow to the length s of the staff’s 
shadow:
h
hr s
sr
Since three of these quantities are 
known, Thales was able to calculate the 
height of the column.
According to legend, Thales used a 
similar method to ﬁnd the height of the 
Great Pyramid in Egypt, a feat that 
impressed Egypt’s king. Plutarch wrote 
that “although he [the king of Egypt] 
admired you [Thales] for other things, yet 
he particularly liked the manner by which 
you measured the height of the pyramid 
without any trouble or instrument.”  The 
principle Thales used, the fact that ratios 
of corresponding sides of similar triangles 
are equal, is the foundation of the subject 
of trigonometry.
500 ft
h
k
24*
27*
Figure 11
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.2  ■  Trigonometry of Right Triangles  487
Concepts
	 1.	 A right triangle with an angle u is shown in the figure.
¨
(a)	 Label the “opposite” and “adjacent” sides of u and the 
hypotenuse of the triangle.
(b)	 The trigonometric functions of the angle u are defined as 
follows:
sin u              
     
        cos u              
     
        tan u              
     
(c)	 The trigonometric ratios do not depend on the size of the 
triangle. This is because all right triangles with the same 
	
acute angle u are  
  . 
	 2.	 The reciprocal identities state that 
csc u 
1
                sec u 
1
                cot u 
1
        
Skills
3–8  ■  Trigonometric Ratios    Find the exact values of the six 
trigonometric ratios of the angle u in the triangle.
	 3.	
4
¨
5
3
	
4.	
24
¨
25
7
	 5.	
41
¨
40
	
6.	
¨
15
8
	 7.	
3
2
¨
	 8.	
8
7
¨
9–10  ■  Trigonometric Ratios    Find (a) sin a and cos b,  
(b) tan a and cot b, and (c) sec a and csc b.
	 9.	
∫
5
3
å
	
10.	
7
4
∫
å
11–14  ■  Using a Calculator    Use a calculator to evaluate the 
expression. Round your answer to five decimal places.
11.	 (a)  sin 22°	
(b)	 cot 23°
12.	 (a)  cos 37°	
(b)	 csc 48°
13.	 (a)  sec 13°	
(b)	 tan 51°
14.	 (a)  csc 10°	
(b)	 sin 46°
15–20  ■  Finding an Unknown Side    Find the side labeled x. In 
Exercises 17 and 18 state your answer rounded to ﬁve decimal 
places.
	15.	
30*
25
x
	
16.	
12
x
45*
17.	
13
x
60*
	 18.	
30*
4
x
19.	
36*
12
x
	 20.	
53*
25
x
21–22  ■  Trigonometric Ratios    Express x and y in terms of trig-
onometric ratios of u.
21.	
¨
28
x
y
	
22.	
¨
4
x
y
23–28  ■  Trigonometric Ratios    Sketch a triangle that has acute 
angle u, and ﬁnd the other ﬁve trigonometric ratios of u.
23.	 tan u 5
6	
24.	 cos u 12
13	
25.	 cot u  1
	26.	 tan u !3	
27.	 csc u 11
6 	
28.	 cot u 5
3
6.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

488 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
29–36  ■  Evaluating an Expression    Evaluate the expression 
without using a calculator.
29.	 sin p
6 cos p
6
	30.	 sin 30 csc 30
31.	 sin 30°  cos 60° sin 60° cos 30°
32.	 1sin 60°2 2 1cos 60°2 2
33.	 1cos 30°2 2 1sin 30°2 2
34.	 a sin p
3
  cos p
4 sin p
4
  cos p
3 b
2
35.	 acos p
4 sin p
6 b
2
	
36.	 asin p
3 tan p
6 csc p
4 b
2
37–44  ■  Solving a Right Triangle    Solve the right triangle.
37.	
16
45*
	
38.	
100
75*
39.	
35
52*
	
40.	
1000
68˚
41.	
33.5
π
8
	
42.	
72.3
π
6
43.	
106
π
5
	
44.	
425
3π
8
Skills Plus
45.	 Using a Ruler to Estimate Trigonometric Ratios    Use a ruler to 
carefully measure the sides of the triangle, and then use your 
measurements to estimate the six trigonometric ratios of u.
¨
46.	 Using a Protractor to Estimate Trigonometric Ratios    Using a 
protractor, sketch a right triangle that has the acute angle 40. 
Measure the sides carefully, and use your results to estimate 
the six trigonometric ratios of 40.
47–50  ■  Finding an Unknown Side    Find x rounded to one deci-
mal place.
47.	
60*
30*
100
x
48.	
60*
30*
85
x
49.	
60*
65*
50
x
	
50.	
30*
5
x
51.	 Trigonometric Ratios    Express the length x in terms of the 
trigonometric ratios of u.
10
¨
x
52.	 Trigonometric Ratios    Express the lengths a, b, c, and d in 
the ﬁgure in terms of the trigonometric ratios of u.
1
¨
a
b
d
c
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.2  ■  Trigonometry of Right Triangles  489
Applications
53.	 Height of a Building    The angle of elevation to the top of the 
Empire State Building in New York is found to be 11 from 
the ground at a distance of 1 mi from the base of the build-
ing. Using this information, ﬁnd the height of the Empire 
State Building.
54.	 Gateway Arch    A plane is ﬂying within sight of the  
Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri, at an elevation of 
35,000 ft. The pilot would like to estimate her distance  
from the Gateway Arch. She ﬁnds that the angle of  
depression to a point on the ground below the arch  
is 22.
(a)	 What is the distance between the plane and the  
arch?
(b)	 What is the distance between a point on the ground  
directly below the plane and the arch?
55.	 Deviation of a Laser Beam    A laser beam is to be directed 
toward the center of the moon, but the beam strays 0.5 from 
its intended path.
(a)	 How far has the beam diverged from its assigned target 
when it reaches the moon? (The distance from the earth 
to the moon is 240,000 mi.)
(b)	 The radius of the moon is about 1000 mi. Will the beam 
strike the moon?
56.	 Distance at Sea    From the top of a 200-ft lighthouse, the 
angle of depression to a ship in the ocean is 23. How far is 
the ship from the base of the lighthouse?
57.	 Leaning Ladder    A 20-ft ladder leans against a building so 
that the angle between the ground and the ladder is 72. How 
high does the ladder reach on the building?
58.	 Height of a Tower    A 600-ft guy wire is attached to the  
top of a communications tower. If the wire makes an angle  
of 65 with the ground, how tall is the communications  
tower?
59.	 Elevation of a Kite    A man is lying on the beach, ﬂying  
a kite. He holds the end of the kite string at ground level  
and estimates the angle of elevation of the kite to be 50.  
If the string is 450 ft long, how high is the kite above the 
ground?
60.	 Determining a Distance    A woman standing on a hill sees  
a ﬂagpole that she knows is 60 ft tall. The angle of depres-
sion to the bottom of the pole is 14, and the angle of eleva-
tion to the top of the pole is 18. Find her distance x from 
the pole.
x
18*
14*
61.	 Height of a Tower    A water tower is located 325 ft from a 
building (see the ﬁgure). From a window in the building, an 
observer notes that the angle of elevation to the top of the 
tower is 39 and that the angle of depression to the bottom of 
the tower is 25. How tall is the tower? How high is the 
window?
39*
25*
325 ft
62.	 Determining a Distance    An airplane is ﬂying at an elevation 
of 5150 ft, directly above a straight highway. Two motorists 
are driving cars on the highway on opposite sides of the 
plane. The angle of depression to one car is 35, and that to 
the other is 52. How far apart are the cars?
63.	 Determining a Distance    If both cars in Exercise 62 are on 
one side of the plane and if the angle of depression to one car 
is 38 and that to the other car is 52, how far apart are the 
cars?
64.	 Height of a Balloon    A hot-air balloon is ﬂoating above a 
straight road. To estimate their height above the ground, the 
balloonists simultaneously measure the angle of depression to 
two consecutive mileposts on the road on the same side of 
the balloon. The angles of depression are found to be 20 and 
22. How high is the balloon?
65.	 Height of a Mountain    To estimate the height of a  
mountain above a level plain, the angle of elevation to the 
top of the mountain is measured to be 32. One thousand 
feet closer to the mountain along the plain, it is found that 
the angle of elevation is 35. Estimate the height of the 
mountain.
66.	 Height of Cloud Cover    To measure the height of the cloud 
cover at an airport, a worker shines a spotlight upward at an 
angle 75 from the horizontal. An observer 600 m away mea-
sures the angle of elevation to the spot of light to be 45. Find 
the height h of the cloud cover.
45*
75*
600 m
h
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

490 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
67.	 Distance to the Sun    When the moon is exactly half full, the 
earth, moon, and sun form a right angle (see the ﬁgure). At 
that time the angle formed by the sun, earth, and moon is 
measured to be 89.85. If the distance from the earth to the 
moon is 240,000 mi, estimate the distance from the earth to 
the sun.
sun
earth
moon
68.	 Distance to the Moon    To ﬁnd the distance to the sun  
as in Exercise 67, we needed to know the distance to the 
moon. Here is a way to estimate that distance: When the  
moon is seen at its zenith at a point A on the earth, it is 
observed to be at the horizon from point B (see the following 
ﬁgure). Points A and B are 6155 mi apart, and the radius of 
the earth is 3960 mi.
(a)	 Find the angle u in degrees.
(b)	 Estimate the distance from point A to the moon.
A
B
6155 mi
¨
earth
moon
69.	 Radius of the Earth    In Exercise 80 of Section 6.1 a method 
was given for ﬁnding the radius of the earth. Here is a more 
modern method: From a satellite 600 mi above the earth it is 
observed that the angle formed by the vertical and the line of 
sight to the horizon is 60.276. Use this information to ﬁnd 
the radius of the earth.
60.276*
70.	 Parallax    To ﬁnd the distance to nearby stars, the method of 
parallax is used. The idea is to ﬁnd a triangle with the star at 
one vertex and with a base as large as possible. To do this, 
the star is observed at two different times exactly 6 months 
apart, and its apparent change in position is recorded. From 
these two observations E1SE2 can be calculated. (The  
times are chosen so that E1SE2 is as large as possible, 
which guarantees that E1OS is 90.) The angle E1SO is 
called the parallax of the star. Alpha Centauri, the star near-
est the earth, has a parallax of 0.000211. Estimate the dis-
tance to this star. (Take the distance from the earth to the sun 
to be 9.3  107 mi.)
0.000211*
O
S
E2
E1
71.	 Distance from Venus to the Sun    The elongation a of a 
planet is the angle formed by the planet, earth, and sun  
(see the ﬁgure). When Venus achieves its maximum  
elongation of 46.3, the earth, Venus, and the sun form a  
triangle with a right angle at Venus. Find the distance 
between Venus and the sun in astronomical units (AU).  
(By deﬁnition the distance between the earth and the sun  
is 1 AU.)
Venus
å
earth
1 AU
sun
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
72.	 DISCUSS:  Similar Triangles    If two triangles are similar, 
what properties do they share? Explain how these properties 
make it possible to deﬁne the trigonometric ratios without 
regard to the size of the triangle.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.3  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Angles  491
6.3  Trigonometric Functions of Angles
■  Trigonometric Functions of Angles  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions at Any Angle   
■  Trigonometric Identities  ■  Areas of Triangles
In Section 6.2 we deﬁned the trigonometric ratios for acute angles. Here we extend the 
trigonometric ratios to all angles by deﬁning the trigonometric functions of angles. With 
these functions we can solve practical problems that involve angles that are not neces-
sarily acute.
■  Trigonometric Functions of Angles
Let POQ be a right triangle with acute angle u as shown in Figure 1(a). Place u in stan-
dard position as shown in Figure 1(b).
y
x
O
Q
P(x, y)
¨
y
x
r
O
Q
P
¨
opposite
adjacent
hypotenuse
(a)
(b)
Figure 1
Then P P1x, y2  is a point on the terminal side of u. In triangle POQ the opposite side 
has length y and the adjacent side has length x. Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we see
that the hypotenuse has length r "x2 y2. So
sin u y
r   cos u x
r   tan u y
x
The other trigonometric ratios can be found in the same way.
These observations allow us to extend the trigonometric ratios to any angle. We 
deﬁne the trigonometric functions of angles as follows (see Figure 2).
Definition of the Trigonometric Functions
Let u be an angle in standard position, and let P1x, y2  be a point on the terminal 
side. If r "x2 y2 is the distance from the origin to the point P1x, y2 , then
sin u y
r
   
cos u x
r
   
tan u y
x 1x ? 02
csc u r
y 1 y ? 02   
sec u r
x 1x ? 02   
cot u x
y 1 y ? 02
Since division by 0 is an undeﬁned operation, certain trigonometric functions are not 
deﬁned for certain angles. For example, tan 90y/x is undeﬁned because x  0. The 
angles for which the trigonometric functions may be undeﬁned are the angles for which 
P(x, y)
y
x
0
¨
r
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

492 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
You may have already studied the trigonometric 
functions deﬁned by using the unit circle (Chap­
ter 5). To see how they relate to the trigonometric 
functions of an angle, let’s start with the unit circle in 
the coordinate plane.
0
1
P(x, y)
t
P(x, y) is the terminal
point determined by t.
y
x
Let P 1x, y2  be the terminal point determined by an 
arc of length t on the unit circle. Then t subtends an 
angle u at the center of the circle. If we drop a per-
pendicular from P onto the point Q on the x-axis, 
then triangle nOPQ is a right triangle with legs of 
length x and y, as shown in the ﬁgure.
O
Q
1
P(x, y)
¨
x
y
r
Triangle OPQ is
a right triangle.
x
y
Now, by the deﬁnition of the trigonometric func-
tions of the real number t we have
sin t y
cos t x
By the deﬁnition of the trigonometric functions of 
the angle u we have
 sin u opp
hyp y
1 y
 cos u adj
hyp x
1 x
If u is measured in radians, then u  t. (See the 
ﬁgure below.) Comparing the two ways of deﬁning 
the trigonometric functions, we see that they are 
identical. In other words, as functions they assign 
identical values to a given real number. (The real 
number is the radian measure of u in one case or the 
length t of an arc in the other.)
0
1
P(x, y)
t
¨
The radian measure
of angle ¨ is t.
y
x
Why then do we study trigonometry in two differ-
ent ways? Because different applications require that 
we view the trigonometric functions differently. (See 
Focus on Modeling, pages 466, 533, and 581, and 
Sections 6.2, 6.5, and 6.6.)
Relationship to the Trigonometric  
Functions of Real Numbers
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.3  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Angles  493
either the x- or y-coordinate of a point on the terminal side of the angle is 0. These are 
quadrantal angles—angles that are coterminal with the coordinate axes.
It is a crucial fact that the values of the trigonometric functions do not depend on the 
choice of the point P1x, y2 . This is because if Pr1xr, yr2  is any other point on the ter-
minal side, as in Figure 3, then triangles POQ and POQ are similar.
■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions at Any Angle
From the deﬁnition we see that the values of the trigonometric functions are all positive 
if the angle u has its terminal side in Quadrant I. This is because x and y are positive in 
this quadrant. [Of course, r is always positive, since it is simply the distance from the 
origin to the point P1x, y2 .] If the terminal side of u is in Quadrant II, however, then x 
is negative and y is positive. Thus in Quadrant II the functions sin u and csc u are 
positive, and all the other trigonometric functions have negative values. You can check 
the other entries in the following table.
Signs of the Trigonometric Functions
Quadrant
Positive Functions
Negative Functions
I
all
none
II
sin, csc
cos, sec, tan, cot
III
tan, cot
sin, csc, cos, sec
IV
cos, sec
sin, csc, tan, cot
We now turn our attention to ﬁnding the values of the trigonometric functions for 
angles that are not acute.
Example 1  ■  Finding Trigonometric Functions of Angles
Find (a) cos 135 and (b) tan 390.
Solution
(a)	 From Figure 4 we see that cos 135x/r. But cos 45x/r, and since 
cos 45° !2/2, we have
cos 135 °  !2
2
(b)	 The angles 390 and 30 are coterminal. From Figure 5 it’s clear that  
tan 390  tan 30, and since tan 30 ° !3/3, we have
tan 390° !3
3
(x, y)
(_x, y)
y
x
0
x
y
r
45*
135*
r
_x
Figure 4
(x, y)
y
x
y
x
30*
390*
0
Figure 5
Now Try Exercises 13 and 15	
■
The following mnemonic device can be 
used to remember which trigonometric 
functions are positive in each quadrant: 
All of them, Sine, Tangent, or Cosine.
y
x
All
Sine
Cosine
Tangent
You can remember this as “All  
Students Take Calculus.”
P(x, y)
P'(x', y')
y
x
O
¨
Q
Q'
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

494 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
From Example 1 we see that the trigonometric functions for angles that aren’t acute 
have the same value, except possibly for sign, as the corresponding trigonometric func-
tions of an acute angle. That acute angle will be called the reference angle.
Reference Angle
Let u be an angle in standard position. The reference angle u associated with u 
is the acute angle formed by the terminal side of u and the x-axis.
Figure 6 shows that to ﬁnd a reference angle u, it’s useful to know the quadrant in 
which the terminal side of the angle u lies.
x
y
0
¨
¨
x
y
0
¨
¨
y
x
0
¨=¨
y
x
0
¨
¨
Figure 6  The reference 
angle u for an angle u
Example 2  ■  Finding Reference Angles
Find the reference angle for (a) u 5p
3  and (b) u 870°.
Solution
(a)	 The reference angle is the acute angle formed by the terminal side of the angle 
5p/3 and the x-axis (see Figure 7). Since the terminal side of this angle is in  
Quadrant IV, the reference angle is
u 2p 5p
3 p
3
(b)	 The angles 870 and 150 are coterminal [because 870 213602 150]. Thus 
the terminal side of this angle is in Quadrant II (see Figure 8). So the reference 
angle is
u 180° 150° 30°
Now Try Exercises 5 and 9	
■
Evaluating Trigonometric Functions for Any Angle
To ﬁnd the values of the trigonometric functions for any angle u, we carry out 
the following steps.
1.	 Find the reference angle u associated with the angle u.
2.	 Determine the sign of the trigonometric function of u by noting the quadrant 
in which u lies.
3.	 The value of the trigonometric function of u is the same, except possibly for 
sign, as the value of the trigonometric function of u.
y
x
0
5π
3
¨
Figure 7
y
x
0
870*
¨
Figure 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.3  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Angles  495
Example 3  ■  Using the Reference Angle to Evaluate  
Trigonometric Functions
Find (a) sin 240 and (b) cot 495.
Solution
(a)	 This angle has its terminal side in Quadrant III, as shown in Figure 9. The reference 
angle is therefore 240  180  60, and the value of sin 240 is negative. Thus
sin 240° sin 60°  !3
2
(b)	 The angle 495 is coterminal with the angle 135, and the terminal side of  
this angle is in Quadrant II, as shown in Figure 10. So the reference angle is  
180  135  45, and the value of cot 495 is negative. We have
cot 495 ° cot 135 ° cot 45 ° 1
Now Try Exercises 19 and 21	
■
Example 4  ■  Using the Reference Angle to Evaluate  
Trigonometric Functions
Find (a) sin 16p
3  and (b) seca p
4 b .
Solution
(a)	 The angle 16p/3 is coterminal with 4p/3, and these angles are in Quadrant III 
(see Figure 11). Thus the reference angle is 14p/32 p p/3. Since the value 
of sine is negative in Quadrant III, we have
sin 16p
3
sin 4p
3 sin p
3  !3
2
(b)	 The angle p/4 is in Quadrant IV, and its reference angle is p/4 (see Figure 12). 
Since secant is positive in this quadrant, we get
seca p
4 b sec p
4 !2
Now Try Exercises 25 and 27	
■
■  Trigonometric Identities
The trigonometric functions of angles are related to each other through several impor-
tant equations called trigonometric identities. We’ve already encountered the recipro-
cal identities. These identities continue to hold for any angle u, provided that both 
Sign
Reference angle
Sign
Reference angle
Coterminal angles
Sign
Reference angle
Coterminal angles
Sign
Reference angle
y
x
0
240*
¨
Figure 9   
S    A
T    C    sin 240 is negative.
y
x
0
495*
¨
Figure 10   
S    A
T    C    tan 495 is negative,  
so cot 495 is negative.
0
π
4
_
y
x
¨
Figure 12   
S    A
T    C    cos1 p
4 2  is positive,  
so sec1 p
4 2  is positive.
0
4π
3
¨
y
x
Figure 11   
S    A
T    C    sin 16p
3  is negative.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

496 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
sides of the equation are deﬁned. The Pythagorean identities are a consequence of the 
Pythagorean Theorem.*
Fundamental Identities
Reciprocal Identities
csc u 
1
sin u   sec u 
1
cos u    cot u 
1
tan u
tan u sin u
cos u   cot u cos u
sin u
Pythagorean Identities
sin2 u cos2 u 1   tan2 u 1 sec2 u   1 cot2 u csc2 u
Proof    Let’s prove the ﬁrst Pythagorean identity. Using x2 y2 r2 (the Pythago-
rean Theorem) in Figure 13, we have
sin2
 u cos2
 u a y
r b
2
a x
r b
2
x2 y2
r2
r2
r2 1
Thus sin2u  cos2u  1. (Although the ﬁgure indicates an acute angle, you should 
check that the proof holds for all angles u.)	
■
See Exercise 76 for the proofs of the other two Pythagorean identities.
Example 5  ■  Expressing One Trigonometric Function  
in Terms of Another
(a)	 Express sin u in terms of cos u.
(b)	 Express tan u in terms of sin u, where u is in Quadrant II.
Solution
(a)	 From the ﬁrst Pythagorean identity we get
sin u 6"1 cos2
 u
	 	 where the sign depends on the quadrant. If u is in Quadrant I or II, then sin u is 
positive, so
sin u "1 cos2
 u
	 	 whereas if u is in Quadrant III or IV, sin u is negative, so
sin u "1 cos2
 u
(b)	 Since tan u  sin u/cos u, we need to write cos u in terms of sin u. By part (a)
cos u 6"1 sin2
 u
	 	 and since cos u is negative in Quadrant II, the negative sign applies here. Thus
tan u sin u
cos u 
sin u
"1 sin2
 u
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
*We follow the usual convention of writing sin2
 u for 1sin u2 2. In general, we write sinnu for 1sin u2 n for all 
integers n except n  1. The superscript n  1 will be assigned another meaning in Section 6.4. Of 
course, the same convention applies to the other ﬁve trigonometric functions.
(x, y)
y
x
0
x
y
r
¨
Figure 13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.3  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Angles  497
Example 6  ■  Evaluating a Trigonometric Function
If tan u 2
3 and u is in Quadrant III, ﬁnd cos u.
Solution 1    We need to write cos u in terms of tan u. From the identity  
tan2
 u 1 sec2
 u we get sec u 6"tan2
 u 1. In Quadrant III, sec u is  
negative, so
sec u "tan2
 u 1
Thus	
 cos u 
1
sec u 
1
"tan2
 u 1
  
1
#A2
3B
2 1

1
#
13
9
 3
!13
Solution 2    This problem can be solved more easily by using the method of Exam- 
ple 2 of Section 6.2. Recall that, except for sign, the values of the trigonometric func-
tions of any angle are the same as those of an acute angle (the reference angle). So, 
ignoring the sign for the moment, let’s sketch a right triangle with an acute angle u 
satisfying tan u 2
3 (see Figure 14). By the Pythagorean Theorem the hypotenuse of 
this triangle has length !13. From the triangle in Figure 14 we immediately see that 
cos u 3/ !13. Since u is in Quadrant III, cos u is negative, so
cos u  3
!13
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
Example 7  ■  Evaluating Trigonometric Functions
If sec u  2 and u is in Quadrant IV, ﬁnd the other ﬁve trigonometric functions of u.
Solution    We sketch a triangle as in Figure 15 so that sec u 2. Taking into 
account the fact that u is in Quadrant IV, we get
 sin u  !3
2    cos u 1
2   tan u !3
 csc u  2
!3   sec u 2   cot u  1
!3
Now Try Exercise 49	
■
■  Areas of Triangles
We conclude this section with an application of the trigonometric functions that  
involves angles that are not necessarily acute. More extensive applications appear in 
Sections 6.5 and 6.6.
The area of a triangle is 1
2 base height. If we know two sides and the in-
cluded angle of a triangle, then we can ﬁnd the height using the trigonometric functions, 
and from this we can ﬁnd the area.
If u is an acute angle, then the height of the triangle in Figure 16(a) is given by  
h  b sin u. Thus the area is
1
2 base height 1
2  ab sin u
If the angle u is not acute, then from Figure 16(b) we see that the height of the triangle is
h b sin1180° u2 b sin u
If you wish to rationalize the denomi-
nator, you can express cos u as
 3
!13 # !13
!13  3!13
13
3
2
œ∑∑
13
¨
Figure 14
1
2
œ∑3
¨
Figure 15
¨
b
a
h
(a)
b
a
h
(b)
¨
¨=180* _ ¨
Figure 16
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

498 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
This is so because the reference angle of u is the angle 180  u. Thus in this case also 
the area of the triangle is
1
2 base height 1
2 ab sin u
Area of a Triangle
The area  of a triangle with sides of lengths a and b and with included  
angle u is
1
2 ab sin u
Example 8  ■  Finding the Area of a Triangle
Find the area of triangle ABC shown in Figure 17.
Solution    The triangle has sides of length 10 cm and 3 cm, with included angle 
120. Therefore
 1
2 ab sin u
  1
2 1102 132 sin 120
  15 sin 60°
        Reference angle
 15 !3
2
13 cm2
Now Try Exercise 57	
■
A
C
B
120*
10 cm
3 cm
Figure 17
Concepts
	 1.	 If the angle u is in standard position and P1x, y2  is a point on 
the terminal side of u, and r is the distance from the origin to 
P, then 
sin u          
 
        cos u          
 
        tan u          
 
	 2.	 The sign of a trigonometric function of u depends on the 
	 	
 
 in which the terminal side of the angle u lies. 
	 	 In Quadrant II, sin u is  
 (positive / negative).
	 	 In Quadrant III, cos u is  
 (positive / negative).
	 	 In Quadrant IV, sin u is  
 (positive / negative).  
	 3.	 (a)	 If u is in standard position, then the reference angle u  
is the acute angle formed by the terminal side of u and 
the  
  . So the reference angle for u 100 is 
u  
  , and that for u 190 is u  
  .
(b)	 If u is any angle, the value of a trigonometric function of 
u is the same, except possibly for sign, as the value of 
the trigonometric function of u. So sin 100sin  
  , 
and sin 190sin  
  .
	 4.	 The area ! of a triangle with sides of lengths a and b and with 
included angle u is given by the formula ! 5  
  . So 
the area of the triangle with sides 4 and 7 and included angle 
u 30 is  
  .
Skills
5–12  ■  Reference Angle    Find the reference angle for the given 
angle.
	 5.	 (a)  120	
(b)	 200	
(c)	 285
	 6.	 (a)	 175	
(b)	 310	
(c)	 730
	 7.	 (a)	 225	
(b)	 810	
(c)	 105
	 8.	 (a)	 99	
(b)	 199	
(c)	 359
	 9.	 (a)	 7p
10 	
(b)	 9p
8 	
(c)	 10p
3
	10.	 (a)	 5p
6 	
(b)	 10p
9 	
(c)	 23p
7
11.	 (a)	 5p
7 	
(b)	 1.4p	
(c)	 1.4
	12.	 (a)	 2.3p	
(b)	 2.3	
(c)	 10p
6.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.3  ■  Trigonometric Functions of Angles  499
13–36  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find the exact 
value of the trigonometric function.
	13.	 cos 150	
14.	 sin 240	
15.	 tan 330
	16.	 sin1302 	
17.	 cot11202 	
18.	 csc 300
19.	 csc1630°2 	
20.	 cot 210	
21.	 cos 570
22.	 sec 120	
23.	 tan 750	
24.	 cos 660
	25.	 sin 3p
2 	
26.	 cos 4p
3 	
27.	 tana 4p
3 b
	28.	 cos a 11p
6 b 	
29.	 csca 5p
6 b 	
30.	 sec 7p
6
31.	 sec 17p
3 	
32.	 csc 5p
4 	
33.	 cota p
4 b
34.	 cos 7p
4 	
35.	 tan  5p
2 	
36.	 sin 11p
6
37–40  ■  Quadrant in Which an Angle Lies    Find the quadrant in 
whichulies from the information given.
37.	 sin u  0    and    cos u  0
38.	 tan u  0    and    sin u  0
39.	 sec u  0    and    tan u  0
40.	 csc u  0    and    cos u  0
41–46  ■  Expressing One Trigonometric Function in Terms of 
Another    Write the ﬁrst trigonometric function in terms of the 
second for u in the given quadrant.
41.	 tan u,	 cos u;	 u in Quadrant III
42.	 cot u,	 sin u;	
u in Quadrant II
43.	 cos u,	 sin u;	
u in Quadrant IV
44.	 sec u,	 sin u;	
u in Quadrant I
45.	 sec u,	 tan u;	
u in Quadrant II
46.	 csc u,	 cot u;	
u in Quadrant III
47–54  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find the values 
of the trigonometric functions of u from the information  
given.
47.	 sin u  4
5, 
u in Quadrant IV
48.	 tan u 4
3, 
u in Quadrant III
49.	 cos u 7
12, 
sin u 0
50.	 cot u  8
9, 
cos u 0
51.	 csc u  2,    u in Quadrant I
52.	 cot u 1
4,    sin u  0
53.	 cos u  2
7,    tan u  0
54.	 tan u  4,    sin u  0
55–56  ■  Values of an Expression    If u p/3, find the value of 
each expression.
55.	 sin 2u, 
2 sin u	
56.	 sin2
 u, 
sin1u22
57–60  ■  Area of a Triangle    Find the area of the triangle with 
the given description.
57.	 A triangle with sides of length 7 and 9 and included angle 72
58.	 A triangle with sides of length 10 and 22 and included angle 10
59.	 An equilateral triangle with side of length 10
60.	 An equilateral triangle with side of length 13
61.	 Finding an Angle of a Triangle    A triangle has an area of 
16 in2, and two of the sides have lengths 5 in. and 7 in. Find 
the sine of the angle included by these two sides.
62.	 Finding a Side of a Triangle    An isosceles triangle has an area 
of 24 cm2, and the angle between the two equal sides is 
5p/6. Find the length of the two equal sides.
SKILLS Plus
63–64  ■  Area of a Region    Find the area of the shaded region in 
the ﬁgure.
63.	
120*
2
	
64.	
12
π
3
Applications
65.	 Height of a Rocket    A rocket ﬁred straight up is tracked by 
an observer on the ground 1 mi away.
(a)	 Show that when the angle of elevation is u, the height of 
the rocket (in ft) is h  5280 tan u.
(b)	 Complete the table to ﬁnd the height of the rocket at the 
given angles of elevation.
u
20
60
80
85
h
1 mi
h
¨
66.	 Rain Gutter    A rain gutter is to be constructed from a metal 
sheet of width 30 cm by bending up one-third of the sheet on 
each side through an angle u. (See the figure on the next page.)
(a)	 Show that the cross-sectional area of the gutter is  
modeled by the function
A1u2 100 sin u 100 sin u cos u
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

500 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
(b)	 Graph the function A for 0  u  p/2.
(c)	 For what angle u is the largest cross-sectional area 
achieved?
¨
10 cm
¨
10 cm
10 cm
67.	 Wooden Beam    A rectangular beam is to be cut from a 
cylindrical log of diameter 20 cm. The ﬁgures show different 
ways this can be done.
(a)	 Express the cross-sectional area of the beam as a  
function of the angle u in the ﬁgures.
(b)	 Graph the function you found in part (a).
(c)	 Find the dimensions of the beam with largest cross- 
sectional area.
20 cm
¨
20 cm
¨
width
depth
68.	 Strength of a Beam    The strength of a beam is proportional 
to the width and the square of the depth. A beam is cut from 
a log as in Exercise 67. Express the strength of the beam as a 
function of the angle u in the ﬁgures.
69.	 Throwing a Shot Put    The range R and height H of a shot put 
thrown with an initial velocity of √0 ft/s at an angle u are 
given by
 R 
√2
0 sin12u2
g
 H √2
0 sin2
 u
2g
	 	 On the earth g  32 ft/s2, and on the moon g  5.2 ft/s2. 
Find the range and height of a shot put thrown under the 
given conditions.
(a)	 On the earth with √0  12 ft/s and u  p/6
(b)	 On the moon with √0  12 ft/s and u  p/6
R
H
70.	 Sledding    The time in seconds that it takes for a sled to slide 
down a hillside inclined at an angle u is
t Å
d
16 sin u
	 	 where d is the length of the slope in feet. Find the time it 
takes to slide down a 2000-ft slope inclined at 30.
d
¨
71.	 Beehives    In a beehive each cell is a regular hexagonal 
prism, as shown in the ﬁgure. The amount of wax W in the 
cell depends on the apex angle u and is given by
W 3.02 0.38 cot u 0.65 csc u
	 	 Bees instinctively choose u so as to use the least amount of 
wax possible.
(a)	 Use a graphing device to graph W as a function of u for  
0  u  p.
(b)	 For what value of u does W have its minimum value? 
[Note: Biologists have discovered that bees rarely deviate 
from this value by more than a degree or two.]
¨
72.	 Turning a Corner    A steel pipe is being carried down a hall-
way that is 9 ft wide. At the end of the hall there is a right- 
angled turn into a narrower hallway 6 ft wide.
(a)	 Show that the length of the pipe in the ﬁgure is modeled 
by the function
L1u2 9 csc u 6 sec u
(b)	 Graph the function L for 0  u  p/2.
(c)	 Find the minimum value of the function L.
(d)	 Explain why the value of L you found in part (c) is the 
length of the longest pipe that can be carried around the 
corner.
6 ft
9 ft
¨
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.4  ■  Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Right Triangles  501
73.	 Rainbows    Rainbows are created when sunlight of different 
wavelengths (colors) is refracted and reﬂected in raindrops. 
The angle of elevation u of a rainbow is always the same. It 
can be shown that u  4b  2a, where
sin a  k sin b
	 	 and a  59.4 and k  1.33 is the index of refraction of 
­water. Use the given information to ﬁnd the angle of ele­
vation u of a rainbow.  [Hint: Find sin b, then use the  
SIN1  key on your calculator to find b.] (For a mathemati-
cal explanation of rainbows see Calculus Early Transcenden-
tals, 7th Edition, by James Stewart, page 282.)
¨
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
74.	 DISCUSS:  Using a Calculator    To solve a certain problem, 
you need to ﬁnd the sine of 4 rad. Your study partner uses his 
calcu­lator and tells you that 
sin 4  0.0697564737
	 	 On your calculator you get 
sin 4  0.7568024953
	 	 What is wrong? What mistake did your partner make?
75.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  Viète’s Trigonometric Diagram    In 
the 16th century the French mathematician François Viète 
(see page 50) published the following remarkable diagram. 
Each of the six trigonometric functions of u is equal to the 
length of a line segment in the ﬁgure. For instance, 
sin u 0  PR 0 , since from OPR we see that
sin u opp
hyp  
0  PR 0
0  OR 0 
0  PR 0
1
 0  PR 0
	 	 For each of the ﬁve other trigonometric functions, ﬁnd a line 
segment in the ﬁgure whose length equals the value of the 
function at u.  [Note: The radius of the circle is 1, the center 
is O, segment QS is tangent to the circle at R, and SOQ is a 
right angle.]
¨
O
P
Q
R
S
1
76.	 PROVE:  Pythagorean Identities    To prove the following 
Pythagorean identities, start with the first Pythagorean iden-
tity, sin2
 u cos2
 u 1, which was proved in the text, and 
then divide both sides by an appropriate trigonometric func-
tion of u.
(a)	 tan2
 u 1 sec2
 u	
(b)	 1 cot2
 u csc2
 u
77.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  Degrees and Radians    What is the 
smallest positive real number x with the property that the sine 
of x degrees is equal to the sine of x radians?
6.4 
Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Right Triangles
■  The Inverse Sine, Inverse Cosine, and Inverse Tangent Functions  ■  Solving for Angles  
in Right Triangles  ■  Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions
Recall that for a function to have an inverse, it must be one-to-one. Since the trigono-
metric functions are not one-to-one, they do not have inverses. So we restrict the do-
main of each of the trigonometric functions to intervals on which they attain all their 
values and on which they are one-to-one. The resulting functions have the same range 
as the original functions but are one-to-one. 
■  The Inverse Sine, Inverse Cosine, and Inverse  
Tangent Functions
Let’s first consider the sine function. We restrict the domain of the sine function  
to angles u with p/2 u p/2. From Figure 1 we see that on this domain the 
sine function attains each of the values in the interval 31, 14  exactly once and so 
The graphs of the inverse trigonometric 
functions are studied in Section 5.5.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

502 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
is one-to-one. Similarly, we restrict the domains of cosine and tangent as shown in 
Figure 1. 
x
r
y
y
y
¨
x
r
¨
x
r
¨
sin ¨= 


¨
0  ¨  π
π
2

π
2
y
r
cos ¨= x
r
tan ¨= 
< <
¨
π
2

π
2
y
x
Figure 1  Restricted domains of the 
sine, cosine, and tangent functions
On these restricted domains we can define an inverse for each of these functions. By the 
definition of inverse function we have 
 sin1
 x y 3  sin y x
 cos1
 x y 3  cos y x
 tan1
 x y 3  tan y x
We summarize the domains and ranges of the inverse trigonometric functions in the 
following box.
The Inverse Sine, Inverse Cosine, and Inverse Tangent 
Functions
The sine, cosine, and tangent functions on the restricted domains 3p/2, p/24 , 
30, p4 , and 1p/2, p/22 , respectively, are one-to one and so have inverses. 
The inverse functions have domain and range as follows. 
Function
Domain
Range 
sin1
31, 14
3p/2, p/24
cos1
31, 14
30, p4
tan1
R
1p/2, p/22
The functions sin1, cos1, and tan1 are sometimes called arcsine, arccosine, 
and arctangent, respectively.
Since these are inverse functions, they reverse the rule of the original function. For 
example, since sin p/6 1
2, it follows that sin1
  1
2 p/6. The following example gives 
further illustrations.
Example 1  ■  Evaluating Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
Find the exact value. 
(a)	 sin1
  !3
2             (b)  cos1A 1
2B            (c)  tan1 1
Solution
(a)	 The angle in the interval 3p/2, p/24 whose sine is !3/2 is p/3. Thus 
sin11 !3/22 p/3.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.4  ■  Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Right Triangles  503
(b)	 The angle in the interval 30, p4 whose cosine is  1
2 is 2p/3. Thus 
cos1A 1
2B 2p/3.
(c)	 The angle in the interval 1p/2, p/22  whose tangent is 1 is p/4. Thus 
tan1
 1 p/4.
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
Example 2  ■  Evaluating Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
Find approximate values for the given expression. 
(a)	 sin110.712             (b)  tan1 2            (c)  cos1 2
Solution    We use a calculator to approximate these values. 
(a)	 Using the INV  SIN  , or SIN21  , or ARC  SIN  key(s) on the calculator (with the 
calculator in radian mode), we get
sin110.712 0.78950
(b)	 Using the INV  TAN  , or TAN21  , or ARC  TAN  key(s) on the calculator (with the 
calculator in radian mode), we get 
tan1
 2 1.10715
(c)	 Since 2 1, it is not in the domain of cos1, so cos1
 2 is not defined.
Now Try Exercises 9, 13, and 15	
■
■  Solving for Angles in Right Triangles
In Section 6.2 we solved triangles by using the trigonometric functions to find the un-
known sides. We now use the inverse trigonometric functions to solve for angles in a right 
triangle.
Example 3  ■  Finding an Angle in a Right Triangle 
Find the angle u in the triangle shown in Figure 2.
Solution    Since u is the angle opposite the side of length 10 and the hypotenuse has 
length 50, we have
sin u 10
50 1
5        sin u opp
hyp
Now we can use sin1 to find u.
 u sin1 1
5        Definition of sin1
 u 11.5°         Calculator (in degree mode)
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Example 4  ■  Solving for an Angle in a Right Triangle 
A 40-ft ladder leans against a building. If the base of the ladder is 6 ft from the base 
of the building, what is the angle formed by the ladder and the building?
Solution    First we sketch a diagram as in Figure 3. If u is the angle between the 
ladder and the building, then 
sin u 6
40 0.15        sin u opp
hyp
10
50
¨
Figure 2
¨
40 ft
6 ft
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

504 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Now we use sin1 to find u.
 u sin110.152        Definition of sin1
 u 8.6°
        Calculator (in degree mode)
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
Example 5  ■  The Angle of a Beam of Light
A lighthouse is located on an island that is 2 mi off a straight shoreline (see Figure 4). 
Express the angle formed by the beam of light and the shoreline in terms of the dis-
tance d in the figure.
Solution    From the figure we see that 
 tan u 2
d
        tan u opp
adj
Taking the inverse tangent of both sides, we get
 tan11tan u2 tan1 a 2
d b         Take tan1 of both sides
 u tan1 a 2
d b         Property of inverse functions: tan11tan u2 u
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
In Sections 6.5 and 6.6 we will learn how to solve any triangle (not necessarily a 
right triangle). The angles in a triangle are always in the interval 10, p2  (or between 0° 
and 180°). We’ll see that to solve such triangles, we need to find all angles in the inter-
val 10, p2  that have a specified sine or cosine. We do this in the next example.
Example 6  ■  Solving a Basic Trigonometric Equation on an Interval
Find all angles u between 0° and 180° satisfying the given equation.
(a)	 sin u 0.4            (b)  cos u 0.4
Solution
(a)	 We use sin1 to find one solution in the interval 3p/2, p/24. 
 sin u 0.4
        Equation
 u sin110.42        Take sin1 of each side
 u 23.6°
        Calculator (in degree mode)
	 	 Another solution with u between 0° and 180° is obtained by taking the supple-
ment of the angle: 180° 23.6° 156.4° (see Figure 5). So the solutions of the 
equation with u between 0° and 180° are 
u 23.6°        and        u 156.4°
(b)	 The cosine function is one-to-one on the interval 30, p4, so there is only one 
solution of the equation with u between 0° and 180°. We find that solution by 
taking cos1 of each side.
 cos u 0.4
       
 u cos110.42        Take cos1 of each side
 u 66.4°
        Calculator (in degree mode)
	 	 The solution is u 66.4°
Now Try Exercises 25 and 27	
■
shoreline
¨
lighthouse
d
2 mi
Figure 4
y
x
0
23.6*
156.4*
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.4  ■  Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Right Triangles  505
■  Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse  
Trigonometric Functions
Expressions like cos1sin1 x2  arise in calculus. We find exact values of such expressions 
using trigonometric identities or right triangles.
Example 7  ■  Composing Trigonometric Functions  
and Their Inverses
Find cosAsin1 3
5B.
Solution 1    Let u sin1 3
5. Then u is the number in the interval 3p/2, p/24  
whose sine is 3
5. Let’s interpret u as an angle and draw a right triangle with u as one 
of its acute angles, with opposite side 3 and hypotenuse 5 (see Figure 6). The remain-
ing leg of the triangle is found by the Pythagorean Theorem to be 4. From the figure 
we get
 cos1sin1 3
52 cos u        u sin1 3
5
 4
5
        cos u adj
hyp
So cosAsin1 3
5B 4
5.
Solution 2    It’s easy to find sinAsin1 3
5B. In fact, by the cancellation properties of 
inverse functions, this value is exactly 3
5. To find cos Asin1 3
5B, we first write the cosine 
function in terms of the sine function. Let u sin1 3
5. Since p/2 u p/2, 
cos u is positive, and we can write the following:
 cos u "1 sin2 u
        cos2
 u sin2
 u 1
 #1 sin2Asin1 3
5B
        u sin1 3
5
 #1 A3
5B
2
        Property of inverse functions: sinAsin1 3
5B 3
5
 #1 9
25 #
16
25 4
5        Calculate
So cosAsin1 3
5B 4
5.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
Example 8  ■  Composing Trigonometric Functions  
and Their Inverses
Write sin1cos1
 x2  and tan1cos1
 x2  as algebraic expressions in x for 1 x 1.
Solution 1    Let u cos1
 x; then cos u x. In Figure 7 we sketch a right triangle 
with an acute angle u, adjacent side x, and hypotenuse 1. By the Pythagorean Theorem 
the remaining leg is "1 x2. From the figure we have
sin1cos1
 x2 sin u "1 x2        and        tan1cos1
 x2 tan u "1 x2
x
Solution 2    Let u cos1
 x. We need to find sin u and tan u in terms of x. As in 
Example 7 the idea here is to write sine and tangent in terms of cosine. Note that 
0 u p because u cos1
 x. We have
sin u 6"1 cos2
 u        and        tan u sin u
cos u 6"1 cos2
 u
cos u
¨
5
3
4
Figure 6   
cos u 4
5
¨
1
x
œ∑∑∑∑∑
1-≈
Figure 7   
cos u x
1 x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

506 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
To choose the proper signs, note that u lies in the interval 30, p4  because u cos1
 x. 
Since sin u is positive on this interval, the sign is the correct choice. Substituting 
u cos1
 x in the displayed equations and using the cancellation property 
cos1cos1
 x2 x, we get 
sin1cos1
 x2 "1 x2        and        tan1cos1
 x2 "1 x2
x
Now Try Exercises 35 and 37	
■
Note: In Solution 1 of Example 8 it might seem that because we are sketching a 
triangle, the angle u cos1
 x must be acute. But it turns out that the triangle method 
works for any x. The domains and ranges of all six inverse trigonometric functions have 
been chosen in such a way that we can always use a triangle to find S1T 11x22 , where 
S and T are any trigonometric functions.
Concepts
	 1.	 For a function to have an inverse, it must be 
 
  . To define the inverse sine function, we 
restrict the  
 of the sine function to the 
interval  
  .
	 2.	 The inverse sine, inverse cosine, and inverse tangent func-
tions have the following domains and ranges.
(a)	 The function sin1 has domain  
 and range 
	
 
  .
(b)	 The function cos1 has domain  
 and range 
	
 
  .
(c)	 The function tan1 has domain  
 and range 
	
 
  .
	 3.	 In the triangle shown we can find the angle u as follows.
(a)	 u sin1     
     
(b)	 u cos1     
     
(c)	 u tan1     
     
	 4.	 To find sinAcos1
  5
13B, we let u cos1A 5
13B and complete the 
right triangle at the top of the next column. We find that 
sinAcos1
  5
13B   
  .
8
¨
10
6
¨
Skills
5–8  ■  Evaluating Inverse Trigonometric Functions    Find the 
exact value of each expression, if it is defined. Express your 
answer in radians.
	 5.	 (a)	 sin1
 1	
(b)	 cos1
 0	
(c)	 tan1
  !3
	 6.	 (a)	 sin1
 0	
(b)	 cos1112 	
(c)	 tan1
 0
	 7.	 (a)	 sin1 a !2
2 b 	 (b)	 cos1 a !2
2 b 	
(c)	 tan1112
	 8.	 (a)	 sin1 a !3
2 b 	 (b)	 cos1A 1
2B	
(c)	 tan1A!3 B
9–16  ■  Evaluating Inverse Trigonometric Functions    Use a cal-
culator to find an approximate value (in radians) of each expres-
sion rounded to five decimal places, if it is defined.
	 9.	 sin110.302 	
10.	 cos110.22
11.	 cos1
  1
3	
12.	 sin1
  5
6
13.	 tan1
 3	
14.	 tan1142 	
15.	 cos1
 3	
16.	 sin1122 	
6.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.4  ■  Inverse Trigonometric Functions and Right Triangles  507
17–22  ■  Finding Angles in Right Triangles    Find the angle u in 
degrees, rounded to one decimal place.
17.	 	
	
18.	
10
¨
6
	
7
¨
18
19.	 	
	
20.	
13
¨
9
	
70
¨
30
21.	 	
	
22.	
7
¨
4
	
9
¨
8
23–28  ■  Basic Trigonometric Equations    Find all angles u 
between 0° and 180° satisfying the given equation. Round your 
answer to one decimal place.
23.	 sin u 2
3	
24.	 cos u 3
4
25.	 cos u  2
5	
26.	 tan u 20
27.	 tan u 5	
28.	 sin u 4
5
29–34  ■  Value of an Expression    Find the exact value of the 
expression.
29.	 cosAsin1
  4
5B	
30.	 cosAtan1
  4
3B	
31.	 secAsin1
  12
13B
32.	 cscAcos1
  7
25B	
33.	 tanAsin1
  12
13B	
34.	 cotAsin1
  2
3B
35–38  ■  Algebraic Expressions    Rewrite the expression as an 
algebraic expression in x.
35.	 cos1sin1
 x2 	
36.	 sin1tan1
 x2
37.	 tan1sin1
 x2 	
38.	 cos1tan1
 x2
Applications
39.	 Leaning Ladder    A 20-ft ladder is leaning against a building. 
If the base of the ladder is 6 ft from the base of the building, 
what is the angle of elevation of the ladder? How high does 
the ladder reach on the building?
40.	 Angle of the Sun    A 96-ft tree casts a shadow that is  
120 ft long. What is the angle of elevation of the sun?
41.	 Height of the Space Shuttle    An observer views the space 
shuttle from a distance of 2 mi from the launch pad.
(a)	 Express the height of the space shuttle as a function of 
the angle of elevation u.
(b)	 Express the angle of elevation u as a function of the 
height h of the space shuttle.
2 mi
h
¨
42.	 Height of a Pole    A 50-ft pole casts a shadow as shown in 
the figure.
(a)	 Express the angle of elevation u of the sun as a function 
of the length s of the shadow.
(b)	 Find the angle u of elevation of the sun when the shadow 
is 20 ft long.
s
50 ft
¨
43.	 Height of a Balloon    A 680-ft rope anchors a hot-air balloon 
as shown in the figure.
(a)	 Express the angle u as a function of the height h of the 
balloon.
(b)	 Find the angle u if the balloon is 500 ft high.
¨
h
680 ft
44.	 View from a Satellite    The figures on the next page indicate 
that the higher the orbit of a satellite, the more of the earth 
the satellite can “see.” Let u, s, and h be as in the figure, and 
assume that the earth is a sphere of radius 3960 mi.
(a)	 Express the angle u as a function of h.
(b)	 Express the distance s as a function of u.
(c)	 Express the distance s as a function of h.    [Hint: Find 
the composition of the functions in parts (a) and (b).]
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

508 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
(d)	 If the satellite is 100 mi above the earth, what is the dis-
tance s that it can see?
(e)	 How high does the satellite have to be to see both Los 
Angeles and New York, 2450 mi apart?
¨
s
h
45.	 Surfing the Perfect Wave    For a wave to be surfable, it can’t 
break all at once. Robert Guza and Tony Bowen have shown 
that a wave has a surfable shoulder if it hits the shoreline at 
an angle u given by
u sin1 a
1
12n 12tan b b
	 	 where b is the angle at which the beach slopes down and 
where n 0, 1, 2, c.
(a)	 For b 10°, find u when n 3.
(b)	 For b 15°, find u when n 2, 3, and 4. Explain why 
the formula does not give a value for u when n 0 or 1.
∫
¨
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
46.	 PROVE:  Inverse Trigonometric Functions on a Calculator     
Most calculators do not have keys for sec1, csc1, or cot1. 
Prove the following identities, and then use these identities 
and a calculator to find sec1
 2, csc1
 3, and cot1
 4.
 sec1
 x cos1 a 1
x b         x $ 1
 csc1
 x sin1 a 1
x b         x $ 1
 cot1
 x tan1 a 1
x b         x 0
6.5  The Law of Sines
■  The Law of Sines  ■  The Ambiguous Case
In Section 6.2 we used the trigonometric ratios to solve right triangles. The trigonomet-
ric functions can also be used to solve oblique triangles, that is, triangles with no right 
angles. To do this, we ﬁrst study the Law of Sines here and then the Law of Cosines in 
the next section.
In general, to solve a triangle, we need to know certain information about its sides 
and angles. To decide whether we have enough information, it’s often helpful to make 
a sketch. For instance, if we are given two angles and the included side, then it’s clear 
that one and only one triangle can be formed (see Figure 1(a)). Similarly, if two sides 
and the included angle are known, then a unique triangle is determined (Figure 1(c)). 
But if we know all three angles and no sides, we cannot uniquely determine the triangle 
because many triangles can have the same three angles. (All these triangles would be 
similar, of course.) So we won’t consider this last case.
(a)  ASA or SAA
(c)
(b) SSA
(d)
SAS
SSS
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.5  ■  The Law of Sines  509
In general, a triangle is determined by three of its six parts (angles and sides) as long 
as at least one of these three parts is a side. So the possibilities, illustrated in Figure 1, 
are as follows.
Case 1    One side and two angles (ASA or SAA)
Case 2    Two sides and the angle opposite one of those sides (SSA)
Case 3    Two sides and the included angle (SAS)
Case 4    Three sides (SSS)
Cases 1 and 2 are solved by using the Law of Sines; Cases 3 and 4 require the Law of 
Cosines.
■  The Law of Sines
The Law of Sines says that in any triangle the lengths of the sides are proportional to 
the sines of the corresponding opposite angles. To state this law (or formula) more eas-
ily, we follow the convention of labeling the angles of a triangle as A, B, and C and the 
lengths of the corresponding opposite sides as a, b, and c, as in Figure 2.
The Law of Sines
In triangle ABC we have
sin  A
a
sin B
b
sin C
c
Proof    To see why the Law of Sines is true, refer to Figure 3. By the formula in  
Section 6.3 the area of triangle ABC is 1
2  ab sin C. By the same formula the area of 
this triangle is also 1
2  ac sin B and 1
2  bc sin A. Thus
1
2  bc sin A 1
2  ac sin B 1
2  ab sin C
Multiplying by 2/1abc2  gives the Law of Sines.	
■
Example 1  ■  Tracking a Satellite (ASA)
A satellite orbiting the earth passes directly overhead at observation stations in 
Phoenix and Los Angeles, 340 mi apart. At an instant when the satellite is between 
these two stations, its angle of elevation is simultaneously observed to be 60 at 
Phoenix and 75 at Los Angeles. How far is the satellite from Los Angeles? 
Solution    We need to find the distance b in Figure 4. Since the sum of the angles in 
any triangle is 180°, we see that C 180° 175° 60°2 45° (see Figure 4), so 
we have
 sin B
b
sin C
c
    Law of Sines
 sin 60°
b
sin 45°
340
    Substitute
 b 340 sin 60°
sin 45°
416    Solve for b
The distance of the satellite from Los Angeles is approximately 416 mi.
Now Try Exercises 5 and 31	
■
A
C
B
c
a
b
Figure 2
B
A
C
a
b
h=b ß C
c
Figure 3
75º
Los Angeles
Phoenix
c = 340 mi
C
a
b
60º
A
B
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

510 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Example 2  ■  Solving a Triangle (SAA)
Solve the triangle in Figure 5.
Solution    First, B 180° 120° 25°2 135°. Since side c is known, to ﬁnd 
side a, we use the relation
 sin A
a
sin C
c
        Law of Sines
 a c sin A
sin C 80.4 sin 20°
sin 25°
65.1        Solve for a
Similarly, to ﬁnd b, we use
 sin B
b
sin C
c
        Law of Sines
 b c sin B
sin C 80.4 sin 135°
sin 25°
134.5        Solve for b
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
■  The Ambiguous Case
In Examples 1 and 2 a unique triangle was determined by the information given. This is 
always true of Case 1 (ASA or SAA). But in Case 2 (SSA) there may be two triangles, 
one triangle, or no triangle with the given properties. For this reason, Case 2 is some-
times called the ambiguous case. To see why this is so, we show in Figure 6 the possi-
bilities when angle A and sides a and b are given. In part (a) no solution is possible, since 
side a is too short to complete the triangle. In part (b) the solution is a right triangle. In 
part (c) two solutions are possible, and in part (d) there is a unique triangle with the given 
properties. We illustrate the possibilities of Case 2 in the following examples.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
A
C
a
b
B
A
C
a
b
B
B
a
A
C
a
b
B
A
C
a
b
Figure 6  The ambiguous case
Example 3  ■  SSA, the One-Solution Case
Solve triangle ABC, where A  45, a 7!2, and b  7.
Solution    We ﬁrst sketch the triangle with the information we have (see Figure 7). 
Our sketch is necessarily tentative, since we don’t yet know the other angles. Never-
theless, we can now see the possibilities.
We ﬁrst ﬁnd B.
 sin A
a
sin B
b
        Law of Sines
 sin B b sin A
a

7
7!2  sin 45° a 1
!2 b a !2
2 b 1
2        Solve for sin B
Which angles B have sin B 1
2? From the preceding section we know that there are  
two such angles smaller than 180 (they are 30 and 150). Which of these angles is 
compatible with what we know about triangle ABC? Since A  45, we cannot  
We consider only angles smaller than 
180, since no triangle can contain  
an angle of 180 or larger.
A
B
C
c=80.4
b
a
25*
20*
Figure 5
A
B
C
7
7 œ∑2
45*
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.5  ■  The Law of Sines  511
have B  150, because 45  150  180. So B  30, and the remaining angle 
is C 180° 130° 45°2 105°.
Now we can ﬁnd side c.
 sin B
b
sin C
c
        Law of Sines
 c b sin C
sin B 7 sin 105°
sin 30°
7 sin 105°
1
2
13.5        Solve for c
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
In Example 3 there were two possibilities for angle B, and one of these was not 
compatible with the rest of the information.  In general, if sin A  1, we must check the 
angle and its supplement as possibilities, because any angle smaller than 180 can be in 
the triangle. To decide whether either possibility works, we check to see whether the 
resulting sum of the angles exceeds 180. It can happen, as in Figure 6(c), that both 
possibilities are compatible with the given information. In that case, two different tri-
angles are solutions to the problem.
Example 4  ■  SSA, the Two-Solution Case
Solve triangle ABC if A  43.1, a  186.2, and b  248.6.
Solution    From the given information we sketch the triangle shown in Figure 8. 
Note that side a may be drawn in two possible positions to complete the triangle. 
From the Law of Sines
sin B b sin A
a
248.6 sin 43.1°
186.2
0.91225
A
B⁄
a=186.2
a=186.2
C
B¤
b=248.6
43.1*
Figure 8
There are two possible angles B between 0 and 180 such that sin B  0.91225. 
Using a calculator, we find that one of the angles is
sin110.912252 65.8°
The other angle is approximately 180  65.8  114.2. We denote these two  
angles by B1 and B2 so that
B1 65.8°  and  B2 114.2°
Thus two triangles satisfy the given conditions: triangle A1B1C1 and triangle A2B2C2.
Solve triangle A1B1C1:
C1 180° 143.1° 65.8°2 71.1°        Find C1
Thus	
c1 a1 sin C1
sin A1
186.2 sin 71.1°
sin 43.1°
257.8        Law of Sines
The supplement of an angle u (where  
0  u  180) is the angle 180  u.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

512 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Solve triangle A2B2C2:
C2 180° 143.1° 114.2°2 22.7°        Find C2
Thus	
c2 a2 sin C2
sin A2
186.2 sin 22.7°
sin 43.1°
105.2        Law of Sines
Triangles A1B1C1 and A2B2C2 are shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9
A⁄
B⁄
a=186.2
C⁄
b=248.6
43.1*
71.1*
65.8*
c⁄Å257.8
A¤
a=186.2
C¤
B¤
b=248.6
43.1*
114.2*
22.7*
c¤Å105.2
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
The next example presents a situation for which no triangle is compatible with the 
given data.
Example 5  ■  SSA, the No-Solution Case
Solve triangle ABC, where A  42, a  70, and b  122.
Solution    To organize the given information, we sketch the diagram in Figure 10.
Let’s try to ﬁnd B. We have
sin  A
a
sin B
b
        Law of Sines
sin B b sin A
a
122 sin 42°
70
1.17        Solve for sin B
A
B
C
42*
70
122
Figure 10
Since the sine of an angle is never greater than 1, we conclude that no triangle 
satisﬁes the conditions given in this problem.
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
Surveying is a method of land measure-
ment used for mapmaking. Surveyors use 
a process called triangulation in which a 
network of thousands of interlocking tri-
angles is created on the area to be 
mapped. The process is started by measur-
ing the length of a baseline between two 
surveying stations. Then, with the use of  
an instrument called a theodolite, the 
angles between these two stations and a 
third station are measured. The Law of 
Sines is then used to calculate the two 
other sides of the triangle formed by the 
three stations. The calculated sides are 
used as baselines, and the process is 
repeated over and over to create a net-
work of triangles. In this method the only 
distance measured is the initial baseline; 
all other distances are calculated from the 
Law of Sines. This method is practical 
because it is much easier to measure 
angles than distances.
Check base
Baseline
One of the most ambitious mapmaking 
efforts of all time was the Great Trigono-
metric Survey of India (see Problem 8, 
page 536) which required several expedi-
tions and took over a century to complete. 
The famous expedition of 1823, led by Sir 
George Everest, lasted 20 years. Ranging 
over treacherous terrain and encounter-
ing the dreaded malaria-carrying mosqui-
toes, this expedition reached the foothills 
of the Himalayas. A later expedition, using 
triangulation, calculated the height of the 
highest peak of the Himalayas to be 
29,002 ft. The peak was named in honor 
of Sir George Everest.
Today, with the use of satellites, the 
height of Mt. Everest is estimated to be 
29,028 ft. The very close agreement of 
these two estimates shows the great 
accuracy of the trigonometric method.
ALAN ODDIE/Photo Edit
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.5  ■  The Law of Sines  513
EXAMPLE 6  ■  Calculating a Distance
A bird is perched on top of a pole on a steep hill, and an observer is located at point A 
on the side of the hill, 110 m downhill from the base of the pole, as shown in the fig-
ure. The angle of inclination of the hill is 50°, and the angle a in the figure is 9°. 
Find the distance from the observer to the bird.
Solution    We first sketch a diagram as shown in Figure 11. We want to find the dis-
tance b in the figure. Triangle ADB is a right triangle, so DBA 90° 50° 40°. 
It follows that ABC 180° 40° 140°.
Now in triangle ABC we have A 9° and B 140°, so 
C 180° 149° 31°. By the Law of Sines we have 
sin B
b
sin C
c
    Law of Sines
Substituting B 140, C 31, and c 110, we get
 sin 140
b
sin 31
110
 b 110 sin 140
sin 31
    Solve for b
 137.3
    Calculator
So the distance from the observer to the bird is about 137 m. 
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
50*
A
å
110 m
C
B
40*
50*
D
A
a
c
b
å
Figure 11
Concepts
	 1.	 In triangle ABC with sides a, b, and c the Law of Sines states  
that 
      
           
           
      
	 2.	 The four cases in which we can solve a triangle are 
ASA  SSA   SAS  SSS
(a)	 In which of these cases can we use the Law of Sines to 
solve the triangle?
(b)	 Which of the cases listed can lead to more than one solu-
tion (the ambiguous case)?
Skills
3–8  ■  Finding an Angle or Side    Use the Law of Sines to ﬁnd 
the indicated side x or angle u.
	 3.	
98.4*
376
C
B
A
x
24.6*
	 4.	
17
28.1*
37.5*
C
B
A
x
	 5.	
26.7
52*
70*
C
B
A
x
	
6.	
56.3
67*
80.2
C
B
A
¨
	 7.	
45
36
120*
C
B
A
¨
	 8. 
185
102*
C
B
A
28*
x
9–12  ■  Solving a Triangle    Solve the triangle using the Law of 
Sines.
	 9.	
65
46*
C
B
A
20*
	10.	
2
30*
C
B
A
100*
6.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

514 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
	11.	
A
C
B
68*
12
12
	
12.	
A
C
B
80*
6.5
3.4
13–18  ■  Solving a Triangle    Sketch each triangle, and then solve 
the triangle using the Law of Sines.
13.	 A  50,    B  68,    c  230
14.	 A  23,    B  110,    c  50
15.	 A  30,    C  65,    b  10
16.	 A  22,    B  95,    a  420
17.	 B  29,    C  51,    b  44
18.	 B  10,    C  100,    c  115
19–28  ■  Solving a Triangle    Use the Law of Sines to solve for 
all possible triangles that satisfy the given conditions.
19.	 a  28,    b  15,    A  110
20.	 a  30,    c  40,    A  37
21.	 a  20,    c  45,    A  125
22.	 b  45,    c  42,    C  38
23.	 b  25,    c  30,    B  25
24.	 a  75,    b  100,    A  30
25.	 a  50,    b  100,    A  50
26.	 a  100,    b  80,    A  135
27.	 a  26,    c  15,    C  29
28.	 b  73,    c  82,    B  58
Skills Plus
29.	 Finding Angles    For the triangle shown, ﬁnd (a) BCD and 
(b) DCA.
B
A
C
20
30*
20
28
D
30.	 Finding a Side    For the triangle shown, ﬁnd the length AD.
A
D
C
B
25*
25*
12
12
Applications
31.	 Tracking a Satellite    The path of a satellite orbiting the earth 
causes the satellite to pass directly over two tracking stations 
A and B, which are 50 mi apart. When the satellite is on one 
side of the two stations, the angles of elevation at A and B are 
measured to be 87.0 and 84.2, respectively.
(a)	 How far is the satellite from station A?
(b)	 How high is the satellite above the ground?
84.2º
87.0º
A
B
32.	 Flight of a Plane    A pilot is ﬂying over a straight  
highway. He determines the angles of depression to  
two mileposts, 5 mi apart, to be 32 and 48, as shown  
in the ﬁgure.
(a)	 Find the distance of the plane from point A.
(b)	 Find the elevation of the plane.
32º
48º
5 mi
A
B
33.	 Distance Across a River    To ﬁnd the distance across a river, a 
surveyor chooses points A and B, which are 200 ft apart on 
one side of the river (see the ﬁgure). She then chooses a ref-
erence point C on the opposite side of the river and ﬁnds that 
BAC  82 and ABC  52. Approximate the distance 
from A to C.
A
B
C
200 ft
82*
52*
34.	 Distance Across a Lake    Points A and B are separated  
by a lake. To ﬁnd the distance between them, a surveyor  
locates a point C on land such that CAB  48.6. He also 
measures CA as 312 ft and CB as 527 ft. Find the distance 
between A and B.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.5  ■  The Law of Sines  515
35.	 The Leaning Tower of Pisa    The bell tower of the cathedral in 
Pisa, Italy, leans 5.6 from the vertical. A tourist stands 105 m 
from its base, with the tower leaning directly toward her. She 
measures the angle of elevation to the top of the tower to be 
29.2. Find the length of the tower to the nearest meter.
36.	 Radio Antenna    A short-wave radio antenna is supported by 
two guy wires, 165 ft and 180 ft long. Each wire is attached 
to the top of the antenna and anchored to the ground at two 
anchor points on opposite sides of the antenna. The shorter 
wire makes an angle of 67 with the ground. How far apart 
are the anchor points?
37.	 Height of a Tree    A tree on a hillside casts a shadow 215 ft 
down the hill. If the angle of inclination of the hillside is 22 
to the horizontal and the angle of elevation of the sun is 52, 
ﬁnd the height of the tree.
215 ft
52º
22º
38.	 Length of a Guy Wire    A communica-
tions tower is located at the top of a 
steep hill, as shown. The angle of 
inclination of the hill is 58. A guy 
wire is to be attached to the top of the 
tower and to the ground, 100 m down-
hill from the base of the tower. The 
angle a in the ﬁgure is determined to 
be 12. Find the length of cable 
required for the guy wire.
39.	 Calculating a Distance    Observers at P and Q are located on the 
side of a hill that is inclined 32 to the horizontal, as shown. The 
observer at P determines the angle of elevation to a hot-air bal-
loon to be 62. At the same instant the observer at Q measures 
the angle of elevation to the balloon to be 71. If P is 60 m 
down the hill from Q, ﬁnd the distance from Q to the balloon.
P
Q
32*
60 m 
40.	 Calculating an Angle    A water tower 30 m tall is located at 
the top of a hill. From a distance of 120 m down the hill it is 
observed that the angle formed between the top and base of 
the tower is 8. Find the angle of inclination of the hill.
30 m
120 m
8º
41.	 Distances to Venus    The elongation a of a planet is the angle 
formed by the planet, earth, and sun (see the ﬁgure). It is 
known that the distance from the sun to Venus is 0.723 AU 
(see Exercise 71 in Section 6.2). At a certain time the elonga-
tion of Venus is found to be 39.4. Find the possible distances 
from the earth to Venus at that time in astronomical units (AU).
Venus
Venus
å
earth
1 AU
sun
42.	 Soap Bubbles    When two bubbles cling together in midair, their 
common surface is part of a sphere whose center D lies on the 
line passing through the centers of the bubbles (see the ﬁgure). 
Also, ACB and ACD each have measure 60.
(a)	 Show that the radius r of the common face is given by
r 
ab
a b
	
[Hint: Use the Law of Sines together with the fact that an 
angle u and its supplement 180  u have the same sine.]
(b)	 Find the radius of the common face if the radii of the 
bubbles are 4 cm and 3 cm.
(c)	 What shape does the common face take if the two  
bubbles have equal radii?
D
A
B
C
a
b
r
58*
å
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

516 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
43.	 PROVE:  Area of a Triangle    Show that, given the three angles 
A, B, and C of a triangle and one side, say, a, the area of the 
triangle is 
area a2 sin B sin C
2 sin A 
44.	 PROVE:  Areas and the Ambiguous Case    Suppose we solve a 
triangle in the ambiguous case. We are given A and sides a 
and b, and we find the two solutions ^ ABC and ^ ArBrCr. 
Prove that 
area of ^ ABC
area of ^ ArBrCr sin C
sin Cr
45.	 DISCOVER:  Number of Solutions in the Ambiguous Case     
We have seen that when the Law of Sines is used to solve a 
triangle in the SSA case, there may be two, one, or no 
solution(s). Sketch triangles like those in Figure 6 to verify 
the criteria in the table for the number of solutions if you are 
given A and sides a and b.
Criterion
Number of solutions
a  b
1
b  a  b sin A
2
a  b sin A
1
a  b sin A
0
	 	 	
If A  30 and b  100, use these criteria to ﬁnd the 
range of values of a for which the triangle ABC has two  
solutions, one solution, or no solution.
6.6  The Law of Cosines
■  The Law of Cosines  ■  Navigation: Heading and Bearing  ■  The Area of a Triangle
■  The Law of Cosines
The Law of Sines cannot be used directly to solve triangles if we know two sides and 
the angle between them or if we know all three sides (these are Cases 3 and 4 of the 
preceding section). In these two cases the Law of Cosines applies.
The Law of Cosines
In any triangle ABC (see Figure 1) we have
 a2 b2 c2 2bc cos A
 b2 a2 c2 2ac cos B
 c2 a2 b2 2ab cos C
Proof    To prove the Law of Cosines, place triangle ABC so that A is at the origin, as 
shown in Figure 2. The coordinates of vertices B and C are 1c, 02 and 1b cos A, b sin A2, 
respectively. (You should check that the coordinates of these points will be the same if 
we draw angle A as an acute angle.) Using the Distance Formula, we get
 a2 1b cos A c2 2 1b sin A 02 2
  b2 cos2
 A 2bc cos A c2 b2 sin2
 A
  b21cos2
 A sin2
 A2 2bc cos A c2
  b2 c2 2bc cos A
Because sin2A  cos2A  1
This proves the ﬁrst formula. The other two formulas are obtained in the same way by 
placing each of the other vertices of the triangle at the origin and repeating the pre-
ceding argument.
■
A
C
B
c
a
b
Figure 1
y
x
A(0, 0)
B(c, 0)
C(b ç A, b ß A)
b
a
c
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.6  ■  The Law of Cosines  517
In words, the Law of Cosines says that the square of any side of a triangle is equal 
to the sum of the squares of the other two sides minus twice the product of those two 
sides times the cosine of the included angle.
If one of the angles of a triangle, say, C, is a right angle, then cos C  0, and the 
Law of Cosines reduces to the Pythagorean Theorem, c2  a2  b2. Thus the Pythago-
rean Theorem is a special case of the Law of Cosines.
Example 1  ■  Length of a Tunnel
A tunnel is to be built through a mountain. To estimate the length of the tunnel, a sur-
veyor makes the measurements shown in Figure 3. Use the surveyor’s data to approxi-
mate the length of the tunnel.
Solution    To approximate the length c of the tunnel, we use the Law of Cosines.
 c2 a2 b2 2ab cos C
        Law of Cosines
  2122 3882 212122 13882 cos 82.4        Substitute
  173730.2367
        Use a calculator
 c !173730.2367 416.8
        Take square roots
Thus the tunnel will be approximately 417 ft long.
Now Try Exercises 3 and 39	
■
Example 2  ■  SSS, the Law of Cosines
The sides of a triangle are a  5, b  8, and c  12 (see Figure 4). Find the angles of 
the triangle.
A
c=12
B
C
a=5
b=8
Figure 4
Solution    We ﬁrst ﬁnd A. From the Law of Cosines, a2  b2  c2  2bc cos A.  
Solving for cos A, we get
cos A b2 c2 a2
2bc
82 122 52
2182 1122
183
192 0.953125
Using a calculator, we ﬁnd that A  cos1(0.953125)  18. In the same way we get
 cos B a2 c2 b2
2ac
52 122 82
2152 1122
0.875
 cos C a2 b2 c2
2ab
52 82 122
2152 182
0.6875
Using a calculator, we find that 
B  cos1(0.875)  29        and        C  cos1(0.6875)  133
Of course, once two angles have been calculated, the third can more easily be found 
from the fact that the sum of the angles of a triangle is 180. However, it’s a good 
idea to calculate all three angles using the Law of Cosines and add the three angles as 
a check on your computations.
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
82.4º
388 ft
212 ft
A
B
C
Figure 3
cos1
or
inv  cos
or
ARC  cos
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

518 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Example 3  ■  SAS, the Law of Cosines
Solve triangle ABC, where A  46.5, b  10.5, and c  18.0.
Solution    We can ﬁnd a using the Law of Cosines.
 a2 b2 c2 2bc cos A
  110.52 2 118.02 2 2110.52 118.02 1cos 46.5°2 174.05
Thus a !174.05 13.2. We also use the Law of Cosines to ﬁnd B and C, as 
in Example 2.
 cos B a2 c2 b2
2ac
13.22 18.02 10.52
2113.22 118.02
0.816477
 cos C a2 b2 c2
2ab
13.22 10.52 18.02
2113.22 110.52
0.142532
Using a calculator, we ﬁnd that 
B  cos1(0.816477)  35.3        and        C  cos1(0.142532)  98.2
To summarize: B  35.3, C  98.2, and a  13.2. (See Figure 5.)
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
We could have used the Law of Sines to ﬁnd B and C in Example 3, since we 
knew all three sides and an angle in the triangle. But knowing the sine of an angle does 
not uniquely specify the angle, since an angle u and its supplement 180  u both have 
the same sine. Thus we would need to decide which of the two angles is the correct 
choice. This ambiguity does not arise when we use the Law of Cosines, because every 
angle between 0 and 180 has a unique cosine. So using only the Law of Cosines is 
preferable in problems like Example 3.
■  Navigation: Heading and Bearing
In navigation a direction is often given as a bearing, that is, as an acute angle measured 
from due north or due south. The bearing N 30 E, for example, indicates a direction 
that points 30 to the east of due north (see Figure 6).
S
N 60° W
N
60°
S
S 70° W
N
70°
S
W
E
W
E
W
E
W
E
N 30° E
N
30°
S
S 50° E
N
50°
Figure 6
Example 4  ■  Navigation
A pilot sets out from an airport and heads in the direction N 20 E, ﬂying at 200 mi/h. 
After 1 h, he makes a course correction and heads in the direction N 40 E. Half an 
hour after that, engine trouble forces him to make an emergency landing.
(a)	 Find the distance between the airport and his ﬁnal landing point.
(b)	 Find the bearing from the airport to his ﬁnal landing point.
Solution
(a)	 In 1 h the plane travels 200 mi, and in half an hour it travels 100 mi, so  
we can plot the pilot’s course as in Figure 7. When he makes his course  
A
B
C
b=10.5
aÅ13.2
c=18.0
98.2*
46.5*
35.3*
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.6  ■  The Law of Cosines  519
correction, he turns 20 to the right, so the angle between the two legs of his trip 
is 180  20  160. So by the Law of Cosines we have
 b2 2002 1002 2 # 200 # 100 cos 160°
  87,587.70
	 	 Thus b  295.95. The pilot lands about 296 mi from his starting point.
(b)	 We ﬁrst use the Law of Sines to ﬁnd A.
 sin A
100 sin 160°
295.95
 sin A 100 # sin 160°
295.95
 0.11557
	 	 Using the SIN1  key on a calculator, we ﬁnd that A  6.636. From Figure 7  
we see that the line from the airport to the ﬁnal landing site points in the direction  
20  6.636  26.636 east of due north. Thus the bearing is about N 26.6 E.
Now Try Exercise 45	
■
■  The Area of a Triangle
An interesting application of the Law of Cosines involves a formula for ﬁnding the area 
of a triangle from the lengths of its three sides (see Figure 8).
Heron’s Formula
The area  of triangle ABC is given by
!s1s a2 1s b2 1s c2
where s 1
2 1a b c2  is the semiperimeter of the triangle; that is, s is half 
the perimeter.
Proof    We start with the formula ! 1
2 ab sin C from Section 6.3. Thus
 2 1
4 a2b2 sin2
 C
  1
4 a2b211 cos2
 C2
        Pythagorean identity
  1
4 a2b211 cos C2 11 cos C2        Factor
Next, we write the expressions 1  cosC and 1  cosC in terms of a, b, and c. By 
the Law of Cosines we have
 cos C a2 b2 c2
2ab
        Law of Cosines
 1 cos C 1 a2 b2 c2
2ab
        Add 1
  2ab a2 b2 c2
2ab
        Common denominator
  
1a b2 2 c2
2ab
        Factor
  
1a b c2 1a b c2
2ab
        Difference of squares
Another angle with sine 0.11557 is 
180  6.636  173.364. But this is 
clearly too large to be A in ABC.
A
B
C
200 mi
40*
20*
100 mi
Figure 7
A
C
B
b
c
a

Figure 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

520 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Similarly,
1 cos C 
1c a b2 1c a b2
2ab
Substituting these expressions in the formula we obtained for 2 gives
 2 1
4 a2b2 
 
1a b c2 1a b c2
2ab
  
1c a b2 1c a b2
2ab
  
1a b c2
2
  
1a b c2
2
  
1c a b2
2
  
1c a b2
2
  s1s c2 1s b2 1s a2
Heron’s Formula now follows from taking the square root of each side.	
■
Example 5  ■  Area of a Lot
A businessman wishes to buy a triangular lot in a busy downtown location (see  
Figure 9). The lot frontages on the three adjacent streets are 125, 280, and 315 ft. 
Find the area of the lot.
Solution    The semiperimeter of the lot is
s 125 280 315
2
360
By Heron’s Formula the area is
 !3601360 1252 1360 2802 1360 3152 17,451.6
Thus the area is approximately 17,452 ft2.
Now Try Exercises 29 and 53	
■
To see that the factors in the last two 
products are equal, note for example 
that
 a b c
2
a b c
2
c
 s c
315 ft
125 ft
280 ft
Figure 9
Concepts
	 1.	 For triangle ABC with sides a, b, and c the Law of Cosines 
states 
	 	 c2 
 
	 2.	 In which of the following cases must the Law of Cosines be 
used to solve a triangle?
ASA    SSS    SAS    SSA
Skills
3–10  ■  Finding an Angle or Side    Use the Law of Cosines to 
determine the indicated side x or angle u.
	 3.	 	
	
  4.	
39*
42
C
B
A
x
21
15
108*
18
C
B
A
x
	 5.	 	
	
  6.	
8
88*
2
x
A
C
B
	 7.
42.15
68.01
C
B
A
¨
37.83
	
  8.
	 9.	  
30
24
30*
C
B
A
x
	
10.	
20
10
C
B
A
12
¨
6.6  Exercises
140*
25
x
25
A
C
B
¨
122.5
60.1
154.6
C
B
A
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.6  ■  The Law of Cosines  521
11–20  ■  Solving a Triangle    Solve triangle ABC.
	11.	 	
	
12. 
40
C
B
A
12
44
13.	 a  3.0,    b  4.0,    C  53
14.	 b  60,    c  30,    A  70
15.	 a  20,    b  25,    c  22
16.	 a  10,    b  12,    c  16
17.	 b  125,    c  162,    B  40
18.	 a  65,    c  50,    C  52
19.	 a  50,    b  65,    A  55
20.	 a  73.5,    B  61,    C  83
21–28  ■  Law of Sines or Law of Cosines?    Find the indicated 
side x or angle u. (Use either the Law of Sines or the Law of 
Cosines, as appropriate.)
21.	
35*
C
B
A
x
3
85*
	
22.	
40*
C
B
A
x
10
18
23.	
30*
C
B
A
x
50
100*
	
24.	
C
B
A
4
11
10
¨
25.	
38*
C
B
A
138
110
¨
	
26.	
40*
C
B
A
8
10
¨
27.	
30*
C
B
A
38
48
x
	
28.	
98*
C
B
A
x
1000
25*
29–32  ■  Heron’s Formula    Find the area of the triangle whose 
sides have the given lengths.
29.	 a  9,    b  12,    c  15
	30.	 a  1,    b  2,    c  2
31.	 a  7,    b  8,    c  9	
32.	 a  11,    b  100,    c  101
Skills Plus
33–36  ■  Heron’s Formula    Find the area of the shaded ﬁgure, 
rounded to two decimals.
33.	
6
4
3
	
34.	
5
5
5
2
2
35.	
5
6
7
8
100*
	
36.	
4
4
3
3
60*
37.	 Area of a Region    Three circles of radii 4, 5, and 6 cm are 
mutually tangent. Find the shaded area enclosed between the 
circles.
38.	 Finding a Length    In the figure, triangle ABC is a right  
triangle, CQ 6, and BQ 4. Also, AQC 30 and 
CQB 45°. Find the length of AQ.    [Hint: First use the 
Law of Cosines to find expressions for a2, b2, and c2.]
Q
C
B
A
4
c
b
6
x
30*
45*
a
18
120*
C
B
A
10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

522 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Applications
39.	 Surveying    To ﬁnd the distance across a small lake, a sur-
veyor has taken the measurements shown. Find the distance 
across the lake using this information.
C
B
A
2.82 mi
3.56 mi
40.3*
40.	 Geometry    A parallelogram has sides of lengths 3 and 5, and 
one angle is 50. Find the lengths of the diagonals.
41.	 Calculating Distance    Two straight roads diverge at an angle 
of 65. Two cars leave the intersection at 2:00 p.m., one trav-
eling at 50 mi/h and the other at 30 mi/h. How far apart are 
the cars at 2:30 p.m.?
42.	 Calculating Distance    A car travels along a straight road, 
heading east for 1 h, then traveling for 30 min on another road 
that leads northeast. If the car has maintained a constant 
speed of 40 mi/h, how far is it from its starting position?
43.	 Dead Reckoning    A pilot ﬂies in a straight path for  
1 h 30 min. She then makes a course correction, heading  
10 to the right of her original course, and ﬂies 2 h in the  
new direction. If she maintains a constant speed of 625 mi/h, 
how far is she from her starting position?
44.	 Navigation    Two boats leave the same port at the same time. 
One travels at a speed of 30 mi/h in the direction N 50 E, 
and the other travels at a speed of 26 mi/h in a direction  
S 70 E (see the ﬁgure). How far apart are the two boats  
after 1 h?
N
S
E
W
50˚
70˚
N 50˚ E
S 70˚ E
45.	 Navigation    A ﬁsherman leaves his home port and heads in 
the direction N 70 W. He travels 30 mi and reaches Egg  
Island. The next day he sails N 10 E for 50 mi, reaching  
Forrest Island.
(a)	 Find the distance between the ﬁsherman’s home port and 
Forrest Island.
(b)	 Find the bearing from Forrest Island back to his  
home port.
10º
70º
30 mi
50 mi
Egg
Island
home port
Forrest
Island
46.	 Navigation    Airport B is 300 mi from airport A at a bearing 
N 50 E (see the ﬁgure). A pilot wishing to ﬂy from A to B 
mistakenly ﬂies due east at 200 mi/h for 30 min, when he 
notices his error.
(a)	 How far is the pilot from his destination at the time he 
notices the error?
(b)	 What bearing should he head his plane to arrive at  
airport B?
50˚
300 mi
Airport B
Airport A
47.	 Triangular Field    A triangular ﬁeld has sides of lengths 22, 
36, and 44 yd. Find the largest angle.
48.	 Towing a Barge    Two tugboats that are 120 ft apart pull a 
barge, as shown. If the length of one cable is 212 ft and the 
length of the other is 230 ft, ﬁnd the angle formed by the two 
cables.
212 ft
230 ft
120 ft
49.	 Flying Kites    A boy is ﬂying two kites at the same time. He 
has 380 ft of line out to one kite and 420 ft to the other. He 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 6.6  ■  The Law of Cosines  523
estimates the angle between the two lines to be 30.  
Approximate the distance between the kites.
30º
380 ft
420 ft
50.	 Securing a Tower    A 125-ft tower is located on the side of a 
mountain that is inclined 32 to the horizontal. A guy wire is 
to be attached to the top of the tower and anchored at a point 
55 ft downhill from the base of the tower. Find the shortest 
length of wire needed.
32º
125 ft
55 ft
51.	 Cable Car    A steep mountain is inclined 74 to the horizontal 
and rises 3400 ft above the surrounding plain. A cable car is 
to be installed from a point 800 ft from the base to the top of 
the mountain, as shown. Find the shortest length of cable 
needed.
800 ft
74*
3400 ft
52.	 CN Tower    The CN Tower in Toronto, Canada, is the  
tallest free-standing structure in North America. A woman 
on the observation deck, 1150 ft above the ground, wants 
to determine the distance between two landmarks on the 
ground below. She observes that the angle formed by the 
lines of sight to these two landmarks is 43. She also 
observes that the angle between the vertical and the line of 
sight to one of the landmarks is 62 and that to the other 
landmark is 54. Find the distance between the two 
landmarks.
43*
54*
62*
53.	 Land Value    Land in downtown Columbia is valued at $20 a 
square foot. What is the value of a triangular lot with sides of 
lengths 112, 148, and 190 ft?
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
54.	 DISCUSS:  Solving for the Angles in a Triangle    The para-
graph that follows the solution of Example 3 on page 518 
explains an alternative method for ﬁnding B and C, using 
the Law of Sines. Use this method to solve the triangle in the 
example, ﬁnding B ﬁrst and then C. Explain how you 
chose the appropriate value for the measure of B. Which 
method do you prefer for solving an SAS triangle problem: 
the one explained in Example 3 or the one you used in this 
exercise?
55.	 PROVE:  Projection Laws    Prove that in triangle ABC
 a b cos C c cos B
 b c cos A a cos C
 c a cos B b cos A
	 	 These are called the Projection Laws.    [Hint: To get the ﬁrst 
equation, add the second and third equations in the Law of 
Cosines and solve for a.]
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

524 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
Angles (p. 472)
An angle consists of two rays with a common vertex. One of the 
rays is the initial side, and the other the terminal side. An angle 
can be viewed as a rotation of the initial side onto the terminal 
side. If the rotation is counterclockwise, the angle is positive; if 
the rotation is clockwise, the angle is negative.
¨
terminal
side
initial side
A
B
O
Notation: The angle in the figure can be referred to as angle 
AOB, or simply as angle O, or as angle u.
Angle Measure (p. 472)
The radian measure of an angle (abbreviated rad) is the length 
of the arc that the angle subtends in a circle of radius 1, as shown 
in the figure.
¨
Radian
measure
of ¨
1
The degree measure of an angle is the number of degrees in the 
angle, where a degree is 1
360 of a complete circle.
To convert degrees to radians, multiply by p/180.
To convert radians to degrees, multiply by 180/p.
Angles in Standard Position (pp. 473, 494)
An angle is in standard position if it is drawn in the xy-plane 
with its vertex at the origin and its initial side on the positive 
x-axis. 
¨
¨
y
x
0
y
x
0
Two angles in standard position are coterminal if their sides 
coincide. 
The reference angle u associated with an angle u is the acute 
angle formed by the terminal side of u and the x-axis.
Length of an Arc; Area of a Sector (pp. 475–476)
Consider a circle of radius r. 
¨
r
A
s
The length s of an arc that subtends a central angle of u radi-
ans is s r u.
The area A of a sector with central angle of u radians is 
A 1
2 r2u.
Circular Motion (pp. 476–477)
Suppose a point moves along a circle of radius r and the ray from 
the center of the circle to the point traverses u radians in time t. 
Let s r u be the distance the point travels in time t. 
The angular speed of the point is v u/t.
The linear speed of the point is √s/t. 
Linear speed √ and angular speed v are related by the formula 
√rv.
Trigonometric Ratios (p. 482)
For a right triangle with an acute angle u the trigonometric ratios 
are defined as follows.
adjacent
opposite
hypotenuse
¨
sin u opp
hyp   
cos u adj
hyp   
tan u opp
adj
csc u hyp
opp   
sec u hyp
adj    
cot u adj
opp
Special Trigonometric Ratios (p. 483)
The trigonometric functions have the following values at the spe-
cial values of u.
u
u
sin u
cos u
tan u
csc u
sec u
cot u
308
p
6
1
2
!3
2
!3
3
2
2 !3
3
!3
458
p
4
!2
2
!2
2
1
!2
!2
1
608
p
3
!3
2
1
2
!3
2 !3
3
2
!3
3
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 6  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6  ■  Review  525
Trigonometric Functions of Angles (p. 491)
Let u be an angle in standard position, and let P1x, y2  be a point 
on the terminal side. Let r "x2 y2 be the distance from the 
origin to the point P1x, y2 . 
P(x, y)
y
x
0
¨
P(x, y)
y
x
0
¨
For nonzero values of the denominator the trigonometric func-
tions are defined as follows.
sin t y
r    
cos t x
r   
tan t y
x
csc t r
y   
sec t r
x   
cot t x
y
Basic Trigonometric Identities (p. 496)
An identity is an equation that is true for all values of the vari-
able. The basic trigonometric identities are as follows.
Reciprocal Identities:
csc u 
1
sin u  sec u 
1
cos u  cot u 
1
tan u
Pythagorean Identities:
 sin2
 u cos2
 u 1
 tan2
 u 1 sec2
 u
 1 cot2
 u csc2
 u
Area of a Triangle (p. 498)
The area ! of a triangle with sides of lengths a and b and with 
included angle u is
! 1
2
 ab sin u
Inverse Trigonometric Functions (p. 502)
Inverse functions of the trigonometric functions are defined by 
restricting the domains as follows.
Function
Domain
Range
sin1
31, 14
C p
2, p
2D
cos1
31, 14
30, p4
tan1
1`, ` 2
A p
2, p
2B
The inverse trigonometric functions are defined as follows.
 sin1 x y 3 sin y x
 cos1 x y 3 cos y x
 tan1 x y 3 tan y x
The Law of Sines and the Law of Cosines (pp. 509, 516)
We follow the convention of labeling the angles of a triangle as  
A, B, C and the lengths of the corresponding opposite sides as  
a, b, c, as in the figure. 
A
C
B
c
a
b
For a triangle ABC we have the following laws.
The Law of Sines states that
sin A
a
sin B
b
sin C
c
The Law of Cosines states that
 a2 b2 c2 2bc cos A
 b2 a2 c2 2ac cos B
 c2 a2 b2 2ab cos C
Heron’s Formula (p. 519)
Let ABC be a triangle with sides a, b, and c. 
A
C
B
b
c
a

Heron’s Formula states that the area ! of triangle ABC is
! !s1s a2 1s b21s c2
where s 1
2 1a b c2  is the semiperimeter of the triangle.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

526 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
	 1.	 (a)	 How is the degree measure of an angle defined?
(b)	 How is the radian measure of an angle defined?
(c)	 How do you convert from degrees to radians? Convert 
45 to radians.
(d)	 How do you convert from radians to degrees? Convert  
2 rad to degrees.
	 2.	 (a)	 When is an angle in standard position? Illustrate with a 
graph.
(b)	 When are two angles in standard position coterminal?  
Illustrate with a graph.
(c)	 Are the angles 25 and 745 coterminal? 
(d)	 How is the reference angle for an angle u defined?
(e)	 Find the reference angle for 150. 
	 3.	 (a)	 In a circle of radius r, what is the length s of an arc that 
subtends a central angle of u radians?
(b)	 In a circle of radius r, what is the area A of a sector with 
central angle u radians?
	 4.	 (a)	 Let u be an acute angle in a right triangle. Identify the 
opposite side, the adjacent side, and the hypotenuse in 
the figure.
¨
(b)	 Define the six trigonometric ratios in terms of the  
adjacent and opposite sides and the hypotenuse.
(c)	 Find the six trigonometric ratios for the angle u  
shown in the figure. 
¨
4
5
3
(d)	 List the special values of sine, cosine, and  
tangent.
	 5.	 (a)	 What does it mean to solve a triangle? 
(b)	 Solve the triangle shown.
10
A
B
C
35*
	 6.	 (a)	 Let u be an angle in standard position, let P1x, y2  be a 
point on the terminal side, and let r be the distance from 
the origin to P, as shown in the figure. Write expressions 
for the six trigonometric functions of u.
P(x, y)
y
x
0
¨
(b)	 Find the sine, cosine, and tangent for the angle u shown 
in the figure. 
P(_3, 4)
y
x
0
¨
r
	 7.	 In each of the four quadrants, identify the trigonometric func-
tions that are positive.
	 8.	 (a)	 Describe the steps we use to find the value of a trigono-
metric function of an angle u. 
(b)	 Find sin 5p/6.
	 9.	 (a)	 State the reciprocal identities.
(b)	 State the Pythagorean identities.
	10.	 (a)	 What is the area of a triangle with sides of length a and b 
and with included angle u?
(b)	 What is the area of a triangle with sides of length a, b, and c?
	11.	 (a)	 Define the inverse sine function, the inverse cosine func-
tion, and the inverse tangent function. 
(b)	 Find sin1
  1
2, cos11 !2/22 , and tan1
 1.
(c)	 For what values of x is the equation sin1sin1
 x2 x 
true? For what values of x is the equation 
sin11sin x2 x true?
■  CONCEPT CHECK
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6  ■  Review  527
	12.	 (a)	 State the Law of Sines.
(b)	 Find side a in the figure. 
A
B
a
b
C
85*
40*
100
(c)	 Explain the ambiguous case in the Law of Sines.
	13.	 (a)	 State the Law of Cosines.
(b)	 Find side a in the figure. 
A
B
a
30
C
40*
50
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
■  exercises
1–2  ■  From Degrees to Radians    Find the radian measure that 
corresponds to the given degree measure.
	 1.	 (a)  30	
(b)	 150	
(c)	 20	
(d)	 225
	 2.	 (a)  105	
(b)	 72	
(c)	 405	
(d)	 315
3–4  ■  From Radians to Degrees    Find the degree measure that 
corresponds to the given radian measure.
	 3.	 (a)  5p
6 	
(b)	  p
9 	
(c)	  4p
3 	
(d)	 4
	 4.	 (a)   5p
3 	
(b)	 10p
9 	
(c)	 5	
(d)	 11p
3
5–10  ■  Length of a Circular Arc    These exercises involve the for-
mula for the length of a circular arc.
	 5.	 Find the length of an arc of a circle of radius 10 m if the arc 
subtends a central angle of 2p/5 rad.
	 6.	 A central angle u in a circle of radius 2.5 cm is subtended by 
an arc of length 7 cm. Find the measure of u in degrees and 
radians.
	 7.	 A circular arc of length 25 ft subtends a central angle of 50. 
Find the radius of the circle.
	 8.	 A circular arc of length 13p m subtends a central angle of 
130. Find the radius of the circle.
	 9.	 How many revolutions will a car wheel of diameter 28 in. make 
over a period of half an hour if the car is traveling at 60 mi/h?
10.	 New York and Los Angeles are 2450 mi apart. Find the angle 
that the arc between these two cities subtends at the center of 
the earth. (The radius of the earth is 3960 mi.)
11–14  ■  Area of a Circular Sector    These exercises involve the 
formula for the area of a circular sector.
11.	 Find the area of a sector with central angle 2 rad in a circle 
of radius 5 m.
12.	 Find the area of a sector with central angle 52 in a circle of 
radius 200 ft.
13.	 A sector in a circle of radius 25 ft has an area of 125 ft2. Find 
the central angle of the sector.
14.	 The area of a sector of a circle with a central angle of 11p/6 
radians is 50 m2. Find the radius of the circle.
15.	 Angular Speed and Linear Speed    A potter’s wheel with 
radius 8 in. spins at 150 rpm. Find the angular and linear 
speeds of a point on the rim of the wheel.
8 in.
16.	 Angular Speed and Linear Speed    In an automobile transmis-
sion a gear ratio g is the ratio
g angular speed of engine
angular speed of wheels
	 	 The angular speed of the engine is shown on the tachometer 
(in rpm).
	 	     A certain sports car has wheels with radius 11 in. Its gear 
ratios are shown in the following table. Suppose the car is in 
fourth gear and the tachometer 
reads 3500 rpm.
(a)	 Find the angular speed of the 
engine.
(b)	 Find the angular speed of the 
wheels.
(c)	 How fast (in mi/h) is the car 
traveling?
Gear
Ratio
1st
4.1
2nd
3.0
3rd
1.6
4th
0.9
5th
0.7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

528 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
17–18  ■  Trigonometric Ratios    Find the values of the six trigo-
nometric ratios of u.
17.	
¨
7
5
	
18.	
3
10
¨
19–22  ■  Finding Sides in Right Triangles    Find the sides labeled 
x and y, rounded to two decimal places.
	19.	
40*
x
5
y
	
20.	
35*
x
2
y
21.	
20*
x
1
y
20*
	
22.	
23–26  ■  Solving a Triangle    Solve the triangle.
23.	
20*
3
A
B
C
	
24.	
60*
20
A
B
C
25.	 	
	
26.	
27.	 Trigonometric 
Ratios    Express the 
lengths a and b in 
the ﬁgure in terms of 
the trigonometric 
ratios of u.
x
y
30*
4
25
7
A
B
C
12
5
A
B
C
28.	 CN Tower    The highest free-standing tower in North America 
is the CN Tower in Toronto, Canada. From a distance of  
1 km from its base, the angle of elevation to the top of the 
tower is 28.81. Find the height of the tower.
29.	 Perimeter of a Regular Hexagon    Find the perimeter of a 
regular hexagon that is inscribed in a circle of radius 8 m.
30.	 Pistons of an Engine    The pistons in a car engine move up 
and down repeatedly to turn the crankshaft, as shown. Find 
the height of the point P above the center O of the crankshaft 
in terms of the angle u.
y
O
¨
2
P
x
8 in.
Q
31.	 Radius of the Moon    As viewed from the earth, the angle 
subtended by the full moon is 0.518. Use this information 
and the fact that the distance AB from the earth to the moon 
is 236,900 mi to ﬁnd the radius of the moon.
B
0.518˚
A
32.	 Distance Between Two Ships    A pilot measures the angles of 
depression to two ships to be 40 and 52 (see the ﬁgure). If 
the pilot is ﬂying at an elevation of 35,000 ft, ﬁnd the dis-
tance between the two ships.
52º
40º
0
1
¨
a
b
y
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6  ■  Review  529
33–44  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find the exact 
value.
33.	 sin 315	
34.	 csc 9p
4 	
35.	 tan1135°2
	36.	 cos 5p
6 	
37.	 cot a 22p
3 b 	
38.	 sin 405
39.	 cos 585	
40.	 sec 22p
3 	
41.	 csc 8p
3
	42.	 sec 13p
6 	
43.	 cot1 390°2 	
44.	 tan 23p
4
45.	 Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find the values of the six 
trigonometric ratios of the angle u in standard position if the 
point 15,  122  is on the terminal side of u.
46.	 Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find sin u if u is in stan-
dard position and its terminal side intersects the circle of 
radius 1 centered at the origin at the point 1!3/2,  1
22 .
47.	 Angle Formed by a Line    Find the acute angle that is formed 
by the line y !3x 1 0 and the x-axis.
48.	 Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find the six trigonometric 
ratios of the angle u in standard position if its terminal side is 
in Quadrant III and is parallel to the line 4y  2x  1  0.
49–52  ■  Expressing One Trigonometric Function in Terms of 
Another    Write the ﬁrst expression in terms of the second, for u 
in the given quadrant.
49.	 tan u,    cos u;    u in Quadrant II
50.	 sec u,    sin u;    u in Quadrant III
51.	 tan2u,    sin u;    u in any quadrant
52.	 csc2u cos2u,    sin u;    u in any quadrant
53–56  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Find the values 
of the six trigonometric functions of u from the information 
given.
53.	 tan u !7/3,    sec u 4
3
	54.	 sec u 41
40,    csc u  41
9
55.	 sin u 3
5,    cos u  0
	56.	 sec u  13
5 ,    tan u  0
57–60  ■  Value of an Expression    Find the value of the given 
trigonometric expression.
57.	 If tan u  1
2 for u in Quadrant II, ﬁnd sin u  cos u.
58.	 If sin u 1
2 for u in Quadrant I, ﬁnd tan u  sec u.
59.	 If tan u  1, ﬁnd sin2u  cos2u.
60.	 If cos u !3/2 and p/2  u  p, ﬁnd sin 2u.
61–64  ■  Values of Inverse Trigonometric Functions    Find the 
exact value of the expression.
61.	 sin11 !3/22 	
62.	 tan11 !3/32
63.	 tanAsin1
  2
5B	
64.	 sinAcos1
  3
8B
65–66  ■  Inverse Trigonometric Functions    Rewrite the expres-
sion as an algebraic expression in x.
65.	 sin1tan1 x2 	
66.	 sec1sin1
 x2
67–68  ■  Finding an Unknown Side    Express u in terms of x.
67.	
x
3
¨
	 68.	
x
2
¨
69–78  ■  Law of Sines and Law of Cosines    Find the side labeled 
x or the angle labeled u.
69.	
A
B
C
10
30*
80*
x
	 70. 
71.	 	
	
72.	
73.	 A
B
C
8
120*
x
2
	
74.	
A
B
6
110*
x
4
C
75.	
A
C
B
12
23
¨
25*
	
76.	
A
C
B
5
4
¨
80*
77.	 A
B
C
100
85
120
¨
	
78.	
45* 105*
A
B
C
2
x
A
B
C
100
40*
x
210
A
B
C
70
60*
x
20
B
C
A
3
5
¨
10*
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

530 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
79.	 Distance Between Two Ships    Two ships leave a port at the 
same time. One travels at 20 mi/h in a direction N 32 E, and 
the other travels at 28 mi/h in a direction S 42 E (see the 
ﬁgure). How far apart are the two ships after 2 h?
N
E
32*
S
W
42*
S 42˚ E
N 32˚ E
80.	 Height of a Building    From a point A on the ground, the 
angle of elevation to the top of a tall building is 24.1. From 
a point B, which is 600 ft closer to the building, the angle of 
elevation is measured to be 30.2. Find the height of the 
building.
24.1*
30.2*
600 ft
B
A
81.	 Distance Between Two Points    Find the distance between 
points A and B on opposite sides of a lake from the informa-
tion shown.
C
B
A
3.2 mi
5.6 mi
42*
82.	 Distance Between a Boat and the Shore    A boat is cruising 
the ocean off a straight shoreline. Points A and B are 120 mi 
apart on the shore, as shown. It is found that A  42.3 and 
B  68.9. Find the shortest distance from the boat to the 
shore.
120 mi
A
B
shoreline
68.9*
42.3*
C
83.	 Area of a Triangle    Find the area of a triangle with sides of 
length 8 and 14 and included angle 35.
84.	 Heron’s Formula    Find the area of a triangle with sides of 
length 5, 6, and 8.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

531
	 1.	 Find the radian measures that correspond to the degree measures 330 and 135.
	 2.	 Find the degree measures that correspond to the radian measures 4p/3 and 1.3.
	 3.	 The rotor blades of a helicopter are 16 ft long and are rotating at 120 rpm.
(a)	 Find the angular speed of the rotor.
(b)	 Find the linear speed of a point on the tip of a blade.
	 4.	 Find the exact value of each of the following.
(a)	 sin 405            (b)  tan1150°2           (c)  sec 5p
3             (d)  csc 5p
2
	 5.	 Find tan u  sin u for the angle u shown.
¨
3
2
	 6.	 Express the lengths a and b shown in the ﬁgure in terms of u.
¨
b
a
24
	 7.	 If cos u  1
3 and u is in Quadrant III, ﬁnd tanu cot u  csc u.
	 8.	 If sin u 5
13 and tan u  5
12, ﬁnd sec u.
	 9.	 Express tan u in terms of sec u for u in Quadrant II.
10.	 The base of the ladder in the ﬁgure is 6 ft from the building, and the angle formed by the 
ladder and the ground is 73. How high up the building does the ladder touch?
6 ft
73*
	11.	 Express u in each ﬁgure in terms of x.
(a)	
4
x
¨
	
(b)	
¨
3
x
12.	 Find the exact value of cosAtan1
  9
40B.
CHAPTER 6
TEST
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

532 
CHAPTER 6  ■  Test
13–18  ■  Find the side labeled x or the angle labeled u.
13.	
12
10
x
48˚
	
14.	
230
52˚
69˚
x
15.	
50
x
28˚
20˚
	
16.	
108˚
28
x
15
17.	
9
8
6
¨
	
18.	
75*
7
5
¨
19.	 Refer to the ﬁgure below.
(a)	 Find the area of the shaded region.
(b)	 Find the perimeter of the shaded region.
72˚
10 m
20.	 Refer to the ﬁgure below.
(a)	 Find the angle opposite the longest side.
(b)	 Find the area of the triangle.
20
13
9
21.	 Two wires tether a balloon to the ground, as shown. How high is the balloon above the 
ground?
75*
85*
100 ft
h
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

533
How can we measure the height of a mountain or the distance across a lake? Obviously, 
it may be difﬁcult, inconvenient, or impossible to measure these distances directly (that 
is, by using a tape measure or a yardstick). On the other hand, it is easy to measure 
angles involving distant objects. That’s where trigonometry comes in: The trigonomet-
ric ratios relate angles to distances, so they can be used to calculate distances from the 
measured angles. In this Focus we examine how trigonometry is used to map a town. 
Modern mapmaking methods use satellites and the Global Positioning System, but 
mathematics remains at the core of the process.
■  Mapping a Town
A student wants to draw a map of his hometown. To construct an accurate map (or scale 
model), he needs to ﬁnd distances between various landmarks in the town. The student 
makes the measurements shown in Figure 1. Note that only one distance is measured: 
that between City Hall and the ﬁrst bridge. All other measurements are angles.
Figure 1
The distances between other landmarks can now be found by using the Law of  
Sines. For example, the distance x from the bank to the ﬁrst bridge is calculated by  
applying the Law of Sines to the triangle with vertices at City Hall, the bank, and the 
ﬁrst bridge.
 
x
sin 50° 
0.86
sin 30°
    Law of Sines
 x 0.86 sin 50°
sin 30°
    Solve for x
 1.32 mi
    Calculator
So the distance between the bank and the ﬁrst bridge is 1.32 mi.
Surveying
	
FOCUS ON MODELING
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

534 
Focus on Modeling
The distance we just found can now be used to ﬁnd other distances. For instance, we 
ﬁnd the distance y between the bank and the cliff as follows:
 
y
sin 64° 
1.32
sin 50°
    Law of Sines
 y 1.32 sin 64°
sin 50°
    Solve for y
 1.55 mi
    Calculator
Continuing in this fashion, we can calculate all the distances between the landmarks 
shown in the rough sketch in Figure 1. We can use this information to draw the map 
shown in Figure 2.
N
City Hall
Church
Fire Hall
School
Bank
0
1/4 1/2 3/4
1 mile
Figure 2
To make a topographic map, we need to measure elevation. This concept is explored 
in Problems 4–6.
Problems
	 1.	 Completing the Map    Find the distance between the church and City Hall.
	 2.	 Completing the Map    Find the distance between the ﬁre hall and the school.   
[Hint: You will need to ﬁnd other distances ﬁrst.]
	 3.	 Determining a Distance    A surveyor on one side of a river wishes to ﬁnd the distance 
between points A and B on the opposite side of the river. On her side she chooses points C 
and D, which are 20 m apart, and measures the angles shown in the ﬁgure below. Find the 
distance between A and B.
A
B
C
20 m
50*
D
45*
40*
20*
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Surveying  535
	 4.	 Height of a Cliff    To measure the height of an inaccessible cliff on the opposite side of a 
river, a surveyor makes the measurements shown in the ﬁgure at the left. Find the height of 
the cliff.
200 m
33.1*
51.6*
69.4*
	 5.	 Height of a Mountain    To calculate the height h of a mountain, angles a and b and  
distance d are measured, as shown in the ﬁgure below.
(a)	 Show that
h 
d
cot a cot b
(b)	 Show that
h d  sin a sin b
sin1b a2
(c)	 Use the formulas from parts (a) and (b) to ﬁnd the height of a mountain if a  25,  
b  29, and d  800 ft. Do you get the same answer from each formula?
å
∫
d
h
B
A
C
	 6.	 Determining a Distance    A surveyor has determined that a mountain is 2430 ft high. 
From the top of the mountain he measures the angles of depression to two landmarks at the 
base of the mountain and ﬁnds them to be 42 and 39. (Observe that these are the same as 
the angles of elevation from the landmarks as shown in the ﬁgure at the left.) The angle be-
tween the lines of sight to the landmarks is 68. Calculate the distance between the two  
landmarks.
	 7.	 Surveying Building Lots    A surveyor surveys two adjacent lots and makes the follow-
ing rough sketch showing his measurements. Calculate all the distances shown in the 
ﬁgure, and use your result to draw an accurate map of the two lots.
42º
39º
68º
2430 ft
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

536 
Focus on Modeling
	 8.	 Great Survey of India    The Great Trigonometric Survey of India was one of the most 
massive mapping projects ever undertaken (see the margin note on page 512). Do some  
research at your library or on the Internet to learn more about the Survey, and write a  
report on your ﬁndings.
© The British Library Board. (Index Chart to the Great Trigonometrical Survey of India/Maps.144.e.24)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Chapters 5 and 6 we studied graphical and geometric properties of the 
trigonometric functions. In this chapter we study algebraic properties of 
these functions, that is, simplifying and factoring expressions and solving 
equations that involve trigonometric functions. 
We have used the trigonometric functions to model different real-world  
phenomena, including periodic motion (such as the sound waves produced 
by a band). To obtain information from a model, we often need to solve 
equations. If the model involves trigonometric functions, we need to solve 
trigonometric equations. Solving trigonometric equations often involves 
using trigonometric identities. We’ve already encountered some basic 
trigonometric identities in the preceding chapters. We begin this chapter by 
finding many new identities.
537
Analytic Trigonometry
7
7.1	 Trigonometric Identities
7.2	 Addition and Subtraction 
Formulas
7.3	 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, 
and Product-Sum Formulas
7.4	 Basic Trigonometric 
Equations
7.5	 More Trigonometric 
Equations
Focus on Modeling 
	
Traveling and Standing 
Waves
© Jule_Berlin/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

538 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
7.1  Trigonometric Identities
■  Simplifying Trigonometric Expressions  ■  Proving Trigonometric Identities
Recall that an equation is a statement that two mathematical expressions are equal. For 
example, the following are equations:
x 2 5
1x 12 2 x2 2x 1
sin2
 t cos2
 t 1
An identity is an equation that is true for all values of the variable(s). The last two 
equations above are identities, but the first one is not, since it is not true for values of x 
other than 3.
A trigonometric identity is an identity involving trigonometric functions. We 
begin by listing some of the basic trigonometric identities. We studied most of  
these in Chapters 5 and 6; you are asked to prove the cofunction identities in Exer-
cise 118.
Fundamental Trigonometric Identities
Reciprocal Identities
csc x 
1
sin x  sec x 
1
cos x  cot x 
1
tan x
tan x sin x
cos x  cot x cos x
sin x
Pythagorean Identities
sin2
 x cos2 x 1  tan2 x 1 sec2
 x  1 cot2
 x csc2
 x
Even-Odd Identities
sin1x2 sin x  cos1x2 cos x  tan1x2 tan x
Cofunction Identities
 sin a p
2 xb cos x   
 tana p
2 xb cot x   
 seca p
2 xb csc x
 cos a p
2 xb sin x    
 cota p
2 xb tan x   
 csca p
2 xb sec x
■  Simplifying Trigonometric Expressions
Identities enable us to write the same expression in different ways. It is often possible 
to rewrite a complicated-looking expression as a much simpler one. To simplify alge-
braic expressions, we used factoring, common denominators, and the Special Product 
Formulas. To simplify trigonometric expressions, we use these same techniques to-
gether with the fundamental trigonometric identities.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.1  ■  Trigonometric Identities  539
Example 1  ■  Simplifying a Trigonometric Expression
Simplify the expression cos t  tan t sin t.
Solution    We start by rewriting the expression in terms of sine and cosine.
 cos t tan t sin t cos t a sin t
cos t b  sin t    Reciprocal identity
  cos2
 t sin2
 t
cos t
    Common denominator
  1
cos t
    Pythagorean identity
  sec t
    Reciprocal identity
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Example 2  ■  Simplifying by Combining Fractions
Simplify the expression sin u
cos u 
cos u
1 sin u.
Solution    We combine the fractions by using a common denominator.
 sin u
cos u 
cos u
1 sin u 
sin u 11 sin u2 cos2 u
cos u 11 sin u2
    Common denominator
  sin u sin2 u cos2 u
cos u 11 sin u2
    Distribute sin u
  
sin u 1
cos u 11 sin u2
    Pythagorean identity
  
1
cos u sec u
    Cancel, and use reciprocal 
identity
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
■  Proving Trigonometric Identities
Many identities follow from the fundamental identities. In the examples that follow, we 
learn how to prove that a given trigonometric equation is an identity, and in the process 
we will see how to discover new identities.
First, it’s easy to decide when a given equation is not an identity. All we need to do 
is show that the equation does not hold for some value of the variable (or variables). 
Thus the equation
sin x cos x 1
is not an identity, because when x  p/4, we have
sin p
4 cos p
4 !2
2
!2
2
!2 ? 1
To verify that a trigonometric equation is an identity, we transform one side of the 
equation into the other side by a series of steps, each of which is itself an identity.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

540 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Guidelines for Proving Trigonometric Identities
1.	 Start with one side.    Pick one side of the equation, and write it down. Your 
goal is to transform it into the other side. It’s usually easier to start with the 
more complicated side.
2.	 Use known identities.    Use algebra and the identities you know to change 
the side you started with. Bring fractional expressions to a common denom-
inator, factor, and use the fundamental identities to simplify expressions.
3.	 Convert to sines and cosines.    If you are stuck, you may ﬁnd it helpful to 
rewrite all functions in terms of sines and cosines.
Warning: To prove an identity, we do not just perform the same operations on both 
sides of the equation. For example, if we start with an equation that is not an identity, 
such as
	
sin x sin x
and square both sides, we get the equation
	
sin2
 x sin2
 x
which is clearly an identity. Does this mean that the original equation is an identity? Of 
course not. The problem here is that the operation of squaring is not reversible in the 
sense that we cannot arrive back at the original equation by taking square roots (reversing 
the procedure). Only operations that are reversible will necessarily transform an identity 
into an identity.
Example 3  ■  Proving an Identity by Rewriting in Terms  
of Sine and Cosine
Consider the equation cos u 1sec u cos u2 sin2 u.
(a)	 Verify algebraically that the equation is an identity.
(b)	 Confirm graphically that the equation is an identity.
Solution   
(a)	 The left-hand side looks more complicated, so we start with it and try to trans-
form it into the right-hand side.
 LHS cos u 1sec u cos u2
  cos u a
1
cos u cos ub         Reciprocal identity
  1 cos2
 u
        Expand
  sin2
 u RHS
        Pythagorean identity
(b)	 We graph each side of the equation to see whether the graphs coincide. From Fig-
ure 1 we see that the graphs of y cos u 1sec u cos u2  and y sin2 u are 
identical. This confirms that the equation is an identity.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
In Example 3 it isn’t easy to see how to change the right-hand side into the left-hand 
side, but it’s deﬁnitely possible. Simply notice that each step is reversible. In other 
words, if we start with the last expression in the proof and work backward through the 
steps, the right-hand side is transformed into the left-hand side. You will probably 
agree, however, that it’s more difﬁcult to prove the identity this way. That’s why it’s 
often better to change the more complicated side of the identity into the simpler side.
1
0
6.5
_3.5
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.1  ■  Trigonometric Identities  541
Example 4  ■  Proving an Identity by Combining Fractions
Verify the identity
2 tan x sec x 
1
1 sin x 
1
1 sin x
Solution    Finding a common denominator and combining the fractions on the right-
hand side of this equation, we get
 RHS 
1
1 sin x 
1
1 sin x
  
11 sin x2 11 sin x2
11 sin x2 11 sin x2
        common denominator
  2 sin x
1 sin2
 x
        Simplify
  2 sin x
cos2 x
        Pythagorean identity
  2 sin x
cos x
 a
1
cos x b
        Factor
  2 tan x sec x LHS
        Reciprocal identities
Now Try Exercise 65	
■
In Example 5 we introduce “something extra” to the problem by multiplying the 
numerator and the denominator by a trigonometric expression, chosen so that we can 
simplify the result.
Example 5  ■  Proving an Identity by Introducing Something Extra
Verify the identity 
cos u
1 sin u sec u tan u.
Solution    We start with the left-hand side and multiply the numerator and denomi-
nator by 1  sin u.
 LHS 
cos u
1 sin u
  
cos u
1 sin u
 #  1 sin u
1 sin u    Multiply numerator and 
denominator by 1 1 sin u
  
cos u 11 sin u2
1 sin2 u
    Expand denominator
  
cos u 11 sin u2
cos2 u
    Pythagorean identity
  1 sin u
cos u
    Cancel common factor
  
1
cos u sin u
cos u
    Separate into two fractions
  sec u tan u
    Reciprocal identities
Now Try Exercise 77	
■
See the Prologue: Principles of Prob-
lem Solving, page P2
We multiply by 1  sinu because we 
know by the difference of squares  
formula that
11 sin u2 11 sin u2 1 sin2
 u
and this is just cos2u, a simpler  
expression.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

542 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Here is another method for proving that an equation is an identity. If we can trans-
form each side of the equation separately, by way of identities, to arrive at the same 
result, then the equation is an identity. Example 6 illustrates this procedure.
Example 6  ■  Proving an Identity by Working  
with Both Sides Separately
Verify the identity 1 cos u
cos u

tan2
 u
sec u 1.
Solution    We prove the identity by changing each side separately into the same 
expression. (You should supply the reasons for each step.)
LHS 1 cos u
cos u

1
cos u cos u
cos u sec u 1
RHS 
tan2
 u
sec u 1 sec2
 u 1
sec u 1 
1sec u 12 1sec u 12
sec u 1
sec u 1
It follows that LHS  RHS, so the equation is an identity.
Now Try Exercise 83	
■
We conclude this section by describing the technique of trigonometric sub­stitution, 
which we use to convert algebraic expressions to trigonometric ones. This is often use-
ful in calculus, for instance, in ﬁnding the area of a circle or an ellipse.
Example 7  ■  Trigonometric Substitution
Substitute sin u for x in the expression "1 x 2, and simplify. Assume that  
0  u  p/2.
Solution    Setting x  sin u, we have
 "1 x 2 "1 sin2
 u    Substitute x  sin u
  "cos2
 u
    Pythagorean identity
  cos u
    Take square root
The last equality is true because cos u  0 for the values of u in question.
Now Try Exercise 89	
■
Euclid (circa 300 b.c.) taught in Alexan-
dria. His Elements is the most widely 
influential scientific book in history. For 
2000 years it was the standard introduc-
tion to geometry in schools, and for 
many generations it was considered the 
best way to develop logical reasoning. 
Abraham Lincoln, for instance, studied 
the Elements as a way to sharpen his 
mind. The story is told that King Ptolemy 
once asked Euclid whether there was a 
faster way to learn geometry than 
through the Elements. Euclid replied that 
there is “no royal road to geometry”—
meaning by this that mathematics does 
not respect wealth or social status. Euclid 
was revered in his own time and was 
referred to as “The Geometer” or “The 
Writer of the Elements.” The greatness of 
the Elements stems from its precise, logi-
cal, and systematic treatment of geome-
try. For dealing with equality, Euclid lists 
the following rules, which he calls “com-
mon notions.”
1.	 Things that are equal to the same 
thing are equal to each other.
2.	 If equals are added to equals, the 
sums are equal.
3.	 If equals are subtracted from equals, 
the remainders are equal.
4.	 Things that coincide with one another 
are equal.
5.	 The whole is greater than the part.
Concepts
	 1.	 An equation is called an identity if it is valid for  
 
values of the variable. The equation 2x x x is an alge-
	 	 braic identity, and the equation sin2  x cos2  x  
 is 
a trigonometric identity.
	 2.	 For any x it is true that cos1x2  has the same value as cos x. 
	 	 We express this fact as the identity  
  .
Skills
3–12  ■  Simplifying Trigonometric Expressions    Write the trigono-
metric expression in terms of sine and cosine, and then simplify.
	 3.	 cos t tan t	
  4.	 cos t csc t
	 5.	 sin u sec u	
  6.	 tan u csc u
	 7.	 tan2x  sec2x	
  8.	 sec x
csc x
7.1  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.1  ■  Trigonometric Identities  543
	 9.	 sin u  cot u cos u	
10.	 cos2
 u 11 tan2
 u2
	11.	 sec u cos u
sin u
	
12.	
cot u
csc u sin u
13–28  ■  Simplifying Trigonometric Expressions    Simplify the 
trigonometric expression.
13.	 sin x sec x
tan x
	
14.	 cos x sec x
cot x
15.	 sin t tan t
tan t
	
16.	 1 cot A
csc A
17.	 cos3x  sin2x cos x	
18.	 sin4
 a cos4
 a cos2
 a
19.	 sec2
 x 1
sec2
 x
	
20.	 sec x cos x
tan x
21.	 1 cos y
1 sec y	
22.	 1 sin y
1 csc y
23.	 1 sin u
cos u

cos u
1 sin u	
24.	
sin t
1 cos t csc t
25.	
cos x
sec x tan x	
26.	
cot A 1
1 tan1A2
27.	
1
1 sin a 
1
1 sin a	
28.	 2 tan2
 x
sec2
 x
1
29–30  ■  Proving an Identity Algebraically and Graphically    Con-
sider the given equation. (a) Verify algebraically that the equation is 
an identity. (b) Confirm graphically that the equation is an identity.
29.	
cos x
sec x sin x csc x sin x	 30.  tan y
csc y sec y cos y
31–88  ■  Proving Identities    Verify the identity.
31.	 sin u
tan u cos u	
32.	 tan x
sec x sin x
33.	 cos u sec u
tan u
cot u	
34.	 cot x sec x
csc x
1
35.	 tan y
csc y 
1
cos y 
1
sec y	
36.	 cos2
 √
sin √csc √sin √
37.	 cos1x2 sin1x2 cos x sin x
38.	 cot1a2 cos1a2 sin1a2 csc a
39.	 tan u cot u sec u csc u
40.	 1sin x cos x2 2 1 2 sin x cos x
41.	 11 cos b2 11 cos b2 
1
csc2
 b
42.	 cos x
sec x sin x
csc x 1
43.	
1
1 sin2
 y 1 tan2
 y	
44.	 csc x sin x cos x cot x
45.	 1tan x cot x2 2 sec2
 x csc2
 x
46.	 tan2
 x cot2
 x sec2
 x csc2
 x
47.	 11 sin2
 t cos2
 t2 2 4 sin2
 t cos2
 t 4 cos2
 t
48.	
2 sin x cos x
1sin x cos x2 2 1 1
49.	 csc x cos2
 x sin x csc x
50.	 cot2
 t cos2
 t cot2
 t cos2
 t
51.	
1sin x cos x2 2
sin2
 x cos2
 x sin2
 x cos2
 x
1sin x cos x2 2
52.	 1sin x cos x2 4 11 2  sin x cos x2 2
53.	 sec t cos t
sec t
sin2
 t
54.	 1cot x csc x2 1cos x 12 sin x
55.	 cos2
 x sin2
 x 2 cos2
 x 1
56.	 2 cos2
 x 1 1 2 sin2
 x
57.	 sin4 u cos4
 u sin2
 u cos2
 u
58.	 11 cos2
 x2 11 cot2
 x2 1
59.	
1sin t cos t2 2
sin t cos t
2 sec t csc t
60.	 sec t csc t 1tan t cot t2 sec2 t csc2 t
61.	 1 tan2
 u
1 tan2
 u 
1
cos2
 u sin2
 u
62.	 1 sec2
 x
1 tan2
 x 1 cos2
 x
63.	 sec x csc x
tan x cot x sin x cos x
64.	 sin x cos x
sec x csc x sin x cos x
65.	 1 cos x
sin x

sin x
1 cos x 2 csc x
66.	 csc x cot x
sec x 1
cot x
67.	 tan2
 u sin2
 u tan2
 u sin2
 u
68.	 sec4
 x tan4
 x sec2
 x tan2
 x
69.	 1 tan x
1 tan x cos x sin x
cos x sin x	
70.	
cos u
1 sin u sin u csc u
cos u cot u
71.	
1
sec x tan x 
1
sec x tan x 2 sec x
72.	 cos2
 t tan2
 t 1
sin2
 t
tan2
 t
	73.	 1 sin x
1 sin x 1 sin x
1 sin x 4 tan x sec x
	74.	 tan x tan y
cot x cot y tan x tan y
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

544 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
	75.	 sin3
 x cos3
 x
sin x cos x 1 sin x cos x
	76.	 tan √cot √
tan2
 √cot2
 √sin √ cos √
77.	 1 cos a
sin a

sin a
1 cos a
78.	 sin x 1
sin x 1 
cos2
 x
1sin x 12 2	
79.	
sin „
sin „ cos „ 
tan „
1 tan „
80.	
sin A
1 cos A cot A csc A
81.	
sec x
sec x tan x sec x 1sec x tan x2
82.	 sec √tan √
1
sec √tan √
83.	
cos u
1 sin u sec u tan u	
84.	
tan √ sin √
tan √sin √tan √sin √
tan √ sin √
85.	 1 sin x
1 sin x 1sec x tan x2 2
	86.	 1 sin x
1 sin x 1tan x sec x2 2
	87.	 csc x cot x 
1
csc x cot x
88.	 sec u 1
sec u 1 tan u sin u
tan u sin u
89–94  ■  Trigonometric Substitution    Make the indicated  
trigonometric substitution in the given algebraic expression and 
simplify (see Example 7). Assume that 0 , u  p/2.
	89.	
x
"1 x 2, x sin u	
90.	 "1 x 2, x tan u
	91.	 "x 2 1, x sec u	
92.	
1
x 2"4 x 2, x 2 tan u
	93.	 "9 x 2, x 3 sin u	
94.	 "x 2 25
x
, x 5 sec u
95–98  ■  Determining Identities Graphically    Graph f  
and g in the same viewing rectangle. Do the graphs suggest  
that the equation f1x2 g1x2  is an identity? Prove your  
answer.
	95.	 f1x2 cos2
 x sin2
 x, g1x2 1 2 sin2
 x
	96.	 f1x2 tan x 11 sin x2, g1x2 sin x cos x
1 sin x
	97.	 f1x2 1sin x cos x2 2, g1x2 1
	98.	 f1x2 cos4
 x sin4
 x, g1x2 2 cos2
 x 1
Skills plus
99–104  ■  Proving More Identities    Verify the identity.
	 99.	 1sin x sin y cos x cos y2 1sin x sin y cos x cos y2
sin2
 y cos2
 x
	100.	 1 cos x sin x
1 cos x sin x 1 sin x
cos x
101.	 1tan x cot x2 4 sec4
 x csc4
 x
102.	 1sin a tan a2 1cos a cot a2 1cos a 121sin a 12
103.	 sin3
 y csc3
 y
sin y csc y sin2
 y csc2
 y 1
104.	 sin6
 b cos6
 b 1 3 sin2
 b cos2
 b
105–108  ■  Proving Identities Involving Other Functions    These 
identities involve trigonometric functions as well as other func-
tions that we have studied.
105.	 ln 0  tan x sin x 0 2 ln 0  sin x 0 ln 0  sec x 0
106.	 ln 0  tan x 0 ln 0  cot x 0 0
107.	 esin2
 xetan2
 x esec2
 xecos2
 x	
108.	 ex2 ln 0  sin x0 ex
 sin2
 x
109–112  ■  Is the Equation an Identity?    Determine whether the 
given equation is an identity. If the equation is not an identity, 
find all its solutions. 
109.	 esin2
 xecos2
 x e	
110.	
x
x 1 1 x
111.	 "sin2 x 1 "sin2 x 1
112.	 xeln x2 x3
113.	 An Identity Involving Three Variables    Suppose 
x R cos u sin f, y R sin u sin f, and z R cos f.  
Verify the identity x2 y2 z2 R2.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	114.	 Discuss:  Equations That Are Identities    You have encoun-
tered many identities in this course. Which of the following 
equations do you recognize as identities? For those that you 
think are identities, test several values of the variables to 
confirm that the equation is true for those variables.
(a)	 1x y2 2 x2 2xy y2	
(b)  x2 y2 1
(c)	 x1y z2 xy xz
(d)	 t2 cos2
 t 1t cos t2 1t cos t2
(e)	 sin t cos t 1	
(f)  x2 tan2
 x 0
	115.	 Discuss:  Equations That Are Not Identities    How can you 
tell if an equation is not an identity? Show that the follow-
ing equations are not identities.
(a)	 sin 2x 2 sin x
(b)	 sin1x y2 sin x sin y
(c)	 sec2
 x csc2
 x 1
(d)	
1
sin x cos x csc x sec x
116.  Discuss:  Graphs and Identities    Suppose you graph two 
functions, f and g, on a graphing device and their graphs  
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.2  ■  Addition and Subtraction Formulas  545
appear identical in the viewing rectangle. Does this prove 
that the equation f1x2 g1x2  is an identity? Explain.
117.  DiscOVER:  Making Up Your Own Identity    If you start with 
a trigonometric expression and rewrite it or simplify it, then 
setting the original expression equal to the rewritten expres-
sion yields a trigonometric identity. For instance, from 
Example 1 we get the identity
cos t tan t sin t sec t
	 	   Use this technique to make up your own identity, then give 
it to a classmate to verify.
118.  Discuss:  Cofunction Identities    In the right triangle 
shown, explain why √1p/22 u. Explain how you can 
obtain all six cofunction identities from this triangle for  
0  u  p/2.
u
√
	
	  
Note that u and √ are complementary angles. So the 
cofunction identities state that “a trigonometric function of 
an angle u is equal to the corresponding cofunction of the 
complementary angle √.”
7.2 
Addition and Subtraction Formulas
■  Addition and Subtraction Formulas  ■  Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse 
Trigonometric Functions  ■  Expressions of the form A sin x  B cos x
■  Addition and Subtraction Formulas
We now derive identities for trigonometric functions of sums and differences.
Addition and Subtraction Formulas
Formulas for sine:	
 sin1s t2 sin s cos t cos s sin t
	
 sin1s t2 sin s cos t cos s sin t
Formulas for cosine:	
 cos1s t2 cos s cos t sin s sin t
	
 cos1s t2 cos s cos t sin s sin t
Formulas for tangent:	
 tan1s t2 tan s tan t
1 tan s tan t
	
 tan1s t2 tan s tan t
1 tan s tan t
Proof of Addition Formula for Cosine    To prove the formula 
cos1s t2 cos s cos t sin s sin t
we use Figure 1. In the ﬁgure, the distances t, s  t, and s have been marked on the 
unit circle, starting at P011, 02  and terminating at Q1, P1, and Q0, respectively. The 
coordinates of these points are as follows:
 P011, 02   
 Q01cos1s2, sin1s22
 P11cos1s t2, sin1s t22    Q11cos t, sin t2
Since cos1s2 cos s and sin1s2 sin s, it follows that the point Q0 has the 
coordinates Q01cos s, sin s2 . Notice that the distances between P0 and P1 and 
between Q0 and Q1 measured along the arc of the circle are equal. Since equal arcs 
are subtended by equal chords, it follows that d1P0, P12 d1Q0, Q12 . Using the Dis-
tance Formula, we get
"3cos1s t2 14 2 3sin1s t2 04 2 "1cos t cos s2 2 1sin t sin s2 2
y
x
O
Q⁄
Q‚
P⁄
P‚
s
s+t
t
_s
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

546 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Squaring both sides and expanding, we have
	
 ___________These add to 1___________
	
↓	
↓
 cos21s t2 2 cos1s t2 1 sin21s t2
  cos2
 t 2 cos s cos t cos2
 s sin2
 t 2 sin s sin t sin2
 s
	
↑ ___________These add to 1___________↑
	
__________These add to 1__________
Using the Pythagorean identity sin2u  cos2u  1 three times gives
2 2 cos1s t2 2 2 cos s cos t 2 sin s sin t
Finally, subtracting 2 from each side and dividing both sides by 2, we get
cos1s t2 cos s cos t sin s sin t
which proves the Addition Formula for Cosine.
■
Proof of Subtraction Formula for Cosine    Replacing t with t in the Addition  
Formula for Cosine, we get
 cos1s t2 cos1s 1t22
  cos s cos1t2 sin s sin1t2        Addition Formula for Cosine
  cos s cos t sin s sin t
        Even-odd identities
This proves the Subtraction Formula for Cosine.
■
See Exercises 77 and 78 for proofs of the other Addition Formulas.
Example 1  ■  Using the Addition and Subtraction Formulas
Find the exact value of each expression.
(a)	 cos 75            (b)  cos  p
12
Solution
(a)	 Notice that 75  45  30. Since we know the exact values of sine and cosine 
at 45 and 30, we use the Addition Formula for Cosine to get
 cos 75cos145302
  cos 45 cos 30sin 45 sin 30
  !2
2  !3
2
!2
2  1
2 !2!3 !2
4
!6 !2
4
(b)	 Since p
12 p
4 p
6 , the Subtraction Formula for Cosine gives
 cos  p
12 cos a p
4 p
6 b
  cos  p
4 cos  p
6 sin  p
4 sin  p
6
  !2
2  !3
2
!2
2  1
2 !6 !2
4
Now Try Exercises 3 and 9	
■
↑
↑
Stock Montage/Archive Photos/Getty Images
Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier 
(1768–1830) is responsible for the most 
powerful application of the trigonometric 
functions (see the margin note on  
page 427). He used sums of these func-
tions to describe such physical phenom-
ena as the transmission of sound and the 
ﬂow of heat.
Orphaned as a young boy, Fourier was 
educated in a military school, where he 
became a mathematics teacher at the age 
of 20. He was later appointed professor at 
the École Polytechnique but resigned this 
position to accompany Napoleon on his 
expedition to Egypt, where Fourier served 
as governor. After returning to France, he 
began conducting experiments on heat. 
The French Academy refused to publish his 
early papers on this subject because of his 
lack of rigor. Fourier eventually became 
Secretary of the Academy and in this 
capacity had his papers published in their 
original form. Probably because of his 
study of heat and his years in the deserts 
of Egypt, Fourier became obsessed with 
keeping himself warm—he wore several 
layers of clothes, even in the summer, and 
kept his rooms at unbearably high temper-
atures. Evidently, these habits overbur-
dened his heart and contributed to his 
death at the age of 62.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.2  ■  Addition and Subtraction Formulas  547
Example 2  ■  Using the Addition Formula for Sine
Find the exact value of the expression sin 20 cos 40  cos 20 sin 40.
Solution    We recognize the expression as the right-hand side of the Addition  
Formula for Sine with s  20 and t  40. So we have
sin 20 cos 40cos 20 sin 40sin120402 sin 60!3
2
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
Example 3  ■  Proving a Cofunction Identity
Prove the cofunction identity cos a p
2 ub sin u.
Solution    By the Subtraction Formula for Cosine we have
 cos a p
2 ub cos p
2
  cos u sin p
2
  sin u
  0 # cos u 1 # sin u sin u
Now Try Exercises 21 and 25	
■
For acute angles, the cofunction identity in Example 3, as well as the other cofunc-
tion identities, can also be derived from the figure in the margin.
Example 4  ■  Proving an Identity
Verify the identity 1 tan x
1 tan x tana p
4 xb .
Solution    Starting with the right-hand side and using the Addition Formula for  
Tangent, we get
 RHS tana p
4 xb 
tan p
4 tan x
1 tan p
4
  tan x
  1 tan x
1 tan x LHS
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
The next example is a typical use of the Addition and Subtraction Formulas in 
calculus.
Example 5  ■  An Identity from Calculus
If f1x2 sin x, show that
f1x h2 f1x2
h
sin x a cos h 1
h
b cos x a sin h
h
b
ç !   -u@=   =ß u
u
b
r
a
π
2
b
r
u
π
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

548 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Solution
 
f1x h2 f1x2
h

sin1x h2 sin x
h
	
Deﬁnition of f
  sin x cos h cos x sin h sin x
h
	
Addition Formula for Sine
  
sin x 1cos h 12 cos x sin h
h
	
Factor
  sin x a cos h 1
h
b cos x a sin h
h
b 	
Separate the fraction
Now Try Exercise 65	
■
■  Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse 
Trigonometric Functions
Expressions involving trigonometric functions and their inverses arise in calculus. In 
the next examples we illustrate how to evaluate such expressions.
Example 6  ■  Simplifying an Expression Involving Inverse 
Trigonometric Functions 
Write sin1cos1
 x tan1 y2  as an algebraic expression in x and y, where 
1 x 1 and y is any real number.
Solution    Let u cos1
 x and f tan1
 y. Using the methods of Section 6.4,  
we sketch triangles with angles u and f such that cos u x and tan f y (see  
Figure 2). From the triangles we have 
sin u "1 x2        cos f 
1
"1 y2        sin f 
y
"1 y2
From the Addition Formula for Sine we have
 sin1cos1 x tan1 y2 sin1u f2
 sin u cos f cos u sin f
    Addition Formula 
for Sine
 "1 x2 
1
"1 y2 x 
y
"1 y2    From triangles
 
1
"1 y2
 1"1 x2 xy2
    Factor 
1
"1 y2
Now Try Exercises 47 and 51	
■
Example 7  ■  Evaluating an Expression Involving  
Trigonometric Functions 
Evaluate sin1u f2 , where sin u 12
13 with u in Quadrant II and tan f 3
4 with f in 
Quadrant III.
Solution    We first sketch the angles u and f in standard position with terminal sides 
in the appropriate quadrants as in Figure 3. Since sin u y/r 12
13, we can label a side 
y
¨
1
x
œ∑∑∑∑∑
1-≈
œ∑∑∑∑∑
1+¥
ƒ
tan ƒ=y
cos ¨=x
1
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.2  ■  Addition and Subtraction Formulas  549
and the hypotenuse in the triangle in Figure 3(a). To find the remaining side, we use the 
Pythagorean Theorem.
 x2 y2 r2         Pythagorean Theorem
 x2 122 132        y  12,    r  13
 x2 25         Solve for x2
 x 5        Because x  0
Similarly, since tan f y/x 3
4, we can label two sides of the triangle in Figure 3(b) 
and then use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the hypotenuse. 
y
5
13
12
_3
_5
_4
ƒ
¨
y
x
x
P (x, y)
P (x, y)
(b)
(a)
Figure 3
Now, to find sin1u f2 , we use the Addition Formula for Sine and the triangles in  
Figure 3.
 sin1u f2 sin u cos f cos u sin f        Addition Formula
 A12
13BA 4
5B A 5
13BA 3
5B
        From triangles
 33
65
        Calculate
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
■  Expressions of the Form A sin x  B cos x
We can write expressions of the form A sin x  B cos x in terms of a single trigonomet-
ric function using the Addition Formula for Sine. For example, consider the expression
1
2 sin x !3
2
  cos x
If we set f  p/3, then cos f 1
2 and sin f !3/2, and we can write
 1
2
  sin x !3
2  cos x cos f sin x sin  f cos x
  sin1x f2 sina x p
3 b
We are able to do this because the coefﬁcients 1
2 and !3/2 are precisely the cosine and 
sine of a particular number, in this case, p/3. We can use this same idea in general to 
write A sin x  B cos x in the form k sin1x  f2. We start by multiplying the numerator 
and denominator by "A2 B2 to get
A sin x B cos x "A2 B2 a
A
"A2 B2  sin x 
B
"A2 B2  cos xb
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

550 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
We need a number f with the property that
cos f 
A
"A2 B2  and  sin f 
B
"A2 B2
Figure 4 shows that the point 1A, B2  in the plane determines a number f with precisely 
this property. With this f we have
 A sin x B cos x "A2 B2 1cos f sin x sin f cos x2
  "A2 B2
  sin1x f2
We have proved the following theorem.
Sums of Sines and Cosines
If A and B are real numbers, then
A sin x B cos x k sin1x f2
where k "A2 B2 and f satisﬁes
cos f 
A
"A2 B2  and  sin f 
B
"A2 B2
Example 8  ■  A Sum of Sine and Cosine Terms
Express 3 sin x  4 cos x in the form k sin1x f2 .
Solution    By the preceding theorem, k "A2 B2 "32 42 5. The angle f 
has the property that sin f B/k 4
5 and cos f A/k 3
5, and f in Quadrant I 
(because sin f and cos f are both positive), so f sin1 4
5. Using a calculator, we 
get f < 53.1. Thus
3 sin x 4 cos x < 5 sin1x 53.12
Now Try Exercise 59	
■
Example 9  ■  Graphing a Trigonometric Function
Write the function f1x2 sin 2x !3 cos 2x in the form k sin12x f2 , and use 
the new form to graph the function.
Solution    Since A  1 and B !3, we have k "A2 B2 !1 3 2. 
The angle f satisﬁes cos f 1
2 and sin f !3/2. From the signs of these quanti-
ties we conclude that f is in Quadrant II. Thus f  2p/3. By the preceding theorem 
we can write
f1x2 sin 2x !3 cos 2x 2 sina 2x 2p
3 b
Using the form
f1x2 2 sin 2a x p
3 b
we see that the graph is a sine curve with amplitude 2, period 2p/2  p, and phase 
shift p/3. The graph is shown in Figure 5.
Now Try Exercise 63	
■
y
x
0
B
A
(A, B)
œ∑∑∑∑∑∑
A™+B™
ƒ
Figure 4
π
_π
_2
2
π
2
_
π
2
π
3
_
y=2 ß 2!x+   @
π
3
y
x
0
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.2  ■  Addition and Subtraction Formulas  551
Concepts
	 1.	 If we know the values of the sine and cosine of x  
and y, we can find the value of sin1x y2  by using  
the  
 Formula for Sine. State the formula: 
sin1x y2   
  .
	 2.	 If we know the values of the sine and cosine of x  
and y, we can find the value of cos1x y2  by using  
the  
 Formula for Cosine. State the formula: 
cos1x y2  
  .
Skills
3–14  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Use an Addition or 
Subtraction Formula to ﬁnd the exact value of the expression, as 
demonstrated in Example 1.
	 3.	 sin 75	
  4.	 sin 15
	 5.	 cos 105	
  6.	 cos 195
	 7.	 tan 15	
  8.	 tan 165
	 9.	 sin  19p
12 	
10.	 cos  17p
12
	11.	 tana p
12 b 	
12.	 sina 5p
12 b
13.	 cos  11p
12 	
14.	 tan  7p
12
15–20  ■  Values of Trigonometric Functions    Use an Addition or 
Subtraction Formula to write the expression as a trigonometric 
function of one number, and then ﬁnd its exact value.
15.	 sin 18 cos 27  cos 18 sin 27
16.	 cos 10 cos 80  sin 10 sin 80
17.	 cos  3p
7
  cos  2p
21
 sin   3p
7
  sin  2p
21
18.	
tan  p
18
 tan  p
9
1 tan  p
18
  tan  p
9
	
19.	 tan 73tan 13
1 tan 73 tan 13
20.	 cos 13p
15
  cos a p
5 b sin 13p
15
  sina p
5 b
21–24  ■  Cofunction Identities    Prove the cofunction identity 
using the Addition and Subtraction Formulas.
21.	 tana p
2 ub cot u	
22.	 cota p
2 ub tan u
23.	 seca p
2 ub csc u	
24.	 csca p
2 ub sec u
25–46  ■  Proving Identities    Prove the identity.
25.	 sinax p
2 b cos x
26.	 cos ax p
2 b sin x
27.	 sin1x p2 sin x
	28.	 cos1x p2 cos x
29.	 tan1x p2 tan x
	30.	 tanax p
2 b cot x
31.	 sina p
2 xb sina p
2 xb
32.	 cos ax p
3 b sinax p
6 b 0
33.	 tanax p
3 b 
!3 tan x
1 !3 tan x
34.	 tanax p
4 b  tan x 1
tan x 1
35.	 sin1x y2 sin1x y2 2 cos x sin y
36.	 cos1x y2 cos1x y2 2 cos x cos y
37.	 cot1x y2  cot x cot y 1
cot y cot x
38.	 cot1x y2  cot x cot y 1
cot x cot y
39.	 tan x tan y  
sin1x y2
cos x cos y
40.	 1 tan x tan y  
cos1x y2
cos x cos y
41.	 tan x tan y
1 tan x tan y 
sin1x y2
cos1x y2
42.	
sin1x y2 sin1x y2
cos1x y2 cos1x y2
 tan y
43.	 cos1x y2 cos1x y2 cos2
 x sin2
 y
44.	 cos1x y2 cos y sin1x y2 sin y cos x
45.	  sin1x y z2 sin x cos y cos z cos x sin y cos z  
	 	
  cos x cos y sin z sin x sin y sin z
46.	 tan1x y2 tan1  y z2 tan1z x2  
tan1x y2 tan1  y z2 tan1z x2 
47–50  ■  Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric  
Functions    Write the given expression in terms of x and  
y only.
47.	 cos1sin1
 x tan1
 y2 	
48.	 tan1sin1
 x cos1
 y2
49.	 sin1tan1
 x tan1
 y2 	
50.	 sin1sin1
 x cos1
 y2
7.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

552 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
51–54  ■  Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Func-
tions    Find the exact value of the expression.
51.	 sinAcos1 1
2 tan1 1B	
52.	 cosAsin1 !3
2 cot1 !3 B
53.	 tanAsin1 3
4 cos1 1
3B	
54.	 sinAcos1 2
3 tan1 1
2B
55–58  ■  Evaluating Expressions Involving Trigonometric  
Functions    Evaluate each expression under the given conditions.
55.	 cos1u f2 ; 
cos u 3
5, 
u in Quadrant IV, 
tan f !3, 
f in Quadrant II.
56.	 sin1u f2; 
tan u 4
3, 
u in Quadrant III, 
sin f !10/10, 
f in Quadrant IV
57.	 sin1u f2 ; 
sin u 5
13, 
u in Quadrant I, 
cos f 2!5/5, 
f in Quadrant II
58.	 tan1u f2 ; 
cos u 1
3, 
u in Quadrant III, 
sin f 1
4, 
f in Quadrant II
59–62  ■  Expressions in Terms of Sine    Write the expression in 
terms of sine only.
59.	 !3 sin x cos x	
60.	 sin x cos x
61.	 51sin 2x cos 2x2 	
62.	 3 sin px 3!3 cos px
63–64  ■  Graphing a Trigonometric Function    (a) Express the 
function in terms of sine only. (b) Graph the function.
63.	 g1x2 cos 2x !3 sin 2x	 64.	 f1x2 sin x cos x
Skills Plus
65–66  ■  Difference Quotient    Let f1x2 cos x and g1x2 sin x. 
Use Addition or Subtraction Formulas to show the following.
65.	
f1x h2 f1x2
h
cos x a 1 cos h
h
b sin x a sin h
h
b
66.	
g1x h2 g1x2
h
a sin h
h
b cos x sin x a 1 cos h
h
b
67–68  ■  Discovering an Identity Graphically    In these exercises 
we discover an identity graphically and then prove the identity. 
(a) Graph the function and make a conjecture, then (b) prove that 
your conjecture is true.
67.	 y sin2 ax p
4 b sin2 ax p
4 b
68.	 y  1
23cos1x p2 cos1x p2 4
69.	 Difference of Two Angles    Show that if b a p/2, then
sin1x a2 cos1x b2 0
70.	 Sum of Two Angles    Refer to the ﬁgure. Show that  
a  b  g, and ﬁnd tan g.
©
4
6
å
∫4
3
71–72  ■  Identities Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions     
Prove the identity.
71.	 tan1 a x y
1 xy b tan1
 x tan1
 y   
[Hint: Let u tan1
 x and √tan1
 y, so that  
x tan u and y tan √. Use an Addition Formula to  
find tan1u √2 .]
72.	 tan1
 x tan1 a 1
x b p
2 , 
x 0  [Hint: Let u tan1
 x 
and √tan1 a 1
x b , so that x tan u and 1
x tan √. Use an 
Addition Formula to find cot1u √2 .]
73.	 Angle Between Two Lines    In this exercise we find a  
formula for the angle formed by two lines in a coordinate 
plane. 
(a)  If L is a line in the plane and u is the angle formed by the 
line and the x-axis as shown in the ﬁgure, show that the 
slope m of the line is given by
m tan u
y
x
0
L
¨
(b)	 Let L1 and L2 be two nonparallel lines in the plane with 
slopes m1 and m2, respectively. Let c be the acute angle 
formed by the two lines (see the following ﬁgure). Show 
that
tan c m2 m1
1 m1m2
y
x
0
L⁄
L¤
¨¤
¨⁄
s=¨¤-¨⁄
(c)	 Find the acute angle formed by the two lines
y 1
3 x 1  and  y 1
2 x 3
(d)	 Show that if two lines are perpendicular, then the slope 
of one is the negative reciprocal of the slope of the other.  
[Hint: First ﬁnd an expression for cot c.]
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.3  ■  Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Product-Sum Formulas  553
74.	 Find A  B  C in the ﬁgure.    [Hint: First use an 
Addition Formula to ﬁnd tan1A B2 .]
1
1
1
1
A
B
C
Applications
75.	 Adding an Echo    A digital delay device echoes an input sig-
nal by repeating it a ﬁxed length of time after it is received. If 
such a device receives the pure note f11t2 5 sin t and 
echoes the pure note f21t2 5 cos t, then the combined 
sound is f1t2 f11t2 f21t2 .
(a)	 Graph y f1t2 , and observe that the graph has the form 
of a sine curve y k sin1t f2 .
(b)	 Find k and f.
76.	 Interference    Two identical tuning forks are struck, one a 
fraction of a second after the other. The sounds produced are 
modeled by f11t2 C  sin vt and f21t2 C sin1vt a2 . 
The two sound waves interfere to produce a single sound 
modeled by the sum of these functions
f1t2 C sin vt C sin1vt a2
(a)	 Use the Addition Formula for Sine to show that f can be 
written in the form f1t2 A sin vt B cos vt, where A 
and B are constants that depend on a.
(b)	 Suppose that C  10 and a  p/3. Find constants k and 
f so that f1t2 k sin1vt f2 .
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
77.	 PROVE:  Addition Formula for Sine    In the text we proved 
only the Addition and Subtraction Formulas for Cosine. Use 
these formulas and the cofunction identities
 sin x cos a p
2 xb
 cos x sina p
2 xb
	 	 to prove the Addition Formula for Sine.    [Hint: To get 
started, use the ﬁrst cofunction identity to write
 sin1s t2 cos a p
2 1s t2b
  cos aa p
2 s b tb
	 	 and use the Subtraction Formula for Cosine.]
78.	 PROVE:  Addition Formula for Tangent    Use the Addition 
Formulas for Cosine and Sine to prove the Addition Formula 
for Tangent.    [Hint: Use
tan1s t2 
sin1s t2
cos1s t2
	 	 and divide the numerator and denominator by cos s cos t.]
7.3 
Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Product-Sum Formulas
■  Double-Angle Formulas  ■  Half-Angle Formulas  ■  Evaluating Expressions Involving 
Inverse Trigonometric Functions  ■  Product-Sum Formulas
The identities we consider in this section are consequences of the addition formulas. 
The Double-Angle Formulas allow us to ﬁnd the values of the trigonometric functions 
at 2x from their values at x. The Half-Angle Formulas relate the values of the trigono-
metric functions at 1
2 x to their values at x. The Product-Sum Formulas relate products 
of sines and cosines to sums of sines and cosines.
■  Double-Angle Formulas
The formulas in the box on the next page are immediate consequences of the addition 
formulas, which we proved in Section 7.2.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

554 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Double-Angle Formulas
Formula for sine:	
sin 2x 2 sin x cos x
Formulas for cosine:	
cos 2x cos2 x sin2
 x
	
  1 2 sin2
 x
	
  2 cos2
 x 1
Formula for tangent:	
tan 2x 
2 tan x
1 tan2 x
The proofs for the formulas for cosine are given here. You are asked to prove the 
remaining formulas in Exercises 35 and 36.
Proof of Double-Angle Formulas for Cosine
 cos 2x cos1x x2
  cos x cos x sin x sin x
  cos2
 x sin2
 x
The second and third formulas for cos 2x are obtained from the formula we just 
proved and the Pythagorean identity. Substituting cos2x  1  sin2x gives
 cos 2x cos2
 x sin2
 x
  11 sin2
 x2 sin2
 x
  1 2 sin2
 x
The third formula is obtained in the same way, by substituting sin2x  1  cos2x.
■
Example 1  ■  Using the Double-Angle Formulas
If cos x  2
3 and x is in Quadrant II, ﬁnd cos 2x and sin 2x.
Solution    Using one of the Double-Angle Formulas for Cosine, we get
 cos 2x 2 cos2
 x 1
  2a 2
3 b
2
1 8
9 1  1
9
To use the formula sin 2x  2 sin x cos x, we need to ﬁnd sin x ﬁrst. We have
sin x "1 cos2
 x #1 A 2
3B
2 !5
3
where we have used the positive square root because sinx is positive in Quadrant II. 
Thus
 sin 2x 2 sin x cos x
  2a !5
3 b a 2
3 b  4!5
9
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.3  ■  Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Product-Sum Formulas  555
Example 2  ■  A Triple-Angle Formula
Write cos 3x in terms of cos x.
Solution
 cos 3x cos12x x2
  cos 2x cos x sin 2x sin x
    Addition formula
  12 cos2
 x 12 cos x 12 sin x cos x2 sin x    Double-Angle Formulas
  2 cos3 x cos x 2 sin2 x cos x
    Expand
  2 cos3
 x cos x 2 cos x 11 cos2
 x2
    Pythagorean identity
  2 cos3
 x cos x 2 cos x 2 cos3
 x
    Expand
  4 cos3
 x 3 cos x
    Simplify
Now Try Exercise 109	
■
Example 2 shows that cos 3x can be written as a polynomial of degree 3 in cos x. The 
identity cos 2x  2 cos2x  1 shows that cos 2x is a polynomial of degree 2 in cos x. In 
fact, for any natural number n we can write cos nx as a polynomial in cos x of degree n (see 
the note following Exercise 109). The analogous result for sin nx is not true in general.
Example 3  ■  Proving an Identity
Prove the identity 
sin 3x
sin x cos x 4 cos x sec x.
Solution    We start with the left-hand side.
 sin 3x
sin x cos x 
sin1x 2x2
sin x cos x
  sin x cos 2x cos x sin 2x
sin x cos x
    Addition Formula
  
sin x 12 cos2 x 12 cos x 12 sin x cos x2
sin x cos x
    Double-Angle Formulas
  
sin x 12 cos2 x 12
sin x cos x

cos x 12 sin x cos x2
sin x cos x
    Separate fraction
  2 cos2
 x 1
cos x
2 cos x
    Cancel
  2 cos x 
1
cos x 2 cos x
    Separate fraction
  4 cos x sec x
    Reciprocal identity
Now Try Exercise 87	
■
■  Half-Angle Formulas
The following formulas allow us to write any trigonometric expression involving even pow-
ers of sine and cosine in terms of the ﬁrst power of cosine only. This technique is important 
in calculus. The Half-Angle Formulas are immediate consequences of these formulas.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

556 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Formulas for lowering powers
sin2
 x 1 cos 2x
2
   cos2
 x 1 cos 2x
2
tan2
 x 1 cos 2x
1 cos 2x
Proof    The ﬁrst formula is obtained by solving for sin2x in the Double-Angle  
Formula cos 2x  1  2 sin2x. Similarly, the second formula is obtained by solving 
for cos2x in the Double-Angle Formula cos 2x  2 cos2x  1.
The last formula follows from the ﬁrst two and the reciprocal identities:
	
tan2
 x sin2
 x
cos2
 x 
1 cos 2x
2
  1 cos 2x
2
1 cos 2x
1 cos 2x
■
Example 4  ■  Lowering Powers in a Trigonometric Expression
Express sin2x cos2x in terms of the ﬁrst power of cosine.
Solution    We use the formulas for lowering powers repeatedly.
 sin2
 x cos2
 x a 1 cos 2x
2
b a 1 cos 2x
2
b
  1 cos2 2x
4
1
4 1
4
  cos2 2x
  1
4 1
4 a 1 cos 4x
2
b 1
4 1
8 cos 4x
8
  1
8 1
8
  cos 4x 1
8
 11 cos 4x2
Another way to obtain this identity is to use the Double-Angle Formula for Sine in 
the form sin x cos x 1
2 sin 2x. Thus
 sin2
 x cos2
 x 1
4
  sin2 2x 1
4 a 1 cos 4x
2
b
 1
8
 11 cos 4x2
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
Half-Angle Formulas
sin u
2 6Å
1 cos u
2
   cos u
2 6Å
1 cos u
2
tan u
2 1 cos u
sin u

sin u
1 cos u
The choice of the  or  sign depends on the quadrant in which u/2 lies.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.3  ■  Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Product-Sum Formulas  557
Proof    We substitute x  u/2 in the formulas for lowering powers and take the square 
root of each side. This gives the ﬁrst two Half-Angle Formulas. In the case of the 
Half-Angle Formula for Tangent we get
 tan  u
2 6Å
1 cos u
1 cos u
  6Å a 1 cos u
1 cos u b a 1 cos u
1 cos u b     Multiply numerator and  
denominator by 1  cos u
  6Å
11 cos u2 2
1 cos2  u
    Simplify
  6
0  1 cos u 0
0  sin u 0
   
"A2 0  A 0
and 1 cos2
 u sin2
 u
Now, 1  cos u is nonnegative for all values of u. It is also true that sinu and 
tan1u/22  always have the same sign. (Verify this.) It follows that
tan u
2 1 cos u
sin u
The other Half-Angle Formula for Tangent is derived from this by multiplying the 
numerator and denominator by 1  cos u.	
■
Example 5  ■  Using a Half-Angle Formula
Find the exact value of sin 22.5.
Solution    Since 22.5 is half of 45, we use the Half-Angle Formula for Sine with  
u  45. We choose the  sign because 22.5 is in the ﬁrst quadrant.
 sin  45
2 Å
1 cos 45
2
        Half-Angle Formula
  Å
1 !2/2
2
        cos 45!2/2
  Å
2 !2
4
        Common denominator
  1
2"2 !2
        Simplify
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Example 6  ■  Using a Half-Angle Formula
Find tan1u/22  if sin u 2
5 and u is in Quadrant II.
Solution    To use the Half-Angle Formula for Tangent, we ﬁrst need to ﬁnd cos u. 
Since cosine is negative in Quadrant II, we have
 cos u "1 sin2
 u
  #1 A2
5B
2  !21
5
Thus	
 tan u
2 1 cos u
sin u
  1 !21/5
2
5
5 !21
2
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

558 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
■  Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse 
Trigonometric Functions
Expressions involving trigonometric functions and their inverses arise in calculus. In 
the next examples we illustrate how to evaluate such expressions.
Example 7  ■  Simplifying an Expression Involving an Inverse 
Trigonometric Function
Write sin12 cos1
 x2  as an algebraic expression in x only, where 1 x 1.
Solution    Let u cos1
 x, and sketch a triangle as in Figure 1. We need to find 
sin 2u, but from the triangle we can find trigonometric functions of u only, not 2u. So 
we use the Double-Angle Formula for Sine. 
 sin12 cos1 x2 sin 2u
        cos1x  u
 2 sin u cos u        Double-Angle Formula
 2x"1 x2         From the triangle
Now Try Exercises 43 and 47	
■
Example 8  ■  Evaluating an Expression Involving Trigonometric 
Functions 
Evaluate sin 2u, where cos u  2
5 with u in Quadrant II.
Solution    We first sketch the angle u in standard position with terminal side in Quad-
rant II as in Figure 2. Since cos u x/r  2
5, we can label a side and the hypotenuse 
of the triangle in Figure 2. To find the remaining side, we use the Pythagorean Theorem.
 x2 y2 r2
        Pythagorean Theorem
 122 2 y2 52
        x  2,    r  5
 y 6!21        Solve for y2
 y !21        Because y  0
We can now use the Double-Angle Formula for Sine.
 sin 2u 2 sin u cos u
        Double-Angle Formula
 2a !21
5
b  a  2
5 b         From the triangle
  4!21
25
        Simplify
Now Try Exercise 51	
■
Discovery Project
Where to Sit at the Movies
To best view a painting or a movie requires that the viewing angle be as large as 
possible. If the painting or movie screen is at a height above eye level, then being 
too far away or too close results in a small viewing angle and hence a poor view-
ing experience. So what is the best distance from which to view a movie or a 
painting? In this project we use trigonometry to find the best location from which 
to view a painting or a movie. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© iStockphoto.com/agencyby
¨
1
x
œ∑∑∑∑∑
1-≈
Figure 1
5
_2
¨
P (x, y)
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.3  ■  Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Product-Sum Formulas  559
■  Product-Sum Formulas
It is possible to write the product sin u cos √ as a sum of trigonometric functions. To see 
this, consider the Addition and Subtraction Formulas for Sine:
 sin1u √2 sin u cos √cos u sin √
 sin1u √2 sin u cos √cos u sin √
Adding the left- and right-hand sides of these formulas gives
sin1u √2 sin1u √2 2 sin u cos √
Dividing by 2 gives the formula
sin u cos √1
23sin1u √2 sin1u √2 4
The other three Product-to-Sum Formulas follow from the Addition Formulas in a 
similar way.
Product-to-Sum Formulas
 sin u cos √1
23sin1u √2 sin1u √2 4
 cos u sin √1
23sin1u √2 sin1u √2 4
 cos u cos √1
23cos1u √2 cos1u √2 4
 sin u sin √1
23cos1u √2 cos1u √2 4
Example 9  ■  Expressing a Trigonometric Product as a Sum
Express sin 3x sin 5x as a sum of trigonometric functions.
Solution    Using the fourth Product-to-Sum Formula with u  3x and √  5x and 
the fact that cosine is an even function, we get
 sin 3x sin 5x 1
23cos13x 5x2 cos13x 5x2 4
  1
2 cos12x2 1
2 cos 8x
  1
2 cos 2x 1
2 cos 8x
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
The Product-to-Sum Formulas can also be used as Sum-to-Product Formulas. This 
is possible because the right-hand side of each Product-to-Sum Formula is a sum and 
the left side is a product. For example, if we let
u x y
2   and  √x y
2
in the ﬁrst Product-to-Sum Formula, we get
sin x y
2
 cos x y
2
1
2  1sin x sin y2
so	
sin x sin y 2 sin x y
2
  cos x y
2
The remaining three of the following Sum-to-Product Formulas are obtained in a 
similar manner.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

560 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Sum-to-Product Formulas
sin x sin y 2 sin x y
2
 cos x y
2
sin x sin y 2 cos x y
2
 sin x y
2
cos x cos y 2 cos x y
2
 cos x y
2
cos x cos y 2 sin x y
2
 sin x y
2
Example 10  ■  Expressing a Trigonometric Sum as a Product
Write sin 7x  sin 3x as a product.
Solution    The ﬁrst Sum-to-Product Formula gives
 sin 7x sin 3x 2 sin 7x 3x
2
 cos 7x 3x
2
  2 sin 5x cos 2x
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
Example 11  ■  Proving an Identity
Verify the identity sin 3x sin x
cos 3x cos x tan x.
Solution    We apply the second Sum-to-Product Formula to the numerator and the 
third formula to the denominator.
 LHS sin 3x sin x
cos 3x cos x 
2 cos 3x x
2
 sin 3x x
2
2 cos 3x x
2
 cos 3x x
2
        Sum-to-Product Formulas
  2 cos 2x sin x
2 cos 2x cos x
        Simplify
 sin x
cos x tan x RHS
        Cancel
Now Try Exercise 93	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 If we know the values of sin x and cos x, we can find the 
value of sin 2x by using the  
 Formula for Sine. 
State the formula: sin 2x  
  .
	 2.	 If we know the value of cos x and the quadrant in which x/2 
lies, we can find the value of sin1x/22  by using the  
 
Formula for Sine. State the formula: 
	 	 sin1x/22  
  .
7.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.3  ■  Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Product-Sum Formulas  561
Skills
3–10  ■  Double Angle Formulas    Find sin 2x, cos 2x, and tan 2x 
from the given information.
	 3.	 sin x 5
13,    x in Quadrant I
	 4.	 tan x  4
3,    x in Quadrant II
	 5.	 cos x 4
5,    csc x  0	
  6.	 csc x  4,    tan x  0
	 7.	 sin x  3
5,    x in Quadrant III
	 8.	 sec x  2,    x in Quadrant IV
	 9.	 tan x  1
3,    cos x  0
	10.	 cot x 2
3,    sin x  0
11–16  ■  Lowering Powers in a Trigonometric Expression    Use 
the formulas for lowering powers to rewrite the expression in 
terms of the ﬁrst power of cosine, as in Example 4.
	11.	 sin4x	
12.	 cos4x
13.	 cos2x sin4x	
14.	 cos4x sin2x
15.	 cos4x sin4x	
16.	 cos6x
17–28  ■  Half Angle Formulas    Use an appropriate Half-Angle 
Formula to ﬁnd the exact value of the expression.
17.	 sin 15	
18.	 tan 15
19.	 tan 22.5	
20.	 sin 75
21.	 cos 165	
22.	 cos 112.5
23.	 tan p
8 	
24.	 cos 3p
8
25.	 cos p
12	
26.	 tan 5p
12
27.	 sin 9p
8 	
28.	 sin 11p
12
29–34  ■  Double- and Half-Angle Formulas    Simplify the 
expression by using a Double-Angle Formula or a Half-Angle 
Formula.
29.	 (a)	 2 sin 18 cos 18	
(b)	 2 sin 3u cos 3u
30.	 (a)	
2 tan 7
1 tan2 7	
(b)	
2 tan 7u
1 tan2 7u
31.	 (a)	 cos2 34  sin2 34	
(b)	 cos2 5u  sin2 5u
32.	 (a)	 cos2 
 u
2 sin2 
 u
2	
(b)	 2 sin u
2 cos u
2
33.	 (a)	
sin 8
1 cos 8	
(b)	 1 cos 4u
sin 4u
34.	 (a)	 Å
1 cos 30
2
	
(b)	 Å
1 cos 8u
2
35.	 Proving a Double-Angle Formula    Use the Addition Formula 
for Sine to prove the Double-Angle Formula for Sine.
36.	 Proving a Double-Angle Formula    Use the Addition For-
mula for Tangent to prove the Double-Angle Formula for 
Tangent.
37–42  ■  Using a Half-Angle Formula    Find sin x
2, cos x
2, and 
tan x
2 from the given information.
37.	 sin x 3
5,    0  x  90
38.	 cos x  4
5,    180  x  270
39.	 csc x 3,    90  x  180
40.	 tan x  1,    0  x  90
41.	 sec x 3
2,    270  x  360
42.	 cot x  5,    180  x  270
43–46  ■  Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Func-
tions    Write the given expression as an algebraic expression in x.
43.	 sin12 tan1
 x2 	
44.	 tan12 cos1
 x2
45.	 sinA1
2 cos1
 xB	
46.	 cos12 sin1
 x2
47–50  ■  Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions    
Find the exact value of the given expression.
47.	 sinA2 cos1 7
25B	
48.	 cosA2 tan1 12
5 B
49.	 secA2 sin1 1
4B	
50.	 tanA1
2 cos1 2
3B
51–54  ■  Evaluating an Expression Involving Trigonometric  
Functions    Evaluate each expression under the given conditions.
51.	 cos 2u; 
sin u  3
5, 
u in Quadrant III
52.	 sin1u/22 ; 
tan u  5
12, 
u in Quadrant IV
53.	 sin 2u; 
sin u 1
7, 
u in Quadrant II
54.	 tan 2u; 
cos u 3
5, 
u in Quadrant I
55–60  ■  Product-to-Sum Formulas    Write the product as a sum.
55.	 sin 2x cos 3x	
56.	 sin x sin 5x
57.	 cos x sin 4x	
58.	 cos 5x cos 3x
59.	 3 cos 4x cos 7x	
60.	 11 sin x
2 cos x
4
61–66  ■  Sum-to-Product Formulas    Write the sum as a product.
61.	 sin 5x  sin 3x	
62.	 sin x  sin 4x
63.	 cos 4x  cos 6x	
64.	 cos 9x  cos 2x
65.	 sin 2x  sin 7x	
66.	 sin 3x  sin 4x
67–72  ■  Value of a Product or Sum    Find the value of the prod-
uct or sum.
67.	 2 sin 52.5 sin 97.5	
68.	 3 cos 37.5 cos 7.5
69.	 cos 37.5 sin 7.5	
70.	 sin 75 sin 15
71.	 cos 255  cos 195	
72.	 cos p
12 cos 5p
12
73–92  ■  Proving Identities    Prove the identity.
73.	 cos2 5x  sin2 5x  cos 10x
74.	 sin 8x  2 sin 4x cos 4x
75.	 1sin x cos x 2 2 1 sin 2x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

562 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
	 76.	 cos4x  sin4x  cos 2x
	 77.	
2 tan x
1 tan2
 x sin 2x
	 78.	 1 cos 2x
sin 2x
tan x
	 79.	 tana x
2 b cos x tana x
2 b sin x
	 80.	 tan a x
2 b csc x 2 cos x
sin x
	 81.	 sin 4x
sin x 4 cos x cos 2x
	 82.	 1 sin 2x
sin 2x
1 1
2 sec x csc x
	 83.	
21tan x cot x2
tan2
 x cot2
 x
sin 2x
	 84.	 tan x 
sin 2x
1 cos 2x
	 85.	 cot 2x 1 tan2 x
2 tan x
	 86.	 41sin6
 x cos6
 x2 4 3 sin2 2x
	 87.	 tan 3x 3 tan x tan3
 x
1 3 tan2
 x
	 88.	 sin 3x cos 3x
cos x sin x
1 4 sin x cos x
	 89.	 sin x sin 5x
cos x cos 5x tan 3x
	 90.	 sin 3x sin 7x
cos 3x cos 7x cot 2x
	 91.	
sin 10x
sin 9x sin x cos 5x
cos 4x
	 92.	 sin x sin 3x sin 5x
cos x cos 3x cos 5x tan 3x
	 93.	 sin x sin y
cos x cos y tana x y
2
b
	 94.	 tan y 
sin1x y2 sin1x y2
cos1x y2 cos1x y2
	 95.	 tan2 a x
2 p
4 b 1 sin x
1 sin x
	 96.	 11 cos 4x2 12 tan2
 x cot2
 x2 8
97–100  ■  Sum-to-Product Formulas    Use a Sum-to-Product 
Formula to show the following.
	 97.	 sin 130  sin 110  sin 10
	 98.	 cos 100  cos 200  sin 50
	 99.	 sin 45  sin 15  sin 75
	100.	 cos 87  cos 33  sin 63
Skills Plus
101.	 Proving an Identity    Prove the identity
sin x sin 2x sin 3x sin 4x sin 5x
cos x cos 2x cos 3x cos 4x cos 5x tan 3x
102.	 Proving an Identity    Use the identity
sin 2x 2  sin x cos x
	
	 n times to show that
sin12nx2 2n sin x cos x  cos 2x  cos 4x . . . cos 2n1
 x
103–104  ■  Identities Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions   
Prove the identity.
103.	 2 sin1
 x cos111 2x22 , 
0 x 1  [Hint: Let 
u sin1
 x, so that x sin u. Use a Double-Angle  
Formula to show that 1 2x2 cos 2u.]
104.	 2 tan1 a 1
x b cos1 a x2 1
x2 1 b    
[Hint: Let u tan1 a 1
x b , so that x 
1
tan u cot u.  
Use a Double-Angle Formula to show that 
x2 1
x2 1 cot2
 u 1
csc2
 u
cos 2u.]
105–107  ■  Discovering an Identity Graphically    In these  
problems we discover an identity graphically and then prove  
the identity.
	105.	 (a)  Graph f1x2 sin 3x
sin x cos 3x
cos x , and make a conjecture.
(b)	 Prove the conjecture you made in part (a).
106.	 (a)  Graph f1x2 cos 2x 2 sin2
 x, and make a conjecture.
(b)	 Prove the conjecture you made in part (a).
107.	 Let f1x2 sin 6x sin 7x.
(a)	 Graph y f1x2 .
(b)	 Verify that f1x2 2 cos 1
2 x sin 13
2  x.
(c)	 Graph y 2 cos 1
2 x and y 2 cos 1
2 x, together with 
the graph in part (a), in the same viewing rectangle. 
How are these graphs related to the graph of f?
108.	 A Cubic Equation    Let 3x  p/3, and let y  cos x. Use the 
result of Example 2 to show that y satisﬁes the equation
8y 3 6y 1 0
	
	 [Note:  This equation has roots of a certain kind that are 
used to show that the angle p/3 cannot be trisected by using 
a ruler and compass only.]
109.	 Tchebycheff Polynomials 
(a)	 Show that there is a polynomial P1t2  of degree 4 such 
that cos 4x P1cos x2  (see Example 2).
(b)	 Show that there is a polynomial Q1t2  of degree 5 such 
that cos 5x Q1cos x2 .
	
	 [Note:  In general, there is a polynomial Pn1t2  of degree n 
such that cos nx Pn1cos x2 . These polynomials are called 
Tchebycheff polynomials, after the Russian mathematician  
P. L. Tchebycheff (1821–1894).]
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.3  ■  Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Product-Sum Formulas  563
110.	 Length of a Bisector    In triangle ABC (see the ﬁgure) the 
line segment s bisects angle C. Show that the length of s is 
given by
s 2ab  cos x
a b
	
	 [Hint: Use the Law of Sines.]
C
B
A
a
b
s
x
x
111.	 Angles of a Triangle    If A, B, and C are the angles in a tri-
angle, show that
sin 2A sin 2B sin 2C 4 sin A sin B sin C
112.	 Largest Area    A rectangle is to be inscribed in a semicircle 
of radius 5 cm as shown in the following ﬁgure.
(a)	 Show that the area of the rectangle is modeled by the 
function
A1u2 25  sin 2u
(b)	 Find the largest possible area for such an inscribed  
rectangle.    [Hint: Use the fact that sinu achieves its 
maximum value at u  p/2.]
(c)	 Find the dimensions of the inscribed rectangle with the 
largest possible area.
¨
5 cm
Applications
113.	 Sawing a Wooden Beam    A rectangular beam is to be cut 
from a cylindrical log of diameter 20 in.
(a)	 Show that the cross-sectional area of the beam is  
modeled by the function
A1u2 200 sin 2u
	
where u is as shown in the figure.
(b)	 Show that the maximum cross-sectional area of such a 
beam is 200 in2.    [Hint: Use the fact that sinu achieves 
its maximum value at u  p/2.]
20 in.
¨
20 in.
¨
114.	 Length of a Fold    The lower right-hand corner of a long 
piece of paper 6 in. wide is folded over to the left-hand 
edge as shown. The length L of the fold depends on the 
angle u. Show that
L 
3
sin u cos2
 u
L
¨
6 in.
115.	 Sound Beats    When two pure notes that are close in fre-
quency are played together, their sounds interfere to pro-
duce beats; that is, the loudness (or amplitude) of the sound 
alternately increases and decreases. If the two notes are 
given by
f11t2 cos 11t  and  f21t2 cos 13t
	
	 the resulting sound is f1t2 f11t2 f21t2 .
(a)	 Graph the function y f1t2 .
(b)	 Verify that f1t2 2 cos t cos 12t.
(c)	 Graph y  2 cos t and y  2 cos t, together with the 
graph in part (a), in the same viewing rectangle. How 
do these graphs describe the variation in the loudness  
of the sound?
116.	 Touch-Tone Telephones    When a key is pressed on a touch-
tone telephone, the keypad generates two pure tones, which 
combine to produce a sound that uniquely identiﬁes the key. 
The ﬁgure shows the low frequency f1 and the high fre-
quency f2 associated with each key. Pressing a key produces 
the sound wave y sin12pf1t2 sin12pf2t2 .
(a)	 Find the function that models the sound produced when 
the 4 key is pressed.
(b)	 Use a Sum-to-Product Formula to express the sound 
generated by the 4 key as a product of a sine and a 
cosine function.
(c)	 Graph the sound wave generated by the 4 key from  
t  0 to t  0.006 s.
Low
frequency
f1
1209
High frequency f2
1336 1477 Hz
697 Hz
1
770 Hz
4
852 Hz
7
941 Hz
*
2
5
8
0
3
6
9
#
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

564 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
117.	 PROVE:  Geometric Proof of a Double-Angle Formula    Use 
the ﬁgure to prove that sin 2u  2 sin u cos u.
C
B
A
O
¨
1
1
	
	 [Hint: Find the area of triangle ABC in two different ways. 
You will need the following facts from geometry:
	
	   An angle inscribed in a semicircle is a right angle, so 
ACB is a right angle.
	
	   The central angle subtended by the chord of a circle is 
twice the angle subtended by the chord on the circle, so 
BOC is 2u.]
7.4 
Basic Trigonometric Equations
■  Basic Trigonometric Equations  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations by Factoring
An equation that contains trigonometric functions is called a trigonometric equation. 
For example, the following are trigonometric equations: 
sin2
 u cos2
 u 1
2 sin u 1 0
tan 2u 1 0
The first equation is an identity—that is, it is true for every value of the variable u. The 
other two equations are true only for certain values of u. To solve a trigonometric equa-
tion, we find all the values of the variable that make the equation true. 
■  Basic Trigonometric Equations
Solving any trigonometric equation always reduces to solving a basic trigonometric 
equation—an equation of the form T1u2 c, where T is a trigonometric function and 
c is a constant. In the next three examples we solve such basic equations. 
Example 1  ■  Solving a Basic Trigonometric Equation 
Solve the equation sin u 1
2.
Solution  Find the solutions in one period.    Because sine has period 2p, we first 
find the solutions in any interval of length 2p. To find these solutions, we look at the 
unit circle in Figure 1. We see that sin u 1
2 in Quadrants I and II, so the solutions in 
the interval 30, 2p2 are
u p
6         u 5p
6
Find all solutions.    Because the sine function repeats its values every 2p units,  
we get all solutions of the equation by adding integer multiples of 2p to these 
solutions:
u p
6 2kp        u 5p
6 2kp
y
x
0
1
_1
_1
1
¨=
¨=π
6
5π
6
1
2
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.4  ■  Basic Trigonometric Equations  565
where k is any integer. Figure 2 gives a graphical representation of the  
solutions.
y
¨
1
_1
π
y=ß ¨
π
6
5π
6
13π
6
17π
6
25π
6
7π
6
_
y=1
2
Figure 2
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
Example 2  ■  Solving a Basic Trigonometric Equation 
Solve the equation cos u  !2
2 , and list eight specific solutions.
Solution  Find the solutions in one period.    Because cosine has period 2p, we first 
find the solutions in any interval of length 2p. From the unit circle in Figure 3 we  
see that cos u !2/2 in Quadrants II and III, so the solutions in the interval 
30, 2p2  are
u 3p
4         u 5p
4
Find all solutions.    Because the cosine function repeats its values every 2p units, we 
get all solutions of the equation by adding integer multiples of 2p to these solutions:
u 3p
4 2kp        u 5p
4 2kp
where k is any integer. You can check that for k 1, 0, 1, 2 we get the following 
specific solutions:
u  5p
4 ,  3p
4 , 3p
4 , 5p
4 , 11p
4 , 13p
4 , 19p
4 , 21p
4
	
k  1	
k  0	
k  1	
k  2
Figure 4 gives a graphical representation of the solutions.
y
¨
1
_1
π
2π
y=cos ¨
3π
4
3π
4
5π
4
11π
4
13π
4
_
5π
4
_
y=
2
2
œ∑∑∑∑∑
_
0
Figure 4
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
•
e
•
•
y
x
¨=3π
4
¨=5π
4
1
_1
_1
1
2
2
œ∑∑∑∑∑
_
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

566 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Example 3  ■  Solving a Basic Trigonometric Equation
Solve the equation cos u 0.65.
Solution  Find the solutions in one period.    We first find one solution by taking 
cos1 of each side of the equation.
 cos u 0.65
        Given equation
 u cos110.652        Take cos1 of each side
 u < 0.86
        Calculator (in radian mode)
Because cosine has period 2p, we next find the solutions in any interval of length 
2p. To find these solutions, we look at the unit circle in Figure 5. We see that 
cos u 0.86 in Quadrants I and IV, so the solutions are
u < 0.86        u < 2p 0.86 < 5.42
Find all solutions.    To get all solutions of the equation, we add integer multiples of 
2p to these solutions:
u < 0.86 2kp        u < 5.42 2kp
where k is any integer. 
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
Example 4  ■  Solving a Basic Trigonometric Equation
Solve the equation tan u 2.
Solution  Find the solutions in one period.    We first find one solution by taking 
tan1 of each side of the equation.
 tan u 2
        Given equation
 u tan1122        Take tan1 of each side
 u < 1.12
        Calculator (in radian mode)
By the definition of tan1 the solution that we obtained is the only solution in the 
interval 1p/2, p/22  (which is an interval of length p).
Find all solutions.    Since tangent has period p, we get all solutions of the equation 
by adding integer multiples of p:
u < 1.12 kp
where k is any integer. A graphical representation of the solutions is shown in Figure 6. 
You can check that the solutions shown in the graph correspond to k 1, 0, 1, 2, 3. 
y
¨
4.26
1.12
7.40
10.54
y=tan ¨
y=2
π
2
π
2
_
_2.02
Figure 6
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
y
x
1
_1
_1
1
¨=0.86
¨=5.42
0.65
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.4  ■  Basic Trigonometric Equations  567
In the next example we solve trigonometric equations that are algebraically equiva-
lent to basic trigonometric equations.
Example 5  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations
Find all solutions of the equation.
(a)  2 sin u 1 0            (b)  tan2
 u 3 0
Solution 
(a)	 We start by isolating sin u.
 2 sin u 1 0        Given equation
 2 sin u 1        Add 1
 sin u 1
2        Divide by 2
	 	 This last equation is the same as that in Example 1. The solutions are 
u p
6 2kp        u 5p
6 2kp
	 	 where k is any integer.
(b)	 We start by isolating tan u.
 tan2
 u 3 0
        Given equation
 tan2
 u 3
        Add 3
 tan u 6!3        Take the square root
	 	 Because tangent has period p, we first find the solutions in any interval of length 
p. In the interval 1p/2, p/22  the solutions are u p/3 and u p/3. To get 
all solutions, we add integer multiples of p to these solutions:
u p
3 kp        u  p
3 kp
	 	 where k is any integer.
Now Try Exercises 27 and 33	
■
■  Solving Trigonometric Equations by Factoring
Factoring is one of the most useful techniques for solving equations, including trigono-
metric equations. The idea is to move all terms to one side of the equation, factor, and 
then use the Zero-Product Property (see Section 1.5). 
Example 6  ■  A Trigonometric Equation of Quadratic Type
Solve the equation 2 cos2
 u 7 cos u 3 0.
Solution    We factor the left-hand side of the equation.
	
 2 cos2
 u 7 cos u 3 0	
Given equation
	
 12 cos u 12 1cos u 32 0	
Factor
	
 2 cos u 1 0        or         cos u 3 0	
Set each factor equal to 0
	
 cos u 1
2        or       
 cos u 3	
Solve for cos u
Zero-Product Property
If AB 0, then A 0 or B 0.
Equation of Quadratic Type
 2C 2 7C 3 0
 12C 12 1C 32 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

568 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Because cosine has period 2p, we first find the solutions in the interval 30, 2p2 . 
For the first equation the solutions are u p/3 and u 5p/3 (see Figure 7). The 
second equation has no solution because cos u is never greater than 1. Thus the 
solutions are 
u p
3 2kp        u 5p
3 2kp
where k is any integer.
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
Example 7  ■  Solving a Trigonometric Equation by Factoring
Solve the equation 5 sin u cos u 4 cos u 0.
Solution    We factor the left-hand side of the equation.
 5 sin u cos u 2 cos u 0
        Given equation
 cos u 15 sin u 22 0
        Factor
 cos u 0  or  5 sin u 4 0
        Set each factor equal to 0
 sin u 0.8        Solve for sin u
Because sine and cosine have period 2p, we first find the solutions of these equations 
in an interval of length 2p. For the first equation the solutions in the interval 30, 2p2  
are u p/2 and u 3p/2. To solve the second equation, we take sin1 of each side.
 sin u 0.80
        Second equation
 u sin110.802        Take sin21 of each side
 u < 0.93
        Calculator (in radian mode)
So the solutions in an interval of length 2p are u 0.93 and u p 0.93 < 4.07 
(see Figure 8). We get all the solutions of the equation by adding integer multiples of 
2p to these solutions.
u p
2 2kp        u 3p
2 2kp        u < 0.93 2kp        u < 4.07 2kp
where k is any integer.
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
y
x
1
_1
_1
1
0.5
¨=5π
3
¨=π
3
Figure 7
y
x
1
_1
_1
_0.8
1
¨=_0.93
¨=π+0.93
Figure 8
Concepts
	 1.	 Because the trigonometric functions are periodic, if a basic 
	 	 trigonometric equation has one solution, it has  
  
(several/infinitely many) solutions. 
	 2.	 The basic equation sin x 2 has  
 (no/one/infinitely 
many) solutions, whereas the basic equation sin x 0.3 has  
	 	
 
 (no/one/infinitely many) solutions.
	 3.	 We can find some of the solutions of sin x 0.3 graphically 
	 	 by graphing y sin x and y  
  . Use the graph 
below to estimate some of the solutions.
1
y
x
1
0
7.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.4  ■  Basic Trigonometric Equations  569
	 4.	 We can find the solutions of sin x 0.3 algebraically. 
(a)	 First we find the solutions in the interval 30, 2p2. We get
	
one such solution by taking sin1 to get x <  
  . 
	
The other solution in this interval is x <  
  .
(b)	 We find all solutions by adding multiples of  
  
to the solutions in 30, 2p2 . The solutions are 
	
x <  
 and x <  
  .
Skills
5–16  ■  Solving Basic Trigonometric Equations    Solve the given 
equation.
	 5.	 sin u !3
2 	
  6.	 sin u  !2
2
	 7.	 cos u 1	
  8.	 cos u !3
2
	 9.	 cos u 1
4	
10.	 sin u 0.3
11.	 sin u 0.45	
12.	 cos u 0.32
13.	 tan u !3	
14.	 tan u 1
15.	 tan u 5	
16.	 tan u  1
3
17–24  ■  Solving Basic Trigonometric Equations    Solve the given 
equation, and list six specific solutions.
17.	 cos u  !3
2 	
18.	 cos u 1
2
19.	 sin u !2
2 	
20.	 sin u  !3
2
21.	 cos u 0.28	
22.	 tan u 2.5
23.	 tan u 10	
24.	 sin u 0.9
25–38  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations    Find all solutions of 
the given equation.
25.	 cos u 1 0	
26.	 sin u 1 0	
27.	 !2 sin u 1 0	
28.	 !2 cos u 1 0
29.	 5 sin u 1 0	
30.	 4 cos u 1 0
31.	 3 tan2
 u 1 0	
32.	 cot u 1 0
33.	 2 cos2
 u 1 0	
34.	 4 sin2
 u 3 0
35.	 tan2
 u 4 0	
36.	 9 sin2
 u 1 0
37.	 sec2
 u 2 0	
38.	 csc2
 u 4 0
39–56  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations by Factoring    Solve 
the given equation.
39.	 1tan2
 u 42 12 cos u 12 0	
40.	 1tan u 22 116 sin2
 u 12 0
41.	 4 cos2
 u 4 cos u 1 0	
42.	 2 sin2
 u sin u 1 0
43.	 3 sin2
 u 7 sin u 2 0	
44.	 tan4
 u 13 tan2
 u 36 0
45.	 2 cos2
 u 7 cos u 3 0	
46.	 sin2
 u sin u 2 0
47.	 cos2
 u cos u 6 0
	48.	 2 sin2
 u 5 sin u 12 0
49.	 sin2
 u 2 sin u 3
	50.	 3 tan3
 u tan u
51.	 cos u 12 sin u 12 0
	52.	 sec u 12 cos u !22 0
53.	 cos u sin u 2 cos u 0
	54.	 tan u sin u sin u 0
55.	 3 tan u sin u 2 tan u 0
	56.	 4 cos u sin u 3 cos u 0
Applications
57.	 Refraction of Light    It has been observed since ancient times 
that light refracts, or “bends,” as it travels from one medium 
to another (from air to water, for example). If √1 is the speed 
of light in one medium and √2 is its speed in another medium, 
then according to Snell’s Law,
sin u1
sin u2
√1
√2
	 	 where u1 is the angle of incidence and u2 is the angle of 
refraction (see the ﬁgure). The number √1/√2 is called the 
index of refraction. The index of refraction for several sub-
stances is given in the table. 
	 	     If a ray of light passes through the surface of a lake at an 
angle of incidence of 70, what is the angle of refraction?
Air
Water
¨⁄
¨¤
Substance
Refraction 
from air  
to substance
Water
1.33
Alcohol
1.36
Glass
1.52
Diamond
2.41
58.	 Total Internal Reﬂection    When light passes from a more-
dense to a less-dense medium—from glass to air, for  
example—the angle of refraction predicted by Snell’s Law 
(see Exercise 57) can be 90 or larger. In this case the light 
beam is actually reﬂected back into the denser medium. 
This phenomenon, called total internal reﬂection, is the 
principle behind ﬁber optics. Set u2  90 in Snell’s Law, 
and solve for u1 to determine the critical angle of incidence 
at which total internal reﬂection begins to occur when light 
passes from glass to air. (Note that the index of refraction 
from glass to air is the reciprocal of the index from air to 
glass.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

570 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
59.	 Phases of the Moon    As the moon revolves around the earth, 
the side that faces the earth is usually just partially illumi-
nated by the sun. The phases of the moon describe how much 
of the surface appears to be in sunlight. An astronomical 
measure of phase is given by the fraction F of the lunar disc 
that is lit. When the angle between the sun, earth, and moon 
is u (0  u  360), then
F 1
2
 11 cos u2
	 	 Determine the angles u that correspond to the following phases:
(a)	 F  0    (new moon)
(b)	 F  0.25    (a crescent moon)
(c)	 F  0.5    (ﬁrst or last quarter)
(d)	 F  1    (full moon)
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
60.	 DISCUSS  ■  WRITE:  Equations and Identities    Which of the 
following statements is true?
	 	   A.  Every identity is an equation.
	 	   B.  Every equation is an identity.
	 	 Give examples to illustrate your answer. Write a short  
paragraph to explain the difference between an equation and 
an identity.
7.5 
More Trigonometric Equations
■  Solving Trigonometric Equations by Using Identities  ■  Equations with Trigonometric 
Functions of Multiples of Angles
In this section we solve trigonometric equations by first using identities to simplify the 
equation. We also solve trigonometric equations in which the terms contain multiples 
of angles.
■  Solving Trigonometric Equations by Using Identities
In the next two examples we use trigonometric identities to express a trigonometric 
equation in a form in which it can be factored. 
Example 1  ■  Using a Trigonometric Identity 
Solve the equation 1 sin u 2 cos2
 u.
Solution    We first need to rewrite this equation so that it contains only one trigono-
metric function. To do this, we use a trigonometric identity.
	
 1 sin u 2 cos2
 u
	
Given equation
	
 1 sin u 211 sin2
 u2	
Pythagorean identity
	
 2 sin2
 u sin u 1 0
	
Put all terms on one side
	
 12 sin u 12 1sin u 12 0
	
Factor
 2 sin u 1 0
        or         sin u 1 0
	
Set each factor equal to 0 
 sin u 1
2
        or       
 sin u 1	
Solve for sin u
 
 u p
6,  5p
6         or       
 u 3p
2 	
Solve for u in the  
interval 30, 2p2
Because sine has period 2p, we get all the solutions of the equation by adding integer 
multiples of 2p to these solutions. Thus the solutions are
u p
6 2kp        u 5p
6 2kp        u 3p
2 2kp
where k is any integer.
Now Try Exercises 3 and 11	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.5  ■  More Trigonometric Equations  571
Example 2  ■  Using a Trigonometric Identity
Solve the equation sin 2u cos u 0.
Solution    The first term is a function of 2u, and the second is a function of u, so we 
begin by using a trigonometric identity to rewrite the first term as a function of u only.
	
 sin 2u cos u 0	
Given equation
	
 2 sin u cos u cos u 0	
Double-Angle Formula
	
 cos u 12 sin u 12 0	
Factor
cos u 0
        or         2 sin u 1 0
	
Set each factor equal to 0
	
 sin u 1
2
	
Solve for sin u
u p
2,  3p
2         or       
u p
6,  5p
6         Solve for u in 30, 2p2
Both sine and cosine have period 2p, so we get all the solutions of the equation by 
adding integer multiples of 2p to these solutions. Thus the solutions are 
u p
2 2kp        u 3p
2 2kp        u p
6 2kp        u 5p
6 2kp
where k is any integer.
Now Try Exercises 7 and 9	
■
Example 3  ■  Squaring and Using an Identity
Solve the equation cos u 1 sin u in the interval 30, 2p2 .
Solution    To get an equation that involves either sine only or cosine only, we square 
both sides and use a Pythagorean identity.
	
 cos u 1 sin u
	
Given equation
	
 cos2
 u 2 cos u 1 sin2
 u
	
Square both sides
	
 cos2
 u 2 cos u 1 1 cos2
 u	
Pythagorean identity
	
 2 cos2
 u 2 cos u 0
	
Simplify
	
 2 cos u 1cos u 12 0
	
Factor
 2 cos u 0
        or         cos u 1 0
	
Set each factor equal to 0
 cos u 0
        or       
 cos u 1	
Solve for cos u
 u p
2,  3p
2         or       
 u p 	
Solve for u in 30, 2p2
Because we squared both sides, we need to check for extraneous solutions. From 
Check Your Answers we see that the solutions of the given equation are p/2 and p.
Check Your Answers
 u p
2
	
 u 3p
2
	
 u p
 cos p
2 1 sin p
2 	
 cos 3p
2 1 sin 3p
2 	
 cos p 1 sin p
 0 1 1
  ✓	
 0 1 0 1
  ✗	
 1 1 0
  ✓
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

572 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Example 4  ■  Finding Intersection Points
Find the values of x for which the graphs of f 1x2 sin x and g 1x2 cos x 
intersect.
Solution 1:  Graphical
The graphs intersect where f 1x2 g 1x2 . In Figure 1 we graph y1 sin x and 
y2 cos x on the same screen, for x between 0 and 2p. Using TRACE or the  
intersect command on the graphing calculator, we see that the two points of inter-
section in this interval occur where x < 0.785 and x < 3.927. Since sine and cosine 
are periodic with period 2p, the intersection points occur where 
x < 0.785 2kp        and        x < 3.927 2kp   
where k is any integer.
1.5
_1.5
0
(b)
Intersection
X=3.9269908  Y= -.7071068
1.5
_1.5
0
6.28
6.28
(a)
Intersection
X=.78539816  Y=.70710678
Figure 1
Solution 2:  Algebraic 
To find the exact solution, we set f 1x2 g 1x2  and solve the resulting equation 
algebraically:
 sin x cos x        Equate functions
Since the numbers x for which cos x 0 are not solutions of the equation, we can 
divide both sides by cos x:
 sin x
cos x 1        Divide by cos x
 tan x 1        Reciprocal identity
The only solution of this equation in the interval 1p/2, p/22  is x p/4. Since  
tangent has period p, we get all solutions of the equation by adding integer multiples 
of p:
x p
4 kp
where k is any integer. The graphs intersect for these values of x. You should use your 
calculator to check that, rounded to three decimals, these are the same values that we 
obtained in Solution 1. 
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
■  Equations with Trigonometric Functions  
of Multiples of Angles
When solving trigonometric equations that involve functions of multiples of angles, we 
first solve for the multiple of the angle, then divide to solve for the angle. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.5  ■  More Trigonometric Equations  573
Example 5  ■  A Trigonometric Equation Involving a Multiple of an Angle 
Consider the equation 2 sin 3u 1 0.
(a)	 Find all solutions of the equation.
(b)	 Find the solutions in the interval 30, 2p2 .
Solution 
(a)	 We first isolate sin 3u and then solve for the angle 3u. 
 2 sin 3u 1 0
        Given equation
 2 sin 3u 1
        Add 1
 sin 3u 1
2
        Divide by 2
 3u p
6,  5p
6         Solve for 3u in the interval 30, 2p2  (see Figure 2)
	 	 To get all solutions, we add integer multiples of 2p to these solutions. So the 
solutions are of the form
3u p
6 2kp            3u 5p
6 2kp
	 	 To solve for u, we divide by 3 to get the solutions
u p
18 2kp
3             u 5p
18 2kp
3
	 	 where k is any integer.
(b)	 The solutions from part (a) that are in the interval 30, 2p2 correspond to k 0, 1, 
and 2. For all other values of k the corresponding values of u lie outside this inter-
val. So the solutions in the interval 30, 2p2 are 
u p
18, 5p
18, 13p
18 , 17p
18 , 25p
18 , 29p
18
	
k  0	
k  1	
k  2
y
x
0
1
_1
_1
1
3¨=π
6
1
2
3¨=5π
6
Figure 2
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Example 6  ■  A Trigonometric Equation Involving a Half Angle 
Consider the equation !3 tan u
2 1 0.
(a)	 Find all solutions of the equation.
(b)	 Find the solutions in the interval 30, 4p2 .
e
•
•
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

574 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
Solution 
(a)	 We start by isolating tan u
2.
 !3 tan u
2 1 0
        Given equation
 !3 tan u
2 1
        Add 1
 tan u
2 
1
!3
        Divide by !3
 u
2 p
6
        Solve for u
2 in the interval a p
2, p
2 b
	 	 Since tangent has period p, to get all solutions, we add integer multiples of p to 
this solution. So the solutions are of the form
u
2 p
6 kp
	 	 Multiplying by 2, we get the solutions
u p
3 2kp
	 	 where k is any integer.
(b)	 The solutions from part (a) that are in the interval 30, 4p2  correspond to k 0 
and k 1. For all other values of k the corresponding values of x lie outside this 
interval. Thus the solutions in the interval 30, 4p2  are
x p
3,  7p
3
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
Concepts
1–2  ■  We can use identities to help us solve trigonometric  
equations. 
	 1.	 Using a Pythagorean identity we see that the equation 
sin x sin2
 x cos2
 x 1 is equivalent to the basic equation
	 	
 
 whose solutions are x  
  .
	 2.	 Using a Double-Angle Formula we see that the equation 
	 	 sin x sin 2x 0 is equivalent to the equation  
  . 
Factoring, we see that solving this equation is equivalent to 
	 	 solving the two basic equations  
 and  
  .
Skills
3–16  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations by Using Identities     
Solve the given equation.
	 3.	 2 cos2
 u sin u 1	
  4.	 sin2
 u 4 2 cos2
 u
	 5.	 tan2
 u 2 sec u 2	
  6.	 csc2
 u cot u 3
	 7.	 2 sin 2u 3 sin u 0	
  8.	 3 sin 2u 2 sin u 0
	 9.	 cos 2u 3 sin u 1	
10.	 cos 2u cos2
 u 1
2
11.	 2 sin2
 u cos u 1	
12.	 tan u 3 cot u 0
13.	 sin u 1 cos u	
14.	 cos u sin u 1
15.	 tan u 1 sec u	
16.	 2 tan u sec2
 u 4
17–30  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations Involving a Multiple of 
an Angle    An equation is given. (a) Find all solutions of the 
equation. (b) Find the solutions in the interval 30, 2p2 .
17.	 2 cos 3u 1	
18.	 2 sin 2u 1
19.	 2 cos 2u 1 0	
20.	 2 sin 3u 1 0
21.	 !3 tan 3u 1 0	
22.	 sec 4u 2 0
23.	 cos u
2 1 0	
24.	 tan u
4 !3 0
25.	 2 sin u
3 !3 0	
26.	 sec u
2 cos u
2
7.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 7.5  ■  More Trigonometric Equations  575
27.	 sin 2u 3 cos 2u
	28.	 csc 3u 5 sin 3u
29.	 1 2 sin u cos 2u
	30.	 tan 3u 1 sec 3u
31–34  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations    Solve the equations 
by factoring.
31.	 3 tan3
 u 3 tan2
 u tan u 1 0
32.	 4 sin u cos u 2 sin u 2 cos u 1 0
33.	 2 sin u tan u tan u 1 2 sin u	
34.	 sec u tan u cos u cot u sin u
35–38  ■  Finding Intersection Points Graphically    (a) Graph f 
and g in the given viewing rectangle and find the intersection 
points graphically, rounded to two decimal places. (b) Find  
the intersection points of f and g algebraically. Give exact 
answers.
35.	 f 1x2 3 cos x 1, 
g1x2 cos x 1; 
32p, 2p4 by 32.5, 4.54
36.	 f 1x2 sin 2x 1, 
g1x2 2 sin 2x 1; 
32p, 2p4 by 31.5, 3.54
37.	 f 1x2 tan x, 
g1x2 !3;   
3 p/2, p/24 by 310, 104
38.	 f 1x2 sin x 1, 
g 1x2 cos x; 
32p, 2p4 by 32.5, 1.54
39–42  ■  Using Addition or Subtraction Formulas    Use an Addi-
tion or Subtraction Formula to simplify the equation. Then find 
all solutions in the interval 30, 2p2 .
39.	 cos u cos 3u sin u sin 3u 0
40.	 cos u cos 2u sin u sin 2u 1
2
41.	 sin 2u cos u cos 2u sin u !3/2
42.	 sin 3u cos u cos 3u sin u 0
43–52  ■  Using Double- or Half-Angle Formulas    Use a Double- 
or Half-Angle Formula to solve the equation in the interval 
30, 2p2 .
43.	 sin 2u cos u 0
	44.	 tan u
2 sin u 0
45.	 cos 2u cos u 2
	46.	 tan u cot u 4 sin 2u
47.	 cos 2u cos2
 u 0
	48.	 2 sin2
 u 2 cos 2u
49.	 cos 2u cos 4u 0
	50.	 sin 3u sin 6u 0
51.	 cos u sin u !2 sin u
2
	52.	 sin u cos u 1
2
53–56  ■  Using Sum-to-Product Formulas    Solve the equation by 
first using a Sum-to-Product Formula. 
53.	 sin u sin 3u 0
	54.	 cos 5u cos 7u 0
55.	 cos 4u cos 2u cos u
	56.	 sin 5u sin 3u cos 4u
57–62  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations Graphically    Use a 
graphing device to find the solutions of the equation, rounded to 
two decimal places.
57.	 sin 2x x	
58.	 cos x x
3
59.	 2sin x x	
60.	 sin x x3
61.	 cos x
1 x2 x2	
62.	 cos x 1
21ex ex2
Skills Plus
63–64  ■  Equations Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions     
Solve the given equation for x.
	63.	 tan1
 x tan1
 2x p
4   [Hint: Let u tan1
 x and 
	 	 √tan1
 2x. Solve the equation u √p
4  by taking the 
	 	 tangent of each side.]
	64.	 2 sin1
 x cos1
 x p  [Hint: Take the cosine of each 
side.]
Applications
65.	 Range of a Projectile    If a projectile is fired with velocity √0 
at an angle u, then its range, the horizontal distance it travels 
(in ft), is modeled by the function
R1u2 √2
0 sin 2u
32
	 	 (See page 627.) If √0 2200 ft/s, what angle (in degrees) 
should be chosen for the projectile to hit a target on the 
ground 5000 ft away? 
66.	 Damped Vibrations    The displacement of a spring vibrating 
in damped harmonic motion is given by 
y 4e3t sin 2pt
	 	 Find the times when the spring is at its equilibrium position 
1y 02 .
67.	 Hours of Daylight    In Philadelphia the number of hours of 
daylight on day t (where t is the number of days after  
January 1) is modeled by the function
L1t2 12 2.83 sina 2p
365
 1t 802b
(a)	 Which days of the year have about 10 h of daylight?
(b)	 How many days of the year have more than 10 h of 
daylight?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

576 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
68.	 Belts and Pulleys    A thin belt of length L surrounds two  
pulleys of radii R and r, as shown in the figure to the right.
(a)	 Show that the angle u (in rad) where the belt crosses 
itself satisfies the equation
u 2 cot u
2 
L
R r p
	
[Hint: Express L in terms of R, r, and u by adding  
up the lengths of the curved and straight parts of the 
belt.]
(b)	 Suppose that R 2.42 ft, r 1.21 ft, and  
L 27.78 ft. Find u by solving the equation in  
part (a) graphically. Express your answer both in  
radians and in degrees.
¨
R
R
r
r
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
69.	 DISCUSS:  A Special Trigonometric Equation    What makes 
the equation sin1cos x2 0 different from all the other equa-
tions we’ve looked at in this section? Find all solutions of 
this equation.
Fundamental Trigonometric Identities (p. 538)
An identity is an equation that is true for all values of the 
variable(s). A trigonometric identity is an identity that involves 
trigonometric functions. The fundamental trigonometric identities 
are as follows.
Reciprocal Identities:
csc x 
1
sin x   
sec x 
1
cos x   
cot x 
1
tan x
tan x sin x
cos x   
cot x cos x
sin x
Pythagorean Identities:
 sin2
 x cos2
 x 1
 tan2
 x 1 sec2
 x
 1 cot2
 x csc2
 x
Even-Odd Identities:
 sin1x2 sin x
 cos1x2 cos x
 tan1x2 tan x
Cofunction Identities:
sina p
2 xb cos x   
tana p
2 xb cot x
seca p
2 xb csc x
cos a p
2 xb sin x   
cota p
2 xb tan x
csca p
2 xb sec x
Proving Trigonometric Identities (p. 540)
To prove that a trigonometric equation is an identity, we use the 
following guidelines.
1.	 Start with one side. Pick one side of the equation.
2.	 Use known identities. Use algebra and known identities to 
change the side you started with into the other side.
3.	 Convert to sines and cosines. Sometimes it is helpful to con-
vert all functions in the equation to sines and cosines.
Addition and Subtraction Formulas (p. 545)
These identities involve the trigonometric functions of a sum or a 
difference.
Formulas for Sine:
sin1s t2 sin s cos t cos s sin t
sin1s t2 sin s cos t cos s sin t
Formulas for Cosine:
cos1s t2 cos s cos t sin s sin t
cos1s t2 cos s cos t sin s sin t
Formulas for Tangent:
tan1s t2 tan s tan t
1 tan s tan t
tan1s t2 tan s tan t
1 tan s tan t
Sums of Sines and Cosines (p. 550)
If A and B are real numbers, then 
A sin x B cos x k sin1x f2
where k "A2 B2 and f satisfies 
cos f 
A
"A2 B2   
sin f 
B
"A2 B2
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 7  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7  ■  Review  577
Double-Angle Formulas (p. 554)
These identities involve the trigonometric functions of twice the 
variable.
Formula for Sine:
sin 2x 2 sin x cos x
Formulas for Cosine:
 cos 2x cos2
 x sin2
 x
 1 2 sin2
 x
 2 cos2
 x 1
Formulas for Tangent:
tan 2x 
2 tan x
1 tan2
 x
Formulas for Lowering Powers (p. 556)
These formulas allow us to write a trigonometric expression 
involving even powers of sine and cosine in terms of the first 
power of cosine only.
sin2
 x 1 cos 2x
2
   
cos2
 x 1 cos 2x
2
tan2
 x 1 cos 2x
1 cos 2x
Half-Angle Formulas (p. 556)
These formulas involve trigonometric functions of half an angle.
sin u
2 6Å
1 cos u
2
   
cos u
2 6Å
1 cos u
2
tan u
2 1 cos u
sin u

sin u
1 cos u
Product-Sum Formulas (pp. 559–560)
These formulas involve products and sums of trigonometric 
functions.
Product-to-Sum Formulas:
 sin u cos √1
2 3sin1u √2 sin1u √24
 cos u sin √1
2 3sin1u √2 sin1u √24
 cos u cos √1
2 3cos1u √2 cos1u √24
 sin u sin √1
2 3cos1u √2 cos1u √24
Sum-to-Product Formulas:
 sin x sin y 2 sin x y
2
 cos x y
2
 sin x sin y 2 cos x y
2
 sin x y
2
 cos x cos y 2 cos x y
2
 cos x y
2
 cos x cos y 2 sin x y
2
 sin x y
2
Trigonometric Equations (p. 564)
A trigonometric equation is an equation that contains trigono-
metric functions. A basic trigonometric equation is an equation of 
the form T1u2 c, where T is a trigonometric function and c is a 
constant. For example, sin u 0.5 and tan u 2 are basic trigo-
nometric equations. Solving any trigonometric equation involves 
solving a basic trigonometric equation.
If a trigonometric equation has a solution, then it has infinitely 
many solutions. 
To find all solutions, we first find the solutions in one period 
and then add integer multiples of the period.
We can sometimes use trigonometric identities to simplify a 
trigonometric equation. 
	 1.	 What is an identity? What is a trigonometric identity? 
	 2.	 (a)	 State the Pythagorean identities.
(b)	 Use a Pythagorean identity to express cosine in terms of 
sine.
	 3.	 (a)	 State the reciprocal identities for cosecant, secant, and 
cotangent.
(b)	 State the even-odd identities for sine and cosine.
(c)	 State the cofunction identities for sine, tangent, and 
secant.
(d)	 Suppose that cos1x2 0.4; use the identities in parts 
(a) and (b) to find sec x.
(e)	 Suppose that sin 10a; use the identities in part (c) to 
find cos 80.
	 4.	 (a)	 How do you prove an identity?
(b)	 Prove the identity sin x1csc x sin x2 cos2
 x
	 5.	 (a)	 State the Addition and Subtraction Formulas for Sine and 
Cosine.
(b)	 Use a formula from part (a) to find sin 75.
	 6.	 (a)	 State the formula for A sin x B cos x.
(b)	 Express 3 sin x 4 cos x as a function of sine only.
	 7.	 (a)	 State the Double-Angle Formula for Sine and the  
Double-Angle Formulas for Cosine. 
(b)	 Prove the identity sec x sin 2x 2 sin x.
	 8.	 (a)	 State the formulas for lowering powers of sine and cosine.
(b)	 Prove the identity 4 sin2
 x cos2
 x sin2
 2x.
	 9.	 (a)	 State the Half-Angle Formulas for Sine and Cosine.
(b)	 Find cos 15.
	10.	 (a)	 State the Product-to-Sum Formula for the product 
sin u cos √.
(b)	 Express sin 5x cos 3x as a sum of trigonometric functions.
■  CONCEPT CHECK
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

578 
CHAPTER 7  ■  Analytic Trigonometry
	11.	 (a)	 State the Sum-to-Product Formula for the sum 
sin x sin y.
(b)	 Express sin 5x sin 7x as a product of trigonometric 
functions.
	12.	 What is a trigonometric equation? How do we solve a trigo-
nometric equation?
(a)	 Solve the equation cos x 1
2.
(b)	 Solve the equation 2 sin x cos x 1
2.
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
■  exercises
1–22  ■  Proving Identities    Verify the identity.
	 1.	 sin u 1cot u tan u2 sec u
	 2.	 1sec u 121sec u 12 tan2
 u
	 3.	 cos2
 x csc x csc x sin x
	 4.	
1
1 sin2
 x 1 tan2
 x
	 5.	 cos2
 x tan2
 x
sin2
 x
cot2
 x sec2
 x
	 6.	 1 sec x
sec x

sin2
 x
1 cos x	
	 7.	
cos2
 x
1 sin x 
cos x
sec x tan x
	 8.	 11 tan x211 cot x2 2 sec x csc x
	 9.	 sin2
 x cot2
 x cos2
 x tan2
 x 1
10.	 1tan x cot x2 2 csc2
 x sec2
 x
11.	
sin 2x
1 cos 2x tan x
12.	
cos1x y2
cos x sin y cot y tan x
13.	 csc x tan x
2 cot x	
14.	 1 tan x tan x
2 sec x
15.	 sin 2x
sin x cos 2x
cos x sec x
16.	 tana x p
4 b 1 tan x
1 tan x	
17.	 sec x 1
sin x sec x tan x
2
18.	 1cos x cos y2 2 1sin x sin y2 2 2 2 cos1x y2
19.	 acos x
2 sin x
2 b
2
1 sin x
20.	 cos 3x cos 7x
sin 3x sin 7x tan 2x
21.	
sin1x y2 sin1x y2
cos1x y2 cos1x y2 tan x
22.	 sin1x y2 sin1x y2 sin2
 x sin2 y
23–26  ■  Checking Identities Graphically    (a) Graph f and g.   
(b) Do the graphs suggest that the equation f1x2 g1x2  is an 
identity? Prove your answer.
23.	 f1x2 1 acos x
2 sin x
2 b
2
, g1x2 sin x
24.	 f1x2 sin x cos x, g1x2 "sin2
 x cos2
 x
25.	 f1x2 tan x tan x
2, g1x2 
1
cos x
26.	 f1x2 1 8 sin2
 x 8 sin4
 x, g1x2 cos 4x
27–28  ■  Determining Identities Graphically    (a) Graph the 
function(s) and make a conjecture, and  (b) prove your 
conjecture.
27.	 f1x2 2 sin2
 3x cos 6x
28.	 f1x2 sin x cot x
2, g1x2 cos x
29–46  ■  Solving Trigonometric Equations    Solve the equation in 
the interval 30, 2p2 .
29.	 4 sin u 3 0	
30.	 5 cos u 3 0
31.	 cos x sin x  sin x  0	
32.	 sin x  2 sin2x  0
33.	 2 sin2x  5 sin x  2  0
34.	 sin x  cos x  tan x  1
35.	 2 cos2x  7 cos x  3  0	
36.	 4 sin2x  2 cos2x  3
37.	 1 cos x
1 cos x 3	
38.	 sin x  cos 2x
39.	 tan3x  tan2x  3 tan x  3  0
40.	 cos 2x csc2x  2 cos 2x	
41.	 tan 1
2 x 2 sin 2x csc x
42.	 cos 3x  cos 2x  cos x  0
43.	 tan x sec x !3	
44.	 2 cos x  3 tan x  0
45.	 cos x  x2  1	
46.	 esinx  x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7  ■  Review  579
	47.	 Range of a Projectile    If a projectile is ﬁred with velocity √0 
at an angle u, then the maximum height it reaches (in ft) is 
modeled by the function
M1u2 √ 2
0 sin2
 u
64
	 	 Suppose √0  400 ft/s.
(a)	 At what angle u should the projectile be ﬁred so that the 
maximum height it reaches is 2000 ft?
(b)	 Is it possible for the projectile to reach a height of  
3000 ft?
(c)	 Find the angle u for which the projectile will travel 
highest.
M(¨)
¨
	48.	 Displacement of a Shock Absorber    The displacement of an 
automobile shock absorber is modeled by the function
f1t2 20.2t sin 4pt
	 	 Find the times when the shock absorber is at its equilibrium 
position (that is, when f1t2 02 .    [Hint: 2 x  0 for all  
real x.]
49–58  ■  Value of Expressions    Find the exact value of the 
expression.
	49.	 cos 15	
50.	 sin 5p
12
	51.	 tan p
8 	
52.	 2  sin p
12
  cos p
12
	53.	 sin 5 cos 40  cos 5 sin 40
	54.	 tan 66tan 6
1 tan 66 tan 6
	55.	 cos2
  p
8 sin2
  p
8 	
56.	 1
2
  cos p
12 !3
2  sin p
12
	57.	 cos 37.5 cos 7.5	
58.	 cos 67.5  cos 22.5
59–64  ■  Evaluating Expressions Involving Trigonometric  
Functions    Find the exact value of the expression given that 
sec x 3
2, csc y  3, and x and y are in Quadrant I.
59.	 sin1x y2 	
60.	 cos1x y2
61.	 tan1x y2 	
62.	 sin 2x
63.	 cos y
2	
64.	 tan y
2
65–66  ■  Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric 
Functions    Find the exact value of the expression.
65.	 tanA2 cos1 3
7B	
66.	 sinAtan1 3
4 cos1 5
13B
67–68  ■  Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions    
Write the expression as an algebraic expression in the variable(s).
67.	 tan12 tan1
 x2 	
68.	 cos1sin1
 x cos1
 y2
	69.	 Viewing Angle of a Sign    A 10-ft-wide highway sign is adja-
cent to a roadway, as shown in the ﬁgure. As a driver 
approaches the sign, the viewing angle u changes.
(a)	 Express viewing angle u as a function of the distance x 
between the driver and the sign.
(b)	 The sign is legible when the viewing angle is 2 or 
greater. At what distance x does the sign ﬁrst become  
legible?
¨
x
10 ft
	70.	 Viewing Angle of a Tower    A 380-ft-tall building supports a 
40-ft communications tower (see the ﬁgure). As a driver 
approaches the building, the viewing angle u of the tower 
changes.
(a)	 Express the viewing angle u as a function of the  
distance x between the driver and the building.
(b)	 At what distance from the building is the viewing angle u 
as large as possible?
x
380 ft
40 ft
¨
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

580
1–8  ■  Verify each identity.
	 1.	 tan u sin u  cos u  sec u
	 2.	
tan x
1 cos x csc x 11 sec x2
	 3.	
2 tan x
1 tan2
 x sin 2x
	 4.	 sin x tana x
2 b 1 cos x
	 5.	 2 sin213x2 1 cos16x2
	 6.	 cos 4x 1 8 sin2
 x 8 sin4
 x
	 7.	 asina x
2 b cos a x
2 bb
2
1 sin x
	 8.	 Let x  2 sin u, p/2  u  p/2. Simplify the expression
x
"4 x 2
	 9.	 Find the exact value of each expression.
(a)	 sin 8 cos 22  cos 8 sin 22      (b)  sin 75      (c)  sin p
12
	10.	 For the angles a and b in the ﬁgures, ﬁnd cos1a b2 .
2
1
å
3
2
∫
	11.	 Write sin 3x cos 5x as a sum of trigonometric functions.
	12.	 Write sin 2x  sin 5x as a product of trigonometric functions.
	13.	 If sin u  4
5 and u is in Quadrant III, ﬁnd tan1u/22 .
14–20  ■  Solve each trigonometric equation in the interval 30, 2p2 . Give the exact value, if 
possible; otherwise, round your answer to two decimal places.
14.	 3 sin u 1 0
15.	 12 cos u 12 1sin u 12 0
16.	 2 cos2
 u 5 cos u 2 0
17.	 sin 2u cos u 0
	18.	 5 cos 2u 2
	19.	 2 cos2
 x cos 2x 0
	20.	 2 tana x
2 b csc x 0
	21.	 Find the exact value of cosA2 tan1 9
40B.
	22.	 Rewrite the expression as an algebraic function of x and y: sin1cos1
 x tan1
 y2 .
CHAPTER 7
TEST
A CUMULATIVE REVIEW TEST FOR CHAPTERS 5, 6, AND 7 CAN BE FOUND AT THE BOOK COMPANION WEBSITE: www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

581
Traveling and Standing Waves
	
FOCUS ON MODELING
We’ve learned that the position of a particle in simple harmonic motion is described by 
a function of the form y  A sin vt (see Section 5.6). For example, if a string is moved 
up and down as in Figure 1, then the red dot on the string moves up and down in simple 
harmonic motion. Of course, the same holds true for each point on the string.
Figure 1
What function describes the shape of the whole string? If we ﬁx an instant in time 
1t 02  and snap a photograph of the string, we get the shape in Figure 2, which is 
modeled by
y A sin kx
where y is the height of the string above the x-axis at the point x.
π
k
2π
k
y
A
_A
x
Figure 2  y  A sin kx
■  Traveling Waves
If we snap photographs of the string at other instants, as in Figure 3, it appears that the 
waves in the string “travel” or shift to the right.
Figure 3
The velocity of the wave is the rate at which it moves to the right. If the wave has 
velocity √, then it moves to the right a distance √t in time t. So the graph of the shifted 
wave at time t is
y1x, t2 A sin k1x √t2
This function models the position of any point x on the string at any time t. We use the 
notation y1x, t2  to indicate that the function depends on the two variables x and t. Here 
is how this function models the motion of the string.
■	 If we ﬁx x, then y1x, t2  is a function of t only, which gives the position of the 
ﬁxed point x at time t.
■	 If we ﬁx t, then y1x, t2  is a function of x only, whose graph is the shape of the 
string at the ﬁxed time t.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

582 
Focus on Modeling
Example 1  ■  A Traveling Wave
A traveling wave is described by the function
y1x, t2 3 sina 2x p
2
  tb         x 0
(a)	 Find the function that models the position of the point x  p/6 at any time t. Ob-
serve that the point moves in simple harmonic motion.
(b)	 Sketch the shape of the wave when t  0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0. Does the wave 
appear to be traveling to the right?
(c)	 Find the velocity of the wave.
Solution
(a)	 Substituting x  p/6, we get
ya p
6, tb 3 sina 2 #  p
6 p
2
  tb 3 sina p
3 p
2
  tb
	
The function y 3 sinAp
3 p
2  tB describes simple harmonic motion with ampli-
tude 3 and period 2p/1p/22 4.
(b)	 The graphs are shown in Figure 4. As t increases, the wave moves to the right.
(c)	 We express the given function in the standard form y1x, t2 A sin k1x √t2 .
 y1x, t2 3 sina 2x p
2
  tb         Given
  3 sin 2a x p
4
  tb         Factor 2
	
Comparing this to the standard form, we see that the wave is moving with veloc-
ity √  p/4.
■
■  Standing Waves
If two waves are traveling along the same string, then the movement of the string is 
determined by the sum of the two waves. For example, if the string is attached to a wall, 
then the waves bounce back with the same amplitude and speed but in the opposite 
direction. In this case, one wave is described by y A sin k1x √t2 , and the reﬂected 
wave is described by y A sin k1x √t2 . The resulting wave is
 y1x, t2 A sin k1x √t2 A sin k1x √t2        Add the two waves
  2A sin kx cos k√t
        Sum-to-Product Formula
The points where kx is a multiple of 2p are special, because at these points y  0 
for any time t. In other words, these points never move. Such points are called nodes. 
Figure 5 shows the graph of the wave for several values of t. We see that the wave does 
not travel but simply vibrates up and down. Such a wave is called a standing wave.
Figure 5  A standing wave
y
2A
_2A
x
6
2
y
3
_3
x
4
0
Figure 4  Traveling wave
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Traveling and Standing Waves  583
Example 2  ■  A Standing Wave
Traveling waves are generated at each end of a wave tank 30 ft long, with equations
 y 1.5 sina p
5
 x 3tb
and	
 y 1.5 sina p
5
 x 3tb
(a)	 Find the equation of the combined wave, and ﬁnd the nodes.
(b)	 Sketch the graph for t  0, 0.17, 0.34, 0.51, 0.68, 0.85, and 1.02. Is this a stand-
ing wave?
Solution
(a)	 The combined wave is obtained by adding the two equations.
 y 1.5 sina p
5
 x 3tb 1.5 sina p
5
 x 3tb         Add the two waves
  3 sin p
5
 x cos 3t
        Sum-to-Product Formula
	
The nodes occur at the values of x for which sin p
5  x 0, that is, where p
5  x kp  
(k an integer). Solving for x, we get x  5k. So the nodes occur at
x 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30
(b)	 The graphs are shown in Figure 6. From the graphs we see that this is a standing 
wave.
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
t=0
t=0.17
t=0.34
t=0.51
t=0.68
t=0.85
t=1.02
y
x
3
_3
0
20
30
10
Figure 6   
y1x, t2 3 sin p
5  x cos 3t

■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

584 
Focus on Modeling
Problems
	 1.	 Wave on a Canal    A wave on the surface of a long canal is described by the  
function
y1x, t2 5 sina2x p
2
  tb  x 0
(a)	 Find the function that models the position of the point x  0 at any time t.
(b)	 Sketch the shape of the wave when t  0, 0.4, 0.8, 1.2, and 1.6. Is this a traveling 
wave?
(c)	 Find the velocity of the wave.
	 2.	 Wave in a Rope    Traveling waves are generated at each end of a tightly stretched rope  
24 ft long, with equations
y 0.2 sin11.047x 0.524t2  and  y 0.2 sin11.047x 0.524t2
(a)	 Find the equation of the combined wave, and ﬁnd the nodes.
(b)	 Sketch the graph for t  0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Is this a standing wave?
	 3.	 Traveling Wave    A traveling wave is graphed at the instant t  0. If it is moving to the 
right with velocity 6, ﬁnd an equation of the form y1x, t2 A sin1kx k√t2  for this wave.
4.6
9.2
13.8
x
y
2.7
_2.7
0
	 4.	 Traveling Wave    A traveling wave has period 2p/3, amplitude 5, and velocity 0.5.
(a)	 Find the equation of the wave.
(b)	 Sketch the graph for t  0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2.
	 5.	 Standing Wave    A standing wave with amplitude 0.6 is graphed at several times t as 
shown in the ﬁgure. If the vibration has a frequency of 20 Hz, ﬁnd an equation of the form 
y1x, t2 A sin ax cos bt that models this wave.
1
2
3
x
y
0.6
_0.6
0
1
2
3
x
y
0.6
_0.6
0
1
2
3
x
y
0.6
_0.6
0
t=0 s
t=0.010 s
t=0.025 s
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Traveling and Standing Waves  585
	 6.	 Standing Wave    A standing wave has maximum amplitude 7 and nodes at 0, p/2, p, 
3p/2, 2p, as shown in the ﬁgure. Each point that is not a node moves up and down with 
period 4p. Find a function of the form y1x, t2 A sin ax cos bt that models this wave.
y
x
7
_7
π
2
2
π
2π
3π
	 7.	 Vibrating String    When a violin string vibrates, the sound produced results from a com-
bination of standing waves that have evenly placed nodes. The ﬁgure illustrates some of the 
possible standing waves. Let’s assume that the string has length p.
(a)	 For ﬁxed t, the string has the shape of a sine curve y  Asin ax. Find the appropriate 
value of a for each of the illustrated standing waves.
(b)	 Do you notice a pattern in the values of a that you found in part (a)? What would the 
next two values of a be? Sketch rough graphs of the standing waves associated with 
these new values of a.
(c)	 Suppose that for ﬁxed t, each point on the string that is not a node vibrates  
with frequency 440 Hz. Find the value of b for which an equation of the form  
y  A cos bt would model this motion.
(d)	 Combine your answers for parts (a) and (c) to ﬁnd functions of the form 
y1x, t2 A sin ax cos bt that model each of the standing waves in the ﬁgure.  
(Assume that A  1.)
	 8.	 Waves in a Tube    Standing waves in a violin string must have nodes at the ends of the 
string because the string is ﬁxed at its endpoints. But this need not be the case with sound 
waves in a tube (such as a ﬂute or an organ pipe). The ﬁgure shows some possible standing 
waves in a tube.
	 	     Suppose that a standing wave in a tube 37.7 ft long is modeled by the function
y1x, t2 0.3 cos 1
2 x cos 50pt
	 	 Here y1x, t2  represents the variation from normal air pressure at the point x feet from the 
end of the tube, at time t seconds.
(a)	 At what points x are the nodes located? Are the endpoints of the tube nodes?
(b)	 At what frequency does the air vibrate at points that are not nodes?
34
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Section 1.9 we learned how to graph points in rectangular coordinates. 
In this chapter we study a different way of locating points in the plane, 
called polar coordinates. Using rectangular coordinates is like describing a 
location in a city by saying that it’s at the corner of 2nd Street and 4th 
Avenue; these directions would help a taxi driver find the location. But we 
may also describe this same location “as the crow flies”; we can say that 
it’s 1.5 miles northeast of City Hall. These directions would help an 
airplane or hot air balloon pilot find the location. So instead of specifying 
the location with respect to a grid of streets and avenues, we specify it by 
giving its distance and direction from a fixed reference point. That’s what 
we do in the polar coordinate system. In polar coordinates the location of a 
point is given by an ordered pair of numbers: the distance of the point 
from the origin (or pole) and the angle from the positive x-axis. 
Why do we study different coordinate systems? It’s because certain 
curves are more naturally described in one coordinate system rather than 
another. For example, in rectangular coordinates lines and parabolas have 
simple equations, but equations of circles are rather complicated. We’ll see 
that in polar coordinates circles have very simple equations.
587
Polar Coordinates  
and Parametric Equations
8
8.1	 Polar Coordinates
8.2	 Graphs of Polar Equations
8.3	 Polar Form of Complex 
Numbers; De Moivre’s 
Theorem
8.4	 Plane Curves and 
Parametric Equations
Focus on Modeling
	
The Path of a Projectile
© gary718/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

588 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
8.1 
Polar Coordinates
■  Definition of Polar Coordinates  ■  Relationship Between Polar and Rectangular 
Coordinates  ■  Polar Equations
In this section we deﬁne polar coordinates, and we learn how polar coordinates are re-
lated to rectangular coordinates.
■  Definition of Polar Coordinates
The polar coordinate system uses distances and directions to specify the location of 
a point in the plane. To set up this system, we choose a ﬁxed point O in the plane called 
the pole (or origin) and draw from O a ray (half-line) called the polar axis as in Fig-
ure 1. Then each point P can be assigned polar coordinates P1r,  u2 , where
r is the distance from O to P
u is the angle between the polar axis and the segment OP
We use the convention that u is positive if measured in a counterclockwise direction 
from the polar axis or negative if measured in a clockwise direction. If r is negative, 
then P1r,  u2  is deﬁned to be the point that lies 0  r 0  units from the pole in the direction 
opposite to that given by u (see Figure 2).
Example 1  ■  Plotting Points in Polar Coordinates
Plot the points whose polar coordinates are given.
(a)	 11,  3p/42             (b)  13,  p/62             (c)  13,  3p2             (d)  14,  p/42
Solution    The points are plotted in Figure 3. Note that the point in part (d) lies 
4 units from the origin along the angle 5p/4, because the given value of r is negative.
P!1,     @
3π
4
3π
4
O
P!3, _   @
π
6
O
π
6
_
O
P(3, 3π)
3π
O
P!_4,    @
π
4
π
4
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3
Now Try Exercises 5 and 7	
■
Note that the coordinates 1r,  u2  and 1r,  u p2  represent the same point, as 
shown in Figure 4. Moreover, because the angles u  2np (where n is any integer) all 
O
r
¨
P
Polar axis
Figure 1
O
¨
P(r, ¨)
r<0
|r|
Figure 2
Figure 4
O
¨
P(r, ¨)
P(_r, ¨+π)
¨+π
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.1  ■  Polar Coordinates  589
have the same terminal side as the angle u, each point in the plane has inﬁnitely  
many representations in polar coordinates. In fact, any point P1r,  u2  can also be rep-
resented by
P1r,  u 2np2  and  P1r,  u 12n 12p2
for any integer n.
Example 2  ■  Different Polar Coordinates for the Same Point
(a)	 Graph the point with polar coordinates P12,  p/32 .
(b)	 Find two other polar coordinate representations of P with r  0 and two with  
r  0.
Solution
(a)	 The graph is shown in Figure 5(a).
(b)	 Other representations with r  0 are
a 2,  p
3 2pb a 2,  7p
3 b
        Add 2p to u
a 2,  p
3 2pb a 2,   5p
3 b         Add 2p to u
	 	 Other representations with r  0 are
 a 2,  p
3 pb a 2,  4p
3 b
        Replace r by r and add p to u
 a 2,  p
3 pb a 2,   2p
3 b         Replace r by r and add p to u
	The graphs in Figure 5 explain why these coordinates represent the same point.
(a)
O
2
4π
3
P!_2,     @
4π
3
O
2
P!_2, _    @
2π
3
2π
3
_
O
2
P!2, _    @
5π
3
5π
3
_
P!2,     @
7π
3
7π
3
O
2
O
2
π
3
π
3
P!2,    @
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
■  Relationship Between Polar  
and Rectangular Coordinates
Situations often arise in which we need to consider polar and rectangular coordinates 
simultaneously. The connection between the two systems is illustrated in Figure 6 (see 
next page), where the polar axis coincides with the positive x-axis. The formulas in the 
box are obtained from the ﬁgure using the deﬁnitions of the trigonometric functions and 
the Pythagorean Theorem. (Although we have pictured the case in which r  0 and u 
is acute, the formulas hold for any angle u and for any value of r.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

590 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
Relationship between Polar and Rectangular Coordinates
1.	 To change from polar to rectangular coordinates, use the formulas
x r cos u  and  y r sin u
2.	 To change from rectangular to polar coordinates, use the formulas
r2 x2 y2  and  tan u y
x 1x ? 02
Example 3  ■  Converting Polar Coordinates  
to Rectangular Coordinates
Find rectangular coordinates for the point that has polar coordinates 14,  2p/32 .
Solution    Since r  4 and u  2p/3, we have
 x r cos u 4 cos 2p
3 4 # a 1
2 b 2
 y r sin u 4 sin 2p
3 4 # !3
2
2!3
Thus the point has rectangular coordinates 12,  2!32 .
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
Example 4  ■  Converting Rectangular Coordinates  
to Polar Coordinates
Find polar coordinates for the point that has rectangular coordinates 12,  22 .
Solution    Using x  2, y  2, we get
r 2 x2 y2 22 122 2 8
so r 2!2 or 2!2. Also
tan u y
x 2
2 1
so u  3p/4 or p/4. Since the point 12,  22  lies in Quadrant IV (see Figure 7), we 
can represent it in polar coordinates as 12!2,  p/42  or 12!2,  3p/42 .
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
x
0
r
¨
x
y
P(r, ¨)
P(x, y)
y
Figure 6
x
y
0
3π
4
π
4
_
(2, _2)
!2 œ∑2, _   @
!_2 œ∑2,     @
π
4
3π
4
Figure 7
Discovery Project
Mapping the World
In the Focus on Modeling on page 533 we learned how surveyors can make a map 
of a city or town. But mapping the whole world introduces a new difficulty. How is 
it possible to represent the spherical world we live on by a flat 
map? This challenge was faced by Renaissance explorers and 
their mapmakers, who developed several ingenious solutions. In 
this project we see how polar coordinates and trigonometry can 
help us make a map of the whole world on a flat sheet of paper.
You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© maodoltee/Shutterstock.com
© Photoraidz/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.1  ■  Polar Coordinates  591
Note that the equations relating polar and rectangular coordinates do not uniquely 
determine r or u. When we use these equations to ﬁnd the polar coordinates of a point, 
we must be careful that the values we choose for r and u give us a point in the correct 
quadrant, as we did in Example 4.
■  Polar Equations
In Examples 3 and 4 we converted points from one coordinate system to the other. Now 
we consider the same problem for equations.
Example 5  ■  Converting an Equation from Rectangular  
to Polar Coordinates
Express the equation x2  4y in polar coordinates.
Solution    We use the formulas x  r cos u and y  r sin u.
 x2 4y
        Rectangular equation
 1r cos u2 2 41r sin u2
        Substitute x  r cos u, y  r sin u
 r 2
 cos2
 u 4r sin u
        Expand
 r 4 sin u
cos2
 u
        Divide by r cos2u
 r 4 sec u tan u        Simplify
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
As Example 5 shows, converting from rectangular to polar coordinates is straight-
forward: Just replace x by r cos u and y by r sin u, and then simplify. But converting 
polar equations to rectangular form often requires more thought.
Example 6  ■  Converting Equations from Polar  
to Rectangular Coordinates
Express the polar equation in rectangular coordinates. If possible, determine the graph 
of the equation from its rectangular form.
(a)	 r  5 sec u            (b)  r  2 sin u            (c)  r  2  2 cos u
Solution
(a)	 Since sec u  1/cos u, we multiply both sides by cos u.
 r 5 sec u        Polar equation
 r cos u 5
        Multiply by cos u
 x 5
        Substitute x  r cos u
	 	 The graph of x  5 is the vertical line in Figure 8.
(b)	 We multiply both sides of the equation by r, because then we can use the  
formulas r2  x2  y2 and r sin u  y.
 r 2 sin u         Polar equation
 r 2 2r sin u        Multiply by r
 x2 y2 2y
        r2  x2  y2 and rsin u  y
 x2 y2 2y 0
        Subtract 2y
 x2 1y 12 2 1
        Complete the square in y
	 	 This is the equation of a circle of radius 1 centered at the point 10,  12 . It is 
graphed in Figure 9.
x
y
0
x=5
Figure 8
x
y
0
1
1
Figure 9
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

592 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
(c)	 We ﬁrst multiply both sides of the equation by r:
r2 2r 2r cos u
	 	 Using r2  x2  y2 and x  r cos u, we can convert two terms in the equation 
into rectangular coordinates, but eliminating the remaining r requires more work.
 x2 y2 2r 2x
        r2  x2  y2 and r cos u  x
 x2 y2 2x 2r
        Subtract 2x
 1x2 y2 2x2 2 4r2
        Square both sides
 1x2 y2 2x2 2 41x2 y22        r2  x2  y2
	 	 In this case the rectangular equation looks more complicated than the polar equa-
tion. Although we cannot easily determine the graph of the equation from its rect-
angular form, we will see in the next section how to graph it using the polar 
equation.
Now Try Exercises 55, 57, and 59	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 We can describe the location of a point in the plane using 
	 	 different  
 systems. The point P shown in 
the figure has rectangular coordinates 1
, 
2 and polar  
coordinates 1
, 
2.
x
y
0
P
1
1
	 2.	 Let P be a point in the plane.
(a)	 If P has polar coordinates 1r, u2  then it has rectangular 
	
coordinates 1x, y2  where x  
 and 
	
y  
  .
(b)	 If P has rectangular coordinates 1x, y2  then it has 
	
polar coordinates 1r, u2  where r2  
 and 
	
tan u  
  .
3–4  ■  Yes or No? If No, give a reason.
	 3.	 Do the polar coordinates 12, p/62  and 12, 7p/62  represent 
the same point?
	 4.	 Do the equations relating polar and rectangular coordinates 
uniquely determine r and u?
Skills
5–10  ■  Plotting Points in Polar Coordinates    Plot the point that 
has the given polar coordinates.
	 5.	 14,  p/42 	
6.	 11,  02 	
  7.	 16,  7p/62
	 8.	 13,  2p/32 	
9.	 12,  4p/32 	
10.	 15,  17p/62
11–16  ■  Different Polar Coordinates for the Same Point    Plot the 
point that has the given polar coordinates. Then give two other 
polar coordinate representations of the point, one with r  0 and 
the other with r  0.
	11.	 13,  p/22 	
12.	 12,  3p/42 	
13.  11,  7p/62
14.	 12,  p/32 	
15.	 15,  02 	
16.  13,  12
17–24  ■  Points in Polar Coordinates    Determine which point in 
the ﬁgure, P, Q, R, or S, has the given polar coordinates.
O
π
4
1
2
3
4 P
π
4
Q
R
S
17.	 14,  3p/42 	
18.	 14,  3p/42
19.	 14,  p/42 	
20.	 14,  13p/42
21.	 14,  23p/42 	
22.	 14,  23p/42
23.	 14,  101p/42 	
24.	 14,  103p/42
8.1  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.1  ■  Polar Coordinates  593
25–26  ■  Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates    A point 
is graphed in rectangular form. Find polar coordinates for the 
point, with r  0 and 0  u  2p.
25.	
x
y
0
P
1
1
	26.	
x
y
0
Q
1
1
27–28  ■  Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates    A point 
is graphed in polar form. Find its rectangular coordinates.
27.	  
O
2π
3
_
R
1
	 28.	
O
S
5π
6
1
29–36  ■  Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates    Find the 
rectangular coordinates for the point whose polar coordinates are 
given.
29.	 14,  p/62 	
30.	 16,  2p/32
31.	 1 !2,  p/42 	
32.	 11,  5p/22
33.	 15,  5p2 	
34.	 10,  13p2
35.	 16!2,  11p/62 	
36.	 1 !3,  5p/32
37–44  ■  Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates    Convert 
the rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates with r  0 and  
0  u  2p.
37.	 11,  12 	
38.	 13 !3,  32
39.	 1 !8,  !82 	
40.	 1!6,  !22
41.	 13,  42 	
42.	 11,  22
43.	 16,  02 	
44.	 10,  !32
45–50  ■  Rectangular Equations to Polar Equations    Convert the 
equation to polar form.
45.	 x  y	
46.	 x2  y2  9
47.	 y  x2	
48.	 y  5
49.	 x  4	
50.	 x2  y2  1
51–70  ■  Polar Equations to Rectangular Equations    Convert the 
polar equation to rectangular coordinates.
51.	 r  7	
52.	 r 3
53.	 u  p
2 	
54.	 u  p
55.	 r cos u  6	
56.	 r 2 csc u
57.	 r 4 sin u	
58.	 r  6 cos u
59.	 r  1  cos u	
60.	 r 311 sin u2
61.	 r 1 2 sin u	
62.	 r  2  cos u
63.	 r 
1
sin u cos u	
64.	 r 
1
1 sin u
	65.	 r 
4
1 2 sin u	
66.	 r 
2
1 cos u
67.	 r2  tan u	
68.	 r2  sin 2u
69.	 sec u  2	
70.	 cos 2u  1
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
71.	 DISCUSS  ■  PROVE:  The Distance Formula in Polar 
Coordinates
(a)	 Use the Law of Cosines to prove that the distance  
between the polar points 1r1,  u12  and 1r2,  u22  is
d "r 2
1 r 2
2 2r1r2 cos1u2 u12
(b)	 Find the distance between the points whose polar coordi-
nates are 13,  3p/42  and 11,  7p/62 , using the formula 
from part (a).
(c)	 Now convert the points in part (b) to rectangular coordi-
nates. Find the distance between them, using the usual 
Distance Formula. Do you get the same answer?
72.	 DISCUSS:  Different Coordinate Systems    As was noted in 
the overview of the chapter, certain curves are more naturally 
described in one coordinate system than in another. In each 
of the following situations, which coordinate system would 
be appropriate: rectangular or polar? Give reasons to support 
your answer. 
(a)	 You need to give directions to your house to a taxi driver. 
(b)	 You need to give directions to your house to a homing 
pigeon. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

594 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
8.2 
Graphs of Polar Equations
■  Graphing Polar Equations  ■  Symmetry  ■  Graphing Polar Equations  
with Graphing Devices
The graph of a polar equation r f 1u2  consists of all points P that have at least one 
polar representation 1r,  u2  whose coordinates satisfy the equation. Many curves that 
arise in mathematics and its applications are more easily and naturally represented by 
polar equations than by rectangular equations.
■  Graphing Polar Equations
A rectangular grid is helpful for plotting points in rectangular coordinates (see Figure 
1(a)). To plot points in polar coordinates, it is convenient to use a grid consisting of 
circles centered at the pole and rays emanating from the pole, as in Figure 1(b). We will 
use such grids to help us sketch polar graphs.
(a)  Grid for rectangular coordinates
(b)  Grid for polar coordinates
3π
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
3π
4
C !3,     @
4π
3
B!4,    @
π
4
π
6
π
4
π
3
5π
4
7π
4
A!6,     @
5π
6
π
2
0
O
π
x
y
0
P(_2, 3)
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
_5 _4 _3 _2 _1_1
_2
_3
_4
_5
Q(4, 2)
R(3, _5)
Figure 1
In Examples 1 and 2 we see that circles centered at the origin and lines that pass 
through the origin have particularly simple equations in polar coordinates.
Example 1  ■  Sketching the Graph of a Polar Equation
Sketch a graph of the equation r  3, and express the equation in rectangular 
coordinates.
Solution    The graph consists of all points whose r-coordinate is 3, that is, all points 
that are 3 units away from the origin. So the graph is a circle of radius 3 centered at 
the origin, as shown in Figure 2.
Squaring both sides of the equation, we get
 r 2 32        Square both sides
 x2 y2 9         Substitute r2  x2  y2
So the equivalent equation in rectangular coordinates is x2  y2  9.
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
r=3
O
3π
4
π
4
5π
4
7π
4
2
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.2  ■  Graphs of Polar Equations  595
In general, the graph of the equation r  a is a circle of radius 0  a 0  centered at the 
origin. Squaring both sides of this equation, we see that the equivalent equation in rect-
angular coordinates is x2  y2  a2.
Example 2  ■  Sketching the Graph of a Polar Equation
Sketch a graph of the equation u  p/3, and express the equation in rectangular 
coordinates.
Solution    The graph consists of all points whose u-coordinate is p/3. This is the 
straight line that passes through the origin and makes an angle of p/3 with the polar 
axis (see Figure 3). Note that the points 1r,  p/32 on the line with r  0 lie in Quadrant 
I, whereas those with r  0 lie in Quadrant III. If the point 1x,  y2 lies on this line, then
y
x tan u tan p
3 !3
Thus the rectangular equation of this line is y !3x.
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
To sketch a polar curve whose graph isn’t as obvious as the ones in the preceding 
examples, we plot points calculated for sufﬁciently many values of u and then join them 
in a continuous curve. (This is what we did when we ﬁrst learned to graph equations in 
rectangular coordinates.)
Example 3  ■  Sketching the Graph of a Polar Equation
Sketch a graph of the polar equation r  2 sin u.
Solution    We ﬁrst use the equation to determine the polar coordinates of several 
points on the curve. The results are shown in the following table.
u
0
p/6
p/4
p/3
p/2
2p/3
3p/4
5p/6
p
r  2 sin u
0
1
!2
!3
2
!3
!2
1
0
We plot these points in Figure 4 and then join them to sketch the curve. The graph 
appears to be a circle. We have used values of u only between 0 and p, since the same 
points (this time expressed with negative r-coordinates) would be obtained if we 
allowed u to range from p to 2p.
1
π
6
π
4
π
3
π
2
2π
3
3π
4
5π
6
Figure 4  r  2 sin u
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
The polar equation r  2 sin u in  
rectangular coordinates is
x2 1 y 12 2 1
(see Section 8.1, Example 6(b)). From 
the rectangular form of the equation we 
see that the graph is a circle of radius 1 
centered at 10,  12 .
2π
3
π
3
4π
3
5π
3
π
3
π
3
¨=
O
2
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

596 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
In general, the graphs of equations of the form
r 2a sin u  and  r 2a cos u
are circles with radius 0  a 0  centered at the points with polar coordinates 1a,  p/22 and 1a,  02, 
respectively.
Example 4  ■  Sketching the Graph of a Cardioid
Sketch a graph of r  2  2 cos u.
Solution    Instead of plotting points as in Example 3, we ﬁrst sketch the graph of  
r  2  2 cos u in rectangular coordinates in Figure 5. We can think of this graph as 
a table of values that enables us to read at a glance the values of r that correspond to 
increasing values of u. For instance, we see that as u increases from 0 to p/2, r (the 
distance from O) decreases from 4 to 2, so we sketch the corre­sponding part of the 
polar graph in Figure 6(a). As u increases from p/2 to p, Figure 5 shows that r 
decreases from 2 to 0, so we sketch the next part of the graph as in Figure 6(b). As  
u increases from p to 3p/2, r increases from 0 to 2, as shown in part (c). Finally, as  
u increases from 3p/2 to 2p, r increases from 2 to 4, as shown in part (d). If we let u 
increase beyond 2p or decrease beyond 0, we would simply retrace our path. Com-
bining the portions of the graph from parts (a) through (d) of Figure 6, we sketch the 
complete graph in part (e).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
O
π
2
¨=
¨=0
O
π
2
¨=
¨=π
O
3π
2
¨=
¨=π
O
¨=2π
3π
2
¨=
O
2
Figure 6  Steps in sketching r  2  2 cos u
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
The curve in Figure 6 is called a cardioid because it is heart-shaped. In general, the 
graph of any equation of the form
r a11 6 cos u2  or  r a11 6 sin u2
is a cardioid.
Example 5  ■  Sketching the Graph of a Four-Leaved Rose
Sketch the curve r  cos 2u.
Solution    As in Example 4, we ﬁrst sketch the graph of r  cos 2u in rectangular 
coordinates, as shown in Figure 7. As u increases from 0 to p/4, Figure 7 shows that 
r decreases from 1 to 0, so we draw the corresponding portion of the polar curve  
in Figure 8 (indicated by ①). As u increases from p/4 to p/2, the value of r goes 
from 0 to 1. This means that the distance from the origin increases from 0 to 1, but 
instead of being in Quadrant I, this portion of the polar curve (indicated by ②) lies 
on the opposite side of the origin in Quadrant III. The remainder of the curve is 
drawn in a similar fashion, with the arrows and numbers indicating the order in 
The polar equation r  2  2 cos u in 
rectangular coordinates is
1x2 y2 2x2 2 41x2 y22
(see Section 8.1, Example 6(c)). The 
simpler form of the polar equation 
shows that it is more natural to describe 
cardioids using polar coordinates.
¨
r
0
3π
2
π
2
π
2π
Figure 5  r  2  2 cos u
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.2  ■  Graphs of Polar Equations  597
which the portions are traced out. The resulting curve has four petals and is called a 
four-leaved rose.
Figure 8  Four-leaved rose r  cos 2u 
sketched in polar coordinates
¨=0
¨=π
3π
4
¨=
π
2
¨=
¨=π
4
1
2
5π
4
3π
2
7π
4
r
1
π
2π
0
_1
π
4
π
2
3π
4
¨
Figure 7  Graph of r  cos 2u sketched in rectangular coordinates
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
In general, the graph of an equation of the form
r a cos nu  or  r a sin nu
is an n-leaved rose if n is odd or a 2n-leaved rose if n is even (as in Example 5).
■  Symmetry
In graphing a polar equation, it’s often helpful to take advantage of symmetry. We list 
three tests for symmetry; Figure 9 shows why these tests work.
Tests for Symmetry
1.	 If a polar equation is unchanged when we replace u by u, then the graph is 
symmetric about the polar axis (Figure 9(a)).
2.	 If the equation is unchanged when we replace r by r, or u by u 1 p, then 
the graph is symmetric about the pole (Figure 9(b)).
3.	 If the equation is unchanged when we replace u by p  u, then the graph is 
symmetric about the vertical line u  p/2 (the y-axis) (Figure 9(c)).
Figure 9
O
(r, ¨)
(_r, ¨)
(a)  Symmetry about the polar axis
(b)  Symmetry about the pole
O
(r, ¨)
(r, _¨)
_¨
¨
(c)  Symmetry about the line ¨= π
2
O
(r, ¨)
(r, π _ ¨)
π-¨
¨
π
2
¨=
The graphs in Figures 2, 6(e), and 8 are symmetric about the polar axis. The graph 
in Figure 8 is also symmetric about the pole. Figures 4 and 8 show graphs that are sym-
metric about u  p/2. Note that the four-leaved rose in Figure 8 meets all three tests 
for symmetry.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

598 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
In rectangular coordinates the zeros of the function y f1x2  correspond to the  
x-intercepts of the graph. In polar coordinates the zeros of the function r f1u2  are the 
angles u at which the curve crosses the pole. The zeros help us sketch the graph, as is  
illustrated in the next example.
Example 6  ■  Using Symmetry to Sketch a Limaçon
Sketch a graph of the equation r  1  2 cos u.
Solution    We use the following as aids in sketching the graph.
Symmetry.    Since the equation is unchanged when u is replaced by u, the graph is 
symmetric about the polar axis.
Zeros.    To ﬁnd the zeros, we solve
 0 1 2 cos u
 cos u  1
2
 u 2p
3 , 4p
3
Table of values.    As in Example 4, we sketch the graph of r  1  2 cos u in rect-
angular coordinates to serve as a table of values (Figure 10).
Now we sketch the polar graph of r  1  2 cos u from u  0 to u  p and then 
use symmetry to complete the graph in Figure 11.
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
The curve in Figure 11 is called a limaçon, after the Middle French word for snail. 
In general, the graph of an equation of the form
r a 6 b cos u        or        r a 6 b sin u
is a limaçon. The shape of the limaçon depends on the relative size of a and b (see the 
box on the next page).
■  Graphing Polar Equations with Graphing Devices
Although it’s useful to be able to sketch simple polar graphs by hand, we need a graph-
ing calculator or computer when the graph is as complicated as the one in Figure 12. 
Fortunately, most graphing calculators are capable of graphing polar equations directly.
Example 7  ■  Drawing the Graph of a Polar Equation
Graph the equation r cos12u/32 .
Solution    We need to determine the domain for u. So we ask ourselves: How many 
times must u go through a complete rotation (2p radians) before the graph starts to 
repeat itself? The graph repeats itself when the same value of r is obtained at u and  
u  2np. Thus we need to ﬁnd an integer n so that
cos 
21u 2np2
3
cos 2u
3
For this equality to hold, 4np/3 must be a multiple of 2p, and this ﬁrst happens when  
n  3. Therefore we obtain the entire graph if we choose values of u between u  0 
and u 0 2132p 6p. The graph is shown in Figure 13.
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
Figure 10
¨
r
0
2π
3
π
3
π
2π
3
_1
Figure 11  r  1  2 cos u
2π
3
¨=
4π
3
¨=
2
Figure 12  r sin u sin315 u/22
1
_1
_1
1
Figure 13  r cos12u/32
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.2  ■  Graphs of Polar Equations  599
Example 8  ■  A Family of Polar Equations
Graph the family of polar equations r  1  c sin u for c  3, 2.5, 2, 1.5, 1. How 
does the shape of the graph change as c changes?
Solution    Figure 14 shows computer-drawn graphs for the given values of c. When  
c  1, the graph has an inner loop; the loop decreases in size as c decreases. When  
c  1, the loop disappears, and the graph becomes a cardioid (see Example 4).
c=3.0
c=2.5
c=2.0
c=1.5
c=1.0
Figure 14  A family of limaçons r  1  c sin u in the viewing rectangle 32.5, 2.54 by 30.5, 4.54
Now Try Exercise 51	
■
The box below gives a summary of some of the basic polar graphs used in calculus.
Some Common Polar Curves
Circles and Spiral
r=a
circle
r=a ß ¨
circle
r=a ç ¨
circle
r=a¨
spiral
Limaçons
a<b
limaçon with
inner loop
a=b
cardioid
a>b
dimpled limaçon
a≥2b
convex limaçon
r  a  b sin u
r  a  b cos u
1a 0,  b 02
Orientation depends on  
the trigonometric function  
(sine or cosine) and the sign of b.
Roses
r=a ç 2¨
4-leaved rose
r=a ç 3¨
3-leaved rose
r=a ç 4¨
8-leaved rose
r=a ç 5¨
5-leaved rose
r  a sin nu
r  a cos nu
n-leaved if n is odd 
2n-leaved if n is even 
Lemniscates	
r™=a™ ß 2¨
lemniscate
r™=a™ ç 2¨
lemniscate
Figure-eight-shaped  
curves
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

600 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
Concepts
	 1.	 To plot points in polar coordinates, we use a grid consisting 
	 	 of  
 centered at the pole and  
 emanating 
from the pole. 
	 2.	 (a)	 To graph a polar equation r f 1u2 , we plot all the 
	 	 	
points 1r, u2  that  
 the equation. 
(b)	 The simplest polar equations are obtained by setting  
r or u equal to a constant. The graph of the polar 
	
equation r 3 is a  
 with radius  
 
	
centered at the  
  . The graph of the polar 
	
equation u p/4 is a  
 passing through the 
	
 
 with slope  
  . Graph these polar  
equations below.
2
O
2
O
Skills
3–8  ■  Graphs of Polar Equations    Match the polar equation with 
the graphs labeled I–VI. Use the table on page 519 to help you.
	 3.	 r  3 cos u	
  4.	 r  3
	 5.	 r  2  2 sin u	
  6.	 r  1  2 cos u
	 7.	 r  sin 3u	
  8.	 r  sin 4u
I
II
1
1
III
IV
3
1
3
V
VI
1
1
3
9–16  ■  Testing for Symmetry    Test the polar equation for symme-
try with respect to the polar axis, the pole, and the line u  p/2.
	 9.	 r  2  sin u	
10.	 r  4  8 cos u
	11.	 r  3 sec u	
12.	 r  5 cos u csc u
13.	 r 
4
3 2 sin u	
14.	 r 
5
1 3 cos u
15.	 r2  4 cos 2u	
16.	 r2  9 sin u
17–22  ■  Polar to Rectangular    Sketch a graph of the polar equa-
tion, and express the equation in rectangular coordinates.
17.	 r  2	
18.	 r  1
19.	 u  p/2	
20.	 u  5p/6
21.	 r  6 sin u	
22.	 r  cos u
23–46  ■  Graphing Polar Equations    Sketch a graph of the polar 
equation.
23.	 r  2 cos u	
24.	 r 3 sin u
25.	 r  2  2 cos u	
26.	 r  1  sin u
27.	 r 311 sin u2 	
28.	 r  cos u  1
29.	 r  sin 2u	
30.	 r  2 cos 3u
31.	 r cos 5u	
32.	 r sin 4u
33.	 r 2 sin 5u	
34.	 r 3 cos 4u
35.	 r !3 2 sin u	
36.	 r  2  sin u
37.	 r !3 cos u	
38.	 r  1  2 cos u
39.	 r 2 2!2 cos u	
40.	 r 3 6 sin u
41.	 r2  cos 2u	
42.	 r2  4 sin 2u
43.	 r  u,    u  0    (spiral)
44.	 r u  1,    u  0    (reciprocal spiral)
45.	 r  2  sec u    (conchoid)
	46.	 r  sin u tan u    (cissoid)
47–50  ■  Graphing Polar Equations    Use a graphing device to 
graph the polar equation. Choose the domain of u to make sure 
you produce the entire graph.
47.	 r cos1u/22 	
48.	 r sin18u/52
49.	 r 1 2 sin1u/22     (nephroid)
50.	 r "1 0.8 sin2
 u    (hippopede)
8.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.2  ■  Graphs of Polar Equations  601
51–52  ■  Families of Polar Equations    These exercises involve 
families of polar equations.
51.	 Graph the family of polar equations r  1  sin nu for  
n  1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. How is the number of loops related to n?
52.	 Graph the family of polar equations r  1  c sin 2u for  
c  0.3, 0.6, 1, 1.5, and 2. How does the graph change as  
c increases?
53–56  ■  Special Polar Equations    Match the polar equation with 
the graphs labeled I–IV. Give reasons for your answers.
53.	 r sin1u/22 	
54.	 r 1/ !u
55.	 r  u sin u	
56.	 r 1 3 cos13u2
1
1
II
I
10
III
IV
1
Skills Plus
57–60  ■  Rectangular to Polar    Sketch a graph of the rectangular 
equation.    [Hint: First convert the equation to polar coordinates.]
57.	 1x2 y22 3 4x2y2	
58.	 1x2 y22 3 1x2 y22 2
59.	 1x2 y22 2 x2 y2	
60.	 x2 y2 1x2 y2 x2 2
61.	 A Circle in Polar Coordinates    Consider the polar equation 
r a cos u b sin u.
(a)	 Express the equation in rectangular coordinates, and use 
this to show that the graph of the equation is a circle. 
What are the center and radius?
(b)	 Use your answer to part (a) to graph the equation 
r 2 sin u 2 cos u.
62.	 A Parabola in Polar Coordinates 
(a)	 Graph the polar equation r  tan u sec u in the viewing 
rectangle 33, 34 by 31, 94.
(b)	 Note that your graph in part (a) looks like a parabola (see 
Section 3.1). Conﬁrm this by converting the equation to 
rectangular coordinates.
Applications
63.	 Orbit of a Satellite    Scientists and engineers often use polar 
equations to model the motion of satellites in earth orbit. 
Let’s consider a satellite whose orbit is modeled by the 
equation r 22500/14 cos u2 , where r is the distance in 
miles between the satellite and the center of the earth and u is 
the angle shown in the following ﬁgure.
(a)	 On the same viewing screen, graph the circle r  3960 
(to represent the earth, which we will assume to be a 
sphere of radius 3960 mi) and the polar equation of the 
satellite’s orbit. Describe the motion of the satellite as u 
increases from 0 to 2p.
(b)	 For what angle u is the satellite closest to the earth? Find 
the height of the satellite above the earth’s surface for 
this value of u.
¨
r
64.	 An Unstable Orbit    The orbit described in Exercise 63 is sta-
ble because the satellite traverses the same path over and over 
as u increases. Suppose that a meteor strikes the satellite and 
changes its orbit to
r 
22500a1 u
40 b
4 cos u
(a)	 On the same viewing screen, graph the circle r  3960 
and the new orbit equation, with u increasing from 0 to 
3p. Describe the new motion of the satellite.
(b)	 Use the TRACE feature on your graphing calculator to 
ﬁnd the value of u at the moment the satellite crashes 
into the earth.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
65.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  A Transformation of Polar Graphs     
How are the graphs of
r 1 sinau p
6 b
	 	 and	
r 1 sinau p
3 b
	 	 related to the graph of r  1  sin u? In general, how is the 
graph of r f1u a2  related to the graph of r f1u2 ?
66.	 DISCUSS:  Choosing a Convenient Coordinate System    Com-
pare the polar equation of the circle r  2 with its equation 
in rectangular coordinates. In which coordinate system is the 
equation simpler? Do the same for the equation of the four-
leaved rose r  sin 2u. Which coordinate system would you 
choose to study these curves?
67.	 DISCUSS:  Choosing a Convenient Coordinate System    Com-
pare the rectangular equation of the line y  2 with its polar 
equation. In which coordinate system is the equation simpler? 
Which coordinate system would you choose to study lines?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

602 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
8.3 
Polar Form of Complex Numbers; De Moivre’s Theorem
■  Graphing Complex Numbers  ■  Polar Form of Complex Numbers   
■  De Moivre’s Theorem  ■  nth Roots of Complex Numbers
In this section we represent complex numbers in polar (or trigonometric) form. This 
enables us to ﬁnd the nth roots of complex numbers. To describe the polar form of 
complex numbers, we must ﬁrst learn to work with complex numbers graphically.
■  Graphing Complex Numbers
To graph real numbers or sets of real numbers, we have been using the number line, 
which has just one dimension. Complex numbers, however, have two components: a 
real part and an imaginary part. This suggests that we need two axes to graph complex 
numbers: one for the real part and one for the imaginary part. We call these the real axis 
and the imaginary axis, respectively. The plane determined by these two axes is called 
the complex plane. To graph the complex number a  bi, we plot the ordered pair of 
numbers 1a,  b2  in this plane, as indicated in Figure 1.
Example 1  ■  Graphing Complex Numbers
Graph the complex numbers z1  2  3i, z2  3  2i, and z1  z2.
Solution    We have z1 z2 12 3i2 13 2i2 5 i. The graph is shown in 
Figure 2.
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
Example 2  ■  Graphing Sets of Complex Numbers
Graph each set of complex numbers.
(a)	 S 5a bi 0  a 06           
(b)  T 5a bi 0  a 1, b 06
Solution
(a)	 S is the set of complex numbers whose real part is nonnegative. The graph is 
shown in Figure 3(a).
(b)	 T is the set of complex numbers for which the real part is less than 1 and the 
imaginary part is nonnegative. The graph is shown in Figure 3(b).
Im
Re
0
(b)
1
Im
Re
0
(a)
Figure 3
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
Figure 1
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
bi
a+bi
a
0
Figure 2
Im
Re
3i
z⁄=2+3i
z¤=3-2i
z⁄+z¤=5+i
2i
i
_i
_2i
2          4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.3  ■  Polar Form of Complex Numbers; De Moivre’s Theorem  603
Recall that the absolute value of a real number can be thought of as its distance from 
the origin on the real number line (see Section 1.1). We deﬁne absolute value for com-
plex numbers in a similar fashion. Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we can see from 
Figure 4 that the distance between a  bi and the origin in the complex plane is 
"a 2 b 2. This leads to the following deﬁnition.
Modulus of a Complex number
The modulus (or absolute value) of the complex number z  a  bi is
0  z 0 "a 2 b 2
Example 3  ■  Calculating the Modulus
Find the moduli of the complex numbers 3  4i and 8  5i.
Solution
 0  3 4i 0 "32 42 !25 5
 0  8 5i 0 "82 152 2 !89
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
Example 4  ■  Absolute Value of Complex Numbers
Graph each set of complex numbers.
(a)	 C 5z  @ 0  z 0 16            (b)  D 5z  @ 0  z 0 16
Solution
(a)	 C is the set of complex numbers whose distance from the origin is 1. Thus C is a 
circle of radius 1 with center at the origin, as shown in Figure 5.
(b)	 D is the set of complex numbers whose distance from the origin is less than or 
equal to 1. Thus D is the disk that consists of all complex numbers on and inside 
the circle C of part (a), as shown in Figure 6.
Im
Re
0
_1
_i
i
C
|z|=1
1
Figure 5
Im
Re
0
_1
_i
i
D
|z|≤1
1
Figure 6
Now Try Exercises 23 and 25	
■
■  Polar Form of Complex Numbers
Let z  a  bi be a complex number, and in the complex plane let’s draw the line seg-
ment joining the origin to the point a  bi (see Figure 7 on the next page). The length 
of this line segment is r 0  z 0 "a 2 b 2. If u is an angle in standard position whose 
The plural of modulus is moduli.
Im
Re
bi
a+bi
0
a
œ∑∑∑∑∑∑
a™+b™
b
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

604 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
terminal side coincides with this line segment, then by the deﬁnitions of sine and cosine 
(see Section 6.3)
a r cos u  and  b r sin u
so z  r cos u  ir sin u  r 1 cos u  i sin u2 . We have shown the following.
Polar Form of Complex Numbers
A complex number z  a  bi has the polar form (or trigonometric form)
z r 1cos u i sin u2
where r 0  z 0 "a 2 b 2 and tan u  b/a. The number r is the modulus of 
z, and u is an argument of z.
The argument of z is not unique, but any two arguments of z differ by a multiple of 
2p. When determining the argument, we must consider the quadrant in which z lies, as 
we see in the next example.
Example 5  ■  Writing Complex Numbers in Polar Form
Write each complex number in polar form.
(a)	 1  i            (b)  1 !3 i            (c)  4!3 4i            (d)  3  4i
Solution    These complex numbers are graphed in Figure 8, which helps us ﬁnd their 
arguments.
Im
Re
i
1+i
1
0
¨
Im
Re
4i
3+4i
3
0
¨
Im
Re
œ∑3 i
_1+œ∑3 i
_1
0
¨
Im
Re
_4i
_4 œ∑3-4i
_4 œ∑3
0
¨
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 8
(a)	 An argument is u  p/4 and r !1 1 !2. Thus
1 i !2a cos p
4 i sin p
4 b
(b)	 An argument is u  2p/3 and r !1 3 2. Thus
1 !3 i 2a cos 2p
3 i sin 2p
3 b
(c)	 An argument is u  7p/6 (or we could use u  5p/6), and 
r !48 16 8. Thus
4 !3 4i 8a cos 7p
6 i sin 7p
6 b
(d)	 An argument is u tan1 
 4
3 and r "32 42 5. So
3 4i 5CcosAtan1 4
3B i sinAtan1 4
3BD
Now Try Exercises 29, 31, 33, and 43	
■
 tan u 1
1 1
 u p
4
 tan u !3
1 !3
 u 2p
3
 tan u 
4
4 !3 
1
!3
 u 7p
6
 tan u 4
3
 u tan1 
 4
3
Im
Re
bi
a+bi
a
0
¨
r
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.3  ■  Polar Form of Complex Numbers; De Moivre’s Theorem  605
The Addition Formulas for Sine and Cosine that we discussed in Section 7.2 greatly 
simplify the multiplication and division of complex numbers in polar form. The follow-
ing theorem shows how.
Multiplication and Division of Complex Numbers
If the two complex numbers z1 and z2 have the polar forms
 z1 r11cos u1 i sin u12  and  z2 r21cos u2 i sin u22
then
 z1z2 r1r23cos1u1 u22 i sin1u1 u22 4
        Multiplication
 z1
z2
r1
r2
3cos1u1 u22 i sin1u1 u22 4  z2 ? 0        Division
This theorem says:
To multiply two complex numbers, multiply the moduli and add the arguments.
To divide two complex numbers, divide the moduli and subtract the arguments.
Proof    To prove the Multiplication Formula, we simply multiply the two complex 
numbers:
 z1z2 r1r21cos u1 i sin u12 1cos u2 i sin u22
  r1r23cos u1 cos u2 sin u1 sin u2 i1sin u1 cos u2 cos u1 sin u22 4
  r1r23cos1u1 u22 i sin1u1 u22 4
In the last step we used the Addition Formulas for Sine and Cosine.
The proof of the Division Formula is left as an exercise. (See Exercise 101.)	
■
Example 6  ■  Multiplying and Dividing Complex Numbers
Let
z1 2a cos p
4 i sin p
4 b  and  z2 5a cos p
3 i sin p
3 b
Find (a) z1z2 and (b) z1/z2.
Solution
(a)	 By the Multiplication Formula
 z1z2 122 152 c cos a p
4 p
3 b i sina p
4 p
3 b d
  10 a cos 7p
12 i sin 7p
12 b
	 	 To approximate the answer, we use a calculator in radian mode and get
 z1z2 < 1010.2588 0.9659i2
 2.588 9.659i
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

606 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
(b)	 By the Division Formula
 z1
z2
2
5 c cos a p
4 p
3 b i sina p
4 p
3 b d
  2
5 c cos a p
12 b i sina p
12 b d
  2
5 a cos 11p
12 i sin 11p
12 b
Using a calculator in radian mode, we get the approximate answer:
z1
z2
< 2
5
 10.9659 0.2588i2 0.3864 0.1035i
Now Try Exercise 49	
■
■  De Moivre’s Theorem
Repeated use of the Multiplication Formula gives the following useful formula for rais-
ing a complex number to a power n for any positive integer n.
De Moivre’s Theorem
If z r 1cos u i sin u2 , then for any integer n
zn rn1cos nu i sin nu2
This theorem says: To take the nth power of a complex number, we take the nth power 
of the modulus and multiply the argument by n.
Proof    By the Multiplication Formula
 z2 zz r23cos1u u2 i sin1u u2 4
  r21cos 2u i sin 2u2
Now we multiply z2 by z to get
 z3 z2z r33cos12u u2 i sin12u u2 4
  r31cos 3u i sin 3u2
Repeating this argument, we see that for any positive integer n
zn rn1cos nu i sin nu2
A similar argument using the Division Formula shows that this also holds for negative  
integers.	
■
Example 7  ■  Finding a Power Using De Moivre’s Theorem
Find A1
2 1
2 iB
10.
Solution    Since 1
2 1
2 i 1
2 11 i2 , it follows from Example 5(a) that
1
2 1
2
 i !2
2
 a cos p
4 i sin p
4 b
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.3  ■  Polar Form of Complex Numbers; De Moivre’s Theorem  607
So by De Moivre’s Theorem
 a 1
2 1
2
 ib
10
a !2
2 b
10
a cos 10p
4
i sin 10p
4 b
  25
210
 a cos 5p
2 i sin 5p
2 b 1
32
 i
Now Try Exercise 65	
■
■  nth Roots of Complex Numbers
An nth root of a complex number z is any complex number „ such that „ n  z. De 
Moivre’s Theorem gives us a method for calculating the nth roots of any complex number.
nth Roots of Complex Numbers
If z r 1cos u i sin u2  and n is a positive integer, then z has the n distinct nth 
roots
„k r 1/n c cos a u 2kp
n
b i sina u 2kp
n
b d
for k  0, 1, 2, . . . , n  1.
Proof    To ﬁnd the nth roots of z, we need to ﬁnd a complex number „ such that
„ n z
Let’s write z in polar form:
z r 1cos u i sin u2
One nth root of z is
„ r 1/n a cos u
n i sin u
n b
since by De Moivre’s Theorem, „ n  z. But the argument u of z can be replaced by  
u  2kp for any integer k. Since this expression gives a different value of „ for k  0, 
1, 2, . . . , n  1, we have proved the formula in the theorem.
■
The following observations help us use the preceding formula.
Finding the nth roots of z  r(cos u  i sin u)
1.	 The modulus of each nth root is r1/n.
2.	 The argument of the ﬁrst root is u/n.
3.	 We repeatedly add 2p/n to get the argument of each successive root.
These observations show that, when graphed, the nth roots of z are spaced equally 
on the circle of radius r1/n.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

608 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
Example 8  ■  Finding Roots of a Complex Number
Find the six sixth roots of z  64, and graph these roots in the complex plane.
Solution    In polar form, z 641cos p i sin p2 . Applying the formula for nth 
roots with n  6, we get
„k 641/6 c cos a p 2kp
6
b i sina p 2kp
6
b d
for k  0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Using 641/6  2, we ﬁnd that the six sixth roots of 64 are
 „0 2a cos p
6 i sin p
6 b !3 i
 „1 2a cos p
2 i sin p
2 b 2i
 „2 2a cos 5p
6 i sin 5p
6 b !3 i
 „3 2a cos 7p
6 i sin 7p
6 b !3 i
 „4 2a cos 3p
2 i sin 3p
2 b 2i
 „5 2 a cos 11p
6
i sin 11p
6
b !3 i
All these points lie on a circle of radius 2, as shown in Figure 9.
Now Try Exercise 81	
■
When ﬁnding roots of complex numbers, we sometimes write the argument u  
of the complex number in degrees. In this case the nth roots are obtained from the 
formula
„k r 1/n c cos a u 360k
n
b i sina u 360k
n
b d
for k  0, 1, 2, . . . , n  1.
We add 2p/6  p/3 to each argument 
to get the argument of the next root.
Discovery Project
Fractals
Most of the things we model in this book follow regular predictable patterns. 
But many real-world phenomena—such as a cloud, a jagged coastline, or a 
flickering flame—appear to have random or even chaotic shapes. Fractals  
allow us to model such shapes and many others. Surprisingly, the extremely 
complex shapes of fractals and their infinite detail are produced by exceedingly 
simple rules and endless repetitions that involve iterating simple functions 
whose inputs and outputs are complex numbers. You can find the project at 
www.stewartmath.com.
© Jennifer Gottschalk/Shutterstock.com
Im
Re
0
2
„‚
2i
_2i
_2
„ﬁ
„¤
„‹
„⁄
„›
Figure 9  The six sixth roots of  
z  64
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.3  ■  Polar Form of Complex Numbers; De Moivre’s Theorem  609
Example 9  ■  Finding Cube Roots of a Complex Number
Find the three cube roots of z  2  2i, and graph these roots in the complex 
plane.
Solution    First we write z in polar form using degrees. We have 
r "22 22 2!2 and u  45. Thus
z 2!2 1cos 45i sin 452
Applying the formula for nth roots (in degrees) with n  3, we ﬁnd that the cube 
roots of z are of the form
 „k A2!2B1/3 c cos a 45360k
3
b i sina 45360k
3
b d
where k  0, 1, 2. Thus the three cube roots are
 „0 !2 1cos 15i sin 152 < 1.366 0.366i
   
 12!22 1/3 123/22 1/3
 21/2 !2
 „1 !2 1cos 135i sin 1352 1 i
 „2 !2 1cos 255i sin 2552 < 0.366 1.366i
The three cube roots of z are graphed in Figure 10. These roots are spaced equally on 
a circle of radius !2.
Now Try Exercise 77	
■
Example 10  ■  Solving an Equation Using the nth Roots Formula
Solve the equation z6  64  0.
Solution    This equation can be written as z6  64. Thus the solutions are the sixth 
roots of 64, which we found in Example 8.
Now Try Exercise 87	
■
We add 360/3  120 to each  
argument to get the argument of the 
next root.
Im
Re
0
œ∑2
„‚
œ∑2 i
_œ∑2 i
_œ∑2
„⁄
„¤
Figure 10  The three cube roots of  
z  2  2i
Concepts
	 1.	 A complex number z a bi has two parts: a is the 
 
 part, and b is the  
 part. To graph  
a bi, we graph the ordered pair 1
, 
2 in the complex 
plane.
	 2.	 Let z a bi.
(a)	 The modulus of z is r  
  , and an argument of 
	
z is an angle u satisfying tan u  
  .
(b)	 We can express z in polar form as z  
  ,  
where r is the modulus of z and u is the argument  
of z. 
	 3.	 (a)	 The complex number z 1 i in polar form is 
	 	 	
z  
  . 
(b)	 The complex number z 2acos p
6 i sin p
6 b  in  
rectangular form is z  
  .
(c)	 The complex number graphed below can be expressed in 
	
		rectangular form as  
 or in polar form as  
  . 
Re
Im
0
z
1
i
8.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

610 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
	 4.	 How many different nth roots does a nonzero complex  
number have?  
  . The number 16 has  
 
fourth roots. These roots are  
  ,  
  , 
 
  , and  
  . In the complex plane these roots 
all lie on a circle of radius  
  . Graph the roots on the 
following graph. 
Re
Im
0
4
i
Skills
5–14  ■  A Complex Number and Its Modulus    Graph the complex 
number and ﬁnd its modulus.
	 5.	 4i	 	
  6.	 3i
	 7.	 2		
  8.	 6
	 9.	 5  2i	
10.	 7  3i
	11.	 !3 i	
12.	 1 !3
3
 i
	13.	 3 4i
5
	
14.	 !2 i !2
2
15–16  ■  Graphing Complex Numbers    Sketch the complex num-
bers z, 2z, z, and 1
2 z on the same complex plane.
15.	 z  1  i	
16.	 z 1 i!3
17–18  ■  Graphing a Complex Number and Its Complex  
Conjugate    Sketch the complex number z and its complex  
conjugate z on the same complex plane.
17.	 z  8  2i	
18.	 z  5  6i
19–20  ■  Graphing Complex Numbers    Sketch z1, z2, z1  z2,  
and z1z2 on the same complex plane.
19.	 z1  2  i,    z2  2  i
20.	 z1  1  i,    z2  2  3i
21–28  ■  Graphing Sets of Complex Numbers    Sketch the set in 
the complex plane.
21.	 5z a bi 0  a 0, b 06
22.	 5z a bi 0  a 1, b 16
23.	 5z @ 0  z 0 36	
24.	 5z @ 0  z 0 16
25.	 5z @ 0  z 0 26	
26.	 5z @ 2 0  z 0 56
27.	 5z a bi 0  a b 26
28.	 5z a bi 0  a b6
29–48  ■  Polar Form of Complex Numbers    Write the complex 
number in polar form with argument u between 0 and 2p.
29.	 1 i	
30.	 1 i	
31.	 2 2i
32.	 !2 !2 i	
33.	 !3 i	
34.	 5 5!3 i
35.	 2!3 2i	
36.	 3 3!3 i	
37.	 2i 
38.	 5i	
39.	 3	
40.	 !2
41.	 !6 !2 i	
42.	 !5 !15 i	
43.	 4 3i
44.	 3 2i	
45.	 41 !3 i2 	
46.	 i1 !2 !6 i2
47.	 311 i2 	
48.	 2i11 i2
49–56  ■  Products and Quotients of Complex Numbers    Find the 
product z1z2 and the quotient z1/z2. Express your answer in polar form.
49.	 z1 3 acos p
3 i sin p
3 b ,    z2 2 acos p
6 i sin p
6 b
50.	 z1 !3a  cos 5p
4 i sin 5p
4 b ,    z2 21  cos p i sin p2
51.	 z1 !2 acos 5p
3 i sin 5p
3 b ,   
	 	 z2 2!2 acos 3p
2 i sin 3p
2 b
52.	 z1  cos 3p
4 i sin 3p
4 ,    z2  cos p
3 i sin p
3
53.	  z1 41cos 120i sin 1202 ,
	 	  z2 21cos 30i sin 302
54.	  z1 !21cos 75i sin 752 ,
	 	  z2 3!21cos 60i sin 602
55.	  z1 41cos 200i sin 2002 ,
	 	  z2 251cos 150i sin 1502
56.	  z1 4
51cos 25i sin 252 ,
	 	  z2 1
51cos 155i sin 1552
57–64  ■  Products and Quotients of Complex Numbers    Write z1 
and z2 in polar form, and then ﬁnd the product z1z2 and the quo-
tients z1/z2 and 1/z1.
57.	 z1 !3 i, z2 1 !3 i
58.	 z1 !2 !2 i, z2 1 i
59.	 z1 2!3 2i, z2 1 i
60.	 z1 !2 i, z2 3 3!3 i
61.	 z1  5  5i,    z2  4	
62.	 z1 4!3 4i, z2 8i
63.	 z1 20, z2 !3 i	
64.	 z1  3  4i,    z2  2  2i
65–76  ■  Powers Using De Moivre’s Theorem    Find the indicated 
power using De Moivre’s Theorem.
65.	 1!3 i2 6	
66.	 11 i2 10
67.	 1!2 !2 i2 5	
68.	 11 i2 7
69.	 a !2
2
!2
2
 ib
12
	
70.	 1 !3 i2 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.4  ■  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  611
71.	 12 2i2 8	
72.	 a 1
2 !3
2
 ib
15
73.	 11 i2 7	
74.	 13 !3 i2 4
75.	 12!3 2i2 5	
76.	 11 i2 8
77–86  ■  Roots of Complex Numbers    Find the indicated roots, 
and graph the roots in the complex plane.
77.	 The square roots of 4!3 4i
78.	 The cube roots of 4!3 4i
79.  The fourth roots of 81i	
80.  The ﬁfth roots of 32
81.  The eighth roots of 1	
82.  The cube roots of 1  i
83.  The cube roots of i	
84.  The ﬁfth roots of i
85.  The fourth roots of 1
86.  The ﬁfth roots of 16 16!3 i
87–92  ■  Solving Equations Using nth Roots    Solve the equation.
87.  z4  1  0	
88.	 z8  i  0
89.  z 3 4!3 4i 0	
90.	 z6  1  0
91.  z3  1  i	
92.	 z3  1  0
Skills Plus
93–96  ■  Complex Coefficients and the Quadratic Formula    The 
quadratic formula works whether the coefficients of the equation 
are real or complex. Solve the following equations using the qua-
dratic formula and, if necessary, De Moivre’s Theorem.
93.	 z2 iz 1 0	
94.	 z2 iz 2 0
95.	 z2 2iz 2 0	
96.	 z2 11 i2z i 0
97–98  ■  Finding nth roots of a Complex Number    Let 
„ cos 12p/n2 i sin 12p/n2 , where n is a positive integer.
  97.	 Show that the n distinct roots of 1 are
1, „, „2, „3, . . . , „n1
  98.	 If z ? 0 and s is any nth root of z, show that the n distinct 
roots of z are
s, s„, s„2, s„3, . . . , s„n1
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
  99.	 DISCUSS:  Sums of Roots of Unity    Find the exact values of 
all three cube roots of 1 (see Exercise 97), and then add 
them. Do the same for the fourth, ﬁfth, sixth, and eighth 
roots of 1. What do you think is the sum of the nth roots of 1 
for any n?
100.	 DISCUSS:  Products of Roots of Unity    Find the product of 
the three cube roots of 1 (see Exercise 97). Do the same for 
the fourth, ﬁfth, sixth, and eighth roots of 1. What do you 
think is the product of the nth roots of 1 for any n?
101.  PROOF:  Division in Polar Form    If the two complex num-
bers z1 and z2 have the polar forms 
z1 r11cos u1 i sin u12
	
	 and	
z2 r21cos u2 i sin u22
	
	 show that
z1
z2
r1
r2
 3cos 1u1 u22 i sin 1u1 u22 4
	
	 [Hint: Multiply numerator and denominator by the complex 
conjugate of z2 and simplify.]
8.4 
Plane Curves and Parametric Equations
■  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  ■  Eliminating the Parameter  ■  Finding  
Parametric Equations for a Curve  ■  Using Graphing Devices to Graph Parametric Curves
So far, we have described a curve by giving an equation (in rectangular or polar coor-
dinates) that the coordinates of all the points on the curve must satisfy. But not all 
curves in the plane can be described in this way. In this section we study parametric 
equations, which are a general method for describing any curve.
■  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations
We can think of a curve as the path of a point moving in the plane; the x- and  
y-coordinates of the point are then functions of time. This idea leads to the following 
deﬁnition.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

612 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
Plane Curves and Parametric Equations
If f and g are functions deﬁned on an interval I, then the set of points 
1f1t2, g1t22  is a plane curve. The equations
x f1t2   y g1t2
where t  I, are parametric equations for the curve, with parameter t.
Example 1  ■  Sketching a Plane Curve
Sketch the curve deﬁned by the parametric equations
x t2 3t   y t 1
Solution    For every value of t we get a point on the curve. For example, if t  0, 
then x  0 and y  1, so the corresponding point is 10, 12 . In Figure 1 we plot 
the points 1x, y2  determined by the values of t shown in the following table.
t=_2
t=5
t=_1
t=0
t=4
t=3
t=2
t=1
y
x
1
5
10
Figure 1
t
x
y
2
10
3
1
4
2
0
0
1
1
2
0
2
2
1
3
0
2
4
4
3
5
10
4
As t increases, a particle whose position is given by the parametric equations 
moves along the curve in the direction of the arrows.
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
If we replace t by t in Example 1, we obtain the parametric equations
x t2 3t   y t 1
The graph of these parametric equations (see Figure 2) is the same as the curve in Fig-
ure 1 but traced out in the opposite direction. On the other hand, if we replace t by 2t 
in Example 1, we obtain the parametric equations
x 4t2 6t   y 2t 1
The graph of these parametric equations (see Figure 3) is again the same but is traced 
out “twice as fast.” Thus a parametrization contains more information than just the 
shape of the curve; it also indicates how the curve is being traced out.
t=2
t=_5
t=1
t=0
t=_4
t=_3
t=_2
t=_1
y
x
1
5
10
Figure 2  x  t2  3t, y  t  1
t=_1
t=0
t=2
t=1
y
x
1
5
10
Figure 3  x  4t2  6t, y  2t  1
The arrows on the curve indicate the 
direction of the curve for increasing 
values of t.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.4  ■  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  613
■  Eliminating the Parameter
Often a curve given by parametric equations can also be represented by a single rect-
angular equation in x and y. The process of ﬁnding this equation is called eliminating 
the parameter. One way to do this is to solve for t in one equation, then substitute into 
the other.
Example 2  ■  Eliminating the Parameter
Eliminate the parameter in the parametric equations of Example 1.
Solution    First we solve for t in the simpler equation, then we substitute into the 
other equation. From the equation y  t  1 we get t  y  1. Substituting into the 
equation for x, we get
x t2 3t 1y 12 2 31y 12 y2 y 2
Thus the curve in Example 1 has the rectangular equation x  y2  y  2, so it is a 
parabola.
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
Eliminating the parameter often helps us identify the shape of a curve, as we see in 
the next two examples.
Example 3  ■  Modeling Circular Motion
The following parametric equations model the position of a moving object at time t 
(in seconds): 
x cos t   y sin t   t 0
Describe and graph the path of the object.
Solution    To identify the curve, we eliminate the parameter. Since cos2t  sin2t  1 
and since x  cos t and y  sin t for every point 1x, y2 on the curve, we have
x2 y2 1cos t2 2 1sin t2 2 1
This means that all points on the curve satisfy the equation x2  y2  1, so the graph is 
a circle of radius 1 centered at the origin. As t increases from 0 to 2p, the point given 
by the parametric equations starts at 11, 02 and moves counterclockwise once around 
the circle, as shown in Figure 4. So the object completes one revolution around the cir-
cle in 2p seconds. Notice that the parameter t can be interpreted as the angle shown in 
the ﬁgure.
Figure 4
3π
2
t=
π
2
t=
0
t
t=0
(1, 0)
(ç t, ß t)
t=2π
t=π
x
y
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
Bettmann/Corbis
Maria Gaetana Agnesi (1718–1799) 
is famous for having written Instituzioni 
Analitiche, one of the ﬁrst calculus 
textbooks.
Agnesi was born into a wealthy family 
in Milan, Italy, the oldest of 21 children. 
She was a child prodigy, mastering many 
languages at an early age, including Latin, 
Greek, and Hebrew. At the age of 20 she 
published a series of essays on philosophy 
and natural science. After her mother died, 
Agnesi took on the task of educating her 
brothers. In 1748 Agnesi published her 
famous textbook, which she originally 
wrote as a text for tutoring her brothers. 
The book compiled and explained the 
mathematical knowledge of the day. It 
contains many carefully chosen examples, 
one of which is the curve now known as 
the “witch of Agnesi” (see Exercise 66,  
page 619). One review calls her book an 
“exposition by examples rather than by 
theory.”  The book gained Agnesi immedi-
ate recognition. Pope Benedict XIV 
appointed her to a position at the Univer-
sity of Bologna, writing,  “we have had the 
idea that you should be awarded the well-
known chair of mathematics, by which it 
comes of itself that you should not thank 
us but we you.”  This appointment was an 
extremely high honor for a woman, since 
very few women then were even allowed 
to attend university. Just two years later, 
Agnesi’s father died, and she left mathe-
matics completely. She became a nun and 
devoted the rest of her life and her wealth 
to caring for sick and dying women, her-
self dying in poverty at a poorhouse of 
which she had once been director.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

614 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
Example 4  ■  Sketching a Parametric Curve
Eliminate the parameter, and sketch the graph of the parametric equations
x sin t   y 2 cos2 t
Solution    To eliminate the parameter, we ﬁrst use the trigonometric identity  
cos2t  1  sin2t to change the second equation:
y 2 cos2 t 2 11 sin2t2 1 sin2 t
Now we can substitute sin t  x from the ﬁrst equation to get
y 1 x2
so the point 1x, y2  moves along the parabola y  1  x2. However, since  
1  sin t  1, we have 1  x  1, so the parametric equations represent only  
the part of the parabola between x  1 and x  1. Since sin t is periodic, the point 
1x, y2 1sin t, 2 cos2 t2  moves back and forth inﬁnitely often along the parabola 
between the points 11, 22  and 11, 22 , as shown in Figure 5.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
■  Finding Parametric Equations for a Curve
It is often possible to ﬁnd parametric equations for a curve by using some geometric 
properties that deﬁne the curve, as in the next two examples.
Example 5  ■  Finding Parametric Equations for a Graph
Find parametric equations for the line of slope 3 that passes through the point 12, 62 .
Solution    Let’s start at the point 12, 62  and move up and to the right along this 
line. Because the line has slope 3, for every 1 unit we move to the right, we must 
move up 3 units. In other words, if we increase the x-coordinate by t units, we must 
correspondingly increase the y-coordinate by 3t units. This leads to the parametric 
equations
x 2 t   y 6 3t
To conﬁrm that these equations give the desired line, we eliminate the parameter. We 
solve for t in the ﬁrst equation and substitute into the second to get
y 6 31x 22 3x
Thus the slope-intercept form of the equation of this line is y  3x, which is a line of 
slope 3 that does pass through 12, 62  as required. The graph is shown in Figure 6.
Now Try Exercise 31	
■
Example 6  ■  Parametric Equations for the Cycloid
As a circle rolls along a straight line, the curve traced out by a ﬁxed point P on the 
circumference of the circle is called a cycloid (see Figure 7). If the circle has radius a 
and rolls along the x-axis, with one position of the point P being at the origin, ﬁnd 
parametric equations for the cycloid.
P
P
P
Figure 7
Figure 6
y
x
0
6
t
3t
2
Figure 5
x
0
y
(1, 2)
(_1, 2)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.4  ■  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  615
Solution    Figure 8 shows the circle and the point P after the circle has rolled 
through an angle u (in radians). The distance d1O, T2  that the circle has rolled must 
be the same as the length of the arc PT, which, by the arc length formula, is au (see 
Section 6.1). This means that the center of the circle is C1au, a2 .
Let the coordinates of P be 1x, y2 . Then from Figure 8 (which illustrates the case  
0  u  p/2), we see that
 x d1O, T2 d1P, Q2 au a sin u a1u sin u2
 y d1T, C2 d1Q, C2 a a cos u a11 cos u2
so parametric equations for the cycloid are
x a1u sin u2   y a11 cos u2
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
The cycloid has a number of interesting physical properties. It is the “curve of quickest 
descent” in the following sense. Let’s choose two points P and Q that are not directly 
above each other and join them with a wire. Suppose we allow a bead to slide down the 
wire under the inﬂuence of gravity (ignoring friction). Of all possible shapes into which 
the wire can be bent, the bead will slide from P to Q the fastest when the shape is half of 
an arch of an inverted cycloid (see Figure 9). The cycloid is also the “curve of equal de-
scent” in the sense that no matter where we place a bead B on a cycloid-shaped wire, it 
takes the same time to slide to the bottom (see Figure 10). These rather surprising proper-
ties of the cycloid were proved (using calculus) in the 17th century by several mathemati-
cians and physicists, including Johann Bernoulli, Blaise Pascal, and Christiaan Huygens.
Figure 9
P
Q
Cycloid
Figure 10
B
B
B
■  Using Graphing Devices to Graph Parametric Curves
Most graphing calculators and computer graphing programs can be used to graph para-
metric equations. Such devices are particularly useful in sketching complicated curves 
like the one shown in Figure 11.
Figure 11   
x  t  2 sin 2t, y  t  2 cos 5t
8
_8
_6.5
6.5
Example 7  ■  Graphing Parametric Curves
Use a graphing device to draw the following parametric curves. Discuss their similari-
ties and differences.
(a)	 x  sin 2t	
(b)  x  sin 3t
	
y  2 cos t	
	
y  2 cos t
Figure 8
P
x
0
y
T
C (a¨, a)
a
¨
x
y
a¨
Q
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

616 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
Solution    In both parts (a) and (b) the graph will lie inside the rectangle given  
by 1  x  1, 2  y  2, since both the sine and the cosine of any number  
will be between 1 and 1. Thus we may use the viewing rectangle 31.5, 1.54 by 
32.5, 2.54.
(a)	 Since 2 cos t is periodic with period 2p (see Section 5.3) and since sin 2t has 
period p, letting t vary over the interval 0  t  2p gives us the complete graph, 
which is shown in Figure 12(a).
(b)	 Again, letting t take on values between 0 and 2p gives the complete graph shown 
in Figure 12(b).
Both graphs are closed curves, which means that they form loops with the same 
starting and ending point; also, both graphs cross over themselves. However, the 
graph in Figure 12(a) has two loops, like a ﬁgure eight, whereas the graph in Fig-
ure 12(b) has three loops.
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
The curves graphed in Example 7 are called Lissajous ﬁgures. A Lissajous ﬁgure is 
the graph of a pair of parametric equations of the form
x A sin v1t   y B cos v2t
where A, B, v1, and v2 are positive real constants. Since sin v1t and cos v2t are  
both between 1 and 1, a Lissajous ﬁgure will lie inside the rectangle determined by  
A  x  A, B  y  B. This fact can be used to choose a viewing rectangle when 
graphing a Lissajous ﬁgure, as in Example 7.
Recall from Section 8.1 that rectangular coordinates 1x, y2  and polar coordinates 
1r, u2  are related by the equations x  r cos u, y  r sin u. Thus we can graph the polar 
equation r f1u2  by changing it to parametric form as follows.
 x r cos u f1u2 cos u        Since r f 1u2
 y r sin u f1u2 sin u
Replacing u by the standard parametric variable t, we have the following result.
Polar Equations in Parametric Form
The graph of the polar equation r f1u2  is the same as the graph of the  
parametric equations
x f1t2 cos t   y f1t2 sin t
Example 8  ■  Parametric Form of a Polar Equation
Consider the polar equation r  u, 1  u  10p.
(a)	 Express the equation in parametric form.
(b)	 Draw a graph of the parametric equations from part (a).
Solution
(a)	 The given polar equation is equivalent to the parametric equations
x t cos t   y t sin t
(b)	 Since 10p  31.42, we use the viewing rectangle 332, 324 by 332, 324, and 
we let t vary from 1 to 10p. The resulting graph shown in Figure 13 is a spiral.
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
(a)  x=ß 2t, y=2 ç t
2.5
_2.5
_1.5
1.5
(b)  x=ß 3t, y=2 ç t
2.5
_2.5
_1.5
1.5
Figure 12
32
_32
_32
32
Figure 13  x  t cos t, y  t sin t
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.4  ■  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  617
Concepts
	 1.	 (a)	 The parametric equations x f 1t2  and y g 1t2  give 
the coordinates of a point 1x, y2 1f 1t2, g 1t22  for  
appropriate values of t. The variable t is called a 
 
  .
(b)	 Suppose that the parametric equations x t, y t2, 
t 0, model the position of a moving object at time t. 
When t 0, the object is at 1
, 
2, and when t 1, 
the object is at 1
, 
2.
(c)	 If we eliminate the parameter in part (b), we get the 
equation y  
  . We see from this equation that 
the path of the moving object is a  
  . 
	 2.	 (a)	 True or False? The same curve can be described by para-
metric equations in many different ways. 
(b)	 The parametric equations x 2t, y 12t2 2 model the 
position of a moving object at time t. When t 0, the 
object is at 1
, 
2, and when t 1, the object is at  
1
, 
2.
(c)	 If we eliminate the parameter, we get the equation  
y  
  , which is the same equation as in Exer-
cise 1(c). So the objects in Exercises 1(b) and 2(b) move 
along the same  
 but traverse the path differ-
ently. Indicate the position of each object when t 0 
and when t 1 on the following graph. 
y
0
1
1
x
Skills
3–26  ■  Sketching a Curve by Eliminating the Parameter    A pair 
of parametric equations is given. (a) Sketch the curve represented 
by the parametric equations. Use arrows to indicate the direction of 
the curve as t increases. (b) Find a rectangular-coordinate equation 
for the curve by eliminating the parameter.
	 3.	 x  2t,    y  t  6
	 4.	 x  6t  4,    y  3t,    t  0
	 5.	 x  t2,    y  t  2,    2  t  4
	 6.	 x  2t  1,    y At 1
2B
2
	 7.	 x !t,    y  1  t	
  8.	 x  t2,    y  t4  1
	 9.	 x 1
t , y t 1	
10.	 x t 1, y 
t
t 1
	11.	 x  4t2,    y  8t3	
12.	 x 0  t 0 , y @  1 0  t 0 @
13.	 x  2 sin t,    y  2 cos t,    0  t  p
14.	 x  2 cos t,    y  3 sin t,    0  t  2p
15.	 x  sin2t,    y  sin4t	
16.	 x  sin2t,    y  cos t
17.	 x  cos t,    y  cos 2t	
18.	 x  cos 2t,    y  sin 2t
19.	 x  sec t,    y  tan t,    0  t  p/2
20.	 x  cot t,    y  csc t,    0  t  p
21.	 x  tan t,    y  cot t,    0  t  p/2
22.	 x et,    y et	
23.	 x e2t,    y et
24.	 x  sec t,    y  tan2t,    0  t  p/2
25.	 x  cos2t,    y  sin2t
26.	 x  cos3t,    y  sin3t,    0  t  2p
27–30  ■  Circular Motion    The position of an object in circular 
motion is modeled by the given parametric equations. Describe 
the path of the object by stating the radius of the circle, the posi-
tion at time t  0, the orientation of the motion (clockwise or 
counterclockwise), and the time t that it takes to complete one 
revolution around the circle. 
27.	 x 3 cos t, y 3 sin t	
28.	 x 2 sin t, y 2 cos t
29.	 x  sin 2t, y  cos 2t	
30.	 x 4 cos 3t, y 4 sin 3t
31–36  ■  Parametric Equations for Curves    Find parametric 
equations for the curve with the given properties.
31.	 The line with slope 1
2, passing through 14, 12
32.	 The line with slope 2, passing through 110, 202
33.	 The line passing through 16, 72  and 17, 82
34.	 The line passing through 112, 72  and the origin
35.	 The circle x2  y2  a2.
36.	 The ellipse
x2
a2 y2
b2 1
37.	 Path of a Projectile    If a projectile is ﬁred with an initial 
speed of √0 ft/s at an angle a above the horizontal, then its 
position after t seconds is given by the parametric equations
x 1√0 cos a2t   y 1√0 sin a2t 16t2
	 	 (where x and y are measured in feet). Show that the path of 
the projectile is a parabola by eliminating the parameter t.
38.	 Path of a Projectile    Referring to Exercise 37, suppose a gun 
ﬁres a bullet into the air with an initial speed of 2048 ft/s at 
an angle of 30 to the horizontal.
(a)	 After how many seconds will the bullet hit the ground?
(b)	 How far from the gun will the bullet hit the ground?
(c)	 What is the maximum height attained by the bullet?
8.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

618 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
39–44  ■  Graphs of Parametric Equations    Use a graphing device 
to draw the curve represented by the parametric equations.
39.	 x  sin t,    y  2 cos 3t
40.	 x  2 sin t,    y  cos 4t
41.	 x  3 sin 5t,    y  5 cos 3t
42.	 x  sin 4t,    y  cos 3t
43.	 x sin1cos t2, y cos1t3/22, 0 t 2p
44.	 x  2 cos t  cos 2t,    y  2 sin t  sin 2t
45–48  ■  Parametric Form of a Polar Equation    A polar equation 
is given. (a) Express the polar equation in parametric form.  
(b) Use a graphing device to graph the parametric equations you 
found in part (a).
45.	 r  2u/12,    0  u  4p	
46.	 r  sin u  2 cos u
47.	 r 
4
2 cos u	
48.	 r  2sin u
49–52  ■  Graphs of Parametric Equations    Match the parametric 
equations with the graphs labeled I–IV. Give reasons for your 
answers.
49.	 x  t3  2t,    y  t2  t
50.	 x  sin 3t,    y  sin 4t
51.	 x  t  sin 2t,    y  t  sin 3t
52.	 x sin1t sin t2, y cos1t cos t2
0
x
y
0
x
y
I
II
0
x
y
0
x
y
III
IV
53.	 Finding Parametric Equations for a Curve    Two circles of 
radius a and b are centered at the origin, as shown in the 
ﬁgure. As the angle u increases, the point P traces out a curve 
that lies between the circles.
(a)	 Find parametric equations for the curve, using u as the  
parameter.
(b)	 Graph the curve using a graphing device, with a  3 and 
b  2.
(c)	 Eliminate the parameter, and identify the curve.
¨
x
0
y
a
b
P
54.	 Finding Parametric Equations for a Curve    Two circles of 
radius a and b are centered at the origin, as shown in the 
ﬁgure.
(a)	 Find parametric equations for the curve traced out by the 
point P, using the angle u as the parameter. (Note that 
the line segment AB is always tangent to the larger 
circle.)
(b)	 Graph the curve using a graphing device, with a  3 and 
b  2.
¨
x
0
y
a
b
P
A
B
55.	 Curtate Cycloid   
(a)  In Example 6, suppose the point P that traces out the 
curve lies not on the edge of the circle but rather at a 
ﬁxed point inside the rim, at a distance b from the center 
(with b  a). The curve traced out by P is called a  
curtate cycloid (or trochoid). Show that parametric 
equations for the curtate cycloid are
x au b sin u   y a b cos u
(b)	 Sketch the graph using a  3 and b  2.
56.	 Prolate Cycloid   
(a)	 In Exercise 55 if the point P lies outside the circle at a 
distance b from the center (with b  a), then the curve 
traced out by P is called a prolate cycloid. Show that 
parametric equations for the prolate cycloid are the same 
as the equations for the curtate cycloid.
(b)	 Sketch the graph for the case in which a  1 and  
b  2.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 8.4  ■  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  619
Skills Plus
57.	 Parametric Equations of a Hyperbola    Eliminate the parame-
ter u in the following parametric equations. (This curve is 
called a hyperbola; see page 800.)
x a tan u   y b sec u
58.	 Parametric Equations of a Hyperbola    Show that the follow-
ing parametric equations represent a part of the hyperbola of 
Exercise 57.
x a!t   y b!t 1
59–62  ■  Graphs of Parametric Equations    Sketch the curve 
given by the parametric equations.
59.	 x  t cos t,    y  t sin t,    t  0
60.	 x  sin t,    y  sin 2t
61.	 x 
3t
1 t3 , y 
3t2
1 t3
62.	 x  cot t,    y  2 sin2t,    0  t  p
63.	 Hypocycloid    A circle C of radius b rolls on the inside of a 
larger circle of radius a centered at the origin. Let P be a ﬁxed 
point on the smaller circle, with initial position at the point 
1a, 02 as shown in the ﬁgure. The curve traced out by P is 
called a hypocycloid.
b
C
P
(a, 0)
¨
x
0
y
(a)	 Show that parametric equations for the hypocycloid are
 x 1a b2 cos u b cos a a b
b
  u b
 y 1a b2 sin u b sina a b
b
  u b
(b)	 If a  4b, the hypocycloid is called an astroid. Show that 
in this case the parametric equations can be reduced to
x a cos3 u   y a sin3 u
	
Sketch the curve. Eliminate the parameter to obtain an 
equation for the astroid in rectangular coordinates.
64.	 Epicycloid    If the circle C of Exercise 63 rolls on the outside 
of the larger circle, the curve traced out by P is called an  
epicycloid. Find parametric equations for the epicycloid.
65.	 Longbow Curve    In the following ﬁgure, the circle of radius 
a is stationary, and for every u, the point P is the midpoint of 
the segment QR. The curve traced out by P for 0  u  p is 
called the longbow curve. Find parametric equations for this 
curve.
P
Q
¨
0
a
R
y=2a
x
y
2a
66.	 The Witch of Agnesi    A curve, called a witch of Agnesi, con-
sists of all points P determined as shown in the ﬁgure.
(a)	 Show that parametric equations for this curve can be 
written as
x 2a cot u   y 2a sin2  u
(b)	 Graph the curve using a graphing device, with a  3.
¨
x
0
y
a
y=2a
P
A
C
67.	 Eliminating the Parameter    Eliminate the parameter u in the 
parametric equations for the cycloid (Example 6) to obtain a 
rectangular coordinate equation for the section of the curve 
given by 0  u  p.
Applications
68.	 The Rotary Engine    The Mazda RX-8 uses an unconven-
tional engine (invented by Felix Wankel in 1954) in which 
the pistons are replaced by a triangular rotor that turns in a 
special housing as shown in the ﬁgure on the next page. The 
vertices of the rotor maintain contact with the housing at all 
times, while the center of the triangle traces out a circle of 
radius r, turning the drive shaft. The shape of the housing is 
given by the parametric equations below (where R is the dis-
tance between the vertices and center of the rotor):
	
x r cos 3u R cos u   y r sin 3u R sin u
(a)	 Suppose that the drive shaft has radius r  1. Graph  
the curve given by the parametric equations for the  
following values of R: 0.5, 1, 3, 5.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

620 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
(b)	 Which of the four values of R given in part (a) seems to 
best model the engine housing illustrated in the ﬁgure?
69.	 Spiral Path of a Dog    A dog is tied to a cylindrical tree  
trunk of radius 1 ft by a long leash. He has managed to wrap 
the entire leash around the tree while playing in the yard, and 
he ﬁnds himself at the point 11, 02  in the ﬁgure. Seeing a 
squirrel, he runs around the tree counterclockwise, keeping 
the leash taut while chasing the intruder.
(a)	 Show that parametric equations for the dog’s path (called 
an involute of a circle) are
x cos u u sin u   y sin u u cos u
	
[Hint: Note that the leash is always tangent to the tree, so 
OT is perpendicular to TD.]
(b)	 Graph the path of the dog for 0  u  4p.
D
T
O
¨
x
y
1
1
1
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
70.	 DISCOVER  ■  WRITE: 
More Information in Parametric  
Equations    In this section we stated that parametric equa-
tions contain more information than just the shape of a 
curve. Write a short paragraph explaining this statement. 
Use the following example and your answers to parts (a) 
and (b) below in your explanation.
	 	     The position of a particle is given by the parametric 
equations
x sin t   y cos t
	 	 where t represents time. We know that the shape of the path 
of the particle is a circle.
(a)	 How long does it take the particle to go once around the 
circle? Find parametric equations if the particle moves 
twice as fast around the circle.
(b)	 Does the particle travel clockwise or counterclockwise 
around the circle? Find parametric equations if the  
particle moves in the opposite direction around the 
circle.
71.	 DISCUSS:  Different Ways of Tracing Out a Curve    The curves 
C, D, E, and F are deﬁned parametrically as follows, where 
the parameter t takes on all real values unless otherwise 
stated:
 C: x t, y t2
 D: x !t, y t, t 0
 E: x sin t, y sin2
 t
 F: x 3t, y 32t
(a)	 Show that the points on all four of these curves satisfy 
the same rectangular coordinate equation.
(b)	 Draw the graph of each curve and explain how the curves 
differ from one another.
Polar Coordinates (p. 588)
In the polar coordinate system the location of a point P in the 
plane is determined by an ordered pair 1r, u2 , where r is the dis-
tance from the pole O to P and u is the angle formed by the polar 
axis and the ray OP
>
, as shown in the figure. 
O
r
¨
P
Polar axis
Polar and Rectangular Coordinates (p. 590)
Any point P in the plane has polar coordinates P1r, u2  and rect-
angular coordinates P1x, y2 , as shown.
x
0
r
¨
x
y
P(r, ¨)
P(x, y)
y
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 8  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8  ■  Review  621
■	 To change from polar to rectangular coordinates, we use 
the equations 
x r cos u  and  y r sin u
■	 To change from rectangular to polar coordinates, we use 
the equations
r2 x2 y2  and  tan u y
x
Polar Equations and Graphs (pp. 594, 599)
A polar equation is an equation in the variables r and u. The 
graph of a polar equation r f1u2  consists of all points 1r, u2  
whose coordinates satisfy the equation. 
Symmetry in Graphs of Polar Equations (p. 597)
We can test a polar equation for symmetry as follows. The graph 
of a polar equation is 
■	 symmetric about the polar axis if the equation is 
unchanged when we replace u by u;
■	 symmetric about the pole if the equation is unchanged 
when we replace r by r, or u by u 1 p.
■	 symmetric about the vertical line u p/2 if the equation 
is unchanged when we replace u by p u.
Complex Numbers (pp. 602–603)
A complex number is a number of the form a bi, where  
i 2 1 and where a and b are real numbers. For the complex 
number z a bi, a is called the real part and b is called the 
imaginary part. A complex number a bi is graphed in the 
complex plane as shown.
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
bi
a+bi
a
0
The modulus (or absolute value) of a complex number 
z a bi is
0  z 0 "a2 b2
Polar Form of Complex Numbers (p. 604)
A complex number z a bi has the polar form (or trigono-
metric form)
z r 1cos u i sin u2
where r 0  z 0  and  tan u b/a. The number r is the modulus of 
z and u is the argument of z. 
Multiplication and Division of Complex Numbers  
in Polar Form (p. 605)
Suppose the complex numbers z1 and z2 have the following polar 
form:
z1 r11cos u1 i sin u12
z2 r21cos u2 i sin u22
Then 
 z1z2 r1r23cos 1u1 u22 i sin 1u1 u22 4
 z1
z2
r1
r2
 3cos 1u1 u22 i sin 1u1 u22 4
De Moivre’s Theorem (p. 606)
If z r 1cos u i sin u2  is a complex number in polar form and 
n is a positive integer, then
zn rn
 1cos nu i sin nu2
nth Roots of Complex Numbers (p. 607)
If z r 1cos u i sin u2  is a complex number in polar form and 
n is a positive integer, then z has the n distinct nth roots 
„0, „1, c, „n1, where 
„k r1/n c cos a u 2kp
n
b i sina u 2kp
n
bd
where k 0, 1, 2, c, n 1
Finding the nth Roots of z (p. 607)
To find the nth roots of z r 1cos u i sin u2 , we use the fol-
lowing observations:
1.	 The modulus of each nth root is r1/n.
2.	 The argument of the first root „0 is u/n.
3.	 Repeatedly add 2p/n to get the argument of each successive 
root.
Parametric Equations (p. 612)
If f and g are functions defined on an interval I, then the set of 
points 1f1t2, g1t22  is a plane curve. The equations
x f1t2      
y g1t2
where t [ I, are parametric equations for the curve, with 
parameter t. 
Polar Equations in Parametric Form (p. 616)
The graph of the polar equation r f1u2  is the same as the 
graph of the parametric equations 
x f1t2 cos t     
y f1t2 sin t
	 1.	 (a)	 Explain the polar coordinate system. 
(b)	 Graph the points with polar coordinates 12, p/32  and  
11, 3p/42 .
(c)	 State the equations that relate the rectangular coordinates 
of a point to its polar coordinates. 
(d)	 Find rectangular coordinates for 12, p/32 .
(e)	 Find polar coordinates for P12, 22 . 
■  CONCEPT CHECK
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

622 
CHAPTER 8  ■  Polar Coordinates and Parametric Equations 
	 2.	 (a)	 What is a polar equation? 
(b)	 Convert the polar equation r  sin u to an equivalent 
rectangular equation.
	 3.	 (a)	 How do we graph a polar equation?
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the polar equation r 4 4 cos u. 
What is the graph called?
	 4.	 (a)	 What is the complex plane? How do we graph a complex 
number z a bi in the complex plane?
(b)	 What are the modulus and argument of the complex 
number z a bi?
(c)	 Graph the point z !3 i, and find the modulus and 
argument of z.
	 5.	 (a)	 How do we express the complex number z in polar form?
(b)	 Express z !3 i in polar form.
	 6.	 Let	
z1 2acos p
3 i sin p
3 b
	 	 and	
z2 5acos p
4 i sin p
4 b
(a)	 Find the product z1z2.
(b)	 Find the quotient z1/z2.
	 7.	 (a)	 State De Moivre’s Theorem. 
(b)	 Use De Moivre’s Theorem to find the fifth power of 
	
z 2acos p
3 i sin p
3 b .
	 8.	 (a)	 State the formula for the nth roots of a complex number 
z r 1cos u i sin u2 .
(b)	 How do we find the nth roots of a complex number?
(c)	 Find the three third roots of z 8.
	 9.	 (a)	 What are parametric equations? 
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the following parametric equations, 
using arrows to indicate the direction of the curve.
x t 1  y t2  2 t 2
(c)	 Eliminate the parameter to obtain an equation in  
x and y.
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
■  exercises
1–6  ■  Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates    A point 
P1r, u2  is given in polar coordinates. (a) Plot the point P.  
(b) Find rectangular coordinates for P.
	 1.	 112,  p/62 	
  2.	 18,  3p/42
	 3.	 13,  7p/42 	
  4.	 1!3,  2p/32
	 5.	 14!3,  5p/32 	
  6.	 16!2,  p/42
7–12  ■  Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates    A point 
P1x, y2  is given in rectangular coordinates. (a) Plot the point P. 
(b) Find polar coordinates for P with r  0. (c) Find polar coor-
dinates for P with r  0.
	 7.	 18,  82 	
  8.	 1!2,  !62
	 9.	 16!2,  6!22 	
10.	 13!3,  32
11.	 13,  !32 	
12.	 14,  42
13–16  ■  Rectangular Equations to Polar Equations    (a) Convert 
the equation to polar coordinates and simplify. (b) Graph the 
equation.    [Hint: Use the form of the equation that you ﬁnd  
easier to graph.]
13.	 x  y  4	
14.	 xy  1
15.	 x2  y2  4x  4y	
16.	 1x2 y22 2 2xy
17–24  ■  Polar Equations to Rectangular Equations    (a) Sketch 
the graph of the polar equation. (b) Express the equation in rect-
angular coordinates.
17.	 r  3  3 cos u	
18.	 r  3 sin u
19.	 r  2 sin 2u	
20.	 r  4 cos 3u
21.	 r2  sec 2u	
22.	 r2  4 sin 2u
23.	 r  sin u  cos u	
24.	 r 
4
2 cos u
25–28  ■  Graphing Polar Equations    Use a graphing device to 
graph the polar equation. Choose the domain of u to make sure 
you produce the entire graph.
25.	 r cos1u/32
	26.	 r sin19u/42
27.	 r 1 4 cos1u/32
	28.	 r  u sin u,    6p  u  6p
29–34  ■  Complex Numbers    A complex number is given.  
(a) Graph the complex number in the complex plane. (b) Find  
the modulus and argument. (c) Write the number in polar form.
29.	 4  4i	
30.	 10i
31.	 5  3i	
32.	 1 !3 i
33.	 1  i	
34.	 20
35–38  ■  Powers Using De Moivre’s Theorem    Use De Moivre’s 
Theorem to ﬁnd the indicated power.
35.	 11 !3 i2 4	
36.	 11 i2 8
37.	 1 !3 i2 4	
38.	 a 1
2 !3
2
 ib
20
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8  ■  Review  623
39–42  ■  Roots of Complex Numbers    Find the indicated roots.
39.	 The square roots of 16i
40.	 The cube roots of 4 4!3 i
41.	 The sixth roots of 1	
42.	 The eighth roots of i
43–46  ■  Parametric Curves    A pair of parametric equations is 
given. (a) Sketch the curve represented by the parametric equa-
tions. Use arrows to indicate the direction of the curve as t 
increases. (b) Find a rectangular-coordinate equation for the curve 
by eliminating the parameter.
43.	 x  1  t2,    y  1  t	
44.	 x  t2  1,    y  t2  1
45.	 x  1  cos t,    y  1  sin t,    0  t  p/2
46.	 x 1
t 2, y 2
t2, 0 t 2
47–48  ■  Graphs of Parametric Equations    Use a graphing device 
to draw the parametric curve.
47.	 x  cos 2t,    y  sin 3t
48.	 x sin1t cos 2t2, y cos1t sin 3t2
49.	 FInding Parametric Equations for a Curve    In the ﬁgure, the 
point P is the midpoint of the segment QR and 0  u  p/2. 
Using u as the parameter, ﬁnd a para­metric representation for 
the curve traced out by P.
P
¨
0
1
R
Q
1
x
y
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

624
	 1.	 (a)	 Convert the point whose polar coordinates are 18,  5p/42  to rectangular coordinates.
(b)	 Find two polar coordinate representations for the rectangular coordinate point 
16,  2!32 , one with r  0 and one with r  0 and both with 0  u  2p.
	 2.	 (a)	 Graph the polar equation r  8 cos u. What type of curve is this?
(b)	 Convert the equation to rectangular coordinates.
	 3.	 Graph the polar equation r 3 6 sin u. What type of curve is this?
	 4.	 Let z 1 !3 i.
(a)	 Graph z in the complex plane.
(b)	 Write z in polar form.
(c)	 Find the complex number z9.
	 5.	 Let z1 4acos  7p
12 i sin  7p
12 b and z2 2acos  5p
12 i sin  5p
12 b .
	 	 Find z1z2 and z1
z2
.
	 6.	 Find the cube roots of 27i, and sketch these roots in the complex plane.
	 7.	 (a)	 Sketch the curve represented by the parametric equations below. Use arrows to indicate 
the direction of the curve as t increases.
x 3 sin t 3   y 2 cos t   0 t p
(b)	 Eliminate the parameter t in part (a) to obtain an equation for this curve in  
rectangular coordinates.
	 8.	 Find parametric equations for the line of slope 2 that passes through the point 13, 52 .
	 9.	 The position of an object in circular motion is modeled by the parametric equations
x 3 sin 2t     
y 3 cos 2t
	 	 where t is measured in seconds.
(a)	 Describe the path of the object by stating the radius of the circle, the position at time 
t 0, the orientation of motion (clockwise or counterclockwise), and the time t it 
takes to complete one revolution around the circle.
(b)	 Suppose the speed of the object is doubled. Find new parametric equations that model 
the motion of the object. 
(c)	 Find a rectangular-coordinate equation for the same curve by eliminating the 
parameter.
(d)	 Find a polar equation for the same curve.
CHAPTER 8
TEST
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

625
The Path of a Projectile
	
FOCUS ON MODELING
Modeling motion is one of the most important ideas in both classical and modern phys-
ics. Much of Isaac Newton’s work dealt with creating a mathematical model for how 
objects move and interact—this was the main reason for his invention of calculus. 
Albert Einstein developed his Special Theory of Relativity in the early 1900s to reﬁne 
Newton’s laws of motion.
In this section we use coordinate geometry to model the motion of a projectile, such 
as a ball thrown upward into the air, a bullet ﬁred from a gun, or any other sort of mis-
sile. A similar model was created by Galileo, but we have the advantage of using our 
modern mathematical notation to make describing the model much easier than it was 
for Galileo!
■  Parametric Equations for the Path of a Projectile
Suppose that we ﬁre a projectile into the air from ground level, with an initial speed √0 
and at an angle u upward from the ground. If there were no gravity (and no air resis-
tance), the projectile would just keep moving indeﬁnitely at the same speed and in the 
same direction. Since distance  speed  time, the projectile would travel a distance 
√0t, so its position at time t would be given by the following parametric equations (as-
suming that the origin of our coordinate system is placed at the initial location of the 
projectile; see Figure 1):
x 1√0 cos u2t   y 1√0 sin u2t        No gravity
But, of course, we know that gravity will pull the projectile back to ground level. By 
using calculus, it can be shown that the effect of gravity can be accounted for by sub-
tracting 1
2 gt2 from the vertical position of the projectile. In this expression, g is the 
gravitational acceleration: g  32 ft/s2  9.8 m/s2. Thus we have the following para-
metric equations for the path of the projectile:
x 1√0 cos u2t   y 1√0 sin u2t 1
2 gt2        With gravity
Example  ■  The Path of a Cannonball
Find parametric equations that model the path of a cannonball ﬁred into the air with 
an initial speed of 150.0 m/s at a 30 angle of elevation. Sketch the path of the can-
nonball.
Solution    Substituting the given initial speed and angle into the general parametric 
equations of the path of a projectile, we get
 x 1150.0 cos 302t   
 y 1150.0 sin 302t 1
219.82t2        Substitute  
√0  150.0, u  30
 x 129.9t
   
 y 75.0t 4.9t2
        Simplify
This path is graphed in Figure 2.
Figure 2  Path of a cannonball
y
500
x
(meters)
	

■
x
0
√‚t
¨
√‚t ç ¨
√‚t ß ¨
y
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

626 
Focus on Modeling
■  Range of a Projectile
How can we tell where and when the cannonball of the above example hits the ground? 
Since ground level corresponds to y  0, we substitute this value for y and solve for t.
 0 75.0t 4.9t2         Set y  0
 0 t175.0 4.9t2        Factor
 t 0  or  t 75.0
4.9 < 15.3
        Solve for t
The ﬁrst solution, t  0, is the time when the cannon was ﬁred; the second solution 
means that the cannonball hits the ground after 15.3 s of ﬂight. To see where this hap-
pens, we substitute this value into the equation for x, the horizontal location of the 
cannonball.
x 129.9115.32 < 1987.5 m
The cannonball travels almost 2 km before hitting the ground.
Figure 3 shows the paths of several projectiles, all ﬁred with the same initial speed 
but at different angles. From the graphs we see that if the ﬁring angle is too high or too 
low, the projectile doesn’t travel very far.
¨=85*
¨=75*
¨=60*
¨=45*
¨=30*
¨=15*
¨=5*
y
x
0
Figure 3  Paths of projectiles
Let’s try to ﬁnd the optimal ﬁring angle—the angle that shoots the projectile as far 
as possible. We’ll go through the same steps as we did in the preceding example, but 
we’ll use the general parametric equations instead. First, we solve for the time when the 
projectile hits the ground by substituting y  0.
 0 1√0 sin u2t 1
2 gt2    Substitute y  0
 0 t1√0 sin u 1
2 gt2     Factor
 0 √0 sin u 1
2 gt
    Set second factor equal to 0
 t 2√0 sin u
g
    Solve for t
Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) was 
born in Pisa, Italy. He studied medicine 
but later abandoned this in favor of sci-
ence and mathematics. At the age of 25, 
by dropping cannonballs of various sizes 
from the Leaning Tower of Pisa, he dem-
onstrated that light objects fall at the 
same rate as heavier ones. This contra-
dicted the then-accepted view of 
Aristotle that heavier objects fall more 
quickly. Galileo also showed that the 
World History Archive/Alamy
distance an object falls is proportional to the square of the time it has 
been falling, and from this he was able to prove that the path of a pro-
jectile is a parabola.
Galileo constructed the ﬁrst telescope and, using it, discovered the 
moons of Jupiter. His advocacy of the Copernican view that the earth 
revolves around the sun (rather than being stationary) led to his being called 
before the Inquisition. By then an old man, he was forced to recant his views, 
but he is said to have muttered under his breath, “Nevertheless, it does 
move.” Galileo revolutionized science by expressing scientiﬁc principles in the 
language of mathematics. He said, “The great book of nature is written in 
mathematical symbols.”  
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   The Path of a Projectile  627
Now we substitute this into the equation for x to see how far the projectile has traveled 
horizontally when it hits the ground.
 x 1√0 cos u2t
    Parametric equation for x
  1√0 cos u2 a 2√0 sin u
g
b     Substitute t 12√0 sin u2/g
 2√ 2
0 sin u cos u
g
    Simplify
  √ 2
0 sin 2u
g
    Use identity sin 2u  2 sin u cos u
We want to choose u so that x is as large as possible. The largest value that the sine of 
any angle can have is 1, the sine of 90. Thus we want 2u  90, or u  45. So to send 
the projectile as far as possible, it should be shot up at an angle of 45. From the last 
equation in the preceding display, we can see that it will then travel a distance x √2
0/g.
Problems
	 1.	 Trajectories Are Parabolas    From the graphs in Figure 3 the paths of projectiles  
appear to be parabolas that open downward. Eliminate the parameter t from the general 
parametric equations to verify that these are indeed parabolas.
	 2.	 Path of a Baseball    Suppose a baseball is thrown at 30 ft/s at a 60 angle to the  
horizontal from a height of 4 ft above the ground.
(a)	 Find parametric equations for the path of the baseball, and sketch its graph.
(b)	 How far does the baseball travel, and when does it hit the ground?
	 3.	 Path of a Rocket    Suppose that a rocket is ﬁred at an angle of 5 from the vertical with 
an initial speed of 1000 ft/s.
(a)	 Find the length of time the rocket is in the air.
(b)	 Find the greatest height it reaches.
(c)	 Find the horizontal distance it has traveled when it hits the ground.
(d)	 Graph the rocket’s path.
	 4.	 Firing a Missile    The initial speed of a missile is 330 m/s.
(a)	 At what angle should the missile be ﬁred so that it hits a target 10 km away? (You 
should ﬁnd that there are two possible angles.) Graph the missile paths for both angles.
(b)	 For which angle is the target hit sooner?
	 5.	 Maximum Height    Show that the maximum height reached by a projectile as a function 
of its initial speed √0 and its ﬁring angle u is
y √2
0 sin2
 u
2g
	 6.	 Shooting into the Wind    Suppose that a projectile is ﬁred into a headwind that pushes 
it back so as to reduce its horizontal speed by a constant amount „. Find parametric equa-
tions for the path of the projectile.
	 7.	 Shooting into the Wind    Using the parametric equations you derived in Problem 6, 
draw graphs of the path of a projectile with initial speed √0  32 ft/s, ﬁred into a headwind  
of „  24 ft/s, for the angles u  5, 15, 30, 40, 45, 55, 60, and 75. Is it still true that 
the greatest range is attained when ﬁring at 45? Draw some more graphs for different an-
gles, and use these graphs to estimate the optimal ﬁring angle.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

628 
Focus on Modeling
	 8.	 Simulating the Path of a Projectile    The path of a projectile can be simulated on a 
graphing calculator. On the TI-83, use the “Path” graph style to graph the general paramet-
ric equations for the path of a projectile, and watch as the circular cursor moves, simulating 
the motion of the projectile. Selecting the size of the Tstep determines the speed of the  
“projectile.”
(a)	 Simulate the path of a projectile. Experiment with various values of u. Use √0  10 ft/s 
and Tstep  0.02. Part (a) of the ﬁgure below shows one such path.
(b)	 Simulate the path of two projectiles, ﬁred simultaneously, one at u  30 and the other 
at u  60. This can be done on the TI-83 using Simul mode (“simultaneous” mode). 
Use √0  10 ft/s and Tstep  0.02. See part (b) of the ﬁgure. Where do the projec-
tiles land? Which lands ﬁrst?
(c)	 Simulate the path of a ball thrown straight up 1u 902 . Experiment with values  
of √0 between 5 and 20 ft/s. Use the “Animate” graph style and Tstep  0.02.  
Simulate the path of two balls thrown simultaneously at different speeds. To bet- 
ter distinguish the two balls, place them at different x-coordinates (for example,  
x  1 and x  2). See part (c) of the ﬁgure. How does doubling √0 change the  
maximum height the ball reaches?
(a)
(b)
(c)
2
0
3
2
0
3
2
0
3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Many real-world quantities are described mathematically by just one 
number: their “size” or magnitude. For example, quantities such as mass, 
volume, distance, and temperature are described by their magnitude. But 
many other real-world quantities involve both magnitude and direction. 
Such quantities are described mathematically by vectors. For example, if 
you push a car with a certain force, the direction in which you push on the 
car is important; you get different results if you push the car forward, 
backward, or perhaps sideways. So force is a vector. The result of several 
forces acting on an object can be evaluated by using vectors. For example, 
we’ll see how we can combine the vector forces of wind and water on the 
sails and hull of a sailboat to find the direction in which the boat will sail. 
Analyzing these vector forces helps sailors to sail against the wind by 
tacking. (See Discovery Project: Sailing Against the Wind referenced on 
page 645.)
629
Vectors in Two and Three 
Dimensions
9
9.1	 Vectors in Two Dimensions
9.2	 The Dot Product
9.3	 Three-Dimensional 
Coordinate Geometry
9.4	 Vectors in Three Dimensions
9.5	 The Cross Product
9.6	 Equations of Lines and 
Planes
Focus on Modeling
	
Vector Fields
James L. Amos/SuperStock
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

630 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
9.1  Vectors in Two Dimensions
■  Geometric Description of Vectors  ■  Vectors in the Coordinate Plane  ■  Using Vectors  
to Model Velocity and Force
In applications of mathematics, certain quantities are determined completely by their 
magnitude—for example, length, mass, area, temperature, and energy. We speak of a 
length of 5 m or a mass of 3 kg; only one number is needed to describe each of these 
quantities. Such a quantity is called a scalar.
On the other hand, to describe the displacement of an object, two numbers are re-
quired: the magnitude and the direction of the displacement. To describe the velocity of 
a moving object, we must specify both the speed and the direction of travel. Quantities 
such as displacement, velocity, acceleration, and force that involve magnitude as well 
as direction are called directed quantities. One way to represent such quantities math-
ematically is through the use of vectors.
■  Geometric Description of Vectors
A vector in the plane is a line segment with an assigned direction. We sketch a vector 
as shown in Figure 1 with an arrow to specify the direction. We denote this vector by 
AB
>
. Point A is the initial point, and B is the terminal point of the vector AB
>
. The 
length of the line segment AB is called the magnitude or length of the vector and is 
denoted by 0  AB
>
 0 . We use boldface letters to denote vectors. Thus we write u AB
>
.
Two vectors are considered equal if they have equal magnitude and the same direction. 
Thus all the vectors in Figure 2 are equal. This deﬁnition of equality makes sense if we 
think of a vector as representing a displacement. Two such displacements are the same if 
they have equal magnitudes and the same direction. So the vectors in Figure 2 can be 
thought of as the same displacement applied to objects in different locations in the plane.
If the displacement u AB
>
 is followed by the displacement v BC
>
, then the result-
ing displacement is AC
>
 as shown in Figure 3. In other words, the single displacement 
represented by the vector AC
>
 has the same effect as the other two displacements together. 
We call the vector AC
>
 the sum of the vectors AB
>
 and BC
>
, and we write AC
>
AB
>
BC
>
. 
(The zero vector, denoted by 0, represents no displacement.) Thus to ﬁnd the sum of 
any two vectors u and v, we sketch vectors equal to u and v with the initial point of one 
at the terminal point of the other (see Figure 4(a)). If we draw u and v starting at the 
same point, then u  v is the vector that is the diagonal of the parallelogram formed by 
u and v shown in Figure 4(b).
Figure 4  Addition of vectors
v
u
u+v
v
u
u+v
(a)
(b)
If c is a real number and v is a vector, we deﬁne a new vector cv as follows: The 
vector cv has magnitude 0  c 0  0  v 0  and has the same direction as v if c  0 and the op-
posite direction if c  0. If c  0, then cv  0, the zero vector. This process is called 
multiplication of a vector by a scalar. Multiplying a vector by a scalar has the effect 
of stretching or shrinking the vector. Figure 5 shows graphs of the vector cv for differ-
ent values of c. We write the vector 112 v as v. Thus v is the vector with the same 
length as v but with the opposite direction.
u=AB
A
B
Figure 1
Figure 2
A
B
C
AB
BC
AC=AB+BC
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.1  ■  Vectors in Two Dimensions  631
The difference of two vectors u and v is deﬁned by u  v  u  1v2. Figure 6 
shows that the vector u  v is the other diagonal of the parallelogram formed by u and v.
v
1
3
_
_2v
_v
2v
v
1
2
v
Figure 5  Multiplication of a vector by a scalar
u+v
_v
v
u
u
u-v
Figure 6  Subtraction of  
vectors
■  Vectors in the Coordinate Plane
So far, we’ve discussed vectors geometrically. By placing a vector in a coordinate plane, 
we can describe it analytically (that is, by using components). In Figure 7(a), to go from 
the initial point of the vector v to the terminal point, we move a1 units to the right and 
a2 units upward. We represent v as an ordered pair of real numbers.
v 8a1, a29
where a1 is the horizontal component of v and a2 is the vertical component of v. 
Remember that a vector represents a magnitude and a direction, not a particular arrow 
in the plane. Thus the vector a1, a2 has many different representations, depending on 
its initial point (see Figure 7(b)).
(a)
(b)
a⁄
a¤
v
x
y
a⁄
a¤
v
a⁄
a¤
v
0
x
y
a⁄
a¤
v
0
Figure 7
Using Figure 8, we can state the relationship between a geometric representation of 
a vector and the analytic one as follows.
Component Form of a Vector
If a vector v is represented in the plane with initial point P1x1, y12  and terminal 
point Q1x2, y22 , then
v 8x2 x1, y2 y19
Example 1  ■  Describing Vectors in Component Form
(a)	 Find the component form of the vector u with initial point 12,  52  and terminal 
point 13,  72 .
(b)	 If the vector v  3, 7 is sketched with initial point 12,  42 , what is its terminal 
point?
(c)	 Sketch representations of the vector w  2, 3 with initial points at 10,  02 , 
12,  22 , 12,  12 , and 11,  42 .
Note the distinction between the vector 
a1, a2 and the point 1a1, a22 .
x⁄
x¤
x
y
v
P
Q
x¤-x⁄
y¤-y⁄
y⁄
y¤
0
Figure 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

632 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
Solution
(a)	 The desired vector is
u 83 122, 7 59 85,  29
(b)	 Let the terminal point of v be 1x, y2 . Then
8x 2, y 49 83,  79
	 	 So x  2  3 and y  4  7, or x  5 and y  11. The terminal point is 15,  112 .
(c)	 Representations of the vector w are sketched in Figure 9.
Now Try Exercises 11, 19, and 23	
■
We now give analytic deﬁnitions of the various operations on vectors that we have 
described geometrically. Let’s start with equality of vectors. We’ve said that two vectors 
are equal if they have equal magnitude and the same direction. For the vectors 
u 8a1, a29 and v 8b1, b29 this means that a1 b1 and a2 b2. In other words, two 
vectors are equal if and only if their corresponding components are equal. Thus all the 
arrows in Figure 7(b) represent the same vector, as do all the arrows in Figure 9.
Applying the Pythagorean Theorem to the triangle in Figure 10, we obtain the fol-
lowing formula for the magnitude of a vector.
Magnitude of a Vector
The magnitude or length of a vector v 8a1, a29 is
0  v 0 "a1
2 a2
2
Example 2  ■  Magnitudes of Vectors
Find the magnitude of each vector.
(a)	 u  2, 3            (b)  v  5, 0            (c)  w  
3
5,  4
5
Solution
(a)	 0  u 0 "22 132 2 !13
(b)	 0  v 0 "52 02 !25 5
(c)	 0  w 0 #A3
5B
2 A4
5B
2 #
9
25 16
25 1
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
The following deﬁnitions of addition, subtraction, and scalar multiplication of vec-
tors correspond to the geometric descriptions given earlier. Figure 11 shows how the 
analytic deﬁnition of addition corresponds to the geometric one.
Algebraic Operations on Vectors
If u 8a1, a29 and v 8b1, b29, then
 u v 8a1 b1, a2 b29
 u v 8a1 b1, a2 b29
 cu 8ca1, ca29  c [ R
x
y
2
0
4
w
w
w
w
Figure 9
x
y
a⁄
a¤
v= a⁄, a¤

|v|=œ∑∑∑∑∑∑
a™⁄+a™¤
0
Figure 10
u
v
u+v
b¤
a¤
b⁄
a⁄
Figure 11
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.1  ■  Vectors in Two Dimensions  633
Example 3  ■  Operations with Vectors
If u  2, 3 and v  1, 2, ﬁnd u  v, u  v, 2 u, 3 v, and 2 u  3 v.
Solution    By the deﬁnitions of the vector operations we have
 u v 82,  39 81,  29 81,  19
 u v 82,  39 81,  29 83,  59
 2u 282,  39 84,  69
 3v 381,  29 83,  69
2u 3v 282,  39 381,  29 84,  69 83,  69 81,  09
Now Try Exercise 31	
■
The following properties for vector operations can be easily proved from the 
deﬁnitions. The zero vector is the vector 0  0, 0. It plays the same role for addition 
of vectors as the number 0 does for addition of real numbers.
Properties of Vectors
Vector addition	
Multiplication by a scalar
u  v  v  u	
c1u v2 cu cv
u 1v w2 1u v2 w	
1c d2u cu du
u  0  u	
1cd2u c1du2 d1cu2
u 1u2 0	
1 u  u
Length of a vector	
0 u  0
0  cu 0 0  c 0  0  u 0 	
c0  0
A vector of length 1 is called a unit vector. For instance, in Example 2(c) the vector 
w  
3
5, 4
5 is a unit vector. Two useful unit vectors are i and j, deﬁned by
i 81,  09  j 80,  19
(See Figure 12.) These vectors are special because any vector can be expressed in terms 
of them. (See Figure 13.)
Vectors in Terms of i and j
The vector v 8a1, a29 can be expressed in terms of i and j by
v 8a1, a29 a1 i a2 j
Example 4  ■  Vectors in Terms of i and j
(a)	 Write the vector u  5, 8 in terms of i and j.
(b)	 If u  3 i  2 j and v  i  6 j, write 2 u  5 v in terms of i and j.
Solution
(a)	 u 5i 182j 5i 8j
1
1
y
x
0
j
i
Figure 12
x
y
0
v
a⁄ i
a¤ j
(a⁄, a¤)
Figure 13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

634 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
(b)	 The properties of addition and scalar multiplication of vectors show that we can 
manipulate vectors in the same way as algebraic expressions. Thus
 2u 5v 213i 2j2 51i 6j2
  16i 4j2 15i 30j2
  i 34j
Now Try Exercises 27 and 35	
■
Let v be a vector in the plane with its initial point at the origin. The direction of v 
is u, the smallest positive angle in standard position formed by the positive x-axis and 
v (see Figure 14). If we know the magnitude and direction of a vector, then Figure 14 
shows that we can ﬁnd the horizontal and vertical components of the vector.
Horizontal and Vertical Components of a Vector
Let v be a vector with magnitude 0  v 0  and direction u.
Then v 8a1, a29 a1 i a2 j, where
a1 0  v 0  cos u    and   
a2 0  v 0  sin u
Thus we can express v as
v 0  v 0  cos ui 0  v 0  sin uj
Example 5  ■  Components and Direction of a Vector
(a)	 A vector v has length 8 and direction p/3. Find the horizontal and vertical  
components, and write v in terms of i and j.
(b)	 Find the direction of the vector u !3 i j.
Solution
(a)	 We have v  a, b, where the components are given by
a 8 cos  p
3 4  and  b 8 sin  p
3 4!3
	 	 Thus v 84,  4 !3 9 4i 4!3 j.
(b)	 From Figure 15 we see that the direction u has the property that
tan u 
1
!3  !3
3
	 	 Thus the reference angle for u is p/6. Since the terminal point of the vector u is 
in Quadrant II, it follows that u  5p/6.
Now Try Exercises 41 and 51	
■
■  Using Vectors to Model Velocity and Force
The velocity of a moving object is modeled by a vector whose direction is the direction 
of motion and whose magnitude is the speed. Figure 16 on the next page shows some 
vectors u, representing the velocity of wind ﬂowing in the direction N 30 E, and a 
vector v, representing the velocity of an airplane ﬂying through this wind at the point 
P. It’s obvious from our experience that wind affects both the speed and the direction 
The use of bearings (such as N 30 E) 
to describe directions is explained on 
page 518 in Section 6.6.
x
y
u
0
1
_œ∑3
¨
Figure 15
x
y
|v|
|v| ß ¨
|v| ç ¨
0
¨
Figure 14
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.1  ■  Vectors in Two Dimensions  635
of an airplane. Figure 17 indicates that the true velocity of the plane (relative to the 
ground) is given by the vector w  u  v.
0
60*
N
P
u
v
y
x
Figure 16
0
y
x
P
u
v
w=u+v
Figure 17
Example 6  ■  The True Speed and Direction of an Airplane
An airplane heads due north at 300 mi/h. It experiences a 40 mi/h crosswind ﬂowing 
in the direction N 30 E, as shown in Figure 16.
(a)	 Express the velocity v of the airplane relative to the air and the velocity u of the 
wind, in component form.
(b)	 Find the true velocity of the airplane as a vector.
(c)	 Find the true speed and direction of the airplane.
Solution
(a)	 The velocity of the airplane relative to the air is v  0 i  300 j  300 j. By the 
formulas for the components of a vector we ﬁnd that the velocity of the wind is
 u 140 cos 60°2i 140 sin 60°2j
  20i 20!3 j
  20i 34.64j
(b)	 The true velocity of the airplane is given by the vector w  u  v:
 w u v 120i 20!3 j2 1300j2
  20i 120!3 3002j
  20i 334.64j
(c)	 The true speed of the airplane is given by the magnitude of w:
0  w 0 "1202 2 1334.642 2 335.2 mi/h
	 	 The direction of the airplane is the direction u of the vector w. The angle u has 
the property that tan u  334.64/20  16.732, so u  86.6. Thus the airplane is 
heading in the direction N 3.4 E.
Now Try Exercise 59	
■
Example 7  ■  Calculating a Heading
A woman launches a boat from one shore of a straight river and wants to land at the 
point directly on the opposite shore. If the speed of the boat (relative to the water) is 
10 mi/h and the river is ﬂowing east at the rate of 5 mi/h, in what direction should she 
head the boat in order to arrive at the desired landing point?
The true velocity is the velocity  
relative to the ground.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

636 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
Solution    We choose a coordinate system with the origin at the initial position of 
the boat as shown in Figure 18. Let u and v represent the velocities of the river and 
the boat, respectively. Clearly, u  5 i, and since the speed of the boat is 10 mi/h, we 
have 0  v 0 10, so
v 110 cos u2i 110 sin u2j
where the angle u is as shown in Figure 18. The true course of the boat is given by the 
vector w  u  v. We have
 w u v 5i 110 cos u2i 110 sin u2j
  15 10 cos u2i 110 sin u2j
Since the woman wants to land at a point directly across the river, her direction 
should have horizontal component 0. In other words, she should choose u in such a 
way that
 5 10 cos u 0
 cos u  1
2
 u 120°
Thus she should head the boat in the direction u  120 (or N 30 W).
Now Try Exercise 57	
■
Force is also represented by a vector. Intuitively, we can think of force as describing 
a push or a pull on an object, for example, a horizontal push of a book across a table or 
the downward pull of the earth’s gravity on a ball. Force is measured in pounds (or in 
newtons, in the metric system). For instance, a man weighing 200 lb exerts a force of 
200 lb downward on the ground. If several forces are acting on an object, the resultant 
force experienced by the object is the vector sum of these forces.
Example 8  ■  Resultant Force
Two forces F1 and F2 with magnitudes 10 and 20 lb, respectively, act on an object at a 
point P as shown in Figure 19. Find the resultant force acting at P.
Solution    We write F1 and F2 in component form:
 F1 110 cos 45°2i 110 sin 45°2j 10  !2
2
  i 10  !2
2
  j
 5!2i 5!2 j
 F2 120 cos 150°2i 120 sin 150°2j 20  !3
2
  i 20a 1
2 b j
  10!3i 10 j
So the resultant force F is
 F F1 F2
  15!2i 5!2j2 110!3i 10j2
  15!2 10!32i 15!2 102j
  10i 17j
The resultant force F is shown in Figure 20.
Now Try Exercise 67	
■
N
x
y
u
w
v
¨ 
0
Figure 18
y
x
0
F¤
F⁄
150*
45*
P
Figure 19
F
y
x
0
F¤
F⁄
P
Figure 20
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.1  ■  Vectors in Two Dimensions  637
Concepts
	 1.	 (a)	 A vector in the plane is a line segment with an assigned 
direction. In Figure I below, the vector u has initial point 
	 	 	
 
 and terminal point  
  . Sketch the  
vectors 2u and u v. 
(b)	 A vector in a coordinate plane is expressed by using  
components. In Figure II below, the vector u has initial 
point 1
, 
2 and terminal point 1
, 
2. In compo-
	
		nent form we write u  8
, 
9, and v  8
, 
9. 
	
	Then 2u  8
, 
9 and u  v  8
, 
9.
I
II
y
x
0
1
1
u
v
u
v
A
B
D
C
	 2.	 (a)	 The length of a vector w 8a1, a29 is 0  w 0  
  , 
so the length of the vector u in Figure II is 
	 	 	
0  u 0  
  .
(b)	 If we know the length 0  w 0  and direction u of a vector w, 
then we can express the vector in component form as 
	
		w  8
, 
9.
Skills
3–8  ■  Sketching Vectors    Sketch the vector indicated. (The  
vectors u and v are shown in the ﬁgure.)
	 3.	 2 u
y
x
u
v
0
1
3
	 4.	 v
	 5.	 u  v
	 6.	 u  v
	 7.	 v  2 u
	 8.	 2 u  v
9–18  ■  Component Form of Vectors    Express the vector with 
initial point P and terminal point Q in component form.
	 9.	
Q
y
x
P
0
1
1
	
10.	
y
x
P
Q
0
1
1
	11.	
P
Q
y
x
0
1
1
	
12.	
P
y
x
Q
0
1
1
13.	 P13,  22, Q18,  92 	
14.	 P11,  12, Q19,  92
15.	 P15,  32, Q11,  02 	
16.	 P11,  32, Q16,  12
17.	 P11,  12, Q11,  12
18.	 P18,  62, Q11,  12
19–22  ■  Sketching Vectors    Sketch the given vector with initial 
point 14, 32, and find the terminal point.
19.	 u 82, 49	
20.	 u 81, 29	
21.	 u 84, 39	
22.	 u 88, 19	
23–26  ■  Sketching Vectors    Sketch representations of the given 
vector with initial points at 10, 02 , 12, 32 , and 13, 52 .
23.	 u 83, 59	
24.	 u 84, 69
25.	 u 87, 29	
26.	 u 80, 99
27–30  ■  Writing Vectors in Terms of i and j    Write the given vec-
tor in terms of i and j.
27.	 u 81, 49	
28.	 u 82, 109
29.	 u 83, 09	
30.	 u 80, 59
31–36  ■  Operations with Vectors    Find 2 u, 3v, u  v, and 
3 u  4v for the given vectors u and v.
31.	 u 82,  79, v 83,  19	
32.	 u 82,  59, v 82,  89
33.	 u 80,  19, v 82,  09
34.	 u i, v 2 j
35.	 u 2 i, v 3 i 2 j	
36.	 u i j, v i j
37–40  ■  Magnitude of Vectors    Find 0  u 0 , 0  v 0 , 0  2 u 0 , 0  1
2 v 0 , 
0  u v 0 , 0  u v 0 , and 0  u 0 0  v 0 .
37.	 u 2 i j, v 3 i 2 j
38.	 u 2 i 3 j, v i 2 j
39.	 u 810,  19, v 82,  29
40.	 u 86,  69, v 82,  19
41–46  ■  Components of a Vector    Find the horizontal and verti-
cal components of the vector with given length and direction, and 
write the vector in terms of the vectors i and j.
41.	 0  v 0 40, u 30°	
42.	 0  v 0 50, u 120°
43.	 0  v 0 1, u 225°	
44.	 0  v 0 800, u 125°
45.	 0  v 0 4, u 10°	
46.	 0  v 0 !3, u 300°
9.1  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

638 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
47–52  ■  Magnitude and Direction of a Vector    Find the magni-
tude and direction (in degrees) of the vector.
47.	 v  3, 4	
48.	 v h !2
2 ,   !2
2 i
49.	 v  12, 5	
50.	 v  40, 9
51.	 v i !3  j	
52.	 v  i  j
Applications
53.	 Components of a Force    A man pushes a lawn mower with a 
force of 30 lb exerted at an angle of 30 to the ground. Find 
the horizontal and vertical components of the force.
54.	 Components of a Velocity    A jet is ﬂying in a direction  
N 20 E with a speed of 500 mi/h. Find the north and east 
components of the velocity.
55.	 Velocity    A river ﬂows due south at 3 mi/h. A swimmer  
attempting to cross the river heads due east swimming at  
2 mi/h relative to the water. Find the true velocity of the 
swimmer as a vector.
2 mi/h
3 mi/h
56.	 Velocity    Suppose that in Exercise 55 the current is flowing 
at 1.2 mi/h due south. In what direction should the swimmer 
head in order to arrive at a landing point due east of his  
starting point?
57.	 Velocity    The speed of an airplane is 300 mi/h relative to the 
air. The wind is blowing due north with a speed of 30 mi/h. In 
what direction should the airplane head in order to arrive at a 
point due west of its location?
58.	 Velocity    A migrating salmon heads in the direction  
N 45 E, swimming at 5 mi/h relative to the water. The pre-
vailing ocean currents ﬂow due east at 3 mi/h. Find the true 
velocity of the ﬁsh as a vector.
59.	 True Velocity of a Jet    A pilot heads his jet due east. The jet 
has a speed of 425 mi/h relative to the air. The wind is blow-
ing due north with a speed of 40 mi/h.
(a)	 Express the velocity of the wind as a vector in compo-
nent form.
(b)	 Express the velocity of the jet relative to the air as a vec-
tor in component form.
(c)	 Find the true velocity of the jet as a vector.
(d)	 Find the true speed and direction of the jet.
60.	 True Velocity of a Jet    A jet is ﬂying through a wind that is 
blowing with a speed of 55 mi/h in the direction N 30 E (see 
the ﬁgure). The jet has a speed of 765 mi/h relative to the air, 
and the pilot heads the jet in the direction N 45 E.
(a)	 Express the velocity of the wind as a vector in compo-
nent form.
(b)	 Express the velocity of the jet relative to the air as a vec-
tor in component form.
(c)	 Find the true velocity of the jet as a vector.
(d)	 Find the true speed and direction of the jet.
N
30°
45°
61.	 True Velocity of a Jet    Find the true speed and direction of 
the jet in Exercise 60 if the pilot heads the plane in the  
direction N 30 W.
62.	 True Velocity of a Jet    In what direction should the pilot in 
Exercise 60 head the plane for the true course to be due north?
63.	 Velocity of a Boat    A straight river ﬂows east at a speed of 
10 mi/h. A boater starts at the south shore of the river and 
heads in a direction 60 from the shore (see the ﬁgure). The 
motorboat has a speed of 20 mi/h relative to the water.
(a)	 Express the velocity of the river as a vector in compo-
nent form.
(b)	 Express the velocity of the motorboat relative to the  
water as a vector in component form.
(c)	 Find the true velocity of the motorboat.
(d)	 Find the true speed and direction of the motorboat.
60*
N
64.	 Velocity of a Boat    The boater in Exercise 63 wants to  
arrive at a point on the north shore of the river directly  
opposite the starting point. In what direction should the  
boat be headed?
65.	 Velocity of a Boat    A boat heads in the direction N 72 E. The 
speed of the boat relative to the water is 24 mi/h. The water is 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.2  ■  The Dot Product  639
ﬂowing directly south. It is observed that the true direction of 
the boat is directly east.
(a)	 Express the velocity of the boat relative to the water as a 
vector in component form.
(b)	 Find the speed of the water and the true speed of the boat.
66.	 Velocity    A woman walks due west on the deck of an ocean 
liner at 2 mi/h. The ocean liner is moving due north at a 
speed of 25 mi/h. Find the speed and direction of the woman 
relative to the surface of the water.
67–72  ■  Equilibrium of Forces    The forces F1, F2, . . . , Fn  
acting at the same point P are said to be in equilibrium if the  
resultant force is zero, that is, if F1  F2  . . .  Fn  0. Find  
(a) the resultant forces acting at P, and (b) the additional force 
required (if any) for the forces to be in equilibrium.
67.	 F1  2, 5,    F2  3, 8
68.	 F1  3, 7,    F2  4, 2,    F3  7, 9
69.	 F1  4 i  j,    F2  3 i  7 j,    F3  8i  3j,     
F4  i  j
70.	 F1  i  j,    F2  i  j,    F3  2 i  j
71.	
y
x
0
10
60*
8
6
30*
20*
F⁄
F¤
F‹
72.	
y
x
P
0
F¤
F‹
F⁄
F›
1
3
5
2
4
73.	 Equilibrium of Tensions    A 100-lb weight hangs from a 
string as shown in the ﬁgure. Find the tensions T1 and T2 in 
the string.
100
50*
30*
T⁄
T¤
74.	 Equilibrium of Tensions    The cranes in the ﬁgure are lifting 
an object that weighs 18,278 lb. Find the tensions T1 and T2.
41.5*
22.3*
T2
T1
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
75.	 DISCUSS:  Vectors That Form a Polygon    Suppose that n vec-
tors can be placed head to tail in the plane so that they form a 
polygon. (The ﬁgure shows the case of a hexagon.) Explain 
why the sum of these vectors is 0.
9.2  The Dot Product
■  The Dot Product of Vectors  ■  The Component of u along v  ■  The Projection of u  
onto v  ■  Work
In this section we deﬁne an operation on vectors called the dot product. This con- 
cept is especially useful in calculus and in applications of vectors to physics and  
engineering.
■  The Dot Product of Vectors
We begin by deﬁning the dot product of two vectors.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

640 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
DeFInition of the Dot Product
If u 8a1, a29 and v 8b1, b29 are vectors, then their dot product, denoted by 
u # v, is defined by 
u # v a1b1 a2b2
Thus to ﬁnd the dot product of u and v, we multiply corresponding components and 
add. The dot product is not a vector; it is a real number, or scalar.
Example 1  ■  Calculating Dot Products
(a)	 If u  3, 2 and v  4, 5 then
u # v 132 142 122 152 2
(b)	 If u  2 i  j and v  5 i  6 j, then
u # v 122 152 112 162 4
Now Try Exercises 5(a) and 11(a)	
■
The proofs of the following properties of the dot product follow easily from the 
deﬁnition.
Properties of the Dot Product
1.	 u # v v # u
2.	 1cu2 # v c1u # v2 u # 1cv2
3.	 1u v2 # w u # w v # w
4.	 0  u 0 2 u # u
Proof    We prove only the last property. The proofs of the others are left as exercises. 
Let u 8a1, a29. Then
	
u # u a1a1 a2a2 a2
1 a2
2 0  u 0 2
■
Let u and v be vectors, and sketch them with initial points at the origin. We deﬁne 
the angle u between u and v to be the smaller of the angles formed by these represen-
tations of u and v (see Figure 1). Thus 0  u  p. The next theorem relates the angle 
between two vectors to their dot product.
The Dot Product Theorem
If u is the angle between two nonzero vectors u and v, then
u # v 0  u 0 0  v 0  cos u
Proof    Applying the Law of Cosines to triangle AOB in Figure 2 gives
0  u v 0 2 0  u 0 2 0  v 0 2 2 0  u 0 0  v 0  cos u
y
x
0
v
u
¨
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.2  ■  The Dot Product  641
Using the properties of the dot product, we write the left-hand side as follows:
 0  u v 0 2 1u v2 # 1u v2
  u # u u # v v # u v # v
  0  u 0 2 21u # v2 0  v 0 2
Equating the right-hand sides of the displayed equations, we get
 0  u 0 2 21u # v2 0  v 0 2 0  u 0 2 0  v 0 2 2 0  u 0 0  v 0  cos u
 21u # v2 2 0  u 0 0  v 0  cos u
 u # v 0  u 0 0  v 0  cos u
This proves the theorem.
■
The Dot Product Theorem is useful because it allows us to ﬁnd the angle between two 
vectors if we know the components of the vectors. The angle is obtained simply by solving 
the equation in the Dot Product Theorem for cos u. We state this important result explicitly.
Angle between Two Vectors
If u is the angle between two nonzero vectors u and v, then
cos u 
u # v
0  u 0 0  v 0
Example 2  ■  Finding the Angle Between Two Vectors
Find the angle between the vectors u  2, 5 and v  4, 3.
Solution    By the formula for the angle between two vectors we have
cos u 
u # v
0  u 0 0  v 0 
122 142 152 132
!4 25 !16 9 
7
5 !29
Thus the angle between u and v is
u cos1 a
7
5 !29 b 105.1°
Now Try Exercises 5(b) and 11(b)	
■
Two nonzero vectors u and v are called perpendicular, or orthogonal, if the angle 
between them is p/2. The following theorem shows that we can determine whether two 
vectors are perpendicular by ﬁnding their dot product.
Orthogonal Vectors
Two nonzero vectors u and v are perpendicular if and only if u  v  0.
Proof    If u and v are perpendicular, then the angle between them is p/2, so
u # v 0  u 0 0  v 0  cos p
2 0
Conversely, if u  v  0, then
0  u 0 0  v 0  cos u 0
Since u and v are nonzero vectors, we conclude that cos u  0, so u  p/2. Thus u 
and v are orthogonal.
■
y
x
0
v
u
¨
u-v
B
A
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

642 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
Example 3  ■  Checking Whether Two Vectors Are Perpendicular
Determine whether the vectors in each pair are perpendicular.
(a)	 u  3, 5 and v  2, 8            (b)  u  2, 1 and v  1, 2
Solution
(a)	 u # v 132 122 152 182 34 ? 0, so u and v are not perpendicular.
(b)	 u # v 122 112 112 122 0, so u and v are perpendicular.
Now Try Exercises 15 and 17	
■
■  The Component of u along v
The component of u along v (also called the component of u in the direction of v or 
the scalar projection of u onto v) is deﬁned to be
0  u 0  cos u
where u is the angle between u and v. Figure 3 gives a geometric interpretation of this 
concept. Intuitively, the component of u along v is the magnitude of the portion of u 
that points in the direction of v. Notice that the component of u along v is negative if 
p/2  u  p.
v
u
¨
|u| 
v
u
¨
|u| cos ¨
cos ¨
Figure 3
In analyzing forces in physics and engineering, it’s often helpful to express a vector 
as a sum of two vectors lying in perpendicular directions. For example, suppose a car 
is parked on an inclined driveway as in Figure 4. The weight of the car is a vector w 
that points directly downward. We can write
w u v
where u is parallel to the driveway and v is perpendicular to the driveway. The vector u 
is the force that tends to roll the car down the driveway, and v is the force experienced 
by the surface of the driveway. The magnitudes of these forces are the compo­nents of w 
along u and v, respectively.
u
w
v
u
w
v
u
w
v
w
Figure 4
Example 4  ■  Resolving a Force into Components
A car weighing 3000 lb is parked on a driveway that is inclined 15 to the hori­zontal, 
as shown in Figure 5.
(a)	 Find the magnitude of the force required to prevent the car from rolling down the 
driveway.
Note that the component of u along v 
is a scalar, not a vector.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.2  ■  The Dot Product  643
(b)	 Find the magnitude of the force experienced by the driveway due to the weight of 
the car.
Solution    The car exerts a force w of 3000 lb directly downward. We resolve w into 
the sum of two vectors u and v, one parallel to the surface of the driveway and the 
other perpendicular to it, as shown in Figure 5.
(a)	 The magnitude of the part of the force w that causes the car to roll down the 
driveway is
0  u 0 component of w along u 3000 cos 75 ° 776
	 	 Thus the force needed to prevent the car from rolling down the driveway is about 
776 lb.
(b)	 The magnitude of the force exerted by the car on the driveway is
0  v 0 component of w along v 3000 cos 15 ° 2898
	 	 The force experienced by the driveway is about 2898 lb.
Now Try Exercise 49	
■
The component of u along v can be computed by using dot products:
0  u 0  cos u 
0  v 0 0  u 0  cos u
0  v 0
u # v
0  v 0
We have shown the following.
The component of u along v
The component of u along v (or the scalar projection of u onto v) is 
compv u u # v
0  v 0
Example 5  ■  Finding Components
Let u  1, 4 and v  2, 1. Find the component of u along v.
Solution    From the formula for the component of u along v we have
compv u u # v
0  v 0 
112 122 142 112
!4 1

2
!5
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
■  The Projection of u onto v
Figure 6 shows representations of the vectors u and v. The projection of u onto v, de-
noted by projv u, is the vector parallel to v and whose length is the component of u 
along v as shown in Figure 6. To ﬁnd an expression for projv u, we ﬁrst ﬁnd a unit vec-
tor in the direction of v and then multiply it by the component of u along v:
 projv u 1component of u along v2 1unit vector in direction of v2
  a u # v
0  v 0 b  v
0  v 0 a u # v
0  v 0 2 b v
We often need to resolve a vector u into the sum of two vectors, one parallel to v and 
one orthogonal to v. That is, we want to write u  u1  u2, where u1 is parallel to v and 
u2 is orthogonal to v. In this case, u1  projv u and u2  u  projv u (see Exercise 43).
u
15*
15*
75*
w
v
Figure 5
v
u
v
u
projv u
projv u
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

644 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
the vector projection of u onto v
The projection of u onto v is the vector projv u given by
projv u a u # v
0  v 0 2 b v
If the vector u is resolved into u1 and u2, where u1 is parallel to v and u2 is 
orthogonal to v, then
u1 projv u  and  u2 u projv u
Example 6  ■  Resolving a Vector into Orthogonal Vectors
Let u  2, 9 and v  1, 2.
(a)	 Find projv u.
(b)	 Resolve u into u1 and u2, where u1 is parallel to v and u2 is orthogonal to v.
Solution
(a)	 By the formula for the projection of one vector onto another we have
 projv u a u # v
0 v 0 2 b v
       
Formula for projection
  a
82,  99 # 81,  29
112 2 22
b 81,  29
       
Deﬁnition of u and v
  481,  29 84,  89
(b)	 By the formula in the preceding box we have u  u1  u2, where
 u1 projv u 84,  89
        From part (a)
 u2 u projv u 82,  99 84,  89 82,  19
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
■  Work
One use of the dot product occurs in calculating work. In everyday use, the term work 
means the total amount of effort required to perform a task. In physics, work has a tech-
nical meaning that conforms to this intuitive meaning. If a constant force of magnitude 
F moves an object through a distance d along a straight line, then the work done is
W Fd  or  work force 3 distance
If F is measured in pounds and d in feet, then the unit of work is a foot-pound (ft-lb). 
For example, how much work is done in lifting a 20-lb weight 6 ft off the ground? Since 
a force of 20 lb is required to lift this weight and since the weight moves through a 
distance of 6 ft, the amount of work done is
W Fd 1202 162 120 ft-lb
This formula applies only when the force is directed along the direction of motion. In 
the general case, if the force F moves an object from P to Q, as in Figure 7, then only 
the component of the force in the direction of D PQ
>
 affects the object. Thus the ef-
fective magnitude of the force on the object is
compD F 0  F 0  cos u
So the work done is
W force 3 distance 1 0  F 0  cos u2 0  D 0 0  F 0 0  D 0  cos u F # D
Note that the projection of u onto v is a 
vector, not a scalar.
F
¨
D
|F| cos ¨
R
P
Q
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.2  ■  The Dot Product  645
We have derived the following simple formula for calculating work.
Work
The work W done by a force F in moving along a vector D is
W F # D
Example 7  ■  Calculating Work
A force is given by the vector F  2, 3 and moves an object from the point 11,  32  to 
the point 15,  92 . Find the work done.
Solution    The displacement vector is
D 85 1,  9 39 84,  69
So the work done is
W F # D 82,  39 # 84,  69 26
If the unit of force is pounds and the distance is measured in feet, then the work done 
is 26 ft-lb.
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
Example 8  ■  Calculating Work
A man pulls a wagon horizontally by exerting a force of 20 lb on the handle. If the 
handle makes an angle of 60 with the horizontal, ﬁnd the work done in moving the 
wagon 100 ft.
Solution    We choose a coordinate system with the origin at the initial position of 
the wagon (see Figure 8). That is, the wagon moves from the point P10,  02  to the 
point Q1100,  02 . The vector that represents this displacement is
D 100i
The force on the handle can be written in terms of components (see Section 9.1) as
F 120 cos 602i 120 sin 602j 10i 10!3j
Thus the work done is
W F # D 110i 10!3j2 # 1100i2 1000 ft-lb
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
Q(100, 0)
y
x
P(0, 0)
60*
Figure 8
Discovery Project
Sailing Against the Wind
Sailors depend on the wind to propel their boats. But what if the wind is blow-
ing in a direction opposite to that in which they want to travel? Although it is 
impossible to sail directly against the wind, it is possible to sail at an angle into 
the wind so that the sailboat can make headway against the wind. In this project 
we discover how vectors that model the sail, the keel, and the wind can be com-
bined to find the direction in which the boat will move. You can find the project 
at www.stewartmath.com.
James L. Amos/SuperStock
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

646 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
Concepts
1–2  ■  Let u 8a1, a29 and v 8b1, b29 be nonzero vectors in the 
plane, and let u be the angle between them.
	 1.	 The dot product of u and v is defined by 
u # v 
 
	 	 The dot product of two vectors is a  
  , not a 
vector.
	 2.	 The angle u satisfies
cos u             
               
	 	 So if u # v 0, the vectors are  
  .
	 3.	 (a)	 The component of u along v is the scalar 0  u 0  cos u  
and can be expressed in terms of the dot product as 
	 	 	
compv u 5  
  . Sketch this component in 
the figure below.
	 	 (b)	 The projection of u onto v is the vector 
	 	 	
projv u  
  . Sketch this projection  
	
in the figure below.
u
v
¨
	 4.	 The work done by a force F in moving an object along a 
	 	 vector D is W   
  .
Skills
5–14  ■  Dot Products and Angles Between Vectors    Find  
(a) u  v and (b) the angle between u and v to the nearest degree.
	 5.	 u  2, 0,    v  1, 1
	 6.	 u i !3 j, v !3 i j
	 7.	 u  2, 7,    v  3, 1
	 8.	 u  6, 6,    v  1, 1
	 9.	 u  3, 2,    v  1, 2
	10.	 u  2i  j,    v  3 i  2 j
	11.	 u 5 j, v i !3 j
	12.	 u  i  j,    v  i  j
13.	 u i 3 j,    v 4 i j
14.	 u 3 i 4 j,    v 2 i j
15–20  ■  Perpendicular Vectors?    Determine whether the given 
vectors are perpendicular.
15.	 u  6, 4,    v  2, 3	
16.	 u  0, 5,    v  4, 0
	17.	 u  2, 6,    v  4, 2	
18. 	u  2 i,    v  7j
19.	 u  2i  8j,    v  12i  3j
20.	 u  4i,    v  i  3j
21–24  ■  Dot Products    Find the indicated quantity, assuming 
that u  2i  j, v  i  3j, and w  3i  4j.
21.	 u  v  u  w	
22.	 u # 1v w2
23.	 1u v2 # 1u v2 	
24.	 1u # v2 1u # w2
25–28  ■  The Component of u along v    Find the component of u 
along v.
25.	 u  4, 6,    v  3, 4
26.	 u 83,  59, v 81/ !2,  1/ !29
27.	 u  7i  24j,    v  j
28.	 u  7i,    v  8i  6j
29–34  ■  Vector Projection of u onto v    (a) Calculate projv u.  
(b) Resolve u into u1 and u2, where u1 is parallel to v and u2 is 
orthogonal to v.
29.	 u  2, 4,    v  1, 1
30.	 u  7, 4,    v  2, 1
31.	 u  1, 2,    v  1, 3
32.	 u  11, 3,    v  3, 2
33.	 u  2, 9,    v  3, 4
34.	 u  1, 1,    v  2, 1
35–38  ■  Calculating Work    Find the work done by the force F 
in moving an object from P to Q.
35.	 F  4i  5j;    P10,  02, Q13,  82
36.	 F  400i  50j;    P11,  12, Q1200,  12
37.	 F  10i  3j;    P12,  32, Q16,  22
38.	 F  4i  20j;    P10, 102, Q15, 252
Skills Plus
39–42  ■  Properties of Vectors    Let u, v, and w be vectors, and 
let c be a scalar. Prove the given property.
39.	 u  v  v  u
40.	 1cu2 # v c1u # v2 u # 1cv2
41.	 1u v2 # w u # w v # w
42.	 1u v2 # 1u v2 0  u 0 2 0  v 0 2
43.	 Projection    Show that projv u and u  projv u are orthogonal.
44.	 Projection    Evaluate v  projv u.
Applications
45.	 Work    The force F  4i  7j moves an object 4 ft along 
the x-axis in the positive direction. Find the work done if the 
unit of force is the pound.
9.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.3  ■  Three-Dimensional Coordinate Geometry  647
46.	 Work    A constant force F  2, 8 moves an object along a 
straight line from the point 12,  52  to the point 111,  132 . Find 
the work done if the distance is measured in feet and the 
force is measured in pounds.
47.	 Work    A lawn mower is pushed a distance of 200 ft along a 
horizontal path by a constant force of 50 lb. The handle of 
the lawn mower is held at an angle of 30 from the horizontal 
(see the ﬁgure). Find the work done.
30*
48.	 Work    A car drives 500 ft on a road that is inclined 12 to 
the horizontal, as shown in the following ﬁgure. The car 
weighs 2500 lb. Thus gravity acts straight down on the car 
with a constant force F  2500 j. Find the work done by 
the car in overcoming gravity.
12*
_2500j
49.	 Force    A car is on a driveway that is inclined 10 to the hori-
zontal. A force of 490 lb is required to keep the car from roll-
ing down the driveway.
(a)	 Find the weight of the car.
(b)	 Find the force the car exerts against the driveway.
50.	 Force    A car is on a driveway that is inclined 25 to the hori-
zontal. If the car weighs 2755 lb, ﬁnd the force required to 
keep it from rolling down the driveway.
51.	 Force    A package that weighs 200 lb is placed on an  
inclined plane. If a force of 80 lb is just sufﬁcient to keep the 
package from sliding, ﬁnd the angle of inclination of  
the plane. (Ignore the effects of friction.)
52.	 Force    A cart weighing 40 lb is placed on a ramp inclined at 
15 to the horizontal. The cart is held in place by a rope 
inclined at 60 to the horizontal, as shown in the ﬁgure. Find 
the force that the rope must exert on the cart to keep it from 
rolling down the ramp.
15*
60*
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
53.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER  ■  WRITE: 
Distance from a Point to 
a Line    Let L be the line 2x  4y  8, and let P be the point 
13,  42 .
(a)	 Show that the points Q10,  22  and R12,  12  lie on L.
(b)	 Let u QP
>
 and v QR
>
, as shown in the ﬁgure. Find  
w  projv u.
(c)	 Sketch a graph that explains why 0  u w 0  is the dis-
tance from P to L. Find this distance.
(d)	 Write a short paragraph describing the steps you would 
take to ﬁnd the distance from a given point to a given 
line.
y
x
P
0
u
v
Q
R
L
9.3  Three-Dimensional Coordinate Geometry
■  The Three-Dimensional Rectangular Coordinate System  ■  Distance Formula in Three 
Dimensions  ■  The Equation of a Sphere
To locate a point in a plane, two numbers are necessary. We know that any point in the 
Cartesian plane can be represented as an ordered pair 1a, b2 of real numbers, where a is 
the x-coordinate and b is the y-coordinate. In three-dimensional space, a third dimen-
sion is added, so any point in space is represented by an ordered triple 1a, b, c2 of real  
numbers. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

648 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
■  The Three-Dimensional Rectangular Coordinate 
System
To represent points in space, we first choose a fixed point O (the origin) and three di-
rected lines through O that are perpendicular to each other, called the coordinate axes 
and labeled the x-axis, y-axis, and z-axis. Usually we think of the x- and y-axes as being 
horizontal and the z-axis as being vertical, and we draw the orientation of the axes as in 
Figure 1. 
The three coordinate axes determine the three coordinate planes illustrated in Fig-
ure 2(a). The xy-plane is the plane that contains the x- and y-axes; the yz-plane is the 
plane that contains the y- and z-axes; the xz-plane is the plane that contains the x- and 
z-axes. These three coordinate planes divide space into eight parts, called octants. 
(b) Coordinate “walls”
z
right wall
left wall
y
x
floor
0
(a) Coordinate planes
yz-plane
xy-plane
xz-plane
0
x
z
y
Figure 2
Because people often have difficulty visualizing diagrams of three-dimensional fig-
ures, you may find it helpful to do the following (see Figure 2(b)). Look at any bottom 
corner of a room and call the corner the origin. The wall on your left is in the xz-plane, 
the wall on your right is in the yz-plane, and the floor is in the xy-plane. The x-axis runs 
along the intersection of the floor and the left wall; the y-axis runs along the intersection 
of the floor and the right wall. The z-axis runs up from the floor toward the ceiling along 
the intersection of the two walls.
Now any point P in space can be located by a unique ordered triple of real numbers 
1a, b, c2 , as shown in Figure 3. The first number a is the x-coordinate of P, the second 
number b is the y-coordinate of P, and the third number c is the z-coordinate of P. The 
set of all ordered triples 51x, y, z2  0  x, y, z [ R6 forms the three-dimensional rectan-
gular coordinate system. 
Example 1  ■  Plotting Points in Three Dimensions 
Plot the points 12, 4, 72  and 14, 3, 52 .
Solution    The points are plotted in Figure 4. 
_5
0
0
4
(2, 4, 7)
7
2
(_4, 3, _5)
3
_4
y
x
z
y
x
z
Figure 4
Now Try Exercise 3(a)	
■
y
x
O
z
Figure 1  Coordinate axes
O
b
a
c
P(a, b, c)
y
x
z
Figure 3  Point P1a, b, c2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.3  ■  Three-Dimensional Coordinate Geometry  649
In two-dimensional geometry the graph of an equation involving x and y is a curve 
in the plane. In three-dimensional geometry an equation in x, y, and z represents a sur-
face in space.
Example 2  ■  Surfaces in Three-Dimensional Space 
Describe and sketch the surfaces represented by the following equations:
(a)	 z 3                    (b)  y 5 
Solution 
(a)	 The surface consists of the points P1x, y, z2 where the z-coordinate is 3. This is the 
horizontal plane that is parallel to the xy-plane and three units above it, as in Figure 5.
(b)	 The surface consists of the points P1x, y, z2  where the y-coordinate is 5. This is 
the vertical plane that is parallel to the xz-plane and five units to the right of it, as 
in Figure 6.
Figure 5  The plane z 3
Figure 6  The plane y 5
0
3
y
z
x
0
5
y
z
x
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
■  Distance Formula in Three Dimensions
The familiar formula for the distance between two points in a plane is easily extended 
to the following three-dimensional formula.
Distance Formula in Three Dimensions
The distance between the points P1x1, y1, z12  and Q1x2, y2, z22  is 
d1P, Q2 "1x2 x12 2 1
 y2 y12 2 1z2 z12 2
Proof    To prove this formula, we construct a rectangular box as in Figure 7, where 
P1x1, y1, z12  and Q1x2, y2, z22  are diagonally opposite vertices and the faces of the box 
are parallel to the coordinate planes. If A and B are the vertices of the box that are in-
dicated in the figure, then
d1P, A2 0  x2 x1 0         d1A, B2 0  y2 y1 0         d1Q, B2 0  z2 z1 0
Triangles PAB and PBQ are right triangles, so by the Pythagorean Theorem we have
 1d1P, Q22 2 1d1P, B22 2 1d1Q, B22 2
 1d1P, B22 2 1d1P, A22 2 1d1A, B22 2
Combining these equations, we get
 1d1P, Q22 2 1d1P, A22 2 1d1A, B22 2 1d1Q, B22 2
 0  x2 x1 0 2 0  y2 y1 0 2 0  z2 z1 0 2
Therefore
	
d1P, Q2 "1x2 x12 2 1y2 y12 2 1z2 z12 2
■
0
z
y
P(x⁄, y⁄, z⁄)
Q(x¤, y¤, z¤)
A(x¤, y⁄, z⁄)
B(x¤, y¤, z⁄)
x
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

650 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
Example 3  ■  Using the Distance Formula 
Find the distance between the points P12, 1, 72  and Q11, 3, 52 . 
Solution    We use the Distance Formula:
d1P, Q2 "11 22 2 13 1122 2 15 72 2 !1 4 4 3
Now Try Exercise 3(b)	
■
■  The Equation of a Sphere
We can use the Distance Formula to find an equation for a sphere in a three-dimensional  
coordinate space.
Equation of a Sphere
An equation of a sphere with center C1h, k, l2  and radius r is 
1x h2 2 1
 y k2 2 1z l2 2 r2
Proof    A sphere with radius r is the set of all points P1x, y, z2  whose distance from 
the center C is the constant r (see Figure 8). By the Distance Formula we have
3d1P, C2 4 2 1x h2 2 1 y k2 2 1z l2 2
Since the distance d1P, C2  is equal to r, we get the desired formula.	
■
Example 4  ■  Finding the Equation of a Sphere 
Find an equation of a sphere with radius 5 and center C12, 1, 32 . 
Solution    We use the general equation of a sphere, with r 5, h 2, k 1, and 
l 3:
1x 22 2 1 y 12 2 1z 32 2 25
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
Example 5  ■  Finding the Center and Radius of a Sphere 
Show that x2 y2 z2 4x 6y 2z 6 0 is the equation of a sphere, and 
find its center and radius.
Solution    We complete the squares in the x-, y-, and z-terms to rewrite the given 
equation in the form of an equation of a sphere.
 x2 y2 z2 4x 6y 2z 6 0
    Given equation
 1x2 4x 42 1y2 6y 92 1z2 2z 12 6 4 9 1    Complete squares
 1x 22 2 1 y 32 2 1z 12 2 8
    Factor into squares
Comparing this with the standard equation of a sphere, we can see that the center is 
12, 3, 12  and the radius is !8 2!2.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
0
z
x
y
r
P(x, y, z)
C(h, k, l)
Figure 8  Sphere with radius r and 
center C1h, k, l2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.3  ■  Three-Dimensional Coordinate Geometry  651
The intersection of a sphere with a plane is called the trace of the sphere in the 
plane. 
Example 6  ■  Finding the Trace of a Sphere 
Describe the trace of the sphere 1x 22 2 1 y 42 2 1z 52 2 36 in  
(a) the xy-plane and (b) the plane z 9.
Solution 
(a)	 In the xy-plane the z-coordinate is 0. So the trace of the sphere in the xy-plane 
consists of all the points on the sphere whose z-coordinate is 0. We replace z by 0 
in the equation of the sphere and get
 1x 22 2 1y 42 2 10 52 2 36        Replace z by 0
 1x 22 2 1 y 42 2 25 36        Calculate
 1x 22 2 1y 42 2 11        Subtract 25
	 	 Thus the trace of the sphere is the circle 
1x 22 2 1 y 42 2 11        z 0
	 	 which is a circle of radius !11 that is in the xy-plane, centered at 12, 4, 02  (see 
Figure 9(a)).
(b)	 The trace of the sphere in the plane z 9 consists of all the points on the sphere 
whose z-coordinate is 9. So we replace z by 9 in the equation of the sphere and 
get
 1x 22 2 1 y 42 2 19 52 2 36        Replace z by 0
 1x 22 2 1 y 42 2 16 36        Calculate
 1x 22 2 1 y 42 2 20        Subtract 16
	 	 Thus the trace of the sphere is the circle 
1x 22 2 1 y 42 2 20        z 9
	 	 which is a circle of radius !20 that is 9 units above the xy-plane, centered at 
12, 4, 92  (see Figure 9(b)).
0
(x-2)2+(y-4)2=11, z=0
(a)
(b)
0
(x-2)2+(y-4)2=20, z=9
z=9
z=0
z
y
x
z
y
x
Figure 9  The trace of a sphere in the planes z 0 and z 9
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

652 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
Concepts
1–2  ■  Refer to the figure.
0
2
3
5
P
	 1.	 In a three-dimensional coordinate system the three mutually 
	 	 perpendicular axes are called the  
-axis, the  
-axis, and 
	 	 the  
-axis. Label the axes in the figure. The point P in the 
figure has coordinates 1
, 
, 
2. The equation of the 
plane passing through P and parallel to the xz-plane is 
	 	
 
  .
	 2.	 The distance between the point P1x1, y1, z12  and Q1x2, y2, z22   
	 	 is given by the formula d1P, Q2 
 
  .  
The distance between the point P in the figure and the origin  
	 	 is  
  . The equation of the sphere centered at P 
	 	 with radius 3 is  
  .
Skills
3–6  ■  Plotting Points and Finding Distance in Three Dimensions   
Two points P and Q are given. (a) Plot P and Q. (b) Find the  
distance between P and Q.
	 3.	 P13, 1, 02 , 
Q11, 2, 52 	
	 4.	 P15, 0, 102 , 
Q13, 6, 72
	 5.	 P12, 1, 02 , 
Q112, 3, 02 	
	 6.	 P15, 4, 62 , 
Q18, 7, 42
7–10  ■  Surfaces in Three Dimensions    Describe and sketch the 
surface represented by the given equation.
	 7.	 x 4	
  8.	 y 2
	 9.	 z 8	
10.	 y 1	
11–14  ■  Equation of a Sphere    Find an equation of a sphere 
with the given radius r and center C.
11.	 r 5;    C12, 5, 32
	12.	 r 3;    C11, 4, 72
13.	 r !6;    C13, 1, 02
	14.	 r !11;    C110, 0, 12
15–18  ■  Center and Radius of a Sphere    Show that the equation 
represents a sphere, and find its center and radius.
15.	 x2 y2 z2 10x 2y 8z 9
16.	 x2 y2 z2 4x 6y 2z 10
17.	 x2 y2 z2 12x 2y	
18.	 x2 y2 z2 14y 6z	
19–20  ■  Trace of a Sphere    In these exercises we find the trace 
of a sphere in a plane.
19.	 Describe the trace of the sphere 
1x 12 2 1 y 22 2 1z 102 2 100 
	 	 (a) in the yz-plane and (b) in the plane x 4.
20.	 Describe the trace of the sphere 
x2 1 y 42 2 1z 32 2 144 
	 	 (a) in the xz-plane and (b) in the plane z 2.
Applications
21.	 Spherical Water Tank    A water tank is in the shape of a 
sphere of radius 5 ft. The tank is supported on a metal circle 
4 ft below the center of the sphere, as shown in the figure. 
Find the radius of the metal circle.
5 ft
22.	 A Spherical Buoy    A spherical buoy of radius 2 ft floats in a 
calm lake. Six inches of the buoy are submerged. Place a 
coordinate system with the origin at the center of the sphere.
(a)	 Find an equation of the sphere. 
(b)	 Find an equation of the circle formed at the waterline of 
the buoy.
2 ft
9.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.4  ■  Vectors in Three Dimensions  653
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
23.	 DISCUSS:  Visualizing a Set in Space    Try to visualize the set 
of all points 1x, y, z2  in a coordinate space that are equidis-
tant from the points P10, 0, 02  and Q10, 3, 02 . Use the Dis-
tance Formula to find an equation for this surface, and 
observe that it is a plane.
24.	 DISCUSS:  Visualizing a Set in Space    Try to visualize the set 
of all points 1x, y, z2  in a coordinate space that are twice as 
far from the points Q10, 3, 02  as from the point P10, 0, 02 . 
Use the Distance Formula to show that the set is a sphere, 
and find its center and radius.
9.4  Vectors in Three Dimensions
■  Vectors in Space  ■  Combining Vectors in Space  ■  The Dot Product for Vectors  
in Space  ■  Direction Angles of a Vector
Recall that vectors are used to indicate a quantity that has both magnitude and direction. 
In Section 9.1 we studied vectors in the coordinate plane, where the direction is re-
stricted to two dimensions. Vectors in space have a direction that is in three-dimensional 
space. The properties that hold for vectors in the plane hold for vectors in space as well. 
■  Vectors in Space
Recall from Section 9.1 that a vector can be described geometrically by its initial point 
and terminal point. When we place a vector v in space with its initial point at the origin, 
we can describe it algebraically as an ordered triple:
v 8a1, a2, a39
where a1, a2, and a3 are the components of v (see Figure 1). Recall also that a vector has 
many different representations, depending on its initial point. The following definition 
gives the relationship between the algebraic and geometric representations of a vector.
Component Form of a Vector in Space
If a vector v is represented in space with initial point P1x1, y1, z12  and terminal 
point Q1x2, y2, z22 , then
v 8x2 x1, y2 y1, z2 z19
Example 1  ■  Describing Vectors in Component Form 
(a)	 Find the components of the vector v with initial point P11, 4, 52  and terminal 
point Q13, 1, 12 .
(b)	 If the vector w 82, 1, 39 has initial point 12, 1, 12, what is its terminal point? 
Solution 
(a)	 The desired vector is
v 83 1, 1 142, 1 59 82, 5, 69
	 	 See Figure 2.
(b)	 Let the terminal point of w be 1x, y, z2 . Then 
w 8x 2, y 1, z 112 9
	 	 Since w 82, 1, 39, we have x 2 2, y 1 1, and z 1 3. So 
x 0, y 2, and z 2, and the terminal point is 10, 2, 22 .
Now Try Exercises 3 and 7	
■
0
(a⁄, a¤, a‹)
v
z
y
x
Figure 1  v 8a1, a2, a39
0
(3, 1, _1)
(1, _4, 5)
v= 2, 5, _6

z
x
y
Figure 2  v 82, 5, 69
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

654 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
The following formula is a consequence of the Distance Formula, since the vector 
v 8a1, a2, a39 in standard position has initial point 10, 0, 02 and terminal point 1a1, a2, a32.
Magnitude of a Vector in Three Dimensions
The magnitude of the vector v 8a1, a2, a39 is 
0  v 0 "a2
1 a2
2 a2
3 
Example 2  ■  Magnitude of Vectors in Three Dimensions
Find the magnitude of the given vector.
(a)	 u 83, 2, 59        (b)  v 80, 3, 19        (c)  w 80, 0, 19
Solution 
(a)	 0  u 0 "32 22 52 !38
(b)	 0  v 0 "02 32 112 2 !10
(c)	 0  w 0 "02 02 112 2 1
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
■  Combining Vectors in Space
We now give definitions of the algebraic operations involving vectors in three dimensions.
Algebraic Operations on Vectors in Three Dimensions
If u 8a1, a2, a39, v 8b1, b2, b39, and c is a scalar, then
 u v 8a1 b1, a2 b2, a3 b39
 u v 8a1 b1, a2 b2, a3 b39
 cu 8ca1, ca2, ca39
 
Example 3  ■  Operations with Three-Dimensional Vectors 
If u 81, 2, 49 and v 86, 1, 19 find u v, u v, and 5 u 3 v.
Solution    Using the definitions of algebraic operations, we have
 u v 81 6, 2 1, 4 19 87, 3, 59
 u v 81 6, 2 112, 4 19 85, 1, 39
 5u 3v 581, 2, 49 386, 1, 19 85, 10, 209 818, 3, 39 813, 7, 179
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
Recall that a unit vector is a vector of length 1. The vector w in Example 2(c) is an 
example of a unit vector. Some other unit vectors in three dimensions are
i 81, 0, 09        j 80, 1, 09        k 80, 0, 19
as shown in Figure 3. Any vector in three dimensions can be written in terms of these 
three vectors (see Figure 4).
k
j
i
z
y
x
Figure 3
v
a⁄ i
a¤ j
a‹ k
(a⁄, a¤, a‹)
x
z
y
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.4  ■  Vectors in Three Dimensions  655
Expressing Vectors in Terms of i, j, and k
The vector v 8a1, a2, a39 can be expressed in terms of i, j, and k by 
v 8a1, a2, a39 a1 i a2 j a3 k
All the properties of vectors on page 633 in Section 9.1 hold for vectors in three 
dimensions as well. We use these properties in the next example.
Example 4  ■  Vectors in Terms of i, j, and k
(a)	 Write the vector u 85, 3, 69 in terms of i, j, and k.
(b)	 If u i 2j 3k and v 4i 7k, express the vector 2u 3v in terms of 
i, j, and k.
Solution 
(a)	 u 5i 132 j 6k 5i 3j 6k
(b)	 We use the properties of vectors to get the following:
 2u 3v 212i 2j 3k2 314i 7k2
 4i 4j 6k 12i 21k
 16i 4j 15k
Now Try Exercises 19 and 23	
■
■  The Dot Product for Vectors in Space
We define the dot product for vectors in three dimensions. All the properties of the dot 
product, including the Dot Product Theorem (page 640), hold for vectors in three  
dimensions. 
Definition of the Dot Product for Vectors in Three Dimensions
If u 8a1, a2, a39 and v 8b1, b2, b39 are vectors in three dimensions, then their 
dot product is defined by 
u # v a1b1 a2b2 a3b3
Example 5  ■  Calculating Dot Products for Vectors  
in Three Dimensions
Find the given dot product.
(a)	 81, 2, 39 # 86, 5, 19       
(b)  12i 3j k2 # 1i 2j 8k2
Solution 
(a)	 81, 2, 39 # 86, 5, 19 112 162 122 152 132 112 1
(b)	  12i 3j k2 # 1i 2j 8k2 82, 3, 19 # 81, 2, 89
	 	
 122 112 132 122 112 182 16
Now Try Exercises 25 and 27	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

656 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
Recall that the cosine of the angle between two vectors can be calculated by using 
the dot product (page 641). The same property holds for vectors in three dimensions. 
We restate this property here for emphasis.
Angle Between Two Vectors
Let u and v be vectors in space, and let u be the angle between them. Then
cos u 
u # v
0  u 0 0  v 0
In particular, u and v are perpendicular (or orthogonal) if and only if 
u # v 0.
Example 6  ■  Checking Whether Two Vectors Are Perpendicular
Show that the vector u 2 i 2 j k is perpendicular to 5 i 4 j 2 k.
Solution    We find the dot product.
12i 2j k2 # 15i 4j 2k2 122 152 122 142 112 122 0
Since the dot product is 0, the vectors are perpendicular. See Figure 5.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
■  Direction Angles of a Vector
The direction angles of a nonzero vector v a1 i a2 j a3 k are the angles a, b, 
and g in the interval 30, p4  that the vector v makes with the positive x-, y-, and z-axes 
(see Figure 6). The cosines of these angles, cos a, cos b, and cos g, are called the  
direction cosines of the vector v. By using the formula for the angle between two vec-
tors, we can find the direction cosines of v: 
cos a 
v # i
0  v 0 0  i 0 a1
0  v 0         cos b 
v # j
0  v 0 0  j 0 a2
0  v 0         cos g 
v # k
0  v 0 0  k 0 a3
0  v 0
Direction Angles of a Vector
If v a1 i a2 j a3 k is a nonzero vector in space, the direction angles a, b, 
and g satisfy
cos a a1
0  v 0         cos b a2
0  v 0         cos g a3
0  v 0
In particular, if 0  v 0 1, then the direction cosines of v are simply the compo-
nents of v. 
Example 7  ■  Finding the Direction Angles of a Vector
Find the direction angles of the vector v i 2 j 3 k.
Solution    The length of the vector v is 0  v 0 "12 22 32 !14. From the 
above box we get
cos a 
1
!14        cos b 
2
!14        cos g 
3
!14
v
a⁄



z
y
x
Figure 6  Direction angles of the 
vector v
u= 2, 2, _1

v= 5, _4, 2

z
y
x
Figure 5  The vectors u and v are 
perpendicular.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.4  ■  Vectors in Three Dimensions  657
Since the direction angles are in the interval 30, p4  and since cos1 gives angles in 
that same interval, we get a, b, and g by simply taking cos1 of the above equations.
a cos1
 1
!14 74   
b cos1
 2
!14 58   
g cos1
 3
!14 37
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
The direction angles of a vector uniquely determine its direction but not its length. 
If we also know the length of the vector v, the expressions for the direction cosines of 
v allow us to express the vector as
v 8 0  v 0 cos a, 0  v 0 cos b, 0  v 0 cos g9
From this we get 
 v 0  v 0 8cos a, cos b, cos g9
 v
0  v 0 8cos a, cos b, cos g9
Since v/ 0  v 0  is a unit vector, we get the following.
Property of Direction Cosines
The direction angles a, b, and g of a nonzero vector v in space satisfy the fol-
lowing equation:
cos2
 a cos2
 b cos2
 g 1
This property indicates that if we know two of the direction cosines of a vector, we 
can find the third up to its sign. 
Example 8  ■  Finding the Direction Angles of a Vector
A vector makes an angle a p/3 with the positive x-axis and an angle b 3p/4 
with the positive y-axis. Find the angle g that the vector makes with the positive 
z-axis, given that g is an obtuse angle.
Solution    By the property of the direction angles we have 
 cos2
 a cos2
 b cos2
 g 1
 cos2 p
3 cos2 3p
4 cos2
 g 1
 a 1
2 b
2
a 1
!2 b
2
cos2
 g 1
 cos2
 g 1
4
 cos g 1
2         or         cos g  1
2
 g p
3        or       
 g 2p
3
Since we require g to be an obtuse angle, we conclude that g 2p/3.
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
An angle u is acute if 0 u p/2 
and is obtuse if p/2 u p.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

658 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
Concepts
	 1.	 A vector in three dimensions can be written in either of two 
forms: in coordinate form as v 8a1, a2, a39 and in terms of 
	 	 the  
 vectors i, j, and k as v 
 
  . 
	 	 The magnitude of the vector v is 0  v 0 
 
  . 
	 	 So 84, 2, 49 
i 
j 
k and 
	 	 7 j 24 k 8
, 
, 
9.
	 2.	 The angle u between the vectors u and v satisfies 
	 	 cos u            
            . So if u and v are perpendicular, then 
	 	 u # v 
 
  . If u 84, 5, 69 and v 83, 0, 29 then 
	 	 u # v 
 
  , so u and v are  
  .
Skills
3–6  ■  Vectors in Component Form    Find the vector v with ini-
tial point P and terminal point Q.
	 3.	 P11, 1, 02 , 
Q10, 2, 52
	  4.	 P11, 2, 12 , 
Q13, 1, 22
	 5.	 P16, 1, 02 , 
Q10, 3, 02
	  6.	 P11, 1, 12 , 
Q10, 0, 12
7–10  ■  Terminal Point of a Vector    If the vector v has initial 
point P, what is its terminal point?
	 7.	 v 83, 4, 29, P12, 0, 12 	
	 8.	 v 80, 0, 19, P10, 1, 12
	 9.	 v 82, 0, 29, P13, 0, 32 	
10.	 v 823, 5, 129, P16, 4, 22 	
11–14  ■  Magnitude of a Vector    Find the magnitude of the 
given vector.
11.	 82, 1, 29	
12.	 85, 0, 129
13.	 83, 5, 49	
14.	 81, 6, 2"29
15–18  ■  Operations with Vectors    Find the vectors u v, 
u v, and 3 u 1
2 v.
15.	 u 82, 7, 39, v 80, 4, 19
16.	 u 80, 1, 39, v 84, 2, 09
17.	 u i j, v j 2 k
18.	 u 8a, 2b, 3c9, v 84a, b, 2c9
19–22  ■  Writing Vectors in Terms of i, j, and k    Express the 
given vector in terms of the unit vectors i, j, and k.
19.	 812, 0, 29	
20.	 80, 3, 59
21.	 83, 3, 09	
22.	 8a, 1
3  a, 49
23–24  ■  Operations with Vectors    Two vectors u and v are 
given. Express the vector 2 u 3 v (a) in component form 
8a1, a2, a39 and (b) in terms of the unit vectors i, j, and k.
23.	 u 80, 2, 19, v 81, 1, 09	
24.	 u 83, 1, 09, v 83, 0, 59
25–28  ■  Dot Products    Two vectors u and v are given. Find 
their dot product u # v.
25.	 u 82, 5, 09, v 8 1
2, 1, 109	
26.	 u 83, 0, 49, v 82, 4, 1
29
27.	 u 6 i 4 j 2 k, v 5
6 i 3
2 j k
28.	 u 3 j 2 k, v 5
6 i 5
3 j
29–32  ■  Perpendicular Vectors?    Determine whether or not the 
given vectors are perpendicular.
29.	 84, 2, 49, 81, 2, 29	
30.	 4 j k, i 2 j 9 k
31.	 80.3, 1.2, 0.99, 810, 5, 109
32.	 8x, 2x, 3x9, 85, 7, 39
33–36  ■  Angle Between Two Vectors    Find the angle between u 
and v, rounded to the nearest tenth degree.
33.	 u 82, 2, 19, v 81, 2, 29
34.	 u 84, 0, 29, v 82, 1, 09
35.	 u j k, v i 2 j 3 k
36.	 u i 2 j 2 k, v 4 i 3 k
37–40  ■  Direction Angles of a Vector    Find the direction angles 
of the given vector, rounded to the nearest degree.
37.	 3 i 4 j 5 k	
38.	 i 2 j k
39.	 82, 3, 69	
40.	 82, 1, 29
41–44  ■  Direction Angles of a Vector    Two direction angles of a 
vector are given. Find the third direction angle, given that it is 
either obtuse or acute as indicated. (In Exercises 43 and 44, round 
your answers to the nearest degree.)
41.	 a p
3, g 2p
3 ; b is acute	
42.	 b 2p
3 , g p
4; a is acute
43.	 a 60°, b 50°; g is obtuse	
	44.	 a 75°, g 15°
Skills Plus
45–46  ■  Impossible Direction Angles    Explain why it is impos-
sible for a vector to have the given direction angles.
45.	 a 20°, b 45°	
46.	 a 150°, g 25°
47.	 Parallel Vectors    Two nonzero vectors are parallel if they point 
in the same direction or in opposite directions. This means that 
if two vectors are parallel, one must be a scalar multiple of the 
9.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.5  ■  The Cross Product  659
other. Determine whether the given vectors u and v are parallel. 
If they are, express v as a scalar multiple of u.
(a)	 u 83, 2, 49, v 86, 4, 89
(b)	 u 89, 6, 129, v 812, 8, 169
(c)	 u i j k, v 2 i 2 j 2 k
48.	 Unit Vectors    A unit vector is a vector of magnitude 1. Mul-
tiplying a vector by a scalar changes its magnitude but not its 
direction. 
(a)	 If a vector v has magnitude m, what scalar multiple of v 
has magnitude 1 (that is, is a unit vector)?
(b)	 Multiply each of the following vectors by an appropriate 
scalar to change them into unit vectors:
81, 2, 29 86, 8, 109 86, 5, 99
Applications
	49.	 Resultant of Four Forces    An object located at the origin in  
a three-dimensional coordinate system is held in equilibrium 
by four forces. One has magnitude 7 lb and points in the 
direction of the positive x-axis, so it is represented by the 
vector 7i. The second has magnitude 24 lb and points in  
the direction of the positive y-axis. The third has magnitude 
25 lb and points in the direction of the negative z-axis.
(a)	 Use the fact that the four forces are in equilibrium (that 
is, their sum is 0) to find the fourth force. Express it in 
terms of the unit vectors i, j, and k.
(b)	 What is the magnitude of the fourth force?
50.	 Central Angle of a Tetrahedron    A tetrahedron is a solid with 
four triangular faces, four vertices, and six edges, as shown 
in the figure. In a regular tetrahedron the edges are all of the 
same length. Consider the tetrahedron with vertices 
A11, 0, 02 , B10, 1, 02 , C10, 0, 12 , and D11, 1, 12 .
(a)	 Show that the tetrahedron is regular.
(b)	 The center of the tetrahedron is the point EA1
2, 1
2, 1
2B (the 
“average” of the vertices). Find the angle between the 
vectors that join the center to any two of the vertices (for 
instance, /AEB). This angle is called the central angle 
of the tetrahedron.
	 	 [Note: In a molecule of methane (CH4) the four hydrogen 
atoms form the vertices of a regular tetrahedron with the car-
bon atom at the center. In this case chemists refer to the cen-
tral angle as the bond angle. In the figure, the tetrahedron in 
the exercise is shown, with the vertices labeled H for hydro-
gen and the center labeled C for carbon.]
H
H
H
H
C
z
y
x
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
51.	 DISCUSS  ■  PROVE:  Vector Equation of a Sphere    Let 
u 82, 2, 29, v 82, 2, 09, and r 8x, y, z9. 
(a)	 Show that the vector equation 1r u2 # 1r v2 0 
represents a sphere, by expanding the dot product and 
simplifying the resulting algebraic equation.
(b)	 Find the center and radius of the sphere.
(c)	 Interpret the result of part (a) geometrically, using the 
fact that the dot product of two vectors is 0 only if the 
vectors are perpendicular.    [Hint: Draw a diagram 
showing the endpoints of the vectors u, v, and r, noting 
that the endpoints of u and v are the endpoints of a diam-
eter and the endpoint of r is an arbitrary point on the 
sphere.]
(d)	 Using your observations from part (a), find a vector 
equation for the sphere in which the points 10, 1, 32  and 
12, 1, 42  form the endpoints of a diameter. Simplify 
the vector equation to obtain an algebraic equation for 
the sphere. What are its center and radius?
9.5  The Cross Product
■  The Cross Product  ■  Properties of the Cross Product  ■  Area of a Parallelogram   
■  Volume of a Parallelepiped
In this section we define an operation on vectors that allows us to find a vector which 
is perpendicular to two given vectors.
■  The Cross Product
Given two vectors u 8a1, a2, a39 and v 8b1, b2, b39, we often need to find a vector w 
perpendicular to both u and v. If we write w 8c1, c2, c39, then u # w 0 and 
v # w 0, so 
 a1c1 a2c2 a3c3 0
 b1c1 b2c2 b3c3 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

660 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
You can check that one of the solutions of this system of equations is the vector 
w 8a2b3 a3b2, a3b1 a1b3, a1b2 a2b19. This vector is called the cross product of 
u and v and is denoted by u 3 v.
The Cross Product
If u 8a1, a2, a39 and v 8b1, b2, b39 are three-dimensional vectors, then the 
cross product of u and v is the vector 
u 3 v 8a2b3 a3b2,  a3b1 a1b3,  a1b2 a2b19
The cross product u 3 v of two vectors u and v, unlike the dot product, is a vector 
(not a scalar). For this reason it is also called the vector product. Note that u 3 v is 
defined only when u and v are vectors in three dimensions.
To help us remember the definition of the cross product, we use the notation of de-
terminants. A determinant of order two is defined by 
`  a
b
c
d ` ad bc
For example,
`  
2
1
6
4 ` 2142 1162 14
A determinant of order three is defined in terms of second-order determinants as
†  
a1
a2
a3
b1
b2
b3
c1
c2
c3
† a1 `  b2
b3
c2
c3
` a2 `  b1
b3
c1
c3
` a3 `  b1
b2
c1
c2
`
Observe that each term on the right side of the above equation involves a number ai in 
the first row of the determinant, and ai is multiplied by the second-order determinant 
obtained from the left side by deleting the row and column in which ai appears. Notice 
also the minus sign in the second term. For example,
 †
1
2
1
3
0
1
5
4
2
† 1 `  0
1
4
2 ` 2 `  
3
1
5
2 ` 112 `  
3
0
5
4 `
 110 42 216 1522 112 112 02 38
We can write the definition of the cross product using determinants as
 †
i
j
k
a1
a2
a3
b1
b2
b3
† ` a2
a3
b2
b3
` i `  a1
a3
b1
b3
` j `  a1
a2
b1
b2
` k
 1a2b3 a3b22i 1a1b3 a3b12j 1a1b2 a2b12k
Although the first row of the above determinant consists of vectors, we expand it as if 
it were an ordinary determinant of order 3. The symbolic formula given by the above 
determinant is probably the easiest way to remember and compute cross products.
Example 1  ■  Finding a Cross Product 
If u 80, 1, 39 and v 82, 0, 19, find u 3 v. 
Determinants and their properties are 
studied in Section 10.7.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.5  ■  The Cross Product  661
Solution    We use the formula above to find the cross product of u and v:
 u 3 v †
i
j
k
0
1
3
2
0
1
†
 `  1
3
0
1 ` i `  0
3
2
1 ` j `  0
1
2
0 ` k
 11 02i 10 62j 10 1222k
 i 6j 2k
So the desired vector is i 6 j 2 k.
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
■  Properties of the Cross Product
One of the most important properties of the cross product is the following theorem.
Cross Product Theorem
The vector u 3 v is orthogonal (perpendicular) to both u and v. 
Proof    To show that u 3 v is orthogonal to u, we compute their dot product and 
show that it is 0.
 1u 3 v2 # u `  a2
a3
b2
b3
` a1 `  a1
a3
b1
b3
` a2 `  a1
a2
b1
b2
` a3
 a11a2b3 a3b22 a21a1b3 a3b12 a31a1b2 a2b12
 a1a2b3 a1a3b2 a1a2b3 a2a3b1 a1a3b2 a2a3b1
 0
A similar computation shows that 1u 3 v2 # v 0. Therefore u 3 v is orthogonal to  
u and to v.	
■
Example 2  ■  Finding an Orthogonal Vector 
If u j 3 k and v 2 i k, find a unit vector that is orthogonal to the plane 
containing the vectors u and v. 
Solution    By the Cross Product Theorem the vector u 3 v is orthogonal to the 
plane containing the vectors u and v. (See Figure 1.) In Example 1 we found 
u 3 v i 6 j 2 k. To obtain an orthogonal unit vector, we multiply u 3 v by 
the scalar 1/ 0  u 3 v 0 : 
u 3 v
0  u 3 v 0 
i 6j 2k
"12 62 22 i 6j 2k
!41
So the desired vector is 
1
!41
 1i 6j 2k2 .
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
v= 2, 0, _1

u= 0, _1, 3

u  v= 1, 6, 2

z
y
x
Figure 1  The vector u 3 v is per-
pendicular to u and v.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

662 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
Example 3  ■  Finding a Vector Perpendicular to a Plane 
Find a vector perpendicular to the plane that passes through the points P11, 4, 62 , 
Q12, 5, 12 , and R11, 1, 12 .
Solution    By the Cross Product Theorem the vector PQ
>
3 PR
>
 is perpendicular to 
both PQ
>
 and PR
>
 and is therefore perpendicular to the plane through P, Q, and R. We 
know that 
 PQ
>
12 12i 15 42j 11 62k 3 i j 7 k
 PR
>
11 12i 11 42j 11 62k 5 j 5 k
We compute the cross product of these vectors:
 PQ
>
3 PR
>
†  
i
j
k
3
1
7
0
5
5
†
 15 352i 115 02j 115 02k 40i 15j 15k
So the vector 840, 15, 159 is perpendicular to the given plane. Notice that any 
nonzero scalar multiple of this vector, such as 88, 3, 39, is also perpendicular to 
the plane.
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
If u and v are represented by directed line segments with the same initial point (as 
in Figure 2), then the Cross Product Theorem says that the cross product u 3 v points 
in a direction perpendicular to the plane through u and v. It turns out that the direction 
of u 3 v is given by the right-hand rule: If the fingers of your right hand curl in the 
direction of a rotation (through an angle less than 180°) from u to v, then your thumb 
points in the direction of u 3 v (as in Figure 2). You can check that the vector u 3 v 
in Figure 1 satisfies the right-hand rule.
¨
u
v
u  v
Figure 2  Right-hand rule
Now that we know the direction of the vector u 3 v, the remaining thing we need 
is the length 0  u 3 v 0 . 
Length of the Cross Product 
If u is the angle between u and v (so 0 u p), then
0  u 3 v 0 0  u 0 0  v 0 sin u
In particular, two nonzero vectors u and v are parallel if and only if
u 3 v 0
Mary Evans Picture Library/Alamy
William Rowan Hamilton  
(1805–1865) was an Irish mathematician 
and physicist. He was raised by his uncle 
(a linguist) who noticed that Hamilton 
had a remarkable ability to learn lan-
guages. When he was five years old, he 
could read Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. At 
age eight he added French and Italian, 
and by age ten he had mastered Arabic 
and Sanskrit.
Hamilton was also a calculating prodigy 
and competed in contests of mental arith-
metic.  He entered Trinity College in Dublin, 
Ireland, where he studied science; he was 
appointed Professor of Astronomy there 
while still an undergraduate. 
Hamilton made many contributions to 
mathematics and physics, but he is best 
known for his invention of quaternions. 
Hamilton knew that we can multiply vec-
tors in the plane by considering them as 
complex numbers. He was looking for a 
similar multiplication for points in space. 
After thinking about this problem for over 
20 years, he discovered the solution in a 
flash of insight while walking near 
Brougham Bridge in Dublin: He realized 
that a fourth dimension is needed to make 
the multiplication work. He carved the for-
mula for his quaternions into the bridge, 
where it still stands. Later, the American 
mathematician Josiah Willard Gibbs 
extracted the dot product and cross prod-
uct of vectors from the properties of qua-
ternion multiplication. Quaternions are 
used today in computer graphics because 
of their ability to easily describe special 
rotations.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.5  ■  The Cross Product  663
Proof    We apply the definitions of the cross product and length of a vector. You can 
verify the algebra in the first step by expanding the right-hand sides of the first and 
second lines and then comparing the results.
 0  u 3 v 0 2 1a2b3 a3b22 2 1a1b3 a3b12 2 1a1b2 a2b12 2
        Definitions
 1a2
1 a2
2 a2
32 1b2
1 b2
2 b2
32 1a1b1 a2b2 a3b32 2        Verify algebra
 0  u 0 2 0  v 0 2 1u # v2 2
        Definitions
 0  u 0 2 0  v 0 2 0  u 0 2 0  v 0 2 cos2
 u
        Property of Dot Product
 0  u 0 2 0  v 0 211 cos2
 u2
        Factor
 0  u 0 2 0  v 0 2  sin2
 u
        Pythagorean Identity
The result follows by taking square roots and observing that "sin2
 u sin u because 
sin u $ 0 when 0 u p.
■
We have now completely determined the vector u 3 v geometrically. The vector 
u 3 v is perpendicular to both u and v, and its orientation is determined by the right-
hand rule. The length of u 3 v is 0  u 0 0  v 0 sin u.
■  Area of a Parallelogram
We can use the cross product to find the area of a parallelogram. If u and v are repre-
sented by directed line segments with the same initial point, then they determine a 
parallelogram with base 0  u 0 , altitude 0  v 0 sin u, and area
A 0  u 0 1 0  v 0 sin u2 0  u 3 v 0
(See Figure 3.) Thus we have the following way of interpreting the magnitude of a cross 
product.
Area of a Parallelogram 
The length of the cross product u 3 v is the area of the parallelogram deter-
mined by u and v.
Example 4  ■  Finding the Area of a Triangle 
Find the area of the triangle with vertices P11, 4, 62 , Q12, 5, 12 , and R11, 1, 12 .
Solution    In Example 3 we computed that PQ
>
3 PR
>
840, 15, 159. The area of 
the parallelogram with adjacent sides PQ and PR is the length of this cross product:
0  PQ
>
3 PR
>
0 "1402 2 1152 2 152 5!82
The area A of the triangle PQR is half the area of this parallelogram, that is, 5
2!82.
Now Try Exercises 21 and 25	
■
■  Volume of a Parallelepiped
The product u # 1v 3 w2  is called the scalar triple product of the vectors u, v, and w. 
You can check that the scalar triple product can be written as the following determinant:
u # 1v 3 w2 †  
a1
a2
a3
b1
b2
b3
c1
c2
c3
†
u
v
¨
|v| ß ¨
Figure 3  Parallelogram determined 
by u and v.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

664 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
The geometric significance of the scalar triple product can be seen by considering the 
parallelepiped* determined by the vectors u, v, and w (see Figure 4). The area of the 
base parallelogram is A 0  v 3 w 0 . If u is the angle between u and v 3 w, then  
the height h of the parallelepiped is h 0  u 0 0  cos u 0 . (We must use 0  cos u 0  instead of 
cos u in case u p/2.) Therefore the volume of the parallelepiped is 
V Ah 0  v 3 w 0 0  u 0 0  cos u 0 0  u # 1v 3 w2 0
The last equality follows from the Dot Product Theorem on page 640.
h
u
w
v
v  w
¨
Figure 4  Parallelepiped determined 
by u, v, and w
We have proved the following formula.
Volume of a Parallelepiped 
The volume of the parallelepiped determined by the vectors u, v, and w is the 
magnitude of their scalar triple product:
V 0  u # 1v 3 w2 0
In particular, if the volume of the parallelepiped is 0, then the vectors u, v, and 
w are coplanar, that is, they lie in the same plane.
Example 5  ■  Coplanar Vectors 
Use the scalar triple product to show that the vectors u 81, 4, 79, v 82, 1, 49, 
and w 80, 9, 189 are coplanar.
Solution    We compute the scalar triple product:
 u # 1v 3 w2 †  
1
4
7
2
1
4
0
9
18
†
 1 `  1
4
9
18 ` 4 `  2
4
0
18 ` 172 `  2
1
0
9 `
 11182 41362 71182 0
So the volume of the parallelepiped is 0, and hence the vectors u, v, and w are 
coplanar.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
*The word parallelepiped is derived from Greek roots which together mean, roughly, “parallel faces.” 
While the word is often pronounced “par-al-lel-uh-PIE-ped,” the more etymologically correct pronunciation 
is “par-al-lel-EP-uh-ped.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.5  ■  The Cross Product  665
Concepts
	 1.	 The cross product of the vectors u 8a1, a2, a39 and 
v 8b1, b2, b39 is the vector
	 	 	
u 3 v †  
i
j
k
   
   
   
   
   
   
†
	
 
 
 
 i 2  
 j   
 k
	 	 So the cross product of u 81, 0, 19 and v 82, 3, 09 
	 	 is u 3 v 
 
  .
	 2.	 The cross product of two vectors u and v is  
 
to u and to v. Thus if both vectors u and v lie in a plane, 
	 	 the vector u 3 v is  
 to the plane.
Skills
3–8  ■  Cross Products    For the given vectors u and v, find the 
cross product u 3 v.
	 3.	 u 81, 0, 39, v 82, 3, 09
	 4.	 u 80, 4, 19, v 81, 1, 29
	 5.	 u 86, 2, 89, v 89, 3, 129	
	 6.	 u 82, 3, 49, v 8 1
6,  1
4,  1
39
	 7.	 u i j k, v 3 i 4 k
	 8.	 u 3 i j, v 3 j k
9–12  ■  Orthogonal Vectors    Two vectors u and v are given.  
(a) Find a vector orthogonal (perpendicular) to both u and v.  
(b) Find a unit vector orthogonal (perpendicular) to both u  
and v.
	 9.	 u 81, 1, 19, v 81, 1, 19
10.	 u 82, 5, 39, v 83, 2, 19
11.	 u 1
2 i j 2
3 k, v 6 i 12 j 6 k
12.	 u 3 j 5 k, v i 2 k
13–16  ■  Length of a Cross Product    The lengths of two vectors 
u and v and the angle u between them are given. Find the length 
of their cross product, 0 u 3 v 0 .
13. 0  u 0 6, 0  v 0 1
2, u 60
14. 0  u 0 4, 0  v 0 5,  u 30
15. 0  u 0 10, 0  v 0 10, u 90
16. 0  u 0 0.12, 0  v 0 1.25, u 75
17–20  ■  Vectors Perpendicular to a Plane    Find a vector that 
is perpendicular to the plane passing through the three given 
points.
17.	 P10, 1, 02,  Q11, 2, 12,  R12, 1, 02
18.	 P13, 4, 52,  Q11, 2, 32,  R14, 7, 62
19.	 P11, 1, 52,  Q12, 2, 02,  R10, 0, 02
20.	 P13, 0, 02,  Q10, 2, 52,  R12, 0, 62
21–24  ■  Area of a Parallelogram    Find the area of the parallelo-
gram determined by the given vectors.
21.	 u 83, 2, 19, v 81, 2, 39	
22.	 u 80, 3, 29, v 85, 6, 09
23.	 u 2 i j 4 k, v 1
2 i 2 j 3
2 k
24.	 u i j k, v i j k
25–28  ■  Area of a Triangle    Find the area of ^PQR.
25.	 P11, 0, 12,  Q10, 1, 02,  R12, 3, 42
26.	 P12, 1, 02,  Q10, 0, 12,  R14, 2, 02
27.	 P16, 0, 02,  Q10, 6, 02,  R10, 0, 62
28.	 P13, 2, 62,  Q11, 4, 62,  R13, 4, 62
29–34  ■  Volume of a Parallelepiped    Three vectors u, v, and w 
are given. (a) Find their scalar triple product u # 1v 3 w2 . (b) Are 
the vectors coplanar? If not, find the volume of the parallelepiped 
that they determine.
29.	 u 81, 2, 39, v 83, 2, 19, w 80, 8, 109
30.	 u 83, 0, 49, v 81, 1, 19, w 87, 4, 09
31.	 u 82, 3, 29, v 81, 4, 09, w 83, 1, 39
32.	 u 81, 1, 09, v 81, 0, 19, w 80, 1, 19
33.	 u i j k, v j k, w i j k
34.	 u 2 i 2 j 3 k, v 3 i j k, w 6 i
Applications
35.	 Volume of a Fish Tank    A fish tank in an avant-garde restau-
rant is in the shape of a parallelepiped with a rectangular 
base that is 300 cm long and 120 cm wide. The front and 
back faces are vertical, but the left and right faces are 
slanted at 30° from the vertical and measure 120 cm by  
150 cm. (See the figure.)
(a)	 Let u, v, and w be the three vectors shown in the  
figure. Find u # 1v 3 w2 .    [Hint: Recall that 
u # v 0  u 0 0  v 0 cos u and 0  u 3 v 0 0  u 0 0  v 0 sin u.]
(b)	 What is the capacity of the tank in liters?     
[Note: 1 L = 1000 cm3.]
30*
u
v
w
9.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

666 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
36.	 Rubik’s Tetrahedron    Rubik’s Cube, a puzzle craze of the 
1980s that remains popular to this day, inspired many similar 
puzzles. The one illustrated in the figure is called Rubik’s 
Tetrahedron; it is in the shape of a regular tetrahedron, with 
each edge !2 inches long. The volume of a regular tetrahe-
dron is one-sixth the volume of the parallelepiped determined 
by any three edges that meet at a corner.
(a)	 Use the triple product to find the volume of Rubik’s  
Tetrahedron.    [Hint: See Exercise 50 in Section 9.4, 
which gives the corners of a tetrahedron that has the 
same shape and size as Rubik’s Tetrahedron.]
(b)	 Construct six identical regular tetrahedra using modeling 
clay. Experiment to see how they can be put together to 
create a parallelepiped that is determined by three edges 
of one of the tetrahedra (thus confirming the above state-
ment about the volume of a regular tetrahedron). 
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
37.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Order of Operations in the Triple  
Product    Given three vectors u, v, and w, their scalar triple 
product can be performed in six different orders:
u # 1v 3 w2, u # 1w 3 v2, v # 1u 3 w2,
v # 1w 3 u2, w # 1u 3 v2, w # 1v 3 u2
(a)	 Calculate each of these six triple products for the 
vectors: 
u 80, 1, 19  v 81, 0, 19  w 81, 1, 09
(b)	 On the basis of your observations in part (a), make a 
conjecture about the relationships between these six  
triple products.
(c)	 Prove the conjecture you made in part (b).
9.6 
Equations of Lines and Planes
■  Equations of Lines  ■  Equations of Planes
In this section we find equations for lines and planes in a three-dimensional coordinate 
space. We use vectors to help us find such equations. 
■  Equations of Lines
A line L in three-dimensional space is determined when we know a point P01x0, y0, z02  
on L and the direction of L. In three dimensions the direction of a line is described 
by a vector v parallel to L. If we let r0 be the position vector of P0 (that is, the vec-
tor OP0
>
), then for all real numbers t the terminal points P of the position vectors 
r0 tv trace out a line parallel to v and passing through P0 (see Figure 1). Each 
value of the parameter t gives a point P on L. So the line L is given by the position 
vector r, where
r r0 tv
for t [ R. This is the vector equation of a line.
Let’s write the vector v in component form v 8a, b, c9 and let r0 8x0, y0, z09 and 
r 8x, y, z9. Then the vector equation of the line becomes 
 8x, y, z9 8x0, y0, z09 t 8a, b, c9
 8x0 ta, y0 tb, z0 tc9
Since two vectors are equal if and only if their corresponding components are equal, we 
have the following result.
The position vector of a point 
1a1, a2, a32  is the vector 8a1, a2, a39; 
that is, it is the vector from the origin 
to the point.
0
v
P‚
P
L
r‚  tv
r‚
tv
z
y
x
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.6  ■  Equations of Lines and Planes  667
Parametric Equations for a Line
A line passing through the point P1x0, y0, z02  and parallel to the vector 
v 8a, b, c9 is described by the parametric equations 
 x x0 at
 y y0 bt
 z z0 ct
where t is any real number. 
Example 1  ■  Equations of a Line 
Find parametric equations for the line that passes through the point 15, 2, 32  and is 
parallel to the vector v 83, 4, 29.
Solution    We use the above formula to find the parametric equations:
 x 5 3t
 y 2 4t
 z 3 2t
where t is any real number. (See Figure 2.)
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Example 2  ■  Equations of a Line 
Find parametric equations for the line that passes through the points 11, 2, 62  and 
12, 3, 72 .
Solution    We first find a vector determined by the two points:
v 82 112, 3 2, 7 69 83, 5, 139
Now we use v and the point 11, 2, 62  to find the parametric equations:
 x 1 3t
 y 2 5t
 z 6 13t
where t is any real number. A graph of the line is shown in Figure 3.
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
In Example 2 we used the point 11, 2, 62  to get the parametric equations of the 
line. We could instead use the point 12, 3, 72 . The resulting parametric equations 
would look different but would still describe the same line (see Exercise 37).
■  Equations of Planes
Although a line in space is determined by a point and a direction, the “direction” of a 
plane cannot be described by a vector in the plane. In fact, different vectors in a plane 
can have different directions. But a vector perpendicular to a plane does completely 
specify the direction of the plane. Thus a plane in space is determined by a point 
0
v= 3, _4, 2

(5, _2, 3)
z
y
x
Figure 2  Line through 15, 2, 32  
with direction v 83, 4, 29
v= 3, _5, _13

(2, _3, _7)
(_1, 2, 6)
z
y
x
Figure 3  Line through 11, 2, 62  
and 12, 3, 72
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

668 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
P01x0, y0, z02  in the plane and a vector n that is orthogonal to the plane. This orthogonal 
vector n is called a normal vector. To determine whether a point P1x, y, z2  is in the 
plane, we check whether the vector P0P
>
 with initial point P0 and terminal point P is 
orthogonal to the normal vector. Let r0 and r be the position vectors of P0 and P, respec-
tively. Then the vector P0P
>
 is represented by r r0 (see Figure 4). So the plane is de-
scribed by the tips of the vectors r satisfying 
n # 1r r02 0
This is the vector equation of the plane. 
Let’s write the normal vector n in component form n 8a, b, c9 and let r0 8x0, y0, z09 
and r 8x, y, z9. Then the vector equation of the plane becomes 
8a, b, c9 # 8x x0, y y0, z z09 0
Performing the dot product, we arrive at the following equation of the plane in the 
variables x, y, and z. 
Equation of a Plane
The plane containing the point P1x0, y0, z02  and having the normal vector 
n 8a, b, c9 is described by the equation 
a1x x02 b1 y y02 c1z z02 0
Example 3  ■  Finding an Equation for a Plane 
A plane has normal vector n 84, 6, 39 and passes through the point 
P13, 1, 22 .
(a)	 Find an equation of the plane.
(b)	 Find the intercepts, and sketch a graph of the plane.
Solution 
(a)	 By the above formula for the equation of a plane we have 
 41x 32 61 y 1122 31z 1222 0         Formula
 4x 12 6y 6 3z 6 0         Expand
 4x 6y 3z 12        Simplify
	 	 Thus an equation of the plane is 4x 6y 3z 12. 
(b)	 To find the x-intercept, we set y 0 and z 0 in the equation of the plane and 
solve for x. Similarly, we find the y- and z-intercepts.
x-intercept:	 Setting y 0, z 0, we get x 3.
y-intercept:	 Setting x 0, z 0, we get y 2.
z-intercept:	 Setting x 0, y 0, we get z 4.
	 	 So the graph of the plane intersects the coordinate axes at the points 13, 0, 02 , 
10, 2, 02 , and 10, 0, 42 . This enables us to sketch the portion of the plane shown 
in Figure 5.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
Example 4  ■  Finding an Equation for a Plane 
Find an equation of the plane that passes through the points P11, 4, 62 , 
Q12, 5, 12 , and R11, 1, 12 .
Notice that in Figure 5 the axes have 
been rotated so that we get a better view.
P
P‚
n
r‚
r-r‚
r
0
z
y
x
Figure 4
(0, _2, 0)
(0, 0, 4)
(3, 0, 0)
0
z
y
x
Figure 5  The plane 
4x 6y 3z 32
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 9.6  ■  Equations of Lines and Planes  669
Solution    The vector n PQ
>
3 PR
>
 is perpendicular to both PQ
>
 and PR
>
 and is 
therefore perpendicular to the plane through P, Q, and R. In Example 3 of Section 9.5 
we found PQ
>
3 PR
>
840, 15, 159. Using the formula for an equation of a plane, 
we have 
 401x 12 151y 42 151z 62 0
        Formula
 40x 40 15y 60 15z 90 0
        Expand
 40x 15y 15z 10        Simplify
 8x 3y 3z 2
        Divide by 25
So an equation of the plane is 8x 3y 3z 2. A graph of this plane is shown in 
Figure 6.
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
In Example 4 we used the point P to obtain the equation of the plane. You can check 
that using Q or R gives the same equation.
(1, _1, 1)
(1, 4, 6)
(_2, 5, _1)
0
z
y
x
Figure 6  A plane through three 
points
Concepts
	 1.	 A line in space is described algebraically by using 
	 	
 
 equations. The line that passes through the 
point P1x0, y0, z02  and is parallel to the vector v 8a, b, c9 is 
	 	 described by the equations x 
 
  , 
	 	 y 
 
  , z 
 
  .
	 2.	 The plane containing the point P1x0, y0, z02  and having the 
normal vector n 8a, b, c9 is described algebraically by the 
	 	 equation  
  .
Skills
3–8  ■  Equations of Lines    Find parametric equations for  
the line that passes through the point P and is parallel to the  
vector v.
	 3.	 P11, 0, 22, v 83, 2, 39	
	 4.	 P10, 5, 32, v 82, 0, 49
	 5.	 P13, 2, 12, v 80, 4, 29
	 6.	 P10, 0, 02, v 84, 3, 59
	 7.	 P11, 0, 22, v 2 i 5 k
	 8.	 P11, 1, 12, v i j k
9–14  ■  Equations of Lines    Find parametric equations for the 
line that passes through the points P and Q.
	 9.	 P11, 3, 22, Q12, 1, 12
	10.	 P12, 1, 22, Q10, 1, 32
11.	 P11, 1, 02, Q10, 2, 22 	
	12.	 P13, 3, 32, Q17, 0, 02
13.	 P13, 7, 52, Q17, 3, 52 	
14.	 P112, 16, 182, Q112, 6, 02
15–20  ■  Equations of Planes    A plane has normal vector n and 
passes through the point P. (a) Find an equation for the plane.  
(b) Find the intercepts, and sketch a graph of the plane.
15.	 n 81, 1, 19, P10, 2, 32 	
16.	 n 83, 2, 09, P11, 2, 72 	
17.	 n 83, 0,  1
29, P12, 4, 82
18.	 n 82
3,  1
3, 19, P16, 0, 32
19.	 n 3 i j 2 k, P10, 2, 32
20.	 n i 4 j, P11, 0, 92
21–26  ■  Equations of Planes    Find an equation of the plane  
that passes through the points P, Q, and R.
21.	 P16, 2, 12, Q15, 3, 12, R17, 0, 02
22.	 P13, 4, 52, Q11, 2, 32, R14, 7, 62
23.	 PA3, 1
3, 5B, QA4, 2
3, 3B, R12, 0, 12
24.	 PA3
2, 4, 2B, QA 1
2, 2, 0B, RA 1
2, 0, 2B
25.	 P16, 1, 12, Q13, 2, 02, R10, 0, 02
26.	 P12, 0, 02, Q10, 2, 22, R10, 0, 42
Skills Plus
27–30  ■  Equations of Lines    A description of a line is given. 
Find parametric equations for the line.
27.	 The line crosses the z-axis where z 4 and crosses the  
xy-plane where x 2 and y 5.
28.	 The line crosses the x-axis where x 2 and crosses the  
z-axis where z 10.
29.	 The line perpendicular to the xz-plane that contains the point 
12, 1, 52 .
30.	 The line parallel to the y-axis that crosses the xz-plane where 
x 3 and z 2.
9.6  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

670 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
31–32  ■  Equations of Planes    A description of a plane is given. 
Find an equation for the plane.
31.	 The plane that crosses the x-axis where x 1, the y-axis 
where y 3, and the z-axis where z 4.
32.	 The plane that is parallel to the plane x 2y 4z 6 and 
contains the origin.
33–34  ■  More Equations of Planes    A description of a plane is 
given. Find an equation for the plane.
33.	 The plane that contains all the points that are equidistant 
from the points P13, 2, 52  and Q11, 1, 42 .
34.	 The plane that contains the line x 1 t, y 2 t,  
z 3t and the point P12, 0, 62 .    [Hint: A vector from 
any point on the line to P will lie in the plane.]
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
35.	 DISCOVER:  Intersection of a Line and a Plane    A line has 
parametric equations 
x 2 t  y 3t  z 5 t
	 	 and a plane has equation 5x 2y 2z 1.
(a)	 For what value of t does the corresponding point on the 
line intersect the plane?
(b)	 At what point do the line and the plane intersect?
36.	 DISCUSS  ■  DISCOVER:  Lines and Planes    A line is parallel 
to the vector v, and a plane has normal vector n.
(a)	 If the line is perpendicular to the plane, what is the rela-
tionship between v and n (parallel or perpendicular)?
(b)	 If the line is parallel to the plane (that is, the line and the 
plane do not intersect), what is the relationship between 
v and n (parallel or perpendicular)?
(c)	 Parametric equations for two lines are given. Which line 
is parallel to the plane x y 4z 6? Which line is 
perpendicular to this plane?
	
Line 1:    x 2t, y 3 2t, z 4 8t
	
Line 2:    x 2t, y 5 2t, z 3 t
37.	 DISCUSS:  Same Line: Different Parametric Equations    Every 
line can be described by infinitely many different sets of 
parametric equations, since any point on the line and any 
vector parallel to the line can be used to construct the equa-
tions. But how can we tell whether two sets of parametric 
equations represent the same line? Consider the following 
two sets of parametric equations:
	 	 Line 1:    x 1 t, y 3t, z 6 5t
	 	 Line 2:    x 1 2t, y 6 6t, z 4 10t
(a)	 Find two points that lie on Line 1 by setting t 0 and 
t 1 in its parametric equations. Then show that these 
points also lie on Line 2 by finding two values of the 
parameter that give these points when substituted into the 
parametric equations for Line 2.
(b)	 Show that the following two lines are not the same by 
finding a point on Line 3 and then showing that it does 
not lie on Line 4.
	
Line 3:    x 4t, y 3 6t, z 5 2t
	
Line 4:    x 8 2t, y 9 3t, z 6 t
Vectors in Two Dimensions (p. 631)
A vector is a quantity with both magnitude and direction. A vec-
tor in the coordinate plane is expressed in terms of two coordi-
nates or components
v 8a1, a29
If a vector v has its initial point at P1x1, y12  and its terminal point 
at Q1x2, y22 , then 
v 8x2 x1, y2 y19
Let u 8a1, a29, v 8b1, b29, and  c [ R. The operations on vec-
tors are defined as follows. 
 u v 8a1 b1, a2 b29        Addition
 u v 8a1 b1, a2 b29        Subtraction
 cu 8ca1, ca29
        Scalar multiplication
The vectors i and j are defined by 
i 81, 09   
j 80, 19
Any vector v 8a1, a29 can be expressed as 
v a1 i a2 j
Let v 8a1, a29. The magnitude (or length) of v is
0  v 0 "a2
1 a2
2
The direction of v is the smallest positive angle u in standard posi-
tion formed by the positive x-axis and v (see the figure below).
If v 8a1, a29, then the components of v satisfy
a1 0  v 0  cos u   
a2 0  v 0  sin u
x
y
v
|v| ß ¨
|v| ç ¨
0
¨
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 9  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 9  ■  Review  671
The Dot Product of Vectors  (p. 640)
If u 8a1, a29 and v 8b1, b29, then their dot product is  
u # v a1b1 a2b2
If u is the angle between u and v, then
u # v 0  u 0  0  v 0 cos u
The angle u between u and v satisfies
cos u 
u # v
0  u 0  0  v 0
The vectors u and v are perpendicular if and only if 
u # v 0
The component of u along v (a scalar) and the projection of u 
onto v (a vector) are given by 
compv u u # v
0  v 0    
projv u a u # v
0  v 0 2 bv
¨
v
u
v
u
¨
projv u
compv u
The work W done by a force F in moving along a vector D is 
W F # D
Three-Dimensional Coordinate Geometry (p. 648)
A coordinate system in space consists of a fixed point O (the  
origin) and three directed lines through O that are perpendicular 
to each other, called the coordinate axes and labeled the x-axis, 
y-axis, and z-axis. The coordinates of a point P1a, b, c2  determine 
its location relative to the coordinate axes. 
O
b
a
c
P(a, b, c)
y
x
z
The distance between the points P1x1, y1, z12  and Q1x2, y2, z22  is 
given by the Distance Formula:
d1P, Q2 "1x2 x12 2 1y2 y12 2 1z2 z12 2
The equation of a sphere with center C1h, k, l2  and radius r is 
1x h2 2 1y k2 2 1z l2 2 r2
Vectors in Three Dimensions (p. 653)
A vector in space is a line segment with a direction.  We sketch a 
vector as an arrow to indicate the direction. A vector in the three 
dimensional coordinate system is expressed in terms of three 
coordinates or components
v 8a1, a2, a39
If a vector v has its initial point at P1x1, y1, z12  and its terminal 
point at Q1x2, y2, z22 , then 
v 8x2 x1, y2 y1, z2 z19
Let u 8a1, a2, a39, v 8b1, b2, b39, and c [ R. The operations 
of vector addition, vector subtraction, scalar multiplication are 
defined as follows:
 u v 8a1 b1, a2 b2, a3 b39
 u v 8a1 b1, a2 b2, a3 b39
 cu 8ca1, ca2, ca39
The vectors i, j, and k are defined by 
i 81, 0, 09   
j 80, 1, 09   
k 80, 0, 19
Any vector v 8a1, a2, a39 can be expressed as 
v a1 i a2 j a3 k
Let v 8a1, a2, a39. The magnitude (or length) of v is
0  v 0 "a2
1 a2
2 a2
3
The direction angles of a nonzero vector v 8a1, a2, a39 are the 
angles a, b, and g in the interval 30, p4  that the vector v makes 
with the positive x-, y-, and z-axes. They are given by 
cos a a1
0  v 0    
cos b a2
0  v 0    
cos g a3
0  v 0
The direction angles satisfy the equation 
cos2
 a cos2
 b cos2
 g 1
The Dot Product of Vectors in Space (p. 655)
If u 8a1, a2, a39 and v 8b1, b2, b39 are vectors in space, then 
their dot product is
u # v a1b1 a2b2 a3b3
If u is the angle between u and v, then
u # v 0  u 0  0  v 0 cos u
The angle u between u and v satisfies
cos u 
u # v
0  u 0  0  v 0
The vectors u and v are perpendicular if and only if 
u # v 0
The Cross Product of Vectors in Space (p. 659)
If u 8a1, a2, a39 and v 8b1, b2, b39 are vectors in space, then 
their cross product is the vector 
u 3 v 1a2b3 a3b22i 1a1b3 a3b12j 1a1b2 a2b12k
We can calculate the cross product using determinants.
u 3 v †
i
j
k
a1
a2
a3
b1
b2
b3
†
The vector u 3 v is orthogonal (or perpendicular) to both u and v.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

672 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
The cross product satisfies 
0  u 3 v 0 0  u 0  0  v 0  sin u
The vectors u and v are parallel if and only if 
u 3 v 0
The area of the parallelogram determined by the vectors u and 
v is 
A 0  u 3 v 0
The volume of the parallelepiped determined by the vectors u, 
v, and w is 
V 0  u # 1v 3 w2  0
Equations of Lines and Planes (p. 666)
A line passing through the point P1x0, y0, z02 and parallel to the 
vector v 8a, b, c9 is described by the parametric equations
 x x0 at
 y y0 bt
 z z0 ct
where t is any real number.
A plane containing the point P1x0, y0, z02 and having the normal 
vector n 8a, b, c9 is described by the equation
a1x x02 b1y y02 c1z z02 0
	 1.	 (a)	 What is a vector in the plane? How do we represent a 
vector in the coordinate plane?
(b)	 Find the vector with initial point 12, 32  and terminal 
point 14, 102 .
(c)	 Let v 82, 19. If the initial point of v is placed at 
P11, 12 , where is its terminal point? Sketch several rep-
resentations of v.
(d)	 How is the magnitude of v 8a1, a29 defined? Find the 
magnitude of w 83, 49. 
(e)	 What are the vectors i and j? Express the vector 
v 85, 99 in terms of i and j. 
(f)	 Let v 8a1, a29 be a vector in the coordinate plane. What 
is meant by the direction u of v? What are the coordi-
nates of v in terms of its length and direction? Sketch a 
figure to illustrate your answer.
(g)	 Suppose that v has length 0  v 0 5 and direction 
u p/6. Express v in terms of its coordinates. 
	 2.	 (a)	 Define addition and scalar multiplication for vectors. 
(b)	 If u 82, 39 and v 85, 99, find u v and 4 u.
	 3.	 (a)	 Define the dot product of the vectors u 8a1, a29 and 
v 8b1, b29, and state the formula for the angle u 
between u and v.
(b)	 If u 82, 39 and v 81, 49, find u # v and find the angle 
between u and v.
	 4.	 (a)	 Describe the three-dimensional coordinate system. What 
are the coordinate planes?
(b)	 What is the distance from the point 13, 2, 52  to each of 
the coordinate planes? 
(c)	 State the formula for the distance between the points 
P1x1, y1, z12  and Q1x2, y2, z22 .
(d)	 Find the distance between the points P11, 2, 32  and 
Q13, 1, 42 .
(e)	 State the equation of a sphere with center C1h, k, l2  and 
radius r.
(f)	 Find an equation for the sphere of radius 5 centered at 
the point 11, 2, 32 .
	 5.	 (a)	 What is a vector in space? How do we represent a vector 
in a three-dimensional coordinate system?
(b)	 Find the vector with initial point 12, 3, 12  and terminal 
point 14, 10, 52 .
(c)	 How is the magnitude of v 8a1, a2, a39 defined? Find 
the magnitude of w 83, 4, 19.
(d)	 What are the vectors i, j, and k? Express the vector 
v 85, 9, 19 in terms of i, j, and k. 
	 6.	 (a)	 Define addition and scalar multiplication for vectors. 
(b)	 If u 82, 3, 19 and v 85, 9, 29, find u v and 4 u.
	 7.	 (a)	 Define the dot product of the vectors u 8a1, a2, a39 and 
v 8b1, b2, b39, and state the formula for the angle u 
between u and v.
(b)	 If u 82, 3, 19 and v 81, 4, 59, find u # v.
	 8.	 (a)	 Define the cross product of the vectors u 8a1, a2, a39 
and v 8b1, b2, b39.
(b)	 True or False? The vector u 3 v is perpendicular to both 
u and v.
(c)	 Let u and v be vectors in space. State the formula that 
relates the magnitude of u 3 v and the angle u between 
u and v.
(d)	 How can we use the cross product to determine whether 
two vectors are parallel? 
	 9.	 (a)	 What are the two properties that determine a line in 
space? Give parametric equations for a line in space.
(b)	 Find parametric equations for the line through the point 
12, 4, 12  and parallel to the vector v 87, 5, 39.
	10.	 (a)	 What are the two properties that determine a plane in 
space? State the equation of a plane.
(b)	 Find an equation for the plane passing through the point 
16, 4, 32 and with normal vector n 85, 3, 29.
■  CONCEPT CHECK
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 9  ■  Review  673
■  exercises
Exercises 1–24 deal with vectors in two dimensions.
1–4  ■  Operations with Vectors    Find 0  u 0 , u v, u v, 2 u, 
and 3 u 2 v.
	 1.	 u 82, 39, v 88, 19	
  2.	 u 85, 29, v 83, 09
	 3.	 u 2 i j, v i 2 j	
  4.	 u 3 j, v i 2 j
5–6  ■  Component Form of a Vector    A description of a vector is 
given. Express the vector in component form.
	 5.	 Find the vector with initial point P10, 32  and terminal point 
Q13, 12 .
	 6.	 If the vector 5 i 8 j is placed in the plane with its initial 
point at P15, 62 , find its terminal point.
7–8  ■  Length and Direction of Vectors    Find the length and 
direction of the given vector.
	 7.	 u 82, 2!39	
  8.	 v 2 i 5 j
9–10  ■  Component Form of a Vector    The length 0  u 0  and 
direction u of a vector u are given. Express u in component form.
	 9.	 0  u 0 20, u 60	
10.	 0  u 0 13.5, u 125
11.	 Resultant Force    Two tugboats are pulling a barge as shown 
in the figure. One pulls with a force of 2.0 3 104 lb in the 
direction N 50° E, and the other pulls with a force of 
3.4 3 104 lb in the direction S 75° E.
(a)	 Find the resultant force on the barge as a vector.
(b)	 Find the magnitude and direction of the resultant force.
12.	 True Velocity of a Plane    An airplane heads N 60° E at a 
speed of 600 mi/h relative to the air. A wind begins to blow 
in the direction N 30° W at 50 mi/h. (See the figure.)
(a)	 Find the velocity of the airplane as a vector.
(b)	 Find the true speed and direction of the airplane.
N
30˚
60˚
50 mi/h
600 mi/h
13–16  ■  Dot Products    Find the vectors 0  u 0 , u # u, and u # v.
13.	 u 84, 39, v 89, 89	
14.	 u 85, 129, v 810, 49
15.	 u 2 i 2 j, v i j
16.	 u 10 j, v 5 i 3 j
17–20  ■  Orthogonal Vectors    Are u and v orthogonal? If not, 
find the angle between them.
17.	 u 84, 29, v 83, 69
	18.	 u 85, 39, v 82, 69
19.	 u 2 i j, v i 3 j
	20.	 u i j, v i j
21–24  ■  Scalar and Vector Projections    Two vectors u and v are 
given. (a) Find the component of u along v. (b) Find projv u.  
(c) Resolve u into the vectors u1 and u2, where u1 is parallel to  
v and u2 is perpendicular to v.
21.	 u 83, 19, v 86, 19	
22.	 u 88, 69, v 820, 209
23.	 u i 2 j, v 4i 9 j
24.	 u 2 i 4 j, v 10 j
Exercises 25–54 deal with three-dimensional coordinate geometry.
25–26  ■  Distance Between Points    Plot the given points, and find 
the distance between them.
25.	 P11, 0, 22, Q13, 2, 32 	
26.	 P10, 2, 42, Q11, 3, 02
27–28  ■  Finding an Equation of a Sphere    Find an equation of 
the sphere with the given radius r and center C.
27.	 r 6, C10, 0, 02 	
28.	 r 2, C11, 2, 42
29–30  ■  Equations of Spheres    Show that the equation repre-
sents a sphere, and find its center and radius.
29.	 x2 y2 z2 2x 6y 4z 2
30.	 x2 y2 z2 4y 4z
31–32  ■  Operations with Vectors    Find 0  u 0 , u v, u v, 
and 3
4 u 2v.
31.	 u 84, 2, 49, v 82, 3, 19
32.	 u 6 i 8 k, v i j k
33–36  ■  Angle Between Vectors    Two vectors u and v are given. 
(a) Find their dot product u # v. (b) Are u and v perpendicular? If 
not, find the angle between them.
33.	 u 83, 2, 49, v 83, 1, 29
34.	 u 82, 6, 59, v 81,  1
2, 19
35.	 u 2 i j 4 k, v 3 i 2 j k
36.	 u j k, v i j
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

674 
CHAPTER 9  ■  Vectors in Two and Three Dimensions
37–40  ■  Cross Products and Orthogonal Vectors    Two vectors u 
and v are given. (a) Find their cross product u 3 v. (b) Find a 
unit vector that is perpendicular to both u and v.
37.	 u 81, 1, 39, v 85, 0, 29
38.	 u 82, 3, 09, v 80, 4, 19
39.	 u i j, v 2 j k
40.	 u i j k, v i j k
41.	 Area of a Triangle    Find the area of the triangle with vertices 
P12, 1, 12, Q10, 0, 32, and R12, 4, 02 .
42.	 Area of a Parallelogram    Find the area of the parallelogram 
determined by the vectors u 84, 1, 19 and v 81, 2, 29.
43.	 Volume of a Parallelepiped    Find the volume of the parallel-
epiped determined by the vectors u 2 i j, v 2 j k, 
and w 3 i j k.
44.	 Volume of a Parallelepiped    A parallelepiped has one vertex 
at the origin; the three edges that have the origin as one end-
point extend to the points P10, 2, 22, Q13, 1, 12 , and 
R11, 4, 12 . Find the volume of the parallelepiped.
45–46  ■  Equations of Lines    Find parametric equations for the 
line that passes through P and is parallel to v.
45.	 P12, 0, 62, v 83, 1, 09
46.	 P15, 2, 82, v 2 i j 5 k
47–48  ■  Equations of Lines    Find parametric equations for the 
line that passes through the points P and Q.
47.	 P16, 2, 32, Q14, 1, 22
48.	 P11, 0, 02, Q13, 4, 22
49–50  ■  Equations of Planes    Find an equation for the plane 
with normal vector n and passing through the point P.
49.	 n 82, 3, 59, P12, 1, 12
50.	 n i 2 j 7 k, P12, 5, 22
51–52  ■  Equations of Planes    Find an equation of the plane that 
passes through the points P, Q, and R.
51.	 P11, 1, 12, Q13, 4, 22, R16, 1, 02
52.	 P14, 0, 02, Q10, 3, 02, R10, 0, 52
53.	 Equation of a Line    Find parametric equations for the line 
that crosses the x-axis where x 2 and the z-axis where 
z 4.
54.	 Equation of a Plane    Find an equation of the plane that con-
tains the line x 2 2t, y 4t, z 6 and the point 
P15, 3, 02 . 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

675
	 1.	 Let u be the vector with initial point P13, 12  and terminal point Q13, 92 .
(a)	 Graph u in the coordinate plane.
(b)	 Express u in terms of i and j.
(c)	 Find the length of u.
	 2.	 Let u 81, 39, and let v 86, 29.
(a)	 Find u 3 v.
(b)  Find 0  u v 0 .
(c)	 Find u # v.
(d)  Are u and v perpendicular?
	 3.	 Let u 84!3, 49.
(a)	 Graph u in the coordinate plane, with initial point 10, 02 .
(b)	 Find the length and direction of u.
	 4.	 A river is flowing due east at 8 mi/h. A man heads his motorboat in the direction N 30° E 
in the river. The speed of the motorboat relative to the water is 12 mi/h. 
(a)	 Express the true velocity of the motorboat as a vector.
(b)	 Find the true speed and direction of the motorboat.
	 5.	 Let u 3 i 2 j and v 5 i j.
(a)	 Find the angle between u and v.
(b)	 Find the component of u along v.
(c)	 Find projv u.
	 6.	 Find the work done by the force F 3 i 5 j in moving an object from the point 12, 22  to 
the point 17, 132 .
	 7.	 Let P14, 3, 12  and Q16, 1, 32  be two points in three-dimensional space. 
(a)	 Find the distance between P and Q.
(b)	 Find an equation for the sphere whose center is P and for which the segment PQ
>
 is a  
radius of the sphere.
(c)	 The vector u has initial point P and terminal point Q. Express u both in component 
form and using the vectors i, j, and k.
	 8.	 Calculate the given quantity if
u i j 2 k  v 3 i 2 j k  w j 5 k
(a)	 2u 3v	
(b) 0  u 0
(c)	 u # v	
(d)  u 3 v
(e) 0  v 3 w 0 	
(f)   u # 1v 3 w2
(g)	 The angle between u and v (rounded to the nearest degree)
	 9.	 Find two unit vectors that are perpendicular to both j 2 k and i 2 j 3 k.
10.	 (a)	 Find a vector perpendicular to the plane that contains the points P11, 0, 02 , 
Q12, 0, 12 , and R11, 4, 32 .
(b)	 Find an equation for the plane that contains P, Q, and R.
(c)	 Find the area of triangle PQR.
11.	 Find parametric equations for the line that contains the points P12, 4, 72  and 
Q10, 3, 52 .
CHAPTER 9
TEST
A CUMULATIVE REVIEW TEST FOR CHAPTERS 8 AND 9 CAN BE FOUND AT THE BOOK COMPANION WEBSITE: www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

676
To model the gravitational force near the earth or the flow of wind on a surface of the 
earth, we use vectors. For example, at each point on the surface of the earth air flows with 
a certain speed and direction. We represent the air currents by vectors. If we graph many 
of these vectors, we get a “picture” or a graph of the flow of the air. (See Figure 1.) 
■  Vector Fields in the Plane
A vector field in the coordinate plane is a function that assigns a vector to each point 
in the plane (or to each point in some subset of the plane). For example, 
F1x, y2 xi yj
is a vector field that assigns the vector xi yj to the point 1x, y2. We graph this vector 
field in the next example.
Example 1  ■  Graphing a Vector Field in the Plane
Graph the vector field F1x, y2 xi yj. What does the graph indicate?
Solution    The table gives the vector field at several points. In Figure 2 we sketch the 
vectors in the table together with several other vectors in the vector field.
5
_5
_5
y
x
5
Figure 2
xx, yc
F 5 x i 1 y j
11, 32
 i 3 j
13, 32
 3 i 3 j
14, 62
 4 i 6 j
16, 12
 6 i j
16, 62
 6 i 6 j
We see from the graph that the vectors in the field point away from the origin, and 
the farther from the origin, the greater the magnitude of the vector.	
■
Example 2  ■  Graphing a Vector Field in the Plane
A potter’s wheel has a radius of 5 in. The velocity of each point on the wheel is given 
by the vector field F1x, y2 yi xj. What does the graph indicate?
Solution    The table gives the vector field at several points. In Figure 3 we sketch the 
vectors in the table.
xx, yc
Fxx, yc
xx, yc
Fxx, yc
11, 02
80, 19
11, 02
80, 19
12, 22
82, 29
12, 22
82, 29
13, 02
80, 39
13, 02
80, 39
10, 12
81, 09
10, 12
81, 09
12, 22
82, 29
12, 22
82, 29
10, 32
83, 09
10, 32
83, 09
We see from the graph that the wheel is rotating counterclockwise and that the 
points at the edge of the wheel have a higher velocity than do the points near the cen-
ter of the wheel.	
■
Vector Fields
FOCUS ON MODELING
z
y
x
Figure 1  Wind represented by a 
vector field
y
x
0
F(1, 0)
F(2, 2)
F(0, 3)
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Vector Fields  677
Graphing vector fields requires graphing a lot of vectors. Some graphing calculators 
and computer programs are capable of graphing vector fields. You can also find many 
Internet sites that have applets for graphing vector fields. The vector field in Example 2 
is graphed with a computer program in Figure 4. Notice how the computer scales the 
lengths of the vectors so that they are not too long yet are proportional to their true 
lengths.
■  Vector Fields in Space
A vector field in three-dimensional space is a function that assigns a vector to each 
point in space (or to each point in some subset of space). For example, 
F1x, y, z2 2xi yj z2 k
is a vector field that assigns the vector 2xi yj z3 k to the point 1x, y, z2 . In general, 
it is difficult to draw a vector field in space by hand, since we must draw many vectors 
with the proper perspective. The vector field in the next example is particularly simple, 
so we’ll sketch it by hand.
Example 3  ■  Graphing a Vector Field in Space
Graph the vector field F1x, y, z2 z k. What does the graph indicate?
Solution    A graph is shown in Figure 5. Notice that all vectors are vertical and point 
upward above the xy-plane and downward below it. The magnitude of each vector 
increases with the distance from the xy-plane. 
■
The gravitational pull of the earth in the space surrounding it is mathematically mod-
eled by a vector field. According to Newton’s Law of Gravity, the gravitational force F 
is directed toward the center of the earth and is inversely proportional to the distance 
from the center of the earth. The magnitude of the force is 
F G Mm
r2
where M is the mass of the earth, m is mass of an object in proximity to the earth, r is 
the distance from the object to the center of the earth, and G is the universal gravita-
tional constant. 
To model the gravitational force, let’s place a three-dimensional coordinate system 
with the origin at the center of the earth. The gravitational force at the point 1x, y, z2  is 
directed toward the origin. A unit vector pointing toward the origin is 
u  xi yj z k
"x2 y2 z2
To obtain the gravitational vector field, we multiply this unit vector by the appropriate 
magnitude, namely, GMm/r2. Since the distance r from the point 1x, y, z2  to the origin 
is r "x2 y2 z2, it follows that r2 x2 y2 z2. So we can express the 
gravitational vector field as 
F1x, y, z2 GMm xi yj z k
1x2 y2 z22 3/2
Some of the vectors in the gravitational field F are pictured in Figure 6.
5
_5
_5
5
Figure 4
0
z
y
x
Figure 5
Figure 6  The gravitational field
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

678 
Focus on Modeling
Problems 
1–6  ■  Sketch the vector field F by drawing a diagram as in Figure 3.
	 1.	 F1x, y2 5 1
2 i 1 1
2 j	
  2.  F1x, y2 5 i 1 x j
	 3.	 F1x, y2 5 y i 1 1
2 j	
  4.  F1x, y2 5 1x 2 y2i 1 x j
	 5.	 F1x, y2 5 y i 1 x j
"x2 1 y2	
  6.  F1x, y2 5 y i 2 x j
"x2 1 y2
7–10  ■  Sketch the vector field F by drawing a diagram as in Figure 5.
	 7.	 F1x, y, z2 5 j	
  8.  F1x, y, z2 5 j 2 k
	 9.	 F1x, y, z2 5 z j	
10.  F1x, y, z2 5 y k
11–14  ■  Match the vector field F with the graphs labeled I–IV.
11.	 F1x, y2 5 8 y, x9	
12.  F1x, y2 5 81, sin y9
13.	 F1x, y2 5 8x 2 2, x 1 19	
14.  F1x, y2 5 8 y, 1/x9
3
5
_3
_3
3
_5
_5
5
5
_5
_5
5
I
II
III
IV
3
_3
_3
3
15–18  ■  Match the vector field F with the graphs labeled I–IV.
15.	 F1x, y, z2 5 i 1 2 j 1 3 k	
16.  F1x, y, z2 5 i 1 2 j 1 z k
17.	 F1x, y, z2 5 x i 1 y j 1 3 k	
18.  F1x, y, z2 5 x i 1 y j 1 z k
z
1
0
_1
y
1
0
_1
x
1 0 _1
z
1
_1
y
1
0
_1
x
1 0 _1
0
y
1
_1
x
1 0 _1
z
1
0
_1
z
1
0
_1
y
1
0
_1
1 0 _1
x
I
II
III
IV
	19.	 Flow Lines in a Current    The current in a turbulent bay is described by the velocity vec-
tor field 
F1x, y2 5 1x 1 y2i 1 1x 2 y2j
	 	 A graph of the vector field F is shown. If a small toy boat is put in this bay, we can tell 
from the graph of the vector field what path the boat would follow. Such paths are called 
flow lines (or streamlines) of the vector field. A streamline starting at 11, 232  is shown in 
blue in the figure. Sketch streamlines starting at the given point. 
(a)  11, 42          (b)  122, 12         (c)  121, 222  
5
_5
_5
y
x
5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Throughout the preceding chapters we modeled real-world situations by  
equations. But many real-world situations involve too many variables to be 
modeled by a single equation. For example, weather depends on the 
relationships among many variables, including temperature, wind speed, air 
pressure, and humidity. So to model the weather (and forecast a snowstorm 
like the one pictured above), scientists use many equations, each having 
many variables. Such collections of equations, called systems of equations, 
work together to describe the weather. Systems of equations with hundreds 
of variables are used by airlines to establish consistent flight schedules and 
by telecommunications companies to find efficient routings for telephone 
calls. In this chapter we learn how to solve systems of equations that consist 
of several equations in several variables. 
679
Systems of Equations  
and Inequalities
10
10.1	 Systems of Linear 
Equations in Two 
Variables
10.2	 Systems of Linear 
Equations in Several 
Variables
10.3	 Matrices and Systems  
of Linear Equations
10.4	 The Algebra of Matrices
10.5	 Inverses of Matrices and 
Matrix Equations
10.6	 Determinants and 
Cramer’s Rule
10.7	 Partial Fractions
10.8	 Systems of Nonlinear 
Equations
10.9	 Systems of Inequalities
focus on Modeling
	
Linear Programming
© Dainis Derics/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

680 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
10.1 
Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables
■  Systems of Linear Equations and Their Solutions  ■  Substitution Method  ■  Elimination 
Method  ■  Graphical Method  ■  The Number of Solutions of a Linear System in Two 
Variables  ■  Modeling with Linear Systems
■  Systems of Linear Equations and Their Solutions
A system of equations is a set of equations that involve the same variables. A system 
of linear equations is a system of equations in which each equation is linear. A solu-
tion of a system is an assignment of values for the variables that makes each equation 
in the system true. To solve a system means to find all solutions of the system.
Here is an example of a system of linear equations in two variables:
b2x y 5
x 4y 7        Equation 1
Equation 2
We can check that x  3 and y  1 is a solution of this system.
	
Equation 1	
Equation 2
	
 2x y 5	
 x 4y 7
	
2132 1 5    ✓	
3 4112 7    ✓
The solution can also be written as the ordered pair 13, 12 .
Note that the graphs of Equations 1 and 2 are lines (see Figure 1). Since the solution 
13, 12  satisfies each equation, the point 13, 12  lies on each line. So it is the point of in-
tersection of the two lines.
(3, 1)
1
3
2x-y=5
1
0
x+4y=7
y
x
Figure 1
■  Substitution Method
To solve a system using the substitution method, we start with one equation in the 
system and solve for one variable in terms of the other variable.
Substitution Method 
1.	 Solve for One Variable.    Choose one equation, and solve for one variable in 
terms of the other variable.
2.	 Substitute.    Substitute the expression you found in Step 1 into the other 
equation to get an equation in one variable, then solve for that variable.
3.	 Back-Substitute.    Substitute the value you found in Step 2 back into the 
expression found in Step 1 to solve for the remaining variable.
A linear equation in two variables is an 
equation of the form
ax by c
The graph of a linear equation is a line 
(see Section 1.10).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.1  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables  681
Example 1  ■  Substitution Method
Find all solutions of the system.
b2x   y 1
3x 4y 14        Equation 1
Equation 2
­SOLUTION  Solve for one variable.    We solve for y in the first equation.
y 1 2x       Solve for y in Equation 1
Substitute.    Now we substitute for y in the second equation and solve for x.
 3x 411 2x2   14        Substitute y  1  2x into Equation 2
 3x 4 8x   14        Expand
 5x 4   14        Simplify
 5x   10        Subtract 4
 x 2        Solve for x
Back-substitute.    Next we back-substitute x  2 into the equation y  1  2x.
y 1 2122 5        Back-substitute
Thus x  2 and y  5, so the solution is the ordered pair 12, 52 . Figure 2 shows 
that the graphs of the two equations intersect at the point 12, 52 .
(_2, 5)
y
x
1
2x+y=1
3x+4y=14
1
0
Figure 2
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
■  Elimination Method
To solve a system using the elimination method, we try to combine the equations using 
sums or differences so as to eliminate one of the variables.
Elimination Method
1.	 Adjust the Coefficients.    Multiply one or more of the equations by appropri-
ate numbers so that the coefficient of one variable in one equation is the neg-
ative of its coefficient in the other equation.
2.	 Add the Equations.    Add the two equations to eliminate one variable, then 
solve for the remaining variable.
3.	 Back-Substitute.    Substitute the value that you found in Step 2 back into one 
of the original equations, and solve for the remaining variable.
Check Your Answer
x 2, y 5:
b  2122 5 1
3122 4152 14  ✓
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

682 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Example 2  ■  Elimination Method
Find all solutions of the system.
b3x 2y 14
0x 2y 2        Equation 1
Equation 2
SOLUTION    Since the coefficients of the y-terms are negatives of each other, we can 
add the equations to eliminate y.
 b3x 2y 14
0x 2y 2        System
  4x
16        Add
 
x 4         Solve for x
Now we back-substitute x  4 into one of the original equations and solve for y. Let’s 
choose the second equation because it looks simpler.
 x 2y 2         Equation 2
 4 2y 2
        Back-substitute x 5 4 into Equation 2
 2y 2        Subtract 4
 y 1
        Solve for y
The solution is 14, 12 . Figure 3 shows that the graphs of the equations in the system 
intersect at the point 14, 12 .
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
■  Graphical Method
In the graphical method we use a graphing device to solve the system of equations.
Graphical Method
1.	 Graph Each Equation.    Express each equation in a form suitable for the 
graphing calculator by solving for y as a function of x. Graph the equations 
on the same screen.
2.	 Find the Intersection Point(s).    The solutions are the x- and y-coordinates of 
the point(s) of intersection.
Example 3  ■  Graphical Method
Find all solutions of the system
b
 1.35x 2.13y 2.36
 2.16x 0.32y 
1.06
Solution    Solving for y in terms of x, we get the equivalent system 
b
 y 
0.63x 1.11
 y 6.75x 3.31
See Appendix C, Graphing with a 
Graphing Calculator, for guidelines  
on using a graphing calculator. See 
Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for specific 
graphing instructions. Go to  
www.stewartmath.com.
(4, 1)
y
x
1
7
x-2y=2
3x+2y=14
1
0
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.1  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables  683
where we have rounded the coefficients to two decimals. Figure 4 shows that the two 
lines intersect. Zooming in, we see that the solution is approximately 10.30, 1.302 .
5
_5
_1.5
1.5
Figure 4
Now Try Exercises 13 and 51	
■
■  The Number of Solutions of a Linear System  
in Two Variables
The graph of a linear system in two variables is a pair of lines, so to solve the system 
graphically, we must find the intersection point(s) of the lines. Two lines may intersect 
in a single point, they may be parallel, or they may coincide, as shown in Figure 5. So 
there are three possible outcomes in solving such a ­system.
Number of Solutions of a Linear System in Two Variables
For a system of linear equations in two variables, exactly one of the following 
is true. (See Figure 5.)
1.	 The system has exactly one solution.
2.	 The system has no solution.
3.	 The system has infinitely many solutions.
A system that has no solution is said to be inconsistent. A system with infinitely 
many solutions is called dependent.
0
x
y
0
x
y
0
x
y
(a) Lines intersect at a
single point. The system
has one solution.
(b) Lines are parallel and
do not intersect. The
system has no solution.
(c) Lines coincide—equations
are for the same line. The system
has inﬁnitely many solutions. 
Figure 5
Example 4  ■  A Linear System with One Solution
Solve the system and graph the lines.
b3x y 0
5x 2y 22        Equation 1
Equation 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

684 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Solution    We eliminate y from the equations and solve for x.
 b6x 2y 0
5x 2y 22
        2 3 Equation 1
 11x 2y 22        Add
 x 2         Solve for x
Now we back-substitute into the first equation and solve for y:
 6122 2y 0
        Back-substitute x 5 2
 2y 12        Subtract 12
 y 6
        Solve for y
The solution of the system is the ordered pair 12, 62, that is,
x 2  y 6
The graph in Figure 6 shows that the lines in the system intersect at the point 12, 62.
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
Example 5  ■  A Linear System with No Solution
Solve the system.
b
8x 2y 5
12x 3y 7        Equation 1
Equation 2
Solution    This time we try to find a suitable combination of the two equations to 
eliminate the variable y. Multiplying the first equation by 3 and the second equation 
by 2 gives
 b
24x 6y 15
24x 6y 14        3 3 Equation 1
2 3 Equation 2
 0 29        Add
Adding the two equations eliminates both x and y in this case, and we end up with  
0  29, which is obviously false. No matter what values we assign to x and y, we can-
not make this statement true, so the system has no solution. Figure 7 shows that the 
lines in the system are parallel so do not intersect. The system is inconsistent.
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
Example 6  ■  A Linear System with Infinitely Many Solutions
Solve the system.
b3x 6y 12
4x 8y 16        Equation 1
Equation 2
Solution    We multiply the first equation by 4 and the second equation by 3 to pre-
pare for subtracting the equations to eliminate x. The new equations are
b12x 24y 48
12x 24y 48       
4 3 Equation 1
3 3 Equation 2
We see that the two equations in the original system are simply different ways of 
expressing the equation of one single line. The coordinates of any point on this line 
Check Your Answer
x 2, y 6:
b3122 
162 0
5122 2162 22  ✓
3x-y=0
y
x
2
6
5x+2y=22
(2, 6)
Figure 6
8x-2y=5
1
1
_12x+3y=7
x
0
y
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.1  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables  685
give a solution of the system. Writing the equation in slope-intercept form, we have 
y 1
2x 2. So if we let t represent any real number, we can write the solution as
 x t
 y 1
2t 2
We can also write the solution in ordered-pair form as
At, 1
2t 2B
where t is any real number. The system has infinitely many solutions (see Figure 8).
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
In Example 3, to get specific solutions we have to assign values to t. For instance, if 
t 1, we get the solution A1,  3
2B. If t 4, we get the solution 14, 02 . For every value 
of t we get a different solution. (See Figure 8.)
■  Modeling with Linear Systems
Frequently, when we use equations to solve problems in the sciences or in other  
areas, we obtain systems like the ones we’ve been considering. When modeling with 
systems of equations, we use the following guidelines, which are similar to those in 
­Section 1.7.
Guidelines for Modeling with Systems of Equations
1.	 Identify the Variables.    Identify the quantities that the problem asks you to 
find. These are usually determined by a careful reading of the question posed 
at the end of the problem. Introduce notation for the variables (call them x 
and y or some other letters).
2.	 Express All Unknown Quantities in Terms of the Variables.    Read the problem 
again, and express all the quantities mentioned in the problem in terms of the 
variables you defined in Step 1.
3.	 Set Up a System of Equations.    Find the crucial facts in the problem that give 
the relationships between the expressions you found in Step 2. Set up a sys-
tem of equations (or a model) that expresses these relationships.
4.	 Solve the System and Interpret the Results.    Solve the system you found in 
Step 3, check your solutions, and state your final answer as a sentence that 
answers the question posed in the problem.
The next two examples illustrate how to model with systems of equations.
Example 7  ■  A Distance-Speed-Time Problem
A woman rows a boat upstream from one point on a river to another point 4 mi away 
in 11
2 hours. The return trip, traveling with the current, takes only 45 min. How fast 
does she row relative to the water, and at what speed is the current flowing?
Solution  Identify the variables.    We are asked to find the rowing speed and the 
speed of the current, so we let
x  rowing speed (mi/h)
y  current speed (mi/h)
current
4 mi
!t, t-2@
1
1
1
2
x
0
y
t=4
t=1
Figure 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

686 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Express unknown quantities in terms of the variable.    The woman’s speed when 
she rows upstream is her rowing speed minus the speed of the current; her speed 
downstream is her rowing speed plus the speed of the current. Now we translate this 
information into the language of algebra.
In Words
In Algebra
Rowing speed
x
Current speed
y
Speed upstream
x  y
Speed downstream
x  y
Set up a system of equations.    The distance upstream and downstream is 4 mi, so 
using the fact that speed  time  ­distance for both legs of the trip, we get
speed upstream   time upstream   distance traveled
speed downstream   time downstream   distance traveled
In algebraic notation this translates into the following equations.
 1x y2 3
2 4        Equation 1
 1x y2 3
4 4        Equation 2
(The times have been converted to hours, since we are expressing the speeds in miles 
per hour.) 
Solve the system.    We multiply the equations by 2 and 4, respectively, to clear the 
denominators.
 b3x 3y 8
3x 3y 16        2 3 Equation 1
4 3 Equation 2
 16x 3y 24        Add
 1x 3y 4         Solve for x
Back-substituting this value of x into the first equation (the second works just as well) 
and solving for y, we get
 3142 3y 8
        Back-substitute x 5 4
 3y 8 12        Subtract 12
 y 4
3
        Solve for y
The woman rows at 4 mi/h, and the current flows at 11
3 mi/h.
Check Your Answer
Speed upstream is	
Speed downstream is
        distance
time
4  mi
11
2 h 2 2
3 mi/h	
        distance
time
4  mi
3
4 h 5 1
3 mi/h
and this should equal	
and this should equal
        rowing speed  current flow	
        rowing speed  current flow
                 4 mi/h  4
3 mi/h  2 2
3 mi/h	
                 4 mi/h  4
3 mi/h  5 1
3 mi/h  ✓
Now Try Exercise 65	
■
Weather Prediction
Modern meteorologists do much more 
than predict tomorrow’s weather. They 
research long-term weather patterns, 
depletion of the ozone layer, global 
warming, and other effects of human 
activity on the weather. But daily 
weather prediction is still a major part of 
meteorology; its value is measured by 
the innumerable human lives that are 
saved each year through accurate predic-
tion of hurricanes, blizzards, and other 
catastrophic weather phenomena. Early 
in the 20th century mathematicians pro-
posed to model weather with equations 
that used the current values of hundreds 
of atmospheric variables. Although this 
model worked in principle, it was impos-
sible to predict future weather patterns 
with it because of the difficulty of mea-
suring all the variables accurately and 
solving all the equations. Today, new 
mathematical models combined with 
high-speed computer simulations and 
better data have vastly improved 
weather prediction. As a result, many 
human as well as economic disasters 
have been averted. Mathematicians at 
the National Oceanographic and Atmos­
pheric Administration (NOAA) are contin-
ually researching better methods of 
weather ­prediction.
Mathematics in the Modern World
Rachel Epstein/PhotoEdit
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.1  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables  687
Example 8  ■  A Mixture Problem
A vintner fortifies wine that contains 10% alcohol by adding a 70% alcohol solution 
to it. The resulting mixture has an alcoholic strength of 16% and fills 1000 one-liter 
bottles. How many liters (L) of the wine and of the alcohol solution does the vint-
ner use?
Solution  Identify the variables.    Since we are asked for the amounts of wine and 
alcohol, we let
x  amount of wine used (L)
y  amount of alcohol solution used (L)
Express all unknown quantities in terms of the variable.    From the fact that the 
wine contains 10% alcohol and the solution contains 70% alcohol, we get the 
following.
In Words
In Algebra
Amount of wine used (L)
x
Amount of alcohol solution used (L)
y
Amount of alcohol in wine (L)
0.10x
Amount of alcohol in solution (L)
0.70y
Set up a system of equations.    The volume of the mixture must be the total of the 
two volumes the vintner is adding together, so
x y 1000
Also, the amount of alcohol in the mixture must be the total of the alcohol contributed 
by the wine and by the alcohol solution, that is,
 0.10x 0.70y 10.1621000
 0.10x 0.70y 160
        Simplify
 x 7y 1600
        Multiply by 10 to clear decimals
Thus we get the system
bx y 1000
x 7y 1600        Equation 1
Equation 2
Solve the system.    Subtracting the first equation from the second eliminates the vari-
able x, and we get
 6y 600        Subtract Equation 1 from Equation 2
 y 100        Solve for y
We now back-substitute y  100 into the first equation and solve for x.
 x 100 1000        Back-substitute y 5 100
 x 900         Solve for x
The vintner uses 900 L of wine and 100 L of the alcohol solution.
Now Try Exercise 67	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

688 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
concepts
	 1.	 The system of equations
b2x 3y 7
5x y 9
	 	 is a system of two equations in the two variables  
 
	 	 and  
  . To determine whether 15, 12  is a solution of 
	 	 this system, we check whether x 5 and y 1 satisfy 
	 	 each  
 in the system. Which of the following are 
solutions of this system? 
15, 12, 11, 32, 12, 12
	 2.	 A system of equations in two variables can be solved by the 
	 	
 
 method, the  
 method, 
	 	 or the  
 method.
	 3.	 A system of two linear equations in two variables can have 
	 	 one solution,  
 solution, or  
 
	 	
 
 solutions.
	 4.	 The following is a system of two linear equations in two  
variables. 
b  x y 1
2x 2y 2
	 	 The graph of the first equation is the same as the graph of the 
	 	 second equation, so the system has  
  
  
solutions. We express these solutions by writing
x  t
y   
	 	 where t is any real number. Some of the solutions of this 
	 	 system are 11,  
2, 13,  
2, and 15,  
2.
skills
5–8  ■  Substitution Method    Use the substitution method to find 
all solutions of the system of equations.
	 5.	 b0x 0y 81
4x 3y 18	
  6.	 b3x 0y 1
5x 2y 1
	 7.	 b x y 2
2x 3y 9	
  8.	 b2x 
y 7
x 2y 2
9–12  ■  Elimination Method    Use the elimination method to find 
all solutions of the system of equations.
	 9.	 b3x 4y    10
4x 4y 2 	
10.	 b2x 5y 15
4x 4y 21
	11.	 b
3x 2y 13
6x 5y 
28	
12.	 b2x 5y 18
3x 4y 
19
13–14  ■  Graphical Method    Two equations and their graphs are 
given. Find the intersection point(s) of the graphs by solving the 
system.
13.	 e2x y 1
x 2y 8	
14.  b  x y 2
2x y 5
1
1
y
x
0
 
1
1
0
y
x
15–20  ■  Number of Solutions Determined Graphically    Graph 
each linear system, either by hand or using a graphing device. 
Use the graph to determine whether the system has one solution, 
no solution, or infinitely many solutions. If there is exactly one 
solution, use the graph to find it.
	15.	 b   x y 4
2x y 2	
16.	 b2x y 4
3x y 6
	17.	 b 2x 3y 12
x 3
2y 4	
18.	 b
2x 6y 0
3x 9y 18
	19.	 bx 1
2y 5
  2x y  10	
20.	 b12x 15y 18
2x 
5
2   y 3
21–50  ■  Solving a System of Equations    Solve the system, or 
show that it has no solution. If the system has infinitely many solu-
tions, express them in the ordered-pair form given in Example 6.
	21.	 b
x y 4
x y 0	
22.	 bx y 3
x 3y 7
	23.	 b2x 3y 9
4x 3y 9	
24.	 b 3x 2y 0
x 2y 8
	25.	 b x 3y 5
2x y 3	
26.	 b   x y 
7
2x 3y 1
	27.	 bx y 
2
4x 3y 3	
28.	 b4x 3y   28
9x y 6
	29.	 b x 2y 7
5x y 2	
30.	 b4x 12y 
0
12x 4y 160
	31.	 b   1
3x 1
6y 1
2
3x 1
6y 
3	
32.	 b
3
4x 1
2y 5
 1
4x 3
2y 1
	33.	 b  
 1
2x 1
3y 2
 1
5x 2
3y 8	
34.	 b
0.2x 0.2y 1.8
0.3x 0.5y 
3.3
	35.	 b3x 2y 8
x 2y 0	
36.	 b4x 2y 16
x 5y 70
	37.	 b x 
4y 8
3x 12y 2	
38.	 b3x 
5y 2
9x 15y 6
10.1  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.1  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables  689
	39.	 b
2x 6y 
10
3x 9y 15	
40.	 b  2x 
3y 8
14x 21y 
3
	41.	 b6x 4y 12
9x 6y 18	
42.	 b
25x 75y    100
10x 30y 40
	43.	 b8s 3t 3
5s 2t 1	
44.	 b
u 30√5
3u 80√
5
45.	 b
1
2x 3
5y 3
5
3x 2y 10	
46.	 b
3
2x 1
3y 
1
2
2x 1
2y  1
2
	47.	 b0.4x 1.2y 14
12x 
5y 10	
48.	 b
 26x 10y 4
0.6x 1.2y 
3
	49.	 b
1
3x 1
4y 
2
8x 6y 10	
50.	 b 1
10 x 
1
2y 
4
    2x 10y 80
51–54  ■  Solving a System of Equations Graphically    Use a 
graphing device to graph both lines in the same viewing rectan-
gle. (Note that you must solve for y in terms of x before graphing 
if you are using a graphing calculator.) Solve the system either by 
zooming in and using trace  or by using Intersect. Round 
your answers to two decimals.
	51.	 b0.21x 3.17y 9.51
2.35x 1.17y 5.89
	52.	 b18.72x 14.91y 12.33
6.21x 12.92y 17.82
	53.	 b2371x 6552y 
13,591
9815x 
992y 618,555
	54.	 b435x 912y 
0
132x 455y 994
Skills Plus
55–58  ■  Solving a General System of Equations    Find x and y in 
terms of a and b.
	55.	 b
 x 
y 0
 x ay 1 1a ? 12
	56.	 b
 ax by 0
x  y 1 1a ? b2
	57.	 b
 ax by 1
 bx ay 1 1a2 b2 ? 02 	
	58.	 b ax   by 0
 a2x b2y 1 1a ? 0, b ? 0, a ? b2
applications
59.  Number Problem    Find two numbers whose sum is 34 and 
whose difference is 10.
60.  Number Problem    The sum of two numbers is twice their 
difference. The larger number is 6 more than twice the 
smaller. Find the numbers.
61.  Value of Coins    A man has 14 coins in his pocket, all of which 
are dimes and quarters. If the total value of his change is 
$2.75, how many dimes and how many quarters does he have?
62.  Admission Fees    The admission fee at an amusement park is 
$1.50 for children and $4.00 for adults. On a certain day, 
2200 people entered the park, and the admission fees that 
were collected totaled $5050. How many children and how 
many adults were admitted?
63.  Gas Station    A gas station sells regular gas for $2.20 per gal-
lon and premium gas for $3.00 a gallon. At the end of a busi-
ness day 280 gallons of gas had been sold, and receipts totaled 
$680. How many gallons of each type of gas had been sold?
64.  Fruit Stand    A fruit stand sells two varieties of strawberries: 
standard and deluxe. A box of standard strawberries sells for 
$7, and a box of deluxe strawberries sells for $10. In one day 
the stand sold 135 boxes of strawberries for a total of $1110. 
How many boxes of each type were sold?
65.  Airplane Speed    A man flies a small airplane from Fargo to 
Bismarck, North Dakota—a distance of 180 mi. Because he is 
flying into a headwind, the trip takes him 2 h. On the way 
back, the wind is still blowing at the same speed, so the return 
trip takes only 1 h 12 min. What is his speed in still air, and 
how fast is the wind blowing?
Bismarck
180 mi
wind
Fargo
66.  Boat Speed    A boat on a river travels downstream between 
two points, 20 mi apart, in 1 h. The return trip against the 
current takes 2 1
2 h. What is the boat’s speed, and how fast 
does the current in the river flow?
current
20 mi
67.  Nutrition    A researcher performs an experiment to test a  
hypothesis that involves the nutrients niacin and retinol. She 
feeds one group of laboratory rats a daily diet of precisely 
32 units of niacin and 22,000 units of retinol. She uses two 
types of commercial pellet foods. Food A contains 0.12 unit  
of niacin and 100 units of retinol per gram. Food B contains 
0.20 unit of niacin and 50 units of retinol per gram. How many 
grams of each food does she feed this group of rats each day?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

690 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
68.	 Coffee Blends    A customer in a coffee shop purchases a 
blend of two ­coffees: Kenyan, costing $3.50 a pound, and  
Sri Lankan, costing $5.60 a pound. He buys 3 lb of the blend, 
which costs him $11.55. How many pounds of each kind 
went into the mixture?
69.	 Mixture Problem    A chemist has two large containers of sul-
furic acid solution, with different concentrations of acid in 
each container. Blending 300 mL of the first solution and  
600 mL of the second gives a mixture that is 15% acid, 
whereas blending 100 mL of the first with 500 mL of the sec-
ond gives a 12 1
2% acid mixture. What are the concentrations 
of sulfuric acid in the original containers?
70.	 Mixture Problem    A biologist has two brine solutions, one 
containing 5% salt and another containing 20% salt. How 
many milliliters of each solution should she mix to obtain  
1 L of a solution that contains 14% salt?
71.	 Investments    A woman invests a total of $20,000 in two  
accounts, one paying 5% and the other paying 8% simple  
interest per year. Her annual interest is $1180. How much did 
she invest at each rate?
72.	 Investments    A man invests his savings in two accounts, one 
paying 6% and the other paying 10% simple interest per year. 
He puts twice as much in the lower-yielding account because 
it is less risky. His annual interest is $3520. How much did 
he invest at each rate?
73.	 Distance, Speed, and Time    John and Mary leave their house 
at the same time and drive in opposite directions. John drives 
at 60 mi/h and travels 35 mi farther than Mary, who  
drives at 40 mi/h. Mary’s trip takes 15 min longer than 
John’s. For what length of time does each of them drive?
74.	 Aerobic Exercise    A woman keeps fit by bicycling and  
running every day. On Monday she spends 1
2 h at each  
activity, covering a total of 12 1
2 mi. On Tuesday she runs for  
12 min and cycles for 45 min, covering a total of 16 mi.  
Assuming that her running and cycling speeds don’t change 
from day to day, find these speeds.
75.	 Number Problem    The sum of the digits of a two-digit  
number is 7. When the digits are reversed, the number is  
increased by 27. Find the number.
76.	 Area of a Triangle    Find the area of the triangle that lies in 
the first quadrant (with its base on the x-axis) and that is 
bounded by the lines y  2x  4 and y  4x  20.
y=2x-4
0
x
y
y=_4x+20
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
77.	 DISCUSS:  The Least Squares Line    The least squares line  
or regression line is the line that best fits a set of points in  
the plane. We studied this line in the Focus on Modeling  
that follows Chapter 1 (see page 139). By using calculus, it  
can be shown that the line that best fits the n data points 
1x1, y12, 1x2, y22, c, 1xn, yn2 is the line y  ax  b, where 
the coefficients a and b satisfy the following pair of linear 
equations. (The notation g
n
k1 xk stands for the sum of all the 
x’s. See Section 12.1 for a complete description of sigma 1g2 
notation.)
a a
n
k1
xkb
 
a nb a
n
k1
yk
a a
n
k1
xk
2 b
 
a a a
n
k1
xkb
 
b a
n
k1
xk yk
	 	 Use these equations to find the least squares line for the fol-
lowing data points.
11, 32, 12, 52, 13, 62, 15, 62, 17, 92
	 	 Sketch the points and your line to confirm that the line fits 
these points well. If your calculator computes regression 
lines, see whether it gives you the same line as the ­formulas.
10.2 
Systems of Linear Equations in Several Variables
■  Solving a Linear System  ■  The Number of Solutions of a Linear System  ■  Modeling  
Using Linear Systems
A linear equation in n variables is an equation that can be put in the form
a1x1 a2x2 . . . anxn c
where a1, a2, . . . , an and c are real numbers, and x1, x2, . . . , xn are the variables. If we 
have only three or four variables, we generally use x, y, z, and „ instead of x1, x2, x3, and 
x4. Such equations are called linear because if we have just two variables, the equation 
is a1x  a2y  c, which is the equation of a line. Here are some examples of equations 
in three variables that illustrate the difference between linear and nonlinear equations.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.2  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Several Variables  691
	 Linear equations	
Nonlinear equations
	 6x1 3x2 !5x3 10	
x2 3y !z 5
	 x y z 2„ 1
2	
x1x2 6x3 6
In this section we study systems of linear equations in three or more variables.
■  Solving a Linear System
The following are two examples of systems of linear equations in three variables. The 
second system is in triangular form; that is, the variable x doesn’t appear in the second 
equation, and the variables x and y do not appear in the third equation.
A system of linear equations      A system in triangular form
	
c
x 2y z 1
x 3y 3z 4
2x 3y z 10
	
c
x 2y z 1
y 2z 5
z 3
It’s easy to solve a system that is in triangular form by using back-substitution. So our 
goal in this section is to start with a system of linear equations and change it to a system 
in triangular form that has the same solutions as the original system. We begin by show-
ing how to use back-substitution to solve a system that is already in triangular form.
Example 1  ■  Solving a Triangular System Using Back-Substitution
Solve the following system using back-substitution:
c
x 2y z  1
y 2z 5
z 3
   
Equation 1
Equation 2
Equation 3
Solution    From the last equation we know that z  3. We back-substitute this  
into the second equation and solve for y.
 y 2132 5    Back-substitute z 5 3 into Equation 2
 y 1    Solve for y
Then we back-substitute y  1 and z  3 into the first equation and solve  
for x.
 x 2112 132 1    Back-substitute y 5 21 and z 5 3 into Equation 1
x 2    Solve for x
The solution of the system is x 2, y 1, z 3. We can also write the solution  
as the ordered triple 12, 1, 32 .
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
To change a system of linear equations to an equivalent system (that is, a system 
with the same solutions as the original system), we use the elimination method. This 
means that we can use the following operations.
Operations That Yield an Equivalent System
1.	 Add a nonzero multiple of one equation to another.
2.	 Multiply an equation by a nonzero constant.
3.	 Interchange the positions of two equations.
Not linear because it contains 
the square and the square  
root of a variable
Not linear because it contains  
a product of variables
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

692 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
To solve a linear system, we use these operations to change the system to an equiva-
lent triangular system. Then we use back-substitution as in Example 1. This process is 
called Gaussian elimination.
Example 2  ■  Solving a System of Three Equations in Three Variables
Solve the following system using Gaussian elimination:
c
3x 2y 3z  1
3x 2y z  13
3x 2y 5z 3
   
Equation 1
Equation 2
Equation 3
Solution    We need to change this to a triangular system, so we begin by eliminat­ing 
the x-term from the second equation.
 x 2y 0z 13    Equation 2
 x 2y 3z 1    Equation 1
 4y 4z 12    Equation 2 112 3 Equation 1 5 new Equation 2
This gives us a new, equivalent system that is one step closer to triangular form.
c
x 2y 3z 1
4y 4z 12
3x 2y 5z 3
   
Equation 1
Equation 2
Equation 3
Now we eliminate the x-term from the third equation.
c
x 2y 03z 01
4y 14z 12
8y 14z 00    Equation 3 132 3 Equation 1 5 new Equation 3
 
Then we eliminate the y-term from the third equation.
c
x 2y 3z 1
x 4y 4z 12
x 2y 6z 24    Equation 3 122 3 Equation 2 5 new Equation 3
The system is now in triangular form, but it will be easier to work with if we divide 
the second and third equations by the common factors of each term.
c
x 2y 3z 1
y 3z 3
z 4
   
1
4 3 Equation 2 5 new Equation 2
 1
6 3 Equation 3 5 new Equation 3
Now we use back-substitution to solve the system. From the third equation we get  
z  4. We back-substitute this into the second equation and solve for y.
y 142 3    Back-substitute z 5 4 into Equation 2
 y 7    Solve for y
Now we back-substitute  y 7 and z  4 into the first equation and solve for x.
x 2172 3142 1    Back-substitute y 5 7 and z 5 4 into Equation 1
 x 3    Solve for x
The solution of the system is x  3, y  7, z  4, which we can write as the ordered 
triple 13, 7, 42.
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
 3x 2y 
5z 
3
 3x 6y 
9z 3
 8y 14z 
0
 8y 14z 
0
 8y 
8z 24
 6z 24
Check Your Answer
x 3, y 7, z 4: 
 132 2172 3142 01
 132 2172 142 13
 3132 2172 5142 3  ✓
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.2  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Several Variables  693
■  The Number of Solutions of a Linear System
The graph of a linear equation in three variables is a plane in three-dimensional space 
(see Section 9.6). A system of three equations in three variables represents three planes 
in space. The solutions of the system are the points where all three planes intersect. 
Three planes may intersect in a point, in a line, or not at all, or all three planes may 
coincide. Figure 1 illustrates some of these possibilities. Checking these possibilities 
we see that there are three possible outcomes when solving such a system.
Number of Solutions of a Linear System
For a system of linear equations, exactly one of the following is true.
1.	 The system has exactly one solution.
2.	 The system has no solution.
3.	 The system has infinitely many solutions.
A system with no solution is said to be inconsistent, and a system with infinitely 
many solutions is said to be dependent. As we see in the next example, a linear system 
has no solution if we end up with a false equation after applying Gaussian elimination 
to the system.
(a) The three planes intersect at a 
single point. The system has 
one solution.
(b) The three planes intersect
at more than one point. The
system has infinitely many
solutions.
(c) The three planes have no point
in common. The system has no
solution.
Figure 1
Example 3  ■  A System with No Solution
Solve the following system:
c
x 2y 2z 1
2x 2y z 6
3x 4y 3z 5
   
Equation 1
Equation 2
Equation 3
Solution    To put this in triangular form, we begin by eliminating the x-terms from 
the second equation and the third equation.
c
x 2y 2z 1
2y 3z 4
3x 4y 3z 5
       Equation 2 122 3 Equation 1 5 new Equation 2
c
x 2y 2z 1
2y 3z 4
2y 3z 2       Equation 3 132 3 Equation 1 5 new Equation 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

694 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Now we eliminate the y-term from the third equation.
c
x 2y 2z 
1
2y 3z 
4
0 2        Equation 3 112 3 Equation 2 5 new Equation 3
The system is now in triangular form, but the third equation says 0  22, which is 
false. No matter what values we assign to x, y, and z, the third equation will never be 
true. This means that the system has no solution.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
Example 4  ■  A System with Infinitely Many Solutions
Solve the following system:
c
x y 5z 2
2x y 4z 
2
2x 4y 2z 
8
   
Equation 1
Equation 2
Equation 3
Solution    To put this in triangular form, we begin by eliminating the x-terms from 
the second equation and the third equation.
c
x 3y 5z 2
3y 6z 
6
2x 4y 2z 
8
        Equation 2 122 3 Equation 1 5 new Equation 2
c
x y 5z 2
3y 6z 
6
6y 12z  12        Equation 3 122 3 Equation 1 5 new Equation 3
Now we eliminate the y-term from the third equation.
c
x y 5z  2
3y 6z   6
0   0         Equation 3 122 3 Equation 2 5 new Equation 3
The new third equation is true, but it gives us no new information, so we can drop it 
from the system. Only two equations are left. We can use them to solve for x and y in 
terms of z, but z can take on any value, so there are infinitely many solutions.
Discovery Project
Best Fit Versus Exact Fit
The law of gravity is precise. But when we obtain data on the distance an object 
falls in a given time, our measurements are not exact. We can, however, find the 
line (or parabola) that best fits our data. Not all of the data points will lie on the 
line (or parabola). But if we are given just two points, we can find a line of 
exact fit—that is, a line that passes through the two points. Similarly, we can 
find a parabola through three points. In this project we compare exact data with 
models of real-world data.You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© Vitalii Nesterchuk/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.2  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Several Variables  695
To find the complete solution of the system, we begin by solving for y in terms of 
z, using the new second equation.
 3y 6z 6
        Equation 2
 y 2z 2
        Multiply by 1
3
 y 2z 2        Solve for y
Then we solve for x in terms of z, using the first equation.
 x 12z 22 5z 2         Substitute y 5 2z 1 2 into Equation 1
 x 3z 2 2         Simplify
 x 3z        Solve for x
To describe the complete solution, we let z be any real number t. The solution is
x 3t
 y 2t 2
z t
We can also write this as the ordered triple 13t, 2t  2, t2.
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
In the solution of Example 4 the variable t is called a parameter. To get a ­specific 
solution, we give a specific value to the parameter t. For instance, if we set t  2, we get
 x 3122 6
 y 2122 2 6
 z 2
Thus 16, 6, 22 is a solution of the system. Here are some other solutions of the system 
obtained by substituting other values for the parameter t.
Parameter t
Solution x23t, 2t 2, tc
1
13, 0, 12
  0
10, 2, 02
  3
19, 8, 32
10
130, 22, 102
You should check that these points satisfy the original equations. There are infinitely 
many choices for the parameter t, so the system has infinitely many solutions.
■  Modeling Using Linear Systems
Linear systems are used to model situations that involve several varying quantities. In 
the next example we consider an application of linear systems to finance.
Example 5  ■  Modeling a Financial Problem Using a Linear System
Jason receives an inheritance of $50,000. His financial advisor suggests that he invest 
this in three mutual funds: a money-market fund, a blue-chip stock fund, and a high-
tech stock fund. The advisor estimates that the money-market fund will return 5% over 
the next year, the blue-chip fund 9%, and the high-tech fund 16%. Jason wants a total 
first-year return of $4000. To avoid excessive risk, he decides to invest three times as 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

696 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
much in the money-market fund as in the high-tech stock fund. How much should he 
invest in each fund?
Solution
Let	
x  amount invested in the money-market fund
	
y  amount invested in the blue-chip stock fund
 
z  amount invested in the high-tech stock fund
We convert each fact given in the problem into an equation.
x y z 50,000
0.05x 0.09y 0.16z 4000
x 3z
       
Total amount invested is $50,000
Total investment return is $4000
Money-market amount is 3 3 high-tech amount
Multiplying the second equation by 100 and rewriting the third, we get the following 
system, which we solve using Gaussian elimination.
c
x y 
z 050,000
5x 9y 16z 400,000
x
3z 
0
        100 3 Equation 2
Subtract 3z
c
x y 
z 
50,000
4y 11z 150,000
     y 4z  50,000
        Equation 2 152 3 Equation 1 5 new Equation 2
Equation 3 112 3 Equation 1 5 new Equation 3
c
x y z 
50,000
           5z 50,000
     y 4z 50,000
        Equation 2 4 3 Equation 3 5 new Equation 2
c
x y z 50,000
z 10,000
y 4z 50,000
        A 1
5B 3 Equation 2
112 3 Equation 3
c
x y   z 50,000
y 4z 50,000
z 10,000
        Interchange Equations 2 and 3
Now that the system is in triangular form, we use back-substitution to find that  
x  30,000, y  10,000, and z  10,000. This means that Jason should invest 
$30,000 in the money-market fund
$10,000 in the blue-chip stock fund
$10,000 in the high-tech stock fund
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
concepts
1–2  ■  These exercises refer to the following system:
c 
x y z 
2
x 2y z 3
3x y 2z 
2
  1.	 If we add 2 times the first equation to the second equation, 
	
the second equation becomes  
   
  .
  2.	 To eliminate x from the third equation, we add  
  
times the first equation to the third equation. The third 
	
equation becomes  
   
  .
10.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.2  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Several Variables  697
skills
3–6  ■  Is the System of Equations Linear?    State whether the 
equation or system of equations is ­linear.
	 3.	 6x !3y 1
2 z 0	
  4.	 x2 y2 z2 4
	 5.	 c 
xy 3y z 5
x y2 5z 0
2x
yz 3
	
  6.	 c
x 2y 3z 10
2x 5y
2
y 2z 4
7–12  ■  Triangular Systems    Use back-substitution to solve the 
triangular system.
	 7.	 c
x 3y z 
0
y z 
3
z 2
	
  8.	 c
3x 3y z 0
y 4z 10
z 3
	 9.	 c 
x 2y z 7
y 3z 9
2z 6
	
10.	 c
x 2y 3z 10
2y z 2
3z 12
11.	 c
2x y 6z 5
y 4z 0
2z 1
	
12.	 c 
4x 3z 10
2y 3z 6
1
2z 4
13–16  ■  Eliminating a Variable    Perform an operation on the 
given system that eliminates the indicated variable. Write the new 
equivalent system.
13.	 c
3x y z 
4
x y 2z 
0
x 2y z 1
	
14.	 c
5x 2y 3z 
3
10x 3y z 20
x 3y z 
8
	 	 Eliminate the x-term	
	
Eliminate the x-term 
	 	 from the second equation.	
	
from the second equation.
15.	 c
2x y 3z 5
2x 3y z 13
6x 5y z 7
	
16.	 c
x 3y 2z 1
y z 1
2y z 
1
	 	 Eliminate the x-term	
	
Eliminate the y-term 
	 	 from the third equation.	
	
from the third equation.
17–38  ■  Solving a System of Equations in Three Variables    Find 
the complete solution of the linear system, or show that it is 
inconsistent.
	17.	 c 
x y z 
4
2y z 1
x y 2z 
5
	
18.	 c 
 x y 2z 0
x y 2z 2
 x y   z     2
19.	 c 
x 2y z 6
y 3z 16
x 3y 2z 
14
	
20.	 c 
x 2y 3z 10
3y z 
7
x y z 
7
21.	 c 
x 
y z 4
x 3y 3z 10
2x 
y z 3
	
22.	 c
x 
y z 0
x 2y 5z 3
3x y
6
23.	 c
x
4z 1
2x y 6z 4
2x 3y 2z 8
	
24.	 c
 
x y 2z 
2
 
3x y 5z 
8
 2x y 2z 7
25.	 c 
2x 4y   z    2
x 2y 3z 4
3x   y   z    1
	
26.	 c
2x y 4z 8
x y 4z 3
2x y 4z 18
27.	 c
2y 4z 1
2x y 2z 1
4x 2y

0
	
28.	 c
y z 1
6x 2y z 
2
x y 3z 2
	29.	 c
 x 2y z 
1
 2x 3y 4z 3
 3x 6y 3z 
4
	
30.	 c
x 2y    5z 4
x           2z 0
4x 2y 11z 2
31.	 c 
2x 3y z 1
x 2y
3
x 3y z 4
	
32.	 c
 x 2y 3z 5
 2x y 
z 5
 4x 3y 7z 5
	33.	 c 
x 
y z 
0
x 2y 3z 3
2x 3y 4z 3
	
34.	 c 
x 2y 
z 3
2x 5y 6z 7
2x 3y 2z 5
35.	 c 
2x 3y 2z 0
2x 3y 4z 4
4x 6y 2z 4
	
36.	 c 
2x 4y z 3
x 2y 4z 6
x 2y 2z 0
37.	 d   
2x 2y 2z 2„ 6
2x 2y 2z 2„ 3
2x 2y 2z 2„ 2
2x 2y 3z 2„ 0
	38.	 d  
x y z 
„ 0
x y 2z 2„ 0
2x 2y 3z 4„ 1
2x 3y 4z 5„ 2
applications
	39.	 Financial Planning    Mark has $100,000 to invest. His  
financial consultant advises him to diversify his investment  
in three types of bonds: short-term, intermediate-term, and  
long-term. The short-term bonds pay 4%, the intermediate-
term bonds pay 5%, and the long-term bonds pay 6% simple 
interest per year. Mark wishes to realize a total annual 
income of 5.1%, with equal amounts invested in short- and 
intermediate-term bonds. How much should he invest in  
each type of bond?
40.	 Financial Planning    Cyndee wants to invest $50,000. Her 
financial planner advises her to invest in three types of 
accounts: one paying 3%, one paying 5 1
2%, and one  
paying 9% simple interest per year. Cyndee wants to put 
twice as much in the lowest-yielding, least-risky account  
as in the highest-yielding account. How much should she 
invest in each account to achieve a total annual return of 
$2540?
41.	 Agriculture    A farmer has 1200 acres of land on which he 
grows corn, wheat, and soybeans. It costs $45 per acre to grow 
corn, $60 to grow wheat, and $50 to grow soybeans. Because 
of market demand, the farmer will grow twice as many acres 
of wheat as of corn. He has allocated $63,750 for the cost of 
growing his crops. How many acres of each crop should he 
plant? 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

698 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
42.  Gas Station    A gas station sells three types of gas: Regular 
for $3.00 a gallon, Performance Plus for $3.20 a gallon, and 
Premium for $3.30 a gallon. On a particular day 6500 gallons 
of gas were sold for a total of $20,050. Three times as many 
gallons of Regular as Premium gas were sold. How many  
gallons of each type of gas were sold that day?
43.  Nutrition    A biologist is performing an experiment on the 
effects of various combinations of vitamins. She wishes to 
feed each of her laboratory rabbits a diet that contains exactly 
9 mg of niacin, 14 mg of thiamin, and 32 mg of riboflavin. 
She has available three different types of com­mercial rabbit 
pellets; their vitamin content (per ounce) is given in the table. 
How many ounces of each type of food should each rabbit be 
given daily to satisfy the experiment ­requirements?
Type A
Type B
Type C
Niacin (mg/oz)
2
3
1
Thiamin (mg/oz)
3
1
3
Riboflavin (mg/oz)
8
5
7
44.  Diet Program    Nicole started a new diet that requires each 
meal to have 460 calories, 6 g of fiber, and 11 g of fat. The 
table shows the fiber, fat, and calorie content of one serving 
of each of three breakfast foods. How many servings of each 
food should Nicole eat to follow her diet?
Food
Fiber (g)
Fat (g)
Calories
Toast
2
1
100
Cottage cheese
0
5
120
Fruit
2
0
  60
45.  Juice Blends    The Juice Company offers three kinds of 
smoothies: Midnight Mango, Tropical Torrent, and Pineapple 
Power. Each smoothie contains the amounts of juices shown 
in the table. 
Smoothie
Mango 
juice (oz)
Pineapple 
juice (oz)
Orange 
juice (oz)
Midnight Mango
8
3
3
Tropical Torrent
6
5
3
Pineapple Power
2
8
4
	 	 On a particular day the Juice Company used 820 oz of mango 
juice, 690 oz of pineapple juice, and 450 oz of orange juice. 
How many smoothies of each kind were sold that day?
46.  Appliance Manufacturing    Kitchen Korner produces refrig-
erators, dishwashers, and stoves at three different factories.  
The table gives the number of each product produced at each 
factory per day. Kitchen Korner receives an order for 110 
refrigerators, 150 dishwashers, and 114 ovens. How many 
days should each plant be scheduled to fill this order?
Appliance
Factory A
Factory B
Factory C
Refrigerators
  8
10
14
Dishwashers
16
12
10
Stoves
10
18
  6
47.  Stock Portfolio    An investor owns three stocks: A, B, and C. 
The closing prices of the stocks on three successive trading 
days are given in the table.
Stock A
Stock B
Stock C
Monday
$10
$25
$29
Tuesday
$12
$20
$32
Wednesday
$16
$15
$32
	 	 Despite the volatility in the stock prices, the total value of the 
investor’s stocks remained unchanged at $74,000 at the end 
of each of these three days. How many shares of each stock 
does the investor own?
48.  Electricity    By using Kirchhoff’s Laws, it can be shown that 
the currents I1, I2, and I3 that pass through the three branches  
of the circuit in the figure satisfy the given linear system. 
Solve the system to find I1, I2, and I3.
c
I1 I2 I3 0
16I1 8I2 4I3 4
            8I2 4I3 5
16 
4 V
8 
5 V
4 
I⁄
I¤
I‹
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
49.  PROVE:  Can a Linear System Have Exactly Two Solutions?
(a)	 Suppose that 1x0, y0, z02 and 1x1, y1, z12 are solutions of the 
system
c
a1x b1y c1z d1
a2x b2y c2z d2
a3x b3y c3z d3
	
Show that Qx0 x1
2
, y0 y1
2
, z0 z1
2
R  is also a solution.
(b)	 Use the result of part (a) to prove that if the system has 
two different solutions, then it has infinitely many 
­solutions.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.3  ■  Matrices and Systems of Linear Equations  699
10.3 
Matrices and Systems of Linear Equations
■  Matrices  ■  The Augmented Matrix of a Linear System  ■  Elementary Row 
Operations  ■  Gaussian Elimination  ■  Gauss-Jordan Elimination  ■  Inconsistent and 
Dependent Systems  ■  Modeling with Linear Systems
A matrix is simply a rectangular array of numbers. Matrices* are used to organize infor-
mation into categories that correspond to the rows and columns of the matrix. For 
­example, a scientist might organize information on a population of endangered whales as 
follows:
	
	
Immature	
Juvenile	
Adult
	
Male
	
Female   B12     52     18
15     42     11R
This is a compact way of saying that there are 12 immature males, 15 immature females, 
18 adult males, and so on.
In this section we represent a linear system by a matrix, called the augmented matrix 
of the system.
	
Linear system	
Augmented matrix
b2x   y 5
  x 4y 7                                B2
1
5
1
4
7R
The augmented matrix contains the same information as the system but in a simpler 
form. The operations we learned for solving systems of equations can now be per-
formed on the augmented matrix.
■  Matrices
We begin by defining the various elements that make up a matrix.
Definition of Matrix
An m  n matrix is a rectangular array of numbers with m rows and n columns.
E
a11
a12
a13
p
a1n
a21
a22
a23
p
a2n
a31
a32
a33
p
a3n
(
(
(
f
(
am1
am2
am3
p
amn
U
d
d
d t m rows
d
	
c	
c	
c	
c
	
n columns
We say that the matrix has dimension m  n. The numbers aij are the entries 
of the matrix. The subscript on the entry aij indicates that it is in the ith row and 
the jth column.
w
Equation 2
Equation 1
x
y
*The plural of matrix is matrices.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

700 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Here are some examples of matrices.
	
Matrix	
Dimension
	
B1
3
0
2
4
1R	
2 3 3    2 rows by 3 columns
	
36
5
0
14	
1 3 4    1 row by 4 columns
■  The Augmented Matrix of a Linear System
We can write a system of linear equations as a matrix, called the augmented matrix of 
the system, by writing only the coefficients and constants that appear in the equations. 
Here is an example.
	
Linear system	
Augmented matrix
c
3x 2y z 5
x 3y z 0
x
4z 11 
C
3
2
1
5
1
3
1
0
1
0
4
11
S
Notice that a missing variable in an equation corresponds to a 0 entry in the augmented 
­matrix.
Example 1  ■  Finding the Augmented Matrix of a Linear System
Write the augmented matrix of the following system of equations:
c
6x 2y  z 4
x 3z 1
7y z 5
SOLUTION    First we write the linear system with the variables lined up in columns.
c
6x 2y    z 4
  x          3z 1
          7y   z 5
The augmented matrix is the matrix whose entries are the coefficients and the con-
stants in this system.
C
6
2
1
4
1
0
3
1
0
7
1
5
S
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
■  Elementary Row Operations
The operations that we used in Section 10.2 to solve linear systems correspond to opera-
tions on the rows of the augmented matrix of the system. For example, adding a multiple 
of one equation to another corresponds to adding a multiple of one row to another.
Elementary Row Operations
1.	 Add a multiple of one row to another.
2.	 Multiply a row by a nonzero constant.
3.	 Interchange two rows.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.3  ■  Matrices and Systems of Linear Equations  701
Note that performing any of these operations on the augmented matrix of a system does 
not change its solution. We use the following notation to describe the elementary row  
operations:
Symbol	
Description
Ri  kRj S Ri	
Change the ith row by adding k times row j to it, and  
then put the result back in row i.
kRi	
Multiply the ith row by k.
Ri 4 Rj	
Interchange the ith and jth rows.
In the next example we compare the two ways of writing systems of linear ­equations.
Example 2  ■  Using Elementary Row Operations  
to Solve a Linear System
Solve the following system of linear equations:
c
x y 3z 4
x 2y 2z 10
3x y 5z 14
SOLUTION    Our goal is to eliminate the x-term from the second equation and the  
x- and y-terms from the third equation. For comparison we write both the system of 
equations and its augmented matrix.
	
System	
Augmented matrix
c
x y 3z 4
x 2y 2z 10
3x y 5z 14	
C
1
1
3
4
1
2
2
10
3
1
5
14
S
c
x  y 3z  4
3y 5z  6
2y 4z  2	
C
1
1
3
4
0
3
5
6
0
2
4
2
S
c
x  y 3z  4
3y 5z  6
y 2z  1	
C
1
1
3
4
0
3
5
6
0
1
2
1
S
c
x  y 3z  4
z  3
y 2z  1	
C
1
1
3
4
0
0
1
3
0
1
2
1
S
c
x  y 3z  4
y 2z  1
z  3	
C
1
1
3
4
0
1
2
1
0
0
1
3
S
Now we use back-substitution to find that x  2, y  7, and z  3. The solution is  
12, 7, 32.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
■  Gaussian Elimination
In general, to solve a system of linear equations using its augmented matrix, we use 
elementary row operations to arrive at a matrix in a certain form. This form is described 
in the following box.
Add 112  Equation 1 to Equation 2.
Add 132  Equation 1 to Equation 3.
  R2 R1 S R2  >
R3 3R1 S R3
1
2 R3>
R2 3R3 S R2>
R2 4 R3>
Interchange Equations 2 and 3.
Multiply Equation 3 by 1
2.
Add 132  Equation 3 to Equation 2 
(to eliminate y from Equation 2).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

702 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Row-Echelon Form and reduced row-echelon form of a matrix
A matrix is in row-echelon form if it satisfies the following conditions.
1.	 The first nonzero number in each row (reading from left to right) is 1. This is 
called the leading entry.
2.	 The leading entry in each row is to the right of the leading entry in the row  
immediately above it.
3.	 All rows consisting entirely of zeros are at the bottom of the matrix.
A matrix is in reduced row-echelon form if it is in row-echelon form and also 
­satisfies the following condition.
4.	 Every number above and below each leading entry is a 0.
In the following matrices the first one is not in row-echelon form. The second one is 
in row-echelon form, and the third one is in reduced row-echelon form. The entries in 
red are the leading entries.
Not in row-echelon form	
Row-echelon form	
Reduced row-echelon form
D
0
1
 1
2
0
6
1
0
3
4
5
0
0
0
1
0.4
0
1
1
0
0
T	
D
1
3
6
10
0
0
0
1
4
3
0
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
T	
D
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
3
0
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
T
Here is a systematic way to put a matrix in row-echelon form using elementary row 
­operations:
■	 Start by obtaining 1 in the top left corner. Then obtain zeros below that 1 by add-
ing ­appropriate multiples of the first row to the rows below it.
■	 Next, obtain a leading 1 in the next row, and then obtain zeros below that 1.
■	 At each stage make sure that every leading entry is to the right of the leading 
entry in the row above it—rearrange the rows if necessary.
■	 Continue this process until you arrive at a matrix in row-echelon form.
This is how the process might work for a 3  4 matrix:
C
1
j
j
j
0
j
j
j
0
j
j
j
S     
C
1
j
j
j
0
1
j
j
0
0
j
j
S     
C
1
j
j
j
0
1
j
j
0
0
1
j
S
Once an augmented matrix is in row-echelon form, we can solve the corresponding 
linear system using back-substitution. This technique is called Gaussian elimination, 
in honor of its inventor, the German mathematician C. F. Gauss (see page 290).
Solving a System Using Gaussian Elimination
1.	 Augmented Matrix.    Write the augmented matrix of the system.
2.	 Row-Echelon Form.    Use elementary row operations to change the augmented 
matrix to row-echelon form.
3.	 Back-Substitution.    Write the new system of equations that corresponds to 
the row-echelon form of the augmented matrix and solve by ­back- 
substitution.
Leading 1’s  
have 0’s above  
and below them
Leading 1’s shift to 
the right in  
successive rows
Leading 1’s do not 
shift to the right  
in successive rows
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.3  ■  Matrices and Systems of Linear Equations  703
Augmented matrix:
Row-echelon form:
Need a 1 here
Need 0’s here
Need a 1 here
Need a 0 here
Need a 1 here
Example 3  ■  Solving a System Using Row-Echelon Form
Solve the following system of linear equations using Gaussian elimination:
c
4x 8y 14z 14
3x 8y 15z 11
2x 8y 12z 17
SOLUTION    We first write the augmented matrix of the system, and then we use ele­
men­tary row operations to put it in row-echelon form.
C
4
8
4
4
3
8
5
11
2
1
12
17
S
1
4 R1>    C
1
2
1
1
3
8
5
11
2
1
12
17
S
  R2 3R1 S R2  >
R3 2R1 S R3
    C
1
2
1
1
0
2
8
14
0
5
10
15
S
1
2 R2>    C
1
2
1
1
0
1
4
7
0
5
10
15
S
R3 5R2 S R3>    C
1
2
1
1
0
1
4
7
0
0
10
20
S
 1
10 R3>    C
1
2
1
1
0
1
4
7
0
0
1
2
S
We now have an equivalent matrix in row-echelon form, and the corresponding 
system of equations is
c
x 2y z 1
x 2y 4z 7
x 2y 4z 2
Back-substitute:    We use back-substitution to solve the system.
 
y 4122 7    Back-substitute z 5 22 into Equation 2
 y 1
    Solve for y
 x 2112 122 1
    Back-substitute y 5 1 and z 5 22 into Equation 1
 x 3    Solve for x
So the solution of the system is 13, 1, 22.
Now Try Exercise 31	
■
Graphing calculators have a “row-echelon form” command that puts a matrix in  
row-echelon form. (On the TI-83/84 this command is ref.) For the augmented matrix 
in Example 3 the ref command gives the output shown in ­Figure 1. Notice that the  
ref([A])
   [[1 2 -1 1 ]
    [0 1 2  -3]
    [0 0 1  -2]]
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

704 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Need a 0 here
Need 0’s here
row-echelon form that is obtained by the calculator differs from the one we got in Ex-
ample 3. This is because the calculator used different row operations than we did. You 
should check that your calculator’s row-echelon form leads to the same solution as ours.
■  Gauss-Jordan Elimination
If we put the augmented matrix of a linear system in reduced row-echelon form, then 
we don’t need to back-substitute to solve the system. To put a matrix in reduced row-
echelon form, we use the following steps.
■	 Use the elementary row operations to put the matrix in row-echelon form.
■	 Obtain zeros above each leading entry by adding multiples of the row containing 
that entry to the rows above it. Begin with the last leading entry and work up.
Here is how the process works for a 3  4 matrix:
C
1
j
j
j
0
1
j
j
0
0
1
j
S      S      C
1
j
0
j
0
1
0
j
0
0
1
j
S      S      C
1
0
0
j
0
1
0
j
0
0
1
j
S
Using the reduced row-echelon form to solve a system is called Gauss-Jordan elimi-
nation. The process is illustrated in the next example.
Example 4  ■  Solving a System Using Reduced Row-Echelon Form
Solve the following system of linear equations, using Gauss-Jordan elimination:
c
4x 8y  4z 14
3x 8y  5z 11
2x  y 12z 17
SOLUTION    In Example 3 we used Gaussian elimination on the augmented matrix of 
this system to arrive at an equivalent matrix in row-echelon form. We continue using 
elementary row operations on the last matrix in Example 3 to arrive at an equivalent 
matrix in reduced row-echelon form.
	
C
1
2
1
1
0
1
4
7
0
0
1
2
S
	
 R2 4R3 S R2 >
R1 R3 S R1
  C
1
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
2
S
	
 R1 2R2 S R1 >  C
1
0
0
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
2
S
We now have an equivalent matrix in reduced row-echelon form, and the correspond-
ing system of equations is
c 
x 3
y 1
z 2
Hence we immediately arrive at the solution 13, 1, 22 .
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
See Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for specific 
instructions on working with matrices. 
Go to www.stewartmath.com.
Since the system is in reduced row-­
echelon form, back-subsitution is not 
required to get the solution.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.3  ■  Matrices and Systems of Linear Equations  705
Graphing calculators also have a command that puts a matrix in reduced row-
echelon form. (On the TI-83/84 this command is rref.) For the augmented matrix in 
Example 4 the rref command gives the output shown in Figure 2. The calculator gives 
the same reduced row-echelon form as the one we got in Example 4. This is because 
every matrix has a unique reduced row-echelon form.
■  Inconsistent and Dependent Systems
The systems of linear equations that we considered in Examples 1–4 had exactly one 
­solution. But as we know from Section 10.2, a linear system may have one solution, no 
­solution, or infinitely many solutions. Fortunately, the row-echelon form of a system 
­allows us to determine which of these cases applies, as described in the following box.
First we need some terminology. A leading variable in a linear system is one that 
­corresponds to a leading entry in the row-echelon form of the augmented matrix of the 
­system.
The Solutions of a Linear System in Row-Echelon Form
Suppose the augmented matrix of a system of linear equations has been trans-
formed by Gaussian elimination into row-echelon form. Then exactly one of the 
following is true.
1.	 No solution.  If the row-echelon form contains a row that represents the equa-
tion 0  c, where c is not zero, then the system has no solution. A system 
with no solution is called inconsistent.
2.	 One solution.  If each variable in the row-echelon form is a leading  
variable, then the system has exactly one solution, which we find using 
back-substitution or Gauss-Jordan elimination.
3.	 Infinitely many solutions. If the variables in the row-echelon form are not all 
leading variables and if the system is not inconsistent, then it has infinitely 
many solutions. In this case the system is called dependent. We solve the 
system by putting the matrix in reduced row-echelon form and then express-
ing the leading variables in terms of the nonleading variables. The nonlead-
ing variables may take on any real numbers as their values.
The matrices below, all in row-echelon form, illustrate the three cases described 
above.
	
No solution	
One solution	
Infinitely many solutions
C
1
2
5
7
0
1
3
4
0
0
0
1
S            C
1
6
1
3
0
1
2
2
0
0
1
8
S            C
1
2
3
1
0
1
5
2
0
0
0
0
S
Example 5  ■  A System with No Solution
Solve the following system:
c
x 3y 2z 12
2x 5y 5z 14
x 2y 3z 20
Each variable is a 
leading variable
z is not a leading 
variable
Last equation 
says 0 = 1
rref([A])
    [[1 0 0 -3]
     [0 1 0 1 ]
     [0 0 1 -2]]
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

706 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
SOLUTION    We transform the system into row-echelon form.
C
1
3
2
12
2
5
5
14
1
2
3
20
S   R2 2R1 S R2 >
R3 R1 S R3
  C
1
3
2
12
0
1
1
10
0
1
1
8
S
 R3 R2 S R3 >  C
1
3
2
12
0
1
1
10
0
0
0
18
S 
1
18 R3>  C
1 3
2
12
0
1
1 10
0
0
0
1
S
This last matrix is in row-echelon form, so we can stop the Gaussian elimination process. 
Now if we translate the last row back into equation form, we get 0x  0y  0z  1,  
or 0  1, which is false. No matter what values we pick for x, y, and z, the last equation 
will never be a true statement. This means that the ­system has no solution.
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
Figure 3 shows the row-echelon form produced by a TI-83/84 calculator for the 
augmented matrix in Example 5. You should check that this gives the same result.
Example 6  ■  A System with Infinitely Many Solutions
Find the complete solution of the following system:
c
3x 5y 36z   10
x
7z 
5
x y 10z 4
SOLUTION    We transform the system into reduced row-echelon form. (The rref 
command on a TI-83 calculator gives the same result, as shown in Figure 4.)
C
3
5
36
10
1
0
7
5
1
1
10
4
S   R1 4 R3 >  C
1
1
10
4
1
0
7
5
3
5
36
10
S
 R2 R1 S R2 >
R3 3R1 S R3
  C
1
1
10
4
0
1
3
1
0
2
6
2
S   R3 2R2 S R3 >  C
1
1
10
4
0
1
3
1
0
0
0
0
S
 R1 R2 S R1 >  C
1
0
7
5
0
1
3
1
0
0
0
0
S
The third row corresponds to the equation 0  0. This equation is always true, no 
matter what values are used for x, y, and z. Since the equation adds no new informa-
tion about the variables, we can drop it from the system. So the last matrix corre-
sponds to the system
ex
7z 5
y 3z 
1        Equation 1
Equation 2
Now we solve for the leading variables x and y in terms of the nonleading variable z.
 x 7z 5        Solve for x in Equation 1
 y 3z 1        Solve for y in Equation 2
Leading variables
ref([A])
[[1 -2.5 2.5 7  ]
 [0 1    1   -10]
 [0 0    0   1  ]]
Figure 3
Reduced row-echelon form on the  
TI-83 calculator:
rref([A])
   [[1 0 -7 -5]
    [0 1 -3 1 ]
    [0 0 0  0 ]]
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.3  ■  Matrices and Systems of Linear Equations  707
To obtain the complete solution, we let z be any real number t, and we express x, y, 
and z in terms of t.
x 7t 5
y 3t 1
z t
We can also write the solution as the ordered triple 17t 5, 3t 1, t2 , where t is any 
real number.
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
In Example 6, to get specific solutions, we give a specific value to t. For example, if  
t 1, then
x 7112 5 2
y 3112 1 4
z 1
Here are some other solutions of the system obtained by substituting other values for 
the parameter t.
Parameter t
Solution x7t 2 5, 3t 1, tc
1
112, 2, 12
0
15, 1, 02
2
19, 7, 22
5
130, 16, 52
Example 7  ■  A System with Infinitely Many Solutions
Find the complete solution of the following system:
c
x 2y 3z 4„ 10
x 3y 3z 4„ 15
2x 2y 6z 8„ 10
SOLUTION    We transform the system into reduced row-echelon form.
C
1
2
3
4
10
1
3
3
4
15
2
2
6
8
10
S   R2 R1 S R2 >
R3 2R1 S R3
  C
1
2
3
4
10
0
1
0
0
5
0
2
0
0
10
S
 R3 2R2 S R3 > C
1
2
3
4
10
0
1
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
S 
 R1 2R2 S R1 > C
1
0
3
4
0
0
1
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
S
This is in reduced row-echelon form. Since the last row represents the equation 0  0, 
we may discard it. So the last matrix corresponds to the system
ex
3z 4„ 0
y 
5
Leading variables
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

708 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
To obtain the complete solution, we solve for the leading variables x and y in terms  
of the nonleading variables z and „, and we let z and „ be any real numbers s and t, 
respectively. Thus the complete solution is
x  3s 4t
y 5
z s
„ t
where s and t are any real numbers.
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
Note that s and t do not have to be the same real number in the solution for Example 7. 
We can choose arbitrary values for each if we wish to construct a specific solution to the 
system. For example, if we let s  1 and t  2, then we get the solution 111, 5, 1, 22. You 
should check that this does indeed satisfy all three of the original equations in Example 7.
Examples 6 and 7 illustrate this general fact: If a system in row-echelon form has n 
nonzero equations in m variables 1m  n2, then the complete solution will have m  n 
nonleading variables. For instance, in Example 6 we arrived at two nonzero equations 
in the three variables x, y, and z, which gave us 3  2  1 nonleading ­variable.
■  Modeling with Linear Systems
Linear equations, often containing hundreds or even thousands of variables, occur fre-
quently in the applications of algebra to the sciences and to other fields. For now, let’s 
consider an example that involves only three variables.
Example 8  ■  Nutritional Analysis Using a System of Linear Equations
A nutritionist is performing an experiment on student volunteers. He wishes to feed 
one of his subjects a daily diet that consists of a combination of three commercial diet 
foods: MiniCal, LiquiFast, and SlimQuick. For the experiment it is important that the 
subject consume exactly 500 mg of potassium, 75 g of protein, and 1150 units of vita-
min D every day. The amounts of these nutrients in 1 oz of each food are given in the 
table. How many ounces of each food should the subject eat every day to satisfy the 
nutrient requirements exactly?
MiniCal
LiquiFast
SlimQuick
Potassium (mg)
50
  75
10
Protein (g)
  5
  10
  3
Vitamin D (units)
90
100
50
SOLUTION    Let x, y, and z represent the number of ounces of MiniCal, LiquiFast, and 
SlimQuick, respectively, that the subject should eat every day. This means that he will 
get 50x mg of potassium from MiniCal, 75y mg from LiquiFast, and 10z mg from 
Slim­Quick, for a total of 50x  75y  10z mg potassium in all. Since the potassium 
re­quire­ment is 500 mg, we get the first equation below. Similar reasoning for the pro-
tein and vitamin D requirements leads to the system
c
50x   75y 10z   500
  5x   10y   3z     75
90x 100y 50z 1150
       
Potassium
Protein
Vitamin D
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.3  ■  Matrices and Systems of Linear Equations  709
Dividing the first equation by 5 and the third one by 10 gives the system
c
10x 15y 2z 100
5x 10y 3z 75
9x 10y 5z 115
 
We can solve this system using Gaussian elimination, or we can use a graphing calcu-
lator to find the reduced row-echelon form of the augmented matrix of the system. 
Using the rref command on the TI-83/84, we get the output in Figure 5. From the 
reduced row-echelon form we see that x  5, y  2, z  10. The subject should be 
fed 5 oz of MiniCal, 2 oz of LiquiFast, and 10 oz of SlimQuick every day.
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
A more practical application might involve dozens of foods and nutrients rather than 
just three. Such problems lead to systems with large numbers of variables and equa-
tions. Computers or graphing calculators are essential for solving such large systems.
rref([A])
   [[1 0 0 5 ]
    [0 1 0 2 ]
    [0 0 1 10]]
Figure 5
Check Your Answer
x 5, y 2, z 10:
c
10152 15122 21102 100
5152 10122 31102 
75
  9152 10122 51102 115  ✓
Concepts
	 1.	 If a system of linear equations has infinitely many solutions, 
	 	 then the system is called  
  . If a system of linear 
	 	 equations has no solution, then the system is called 
 
  .
	 2.	 Write the augmented matrix of the following system of  
equations.
	
System	
Augmented matrix
c
x y z 
1
x
2z 3
2y z 
3
            C
j j j j
j j j j
j j j j
S
	 3.	 The following matrix is the augmented matrix of a system of 
linear equations in the variables x, y, and z. (It is given in  
reduced row-echelon form.)
C
1
0
1
3
0
1
2
5
0
0
0
0
S
(a)	 The leading variables are  
  .
(b)	 Is the system inconsistent or dependent?  
(c)	 The solution of the system is:
x _____  , y _____  , z _____
	 4.	 The augmented matrix of a system of linear equations is given 
in reduced row-echelon form. Find the solution of the system.
(a)  C
1 0 0 2
0 1 0 1
0 0 1 3
S     (b)  C
1 0 1 2
0 1 1 1
0 0 0 0
S     (c)  C
1 0 0 2
0 1 0 1
0 0 0 3
S
	
	
x _____	
x _____	
x _____
	
	
y _____	
y _____	
y _____
	
	
z _____	
z _____	
z _____
skills
5–10  ■  Dimension of a Matrix    State the dimension of the 
matrix.
	 5.	 C
2
7
0
1
5
3
S 	
  6.	 c 1
5
4
0
0
2
11
3d  
	 7.	 c 12
35d   	
  8.	 C
3
0
1
S  
	 9.	 31 4 74 	
10.	 c 1
0
0
1d
11–12  ■  The Augmented Matrix    Write the augmented matrix 
for the system of linear equations.
11.	 c
3x y z 2
2x y
1
x
z 3
	
12.	 c
x
z 1
3y 2z 
7
x y 3z 
3
13–20  ■  Form of a Matrix    A matrix is given. (a) Determine 
whether the matrix is in row-echelon form. (b) Determine 
whether the matrix is in reduced ­row-echelon form. (c) Write the 
system of equations for which the given matrix is the augmented 
matrix.
13.  c 1
0
3
0
1
5d 	
14.	 c 1
3
3
0
1
5d
15.  C
1
2
8
0
0
1
3
2
0
0
0
0
S 	
16.	 C
1
0
7
0
0
1
3
0
0
0
0
1
S
17.  C
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
5
1
S 	
18.	 C
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
2
0
0
1
3
S
10.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

710 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
19.  D
1
3
0
1
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
T 	
20.	 D
1
3
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
0
0
0
1
0
0
T
21–24  ■  Elementary Row Operations    Perform the indicated 
elementary row operation.
21.	 C
1
1
2
0
3
1
1
4
1
2
1
1
S 	
22.	 C
5
2
3
3
10
3
1
20
1
3
1
8
S
	 	 Add 3 times Row 1 to 	
	
Add 2 times Row 1 to  
Row 2.	
	
Row 2. 
23. C
2
1
3
5
2
3
1
13
6
5
1
7
S 	
24.	 C
1
3
2
1
0
1
1
1
0
2
1
1
S
	 	 Add 3 times Row 1 to 	
	
Add 2 times Row 2 to  
Row 3.	
	
Row 3.
25–28  ■  Back-Substitution    A matrix is given in row-echelon 
form. (a) Write the system of equations for which the given 
matrix is the augmented matrix. (b) Use back-substitution to 
solve the system.
25.	 C
1
2
4
3
0
1
2
7
0
0
1
2
S 	
26.	 C
1
1
3
8
0
1
3
5
0
0
1
1
S
27.	 D
1
2
3
1
7
0
1
2
0
5
0
0
1
2
5
0
0
0
1
3
T
	28.	 D
1
0
2
2
5
0
1
3
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
T
29–38  ■  Linear Systems with One Solution    The system of lin-
ear equations has a unique solution. Find the solution using 
Gaussian elimination or Gauss-Jordan elimination.
29.  c
x 2y  z 1
  y 2z 5
x  y 3z 8
	
30.  c
x y 6z 3
x y 3z 3
x 2y 4z 7
31.  c
x y z 2
2x 3y 2z 4
4x y 3z 1
	
32.  c
x y z 
4
x 2y 3z 17
2x y 3z 7
33.  c
 x 2y z 2
x 2y z 0
2x y z 3
	
34.  c
2y z 4
x y z 4
3x 3y z 10
35.  c
x1 2x2 x3  9
2x1
x3 2
3x1 5x2 2x3  22
	
36.  c
2x1 2x2 4x3 17
2x1 2x2 4x3 16
3x1 2x2 4x3 11
37.  c
2x 3y z 13
x 2y 5z 6
5x y z 49
	
38.  c
10x 10y 20z 60
15x 20y 30z 25
5x 30y 10z 45
39–48  ■  Dependent or Inconsistent Linear Systems    Determine 
whether the system of linear equations is inconsistent or depen-
dent. If it is dependent, find the complete solution.
39.  c
x y z 2
y 3z 1
2x y 5z 0
	
40.  c
x y 3z 3
2x y 2z 5
y 8z 8
41.  c
2x 3y 9z 5
x
3z 
2
3x y 4z 3
	
42.  c
x 2y 5z 
3
2x 6y 11z 
1
3x 16y 20z 26
43.  c
  x   y   3z   3
4x 8y 32z 24
2x 3y 11z   4
	
44.  c
2x 6y 2z 12
      x 3y 2z    10
  x 3y 2z      6
45.  c
  x 4y   2z 3
2x   y   5z  12
8x 5y 11z  30
	
46.  c
3r 2s 3t  10
  r   s   t 5
  r 4s   t  20
47.  c
2x y 2z 12
x 1
2 y z 6
3x 3
2 y 3z  18
	
48.  c 
           y 5z 7
3x 2y
12
3x
10z 80
49–64  ■  Solving a Linear System    Solve the system of linear 
equations.
49.  c 
4x 3y 3z 8
2x 3y 3z 4
2x 3y 2z 3
	
50.  c 
 2x 3y 5z 14
 4x 3y 2z 17
x 3y 5z 13
51.  c
2x y 3z 9
x
7z 10
3x 2y z 4
	
52.  c
4x   y 36z 24
x
       2y   9z 3
2x   y   6z 6
53.  c 
2x 2y 3z 15
2x 4y 6z 1 10
 3x 7y 2z 13
	
54.  c 
3x 3y z 2
4x 3y z 4
2x 5y z 0
55.  c 
x   y 6z 
8
x

z 
5
x 3y 14z 4
	
56.  c
  3x   y 2z 1
  4x 2y   z 7
x 3y 2z 1
57.  d  
x 2y z 3„ 3
3x 4y z „ 9
x y z „ 0
2x y 4z 2„ 3
	58.  d  
x y z „ 
6
2x 
z 3„ 
8
x y
4„ 10
3x 5y z „ 
20
59.	 d
    x    y 2z 2„ 2
            3y   z 2„ 
2
      x y          3„ 
2
3x        z 2„ 5
60.	 d  
3x 3y 2z 2„ 12
3x 2y 2z 2„ 10
3x 3y 2z 5„ 15
3x 3y 2z 5„ 13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.3  ■  Matrices and Systems of Linear Equations  711
61.  c
x y
„ 0
3x
z 2„ 0
x 4y z 2„ 0
	
62.	 c
  2x   y 2z „ 5
 x   y 4z „ 3
  3x 2y 4z        0
 
63.  d
x
z „ 
4
y z
4
x 2y 3z „  12
2x
2z 5„ 1
 
64.  d  
2x 2y 2z 2„ 10
3x 2y 2z 2„ 10
2x 2y 2z 4„ 12
2x 2y 2z 5„ 16
65–68  ■  Solving a Linear System Using a Graphing Calculator     
Solve the system of linear equations by using the rref com-
mand on a graphing calculator. State your answer rounded to two 
decimal places.
65.	 c
0.75x 3.75y 2.95z 4.0875
0.95x 8.75y
3.375
1.25x 0.15y 2.75z 3.6625
	
66. c
1.31x 2.72y 3.71z 13.9534
0.21x
3.73z 
13.4322
2.34y 4.56z 21.3984
67.	 d
42x 31y
42„ 0.4
6x
9„ 
4.5
35x
67z 32„ 348.8
31y 48z 52„ 76.6
	68.	 d
49x 27y 52z
145.0
27y
43„ 118.7
31y 42z
72.1
73x 54y
132.7
applications
69.  Nutrition    A doctor recommends that a patient take 50 mg 
each of niacin, riboflavin, and thiamin daily to alleviate a 
vitamin deficiency. In his medicine chest at home the patient 
finds three brands of vitamin pills. The amounts of the rele-
vant vitamins per pill are given in the table. How many pills 
of each type should he take every day to get 50 mg of each 
vitamin?
VitaMax
Vitron
VitaPlus
Niacin (mg)
  5
10
15
Riboflavin (mg)
15
20
  0
Thiamin (mg)
10
10
10
70.  Mixtures    A chemist has three acid solutions at various con-
centrations. The first is 10% acid, the second is 20%, and the 
third is 40%. How many milliliters of each should she use to  
make 100 mL of 18% solution, if she has to use four times as 
much of the 10% solution as the 40% solution?
71.  Distance, Speed, and Time    Amanda, Bryce, and Corey  
enter a race in which they have to run, swim, and cycle over a 
marked course. Their average speeds are given in the table. 
Corey finishes first with a total time of 1 h 45 min. Amanda 
comes in second with a time of 2 h 30 min. Bryce finishes last 
with a time of 3 h. Find the distance (in mi) for each part of the 
race.
Average speed (mi/h)
Running
Swimming
Cycling
Amanda
10
4
20
Bryce
  7 1
2
6
15
Corey
15
3
40
72.  Classroom Use    A small school has 100 students who  
occupy three ­class­rooms: A, B, and C. After the first period 
of the school day, half the students in room A move to  
room B, one-fifth of the students in room B move to room C,  
and one-third of the students in room C move to room A. 
­Nevertheless, the total number of students in each room is  
the same for both periods. How many students occupy each 
room?
73.  Manufacturing Furniture    A furniture factory makes wooden 
tables, chairs, and armoires. Each piece of furniture requires 
three operations: cutting the wood, assembling, and finishing. 
Each operation requires the number of hours given in the 
table. The workers in the factory can provide 300 h of cut-
ting, 400 h of assembling, and 590 h of finishing each work 
week. How many tables, chairs, and armoires should be pro-
duced so that all available labor-hours are used? Or is this 
impossible?
Table
Chair
Armoire
Cutting (h)
1
2
1
1
Assembling (h)
1
2
1 1
2
1
Finishing (h)
1
1 1
2
2
74.  Traffic Flow    A section of a city’s street network is shown in 
the figure. The arrows indicate one-way streets, and the num-
bers show how many cars enter or leave this section of the 
city via the indicated street in a certain one-hour period. The 
variables x, y, z, and „ represent the number of cars that 
travel along the portions of First, Second, Avocado, and Birch 
Streets during this period. Find x, y, z, and „, assuming that 
none of the cars stop or park on any of the streets shown.
180
70
20
200
30
200
400
200
FIRST STREET
SECOND STREET
AVOCADO
STREET
BIRCH
STREET
x
y
z
„
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

712 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
75.	 DISCUSS:  Polynomials Determined by a Set of Points    We all 
know that two points uniquely determine a line y  ax  b 
in the coordinate plane. Similarly, three points uniquely 
determine a quadratic (second-degree) polynomial
y ax2 bx c
	 	 four points uniquely determine a cubic (third-degree) 
­polynomial 
y ax3 bx2 cx d
	 	 and so on. (Some exceptions to this rule are if the three points 
actually lie on a line, or the four points lie on a quadratic or 
line, and so on.) For the following set of five points, find the 
line that contains the first two points, the quadratic that con-
tains the first three points, the cubic that contains the first 
four points, and the fourth-degree polynomial that contains 
all five points.
10, 02, 11, 122, 12, 402, 13, 62, 11, 142 
	 	 Graph the points and functions in the same viewing ­rectangle 
using a graphing device.
10.4  The Algebra of Matrices
■  Equality of Matrices  ■  Addition, Subtraction, and Scalar Multiplication  
of Matrices  ■  Multiplication of Matrices  ■  Properties of Matrix Multiplication   
■  Applications of Matrix  Multiplication  ■  Computer Graphics
Thus far, we have used matrices simply for notational convenience when solving linear 
systems. Matrices have many other uses in mathematics and the sciences, and for most 
of these applications a knowledge of matrix algebra is essential. Like numbers, matrices 
can be added, subtracted, multiplied, and divided. In this section we learn how to per-
form these algebraic operations on matrices.
■  Equality of Matrices
Two matrices are equal if they have the same entries in the same positions.
Equality of Matrices
The matrices A  ”aij’ and B  ”bij’ are equal if and only if they have the same 
dimension m  n, and corresponding entries are equal, that is,
aij  bij
for i  1, 2, . . . , m and j  1, 2, . . . , n.
Example 1  ■  Equal Matrices
Find a, b, c, and d, if
c a
b
c
dd c 1
3
5
2d
SOLUTION    Since the two matrices are equal, corresponding entries must be the same. 
So we must have a  1, b  3, c  5, and d  2.
Now Try Exercises 5 and 7	
■
Equal matrices
c !4
22
e0
0.5
1
1 1d c 2
4
1
1
2
2
2
0d
Unequal matrices
C
1 2
3 4
5 6
S ? c 1 3 5
2 4 6 d
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.4  ■  The Algebra of Matrices  713
■  Addition, Subtraction, and Scalar Multiplication  
of Matrices
Two matrices can be added or subtracted if they have the same dimension. (Otherwise, 
their sum or difference is undefined.) We add or subtract the matrices by adding or 
subtracting corresponding entries. To multiply a matrix by a number, we multiply every 
element of the matrix by that number. This is called the scalar product.
Sum, Difference, and Scalar Product of Matrices
Let A  ”aij’ and B  ”bij’ be matrices of the same dimension m  n, and let c  
be any real number.
1.	 The sum A  B is the m  n matrix obtained by adding corresponding 
entries of A and B. 
A B 3aij bij4
2.	 The difference A  B is the m  n matrix obtained by subtracting corre-
sponding entries of A and B. 
A B 3aij bij4
3.	 The scalar product cA is the m  n matrix obtained by multiplying each 
entry of A by c. 
cA 3caij4
Example 2  ■  Performing Algebraic Operations on Matrices
Let	
A C
2
3
0
5
7
 1
2
S  B C
1
0
3
1
2
2
S
C c 7
3
0
0
1
5d  D c 6
0
6
8
1
9d
Carry out each indicated operation, or explain why it cannot be performed.
(a)  A B            (b)  C D            (c)  C A            (d)  5A
SOLUTION   
(a)	 A B C
2
3
0
5
7
 1
2
S C
1
0
3
1
2
2
S C
3
3
3
6
9
3
2
S
(b)	  C D c 7
3
0
0
1
5d c 6
0
6
8
1
9d
	 	
 c
1
3
6
8
0
4d
(c)	 C A is undefined because we can’t add matrices of different dimensions.
(d)	 5A 5 C
2
3
0
5
7
 1
2
S C
10
15
0
25
35
 5
2
S
Now Try Exercises 23 and 25	
■
Courtesy UC Berkeley Office of Media Relations
Julia Robinson (1919–1985) was 
born in St. Louis, Missouri, and grew up 
at Point Loma, California. Because of an 
illness, Robinson missed two years of 
school, but later, with the aid of a tutor, 
she completed fifth, sixth, seventh, and 
eighth grades, all in one year. Later, at 
San Diego State University, reading biog-
raphies of mathematicians in E. T. Bell’s 
Men of Mathematics awakened in her 
what became a lifelong passion for math-
ematics. She said, “I cannot overempha-
size the importance of such books . . . in 
the intellectual life of a student.” 
Robinson is famous for her work on 
Hilbert’s tenth problem (page 735), 
which asks for a general procedure for 
determining whether an equation has 
integer solutions. Her ideas led to a com-
plete answer to the problem. Interest-
ingly, the answer involved certain proper-
ties of the Fibonacci numbers (page 846) 
discovered by the then 22-year-old Rus-
sian mathematician Yuri Matijaseviˇc. As a 
result of her brilliant work on Hilbert’s 
tenth problem, Robinson was offered a 
professorship at the University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley, and became the first 
woman mathematician elected to the 
National Academy of Sciences. She also 
served as president of the American 
Mathematical Society.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

714 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
The properties in the box follow from the definitions of matrix addition and scalar 
multiplication and the corresponding properties of real numbers.
Properties of Addition and Scalar Multiplication of Matrices
Let A, B, and C be m  n matrices and let c and d be scalars.
A B B A	
Commutative Property of Matrix Addition
1A B2 C A 1B C2	
Associative Property of Matrix Addition
c1dA2 cdA	
Associative Property of Scalar Multiplication
1c d2A cA dA	
Distributive Properties of Scalar Multiplication
c1A B2 cA cB
Example 3  ■  Solving a Matrix Equation
Solve the matrix equation
2X A B
for the unknown matrix X, where
A c
2
3
5
1d  B c 4
1
1
3d
SOLUTION    We use the properties of matrices to solve for X.
 2X A B
        Given equation
 2X B A
        Add the matrix A to each side
 X 1
2 1B A2        Multiply each side by the scalar 1
2
So	
 X 1
2
 a c 4
1
1
3d c
2
3
5
1d b         Substitute the matrices A and B
	
 1
2
 c
6
2
4
4d
        Add matrices
	
 c
3
1
2
2d
        Multiply by the scalar 1
2
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
■  Multiplication of Matrices
Multiplying two matrices is more difficult to describe than other matrix operations. In 
later examples we will see why multiplying matrices involves a rather complex proce-
dure, which we now describe.
First, the product AB 1or A # B2 of two matrices A and B is defined only when the 
number of columns in A is equal to the number of rows in B. This means that if we write 
their dimensions side by side, the two inner numbers must match:
Matrices	
A	
B
Dimensions            m  n            n  k
Columns in A
Rows in B
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.4  ■  The Algebra of Matrices  715
If the dimensions of A and B match in this fashion, then the product AB is a matrix of 
dimension m  k. Before describing the procedure for obtaining the elements of AB, 
we define the inner product of a row of A and a column of B.
If ”a1    a2  . . .  an’ is a row of A, and if D
b1
b2
(
bn
T is a column of B, then their inner product 
is the number a1b1  a2b2  . . .  anbn. For example, taking the inner product of 
[2    1    0    4] and D
5
4
3
1
2
 T gives 
2 # 5 112 # 4 0 # 132 4 # 1
2 8
We now define the product AB of two matrices.
Matrix Multiplication
If A  ”aij’ is an m  n matrix and B  ”bij’ an n  k matrix, then their product 
is the m  k matrix
C  ”cij’
where cij is the inner product of the ith row of A and the jth column of B. We 
write the product as
C  AB
This definition of matrix product says that each entry in the matrix AB is obtained 
from a row of A and a column of B as follows: The entry cij in the ith row and jth column 
of the matrix AB is obtained by multiplying the entries in the ith row of A with the cor-
responding entries in the jth column of B and adding the results.
Cj j jS # C
j
j
j
S C
cij
S
Example 4  ■  Multiplying Matrices
Let
A c
1
3
1
0d    and   B c 1
5
2
0
4
7d
Calculate, if possible, the products AB and BA.
SOLUTION    Since A has dimension 2  2 and B has dimension 2  3, the product AB 
is defined and has dimension 2  3. We can therefore write
AB c
1
3
1
0d  c 1
5
2
0
4
7d c ?
?
?
?
?
?d
If we think of the row of A and the col-
umn of B as vectors, then their inner 
product is the same as their dot product 
(see Sections 9.2 and 9.4).
Entry in ith row and 
jth column of AB
ith row of A
jth column of B
Inner numbers match, 
so product is deﬁned
Outer numbers give dimension 
of product: 2  3
2 3 2 2 3 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

716 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
where the question marks must be filled in using the rule defining the product of two 
matrices. If we define C  AB  ”cij’, then the entry c11 is the inner product of the 
first row of A and the first column of B:
c
1
3
1
0d  c 1
5
2
0
4
7d  1 # 112 3 # 0 1
Similarly, we calculate the remaining entries of the product as follows.
Entry	
Inner product of:	
Value	
Product matrix
c12     c
1
3
1
0d  c 1
5
2
0
4
7d  1 # 5 3 # 4 17    c 1
17
   d
c13     c
1
3
1
0d  c 1
5
2
0
4
7d  1 # 2 3 # 7 23    c 1
17
23 d
c21     c
1
3
1
0d  c 1
5
2
0
4
7d  112 # 112 0 # 0 1  c 1
17
23
1
d
c22     c
1
3
1
0d  c 1
5
2
0
4
7d  112 # 5 0 # 4 5  c 1
17
23
1
5
d
c23     c
1
3
1
0d  c 1
5
2
0
4
7d  112 # 2 0 # 7 2  c 1
17
23
1
5
2d
Thus we have	
AB c 1
17
23
1
5
2d
The product BA is not defined, however, because the dimensions of B and A are
2 3 3  and  2 3 2
The inner two numbers are not the same, so the rows and columns won’t match up when 
we try to calculate the product.
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
Graphing calculators and computers are capable of performing matrix algebra. For 
instance, if we enter the matrices in Example 4 into the matrix variables [A] and [B] 
on a TI-83 calculator, then the calculator finds their product as shown in Figure 1.
■  Properties of Matrix Multiplication
Although matrix multiplication is not commutative, it does obey the Associative and  
Distributive Properties.
Properties of Matrix Multiplication
Let A, B, and C be matrices for which the following products are defined. Then
 A1BC2 1AB2C	
Associative Property
 A1B C2 AB AC
 1B C2A BA CA	
Distributive Property
The next example shows that even when both AB and BA are defined, they aren’t  
necessarily equal. This proves that matrix multiplication is not commutative.
See Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for specific 
instructions on working with matrices. 
Go to www.stewartmath.com.
Not equal, so product 
is not defined
2 3 3 2 3 2
[A]*[B]
    [[ -1 17 23]
     [1  -5 -2]]
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.4  ■  The Algebra of Matrices  717
Example 5  ■  Matrix Multiplication Is Not Commutative
Let	
A c
5
7
3
0d  and  B c 1
2
9
1d
Calculate the products AB and BA.
SOLUTION    Since both matrices A and B have dimension 2  2, both products AB and 
BA are defined, and each product is also a 2  2 matrix.
 AB c
5
7
3
0d c 1
2
9
1d c
5 # 1 7 # 9
5 # 2 7 # 112
132 # 1 0 # 9
132 # 2 0 # 112 d
 c 68
3
3
6d
 BA c 1
2
9
1d c
5
7
3
0d c
1 # 5 2 # 132
1 # 7 2 # 0
9 # 5 112 # 132
9 # 7 112 # 0d
 c 1
7
48
63 d
This shows that, in general, AB ? BA. In fact, in this example AB and BA don’t even 
have an entry in common.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
■  Applications of Matrix Multiplication
We now consider some applied examples that give some indication of why mathemati-
cians chose to define the matrix product in such an apparently bizarre fashion. Exam- 
ple 6 shows how our definition of matrix product allows us to express a system of linear 
equations as a single matrix equation.
Example 6  ■  Writing a Linear System as a Matrix Equation
Show that the following matrix equation is equivalent to the system of equations in 
Example 2 of Section 10.3.
C
1
1
3
1
2
2
3
1
5
S C
x
y
z
S C
4
10
14
S
SOLUTION    If we perform matrix multiplication on the left-hand side of the equation, 
we get
C
 x y 3z
 x 2y 2z
3x y 5z
S C
4
10
14
S
Because two matrices are equal only if their corresponding entries are equal, we 
equate entries to get
c
x y 3z 4
x 2y 2z 10
3x y 5z 14
This is exactly the system of equations in Example 2 of Section 10.3.
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
Matrix equations like this one are 
described in more detail on page 728.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

718 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Example 7  ■  Representing Demographic Data by Matrices
In a certain city the proportions of voters in each age group who are registered as 
Democrats, Republicans, or Independents are given by the following matrix.
	
Age
	
18–30	 31–50	 Over 50
Democrat
Republican
Independent
C
0.30
0.60
0.50
0.50
0.35
0.25
0.20
0.05
0.25
S A
The next matrix gives the distribution, by age and sex, of the voting population of  
this city.
	
Male	
Female
18–30
Age            31–50
Over 50
C
5,000
6,000
10,000
12,000
12,000
15,000
S B
For this problem, let’s make the (highly unrealistic) assumption that within each age 
group, political preference is not related to gender. That is, the percentage of Demo-
crat males in the 18–30 group, for example, is the same as the percentage of Demo-
crat females in this group.
(a)	 Calculate the product AB.
(b)	 How many males are registered as Democrats in this city?
(c)	 How many females are registered as Republicans?
SOLUTION   
(a)
	
AB C
0.30
0.60
0.50
0.50
0.35
0.25
0.20
0.05
0.25
S  C
5,000
6,000
10,000
12,000
12,000
15,000
S C
13,500
16,500
9,000
10,950
4,500
5,550
S
(b)	 When we take the inner product of a row in A with a column in B, we are adding 
the number of people in each age group who belong to the category in question. 
For example, the entry c21 of AB 1the 90002 is obtained by taking the inner prod-
uct of the Republican row in A with the Male column in B. This number is there-
fore the total number of male Republicans in this city. We can label the rows and 
columns of AB as follows.
	
Male	
Female
Democrat
Republican
Independent
C
13,500
16,500
9,000
10,950
4,500
5,550
S AB
	
Thus 13,500 males are registered as Democrats in this city.
(c)	 There are 10,950 females registered as Republicans.
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
In Example 7 the entries in each column of A add up to 1. (Can you see why this has 
to be true, given what the matrix describes?) A matrix with this property is called sto-
chastic. Stochastic matrices are used extensively in statistics, where they arise fre-
quently in situations like the one described here.
Courtesy of the Archives,  
California Institute of Technology
Olga Taussky-Todd (1906–1995) was 
instrumental in developing applications 
of matrix theory. Described as “in love 
with anything matrices can do,” she suc-
cessfully applied matrices to aerodynam-
ics, a field used in the design of airplanes 
and rockets. Taussky-Todd was also 
famous for her work in number theory, 
which deals with prime numbers and 
divisibility. Although number ­theory has 
often been called the least applicable 
branch of mathematics, it is now used in 
significant ways throughout the com-
puter industry.
Taussky-Todd studied mathematics at 
a time when young women rarely aspired 
to be mathematicians. She said, “When I 
entered university I had no idea what it 
meant to study mathematics.” One of the 
most respected mathematicians of her 
day, she was for many years a professor of 
mathematics at Caltech in Pasadena.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.4  ■  The Algebra of Matrices  719
■  Computer Graphics
One important use of matrices is in the digital representation of images. A digital 
camera or a scanner converts an image into a matrix by dividing the image into a 
rectangular array of elements called pixels. Each pixel is assigned a value that rep-
resents the color, brightness, or some other feature of that location. For example,  
in a 256-level gray-scale image each pixel is assigned a value between 0 and  
255, where 0 represents white, 255 represents black, and the numbers in between 
represent increasing gradations of gray. The gradations of a much simpler eight-level 
gray scale are shown in ­Figure 2. We use this eight-level gray scale to illustrate the 
process.
To digitize the black and white image in Figure 3(a), we place a grid over the pic-
ture as shown in Figure 3(b). Each cell in the grid is compared to the gray scale and 
then assigned a value between 0 and 7 depending on which gray square in the scale 
most closely matches the “darkness” of the cell. (If the cell is not uniformly gray, an 
average value is assigned.) The values are stored in the matrix shown in Figure 3(c). 
The digital image corresponding to this matrix is shown in Figure 3(d). Obviously, the 
grid that we have used is far too coarse to provide good image resolution. In practice, 
currently available high-resolution digital cameras use matrices with dimension as 
large as 2048  2048.
E. O. Hoppe/Historical/Corbis
(a) Original image
(b) 10  10 grid
(d) Digital image
(c) Matrix representation
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
6
5
2
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
5
5
3
1
1
1
1
3
5
4
6
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2  4
2
2
2
2
2
3
5
5
2
2
3
4
4
3
3
3
4
3
2
3
3
3
4
Figure 3
Once the image is stored as a matrix, it can be manipulated by using matrix op-
erations. For example, to darken the image, we add a constant to each entry in the 
matrix; to lighten the image, we subtract a constant. To increase the contrast, we 
darken the darker areas and lighten the lighter areas, so we could add 1 to each entry 
that is 4, 5, or 6 and subtract 1 from each entry that is 1, 2, or 3. (Note that we can-
Discovery Project
Will the Species Survive?
To study how a species survives, scientists observe the stages in the life cycle of 
the species—for example, young, juvenile, adult. The proportion of the popula-
tion at each stage and the proportion that survives to the next stage in each sea-
son are modeled by matrices. In this project we explore how matrix multiplica-
tion is used to predict the population proportions for the next season, the season 
after that, and so on, ultimately predicting the long-term prospects for the sur-
vival of the species. You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
© Sergei25/Shutterstock.com
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

720 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
not darken an entry of 7 or lighten a 0.) Applying this process to the matrix in Figure 
3(c) produces the new matrix in Figure 4(a). This generates the high-contrast image 
shown in Figure 4(b).
(b) High contrast image
(a) Matrix modified to
increase contrast
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
7
6
1
0
0
0
0
1
2
2
6
6
2
0
0
0
0
2
6
5
7
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1  5
1
1
1
1
1
2
6
6
1
1
2
5
5
2
2
2
5
2
1
2
2
2
5
Figure 4
Other ways of representing and manipulating images using matrices are discussed in 
the Discovery Projects Computer Graphics I and II at the book companion website, 
www.stewartmath.com.
concepts
	 1.	 We can add (or subtract) two matrices only if they have the 
	 	 same  
  .
	 2.	 (a)	 We can multiply two matrices only if the number of 
	 	 	
 
 in the first matrix is the same as the number of 
	 	 	
 
 in the second matrix.
(b)	 If A is a 3  3 matrix and B is a 4  3 matrix, which of 
the following matrix multiplications are possible?  
	 	 	
(i)  AB        (ii)  BA        (iii)  AA        (iv)  BB
	 3.	 Which of the following operations can we perform for a  
matrix A of any dimension?
(i)  A A        (ii)  2A        (iii)  A # A
	 4.	 Fill in the missing entries in the product matrix.
C
3
1
2
1
2
0
1
3
2
S  C
1
3
2
3
2
1
2
1
0
S C
4
j
7
7
7
j
j
5
5
S
skills
5–6  ■  Equality of Matrices    Determine whether the matrices A 
and B are equal.
	 5.	 A c  1
2
0
1
2
6
0d  B c 1
2
1
2
6d
	 6.	 A c
1
4
ln  1
2
3 d  B c 0.25
0
!4
6
2
d
7–8  ■  Equality of Matrices    Find the values of a and b that make 
the matrices A and B equal.
	 7.	 A c
3
4
1
ad         B c
b
4
1
5d 	
	 8.	 A c
3
5
7
4
a
2d         B c
3
5
b
4
5
2d
9–16  ■  Matrix Operations    Perform the matrix operation, or if it 
is impossible, explain why.
	 9.	 c
2
6
5
3d c 1
3
6
2d
	10.	 c 0
1
1
1
1
0d c 2
1
1
1
3
2d
11.	 3C
1
2
4
1
1
0
S 	
12.	 2C
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
S 
1
1
C2
1
3
1
S
13.	 C
2
6
1
3
2
4
S  C
1
2
3
6
2
0
S 	
14.	 c 2
1
2
6
3
4d   C
1
2
3
6
2
0
S
15.	 c
1
2
1
4d c 1
2
3
2
2
1d
	16.	 C
2
3
0
1
1
2
S  c 5
1d
10.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.4  ■  The Algebra of Matrices  721
17–22  ■  Matrix Equations    Solve the matrix equation for the 
unknown matrix X, or explain why no solution exists.
A c 4
6
1
3d  B c 2
5
3
7d
C C
2
3
1
0
0
2
S  D C
10
20
30
20
10
0
S
17.  2X A B	
18.  3X B C
19.  21B X2 D	
20.  51X C2 D
21.  1
51X D2 C	
22.  2A B 3X
23–36  ■  Matrix Operations    The matrices A, B, C, D, E, F, G 
and H are defined as follows.
A c 2
5
0
7d       B c 3
1
2
5
1
1
3d       C c 2
 5
2
0
0
2
3d
D 37
34  E C
1
2
0
S  F C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S
G C
5
3
10
6
1
0
5
2
2
S        H c 3
1
2
1d
Carry out the indicated algebraic operation, or explain why it  
cannot be performed.
23.	 (a)	 B C	
(b)	 B F
24.	 (a)	 C B	
(b)	 2C 6B
25.	 (a)	 5A	
(b)	 C 5A
26.  (a)	 3B 2C	
(b)	 2H D
27.  (a)	 AD	
(b)	 DA
28.  (a)	 DH	
(b)	 HD
29.  (a)	 AH	
(b)	 HA
30.  (a)	 BC	
(b)	 BF
31.  (a)	 GF	
(b)	 GE
32.  (a)	 B2	
(b)	 F2
33.  (a)	 A2	
(b)	 A3
34.  (a)	 1DA2B	
(b)	 D1AB2
35.  (a)	 ABE	
(b)	 AHE
36.  (a)	 DB DC	
(b)	 BF FE
37–42  ■  Matrix Operations    The matrices A, B, and C are 
defined as follows. 
A C
0.3
1.1
2.4
0.9
0.1
0.4
0.7
0.3
0.5
S         B C
1.2
0.1
0
0.5
0.5
2.1
S
C c 0.2
0.2
0.1
1.1
2.1
2.1d
Use a graphing calculator to carry out the indicated algebraic 
operation, or explain why it cannot be performed. 
	37.	 AB	
38.	 BA	
39.	 BC
	40.	 CB	
41.	 B C	
42.	 A2
43–46  ■  Equality of Matrices    Solve for x and y.
43.	 c x
2y
4
6d c 2
2
2x
6yd
	44.	 3c x
y
y
xd c
6
9
9
6d
45.	 2c
x
y
x y
x yd c
2
4
2
6d
46.	 c
x
y
y
xd c y
x
x
yd c
4
4
6
6d
47–50  ■  Linear Systems as Matrix Equations    Write the system 
of equations as a matrix equation (see Example 6).
47.	 e2x 5y 7
3x 2y 4	
48.	 c
 6x y z 12
 2x
z 7
 
y 2z 4
49.	 c
3x1 2x2 x3 x4 0
x1
x3
5
3x2 x3 x4 4
50.  d
x y z 2
4x 2y z 2
x y 5z 2
x y z 2
Skills Plus
51.  Products of Matrices    The matrices A, B, and C are defined 
as follows.
A c 1
0
6
1
2
1
2
4
0d
B 31
7
9
24         C D
1
0
1
2
T
	 	 Determine which of the following products are defined, and 
calculate the ones that are.
ABC
BCA  ACB
CAB  BAC
CBA
52.  Expanding Matrix Bionomials   
(a)  Prove that if A and B are 2 3 2 matrices, then
1A B2 2 A2 AB BA B2
(b)	 If A and B are 2 3 2 matrices, is it necessarily true  
that
1A B2 2 0 A2 2AB B2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

722 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
applications
	53.	 Education and Income    A women’s group takes a survey to 
determine the education and income of its members. Matrix A 
summarizes the proportions of members in various categories 
of years of postsecondary education and income. Matrix B 
shows the total number of members in each income category. 
(a)	 Calculate the product matrix AB.
(b)	 Interpret the entries of the matrix AB.
	
Income level
	
Less than	
$50,000	
$100,000 
	
$50,000	
to 100,000	
or more
None
1 to 4
More than 4
  C
0.75    0.10
  0
0.25
  0.70    0.70
0
 0.20
0.30
S A
	
Total
Less than $50,000
$50,000 to 100,000
$100,000 or more
  C
4
20
10
S B
	54.	 Exam Scores    A large physics class takes a survey of the 
number of hours the students slept before an exam and their 
exam scores. Matrix A summarizes the proportions of stu-
dents in different categories of exam scores and hours of 
sleep. Matrix B shows the total number of students in three 
exam score categories. 
(a)	 Calculate the product matrix AB.
(b)	 Interpret the entries of the matrix AB.
	
Exam Score
	
Below 60	
60 to 80	
Above 80
Less than 4
4 to 7
More than 7
  C
0.75    0.20
  0.05
0.60
  0.30    0.10
0.40
 0.30
0.30
S A
	
Total
Below 60
60 to 80
Above 80
  C
80
170
40
S B
55.	 Frozen-Food Revenue    Some of the frozen foods that Joe’s 
Specialty Foods sells are pesto pizza, spinach ravioli, and 
macaroni and cheese. The sales distribution for these prod-
ucts is tabulated in matrix A. The retail price (in dollars) for 
each item is tabulated in matrix B.
(a)	 Calculate the product matrix AB.
(b)	 What is the total revenue for Monday?
(c)	 What is the total revenue from all three days?
	
Specialty Food
	
Pizza	
Ravioli	 Mac & Cheese
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
  C
50    20
  15
40
  75    20
35
 60
100
S A
	
Price ($)
Pizza
Ravioli
Mac & Cheese
  C
3.50
5.75
4.25
S B
56.  Fast-Food Sales    A small fast-food chain with restaurants in 
Santa Monica, Long Beach, and Anaheim sells only ham-
burgers, hot dogs, and milk shakes. On a certain day, sales 
were distributed according to the following matrix.
	
Number of items sold
	
Santa 	
Long	
 
	
Monica	
Beach	
Anaheim
Hamburgers
Hot dogs
Milk shakes
  C
4000   1000   3500
400
300
200
700
500
9000
S A
	
The price of each item is given by the following matrix.
	
Hamburger	
Hot dog	
Milk shake
”$0.90            $0.80            $1.10’  B
	
(a)  Calculate the product BA.
	
(b)  Interpret the entries in the product matrix BA.
57.  Car-Manufacturing Profits    A specialty-car manufacturer has 
plants in Auburn, Biloxi, and Chattanooga. Three models are 
produced, with daily production given in the following matrix.
	
Cars produced each day
	
Model K	
Model R	
Model W
Auburn
Biloxi
Chattanooga
  C
12    10
  0
4
  4    20
8
 9
12
S A
	 	 Because of a wage increase, February profits are lower than 
January profits. The profit per car is tabulated by model in 
the following matrix.
	
January	 February
Model K
Model R
Model W
  C
$1000
$500
$2000
$1200
$1500
$1000
S B
(a)	 Calculate AB.
(b)	 Assuming that all cars produced were sold, what was the 
daily profit in January from the Biloxi plant?
(c)	 What was the total daily profit (from all three plants) in 
February?
58.  Canning Tomato Products    Jaeger Foods produces tomato 
sauce and tomato paste, canned in small, medium, large, and 
giant-sized cans. The matrix A gives the size (in ounces) of 
each container.
	
Small	
Medium	
Large	
Giant
Ounces 3 6	
10	
14	
28 4 A
	 	 The matrix B tabulates one day’s production of tomato sauce 
and tomato paste.
	
Cans of	 Cans of 
	
sauce	
paste
  
Small
Medium
Large
Giant
 D
2000
  2500
3000
1500
2500
1000
1000
500
T B
(a)	 Calculate the product AB.
(b)	 Interpret the entries in the product matrix AB.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.4  ■  The Algebra of Matrices  723
59.  Produce Sales    A farmer’s three children, Amy, Beth, and 
Chad, run three roadside produce stands during the summer 
months. One weekend they all sell watermelons, yellow 
squash, and tomatoes. The matrices A and B tabulate the  
number of pounds of each product sold by each sibling on 
Saturday and Sunday.
	
Saturday
	
Melons	
Squash	 Tomatoes
Amy
Beth
Chad
  C
120   50   60
40
25
30
60
30
20
S A
	
Sunday
	
Melons	
Squash	 Tomatoes
Amy
Beth
Chad
  C
100   60   30
35
20
20
60
25
30
S B
	 	 The matrix C gives the price per pound (in dollars) for each 
type of produce that they sell.
	
Price per pound
Melons
Squash
Tomatoes
  C
0.10
0.50
1.00
S C
	
Perform each of the following matrix operations, and inter-
pret the entries in each result.
(a)  AC        (b)  BC        (c)  A  B        (d)  ÓA  BÔC
60.  Digital Images    A four-level gray scale is shown below.
0
1
2
3
(a)	 Use the gray scale to find a 6  6 matrix that digitally 
represents the image in the figure.
(b)	 Find a matrix that represents a darker version of the 
image in the figure.
(c )	 The negative of an image is obtained by reversing light 
and dark, as in the negative of a photograph. Find the 
matrix that represents the negative of the image in the 
figure. How do you change the elements of the matrix to 
create the negative?
(d)	 Increase the contrast of the image by changing each 1 to 
a 0 and each 2 to a 3 in the matrix you found in part (a). 
Draw the image represented by the resulting matrix. 
Does this clarify the image?
(e)	 Draw the image represented by the matrix I. Can you 
recognize what this is? If you don’t, try increasing the 
contrast.
I F
1
2
3
3
2
0
0
3
0
1
0
1
1
3
2
3
0
0
0
3
0
1
0
1
1
3
3
2
3
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
V
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
61.	 DISCUSS:  When Are Both Products Defined?    What must be 
true about the dimensions of the matrices A and B if both 
products AB and BA are defined?
62.	 DISCOVER:  Powers of a Matrix    Let
A c 1
1
0
1d
	 	 Calculate A2, A3, A4, . . . until you detect a pattern. Write a 
general formula for An.
63.  DISCOVER:  Powers of a Matrix    Let 
A c 1
1
1
1d
	 	 Calculate A2, A3, A4, . . . until you detect a pattern. Write a 
general ­formula for An.
64.	 DISCUSS:  Square Roots of Matrices    A square root of a 
matrix B is a matrix A with the property that A2  B. (This is 
the same definition as for a square root of a number.) Find as 
many square roots as you can of each matrix:
c 4
0
0
9d  c 1
5
0
9d
	 	 [Hint: If A c a
b
c
dd , write the equations that a, b, c, and
	 	 d would have to satisfy if A is the square root of the given 
matrix.]
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

724 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
10.5 
Inverses of Matrices and Matrix Equations
■  The Inverse of a Matrix  ■  Finding the Inverse of a 2  2 Matrix  ■  Finding the Inverse  
of an n  n Matrix  ■  Matrix Equations  ■  Modeling with Matrix Equations
In Section 10.4 we saw that when the dimensions are appropriate, matrices can be 
added, subtracted, and multiplied. In this section we investigate division of matrices. 
With this operation we can solve equations that involve matrices.
■  The Inverse of a Matrix
First, we define identity matrices, which play the same role for matrix multiplication as 
the number 1 does for ordinary multiplication of numbers; that is, 1 # a a # 1 a for 
all numbers a. A square matrix is one that has the same number of rows as columns. 
The main diagonal of a square matrix consists of the entries whose row and column 
numbers are the same. These entries stretch diagonally down the matrix, from top left 
to ­bottom right.
Identity Matrix
The identity matrix In is the n  n matrix for which each main diagonal entry 
is a 1 and for which all other entries are 0.
Thus the 2  2, 3  3, and 4  4 identity matrices are
I2  B1
0
0
1R          I3  C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S        I4  D
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
T
Identity matrices behave like the number 1 in the sense that
A # In  A        and        In # B  B
whenever these products are defined. 
Example 1  ■  Identity Matrices
The following matrix products show how multiplying a matrix by an identity matrix 
of the appropriate dimension leaves the matrix unchanged.
c 1
0
0
1d  c
3
5
6
1
2
7d   c
3
5
6
1
2
7d
C
1
7
1
2
12
1
3
2
0
7
S C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S  C
1
7
1
2
12
1
3
2
0
7
S
Now Try Exercise 1(a), (b)	
■
If A and B are n  n matrices, and if AB  BA  In, then we say that B is the inverse 
of A, and we write B  A1. The concept of the inverse of a matrix is analogous to that 
of the reciprocal of a real number.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.5  ■  Inverses of Matrices and Matrix Equations  725
inverse of a matrix
Let A be a square n  n matrix. If there exists an n  n matrix A1 with the 
property that
AA1  A1A  In
then we say that A1 is the inverse of A.
Example 2  ■  Verifying That a Matrix Is an Inverse
Verify that B is the inverse of A, where
A c 2
1
5
3d  and     B c
3
1
5
2d
SOLUTION    We perform the matrix multiplications to show that AB  I and BA  I.
c 2
1
5
3d  c
3
1
5
2d   c 2 #  3 1152
2112 1 #  2
5 #  3 3152
5112 3 #  2d   c 1
0
0
1d
c
3
1
5
2d  c 2
1
5
3d   c 3 #  2 1125
3 #  1 1123
1522 2 #  5
1521 2 #  3d   c 1
0
0
1d
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
■  Finding the Inverse of a 2  2 Matrix
The following rule provides a simple way for finding the inverse of a 2  2 matrix, 
when it exists. For larger matrices there is a more general procedure for finding in-
verses, which we consider later in this section.
inverse of a 2  2 matrix
If A c a
b
c
d d , then
A1 
1
ad  bc c
d
b
c
a d
If ad  bc  0, then A has no inverse.
Arthur Cayley (1821–1895) was an 
English mathematician who was instru-
mental in developing the theory of matri-
ces. He was the first to use a single symbol 
such as A to represent a matrix, thereby 
introducing the idea that a matrix is a sin-
gle entity rather than just a collection of 
numbers. Cayley practiced law until the 
age of 42, but his primary interest from 
adolescence was mathematics, and he 
Bygone Collection/Alamy
published almost 200 articles on the subject in his spare time. In 1863 he 
accepted a professorship in mathematics at Cambridge, where he taught 
until his death. Cayley’s work on matrices was of purely theoretical inter-
est in his day, but in the 20th century many of his results found applica-
tion in physics, the social sciences, business, and other fields. One of the 
most common uses of matrices today is in computers, where matrices 
are employed for data storage, error correction, image manipulation, and 
many other purposes. These applications have made matrix algebra 
more useful than ever.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

726 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Example 3  ■  Finding the Inverse of a 2  2 Matrix
Let
A c 4
5
2
3d
Find A1, and verify that AA1  A1A  I2.
SOLUTION    Using the rule for the inverse of a 2  2 matrix, we get
A1 
1
4 #  3 5 #  2 c
3
5
2
4d 1
2 c
3
5
2
4d c
3
2
 5
2
1
2d
To verify that this is indeed the inverse of A, we calculate AA1 and A1A:
 AA1 c 4
5
2
3d c
3
2
 5
2
1
2d c 4 #  3
2 5112
4A 5
2B 5 #  2
2 #  3
2 3112
2A 5
2B 3 #  2d c 1
0
0
1d
 A1A c
3
2
 5
2
1
2d  c 4
5
2
3d c
3
2 #  4 A 5
2B2
3
2 #  5 A 5
2B3
1124 2 #  2
1125 2 #  3d c 1
0
0
1d
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
The quantity ad bc that appears in the rule for calculating the inverse of a 
2  2 matrix is called the determinant of the matrix. If the determinant is 0, then the 
matrix does not have an inverse (since we cannot divide by 0).
■  Finding the Inverse of an n  n Matrix
For 3  3 and larger square matrices the following technique provides the most ­efficient 
way to calculate their inverses. If A is an n  n matrix, we first construct the n  2n 
matrix that has the entries of A on the left and of the identity matrix In on the right:
D
a11
a12
c
a1n
@
1
0
c
0
a21
a22
c
a2n
@
0
1
c
0
(
(
f
(
@
(
(
f
(
an1
an2
c
ann
@
0
0
c
1
T
We then use the elementary row operations on this new large matrix to change the left 
side into the identity matrix. (This means that we are changing the large matrix to 
­reduced row-echelon form.) The right side is transformed automatically into A1. 
(We omit the proof of this fact.)
Example 4  ■  Finding the Inverse of a 3  3 Matrix
Let A be the matrix
A C
1
2
4
2
3
6
3
6
15
S
(a)	 Find ­A1.
(b)	 Verify that AA1 A1A I3.
SOLUTION
(a)	 We begin with the 3  6 matrix whose left half is A and whose right half is the 
identity matrix.
C
1
2
4
@
1
0
0
2
3
6
@
0
1
0
3
6
15
@
0
0
1
S
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.5  ■  Inverses of Matrices and Matrix Equations  727
	 	 We then transform the left half of this new matrix into the identity matrix by per-
forming the following sequence of elementary row operations on the entire new 
matrix.
	
  R2 2R1 S R2  >
R3 3R1 S R3
    C
1
2
4
k
1
0
0
0
1
2
k
2
1
0
0
0
3
k
3
0
1
S
	
1
3 R3>
    C
1
2
4
k
1
0
0
0
1
2
k
2
1
0
0
0
1
k
1
0
1
3
S
	
R1 2R2 S R1>
    C
1
0
0
k
3
2
0
0
1
2
k
2
1
0
0
0
1
k
1
0
1
3
S
	
R2 2R3 S R2>
    C
1
0
0
k
3
2
0
0
1
0
k
4
1
 2
3
0
0
1
k
1
0
1
3
S
	 	 We have now transformed the left half of this matrix into an identity matrix. (This 
means that we have put the entire matrix in reduced row-echelon form.) Note that 
to do this in as systematic a fashion as possible, we first changed the elements 
below the main diagonal to zeros, just as we would if we were using Gaussian 
elimination. We then changed each main diagonal element to a 1 by multiplying 
by the ­appropriate constant(s). Finally, we completed the process by changing the 
­remaining entries on the left side to zeros. 
	 	
The right half is now A1.
A1 C
3
2
0
4
1
 2
3
1
0
1
3
S
(b)	 We calculate AA1 and A1A and verify that both products give the identity 
matrix I3.
 AA1 C
1
2
4
2
3
6
3
6
15
S C
3
2
0
4
1
 2
3
1
0
1
3
S C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S
 A1A C
3
2
0
4
1
 2
3
1
0
1
3
S C
1
2
4
2
3
6
3
6
15
S C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S
Now Try Exercises 9 and 19	
■
Graphing calculators are also able to calculate matrix inverses. On the TI-83 and TI-84 
calculators, matrices are stored in memory using names such as [A], [B], [C], . . . . To 
find the inverse of [A], we key in
[A]  x21   enter
For the matrix of Example 4 this results in the output shown in Figure 1 (where we have 
also used the  Frac command to display the output in fraction form rather than in 
decimal form).
The next example shows that not every square matrix has an inverse.
[A]-1 Frac
   [[ -3 2 0   ]
    [ -4 1 -2/3]
    [1  0 1/3 ]]
Figure 1
See Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for specific 
instructions on working with matrices. 
Go to www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

728 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Example 5  ■  A Matrix That Does Not Have an Inverse
Find the inverse of the matrix
C
2
3
7
1
2
7
1
1
4
S
SOLUTION    We proceed as follows.
C
2
3
7
k
1
0
0
1
2
7
k
0
1
0
1
1
4
k
0
0
1
S   R1 4 R2 >  C
1
2
7
k
0
1
0
2
3
7
k
1
0
0
1
1
4
k
0
0
1
S
  R2 2R1 S R2  >
R3 R1 S R3
    C
1
2
7
k
0
1
0
0
7
21
k
1
2
0
0
1
3
k
0
1
1
S
 1
7 R2>
    C
1
2
7
k
0
1
0
0
1
3
k
 1
7
2
7
0
0
1
3
k
0
1
1
S
  R3 R2 S R3  >
R1 2R2 S R1
    C
1
0
1
k
2
7
3
7
0
0
1
3
k
 1
7
2
7
0
0
0
0
k
 1
7
 5
7
1
S
At this point we would like to change the 0 in the 13, 32 position of this matrix to a 1 
without changing the zeros in the 13, 12 and 13, 22 positions. But there is no way to 
accomplish this, because no matter what multiple of rows 1 and/or 2 we add to row 3, 
we can’t change the third zero in row 3 without changing the first or second zero as 
well. Thus we cannot change the left half to the identity matrix, so the original matrix 
doesn’t have an inverse.
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
If we encounter a row of zeros on the left when trying to find an inverse, as in Ex-
ample 5, then the original matrix does not have an inverse. If we try to calculate the 
inverse of the matrix from Example 5 on a TI-83 calculator, we get the error message 
shown in Figure 2. (A matrix that has no inverse is called singular.)
■  Matrix Equations
We saw in Example 6 in Section 10.4 that a system of linear equations can be written 
as a single matrix equation. For example, the system
c
     x 2y 4z 7
   2x 3y 6z 5
3x 6y 15z 0
is equivalent to the matrix equation
C
1
2
4
2
3
6
3
6
15
S C
x
y
z
S  C
7
5
0
S
A
X
B
ERR:SINGULAR MAT
1:Quit
2:Goto
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.5  ■  Inverses of Matrices and Matrix Equations  729
If we let
A C
1
2
4
2
3
6
3
6
15
S   X C
x
y
z
S   B C
7
5
0
S
then this matrix equation can be written as
AX  B
The matrix A is called the coefficient matrix.
We solve this matrix equation by multiplying each side by the inverse of A (provided 
that this inverse exists).
 AX B
 A11AX2 A1B    Multiply on left by A1
 1A1A2X A1B    Associative Property
 I3X A1B    Property of inverses
 X A1B    Property of identity matrix
In Example 4 we showed that
A1 C
3
2
0
4
1
 2
3
1
0
1
3
S
So from X  A1B we have
C
x
y
z
S  C
3
2
0
4
1
 2
3
1
0
1
3
S C
7
5
0
S  C
11
23
7
S
Thus x  11, y  23, z  7 is the solution of the original system.
We have proved that the matrix equation AX  B can be solved by the following 
method.
solving a matrix equation
If A is a square n  n matrix that has an inverse A1 and if X is a variable matrix 
and B a known matrix, both with n rows, then the solution of the matrix equation 
AX  B
is given by
X  A1B
Example 6  ■  Solving a System Using a Matrix Inverse
A system of equations is given.
(a)	 Write the system of equations as a matrix equation.
(b)	 Solve the system by solving the matrix equation.
b2x 5y 15
3x 6y 36
Solving the matrix equation AX  B  
is very similar to solving the simple 
real-number equation
3x  12
which we do by multiplying each side 
by the reciprocal (or inverse) of 3.
 1
3 13x2 1
3 1122
 x 4
X	
	
A1	
B
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

730 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
SOLUTION
(a)	 We write the system as a matrix equation of the form AX  B.
B2
5
3
6R B  x
yR B15
36R
(b)	 Using the rule for finding the inverse of a 2  2 matrix, we get
A1 c 2
5
3
6d
1

1
2162 1523 c 6
152
3
2 d 1
3 c 6
5
3
2d
 
	 	 Multiplying each side of the matrix equation by this inverse matrix, we get
c x
yd 1
3 c 6
5
3
2d c 15
36d c 30
9d
	 	 So x  30 and y  9.
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
■  Modeling with Matrix Equations
Suppose we need to solve several systems of equations with the same coefficient ma-
trix. Then converting the systems to matrix equations provides an efficient way to ob-
tain the ­solutions, because we need to find the inverse of the coefficient matrix only 
once. This procedure is particularly convenient if we use a graphing calculator to per-
form the matrix ­operations, as in the next example.
Example 7  ■  Modeling Nutritional Requirements  
Using Matrix Equations
A pet-store owner feeds his hamsters and gerbils different mixtures of three types of 
rodent food: KayDee Food, Pet Pellets, and Rodent Chow. He wishes to feed his 
­animals the correct amount of each brand to satisfy their daily requirements for pro-
tein, fat, and carbohydrates exactly. Suppose that hamsters require 340 mg of protein, 
280 mg of fat, and 440 mg of carbohydrates, and gerbils need 480 mg of protein, 
360 mg of fat, and 680 mg of carbohydrates each day. The amount of each nutrient 
(in mg) in 1 g of each brand is given in the following table. How many grams of each 
food should the storekeeper feed his hamsters and gerbils daily to satisfy their nutri-
ent requirements?
KayDee Food
Pet Pellets
Rodent Chow
Protein (mg)
10
  0
20
Fat (mg)
10
20
10
Carbohydrates (mg)
  5
10
30
SOLUTION    We let x 1, x 2, and x 3 be the respective amounts (in grams) of KayDee 
Food, Pet Pellets, and Rodent Chow that the hamsters should eat, and we let y 1, y 2, 
	A	
X	
	
B
 X	 	
A1	
B
Mathematical Ecology
In the 1970s humpback whales ­became a 
center of controversy. ­Environmentalists 
believed that whaling threatened the 
whales with imminent extinction; whal-
ers saw their livelihood threatened by 
any attempt to stop whaling. Are whales 
really threatened to ­ex­tinc­tion by whal-
ing? What level of whaling is safe to guar-
antee ­survival of the whales? These 
­questions motivated mathematicians to 
study population patterns of whales and 
other species more closely.
As early as the 1920s Lotka and 
Volterra had founded the field of mathe-
matical biology by creating predator-prey 
models. Their models, which draw on a 
branch of mathematics called differential 
equations, take into account the rates at 
which predator eats prey and the rates of 
growth of each population. Note that as 
predator eats prey, the prey population 
decreases; this means less food supply for 
the predators, so their population begins 
to decrease; with fewer predators the prey 
population begins to increase, and so on. 
­Normally, a state of equilibrium develops, 
and the two populations alternate 
between a minimum and a maximum. 
Notice that if the ­predators eat the prey 
too fast, they will be left without food and 
will thus ensure their own extinction.
Since Lotka and Volterra’s time, more 
detailed mathematical models of animal 
populations have been developed. For 
many species the population is divided  
into several stages: immature, juvenile, 
adult, and so on. The proportion of each 
stage that survives or reproduces in a  
given time period is entered into a matrix 
(called a transition matrix); matrix multipli-
cation is then used to predict the popula-
tion in succeeding time periods. (See  
Discovery Project: Will the Species  
Survive? at the book companion website:  
www.stewartmath.com.) 
As you can see, the power of mathe-
matics to model and predict is an invalu-
able tool in the ongoing debate over the 
­environment.
Mathematics in the Modern World
© Konrad Mostert/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.5  ■  Inverses of Matrices and Matrix Equations  731
and y3 be the corresponding amounts for the gerbils. Then we want to solve the matrix 
equations
C
10
0
20
10
20
10
5
10
30
S C
x1
x2
x3
S C
340
280
440
S        Hamster equation
C
10
0
20
10
20
10
5
10
30
S C
y1
y2
y3
S C
480
360
680
S        Gerbil equation
Let
A C
10
0
20
10
20
10
5
10
30
S    B C
340
280
440
S    C C
480
360
680
S    X C
x1
x2
x3
S    Y C
y1
y2
y3
S
Then we can write these matrix equations as
 AX B        Hamster equation
 AY C        Gerbil equation
We want to solve for X and Y, so we multiply both sides of each equation by A1, the 
inverse of the coefficient matrix. We could find A1 by hand, but it is more convenient 
to use a graphing calculator as shown in Figure 3.
[A]-1*[B]
             [[10]
              [3 ]
              [12]]
(a)
[A]-1*[C]
             [[8 ]
              [4 ]
              [20]]
(b)
Figure 3
So
X A1B C
10
3
12
S    Y A1C C
8
4
20
S
Thus each hamster should be fed 10 g of KayDee Food, 3 g of Pet Pellets, and 12 g 
of ­Rodent Chow; and each gerbil should be fed 8 g of KayDee Food, 4 g of Pet  
Pellets, and 20 g of Rodent Chow daily.
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
concepts
	 1.	 (a)	 The matrix I c 1
0
0
1d  is called an  
 matrix.
(b)	 If A is a 2  2 matrix, then A  I   
 and 
	
	I  A   
  .
(c)	 If A and B are 2  2 matrices with AB  I, then B is the 
	
	 
 of A.
	 2.	 (a)	 Write the following system as a matrix equation AX  B.
	
System	
Matrix equation
	
A	
#	
X	
	
B
5x 3y 4
3x 2y 3                Bj
j
j
jR Bj
jR Bj
jR
(b)	 The inverse of A is A1  c j
j
j
jd .
10.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

732 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
(c)	 The solution of the matrix equation is X A1B.
	
X	 	
A1	
B
c x
yd Bj
j
j
jR Bj
jR Bj
jR
(d)	 The solution of the system is x   
  ,  
y  
  .
skills
3–6  ■  Verifying the Inverse of a Matrix    Calculate the products 
AB and BA to verify that B is the inverse of A.
  3.  A c 4
1
7
2d    
B c
2
1
7
4d
  4.  A c 2
3
4
7d    
B c
7
2
 3
2
2
1d
  5.  A C
1
3
1
1
4
0
1
3
2
S    
B C
8
3
4
2
1
1
1
0
1
S
  6.  A C
3
2
4
1
1
6
2
1
12
S    
B C
9
10
8
12
14
11
 1
2
1
2
1
2
S
7–8  ■  The Inverse of a 2 3 2 Matrix    Find the inverse of  
the matrix and verify that A1A  AA1  I2 and  
B1B  BB1  I3.
  7.  A c 7
4
3
2d
	
 
8.  B C
1
3
2
0
2
2
2
1
0
S
9–10  ■  The Inverse of a 2 3 2 Matrix    Use a graphing calculator  
to find the inverse of the matrix and to verify that A1A  AA1  I2 
and B1B  BB1  I3. (On a TI-83, use the ▶Frac command to 
obtain the answer in fractions.)
	 9.	 A c
1.2
0.3
1.2
0.2d 	
10.	 B C
5
1
3
6
1
3
7
1
2
S  
11–26  ■  Finding the Inverse of a Matrix    Find the inverse of the 
matrix if it exists.
11.	 c 3
5
2
3d 	
12.	 c 3
4
7
9d
13.	 c
2
5
5
13d 	
14.	 c 7
4
8
5d
15.	 c
6
3
8
4d 	
16.	 c
1
2
1
3
5
4d
17.	 c 0.4
1.2
0.3
0.6d 	
18.	 C
4
2
3
3
3
2
1
0
1
S
19.	 C
2
4
1
1
1
1
1
4
0
S 	
20.	 C
5
7
4
3
1
3
6
7
5
S
21.	 C
1
2
3
4
5
1
1
1
10
S 	
22.	 C
2
1
0
1
1
4
2
1
2
S
23.	 C
0
2
2
3
1
3
1
2
3
S 	
24.	 C
3
2
0
5
1
1
2
2
0
S
25.	 D
1
2
0
3
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
2
0
2
T 	
26.	 D
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
T
27–34  ■  Finding the Inverse of a Matrix    Use a graphing calcu-
lator to find the inverse of the matrix, if it exists. (On a TI-83, use 
the ▶Frac command to obtain the answer in fractions.)
27.	 C
3
2
3
0
1
3
1
0
2
S 	
28.	 C
5
2
1
5
1
0
0
1
2
S
29. D
1
4
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
4
1
2
2
2
2
0
T 	
30.	 D
3
0
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
3
0
1
2
3
1
0
T
31.	 C
1
7
3
0
2
1
0
0
3
S 	
32.	 D
1
0
0
0
2
5
0
0
4
2
3
0
5
1
2
1
T
33.	 D
1
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
7
T 	
34.	 C
1
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
3
S
35–38  ■  Products Involving Matrices and Inverses    The matrices 
A and B are defined as follows. 
A C
1
0
2
0
2
1
4
2
1
S         B C
2
1
2
0
3
1
1
0
2
S
Use a graphing calculator to carry out the indicated algebraic 
operations, or explain why they cannot be performed. State the 
answer using fractions. (On a TI-83, use the ▶Frac command to 
obtain the answer in fractions.)
35.	 A1B            36.  AB1	
37.  BAB1            38.  B1AB
39–46  ■  Solving a Linear System as a Matrix Equation    Solve the 
system of equations by converting to a matrix equation and using 
the inverse of the coefficient matrix, as in Example 6. Use the 
inverses from Exercises 11–14, 19, 20, 23, and 25.
39.	 b3x 5y 4
2x 3y 0	
40.	 b3x 4y 10
7x 9y 20
41.	 b    2x 5y 2
5x 13y 20	
42.	 b7x 4y 
0
    8x 5y 100
43.	 c
2x 4y z 
7
x y z 
0
x 4y
2
	
44.	 c
5x 7y 4z 1
3x 1y 3z 1
6x 7y 5z 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.5  ■  Inverses of Matrices and Matrix Equations  733
45.	 c
1x2y 2z 12
3x 1y 3z 2
1x 2y 3z 08
	
46.	 d
x 2y z 3„ 0
11y z 1„ 1
1y z 1„ 2
x 2y z 2„ 3
47–52  ■  Solving a Linear System    Solve the system of equations 
by converting to a matrix equation. Use a graphing calculator to 
perform the necessary matrix operations, as in Example 7.
47.	 c
x 1y 2z 03
2x 1y 5z 11
2x 3y 1z 12
	
48.	 c
3x 4y 2z 2
2x 3y 5z 5
5x 2y 2z 3
49.	 c
12x 1
2 y 7z 21
11x 2y 3z 43
13x y 4z 29
	
50.	 c
x 1
2 y 1
3 z 
4
x 1
4 y 1
6 z 
7
x y z 6
51.	 d
x y
3„ 0
x
2z
8
2y z „ 5
2x 3y
2„ 13
52.	 d
1x 1y 1z 1„ 15
1x 1y 1z 1„ 15
1x 2y 3z 4„ 26
1x 2y 3z 4„ 12
Skills Plus
53–54  ■  Solving a Matrix Equation    Solve the matrix equation 
by multiplying each side by the appropriate inverse matrix.
53.	 c
3
2
4
3d  c x
y
z
u
√
„ d c 1
0
1
2
1
3d
54.	 C
0
2
2
3
1
3
1
2
3
S £
x
u
y
√
z
„
§ £
3
6
6
12
0
0
§
55–56  ■  Inverses of Special Matrices    Find the inverse of the 
matrix.
55.	 c a
a
a
ad 	
56.	 D
a
0
0
0
0
b
0
0
0
0
c
0
0
0
0
d
T
	
	
1a ? 02
	
1abcd ? 02
57–60  ■  When Do Matrices Have Inverses?    Find the inverse of 
the matrix. For what value(s) of x, if any, does the matrix have no 
inverse?
57.	 c 2
x
x
x2 d 	
58.	 c ex
e2x
e2x
e3x d
59.	 C
1
ex 
0
ex
e2x
0
0
0
2
S 	
60.	 £
x
1
x
1
x 1
§
applications
61.	 Nutrition    A nutritionist is studying the effects of the 
­nutrients folic acid, choline, and inositol. He has three 
types of food available, and each type contains the follow-
ing amounts of these nutrients per ounce.
Type A
Type B
Type C
Folic acid (mg)
3
1
3
Choline (mg)
4
2
4
Inositol (mg)
3
2
4
(a)	 Find the inverse of the matrix
C
3
1
3
4
2
4
3
2
4
S
	
and use it to solve the remaining parts of this problem.
(b)	 How many ounces of each food should the nutritionist 
feed his laboratory rats if he wants their daily diet to 
contain 10 mg of folic acid, 14 mg of choline, and 13 mg 
of inositol?
(c)	 How much of each food is needed to supply 9 mg of 
folic acid, 12 mg of choline, and 10 mg of inositol?
(d)	 Will any combination of these foods supply 2 mg of folic 
acid, 4 mg of choline, and 11 mg of inositol?
62.	 Nutrition    Refer to Exercise 61. Suppose food type C has 
been improperly labeled, and it actually contains 4 mg of 
folic acid, 6 mg of choline, and 5 mg of inositol per ounce. 
Would it still be possible to use matrix inversion to solve 
parts (b), (c), and (d) of Exercise 61? Why or why not?
63.	 Sales Commissions    A saleswoman works at a kiosk that 
offers three different models of cell phones: standard with 
16 GB capacity, deluxe with 32 GB capacity, and super-
deluxe with 64 GB capacity. For each phone that she sells, 
she earns a commission based on the cell phone model. One 
week she sells 9 standard, 11 deluxe, and 8 super-deluxe and 
makes $740 in commission. The next week she sells 13 stan-
dard, 15 deluxe, and 16 super-deluxe for a $1204 commis-
sion. The third week she sells 8 standard, 7 deluxe, and 
14 super-deluxe, earning $828 in commission.
(a)	 Let x, y, and z represent the commission she earns on stan-
dard, deluxe, and super-deluxe, respectively. Translate the 
given information into a system of equations in x, y, and z.
(b)	 Express the system of equations you found in part (a) as 
a matrix equation of the form AX  B.
(c)	 Find the inverse of the coefficient matrix A and use it to 
solve the matrix equation in part (b). How much com-
mission does the saleswoman earn on each model of cell 
phone?
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
64.	 DISCUSS:  No Zero-Product Property for Matrices    We have 
used the Zero-Product Property to solve algebraic equations. 
Matrices do not have this property. Let O represent the 2  2 
zero matrix
O c 0
0
0
0d
	 	 Find 2  2 matrices A ? O and B ? O such that AB  O.  
Can you find a matrix A ? O such that A2  O?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

734 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
10.6 
Determinants and Cramer’s Rule
■  Determinant of a 2  2 Matrix  ■  Determinant of an n  n Matrix  ■  Row and Column 
Transformations  ■  Cramer’s Rule  ■  Areas of Triangles Using Determinants
If a matrix is square (that is, if it has the same number of rows as columns), then we 
can assign to it a number called its determinant. Determinants can be used to solve 
systems of linear equations, as we will see later in this section. They are also useful in 
determining whether a matrix has an inverse.
■  Determinant of a 2 3 2 Matrix
We denote the determinant of a square matrix A by the symbol det1A2  or 0  A 0 . We first 
define det1A2  for the simplest cases. If A 3a4 is a 1 3 1 matrix, then det1A2 a. 
The following box gives the definition of a 2 3 2 determinant.
Determinant of a 2  2 Matrix
The determinant of the 2  2 matrix A c a
b
c
d d  is
det1A2 k  A k ` a
b
c
d ` ad bc
Example 1  ■  Determinant of a 2  2 Matrix
Evaluate 0  A 0  for A c 6 3
2
3d .
Solution
` 6
3
2    3 ` 6 # 3 1322 18 162 24
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
■  Determinant of an n  n Matrix
To define the concept of determinant for an arbitrary n  n matrix, we need the follow-
ing terminology.
Minors and Cofactors
Let A be an n  n matrix.
1.	 The minor Mij of the element aij is the determinant of the matrix obtained by 
deleting the ith row and jth column of A.
2.	 The cofactor Aij of the element aij is
Aij 112 ijMij
For example, if A is the matrix
£
2    3   1
0
2
4
2
5
6
§
We will use both notations, det1A2 and 
0  A 0 , for the determinant of A. Although 
the symbol 0  A 0  looks like the absolute 
value symbol, it will be clear from the 
context which meaning is intended.
To evaluate a 2  2 determinant, we 
take the product of the diagonal from 
top left to bottom right and subtract the 
product from top right to bottom left, 
as indicated by the arrows.
→
←
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.6  ■  Determinants and Cramer’s Rule  735
then the minor M12 is the determinant of the matrix obtained by deleting the first row 
and second column from A. Thus
M12 3
2 3 1
0 2
4
2 5
6
3 `
0 4
2 6 ` 0162 4122 8
So the cofactor A12 112 12M12 8. Similarly,
M33 3
2 3 1
0 2
4
2 5
6
3 ` 2 3
0 2 ` 2 # 2 3 # 0 4
So A33 112 33M33 4.
Note that the cofactor of aij is simply the minor of aij multiplied by either 1 or 1,  
depending on whether i j is even or odd. Thus in a 3  3 matrix we obtain the cofac-
tor of any element by prefixing its minor with the sign obtained from the following 
checkerboard pattern.
£



§
We are now ready to define the determinant of any square matrix.
The determinant of a square matrix
If A is an n  n matrix, then the determinant of A is obtained by multiplying 
each element of the first row by its cofactor and then adding the results. In  
symbols,
det1A2 0  A 0  4  
a11
a12
c
a1n
a21
a22
c
a2n
(
(
f
(
an1
an2
p
ann
4 a11 A11 a12   A12 . . . a1n   A1n
Example 2  ■  Determinant of a 3  3 Matrix
Evaluate the determinant of the matrix
A C
2
3
1
0
2
4
2
5
6
S
Solution
 det1A2 3
2 3 1
0 2
4
2 5
6
3 2 ` 2
4
5
6 ` 3 `
0
4
2
6 ` 112 `
0
2
2
5 `
 212 # 6 4 # 52 330 # 6 4122 4 30 # 5 2122 4
 16 24 4
 44
Now Try Exercises 21 and 29	
■
Baldwin H. Ward & Kathryn C. Ward/Corbis
David Hilbert (1862–1943) was born in 
Königsberg, Germany, and became a pro-
fessor at Göttingen University. He is con-
sidered by many to be the greatest math-
ematician of the 20th century. At the 
International Congress of Mathematicians 
held in Paris in 1900, Hilbert set the direc-
tion of mathematics for the about-to-
dawn 20th century by posing 23 problems 
that he believed to be of crucial impor-
tance. He said that “these are problems 
whose solutions we expect from the 
future.” Most of Hilbert’s problems have 
now been solved (see Julia Robinson, 
page 713, and Alan Turing, page 118), and 
their solutions have led to important new 
areas of mathematical research. Yet as we 
proceed into the new millennium, some of 
Hilbert’s problems remain unsolved. In his 
work, Hilbert emphasized structure, logic, 
and the foundations of mathematics. Part 
of his genius lay in his ability to see the 
most general possible statement of a 
problem. For instance, Euler proved that 
every whole number is the sum of four 
squares; Hilbert proved a similar state-
ment for all powers of positive integers.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

736 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
In our definition of the determinant we used the cofactors of elements in the first 
row only. This is called expanding the determinant by the first row. In fact, we can 
expand the determinant by any row or column in the same way and obtain the same 
result in each case (although we won’t prove this). The next example illustrates this 
principle.
Example 3  ■  Expanding a Determinant About a Row  
and a Column
Let A be the matrix of Example 2. Evaluate the determinant of A by expanding
(a)	 by the second row
(b)	 by the third column
Verify that each expansion gives the same value.
Solution
(a)	 Expanding by the second row, we get
 det1A2 3
2 3 1
0 2
4
2 5
6
3 0 ` 3 1
5
6 ` 2 `
2 1
2
6 ` 4 `
2
3
2
5 `
 0 232 # 6 112 122 4 432 # 5 3122 4
 0 20 64 44
(b)	 Expanding by the third column gives
 det1A2 3
2
3
1
0
2
4
2
5
6
3
 1 `
0
2
2
5 ` 4 `
2
3
2
5 ` 6 ` 2
3
0
2 `
 30 # 5 2122 4 432 # 5 3122 4 612 # 2 3 # 02
 4 64 24 44
In both cases we obtain the same value for the determinant as when we expanded by 
the first row in Example 2.
We can also use a graphing calculator to compute determinants, as shown in  
Figure 1.
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
The following criterion allows us to determine whether a square matrix has an in-
verse without actually calculating the inverse. This is one of the most important uses of 
the determinant in matrix algebra, and it is the reason for the name determinant.
Invertibility Criterion
If A is a square matrix, then A has an inverse if and only if det1A2 ? 0.
We will not prove this fact, but from the formula for the inverse of a 2  2 matrix  
(page 725) you can see why it is true in the 2  2 case.
See Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for specific 
instructions on calculating determi-
nants. Go to www.stewartmath.com.
Here is the output when the TI-83 is 
used to calculate the determinant in 
Example 3:
[A]
        [[2  3 -1]
         [0  2 4 ]
         [ -2 5 6 ]]
det([A])
                       -44
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.6  ■  Determinants and Cramer’s Rule  737
Example 4  ■  Using the Determinant to Show That a Matrix Is  
Not Invertible
Show that the matrix A has no inverse.
A D
1
2
0
4
0
0
0
3
5
6
2
6
2
4
0
9
T
Solution    We begin by calculating the determinant of A. Since all but one of the  
elements of the second row is zero, we expand the determinant by the second row. If 
we do this, we see from the following equation that only the cofactor A24 will have to 
be calculated.
 det1A2 4
1
2
0
4
0
0
0
3
5
6
2
6
2
4
0
9
4
 0 # A21 0 # A22 0 # A23 3 # A24 3A24
 3 3
1
2
0
5
6
2
2
4
0
3        Expand this by column 3
 3122 ` 1
2
2
4 `
 3122 11 # 4 2 # 22 0
Since the determinant of A is zero, A cannot have an inverse, by the Invertibility Criterion.
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
■  Row and Column Transformations
The preceding example shows that if we expand a determinant about a row or column  
that contains many zeros, our work is reduced considerably because we don’t have to 
evaluate the cofactors of the elements that are zero. The following principle often sim-
plifies the process of finding a determinant by introducing zeros into the matrix without 
changing the value of the determinant.
Row and Column Transformations of a Determinant
If A is a square matrix and if the matrix B is obtained from A by adding a  
multiple of one row to another or a multiple of one column to another, then  
det1A2 det1B2 .
Example 5  ■  Using Row and Column Transformations  
to Calculate a Determinant
Find the determinant of the matrix A. Does it have an inverse?
A D
8
2
1
4
3
5
3
11
24
6
1
12
2
2
7
1
T
Pictorial Parade/Hulton Archive/Getty Images
emmy noether (1882–1935) was one 
of the foremost mathematicians of the 
early 20th century. Her groundbreaking 
work in abstract algebra provided much 
of the foundation for this field, and her 
work in invariant theory was essential in 
the development of Einstein’s theory of 
general relativity. Although women 
weren’t allowed to study at German uni-
versities at that time, she audited courses 
unofficially and went on to receive a doc-
torate at Erlangen summa cum laude, 
despite the opposition of the academic 
senate, which declared that women stu-
dents would “overthrow all academic 
order.” She subsequently taught mathe-
matics at ­Göttingen, Moscow, and 
Frankfurt. In 1933 she left Germany to 
escape Nazi persecution, accepting a 
position at Bryn Mawr College in subur-
ban Philadelphia. She lectured there and 
at the Institute for Advanced Study in 
Princeton, New Jersey, until her untimely 
death in 1935.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

738 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Solution    If we add 3 times row 1 to row 3, we change all but one element of  
row 3 to zeros.
D
8
2
1
4
3
5
3
11
0
0
4
0
2
2
7
1
T
This new matrix has the same determinant as A, and if we expand its determinant by 
the third row, we get
det1A2 4 3
8
2
4
3
5
11
2
2
1
3
Now, adding 2 times column 3 to column 1 in this determinant gives us
 det1A2 4 3
0
2
4
25
5
11
0
2
1
3        Expand this by column 1
 41252 ` 2
4
2
1 `
 41252 32112 14224 600
Since the determinant of A is not zero, A does have an inverse.
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
■  Cramer’s Rule
The solutions of linear equations can sometimes be expressed by using determinants. 
To illustrate, let’s solve the following pair of linear equations for the variable x.
eax by r
cx dy s
To eliminate the variable y, we multiply the first equation by d and the second by b and 
subtract.
adx bdy rd
bcx bdy bs          
adx bcx rd bs
Discovery Project
Computer Graphics I
Matrix algebra is the basic tool used in computer graphics. Properties of each 
pixel in an image are stored in a large matrix in the computer memory. In this 
project we discover how matrix multiplication can be used to “move” a point in 
the plane to a prescribed location. Combining such moves for each pixel in an 
image enables us to stretch, compress, translate, and otherwise transform an 
image on a computer screen by using matrix algebra. You can find the project at 
www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.6  ■  Determinants and Cramer’s Rule  739
Factoring the left-hand side, we get 1ad bc2x rd bs. Assuming that ad bc ? 0, 
we can now solve this equation for x:
x rd bs
ad bc
Similarly, we find
y as cr
ad bc
The numerator and denominator of the fractions for x and y are determinants of  
2  2 matrices. So we can express the solution of the system using determinants as 
follows.
Cramer’s Rule for Systems in Two Variables
The linear system
eax by r
cx dy s
has the solution
x 
` r
b
s
d `
` a b
c
d `   y 
` a r
c
s `
` a b
c
d `
provided that    ` a b
c
d ` ? 0.
Using the notation
D c a
b
c
dd      Dx c r
b
s
dd     Dy c a
r
c
s d
we can write the solution of the system as
x 
0  Dx 0
0  D 0   and  y 
0  Dy 0
0  D 0
Example 6  ■  Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System  
with Two Variables
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the system.
e2x 6y 1
  x 8y  2
Coefficient 
matrix
Replace first  
column of D by  
r and s
Replace second 
column of D by 
r and s
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

740 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Solution    For this system we have
 0  D 0 ` 2 6
1 8 ` 2 # 8 6 # 1 10
 0  Dx 0 ` 1 6
2 8 ` 1128 6 # 2 20
 0  Dy 0 ` 2 1
1
2 ` 2 # 2 1121 5
The solution is
 x 
0  Dx 0
0  D 0 20
10 2
 y 
0  Dy 0
0  D 0 5
10 1
2
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
Cramer’s Rule can be extended to apply to any system of n linear equations in  
n variables in which the determinant of the coefficient matrix is not zero. As we saw in 
the preceding section, any such system can be written in matrix form as
≥ 
a11
a12
c
a1n
a21
a22
c
a2n
(
(
f
(
an1
an2
p
ann
¥  ≥
x1
x2
(
xn
¥  ≥
b1
b2
(
bn
¥
By analogy with our derivation of Cramer’s Rule in the case of two equations in two 
unknowns, we let D be the coefficient matrix in this system, and Dxi be the matrix 
obtained by replacing the ith column of D by the numbers b1, b2, . . . , bn that appear 
to the right of the equal sign. The solution of the system is then given by the follow-
ing rule.
Cramer’s Rule
If a system of n linear equations in the n variables x 1, x 2, . . . , x n is equivalent 
to the matrix equation DX  B, and if 0  D 0 ? 0, then its solutions are
x1 
0  Dx1
 0
0  D 0    x2 
0  Dx2
 0
0  D 0    p   xn 
0  Dxn
 0
0  D 0
where Dxi is the matrix obtained by replacing the ith column of D by the n  1 
matrix B.
Example 7  ■  Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System  
with Three Variables
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the system.
c
2x 3y 4z 1
x         6z 0
3x 2y         5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.6  ■  Determinants and Cramer’s Rule  741
Solution    First, we evaluate the determinants that appear in Cramer’s Rule. Note 
that D is the coefficient matrix and that Dx, Dy, and Dz are obtained by replacing the 
first, second, and third columns of D by the constant terms.
 0  D 0 3
2 3 4
1
0 6
3 2 0
3 38  0  Dx 0 3
1
3
4
0
0
6
5
2
0
3 78
 0  Dy 0 3
2
1
4
1
0
6
3
5
0
3 22  0  Dz 0 3
2
3
1
1
0
0
3
2
5
3 13
Now we use Cramer’s Rule to get the solution:
x 
0  Dx 0
0  D 0 78
38 39
19                y 
0  Dy 0
0  D 0 22
38 11
19
z 
0  Dz 0
0  D 0   13
38  13
38
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
Solving the system in Example 7 using Gaussian elimination would involve matri-
ces whose elements are fractions with fairly large denominators. Thus in cases like 
Examples 6 and 7, Cramer’s Rule gives us an efficient way to solve systems of linear 
equations. But in systems with more than three equations, evaluating the various de-
terminants that are involved is usually a long and tedious task (unless you are using a 
graphing calculator). Moreover, the rule doesn’t apply if 0  D 0 0 or if D is not a 
square matrix. So Cramer’s Rule is a useful alternative to Gaussian elimination, but 
only in some ­situations.
■  Areas of Triangles Using Determinants
Determinants provide a simple way to calculate the area of a triangle in the coordinate 
plane.
Area of a Triangle
If a triangle in the coordinate plane has vertices 1a1, b12, 1a2, b22, and 1a3, b32, 
then its area is
!  1
2  3
a1
b1
1
a2
b2
1
a3
b3
1
3       
y
x
(a⁄, b⁄)
0
(a‹, b‹)
(a¤, b¤)
where the sign is chosen to make the area positive.
You are asked to prove this formula in Exercise 74.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

742 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Example 8  ■  Area of a Triangle
Find the area of the triangle shown in Figure 2.
y
x
0
1
2
4
6
3
Figure 2
Solution    The vertices are 11, 22, 13, 62, and 11, 42. Using the formula in the preced-
ing box, we get
!  1
2 3
1
4
1
3
6
1
1
2
1
3  1
2 1122
To make the area positive, we choose the negative sign in the formula. Thus the area 
of the triangle is
!  1
2 1122 6
Now Try Exercise 57	
■
[A]
         [[ -1 4 1]
          [3  6 1]
          [1  2 1]]
det([A])
                       -12
We can calculate the determinant by 
hand or by using a graphing calculator.
Concepts
	 1.	 True or false?  det1A2 is defined only for a square matrix A.
	 2.	 True or false?  det1A2 is a number, not a matrix.
	 3.	 True or false?  If det1A2  0, then A is not invertible.
	 4.	 Fill in the blanks with appropriate numbers to calculate the  
determinant. Where there is “”, choose the appropriate sign 
1 or 2.
(a)	 2
2
1
3
42 jj jj  
(b)
	
3
1
0
2
3
2
1
0
3
4
3 j1jj jj2 j1jj jj2
j1jj jj2 
 
skills
5–14  ■  Finding Determinants    Find the determinant of the 
matrix, if it exists.
  5.  c 2
0
0
3d 	
 6.  c 0
1
2
0d
	 7.	 c
3
2
1
1
 2
3
d 	
  8.	 c
0.2
0.4
0.4
0.8d
	 9.	 c 4
5
0
1d   	
10.	 c 2
1
3
2d
11.	 32
54 	
12.	 c 3
0d
13.	 c
1
2
1
8
1
1
2
d 	
14.	 c 2.2
1.4
0.5
1.0d
15–20  ■  Minors and Cofactors    Evaluate the minor and cofactor 
using the matrix A.
A C
1
0
1
2
3
5
2
0
0
4
S
15.	 M11, A11	
16.	 M33, A33
	17.	 M12, A12	
18.	 M13, A13
	19.	 M23, A23	
20.	 M32, A32
10.6  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.6  ■  Determinants and Cramer’s Rule  743
21–28  ■  Finding Determinants    Find the determinant of the 
matrix. Determine whether the matrix has an inverse, but don’t 
calculate the inverse.
21.  C
2
1
0
0
2
4
0
1
3
S 	
22.  C
1
2
5
2
3
2
3
5
3
S
23.  C
30
0
20
0
10
20
40
0
10
S 	
24.  C
2
 3
2
1
2
2
4
0
1
2
2
1
S
25.  C
1
3
7
2
0
8
0
2
2
S	
26.  C
0
1
0
2
6
4
1
0
3
S
27.  D
1
3
3
0
0
2
0
1
1
0
0
2
1
6
4
1
T 	
28.  D
1
2
0
2
3
4
0
4
0
1
6
0
1
0
2
0
T
29–34  ■  Finding Determinants    Use a graphing calculator to 
find the determinant of the matrix. Determine whether the matrix 
has an inverse, but don’t calculate the inverse.
29.	 C
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
S
	30.	 C
10
20
31
10
11
45
20
40
50
S
31.	 D
1
10
2
7
2
18
18
13
3
30
4
24
1
10
2
10
T
	32.	 D
1
3
2
5
3
9
11
5
2
6
0
31
5
15
10
39
T
33.	 D
4
3
2
10
8
6
24
1
20
15
3
27
12
9
6
1
T
	34.	 D
2
3
5
10
2
2
26
3
6
9
16
45
8
12
20
36
T
35–38  ■  Determinants Using Row and Column Operations     
Evaluate the determinant, using row or column operations when-
ever possible to simplify your work.
35.	 4
0
0
4
6
2
1
1
3
2
1
2
3
3
0
1
7
4	
36.  4
2
3
1
7
4
6
2
3
7
7
0
5
3
12
4
0
4
37.  5
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
0
0
3
6
9
0
0
0
4
8
0
0
0
0
5
5	
38.  4
2
1
6
4
7
2
2
5
4
2
10
8
6
1
1
4
4
39.  Calculating a Determinant in Different Ways    Consider the 
matrix
B C
4
1
0
2
1
1
4
0
3
S
(a)	 Evaluate det1B2 by expanding by the second row.
(b)	 Evaluate det1B2 by expanding by the third column.
(c)	 Do your results in parts (a) and (b) agree?
40.  Determinant of a Special Matrix    Find the determinant of a 
10 3 10 matrix which has a 2 in each main diagonal entry 
and zeros everywhere else.
41–56  ■  Cramer’s Rule    Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the  
system.
41.	 e2x y 9
x 2y 
8	
42.  e 6x 12y 33
 4x 17y 20
43.  e x 6y 3
 3x 2y 1	
44.  e
1
2x 1
3y 1
1
4x 1
6y  3
2
45.  e0.4x 1.2y 0.4
1.2x 1.6y 3.2	
46.  e10x 17y 21
20x 31y 39
47.  •
x 2y 2z 10
3x 2y 2z 11
x 2y 2z 10
	
48.  •
5x 3y z 
6
4y 6z 
22
7x 10y
13
49.  •
2x1 3x2 5x3 1
x1 
x2 x3 2
2x2 x3 8
	
50.  •
2a 2b 2c 02
a 2b 2c 09
3a 5b 2c 22
51.  •
 1
3x 1
5y 1
2z 7
10
 2
3x 2
5y 3
2z 11
10
x 4
5y 
z 9
5
	
52.  •
2x y        
  5
5x

 
3z 19
4y 7z 17
53.  •
2x 3y 5z 04
2x 7y 5z 10
4x 7y 5z 00
	
54.  •
2x 5y 5z 4
x 5y 0z 8
3x 5y 5z 0
55.  µ
2x y 2z „ 0
2x y 2z „ 0
2x y 2z „ 0
2x y 2z „ 1
	
56.  µ
x y 1
y z 2
z „ 3
„ x4
57–60  ■  Area of a Triangle    Sketch the triangle with the given 
vertices, and use a determinant to find its area.
57.  10, 02, 16, 22, 13, 82 	
58.  11, 02, 13, 52, 12, 22
59.  11, 32, 12, 92, 15, 62 	
60.  12, 52, 17, 22, 13, 42
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

744 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Skills Plus
61–62  ■  Determinants of Special Matrices    Evaluate the 
determinants.
61.	 5
a
0
0
0
0
0
b
0
0
0
0
0
c
0
0
0
0
0
d
0
0
0
0
0
e
5	
62.	 5
a
a
a
a
a
0
a
a
a
a
0
0
a
a
a
0
0
0
a
a
0
0
0
0
a
5
63–66  ■  Determinant Equations    Solve for x.
63.	 3
x
12
13
0
x 1
23
0
0
x 2
3 0	 64.	 3
x
1
1
1
1
x
x
1
x
3 0
65.	 3
1
0
x
x2
1
0
x
0
1
3 0	
66.	 3
a
b
x a
x
x b
x
0
1
1
3 0
67.  Using Determinants    Show that   
	
3
1
x
x2
1
y
y2
1
z
z2
3 1x y2 1y z2 1z x2
68.  Number of Solutions of a Linear System    Consider the 
system
c
x 2y 6z 5
3x 6y 5z 8
2x 6y 9z 7
(a)	 Verify that x  1, y  0, z  1 is a solution of the 
system.
(b)	 Find the determinant of the coefficient matrix.
(c)	 Without solving the system, determine whether there are 
any other solutions.
(d)	 Can Cramer’s Rule be used to solve this system? Why or 
why not?
69.	 Collinear Points and Determinants
(a)	 If three points lie on a line, what is the area of the  
“triangle” that they determine? Use the answer to  
this question, together with the determinant formula  
for the area of a triangle, to explain why the points 
1a1, b12, 1a2, b22, and 1a3, b32 are collinear if and  
only if
3
a1
b1
1
a2
b2
1
a3
b3
1
3 0
(b)	 Use a determinant to check whether each set of points is 
collinear. Graph them to verify your answer.
	
(i)	 16, 42, 12, 102, 16, 132
	
(ii)	 15, 102, 12, 62, 115, 22
70.	 Determinant Form for the Equation of a Line
(a)	 Use the result of Exercise 69(a) to show that the ­equation 
of the line containing the points 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22 is
3
x
y
1
x1
y1
1
x2
y2
1
3 0
(b)	 Use the result of part (a) to find an equation for the line 
containing the points 120, 502 and 110, 252.
applications
71.  Buying Fruit    A roadside fruit stand sells apples at 75¢ a 
pound, peaches at 90¢ a pound, and pears at 60¢ a pound. 
Muriel buys 18 lb of fruit at a total cost of $13.80. Her 
peaches and pears together cost $1.80 more than her apples.
(a)	 Set up a linear system for the number of pounds of 
apples, peaches, and pears that she bought.
(b)	 Solve the system using Cramer’s Rule.
72.	 The Arch of a Bridge    The opening of a railway bridge over a 
roadway is in the shape of a parabola. A surveyor measures 
the heights of three points on the bridge, as shown in the fig-
ure. He wishes to find an equation of the form
y ax2 bx c
	 	 to model the shape of the arch.
(a)	 Use the surveyed points to set up a system of linear 
equations for the unknown coefficients a, b, and c.
(b)	 Solve the system using Cramer’s Rule.
x
10
25 ft
40 ft
33   ft
40
15
y (ft)
3
4
0
73.  A Triangular Plot of Land    An outdoors club is purchasing 
land to set up a conservation area. The last remaining piece 
they need to buy is the triangular plot shown in the figure. 
Use the determinant formula for the area of a triangle to find 
the area of the plot.
2000
4000
6000
2000
4000
6000
E-W baseline (ft)
N-S baseline (ft)
0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.7  ■  Partial Fractions  745
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
74.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Determinant Formula for the Area of a 
Triangle    The figure shows a triangle in the plane with verti-
ces 1a1, b12, 1a2, b22, and 1a3, b32.
(a)	 Find the coordinates of the vertices of the surrounding 
rectangle, and find its area.
(b)	 Find the area of the red triangle by subtracting the  
areas of the three blue triangles from the area of the  
rectangle.
(c)	 Use your answer to part (b) to show that the area ! of 
the red triangle is given by
!  1
2 3
a1
b1
1
a2
b2
1
a3
b3
1
3
y
x
(a⁄, b⁄)
0

(a‹, b‹)
(a¤, b¤)
75.  DISCUSS:  Matrices with Determinant Zero    Use the defini-
tion of determinant and the elementary row and column oper-
ations to explain why matrices of the following types have 
determinant 0.
(a)	 A matrix with a row or column consisting entirely  
of zeros
(b)	 A matrix with two rows the same or two columns  
the same
(c)	 A matrix in which one row is a multiple of another row,  
or one column is a multiple of another column
76.  DISCUSS  ■  WRITE:  Solving Linear Systems    Suppose you 
have to solve a linear system with five equations and five 
variables without the assistance of a calculator or computer. 
Which method would you prefer: Cramer’s Rule or Gaussian 
elimination? Write a short paragraph explaining the reasons 
for your answer.
10.7 
Partial Fractions
■  Distinct Linear Factors  ■  Repeated Linear Factors  ■  Irreducible Quadratic Factors   
■  Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factors
To write a sum or difference of fractional expressions as a single fraction, we bring 
them to a common denominator. For example,
1
x 1 
1
2x 1 
12x 12 1x 12
1x 12 12x 12

3x
2x2 x 1
But for some applications of algebra to calculus we must reverse this process—that is, 
we must express a fraction such as 3x/12x2 x 12  as the sum of the simpler frac-
tions 1/1x 12 and 1/12x 12. These simpler fractions are called partial fractions; 
we learn how to find them in this section.
Let r be the rational function
r1x2 
P1x2
Q1x2  
where the degree of P is less than the degree of Q. By the Linear and Quadratic Factors 
Theorem in Section 3.5, every polynomial with real coefficients can be ­factored com-
pletely into linear and irreducible quadratic factors, that is, factors of the form ax  b 
and ax2 bx c, where a, b, and c are real numbers. For instance,
x4 1 1x2 12 1x2 12 1x 12 1x 12 1x2 12
Common denominator
Partial fractions
1
x 1 
1
2x 1 
3x
2x2 x 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

746 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
After we have completely factored the denominator Q of r, we can express r1x2  as a 
sum of partial fractions of the form
A
1ax b2 i  and  
Ax B
1ax2 bx c2  j
This sum is called the partial fraction decomposition of r. Let’s examine the details 
of the four possible cases.
■  Distinct Linear Factors
We first consider the case in which the denominator factors into distinct linear factors.
Case 1: The Denominator Is a Product of Distinct  
Linear Factors
Suppose that we can factor Q1x2 as
Q1x2 1a1x b12 1a2x b22 . . . 1an x bn2
with no factor repeated. In this case the partial fraction decomposition of 
P1x2/Q1x2  takes the form
P1x2
Q1x2 
A1
a1x b1

A2
a2x b2
. . . 
An
an x bn
The constants A1, A2, . . . , An are determined as in the following example.
Example 1  ■  Distinct Linear Factors
Find the partial fraction decomposition of 
5x 7
x3 2x2 x 2.
SOLUTION    The denominator factors as follows.
x3 2x2 x 2 x21x 22 1x 22 1x2 12 1x 22
 1x 12 1x 12 1x 22
This gives us the partial fraction decomposition
5x 7
x3 2x2 x 2 
A
x 1 
B
x 1 
C
x 2
Multiplying each side by the common denominator, Óx  1ÔÓx  1ÔÓx  2Ô, we get
 5x 7 A1x 12 1x 22 B1x 12 1x 22 C1x 12 1x 12
 A1x2 3x 22 B1x2 x 22 C1x2 12 	
Expand
 1A B C2x2 13A B2x 12A 2B C2 	
Combine like terms
If two polynomials are equal, then their coefficients are equal. Thus since 5x  7 has no 
x2-term, we have A  B  C  0. Similarly, by comparing the coefficients of x, we see 
that 3A  B  5, and by comparing constant terms, we get 2A  2B  C  7. This 
leads to the following system of linear equations for A, B, and C.
c
A 
B C 0
3A 
B
5
2A 2B C 7
       
Equation 1: Coefficients of x2
Equation 2: Coefficients of x
Equation 3: Constant coefficients
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.7  ■  Partial Fractions  747
We use Gaussian elimination to solve this system.
c
A B C 0
2B 3C 5
4B 3C 7
        Equation 2 1 (23) 3 Equation 1
Equation 3 1 (22) 3 Equation 1
c
A 2B 3C 0
A 2B 3C 5
A 2B 3C 3
       
Equation 3 1 (22) 3 Equation 2
From the third equation we get C  1. Back-substituting, we find that B  1 and  
A  2. So the partial fraction decomposition is
5x 7
x3 2x2 x 2 
2
x 1 
1
x 1 
1
x 2
Now Try Exercises 3 and 13	
■
The same approach works in the remaining cases. We set up the partial fraction de-
composition with the unknown constants A, B, C, . . . . Then we multiply each side of 
the resulting equation by the common denominator, combine like terms on the right-
hand side of the equation, and equate coefficients. This gives a set of linear equations 
that will always have a unique solution (provided that the partial fraction decomposition 
has been set up correctly).
■  Repeated Linear Factors
We now consider the case in which the denominator factors into linear factors, some of 
which are repeated.
Case 2: The Denominator Is a Product of Linear Factors,  
Some of Which Are Repeated
Suppose the complete factorization of Q1x2  contains the linear factor ax  b  
repeated k times; that is, Óax  bÔk is a factor of Q1x2 . Then, corresponding to 
each such factor, the partial fraction decomposition for P1x2/Q1x2  contains
A1
ax b 
A2
1ax b2 2 . . . 
Ak
1ax b2 k
Example 2  ■  Repeated Linear Factors
Find the partial fraction decomposition of x2 1
x1x 12 3.
SOLUTION    Because the factor x  1 is repeated three times in the denominator, the 
partial fraction decomposition has the form
x2 1
x1x 12 3 A
x 
B
x 1 
C
1x 12 2 
D
1x 12 3
Multiplying each side by the common denominator, xÓx  1Ô3, gives
 x2 1 A1x 12 3 Bx1x 12 2 Cx1x 12 Dx
 A1x3 3x2 3x 12 B1x3 2x2 x2 C1x2 x2 Dx       Expand
 1A B2x3 13A 2B C2x2 13A B C D2x A      Combine like terms
The Rhind Papyrus is the oldest 
known mathematical document. It is an 
Egyptian scroll written in 1650 b.c. by the 
scribe Ahmes, who explains that it is an 
exact copy of a scroll written 200 years 
earlier. Ahmes claims that his papyrus 
contains “a thorough study of all things, 
insight into all that exists, knowledge of 
all obscure secrets.” Actually, the docu-
ment contains rules for doing arithmetic, 
including multiplication and division of 
fractions and several exercises with solu-
tions. The exercise shown below reads:  
“A heap and its seventh make nineteen; 
how large is the heap?” In solving prob-
lems of this sort, the Egyptians used par-
tial fractions because their number sys-
tem required all fractions to be written as 
sums of reciprocals of whole numbers. 
For example, 7
12 would be written as 
1
3 1
4.
The papyrus gives a correct formula  
for the volume of a truncated pyramid, 
which the ancient Egyptians used when 
building the pyramids at Giza. It also gives 
the formula A A8
9 dB
2 for the area of a cir-
cle with diameter d. How close is this to the 
actual area?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

748 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Equating coefficients, we get the following equations.
d
A 
B
0
3A 2B C
1
3A B C D 0
A
1
       
Coefficients of x3
Coefficients of x2
Coefficients of x
Constant coefficients
If we rearrange these equations by putting the last one in the first position, we can 
easily see (using substitution) that the solution to the system is A  1, B  1,  
C  0, D  2, so the partial fraction decomposition is
x2 1
x1x 12 3 1
x 
1
x 1 
2
1x 12 3
Now Try Exercises 5 and 29	
■
■  Irreducible Quadratic Factors
We now consider the case in which the denominator has distinct irreducible quadratic 
factors.
Case 3: The Denominator Has Irreducible Quadratic 
Factors, None of Which Is Repeated
Suppose the complete factorization of Q1x2  contains the quadratic factor  
ax2  bx  c (which can’t be factored further). Then, corresponding to this, the 
partial fraction decomposition of P1x2/Q1x2  will have a term of the form
Ax B
ax2 bx c
Example 3  ■  Distinct Quadratic Factors
Find the partial fraction decomposition of 2x2 x 4
x3 4x
.
SOLUTION    Since x3 4x x1x2 42, which can’t be factored further, we write
2x2 x 4
x3 4x
A
x Bx C
x2 4
Multiplying by x1x2 42, we get
 2x2 x 4 A1x2 42 1Bx C2x
 1A B2x2 Cx 4A
Equating coefficients gives us the equations
c
A B 2
A  C 1
A 4A 4
       
Coefficients of x2
Coefficients of x
Constant coefficients
so A  1, B  1, and C  1. The required partial fraction decomposition is
2x2 x 4
x3 4x
1
x x 1
x2 4
Now Try Exercises 7 and 37	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.7  ■  Partial Fractions  749
■  Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factors
We now consider the case in which the denominator has irreducible quadratic factors, 
some of which are repeated.
Case 4: The Denominator Has a Repeated Irreducible  
Quadratic Factor
Suppose the complete factorization of QÓxÔ contains the factor Óax2  bx  cÔk, 
where ax2  bx  c can’t be factored further. Then the partial fraction decom-
position of P1x2/Q1x2  will have the terms
A1x B1
ax2 bx c 
A2 x B2
1ax2 bx c2 2 . . . 
Ak x Bk
1ax2 bx c2 k
Example 4  ■  Repeated Quadratic Factors
Write the form of the partial fraction decomposition of
x5 3x2 12x 1
x31x2 x 12 1x2 22 3
SOLUTION
x5 3x2 12x 1
x31x2 x 12 1x2 22 3
A
x B
x2 C
x3 
Dx E
x2 x 1 Fx G
x2 2 
Hx I
1x2 22 2 
Jx K
1x2 22 3
Now Try Exercises 11 and 41	
■
To find the values of A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, and K in Example 4, we would have 
to solve a system of 11 linear equations. Although possible, this would certainly involve 
a great deal of work!
The techniques that we have described in this section apply only to rational functions 
P1x2/Q1x2  in which the degree of P is less than the degree of Q. If this isn’t the case, 
we must first use long division to divide Q into P.
Example 5  ■  Using Long Division to Prepare for Partial Fractions
Find the partial fraction decomposition of
2x4 4x3 2x2 x 7
x3 2x2 x 2
SOLUTION    Since the degree of the numerator is larger than the degree of the denomi-
nator, we use long division to obtain
2x4 4x3 2x2 x 7
x3 2x2 x 2
2x 
5x 7
x3 2x2 x 2
The remainder term now satisfies the requirement that the degree of the numerator is 
less than the degree of the denominator. At this point we proceed as in Example 1 to 
obtain the decomposition
2x4 4x3 2x2 x 7
x3 2x2 x 2
2x 
2
x 1 
1
x 1 
1
x 2
Now Try Exercise 43	
■
 2x
 x3 2x2 x 2q2x4 4x3 2x2 
x 7
 2x4 4x3 2x2 4x
 
5x 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

750 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Concepts
1­–2  ■  For each rational function r, choose from (i)­–(iv) the  
appropriate form for its partial fraction decomposition.
	 1.	 r1x2 
4
x1x 22 2
	
(i)	 A
x  
B
x 2	
(ii)	 A
x 
B
1x 22 2
	
(iii)	 A
x 
B
x 2 
C
1x 22 2	
(iv)	 A
x 
B
x 2 Cx D
1x 22 2
	 2.	 r1x2 
2x 8
1x 12 1x2 42
	
(i)	
A
x 1 
B
x2 4
	
(ii)	
A
x 1 Bx C
x2 4
	
(iii)	
A
x 1 
B
x 2 
C
x2 4
	
(iv)	 Ax B
x 1 Cx D
x2 4
skills
3–12  ■  Form of the Partial Fraction Decomposition    Write the 
form of the partial fraction decomposition of the function (as in 
Example 4). Do not determine the numerical values of the 
coefficients.
  3.	
1
1x 121x 22 	
  4.	
x
x2 3x 4
  5.	
x2 3x 5
1x 22 21x 42 	
  6.	
1
x4 x3
  7.	
x2
1x 321x2 42 	
  8.	
1
x4 1
  9.	
x3 4x2 2
1x2 121x2 22 	
10.	 x4 x2 1
x21x2 42 2
11.	
x3 x 1
x12x 52 31x2 2x 52 2	 12.	
1
1x3 12 1x2 12
13–44  ■  Partial Fraction Decomposition    Find the partial frac-
tion decomposition of the rational function.
13. 
2
1x 121x 12 	
14. 
2x
1x 12 1x 12
15. 
5
1x 121x 42 	
16. 
x 6
x1x 32
17. 
12
x2 9	
18.  x 12
x2 4x
19. 
4
x2 4	
20. 
2x 1
x2 x 2
21.	
x 14
x2 2 x 8	
22.	 8x 3
2x2 x
23.	
x
8x2 10x 3	
24.	
7x 3
x3 2x2 3x
25.	
9x2 9x 6
2x3 x2 8x 4	
26.	
3x2 3x 27
1x 22 12x2 3x 92
27.	 x2 1
x3 x2	
28.	
3x2 5x 13
13x 22 1x2 4x 42
29.	
2x
4x2 12x 9	
30.	
x 4
12x 52 2
31.	 4x2 x 2
x4 2x3
	
32.	 x3 2x2 4x 3
x4
33.	 10x2 27x 14
1x 12 31x 22
	
34.	
2x2 5x 1
x4 2x3 2x 1
35.	 3x3 22x2 53x 41
1x 22 21x 32 2
	
36.	 3x2 12x 20
x4 8x2 16
37.	 x 3
x3 3x	
38.	
3x2 2x 8
x3 x2 2x 2
39.	
2x3 7x 5
1x2 x 22 1x2 12 	
40.	
x2 x 1
2x4 3x2 1
41.	 x4 x3 x2 x 1
x1x2 12 2
	
42.	 2x2 x 8
1x2 42 2
43.	 x5 2x4 x3 x 5
x3 2x2 x 2
	
44.	 x5 3x4 3x3 4x2 4x 12
1x 22 21x2 22
Skills Plus
45.  Partial Fractions    Determine A and B in terms of a and b.
ax b
x2 1 
A
x 1 
B
x 1 
46.  Partial Fractions    Determine A, B, C, and D in terms of a 
and b.
ax3 bx2
1x2 12 2 Ax B
x2 1 Cx D
1x2 12 2 
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
47.  DISCUSS:  Recognizing Partial Fraction Decompositions    For 
each expression, determine whether it is already a partial 
fraction decomposition or whether it can be decomposed 
further.
(a)	
x
x2 1 
1
x 1	
(b)	
x
1x 12 2
(c)	
1
x 1 
2
1x 12 2	
(d)	
x 2
1x2 12 2
10.7  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.8  ■  Systems of Nonlinear Equations  751
48.  DISCUSS:  Assembling and Disassembling Partial Fractions     
The following expression is a partial fraction decomposition.
2
x 1 
1
1x 12 2 
1
x 1 
	 	 Use a common denominator to combine the terms into one 
fraction. Then use the techniques of this section to find its  
partial fraction decomposition. Did you get back the original 
expression?
10.8 
Systems of Nonlinear Equations
■  Substitution and Elimination Methods  ■  Graphical Method
In this section we solve systems of equations in which the equations are not all linear. 
The methods we learned in Section 10.1 can also be used to solve nonlinear systems.
■  Substitution and Elimination Methods
To solve a system of nonlinear equations, we can use the substitution or elimination 
method, as illustrated in the next examples.
Example 1  ■  Substitution Method
Find all solutions of the system.
b x2 y2 100
3x y 10         Equation 1
Equation 2
SOLUTION  Solve for one variable.    We start by solving for y in the second equation.
y 3x 10        Solve for y in Equation 2
Substitute.    Next we substitute for y in the first equation and solve for x.
 x2 13x 102 2 100        Substitute y  3x  10 into Equation 1
 x2 19x2 60x 1002 100        Expand
 10x2 60x 0
        Simplify
 10x1x 62 0
        Factor
 x 0  or  x 6
        Solve for x
Back-substitute.    Now we back-substitute these values of x into the equation  
y  3x  10.
For x 0:  y 3102 10 10        Back-substitute
For x 6:  y 3162 10   8         Back-substitute
So we have two solutions: 10, 102  and 16, 82 .
The graph of the first equation is a circle, and the graph of the second equation is a 
line. Figure 1 shows that the graphs intersect at the two points 10, 102  and 16, 82 .
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
Example 2  ■  Elimination Method
Find all solutions of the system.
b
 3x2 2y 26
 5x2 7y 3         Equation 1
Equation 2
Check Your Answers
x 0, y 10:
b  102 2 1102 2 100
 3102 1102 10   ✓
x 6, y 8:
b
 162 2 182 2 36 64 100
 3162 182 18 8 10
  ✓
(6, 8)
(0, _10)
y
x
6
0
6
≈+¥=100
3x-y=10
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

752 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
SOLUTION    We choose to eliminate the x-term, so we multiply the first equation by 5 
and the second equation by 3. Then we add the two equations and solve for y.
b  15x2 10y   130
15x2 21y    9        5  Equation 1 
132 3 Equation 2
 11y   121        Add
 y 11        Solve for y
Now we back-substitute y  11 into one of the original equations, say 
3x2 2y 26, and solve for x.
 3x2 21112 26        Back-substitute y  11 into Equation 1
 3x2 48        Add 22
 x2 16        Divide by 3
 x 4 or x 4         Solve for x
So we have two solutions: 14, 112  and 14, 112 .
The graphs of both equations are parabolas (see Section 3.1). Figure 2 shows that 
the graphs intersect at the two points 14, 112  and 14, 112 .
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
■  Graphical Method
The graphical method is particularly useful in solving systems of nonlinear equations.
Example 3  ■  Graphical Method
Find all solutions of the system
e x2 y 2
2x y 1
Solution  Graph each equation.    To graph, we solve for y in each equation.
b
 y x2 2
 y 2x 1
Find intersection points.    Figure 3 shows that the graphs of these equations intersect 
at two points. Zooming in, we see that the solutions are
11, 12 and 13, 72
8
_3
_3
4
≈-y=2
(3, 7)
(_1, _1)
2x-y=_1
Figure 3
Check Your Answers
x 1, y 1:	
x 3, y 7:
b  
 112 2 112 2
 2112 112 1  ✓       
b
 32 7 2
 2132 7 1  ✓
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
(4, _11)
y
x
2
3≈+2y=26
5
0
(_4, _11)
5≈+7y=3
Figure 2
Check Your Answers
x 4, y 11:
b3142 2 21112 26
5142 2 71112 3   ✓
x 4, y 11:
b3142 2 21112 26
5142 2 71112 3   ✓
See Appendix C, Graphing with a 
Graphing Calculator, for guidelines  
on using a graphing calculator. See 
Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for specific 
graphing instructions. Go to  
www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.8  ■  Systems of Nonlinear Equations  753
Example 4  ■  Solving a System of Equations Graphically
Find all solutions of the system, rounded to one decimal place.
b
 x2 y2 12
 y 2x2 5x        Equation 1
Equation 2
Solution    The graph of the first equation is a circle, and the graph of the second is a 
parabola. To graph the circle on a graphing calculator, we must first solve for y in 
terms of x.
 x2 y2 12
 y2 12 x2
        Isolate y 2 on LHS
 y "12 x2        Take square roots
To graph the circle, we must graph both functions.
y "12 x2  and  y "12 x2
In Figure 4 the graph of the circle is shown in red, and the parabola is shown  
in blue. The graphs intersect in Quadrants I and II. Zooming in, or using the 
Intersect command, we see that the intersection points are 10.559, 3.4192 and 
12.847, 1.9742. There also appears to be an intersection point in Quadrant IV. How-
ever, when we zoom in, we see that the curves come close to each other but don’t 
intersect (see Figure 5). Thus the system has two solutions; rounded to the nearest 
tenth, they are
10.6, 3.42 and  12.8, 2.02
5
_5
_7
7
(b)
Intersection
X=2.8467004  Y=1.973904
5
_5
_7
7
(a)
Intersection
X=-.5588296  Y=3.4187292
0.5
2.0
_4
_2
Figure 5  Zooming in
Figure 4  x2 y2 12, y 2x2 5x
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
Global Positioning 
System (GPS)
On a cold, foggy day in 1707 a 
British naval fleet was sailing 
home at a fast clip. The fleet’s 
navigators didn’t know it, but 
the fleet was only a few yards 
from the rocky shores of 
England. In the ensuing disas-
ter the fleet was totally 
destroyed. This tragedy could 
have been avoided had the 
navigators known their posi-
tions. In those days latitude was determined by the position of the North 
Star (and this could be done only at night in good weather), and 
Mathematics in the Modern World
longitude was determined by the position of the sun relative to where it 
would be in England at that same time. So navi­gation required an accu-
rate method of telling time on ships. (The invention of the spring-loaded 
clock brought about the eventual solution.)
Since then, several different ­methods have been developed  
to determine position, and all rely heavily on mathematics (see 
­LORAN, page 804). The latest method, called the Global Positioning  
System (GPS), uses triangulation. In this system, 24 satellites are stra-
tegically located above the surface of the earth. A handheld GPS 
device measures distance from a satellite, using the travel time of 
radio signals emitted from the satellite. Knowing the distances to 
three different satellites tells us that we are at the point of intersec-
tion of three different spheres. This uniquely determines our position 
(see ­Exercise 51, page 755).
Courtesy of NASA
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

754 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
concepts
1–2  ■  The system of equations 
b2y x2 0
y x 4
is graphed below.
	 1.	 Use the graph to find the solution(s) of the system.
	 2.	 Check that the solutions you found in Exercise 1 satisfy the 
system.
x
0
y
1
1
skills
3–8  ■  Substitution Method    Use the substitution method to find 
all solutions of the system of equations.
	 3.	 b  y x2
y x 12	
  4.	 bx2 y2 25
y 2x
	 5.	 bx2 y2 8
x y 0	
  6.	 b
 x2 y 9
 x y 3 0
	 7.	 b x y2 0
2x 5y2 75	
  8.	 b x2 y 1
2x2 3y 17
9–14  ■  Elimination Method    Use the elimination method to find 
all solutions of the system of equations.
	 9.	 bx2 2y 1
x2 5y 29
	10.	 b3x2 4y 17
2x2 5y 2
11.	 b3x2 y2 11
x2 4y2 8
	12.	 b2x2 4y 13
  x2  y2   7
2
13.	 b
x y2 3 0
2x2 y2 4 0
	14.	 b x2 y2 1
2x2 y2 x 3
15–18  ■  Finding Intersection Points Graphically    Two equations 
and their graphs are given. Find the intersection point(s) of the 
graphs by solving the system.
15.	 e x2 y 8
x 2y 6	
16.	 b
 x y2 4
 x y2 2
1
0
1
y
x	
1
0
2
y
x
17.	 b
 x2 y 0
 x3 2x y 0	
18.	 bx2 y2 4x
x y2
 
0
1
1
y
x
	
0
1
1
y
x
19–32  ■  Solving Nonlinear Systems    Find all solutions of the 
system of equations.
19.	 b
 y x2 4x
 y 4x 16	
20.	 b
 x y2 0
 y x2 0
21.	 b  x 2y 2
y2 x2 2x 4	
22.	 b
 y 4 x2
 y x2 4
23.	 bx y 4
 xy 12
	24.	 b
xy 24
2x2 y2 4 0
25.	 b
x2y 16
x2 4y 16 0	
26.	 b  x !y 0
y2 4x2 12
27.	 bx2 y2 9
x2 y2 1	
28.	 b x2 2y2 2
2x2 3y 15
29.	 b 2x2 8y3 19
4x2 16y3 34	
30.	 b
 x4 y3 17
3x4 5y3 53
31.	 µ
2
x 3
y 1
 4
x 7
y 1
	
32.	 µ  
4
x2 6
y4 7
2
1
x2 2
y4 0
10.8  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.8  ■  Systems of Nonlinear Equations  755
33–40  ■  Graphical Method    Use the graphical method to find 
all solutions of the system of equations, rounded to two decimal 
places.
33.	 b  y x2 8x
y 2x 16	
34.	 by x2 4x
2x y 2
35.	 bx2 y2 25
x 3y 2 	
36.	 bx2 y2 17
 x2 2x y2 13
37.	 •
x2
9 y2
18 1
y x2 6x 2
	
38.	 b  x2 y2 3
y x2 2x 8
39.	 bx4 16y4 32
x2 2x y 0	
40.	 b  y ex ex
y 5 x2
Skills Plus
41–44  ■  Some Trickier Systems    Follow the hints and solve the 
systems.
41.	 b
log x log y 3
2
2 log x log y 0	 [Hint: Add the equations.]
42.	 b2x 2 y 10
4x 4 y 68	
[Hint: Note that 4x 22x 12x2 2.]
43.	 b
x y 3 
 x3 y3 387	
[Hint: Factor the left-hand side of 
the second equation.]
44.	 b
 x2 xy 1
 xy y2 3	
[Hint: Add the equations, and factor 
the result.]
applications
45.  Dimensions of a Rectangle    A rectangle has an area of  
180 cm2 and a perimeter of 54 cm. What are its dimensions?
46.  Legs of a Right Triangle    A right triangle has an area of  
84 ft2 and a hypotenuse 25 ft long. What are the lengths of its 
other two sides?
47.  Dimensions of a Rectangle    The perimeter of a rectangle is 
70, and its diagonal is 25. Find its length and width.
48.  Dimensions of a Rectangle    A circular piece of sheet metal 
has a diameter of 20 in. The edges are to be cut off to form a 
rectangle of area 160 in2 (see the figure). What are the 
dimensions of the rectangle?
49.  Flight of a Rocket    A hill is inclined so that its “slope” is 1
2, 
as shown in the figure. We introduce a coordinate system 
with the ­origin at the base of the hill and with the scales on 
the axes measured in meters. A rocket is fired from the base 
of the hill in such a way that its trajectory is the parabola 
y x2 401x. At what point does the rocket strike the 
­hillside? How far is this point from the base of the hill (to the 
nearest centimeter)?
run
rise
=1
2
rise
run
x
y
0
50.  Making a Stovepipe    A rectangular piece of sheet metal with 
an area of 1200 in2 is to be bent into a cylindrical length of 
stovepipe having a volume of 600 in3. What are the dimen-
sions of the sheet metal?
x
y
51.  Global Positioning System (GPS)    The Global Positioning 
System determines the location of an object from its  
distances to satellites in orbit around the earth. In the  
simplified, two-dimensional situation shown in the follow-
ing figure, determine the coordinates of P from the fact 
that P is 26 units from satellite A and 20 units from 
­satellite B.
P(x, y)
20
26
B(28, 20)
A(22, 32)
y
x
Planet
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

756 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
52.  DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Intersection of a Parabola and a 
Line    On a sheet of graph paper or using a graphing calcula-
tor, draw the parabola y  x2. Then draw the graphs of the 
linear equation y  x  k on the same coordinate plane for 
various values of k. Try to choose values of k so that the line 
and the parabola intersect at two points for some of your k’s 
and not for others. For what value of k is there exactly one 
intersection point? Use the results of your experiment to 
make a conjecture about the values of k for which the 
­following system has two solutions, one solution, and no 
solution. Prove your conjecture.
b  y x2
y x k
10.9 
Systems of Inequalities
■  Graphing an Inequality  ■  Systems of Inequalities  ■  Systems of Linear Inequalities   
■  Application: Feasible Regions
In this section we study systems of inequalities in two variables from a graphical point 
of view. 
■  Graphing an Inequality
We begin by considering the graph of a single inequality. We already know that the 
graph of y x2, for example, is the parabola in Figure 1. If we replace the equal sign 
by the symbol , we obtain the inequality
y x 2
1
1
0
y
x
y=≈
Figure 1
Its graph consists of not just the parabola in Figure 1, but also every point whose  
y-coordinate is larger than x2. We indicate the solution in Figure 2(a) by shading the 
points above the parabola.
Similarly, the graph of y x2 in Figure 2(b) consists of all points on and below the 
parabola. However, the graphs of y x2 and y x2 do not include the points on the 
parabola itself, as indicated by the dashed curves in Figures 2(c) and 2(d).
(a) y≥≈
0
y
x
1
1
1
1
0
y
x
1
1
0
y
x
1
1
0
y
x
(b) y≤≈
(c) y>≈
(d) y<≈
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.9  ■  Systems of Inequalities  757
The graph of an inequality, in general, consists of a region in the plane whose bound-
ary is the graph of the equation obtained by replacing the inequality sign 1, , , 
or 2 with an equal sign. To determine which side of the graph gives the solution set of 
the inequality, we need only check test points.
Graphing an inequality
To graph an inequality, we carry out the following steps.
1.	 Graph the Equation.    Graph the equation that corresponds to the inequality. 
Use a dashed curve for  or  and a solid curve for  or .
2.	 Graph the Inequality.    The graph of the inequality consists of all the points 
on one side of the curve that we graphed in Step 1. We use test points on 
either side of the curve to determine whether the points on that side satisfy 
the inequality. If the point satisfies the inequality, then all the points on that 
side of the curve satisfy the inequality. In that case, shade that side of the 
curve to indicate that it is part of the graph. If the test point does not satisfy 
the inequality, then the region isn’t part of the graph.
Example 1  ■  Graphs of Inequalities
Graph each inequality.
(a)	 x2 y2 25      (b)  x 2y 5
Solution    We follow the guidelines given above.
(a)	 Graph the equation.    The graph of the equation x2 y2 25 is a circle of 
radius 5 centered at the origin. The points on the circle itself do not satisfy the 
inequality because it is of the form , so we graph the circle with a dashed 
curve, as shown in Figure 3. 
	 	 Graph the inequality.    To determine whether the inside or the outside of the cir-
cle satisfies the inequality, we use the test points 10, 02  on the inside and 16, 02  
on the outside. To do this, we substitute the coordinates of each point into the 
inequality and check whether the result satisfies the inequality. 
Test point
Inequality x2 y2 * 25
Conclusion
10, 02
02 02 
? 25  ✓
Part of graph
16, 02
62 02 
? 25  ✗
Not part of graph
	 	 Our check shows that the points inside the circle satisfy the inequality. A graph of 
the inequality is shown in Figure 3.
(b)	 Graph the equation.    We first graph the equation x 2y 5. The graph is the 
line shown in Figure 4. 
	 	 Graph the inequality.    Let’s use the test points 10, 02  and 15, 52  on either side 
of the line. 
Test point
Inequality x 2y # 5
Conclusion
10, 02
0 2102 
? 5  ✗
Not part of graph
15, 52
5 2152 
? 5  ✓
Part of graph
Note that any point inside or outside 
the circle can serve as a test point. We 
have chosen these points for simplicity.
1
1
0
y
x
(6, 0)
Figure 3  Graph of x2 y2 25
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

758 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Our check shows that the points above the line satisfy the inequality. A graph of the 
inequality is shown in Figure 4.
1
1
0
y
x
Figure 4  Graph of x 2y 5
Now Try Exercises 15 and 21	
■
■  Systems of Inequalities
We now consider systems of inequalities. The solution set of a system of inequalities 
in two variables is the set of all points in the coordinate plane that satisfy every in-
equality in the system. The graph of a system of inequalities is the graph of the 
solution set.
To find the solution of a system of inequalities, we first graph each inequality in 
the system. The solution of the system consists of those points in the coordinate 
plane that belong to the solution of each inequality in the system. In other words, the 
solution of the system is the intersection of the solutions of the individual inequali-
ties in the system. So to solve a system of inequalities, we use the following guide-
lines.
the solution of a system of inequalities
To graph the solution of a system of inequalities, we carry out the following 
steps.
1.	 Graph Each Inequality.    Graph each inequality in the system on the same 
graph.
2.	 Graph the Solution of the System.    Shade the region where the graphs of all the 
inequalities intersect. All the points in this region satisfy each inequality, so 
they belong to the solution of the system. 
3.	 Find the Vertices.    Label the vertices of the region that you shaded in Step 2. 
Example 2  ■  A System of Two Inequalities
Graph the solution of the system of inequalities, and label its vertices.
bx2 y2 25
x 2y 5
Solution    These are the two inequalities of Example 1. Here we want to graph only 
those points that simultaneously satisfy both inequalities.
Graph each inequality.    In Figure 5(a) we graph the solutions of the two inequalities 
on the same axes (in different colors). 
Graph the solution of the system.    The solution of the system of inequalities is the 
intersection of the two graphs. This is the region where the two regions overlap, which 
is the purple region graphed in Figure 5(b). 
We can write the inequality in  
Example 1 as 
y  1
2 x 5
2
From this form of the inequality we see 
that the solution consists of the points 
with y-values on or above the line 
y  1
2 x 5
2. So the graph of the 
inequality is the region above the line.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.9  ■  Systems of Inequalities  759
Find the Vertices.    The points 13, 42  and 15, 02  in Figure 5(b) are the vertices of 
the ­solution set. They are obtained by solving the system of equations
bx2 y2 25
x 2y 5
We solve this system of equations by substitution. Solving for x in the second equa-
tion gives x 5 2y, and substituting this into the first equation gives
 15 2y2 2 y2 25        Substitute x  5  2y
 125 20y 4y22 y2 25        Expand
 20y 5y2 0         Simplify
 5y14 y2 0         Factor
Thus y  0 or y  4. When y  0, we have x 5 2102 5, and when y  4, we 
have x 5 2142 3. So the points of intersection of these curves are 15, 02  and 
13, 42 .
Note that in this case the vertices are not part of the solution set, since they don’t 
satisfy the inequality x2  y2  25 (so they are graphed as open circles in the figure). 
They simply show where the “corners” of the solution set lie.
Now Try Exercise 43	
■
■  Systems of Linear Inequalities
An inequality is linear if it can be put into one of the following forms:
ax  by  c            ax  by  c            ax  by  c            ax  by  c
In the next example we graph the solution set of a system of linear inequalities.
Example 3  ■  A System of Four Linear Inequalities
Graph the solution set of the system, and label its vertices.
d
x 3y 12
x y 8
x 0
y 0
Solution  Graph each inequality.    In Figure 6 we first graph the lines given by the 
equations that correspond to each inequality. To determine the graphs of the first two 
inequalities, we need to check only one test point. For simplicity let’s use the point 
10, 02 .
Inequality
Test point x0, 0c
Conclusion
x 3y 12
0 3102 
? 12  ✓
Satisfies inequality
x y 8
0 0 
? 8  ✓
Satisfies inequality
Since 10, 02 is below the line x  3y  12, our check shows that the region on or 
below the line must satisfy the inequality. Likewise, since 10, 02  is below the line  
x  y  8, our check shows that the region on or below this line must satisfy the 
inequality. The inequalities x  0 and y  0 say that x and y are nonnegative. These 
regions are sketched in Figure 6(a).
Graph the solution of the system.    The solution of the system of inequalities is the 
intersection of the graphs. This is the purple region graphed in Figure 6(b).
(a)
0
y
x
(b)
0
y
x
(5, 0)
(_3, 4)
Figure 5  bx2 y2 25
x 2y 5
(b)
0
y
x
(8, 0)
(6, 2)
(0, 4)
12
8
(a)
0
y
x
12
8
x+y=8
x=0
y=0
x+3y=12
8
4
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

760 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Find the Vertices.   The coordinates of each vertex are obtained by simultaneously 
solving the equations of the lines that intersect at that vertex. From the system
bx 3y 12
x y 8
we get the vertex 16, 22. The origin 10, 02 is also clearly a vertex. The other two verti-
ces are at the x- and y-intercepts of the corresponding lines: 18, 02 and 10, 42. In this 
case all the vertices are part of the solution set.
Now Try Exercise 51	
■
Example 4  ■  A System of Linear Inequalities
Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities, and label the vertices.
(a)  d
10x 20y 60
30x 20y 100
10x 40y 80
x 0, y 0
      (b)  d
10x 20y 60
30x 20y 100
10x 40y 80
x 0, y 0
Solution 
(a)	 Graph each inequality.    We must graph the lines that correspond to these inequal-
ities and then shade the appropriate regions. The graph of 10x 20y 60 is the 
region above the line y 3 1
2 x. The graph of 30x 20y 100 is the region 
above the line y 5 3
2 x, and the graph of 10x 40y 80 is the region above 
the line y 2 1
4 x.
	 	 Graph the solution of the system.    The inequalities x 0 and y 0 indicate 
that the region is in the first quadrant. With this information we graph the system 
of inequalities in Figure 7. 
	 	 Find the vertices.    We determine the vertices of the region by finding the points 
of intersection of the appropriate lines. You can check that the vertices of the 
region are the ones indicated in Figure 7.
(b)	 The graph of the first inequality 10x 20y 60 is the region below the line
y 3 1
2 x, and all the other inequalities are the same as those in part (a),  
so the solution to the system is the region (colored purple) shown in  
Figure 8.
Figure 7
30x+20y=100
10x+20y=60
10x+40y=80
0
y
x
1
1
(4, 1)
(8, 0)
(0, 5)
(2, 2)
Figure 8
30x+20y=100
10x+20y=60
10x+40y=80
0
y
x
1
1
(4, 1)
(2.4, 1.6)
(8, 0)
(0, 5)
(2, 2)
Now Try Exercises 59 and 63	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.9  ■  Systems of Inequalities  761
Example 5  ■  A System of Linear Inequalities
Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities, and label the vertices.
c
x 2y 8
x 2y 4
3x 2y 8
Solution  Graph each inequality.    We must graph the lines that correspond to  
these inequalities and then shade the appropriate regions, as in Example 2. We will 
use a graphing calculator, so we must first isolate y on the left-hand side of each 
inequality.
c 
y  1
2 x 4
y 1
2 x 2
y 3
2 x 4
Using the shading feature of the calculator, we obtain the graph in Figure 9(a). Note 
that the calculator shades each region in a different pattern.
Graph the solution of the system.    The solution set is the triangular region that is 
shaded in all three patterns. The solution set is graphed in Figure 9(b).
Find the vertices.    We use the TRACE  or the Intersect command to find the ver-
tices of the region. The vertices are labeled in Figure 9(b).
Figure 9
8
_2
_2
8
y
x
0
1
1
(2, 3)
(4, 2)
(6, 5)
(a) Graphing calculator output
(b) Graph of solution set
Now Try Exercise 65	
■
A region in the plane is called bounded if it can be enclosed in a (sufficiently large) 
circle. A region that is not bounded is called unbounded. For example, the regions 
graphed in Figures 3, 5(b), 6(b), 8, and 9 are bounded because they can be enclosed in a 
circle, as illustrated in Figure 10(a).  But the regions graphed in Figures 2, 4, and 7 are 
unbounded, because we cannot enclose them in a circle as illustrated in Figure 10(b). 
Figure 10
0
y
x
1
1
0
y
x
2
2
(a) A bounded region can be
enclosed in a circle.
(b) An unbounded region cannot be
enclosed in a circle.
See Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for specific 
instructions on graphing inequalities. 
Go to www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

762 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
■  Application: Feasible Regions
Many applied problems involve constraints on the variables. For instance, a factory 
manager has only a certain number of workers who can be assigned to perform jobs on 
the factory floor. A farmer deciding what crops to cultivate has only a certain amount 
of land that can be seeded. Such constraints or limitations can usually be expressed as 
systems of inequalities. When dealing with applied inequalities, we usually refer to the 
solution set of a system as a feasible region, because the points in the solution set rep-
resent feasible (or possible) values for the quantities being studied.
Example 6  ■  Restricting Pollutant Outputs
A factory produces two agricultural pesticides, A and B. For every barrel of pesticide 
A, the factory emits 0.25 kg of carbon monoxide (CO) and 0.60 kg of sulfur dioxide 
(SO2); and for every barrel of pesticide B, it emits 0.50 kg of CO and 0.20 kg of SO2. 
Pollution laws restrict the factory’s output of CO to a maximum of 75 kg per day and 
its output of SO2 to a maximum of 90 kg per day.
(a)	 Find a system of inequalities that describes the number of barrels of each pesti-
cide the factory can produce per day and still satisfy the pollution laws. Graph the 
feasible region.
(b)	 Would it be legal for the factory to produce 100 barrels of pesticide A and 80 bar-
rels of pesticide B per day?
(c)	 Would it be legal for the factory to produce 60 barrels of pesticide A and 160 bar-
rels of pesticide B per day?
Solution
(a)	 We state the constraints as a system of inequalities and then graph the solution of 
the system.
	 	 Set up the inequalities.    We first identify and name the variables, and we then 
express each statement in the problem in terms of the variables. We let the vari-
able x represent the number of barrels of A produced per day and let y be the 
number of barrels of B produced per day. We can organize the information in the 
problem as follows.
In Words
In Algebra
Barrels of A produced
x
Barrels of B produced 
y
Total CO produced
0.25x 0.50y
Total SO2 produced
0.60x 0.20y
	 	 From the information in the problem and the fact that x and y can’t be negative 
we obtain the following inequalities.
c
0.25x 0.50y 75
0.60x 0.20y 90
x 0, y 0
        At most 75 kg of CO can be produced
        At most 90 kg of SO2 can be produced
	 	 Multiplying the first inequality by 4 and the second by 5 simplifies the system to 
the following:
c
x 2y 300
3x y 450
x 0, y 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.9  ■  Systems of Inequalities  763
	 	 Graph the solution set.    We first graph the equations 
x 2y 300
3x y 450
	 	 The graphs are the two lines shown in Figure 11. Using the test point 10, 02 , we 
see that the solution set of each of these inequalities is the region below the corre-
sponding line. So the solution to the system is the intersection of these sets as 
shown in Figure 11. 
(b)	 Since the point 1100, 802 lies inside the feasible region, this production plan is  
legal (see Figure 11).
(c)	 Since the point 160, 1602 lies outside the feasible region, this production plan is 
not legal. It violates the CO restriction, although it does not violate the SO2  
restriction (see Figure 11).
Now Try Exercise 69	
■
0
y
x
(100, 80)
(60, 160)
300
200
100
200
100
400
300
3x+y=450
x+2y=300
Figure 11
concepts
	 1.	 If the point 12, 32  is a solution of an inequality in x and y, 
then the inequality is satisfied when we replace x by 
 
 and y by  
  . Is the point 12, 32  a solution 
of the inequality 4x 2y 1? 
	 2.	 To graph an inequality, we first graph the corresponding 
 
  . So to graph the inequality y x 1, we  
first graph the equation  
  . To decide which  
side of the graph of the equation is the graph of the  
inequality, we use  
 points. Complete the table,  
and sketch a graph of the inequality by shading the appropri-
ate region.
Test point
Inequality y " x 1
Conclusion
10, 02
10, 22
x
y
y=x+1
0
1
1
	 3.	 If the point 12, 32  is a solution of a system of inequalities in x 
and y, then each inequality is satisfied when we replace x by 
 
 and y by  
  . Is the point 12, 32  a solution 
of the following system? 
e2x 4y 17
6x 5y 29
	 4.	 Shade the solution of each system of inequalities on the given 
graph. 
(a)	 b  x y 0
x y 2	
(b)	 bx y 0
x y 2
y
x+y=2
x-y=0
x
1
1

y
x+y=2
x-y=0
x
1
1
(c)	 bx y 0
x y 2	
(d)	 bx y 0
x y 2
y
x+y=2
x-y=0
x
1
1

y
x+y=2
x-y=0
x
1
1
10.9  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

764 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
skills
5–6  ■  Solutions of Inequalities    An inequality and several 
points are given. For each point determine whether it is a solution 
of the inequality.
	 5.	 x 5y 3; 
11, 22 , 11, 22 , 11, 22 , 18, 12
	 6.	 3x 2y 2; 
12, 12 , 11, 32 , 11, 32 , 10, 12
7–8  ■  Solutions of Systems of Inequalities    A system of 
inequalities and several points are given. Determine which points 
are solutions of the system.
	 7.	 e3x 2y 5
2x y 3; 
10, 02 , 11, 22 , 11, 12 , 13, 12
	 8.	 e x 2y 4
4x 3y 11; 
10, 02 , 11, 32 , 13, 02 , 11, 22
9–22  ■  Graphing Inequalities    Graph the inequality.
	 9.	 y 2x	
10.	 y 3x
	11.	 y 2	
12.	 x 1
	13.	 x 2	
14.	 y 1
	15.	 y x 3	
16.	 y 1 x
	17.	 2x y 4	
18.	 3x y 9 0
	19.	 x2 y 5	
20.	 y x2 1
	21.	 x2 y2 9	
22.	 x2 1y 22 2 4
23–26  ■  Graphing Inequalities    Use a graphing calculator to 
graph the linear inequality.
	23.	 3x 2y 18	
24.	 4x 3y 9
	25.	 5x 2y 8	
26.	 5x 3y 15
27–30  ■  Finding Inequalities from a Graph    An equation and its 
graph are given. Find an inequality whose solution is the shaded 
region.
	27.	 y 1
2x 1	
28.	 y  x2  2
1
1
0
y
x
	
1
1
0
y
x
	29.	 x2  y2  4	
30.	 y  x3  4x
1
1
0
y
x
	
1
1
0
y
x
31–58  ■  Systems of Inequalities    Graph the solution set of the 
system of inequalities. Find the coordinates of all vertices, and 
determine whether the solution set is bounded.
	31.	 b  x y 4
y x	
32.	 b2x 3y 12
3x y 21
33.	 b   y 1
4x 2
y 2x 5	
34.	 b  x y 0 
4 y 2x
	35.	 c 
y 2x 8
y  1
2x 5
x 0, y 0
	
36.	 c 
4x 3y 18
2x y 8
x 0, y 0
37.	 d
x 0
y 0
3x 5y 15
3x 2y 9
	
38.	 c 
x 2
 y 12
2x 4y 8
39.	 b  y 9 x2
x 0, y 0	
40.	 c 
y x2
y 4
x 0
	41.	 b  y 9 x2
y x 3 	
42.	 b  
y x2
x y 6
	43.	 b  x2 y2 4
x y 0	
44.	 d
x 0
y 0
x y 10
x2 y2 9
	45.	 b  x2 y 0
2x2 y 12	
46.	 e2x2 y 4
x2 y 8
	47.	 e x2 y2 9
2x y2 1	
48.	 e x2 y2 4
x2 2y 1
	49.	 c 
x 2y 14
3x y 0
x y 2
	
50.	 c
y x 6
3x 2y 12
x 2y 2
	51.	 d  
x 0
y 0
x 5
x y 7
	
52.	 d
x 0
y 0
y 4
2x y 8
	53.	 c
y x 1
x 2y 12
x 1 0
	
54.	 c
x y 12
y 1
2 x 6
3x y 6
	55.	 c 
x2 y2 8
x 2
y 0
	
56.	 c
x2 y 0
x y 6
x y 6
	57.	 c 
x2 y2 9
x y 0
x 0
	
58.	 c 
y x3
y 2x 4
x y 0
59–64  ■  Systems of Inequalities    Graph the system of inequali-
ties, label the vertices, and determine whether the region is 
bounded or unbounded.
	59.	 •
x 2y 14
3x y 0
x y 2
	
60.	 •
x 2y 14
3x y 0
x y 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 10.9  ■  Systems of Inequalities  765
	61.	 •  
x y 12
y 1
2 x 6
y 2x 6
	
62.	 •
y x 1
x 2y 12
x 1 0
	63.	 µ
30x 10y 50
10x 20y 50
10x 60y 90
x 0, y 0
	
64.	 µ
x y 6
4x 7y 39
x 5y 13
x 0, y 0
65–68  ■  Graphing Systems of Inequalities    Use a graphing cal-
culator to graph the solution of the system of inequalities. Find 
the coordinates of all vertices, ­rounded to one decimal place.
	65.	 c  
y x 3
y 2x 6
y 8
	
66.	 c
x y 12
2x y 24
x y 6
	67.	 b  y 6x x2
x y 4	
68.	 c 
y x3
2x y 0
y 2x 6
applications
	69.	 Planting Crops    A farmer has 500 acres of arable land on 
which he wants to plant potatoes and corn. The farmer has 
$40,000 available for planting and $30,000 for fertilizer. 
Planting 1 acre of potatoes costs $90, and planting 1 acre of 
corn costs $50. Fertilizer costs $30 for 1 acre of potatoes and 
$80 for 1 acre of corn. 
(a)	 Find a system of inequalities that describes the number 
of acres of each crop that the farmer can plant with the 
available resources. Graph the feasible region.
(b)	 Can the farmer plant 300 acres of potatoes and 180 acres 
of corn?
(c)	 Can the farmer plant 150 acres of potatoes and 325 acres 
of corn?
	70.	 Planting Crops    A farmer has 300 acres of arable land on 
which she wants to plant cauliflower and cabbage. The 
farmer has $17,500 available for planting and $12,000 for 
fertilizer. Planting 1 acre of cauliflower costs $70, and plant-
ing 1 acre of cabbage costs $35. Fertilizer costs $25 for  
1 acre of cauliflower and $55 for 1 acre of cabbage. 
(a)	 Find a system of inequalities that describes the number 
of acres of each crop that the farmer can plant with the 
available resources. Graph the feasible region.
(b)	 Can the farmer plant 155 acres of cauliflower and  
115 acres of cabbage?  
(c)	 Can the farmer plant 115 acres of cauliflower and  
175 acres of cabbage? 
	71.	 Publishing Books    A publishing company publishes  
a total of no more than 100 books every year. At least  
20 of these are nonfiction, but the company always publishes 
at least as much fiction as nonfiction. Find a system of 
inequalities that describes the possible numbers of fiction and 
nonfiction books that the company can produce each year 
consistent with these policies. Graph the solution set.
	72.	 Furniture Manufacturing    A man and his daughter manufac-
ture unfinished tables and chairs. Each table requires 3 h of 
sawing and 1 h of assembly. Each chair requires 2 h of saw-
ing and 2 h of assembly. Between the two of them, they can 
put in up to 12 h of sawing and 8 h of assembly work each 
day. Find a system of inequalities that describes all possible 
combinations of tables and chairs that they can make daily. 
Graph the solution set.
	73.	 Coffee Blends    A coffee merchant sells two different coffee 
blends. The Standard blend uses 4 oz of arabica and 12 oz of 
robusta beans per package; the Deluxe blend uses 10 oz of 
­arabica and 6 oz of robusta beans per package. The merchant 
has 80 lb of arabica and 90 lb of robusta beans available. 
Find a system of inequalities that describes the possible num-
ber of Standard and Deluxe packages the merchant can make. 
Graph the solution set.
	74.	 Nutrition    A cat food manufacturer uses fish and beef by-
products. The fish contains 12 g of protein and 3 g of fat per 
ounce. The beef contains 6 g of protein and 9 g of fat per 
ounce. Each can of cat food must contain at least 60 g of pro-
tein and 45 g of fat. Find a system of inequalities that 
describes the possible number of ounces of fish and beef by-
products that can be used in each can to satisfy these mini-
mum requirements. Graph the solution set.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	75.	 DISCUSS:  Shading Unwanted Regions    To graph the solution 
of a system of inequalities, we have shaded the solution of each 
inequality in a different color; the solution of the system is the 
region where all the shaded parts overlap. Here is a different 
method: For each inequality, shade the region that does not sat-
isfy the inequality. Explain why the part of the plane that is left 
unshaded is the solution of the system. Solve the following sys-
tem by both methods. Which do you prefer? Why?
d
x 2y 4
x y 1
x 3y 9
x 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

766 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Systems of Equations (p. 680)
A system of equations is a set of equations that involve the same 
variables. A system of linear equations is a system of equations 
in which each equation is linear. Systems of of linear equations in 
two variables (x and y) and three variables (x, y, and z) have the 
following forms:
	 Linear system	
Linear system
	
2 variables	
3 variables
a11x a12 y b1
a21x a22 y b2	
a11x a12 y a13z b1
a21x a22 y a23z b2
a31x a32 y a33z b3
A solution of a system of equations is an assignment of values 
for the variables that makes each equation in the system true. To 
solve a system means to find all solutions of the system.
Substitution Method (p. 680)
To solve a pair of equations in two variables by substitution:
1.	 Solve for one variable in terms of the other variable in one 
­equation.
2.	 Substitute into the other equation to get an equation in one 
­variable, and solve for this variable.
3.	 Back-substitute the value(s) of the variable you have found 
into either original equation, and solve for the remaining 
variable.
Elimination Method (p. 681)
To solve a pair of equations in two variables by elimination:
1.	 Adjust the coefficients by multiplying the equations by 
appropriate constants so that the term(s) involving one of the 
variables are of opposite sign in the equations.
2.	 Add the equations to eliminate that one variable; this gives  
an equation in the other variable. Solve for this variable.
3.	 Back-substitute the value(s) of the variable that you have 
found into either original equation, and solve for the remaining 
variable.
Graphical Method (p. 682)
To solve a pair of equations in two variables graphically, first put 
each equation in function form, y f1x2 .
1.	 Graph the equations on a common screen.
2.	 Find the points of intersection of the graphs. The solutions 
are the x- and y-coordinates of the points of intersection.
Gaussian Elimination (p. 691)
When we use Gaussian elimination to solve a system of linear 
equations, we use the following operations to change the system 
to an equivalent simpler system:
1.	 Add a nonzero multiple of one equation to another.
2.	 Multiply an equation by a nonzero constant.
3.	 Interchange the position of two equations in the system.
Number of Solutions of a Linear System (p. 693)
A system of linear equations can have:
1.	 A unique solution for each variable.
2.	 No solution, in which case the system is inconsistent.
3.	 Infinitely many solutions, in which case the system is 
­dependent.
How to Determine the Number of Solutions  
of a Linear System (p. 693)
When we use Gaussian elimination to solve a system of linear 
equations, then we can tell that the system has:
1.	 No solution (is inconsistent) if we arrive at a false equation of 
the form 0  c, where c is nonzero.
2.	 Infinitely many solutions (is dependent) if the system is con-
sistent but we end up with fewer equations than variables 
(after discarding redundant equations of the form 0  0).
Matrices (p. 699)
A matrix A of dimension m 3 n  is a rectangular array of num-
bers with m rows and n columns:
A D
a11
a12
c
a1n
a21
a22
c
a2n
(
(
f
(
am1
am2
c
amn
T
Augmented Matrix of a System (p. 700)
The augmented matrix of a system of linear equations is the  
matrix consisting of the coefficients and the constant terms.  
For example, for the two-variable system
 a11x a12x b1
 a21x a22x b2
the augmented matrix is
c a11
a12
b1
a21
a22
b2
d
Elementary Row Operations (p. 700)
To solve a system of linear equations using the augmented matrix 
of the system, the following operations can be used to transform 
the rows of the matrix:
1.	 Add a nonzero multiple of one row to another.
2.	 Multiply a row by a nonzero constant.
3.	 Interchange two rows.
Row-Echelon Form of a Matrix (p. 702)
A matrix is in row-echelon form if its entries satisfy the follow-
ing conditions:
1.	 The first nonzero entry in each row (the leading entry) is the 
number 1.
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 10  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 10  ■  Review  767
2.	 The leading entry of each row is to the right of the leading 
entry in the row above it.
3.	 All rows consisting entirely of zeros are at the bottom of the  
matrix.
If the matrix also satisfies the following condition, it is in 
reduced row-echelon form:
4.	 If a column contains a leading entry, then every other entry in 
that column is a 0.
Number of Solutions of a Linear System (p. 705)
If the augmented matrix of a system of linear equations has been 
reduced to row-echelon form using elementary row operations, 
then the system has:
1.	 No solution if the row-echelon form contains a row that  
represents the equation 0 1. In this case the system is 
inconsistent.
2.	 One solution if each variable in the row-echelon form is a  
leading variable.
3.	 Infinitely many solutions if the system is not inconsistent but 
not every variable is a leading variable. In this case the system 
is dependent.
Operations on Matrices (p. 713)
If A and B are m 3 n matrices and c is a scalar (real number), 
then:
1.	 The sum A B is the m 3 n matrix that is obtained by add-
ing corresponding entries of A and B.
2.	 The difference A B is the m 3 n matrix that is obtained by 
subtracting corresponding entries of A and B.
3.	 The scalar product cA is the m 3 n matrix that is obtained 
by multiplying each entry of A by c.
Multiplication of Matrices (p. 715)
If A is an m 3 n matrix and B is an n 3 k matrix (so the num-
ber of columns of A is the same as the number of rows of B), 
then the matrix product AB is the m 3 k matrix whose ij-
entry is the inner product of the ith row of A and the jth  
column of B.
Properties of Matrix Operations (pp. 714, 716)
If A, B, and C are matrices of compatible dimensions then the  
following properties hold:
1.	 Commutativity of addition:
A B B A
2.	 Associativity:
 1A B2 C A 1B C2
 1AB2C A1BC2
3.	 Distributivity:
 A1B C2 AB AC
 1B C2A BA CA
(Note that matrix multiplication is not commutative.)
Identity Matrix (p. 724)
The identity matrix In is the n 3 n matrix whose main diagonal 
entries are all 1 and whose other entries are all 0:
In D
1
0
c
0
0
1
c
0
(
(
f
(
0
0
c
1
T
If A is an m 3 n matrix, then
AIn A  and  ImA A
Inverse of a Matrix (p. 725)
If A is an n 3 n matrix, then the inverse of A is the n 3 n matrix  
A1 with the following properties:
 A1A In        and         AA1 In
To find the inverse of a matrix, we use a procedure involving  
elementary row operations (explained on page 726). (Note that 
some square matrices do not have an inverse.)
Inverse of a 2  2 Matrix (p. 725)
For 2 3 2 matrices the following special rule provides a shortcut 
for finding the inverse:
A Ba
b
c
dR 1 A1 
1
ad bc
  B   d
b
c
   a R
Writing a Linear System as a Matrix Equation (p. 728)
A system of n linear equations in n variables can be written as a 
single matrix equation
AX B
where A is the n 3 n matrix of coefficients, X is the n 3 1 matrix 
of the variables, and B is the n 3 1 matrix of the constants. For 
example, the linear system of two equations in two variables
 a11x a12 x b1
 a21x a22 x b2
can be expressed as
Ba11
a12
a21
a22
R Bx
 yR Bb1
b2
R
Solving Matrix Equations (p. 729)
If A is an invertible n 3 n matrix, X is an n 3 1 variable matrix, 
and B is an n 3 1 constant matrix, then the matrix equation
AX B
has the unique solution
X A1B
Determinant of a 2  2 Matrix (p. 734)
The determinant of the matrix
A Ba
b
c
dR
is the number
det1A2 0  A 0 ad bc
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

768 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Minors and Cofactors (p. 734)
If A 0  aij 0  is an n 3 n matrix, then the minor Mij of the entry 
aij is the determinant of the matrix obtained by deleting the ith 
row and the jth column of A.
The cofactor Aij of the entry aij is
Aij 112 ijMij
(Thus, the minor and the cofactor of each entry either are the 
same or are negatives of each other.)
Determinant of an n  n Matrix (p. 735)
To find the determinant of the n 3 n matrix
A D
a11
a12
c
a1n
a21
a22
c
a2n
(
(
f
(
an1
an2
c
ann
T
we choose a row or column to expand, and then we calculate the 
number that is obtained by multiplying each element of that row 
or column by its cofactor and then adding the resulting products. 
For example, if we choose to expand about the first row, we get
det1A2 0  A 0 a11A11 a12 A12 . . . a1n A1n
Invertibility Criterion (p. 736)
A square matrix has an inverse if and only if its determinant is  
not 0.
Row and Column Transformations (p. 737)
If we add a nonzero multiple of one row to another row in a 
square matrix or a nonzero multiple of one column to another 
column, then the determinant of the matrix is unchanged.
Cramer’s Rule (pp. 738–740)
If a system of n linear equations in the n variables x1, x2, c, xn 
is equivalent to the matrix equation DX B and if 0  D 0 ? 0, 
then the solutions of the system are
x1 
0  Dx1
 0
0  D 0   x2 
0  Dx2
 0
0  D 0   . . .  xn 
0  Dxn
 0
0  D 0
where Dxi is the matrix that is obtained from D by replacing its 
ith column by the constant matrix B.
Area of a Triangle Using Determinants (p. 741)
If a triangle in the coordinate plane has vertices 1a1, b12, 1a2, b22,  
and 1a3, b32 , then the area of the triangle is given by
!  1
2 3
a1
b1
1
a2
b2
1
a3
b3
1
3
where the sign is chosen to make the area positive.
Partial Fractions (pp. 745–749)
The partial fraction decomposition of a rational function 
r1x2 
P1x2
Q1x2
(where the degree of P is less than the degree of Q) is a sum of 
­simpler fractional expressions that equal r1x2  when brought to a 
common denominator. The denominator of each simpler fraction 
is either a linear or quadratic factor of Q1x2  or a power of such a 
linear or quadratic factor. So to find the terms of the partial frac-
tion decomposition, we first factor Q1x2  into linear and irreduc-
ible quadratic factors. The terms then have the following forms, 
depending on the factors of Q1x2 .
1.	 For every distinct linear factor ax b there is a term of the 
form 
A
ax b
2.	 For every repeated linear factor 1ax b2 m there are terms of 
the form
A1
ax b 
A2
1ax b2 2 . . . 
Am
1ax b2 m
3.	 For every distinct quadratic factor ax2 bx c there is a 
term of the form 
Ax B
ax2 bx c
4.	 For every repeated quadratic factor 1ax2 bx c2 m there 
are terms of the form
A1x B1
ax2 bx c 
A2x B2
1ax2 bx c2 2 . . . 
Amx Bm
1ax2 bx c2 m
Graphing Inequalities (pp. 756–757)
To graph an inequality:
1.	 Graph the equation that corresponds to the inequality. This 
“boundary curve” divides the coordinate plane into separate 
­regions.
2.	 Use test points to determine which region(s) satisfy the 
­inequality.
3.	 Shade the region(s) that satisfy the inequality, and use a solid 
line for the boundary curve if it satisfies the inequality ( or 
) and a dashed line if it does not (, or .).
Graphing Systems of Inequalities (p. 758)
To graph the solution of a system of inequalities (or feasible 
region determined by the inequalities):
1.	 Graph all the inequalities on the same coordinate  
plane.
2.	 The solution is the intersection of the solutions of all the 
inequalities, so shade the region that satisfies all the inequalities.
3.	 Determine the coordinates of the intersection points of all the 
boundary curves that touch the solution set of the system. 
These points are the vertices of the solution.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 10  ■  Review  769
	 1.	 (a)	 What are the three methods we use to solve a system of 
equations? 
(b)	 Solve the system by the elimination method and by the 
graphical method.
e x y 3
3x y 1
	 2.	 For a system of two linear equations in two variables:
(a)	 How many solutions are possible? 
(b)	 What is meant by an inconsistent system? a dependent 
system?
	 3.	 What operations can be performed on a linear system so as to 
arrive at an equivalent system?
	 4.	 (a)	 Explain how Gaussian elimination works. 
(b)	 Use Gaussian elimination to put the following system in 
triangular form, and then solve the system.
	
System	
Triangular form
	
•
x y 2z 3
x 2y z 5
3x y 5z 1
	 5.	 What does it mean to say that A is a matrix with dimension 
m 3 n? 
	 6.	 What is the row-echelon form of a matrix? What is a leading 
entry?
	 7.	 (a)	 What is the augmented matrix of a system? What are 
leading variables?
(b)	 What are the elementary row operations on an aug-
mented matrix? 
(c)	 How do we solve a system using the augmented matrix? 
(d)	 Write the augmented matrix of the following system of 
linear equations. 
•
x y 2z 3
x 2y z 5
3x y 5z 1
(e)	 Solve the system in part (d). 
	 8.	 Suppose you have used Gaussian elimination to transform the 
augmented matrix of a linear system into row-echelon form. 
How can you tell whether the system has exactly one solu-
tion? no solution? infinitely many solutions?
	 9.	 What is the reduced row echelon form of a matrix?
	10.	 (a)	 How do Gaussian elimination and Gauss-Jordan elimina-
tion differ?
(b)	 Use Gauss-Jordan elimination to solve the linear system 
in part 7(d). 
	11.	 If A and B are matrices with the same dimension and k is a 
real number, how do you find A B and kA?
	12.	 (a)	 What must be true of the dimensions of A and B for the 
product AB to be defined? 
(b)	 If A has dimension 2 3 3 and if B has dimension 3 3 2, 
is the product AB defined? If so, what is the dimension 
of AB?
(c)	 Find the matrix product.
c 2
1
4
0d c 3
4
1
5
1
2d
13.	 (a)	 What is an identity matrix In? If A is an n 3 n matrix, 
what are the products AIn and In A?
(b)	 If A is an n 3 n matrix, what is its inverse matrix?
(c)	 Complete the formula for the inverse of a 2 3 2 matrix
A c a
b
c
dd
(d)	 Find the inverse of A. 
A c 1
1
3
1d
14.	 (a)	 Express the system in 1(b) as a matrix equation AX B.
(b)	 If a linear system is expressed as a matrix equation 
AX B, how do we solve the system? Solve the system 
in part (a).
15.	 (a)	 Is it true that the determinant det A of a matrix A is 
defined only if A is a square matrix? 
(b)	 Find the determinant of the matrix A in part 13(d).
(c)	 Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the system in 1(b). 
16.	 (a)	 How do we express a rational function r as a partial frac-
tion decomposition?
(b)	 Give the form of the partial fraction decomposition. 
	
(i) 
2x
1x 52 1x 22 2    (ii) 
2x
1x 521x2 12
	17.	 (a)	 How do we graph an inequality in two variables?
(b)	 Graph the solution set of the inequality x y 3.
(c)	 Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities: 
x y 3, 3x y 1.
■  CONCEPT CHECK
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

770 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
■  exercises
1–6  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables    Solve the 
system of equations, and graph the lines.
	 1.	 e 3x y 5
2x y 5	
  2.	 e y   2x 6
y x 3
	 3.	 e 2x 7y 28
y 2
7 x 4
	
  4.	 e
6x 8y 15  
 3
2 x 2y 4
	 5.	 •
2x 
y 
1
x 3y 10
3x 4y 15
	
  6.	 •
2x 5y 
9
x 3y 
1
7x 2y 14
7–10  ■  Systems of Nonlinear Equations    Solve the system of 
equations.
	 7.	 ey x2 2x
y 6 x
	
  8.	 ex2 y2 8
y x 2
	 9.	 µ
3x 4
y 6
x 8
y 4
	
10.	 ex2 y2 10
x2 2y2 7y 0
11–14  ■  Systems of Nonlinear Equations    Use a graphing device 
to solve the system. Round answers to the nearest hundredth.
11.	 e 0.32x 0.43y 
0
7x 
12y 341
	12.	 e !12x 3!2y 
660
7137x 3931y 20,000
13.	 ex y2 10
x 1
22 y 12	
14.	 e y 5x x
y x 5 5
15–20  ■  Matrices    A matrix is given.
(a)	 State the dimension of the matrix.
(b)	 Is the matrix in row-echelon form?
(c)	 Is the matrix in reduced row-echelon form?
(d)	 Write the system of equations for which the given  
matrix is the augmented matrix.
15.	 c 1
2
5
0
1
3 d 	
16.	 c 1
0
6
0
1
0 d
17.	 £
1
0
8
0
0
1
5
1
0
0
0
0
§ 	
18.	 £
1
3
6
2
2
1
0
5
0
0
1
0
§
19.	 £
0
1
3
4
1
1
0
7
1
2
1
2
§ 	
20.	 ≥
1
8
6
4
0
1
3
5
0
0
2
7
1
1
1
0
¥
21–42  ■  Systems of Linear Equations in Several Variables    Find 
the complete solution of the system, or show that the system has 
no solution.
21.	 •
x 
y 2z 
6
2x
5z 12
x 2y 3z 
9
	
22.	 •
x 2y 3z 1
x 3y 
z 0
2x
6z 6
23.	 •
x 2y 3z 1
2x y 
z 3
2x 7y 11z 2
	
24.	 d
x y z „ 2
2x
3z
5
x 2y
4„ 9
x y 2z 3„ 5
25.	 •
x 2y 2z 
6
x 
y
1
2x 
y 3z 
7
	
26.	 •
x 
y 
z 2
x 
y 3z 6
2y 3z 5
27.	 •
x 2y 
3z 2
2x 
y 
z 
2
2x 7y 11z 9
	
28.	 •
x y 
z 
2
x y 3z 
6
3x y 5z 10
29.	 d
x y z „ 
0
x y 4z „ 1
x 2y
4„ 7
2x 2y 3z 4„ 3
30.	 d
x
3z
1
y
4„ 
5
2y z „ 
0
2x y 5z 4„ 
4
31.	 e x 3y 
z 4
4x y 15z 5	
32.	 •
2x 3y 4z 3
4x 5y 9z 13
2x
7z 0
33.	 •
x 4y z 
8
2x 6y z 9
x 6y 4z 15
	
34.	  d
x
z „ 2
2x y
2„ 12
3y z „ 4
x y z
„ 10
35.	 •
x y 3z 2
2x y z 2
3x
4z 4
	
36.	 •
x y

1
x y 2z 
3
x 3y 2z 1
37.	 e x y z „ 0
3x y z „ 2	
38.	 •
x y 3
2x y 6
x 2y 9
39.	 •
x y z 0
3x 2y z 6
x 4y 3z 3
	
40.	 •
x 2y 3z 2
2x y 5z 1
4x 3y z 6
41.	 d
x y z „ 2
x y z „ 0
2x
2„ 2
2x 4y 4z 2„ 6
	42.	 c
x y 2z 3„ 0
y z 
„ 1
3x 2y 7z 10„ 2
43.	 Investments    A man invests his savings in two accounts, one 
paying 6% interest per year and the other paying 7%. He has 
twice as much invested in the 7% account as in the 6% 
account, and his annual interest income is $600. How much is 
invested in each account?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 10  ■  Review  771
44.	 Number of Coins    A piggy bank contains 50 coins, all of 
them nickels, dimes, or quarters. The total value of the coins 
is $5.60, and the value of the dimes is ﬁve times the value of 
the nickels. How many coins of each type are there?
45.	 Investments    Clarisse invests $60,000 in money-market 
accounts at three different banks. Bank A pays 2% interest 
per year, bank B pays 2.5%, and bank C pays 3%. She 
decides to invest twice as much in bank B as in the other two 
banks. After 1 year, Clarisse has earned $1575 in interest. 
How much did she invest in each bank?
46.	 Number of Fish Caught    A commercial ﬁsherman ﬁshes for 
haddock, sea bass, and red snapper. He is paid $1.25/lb for 
haddock, $0.75/lb for sea bass, and $2.00/lb for red snapper. 
Yesterday he caught 560 lb of ﬁsh worth $575. The haddock 
and red snapper together are worth $320. How many pounds 
of each ﬁsh did he catch?
47–58  ■  Matrix Operations    Let
A 32
0
14    
B c
1
2
4
2
1
0d
C £
1
2
3
2
3
2
2
1
§    
D £
1
4
0
1
2
0
§
E c
2
1
 1
2
1d    
F £
4
0
2
1
1
0
7
5
0
§    
G 354
Carry out the indicated operation, or explain why it cannot be  
performed.
47.	 A  B	
48.	 C  D
	49.	 2C  3D	
50.	 5B  2C
	51.	 GA		
52.	 AG
53.	 BC	 	
54.	 CB
	55.	 BF	 	
56.	 FC
	57.	 1C D2E	
58.	 F12C D2
59–60  ■  Inverse Matrices    Verify that the matrices A and B are 
inverses of each other by calculating the products AB and BA.
59.	 A c
2
5
2
6 d , B c 3
5
2
1
1 d
60.	 A £
2
1
3
2
2
1
0
1
1
§ , B £
 3
2
2
5
2
 1
1
2
1
1
1
§
61–66  ■  Matrix Equations    Solve the matrix equation for the 
unknown matrix X, or show that no solution exists, where
A c 2
1
3
2d  B c
1
2
2
4d  C c
0
1
3
2
4
0d
61.	 A  3X  B	
62.	 1
2 1X 2B2 A
63.	 21X A2 3B	
64.	 2X  C  5A
65.	 AX  C	
66.	 AX  B
67–74  ■  Determinants and Inverse Matrices    Find the determi-
nant and, if possible, the inverse of the matrix.
67.	 c 1
4
2
9 d 	
68.	 c 2
2
1
3 d
69.	 c
4
12
2
6 d 	
70.	 £
2
4
0
1
1
2
0
3
2
§
71.	 £
3
0
1
2
3
0
4
2
1
§ 	
72.	 £
1
2
3
2
4
5
2
5
6
§
73.	 ≥
1
0
0
1
0
2
0
2
0
0
3
3
0
0
0
4
¥ 	
74.	 ≥
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
¥
75–78  ■  Using Inverse Matrices to Solve a System    Express the 
system of linear equations as a matrix equation. Then solve the 
matrix equation by multiplying each side by the inverse of the 
coefﬁcient matrix.
75.	 e 12x 5y 10
5x 2y 17	
76.	 e 6x 5y 
1
8x 7y 1
77.	 •
2x 
y 5z 1
3
x 2y 2z 1
4
x
3z 1
6
	
78.	 •
2x
3z 5
x y 6z 0
3x y 
z 5
79–82  ■  Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System    Solve the sys-
tem using Cramer’s Rule.
79.	 e 2x 
7y 13
6x 16y 30	
80.	 e 12x 11y 140
7x 
9y 
20
81.	 •
2x 
y 5z 
0
x 7y

9
5x 4y 3z 9
	
82.	 •
3x 4y 
z 10
x 
4z 20
2x 
y 5z 30
83–84  ■  Area of a Triangle    Use the determinant formula for the 
area of a triangle to ﬁnd the area of the triangle in the ﬁgure.
	83.	 	
	
84.
0
y
x
1
1
	
y
x
0
2
3
85–90  ■  Partial Fraction Decomposition    Find the partial frac-
tion decomposition of the rational expression.
85.	
3x 1
x2 2x 15	
86.	
8
x3 4x
87.	
2x 4
x1x 12 2	
88.	
x 6
x3 2x2 4x 8
89.	 2x 1
x3 x 	
90.	 5x2 3x 10
x4 x2 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

772 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
91–94  ■  Intersection Points    Two equations and their graphs are 
given. Find the intersection point(s) of the graphs by solving the 
system.
	 91.	 e 2x 3y 7
x 2y 0	
92.	 e3x y 8
y x2 5x
1
1
0
y
x
	
2
0
2
y
x
	 93.	 ex2 y 2
x2 3x y 0	
94.	 ex y 2
x2 y2 4y 4
1
0
1
y
x
	
2
1
0
y
x
95–96  ■  Finding an Inequality from a Graph    An equation and 
its graph are given. Find an inequality whose solution is the 
shaded region.
	 95.	 x  y2  4	
96.	 x2  y2  8
1
1
0
y
x
	
1
1
0
y
x
97–100  ■  Graphing Inequalities    Graph the inequality.
  97.	 3x  y  6	
98.	 y  x2  3
  99.	 x2  y2  9	
100.	 x  y2  4
101–104  ■  Solution Set of a System of Inequalities    The ﬁgure 
shows the graphs of the equations corresponding to the given 
inequalities. Shade the solution set of the system of inequalities.
101.  ey x2 3x
y 1
3 x 1 	
102.	 ey x 1
x2 y2 1
1
1
0
y
x
	
1
1
0
y
x
103.	 •
x y 2
y x 2
x 3
	
104.	 •
y 2x
y 2x
y  1
2 x 2
1
1
0
y
x
	
4
4
0
y
x
105–108  ■  Systems of Inequalities    Graph the solution set of 
the system of inequalities. Find the coordinates of all vertices, 
and determine whether the solution set is bounded or unbounded.
105.	 ex2 y2 9
x y 0
	106.	 ey x2 4
y 20
107.	 •
x 0, y 0
x 2y 12
y x 4
	108.	 •
x 4
x y 24
x 2y 12
109–110  ■  General Systems of Equations    Solve for x, y, and z 
in terms of a, b, and c.
109.	 •
x y z a
x y z b
x y z c
110.	 •
ax by cz a b c
bx by cz c
cx cy cz c
    1a ? b, b ? c, c ? 02
111.	 General Systems of Equations    For what values of k  
do the following three lines have a common point of 
intersection?
 x y 12
 kx y 0
 y x 2k
112.	 General Systems of Equations    For what value of k does the 
following system have inﬁnitely many solutions?
•
kx y z 0
x 2y kz 0
x
3z 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

773
1–2  ■  A system of equations is given. (a) Determine whether the system is linear or nonlinear. 
(b) Find all solutions of the system.
	 1.	 e x 3y 
7
5x 2y 4	
2.  e6x y2 10
3x y 5
	 3.	 Use a graphing device to ﬁnd all solutions of the system rounded to two decimal places.
ex 2y 1
y x3 2x2
	 4.	 In 2 1
2  h an airplane travels 600 km against the wind. It takes 50 min to travel 300 km with 
the wind. Find the speed of the wind and the speed of the airplane in still air.
	 5.	 Determine whether each matrix is in reduced row-echelon form, row-echelon form, or  
neither.
	 	 (a)	 c 1
2
4
6
0
1
3
0 d 	
(b)  ≥
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
¥ 	
(c)  £
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
3
§
	 6.	 Use Gaussian elimination to ﬁnd the complete solution of the system, or show that  
no solution exists.
	 	 (a)	 •
x 
y 2z 
0
2x 4y 5z 5
2y 3z 
5
	 	
(b)  •
2x 3y 
z 
3
x 2y 2z 1
4x 
y 5z 
4
	 7.	 Use Gauss-Jordan elimination to ﬁnd the complete solution of the system.
•
x 3y 
z 
0
3x 4y 2z 1
x 2y

1
	 8.	 Anne, Barry, and Cathy enter a coffee shop. Anne orders two coffees, one juice, and  
two doughnuts and pays $6.25. Barry orders one coffee and three doughnuts and pays 
$3.75. Cathy orders three coffees, one juice, and four doughnuts and pays $9.25. Find the 
price of coffee, juice, and doughnuts at this coffee shop.
	 9.	 Let
A c 2
3
2
4 d   B £
2
4
1
1
3
0
§   C £
1
0
4
1
1
2
0
1
3
§
	 	 Carry out the indicated operation, or explain why it cannot be performed.
(a)	 A  B	
(b)	 AB	
(c)	 BA  3B	
(d)	 CBA
(e)	 A1	
(f)	 B1	
(g)	 det(B)	
(h)	 det(C)
	10.	 (a)  Write a matrix equation equivalent to the following system.
e 4x 3y 10
3x 2y 30
(b)	 Find the inverse of the coefﬁcient matrix, and use it to solve the system.
	11.	 Only one of the following matrices has an inverse. Find the determinant of each matrix, 
and use the determinants to identify the one that has an inverse. Then ﬁnd the inverse.
A £
1
4
1
0
2
0
1
0
1
§   B £
1
4
0
0
2
0
3
0
1
§
CHAPTER 10
TEST
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

774 
CHAPTER 10  ■  Test
	12.	 Solve using Cramer’s Rule:
•
2x

z 14
3x 
y 5z 
0
4x 2y 3z 2
	13.	 Find the partial fraction decomposition of the rational expression.
(a)	
4x 1
1x 12 21x 22 	
(b)  2x 3
x 3 3x
	14.	 Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities. Label the vertices with their  
coordinates.
	 	 (a)	 c
2x y 
8
x y 2
x 2y 
4
	
(b)  e  x2 y 5
y 2x 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

775
Linear programming is a modeling technique that is used to determine the optimal 
allocation of resources in business, the military, and other areas of human endeavor. 
For example, a manufacturer who makes several different products from the same raw 
materials can use linear programming to determine how much of each product should 
be produced to maximize the profit. This modeling technique is probably the most 
important practical application of systems of linear inequalities. In 1975 Leonid 
Kantorovich and T. C. Koopmans won the Nobel Prize in economics for their work 
in the development of this technique.
Although linear programming can be applied to very complex problems with hun-
dreds or even thousands of variables, we consider only a few simple examples to 
which the graphical methods of Section 10.9 can be applied. (For large numbers of 
variables a linear programming method based on matrices is used.) Let’s examine a 
typical problem.
Example 1  ■  Manufacturing for Maximum Profit
A small shoe manufacturer makes two styles of shoes: oxfords and loafers. Two ma-
chines are used in the process: a cutting machine and a sewing machine. Each type of 
shoe requires 15 min per pair on the cutting machine. Oxfords require 10 min of sew-
ing per pair, and loafers require 20 min of sewing per pair. Because the manufacturer 
can hire only one operator for each machine, each process is available for just 8 h per 
day. If the profit is $15 on each pair of oxfords and $20 on each pair of loafers, how 
many pairs of each type should be produced per day for maximum profit?
SOLUTION    First we organize the given information into a table. To be consistent, let’s 
convert all times to hours.
Oxfords
Loafers
Time available
Time on cutting machine (h)
Time on sewing machine (h)
1
4
1
6
1
4
1
3
8
8
Profit
$15
$20
We describe the model and solve the problem in four steps.
■  Choose the Variables
To make a mathematical model, we first give names to the variable quantities. For  
this problem we let
x  number of pairs of oxfords made daily
y  number of pairs of loafers made daily
■  Find the Objective Function
Our goal is to determine which values for x and y give maximum profit. Since each 
pair of oxfords provides $15 profit and each pair of loafers provides $20, the total 
profit is given by
P 15x 20y
This function is called the objective function.
Because loafers produce more profit, it 
would seem best to manufacture only 
loafers. Surprisingly, this does not turn 
out to be the most profitable solution.
Linear Programming
	
FOCUS ON MODELING
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

776 
Focus on Modeling
■  Graph the Feasible Region
The larger x and y are, the greater is the profit. But we cannot choose arbitrarily large 
values for these variables because of the restrictions, or constraints, in the problem. 
Each restriction is an inequality in the variables.
In this problem the total number of cutting hours needed is 1
4x 1
4y. Since only  
8 h are available on the cutting machine, we have
1
4x 1
4y 8
Similarly, by considering the amount of time needed and available on the sewing  
machine, we get
1
6 x 1
3y 8
We cannot produce a negative number of shoes, so we also have
x 0  and   y 0
Thus x and y must satisfy the constraints
c 
1
4 x 1
4 y 8
1
6 x 1
3 y 8
x 0, y 0
If we multiply the first inequality by 4 and the second by 6, we obtain the simplified 
system
c 
x 2y 32
x 2y 48
x 0, y 0
The solution of this system (with vertices labeled) is sketched in Figure 1. The only val-
ues that satisfy the restrictions of the problem are the ones that correspond to points of 
the shaded region in Figure 1. This is called the feasible region for the problem.
■  Find the Maximum Profit
As x or y increases, profit increases as well. Thus it seems reasonable that the maxi-
mum profit will occur at a point on one of the outside edges of the feasible region, 
where it is impossible to increase x or y without going outside the region. In fact, it 
can be shown that the maximum value occurs at a vertex. This means that we need  
to check the profit only at the vertices. The largest value of P occurs at the point  
116, 162, where P  $560. Thus the manufacturer should make 16 pairs of oxfords 
and 16 pairs of loafers, for a maximum daily profit of $560.
Vertex
P  15x  20y
10, 02
0
10, 242
15102
201242 $480
116, 162
151162 201162 $560
132, 02
151322 20102
$480
Maximum profit

■
The linear programming problems that we consider all follow the pattern of Ex-
ample 1. Each problem involves two variables. The problem describes restrictions, 
called constraints, that lead to a system of linear inequalities whose solution is called 
the feasible region. The function that we wish to maximize or minimize is called the 
objective function. This function always attains its largest and smallest values at the 
vertices of the feasible region. This modeling technique involves four steps, sum-
marized in the following box.
y
x
10
10
x+y=32
x+2y=48
(0, 24)
(0, 0)
(32, 0)
(16, 16)
Figure 1
Linear Programming helps the tele-
phone industry to determine the most 
efficient way to route telephone calls. The 
computerized routing decisions must be 
made very rapidly so that callers are not 
kept waiting for connections. Since the 
database of customers and routes is 
huge, an extremely fast method for solv-
ing linear programming problems is 
essential. In 1984 the 28-year-old mathe-
matician Narendra Karmarkar, working 
at Bell Labs in Murray Hill, New Jersey, 
discovered just such a method. His idea is 
so ingenious and his method so fast that 
the discovery caused a sensation in the 
mathematical world. Although mathe-
matical discoveries rarely make the news, 
this one was reported in Time, on Decem-
ber 3, 1984. Today airlines routinely use 
Karmarkar’s technique to minimize costs 
in scheduling passengers, flight person-
nel, fuel, baggage, and maintenance 
workers.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Linear Programming  777
Guidelines for Linear Programming
1.	 Choose the Variables.    Decide what variable quantities in the problem should 
be named x and y.
2.	 Find the Objective Function.    Write an expression for the function we want to 
maximize or minimize.
3.	 Graph the Feasible Region.    Express the constraints as a system of inequali-
ties, and graph the solution of this system (the feasible region).
4.	 Find the Maximum or Minimum.    Evaluate the objective function at the verti-
ces of the feasible region to determine its maximum or minimum value.
Example 2  ■  A Shipping Problem
A car dealer has warehouses in Millville and Trenton and dealerships in Camden and 
Atlantic City. Every car that is sold at the dealerships must be delivered from one of 
the warehouses. On a certain day the Camden dealers sell 10 cars, and the Atlantic 
City dealers sell 12. The Millville warehouse has 15 cars available, and the Trenton 
warehouse has 10. The cost of shipping one car is $50 from Millville to Camden, $40 
from Millville to Atlantic City, $60 from Trenton to Camden, and $55 from Trenton 
to Atlantic City. How many cars should be moved from each warehouse to each deal-
ership to fill the orders at minimum cost?
SOLUTION    Our first step is to organize the given information. Rather than construct a 
table, we draw a diagram to show the flow of cars from the warehouses to the dealerships 
(see Figure 2 below). The diagram shows the number of cars available at each warehouse 
or required at each dealership and the cost of shipping between these locations.
■  Choose the Variables
The arrows in Figure 2 indicate four possible routes, so the problem seems to involve 
four variables. But we let
x  number of cars to be shipped from Millville to Camden
y  number of cars to be shipped from Millville to Atlantic City
To fill the orders, we must have
10  x  number of cars shipped from Trenton to Camden
12  y  number of cars shipped from Trenton to Atlantic City
So the only variables in the problem are x and y.
Camden
Sell 10
Millville
15 cars
Atlantic City
Sell 12
Trenton
10 cars
$50
$40
$60
$55
Ship
x cars
Ship
10-x
cars
Ship
y cars
Ship
12-y
cars
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

778 
Focus on Modeling
■  Find the Objective Function
The objective of this problem is to ­minimize cost. From Figure 2 we see that the total 
cost C of shipping the cars is
C 50x 40y 60110 x2 55112 y2
50x 40y 600 60x 660 55y
1260 10x 15y
This is the objective function.
■  Graph the Feasible Region
Now we derive the constraint inequalities that define the feasible region. First, the 
number of cars shipped on each route can’t be negative, so we have
x 0   
y 0
10 x 0   12 y 0
Second, the total number of cars shipped from each warehouse can’t exceed the num-
ber of cars available there, so
x y 15
110 x2 112 y2 10
Simplifying the latter inequality, we get
22 x y 10
x y 12
x y 12
The inequalities 10  x  0 and 12  y  0 can be rewritten as x  10 and y  12. 
Thus the feasible region is described by the constraints
d
x y 15
x y 12
0 x 10
0 y 12
The feasible region is graphed in Figure 3.
■  Find the Minimum Cost
We check the value of the objective function at each vertex of the feasible region.
Vertex
C  1260 2 10x 2 15y
10, 122
1260 10102
151122 $1080
13, 122
1260 10132
151122 $1050
110, 52
1260 101102 15152
$1085
110, 22
1260 101102 15122
$1130
Minimum cost
The lowest cost is incurred at the point Ó3, 12Ô. Thus the dealer should ship
  3 cars from Millville to Camden
12 cars from Millville to Atlantic City
  7 cars from Trenton to Camden
  0 cars from Trenton to Atlantic City

■
In the 1940s mathematicians developed matrix methods for solving linear program-
ming problems that involve more than two variables. These methods were first used by 
the Allies in World War II to solve supply problems similar to (but, of course, much 
more complicated than) Example 2. Improving such matrix methods is an active and 
exciting area of current mathematical research.
y
x
x+y=12
y=12
(0, 12)
(3, 12)
x+y=15
x=10
(10, 2)
(10, 5)
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Linear Programming  779
Problems
1–4  ■  Find the maximum and minimum values of the given objective function on the ­indicated 
feasible region.
	 1.	 M 200 x y	
  2.	 N 1
2 x 1
4 y 40
y
x
0
4
2
5
	
y
x
1
1
4
4
y=x
	 3.	 P 140 x 3y	
  4.	 Q 70x 82y
	 	 c
x 0, y 0
2x y 10
2x 4y 28	
	
d
x 0, y 0
x 10, y 20
x y 5
x 2y 18
	 5.	 Making Furniture    A furniture manufacturer makes wooden tables and chairs. The pro-
duction process involves two basic types of labor: carpentry and finishing. A table requires  
2 h of carpentry and 1 h of finishing, and a chair requires 3 h of carpentry and 1
2 h of finish-
ing. The profit is $35 per table and $20 per chair. The manufacturer’s employees can supply 
a maximum of 108 h of carpentry work and 20 h of ­finishing work per day. How many tables 
and chairs should be made each day to ­maximize profit?
	 6.	 A Housing Development    A housing contractor has subdivided a farm into 100 build-
ing lots. She has designed two types of homes for these lots: colonial and ranch style. A 
colonial requires $30,000 of capital and produces a profit of $4000 when sold. A ranch-
style house requires $40,000 of capital and provides an $8000 profit. If the contractor has 
$3.6 million of capital on hand, how many houses of each type should she build for maxi-
mum profit? Will any of the lots be left vacant?
	 7.	 Hauling Fruit    A trucker hauls citrus fruit from Florida to Montreal. Each crate of  
oranges is 4 ft3 in volume and weighs 80 lb. Each crate of grapefruit has a volume of 6 ft3 
and weighs 100 lb. His truck has a maximum capacity of 300 ft3 and can carry no more 
than 5600 lb. Moreover, he is not permitted to carry more crates of grapefruit than crates of 
oranges. If his profit is $2.50 on each crate of oranges and $4 on each crate of grapefruit, 
how many crates of each fruit should he carry for maximum profit?
	 8.	 Manufacturing Calculators    A manufacturer of calculators produces two models: stan-
dard and scientific. Long-term demand for the two models mandates that the company 
manufacture at least 100 standard and 80 scientific calculators each day. However, because 
of limitations on production capacity, no more than 200 standard and 170 scientific calcula-
tors can be made daily. To satisfy a shipping contract, a total of at least 200 calculators 
must be shipped every day.
(a)	 If the production cost is $5 for a standard calculator and $7 for a scientific one, how 
many of each model should be produced daily to minimize this cost?
(b)	 If each standard calculator results in a $2 loss but each scientific one produces a  
$5 profit, how many of each model should be made daily to maximize profit?
	 9.	 Shipping Televisions    An electronics discount chain has a sale on a certain brand of 
60-in. high-definition television set. The chain has stores in Santa Monica and El Toro and 
warehouses in Long Beach and Pasadena. To satisfy rush orders, 15 sets must be shipped 
from the warehouses to the Santa Monica store, and 19 must be shipped to the El Toro 
store. The cost of shipping a set is $5 from Long Beach to Santa Monica, $6 from Long 
Beach to El Toro, $4 from Pasadena to Santa Monica, and $5.50 from Pasadena to El Toro. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

780 
Focus on Modeling
If the Long Beach warehouse has 24 sets and the Pasadena warehouse has 18 sets in stock, 
how many sets should be shipped from each warehouse to each store to fill the orders at a 
minimum shipping cost?
	10.	 Delivering Plywood    A man owns two building supply stores, one on the east side and 
one on the west side of a city. Two customers order some 1
2-inch plywood. Customer A 
needs 50 sheets, and customer B needs 70 sheets. The east-side store has 80 sheets, and the 
west-side store has 45 sheets of this plywood in stock. The east-side store’s delivery costs 
per sheet are $0.50 to customer A and $0.60 to customer B. The west-side store’s delivery 
costs per sheet are $0.40 to customer A and $0.55 to customer B. How many sheets should 
be shipped from each store to each customer to minimize delivery costs?
	11.	 Packaging Nuts    A confectioner sells two types of nut mixtures. The standard-mixture 
package contains 100 g of cashews and 200 g of peanuts and sells for $1.95. The deluxe-
mixture package contains 150 g of cashews and 50 g of peanuts and sells for $2.25. The 
confectioner has 15 kg of cashews and 20 kg of peanuts available. On the basis of past 
sales, the confectioner needs to have at least as many standard as deluxe packages avail-
able. How many bags of each mixture should he package to maximize his revenue?
	12.	 Feeding Lab Rabbits    A biologist wishes to feed laboratory rabbits a mixture of two 
types of foods. Type I contains 8 g of fat, 12 g of carbohydrate, and 2 g of protein per 
ounce. Type II contains 12 g of fat, 12 g of carbohydrate, and 1 g of protein per ounce. 
Type I costs $0.20 per ounce and type II costs $0.30 per ounce. Each rabbit receives a daily 
­minimum of 24 g of fat, 36 g of carbohydrate, and 4 g of protein, but get no more than  
5 oz of food per day. How many ounces of each food type should be fed to each rabbit 
daily to satisfy the dietary requirements at minimum cost?
	13.	 Investing in Bonds    A woman wishes to invest $12,000 in three types of bonds: munici-
pal bonds paying 7% interest per year, bank certificates paying 8%, and high-risk bonds 
paying 12%. For tax reasons she wants the amount invested in municipal bonds to be at 
least three times the amount invested in bank certificates. To keep her level of risk manage-
able, she will invest no more than $2000 in high-risk bonds. How much should she invest 
in each type of bond to maximize her annual interest yield?    [Hint: Let x  amount in 
municipal bonds and y  amount in bank certificates. Then the amount in high-risk bonds 
will be 12,000  x  y.]
	14.	 Annual Interest Yield    Refer to Problem 13. Suppose the investor decides to increase 
the maximum invested in high-risk bonds to $3000 but leaves the other conditions 
unchanged. By how much will her maximum possible interest yield increase?
	15.	 Business Strategy    A small software company publishes computer games, educational 
software, and utility software. Their business strategy is to market a total of 36 new pro-
grams each year, at least four of these being games. The number of utility programs pub-
lished is never more than twice the number of educational programs. On average, the com-
pany makes an annual profit of $5000 on each computer game, $8000 on each educational 
program, and $6000 on each utility program. How many of each type of software should 
the company publish annually for maximum profit?
	16.	 Feasible Region    All parts of this problem refer to the following feasible region and 
objective function.
d  
x 0 
x y 
x 2y 12
x 0y 10
P x 4y
(a)	 Graph the feasible region.
(b)	 On your graph from part (a), sketch the graphs of the linear equations obtained by set-
ting P equal to 40, 36, 32, and 28.
(c)	 If you continue to decrease the value of P, at which vertex of the feasible region will 
these lines first touch the feasible region?
(d)	 Verify that the maximum value of P on the feasible region occurs at the vertex you 
chose in part (c).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Conic sections are the curves that are formed when a plane cuts a cone, as 
shown in the figure. For example, if a cone is cut horizontally, the cross 
section is a circle. So a circle is a conic section. Other ways of cutting a 
cone produce ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas.
Ellipse
Parabola
Hyperbola
Circle
Our goal in this chapter is to find equations whose graphs are conic 
sections. We will find such equations by analyzing the geometric 
properties of conic sections. These properties make conic sections useful 
for many real-world applications. For instance, a reflecting surface with 
parabolic cross sections concentrates light at a single point. This property 
of a parabola is used in the construction of solar power plants, like the one 
in California pictured above. In the Focus on Modeling at the end of the 
chapter we explore how these curves are used in architecture.
781
Conic Sections
11
11.1	 Parabolas
11.2	 Ellipses
11.3	 Hyperbolas
11.4	 Shifted Conics
11.5	 Rotation of Axes
11.6	 Polar Equations of Conics
Focus on Modeling
	
Conics in Architecture
Harald Sund/The Image Bank/Getty Images
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

782 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
11.1 
Parabolas
■  Geometric Definition of a Parabola  ■  Equations and Graphs of Parabolas   
■  Applications
■  Geometric Definition of a Parabola
We saw in Section 3.1 that the graph of the equation
y ax2 bx c
is a U-shaped curve called a parabola that opens either upward or downward, depend-
ing on whether the number a is positive or negative.
In this section we study parabolas from a geometric, rather than an algebraic, point 
of view. We begin with the geometric deﬁnition of a parabola and show how this leads 
to the algebraic formula that we are already familiar with.
Geometric Definition of a Parabola
A parabola is the set of all points in the plane that are equidistant from a ﬁxed 
point F (called the focus) and a ﬁxed line l (called the directrix).
This deﬁnition is illustrated in Figure 1. The vertex V of the parabola lies halfway 
between the focus and the directrix, and the axis of symmetry is the line that runs 
through the focus perpendicular to the directrix.
Parabola
l
Axis
Focus
Vertex
Directrix
F
V
Figure 1
In this section we restrict our attention to parabolas that are situated with the vertex  
at the origin and that have a vertical or horizontal axis of symmetry. (Parabolas in more 
general positions will be considered in Section 11.4.) If the focus of such a parabola is 
the point F10, p2 , then the axis of symmetry must be vertical, and the directrix has the 
equation y  p. Figure 2 illustrates the case p  0.
Deriving the Equation of a Parabola    If P1x, y2  is any point on the parabola, then the 
distance from P to the focus F (using the Distance Formula) is
"x2 1 y p2 2
The distance from P to the directrix is
0  y 1p2  0 0  y p 0
y=_p
F(0, p)
P(x, y)
y
x
y
0
p
p
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.1  ■  Parabolas  783
By the deﬁnition of a parabola these two distances must be equal.
 "x2 1 y p2 2 0  y p 0
 x2 1 y p2 2 0  y p 0 2 1 y p2 2        Square both sides
 x2 y2 2py p2 y2 2py p2
        Expand
 x2 2py 2py
        Simplify
 x2 4py
If p 0, then the parabola opens upward; but if p 0, it opens downward. When x is 
replaced by x, the equation remains unchanged, so the graph is symmetric about the 
y-axis.
■  Equations and Graphs of Parabolas
The following box summarizes what we have just proved about the equation and fea-
tures of a parabola with a vertical axis.
Parabola with Vertical Axis
The graph of the equation
x2 4py
is a parabola with the following properties.
vertex	
V10, 02
focus	
F10, p2
directrix	
y p
The parabola opens upward if p  0 or downward if p  0.
y=_p
F(0, p)
x
y
0
≈=4py with p>0
≈=4py with p<0
y=_p
F(0, p)
x
y
0
Example 1  ■  Finding the Equation of a Parabola
Find an equation for the parabola with vertex V10, 02  and focus F10, 22 , and sketch 
its graph.
Solution    Since the focus is F10, 22 , we conclude that p  2 (so the directrix is 
y 2). Thus the equation of the parabola is
 x2 4122y        x2 5 4py with p 5 2
 x2 8y
Since p  2  0, the parabola opens upward. See Figure 3.
Now Try Exercises 31 and 49	
■
y=_2
F(0, 2)
≈=8y
x
y
3
_3
_3
3
0
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

784 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
Example 2  ■  Finding the Focus and Directrix of a Parabola  
from Its Equation
Find the focus and directrix of the parabola y x2, and sketch the graph.
Solution    To ﬁnd the focus and directrix, we put the given equation in the standard 
form x2 y. Comparing this to the general equation x 2 4py, we see that 
4p 1, so p  1
4. Thus the focus is F A0,  1
4B, and the directrix is y 1
4. The 
graph of the parabola, together with the focus and the directrix, is shown in Figure 
4(a). We can also draw the graph using a graphing calculator as shown in Figure 4(b).
Figure 4
x
y
2
_2
1
_2
y=_≈
F!0, _   @
1
4
1
4
y=
(a)
(b)
1
2
_2
_4
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
Reﬂecting the graph in Figure 2 about the diagonal line y  x has the effect of inter-
changing the roles of x and y. This results in a parabola with horizontal axis. By the 
same method as before, we can prove the following properties.
Parabola with horizontal Axis
The graph of the equation
y2 4px
is a parabola with the following properties.
vertex	
V10, 02
focus	
F1  p, 02
directrix	
x p
The parabola opens to the right if p  0 or to the left if p  0.
x=_p
F(p, 0)
x
y
0
x=_p
F(p, 0)
x
y
0
¥=4px with p>0
¥=4px with p<0
Looking Inside Your Head
Would you like to look inside your head? 
The idea isn’t particularly appealing to 
most of us, but doctors often need to do 
just that. If they can look without invasive 
surgery, all the better. An X-ray doesn’t 
really give a look inside, it simply gives a 
“graph” of the density of tissue the X-rays 
must pass through. So an X-ray is a 
“ﬂattened” view in one direction. Suppose 
you get an X-ray view from many different 
directions. Can these “graphs” be used to 
­reconstruct the three-dimensional inside 
view? This is a purely mathematical prob-
lem and was solved by mathematicians a 
long time ago. However, reconstructing 
the inside view requires ­thousands of 
tedious computations. Today, mathemat-
ics and high-speed computers make it 
possible to “look inside” by a process 
called computer-aided tomography (CAT 
scan). Mathematicians continue to search 
for better ways of using mathematics to 
reconstruct images. One of the ­latest 
techniques, called magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), combines molecular biol-
ogy and mathematics for a clear “look 
inside.”
Mathematics in the Modern World
Mira/Alamy
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.1  ■  Parabolas  785
Example 3  ■  A Parabola with Horizontal Axis
A parabola has the equation 6x y2 0.
(a)	 Find the focus and directrix of the parabola, and sketch the graph.
(b)	 Use a graphing calculator to draw the graph.
Solution
(a)	 To ﬁnd the focus and directrix, we put the given equation in the standard form 
y2 6x. Comparing this to the general equation y2 4px, we see that 
4p 6, so p  3
2. Thus the focus is F A 3
2, 0B, and the directrix is x 3
2. 
Since p  0, the parabola opens to the left. The graph of the parabola, together 
with the focus and the directrix, is shown in Figure 5(a).
(b)	 To draw the graph using a graphing calculator, we need to solve for y.
 6x y2 0
 y2 6x
    Subtract 6x
 y !6x    Take square roots
	 	 To obtain the graph of the parabola, we graph both functions
y !6x  and  y !6x
	 	 as shown in Figure 5(b).
(a)
3
2
x=
3
2
_
F!      , 0@
1
1
6x+¥=0
x
y
0
2
_6
_6
6
y = –
–6x
(b)
y =
–6x
Figure 5
Now Try Exercises 13 and 25	
■
Graphing Calculator Note    The equation y2 4px does not deﬁne y as a function of x  
(see page 165). So to use a graphing calculator to graph a parabola with a horizontal axis, 
we must ﬁrst solve for y. This leads to two functions: y !4px and y !4px. We 
need to graph both functions to get the complete graph of the parabola. For example, in 
Figure 5(b) we had to graph both y !6x and y !6x to graph the parabola 
y2 6x.
We can use the coordinates of the focus to estimate the “width” of a parabola when 
sketching its graph. The line segment that runs through the focus perpendicular to the 
axis, with endpoints on the parabola, is called the latus rectum, and its length is the 
focal ­diameter of the parabola. From Figure 6 we can see that the distance from an 
endpoint Q of the latus rectum to the directrix is 0  2p 0 . Thus the distance from Q to the 
focus must be 0  2p 0  as well (by the deﬁnition of a parabola), so the focal diameter is 
0  4p 0 . In the next example we use the focal diameter to determine the “width” of a 
parabola when graphing it.
Latus
rectum
x=_p
F(p, 0)
2p
p
p
Q
x
y
0
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

786 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
Example 4  ■  The Focal Diameter of a Parabola
Find the focus, directrix, and focal diameter of the parabola y 1
2 x2, and sketch its 
graph.
Solution    We ﬁrst put the equation in the form x2  4py.
 y 1
2 x2
 x2 2y         Multiply by 2, switch sides
From this equation we see that 4p  2, so the focal diameter is 2. Solving for p gives  
p 1
2, so the focus is A0, 1
2B, and the directrix is y  1
2. Since the focal diameter is 
2, the latus rectum extends 1 unit to the left and 1 unit to the right of the focus. The 
graph is sketched in Figure 7.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
In the next example we graph a family of parabolas to show how changing the dis-
tance between the focus and the vertex affects the “width” of a parabola.
Example 5  ■  A Family of Parabolas
(a)	 Find equations for the parabolas with vertex at the origin and foci 
F1A0, 1
8B, F2A0, 1
2B, F3A0, 1B, and F410, 42 .
(b)	 Draw the graphs of the parabolas in part (a). What do you conclude?
Solution
(a)	 Since the foci are on the positive y-axis, the parabolas open upward and have 
equations of the form x2  4py. This leads to the following equations.
Focus
p
Equation x2 5 4py
Form of the equation  
for graphing calculator
F1A0, 1
8B
p 1
8
x2 1
2 y
y  2x2
F2A0, 1
2B
p 1
2
x2  2y
y  0.5x2
F310, 12
p 1
x2  4y
y  0.25x2
F410, 42
p 4
x2  16y
y  0.0625x2
(b)	 The graphs are drawn in Figure 8. We see that the closer the focus is to the ver-
tex, the narrower the parabola.
5
_0.5
_5
5
5
_0.5
_5
5
5
_0.5
_5
5
5
_0.5
_5
5
y=2≈
y=0.5≈
y=0.25≈
y=0.0625≈
Figure 8  A family of parabolas
Now Try Exercise 59	
■
x
y
2
1
1
1
2
y=_
1
2
y= x™
1
2
F!0,   @
1
2
!_1,   @
1
2
!1,   @
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.1  ■  Parabolas  787
■  Applications
Parabolas have an important property that makes them useful as reﬂectors for lamps and 
telescopes. Light from a source placed at the focus of a surface with parabolic cross 
section will be reﬂected in such a way that it travels parallel to the axis of the parabola 
(see Figure 9). Thus a parabolic mirror reﬂects the light into a beam of parallel rays. 
Conversely, light approaching the reﬂector in rays parallel to its axis of symmetry is 
concentrated to the focus. This reﬂection property, which can be proved by using cal-
culus, is used in the construction of reﬂecting telescopes.
F
Figure 9  Parabolic reﬂector
Example 6  ■  Finding the Focal Point of a Searchlight Reﬂector
A searchlight has a parabolic reﬂector that forms a “bowl,” which is 12 in. wide from 
rim to rim and 8 in. deep, as shown in Figure 10. If the ﬁlament of the light bulb is 
located at the focus, how far from the vertex of the reﬂector is it?
8 in.
12 in.
Figure 10  A parabolic reﬂector
Archimedes (287–212 b.c.) 
was the greatest mathemati-
cian of the ancient world. He 
was born in Syracuse, a Greek 
colony on Sicily, a generation 
after Euclid (see page 542).  
One of his many discoveries  
is the Law of the Lever (see 
page 79). He famously said, 
“Give me a place to stand and 
a fulcrum for my lever, and I 
can lift the earth.”
Renowned as a mechani-
cal ­genius for his many engineering ­inventions, he designed pulleys for lift-
ing heavy ships and the spiral screw for transporting water to higher levels. 
He is said to have used parabolic mirrors to concentrate the rays of the sun 
to set ﬁre to Roman ships attacking Syracuse. 
King Hieron II of Syracuse once suspected a goldsmith of keeping 
part of the gold intended for the king’s crown and ­replacing it with an 
equal amount of silver. The king asked Archimedes for advice. While in 
deep thought at a public bath, Archimedes discovered the solution to 
the king’s problem when he noticed that his body’s volume was the 
same as the volume of water it displaced from the tub. Using this 
insight, he was able to measure the volume of each crown and so deter-
mine which was the denser, all-gold crown. As the story is told, he ran 
home naked, shouting, “Eureka, eureka!” (“I have found it, I have found 
it!”) This incident attests to his enormous powers of ­concentration.
In spite of his engineering prow­ess, Archimedes was most proud of his 
mathematical discoveries. These include the formulas for the volume of a 
sphere, AV 4
3 pr3B and the surface area of a sphere AS 4pr2B and a 
careful analysis of the properties of parabolas and other conics.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

788 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
Solution    We introduce a coordinate system and place a parabolic cross section of 
the reﬂector so that its vertex is at the origin and its axis is vertical (see Figure 11). 
Then the equation of this parabola has the form x2  4py. From Figure 11 we see that 
the point 16, 82  lies on the parabola. We use this to ﬁnd p.
 62 4p182        The point (6, 8) satisﬁes the equation x2 5 4py
 36 32p
 p 9
8
The focus is F A0, 9
8B, so the distance between the vertex and the focus is 9
8 1 1
8 in. 
Because the ﬁlament is positioned at the focus, it is located 1 1
8 in. from the vertex of 
the reﬂector.
Now Try Exercise 61	
■
(6, 8)
8
12
1 1
8
x
y
0
_6
6
Figure 11
concepts
	 1.	 A parabola is the set of all points in the plane that are ­
	 	 equidistant from a fixed point called the  
 and a
	 	 fixed line called the  
 of the parabola.
	 2.	 The graph of the equation x2 4py is a parabola with focus 
	 	 F1 
  ,  
2 and directrix y   
  . So the graph of 
	 	 x2 12y is a parabola with focus F1 
  ,  
2 and directrix 
	 	 y   
  .
	 3.	 The graph of the equation y2 4px is a parabola with focus 
	 	 F1 
  ,  
2 and directrix x   
  . So the graph of 
	 	 y2 12x is a parabola with focus F1 
  ,  
2 and directrix 
	 	 x   
  .
	 4.	 Label the focus, directrix, and vertex on the graphs given for 
the parabolas in Exercises 2 and 3.
(a)	 x2 12y	
(b)	 y2 12x
y
x
0 1
1
y
x
0
1
3
skills
5–10  ■  Graphs of Parabolas    Match the equation with the 
graphs labeled I–VI. Give ­reasons for your answers.
	 5.	 y2  2x	
  6.	 y2  1
4 x
	 7.	 x2  6y	
  8.	 2x2  y
	 9.	 y2  8x  0	
10.  12y  x2  0
I
II
x
1
0
1
y
III
IV
x
1
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
2
2
y
V
VI
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
1
y
0
11–24  ■  Graphing Parabolas    An equation of a parabola is 
given. (a) Find the focus, directrix, and focal diameter of the 
parabola. (b) Sketch a graph of the parabola and its directrix.
11.	 x2 8y	
12.	 x2 4y
13.	 y2 24x	
14.	 y2 16x
15.	 y  1
8 x2	
16.	 x 2y2
17.	 x 2y2	
18.	 y 1
4 x2
19.	 5y x2	
20.	 9x y2
21.	 x2 12y 0	
22.	 x 1
5 y2 0
	23.	 5x  3y2  0	
24.	 8x2  12y  0
11.1  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.1  ■  Parabolas  789
25–30  ■  Graphing Parabolas    Use a graphing device to graph 
the parabola.
25.	 x2  16y	
26.	 x2  8y
27.	 y2  1
3 x	
28.	 8y2  x
29.	 4x  y2  0	
30.	 x  2y2  0
31–48  ■  Finding the Equation of a Parabola    Find an equation 
for the parabola that has its vertex at the origin and satisﬁes the 
given condition(s).
31.	 Focus: F10, 62 	
32.	 Focus: F A0,  1
4B
33.	 Focus: F18, 02 	
34.	 Focus: F15, 02
35.	 Focus: FA0,  3
4B	
36.	 Focus: FA 1
12, 0B
37.	 Directrix: x 4	
38.	 Directrix: y 1
2
39.	 Directrix: y 1
10	
40.	 Directrix: x  1
8
41.	 Directrix: x 1
20	
42.	 Directrix: y 5
43.	 Focus on the positive x-axis, 2 units away from the directrix
44.	 Focus on the negative y-axis, 6 units away from the directrix
45.	 Opens downward with focus 10 units away from the vertex
46.	 Opens upward with focus 5 units away from the vertex
47.	 Directrix has y-intercept 6
48.	 Focal diameter 8 and focus on the negative y-axis
49–58  ■  Finding the Equation of a Parabola    Find an equation 
of the parabola whose graph is shown.
49.	 	
	
50.	
0
y
x
2
Focus
	
x=_2
0
y
x
Directrix
51.	 	
	
52.	
x=4
0
y
x
Directrix
	
0
y
x
_3
Focus
53.	 	
	
54.
3
2
3
2
0
y
x
Focus
	
Focus
y
0
x
5
55.	 	
	
56.	
(4, _2)
0
y
x
	
Directrix
Square has
area 16
y
0
x
57.	
Focus
Shaded
region
has area 8
0
y
x
58.	
Focus
y
0
x
2
1
2
Slope=
59–60  ■  Families of Parabolas    (a) Find equations for the family 
of parabolas with the given description. (b) Draw the graphs. 
What do you conclude?
	59.	 The family of parabolas with vertex at the origin and with 
directrixes y 1
2, y  1, y  4, and y  8
60.	 The family of parabolas with vertex at the origin, focus on 
the positive y-axis, and with focal ­diameters 1, 2, 4, and 8
applications
	61.	 Parabolic Reﬂector    A lamp with a parabolic reﬂector is 
shown in the ﬁgure. The bulb is placed at the focus, and the 
­focal diameter is 12 cm.
(a)	 Find an equation of the parabola.
(b)	 Find the diameter d1C, D2  of the opening, 20 cm from 
the vertex.
A
B
6 cm
6 cm
20 cm
O
D
C
F
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

790 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
	62.	 Satellite Dish    A reﬂector for a satellite dish is parabolic in 
cross section, with the receiver at the ­focus F. The reﬂector is 
1 ft deep and 20 ft wide from rim to rim (see the ﬁgure). 
How far is the receiver from the vertex of the parabolic 
reﬂector?
F
1 ft
20 ft
?
63.	 Suspension Bridge    In a suspension bridge the shape of the 
suspension cables is parabolic. The bridge shown in the 
ﬁgure has towers that are 600 m apart, and the lowest point 
of the suspension cables is 150 m below the top of the tow-
ers. Find the equation of the parabolic part of the cables, 
placing the origin of the coordinate system at the vertex.     
[Note: This equation is used to ﬁnd the length of cable 
needed in the construction of the bridge.]
600 m
150 m
	64.	 Reﬂecting Telescope    The Hale telescope at the Mount Palo-
mar Observatory has a 200-in. mirror, as shown in the figure. 
The mirror is constructed in a parabolic shape that collects 
light from the stars and focuses it at the prime focus, that is, 
the focus of the parabola. The mirror is 3.79 in. deep at its 
center. Find the focal length of this parabolic mirror, that is, 
the distance from the vertex to the focus.
Prime
focus
200 in.
3.79 in.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	65.	 DISCUSS  ■  WRITE:  Parabolas in the Real World    Several 
examples of the uses of parabolas are given in the text. Find 
other situations in real life in which parabolas occur. Consult 
a scientiﬁc encyclopedia in the reference section of your 
library, or search the Internet.
	66.	 DISCUSS:  Light Cone from a Flashlight    A ﬂashlight is held to 
form a lighted area on the ground, as shown in the ﬁgure. Is it 
possible to angle the ﬂashlight in such a way that the boundary 
of the lighted area is a parabola? Explain your answer.
11.2 
Ellipses
■  Geometric Definition of an Ellipse  ■  Equations and Graphs of Ellipses   
■  Eccentricity of an Ellipse
■  Geometric Definition of an Ellipse
An ellipse is an oval curve that looks like an elongated circle. More precisely, we have 
the following deﬁnition.
Geometric Definition of an Ellipse
An ellipse is the set of all points in the plane the sum of whose distances from 
two ﬁxed points F1 and F2 is a constant. (See Figure 1.) These two ﬁxed points 
are the foci (plural of focus) of the ellipse.
F⁄
P
F¤
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.2  ■  Ellipses  791
The geometric deﬁnition suggests a simple method for drawing an ellipse. Place a 
sheet of paper on a drawing board, and insert thumbtacks at the two points that are to 
be the foci of the ellipse. Attach the ends of a string to the tacks, as shown in Figure 
2(a). With the point of a pencil, hold the string taut. Then carefully move the pencil 
around the foci, keeping the string taut at all times. The pencil will trace out an ellipse, 
because the sum of the distances from the point of the pencil to the foci will always 
equal the length of the string, which is constant.
If the string is only slightly longer than the distance between the foci, then the ellipse that 
is traced out will be elongated in shape, as in Figure 2(a), but if the foci are close together 
relative to the length of the string, the ellipse will be almost circular, as shown in Figure 2(b).
(b)
(a)
Figure 2
Deriving the Equation of an Ellipse    To obtain the simplest equation for an ellipse, we 
place the foci on the x-axis at F11c, 02  and F21c, 02  so that the origin is halfway be-
tween them (see Figure 3).
For later convenience we let the sum of the distances from a point on the ellipse to 
the foci be 2a. Then if P1x, y2  is any point on the ellipse, we have
d1P, F12 d1P, F22 2a
So from the Distance Formula we have
"1x c2 2 y2 "1x c2 2 y2 2a
or	
"1x c2 2 y2 2a "1x c2 2 y2
Squaring each side and expanding, we get
x2 2cx c2 y2 4a2 4a"1x c2 2 y2 1x2 2cx c2 y22
which simpliﬁes to
4a"1x c2 2 y2 4a2 4cx
Dividing each side by 4 and squaring again, we get
 a231x c2 2 y24 1a2 cx2 2
 a2x2 2a2cx a2c2 a2y2 a 4 2a2cx c2x2
 1a2 c22x2 a2y2 a21a2 c22
Since the sum of the distances from P to the foci must be larger than the distance be-
tween the foci, we have that 2a  2c, or a  c. Thus a2 c2 0, and we can divide 
each side of the preceding equation by a21a2 c22  to get
x2
a2 
y2
a2 c2 1
For convenience let b2 a2 c2 1with b  02. Since b2 a2, it follows that b  a. 
The preceding equation then becomes
x2
a2 y2
b2 1  a b
P(x, y)
F¤(c, 0)
F⁄(_c, 0)
0
y
x
Figure 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

792 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
This is the equation of the ellipse. To graph it, we need to know the x- and y-intercepts. 
Setting y  0, we get
x2
a2 1
so x2 a2, or x  a. Thus the ellipse crosses the x-axis at 1a, 02  and 1a, 02 , as in 
Figure 4. These points are called the vertices of the ellipse, and the segment that joins 
them is called the major axis. Its length is 2a.
(0, b)
(a, 0)
(_a, 0)
(0, _b)
(_c, 0)
(c, 0)
b
c
a
0
y
x
Figure 4   
x2
a2 y2
b2 1 with a b
Similarly, if we set x  0, we get y  b, so the ellipse crosses the y-axis at 10, b2  
and 10, b2 . The segment that joins these points is called the minor axis, and it has 
length 2b. Note that 2a  2b, so the major axis is longer than the minor axis. The origin 
is the ­center of the ellipse.
If the foci of the ellipse are placed on the y-axis at 10, c2  rather than on the x-axis, 
then the roles of x and y are reversed in the preceding discussion, and we get a vertical 
ellipse.
■  Equations and Graphs of Ellipses
The following box summarizes what we have just proved about ellipses centered at the 
origin.
Ellipse with Center at the Origin
The graph of each of the following equations is an ellipse with center at the ori-
gin and having the given properties.
equation	
x2
a2 y2
b2 1	
x2
b2 y2
a2 1
	
a  b  0	
a  b  0
vertices	
1a, 02 	
10, a2
major axis	
Horizontal, length 2a	
Vertical, length 2a
minor axis	
Vertical, length 2b	
Horizontal, length 2b
foci	
1c, 02 ,  c2 a2 b2	
10, c2 ,  c2 a2 b2
graph	
b
a
_a
_b
F⁄(0, _c)
F¤(0, c)
y
x
0
b
a
_a
_b
F⁄(_c, 0)
F¤(c, 0)
y
x
0
If a b in the equation of an ellipse, 
then 
x2
a2 y2
a2 1
so x2 y2 a2. This shows that in 
this case the “ellipse” is a circle with 
radius a.
In the standard equation for an ellipse, 
a2 is the larger denominator, and b2 is 
the smaller. To ﬁnd c2, we subtract: 
larger denominator minus smaller  
denominator.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.2  ■  Ellipses  793
The orbits of the planets are ellipses, 
with the sun at one focus.
Example 1  ■  Sketching an Ellipse
An ellipse has the equation
x2
9 y2
4 1
(a)	 Find the foci, the vertices, and the lengths of the major and minor axes, and 
sketch the graph.
(b)	 Draw the graph using a graphing calculator.
SOLUTION
(a)	 Since the denominator of x2 is larger, the ellipse has a horizontal major axis. This 
gives a2 9 and b2 4, so c2 a2 b2 9 4 5. Thus a  3, b  2, 
and c !5.
foci	
1!5, 02
vertices	
13, 02
length of major axis	
6
length of minor axis	
4
	 	 The graph is shown in Figure 5(a).
(b)	 To draw the graph using a graphing calculator, we need to solve for y.
 x2
9 y2
4 1
 y2
4 1 x2
9
    Subtract x2
9
 y2 4a 1 x2
9 b     Multiply by 4
 y 2 Å1 x2
9     Take square roots
	 	 To obtain the graph of the ellipse, we graph both functions
y 2"1 x2/9  and  y 2"1 x2/9
	
as shown in Figure 5(b).
(b)
(a)
3
4
0
x
y
F⁄!_ 5, 0@
F ! 5, 0@
4.7
_4.7
_3.1
3.1
y = –2
1 – x2/9
y = 2
1 – x2/9
Figure 5 
x2
9 y2
4 1
Now Try Exercises 9 and 35	
■
Note that the equation of an ellipse 
does not define y as a function of x  
(see page 165). That’s why we need to 
graph two functions to graph an ellipse.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

794 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
Example 2  ■  Finding the Foci of an Ellipse
Find the foci of the ellipse 16x2 9y2 144, and sketch its graph.
SOLUTION    First we put the equation in standard form. Dividing by 144, we get
x2
9 y2
16 1
Since 16  9, this is an ellipse with its foci on the y-axis and with a  4 and b  3. 
We have
 c2 a2 b2 16 9 7
 c !7
Thus the foci are 10, !72 . The graph is shown in Figure 6(a).
We can also draw the graph using a graphing calculator as shown in Figure 6(b).
0
x
y
4
F¤!0,
7@
5
F⁄!0, _
7@
9
_9
_5
5
5
y = 4 1 – x2/9
y = 4 1 – x2/9
(a)
(b)
Figure 6 
16x2 9y2 144
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
Example 3  ■  Finding the Equation of an Ellipse
The vertices of an ellipse are 14, 02 , and the foci are 12, 02 . Find its equation,  
and sketch the graph.
SOLUTION    Since the vertices are 14, 02 , we have a  4, and the major axis is hori-
zontal. The foci are 12, 02 , so c  2. To write the equation, we need to ﬁnd b. Since 
c2 a2 b2, we have
 22 42 b2
 b2 16 4 12
Thus the equation of the ellipse is
x2
16 y2
12 1
The graph is shown in Figure 7.
Now Try Exercises 31 and 39	
■
■  Eccentricity of an Ellipse
We saw earlier in this section (Figure 2) that if 2a is only slightly greater than 2c, the 
ellipse is long and thin, whereas if 2a is much greater than 2c, the ellipse is almost cir-
cular. We measure the deviation of an ellipse from being circular by the ratio of a and c.
4
0
x
y
5
F⁄(_2, 0)
F¤(2, 0)
Figure 7   
x2
16 y2
12 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.2  ■  Ellipses  795
DeFInition of Eccentricity
For the ellipse x2
a2 y2
b2 1 or x2
b2 y2
a2 1 1with a b 02 , the 
eccentricity e is the number
e c
a
where c "a2 b2. The eccentricity of every ellipse satisﬁes 0  e  1.
Thus if e is close to 1, then c is almost equal to a, and the ellipse is elongated in shape, 
but if e is close to 0, then the ellipse is close to a circle in shape. The eccentricity is a 
measure of how “stretched” the ellipse is.
In Figure 8 we show a number of ellipses to demonstrate the effect of varying the 
eccentricity e.
e=0.86
e=0.1
e=0.5
e=0.68
FIGURE 8  Ellipses with various eccentricities
Example 4  ■  Finding the Equation of an Ellipse from Its  
Eccentricity and Foci
Find the equation of the ellipse with foci 10, 82  and eccentricity e 4
5, and sketch 
its graph.
SOLUTION    We are given e 4
5 and c  8. Thus
 4
5 8
a     Eccentricity e c
a
 4a 40    Cross-multiply
 a 10
To ﬁnd b, we use the fact that c2  a2  b2.
 82 102 b 2
 b 2 102 82 36
 b 6
Thus the equation of the ellipse is
x 2
36 y 2
100 1
Because the foci are on the y-axis, the ellipse is oriented vertically. To sketch the 
ellipse, we ﬁnd the intercepts. The x-intercepts are 6, and the y-intercepts are 10. 
The graph is sketched in Figure 9.
Now Try Exercise 53	
■
0
x
y
6
10
_6
_10
F⁄(0, 8)
F¤(0, _8)
FIGURE 9   
x2
36 y2
100 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

796 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
Gravitational attraction causes the planets to move in elliptical orbits around the sun 
with the sun at one focus. This remarkable property was ﬁrst observed by Johannes  
Kepler and was later deduced by Isaac Newton from his inverse square Law of Gravity, 
using calculus. The orbits of the planets have different eccentricities, but most are 
nearly circular (see the margin).
Ellipses, like parabolas, have an interesting reﬂection property that leads to a number 
of practical applications. If a light source is placed at one focus of a reﬂecting surface 
with elliptical cross sections, then all the light will be reﬂected off the surface to the 
other ­focus, as shown in Figure 10. This principle, which works for sound waves as well 
as for light, is used in lithotripsy, a treatment for kidney stones. The patient is placed in 
a tub of water with elliptical cross sections in such a way that the kidney stone is ac-
curately located at one focus. High-intensity sound waves generated at the other focus 
are reﬂected to the stone and destroy it with minimal damage to surrounding tissue. The 
patient is spared the trauma of surgery and recovers within days instead of weeks.
The reﬂection property of ellipses is also used in the construction of whispering gal-
leries. Sound coming from one focus bounces off the walls and ceiling of an elliptical 
room and passes through the other focus. In these rooms even quiet whispers spoken at 
one focus can be heard clearly at the other. Famous whispering galleries include the 
National Statuary Hall of the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C. (see page 836), and the 
Mormon Tabernacle in Salt Lake City, Utah.
F⁄
F¤
Figure 10
Eccentricities of the Orbits  
of the Planets
The orbits of the planets are ellipses with 
the sun at one focus. For most planets 
these ellipses have very small eccentric-
ity, so they are nearly circular. However, 
Mercury and Pluto, the innermost and 
outermost known planets, respectively, 
have visibly elliptical orbits.
Planet	
Eccentricity
Mercury	
	
0.206
Venus	
	
0.007
Earth	
	
0.017
Mars	
	
0.093
Jupiter	
	
0.048
Saturn	
	
0.056
Uranus	
	
0.046
Neptune	
	
0.010
Pluto*	
	
0.248
*Pluto is a “dwarf planet.”
concepts
	 1.	 An ellipse is the set of all points in the plane for which the 
	 	
 
 of the distances from two fixed points F1 and F2 is 
	 	 constant. The points F1 and F2 are called the  
 of 
the ellipse.
	 2.	 The graph of the equation x2
a2 y2
b2 1 with a b 0 is 
	 	 an ellipse with vertices 1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2 and foci 
	 	 1c, 02 , where c   
  . So the graph of x2
52 y2
42 1 
	 	 is an ellipse with vertices 1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2 and foci  
1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2.
	 3.	 The graph of the equation x2
b2 y2
a2 1 with a b 0 
	 	 is an ellipse with vertices 1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2 and foci 
	 	 10, c2, where c   
  . So the graph of x2
42 y2
52 1 
	 	 is an ­ellipse with vertices 1
 
, 
 
2 and 1
 
, 
 
2 and foci  
1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2.
	 4.	 Label the vertices and foci on the graphs given for the 
ellipses in Exercises 2 and 3.
(a)	 x2
52 y2
42 1	
	 (b)	 x2
42 y2
52 1
y
x
0
1
1
y
x
0
1
1
skills
5–8  ■  Graphs of Ellipses    Match the equation with the graphs 
labeled I–IV. Give reasons for your answers.
	 5.	 x2
16 y2
4 1	
  6.	 x2 y2
9 1
11.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.2  ■  Ellipses  797
	 7.	 4x2 y2 4	
  8.	 16x2 25y2 400
I
II
III
IV
y
x
0
1
1
y
x
0
1
1
x
0
1
2
y
y
x
0
1
1
9–28  ■  Graphing Ellipses    An equation of an ellipse is  
given. (a) Find the vertices, foci, and eccentricity of the ellipse. 
(b) Determine the lengths of the major and minor axes. (c) Sketch 
a graph of the ellipse.
	 9.	 x2
25 y2
9 1	
10.	 x2
16 y2
25 1
11.	 x2
36 y2
81 1	
12.	 x2
4 y2 1
13.	 x2
49 y2
25 1	
14.	 x2
9 y2
64 1
15.	 9x2 4y2 36	
16.	 4x2 25y2 100
	17.	 x2 4y2 16	
18.	 4x2 y2 16
19.	 16x2 25y2 1600	
20.	 2x2 49y2 98
21.	 3x2 y2 9	
22.	 x2 3y2 9
23.	 2x2 y2 4	
24.	 3x2 4y2 12
25.	 x2 4y2 1	
26.	 9x2 4y2 1
	27.	 x2 4 2y2	
28.	 y2 1 2x2
29–34  ■  Finding the Equation of an Ellipse    Find an equation 
for the ellipse whose graph is shown.
	29.	 	
	
30.	
y
x
0
4
5
	
	
0
5
y
x
2
31.	         	
32.	
F(0, 2)
0
y
x
2
	
0
4
F(0, 3)
y
x
	33.	         	
34.	
0
y
x
16
(8, 6)
	
(_1, 2)
y
x
2
0
35–38  ■  Graphing Ellipses    Use a graphing device to graph the 
ellipse.
	35.	 x2
25 y2
20 1	
36.	 x2 y2
12 1
	37.	 6x2 y2 36	
38.	 x2 2y2 8
39–56  ■  Finding the Equation of an Ellipse    Find an equation 
for the ellipse that satisﬁes the given conditions.
	39.	 Foci: 14, 02 , vertices: 15, 02
	40.	 Foci: 10, 32 , vertices: 10, 52
41.	 Foci: F11, 02 , vertices: 12, 02
42.	 Foci: F10, 22 , vertices: 10, 32
43.	 Foci: F10, !102 , vertices: 10, 72
44.	 Foci: F1!15, 02 , vertices: 16, 02
	45.	 Length of major axis: 4, length of minor axis: 2, foci on  
y-axis
46.	 Length of major axis: 6, length of minor axis: 4, foci on  
x-axis
	47.	 Foci: 10, 22 , length of minor axis: 6
	48.	 Foci: 15, 02 , length of major axis: 12
	49.	 Endpoints of major axis: 110, 02 , distance between  
foci: 6
	50.	 Endpoints of minor axis: 10, 32 , distance between foci: 8
	51.	 Length of major axis: 10, foci on x-axis, ellipse passes 
through the point 1 !5, 22
52.	 Length of minor axis: 10, foci on y-axis, ellipse passes 
through the point 1 !5, !402
53.	 Eccentricity: 1
3, foci: 10, 22
54.	 Eccentricity: 0.75, foci: 11.5, 02
55.	 Eccentricity: !3/2, foci on y-axis, length of major axis: 4
56.	 Eccentricity: !5/3, foci on x-axis, length of major axis: 12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

798 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
Skills Plus
57–60  ■  Intersecting Ellipses    Find the intersection points of the 
pair of ellipses. Sketch the graphs of each pair of equations on the 
same coordinate axes, and label the points of intersection.
	57.	 e4x2 y2 4
4x2 9y2 36	
58.	 µ
x2
16 y2
9 1
x2
9 y2
16 1
	59.	 c
100x2 25y2 100
x2 
y2
9 
1
	
60.	 b 25x2 144y2 3600
144x2 25y2 3600
	61.	 Ancillary Circle    The ancillary circle of an ellipse is the cir-
cle with radius equal to half the length of the minor axis and 
center the same as the ellipse (see the ﬁgure). The ancillary 
circle is thus the largest circle that can ﬁt within an ellipse.
(a)	 Find an equation for the ancillary circle of the ellipse  
x2 4y2 16.
(b)	 For the ellipse and ancillary circle of part (a), show that 
if 1s, t2  is a point on the ancillary circle, then 12s, t2  is a 
point on the ellipse.
Ancillary
circle
Ellipse
	62.	 Family of Ellipses   
(a)  Use a graphing device to sketch the top half (the portion 
in the ﬁrst and second quadrants) of the family of 
ellipses x2 ky2 100 for k  4, 10, 25, and 50.
(b)	 What do the members of this family of ellipses have in 
common? How do they differ?
	63.	 Family of Ellipses    If k  0, the following equation repre-
sents an ellipse:
x2
k 
y2
4 k 1
	 	 Show that all the ellipses represented by this equation have 
the same foci, no matter what the value of k.
	64.	 How Wide Is an Ellipse at a Focus?    A latus rectum for an 
ellipse is a line segment perpendicular to the major axis at a 
focus, with endpoints on the ellipse, as shown in the figure. 
Show that the length of a latus rectum is 2b2/a for the ellipse
x2
a2 y2
b2 1  a b
b
a
_b
_a
Foci
Latus rectum
y
x
applications
65.	 Perihelion and Aphelion    The planets move around the sun 
in elliptical orbits with the sun at one focus. The point in  
the orbit at which the planet is closest to the sun is called 
perihelion, and the point at which it is farthest is called  
aphelion. These points are the vertices of the orbit. The 
earth’s distance from the sun is 147,000,000 km at perihelion 
and 153,000,000 km at aphelion. Find an equation for the 
earth’s orbit. (Place the origin at the center of the orbit with 
the sun on the x-axis.)
Aphelion
Perihelion
	66.	 The Orbit of Pluto    With an eccentricity of 0.25, Pluto’s orbit 
is the most eccentric in the solar system. The length of the 
minor axis of its orbit is approximately 10,000,000,000 km. 
Find the distance between Pluto and the sun at perihelion and 
at aphelion. (See Exercise 65.)
	67.	 Lunar Orbit    For an object in an elliptical orbit around the 
moon, the points in the orbit that are closest to and farthest from 
the center of the moon are called perilune and apolune, respec-
tively. These are the vertices of the orbit. The center of the 
moon is at one focus of the orbit. The Apollo 11 spacecraft was 
placed in a lunar orbit with perilune at 68 mi and apolune at  
195 mi above the surface of the moon. Assuming that the moon 
is a sphere of radius 1075 mi, ﬁnd an equation for the orbit of 
Apollo 11. (Place the coordinate axes so that the origin is at the 
center of the orbit and the foci are located on the x-axis.)
68 mi
195 mi
Perilune
Apolune
	68.	 Plywood Ellipse    A carpenter wishes to construct an elliptical 
table top from a 4 ft by 8 ft sheet of plywood. He will trace out 
the ellipse using the 
“thumbtack and string” 
method illustrated in Fig-
ures 2 and 3. What length of 
string should he use, and 
how far apart should the 
tacks be located, if the 
ellipse is to be the largest 
possible that can be cut out 
of the plywood sheet?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.3  ■  Hyperbolas  799
	69.	 Sunbur­st Window    A “sunburst” window above a doorway is 
constructed in the shape of the top half of an ellipse, as 
shown in the ﬁgure. The window is 20 in. tall at its highest 
point and 80 in. wide at the bottom. Find the height of the 
window 25 in. from the center of the base.
80 in.
25 in.
20 in.
h
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	70.	 DISCUSS:  Drawing an Ellipse on a Blackboard    Try draw-
ing an ­ellipse as accurately as possible on a blackboard. 
How would a piece of string and two friends help this 
process?
	71.	 DISCUSS:  Light Cone from a Flashlight    A ﬂashlight  
shines on a wall, as shown in the ﬁgure. What is the  
shape of the boundary of the lighted area? Explain your 
answer.
	72.	 DISCUSS:  Is It an Ellipse?    A piece of paper is wrapped around 
a cylindrical bottle, and then a compass is used to draw a circle 
on the paper, as 
shown in the ﬁgure. 
When the paper is 
laid ﬂat, is the shape 
drawn on the paper 
an ellipse? (You 
don’t need to prove 
your answer, but you 
might want to do the 
experiment and see 
what you get.)
11.3 
Hyperbolas
■  Geometric Definition of a Hyperbola  ■  Equations and Graphs of Hyperbolas
■  Geometric Definition of a Hyperbola
Although ellipses and hyperbolas have completely different shapes, their deﬁnitions 
and equations are similar. Instead of using the sum of distances from two ﬁxed foci, as 
in the case of an ellipse, we use the difference to deﬁne a hyperbola.
Geometric Definition of a Hyperbola
A hyperbola is the set of all points in the plane, the difference of whose dis-
tances from two ﬁxed points F1 and F2 is a constant. (See Figure 1.) These two 
ﬁxed points are the foci of the hyperbola.
Deriving the Equation of a Hyperbola    As in the case of the ellipse, we get the simplest 
equation for the hyperbola by placing the foci on the x-axis at 1c, 02 , as shown in 
Figure 1. By deﬁnition, if P1x, y2  lies on the hyperbola, then either d1P, F12 d1P, F22  
or d1P, F22 d1P, F12  must equal some positive constant, which we call 2a. Thus we 
have
 d1P, F12 d1P, F22 2a
or	
 "1x c2 2 y2 "1x c2 2 y2 2a
x
y
0
F¤(c, 0)
P(x, y)
F⁄(_c, 0)
Figure 1  P is on the hyperbola if 
0  d1P, F12 d1P, F22  0 2a.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

800 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
Proceeding as we did in the case of the ellipse (Section 11.2), we simplify this to
1c2 a22x2 a2y2 a21c2 a22
From triangle PF1F2 in Figure 1 we see that 0  d1P, F12 d1P, F22  0 2c. It follows 
that 2a  2c, or a  c. Thus c2 a2 0, so we can set b2 c2 a2. We then sim-
plify the last displayed equation to get
x2
a2 y2
b2 1
This is the equation of the hyperbola. If we replace x by x or y by y in this equation, 
it remains unchanged, so the hyperbola is symmetric about both the x- and y-axes and 
about the origin. The x-intercepts are a, and the points 1a, 02  and 1a, 02  are the 
vertices of the hyperbola. There is no y-intercept, because setting x  0 in the equation 
of the hyperbola leads to y2 b2, which has no real solution. Furthermore, the equa-
tion of the hyperbola implies that
x2
a2 y2
b2 1 1
so x2/a2 1; thus x2 a2, and hence x  a or x  a. This means that the hyperbola 
consists of two parts, called its branches. The segment joining the two vertices on the 
separate branches is the transverse axis of the hyperbola, and the origin is called its center.
If we place the foci of the hyperbola on the y-axis rather than on the x-axis, this has 
the effect of reversing the roles of x and y in the derivation of the equation of the hyper-
bola. This leads to a hyperbola with a vertical transverse axis.
■  Equations and Graphs of Hyperbolas
The main properties of hyperbolas are listed in the following box.
Hyperbola with Center at the Origin
The graph of each of the following equations is a hyperbola with center at the origin and having the given properties.
equation	
x2
a2 y2
b2 1  a 0, b 0	
y2
a2 x2
b2 1  a 0, b 0
vertices	
1a, 02 	
10, a2
transverse axis	
Horizontal, length 2a	
Vertical, length 2a
asymptotes	
y  b
a
 x	
y  a
b
 x
foci	
1c, 02, c2 a2 b2	
10, c2, c2 a2 b2
graph	
x
y
y=_    x
b
a
y=   x
b
a
F¤(c, 0)
b
F⁄(_c, 0)
_b
a
_a
x
y
b
F⁄(0, c)
_b
F¤(0, _c)
a
_a
y=_    x
a
b
y=   x
a
b
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.3  ■  Hyperbolas  801
The asymptotes mentioned in this box are lines that the hyperbola approaches for 
large values of x and y. To ﬁnd the asymptotes in the ﬁrst case in the box, we solve the 
equation for y to get
 y  b
a "x2 a2
  b
a
 x Å1 a2
x2
As x gets large, a2/x2 gets closer to zero. In other words, as x → q, we have a2/x2 → 0. 
So for large x the value of y can be approximated as y 1b/a2x. This shows that 
these lines are asymptotes of the hyperbola.
Asymptotes are an essential aid for graphing a hyperbola; they help us to determine 
its shape. A convenient way to ﬁnd the asymptotes, for a hyperbola with horizontal 
transverse axis, is to ﬁrst plot the points 1a, 02 , 1a, 02 , 10, b2 , and 10, b2 . Then 
sketch horizontal and vertical segments through these points to construct a rectangle, as 
shown in Figure 2(a). We call this rectangle the central box of the hyperbola. The 
slopes of the diagonals of the central box are b/a, so by extending them, we obtain 
the asymptotes y 1b/a2x, as sketched in Figure 2(b). Finally, we plot the vertices 
and use the asymptotes as a guide in sketching the hyperbola shown in Figure 2(c). (A 
similar procedure applies to graphing a hyperbola that has a vertical transverse axis.)
(a) Central box
(b) Asymptotes
(c) Hyperbola
x
y
b
_b
a
_a
x
y
b
_b
a
_a
0
x
y
b
_b
a
_a
Figure 2  Steps in graphing the hyperbola x2
a2 y2
b2 1
How to Sketch a Hyperbola
1.	 Sketch the Central Box.    This is the rectangle centered at the origin, with sides 
parallel to the axes, that crosses one axis at a and the other at b.
2.	 Sketch the Asymptotes.    These are the lines obtained by extending the diag-
onals of the central box.
3.	 Plot the Vertices.    These are the two x-intercepts or the two y-intercepts.
4.	 Sketch the Hyperbola.    Start at a vertex, and sketch a branch of the hyperbola, 
approaching the asymptotes. Sketch the other branch in the same way.
Example 1  ■  A Hyperbola with Horizontal Transverse Axis
A hyperbola has the equation
9x 2 16y 2 144
(a)	 Find the vertices, foci, length of the transverse axis, and asymptotes, and sketch 
the graph.
(b)	 Draw the graph using a graphing calculator.
Asymptotes of rational functions are 
discussed in Section 3.6.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

802 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
SOLUTION
(a)	 First we divide both sides of the equation by 144 to put it into standard form:
x2
16 y2
9 1
	 	 Because the x2-term is positive, the hyperbola has a horizontal transverse axis;  
its vertices and foci are on the x-axis. Since a2  16 and b2  9, we get a  4,  
b  3, and c !16 9 5. Thus we have
vertices	
14, 02
foci	
15, 02
asymptotes	
y  3
4 x
	 	 The length of the transverse axis is 2a  8. After sketching the central box  
and asymptotes, we complete the sketch of the ­hyperbola as in Figure 3(a).
(b)	 To draw the graph using a graphing calculator, we need to solve for y.
 9x2 16y2 144
 16y2 9x2 144     Subtract 9x2
 y2 9a x2
16 1b     Divide by 16 and factor 9
 y 3 Å
x2
16 1    Take square roots
	 	 To obtain the graph of the hyperbola, we graph the functions
y 3"1x2/162 1  and  y 3"1x2/162 1
	 	 as shown in Figure 3(b).
x
y
y = – 3
4
(5, 0)
3
(_5, 0)
_3
4
_4
(a)
(b)
10
_10
x
y = 3
4 x
_
6
_6
y = –3 (x2/16) – 1
(x2/16) – 1
y = 3
Figure 3 
9x2 16y2 144
Now Try Exercises 9 and 33	
■
Example 2  ■  A Hyperbola with Vertical Transverse Axis
Find the vertices, foci, length of the transverse axis, and asymptotes of the hyperbola, 
and sketch its graph.
x2 9y2 9 0
Note that the equation of a hyperbola 
does not deﬁne y as a function of x (see 
page 165). That’s why we need to graph 
two functions to graph a hyperbola.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.3  ■  Hyperbolas  803
SOLUTION    We begin by writing the equation in the standard form for a hyperbola:
 x2 9y2 9
 y2 x2
9 1
        Divide by 9
Because the y2-term is positive, the hyperbola has a vertical transverse axis; its foci  
and vertices are on the y-axis. Since a2  1 and b2  9, we get a  1, b  3, and 
c !1 9 !10. Thus we have
vertices	
10, 12
foci	
10, !10 2
asymptotes	
y  1
3 x
The length of the transverse axis is 2a  2. We sketch the central box and asymptotes, 
then complete the graph, as shown in Figure 4(a). We can also draw the graph using a 
graphing calculator, as shown in Figure 4(b).
(a)
(b)
5
_5
x
y
3
1
F⁄Ó0,    10Ô
F¤Ó0, _   10Ô
2
_2
y = –
1 + x2/9
y =
1 + x2/9
Figure 4 
x2 9y2 9 0
Now Try Exercises 21 and 35	
■
Example 3  ■  Finding the Equation of a Hyperbola from Its  
Vertices and Foci
Find the equation of the hyperbola with vertices 13, 02  and foci 14, 02 . Sketch the 
graph.
SOLUTION    Since the vertices are on the x-axis, the hyperbola has a horizontal trans-
verse axis. Its equation is of the form
x2
32 y2
b2 1
We have a  3 and c  4. To ﬁnd b, we use the relation a2 b2 c2.
 32 b2 42
 b2 42 32 7
 b !7
Thus the equation of the hyperbola is
x2
9 y2
7 1
The graph is shown in Figure 5.
Now Try Exercises 27 and 37	
■
Paths of Comets
The path of a comet is an ellipse, a parab-
ola, or a hyperbola with the sun at a 
focus. This fact can be proved by using 
calculus and Newton’s Laws of Motion.* If 
the path is a parabola or a hyperbola, the 
comet will never return. If the path is an 
ellipse, it can be determined precisely 
when and where the comet can be seen 
again. Halley’s comet has an elliptical 
path and returns every 75 years; it was 
last seen in 1987. The brightest comet of 
the 20th century was comet Hale-Bopp, 
seen in 1997. Its orbit is a very eccentric 
ellipse; it is expected to return to the 
inner solar system around the year 4377.
*James Stewart, Calculus, 7th ed. (Belmont, CA: 
Brooks/Cole, 2012), pages 892 and 896.
0
x
y
3
_3
_3
3
7
_ 7
Figure 5   
x2
9 y2
7 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

804 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
Example 4  ■  Finding the Equation of a Hyperbola from Its  
Vertices and Asymptotes
Find the equation and the foci of the hyperbola with vertices 10, 22  and asymptotes  
y  2x. Sketch the graph.
SOLUTION    Since the vertices are on the y-axis, the hyperbola has a vertical transverse 
axis with a  2. From the asymptote equation we see that a/b  2. Since a  2, we 
get 2/b  2, so b  1. Thus the equation of the hyperbola is
y2
4 x2 1
To ﬁnd the foci, we calculate c2 a2 b2 2 2 12 5, so c !5. Thus the 
foci are 10, !52 . The graph is shown in Figure 6.
Now Try Exercises 31 and 41	
■
Like parabolas and ellipses, hyperbolas have an interesting reﬂection property. 
Light aimed at one focus of a hyperbolic mirror is reﬂected toward the other focus, as 
shown in Figure 7. This property is used in the construction of Cassegrain-type tele-
scopes. A hyperbolic mirror is placed in the telescope tube so that light reﬂected 
from the primary parabolic reﬂector is aimed at one focus of the hyperbolic mirror. 
The light is then refocused at a more accessible point below the primary reﬂector 
(Figure 8).
F⁄
F¤
Figure 7  Reﬂection property of  
hyperbolas
F⁄
F¤
Hyperbolic
reflector
Parabolic reﬂector
Figure 8  Cassegrain-type telescope
The LORAN (LOng RAnge Navigation) system was used until the early 1990s; 
it has now been superseded by the GPS system (see page 753). In the LORAN sys-
tem, ­hyper­bolas are used onboard a ship to determine its location. In Figure 9 radio 
stations at A and B transmit signals simultaneously for reception by the ship at P. 
The onboard computer converts the time difference in reception of these signals into  
a distance difference d1P, A2 d1P, B2 . From the deﬁnition of a hyperbola this  
locates the ship on one branch of a hyperbola with foci at A and B (sketched in  
black in the ﬁgure). The same procedure is carried out with two other radio stations 
at C and D, and this locates the ship on a second hyperbola (shown in red in the 
ﬁgure). (In practice, only three stations are needed because one station can be used 
as a focus for both hyperbolas.) The coordinates of the intersection point of these 
two hyperbolas, which can be calculated precisely by the computer, give the loca-
tion of P.
x
y
1
F⁄
F¤
Figure 6   
y2
4 x2 1
B
A
D
C
P
Figure 9  LORAN system for 
ﬁnding the location of a ship
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.3  ■  Hyperbolas  805
concepts
	 1.	 A hyperbola is the set of all points in the plane for which the 
	 	
 
 of the distances from two fixed points F1 and F2 is 
	 	 constant. The points F1 and F2 are called the  
 of 
the hyperbola.
	 2.	 The graph of the equation x2
a2 y2
b2 1 with a 0, b 0 
	 	 is a hyperbola with  
 (horizontal/vertical) transverse 
axis, vertices 1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2 and foci 1c, 02, where 
	 	 c  
  . So the graph of x2
42 y2
32 1 is a hyperbola 
	 	 with vertices 1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2 and foci 1 
  ,  
2 and 
1 
  ,  
2.
	 3.	 The graph of the equation y2
a2 x2
b2 1 with a 0, b 0 
	 	 is a hyperbola with  
 (horizontal/vertical) transverse 
	 	 axis, vertices 1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2 and foci 10, c2 , 
	 	 where c  
  . So the graph of   y2
42 x2
32 1 
	 	 is a hyperbola with vertices 1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2 and 
	 	 foci 1 
  ,  
2 and 1 
  ,  
2.
	 4.	 Label the vertices, foci, and asymptotes on the graphs given 
for the hyperbolas in Exercises 2 and 3.
	 	 (a)	 x2
42 y2
32 1	
(b)  y2
42 x2
32 1
y
x
0
1
1
y
x
0
1
1
skills
5–8  ■  Graphs of Hyperbolas    Match the equation with the 
graphs labeled I–IV. Give reasons for your answers.
	 5.	 x2
4 y2 1	
  6.	 y2 x2
9 1
	 7.	 16y2 x2 144	
  8.	 9x2 25y2 225
I
II
III
IV
x
y
2
1
4
1
x
y
x
y
1
1
y
x
2
2
9–26  ■  Graphing Hyperbolas    An equation of a hyperbola is 
given. (a) Find the vertices, foci, and asymptotes of the hyper-
bola. (b) Determine the length of the transverse axis. (c) Sketch a 
graph of the hyperbola.
	 9.	 x2
4 y2
16 1	
10.	 y2
9 x2
16 1
11.	 y2
36 x2
4 1	
12.	 x2
9 y2
64 1
	13.	 y2 x2
25 1	
14.	 x2
2 y2 1
	15.	 x2 y2 1	
16.	 x2
16 y2
12 1
17.	 9x2 4y2 36	
18.	 25y2 9x2 225
19.	 4y2 9x2 144	
20.	 y2 25x2 100
21.	 x2 4y2 8 0	
22.	 3y2 x2 9 0
23.	 x2 y2 4 0	
24.	 x2 3y2 12 0	
25.	 4y2 x2 1	
26.	 9x2 16y2 1
27–32  ■  Finding an Equation of a Hyperbola    Find the equation 
for the hyperbola whose graph is shown.
	27.	  
0
x
y
1
F¤(4, 0)
F⁄(_4, 0)
1
	 28. 
0
x
y
_12
12
F⁄(0, 13)
F¤(0, _13)
1
11.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

806 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
	29.	
0
x
y
_4
4
(3, _5)
2
	
30. 
(4, 4)
2 3
2
x
y
	31.	
y=3x
y=_3x
0
x
y
3
1
	
32.	
y=_   x
1
2
y=   x
1
2
x
y
_5
5
33–36  ■  Graphing Hyperbolas    Use a graphing device to graph 
the hyperbola.
	33.	 x2 2y2 8	
34.	 3y2 4x2 24
	35.	 y2
2 x2
6 1	
36.	 x2
100 y2
64 1
37–50  ■  Finding the Equation of a Hyperbola    Find an equation 
for the hyperbola that satisﬁes the given conditions.
	37.	 Foci: 15, 02 , vertices: 13, 02
	38.	 Foci: 10, 102 , vertices: 10, 82
	39.	 Foci: 10, 22 , vertices: 10, 12
	40.	 Foci: 16, 02 , vertices: 12, 02
	41.	 Vertices: 11, 02 , asymptotes: y 5x
	42.	 Vertices: 10, 62 , asymptotes: y  1
3 x
43.	 Vertices: 10, 62 , hyperbola passes through 15, 92
44.	 Vertices: 12, 02 , hyperbola passes through A3, !30 B
	45.	 Asymptotes: y x, hyperbola passes through 15, 32
	46.	 Asymptotes: y x, hyperbola passes through 11, 22
	47.	 Foci: 10, 32 , hyperbola passes through 11, 42
	48.	 Foci: A!10, 0B, hyperbola passes through A4, !18 B
	49.	 Foci: 15, 02 , length of transverse axis: 6
	50.	 Foci: 10, 12 , length of transverse axis: 1
Skills Plus
	51.	 Perpendicular Asymptotes
(a)	 Show that the asymptotes of the hyperbola x2 y2 5 
are perpendicular to each other.
(b)	 Find an equation for the hyperbola with foci 1c, 02  and 
with asymptotes perpendicular to each other.
	52.	 Conjugate Hyperbolas    The hyperbolas
x2
a2 y2
b2 1  and  x2
a2 y2
b2 1
	 	 are said to be conjugate to each other.
(a)	 Show that the hyperbolas
x2 4y2 16 0  and  4y2 x2 16 0
	
	are conjugate to each other, and sketch their graphs on 
the same coordinate axes.
(b)	 What do the hyperbolas of part (a) have in common?
(c)	 Show that any pair of conjugate hyperbolas have the  
relationship you discovered in part (b).
	53.	 Equation of a Hyperbola    In the derivation of the equation of 
the hyperbola at the beginning of this section we said that the 
equation
"1x c2 2 y2 "1x c2 2 y2 2a
	 	 simpliﬁes to
1c2 a22x2 a2y2 a21c2 a22
	 	 Supply the steps needed to show this.
	54.	 Verifying a Geometric Property of a Hyperbola   
(a)	 For the hyperbola
x2
9 y2
16 1
	
determine the values of a, b, and c, and ﬁnd the coordi-
nates of the foci F1 and F2.
(b)	 Show that the point P15,  16
3 2  lies on this hyperbola.
(c)	 Find d1P, F12  and d1P, F22 .
(d)	 Verify that the difference between d1P, F12  and d1P, F22   
is 2a.
	55.	 Confocal Hyperbolas    Hyperbolas are called confocal if they 
have the same foci.
(a)	 Show that the hyperbolas
y 2
k 
x 2
16 k 1  0 k 16
	
	are confocal.
(b)	 Use a graphing device to draw the top branches of  
the family of hyperbolas in part (a) for k  1, 4, 8,  
and 12. How does the shape of the graph change as  
k increases?
applications
	56.	 Navigation    In the ﬁgure on the next page, the LORAN sta-
tions at A and B are 500 mi apart, and the ship at P receives 
station A’s signal 2640 microseconds (ms) before it receives 
the signal from station B.
(a)	 Assuming that radio signals travel at 980 ft/ms, ﬁnd 
d1P, A2 d1P, B2.
(b)	 Find an equation for the branch of the hyperbola indi-
cated in red in the ﬁgure. (Use miles as the unit of 
distance.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.4  ■  Shifted Conics  807
(c)	 If A is due north of B and if P is due east of A, how far is 
P from A?
x (mi)
y (mi)
P
A
B
0
250
_250
	57.	 Comet Trajectories    Some comets, such as Halley’s comet, 
are a permanent part of the solar system, traveling in ellipti-
cal orbits around the sun. Other comets pass through the solar 
system only once, following a hyperbolic path with the sun at 
a focus. The ﬁgure below shows the path of such a comet. 
Find an equation for the path, assuming that the closest the 
comet comes to the sun is 2  109 mi and that the path the 
comet was taking ­before it neared the solar system is at a 
right angle to the path it continues on after leaving the solar 
system.
x
y
2  10ª mi  
	58.	 Ripples in Pool    Two stones are dropped simultaneously into 
a calm pool of water. The crests of the resulting waves form 
equally spaced concentric circles, as shown in the ﬁgures. 
The waves interact with each other to create certain interfer-
ence patterns.
(a)	 Explain why the red dots lie on an ellipse.
(b)	 Explain why the blue dots lie on a hyperbola.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
	59.	 DISCUSS  ■  WRITE:  Hyperbolas in the Real World    Several 
examples of the uses of hyperbolas are given in the text. Find 
other situations in real life in which hyperbolas occur. Consult 
a scientiﬁc encyclopedia in the reference section of your 
library, or search the Internet.
	60.	 DISCUSS:  Light from a Lamp    The light from a lamp forms a 
lighted area on a wall, as shown in the ﬁgure. Why is the 
boundary of this lighted area a hyperbola? How can one hold a 
ﬂashlight so that its beam forms a hyperbola on the ground?
11.4 
Shifted Conics
■  Shifting Graphs of Equations  ■  Shifted Ellipses  ■  Shifted Parabolas   
■  Shifted Hyperbolas  ■  The General Equation of a Shifted Conic
In the preceding sections we studied parabolas with vertices at the origin and ellipses and 
hyperbolas with centers at the origin. We restricted ourselves to these cases because these 
equations have the simplest form. In this section we consider conics whose vertices and 
centers are not necessarily at the origin, and we determine how this affects their ­equations.
■  Shifting Graphs of Equations
In Section 2.6 we studied transformations of functions that have the effect of shifting 
their graphs. In general, for any equation in x and y, if we replace x by x  h or by  
x  h,  the graph of the new equation is simply the old graph shifted horizontally; if y is 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

808 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
re­placed by y  k or by y  k, the graph is shifted vertically. The following box gives 
the details.
Shifting Graphs of Equations
If h and k are positive real numbers, then replacing x by x  h or by x  h and  
replacing y by y  k or by y  k has the following effect(s) on the graph of any 
equation in x and y.
	
Replacement	
How the graph is shifted
1.	 x replaced by x  h	
Right h units
2.	 x replaced by x  h	
Left h units
3.	 y replaced by y  k	
Upward k units
4.	 y replaced by y  k	
Downward k units
■  Shifted Ellipses
Let’s apply horizontal and vertical shifting to the ellipse with equation
x2
a2 y2
b2 1
whose graph is shown in Figure 1. If we shift it so that its center is at the point 1h, k2  
instead of at the origin, then its equation becomes
1x h2 2
a2

1 y k2 2
b2
1
y
x
b
a
(0, 0)
+     =1
y™
b™
x™
™
a™
b
a
(h, k)
h
k
(x-h, y-k)
(x, y)
=1
(y-k)™
b™
(x-h)™
a™
+
Figure 1  Shifted ellipse
Example 1  ■  Sketching the Graph of a Shifted Ellipse
Sketch a graph of the ellipse
1x 12 2
4

1 y 22 2
9
1
and determine the coordinates of the foci.
SOLUTION    The ellipse
1x 12 2
4

1 y 22 2
9
1        Shifted ellipse
is shifted so that its center is at 11,  22 . It is obtained from the ellipse
x 2
4 y 2
9 1        Ellipse with center at origin
North Wind/North Wind Picture Archives
Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) was 
the ﬁrst to give a correct description of 
the motion of the planets. The cosmol-
ogy of his time postulated complicated 
systems of circles moving on circles to 
describe these motions. Kepler sought a 
simpler and more harmonious descrip-
tion. As the ofﬁcial astronomer at the 
imperial court in Prague, he studied the 
astronomical observations of the Danish 
astronomer Tycho Brahe, whose data 
were the most accurate available at the 
time. After numerous attempts to ﬁnd a 
theory, Kepler made the momentous dis-
covery that the orbits of the planets are 
elliptical. His three great laws of plane-
tary motion are
1.	 The orbit of each planet is an ellipse 
with the sun at one focus.
2.	 The line segment that joins the sun to 
a planet sweeps out equal areas in 
equal time (see the ﬁgure).
3.	 The square of the period of revolution 
of a planet is proportional to the cube 
of the length of the major axis of its 
orbit.
Kepler’s formulation of these laws is per-
haps the most impressive deduction from 
empirical data in the history of science.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.4  ■  Shifted Conics  809
by shifting it left 1 unit and upward 2 units. The endpoints of the minor and major axes 
of the ellipse with center at the origin are 12, 02, 12, 02, 10, 32, 10, 32. We apply the 
required shifts to these points to obtain the corresponding points on the shifted ellipse.
 12, 02 S  12 1, 0 22 11, 22
 12, 02 S  12 1, 0 22 13, 22
 10, 32 S  10 1, 3 22 11, 52
 10, 32 S  10 1, 3 22 11, 12
This helps us sketch the graph in Figure 2.
To ﬁnd the foci of the shifted ellipse, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the foci of the ellipse with cen-
ter at the origin. Since a2 9 and b2 4, we have c2 9 4 5, so c !5. So 
the foci are A0, !5 B. Shifting left 1 unit and upward 2 units, we get
 A0, !5 B S  A0 1, !5 2B A1, 2 !5 B
 A0, !5 B S  A0 1, !5 2B A1, 2 !5 B
Thus the foci of the shifted ellipse are
A1, 2 !5B  and  A1, 2 !5B
Now Try Exercise 7	
■
Example 2  ■  Finding the Equation of a Shifted Ellipse
The vertices of an ellipse are 17, 32  and 13, 32 , and the foci are 16, 32  and 12, 32 . 
Find the equation for the ellipse, and sketch its graph.
SOLUTION    The center of the ellipse is the midpoint of the line segment between the 
vertices. By the Midpoint Formula the center is 
a 7 3
2
, 3 3
2
b 12, 32         Center
Since the vertices lie on a horizontal line, the major axis is horizontal. The length of 
the major axis is 3 172 10, so a 5. The distance between the foci is 
2 162 8, so c 4. Since c2 a2 b2, we have
 42 52 b2
        c 4, a 5
 b2 25 16 9        Solve for b2
Thus the equation of the ellipse is
1x 22 2
25

1y 32 2
9
1        Equation of shifted ellipse
The graph is shown in Figure 3.
0
x
y
F¤(2, 3)
F⁄(_6, 3)
(3, 3)
(_7, 3)
4
1
1
(_2, 3)
Figure 3  Graph of 
1x 22 2
25

1y 32 2
9
1
Now Try Exercise 35	
■
The Midpoint Formula is given on 
page 94.
0
x
y
(_1, 5)
(1, 2)
(_3, 2)
(_1, _1)
3
2
(_1, 2)
Figure 2 
1x 12 2
4

1 y 22 2
9
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

810 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
■  Shifted Parabolas
Applying shifts to parabolas leads to the equations and graphs shown in Figure 4.
(a) (x-h)™=4p(y-k)
p>0
(b) (x-h)™=4p(y-k)
p<0
(c) (y-k)™=4p(x-h)
p>0
(d) (y-k)™=4p(x-h)
p<0
x
y
0
(h, k)
x
y
0
(h, k)
x
y
0
(h, k)
x
y
0
(h, k)
Figure 4  Shifted parabolas
Example 3  ■  Graphing a Shifted Parabola
Determine the vertex, focus, and directrix, and sketch a graph of the parabola.
x2 4x 8y 28
SOLUTION    We complete the square in x to put this equation into one of the forms in 
Figure 4.
 x2 4x 4 8y 28 4    Add 4 to complete the square
 1x 22 2 8y 24
    Perfect square
 1x 22 2 81y 32
    Shifted parabola
This parabola opens upward with vertex at 12, 32 . It is obtained from the parabola
x2 8y        Parabola with vertex at origin
by shifting right 2 units and upward 3 units. Since 4p  8, we have p  2, so the 
focus is 2 units above the vertex and the directrix is 2 units below the vertex. Thus 
the focus is 12, 52 , and the directrix is y  1. The graph is shown in Figure 5.
Now Try Exercises 13 and 19	
■
■  Shifted Hyperbolas
Applying shifts to hyperbolas leads to the equations and graphs shown in Figure 6.
x
y
0
(h, k)
x
y
0
(h, k)
=1
(x-h)™
a™
(y-k)™
b™
-
(a)
=1
(x-h)™
b™
(y-k)™
a™
+
-
(b)
Figure 6  Shifted hyperbolas
Example 4  ■  Graphing a Shifted Hyperbola
A shifted conic has the equation
9x2 72x 16y2 32y 16
(a)	 Complete the square in x and y to show that the equation represents a hyperbola.
0
x
y
(2, 3)
F(2, 5)
y=1
Figure 5 
x2 4x 8y 28
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.4  ■  Shifted Conics  811
(b)	 Find the center, vertices, foci, and asymptotes of the hyperbola, and sketch its 
graph.
(c)	 Draw the graph using a graphing calculator.
SOLUTION
(a)	 We complete the squares in both x and y.
 91x2 8x
2 161 y2 2y
2 16
    Group terms and factor
 91x2 8x 162 161 y2 2y 12 16 9 # 16 16 # 1    Complete the squares
 91x 42 2 161 y 12 2 144
    Divide this by 144
 
1x 42 2
16

1 y 12 2
9
1
    Shifted hyperbola
	 	 Comparing this to Figure 6(a), we see that this is the equation of a shifted 
hyperbola.
(b)	 The shifted hyperbola has center 14, 12  and a horizontal transverse axis.
center    14, 12
	 	 Its graph will have the same shape as the unshifted hyperbola
x2
16 y2
9 1        Hyperbola with center at origin
	 	 Since a2  16 and b2  9, we have a  4, b  3, and c "a2 b2 
!16 9 5. Thus the foci lie 5 units to the left and to the right of the center, 
and the vertices lie 4 units to either side of the center.
foci	
11,  12 and 19,  12
vertices	
10,  12 and 18,  12
	 	 The asymptotes of the unshifted hyperbola are y  3
4 x, so the asymptotes of 
the shifted hyperbola are found as follows.
asymptotes	
 y 1  3
4 1x 42
	
 y 1  3
4 x 7 3
y 3
4 x 4  and  y  3
4 x 2
	 	 To help us sketch the hyperbola, we draw the central box; it extends 4 units left 
and right from the center and 3 units upward and downward from the center. We 
then draw the asymptotes and complete the graph of the shifted hyperbola as 
shown in Figure 7(a).
(a)
(b)
13
_5
_7
5
0
y
(4, 2)
(4, _4)
(4, _1)
F (9, _1)
F⁄(_1, _1)
(0, _1)
(8, _1)
y=_   x+2
3
4
y=   x-4
3
4
y = –1 + 0.75
x2 – 8x
y = –1 – 0.75
x2 – 8x
x
Figure 7  9x2 72x 16y2 32y 16
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

812 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
(c)	 To draw the graph using a graphing calculator, we need to solve for y. The given 
equation is a quadratic equation in y, so we use the Quadratic Formula to solve  
for y. Writing the equation in the form
16y2 32y 9x2 72x 16 0
	 	 we get
 y 
32 "322 41162 19x2 72x 162
21162
    Quadratic Formula
  32 "576x2 4608x
32
    Expand
 32 24 "x2 8x
32
    Factor 576 from under 
the radical
  1 3
4 "x2 8x
    Simplify
	 	 To obtain the graph of the hyperbola, we graph the functions
y 1 0.75 "x2 8x
and	
y 1 0.75 "x2 8x
	 	 as shown in Figure 7(b).
Now Try Exercises 21, 27 and 61	
■
■  The General Equation of a Shifted Conic
If we expand and simplify the equations of any of the shifted conics illustrated in  
Figures 1, 4, and 6, then we will always obtain an equation of the form
Ax2 Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
where A and C are not both 0. Conversely, if we begin with an equation of this form, 
then we can complete the square in x and y to see which type of conic section the equa-
tion represents. In some cases the graph of the equation turns out to be just a pair of 
lines or a single point, or there might be no graph at all. These cases are called degen-
erate conics. If the equation is not degenerate, then we can tell whether it represents a 
parabola, an ­ellipse, or a hyperbola simply by examining the signs of A and C, as de-
scribed in the following box.
General Equation of a Shifted Conic
The graph of the equation
Ax2 Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
where A and C are not both 0, is a conic or a degenerate conic. In the nonde-
generate cases the graph is
1.	 a parabola if A or C is 0,
2.	 an ellipse if A and C have the same sign (or a circle if A  C),
3.	 a hyperbola if A and C have opposite signs.
Example 5  ■  An Equation That Leads to a Degenerate Conic
Sketch the graph of the equation
9x2 y2 18x 6y 0
Note that the equation of a hyperbola 
does not define y as a function of x (see 
page 165). That’s why we need to graph 
two functions to graph a hyperbola.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.4  ■  Shifted Conics  813
Solution    Because the coefﬁcients of x2 and y2 are of opposite sign, this equation 
looks as if it should represent a hyperbola (like the equation of Example 4). To see 
whether this is in fact the case, we complete the squares.
 91x2 2x
2 1 y2 6y
2 0
    Group terms and factor 9
 91x2 2x 12 1 y2 6y 92 0 9 # 1 9    Complete the squares
 91x 12 2 1 y 32 2 0
    Factor
 1x 12 2 
1 y 32 2
9
0
    Divide by 9
For this to ﬁt the form of the equation of a hyperbola, we would need a nonzero con-
stant to the right of the equal sign. In fact, further analysis shows that this is the equa-
tion of a pair of intersecting lines.
 1 y 32 2 91x 12 2
 y 3  31x 12    Take square roots
 y 31x 12 3  or   y 31x 12 3
 y 3x 6   
 y 3x
These lines are graphed in Figure 8.
Now Try Exercise 55	
■
Because the equation in Example 5 looked at ﬁrst glance like the equation of a 
­hyperbola but, in fact, turned out to represent simply a pair of lines, we refer to its graph 
as a degenerate hyperbola. Degenerate ellipses and parabolas can also arise when we 
complete the square(s) in an equation that seems to represent a conic. For example, the 
equation
4x2 y2 8x 2y 6 0
looks as if it should represent an ellipse, because the coefﬁcients of x2 and y2 have the 
same sign. But completing the squares leads to
1x 12 2 
1 y 12 2
4
 1
4
which has no solution at all (since the sum of two squares cannot be negative). This 
­equation is therefore degenerate.
concepts
	 1.	 Suppose we want to graph an equation in x and y.
	 	 (a)	 If we replace x by x  3, the graph of the equation is 
	 	 	
shifted to the  
 by 3 units. If we replace x by 
	 	 	
x  3, the graph of the equation is shifted to the 
	 	 	
 
 by 3 units.
	 	 (b)	 If we replace y by y  1, the graph of the equation is 
	 	 	
shifted  
 by 1 unit. If we replace y by y  1, 
	 	 	
the graph of the equation is shifted  
 by  
1 unit.
	 2.	 The graphs of x2 12y and 1x 32 2 121 y 12 are 
given. Label the focus, directrix, and vertex on each parabola.
y
x
0 1
1
y
x
0 1
1
11.4  Exercises
Figure 8 
9x2 y2 18x 6y 0
0
x
y
6
_2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

814 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
	 3.	 The graphs of x2
52 y2
42 1 and 
1x 32 2
52

1 y 12 2
42
1 
	 	 are given. Label the vertices and foci on each ellipse.
y
x
0
1
1
y
x
0
1
1
	 4.	 The graphs of x2
42 y2
32 1 and 
1x 32 2
42

1y 12 2
32
1 
	 	 are given. Label the vertices, foci, and asymptotes on each  
hyperbola.
y
x
0
1
1
y
x
0
1
1
skills
5–12  ■  Graphing Shifted Ellipses    An equation of an ellipse  
is given. (a) Find the center, vertices, and foci of the ellipse.  
(b) Determine the lengths of the major and minor axes. (c) Sketch 
a graph of the ellipse.
	 5.	
1x 22 2
9

1 y 12 2
4
1	   6.	
1x 32 2
16
1 y 32 2 1
	 7.	 x2
9 
1 y 52 2
25
1	
  8.	 x2 
1y 22 2
4
1
	 9.	
1x 52 2
16

1y 12 2
4
1
	10.	
1x 12 2
36

1y 12 2
64
1
	11.	 4x2 25y2 50y 75	
12.	 9x2 54x y2 2y 46 0
13–20  ■  Graphing Shifted Parabolas    An equation of a parabola 
is given. (a) Find the vertex, focus, and directrix of the parabola. 
(b) Sketch a graph showing the parabola and its directrix.
	13.	 1x 32 2 81 y 12 	
14.	 1y 12 2 161x 32
	15.	 1 y 52 2 6x 12	
16.	 y2 16x 8
	17.	 21x 12 2 y	
18.	 4Ax 1
2B
2 y	
19.	 y2 6y 12x 33 0
	20.	 x2 2x 20y 41 0
21–28  ■  Graphing Shifted Hyperbolas    An equation of a hyper-
bola is given. (a) Find the center, vertices, foci, and asymptotes of 
the hyperbola. (b) Sketch a graph showing the hyperbola and its 
asymptotes.
	21.	
1x 12 2
9

1 y 32 2
16
1	 22.	 1x 82 2 1 y 62 2 1
	23.	 y2 
1x 12 2
4
1
	24.	
1 y 12 2
25
1x 32 2 1
	25.	
1x 12 2
9

1y 12 2
4
1	
26.	
1y 22 2
36
x2
64 1
27.	 36x2 72x 4y2 32y 116 0	
28.	 25x2 9y2 54y 306
29–34  ■  Finding the Equation of a Shifted Conic    Find an equa-
tion for the conic whose graph is shown.
	29.	 	
	
30.
	 	
_2
2
0
x
y
4

0
x
y
_6
Directrix
y=_12
5
	31.	 	
	
32.
	 	
F(8, 0)
4
0
x
y
10
	
0
x
y
_3
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.4  ■  Shifted Conics  815
	33.	
0
x
y
1
Asymptote
y=x+1
34.	
0
x
y
4
2
_4
6
35–46  ■  Finding the Equation of a Shifted Conic    Find an equa-
tion for the conic section with the given properties.
35.	 The ellipse with center C12, 32 , vertices V118, 32  and 
V2112, 32 , and foci F114, 32  and F218, 32
36.	 The ellipse with vertices V111, 42  and V211, 62  and foci 
F111, 32  and F211, 52
37.	 The hyperbola with center C11, 42 , vertices V111, 32  
and V211, 112 , and foci F111, 52  and F211, 132
38.	 The hyperbola with vertices V111, 12  and V215, 12  and 
foci F114, 12  and F218, 12
39.	 The parabola with vertex V13, 52  and directrix y 2
40.	 The parabola with focus F11, 32  and directrix x 3
41.	 The hyperbola with foci F111, 52  and F211, 52  that passes 
through the point 11, 42
42.	 The hyperbola with foci F112, 22  and F214, 22  that passes 
through the point 13, 22 .
43.	 The ellipse with foci F111, 42  and F215, 42  that passes 
through the point 13, 12
44.	 The ellipse with foci F113, 42  and F213, 42 , and  
x-intercepts 0 and 6
45.	 The parabola that passes through the point 16, 12 , with vertex 
V11, 22  and horizontal axis of symmetry 
46.	 The parabola that passes through the point 16, 22 , with  
vertex V14, 12  and vertical axis of symmetry
47–58  ■  Graphing Shifted Conics    Complete the square to deter-
mine whether the graph of the equation is an ellipse, a parabola, a 
hyperbola, or a degenerate conic. If the graph is an ellipse, ﬁnd the 
center, foci, vertices, and lengths of the major and minor axes. If it 
is a parabola, ﬁnd the vertex, focus, and directrix. If it is a hyper-
bola, ﬁnd the center, foci, vertices, and asymptotes. Then sketch the 
graph of the equation. If the equation has no graph, explain why.
	47.	 y2 41x 2y2
	48.	 9x2 36x 4y2 0
	49.	 x2 5y2 2x 20y 44
	50.	 x2 6x 12y 9 0
	51.	 4x2 25y2 24x 250y 561 0
	52.	 2x2 y2 2y 1
53.	 16x2 9y2 96x 288 0
	54.	 4x2 4x 8y 9 0
	55.	 x2 16 41 y2 2x2
56.	 x2 y2 101x y2 1
	57.	 3x2 4y2 6x 24y 39 0
	58.	 x2 4y2 20x 40y 300 0
59–62  ■  Graphing Shifted Conics    Use a graphing device to 
graph the conic.
	59.	 2x2 4x y 5 0
	60.	 4x2 9y2 36y 0
	61.	 9x2 36 y2 36x 6y
	62.	 x2 4y2 4x 8y 0
Skills Plus
	63.	 Degenerate Conic    Determine what the value of F must be if 
the graph of the equation
4x2 y2 41x 2y2 F 0
	 	 is (a) an ellipse, (b) a single point, or (c) the empty set.
	64.	 Common Focus and Vertex    Find an equation for the  
ellipse that shares a vertex and a focus with the parabola  
x2  y  100 and has its other focus at the origin.
	65.	 Confocal Parabolas    This exercise deals with confocal 
parabolas, that is, families of parabolas that have the same 
focus.
(a)	 Draw graphs of the family of parabolas
x2 4p1 y p2
	
	for p 2,  3
2, 1,  1
2, 1
2, 1, 3
2, 2.
(b)	 Show that each parabola in this family has its focus at 
the origin.
(c)	 Describe the effect on the graph of moving the vertex 
closer to the origin.
applications
	66.	 Path of a Cannonball    A cannon ﬁres a cannonball as shown 
in the ﬁgure. The path of the cannonball is a parabola with 
­vertex at the highest point of the path. If the cannonball lands 
1600 ft from the cannon and the highest point it reaches is 
3200 ft above the ground, ﬁnd an equation for the path of the 
cannonball. Place the origin at the location of the ­cannon.
y (ft)
3200
1600
x (ft)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

816 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
	67.	 Orbit of a Satellite    A satellite is in an elliptical orbit 
around the earth with the center of the earth at one focus,  
as shown in the figure. The height of the satellite above the 
earth varies between 140 mi and 440 mi. Assume that the 
earth is a sphere with radius 3960 mi. Find an equation for 
the path of the satellite with the origin at the center of the 
earth.
440 mi
140 mi
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
68.	 DISCUSS:  A Family of Confocal Conics    Conics that share a 
focus are called confocal. Consider the family of conics that 
have a focus at 10, 12  and a vertex at the origin, as shown in 
the figure.
(a)	 Find equations of two different ellipses that have these 
properties.
(b)	 Find equations of two different hyperbolas that have 
these properties.
(c)	 Explain why only one parabola satisﬁes these properties. 
Find its equation.
(d)	 Sketch the conics you found in parts (a), (b), and (c) on 
the same coordinate axes (for the hyperbolas, sketch the 
top branches only).
(e)	 How are the ellipses and hyperbolas related to the 
parabola?
0
x
y
1
11.5 
Rotation of Axes
■  Rotation of Axes  ■  General Equation of a Conic  ■  The Discriminant
In Section 11.4 we studied conics with equations of the form
Ax2 Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
We saw that the graph is always an ellipse, parabola, or hyperbola with horizontal or 
vertical axes (except in the degenerate cases). In this section we study the most general  
second-degree equation
Ax2 Bxy Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
We will see that the graph of an equation of this form is also a conic. In fact, by rotating 
the coordinate axes through an appropriate angle, we can eliminate the term Bxy and 
then use our knowledge of conic sections to analyze the graph.
■  Rotation of Axes
In Figure 1 the x- and y-axes have been rotated through an acute angle f about the ori-
gin to produce a new pair of axes, which we call the X- and Y-axes. A point P that has 
coordinates 1x, y2  in the old system has coordinates 1X, Y2  in the new system. If we let 
r denote the distance of P from the origin and let u be the angle that the segment OP 
0
P(x, y)
P(X, Y)
y
x
Y
X
ƒ
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.5  ■  Rotation of Axes  817
makes with the new X-axis, then we can see from Figure 2 (by considering the two right 
triangles in the ﬁgure) that
 X r cos u    
 Y r sin u
 x r cos1u f2     y r sin1u f2
Using the Addition Formula for Cosine, we see that
 x r cos1u f2
  r 1cos u cos f sin u sin f2
  1r cos u2 cos f 1r sin u2 sin f
  X cos f Y sin f
Similarly, we can apply the Addition Formula for Sine to the expression for y to obtain  
y  X sin f  Y cos f. By treating these equations for x and y as a system of linear 
equations in the variables X and Y (see Exercise 35), we obtain expressions for X and Y 
in terms of x and y, as detailed in the following box.
Rotation of Axes Formulas
Suppose the x- and y-axes in a coordinate plane are rotated through the acute 
angle f to produce the X- and Y-axes, as shown in Figure 1. Then the coordi-
nates 1x, y2  and 1X, Y2  of a point in the xy- and the XY-planes are related as 
follows.
 x X cos f Y sin f     X x cos f y sin f
 y X sin f Y cos f     Y x sin f y cos f
Example 1  ■  Rotation of Axes
If the coordinate axes are rotated through 30, ﬁnd the XY-coordinates of the point 
with xy-coordinates 12,  42 .
Solution    Using the Rotation of Axes Formulas with x  2, y  4, and f  30, 
we get
 X 2 cos 30142 sin 302a !3
2 b 4a 1
2 b !3 2
 Y 2 sin 30142 cos 302a 1
2 b 4a !3
2 b 1 2!3
The XY-coordinates are 12 !3,  1 2!32 .
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Example 2  ■  Rotating a Hyperbola
Rotate the coordinate axes through 45 to show that the graph of the equation xy  2 
is a hyperbola.
Solution    We use the Rotation of Axes Formulas with f  45 to obtain
 x X cos 45Y sin 45X
!2 
Y
!2
 y X sin 45Y cos 45X
!2 
Y
!2
y
0
P
x
Y
X
ƒ
¨
y
r
X
Y
x
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

818 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
Substituting these expressions into the original equation gives
 a X
!2 
Y
!2 b a X
!2 
Y
!2 b 2
 X 2
2 Y 2
2 2
 X 2
4 Y 2
4 1
We recognize this as a hyperbola with vertices 12,  02  in the XY-coordinate system. 
Its asymptotes are Y  X, which correspond to the coordinate axes in the xy-system 
(see Figure 3).
y
x
0
X
Y
45*
Figure 3 
xy 2
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
■  General Equation of a Conic
The method of Example 2 can be used to transform any equation of the form
Ax2 Bxy Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
into an equation in X and Y that doesn’t contain an XY-term by choosing an appropriate 
angle of rotation. To ﬁnd the angle that works, we rotate the axes through an angle f 
and substitute for x and y using the Rotation of Axes Formulas.
 A1X cos f Y sin f2 2 B1X cos f Y sin f2 1X sin f Y cos f2
  C1X sin f Y cos f2 2 D1X cos f Y sin f2
  E1X sin f Y cos f2 F 0
If we expand this and collect like terms, we obtain an equation of the form
ArX 2 BrXY CrY 2 DrX ErY Fr 0
where
 Ar A cos2
 f B sin f cos f C sin2
 f
 Br 21C A2 sin f cos f B1cos2
 f sin2
 f2
 Cr A sin2
 f B sin f cos f C cos2
 f
 Dr D cos f E sin f
 Er D sin f E cos f
 Fr F
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.5  ■  Rotation of Axes  819
To eliminate the XY-term, we would like to choose f so that B  0, that is,
 21C 2 A2 sin f cos f 1 B1cos2
 f 2 sin2
 f2 0
 1C 2 A2 sin 2f 1 B cos 2f 0
	 Double-Angle Formulas  
for Sine and Cosine
 B cos 2f 1A 2 C2 sin 2f       
 cot 2f A 2 C
B
	 Divide by B sin 2f
The preceding calculation proves the following theorem.
Simplifying the General Conic Equation
To eliminate the xy-term in the general conic equation
Ax2 1 Bxy 1 Cy2 1 Dx 1 Ey 1 F 0
rotate the axes through the acute angle f that satisﬁes
cot 2f A 2 C
B
Example 3  ■  Eliminating the xy-Term
Use a rotation of axes to eliminate the xy-term in the equation
6!3x2 1 6xy 1 4!3y2 21!3
Identify and sketch the curve.
Solution    To eliminate the xy-term, we rotate the axes through an angle f that 
satisﬁes
cot 2f A 2 C
B
6!3 2 4!3
6
!3
3
Thus 2f  60, and hence f  30. With this value of f we get
 x Xa !3
2 b 2 Y a 1
2 b     Rotation of Axes Formulas
 y Xa 1
2 b 1 Y a !3
2 b    
cos f !3
2 , sin f 1
2
Substituting these values for x and y into the given equation leads to
6!3a X!3
2
2 Y
2 b
2
1 6a X!3
2
2 Y
2 b a X
2 1 Y!3
2
b 1 4!3a X
2 1 Y!3
2
b
2
21!3
Expanding and collecting like terms, we get
 7!3X 2 1 3!3Y 2 21!3
 X 2
3 1 Y 2
7 1
        Divide by 21!3
This is the equation of an ellipse in the XY-coordinate system. The foci lie on the 
Y-axis. Because a2  7 and b2  3, the length of the major axis is 2!7, and the 
length of the minor axis is 2!3. The ellipse is sketched in Figure 4.
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Double-Angle Formulas
sin 2f 2 sin f cos f
cos 2f cos2
 f 2 sin2
 f
y
x
X
Y
30*
Figure 4 
6!3x2 1 6xy 1 4!3y2 21!3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

820 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
In the preceding example we were able to determine f without difﬁculty, since we  
remembered that cot 60!3/3. In general, ﬁnding f is not quite so easy. The next  
example illustrates how the following Half-Angle Formulas, which are valid for  
0  f  p/2, are useful in determining f (see Section 7.3).
cos f Å
1 cos 2f
2
   sin f Å
1 cos 2f
2
Example 4  ■  Graphing a Rotated Conic
A conic has the equation
64x2 96xy 36y2 15x 20y 25 0
(a)	 Use a rotation of axes to eliminate the xy-term.
(b)	 Identify and sketch the graph.
(c)	 Draw the graph using a graphing calculator.
Solution
(a)	 To eliminate the xy-term, we rotate the axes through an angle f that satisﬁes
cot 2f A C
B
64 36
96
7
24
	 	 In Figure 5 we sketch a triangle with cot 2f 7
24. We see that
cos 2f 7
25
	 	 so, using the Half-Angle Formulas, we get
cos f Å
1 7
25
2
Å
16
25 4
5
sin f Å
1 7
25
2
Å
9
25 3
5
	 	 The Rotation of Axes Formulas then give
x 4
5 X 3
5 Y  and  y 3
5 X 4
5 Y
	 	 Substituting into the given equation, we have
 64A4
5 X 3
5 YB2 96A4
5 X 3
5 YBA3
5 X 4
5 YB
 36A3
5 X 4
5YB2 15A4
5 X 3
5YB 20A3
5 X 4
5YB 25 0
7
24
25
2ƒ
Figure 5
Discovery Project
Computer Graphics II
An image on a computer screen is stored in the computer memory as a large 
matrix. Each matrix entry contain information about one pixel in the image. In 
Discovery Project: Computer Graphics I we experimented with using matrix 
operations to transform an image—stretch, shrink, reflect, or shear. But rotating 
an image requires knowledge of the rotation formulas we study in this section. 
In this project we experiment with using rotation matrices to rotate an image. 
You can find the project at www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.5  ■  Rotation of Axes  821
	 	 Expanding and collecting like terms, we get
 100X 2 25Y 25 0
 4X 2 Y 1
    Simplify
 X 2  1
4 1Y 12        Divide by 4
(b)	 We recognize this as the equation of a parabola that opens along the negative  
Y-axis and has vertex 10,  12  in XY-coordinates. Since 4p  1
4, we have 
p  1
16, so the focus is A0,  15
16B and the directrix is Y 17
16. Using
f cos1 
 4
5 < 37
	 	 we sketch the graph in Figure 6(a).
y
x
X
Y
ƒÅ37*
(0, 1)
(a)
2
_2
(b)
_2
2
15x + 10)/18
15x + 10)/18
y = (–24x – 5 – 5
y = (–24x – 5 + 5
Figure 6 
64x2 96xy 36y2 15x 20y 25 0
(c)	 To draw the graph using a graphing calculator, we need to solve for y. The given 
equation is a quadratic equation in y, so we can use the Quadratic Formula to 
solve for y. Writing the equation in the form
36y2 196x 202y 164x2 15x 252 0
	 	 we get
 y 
196x 202 "196x 202 2 41362 164x2 15x 252
21362
        Quadratic 
Formula
  
196x 202 "6000x 4000
72
        Expand
  96x 20 20"15x 10
72
        Simplify
  24x 5 5"15x 10
18
        Simplify
	 	 To obtain the graph of the parabola, we graph the functions
y 124x 5 5!15x 102/18  and  y 124x 5 5!15x 102/18
	 	 as shown in Figure 6(b).
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

822 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
■  The Discriminant
In Examples 3 and 4 we were able to identify the type of conic by rotating the axes. The 
next theorem gives rules for identifying the type of conic directly from the equation, 
without rotating axes.
Identifying Conics by the Discriminant
The graph of the equation
Ax2 Bxy Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
is either a conic or a degenerate conic. In the nondegenerate cases the graph is
1.	 a parabola if B2  4AC  0,
2.	 an ellipse if B2  4AC  0,
3.	 a hyperbola if B2  4AC  0.
The quantity B2  4AC is called the discriminant of the equation.
Proof    If we rotate the axes through an angle f, we get an equation of the form
ArX 2 BrXY CrY 2 DrX ErY Fr 0
where A, B, C, . . . are given by the formulas on page 818. A straightforward calcu-
lation shows that
1Br2 2 4ArCr B2 4AC
Thus the expression B2  4AC remains unchanged for any rotation. In particular,  
if we choose a rotation that eliminates the xy-term 1Br 02 , we get
ArX 2 CrY 2 DrX ErY Fr 0
In this case B2  4AC  4AC. So B2  4AC  0 if either A or C is zero;  
B2  4AC  0 if A and C have the same sign; and B2  4AC  0 if A and C have 
opposite signs. According to the box on page 812, these cases correspond to the graph of 
the last displayed equation being a parabola, an ellipse, or a hyperbola, respectively.	
■
In the proof we indicated that the discriminant is unchanged by any rotation; for this 
reason the discriminant is said to be invariant under rotation.
Example 5  ■  Identifying a Conic by the Discriminant
A conic has the equation
3x2 5xy 2y2 x y 4 0
(a)	 Use the discriminant to identify the conic.
(b)	 Conﬁrm your answer to part (a) by graphing the conic with a graphing calculator.
Solution
(a)	 Since A  3, B  5, and C  2, the discriminant is
B2 4AC 52 4132 122 49 0
	 	 So the conic is a hyperbola.
(b)	 Using the Quadratic Formula, we solve for y to get
y 5x 1 "49x2 2x 33
4
	 	 We graph these functions in Figure 7. The graph conﬁrms that this is a ­hyperbola.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
3
_3
_5
5
y = (5x – 1 +
y = (5x – 1 – 
49x2 – 2x + 33)/4
49x2 – 2x + 33)/4
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.5  ■  Rotation of Axes  823
Concepts
	 1.	 Suppose the x- and y-axes are rotated through an acute angle f 
to produce the new X- and Y-axes. A point P in the plane can 
be described by its xy-coordinates 1x, y2 or its XY-coordinates 
1X, Y2. These coordinates are related by the following  
formulas.
	 	 x  
        X  
	 	 y  
        Y  
	 2.	 Consider the equation 
Ax2 Bxy Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
(a)	 In general, the graph of this equation is a  
  . 
(b)	 To eliminate the xy-term from this equation, we rotate  
the axes through an angle f that satisfies 
	
cot 2f  
  .
(c)	 The discriminant of this equation is  
  .
	
If the discriminant is 0, the graph is a  
  ; 
	
if it is negative, the graph is  
  ; and 
	
if it is positive, the graph is  
  .
Skills
3–8  ■  Rotation of Axes    Determine the XY-coordinates of the 
given point if the coordinate axes are rotated through the indi-
cated angle.
	 3.	 11,  12, f 45	
  4.	 12,  12, f 30
	 5.	 A3,  !3B, f 60	
  6.	 12,  02, f 15
	 7.	 10,  22, f 55	
  8.	 A !2,  4 !2B, f 45
9–14  ■  Finding the Equation for a Rotated Conic    Determine the 
equation of the given conic in XY-coordinates when the coordi-
nate axes are rotated through the indicated angle.
	 9.	 x2  3y2 4,    f  60
	10.	 y 1x 12 2, f 45
	11.	 x2 y2 2y, f cos1 
 3
5
12.	 x2 2y2 16, f sin1 
 3
5
13.	 x2 2 !3 xy y2 4, f 30
14.	 xy  x  y,    f  p/4
15–28  ■  Graphing a Rotated Conic    (a) Use the discriminant to 
determine whether the graph of the equation is a parabola, an 
ellipse, or a hyperbola. (b) Use a rotation of axes to eliminate the 
xy-term. (c) Sketch the graph.
15.	 xy  8
16.	 xy  4  0
17.	 x2 2 !3 xy y2 2 0
18.	 13x2 6 !3 xy 7y2 16
19.	 11x2  24xy  4y2  20  0
20.	 21x2 10 !3 xy 31y2 144
21.	 !3 x2 3xy 3
22.	 153x2  192xy  97y2  225
23.	 x2  2xy  y2  x  y  0
24.	 25x2  120xy  144y2  156x  65y  0
25.	 2 !3 x2 6xy !3 x 3y 0
26.	 9x2 24xy 16y2 1001x y 12
27.	 52x2  72xy  73y2  40x  30y  75
28.	 17x 24y2 2 600x 175y 25
29–32  ■  Identifying a Conic from Its Discriminant    (a) Use the 
discriminant to identify the conic. (b) Conﬁrm your answer by 
graphing the conic using a graphing device.
29.	 2x2  4xy  2y2  5x  5  0
30.	 x2  2xy  3y2  8
31.	 6x2  10xy  3y2  6y  36
32.	 9x2  6xy  y2  6x  2y  0
Skills Plus
33.	 Identifying a Hyperbola Using Rotation of Axes   
(a)	 Use rotation of axes to show that the following equation 
represents a hyperbola.
7x2 48xy 7y2 200x 150y 600 0
(b)	 Find the XY- and xy-coordinates of the center, vertices, 
and foci.
(c)	 Find the equations of the asymptotes in XY- and  
xy-coordinates.
34.	 Identifying a Parabola Using Rotation of Axes   
(a)	 Use rotation of axes to show that the following equation 
represents a parabola.
2 !21x y2 2 7x 9y
(b)	 Find the XY- and xy-coordinates of the vertex and focus.
(c)	 Find the equation of the directrix in XY- and 
xy-coordinates.
35.	 Rotation of Axes Formulas    Solve the equations
x X cos f Y sin f
y X sin f Y cos f
	 	 for X and Y in terms of x and y.    [Hint: To begin, multiply 
the ﬁrst equation by cos f and the second by sin f, and then 
add the two equations to solve for X.]
36.	 Graphing an Equation Using Rotation of Axes    Show that the 
graph of the equation
!x !y 1
	 	 is part of a parabola by rotating the axes through an angle of 
45.    [Hint: First convert the equation to one that does not  
involve radicals.]
11.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

824 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
37.	 PROVE:  Matrix Form of Rotation of Axes Formulas    Let Z, 
Z, and R be the matrices
Z c x
yd   Zr c X
Yd
R c cos f
sin f
sin f
cos f d
(a)	 Show that the Rotation of Axes Formulas can be written as
Z RZr  and  Zr R1Z
(b)	 Let R1 and R2 be matrices that represent rotations 
through the angles f1 and f2, respectively. Show that 
the product matrix R1R2 represents a rotation through an 
angle f1 f2.  [Hint: Use the Addition Formulas for 
Sine and Cosine to simplify the entries of the matrix 
R1R2.]
38.	 PROVE:  Algebraic Invariants    A quantity is invariant under 
rotation if it does not change when the axes are rotated. It 
was stated in the text that for the general equation of a conic 
the quantity B 2  4AC is invariant under rotation.
(a)	 Use the formulas for A, B, and C on page 818 to prove 
that the quantity B 2  4AC is invariant under rotation; 
that is, show that
B2 4AC Br2 4ArCr
(b)	 Prove that A  C is invariant under rotation.
(c)	 Is the quantity F invariant under rotation?
39.	 DISCOVER  ■  PROVE:  Geometric Invariants    Do you expect 
that the distance between two points is invariant under rota-
tion? Prove your answer by comparing the distance d1P, Q2  
and d1Pr, Qr2  where P and Q are the images of P and Q 
under a rotation of axes.
11.6 
Polar Equations of Conics
■  A Unified Geometric Description of Conics  ■  Polar Equations of Conics
■  A Unified Geometric Description of Conics
Earlier in this chapter, we deﬁned a parabola in terms of a focus and directrix, but we 
deﬁned the ellipse and hyperbola in terms of two foci. In this section we give a more 
uniﬁed treatment of all three types of conics in terms of a focus and directrix. If we 
place one focus at the origin, then a conic section has a simple polar equation. More-
over, in polar form, rotation of conics becomes a simple matter. Polar equations of el-
lipses are crucial in the derivation of Kepler’s Laws (see page 808).
Equivalent Description of Conics
Let F be a ﬁxed point (the focus), / a ﬁxed line (the directrix), and let e be a 
ﬁxed positive number (the eccentricity). The set of all points P such that the 
ratio of the distance from P to F to the distance from P to / is the constant e is 
a conic. That is, the set of all points P such that
d1P, F2
d1P, ,2 e
is a conic. The conic is a parabola if e  1, an ellipse if e  1, or a hyperbola if 
e  1.
Proof    If e  1, then d1P, F2 d1P, ,2 , and so the given condition becomes the 
deﬁnition of a parabola as given in Section 11.1.
Now, suppose e ? 1. Let’s place the focus F at the origin and the directrix parallel 
to the y-axis and d units to the right. In this case the directrix has equation x  d and 
is perpendicular to the polar axis. If the point P has polar coordinates 1r,  u2 , we see 
from Figure 1 that d1P, F2 r and d1P, ,2 d r cos u. Thus the condition 
d1P, F2/d1P, ,2 e, or d1P, F2 e # d1P, ,2 , becomes
r e1d r cos u2
r ç ¨
y
x
F
 (Directrix)
x=d
P
¨
r
d
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.6  ■  Polar Equations of Conics  825
If we square both sides of this polar equation and convert to rectangular coordi-
nates, we get
 x2 y2 e21d x2 2
 11 e22x2 2de2x y2 e2d2
    Expand and simplify
 a x 
e2d
1 e2 b
2

y2
1 e2 
e2d2
11 e22 2     Divide by 1  e2 and complete  
the square
If e  1, then dividing both sides of this equation by e2d2/11 e22 2 gives an equation 
of the form
1x h2 2
a2
y2
b2 1
where
h e2d
1 e2   a2 
e2d2
11 e22 2   b2 
e2d2
1 e2
This is the equation of an ellipse with center 1h,  02. In Section 11.2 we found that the 
foci of an ellipse are a distance c from the center, where c2  a2  b2. In our case
c2 a2 b2 
e4d2
11 e22 2
Thus c e2d/11 e22 h, which conﬁrms that the focus deﬁned in the theorem 
(namely the origin) is the same as the focus deﬁned in Section 11.2. It also follows that
e c
a
If e  1, a similar proof shows that the conic is a hyperbola with e  c/a, where  
c2  a2  b2.	
■
■  Polar Equations of Conics
In the proof we saw that the polar equation of the conic in Figure 1 is r e1d r cos u2 . 
Solving for r, we get
r 
ed
1 e cos u
If the directrix is chosen to be to the left of the focus 1x d2 , then we get the equa-
tion r ed/11 e cos u2 . If the directrix is parallel to the polar axis 1y d or y d2 , 
then we get sin u instead of cos u in the equation. These observations are summarized 
in the following box and in Figure 2.
Polar Equations of Conics
A polar equation of the form
r 
ed
1 e cos u  or  r 
ed
1 e sin u
represents a conic with one focus at the origin and with eccentricity e. The conic is
1.	 a parabola if e  1,
2.	 an ellipse if 0  e  1,
3.	 a hyperbola if e  1.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

826 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
(a)  r=
ed
1+e ç ¨
(b)  r=
ed
1-e ç ¨
(c)  r=
ed
1+e ß ¨
(d)  r=
ed
1-e ß ¨
y
x
F
x=d
Directrix
Axis
F
x=_d
Directrix
y
x
Axis
F
y=d             Directrix
y
x
Axis
y=_d           Directrix
F
y
x
Axis
Figure 2  The form of the polar equation of a conic indicates the location of the directrix.
To graph the polar equation of a conic, we ﬁrst determine the location of the directrix 
from the form of the equation. The four cases that arise are shown in Figure 2. (The 
ﬁgure shows only the parts of the graphs that are close to the focus at the origin. The 
shape of the rest of the graph depends on whether the equation represents a parabola, 
an ellipse, or a hyperbola.) The axis of a conic is perpendicular to the directrix—
speciﬁcally we have the following:
1.	 For a parabola the axis of symmetry is perpendicular to the directrix.
2.	 For an ellipse the major axis is perpendicular to the directrix.
3.	 For a hyperbola the transverse axis is perpendicular to the directrix.
Example 1  ■  Finding a Polar Equation for a Conic
Find a polar equation for the parabola that has its focus at the origin and whose direc-
trix is the line y  6.
Solution    Using e  1 and d  6 and using part (d) of Figure 2, we see that the 
polar equation of the parabola is
r 
6
1 sin u
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
To graph a polar conic, it is helpful to plot the points for which u  0, p/2, p, and 
3p/2. Using these points and a knowledge of the type of conic (which we obtain from 
the eccentricity), we can easily get a rough idea of the shape and location of the 
graph.
Example 2  ■  Identifying and Sketching a Conic
A conic is given by the polar equation
r 
10
3 2 cos u
(a)	 Show that the conic is an ellipse, and sketch its graph.
(b)	 Find the center of the ellipse and the lengths of the major and minor axes.
Solution
(a)	 Dividing the numerator and denominator by 3, we have
r 
10
3
1 2
3 cos u
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.6  ■  Polar Equations of Conics  827
	 	 Since e 2
3 1, the equation represents an ellipse. For a rough graph we plot 
the points for which u  0, p/2, p, 3p/2 (see Figure 3).
u
r
0
10
p
2
10
3
p
2
3p
2
10
3
0
V⁄ (10, 0
V¤ (2, π)
)
Focus
2œ∑5Å4.47
!   ,    @
π
2
10
3
!   ,      @
3π
2
10
3
π
4
3π
4
5π
4
7π
4
Figure 3  r 
10
3 2 cos u
(b)	 Comparing the equation to those in Figure 2, we see that the major axis is  
horizontal. Thus the endpoints of the major axis are V1110,  02  and V212,  p2 .  
So the center of the ellipse is at C14,  02 , the midpoint of V1V2.
	 	  
The distance between the vertices V1 and V2 is 12; thus the length of the major 
axis is 2a  12, so a  6. To determine the length of the minor axis, we need to 
ﬁnd b. From page 825 we have c ae 6A2
3B 4, so
b2 a2 c2 62 42 20
	 	 Thus b !20 2 !5 < 4.47, and the length of the minor axis is 
2b 4 !5 < 8.94.
Now Try Exercises 17 and 21	
■
Example 3  ■  Identifying and Sketching a Conic
A conic is given by the polar equation
r 
12
2 4 sin u
(a)	 Show that the conic is a hyperbola, and sketch its graph.
(b)	 Find the center of the hyperbola, and sketch the asymptotes.
Solution
(a)	 Dividing the numerator and denominator by 2, we have
r 
6
1 2 sin u
	 	 Since e  2  1, the equation represents a hyperbola. For a rough graph we plot 
the points for which u  0, p/2, p, 3p/2 (see Figure 4).
(b)	 Comparing the equation to those in Figure 2, we see that the transverse axis is 
vertical. Thus the endpoints of the transverse axis (the vertices of the hyperbola) 
are V112,  p/22  and V216,  3p/22 V216,  p/22 . So the center of the hyperbola is 
C14,  p/22 , the midpoint of V1V2.
	 	  
To sketch the asymptotes, we need to ﬁnd a and b. The distance between V1 
and V2 is 4; thus the length of the transverse axis is 2a  4, so a  2. To ﬁnd b, 
we ﬁrst ﬁnd c. From page 825 we have c  ae  2  2  4, so
b2 c2 a2 42 22 12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

828 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
	 	 Thus b !12 2 !3 < 3.46. Knowing a and b allows us to sketch the central 
box, from which we obtain the asymptotes shown in Figure 4.
u
r
0
6
p
2
2
p
6
3p
2
26
(6, 0)
Focus
0
(6, π)
V¤ !_ 6,      @
3π
2
V⁄ !2,    @
π
2
π
6
5π
6
5π
4
7π
4
Figure 4  r 
12
2 4 sin u
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
When we rotate conic sections, it is much more convenient to use polar equations 
than Cartesian equations. We use the fact that the graph of r f1u a2  is the graph 
of r f1u2  rotated counterclockwise about the origin through an angle a (see Exer-
cise 65 in Section 8.2).
Example 4  ■  Rotating an Ellipse
Suppose the ellipse of Example 2 is rotated through an angle p/4 about the origin. 
Find a polar equation for the resulting ellipse, and draw its graph.
Solution    We get the equation of the rotated ellipse by replacing u with u  p/4 in 
the equation given in Example 2. So the new equation is
r 
10
3 2 cos1u p/42
We use this equation to graph the rotated ellipse in Figure 5. Notice that the ellipse 
has been rotated about the focus at the origin.
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
In Figure 6 we use a computer to sketch a number of conics to demonstrate the effect 
of varying the eccentricity e. Notice that when e is close to 0, the ellipse is nearly cir-
cular, and it becomes more elongated as e increases. When e  1, of course, the conic 
is a parabola. As e increases beyond 1, the conic is an ever steeper hyperbola.
e=0.86
e=0.5
e=1
e=1.4
e=4
Figure 6
11
_6
_5
15
r=
10
3-2 ç ¨
r=
10
3-2 ç(¨ _ π/4)
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 11.6  ■  Polar Equations of Conics  829
Concepts
	 1.	 All conics can be described geometrically by using a fixed 
	 	 point F called the  
 and a fixed line , called 
	 	 the  
  . For a fixed positive number e the set of 
all points P satisfying
               
          
e
	 	 is a  
  . If e 1, the conic is a(n) 
	 	
 
  ; if e 1, the conic is a(n)  
  ; 
	 	 and if e 1, the conic is a(n)  
  . The number e 
	 	 is called the  
 of the conic.
	 2.	 The polar equation of a conic with eccentricity e has one of 
the following forms: 
r  
        or        r  
Skills
3–10  ■  Finding a Polar Equation for a Conic    Write a polar equa-
tion of a conic that has its focus at the origin and satisﬁes the 
given conditions.
	 3.	 Ellipse, eccentricity 2
3, directrix x  3
	 4.	 Hyperbola, eccentricity 4
3, directrix x  3
	 5.	 Parabola, directrix y  2
	 6.	 Ellipse, eccentricity 1
2, directrix y  4
	 7.	 Hyperbola, eccentricity 4, directrix r  5 sec u
	 8.	 Ellipse, eccentricity 0.6, directrix r  2 csc u
	 9.	 Parabola, vertex at 15,  p/22
	10.	 Ellipse, eccentricity 0.4, vertex at 12,  02
11.6  Exercises
11–16  ■  Graphs of Polar Equations of Conics    Match the polar 
equations with the graphs labeled I–VI. Give reasons for your 
answer.
	11.	 r 
6
1 cos u	
12.	 r 
2
2 cos u
13.	 r 
3
1 2 sin u	
14.	 r 
5
3 3 sin u
15.	 r 
12
3 2 sin u	
16.	 r 
12
2 3 cos u
π
2
3π
2
π
1
I
IV
II
V
III
VI
1
π
2
3π
2
π
π
2
3π
2
π
1
π
2
3π
2
π
5
10
π
2
π
3π
2
7
15
π
2
3π
2
π
1
r
r
r
r
r
r
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

830 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
17–20  ■  Polar Equation for a Parabola    A polar equation of a 
conic is given. (a) Show that the conic is a parabola, and sketch 
its graph. (b) Find the vertex and directrix, and indicate them on 
the graph.
17.	 r 
4
1 sin u	
18.	 r 
3
2 2 sin u
19.	 r 
5
3 3 cos u	
20.	 r 
2
5 5 cos u
21–24  ■  Polar Equation for an Ellipse    A polar equation of a 
conic is given. (a) Show that the conic is an ellipse, and sketch its 
graph. (b) Find the vertices and directrix, and indicate them on 
the graph. (c) Find the center of the ellipse and the lengths of the 
major and minor axes.
21.	 r 
4
2 cos u	
22.	 r 
6
3 2 sin u
23.	 r 
12
4 3 sin u	
24.	 r 
18
4 3 cos u
25–28  ■  Polar Equation for a Hyperbola    A polar equation of a 
conic is given. (a) Show that the conic is a hyperbola, and sketch 
its graph. (b) Find the vertices and directrix, and indicate them on 
the graph. (c) Find the center of the hyperbola, and sketch the 
asymptotes.
25.	 r 
8
1 2 cos u	
26.	 r 
10
1 4 sin u
27.	 r 
20
2 3 sin u	
28.	 r 
6
2 7 cos u
29–36  ■  Identifying and Graphing a Conic    (a) Find the eccen-
tricity, and identify the conic. (b) Sketch the conic, and label the 
vertices.
29.	 r 
4
1 3 cos u	
30.	 r 
8
3 3 cos u
31.	 r 
2
1 cos u	
32.	 r 
10
3 2 sin u
33.	 r 
6
2 sin u	
34.	 r 
5
2 3 sin u
35.	 r 
7
2 5 sin u	
36.	 r 
8
3 cos u
37–40  ■  Rotating a Conic    A polar equation of a conic is given. 
(a) Find the eccentricity and the directrix of the conic. (b) If this 
conic is rotated about the origin through the given angle u, write 
the resulting equation. (c) Draw graphs of the original conic and 
the rotated conic on the same screen.
37.	 r 
1
4 3 cos u;    u p
3 	 38.	 r 
2
5 3 sin u;    u 2p
3
39.	 r 
2
1 sin u;    u  p
4
	40.	 r 
9
2 2 cos u;    u  5p
6
Skills Plus
41.	 Families of Conics    Graph the conics r e/11 e cos u2  
with e  0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 on a common screen. How 
does the value of e affect the shape of the curve?
42.	 Families of Conics   
(a) Graph the conics 
r 
ed
11 e sin u2  
	
for e  1 and various values of d. How does the value of 
d affect the shape of the conic?
(b)	 Graph these conics for d  1 and various values of e. 
How does the value of e affect the shape of the conic?
Applications
43.	 Orbit of the Earth    The polar equation of an ellipse can be 
expressed in terms of its eccentricity e and the length a of its 
major axis.
(a)	 Show that the polar equation of an ellipse with directrix  
x  d can be written in the form
r 
a11 e22
1 e cos u
	
[Hint: Use the relation a2 e2d2/11 e22 2 given in the 
proof on page 825.]
(b)	 Find an approximate polar equation for the elliptical  
orbit of the earth around the sun (at one focus) given that 
the eccentricity is about 0.017 and the length of the 
major axis is about 2.99  108 km.
44.	 Perihelion and Aphelion    The planets move around the sun 
in elliptical orbits with the sun at one focus. The positions of 
a planet that are closest to, and farthest from, the sun are 
called its perihelion and aphelion, respectively.
Aphelion
Perihelion
Sun
Planet
¨
r
(a)	 Use Exercise 43(a) to show that the perihelion distance 
from a planet to the sun is a11 e2  and the aphelion 
distance is a11 e2 .
(b)	 Use the data of Exercise 43(b) to ﬁnd the distances from 
the earth to the sun at perihelion and at aphelion.
45.	 Orbit of Pluto    The distance from Pluto to the sun is  
4.43  109 km at perihelion and 7.37  109 km at aphelion. 
Use Exercise 44 to ﬁnd the eccentricity of Pluto’s orbit.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 11  ■  Review  831
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
46.	 DISCUSS:  Distance to a Focus    When we found polar equa-
tions for the conics, we placed one focus at the pole. It’s easy 
to ﬁnd the distance from that focus to any point on the conic. 
Explain how the polar equation gives us this distance.
47.	 DISCUSS:  Polar Equations of Orbits    When a satellite orbits 
the earth, its path is an ellipse with one focus at the center of 
the earth. Why do scientists use polar (rather than rectangu-
lar) coordinates to track the position of satellites?     
[Hint: Your answer to Exercise 46 is relevant here.]
Geometric Definition of a Parabola (p. 782)
A parabola is the set of points in the plane that are equidistant 
from a fixed point F (the focus) and a fixed line l (the directrix).
Graphs of Parabolas with Vertex at the Origin (pp. 783, 784)
A parabola with vertex at the origin has an equation of the form  
x2  4py if its axis is vertical and an equation of the form  
y2  4px if its axis is horizontal.
	
x2  4py	
y2  4px
	
y
x
p>0
p<0
p
	
y
x
p>0
p<0
p
Focus 10, p2, directrix y  p	
Focus 1p, 02, directrix x  p
Geometric Definition of an Ellipse (p. 790)
An ellipse is the set of all points in the plane for which the sum 
of the distances to each of two given points F1 and F2 (the foci) is 
a fixed constant.
Graphs of Ellipses with Center at the Origin (p. 792)
An ellipse with center at the origin has an equation of the form 
x2
a2 y2
b2 1 if its axis is horizontal and an equation of the form 
x2
b2 y2
a2 1 if its axis is vertical (where in each case a  b  0).
	
x2
a2 y2
b2 1	
x2
b2 y2
a2 1
	
a>b
a
b
_a
_b
c
_c
x
y
	
a>b
b
a
_b
_a
c
_c
x
y
	 Foci 1c, 02, c2  a2  b2 	
Foci 10, c2, c2  a2  b2 
Eccentricity of an Ellipse (p. 795)
The eccentricity of an ellipse with equation x2
a2 y2
b2 1 or 
x2
b2 y2
a2 1 (where a  b  0) is the number
e c
a
where c "a2 b2. The eccentricity e of any ellipse is a num-
ber between 0 and 1. If e is close to 0, then the ellipse is nearly 
circular; the closer e gets to 1, the more elongated it becomes.
Geometric Definition of a Hyperbola (p. 799)
A hyperbola is the set of all points in the plane for which the 
absolute value of the difference of the distances to each of two 
given points F1 and F2 (the foci) is a fixed constant.
Graphs of Hyperbolas with Center at the Origin (p. 800)
A hyperbola with center at the origin has an equation of the form
x2
a2 y2
b2 1 if its axis is horizontal and an equation of the form
 x2
b2 y2
a2 1 if its axis is vertical.
	
x2
a2 y2
b2 1	
 x2
b2 y2
a2 1
	
a
b
_a
_b
_c
c
x
y
	
a
b
_a
_b
_c
c
x
y
	
Foci 1c, 02, c2  a2  b2 	
Foci 10, c2, c2  a2  b2 
	
Asymptotes: y  b
a x	
Asymptotes: y  a
b x
Shifted Conics (p. 808)
If the vertex of a parabola or the center of an ellipse or a hyper-
bola does not lie at the origin but rather at the point (h, k), then 
we refer to the curve as a shifted conic. To find the equation of 
the shifted conic, we use the “unshifted” form for the appropriate 
curve and ­replace x by x  h and y by y  k.
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 11  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

832 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
General Equation of a Shifted Conic (p. 812)
The graph of the equation
Ax2  Cy2  Dx  Ey  F  0
(where A and C are not both 0) is either a conic or a degenerate 
conic. In the nondegenerate cases the graph is
1.	 a parabola if A  0 or C  0,
2.	 an ellipse if A and C have the same sign (or a circle if A  C),
3.	 a hyperbola if A and C have opposite sign.
To graph a conic whose equation is given in general form, com-
plete the squares in x and y to put the equation in standard form 
for a parabola, an ellipse, or a hyperbola.
Rotation of Axes (p. 817)
Suppose the x- and y-axes in a coordinate plane are rotated 
through the acute angle f to produce the X- and Y-axes, as shown 
in the figure below. Then the coordinates of a point in the xy- and 
the XY-planes are related as follows:
 x X cos f Y sin f   X x cos f y sin f
 y X sin f Y cos f   Y x sin f y cos f
 
0
P(x, y)
P(X, Y)
y
x
Y
X
ƒ
The General Conic Equation (pp. 819, 822)
The general equation of a conic is of the form 
Ax2 Bxy Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
The quantity B2 4AC is called the discriminant of the equa-
tion. The graph is 
1.	 a parabola if B2 4AC 0,
2.	 an ellipse if B2 4AC 0,
3.	 a hyperbola if B2 4AC 0.
To eliminate the xy-term in the general equation of a conic, rotate 
the axes through an angle f that satisfies 
cot 2f A C
B
Polar Equations of Conics (p. 825)
A polar equation of the form 
r 
ed
1 e cos u    or   
r 
ed
1 e sin u
represents a conic with one focus at the origin and with eccentric-
ity e. The conic is 
1.	 a parabola if e 1,
2.	 an ellipse if 0 e 1,
3.	 a hyperbola if e 1.
	 1.	 (a)  Give the geometric definition of a parabola.
(b)	 Give the equation of a parabola with vertex at the origin 
and with vertical axis. Where is the focus? What is the 
directrix?
(c)	 Graph the equation x2 8y. Indicate the focus on the 
graph.
	 2.	 (a)	 Give the geometric definition of an ellipse.
(b)	 Give the equation of an ellipse with center at the origin 
and with major axis along the x-axis. How long is the 
major axis? How long is the minor axis? Where are the 
foci? What is the eccentricity of the ellipse?
(c)	 Graph the equation x2
16 y2
9 1. What are the lengths 
	
of the major and minor axes? Where are the foci?
	 3.	 (a)	 Give the geometric definition of a hyperbola.
(b)	 Give the equation of a hyperbola with center at the origin 
and with transverse axis along the x-axis. How long is 
the transverse axis? Where are the vertices? What are the 
asymptotes? Where are the foci? 
(c)	 What is a good first step in graphing the hyperbola that is 
described in part (b)? 
(d)	 Graph the equation x2
16 y2
9 1. What are the 
	
asymptotes? Where are the vertices? Where are the foci? 
What is the length of the transverse axis? 
	 4.	 (a)	 Suppose we are given an equation in x and y. Let h and k 
be positive numbers. What is the effect on the graph of 
the equation if x is replaced by x h or x h and if  
y is replaced by y k or y k?
(b)	 Sketch a graph of 
1x 22 2
16

1y 42 2
9
1
	 5.	 (a)	 How can you tell whether the following nondegenerate 
conic is a parabola, an ellipse, or a hyperbola?
Ax2 Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
(b)	 What conic does 3x2 5y2 4x 5y 8 0 
represent?
■  CONCEPT CHECK
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 11  ■  Review  833
	 6.	 (a)	 Suppose that the x- and y-axes are rotated through an 
acute angle f to produce the X- and Y-axes. What are the 
equations that relate the coordinates 1x,y2  and 1X,Y2  of a 
point in the xy-plane and XY-plane, respectively?
(b)	 In the equation below, how do you eliminate the xy-term?
Ax2 Bxy Cy2 Dx Ey F 0
(c)	 Use a rotation of axes to eliminate the xy-term in the 
equation
25x2 14xy 25y2 288
	
Graph the equation.
	 7.	 (a)	 What is the discriminant of the equation in 6(b)? How 
can you use the discriminant to determine the type of 
conic that the equation represents? 
(b)	 Use the discriminant to identify the equation in 6(c).
	 8.	 (a)	 Write polar equations that represent a conic with eccen-
tricity e. For what values of e is the conic an ellipse? a 
hyperbola? a parabola?
(b)	 What conic does the polar equation r 2/11 cos u2  
represent? Graph the conic.
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
■  EXERCISES
1–12  ■  Graphing Parabolas    An equation of a parabola is  
given. (a) Find the vertex, focus, and directrix of the parabola.  
(b) Sketch a graph of the parabola and its directrix.
	 1.	 y2  4x	
  2.	 x 1
12 y2
	 3.	 1
8 x2 y	
  4.	 x2 8y
	 5.	 x2  8y  0	
  6.	 2x  y2  0
	 7.	 1y 22 2 41x 22 	
  8.	 1x 32 2 201y 22
	 9.	 1
2 1y 32 2 x 0	
10.	 21x 12 2 y
	11.	 1
2 x2 2x 2y 4	
12.	 x2 31x y2
13–24  ■  Graphing Ellipses    An equation of an ellipse is given. 
(a) Find the center, vertices, and foci of the ellipse. (b) Determine 
the lengths of the major and minor axes. (c) Sketch a graph of the 
ellipse.
	13.	 x2
9 y2
25 1	
14.	 x2
49 y2
9 1
15.	 x2
49 y2
4 1	
16.	 x2
4 y2
36 1
17.	 x2  4y2  16	
18.	 9x2  4y2  1
19.	
1x 32 2
9
y2
16 1	
20.	
1x 22 2
25

1y 32 2
16
1
21.	
1x 22 2
9

1y 32 2
36
1	
22.	 x2
3 
1y 52 2
25
1
23.	 4x2  9y2  36y	
24.	 2x2 y2 2 41x y2
25–36  ■  Graphing Hyperbolas    An equation of a hyperbola is 
given. (a) Find the center, vertices, foci, and asymptotes of the 
hyperbola. (b) Sketch a graph of the hyperbola.
25.	  x2
9 y2
16 1	
26.	 x2
49 y2
32 1
27.	 x2
4 y2
49 1	
28.	 y2
25 x2
4 1
29.	 x2  2y2  16	
30.	 x2  4y2  16  0
31.	
1x 42 2
16
y2
16 1	
32.	
1x 22 2
8

1y 22 2
8
1
33.	
1y 32 2
4

1x 12 2
36
1	
34.	
1y 32 2
3
x2
16 1
35.	 9y2  18y  x2  6x  18	
36.	 y2  x2  6y
37–42  ■  Finding the Equation of a Conic    Find an equation for 
the conic whose graph is shown.
37.	 	
	
38.
	 	
0
x
y
2
F(2, 0)
	
0
x
y
5
_12
_5
12
39.	 	
	
40.
	 	
0
x
y
F(0, 5)
4
_4
	
	
0
x
y
V(4, 4)
4
8
41.	 	
	
42.
	 	
0
x
y
2
4
	 	
0
x
y
1
1
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

834 
CHAPTER 11  ■  Conic Sections
43–54  ■  Identifying and Graphing a Conic    Determine whether 
the equation represents an ellipse, a parabola, a hyperbola, or a 
degenerate conic. If the graph is an ellipse, find the center, foci, 
and vertices. If it is a parabola, find the vertex, focus, and direc-
trix. If it is a hyperbola, find the center, foci, vertices, and asymp-
totes. Then sketch the graph of the equation. If the equation has 
no graph, explain why.
43.	 x2
12 y 1	
44.	 x2
12 y2
144 y
12
45.	 x2  y2  144  0	
46.	 x2  6x  9y2
47.	 4x2 y2 81x y2 	
48.	 3x2 61x y2 10
49.	 x  y2  16y	
50.	 2x2  4  4x  y2
51.	 2x2  12x  y2  6y  26  0
52.	 36x2  4y2  36x  8y  31
53.	 9x2  8y2  15x  8y  27  0
54.	 x2  4y2  4x  8
55–64  ■  Finding the Equation of a Conic    Find an equation for 
the conic section with the given properties.
55.	 The parabola with focus F10, 12  and directrix y  1
56.	 The parabola with vertex at the origin and focus F15, 02
57.	 The ellipse with center at the origin and with x-intercepts 2 
and y-intercepts 5
58.	 The hyperbola with vertices V10, 22  and asymptotes 
y  1
2 x
59.	 The ellipse with center C10, 42 , foci F110, 02  and F210, 82 , 
and major axis of length 10
60.	 The hyperbola with center C12, 42 , foci F112, 12  and 
F212, 72 , and vertices V112, 62  and V212, 22
61.	 The ellipse with foci F111, 12  and F211, 32  and with one  
vertex on the x-axis
62.	 The parabola with vertex V15, 52  and directrix the y-axis
63.	 The ellipse with vertices V117, 122  and V217, 82  and  
passing through the point P11, 82
64.	 The parabola with vertex V11, 02  and horizontal axis of 
symmetry and crossing the y-axis at y  2
65.	 Path of the Earth    The path of the earth around the sun is an 
ellipse with the sun at one focus. The ellipse has major axis 
of length 186,000,000 mi and eccentricity 0.017. Find the 
distance between the earth and the sun when the earth is  
(a) closest to the sun and (b) farthest from the sun.
186,000,000 mi
66.	 LORAN    A ship is located 40 mi from a straight shoreline. 
LORAN stations are located at points A and B on the shoreline, 
300 mi apart. From the LORAN signals, the captain determines 
that the ship is 80 mi closer to A than to B. Find the location of 
the ship. (Place A and B on the y-axis with the x-axis halfway 
between them. Find the x- and y-coordinates of the ship.)
40 mi
A
B
300 mi
67.	 Families of Ellipses   
(a)  Draw graphs of the following family of ellipses for  
k  1, 2, 4, and 8.
x2
16 k 2 y2
k 2 1
(b)	 Prove that all the ellipses in part (a) have the same foci.
68.	 Families of Parabolas   
(a)  Draw graphs of the following family of parabolas for 
k 1
2, 1, 2, and 4.
y kx2
(b)	 Find the foci of the parabolas in part (a).
(c)	 How does the location of the focus change as k 
increases?
69–72  ■  Identifying a Conic    An equation of a conic is given. 
(a) Use the discriminant to determine whether the graph of the 
equation is a parabola, an ellipse, or a hyperbola. (b) Use a rota-
tion of axes to eliminate the xy-term. (c) Sketch the graph.
69.	 x2  4xy  y2  1
70.	 5x2 6xy 5y2 8!2x 8!2y 4 0
71.	 7x2 6 !3 xy 13y2 4 !3 x 4y 0
72.	 9x2  24xy  16y2  25
73–76  ■  Identify a Conic from Its Graph    Use a graphing device 
to graph the conic. Identify the type of conic from the graph.
73.	 5x2  3y2  60	
74.	 9x2  12y2  36  0
75.	 6x  y2  12y  30	
76.	 52x2  72xy  73y2  100
77–80  ■  Polar Equations of Conics    A polar equation of a  
conic is given. (a) Find the eccentricity, and identify the conic. 
(b) Sketch the conic, and label the vertices.
77.	 r 
1
1 cos u	
78.	 r 
2
3 2 sin u
79.	 r 
4
1 2 sin u	
80.	 r 
12
1 4 cos u
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

835
	 1.	 Find the focus and directrix of the parabola x2  12y, and sketch its graph.
	 2.	 Find the vertices, foci, and the lengths of the major and minor axes for the ellipse 
	 	 x2
16 y2
4 1. Then sketch its graph.
	 3.	 Find the vertices, foci, and asymptotes of the hyperbola y2
9 x2
16 1. Then sketch its 
graph.
	 4.	 Find an equation for the parabola with vertex 10, 02  and focus 14, 02 .
	 5.	 Find an equation for the ellipse with foci 13, 02  and vertices 14, 02 .
	 6.	 Find an equation for the hyperbola with foci 10, 52  and with asymptotes y  3
4 x.
7–9  ■  Find an equation for the conic whose graph is shown.
	 7.	
(_4, 2)
1
_1
0
x
y
 8. 
2
2
(4, 3)
0
x
y
 9. 
0
x
y
1
1
F(4, 0)
10–12  ■  Determine whether the equation represents an ellipse, a parabola, or a hyperbola. If 
the graph is an ellipse, find the center, foci, and vertices. If it is a parabola, find the vertex, 
focus, and directrix. If it is a hyperbola, find the center, foci, vertices, and asymptotes. Then 
sketch the graph of the equation. 
	10.	 16x2  36y2  96x  36y  9  0
	11.	 9x2  8y2  36x  64y  164
	12.	 2x  y2  8y  8  0
	13.	 Find an equation for the ellipse with center 12, 02 , foci 12, 32  and major axis of length 8.
	14.	 Find an equation for the parabola with focus 12, 42  and directrix the x-axis.
	15.	 A parabolic reﬂector for a car headlight forms a bowl shape that is 6 in. wide at its  
opening and 3 in. deep, as shown in the ﬁgure at the left. How far from the vertex should 
the ﬁlament of the bulb be placed if it is to be located at the focus?
16.	 (a)	 Use the discriminant to determine whether the graph of the following equation is a 
parabola, an ellipse, or a hyperbola:
5x2 4xy 2y2 18
(b)	 Use rotation of axes to eliminate the xy-term in the equation.
(c)	 Sketch a graph of the equation.
(d)	 Find the coordinates of the vertices of this conic (in the xy-coordinate system).
17.	 (a)	 Find the polar equation of the conic that has a focus at the origin, eccentricity e 1
2, 
and directrix x  2. Sketch a graph of the conic.
(b)	 What type of conic is represented by the following equation? Sketch its graph.
r 
3
2 sin u
CHAPTER 11
TEST
6 in.
3 in.
A CUMULATIVE REVIEW TEST FOR CHAPTERS 10 AND 11 CAN BE FOUND AT THE BOOK COMPANION WEBSITE: www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

836
Many buildings employ conic sections in their design. Architects have various reasons 
for using these curves, ranging from structural stability to simple beauty. But how can 
a huge parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola be accurately constructed in concrete and steel? 
In this ­Focus on Modeling, we will see how the geometric properties of the conics can 
be used to construct these shapes.
■  Conics in Buildings
In ancient times architecture was part of mathematics, so architects had to be mathema-
ticians. Many of the structures they built—pyramids, temples, amphitheaters, and irri-
gation projects—still stand. In modern times architects employ even more sophisticated 
mathematical principles. The photographs below show some structures that employ 
conic sections in their design.
Roman Amphitheater in  
Alexandria, Egypt (circle)
Ceiling of Statuary Hall in the 
U.S. Capitol (ellipse)
Roof of the Skydome in  
Toronto, Canada (parabola)
Nik Wheeler/Encyclopedia/Corbis
Architect of the Capitol
Walter Schmid/The Image Bank/Getty Images
Roof of Washington Dulles Airport 
(hyperbola and parabola)
McDonnell Planetarium,  
St. Louis, MO (hyperbola)
Attic in La Pedrera,  
Barcelona, Spain (parabola)
Andrew Holt/Photographer’s Choice/Getty Images
Joe Sohm/VisionsofAmerica/Photodisc/Getty Images
O. Alamany & E. Vicens/Terra/Corbis
Architects have different reasons for using conics in their designs. For example, the 
Spanish architect Antoni Gaudí used parabolas in the attic of La Pedrera (see photo 
above). He reasoned that since a rope suspended between two points with an equally 
distributed load (as in a suspension bridge) has the shape of a parabola, an inverted 
parabola would provide the best support for a flat roof.
■  Constructing Conics
The equations of the conics are helpful in manufacturing small objects, because a 
­computer-controlled cutting tool can accurately trace a curve given by an equation. But 
in a building project, how can we construct a portion of a parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola 
that spans the ceiling or walls of a building? The geometric properties of the conics 
provide practical ways of constructing them. For example, if you were building a circu-
lar tower, you would choose a center point, then make sure that the walls of the tower 
Conics in Architecture
FOCUS ON MODELING
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Conics in Architecture  837
were a ﬁxed ­distance from that point. Elliptical walls can be constructed by using a 
string anchored at two points, as shown in Figure 1.
To construct a parabola, we can use the apparatus shown in Figure 2. A piece of 
string of length a is anchored at F and A. The T-square, also of length a, slides along 
the straight bar L. A pencil at P holds the string taut against the T-square. As the  
T-square slides to the right, the pencil traces out a curve.
Parabola
L
F
a
P
A
Figure 2  Constructing a parabola
From the ﬁgure we see that
d1F, P2 d1P, A2 a        The string is of length a
d1L, P2 d1P, A2 a        The T-square is of length a
It follows that d1F, P2 d1P, A2 d1L, P2 d1P, A2 . Subtracting d1P, A2  from 
each side, we get
d1F, P2 d1L, P2
The last equation says that the distance from F to P is equal to the distance from P to 
the line L. Thus the curve is a parabola with focus F and directrix L.
In building projects, it is easier to construct a straight line than a curve. So in some 
buildings, such as in the Kobe Tower (see Problem 4), a curved surface is produced by 
using many straight lines. We can also produce a curve using straight lines, such as the 
parabola shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3  Tangent lines to a parabola
Each line is tangent to the parabola; that is, the line meets the parabola at exactly 
one point and does not cross the parabola. The line tangent to the parabola y x 2 at 
the point 1a, a22  is
y 2ax a2
You are asked to show this in Problem 6. The parabola is called the envelope of all such 
lines.
Circle
C
P
F1
P
F2
Ellipse
Figure 1  Constructing a circle  
and an ellipse
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

838 
Focus on Modeling
Problems
	 1.	 Conics in Architecture    The photographs on page 836 show six examples of buildings 
that contain conic sections. Search the Internet to ﬁnd other examples of structures that em-
ploy parabolas, ellipses, or hyperbolas in their design. Find at least one example for each 
type of conic.
	 2.	 Constructing a Hyperbola    In this problem we construct a hyperbola. The wooden bar 
in the ﬁgure can pivot at F1. A string that is shorter than the bar is anchored at F2 and at A, 
the other end of the bar. A pencil at P holds the string taut against the bar as it moves coun-
terclockwise around F1.
(a)	 Show that the curve traced out by the pencil is one branch of a hyperbola with foci at 
F1 and F2.
(b)	 How should the apparatus be reconﬁgured to draw the other branch of the hyperbola?
Pivot
point
Hyperbola
F1
F2
P
A
	 3.	 A Parabola in a Rectangle    The following method can be used to construct a  
parabola that ﬁts in a given rectangle. The parabola will be approximated by many short  
line segments.
	 	  
First, draw a rectangle. Divide the rectangle in half by a vertical line segment, and label 
the top endpoint V. Next, divide the length and width of each half rectangle into an equal 
number of parts to form grid lines, as shown in the ﬁgure below. Draw lines from V to the 
endpoints of horizontal grid line 1, and mark the points where these lines cross the vertical 
grid lines labeled 1. Next, draw lines from V to the endpoints of horizontal grid line 2, and 
mark the points where these lines cross the vertical grid lines labeled 2. Continue in this 
way until you have used all the horizontal grid lines. Now use line segments to connect the 
points you have marked to obtain an approximation to the desired parabola. Apply this pro-
cedure to draw a parabola that ﬁts into a 6 ft by 10 ft rectangle on a lawn.
3
2
1
2 1
1 2 3
3
V
3
2
1
2 1
1 2 3
3
V
3
2
1
2 1
1 2 3
3
V
	 4.	 Hyperbolas from Straight Lines    In this problem we construct hyperbolic shapes using 
straight lines. Punch equally spaced holes into the edges of two large plastic lids. Connect 
corresponding holes with strings of equal lengths as shown in the ﬁgure on the next page. 
Holding the strings taut, twist one lid against the other. An imaginary surface passing 
through the strings has hyperbolic cross sections. (An architectural example of this is the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Conics in Architecture  839
Kobe Tower in Japan, shown in the photograph.) What happens to the vertices of the hy-
perbolic cross sections as the lids are twisted more?
	 5.	 Tangent Lines to a Parabola    In this problem we show that the line tangent to the pa-
rabola y  x2 at the point 1a, a22  has the equation y 2ax a2.
(a)	 Let m be the slope of the tangent line at 1a, a22 . Show that the equation of the tangent 
line is y a 2 m1x a2 .
(b)	 Use the fact that the tangent line intersects the parabola at only one point to show that 
1a, a22  is the only solution of the system.
ey a2 m1x a2
y x2
(c)	 Eliminate y from the system in part (b) to get a quadratic equation in x. Show that the 
discriminant of this quadratic is 1m 2a2 2. Since the system in part (b) has exactly 
one solution, the discriminant must equal 0. Find m.
(d)	 Substitute the value for m you found in part (c) into the equation in part (a), and  
simplify to get the equation of the tangent line.
	 6.	 A Cut Cylinder    In this problem we prove that when a cylinder is cut by a plane, an el-
lipse is formed. An architectural example of this is the Tycho Brahe Planetarium in Copen-
hagen (see the photograph). In the ﬁgure, a cylinder is cut by a plane, resulting in the red 
curve. Two spheres with the same radius as the cylinder slide inside the cylinder so that 
they just touch the plane at F1 and F2. Choose an arbitrary point P on the curve, and let Q1 
and Q2 be the two points on the cylinder where a vertical line through P touches the “equa-
tor” of each sphere.
(a)	 Show that PF1  PQ1 and PF2  PQ2.    [Hint: Use the fact that all tangents to a 
sphere from a given point outside the sphere are of the same length.]
(b)	 Explain why PQ1  PQ2 is the same for all points P on the curve.
(c)	 Show that PF1  PF2 is the same for all points P on the curve.
(d)	 Conclude that the curve is an ellipse with foci F1 and F2.
Bob Krist/Documentary/Corbis
Q1
Q2
P
F2
F1
© Martin Mette/Shutterstock.com
0
x
y
Tangent
line
y=x2
a
a2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Throughout this book we have used functions to model real-world 
situations. The functions we’ve used have always had real numbers as 
inputs. But many real-world situations occur in stages: stage 1, 2, 3, . . . . 
To model such situations, we need functions whose inputs are the natural 
numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . (representing the stages). For example, the peaks of a 
bouncing ball are represented by the natural numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . 
(representing peak 1, 2, 3, . . .). A function f that models the height of the 
ball at each peak has natural numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . as inputs and gives the 
heights as f112, f122, f132, . . . . In general a function whose inputs are 
the natural numbers is called a sequence. We can think of a sequence as 
simply a list of numbers written in a specific order.
The amount in a bank account at the end of each month, mortgage 
payments, and the amount of an annuity are sequences. The formulas that 
generate these sequences drive our economy—they allow us to borrow 
money to buy our dream home closer to graduation than to retirement.
Many patterns in nature can be modeled by sequences. For example, the 
Fibonacci sequence describes such varied natural patterns as the growth of 
a rabbit population, the arrangements of leaves on a plant, the arrangement 
of scales on a pineapple, and the intricate pattern in a nautilus (pictured 
above).
841
Sequences and Series
12
12.1	 Sequences and 
Summation Notation
12.2	 Arithmetic Sequences
12.3	 Geometric Sequences
12.4	 Mathematics of Finance
12.5	 Mathematical Induction
12.6	 The Binomial Theorem
Focus on Modeling
	
Modeling with Recursive 
Sequences
© Mircea BEZERGHEANU/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

842 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
12.1 
Sequences and Summation Notation
■  Sequences  ■  Recursively Defined Sequences  ■  The Partial Sums of a Sequence   
■  Sigma Notation
Roughly speaking, a sequence is an inﬁnite list of numbers. The numbers in the se-
quence are often written as a1, a2, a3, . . . . The dots mean that the list continues forever. 
A simple example is the sequence
5,  10,  15,  20,  25, . . .
	
↑	
↑	
↑	
↑	
↑
	
a1	
a2	
a3	
a4	
a5 . . .
We can describe the pattern of the sequence displayed above by the following formula:
an 5n
You may have already thought of a different way to describe the pattern—namely, “you 
go from one number to the next by adding 5.” This natural way of describing the se-
quence is expressed by the recursive formula:
an an1 5
starting with a1  5. Try substituting n  1, 2, 3, . . . in each of these formulas to see 
how they produce the numbers in the sequence. In this section we see how these differ-
ent ways are used to describe speciﬁc sequences.
■  Sequences
Any ordered list of numbers can be viewed as a function whose input values are 1, 2,  
3, . . . and whose output values are the numbers in the list. So we define a sequence as  
follows.
Definition of a Sequence
A sequence is a function a whose domain is the set of natural numbers. The 
terms of the sequence are the function values 
a112, a122, a132, . . . , a1n2, . . .
We usually write an instead of the function notation a1n2 . So the terms of the 
sequence are written as
a1, a2, a3, . . . , an, . . . 
The number a1 is called the first term, a2 is called the second term, and in 
general, an is called the nth term.
Here is a simple example of a sequence:
2, 4, 6, 8, 10, . . .
We can write a sequence in this way when it’s clear what the subsequent terms of the 
sequence are. This sequence consists of even numbers. To be more accurate, however, 
we need to specify a procedure for ﬁnding all the terms of the sequence. This can be 
done by giving a formula for the nth term an of the sequence. In this case,
an 2n
Another way to write this sequence is 
to use function notation:
 a1n2 2n
 so a112 2, a122 4, a132 6, . . .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.1  ■  Sequences and Summation Notation  843
and the sequence can be written as
2,     4,     6,     8,  . . . ,  2n,  . . .
Notice how the formula an  2n gives all the terms of the sequence. For instance, sub-
stituting 1, 2, 3, and 4 for n gives the ﬁrst four terms:
a1 2 # 1 2  a2 2 # 2 4
a3 2 # 3 6  a4 2 # 4 8
To ﬁnd the 103rd term of this sequence, we use n  103 to get
a103 2 # 103 206
Example 1  ■  Finding the Terms of a Sequence
Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms and the 100th term of the sequence deﬁned by each formula.
(a)	 an 2n 1	
(b)	 cn n2 1
(c)	 tn 
n
n 1	
(d)	 rn 
112 n
2n
Solution    To ﬁnd the ﬁrst ﬁve terms, we substitute n  1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 in the 
­formula for the nth term. To ﬁnd the 100th term, we substitute n  100. This gives 
the ­following.
nth term
First ﬁve terms
100th term
(a)	 2n  1
1, 3, 5, 7, 9
199
(b)	 n2  1
0, 3, 8, 15, 24
9999
(c)	
n
n 1
1
2, 2
3, 3
4, 4
5, 5
6
100
101
(d)	
112 n
2n
 1
2, 1
4,  1
8, 1
16,  1
32
1
2100
Now Try Exercises 3, 5, 7, and 9	
■
In Example 1(d) the presence of 112 n in the sequence has the effect of making 
successive terms alternately negative and positive.
It is often useful to picture a sequence by sketching its graph. Since a sequence is a 
function whose domain is the natural numbers, we can draw its graph in the Cartesian 
plane. For instance, the graph of the sequence
1,  1
2,  1
3,  1
4,  1
5,  1
6,  . . . ,  1
n,  . . .
is shown in Figure 1.
Compare the graph of the sequence shown in Figure 1 to the graph of
1,   1
2,  1
3,   1
4,  1
5,   1
6,  . . . ,  
112 n1
n
,  . . .
shown in Figure 2. The graph of every sequence consists of isolated points that are not 
­connected.
1st 
term
2nd 
term
3rd 
term
4th  
term
nth 
term
an
n
0
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Terms are
decreasing
Figure 1
an
n
0
1
1
_1
3
5
Terms alternate
in sign
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

844 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Graphing calculators are useful in analyzing sequences. To work with sequences on 
a TI-83, we put the calculator in Seq mode (“sequence” mode) as in Figure 3(a). If we 
enter the sequence u1n2 n/1n 12  of Example 1(c), we can display the terms using 
the TABLE  command as shown in Figure 3(b). We can also graph the sequence as 
shown in Figure 3(c).
FIGURE 
3
(b)
(c)
1.5
0
15
   
u( )
 1
.5
 2
.66667
 3
.75
 4
.8
 5
.83333
 6
.85714
 7
.875
 =1
(a)
 Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
 Min=1
 u( ) = /( +1)
=
Figure 3 
u1n2 n/1n 12
Finding patterns is an important part of mathematics. Consider a sequence that begins
1, 4, 9, 16, . . .
Can you detect a pattern in these numbers? In other words, can you deﬁne a sequence 
whose ﬁrst four terms are these numbers? The answer to this question seems easy; these 
numbers are the squares of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4. Thus the sequence we are looking 
for is deﬁned by an  n2. However, this is not the only sequence whose ﬁrst four terms 
are 1, 4, 9, 16. In other words, the answer to our problem is not unique (see Exercise 
86). In the next example we are interested in ﬁnding an obvious sequence whose ﬁrst 
few terms agree with the given ones.
Example 2  ■  Finding the nth Term of a Sequence
Find the nth term of a sequence whose ﬁrst several terms are given.
(a)	 1
2, 3
4, 5
6, 7
8, . . .                (b)  2, 4, 8, 16, 32, . . .
Solution
(a)	 We notice that the numerators of these fractions are the odd numbers and the 
denominators are the even numbers. Even numbers are of the form 2n, and odd 
numbers are of the form 2n  1 (an odd number differs from an even number  
by 1). So a ­sequence that has these numbers for its ﬁrst four terms is given by
an 2n 1
2n
(b)	 These numbers are powers of 2, and they alternate in sign, so a sequence that 
agrees with these terms is given by
an 112 n2n
	 	 You should check that these formulas do indeed generate the given terms.
Now Try Exercises 29 and 35	
■
See Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for additional in­
structions on working with sequences. 
Go to www.stewartmath.com.
Not all sequences can be deﬁned by a 
formula. For example, there is no 
known formula for the sequence of 
prime numbers:*
2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, . . .
* A prime number is a whole number p whose only divisors are p and 1. (By convention the number 1 is 
not considered prime.)
Eratosthenes (circa 276–195 b.c.) was 
a renowned Greek geographer, mathe-
matician, and astronomer. He accurately 
calculated the circumference of the earth 
by an ­ingenious method. He is most 
famous, however, for his method for find-
ing primes, now called the sieve of 
Eratosthenes. The method consists of list-
ing the integers, beginning with 2 (the 
first prime), and then crossing out all the 
multiples of 2, which are not prime. The 
next number remaining on the list is 3 
(the second prime), so we again cross out 
all multiples of it. The next remaining 
number is 5 (the third prime number), 
and we cross out all multiples of it, and 
so on. In this way all numbers that are 
not prime are crossed out, and the 
remaining numbers are the primes.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
20
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39
40
41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49
50
51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59
60
61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69
70
71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79
80
81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89
90
91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.1  ■  Sequences and Summation Notation  845
■  Recursively Defined Sequences
Some sequences do not have simple deﬁning formulas like those of the preceding ex-
ample. The nth term of a sequence may depend on some or all of the terms preceding 
it. A sequence deﬁned in this way is called recursive. Here are two examples.
Example 3  ■  Finding the Terms of a Recursively Deﬁned Sequence
A sequence is deﬁned recursively by a1  1 and
an 31an1 22
(a)	 Find the first five terms of the sequence.
(b)	 Use a graphing calculator to find the 20th term of the sequence.
Solution   
(a)	 The deﬁning formula for this sequence is recursive. It allows us to ﬁnd the nth 
term an if we know the preceding term an1. Thus we can ﬁnd the second term 
from the ﬁrst term, the third term from the second term, the fourth term from 
the third term, and so on. Since we are given the ﬁrst term a1  1, we can pro-
ceed as follows.
a2 31a1 22 311 22 9
a3 31a2 22 319 22 33
a4 31a3 22 3133 22 105
a5 31a4 22 31105 22 321
	 	 Thus the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of this sequence are
1, 9, 33, 105, 321, . . .
(b)	 Note that to ﬁnd the 20th term of the recursive sequence, we must ﬁrst ﬁnd all 19 
preceding terms. This is most easily done by using a graphing calculator. Figure 
4(a) shows how to enter this sequence on the TI-83 calculator. From Figure 4(b) 
we see that the 20th term of the sequence is 
a20  4,649,045,865
(a)
(b)
u(20)
4649045865
 Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
  Min=1
 u( )=3(u( -1)+2)
 u( Min)={1}
Figure 4 
u1n2 31u1n 12 22, u112 1
Now Try Exercises 15 and 25	
■
Example 4  ■  The Fibonacci Sequence
Find the ﬁrst 11 terms of the sequence deﬁned recursively by F1  1, F2  1 and
Fn Fn1 Fn2
See Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for additional in-
structions on working with sequences. 
Go to www.stewartmath.com.
Large Prime Numbers
The search for large primes fascinates 
many people. As of this writing, the larg-
est known prime number is
257,885,161 1
It was discovered by Dr. Curtis Cooper of 
the University of Central Missouri in 
January 2013. In decimal notation this 
number contains 17,425,170 digits. If it 
were written in full, it would occupy 
more than four times as many pages as 
this book contains. Cooper was working 
with a large Internet group known as 
GIMPS (the Great Internet Mersenne 
Prime Search). Numbers of the form 
2p 1, where p is prime, are called 
Mersenne numbers and are named for 
the French monk who first studied them 
in the 1600s. Such numbers are more 
easily checked for primality than others. 
That is why the largest known primes are 
of this form.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

846 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Solution    To ﬁnd Fn, we need to ﬁnd the two preceding terms, Fn1 and Fn2.  
Since we are given F1 and F2, we proceed as follows.
F3 F2 F1 1 1 2
F4 F3 F2 2 1 3
F5 F4 F3 3 2 5
It’s clear what is happening here. Each term is simply the sum of the two terms that 
precede it, so we can easily write down as many terms as we please. Here are the ﬁrst 
11 terms. (You can also find these using a graphing calculator.)
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, . . .
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
The sequence in Example 4 is called the Fibonacci sequence, named after the 13th 
century Italian mathematician who used it to solve a problem about the breeding of 
rabbits (see Exercise 85). The sequence also occurs in numerous other applications in 
nature. (See Figures 5 and 6.) In fact, so many phenomena behave like the Fibonacci 
sequence that one mathematical journal, the Fibonacci Quarterly, is devoted entirely to 
its properties.
1
1
2
3
5
8
Figure 5  The Fibonacci  
sequence in the branching  
of a tree
1 1
2
3
5
8
13
21
34
Fibonacci spiral
Nautilus shell
Figure 6
Stefano Bianchetti/Corbis
Fibonacci (1175–1250) was born in 
Pisa, Italy, and was educated in North 
Africa. He traveled widely in the 
Mediterranean area and learned the vari-
ous methods then in use for writing 
numbers. On returning to Pisa in 1202, 
Fibonacci advocated the use of the 
Hindu-Arabic decimal system, the one we 
use today, over the Roman ­numeral sys-
tem that was used in Europe in his time. 
His most famous book, Liber Abaci, 
expounds on the advantages of the 
Hindu-­Arabic numerals. In fact, multipli-
cation and division were so complicated 
using Roman num­erals that a college 
degree was necessary to master these 
skills. Interestingly, in 1299 the city of 
Florence outlawed the use of the decimal 
system for merchants and businesses, 
requiring numbers to be written in 
Roman numerals or words. One can only 
speculate about the reasons for this law.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.1  ■  Sequences and Summation Notation  847
■  The Partial Sums of a Sequence
In calculus we are often interested in adding the terms of a sequence. This leads to the 
following deﬁnition.
The Partial Sums of a Sequence
For the sequence
a1, a2, a3, a4, . . . , an, . . .
the partial sums are
 S1 a1
 S2 a1 a2
 S3 a1 a2 a3
 S4 a1 a2 a3 a4
 (
 Sn a1 a2 a3 . . . an
 (
S1 is called the ﬁrst partial sum, S2 is the second partial sum, and so on. Sn is 
called the nth partial sum. The sequence S1, S2, S3, . . . , Sn, . . . is called the 
sequence of partial sums.
Example 5  ■  Finding the Partial Sums of a Sequence
Find the ﬁrst four partial sums and the nth partial sum of the sequence given by  
an  1/2n.
Solution    The terms of the sequence are
1
2,  1
4,  1
8, . . .
The ﬁrst four partial sums are
S1 1
2
 1
2
S2 1
2 1
4
 3
4
S3 1
2 1
4 1
8
 7
8
S4 1
2 1
4 1
8 1
16 15
16
Notice that in the value of each partial sum, the denominator is a power of 2 and the  
numerator is one less than the denominator. In general, the nth partial sum is
Sn 2n 1
2n
1 1
2n
The ﬁrst ﬁve terms of an and Sn are graphed in Figure 7.
Now Try Exercise 43	
■
a⁄
n
0
1
1
1
2
S⁄
S¤
a¤
S‹
a‹
S›
a›
Sﬁ
aﬁ
2
3
4
5
Partial sums of
the sequence
Terms of the
sequence
Figure 7  Graph of the sequence an 
and the sequence of partial sums Sn
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

848 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Example 6  ■  Finding the Partial Sums of a Sequence
Find the ﬁrst four partial sums and the nth partial sum of the sequence given by
an 1
n 
1
n 1
Solution    The ﬁrst four partial sums are
 S1 a 1 1
2 b                  1 1
2
 S2 a 1 1
2 b a 1
2 1
3 b             1 1
3
 S3 a 1 1
2 b a 1
2 1
3 b a 1
3 1
4 b       1 1
4
 S4 a 1 1
2 b a 1
2 1
3 b a 1
3 1
4 b a 1
4 1
5 b 1 1
5
Do you detect a pattern here? Of course. The nth partial sum is
Sn 1 
1
n 1
Now Try Exercise 45	
■
■  Sigma Notation
Given a sequence
a1, a2, a3, a4, . . .
we can write the sum of the ﬁrst n terms using summation notation, or sigma nota-
tion. This notation derives its name from the Greek letter  (capital sigma, correspond-
ing to our S for “sum”). Sigma notation is used as follows:
a
n
k1
ak a1 a2 a3 a4 . . . an
The left side of this expression is read, “The sum of ak from k  1 to k  n.” The letter 
k is called the index of summation, or the summation variable, and the idea is to re-
place k in the expression after the sigma by the integers 1, 2, 3, . . . , n, and add the 
resulting expressions, arriving at the right-hand side of the equation.
Example 7  ■  Sigma Notation
Find each sum.
(a)	 a
5
k1
k 2            (b)  a
5
j3
1
j             (c)  a
10
k5
k            (d)  a
6
i1
2
Solution   
(a)	 a
5
k1
k 2 12 22 32 42 52 55
(b)	 a
5
j3
1
j 1
3 1
4 1
5 47
60
                             a
n
k1
ak
This tells us to 
end with k  n
This tells us to 
start with k  1
This tells 
us to add
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.1  ■  Sequences and Summation Notation  849
(c)	 a
10
k5
k 5 6 7 8 9 10 45
(d)	 a
6
i1
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 12
Now Try Exercises 47 and 49	
■
We can use a graphing calculator to evaluate sums. For instance, Figure 8 shows how 
the TI-83 can be used to evaluate the sums in parts (a) and (b) of Example 7.
Example 8  ■  Writing Sums in Sigma Notation
Write each sum using sigma notation.
(a)	 13  23  33  43  53  63  73
(b)	 !3 !4 !5 . . . !77
Solution
(a)	 We can write
13 23 33 43 53 63 73 a
7
k1
k 3
(b)	 A natural way to write this sum is
!3 !4 !5 . . . !77 a
77
k3
!k
	 	 However, there is no unique way of writing a sum in sigma notation. We could 
also write this sum as
!3 !4 !5 . . . !77 a
74
k0
!k 3
or	
!3 !4 !5 . . . !77 a
75
k1
!k 2
Now Try Exercises 67 and 69	
■
The Golden Ratio
The ancient Greeks considered a line segment to be divided into the 
golden ratio if the ratio of the shorter part to the longer part is the 
same as the ratio of the longer part to the whole segment.
1
x
Thus the segment shown is divided into the golden ratio if
1
x 
x
1 x
This leads to a quadratic equation whose positive solution is
x 1 !5
2
< 1.618
This ratio occurs naturally in many places. For instance, psychology 
experiments show that the most pleasing shape of rectangle is one 
whose sides are in golden ratio. The ancient Greeks agreed with this and 
built their temples in this ratio.
The golden ratio is related to the Fibonacci sequence. In fact, it can be 
shown by using calculus* that the ratio of two successive Fibonacci 
numbers
Fn1
Fn
gets closer to the golden ratio the larger the value of n. Try ﬁnding this 
ratio for n  10.
Clark Dunbar/Flame/Corbis
1
1.618
*See Principles of Problem Solving 13 at the book companion website:  
www.stewartmath.com.
sum(seq(K2 
,K,1,5,1))
55
sum(seq(1/J,J,3,5,
1)) Frac
47/60
Figure 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

850 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
The following properties of sums are natural consequences of properties of the real 
numbers.
Properties of Sums
Let a1, a2, a3, a4, . . . and b1, b2, b3, b4, . . . be sequences. Then for every posi-
tive integer n and any real number c the following properties hold.
1.	 a
n
k1
1ak bk2 a
n
k1
ak a
n
k1
bk
2.	 a
n
k1
1ak bk2 a
n
k1
ak a
n
k1
bk
3.	 a
n
k1
cak ca a
n
k1
ak b
Proof    To prove Property 1, we write out the left side of the equation to get
a
n
k1
1ak bk2 1a1 b12 1a2 b22 1a3 b32 . . . 1an bn2
Because addition is commutative and associative, we can rearrange the terms on the 
right-hand side to read
a
n
k1
1ak bk2 1a1 a2 a3 . . . an2 1b1 b2 b3 . . . bn2
Rewriting the right side using sigma notation gives Property 1. Property 2 is proved in  
a similar manner. To prove Property 3, we use the Distributive Property:
 a
n
k1
cak ca1 ca2 ca3 . . . can
	
  c1a1 a2 a3 . . . an2 ca a
n
k1
akb 
■
concepts
	 1.	 A sequence is a function whose domain is  
  .
	 2.	 The nth partial sum of a sequence is the sum of the first 
	 	
 
 terms of the sequence. So for the sequence an n2
	 	 the fourth partial sum is S4  
   
   
   
 
	 	   
  .
skills
3–14  ■  Terms of a Sequence    Find the ﬁrst four terms and the 
100th term of the sequence whose nth term is given.
	 3.	 an  n 2 3	
  4.	 an  2n 2 1
	 5.	 an 
1
2n 1	
  6.	 an  n2 2 1
	 7.	 an 5n	
  8.	 an a 1
3 b
n
	 9.	 an 
112 n
n2
	
10.	 an 1
n2
	11.	 an 1 112 n	
12.	 an 112 n1
 
n
n 1
	13.	 an  nn	
14.	 an  3
15–20  ■  Recursive Sequences    A sequence is defined recursively 
by the given formulas. Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the sequence.
15.	 an 21an1 32 and a1 4
16.	 an an1
6  and a1 24
17.	 an  2an1  1    and    a1  1
18.	 an 
1
1 an1 and a1 1
19.	 an  an1  an2    and    a1  1, a2  2
20.	 an  an1  an2  an3    and    a1  a2  a3  1
12.1  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.1  ■  Sequences and Summation Notation  851
21–26  ■  Terms of a Sequence    Use a graphing calculator to  
do the following. (a) Find the ﬁrst ten terms of the sequence.  
(b) Graph the ﬁrst ten terms of the ­sequence.
21.	 an  4n  3	
22.	 an  n2  n
23.	 an 12
n 	
24.	 an 4 2112 n
	25.	 an 
1
an1 and a1 2
	26.	 an  an1  an2    and    a1  1, a2  3
27–38  ■  nth term of a Sequence    Find the nth term of a 
sequence whose ﬁrst several terms are given.
27.	 2, 4, 6, 8, . . .	
28.	 1, 3, 5, 7, . . .
	29.	 2, 4, 8, 16, . . .	
30.	  1
3, 1
9,  1
27, 1
81, . . .
31.	 2, 3, 8, 13, . . .	
32.	 7, 4, 1, 2, c
	33.	 5, 25, 125, 625, . . .	
34.	 3, 0.3, 0.03, 0.003, . . .
35.	 1, 3
4, 5
9, 7
16, 9
25, . . .	
36.	 3
4, 4
5, 5
6, 6
7, . . .
37.	 0, 2, 0, 2, 0, 2, . . .	
38.	 1, 1
2, 3, 1
4, 5, 1
6, . . .
39–42  ■  Partial Sums    Find the ﬁrst six partial sums S1, S2, S3, 
S4, S5, S6 of the ­sequence whose nth term is given.
39.	 1, 3, 5, 7, . . .	
40.	 12, 22, 32, 42, . . .
41.	 1
3, 1
32, 1
33, 1
34, . . .	
42.	 1, 1, 1, 1, . . .
43–46  ■  nth Partial Sum    Find the ﬁrst four partial sums and 
the nth partial sum of the sequence an.
43.	 an 2
3n	
44.	 an 
1
n 1 
1
n 2
45.	 an !n !n 1
46.	 an loga
n
n 1 b     [Hint: Use a property of logarithms to 
write the nth term as a difference.]
47–54  ■  Evaluating a Sum    Find the sum.
47.	 a
4
k1
k	
48.	 a
4
k1
k 2
49.	 a
3
k1
1
k	
50.	 a
100
j1
112 j
51.	 a
8
i1
31 112 i4 	
52.	 a
12
i4
10
53.	 a
5
k1
2 k1	
54.	 a
3
i1
i 2i
55–60  ■  Evaluating a Sum    Use a graphing calculator to evalu-
ate the sum.
55.	 a
10
k1
k 2	
56.	 a
100
k1
13k 42
57.	 a
20
j7
 j 211 j2 	
58.	 a
15
j5
1
j 2 1
59.	 a
22
n0
112 n 2n	
60.	 a
100
n1
112 n
n
61–66  ■  Sigma Notation    Write the sum without using sigma 
notation.
61.	 a
4
k1
k 3	
62.	 a
4
j1 Å
j 1
j 1
63.	 a
6
k0
!k 4	
64.	 a
9
k6
k1k 32
65.	 a
100
k3
x k	
66.	 a
n
j1
112  j1x  j
67–74  ■  Sigma Notation    Write the sum using sigma notation.
67.	 2  4  6  . . .  50   
68.  2  5  8  . . .  29
	69.	 12  22  32  . . .  102
70.	
1
2 ln 2 
1
3 ln 3 
1
4 ln 4 
1
5 ln 5 . . . 
1
100 ln 100
71.	
1
1 # 2 
1
2 # 3 
1
3 # 4 . . . 
1
999 # 1000
72.	 !1
12 !2
22 !3
32 . . . !n
n2
73.	 1  x  x2  x3  . . .  x100
74.	 1  2x  3x2  4x3  5x4  . . .  100x99
Skills plus
75.	 nth Term of a Sequence    Find a formula for the nth term of 
the sequence
!2, "2!2, #2"2!2, $2#2"2!2, . . .
	 	 [Hint: Write each term as a power of 2.]
76.	 Comparing a Sequence to the Fibonacci Sequence    Deﬁne 
the sequence
Gn 
1
!5 a
11 !52 n 11 !52 n
2n
b
	 	 Use the TABLE  command on a graphing calculator to ﬁnd  
the ﬁrst ten terms of this sequence. Compare to the Fibonacci 
sequence Fn.
applications
77.	 Compound Interest    Julio deposits $2000 in a savings 
account that pays 2.4% interest per year compounded 
monthly. The amount in the account after n months is given 
by
An 2000a1 0.024
12
b
n
(a)	 Find the ﬁrst six terms of the sequence.
(b)	 Find the amount in the account after 3 years.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

852 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
78.	 Compound Interest    Helen deposits $100 at the end of each 
month into an account that pays 6% interest per year com-
pounded monthly. The amount of interest she has accumu-
lated after n months is given by
In 100a 1.005n 1
0.005
nb
(a)	 Find the ﬁrst six terms of the sequence.
(b)	 Find the interest she has accumulated after 5 years.
79.	 Population of a City    A city was incorporated in 2004 with a 
population of 35,000. It is expected that the population will 
increase at a rate of 2% per year. The population n years after 
2004 is given by
Pn 35,00011.022 n
(a)	 Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the sequence.
(b)	 Find the population in 2014.
80.	 Paying off a Debt    Margarita borrows $10,000 from her 
­uncle and agrees to repay it in monthly installments of 
$200. Her uncle charges 0.5% interest per month on the 
balance.
(a)	 Show that her balance An in the nth month is given recur-
sively by A0  10,000 and
An 1.005An1 200
(b)	 Find her balance after 6 months.
81.	 Fish Farming    A ﬁsh farmer has 5000 catﬁsh in his pond. 
The number of catﬁsh increases by 8% per month, and the 
farmer harvests 300 catﬁsh per month.
(a)	 Show that the catﬁsh population Pn after n months is 
given recursively by P0  5000 and
Pn 1.08Pn1 300
(b)	 How many ﬁsh are in the pond after 12 months?
82.	 Price of a House    The median price of a house in Orange 
County increases by about 6% per year. In 2002 the median 
price was $240,000. Let Pn be the median price n years after 
2002.
(a)	 Find a formula for the sequence Pn.
(b)	 Find the expected median price in 2010.
83.	 Salary Increases    A newly hired salesman is promised a 
beginning salary of $30,000 a year with a $2000 raise 
every year. Let Sn be his salary in his nth year of 
employment.
(a)	 Find a recursive deﬁnition of Sn.
(b)	 Find his salary in his ﬁfth year of employment.
84.	 Concentration of a Solution    A biologist is trying to ﬁnd the 
optimal salt concentration for the growth of a certain species 
of mollusk. She begins with a brine solution that has 4 g/L of 
salt and increases the concentration by 10% every day. Let  
C0 denote the initial concentration, and let Cn be the concen-
tration after n days.
(a)	 Find a recursive deﬁnition of Cn.
(b)	 Find the salt concentration after 8 days.
85.	 Fibonacci’s Rabbits    Fibonacci posed the following problem: 
Suppose that rabbits live forever and that every month each 
pair produces a new pair that becomes productive at age  
2 months. If we start with one newborn pair, how many pairs 
of rabbits will we have in the nth month? Show that the answer 
is Fn, where Fn is the nth term of the Fibonacci sequence.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
86.	 DISCOVER  ■  prove:  Different Sequences That Start the Same
(a)	 Show that the ﬁrst four terms of the sequence defined by 
an  n2 are
1, 4, 9, 16, . . .
(b)	 Show that the ﬁrst four terms of the sequence defined by  
an  n2 1n 12 1n 22 1n 32 1n 42  are also
1, 4, 9, 16, . . .
(c)	 Find a sequence whose ﬁrst six terms are the same as 
those of an  n2 but whose succeeding terms differ from 
this ­sequence.
(d)	 Find two different sequences that begin
2, 4, 8, 16, . . .
87.	 discuss:  A Recursively Deﬁned Sequence    Find the ﬁrst  
40 terms of the sequence deﬁned by
an1 c
an
2
if an is an even number
3an 1
if an is an odd number
	 	 and a1  11. Do the same if a1  25. Make a conjecture 
about this type of sequence. Try several other values for a1, 
to test your conjecture.
88.	 discuss:  A Different Type of Recursion    Find the ﬁrst  
ten terms of the sequence deﬁned by
an anan1 anan2
	 	 with
a1 1  and  a2 1
	 	 How is this recursive sequence different from the others in 
this section?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.2  ■  Arithmetic Sequences  853
12.2 
Arithmetic Sequences
■  Arithmetic Sequences  ■  Partial Sums of Arithmetic Sequences
In this section we study a special type of sequence, called an arithmetic sequence.
■  Arithmetic Sequences
Perhaps the simplest way to generate a sequence is to start with a number a and add to 
it a ﬁxed constant d, over and over again.
Definition of an Arithmetic Sequence
An arithmetic sequence is a sequence of the form
a, a d, a 2d, a 3d, a 4d, . . .
The number a is the ﬁrst term, and d is the common difference of the 
sequence. The nth term of an arithmetic sequence is given by
an a 1n 12d
The number d is called the common difference because any two consecutive terms 
of an arithmetic sequence differ by d.
Example 1  ■  Arithmetic Sequences
(a)	 If a  2 and d  3, then we have the arithmetic sequence
2, 2 3, 2 6, 2 9, . . .
	
or	
2, 5, 8, 11, . . .
	
Any two consecutive terms of this sequence differ by d  3. The nth term is 
an 2 31n 12 .
(b)	 Consider the arithmetic sequence
9, 4, 1, 6, 11, . . .
	
Here the common difference is d  5. The terms of an arithmetic sequence 
decrease if the common difference is negative. The nth term is an 9 51n 12.
(c)	 The graph of the arithmetic sequence an 1 21n 12  is shown in Figure 1. 
­Notice that the points in the graph lie on the straight line y  2x  1, which has 
slope d  2.
Now Try Exercises 5, 11, and 17	
■
An arithmetic sequence is determined completely by the ﬁrst term a and the common 
difference d. Thus if we know the ﬁrst two terms of an arithmetic sequence, then we 
can ﬁnd a formula for the nth term, as the next example shows.
Example 2  ■  Finding Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence
Find the common difference, the first six terms, the nth term, and the 300th term of 
the arithmetic sequence
13, 7, 1, 5, c
See Appendix D, Using the TI-83/84 
Graphing Calculator, for instructions 
on how to graph sequences. Go to 
www.stewartmath.com.
20
0
10
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

854 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Solution    Since the ﬁrst term is 13, we have a  13. The common difference is  
d  7  13  6. Thus the nth term of this sequence is
an 13 61n 12
From this we find the first six terms:
13, 7, 1, 5, 11, 17, . . .
The 300th term is a 300 13 61300 12 1781.
Now Try Exercise 33	
■
The next example shows that an arithmetic sequence is determined completely by 
any two of its terms.
Example 3  ■  Finding Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence
The 11th term of an arithmetic sequence is 52, and the 19th term is 92. Find the 
1000th term.
Solution    To ﬁnd the nth term of this sequence, we need to ﬁnd a and d in the 
­formula
an a 1n 12d
From this formula we get
 a11 a 111 12d a 10d
 a19 a 119 12d a 18d
Since a11  52 and a19  92, we get the following two equations:
e 52 a 10d
92 a 18d
Solving this system for a and d, we get a  2 and d  5. (Verify this.) Thus the nth 
term of this sequence is
an 2 51n 12
The 1000th term is a1000 2 511000 12 4997.
Now Try Exercise 47	
■
■  Partial Sums of Arithmetic Sequences
Suppose we want to ﬁnd the sum of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , 100, that is,
a
100
k1
k
When the famous mathematician C. F. Gauss (see page 290) was a schoolboy, his 
teacher posed this problem to the class and expected that it would keep the students busy 
for a long time. But Gauss answered the question almost immediately. His idea was this: 
Since we are adding numbers produced according to a ﬁxed pattern, there must also be 
a pattern (or formula) for ﬁnding the sum. He started by writing the numbers from 1 to 
100 and then below them wrote the same numbers in reverse order. Writing S for the 
sum and adding corresponding terms give
S 
1 
2 
3 . . . 98 99 100
S 100 99 98 . . . 
3 
2 
1
2S 101 101 101 . . . 101 101 101
It follows that 2S 10011012 10,100, so S  5050.
Fair Division of Assets
Dividing an asset fairly among a number 
of people is of great interest to mathema-
ticians. Problems of this nature include 
dividing the national budget, disputed 
land, or assets in divorce cases. In 1994 
Brams and Taylor found a mathematical 
way of dividing things fairly. Their solu-
tion has been applied to division prob-
lems in political science, legal proceed-
ings, and other areas. To understand the 
problem, consider the following example. 
Suppose persons A and B want to divide a 
property fairly between them. To divide it 
fairly means that both A and B must be 
satisﬁed with the outcome of the division. 
Solution: A gets to divide the property 
into two pieces, then B gets to choose the 
piece he or she wants. Since both A and B 
had a part in the division process, each 
should be satisﬁed. The situation 
becomes much more complicated if three 
or more people are involved (and that’s 
where mathematics comes in).
Dividing things fairly involves much 
more than simply cutting things in half; it 
must take into account the relative worth 
each person attaches to the thing being 
divided. A story from the Bible illustrates 
this clearly. Two women appear before King 
Solomon, each claiming to be the mother 
of the same newborn baby. To discover 
which of these two women is the real 
mother, King Solomon ordered his swords-
man to cut the baby in half! The real 
mother, who attaches far more worth to 
the baby than anyone else does, 
­immed­iately gives up her claim to the baby 
to save the baby’s life.
Mathematical solutions to fair-division 
problems have recently been applied in an 
international treaty, the Convention on the 
Law of the Sea. If a country wants to 
develop a portion of the sea ﬂoor, it is 
required to divide the portion into two 
parts, one part to be used by itself and the 
other by a consortium that will preserve it 
for later use by a less developed country. 
The consortium gets ﬁrst pick.
Mathematics in the Modern World
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.2  ■  Arithmetic Sequences  855
Of course, the sequence of natural numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . is an arithmetic sequence 
(with a  1 and d  1), and the method for summing the ﬁrst 100 terms of this se-
quence can be used to ﬁnd a formula for the nth partial sum of any arithmetic sequence. 
We want to ﬁnd the sum of the ﬁrst n terms of the arithmetic sequence whose terms are 
ak a 1k 12d; that is, we want to ﬁnd
 Sn a
n
k1
3a 1k 12d4
  a 1a d2 1a 2d2 1a 3d2 . . . 3a 1n 12d4
Using Gauss’s method, we write
Sn 
a

1a d2
 . . . 3a 1n 22d4 3a 1n 12d4
Sn 3a 1n 12d4 3a 1n 22d4  . . . 
1a d2

a
2Sn 32a 1n 12d4 32a 1n 12d4  . . . 32a 1n 12d4 32a 1n 12d4
There are n identical terms on the right side of this equation, so
 2Sn n32a 1n 12d4
 Sn n
2
 32a 1n 12d4
Notice that an a 1n 12d is the nth term of this sequence. So we can write
Sn n
2
 3a a 1n 12d4 na a an
2
b
This last formula says that the sum of the ﬁrst n terms of an arithmetic sequence is the 
average of the ﬁrst and nth terms multiplied by n, the number of terms in the sum. We 
now summarize this result.
Partial Sums of an Arithmetic Sequence
For the arithmetic sequence given by an a 1n 12d, the nth partial sum
Sn a 1a d2 1a 2d2 1a 3d2 . . . 3a 1n 12d4
is given by either of the following formulas.
1.	 Sn n
2
 32a 1n 12d4 	
2.  Sn n a a an
2
b
Example 4  ■  Finding a Partial Sum of an Arithmetic Sequence
Find the sum of the ﬁrst 50 odd numbers.
Solution    The odd numbers form an arithmetic sequence with a  1 and  
d  2. The nth term is an 1 21n 12 2n 1, so the 50th odd number is 
a50 21502 1 99. Substituting in Formula 2 for the partial sum of an arithmetic 
sequence, we get
S50 50a a a50
2
b 50a 1 99
2
b 50 # 50 2500
Now Try Exercise 51	
■
Example 5  ■  Finding a Partial Sum of an Arithmetic Sequence
Find the following partial sum of an arithmetic sequence:
3 7 11 15 . . . 159
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

856 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Solution    For this sequence a 3 and d 4, so an 3 1 41n 12 . To find 
which term of the sequence is the last term 159, we use the formula for the nth term 
and solve for n.
 159 3 1 41n 12    Set an 159
 39 n 1
    Subtract 3; divide by 4
 n 40
    Add 1
To find the partial sum of the first 40 terms, we use Formula 1 for the nth partial sum 
of an arithmetic sequence:
S40 40
2  32132 1 4140 12 4 3240
Now Try Exercise 57	
■
Example 6  ■  Finding the Seating Capacity of an Amphitheater
An amphitheater has 50 rows of seats with 30 seats in the ﬁrst row, 32 in the second, 
34 in the third, and so on. Find the total number of seats.
Solution    The numbers of seats in the rows form an arithmetic sequence with 
a  30 and d  2. Since there are 50 rows, the total number of seats is the sum
 S50 50
2  321302 1 49122 4        Sn n
2
 32a 1 1n 12d4
  3950
Thus the amphitheater has 3950 seats.
Now Try Exercise 75	
■
Example 7  ■  Finding the Number of Terms in a Partial Sum
How many terms of the arithmetic sequence 5, 7, 9, . . . must be added to get 572?
Solution    We are asked to ﬁnd n when Sn  572. Substituting a  5, d  2, and  
Sn  572 in Formula 1 for the partial sum of an arithmetic sequence, we get
 572 n
2
 32 # 5 1 1n 1224        Sn n
2
 32a 1 1n 12d4
 572 5n 1 n1n 12
        Distributive Property
 0 n2 1 4n 572
        Expand
 0 1n 222 1n 1 262
        Factor
This gives n  22 or n  26. But since n is the number of terms in this partial sum, 
we must have n  22.
Now Try Exercise 65	
■
Stage
concepts
	 1.	 An arithmetic sequence is a sequence in which the  
 
between successive terms is constant.
	 2.	 The sequence given by an a 1 1n 12d is an arithmetic 
	 	 sequence in which a is the first term and d is the  
 
	 	
 
  . So for the arithmetic sequence an 2 1 51n 12  
	 	 the first term is  
  , and the common difference is 
	 	
 
.
3–4  ■  True or False? If False, give a reason.
	 3.	 The nth partial sum of an arithmetic sequence is the average 
of the first and last terms times n.
	 4.	 If we know the first and second terms of an arithmetic 
sequence, then we can find any other term.
12.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.2  ■  Arithmetic Sequences  857
skills
5–10  ■  Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence    The nth term of an 
arithmetic sequence is given. (a) Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the 
sequence. (b) What is the common difference d? (c) Graph the 
terms you found in part (a).
	 5.	 an 7 31n 12 	
  6.	 an 10 201n 12
	 7.	 an 6 41n 12 	
  8.	 an 10 41n 12
	 9.	 an 5
2 1n 12 	
10.	 an 1
2 1n 12
11–16  ■  nth Term of an Arithmetic Sequence    Find the nth term 
of the arithmetic sequence with given ﬁrst term a and common 
difference d. What is the 10th term?
	11.	 a  9,  d  4	
12.	 a  5,  d  4
	13.	 a  0.7,  d  0.2	
14.	 a 14, d  3
2
	15.	 a 5
2, d  1
2	
16.	 a !3, d !3
17–26  ■  Arithmetic Sequence?    The first four terms of a 
sequence are given. Can these terms be the terms of an arithmetic 
sequence? If so, find the common difference.
	17.	 11, 17, 23, 29, . . .	
18.	 31, 19, 7, 5, . . .
	19.	 16, 9, 2, 4, . . .	
20.	 100, 68, 36, 4, . . .
21.	 2, 4, 8, 16, . . .	
22.	 2, 4, 6, 8, . . .
23.	 3, 3
2, 0,  3
2, . . .	
24.	 ln 2, ln 4, ln 8, ln 16, . . .
25.	 2.6, 4.3, 6.0, 7.7, . . .	
26.	 1
2, 1
3, 1
4, 1
5, . . .
27–32  ■  Arithmetic Sequence?    Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the 
sequence, and determine whether it is arithmetic. If it is arithme-
tic, ﬁnd the common difference, and express the nth term of the 
sequence in the standard form an a 1n 12d.
27.	 an  4  7n	
28.	 an  4  2n
29.	 an 
1
1 2n	
30.	 an 1 n
2
31.	 an  6n  10	
32.	 an 3 112 nn
33–44  ■  Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence    Determine the com-
mon difference, the ﬁfth term, the nth term, and the 100th term of 
the arithmetic sequence.
33.	 4, 10, 16, 22, . . .	
34.	 1, 11, 23, 35, . . .
35.	 29, 11, 7, 25 . . .	
36.	 64, 49, 34, 19, . . .
37.	 4, 9, 14, 19, . . .	
38.	 11, 8, 5, 2, . . .
39.	 12, 8, 4, 0, . . .	
40.	 7
6, 5
3, 13
6 , 8
3, . . .
41.	 25, 26.5, 28, 29.5, . . .	
42.	 15, 12.3, 9.6, 6.9, . . .
43.	 2, 2  s, 2  2s, 2  3s, . . .
44.	 t, t  3, t  6, t  9, . . .
45–50  ■  Finding Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence    Find the 
indicated term of the arithmetic sequence with the given description.
45.	 The 50th term is 1000, and the common difference is 6. Find 
the first and second terms.
46.	 The 100th term is 750, and the common difference is 20. 
Find the fifth term.
47.	 The fourteenth term is 2
3, and the ninth term is 1
4. Find the 
first term and the nth term.
48.	 The twelfth term is 118, and the eighth term is 146. Find the 
first term and the nth term.
49.	 The first term is 25, and the common difference is 18. Which 
term of the sequence is 601?
50.	 The first term is 3500, and the common difference is 15. 
Which term of the sequence is 2795?
51–56  ■  Partial Sums of an Arithmetic Sequence    Find the partial 
sum Sn of the arithmetic sequence that satisﬁes the given conditions.
51.	 a 3, 
d 5, 
n 20
	52.	 a 10, 
d 8, 
n 30
53.	 a 40, 
d 14, 
n 15
	54.	 a 2, 
d 23, 
n 25
55.	 a1  55,  d  12,  n  10
	56.	 a2  8,  a5  9.5,  n  15
57–64  ■  Partial Sums of an Arithmetic Sequence    A partial sum 
of an arithmetic sequence is given. Find the sum.
57.	 1  5  9  . . .  401
58.	 3 A 3
2B 0 3
2 3 . . . 30
59.	 250  233  216  . . .  97
60.	 89  85  81  . . .  13	
61.	 0.7  2.7  4.7  . . .  56.7
62.	 10  9.9  9.8  . . .  0.1
63.	 a
10
k0
13 0.25k2 	
64.	 a
20
n0
11 2n2
65–66  ■  Adding Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence    Find the 
number of terms of the arithmetic sequence with the given 
description that must be added to get a value of 2700.
65.	 The first term is 5, and the common difference is 2.
66.	 The first term is 12, and the common difference is 8.
Skills plus
67.	 Special Triangle    Show that a right triangle whose sides are 
in arithmetic progression is similar to a 3–4–5 triangle.
68.	 Product of Numbers    Find the product of the numbers
101/10, 102/10, 103/10, 104/10, . . . , 1019/10
69.	 Harmonic Sequence    A sequence is harmonic if the recipro-
cals of the terms of the sequence form an arithmetic sequence. 
Determine whether the following sequence is harmonic:
1, 3
5, 3
7, 1
3, . . .
70.	 Harmonic Mean    The harmonic mean of two numbers is 
the reciprocal of the average of the reciprocals of the two 
numbers. Find the harmonic mean of 3 and 5.
applications
71.	 Depreciation    The purchase value of an ofﬁce computer is 
$12,500. Its annual depreciation is $1875. Find the value of 
the computer after 6 years.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

858 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
72.	 Poles in a Pile    Telephone poles are being stored in a pile with 
25 poles in the ﬁrst layer, 24 in the second, and so on. If there 
are 12 layers, how many telephone poles does the pile contain?
73.	 Salary Increases    A man gets a job with a salary of $30,000 
a year. He is promised a $2300 raise each subsequent year. 
Find his total earnings for a 10-year period.
74.	 Drive-In Theater    A drive-in theater has spaces for 20 cars in 
the ﬁrst parking row, 22 in the second, 24 in the third, and so 
on. If there are 21 rows in the theater, ﬁnd the number of cars 
that can be parked.
75.	 Theater Seating    An architect designs a theater with 15 seats 
in the ﬁrst row, 18 in the second, 21 in the third, and so on. If 
the theater is to have a seating capacity of 870, how many 
rows must the architect use in his design?
76.	 Falling Ball    When an object is allowed to fall freely near the 
surface of the earth, the gravitational pull is such that the 
object falls 16 ft in the ﬁrst second, 48 ft in the next second, 
80 ft in the next second, and so on.
(a)	 Find the total distance a ball falls in 6 s.
(b)	 Find a formula for the total distance a ball falls in n 
seconds.
77.	 The Twelve Days of Christmas    In the well-known song 
“The Twelve Days of Christmas,” a person gives his sweet-
heart k gifts on the kth day for each of the 12 days of 
Christmas. The person also repeats each gift identically on 
each subsequent day. Thus on the 12th day the sweetheart 
receives a gift for the ﬁrst day, 2 gifts for the second, 3 gifts 
for the third, and so on. Show that the number of gifts 
received on the 12th day is a partial sum of an arithmetic 
sequence. Find this sum.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
78.	 discuss:  Arithmetic Means    The arithmetic mean (or 
average) of two numbers a and b is
m a b
2
	 	 Note that m is the same distance from a as from b, so a, m, b  
is an arithmetic sequence. In general, if m1, m2, . . . , mk are 
equally spaced between a and b so that
a, m1, m2, . . . , mk, b
	 	 is an arithmetic sequence, then m1, m2, . . . , mk are called k 
arithmetic means between a and b.
(a)	 Insert two arithmetic means between 10 and 18.
(b)	 Insert three arithmetic means between 10 and 18.
(c)	 Suppose a doctor needs to increase a patient’s dosage of 
a certain medicine from 100 mg to 300 mg per day in 
ﬁve equal steps. How many arithmetic means must be 
inserted between 100 and 300 to give the progression of 
daily doses, and what are these means?
12.3 
Geometric Sequences
■  Geometric Sequences  ■  Partial Sums of Geometric Sequences  ■  What Is an Infinite 
Series?  ■  Infinite Geometric Series
In this section we study geometric sequences. This type of sequence occurs frequently 
in applications to ﬁnance, population growth, and other ﬁelds.
■  Geometric Sequences
Recall that an arithmetic sequence is generated when we repeatedly add a number d to 
an initial term a. A geometric sequence is generated when we start with a number a and 
repeatedly multiply by a ﬁxed nonzero constant r.
Definition of a Geometric Sequence
A geometric sequence is a sequence of the form
a, ar, ar2, ar3, ar4, . . .
The number a is the ﬁrst term, and r is the common ratio of the sequence. 
The nth term of a geometric sequence is given by
an arn1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.3  ■  Geometric Sequences  859
The number r is called the common ratio because the ratio of any two consecutive 
terms of the sequence is r.
Example 1  ■  Geometric Sequences
(a)	 If a  3 and r  2, then we have the geometric sequence
3, 3 # 2, 3 # 22, 3 # 23, 3 # 24, . . .
	
or	
3, 6, 12, 24, 48, . . .
	
Notice that the ratio of any two consecutive terms is r  2. The nth term is 
an 3122 n1.
(b)	 The sequence
2, 10, 50, 250, 1250, . . .
	
is a geometric sequence with a  2 and r  5. When r is negative, the terms of 
the sequence alternate in sign. The nth term is an 2152 n1.
(c)	 The sequence
1,  1
3,  1
9,  1
27,  1
81,  . . .
	
is a geometric sequence with a  1 and r 1
3. The nth term is an 1A1
3B
n1.
(d)	 The graph of the geometric sequence defined by an 1
5 # 2n1 is shown in Figure 
1. Notice that the points in the graph lie on the graph of the exponential function 
y 1
5 # 2x1.
If 0  r  1, then the terms of the geometric sequence ar n1 decrease, but if r  1, 
then the terms increase. (What happens if r  1?)
Now Try Exercises 5, 9, and 13	
■
Geometric sequences occur naturally. Here is a simple example. Suppose a ball has 
elasticity such that when it is dropped, it bounces up one-third of the distance it has 
fallen. If this ball is dropped from a height of 2 m, then it bounces up to a height of 
2A1
3B 2
3  m. On its second bounce, it returns to a height of A2
3BA1
3B 2
9  m, and so on (see 
Figure 2). Thus the height hn that the ball reaches on its nth bounce is given by the 
geometric sequence
hn 2
3 A1
3B
n1 2A1
3B
n
We can ﬁnd the nth term of a geometric sequence if we know any two terms, as the 
following examples show.
Example 2  ■  Finding Terms of a Geometric Sequence
Find the common ratio, the first term, the nth term, and the eighth term of the geomet-
ric sequence
5, 15, 45, 135, . . .
Solution    To ﬁnd a formula for the nth term of this sequence, we need to ﬁnd the 
first term a and the common ratio r. Clearly, a  5. To ﬁnd r, we ﬁnd the ratio of any 
two consecutive terms. For instance, r 45
15 3. Thus
an 5132 n1        an arn1
The eighth term is a8 5132 81 5132 7 10,935.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
20
0
8
Figure 1
1
2
3
2 m
m
2
3
m
2
9
0
t
h
Figure 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

860 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Example 3  ■  Finding Terms of a Geometric Sequence
The third term of a geometric sequence is 63
4 , and the sixth term is 1701
32 . Find the ﬁfth 
term.
Solution    Since this sequence is geometric, its nth term is given by the formula 
an arn1. Thus
 a3  ar 31 ar 2
 a6  ar61 ar 5
From the values we are given for these two terms, we get the following system of 
­equations:
u
63
4 ar2
1701
32 ar5
We solve this system by dividing.
 ar 5
ar 2 
1701
32
63
4
 r3 27
8
        Simplify
 r 3
2
        Take cube root of each side
Substituting for r in the ﬁrst equation gives
 63
4 aA3
2B
2        Substitute r 3
2 in 63
4 ar2
 a 7
        Solve for a
It follows that the nth term of this sequence is
an 7A3
2B
n1
Thus the ﬁfth term is
a5 7A3
2B
51 7A3
2B
4 567
16
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
■  Partial Sums of Geometric Sequences
For the geometric sequence a, ar, ar2, ar3, ar4, . . . , ar n1, . . . , the nth partial sum 
is
Sn a
n
k1
ar k1 a ar ar2 ar3 ar4 . . . arn1
To ﬁnd a formula for Sn, we multiply Sn by r and subtract from Sn.
 Sn a ar ar2 ar3 ar4 . . . arn1
 
rSn 
ar ar2 ar3 ar4 . . . arn1 arn
 Sn rSn a arn
So	
 Sn11 r2 a11 rn2
 Sn 
a11 rn2
1 r   r ? 1
We summarize this result.
Science Source
Srinivasa Ramanujan (1887–1920) 
was born into a poor family in the small 
town of Kumbakonam in India. Self-
taught in mathematics, he worked in vir-
tual isolation from other mathematicians. 
At the age of 25 he wrote a letter to G. H. 
Hardy, the leading British mathematician 
at the time, listing some of his discover-
ies. His discoveries included the following 
series for calculating p:
1
p 2!2
9801 a
`
k0
14k2! 11103 26390k2
1k !2 4 3964k
Hardy immediately recognized 
Ramanujan’s genius, and for the next six 
years the two worked together in London 
until Ramanujan fell ill and returned to 
his hometown in India, where he died a 
year later. ­Ramanujan was a genius with 
a phenomenal ability to see hidden pat-
terns in the properties of numbers. Most 
of his discoveries were written as compli-
cated inﬁnite series, the importance of 
which was not recognized until many 
years after his death. In the last year of 
his life he wrote 130 pages of mysterious 
formulas, many of which still defy proof. 
Hardy tells the story that when he visited 
Ramanujan in a hospital and arrived in a 
taxi, he remarked to Ramanujan that the 
cab’s number, 1729, was uninteresting. 
­Ramanujan replied “No, it is a very inter-
esting number. It is the smallest number 
expressible as the sum of two cubes in 
two different ways.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.3  ■  Geometric Sequences  861
Partial Sums of a Geometric Sequence
For the geometric sequence defined by an  ar n1, the nth partial sum
Sn a ar ar 2 ar 3 ar 4 . . . ar n1  r ? 1
is given by
Sn a 1 r n
1 r
Example 4  ■  Finding a Partial Sum of a Geometric Sequence
Find the following partial sum of a geometric sequence:
1 4 16 . . . 4096
Solution    For this sequence a 1 and r 4, so an 4n1. Since 46 4096, we use 
the formula for Sn with n 7, and we have
S7 1 # 1 47
1 4 5461
Thus this partial sum is 5461.
Now Try Exercises 49 and 53	
■
Example 5  ■  Finding a Partial Sum of a Geometric Sequence
Find the sum a
6
k1
7A 2
3B
k1.
Solution    The given sum is the sixth partial sum of a geometric sequence with 
first term a 7A 2
3B
0 7 and r  2
3. Thus by the formula for Sn with n 6 we 
have
S6 7 # 1 A 2
3B
6
1 A 2
3B 7 # 1 64
729
5
3
931
243 < 3.83
Now Try Exercise 59	
■
■  What Is an Infinite Series?
An expression of the form
a
`
k1
ak a1 a2 a3 a4 . . .
Discovery Project
Finding Patterns
Finding patterns in nature is an important part of mathematical modeling. If we 
can find a pattern (or a formula) that describes the terms of a sequence, then we 
can use the pattern to predict subsequent terms of the sequence. In this project 
we investigate difference sequences and how they help us find patterns in trian-
gular, square, pentagonal, and other polygonal numbers. You can find the proj-
ect at www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

862 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
is called an inﬁnite series. The dots mean that we are to continue the addition indeﬁnitely. 
What meaning can we attach to the sum of inﬁnitely many numbers? It seems at ﬁrst that 
it is not possible to add inﬁnitely many numbers and arrive at a ﬁnite number. But consider 
the following problem. You have a cake, and you want to eat it by ﬁrst eating half the cake, 
then eating half of what remains, then again eating half of what remains. This process can 
continue indeﬁnitely because at each stage, some of the cake remains. (See Figure 3.)
1
2
1
4
1
8
1
16
1
32
1
2
1
4
1
8
1
16
1
2
1
4
1
8
1
2
1
4
1
2
Figure 3
Does this mean that it’s impossible to eat all of the cake? Of course not. Let’s write 
down what you have eaten from this cake:
a
`
k1
1
2k 1
2 1
4 1
8 1
16 . . .
This is an inﬁnite series, and we note two things about it: First, from Figure 3 it’s clear 
that no matter how many terms of this series we add, the total will never exceed 1. 
Second, the more terms of this series we add, the closer the sum is to 1 (see Figure 3). 
This suggests that the number 1 can be written as the sum of inﬁnitely many smaller 
numbers:
1 1
2 1
4 1
8 1
16 . . . 1
2n . . .
To make this more precise, let’s look at the partial sums of this series:
 S1 1
2
  1
2
 S2 1
2 1
4
  3
4
 S3 1
2 1
4 1
8
  7
8
 S4 1
2 1
4 1
8  1
16 15
16
and, in general (see Example 5 of Section 12.1),
Sn 1 1
2n
As n gets larger and larger, we are adding more and more of the terms of this series. 
Intuitively, as n gets larger, Sn gets closer to the sum of the series. Now notice that as n 
gets large, 1/2n gets closer and closer to 0. Thus Sn gets close to 1  0  1. Using the 
notation of Section 3.6, we can write
Sn S 1 as n S `
In general, if Sn gets close to a ﬁnite number S as n gets large, we say that the infinite 
series converges (or is convergent). The number S is called the sum of the infinite series. 
If an infinite series does not converge, we say that the series diverges (or is divergent).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.3  ■  Geometric Sequences  863
■  Infinite Geometric Series
An inﬁnite geometric series is a series of the form
a ar ar2 ar3 ar4 . . . arn1 . . .
We can apply the reasoning used earlier to ﬁnd the sum of an inﬁnite geometric series. 
The nth partial sum of such a series is given by the formula
Sn a  1 r n
1 r  r ? 1
It can be shown that if 0  r 0 1, then r n gets close to 0 as n gets large (you can easily 
convince yourself of this using a calculator). It follows that Sn gets close to a/11 r2  
as n gets large, or
Sn S
a
1 r as n S `
Thus the sum of this inﬁnite geometric series is a/11 r2 .
Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series
If 0  r 0 1, then the infinite geometric series 
a
`
k1
ark1 a ar ar2 ar3 . . .
converges and has the sum 
S 
a
1 r
If 0  r 0 1, the series diverges.
Example 6  ■  Inﬁnite Series
Determine whether the infinite geometric series is convergent or divergent. If it is con-
vergent, find its sum.
(a)	 2 2
5 2
25 
2
125 . . .        (b)  1 7
5 a 7
5 b
2
a 7
5 b
3
. . . 
Here is another way to arrive at the  
formula for the sum of an inﬁnite geo-
metric series:
 S a ar ar2 ar3 . . .
 a r 1a ar ar2 . . .2
 a rS
Solve the equation S  a  rS for S  
to get
 S rS a
 11 r2S a
 S 
a
1 r
Fractals
Many of the things we 
model in this book have 
regular predictable 
shapes. But recent 
advances in mathematics 
have made it possible to 
model such seemingly 
random or even chaotic 
shapes as those of a cloud, 
a ﬂickering ﬂame, a moun-
tain, or a jagged coastline. The basic tools in this type of modeling are 
the fractals invented by the mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot. A  
fractal is a geometric shape built up from a simple basic shape by 
Mathematics in the Modern World
scaling and repeating the shape indeﬁnitely according to a given rule. 
Fractals have inﬁnite detail; this means the closer you look, the more 
you see. They are also self-similar; that is, zooming in on a portion of 
the fractal yields the same detail as the original shape. Because of their 
beautiful shapes, fractals are used by movie makers to create ﬁctional 
landscapes and exotic backgrounds.
Although a fractal is a complex shape, it is produced according to very 
simple rules. This property of fractals is exploited in a process of storing pic-
tures on a computer called fractal image compression. In this process a pic-
ture is stored as a simple basic shape and a rule; repeating the shape accord-
ing to the rule produces the original picture. This is an extremely efﬁcient 
method of storage; that’s how thousands of color pictures can be put on a 
single flash drive.
Bill Ross/Cusp/Corbis
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

864 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Solution
(a)	 This is an infinite geometric series with a 2 and r 1
5. Since 0  r 0 @  1
5 @ 1, 
the series converges. By the formula for the sum of an infinite geometric series 
we have 
S 
2
1 1
5
5
2
(b)	 This is an infinite geometric series with a 1 and r 7
5. Since 0  r 0 @  7
5 @ 1,  
the series diverges.
Now Try Exercises 65 and 69	
■
Example 7  ■  Writing a Repeated Decimal as a Fraction
Find the fraction that represents the rational number 2.351.
Solution    This repeating decimal can be written as a series:
23
10 
51
1000 
51
100,000 
51
10,000,000 
51
1,000,000,000 . . .
After the ﬁrst term, the terms of this series form an inﬁnite geometric series with
a 
51
1000  and  r 
1
100
Thus the sum of this part of the series is
S 
51
1000
1 
1
100

51
1000
99
100

51
1000 # 100
99 51
990
So	
2.351 23
10 51
990 2328
990 388
165
Now Try Exercise 77	
■
concepts
	 1.	 A geometric sequence is a sequence in which the  
 
of successive terms is constant.
	 2.	 The sequence given by an arn1 is a geometric sequence 
	 	 in which a is the first term and r is the  
  
  . 
	 	 So for the geometric sequence an 2152 n1 the first term is 
	 	
 
  ,and the common ratio is  
  .
	 3.	 True or False? If we know the first and second terms of a 
geometric sequence, then we can find any other term.
	 4.	 (a)  The nth partial sum of a geometric sequence an arn1 
	 	 	
is given by Sn  
  .
	 	 (b)	 The series a
`
k1
ark1 a ar ar2 ar3 . . .
	 	 	
is an infinite  
 series. If 0  r 0 1, then this 
	 	 	
series  
  , and its sum is S  
  . 
	 	 	
If 0  r 0 1, the series  
  .
skills
5–8  ■  nth Term of a Geometric Sequence    The nth term of a 
sequence is given. (a) Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the sequence. 
(b) What is the common ratio r? (c) Graph the terms you found  
in (a).
	 5.	 an 7132 n1	
  6.	 an 610.52 n1
	 7.	 an 5
2 A 1
2B
n1	
  8.	 an 3n1
9–12  ■  nth Term of a Geometric Sequence    Find the nth term of 
the geometric sequence with given ﬁrst term a and common ratio 
r. What is the fourth term?
	 9.	 a 7, 
r 4	
10.	 a 3, 
r 2
	11.	 a 5
2, r  1
2	
12.	 a !3, r !3
13–22  ■  Geometric Sequence?    The first four terms of a 
sequence are given. Determine whether these terms can be the 
terms of a geometric sequence. If the sequence is geometric, find 
the common ratio.
	13.	 3, 6, 12, 24, . . .	
14.	 3, 48, 93, 138, . . .
12.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.3  ■  Geometric Sequences  865
15.	 3072, 1536, 768, 384, . . .	
16.	 432, 144, 48, 16, . . .
17.	 3, 3
2, 3
4, 3
8, . . .	
18.	 27, 9, 3, 1, . . .
19.	 1
2, 1
3, 1
4, 1
5, . . .	
20.	 e2, e4, e6, e8, . . .
21.	 1.0, 1.1, 1.21, 1.331, . . .	
22.	 1
2, 1
4, 1
6, 1
8, . . .
23–28  ■  Geometric Sequence?    Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the 
sequence, and determine whether it is geometric. If it is geomet-
ric, ﬁnd the common ratio, and express the nth term of the 
sequence in the standard form an  arn1.
23.	 an 2132 n	
24.	 an 4 3n
25.	 an 1
4n	
26.	 an 112 n2n
27.	 an ln15n12 	
28.	 an  n n
29–38  ■  Terms of a Geometric Sequence    Determine the  
common ratio, the ﬁfth term, and the nth term of the geometric 
sequence.
29.	 2, 6, 18, 54, . . .	
30.	 7, 14
3 , 28
9 , 56
27, . . .
31.	 0.3, 0.09, 0.027, 0.0081, . . .
32.	 1, !2, 2, 2!2, . . .
33.	 144, 12, 1,  1
12, . . .	
34.	 8, 2,  1
2,  1
8, . . .
35.	 3, 35/3, 37/3, 27, . . .	
36.	 t, t 2
2 , t 3
4 , t  4
8 , . . .
37.	 1, s2/7, s4/7, s6/7, . . .	
38.	 5, 5c1, 52c1, 53c1, . . .
39–46  ■  Finding Terms of a Geometric Sequence    Find the  
indicated term(s) of the geometric sequence with the given 
description.
39.	 The first term is 15 and the second term is 6. Find the fourth 
term.
40.	 The first term is 1
12 and the second term is  1
2. Find the sixth 
term.
41.	 The third term is  1
3 and the sixth term is 9. Find the first 
and second terms.
42.	 The fourth term is 12 and the seventh term is 32
9 . Find the first 
and nth terms.
43.	 The third term is 18 and the sixth term is 9216. Find the 
first and nth terms.
44.	 The third term is 54 and the sixth term is 729
256. Find the first 
and second terms. 
45.	 The common ratio is 0.75 and the fourth term is 729. Find 
the first three terms.
46.	 The common ratio is 1
6 and the third term is 18. Find the first 
and seventh terms.
47.	 Which Term?    The first term of a geometric sequence is 
1536 and the common ratio is 1
2. Which term of the sequence 
is 6?
48.	 Which Term?    The second and fifth terms of a geometric 
sequence are 30 and 3750, respectively. Which term of the 
sequence is 468,750?
49–52  ■  Partial Sums of a Geometric Sequence    Find the  
partial sum Sn of the geometric sequence that sat­isﬁes the given 
conditions.
49.	 a  5,  r  2,  n  6	
50.	 a 2
3,    r 1
3,    n 4
51.	 a3  28,    a6  224,    n  6
52.	 a2  0.12,    a5  0.00096,    n  4
53–58  ■  Partial Sums of a Geometric Sequence    Find the sum.
53.	 1  3  9  . . .  2187
54.	 1 1
2 1
4 1
8 . . . 
1
512
55.	 15 30 60 . . . 960
56.	 5120 2560 1280 . . . 20
57.	 1.25 12.5 125 . . . 12,500,000
58.	 10800 1080 108 . . . 0.000108
59–64  ■  Partial Sums of a Geometric Sequence    Find the sum.
59.	 a
5
k1
3A1
2B
k1	
60.	 a
5
k1
8A 3
2B
k1
61.	 a
6
k1
5122 k1	
62.	 a
6
k1
10152 k1
63.	 a
5
k1
3A2
3B
k1	
64.	 a
6
k1
64A3
2B
k1
65–76  ■  Infinite Geometric Series    Determine whether the infi-
nite geometric series is convergent or divergent. If it is conver-
gent, find its sum.
65.	 1 1
3 1
9 1
27 . . .	
66.	 1 1
2 1
4 1
8 . . .
67.	 1 1
3 1
9 1
27 . . .	
68.	 2
5 4
25 
8
125 . . .
	69.	 1 3
2 a 3
2 b
2
a 3
2 b
3
. . .
70.	 1
36 1
38 1
310 1
312 . . .
71.	 3 3
2 3
4 3
8 . . .
72.	 1 1 1 1 . . .
73.	 3 311.12 311.12 2 311.12 3 . . .
74.	  100
9
10
3 1 3
10 . . .
75.	
1
!2 1
2 
1
2!2 1
4 . . .
76.	 1 "2 2 2"2 4 . . .
77–82  ■  Repeated Decimal    Express the repeating decimal as a 
fraction.
77.	 0.777 . . .	
78.  0.253	
79.  0.030303 . . .
	80.	 2.1125	
81.  0.112	
82.  0.123123123 . . .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

866 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Skills plus
83.	 Geometric Means    If the numbers a1, a2, . . . , an form a geo-
metric sequence, then a2, a3, . . . , an1 are geometric means 
between a1 and an. Insert three geometric means between 5 
and 80.
84.	 Partial Sum of a Geometric Sequence    Find the sum of the 
ﬁrst ten terms of the sequence
a b, a2 2b, a3 3b, a4 4b, . . .
85–86  ■  Arithmetic or Geometric?    The first four terms of a 
sequence are given. Determine whether these terms can be the 
terms of an arithmetic sequence, a geometric sequence, or neither. 
If the sequence is arithmetic or geometric, find the next term.
85.	 (a)  5, 3, 5, 3, . . .	
(b)	 1
3, 1, 5
3, 7
3, . . .
	 	 (c)	 !3, 3, 3!3, 9, . . .	
(d)	 3,  3
2, 0, 3
2, . . .
86.	 (a)  1, 1, 1, 1, . . .	
(b)	 !5, !
3 5, !
6 5, 1, . . .
	 	 (c)	 2, 1, 1
2, 2, . . .	
(d)	 x 1, x, x 1, x 2, . . .
applications
87.	 Depreciation    A construction company purchases a bull-
dozer for $160,000. Each year the value of the bulldozer 
depreciates by 20% of its value in the preceding year. Let Vn 
be the value of the bulldozer in the nth year. (Let n  1 be 
the year the bulldozer is purchased.)
(a)	 Find a formula for Vn.
(b)	 In what year will the value of the bulldozer be less than 
$100,000?
88.	 Family Tree    A person has two parents, four grandparents, 
eight great-grandparents, and so on. How many ancestors 
does a person have 15 generations back?
Father
Mother
Grandfather
Grandmother
Grandfather
Grandmother
89.	 Bouncing Ball    A ball is dropped from a height of 80 ft. The 
elasticity of this ball is such that it rebounds three-fourths of 
the distance it has fallen. How high does the ball rebound on 
the ﬁfth bounce? Find a formula for how high the ball 
rebounds on the nth bounce.
90.	 Bacteria Culture    A culture initially has 5000 bacteria, and 
its size increases by 8% every hour. How many bacteria are 
present at the end of 5 hours? Find a formula for the number 
of bacteria present after n hours.
91.	 Mixing Coolant    A truck radiator holds 5 gal and is ﬁlled 
with water. A gallon of water is removed from the radiator 
and replaced with a gallon of antifreeze; then a gallon of the 
mixture is removed from the radiator and again replaced by a 
gallon of antifreeze. This process is repeated in­deﬁ­nitely. 
How much water remains in the tank after this process is 
repeated 3 times? 5 times? n times?
92.	 Musical Frequencies    The frequencies of musical notes 
(measured in cycles per second) form a geometric sequence. 
Middle C has a frequency of 256, and the C that is an octave 
higher has a frequency of 512. Find the frequency of C two 
­octaves below middle C.
93.	 Bouncing Ball    A ball is dropped from a height of 9 ft. The 
elasticity of the ball is such that it always bounces up one-
third the distance it has fallen.
(a)	 Find the total distance the ball has traveled at the instant 
it hits the ground the ﬁfth time.
(b)	 Find a formula for the total distance the ball has traveled 
at the instant it hits the ground the nth time.
94.	 Geometric Savings Plan    A very patient woman wishes to 
become a billionaire. She decides to follow a simple scheme: 
She puts aside 1 cent the ﬁrst day, 2 cents the second day,  
4 cents the third day, and so on, doubling the number of cents 
each day. How much money will she have at the end of 
30 days? How many days will it take this woman to realize  
her wish?
95.	 St. Ives    The following is a well-known children’s rhyme:
As I was going to St. Ives,
I met a man with seven wives;
Every wife had seven sacks;
Every sack had seven cats;
Every cat had seven kits;
Kits, cats, sacks, and wives,
How many were going to St. Ives?
	 	 Assuming that the entire group is actually going to St. Ives, 
show that the answer to the question in the rhyme is a partial 
sum of a geometric sequence, and ﬁnd the sum.
96.	 Drug Concentration    A certain drug is administered once a 
day. The concentration of the drug in the patient’s blood-
stream increases rapidly at ﬁrst, but each successive dose has 
less effect than the preceding one. The total amount of the 
drug (in mg) in the bloodstream after the nth dose is given by
a
n
k1
50A1
2B
k1
(a)	 Find the amount of the drug in the bloodstream after  
n  10 days.
(b)	 If the drug is taken on a long-term basis, the amount in  
the bloodstream is approximated by the inﬁnite series 
	
a
`
k1
50A1
2B
k1. Find the sum of this series.
97.	 Bouncing Ball    A certain ball rebounds to half the height 
from which it is dropped. Use an inﬁnite geometric series to 
approximate the total distance the ball travels after being 
dropped from 1 m above the ground until it comes to rest.
98.	 Bouncing Ball    If the ball in Exercise 97 is dropped from  
a height of 8 ft, then 1 s is required for its ﬁrst complete 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.4  ■  Mathematics of Finance  867
	
	 bounce—from the instant it ﬁrst touches the ground until it 
next touches the ground. Each subsequent complete bounce 
requires 1/ !2 as long as the preceding complete bounce. 
Use an inﬁnite geometric series to estimate the time interval 
from the instant the ball ﬁrst touches the ground until it 
stops bouncing.
	 99.	 Geometry    The midpoints of the sides of a square of side 1 
are joined to form a new square. This procedure is repeated 
for each new square. (See the ﬁgure.)
(a)	 Find the sum of the areas of all the squares.
(b)	 Find the sum of the perimeters of all the squares.
100.	 Geometry    A circular disk of radius R is cut out of paper, 
as shown in ﬁgure (a). Two disks of radius 1
2 R are cut out of 
paper and placed on top of the ﬁrst disk, as in ﬁgure (b), 
and then four disks of radius 1
4 R are placed on these two 
disks, as in ﬁg­ure (c). Assuming that this process can be 
repeated in­deﬁ­nitely, ﬁnd the total area of all the disks.
(a)
(b)
(c)
101.	 Geometry    A yellow square of side 1 is divided into nine 
smaller squares, and the middle square is colored blue as 
shown in the ﬁgure. Each of the smaller yellow squares is in 
turn divided into nine squares, and each middle square is 
colored blue. If this process is continued indeﬁnitely, what 
is the total area that is colored blue?
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
102.	 PROVE:  Reciprocals of a Geometric Sequence    If a1, a2,  
a3, . . . is a geometric sequence with common ratio r, show 
that the sequence
1
a1
, 1
a2
, 1
a3
, . . .
	
	 is also a geometric sequence, and ﬁnd the common ratio.
103.	 PROVE:  Logarithms of a Geometric Sequence    If a1, a2,  
a3, . . . is a geometric sequence with a common ratio r  0 
and a1  0, show that the sequence
log a1, log a2, log a3, . . .
	
	 is an arithmetic sequence, and ﬁnd the common difference.
104.	 PROVE:  Exponentials of an Arithmetic Sequence    If a1, a2,  
a3, . . . is an arithmetic sequence with common difference d, 
show that the sequence
10a1, 10a2, 10a3, . . .
	
	 is a geometric sequence, and ﬁnd the common ratio.
12.4 
Mathematics of Finance
■  The Amount of an Annuity  ■  The Present Value of an Annuity  ■  Installment Buying
Many ﬁnancial transactions involve payments that are made at regular intervals. For 
example, if you deposit $100 each month in an interest-bearing account, what will the 
value of your account be at the end of 5 years? If you borrow $100,000 to buy a house, 
how much must your monthly payments be in order to pay off the loan in 30 years? 
Each of these questions involves the sum of a sequence of numbers; we use the results 
of the preceding section to answer them here.
■  The Amount of an Annuity
An annuity is a sum of money that is paid in regular equal payments. Although the 
word annuity suggests annual (or yearly) payments, they can be made semiannually, 
quarterly, monthly, or at some other regular interval. Payments are usually made at the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

868 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
end of the payment interval. The amount of an annuity is the sum of all the individual 
payments from the time of the ﬁrst payment until the last payment is made, together 
with all the interest. We denote this sum by Af (the subscript f here is used to denote 
ﬁnal amount).
Example 1  ■  Calculating the Amount of an Annuity
An investor deposits $400 every December 15 and June 15 for 10 years in an account 
that earns interest at the rate of 8% per year, compounded semiannually. How much 
will be in the account immediately after the last payment?
Solution    We need to ﬁnd the amount of an annuity consisting of 20 semiannual 
payments of $400 each. Since the interest rate is 8% per year, compounded semiannu-
ally, the interest rate per time period is i  0.08/2  0.04. The ﬁrst payment is in the 
account for 19 time periods, the second for 18 time periods, and so on.
The last payment receives no interest. The situation can be illustrated by the time 
line in Figure 1.
1
2
3
400
400
400
400
400
400
9
10
400
400
400
400
400(1.04)
400(1.04)2
400(1.04)3
400(1.04)14
400(1.04)15
400(1.04)16
400(1.04)17
400(1.04)18
400(1.04)19
Time
(years)
NOW
Payment
(dollars)
…
…
Figure 1
The amount Af of the annuity is the sum of these 20 amounts. Thus
Af 400 40011.042 40011.042 2 . . . 40011.042 19
But this is a geometric series with a  400, r  1.04, and n  20, so
Af 400  
1 11.042 20
1 1.04
< 11,911.23
Thus the amount in the account after the last payment is $11,911.23.
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
In general, the regular annuity payment is called the periodic rent and is denoted by 
R. We also let i denote the interest rate per time period and let n denote the number of 
payments. We ­always assume that the time period in which interest is compounded is 
equal to the time between payments. By the same reasoning as in Example 1, we see 
that the amount Af of an annuity is
Af R R11 i2 R11 i2 2 . . . R11 i2 n1
Since this is the nth partial sum of a geometric sequence with a  R and r  1  i, the 
formula for the partial sum gives
Af R  
1 11 i2 n
1 11 i2 R  
1 11 i2 n
i
R  
11 i2 n 1
i
  When using interest rates in calcu-
lators, remember to convert percent-
ages to decimals. For example, 8% is 
0.08.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.4  ■  Mathematics of Finance  869
Amount of an Annuity
The amount Af of an annuity consisting of n regular equal payments of size R 
with interest rate i per time period is given by
Af R  
11 i2 n 1
i
Example 2  ■  Calculating the Amount of an Annuity
How much money should be invested every month at 12% per year, compounded 
monthly, in order to have $4000 in 18 months?
Solution    In this problem i  0.12/12  0.01, Af  4000, and n  18. We need to 
ﬁnd the amount R of each payment. By the formula for the amount of an annuity,
4000 R 
11 0.012 18 1
0.01
Solving for R, we get
R 
400010.012
11 0.012 18 1 < 203.928
Thus the monthly investment should be $203.93.
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
■  The Present Value of an Annuity
If you were to receive $10,000 ﬁve years from now, it would be worth much less than 
if you got $10,000 right now. This is because of the interest you could accumulate 
during the next 5 years if you invested the money now. What smaller amount would 
you be willing to accept now instead of receiving $10,000 in 5 years? This is the 
amount of money that, together with interest, would be worth $10,000 in 5 years. The 
amount that we are looking for here is called the discounted value or present value. 
If the interest rate is 8% per year, compounded quarterly, then the interest per time 
period is i  0.08/4  0.02, and there are 4  5  20 time periods. If we let PV 
denote the present value, then by the formula for compound interest (Section 4.1) we 
have
10,000 PV11 i2 n PV11 0.022 20
so	
PV 10,00011 0.022 20 < 6729.713
Thus in this situation the present value of $10,000 is $6729.71. This reasoning leads to  
a general formula for present value. If an amount Af is to be paid in a lump sum n time  
periods from now and the interest rate per time period is i, then its present value Ap is 
given by
Ap Af 11 i2 n
Similarly, the present value of an annuity is the amount Ap that must be invested 
now at the interest rate i per time period to provide n payments, each of amount R. 
Clearly, Ap is the sum of the present values of each individual payment (see Exercise 
29). Another way of ﬁnding Ap is to note that Ap is the present value of Af:
Ap Af 11 i2 n R  
11 i2 n 1
i
 11 i2 n R 
1 11 i2 n
i
Mathematical Economics
The health of the global economy is 
determined by such interrelated factors 
as supply, demand, production, con-
sumption, pricing, distribution, and thou-
sands of other factors. These factors are 
in turn determined by economic deci-
sions (for example, whether or not you 
buy a certain brand of toothpaste) made 
by billions of different individuals each 
day. How will today’s creation and distri-
bution of goods affect tomorrow’s econ-
omy? Such questions are tackled by 
mathematicians who work on mathemat-
ical models of the economy. In the 1940s 
Wassily Leontief, a pioneer in this area, 
created a model consisting of thousands 
of equations that describe how different 
sectors of the economy, such as the oil 
industry, transportation, and communi-
cation, interact with each other. A differ-
ent approach to economic models, one 
dealing with individuals in the economy 
as opposed to large sectors, was pio-
neered by John Nash in the 1950s. In his 
model, which uses game theory, the 
economy is a game where individual 
players make ­decisions that often lead to 
mutual gain. Leontief and Nash were 
awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics in 
1973 and 1994, respectively. Economic 
theory continues to be a major area of 
mathematical research.
Mathematics in the Modern World
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

870 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
The Present Value of an Annuity
The present value Ap of an annuity consisting of n regular equal payments of 
size R and interest rate i per time period is given by
Ap R  
1 11 i2 n
i
Example 3  ■  Calculating the Present Value of an Annuity
A person wins $10,000,000 in the California lottery, and the amount is paid in yearly 
installments of half a million dollars each for 20 years. What is the present value of 
his winnings? Assume that he can earn 10% interest, compounded annually.
Solution    Since the amount won is paid as an annuity, we need to ﬁnd its present 
value. Here i  0.1, R  $500,000, and n  20. Thus
Ap 500,000 
1 11 0.12 20
0.1
< 4,256,781.859
This means that the winner really won only $4,256,781.86 if it were paid 
immediately.
Now Try Exercise 11	
■
■  Installment Buying
When you buy a house or a car by installment, the payments that you make are an an-
nuity whose present value is the amount of the loan.
Example 4  ■  The Amount of a Loan
A student wishes to buy a car. She can afford to pay $200 per month but has no 
money for a down payment. If she can make these payments for 4 years and the inter-
est rate is 12%, what purchase price can she afford?
Solution    The payments that the student makes constitute an annuity whose present 
value is the price of the car (which is also the amount of the loan, in this case). Here 
we have i  0.12/12  0.01, R  200, and n  12  4  48, so
Ap R  
1 11 i2 n
i
200  
1 11 0.012 48
0.01
< 7594.792
Thus the student can buy a car priced at $7594.79.
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
When a bank makes a loan that is to be repaid with regular equal payments R, then 
the payments form an annuity whose present value Ap is the amount of the loan. So to 
ﬁnd the size of the payments, we solve for R in the formula for the amount of an annu-
ity. This gives the following formula for R.
Installment Buying 
If a loan Ap is to be repaid in n regular equal payments with interest rate i per 
time period, then the size R of each payment is given by
R 
iAp
1 11 i2 n
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.4  ■  Mathematics of Finance  871
Example 5  ■  Calculating Monthly Mortgage Payments
A couple borrows $100,000 at 9% interest as a mortage loan on a house. They expect 
to make monthly payments for 30 years to repay the loan. What is the size of each 
payment?
Solution    The mortgage payments form an annuity whose present value is  
Ap  $100,000. Also, i  0.09/12  0.0075, and n  12  30  360. We are  
looking for the amount R of each payment.
From the formula for installment buying we get
 R 
iAp
1 11 i2 n 
10.00752 1100,0002
1 11 0.00752 360 < 804.623
Thus the monthly payments are $804.62.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
We now illustrate the use of graphing devices in solving problems related to install-
ment buying.
Example 6  ■  Calculating the Interest Rate from the Size  
of Monthly Payments
A car dealer sells a new car for $18,000. He offers the buyer payments of $405 per 
month for 5 years. What interest rate is this car dealer charging?
Solution    The payments form an annuity with present value Ap  $18,000,  
R  405, and n  12  5  60. To ﬁnd the interest rate, we must solve for i in the 
­equation
R 
iAp
1 11 i2 n
A little experimentation will convince you that it is not possible to solve this equation 
for i algebraically. So to ﬁnd i, we use a graphing device to graph R as a function of 
the interest rate x, and we then use the graph to ﬁnd the interest rate corresponding to 
the value of R we want ($405 in this case). Since i  x/12, we graph the function
R1x2 
x
12
 118,0002
1 a 1 x
12 b
60
in the viewing rectangle 30.06, 0.164 3350, 4504 , as shown in Figure 2. We also 
graph the horizontal line R1x2 405 in the same viewing rectangle. Then, by moving 
the cursor to the point of intersection of the two graphs, we ﬁnd that the correspond-
ing x-value is approximately 0.125. Thus the interest rate is about 12 1
2%.
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
450
350
0.06
0.16
0.125
405
Figure 2
concepts
	 1.	 An annuity is a sum of money that is paid in regular equal 
	 	 payments. The  
 of an annuity is the sum of all the 
­individual payments together with all the interest.
	 2.	 The  
  
 of an annuity is the amount that 
must be invested now at interest rate i per time period to  
provide n payments each of amount R.
12.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

872 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
applications
	 3.	 Annuity    Find the amount of an annuity that consists of  
ten annual payments of $1000 each into an account that pays 
6% interest per year.
	 4.	 Annuity    Find the amount of an annuity that consists of  
24 monthly payments of $500 each into an account that pays 
8% interest per year, compounded monthly.
	 5.	 Annuity    Find the amount of an annuity that consists of  
20 annual payments of $5000 each into an account that pays 
interest of 12% per year.
	 6.	 Annuity    Find the amount of an annuity that consists of  
20 semiannual payments of $500 each into an account that 
pays 6% interest per year, compounded semiannually.
	 7.	 Annuity    Find the amount of an annuity that consists of  
16 quarterly payments of $300 each into an account that pays 
8% interest per year, compounded quarterly.
	 8.	 Annuity    Find the amount of an annuity that consists of  
40 annual payments of $2000 each into an account that pays 
interest of 5% per year. 
	 9.	 Saving    How much money should be invested every quarter 
at 10% per year, compounded quarterly, to have $5000 in  
2 years?
	10.	 Saving    How much money should be invested monthly at 6% 
per year, compounded monthly, to have $2000 in 8 months?
	11.	 Annuity    What is the present value of an annuity that con-
sists of 20 semiannual payments of $1000 at an interest rate 
of 9% per year, compounded semiannually?
12.	 Annuity    What is the present value of an annuity that con-
sists of 30 monthly payments of $300 at an interest rate of 
8% per year, compounded monthly?
	13.	 Funding an Annuity    How much money must be invested 
now at 9% per year, compounded semiannually, to fund an 
annuity of 20 payments of $200 each, paid every 6 months, 
the ﬁrst payment being 6 months from now?
14.	 Funding an Annuity    A 55-year-old man deposits $50,000 to 
fund an annuity with an insurance company. The money will 
be invested at 8% per year, compounded semiannually. He is 
to draw semiannual payments until he reaches age 65. What 
is the amount of each payment?
15.	 Financing a Car    A woman wants to borrow $12,000 to buy a 
car. She wants to repay the loan by monthly installments for 
4 years. If the interest rate on this loan is 10 1
2% per year, 
compounded monthly, what is the amount of each payment?
16.	 Mortgage    What is the monthly payment on a 30-year mort-
gage of $80,000 at 9% interest? What is the monthly pay-
ment on this same mortgage if it is to be repaid over a 
15-year ­period?
17.	 Mortgage    What is the monthly payment on a 30-year 
­mortgage of $100,000 at 8% interest per year, compounded 
monthly? What is the total amount paid on this loan over the 
30-year period?
	18.	 Mortgage    What is the monthly payment on a 15-year mort-
gage of $200,000 at 6% interest? What is the total amount 
paid on this loan over the 15-year period?
	19.	 Mortgage    Dr. Gupta is considering a 30-year mortgage at 
6% interest. She can make payments of $3500 a month. What 
size loan can she afford?
20.	 Mortgage    A couple can afford to make a monthly mortgage 
payment of $650. If the mortgage rate is 9% and the couple 
intends to secure a 30-year mortgage, how much can they 
­borrow?
21.	 Financing a Car    Jane agrees to buy a car for a down pay-
ment of $2000 and payments of $220 per month for 3 years. 
If the interest rate is 8% per year, compounded monthly, what 
is the actual purchase price of her car?
22.	 Financing a Ring    Mike buys a ring for his ﬁancee by paying 
$30 a month for one year. If the interest rate is 10% per year, 
compounded monthly, what is the price of the ring?
23.	 Mortgage    A couple secures a 30-year loan of $100,000 at 
9 3
4% per year, compounded monthly, to buy a house.
(a)	 What is the amount of their monthly payment?
(b)	 What total amount will they pay over the 30-year period?
(c)	 If, instead of taking the loan, the couple deposits the 
monthly payments in an account that pays 9 3
4% interest  
per year, compounded monthly, how much will be in the 
account at the end of the 30-year period?
	24.	 Mortgage    A couple needs a mortgage of $300,000. Their 
mortgage broker presents them with two options: a 30-year 
mortgage at 6 1
2% interest or a 15-year mortgage at 5 3
4% 
­interest.
(a)	 Find the monthly payment on the 30-year mortgage and 
on the 15-year mortgage. Which mortgage has the larger 
monthly payment?
(b)	 Find the total amount to be paid over the life of each 
loan. Which mortgage has the lower total payment over 
its ­lifetime?
25.	 Interest Rate    John buys a stereo system for $640. He agrees 
to pay $32 a month for 2 years. Assuming that interest is 
compounded monthly, what interest rate is he paying?
26.	 Interest Rate    Janet’s payments on her $12,500 car are $420 
a month for 3 years. Assuming that interest is compounded 
monthly, what interest rate is she paying on the car loan?
27.	 Interest Rate    An item at a department store is priced at 
$189.99 and can be bought by making 20 payments of 
$10.50. Find the interest rate, assuming that interest is com-
pounded monthly.
28.	 Interest Rate    A man purchases a $2000 diamond ring for a 
down payment of $200 and monthly installments of $88 for  
2 years. Assuming that interest is compounded monthly, what 
interest rate is he paying?
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
29.	 discover:  Present Value of an Annuity   
(a)  Draw a time line as in Example 1 to show that the pres-
ent value of an annuity is the sum of the present values 
of each payment, that is,
Ap 
R
1 i 
R
11 i2 2 
R
11 i2 3 . . . 
R
11 i2 n
(b)	 Use part (a) to derive the formula for Ap given in the text.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.5  ■  Mathematical Induction  873
30.	 discover:  An Annuity That Lasts Forever    An annuity in 
perpetuity is one that continues forever. Such annuities are 
useful in setting up scholarship funds to ensure that the award 
continues.
(a)	 Draw a time line (as in Example 1) to show that to set up 
an annuity in perpetuity of amount R per time period, the 
amount that must be invested now is
Ap 
R
1 i 
R
11 i2 2 
R
11 i2 3 . . . 
R
11 i2 n . . .
	
	where i is the interest rate per time period.
(b)	 Find the sum of the inﬁnite series in part (a) to show that
Ap R
i
(c)	 How much money must be invested now at 10% per 
year, compounded annually, to provide an annuity in per-
petuity of $5000 per year? The ﬁrst payment is due in  
1 year.
(d)	 How much money must be invested now at 8% per year, 
compounded quarterly, to provide an annuity in perpetu-
ity of $3000 per year? The ﬁrst payment is due in 1 year.
31.	 discover:  Amortizing a Mortgage    When they bought their 
house, John and Mary took out a $90,000 mortgage at 9% 
interest, repayable monthly over 30 years. Their payment is 
$724.17 per month (check this, using the formula in the text). 
The bank gave them an amortization schedule, which is a 
table showing how much of each payment is interest, how 
much goes toward the principal, and the remaining principal 
after each payment. The table below shows the ﬁrst few 
entries in the amortization schedule.
Payment  
number
Total  
payment
Interest  
payment
Principal  
payment
Remaining 
principal
1
724.17
675.00
49.17
89,950.83
2
724.17
674.63
49.54
89,901.29
3
724.17
674.26
49.91
89,851.38
4
724.17
673.89
50.28
89,801.10
	 	 After 10 years they have made 120 payments and are won-
dering how much they still owe, but they have lost the amor-
tization schedule.
(a)	 How much do John and Mary still owe on their mort-
gage?  [Hint: The remaining balance is the present 
value of the 240 remaining payments.]
(b)	 How much of their next payment is interest, and how 
much goes toward the principal?    [Hint: Since  
9%  12  0.75%, they must pay 0.75% of the  
remaining principal in interest each month.]
12.5 
Mathematical Induction
■  Conjecture and Proof  ■  Mathematical Induction
There are two aspects to mathematics—discovery and proof—and they are of equal 
importance. We must discover something before we can attempt to prove it, and we 
cannot be certain of its truth until it has been proved. In this section we examine the 
relationship between these two key components of mathematics more closely.
■  Conjecture and Proof
Let’s try a simple experiment. We add more and more of the odd numbers as follows:
 1 1
 1 3 4
 1 3 5 9
 1 3 5 7 16
 1 3 5 7 9 25
What do you notice about the numbers on the right-hand side of these equations? They 
are, in fact, all perfect squares. These equations say the following:
The sum of the ﬁrst 1 odd number is 12 .
The sum of the ﬁrst 2 odd numbers is 22.
The sum of the ﬁrst 3 odd numbers is 32.
The sum of the ﬁrst 4 odd numbers is 42.
The sum of the ﬁrst 5 odd numbers is 52.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

874 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
This leads naturally to the following question: Is it true that for every natural number n, the 
sum of the ﬁrst n odd numbers is n2? Could this remarkable property be true? We could try 
a few more numbers and ﬁnd that the pattern persists for the ﬁrst 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 odd 
numbers. At this point we feel fairly confident that this is always true, so we make a  
conjecture:
The sum of the ﬁrst n odd numbers is n2.
Since we know that the nth odd number is 2n  1, we can write this statement more 
precisely as
1 3 5 . . . 12n 12 n2
It is important to realize that this is still a conjecture. We cannot conclude by checking 
a ﬁnite number of cases that a property is true for all numbers (there are inﬁnitely 
many). To see this more clearly, suppose someone tells us that he has added up the ﬁrst 
trillion odd numbers and found that they do not add up to 1 trillion squared. What would 
you tell this person? It would be silly to say that you’re sure it’s true because you have 
already checked the ﬁrst ﬁve cases. You could, however, take out paper and pencil and 
start checking it yourself, but this task would probably take the rest of your life. The 
tragedy would be that after completing this task, you would still not be sure of the truth 
of the conjecture! Do you see why?
Herein lies the power of mathematical proof. A proof is a clear argument that dem-
onstrates the truth of a statement beyond doubt.
■  Mathematical Induction
Let’s consider a special kind of proof called mathematical induction. Here is how it 
works: Suppose we have a statement that says something about all natural numbers n. 
For example, for any natural number n, let P1n2  be the following statement:
P1n2 :    The sum of the first n odd numbers is n2
Since this statement is about all natural numbers, it contains inﬁnitely many statements; 
we will call them P(1), P(2), . . . .
 P112: The sum of the ﬁrst 1 odd number is 12.
 P122: The sum of the ﬁrst 2 odd numbers is 22.
 P132: The sum of the ﬁrst 3 odd numbers is 32.
	
( 	
(
How can we prove all of these statements at once? Mathematical induction is a clever 
way of doing just that.
The crux of the idea is this: Suppose we can prove that whenever one of these state-
ments is true, then the one following it in the list is also true. In other words,
For every k, if P1k2 is true, then P1k 12 is true.
This is called the induction step because it leads us from the truth of one statement to 
the truth of the next. Now suppose that we can also prove that
P112 is true.
The induction step now leads us through the following chain of statements:
P112 is true, so P122 is true.
P122 is true, so P132 is true.
P132 is true, so P142 is true.
	
( 	
(
Consider the polynomial
p1n2 n2 n 41
Here are some values of p1n2 :
p112 41 p122 43
p132 47 p142 53
p152 61 p162 71
p172 83 p182 97
All the values so far are prime num-
bers. In fact, if you keep going, you 
will ﬁnd that p1n2  is prime for all nat-
ural numbers up to n  40. It might 
seem reasonable at this point to conjec-
ture that p1n2  is prime for every natu-
ral number n. But that conjecture 
would be too hasty, because it is easily 
seen that p1412  is not prime. This 
illustrates that we cannot be certain of 
the truth of a statement no matter how 
many special cases we check. We need 
a convincing argument—a proof—to 
determine the truth of a statement.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.5  ■  Mathematical Induction  875
So we see that if both the induction step and P112  are proved, then statement P1n2  is 
proved for all n. Here is a summary of this important method of proof.
Principle of Mathematical Induction
For each natural number n, let P1n2  be a statement depending on n. Suppose 
that the following two conditions are satisﬁed.
1.	 P112  is true.
2.	 For every natural number k, if P1k2  is true then P1k 12  is true.
Then P1n2  is true for all natural numbers n.
To apply this principle, there are two steps:
Step 1	 Prove that P112  is true.
Step 2	 Assume that P1k2  is true, and use this assumption to prove that P1k 12  is 
true.
Notice that in Step 2 we do not prove that P1k2  is true. We only show that if P1k2  is 
true, then P1k 12  is also true. The assumption that P1k2  is true is called the induc-
tion ­hypothesis.
©1979 National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Used by permission. Courtesy of Andrejs Dunkels, Sweden.
We now use mathematical induction to prove that the conjecture that we made at the 
beginning of this section is true.
Example 1  ■  A Proof by Mathematical Induction
Prove that for all natural numbers n,
1 3 5 . . . 12n 12 n2
Solution    Let P1n2 denote the statement 1 3 5 . . . 12n 12 n2.
Step 1	 We need to show that P112  is true. But P112  is simply the statement that  
1  12, which is of course true.
Step 2	 We assume that P1k2  is true. Thus our induction hypothesis is
1 3 5 . . . 12k 12 k 2
	
We want to use this to show that P1k 12  is true, that is,
1 3 5 . . . 12k 12 321k 12 14 1k 12 2
Alfredo Dagli Orti/The Art Archive/ 
Fine Art/Corbis
Blaise Pascal (1623–1662) is consid­
ered one of the most versatile minds in 
modern history. He was a writer and phi-
losopher as well as a gifted mathemati-
cian and physicist. Among his contribu-
tions that appear in this book are Pascal’s 
triangle and the Principle of Mathemati-
cal Induction.
Pascal’s father, himself a mathemati-
cian, believed that his son should not study 
mathematics until he was 15 or 16. But at 
age 12, Blaise insisted on learning geome-
try and proved most of its elementary theo-
rems himself. At 19 he invented the ﬁrst 
mechanical adding machine. In 1647, after 
writing a major treatise on the conic sec-
tions, he abruptly abandoned mathematics 
because he felt that his intense studies 
were contributing to his ill health. He 
devoted himself instead to frivolous recre-
ations such as gambling, but this only 
served to pique his interest in probability. In 
1654 he miraculously survived a carriage 
accident in which his horses ran off a 
bridge. Taking this to be a sign from God, 
Pascal entered a monastery, where he pur-
sued theology and philosophy, writing his 
famous Pensées. He also continued his 
mathematical research. He valued faith and 
intuition more than reason as the source of 
truth, declaring that “the heart has its own 
reasons, which reason cannot know.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

876 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
	
3 Note that we get P1k 12  by substituting k  1 for each n in the statement 
P1n2.4  We start with the left-hand side and use the induction hypothesis to ob-
tain the right-hand side of the equation.
1 3 5 . . . 12k 12 321k 12 14
      31 3 5 . . . 12k 12 4 321k 12 14	
Group the ﬁrst k terms
      k 2 321k 12 14
	
Induction hypothesis
      k 2 32k 2 14
	
Distributive ­Property
      k 2 2k 1
	
Simplify
      1k 12 2
	
Factor
Thus P1k 12  follows from P1k2, and this completes the induction step.
Having proved Steps 1 and 2, we conclude by the Principle of Mathematical 
Induction that P1n2  is true for all natural numbers n.
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Example 2  ■  A Proof by Mathematical Induction
Prove that for every natural number n,
1 2 3 . . . n 
n1n 12
2
Solution    Let P1n2  be the statement 1 2 3 . . . n n1n 12/2. We want 
to show that P1n2  is true for all natural numbers n.
Step 1	 We need to show that P112  is true. But P112  says that
1 
111 12
2
	
and this statement is clearly true.
Step 2	 Assume that P1k2  is true. Thus our induction hypothesis is
1 2 3 . . . k 
k1k 12
2
	
We want to use this to show that P1k 12  is true, that is,
1 2 3 . . . k 1k 12 
1k 12 31k 12 14
2
	
So we start with the left-hand side and use the induction hypothesis to obtain 
the right side.
1 2 3 . . . k 1k 12
      31 2 3 . . . k4 1k 12        Group the ﬁrst k terms
      
k1k 12
2
1k 12
        Induction hypothesis
      1k 12 a k
2 1b
        Factor k  1
      1k 12 a k 2
2
b
        Common denominator
      
1k 12 31k 12 14
2
        Write k  2 as k  1  1
Thus P1k 12  follows from P1k2 , and this completes the induction step.
This equals k2 by the induction 
hypothesis
This equals 
k1k 12
2
 by the 
­induction hypothesis
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.5  ■  Mathematical Induction  877
Having proved Steps 1 and 2, we conclude by the Principle of Mathematical Induc-
tion that P1n2  is true for all natural numbers n.
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
The following box gives formulas for the sums of powers of the ﬁrst n natural num-
bers. These formulas are important in calculus. Formula 1 is proved in Example 2. The 
other formulas are also proved by using mathematical induction (see Exercises 6 and 9).
Sums of Powers
0.	 a
n
k1
1 n	
2.  a
n
k1
k2 
n1n 12 12n 12
6
1.	 a
n
k1
k 
n1n 12
2
	
3.  a
n
k1
k3 
n21n 12 2
4
It might happen that a statement P1n2  is false for the ﬁrst few natural numbers but 
true from some number on. For example, we might want to prove that P1n2  is true for 
n  5. Notice that if we prove that P152  is true, then this fact, together with the induc-
tion step, would imply the truth of P152 , P162 , P172 , . . . . The next example illustrates 
this point.
Example 3  ■  Proving an Inequality by Mathematical Induction
Prove that 4n  2n for all n  5.
Solution    Let P1n2 denote the statement 4n  2n.
Step 1	 P152 is the statement that 4 # 5  25, or 20  32, which is true.
Step 2	 Assume that P1k2  is true. Thus our induction hypothesis is
4k 2k
	
We want to use this to show that P1k 12  is true, that is,
41k 12 2k1
	
So we start with the left-hand side of the inequality and use the induction hy-
pothesis to show that it is less than the right-hand side. For k  5 we have
 41k 12 4k 4         Distributive Property
  2k 4         Induction hypothesis
  2k 4k        Because 4  4k
  2k 2k         Induction hypothesis
  2 # 2k
  2k1
        Property of exponents
	
Thus P1k 12  follows from P1k2, and this completes the induction step.
Having proved Steps 1 and 2, we conclude by the Principle of Mathematical 
Induction that P1n2  is true for all natural numbers n  5.
Now Try Exercise 21	
■
We get P(k  1) by replacing n by  
k  1 in the statement P(n).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

878 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
concepts
	 1.	 Mathematical induction is a method of proving that a 
	 	 statement P1n2  is true for all  
 numbers n. In Step 1 
	 	 we prove that  
 is true.
	 2.	 Which of the following is true about Step 2 in a proof by 
mathematical induction?
	
(i)	 We prove “P1k 12  is true.”
	
(ii)	 We prove “If P1k2  is true, then P1k 12  is true.”
skills
3–14  ■  Proving a Formula    Use mathematical induction to prove 
that the formula is true for all natural numbers n.
	 3.	 2 4 6 . . . 2n n1n 12
	 4.	 1 4 7 . . . 13n 22 
n13n 12
2
	 5.	 5 8 11 . . . 13n 22 
n13n 72
2
	 6.	 12 22 32 . . . n 2 
n1n 12 12n 12
6
	 7.	 1 # 2 2 # 3 3 # 4 . . . n1n 12  
n1n 12 1n 22
3
	 8.	 1 # 3 2 # 4 3 # 5 . . . n1n 22  
n1n 12 12n 72
6
	 9.	 13 23 33 . . . n3 
n21n 12 2
4
	10.	 13 33 53 . . . 12n 12 3 n212n2 12
	11.	 23 43 63 . . . 12n2 3 2n21n 12 2
12.	
1
1 # 2 
1
2 # 3 
1
3 # 4 . . . 
1
n1n 12 
n
1n 12
13.	 1 # 2 2 # 22 3 # 23 4 # 24 . . . n # 2n
	 	 	
	  231 1n 122n4
14.	 1 2 22 . . . 2n1 2n 1
15–24  ■  Proving a Statement    Use mathematical induction to 
show that the given statement is true.
15.	 n2  n is divisible by 2 for all natural numbers n.
16.	 5n  1 is divisible by 4 for all natural numbers n.
17.	 n2  n  41 is odd for all natural numbers n.
18.	 n3  n  3 is divisible by 3 for all natural numbers n.
19.	 8n  3n is divisible by 5 for all natural numbers n.
20.	 32n  1 is divisible by 8 for all natural numbers n.
21.	 n  2n for all natural numbers n.
22.	 1n 12 2 2n2 for all natural numbers n  3.
23.	 If x  1, then 11 x2 n 1 nx for all natural numbers n.
24.	 100n  n2 for all n  100.
25.	 Formula for a Recursive Sequence    A sequence is  
defined recursively by an1  3an and a1  5. Show that  
an  5  3n1 for all natural numbers n.
26.	 Formula for a Recursive Sequence    A sequence is deﬁned 
recursively by an1  3an  8 and a1  4. Find an explicit 
formula for an, and then use mathematical induction to prove 
that the formula you found is true.
27.	 Proving a Factorization    Show that x  y is a factor of  
x n  y n for all natural numbers n.
3Hint: x k1 y k1 x k1x y2 1x k y k2y.4
28.	 Proving a Factorization    Show that x  y is a factor of  
x2n1  y2n1 for all natural numbers n.
SKILLS Plus
29–33  ■  Fibonacci Sequence    Fn denotes the nth term of the 
Fibonacci sequence discussed in Section 12.1. Use mathematical 
induction to prove the statement.
29.	 F3n is even for all natural numbers n.
30.	 F1  F2  F3  . . .  Fn  Fn2  1
31.	 F2
1  F2
2  F2
3  . . .  F2
n  FnFn1
32.	 F1  F3  . . .  F2n1  F2n
33.	 For all n  2,
c 1
1
1
0d
n
c Fn1
Fn
Fn
Fn1
d
34.	 Formula Using Fibonacci Numbers    Let an be the nth term of 
the sequence deﬁned recursively by
an1 
1
1 an
	 	 and let a1  1. Find a formula for an in terms of the Fibo-
nacci numbers Fn. Prove that the formula you found is valid 
for all natural numbers n.
35.	 Discover and Prove an Inequality    Let Fn be the nth term of 
the Fibonacci sequence. Find and prove an inequality relating 
n and Fn for natural numbers n.
36.	 Discover and Prove an Inequality    Find and prove an 
inequality relating 100n and n3.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
37.	 discuss:  True or False?    Determine whether each statement 
is true or false. If you think the statement is true, prove it. If 
you think it is false, give an example in which it fails.
(a)	 p1n2 n2 n 11 is prime for all n.
(b)	 n2  n for all n  2.
(c)	 22n1  1 is divisible by 3 for all n  1.
(d)	 n3 1n 12 2 for all n  2.
(e)	 n3  n is divisible by 3 for all n  2.
(f)	 n3  6n2  11n is divisible by 6 for all n  1.
12.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.6  ■  The Binomial Theorem  879
38.	 discuss:  All Cats Are Black?    What is wrong with the fol-
lowing “proof” by mathematical induction that all cats are 
black? Let P1n2  denote the statement “In any group of n cats, 
if one cat is black, then they are all black.”
Step 1	 The statement is clearly true for n  1.
Step 2	 Suppose that P1k2  is true. We show that P1k 12  is true.
Suppose we have a group of k  1 cats, one of whom 
is black; call this cat “Tadpole.” Remove some other cat 
(call it “Sparky”) from the group. We are left with k cats, 
one of whom (Tadpole) is black, so by the induction 
hypothesis, all k of these are black. Now put Sparky back 
in the group and take out Tadpole. We again have a group 
of k cats, all of whom—except possibly Sparky—are 
black. Then by the induction hypothesis, Sparky must be 
black too. So all k  1 cats in the original group are black.
	 	 Thus by induction P1n2  is true for all n. Since everyone has 
seen at least one black cat, it follows that all cats are black.
Tadpole
Sparky
12.6  The Binomial Theorem
■  Expanding xa 1 bc n  ■  The Binomial Coefficients  ■  The Binomial Theorem   
■  Proof of the Binomial Theorem
An expression of the form a  b is called a binomial. Although in principle it’s easy 
to raise a  b to any power, raising it to a very high power would be tedious. In this 
section we ﬁnd a formula that gives the expansion of 1a b2 n for any natural number 
n and then prove it using mathematical induction.
■  Expanding xa 1 bc n
To ﬁnd a pattern in the expansion of 1a b2 n, we ﬁrst look at some special cases.
 1a b2 1 a b
 1a b2 2 a2 2ab b2
 1a b2 3 a3 3a2b 3ab2 b3
 1a b2 4 a4 4a3b 6a2b2 4ab3 b4
 1a b2 5 a5 5a4b 10a3b2 10a2b3 5ab4 b5
 (
The following simple patterns emerge for the expansion of 1a b2 n.
1.	 There are n  1 terms, the ﬁrst being an and the last being bn.
2.	 The exponents of a decrease by 1 from term to term, while the exponents of b in-
crease by 1.
3.	 The sum of the exponents of a and b in each term is n.
For instance, notice how the exponents of a and b behave in the expansion of 
1a b2 5.
The exponents of a decrease:
1a b2 5 a   5a   b1   10a b2  10a b3  5a  b4 b5
The exponents of b increase:
1a b2 5 a5 5a4b   10a3b   10a2b  5a1b  b
5 
4 
3 
2 
1
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

880 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
With these observations we can write the form of the expansion of 1a b2 n for any natu-
ral number n. For example, writing a question mark for the missing coefﬁcients, we have
Óa  bÔ8  a8  ?a7b  ?a6b2  ?a5b3  ?a4b4  ?a3b5  ?a2b6  ?ab7  b8
To complete the expansion, we need to determine these coefﬁcients. To ﬁnd a pattern, 
let’s write the coefﬁcients in the expansion of 1a b2 n for the ﬁrst few values of n in 
a triangular array as shown in the following array, which is called Pascal’s triangle.
	
1a b2 0	
1
5
10
1
10
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
3
2
4
3
6
	
1a b2 1	
1a b2 2
	
1a b2 3
	
1a b2 4
	
1a b2 5
The row corresponding to 1a b2 0 is called the zeroth row and is included to show the 
symmetry of the array. The key observation about Pascal’s triangle is the following 
­property.
Key Property of Pascal’s Triangle
Every entry (other than a 1) is the sum of the two entries diagonally above it.
From this property it is easy to ﬁnd any row of Pascal’s triangle from the row above 
it. For instance, we ﬁnd the sixth and seventh rows, starting with the ﬁfth row:
	
1a b2 5	
1        5        10        10        5        1
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
1	
6	
15	
20	
15	
6	
1
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
1	
7	
21	
35	
35	
21	
7	
1
	
1a b2 6
	
1a b2 7
To see why this property holds, let’s consider the following expansions:
1a b2 5 a5 5a4b 10a3b2  10a2b3  5ab4 b5
1a b2 6 a6 6a5b 15a4b2 20a3b3  15a2b4 6ab5 b6
We arrive at the expansion of 1a b2 6 by multiplying 1a b2 5 by 1a b2 . Notice, 
for instance, that the circled term in the expansion of 1a b2 6 is obtained via this 
multiplication from the two circled terms above it. We get this term when the two terms 
above it are multiplied by b and a, respectively. Thus its coefﬁcient is the sum of the 
coefﬁcients of these two terms. We will use this observation at the end of this section 
when we prove the Binomial Theorem.
Having found these patterns, we can now easily obtain the expansion of any bino-
mial, at least to relatively small powers.
Example 1  ■  Expanding a Binomial Using Pascal’s Triangle
Find the expansion of 1a b2 7 using Pascal’s triangle.
Solution    The ﬁrst term in the expansion is a7, and the last term is b7. Using the fact 
that the exponent of a decreases by 1 from term to term and that of b increases by 1 
from term to term, we have
1a  b2 7  a7  ?a6b  ?a5b2  ?a4b3  ?a3b4  ?a2b5  ?ab6  b7
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
→
←––
←
What we now call Pascal’s triangle 
appears in this Chinese document by Chu 
Shikie, dated 1303. The title reads “The 
Old Method Chart of the Seven Multiply-
ing Squares.” The triangle was rediscov-
ered by Pascal (see page 875).
University of York, Department of Mathematics
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.6  ■  The Binomial Theorem  881
The appropriate coefﬁcients appear in the seventh row of Pascal’s triangle. Thus
1a b2 7 a7 7a6b 21a5b2 35a4b3 35a3b4 21a2b5 7ab6 b7
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
Example 2  ■  Expanding a Binomial Using Pascal’s Triangle
Use Pascal’s triangle to expand 12 3x2 5.
Solution    We ﬁnd the expansion of 1a b2 5 and then substitute 2 for a and 3x  
for b. Using Pascal’s triangle for the coefﬁcients, we get
1a b2 5 a 5 5a 4b 10a 3b 2 10a 2b 3 5ab 4 b 5
Substituting a  2 and b  3x gives
 12 3x2 5 122 5 5122 413x2 10122 313x2 2 10122 213x2 3 5122 13x2 4 13x2 5
  32 240x 720x 2 1080x 3 810x 4 243x 5
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
■  The Binomial Coefﬁcients
Although Pascal’s triangle is useful in ﬁnding the binomial expansion for reasonably 
small values of n, it isn’t practical for ﬁnding 1a b2 n for large values of n. The 
reason is that the method we use for ﬁnding the successive rows of Pascal’s triangle 
is recursive. Thus to ﬁnd the 100th row of this triangle, we must ﬁrst ﬁnd the preced-
ing 99 rows.
We need to examine the pattern in the coefﬁcients more carefully to develop a for-
mula that allows us to calculate directly any coefﬁcient in the binomial expansion. Such 
a formula exists, and the rest of this section is devoted to ﬁnding and proving it. How-
ever, to state this formula, we need some notation.
The product of the ﬁrst n natural numbers is denoted by n! and is called n factorial.
n! 1 # 2 # 3 # . . . # 1n 12 # n
We also deﬁne 0! as follows:
0! 1
This deﬁnition of 0! makes many formulas involving factorials shorter and easier to 
write.
The Binomial Coefficient
Let n and r be nonnegative integers with r  n. The binomial coefﬁcient is 
denoted by An
rB and is deﬁned by
a n
r b 
n!
r! 1n r2!
 4! 1 # 2 # 3 # 4 24
 7! 1 # 2 # 3 # 4 # 5 # 6 # 7 5040
 10! 1 # 2 # 3 # 4 # 5 # 6 # 7 # 8 # 9 # 10
  3,628,800
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

882 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Example 3  ■  Calculating Binomial Coefficients
(a)	  a 9
4b 
9!
4! 19 42! 
9!
4! 5! 
1 # 2 # 3 # 4 # 5 # 6 # 7 # 8 # 9
11 # 2 # 3 # 42 11 # 2 # 3 # 4 # 52
	
  6 # 7 # 8 # 9
1 # 2 # 3 # 4 126
(b)	  a 100
3 b 
100!
3! 1100 32! 1 # 2 # 3 # p # 97 # 98 # 99 # 100
11 # 2 # 32 11 # 2 # 3 # p # 972
	
  98 # 99 # 100
1 # 2 # 3
161,700
(c)	  a 100
97 b 
100!
97! 1100 972! 1 # 2 # 3 # p # 97 # 98 # 99 # 100
11 # 2 # 3 # p # 972 11 # 2 # 32
	
  98 # 99 # 100
1 # 2 # 3
161,700
Now Try Exercises 17 and 19	
■
Although the binomial coefﬁcient An
rB is deﬁned in terms of a fraction, all the results of 
Example 3 are natural numbers. In fact, An
rB is always a natural number (see Exercise 54). 
Notice that the binomial coefﬁcients in parts (b) and (c) of Example 3 are equal. This is a 
special case of the following relation, which you are asked to prove in Exercise 52.
a n
r b a
n
n r b
To see the connection between the binomial coefﬁcients and the binomial expansion 
of 1a b2 n, let’s calculate the following binomial coefﬁcients:
a 5
0b 1  a 5
1b 5  a 5
2b 10  a 5
3b 10  a 5
4b 5  a 5
5b 1
These are precisely the entries in the ﬁfth row of Pascal’s triangle. In fact, we can write 
Pascal’s triangle as follows.
a 0
0b
a 1
0b  a 1
1b
a 2
0b  a 2
1b  a 2
2b
a 3
0b  a 3
1b  a 3
2b  a 3
3b
a 4
0b  a 4
1b  a 4
2b  a 4
3b  a 4
4b
a 5
0b  a 5
1b  a 5
2b  a 5
3b  a 5
4b  a 5
5b
#   #   #   #   #   #   #
a n
0b  a n
1b  a n
2b  #  #  #  a
n
n 1b  a n
nb
a5
2b 
5!
2! 15 22! 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.6  ■  The Binomial Theorem  883
To demonstrate that this pattern holds, we need to show that any entry in this version of 
Pascal’s triangle is the sum of the two entries diagonally above it. In other words, we 
must show that each entry satisﬁes the key property of Pascal’s triangle. We now state 
this property in terms of the binomial coefﬁcients.
Key Property of the Binomial Coefficients
For any nonnegative integers r and k with r  k,
a
k
r 1b a k
r b a k 1
r
b
Notice that the two terms on the left-hand side of this equation are adjacent entries 
in the kth row of Pascal’s triangle and the term on the right-hand side is the entry di-
agonally below them, in the 1k 12 st row. Thus this equation is a restatement of the 
key property of Pascal’s triangle in terms of the binomial coefﬁcients. A proof of this 
formula is outlined in Exercise 53.
■  The Binomial Theorem
We are now ready to state the Binomial Theorem.
The Binomial Theorem
1a b2 n a n
0b a n a n
1b a n1b a n
2b a n2
 b 2 . . . a
n
n 1b ab n1 a n
nb b n
We prove this theorem at the end of this section. First, let’s look at some of its appli­
cations.
Example 4  ■  Expanding a Binomial Using the Binomial Theorem
Use the Binomial Theorem to expand 1x y2 4.
Solution    By the Binomial Theorem,
1x y2 4 a 4
0b x 4 a 4
1b x 3y a 4
2b x 2y 2 a 4
3b xy 3 a 4
4b y 4
Verify that
a 4
0b 1  a 4
1b 4  a 4
2b 6  a 4
3b 4  a 4
4b 1
It follows that
1x y2 4 x 4 4x 3y 6x 2y 2 4xy 3 y 4
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
Example 5  ■  Expanding a Binomial Using the Binomial Theorem
Use the Binomial Theorem to expand A !x 1B8.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

884 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Solution    We ﬁrst ﬁnd the expansion of 1a b2 8 and then substitute !x for a and 
1 for b. Using the Binomial Theorem, we have
 1a b2 8 a 8
0b a8 a 8
1b a7b a 8
2b a6b 2 a 8
3b a 5b 3 a 8
4b a 4b 4
  a 8
5b a 3b 5 a 8
6b a 2b6 a 8
7b ab7 a 8
8b b8
Verify that
a 8
0b 1  a 8
1b 8  a 8
2b 28  a 8
3b 56  a 8
4b 70
a 8
5b 56  a 8
6b 28  a 8
7b 8  a 8
8b 1
So
 1a b2 8 a8 8a7b 28a6b2 56a5b3 70a4b4 56a3b5
 28a2b6 8ab7 b8
Performing the substitutions a  x1/2 and b  1 gives
 A !x 1B8 1x1/22 8 81x1/22 7112 281x1/22 6112 2 561x1/22 5112 3
  701x1/22 4112 4 561x1/22 3112 5 281x1/22 2112 6
  81x1/22 112 7 112 8
This simpliﬁes to
1 !x 12 8 x4 8x7/2 28x3 56x5/2 70x2 56x3/2 28x 8x1/2 1
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
The Binomial Theorem can be used to ﬁnd a particular term of a binomial expansion 
without having to ﬁnd the entire expansion.
General Term of the Binomial Expansion
The term that contains a r in the expansion of 1a b2 n is
a n
r b arbnr
Example 6  ■  Finding a Particular Term in a Binomial Expansion
Find the term that contains x5 in the expansion of 12x y2 20.
Solution    The term that contains x5 is given by the formula for the general term 
with a  2x, b  y, n  20, and r  5. So this term is
a 20
5 b a5b15 
20!
5! 120 52!
 12x2 5y15 
20!
5! 15!
 32x5y15 496,128x5y15
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
Example 7  ■  Finding a Particular Term in a Binomial Expansion
Find the coefﬁcient of x8 in the expansion of a x2 1
x b
10
.
Recall that
an
r b a
n
n r b
(See page 882.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 12.6  ■  The Binomial Theorem  885
Solution    Both x2 and 1/x are powers of x, so the power of x in each term of  
the expansion is determined by both terms of the binomial. To ﬁnd the required 
coefﬁcient, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the general term in the expansion. By the formula we have  
a  x2, b  1/x, and n  10, so the general term is
a 10
r b 1x22 r a 1
x b
10r
a 10
r b x2r1x12 10r a 10
r b x3r10
Thus the term that contains x8 is the term in which
 3r 10 8
 r 6
So the required coefﬁcient is
a 10
6 b 210
Now Try Exercise 41	
■
■  Proof of the Binomial Theorem
We now give a proof of the Binomial Theorem using mathematical induction.
Proof    Let P1n2  denote the statement
1a b2 n a n
0b a n a n
1b a n1b a n
2b a n2b 2 . . . a
n
n 1b ab n1 a n
nb b n
Step 1	 We show that P112  is true. But P112  is just the statement
1a b2 1 a 1
0b a1 a 1
1b b1 1a 1b a b
	
which is certainly true.
Step 2	 We assume that P1k2  is true. Thus our induction hypothesis is
1a b2 k a k
0b a k a k
1b a k1b a k
2b a k2b 2 . . . a
k
k 1b ab k1 a k
kb b k
	
We use this to show that P1k 12  is true.
 1a b2 k1 1a b2 31a b2 k4
	
  1a b2 c a k
0b a k a k
1b a k1b a k
2b a k2b 2 . . . a
k
k 1b ab k1 a k
kb b kd 	
Induction 
hypothesis
 ac a k
0b a k a k
1b a k1b a k
2b a k2b 2 . . . a
k
k 1b ab k1 a k
kb b kd
  bc a k
0b ak a k
1b ak1b a k
2b ak2b2 . . . a
k
k 1b abk1 a k
kb bkd 	
Distributive 
Property
 
a k
0b ak1 a k
1b akb a k
2b ak1b2 . . . a
k
k 1b a2bk1 a k
kb abk
  a k
0b akb a k
1b ak1b 2 a k
2b ak2b3 . . . a
k
k 1b abk a k
kb bk1	
Distributive 
Property
  a k
0b ak1 c a k
0b a k
1b d akb c a k
1b a k
2b dak1b2
	
. . . c a
k
k 1b a k
kb dabk a k
kb bk1	
Group  
like terms
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

886 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
	
Using the key property of the binomial coefﬁcients, we can write each of the  
expressions in square brackets as a single binomial coefﬁcient. Also, writing 
the ﬁrst and last coefﬁcients as Ak1
0 B and Ak1
k1B (these are equal to 1 by Exer­
cise 50) gives
1a b2 k1 a k 1
0
b a k1 a k 1
1
b a kb a k 1
2
b a k1b 2 . . . a k 1
k
b ab k a k 1
k 1b b k1
	
But this last equation is precisely P1k 12, and this completes the induction step.
Having proved Steps 1 and 2, we conclude by the Principle of Mathematical 
Induction that the theorem is true for all natural numbers n.	
■
concepts
	 1.	 An algebraic expression of the form a b, which consists of 
	 	 a sum of two terms, is called a  
  .
	 2.	 We can find the coefficients in the expansion of 1a b2 n 
	 	 from the nth row of  
 triangle. So 
1a b2 4 ■a4 ■a3b ■a2b2 ■ab3 ■b4
	 3.	 The binomial coefficients can be calculated directly by using
	 	 the formula an
k b  
  . So a4
3b  
  .
	 4.	 To expand 1a b2 n, we can use the  
 Theorem.  
Using this theorem, we find the expansion 1a b2 4 
a■
■ba4 a■
■ba3b a■
■ba2b2 a■
■bab3 a■
■bb4
skills
5–16  ■  Pascal’s Triangle    Use Pascal’s triangle to expand the 
expression.
	 5.	 1x y2 6	
6.	 12x 12 4	
  7.	 ax 1
x b
4
	 8.	 1x y2 5	
9.	 1x 12 5	
10.	 A !a !bB6
	11.	 1x 2
 y 12 5	
12.	 A1 !2B6	
13.	 12x 3y2 3
14.	 11 x 32 3	
15.	 a 1
x !xb
5
	
16.	 a2 x
2 b
5
17–24  ■  Calculating Binomial Coefficients    Evaluate the 
expression.
17.	 a6
4b 	
18.	 a8
3b 	
19.	 a100
98 b
20.	 a10
5 b 	
21.	 a3
1b a4
2b 	
22.	 a5
2b a5
3b
23.	 a5
0b a5
1b a5
2b a5
3b a5
4b a5
5b
24.	 a5
0b a5
1b a5
2b a5
3b a5
4b a5
5b
25–28  ■  Binomial Theorem    Use the Binomial Theorem to 
expand the expression.
25.	 1x 2y2 4	
26.	 11 x2 5
27.	 a1 1
x b
6
	
28.	 12A B22 4
29–42  ■  Terms of a Binomial Expansion    Find the indicated 
terms in the expansion of the given binomial.
29.	 The ﬁrst three terms in the expansion of 1x 2y2 20
30.	 The ﬁrst four terms in the expansion of 1x1/2 12 30
31.	 The last two terms in the expansion of 1a2/3 a1/32 25
32.	 The ﬁrst three terms in the expansion of
ax 1
x b
40
33.	 The middle term in the expansion of 1x2 12 18
34.	 The ﬁfth term in the expansion of 1ab 12 20
35.	 The 24th term in the expansion of 1a b2 25
36.	 The 28th term in the expansion of 1A B2 30
37.	 The 100th term in the expansion of 11 y2 100
38.	 The second term in the expansion of
ax2 1
x b
25
39.	 The term containing x4 in the expansion of 1x 2y2 10
40.	 The term containing y3 in the expansion of A !2 yB12
41.	 The term containing b8 in the expansion of 1a b22 12
42.	 The term that does not contain x in the expansion of
a8x 1
2x b
8
43–46  ■  Factoring    Factor using the Binomial Theorem.
43.	 x4 4x3y 6x2y2 4xy3 y4
44.	 1x 12 5 51x 12 4 101x 12 3
	 	
101x 12 2 51x 12 1
12.6  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 12  ■  Review  887
45.	 8a3 12a2b 6ab2 b3
46.	 x8 4x6y 6x4y2 4x2y3 y4
47–48  ■  Simplifying a Difference Quotient    Simplify using the 
Binomial Theorem.
47.	
1x h2 3 x3
h
	
48.	
1x h2 4 x4
h
Skills plus
49–52  ■  Proving a Statement    Show that the given statement  
is true.
49.	 11.012 100 2.    [Hint: Note that 11.012 100 11 0.012 100, 
and use the Binomial Theorem to show that the sum of the 
ﬁrst three terms of the expansion is greater than 2.]
50.	 an
0b 1 and an
nb 1
51.	 an
1b a
n
n 1b n
52.	 an
r b a
n
n r b     for 0  r  n
53.	 Proving an Identity    In this exercise we prove the identity
a
n
r 1b an
r b an 1
r
b
(a)	 Write the left-hand side of this equation as the sum of 
two ­fractions.
(b)	 Show that a common denominator of the expression that 
you found in part (a) is r! 1n r 12!.
(c)	 Add the two fractions using the common denominator in 
part (b), simplify the numerator, and note that the resulting 
expression is equal to the right-hand side of the equation.
54.	 Proof Using Induction    Prove that An
rB is an integer for all n 
and for 0  r  n.  [Suggestion: Use induction to show that 
the statement is true for all n, and use Exercise 53 for the 
induction step.]
Applications
55.	 Difference in Volumes of Cubes    The volume of a cube of 
side x inches is given by V1x2 x3, so the volume of a cube 
of side x 2 inches is given by V1x 22 1x 22 3. Use 
the Binomial Theorem to show that the difference in volume 
between the larger and smaller cubes is 6x2 12x 8 cubic 
inches. 
56.	 Probability of Hitting a Target    The probability that an archer 
hits the target is p 0.9, so the probability that he misses 
the target is q 0.1. It is known that in this situation the 
probability that the archer hits the target exactly r times in n 
attempts is given by the term containing pr in the binomial 
expansion of 1  p q2 n. Find the probability that the archer 
hits the target exactly three times in five attempts.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
57.	 discuss:  Powers of Factorials    Which is larger, 1100!2 101 or 
1101!2 100?    [Hint: Try factoring the expressions. Do they 
have any common factors?]
58.	 discover  ■  prove:  Sums of Binomial Coefﬁcients    Add 
each of the ﬁrst ﬁve rows of Pascal’s triangle, as indicated. 
Do you see a pattern?
1 1 ?
1 2 1 ?
1 3 3 1 ?
1 4 6 4 1 ?
1 5 10 10 5 1 ?
	 	 On the basis of the pattern you have found, ﬁnd the sum of 
the nth row:
an
0b an
1b an
2b . . . an
nb
	 	 Prove your result by expanding 11 12 n using the Binomial 
Theorem.
59.	 discover  ■  prove:  Alternating Sums of Binomial 
Coefﬁcients    Find the sum
an
0b an
1b an
2b . . . 112 n an
nb
	 	 by ﬁnding a pattern as in Exercise 58. Prove your result by 
­expanding 11 12 n using the Binomial Theorem.
Sequences (p. 842)
A sequence is a function whose domain is the set of natural 
numbers. Instead of writing a(n) for the value of the sequence at 
n, we generally write an, and we refer to this value as the nth 
term of the sequence. Sequences are often described in list 
form:
a1, a2, a3, c
Partial Sums of a Sequence (pp. 847–848)
For the sequence a1, a2, a3, cthe nth partial sum Sn is the sum 
of the first n terms of the sequence:
Sn a1 a2 a3 . . . an
The nth partial sum of a sequence can also be expressed by using 
sigma notation:
Sn a
n
k1
ak
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 12  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

888 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
Arithmetic Sequences (p. 853)
An arithmetic sequence is a sequence whose terms are obtained 
by adding the same fixed constant d to each term to get the next 
term. Thus an arithmetic sequence has the form
a, a d, a 2d, a 3d, c
The number a is the first term of the sequence, and the number d 
is the common difference. The nth term of the sequence is
an a 1n 12d
Partial Sums of an Arithmetic Sequence (p. 855)
For the arithmetic sequence an a 1n 12d the nth partial 
sum Sn a
n
k1
3a 1k 12d4  is given by either of the following 
equivalent formulas:
1.  Sn n
2
 32a 1n 12d4       2.  Sn na a an
2
b
Geometric Sequences (p. 858)
A geometric sequence is a sequence whose terms are obtained 
by multiplying each term by the same fixed constant r to get the 
next term. Thus a geometric sequence has the form
a, ar, ar2, ar3, c
The number a is the first term of the sequence, and the number r 
is the common ratio. The nth term of the sequence is
an arn1
Partial Sums of a Geometric Sequence (p. 861)
For the geometric sequence an arn1 the nth partial sum 
Sn a
n
k1
ar k1 (where r ? 1) is given by
Sn a 1 rn
1 r
Infinite Geometric Series (p. 863)
An infinite geometric series is a series of the form
a ar ar2 ar3 . . . arn1 . . .
An infinite geometric series for which 0  r 0 1 has the sum
S 
a
1 r
Amount of an Annuity (p. 869)
The amount Af of an annuity consisting of n regular equal pay-
ments of size R with interest rate i per time period is given by
Af R 
11 i2 n 1
i
Present Value of an Annuity (p. 870)
The present value Ap of an annuity consisting of n regular equal 
payments of size R with interest rate i per time period is given by
Ap R 
1 11 i2 n
i
Present Value of a Future Amount (p. 869)
If an amount Af is to be paid in one lump sum, n time periods 
from now, and the interest rate per time period is i, then its  
present value Ap is given by
Ap Af 11 i2 n
Installment Buying (p. 870)
If a loan Ap is to be repaid in n regular equal payments with 
interest rate i per time period, then the size R of each payment is 
given by
R 
iAp
1 11 i2 n
Principle of Mathematical Induction (p. 875)
For each natural number n, let P(n) be a statement that depends 
on n. Suppose that each of the following conditions is satisfied.
1.	 P(1) is true.
2.	 For every natural number k, if P(k) is true, then P1k 12  is 
true.
Then P(n) is true for all natural numbers n.
Sums of Powers (p. 877)
0.  a
n
k1
1 n	
1.  a
n
k1
k 
n1n 12
2
2.  a
n
k1
k2 
n1n 12 12n 12
6
	
3.  a
n
k1
k3 
n2 1n 12 2
4
Binomial Coefficients (pp. 881–883)
If n and r are positive integers with n r, then the binomial 
coefficient An
rB is defined by
an
r b 
n!
r! 1n r2!
Binomial coefficients satisfy the following properties:
an
r b a
n
n r b
a
k
r 1b ak
r b ak 1
r
b
The Binomial Theorem (pp. 883–884)
1a b2 n an
0ban an
1ban1b an
2ban2b2 . . . an
nbbn
The term that contains ar in the expansion of 1a b2 n is 
An
rBarbnr.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 12  ■  Review  889
	 1.	 (a)	 What is a sequence? What notation do we use to denote 
the terms of a sequence?
(b)	 Find a formula for the sequence of even numbers and a 
formula for the sequence of odd numbers.
(c)	 Find the first three terms and the 10th term of the 
sequence given by an n/1n 12 .
	 2.	 (a)	 What is a recursively defined sequence?
(b)	 Find the first four terms of the sequence recursively 
defined by a1 3 and an n 2an1.
	 3.	 (a)	 What is meant by the partial sums of a sequence?
(b)	 Find the first three partial sums of the sequence given by 
an 1/n.
	 4.	 (a)	 What is an arithmetic sequence? Write a formula for the 
nth term of an arithmetic sequence.
(b)	 Write a formula for the arithmetic sequence that starts as 
follows: 3, 8, . . . Write the first five terms of this sequence.
(c)	 Write two different formulas for the sum of the first  
n terms of an arithmetic sequence.
(d)	 Find the sum of the first 20 terms of the sequence in  
part (b).
	 5.	 (a)	 What is a geometric sequence? Write an expression for 
the nth term of a geometric sequence that has first term a 
and common ratio r.
(b)	 Write an expression for the geometric sequence with first 
term a 3 and common ratio r 1
2. Give the first five 
terms of this sequence.
(c)	 Write an expression for the sum of the first n terms of a 
geometric sequence. 
(d)	 Find the sum of the first five terms of the sequence in 
part (b).
	 6.	 (a)	 What is an infinite geometric series?
(b)	 What does it mean for an infinite series to converge? For 
what values of r does an infinite geometric series con-
verge? If an infinite geometric series converges, then 
what is its sum?
(c)	 Write the first four terms of the infinite geometric series 
with first term a 5 and common ratio r 0.4. Does 
the series converge? If so, find its sum.
	 7.	 (a)	 Write 13 23 33 43 53 using sigma notation.
(b)	 Write a
5
k3
2k2 without using sigma notation.
	 8.	 (a)	 What is an annuity? Write an expression for the amount 
Af of an annuity consisting of n regular equal payments 
of size R with interest rate i per time period.
(b)	 An investor deposits $200 each month into an account 
that pays 6% compounded monthly. How much is in the 
account at the end of 3 years?
(c)	 What is the formula for calculating the present value of 
the annuity in part (b)?
(d)	 What is the present value of the annuity in part (b)?
(e)	 When buying on installment, what is the formula for cal-
culating the periodic payments?
(f)	 If you take out a 5-year loan for $10,000 at 3% interest 
compounded monthly, what is the size of each monthly 
payment?
	 9.	 (a)	 State the Principle of Mathematical Induction.
(b)	 Use mathematical induction to prove that for all natural 
numbers n, 3n 1 is an even number.
	10.	 (a)	 Write Pascal’s triangle. How are the entries in the trian-
gle related to each other?
	
Row 0	
	
Row 1	
 
	
Row 2	
 
 
	
Row 3	
 
 
 
(b)	 Use Pascal’s triangle to expand1x c2 3.
	11.	 (a)	 What does the symbol n! mean? Find 5!.
(b)	 Define An
rB, and find A5
2B.
	12.	 (a)	 State the Binomial Theorem.
(b)	 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand 1x 22 3.
(c)	 Use the Binomial Theorem to find the term containing x4 
in the expansion of 1x 22 10.
■  CONCEPT CHECK
1–6  ■  Terms of a Sequence    Find the ﬁrst four terms as well as 
the tenth term of the sequence with the given nth term.
	 1.	 an 
n2
n 1	
  2.	 an 112 n 2n
n
	 3.	 an 
112 n 1
n3
	
  4.	 an 
n1n 12
2
	 5.	 an 
12n2!
2nn! 	
  6.	 an an 1
2
b
7–10  ■  Recursive Sequences    A sequence is deﬁned recursively. 
Find the ﬁrst seven terms of the sequence.
	 7.	 an  an1  2n  1,    a1  1
	 8.	 an an1
n ,    a1  1
	 9.	 an  an1  2an2,    a1  1, a2  3
10.	 an !3an1, a1 !3
■  EXERCISES
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

890 
CHAPTER 12  ■  Sequences and Series
11–14  ■  Arithmetic or Geometric?    The nth term of a sequence 
is given. (a) Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the sequence. (b) Graph 
the terms you found in part (a). (c) Find the ﬁfth partial sum of 
the sequence. (d) Determine whether the sequence is arithmetic or 
geometric. Find the common difference or the common ratio.
11.	 an  2n  5	
12.	 an 5
2n
	13.	 an 3n
2n1	
14.	 an 4 n
2
15–22  ■  Arithmetic or Geometric?    The ﬁrst four terms of a 
sequence are given. Determine whether they can be the terms of 
an arithmetic sequence, a geometric sequence, or neither. If the 
sequence is arithmetic or geometric, ﬁnd the ﬁfth term.
15.	 5, 5.5, 6, 6.5, . . .	
16.	 !2, 2 !2, 3 !2, 4 !2, . . .
17.	 t  3, t  2, t  1, t, . . .	
18.	 !2, 2, 2 !2, 4, . . .
19.	 t3, t2, t, 1, . . .	
20.	 1,  3
2, 2,  5
2, . . .
21.	 3
4, 1
2, 1
3, 2
9, . . .	
22.	 a, 1, 1
a, 1
a 2, . . .
23.	 Proving a Sequence Is Geometric    Show that 3, 6i, 12, 
24i, . . . is a geometric sequence, and ﬁnd the common 
ratio. (Here i !1.)
24.	 nth Term of a Geometric Sequence    Find the nth term of the 
geometric sequence 2, 2  2i, 4i, 4  4i, 8, . . . (Here 
i !1.)
25–28  ■  Finding Terms of Arithmetic and Geometric Sequences    
Find the indicated term of the arithmetic or geometric sequence 
with the given description.
25.	 The fourth term of an arithmetic sequence is 11, and the sixth 
term is 17. Find the second term.
26.	 The 20th term of an arithmetic sequence is 96, and the com-
mon difference is 5. Find the nth term.
27.	 The third term of a geometric sequence is 9, and the common 
ratio is 3
2. Find the ﬁfth term.
28.	 The second term of a geometric sequence is 10, and the ﬁfth 
term is 1250
27 . Find the nth term.
29.	 Salary    A teacher makes $32,000 in his ﬁrst year at Lakeside 
School and gets a 5% raise each year.
(a)	 Find a formula for his salary An in his nth year at this 
school.
(b)	 List his salaries for his ﬁrst 8 years at this school.
30.	 Salary    A colleague of the teacher in Exercise 29, hired at 
the same time, makes $35,000 in her ﬁrst year and gets a 
$1200 raise each year.
(a)	 What is her salary An in her nth year at this school?
(b)	 Find her salary in her eighth year at this school, and 
compare it to the salary of the teacher in Exercise 29 in 
his eighth year.
31.	 Bacteria Culture    A certain type of bacteria divides every  
5 s. If three of these bacteria are put into a petri dish, how 
many bacteria are in the dish at the end of 1 min?
32.	 Arithmetic Sequences    If a1, a2, a3, . . . and b1, b2, b3, . . . 
are arithmetic sequences, show that a1  b1, a2  b2,  
a3  b3, . . . is also an arithmetic sequence.
33.	 Geometric Sequences    If a1, a2, a3, . . . and b1, b2, b3, . . . 
are geometric sequences, show that a1b1, a2b2, a3b3, . . . is 
also a geometric sequence.
34.	 Arithmetic or Geometric?   
(a)	 If a1, a2, a3, . . . is an arithmetic sequence, is the 
sequence a1  2, a2  2, a3  2, . . . arithmetic?
(b)	 If a1, a2, a3, . . . is a geometric sequence, is the sequence 
5a1, 5a2, 5a3, . . . geometric?
35.	 Arithmetic and Geometric Sequences    Find the values of x 
for which the sequence 6, x, 12, . . . is
(a)	 arithmetic	
(b)  geometric
36.	 Arithmetic and Geometric Sequences    Find the values of x 
and y for which the sequence 2, x, y, 17, . . . is
(a)	 arithmetic	
(b)  geometric
37–40  ■  Partial Sums    Find the sum.
37. a
6
k3
1k 12 2	
38. a
4
i1
2i
2i 1
39. a
6
k1
1k 122k1	
40. a
5
m1
3m2
41–44  ■  Sigma Notation    Write the sum without using sigma 
notation. Do not ­evaluate.
41. a
10
k1
1k 12 2	
42. a
100
j2
1
j 1
43. a
50
k1
3k
2k1	
44. a
10
n1
n22n
45–48  ■  Sigma Notation    Write the sum using sigma notation. 
Do not evaluate.
45.	 3  6  9  12  . . .  99
46.	 12  22  32  . . .  1002
47.	 1 # 23  2 # 24  3 # 25  4 # 26  . . .  100 # 2102
48.	
1
1 # 2 
1
2 # 3 
1
3 # 4 . . . 
1
999 # 1000
49–54  ■  Sums of Arithmetic and Geometric Sequences    Deter-
mine whether the expression is a partial sum of an arithmetic or 
geometric sequence. Then ﬁnd the sum.
49.	 1 0.9 10.92 2 . . . 10.92 5
50.	 3  3.7  4.4  . . .  10
51.	 !5 2 !5 3 !5 . . . 100 !5
52.	 1
3 2
3 1 4
3 . . . 33
53. a
6
n0
3142 n	
54. a
8
k0
7152 k/2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 12  ■  Review  891
55–60  ■  Infinite Geometric Series    Determine whether the infi-
nite geometric series is convergent or divergent. If it is conver-
gent, find its sum.
55.	 1 2
5 4
25 
8
125 . . .
56.	 0.1  0.01  0.001  0.0001  . . .
57.	 5 511.012 511.012 2 511.012 3 . . .
58.	 1 1
31/2 1
3 1
33/2 . . .
59.	 1 9
8 a 9
8 b
2
a 9
8 b
3
. . .
60.	 a  ab2  ab4  ab6  . . . ,    0  b 0 1
61.	 Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence    The ﬁrst term of an arithme-
tic sequence is a  7, and the common difference is d  3. 
How many terms of this sequence must be added to obtain 325?
62.	 Terms of an Geometric Sequence    The sum of the ﬁrst three 
terms of a geometric series is 52, and the common ratio is  
r  3. Find the ﬁrst term.
63.	 Ancestors    A person has two parents, four grandparents, 
eight great-­grandparents, and so on. What is the total number 
of a person’s ancestors in 15 generations?
64.	 Annuity    Find the amount of an annuity consisting of  
16 annual payments of $1000 each into an account that pays 
8% interest per year, compounded annually.
65.	 Investment    How much money should be invested every 
quarter at 12% per year, compounded quarterly, in order to 
have $10,000 in one year?
66.	 Mortgage    What are the monthly payments on a mortgage 
of $60,000 at 9% interest if the loan is to be repaid in
(a)	 30 years?	
(b)  15 years?
67–69  ■  Mathematical Induction    Use mathematical induction 
to prove that the formula is true for all natural numbers n.
67.	 1 4 7 . . . 13n 22 
n13n 12
2
68.	
1
1 # 3 
1
3 # 5 
1
5 # 7 . . . 
1
12n 1212n 12  
n
2n 1
69.	 a1 1
1 b a1 1
2 b a1 1
3 b . . . a1 1
n b n 1
70–72  ■  Proof by Induction    Use mathematical induction to 
show that the given statement is true.
70.	 7 n  1 is divisible by 6 for all natural numbers n.
71.	 The Fibonacci number F4n is divisible by 3 for all natural 
numbers n.
72.	 Formula for a Recursive Sequence    A sequence is defined 
recursively by an1  3an  4 and a1  4. Show that  
an  2 # 3n  2 for all natural numbers n.
73–76  ■  Binomial Coefficients    Evaluate the expression.
73.	 a5
2b a5
3b 	
74.	 a10
2 b a10
6 b
75.	 a
5
k0
a5
k b 	
76.	 a
8
k0
a8
k b a
8
8 kb
77–80  ■  Binomial Expansion    Expand the expression.
77.	 1A B2 3	
78.	 1 x 22 5
79.	 11 x22 6	
80.	 12x y2 4
81–83  ■  Terms in a Binomial Expansion    Find the indicated 
terms in the given binomial expansion.
81.	 Find the 20th term in the expansion of 1a b2 22.
82.	 Find the ﬁrst three terms in the expansion of 1b2/3 b1/32 20.
83.	 Find the term containing A6 in the expansion of 1A 3B2 10.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

892
	 1.	 Find the ﬁrst six terms and the sixth partial sum of the sequence whose nth term is  
an  2n2  n.
	 2.	 A sequence is deﬁned recursively by an1 3an n, a1 2.  Find the ﬁrst six terms of  
the sequence.
	 3.	 An arithmetic sequence begins 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, . . . .
(a)	 Find the common difference d for this sequence.
(b)	 Find a formula for the nth term an of the sequence.
(c)	 Find the 35th term of the sequence.
	 4.	 A geometric sequence begins 12, 3, 3
4, 3
16, 3
64, . . . .
(a)	 Find the common ratio r for this sequence.
(b)	 Find a formula for the nth term an of the sequence.
(c)	 Find the tenth term of the sequence.
	 5.	 The ﬁrst term of a geometric sequence is 25, and the fourth term is 1
5.
(a)	 Find the common ratio r and the ﬁfth term.
(b)	 Find the partial sum of the ﬁrst eight terms.
	 6.	 The ﬁrst term of an arithmetic sequence is 10, and the tenth term is 2.
(a)	 Find the common difference and the 100th term of the sequence.
(b)	 Find the partial sum of the ﬁrst ten terms.
	 7.	 Let a1, a2, a3, . . . be a geometric sequence with initial term a and common ratio r. Show 
that a 2
1, a 2
2, a 2
3, . . . is also a geometric sequence by ﬁnding its common ratio.
	 8.	 Write the expression without using sigma notation, and then ﬁnd the sum.
(a)	 a
5
n1
11 n22 	
(b)	 a
6
n3
112 n2n2
	 9.	 Find the sum.
(a)	 1
3 2
32 22
33 23
34 . . . 29
310
(b)	 1 1
21/2 1
2 1
23/2 . . .
10.	 Use mathematical induction to prove that for all natural numbers n,
12 22 32 . . . n2 
n1n 12 12n 12
6
11.	 Expand 12x y 22 5.
12.	 Find the term containing x3 in the binomial expansion of 13x 22 10.
13.	 A puppy weighs 0.85 lb at birth, and each week he gains 24% in weight. Let an be his 
weight in pounds at the end of his nth week of life.
(a)	 Find a formula for an.
(b)	 How much does the puppy weigh when he is 6 weeks old?
(c)	 Is the sequence a1, a2, a3, . . . arithmetic, geometric, or neither?
CHAPTER 12
TEST
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

893
Many real-world processes occur in stages. Population growth can be viewed in 
stages—each new generation represents a new stage in population growth. Compound 
interest is paid in stages—each interest payment creates a new account balance. Many 
things that change continuously are more easily measured in discrete stages. For ex-
ample, we can measure the temperature of a continuously cooling object in one-hour 
intervals. In this Focus on Modeling we learn how recursive sequences are used to 
model such situations. In some cases we can get an explicit formula for a sequence from 
the recursion relation that deﬁnes it by ﬁnding a pattern in the terms of the sequence.
■  Recursive Sequences as Models
Suppose you deposit some money in an account that pays 6% interest compounded 
monthly. The bank has a deﬁnite rule for paying interest: At the end of each month the 
bank adds to your account 1
2% (or 0.005) of the amount in your account at that time. 
Let’s express this rule as follows:
amount at the end of 
this month
  amount at the end of 
last month
 0.005  amount at the end of 
last month
Using the Distributive Property, we can write this as
amount at the end of 
this month
  1.005  amount at the end of 
last month
To model this statement using algebra, let A0 be the amount of the original deposit, let 
A1 be the amount at the end of the ﬁrst month, let A2 be the amount at the end of the 
second month, and so on. So An is the amount at the end of the nth month. Thus
An 1.005An1
We recognize this as a recursively deﬁned sequence—it gives us the amount at each 
stage in terms of the amount at the preceding stage.
An
0.005An1
A2
A1
A0
To ﬁnd a formula for An, let’s ﬁnd the ﬁrst few terms of the sequence and look for a 
­pattern.
 A1 1.005A0
 A2 1.005A1 11.0052 2A0
 A3 1.005A2 11.0052 3A0
 A4 1.005A3 11.0052 4A0
We see that in general, An 11.0052 nA0.
We can use mathematical induction to 
prove that the formula we found for An 
is valid for all natural numbers n.
Modeling with Recursive Sequences
	
FOCUS ON MODELING
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

894 
Focus on Modeling
Example 1  ■  Population Growth
A certain animal population grows by 2% each year. The initial population is 5000.
(a)	 Find a recursive sequence that models the population Pn at the end of the nth 
year.
(b)	 Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the sequence Pn.
(c)	 Find a formula for Pn.
Solution
(a)	 We can model the population using the following rule:
population at the end of this year   1.02  population at the end of last year
	
Algebraically, we can write this as the recursion relation
Pn 1.02Pn1
(b)	 Since the initial population is 5000, we have
 P0 5000
 P1 1.02P0 11.0225000
 P2 1.02P1 11.022 25000
 P3 1.02P2 11.022 35000
 P4 1.02P3 11.022 45000
(c)	 We see from the pattern exhibited in part (b) that Pn 11.022 n5000. (Note that 
Pn is a geometric sequence, with common ratio r  1.02.)

■
Example 2  ■  Daily Drug Dose
A patient is to take a 50-mg pill of a certain drug every morning. It is known that the 
body eliminates 40% of the drug every 24 h.
(a)	 Find a recursive sequence that models the amount An of the drug in the patient’s 
body after each pill is taken.
(b)	 Find the ﬁrst four terms of the sequence An.
(c)	 Find a formula for An.
(d)	 How much of the drug remains in the patient’s body after 5 days? How much will 
accumulate in his system after prolonged use?
Solution
(a)	 Each morning, 60% of the drug remains in his system, plus he takes an additional 
50 mg (his daily dose).
amount of drug this 
morning
  0.6  
amount of drug 
yesterday morning   50 mg
	
We can express this as a recursion relation
An 0.6An1 50
(b)	 Since the initial dose is 50 mg, we have
 A0 50
 A1 0.6A0 50 0.61502 50
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Modeling with Recursive Sequences  895
 A2 0.6A1 50 0.630.61502 504 50
  0.621502 0.61502 50
  5010.62 0.6 12
 A3 0.6A2 50 0.630.621502 0.61502 504 50
  0.631502 0.621502 0.61502 50
  5010.63 0.62 0.6 12
(c)	 From the pattern in part (b) we see that
 An 5011 0.6 0.62 . . . 0.6n2
  50a 1 0.6n1
1 0.6 b
        Partial sum of a geometric  
sequence (page 861)
  12511 0.6n12
        Simplify
(d)	 To ﬁnd the amount remaining after 5 days, we substitute n  5 and get 
A5 12511 0.6512 < 119 mg.
	
 
To ﬁnd the amount remaining after prolonged use, we let n become large. As n 
gets large, 0.6n approaches 0. That is, 0.6n S 0 as n S ` (see Section 4.1, page 
332). So as n S `,
An 12511 0.6n12 S 12511 02 125
	
Thus after prolonged use, the amount of drug in the patient’s system approaches 
125 mg (see Figure 1, where we have used a graphing calculator to graph the  
sequence).
Enter sequence
Graph sequence
Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
 Min=0
u( )=125(1-.6^( +1))
150
0
16
Figure 1

■
Problems
	 1.	 Retirement Accounts    Many college professors keep retirement savings with TIAA, the 
largest annuity program in the world. Interest on these accounts is compounded and cred-
ited daily. Professor Brown has $275,000 on deposit with TIAA at the start of 2015 and re-
ceives 3.65% interest per year on his account.
(a)	 Find a recursive sequence that models the amount An in his account at the end of the 
nth day of 2015.
(b)	 Find the ﬁrst eight terms of the sequence An, rounded to the nearest cent.
(c)	 Find a formula for An.
	 2.	 Fitness Program    Sheila decides to embark on a swimming program as the best way to 
maintain cardiovascular health. She begins by swimming 5 min on the ﬁrst day, then adds  
1 1
2 min every day after that.
(a)	 Find a recursive formula for the number of minutes Tn that she swims on the nth day 
of her program.
(b)	 Find the ﬁrst 6 terms of the sequence Tn.
(c)	 Find a formula for Tn. What kind of sequence is this?
(d)	 On what day does Sheila attain her goal of swimming at least 65 min a day?
(e)	 What is the total amount of time she will have swum after 30 days?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

896 
Focus on Modeling
	 3.	 Monthly Savings Program    Alice opens a savings account that pays 3% interest per 
year, compounded monthly. She begins by depositing $100 at the start of the ﬁrst month 
and adds $100 at the end of each month, when the interest is credited.
(a)	 Find a recursive formula for the amount An in her account at the end of the nth month. 
­(Include the interest credited for that month and her monthly deposit.)
(b)	 Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the sequence An.
(c)	 Use the pattern you observed in (b) to ﬁnd a formula for An.    [Hint: To ﬁnd the pat-
tern most easily, it’s best not to simplify the terms too much.]
(d)	 How much has she saved after 5 years?
	 4.	 Pollution    A chemical plant discharges 2400 tons of pollutants every year into an adja-
cent lake. Through natural runoff, 70% of the pollutants contained in the lake at the begin-
ning of the year are expelled by the end of the year.
	 	 (a)	 Explain why the following sequence models the amount An of the pollutant in the lake 
at the end of the nth year that the plant is operating.
An 0.30An1 2400
(b)	 Find the ﬁrst ﬁve terms of the sequence An.
(c)	 Find a formula for An.
(d)	 How much of the pollutant remains in the lake after 6 years? How much will remain 
after the plant has been operating a long time?
(e)	 Verify your answer to part (d) by graphing An with a graphing calculator for n  1 to  
n  20.
	 5.	 Annual Savings Program    Ursula opens a 1-year CD that yields 5% interest per year. 
She begins with a deposit of $5000. At the end of each year when the CD matures, she re-
invests at the same 5% interest rate, also adding 10% to the value of the CD from her other 
savings. (So for example, after the ﬁrst year her CD has earned 5% of $5000 in interest, for 
a value of $5250 at maturity. She then adds 10%, or $525, bringing the total value of her 
renewed CD to $5775.)
(a)	 Find a recursive formula for the amount Un in Ursula’s CD when she reinvests at the 
end of the nth year.
(b)	 Find the ﬁrst five terms of the sequence Un. Does this appear to be a geometric sequence?
(c)	 Use the pattern you observed in (b) to ﬁnd a formula for Un.
(d)	 How much has she saved after 10 years?
	 6.	 Annual Savings Program    Victoria opens a one-year CD with a 5% annual interest yield at 
the same time as her friend Ursula in Problem 5. She also starts with an initial deposit of 
$5000. However, Victoria decides to add $500 to her CD when she reinvests at the end of the 
ﬁrst year, $1000 at the end of the second, $1500 at the end of the third, and so on.
(a)	 Explain why the recursive formula displayed below gives the amount Vn in Victoria’s 
CD when she reinvests at the end of the nth year.
Vn 1.05Vn1 500n
(b)	 Using the Seq (“sequence”) mode on your graphing calculator, enter the sequences 
Un and Vn as shown in the ﬁgure. Then use the TABLE  command to compare the 
two sequences. For the ﬁrst few years, Victoria seems to be accumulating more savings 
than Ursula. Scroll down in the table to verify that Ursula eventually pulls ahead of  
Victoria in the savings race. In what year does this occur?
Entering the sequences
Table of values of the sequences
   
u( )
 0
5000
 1
5775
 2
6670.1
 3
7704
 4
8898.1
 5
10277
 6
11870
5000
5750
7037.5
8889.4
11334
14401
18121
v( )
 =0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this chapter we study the central idea underlying calculus: the concept 
of a limit. Calculus is used in modeling numerous real-life phenomena, 
particularly situations that involve change or motion. Limits are used in 
finding the instantaneous rate of change of a function as well as the area of 
a region with curved boundary. You will learn in calculus that these two 
apparently different problems are closely related. In this chapter we see 
how limits allow us to solve both problems.
In Chapter 2 we learned how to find the average rate of change of a 
function. For example, to find the average speed, we divide the total distance 
traveled by the total time. But how can we find instantaneous speed—that is, 
the speed at a given instant? We can’t divide the total distance by the total 
time because in an instant the total distance traveled is zero and the total 
time spent traveling is zero! But we can find the average rate of change on 
smaller and smaller intervals, zooming in on the instant we want. In other 
words, the instantaneous speed is a limit of the average speeds.
In this chapter we also learn how to find areas of regions with curved 
sides by using the limit process.
897
Limits: A Preview of Calculus
13
13.1	 Finding Limits 
Numerically and 
Graphically
13.2	 Finding Limits 
Algebraically
13.3	 Tangent Lines and 
Derivatives
13.4	 Limits at Inﬁnity; Limits  
of Sequences
13.5	 Areas
Focus on Modeling
	
Interpretations of Area
PF-(space1)/Alamy
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

898 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
13.1 
Finding Limits Numerically and Graphically
■  Definition of Limit  ■  Estimating Limits Numerically and Graphically  ■  Limits That  
Fail to Exist  ■  One-Sided Limits
In this section we use tables of values and graphs of functions to answer the question, What 
happens to the values f1x2 of a function f as the variable x approaches the number a?
■  Definition of Limit
We begin by investigating the behavior of the function f deﬁned by
f1x2 x2 x 2
for values of x near 2. The following tables give values of f1x2  for values of x close to 
2 but not equal to 2.
4
Ï
approaches
4 . . .
2
. . . as x approaches 2
y=≈-x+2
0
y
x
Figure 1
x
fxxc
1.0
2.000000
1.5
2.750000
1.8
3.440000
1.9
3.710000
1.95
3.852500
1.99
3.970100
1.995
3.985025
1.999
3.997001
x
fxxc
3.0
8.000000
2.5
5.750000
2.2
4.640000
2.1
4.310000
2.05
4.152500
2.01
4.030100
2.005
4.015025
2.001
4.003001
From the table and the graph of f (a parabola) shown in Figure 1 we see that when 
x is close to 2 (on either side of 2), f1x2  is close to 4. In fact, it appears that we can 
make the values of f1x2  as close as we like to 4 by taking x sufﬁciently close to 2. We 
express this by saying “the limit of the function f1x2 x2 x 2 as x approaches 2 
is equal to 4.” The notation for this is
lim
 xS2 1x2 x 22 4
In general, we use the following notation.
DeFInition of the Limit of a Function
We write
	
lim
xSa f1x2 L
and say
“the limit of f1x2, as x approaches a, equals L”
if we can make the values of f1x2  arbitrarily close to L (as close to L as we 
like) by taking x to be sufﬁciently close to a, but not equal to a.
Roughly speaking, this says that the values of f1x2  get closer and closer to the num-
ber L as x gets closer and closer to the number a (from either side of a) but x ? a.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.1  ■  Finding Limits Numerically and Graphically  899
An alternative notation for limxSa f1x2 L is
f1x2 S L  as  x S a
which is usually read “f1x2  approaches L as x approaches a.” This is the notation we 
used in Section 3.6 when discussing asymptotes of rational functions.
Notice the phrase “but x ? a” in the deﬁnition of limit. This means that in ﬁnding 
the limit of f1x2  as x approaches a, we never consider x  a. In fact, f1x2  need not even 
be deﬁned when x  a. The only thing that matters is how f is deﬁned near a.
Figure 2 shows the graphs of three functions. Note that in part (c), f1a2  is not 
deﬁned, and in part (b), f1a2 ? L. But in each case, regardless of what happens at a, 
limxSa f1x2 L.
(a)
0
L
a
0
L
a
0
L
a
(b)
(c)
y
x
x
x
y
y
Figure 2  lim
xSa f1x2 L in all three cases
■  Estimating Limits Numerically and Graphically
In Section 13.2 we will develop techniques for ﬁnding exact values of limits. For now, 
we use tables and graphs to estimate limits of functions.
Example 1  ■  Estimating a Limit Numerically and Graphically
Estimate the value of the following limit by making a table of values. Check your 
work with a graph.
lim 
xS1
x 1
x2 1
Solution    Notice that the function f1x2 1x 12/1x2 12  is not deﬁned when  
x  1, but this doesn’t matter because the deﬁnition of limxSa f1x2  says that we 
consider values of x that are close to a but not equal to a. The following tables give 
values of f1x2  (rounded to six decimal places) for values of x that approach 1 (but 
are not equal to 1).
x * 1
fxxc
0.5
0.666667
0.9
0.526316
0.99
0.502513
0.999
0.500250
0.9999
0.500025
x + 1
fxxc
1.5
0.400000
1.1
0.476190
1.01
0.497512
1.001
0.499750
1.0001
0.499975
On the basis of the values in the two tables we make the guess that
lim 
xS1
x 1
x2 1 0.5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

900 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
As a graphical veriﬁcation we use a graphing device to produce Figure 3. We see 
that when x is close to 1, y is close to 0.5. If we use the ZOOM  and TRACE  features to 
get a closer look, as in Figure 4, we notice that as x gets closer and closer to 1, y 
becomes closer and closer to 0.5. This reinforces our conclusion.
1
0
2
(1, 0.5)
Figure 3
0.6
0.9
1.1
(1, 0.5)
0.4
Figure 4
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
Example 2  ■  Finding a Limit from a Table
Find lim
tS0 "t2 9 3
t2
.
Solution    The upper table in the margin lists values of the function for several values of 
t near 0. As t approaches 0, the values of the function seem to approach 0.1666666 . . . , 
so we guess that
lim
tS0 "t2 9 3
t2
1
6
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
What would have happened in Example 2 if we had taken even smaller values of t? 
The lower table in the margin shows the results from one calculator; you can see that 
something strange seems to be happening.
If you try these calculations on your own calculator, you might get different values, 
but eventually, you will get the value 0 if you make t sufﬁciently small. Does this mean 
that the answer is really 0 instead of 1
6? No, the value of the limit is 1
6, as we will show 
in the next section. The problem is that the calculator gave false values because 
"t2 9 is very close to 3 when t is small. (In fact, when t is sufﬁciently small, a cal-
culator’s value for "t2 9 is 3.000 . . . to as many digits as the calculator is capable 
of carrying.)
Something similar happens when we try to graph the function of Example 2 on a 
graphing device. Parts (a) and (b) of Figure 5 show quite accurate graphs of this func-
tion, and when we use the TRACE  feature, we can easily estimate that the limit is about 
1
6. But if we zoom in too far, as in parts (c) and (d), then we get inaccurate graphs, again 
because of problems with subtraction.
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
(a)  [_5, 5] by [_0.1, 0.3]
(b)  [_0.1, 0.1] by [_0.1, 0.3]
(c)  [_10–§, 10–§] by [_0.1, 0.3]
(d)  [_10–¶, 10–¶] by [_0.1, 0.3]
Figure 5
t
"t2 1 9 2 3
t2
1.0
0.16228
0.5
0.16553
0.1
0.16662
0.05
0.16666
0.01
0.16667
t
"t2 1 9 2 3
t2
0.0005
0.16800
0.0001
0.20000
0.00005
0.00000
0.00001
0.00000
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.1  ■  Finding Limits Numerically and Graphically  901
■  Limits That Fail to Exist
Functions do not necessarily approach a ﬁnite value at every point. In other words, it’s 
possible for a limit not to exist. The next three examples illustrate ways in which this 
can happen.
Example 3  ■  A Limit That Fails to Exist (A Function with a Jump)
The Heaviside function H is deﬁned by
H1t2 e0 if t 0
1 if t $ 0
[This function, named after the electrical engineer Oliver Heaviside (1850–1925), can 
be used to describe an electric current that is switched on at time t  0.] Its graph is 
shown in Figure 6. Notice the “jump” in the graph at x  0.
As t approaches 0 from the left, H1t2  approaches 0. As t approaches 0 from the 
right, H1t2  approaches 1. There is no single number that H1t2  approaches as t 
approaches 0. Therefore limtS0  H1t2  does not exist.
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
Example 4  ■  A Limit That Fails to Exist (A Function That Oscillates)
Find lim
xS0 sin p
x .
Solution    The function f1x2 sin1p/x2  is undeﬁned at 0. Evaluating the function 
for some small values of x, we get
 f112 sin p 0  
 fA1
2B sin 2p 0
 fA1
3B sin 3p 0  
 fA1
4B sin 4p 0
 f10.12 sin 10p 0   f10.012 sin 100p 0
Similarly, f10.0012 f10.00012 0. On the basis of this information we might be 
tempted to guess that
lim
xS0 sin p
x ? 0
but this time our guess is wrong. Note that although f11/n2 sin np 0 for any 
integer n, it is also true that f1x2 1 for inﬁnitely many values of x that approach 0. 
(See the graph in Figure 7.)
y=ß(π/x)
1
1
_1
_1
y
x
Figure 7
The dashed lines indicate that the values of sin1p/x2  oscillate between 1 and 1 
inﬁnitely often as x approaches 0. Since the values of f1x2  do not approach a ﬁxed 
number as x approaches 0,
lim
xS0 sin p
x does not exist
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
1
0
y
x
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

902 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Example 4 illustrates some of the pitfalls in guessing the value of a limit. It is easy 
to guess the wrong value if we use inappropriate values of x, but it is difﬁcult to know 
when to stop calculating values. And as the discussion after Example 2 shows, some-
times calculators and computers give incorrect values. In the next two sections, how-
ever, we will develop foolproof methods for calculating limits.
Example 5  ■  A Limit That Fails to Exist (A Function  
with a Vertical Asymptote)
Find lim
xS0 1
x2 if it exists.
Solution    As x becomes close to 0, x2 also becomes close to 0, and 1/x2 becomes 
very large. (See the table in the margin.) In fact, it appears from the graph of the func-
tion f1x2 1/x2 shown in Figure 8 that the values of f1x2  can be made arbitrarily 
large by taking x close enough to 0. Thus the values of f1x2  do not approach a num-
ber, so limxS0 11/x22  does not exist.
y= 1
≈
0
y
x
Figure 8
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
To indicate the kind of behavior exhibited in Example 5, we use the notation
lim
xS0 1
x2 `
This does not mean that we are regarding q as a number. Nor does it mean that the 
limit exists. It simply expresses the particular way in which the limit does not exist: 
1/x2 can be made as large as we like by taking x close enough to 0. Notice that the 
line x  0 (the y-axis) is a vertical asymptote in the sense that we described in Sec-
tion 3.6.
■  One-Sided Limits
We noticed in Example 3 that H1t2  approaches 0 as t approaches 0 from the left and 
H1t2  approaches 1 as t approaches 0 from the right. We indicate this situation sym-
bolically by writing
lim
tS0 H1t2 0  and  lim
tS0 H1t2 1
The symbol “t → 0” indicates that we consider only values of t that are less than 
0. Likewise, “t → 0” indicates that we consider only values of t that are greater  
than 0.
x
1
x2
1
1
0.5
4
0.2
25
0.1
100
0.05
400
0.01
10,000
0.001
1,000,000
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.1  ■  Finding Limits Numerically and Graphically  903
Definition of a One-Sided Limit
We write
lim
xSa f1x2 L
and say that the “left-hand limit of f1x2 as x approaches a” [or the “limit of f1x2  
as x approaches a from the left”] is equal to L if we can make the values of f1x2  
arbitrarily close to L by taking x to be sufﬁciently close to a and x less than a.
Notice that this deﬁnition differs from the deﬁnition of a two-sided limit only in that 
we require x to be less than a. Similarly, if we require that x be greater than a, we get 
“the right-hand limit of fxxc as x approaches a is equal to L,” and we write
lim
xSa f1x2 L
Thus the symbol “x → a” means that we consider only x  a. These deﬁnitions are 
illustrated in Figure 9.
x    a_
x    a+
0
L
x
a
0
Ï
Ï
L
x
a
(a) lim  Ï=L
(b) lim  Ï=L
y
x
x
y
Figure 9
By comparing the deﬁnitions of two-sided and one-sided limits, we see that the fol-
lowing is true.
lim
xSa f1x2 L if and only if lim
xSa f1x2 L and lim
xSa f1x2 L
Thus if the left-hand and right-hand limits are different, the (two-sided) limit does not 
exist. We use this fact in the next two examples.
Example 6  ■  Limits from a Graph
The graph of a function g is shown in Figure 10. Use it to state the values (if they 
exist) of the following:
(a)	 lim
xS2 g1x2, lim
xS2 g1x2, lim
xS2  g1x2
(b)	 lim
xS5 g1x2, lim
xS5 g1x2, lim
xS5  g1x2
Solution
(a)	 From the graph we see that the values of g1x2  approach 3 as x approaches 2 from 
the left, but they approach 1 as x approaches 2 from the right. Therefore
lim
xS2 g1x2 3  and  lim
xS2 g1x2 1
	 	 Since the left- and right-hand limits are different, we conclude that limxS2  g1x2  
does not exist.
0
y=˝
1
2
3
4
5
1
3
4
y
x
Figure 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

904 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
(b)	 The graph also shows that
lim
xS5 g1x2 2  and  lim
xS5 g1x2 2
	 	 This time the left- and right-hand limits are the same, so we have
lim
xS5 g1x2 2
	 	 Despite this fact, notice that g152 ? 2.
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
Example 7  ■  A Piecewise-Defined Function
Let f be the function deﬁned by
f 1x2 e2x2    
if x 1
4 x
if x $ 1
Graph f, and use the graph to ﬁnd the following:
(a)  lim
xS1 f1x2             (b)  lim
xS1 f1x2             (c)  lim 
xS1  f1x2
Solution    The graph of f is shown in Figure 11. From the graph we see that the  
values of f1x2  approach 2 as x approaches 1 from the left, but they approach 3 as x 
approaches 1 from the right. Thus the left- and right-hand limits are not equal. So  
we have
(a)	 lim
xS1 f1x2 2            (b)  lim
xS1 f1x2 3            (c)  lim 
xS1 
 f 1x2  does not exist.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
Concepts
	 1.	 When we write lim 
xSaf1x2 L then, roughly speaking, the 
	 	 values of f1x2  get closer and closer to the number  
 
as the values of x get closer and closer to  
  . To 
	 	 determine lim
xS5 x 5
x 5, we try values for x closer and closer to 
	 	
 
 and find that the limit is  
  .
	 2.	 We write lim
xSa f 1x2 L and say that the  
 of f1x2  
	 	 as x approaches a from the  
 (left/right) is equal 
	 	 to  
  . To find the left-hand limit, we try values for x 
	 	 that are  
 (less/greater) than a. A limit exists if and 
	 	 only if both the  
-hand and  
-hand 
	 	 limits exist and are  
  .
Skills
3–4  ■  Estimating Limits Numerically and Graphically    Estimate 
the value of the limit by making a table of values. Check your 
work with a graph.
	 3.	 lim
xS5 x2 25
x 5 	
  4.  lim
xS3 x2 x 6
x 3
5–10  ■  Estimating Limits Numerically    Complete the table of 
values (to ﬁve decimal places), and use the table to estimate the 
value of the limit.
	 5.	 lim
xS4 !x 2
x 4
x
3.9
3.99
3.999
4.001
4.01
4.1
fxxc
	 6.	 lim
xS2 
x 2
x2 x 6
x
1.9
1.99
1.999
2.001
2.01
2.1
fxxc
	 7.	 lim
xS1 x 1
x3 1
x
0.9
0.99
0.999
1.001
1.01
1.1
fxxc
13.1  Exercises
0
1
1
3
2
4
y
x
Figure 11
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.1  ■  Finding Limits Numerically and Graphically  905
	 8.	 lim
xS0 ex 1
x
x
20.1
20.01
20.001
0.001
0.01
0.1
fxxc
	 9.	 lim
xS0 sin x
x
x
61
60.5
60.1
60.05
60.01
fxxc
	10.	 lim
xS0 x ln x
x
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0001
0.00001
fxxc
11–16  ■  Estimating Limits Numerically and Graphically    Use a 
table of values to estimate the value of the limit. Then use a 
graphing device to conﬁrm your result graphically.
	11.	 lim
xS4 
x 4
x2 7x 12	
12.	 lim
xS1 x3 1
x2 1
	13.	 lim
xS0 5x 3x
x
	
14.	 lim
xS0 !x 9 3
x
15.	 lim
xS1 a 1
ln x 
1
x 1 b 	
16.	 lim
xS0 tan 2x
tan 3x
17–20  ■  Limits from a Graph    For the function f whose graph is 
given, state the value of the given quantity if it exists. If it does 
not exist, explain why.
17.	 (a)	 lim
xS1 f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS1 f1x2 	
(c)	 lim
xS1 f1x2
(d)	 lim
xS5 f1x2 	
(e)	 f152
0
2
4
4
2
y
x
18.	 (a)	 lim
xS0 f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS3 f1x2 	
(c)	 lim
xS3 f1x2
(d)	 lim
xS3 f1x2 	
(e)	 f132
0
2
4
4
2
y
x
19.	 (a)	 lim
tS0 f1t2
(b)	 lim
tS0 f1t2 	
(c)	 lim
tS0 f1t2
(d)	 lim
tS2 f1t2 	
(e)	 lim
tS2 f1t2 	
(f)	 lim
tS2 f1t2
(g)	 f122 	
(h)	 lim
tS4 f1t2
2
4
4
2
y
t
20.	 (a)	 lim
xS3 f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS1 f1x2 	
(c)	 lim
xS3 f1x2
(d)	 lim
xS2 f 1x2 	
(e)	 lim
xS2 f1x2 	
(f)	 lim
xS2 f1x2
0
3
_2
_3
1
2
1
2
_1
_2
y
x
21–28  ■  Estimating Limits Graphically    Use a graphing device 
to determine whether the limit exists. If the limit exists, estimate 
its value to two decimal places.
21.	 lim
xS1 x3 x2 3x 5
2x2 5x 3
	
22.	 lim
xS0 
x2
cos 5x cos 4x
23.	 lim
xS0 ln1sin2
 x2 	
24.	 lim
xS2 x3 6x2 5x 1
x3 x2 8x 12
25.	 lim
xS0 cos 1
x	
26.	 lim
xS0 sin 2
x
27.	 lim
xS3 
0  x 3 0
x 3 	
28.	 lim
xS0 
1
1 e1/x
29–32  ■  One-Sided Limits    Graph the piecewise-deﬁned func-
tion and use your graph to ﬁnd the values of the limits, if they 
exist.
29.	 f1x2 ex2
if x 2
6 x
if x 2
(a)	 lim
xS2 f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS2 f1x2 	
(c)	 lim
xS2 f1x2
30.	 f1x2 e2
if x 0
x 1
if x $ 0
(a)	 lim
xS0 f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS0 f1x2 	
(c)	 lim
xS0 f1x2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

906 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
31.	 f1x2 ex 3
if x 1
3
if x $ 1
(a)	 lim
xS1 f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS1 f1x2 	
(c)	 lim
xS1 f1x2
32.	 f1x2 e2x 10
if x 2
x 4
if x 2
(a)	 lim
xS2 f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS2 f1x2 	
(c)	 lim
xS2 f1x2
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
33.	 DISCUSS:  A Function with Speciﬁed Limits    Sketch the 
graph of an example of a function f that satisﬁes all of the 
following conditions.
lim
xS0 f1x2 2   lim
xS0 f1x2 0
lim
xS2 f1x2 1   f102 2   f122 3
	 	 How many such functions are there?
34.	 DISCUSS:  Graphing Calculator Pitfalls
(a)	 Evaluate 
h1x2 tan x x
x3
 
	
for x  1, 0.5, 0.1, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.005.
(b)	 Guess the value of lim
xS0 tan x x
x3
.
(c)	 Evaluate h1x2  for successively smaller values of  
x until you ﬁnally get a value of 0 for h1x2 . Are you  
still conﬁdent that your guess in part (b) is correct?  
Explain why you eventually got a value of 0 for h1x2 .
(d)	 Graph the function h in the viewing rectangle 31, 14   
by 30, 14 . Then zoom in toward the point where the 
graph crosses the y-axis to estimate the limit of h1x2  as x 
approaches 0. Continue to zoom in until you observe dis-
tortions in the graph of h. Compare with your results in  
part (c).
13.2 
Finding Limits Algebraically
■  Limit Laws  ■  Applying the Limit Laws  ■  Finding Limits Using Algebra  
and the Limit Laws  ■  Using Left- and Right-Hand Limits
In Section 13.1 we used calculators and graphs to guess the values of limits, but we saw 
that such methods don’t always lead to the correct answer. In this section we use alge-
braic methods to ﬁnd limits exactly.
■  Limit Laws
We use the following properties of limits, called the Limit Laws, to calculate limits.
Limit Laws
Suppose that c is a constant and that the following limits exist:
lim
xSa f1x2  and  lim
xSa  g1x2
Then
1.	 lim
xSa 3f1x2 g1x2 4 lim
xSa f1x2 lim
xSa  g1x2         Limit of a Sum
2.	 lim
xSa 3f1x2 g1x2 4 lim
xSa f1x2 lim
xSa  g1x2 	
Limit of a Difference
3.	 lim
xSa 3cf1x2 4 c lim
xSa  f1x2 	
Limit of a Constant Multiple
4.	 lim
xSa 3f1x2g1x2 4 lim
xSa f1x2 # lim
xSa  g1x2 	
Limit of a Product
5.	 lim
xSa 
f1x2
g1x2 
lim
xSa f1x2
lim
xSa  g1x2 if lim
xSa   g1x2 ? 0	
Limit of a Quotient
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.2  ■  Finding Limits Algebraically  907
These ﬁve laws can be stated verbally as follows:
1.	 The limit of a sum is the sum of the limits.
2.	 The limit of a difference is the difference of the limits.
3.	 The limit of a constant times a function is the constant times the limit of the  
function.
4.	 The limit of a product is the product of the limits.
5.	 The limit of a quotient is the quotient of the limits (provided that the limit of the 
denominator is not 0).
It’s easy to believe that these properties are true. For instance, if f1x2  is close to L 
and g1x2  is close to M, it is reasonable to conclude that f1x2 g1x2  is close to L  M. 
This gives us an intuitive basis for believing that Law 1 is true.
If we use Law 4 (Limit of a Product) repeatedly with g1x2 f1x2 , we obtain the 
following Law 6 for the limit of a power. A similar law holds for roots.
Limit Laws
6.	 lim
xSa 3f1x2 4 n 3lim
xSa f1x2 4 n    where n is a positive integer	
Limit of a Power
7.	 lim
xSa!
n f1x2 !
n lim
xSa f1x2     where n is a positive integer	
Limit of a Root
[If n is even, we assume that limxSa f1x2 0.]
In words, these laws say the following:
6.	 The limit of a power is the power of the limit.
7.	 The limit of a root is the root of the limit.
Example 1  ■  Using the Limit Laws
Use the Limit Laws and the graphs of f and g in Figure 1 to evaluate the following 
limits if they exist.
(a)	 lim
xS23f1x2 5g1x2 4	
(b)	 lim
xS1 3f1x2g1x2 4
(c)	 lim
xS2 
f1x2
g1x2 	
(d)	 lim
xS1 3f1x2 4 3
0
f
g
1
1
y
x
Figure 1
Solution
(a)	 From the graphs of f and g we see that
lim
xS2 f1x2 1  and  lim
xS2 g1x2 1
Limit of a Sum
Limit of a Difference
Limit of a Constant Multiple
Limit of a Product
Limit of a Quotient
Limit of a Power
Limit of a Root
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

908 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
	 	 Therefore we have
 lim
xS23f1x2 5g1x2 4 lim
xS2 f1x2 lim
xS235g1x2 4        Limit of a Sum
  lim
xS2 f1x2 5 lim
xS2 g1x2
        Limit of a Constant Multiple
  1 5112 4
(b)	 We see that limxS1 f1x2 2. But limxS1 g1x2  does not exist because the  
left- and right-hand limits are different:
lim
xS1 g1x2 2   lim
xS1 g1x2 1
	 	 So we can’t use Law 4 (Limit of a Product). The given limit does not exist, since 
the left-hand limit is not equal to the right-hand limit.
(c)	 The graphs show that
lim
xS2 f1x2 < 1.4  and  lim
xS2  g1x2 0
	 	 Because the limit of the denominator is 0, we can’t use Law 5 (Limit of a  
Quotient). The given limit does not exist because the denominator approaches 0 
while the numerator approaches a nonzero number.
(d)	 Since limxS1 f1x2 2, we use Law 6 to get
 lim
xS1 3f1x2 4 3 3lim
xS1 f1x2 4 3        Limit of a Power
  23 8
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
■  Applying the Limit Laws
In applying the Limit Laws, we need to use four special limits.
Some Special Limits
1.	 lim
xSa c c     
2.	 lim
xSa x a
3.	 lim
xSa xn an    where n is a positive integer
4.	 lim
xSa!
n x !
n a    where n is a positive integer and a  0
Special Limits 1 and 2 are intuitively obvious—looking at the graphs of y  c and 
y  x will convince you of their validity. Limits 3 and 4 are special cases of Limit Laws 
6 and 7 (Limits of a Power and of a Root).
Example 2  ■  Using the Limit Laws
Evaluate the following limits, and justify each step.
(a)	 lim
xS5 12x2 3x 42         (b)  lim
xS2
x3 2x2 1
5 3x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.2  ■  Finding Limits Algebraically  909
Solution
(a)	  lim
xS5 12x2 3x 42 lim 
xS5 12x22 lim 
xS5 13x2 lim
xS5 4    Limits of a Difference  
and Sum
	 	
  2 lim
xS5 x2 3 lim
xS5 x lim
xS5 4
    Limit of a  
Constant Multiple
	 	
  21522 3152 4
    Special Limits 3, 2, and 1
	 	
  39
(b)	 We start by using Law 5, but its use is fully justiﬁed only at the ﬁnal stage when 
we see that the limits of the numerator and denominator exist and the limit of the 
denominator is not 0.
 lim
xS2
x3 2x2 1
5 3x

lim
xS21x3 2x2 12
lim
xS215 3x2
	
Limit of a Quotient
  
lim
xS2 x3 2 lim
xS2 x2 lim
xS21
lim
xS2 5 3 lim
xS2 x
	
Limits of Sums,  
Differences, and  
Constant Multiples
  
122 3 2122 2 1
5 3122
        Special Limits 3, 2, and 1
   1
11
Now Try Exercises 9 and 11	
■
If we let f1x2 2x2 3x 4, then f152 39. In Example 2(a) we found that 
limxS5 f1x2 39. In other words, we would have gotten the correct answer by substi-
tuting 5 for x. Similarly, direct substitution provides the correct answer in part (b). The 
functions in Example 2 are a polynomial and a rational function, respectively, and 
similar use of the Limit Laws proves that direct substitution always works for such 
functions. We state this fact as follows.
Limits by Direct Substitution
If f is a polynomial or a rational function and a is in the domain of f, then
lim
xSa f1x2 f1a2
Functions with this direct substitution property are called continuous at a. You will 
learn more about continuous functions when you study calculus.
Example 3  ■  Finding Limits by Direct Substitution
Evaluate the following limits.
(a)	 lim
xS3 12x3 10x 82
(b)  lim
xS1
x2 5x
x4 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

910 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Solution
(a)	 The function f1x2 2x3 10x 12 is a polynomial, so we can ﬁnd the limit 
by direct substitution:
lim
xS3 12x3 10x 122 2132 3 10132 8 16
(b)	 The function f1x2 1x2 5x2/1x4 22  is a rational function, and x  1 is in 
its domain (because the denominator is not zero for x  1). Thus we can ﬁnd 
the limit by direct substitution:
lim
xS1
x2 5x
x4 2 
112 2 5112
112 4 2
 4
3
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
■  Finding Limits Using Algebra and the Limit Laws
As we saw in Example 3, evaluating limits by direct substitution is easy. But not all 
limits can be evaluated this way. In fact, most of the situations in which limits are use-
ful require us to work harder to evaluate the limit. The next three examples illustrate 
how we can use algebra to ﬁnd limits.
Example 4  ■  Finding a Limit by Canceling a Common Factor
Find lim
xS1 x 1
x2 1.
Solution    Let f1x2 1x 12/1x2 12 . We can’t ﬁnd the limit by substituting  
x  1 because f112  isn’t deﬁned. Nor can we apply Law 5 (Limit of a Quotient)  
because the limit of the denominator is 0. Instead, we need to do some preliminary  
algebra. We factor the denominator as a difference of squares:
x 1
x2 1 
x 1
1x 12 1x 12
The numerator and denominator have a common factor of x  1. When we take the 
limit as x approaches 1, we have x ? 1, and so x  1 ? 0. Therefore we can cancel 
the common factor and compute the limit as follows.
 lim
xS1 x 1
x2 1 lim
xS1 
x 1
1x 12 1x 12         Factor
  lim
xS1  
1
x 1
        Cancel
  
1
1 1 1
2
        Let x → 1
This calculation conﬁrms algebraically the answer we got numerically and graphi-
cally in Example 1 in Section 13.1.
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
Example 5  ■  Finding a Limit by Simplifying
Evaluate lim
hS0 
13 h2 2 9
h
.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.2  ■  Finding Limits Algebraically  911
Solution    We can’t use direct substitution to evaluate this limit, because the limit of 
the denominator is 0. So we ﬁrst simplify the limit algebraically.
 lim
hS0 
13 h2 2 9
h
lim
hS0 
19 6h h22 9
h
        Expand
  lim
hS0 6h h2
h
        Simplify
  lim
hS0 16 h2
        Cancel h
  6
        Let h → 0
Now Try Exercise 25	
■
Example 6  ■  Finding a Limit by Rationalizing
Find lim
tS0 "t2 9 3
t2
.
Solution    We can’t apply Law 5 (Limit of a Quotient) immediately, since the limit  
of the denominator is 0. Here the preliminary algebra consists of rationalizing the 
numerator:
 lim
tS0 "t2 9 3
t2
lim
tS0 "t2 9 3
t2
# "t2 9 3
"t2 9 3
        Rationalize numerator
  lim
tS0 
1t2 92 9
t2A"t2 9 3B
lim
tS0 
t2
t2A"t2 9 3B
  lim
tS0 
1
"t2 9 3

1
"lim
tS0 1t2 92 3

1
3 3 1
6
This calculation conﬁrms the guess that we made in Example 2 in Section 13.1.
Now Try Exercise 27	
■
■  Using Left- and Right-Hand Limits
Some limits are best calculated by ﬁrst ﬁnding the left- and right-hand limits. The fol-
lowing theorem is a reminder of what we discovered in Section 13.1. It says that a 
two-sided limit exists if and only if both of the one-sided limits exist and are equal.
lim
xSa f1x2 L  if and only if  lim
xSaf1x2 L lim
xSaf1x2
When computing one-sided limits, we use the fact that the Limit Laws also hold for 
one-sided limits.
Example 7  ■  Comparing Right and Left Limits
Show that lim
xS0 0  x 0 0.
B. Sanerson/Science Source
Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1727) is uni-
versally regarded as one of the giants of 
physics and mathematics. He is well 
known for discovering the laws of motion 
and gravity and for inventing calculus, 
but he also proved the Binomial Theorem 
and the laws of optics, and he developed 
methods for solving poly­nomial equa-
tions to any desired ac­curacy. He was 
born on Christmas Day, a few months 
after the death of his father. After an 
unhappy childhood, he entered Cam-
bridge University, where he learned 
mathematics by studying the writings of 
Euclid and Descartes.
During the plague years of 1665 and 
1666, when the university was closed, 
Newton thought and wrote about ideas 
that, once published, instantly revolu-
tionized the sciences. Imbued with a 
pathological fear of criticism, he pub-
lished these writings only after many 
years of encouragement from Edmund 
Halley (who discovered the now-famous 
comet) and other colleagues.
Newton’s works brought him enor-
mous fame and prestige. Even poets were 
moved to praise; Alexander Pope wrote:
Nature and Nature’s Laws
    lay hid in Night.
God said, “Let Newton be”
    and all was Light.
Newton was far more modest about 
his accomplishments. He said, “I seem to 
have been only like a boy playing on the 
seashore . . . while the great ocean of 
truth lay all undiscovered before me.” 
Newton was knighted by Queen Anne in 
1705 and was buried with great honor in 
Westminster Abbey.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

912 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Solution    Recall that
0  x 0 ex
if x $ 0
x
if x 0
Since 0  x 0 x for x  0, we have
lim
xS0
 0  x 0 lim
xS0x 0
For x  0 we have 0  x 0 x, so
lim
xS0
 0  x 0 lim
xS0 1x2 0
Therefore
lim
xS0 0  x 0 0
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
Example 8  ■  Comparing Right and Left Limits
Prove that lim
xS0 
0  x 0
x  does not exist.
Solution    Since 0  x 0 x for x  0 and 0  x 0 x for x  0, we have
 lim
xS0 
0  x 0
x
lim
xS0 x
x lim
xS0 1 1
 lim
xS0 
0  x 0
x
lim
xS0 x
x lim
xS0112 1
Since the right-hand and left-hand limits exist and are different, it follows that 
limxS0 0  x 0 /x does not exist. The graph of the function f1x2 0  x 0 /x is shown in  
Figure 3 and supports the limits that we found.
Now Try Exercise 39	
■
Example 9  ■  The Limit of a Piecewise Defined Function
Let
f1x2 e !x 4
if x 4
8 2x
if x 4
Determine whether lim
xS4 f1x2  exists.
Solution    Since f1x2 !x 4 for x  4, we have
lim
xS4f1x2 lim
xS4!x 4 !4 4 0
Since f1x2 8 2x for x  4, we have
lim
xS4 f1x2 lim
xS418 2x2 8 2 # 4 0
The right- and left-hand limits are equal. Thus the limit exists, and
lim
xS4 f1x2 0
The graph of f is shown in Figure 4.
Now Try Exercise 43	
■
The result of Example 7 looks  
plausible from Figure 2.
0
y=|x|
y
x
Figure 2
1
_1
0
y=|x|
x
y
x
Figure 3
4
0
y
x
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.2  ■  Finding Limits Algebraically  913
Concepts
	 1.	 Suppose the following limits exist: 
lim
xSa f 1x2     and   
lim
xSa g 1x2
	 	 Then lim
xSa 3f 1x2 g 1x2 4  
   
  , and
	 	 lim
xSa 3f 1x2g 1x2 4  
#  
  .
	 	 These formulas can be stated verbally as follows: The limit 
	 	 of a sum is the  
 of the limits, and the limit of a 
	 	 product is the  
 of the limits.
	 2.	 If f is a polynomial or a rational function and a is in the 
	 	 domain of f, then lim
xSa f 1x2 
 
  .
Skills
	 3.	 Limits from a Graph    The graphs of f and g are given. Use 
them to evaluate each limit if it exists. If the limit does not 
exist, explain why.
(a)	 lim
xS2 3f1x2 g1x2 4 	
(b)	 lim
xS1 3f1x2 g1x2 4
(c)	 lim
xS0 3f1x2g1x2 4 	
(d)	
lim
xS1 
f1x2
g1x2
(e)	 lim
xS2 x 3f1x2 	
(f)	 lim
xS1"3 f1x2
1
y=Ï
1
0
1
y=˝
1
y
x
x
y
	 4.	 Using Limit Laws    Suppose that
lim
xSa  f1x2 3  lim
xSa  g1x2 0  lim
xSa  h1x2 8
	 	 Find the value of the given limit. If the limit does not exist,  
explain why.
(a)	 lim
xSa 3f1x2 h1x2 4 	
(b)	 lim
xSa 3f1x2 4 2
(c)	 lim
xSa !
3 h1x2 	
(d)	 lim
xSa 1
f1x2
(e)	 lim
xSa  
f1x2
h1x2 	
(f)	 lim 
xSa
g1x2
f1x2
(g)	 lim
xSa  
f1x2
g1x2 	
(h)	 lim
xSa 
2f1x2
h1x2 f1x2
5–18  ■  Using Limit Laws    Evaluate the limit and justify each 
step by indicating the appropriate Limit Law(s).
	 5.	 lim
xS5 x	
  6.	 lim
xS0 3
	 7.	 lim
tS3 4t	
  8.	 lim
tS2 11 3t2
	 9.	 lim
xS4 15x2 2x 32 	
10.	 lim
xS0
 13x3 2x2 52
	11.	 lim
xS1 
x 2
x2 4x 3	
12.	 lim
xS2 2 x
x2 1
	13.	 lim
xS3 1x3 22 1x2 5x2 	
14.	 lim
tS21t 12 91t2 12
	15.	 lim
xS1 a x4 x2 6
x4 2x 3 b
2
	16.	 lim
xS0 a 5x20 2x2 3000
x2 1
b
1/3
	17.	 lim
xS12
 A"x2 25 !3x B	
18.	 lim
uS2"u4 3u 6
19–32  ■  Finding Limits    Evaluate the limit if it exists.
	19.	 lim
xS2 x2 x 6
x 2
	
20.	 lim
xS4  x2 5x 4
x2 3x 4
	21.	 lim
xS2 x2 x 6
x 2
	
22.	 lim
xS1 x3 1
x2 1
23.	 lim
tS3 
t2 9
2t2 7t 3	
24.	 lim
xS2 x4 16
x 2
25.	 lim
hS0 
12 h2 2 4
h
	
26.	 lim
hS0 
12 h2 3 8
h
27.	 lim
xS7 !x 2 3
x 7
	
28.	 lim
hS0 !1 h 1
h
29.	 lim
xS4 
1
4 1
x
4 x 	
30.	 lim
tS0 a 1
t 
1
t2 t b
31.	 lim
hS0 
13 h2 1 31
h
	
32.	 lim
tS4 
1
!t 1
2
t 4
33–36  ■  Finding Limits    Find the limit, and use a graphing 
device to conﬁrm your result graphically.
33.	 lim
xS1 x2 1
!x 1	
34.	 lim
xS0 
14 x2 3 64
x
35.	 lim
xS1
x2 x 2
x3 x
	
36.	 lim
xS1 x8 1
x5 1
37–42  ■  Does the Limit Exist?    Find the limit, if it exists. If the 
limit does not exist, explain why.
37.	 lim
xS4 0  x 4 0 	
38.	 lim
xS4
0  x 4 0
x 4
39.	 lim
xS2 
0  x 2 0
x 2 	
40.	 lim
xS1.5 2x2 3x
0  2x 3 0
41.	 lim
xS0a 1
x 
1
0  x 0 b 	
42.	 lim
xS0a 1
x 
1
0  x 0 b
13.2  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

914 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
43.	 Does the Limit Exist?    Let
f1x2 ex 1               if x 2
x2 4x 6    if x $ 2
(a)	 Find limxS2 f1x2 and limxS2 f1x2 .
(b)	 Does limxS2 f1x2  exist?
(c)	 Sketch the graph of f.
44.	 Does the Limit Exist?    Let
h1x2 •
x
if x 0
x2
if 0 x 2
8 x
if x 2
(a)	 Evaluate each limit if it exists.
	
(i)	 lim
xS0 h1x2 	
(iv)	 lim
xS2h1x2
	
(ii)	 lim
xS0 h1x2 	
(v)	 lim
xS2h1x2
	
(iii)	 lim
xS1 h1x2 	
(vi)	 lim
xS2 h1x2
(b)	 Sketch the graph of h.
Skills Plus
45.	 Finding Limits Numerically and Graphically   
(a)	 Estimate the value of
lim
xS0 
x
"1 3x 1
	
by graphing the function f1x2 x/A !1 3x 1B.
(b)	 Make a table of values of f1x2  for x close to 0, and guess 
the value of the limit.
(c)	 Use the Limit Laws to prove that your guess is correct.
46.	 Finding Limits Numerically and Graphically   
(a)	 Use a graph of
f1x2 !3 x !3
x
	
to estimate the value of limxS0 f 1x2 to two decimal places.
(b)	 Use a table of values of f1x2  to estimate the limit to four 
decimal places.
(c)	 Use the Limit Laws to ﬁnd the exact value of the limit.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
47.	 DISCUSS:  Cancellation and Limits
(a) What is wrong with the following equation?
x2 x 6
x 2
x 3
(b)	 In view of part (a), explain why the equation
lim
xS2 x2 x 6
x 2
lim
xS2 1x 32
	
	is correct.
48.	 DISCUSS:  The Lorentz Contraction    In the theory of relativ-
ity the Lorentz contraction formula
L L0"1 √2/c2
	 	 expresses the length L of an object as a function of its veloc-
ity √ with respect to an observer, where L0 is the length of the 
object at rest and c is the speed of light. Find lim√Sc L, and 
interpret the result. Why is a left-hand limit necessary?
49.	 DISCUSS  ■  PROVE:  Limits of Sums and Products
(a)	 Show by means of an example that
	
limxSa 3f1x2 g1x2 4  may exist even though neither
	
limxSa f1x2 nor limxSa g1x2  exists.
(b)	 Show by means of an example that
	
limxSa 3f1x2g1x2 4  may exist even though neither
	
limxSa f1x2 nor limxSa g1x2  exists.
13.3  Tangent Lines and Derivatives
■  Tangent Lines  ■  Derivatives  ■  Instantaneous Rates of Change
In this section we see how limits arise when we attempt to ﬁnd the tangent line to a 
curve or the instantaneous rate of change of a function.
■  Tangent Lines
A tangent line is a line that just touches a curve. For instance, Figure 1 shows the pa-
rabola y  x2 and the tangent line t that touches the parabola at the point P11, 12 . We 
will be able to ﬁnd an equation of the tangent line t as soon as we know its slope m. The 
difﬁculty is that we know only one point, P, on t, whereas we need two points to com-
pute the slope. But observe that we can compute an approximation to m by choosing a 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.3  ■  Tangent Lines and Derivatives  915
nearby point Q1x, x22  on the parabola (as in Figure 2) and computing the slope mPQ of 
the secant line PQ.
0
y=≈
t
P(1, 1)
y
x
Figure 1
0
y=≈
t
QÓx, ≈Ô
P(1, 1)
y
x
Figure 2
We choose x ? 1 so that Q ? P. Then
mPQ x2 1
x 1
Now we let x approach 1, so Q approaches P along the parabola. Figure 3 shows how 
the corresponding secant lines rotate about P and approach the tangent line t.
Q approaches P from the right
Q approaches P from the left
P
0
Q
t
P
0
Q
t
P
0
Q
t
P
0
Q
t
P
0
Q
t
P
0
Q
t
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
Figure 3
The slope of the tangent line is the limit of the slopes of the secant lines:
m lim
QSP mPQ
So using the method of Section 13.2, we have
 m lim
xS1 x2 1
x 1 lim
xS1 
1x 12 1x 12
x 1
  lim
xS1 1x 12 1 1 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

916 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Now that we know the slope of the tangent line is m  2, we can use the point-slope 
form of the equation of a line to ﬁnd its equation.
y 1 21x 12  or  y 2x 1
We sometimes refer to the slope of the tangent line to a curve at a point as the slope 
of the curve at the point. The idea is that if we zoom in far enough toward the point, 
the curve looks almost like a straight line. Figure 4 illustrates this procedure for the 
curve y  x2. The more we zoom in, the more the parabola looks like a line. In other 
words, the curve becomes almost indistinguishable from its tangent line.
Figure 4  Zooming in toward the point 11, 12 on the parabola y  x2
(1, 1)
2
0
2
(1, 1)
1.5
0.5
1.5
(1, 1)
1.1
0.9
1.1
If we have a general curve C with equation y f1x2  and we want to ﬁnd the tangent 
line to C at the point P1a, f1a22 , then we consider a nearby point Q1x, f1x22 , where 
x ? a, and compute the slope of the secant line PQ.
mPQ 
f1x2 f1a2
x a
Then we let Q approach P along the curve C by letting x approach a. If mPQ approaches 
a number m, then we deﬁne the tangent t to be the line through P with slope m. (This 
amounts to saying that the tangent line is the limiting position of the secant line PQ as 
Q approaches P. See Figure 5.)
0
P
t
Q
Q
Q
0
a
x
PÓa, f(a)Ô
Ï-f(a)
x-a
QÓx, ÏÔ
y
x
y
x
Figure 5
Definition of a Tangent Line
The tangent line to the curve y f1x2  at the point P1a, f1a22  is the line 
through P with slope
m lim
xSa 
f1x2 f1a2
x a
provided that this limit exists.
The point-slope form for the equation 
of a line through the point 1x1, y12  with 
slope m is
y y1 m1x x12
(See Section 1.10.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.3  ■  Tangent Lines and Derivatives  917
Example 1  ■  Finding a Tangent Line to a Hyperbola
Find an equation of the tangent line to the hyperbola y  3/x at the point 13, 12 .
Solution    Let f1x2 3/x. Then the slope of the tangent line at 13, 12  is
 m lim 
xS3
f1x2 f132
x 3
    Deﬁnition of m
  lim 
xS3
3
x 1
x 3
   
f1x2 3
x
  lim
xS3 3 x
x1x 32
    Multiply numerator 
and denominator by x
  lim
xS3 a 1
x b
    Cancel x  3
   1
3
    Let x → 3
Therefore an equation of the tangent line at the point 13, 12  is
y 1  1
3 1x 32
which simpliﬁes to
x 3y 6 0
The hyperbola and its tangent are shown in Figure 6.
0
(3, 1)
x+3y-6=0
y=3
x
y
x
Figure 6
Now Try Exercises 3 and 11	
■
There is another expression for the slope of a tangent line that is sometimes easier 
to use. Let h  x  a. Then x  a  h, so the slope of the secant line PQ is
mPQ 
f1a h2 f1a2
h
See Figure 7, in which the case h  0 is illustrated and Q is to the right of P. If it hap-
pened that h  0, however, Q would be to the left of P.
0
a
a+h
PÓa, f(a)Ô
f(a+h)-f(a)
h
QÓa+h, f(a+h)Ô
t
y
x
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

918 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Notice that as x approaches a, h approaches 0 (because h  x  a), so the expression 
for the slope of the tangent line becomes
m lim
hS0 
f1a h2 f1a2
h
Example 2  ■  Finding a Tangent Line
Find an equation of the tangent line to the curve y  x3  2x  3 at the point 11, 22 .
Solution    If f1x2 x3 2x 3, then the slope of the tangent line where a  1 is
m lim
hS0 
f11 h2 f112
h
        Deﬁnition of m
 lim
hS0 
311 h2 3 211 h2 34 313 2112 34
h
        f1x2 x3 2x 3
 lim
hS0 1 3h 3h2 h3 2 2h 3 2
h
        Expand numerator
 lim
hS0 h 3h2 h3
h
        Simplify
 lim
hS0 11 3h h22
        Cancel h
 1
        Let h → 0
So an equation of the tangent line at 11, 22  is
y 2 11x 12  or  y x 1
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
■  Derivatives
We have seen that the slope of the tangent line to the curve y f1x2  at the point 
1a, f1a22  can be written as
lim
hS0 
f1a h2 f1a2
h
It turns out that this expression arises in many other contexts as well, such as ﬁnding 
velocities and other rates of change. Because this type of limit occurs so widely, it is 
given a special name and notation.
Definition of a Derivative
The derivative of a function f at a number a, denoted by fr1a2 , is
fr1a2 lim
hS0 
f1a h2 f1a2
h
if this limit exists.
Newton and Limits
In 1687 Isaac Newton (see page 911)  
published his masterpiece Principia  
Mathematica. In this work, the greatest 
scientiﬁc treatise ever written, Newton 
set forth his version of calculus and used 
it to investigate mechanics, ﬂuid dynam-
ics, and wave motion and to explain the 
motion of planets and comets.
The beginnings of calculus are found 
in the calculations of areas and volumes 
by ancient Greek scholars such as 
Eudoxus and Archimedes. Although 
aspects of the idea of a limit are implicit 
in their “method of exhaustion,” Eudoxus 
and Archimedes never explicitly formu-
lated the concept of a limit. Likewise, 
mathematicians such as Cavalieri, Fermat, 
and Barrow, the immediate precursors of 
Newton in the development of calculus, 
did not actually use limits. It was Isaac 
Newton who ﬁrst talked explicitly about 
limits. He explained that the main idea 
behind limits is that quantities “approach 
nearer than by any given difference.” 
Newton stated that the limit was the 
basic concept in calculus, but it was left 
to later mathematicians like Cauchy and 
Weierstrass to clarify these ideas.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.3  ■  Tangent Lines and Derivatives  919
Example 3  ■  Finding a Derivative at a Point
Find the derivative of the function f1x2 5x2 3x 1 at the number 2.
Solution    According to the deﬁnition of a derivative, with a  2, we have
 fr122 lim 
hS0
f12 h2 f122
h
    Deﬁnition of fr122
  lim 
hS0
3512 h2 2 312 h2 14 35122 2 3122 14
h
   
f1x2 5x2 3x 1
  lim
hS0 20 20h 5h2 6 3h 1 25
h
    Expand
  lim
hS0 23h 5h2
h
    Simplify
  lim
hS0 123 5h2     Cancel h
  23
    Let h → 0
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
We see from the deﬁnition of a derivative that the number fr1a2  is the same as the 
slope of the tangent line to the curve y f1x2  at the point 1a, f1a22 . So the result of 
Example 3 shows that the slope of the tangent line to the parabola y  5x2  3x  1 at 
the point 12, 252  is fr122 23.
Example 4  ■  Finding a Derivative
Let f1x2 !x.
(a)	 Find fr1a2 .      (b)  Find fr112, fr142, and fr192 .
Solution
(a)	 We use the deﬁnition of the derivative at a:
 fr1a2 lim
hS0 
f1a h2 f1a2
h
        Deﬁnition of derivative
  lim
hS0 !a h !a
h
        f1x2 !x
  lim
hS0 !a h !a
h
# !a h !a
!a h !a
        Rationalize numerator
  lim
hS0 
1a h2 a
hA !a h !aB
        Difference of squares
  lim
hS0 
h
hA !a h !aB
        Simplify numerator
  lim
hS0 
1
!a h !a
        Cancel h
  
1
!a !a 
1
2 !a
        Let h → 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

920 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
(b)	 Substituting a  1, a  4, and a  9 into the result of part (a), we get
fr112 
1
2 !1 1
2   fr142 
1
2 !4 1
4   fr192 
1
2 !9 1
6
	 	 These values of the derivative are the slopes of the tangent lines shown in  
Figure 8.
Now Try Exercises 25 and 27	
■
■  Instantaneous Rates of Change
In Section 2.4 we deﬁned the average rate of change of a function f between the num-
bers a and x as
average rate of change change in y
change in x 
f1x2 f1a2
x a
Suppose we consider the average rate of change over smaller and smaller intervals by 
letting x approach a. The limit of these average rates of change is called the instanta-
neous rate of change.
Instantaneous Rate of Change
If y f1x2 , the instantaneous rate of change of y with respect to x at x  a 
is the limit of the average rates of change as x approaches a:
instantaneous rate of change lim
xSa 
f1x2 f1a2
x a
fr1a2
Notice that we now have two ways of interpreting the derivative:
■	 fr1a2  is the slope of the tangent line to y f1x2  at x  a
■	 fr1a2  is the instantaneous rate of change of y with respect to x at x  a
In the special case in which x  t  time and s  f1t2  displacement 1directed 
distance2 at time t of an object traveling in a straight line, the instantaneous rate of 
change is called the instantaneous velocity.
Example 5  ■  Instantaneous Velocity of a Falling Object
If an object is dropped from a height of 3000 ft, its distance above the ground (in 
feet) after t seconds is given by h1t2 3000 16t2. Find the object’s instantaneous 
velocity after 4 seconds.
Discovery Project
Designing a Roller Coaster
To ensure an exhilarating ride, a roller coaster ought to consist of steep  
rises and drops joined by thrilling curves. For a safe ride, these curves must  
fit together “smoothly.” In designing a roller coaster, you can choose where  
to locate the ascents and drops. We’ll explore how the derivative can help  
us join these ascents and drops smoothly. You can find the project at  
www.stewartmath.com.
© Racheal Grazias/Shutterstock.com
9
4
1
1
0
y=œ∑x
y
x
Figure 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.3  ■  Tangent Lines and Derivatives  921
Solution    After 4 s have elapsed, the height is h142 2744 ft. The instantaneous 
velocity is
hr142 lim
tS4 
h1t2 h142
t 4
    Deﬁnition of hr142
 lim
tS4 3000 16t2 2744
t 4
   
h1t2 3000 16t2
 lim
tS4 256 16t2
t 4
    Simplify
 lim
tS4 
1614 t2 14 t2
t 4
    Factor numerator
 lim
tS4 1614 t2
    Cancel t  4
  1614 42 128 ft/s    Let t → 4
The negative sign indicates that the height is decreasing at a rate of 128 ft/s.
Now Try Exercise 37	
■
Example 6  ■  Estimating an Instantaneous Rate of Change
Let P 1t2  be the population of the United States at time t. The first table in the margin 
gives approximate values of this function by providing midyear population estimates 
from 2004 to 2012. Interpret and estimate the value of Pr120082 .
Solution    The derivative Pr120082  means the rate of change of P with respect to t 
when t  2008, that is, the rate of increase of the population in 2008.
According to the deﬁnition of a derivative, we have
Pr120082 lim
tS2008
P1t2 P120082
t 2008
So we compute and tabulate values of the difference quotient (the average rates of 
change) as shown in the second table in the margin. We see that Pr120082  lies 
somewhere between 2,857,027 and 2,627,862. (Here we are making the reasonable 
assumption that the population didn’t ﬂuctuate wildly between 2004 and 2012.) We 
estimate that the rate of increase of the U.S. population in 2008 was the average of 
these two numbers, namely,
Pr120082 <  2.74 million people/year
Now Try Exercise 43	
■
h(t)
Here, we have estimated the derivative 
by averaging the slopes of two secant 
lines. Another method is to plot the pop-
ulation function and estimate the slope 
of the tangent line when t  2008.
U.S. Population
t
Pxtc
2004
292,805,298
2006
298,379,912
2008
304,093,966
2010
309,349,689
2012
313,914,040
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
t
Pxtc 2 Px2008c
t 2 2008
2004
2,822,167
2006
2,857,027
2010
2,627,862
2012
2,455,019
Concepts
	 1.	 The derivative of a function f at a number a is 
fr1a2 lim
hS0                           
      
 
	 	 if the limit exists. The derivative fr1a2  is the  
 of the 
	 	 tangent line to the curve y f1x2  at the point 1
, 
2.
	 2.	 If y f1x2 , the average rate of change of f between the num-
	 	 bers x and a is               
              . The limit of the average rates of 
	 	 change as x approaches a is the  
 rate of change of y 
	 	 with respect to x at x a; this is also the derivative fr1
2.
13.3  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

922 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Skills
3–10  ■  Slope of a Tangent Line    Find the slope of the tangent 
line to the graph of f at the given point.
	 3.	 f1x2 3x 4, at 11, 72
	 4.	 f1x2 5 2x, at 13, 112
	 5.	 f1x2 4x2 3x, at 11, 72
	 6.	 f1x2 1 2x 3x2, at 11, 02
	 7.	 f1x2 2x3, at 12, 162
	  8.	 f1x2 x3 1, at 12, 92
	 9.	 f1x2 
5
x 2, at 13, 12
	10.	 f1x2 
6
x 1, at 12, 22
11–18  ■  Equation of a Tangent Line    Find an equation of the 
tangent line to the curve at the given point. Graph the curve and 
the tangent line.
	11.	 f1x2 2x2 1, at 12, 72
	12.	 f1x2 4x2 3, at 11, 12
	13.	 y x x2, at 11, 02
	14.	 y 2x x3, at 11, 12
	15.	 y 
x
x 1, at 12, 22
	16.	 y 1
x2, at 11, 12
17.	 y !x 3, at 11, 22
	18.	 y !1 2x, at 14, 32
19–26  ■  The Derivative at a Number    Find the derivative of the 
function at the given number.
19.	 f1x2 1 3x2,    at 2	
20.	 f1x2 2 3x x2,    at 1
21.	 f1x2 x 3x2, at 1
	22.	 f1x2 x x3, at 1
23.	 f1x2 
1
x 1, at 2
	24.	 f1x2 
x
2 x, at 3
25.	 F1x2 
1
!x,    at 4
	26.	 G1x2 1 2!x,    at 4
27–30  ■  Evaluating Derivatives    Find the following for the 
given function f: (a) fr1a2 , where a is in the domain of f, and  
(b) fr132  and fr142 .
27.	 f1x2 x2 2x	
28.	 f1x2  1
x2
29.	 f1x2 
x
x 1	
30.	 f1x2 !x 2
Skills Plus
31.	 Tangent Lines   
(a)	 If f1x2 x3 2x 4, ﬁnd fr1a2 .
(b)	 Find equations of the tangent lines to the graph of  
f at the points whose x-coordinates are 0, 1, and 2.
(c)	 Graph f and the three tangent lines.
32.	 Tangent Lines   
(a)	 If g1x2 1/12x 12 , ﬁnd gr1a2 .
(b)	 Find equations of the tangent lines to the graph of g at 
the points whose x-coordinates are 1, 0, and 1.
(c)	 Graph g and the three tangent lines.
33–36  ■  Which Derivative Does the Limit Represent?    The given 
limit represents the derivative of a function f at a number a. Find 
f and a.
33.	 lim
hS0 
11 h2 10 1
h
	
34.	 lim
xS5 2x 32
x 5
35.	 lim
tS1 !t 1 !2
t 1
	
36.	 lim
hS0 
cos1p h2 1
h
Applications
37.	 Velocity of a Ball    If a ball is thrown straight up with a veloc-
ity of 40 ft/s, its height (in ft) after t seconds is given by  
y  40t  16t2. Find the instantaneous velocity when t  2.
38.	 Velocity on the Moon    If an arrow is shot upward on  
the moon with a velocity of 58 m/s, its height (in meters) 
after t seconds is given by H  58t  0.83t2.
(a)	 Find the instantaneous velocity of the arrow after  
1 second.
(b)	 Find the instantaneous velocity of the arrow when t  a.
(c)	 At what time t will the arrow hit the moon?
(d)	 With what velocity will the arrow hit the moon?
39.	 Velocity of a Particle    The displacement s (in meters) of a 
particle moving in a straight line is given by the equation of 
motion s  4t3  6t  2, where t is measured in seconds. 
Find the instantaneous velocity of the particle s at times  
t  a, t  1, t  2, t  3.
40.	 Inﬂating a Balloon    A spherical balloon is being inﬂated. 
Find the rate of change of the surface area AS 4pr2B with 
respect to the radius r when r  2 ft.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.3  ■  Tangent Lines and Derivatives  923
41.	 Temperature Change    A roast turkey is taken from an oven 
when its temperature has reached 185F and is placed on a 
table in a room where the temperature is 75F. The graph shows 
how the temperature of the turkey decreases and eventually 
approaches room temperature. By measuring the slope of the 
tangent, estimate the rate of change of the temperature after  
1 hour.
T (˚F)
0
P
30
60
90
120 150
100
200
t (min)
42.	 Heart Rate    A cardiac monitor is used to measure the heart 
rate of a patient after surgery. It compiles the number of 
heartbeats after t min. When the data in the table are graphed, 
the slope of the tangent line represents the heart rate in beats 
per minute.
t (min)
Heartbeats
36
2530
38
2661
40
2806
42
2948
44
3080
(a)	 Find the average heart rates (slopes of the secant lines) 
over the time intervals 340, 424 and 342, 444.
(b)	 Estimate the patient’s heart rate after 42 min by averag-
ing the slopes of these two secant lines.
43.	 Water Flow    A tank holds 1000 gal of water, which drains 
from the bottom of the tank in half an hour. The values in the 
table show the volume V of water remaining in the tank (in 
gal) after t minutes.
t (min)
V (gal)
  5
694
10
444
15
250
20
111
25
  28
30
    0
(a)	 Find the average rates at which water ﬂows from the tank 
(slopes of secant lines) for the time intervals 310, 154 and 
315, 204.
(b)	 The slope of the tangent line at the point 115, 2502  rep-
resents the rate at which water is ﬂowing from the tank 
after 15 min. Estimate this rate by averaging the slopes 
of the secant lines in part (a).
44.	 World Population Growth    The table gives approximate val-
ues for the world population by providing midyear popula-
tion estimates for the years 1900–2010
Year
Population  
(millions)
Year
Population  
(millions)
1900
1650
1960
3040
1910
1750
1970
3710
1920
1860
1980
4450
1930
2070
1990
5290
1940
2300
2000
6090
1950
2560
2010
6870
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
	 	 Estimate the rate of population growth in 1920 and in 2000 
by averaging the slopes of two secant lines.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
45.	 DISCUSS:  Estimating Derivatives from a Graph    For the 
function g whose graph is given, arrange the following num-
bers in increasing order, and explain your reasoning.
0  gr122  gr102  gr122  gr142
y=˝
1
3
4
_1
0
2
1
2
_1
y
x
46.	 DISCUSS:  Estimating Velocities from a Graph    The graph 
shows the position function of a car. Use the shape of the 
graph to explain your answers to the following questions.
(a)	 What was the initial velocity of the car?
(b)	 Was the car going faster at B or at C?
(c)	 Was the car slowing down or speeding up at A, B, and C?
(d)	 What happened between D and E?
t
s
A
0
B
C
D
E
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

924 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
13.4 
Limits at Infinity; Limits of Sequences
■  Limits at Infinity  ■  Limits of Sequences
In this section we study a special kind of limit called a limit at inﬁnity. We examine the 
limit of a function f1x2  as x becomes large. We also examine the limit of a sequence an 
as n becomes large. Limits of sequences will be used in Section 13.5 to help us ﬁnd the 
area under the graph of a function.
■  Limits at Infinity
Let’s investigate the behavior of the function f deﬁned by
f1x2 x2 1
x2 1
as x becomes large. The table in the margin gives values of this function rounded to six 
decimal places, and the graph of f has been drawn by a computer in Figure 1.
Figure 1
1
0
y=1
y=≈-1
≈+1
y
x
As x grows larger and larger, you can see that the values of f1x2  get closer and closer 
to 1. In fact, it seems that we can make the values of f1x2  as close as we like to 1 by 
taking x sufﬁciently large. This situation is expressed symbolically by writing
lim
xS` x2 1
x2 1 1
In general, we use the notation
lim
xS` f1x2 L
to indicate that the values of f1x2  become closer and closer to L as x becomes larger 
and larger.
Limit at Infinity
Let f be a function deﬁned on some interval 1a,  `2 . Then
lim
xS` f1x2 L
means that the values of f1x2  can be made arbitrarily close to L by taking x 
sufﬁciently large.
Another notation for lim
xS` f1x2 L is
f1x2 S L  as  x S `
Limits at inﬁnity are also discussed in 
Section 3.6.
x
fxxc
0
1.000000
1
0.000000
2
0.600000
3
0.800000
4
0.882353
5
0.923077
10
0.980198
50
0.999200
100
0.999800
1000
0.999998
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.4  ■  Limits at Infinity; Limits of Sequences  925
The symbol q does not represent a number. Nevertheless, we often read the expression 
lim
xS` f1x2 L as
	
“the limit of f1x2 , as x approaches inﬁnity, is L”
or	
“the limit of f1x2 , as x becomes inﬁnite, is L”
or	
“the limit of f1x2 , as x increases without bound, is L”
Geometric illustrations are shown in Figure 2. Notice that there are many ways for the 
graph of f to approach the line y  L (which is called a horizontal asymptote) as we 
look to the far right.
Figure 2  Examples illustrating lim
xS` f1x2 L
0
y=Ï
y=L
0
y=Ï
y=L
0
y=Ï
y=L
y
x
y
x
y
x
Referring back to Figure 1, we see that for numerically large negative values of x, 
the values of f1x2  are close to 1. By letting x decrease through negative values without 
bound, we can make f1x2  as close as we like to 1. This is expressed by writing
lim
xS` x2 1
x2 1 1
The general deﬁnition is as follows.
Limit at Negative Infinity
Let f be a function deﬁned on some interval 1`, a2 . Then
lim
xS` f1x2 L
means that the values of f1x2  can be made arbitrarily close to L by taking x 
sufﬁciently large negative.
Again, the symbol ` does not represent a number, but the expression lim
xS` f1x2 L 
is often read as
“the limit of f1x2, as x approaches negative infinity, is L”
The deﬁnition is illustrated in Figure 3. Notice that the graph approaches the line y  L 
as we look to the far left.
Horizontal Asymptote
The line y  L is called a horizontal asymptote of the curve y f1x2  if either
lim
xS` f1x2 L  or  lim
xS` f1x2 L
0
y=Ï
y=L
0
y=Ï
y=L
y
x
x
y
Figure 3  Examples illustrating 
lim
xS` f1x2 L
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

926 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
For instance, the curve illustrated in Figure 1 has the line y  1 as a horizontal as-
ymptote because
lim
xS` x2 1
x2 1 1
As we discovered in Section 5.5, an example of a curve with two horizontal asymp-
totes is y  tan1x (see Figure 4). In fact,
lim
xS` tan1
 x  p
2  and  lim
xS` tan1
 x p
2
so both of the lines y  p/2 and y  p/2 are horizontal asymptotes. (This follows 
from the fact that the lines x  p/2 are vertical asymptotes of the graph of tan.)
Example 1  ■  Limits at Infinity
Find lim
xS` 1
x and lim
xS` 1
x.
Solution    Observe that when x is large, 1/x is small. For instance,
1
100 0.01   
1
10,000 0.0001   
1
1,000,000 0.000001
In fact, by taking x large enough, we can make 1/x as close to 0 as we please. 
Therefore
lim
xS` 1
x 0
Similar reasoning shows that when x is large negative, 1/x is small negative, so we 
also have
lim
xS` 1
x 0
It follows that the line y  0 (the x-axis) is a horizontal asymptote of the curve 
y  1/x. (This is a hyperbola; see Figure 5.)
Now Try Exercise 5	
■
The Limit Laws that we studied in Section 13.2 also hold for limits at inﬁnity. In 
particular, if we combine Law 6 (Limit of a Power) with the results of Example 1, we 
obtain the following important rule for calculating limits.
If k is any positive integer, then
lim
xS` 1
xk 0  and  lim
xS` 1
xk 0
Example 2  ■  Finding a Limit at Infinity
Evaluate lim
xS` 3x2 x 2
5x2 4x 1.
Solution    To evaluate the limit at inﬁnity of a rational function, we ﬁrst divide  
both the numerator and denominator by the highest power of x that occurs in the  
We ﬁrst investigated horizontal  
asymptotes and limits at inﬁnity for  
rational functions in Section 3.6.
0
_ π
2
π
2
x
y
Figure 4  y tan1
 x
0
x
1
x
y=
y
Figure 5  lim
xS` 1
x 0, lim
xS` 1
x 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.4  ■  Limits at Infinity; Limits of Sequences  927
denominator. (We may assume that x ? 0, since we are interested only in large values 
of x.) In this case the highest power of x in the denominator is x2, so we have
 lim
xS` 3x2 x 2
5x2 4x 1 lim
xS` 
3 1
x 2
x2
5 4
x 1
x2
    Divide numerator and 
denominator by x2
  
lim
xS` a 3 1
x 2
x2 b
lim
xS` a 5 4
x 1
x2 b
    Limit of a Quotient
  
lim
xS`
 3 lim
xS` 1
x 2 lim
xS` 1
x2
lim
xS` 5 4 lim
xS` 1
x lim
xS` 1
x2
   
Limits of Sums,  
Differences, and  
Constant Multiples
  3 0 0
5 0 0 3
5
    Let x → `
A similar calculation shows that the limit as x S ` is also 3
5. Figure 6 illustrates the 
results of these calculations by showing how the graph of the given rational function 
approaches the horizontal asymptote y 3
5.
Now Try Exercise 9	
■
Example 3  ■  A Limit at Negative Infinity
Use numerical and graphical methods to ﬁnd lim
xS` ex.
Solution    From the graph of the natural exponential function y  e x in Figure 7 and 
the corresponding table of values we see that
lim
xS` ex 0
It follows that the line y  0 (the x-axis) is a horizontal asymptote.
y=Æ
0
1
1
y
x
Figure 7
x
ex
0
1.00000
1
0.36788
2
0.13534
3
0.04979
5
0.00674
8
0.00034
10
0.00005
Now Try Exercise 19	
■
Example 4  ■  A Function with No Limit at Inﬁnity
Evaluate lim
xS` sin x.
1
y=0.6
0
y
x
Figure 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

928 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Solution    From the graph in Figure 8 and the periodic nature of the sine function we 
see that as x increases, the values of sin x oscillate between 1 and 1 inﬁnitely often, 
so they don’t approach any deﬁnite number. Therefore limxS` sin x does not exist.
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
■  Limits of Sequences
In Section 12.1 we introduced the idea of a sequence of numbers a1, a2, a3, . . . . Here 
we are interested in their behavior as n becomes large. For instance, the sequence 
deﬁned by
an 
n
n 1
is pictured in Figure 9 by plotting its terms on a number line and in Figure 10 by  
plotting its graph. From Figure 9 or 10 it appears that the terms of the sequence 
an n/1n 12  are approaching 1 as n becomes large. We indicate this by writing
lim
nS` 
n
n 1 1
DeFInition of the Limit of a Sequence
A sequence a1, a2, a3, . . . has the limit L and we write
lim
nS` an L  or  an S L as n S `
if the nth term an of the sequence can be made arbitrarily close to L by taking n 
sufﬁciently large. If limnS` an exists, we say the sequence converges (or is con-
vergent). Otherwise, we say the sequence diverges (or is divergent).
This deﬁnition is illustrated by Figure 11.
0
n
an
L
1 2 3
0
n
an
L
1 2 3
Figure 11  Graphs of two sequences with lim
nS` an L
If we compare the deﬁnitions of limnS` an L and limxS` f1x2 L, we see that 
the only difference is that n is required to be an integer. Thus the following is true.
If lim
xS` f1x2 L and f1n2 an when n is an integer, then lim
nS` an L.
In particular, since we know that limxS` 11/xk2 0 when k is a positive integer, we 
have
lim
nS` 1
nk 0        if k is a positive integer
Note that the Limit Laws given in Section 13.2 also hold for limits of sequences.
0
y=ß x
y
x
Figure 8
0
1
1
2
a⁄
a a‹ a›
Figure 9
0
n
an
1
1
2 3 4 5 6 7
7
8
a‡=
Figure 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.4  ■  Limits at Infinity; Limits of Sequences  929
Example 5  ■  Finding the Limit of a Sequence
Find lim
nS` 
n
n 1.
Solution    The method is similar to the one we used in Example 2: Divide the 
numerator and denominator by the highest power of n, and then use the Limit Laws.
 lim
nS` 
n
n 1 lim
nS` 
1
1 1
n
        Divide numerator and  
denominator by n
  
lim
nS` 1
lim
nS` 1 lim
nS` 1
n
        Limits of a Quotient  
and a Sum
  
1
1 0 1
        Let n → `
Therefore the sequence an n/1n 12  is convergent.
Now Try Exercise 23	
■
Example 6  ■  A Sequence That Diverges
Determine whether the sequence an 112 n is convergent or divergent.
Solution    If we write out the terms of the sequence, we obtain
1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, . . .
The graph of this sequence is shown in Figure 12. Since the terms oscillate between 1 
and 1 inﬁnitely often, an does not approach any number. Thus limnS` 112 n does 
not exist; that is, the sequence an 112 n is divergent.
Now Try Exercise 29	
■
Example 7  ■  Finding the Limit of a Sequence
Find the limit of the sequence given by
an 15
n3 c
n1n 12 12n 12
6
d
Solution    Before calculating the limit, let’s ﬁrst simplify the expression for an. 
Because n3  n # n # n, we place a factor of n beneath each factor in the numerator that 
contains an n:
an 15
6 # n
n # n 1
n
# 2n 1
n
5
2 # 1 # a 1 1
n b a 2 1
n b
Now we can compute the limit.
 lim
nS` an lim
nS` 5
2 a 1 1
n b a 2 1
n b
        Deﬁnition of an
  5
2 lim
nS` a 1 1
n b lim
nS` a 2 1
n b         Limit of a Product
  5
2
 112 122 5
        Let n → `
Now Try Exercise 31	
■
This result shows that the guess we 
made earlier from Figures 9 and  
10 was correct.
0
n
an
1
1
2
3
4
_1
Figure 12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

930 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Concepts
	 1.	 Let f be a function defined on some interval 1a, `2 . Then 
lim
xS` f 1x2 L
	 	 means that the values of f 1x2  can be made arbitrarily close to 
	 	
 
 by taking  
 sufficiently large. In this case 
	 	 the line y L is called a  
  
 of the function 
	 	 y f 1x2 . For example, lim
xS` 1
x 
 
  , and the line 
	 	 y 
 
 is a horizontal asymptote.
	 2.	 A sequence a1, a2, a3, . . . has the limit L if the nth term an of 
	 	 the sequence can be made arbitrarily close to  
 by 
	 	 taking n to be sufficiently  
  . If the limit exists, we 
	 	 say that the sequence  
  ; otherwise, the 
	 	 sequence  
  .
Skills
3–4  ■  Limits from a Graph   
(a)  Use the graph of f to ﬁnd the following limits.
(i)  lim
xS` f1x2     (ii)  lim
xS` f1x2
(b)  State the equations of the horizontal asymptotes.
	 3.	
1
1
x
f
y
	 4.	
1
1
y
x
f
5–18  ■  Limits at Infinity    Find the limit.
	 5.	 lim
xS` 6
x	
  6.	 lim
xS` 3
x4
	 7.	 lim
xS` 2x 1
5x 1	
  8.	 lim
xS` 2 3x
4x 5
	 9.	 lim
xS` 4x2 1
2 3x2	
10.	 lim
xS` 
x2 2
x3 x 1
	11.	  lim
tS` 
8t3 t
12t 12 12t2 12 	
12.	 lim
rS` 4r3 r2
1r 12 3
13.	 lim
xS` 
x4
1 x2 x3	
14.	  lim
tS` a 1
t 
2t
t 1 b
15.	 lim
xS` a x 1
x 1 6b 	
16.	 lim
xS ` a 3 x
3 x 2b
17.	 lim
xS` cos x	
18.	 lim
xS` sin2
 x
19–22  ■  Estimating Limits Numerically and Graphically    Use a 
table of values to estimate the limit. Then use a graphing device 
to conﬁrm your result graphically.
19.	 lim
xS` "x2 4x
4x 1 	
20.	 lim
xS` A"9x2 x 3xB
21.	 lim
xS` x5
ex	
22.	 lim
xS` a 1 2
x b
3x
23–34  ■  Limits of Sequences    If the sequence with the given nth 
term is convergent, ﬁnd its limit. If it is divergent, explain why.
23.	 an 1 n
n n2	
24.	 an 
5n
n 5
25.	 an 
n2
n 1	
26.	 an n 1
n3 1
27.	 an 1
3n	
28.	 an 
112 n
n
29.	 an sin1np/22 	
30.	 an  cos np
31.	 an 3
n2 c
n1n 12
2
d 	
32.	 an 5
n a n 4
n c
n1n 12
2
d b
33.	 an 24
n3 c
n1n 12 12n 12
6
d
34.	 an 12
n4 c
n1n 12
2
d
2
Skills Plus
35–36  ■  A Function from a Description    Find a formula from a 
function f that satisfies the following conditions.
	35.	 Vertical asymptotes x 1 and x 3 and horizontal asymp-
tote y 1.
	36.	 lim
xS` f1x2 0, 
lim
xS0 f1x2 `, 
f122 0, 
lim
xS3 f1x2 `, 
lim
xS3 f1x2 `
	37.	 Asymptote Behavior    How close to 3 do we have to take x 
so that 
1
1x 32 2 10,000
	38.	 Equivalent Limits    Show that 
lim
xS` f1x2 lim
tS0 fa 1
t b
and	
lim
xS ` f1x2 lim
tS0 fa 1
t b
	 	 if these limits exist.
13.4  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.5  ■  Areas  931
Applications
39.	 Salt Concentration
(a)	 A tank contains 5000 L of pure water. Brine that contains 
30 g of salt per liter of water is pumped into the tank at a 
rate of 25 L/min. Show that the concentration of salt 
after t minutes (in g/L) is
C1t2 
30t
200 t
(b)	 What happens to the concentration as t S `?
40.	 Velocity of a Raindrop    The downward velocity of a falling 
raindrop at time t is modeled by the function
√1t2 1.211 e8.2t2
(a)	 Find the terminal velocity of the raindrop by evaluating 
limtS` √1t2 . (Use the result of Example 3.)
(b)	 Graph √1t2 , and use the graph to estimate how long it 
takes for the velocity of the raindrop to reach 99% of its 
terminal velocity.
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
41.	 DISCUSS:  The Limit of a Recursive Sequence
(a)	 A sequence is deﬁned recursively by a1  0 and
an1 "2 an
	
Find the ﬁrst ten terms of this sequence rounded to  
eight decimal places. Does this sequence appear to be 
convergent? If so, guess the value of the limit.
(b)	 Assuming that the sequence in part (a) is convergent, let 
limnS` an L. Explain why limnS` an1 L also and 
therefore
L !2 L
	
Solve this equation to ﬁnd the exact value of L.
13.5 
Areas
■  The Area Problem  ■  Definition of Area
We have seen that limits are needed to compute the slope of a tangent line or an instan-
taneous rate of change. Here we will see that they are also needed to ﬁnd the area of a 
region with a curved boundary. The problem of ﬁnding such areas has consequences far 
beyond simply ﬁnding area. (See the Focus on Modeling on page 944.)
■  The Area Problem
One of the central problems in calculus is the area problem: Find the area of the region 
S that lies under the curve y f1x2  from a to b. This means that S, illustrated in Figure 
1, is bounded by the graph of a function f (where f1x2 $ 0), the vertical lines x  a 
and x  b, and the x-axis.
0
a
b
y=Ï
S
x=a
x=b
y
x
Figure 1
In trying to solve the area problem, we have to ask ourselves: What is the meaning 
of the word area? This question is easy to answer for regions with straight sides. For a 
rectangle, the area is deﬁned as the product of the length and the width. The area of a 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

932 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
triangle is half the base times the height. The area of a polygon is found by dividing it 
into triangles (as in Figure 2) and adding the areas of the triangles.
A⁄
A¤
A‹
A›
A=A⁄+A¤+A‹+A›
h
b
A=   bh
1
2
A=l„
l
„
Figure 2
However, it is not so easy to ﬁnd the area of a region with curved sides. We all have 
an intuitive idea of what the area of a region is. But part of the area problem is to make 
this intuitive idea precise by giving an exact deﬁnition of area.
Recall that in deﬁning a tangent, we ﬁrst approximated the slope of the tangent line 
by slopes of secant lines, and then we took the limit of these approximations. We pursue 
a similar idea for areas. We ﬁrst approximate the region S by rectangles, and then we 
take the limit of the areas of these rectangles as we increase the number of rectangles. 
The following example illustrates the procedure.
Example 1  ■  Estimating an Area Using Rectangles
Use rectangles to estimate the area under the parabola y  x2 from 0 to 1 (the para-
bolic region S illustrated in Figure 3).
0
1
(1, 1)
y=≈
S
y
x
Figure 3
Solution    We ﬁrst notice that the area of S must be somewhere between 0 and 1 
because S is contained in a square with side length 1, but we can certainly do better 
than that. Suppose we divide S into four strips S1, S2, S3, and S4 by drawing the vertical 
lines x 1
4, x 1
2, and x 3
4 as in Figure 4(a). We can approximate each strip by a 
rectangle whose base is the same as the strip and whose height is the same as the  
right edge of the strip (see Figure 4(b)). In other words, the heights of these rectangles 
are the values of the function f1x2 x2 at the right endpoints of the subintervals 
C0,  1
4D, C1
4,  1
2D, C1
2,  3
4D, and C3
4,  1D.
(b)
(a)
0
1
(1, 1)
y=≈
3
4
1
2
1
4
S›
S‹
S¤
S⁄
0
1
3
4
1
2
1
4
(1, 1)
y=≈
y
x
y
x
Figure 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.5  ■  Areas  933
Each rectangle has width 1
4, and the heights are A1
4B
2, A1
2B
2, A3
4B
2, and 12. If we let R4 
be the sum of the areas of these approximating rectangles, we get
R4 1
4 # A1
4B
2 1
4 # A1
2B
2 1
4 # A3
4B
2 1
4 # 1
2 15
32 0.46875
From Figure 4(b) we see that the area A of S is less than R4, so
A 0.46875
Instead of using the rectangles in Figure 4(b), we could use the smaller rectangles 
in Figure 5 whose heights are the values of f at the left endpoints of the subintervals. 
(The leftmost rectangle has collapsed because its height is 0.) The sum of the areas of 
these approximating rectangles is
L4 1
4 # 0
2 1
4 # A1
4B
2 1
4 # A1
2B
2 1
4 # A3
4B
2 7
32 0.21875
We see that the area of S is larger than L4, so we have lower and upper estimates for A:
0.21875 A 0.46875
We can repeat this procedure with a larger number of strips. Figure 6 shows what 
happens when we divide the region S into eight strips of equal width. By computing 
the sum of the areas of the smaller rectangles 1L82  and the sum of the areas of the 
larger rectangles 1R82 , we obtain better lower and upper estimates for A:
0.2734375 A 0.3984375
So one possible answer to the question is to say that the true area of S lies somewhere 
between 0.2734375 and 0.3984375.
(a) Using left endpoints
(b) Using right endpoints
0
1
1
8
y=≈
(1, 1)
0
1
1
8
(1, 1)
y=≈
y
x
y
x
Figure 6  Approximating S with 
eight rectangles
We could obtain better estimates by increasing the number of strips. The table  
in the margin shows the results of similar calculations (with a computer) using n rect-
angles whose heights are found with left endpoints 1Ln2 or right endpoints 1Rn2. In par-
ticular, we see by using 50 strips that the area lies between 0.3234 and 0.3434. With 
1000 strips we narrow it down even more: A lies between 0.3328335 and 0.3338335. 
A good estimate is obtained by averaging these numbers: A  0.3333335.
Now Try Exercise 3	
■
From the values in the table it looks as if Rn is approaching 1
3 as n increases. We 
conﬁrm this in the next example.
Example 2  ■  The Limit of Approximating Sums
For the region S in Example 1, show that the sum of the areas of the upper approxi-
mating rectangles approaches 1
3, that is,
lim
nS`
 Rn 1
3
n
Ln
Rn
10
0.2850000
0.3850000
20
0.3087500
0.3587500
30
0.3168519
0.3501852
50
0.3234000
0.3434000
100
0.3283500
0.3383500
1000
0.3328335
0.3338335
0
1
(1, 1)
3
4
1
2
1
4
y=≈
y
x
Figure 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

934 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Solution    Let Rn be the sum of the areas of the n rectangles shown in Figure 7. Each 
rectangle has width 1/n, and the heights are the values of the function f1x2 x2 at the 
points 1/n, 2/n, 3/n, . . . , n/n. That is, the heights are 11/n2 2, 12/n2 2, 13/n2 2, . . . , 1n/n2 2. 
Thus
 Rn 1
n a 1
n b
2
1
n a 2
n b
2
1
n a 3
n b
2
. . . 1
n a n
n b
2
  1
n # 1
n2
 112 22 32 . . . n22
  1
n3
 112 22 32 . . . n22
Here we need the formula for the sum of the squares of the ﬁrst n positive integers:
12 22 32 . . . n2 
n1n 12 12n 12
6
Putting the preceding formula into our expression for Rn, we get
Rn 1
n3 # n1n 12 12n 12
6

1n 12 12n 12
6n2
Thus we have
 lim
nS` Rn lim
nS` 
1n 12 12n 12
6n2
  lim
nS` 1
6 a n 1
n
b a 2n 1
n
b
  lim
nS` 1
6 a 1 1
n b a 2 1
n b
  1
6 # 1 # 2 1
3
Now Try Exercise 13	
■
It can be shown that the lower approximating sums also approach 1
3, that is,
lim
nS` Ln 1
3
From Figures 8 and 9 it appears that as n increases, both Rn and Ln become better and 
better approximations to the area of S. Therefore we deﬁne the area A to be the limit of 
the sums of the areas of the approximating rectangles, that is,
A lim
nS` Rn lim
nS` Ln 1
3
1
0
n=50    Rﬁ‚=0.3434
1
0
n=30    R‹‚Å0.3502
1
0
n=10    R⁄‚=0.385
y
x
y
x
y
x
Figure 8
This formula was discussed in  
Section 12.5.
1
n
0
1
(1, 1)
y=≈
y
x
Figure 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.5  ■  Areas  935
1
0
n=10    L⁄‚=0.285
1
0
n=30    L‹‚Å0.3169
1
0
n=50    Lﬁ‚=0.3234
y
x
y
x
y
x
Figure 9
■  Definition of Area
Let’s apply the idea of Examples 1 and 2 to the more general region S of Figure 1. We 
start by subdividing S into n strips S1, S2, . . . , Sn of equal width as in Figure 10.
0
a
b
x⁄
x¤
x‹
xi-1
xi
xn-1
.  .  .
.  .  .
y=Ï
S⁄
S¤
S‹
Si
Sn
y
x
Figure 10
The width of the interval 3a,  b4  is b  a, so the width of each of the n strips is
x b a
n
These strips divide the interval 3a,  b4  into n subintervals
3x0, x14, 3x1, x24, 3x2, x34,    . . . ,    3xn1, xn4
where x0  a and xn  b. The right endpoints of the subintervals are
x1 a x, x2 a 2 x, x3 a 3 x, . . . , xk a k x, . . .
Let’s approximate the kth strip Sk by a rectangle with width x and height f1xk2 , 
which is the value of f at the right endpoint (see Figure 11). Then the area of the kth 
rectangle is f1xk2  x. What we think of intuitively as the area of S is approximated by 
the sum of the areas of these rectangles, which is
Rn f1x12  x f1x22  x . . . f1xn2  x
0
a
b
x⁄
x¤
x‹
xk-1 xk
Îx
f(xk)
y
x
Figure 11
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

936 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Figure 12 shows this approximation for n  2, 4, 8, and 12.
(a) n=2
(b) n=4
(c) n=8
(d) n=12
0
a
b
x⁄
0
a
b
x⁄
x¤
x‹
0
a
b
0
a
b
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
Figure 12
Notice that this approximation appears to become better and better as the number of 
strips increases, that is, as n S `. Therefore we deﬁne the area A of the region S in the 
following way.
Definition of Area
The area A of the region S that lies under the graph of the continuous function 
f is the limit of the sum of the areas of approximating rectangles:
A lim
nS` Rn lim
nS`3f1x12  x f1x22  x . . . f1xn2  x4
Using sigma notation, we write this as follows:
A lim
nS` a
n
k1
f1xk2  x
In using this formula for area, remember that x is the width of an approximating 
rectangle, xk is the right endpoint of the kth rectangle, and f1xk2  is its height. So
Width:               x b a
n
 Right endpoint:     xk a k x
Height:          f1xk2 f1a k x2
When working with sums, we will need the following properties from Section 12.1:
a
n
k1
1ak bk2 a
n
k1
ak a
n
k1
bk    a
n
k1
cak c a
n
k1
ak
We will also need the following formulas for the sums of the powers of the ﬁrst n natu-
ral numbers from Section 12.5.
a
n
k1
c nc                                  a
n
k1
k 
n1n 12
2
 a
n
k1
k 2 
n1n 12 12n 12
6
            a
n
k1
k 3 
n21n 12 2
4
Example 3  ■  Finding the Area Under a Curve
Find the area of the region that lies under the parabola y  x2, where 0  x  5.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.5  ■  Areas  937
Solution    The region is graphed in Figure 13. To ﬁnd the area, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the 
dimensions of the approximating rectangles at the nth stage.
Width:                 x b a
n
5 0
n
5
n
Right endpoint:         xk a k x 0 ka 5
n b 5k
n
Height:            f1xk2 f a 5k
n b a 5k
n b
2
25k2
n2
Now we substitute these values into the deﬁnition of area.
 A lim
nS` a
n
k1
f1xk2  x
    Deﬁnition of area
  lim
nS` a
n
k1
25k2
n2 # 5
n
   
f1xk2 25k2
n2 , x 5
n
  lim
nS` a
n
k1
125k2
n3
    Simplify
  lim
nS` 125
n3  a
n
k1
k2
    Factor 125
n3
  lim
nS` 125
n3 # n1n 12 12n 12
6
    Sum of Squares Formula
  lim
nS` 
12512n2 3n 12
6n2
    Cancel n, and expand the numerator
  lim
nS` 125
6 a 2 3
n 1
n2 b
    Divide the numerator and denominator by n2
  125
6
 12 0 02 125
3
    Let n → `
Thus the area of the region is 125
3 < 41.7.
Now Try Exercise 15	
■
Example 4  ■  Finding the Area Under a Curve
Find the area of the region that lies under the parabola y  4x  x2, where 1  x  3.
Solution    We start by ﬁnding the dimensions of the approximating rectangles at the 
nth stage.
Width:               x b a
n
3 1
n
2
n
 Right endpoint:      xk a k x 1 ka 2
n b 1 2k
n
Height:              f1xk2 f a 1 2k
n b 4a 1 2k
n b a 1 2k
n b
2
  4 8k
n 1 4k
n 4k 2
n2
  3 4k
n 4k 2
n2
We can also calculate the limit by  
writing
125
n3 # n1n 12 12n 12
6
 125
6 a n
n b a n 1
n
b a 2n 1
n
b
as in Example 2.
1
5
5
25
0
y=≈
y
x
Figure 13
1
4
0
y=4x-≈
3
y
x
The figure below shows the region 
whose area is computed in Example 4.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

938 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Thus according to the deﬁnition of area, we get
 A lim
nS` a
n
k1
f1xk2  x lim
nS` a
n
k1
a 3 4k
n 4k2
n2 b a 2
n b
  lim
nS` a a
n
k1
3 4
n a
n
k1
k 4
n2 a
n
k1
k2 b a 2
n b
  lim
nS` a 2
n a
n
k1
3 8
n2 a
n
k1
k 8
n3 a
n
k1
k2 b
  lim
nS` a 2
n
 13n2 8
n2 c
n1n 12
2
d 8
n3 c
n1n 12 12n 12
6
d b
  lim
nS` a 6 4 # n
n # n 1
n
4
3 # n
n # n 1
n
# 2n 1
n
b
  lim
nS` c 6 4a 1 1
n b 4
3 a 1 1
n b a 2 1
n b d
  6 4 # 1 4
3 # 1 # 2 22
3
Now Try Exercise 17	
■
Concepts
1–2  ■  The graph of a function f is shown below.
0
a
b
x⁄
f
y
x
x¤
x‹
	 1.	 To find the area under the graph of f, we first approximate 
	 	 the area by  
  . Approximate the area by drawing four 
rectangles. The area R4 of this approximation is
R4 
  
  
  
	 2.	 Let Rn be the approximation obtained by using n rectangles  
of equal width. The exact area under the graph of f is 
A lim
nS`
Skills
	 3.	 Estimating an Area Using Rectangles   
(a)  By reading values from the given graph of f, use ﬁve 
rectangles to ﬁnd a lower estimate and an upper esti-
mate for the area under the given graph of f from x  0 
to x  10. In each case, sketch the rectangles that you 
use.
(b)	 Find new estimates using ten rectangles in each case.
0
5
5
y=Ï
10
y
x
	 4.	 Estimating an Area Using Rectangles   
(a)  Use six rectangles to ﬁnd estimates of each type for the 
area under the given graph of f from x  0 to x  12.
	
(i)	 L6  (using left endpoints)
	
(ii)	 R6 (using right endpoints)
(b)	 Is L6 an underestimate or an overestimate of the true area?
(c)	 Is R6 an underestimate or an overestimate of the true area?
0
4
4
8
y=Ï
8
12
y
x
13.5  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 13.5  ■  Areas  939
5–8  ■  Estimating Areas Using Rectangles    Approximate the area 
of the shaded region under the graph of the given function by using 
the indicated rectangles. (The rectangles have equal width.)
	 5.	 f1x2 1
2 x 2	
  6.	 f1x2 4 x 2
y
x
1
1
2
0
	
1
1
_1 0
y
x
	 7.	 f1x2 4
x	
  8.	 f1x2 9x x 3
1
1
7
0
4
y
x
	
2
5
1
10
0
y
x
9–12  ■  Estimating Areas Using Rectangles    In these exercises we 
estimate the area under the graph of a function by using rectangles.
	 9.	 (a)	 Estimate the area under the graph of f1x2 1/x from  
x  1 to x  5 using four approximating rectangles and 
right endpoints. Sketch the graph and the rectangles. Is 
your estimate an underestimate or an overestimate?
(b)	 Repeat part (a), using left endpoints.
	10.	 (a)	 Estimate the area under the graph of f1x2 25 x2 
from x  0 to x  5 using ﬁve approximating rectangles 
and right endpoints. Sketch the graph and the rectangles. 
Is your estimate an underestimate or an overestimate?
(b)	 Repeat part (a) using left endpoints.
	11.	 (a)	 Estimate the area under the graph of f1x2 1 x2 from  
x  1 to x  2 using three rectangles and right end-
points. Then improve your estimate by using six rectan-
gles. Sketch the curve and the approximating rectangles.
(b)	 Repeat part (a) using left endpoints.
12.	 (a)	 Estimate the area under the graph of f1x2 ex,  
0  x  4, using four approximating rectangles and  
taking the sample points to be
	
(i)	 right endpoints
	
(ii)	 left endpoints
	
In each case, sketch the curve and the rectangles.
(b)	 Improve your estimates in part (a) by using eight rectangles.
13–14  ■  Finding the Area Under A Curve    Use the deﬁnition of 
area as a limit to ﬁnd the area of the region that lies under the curve. 
Check your answer by sketching the region and using geometry.
13.	 y  3x,    0  x  5	
14.	 y  2x  1,    1  x  3
15–20  ■  Finding the Area Under a Curve    Find the area of the 
region that lies under the graph of f over the given interval.
15.	 f1x2 3x2,    0  x  2
16.	 f1x2 x x2,    0  x  1
17.	 f1x2 x3 2,    0  x  5
18.	 f1x2 4x3,    2  x  5
19.	 f1x2 x 6x2,    1  x  4
20.	 f1x2 20 2x2,    2  x  3
DiSCUSS 
■ 
DISCOVER 
■ 
PROVE 
■  WRITE
21.	 DISCUSS:  Approximating Area with a Calculator    When we 
approximate areas using rectangles as in Example 1, then the 
more rectangles we use, the more accurate the answer. The 
following TI-83 program ﬁnds the approximate area under 
the graph of f on the interval 3a, b4  using n rectangles. To 
use the program, ﬁrst store the function f in Y1. The program 
prompts you to enter N, the number of rectangles, and A and 
B, the endpoints of the interval.
(a)	 Approximate the area under the graph of 
f1x2 x 5 2x 3 on 31, 34, using 10, 20, and  
100 rectangles.
(b)	 Approximate the area under the graph of f on the given 
interval, using 100 rectangles.
	
(i)	 f1x2 sin x,    on 30, p4
	
(ii)	 f1x2 ex2,    on 31, 14
PROGRAM:AREA
:Prompt N
:Prompt A
:Prompt B
:(B-A)/N→D
:0→S
:A→X
:For (K,1,N)
:X+D→X
:S+Y1→S
:End
:D*S→S
:Disp “AREA IS”
:Disp S
22.	 WRITE:  Regions with Straight Versus Curved Boundaries     
Write a short essay that explains how you would ﬁnd the 
area of a polygon, that is, a region bounded by straight line 
segments. Then explain how you would ﬁnd the area of a 
region whose boundary is curved, as we did in this section. 
What is the fundamental difference between these two 
processes?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

940 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
Limits (pp. 898, 903)
We say that the limit of a function f, as x approaches a, equals 
L, and we write 
lim
xSa f1x2 L
provided that the values of f1x2  can be made arbitrarily close to 
L by taking x to be sufficiently close to a. 
The left-hand and right-hand limits of f, as x approaches a, are 
defined similarly:
lim
xSa f1x2 L   
lim
xSa f1x2 L
The limit of f, as x approaches a, exists if and only if both left- 
and right-hand limits exist: limxSa f1x2 L if and only if 
limxSa f1x2 L and limxSa f1x2 L.
Algebraic Properties of Limits (pp. 906–908)
The following Limit Laws hold:
1.	 lim
xSa 3f1x2 g1x2 4 lim
xSa f1x2 lim
xSa  g1x2
2.	 lim
xSa 3f1x2 g1x2 4 lim
xSa f1x2 lim
xSa  g1x2
3.	 lim
xSa cf1x2 c lim
xSa f1x2
4.	 lim
xSa 3f1x2g1x2 4 lim
xSa f1x2 # lim
xSa g1x2
5.	 lim
xSa 
 f1x2
g1x2 
lim
xSa f1x2
lim
xSa g1x2 ,  if lim
xSa g1x2 ? 0
6.	 lim
xSa 3f1x2 4 n 3lim
xSa f1x2 4 n	
  7.	 lim
xSa!
n f1x2 !
n lim
xSa f1x2
The following special limits hold:
1.	 lim
xSa c c	
  2.	 lim
xSa x a
3.	 lim
xSa xn an	
  4.	 lim
xSa!
n x !
n a
If f is a polynomial or a rational function and a is in the domain 
of f, then limxSa f1x2 f 1a2 .
Derivatives (p. 918)
Let y f1x2  be a function. The derivative of f at a, denoted by 
fr1a2 , is 
fr1a2 lim
hS0 
f1x h2 f1x2
h
Equivalently, the derivative fr1a2  is 
fr1a2 lim
xSa 
f1x2 f1a2
x a
The derivative of f at a is the slope of the tangent line to the 
curve y f1x2  at the point P1a, f1a22 .
The derivative of f at a is the instantaneous rate of change of y 
with respect to x at x a. 
Limits at Infinity (pp. 924–926)
We say that the limit of a function f, as x approaches infinity, 
is L, and write
lim
xS` f1x2 L
provided that the values of f1x2  can be made arbitrarily close to 
L by taking x sufficiently large.
We say that the limit of a function f, as x approaches negative 
infinity, is L, and we write
lim
xS` f1x2 L
provided that the values of f1x2  can be made arbitrarily close to 
L by taking x sufficiently large negative.
The line y L is a horizontal asymptote of the curve y  f1x2  
if either 
lim
xS` f1x2 L    or   
lim
xS` f1x2 L
The following special limits hold, where k 0:
lim
xS` 1
xk 0    and   
lim
xS` 1
xk 0
Limits of Sequences (p. 928)
We say that a sequence a1, a2, a3, . . . has the limit L, and we write
lim
nS` an L
provided that the nth term an of the sequence can be made arbi-
trarily close to L by taking n sufficiently large. 
If limxS` f1x2 L and if f1n2 an when n is an integer, then 
limnS` an L.
Area (pp. 935–936)
Let f be a continuous function defined on the interval 3a, b4 . The 
area A of the region that lies under the graph of f is the limit of 
the sum of the areas of approximating rectangles:
 A lim
nS` 3f1x12  x f1x22  x . . . f1xn2 x4
 lim
nS`
 a
n
k1
 f1xk2  x
where 
x b a
n
    and   
xk a k x
Summation Formulas (p. 936)
The following summation formulas are useful for calculating 
areas:
 a
n
k1
c nc  
 a
n
k1
k 
n1n 12
2
 a
n
k1
k2 
n1n 12 12n 12
6
   a
n
k1
k3 
n21n 12 2
4
■  PROPERTIES AND FORMULAS
CHAPTER 13  ■  REVIEW
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 13  ■  Review  941
	 1.	 (a)	 Explain what is meant by limxSa f1x2 L.
(b)	 If limxS2 f1x2 5, is it possible that f122 3?
(c)	 Find limxS2 x2.
	 2.	 To evaluate the limit of a function, we often need to first 
rewrite the function using the rules of algebra. What is the 
logical first step in evaluating each of the following limits?
(a)	 lim
xS2 x2 4
x 2 	
(b)	 lim
hS0 
15 h2 2 25
h
(c)	 lim
xS3 !x 1 2
x 3
	
(d)	 lim
xS7 
a 1
7 1
x b
x 7
	 3.	 (a)	 Explain what it means to say:
lim
xS3 f1x2 5   
lim
xS3 f1x2 10
(b)	 If the two equations in part (a) are true, is it possible that 
limxS3 f1x2 5?
(c)	 Find limxS2 f1x2  and limxS2 f1x2 , where f is defined 
as follows:
f1x2 e1 if x 2
x if x 2
(d)	 For f as in (c), does limxS2 f1x2  exist?
	 4.	 (a)	 Define the derivative fr1a2  of a function f at x a.
(b)	 State an equivalent formulation for fr1a2 .
(c)	 Find the derivative of f1x2 x2 at x 3.
	 5.	 (a)	 Give two different interpretations of the derivative of the 
function y f1x2  at x a.
(b)	 For the function f1x2 x2, find the slope of the tangent 
line to the graph of f at the point 13, 92  on the graph. 
(c)	 For the function y x2, find the instantaneous rate of 
change of y with respect to x when x 3.
(d)	 Write expressions for the average rate of change of y 
with respect to x between a and x and for the instanta-
neous rate of change of y with respect to x at x a.
	 6.	 (a)	 Explain what is meant by limxS` f1x2 L. Draw 
sketches to illustrate different ways in which this can 
happen.
(b)	 Find lim
xS` 3x2 x
x2 1 .
(c)	 Explain why limxS` sin x does not exist.
	 7.	 (a)	 If a1, a2, a3, . . . is a sequence, what is meant by 
	 	 	
limnS` an L? What is a convergent sequence?
(b)	 Find limnS`112 n/n. 
	 8.	 (a)	 Suppose S is the region under the graph of the function 
y f1x2  and above the x-axis, where a x b. 
Explain how this area is approximated by rectangles, and 
write an expression for the area of S as a limit of sums. 
(b)	 Find the area under the graph of f1x2 x2 and above 
the x-axis, between x 0 and x 3.
■  CONCEPT CHECK
1–6  ■  Estimating Limits Numerically and Graphically    Use a 
table of values to estimate the value of the limit. Then use a 
graphing device to conﬁrm your result graphically.
	 1.	 lim
xS2 
x 2
x2 3x 2	
  2.	 lim
tS1 t 1
t 3 t
	 3.	 lim
xS0 2x 1
x
	
  4.	 lim
xS0 sin 2x
x
	 5.	 lim
xS1 ln !x 1	
  6.	 lim
xS0 tan x
0 x 0
	 7.	 Limits from a Graph    The graph of f is shown in the ﬁgure. 
Find each limit, or explain why it does not exist.
(a)	 lim
xS2
 f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS3
 f1x2
(c)	
lim
xS3
 f1x2 	
(d)	 lim
xS3
 f1x2
(e)	 lim
xS4 f1x2 	
(f)	 lim
xS`
 f1x2
(g)	 lim
xS`f1x2 	
(h)	 lim
xS0 f1x2
1
1
y
x
■  EXERCISES
ANSWERS TO THE CONCEPT CHECK CAN BE FOUND AT THE BACK OF THE BOOK.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

942 
CHAPTER 13  ■  Limits: A Preview of Calculus
	 8.	 One-Sided Limits    Let
f1x2 •
2
if x 1
x2
if 1 x 2
x 2
if x 2
	 	 Find each limit, or explain why it does not exist.
(a)	
lim
xS1f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS1f1x2
(c)	 lim
xS1 f1x2 	
(d)	 lim
xS2f1x2
(e)	 lim
xS2 f1x2 	
(f)	 lim
xS2 f1x2
(g)	 lim
xS0 f1x2 	
(h)	 lim 
xS3 1f1x22 2
9–20  ■  Finding Limits    Evaluate the limit, if it exists. Use the 
Limit Laws when possible.
	 9.	 lim 
xS2 x 1
x 3	
10.	 lim 
tS1 1t3 3t 62
11.	 lim
xS3 x2 x 12
x 3
	
12.	 lim
xS2 
x2 4
x2 x 2
13.	 lim
uS0 
1u 12 2 1
u
	
14.	 lim
zS9 !z 3
z 9
15.	 lim
xS3 x 3
0  x 3 0 	
16.	 lim
xS0 a 1
x 
2
x2 2x b
17.	 lim
xS` 2x
x 4	
18.	 lim
xS` 
x2 1
x4 3x 6
19.	 lim
xS`
  cos2 x	
20.	 lim
tS` 
t4
t3 1
21–24  ■  Derivative of a Function    Find the derivative of the 
function at the given number.
21.	 f1x2 3x 5, at 4	
22.	 g1x2 2x2 1, at 1
23.	 f1x2 !x, at 16	
24.	 f1x2 
x
x 1, at 1
25–28  ■  Evaluating Derivatives    (a) Find fr1a2 . (b) Find fr122  
and fr122 .
25.	 f1x2 6 2x	
26.	 f1x2 x2 3x
27.	 f1x2 !x 6	
28.	 f1x2 4
x
29–30  ■  Equation of a Tangent Line    Find an equation of the 
tangent line shown in the ﬁgure.
29.	 	
	
30.	
1
0
y=4x-≈
2
1
(1, 3)
4
y
x
	
1
4
0
y=œ∑x
1
(1, 1)
y
x
31–34  ■  Equation of a Tangent Line    Find an equation of the 
line tangent to the graph of f at the given point.
31.	 f1x2 2x, at 13,  62 	
32.	 f1x2 x2 3, at 12,  12
33.	 f1x2 1
x, at a 2,  1
2 b 	
34.	 f1x2 !x 1, at 13,  22
35.	 Velocity of a Dropped Stone    A stone is dropped from the 
roof of a building 640 ft above the ground. The height of the 
stone (in ft) after t seconds is given by h1t2 640 16t2.
(a)	 Find the velocity of the stone when t  2.
(b)	 Find the velocity of the stone when t  a.
(c)	 At what time t will the stone hit the ground?
(d)	 With what velocity will the stone hit the ground?
36.	 Instantaneous Rate of Change    If a gas is conﬁned in a ﬁxed 
volume, then according to Boyle’s Law the product of the 
pressure P and the temperature T is a constant. For a certain 
gas, PT  100, where P is measured in lb/in2 and T is mea-
sured in kelvins (K).
(a)	 Express P as a function of T.
(b)	 Find the instantaneous rate of change of P with respect 
to T when T  300 K.
37–42  ■  Limit of a Sequence    If the sequence is convergent, ﬁnd 
its limit. If it is divergent, explain why.
37.	 an 
n
5n 1	
38.	 an 
n3
n3 1
39.	 an 
n1n 12
2n2
	
40.	 an 
n3
2n 6
41.	 an cos a np
2 b 	
42.	 an 10
3n
43–44  ■  Estimating Areas Using Rectangles    Approximate the 
area of the shaded region under the graph of the given function by 
using the indicated rectangles. (The rectangles have equal width.)
43.	 f1x2 !x	
44.	 f1x2 4x x2
1
3
0
1
y
x
     
1
0
3
1
4
y
x
45–48  ■  Area Under a Curve    Use the limit deﬁnition of area to 
ﬁnd the area of the region that lies under the graph of f over the 
given interval.
45.	 f1x2 2x 3, 0 x 2
46.	 f1x2 x2 1, 0 x 3
47.	 f1x2 x2 x, 1 x 2
48.	 f1x2 x3, 1 x 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

943
	 1.	 (a)	 Use a table of values to estimate the limit
lim
xS0 
x
sin 2x
(b)	 Use a graphing calculator to conﬁrm your answer graphically.
	 2.	 For the piecewise-deﬁned function f whose graph is shown, ﬁnd:
(a)  lim
xS1 f1x2 	
(b)	 lim
xS1 f1x2 	
(c)	 lim
xS1 f1x2
(d)  lim
xS0 f1x2 	
(e)	 lim
xS0 f1x2 	
(f)	 lim
xS0 f1x2
(g)  lim
xS2 f1x2 	
(h)	 lim
xS2 f1x2 	
(i)	 lim
xS2 f1x2
f1x2 µ
1
if x 1
0
if x 1
x2
if 1 x 2
4 x
if 2 x
	
	
1
0
2
1
4
y
x
	 3.	 Evaluate the limit if it exists.
(a)	 lim
xS2 x2 2x 8
x 2
	
(b)	 lim
xS2 x2 2x 8
x 2
	
(c)	 lim
xS2 
1
x 2
(d)	 lim
xS2 x 2
0 x 2 0 	
(e)	 lim
xS4 !x 2
x 4 	
(f)	 lim
xS` 2x2 4
x2 x
	 4.	 Let f1x2 x2 2x. Find:
	(a)  fr1x2 	
(b)  fr112, fr112, fr122
	 5.	 Find the equation of the line tangent to the graph of f1x2 !x at the point where  
x  9.
	 6.	 Find the limit of the sequence.
(a)	 an 
n
n2 4	
(b)  an sec np
	 7.	 The region sketched in the ﬁgure in the margin lies under the graph of f1x2 4 x2, 
above the interval 0  x  1.
(a)	 Approximate the area of the region with ﬁve rectangles, equally spaced along the  
x-axis, using right endpoints to determine the heights of the rectangles.
(b)	 Use the limit deﬁnition of area to ﬁnd the exact value of the area of the region.
1
1
4
y=4-≈
0
y
x
CHAPTER 13
TEST
A CUMULATIVE REVIEW TEST FOR CHAPTERS 12 AND 13 CAN BE FOUND AT THE BOOK COMPANION WEBSITE: www.stewartmath.com.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

944
The area under the graph of a function is used to model many quantities in physics, 
economics, engineering, and other ﬁelds. That is why the area problem is so important. 
Here, we will show how the concept of work (Section 9.2) is modeled by area. Several 
other applications are explored in the problems.
Recall that the work W done in moving an object is the product of the force F applied 
to the object and the distance d that the object moves:
W Fd   work force distance
This formula is used if the force is constant. For example, suppose you are pushing a 
crate across a ﬂoor, moving along the positive x-axis from x  a to x  b, and you ap-
ply a constant force F  k. The graph of F as a function of the distance x is shown in 
Figure 1(a). Notice that the work done is W Fd k1b a2 , which is the area under 
the graph of F (see Figure 1(b)).
F
0
a
b
k
(a)
(b)
F
0
a
b
k
work=area
x
x
Figure 1  A constant force F
But what if the force is not constant? For example, suppose the force you apply to 
the crate varies with distance (you push harder at certain places than you do at others). 
More precisely, suppose that you push the crate along the x-axis in the positive direc-
tion, from x  a to x  b, and at each point x between a and b you apply a force f1x2  
to the crate. Figure 2 shows a graph of the force f as a function of the distance x.
y
(force)
0
x
(distance)
a
b
f
Figure 2  A variable force
How much work was done? We can’t apply the formula for work directly because 
the force is not constant. So let’s divide the interval 3a, b4 into n subintervals with end-
points x0, x1, . . . , xn and equal width x, as shown in Figure 3(a) on the next page. The 
force at the right endpoint of the interval 3xk1, xk4 is f1xk2 . If n is large, then x is 
small, so the values of f don’t change very much over the interval 3xk1, xk4. In other 
words f is almost constant on the interval, so the work Wk that is done in moving the 
crate from xk1 to xk is approximately
Wk < f1xk2  x
Thus we can approximate the work done in moving the crate from x  a to x  b by
W < a
n
k1
f1xk2  x
Interpretations of Area
FOCUS ON MODELING
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Interpretations of Area  945
It seems that this approximation becomes better as we make n larger (and so make the 
interval 3xk1, xk4 smaller). Therefore we deﬁne the work done in moving an object from 
a to b as the limit of this quantity as n S `:
W lim
nS` a
n
k1
f1xk2  x
Notice that this is precisely the area under the graph of f between x  a and x  b as 
deﬁned in Section 13.5. See Figure 3(b).
(force)
0
(distance)
x‚
xn
x⁄
xk_1 xk
Îx
…
…
(force)
0
(distance)
work=area under
graph of f
(a)
(b)
y
x
y
x
Figure 3  Approximating work
Example  ■  The Work Done by a Variable Force
A man pushes a crate along a straight path a distance of 18 ft. At a distance x from his 
starting point, he applies a force given by f1x2 340 x2. Find the work done by 
the man.
Solution    The graph of f between x  0 and x  18 is shown in Figure 4. Notice 
how the force the man applies varies: He starts by pushing with a force of 340 lb but 
steadily applies less force. 
(force)
0
(distance)
xk_1
xk
Îx
50
350
5
y
x
Figure 4
The work done is the area under the graph of f on the interval 30, 184. To ﬁnd this 
area, we start by ﬁnding the dimensions of the approximating rectangles at the nth 
stage.
Width:	
 x b a
n
18 0
n
18
n
Right endpoint:	
 xk a k  x 0 ka 18
n b 18k
n
Height:	
 f1xk2 f a 18k
n b 340 a 18k
n b
2
	
  340 324k2
n2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

946 
Focus on Modeling
Thus according to the deﬁnition of work, we get
 W lim
nS` a
n
k1
f1xk2  x lim
nS` a
n
k1
a 340 324k2
n2
b a 18
n b
  lim
nS` a 18
n a
n
k1
340 
1182 13242
n3
a
n
k1
k2 b
  lim
nS` a 18
n
  340n 5832
n3 c
n1n 12 12n 12
6
d b
  lim
nS` a 6120 972 # n
n # n 1
n
# 2n 1
n
b
  6120 972 # 1 # 1 # 2 4176
So the work done by the man in moving the crate is 4176 ft-lb.
■
Problems
	 1.	 Work Done by a Winch    A motorized winch is being used to pull a felled tree to a log-
ging truck. The motor exerts a force of f1x2 1500 10x 1
2 x2 lb on the tree at the 
instant when the tree has moved x ft. The tree must be moved a distance of 40 ft, from  
x  0 to x  40. How much work is done by the winch in moving the tree?
	 2.	 Work Done by a Spring    Hooke’s law states that when a spring is stretched, it pulls 
back with a force proportional to the amount of the stretch. The constant of proportionality 
is a characteristic of the spring known as the spring constant. Thus a spring with spring 
constant k exerts a force f1x2 kx when it is stretched a distance x.
	 	  
A certain spring has spring constant k  20 lb/ft. Find the work done when the spring is 
pulled so that the amount by which it is stretched increases from x  0 to x  2 ft.
	 3.	 Force of Water    As any diver knows, an object submerged in water experiences pressure, 
and as depth increases, so does the water pressure. At a depth of x ft, the water pressure is 
p1x2 62.5x lb/ft2. To ﬁnd the force exerted by the water on a surface, we multiply the 
pressure by the area of the surface:
force pressure area
	 	  
Suppose an aquarium that is 3 ft wide, 6 ft long, and 4 ft high is full of water. The  
bottom of the aquarium has area 3  6  18 ft2, and it experiences water pressure of 
p142 62.5 4 250 lb/ft2. Thus the total force exerted by the water on the bottom is  
250  18  4500 lb.
	 	  
The water also exerts a force on the sides of the aquarium, but this is not as easy to cal-
culate because the pressure increases from top to bottom. To calculate the force on one of 
the 4 ft by 6 ft sides, we divide its area into n thin horizontal strips of width ¢x, as shown 
in the ﬁgure. The area of each strip is
length width 6 x
	 	 If the bottom of the kth strip is at the depth xk, then it experiences water pressure  
of approximately p1xk2 62.5xk lb/ft2—the thinner the strip, the more accurate the  
approximation. Thus on each strip, the water exerts a force of
pressure area 62.5xk 6 x 375xk x lb
(a)	 Explain why the total force exerted by the water on the 4 ft by 6 ft sides of the  
aquarium is
lim
nS` a
n
k1
375xk x
	
where ¢x  4/n and xk  4k/n.
Ï=kx
x
0
xk
x
(depth)
4 ft
6 ft
3 ft
Îx
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   Interpretations of Area  947
(b)	 What area does the limit in part (a) represent?
(c)	 Evaluate the limit in part (a) to ﬁnd the force exerted by the water on one of the 4 ft by  
6 ft sides of the aquarium.
(d)	 Use the same technique to ﬁnd the force exerted by the water on one of the 4 ft by 3 ft 
sides of the aquarium.
[Note: Engineers use the technique outlined in this problem to ﬁnd the total force exerted 
on a dam by the water in the reservoir behind the dam.]
	 4.	 Distance Traveled by a Car    Since distance  speed  time, it is easy to see that a  
car moving, say, at 70 mi/h for 5 h will travel a distance of 350 mi. But what if the speed 
varies, as it usually does in practice?
(a)	 Suppose the speed of a moving object at time t is √1t2 . Explain why the distance  
traveled by the object between times t  a and t  b is the area under the graph of √ 
between t  a and t  b.
(b)	 The speed of a car t seconds after it starts moving is given by the function 
√1t2 6t 0.1t3 ft/s. Find the distance traveled by the car from t  0 to t  5 s.
	 5.	 Heating Capacity    If the outdoor temperature reaches a maximum of 90F one day and 
only 80F the next, then we would probably say that the ﬁrst day was hotter than the sec-
ond. Suppose, however, that on the ﬁrst day the temperature was below 60F for most of 
the day, reaching the high only brieﬂy, whereas on the second day the temperature stayed 
above 75F all the time. Now which day is the hotter one? To better measure how hot a 
particular day is, scientists use the concept of heating degree-hour. If the temperature is  
a constant D degrees for t hours, then the “heating capacity” generated over this period is  
Dt heating degree-hours.
heating degree-hours temperature time
	 	 If the temperature is not constant, then the number of heating degree-hours equals the area 
under the graph of the temperature function over the time period in question.
(a)	 On a particular day the temperature (in F) was modeled by the function 
D1t2 61 6
5 t 1
25 t2, where t was measured in hours since midnight. How many 
heating degree-hours were experienced on this day, from t  0 to t  24?
(b)	 What was the maximum temperature on the day described in part (a)?
(c)	 On another day the temperature (in F) was modeled by the function 
E1t2 50 5t 1
4t 2. How many heating degree-hours were experienced on  
this day?
(d)	 What was the maximum temperature on the day described in part (c)?
(e)	 Which day was “hotter”?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this appendix we review the concepts of similarity and congruence as well as the 
Pythagorean Theorem.
■  Congruent Triangles
In general, two geometric figures are congruent if they have the same shape and size. 
In particular, two line segments are congruent if they have the same length, and two 
angles are congruent if they have the same measure. For triangles we have the following 
definition.
congruent triangles
Two triangles are congruent if their vertices can be matched up so that corre-
sponding sides and angles are congruent.
We write nABC > nPQR to mean that triangle ABC is congruent to trian-
gle PQR and that the sides and angles correspond as follows.
AB 5 PQ    /A 5 /P
BC 5 QR    /B 5 /Q
AC 5 PR    /C 5 /R
A
B
C
A
Q
R
P
To prove that two triangles are congruent, we don’t need to show that all six corre-
sponding parts (side and angles) are congruent. For instance, if all three sides are con-
gruent, then all three angles must also be congruent. You can easily see why the follow-
ing properties lead to congruent triangles.
■	 Side-Side-Side (SSS). If each side of one triangle is congruent to the corre-
sponding side of another triangle, then the two triangles are congruent. See Fig-
ure 1(a).
■	 Side-Angle-Side (SAS). If two sides and the included angle in one triangle are 
congruent to the corresponding sides and angle in another triangle, then the two 
triangles are congruent. See Figure 1(b).
■	 Angle-Side-Angle (ASA). If two angles and the included side in one triangle are 
congruent to the corresponding angles and side in another triangle, then the trian-
gles are congruent. See Figure 1(c).
Example 1  ■  Congruent Triangles
(a)	 nADB > nCBD by SSS.     
(b)  nABE > nCBD by SAS.
A
B
D
C
B
C
D
E
A
Geometry Review
APPENDIX A
949
D666
E6$6
F$6$
Figure 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

950 
APPENDIX A  ■  Geometry Review
(c)	 nABD > nCBD by ASA.      (d)  These triangles are not necessarily congru-
ent. “Side-side-angle” does not determine 
congruence.
A
B
D
C
	
A
B
C
D
E
F

■
■  Similar Triangles
Two geometric figures are similar if they have the same shape, but not necessarily the 
same size. (See Discovery Project: Similarity referenced on page 484.) In the case of 
triangles we can define similarity as follows.
similar triangles
Two triangles are similar if their vertices can be matched up so that corre-
sponding angles are congruent. In this case corresponding sides are 
proportional.
We write nABC , nPQR to mean that triangle ABC is similar to triangle 
PQR and that the following conditions hold.
The angles correspond as follows:
/A 5 /P,  /B 5 /Q,  /C 5 /R
The sides are proportional as follows:
AB
PQ 5 BC
QR 5 AC
PR
A
B
C
P
Q
R
The sum of the angles in any triangle is 180°. So if we know two angles in a triangle, 
the third is determined. Thus to prove that two triangles are similar, we need only show 
that two angles in one are congruent to two angles in the other.
Example 2  ■  Similar Triangles
Find all pairs of similar triangles in the figures.
(a)	
(b) 
B
A
E
D
C
S
P
Q
R
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPENDIX A  ■  Geometry Review  951
Solution
(a)	 Since /AEB and /CED are opposite angles, they are equal. Thus 
nAEB , nCED
(b)	 Since all triangles in the figure are right triangles, we have
/QSR 1 /QRS 5 90°
/QSR 1 /QSP 5 90°
	 	 Subtracting these equations we find that /QSP 5 /QRS. Thus
nPQS , nSQR , nPSR

■
Example 3  ■  Proportional Sides in Similar Triangles
Given that the triangles in the figure are similar, find the lengths x and y.
15
x
20
 
3
2
y
Solution    By similarity, we know that the lengths of corresponding sides in the  
triangles are proportional. First we find x.
 x
2 5 15
3
        Corresponding sides are proportional
 x 5 2 # 15
3
5 10        Solve for x
Now we find y.
 15
3 5 20
y
        Corresponding sides are proportional
 y 5 20 # 3
15
5 4        Solve for y

■
■  The Pythagorean Theorem
In a right triangle the side opposite the right angle is called the hypotenuse, and the 
other two sides are called the legs.
the pythagorean theorem
In a right triangle the square of the hypotenuse  
is equal to the sum of the squares of the legs.  
That is, in triangle ABC in the figure
	
	
a2 1 b2 5 c2
a
C
b
c
A
B
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

952 
APPENDIX A  ■  Geometry Review
Example 4  ■  Using the Pythagorean Theorem
Find the lengths x and y in the right triangles shown.
(a)	 	
(b) 
7
y
25
20
21
x
Solution
(a)	 We use the Pythagorean Theorem with a 5 20, and b 5 21, and c 5 x. Then  
x2 5 202 1 212 5 841. So x 5 !841 5 29.
(b)	 We use the Pythagorean Theorem with c 5 25, a 5 7, and b 5 y. Then  
252 5 72 1 y2, so y2 5 252 2 72 5 576. Thus y 5 !576 5 24.

■
The converse of the Pythagorean Theorem is also true.
converse of the pythagorean theorem
If the square of one side of a triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of the 
other two sides, then the triangle is a right triangle.
Example 5  ■  Proving That a Triangle Is a Right Triangle
Prove that the triangle with sides of length 8, 15, and 17 is a right triangle.
Solution    You can check that 82 1 152 5 172. So the triangle must be a right trian-
gle by the converse of the Pythagorean Theorem.

■
1–4  ■  Congruent Triangles?    Determine whether the pair of tri-
angles is congruent. If so, state the congruence principle you are 
using.
	 1.	
	 2.	
	
3. 
	 4.	
5–8  ■  Similar Triangles?    Determine whether the pair of trian-
gles is similar.
	 5.	
50*
40*
	
A  Exercises
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

APPENDIX A  ■  Geometry Review  953
	 6.	
20*
20*
	
7. 
45*
45*
	 8.	
100*
100*
55*
15*
9–12  ■  Similar Triangles    Given that the pair of triangles is sim-
ilar, find the length(s) x and/or y.
  9.
6
5
150
x
10. 
25
36
y
11.
7
2
x
3
2
y
9
2
 12.
x
8
x
2
13–14  ■  Using Similarity    Express x in terms of a, b, and c.
13.	
c
a
b
x
14.	
c
b
a
x
15.  Proving Similarity    In the figure CDEF is a rectangle. Prove 
that nABC , nAED , nEBF.
A
B
F
C
D
E
16.	 Proving Similarity    In the figure DEFG is a square. Prove the 
following:
(a)	 nADG , nGCF
(b)	 nADG , nFEB
(c)	 AD # EB 5 DG # FE
(d)	 DE 5 !AD # EB
A
B
F
C
G
E
D
17–22  ■  Pythagorean Theorem    In the given right triangle, find 
the side labeled x.
17.	
6
8
x
	
18.	
73
55
x
19. 
x
2
1
	
20.	
x
20
3x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

954 
APPENDIX A  ■  Geometry Review
21.	
x
x+2
58
	
22.	
x+1
x
17
23–28  ■  Right Triangle?    The lengths of the sides of a triangle are 
given. Determine whether the triangle is a right triangle.
23.	 5,  12,  13	
24.	 15,  20,  25
25.	 8,  10,  12	
26.	 6,  17,  18
27.	 48,  55,  73	
28.	 13,  84,  85
29–32  ■  Pythagorean Theorem    These exercises require the use 
of the Pythagorean Theorem.
29.  One leg of a right triangle measures 11 cm. The hypotenuse  
is 1 cm longer than the other leg. Find the length of the  
hypotenuse.
30.  The length of a rectangle is 1 ft greater than its width.  
Each diagonal is 169 ft long. Find the dimensions of the  
rectangle.
31.  Each of the diagonals of a quadrilateral is 27 cm long. Two 
adjacent sides measure 17 cm and 21 cm. Is the quadrilateral 
a rectangle?
32.  Find the height h of the right triangle ABC shown in the fig-
ure.  [Hint: Find the area of triangle ABC in two different 
ways.]
15
A
20
B
C
h
33.  Diagonal of a Box    Find the length of the diagonal of the rect-
angular box shown in the figure.
3
4
12
34.  Pythagorean Triples    If a, b, c are positive integers such that 
a2 1 b2 5 c2, then 1a, b, c2  is called a Pythagorean triple. 
(a)	 Let m and n be positive integers with m . n. Let  
a 5 m2 2 n2, b 5 2mn, and c 5 m2 1 n2. Show that  
1a, b, c2  is a Pythagorean triple.
(b)	 Use part (a) to find the rest of the Pythagorean triples in 
the table.
m
n
xa, b, cc
2
1
13, 4, 52
3
1
18, 6, 102
3
2
4
1
4
2
4
3
5
1
5
2
5
3
5
4
35.  Finding a Length    Two vertical poles, one 8 ft tall and the 
other 24 ft tall, have ropes stretched from the top of each to 
the base of the other (see the figure). How high above the 
ground is the point where the ropes cross?  [Hint: Use 
similarity.]
h
8 ft
24 ft
The following appendices can be found at www.stewartmath.com. 
APPENDIX B: Calculations and Significant Figures
APPENDIX C: Graphing with a Graphing Calculator 
APPENDIX D: Using the TI-83/84 Graphing Calculator
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 1.3  A1
prologue  ■  page p4
1.  It can’t go fast enough.    2.  40% discount   
3.  427, 3n  1    4.  57 min    5.  No, not necessarily   
6.  The same amount    7.  2p
8.  The North Pole is one such point; there are infinitely many  
others near the South Pole.
chapter 1
Section 1.1  ■  page 10
1.  Answers may vary. Examples: (a)  2    (b)  3    (c)  3
2     
(d)  !2    2.  (a)  ba; Commutative    (b)  1a b2 c;  
Associative    (c)  ab ac; Distributive    3.  (a)  5x 0  2 x 76   
(b)  12, 72     4.  absolute value; positive    5.  0  b a 0 ; 7     
6.  (a)  Yes    (b)  No    7.  (a)  No    (b)  No     
8.  (a)  Yes    (b)  Yes    9.  (a)  100    (b)  0, 100, 8     
(c)  1.5, 0, 5
2, 2.71, 3.14, 100, 8    (d)  !7, p     
11.  Commutative Property of Addition    13.  Associative Prop-
erty of Addition    15.  Distributive Property    17.  Commutative 
Property of Multiplication    19.  3  x    21.  4A  4B     
23.  3x  3y    25.  8m    27.  5x  10y    29.  (a)  17
30    (b)  9
20   
31.  (a)  3    (b)  13
20    33.  (a)      (b)      (c)      35.  (a)  False   
(b)  True    37.  (a)  True    (b)  False    39.  (a)  x  0    (b)  t  4   
(c)  a  p    (d)  5  x  1
3    (e)  0  3 p 0 5     
41.  (a)  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}    (b)  {2, 4, 6}   
43.  (a)  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}    (b)  {7}
45.  (a)  5x 0  x 56    (b)  5x 0  1 x 46
47.  3  x  0	
49.  2  x  8
	
8
2
51.  x  2	
53.  1`,  14
2
	
55.  12,  14    
−2
1
57.  11,  ` 2    
−1
59.  (a)  33,  54     (b)  13,  54    
61. 
−2
1
	
63. 
0
6
65. 
−4
4
67.  (a)  100    (b)  73    69.  (a)  2    (b)  1    71.  (a)  12    (b)  5  
73.  5    75.  (a)  15    (b)  24    (c)  67
40    77.  (a)  7
9    (b)  13
45    (c)  19
33  
79.  p 3    81.  b a    83.  (a)      (b)      (c)      (d)    
85.  Distributive Property
87.  (a)  Yes, no    (b)  6 ft
Section 1.2  ■  page 21
1.  (a)  56    (b)  base, exponent    2.  (a)  add, 39    (b)  subtract, 33   
3.  (a)  51/3    (b)  !5    (c)  No    4.  141/22 3 8, 1432 1/2 8   
5. 
1
!3 
1
!3 # !3
!3 !3
3     6.  2
3    7.  (a)  No    (b)  Yes    8.  (a)  No  
(b)  No    (c)  No    (d)  No    9.  31/2    11.  "
3 42   
13.  53/5    15.  "
5 a2    17.  (a)  64    (b)  64    (c)   27
25   
−3
0
1
19.  (a)  1
2    (b)  1
8    (c)  9
4    21.  (a)  625    (b)  25    (c)  64   
23.  (a)  6!
3 2    (b)    !2
3     (c)  3!3
2
   
25.  (a)  3!5    (b)  4    (c)  6!
3 2    27.  (a)  2!11   
(b)  4    (c)  1
4    29.  (a)  x7    (b)  8y6    (c)  y5    31.  (a)  1
x2   
(b)  1
„    (c)  x6    33.  (a)  a6    (b)  a18    (c)  5x9
8     35.  (a)  6x3y5  
(b)  25„4
z
    37.  (a)  x7
y     (b)  a9
8b6    39.  (a)  a19b
c9     (b)  √10
u11   
41.  (a)  4a8
b9     (b)  125
x6y3    43.  (a)  b3
3a    (b) 
s3
q7r4   
45.  (a)  0  x 0     (b)  2x2    47.  (a)  2ab!
6 b    (b)  4a2
 "
3 b2   
49.  (a)  7!2    (b)  9!3    51.  (a)  13a 12 !a   
(b)  14 x22 !x    53.  (a)  9 "x2 1    (b)  6 "x2 y2   
55.  (a)  2    (b)  2    (c)  1
3    57.  (a)  4    (b)  3
2    (c)  8
27   
59.  (a)  5    (b)  !
5 3    (c)  4    61.  (a)  x2    (b)  y2   
63.  (a)  „5/3    (b)  8a13/4    65.  (a)  4a4b    (b)  8a9b12   
67.  (a)  4st4    (b)  4x
y     69.  (a)  x4
y     (b)  8y8
x2    
71.  (a)  x3/2    (b)  x6/5    73.  (a)  y3/2    (b)  10x7/12   
75.  (a)  2st11/6    (b)  x    77.  (a)  y1/2    (b)  4u
√2     79.  (a)  !6
6    
(b)  !6
2     (c)  9!
4 8
2
    81.  (a)  !5x
5x     (b)  !5x
5
    (c)  "
5 x2
x
   
83.  (a)  6.93  107    (b)  7.2  1012    (c)  2.8536  105   
(d)  1.213  104    85.  (a)  319,000    (b)  272,100,000   
(c)  0.00000002670    (d)  0.000000009999   
87.  (a)  5.9  1012 mi    (b)  4  1013 cm   
(c)  3.3  1019 molecules    89.  1.3  1020     
91.  1.429  1019    93.  7.4  1014    95.  (a)  Negative     
(b)  Positive    (c)  Negative    (d)  Negative    (e)  Positive   
(f)  Negative    97.  2.5  1013 mi    99.  1.3  1021 L     
101.  4.03  1027 molecules    103.  (a)  28 mi/h    (b)  167 ft   
Section 1.3  ■  page 33
1.  (a)  3; 2x5, 6x4, 4x3    (b)  2x3; 2x31x2 3x 22
2.  10, 7; 2, 5; 1x 22  1x 52     3.  x2; x2
 13x 12    
4.  A2 2AB B2; 4x2 12x 9    5.  A2 B2; 25 x2   
6.  1A B2 1A B2; 12x 52 12x 52     7.  1A B2 2; 1x 52 2   
8.  (a)  No    (b)  Yes    (c)  Yes    (d)  Yes    9.  Binomial; 5x3, 6; 3   
11.  Monomial; 8; 0    13.  Four terms; x4, x3, x2, x; 4     
15.  7x  5    17.  x2 2x 3    19.  5x3 3x2 10x 2     
21.  9x  103    23.  t4  t3  t2  10t  5     
25.  21t2  26t  8    27.  6x2  7x  5    29.  2x2  5xy  3y2   
31.  25x2 10x 1    33.  4u2  4u√  √2   
A1
to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
ANSWERS
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A2 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
35.  4x2  12xy  9y2    37.  x2 36    39.  9x2  16     
41.  x  4    43.  y3  6y2  12y  8   
45.  8r3  12r2  6r  1    47.  x3  4x2  7x  6     
49.  2x3  7x2  7x  5    51.  x!x x    53.  y2  y     
55.  x4  a4    57.  a  b2    59.  x4  x2  2x  1     
61.  4x2  4xy  y2  9    63.  x12x2 12      
65.  1y 621y 92     67.  xy12x 6y 32      
69.  1x 721x 12     71.  12x 52 14x 32      
73.  13x 121x 52     75.  13x 42 13x 82      
77.  13a 4213a 42     79.  13x y2 19x2 3xy y22      
81.  12s 5t214s2 10st 25t22     83.  1x 62 2     
85.  1x 421x2 12     87.  1 x2 12 15x 12      
89.  1x 121x2 12     91.  !x1x 12 1x 12    
93.  x3/211 x2 2    95.  1x2 12 1/21x2 32      
97.  6x12x2 32     99.  1x 42 1x 22     101.  12x 32 1x 12    
103.  91x 521x 12     105.  17 2y2 17 2y2        
107.  1t 32 2    109.  12x y2 2    111.  4ab   
113.  1x 121x 12 1x 32 1x 32      
115.  12x 5214x2 10x 252     117.  x1x 12 2     
119.  x2y31x y2 1x y2     121.  1x 22 1x 22 13x 12      
123.  31x 121x 22     125.  1a 12 1a 12 1a 22 1a 22      
127.  21x2 42 41x 22 317x2 10x 82    
129.  1x2 32 4/3A1
3 x2 3B   
133.  1a b c2 1a b c2 1a b c2 1a b c2
Section 1.4  ■  page 42
1.  (a), (c)    2.  numerator; denominator; x 1
x 3   
3.  numerators; denominators; 
2x
x2 4x 3   
4.  (a)  3    (b)  x1x 12 2    (c)  2x2 1
x1x 12 2
5.  (a)  Yes    (b)  No    6.  (a)  Yes    (b)  No
7.      9.  5x 0  x ? 36    11.  5x 0  x 36   
13.  5x 0  x ? 1, 26    15.  2x 1
21x 32     17. 
1
x 2   
19.  x 2
x 5    21. 
y
y 1    23. 
x 12x 32
2x 3     25. 
1
41x 22    
27.  x 3
x 2    29. 
1
t 2 9    31.  x 4
x 1    33. 
x 5
12x 32 1x 42    
35.  x21x 12     37.  x
yz    39.  x 4
x 3    41. 
3x 7
1x 32 1x 52    
43. 
2x 5
1x 121x 22     45. 
215x 92
12x 32 2     47.  u2 3u 1
u 1
   
49. 
2x 1
x21x 12     51. 
2x 7
1x 32 1x 42     53. 
x 2
1x 32 1x 32    
55.  5x 6
x1x 12     57. 
5
1x 12 1x 22 1x 32     59.  x 1
1 2x   
61.  x 3
x 1    63. 
2
1x 12 1x 32     65. 
x21y 12
y21x 12    
67.  xy    69.  y x
xy
    71. 
1
1 x    73.   
1
11 x2 11 x h2
75.   
2x h
x 21x h2 2    77. 
1
"1 x2    79. 
1x 22 21x 132
1x 32 3
   
81. 
x 2
1x 12 3/2    83. 
2x 3
1x 12 4/3    85.  !3 5
22
   
87. 
21 !7 !22
5
    89.  y!3 y!y
3 y
    91. 
4
311 !52    
93. 
r 2
51 !r !22     95. 
1
"x2 1 x
    97.  (a) 
R1R2
R1 R2
   
(b)  20
3 6.7 ohms   
Section 1.5  ■  page 55
1.  (a)  Yes    (b)  Yes    (c)  No    2.  (a)  Take (positive and  
negative) square roots of both sides.    (b)  Subtract 5 from both 
sides.    (c)  Subtract 2 from both sides.     
3.  (a)  Factor into 1x 12 1x 52 , and use the Zero-Product 
­Property.    (b)  Add 5 to each side, then complete the square by 
adding 4 to both sides.    (c)  Insert coefficients into the Quadratic 
Formula.    4.  (a)  0, 4    (b)  factor    5.  (a)  !2x x     
(b)  2x  x2    (c)  0, 2    (d)  0   
6.  quadratic; x  1; W 2  5W  6  0   
7.  x1x 22; 31x 22 5x 2x1x 22    
8.  square; 12x 12 2 x 1    9.  (a)  No    (b)  Yes     
11.  (a)  Yes    (b)  No    13.  4    15.  18    17.  3
5    19.   27
4      
21.   3
4    23.  30    25.   1
3    27.  13
3     29.  2   
31.  R PV
nT     33.  „ P 2l
2
    35.  x 2d b
a 2c   
37.  x 
1 a
a2 a 1    39.  r Ä
3V
ph   
41.  b "c2 a2    43.  t 
√0 "√2
0 2gh
g
   
45.  4, 3    47.  3, 4    49.  3
2, 5
2    51.  2, 1
3    53.  2   
55.  2, 7    57.   1 !6    59.  3 2!5    61.  2 !14
2    
63.  0, 1
4    65.  3, 5    67.  6, 7    69.   3
2, 1    71.  1 2 !6
3    
73.   2
3    75.   9
2, 1
2    77.  No solution    79.  8 !14
10
    81.  2  
83.  1    85.  No real solution    87.  50, 100    89.   7
5, 2   
91.   3
2, 5    93.  7    95.  4    97.  4    99.  3    101.  8   
103.  2 !2, !5    105.  No real solution   
107.  3!3, 2!2    109.  1, 0, 3    111.  27, 729   
113.  2,  4
3    115.  3.99, 4.01    117.   1
2    119.  20   
121.  3, 1 !13
2
    123.  !a, 2!a    125.  "a2 36   
127.  4.24 s    129.  (a)  After 1 s and 1 1
2 s    (b)  Never    (c)  25 ft   
(d)  After 1 1
4 s    (e)  After 2 1
2 s    131.  (a)  0.00055, 12.018m     
(b)  234.375 kg/m3    133.  (a)  After 17 years, on Jan. 1, 2019     
(b)  After 18.612 years, on Aug. 12, 2020    135.  50     
137.  132.6 ft
Section 1.6  ■  page 63
1.  1    2.  3, 4    3.  (a)  3  4i    (b)  9  16  25    4.  3  4i 
5.  Yes    6.  Yes    7.  Real part 5, imaginary part 7     
9.  Real part  2
3, imaginary part  5
3    11.  Real part 3, imaginary 
part 0    13.  Real part 0, imaginary part  2
3    15.  Real part !3, 
imaginary part 2    17.  3  7i    19.  1  10i    21.  3  5i     
23.  2  2i    25.  19  4i    27.  4  8i    29.  30  10i   
31.  27  8i    33.  29    35.  21  20i    37.  i    39.  8
5 1
5 i   
41.  4  2i    43.  2 4
3 i    45.  i    47.  i    49.  243i   
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 1.8  A3
51.  1    53.  7i    55.  6    57.  13 !52 13 !52i   
59.  2    61.  7i    63.  1
2 !7
2
 i    65.   3
2 !19
2
 i   
67.   1
2 !3
2
 i    69.  1
2 1
2 i    71.  1 !6
6
 i   
73.  8  2i    75.  25   
Section 1.7  ■  page 75
2.  principal; interest rate; time in years   
3.  (a)  x2    (b)  l„    (c)  pr2    4.  1.6   
5.  1
x    6.  r d
t
 , t d
r     7.  3n  3    9.  3n 6    11.  160 s
3
  
13.  0.025x    15.  4„2    17.  d
55    19. 
25
3 x    21.  400 mi   
23.  86    25.  $9000 at 4 1
2% and $3000 at 4%    27.  7.5%     
29.  $7400    31.  8 h    33.  40 years old    35.  9 pennies,  
9 nickels, 9 dimes    37.  45 ft    39.  120 ft by 120 ft     
41.  25 ft by 35 ft    43.  60 ft by 40 ft    45.  120 ft     
47.  (a)  9 cm    (b)  5 in.    49.  4 in.    51.  18 ft    53.  5 m     
55.  200 mL    57.  18 g    59.  0.6 L    61.  35%    63.  37 min 20 s   
65.  3 h    67.  Irene 3 h, Henry 4 1
2 h    69.  4 h    71.  500 mi/h     
73.  50 mi/h (or 240 mi/h)    75.  6 km/h     
77.  6.4 ft from the fulcrum    79.  2 ft by 6 ft by 15 ft     
81.  13 in. by 13 in.    83.  2.88 ft    85.  16 mi; no    87.  7.52 ft     
89.  18 ft    91.  4.55 ft
Section 1.8  ■  page 88
1.  (a)      (b)      (c)      (d)     
2.  1, 2
Interval
x2`, 21c
x21, 2c
x2, `c
Sign of x 1 1



Sign of x 2 2



Sign of xx 1 1c/xx 2 2c



yes, 2; 31, 22    
3.  (a)  33, 34     (b)  1`, 34, 33, ` 2     4.  (a)   3    (b)   3  
5.  (a)  No    (b)  No    6.  (a)  Divide by 3    (b)  Add 2   
(c)  Rewrite as 8 3x 2 8    7.  E5
6, 1, !5, 3, 5F   
9.  53, 56    11.  55, 1, !5, 3, 56   
13.  A `, 7
2D 	
15.  14,  ` 2
7
2
	
17.  1`,  24   	
19.  A`,   1
2B
	
1
2
−
21.  13,  ` 2   	
23.  A16
3 ,  `B
−3
	
16
3
25.  1`,  182   	
27.  1`,  14  
−18
	
29.  33,  12   	
31.  12,  62  
−1
−3
	
6
2
4
2
−1
0
33.  C 9
2,  5B  	
35.  A15
2 ,  21
2 D 
9
2
5
	
21
2
15
2
37.  12,  32   	
39.  A`,   7
2D < 30,  ` 2  
	
0
−7
2
41.  33, 64  	
43.  1`,  14 < C1
2,  `B 
	
1
2
−1
45.  11,  42   	
47.  1`,  32 < 16,  ` 2
	
−3
6
49.  12,  22   	
51.  1`,  24 < 31,  34  
2
−2
	
53.  1`,  22 < 12,  42  
4
_2
55.  1`, 54 < 536 < 32, ` 2
−5
−3
2
57.  12,  02 < 12,  ` 2   	
59.  1`,  12 < 33,  ` 2
2
0
−2
	
3
−1
61.  A 3
2, 1B  	
63.  1`,  52 < 316,  ` 2  
	
16
5
65.  12,  02 < 12,  ` 2 	
67.  32,  12 < 10,  14
	
1
0
−1
−2
69.  32,  02 < 11,  34   	
71.  A3,   1
2B < 12,  ` 2
	
−1
2
2
−3
73.  1`,  12 < 11,  ` 2   	
75.  14,  42  
1
−1
	
77.  A`,   7
2B < A7
2,  `B  	
79.  32, 84 
−7
2
7
2
	
81.  A2 ,  2
3B	
83.  1`, 14 < C7
3, `B
2
3
−2
	
_1
7
3
85.  14,  82   	
87.  16.001,  5.9992
	
89.  C 1
2,  3
2D  
−1
2
3
2
91.  0  x 0 3    93.  0  x 7 0 5   
95.  0  x 0 2    97.  0  x 0 3   
99.  0  x 1 0 3    101.  x 3 or x 3   
103.  x 2 or x 5    105.  x 
1a b2c
ab
   
107.  x ac 4a d
ab
 or x ac 4a d
ab
   
−2
3
6
−3
4
−1
−2
3
1
−1
3
2
−
2
0
−2
3
1
0
−2
4
−4
8
2
8
−4
−5.999
−6.001
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A4 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
109.  68  F  86    111.  More than 200 mi     
113.  Between 12,000 mi and 14,000 mi   
115.  (a)   1
3 P 560
3     (b)  From $215 to $290     
117.  Distances between 20,000 km and 100,000 km     
119.  From 0 s to 3 s    121.  Between 0 and 60 mi/h   
123.  Between 20 and 40 ft   
125.  Between 62.4 and 74.0 in.
Section 1.9  ■  page 101
1.  13, 52     2.  "1c a2 2 1d b2 2; 10   
3.  a a c
2
, b d
2
b; 14, 62
   
4.  2; 3; No   
x
y
xx, yc
2
 1
2
A2,  1
2B
1
0
11, 02
0
1
2
A0, 1
2B
1
1
11, 12
2
3
2
A2, 3
2B
   
5.  (a)  y; x; 1    (b)  x; y; 1
2    6.  11, 22; 3   
7.  (a)  1a, b2     (b)  1a, b2     (c)  1a, b2    
8.  (a)  3 and 3; 1 and 2    (b)  y-axis   
9.  Yes    10.  No   
11.  A15,  12 , B11,  22 , C12,  62 , D16,  22 ,  
E14,  12 , F12,  02 , G11,  32 , H12,  22    
13.  	
15.  (a)  	
    (b) 
y
0
x
1
1
17.  (a)	
(b) 
1
1
0
y
x
1
2
! ,
@
2
3
5
(_1, 0)
(_1, _2)
(0, 5)
5
y
0
x
5
5
y
0
x
5
5
y
0
x
5
5
y
0
x
19.  (a)	
(b) 
21.  (a)  !13    (b)  A3
2,  1B    23.  (a)  10    (b)  11,  02    
25.  (a)  	
27.  (a)
	
(_4, 5)
(3, _2)
5
5
y
0
x
(b)  10    (c)  13,  122 	
(b)  7!2    (c)  A 1
2,  3
2B
29.  (a)  	
31.  24
	
y
0
x
3
5
_3
_5
A(1, 3)
B(5, 3)
C(1, _3)
D(5, _3)
(b)  4!10    (c)  10,  02
33.  Trapezoid, area  9 
y
0
x
3
5
_3
_5
D
C
A
B
	
35.  A16,  72     37.  Q11,  32     41.  (b)  10    45.  10,  42    
47.  12,  32    
y
0
x
5
2
_5
R(4, 2)
Q(1, 1)
P(_
S
1, _4)
(2, _3)
49.  (a) 
y
0
x
_4
4
_4
4
A
B
C
D
	 (b)  A5
2,  3B, A5
2,  3B
51.  No, yes, yes    53.  Yes, no, yes   
5
5
y
0
x
y
0
x
5
5
_5
_5
8
(0, 8)
(6, 16)
−8
8
y
0
x
y
0
x
_4
4
_4
4
(6, _2)
(_6, 2)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 1.9  A5
55. 
2
0
2
y
x
	
57. 
59. 
2
x
y
1
0
61. 
_2000
2000
_100
150
63. 
_0.2
0.2
_50
50
65.  (a)  x-intercept 3,	
(b)  x-intercept 1,
	
y-intercept 6,	
y-intercept 1,
	
no symmetry	
no symmetry
	
y
0
x
1
1
67.  (a)  x-intercept 1,	
(b)  x-intercept 0,
	
y-intercept 1,	
y-intercept 0,
	
no symmetry	
symmetry about y-axis
	
2
1
0
y
x
y
0
x
2
1
4
−4
2
−4
y
0
x
y
x
2
1
0
69.  (a)  x-intercepts 2,	
(b)  x-intercept 0,
	
y-intercept 2,	
y-intercept 0,
	
symmetry about y-axis	
symmetry about origin
	
5
1
y
0
x
71.  (a)  x-intercept 6; y-intercept 6     
(b)  x-intercepts !5; y-intercept 5   
73.  (a)  x-intercepts 2; no y-intercept     
(b)  x-intercept 1
4; y-intercept 1
75.  x-intercepts 0, 4; y-intercept 0   
77.  x-intercepts 2, 2; y-intercepts 4, 4   
79.  (a)   	
81.  (a) 
_1
1
_2
2
	
_3
1
_5
5
(b)  x-intercepts 0, 1; 	
(b)  No x-intercept; 
	
y-intercept 0	
	
y-intercept 22
83.	 10, 02, 3	
85.	 10, 42, 1
	
87.  13, 42, 5	
y 
x 
2 
0 
2 
	
89.  1x 22 2 1 y 12 2 9    91.  x2  y2  65   
93.  1x 22 2 1 y 52 2 25    95.  1x 72 2 1 y 32 2 9   
97.  1x 22 2 1 y 22 2 4    99.  12, 32, 1    101.  A1
4,   1
4B,  1
2   
103.  A3
4,  0B,  3
4    105.  Symmetry about y-axis     
107.  Symmetry about origin    109.  Symmetry about origin   
y
0
x
5
3
−5
y 
x 
1 
0 
1
1
1
4
y
0
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A6 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
111.  	
113. 
y
0
x
4
_4
_1
1
	
y
0
x
4
_4
1
2
_ 1
2
115. 
y
0
x
2
2
_2
_2
117.  12p    119.  (a)  18, 52     (b)  1a 3, b 22     (c)  10, 22      
(d)  Ar12, 12, Br10, 42, Cr15, 32
121.  (a) 
1
1
y
0
x
	 (b) 
1
1
y
0
x
(c) 
1
1
y
0
x
123.  (a)  15th Street and 12th Avenue    (b)  17 blocks   
Section 1.10  ■  page 113
1.  y; x; 2    2.  (a)  3    (b)  3    (c)   1
3    3.  y 2 31x 12
4.  6, 4;  2
3 x 4;  2
3    5.  0; y  3    6.  Undefined; x  2   
7.  (a)  Yes    (b)  Yes    (c)  No    (d)  Yes   
8. 
x=_3
y=_3
5
5
y
0
x
    Yes
9.  2    11.  1
5    13.  0    15.  3
4    17.  2, 1
2, 3,  1
4
19.  x  y  4  0    21.  3x  2y  6  0    23.  3x  y  2  0   
25.  5x  y  7  0    27.  2x  3y  19  0     
29.  5x  y  11  0    31.  8x  y  11  0     
33.  3x  y  3  0    35.  y  3    37.  x  2     
39.  3x  y  1  0    41.  y  5    43.  x  2y  11  0     
45.  x  1    47.  5x  2y  1  0    49.  x  y  6  0   
51.  (a) 
(−2, 1)
1
−3
5
y
0
x
(b)  3x  2y  8  0
53.  They all have the same slope. 	
−8
8
−5
5
b = −6
b = −1
b = −3
b = 0
b = 1
b = 3
b = 6
	
55.  They all have the same x-intercept. 	
       
−5
5
−2
8
m = 1.5
m = −1.5
m = 0.75
m = 0.25
m = 0
m = −0.25
m = −0.75
	
57.  1, 3 	
59.  2, 7
1
1
0
y
x
	
1
1
0
y
x
61.   4
5, 2	
63.  0, 4 
5
−5
0
−3
3
y
x
	
65.  Undefined, none	
67.  2, 5
1
1
0
y
x
	
1
1
0
y
x
5
−5
5
y
0
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Chapter 1 Review  A7
69.  2, 3	
71.   2
3, 4
1
1
0
y
x
	
1
4
0
y
x
73.  Parallel    75.  Perpendicular    77.  Neither   
83.  x  y  3  0    85.  (b)  4x  3y  24  0   
87.  (a)  The slope represents an increase of 0.02C every year, 
and the T-intercept is the average surface temperature in 
1950.    (b)  17.0C   
89.  (a) 
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
200
100
y
x
(b)  The slope represents a decrease of 4 spaces rented for each 
one dollar increase in rental price, the y-intercept indicates that 
200 spaces are rented if there is no increase in price, and the 
x-intercept indicates that no spaces are rented with an increase of 
$50 in rental price.
91.  (a) 
(b)  40
93.  (a)  V  950t  4000   
(b) 
4000
0
5
y
x

(c)  The slope represents a decrease of $950 each year in the 
value of the computer, and the V-intercept is the original price of 
the computer.    (d)  $1150
Section 1.11  ■  page 121
1.  x    2.  above    3.  (a)  x  1, 0, 1, 3    (b)  31, 04 < 31, 34
4.  (a)  x  1, 4    (b)  11, 42     5.  4    7.  5
14     
9.  4!2  5.7    11.  No solution    13.  2.5, 2.5   
15.  5 2!
4 5 7.99, 5 2!
4 5 2.01    17.  3.00, 4.00     
19.  1.00, 2.00, 3.00    21.  1.62    23.  1.00, 0.00, 1.00    25.  4
27.  No solution    29.  2.55    31.  2.05, 0, 1.05     
33.  32.00, 5.004     35.  1`, 1.004 < 32.00, 3.004    
C
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
F
22
4
14
32
50
68
86
37.  11.00, 02 < 11.00, ` 2     39.  1`, 02     41.  11, 42      
43.  1`, 54 < 536 < 32, ` 2     45.  2.27   
47.  (a) 
0
450
−5000
20,000
	
(b)  101 cooktops 
(c)  279  x  400
Section 1.12  ■  page 127
1.  directly proportional; proportionality    2.  inversely  
proportional; proportionality    3.  directly proportional;  
inversely proportional    4.  1
2 xy     
5.  (a)  Directly proportional    (b)  Not proportional     
6.  (a)  Not proportional    (b)  Inversely proportional   
7.  T  kx    9.  √  k/z    11.  y  ks/t    13.  z k!y   
15.  V  kl„h    17.  R kP2t2
b3     19.  y  7x    21.  A 21
r    
23.  A 18x
t     25.  W  360/r2    27.  C  16l„h   
29.  R 27.5
!x     31.  (a)  z k  x3
y2     (b)  27
4    
33.  (a)  z kx3y5    (b)  864    35.  (a)  F  kx    (b)  7.5     
(c)  45 N    37.  (a)  P  ks3    (b)  0.012    (c)  324    39.  46 mi/h   
41.  5.3 mi/h    43.  (a)  P  kT/V    (b)  8.3    (c)  51.9 kPa   
45.  (a)  L k/d2    (b)  7000    (c)  1
4    (d)  4   
47.  (a)  R  kL/d2     (b)  0.002916    (c)  R  137     (d)  3
4   
49.  (a)  160,000    (b)  1,930,670,340     
51.  (a)  T k !l    (b)  quadruple the length l   
53.  (a)  f k/L    (b)  Halves it    55.  3.47 1014 W/m2
Chapter 1 Review  ■  page 133
1.  Commutative Property of Addition
3.  Distributive Property   
5.  2  x  6   
−2
6
7.  35,  ` 2    
5
9.  3    11.  4    13.  1
6    15.  11    17.  (a)  b14    (b)  12xy8   
19.  (a)  x2y2    (b)  0  x 0  y2    21.  7.825  1010    23.  1.65  1032   
25.  1x 72 1x 22     27.  1x 12 21x 12 2   
29.  41t 22 1t 22    
31.  1x 12 1x2 x 12 1x 12 1x2 x 12    
33.  x1/215x 32 1x 12     35.  1x 2214x2 32      
37.  1a b 52 1a b 22     39.  4y2  49   
41.  2x3  6x2  4x    43. 
31x 32
x 4     45.  3x2 7x 8
x1x 22 2
   
47.   1
2x    49.  3!2 2!3    51.  !11
11     53.  10!2 10   
55.  5    57.  No solution    59.  2, 7    61.  1, 1
2    63.  0,  5
2   
65.  2 !7
3
    67.  5    69.  3, 11    71.  (a)  3 i   
(b)  8 i    73.  (a)  6
5 8
5 i    (b)  2        75.  4i    77.  3  i   
79.  4, 4i    81.  20 lb raisins, 30 lb nuts     
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A8 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
83.  1
41 !329 32 3.78 mi/h    85.  1 h 50 min   
87.  13,  ` 2 	
89.  1`,  62 < 12,  ` 2
−3
	
−6
2
91.  1`,  22 < 12,  44 	
93.  32, 84
4
2
−2
	
8
2
95.  (a) 
y
0
x
4
4
_4
_4
8
12
Q (_5, 12)
P (2, 0)
    (b)  !193    (c)  A 3
2,  6B
(d)  y  12
7  x 24
7  	
(e)  1x 22 2 y2 193 
y
0
x
4
_4
_4
8
12
(_5, 12)
24
7
2
	
y
0
x
8
8
_8
_8
(2, 0)
97.  	
y
0
x
5
3
	
99.  B    101.  1x 52 2 1 y 12 2 26   
103.  (a)  Circle   
(b)  Center 11, 32 , radius 1
y 
x 
1 
0 
1 
105.  (a)  No graph   
107.	
109.
y
0
x
_2
2
_2
2
	
0
x
3
_3
_4
y
4
111.
y
0
x
2
2
113.  (a)  Symmetry about y-axis     
(b)  x-intercepts 3, 3; y-intercept 9     
115.  (a)  Symmetry about y-axis     
(b)  x-intercept 0; y-intercepts 0, 2     
117.  (a)  Symmetric about origin     
(b)  x-intercepts 1, 1; y-intercepts 1, 1
119.  (a) 
8
_2
10
_10
(b)  x-intercepts 0, 6; y-intercept 0
121.  (a) 
6
_3
10
_25
(b)  x-intercepts 1, 0, 5; y-intercept 0
123.  (a)  y 2x 6   
(b)  2x y 6 0   
(c) 
1
2
0
y
x
125.  (a)  y 2
3 x 16
3    
(b)  2x 3y 16 0   
(c) 
2
1
0
y
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Chapter 1 Test  A9
127.  (a)  x  3    (b)  x  3  0   
(c) 
1
1
0
y
x
129.  (a)  y  4x    (b)  4x y 0   
(c) 
2
4
0
y
x
131.  (a)  The slope represents a stretch of 0.3 in. for each  
one-pound increase in weight. The S-intercept represents the 
unstretched length of the spring.    (b)  4 in.
133.  1, 6    135.  31, 64     137.  1`, 04 < 34, ` 2    
139.  1, 7    141.  2.72, 1.15, 1.00, 2.87    143.  31, 34      
145.  11.85, 0.602 < 10.45, 2.002      
147.  x2  y2  169, 5x  12y  169  0   
149.  M  8z    151.  (a)  I  k/d2    (b)  64,000     
(c)  160 candles    153.  11.0 mi/h   
Chapter 1 Test  ■  page 137
1.  (a) 
_5
3
2
(b)  1`,  34, 31,  42     (c)  16    2.  (a)  81    (b)  81    (c)  1
81   
(d)  25    (e)  9
4    (f)  1
8    3.  (a)  1.86  1011    (b)  3.965  107
4.  (a)  6 !2    (b)  48a5b7    (c) 
x
9y7    (d)  x 2
x 2    (e) 
1
x 2
(f)  1x y2     5.  5 !2 2 !10   
6.  (a)  11x  2     (b)  4x2  7x  15    (c)  a  b     
(d)  4x2  12x  9    (e)  x3  6x2  12x  8   
7.  (a)  12x 52 12x 52     (b)  12x 32 1x 42      
(c)  1x 32 1x 22 1x 22     (d)  x1x 32 1x2 3x 92      
(e)  3x1/21x 12 1x 22     (f)  xy1x 22 1x 22    
8.  (a)  6    (b)  1    (c)  3, 4    (d)  1 !2
2    
(e)  No real solution    (f)  1, !2    (g)  2
3, 22
3     9.  (a)  7 i   
(b)  1 5i    (c)  18 i    (d)  6
25 17
25 i    (e)  1    (f)  6 2i   
10.  1  !2
2
 i    11.  120 mi    12.  50 ft by 120 ft   
13.  (a)  34,  32 	
_4
3
       (b)  12,  02 < 11,  ` 2 	
_2
0
1
       (c)  11,  72 	
1
7
       (d)  11,  44 	
_1
4
14.  Between 41F and 50F    15.  0  x  6   
16.  (a)  S13,  62    
y
0
x
1
1
Q
P
S
R
    (b)  18
17.  (a) 
y
0
x
1
_4
	
(b)  x-intercepts 2, 2  
y-intercept 4   
	
  	
(c)  Symmetric about  
y-axis   
18.  (a) 
Q(5, 6)
P(−3, 1)
1
1
0
y
x
(b)  !89    (c)  A1,  7
2B    (d)  5
8    (e)  y  8
5 x 51
10   
(f)  1x 12 2 Ay 7
2B2 89
4
19.  (a)  10,  02, 5      	
(b)  12,  12, 3    
(0, 0)
−2
−2
2
2
y
x
	
     
(2, −1)
0
4
2
y
x
(c)  13,  12, 2   
(−3, 1)
−5
0
3
y
x
20.  y 2
3 x 5    
2
2
0
y
x
	
slope 2
3; y-intercept 5 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A10 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
21.  (a)  3x  y  3  0    (b)  2x  3y  12  0
22.  (a)  4C    (b)   
1
100
10
0
T
x
(c)  The slope represents an increase of 0.08C for each  
one-centimeter increase in depth, the x-intercept is the depth  
at which the temperature is 0C, and the T-intercept is the  
temperature at ground level.
23.  (a)  2.94, 0.11, 3.05    (b)  31, 24
24.  (a)  M  k„h2/L    (b)  400    (c)  12,000 lb
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 144
1.  (a) 
Regression line
Femur length (cm)
Height (cm)
0
150
160
170
180
x
y
35
40
45
50
55
(b)  y  1.8807x  82.65    (c)  191.7 cm
3.  (a) 
y
0
x
Regression line
Diameter (in.)
Age (yr)
100
80
60
40
20
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
(b)  y  6.451x  0.1523    (c)  116 years
5.  (a) 
50
60
70
80
90
Temperature (°F)
Chirping rate (chirps/min)
50
100
150
200
y
x
0
Regression line
(b)  y  4.857x  220.97    (c)  265 chirps/min
7.  (a) 
10 20 30
80 90
60 70
40 50
100
Flow rate (%)
Mosquito positive rate (%)
15
20
5
10
25
Regression line
y
0
x
(b)  y  0.168x  19.89    (c)  8.13%
9.  (a) 
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
Life expectancy (years)
55
60
65
70
80
75
y
0
x
Regression line
(b)  y  0.2708x  462.9    (c)  80.4 years
chapter 2
Section 2.1  ■  page 155
1.  (a) f112 0    (b) f122 9    (c) f122 f 112 9     
2.  domain, range    3.  (a) f and g    (b) f152 10, g152 0     
4.  (a) square, add 3   
(b) 
x
0
2
4
6
fxxc
19
7
3
7
5.  one; (i)    6.  (a) Yes    (b) No    7.  f1x2 3x 5   
9.  f1x2 1x 12 2    11.  Multiply by 2, then add 3   
13.  Add 1, then multiply by 5   
15. 
1
0
2
1
2
5
subtract 1,
take square root
subtract 1,
take square root
subtract 1,
take square root
(input)
(output)
	
17. 
19.  3, 3, 6,  23
4     21.  1, 5
3, 0, 1 2a
3
, 1 2a
3
, 3 2a
3
23.  0, 15, 3, a2  2a, x2  2x, 1
a2 2
a   
25.   1
3, undefined, 1
3, 1 a
1 a, 2 a
a
, 2 x2
x2
27.  3, 5, 3, 1 2!2, a2 6a 5, x2 2x 3, 
x4 2x2 3
29.  6, 2, 1, 2, 2 0 x 0 , 21x2 12     31.  4, 1, 1, 2, 3     
33.  8,  3
4, 1, 0, 1    35.  x2  4x  5, x2  6     
37.  x2  4, x2  8x  16    39.  12    41.  21   
x
fxxc
1
8
0
2
1
0
2
2
3
8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 2.2  A11
43.  5 2a, 5 2a 2h, 2    45.  5, 5, 0   
47. 
a
a 1, 
a h
a h 1, 
1
1a h 12 1a 12
49.  3  5a  4a2, 3  5a  5h  4a2  8ah  4h2,  
5  8a  4h    51.  1`, ` 2 , 1`, ` 2      
53.  32, 64 , 36, 184     55.  5x 0  x ? 36    57.  5x 0  x ? 16
59.  31, ` 2     61.  1`, ` 2     63.  A`, 1
2D    
65.  32, 32 < 13, ` 2     67.  1`, 04 < 36, ` 2     69.  14, ` 2    
71.  A1
2, `B    73.  (a)  f1x2 x
3 2
3
(b) 
x
fxxc
2
4
3
4
2
6
8
3
8
10
3
	
(c) 
x 
y 
1 
0 
1
75.  (a)  T1x2 0.08x 
(b) 
x
Txxc
2
0.16
4
0.32
6
0.48
8
0.64
	
(c) 
x
y
2
2
0
77.  1`, ` 2 , 51, 56     
79.  (a)  50, 0    (b)  V102  is the volume of the full tank, and 
V1202  is the volume of the empty tank, 20 min later.   
(c) 
x
Vxxc
0
50
5
28.125
10
12.5
15
3.125
20
0
	
(d)  50 gal
81.  (a)  8.66 m, 6.61 m, 4.36 m    (b)  It will appear to get shorter.   
83.  (a)  √10.12 4440, √10.42 1665   
(b)  Flow is faster near central axis.
(c) 
r
√xrc
0
4625
0.1
4440
0.2
3885
0.3
2960
0.4
1665
0.5
0
	
(d)  4440 cm/s
85.  (a)  T150002 0, T112,0002 960, T125,0002 5350 
(b)  The amount of tax paid on incomes of 5000, 12,000,  
and 25,000
87.  (a)  T1x2 e75x
if 0 x 2
150 501x 22
if x 2
(b)  $150, $200, $300    (c)  Total cost of staying at the hotel
89. 
	
Days
Height
of grass
0
91.
Section 2.2  ■  page 166
1. f1x2, x2 2, 7, 7   
x
fxxc
xx, yc
2
2
12, 22
1
1
11, 12
0
2
10, 22
1
1
11, 12
2
2
12, 22
     
1
1
0
y
x
2. 10    3. 7    4. (a) IV    (b)  II    (c)  I    (d)  III
5.  	
  7. 
1
1
0
y
x
	
9.  	
11. 
	
y
5
x
1
0
T
t
0
T
0
t
2
4
6
8
10
12
50
52
54
56
58
60
y
x
2
0
2
_2
_2
y
2
_5
0
x
5
_5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A12 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
13. 	
15. 
y
100
x
1
0
	
17. 	
19. 
y
2
x
1
0
	
21. 	
23. 
y
1
t
1
_1 0
	
25.  	
27. 
y
0
x
5
5
_5
_5
	
29. (a)	
(b)
−5
5
−5
5
	
−10
10
−10
10
(c)	
(d)
−5
20
−2
10
	
−100
100
−10
10
Graph (c) is the most appropriate.
y
0
x
4
_4
_4
4
x 
y 
1 
0 
1 
y
0
x
5
5
_5
_2
y
0
x
5
5
_5
31. (a)	
(b)
−2
2
−2
2
	
−10
10
−3
3
(c)	
(d)
−10
5
−3
3
	
−10
10
−10
10
Graph (c) is the most appropriate.
33.  	
35. 
	
y
0
x
5
4
_5
37.  	
39. 
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_3
	
41.  	
43. 
y
0
x
5
5
_5
	
y
0
x
5
5
_5
45.  	
47. 
	
7
7
_7
_7
49.  f1x2 •
2
if x 2
x
if 2 x 2
2
if x 2
51.  (a)  Yes    (b)  No    (c)  Yes    (d)  No     
53.  Function, domain 33, 24, range 32, 24     
55.  Not a function    57.  Yes    59.  No    61.  No    63.  No     
65.  Yes    67.  Yes   
y
0
x
5
2
_5
_2
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_2
y
0
x
1
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

69.  (a)  	
(b)
10
5
_5
_10
c=6
c=4
c=2
c=0
	
(c)  If c  0, then the graph of f1x2 x 2 c is the same as the 
graph of y  x2 shifted upward c units. If c  0, then the graph 
of f1x2 x2 c is the same as the graph of y  x2 shifted 
downward c units.
71.  (a)  	
(b) 
	
10
10
_10
_10
c=0
c=_2
c=_4
c=_6
(c)  If c  0, then the graph of f1x2 1x c2 3 is the same as 
the graph of y  x3 shifted to the right c units. If c  0, then the 
graph of f1x2 1x c2 3 is the same as the graph of y  x3 
shifted to the left 0 c 0  units.
73.  (a)  	
(b) 
	
2
2
3
3
c=1
5
c=1
3
c=1
(c)  Graphs of even roots are similar to !x; graphs of odd 
roots are similar to !
3 x. As c increases, the graph of y 
c!x 
becomes steeper near 0 and ﬂatter when x  1.
75.  f1x2  7
6 x 4
3, 2  x  4   
77.  f1x2 "9 x2, 3  x  3   
79. 
0
0.005
10
100
81.  (a)  E1x2 e 6 0.10x
if 0 x 300
36 0.061x 3002
if x 300
(b) 
10
5
_5
_10
c=0
c=_2
c=_4
c=_6
10
10
_10
_10
c=0
c=2
c=4
c=6
1
3
1
4
c=1
2
c=1
4
c=1
6
100
0
10
x (kWh)
E (dollars)
83.  P1x2 d 
0.49
if 0 x 1
0.70
if 1 x 2
0.91
if 2 x 3
1.12
if 3 x 3.5
 
P
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
x
1
2
3
4
0
Section 2.3  ■  page 178
1.  a, 4, 0, f 132 f 112 4    2. x, y, 1`, ` 21`, 74      
3.  (a)  increase, 1`, 22, 14, 52    (b)  decrease, 12, 42, 15, ` 2      
4.  (a)  largest, 7, 6, 5    (b)  smallest, 2, 4    5.  x; x; 1, 7, 31, 74      
6.  (a)  2x 1, x 4; 1  (b)  2x 1, x 4, higher; 
1`, 12    7.  (a)  1, 1, 3, 4    (b)  Domain 33, 44, range 
31, 44    (c)  3, 2, 4    (d)  3 x 2 and x  4    (e)  1     
9.  (a)  f102     (b)  g132     (c)  2, 2     
(d)  5x 0 4 x 2 or 2 x 36    (e)  5x 0 2 x 26   
11.  (a)  	
13.  (a) 
	
0
y
1
x
2
(b)  1`, ` 2 , 1`, ` 2 	
(b)  32, 54, 34, 34
15.  (a)  	
17.  (a) 
y
2
x
1
0
	
(b)  33, 34, 31, 84	
(b)  Domain 1`, ` 2 , 
	
range 31, ` 2
19.  (a)  	
21.  (a)
−1
3
−1
9
	
−0.8
4.8
−4.75
4.75
(b)  Domain 31, ` 2 , 	
(b)  Domain 34, 44,  
range 30, ` 2 	
range 30, 44
23.  (a)  x 3    (b)  x 3   
25.  (a)  x 2, 1    (b)  2 x 1     
27.  (a)  x 4.32, 1.12, 1.44     
(b)  4.32 x 1.12 or x 1.44     
y
2
x
1
0
_3
10
_6
2
Answers to Section 2.3  A13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A14 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
29.  (a)  x 1, 0.25, 0.25     
(b)  1 x 0.25 or x 0.25     
31.  (a)  Domain 31, 44 , range 31, 34     (b)  Increasing on 
11, 12  and 12, 42 , decreasing on 11, 22      
33.  (a)  Domain 33, 34 , range 32, 24     (b)  Increasing on 
12, 12  and 11, 22 , decreasing on 13, 22 , 11, 12, and 
12, 32          
35.  (a)  	
37.  (a) 
10
_10
7
_2
	
20
_25
5
_3
(b)  Domain 1`, ` 2 , 	
(b)  Domain 1`, ` 2 ,  
range 36.25, ` 2 	
range 1`, ` 2
(c)  Increasing on 12.5, ` 2 ; 	
(c)  Increasing on 1`, 12 ,   
decreasing on 1`, 2.52 	
12, ` 2 ; decreasing on 1 1, 2 2
39.  (a)	
41.  (a) 
3
_3
5
_5
	
5
_5
10
_10
(b)  Domain 1`, ` 2 , 	
(b)  Domain 1`, ` 2 ,  
range 1`, ` 2 	
range 30, ` 2
(c)  Increasing on 	
(c)  Increasing on 10, ` 2 ;  
1`, 1.552 , 10.22, ` 2 ; 	
decreasing on 1`, 02  
decreasing on 1 1.55, 0.22 2
43.  (a)  Local maximum 2 when x  0; local minimum 1 when  
x  2, local minimum 0 when x  2    (b) Increasing on 
12, 02 < 12, ` 2 ; decreasing on 1`, 22 < 10, 22      
45.  (a)  Local maximum 0 when x  0; local maximum 1 when  
x  3, local minimum 2 when x  2, local minimum 1 
when x  1    (b)  Increasing on 12, 02 < 11, 32 ; decreasing on 
1`, 22 < 10, 12 < 13, ` 2     47.  (a)  Local maximum  0.38 
when x  0.58; local minimum  0.38 when x  0.58     
(b)  Increasing on 1`, 0.582 < 10.58, ` 2 ; decreasing on 
10.58, 0.582     49.  (a)  Local ­maximum  0 when x  0;  
local minimum  13.61 when x  1.71, local  
minimum  73.32 when x  3.21     
(b)  Increasing on 11.71, 02 < 13.21, ` 2 ; decreasing on 
1`, 1.712 < 10, 3.212     51.  (a)  Local maximum  5.66 
when x  4.00    (b)  Increasing on 1`, 4.002 ; decreasing on 
14.00, 6.002     53.  (a)  Local maximum  0.38 when x  1.73; 
­local minimum  0.38 when x  1.73    (b)  Increasing on 
1`, 1.732 < 11.73, ` 2; decreasing on 11.73, 02 < 10, 1.732    
55.  (a)  500 MW, 725 MW    (b)  Between 3:00 a.m. and  
4:00 a.m.    (c)  Just before noon    (d)  100 MW     
57.  (a)   Increasing on 10, 302 < 132, 682 ; decreasing on 
130, 322     (b)  He went on a crash diet and lost weight, only to 
regain it again later.    (c)  100 lb    59.  (a)  Increasing on 
10, 1502 < 1300, ` 2 ; decreasing on 1150, 3002     (b)  Local  
maximum when x 150; local minimum when x 300     
(c)  50 ft    61.  Runner A won the race. All runners ﬁnished. 
Runner B fell but got up again to ﬁnish second.
63.  (a)
100
480
0
300
(b)  Increases    65.  7.5 mi/h   
Section 2.4  ■  page 187
1.  100 miles
2 hours
50 mi/h    2. 
f1b2 f1a2
b a
    3.  25 1
5 1 6
4.  (a)  secant    (b)  3    5.  (a)  Yes    (b)  Yes    6.  (a)  No     
(b)  No    7.  (a)  2    (b)  2
3    9.  (a)  4    (b)   4
5    11.  (a)  3     
(b)  3    13.  (a)  5    (b)  1    15.  (a)  51    (b)  17     
17.  (a)  600    (b)  60    19.  (a)  5h2 30h    (b)  5h 30   
21.  (a)  1 a
a
    (b)   1
a    23.  (a) 
2h
a1a h2     (b)   
2
a1a h2    
25.  (a)  1
2    27.  f ; g; 0, 1.5    29.  0.25 ft/day     
31.  (a)  245 persons/year    (b)  328.5 persons/year     
(c)  1997–2001    (d)  2001–2006    33.  (a)  14 players/year     
(b)  18 players/year    (c)  103 players/year    (d)  2006–2007, 
2004–2005    35.  First 20 minutes: 4.05°F/min, next 20 minutes: 
1.5°F/min; first ­interval    37.  (a)  All 10 m/s    (b)  Skier A 
started quickly and slowed down, skier B maintained a constant 
speed, and skier C started slowly and sped up.   
Section 2.5  ■  page 195
1.  (a)  linear, a, b    (b)  line    2.  (a)  5    (b)  line, 5, 7     
3.  15    4.  15 gal/min    5.  Upward    6.  Yes, 0, 0    7.  Yes, 
f1x2 1
3 x 3    9.  No    11.  Yes, f1x2 1
5 x 1
5    13.  No   
15.  2	
17.   2
3
y
2
x
1
0
	
19.  (a)  	
21.  (a) 
y
1
x
1
0
	
(b)  2    (c)  2	
(b)  0.5    (c)  0.5
y
2
t
2
0
y
1
t
1
0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23.  (a)  	
25.  (a) 
y
10
t
2
0
	
(b)   10
3     (c)   10
3 	
(b)   3
2    (c)   3
2
27.  f1x2 3x 1    29.  h1x2 1
2 x 3     
31.  (a)  3
2    (b)  f 1x2 3
2 x 7     
33.  (a)  1    (b)  f1x2 x 3     
35.  (a)   1
2    (b)  f1x2  1
2 x 2   
37.  	
39.  (a)
y
1
t
1
1
2
a=
a=1
a=2
	
As a increases, the graph of	
(b)  150   
f becomes steeper and the	
(c)  150,000 tons/year
rate of change increases.	
41.  (a)  V 1t2 0.5t 2  (b)  26 s   
43.  (a)  1
12, H1x2 1
12 x    (b)  12.5 in.   
45.  (a)  Jari    (b)  Jade: 60 mi/h; Jari: 70 mi/h     
(c)  Jade: f1t2 t 10; Jari g1t2 7
6 t    47.  3.16 mi 
49.  (a)  C1x2 1
4 x 260
(b)  1
4	
(c)  $0.25/mi
 
Section 2.6  ■  page 206
1.  (a)  up    (b)  left    2.  (a)  down    (b)  right    3.  (a)  x-axis     
(b)  y-axis    4.  (a)  II    (b)  I    (c)  III    (d)  IV    5.  Symmetric 
about the y-axis    6.  Symmetric about the origin    7.  (a)  Shift 
downward 1 unit    (b)  Shift to the right 2 units    9.  (a)  Reflect 
about the y-axis    (b)  Stretch vertically by a factor of 3     
11.  (a)  Shift to the right 5 units, then upward 2 units     
(b)  Shift to the left 1 unit, then downward 1 unit     
13.  (a)  Reflect in the x-axis, then shift upward 5 units     
(b)  Stretch vertically by a factor of 3, then shift downward  
5 units    15.  (a)  Shift to the left 5 units, stretch vertically by a 
factor of 2, then shift downward 1 unit    (b)  Shift to the right  
3 units, shrink vertically by a factor of 1
4, then shift upward  
5 units   
y
1
t
1
0
T
32,000
34,000
36,000
38,000
x
10
20
30
0
C
100
300
200
400
600
500
x
200
600
1000
1400
0
17.  (a)  Shrink horizontally by a factor of 1
4     
(b)  Stretch horizontally by a factor of 4    19.  (a)  Shift to the  
left 2 units    (b)  Shift upward 2 units    21.  (a)  Shift to the left  
2 units, then shift downward 2 units    (b)  Shift to the right  
2 units, then shift upward 2 units   
23.  (a)	
(b)
	
x 
y 
1 
0 
1 
(c)	
(d)
	
x 
y 
1 
0 
1 
25.  II    27.  I   
29. 	
31. 
y
1
x
1
0
	
33.	
35.
x
y
1
0
5
	
37.	
39.
x 
y 
1 
0 
5 
	
x 
y 
1 
0 
2 
x 
y 
2 
0 
1 
x 
y 
1 
1 
y
1
x
1
0
x 
y 
2 
0 
1 
Answers to Section 2.6  A15
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A16 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
41.	
43.
	
x 
y 
2 
0 
2 
45.	
47.
	
x 
y 
2 
0 
2 
49.	
51.
	
x
y
4
0
1
53.  y x2 3    55.  y !x 2    57.  y 0  x 2 0 5   
59.  y !
4 x 1    61.  y 21x 32 2 2   
63.  g1x2 1x 22 2    65.  g1x2 0  x 1 0 2   
67.  g1x2 !x 2    69.  (a)  3    (b)  1    (c)  2    (d)  4   
71.  (a)	
(b)
x 
y 
1 
1 
0 
	
x 
y 
1 
1 
0 
(c)	
(d)
x 
y 
1 
1 
0 
	
x 
y 
1 
1 
0 
(e)	
(f)
x 
y 
1 
2 
0 
	
x 
y 
1 
1 
0 
x 
y 
1 
0 
1 
x 
y 
1 
0 
2 
x 
y 
2 
0 
2 
73.  (a)  	
(b) 
y
0
x
6
2
	
y
0
x
6
2
75. 
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_3
77. 
8
8
_8
_2
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
	 
For part (b) shift the graph in (a) to the left 
5 units; for part (c) shift the graph in (a) to 
the left 5 units and stretch vertically by a 
factor of 2; for part (d) shift the graph in (a) 
to the left 5 units, stretch vertically by a fac-
tor of 2, and then shift upward 4 units.
79. 
4
6
_4
_4
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
	

For part (b) shrink the graph in (a) vertically 
by a factor of 1
3; for part (c) shrink the graph 
in (a) vertically by a factor of 1
3 and reﬂect in 
the x-axis; for part (d) shift the graph in (a) to 
the right 4 units, shrink vertically by a factor 
of 1
3, and then reﬂect in the x-axis.
81. 
4
5
_5
_4
1
2
4
(b) (a)
(c)
	

The graph in part (b) is shrunk horizontally 
by a ­factor of 1
2 and the graph in part (c) is 
stretched by a ­factor of 2.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 2.7  A17
83.  Even
x 
y 
1 
0 
1 
	
85.  Neither	
87.  Odd 
y
0
x
5
3
_5
_3
89.  Neither   
91.  (a)  	
(b) 
y
x
2
−2
3
−2
0
	
y
x
2
−2
2
0
93.  To obtain the graph of g, reﬂect in the x-axis the part of the 
graph of f that is below the x-axis.   
95.  (a)  	
(b) 
y
0
x
5
5
_5
_3
	
97.  (a)  She drops to 200 ft, bounces up and down, then settles at 
350 ft.
(b)  y (ft)
t (s)
500
4
0
(c)  Shift downward 100 ft; H1t2 h1t2 100
99.  (a)  80 ft/min; 20 min; 800 ft
(b)  d (ft)
t (min)
200
10
0
  Shrunk vertically by a factor  
of 0.50; 40 ft/min; 400 ft
_5
y
0
x
5
5
(c)  d (ft)
t (min)
200
10
0
  Shifted to the right 10 min; the 
class left 10 min later
Section 2.7  ■  page 216
1.  8, 2, 15, 3
5    2.  f1g1x22, 12    3.  Multiply by 2, then add 1; 
Add 1, then multiply by 2    4.  x 1, 2x, 2x 1, 21x 12
5.  (a)  f, g    (b)  f, g    (c)  f, g, 0    6.  g, f     
7.  1f g2 1x2 3x, 1`, ` 2; 1f g21x2 x, 1`, ` 2; 
1fg2 1x2 2x2, 1`, ` 2; a f
g b 1x2 1
2, 1`, 02 < 10, ` 2  
9.  1f g2 1x2 2x2 x, 1`, ` 2; 1f g21x2 x, 1`, ` 2; 
1fg2 1x2 x4 x3, 1`, ` 2; a f
g b 1x2 1 1
x, 
1`, 02 < 10, ` 2  
11.  1f g2 1x2 x2 4x 5, 1`, ` 2 ; 
1f g2 1x2 x2 2x 5, 1`, ` 2 ; 
1fg2 1x2 x3 8x2 15x, 1`, ` 2;
a f
g b 1x2 5 x
x2 3x, 1`, 02 < 10, 32 < 13, ` 2
13.  1f g2 1x2 "25 x2 "x 3, 33, 54 ; 
1f g2 1x2 "25 x2 "x 3, 33, 54 ; 
1fg2 1x2 "125 x22 1x 32, 33, 54 ; 
a f
g b 1x2 Å
25 x2
x 3 , 13, 54
15.  1f g2 1x2 6x 8
x2 4x, x ? 4, x ? 0; 
1f g2 1x2 2x 8
x 2 4x , x ? 4, x ? 0;
1fg2 1x2 
8
x2 4x, x ? 4, x ? 0; 
a f
g b 1x2 x 4
2x , x ? 4, x ? 0   
17.  30, 34     19.  13, ` 2    
21.  	
23. 
1
1
0
y
x
g
f
f+g
	
25. 
3
3
_3
_2
f
g
f+g
3
3
_3
_1
f
g
f+g
1
_1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A18 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
27.  (a)  5    (b)  5    29.  (a)  3    (b)  45     
31.  (a)  2x2  5    (b)  4x2  12x  5    33.  4     
35.  5    37.  4    39.  6    41.  3    43.  1    45.  3   
47.  1f + g21x2 8x 1, 1`, ` 2 ; 
1g + f21x2 8x 11, 1`, ` 2 ; 1f + f2 1x2 4x 9, 1`, ` 2 ; 
1g + g21x2 16x 5, 1`, ` 2    
49.  1f + g21x2 1x 12 2, 1`, ` 2 ; 
1g + f21x2 x2 1, 1`, ` 2 ; 1f + f2 1x2 x4, 1`, ` 2 ; 
1g + g21x2 x 2, 1`, ` 2    
51.  1f + g21x2 
1
2x 4, x ? 2; 1g + f2 1x2 2
x 4, x ? 0; 
1f + f21x2 x, x ? 0, 1g + g2 1x2 4x 12, 1`, ` 2    
53.  1f + g21x2 0  2x 3 0 , 1`, ` 2 ; 
1g + f21x2 2 0  x 0 3, 1`, ` 2 ; 1f + f2 1x2 0  x 0 , 1`, ` 2 ; 
1g + g21x2 4x 9, 1`, ` 2    
55.  1f + g21x2 2x 1
2x
, x ? 0; 
1g + f21x2 
2x
x 1 1, x ? 1; 
1f + f21x2 
x
2x 1, x ? 1, x ?  1
2; 
1g + g21x2 4x 3, 1`, ` 2
57.  1f + g21x2 
1
x 1, x ? 1, x ? 0; 1g + f2 1x2 x 1
x
,  
x ? 1, x ? 0; 1f + f2 1x2 
x
2x 1, x ? 1, x ?  1
2; 
1g + g21x2  x, x ? 0
59.  1f + g + h21x2 !x 1 1
61.  1f + g + h21x2 1 !x 52 4 1   
63.  g1x2 x 9, f1x2 x5    65.  g1x2 x2, f1x2 x/1x 42   
67.  g1x2 1 x3, f1x2 0  x 0    
69.  h1x2 x2, g1x2 x 1, f1x2 1/x   
71.  h1x2 !
3 x, g1x2 4 x, f1x2 x 9   
73.  Yes; m1m2    75.  R1x2 0.15x 0.000002x2   
77.  (a)  g1t2 60t    (b)  f1r2 pr2    (c)  1f + g2 1t2 3600pt2  
79.  A1t2 16pt2    81.  (a)  f1x2 0.9x   
(b)  g1x2 x 100    (c)  1f + g2 1x2 0.9x 90,
1g + f2 1x2 0.9x 100, 1f + g2 : ﬁrst rebate, then discount, 
1g + f2 : ﬁrst discount, then rebate, g + f is the better deal   
Section 2.8  ■  page 225
1.  different, Horizontal Line    2.  (a)  one-to-one, g1x2 x3
(b)  g11x2 x1/3    3.  (a)  Take the cube root, subtract 5, then 
­divide the result by 3.    (b)  f1x2 13x 52 3, f11x2 x1/3 5
3
 
4. Yes, 4, 5    5.  14, 32    6.  (a)  False    (b)  True    7.  No     
9. Yes    11.  No    13.  Yes    15. Yes    17.  No    19.  No    21.  Yes   
23.  No    25.  (a)  2    (b)  3    27.  1    29.  (a)  6    (b)  2    (c)  0   
31.  4    33.  1    35.  2    49.  f 11x2 1
3 x 5
3   
51.  f11x2 #
3 1
415 x2     53.  f11x2 11/x2 2   
55.  f11x2 
4x
1 x    57.  f11x2 7x 5
x 2    
59.  f11x2 x 3
5x 2    61.  f11x2 !4 x, x 4   
63.  f11x2 !
6 x, x 0    65.  f11x2 !
3 2 5x   
67.  f11x2 x2 5
8
, x 0    69.  f11x2 1x 22 3   
71.  (a)  	
(b)
y
0
x
5
2
_5
_5
f
	
(c)  f11x2 1
31x 62    
73.  (a)	
(b) 
y
0
x
2
2
_2
_1
f
	
y
0
x
2
2
_2
_1
f–¡
(c)  f 11x2 x2 1, x 0   
75.  Not one-to-one	
77.  One-to-one
3
2
_2
_3
	
20
16
_4
_20
79.  Not one-to-one	
10
15
_5
_10
81.  (a)  f11x2 x 2	
(b)  	
4
4
_4
_4
f
f _1
	
83.  (a)  g11x2 x2 3, x 0
(b)   
4
4
_4
_4
g
g−1
y
0
x
3
5
_5
_2
f–¡
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Chapter 2 Review  A19
85.  x 0, f11x2 !4 x    87.  x 2, h11x2 !x 2
89.  	
91.  (a)
y
x
1
1
0
	
	
(b)  Yes    (c)  f11x2 1
x
93.  (a)  f1n2 16 1.5n    (b)  f11x2 2
3 1x 162 ; the  
number of toppings on a pizza that costs x dollars    (c)  6
95.  (a)  f11V2 40 4!V, time elapsed when V gal of water 
remain    (b)  24.5 min; in 24.5 min the tank has 15 gal of water 
remaining    97.  (a)  f11D2 50 1
3 D; the price associated with 
the demand D    (b)  $40; when the demand is 30 units, the price  
is $40    99.  (a)  f1x2 0.9766x    (b)  f11x2 1.02396x; the 
exchange rate from U.S. dollars to ­Canadian dollars     
(c)  $12,543.52    101.  (a)  f1x2 0.85x    (b)  g1x2 x 1000   
(c)  H  0.85x  850    (d)  H11x2 1.176x 1000, the  
original sticker price for a given discounted price    (e)  $16,288, 
the original price of the car when the discounted price  
($1000 rebate, then 15% off) is $13,000   
Chapter 2 Review  ■  page 231
1.  f1x2 x2 5    3.  Add 10, then multiply the result by 3.   
5. 
x
gxxc
21
5
0
0
1
23
2
24
3
23
7.  (a)  C110002 34,000, C110,0002 205,000     
(b)  The costs of printing 1000 and 10,000 copies of the book     
(c)  C102 5000; fixed costs    (d)  $171,000; $19/copy   
9.  6, 2, 18, a2  4a  6, a2  4a  6, x2  2x  3, 4x2  8x  6  
11.  (a)  Not a function    (b)  Function    (c)  Function, one-to-
one    (d)  Not a function    13.  Domain 33, ` 2 , range 30, ` 2    
15.  1`, ` 2     17.  34, ` 2    19.  5x 0  x ? 2, 1, 06   
21.  1`, 14 < 31, 44    
23.  	
25. 
	
y
3
x
1
0
y
1
x
1
0
y
0
x
5
3
_5
_3
27.  	
29. 
	
y
1
x
1
0
31.  	
33. 
y
2
x
1
0
	
35.  	
37. 
y
1
x
2
0
	
39.  No    41.  Yes    43.  (iii)   
45.  (a)  	
47.  (a) 
_1
4
_4
4
	
_1
5
_5
5
(b)  Domain 33, 34, 	
(b)  Domain  
range 30, 34	
32.11, 0.254 < 31.86, ` 2 ,  
	
range 30, ` 2
49.    	
Increasing on 1`, 02 , 
12.67, ` 2 ; decreasing on  
10, 2.672    
51.  4, 1    53.  4, 4
3    55.  9, 3    57.  No   
y
1
x
1
0
y
1
x
2
y
0
x
5
5
_5
10
6
_2
_10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A20 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
59.  (a)  	
y
1
x
1
0
(b)  3    (c)  3	
61.  f1x2 2x 3    63.  f1x2 2x 3   
65.  f1x2  1
2 x 4    67.  (a)  P1102 5010, P1202 7040; 
the populations in 1995 and 2005    (b)  203 people/year; average 
annual population increase    69.  (a)  1
2, 1
2    (b)  Yes    (c)  Yes, 1
2   
71.  (a)  Shift upward 8 units    (b)  Shift to the left 8 units     
(c)  Stretch vertically by a factor of 2, then shift upward 1 unit     
(d)  Shift to the right 2 units and downward 2 units    (e)  Reﬂect in 
y-axis    (f)  Reﬂect in y-axis, then in x-axis    (g)  Reﬂect in x-axis   
(h)  Reﬂect in line y  x   
73.  (a)  Neither    (b)  Odd    (c)  Even    (d)  Neither     
75.  Local minimum 5 27 when x 5 21   
77.  Local maximum  3.79 when x  0.46; local  
minimum  2.81 when x  0.46    79.  68 ft   
81.
−2
10
f(x)
g(x)
(f+g)(x)
−4
4
83.  (a)  1f g2 1x2 x2 6x 6    (b)  1f g2 1x2 x2 2   
(c)  1fg21x2 3x3 13x2 18x 8   
(d)  1f/g21x2 1x2 3x 22/14 3x2    
(e)  1f + g21x2 9x2 15x 6     
(f)  1g + f21x2 3x2 9x 2   
85.  1f + g21x2 3x2 6x 1, 1`, ` 2 ; 
1g + f21x2 9x2 12x 3, 1`, ` 2 ; 1f + f2 1x2 9x 4,
1`, ` 2 ; 1g + g2 1x2 x4 4x3 6x2 4x, 1`, ` 2    
87.  1f + g + h21x2 1 !x    89.  Yes    91.  No    93.  No   
95.  f11x2 x 2
3
    97.  f11x2 !
3 x 1    99.  Yes, 1, 3   
101.  (a), (b) 
y
0
x
5
3
_5
_3
f
f –¡
(c)  f11x2 !x 4   
Chapter 2 Test  ■  page 235
1.  (a) and (b) are graphs of functions,  
(a) is one-to-one   
2.  (a)  0, !2
3 , !a 2
a 3     (b)  30, ` 2    
(c)  3!10 11!2
264
0.023   
3.  (a)  f1x2 1x 22 3   
(b) 
x
fxxc
21
227
0
28
1
21
2
0
3
1
4
8
	
(c) 
x 
y 
1 
0 
2 
(d)  By the Horizontal Line Test; take the cube root, then add 2
(e)  f11x2 x1/3 2    4.  (a)  Local minimum f 112 4,  
local maxima f 142 1 and f 132 4    (b)  Increasing on 
1`, 42  and 11, 32 , decreasing on 14, 12  and 13, ` 2    
5.  (a)  R122 4000, R142 4000; total sales ­revenue with 
prices of $2 and $4
(b) 
0
5000
5
  Revenue increases until price 
reaches $3, then decreases
(c)  $4500; $3    6.  2h h2, 2 h
7.  (a)  g; f is not linear because it has a square term
(b) 
y
10
x
0
y=˝
y=Ï
2
(c)  5
8.  (a)  	
(b) 
	
y
0
x
5
3
_5
_3
y
0
x
5
3
_5
_3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.  (a)  Shift to the right 3 units, then shift upward 2 units   
(b)  Reﬂect in y-axis   
10.  (a)  3, 0
(b) 
x 
y 
1 
0 
3 
11.  (a)  x2 2x 2    (b)  x2 4    (c)  x2 5x 7   
(d)  x2 x 2    (e)  1    (f)  4    (g)  x 9   
12.  (a)  Yes    (b)  No    14.  f11x2  5x 3
2x 1   
15.  (a)  f11x2 3 x2, x 0   
(b) 
y
0
x
5
3
_5
_3
f
f –¡
16.  Domain 30, 64, range 31, 74    17.  1, 3
18. 
1
1
0
y
x
y=f(x)+2
y=f(x-2)
f
19.  5, 5
4    20.  0, 4
21. 
y
x
0
1
1
22.  (a)  	
(b)  No   
20
4
_4
_30
(c)  Local minimum  27.18 when x  1.61;  
local maximum  2.55 when x  0.18;  
local minimum  11.93 when x  1.43     
(d)  327.18, ` 2     (e)  Increasing on 11.61, 0.182 < 11.43, ` 2 ; 
decreasing on 1`, 1.612 < 10.18, 1.432
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 240
1.  A1„2 3„2, „ 0    3.  V1„2 1
2 „3, „ 0   
5.  A1x2 10x x2, 0 x 10    7.  A1x2 1 !3/42x2, x 0  
9.  r1A2 "A/p, A 0    11.  S1x2 2 x2 240
x , x 0   
13.  D1t2 25t, t 0    15.  A1b2 b!4 b, 0 b 4   
17.  A1h2 2h"100 h2, 0 h 10   
19.  (b)  p1x2 x119 x2     (c)  9.5, 9.5   
21.  (b)  A1x2 x12400 2 x2     (c)  600 ft by 1200 ft   
23.  (a)  f1„2 8„ 17200/„2     (b)  Width along road is  
30 ft, length is 40 ft    (c)  15 ft to 60 ft   
25.  (a)  A1x2 15x a p 4
8
bx2   
(b)  Width  8.40 ft, height of rectangular part  4.20 ft 
27.  (a)  A1x2 x2 48
x    
(b)  Height  1.44 ft, width  2.88 ft
29.  (a)  A1x2 2x 200
x     (b)  10 m by 10 m
31.  (b)  To point C, 5.1 mi from B   
chapter 3
Section 3.1  ■  page 251
1.  square    2.  (a)  1h, k2    (b)  upward, minimum     
(c)  downward, maximum    3.  upward, 12, 62, 6, minimum     
4.  downward, 12, 62, 6, maximum   
5.  (a)  13, 42 ; x-intercepts 1, 5; y-intercept 5   
(b)  maximum 4    (c)  , 1`, 44    
7.  (a)  11, 32 ; x-intercepts 2  !6
2
; y-intercept 1   
(b)  minimum 3    (c)  , 33, ` 2    
9.  (a)  f1x2 1x 12 2 2	
11.  (a)  f1x2 1x 32 2 9
(b)  Vertex 11, 22 	
(b)  Vertex 13, 92
no x-intercepts	
x-intercepts 0, 6 
y-intercept 3    	
y-intercept 0
(c)  	
(c)  	
(d)  , 32, ` 2 	
(d)  , 39, ` 2
x
y
1
0
1
3
0
−3
−3
3
x
y
Answers to Section 3.1  A21
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A22 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
13.  (a)  f1x2 31x 12 2 3	
15.  (a)  f1x2 1x 22 2 1
(b)  Vertex 11, 32 	
(b)  Vertex 12, 12
x-intercepts 2, 0	
x-intercepts 1, 3  
y-intercept 0    	
y-intercept 3   
(c)  	
(c) 
(d)  , 33, ` 2 	
(d)  , 31, ` 2
17.  (a)  f1x2 1x 32 2 13   
(b)  Vertex 13, 132 ; x-intercepts 3 !13; y-intercept 4   
(c)  	
(d)  , 1`, 134
19.  (a)  f1x2 21x 12 2 1     
(b)  Vertex 11, 12 ; no x-intercept; y-intercept 3
(c)  	
(d)  , 31, ` 2
21.  (a)  f1x2 21x 52 2 7	
(b)  Vertex 15, 72 ; no x-intercept; y-intercept 57   
(c)  	
(d)  , 37, ` 2
23.  (a)  f 1x2 4Ax 3
2B
2 10
(b)  Vertex A 3
2, 10B; x-intercepts  3
2 !10
2 ,  3
2 !10
2 ;  
y-intercept 1
(c)  	
(d)  , 1`, 104
x
y
1
0
1
2
0
−2
2
x
y
2
−2
6
x
y
y
0
x
3
3
_3
y
0
x
5
7
_2
x
y
1
0
1
25.  (a)  f1x2 1x 12 2 2	
27.  (a)  f1x2 31x 12 2 2  
(b)  	
(b) 
(c)  Minimum f112 2	
(c)  Minimum f112 2
29.  (a)  f1x2 Ax 3
2B
2 21
4 	
31.  (a)  g1x2 31x 22 2 1
(b)  	
(b) 
(c)  Maximum fA 3
2B 21
4 	
(c)  Minimum g122 1
33.  (a)  h1x2 Ax 1
2B
2 5
4
(b)  	
(c)  Maximum hA 1
2B 5
4
35.  Minimum f112 3   
37.  Maximum f122 77   
39.  Minimum f10.62 15.64   
41.  Minimum h122 8   
43.  Maximum f112 7
2   
45.  (a)  4.01    (b)  4.011025   
47.  f1x2 41x 22 2 3   
49.  7    51.  25 ft    53.  $4000, 100 units    55.  30 times   
57.  50 trees/acre    59.  600 ft by 1200 ft   
61.  Width 8.40 ft, height of rectangular part 4.20 ft   
63.  (a)  f1x2 x11200 x2     (b)  600 ft by 600 ft     
65.  (a)  R1x2 x157,000 3000x2     (b)  $9.50    (c)  $19.00   
Section 3.2  ■  page 265
1.  II    2.  (a)  `, `    (b)  `, `     
3.  (a) 0    (b) factor    (c)  x    4.  (a)
5.  (a)  	
(b) 
y
0
x
2
3
_3
_2
(_1, _2)
x
y
1
0
2
(1, −2)
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_2
!_   ,      @
3
2
21
4
y
0
x
6
10
(2, 1)
y
0
x
2
2
_4
_2
!_   ,    @
1
2
5
4
y
0
x
2
2
_2
_4
y
0
x
4
16
_2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 3.2  A23
(c)  	
(d) 
7.  (a)  	
(b) 
(c)  	
(d) 
9.  (a)  y S ` as x S `, y S ` as x S `    (b)  III   
11.  (a)  y S ` as x S `, y S ` as x S `    (b)  V   
13.  (a)  y S ` as x S `, y S ` as x S `    (b)  VI   
15.  	
17. 
19.  	
21. 
23.  	
25. 
y
1
x
1
0
y
1
x
1
0
y
0
x
2
4
_2
_8
y
0
x
_3
_9
27
y
0
x
1
4
_2
_8
y
0
x
1
4
_1
y
0
x
1
1
−2
x
y
1
3
0
_2
1
x
y
1
1
2
3
_3
_1
0
1
y
6
x
1
0
x
y
2
0
1
1
0
y
2
x
1
0
27.  	
29. 
31.  P1x2 x1x 22 1x 32 	
33.  P1x2 x1x 321x 42  
	
35.  P1x2 x21x 12 1x 22 	 37.  P1x2 1x 12 21x 12   
	
39.  P1x2 12x 12 1x 32 1x 32  
y
0
x
2
1
2
3
9
10
_2
_3
_20
41.  P1x2 1x 22 21x2 2x 42  
y
0
x
2
5
16
_2
43.  P1x2 1x2 12 1x 22 1x 22  
0
x
1
2
2
_1 _2
_4
_2
y
y
0
x
4
4
3
_4
y
0
x
1
10
_1
_30
3
y
0
x
4
3
4
_4
_2
_4
y
0
x
1
4
10
_1
_3
_10
y
0
x
1
2
1
_1
_1
y
0
x
1
1
_1
_1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A24 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
45.  y → `    as    x → `, y →`    as    x → `     
47.  y → `    as    x → `    49.  y → `    as    x → `,  
y → `    as    x → `    51.  (a)  x-intercepts 0, 4; y-intercept 0     
(b)  Maximum 12, 42     53.  (a)  x-intercepts 2, 1; y-intercept 1     
(b)  Minimum 11, 22 ,  maximum 11, 02    
55.  	
  local maximum 14, 162 , 
domain 1`, ` 2 ,     
range 1`, 164
57.  	
59. 
local maximum 12, 252 , 	
local minimum 13, 272 ,   
local minimum 12, 72 ,    	
domain 1`, ` 2 ,
domain 1`, ` 2 ,    	
range 327, ` 2
range 1`, ` 2    
61.  	
local maximum 11, 52 ,  
local minimum 11, 12 ,     
domain 1`, ` 2 ,     
range 1`, ` 2    
63.  One local maximum, no local minimum    65.  One local  
maximum, one local ­minimum    67.  One local maximum, two 
local minima    69.  No local extrema    71.  One local maximum, 
two local minima   
73.  	
75. 
5
1
_1
_5
c=5
c=2
c=1
2
c=1
	
Increasing the value of c 
	
Increasing the value of c
stretches the graph vertically.
	
moves the graph up.
77.  	

Increasing the value of c  
causes a deeper dip in the  
graph in the fourth quadrant 
and moves the positive 
x-intercept to the right.
10
4
_2
_40
c=0
c=1
c=8
c=27
30
12
_4
_50
30
5
_5
_30
30
5
_5
_30
10
3
_3
_5
5
1.5
_1.5
_3
c=2
c=1
c=0
c=_1
79.  (a)	
(b)  Three     
(c)  10, 22, 13, 82, 12, 122
81.  (d)  P1x2 PO1x2 PE1x2 , where PO1x2 x5 6x3 2x  
and PE1x2 x2 5
83.  (a)  	
local maximum 11.8, 2.12  
local minimum 13.6, 0.62
       (b)  	
local maximum 11.8, 7.12  
local minimum  
13.5, 4.42
85.  5; there are four local extrema     
87.  (a)  26 blenders    (b)  No; $3276.22     
89.  (a)  V1x2 4x3 120x2 800x    (b)  0  x  10   
(c)  Maximum volume  1539.6 cm3 
     
1600
10
0
Section 3.3  ■  page 273
1.  quotient, remainder    2.  (a)  factor    (b)  k
3.  2x 1 
9
x 2    5.  2x 1
2 
  15
2
2x 1   
7.  2x2 x 1 4x 4
x2 4     9.  1x 12 1x2 x 32 9   
11.  12x 32 1x2 12 3   
13.  12x2 12 14x2 2x 12 12x 12    
In answers 15–37 the ﬁrst polynomial given is the quotient, and 
the second is the remainder.
15.  x 1, 5    17.  2x2  1, 2    19.  x 1, 2   
21.  3x  1, 7x  5    23.  x4  1, 0    25.  2x 1, 6   
27.  3x 2, 2    29.  x2  2, 3    31.  x2  3x  1, 1   
33.  x4  x3  4x2  4x  4, 2    35.  2x2  4x, 1   
37.  x2  3x  9, 0    39.  3    41.  12    43.  7    45.  483   
47.  2159    49.  7
3    51.  8.279    57.  3, 3    59.  1 !6   
61.  5 !37
6
    63.  x3  3x2  x  3   
65.  x4  8x3  14x2  8x  15   
y
0
x
3
10
_3
_10
−10
10
−2
6
−10
10
−2
6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 3.6  A25
67.  2x4 4x3 10x2 12x    69.  3x4 9x2 6   
71.  1x 12 1x 12 1x 22     73.  1x 22 21x 12 2   
Section 3.4  ■  page 283
1.  a0, an,  1,  1
2,  1
3,  1
6, 2,  2
3, 5,  5
2,  5
3,  5
6, 10,  10
3
2.  1, 3, 5; 0     3.  True    4.  False    5.  1, 3     
7.  1, 2, 4, 8,  1
2    9.  1, 7,  1
2,  7
2,  1
4,  7
4   
11.  (a)  1,  1
5    (b)  1, 1, 1
5    13.  (a)  1, 3,  1
2,  3
2   
(b)   1
2, 1, 3    15.  5, 1, 2; P1x2 1x 52 1x 12 1x 22
17.  2, 1; P1x2 1x 22 21x 12
19.  2; P1x2 1x 22 3   
21.  3, 2, 5; P1x2 1x 32 1x 22 1x 52
23.  3, 1, 1; P1x2 1x 32 1x 12 1x 12
25.  1, 2; P1x2 1x 22 1x 22 1x 12 1x 12
27.  4, 2, 1, 1; P1x2 1x 42 1x 22 1x 12 1x 12
29.  3,  1
2, 1
2, 3; P1x2 1x 32 12x 12 12x 12 1x 32
31.  2, 1
3, 3; P1x2 1x 22 1x 22 1x 32 13x 12
33.  1,  1
2; P1x2 1x 12 12x 12 12x 12
35.   3
2, 1
2, 1; P1x2 1x 12 12x 32 12x 12
37.   2
3,  1
2, 3
4; P 1x2 13x 22 12x 12 14x 32
39.  1, 1
2, 2; P1x2 1x 12 1x 22 212x 12
41.  3, 2, 1, 3; P1x2 1x 32 1x 22 21x 12 1x 32
43.  1,  1
3, 2, 5; P1x2 1x 12 21x 22 1x 52 13x 12
45.  1,  1 !13
3
    47.  1, 4, 3 !13
2
   
49.  3, 1 !5
2
    51.  1
2, 1 !3
2
    53.  1,  1
2, 3 !10   
55.  (a)  2, 2, 3          	
(b) 
57.  (a)   1
2, 2	
(b) 
59.  (a)  1, 2	
(b) 
61.  (a)  1, 2    	
(b) 
y
0
x
1
5
_1
y
0
x
2
20
_20
y
0
x
2
5
_1
_5
y
0
x
1
5
_1
_5
63.  1 positive, 2 or 0 negative; 3 or 1 real    65.  1 positive,  
1 negative; 2 real    67.  2 or 0 positive, 0 negative; 3 or 1 real 
(since 0 is a zero but is neither ­positive nor negative)    77.  3, 2 
79.  3, 1    81.  2, 1
2, 1    83.   1
2,  !5    85.  2, 1, 3, 4   
91.  2, 2, 3    93.   3
2, 1, 1, 4    95.  1.28, 1.53    97.  1.50  
99.  11.3 ft    101.  (a)  It began to snow again.    (b)  No   
(c)  Just before midnight on Saturday night    103.  2.76 m     
105.  88 in. (or 3.21 in.)
Section 3.5  ■  page 293
1.  6; 7; 2, 3    2.  (a)  x  a    (b)  1x a2 m    3.  n    4.  a bi; 
3 i    5.  (a)  True    (b)  True    (c)  False, x4 1 0 for all 
real x    6.  (a)  False, x2 1 has no real zeros     
(b)  True    (c)  False, x2 1 factors into linear factors with 
complex coefficients    7.  (a)  0, 2i    (b)  x21x 2i21x 2i2      
9.  (a)  0, 1  i    (b)  x1x 1 i2 1x 1 i2      
11.  (a)  i    (b)  1x i2 21x i2 2     
13.  (a)  2, 2i    (b)  1x 22 1x 221x 2i21x 2i2      
15.  (a)  2, 1 i !3     
(b)  1x 22 Ax 1 i !3 BAx 1 i !3 B   
17.  (a)  1, 1
2 1
2 i !3,  1
2 1
2 i !3   
(b)  1x 12 1x 12 Ax 1
2 1
2 i !3 B Ax 1
2 1
2 i !3 B 
Ax 1
2 1
2 i !3B Ax 1
2 1
2 i !3 B
In answers 19–35 the factored form is given ﬁrst, then the zeros 
are listed with the multiplicity of each in parentheses.
19.  1x 5i2 1x 5i2; 5i 112    
21.  3x 11 i2 4 3x 11 i2 4; 1 i 112, 1 i 112
23.  x1x 2i2 1x 2i2; 0 112, 2i 112, 2i 112    
25.  1x 12 1x 12 1x i2 1x i2; 1 112, 1 112, i 112, i 112   
27.  16Ax 3
2BAx 3
2BAx 3
2 iBAx 3
2 iB; 3
2 112,  3
2 112, 3
2 i 112, 
 3
2 i 112     29.  1x 12 1x 3i2 1x 3i2; 1 112, 3i 112, 3i 112
31.  1x i2 21x i2 2; i122, i122
33.  1x 12 1x 12 1x 2i2 1x 2i2; 1 112, 1 112, 
2i112, 2i112
35.  xAx i !3 B2Ax i !3 B2; 0 112, i !3 122, i !3 122
37.  P1x2 x 2 2x 2    39.  Q1x2 x3 3x2 4x 12     
41.  P1x2 x3 2x2 x 2   
43.  R1x2 x4 4x3 10x2 12x 5   
45.  T 1x2 6x4 12x3 18x2 12x 12    47.  2, 2i   
49.  1, 1 i !3
2
    51.  2, 1 i !3
2
    53.   3
2, 1 i !2   
55.  2, 1, 3i    57.  1, 2i, i !3    59.  3 (multiplicity 2), 2i 
61.   1
2 1multiplicity 22, i    63.  1 (multiplicity 3), 3i   
65.  (a)  1x 52 1x2 42     (b)  1x 521x 2i21x 2i2    
67.  (a)  1x 12 1x 12 1x2 92      
(b)  1x 12 1x 12 1x 3i2 1x 3i2
69.  (a)  1x 22 1x 22 1x2 2x 421x2 2x 42
(b)  1x 22 1x 22 Cx A1 i !3 BDCx A1 i !3 BD  
Cx A1 i !3 BDCx A1 i !3 BD    
71.  (a)  4 real    (b)  2 real, 2 non-real    (c)  4 non-real   
Section 3.6  ■  page 308
1.  `, `    2.  2    3.  1, 2    4.  1
3    5.  2, 3    6.  1     
7.  (a)  False    (b)  True    (c)  False    (d)  True    8.  True     
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A26 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
9.  (a)  3, 19, 199, 1999; 5, 21, 201, 2001;  
1.2500, 1.0417, 1.0204, 1.0020; 0.8333, 0.9615, 0.9804, 0.9980
(b)  r1x2 S ` as x S 2; r1x2 S ` as x S 2
(c)  Horizontal asymptote y  1   
11.  (a)  22, 430, 40,300, 4,003,000; 10, 370, 
39,700, 3,997,000; 0.3125, 0.0608, 0.0302, 0.0030;  
0.2778, 0.0592, 0.0298, 0.0030
(b)  r1x2 S ` as x S 2; r1x2 S ` as x S 2
(c)  Horizontal asymptote y  0   
13.  	
15.     
	
domain 5x 0  x ? 16	
domain 5x 0  x ? 16
range 5y 0  y ? 06	
range 5y 0  y ? 06
17.  	
19. 
domain 5x 0  x ? 26	
domain 5x 0  x ? 36
range 5y 0  y ? 26	
range 5y 0  y ? 16
21.  x-intercept 1, y-intercept  1
4    23.  x-intercepts 1, 2;  
y-intercept 1
3    25.  x-intercepts 3, 3; no y-intercept     
27.  x-intercept 3, y-intercept 3, vertical x  2; horizontal y  2   
29.  x-intercepts 1, 1; y-intercept 1
4; vertical x  2, x  2;  
horizontal y  1    31.  Vertical x  2; horizontal y  0   
33.  Horizontal y 0    35.  Vertical x 1
2, x 1;  
horizontal y  3    37.  Vertical x  7
4, x 2; horizontal y 1
2  
39.  Vertical x  0; horizontal y  3    41.  Vertical x  1   
43.  	
x-intercept 1 
y-intercept 2 
vertical x  2 
horizontal y  4 
domain 5x 0  x ? 26 
range 5y 0  y ? 46
45.  	
No x-intercept 
y-intercept 13
4  
vertical x 2 
horizontal y 3 
domain 5x 0  x ? 26 
range 5y 0  y 36
y
0
x
1
1
y
0
x
_1
5
y
0
x
2
5
y
0
x
2
−2
2
−3
y
0
x
4
5
_4
_5
1
y
1
0
x
47.  	
No x-intercept 
y-intercept  9
8 
vertical x 4 
horizontaly 1 
domain 5x 0  x ? 46 
range 5y 0  y 16
49.  	
x-intercept 2 
y-intercept 2 
vertical x  1, x  4 
horizontal y  0 
domain 5x 0  x ? 1, 46 
range 
51.  	
x-intercept 2 
y-intercept 2 
vertical x  2, x  1 
horizontal y  0 
domain 5x 0  x ? 2, 16 
range 5y 0  y 0.2 or y 26
53.  	
x-intercepts 2, 1 
y-intercept 2
3 
vertical x  1, x  3 
horizontal y  1 
domain 5x 0  x ? 1, 36 
range 
55.  	
x-intercepts 1, 2 
vertical x  1, x  0 
horizontal y  2 
domain 5x 0  x ? 1, 06 
range 5y 0  y 2 or y 18.46
57.  	
x-intercept 1 
vertical x  0, x  3 
horizontal y  0 
domain 5x 0  x ? 0, 36 
range 
1
y
1
0
x
y
0
x
1
5
y
x
3
3
0
y
0
x
6
6
_6
_6
y
x
2
5
0
y
0
x
2
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 3.6  A27
59.  	
x-intercept 1 
y-intercept 1 
vertical x  1 
horizontal y  1 
domain 5x 0  x ? 16 
range 5y 0  y 06
61.  	
y-intercept 5
4 
vertical x  2 
horizontal y  5 
domain 5x 0  x ? 26 
range 5y 0  y 1.06
63.  	
x-intercept 5 
y-intercept 5
2 
vertical x 2 
horizontal y 1 
domain 5x 0  x ? 2, 16 
range 5y 0  y ? 1, 26
65.  	
x-intercept 3 
y-intercept 3 
no asymptote 
domain 5x 0  x ? 16 
range 5y 0  y ? 46
67.  	
x-intercept 3 
y-intercept 9 
no asymptote 
domain 5x 0  x ? 16 
range 5y 0  y 06
69.  	
slant y  x  2  
vertical x  2   
y
0
x
6
6
_6
y
x
5
−5
6
(1, 2)
y
1
x
1
0
(_1, _4)
y
1
x
1
0
(_1, 16)
y
2
x
1
0
y
0
x
6
10
_6
_10
71.  	
slant y  x  2  
vertical x  0   
73.  	
slant y  x  8  
vertical x  3   
75.  	
slant y  x  1  
vertical x  2, x  2   
77.  	
vertical x  3   
79.  	
vertical x  2   
81.  	
vertical x  1.5 
x-intercepts 0, 2.5 
y-intercept 0, local  
maximum 13.9, 10.42  
local minimum 10.9, 0.62  
end behavior y  x  4   
83.  	
vertical x  1  
x-intercept 0  
y-intercept 0  
local minimum 11.4, 3.12   
end behavior y  x2   
y
0
x
6
10
_6
_10
y
0
x
10
30
_10
_30
_4
_1
y
0
x
6
30
_6
30
10
_10
_30
60
10
_10
_30
10
10
_10
_20
10
3
_3
_5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A28 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
85.  	
vertical x  3 
x-intercepts 1.6, 2.7 
y-intercept 2  
local maxima 10.4, 1.82 , 
12.4, 3.82 ,  
local minima 10.6, 2.32 , 
13.4, 54.32   
end behavior y  x3
87.  (a)  	
(b)  It levels off at 3000.
89.  (a)  2.50 mg/L    (b)  It decreases to 0.    (c)  16.61 h   
91.  5000
400
0
	 If the speed of the train 
approaches the speed of sound, 
then the pitch increases 
indeﬁnitely (a sonic boom).   
Section 3.7  ■  page 316
1.  zeros; zeros; 32, 04, 31, ` 2  
x
Sign of
x+2
x-1 
x(x+2)(x-1)
2
1
0
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
-
+
+
+
+
2.  zeros; zeros; cut points; 1`, 4,2, 32, 14, 13, ` 2
x+2
Sign of
x-1
x-3 
(x+2)(x-1)
(x-3)(x+4)
4
1
x+4 
2
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
+
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
3.  1`, 52 < A 5
2, 3B    5.  1`, 52 < 15, 32 < 11, ` 2   
7.  34, 24 < 32, ` 2    9.  A`, 1
2B    11.  13, 32    
13.  35, 14 < 33, ` 2    15.  1`, 12 < 11, 72    17.  11, 102    
19.  A7,  5
2D < 15, ` 2    21.  A`, 1 !3 B < C0, !3 1B  
23.  1`, 32 < A 2
3, 1B < 13, ` 2    25.  14, 34    
27.  C8,  5
2B    29.  A0, 3!3
2
 D < A1, 3!3
2
 D    
31.  1`, 22 < 11, 12 < 11, ` 2    33.  32, 02 < 11, 34    
35.  A3,  1
2B < 12, ` 2    37.  1`, 22 < 15, ` 2    
39.  A 1
2, 0B < A1
2, `B    41.  32, 34    43.  1`, 14 < 31, ` 2    
100
5
_5
_100
4000
30
0
45.  32, 14 < 33, ` 2    47.  1`, 1.372 < 10.37, 12    
49.  10, 1.602    51.  10, 14    53.  1`, a4 < 3b, c4 < 3d, ` 2    
55.  More than 35.6 m   
57. 
	
Between 9.5 and 42.3 mi/h
Chapter 3 Review  ■  page 320
1.  (a)  f1x2 1x 32 2 7	
3.  (a)  f1x2 1x 52 2 26
(b)  	
(b) 
5.  Maximum fA3
2B 5
4  7.  68 ft   
9.  	
11. 
13.  	
15.  (a)  y S ` as x S `,	
17.  (a)  y S ` as x S `,
	
y S ` as x S `	
y S ` as x S `
(b)  	
(b) 
60
100
0
y
1
x
_1 0
y
10
x
1
0
y
0
x
4
64
300
_4
_300
y
x
1
_30
(_1, _32)
200
_3
_200
y
x
1
_1
100
31
_100
0
x
y
0
1
10
x
y
16
0
5
_5
100
_100
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Chapter 3 Review  A29
19.  (a)  0 (multiplicity 3), 2 (multiplicity 2)
(b)  	
21.  	
x-intercepts 2.1, 0.3, 1.9 
y-intercept 1  
local maximum 11.2, 4.12   
local minimum 11.2, 2.12   
y → `    as    x → `    and     
y → `    as    x → `
23.  	
x-intercepts 0.1, 2.1 
y-intercept 1  
local minimum 11.4, 14.52   
y → `    as    x → `    and 
y → `    as    x → `   
25.  (a)  S 13.8x1100 x22 	
(b)  0  x  10   
(c)  	
(d)  5.8 in.   
In answers 27–33 the ﬁrst polynomial given is the quotient, and 
the second is the remainder.
27.  x 2, 4    29.  2x2 11x 58, 294     
31.  x3  5x2  17x  83, 422    33.  2x  3, 12    35.  3    37.  8   
41.  (a)  1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 18    (b)  2 or 0 positive, 3 or 1 
negative    43.  (a)  1, 2, 4, 8,  1
3,  2
3,  4
3,  8
3     
(b)  0 or 2 positive, 1 or 3 negative     
45.  (a)  4, 0, 4	
(b) 
47.  (a)  2, 0 (multiplicity 2), 1	 (b) 
x
y 
1 
0 
1
10
_10
3
_3
30
_20
3
_2
6000
10
0
y
x
4
30
_4
_30
0
y
x
1
4
_2
_4
0
49.  (a)  2, 1, 2, 3	
51.  (a)   1
2, 1
(b)  	
(b)   
53.  4x3 18x2 14x 12   
55.  No; since the complex conjugates of imaginary zeros will 
also be zeros, the polynomial would have 8 zeros, contradicting 
the ­requirement that it have degree 4.     
57.  1, i    59.  3, 1, 5    61.  1  2i, 2 (multiplicity 2)     
63.  2, 1 (multiplicity 3)    65.  2, 1 i !3   
67.  1, 3, 1 i !7
2
    69.  x  0.5, 3    71.  x  0.24, 4.24   
73.  2, P1x2 1x 22 1x2 2x 22
75.  (a) Vertical asymptote 	
77.  (a)  Vertical asymptote  
x  4, horizontal 	
x 1, horizontal asymptote  
asymptote y  0, 	
y  3, x-intercept 4
3, 
no x-intercept, y-intercept 3
4,	
y-intercept 4,
domain 5x 0  x ? 46	
domain 5x 0  x ? 16
range 5y 0  y ? 06	
range 5y 0  y ? 36
(b)  	
(b)   
79.   	
81. 
	
Domain 5x 0  x ? 16,	
Domain 5x 0  x ? 2, 46,
range 5y 0  y ? 36	
range 1`, ` 2
83.  	
	
Domain 1`, ` 2 ,	
range Ey 0  9 y 1
2F	
y
x
2
20
_2 _10
0
y
x
1
10
_1
_10
x
y
0.75
0
1
2
x
y
0
1
1
4
3
y
0
x
5
4
3
10
_5
_20
_12
y
0
x
6
6
0.25
_6
_6
y
0
x
5
3
_5
_3
_9
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A30 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
85.  	
x-intercept 7 
y-intercept 7 
no asymptote 
domain 5x 0  x ? 26 
range 5y 0  y ? 96
87.  	
x-intercept 6 
y-intercept  6
5 
vertical x 5 
horizontal y 1 
domain 5x 0  x ? 3, 56 
range Ey 0  y ? 1,  9
2F
89.  	
x-intercept 3 
y-intercept 0.5 
vertical x  3 
horizontal y  0.5 
no local extrema
91.  	
x-intercept 2 
y-intercept 4 
vertical x  1, x  2 
slant y  x  1 
local maximum 
10.425, 3.5992  
local minimum 14.216, 7.1752   
93.  1`, 14 < C 3
2, `B    95.  13, 32    
97.  1`, 22 < 11, 22     99.  13, 02 < A2, 9
2D    
101.  C3, 8
3D     103.  30.74, 1.954    
Chapter 3 Test  ■  page 323
1.  f1x2 Ax 1
2B
2 25
4    
2.  Minimum gA 3
2B  3
2    3.  (a)  2500 ft    (b)  1000 ft
4. 
(2, 9)
y
1
x
1
0
y
2
x
2
9
2
!3, _   @
20
10
_10
_20
30
6
_6
_30
x
y
1
0
1
25
4
_
y
x
1
19
40
_2
_40
0
5.  (a)  x3  2x2  2, 9    (b)  x3 2x2 1
2, 15
2    
6.  (a)  1, 3,  1
2,  3
2    (b)  21x 32 Ax 1
2B1x 12    
(c)  1, 1
2, 3    (d) 
7.  3, 1  i    8.  1x 12 21x 2i2 1x 2i2      
9.  x4  2x3  10x2  18x  9     
10.  (a)  4, 2, or 0 positive; 0 negative   
(c)  0.17, 3.93 
(d)  Local minimum 12.82, 70.312    
11.  (a)  r, u    (b)  s    (c)  s, „    (d)  „     
(e)  Vertical x 1, x 2; horizontal y 0   
(f) 
(g)  x2  2x  5 
12.  Ex 0  x 1 or 5
2 x 3F   
13.  Ex 0  1 !5 x 1 !5F
14.  (a) 
x-intercepts 1.24, 0, 2, 3.24, local maximum P 112 5,  
local minima P 10.732 P12.732 4
(b)  1`, 1.244 < 30, 24 < 33.24, ` 2
y
0
x
10
1
1
2
80
_80
5
_3
y
0
x
6
2
6
25
6
_6
_3
_6
60
10
_10
_60
_5
10
_2
4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 4.1  A31
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 327
1.  (a)  y  0.275428x2  19.7485x  273.5523   
(b) 
(c)  35.85 lb/in2   
3.  (a)  y  0.00203708x3  0.104521x2  1.966206x  1.45576  
(b) 
(c)  43 vegetables    (d)  2.0 s   
5.  (a)  y  0.0120536x2  0.490357x  4.96571   
(b)  	
(c)  19.0 min
chapter 4
Section 4.1  ■  page 336
1.  5; 1
25; 1; 25; 15,625    2.  (a)  III    (b)  I    (c)  II    (d)  IV 
3. (a)  downward    (b)  right    4.  principal, interest rate per year, 
number of times interest is compounded per year, number of 
years, amount after t years; $112.65    5.  horizontal, 0; 0     
6.  horizontal, 3; 3    7.  2.000, 22.195, 0.063, 1.516     
9.  0.192, 0.070, 15.588, 1.552   
11.  	
13. 
15.  	
17. 
82
46
25
48
22
30
0
5.1
20
0
y
0
x
1
_2
2
2
(2, 4)
y
0
x
_2
2
3
(_2, 9)
1
(2, 5.07)
1
1
x
0
y
y
0
x
2
1
−2
y=2x
y=2_x
19.  	
21.  f1x2 3x    23.  f1x2 A1
4B
x    25.  II   
27.  R, 13, ` 2, y 3 	
29.  R, 1`, 02, y 0
y
0
x
5
3
_5
_5
(1, _1)
	
31.  R, 10, ` 2, y 0 	
33.  R, 11, ` 2, y 1
	
(0, 2)
1
1
x
y
0
35.  R, 1`, 22, y 2 	
37.  R, 11, ` 2, y 1
	
(4, 2)
1
1
2
x
y
0
39.  R, 1`, 12, y 1 	
41.  (a) 
(_1, _2)
1
1
x
y
	
	
(b)  The graph of g is steeper 
	
than that of f.
y
0
x
_2
2
1
2
y=7˛
y=4˛
y
0
x
_2
2
_1
(1, _3)
y
0
x
_2
2
(_3, 1)
1000
y
1
x
1
0
y
0
x
_2
2
2
˝=3(2˛)
Ï=2˛
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A32 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
43. 
y
g(x) = 3x
f(x) = x3
0
x
2
200
45.  (a) 
20
5
0
˝=x∞
Ï=2˛
(i)
	
10¶
25
0
˝=x∞
Ï=2˛
(ii)
	
The graph of f ultimately in-
creases much more quickly than 
that of g.
	
(b)  1.2, 22.4
47.  	
	
The larger the value of c, the  
more rapidly the graph  
increases.
49.  (a)  Increasing on 1`, 0.502 ; decreasing on 10.50, ` 2      
(b)  10,  1.782     53.  (a)  N1t2 1500 # 2t    (b)  25,165,824,000   
55.  $5203.71, $5415.71, $5636.36, $5865.99, $6104.98, $6353.71   
57.  (a)  $11,605.41    (b)  $13,468.55    (c)  $15,630.80     
59.  (a)  $519.02    (b)  $538.75    (c)  $726.23     
61.  $7678.96    63.  8.30%   
Section 4.2  ■  page 341
1.  natural; 2.71828    2.  principal, interest rate per year,  
number of years; amount after t years; $112.75     
3.  2.718, 23.141, 0.050, 4.113
x
0
1
2
3
4
6
8
10
fxxc
0
1
8
27
64
216
512
1000
gxxc
1
3
9
27
81
729
6561
59,049
10
(iii)
•
50
0
˝=x∞
Ï=2˛
5
3
_3
_1
c=4
c=2
c=1
c=0.25
c=0.5
5.  	
7.  , 12, ` 2, y 2	
  9.  , 1`, 02, y 0
	
11.  , 11, ` 2, y 1	
13.  , 10, ` 2, y 0
y
0
x
_1
2
1
(_1, 1.72)
	
15.  , 13, ` 2, y 3 	
17.  (a)
(0, e _3)
(_1, _2)
1
1
x
y
	
19. (a) 
5
3
_3
_1
a=2
a=1
a=1.5
a=0.5
(b)  The larger the value of a, the wider the graph.
21.  Local minimum 10.37, 0.692     23.  27.4 mg   
x
y
22
0.20
21
0.55
20.5
0.91
0
1.5
0.5
2.47
1
4.08
2
11.08
y
2
x
1
0
y
4
x
1
0
y
0
x
_2
1
_1
(1, _2.72)
y
0
x
1
1
(2, 1)
y
0
x
2
5
_2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25.  (a)  0    (b)  113.8 ft/s, 155.6 ft/s
(c)
200
100
0
(d)  180 ft/s
27.  (a)  100    (b)  482, 999, 1168    (c)  1200
29.  (a)  11.79 billion, 11.97 billion   
(b)  	
(c)  12 billion
31.  $7213.18, $7432.86, $7659.22, $7892.48, $8132.84, $8380.52   
33.  (a)  $2145.02    (b)  $2300.55    (c)  $3043.92     
35.  (a)  $768.05    (b)  $769.22    (c)  $769.82    (d)  $770.42     
37.  (a) is best.   
39.  (a)  A1t2 5000e0.09t    (b) 
(c)  After 17.88 years
Section 4.3  ■  page 351
1.  x
2.  9; 1, 0, 1, 2, 1
2    3.  (a)  log5 125 3    (b)  52 25     
4.  (a)  III    (b)  II    (c)  I    (d)  IV    5.  vertical, 0    6.  vertical, 1  
7. 
9.  (a)  34  81    (b)  30  1    11.  (a)  81/3  2    (b)  102  0.01  
13.  (a)  3x  5    (b)  72  3y    15.  (a)  e3y  5    (b)  e1  t  1  
17.  (a)  log10 10,000  4    (b)  log5A 1
25B  2   
19.  (a)  log8A1
8B 1    (b)  log2A1
8B 3   
0
14
500
20
0
30000
x
103
102
101
100
101
102
103
101/2
log x
3
2
1
0
21
22
23
1
2
Logarithmic form
Exponential form
log8 8 1
81  8
log8 64 2
82  64
log8 4 2
3
82/3  4
log8 512 3
83  512
log8A1
8B 1
81 1
8
log8A 1
64B 2
82 1
64
21.  (a)  log4 70  x    (b)  log3 „  5   
23.  (a)  ln 2  x    (b)  ln y  3   
25.  (a)  1    (b)  0    (c)  5    27.  (a)  2    (b)  2    (c)  10   
29.  (a)  3    (b)  1
2    (c)  1    31.  (a)  5    (b)  27    (c)  10   
33.  (a)   2
3    (b)  4    (c)  1    35.  (a)  64    (b)  2   
37.  (a)  e3    (b)  2    39.  (a)  2    (b)  32   
41.  (a)  1    (b) 
1
1000    43.  (a)  2    (b)  4   
45.  (a)  0.3010    (b)  1.5465    (c)  0.1761   
47.  (a)  1.6094    (b)  3.2308    (c)  1.0051   
49.	
51.
x
y 
1 
0 
1
	
x
y 
2 
0 
1
53.  y  log5 x    55.  y  log9 x    57.  I   
59.  	
61.  1`, 02, , x 0
y
0
x
5
_2
_2
5
y=4˛
y=ø› x
	
63.  14, ` 2, , x 4	
65.  15, ` 2, , x 5
	
x
y
0
1
1
67.  10, ` 2, , x 0 	
69.  11, ` 2, , x 1
y
0
x
1
1
(1, 2)
	
71.  10, ` 2, 30, ` 2, x 0
y
0
x
1
1
y
0
x
1
1
y
0
x
1
_1
1
0
x
y
2
−2
1
Answers to Section 4.3  A33
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A34 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
73.  13, ` 2     75.  1`, 12 < 11, ` 2     77.  10, 22    
79.  	
domain 11, 12   
vertical asymptotes x  1,  
x  1  
local maximum 10, 02
81.  	
domain 10, ` 2   
vertical asymptote x  0  
no maximum or minimum
83.  	
domain 10, ` 2   
vertical asymptote x  0  
horizontal asymptote y  0  
local maximum  
 12.72, 0.372
85.  1f + g21x2 2x1, 1`, ` 2; 1g + f2 1x2 2x 1, 1`, ` 2
87.  1f + g21x2 log21x 22, 12, ` 2;
1g + f21x2 log2 x 2, 10, ` 2
89.  The graph of f grows more slowly than g.
91.  (a)  	
(b)  The graph of 
f1x2 log1cx2  is  
the graph of 
f1x2 log1x2  shifted 
upward log c units.
93.  (a)  11, ` 2     (b)  f11x2 102x   
95.  (a)  f11x2 log2 a
x
1 x b     (b)  10, 12    
97.  2602 years    99.  11.6 years, 9.9 years, 8.7 years   
101.  5.32, 4.32
Section 4.4  ■  page 358
1.  sum; log5 25  log5 125  2  3
2.  difference; log5 25  log5 125  2  3
3.  power; 10 # log5 25 10 # 2    4.  2 log x  log y log z
5.  log a x2y
z b     6.  (a)  10, e; Change of Base; 
log7 12 log 12
log 7 1.277    (b)  Yes    7.  (a)  False   
(b)  True    8.  (a)  True    (b)  False    9.  4    11.  2    13.  1     
15.  1
2    17.  3    19.  200    21.  4    23.  log3 8  log3 x   
25.  log3 2 log3 x log3 y    27.  3 ln a   
29.  101log2 x log2 y2     31.  log2 A  2 log2 B   
33.  log3 2 log3 x log3 y    35.  log5 3 2 log5 x 3 log5 y  
37.  1
2 5
2 log3 x log3 y    39.  3 log x  4 log y  6 log z   
41.  1
2 ln1x4 22     43.  ln x 1
2 1ln y ln z2      
45.  1
4 log1x2 y22    
47.  1
23log1x2 42 log1x2 12 2 log1x3 724
1
2
_2
_2
3
3
_1
_6
1
20
_1
_3
2.6
100
_10
_1
c=4
c=3
c=2
c=1
49.  log4 294    51.  log 
x2
1x 12 3    53.   loga
x41x 12 2
"
3 x2 1
b    
55.  ln a2 b2
c2
    57.  log a
x2
x 3 b     59.  2.321928   
61.  2.523719    63.  0.493008    65.  3.482892   
67. 
	
73.  (a)  P  c/W k    (b)  1866, 64
75.  (a)  M  2.5 log B  2.5 log B0
Section 4.5  ■  page 368
1.  (a)  ex  25    (b)  x  ln 25    (c)  3.219   
2.  (a)  log 31x  22  log x    (b)  31x  22  x    (c)  3    3.  4   
5.  3
2    7.  3    9.  1, 1    11.  (a)  2 log 5    (b)  1.397940   
13.  (a)   1
5 ln 10    (b)  0.460517    15.  (a)  1 log 3
log 2   
(b)  0.584963    17.  (a)  lnA10
3 B    (b)  1.203973   
19.  (a) 
ln110/32
12 ln141/402     (b)  4.063202    21.  (a)  1 ln 2
4
   
(b)  0.076713    23.  (a)  5
7 ln 15
7 ln 2    (b)  0.156158   
25.  (a)  14 log 0.1
log 3
    (b)  29.342646   
27.  (a)  1
5 logA5
4B    (b)  0.019382   
29.  (a)  1 ln 12
4
    (b)  0.371227   
31.  (a) 
ln150/32
2 ln 2     (b)  2.029447   
33.  (a) 
log 4
log15/42     (b)  6.212567   
35.  (a)   log 18
log18/32     (b)  2.946865   
37.  (a)  ln 11.5    (b)  2.442347    39.  ln 2  0.6931, 0   
41.  1
2 ln 3  0.5493    43.  1    45.  1    47.  0, 4
3    49.  5   
51.  2, 4    53.  5    55.  e10  22,026    57.  0.01    59.  95
3    
61. 7    63.  4    65.  6    67.  13
12    69.  2.21    71.  0.00, 1.14   
73.  0.57    75.  0.36    77.  1/ !5 0.4472   
79.  2  x  4 or 7  x  9    81.  log 2  x  log 5   
83.  f 11x2 ln x
2 ln 2    85.  f 11x2 2x 1    87.  3
2   
89.  (a)  $6435.09    (b)  8.24 years   
91.  6.33 years    93.  8.15 years    95.  13 days   
97.  (a)  7337    (b)  1.73 years   
99.  (a)  P P0eh/k    (b)  56.47 kPa   
101.  (a)  t  5
13 lnA1 13
60 IB    (b)  0.218 s
Section 4.6  ■  page 378
1.  (a)  n1t2 10 # 22t/3    (b)  1.06 108    (c)  14.9 
2
4
_1
_3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.  (a)  3125    (b)  317,480   
(c) 
5.  (a)  n1t2 18,000e0.08t    (b)  34,100    (c)  4.1
(d) 
7.  (a)  233 million    (b)  181 million   
9.  (a)  n1t2 112,000 # 2t/18    (b)  n1t2 112,000e0.0385t   
(c)  	
(d)  38.9 years
11.  (a)  20,000    (b)  n1t2 20,000e0.1096t     
(c)  About 48,000    (d)  14.7 years   
13.  (a)  n1t2 8600e0.1508t    (b)  About 11,600    (c)  4.6 h   
15.  (a)  n1t2 29.76e0.012936t million    (b)  53.6 years     
(c)  38.55 million    17.  (a)  m1t2 22 # 2t/1600     
(b)  m1t2 22e0.000433t    (c)  3.9 mg    (d)  463.4   
19.  18 years    21.  149 h    23.  3560 years    25.  (a)  210F     
(b)  153F    (c)  28 min    27.  (a)  137F    (b)  About 2 h   
Section 4.7  ■  page 385
1.  (a)  2.3    (b)  3.5    (c)  8.3    3.  (a)  103 M    (b)  3.2  107 M  
5.  4.8  pH  6.4    7.  (a)  6.31  104 M, 1.26  103 M   
(b)  California    9.  (a)  5.49    (b)  6.3 cm    11.  log 20  1.3   
13.  Six times as intense    15.  73 dB    17.  105 W/m2   
19.  (a)  75 dB    (b)  103 W/m2    (c)  32.3   
Chapter 4 Review  ■  page 388
1.  0.089, 9.739, 55.902    3.  0.269, 1.472, 12.527   
5.  , 10, ` 2, y 0	
7.  , 13, ` 2, y 3
y
0
x
3
3
−3
	
y
0
x
3
4
−3
0
10
20
30
50
40
t (years)
n (millions)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
n(t)
t
2
20,000
40,000
60,000
0
10
20
30
40
t
n (millions)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
9.  , 11, ` 2, y 1	
11.  11, ` 2, , x 1
x
y
0
1
2
	
13.  10, ` 2, , x 0	
15.  10, ` 2, , x 0
y
0
x
1
1
(1, 2)
	
y
0
x
5
1
17.  A`,  1
2B    19.  1`, 22 < 12, ` 2     21.  210  1024   
23.  10 y  x    25.  log2 64  6   27.  log 74  x    29.  7    31.  45  
33.  6    35.  3    37.  1
2    39.  2    41.  92    43.  2
3   
45.  log A  2 log B  3 log C   
47.  1
23ln1x 12 ln1x 12 ln1x2 124
49.  2 log5 x 3
2 log511 5x2 
1
23log5 x log51x 12 log51x 124
51.  log 96    53.  log2 a
1x y2 3/2
1x2 y22 2 b     55.  loga x2 4
"x2 4
b    
57.  5    59.  1
3
 c log 7
log 2 5d 2.60    61. 
log14/2432
log 36
1.15   
63.  4, 2    65.  3    67.  15    69.  9    71.  ­0.430618   
73.  2.303600   
75.  	
vertical asymptote  
x  2  
horizontal asymptote  
y  2.72 
no maximum or minimum
77.  	
vertical asymptotes 
x  1, x  0, x  1 
local maximum  
 10.58, 0.412
79.  2.42    81.  0.16  x  3.15
83.  Increasing on 1`, 02 and 11.10, ` 2, decreasing on 10, 1.102
85.  1.953445    87.  0.579352    89.  log4258   
91.  (a)  $16,081.15    (b)  $16,178.18    (c)  $16,197.64   
(d)  $16,198.31    93.  1.83 years    95.  4.341%   
97.  (a)  n1t2 30e0.15t    (b)  55    (c)  19 years   
99.  (a)  9.97 mg    (b)  1.39  105 years   
101.  (a)  n1t2 150e0.0004359t    (b)  97.0 mg    (c)  2520 years   
103.  (a)  n1t2 1500e0.1515t    (b)  7940    105.  7.9, basic     
107.  8.0   
y
0
x
5
1
_1
10
20
_20
_1
1.5
2.5
_1.5
_1.5
Answers to Chapter 4 Review  A35
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A36 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
Chapter 4 Test  ■  page 391
1.  (a)  , 14, ` 2, y 4	
(b)  13, ` 2, , x 3 
x
y 
1 
0 
4 
	
x
y 
1 
0 
2 
2.  (a)  A3
2, `B    (b)  1`, 12 < 11, ` 2
3.  (a)  log6 25  2x    (b)  e3  A
4.  (a) 36    (b) 3    (c)  3
2    (d)  3    (e)  2
3    (f)  2
5.  (a)  log x 3 log y 2 log z    (b)  1
2 ln x 1
2 ln y
(c)  1
3 3log1x 22 4 log x log1x2 424
6.  (a)  log1ab22     (b)  ln1x 52     (c)  log2 3!x 1
x3
   
7.  (a) 25    (b) 1, 2    (c) 11.13    (d)  5.39     
8.  (a) 500    (b) 2
3    (c) 3 e4/5 0.774    (d)  2    9.  1.326   
10.  (a)  n1t2 1000e2.07944t    (b)  22,600    (c)  1.3   
(d) 
11.  (a)  A1t2 12,000a1 0.056
12
b
12t
    (b)  $14,195.06   
(c)  9.12 years    12.  (a)  m1t2 3 # 2t/10    (b)  m1t2  3e0.0693t
     
(c)  0.047 g    (d)  after 3.6 min    13.  1995 times more intense
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 398
1.  (a) 
(b)  y  ab t, where a  3.334926  1015, b  1.019844, and  
y is the population in millions in the year t    (c)  577 million   
(d)  196 million   
3.  (a) 
(b)  y  ab t, where a  4.79246 and b  0.99642    (c)  192.8 h
y
0
x
10,000
1
2
350
0
2020
1780
5.5
0
-10
50
5.  (a)  y  at b, where a  49.70030 and b  0.15437;  
y  ab t, where a  44.82418 and b  0.99317
(b) 
(c)  The power function   
7.  y  ab x, where a  2.414 and b  1.05452
9.  (a) 
(b) 
(c)  The power function
(d)  y  ax b, where a  0.893421326 and b  1.50983
chapter 5
Section 5.1  ■  page 407
1.  (a)  10, 02, 1    (b)  x2 y2 1    (c)  (i)  0    (ii)  0    (iii)  0     
(iv)  0    2.  (a)  terminal    (b)  10, 12, 11, 02, 10, 12, 11, 02
9.   4
5    11.  2 !2/3    13.  3 !5/7    15.   PA 5
13,   12
13B   
17.  PA !5/3,  2
3B    19.  PA !2/3,  !7/3B   
21.  t p/4, A !2/2,  !2/2B; t p/2, 10,  12 ; 
t 3p/4, A !2/2,  !2/2B; t p, 11,  02 ; 
t 5p/4, A!2/2,   !2/2B; t 3p/2, 10,  12 ; 
t 7p/4, A !2/2,  !2/2B; t 2p, 11,  02
23.  11,  02     25.  10,  12     27.  A !3/2,   1
2B   
29.  A!2/2,  !2/2B    31.  A!3/2,  1
2B   
33.  1 !2/2, !2/22     35.  A!2/2,  !2/2B   
37.  (a)  p/3    (b)  p/3    (c)  p/6    (d)  3.5  p  0.36   
39.  (a)  2p/7    (b)  2p/9    (c)  p  3  0.14     
(d)  2p  5  1.28    41.  (a)  p/6    (b)  A !3/2,   1
2B   
43.  (a)  p/3    (b)  A 1
2,  !3/2B   
45.  (a)  p/3    (b)  A 1
2,  !3/2B
47.  (a)  p/4    (b)  A!2/2,  !2/2B
49.  (a)  p/6    (b)  A !3/2, 1
2B   
51.  (a)  p/3    (b)  A1
2,  !3/2B
53.  (a)  p/3    (b)  A 1
2,  !3/2B
55.  10.5,  0.82     57.  10.5,  0.92    
59.  (a)  A 3
5,  4
5B    (b)  A3
5,   4
5B    (c)  A 3
5,   4
5B    (d)  A3
5,  4
5B
70
y = abt
y = atb
125
0
850
0
100
6.75
3
0
3
2
100
6.75
4.6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 5.3  A37
Section 5.2  ■  page 416
1.  y, x, y/x    2.  1; 1    3.  t  p/4, sin t !2/2, cos t !2/2;  
t  p/2, sin t  1, cos t  0; t  3p/4, sin t !2/2, 
cos t !2/2; t  p, sin t  0, cos t  1; t  5p/4, 
sin t !2/2, cos t !2/2; t  3p/2, sin t  1,  
cos t  0; t  7p/4, sin t !2/2, cos t !2/2;  
t  2p, sin t  0, cos t  1
5.  (a)   1
2    (b)  !3/2    (c)  !3/3
7.  (a)  !2/2    (b)  !2/2    (c)  !2/2
9.  (a)  !2/2    (b)  !2/2    (c)  !2/2
11.  (a)  !3/2    (b)  2 !3/3    (c)  !3/3
13.  (a)  1
2    (b)  2    (c)  !3/2   
15.  (a)  !3/2    (b)  2 !3/3    (c)  !3/3
17.  (a)  2    (b)  2 !3/3    (c)  !3
19.  (a)  !3/2    (b)  2 !3/3    (c)  !3/3
21.  (a)  0    (b)  1    (c)  0   
23.  sin 0  0, cos 0  1, tan 0  0, sec 0  1, others undefined
25.  sin p  0, cos p  1, tan p  0, sec p  1,  
others undefined
27.   4
5,  3
5, 4
3    29.  2 !2/3,  1
3, 2!2       
31.  !13/7, 6/7, !13/6    33.   12
13,  5
13, 12
5     35.  21
29,  20
29,  21
20  
37.  (a)  0.8    (b)  0.84147    39.  (a)  0.9    (b)  0.93204   
41.  (a)  1    (b)  1.02964    43.  (a)  0.6    (b)  0.57482
45.  Negative    47.  Negative    49.  II    51.  II   
53.  sin t "1 cos2  t    55.  tan t 
sin t
"1 sin2 t   
57.  sec t  "1 tan2 t    59.  tan t "sec2 t 1   
61.  tan2 t 
sin2 t
1 sin2 t   
63.  cos t 3
5, tan t  4
3, csc t  5
4, sec t 5
3, cot t  3
4
65.  sin t 2 !2/3, cos t 1
3, tan t 2 !2, 
csc t  3
4 !2, cot t  !2/4
67.  sin t 12
13, cos t  5
13, csc t 13
12, sec t  13
5 , cot t  5
12
69.  cos t  !15/4, tan t !15/15, csc t 4, 
sec t 4 !15/15, cot t !15
71.  Odd    73.  Odd    75.  Even    77.  Neither   
79.  y102 4, y10.252 2.828, y10.502 0, 
y10.752 2.828, y11.002 4, y11.252 2.828
81.  (a)  0.49870 amp    (b)  0.17117 amp
Section 5.3  ■  page 429
1.  f1t2; 2p, 1
1
_1
π
2π
x
y
	
1
_1
π
2π
x
y
2.  upward; x  3.  0  a 0 , 2p/k, 3, p 
4.  0  a 0 , 2p/k, b; 4, 2p/3, p/6
5.  	
7. 
  9.  	
11. 
13.  	
15. 
17.  	
19.  1, p  	
21.  1, 2p/3
y
0
x
−1
−
π
1
2
1
2
π
2
	
y
1
_1
x
0
π
3
23.  2, 2
3	
25.  10, 4p
	
y
0
x
_10
10
π
2
27.  1
3, 6p 	
29.  2, 1
y
0
x
_1
1
3π
6π
1
3
	
y
0
x
_2
2
1
4
y
2
x
π
2π
0
y
0
x
−1
1
π
y
0
x
−π
π
−2
y
0
x
−3
3
−π
π
y
0
x
−1
1
−π
π
y
0
x
3
−π
π
y
0
x
1
2
−π
π
y
x
0
1
3
2
3
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A38 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
31.  1
2, 2 	
33.  1, 2p, p/2 
	
5π
2
y
0
x
1
π
2
_1
35.  2, 2p, p/6 	
37.  4, p, p/2 
	
y
0
x
π
4
π
4
_4
_
4
39.  5, 2p/3, p/12 	
41.  1
2, p, p/6
3π
4
y
0
x
5
π
12
_5
	
43.  3, 2,  1
2 	
45.  1, 2p/3, p/3
3
2
y
0
x
3
_3
1
2
_
	
47.  (a)  4, 2p, 0    (b)  y  4 sin x
49.  (a)  3
2, 2p/3, 0    (b)  y 3
2 cos 3x
51.  (a)  1
2, p, p/3    (b)  y  1
2 cos 21x p/32
53.  (a)  4, 3
2,  1
2    (b)  y 4 sin 4p/3 Ax 1
2B
55.  	
57. 
1.5
0.1
_0.1
_1.5
	
1.5
250
_250
_1.5
y
0
1
2
x
1
2
13π
6
y
0
x
2
π
6
_2
7π
6
y
0
1
x
π
6
π
3
y
0
x
1
_1
π
3
_
59.  	
61. 
3
0.2
_0.2
_3
	
63.  	
65. 
7
6.28
_6.28
_7
	
67.  	
y  x2 sin x is a sine curve 
that lies between the graphs 
of y  x2 and y  x2
69.  	
y !x sin 5px is a sine 
curve that lies between the 
graphs of y !x and 
y !x
71.  	
y  cos 3px cos 21px is a 
cosine curve that lies between 
the graphs of y  cos 3px 
and y  cos 3px
73.  Maximum value 1.76 when x  0.94, minimum value 1.76 
when x  0.94 (The same maximum and minimum values 
occur at infinitely many other values of x.)
75.  Maximum value 3.00 when x 1.57, minimum value 1.00 
when x  1.57 (The same maximum and minimum values 
occur at infinitely many other values of x.)
77.  1.16    79.  0.34, 2.80   
81.  (a)  Odd    (b)  2p, 4p, 6p, . . .
(c)  	
(d)  f1x2  approaches 0 
(e)  f1x2  approaches 0
83.  (a)  20 s    (b)  6 ft
1.2
0.5
_0.5
_0.2
2.25
6.25
_6.25
_2.25
225
15
_15
_225
2.8
7.5
_0.5
_2.8
1.5
0.5
_0.5
_1.5
1
20
_20
_1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 5.4  A39
85.  (a)  1
80 min    (b)  80
(c)  	
(d)  140
90 ; higher than normal
Section 5.4  ■  page 438
1.  p; p
2 np, n an integer	
2.  2p; np, n an integer
10
_10
x
y
_π
2
π
2
	
5
_5
x
y
_π
π
3.  II    5.  VI    7.  IV
9.  p 	
11.  p 
y
5
x
π
_π
	
y
4
x
π
_π
0
13.  p 	
15.  2p 
	
y
0
x
_π
2
π
2
17.  2p 	
19.  p/3
y
0
x
_π
3
π
	
y
0
x
140
1
80
115
90
y
0
x
_5
_ π
2
π
2
5
−
y
x
0
2
π
2
π
2
21.  1	
23.  1
3
y
5
x
1
_1
0
	
y
5
x
0
1
3
−1
3
25.  4 	
27.  1
3
	
y
0
x
5
_ 1
1
3
_5
3
29.  p/2 	
31.  p
2
y
_π
2
π
2
x
	
y
0
x
1
π
2
_ π
2
_1
33.  4
3	
35.  p
y
0
x
5
1
3
1
3
_
	
37.  p	
39.  2p
y
2
x
0
_2π
_π
π
3π
4
2π
	
y
0
x
4
1
_4
y
2
x
0
_2π
_π
π
2π
π
4
y
2
x
0
_π
π
2π
π
4
_2π
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A40 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
41.  2p	
43.  p/2
y
0
x
π
6
0.5
7π
6
5π
6
_
	
45.  p/3	
47.  p/2 
	
y
0
x
4
_ π
2
_4
π
2
49.  2  	
51.  p
y
x
2
5
6
11
6
_ 1
6
	
53.  2p/3  	
55.  3p/2
y
0
x
5
π
6
_ π
3
	
y
0
x
1
π
4
7π
4
_ 5π
4
57.  2  	
59.  p/2 
y
0
x
3
0.5
_3
	
y
0
x
4
π
6
2π
3
_π
3
y
2
x
0
π
12
π
2
−π
2
y
5
x
0
π
6
−π
2
π
2
y
2
x
0
π
2
−π
2
61.  (a)  1.53 mi, 3.00 mi, 18.94 mi   
(b) 
(c)  d1t2  approaches `
Section 5.5  ■  page 444
1.  (a)  3p/2, p/24, y, x, p/6, p/6, 1
2   
(b)  30, p4; y, x, p/3, p/3, 1
2    2.  3p/2, p/24; 1ii2
3.  (a) p/2    (b)  p/3    (c)  Undefined    5.  (a)  p    (b)  p/3     
(c)  5p/6    7.  (a)  p/4    (b)  p/3    (c)  p/6    9.  (a)  2p/3   
(b)  p/4    (c)  p/4    11.  0.72973    13.  2.01371   
15.  2.75876    17.  1.47113    19.  0.88998    21.  0.26005   
23.  1
4    25.  5    27.  Undefined    29.   1
5    31.  p/4    33.  p/4   
35.  5p/6    37.  5p/6    39.  p/4    41.  p/3    43.  !3/3   
45.  1
2    47.  !2/2   
Section 5.6  ■  page 456
1.  (a)  a sin vt    (b)  a cos  vt   
2.  (a)  kect sin vt    (b)  kect cos vt
3.  (a)  0  A 0 , 2p/k, b; A sin k At b
kB; b/k    (b)  5, p/2, p, p/4
4.  p, p/2; p/2, out of phase   
5.  (a)  2, 2p/3, 3/12p2     	
7.  (a)  1, 20p/3, 3/120p2
(b)  	
(b) 
9.  (a)  1
4, 4p/3, 3/14p2     (b)  	
11.  (a)  5, 3p, 1/13p2     (b) 
y
0
x
2
5
1
y
2
π
6
_2
0
t
10π
3
y
1
_1
20π
3
0
t
14π
9
y
0.25
2π
9
8π
9
_0.25
0
t
y
0
t
9
8
_
5
_5
9
8
3π-
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Chapter 5 Review  A41
13.  y 10 sina 2p
3
 tb     15.  y 6 sin110t2    
17.  y 60 cos14pt2     19.  y 2.4 cos11500pt2    
21.  (a)  y  2e1.5t cos 6pt    (b) 
23.  (a)  y 100e0.05t cos p
2
 t   
(b) 
25.  (a)  y  7e10t sin 12t    (b) 
27.  (a)  y  0.3e0.2t sin(40pt)   
(b) 
29.  5, p, p/2, p/4    31.  100, 2p/5, 2p, 2p/5   
33.  20, p, p/2, p/4   
35.  (a)  p/2, 5p/2	
37.  (a)  p/2, p/3
(b)  22p    	
(b)  p/6
(c)  In phase	
(c)  Out of phase
(d)  	
(d) 
y
2
_2
1
2
0
t
y
100
_100
8
16
0
t
y
3
_3
π
6
π
3
0
t
y
0
t
0.3
_0.3
0.6
y
x
0
5
π
3
y⁄, y¤
y
x
0
80
π
5
y⁄
y¤
39.  (a)  10 cycles per minute   
(b)  	
(c)  8.2 m
41.  (a)  25, 0.0125, 80    (b) 
(c)  The period decreases and the frequency increases.
43.  d1t2 5 sin15pt2    
45.  y 21 sina p
6
 tb    
47.  y 5 cos12pt2     49.  y 11 10 sina pt
10 b
   
51.  y 3.8 0.2 sina p
5
 tb
53.  f1t2 10 sina p
12
 1t 82b 90
55.  (a)  45 V    (b)  40    (c)  40    (d)  E1t2 45 cos180pt2
57.  f1t2 e0.9t sin pt    59.  c 1
3 ln 4 0.46   
61.  (a)  y sin1200pt2, y sina200pt 3p
4 b    
(b)  No; 3p/4
Chapter 5 Review  ■  page 463
1.  (b)  1
2, !3/2, !3/3    3.  (a)  p/3    (b)  A 1
2,  !3/2B   
(c)  sin t !3/2, cos t  1
2, tan  t !3, csc t 2 !3/3,
 sec t 2, cot t !3/3
5.  (a)  p/4    (b)  1!2/2,  !2/22    
(c)  sin t !2/2, cos t !2/2,
tan t 1, csc t !2, sec t !2, cot t 1
7.  (a)  !2/2    (b)  !2/2    9.  (a)  0.89121    (b)  0.45360   
11.  (a)  0    (b)  Undeﬁned    13.  (a)  Undeﬁned    (b)  0   
15.  (a)  !3/3    (b)  !3    17. 
sin t
1 sin2
 t    19. 
sin t
"1 sin2
 t  
21.  tan t  5
12, csc t 13
5 , sec t  13
12, cot t  12
5
y
0
t
7.8
8
8.2
10
1
y
0
t
90
140
80
1
y (feet)
0
t
(hours)
21
3
12
_21
6
9
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A42 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
23.  sin t 2 !5/5, cos t !5/5, 
tan t 2, sec t !5   
25.   !17
4
4    27.  3   
29.  (a)  10, 4p, 0    	
31.  (a)  1, 4p, 0
(b)  	
(b) 
33.  (a)  3, p, 1    	
35.  (a)  1, 4,  1
3   
(b)  	
(b) 
37.  y  5 sin 4x    39.  y 1
2 sin 2pAx 1
3B	
41.  p  	
43.  p
y
0
x
5
_π
π
	
y
0
x
2
π
2
45.  p	
47.  2p
y
0
x
4
π
4
π
4
_
3π
4
_4
	
y
x
1
π
4
5π
4
49.  p/2    51.  p/6    53.  100, p/4, 2p/2, 2p/16   
55.  (a)  3p/2, 5p/2  (b)  2p  (c)  Out of phase
(d)  	
y
0
x
10
_10
_2π
2π
4π
y
0
x
1
_1
_4π
_π
4π
π
y
0
x
3
_3
1-π
1+π
1
y
0
x
1
_1
_ 3
13
3
11
_3
1
y
x
0
25
_25
π
_π
y⁄
y¤
57.  (a)  	
(b)  Period p 
(c)  Even
59.  (a)  	
(b)  Not periodic     
(c)  Neither
61.  (a)  	
(b)  Not periodic 
(c)  Even
63.  	
    y  x sin x is a sine  
function whose graph lies  
between those of y  x and  
y  x
65.  	
    The graphs are related by 
graphical addition.
67.  1.76, 1.76    69.  0.30, 2.84   
71.  (a)	
	
 
(b)  y1 has period p, y2 has period 2p   
(c)  sin1cos x2 cos1sin x2 , for all x
73.  y 50 cos18pt2
Chapter 5 Test  ■  page 465
1.  y  5
6    2.  (a)  4
5    (b)   3
5    (c)   4
3    (d)   5
3
3.  (a)   1
2    (b)  !2/2    (c)  !3    (d)  1
1.5
6.28
_6.28
_0.5
1.5
50
_50
_1.5
5
5
_5
_5
15
15
_15
_15
3.5
3.14
_3.14
_3.5
1.5
_1.5
8
y¤
y⁄
_8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Chapter 5 Focus on Modeling  A43
4.  tan t  
sin t
"1 sin2 t
    5.   2
15
6.  (a)  5, p/2, 0, 0	
7.  (a)  2, 4p, p/6, p/3
(b)  	
(b) 
8.  p  	
9.  p/2
y
x
1
π
4
_1
3π
4
0
	
10.  (a)  p/4    (b)  5p/6    (c)  0    (d)  1
2
11.  y 2 sin 21x p/32
12.  (a)  p/2, p/3    (b)  p/6   
(c)  Out of phase
(d) 
y⁄
y¤
−π
2
y
x
0
30
π
2
13.  (a)	
(b)  Even   
	

(c)  Minimum value 0.11 when x  2.54, maximum value 1 
when x  0
14.  y 5 sin14pt2
15.  y  16e0.1t cos 24pt	
y
0
x
5
_5
π
2
π
4
13π
3
y
0
x
2
π
3
_2
y
0
x
1
π
4
_1
1.2
9.42
_9.42
_0.4
18
1
0
_18
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 469
1.  (a) and (c) 
(b)  y 2.1 cos10.52t2      
(d)  y 2.05 sin10.50t 1.552 0.01    (e)  The formula of (d) 
reduces to y 2.05 cos10.50t 0.022 0.01. Same as (b),  
rounded to one decimal.
3.  (a) and (c) 
(b)  y 12.05 cos15.21t 0.322 13.05
(d)  y 11.72 sin15.05t 0.242 12.96    (e)  The formula of 
(d) reduces to y 11.72 cos15.051t 0.2622 12.96. Close, but 
not identical, to (b).
5.  (a) and (c) 
(b)  y 0.4 cos10.261t 1622 37, where y is the body  
temperature (C) and t is hours since midnight
(d)  y 0.37 sin10.26t 2.622 37.0
7.  (a) and (c) 
(b)  y 20.5 sin10.521t 622 42.5, where y is the salmon  
population ( 1000), and t is years since 1985
(d)  y 17.8 sin10.52t 3.112 42.4
2
y
0
t
_2
1
14
y=2.1 cos(0.52t)
25
y
0
t
5
0.1
1.0
1.5
y=12.05 cos(5.2(t-0.3))+13.05
38
y
0
t
36
37
24
y=0.4 cos(0.26(t-16))+37
12
70
y
0
t
20
60
50
40
30
15
y=20.5 sin(0.52(t-6))+42.5
10
Year since 1985
5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A44 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
chapter 6
Section 6.1  ■  page 478
1.  (a)  arc, 1    (b)  p/180    (c)  180/p    2.  (a)  ru    (b)  1
2r2u
3.  (a)  u/t    (b)  s/t    (c)  rv    4.  No, B    5.  p/12  0.262 rad   
7.  3p/10  0.942 rad    9.  p/4  0.785 rad   
11.  5p/9  1.745 rad    13.  50p/9  17.453 rad   
15.  7p/18  1.222 rad    17.  3008    19.  150   
21.  540/p  171.9    23.  216/p  68.8   
25.  18    27.  24    29.  410, 770, 310, 670     
31.  11p/4, 19p/4, 5p/4, 13p/4     
33.  7p/4, 15p/4, 9p/4, 17p/4    35.  Yes    37.  Yes     
39.  Yes    41.  40    43.  60    45.  280    47.  7p/6     
49.  p    51.  p/4    53.  15p/2  23.6     
55.  360/p  114.6    57.  15 cm    59.  14
9  rad, 89.1     
61.  18/p  5.73 m    63.  (a)  128p/9 44.68    (b)  25     
65.  100p/3  104.7 m2    67.  6!5p/p 7.6 m     
69.  1
2 rad    71.  p/4 ft2    73.  3p/2 rad, p/8 rad     
75.  13.9 mi    77.  330p mi  1037 mi    79.  1.6 million mi     
81.  1.15 mi    83.  360p in2  1130.97 in2     
85.  (a)  90p rad/min    (b)  1440p in./min  4523.9 in./min     
87.  32p/15 ft/s  6.7 ft/s    89.  1039.6 mi/h    91.  2.1 m/s     
93.  (a)  10p cm  31.4 cm    (b)  5 cm    (c)  3.32 cm     
(d)  86.8 cm3
Section 6.2  ■  page 487
1.  (a) 
(b) 
opposite
hypotenuse, adjacent
hypotenuse, opposite
adjacent    (c)  similar
2.  sin u, cos u, tan u
3.  sin u 4
5, cos u 3
5, tan u 4
3, csc u 5
4, 
sec u 5
3, cot u 3
4   
5.  sin u 40
41, cos u 9
41, tan u 40
9 , 
csc u 41
40, sec u 41
9 , cot u 9
40   
7.  sin u 2!13/13, cos u 3!13/13, tan u 2
3, 
csc u !13/2, sec u !13/3, cot u 3
2   
9.  (a)  3!34/34, 3!34/34    (b)  3
5, 3
5    (c)  !34/5, !34/5   
11.  (a)  0.37461    (b)  2.35585    13.  (a)  1.02630    (b)  1.23490   
15.  25
2     17.  13!3/2    19.  16.51658   
21.  x  28 cos u, y  28 sin u   
23.  sin u 5!61/61, cos u 6!61/61, csc u !61/5,
sec u !61/6, cot u 6
5
¨
œ∑∑
61
5
6
¨
adjacent
opposite
hypotenuse
25.  sin u !2/2, cos u !2/2, tan u 1, 
csc u !2, sec u !2
¨
1
1
œ∑2
27.  sin u 6
11, cos u !85/11, tan u 6!85/85, 
sec u 11!85/85, cot u !85/6
¨
11
6
œ∑∑
85
29.  11 !32/2    31.  1    33.  1
2    35.  3
4 A !2/2B   
37.  	
39. 
41.  	
43. 
45.  sin u  0.44, cos u  0.89, tan u  0.50, csc u  2.25,  
sec u  1.125, cot u  2.00    47.  230.9    49.  63.7   
51.  x  10 tan u sin u    53.  1026 ft   
55.  (a)  2100 mi    (b)  No    57.  19 ft    59.  345 ft     
61.  415 ft, 152 ft    63.  2570 ft    65.  5808 ft     
67.  91.7 million mi    69.  3960 mi    71.  0.723 AU
Section 6.3  ■  page 498
1.  y/r, x/r, y/x    2.  quadrant; positive; negative; negative
3.  (a)  x-axis; 80, 10    (b)  80; 10    4.  1
2 ab sin u; 7   
5.  (a)  60    (b)  20    (c)  75    7.  (a)  45    (b)  90    (c)  75   
9.  (a)  3p/10    (b)  p/8    (c)  p/3   
11.  (a)  2p/7    (b)  0.4p    (c)  1.4    13.  !3/2    15.  !3/3   
17.  !3/3    19.  1    21.  !3/2    23.  !3/3    25.  1   
27.  !3    29.  2    31.  2    33.  1   
35.  Undeﬁned    37.  III    39.  IV   
41.  tan u "1 cos2
 u/cos u   
43.  cos u "1 sin2 u    45.  sec u "1 tan2 u   
47.  cos u 3
5, tan u  4
3, csc u  5
4, sec u 5
3, cot   u  3
4  
49.  sin u !95/12, tan u !95/7, csc u 12!95/95, 
sec u 12
7 , cot   u 7!95/95   
45*
45*
16œ∑2Å22.63
16
16
52*
38*
56.85
44.80
35
30.95
33.5
12.82
3π
8
π
8
106
180.34
145.90
3π
10
π
5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Chapter 6 Review  A45
51.  sin u 1
2, cos u !3/2, tan u !3/3, 
sec u 2!3/3, cot u !3
53.  sin u 3!5/7, tan u 3!5/2, csc u 7!5/15, 
sec u  7
2, cot u 2!5/15
55.  !3/2, !3    57.  30.0    59.  25!3 43.3     
61.  66.1    63.  14p/32 !3 2.46   
65.  (b)
u
20
60
80
85
h
1922
9145
29,944
60,351
67.  (a)  A(u)  400 sin u cos u
(b) 
(c)  width  depth  14.14 in.   
69.  (a)  9!3/4 ft 3.897 ft, 9
16 ft 0.5625 ft     
(b)  23.982 ft, 3.462 ft   
71.  (a)  		
(b)  0.946 rad or 54
73.  42°   
Section 6.4  ■  page 506
1.  one-to-one; domain, 3p/2, p/24    
2.  (a)  31, 14, 3p/2, p/24     (b)  31, 14, 30, p4    
(c)  , 1p/2, p/22     3.  (a)  8
10    (b)  6
10    (c)  8
6   
4.  12
13   
5.  (a)  p/2    (b)  p/2    (c)  p/3   
7.  (a)  p/4    (b)  3p/4    (c)  p/4    9.  0.30469   
11.  1.23096    13.  1.24905    15.  Undefined    17.  36.9°   
19.  34.7°    21.  34.8°    23.  41.8°, 138.2°    25.  113.6°   
27.  78.7°    29.  3
5    31.  13
5     33.  12
5     35.  "1 x2   
37.  x/"1 x2    39.  72.5°, 19 ft   
41.  (a)  h  2 tan u    (b)  u  tan11 h/2 2    
43.  (a)  u  sin11 h/680 2     (b)  u  47.3°
45.  (a)  54.1°    (b)  48.3°, 32.2°, 24.5°. The function sin1 is 
undefined for values outside the interval 31, 14.
300
1.57
0
10
0
3
13
¨
12
5
Section 6.5  ■  page 513
1.  sin A
a
sin B
b
sin C
c
    2.  (a)  ASA, SSA    (b)  SSA 
3.  318.8    5.  24.8    7.  44    9.  C  114, a  51, b  24 
11.  A  44, B  68, a  8.99   
13.  C  62, a  200, b  242
15.  B  85, a  5, c  9
17.  A  100, a  89, c  71
19.  B  30, C  40, c  19    21.  No solution
23.  A1  125, C1  30, a1  49;  
A2  5, C2  150, a2  5.6     
25.  No solution    27.  A1  57.2, B1  93.8, b1  30.9;  
A2  122.8, B2  28.2, b2  14.6     
29.  (a)  91.146    (b)  14.427    31.  (a)  1018 mi    (b)  1017 mi   
33.  219 ft    35.  55.9 m    37.  175 ft    39.  192 m     
41.  0.427 AU, 1.119 AU   
Section 6.6  ■  page 520
1.  a2 b2 2ab cos C    2.  SSS, SAS    3.  28.9    5.  47   
7.  29.89    9.  15    11.  A  39.4, B  20.6, c  24.6   
13.  A  48, B  79, c  3.2   
15.  A  50, B  73, C  57   
17.  A1  83.6, C1  56.4, a1  193;  
A2  16.4, C2  123.6, a2  54.9   
19.  No such triangle    21.  2    23.  25.4    25.  89.2   
27.  24.3    29.  54    31.  26.83    33.  5.33    35.  40.77     
37.  3.85 cm2    39.  2.30 mi    41.  23.1 mi    43.  2179 mi     
45.  (a)  62.6 mi    (b)  S 18.2 E    47.  96    49.  211 ft     
51.  3835 ft    53.  $165,554
Chapter 6 Review  ■  page 527
1.  (a)  p/6    (b)  5p/6    (c)  p/9    (d)  5p/4     
3.  (a)  150    (b)  20    (c)  240    (d)  229.2   
5.  4p  12.6 m    7.  90/p  28.6 ft    9.  21,609    11.  25 m2
50*
230
A
B
68*
C
30*
10
A
B
65*
C
29*
44
A
B
51*
C
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A46 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
13.  0.4 rad  22.9    15.  300p rad/min  942.5 rad/min,  
7539.8 in./min  628.3 ft/min     
17.  sin u 5/ !74, cos u 7/ !74, tan u 5
7, 
csc u !74/5, sec u !74/7, cot u 7
5   
19.  x  3.83, y  3.21    21.  x  2.92, y  3.11   
23.  A 70, a 2.819, b 1.026   
25.  A 16.3, C 73.7, c 24
27.  a  cot u, b  csc u    29.  48 m    31.  1076 mi   
33.  !2/2    35.  1    37.  !3/3    39.  !2/2   
41.  2!3/3    43.  !3   
45.  sin u 12
13, cos u  5
13, tan u  12
5 , 
csc u 13
12, sec u  13
5 , cot u  5
12    47.  60   
49.  tan u "1 cos2
 u/cos u   
51.  tan2
 u sin2 u/11 sin2
 u2    
53.  sin u !7/4, cos u 3
4, csc u 4!7/7, cot u 3!7/7   
55.  cos u  4
5, tan u  3
4, csc u 5
3, sec u  5
4, 
cot u  4
3    57.  !5/5    59.  1    61.  p/3    63.  2/"21   
65.  x/"1 x2    67.  u cos11x/32     69.  5.32    71.  148.07   
73.  9.17    75.  54.1° or 125.9°    77.  80.4°    79.  77.3 mi   
81.  3.9 mi    83.  32.12   
Chapter 6 Test  ■  page 531
1.  11p/6, 3p/4    2.  240, 74.5
3.  (a)  240p rad/min  753.98 rad/min   
(b)  12,063.7 ft/min  137 mi/h    4.  (a)  !2/2   
(b)  !3/3    (c)  2    (d)  1    5.  A26 6!13B/39   
6.  a  24 sin u, b  24 cos u    7.  14 3!22/4   
8.   13
12    9.  tan u "sec2
 u 1    10.  19.6 ft
11.  (a)  u tan11x/42     (b)  u cos113/x2     12.  40
41
13.  9.1    14.  250.5    15.  8.4    16.  19.5    17.  78.6°    18.  40.2°
19.  (a)  15.3 m2    (b)  24.3 m    20.  (a)  129.9    (b)  44.9   
21.  554 ft
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 534
1.  1.41 mi    3.  14.3 m    5.  (c)  2350 ft   
7. 
chapter 7
Section 7.1  ■  page 542
1.  all; 1    2.  cos1x2 cos x    3.  sin t    5.  tan u    7.  1   
9.  csc u    11.  tan u    13.  1    15.  cos t  1    17.  cos x   
19.  sin2x    21.  cos y    23.  2 sec u    25.  1  sin x    27.  2 sec2a  
29.  (a)  LHS 1 sin2
 x
sin x
RHS
31.  LHS sin u  cos u
sin u RHS
33.  LHS cos u  
1
cos u
  cot u RHS
150 ft
84.0 ft
91.9 ft
120.2 ft
149.5 ft
151.7 ft
128.0 ft
173.2 ft
195.0 ft
35.  LHS 
sin y
cos y
1
sin y
sin2
 y
cos y 1 cos2
 y
cos y

1
cos y cos y RHS
37.  LHS cos x 1sin x2 RHS
39.   LHS sin u
cos u cos u
sin u sin2
 u cos2
 u
cos u sin u
  
1
cos u sin u RHS
41.  LHS 1 cos2 sin2 RHS
43.  LHS 
1
cos2 y sec2 y RHS
45.   LHS tan2 x 2 tan x cot x cot2 x tan2 x 2 cot2 x
  1tan2 x 12 1cot2 x 12 RHS
47.   LHS 12 cos2
 t2 2 4 sin2
 t cos2
 t
 4 cos2
 t1cos2
 t sin2
 t2 RHS
49.  LHS cos2
 x
sin x sin2
 x
sin x 
1
sin x RHS
51.   LHS 
1sin x cos x2 2
1sin x cos x2 1sin x cos x2 sin x cos x
sin x cos x
  
1sin x cos x2 1sin x cos x2
1sin x cos x2 1sin x cos x2 RHS
53.  LHS 
1
cos t cos t
1
cos t
# cos t
cos t 1 cos2
 t
1
RHS
55.  LHS cos2
 x 11 cos2
 x2 2 cos2
 x 1 RHS
57.   LHS 1sin2
 u2 2 1cos2
 u2 2
 
 1sin2
 u cos2
 u2 1sin2
 u cos2
 u2 RHS
59.   LHS sin2
 t 2 sin t cos t cos2
 t
sin t cos t
  sin2
 t cos2
 t
sin t cos t
2 sin t cos t
sin t cos t 
1
sin t cos t 2
  RHS
61.  LHS 
1 sin2 u
cos2 u
1 sin2 u
cos2 u
# cos2
 u
cos2
 u cos2
 u sin2
 u
cos2
 u sin2
 u RHS
63.  LHS 
1
cos x 
1
sin x
sin x
cos x cos x
sin x
# sin x cos x
sin x cos x sin x cos x
sin2
 x cos2
 x RHS
65.   LHS 1 cos x
sin x
# 1 cos x
1 cos x 
sin x
1 cos x # sin x
sin x
  1 2 cos x cos2 x sin2 x
sin x11 cos x2

2 2 cos x
sin x11 cos x2
 
211 cos x2
sin x11 cos x2 RHS
67.  LHS sin2 u
cos2 u sin2 u cos2 u
cos2 u
sin2 u
cos2 u
 11 cos2 u2 RHS
69.  LHS 
1 sin x
cos x
1 sin x
cos x
# cos x
cos x cos x sin x
cos x sin x RHS
71.   LHS sec x tan x sec x tan x
1sec x tan x2 1sec x tan x2
  
2 sec x
sec2
 x tan2
 x RHS
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 7.2  A47
73.   LHS 
11 sin x2 2 11 sin x2 2
11 sin x2 11 sin x2
 1 2 sin x sin2
 x 1 2 sin x sin2
 x
1 sin2
 x
  4 sin x
cos2
 x 4  sin x
cos x #
1
cos x RHS
75.   LHS 
1sin x cos x2 1sin2
 x sin x cos x cos2
 x2
sin x cos x
  sin2
 x sin x cos x cos2
 x RHS
77.   LHS 1 cos a
sin a
# 1 cos a
1 cos a
 
 
1 cos2
 a
sin a11 cos a2 
sin2
 a
sin a11 cos a2 RHS
79.  LHS 
sin „
sin „ cos „ #
1
cos „
1
cos „

sin „
cos „
sin „
cos „ cos „
cos „
RHS
81.   LHS 
sec x
sec x tan x # sec x tan x
sec x tan x
  
sec x1sec x tan x2
sec2
 x tan2
 x
RHS
83.   LHS 
cos u
1 sin u # 1 sin u
1 sin u 
cos u11 sin u2
1 sin2
 u
 
cos u11 sin u2
cos2
 u
RHS
85.   LHS 1 sin x
1 sin x # 1 sin x
1 sin x 1 2 sin x sin2
 x
1 sin2
 x
  
1
cos2
 x 2 sin x
cos2
 x sin2
 x
cos2
 x
 sec2
 x 2 sec x tan x tan2
 x
 1sec x tan x2 2 RHS
87.   LHS 
1
sin x cos x
sin x 
11 cos x2 11 cos x2
sin x11 cos x2
  
sin2
 x
sin x11 cos x2 
1
1
sin x cos x
sin x
RHS
89.  tan u    91.  tan u    93.  3 cos u   
95.  	
Yes
97.  	
No
99.   LHS sin2
 x sin2
 y cos2
 x cos2
 y
 11 cos2
 x2 sin2
 y cos2
 x11 sin2
 y2 RHS
1.5
6.28
_6.28
_1.5
3
6.28
_6.28
_1
101.   LHS a sin x
cos x cos x
sin x b
4
a sin2
 x cos2
 x
sin x cos x
b
4
  a
1
sin x cos x b
4
RHS
103.   LHS 
1sin y csc y2 1sin2
 y sin y csc y csc2
 y2
sin y csc y
 RHS
105.   LHS ln 0  tan x 0 ln 0  sin x 0 ln ` sin x
cos x ` ln 0 sin x 0
 ln 0  sin x 0 ln `
1
cos x ` ln 0 sin x 0 RHS
107.  LHS e1cos2
 xesec2
 x1 e1cos2
 xsec2
 x1 RHS
109.  Yes    111.  x kp, k an integer   
Section 7.2  ■  page 551
1.  addition; sin x cos y  cos x sin y   
2.  subtraction; cos x cos y  sin x sin y
3.  !6 !2
4
    5.  !2 !6
4
    7.  2 !3    9.   !6 !2
4
  
11.  !3 2    13.   !6 !2
4
    15.  !2/2    17.  1
2    19.  !3  
21.   LHS sinAp
2 uB
cosAp
2 uB sin p
2 cos u cos p
2 sin u
cos p
2   cos u sin p
2 sin u
  cos u
sin u RHS
23.   LHS 
1
cosAp
2 uB 
1
cos p
2 cos u sin p
2 sin u
  1
sin u RHS
25.  LHS sin x cos p
2 cos x sin p
2 RHS
27.  LHS sin x cos p cos x sin p RHS
29.  LHS tan x tan p
1 tan x tan p RHS
31.   LHS sina p
2 xb sin p
2
  cos x cos p
2
  sin x cos x
 RHS sina p
2 xb sin p
2
  cos x cos p
2
  sin x cos x
33.  LHS tan x tan p
3
1 tan x tan p
3
RHS
35.   LHS sin x cos y cos x sin y
  1sin x cos y cos x sin y2 RHS
37.   LHS 
1
tan1x y2 1 tan x tan y
tan x tan y
  1 
1
cot x 1
cot y
1
cot x 
1
cot y # cot x cot y
cot x cot y RHS
39.  LHS sin x
cos x sin y
cos y sin x cos y cos x sin y
cos x cos y
RHS
41.   LHS 
1tan x tan y2 1cos x cos y2
11 tan x tan y2 1cos x cos y2
 sin x cos y cos x sin y
cos x cos y sin x sin y RHS
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A48 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
43.   LHS 1cos x cos y sin x sin y2 1cos x cos y sin x sin y2
  cos2
 x cos2
 y sin2
 x sin2
 y
 cos2
 x11 sin2
 y2 11 cos2
 x2 sin2
 y
 cos2
 x sin2
 y cos2
 x sin2
 y cos2
 x sin2
 y RHS
45.   LHS sin11x y2 z2
 sin1x y2 cos z cos1x y2 sin z
 cos z 3sin x cos y cos x sin y4
  sin z 3cos x cos y sin x sin y4 RHS
47.  "1 x2 xy
"1 y2
    49. 
x y
"1 x2 "1 y2   
51.  1
4 A !6 !2 B    53.  3 2!14
!7 6!2    55.   1
10 A3 4!3 B   
57.  2!5/65    59.  2 sinax 5p
6 b     61.  5!2 sina2x 7p
4 b
63.  (a)  g1x2 2 sin 2ax p
12 b    
(b) 
67.  (a) 
sin2 ax p
4 b sin2 ax p
4 b 1
71.   LHS tan1 a tan u tan √
1 tan u tan √b tan11tan1u √22
 u √RHS
73.  (c)  8.1°
75.  (a) 
(b)  k 5 !2, f  p/4
Section 7.3  ■  page 560
1.  Double-Angle; 2 sin x cos x   
2.  Half-Angle; "11 cos x2/2
3.  120
169, 119
169, 120
119    5.   24
25, 7
25,  24
7     7.  24
25, 7
25, 24
7    
9.   3
5, 4
5,  3
4    11.  1
2 A3
4 cos 2x 1
4   cos 4xB
13.  1
16 11 cos 2x cos 4x cos 2x cos 4x2
11π
12
y
0
x
2
π
12
_
3
6.28
_6.28
_3
10
6.28
_6.28
_10
15.  1
32 A3
4 cos 4x 1
4 cos 8xB
17.  1
2 "2 !3    19.  !2 1    21.   1
2 "2 !3   
23.  !2 1    25.  1
2 "2 !3    27.   1
2 "2 !2   
29.  (a)  sin 36    (b)  sin 6u    31.  (a)  cos 68    (b)  cos 10u
33.  (a)  tan 4    (b)  tan 2u    37.  !10/10, 3 !10/10, 1
3   
39.  "A3 2 !2B/6, "A3 2 !2B/6, 3 2 !2
41.  !6/6,  !30/6,  !5/5    43. 
2x
1 x2    45.  Å
1 x
2
   
47.  336
625    49.  8
7    51.  7
25    53.  8!3/49    55.  1
2 1sin 5x sin x2   
57.  1
2 1sin 5x sin 3x2     59.  3
2 1cos 11x cos 3x2    
61.  2 sin 4x cos x    63.  2 sin 5x sin x    65.  2 cos 9
2 x sin 5
2 x   
67.  A !2 !3 B/2    69.  1
4 A !2 1B    71.  !2/2   
73.  LHS  cos12 # 5x2   RHS
75.   LHS sin2
 x 2 sin x cos x cos2
 x
 1 2 sin x cos x RHS
77.  LHS 2 tan x
sec2
 x 2 # sin x
cos x cos2
 x 2 sin x cos x RHS
79.   LHS 1 cos x
sin x
cos xa 1 cos x
sin x
b
 1 cos x cos x cos2
 x
sin x
sin2
 x
sin x RHS
81.   LHS 2 sin 2x cos 2x
sin x

212 sin x cos x2 1cos 2x2
sin x
RHS
83.   LHS 
21tan x cot x2
1tan x cot x2 1tan x cot x2 
2
tan x cot x
  
2
sin x
cos x cos x
sin x # sin x cos x
sin x cos x 2 sin x cos x
sin2
 x cos2
 x
  2 sin x cos x RHS
85.  LHS 
1
tan 2x 
1
2 tan x
1 tan2
 x
RHS
87.   LHS tan12x x2 tan 2x tan x
1 tan 2x tan x
  
2 tan x
1 tan2 x tan x
1 
2 tan x
1 tan2 x  tan x
  
2 tan x tan x11 tan2
 x2
1 tan2
 x 2 tan x tan x RHS
89.  LHS 2 sin 3x cos 2x
2 cos 3x cos 2x sin 3x
cos 3x RHS
91.  LHS 2 sin 5x cos 5x
2 sin 5x cos 4x RHS
93.   LHS 2 sinA
x y
2 B cosA
x y
2 B
2 cosA
x y
2 B cosA
x y
2 B
  sinA
x y
2 B
cosA
x y
2 B RHS
95.   LHS 1 cos 2Ax
2 p
4B
1 cos 2Ax
2 p
4B 1 cosAx p
2B
1 cosAx p
2B
  
1 1sin x2
1 1sin x2 RHS
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

101.   LHS 
1sin x sin 5x2 1sin 2x sin 4x2 sin 3x
1cos x cos 5x2 1cos 2x cos 4x2 cos 3x
  2 sin 3x cos 2x 2 sin 3x cos x sin 3x
2 cos 3x cos 2x 2 cos 3x cos x cos 3x
  
sin 3x12 cos 2x 2 cos x 12
cos 3x12 cos 2x 2 cos x 12 RHS
103.  RHS cos111 2 sin2
 u2 cos11cos 2u2 2u LHS 
105.  (a)  	
sin 3x
sin x cos 3x
cos x 2
107.  (a)     
(c)  	
	
The graph of y f1x2  lies 
between the two other 
graphs.
109.  (a)  P1t2 8t4 8t2 1    (b)  Q1t2 16t5 20t3 5t
115.  (a) and (c) 
The graph of f lies between the graphs of y  2 cos t and  
y  2 cos t. Thus, the loudness of the sound varies between  
y  2 cos t.
Section 7.4  ■  page 568
1.  infinitely many    2.  no, infinitely many   
3.  0.3; x  9.7, 6.0, 3.4, 0.3, 2.8, 6.6, 9.1   
4.  (a)  0.30, 2.84    (b)  2p, 0.30  2kp, 2.84  2kp   
5.  p
3 2kp, 2p
3 2kp   
7.  12k 12p    9.  1.32 2kp, 4.97 2kp
11.  3.61 2kp, 5.82 2kp    13.   p
3 kp   
15.  1.37 kp    17.  5p
6 2kp, 7p
6 2kp;
7p/6, 5p/6, 5p/6, 7p/6, 17p/6, 19p/6
5
6.28
_6.28
_5
2.5
9.42
_9.42
_2.5
2.5
9.42
_9.42
_2.5
2.5
π
_π
_2.5
19. 
p
4 2kp, 3p
4 2kp; 7p/4, 5p/4, p/4, 3p/4, 
9p/4, 11p/4
21.  1.29 2kp, 5.00 2kp; 5.00, 1.29, 1.29, 5.00, 
7.57, 11.28
23.  1.47 kp; 7.75, 4.61, 1.47, 1.67, 4.81, 7.95
25.  12k 12p    27.  5p
4 2kp, 7p
4 2kp   
29.  0.20 2kp, 2.94 2kp    31.   p
6 kp, p
6 kp   
33.  p
4 kp, 3p
4 kp    35.  1.11 kp, 1.11 kp   
37.  p
4 kp, 3p
4 kp   
39.  1.11 kp, 1.11 kp, 2p
3 2kp, 4p
3 2kp
41.  p
3 2kp, 5p
3 2kp    43.  0.34 2kp, 2.80 2kp   
45.  p
3 2kp, 5p
3 2kp    47.  No solution    49.  3p
2 2kp   
51.  p
2 kp, 7p
6 2kp, 11p
6
2kp    53.  p
2 kp   
55.  kp, 0.73 2kp, 2.41 2kp    57.  44.95°   
59.  (a)  0°    (b)  60°, 120°    (c)  90°, 270°    (d)  180°
Section 7.5  ■  page 574
1.  sin x  0, kp    2.  sin x  2 sin x cos x  0, sin x  0, 
1  2 cos x  0    3.  7p
6 2kp, 11p
6
2kp, p
2 2kp
5.  12k 12p, 1.23 2kp, 5.05 2kp
7.  kp, 0.72 2kp, 5.56 2kp    9.  p
6 2kp, 5p
6 2kp
11.  p
3 2kp, 5p
3 2kp, 12k 12p   
13.  12k 12p, p
2 2kp    15.  2kp   
17.  (a)  p
9 2kp
3
 , 5p
9 2kp
3     (b)  p/9, 5p/9, 7p/9, 11p/9, 
13p/9, 17p/9   
19.  (a)  p
3 kp, 2p
3 kp    (b)  p/3, 2p/3, 4p/3, 5p/3   
21.  (a)  5p
18 kp
3     (b)  5p/18, 11p/18, 17p/18, 23p/18, 
29p/18, 35p/18   
23.  (a)  4kp    (b)  0   
25.  (a)  4p 6kp, 5p 6kp    (b)  None   
27.  (a)  0.62 kp
2     (b)  0.62, 2.19, 3.76, 5.33   
29.  (a)  kp, p
2 2kp    (b)  0, p/2, p   
Answers to Section 7.5  A49
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A50 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
31.  (a)  p
6 kp, p
4 kp, 5p
6 kp   
(b)  p/6, p/4, 5p/6, 7p/6, 5p/4, 11p/6
33.  (a)  p
6 2kp, 5p
6 2kp, 3p
4 kp   
(b)  p/6, 3p/4, 5p/6, 7p/4
35.  (a)	
37.  (a)	
	
_2.5
4.5
_2π
2π
	
_10
10
_ 
2

2
	
13.14, 22 	
11.04, 1.732
(b)  112k 12p, 22 	
(b)  a p
3 kp, !3b
39.  p/8, 3p/8, 5p/8, 7p/8, 9p/8, 11p/8, 13p/8, 15p/8
41.  p/3, 2p/3    43.  p/2, 7p/6, 3p/2, 11p/6    45.  0
47.  0, p    49.  0, p/3, 2p/3, p, 4p/3, 5p/3    51.  p/6, 3p/2   
53.  kp/2    55.  p
2 kp, p
9 2kp
3 , 5p
9 2kp
3    
57.  0, 0.95    59.  1.92    61.  0.71   
63.  !17 3
4
    65.  0.95° or 89.1°   
67.  (a)  34th day (February 3), 308th day (November 4)   
(b)  275 days   
Chapter 7 Review  ■  page 578
1.   LHS sin u a cos u
sin u sin u
cos u b cos u sin2
 u
cos u
  cos2
 u sin2
 u
cos u
RHS
3.   LHS 11 sin2
 x2 csc x csc x
 csc x sin2
 x csc x csc x
  sin2
 x 1
sin x RHS
5.  LHS cos2
 x
sin2
 x tan2
 x
sin2
 x cot2
 x 
1
cos2
 x RHS
7.  LHS 
cos x
1
cos x 11 sin x2 
cos x
1
cos x sin x
cos x
RHS
9.  LHS sin2 x cos2 x
sin2 x cos2 x sin2 x
cos2 x cos2 x sin2 x RHS
11.  LHS 
2 sin x cos x
1 2 cos2 x 1 2 sin x cos x
2 cos2 x
2 sin x
2 cos x RHS
13.   LHS csc x 1 cos x
sin x
 csc x 1csc x cot x2 RHS
15.   LHS 2 sin x cos x
sin x
2 cos2 x 1
cos x
  2 cos x 2 cos x 
1
cos x RHS
17.   LHS 
1
cos x 1
sin x 1
cos x
a
1
cos x 1b cos x
sin x
 1 cos x
sin x
RHS
19.   LHS cos2
  x
2 2 sin x
2 cos x
2 sin2
  x
2
 1 sinA2 # x
2B RHS
21.   LHS 2 sinA
1 xy 2 1 xy 2
2
B cosA
1 xy 2 1 xy 2
2
B
2 cosA
1 xy 2 1 xy 2
2
B cosA
1 xy 2 1 xy 2
2
B
 2 sin x cos y
2 cos x cos y RHS
23.  (a)  	
    (b)  Yes
25.  (a)  	
    (b)  No
27.  (a)  	
2 sin2
 3x cos 6x 1
29.  0.85, 2.29    31.  0, p    33.  p/6,  5p/6    35.  p/3,  5p/3   
37.  2p/3,  4p/3    39.  p/3,  2p/3,  3p/4,  4p/3,  5p/3,  7p/4     
41.  p/6,  p/2,  5p/6,  7p/6,  3p/2,  11p/6    43.  p/6   
45.  1.18    47.  (a)  63.4    (b)  No    (c)  90   
49.  !2 !6
4
 or 1
2 "2 !3    51.  !2 1    53.  !2/2   
55.  !2/2    57.  !2 !3
4
    59.  2
9 1 !10 12    
61.  2
3 A !2 !5B    63.  "A3 2 !2B/6    65.   12"10
31
   
67. 
2x
1 x2    69.  (a)  u tan1 a 10
x b     (b)  286.4 ft
Chapter 7 Test  ■  page 580
1.  LHS sin u
cos u sin u cos u sin2 u cos2 u
cos u
RHS
2.   LHS 
tan x
1 cos x # 1 cos x
1 cos x 
tan x11 cos x2
1 cos2 x
  
sin x
cos x 11 cos x2
sin2 x

1
sin x # 1 cos x
cos x
RHS
3.  LHS 2 tan x
sec2 x 2 sin x
cos x # cos2 x 2 sin x cos x RHS
1.5
3.14
_3.14
_1.5
4
6.28
_6.28
_4
1.5
3.14
_3.14
_1.5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.  LHS sin x tana x
2 b sin xa 1 cos x
sin x
b RHS
5.  LHS 2a 1 cos 6x
2
b RHS
6.   LHS 1 2 sin2 2x 1 212 sin x cos x2 2
 1 8 sin2 x11 sin2 x2 RHS
7.   LHS sin2 a x
2 b 2 sina x
2 b cos a x
2 b cos2 a x
2 b
 1  sin 2a x
2 b RHS
8.  tan u    9.  (a)  1
2    (b)  !2 !6
4
 or 1
2 "2 !3   
(c)  !6 !2
4
 or 1
2 "2 !3
10.  A10 2 !5 B/15
11.  1
2 1sin 8x sin 2x2     12.  2 cos 7
2 x sin 3
2 x    13.  2
14.  0.34, 2.80    15.  p/3, p/2, 5p/3    16.  2p/3, 4p/3   
17.  p/6, p/2, 5p/6, 3p/2    18.  0.58, 2.56, 3.72, 5.70   
19.  p/3, 2p/3, 4p/3, 5p/3    20.  p/3, 5p/3   
21.  1519
1681    22.  "1 x2 xy
"1 y2
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 584
1.  (a)  y 5 sina p
2
  tb    
(b) 
Yes, it is a traveling wave. 
(c)  √  p/4
3.  y1x, t2 2.7 sin10.68x 4.10t2
5.  y1x, t2 0.6 sin1px2 cos140pt2
7.  (a)  1, 2, 3, 4   
(b)  5: 
	
6:
(c)  880p    (d)  y1x, t2 sin x cos1880pt2 ; 
y1x, t2 sin12x2 cos1880pt2 ; y1x, t2 sin13x2 cos1880pt2 ; 
y1x, t2 sin14x2 cos1880pt2
7
y
5
1
_5
0
x
chapter 8
Section 8.1  ■  page 592
1.  coordinate; 11, 12, 1 !2, p/42     2.  (a)  r cos u, r sin u   
(b)  x2 y2, y/x    3.  Yes    4.  No; adding a multiple of 2p to u 
gives the same point.
5.  	
7. 
9.  	
11.  	
a3,  3p
2 b, a3,  5p
2 b
13.  	
a1,   5p
6 b, a1,  p
6 b
15.  	
15,  2p2, 15,  p2
17.  Q    19.  Q    21.  P    23.  P    25.  A3 !2,  3p/4B   
27.  a 5
2,   5 !3
2
b
   
29.  A2 !3,  2B    31.  11,  12    
33.  15,  02     35.  A3 !6,  3 !2B    37.  A !2,  3p/4B   
39.  14,  p/42     41.  A5,  tan1 
  4
3B    43.  16,  p2     45.  u  p/4   
47.  r  tan u sec u    49.  r  4 sec u    51.  x2  y2  49   
53.  x  0    55.  x  6    57.  x2 y2 4y   
59.  x2 y2 1x2 y2 x2 2    61.  1x2 y2 2y2 2 x2 y2  
63.  y  x  1    65.  x2  3y2  16y  16  0
67.  x2 y2 y
x    69.  y2 3x2 0   
Section 8.2  ■  page 600
1.  circles, rays    2.  (a)  satisfy    (b)  circle, 3, pole; line, pole, 1
3.  VI    5.  II    7.  I    9.  Symmetric about u  p/2
11.  Symmetric about the polar axis
13.  Symmetric about u  p/2
15.  All three types of symmetry
17.  	
19. 
O
1
(2, 0)
!2,    @
π
2
!2,      @
3π
2
(2, π)
	
O
1
x2 y2 4	
x 0
!4,
@
π
4
π
4
O
!6, _     @
7π
6
7π
6
O
_
!_2,      @
4π
3
4π
3
O
!3,    @
π
2
π
2
O
!_1,      @
7π
6
7π
6
O
O
(_5, 0)
Answers to Section 8.2  A51
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A52 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
21.  	
23. 
O
1
!6,    @
π
2
	
O
1
(_2, 0)
x2 1y 32 2 9	
25.  	
27. 
O
1
(4, π)
!2,    @
π
2
!2,      @
3π
2
	
O
1
(_3, π)
(_3, 0)
!_6,    @
π
2
29.  	
31. 
O
1
	
1
1
33.  	
35. 
	
2
1
O
3  2,
3π
2
!
@
œ
3  2, π
2
!
@
œ
3, π
!
@
œ
3, 0
!
@
œ
37.  	
39. 
1
1
O
3 ,
3π
2
!
@
œ
3, π
2
!
@
œ
3  1, 0
!
@
œ
3  1, π
!
@
œ
	
41.  	
43. 
1
O
	
O
10
(π, π)
!5,    @
π
2
!2,      @
3π
2
O
!2,    @
π
2
!2-2 2, 0@
œ
!2+2 2, π@
œ
45.  	
O
1
(3, 0)
	
47.  0  u  4p	
49.  0  u  4p
1
1.25
_1.25
_1
	
3
1.5
_3.5
_3
51.  The graph of r  1  sin nu has n loops.
53.  IV    55.  III   
57.  	
59. 
61.  (a)  ax a
2 b
2
ay b
2 b
2
a2 b2
4
, 
a a
2, b
2 b, 1
2
 "a2 b2
(b) 
63.  (a)  Elliptical 
(b)  p; 540 mi
Section 8.3  ■  page 609
1.  real, imaginary, 1a, b2     2.  (a)  "a2 b2, b/a   
(b)  r 1cos u i sin u2    
3.  (a)  !2acos 3p
4 i sin 3p
4 b     (b)  !3 i
(c)  1 i, !2acos p
4 i sin p
4 b    
O
1
1
1
1
O
(2, 0)
!2,    @
π
2
!0,      @
3π
4
7000
12000
_9000
_7000
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 8.3  A53
Answers to Section 8.3  A53
4.  n; four; 2, 2i, 2, 2i; 2	
5.  4 	
7.  2 
9.  !29  	
11.  2
Im
0
Re
1
i
5+2i
	
Im
0
Re
1
i
œ∑3+i
13.  1 	
15. 
Im
0
Re
1
i
0.6+0.8i
	
 
17.  	
19. 
21.  	
23. 
25.  	
27. 
2i
2i
Re
Im
2
2
0
Im
0
Re
1
i
_1
4i
Im
0
Re
i
_2
Im
0
Re
1
i
_1
0.5+0.5i
1+i
2+2i
_1-i
Im
0
Re
2
i
8+2i
8-2i
8
Im
0
Re
1
i
z¤=2+i
z⁄=2-i
4
z⁄+z¤=4
z⁄z¤=5
Im
0
Re
1
i
_1
Im
0
Re
1
i
Im
0
Re
1
i
Im
0
Re
1
i
29.  !2acos p
4 i sin p
4 b     31.  2!2acos 3p
4 i sin 3p
4 b    
33.  2acos 7p
6 i sin 7p
6 b     35.  4acos 11p
6
i sin 11p
6 b    
37.  2acos p
2 i sin p
2 b     39.  31cos p i sin p2    
41.  2!2acos 5p
6 i sin 5p
6 b    
43.  5AcosAtan1 3
4B i sinAtan1 3
4BB
45.  8acos 11p
6
i sin 11p
6 b     47.  3 !2acos 3p
4 i sin 3p
4 b   
49.  z1z2 6acos p
2 i sin p
2
 b, z1
z2
3
2 acos p
6 i sin p
6 b
51.  z1z2 4acos 7p
6 i sin 7p
6 b, 
z1
z2
1
2 acos p
6 i sin p
6 b
   
53.  z1z2 81cos 150i sin 1502
z1/z2 21cos 90i sin 902
55.  z1z2 1001cos 350i sin 3502
z1/z2 
4
 25  1cos 50i sin 502
57.  z1 2acos p
6 i sin p
6 b
z2 2acos p
3 i sin p
3 b
z1z2 4acos p
2 i sin p
2 b
z1
z2
cos a p
6 b i sina p
6 b
1
z1
1
2 c cos a p
6 b i sina p
6 bd
59.  z1 4acos 11p
6
i sin 11p
6 b
z2 !2acos 3p
4 i sin 3p
4 b
z1z2 4 !2acos 7p
12 i sin 7p
12 b
z1
z2
2 !2acos 13p
12 i sin 13p
12 b
1
z1
1
4 acos p
6 i sin p
6 b
61.  z1 5 !2acos p
4 i sin p
4 b
z2 41cos 0 i sin 02
z1z2 20 !2acos p
4 i sin p
4 b
z1
z2
5 !2
4
acos p
4 i sin p
4 b
1
z1
!2
10 c cos a p
4 b i sin a p
4 bd
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A54 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
63.  z1 201cos p i sin p2
z2 2acos p
6 i sin p
6 b
z1z2 40acos 7p
6 i sin 7p
6 b
z1
z2
10acos 5p
6 i sin 5p
6 b
1
z1
1
20 1cos p i sin p2
65.  64    67.  16!2 16!2i    69.  1    71.  4096
73.  811 i2     75. 
1
 2048 A!3 iB   
77.  2 !2acos p
12 i sin p
12 b ,	
2 !2acos 13p
12 i sin 13p
12 b  
79.  3acos 3p
8 i sin 3p
8 b ,	
3acos 7p
8 i sin 7p
8 b ,
3acos 11p
8
i sin 11p
8 b , 
	
3acos 15p
8
i sin 15p
8 b 
81.  1, i,  !2
2
!2
2
 i,	
	
!2
2
!2
2
 i
83.  !3
2
1
2
 i,  !3
2
1
2
 i, i	
85.  !2
2
!2
2
 i,	
	
 !2
2
!2
2
 i
i
1
Im
0
Re
„⁄
„¤
„‚
i
1
Im
0
Re
„¤
„⁄
„‹
„‚
i
1
Im
0
Re
„¤
„⁄
„‹
„›
„ﬁ
„ﬂ
„‡
„‚
i
1
Im
0
Re
„¤
„⁄
„‚
i
1
Im
0
Re
„¤
„⁄
„‹
87.  !2
2
!2
2
 i, !2
2
!2
2
 i
89.  2acos p
18 i sin p
18 b , 2acos 13p
18 i sin 13p
18 b , 
2acos 25p
18 i sin 25p
18 b
91.  21/6 acos 5p
12 i sin 5p
12 b , 21/6 acos 13p
12 i sin 13p
12 b , 
21/6 acos 21p
12 i sin 21p
12 b
93.  1
2 !5
2
 i    95.  1 i, 1 i   
Section 8.4  ■  page 617
1.  (a)  parameter    (b)  10, 02, 11, 12     (c)  x2; parabola
2.  (a)  True    (b)  10, 02, 12, 42     (c)  x2; path
	
 
1
0
3
2
1
y
x
t=1 [1(b)]
t=0 [1(b) and 2(b)]
t=1 [2(b)]
3.  (a)  	
5.  (a) 
y
0
x
6
6
_6
	
y
0
x
4
1
16
(b)  x  2y  12  0	
(b)  x 1 y 22 2
7.  (a)  	
9.  (a) 
y
0
x
3
1
_3
	
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_3
(b)  x !1 y	
(b)  y 1
x 1
11.  (a)  	
13.  (a) 
	
y
0
x
1
1
_1
_1
(b)  x3  y2	
(b)  x2  y2  4, x  0
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Chapter 8 Review  A55
15.  (a)  	
17.  (a) 
y
0
x
1
1
	
y
0
x
1
1
(b)  y  x2, 0  x  1	
(b)  y  2x2  1, 1  x  1
19.  (a)  	
21.  (a) 
y
0
x
1
1
	
(b)  x2  y2  1, x  1, y  0	 (b)  y 1/x, x 0
23.  (a)  	
25.  (a) 
	
y
0
x
1
1
(b)  x  y2, y . 0	
(b)  x  y  1, 0  x  1
27.  3, (3, 0), counterclockwise, 2p sec
29.  1, (0, 1), clockwise, p sec    31.  x 4 t, y 1 1
2 t
33.  x  6  t, y  7  t    35.  x  a cos t, y  a sin t   
39.  	
41. 
2.5
1.25
_1.25
_2.5
	
6
3.5
_3.5
_6
43. 
1.2
1
_1
_1.2
45.  (a)  x  2t/12 cos t, y  2t/12 sin t
(b) 
y
0
x
1
1
y
0
x
1
1
2.5
2.5
_2.5
_2.5
47.  (a)  x 
4 cos t
2 cos t, y 
4 sin t
2 cos t   
(b) 
49.  III    51.  II   
53.  (a)  x  a cos u, y  b sin u   
(b)    	
  (c)  x2
a2 y2
b2 1
55.  	
59. 
	
y
0
x
2
3
_2
_3
61.  	
63.  (b)  x2/3  y2/3  a2/3
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_3
	
65.  x a1sin t cos t cot t2, y a11 sin2
 t2
67.  y a a cos a x "2ay y2
a
b
69.  (b) 
Chapter 8 Review  ■  page 622
1.  (a)  	
3.  (a) 
(b)  A6!3,  6B	
(b)  a 3!2
2
,  3!2
2
b
3
5
_2
_3
4
_4
_3
3
20
_20
_1
6
y
0
x
a
a
15
23
_23
_15
!12,    @
π
6
π
6
O
!_3, 
@
7π
4
7π
4
O
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A56 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
5.  (a)  	
(b)  A2!3,  6B	
7.  (a)  	
	
(b)  a8!2,  p
4 b     (c)  a8!2,  5p
4 b
9.  (a)  	
	
	
(b)  a12,  5p
4 b     (c)  a12,  p
4 b
11.  (a)  	
	
(b)  a2!3,  5p
6 b     (c)  a2!3,   p
6 b
13.  (a)  r 
4
cos u sin u	
(b) 
15.  (a)  r 41cos u sin u2 	
(b) 
!4
@
_    
5π
3
_    
5π
3
O
œ∑3,
y
0
x
8
8
(8, 8)
y
0
x
_8
_8
Ó_6œ∑
2Ô
2, _6œ∑
y
0
x
3
1
_3
Ó_3, œ∑3Ô
y
0
x
4
4
O
2
2
17.  (a) 
(b)  1x2 y2 3x2 2 91x2 y22
19.  (a) 
(b)  1x2 y22 3 16x2y2
21.  (a) 
(b)  x2  y2  1
23.  (a)  	
(b)  x2  y2  x  y
25.  0  u  3p 	
1
1.25
_0.75
_1
	
27.  0  u  6p
5
6
_4
_5
1
(6, 0)
!3,    @
π
2
!3,      @
3π
2
O
O
2
O
(1, 0)
(1, π)
O
(1, 0)
!1,    @
π
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Chapter 8 Test  A57
29.  (a)  	
	
(b)  4!2, p
4     (c)  4!2acos p
4 i sin p
4 b
31.  (a) 
(b)  !34, tan1 3
5    (c)  !343cosAtan1 3
5B i sinAtan1 3
5B 4
33.  (a) 
(b)  !2, 3p
4     (c)  !2acos 3p
4 i sin 3p
4 b    
35.  8A1 i !3 B    37.   1
32 A1 i !3 B   
39.  2 !211 i2, 2!211 i2    
41.  1, 1
2 !3
2
 i,  1
2 !3
2
 i   
43.  (a)   
y
0
x
_2
2
_2
(b)  x  2y  y2
45.  (a) 
y
0
x
1
1
(b)  1x 12 2 1 y 12 2 1, 1  x  2, 0  y  1
Im
0
Re
1
i
4+4i
Im
0
Re
1
i
5+3i
Im
0
Re
1
i
_1
_1+i
47.  	
1.25
1.25
_1.25
_1.25
	
49.  x 1
2 11 cos u2, y 1
2 1sin u tan u2
Chapter 8 Test  ■  page 624
1.  (a)  A4!2,  4!2B    (b)  A4!3,  5p/6B, A4!3,  11p/6B
2.  (a)  circle     	
(b)  1x 42 2 y2 16
3.  limaçon    	
4.  (a) 
(b)  2acos p
3 i sin p
3 b    
(c)  512    5.  8, !3 i
6.  3i, 3a !3
2
1
2
 ib
O
8
_2
2
O
œ∑3i
1+
Im
0
Re
i
1
„‚
3
Im
0
Re
„¤
„⁄
_3i
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A58 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
7.  (a)
y
0
x
2
2
_2
(b) 
1x 32 2
9
y2
4 1, x 3
8.  x  3  t, y  5  2t
9.  (a)  3, (0, 3), clockwise, p    (b)  x  3 sin 4t, y  3 cos 4t
(c)  x2 1 y2  9    (d)  r  3
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 627
1.  y a
g
2√2
0 cos2 u bx2 1tan u2x
3.  (a)  62.26 s    (b)  15,500 ft    (c)  5426 ft   
(d) 
7.  No, u  23   
chapter 9
Section 9.1  ■  page 637
1.  (a)  A, B 
u
2u
u
v
u+v
(b)  12, 12, 14, 32, 82, 29, 83, 69, 84, 49, 81, 89
2.  (a)  "a2
1 a2
2, 2"2    (b)  8 0  w 0  cos u, 0  w 0  sin u9
3.  	
5. 
y
(feet)
x
(feet)
1000
5000
0
2
_2
y
0
x
2u
7
1
y
0
x
u+v
7.  	
9.  3, 3    11.  3, 1    13.  5, 7    15.  4, 3    17.  0, 2   
19.  	
21. 
23.  	
25. 
27.  i  4j    29.  3i   
31.  4, 14, 9, 3, 5, 8, 6, 17
33.  0, 2, 6, 0, 2, 1, 8, 3
35.  4i, 9i  6j, 5i  2j, 6i  8j
37.  !5, !13, 2!5, 1
2!13, !26, !10, !5 !13
39.  !101, 2!2, 2!101, !2, !73, !145, !101 2!2
41.  20!3 i 20j    43.   !2
2
  i !2
2
  j
45.  4 cos 10i  4 sin 10j  3.94i  0.69j
47.  5, 53.13    49.  13, 157.38    51.  2, 60    53.  15!3, 15
55.  2i  3j    57.  S 84.26° W    59.  (a)  40j    (b)  425i   
(c)  425i  40j    (d)  427 mi/h, N 84.6 E
61.  794 mi/h, N 26.6 W   
63.  (a)  10 i    (b)  10 i  10!3 j    (c)  20 i  10!3 j     
(d)  26.5 mi/h, N 49.1 E   
65.  (a)  22.8i  7.4j    (b)  7.4 mi/h, 22.8 mi/h
67.  (a)  5, 3    (b)  5, 3    69.  (a)  4j    (b)  4j
71.  (a)  7.57, 10.61    (b)  7.57, 10.61   
73.  T1  56.5i  67.4j, T2  56.5i  32.6j
Section 9.2  ■  page 646
1.  a1b1  a2b2; real number or scalar   
2. 
u # v
0  u 0 0  v 0 ; perpendicular
_2
7
y
0
x
v-2u
1
u
x
y
(6, 7)
(4, 3)
1
1
1
u
x
y
(8, 0)
(4, 3)
1
u
x
y
(2, 3)
u
(_3, 5)
u
1
1
1
u
u
u
x
y
(_3, 5)
u
(2, 3)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 9.6  A59
3.  (a)  u # v
0 v 0     (b)  a u # v
0  v 0 2 bv   
4.  F # D    5.  (a)  2    (b)  45    7.  (a)  13    (b)  56   
9.  (a)  1    (b)  97    11.  (a)  5!3    (b)  30   
13.  (a)  1    (b)  86°    15.  Yes    17.  No    19.  Yes   
21.  9    23.  5    25.   12
5     27.  24   
29.  (a)  1, 1    (b)  u1  1, 1, u2  3, 3
31.  (a)  8 1
2,  3
29    (b)  u1 8 1
2,  3
29, u2 83
2,  1
29
33.  (a)  8 18
5 ,  24
5 9    (b)  u1 8 18
5 ,  24
5 9, u2 828
5 ,  21
5 9
35.  28    37.  25    45.  16 ft-lb    47.  8660 ft-lb   
49.  (a)  2822 lb    (b)  2779 lb    51.  23.6   
Section 9.3  ■  page 652
1.  x, y, z; (5, 2, 3); y  2	
	
P
y
x
z
0
2.  "1x2 x12 2 1y2 y12 2 1z2 z12 2; 
!38; 1x 52 2 1y 22 2 1z 32 2 9
3.  (a)  	
5.  (a) 
	
(b)  !42	
(b)  2!29
7.  Plane parallel to the 	
9.  Plane parallel to the  
yz-plane	
     xy-plane
	
11.  1x 22 2 1y 52 2 1z 32 2 25
13.  1x 32 2 1y 12 2 z2 6
15.  Center: 15, 1, 42 , radius: !51
17.  Center: 16, 1, 02 , radius: !37
19.  (a)  Circle, center: 10, 2, 102 , radius: 3!11   
(b)  Circle, center: 14, 2, 102 , radius: 5!3    21.  (a)  3   
Section 9.4  ■  page 658
1.  unit, a1i  a2 j  a3k; 
"a2
1 a2
2 a3
2; 4i 122j k, 80, 7, 249
v
u
projv u
compv u
¨
y
0
Q(_1, 2, _5)
P(3, 1, 0)
x
z
Q(_12, 3, 0)  
P(_2, _1, 0)  
x
y
z
0
x
y
4
0
z
x
y
z
0
8
2. 
u # v
0  u 0 0  v 0 ; 0; 0, perpendicular    3.  81, 1, 59       
5.  86, 2, 09    7.  15, 4, 12     9.  11, 0, 12     11.  3   
13.  5!2    15.  82, 3, 29, 82, 11, 49, H6, 23, 19
2  I   
17.  i 2 k, i 2 j 2 k, 3 i 7
2 j k    19.  12i  2k   
21.  3i  3j    23.  (a)  83, 1, 29    (b)  3i  j  2k    25.  4   
27.  1    29.  Yes    31.  No    33.  116.4°    35.  100.9°   
37.    65°,   56°,   45°    39.    73°,   65°,  
  149°    41.  45°    43.  125°    47.  (a)  Parallel, v 5 2u   
(b)  Parallel, v  4
3 u    (c)  Not parallel   
49.  (a)  7i  24j  25k    (b)  25"2   
Section 9.5  ■  page 665
1.  †
i
j
k
a1
a2
a3
b1
b2
b3
†

1a2b3 a3b22  i 1a3b1 a1b32j 
     1a1b2 a2b12k, 3 i 2 j 3 k
2.  perpendicular; perpendicular    3.  9i  6j  3k   
5.  0    7.  4i  7j  3k   
9.  (a)  80, 2, 29    (b)  h0, !2
2 , !2
2 i    
11.  (a)  14i  7j    (b)  2!5
5  i !5
5  j
13.  3!3
2
    15.  100    17.  80, 2, 29    19.  810, 10, 09   
21.  4!6    23.  5!14
2
    25.  !14    27.  18!3   
29.  (a)  0    (b)  Yes    31.  (a)  55    (b)  No, 55     
33.  (a) 2    (b)  No, 2   
35.  (a)  2,700,000 !3    (b)  4677 liters   
Section 9.6  ■  page 669
1.  parametric; x x0 at, y y0 bt, z z0 ct
2.  a1x x02 b1y y02 c1z z02 0
3.  x 1 3t, y 2t, z 2 3t
5.  x 3, y 2 4t, z 1 2t
7.  x 1 2t, y 0, z 2 5t
9.  x 1 t, y 3 4t, z 2 3t
11.  x 1 t, y 1 t, z 2t
13.  x 3 4t, y 7 4t, z 5
15.  (a)  x y z 5    (b)  x-intercept 5, y-intercept 5,  
z-intercept 5
y
x
5
5
_5
0
z
17.  (a)  6x z 4    (b)  x-intercept 2
3, no y-intercept,  
z-intercept 4
y
x
z
2
3
0
_4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A60 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
19.  (a)  3x y 2z 8    (b)  x-intercept  8
3, y-intercept 8,  
z-intercept 4
y
x
z
0
_4
8
8
3
_
21.  5x 3y z 35    23.  x 3y 2   
25.  2x 3y 9z 0    27.  x 2t, y 5t, z 4 4t   
29.  x 2, y 1 t, z 5    31.  12x 4y 3z 12   
33.  4x 3y z 10   
Chapter 9 Review  ■  page 673
1.  "13, 86, 49, 810, 29, 84, 69, 822, 79
3.  "5, 3 i j, i 3 j, 4 i 2 j, 4 i 7 j
5.  83, 49    7.  4, 120°    9.  810, 10!39   
11.  (a)  10414.8 i 0.4 j2     (b)  4.8  104 lb, N 85.2° E   
13.  5, 25, 60    15.  2!2, 8, 0    17.  Yes    19.  No, 45°   
21.  (a)  17!37
37
    (b)  H102
37 ,  17
37I   
(c)  u1 H102
37 ,  17
37I, u2 H 9
37, 54
37I   
23.  (a)   14!97
97
    (b)   56
97  i 126
97   j   
(c)  u1  56
97  i 126
97   j, u2 153
97   i 68
97  j   
25.  3	
x
y
P(1, 0, 2)  
0
Q(3, _2, 3)  
z
	
27.  x2 y2 z2 36   
29.  Center: 11, 3, 22 , radius: 4   
31.  6, 86, 1, 39, 82, 5, 59, 81,  15
2 , 59
33.  (a)  1    (b) No, 92.8°    35.  (a)  0    (b)  Yes   
37.  (a)  82, 17, 59   
(b)  h !318
159 , 17!318
318
,  5!318
318
i    
39.  (a)  i  j  2k   
(b)  !6
6
  i !6
6
  j !6
3
  k   
41.  15
2     43.  9    45.  x 2 3t, y t, z 6   
47.  x 6 2t, y 2 3t, z 3 t
49.  2x 3y 5z 2    51.  x y 3z 5   
53.  x 2 2t, y 0, z 4t
Chapter 9 Test  ■  page 675
1.  (a)                                                (b)  6i  10j    (c)  2!34
1
u
x
y
(3, _1)
(_3, 9)
1
2.  (a)  819, 39    (b)  5!2    (c)  0    (d)  Yes
3.  (a)                                                  (b)  8, 150°   
1
u
x
y
(_4œ∑3, 4)
1
4.  (a)  14 i 6"3 j    (b)  17.4 mi/h, N 53.4° E   
5.  (a)  45°    (b)  !26
2
    (c)  5
2  i 1
2  j    6.  90   
7.  (a)  6    (b)  1x 42 2 1y 32 2 1z 12 2 36   
(c)  82, 4, 49 2 i 4 j 4 k    8.  (a)  11i  4j  k    (b)  !6  
(c)  1    (d)  3i  7j  5k    (e)  3!35    (f)  18    (g)  96°   
9.  h 7!6
18 , !6
9 ,  !6
18 i, h 7!6
18 ,  !6
9 , !6
18 i
10.  (a)  84, 3, 49    (b)  4x 3y 4z 4    (c)  !41
2
11.  x 2 2t, y 4 t, z 7 2t
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 678
1.  	
3. 
5.  	
7. 
x
y
0
x
y
0
x
y
0
x
y
z
0
x
y
z
0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.  	
11.  II    13.  I    15.  IV    17.  III   
19.  	
chapter 10
Section 10.1  ■  page 688
1.  x, y; equation; 12, 12     2.  substitution, elimination, 
graphical    3.  no, infinitely many    4.  infinitely many; 
1 t; 11, 02, 13, 42, 15, 42     5.  13, 22     7.  13, 12    
9.  12, 12     11.  13, 22     13.  12, 32    
15.  12, 22 	
17.  No solution
	
y
0
x
5
5
_5
_5
19.  Infinitely many solutions
y
0
x
2
2
21.  12, 22     23.  13, 12     25.  12, 12     27.  13, 52     29.  11, 32   
31.  16, 62     33.  110, 92     35.  12, 12     37.  No solution   
39.  Ax, 1
3 x 5
3B    41.  Ax, 3 3
2 xB    43.  13, 72    
45.  Ax, 5 5
6 xB    47.  15, 102     49.  No solution   
51.  13.87, 2.742     53.  161.00, 20.002     55.  a 
1
a 1, 
1
a 1 b   
57.  a
1
a b, 
1
a b b     59.  22, 12    61.  5 dimes, 9 quarters   
63.  200 gallons of regular gas, 80 gallons of premium gas   
x
y
z
0
x
y
z
0
_5
0
5
_5
(a)
(b)
(c)
x
y
x
0
1
1
y
(2, _2)
2x+y=2
x-y=4
65.  Plane’s speed 120 mi/h, wind speed 30 mi/h   
67.  200 g of A, 40 g of B    69.  25%, 10%    71.  $14,000 at 5%, 
$6,000 at 8%    73.  John 2 1
4 h, Mary 2 1
2 h    75.  25
Section 10.2  ■  page 696
1.  x  3z  1    2.  3; 4y  5z  4    3.  Linear   
5.  Nonlinear    7.  15, 1, 22     9.  14, 0, 32     11.  A5, 2,  1
2B   
13.  c 
3x y z 
4
y z 1
x 2y z 1
    	
15.  c 
2x y 3z 
5
2x 3y z 13
8y 8z 8
   
17.  12, 1, 32    19.  11, 1, 52    21.  11, 2, 12     23.  15, 0, 12    
25.  10, 1, 22     27.  A1
4, 1
2,  1
2B    29.  No solution   
31.  No solution    33.  13 t, 3 2t, t2    
35.  A2 2t,  2
3 4
3 t, tB    37.  11, 1, 1, 22    
39.  $30,000 in short-term, $30,000 in intermediate-term, 
$40,000 in long-term    41.  250 acres corn, 500 acres wheat, 
450 acres soybeans    43.  Impossible    45.  50 Midnight Mango, 
60 Tropical Torrent, 30 Pineapple Power    47.  1500 shares of A, 
1200 shares of B, 1000 shares of C   
Section 10.3  ■  page 709
1.  dependent, inconsistent
2.  C
1
1
1
1
1
0
2
3
0
2
1
3
S
3.  (a)  x and y    (b)  dependent    (c)  x 3 t, y 5 2t, z t
4.  (a)  x 2, y 1, z 3    (b)  x 2 t, y 1 t, z t     
(c)  No solution    5.  3  2    7.  2  1    9.  1  3   
11.  C
3
1
1
2
2
1
0
1
1
0
1
3
S    
13.  (a)  Yes    (b)  Yes    (c)  ex 3
y 5
15.  (a)  Yes    (b)  No    (c)  c
x 2y 8z 0
y 3z 2
0 0
   
17.  (a)  No    (b)  No    (c)  c 
x
0
0 0
y 5z 1
19.  (a)  Yes    (b)  Yes    (c)  d  
x 3y
„ 0
z 2„ 0
0 1
0 0
   
21.  C
1
1
2
0
0
4
7
4
1
2
1
1
S     23.  C
2
1
3
5
2
3
1
13
0
8
8
8
S    
25.  (a)  c 
x 2y 4z 3
y 2z 7
z 2
    (b)  11, 3, 22
27.  (a)  d  
x 2y 3z „ 7
y 2z
5
z 2„ 5
„ 3
    (b)  17, 3, 1, 32
Answers to Section 10.3  A61
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A62 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
29.  11, 1, 22     31.  11, 0, 12     33.  11, 0, 12     35.  11, 5, 02    
37.  110, 3, 22     39.  No solution    41.  12 3t, 3 5t, t2    
43.  No solution    45.  12t 5, t 2, t2    
47.  A 1
2 s t 6, s, tB    49.  12, 1, 32     51.  No solution   
53.  19, 2, 02     55.  15 t, 3 5t, t2     57.  10, 3, 0, 32    
59.  11, 0, 0, 12     61.  A1
3 s 2
3 t, 1
3 s 1
3 t, s, tB   
63.  A7
4 7
4 t,  7
4 3
4 t, 9
4 3
4 t, tB   
65.  x 1.25, y 0.25, z 0.75   
67.  x 1.2, y 3.4, z 5.2, „ 1.3   
69.  2 VitaMax, 1 Vitron, 2 VitaPlus    71.  5-mile run, 2-mile 
swim, 30-mile cycle    73.  Impossible   
Section 10.4  ■  page 720
1.  dimension    2.  (a)  columns, rows    (b)  (ii), (iii)    3.  (i), (ii)
4.  C
4
9
7
7
7
0
4
5
5
S     5.  No    7.  a 5, b 3   
9.  B1
3
1
5R     11.  C
3
6
12
3
3
0
S     13.  Impossible   
15.  B5
2
1
7
10
7R     17.  B1
 1
2
1
2R     19.  Impossible   
21.  C
0
5
25
20
10
10
S     23.  (a)  B5
2
5
1
1
0R     (b)  Impossible  
25.  (a)  B10
25
0
35R     (b)  Impossible   
27.  (a)  Impossible    (b)  314 144    
29.  (a)  B4
7
14
7R     (b)  B6
8
4
17R    
31.  (a)  C
5
3
10
6
1
0
5
2
2
S     (b)  C
1
8
1
S    
33.  (a)  B4
45
0
49R     (b)  B8
335
0
343R    
35.  (a)  B 13
7R     (b)  Impossible    37.  C
1.56
5.62
1.28
0.88
1.09
0.97
S    
39.  C
0.35
0.03
0.33
0.55
1.05
1.05
2.41
4.31
4.46
S     41.  Impossible     
43.  x 2, y 1    45.  x 1, y 2   
47.  B2
5
3
2R   B
 x
 yR B7
4R
49.  C
3
2
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
3
1
1
S   D
x1
x2
x3
x4
T C
0
5
4
S
51.  Only ACB is defined.  ACB B3
21
27
6
2
14
18
4R
53.  (a)  C
5
22
7
S
(b)  Five members have no postsecondary education, 22 have 1 to 
4 years, and seven have more than 4 years.
55.  (a)  C
353.75
656.25
892.50
S     (b)  $353.75    (c)  $1902.50
57.  (a)  C
$32,000
$18,000
$42,000
$26,800
$44,000
$26,800
S     (b)  $42,000    (c)  $71,600
59.  (a)  C
97.00
46.50
41.00
S  
(b)  C
70.00
33.50
48.50
S  
(c)  C
220
110
90
75
45
50
120
55
50
S  
(d)  C
167.00
80.00
89.50
S  
Section 10.5  ■  page 731
1.  (a)  identity    (b)  A, A    (c)  inverse
	
A	
X	
B
2.  (a)  B5
3
3
2R   B
 x
 yR B4
3R     (b)  B
2
3
3
5R
	
A1	
B	
(c)  B
2
3
3
5R   B4
3R B
 1
 3R     (d)  x 1, y 3   
7.  B
1
2
 3
2
7
2
R     9.  B
1
3
 1
2
2
2R     11.  B
3
5
2
3R    
13.  B 13
5
5
2R     15.  No inverse    17.  B
1
2
 1
2
2
3
 R    
19.  C
4
4
5
1
1
1
5
4
6
S     21.  No inverse   
23.  C
 9
2
1
4
3
1
3
7
2
1
3
S     25.  D
0
0
2
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
T    
27.  C
2
3
4
3
3
1
1
3
1
3
2
3
1
S     29.  D
2
3
1
2
0
1
0
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
0
T    
Amy’s stand sold $97 of produce on Saturday.
Beth’s stand sold $46.50.
Chad’s stand sold $41.
Amy’s stand sold $70 of produce on Sunday.
Beth’s stand sold $33.50.
Chad’s stand sold $48.50.
This represents the number of melons, 
squash, and tomatoes they sold during 
the weekend.
During the weekend Amy’s stand sold $167, 
Beth’s stand sold $80, and Chad’s stand sold 
$89.50 of produce.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 10.8  A63
Answers to Section 10.8  A63
31.  C
1
 7
2
1
6
0
1
2
 1
6
0
0
1
3
S     33.  D
1
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
1
4
0
0
0
0
1
7
T    
35.  C
 1
4
3
4
3
4
 7
16
 23
16
 3
16
7
8
 1
8
 5
8
S       37.  C
7
3
4
22
7
 2
7
16
7
50
7
26
7
37
7
S    
39.  x  12, y  8    41.  x  126, y  50   
43.  x  38, y  9, z  47    45.  x  20, y  10, z  16   
47.  x  3, y  2, z  1    49.  x  3, y  2, z  2   
51.  x  8, y  1, z  0, „  3   
53.  B 7
2
3
10
3
5R     55.  1
2a
  B
1
1
1
1R
   
57.  D
1
 1
x
 1
x
2
x2
T ; inverse does not exist for x  0
59.  1
2C
1
ex
0
ex
e2x
0
0
0
1
S ; inverse exists for all x
61.  (a)  C
0
1
1
2
3
2
0
1
 3
2
1
S     (b)  1 oz A, 1 oz B, 2 oz C
(c)  2 oz A, 0 oz B, 1 oz C    (d)  No   
63.  (a)  c 
 9x 11y 8z 740
13x 15y 16z 1204
 8x 7y 14z 828
(b)  C
9
11
8
13
15
16
8
7
14
S   C
x
y
z
S C
740
1204
828
S   
(c)  A1 C
7
4
 7
4
1
 27
28
31
28
 5
7
 29
56
25
56
 1
7
S
She earns $16 on a standard model, $28 on a deluxe model and  
$36 on a super-deluxe model.
Section 10.6  ■  page 742
1.  True    2.  True    3.  True    4.  (a)   2 # 4 132 # 1 11
(b)   
1(2  4  (3)  1)  0(3  4  0  1)  2(3  (3)  0  2)  7  
5.  6    7.  0    9.  4    11.  Does not exist    13.  1
8    15.  20, 20   
17.  12, 12    19.  0, 0    21.  4, has an ­inverse   
23.  5000, has an inverse    25.  0, does not have an inverse   
27.  4, has an inverse    29.  6, has an inverse   
31.  12, has an inverse    33.  0, does not have an inverse   
35.  18    37.  120    39.  (a)  2    (b)  2    (c)  Yes    41.  12, 52   
43.  10.6, 0.42     45.  14, 12     47.  14, 2, 12     49.  11, 3, 22    
51.  10, 1, 12     53.  A189
29 ,  108
29 , 88
29B    55.  A1
2, 1
4, 1
4, 1B   
57.  21    59.  63
2     61.  abcde    63.  0, 1, 2    65.  1, 1   
69.  (a)  0    (b)  (i) Yes, (ii) No   
71.  (a)  c 
75x 90y 60z 1318
75x 90y 60z 1380
75x 90y 60z 1180
(b)  8 apples, 6 peaches, 4 pears
73.  7 million ft2
Section 10.7  ■  page 750
1.  (iii)    2.  (ii)    3. 
A
x 1 
B
x 2   
5. 
A
x 2 
B
1x 22 2 
C
x 4   
7. 
A
x 3 Bx C
x2 4     9.  Ax B
x2 1 Cx D
x2 2    
11.  A
x 
B
2x 5 
C
12x 52 2 
D
12x 52 3

Ex F
x2 2x 5 
Gx H
1x2 2x 52 2
13. 
1
x 1 
1
x 1    15. 
1
x 1 
1
x 4   
17. 
2
x 3 
2
x 3    19. 
1
x 2 
1
x 2   
21. 
3
x 4 
2
x 2    23. 
 1
2
2x 1 
3
2
4x 3   
25. 
2
x 2 
3
x 2 
1
2 x 1    27. 
2
x 1 1
x 1
x2   
29. 
1
2x 3 
3
12x 32 2    31.  2
x 1
x3 
2
x 2   
33. 
4
x 2 
4
x 1 
2
1x 12 2 
1
1x 12 3
35. 
3
x 2 
1
1x 22 2 
1
1x 32 2    37.  x 1
x2 3 1
x   
39. 
2x 5
x2 x 2 
5
x2 1    41. 
1
x2 1 
x 2
1x2 12 2 1
x   
43.  x2 
3
x 2 x 1
x2 1    45.  A a b
2
, B a b
2
Section 10.8  ■  page 754
1.  14, 82, 12, 22     3.  14, 162, 13, 92     5.  12, 22, 12, 22    
7.  125, 52, 125, 52     9.  13, 42 13, 42    
11.  12, 12, 12, 12, 12, 12, 12, 12  
13.  11, !22, 11, !22, A1
2, "7
2B, A1
2, "7
2B   
15.  12, 42, A 5
2, 7
4B    17.  10, 02, 11, 12, 12, 42    
19.  14, 02     21.  12, 22     23.  16, 22, 12, 62    
25.  No solution    27.  1 !5, 22, 1 !5, 22, 1!5, 22, 1!5, 22   
29.  A3,  1
2B, A3,  1
2B    31.  A1
5, 1
3B    33.  12.00, 20.002, 18.00, 02   
35.  14.51, 2.172, 14.91, 0.972    
37.  11.23, 3.872, 10.35, 4.212    
39.  12.30, 0.702, 10.48, 1.192    41.  1 !10, 102    
43.  15, 82, 18, 52     45.  12 cm by 15 cm   
47.  15, 20    49.  1400.50, 200.252, 447.77 m    51.  112, 82
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A64 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
Section 10.9  ■  page 763
1. 2, 3; yes   
2.  equation; y x 1; test
Test point
Inequality y " x 1 1
Conclusion
10, 02
0 
? 0 1  ✓
Part of graph
10, 22
2 
? 0 1  ✕
Not part of graph
y
0
x
1
1
y=x+1
3. 2, 3; yes   
4. (a)	
(b)
x 
0 
1 
1 
y 
x+y=2
x-y=0
	
x 
0 
1 
1 
y 
x+y=2
x-y=0
(c)	
(d)
x 
0 
1 
1 
y 
x+y=2
x-y=0
	
x 
0 
1 
1 
y 
x+y=2
x-y=0
5.  11, 22, 11, 22     7.  11, 22, 11, 12    
9.  	
11. 
y=_2x
y
0
x
1
1
	
y=2
y
x
1
1
0
13.  	
15. 
x=2
y
x
1
1
0
	
y=x-3
y
x
1
1
0
17.  	
19. 
2x-y=_4
y
x
1
1
0
	
_x™+y=5
y
x
1
10
0
21.  	
23. 
x™+y™=9
y
x
1
1
0
	
25.  	
9
−9
6
−3
	
27.  y 1
2 x 1    29.  x2 y2 4
31.  	
33. 
y
0
x
3
3
x + y = 4
y = x
(2, 2)
	
y
0
x
3
(4, 3)
1
4
3
y =
y = 2x − 5
x + 2
Not bounded	
Not bounded
35.	
37.
	
y
0
x
1
1
3x + 5y = 15
, 2
3x + 2y = 9
(
)
5
3
Bounded	
Bounded
3
−12
10
−2
x 
0 1 
1 
(0, 5) 
(2, 4) 
(4, 0) 
y=_2x+8
y
y=_ x+5
1
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 10.9  A65
39.  	
41. 
	
y
0
x
1
1
y = 9 − x2
y = x + 3
(2, 5)
(−3, 0)
Bounded	
Bounded
43.  	
45. 
y
0
x
1
1
(−   2, −   2)
x2 + y2 = 4
x − y = 0
(   2,    2)
	
Bounded	
Bounded
47.  	
49. 
2x+y™=1
x™+y™=9
y
x
1
1
0
(_2, _   5)
(_2,    5)
	
y
x
2
2
x − y = 2
3x − y = 0
x + 2y = 14
(6, 4)
(−1, −3)
Bounded	
Not bounded
51.  	
53. 
y
0
x
1
1
x + y = 7
x = 5
(5, 2)
	
y
0
x
3
3
x + 1 = 0
x + 2y = 12
y = x + 1
10
3
13
3
,
(
)
13
2
−1,
(
)
Bounded	
Bounded
55.  	
57. 
	
Bounded	
Bounded
x
0 1 
1 
y 
(3, 0) 
(0, 9) 
y=9-x2
y
0
x
1
5
x2 − y = 0
2x2 + y = 12
(2, 4)
(−2, 4)
y
0
x
1
1
(2, 2)
x2 + y2 = 8
x = 2
(2   2, 0)
y
0
x
2
2
(0, 3)
,
(
)
−3   2
2
3   2
2
x + y = 0
x2 + y2 = 9
59.  	
61. 
y
x
2
2
(_1, _3)
(2, 6)
(6, 4)
	
y
x
2
2
(_8, _10)
(2, 10)
(12, 0)
0
Bounded	
Not bounded
63.  	
65. 
	
10
−4
13
−5
(11, 8)
(−1, 8)
Not bounded	
67.  	
10
−6
10
−4
(0.6, 3.4)
(6.4, −2.4)
	
69.  (a)  d  
x 
y 500
90x 50y 40,000
30x 80y 30,000
x 0,
y 0
	
      	
(b)  Yes    (c)  No
71.	 x  number of fiction books	
	
y  number of nonfiction  
books
	
c 
x y 100
20 y, x y
x 0, y 0
	
y
x
1
1
0
(0, 5)
(1, 2)
(3, 1)
(9, 0)
y
x
100
100
0
(375, 125)
(200, 300)
4000
9 , 0
(
)
(0, 375)
y
x
50
50
0
(50, 50)
(80, 20)
(20, 20)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A66 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
73.	 x  number of standard	
 
packages
	
y  number of deluxe  
packages
	
c  
1
4 x 5
8 y 80
3
4 x 3
8 y 90
x 0, y 0 
Chapter 10 Review  ■  page 770
1.  12,  12  	
y
0
x
1
1
	
3.  x any number	
5.  No solution  
y 2
7 x 4 
	
y
0
x
1
1
7.  13,  32, 12,  82     9.  A
 16 
7 ,   
 14 
3 B    11.  121.41,  15.932    
13.  111.94,  1.392, 112.07,  1.442
15.  (a)  2  3    (b)  Yes    (c)  No
(d)  ex 2y 5
y     3
17.  (a)  3  4    (b)  Yes    (c)  Yes
(d)  •
 x 8z     0
y 5z 1
0 
0
19.  (a)  3  4    (b)  No    (c)  No
(d)  •
y 3z 4
x y
7
x 2y z 2
21.  11,  1,  22     23.  No solution    25.  10, 1, 22     27.  No solution
29.  11,  0,  1,  22     31.  14t 1, t 1, t2      
33.  16 5t, 1
217 3t2, t2     35.  A 4
3 t 4
3,  5
3 t 2
3,  tB   
37.  1s 1,  2s t 1,  s,  t2     39.  No solution     
41.  11,  t 1,  t,  02     43.  $3000 at 6%, $6000 at 7%
45.  $2500 in bank A, $40,000 in bank B, $17,500 in bank C
47.  Impossible
y
0
x
50
(70, 100)
(0, 128)
(120, 0)
50
y
0
x
2
2
49.  £
4
18
4
0
2
2
§     51.  310
0
54     53.  c  7
2
10
1
 9
2
d
55.  c 30
22
2
9
1
4d     57.  £
 1
2
11
2
15
4
 3
2
 1
2
1
§     61.  1
3 c 1
3
5
2d    
63.  c
7
2
2
0
8d     65.  c
2
2
6
4
5
9d     67.  1, c
9
4
2
1d    
69.  0, no inverse    71.  1, £
3
2
3
2
1
2
8
6
9
§
73.  24, ≥
1
0
0
 1
4
0
1
2
0
 1
4
0
0
1
3
 1
4
0
0
0
1
4
¥     75.  165,  1542     77.  A 1
12,  1
12,  1
12B
79.  A1
5,  9
5B    81.  A 87
26,  21
26,  3
2B    83.  11    85. 
2
x 5 
1
x 3   
87.  4
x 
4
x 1 
2
1x 12 2    89.  1
x x 2
x2 1   
91.  12,  12     93.  A 1
2,   7
4B, 12,   22     95.  x  y2  4   
97.  	
99. 
	
y
0
x
1
1
x2 + y2 = 9
101.  	
103. 
	
105.  	
107. 
	
y
0
x
4
4
,
(
)
4
3
16
3
x + 2y = 12
y = x + 4
Bounded    	
Bounded
109.  x b c
2
, y a c
2
, z a b
2
    111.  2, 3   
y
0
x
1
1
3x + y = 6
y
0
x
1
1
y
0
x
1
1
y
0
x
2
2
,
(
)
3   2
2
3   2
2
,
(
)
3   2
2
3   2
2
x2 + y2 = 9
x + y = 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 11.1  A67
Chapter 10 Test  ■  page 773
1.  (a)  Linear    (b)  12,  32     2.  (a)  Nonlinear   
(b)  11,  22, A5
3,  0B
3.  10.55,  0.782, 10.43,  0.292, 12.12,  0.562
4.  Wind 60 km/h, airplane 300 km/h
5.  (a)  Row-echelon form    (b)  Reduced row-echelon form
(c)  Neither    6.  (a)  A5
2,  5
2,  0B    (b)  No solution
7.  A 3
5 2
5 t,  1
5 1
5 t,  tB
8.  Coffee $1.50, juice $1.75, donut $0.75
9.  (a)  Incompatible dimensions
(b)  Incompatible dimensions
(c)  £
6
10
3
2
3
9
§     (d)  £
36
58
0
3
18
28
§     (e)  c
2
 3
2
1
1d
(f)  B is not square    (g)  B is not square    (h)  3
10.  (a)  c 4
3
3
2d c x
yd c 10
30d     (b)  170, 902
11.  0  A 0 0, 0  B 0 2, B1 £
1
2
0
0
1
2
0
3
6
1
§
12.  15,  5,  42
13.  (a) 
1
x 1 
1
1x 12 2 
1
x 2    (b)   1
x x 2
x2 3
14.  (a)  	
(b) 
y
0
x
1
1
(2, 4)
2x + y = 8
x + 2y = 4
	
y
0
x
1
1
(_2, 1)
y = 2x + 5
x2 + y = 5
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 779
1.  198, 195   
3.  	
maximum 161
	
minimum 135
5.  3 tables, 34 chairs    7.  30 grapefruit crates, 30 orange crates   
9.  15 Pasadena to Santa Monica, 3 Pasadena to El Toro,  
0 Long Beach to Santa ­Monica, 16 Long Beach to El Toro     
11.  90 standard, 40 deluxe    13.  $7500 in municipal bonds, 
$2500 in bank certificates, $2000 in high-risk bonds     
15.  4 games, 32 educational, 0 utility
y
0
x
3
3
2x + y = 10
2x + 4y = 28
chapter 11
Section 11.1  ■  page 788
1.  focus, directrix    2.  F10, p2, y p, F10, 32, y 3
3.  F1  p, 02, x p, F13, 02, x 3
4.  (a)	
(b)
	
0 
1
3
Vertex (0, 0)
Focus (3, 0)
Directrix
x=_3
x 
y
5.  III    7.  II    9.  VI   
Order of answers for 11–23, part (a): focus; directrix;  
focal diameter
11.  (a)  F10, 22; y 2; 8	
13.  (a)  F16, 02; x 6; 24
(b)  	
(b) 
15.  (a)  F10, 22; y 2; 8	
17.  (a)  FA 1
8, 0B; x 1
8; 1
2
(b)  	
(b) 
19.  (a)  FA0, 5
4B; y  5
4; 5	
21.  (a)  F10, 32; y 3; 12
(b)  	
(b) 
0 
1 
1 
Focus (0, 3)
Vertex (0, 0)
Directrix
y=_3
x 
y
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
0
2
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
6
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A68 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
23.  (a)  FA 5
12, 0B; x 5
12; 5
3	
25. 
(b)  	
27.  	
29. 
1
_1
1
_3
	
4
_4
1
_2
31.  x2 24y    33.  y2 32x    35.  x2 3y    37.  y2 16x  
39.  x2  2
5 y    41.  y2  1
5 x    43.  y2 4x    45.  x2 40y  
47.  x2 24y    49.  x2 8y    51.  y2 16x   
53.  y2 3x    55.  x y2    57.  x2 4 !2 y   
59.  (a)  x2 4py, p 1
2, 1, 4, and 8   
(b)  The closer the directrix to the    
vertex, the steeper the parabola.
61.  (a)  y2  12x    (b)  8 !15 31 cm    63.  x2  600y   
Section 11.2  ■  page 796
1.  sum; foci
2.  1a, 02, 1a, 02; c "a2 b2; 
15, 02, 15, 02, 13, 02, 13, 02
3.  10, a2, 10, a2; c "a2 b2; 
10, 52, 10, 52, 10, 32, 10, 32
4.  (a)  	
(b) 
0 
1 
1 
Focus (3, 0)
Focus (_3, 0)
Vertex (_5, 0)
Vertex (5, 0)
x 
y
	
	
0 
1 
1 
Focus
(0, 3)
Focus
(0, _3)
Vertex (0, _5)
Vertex (0, 5)
x 
y
5.  II    7.  I   
1
_0.5
3
_3
y
x
2
_1
_2
0
3
_3
_1
p=8
p=4
p=1
p=1
2
Order of answers for 9–27 part (a): vertices; foci; eccentricity
9.  (a)  V15, 02; F14, 02; 4
5	
11. (a) V10, 92;
(b)  10, 6	
F10, 3!52; !5/3
	
(b)  18, 12
(c) 
	
(c) 
13. (a) V17, 02;	
15.  (a)  V10, 32;
F12!6, 02; 2!6/7	
FA0, !5 B; !5/3
(b)  14, 10	
(b)  6, 4
(c)  	
(c) 
17.  (a)  V14, 02;	
19.  (a)  V110, 02;
FA2!3, 0B; !3/2 	
F16, 02; 3
5
(b)  8, 4	
(b)  20, 16
(c)  	
(c) 
21.  (a)  V10, 32;	
23.  (a)  V10, 22;
F10, !62; !6/3	
F10, !22; !2/2
(b)  6, 2!3	
(b)  4, 2!2
(c)  	
(c) 
y
0
x
5
3
_5
_3
y
x
2
0
2
y
x
1
0
1
y
0
x
2
2
_2
_2
y
0
x
4
2
_4
_2
y
x
2
0
2
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
0
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 11.3  A69
25. (a) V11, 02;	
27.  (a)  V12, 02;
FA!3/2, 0B; !3/2	
FA!2, 0B; !2/2
(b)  2, 1	
(b)  4, 2!2
(c)  	
(c) 
29.  x2
25 y2
16 1    31.  x2
4 y2
8 1    33.  x2
256 y2
48 1   
35.  	
37. 
5
6
_6
_5
	
7
7
_7
_7
39.  x2
25 y2
9 1    41.  x2
4 y2
3 1    43.  x2
39 y2
49 1   
45.  x2 y2
4 1    47.  x2
9 y2
13 1    49.  x2
100 y2
91 1   
51.  x2
25 y2
5 1    53.  x2
32 y2
36 1    55.  x2 y2
4 1     
57.  10, 22  	
59.  11, 02
	
y
0
x
1
1
_1
61.  (a)  x2  y2  4
65. 
x2
2.2500 1016 
y2
2.2491 1016 1
67. 
x2
1,455,642 
y2
1,451,610 1    69.  5 !39/2 15.6 in.
Section 11.3  ■  page 805
1.  difference; foci
2.  horizontal; 
1a, 02, 1a, 02; "a2 b2; 14, 02, 14, 02, 15, 02, 15, 02  
3.  vertical; 
10, a2, 10, a2; "a2 b2; 10, 42, 10, 42, 10, 52, 10, 52  
y
0
x
1
1
_1
_1
y
x
1
−1
0
2
−2
y
0
x
3
2
_3
_2
4.  (a)	
           (b)
	
       
Focus
(0, _5)
Vertex
(0, 4)
4
3
y=_
x
Vertex
(0, _4)
Focus
(0, 5)
4
3
y= x
0
1
1
x
y
5.  III    7.  II   
Order of answers for 9–25, part (a): vertices; foci; asymptotes
9.  (a)  V12, 02;	
11. (a) V10, 62;
FA2!5, 0B; y 2x	
FA0,  2!10 B; y  3 x
(b)  4	
(b)  12
(c)  	
(c)
13.  (a)  V10, 12;	
15.  (a)  V11, 02; FA!2, 0B;
FA0,  !26 B; y  1
5 x	
y x
(b)  2	
(b)  2
(c)  	
(c) 
17.  (a) V12, 02; 	
19.  (a)  V10, 62;
FA!13, 0B; y  3
2 x	
F10, 2!132; y  3
2 x
(b)  4	
(b)  12
(c)  	
(c) 
Focus (_5, 0)
Asymptote
Asymptote
3 
4 
Focus (5, 0)
y=_ x 
Vertex (_4, 0)
Vertex (4, 0)
3 
4 
y= x 
0 
1 
1 
x 
y
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_3
y
x
1
4
y
x
5
2
_5
_2
y
x
3
3
_3
_3
y
x
5
−5
5
−5
y
x
4
4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A70 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
21. (a) VA2!2, 0B;	
23.  (a)  V10, 22;
F1!10, 0B; y  1
2 x	
F10, 2!22; y x
(b)  4!2	
(b)  4
(c)  	
(c) 
25.  (a)  VA0,  1
2B;	
FA0, !5/2B; y  1
2 x	
(b)  1	
(c)  	
27.  x2
4 y2
12 1    29.  y2
16 x2
16 1    31.  y2
9 x2 1   
33.  	
35. 
8
_8
8
_8
	
8
_8
8
_8
37.  x2
9 y2
16 1    39.  y2 x2
3 1    41.  x2 y2
25 1   
43.  y2
36 x2
20 1    45.  x2
16 y2
16 1    47.  y2
8 x2 1   
49.  x2
9 y2
16 1    51.  (b)  x2  y2  c2/2   
55.  (b) 
	
    As k increases, the 
­asymptotes get  
steeper.
57.  x2 y2 2.3 1019
Section 11.4  ■  page 813
1.  (a)  right; left    (b)  upward; downward
y
x
5
5
_5
_5
y
x
5
−5
5
−5
y
x
3
2
_3
_2
10
5
_5
0
k=12
k=8
k=4
k=1
2.  	
3. 
	
4. 
Focus
(_2, 1)
Focus
(8, 1)
0 
1 
1 
Vertex (_1, 1)
Vertex (7, 1)
x 
y 
Asymptote
Asymptote
3 
4 
y=_ x+ 13 
4 
x- 5 
4 
3 
4 
y=
5.  (a)  C12, 12; V111, 12, 	
7.  (a)  C10, 52; V110, 102,
V215, 12; F12 !5, 12 	
V210, 02; F110, 92, F210, 12  
(b) 6, 4	
(b) 10, 6
(c) 	
(c) 
0 
1 
1 
Focus (0, 3)
Vertex (0, 0)
Directrix
y=_3
x 
y
0 
1 
1 
Focus (3, 4)
Vertex (3, 1)
Directrix
y=_2
x 
y
0 
1 
1 
Focus (3, 0)
Focus (_3, 0)
Vertex (_5, 0)
Vertex (5, 0)
x 
y
0 
1 
1 
Focus (6, 1)
Focus (0, 1)
Vertex (_2, 1)
Vertex (8, 1)
x 
y
Focus (_5, 0)
Focus (5, 0)
Vertex (_4, 0)
Vertex (4, 0)
Asymptote
Asymptote
3 
4 
y=_ x 
3 
4 
y= x 
0 
1 
1 
x 
y
y
x
1
1
y
x
3
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 11.4  A71
9.  (a)  C15, 12; V119, 12 ,	
11.  (a)  C10, 12; V15, 12;
V211, 12; F15 2!3, 12 	
F1!21, 12  
(b)  8, 4	
(b) 10, 4 
(c) 	
(c) 
13.  (a)  V13, 12; F13, 12;	
15.  (a)  V12, 52; FA1
2, 5B; 
directrix y 3	
directrix x 7
2
(b) 	
(b) 
17.  (a)  V11, 02; FA1, 1
8B; 	
19.  (a)  V12, 32; F15, 32;
directrix y  1
8	
directrix x 1
(b) 	
(b) 
21.  (a)  C11, 32; V114, 32,	
23.  (a)  C11, 02; V11, 12;
V212, 32; F116, 32, F214, 32;	
F11, !52; asymptotes
asymptotes y 4
3 x 13
3  and	
y 1
2 x 1
2 and y  1
2 x 1
2
y  4
3 x 5
3
(b) 	
(b) 
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
5
0
1
y
x
2
0
1
y
x
1
1
y
x
1
1
y
x
1
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
2
25.  (a)  C11, 12;	
27.  (a)  C11, 42; V111, 22,
V114, 12, V212, 12;	
V211, 102; F11, 4 2!102;
F11 !13, 12; asymptotes	 asymptotes y 3x 7 and
y 2
3 x 1
3 and y  2
3 x 5
3	
y 3x 1
(b) 	
(b) 
29.  x2  1
4 1y 42     31. 
1x 52 2
25
y2
16 1   
33.  1 y 12 2 x 2 1    35. 
1x 22 2
100

1y 32 2
64
1   
37. 
1y 42 2
49

1x 12 2
32
1    39.  1x 32 2 121y 52    
41.  y2
16 
1x 12 2
9
1    43. 
1x 32 2
29

1y 42 2
25
1   
45.  1y 22 2 1
7 1x 12    
47.  Parabola; 	
49.  Hyperbola; C11, 22;
V14, 42; F13, 42; 	
F11 !30, 22; V114, 22,
directrix x 5	
V216, 22; asymptotes
	
y  !5
5
 1x 12 2
y
x
5
0
5
	
y
x
2
0
2
51.  Ellipse; C13, 52;	
53.  Hyperbola; C13, 02;
FA3 !21, 5B;	
F13, 52;V13, 42 ; 
V112, 52, V218, 52 ; 	
asymptotes y  4
3 1x 32
major axis 10, 	
minor axis 4 	
	
y
0
x
1
1
y
x
1
1
y
1
4
x
y
0
x
3
_5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A72 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
55.  Degenerate conic 	
57.  Point 11, 32  
(pair of lines), 	
y  1
2 1x 42  	
	
y
0
x
1
1
(1, 3 )
59.  	
61. 
3
4
_2
_9
	
8
_12
6
_2
63.  (a)  F 17    (b)  F 17    (c)  F 17
65.  (a) 
(c)  The parabolas become narrower.
67. 
1x 1502 2
18,062,500 
y2
18,040,000 1
Section 11.5  ■  page 823
1.  x  X cos f  Y sin f, y  X sin f  Y cos f,  
X  x cos f  y sin f, Y  x sin f  y cos f
2.  (a)  conic section    (b)  1A C2/B    (c)  B2  4AC,  
parabola, ellipse, hyperbola    3.  A !2,  0B    5.  A0,  2 !3 B   
7.  11.6383,  1.14722     9.  X 2 !3 XY 2 0
11.  7Y 2 48XY 7X 2 40X 30Y 0    13.  X 2 Y 2 2
15.  (a)  Hyberbola   
(b)  X 2 Y 2 16
(c)  f  45   
y
0
x
4
4
6
6
_6
_6
p=1
p=
p=2
p=-2
p=-
p=-1
1
2
p=
3
2
1
2
3
2
p=-
y
Y
0
x
X
6
6
_6
_6
17.  (a)  Hyberbola    	
19.  (a)  Hyberbola 
(b)  Y 2 X 2 1
	
(b)  X 2
4 Y 2 1
(c)  f  30 
	
(c)  f  53
y
0
x
Y
X
5
5
_5
_5
	
y
x
Y
X
4
4
_4
_4
21.  (a)  Hyberbola	
23.  (a)  Parabola   
(b)  3X 2 Y 2 2 !3	
(b)  Y !2 X 2
(c)  f  30 	
(c)  f  45 
y
x
Y
X
6
6
_6
_6
	
25.  (a)  Hyberbola	
27.  (a)  Ellipse   
(b)  1X 12 2 3Y 2 1
	
(b)  X 2 
1Y 12 2
4
1
(c)  f  60 
	
(c)  f  53
29.  (a)  Parabola	
31.  (a)  Hyperbola   
(b)  	
(b)  	
33.  (a)  1X 52 2 Y 2 1     
(b)  XY-coordinates: C15,  02; V116,  02, V214,  02; FA5 !2,  0B; 
xy-coordinates: 
C14,  32; V1A24
5 ,  18
5 B, V2A16
5 ,  12
5 B; F1A4 4
5 !2,  3 3
5 !2B,
F2A4 4
5 !2,  3 3
5 !2B
(c)  Y 1X 52; 7x y 25 0, x 7y 25 0
35.  X  x cos f  y sin f; Y  x sin f  y cos f
Section 11.6  ■  page 829
1.  focus, directrix; distance from P to F
distance from P to , , conic section; parabola, 
ellipse, hyperbola, eccentricity   
y
x
Y
X
6
6
_6
y
x
Y
X
1
1
y
x
Y
X
6
6
_6
_6
6
_4
6
_2
10
_15
15
_10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2. 
ed
1 e cos u, 
ed
1 e sin u    3.  r 6/13 2 cos u2    
5.  r 2/11 sin u2     7.  r 20/11 4 cos u2
9.  r 10/11 sin u2     11.  II    13.  VI    15.  IV   
17.  (a), (b)	
19.  (a), (b)
	
21.  (a), (b)	
23.  (a), (b)
1
O
, π @
V⁄(4,0)
x=_4
V¤ ! 4
3
	
(c)  CA4
3, 0B, major axis: 16
3 , 	
(c)  CA36
7 , 3p
2 B, major axis: 96
7 , 
minor axis: 8 !3
3 	
minor axis: 24 !7
7
25.  (a), (b)	
27.  (a), (b)
2
O
, 0
V⁄ !
 @
8
3
V2 (_8, π)
x=4
	
(c)  A16
3 , 0B	
(c)  A12, 3p
2 B
29.  (a)  3, hyperbola	
31.  (a)  1, parabola
(b)  	
(b) 
33.  (a)  1
2, ellipse    	
35.  (a)  5
2, hyperbola
(b)  	
(b) 
4
y=_4
2,
V !
 @
3π
2
O
1
O
, 0
V !
 @
5
6
x=
5
3
2
O
y=4
3π
2
,
V⁄ !
 @
12
7
π
2
12,
V¤ !
 @
5
y=_ 20
3
_20,
V¤ !
 @
π
2
4,
V⁄ !
 @
3π
2
O
(_2,π)
(1,0)
O
(1,π)
!2,
@
3π
2
!2,
@
π
2
(3, 0)
O
!2,    @
π
 2
!6,      @
3π
 2
O
7
3
!_   ,    @
π
2
!1,      @
3π
2
37.  (a)  eccentricity 3
4,      	
39.  (a)  eccentricity 1,  
directrix x  1
3	
directrix y  2
(b)  r 
1
4 3 cosAu p
3B 	
(b)  r 
2
1 sinAu p
4B
(c)  	
(c) 
41.  The ellipse is nearly circular 	
      
when e is close to 0 and becomes  
more elongated as e → 1. At e  1  
the curve becomes a parabola. 
43.  (b)  r 11.49 1082/11 0.017 cos u2     45.  0.25
Chapter 11 Review  ■  page 833
1.  (a) V10,  02; F11,  02;	
3.  (a) V10, 02; F10, 22;
directrix x 1	
directrix y 2
(b)  	
(b)
5.  (a) V10,  02; F10,  22;	
7.  (a) V12, 22; F11, 22; 
directrix y 2	
directrix x 3
(b)  	
(b)
9.  (a)  V10, 32; FA 1
2, 3B; 	
11.  (a) V12,  32;  
directrix x 1
2	
F12,  22; directrix y 4
(b)  	
(b)
1
0.5
_0.5
1.25
3
8
_9
3
e=0.4
e=1.0
e=0.8
e=0.6
y
x
1
0
2
y
x
1
1
0
y
x
4
0
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
1
0
1
y
x
2
0
1
Answers to Chapter 11 Review  A73
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A74 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
13.  (a)  C10,  02; V10,  652;	
15.  (a)  C10, 02; V167, 02;
F10,  642 	
F163!5, 02
(b)  10, 6	
(b) 14, 4
(c)  	
(c)
17.  (a)  C10,  02; V164,  02;	
19.  (a)  C13,  02; V13,  6 42;
FA62!3,  0B	
FA3,  6 !7B 
(b)  8, 4	
(b)  8, 6
(c)  	
(c)
21.  (a)  C12, 232; V112, 292,	
23.  (a)  C10,  22; V163,  22;
V212, 32; F12, 23 6 3!32 	
FA6!5,  2B 
(b)  12, 6	
(b)  6, 4
(c)  	
(c)
25.  (a)  C10,  02; V10,  642;	
27.  (a)  C10, 02; V162, 02;
F10,  652; asymptotes 	
F16!53, 02; asymptotes 
y 6 4
3 x	
y 6 7
2 x
(b)  	
(b) 
y
0
x
2
_2
_2
2
y
x
2
0
4
y
0
x
4
1
_4
y
x
1
_4
4
y
x
1
0
2
3
_3
y
0
x
1
y
x
2
2
y
x
1
6
29.  (a)  C10,  02; V164,  02;	
31.  (a)  C124,  02; V1128,  02,
FA62!6,  0B; asymptotes	
V210,  02; FA24 6 4!2,  0B;
y 6 1
!2
 x
	
asymptotes y 61x 1 42
(b) 	
(b)
33.  (a)  C121, 32; V1121, 12 ,	
35.  (a)  C123,  212;
V2121, 52; F121, 3 6 2!102;	 VA23,  21 6 !2 B;
asymptotes y 1
3 x 1 10
3  and	
FA23,  21 6 2!5 B;
y 2 1
3 x 1 8
3	
asymptotes y 1
3 x,
	
y 2 1
3 x 2 2
(b)  	
(b)
37.  y2  8x    39.  y2
16 2 x2
9 1    41. 
1x 2 42 2
16
1
1 y 2 22 2
4
1
43.  Parabola; V10, 12;	
45.  Hyperbola; C10, 02;
F10, 222; directrix y 4	
F10, 612!22; V10, 6122 ;
	
asymptotes y 6x
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_3
	
47.  Ellipse;  C11, 42 ;	
49.  Parabola; V1264, 82 ;
F11, 4 6 !15 2;	
FA2 255
4 , 8B; directrix x 2 257
4
V11, 4 6 2!5 2 	
y
0
x
3
_3
3
	
y
0
x
5
_60
_5
y
0
x
3
3
_3
_3
y
0
x
1
1
4
_4
y
x
2
0
6
y
0
x
3
2
_3
_2
y
0
x
18
18
_18
_18
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

51.  Ellipse; C13, 32 ;
F a3, 3 !2
2 b; 
V113, 42, V213, 22
y
0
x
3
_3
53.  Has no graph
55.  x2  4y    57.  x2
4 y2
25 1   
59.  x2
9 
1y 42 2
25
1   
61. 
1x 12 2
3

1 y 22 2
4
1
63. 
41x 72 2
225

1 y 22 2
100
1
65.  (a)  91,419,000 mi    (b)  94,581,000 mi   
67.  (a) 
10
10
_10
_10
k=8
k=4
k=1
k=2
69.  (a)  Hyperbola    (b)  3X 2  Y 2  1   
(c)  f  45   
71.  (a)  Ellipse    	
(b)  1X 12 2 4Y 2 1   
(c)  f  30  	
y
x
1
1
X
Y
	
y
x
2
2
_2
_2
X
Y
73.  Ellipse  	
75.  Parabola
_5
5
5
_5
	
20
15
_15
_10
77.  (a)  e  1, parabola    	
(b) 
79.  (a)  e  2, hyperbola    	
(b)  	
Chapter 11 Test  ■  page 835
1.  F10,  32, y 3  	
2.  V14,  02; FA2!3,  0B; 8, 4 
	
y
0
x
4
2
_4
_2
3.  V10,  32; F10,  52; y  3
4 x	
4.  y2  16x    5.  x2
16 y2
7 1    6.  y2
9 x2
16 1   
7.  y2  x    8.  x2
16 
1 y 32 2
9
1    9.  1x 22 2 y2
3 1
O
!   , π@
1
2
1
O
1
!_4,      @
3π
2
!   ,    @
π
2
4
3
y
0
x
4
2
_4
_2
y
0
x
8
8
_8
_8
Answers to Chapter 11 Test  A75
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A76 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
10.    Ellipse; CA3,  1
2B;	
11.  Hyperbola; C12, 42,
FA3 !5,  1
2B; V1A0,  1
2B,	
F12 !17, 42,
V2A6,  1
2B	
V12 2!2, 42,  asymptotes
	
y 4  3!2
4
 1x 22
	
y
0
x
_2
4
12.    Parabola; V14, 42;	
FA7
2, 4B; directrix x 9
2
13. 
1x 22 2
7
y2
16 1    14.  1x 22 2 81y 22     15.  3
4 in.  
16.  (a)  Ellipse    (b)  X 2
3 Y 2
18 1
(c)  f  27   
(d)  A3 "2/5,  6 "2/5B, A3 "2/5,  6 "2/5B
17.  (a)  r 
1
1 0.5 cos u	
(b)  Ellipse
1
1
O
	
2
2
, π
!
 @
3
2
, 0
!
 @
3
2
1,
!
 @
3π
2
3,
!
 @
π
2
O
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 838
5.  (c)  x2 mx 1ma a22 0,  
discriminant m2 4ma 4a2 1m 2a2 2,  m 2a
y
0
x
6
3
_3
y
0
x
4
2
_4
_4
y
x
2
2
_2
_2
X
Y
chapter 12
SECTION 12.1  ■  page 850
1.  the natural numbers    2.  n; 12 22 32 42 30
3.  2, 1, 0, 1; 97    5.  1
3, 1
5, 1
7, 1
9; 1
201    7.  5, 25, 125, 625; 5100   
9.  1, 1
4,  1
9, 1
16; 
1
10,000    11.  0, 2, 0, 2; 2   
13.  1, 4, 27, 256; 100100    15.  4, 14, 34, 74, 154   
17.  1, 3, 7, 15, 31    19.  1, 2, 3, 5, 8
21.  (a)  7, 11, 15, 19, 23, 27, 	
23.  (a)  12, 6, 4, 3, 12
5 , 2, 12
7 , 3
2,  
31, 35, 39, 43	
4
3, 6
5
(b)  	
(b) 
25.  (a)  2, 1
2, 2, 1
2, 2, 1
2, 2, 1
2, 2, 1
2
(b)  	
27.  2n    29.  2n    31.  5n  7    33.  an 112 n1
 5n   
35.  12n 12/n2    37.  1 112 n    39.  1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36
41.  1
3, 4
9, 13
27, 40
81, 121
243, 364
729    43.  2
3, 8
9, 26
27, 80
81; Sn 1 1
3n
45.  1 !2, 1 !3, 1, 1 !5; Sn 1 !n 1
47.  10    49.  11
6     51.  8    53.  31    55.  385    57.  46,438   
59.  22    61.  13  23  33  43
63.  !4 !5 !6 !7 !8 !9 !10
65.  x 3  x 4  . . .  x 100    67.  a
25
k1
2k    69.  a
10
k1
k2   
71.  a
999
k1
1
k1k 12     73.  a
100
k0
xk    75.  212n12/2n
77.  (a)  2004.00, 2008.01, 2012.02, 2016.05, 2020.08, 2024.12
(b)  $2149.16    79.  (a)  35,700, 36,414, 37,142, 37,885, 38,643  
(b)  42,665    81.  (b)  6898    83.  (a)  Sn Sn1 2000   
(b)  $38,000
Section 12.2  ■  page 856
1.  difference    2.  common difference; 2, 5    3.  True    4.  True
5.  (a)  7, 10, 13, 16, 19    	
7.  (a)  6, 10, 14, 18, 22
(b)  3	
(b)  4
(c)  	
(c) 
45
11
0
14
11
0
3
11
0
1
n
an
0
5
1
n
an
0
_10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 12.5  A77
9.  (a)  5
2, 3
2, 1
2, 1
2,  3
2
(b)  1
(c) 
1
1
n
an
0
_1
11.  an 9 41n 12, a10 45
13.  an 0.7 0.21n 12, a10 2.5
15.  an 5
2 1
2 1n 12, a10 2    17.  Yes, 6    19.  No   
21.  No    23.  Yes,  3
2    25.  Yes, 1.7   
27.  11, 18, 25, 32, 39; 7; an 11 71n 12
29.  1
3, 1
5, 1
7, 1
9, 1
11; not arithmetic
31.  4, 2, 8, 14, 20; 6; an 4 61n 12
33.  6, a5 28, an 4 61n 12, a100 598
35.  18, a5 43, an 29 181n 12, a100 1753
37.  5, a5 24, an 4 51n 12, a100 499
39.  4, a5 4, an 12 41n 12, a100 384
41.  1.5, a5 31, an 25 1.51n 12, a100 173.5
43.  s, a5 2 4s, an 2 1n 12s, a100 2 99s
45.  706, 712    47.  a1  5
12, an  5
12 1
12 1n 12
49.  33rd    51.  1010    53.  870    55.  1090    57.  20,301   
59.  1735    61.  832.3    63.  46.75    65.  50    69.  Yes   
71.  $1250    73.  $403,500    75.  20    77.  78
Section 12.3  ■  page 864
1.  ratio    2.  common ratio; 2, 5    3.  True    4.  (a)  a a 1 r n
1 r b
  
(b)  geometric; converges, a/11 r2 ; diverges
5.  (a)  7, 21, 63, 189, 567   
(b)  3
(c) 
7.  (a)  5
2,  5
4, 5
8,  5
16, 5
32 
(b)   1
2
(c) 
9.  an 7142 n1, a4 448    11.  an 5
2 A 1
2B
n1, a4  5
16   
13.  Yes, 2    15.  Yes, 1
2    17.  Yes, 1
2    19.  No    21.  Yes, 1.1   
23.  6, 18, 54, 162, 486; geometric, common ratio 3; an  6  3n1  
25.  1
4, 1
16, 1
64, 1
256, 1
1024; geometric, common ratio 1
4; an 1
4 A1
4B
n1   
27.  0, ln 5, 2 ln 5, 3 ln 5, 4 ln 5; not geometric   
1
n
an
0
100
1
1
n
an
0
_1
29.  3, a5  162, an  2  3n1   
31.  0.3, a5 0.00243, an 10.32 10.32 n1   
33.   1
12, a5 
1
144, an 144 A 1
12B
n1
35.  32/3, a5 311/3, an 312n12/3   
37.  s2/7, a5 s8/7, an s21n12/7    39.  24
25   
41.  a1  1
27, a2 1
9    43.  a1  9
32, an  9
32  A8B
n1   
45.  a1 1728, a2 1296, a3 972    47.  Ninth    49.  315   
51.  441    53.  3280    55.  645    57.  13,888,888.75   
59.  93
16    61.  2105    63.  211
27     65.  3
2    67.  3
4   
69.  divergent    71.  2    73.  divergent    75.  !2 1   
77.  7
9    79.  1
33    81.  112
999    83.  10, 20, 40    85.  (a)  Neither   
(b)  Arithmetic, 3    (c)  Geometric, 9!3    (d)  Arithmetic, 3   
87.  (a)  Vn 160,00010.802 n1    (b)  4th year    89.  19 ft, 80 A3
4B
n 
91.  64
25, 1024
625 , 5 A4
5B
n    93.  (a)  17 8
9 ft    (b)  18 A1
3B
n3   
95.  2801    97.  3 m    99.  (a)  2    (b)  8 4 !2    101.  1
Section 12.4  ■  page 871
1.  amount    2.  present value    3.  $13,180.79   
5.  $360,262.21    7.  $5,591.79    9.  $572.34   
11.  $13,007.94    13.  $2,601.59    15.  $307.24   
17.  $733.76, $264,153.60    19.  $583,770.65    21.  $9020.60   
23.  (a)  $859.15    (b)  $309,294.00    (c)  $1,841,519.29   
25.  18.16%    27.  11.68%   
Section 12.5  ■  page 878
1.  natural; P(1)    2.  (ii)   
3.  Let P1n2 denote the statement 2 4 . . . 2n n1n 12.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 2 111 12 .
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
2 4 . . . 2k 21k 12
 
  k1k 12 21k 12         Induction 
hypothesis
 
  1k 12 1k 22
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathe­matical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
5.  Let P1n2  denote the statement
5 8 . . . 13n 22 
n13n 72
2
.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 5 
113 # 1 72
2
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
5 8 . . . 13k 22 331k 12 24
 
  
k13k 72
2
13k 52         Induction  
hypothesis
    3k 2 13k 10
2
 
  
1k 12 331k 12 74
2
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A78 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
7.  Let P1n2  denote the statement
1 # 2 2 # 3 . . . n1n 12 
n1n 12 1n 22
3
.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 1 # 2 
1 # 11 12 # 11 22
3
.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
1 # 2 2 # 3 . . . k1k 12 1k 12 1k 22
 
  
k1k 12 1k 22
3
1k 12 1k 22         Induction  
hypothesis
 
  
1k 12 1k 22 1k 32
3
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
9.  Let P1n2  denote the statement
13 23 . . . n3 
n21n 12 2
4
.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 13 
12 # 11 12 2
4
.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
13 23 . . . k 3 1k 12 3
      
k 21k 12 2
4
1k 12 3        Induction  
hypothesis
      
1k 12 23k 2 41k 12 4
4
      
1k 12 21k 22 2
4
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
11.  Let P1n2  denote the statement
23 43 . . . 12n2 3 2n21n 12 2.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 23 2 # 1211 12 2.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
23 43 . . . 12k2 3 321k 12 4 3
 
  2k 21k 12 2 321k 12 4 3        Induction hypothesis
 
  1k 12 212k 2 8k 82
 
  21k 12 21k 22 2
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
13.  Let P1n2  denote the statement
1 # 2 2 # 22 . . . n # 2n 231 1n 122n4 .
Step 1 P112  is true, since 1 # 2 231 04 .
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
1 # 2 2 # 22 . . . k # 2k 1k 12 # 2k1
 
  231 1k 122k4 1k 12 # 2k1        Induction 
hypothesis
 
  2 1k 122k1 1k 12 # 2k1
 
  2 2k2k1 211 k2k12
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
15.  Let P1n2  denote the statement n2  n is divisible by 2.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 12  1 is divisible by 2.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Now
 1k 12 2 1k 12 k2 2k 1 k 1
  1k2 k2 21k 12
But k 2  k is divisible by 2 (by the induction hypothesis), and 
21k 12  is clearly divisible by 2, so 1k 12 2 1k 12  is 
divisible by 2. So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Prin-
ciple of Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
17.  Let P1n2  denote the statement n2  n  41 is odd.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 12  1  41 is odd.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Now
1k 12 2 1k 12 41 1k2 k 412 2k
But k2  k  41 is odd (by the induction hypothesis), and 2k is 
clearly even, so their sum is odd. So P1k 12  follows from 
P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of Mathematical Induction P1n2  
holds for all n.
19.  Let P1n2  denote the statement 8n  3n is divisible by 5.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 81  31 is divisible by 5.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Now
8k1 3k1 8 # 8k 3 # 3k
 8 # 8k 18 52 # 3k 8 # 18k 3k2 5 # 3k
which is divisible by 5 because 8k  3k is divisible by 5 (by the 
induction hypothesis) and 5  3k is clearly divisible by 5. So 
P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of Mathemat-
ical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
21.  Let P1n2  denote the statement n  2n.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 1  21.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
 k 1 2k 1
        Induction hypothesis
 2k 2k
        Because 1  2k
 2 # 2k 2k1
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
23.  Let P1n2  denote the statement 11 x2 n 1 nx for  
x  1.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 11 x2 1 1 1 # x.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
11 x2 k1 11 x2 11 x2 k
 
11 x2 11 kx2         Induction hypothesis
 
1 1k 12x kx2
 
1 1k 12x
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25.  Let P1n2  denote the statement an  5  3n1.
Step 1 P112  is true, since a1  5  30  5.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
ak1 3 # ak
        Deﬁnition of ak11
 3 # 5 # 3k1        Induction hypothesis
 5 # 3k
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
27.  Let P1n2  denote the statement x  y is a factor of x n  y n.
Step 1 P112  is true, since x  y is a factor of x 1  y 1.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Now
x k1 y k1 x k1 x ky x ky y k1
 x k1x y2 1x k y k2y
But x k1x y2  is clearly divisible by x  y, and 1x k y k2y is 
divisible by x  y (by the induction hypothesis), so their sum is 
divisible by x  y. So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the 
Principle of Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
29.  Let P1n2  denote the statement F3n is even.
Step 1 P112  is true, since F31  2, which is even.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Now, by the deﬁnition of the  
Fibonacci sequence
 F31k12 F3k3 F3k2 F3k1
  F3k1 F3k F3k1
  F3k 2 # F3k1
But F3k is even (by the induction hypothesis), and 2  F3k1 is 
clearly even, so F31k12 is even. So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . 
Thus by the Principle of Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for  
all n.
31.  Let P1n2  denote the statement
F2
1 F2
2 . . . F2
n Fn # Fn1.
Step 1 P112  is true, since F2
1 F1 # F2 (because F1  F2  1).
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
F2
1 F2
2 . . . F2
k F2
k1
 
Fk # Fk1 F2
k1        Induction hypothesis
 
Fk11Fk Fk12         Deﬁnition of the 
­Fibonacci sequence
 
Fk1 # Fk2
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
33.  Let P1n2  denote the statement 
c 1
1
1
0d
n
c Fn1
Fn
Fn
Fn1
d .
Step 1 P122  is true, since 
c 1
1
1
0d
2
c 2
1
1
1d c F3
F2
F2
F1
d .
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
c 1
1
1
0d
k1
c 1
1
1
0d
k
c 1
1
1
0d
  c Fk1
Fk
Fk
Fk1
d c 1
1
1
0d 	
Induction hypothesis
  c Fk1 Fk
Fk1
Fk Fk1
Fk
d
  c Fk2
Fk1
Fk1
Fk
d 	
Deﬁnition of the 
­Fibonacci sequence
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n  2.
35.  Let P1n2  denote the statement Fn  n.
Step 1 P152  is true, since F5  5 (because F5  5).
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Now
Fk1 Fk Fk1        Deﬁnition of the Fibonacci sequence
 k Fk1         Induction hypothesis
 k 1
        Because Fk1  1
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n  5.
Section 12.6  ■  page 886
1.  binomial    2.  Pascal’s; 1, 4, 6, 4, 1   
3. 
n!
k! 1n k2!; 
4!
3! 14 32! 4
4.  Binomial; a4
0b, a4
1b, a4
2b, a4
3b, a4
4b
5.  x6  6x5y  15x4y2  20x3y3  15x2y4  6xy5  y6
7.  x4 4x2 6 4
x2 1
x4   
9.  x5  5x4  10x3  10x2  5x  1
11.  x10y5  5x8y4  10x6y3  10x4y2  5x2y  1
13.  8x3  36x2y  54xy2  27y3
15.  1
x5 5
x7/2 10
x2 10
x1/2 5x x5/2
17.  15    19.  4950    21.  18    23.  32   
25.  x4  8x3y  24x2y2  32xy3  16y4
27.  1 6
x 15
x2 20
x3 15
x4 6
x5 1
x6
29.  x20  40x19y  760x18y2    31.  25a26/3  a25/3   
33.  48,620x18    35.  300a2b23    37.  100y99    39.  13,440x4y6   
41.  495a8b8    43.  1x y2 4    45.  12a b2 3
47.  3x2  3xh  h2
CHAPTER 12 Review  ■  page 889
1.  1
2, 4
3, 9
4, 16
5 ; 100
11     3.  0, 1
4, 0, 1
32; 1
500   
5.  1, 3, 15, 105; 654,729,075
7.  1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49   
9.  1, 3, 5, 11, 21, 43, 85
Answers to Chapter 12 Review  A79
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A80 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
11.  (a)  7, 9, 11, 13, 15    	
13.  (a)  3
4, 9
8, 27
16, 81
32, 243
64
(b)  	
(b) 
(c)  55	
(c)  633
64
(d)  Arithmetic, common 	
(d)  Geometric, common 
difference 2	
ratio 3
2
15.  Arithmetic, 7    17.  Arithmetic, t  1    19.  Geometric, 1
t    
21.  Geometric, 4
27    23.  2i    25.  5    27.  81
4    
29.  (a)  An 32,00011.052 n1    (b)  $32,000, $33,600, $35,280, 
$37,044, $38,896.20, $40,841.01, $42,883.06, $45,027.21   
31.  12,288    35.  (a)  9    (b)  6 !2    37.  126   
39.  384    41.  02  12  22  . . .  92   
43.  3
22 32
23 33
24 . . . 350
251    45.  a
33
k1
3k    47.  a
100
k1
k2k2   
49.  Geometric; 4.68559    51.  Arithmetic, 5050 !5   
53.  Geometric, 9831    55.  5
7    57.  Divergent    59.  Divergent   
61.  13    63.  65,534    65.  $2390.27   
67.  Let P1n2  denote the ­statement
1 4 7 . . . 13n 22 
n13n 12
2
.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 1 
113 # 1 12
2
.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
1 4 7 . . . 13k 22 331k 12 24
 
 
k13k 12
2
33k 14         Induction hypothesis
 
  3k 2 k 6k 2
2
 
  
1k 12 13k 22
2
 
  
1k 12 331k 12 14
2
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
69.  Let P1n2  denote the statement
A1 1
1BA1 1
2B . . . A1 1
nB n 1.
Step 1 P112  is true, since A1 1
1B 1 1.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
a1 1
1 b a1 1
2 b . . . a1 1
k b a1 
1
k 1 b
 
  1k 12 a1 
1
k 1 b         Induction hypothesis
 
  1k 12 1
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
1
10
15
5
n
an
0
1
2
3
1
n
an
0
4
71.  Let P1n2  denote the statement that F4n is divisible by 3.
Step 1 P112  is true, since F4  3.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then F4k is divisible by 3. Using the 
deﬁnition of the Fibonacci sequence repeatedly, we get
F41k12 F4k4 F4k3 F4k2
  1F4k2 F4k12 1F4k1 F4k2
  31F4k1 F4k2 F4k14 1F4k1 F4k2
  3F4k1 2F4k
The ﬁrst term is clearly divisible by 3, and so is the second by the 
induction hypothesis. So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by 
the Principle of Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
73.  100    75.  32    77.  A3 3A2B 3AB2 B3
79.  1  6x 2  15x 4  20x 6  15x 8  6x 10  x 12
81.  1540a3b19    83.  17,010A 6B 4
Chapter 12 Test  ■  page 892
1.  1, 6, 15, 28, 45, 66; 161    2.  2, 5, 13, 36, 104, 307   
3.  (a)  3    (b)  an 2 1n 123    (c)  104   
4.  (a)  1
4    (b)  an 12A1
4B
n1
    (c)  3/48   
5.  (a)  1
5, 1
25    (b)  58 1
12,500    6.  (a)   8
9, 78    (b)  60
8.  (a)  11 122 11 222 11 322 11 422 
11 522 50
(b)  112 321 112 422 112 523 112 624 10
9.  (a)  58,025
59,049    (b)  2 !2
10.  Let P1n2  denote the statement
12 22 . . . n2 
n1n 12 12n 12
6
.
Step 1 P112  is true, since 12 
111 12 12 # 1 12
6
.
Step 2 Suppose P1k2  is true. Then
    12 22 . . . k2 1k 12 2
          
k1k 12 12k 12
6
1k 12 2        Induction hypothesis
          
k1k 12 12k 12 61k 12 2
6
          
1k 12 3k12k 12 61k 12 4
6
          
1k 12 12k 2 7k 62
6
          
1k 12 31k 12 14 321k 12 14
6
So P1k 12  follows from P1k2 . Thus by the Principle of  
Mathematical Induction P1n2  holds for all n.
11.  32x5  80x4y2  80x3y4  40x2y6  10xy8  y10
12.  a10
3 b 13x2 3122 7 414,720x 3
13.  (a)  an 10.852 11.242 n    (b)  3.09 lb    (c)  Geometric
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Section 13.3  A81
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 895
1.  (a)  An  1.0001An1, A0  275,000    (b)  A0  275,000, 
A1  275,027.50, A2  275,055.00, A3  275,082.51,  
A4  275,110.02, A5  275,137.53, A6  275,165.04,  
A7  275,192.56    (c)  An 1.0001n1275,0002
3.  (a)  An  1.0025An1  100, A0  100    (b)  A0  100,  
A1  200.25, A2  300.75, A3  401.50, A4  502.51     
(c)  An 100311.0025n1 12/0.00254     (d)  $6580.83
5.  (a)  Un Un1 0.05Un1 0.11Un1 0.05Un12 
1.155Un1, U0 5000    (b)  U0  5000, U1  5775,  
U2  6670.13, U3  7703.99, U4  8898.11     
(c)  Un 500011.1552 n    (d)  $21,124.67   
chapter 13
Section 13.1  ■  page 904
1.  L, a; 5, 1    2.  limit, left, L; less; left, right, equal   
3.  10    5.  1
4    7.  1
3    9.  1    11.  1    13.  0.51    15.  1
2   
17.  (a)  2    (b)  3    (c)  Does not exist    (d)  4    (e)  Not deﬁned  
19.  (a)  1    (b)  2    (c)  Does not exist    (d)  2    (e)  0   
(f)  Does not exist    (g)  1    (h)  3    21.  8   
23.  Does not exist    25.  Does not exist    27.  Does not exist   
29.  (a)  4    (b)  4    (c)  4 
1
1
x
y
0
4
2
31.  (a)  4    (b)  3    (c)  Does not exist 
1
1
x
y
0
4
2
Section 13.2  ■  page 913
1.  lim 
xSaf1x2 lim 
xSag1x2, lim 
xSaf1x2 # lim 
xSag1x2 ; sum, product   
2.  f1a2     3.  (a)  2    (b)  Does not exist    (c)  0     
(d)  Does not exist    (e)  16    (f)  2   
5.  5    7.  12    9.  75    11.  1
2    13.  174    15.  4
9    17.  7    19.  5  
21.  Does not exist    23.  6
5    25.  4    27.  1
6    29.   1
16    31.   1
9  
33.  4 	
35.   3
2 
5
_1
2
_1
	
1
_3
1
_3
37.  0    39.  Does not exist    41.  Does not exist   
43.  (a)  1, 2    (b)  Does not exist   
(c) 
45.  (a)  0.667 
(b)  0.667
x
fxxc
0.1
0.71339
0.01
0.67163
0.001
0.66717
0.0001
0.66672
x
fxxc
0.1
0.61222
0.01
0.66163
0.001
0.66617
0.0001
0.66662
(c)  2
3
Section 13.3  ■  page 921
1. 
f1a h2 f1a2
h
; slope, 1a, f 1a22     2. 
f1x2 f1a2
x a
, 
instantaneous, a    3.  3    5.  11    7.  24    9.   1
5   
11.  y  8x 1 9	
13.  y  x  1
	
2
2
x
y
0
y = x + x2
y = −x − 1
15.  y  x  4 	
17.  y 1
4 x 7
4 
2
2
0
x
y
y =
y = −x + 4
x
x-1
	
19.  fr122 12    21.  fr112 7    23.  fr122  1
9   
25.  Fr142  1
16    27.  (a)  2a 2    (b)  8, 10   
1
1
x
y
0
1
_1
1
_1
2
5
x
y
y=_8x+9
y=_2≈+1
0
2
1
0
x
y
y =
x +
y =
1
4
7
4
x + 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A82 
Answers to Selected Exercises and Chapter Tests
29.  (a) 
1
1a 12 2    (b)  1
16, 1
25     
31.  (a)  fr1a2 3a2 2   
(b)  y  2x  4, y  x  2, y  10x  12   
(c) 
33.  f1x2 x10, a 1    35.  f1t2 !t 1, a 1   
37.  24 ft/s    39.  12a2  6 m/s, 18 m/s, 54 m/s, 114 m/s   
41.  20.8/min    43.  (a)  38.8 gal/min, 27.8 gal/min   
(b)  33.8 gal/min   
Section 13.4  ■  page 930
1.  L, x; horizontal asymptote; 0, 0   
2.  L, large; converges, diverges   
3.  (a)  1, 2    (b)  y  1, y  2    5.  0   
7.  2
5    9.  4
3    11.  2    13.  Does not exist    15.  7   
17.  Does not exist    19.   1
4    21.  0    23.  0   
25.  Divergent    27.  0    29.  Divergent    31.  3
2    33.  8   
35.  f1x2 
x2
1x 12 1x 32 3Other answers are possible.4
37.  Within 0.01    39.  (b)  30 g/L   
Section 13.5  ■  page 938
1.  rectangles; 
f1x121x1 a2 f1x22 1x2 x12 f1x32 1x3 x22 f1b2 1b x32
2.  a
n
k1
f1xk2  Dx
3.  (a)  40, 52 
y
x
0
5
5
y=Ï
10
y
x
0
5
5
y=Ï
10
(b)  43, 49
5.  5.25    7.  223
35    
9.  (a)  77
60, underestimate 	
(b)  25
12, overestimate
0.5
1.0
1.5
2
3
4
y
x
0
1
5
	
0.5
1.0
1.5
2
3
4
y
x
0
1
5
20
_20
3
_3
11.  (a)  8, 6.875	
(b)  5, 5.375 
y
x
0
1
2
y
x
0
1
2
	
y
x
0
1
2
y
x
0
1
2
13.  37.5    15.  8    17.  166.25    19.  133.5   
Chapter 13 Review  ■  page 941
1.  1    3.  0.69    5.  Does not exist   
7.  (a)  Does not exist    (b)  2.4    (c)  2.4    (d)  2.4    (e)  0.5     
(f)  1    (g)  2    (h)  0    9.  3    11.  7    13.  2    15.  1    17.  2  
19.  Does not exist    21.  fr142 3    23.  fr1162 1
8   
25.  (a)  fr1a2 2    (b)  2, 2   
27.  (a)  fr1a2 1/A2 !a 6 B    (b)  1/A4 !2 B, 1/4   
29.  y  2x  1    31.  y  2x    33.  y  1
4 x 1   
35.  (a)  64 ft/s    (b)  32a ft/s    (c)  !40 6.32 s   
(d)  202.4 ft/s    37.  1
5    39.  1
2    41.  Divergent    43.  3.83   
45.  10    47.  5
6   
Chapter 13 Test  ■  page 943
1.  (a)  1
2    (b) 
2.  (a)  1    (b)  1    (c)  1    (d)  0    (e)  0    (f)  0    (g)  4    (h)  2
(i)  Does not exist   
3.  (a)  6    (b)  2    (c)  Does not exist
(d)  Does not exist    (e)  1
4    (f)  2   
4.  (a)  fr1x2 2x 2    (b)  4, 0, 2   
5.  y 1
6 x 3
2    6.  (a)  0    (b)  Does not exist
7.  (a)  89
25    (b)  11
3
Focus on Modeling  ■  page 946
1.  57,333 1
3 ft-lb    3.  (b)  Area under the graph of p1x2 375x 
between x  0 and x  4    (c)  3000 lb    (d)  1500 lb   
5.  (a)  1625.28 heating degree-hours    (b)  70F   
(c)  1488 heating degree-hours    (d)  75F   
(e)  The day in part (a)
APPENDIX A  ■  page 952
1.  Congruent, ASA    2.  Congruent, SSS   
3.  Not necessarily congruent    4.  Congruent, SAS   
5.  Similar    6.  Similar    7.  Similar    8.  Not similar   
2
_1
1.5
_1.5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to Appendix A  A83
9.  x 125    10.  y 30    11.  x 6, y 21
4    
12.  x 4    13.  x 
ac
a b    14.  x ac
b a   
17.  x 10    18.  x 48    19.  x !3   
20.  x 2!10    21.  x 40    22.  x 144    23.  Yes   
24.  Yes    25.  No    26.  No    27.  Yes    28.  Yes    29.  61 cm   
30.  119 ft by 120 ft    31.  No    32.  12    33.  13
34.  (b)  	
35.  h 6
m
n
xa, b, cc
2
1
13, 4, 52
3
1
18, 6, 102
3
2
15, 12, 132
4
1
115, 8, 172
4
2
112, 16, 202
4
3
17, 24, 252
5
1
124, 10, 262
5
2
121, 20, 292
5
3
116, 30, 342
5
4
19, 40, 412
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
Abel, Niels Henrik, 286
Absolute value, 8–9
of complex numbers, 603
equations, 55, 96
properties of, 9
Absolute value function, 162, 166
Absolute value inequalities, 86–87
Acute angle, 657
Addition
of complex numbers, 60–61
graphical, of functions, 212
of inequalities, 82
of matrices, 713–714
of polynomials, 26
of rational expressions, 38–39
of vectors, 630, 632, 633
Addition and subtraction formulas, 
545–553
Additive identity, 4
Adleman, Leonard, 302
Agnesi, Maria Gaetana, 613
Ahmes (Rhind papyrus scribe), 747
Algebraic errors
avoiding, 42
counterexamples, 45
Algebraic expressions, 25–35, 36
domain of, 36
multiplying, 26–27
Alternating current, modeling, 450–451
AM (amplitude modulation) radio, 427
Ambiguous case, of solving triangles, 
510–513, 516
Amortization schedule, 873
Amplitude, 422, 423
decaying, 428
harmonic motion and, 446
period and, 423–425
variable, 427–428
Amplitude modulation (AM) radio, 428
Analogy, used in problem solving, P1
Analytic trigonometry. See Trigonometric 
equations; Trigonometric identities
Ancillary circle of ellipse, 798
Angle measure, 472–481
Angles. See also Trigonometric functions, 
of angles
acute, 657
angle of depression, 485
angle of elevation, 485
angle of incidence, 569
angle of inclination, 485
angle of refraction, 569
bond, 659
central, of tetrahedron, 659
defined, 472
direction angles of a vector, 656–657
equations with trigonometric functions 
of multiples of, 572–574
Atmospheric pressure formula, 369
Augmented matrix, 699, 700, 701, 702, 703
Automotive design, 260
Average rate of change, 183–190, 192, 920
Avogadro’s number, 24
Axes. See also Rotation of axes
of a conic, 826
coordinate, 648
of ellipses, 792, 793
of hyperbolas, 800
of parabolas, 783–785
polar axis, 588
real and imaginary, 602
Axis of symmetry, parabolas, 782
Back-substitution
in nonlinear systems, 751
solving linear equations, 680, 681, 691, 
692, 702, 703
Base, change of, 357–358
Base 10 logarithm, 348–349
Bearing, 518–519
Beats, sound, 563
Beer-Lambert Law, 366, 398
Bell, E.T., 713
Bernoulli, Johann, 615
Best fit
exact fit vs., 694
finding, 139–144, 325–327
measuring, 143–144
polynomials of, 325–327
Bhaskara, 74
Binomial coefficients, 881–883
Binomial expansion, 879–881
Binomials, 25, 879
Binomial Theorem, 883–886
proof of, 885–886
Bits, changing words/sounds/pictures to, 28
Blood pressure, systolic and diastolic, 430
Boltzmann Law, 182
Bond angle, 659
Bounded regions, of planes, 761
Bowen, Tony, 508
Boyle’s Law, 124
Brahe, Tycho, 808
Brams, Steven, 854
Branches, of hyperbolas, 800
Bridge science, 262
CAD (computer-aided design), 260
Calculators
evaluating trigonometric functions, 
413–414, 433, 441
graphing calculators, 176–177, 426–428, 
598–599, 615–616, 900, 906, 939
as graphing device, 426
radian mode, 414
scientific notation on, 17
obtuse, 657
phase, 453–455
quadrantal, 493
reference, 494–495
in right triangles, solving for, 503–504
standard position of, 473–475
supplement of, 511
between vectors, 641, 656
viewing, 558
Angle-side-angle (ASA) congruence 
property, 949
Angular speed, 476
Annual percentage yield, 335
Annuities
calculating amount of, 867–869
in perpetuity, 873
present value of, 869–870
Aphelion, 798, 830
Apolune, 798
Arccosine function, 441, 502
Archimedes, 79, 416, 787, 918
Architecture, conics in, 836–839
Arcsine function, 440, 502
Arctangent function, 443, 502
Area
of circular sector, 476
of a parallelogram, 663
of a triangle, 497–498, 519–520, 663, 
741–742, 745
Area problem, calculus, 931–939
approximating area with calculator, 939
under a curve, 936–938
defined, 935–938
estimating using rectangles, 932–933
under graphs, 944–947
limit of approximating sums, 933–935
Area problems, modeling, 67–69
Areas, formulas for, inside front cover
Argument of complex number, 604
Aristarchus of Samos, 485
Aristotle, 241
Arithmetic-geometric mean inequality, 91
Arithmetic mean, 858
Arithmetic sequences, 853–858
defined, 853
partial sums, 854–856
Arrow diagram, of functions, 149–150
Arrow notation, 296
Assets, division of, 854
Associative Property, 3
Astroid, 619
Asymptotes, 295–297
defined, 297
horizontal, 297, 299–307, 925–926
of hyperbolas, 801, 804
of rational functions, 298–307
slant, 305–306
vertical, 297, 298–307, 432–434, 902
I1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I2 
Index
Calculus
addition and subtraction formulas in, 
547–548
preview of. See Limits
Cancellation, simplifying rational 
expressions by, 37
Cancellation properties, 440, 441, 442
Cardano, Gerolamo, 286, 292
Cardioid, 596, 599
Carrier signals, radio, 428
Carrying capacity, 397
of a road, 295
Cartesian plane, 92–93, 201. See also 
Coordinate plane
Cassegrain-type telescopes, reflection 
property used in, 804
CAT (Computer Aided Tomography) scan, 
784
Catenary, 338
Cayley, Arthur, 725
Celsius and Fahrenheit scales, relationship 
between, 88
Center
of ellipse, 792
of hyperbola, 800
of sphere, 650
Central angle of tetrahedron, 659
Central box, of hyperbolas, 801, 802
Change of Base Formula, 357–358
Chaos and iteration, 211
Chevalier, Auguste, 277
Chu Shikie, 880
Circadian rhythms, 458, 469
Circles, 97–99, 781
ancillary, of ellipse, 798
area of, 154
equations of, 98–99
graphing, 98
involute of a, 620
as polar graph, 596, 599
Circular arc, length of, 475–476
Circular function. See Trigonometric 
functions
Circular motion, 476–477
modeling, 613
Circular sector, area of, 476
Closed curves, 616
Codes, unbreakable, 302
Coefficient matrix, 729
Coefficients
binomial, 881–883
correlation, 143–144
of polynomials, 254, 257–258
Cofactors, determinant of matrix, 734–735
Cofunction identities, 538, 547
Collinear points, 116, 744
Column transformations, of determinants, 
737–738
Combining logarithmic expressions, 
356–357
Combining variations, 125–126
Comets, paths of, 803
Common (base 10) logarithms, 348–349
Common difference of sequence, 853
Constant(s)
damping, 451
of proportionality, 123, 124
spring, 127, 458, 946
Constant coefficient, 254
Constant force, 944
Constant function, 160
Constant rate of change, 187
Constant term, 254
Constraints, 762, 776, 777
Continuous functions, 164, 256, 909
Continuously compounded interest, 
340–341
Contradiction, proof by, P2
Convergent infinite series, 862, 864
Convergent sequence, 928, 930
Cooling, Newton’s Law of, 377–378, 380
Cooper, Curtis, 845
Coordinate axes, 648
Coordinate geometry, three-dimensional. 
See Three-dimensional coordinate 
geometry
Coordinate line (real number line), 6, 9
Coordinate plane, 1, 92–93, 648
circles on, 97–99
coordinates as addresses, 93
graphing equations in, 95–96
intercepts on, 96–97
symmetry in, 99–101
vectors in, 631–634
Coordinates. See Polar coordinates; 
Rectangular coordinates
Correlation, 143–144
causation vs., 144
Correlation coefficient, 143–144
Cosecant function, 409
cosecant curves, 436–437
formula for, 491
graphing, 433–434, 436–437
inverse, 444
periodic properties, 432
special values of, 410
trigonometric ratios, 482
Cosine function, 409
addition and subtraction formulas for, 
545–546
cosine curves, 421–422, 423, 427–428, 
466–468
double-angle formula for, 554, 819
formula for, 491
graphing, 419–421
graphing transformations of, 421–425
half-angle formula for, 556, 820
inverse cosine, 441–442, 502–503
Law of Cosines, 516–523
periodic properties of, 419
product-to-sum formula for, 559
shifted curves, 424, 425
special values of, 410
sum of sines and cosines, 549–550
sum-to-product formula for, 560
trigonometric ratios, 482
Cosines, direction, of a vector, 656–657
Cost function, 163
Common ratio of geometric sequence, 858
Commutative Property, 3
Complete Factorization Theorem, 287
Completing the square, 49–50
Complex conjugates, 61, 63, 64
Conjugate Zeros Theorem, 291–292, 294
Complex numbers, 59–64
arithmetic operations on, 60–61
complex roots of quadratic equations, 
62–63, 64
defined, 59
De Moivre’s Theorem, 606–607
graphing, 602–603
multiplication and division of, 605–606
polar (trigonometric) form of, 603–606
roots of, 607–609
square roots of negative numbers, 62
Complex plane, 602
Complex roots, of quadratic equations, 
62–63, 64
Complex zeros, 287–294
Component form of a vector, 631–632, 653
Component of u along v, 642–643
Composite function, 212–215
Compound fractions, 39–41
Compound interest, 334–335, 337, 369
annuities and, 867–869
continuously compounded, 340–341
formula for, 334
using logarithmic equations for, 
366–367, 369
Computer-aided design (CAD), 260
Computer Aided Tomography (CAT) scan, 
784
Computer graphics
applying matrices to generation of, 
719–720, 738
rotating an image, 820
Computers
applications of, 202
as graphing device, 426
Confocal conics
family of, 816
hyperbolas, 806
parabolas, 815
Congruent triangles, 949–950
Conics. See also by type
in architecture, 836–839
basic shapes of, 781
confocal, 806, 815, 816
degenerate, 812–813
equivalent description of, 824
graphing rotated, 821
identifying and sketching, 826–828
identifying by discriminant, 822
polar equations of, 824–831
shifted, 807–816
simplifying general equation for, 
818–821
Conjecture, mathematical induction and, 
873–874
Conjugate hyperbolas, 806
Conjugate radical, 41
Conjugate Zeros Theorem, 291–292, 294
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index  I3
Cotangent function, 409
cotangent curves, 435, 436
formula for, 491
graphing, 433, 436
inverse, 444
periodic properties, 432
special values of, 410
trigonometric ratios, 482
Coterminal angles, 473–475
Counterexample, 45
Cramer’s Rule, 738–741
Cross product, 659–666
area of a parallelogram, 663
finding, 660–661
length of, 662
properties of, 661–663
volume of a parallelepiped, 663–664
Cross Product Theorem, 661–663
Cubic formula, 286
Cubic splines, 255
Curtate cycloid (trochoid), 618
Curve
area under, 936–938
slope of a, 916–918
Cut points of rational inequalities, 313
Cycles, of vibration, 446
Cycloid
curtate (trochoid), 618
parametric equations, 614–615
prolate, 618
Damped harmonic motion, 451–453, 575
Damping constant, 451
Data
fitting sinusoidal curves to, 466–470
linearizing, 394–395
Daylight, modeling hours of, 449–450
Decibel scale, 384–385
Degenerate conics, 812–813
Degrees
as angle measure, 472
compared with radians, 473
Demand function, 228
De Moivre’s Theorem, 606–607
Denominators, 5
common factors in numerators and, 
304–305
of partial fractions, 746–749
rationalizing, 20–21, 41
Dependent systems, linear equations, 683, 
684–685, 693, 694–695, 705, 706–708
Dependent variables, 149
Depressed cubic, 286
Depression, angle of, 485
Derivatives, 918–920
defined, 918
estimating from graphs, 923
finding at a point, 919
Descartes, René, 92, 201, 278
Descartes’ Rule of Signs, 278–279
Determinants, 726, 734–745
areas of triangles, 741–742, 745
cofactors, 734–735
collinear points and, 744
defined, 640
projection of u onto v, 643–644
properties of, 640
of vectors, 639–642, 655
Dot Product Theorem, 640–641
Double-angle formulas, 553–554, 564, 819
e (number), 338
expressing a model in terms of, 374–375
logarithm with base e (natural 
logarithm), 349–351
Earthquakes, magnitude of, 382–384
Ebbinghaus, Hermann, 356, 399
Eccentricity
of a conic, 824, 825, 828
of an ellipse, 794–796
of planetary orbits, 796
Ecology, mathematical study of, 730
Economics, use of mathematics in, 869
Einstein, Albert, P4, 625, 737
Elementary row operations, 700–701
Elements, of sets, 6
Elevation, angle of, 485
Elimination method, 681–682
for solving system of nonlinear 
equations, 751–752
Ellipses, 480, 781, 790–799
ancillary circle of, 798
with center at origin, 792
constructing, 839
eccentricity of, 794–796
equation of, 792, 794, 795
equation of, deriving, 791–792
foci of, 795
geometric definition of, 790–792
graphing shifted, 808
latus rectum of, 798
orbits of planets as, 796
rotating, 828
sketching, 793
vertices of, 792, 793
Elongation, 490, 515
Empty set [, 7
Encryption, 302
End behavior
of polynomials, 256–258, 259
of rational functions, 306–307
Endpoints
of intervals, 83, 85, 86
of polynomial inequalities, 311
of rational inequalities, 313
Envelope of lines, parabola as, 837
Epicycloid, 619
Equality
of matrices, 712
properties of, 46
of vectors, 630, 632
Equations, 1, 45–59. See also Systems of 
equations; Systems of linear equations
absolute value, 55, 96
of circles, 98–99
of an ellipse, 792, 794, 795
of an ellipse, deriving, 791–792
equivalent, 45
expanding, about row and column, 736
invertibility criterion, 736–737
minors, 734–735
of order three, 660
of order two, 660
row and column transformations, 
737–738
zero, matrices with, 745
Difference
of cubes, 30
of functions, 210, 211
of matrices, 713
of squares, 30–31
Difference quotients, 152, 185
Difficulty, index of (ID), 354
Digital images, 719–720, 723
Digital numbers, 16, 50
Diophantus, 20, 117
Directed quantities. See Vectors
Direction angles of a vector, 656–657
Direction cosines, 656–657
Directrix, 782, 784, 824, 825–826
Direct substitution, finding limits using, 
909–910
Direct variation, 122–123
Discriminant
identifying conics by, 822
invariant under rotation, 822, 824
of quadratic formula, 51–52
Distance, between points on the real line, 9
Distance, rate, and time problems, 72–74
Distance formula, 93–94, 593
in three dimensions, 649–650
Distributive Property
combining like terms, 26
factoring with, 28–29
multiplying algebraic expressions, 26–27
real numbers and, 3–4
Divergent infinite series, 862, 864
Divergent sequence, 928, 930
Dividends, 269
Division
of complex numbers, 61, 605–606
long, 269–270, 749
overview of, 5
of polynomials, 269–275
of rational expressions, 38
synthetic, 270–271
Division Algorithm, 269
Divisors, 5, 269
Domains
of algebraic expression, 36
of combined functions, 210, 211
finding, from graphs, 170–171
of functions, 149, 153
of inverse functions, 220
of logarithmic functions, 350
of rational functions, 295
of trigonometric functions, 412
Doppler effect, 310, 459
Dot mode, calculators, 162
Dot product, 639–647
calculating work, 644–645
component of u along v, 642–643
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I4 
Index
Equations (continued)
exponential, 360–363
false, 693
family of, 58
of functions, 164–165
graphic solutions for, 117–120,  
171–173
graph of, 95–96
of horizontal lines, 110
of a hyperbola, 800, 803–804
of a hyperbola, deriving, 799–800
involving fractional expressions, 53
involving fractional powers, 55
involving radicals, 54
linear, 46–47, 110–111
of lines, 108–113
of lines in three-dimensional space, 
666–667
logarithmic, 363–366
matrix, 717, 728–731
modeling with. See Mathematical models
nonlinear, 46
of a parabola, 783
of a parabola, deriving, 782–783
polynomial, 281–282
Properties of Equality and, 46
quadratic, 48–53
of quadratic type, 54
roots of, 259
of a shifted conic, 812–813
solving by working backward, P2
solving for unknown functions, 229
solving using analogy strategy, P1
two-intercept form of, 115
in two variables, 95–96
used in ancient times, 66
of vertical lines, 110
Equations, trigonometric, 538, 564–576
with functions of multiples of angles, 
572–574
solving, 564–568
solving, on an interval, 504
Equivalent equations, 45
Equivalent inequalities, 81
Equivalent systems, 691–692
Eratosthenes, 480, 844
Error-correcting codes, 39
Euclid, 542
Eudoxus, 918
Euler, Leonhard, P1, 63, 338, 735
Even function, 204–205, 210, 218
Even-odd identities, 538
Even-odd properties, 414–415
Everest, Sir George, 512
Expanding a logarithmic expression, 
355–356
Exponential data, linearizing, 395
Exponential equations, 360–363
Exponential form, 344
Exponential function, 329, 330–343
compared with power function, 333–334
compound interest, 334–335
family of, 331–332
graphs of, 331–334, 339
Flow lines of vector field, 678
FM (frequency modulation) radio, 428
Focal diameter, of parabolas, 785–786, 786
Focal length, 790
Focus
of a conic, 824
of an ellipse, 790, 793, 794
of a hyperbola, 799, 803
of a parabola, 782, 784, 790
prime, 790
FOIL method, 26
Force
constant vs. variable, 944
modeling, 636
resolving into components, 642–643
Forgetting, Law of (Forgetting Curve), 
356–357, 399
Formula, visualizing a, 29
Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph, 427, 546
Fourier analysis, 28
Four-leaved rose, 596–597, 599
Frac command, 727
Fractal image compression, 863
Fractals, 608, 863
Fractional exponents, 19, 32, 55
Fractional expressions, 36. See also 
Rational expressions
compound fractions, 39–41
solving equations involving, 53
standard form of, 21
Fractions
compound, 39–41
LCD and adding, 5
partial, 745–751
properties of, 5
writing repeated decimal as, 864
Frequency, harmonic motion and, 446
Frequency modulation (FM) radio, 428
Functions, 147–244
algebra of, 210
average rate of change and, 183–190
combining, 210–218
common examples of, 148–149
comparing values of, graphically, 171–173
composition of, 212–215
constant, 160
defined, 149–150
demand, 228
domain of, 153
equations of, 164–165
evaluating, 150–153
even, 204–205, 210, 218
finding values of, from graph, 170–171
graphing, 159–170, 301–307, 331–334
greatest integer, 162–163
identity, 228
increasing/decreasing, 173–175
inverse, 220–225
limits of, 898–906
linear, 160, 166, 190–197
linear, constant rate of change, 187
local maximum and minimum values of, 
175–178
logistic, 211
natural, 338–343
transformations of, 333
Exponential growth, 338
doubling time, 370–372
relative growth rate, 372–375
Exponential modeling, 370–380, 392–393
Exponential notation, 13, 16–17
Exponents
fractional, 19, 32, 55
integer, 13–16
integer, exponential notation, 13
integer, zero and negative exponents, 14, 
16
Laws of, 14–16, 19, 20, 330
rational, 19–20
Extraneous solutions, 54
Extreme values, using graphing devices for, 
176–177
Factoring
common factors, 28–29, 304–305
Complete Factorization Theorem, 287
completely, 32
complex zeros and, 289–290
differences and sums of cubes, 30, 31
differences of squares, 30–31
expressions with fractional exponents, 32
fifth-degree polynomial, 280–281
finding limit by canceling common 
factors, 910
by grouping, 32–33
inequalities, 83–86
polynomials, 287–289, 289–290
solving trigonometric equations by, 
567–568
by trial and error, 29, 30
trinomials, 29–30
Factoring formulas, 30
Factors, 31
Factor Theorem, 272–273, 275
Fahrenheit and Celsius scales, relationship 
between, 88
Fair division of assets, 854
Falling objects, instantaneous velocity of, 
920–921
False equations, 693
Family
of equations, 58
of exponential functions, 331–332
of lines, graphing, 113
of logarithmic functions, 346
of polynomials, 265
of power functions, 161–162
Feasible region, 762–763, 776, 777, 778
Fechner, Gustav, 348
Fermat, Pierre de, 20, 63, 92, 117
Ferrari, 286
Fibonacci, Leonardo, 846
Fibonacci numbers, 713, 845–846, 849, 
852
Finance
mathematics of, 867–873
modeling using linear systems, 695–696
Fitts’s Law, 354
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index  I5
methods for representing, 154–155
modeling with, 237–244
modeling with, guidelines for, 237
objective, 775, 776, 777, 778
odd, 204–205, 210, 218
one-to-one, 219–220, 222–223
polynomial, 245, 254–268, 325–327
power, 160, 166, 333–334, 393–394
rational, 295–311
root, 160, 166
transformations of, 198–210
trigonometric. See Trigonometric 
functions
Fundamental identities, 415–416, 496, 538
Fundamental Principle of Analytic 
Geometry, 95, 97
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, 287
Galileo, Galilei, 625, 626
Galois, Evariste, 277, 286
Game theory, 869
Gateway Arch, 338
Gaudí, Antoni, 836
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 287, 290, 702, 
854–855
Gaussian elimination, 692, 701–704
Gauss-Jordan elimination, 704–705
Gear ratio, 527
General conic equation, simplifying, 
818–821
Geometric mean, 866
Geometric sequences, 858–867
Geometry, analytic. See Conics; Ellipses; 
Hyperbolas; Parabolas; Parametric 
equations
Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 662
GIMPS (Great Internet Mersenne Prime 
Search), 845
Global Positioning System (GPS), 753
Golden ratio, 849
Googol, 354
Googolplex, 354
Grads, measuring angles with, 481
Graphical addition, 212
Graphical solutions, 117–120
compared with algebraic method, 117, 
118–119, 120
for equations, 117–120, 171–173
for inequalities, 120–121, 171–173
for systems of equations, 682–683
for systems of nonlinear equations, 
752–753
Graphing calculators, 161–162
approximating area with, 939
choosing viewing rectangle, 426
for extreme values of functions, 176–177
for graphing equation with two variables, 
96
for graphing parabolas, 785
for graphing polar equations, 598–599
for parametric curve graphs, 615–616
pitfalls of, 906
for trigonometric graphs, 426–428
ZOOM and TRACE features of, 900
Horizontal lines, 110, 219, 220
Horizontal line test, 219, 220
Horizontal shifts, of graphs, 199–200
Horizontal stretching and shrinking, of 
graphs, 203–204
Huygens, Christian, 615
Hyperbolas, 619, 781, 799–807
with center at origin, 800
confocal, 806
conjugate, 806
constructing, 838–839
degenerate, 813
equation of, 803–804
finding tangent line to, 917–918
geometric definition of, 799–800
rotating, 817–818
shifted, 810–812
sketching, 801–804
with transverse axis, 801–803
Hyperbolic cosine function, 341
Hyperbolic sine function, 341
Hypocycloid, 619
Hypotenuse, 951
Hypothesis, induction, 875
Ideal Gas Law, 128
Identities, 538
addition and subtraction formulas for, 
547–548
cofunction, 538, 547
even-odd, 538
Pythagorean, 415, 416, 496, 538
reciprocal, 414, 415, 496, 538
trigonometric, 414, 415–416, 495–497, 
538, 538–545, 570–572
Identity function, 228
Identity matrices, 724
Image of x under f, 149
Imaginary axis, 602
Imaginary part, of complex numbers, 
59–60
Incidence, angle of, 569
Inclination, angle of, 485
Inconsistent systems, linear equations, 683, 
684, 693–694, 705–706
Independent variables, 149
Index of difficulty (ID), 354
Index of refraction, 569
Index of summation, 848
Induction, mathematical, P2, 873–880
conjecture and proof, 873–874
induction step, 874–875
principle of, 875–877
sums of powers and, 877
Induction hypothesis, 875
Inequalities, 81–91. See also Systems of 
inequalities, graphing
absolute value, 86–87
arithmetic-geometric mean, 91
equivalent, 81
graphic solutions for, 120–121, 171–173
graphing, 756–758
linear, 82–83, 759
modeling with, 87–88
Graphing devices. See Graphing calculators
Graphing functions, 159–170
exponential functions, 331–334, 339
getting information from, 170–182
with a graphing calculator, 161–162
with “holes,” 304–305
logarithmic functions, 345–347, 349, 
350–351
rational functions, 301–307
to solve rational inequality graphically, 
315
Graphs
of complex numbers, 602–603
describing real-world “story,” 177
of equations of two variables, 95–96
of inverse function, 224
of linear functions, 166, 191–192
of nonlinear inequalities, 756–758
of polar equations, 594–601
of polynomials, 255–265
reflecting, 200–201, 203
shifted, 807–812
shifts, horizontal, 199–200
shifts, vertical, 198–199, 200
stretching and shrinking, 202–204
of systems of inequalities, 758–763
of vector fields, 676–677
Gravity, Newton’s Law of, 47, 126, 182, 
394, 677
Greater than (.), 6
Greatest integer function, 162–163, 166
Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search 
(GIMPS), 845
Great Trigonometric Survey of India, 512, 
536
Grouping, factoring by, 32–33
Guza, Robert, 508
Half-angle formulas, 553, 555–557, 820
Half-life of radioactive elements, 375–376
Halley, Edmund, 911
Hamilton, William Rowan, 662
Hamming, Richard, 39
Hardy, G.H., 860
Harmonic mean, 857
Harmonic motion, 418, 445–460
damped, 451–453, 575
modeling periodic behavior, 445–451, 
466–469
phase and phase difference, 453–455
simple, 446–451, 581
Harmonic sequences, 857
Heating degree-hour, 947
Heaviside, Oliver, 901
Heaviside function, 901
Heron’s Formula, 519–520
Hilbert, David, 118, 735
Hilbert’s tenth problem, 713
Hipparchus, 483
Holes, graphing rational functions with, 
304–305
Hooke’s Law, 127, 136, 946
Horizontal asymptotes, 297, 299–307, 
925–926
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I6 
Index
Inequalities (continued)
nonlinear, 83–86
polynomial, 311–313
proving by induction, 877
rational, 313–315
with repeated factors, 85
rules for, 82
Infinite geometric series, 863–864
Infinite series, 861–864
convergent or divergent, 862, 863–864
Infinity
limits at, 924–928
symbol, 7
Initial point, vectors, 630
Initial side, of angles, 472
Inner product, of matrices, 715–716
Input, in function as machine, 149
Installment buying, 870–871
Instantaneous rate of change, 185, 920–921
defined, 920
estimating, 921
instantaneous velocity of falling objects, 
920–921
Instantaneous speed, 897
Integer exponents, 13–16
Integers, as real number type, 2
Intensity, magnitude and, 382–384
Intensity levels of sound, 348–349, 
384–385
Intercepts, 96–97
Interest, on investment, 66–67
Intermediate Value Theorem for 
Polynomials, 259
intersect command, in calculators, 
119, 315, 753, 761
Intersections
finding intersection points, 572
of intervals, 8
of sets, 7
Interval notation, 7
Intervals, 7–8
endpoints of, 83, 85, 86
graphing, 7
increasing/decreasing functions,  
174–175
open and closed, 7, 8
solving an equation in an interval, 119
test values for, 83, 84
unions and intersections, 8
Invariants under rotation, 822, 824
Invariant Theory, 737
Inverse cosecant, 444
Inverse cosine, 441–442, 502–503
Inverse cotangent, 444
Inverse functions, 220–225
defined, 220
finding, 222
graphing, 224
linear functions becoming, 228
modeling, 224–225
properties of, 222
Inverse numbers, 5
Inverse of matrices, 724–728, 729–730
Inverse sine, 501–503
Left-hand limits, 903, 911–912
Legs of right triangle, 951
Lemniscates, as polar graph, 599
Length, vectors, 630, 632, 633
Lens equation, 58
Leontief, Wassily, 869
Less than (,), 6
Lever, Law of the, 79, 787
Like terms, combining, 26
Limaçon, 598, 599
Limit Laws, 906–911
finding limits using, 910–911
limits at infinity and, 926
Limits, 897–947
derivative problems, 919–920
finding by direct substitution, 909–910
finding by using algebra and Limit Laws, 
910–911
of a function, 898–906
instantaneous rates of change, 920–921
left- and right-hand limits, 911–912
Newton on, 918
special, 908–909
tangent line problems, 914–918
Limits, area problems, 931–939
area defined, 935–938
area under a curve, 936–938
area under a graph, 944–947
estimating area using rectangles, 
932–933
limit of approximating sums, 933–935
modeling with, 944–947
Limits at infinity, 924–927
defined, 924
finding, 926–927
functions with no limit at infinity, 
927–928
at negative infinity, 925, 927
Limits of sequences, 928–929
defined, 928
finding, 930
limits of recursive sequences, 931
Linear and Quadratic Factors Theorem, 292
Linear depreciation, 116
Linear equations, 110–111. See also 
Systems of linear equations
graph of, 111
solving, 46–47
two-intercept form of, 115
Linear factors, 292–293, 746–748
Linear fractional transformations, 297–298
Linear functions, 160, 190–197
becoming inverse, 228
constant rate of change, 187
defined, 191
graphs of, 166, 191–192
identifying, 191
modeling with, 193–195
slope and rate of change, 192
Linear inequalities, 82–83, 759
graphing systems of, 759–761
Linearizing, 394–395
exponential data, 395
power data, 395
Inverse square laws, 126
for sound, 386
Inverse tangent, 502–503
Inverse trigonometric functions, 439–445, 
501–508
evaluating expressions involving, 
505–506, 548–549
inverse cosecant, 444
inverse cosine, 441–442, 502–503
inverse cotangent, 444
inverse secant, 444
inverse sine, 439–441, 501–502
inverse tangent, 442–443, 502–503
solving for angles in right triangles 
using, 503–504
Inverse variation, 124
Invertibility criterion, 736–737
Involute of a circle, 620
Irrational numbers, 2
Irreducible quadratic factor, 292, 748–749
Iteration, chaos and, 211
Jordan, Camille, 277
Kantorovich, Leonid, 775
Karmarkar, Narendra, 776
Kepler, Johannes, 393, 394, 796, 808
Kepler’s Third Law, 24, 128
Kirchhoff’s Laws, 698
Knuth, Donald, 165
Koopmans, T.C., 775
Kovalevsky, Sonya, 205
Lag time, phase of harmonic motion, 453
Laminar flow, law of, 158
Latus rectum, 785, 798
Law enforcement, use of mathematics for, 
347
Law of Cooling, Newton’s, 377–378, 380
Law of Cosines, 516–523
Law of Forgetting (Forgetting Curve), 
356–357, 399
Law of Gravity, 47, 126, 182, 394, 677
Law of laminar flow, 158
Law of Sines, 508–516
Law of the Lever, 79, 787
Law of the pendulum, 129
Laws of Exponents, 14–16, 330
for rational exponents, 19, 20
Laws of Logarithms, 354–360
LCD. See Least common denominator 
(LCD)
Leading coefficients, 254, 257–258
Leading entry in row-echelon form, 702
Leading terms, 254
end behavior of polynomial and, 
257–258
Leading variable, 705
Lead time, phase of harmonic motion, 453
Learning curve, 370
Least common denominator (LCD)
adding fractions, 5
using with rational expressions, 38
Least squares line, 690
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index  I7
Linear programming, 775–780
guidelines for, 777
Karmarkar’s technique, 776
Linear speed, 476–477
Line of sight, 485
Lines, 106–116
of best fit, 139–144
family of, graphing, 113
general equation of, 110
parallel, 111–112
parametric equations for, 667
perpendicular, 112–113
point-slope form of equation of,  
108–109
slope-intercept form of equation of, 109
slope of, 106–108
vector equation of, 666–667
vertical and horizontal, 110
LinReg command, 140, 143
Lissajous figure, 616
Lithotripsy, reflection property used in, 796
Local extrema, of polynomials, 264–265, 
268
Local maximum, 175–177, 264
Local minimum, 175–177, 264
loga, 344
Logarithmic equations, 363–366
applications of, 366–367
Logarithmic form, 344
Logarithmic functions, 329, 344–354
common (base 10) logarithms, 348–349
family of, 346
graphs of, 345–347, 349, 350–351
natural logarithms, 349–351
properties of, 345
Logarithmic scales, 381–386
Logarithms, Laws of, 354–360
Logistic command, in calculator, 397, 
400
Logistic curves (or logistic growth model), 
340, 342, 397, 400
Logistic function, 211
Log-log plot, 395
Longbow curve, 619
Long division
partial fractions and, 749
of polynomials, 269–270
LORAN (LOng RAnge Navigation), 804
Lorentz Contraction Formula, 914
Lotka, Alfred J., 730
Lower bounds, 279–281, 282
Machine, function as, 149
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 784
Magnitude
of an earthquake, 382–384
of gravitational force, 677
orders of, 350
of a star, 360
of vectors, 630, 632, 654
Main diagonal, of matrices, 724
Major axes, of ellipses, 792, 793
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 863
Mapping the world, 590
minimum command, in calculators, 177
Minor axes, of ellipses, 792, 793
Minors, determinant of matrix, 734–735
Mixture problems, 69–71
Modeling. See also Mathematical models
with area, 67–69, 944–947
circular motion, 613
with composite functions, 215
defined, 237
with equations, 65–81
exponential, 370–380, 392–393
fitting sinusoidal curves to data, 466–470
force and velocity, 634–636
harmonic motion, 445–460
with inverse functions, 224–225
with linear functions, 193–195
with linear systems, 685–687, 695–696, 
708–709
with logistic functions, 397
path of a projectile, 625–628
with polynomial functions, 325–327
population growth, 329, 370–375, 
392–393, 397
with power functions, 393–394, 396
prey/predator models, 427, 470, 730
with quadratic functions, 250–251
with recursive sequences, 893–896
standing waves, 582–583
surveying, 533–536
traveling waves, 581–582
using linear programming, 775–780
using matrix equations, 730–731
vector fields, 676–678
Modulus of complex numbers, 603, 604
Monomials, 25, 255–256
Mortgage payments, 871
amortizing a mortgage, 873
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), 784
Multiple angles, trigonometric functions of, 
572–574
Multiplication
of algebraic expressions, 26–27
of complex numbers, 60–61, 605–606
of functions, 210
of inequalities, 82
of matrices, 714–718
of polynomials, 26–27
of rational expressions, 37
of vectors by scalars, 630, 631, 633
Multiplicative identity, 5
Multiplicities, zeros and, 263, 289–291
Music, logarithmic scale at heart of, 382
Musical note, vibrations of, 447
Napier, John, 348
Nash, John, 869
Natural exponential functions, 338–343
Natural logarithms, 349–351
Natural numbers, 2
Nautical mile, 480
Navigation
bearings, 518–519
Global Positioning System (GPS), 753
LORAN, 804
Mathematical models, 65–81. See also 
Modeling
constructing, 66–74
defined, 139
finding line of best fit, 139–144
functions as, 237–244
guidelines for, 65
guidelines for modeling functions, 237
measuring fit, 143–144
using inequalities, 87–88
variation, 122–130
Matijasevič, Yuri, 713
Matrices, algebra of, 712–723. See also 
Determinants
applied to computer graphics, 719–720
determinants, 726, 734–745
equality of matrices, 712
identity matrices, 724
inverse of matrices, 724–728, 729–730
matrix equations, 717, 728–731
multiplication, 714–718
no Zero-Product Property for, 733
rotating images in plane, 820
rotation of axes formulas, 820, 824
singular matrix, 728
square matrix, 724, 734–737
square roots of matrix, 723
stochastic matrices, 718
sum, difference, and scalar product, 
713–714
transition matrix, 730
Matrices, solving linear equations, 699–712
augmented matrix, 699, 700, 701, 702, 
703
elementary row operations, 700–701
Gaussian elimination, 701–704
matrix defined, 699
reduced row-echelon form, 702, 704–705
row-echelon form, 702–704, 705–708
Matrix equations, 717, 728–731
Maxima value, 247–249
of a fourth-degree polynomial function, 
252
linear programming for, 775–780
local, 175–177, 264
modeling with functions to find, 
237–238, 250–251
maximum command, in calculators, 177, 
178
Mean
arithmetic, 858
geometric, 866
harmonic, 857
Measurements, units of, 6
Median, 103
Mersenne numbers, 845
Midpoint formula, 94–95
Mill, John Stuart, 201
Minima value, 247–249
local, 175–177, 264
modeling with functions to find, 
239–240
of a sixth-degree polynomial function, 
252
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I8 
Index
Negative exponents, 14, 16
Negative numbers, 4
square roots of, 62
Negative of image, 723
Net change, in the value of a function, 151
Newton, Sir Isaac, 625, 796, 803, 911,  
918
Newton’s Law of Cooling, 377–378, 380
Newton’s Law of Gravitation, 47, 126,  
182, 394, 677
n-leaved rose, 597, 599
n! (n factorial), 881
Nodes, standing wave, 582–583
Noether, Emmy, 737
Nonlinear equations, 46
systems of, 751–756
Nonlinear inequalities, 83–86
graphing, 756–758
guidelines for solving, 83
Normal vector, 668
Notation
arrow, 296
exponential, 13, 16–17
interval, 7
limit of a function, 898–899, 902
of logarithmic function, 344
of natural logarithms, 349
scientific, 16–17
set-builder, 6
sigma, 848–850
summation, 848–850
use in problem solving, P1
nth root, 18–19
of complex number, 607–609
properties of, 18
Numbers
complex. See Complex numbers
converting sound, pictures, and text  
into, 28
imaginary, 60
inverse, 5
irrational, 2
negative, 4
ordered pair of, 92
prime, 844, 845
rational, 2
real. See Real numbers
reference, 405–407
representing functions with, 154, 155
Number theory, 718
Numerators, 5
common factors in denominators and, 
304–305
rationalizing, 41, 911
Numerical method to find trigonometric 
ratios, 484
Objective function, 775, 776, 777, 778
Oblique asymptotes, 305–306
Oblique triangles, 508
Obtuse angle, 657
Octants, 648
Odd functions, 204–205, 210, 218
One-sided limits, 902–904, 911–912
Period, 423
amplitude and, 423–425
harmonic motion and, 446
quasi-period, 451n
Periodic behavior, modeling, 445–451, 
466–469
Periodic functions, 419, 427, 431
Periodic motion, 401
Periodic properties, 432
Periodic rent, 868
Perpendicular lines, 112–113
Phase difference, 454, 455
Phase (phase angle), 453–455
pH scale, 381–382
Pi (p)
series for calculating, 860
value of, 416
Piecewise defined function, 151, 904
graphing, 162–164
limit of, 912
Plane(s)
bounded and unbounded regions, 761
complex, 602
coordinate, 1, 92–93, 648
as graph of linear equation in three 
variables, 693
vector equation of, 668–669
vector fields in, 676–677
Plane curves, 612
Planetary orbits
eccentricities of, 796
Kepler’s description of, 24, 128, 808
perihelion and aphelion, 798, 830
power model for planetary periods, 
393–394
Point-slope form of equation of lines, 
108–109
Polar axis, 588
Polar coordinates, 587, 588–593
graphing polar equations, 594–601
relationship between rectangular 
coordinates and, 589–591
Polar equations, 591–592
of conics, 824–831
family of, 599
graphs of, 594–601
in parametric form, 616
Polar form of complex numbers, 603–606
Pole. See Origin (O)
Polya, George, P1
Polynomial function, 245, 254–268
defined, 254
of degree n, 246, 254
as models, 325–327
Polynomial inequalities, 311–313
Polynomials, 25
adding and subtracting, 26
of best fit, 325–327
defined, 254
degrees of, 25
dividing, 269–275
end behavior of, 256–258, 259
factoring, 287–289, 289–290
family of, 265
One-to-one function, 219–220
finding inverse of, 222–223
Orbits. See Planetary orbits
Ordered pair, of numbers, 92
Ordered triple, 648
Orders of magnitude, 350
Origami, 361
Origin (O), 6, 92, 588
ellipse with center at, 792
hyperbola with center at, 800
symmetry with respect to, 99, 100
Orthogonal vectors, 641–642, 644, 656, 
661
Output, in function as machine, 149
p (pi)
series for calculating, 860
value of, 416
Parabolas, 756, 781, 782–790
confocal, 815
constructing, 837, 838
equation of, 783
equation of, deriving, 782–783
family of, 786
focal diameter of, 785–786, 786
focal point of, 787–788
geometric definition of, 782–783
graph of, 96
graph of shifted, 810
with horizontal axis, 784–785
latus rectum of, 785
as quadratic function, 246
sketching, 785–786
with vertical axis, 783–784
Parallax, 490
Parallelepiped, volume of, 663–664
Parallel lines, 111–112
Parallelogram, area of, 663
Parallel vectors, 658–659
Parameters, 58, 612, 613–614, 695
Parametric curve, graphing, 615–616
Parametric equations, 611–620
for cycloid, 614–615
eliminating parameter, 613–614
for a graph, 614
graphing parametric curves, 615–616
for a line, 667
for path of projectile, 625–628
plane curves and, 611–612
polar equations in parametric form, 616
Pareto, Vilfredo, 359
Pareto’s Principle, 359
Partial fraction decomposition, 746–749
Partial fractions, 745–751
Partial sums, of sequences, 847–848, 
854–856, 860–861
Pascal, Blaise, 615, 875
Pascal’s triangle, 880–881, 882–883
Pattern recognition, P1, 861
Paulos, John Allen, 143
Pendulum, law of the, 129
Perfect square, 30, 31, 49
Perihelion, 798, 830
Perilune, 798
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index  I9
graphs of, 255–265
guidelines for graphing, 259
local extrema of, 264–265
nested form, 275
product of, 26–27
real zeros of, 259, 275–286
Tchebycheff, 562
zeros of, 258–263, 272–273
Population growth, 329, 370–375, 
392–393, 397
carrying capacity and, 397
Position vector, 666
Power data, linearizing, 395
Power functions, 160
compared with exponential functions, 
333–334
graphs of, 161–162, 166
modeling with, 393–394, 396
Powers
finding, using De Moivre’s Theorem, 
606–607
formulas for lowering, 556
Predator/prey models, 427, 470, 730
Present value, 338
of an annuity (Ap), 869–870
Prime focus, 790
Prime numbers, 844, 845
Principal, compound interest and, 334
Principal nth root, 18
Principal square root, 18
of complex numbers, 62
of negative numbers, 62
Principle of Mathematical Induction, 
875–877
Principle of Substitution, 27–28
Problem solving, principles, P1–4
Products. See also Multiplication
of functions, 210
inner, 715–716
of polynomials, 26–27
positive/negative, 83
scalar, 713, 714
sign of, 83
Product-sum formulas, 553, 559–560
Projectile
modeling path of, 52–53, 625–628
range of, 575
Projection laws, 523
Projection of vectors, 643–644
Prolate cycloid, 618
Proof
of Binomial Theorem, 885–886
by contradiction, P2
mathematical induction and, 873–874
Proportionality, 123–126
constant of, 123, 124
direct, 122–123
inverse, 124
joint, 125–126
shape and size in natural world, 125
symbol, 125
Proportional sides in similar triangles, 950, 
951
Pure imaginary number, 60
Rate of change
average, 183–190, 192
changing, 186
constant, 187
instantaneous, 185, 920–921
making a linear model from, 193
slope as, 184, 192
Rational exponents, 19–20
Rational expressions, 36–45
adding and subtracting, 38
avoiding common errors, 42
compound fractions, 39–41
multiplying and dividing, 37–38
rationalizing denominator or numerator, 
41
simplifying, 37
Rational functions, 295–311
asymptotes of, 298–307
common factors in numerator and 
denominator, 304–305
graphing, 301–307
with holes, 304–305
inverse of, finding, 223
simple, 295–296
slant asymptotes and end behavior, 
305–307
transformations, 297–298, 311
Rational inequalities, 313–315
Rationalizing the denominator or 
numerator, 20–21, 41, 911
Rational numbers, 2
Rational zeros. See Real zeros, of 
polynomials
Rational Zeros Theorem, 275–278, 291
Real axis, 602
Real number line, 6, 9
Real numbers, 1, 2–12
absolute values and distance, 8–9
Law of Exponents and, 330
natural numbers as, 2
order of (less than, greater than), 6
properties of, 3–5
real lines and, 6
in the real world, 6
sets and intervals, 6–8
Real part, of complex numbers, 59–60
Real zeros, of polynomials, 259, 275–286
Reciprocal functions, 166
Reciprocal identities, 414, 415, 496, 538
Reciprocal relations, 484
Reciprocals of inequalities, direction of 
inequality and, 82
Rectangles, using to estimate area, 932–933
Rectangular coordinates, 587, 589–591
Recursive sequences, 845–846
limits of, 931
as models, 893–896
Reduced row-echelon form of a matrix, 702
Reduction formulas, 418–419, 439
ref command, in calculator, 703
Reference angle, 494–495
Reference numbers, 405–407
finding value of trigonometric function 
with, 412–413
PwrReg command, 396
Pythagoras, 241
Pythagorean identities, 415, 416, 496, 538
Pythagorean Theorem, 241, 951–952
converse of, 952
using, 952
Pythagorean triple, 954
Quadrantal angles, 493
Quadrants, of coordinate plane, 92
Quadratic equations, 48–53
complex roots of, 62–63
exponential equation of quadratic type, 
363
form of, 48
fourth-degree equation of quadratic type, 
54
path of projectile modeled by, 52–53
solving by completing the square,  
49–50
solving by factoring, 48
solving simple, 48–49
trigonometric equation of quadratic type, 
567–568
Quadratic factors, 292–293
irreducible, 292, 748–749
Quadratic formula, 50–51
complex solutions and, 63
discriminant of, 51–52
using Rational Zeros Theorem and, 278
Quadratic function, 246–254
graphing, 246–247
maximum/minimum value of, 247–249
modeling with, 250–251
standard form of, 246–247
Quadratic inequalities, 84–85
Quasi-period, 451n
Quaternions, 662
Quotients, 269, 270
difference quotients, 152
in division, 5
of functions, 210
inequalities and, 85–86
positive/negative, 83
Radian measure, of angles, 472–473, 475
Radicals, 17–19
combining, 19
conjugate, 41
equations for, 54
nth root and, 18–19
using, with rational exponents, 19, 20
Radio, AM and FM, 428
Radioactive decay model, 376
Radioactive elements, half-lives of, 
375–376
Radioactive waste, 377
Radiocarbon dating, 353, 367
Ramanujan, Srinivasa, 860
Range
finding from graphs, 170–171
of functions, 149
of an inverse function, 220, 221
of a projectile, 575
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I10 
Index
Reflecting graphs, 200–201, 203,  
346–347
Reflection, total internal, 569
Reflection property
of ellipses, 796
of hyperbolas, 804
of parabolas, 787
Refraction, angle of, 569
Refraction, index of, 569
Regression line, 140–143, 690
Relations, reciprocal, 484
Relative decay rate, 376
Relative growth rate, 372–375
Relativity, Theory of, 158, 625, 737
Remainders, 269, 270
Remainder Theorem, 272
Repeating decimal, 2–3, 864
Resistance, electrical, 44, 307
Resultant force, 636
Rhind papyrus, 747
Richter, Charles, 382
Richter scale, 382–384
Right-hand limits, 903–904, 911–912
Right-hand rule, 662
Right triangles, 482–486
hypotenuse of, 951
legs of, 951
proving triangle to be, 952
solving for angles in, 503–504
Right triangle trigonometry, 482–490
applications, 484–486
Rise, vs. run in slope, 106
Rivest, Ron, 302
Robinson, Julia, 713
Romanus, Adrianus, 416
Root functions, 160, 166
Root-mean-square (rms) method, 451
Roots
complex, 62–63
of complex numbers, 607–609
of equations, 45
of polynomial equations, 259
of unity, 294
Roses (polar curve), 596–597, 599
Rotation of axes, 816–824
eliminating xy-term, 819
formulas, 817
graphing rotated conics, 821
matrix form of formulas, 820, 824
rotating hyperbolas, 817–818
Row-echelon form
of a matrix, 702–704, 705–708
reduced, 702, 704–705
solutions of a linear system in,  
705–708
solving linear equations, 703–704, 705
Row transformations, of determinants, 
737–738
rref command, in calculators, 709
RSA code, 302
Rubik’s Tetrahedron, 666
Rule(s)
function as, 147
for inequalities, 82
Sine
addition and subtraction formulas for, 
545, 547, 553
curves, 423, 427, 428, 468
curves, phase difference between, 
454–455
double-angle formula for, 554, 819
formula for, 491
half-angle formula for, 556, 557, 820
Law of, 508–516
product-to-sum formula for, 559
sum of sines and cosines, 549–550
sum-to-product formula for, 559, 560
trigonometric ratios, 482
Sine function, 409
graphing, 419–421
graphing transformations of, 421–425
inverse, 439–441, 501–503
periodic properties of, 419
shifted curves, 424–425, 453–455
special values of, 410
Singular matrix, 728
SinReg command, in calculator, 468
Sinusoidal curves, 423, 431
fitting to data, 466–470
Slant asymptotes, 305–306
Slope
indicating rate of change, 184, 192
of lines, 106–108
making a linear model from, 194
Slope-intercept form of equation of a line, 
109
Slope of the line tangent to a curve, 
916–918
Snell’s Law, 569
Solutions. See Roots
Sørensen, Søren Peter Lauritz, 381
Sound. See also Harmonic motion
intensity levels of, 348–349, 384–385
inverse square law for, 386
Sound beats, 563
Special Product Formulas, 27–28, 29, 35
Special Theory of Relativity, 625
Species, study of survival of, 719
Species-Area relationship, 360
Sphere
area of, 157
equation of, 650–651
Spiral, as polar graph, 599
Splines, polynomial curves, 255, 260
Spring, vibrating, 446–447, 448
Spring constant, 127, 458, 946
Square matrix, 724, 734–737
Square roots, 18–19
of matrices, 723
of negative numbers, 62
nth root and, 18
Squaring function, 149
Standard form
of equation of a circle, 98
of fractional expression, 21
Standard position, of angles, 473–475
Standing waves, 582–583
Stars, modeling brightness of, 449
Rule of Signs (Descartes’), 278–279
Run, vs. rise in slope, 106
Scalar product, of matrices, 713, 714
Scalar projection of u along v, 642–643
Scalars, 630, 631
Scalar triple product, 663–664
Scatter plots, 139–144, 325, 392–393, 395, 
396
fitting sinusoidal curves to data, 466–470
Scientific notation, 16–17
Secant
formula for, 491
trigonometric ratios, 482
Secant function, 409
graphing, 433, 434, 437
inverse, 444
periodic properties, 432
secant curves, 436, 437
special values of, 410
Secant line, average rate of change as slope 
of, 184
Sectors, circular, 476
Self-similar, fractals as, 863
Semi-log plot, 395
Semiperimeter, 519
Seq mode, calculators, 844, 896
Sequences, 841–867
arithmetic, 853–858
convergent, 928, 930
defined, 842
divergent, 928, 930
Fibonacci, 713, 845–846, 849, 852
finding terms of, 843–844, 859–860
geometric, 858–867
harmonic, 857
infinite series, 861–864
partial sums of, 847–848, 854–856, 
860–861
properties of sums of, 850
recursive, 845–846, 893–896, 931
sigma notation of, 848–850
Sequences, limits of, 928–929
Series
for calculating π, 860
infinite, 861–864
Set-builder notation, 6
Sets
as collection of objects, 6
unions and intersections, 7
Shamir, Adi, 302
Shanks, William, 416
Shifted conics, 807–816
Side-angle-side (SAS) congruence 
property, 949
Side-side-side (SSS) congruence property, 
949
Sieve of Eratosthenes, 844
Sight, line of, 485
Sigma notation, 848–850
Signs, of trigonometric functions, 412, 493
Similarity, 484
Similar triangles, 950–951
Simple harmonic motion, 445–451, 581
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index  I11
Stefan Boltzmann Law, 182
Step functions, 163, 169
Stochastic matrices, 718
Streamlines of vector field, 678
Substitution, Principle of, 27–28
Substitution, trigonometric, 542
Substitution method
for solving linear systems, 680–681
for solving system of nonlinear 
equations, 751
using direct substitution for finding 
limits, 909–910
Subtraction
of complex numbers, 60–61
of inequalities, 82
of matrices, 713
overview of, 4
of polynomials, 26
of rational expressions, 38
of vectors, 631
Subtraction and addition formulas, 
545–553
Summation notation, 848–850
Summation variable, 848
Sums
of cubes, 30, 31
of functions, 210
of infinite geometric series, 863–864
of infinite series, 862
limits of approximating, 933–935
of matrices, 713–714
partial sums of sequences, 847–848, 
854–856, 860–861
of powers, 877
of sequences, properties of, 850
of sines and cosines, 549–550
Sum-to-product formulas, 559–560
Supplement of angle, 511
Surveying, 533–536
using triangulation for, 512
Symmetry, 99–101
tests for, 597–598
Synthetic division, 270–271
Systems of equations, 679, 680
elimination method for solving, 681–682
graphical method for solving, 682–683
modeling with, 685–687
substitution method for solving, 680–681
Systems of inequalities, graphing, 758–763. 
See also Inequalities
linear inequalities, 759–761
Systems of linear equations
dependent and inconsistent, 683–685, 
693–695
graph of, 693
modeling with, 685–687, 695–696, 
708–709
several variables, 690–698
solutions of, 680, 683–684, 693–694
three variables, 740–741
two variables, 680–690, 739–740
using Cramer’s Rule for solving, 738–741
writing as matrix equations, 717
Systems of nonlinear equations, 751–756
Traffic management, 295
Transformations
of cosecant and secant functions, 
436–437
of exponential functions, 333
of functions, 198–210
of monomials, 255–256
of rational functions, 297–298, 311
of sine and cosine functions, 421–425
of tangent and cotangent functions, 
434–436
Transition matrix, 730
Transverse axes, of hyperbolas, 800, 
801–803
Traveling waves, 581–582
Triangle Inequality, 12
Triangles
area of, 497–498, 519–520, 663, 
741–742, 745
congruent, 949–950
Pascal’s triangle, 880–881, 882–883
right triangle trigonometry, 482–490
similar, 950–951
solving the ambiguous case, 510–513, 
516
solving height problems, 69
solving oblique, 508
special, 483–484
Triangular form, of linear systems, 691
Triangulation
in Global Positioning System (GPS), 753
for surveying, 512
Trigonometric equations, 538, 564–576
on an interval, solving, 504
Trigonometric functions, inverse, 439–445, 
501–508
evaluating expressions involving, 
548–549, 558
Trigonometric functions, of angles, 
471–536
defined, 491
reference angle and, 494–495
relationship to trigonometric functions of 
real numbers, 411, 492
signs of, 493
Trigonometric functions, of real numbers, 
401–470
defined, 409
domains of, 412
even-odd properties, 414–415
relationship to trigonometric functions of 
angles, 411, 492
signs of, 412
trigonometric identities, 414, 415–416
unit circle, 402–409
values of, 412–415, 432
Trigonometric graphs, 419–439
of cosecant and secant functions, 
433–434, 436–437
graphing devices used for, 426–428
of sine and cosine functions, 419–421
of sum of sine and cosine, 550
of tangent and cotangent functions, 
432–436
TABLE command, in calculators, 844, 851, 
896
Table of values for a function, 152, 154, 155
Tables, finding limits using, 899–900
Taking cases, P2
Tangent, 491
addition and subtraction formulas for, 
545, 553
double-angle formula for, 554
half-angle formula for, 556, 557
to parabola, 837, 839
trigonometric ratios, 482
Tangent function, 409
graphing, 432–435
inverse, 442–443, 502–503
periodic properties, 432
special values of, 410
tangent curves, 434–435
Tangent line, 914–918
defined, 916
to a hyperbola, finding, 917–918
Taussky-Todd, Olga, 718
Taylor, Brook, 433, 854
Tchebycheff, P.L., 562
Tchebycheff polynomials, 562
Terminal points
reference numbers and, 405–407
on unit circle, 402–405
of vectors, 630
Terminal side, of angles, 472
Terminal velocity, 342
Terms, 31
combining like, 26
of polynomial, 25, 26
Terms, of sequences
defined, 842
finding, 843–844, 853–854, 856, 
859–860, 884–885
for recursive sequences, 845
Test points, graphing, 259, 260, 757
Test values for intervals, 83, 84
Tetrahedron, 659
Rubik’s Tetrahedron, 666
Thales of Meletus, 486
Theodolite, 512
Theory of Relativity, 158, 625, 737
Three-dimensional coordinate geometry, 
647–653
distance formula in, 649–650
equation of a sphere, 650–651
equations of lines in, 666–667
equations of planes in, 667–669
three-dimensional rectangular coordinate 
system, 648–649
vector fields in space, 677
vectors in, 653–659
Tide, modeling height of, 466–468
Time needed to do job problems, 71–72
Torricelli, Evangelista, 250
Torricelli’s Law, 157, 228, 250, 328
Total internal reflection, 569
TRACE command, in calculators, 119, 
176–177, 761, 900
Trace of sphere, 651
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I12 
Index
Trigonometric identities, 538, 538–545
of angles, 495–497
fundamental, 415–416, 496, 538
proving, 539–542
of real numbers, 414, 415–416
simplifying trigonometric expressions, 
538–539
solving trigonometric equations by 
using, 570–572
Trigonometric ratios, 482–483, 485, 491
special, 483–484
Trigonometric substitution, 542
Trinomials, 25
factoring, 29–30
Triple-angle formula, 555
Trochoid, 618
True velocity, 635
Tsu Ch’ung-chih, 416
Turing, Alan, 118, 202
Two-intercept form of linear equation, 115
Two-sided limits, 903–904, 911
Unbounded regions, of planes, 761
Unbreakable codes, 302
Unions
of intervals, 8
of sets, 7
Unit circle, 402–409
points on, 402
reference numbers, 405–407, 412–413
terminal points, 402–405
Units of measurement, 6
Unit vector, 633, 659
Universal machine, 202
Upper and Lower Bounds Theorem, 279, 
281–282
Upper bounds, 279–281, 282
Value of f at x, 149
Variable force, 944
work done by, 945–946
Variables
correlation of, 143–144
defined, 25
dependent and independent, 149
leading, 705
in linear systems, 680–687
summation, 848
Variation, modeling, 122–130
direct, 122–123
inverse, 124
joint, 125–126
Variation in sign, 279
Vector fields
flow lines (or streamlines) of, 678
gravitational, 677
modeling, 676–678
Viète, François, 50, 501
Viewing angle, 558
Voltage, measuring, 451
Volterra, Vito, 730
Von Neumann, John, 202
Wankel, Felix, 619
Wavelet theory, 28
Waves
standing, 582–583
traveling, 581–582
Weather prediction, 686
Weber-Fechner Law, 384
Whispering galleries, reflection property 
used in, 796
Wiles, Andrew, 117
Witch of (Maria) Agnesi (curve), 619
Words, representing functions with, 154, 
155
Work, 645
calculating with dot product, 644–645
done by variable force, 945–946
modeled by area, 944–947
x-axis, 92, 99, 100, 648
x-coordinate, 92
x-intercepts, 96, 97
graphing rational functions and,  
301–306
vertex and, 254
xy-plane, 648
xz-plane, 648
y-axis, 92, 99, 100, 648
y-coordinate, 92
y-intercepts, 97
graphing rational functions and,  
301–306
yz-plane, 648
z-axis, 648
Zero(s)
additive identity, 4
complex, 287–294
Factor Theorem and, 272–273
multiplicities and, 263, 289–291
of polynomials, 258–263, 272–273, 276
Rational Zeros Theorem, 275–278, 291
real, 259, 275–286
zero command, in calculators, 119
Zero exponents, 14
Zero-Product Property, 48, 567
Zeros Theorem, 289
Zero vector, 630, 633
ZOOM feature, in calculators, 900
Vectors, 629–678. See also Dot product
algebraic operations on, 632–633, 654
analytic description of, 631–634
angle between, 641, 656
calculating components of, 643
component form of, 631–632, 653
coplanar, 664
cross product of, 659–666
direction angles of, 656–657
direction of, 630, 631, 634, 642–643, 
662
dot product of, 639–642, 655
equations of lines, 666–667
equations of planes, 668–669
expressing in terms of i, j, and k, 655
expressing in terms of i and j, 633–634
geometric description of, 630–631
horizontal and vertical components, 631, 
634
magnitude, 630, 632, 654
modeling velocity and force, 634–636
normal, 668
orthogonal, 641–642, 644, 656, 661
parallel, 658–659
perpendicularity, checking for, 642, 656
perpendicular to plane, finding, 662
projection of u onto v, 643–644
properties of, 633
resolving, 643–644
in space, 653–659
unit, 633, 659
use of, 630
wind as, tacking against, 629, 645
zero, 630, 633
Velocity
estimating, 923
instantaneous, 920–921
modeling, 634–636
terminal, 342
of traveling waves, 581–582
true, 635
Vertical asymptotes, 297, 298–307, 
432–434, 902
Vertical axes, of parabolas, 783–784
Vertical lines, 110
Vertical line test, 164
Vertical shifts, graphs, 198–199, 200
Vertical stretching and shrinking, graphs, 
202–203
Vertices
of ellipses, 792, 793
of feasible region, 776, 777, 778
of hyperbolas, 800, 803–804
of parabolas, 246, 782
of systems of inequalities, 758, 759, 760, 
761
x-intercepts and, 254
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
chapter 1 
(continued)
Review: Concept Check Answers
	 1.	 (a)	 What does the set of natural numbers consist of? What 
does the set of integers consist of? Give an example of 
an integer that is not a natural number.
The set of natural numbers consists of the counting num-
bers 1, 2, 3, . . . . The set of integers consists of the natu-
ral numbers together with their negatives and 0. The 
number 21 is an integer that is not a natural number.
(b)	 What does the set of rational numbers consist of? Give 
an example of a rational number that is not an integer.
The set of rational numbers is constructed by taking all 
ratios of nonzero integers, and then adding the number 0. 
The number 2/3 is a rational number that is not an 
integer.
(c)	 What does the set of irrational numbers consist of? Give 
an example of an irrational number.
The set of irrational numbers consists of all those num-
bers that cannot be expressed as a ratio of integers. The 
number !5 is an irrational number.
(d)	 What does the set of real numbers consist of? 
The set of real numbers consists of all the rational num-
bers along with all the irrational numbers.
	 2.	 A property of real numbers is given. State the property and 
give an example in which the property is used.
	
(i)	 Commutative Property:
a 1 b 5 b 1 a and ab 5 ba. For example, 
5 1 8 5 8 1 5 and 5 # 8 5 8 # 5.
	
(ii)	 Associative Property:
1a 1 b2 1 c 5 a 1 1b 1 c2  and 1ab2c 5 a1bc2 .  
For example, 12 1 52 1 3 5 2 1 15 1 32  and 
12 # 523 5 215 # 32 .
	
(iii)	 Distributive Property:
a1b 1 c2 5 ab 1 ac and 1b 1 c2a 5 ab 1 ac.  
For example, 711 1 42 5 7 # 1 1 7 # 4 and 
12 1 529 5 9 # 2 1 9 # 5.
	 3.	 Explain the difference between the open interval 1a, b2  and 
the closed interval 3a, b4. Give an example of an interval that 
is neither open nor closed.
The open interval excludes the endpoints a and b, and the 
closed interval includes the endpoints a and b. The interval 
10, 14 is neither open nor closed.
	 4.	 Give the formula for finding the distance between two real 
numbers a and b. Use the formula to find the distance 
between 103 and 252.
The distance between a and b is 0  b 2 a 0 . The distance 
between 103 and 252 is 0 12522 2 103 0 5 155.
	 5.	 Suppose a ? 0 is any real number.
(a)	 In the expression an, which is the base and which is the 
exponent?
The base is a and the exponent is n.
(b)	 What does an mean if n is a positive integer? What does 
65 mean?
The expression an means to multiply a by itself n times. 
For example, 65 5 6 # 6 # 6 # 6 # 6.
(c)	 What does a2n mean if n is a positive integer? What 
does 322 mean?
The expression a2n means the reciprocal of an, that is, 
a2n 5 1
an. For example, 322 5 1
32.
(d)	 What does an mean if n is zero? 
Any number raised to the 0 power is always equal to 1.
(e)	 If m and n are positive integers, what does am/n mean? 
What does 43/2 mean?
The expression am/n means the nth root of the mth power 
of a. So 43/2 means that you take the square root of 4 and 
then raise it to the third power: 43/2 5 8.
	 6.	 State the first five Laws of Exponents. Give examples in 
which you would use each law.
Law 1: aman 5 am1n; 
52 # 56 5 58
Law 2: am
an 5 am2n; 
34
32 5 3422 5 32
Law 3: 1am2 n 5 amn; 
1322 4 5 32#4 5 38
Law 4: 1ab2 n 5 anbn; 
13 # 52 4 5 34 # 54
Law 5: a a
b b
n
5 an
bn; 
a 3
5 b
2
5 32
52
	 7.	 When you multiply two powers of the same number, what 
should you do with the exponents? When you raise a power 
to a new power, what should you do with the exponents? 
When you multiply two powers of the same number, you add 
the exponents. When you raise a power to a new power, you 
multiply the two exponents.
	 8.	 (a)	 What does !
n a 5 b mean? 
The number b is the nth root of a.
(b)	 Is it true that "a2 is equal to 0  a 0 ? Try values for a that 
are positive and negative.
Yes, "a2 5 0  a 0 .
(c)	 How many real nth roots does a positive real number 
have if n is even? If n is odd?
There are two real nth roots if n is even and one real nth 
root if n is odd.
(d)	 Is !
4 22 a real number? Is !
3 22 a real number? Explain 
why or why not.
The expression !
4 22 does not represent a real number 
because the fourth root of a negative number is unde-
fined. The expression !
3 22 does represent a real number 
because the third root of a negative number is defined.
✃
chapter 1 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

chapter 1 
Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
	 9.	 Explain the steps involved in rationalizing a denominator. 
What is the logical first step in rationalizing the denominator 
of the expression 5
!3?
The logical first step in rationalizing 5
!3 is to multiply the 
numerator and denominator by !3:
5
!3 # !3
!3 5 5!3
3
	10.	 Explain the difference between expanding an expression and 
factoring an expression.
We use the Distributive Property to expand algebraic expres-
sions, and we reverse this process by factoring an expression 
as a product of simpler ones.
	11.	 State the Special Product Formulas used for expanding the 
given expression. Use the appropriate formula to expand 
1x 1 52 2 and 1x 1 52 1x 2 52 .
	
(i)	 1a 1 b2 2 5 a2 1 2ab 1 b2
	
(ii)	 1a 2 b2 2 5 a2 2 2ab 1 b2
	
(iii)	 1a 1 b2 3 5 a3 1 3a2b 1 3ab2 1 b3
	
(iv)	 1a 2 b2 3 5 a3 2 3a2b 1 3ab2 2 b3
	
(v)	 1a 1 b2 1a 2 b2 5 a2 2 b2
By (i) we have 1x 1 52 2 5 x2 1 10x 1 25, and by (v) we 
have 1x 1 52 1x 2 52 5 x2 2 25.
	12.	 State the following Special Factoring Formulas. Use the 
appropriate formula to factor x2 2 9.
	
(i)	 Difference of Squares: a2 2 b2 5 1a 1 b2 1a 2 b2
	
(ii)	 Perfect Square: a2 1 2ab 1 b2 5 1a 1 b2 2
	
(iii)	 Sum of Cubes: 1a 1 b2 1a2 2 ab 1 b22 5 1a 1 b2 3
By (i) we have x2 2 9 5 1x 1 32 1x 2 32 .
	13.	 If the numerator and the denominator of a rational expression 
have a common factor, how would you simplify the expres-
sion? Simplify the expression x2 1 x
x 1 1 .
You would simplify the expression by canceling the common 
factors in the numerator and the denominator. We simplify 
the expression as follows:
x2 1 x
x 1 1 5
x1x 1 12
x 1 1
5 x
	14.	 Explain the following.
(a)	 How to multiply and divide rational expressions. 
To multiply two rational expressions, we multiply their 
numerators and multiply their denominators. To divide a 
rational expression by another rational expression, we 
invert the divisor and multiply.
(b)	 How to add and subtract rational expressions. 
To add or subtract two rational expressions, we first find 
the least common denominator (LCD), then rewrite the 
expressions using the LCD, and then add the fractions 
and combine the terms in the numerator.
(c)	 What LCD do we use to perform the addition in the 
­expression 
3
x 2 1 1
5
x 1 2?
We use 1x 2 12 1x 1 22 .
	15.	 What is the logical first step in rationalizing the denominator 
of 
3
1 1 !x?
Multiply both the numerator and the denominator by 
A1 2 !x B: 
3
1 1 !x # 1 2 !x
1 2 !x 5
3A1 2 !x B
1 2 x
	16.	 What is the difference between an algebraic expression and 
an equation? Give examples.
An algebraic expression is a combination of variables; for 
example, 2x2 1 xy 1 6. An equation is a statement that two 
mathematical expressions are equal; for example, 
3x 2 2y 5 9x 2 1.
	17.	 Write the general form of each type of equation.
	
(i)	 Linear equation: ax 1 b 5 0
	
(ii)	 Quadratic equation: ax2 1 bx 1 c 5 0
	18.	 What are the three ways to solve a quadratic equation? 
	 (i)	 Factor the equation and use the Zero-Product property.
	(ii)	 Complete the square and solve.
	(iii)	 Use the Quadratic Formula.
	19.	 State the Zero-Product Property. Use the property to solve the 
equation x1x 2 12 5 0.
The Zero-Product Property states that AB 5 0 if and only if 
A 5 0 or B 5 0.
To solve the equation x1x 2 12 5 0, the Zero-Product  
Property shows that either x 5 0 or x 5 1.
	20.	 What do you need to add to ax2 1 bx  to complete the 
square? Complete the square for the expression x2 1 6x.
To complete the square, add a b
2 b
2
. To make x2 1 6x a  
perfect square, add a 6
2 b
2
5 9, and this gives the perfect 
square x2 1 6x 1 9 5 1x 1 32 2.
	21.	 State the Quadratic Formula for the quadratic equation 
ax2 1 bx 1 c 5 0, and use it to solve the equation 
x2 1 6x 2 1 5 0.
The Quadratic Formula is x 5 2b 6 "b2 2 4ac
2a
.
Using the Quadratic Formula we get
x 5
26 6 !36 2 4112 1212
2112
5 23 6 !10
(continued)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
(continued)
Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 1 
	22.	 What is the discriminant of the quadratic equation 
ax2 1 bx 1 c 5 0? Find the discriminant of 
2x2 2 3x 1 5 5 0. How many real solutions does this  
equation have?
The discriminant is b2 2 4ac. The discriminant of 
2x2 2 3x 1 5 5 0 is negative, so there are no real solutions.
	23.	 What is the logical first step in solving the equation 
!x 2 1 5 x 2 3? Why is it important to check your 
answers when solving equations of this type? 
The logical first step in solving this equation is to square both 
sides. It is important to check your answers because the oper-
ation of squaring both sides can turn a false equation into a 
true one. In this case x 5 5 and x 5 2 are potential solu-
tions, but after checking, we see that x 5 5 is the only 
solution.
	24.	 What is a complex number? Give an example of a complex 
number, and identify the real and imaginary parts.
A complex number is an expression of the form a 1 bi, 
where a and b are real numbers and i 2 5 21. The complex 
number 2 1 3i has real part 2 and imaginary part 3.
	25.	 What is the complex conjugate of a complex number a 1 bi? 
The complex conjugate of a 1 bi is a 2 bi. 
	26.	 (a)	 How do you add complex numbers? 
To add complex numbers, add the real parts and the 
imaginary parts.
(b)	 How do you multiply 13 1 5i2 12 2 i2 ? 
Multiply complex numbers like binomials: 
13 1 5i2 12 2 i2 5 6 1 10i 2 3i 2 5i 2 5 11 1 7i
(c)	 Is 13 2 i2 13 1 i2  a real number? 
Yes, 13 2 i2 13 1 i2 5 9 2 i 2 5 10
(d)	 How do you simplify the quotient 13 1 5i2/13 2 i2 ?
Multiply the numerator and the denominator by 3 1 i, 
the complex conjugate of the denominator.
	27.	 State the guidelines for modeling with equations. 
	 (i)	 Identify the variable.
	(ii)	 Translate from words to algebra.
	(iii)  Set up the model.
	(iv)	 Solve the equation and check your answer.
	28.	 Explain how to solve the given type of problem.
(a)	 Linear inequality: 2x $ 1
Divide both sides by 2; the solution set is 3 1
2, `B.
(b)	 Nonlinear inequality: 1x 2 12 1x 2 42 , 0
Find the intervals and make a table or diagram; the solu-
tion set is 11, 42 .
(c)	 Absolute value equation: 0  2x 2 5 0 5 7
Solve the two equations 2x 2 5 5 7 and 2x 2 5 5 27; 
the solutions are x 5 6 and x 5 21.
(d)	 Absolute value inequality: 0  2x 2 5 0 # 7
Solve the equivalent inequality 27 # 2x 2 5 # 7; the 
solution set is 321, 64 .
	29.	 (a)	 In the coordinate plane, what is the horizontal axis called 
and what is the vertical axis called?
The horizontal axis is called the x-axis and the vertical 
axis is called the y-axis.
(b)	 To graph an ordered pair of numbers 1x,  y2 , you need the 
coordinate plane. For the point 12,  32 , which is the 
x-coordinate and which is the y-coordinate?
The x-coordinate is 2, and the y-coordinate is 3.
(c)	 For an equation in the variables x and y, how do you 
determine whether a given point is on the graph? Is the 
point 15,  32  on the graph of the equation y 5 2x 2 1?
Any point 1x,  y2  on the graph must satisfy the equation.  
Since 3 ? 2152 2 1, the point 15,  32  is not on the graph 
of the equation y 5 2x 2 1.
	30.	 (a)	 What is the formula for finding the distance between the 
points 1x1,  y12  and 1x2,  y22 ?
d 5 "1x2 2 x12 2 1 1y2 2 y12 2
(b)	 What is the formula for finding the midpoint between 
1x1,  y12  and 1x2,  y22 ?
a x1 1 x2
2
, y1 1 y2
2
b
	31.	 How do you find x-intercepts and y-intercepts of a graph of 
an equation?
To find the x-intercepts, you set y 5 0 and solve for x. To 
find the y-intercepts, you set x 5 0 and solve for y.
	32.	 (a)	 Write an equation of the circle with center 1h,  k2  and 
radius r. 
1x 2 h2 2 1 1y 2 k2 2 5 r2
(b)	 Find the equation of the circle with center 12,  212  and 
radius 3.
1x 2 22 2 1 1y 1 12 2 5 9
	33.	 (a)	 How do you test whether the graph of an equation is 
symmetric with respect to the (i) x-axis, (ii) y-axis, and 
(iii) origin?
	 (i)	 When you replace y by 2y, the resulting equation 
is equivalent to the original one. 
	(ii)	 When you replace x by 2x, the resulting equation 
is equivalent to the original one. 
	(iii)	 When you replace x by 2x and y by 2y, the result-
ing equation is equivalent to the original one. 
(b)	 What type of symmetry does the graph of the equation
xy2 1 y2x2 5 3x have?
The graph is symmetric with respect to the x-axis.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

chapter 1 
Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
	34.	 (a)	 What is the slope of a line? How do you compute the 
slope of the line through the points 121,  42 and 11,  222?
The slope of a line is a measure of “steepness.” The slope 
of the line through the points 121, 42 and 11, 222 is
m 5 rise
run 5 22 2 4
1 2 1212 5 23
(b)	 How do you find the slope and y-intercept of the line 
6x 1 3y 5 12? 
You write the equation in slope-intercept form 
y 5 mx 1 b. The slope is m, and the y-intercept is b. 
The slope-intercept form of this line is y 5 22x 1 4, so 
the slope is 22 and the intercept is 4.
(c)	 How do you write the equation for a line that has slope 3 
and passes through the point 11,  22 ?
Use the point-slope form of the equation of a line. So the 
equation is y 2 2 5 31x 2 12 .
	35.	 Give an equation of a vertical line and of a horizontal line 
that passes through the point 12,  32 .
An equation of a vertical line that passes through 12, 32  is 
x 5 2. An equation of a horizontal line that passes through 
(2, 3) is y 5 3.
	36.	 State the general equation of a line.
Ax 1 By 5 C, where A and B are not both zero
	37.	 Given lines with slopes m1 and m2, explain how you can tell 
whether the lines are (i) parallel, (ii) perpendicular.
	 (i)	 The lines are parallel if m1 5 m2.
	(ii)	 The lines are perpendicular if m2 5 2 1
m1
.
	38.	 How do you solve an equation (i) algebraically?  
(ii) graphically? 
	 (i)	 Use the rules of algebra to isolate the unknown on one 
side of the equation.
	(ii)	 Move all terms to one side and set that side equal to y. 
Sketch a graph of the resulting equation to find the val-
ues of x at which y 5 0.
	39.	 How do you solve an inequality (i) algebraically?  
(ii) graphically? 
	 (i)	 Use the rules of algebra to isolate the unknown on one 
side of the inequality.
	(ii)	 Move all terms to one side, and set that side equal to y.  
Sketch a graph to find the values x where the graph is 
above (or below) the x-axis.
	40.	 Write an equation that expresses each relationship.
(a)	 y is directly proportional to x: 
y 5 kx
(b)	 y is inversely proportional to x: 
y 5 k
x
(c)	 z is jointly proportional to x and y: 
z 5 kxy
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
(continued)
Review: Concept Check Answers
chapter 2 
	 1.	 Define each concept.
(a)	 Function
A function f is a rule that assigns to each input x in a set 
A exactly one output f1x2  in a set B.
(b)	 Domain and range of a function
The domain of a function is the set of all the possible 
input values, and the range is the set of all possible out-
put values.
(c)	 Graph of a function
The graph of a function f is the set of all ordered pairs 
1x, f1x22  plotted in a coordinate plane for x in the 
domain of f.
(d)	 Independent and dependent variables 
The symbol that represents any value in the domain of a 
function f is called an independent variable, and the 
symbol that represents any value in the range of f is 
called a dependent variable.
	 2.	 Describe the four ways of representing a function.
A function can be represented verbally (using words), alge-
braically (using a formula), visually (using a graph), and 
numerically (using a table of values).
	 3.	 Sketch graphs of the following functions by hand.
(a)	 f1x2 5 x2	
(b)	 g1x2 5 x3
1
1
y
x
0
	
1
5
y
x
0
(c)	 h1x2 5 0  x 0 	
(d)	 k1x2 5 !x
1
1
y
x
0
	
1
1
y
x
0
	 4.	 What is a piecewise defined function? Give an example.
A piecewise defined function is defined by different formulas 
on different parts of its domain. An example is
f1x2 5 ex2
if x . 0
2
if x # 0
	 5.	 (a)	 What is the Vertical Line Test, and what is it used for?
The Vertical Line Test states that a curve in the coordi-
nate plane represents a function if and only if no vertical 
line intersects the curve more than once. It is used to 
determine when a given curve represents a function.
(b)	 What is the Horizontal Line Test, and what is it used for?
The Horizontal Line Test states that a function is one-to-
one if and only if no horizontal line intersects its graph 
more than once. It is used to determine when a function 
is one-to-one.
	 6.	 Define each concept, and give an example of each.
(a)	 Increasing function
A function is increasing when its graph rises. More  
precisely, a function is increasing on an interval I if 
f1x12 , f1x22  whenever x1 , x2 in I. For example,  
the function f1x2 5 x2 is an increasing function on the  
interval 10, ` 2 .
(b)	 Decreasing function
A function is decreasing when its graph falls. More  
precisely, a function is decreasing on an interval I if 
f1x12 . f1x22  whenever x1 , x2 in I. For example,  
the function f1x2 5 x2 is a decreasing function on the  
interval 12`, 02 .
(c)	 Constant function
A function f is constant if f1x2 5 c. For example, the 
function f1x2 5 3 is constant.
	 7.	 Suppose we know that the point 13, 52  is a point on the graph 
of a function f. Explain how to find f132  and f 21152 .
Since 13, 52  is on the graph of f, the value 3 is the input and 
the value 5 is the output, so f132 5 5 and f21152 5 3.
	 8.	 What does it mean to say that f142  is a local maximum value 
of f?
The value f142  is a local maximum if f142 $ f 1x2  for all x 
near 4.
	 9.	 Explain how to find the average rate of change of a function 
f between x 5 a and x 5 b.
The average rate of change of f is 
change in y
change in x 5
f1b2 2 f1a2
b 2 a
	10.	 (a)	 What is the slope of a linear function? How do you find 
it? What is the rate of change of a linear function?
The slope of the graph of a linear function 
f1x2 5 ax 1 b is the same as the rate of change of f, 
and they are both equal to a, the coefficient of x.
(b)	 Is the rate of change of a linear function constant? 
Explain.
Yes, because it is equal to the slope, and the slope is the 
same between any two points.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 2 
(c)	 Give an example of a linear function, and sketch its 
graph.
An example is f1x2 5 2x 1 1, and the graph is shown 
below.
f1x2 5 2x 1 1
1
2
y
x
0
	11.	 Suppose the graph of a function f is given. Write an equation 
for each of the graphs that are obtained from the graph of f 
as follows.
(a)	 Shift upward 3 units: y 5 f1x2 1 3
(b)	 Shift downward 3 units: y 5 f1x2 2 3
(c)	 Shift 3 units to the right: y 5 f1x 2 32
(d)	 Shift 3 units to the left: y 5 f1x 1 32
(e)	 Reflect in the x-axis: y 5 2f1x2
(f)	 Reflect in the y-axis: y 5 f12x2
(g)	 Stretch vertically by a factor of 3: y 5 3f1x2
(h)	 Shrink vertically by a factor of 1
3: y 5 1
3 f1x2
(i)	 Shrink horizontally by a factor of 1
3: y 5 f13x2
(j)	 Stretch horizontally by a factor of 3: y 5 fA1
3 xB
	12.	 (a)	 What is an even function? How can you tell that a func-
tion is even by looking at its graph? Give an example of 
an even function.
An even function f satisfies f12x2 5 f1x2  for all x in its 
domain. If the graph of a function is symmetric with 
respect to the y-axis, then the function is even. Some 
examples are f1x2 5 x2 and f1x2 5 0  x 0 .
(b)	 What is an odd function? How can you tell that a func-
tion is odd by looking at its graph? Give an example of 
an odd function.
An odd function f satisfies f12x2 5 2f1x2  for all x in 
its domain. If the graph of a function is symmetric with 
respect to the origin, then the function is odd. Some 
examples are f1x2 5 x3 and f1x2 5 !
3 x.
	13.	 Suppose that f has domain A and g has domain B. What are 
the domains of the following functions?
(a)	 Domain of f 1 g: A > B
(b)	 Domain of fg: A > B
(c)	 Domain of f/g: 5x [ A > B 0  g1x2 ? 06
	14.	 (a)	 How is the composition function f + g defined? What is 
its domain? 
The function f + g is defined by f + g1x2 5 f1g1x22 . The 
domain is the set of all x in the domain of g such that 
g1x2  is in the domain of f.
(b)	 If g1a2 5 b and f1b2 5 c, then explain how to find 
1f + g21a2 .
To find f + g1a2 , we evaluate the following:
f + g1a2 5 f1g1a22 5 f1b2 5 c
	15.	 (a)	 What is a one-to-one function?
A function with domain A is called a one-to-one function 
if no two elements of A have the same image. More pre-
cisely, f1x12 ? f1x22  whenever x1 ? x2.
(b)	 How can you tell from the graph of a function whether it 
is one-to-one?
We use the Horizontal Line Test, which states that a 
function is one-to-one if and only if no horizontal line 
intersects its graph more than once.
(c)	 Suppose that f is a one-to-one function with domain A 
and range B. How is the inverse function f 21 defined? 
What are the domain and range of f 21? 
The inverse function of f has domain B and range A and 
is defined by 
f 211y2 5 x    3     f1x2 5 y
(d)	 If you are given a formula for f, how do you find a  
formula for f 21? Find the inverse of the function 
f 1x2 5 2x.
We write y 5 f1x2 , solve the equation for x in terms  
of y, and interchange x and y. The resulting equation is 
y 5 f 211x2 . If f1x2 5 2x, we write y 5 2x, solve for x 
to get x 5 1
2 y, interchange x and y to get f 211x2 5 1
2 x.
(e)	 If you are given a graph of f, how do you find a graph of 
the inverse function f 21?
The graph of the inverse function f 21 is obtained by 
reflecting the graph of f in the line y 5 x.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
Review: Concept Check Answers
(continued)
chapter 3 
	 1.	 (a)	 What is the degree of a quadratic function f? What is the 
standard form of a quadratic function? How do you put a 
quadratic function into standard form?
A quadratic function f is a polynomial of degree 2.  
The standard form of a quadratic function f is 
f1x2 5 a1x 2 h2 2 1 k . Complete the square to put a 
quadratic function into standard form.
(b)	 The quadratic function f1x2 5 a1x 2 h2 2 1 k is in stan-
dard form. The graph of f is a parabola. What is the ver-
tex of the graph of f? How do you determine whether 
f1h2 5 k is a minimum or a maximum value?
The vertex of the graph of f is 1h, k2 . If the coefficient a 
is positive, then the graph of f opens upward and
f1h2 5 k is a minimum value. If a is negative, then the 
graph of f opens downward andf1h2 5 k is a maximum 
value.
(c)	 Express f1x2 5 x2 1 4x 1 1 in standard form. Find the 
vertex of the graph and the maximum or minimum value 
of f.
We complete the square to get f1x2 5 1x 1 22 2 2 3. 
The graph is a parabola that opens upward with vertex 
122, 232 . The minimum value is f1222 5 23.
	 2.	 (a)	 Give the general form of polynomial function P of 
degree n.
P1x2 5 an xn 1 an21xn21 1 . . . 1 a1x 1 a0   
an ? 0
(b)	 What does it mean to say that c is a zero of P? Give two 
equivalent conditions that tell us that c is a zero of P.
The value c is a zero of P if P1c2 5 0. Equivalently,  
c is a zero of P if x 2 c is a factor of P or if c is an 
x-intercept of the graph of P.
	 3.	 Sketch graphs showing the possible end behaviors of polyno-
mials of odd degree and of even degree.
y
y
0
x
0
x
y
y
0
x
0
x
Odd degree
Even degree
	 4.	 What steps do you follow to graph a polynomial function P?
We first find the zeros of P and then make a table using test 
points between successive zeros. We then  determine the end 
behavior and use all this information to graph P.
	 5.	 (a)	 What is a local maximum point or local minimum point 
of a polynomial P?
The point 1a, P1a22  is a local maximum if it is the high-
est point on the graph of P within some viewing rectan-
gle. The point  1b, P1b22  is a local minimum if it is the 
lowest point on the graph of P within some viewing 
rectangle.
(b)	 How many local extrema can a polynomial P of degree n 
have?
The graph of P has at most n 2 1 local extrema.
	 6.	 When we divide a polynomial P1x2  by a divisor D1x2, the 
Division Algorithm tells us that we can always obtain a quo-
tient Q1x2 and a remainder R1x2 . State the two forms in 
which the result of this division can be written.
 
P1x2
D1x2 5 Q1x2 1
R1x2
D1x2
 P1x2 5 D1x2Q1x2 1 R1x2
	 7.	 (a)	 State the Remainder Theorem. 
If a polynomial P1x2  is divided by x 2 c, then the 
remainder is the value P1c2 . 
(b)	 State the Factor Theorem. 
The number c is a zero of P if and only if x 2 c is a  
factor of P1x2 .
(c)	 State the Rational Zeros Theorem.
If the polynomial 
P1x2 5 an xn 1 an21xn21 1 . . . 1 a1x 1 a0
has integer coefficients, then every rational zero of P is 
of the form p/q, where p is a factor of the constant coef-
ficient a0 and q is a factor of the leading coefficient an.
	 8.	 What steps would you take to find the rational zeros of a 
polynomial P?
First list all possible rational zeros of P given by the Rational 
Zeros Theorem. Evaluate P at a possible zero (using syn-
thetic division), and note the quotient if the remainder is 0. 
Repeat this process on the quotient until you reach a quotient 
that is quadratic. Then use the quadratic formula to find the 
remaining zeros.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 3 
	 9.	 Let P1x2 5 2x4 2 3x3 1 x 2 15.
(a)	 Explain how Descartes’ Rule of Signs is used to deter-
mine the possible number of positive and negative real 
roots of P.
Since there are three variations in sign in P1x2 , by 
Descartes’ Rule of Signs there are either three or one 
positive real zeros. Since there is one variation in sign in 
P12x2 , by Descartes’ Rule of Signs there is exactly one 
negative real zero.
(b)	 What does it mean to say that a is a lower bound and b is 
an upper bound for the zeros of a polynomial?
We say that a is a lower bound and b is an upper bound 
for the zeros of a polynomial if every real zero c of the 
polynomial satisfies a # c # b.
(c)	 Explain how the Upper and Lower Bounds Theorem is 
used to show that all the real zeros of P lie between 23 
and 3. 
When we divide P by x 2 3, the row that contains the 
quotient and the remainder has only nonnegative  
entries, so 3 is an upper bound. When we divide P by 
x 2 1232 5 x 1 3, the row that contains the quotient 
and the remainder has entries that alternate in sign, so 
23 is a lower bound. 
	10.	 (a)	 State the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.
Every polynomial has at least one complex zero.
(b)	 State the Complete Factorization Theorem. 
Every polynomial of degree n $ 1 can be factored com-
pletely into linear factors (with complex coefficients).
(c)	 State the Zeros Theorem. 
Every polynomial of degree n $ 1 has exactly n zeros, 
provided that a zero of multiplicity k is counted  
k times. 
(d)	 State the Conjugate Zeros Theorem. 
If a polynomial has real coefficients and if the complex 
number z is a zero of the polynomial, then its complex 
conjugate z is also a zero of the polynomial.
	11.	 (a)	 What is a rational function?
A rational function is a function of the form 
r1x2 5
P1x2
Q1x2 , where P and Q are polynomials.
(b)	 What does it mean to say that x 5 a is a vertical asymp-
tote of y 5 f1x2 ?
The line x 5 a is a vertical asymptote if 
y S 6`  as 
x S a1  or 
x S a2
(c)	 What does it mean to say that y 5 b is a horizontal 
asymptote of y 5 f1x2 ?
The line y 5 b is a horizontal asymptote if 
y S b  as 
x S `  or 
x S 2`
(d)	 Find the vertical and horizontal asymptotes of 
f1x2 5 5x2 1 3
x2 2 4
The denominator factors as 1x 2 22 1x 1 22 , so the verti-
cal asymptotes are x 5 2 and x 5 22. The horizontal 
asymptote is y 5 5.
	12.	 (a)	 How do you find vertical asymptotes of rational functions? 
Vertical asymptotes of a rational function are the line 
x 5 a, where a is a zero of the denominator. 
(b)	 Let s be the rational function 
s1x2 5 an xn 1 an21xn21 1 . . . 1 a1x 1 a0
bm xm 1 bm21xm21 1 . . . 1 b1x 1 b0
	
	How do you find the horizontal asymptote of s? 
If n , m, then the horizontal asymptote is 
y 5 0
If n 5 m, then the horizontal asymptote is 
y 5 an
bm
If n . m, then there is no horizontal asymptote.
	13.	 (a)	 Under what circumstances does a rational function have 
a slant asymptote? 
If r1x2 5 P1x2/Q1x2  and the degree of P is one greater 
than the degree of Q, then r has a slant asymptote.
(b)	 How do you determine the end behavior of a rational 
function? 
Divide the numerator by the denominator; the quotient 
determines the end behavior of the function.
	14.	 (a)	 Explain how to solve a polynomial inequality.
Move all terms to one side, factor the polynomial, find 
the zeros of the polynomial, use the zeros and test points 
to make a sign diagram, and use the diagram to solve the 
inequality.
(b)	 What are the cut points of a rational function? Explain 
how to solve a rational inequality. 
The cut points are the zeros of the numerator and zeros 
of the denominator. To solve a rational inequality, move 
all terms to one side, factor the numerator and denomina-
tor to find all the cut points, use the cut points and test 
points to make a sign diagram, and use the diagram to 
solve the inequality.
(c)	 Solve the inequality x2 2 9 # 8x.
Move all terms to one side and then factor: 
1x 1 12 1x 2 92 # 0. We make a sign diagram as shown.
Sign of x  1
Sign of x 9
Sign of (x  1)(x  9)
1
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
9
The solution is the interval 321, 94 .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
Review: Concept Check Answers
(continued)
chapter 4 
	 1.	 Let f be the exponential function with base a.
(a)	 Write an equation that defines f. 
f1x2 5 ax
(b)	 Write an equation for the exponential function f with 
base 3.
f1x2 5 3x
	 2.	 Let f be the exponential function f1x2 5 ax, where a . 0.
(a)	 What is the domain of f?
All real numbers 12`, ` 2
(b)	 What is the range of f?
All positive real numbers 10, ` 2
(c)	 Sketch graphs of f for the following cases.
	
(i)  a . 1    (ii)  0 , a , 1
0
x
y
(0, 1)
0
x
y
(0, 1)
(i)
(ii)
	 3.	 If x is large, which function grows faster, f1x2 5 2x or 
g1x2 5 x2?
The function f1x2 5 2x grows faster. We can see this by 
graphing both functions in a sufficiently large viewing 
rectangle.
	 4.	 (a)	 How is the number e defined?
The number e is the value that a1 1 1
n b
n
approaches as 
n becomes large.
(b)	 Give an approximate value of e, correct to four decimal 
places.
e < 2.71828
(c)	 What is the natural exponential function?
It is the exponential function with base e: 
f1x2 5 ex
	 5.	 (a)	 How is loga x defined?
loga x 5 y 3 ay 5 x
(b)	 Find log3 9.
log3 9 5 2  because 
32 5 9
(c)	 What is the natural logarithm?
It is the logarithm with base e: ln x 5 loge x
(d)	 What is the common logarithm?
It is the logarithm with base 10: log x 5 log10 x
(e)	 Write the exponential form of the equation  
log7 49 5 2.
72 5 49
	 6.	 Let f be the logarithmic function f1x2 5 loga x.
(a)	 What is the domain of f?
All positive real numbers 10, ` 2
(b)	 What is the range of f?
All real numbers 12`, ` 2
(c)	 Sketch a graph of the logarithmic function for the case 
that a . 1.
x
y
0
1
	 7.	 State the three Laws of Logarithms.
loga xy 5 loga x 1 loga y
loga a x
y b 5 loga x 2 loga y
loga xN 5 N loga x
	 8.	 (a)	 State the Change of Base Formula. 
loga x 5 logb x
logb a
(b)	 Find log7 30.
By the Change of Base Formula
log7 30 5 log 30
log 7 < 1.7479
	 9.	 (a)	 What is an exponential equation?
An exponential equation is one in which the unknown 
occurs in an exponent.
(b)	 How do you solve an exponential equation?
First isolate the exponential term on one side, take loga-
rithms of each side, and then use the laws of logarithms 
to bring down the exponent. Then solve for the unknown.
(c)	 Solve for x: 2x 5 19
 log 2x 5 log 19
 x log 2 5 log 19
 x 5 log 19
log 2 < 4.2479
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 4 
	10.	 (a)	 What is a logarithmic equation?
A logarithmic equation is one in which a logarithm of 
the unknown occurs.
(b)	 How do you solve a logarithmic equation?
First combine the logarithmic terms on one side of the 
equation, write the resulting equation in exponential 
form, and then solve for the unknown. 
(c)	 Solve for x: 4 log3 x 5 7
 4 log3 x 5 7
 log3 x 5 1.75
 x 5 31.75 <  6.84
	11.	 Suppose that an amount P is invested at an interest rate r and 
A1t2  is the amount of the investment after t years. Write a 
formula for A1t2  in the following cases.
(a)	 Interest is compounded n times per year.
A1t2 5 P a1 1 r
n b
nt
(b)	 Interest is compounded continuously.
A1t2 5 Pert
	12.	 Suppose that the initial size of a population is n0 and the 
population grows exponentially. Let n1t2  be the size of the 
population at time t. 
(a)	 Write a formula for n1t2  in terms of the doubling time a.
n1t2 5 n0 2t/a
(b)	 Write a formula for n1t2  in terms of the relative growth 
rate r. 
n1t2 5 n0 ert
	13.	 Suppose that the initial mass of a radioactive substance is m0 
and the half-life of the substance is h. Let m1t2  be the mass 
remaining at time t. 
(a)	 What is meant by the half-life h?
The time it takes for a mass to decay to half its amount
(b)	 Write a formula for m1t2  in terms of the half-life h.
m1t2 5 m0 22t/h
(c)	 Write a formula for the relative decay rate r in terms of 
the half-life h.
r 5 ln 2
h
(d)	 Write a formula for m1t2  in terms of the relative decay 
rate r. 
m1t2 5 m0 e2rt
	14.	 Suppose that the initial temperature difference between an 
object and its surroundings is D0 and the surroundings have 
temperature Ts. Let T1t2  be the temperature at time t. State 
Newton’s Law of Cooling for T1t2 .
T1t2 5 Ts 1 D0 e2kt
where k is a constant that depends on the type of object.
	15.	 What is a logarithmic scale? If we use a logarithmic scale 
with base 10, what do the following numbers correspond to 
on the logarithmic scale? 
(i)  100    (ii)  100,000    (iii)  0.0001
On a logarithmic scale, numbers are represented by their 
logarithms. 
(i)  2    (ii)  5     (iii)  24
	16.	 (a)	 What does the pH scale measure?
The acidity (or alkalinity) of a substance
(b)	 Define the pH of a substance with hydrogen ion concen-
tration of 3H14.
pH 5 2log 3H14
	17.	 (a)	 What does the Richter scale measure?
The magnitude of earthquakes
(b)	 Define the magnitude M of an earthquake in terms of the 
intensity I of the earthquake and the intensity S of a stan-
dard earthquake.
M 5 2log I
S
	18.	 (a)	 What does the decibel scale measure?
The loudness of sound
(b)	 Define the decibel level B of a sound in terms of the 
intensity I of the sound and the intensity I0 of a barely 
audible sound. 
B 5 10 log I
I0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
Review: Concept Check Answers
(continued)
chapter 5 
	 1.	 (a)	 What is the unit circle, and what is the equation of the 
unit circle?
The unit circle is the circle of radius 1 centered at 10, 02 . 
The equation of the unit circle is x2 1 y2 5 1.
(b)	 Use a diagram to explain what is meant by the terminal 
point P1x, y2  determined by t.
y
x
0
1
t
P(x, y)
(c)	 Find the terminal point for t 5 p
2.
P1x, y2 5 10, 12
(d)	 What is the reference number associated with t?
The reference number is the shortest distance along the 
unit circle between the terminal point determined by t 
and the x-axis.
(e)	 Find the reference number and terminal point for t 5 7p
4 .
The reference number is p
4. The terminal point is in 
Quadrant IV, so P1x, y2 5 A !2
2 , 2 !2
2
 B.
	 2.	 Let t be a real number, and let P1x, y2  be the terminal point 
determined by t.
(a)	 Write equations that define sin t, cos t, tan t, csc t, sec t, 
and cot t.
 sin t 5 y   cos t 5 x   tan t 5 y
x
 csc t 5 1
y    sec t 5 1
x   cot t 5 x
y
(b)	 In each of the four quadrants, identify the trigonometric 
functions that are positive.
In Quadrant I all functions are positive; in Quadrant II the 
sine and cosecant functions are positive; in Quadrant III 
the tangent and cotangent functions are positive; and in 
Quadrant IV the cosine and secant functions are positive.
(c)	 List the special values of sine, cosine, and tangent.
sin 0 5 0, sin p
6 5 1
2, sin p
4 5 !2
2 , sin p
3 5 !3
2 , sin p
2 5 1
cos 0 5 1, cos p
6 5 !3
2 , cos p
4 5 !2
2 , cos p
3 5 1
2, cos p
2 5 0
tan 0 5 0, tan p
6 5 !3
3 , tan p
4 5 1, tan p
3 5 !3
	 3.	 (a)	 Describe the steps we use to find the value of a trigono-
metric function at a real number t. 
We find the reference number for t, the quadrant where 
the terminal point lies, and the sign of the function in 
that quadrant, and we use all these to find the value of 
the function at t.
(b)	 Find sin 5p
6 .
The terminal point of 5p
6  is in Quadrant II. Since sine is 
positive in Quadrant II, sin 5p
6 5 sin p
6 5 1
2.
	 4.	 (a)	 What is a periodic function? 
A function f is periodic if there is a positive number p 
such that f1x 1 p2 5 f1x2  for every x. The least such p 
is called the period of f.
(b)	 What are the periods of the six trigonometric functions?
The sine, cosine, cosecant, and secant functions have period 
2p, and the tangent and cotangent functions have period p.
(c)	 Find sin 19p
4 .
sin 19p
4 5 sin A3p
4 1 4pB 5 sin 3p
4 5 !2
2
	 5.	 (a)	 What is an even function, and what is an odd function?
An even function satisfies f12x2 5 f1x2 . 
An odd function satisfies f12x2 5 2f1x2 .
(b)	 Which trigonometric functions are even? Which are odd?
The cosine and secant functions are even; the sine,  
cosecant, tangent, and cotangent functions are odd.
(c)	 If sin t 5 0.4, find sin12t2 .
Since the sine function is odd, sin 12t2 5 20.4.
(d)	 If cos s 5 0.7, find cos12s2 .
Since the cosine function is even, cos 12s2 5 0.7.
	 6.	 (a)	 State the reciprocal identities.
csc t 5
1
sin t, sec t 5
1
cos t, cot t 5
1
tan t, 
tan t 5 sin t
cos t, cot t 5 cos t
sin t
(b)	 State the Pythagorean identities.
sin2 t 1 cos2 t 5 1, tan2 t 1 1 5 sec2 t, 
1 1 cot2 t 5 csc2 t
	 7.	 (a)	 Graph the sine and cosine functions.
y
x
0
y=ß x
1
_1
π
2π
Period 2π
y
x
0
y=ç x
1
_1
π
2π
Period 2π
(b)	 What are the amplitude, period, and horizontal shift for 
the sine curve y 5 a sin k1x 2 b2  and for the cosine 
curve y 5 a cos k1x 2 b2 ?
Amplitude a; period 2p
k ; horizontal shift b
(c)	 Find the amplitude, period, and horizontal shift of 
	
y 5 3 sina2x 2 p
6 b.
We factor to get y 5 3 sin 21x 2 p
122 .
Amplitude 3; period p; horizontal shift p
12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 5 
	 8.	 (a)	 Graph the tangent and cotangent functions.
y=† x
y=ˇ x
y
x
π
2
0
π
π
2
_
_π
1
y
x
π
2
3π
2
π
2
_
1
0
π
(b)	 For the curves y 5 a tan kx and y 5 a cot kx, state appro-
priate intervals to graph one complete period of each curve.
An appropriate interval for y 5 a tan kx is 
12p/2k, p/2k2 .
An appropriate interval for y 5 a cot kx is 10, p/k2 .
(c)	 Find an appropriate interval to graph one complete 
period of y 5 5 tan 3x.
An appropriate interval for y 5 5 tan 3x is 12p/6, p/62 .
	 9.	 (a)	 Graph the cosecant and secant functions.
y
x
0
y= x
1
_1
π
2π
y=˚ x
y
x
0
1
_1
π
2π
(b)	 For the curves y 5 a csc kx and y 5 a sec kx, state 
appropriate intervals to graph one complete period of 
each curve.
An appropriate interval for y 5 a csc kx is 10, 2p/k2 .
An appropriate interval for y 5 a sec kx is 10, 2p/k2 .
(c)	 Find an appropriate interval to graph one period of 
y 5 3 csc 6x.
An appropriate interval for y 5 3 csc 6x is 10, p/32 .
	10.	 (a)	 Define the inverse sine function, the inverse cosine func-
tion, and the inverse tangent function. 
 sin21x 5 y 3   sin y 5 x
 cos21x 5 y 3   cos y 5 x
 tan21x 5 y 3   tan y 5 x
(b)	 Find sin21 1
2, cos21 !2
2 , and tan21
 1.
From 2(c) and the definitions in part (a) we get 
sin21 1
2 5 p
6, cos21 !2
2 5 p
4, and tan21 1 5 p
4.
(c)	 For what values of x is the equation sin1sin21
 x2 5 x true? 
For what values of x is the equation sin211sin x2 5 x true?
 sin1sin21 x2 5 x  for 
21 # x # 1
 sin211sin x2 5 x  for 
2 p
2 # x # p
2
	11.	 (a)	 What is simple harmonic motion?
An object is in simple harmonic motion if its displacement 
y at time t is modeled by y 5 a sin vt or y 5 a cos vt.
(b)	 What is damped harmonic motion?
An object is in damped harmonic motion if its displace-
ment y at time t is modeled by y 5 ke2ct sin vt or 
y 5 ke2ct cos vt, c . 0.
(c)	 Give real-world examples of harmonic motion.
The motion of a vibrating mass on a spring, the vibra-
tions of a violin string, the brightness of a variable star, 
and many more
	12.	 Suppose that an object is in simple harmonic motion given by 
	 	 y 5 5 sina2t 2 p
3 b.
(a)	 Find the amplitude, period, and frequency. 
Amplitude 5; period 2p
2 5 p; frequency 2
2p 5 1
p
(b)	 Find the phase and the horizontal shift.
The phase is p
3, and the horizontal shift (or lag time) is p
6.
	13.	 Consider the following models of harmonic motion.
y1 5 5 sin12t 2 12    
y2 5 5 sin12t 2 32
	 	 Do both motions have the same frequency? What is the phase 
for each equation? What is the phase difference? Are the 
objects moving in phase or out of phase?
Both motions have the same frequency: 1/p. The phase of 
the first is 1, and the phase of the second is 3. The phase dif-
ference is 3 2 1 5 2, which is not a multiple of 2p, so the 
objects are moving out of phase.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
Review: Concept Check Answers
(continued)
chapter 6 
	 1.	 (a)	 How is the degree measure of an angle defined?
An angle of 18 is 1
360 of a complete revolution.
(b)	 How is the radian measure of an angle defined?
The radian measure of an angle is the length of the arc 
that the angle subtends in a circle of radius 1.
(c)	 How do you convert from degrees to radians? Convert 
458 to radians.
To convert from degrees to radians, we multiply by 
p/180. So
458 5 45a p
180 brad 5 p
4
(d)	 How do you convert from radians to degrees? Convert  
2 rad to degrees.
To convert from radians to degrees, we multiply by 
180/p. So
2 rad 5 2a 180
p b < 114.68
	 2.	 (a)	 When is an angle in standard position? Illustrate with a 
graph.
An angle is in standard position if it is drawn in the  
xy-plane with its vertex at the origin and its initial side 
on the positive x-axis.
¨
¨
y
x
0
y
x
0
(b)	 When are two angles in standard position coterminal?  
Illustrate with a graph.
Two angles are coterminal if their sides coincide. Angles 
that differ by a multiple of 2p rad (or a multiple of 
3608) are coterminal.
y
x
0
5π
3
_
y
x
0
π
3
(c)	 Are the angles 258 and 7458 coterminal? 
Yes, because 7458 2 258 5 7208, which is a multiple of 
3608.
(d)	 How is the reference angle for an angle u defined?
The reference angle u is the acute angle formed by the 
terminal side of u and the x-axis.
(e)	 Find the reference angle for 1508. 
The reference angle is u 5 1808 2 1508 5 308.
	 3.	 (a)	 In a circle of radius r, what is the length s of an arc that 
subtends a central angle of u radians?
s 5 ru
(b)	 In a circle of radius r, what is the area A of a sector with 
central angle u radians?
A 5 1
2 r2u
	 4.	 (a)	 Let u be an acute angle in a right triangle. Identify the 
opposite side, the adjacent side, and the hypotenuse in 
the figure.
¨
hypotenuse
adjacent
opposite
(b)	 Define the six trigonometric ratios in terms of the  
adjacent and opposite sides and the hypotenuse.
 sin u 5 opp
hyp   cos u 5 adj
hyp   tan u 5 opp
adj
 csc u 5 hyp
opp   sec u 5 hyp
adj   cot u 5 adj
opp
(c)	 Find the six trigonometric ratios for  
the angle u shown in the figure. 
 sin u 5 3
5   cos u 5 4
5   tan u 5 3
4
 csc u 5 5
3   sec u 5 5
4   cot u 5 4
3
(d)	 List the special values of sine, cosine, and tangent.
 sin p
6 5 1
2  
 sin p
4 5 !2
2    sin p
3 5 !3
2
 cos p
6 5 !3
2    cos p
4 5 !2
2    cos p
3 5 1
2
 tan p
6 5 !3
3    tan p
4 5 1   tan p
3 5 !3
	 5.	 (a)	 What does it mean to solve a triangle? 
To solve a triangle means to find all three angles and all 
three sides.
(b)	 Solve the triangle shown.
/B 5 908 2 358 5 558
 a 5 10 sin 358 < 5.74
 b 5 10 cos 358 < 8.19
	 6.	 (a)	 Let u be an angle in standard position, let P1x, y2  be a 
point on the terminal side, and let r be the distance from 
¨
4
5
3
10
A
B
C
35*
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 6 
the origin to P, as shown in the figure. Write expressions 
for the six trigonometric functions of u.
P(x, y)
y
x
0
¨
r
   
 sin u 5 y
r   csc u 5 r
y
 cos u 5 x
r   sec u 5 r
x
 tan u 5 y
x   cot u 5 x
y
(b)	 Find the sine, cosine, and tangent for the angle u shown 
in the figure. 
P(_3, 4)
y
x
0
¨
r
   
Here x 5 23, y 5 4, and 
r 5 "1232 2 1 42 5 5. So 
sin u 5 4
5, cos u 5 23
5 , and 
tan u 5
4
23.
	 7.	 In each of the four quadrants, identify the trigonometric func-
tions that are positive.
In Quadrant I all the trigonometric functions are positive; in 
Quadrant II the sine and cosecant functions are positive; in 
Quadrant III the tangent and cotangent functions are positive; 
and in Quadrant IV the cosine and secant functions are positive.
	 8.	 (a)	 Describe the steps we use to find the value of a trigono-
metric function of an angle u. 
We find the reference angle for u, the quadrant where the 
terminal side lies, and the sign of the function in that 
quadrant, and we use all these to find the value of the 
function at u.
(b)	 Find sin 5p/6.
The terminal side of the angle 5p
6  is in Quadrant II, and 
the reference angle is p 2 5p
6 5 p
6. Since sine is positive 
in Quadrant II, sin 5p
6 5 sin p
6 5 1
2.
	 9.	 (a)	 State the reciprocal identities.
csc u 5
1
sin u  sec u 5
1
cos u  cot u 5
1
tan u
(b)	 State the Pythagorean identities.
sin2
 u 1 cos2
 u 5 1  tan2
 u 1 1 5 sec2
 u  1 1 cot2
 u 5 csc2
 u
	10.	 (a)	 What is the area of a triangle with sides of length a and b 
and with included angle u?
The area is ! 5 1
2
 ab sin u.
(b)	 What is the area of a triangle with sides of length a, b, 
and c?
The area is given by Heron’s Formula
! 5 !s1s 2 a2 1s 2 b2 1s 2 c2
where s 5 1
2 1a 1 b 1 c2  is the semiperimeter.
	11.	 (a)	 Define the inverse sine function, the inverse cosine func-
tion, and the inverse tangent function. 
 sin21
 x 5 y 3  sin y 5 x
 cos21
 x 5 y 3  cos y 5 x
 tan21
 x 5 y 3  tan y 5 x
(b)	 Find sin21
  1
2, cos211 !2/22 , and tan21
 1.
From 2(c) and the definitions in part (a) we get
sin21
  1
2 5 p
6  cos21
  !2
2 5 p
4  tan211 5 p
4
(c)	 For what values of x is the equation sin1sin21
 x2 5 x 
true? For what values of x is the equation 
sin211sin x2 5 x true?
sin 1sin21
 x2 5 x  for 
21 # x # 1
sin211sin x2 5 x  for 
2 p
2 # x # p
2
	12.	 (a)	 State the Law of Sines.
In triangle ABC we have sin A
a
5 sin B
b
5 sin C
c
.
(b)	 Find side a in the figure. 
Note that /C 5 1808 2 1858 1 4082 5 558. 
By the Law of Sines 
sin 858
a
5 sin 558
100 , so 
a 5 100 sin 858
sin 558
< 121.6.
(c)	 Explain the ambiguous case in the Law of Sines.
In the case SSA there may be two triangles, one triangle, 
or no triangle with the given sides and angles. 
	13.	 (a)	 State the Law of Cosines.
In triangle ABC we have 
 a2 5 b2 1 c2 2 2bc cos A
 b2 5 a2 1 c2 2 2ac cos B
 c2 5 a2 1 b2 2 2ab cos C
(b)	 Find side a in the figure. 
A
B
a
30
C
40*
50
By the Law of Cosines we have
 a 5 "b2 1 c2 2 2bc cos A
 5 "502 1 302 2 21502 1302cos 408
 < 33.2
A
B
a
b
C
85*
40*
100
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
Review: Concept Check Answers
(continued)
chapter 7 
	 1.	 What is an identity? What is a trigonometric identity? 
An identity is an equation that is true for all values of the 
variable(s). A trigonometric identity is an identity that 
involves trigonometric functions.
	 2.	 (a)	 State the Pythagorean identities.
 sin2
 x 1 cos2
 x 5 1
 tan2
 x 1 1 5 sec2
 x
 1 1 cot2
 x 5 csc2
 x
(b)	 Use a Pythagorean identity to express cosine in terms of 
sine.
By the first Pythagorean identity we have 
cos x 5 6"1 2 sin2
 x
	 3.	 (a)	 State the reciprocal identities for cosecant, secant, and 
cotangent.
csc x 5
1
sin x  sec x 5
1
cos x  cot x 5
1
tan x
(b)	 State the even-odd identities for sine and cosine.
sin12x2 5 2sin x  cos12x2 5 cos x
(c)	 State the cofunction identities for sine, tangent, and secant.
sin Ap
2 2 xB 5 cos x  tan Ap
2 2 xB 5 cot x  sec Ap
2 2 xB 5 csc x
(d)	 Suppose that cos12x2 5 0.4; use the identities in parts 
(a) and (b) to find sec x.
sec x 5
1
cos x 5
1
cos12x2 5 1
0.4 5 2.5
(e)	 Suppose that sin 108 5 a; use the identities in part (c) to 
find cos 808.
Since 108 and 808 are complementary angles, we have 
cos 808 5 sin 108 5 a.
	 4.	 (a)	 How do you prove an identity?
Start with one side of the equation, and then use known 
identities to transform it to the other side.
(b)	 Prove the identity sin x1csc x 2 sin x2 5 cos2
 x
 LHS 5 sin x1csc x 2 sin x2
 5 sin xa
1
sin x 2 sin xb  Reciprocal identity
 5 1 2 sin2
 x
  Distributive Property
 5 cos2
 x 5 RHS
  Pythagorean identity
	 5.	 (a)	 State the Addition and Subtraction Formulas for Sine and 
Cosine.
sin1s 1 t2 5 sin s cos t 1 cos s sin t
cos1s 1 t2 5 cos s cos t 2 sin s sin t
(b)	 Use a formula from part (a) to find sin 758.
 sin 758 5 sin1458 1 3082
 5 sin 458 cos 308 1 cos 458 sin 308
 5 !2
2  !3
2
1 !2
2  1
2 5 !6 1 !2
4
	 6.	 (a)	 State the formula for A sin x 1 B cos x.
Let k 5 "A2 1 B2; then
A sin x 1 B cos x 5 k sin1x 1 f2
where f satisfies cos f 5 A/"A2 1 B2 and 
sin f 5 B/"A2 1 B2.
(b)	 Express 3 sin x 1 4 cos x as a function of sine only.
We have k 5 "32 1 42 5 5. The angle f satisfies 
cos f 5 3
5 and sin f 5 4
5, so f is in Quadrant I. We 
find f 5 sin21A4
5B < 53.18. Thus
3 sin x 1 4 cos x 5 5 sin1x 1 53.182
	 7.	 (a)	 State the Double-Angle Formula for Sine and the  
Double-Angle Formulas for Cosine. 
 sin 2x 5 2 sin x cos x
 cos 2x 5 cos2
 x 2 sin2
 x
 5 1 2 2 sin2
 x
 5 2 cos2
 x 2 1
(b)	 Prove the identity sec x sin 2x 5 2 sin x.
 LHS 5 sec x sin 2x
 5 sec x12 sin x cos x2   Double-Angle Formula
 5
1
cos x
 12 sin x cos x2  Reciprocal identity
 5 2 sin x 5 RHS
  Pythagorean identity
	 8.	 (a)	 State the formulas for lowering powers of sine and cosine.
sin2
 x 5 1 2 cos 2x
2
  cos2
 x 5 1 1 cos 2x
2
(b)	 Prove the identity 4 sin2
 x cos2
 x 5 sin2
 2x.
 LHS 5 4 sin2
 x cos2
 x
 5 4a 1 2 cos 2x
2
b a 1 1 cos 2x
2
b  Lower powers
 5 1 2 cos2
 2x
  Simplify
 5 sin2
 2x 5 RHS
  Pythagorean identity
	 9.	 (a)	 State the Half-Angle Formulas for Sine and Cosine.
sin u
2 5 6 Ä
1 2 cos u
2
  cos u
2 5 6 Ä
1 1 cos u
2
(b)	 Find cos 158.
 cos 158 5 cos a 308
2 b
 5 6Å
1 1 cos 308
2
5 6Å
1 1 !3/2
2
 5 6 Å
2 1 !3
4
5 6 1
2 "2 1 !3
Since 158 is in Quadrant I and since cosine is positive in 
Quadrant I, we conclude that cos 158 5 1
2  "2 1 !3.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 7 
	10.	 (a)	 State the Product-to-Sum Formula for the product 
sin u cos √.
sin u cos √5 1
2 3sin1u 1 √2 1 sin1u 2 √24
(b)	 Express sin 5x cos 3x as a sum of trigonometric 
functions.
By the formula in part (a) we have
 sin 5x cos 3x 5 1
2 3sin15x 1 3x2 1 sin15x 2 3x24
 5 1
2 sin 8x 1 1
2 sin 2x
	11.	 (a)	 State the Sum-to-Product Formula for the sum 
sin x 1 sin y.
sin x 1 sin y 5 2 sin x 1 y
2
 cos x 2 y
2
(b)	 Express sin 5x 1 sin 7x as a product of trigonometric 
functions.
By the formula in part (a) we have
 sin 5x 1 sin 7x 5 2 sin 5x 1 7x
2
 cos 5x 2 7x
2
 5 2 sin 6x cos12x2
 5 2 sin 6x cos x
	12.	 What is a trigonometric equation? How do we solve a trigo-
nometric equation?
A trigonometric equation is an equation involving trigono-
metric functions. To solve a trigonometric equation, we first 
find all solutions for one period of the function involved and 
then add integer multiples of the period to obtain all 
solutions.
(a)	 Solve the equation cos x 5 1
2.
The solutions of this equation in the interval 30, 2p2  are 
x 5 p
3     and   
x 5 5p
3
To obtain all solutions, we add multiples of 2p (because 
cos x is periodic with period 2p). The solutions are
x 5 p
3 1 2kp    and   
x 5 5p
3 1 2kp
where k is any integer. 
(b)	 Solve the equation 2 sin x cos x 5 1
2.
First we use a double-angle formula to express the left-
hand side as a single trigonometric function.
 2 sin x cos x 5 1
2  Given equation
 sin 2x 5 1
2  Double-Angle Formula
The solutions of this equation in the interval 30, 2p2  are 
2x 5 p
6     and   
2x 5 5p
6
To obtain all solutions, we add multiples of 2p. The 
solutions are
2x 5 p
6 1 2kp    and   
2x 5 5p
6 1 2kp
and dividing by 2, we get the solutions
x 5 p
12 1 kp    and   
x 5 5p
12 1 kp
where k is any integer. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
Review: Concept Check Answers
(continued)
chapter 8 
	 1.	 (a)	 Explain the polar coordinate system. 
In the polar coordi-
nate system the loca-
tion of a point P in the 
plane is determined by 
an ordered pair 1r, u2 , 
where r is the distance 
from the pole O to P 
and u is the angle formed by the polar axis  
and the ray OP
>
, as shown in the figure.
(b)	 Graph the points with polar coordinates 12, p/32  and 
121, 3p/42 .
x
y
O
3π
4
π
3
π
3
!_1, 
1
     @
3π
4
x
y
O
!2, 
2
 @
(c)	 State the equations that relate the rectangular coordinates 
of a point to its polar coordinates. 
To change from polar to rectangular:
x 5 r cos u  and  y 5 r sin u
To change from rectangular to polar:
r2 5 x2 1 y2  and  tan u 5 y
x
(d)	 Find rectangular coordinates for 12, p/32 .
x 5 2 cos p
3 5 1  and  y 5 2 sin p
3 5 !3
So in rectangular coordinates the point is 11, !32 .
(e)	 Find polar coordinates for P122, 22 . 
r2 5 1222 2 1 22 5 8, so r 5 !8 5 2!2. 
tan u 5 2/1222 5 21 and P is in Quadrant II, so 
u 5 3p/4. So in polar coordinates the point is 
12!2, 3p/42 .
	 2.	 (a)	 What is a polar equation? 
A polar equation is an equation in the variables r and u, 
where these variables are the polar coordinates of the 
point 1r, u2 .
(b)	 Convert the polar equation r 5  sin u to an equivalent 
rectangular equation.
 r 5 sin u   Polar equation
 r2 5 r sin u  Multiply by r
 x2 1 y2 5 y
  Convert
In the last step we substituted r2 5 x2 1 y2 and 
r sin u 5 y. So an equivalent rectangular equation is 
x2 1 y2 5 y.
	 3.	 (a)	 How do we graph a polar equation?
We plot all the points with polar coordinates 1r, u2  that 
satisfy the equation.
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the polar equation r 5 4 1 4 cos u. 
What is the graph called?
O
8
This graph is called a cardioid.
	 4.	 (a)	 What is the complex plane? How do we graph a complex 
number z 5 a 1 bi in the complex plane?
The complex plane is a plane determined by two axes: 
the real axis and the imaginary axis. To graph the com-
plex number z 5 a 1 bi, we plot the ordered pair 1a, b2  
in this plane as shown.
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
bi
a+bi
a
0
(b)	 What are the modulus and argument of the complex 
number z 5 a 1 bi?
The modulus of z, written 0  z 0 , is the distance of the 
point z to the origin in the complex plane. So 
0  z 0 5 "a2 1 b2
The argument of z is the angle u formed by the line seg-
ment connecting the origin to the point z and the positive 
real axis. So tan u 5 b/a.
Im
Re
Modulus
Argument
bi
a+bi
a
0
¨
|z|
O
r
¨
P(r, ¨) 
Polar axis
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

chapter 1 
Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 8 
(c)	 Graph the point z 5 !3 2 i, and find the modulus and 
argument of z.
Im
Re
i
1
0
œ∑3-i
11π
6

Modulus:   0  z 0 5 "1 !32 2 1 12 
 5 !4 5 2
Argument: 
u 5 11p
6
	 5.	 (a)	 How do we express the complex number z in polar form?
The polar form is z 5 r 1cos u 1 i sin u2, where r is the 
modulus and u is the argument of z.
(b)	 Express z 5 !3 2 i in polar form.
Using the moduli and arguments from Question 4(c) 
above, we get 
z 5 2acos 11p
6
1 i sin 11p
6 b
	 6.	 Let	
z1 5 2acos p
3 1 i sin p
3 b
	 	 and	
z2 5 5acos p
4 1 i sin p
4 b
(a)	 Find the product z1z2.
To find the product z1z2, we multiply the moduli and add 
the arguments, so 
 z1z2 5 10c cos a p
3 1 p
4 b 1 i sina p
3 1 p
4 bd
 5 10acos 7p
12 1 i sin 7p
12 b
(b)	 Find the quotient z1/z2.
To find the quotient z1/z2, we divide the moduli and sub-
tract the arguments, so 
 z1
z2
5 2
5
 c cos a p
3 2 p
4 b 1 i sina p
3 2 p
4 bd
 5 2
5
 acos p
12 1 i sin p
12 b
	 7.	 (a)	 State De Moivre’s Theorem. 
If z 5 r 1cos u 1 i sin u2  then 
zn 5 rn1cos nu 1 i sin nu2
(b)	 Use De Moivre’s Theorem to find the fifth power of 
	
z 5 2acos p
3 1 i sin p
3 b .
z5 5 32acos 5p
3 1 i sin 5p
3 b
	 8.	 (a)	 State the formula for the nth roots of a complex number 
z 5 r 1cos u 1 i sin u2 .
The n nth roots are 
„k 5 r1/n c cos a u 1 2kp
n
b 1 i sina u 1 2kp
n
bd
for k 5 0, 1, 2, . . . , n 2 1.
(b)	 How do we find the nth roots of a complex number?
We use the following guidelines.
1.  The modulus of each nth root is r1/n.
2.  The argument of the first root is u/n.
3.  Add 2p/n to get the argument of each successive root.
(c)	 Find the three third roots of z 5 28.
First we express z in polar form:
z 5 81cos p 1 i sin p2
So the modulus of each root is 81/3 5 2. The argument 
of the first root is p/3. We add 2p/3 to get the argument 
of each successive root. So the three roots are
 „0 5 2c cos a p
3 b 1 i sina p
3 bd 5 1 1 !3 i
 „1 5 2c cos a p 1 2p
3
b 1 i sina p 1 2p
3
bd 5 22
 „2 5 2c cos a p 1 4p
3
b 1 i sina p 1 4p
3
bd 5 1 2 !3 i
	 9.	 (a)	 What are parametric equations? 
Parametric equations are equations of the form 
x 5 f1t2  y 5 g1t2
 where f and g are functions of the parameter t. 
(b)	 Sketch a graph of the following parametric equations, 
using arrows to indicate the direction of the curve.
x 5 t 1 1  y 5 t2  22 # t # 2
t
xx, yc
22
121, 42
21
10, 12
0
10, 02
1
12, 12
2
13, 42
(c)	 Eliminate the parameter to obtain an equation in  
x and y.
From the first equation t 5 x 2 1, so from the second 
equation we have y 5 1x 2 12 2.
1
1
y
x
0
t=_2
t=2
t=_1
t=1
t=0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
Review: Concept Check Answers
(continued)
chapter 9 
	 1.	 (a)	 What is a vector in the plane? How do we represent a 
vector in the coordinate plane?
A vector is a quantity that has both length (or magnitude) 
and direction. A vector v in the coordinate plane is 
expressed in terms of components as
v 5 ka1, a2l
where a1 is the horizontal component and a2 is the verti-
cal component.
(b)	 Find the vector with initial point 12, 32  and terminal 
point 14, 102 .
v 5 k4 2 2, 10 2 3l 5 k2, 7l
(c)	 Let v 5 82, 19. If the initial point of v is placed at 
P11, 12 , where is its terminal point? Sketch several rep-
resentations of v.
The terminal point is Q11 1 2, 1 1 12 5 Q13, 22 .
1
1
x
y
v
v
v v
v
v
v
v
v
0
(d)	 How is the magnitude of v 5 8a1, a29 defined? Find the 
magnitude of w 5 83, 49. 
The magnitude of v is 0  v 0 5 "a2
1 1 a2
2. We have
0  w 0 5 "32 1 42 5 5.
(e)	 What are the vectors i and j? Express the vector 
v 5 85, 99 in terms of i and j. 
The vector i 5 k1, 0l and j 5 k0, 1l. So v 5 5i 1 9 j.
(f)	 Let v 5 8a1, a29 be a vector in the coordinate plane. What 
is meant by the direction u of v? What are the coordi-
nates of v in terms of its length and direction? Sketch a 
figure to illustrate your answer.
The direction of v is the smallest positive angle u in 
standard position formed by the positive x-axis and v. So  
v 5 0  v 0  cos u i 1 0  v 0  sin u j.
x
y
v
|v| ß ¨
|v| ç ¨
0
¨
(g)	 Suppose that v has length 0  v 0 5 5 and direction 
u 5 p/6. Express v in terms of its coordinates. 
v 5 5 cos p
6
   i 1 5 sin p
6
   i 5 5!3
2
  i 1 5
2
  j
	 2.	 (a)	 Define addition and scalar multiplication for vectors. 
Let u 5 ka1, a2l and v 5 kb1, b2l and let c [ R. Then 
u 1 v 5 ka1 1 b1, a2 1 b2l, and cu 5 kca1, ca2l.
(b)	 If u 5 82, 39 and v 5 85, 99, find u 1 v and 4 u.
u 1 v 5 k2 1 5, 3 1 9l 5 k7, 12l, and 
4 u 5 k4 # 2, 4 # 3l 5 k8, 12l.
	 3.	 (a)	 Define the dot product of the vectors u 5 8a1, a29 and 
v 5 8b1, b29, and state the formula for the angle u 
between u and v.
The dot product is u # v 5 a1b1 1 a2b2. The angle u  
satisfies cos u 5
u # v
0  u 0 0  v 0 .
(b)	 If u 5 82, 39 and v 5 81, 49, find u # v and find the angle 
between u and v.
The dot product is u # v 5 2 # 1 1 3 # 4 5 14. The angle 
u between u and v satisfies
cos u 5
14
!13!17 < 0.942
So u 5 cos2110.9422 < 19.78.
	 4.	 (a)	 Describe the three-dimensional coordinate system. What 
are the coordinate planes?
The coordinate system consists of a point O, called the 
origin, and three mutually perpendicular lines called the 
coordinate axes, labeled as the x-, y-, and z-axes. The 
point P1a, b, c2  is plotted in this system as shown.
The coordinate planes are the xy-plane, the xz-plane, and 
the yz-plane as shown.
0
b
a
c
P(a, b, c)
y
x
z
0
b
a
c
P(a, b, c)
y
x
z
yz-plane
xy-plane
xz-plane
(b)	 What is the distance from the point 13, 22, 52  to each of 
the coordinate planes? 
The distance to the xy-plane is 5, to the xz-plane is 2, and 
to the yz-plane is 3.
(c)	 State the formula for the distance between the points 
P1x1, y1, z12  and Q1x2, y2, z22 .
d1P, Q2 5 "1x2 2 x12 2 1 1y2 2 y12 2 1 1z2 2 z12 2
(d)	 Find the distance between the points P11, 2, 32  and 
Q13, 21, 42 .
d1P, Q2 5 "13 2 12 2 1 121 2 22 2 1 14 2 32 2 5 !14
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 9 
(e)	 State the equation of a sphere with center C1h, k, l2  and 
radius r.
1x 2 h2 2 1 1y 2 k2 2 1 1z 2 l2 2 5 r2
(f)	 Find an equation for the sphere of radius 5 centered at 
the point 11, 2, 232 .
1x 2 12 2 1 1y 2 22 2 1 1z 1 32 2 5 52
	 5.	 (a)	 What is a vector in space? How do we represent a vector 
in a three-dimensional coordinate system?
A vector is a quantity that has both length (or magnitude) 
and direction. A vector v in a three-dimensional coordi-
nate system is expressed in terms of components as
v 5 ka1, a2, a3l
(b)	 Find the vector with initial point 12, 3, 212  and terminal 
point 14, 10, 52 .
v 5 k4 2 2, 10 2 3, 5 2 1212l 5 k2, 7, 6l
(c)	 How is the magnitude of v 5 8a1, a2, a39 defined? Find 
the magnitude of w 5 83, 4, 19.
The magnitude of v is 0  v 0 5 "a2
1 1 a2
2 1 a2
3. 
We have  0  w 0 5 "32 1 42 1 12 5 "26.
(d)	 What are the vectors i, j, and k? Express the vector 
v 5 85, 9, 219 in terms of i, j, and k. 
 i 5 k1, 0, 0l
 j 5 k0, 1, 0l
 k 5 k0, 0, 1l
So v 5 5 i 1 9 j 2 k.
	 6.	 (a)	 Define addition and scalar multiplication for vectors. 
u 5 ka1, a2, a3l and v 5 kb1, b2, b3l, and let c [ R. Then 
u 1 v 5 ka1 1 b1, a2 1 b2, a3 1 b3l, and 
cu 5 kca1, ca2, ca3l.
(b)	 If u 5 82, 3, 219 and v 5 85, 9, 29, find u 1 v and 4 u.
u 1 v 5 k2 1 5, 3 1 9, 21 1 2l 5 k7, 12, 1l and 
4 u 5 k4 # 2, 4 # 3, 41212l 5 k8, 12, 24l.
	 7.	 (a)	 Define the dot product of the vectors u 5 8a1, a2, a39 and 
v 5 8b1, b2, b39, and state the formula for the angle u 
between u and v.
The dot product is u # v 5 a1b1 1 a2b2 1 a3b3. The 
angle u satisfies cos u 5
u # v
0  u 0 0  v 0 .
(b)	 If u 5 82, 3, 219 and v 5 81, 4, 59, find u # v.
u # v 5 2 # 1 1 3 # 4 1 1212 # 5 5 9
	 8.	 (a)	 Define the cross product of the vectors u 5 8a1, a2, a39 
and v 5 8b1, b2, b39.
 u 3 v 5 †
i
j
k
a1
a2
a3
b1
b2
b3
†
 5 1a2b3 2 a3b22i 2 1a1b3 2 a3b12j 1 1a1b2 2 a2b12k
(b)	 True or False? The vector u 3 v is perpendicular to both 
u and v.
True.
(c)	 Let u and v be vectors in space. State the formula that 
relates the magnitude of u 3 v and the angle u between 
u and v.
0  u 3 v 0 5 0  u 0 0  v 0 sin u
(d)	 How can we use the cross product to determine whether 
two vectors are parallel? 
The vectors u and v are parallel if and only if 
u 3 v 5 0.
	 9.	 (a)	 What are the two properties that determine a line in 
space? Give parametric equations for a line in space.
A line is determined by a point 1x0, y0, z02  on the line 
and a vector v 5 ka, b, cl parallel to the line. Parametric 
equations for the line are x 5 x0 1 at, y 5 y0 1 bt, and 
z 5 z0 1 ct.
(b)	 Find parametric equations for the line through the point 
122, 4, 12  and parallel to the vector v 5 87, 5, 39.
x 5 22 1 7t   
y 5 4 1 5t   
z 5 1 1 3t
	10.	 (a)	 What are the two properties that determine a plane in 
space? State the equation of a plane.
A plane is determined by a point 1x0, y0, z02  on the plane 
and a vector n 5 ka, b, cl that is normal (or perpendicu-
lar) to the plane. An equation for the plane is 
a1x 2 x02 1 b1y 2 y02 1 c1z 2 z02 5 0.
(b)	 Find an equation for the plane passing through the point 
16, 24, 32 and with normal vector n 5 85, 23, 29.
51x 2 62 2 31y 1 42 1 21z 2 32 5 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
(continued)
Review: Concept Check Answers
chapter 10 
	 1.	 (a)	 What are the three methods we use to solve a system of 
equations? 
The substitution method, the elimination method, and the 
graphical method
(b)	 Solve the system by the elimination method and by the 
graphical method.
e x 1 y 5 3
3x 2 y 5 1
Elimination method: To eliminate y, we add the two 
equations to get 4x 5 4, so x 5 1.  Substituting 1 for x 
in the first equation, we get 1 1 y 5 3, so y 5 2. The 
solution is 11, 22
Graphical method: We graph the two equations as 
shown. The point of intersection is 11, 22 . So the solu-
tion of the system is 11, 22 .
1
1
y
x
x+y=3
3x-y=1
(1, 2)
0
	 2.	 For a system of two linear equations in two variables:
(a)	 How many solutions are possible? 
Such a system can have one solution, no solution, or infi-
nitely many solutions.
(b)	 What is meant by an inconsistent system? a dependent 
system?
A system is inconsistent if it has no solution. A system is 
dependent if it has infinitely many solutions.
	 3.	 What operations can be performed on a linear system so as to 
arrive at an equivalent system?
1.  Add a nonzero multiple of one equation to another.
2.  Multiply an equation by a nonzero constant.
3.  Interchange the position of two equations.
	 4.	 (a)	 Explain how Gaussian elimination works. 
We use the operations in Question 3 above to obtain a 
system in triangular form and then use back-substitution 
to solve for the variables.
(b)	 Use Gaussian elimination to put the following system in 
triangular form, and then solve the system.
	
System	
Triangular form
	
•
x 1 y 2 2z 5 3
x 1 2y 1 z 5 5
3x 2 y 1 5z 5 1
	
•
x 1 y 2 2z 5 3
y 1 3z 5 2
23z 5 0
Using back-substitution, we get the solution 11, 2, 02 .
	 5.	 What does it mean to say that A is a matrix with dimension 
m 3 n? 
An m 3 n matrix A has m rows and n columns. 
	 6.	 What is the row-echelon form of a matrix? What is a leading 
entry?
The first nonzero entry in a row (reading from left to right) is 
called a leading entry. A matrix is in row-echelon form if it 
satisfies the following:
1.  The leading entry in each row is 1.
2.  The leading entry in each row is to the right of the leading 
entry in the row above it.
3.  All rows consisting entirely of 0’s are at the bottom of the 
matrix.
	 7.	 (a)	 What is the augmented matrix of a system? What are 
leading variables?
The augmented matrix of a linear system is the matrix 
that contains the coefficients and the constant terms. A 
leading variable is one that corresponds to a leading 
entry in the augmented matrix. 
(b)	 What are the elementary row operations on an aug-
mented matrix? 
The elementary row operations on a matrix correspond to 
the operations in Question 3.
1.  Add a nonzero multiple of one row to another.
2.  Multiply a row by a nonzero constant.
3.  Interchange the position of two rows.
(c)	 How do we solve a system using the augmented matrix? 
We perform elementary row operations to put the matrix 
in row-echelon form (as in Question 6). The equations 
that correspond to the row-echelon form can be solved 
using back-substitution.
(d)	 Write the augmented matrix of the following system of 
linear equations. 
•
x 1 y 2 2z 5 3
x 1 2y 1 z 5 5
3x 2 y 1 5z 5 1
   
£
1
1
22
3
1
2
1
5
3
21
5
1
§
(e)	 Solve the system in part (d). 
We use elementary row operations to put the augmented 
matrix into row-echelon form. 
£
1
1
22
3
0
1
3
2
0
0
23
0
§    
•
x 1 y 2 2z 5 3
y 1 3z 5 2
23z 5 0
The system is solved by back-substitution as in  
Question 4(b). The solution is 11, 2, 02 .
	 8.	 Suppose you have used Gaussian elimination to transform the 
augmented matrix of a linear system into row-echelon form. 
How can you tell whether the system has exactly one solu-
tion? no solution? infinitely many solutions?
No solution: The row-echelon form has a row that represents 
the equation 0 5 c, where c is not zero.
Exactly one solution: Each variable in the row-echelon form 
is a leading variable.
Infinitely many solutions: The variables in the row-echelon 
form are not all leading.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 10 
	 9.	 What is the reduced row echelon form of a matrix?
A matrix is in reduced row-echelon form if it is in row-
echelon form and also satisfies the following:
Every number above and below each leading entry is a 0.
	10.	 (a)	 How do Gaussian elimination and Gauss-Jordan elimina-
tion differ?
In each method we start with the augmented matrix of a 
linear system and perform row operations. In Gaussian 
elimination we put the matrix in row-echelon form. In 
Gauss-Jordan elimination we put the matrix in reduced 
row-echelon form.
(b)	 Use Gauss-Jordan elimination to solve the linear system 
in part 7(d). 
We start with the matrix in 7(d) and continue to use row 
operations to obtain the following reduced-row echelon 
form and the corresponding system of equations:
£
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
2
0
0
1
0
§    
•
x  5 1
y 5 2
z 5 0
The solution is 11, 2, 02 .
	11.	 If A and B are matrices with the same dimension and k is a 
real number, how do you find A 1 B and kA?
To find A 1 B, we add corresponding entries. To find kA, we 
multiply each entry in A by k. 
	12.	 (a)	 What must be true of the dimensions of A and B for the 
product AB to be defined? 
The number of columns of A must be the same as the 
number of rows of B. 
(b)	 If A has dimension 2 3 3 and if B has dimension 3 3 2, 
is the product AB defined? If so, what is the dimension 
of AB?
The product AB is defined and has dimension 2 3 2.
(c)	 Find the matrix product.
c 2
1
4
0d c 3
4
1
5
1
2d 5 c 11
9
4
12
16
4d
13.	 (a)	 What is an identity matrix In? If A is an n 3 n matrix, 
what are the products AIn and In A?
The identity matrix In is an n 3 n matrix with 1’s on the 
main diagonal and 0’s elsewhere: AIn 5 A and InA 5 A.
(b)	 If A is an n 3 n matrix, what is its inverse matrix?
The inverse is a matrix A21 with the property that 
AA21 5 In and A21A 5 In.
(c)	 Complete the formula for the inverse of a 2 3 2matrix
A 5 c a
b
c
dd    
A21 5
1
ad 2 bc c
d
2 b
2c
ad
(d)	 Find the inverse of A. 
A 5 c 1
1
3
21d    
A21 5 c  
1
4
1
4
3
4
2 1
4
d
14.	 (a)	 Express the system in 1(b) as a matrix equation AX 5 B.
c 1
1
3
21d c x
yd 5 c 3
1d
	
A	
X	
B
(b)	 If a linear system is expressed as a matrix equation 
AX 5 B, how do we solve the system? Solve the system 
in part (a).
The solution is given by the matrix X 5 A21B. We found 
A21 in 13(d). So
c x
yd 5  c
1
4
1
4
3
4
2 1
4
d c 3
1d 5 c 1
2d
	
X	
A21	
B
15.	 (a)	 Is it true that the determinant det A of a matrix A is 
defined only if A is a square matrix? 
Yes
(b)	 Find the determinant of the matrix A in part 13(d).
detc 1
1
3
2 1d 5 112 1212 2 112 132 5 24
(c)	 Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the system in 1(b). 
x 5
`  3
1
1
21
 `
`  1
1
3
21
 `
5 1   
y 5
`  1
3
3
1
 `
`  1
1
3
21
 `
5 2
16.	 (a)	 How do we express a rational function r as a partial frac-
tion decomposition?
We express r as a sum of fractions whose denominators 
consist of linear or irreducible quadratic factors.
(b)	 Give the form of the partial fraction decomposition. 
	
(i) 
2x
1x 2 52 1x 2 22 2 5
A
x 2 5 1
B
x 2 2 1
C
1x 2 22 2
	
(ii) 
2x
1x 2 52 1x2 1 12 5
A
x 2 5 1 Bx 1 C
x2 1 1
	17.	 (a)	 How do we graph an inequality in two variables?
We first graph the corresponding equation and then use 
test points to determine the solution set.
(b)	 Graph the solution set of the inequality x 1 y $ 3.
(c)	 Graph the solution set of the system of inequalities: 
 x 1 y $ 3
 3x 2 y $ 1
1
1
y
x
x+y=3
0
1
1
y
x
x+y=3
x+y≥3
x+y≥3, 3x-y≥1
3x-y=1
0
c
b
b
c
b
b
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
(continued)
Review: Concept Check Answers
chapter 11 
	 1.	 (a)  Give the geometric definition of a parabola.
A parabola is the set of points in the plane that are equi-
distant from a fixed point F (called the focus) and a fixed 
line l (called the directrix).
(b)	 Give the equation of a parabola with vertex at the origin 
and with vertical axis. Where is the focus? What is the 
directrix?
The equation of a parabola with vertical axis and vertex 
at the origin has the form 
x2 5 4py
where the focus is F10, p2  and the directrix is the hori-
zontal line y 5 2p.
(c)	 Graph the equation x2 5 8y. Indicate the focus on the 
graph.
Writing the equation as x2 5 4122y, we see that p 5 2. 
So the focus is F10, 22 , and the directrix is the line 
y 5 22. 
1
1
y
x
0
(0, 2)
	 2.	 (a)	 Give the geometric definition of an ellipse.
An ellipse is the set of all points in the plane, the sum of 
whose distances from two fixed points F1 and F2 is a 
constant. These two fixed points are the foci (plural of 
focus) of the ellipse.
(b)	 Give the equation of an ellipse with center at the origin 
and with major axis along the x-axis. How long is the 
major axis? How long is the minor axis? Where are the 
foci? What is the eccentricity of the ellipse?
The equation of an ellipse with center at the origin and 
with major axis along the x-axis has the form 
x2
a2 1 y2
b2 5 1
The major axis is along the x-axis, provided that a . b. 
In this case its length is 2a. The minor axis is along the 
y-axis, and its length is 2b.
The foci are 16c, 02 , where c2 5 a2 2 b2. 
The eccentricity is e 5 c/a. 
(c)	 Graph the equation x2
16 1 y2
9 5 1. What are the lengths 
	
of the major and minor axes? Where are the foci?
Comparing this equation with the general equation of an 
ellipse, we see that a 5 4 and b 5 3. Since 4 . 3, the 
major axis is along the x-axis and has length 2 # 4 5 8. 
The minor axis is along the y-axis, and it length is 
2 # 3 5 6. We find c2 5 16 2 9 5 7, so the foci are at 
16!7, 02 .
1
1
y
x
0
7, 0)
_
(
7, 0)
(
	 3.	 (a)	 Give the geometric definition of a hyperbola.
A hyperbola is the set of all points in the plane, the dif-
ference of whose distances from two fixed points F1 and 
F2 is a constant. These two fixed points are the foci of 
the hyperbola.
(b)	 Give the equation of a hyperbola with center at the origin 
and with transverse axis along the x-axis. How long is 
the transverse axis? Where are the vertices? What are the 
asymptotes? Where are the foci? 
The equation of a hyperbola with center at the origin and 
with transverse axis along the x-axis has the form 
x2
a2 2 y2
b2 5 1
The transverse axis is along the x-axis and  its length 2a.
The vertices are at 16a, 02 .
The asymptotes are the lines y 5 61b/a2x.
The foci are at 16c, 02 , where c2 5 a2 1 b2. 
(c)	 What is a good first step in graphing the hyperbola that is 
described in part (b)? 
A good first step is to sketch the central box. This is the 
rectangle centered at the origin, with sides parallel to the 
axes, that crosses the x-axis at 6a and the y-axis at 6b. 
(d)	 Graph the equation x2
16 2 y2
9 5 1. What are the 
	
asymptotes? Where are the vertices? Where are the foci? 
What is the length of the transverse axis? 
This is an equation of a hyperbola with transverse axis 
along the x-axis. The central box crosses the axes at 
164, 02  and 10, 632 . The asymptotes are y 5 6 3
4 x. The 
vertices are 164, 02 . We find c2 5 16 1 9 5 25, so the 
foci are 165, 02 . Using the vertices and the asymptotes 
as guides, we graph the hyperbola as shown.
x
y
(5, 0)
1
(_5, 0)
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 11
	 4.	 (a)	 Suppose we are given an equation in x and y. Let h and k 
be positive numbers. What is the effect on the graph of 
the equation if x is replaced by x 2 h or x 1 h and if  
y is replaced by y 2 k or y 1 k?
Replacing x by x 2 h or x 1 h shifts the graph to the 
right or left, respectively, by h units. Replacing y by 
y 2 k or y 1 k shifts the graph upward or downward 
respectively, by k units. 
(b)	 Sketch a graph of 
1x 1 22 2
16
1
1y 2 42 2
9
5 1.
The graph is the same as the ellipse in 2(c) but shifted 
left 2 units and upward 4 units. So the center of the 
ellipse is at 122, 42 .
1
2
y
x
0
(_2, 4)
	 5.	 (a)	 How can you tell whether the following nondegenerate 
conic is a parabola, an ellipse, or a hyperbola?
Ax2 1 Cy2 1 Dx 1 Ey 1 F 5 0
The graph is a parabola if either A or C is 0, an ellipse if 
A and C have the same sign (a circle if A 5 C), or a 
hyperbola if A and C have opposite signs.
(b)	 What conic does 3x2 2 5y2 1 4x 1 5y 2 8 5 0 
represent?
The graph is a hyperbola because the coefficients of x2 
and y2 (3 and 25) have opposite signs. 
	 6.	 (a)	 Suppose that the x- and y-axes are rotated through an 
acute angle f to produce the X- and Y-axes. What are the 
equations that relate the coordinates 1x, y2  and 1X, Y2  of 
a point in the xy-plane and XY-plane, respectively?
 x 5 X cos f 2 Y sin f   X 5 x cos f 1 y sin f
 y 5 X sin f 1 Y cos f   Y 5 2x sin f 1 y cos f
(b)	 In the equation below, how do you eliminate the 
xy-term?
Ax2 1 Bxy 1 Cy2 1 Dx 1 Ey 1 F 5 0
Rotate the axes through an angle f that satisfies 
cot 2f 5 A 2 C
B
(c)	 Use a rotation of axes to eliminate the xy-term in the 
equation 25x2 2 14xy 1 25y2 5 288. Graph the 
equation.
The angle f satisfies cot 2f 5 0, so f 5 458. By part 
(a) we have 
 x 5 X cos 458 2 Y sin 458 5 X 2 Y
!2
 y 5 X sin 458 1 Y cos 458 5 X 1 Y
!2
Substituting into the given equation and simplifying,  
we get
X 2
16 1 Y 2
9 5 1
y
x
y
Y
x
X
45*
	 7.	 (a)	 What is the discriminant of the equation in 6(b)? How 
can you use the discriminant to determine the type of 
conic that the equation represents? 
The discriminant is B2 2 4AC. The conic is a parabola, 
ellipse, or hyperbola provided that the discriminant is 
zero, negative, or positive, respectively.
(b)	 Use the discriminant to identify the equation in 6(c).
The discriminant is 142 2 41252 1252 , 0, which con-
firms that the equation represents an ellipse.
	 8.	 (a)	 Write polar equations that represent a conic with eccen-
tricity e. For what values of e is the conic an ellipse? a 
hyperbola? a parabola?
Polar equations of conics have the form 
r 5
ed
1 6 e cos u    or   
r 5
ed
1 6 e sin u
The equation represents a parabola if e 5 1, an ellipse if 
0 , e , 1, and a hyperbola if e . 1.
(b)	 What conic does the polar equation r 5 2/11 2 cos u2  
represent? Graph the conic.
This is a polar equation of a parabola.
1
1
O
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
(continued)
Review: Concept Check Answers
chapter 12 
	 1.	 (a)	 What is a sequence? What notation do we use to denote 
the terms of a sequence?
A sequence is a list of numbers written in a specific 
order. Each number is called a term of the sequence. We 
denote the terms of a sequence by a1, a2, a3, . . . .
(b)	 Find a formula for the sequence of even numbers and a 
formula for the sequence of odd numbers.
Even numbers:	
an 5 2n
Odd numbers:	
an 5 2n 1 1 
(c)	 Find the first three terms and the 10th term of the 
sequence given by an 5 n/1n 1 12 .
a1 5 1
2, a2 5 2
3, a3 5 3
4,  and 
a10 5 10
11
	 2.	 (a)	 What is a recursively defined sequence?
A recursively defined sequence is a sequence in which 
each term depends on some or all of the preceding terms. 
(b)	 Find the first four terms of the sequence recursively 
defined by a1 5 3 and an 5 n 1 2an21.
a1 5 3, a2 5 8, a3 5 19, a4 5 42
	 3.	 (a)	 What is meant by the partial sums of a sequence?
The nth partial sum Sn of a sequence a1, a2, a3, . . . is 
obtained by adding the first n terms of the sequence 
S1 5 a1, S2 5 a1 1 a2, . . . , and in general 
Sn 5 a1 1 a2 1 . . . 1 an.
(b)	 Find the first three partial sums of the sequence given by 
an 5 1/n.
S1 5 1
1 5 1, S2 5 1
1 1 1
2 5 3
2, S3 5 1
1 1 1
2 1 1
3 5 11
6
	 4.	 (a)	 What is an arithmetic sequence? Write a formula for the 
nth term of an arithmetic sequence.
An arithmetic sequence an is obtained when we start 
with a number a and add to it a fixed constant d over and 
over again. So 
an 5 a 1 1n 2 12d
(b)	 Write a formula for the arithmetic sequence that starts  
as follows: 3, 8, . . . Write the first five terms of this 
sequence.
The first term is a 5 3, and the common difference is 5. 
So the nth term is 
an 5 3 1 1n 2 125
which simplifies to an 5 22 1 5n. So the first five 
terms are 3, 8, 13, 18, and 23.
(c)	 Write two different formulas for the sum of the first  
n terms of an arithmetic sequence.
Sn 5 n
2
 32a 1 1n 2 12d4 and Sn 5 nc a 1 an
2
d
(d)	 Find the sum of the first 20 terms of the sequence in  
part (b).
Using the first formula in part (c), we get
S20 5 20
2
 32 # 3 1 19 # 54 5 1010
	 5.	 (a)	 What is a geometric sequence? Write an expression for 
the nth term of a geometric sequence that has first term a 
and common ratio r.
A geometric sequence an is obtained when we start with 
a number a and multiply it by a fixed constant r over and 
over again. So 
an 5 arn21
(b)	 Write an expression for the geometric sequence with first 
term a 5 3 and common ratio r 5 1
2. Give the first five 
terms of this sequence.
The nth term is an 5 3A1
2B
n21.
The first five terms are 3, 3
2, 3
4, 3
8, and 3
16.
(c)	 Write an expression for the sum of the first n terms of a 
geometric sequence. 
Sn 5 a 1 2 rn
1 2 r
(d)	 Find the sum of the first five terms of the sequence in 
part (b).
Using the formula in part (c), we get
S5 5 3 
1 2 A1
2B
5
1 2 A1
2B
5 93
16
	 6.	 (a)	 What is an infinite geometric series?
An infinite geometric series is a series with infinitely 
many terms of the form
a 1 ar 1 ar2 1 . . . 1 arn 1 . . .
(b)	 What does it mean for an infinite series to converge? For 
what values of r does an infinite geometric series con-
verge? If an infinite geometric series converges, then 
what is its sum?
An infinite series converges if its sequence of partial 
sums Sn approaches a finite number as n S `. An infi-
nite geometric series converges if 0  r 0 , 1; in this case 
its sum is S 5 a/11 2 r2 . 
(c)	 Write the first four terms of the infinite geometric series 
with first term a 5 5 and common ratio r 5 0.4. Does 
the series converge? If so, find its sum.
5 1 510.42 1 510.42 2 1 510.42 3 1 . . . 1 510.42 n 1 . . . 
The series converges because 0  0.4 0 , 1. By the formula 
in part (b) the sum of the series is
S 5
5
1 2 0.4 5 25
3
	 7.	 (a)	 Write 13 1 23 1 33 1 43 1 53 using sigma notation.
13 1 23 1 33 1 43 1 53 5 a
5
k51
k3
(b)	 Write a
5
k53
2k2 without using sigma notation.
a
5
k53
2k2 5 2 # 32 1 2 # 42 1 2 # 52
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 12 
	 8.	 (a)	 What is an annuity? Write an expression for the amount 
Af of an annuity consisting of n regular equal payments 
of size R with interest rate i per time period.
An annuity is a sum of money that is paid in regular 
equal payments. The amount is 
Af 5 R  
11 1 i2 n 2 1
i
(b)	 An investor deposits $200 each month into an account 
that pays 6% compounded monthly. How much is in the 
account at the end of 3 years?
The interest per time period is i 5 0.06/12 5 0.005; the 
number of time periods is n 5 3 3 12 5 36.
Af 5 200  
11 1 0.0052 36 2 1
0.005
5 7867. 22
(c)	 What is the formula for calculating the present value of 
the annuity in part (b)?
Ap 5 R  
1 2 11 1 i2 2n
i
(d)	 What is the present value of the annuity in part (b)?
Ap 5 200  
1 2 11 1 0.0052 236
0.005
5 6574. 20
(e)	 When buying on installment, what is the formula for cal-
culating the periodic payments?
If a loan Ap is to be repaid in n regular equal payments 
with interest rate i per time period, then the size R of 
each payment is 
R 5
iAp
1 2 11 1 i2 2n
(f)	 If you take out a 5-year loan for $10,000 at 3% interest 
compounded monthly, what is the size of each monthly 
payment?
The interest per time period is i 5 0.03/12 5 0.0025; 
the number of time periods is n 5 5 3 12 5 60. 
R 5
0.0025110,0002
1 2 11 1 0.00252 260 5 179. 69
	 9.	 (a)	 State the Principle of Mathematical Induction.
A statement P1n2  about a natural number n is true for all 
n provided that the following hold.
1.  P112  is true.
2.  If P1k2  is true, then P1k 1 12  is true.
(b)	 Use mathematical induction to prove that for all natural 
numbers n, 3n 2 1 is an even number.
Let P1n2  be the statement that 3n 2 1 is even.
1.  P112  is true because 31 2 1 is even.
2.  Suppose P1k2  is true. Now
3k11 2 1 5 3 # 3k 2 1 5 2 # 3k 1 3k 2 1
	
even	
even
The first term is clearly even, and the second is even 
by the induction hypothesis. So P1k 1 12  is true.
It follows that the statement is true for all n.
	10.	 (a)	 Write Pascal’s triangle. How are the entries in the trian-
gle related to each other?
Row 0	
1
Row 1	
1  
1
Row 2	
1  
2  
1
Row 3	
1  
3  
3  
1
Each entry is the sum of the two entries above it.
(b)	 Use Pascal’s triangle to expand 1x 1 c2 3.
1x 1 c2 3 5 x3 1 3x2c 1 3xc2 1 c3
	11.	 (a)	 What does the symbol n! mean? Find 5!.
n! 5 1 # 2 # 3 # . . . # n; 5! 5 1 # 2 # 3 # 4 # 5 5 120 
(b)	 Define An
rB, and find A5
2B.
an
r b 5
n!
r! 1n 2 r2!,  a5
2b 5
5!
2!  3! 5 10
	12.	 (a)	 State the Binomial Theorem.
1a 1 b2 n 5 an 1 an
1ban21b 1 an
2ban22b2 1 . . . 1 bn
(b)	 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand 1x 1 22 3.
 1x 1 22 3 5 x3 1 a3
1bx221 1 a3
2bx1 # 22 1 23
 5 x3 1 6x2 1 12x 1 8
(c)	 Use the Binomial Theorem to find the term containing x4 
in the expansion of 1x 1 22 10.
The term is A10
4 Bx426 5 13440x4.
b
b
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

✃
Cut here and keep for reference
(continued)
	 1.	 (a)	 Explain what is meant by limxSa f1x2 5 L.
As x approaches a, the values of f1x2  approach the num-
ber L. 
(b)	 If limxS2 f1x2 5 5, is it possible that f122 5 3?
Yes. For x close to 2, f1x2  is close to 5. But the value of 
f at 2 does not affect the limit. 
(c)	 Find limxS2 x2.
If x is close to 2, then x2 is close to 4, so limxS2 x2 5 4.
	 2.	 To evaluate the limit of a function, we often need to first 
rewrite the function using the rules of algebra. What is the 
logical first step in evaluating each of the following limits?
(a)	 lim
xS2 x2 2 4
x 2 2 	
(b)	 lim
hS0 
15 1 h2 2 2 25
h
Factor the numerator, 	
	
Expand the numerator,  
and simplify. 	
	
and simplify. 
(c)	 lim
xS3 !x 1 1 2 2
x 2 3
	
(d)	 lim
xS7 
a 1
7 2 1
x b
x 2 7
Rationalize the numerator 	
Combine the fractions  
by multiplying the numer-	
in the numerator, using 
ator and denominator 	
	
the common denomi- 
by !x 1 1 1 2, and then 	
nator 7x, and simplify.
simplify. 
	 3.	 (a)	 Explain what it means to say:
lim
xS32 f1x2 5 5   
lim
xS31 f1x2 5 10
The first equation says that the limit, as x approaches 3 
from the left (through values to the left of 3, or less  
than 3), is 5. 
The second equation says that the limit, as x approaches 
3 from the right (through values to the right of 3, or 
greater than 3), is 10. 
(b)	 If the two equations in part (a) are true, is it possible that 
limxS3 f1x2 5 5?
No. For the limit to exist, the left- and right-hand limits 
must be equal.
(c)	 Find limxS22 f1x2  and limxS21 f1x2 , where f is defined 
as follows:
f1x2 5 e1 if x # 2
x if x . 2
As x gets close to 2 from the left (through values less 
than 2), the function is constantly 1, so the limit from the 
left is 1. Similarly, as x gets close to 2 from the right 
(through values greater than 2), the function is equal to x, 
so the values of f approach 2. Thus the limit from the 
right is 2. 
lim
xS22 f1x2 5 1    and   
lim
xS21 f1x2 5 2
(d)	 For f as in (c), does limxS2 f1x2  exist?
No, because the left- and right-hand limits are not equal. 
	 4.	 (a)	 Define the derivative fr1a2  of a function f at x 5 a.
fr1a2 5 lim
hS0 
f1a 1 h2 2 f1a2
h
(b)	 State an equivalent formulation for fr1a2 .
fr1a2 5 lim
xSa 
f1x2 2 f1a2
x 2 a
(c)	 Find the derivative of f1x2 5 x2 at x 5 3.
Using the definition in (a), we have
 fr132 5 lim
hS0 
f13 1 h2 2 f132
h
 5 lim
hS0 
13 1 h2 2 2 32
h
 5 lim
hS0 6h 1 h2
h
 5 lim
hS0 16 1 h2 5 6
So fr132 5 6.
	 5.	 (a)	 Give two different interpretations of the derivative of the 
function y 5 f1x2  at x 5 a.
The derivative has the following interpretations:
fr1a2  is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at 
the point P1a, f1a22 .
fr1a2  is the instantaneous rate of change of y with 
respect to x at x 5 a. 
(b)	 For the function f1x2 5 x2, find the slope of the tangent 
line to the graph of f at the point 13, 92  on the graph. 
The slope is fr132 5 6 (from 4(c)).
(c)	 For the function y 5 x2, find the instantaneous rate of 
change of y with respect to x when x 5 3.
The instantaneous rate of change is fr132 5 6 (from 
4(c)).
(d)	 Write expressions for the average rate of change of y 
with respect to x between a and x and for the instanta-
neous rate of change of y with respect to x at x 5 a.
	
Average	
Instantaneous
	
rate of change	
rate of change
	
f1x2 2 f1a2
x 2 a
	
lim
xSa 
f1x2 2 f1a2
x 2 a
Review: Concept Check Answers
chapter 13 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	 6.	 (a)	 Explain what is meant by limxS` f1x2 5 L. Draw sketches 
to illustrate different ways in which this can happen.
It means that the values of f1x2  can be made arbitrarily 
close to L by taking x sufficiently large. 
y=Ï
y=L
y=Ï
y=L
0
y
x
0
y
x
(b)	 Find lim
xS` 3x2 1 x
x2 1 1 .
We divide numerator and denominator by x2. 
lim
xS` 3x2 1 x
x2 1 1 5 lim
xS` 
3 1 1
x
1 1 1
x2
5 3 1 0
1 1 0 5 3
(c)	 Explain why limxS` sin x does not exist.
From the graph below we see that as x increases, the val-
ues of the sine function oscillate between 1 and 21, so 
they don’t approach a definite number. 
0
y=ß x
y
x
	 7.	 (a)	 If a1, a2, a3, . . . is a sequence, what is meant by 
	 	 	
limnS` an 5 L? What is a convergent sequence?
It means that the nth term an of the sequence can be 
made arbitrarily close to L by taking n sufficiently large. 
The sequence is convergent if limnS` an exists.
(b)	 Find limnS`1212 n/n. 
As n gets large, the denominator gets large but the 
numerator is always 1 or 21, so the limit is 0. 
	 8.	 (a)	 Suppose S is the region under the graph of the function 
y 5 f1x2  and above the x-axis, where a # x # b. 
Explain how this area is approximated by rectangles, and 
write an expression for the area of S as a limit of sums. 
We first divide the interval 3a, b4  into n equal intervals, 
each of length Dx 5 1b 2 a2/n, and then erect a rectan-
gle on each of these intervals, where its height is the 
value of f at the right-hand endpoint. The area is the 
limit of the sum of these approximating rectangles: 
A 5 lim
nS` a
n
k51
f1xk2  Dx
where 
Dx 5 b 2 a
n
    and   
xk 5 a 1 k Dx
Îx
f(xk)
0
a
b
x⁄
x¤
x‹
xk-1 xk
y
x
(b)	 Find the area under the graph of f1x2 5 x2 and above 
the x-axis, between x 5 0 and x 5 3.
We first divide the interval 30, 34  into n equal intervals, 
each of length
Dx 5 3 2 0
n
5 3
n
The right-hand endpoint of the kth interval is 
xk 5 0 1 k  3
n 5 3k
n
So the area is
 A 5 lim
nS` a
n
k51
f1xk2 Dx 5 lim
nS` a
n
k51
 f a 3k
n b # 3
n
 5 lim
nS` a
n
k51
a 3k
n b
2 # 3
n 5 lim
nS` 33
n3 a
n
k51
k2
 5 lim
nS` 27
n3 # n1n 1 12 12n 1 12
6
 5 lim
nS` 54n3 1 81n2 1 27n
6n3
5 9
Review: Concept Check Answers (continued)
chapter 13 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

sequences and series
Arithmetic
a, a 1 d, a 1 2d, a 1 3d, a 1 4d, . . .
an 5 a 1 1 n 2 1 2 d
Sn 5 a
n
k51
ak 5 n
2
 32a 1 1n 2 12d4 5 na a 1 an
2
b
Geometric
a, ar, ar2, ar3, ar4, . . .           
an 5 ar n21
Sn 5 a
n
k51
ak 5 a  1 2 rn
1 2 r
If 0  r 0 , 1, then the sum of an infinite geometric series is
S 5
a
1 2 r
the binomial theorem
1a 1 b2 n 5 a n
0 b an 1 a n
1 b an21b 1 . . . 1 a
n
n21 b abn21 1 a n
n b bn
finance
Compound interest
A 5 Pa1 1 r
n b
nt
where A is the amount after t years, P is the principal, r is the 
interest rate, and the interest is compounded n times per year.
Amount of an annuity
Af 5 R  
11 1 i2 n 2 1
i
where Af is the final amount, i is the interest rate per  
time period, and there are n pay­ments of size R.
Present value of an annuity
Ap 5 R  
1 2 11 1 i2 2n
i
where Ap is the present value, i is the interest rate per  
time period, and there are n pay­ments of size R.
Installment buying
R 5
iAp
1 2 11 1 i2 2n
where R is the size of each payment, i is the interest rate per 
time period, Ap is the amount of the loan, and n is the num-
ber of pay­ments.
conic sections
Circles	
0
C(h, k)
r
x
y
1x 2 h2 2 1 1y 2 k2 2 5 r2
Parabolas
	
x2 5 4py	
y2 5 4px
y
x
p>0
p<0
y
x
p>0
p<0
p
p
Focus 10, p2, directrix y 5 2p	
Focus 1p, 02, directrix x 5 2p
0
y
x
(h, k)
0
y
x
(h, k)
y 5 a1x 2 h2 2 1 k,	
y 5 a1x 2 h2 2 1 k,
a , 0,    h . 0,    k . 0 	
a . 0,    h . 0,    k . 0
Ellipses
	
x2
a2 1 y2
b2 5 1	
x2
b2 1 y2
a2 5 1
a>b
b
a
_b
_a
c
_c
a>b
a
b
_a
_b
c
_c
x
y
x
y
Foci 16c, 02, c2 5 a2 2 b2	
Foci 10, 6c2, c2 5 a2 2 b2
Hyperbolas
	
x2
a2 2 y2
b2 5 1	
2 x2
b2 1 y2
a2 5 1
a
b
_a
_b
_c
c
x
y
b
a
_b
_a
c
_c
x
y
Foci 16c, 02, c2 5 a2 1 b2	
Foci 10, 6c2, c2 5 a2 1 b2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

special triangles
60*
1
2
30*
œ∑3
1
1
œ∑2
45*
45*
graphs of the trigonometric functions
y=ß x
x
y
1
_1
π
2π
y=ç x
x
y
1
_1
π
x
y
π
2π
y=† x
y= x
x
y
1
_1
π
2π
y=˚ x
x
y
1
_1
π
2π
x
y
π
2π
y=ˇ x
sine and cosine curves
y 5 a sin k1x 2 b2    1k . 02	
y 5 a cos k1x 2 b2    1k . 02
x
y
a
_a
b
One period
b+2π
k
x
y
a
_a
b
b+2π
k
One period
a>0
a>0
amplitude: 0  a 0       period: 2p/k      phase shift: b
Graphs of the inverse
trigonometric functions
	
y 5 sin21x	
y 5 cos21x	
y 5 tan21x
y
x
1
π
_1
π
2
y
x
1
_1
π
2
π
2
_
y
x
π
2
π
2
_
Angle measurement
p radians 5 180°	
r
r
¨
s
A
18 5 p
180 rad   
1 rad 5 1808
p
s 5 ru   
A 5 1
2 r2u    1u in radians2
To convert from degrees to radians, multiply by p
180.
To convert from radians to degrees, multiply by 180
p .
trigonometric functions
of real numbers
sin t 5 y	
csc t 5 1
y
	
y
x
0
1
(x, y)
t
cos t 5 x	
sec t 5 1
x
tan t 5 y
x	
cot t 5 x
y
trigonometric functions of angles 
sin u 5 }
y
r
}	
csc u 5 }y
r
}	
(x, y)
r
¨
x
y
cos u 5 }x
r
}	
sec u 5 }x
r
}
tan u 5 }
y
x
}	
cot u 5 }x
y
}
right angle trigonometry
sin u 5 opp
hyp	
csc u 5 hyp
opp
	
¨
opp
adj
hyp
cos u 5  adj
hyp	
sec u 5 hyp
adj
tan u 5 opp
adj 	
cot u 5  adj
opp
special values of the
trigonometric functions
	
u	
radians	
sin u	
cos u	
tan u
	
0°	
0	
0	
1	
0
	
30°	
p/6	
1/2	
!3/2	
!3/3
	
45°	
p/4	
!2/2	
!2/2	
1
	
60°	
p/3	
!3/2	
1/2	
!3
	
90°	
p/2	
1	
0	
—
	 180°	
p	
0	
21	
0
	 270°	
3p/2	
21	
0	
—	
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

formulaS FOR REDUCING POWERS
sin2x 5 1 2 cos 2x
2
	
cos2x 5 1 1 cos 2x
2
tan2x 5 1 2 cos 2x
1 1 cos 2x
half-angle formulas
sin u
2 5 6Å
1 2 cos u
2
	
cos u
2 5 6Å
1 1 cos u
2
tan u
2 5 1 2 cos u
sin u
5
sin u
1 1 cos u
product-to-sum and
sum-to-product identities
sin u cos √5 1
2 3sin1u 1 √2 1 sin1u 2 √24
cos u sin √5 1
2 3sin1u 1 √2 2 sin1u 2 √24
cos u cos √5 1
2 3cos1u 1 √2 1 cos1u 2 √24
sin u sin √5 1
2 3cos1u 2 √2 2 cos1u 1 √24
sin x 1 sin y 5 2 sin x 1 y
2
 cos x 2 y
2
sin x 2 sin y 5 2 cos x 1 y
2
 sin x 2 y
2
cos x 1 cos y 5 2 cos x 1 y
2
 cos x 2 y
2
cos x 2 cos y 5 22 sin x 1 y
2
 sin x 2 y
2
the laws of sines and cosines
The Law of Sines
sin A
a
5 sin B
b
5 sin C
c
The Law of Cosines
a2 5 b2 1 c2 2 2bc cos A
b2 5 a2 1 c2 2 2ac cos B
c2 5 a2 1 b2 2 2ab cos C
fundamental identities
sec x 5 
1
cos x	
csc x 5  1
sin x
tan x 5  sin x
cos x	
cot x 5 
1
tan x
sin2x 1 cos2x 5 1	
1 1 tan2x 5 sec2x 	
1 1 cot2x 5 csc2x
sin12x2 5 2sin x	
cos12x2 5 cos x	
tan12x2 5 2tan x
cofunction identities
sin a p
2 2 xb  5 cos x	
cos a p
2 2 xb  5 sin x
tan a p
2 2 xb  5 cot x	
cot a p
2 2 xb  5 tan x
sec a p
2 2 xb 5 csc x	
csc a p
2 2 xb  5 sec x
reduction identities
sin1 x 1 p 2  5 2sin x	
sin ax 1 p
2 b  5 cos x
cos1 x 1 p 2  5 2cos x	
cos ax 1 p
2 b  5 2sin x
tan1 x 1 p 2  5 tan x	
tan ax 1 p
2 b  5 2cot x
addition and subtraction formulas
sin1 x 1 y 2  5 sin x cos y 1 cos x sin y
sin1 x 2 y 2  5 sin x cos y 2 cos x sin y
cos1 x 1 y 2  5 cos x cos y 2 sin x sin y
cos1 x 2 y 2  5 cos x cos y 1 sin x sin y
tan1 x 1 y 2  5  tan x 1 tan y
1 2 tan x tan y
tan1 x 2 y 2  5 tan x 2 tan y
1 1 tan x tan y
double-angle formulas
sin 2x 5 2 sin x cos x 	
cos 2x 5 cos2x 2 sin2x
	
	
5 2 cos2x 2 1
tan 2x 5  2 tan x
1 2 tan2
 x	
	
5 1 2 2 sin2x
A
b
c
a
B
C
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

