
As you begin, you may feel anxious about the number of theorems, definitions,  
procedures, and equations. You may wonder if you can learn it all in time. Don’t  
worry—your concerns are normal. This textbook was written with you in mind. If you 
attend class, work hard, and read and study this text, you will build the knowledge 
and skills you need to be successful. Here’s how you can use the text to your benefit.
Read Carefully
When you get busy, it’s easy to skip reading and go right to the problems. Don’t . . . 
the text has a large number of examples and clear explanations to help you break 
down the mathematics into easy-to-understand steps. Reading will provide you with 
a clearer understanding, beyond simple memorization. Read before class (not after) 
so you can ask questions about anything you didn’t understand. You’ll be amazed at 
how much more you’ll get out of class if you do this.
Use the Features
I use many different methods in the classroom to communicate. Those methods, 
when incorporated into the text, are called “features.” The features serve many  
purposes, from providing timely review of material you learned before (just when 
you need it) to providing organized review sessions to help you prepare for quizzes 
and tests. Take advantage of the features and you will master the material.
To make this easier, we’ve provided a brief guide to getting the most from this 
text. Refer to “Prepare for Class,” “Practice,” and “Review” on the following three 
pages. Spend fifteen minutes reviewing the guide and familiarizing yourself with the 
features by flipping to the page numbers provided. Then, as you read, use them. This 
is the best way to make the most of your text.
Please do not hesitate to contact us, through Pearson Education, with any  
questions, comments, or suggestions for improving this text. I look forward to  
hearing from you, and good luck with all of your studies.
Best Wishes!
 
To the Student

Prepare for Class ‘‘Read the Book’’
Prepare for Class ‘‘Read the Book’’
In Words
	
Feature	
Description	
Benefit	
Page
Each chapter begins with a discussion of 
a topic of current interest and ends with a 
related project.
The Project lets you apply what you 
learned to solve a problem related to the 
topic.
	 Every Section begins with . . .
	 Sections contain . . .
Chapter-Opening 
Topic & Project
Exploration and  
Seeing the Concept 
	
Internet-Based  
Projects
WARNING
Calculus
Model It!  Examples 
and Problems
The projects allow for the integration of 
spreadsheet technology that you will need 
to be a productive member of the  
workforce.
The projects give you an opportunity to 
collaborate and use mathematics to deal 
with issues of current interest.
Learning Objectives
Each section begins with a list of objectives. 
Objectives also appear in the text where 
the objective is covered.
Most sections begin with a list of key  
concepts to review with page numbers.
Problems that assess whether you have the 
prerequisite knowledge for the upcoming 
section.
These follow most examples and direct 
you to a related exercise.
Warnings are provided in the text.
These graphing utility activities foreshadow 
a concept or solidify a concept just  
presented.
You will obtain a deeper and more 
intuitive understanding of theorems and 
definitions.
We learn best by doing. You’ll solidify 
your understanding of examples if you try 
a similar problem right away, to be sure 
you understand what you’ve just read.
These point out common mistakes and 
help you to avoid them.
These focus your studying by emphasizing 
what’s most important and where to find it.
Ever forget what you’ve learned? This  
feature highlights previously learned material 
to be used in this section. Review it, and 
you’ll always be prepared to move forward.
Not sure you need the Preparing for This 
Section review? Work the ‘Are You  
Prepared?’ problems. If you get one wrong, 
you’ll know exactly what you need to 
review and where to review it!
Preparing for  
this Section
Now Work the 
‘Are You Prepared?’ 
Problems
Now Work 
problems
These provide alternative descriptions of 
select definitions and theorems.
These appear next to information essential 
for the study of calculus.
These examples provide “how-to”  
instruction by offering a guided, step-by-step 
approach to solving a problem.
These examples and problems require you 
to build a mathematical model from either 
a verbal description or data. The homework 
Model It! problems are marked by purple 
headings.
With each step presented on the left and 
the mathematics displayed on the right, 
you can immediately see how each step  
is employed. 
It is rare for a problem to come in the  
form “Solve the following equation.” 
Rather, the equation must be developed 
based on an explanation of the problem. 
These problems require you to develop 
models that will allow you to describe the 
problem mathematically and suggest a 
solution to the problem.
Does math ever look foreign to you? This 
feature translates math into plain English.
Pay attention–if you spend extra time 
now, you’ll do better later!
SHOWCASE EXAMPLES
	 Every Chapter Opener begins with . . .
282
383
303
303
303, 314
310, 315
336
298, 323
320
85, 287, 
311
214
327, 355
2

	
Feature	
Description	
Benefit	
Page
These assess your retention of the  
prerequisite material you’ll need. Answers 
are given at the end of the section exercises. 
This feature is related to the Preparing for 
This Section feature.
These short-answer questions, mainly  
Fill-in-the-Blank, Multiple-Choice and  
True/False items, assess your understanding 
of key definitions and concepts in the  
current section.
Correlated with section examples, these 
problems provide straightforward practice.
These problems offer comprehensive  
assessment of the skills learned in the 
section by asking problems that relate to 
more than one concept or objective. These 
problems may also require you to utilize 
skills learned in previous sections.
Learning mathematics is a building 
process. Many concepts are interrelated. 
These problems help you see how  
mathematics builds on itself and also see 
how the concepts tie together.
It’s important to dig in and develop your 
skills. These problems provide you with 
ample opportunity to do so.
It is difficult to learn math without  
knowing the language of mathematics. 
These problems test your understanding  
of the formulas and vocabulary.
Do you always remember what you’ve 
learned? Working these problems is 
the best way to find out. If you get one 
wrong, you’ll know exactly what you  
need to review and where to review it!
These problems allow you to apply your 
skills to real-world problems. They also 
allow you to extend concepts learned in 
the section.
“Discussion and Writing” problems are 
colored red. They support class  
discussion, verbalization of mathematical 
ideas, and writing and research projects.
To verbalize an idea, or to describe it 
clearly in writing, shows real understanding. 
These problems nurture that understanding. 
Many are challenging, but you’ll get out 
what you put in.
You will see that the material learned 
within the section has many uses in  
everyday life.
‘Are You Prepared?’ 
Problems 
Concepts and 
Vocabulary
Skill Building
Now Work 
problems
314, 328
314
314–316
316–317
317–319
319
319
312, 315, 
316
379–381
Mixed Practice
Applications and  
Extensions
Explaining Concepts: 
Discussion and
Writing
NEW!  
Retain Your  
Knowledge
These problems allow you to practice  
content learned earlier in the course.
Many examples refer you to a related 
homework problem. These related 
problems are marked by a pencil and 
orange numbers.
Every chapter concludes with a  
comprehensive list of exercises to pratice. 
Use the list of objectives to determine the 
objective and examples that correspond 
to the problems.
Work these problems to ensure that you 
understand all the skills and concepts of 
the chapter. Think of it as a comprehensive 
review of the chapter.
If you get stuck while working problems, 
look for the closest Now Work problem, 
and refer to the related example to  
see if it helps.
Remembering how to solve all the  
different kinds of problems that  
you encounter throughout the course  
is difficult. This practice helps you  
remember.
Review Exercises
Practice ‘‘Work the Problems’’
Practice ‘‘Work the Problems’’

Review ‘‘Study for Quizzes and Tests’’
Review ‘‘Study for Quizzes and Tests’’
	
Feature	
Description	
Benefit	
Page
A detailed list of important theorems,  
formulas, and definitions from the chapter.
Contains a complete list of objectives  
by section, examples that illustrate the  
objective, and practice exercises that test 
your understanding of the objective.
Review these and you’ll know the most  
important material in the chapter! 
Do the recommended exercises and you’ll 
have mastered the key material. If you 
get something wrong, go back and work 
through the example listed and try again.
These provide comprehensive review and 
practice of key skills, matched to the Learning 
Objectives for each section.
	 The Chapter Review at the end of each chapter contains . . .
377–378
378–379
379–381
Things to Know
Review Exercises
You Should Be  
 Able to . . .
Practice makes perfect. These problems 
combine exercises from all sections,  
giving you a comprehensive review in one 
place.
These problem sets appear at the end of 
each chapter, beginning with Chapter 2. 
They combine problems from previous 
chapters, providing an ongoing cumulative 
review. When you use them in conjunction 
with the Retain Your Knowledge problems, 
you will be ready for the final exam.
The Chapter Projects apply to what  
you’ve learned in the chapter. Additional 
projects are available on the Instructor’s 
Resource Center (IRC).
Cumulative Review
Chapter Projects
These problem sets are really important. 
Completing them will ensure that you are 
not forgetting anything as you go. This will 
go a long way toward keeping you primed 
for the final exam.
The Chapter Projects give you an opportunity 
to apply what you’ve learned in the chapter  
to the opening topic. If your instructor  
allows, these make excellent opportunities 
to work in a group, which is often the best 
way of learning math.
About 15–20 problems that can be taken 
as a Chapter Test. Be sure to take the Chapter 
Test under test conditions—no notes!
Chapter Test
Be prepared. Take the sample practice 
test under test conditions. This will get you 
ready for your instructor’s test. If you get a 
problem wrong, you can watch the Chapter 
Test Prep Video.
In selected chapters, a Web-based project 
is given.
	
Internet-Based 
	
Projects
These projects give you an opportunity to 
collaborate and use mathematics to deal 
with issues of current interest by using the 
Internet to research and collect data.
382
382–383
383–384
383

Adaptive Study Plan
Skills for Success
Achieve Your Potential 
The author, Michael Sullivan, has developed specific content 
in MyMathLab® to ensure you have many resources  
to help you achieve success in mathematics - and beyond!  
The MyMathLab features described here will help you:
• Review math skills and concepts you may have forgotten
• Retain new concepts as you move through your math course
• Develop skills that will help with your transition to college 
The Study Plan will help you study 
more efficiently and effectively. 
Your performance and activity are  
assessed continually in real time, 
providing a personalized experience 
based on your individual needs.
The Skills for Success Modules  
support your continued success in  
college. These modules provide  
tutorials and guidance on a variety 
of topics, including transitioning to 
college, online learning, time  
management, and more.  
Additional content is provided to 
help with the development of  
professional skills such as resume 
writing and interview preparation.

Are you frustrated when you 
know you learned a math 
concept in the past, but you 
can’t quite remember the skill 
when it’s time to use it? 
Don’t worry! 
The author has included 
Getting Ready material so you 
can brush up on forgotten  
material efficiently by taking a  
quick skill review quiz to pinpoint the areas where you need help.
Then, a personalized homework assignment provides additional 
practice on those forgotten concepts, right when you need it. 
As you work through your math 
course, these MyMathLab®  
exercises support ongoing  
review to help you maintain  
essential skills. 
The ability to recall important 
math concepts as you continually 
acquire new mathematical skills 
will help you be successful in 
this math course and in your 
future math courses.
Getting Ready
Retain Your Knowledge

Precalculus
Tenth Edition
Global Edition
Michael Sullivan
Chicago State University

Editor in Chief: Anne Kelly
Acquisitions Editor: Dawn Murrin
Assistant Acquisitions Editor, Global Editions: Aditee Agarwal
Assistant Editor: Joseph Colella
Program Team Lead: Karen Wernholm
Program Manager: Chere Bemelmans
Project Team Lead: Peter Silvia
Project Manager: Peggy McMahon
Project Editor, Global Editions: K.K. Neelakantan
Senior Manufacturing Controller, Global Editions: Trudy Kimber
Associate Media Producer: Marielle Guiney
Media Production Manager, Global Editions: Vikram Kumar
Senior Project Manager, MyMathLab: Kristina Evans
QA Manager, Assessment Content: Marty Wright
Senior Marketing Manager: Michelle Cook
Marketing Manager: Peggy Sue Lucas
Marketing Assistant: Justine Goulart
Senior Author Support/Technology Specialist: Joe Vetere
Procurement Manager: Vincent Scelta
Procurement Specialist: Carol Melville
Text Design: Tamara Newnam
Production Coordination,
Illustrations: Cenveo® Publisher Services
Associate Director of Design,
USHE EMSS/HSC/EDU: Andrea Nix
Project Manager, Rights and Permissions: Diahanne Lucas Dowridge
Art Director: Heather Scott
Typeset by Cenveo® Publisher Services 
Printed and bound in Malaysia
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on page 1147, which constitutes an extension of this copyright page.
Unless otherwise indicated herein, any third-party trademarks that may appear in this work are the property of their respective owners, and any refer-
ences to third-party trademarks, logos or other trade dress are for demonstrative or descriptive purposes only. Such references are not intended to imply 
any sponsorship, endorsement, authorization, or promotion of Pearson’s products by the owners of such marks, or any relationship between the owner 
and Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates, authors, licensees or distributors.
Microsoft® and Windows® are registered trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation in the U.S.A. and other countries. Screen 
shots and icons reprinted with permission from the Microsoft Corporation.  This book is not sponsored or endorsed by or  
affiliated with the Microsoft Corporation.
Microsoft and /or its respective suppliers make no representations about the suitability of the information contained 
in the documents and related graphics published as part of the services for any purpose. All such documents and  
related graphics are provided “as is” without warranty of any kind. Microsoft and /or its respective suppliers hereby 
disclaim all warranties and conditions with regard to this information, including all warranties and conditions of  
merchantability, whether express, implied or statutory, fitness for a particular purpose, title and non-infringement. 
In no event shall microsoft and /or its respective suppliers be liable for any special, indirect or consequential dam-
ages or any damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether in an action of contract, negligence 
or other tortious action, arising out of or in connection with the use or performance of information available from the 
services. The documents and related graphics contained herein could include technical inaccuracies or typographical 
errors. Changes are periodically added to the information herein. Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers may make  
improvements and /or changes in the product (s) and /or the program (s) described herein at any time. Partial screen 
shots may be viewed in full within the software version specified.
Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com
© Pearson Education Limited 2018
The right of Michael Sullivan to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988.
Authorized adaptation from the United States edition, entitled Precalculus, 10th edition, ISBN 978-0-321-97907-0, by Michael Sullivan published by  
Pearson Education © 2016.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior written permission of the publisher or a license permitting restricted  
copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark in this text does not vest in the author or publisher 
any trademark ownership rights in such trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorsement of this book by 
such owners.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ISBN-10: 1-292-12177-7
ISBN-13: 978-1-292-12177-2

Three Distinct Series	
20
The Contemporary Series 	
21
Preface to the Instructor	
22
Resources for Success	
26
Applications Index	
28
	
1	
Graphs	
35
1.1	 The Distance and Midpoint Formulas	
36
Use the Distance Formula • Use the Midpoint Formula
1.2	 Graphs of Equations in Two Variables; Intercepts; Symmetry	
43
Graph Equations by Plotting Points • Find Intercepts from a Graph • Find 
Intercepts from an Equation • Test an Equation for Symmetry with Respect 
to the x-Axis, the y-Axis, and the Origin • Know How to Graph Key Equations
1.3	 Lines	
53
Calculate and Interpret the Slope of a Line • Graph Lines Given a Point and 
the Slope • Find the Equation of a Vertical Line • Use the Point–Slope Form 
of a Line; Identify Horizontal Lines • Find the Equation of a Line Given 
Two Points • Write the Equation of a Line in Slope–Intercept Form  
• Identify the Slope and y-Intercept of a Line from Its Equation • Graph Lines 
Written in General Form Using Intercepts • Find Equations of Parallel Lines 
• Find Equations of Perpendicular Lines
1.4	 Circles	
68
Write the Standard Form of the Equation of a Circle• Graph a Circle • Work 
with the General Form of the Equation of a Circle
Chapter Review	
74
Chapter Test	
76
Chapter Project	
77
	
2	
Functions and Their Graphs	
78
2.1	 Functions	
79
Determine Whether a Relation Represents a Function • Find the Value of a 
Function •  Find the Difference Quotient of a Function • Find the Domain 
of a Function Defined by an Equation • Form the Sum, Difference, Product, 
and Quotient of Two Functions 
2.2	 The Graph of a Function	
94
Identify the Graph of a Function • Obtain Information from or about the 
Graph of a Function 
2.3	 Properties of Functions	
103
Determine Even and Odd Functions from a Graph • Identify Even and Odd 
Functions from an Equation • Use a Graph to Determine Where a Function Is 
Increasing, Decreasing, or Constant • Use a Graph to Locate Local Maxima 
and Local Minima • Use a Graph to Locate the Absolute Maximum and the 
Absolute Minimum • Use a Graphing Utility to Approximate Local Maxima 
and Local Minima and to Determine Where a Function Is Increasing or 
Decreasing • Find the Average Rate of Change of a Function  
Contents
9

2.4	 Library of Functions; Piecewise-defined Functions	
117
Graph the Functions Listed in the Library of Functions • Graph  
Piecewise-defined Functions
2.5	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations	
127
Graph Functions Using Vertical and Horizontal Shifts • Graph Functions 
Using Compressions and Stretches • Graph Functions Using Reflections 
about the x-Axis and the y-Axis 
2.6	 Mathematical Models: Building Functions	
140
Build and Analyze Functions
Chapter Review	
146
Chapter Test	
150
Cumulative Review	
151
Chapter Projects	
151
	
3	
Linear and Quadratic Functions	
153
3.1	 Properties of Linear Functions and Linear Models	
154
Graph Linear Functions • Use Average Rate of Change to Identify Linear 
Functions • Determine Whether a Linear Function Is Increasing, Decreasing, 
or Constant • Build Linear Models from Verbal Descriptions 
3.2	 Building Linear Models from Data	
164
Draw and Interpret Scatter Diagrams • Distinguish between Linear  
and Nonlinear Relations • Use a Graphing Utility to Find the Line  
of Best Fit 
3.3	 Quadratic Functions and Their Properties	
170
Graph a Quadratic Function Using Transformations • Identify the Vertex 
and Axis of Symmetry of a Quadratic Function • Graph a Quadratic  
Function Using Its Vertex, Axis, and Intercepts • Find a Quadratic Function 
Given Its Vertex and One Other Point • Find the Maximum or Minimum 
Value of a Quadratic Function 
3.4	 Build Quadratic Models from Verbal Descriptions and from Data	 182
Build Quadratic Models from Verbal Descriptions • Build Quadratic Models 
from Data 
3.5	 Inequalities Involving Quadratic Functions	
192
Solve Inequalities Involving a Quadratic Function 
Chapter Review	
195
Chapter Test	
198
Cumulative Review	
199
Chapter Projects	
200
	
4	
Polynomial and Rational Functions	
201
4.1	 Polynomial Functions and Models	
202
Identify Polynomial Functions and Their Degree •  Graph Polynomial  
Functions Using Transformations • Know Properties of the Graph of a  
Polynomial Function • Analyze the Graph of a Polynomial  
Function • Build Cubic Models from Data 
4.2	 Properties of Rational Functions	
223
Find the Domain of a Rational Function • Find the Vertical Asymptotes  
of a Rational Function •  Find the Horizontal or Oblique Asymptote of a 
Rational Function 
10 
Contents

4.3	 The Graph of a Rational Function	
233
Analyze the Graph of a Rational Function • Solve Applied Problems  
Involving Rational Functions
4.4	 Polynomial and Rational Inequalities	
248
Solve Polynomial Inequalities • Solve Rational Inequalities 
4.5	 The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function	
255
Use the Remainder and Factor Theorems • Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to 
Determine the Number of Positive and the Number of Negative Real Zeros 
of a Polynomial Function • Use the Rational Zeros Theorem to List the 
Potential Rational Zeros of a Polynomial Function • Find the Real Zeros of 
a Polynomial Function • Solve Polynomial Equations • Use the Theorem for 
Bounds on Zeros • Use the Intermediate Value Theorem 
4.6	 Complex Zeros; Fundamental Theorem of Algebra	
270
Use the Conjugate Pairs Theorem • Find a Polynomial Function with  
Specified Zeros • Find the Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function 
Chapter Review	
276
Chapter Test	
279
Cumulative Review	
279
Chapter Projects	
280 
	
5	
Exponential and Logarithmic Functions	
282
5.1	 Composite Functions	
283
Form a Composite Function • Find the Domain of a Composite Function
5.2	 One-to-One Functions; Inverse Functions	
291
Determine Whether a Function Is One-to-One • Determine the Inverse of a 
Function Defined by a Map or a Set of Ordered Pairs • Obtain the Graph of 
the Inverse Function from the Graph of the Function • Find the Inverse of a 
Function Defined by an Equation 
5.3	 Exponential Functions	
303
Evaluate Exponential Functions • Graph Exponential Functions  
• Define the Number e • Solve Exponential Equations 
5.4	 Logarithmic Functions	
320
Change Exponential Statements to Logarithmic Statements and  
Logarithmic Statements to Exponential Statements • Evaluate Logarithmic 
Expressions • Determine the Domain of a Logarithmic Function  
• Graph Logarithmic Functions • Solve Logarithmic Equations 
5.5	 Properties of Logarithms	
332
Work with the Properties of Logarithms • Write a Logarithmic  
Expression as a Sum or Difference of Logarithms • Write a Logarithmic 
Expression as a Single Logarithm • Evaluate Logarithms Whose Base Is 
Neither 10 Nor e
5.6	 Logarithmic and Exponential Equations	
341
Solve Logarithmic Equations • Solve Exponential Equations  
• Solve Logarithmic and Exponential Equations Using a Graphing Utility 
5.7	 Financial Models	
348
Determine the Future Value of a Lump Sum of Money • Calculate  
Effective Rates of Return • Determine the Present Value of a Lump  
Sum of Money • Determine the Rate of Interest or the Time Required to 
Double a Lump Sum of Money
Contents  11

5.8	 Exponential Growth and Decay Models; Newton’s Law;  
Logistic Growth and Decay Models	
358
Find Equations of Populations That Obey the Law of Uninhibited Growth  
• Find Equations of Populations That Obey the Law of Decay • Use Newton’s 
Law of Cooling • Use Logistic Models
5.9	 Building Exponential, Logarithmic, and Logistic  
Models from Data	
369
Build an Exponential Model from Data • Build a Logarithmic Model from 
Data • Build a Logistic Model from Data 
Chapter Review	
377
Chapter Test	
382
Cumulative Review	
382
Chapter Projects	
383
	
6	
Trigonometric Functions	
385
6.1	 Angles and Their Measure	
386
Convert between Decimals and Degrees, Minutes, Seconds Measures for  
Angles • Find the Length of an Arc of a Circle • Convert from  
Degrees to Radians and from Radians to Degrees • Find the Area of a  
Sector of a Circle • Find the Linear Speed of an Object Traveling in  
Circular Motion 
6.2	 Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach	
400
Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions Using a Point on the 
Unit Circle • Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions of  
Quadrantal Angles • Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions of 
p
4 = 45° • Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions of p
6 = 30° 
and p
3 = 60° • Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions for 
Integer Multiples of p
6 = 30°, p
4 = 45°, and p
3 = 60° • Use a Calculator to 
Approximate the Value of a Trigonometric Function • Use a Circle of  
Radius r to Evaluate the Trigonometric Functions 
6.3	 Properties of the Trigonometric Functions	
417
Determine the Domain and the Range of the Trigonometric Functions  
• Determine the Period of the Trigonometric Functions • Determine the 
Signs of the Trigonometric Functions in a Given Quadrant • Find the Values 
of the Trigonometric Functions Using Fundamental Identities • Find the 
Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions of an Angle Given One of the 
Functions and the Quadrant of the Angle • Use Even–Odd Properties to 
Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions 
6.4	 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions	
431
Graph Functions of the Form y = A sin (vx) Using Transformations  
• Graph Functions of the Form y = A cos (vx) Using Transformations  
• Determine the Amplitude and Period of Sinusoidal Functions • Graph 
Sinusoidal Functions Using Key Points • Find an Equation for a Sinusoidal 
Graph 
6.5	 Graphs of the Tangent, Cotangent, Cosecant,  
and Secant Functions	
446
Graph Functions of the Form y = A tan (vx) + B and y = A cot (vx) + B  
• Graph Functions of the Form y = A csc (vx) + B and y = A sec (vx) + B 
6.6	 Phase Shift; Sinusoidal Curve Fitting	
454
Graph Sinusoidal Functions of the Form y = A sin (vx - f) + B  
• Build Sinusoidal Models from Data
12 
Contents

Chapter Review	
464
Chapter Test	
470
Cumulative Review	
471
Chapter Projects	
472
	
7	
Analytic Trigonometry	
474
7.1	 The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions	
475
Find the Exact Value of an Inverse Sine Function • Find an Approximate 
Value of an Inverse Sine Function • Use Properties of Inverse Functions 
to Find Exact Values of Certain Composite Functions • Find the Inverse 
Function of a Trigonometric Function • Solve Equations Involving Inverse 
Trigonometric Functions
7.2	 The Inverse Trigonometric Functions (Continued)	
488
Find the Exact Value of Expressions Involving the Inverse Sine, Cosine, and 
Tangent Functions • Define the Inverse Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent 
Functions • Use a Calculator to Evaluate sec-1 x, csc-1 x, and cot-1 x  
• Write a Trigonometric Expression as an Algebraic Expression
7.3	 Trigonometric Equations	
494
Solve Equations Involving a Single Trigonometric Function • Solve  
Trigonometric Equations Using a Calculator • Solve Trigonometric Equations 
Quadratic in Form • Solve Trigonometric Equations Using Fundamental 
Identities • Solve Trigonometric Equations Using a Graphing Utility
7.4	 Trigonometric Identities	
504
Use Algebra to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions • Establish Identities 
7.5	 Sum and Difference Formulas	
512
Use Sum and Difference Formulas to Find Exact Values • Use Sum and  
Difference Formulas to Establish Identities • Use Sum and Difference 
Formulas Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions • Solve Trigonometric 
Equations Linear in Sine and Cosine 
7.6	 Double-angle and Half-angle Formulas	
524
Use Double-angle Formulas to Find Exact Values • Use Double-angle Formulas 
to Establish Identities • Use Half-angle Formulas to Find Exact Values 
7.7	 Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas	
534
Express Products as Sums • Express Sums as Products 
Chapter Review	
538
Chapter Test	
541
Cumulative Review	
542
Chapter Projects	
543
	
8	
Applications of Trigonometric Functions	
544
8.1	 Right Triangle Trigonometry; Applications	
545
Find the Value of Trigonometric Functions of Acute Angles Using Right 
Triangles • Use the Complementary Angle Theorem • Solve Right Triangles  
• Solve Applied Problems 
8.2	 The Law of Sines	
558
Solve SAA or ASA Triangles • Solve SSA Triangles • Solve Applied Problems 
8.3	 The Law of Cosines	
568
Solve SAS Triangles • Solve SSS Triangles • Solve Applied Problems
Contents  13

8.4	 Area of a Triangle	
575
Find the Area of SAS Triangles • Find the Area of SSS Triangles
8.5	 Simple Harmonic Motion; Damped Motion; Combining Waves	
581
Build a Model for an Object in Simple Harmonic Motion • Analyze  
Simple Harmonic Motion • Analyze an Object in Damped Motion 
• Graph the Sum of Two Functions 
Chapter Review	
590
Chapter Test	
593
Cumulative Review	
594
Chapter Projects	
595
	
9	
Polar Coordinates; Vectors	
597
9.1	 Polar Coordinates	
598
Plot Points Using Polar Coordinates • Convert from Polar Coordinates to 
Rectangular Coordinates • Convert from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar 
Coordinates • Transform Equations between Polar and Rectangular Forms 
9.2	 Polar Equations and Graphs	
607
Identify and Graph Polar Equations by Converting to Rectangular  
Equations • Test Polar Equations for Symmetry • Graph Polar Equations  
by Plotting Points 
9.3	 The Complex Plane; De Moivre’s Theorem	
622
Plot Points in the Complex Plane • Convert a Complex Number between 
Rectangular Form and Polar Form • Find Products and Quotients of  
Complex Numbers in Polar Form • Use De Moivre’s Theorem • Find  
Complex Roots 
9.4	 Vectors	
630
Graph Vectors • Find a Position Vector • Add and Subtract Vectors  
Algebraically • Find a Scalar Multiple and the Magnitude of a Vector 
• Find a Unit Vector • Find a Vector from Its Direction and Magnitude 
• Model with Vectors 
9.5	 The Dot Product	
644
Find the Dot Product of Two Vectors • Find the Angle between Two Vectors 
• Determine Whether Two Vectors Are Parallel • Determine Whether Two 
Vectors Are Orthogonal • Decompose a Vector into Two Orthogonal Vectors 
• Compute Work
9.6	 Vectors in Space	
651
Find the Distance between Two Points in Space • Find Position Vectors in 
Space • Perform Operations on Vectors • Find the Dot Product •  Find the 
Angle between Two Vectors • Find the Direction Angles of a Vector
9.7	 The Cross Product	
661
Find the Cross Product of Two Vectors • Know Algebraic Properties of 
the Cross Product • Know Geometric Properties of the Cross Product  
• Find a Vector Orthogonal to Two Given Vectors • Find the Area of a  
Parallelogram 
Chapter Review	
667
Chapter Test	
670
Cumulative Review	
671
Chapter Projects	
671
14 
Contents

	
10	
Analytic Geometry	
672
10.1	Conics	
673
Know the Names of the Conics
10.2	The Parabola	
674
Analyze Parabolas with Vertex at the Origin • Analyze Parabolas with  
Vertex at (h, k) • Solve Applied Problems Involving Parabolas
10.3	The Ellipse	
683
Analyze Ellipses with Center at the Origin • Analyze Ellipses with  
Center at (h, k) •  Solve Applied Problems Involving Ellipses 
10.4	The Hyperbola	
693
Analyze Hyperbolas with Center at the Origin • Find the Asymptotes of 
a Hyperbola • Analyze Hyperbolas with Center at (h, k) • Solve Applied 
Problems Involving Hyperbolas 
10.5	Rotation of Axes; General Form of a Conic	
706
Identify a Conic • Use a Rotation of Axes to Transform Equations 
• Analyze an Equation Using a Rotation of Axes • Identify Conics without  
a Rotation of Axes 
10.6	Polar Equations of Conics	
714
Analyze and Graph Polar Equations of Conics • Convert the Polar  
Equation of a Conic to a Rectangular Equation 
10.7	Plane Curves and Parametric Equations	
720
Graph Parametric Equations • Find a Rectangular Equation for a  
Curve Defined Parametrically • Use Time as a Parameter in Parametric 
Equations • Find Parametric Equations for Curves Defined by  
Rectangular Equations
Chapter Review	
732
Chapter Test	
735
Cumulative Review	
735
Chapter Projects	
736
	
11	
Systems of Equations and Inequalities	
737
11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Substitution and Elimination	
738
Solve Systems of Equations by Substitution • Solve Systems of Equations 
by Elimination • Identify Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing 
Two Variables • Express the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations 
Containing Two Variables • Solve Systems of Three Equations Containing 
Three Variables • Identify Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing 
Three Variables • Express the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations 
Containing Three Variables 
11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices	
753
Write the Augmented Matrix of a System of Linear Equations • Write the 
System of Equations from the Augmented Matrix • Perform Row Operations 
on a Matrix • Solve a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices 
11.3	Systems of Linear Equations: Determinants	
768
Evaluate 2 by 2 Determinants • Use Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of  
Two Equations Containing Two Variables • Evaluate 3 by 3 Determinants  
• Use Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Three Equations Containing Three 
Variables • Know Properties of Determinants 
Contents  15

11.4	Matrix Algebra	
778
Find the Sum and Difference of Two Matrices • Find Scalar Multiples of a 
Matrix • Find the Product of Two Matrices • Find the Inverse of a Matrix 
Solve a System of Linear Equations Using an Inverse Matrix 
11.5	Partial Fraction Decomposition	
795
Decompose P
Q Where Q Has Only Nonrepeated Linear Factors 
• Decompose P
Q Where Q Has Repeated Linear Factors • Decompose P
Q  
Where Q Has a Nonrepeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor • Decompose P
Q  
Where Q Has a Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor 
11.6	Systems of Nonlinear Equations	
803
Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution • Solve a  
System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination 
11.7	Systems of Inequalities	
812
Graph an Inequality • Graph a System of Inequalities 
11.8	Linear Programming	
819
Set Up a Linear Programming Problem • Solve a Linear Programming 
Problem
Chapter Review	
826
Chapter Test	
830
Cumulative Review	
831
Chapter Projects	
831
	
12	
Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem	
833
12.1	Sequences	
834
Write the First Several Terms of a Sequence • Write the Terms of a  
Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula • Use Summation Notation 
• Find the Sum of a Sequence 
12.2	Arithmetic Sequences	
844
Determine Whether a Sequence Is Arithmetic • Find a Formula for an  
Arithmetic Sequence • Find the Sum of an Arithmetic Sequence 
12.3	Geometric Sequences; Geometric Series	
850
Determine Whether a Sequence Is Geometric • Find a Formula for a  
Geometric Sequence • Find the Sum of a Geometric Sequence 
• Determine Whether a Geometric Series Converges or Diverges • Solve 
Annuity Problems 
12.4	Mathematical Induction	
861
Prove Statements Using Mathematical Induction 
12.5	The Binomial Theorem	
865
Evaluate a  n
j b • Use the Binomial Theorem
Chapter Review	
871
Chapter Test	
874
Cumulative Review	
874
Chapter Projects	
875
16 
Contents

	
13	
Counting and Probability	
876
13.1	Counting	
877
Find All the Subsets of a Set • Count the Number of Elements in a Set 
• Solve Counting Problems Using the Multiplication Principle 
13.2	Permutations and Combinations	
882
Solve Counting Problems Using Permutations Involving n Distinct  
Objects • Solve Counting Problems Using Combinations • Solve Counting 
Problems Using Permutations Involving n Nondistinct Objects  
13.3	Probability	
891
Construct Probability Models • Compute Probabilities of Equally Likely 
Outcomes • Find Probabilities of the Union of Two Events • Use the 
Complement Rule to Find Probabilities 
Chapter Review	
901
Chapter Test	
903
Cumulative Review	
904
Chapter Projects	
904
	
14	
A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative,  
and Integral of a Function	
906
14.1	Finding Limits Using Tables and Graphs	
907
Find a Limit Using a Table • Find a Limit Using a Graph
14.2	Algebra Techniques for Finding Limits	
912
Find the Limit of a Sum, a Difference, and a Product • Find the Limit of a 
Polynomial • Find the Limit of a Power or a Root • Find the Limit of a  
Quotient • Find the Limit of an Average Rate of Change
14.3	One-sided Limits; Continuous Functions	
919
Find the One-sided Limits of a Function • Determine Whether a Function Is 
Continuous
14.4	The Tangent Problem; The Derivative	
926
Find an Equation of the Tangent Line to the Graph of a Function • Find the 
Derivative of a Function • Find Instantaneous Rates of Change • Find the 
Instantaneous Speed of a Particle 
14.5	The Area Problem; The Integral	
933
Approximate the Area under the Graph of a Function • Approximate  
Integrals Using a Graphing Utility
Chapter Review	
939
Chapter Test	
942
Chapter Projects	
943
	
Appendix A	
Review	
945
 A.1	 Algebra Essentials	
945
 Work with Sets • Graph Inequalities • Find Distance on the Real Number 
Line • Evaluate Algebraic Expressions • Determine the Domain of a  
Variable • Use the Laws of Exponents • Evaluate Square Roots • Use a  
Calculator to Evaluate Exponents
A.2	 Geometry Essentials	
958
Use the Pythagorean Theorem and Its Converse • Know Geometry  
Formulas • Understand Congruent Triangles and Similar Triangles
Contents  17

A.3	 Polynomials	
966
Recognize Monomials • Recognize Polynomials • Know Formulas for  
Special Products • Divide Polynomials Using Long Division • Factor  
Polynomials • Complete the Square
A.4	 Synthetic Division	
975
Divide Polynomials Using Synthetic Division
A.5	 Rational Expressions	
979
Reduce a Rational Expression to Lowest Terms • Multiply and Divide  
Rational Expressions • Add and Subtract Rational Expressions • Use the 
Least Common Multiple Method • Simplify Complex Rational Expressions 
A.6	 Solving Equations	
987
Solve Equations by Factoring • Solve Equations Involving Absolute  
Value • Solve a Quadratic Equation by Factoring • The Square Root  
Method • Solve a Quadratic Equation by Completing the Square • Solve a 
Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula
A.7	 Complex Numbers; Quadratic Equations in the Complex  
Number System	
997
Add, Subtract, Multiply, and Divide Complex Numbers • Solve Quadratic 
Equations in the Complex Number System
A.8	 Problem Solving: Interest, Mixture, Uniform Motion,  
Constant Rate Job Applications	
1006
Translate Verbal Descriptions into Mathematical Expressions • Solve  
Interest Problems • Solve Mixture Problems • Solve Uniform Motion  
Problems • Solve Constant Rate Job Problems
A.9	 Interval Notation; Solving Inequalities	
1016
Use Interval Notation • Use Properties of Inequalities • Solve Inequalities • 
Solve Combined Inequalities • Solve Inequalities Involving Absolute Value
A.10	nth Roots; Rational Exponents	
1026
Work with nth Roots • Simplify Radicals • Rationalize Denominators • 
Solve Radical Equations • Simplify Expressions with Rational Exponents
	
Appendix B	
Graphing Utilities	
1035
B.1	 The Viewing Rectangle	
1035
B.2 	 Using a Graphing Utility to Graph Equations	
1037
B.3	 Using a Graphing Utility to Locate Intercepts and Check  
for Symmetry 	
1039
B.4	 Using a Graphing Utility to Solve Equations	
1040
B.5	 Square Screens 	
1042
B.6	 Using a Graphing Utility to Graph Inequalities	
1043
B.7	 Using a Graphing Utility to Solve Systems of Linear Equations 	
1043
B.8	 Using a Graphing Utility to Graph a Polar Equation 	
1045
B.9	 Using a Graphing Utility to Graph Parametric Equations 	
1045
Answers	
1047
Credits	
1147
Index	
1149
18 
Contents

To the Memory of  
My Mother and Father

Students have different goals, learning styles, and levels of preparation. Instructors 
have different teaching philosophies, styles, and techniques. Rather than write one 
series to fit all, the Sullivans have written three distinct series. All share the same 
goal—to develop a high level of mathematical understanding and an appreciation 
for the way mathematics can describe the world around us. The manner of reaching 
that goal, however, differs from series to series.
Contemporary Series, Tenth Edition
The Contemporary Series is the most traditional in approach yet modern in its  
treatment of precalculus mathematics. Graphing utility coverage is optional and can 
be included or excluded at the discretion of the instructor: College Algebra, Algebra 
& Trigonometry, Trigonometry: A Unit Circle Approach, Precalculus.
Enhanced with Graphing Utilities Series,  
Sixth Edition
This series provides a thorough integration of graphing utilities into topics, allowing 
students to explore mathematical concepts and encounter ideas usually studied in 
later courses. Using technology, the approach to solving certain problems differs 
from the Contemporary Series, while the emphasis on understanding concepts and 
building strong skills does not: College Algebra, Algebra & Trigonometry, Precalculus.
Concepts through Functions Series,  
Third Edition
This series differs from the others, utilizing a functions approach that serves as the 
organizing principle tying concepts together. Functions are introduced early in  
various formats. This approach supports the Rule of Four, which states that functions  
are represented symbolically, numerically, graphically, and verbally. Each chapter 
introduces a new type of function and then develops all concepts pertaining to that 
particular function. The solutions of equations and inequalities, instead of being  
developed as stand-alone topics, are developed in the context of the underlying 
functions. Graphing utility coverage is optional and can be included or excluded 
at the discretion of the instructor: College Algebra; Precalculus, with a Unit Circle  
Approach to Trigonometry; Precalculus, with a Right Triangle Approach to  
Trigonometry.
Three Distinct Series
20

The Contemporary Series
College Algebra, Tenth Edition
This text provides a contemporary approach to college algebra, with three chapters 
of review material preceding the chapters on functions. Graphing calculator usage 
is provided, but is optional. After completing this book, a student will be adequately 
prepared for trigonometry, finite mathematics, and business calculus.
Algebra & Trigonometry, Tenth Edition
This text contains all the material in College Algebra, but also develops the  
trigonometric functions using a right triangle approach and showing how it  
relates to the unit circle approach. Graphing techniques are emphasized, including a  
thorough discussion of polar coordinates, parametric equations, and conics using  
polar coordinates. Graphing calculator usage is provided, but is optional. After  
completing this book, a student will be adequately prepared for finite mathematics, 
business calculus, and engineering calculus.
Precalculus, Tenth Edition
This text contains one review chapter before covering the traditional precalculus  
topic of functions and their graphs, polynomial and rational functions, and  
exponential and logarithmic functions. The trigonometric functions are introduced  
using a unit circle approach and showing how it relates to the right triangle  
approach. Graphing techniques are emphasized, including a thorough discussion of 
polar coordinates, parametric equations, and conics using polar coordinates. Graphing  
calculator usage is provided, but is optional. The final chapter provides an  
introduction to calculus, with a discussion of the limit, the derivative, and the  
integral of a function. After completing this book, a student will be adequately  
prepared for finite mathematics, business calculus, and engineering calculus.
Trigonometry: a Unit Circle Approach, Tenth Edition
This text, designed for stand-alone courses in trigonometry, develops the trigonometric  
functions using a unit circle approach and showing how it relates to the right  
triangle approach. Graphing techniques are emphasized, including a thorough  
discussion of polar coordinates, parametric equations, and conics using polar  
coordinates. Graphing calculator usage is provided, but is optional. After completing 
this book, a student will be adequately prepared for finite mathematics, business 
calculus, and engineering calculus.
21

Preface to the Instructor
A
s a professor of mathematics at an urban public  
university for 35 years, I understand the varied 
needs of precalculus students. Students range from  
being underprepared, with little mathematical background 
and a fear of mathematics, to being highly prepared 
and motivated. For some, this is their final course in  
mathematics. For others, it is preparation for future  
mathematics courses. I have written this text with both 
groups in mind.
A tremendous benefit of authoring a successful series is 
the broad-based feedback I receive from teachers and students  
who have used previous editions. I am sincerely grateful for 
their support. Virtually every change to this edition is the  
result of their thoughtful comments and suggestions. I hope 
that I have been able to take their ideas and, building upon a  
successful foundation of the ninth edition, make this series an 
even better learning and teaching tool for students and teachers.
Features in the Tenth Edition
A descriptive list of the many special features of Precalculus 
can be found on the endpapers in the front of this text.
This list places the features in their proper context, as 
building blocks of an overall learning system that has been 
carefully crafted over the years to help students get the most 
out of the time they put into studying. Please take the time to 
review this and to discuss it with your students at the beginning 
of your course. My experience has been that when students  
utilize these features, they are more successful in the course.
New to the Tenth Edition
•	 Retain Your Knowledge This new category of problems 
in the exercise set are based on the article “To Retain 
New Learning, Do the Math” published in the Edurati 
Review. In this article, Kevin Washburn suggests that “the 
more students are required to recall new content or skills, the 
better their memory will be.” It is frustrating when students  
cannot recall skills learned earlier in the course. To alleviate  
this recall problem, we have created “Retain Your 
Knowledge” problems. These are problems considered 
to be “final exam material” that students can use to maintain 
their skills. Answers to all these problems appear in the back 
of the book, and all are programmed in MyMathLab.
•	 Guided Lecture Notes Ideal for online, emporium/ 
redesign courses, inverted classrooms, or traditional  
lecture classrooms. These lecture notes help students 
take thorough, organized, and understandable notes 
as they watch the Author in Action videos. They ask  
students to complete definitions, procedures, and  
examples based on the content of the videos and text. 
In addition, experience suggests that students learn by  
doing and understanding the why/how of the concept or 
property. Therefore, many sections will have an exploration  
activity to motivate student learning. These explorations 
introduce the topic and/or connect it to either a real-world 
application or a previous section. For example, when the 
vertical-line test is discussed in Section 2.2, after the  
theorem statement, the notes ask the students to explain 
why the vertical-line test works by using the definition 
of a function. This challenge helps students process the 
information at a higher level of understanding.
•	 Illustrations Many of the figures now have captions to 
help connect the illustrations to the explanations in the 
body of the text.
•	 TI Screen Shots In this edition we have replaced all the 
screen shots from the ninth edition with screen shots us-
ing TI-84Plus C. These updated screen shots help students 
visualize concepts clearly and help make stronger connec-
tions between equations, data, and graphs in full color.
•	 Chapter Projects, which apply the concepts of each  
chapter to a real-world situation, have been enhanced 
to give students an up-to-the-minute experience. Many  
projects are new and Internet-based, requiring the student 
to research information online in order to solve problems.
•	 Exercise Sets All the exercises in the text have been  
reviewed and analyzed for this edition, some have been 
removed, and new ones have been added. All time-sensitive 
problems have been updated to the most recent information 
available. The problem sets remain classified according 
to purpose.
The ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems have been  
improved to better serve their purpose as a just-in-time  
review of concepts that the student will need to apply in 
the upcoming section.
The Concepts and Vocabulary problems have been  
expanded and now include multiple-choice exercises.  
Together with the fill-in-the-blank and True/False  
problems, these exercises have been written to serve as 
reading quizzes.
Skill Building problems develop the student’s 
computational skills with a large selection of exercises 
that are directly related to the objectives of the section. 
Mixed Practice problems offer a comprehensive assessment 
of skills that relate to more than one objective. Often 
these require skills learned earlier in the course.
Applications and Extensions problems have been 
updated. Further, many new application-type exercises 
have been added, especially ones involving information 
and data drawn from sources the student will recognize, 
to improve relevance and timeliness.
The Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing  
exercises have been improved and expanded to provide 
more opportunity for classroom discussion and group 
projects.
22

New to this edition, Retain Your Knowledge exercises 
consist of a collection of four problems in each exercise set 
that are based on material learned earlier in the course. 
They serve to keep information that has already been 
learned “fresh” in the mind of the student. Answers to all 
these problems appear in the book.
The Review Exercises in the Chapter Review have 
been streamlined, but they remain tied to the clearly  
expressed objectives of the chapter. Answers to all these 
problems appear in the book.
Content Changes in the Tenth Edition
•	 Section 2.1 The objective Find the Difference Quotient 
of a Function has been added.
•	 Section 4.1 The subsection Behavior of the Graph of a 
Polynomial Function Near a Zero has been removed.
•	 Section 4.3 A subsection has been added that discusses 
the role of multiplicity of the zeros of the denominator 
of a rational function as it relates to the graph near a 
vertical asymptote.
•	 Section 4.5 The objective Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs 
has been included.
•	 Section 4.5 The theorem Bounds on the Zeros of a  
Polynomial Function is now based on the traditional 
method of using synthetic division.
Using the Tenth Edition Effectively 
with Your Syllabus
To meet the varied needs of diverse syllabi, this text  
contains more content than is likely to be covered in a  
Precalculus course. As the chart illustrates, this text has been 
organized with flexibility of use in mind. Within a given  
chapter, certain sections are optional (see the details that follow 
the figure below) and can be omitted without loss of continuity.
Appendix A  Review
This chapter consists of review material. It may be used as the 
first part of the course or later as a just-in-time review when 
the content is required. Specific references to this chapter  
occur throughout the book to assist in the review process.
Chapter 1  Graphs
This chapter lays the foundation for functions.
Chapter 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Perhaps the most important chapter. Section 2.6 is optional.
Chapter 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Topic selection depends on your syllabus. Sections 3.2  
and 3.4 may be omitted without loss of continuity.
Chapter 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Topic selection depends on your syllabus.
Chapter 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Sections 5.1–5.6 follow in sequence. Sections 5.7, 5.8,  
and 5.9 are optional.
Chapter 6  Trigonometric Functions
Section 6.6 may be omitted in a brief course.
Chapter 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Sections 7.7 may be omitted in a brief course.
Chapter 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Sections 8.4 and 8.5 may be omitted in a brief course.
Chapter 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Sections 9.1–9.3 and Sections 9.4–9.7 are independent and 
may be covered separately.
Chapter 10  Analytic Geometry
Sections 10.1–10.4 follow in sequence. Sections 10.5, 10.6, 
and 10.7 are independent of each other, but each requires 
Sections 10.1–10.4.
Chapter 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Sections 11.2–11.7 may be covered in any order, but each 
requires Section 11.1. Section 11.8 requires Section 11.7.
Chapter 12  Sequences; Induction; The Binomial 
Theorem
There are three independent parts: Sections 12.1–12.3;  
Section 12.4; and Section 12.5.
Chapter 13  Counting and Probability
The sections follow in sequence.
Chapter 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit,  
Derivative, and Integral of a Function
If time permits, coverage of this chapter will give your  
students a beneficial head start in calculus.
Preface  23
2
1
Appendix A
Appendix B
10.110.4
10.510.7
9.19.3
3
4
5
6
12
14
13
11
7
8
9.49.7

Acknowledgments
Textbooks are written by authors, but evolve from an idea 
to final form through the efforts of many people. It was 
Don Dellen who first suggested this text and series to me. 
Don is remembered for his extensive contributions to  
publishing and mathematics.
Thanks are due to the following people for their  
assistance and encouragement to the preparation of this 
edition:
•	 From Pearson Education: Anne Kelly for her substantial  
contributions, ideas, and enthusiasm; Dawn Murrin, 
for her unmatched talent at getting the details right;  
Joseph Colella for always getting the reviews and pages 
to me on time; Peggy McMahon for directing the always  
difficult production process; Rose Kernan for handling 
liaison between the compositor and author; Peggy  
Lucas for her genuine interest in marketing this text; 
Chris Hoag for her continued support and genuine  
interest; Paul Corey for his leadership and commitment  
to excellence; and the Pearson Math and Science Sales 
team, for their continued confidence and personal  
support of our texts.
•	 Accuracy checkers: C. Brad Davis, who read the entire  
manuscript and accuracy checked answers. His  
attention to detail is amazing; Timothy Britt, for creating  
the Solutions Manuals and accuracy checking  
answers.
	
Finally, I offer my grateful thanks to the dedicated  
users and reviewers of my texts, whose collective  
insights form the backbone of each textbook revision.
James Africh, College of DuPage
Steve Agronsky, Cal Poly State University
Gererdo Aladro, Florida International  
University
Grant Alexander, Joliet Junior College
Dave Anderson, South Suburban College
Richard Andrews, Florida A&M University
Joby Milo Anthony, University of Central 
Florida
James E. Arnold, University of  
Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Adel Arshaghi, Center for Educational Merit
Carolyn Autray, University of West Georgia
Agnes Azzolino, Middlesex County College
Wilson P. Banks, Illinois State University
Sudeshna Basu, Howard University
Dale R. Bedgood, East Texas State University
Beth Beno, South Suburban College
Carolyn Bernath, Tallahassee Community 
College
Rebecca Berthiaume, Edison State College
William H. Beyer, University of Akron
Annette Blackwelder, Florida State University
Richelle Blair, Lakeland Community College
Kevin Bodden, Lewis and Clark College
Jeffrey Boerner, University of Wisconsin-Stout
Barry Booten, Florida Atlantic University
Larry Bouldin, Roane State Community  
College
Bob Bradshaw, Ohlone College
Trudy Bratten, Grossmont College
Tim Bremer, Broome Community College
Tim Britt, Jackson State Community College
Michael Brook, University of Delaware
Joanne Brunner, Joliet Junior College
Warren Burch, Brevard Community College
Mary Butler, Lincoln Public Schools
Melanie Butler, West Virginia University
Jim Butterbach, Joliet Junior College
William J. Cable, University of  
Wisconsin-Stevens Point
Lois Calamia, Brookdale Community College
Jim Campbell, Lincoln Public Schools
Roger Carlsen, Moraine Valley Community 
College
Elena Catoiu, Joliet Junior College
Mathews Chakkanakuzhi, Palomar College
Tim Chappell, Penn Valley Community College
John Collado, South Suburban College
Alicia Collins, Mesa Community College
Nelson Collins, Joliet Junior College
Rebecca Connell, Troy University
Jim Cooper, Joliet Junior College
Denise Corbett, East Carolina University
Carlos C. Corona, San Antonio College
Theodore C. Coskey, South Seattle  
Community College
Donna Costello, Plano Senior High School
Paul Crittenden, University of Nebraska at 
Lincoln
Faye Dang, Joliet Junior College
John Davenport, East Texas State University
Antonio David, Del Mar College
Stephanie Deacon, Liberty University
Duane E. Deal, Ball State University
Jerry DeGroot, Purdue North Central
Timothy Deis, University of Wisconsin- 
Platteville
Joanna DelMonaco, Middlesex Community 
College
Vivian Dennis, Eastfield College
Deborah Dillon, R. L. Turner High School
Guesna Dohrman, Tallahassee Community 
College
Cheryl Doolittle, Iowa State University
Karen R. Dougan, University of Florida
Jerrett Dumouchel, Florida Community  
College at Jacksonville
Louise Dyson, Clark College
Paul D. East, Lexington Community College
Don Edmondson, University of Texas-Austin
Erica Egizio, Joliet Junior College
Jason Eltrevoog, Joliet Junior College
Christopher Ennis, University of Minnesota
Kathy Eppler, Salt Lake Community College
Ralph Esparza, Jr., Richland College
Garret J. Etgen, University of Houston
Scott Fallstrom, Shoreline Community  
College
Pete Falzone, Pensacola Junior College
Arash Farahmand, Skyline College
W.A. Ferguson, University of Illinois-Urbana/
Champaign
Iris B. Fetta, Clemson University
Mason Flake, student at Edison Community 
College
Timothy W. Flood, Pittsburg State University
Robert Frank, Westmoreland County 
Community College
Merle Friel, Humboldt State University
Richard A. Fritz, Moraine Valley 
Community College
Dewey Furness, Ricks College
Mary Jule Gabiou, North Idaho College
Randy Gallaher, Lewis and Clark College
Tina Garn, University of Arizona
Dawit Getachew, Chicago State University
Wayne Gibson, Rancho Santiago College
Loran W. Gierhart, University of Texas at San 
Antonio and Palo Alto College
Robert Gill, University of Minnesota Duluth
Nina Girard, University of Pittsburgh at 
Johnstown
Sudhir Kumar Goel, Valdosta State University
Adrienne Goldstein, Miami Dade College, 
Kendall Campus
Joan Goliday, Sante Fe Community College
Lourdes Gonzalez, Miami Dade College, 
Kendall Campus
Frederic Gooding, Goucher College
Donald Goral, Northern Virginia Community 
College
Sue Graupner, Lincoln Public Schools
Mary Beth Grayson, Liberty University
Jennifer L. Grimsley, University of Charleston
Ken Gurganus, University of North Carolina
James E. Hall, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Judy Hall, West Virginia University
Edward R. Hancock, DeVry Institute of 
Technology
Julia Hassett, DeVry Institute, Dupage
Christopher Hay-Jahans, University of South 
Dakota
Michah Heibel, Lincoln Public Schools
LaRae Helliwell, San Jose City College
Celeste Hernandez, Richland College
Gloria P. Hernandez, Louisiana State  
University at Eunice
Brother Herron, Brother Rice High School
Robert Hoburg, Western Connecticut State 
University
Lynda Hollingsworth, Northwest Missouri 
State University
Deltrye Holt, Augusta State University
Charla Holzbog, Denison High School
Lee Hruby, Naperville North High School
Miles Hubbard, St. Cloud State University
Kim Hughes, California State College-San 
Bernardino
Stanislav, Jabuka, University of Nevada, Reno
Ron Jamison, Brigham Young University
Richard A. Jensen, Manatee Community 
College
Glenn Johnson, Middlesex Community College
Sandra G. Johnson, St. Cloud State University
Tuesday Johnson, New Mexico State  
University
Moana H. Karsteter, Tallahassee Community 
College
Susitha Karunaratne, Purdue University North 
Central
Donna Katula, Joliet Junior College
24 
Preface

Arthur Kaufman, College of Staten Island
Thomas Kearns, North Kentucky University
Jack Keating, Massasoit Community College
Shelia Kellenbarger, Lincoln Public Schools
Rachael Kenney, North Carolina State  
University
John B. Klassen, North Idaho College
Debra Kopcso, Louisiana State University
Lynne Kowski, Raritan Valley Community 
College
Yelena Kravchuk, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham
Ray S. Kuan, Skyline College
Keith Kuchar, Manatee Community College
Tor Kwembe, Chicago State University
Linda J. Kyle, Tarrant Country Jr. College
H.E. Lacey, Texas A & M University
Harriet Lamm, Coastal Bend College
James Lapp, Fort Lewis College
Matt Larson, Lincoln Public Schools
Christopher Lattin, Oakton Community College
Julia Ledet, Lousiana State University
Adele LeGere, Oakton Community College
Kevin Leith, University of Houston
JoAnn Lewin, Edison College
Jeff Lewis, Johnson County Community College
Janice C. Lyon, Tallahassee Community College
Jean McArthur, Joliet Junior College
Virginia McCarthy, Iowa State University
Karla McCavit, Albion College
Michael McClendon, University of Central 
Oklahoma
Tom McCollow, DeVry Institute of Technology
Marilyn McCollum, North Carolina State 
University
Jill McGowan, Howard University
Will McGowant, Howard University
Angela McNulty, Joliet Junior College
Laurence Maher, North Texas State University
Jay A. Malmstrom, Oklahoma City Community 
College
Rebecca Mann, Apollo High School
Lynn Marecek, Santa Ana College
Sherry Martina, Naperville North High School
Alec Matheson, Lamar University
Nancy Matthews, University of Oklahoma
James Maxwell, Oklahoma State  
University-Stillwater
Marsha May, Midwestern State University
James McLaughlin, West Chester University
Judy Meckley, Joliet Junior College
David Meel, Bowling Green State University
Carolyn Meitler, Concordia University
Samia Metwali, Erie Community College
Rich Meyers, Joliet Junior College
Eldon Miller, University of Mississippi
James Miller, West Virginia University
Michael Miller, Iowa State University
Kathleen Miranda, SUNY at Old Westbury
Chris Mirbaha, The Community College of 
Baltimore County
Val Mohanakumar, Hillsborough Community 
College
Thomas Monaghan, Naperville North High 
School
Miguel Montanez, Miami Dade College,  
Wolfson Campus
Maria Montoya, Our Lady of the Lake  
University
Susan Moosai, Florida Atlantic University
Craig Morse, Naperville North High School
Samad Mortabit, Metropolitan State University
Pat Mower, Washburn University
Tammy Muhs, University of Central Florida 
A. Muhundan, Manatee Community College
Jane Murphy, Middlesex Community College
Richard Nadel, Florida International University
Bill Naegele, South Suburban College
Gabriel Nagy, Kansas State University
Karla Neal, Lousiana State University
Lawrence E. Newman, Holyoke Community 
College
Dwight Newsome, Pasco-Hernando  
Community College
Denise Nunley, Maricopa Community Colleges
James Nymann, University of Texas-El Paso
Mark Omodt, Anoka-Ramsey Community 
College
Seth F. Oppenheimer, Mississippi State  
University
Leticia Oropesa, University of Miami
Linda Padilla, Joliet Junior College
Sanja Pantic, University of Illinois at Chicago
E. James Peake, Iowa State University
Kelly Pearson, Murray State University
Dashamir Petrela, Florida Atlantic University
Philip Pina, Florida Atlantic University
Charlotte Pisors, Baylor University
Michael Prophet, University of Northern Iowa
Laura Pyzdrowski, West Virginia University
Carrie Quesnell, Weber State University
Neal C. Raber, University of Akron
Thomas Radin, San Joaquin Delta College
Aibeng Serene Radulovic, Florida Atlantic 
University
Ken A. Rager, Metropolitan State College
Kenneth D. Reeves, San Antonio College
Elsi Reinhardt, Truckee Meadows Community 
College
Jose Remesar, Miami Dade College, Wolfson 
Campus
Jane Ringwald, Iowa State University
Douglas F. Robertson, University of  
Minnesota, MPLS
Stephen Rodi, Austin Community College
William Rogge, Lincoln Northeast High  
School
Howard L. Rolf, Baylor University
Mike Rosenthal, Florida International 
University
Phoebe Rouse, Lousiana State University
Edward Rozema, University of Tennessee at 
Chattanooga
Dennis C. Runde, Manatee Community College
Alan Saleski, Loyola University of Chicago
Susan Sandmeyer, Jamestown Community 
College
Brenda Santistevan, Salt Lake Community 
College
Linda Schmidt, Greenville Technical College
Ingrid Scott, Montgomery College
A.K. Shamma, University of West Florida
Zachery Sharon, University of Texas at San 
Antonio
Martin Sherry, Lower Columbia College
Carmen Shershin, Florida International 
University
Tatrana Shubin, San Jose State University
Anita Sikes, Delgado Community College
Timothy Sipka, Alma College
Charlotte Smedberg, University of Tampa
Lori Smellegar, Manatee Community College
Gayle Smith, Loyola Blakefield
Cindy Soderstrom, Salt Lake Community 
College
Leslie Soltis, Mercyhurst College
John Spellman, Southwest Texas State  
University
Karen Spike, University of North Carolina
Rajalakshmi Sriram, Okaloosa-Walton  
Community College
Katrina Staley, North Carolina Agricultural 
and Technical State University
Becky Stamper, Western Kentucky  
University
Judy Staver, Florida Community  
College-South
Robin Steinberg, Pima Community College
Neil Stephens, Hinsdale South High School
Sonya Stephens, Florida A&M Univeristy
Patrick Stevens, Joliet Junior College
John Sumner, University of Tampa
Matthew TenHuisen, University of North 
Carolina, Wilmington
Christopher Terry, Augusta State University
Diane Tesar, South Suburban College
Tommy Thompson, Brookhaven College
Martha K. Tietze, Shawnee Mission Northwest 
High School
Richard J. Tondra, Iowa State University
Florentina Tone, University of West Florida
Suzanne Topp, Salt Lake Community College
Marilyn Toscano, University of Wisconsin, 
Superior
Marvel Townsend, University of Florida
Jim Trudnowski, Carroll College
Robert Tuskey, Joliet Junior College
Mihaela Vajiac, Chapman University-Orange
Julia Varbalow, Thomas Nelson Community 
College-Leesville
Richard G. Vinson, University of South 
Alabama
Jorge Viola-Prioli, Florida Atlantic University
Mary Voxman, University of Idaho
Jennifer Walsh, Daytona Beach Community 
College
Donna Wandke, Naperville North High School
Timothy L.Warkentin, Cloud County  
Community College
Melissa J. Watts, Virginia State University
Hayat Weiss, Middlesex Community College
Kathryn Wetzel, Amarillo College
Darlene Whitkenack, Northern Illinois  
University
Suzanne Williams, Central Piedmont  
Community College
Larissa Williamson, University of Florida
Christine Wilson, West Virginia University
Brad Wind, Florida International University
Anna Wiodarczyk, Florida International 
University
Mary Wolyniak, Broome Community  
College
Canton Woods, Auburn University
Tamara S. Worner, Wayne State College
Terri Wright, New Hampshire Community 
Technical College, Manchester
Aletheia Zambesi, University of West Florida
George Zazi, Chicago State University
Steve Zuro, Joliet Junior College
 
Chicago State University
Preface  25
Pearson would like to thank and acknowledge Sunila Sharma, Miranda House, Anuj Chatterje, and Monica Sethi for contributing to the  
Global Edition, and Mani Sankar, East Point College of Engineering and Technology, and Jairusha Jackson, for reviewing the Global Edition.

Resources for Success
Getting Ready
Students refresh prerequisite topics through 
assignable skill review quizzes and personalized 
homework integrated in MyMathLab.
Skills for Success Modules  are integrated within the MyMathLab course to help 
students succeed in collegiate courses and prepare for future professions.
Retain Your Knowledge These new exercises support ongoing review at the course 
level and help students maintain essential skills.
Video Assessment
Video assessment is tied to key Author in Action videos to check 
students’ conceptual understanding of important math concepts.
Enhanced Graphing Functionality
New functionality within the graphing 
utility allows graphing of 3-point quadratic  
functions, 4-point cubic graphs, and 
transformations in exercises.
Adaptive Study Plan
The Study Plan makes studying more efficient and  
effective for every student. Performance and activity  
are assessed continually in real time. The data and 
analytics are used to provide personalized content– 
reinforcing concepts that target each student’s 
strengths and weaknesses.
	
Online Course  (access code required) 
MyMathLab delivers proven results in helping individual students succeed. It provides engaging  
experiences that personalize, stimulate, and measure learning for each student. And it comes from an 
experienced partner with educational expertise and an eye on the future. MyMathLab helps prepare 
students and gets them thinking more conceptually and visually through the following features:
26

Instructor Resources
Additional resources can be downloaded from  
www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/sullivan.
TestGen®
TestGen® (www.pearsoned.com/testgen) enables 
instructors to build, edit, print, and administer tests 
using a computerized bank of questions developed 
to cover all the objectives of the text.
PowerPoint® Lecture Slides
Fully editable slides correlated with the text.
Instructor Solutions Manual
Includes fully worked solutions to all exercises  
in the text.
Mini Lecture Notes
Includes additional examples and helpful teaching 
tips, by section.
Online Chapter Projects
Additional projects that give students an opportunity  
to apply what they learned in the chapter.
Student Resources
Additional resources to enhance student success:
Lecture Video
Author in Action videos are actual classroom  
lectures with fully worked out examples presented 
by Michael Sullivan. All video is assignable within 
MyMathLab.
Chapter Test Prep Videos
Students can watch instructors work through  
step-by-step solutions to all chapter test exercises 
from the text. These are available in MyMathLab and  
on YouTube.
Guided Lecture Notes
These lecture notes assist students in taking thorough, 
organized, and understandable notes while watching 
Author in Action videos. Students actively participate in 
learning the how/why of important concepts through 
explorations and activities. The Guided Lecture Notes 
are available as PDF’s and customizable Word files in 
MyMathLab. They can also be packaged with the text 
and the MyMathLab access code.
Algebra Review
Four chapters of Intermediate Algebra review. Perfect 
for a slower-paced course or for individual review.
27

28
Acoustics
amplifying sound, 380
loudness of sound, 331
loudspeaker, 588
tuning fork, 588, 589
whispering galleries, 689–690
Aerodynamics
modeling aircraft motion, 671
Aeronautics
Challenger disaster, 368
Agriculture
farm management, 825
farm workers in U.S., 367
field enclosure, 810
grazing area for cow, 580
milk production, 374
minimizing cost, 825
removing stump, 643
Air travel
bearing of aircraft, 555
distance between two planes, 142
flight time and ticket price, 169
frequent flyer miles, 565
holding pattern, 502
parking at O’Hare International Airport, 125
revising a flight plan, 573
speed and direction of aircraft, 637, 641
Archaeology
age of ancient tools, 360–361
age of fossil, 366
age of tree, 366
date of prehistoric man’s death, 380
Architecture
brick staircase, 849, 873
Burj Khalifa building, 959
Flatiron Building, 579
floor design, 847–848, 873
football stadium seating, 849
mosaic design, 849, 873
Norman window, 189, 964
parabolic arch, 189
racetrack design, 692
special window, 189, 197
stadium construction, 849
window design, 189
Area. See also Geometry
of Bermuda Triangle, 579
under a curve, 487
of isosceles triangle, 533
of sector of circle, 396
of segment of circle, 591
Art
fine decorative pieces, 415
Astronomy
angle of elevation of Sun, 554
distances of planets from Sun, 843
International Space Station (ISS), 732
planetary orbits
Earth, 692
elliptical, 692
Jupiter, 692
Mars, 692
Mercury, 719
Pluto, 692
radius of Moon, 416
Aviation
modeling aircraft motion, 671
orbital launches, 750
speed of plane, 1015
Biology
alcohol and driving, 327, 332
bacterial growth, 359–360, 373
E-coli, 115, 155
blood types, 881–882
bone length, 197–198
cricket chirp rate and temperature, 191
healing of wounds, 317, 331
maternal age versus Down syndrome, 170
muscle force, 642
yeast biomass as function of time, 372
Business
advertising, 198
automobile production, 289, 766
blending coffee, 1013
checkout lines, 900
clothing store, 902
cookie orders, 829
cost
of can, 244, 247
of commodity, 290
of manufacturing, 254, 818–819, 957,  
1013
marginal, 181, 197
minimizing, 197, 825, 830
of printing, 217
of production, 114, 289, 793, 830
of transporting goods, 126
cost equation, 66
cost function, 162
average, 97
demand equation, 197, 280
depreciation, 282
discount pricing, 290
drive-thru rate
at Burger King, 313
at Citibank, 317, 331
at McDonald’s, 318
equipment depreciation, 859
ethanol production, 373
expense computation, 1014
farm workers in U.S., 367
Jiffy Lube’s car arrival rate, 317, 331
managing a meat market, 825
milk production, 374
mixing candy, 1013
mixing nuts, 1013
new-car markup, 1025
orange juice production, 766
precision ball bearings, 957
presale orders, 750
product design, 826
production scheduling, 825
product promotion, 67
profit, 793–794
maximizing, 823–824, 825–826
profit function, 93
rate of return on, 355
restaurant management, 750
revenue, 181, 194–195, 1013
airline, 826
of clothing store, 783
daily, 181
from digital music, 139
from football seating, 860
instantaneous rate of change of, 734, 
932, 933 
maximizing, 181, 188
monthly, 181
theater, 751
RV rental, 198–199
salary, 290, 849
gross, 92
increases in, 859, 873
sales
commission on, 197, 1024
of movie theater ticket, 738, 742–743, 750
net, 42
profit from, 1015
salvage value, 380
straight-line depreciation, 158–159, 162
supply and demand, 159–160, 162
tax, 254
toy truck manufacturing, 818–819
transporting goods, 819
truck rentals, 66, 162–163
unemployment, 903
wages
of car salesperson, 66
Calculus
absolute maximum/minimum in, 108
area under a curve, 114, 140, 487
asymptotes in, 226–227
Applications Index

average rate of change in, 110
carrying a ladder around a corner, 502–503
cylinder inscribed in a cone, 144
cylinder inscribed in a sphere, 144
difference quotient in, 85–86, 92, 319, 340, 
523
ex in, 311–312
filling conical tank, 145
functions approximated by polynomial 
functions in, 222
increasing/decreasing functions in, 105–106
infinite geometric series, 854
infinite limits, 212
Intermediate Value Theorem, 264, 265
limit notation in, 854
limits at infinity, 212
local maxima/minima in, 107
longest ladder carried around corner, 454, 
502–503
maximizing projectile range, 502, 528, 533
maximizing rain gutter construction, 
532–533
open box construction, 145
partial fraction decomposition, 796
secant line in, 111
Simpson’s rule, 189
Snell’s Law of Refraction, 503–504
tangent line, 579
trigonometric functions, 526–527, 534
wire into geometric shapes, 144
Carpentry. See also Construction
pitch, 68
Chemistry
alpha particles, 705
decomposition reactions, 367
drug concentration, 246
pH, 330
purity of gold, 1014
radioactive decay, 366, 373–374, 380, 826
radioactivity from Chernobyl, 367
reactions, 189
salt solutions, 1014
sugar molecules, 1014
volume of gas, 1024
Combinatorics
airport codes, 883
binary codes, 902
birthday permutations, 885, 889, 890, 
896–897, 901, 902–903
blouses and skirts combinations, 881
book arrangements, 889
box stacking, 889
code formation, 889
combination locks, 890
committee formation, 887, 889–890, 902
Senate committees, 890
flag arrangement, 888, 902
gender composition of children in family, 894
letter codes, 883
license plate possibilities, 889, 902, 903
lining up people, 884, 889
number formation, 881, 889, 890, 903
objects selection, 890
seating arrangements, 902
shirts and ties combinations, 881
telephone numbers, 902
two-symbol codewords, 880
word formation, 887–888, 890, 903
Communications
cell phone towers, 375
installing cable TV, 145
international call plan, 163
phone charges, 162
satellite dish, 679–680, 681
spreading of rumors, 317, 331
tablet service, 125
Touch-Tone phones, 537, 589
wireless data plan, 78, 114–115, 151–152
Computers and computing
graphics, 643, 794–795
households owning computers, 367
iPod storage capacity, 163
laser printers, 1014
three-click rule, 794
website design, 794
website map, 794
Word users, 367
Construction
of box, 810, 1015
closed, 149
open, 145
of brick staircase, 873
of can, 278
of coffee can, 1015
of cylindrical tube, 810
of enclosures
around garden, 1014
around pond, 1014
maximizing area of, 184, 188, 197
of fencing, 184, 188, 197, 810
minimum cost for, 246
of flashlight, 681
of headlight, 681
of highway, 555, 566, 592
installing cable TV, 145
pitch of roof, 556
of rain gutter, 189, 408, 532–533, 546–547
of ramp, 565
access ramp, 67
of rectangular field enclosure, 188
of stadium, 189, 849
of steel drum, 247
of swimming pool, 964, 965
of swing set, 574
of tent, 578
TV dish, 681
vent pipe installation, 692
Cryptography
matrices in, 794
Decorating
Christmas tree, 960
Demographics
birth rate
age of mother and, 191
of unmarried women, 181
diversity index, 330
divorced population, 186–187
life expectancy, 1024
marital status, 882
mosquito colony growth, 366
population. See Population
rabbit colony growth, 842
Design
of awning, 567
of box with minimum surface area, 247
of fine decorative pieces, 415
of Little League Field, 399
of water sprinkler, 397
Direction
of aircraft, 637, 641
compass heading, 642
for crossing a river, 641
of fireworks display, 704
of lightning strikes, 704
of motorboat, 641
of swimmer, 670
Distance
Bermuda Triangle, 965
bicycle riding, 102
from Chicago to Honolulu, 487
circumference of Earth, 398, 399
between cities, 392–393, 397
between Earth and Mercury, 567
between Earth and Venus, 567
from Earth to a star, 554–555
of explosion, 705
height
of aircraft, 565, 567
of bouncing ball, 859, 873
of bridge, 565
of building, 554, 555
of cloud, 550
of Eiffel Tower, 554
of embankment, 555
of Ferris Wheel rider, 502
of Great Pyramid of Cheops, 567, 965
of helicopter, 592
of hot-air balloon, 555
of Lincoln’s caricature on  
Mt. Rushmore, 555
of mountain, 562, 565
of statue on a building, 550–551
of tower, 556
of tree, 416, 565
of Washington Monument, 555
of Willis Tower, 555
from home, 102
Applications Index  29

30 
Applications Index
from Honolulu to Melbourne, Australia, 487
of hot-air balloon
to airport, 593
from intersection, 42
from intersection, 144
length
of guy wire, 573
of mountain trail, 555
of ski lift, 565
limiting magnitude of telescope, 380
to the Moon, 566
pendulum swings, 855, 859
to plateau, 554
across a pond, 554
range of airplane, 1015
reach of ladder, 554
of rotating beacon, 454
between runners, 565
at sea, 566, 592
to shore, 554, 566, 591
between skyscrapers, 556, 557
stopping, 93, 181, 302
to tower, 567
traveled by wheel, 964
between two moving vehicles, 42
toward intersection, 144
between two objects, 554, 555
between two planes, 142
viewing, 416
visibility of Gibb’s Hill Lighthouse beam, 
551–552, 965
visual, 965
walking, 102
width
of gorge, 553
of Mississippi River, 556
of river, 549, 591
Economics
Consumer Price Index (CPI), 357
demand equations, 280
federal stimulus package of 2009, 356
inflation, 356
IS-LM model in, 751
marginal propensity to consume, 860
multiplier, 860
national debt, 115
participation rate, 93
per capita federal debt, 356
poverty rates, 221
poverty threshold, 43
relative income of child, 794
unemployment, 903
Education
age distribution of community college, 903
college costs, 356, 859–860
college tuition and fees, 793
degrees awarded, 879
doctorates, 900
faculty composition, 901
field trip, 254
funding a college education, 380
grade computation, 1025
IQ tests, 1025
learning curve, 318, 331
maximum level achieved, 831–832
multiple-choice test, 889
probability of acceptance to college, 903
spring break, 825
student loan, 150
interest on, 793
true/false test, 889
video games and grade-point average,  
169
Electricity
alternating current (ac), 470, 523
alternating current (ac) circuits, 445, 463
alternating current (ac) generators, 
445–446
charging a capacitor, 589
cost of, 123
current in RC circuit, 318
current in RL circuit, 318, 331
impedance, 1005
Kirchhoff’s Rules, 751, 767
parallel circuits, 1005
resistance in, 232
rates for, 66, 1024
resistance, 232, 986
voltage
foreign, 957
U.S., 957
Electronics. See also Computers and 
computing
blu-ray drive, 397
DVD drive, 397
loudspeakers, 588
microphones, 52
sawtooth curve, 533, 589
Energy
nuclear power plant, 704–705
solar, 52, 649–650
solar heat, 682
thermostat control, 139
Engineering
bridges
clearance, 446
Golden Gate, 185–186
parabolic arch, 197, 682
semielliptical arch, 691, 692, 734
suspension, 189, 681–682
drive wheel, 592
Gateway Arch (St. Louis), 682
grade
of mountain trail, 811
of road, 68
lean of Leaning Tower of Pisa, 566
moment of inertia, 537
piston engines, 415
product of inertia, 533
road system, 606
robotic arm, 660
rods and pistons, 574
searchlight, 511, 682, 734
whispering galleries, 691
Entertainment
Demon Roller Coaster customer  
rate, 318
movie theater, 486
theater revenues, 751
Environment
endangered species, 317
lake pollution control laws, 842
oil leakage, 289
Exercise and fitness
for weight loss, 1024
Finance. See also Investment(s)
balancing a checkbook, 957
bills in wallet, 903
cable rates, 374
clothes shopping, 831
college costs, 356, 859–860
computer system purchase, 355
cost
of car, 66
of car rental, 126
of electricity, 123
of fast food, 750
minimizing, 197, 246
of natural gas, 125
of printing, 217
of trans-Atlantic travel, 92–93, 101
of triangular lot, 578
cost function, 162
cost minimization, 181
credit cards
balance on, 803
debt, 842
interest on, 355
payment, 126, 842
depreciation, 317
of car, 347, 383
discounts, 290
division of money, 1008, 1013
effective rate of interest, 352
electricity rates, 66
federal stimulus package of 2009, 356
financial planning, 750, 763–764, 766, 
1008, 1013
foreign exchange, 290
funding a college education, 380
future value of money, 221–222
gross salary, 92
income versus crime rate, 376
life cycle hypothesis, 190
loans, 1013
car, 842
interest on, 150, 793, 1008
repayment of, 355
student, 793

mortgages, 357
fees, 126
interest rates on, 356
second, 356
price appreciation of homes, 355
prices of fast food, 752
refunds, 751
revenue maximization, 181, 182–184,  
188
rich man’s promise, 860
salary options, 860
saving
for a car, 355
for a home, 859
savings accounts interest, 355
selling price of a home, 77
sinking fund, 859–860
taxes, 162
e-filing returns, 115
federal income, 126, 290, 302, 1024
luxury, 162
truck rentals, 161
used-car purchase, 355
water bills, 1024–1025
Food and nutrition
animal, 826
candy, 168
color mix of candy, 903
cooler contents, 903
cooling time of pizza, 366
fast food, 750, 752
Girl Scout cookies, 900
hospital diet, 752, 766
ice cream, 825
“light” foods, 1025
number of possible meals, 879–880
raisins, 168–169
soda and hot dogs buying combinations, 
163
warming time of beer stein, 367
Forestry
wood product classification, 365
Games
coin toss, 893
die rolling, 892–893, 894, 903
grains of wheat on a chess  
board, 860
lottery, 903, 904–905
Gardens and gardening. See also 
Landscaping
enclosure for, 1014
Geography
area of Bermuda Triangle, 579
area of lake, 579, 592
inclination of mountain trail, 549, 591
Geology
earthquakes, 332
Geometry
angle between two lines, 523
balloon volume, 289
circle
area of, 579, 1013
area of segment of, 398
center of, 74
circumference of, 957, 1013
equation of, 777
inscribed in square, 143
length of chord of, 574
radius of, 74, 810
collinear points, 777
cone volume, 290
cube
length of edge of, 269
surface area of, 957
volume of, 957
cylinder
inscribing in cone, 144
inscribing in sphere, 144
volume of, 290
Descartes’s method of equal roots,  
810–811
equation of line, 777
ladder angle, 593
polygon
area of, 777
quadrilateral area, 594
rectangle
area of, 92, 141–142, 149, 957
dimensions of, 810
inscribed in circle, 143
inscribed in ellipse, 692
inscribed in semicircle, 143, 533
perimeter of, 957
semicircle inscribed in, 144
semicircle area, 578, 579, 594
sphere, 660
surface area of, 957
volume of, 957
square
area of, 964, 1013
diagonals of, 42
perimeter of, 1013
surface area
of balloon, 289
of cube, 957
of sphere, 957
triangle
area of, 578, 579, 594, 777,  
957
circumscribing, 568
equilateral, 42, 957
inscribed in circle, 144
isosceles, 92, 594, 810
medians of, 41
Pascal’s, 842
perimeter of, 957
right, 553
sides of, 594
volume of parallelepiped,  
666
Government
federal debt, 115
per capita, 356
federal income tax, 93, 126, 290, 302, 1024
e-filing returns, 115
federal stimulus package of 2009, 356
first-class mail, 127
Health. See also Medicine
age versus total cholesterol, 375
blood pressure, 502
cigarette use among teens, 67
expenditures on, 93
heartbeats during exercise, 156–157
ideal body weight, 302
life cycle hypothesis, 190
Home improvement. See also  
Construction
painting a house, 752
Housing
apartment rental, 190
number of rooms in, 92
price appreciation of homes, 355
Investment(s)
annuity, 856–857, 859
in bonds, 826
Treasuries, 766, 767, 816, 818, 820
zero-coupon, 353, 356
in CDs, 352, 826
compound interest on, 348–349, 350, 
351–352, 355–356, 454
diversified, 752
dividing, 127, 1013
doubling of, 353–354, 356
effective rate of interest, 352
finance charges, 355
in fixed-income securities, 356, 826
435K, 859, 873
growth rate for, 355–356
IRA, 356, 856–857, 859
mutual fund growth over time, 370
return on, 355, 825, 826
savings account, 351–352
in stock
analyzing, 200
appreciation, 355
beta, 153, 200
NASDAQ stocks, 889
NYSE stocks, 889
portfolios of, 882
price of, 860
time to reach goal, 355, 357
tripling of, 354, 356
Landscaping. See also Gardens  
and gardening
height of tree, 565
pond enclosure, 197
rectangular pond border, 197
removing stump, 643
Applications Index  31

32 
Applications Index
tree planting, 766
watering lawn, 397
Law and law enforcement
income vs. crime rate, 376
motor vehicle thefts, 900
violent crimes, 93
Leisure and recreation
amusement park ride, 397
cable TV, 145
rates, 374
community skating rink, 150
Ferris wheel, 73, 398, 502, 567, 588
field trip, 254
video games and grade-point average, 169
Measurement
optical methods of, 511
of rainfall, 650
Mechanics. See Physics
Medicine. See also Health
age versus total cholesterol, 375
blood pressure, 502
cancer
breast, 373
pancreatic, 317
drug concentration, 114, 246
drug medication, 317, 331
healing of wounds, 317, 331
spreading of disease, 381
Meteorology
weather balloon height and atmospheric 
pressure, 371
Miscellaneous
banquet seating, 825
bending wire, 810
biorhythms, 446
carrying a ladder around a corner, 454, 
502–503
citrus ladders, 849
coffee container, 384
cross-sectional area of beam, 93, 100
curve fitting, 751, 766, 829
drafting error, 42
land dimensions, 565
Mandelbrot sets, 629
pet ownership, 900
surface area of balloon, 289
surveillance satellites, 556–557
volume of balloon, 289
wire enclosure area, 144
working together on a job, 1014
Mixtures. See also Chemistry
blending coffees, 819, 829, 1008–1009, 1013
blending teas, 1013
candy, 1013
cement, 1015
mixed nuts, 750, 819, 829, 1013
solutions, 750
water and antifreeze, 1014
Motion, 589. See also Physics
catching a train, 734
on a circle, 397
of Ferris Wheel rider, 502
of golf ball, 100–101
minute hand of clock, 396, 470
objects approaching intersection, 731
of pendulum, 589
revolutions of circular disk, 964
simulating, 725
tortoise and the hare race, 810
uniform, 731, 1009–1011, 1013
Motor vehicles
alcohol and driving, 327, 332
angular speed of race car, 470
approaching intersection, 731
automobile production, 289, 766
average car speed, 1015
brake repair with tune-up, 903
braking load, 650, 670
crankshafts, 566
depreciation, 282
depreciation of, 347, 383
with Global Positioning System (GPS), 381
loans for, 842
new-car markup, 1025
runaway car, 195
speed and miles per gallon, 190–191
spin balancing tires, 398
stopping distance, 93, 181, 302
theft of, 900
used-car purchase, 355
windshield wiper, 397
Music
revenues from, 139
Navigation
avoiding a tropical storm, 573
bearing, 551–552, 572
of aircraft, 555
of ship, 555, 592
charting a course, 642
commercial, 565
compass heading, 642
crossing a river, 641, 642
error in
correcting, 570–571, 592
time lost due to, 565
rescue at sea, 562–563, 565–566
revising a flight plan, 573
Oceanography
tides, 464
Optics
angle of refraction, 503–504
bending light, 504
Brewster angle, 504
index of refraction, 503–504
laser beam, 554
laser projection, 533
lensmaker’s equation, 986
light obliterated through glass, 317
mirrors, 705
reflecting telescope, 682
Pediatrics
height vs. head circumference, 169, 302
Pharmacy
vitamin intake, 751, 767
Photography
camera distance, 555
Physics
angle of elevation of Sun, 554
angle of inclination, 650
bouncing balls, 873
braking load, 650
damped motion, 584, 593
Doppler effect, 246
effect of elevation on weight, 101
force, 641, 1013
to hold a wagon on a hill, 647–648
muscle, 642
resultant, 641
gravity, 232, 254
on Earth, 92, 302
on Jupiter, 92
harmonic motion, 583
heat transfer, 502
inclination of mountain trail, 549
inclined ramp, 642
kinetic energy, 1013
missile trajectory, 200
moment of inertia, 537
motion of object, 583
pendulum motion, 396, 589, 855, 1034
period, 139–140, 302
pressure, 1013
product of inertia, 533
projectile motion, 184–185, 188–189, 
414–416, 502, 503, 528, 533, 537, 637, 
723–724, 730, 731, 734
artillery, 195, 493
hit object, 730
thrown object, 730
simple harmonic motion, 592–593
simulating motion, 725
static equilibrium, 638–639, 642, 643, 670
static friction, 642
tension, 638–639, 642, 670, 865
thrown object, 637
ball, 190, 194, 930–931, 932
truck pulls, 643
uniform motion, 144, 731, 734, 1009–1011, 
1013
velocity down inclined planes, 1033
vertically propelled object, 194

Applications Index  33
weight
of a boat, 641
of a car, 641
of a piano, 638
work, 660, 1013
Play
swinging, 594
wagon pulling, 641, 648
Population. See also  
Demographics
bacteria, 319, 366, 373
decline in, 366
E-coli growth, 115, 155
of endangered species, 367
of fruit fly, 364
as function of age, 92
growth in, 366
insect, 232, 366
of trout, 842
of United States, 347, 374, 875
of world, 347, 375, 380, 833, 943
Probability
of birthday shared by people in a room, 367
checkout lines, 900
classroom composition, 900
exponential, 313, 317–318, 331
household annual income, 900
Poisson, 318
“Price is Right” games, 900
of winning a lottery, 901
Pyrotechnics
fireworks display, 704
Rate. See also Speed
of car, 397
catching a bus, 730
catching a train, 730
current of stream, 751
of emptying
oil tankers, 1015
a pool, 1015
a tub, 1015
to keep up with the Sun, 398
revolutions per minute
of bicycle wheels, 397
of pulleys, 399
of two cyclists, 1015
of water use, 140
Real estate
commission schedule, 1024
cost of triangular lot, 578
housing prices, 278
mortgage loans, 357
Recreation
bungee jumping, 254
Demon Roller Coaster customer rate, 318
online gambling, 900
Security
security cameras, 554
Seismology
calibrating instruments, 734
Sequences. See also  
Combinatorics
ceramic tile floor design, 847–848
Drury Lane Theater, 849
football stadium seating, 849
seats in amphitheater, 849
Speed
of aircraft, 641, 1015
angular, 397, 470
average, 1015
of current, 398, 829, 1013
as function of time, 102, 144
of glider, 591
instantaneous
of ball, 932, 941
on the Moon, 932–933
linear, 394–395, 397
on Earth, 397, 398
of Moon, 397
of motorboat, 1013
of moving walkways, 1014
per gallon rate and, 190–191
revolutions per minute of  
pulley, 398
of rotation of lighthouse  
beacons, 470
of swimmer, 670
of truck, 554
of wheel pulling cable cars, 398
wind, 750
Sports
baseball, 730, 731, 890, 902
diamond, 42
dimensions of home plate, 578
field, 573, 574
Little League, 42, 399
on-base percentage, 164–165
stadium, 573
World Series, 890
basketball, 890
free throws, 100, 556
granny shots, 100
biathlon, 1015
bungee jumping, 254
cycling, 1015
distance between runners, 565
exacta betting, 903
football, 692, 1014
defensive squad, 890
seating revenue, 860
golf, 100–101, 376, 502, 723–724, 730
distance to the green, 572
sand bunkers, 493
hammer throw, 472
Olympic heroes, 1015
pool shots, 557
races, 807–808, 810, 1014–1015
relay runners, 902
swimming, 594, 670
tennis, 1014
Statistics. See Probability
Surveys
of appliance purchases, 881
data analysis, 878, 881
stock portfolios, 882
of summer session  
attendance, 881
of TV sets in a house, 900
Temperature
of air parcel, 849
body, 957
conversion of, 290, 302
cooling time of pizza, 366
cricket chirp rate and, 191
measuring, 66–67
after midnight, 221
monthly, 463–464, 470–471
relationship between scales, 139
sinusoidal function from, 459–460
of skillet, 380
warming time of beer stein, 367
wind chill factor, 381
Tests and testing
IQ, 1025
Time
for beer stein to warm, 367
for block to slide down inclined plane, 
415
Ferris Wheel rider height as function of, 
502
to go from an island to a town, 145
hours of daylight, 280–281, 385, 461–462, 
465, 473, 486
for pizza to cool, 366
of sunrise, 398, 486
of trip, 415, 431
Transportation
deicing salt, 493
Niagara Falls Incline Railway, 555
Travel. See also Air travel;  
Navigation
bearing, 592
drivers stopped by the police,  
383
parking at O’Hare International  
Airport, 125
tailgating, 416
Volume
of gasoline in tank, 1033
of ice in skating rink, 150
of water in cone, 145

34 
Applications Index
Weapons
artillery, 195, 493
cannons, 200
Weather
atmospheric pressure,  
317, 331
avoiding a tropical storm, 573
cooling air, 849
hurricanes, 221, 463
lightning strikes, 701–702, 704
probability of rain, 896
rainfall measurement, 650
relative humidity, 318
weather satellites, 73
wind chill, 126–127, 381
Work, 648
computing, 648, 649, 670
constant rate jobs, 830
pulling a wagon, 648
ramp angle, 650
wheelbarrow push, 641

35
35
How to Value a House
Two things to consider in valuing a home are, first, how does it compare to similar 
homes that have sold recently? Is the asking price fair? And second, what value  
do you place on the advertised features and amenities? Yes, other people might 
value them highly, but do you?
Zestimate home valuation, RealEstateABC.com, and Reply.com are 
among the many algorithmic (generated by a computer model) starting 
points in figuring out the value of a home. They show you how the home is 
priced relative to other homes in the area, but you need to add in all the things 
that only someone who has seen the house knows. You can do that using  
My Estimator, and then you create your own estimate and see how it stacks 
up against the asking price.
Looking at “Comps”
Knowing whether an asking price is fair will be important when you’re ready to make 
an offer on a house. It will be even more important when your mortgage lender hires 
an appraiser to determine whether the house is worth the loan you want.
Check with your agent, Zillow.com, propertyshark.com, or other websites to see 
recent sales of homes in the area that are similar, or comparable, to what you’re looking 
for. Print them out and keep these “comps” in a three-ring binder; you’ll be referring 
to them quite a bit.
Note that “recent sales” usually means within the last six months. A sales price 
from a year ago may bear little or no relation to what is going on in your area right 
now. In fact, some lenders will not accept comps older than three months.
Market activity also determines how easy or difficult it is to find accurate comps. 
In a “hot” or busy market, with sales happening all the time, you’re likely to have 
lots of comps to choose from. In a less active market, finding reasonable comps  
becomes harder. And if the home you’re looking at has special design features, finding a  
comparable property is harder still. It’s also necessary to know what’s going on in a 
given sub-segment. Maybe large, high-end homes are selling like hotcakes, but owners 
of smaller houses are staying put, or vice versa.
Source:  http://allmyhome.blogspot.com/2008/07/how-to-value-house.html
—See the Internet-based Chapter Project—
 A Look Back
Appendix A reviews skills from intermediate algebra.
A Look Ahead 
Here we connect algebra and geometry using the rectangular coordinate 
system. In the 1600s, algebra had developed to the point that René Descartes 
(1596–1650) and Pierre de Fermat (1601–1665) were able to use rectangular  
coordinates to translate geometry problems into algebra problems, and vice versa. 
This enabled both geometers and algebraists to gain new insights into their subjects, 
which had been thought to be separate but now were seen as connected.
1
Graphs
Outline
1.1	
 The Distance and Midpoint Formulas
1.2	
Graphs of Equations in Two Variables; 
Intercepts; Symmetry
1.3	
Lines
1.4	
Circles
 	
Chapter Review
	
Chapter Test
 	
Cumulative Review
 	
Chapter Project

36 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
Rectangular Coordinates
We locate a point on the real number line by assigning it a single real number, called 
the coordinate of the point. For work in a two-dimensional plane, we locate points 
by using two numbers.
Begin with two real number lines located in the same plane: one horizontal and 
the other vertical. The horizontal line is called the x-axis, the vertical line the y-axis, 
and the point of intersection the origin O. See Figure 1.  Assign coordinates to every 
point on these number lines using a convenient scale. In mathematics, we usually 
use the same scale on each axis, but in applications, different scales appropriate to 
the application may be used.
The origin O has a value of 0 on both the x-axis and the y-axis. Points on the 
x-axis to the right of O are associated with positive real numbers, and those to the 
left of O are associated with negative real numbers. Points on the y-axis above O 
are associated with positive real numbers, and those below O are associated with 
negative real numbers. In Figure 1, the x-axis and y-axis are labeled as x and y, 
respectively, and an arrow at the end of each axis is used to denote the positive 
direction.
The coordinate system described here is called a rectangular or Cartesian*  
coordinate system. The plane formed by the x-axis and y-axis is sometimes called 
the xy-plane, and the x-axis and y-axis are referred to as the coordinate axes.
Any point P in the xy-plane can be located by using an ordered pair 1x, y2 of 
real numbers. Let x denote the signed distance of P from the y-axis (signed means 
that if P is to the right of the y-axis, then x 7 0, and if P is to the left of the y-axis, 
then x 6 0); and let y denote the signed distance of P from the x-axis. The ordered 
pair 1x, y2, also called the coordinates of P, gives us enough information to locate 
the point P in the plane.
For example, to locate the point whose coordinates are 1 -3, 12, go 3 units 
along the x-axis to the left of O and then go straight up 1 unit. We plot this point 
by placing a dot at this location. See Figure 2, in which the points with coordinates 
1 -3, 12, 1 -2, -32, 13, -22, and 13, 22 are plotted.
The origin has coordinates 10, 02. Any point on the x-axis has coordinates of 
the form 1x, 02, and any point on the y-axis has coordinates of the form 10, y2.
If 1x, y2 are the coordinates of a point P, then x is called the x-coordinate, or 
abscissa, of P, and y is the y-coordinate, or ordinate, of P. We identify the point P by 
its coordinates 1x, y2 by writing P = 1x, y2. Usually, we will simply say “the point 
1x, y2” rather than “the point whose coordinates are 1x, y2.”
The coordinate axes divide the xy-plane into four sections called quadrants, as 
shown in Figure 3. In quadrant I, both the x-coordinate and the y-coordinate of all 
points are positive; in quadrant II, x is negative and y is positive; in quadrant III, 
both x and y are negative; and in quadrant IV, x is positive and y is negative. Points 
on the coordinate axes belong to no quadrant.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
1.1  The Distance and Midpoint Formulas
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Algebra Essentials (Appendix A, Section A.1,  
pp. 945–954)
•	 Geometry Essentials (Appendix A, Section A.2,  
pp. 958–962)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 41.
	
Objectives	 	1  Use the Distance Formula  (p. 37)
	
	 	2  Use the Midpoint Formula  (p. 39)
* Named after René Descartes (1596–1650), a French mathematician, philosopher, and theologian.
Figure 1  xy@Plane
x
y
–4
–2
4
2
2
–2
4
–4
O
Figure 2 
x
y
–4
4
1
3
2
2
3
3
2
4
(3, 2)
3
(–3, 1)
(–2, –3)
(3, –2)
O
Figure 3 
x
y
Quadrant I
x > 0, y > 0
Quadrant IV
x > 0, y < 0
Quadrant II
x < 0, y > 0
Quadrant III
x < 0, y < 0

Section 1.1  The Distance and Midpoint Formulas  37
Comment  On a graphing calculator, you can set the scale on each axis. Once this has been done, 
you obtain the viewing rectangle. See Figure 4 for a typical viewing rectangle. You should now read  
Section B.1, The Viewing Rectangle, in Appendix B.	
■
Figure 4  TI-84 Plus C Standard Viewing Rectangle
Use the Distance Formula
If the same units of measurement (such as inches, centimeters, and so on) are used 
for both the x-axis and y-axis, then all distances in the xy-plane can be measured 
using this unit of measurement.
Finding the Distance between Two Points
Find the distance d between the points 11, 32 and 15, 62.
 First plot the points 11, 32 and 15, 62 and connect them with a straight line. See 
Figure 5(a). To find the length d, begin by drawing a horizontal line from 11, 32 to 
15, 32 and a vertical line from 15, 32 to 15, 62, forming a right triangle, as shown in 
Figure 5(b). One leg of the triangle is of length 4 (since 0 5 - 10 = 4), and the other 
is of length 3 (since 0 6 - 30 = 3). By the Pythagorean Theorem, the square of the 
distance d that we seek is
 d2 = 42 + 32 = 16 + 9 = 25
 d = 225 = 5
1
Example 1
Solution
Figure 5 
•
x
y
3
(1, 3)
(5, 6)
3
4
d
6
(b)
6
3
(5, 3)
x
y
3
(1, 3)
(5, 6)
d
6
(a)
6
3
The distance formula provides a straightforward method for computing the 
distance between two points.
Distance Formula
The distance between two points P1 = 1x1, y12 and P2 = 1x2, y22, denoted by 
d1P1, P22, is
	
d1P1, P22 = 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122	
(1)
Theorem
Proof of the Distance Formula  Let 1x1, y12 denote the coordinates of point P1 
and let 1x2, y22 denote the coordinates of point P2. Assume that the line joining 
P1 and P2 is neither horizontal nor vertical. Refer to Figure 6(a) on page 38. The  
coordinates of P3 are 1x2, y12. The horizontal distance from P1 to P3 is the absolute 
In Words
To compute the distance between 
two points, find the difference 
of the x-coordinates, square it, 
and add this to the square of the 
difference of the y-coordinates. 
The square root of this sum is the 
distance.

38 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
value of the difference of the x-coordinates, 0 x2 - x10 .  The vertical distance from 
P3 to P2 is the absolute value of the difference of the y-coordinates, 0 y2 - y10 . See 
Figure 6(b). The distance d1P1, P22 is the length of the hypotenuse of the right  
triangle, so, by the Pythagorean Theorem, it follows that
 3d1P1, P22 42 = 0 x2 - x10 2 + 0 y2 - y10 2
 = 1x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122
 d1P1, P22 = 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122
Figure 6 
P1  (x1, y1)
x1
(a)
x2
P3  (x2, y1)
y
y
x
x
P2  (x2, y2)
y2
y1
(b)
x1
x2
P2  (x2, y2)
y2
y1
P1  (x1, y1)
d(P1, P2)
P3  (x2, y1)
x2  x1
y2  y1
Now, if the line joining P1 and P2 is horizontal, then the y-coordinate of P1 
equals the y-coordinate of P2; that is, y1 = y2. Refer to Figure 7(a). In this case, the 
distance formula (1) still works, because for y1 = y2, it reduces to
d1P1, P22 = 21x2 - x122 + 02 = 21x2 - x122 = 0 x2 - x10
Figure 7 
x2  x1
x1
x2
y1
x
y
P2  (x2, y1)
P1  (x1, y1)
d(P1, P2)
(a)
y2  y1
x1
y1
y2
P2  (x1, y2)
P1  (x1, y1)
d(P1, P2)
x
y
(b)
A similar argument holds if the line joining P1 and P2 is vertical. See  
Figure 7(b).	
■
Using the Distance Formula
Find the distance d between the points 1 -4, 52 and (3, 2).
 Using the distance formula, equation (1), reveals that the distance d is
 d = 233 - 1 -42 42 + 12 - 522 = 272 + 1 -322
 = 249 + 9 = 258 ≈7.62
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 9  a n d  2 3
The distance between two points P1 = 1x1, y12 and P2 = 1x2, y22 is never a  
negative number.  Also, the distance between two points is 0 only when the points are 
identical—that is, when x1 = x2 and y1 = y2.   And, because 1x2 - x122 = 1x1 - x222 
and 1y2 - y122 = 1y1 - y222, it makes no difference whether the distance is  
computed from P1 to P2 or from P2 to P1; that is, d1P1, P22 = d1P2, P12.
The introduction to this chapter mentioned that rectangular coordinates enable 
us to translate geometry problems into algebra problems, and vice versa. The next 
example shows how algebra (the distance formula) can be used to solve geometry 
problems.
Example 2
Solution
•

Section 1.1  The Distance and Midpoint Formulas  39
Using Algebra to Solve Geometry Problems
Consider the three points A = 1 -2, 12, B = 12, 32, and C = 13, 12.
(a)	 Plot each point and form the triangle ABC.
(b)	 Find the length of each side of the triangle.
(c)	 Show that the triangle is a right triangle.
(d)	 Find the area of the triangle.
 (a)	 Figure 8 shows the points A, B, C and the triangle ABC.
(b)	 To find the length of each side of the triangle, use the distance formula,  
equation (1).
 d1A, B2 = 232 - 1 -22 42 + 13 - 122 = 216 + 4 = 220 = 225
 d1B, C2 = 213 - 222 + 11 - 322 = 21 + 4 = 25
 d1A, C2 = 233 - 1 -22 42 + 11 - 122 = 225 + 0 = 5
(c)	 If the sum of the squares of the lengths of two of the sides equals the square of the 
length of the third side, then the triangle is a right triangle. Looking at Figure 8, 
it seems reasonable to conjecture that the angle at vertex B might be a right 
angle. We shall check to see whether
3d1A, B2 42 + 3d1B, C2 42 = 3d1A, C2 42
Using the results in part (b) yields
 3d1A, B2 42 + 3d1B, C2 42 = 122522 + 1 2522
 = 20 + 5 = 25 = 3d1A, C2 42
It follows from the converse of the Pythagorean Theorem that triangle ABC is 
a right triangle.
(d)	 Because the right angle is at vertex B, the sides AB and BC form the base and 
height of the triangle. Its area is
Area = 1
2
 1Base2 1Height2 = 1
2
 12252 1 252 = 5 square units
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1
Use the Midpoint Formula
We now derive a formula for the coordinates of the midpoint of a line segment. 
Let P1 = 1x1, y12 and P2 = 1x2, y22 be the endpoints of a line segment, and let 
M = 1x, y2 be the point on the line segment that is the same distance from P1 as it is 
from P2. See Figure 9. The triangles P1
 AM and MBP2 are congruent. [Do you see why? 
d1P1, M2 = d1M, P22 is given; also, ∠AP1
 M = ∠BMP2* and ∠P1
 MA = ∠MP2
 B. 
Thus, we have angle–side–angle.] Because triangles P1
 AM and MBP2 are congruent, 
corresponding sides are equal in length. That is,
 x - x1 = x2 - x  and   y - y1 = y2 - y
 2x = x1 + x2  
 2y = y1 + y2
 x = x1 + x2
2   
 y = y1 + y2
2
Example 3
Solution
•
2
*A postulate from geometry states that the transversal P1P2 forms congruent corresponding angles with 
the parallel line segments P1A and MB.
Figure 8 
x
y
–3
3
3
C = (3, 1)
B = (2, 3)
A = (–2, 1)
Figure 9 
x1
x2
x
y1
x
y
A = (x, y1)
M = (x, y)
P1 = (x1, y1)
x – x1
x2 – x
y2 – y
y – y1
P2 = (x2, y2)
B = (x2, y)
y
y2

40 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
Finding the Midpoint of a Line Segment
Find the midpoint of the line segment from P1 = 1 -5, 52 to P2 = 13, 12. Plot the 
points P1 and P2 and their midpoint.
 Apply the midpoint formula (2) using x1 = -5, y1 = 5, x2 = 3, and y2 = 1. Then 
the coordinates 1x, y2 of the midpoint M are
x = x1 + x2
2
= -5 + 3
2
= -1 and y = y1 + y2
2
= 5 + 1
2
= 3
That is, M = 1 -1, 32. See Figure 10.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 7
Example 4
Solution
•
Midpoint Formula
The midpoint M = 1x, y2 of the line segment from P1 = 1x1, y12 to 
P2 = 1x2, y22 is
	
M = 1x, y2 = ¢ x1 + x2
2
, y1 + y2
2
≤	
(2)
Theorem
Figure 10 
x
y
5
5
–5
P2  (3, 1)
P1  (–5, 5)
M  (–1, 3)
	 7.	 If 1x, y2 are the coordinates of a point P in the xy-plane, 
then x is called the  
  of P, and y 
is the  
  of P.
	 8.	 The coordinate axes divide the xy-plane into four sections 
called  
 .
	 9.	 If three distinct points P, Q, and R all lie on a line, and if 
d1P, Q2 = d1Q, R2, then Q is called the  
  
of the line segment from P to R.
	 10.	 True or False  The distance between two points is  
sometimes a negative number. 
	 11.	 True or False  The point 1- 1, 42 lies in quadrant IV of the 
Cartesian plane. 
	 12.	 True or False  The midpoint of a line segment is found by 
averaging the x-coordinates and averaging the y-coordinates 
of the endpoints. 
	 13.	 Which of the following statements is true for a point (x, y) 
that lies in quadrant III?
(a)	 Both x and y are positive.
(b)	 Both x and y are negative.
(c)	 x is positive, and y is negative.
(d)	 x is negative, and y is positive. 
	 14.	 Choose the formula that gives the distance between two 
points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2).
(a)	 2(x2 - x1)2 + (y2 - y1)2
(b)	 2(x2 + x1)2 - (y2 + y1)2
(c)	 2(x2 - x1)2 - (y2 - y1)2
(d)	 2(x2 + x1)2 + (y2 + y1)2 
Concepts and Vocabulary
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 On the real number line, the origin is assigned the number 
       
 . (p. 948)
	 2.	 If - 3 and 5 are the coordinates of two points on the real 
number line, the distance between these points is              . 
(pp. 949–950)
	 3.	 If 3 and 4 are the legs of a right triangle, the hypotenuse is 
        
 . (p. 958)
	 4.	 Use the converse of the Pythagorean Theorem to show that 
a triangle whose sides are of lengths 11, 60, and 61 is a right 
triangle. (pp. 958–959)  
	 5.	 The area A of a triangle whose base is b and whose altitude 
is h is A =  
 
 . (p. 959)
	 6.	 True or False  Two triangles are congruent if two angles and 
the included side of one equals two angles and the included 
side of the other. (pp. 960–961).   
1.1  Assess Your Understanding
In Words
To find the midpoint of a line  
segment, average the x-coordinates 
of the endpoints, and average the 
y-coordinates of the endpoints.

Section 1.1  The Distance and Midpoint Formulas  41
–1
x
y
2
2
–2
P2  (–2, 2)
P1  (1, 1)
In Problems 15 and 16, plot each point in the xy-plane. Tell in which quadrant or on what coordinate axis each point lies.
Skill Building
	15.	 (a)	 A = 1- 3, 22
(b)	 B = 16, 02
(c)	 C = 1- 2, - 22
16.	 (a)  A = 11, 42
(b)  B = 1- 3, - 42
(c)  C = 1- 3, 42
(d)	 D = 16, 52
(e)	 E = 10, - 32
(f)	 F = 16, - 32
(d)	 D = 14, 12
(e)	 E = 10, 12
(f)	 F = 1-3, 02
	 17.	 Plot the points 12, 02, 12, - 32, 12, 42, 12, 12, and 12, - 12. Describe the set of all points of the form 12, y2, where y is a real number.
	 18.	 Plot the points 10, 32, 11, 32, 1- 2, 32, 15, 32, and 1- 4, 32. Describe the set of all points of the form 1x, 32, where x is a real number.
In Problems 19–30, find the distance d1P1, P22 between the points P1 and P2.
	 19.	 	
	 22.	 	
P1 = (0, 0)
P2 = (2, 1)
x
y
–2
–1
2
2
P1 = (0, 0)
P2 = (–2, 1)
x
y
–2
–1
2
2
	 23.	 P1 = 13, - 42; P2 = 15, 42 
	 24.	 P1 = 1- 1, 02; P2 = 12, 42 
	 25.	 P1 = 12, - 32; P2 = 14, 22 
	 26.	 P1 = 1- 3, 22; P2 = 16, 02 
	 27.	 P1 = 1- 4, - 32; P2 = 16, 22 
	 28.	 P1 = 14, - 32; P2 = 16, 42 
	 29.	 P1 = 1a, a2; P2 = 10, 02 
	 30.	 P1 = 1a, b2; P2 = 10, 02 
	 31.	 A = 1- 2, 52; B = 11, 32; C = 1- 1, 02
	 32.	 A = 1- 2, 52; B = 112, 32; C = 110, -112
	 33.	 A = 1- 6, 32; B = 13, - 52; C = 1- 1, 52
	 34.	 A = 1- 5, 32; B = 16, 02; C = 15, 52
	 35.	 A = 14, - 32; B = 14, 12; C = 12, 12
	 36.	 A = 14, - 32; B = 10, - 32; C = 14, 22
	 37.	 P1 = 13, - 42; P2 = 15, 42 
	 38.	 P1 = 1- 2, 02; P2 = 12, 42 
	 39.	 P1 = 12, - 32; P2 = 14, 22 
	 40.	 P1 = 1- 3, 22; P2 = 16, 02 
	 41.	 P1 = 1- 4, - 32; P2 = 12, 22   
	 42.	 P1 = 14, - 32; P2 = 16, 12 
	 43.	 P1 = 1a, a2; P2 = 10, 02 
	 44.	 P1 = 1a, b2; P2 = 10, 02 
In Problems 31–36, plot each point and form the triangle ABC. Show that the triangle is a right triangle. Find its area.
In Problems 37–44, find the midpoint of the line segment joining the points P1 and P2.
	 45.	 If the point 13, 82 is shifted 2 units to the right and 4 units 
down, what are its new coordinates? 
	 46.	 If the point 1- 1, 62 is shifted 2 units to the left and 4 units 
up, what are its new coordinates? 
	 47.	 Find all points having an x-coordinate of 4 whose distance 
from the point 1- 4, 22 is 10. 
	 48.	 Find all points having a y-coordinate of - 6 whose distance 
from the point 11, 22 is 17.
(a)	 By using the Pythagorean Theorem.
(b)	 By using the distance formula. 
	 49.	 Find all points on the x-axis that are 12 units from the point 
15, - 62. 
	 50.	 Find all points on the y-axis that are 6 units from the point 
14, - 32. 
	 51.	 Suppose that A = 12, 52 are the coordinates of a point in 
the xy-plane.
(a)	 Find the coordinates of the point if A is shifted 2 units to 
the right and 3 units down. 
Applications and Extensions
Median
A
D
F
E
B
C
Midpoint
	 21.	 	
	 20.	 	
(b)	 Find the coordinates of the point if A is shifted 1 unit to 
the left and 6 units up. 
	 52.	 Plot the points A = 1- 1, 82 and M = 12, 32 in the  
xy-plane. If M is the midpoint of a line segment AB, find the 
coordinates of B. 
	 53.	 The midpoint of the line segment from P1 to P2 is 1-6, 52. If 
P1 = 1- 6, 32, what is P2? 
	 54.	 The midpoint of the line segment from P1 to P2 is 15, -42. If 
P2 = 17, - 22, what is P1?  
	 55.	 Geometry  The medians of a triangle are the line segments 
from each vertex to the midpoint of the opposite side (see 
the figure). Find the lengths of the medians of the triangle 
with vertices at A = 12, 02, B = 18, 02, and C = 14, 62.
x
y
–2
–1
2
2
P1 = (–1, 1)
P2 = (2, 2)

42 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
	 56.	 Geometry  An equilateral triangle is one in which all three 
sides are of equal length. If two vertices of an equilateral  
triangle are 10, 42 and 10, 02, find 	
 
the third vertex. How many of these 	
 
triangles are possible? 
s
s
s
	 57.	 Geometry  Find the midpoint of each diagonal of a square 
with side of length s. Draw the conclusion that the diagonals 
of a square intersect at their midpoints.
[Hint: Use (0, 0), (0, s), (s, 0), and (s, s) as the vertices of the 
square.] 
	 58.	 Geometry  Verify that the points (0, 0), (a, 0), and aa
2, 23 a
2
b
	
	 are the vertices of an equilateral triangle. Then show that 
the midpoints of the three sides are the vertices of a second 
equilateral triangle (refer to Problem 56).
In Problems 59–62, find the length of each side of the triangle  
determined by the three points P1, P2, and P3. State whether  
the triangle is an isosceles triangle, a right triangle, neither of these,  
or both. (An isosceles triangle is one in which at least two of the 
sides are of equal length.)
	 69.	 Drafting Error  When a draftsman draws three lines that 
are to intersect at one point, the lines may not intersect as  
intended and subsequently will form an error triangle. If this 
error triangle is long and thin, one estimate for the location 
of the desired point is the midpoint of the shortest side. The 
figure shows one such error triangle.
	 59.	 P1 = 14, 22; P2 = 110, 42; P3 = 16, - 42
	 60.	 P1 = 1- 1, 42; P2 = 16, 22; P3 = 14, - 52
	 61.	 P1 = 1- 8, - 32, P2 = 10, 152, P3 = 15, 22
	 62.	 P1 = 17, 22; P2 = 1- 4, 02; P3 = 14, 62
	 63.	 Baseball  A 
ma-
jor league base-
ball “diamond” is 
­actually a square 90 
feet on a side (see 
the figure). What is 
the distance direct-
ly from home plate 
to 
second 
base 
(the diagonal of  
the square)? 
	 64.	 Little League Baseball  The layout of a Little League playing 
field is a square 60 feet on a side. How far is it directly from 
home plate to second base (the diagonal of the square)? 
Source: Little League Baseball, Official Regulations and 
Playing Rules, 2014.
	 65.	 Baseball  Refer to Problem 63. Overlay a rectangular  
coordinate system on a major league baseball diamond so 
that the origin is at home plate, the positive x-axis lies in 
the direction from home plate to first base, and the positive  
y-axis lies in the direction from home plate to third base. 
Pitching
rubber
Home plate
1st base
2nd base
3rd base
90 ft
90 ft
15 mph
East
100 ft
x
y
 (1.4, 1.3)
 (2.7, 1.7)
 (2.6, 1.5)
1.7
1.5
1.3
2.6 2.7
1.4
(a)	 Find an estimate for the desired intersection point. 
(b)	 Find the length of the median for the midpoint found in 
part (a). See Problem 55. 
	 70.	 Net Sales  The figure on page 43 illustrates how net sales 
of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., grew from 2007 through 2013. Use 
the midpoint formula to estimate the net sales of Wal-Mart 
Stores, Inc., in 2010. How does your result compare to the 
reported value of $405 billion? 
Source: Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 2013 Annual Report
x-axis lies in the direction from home plate to first base, and 
the positive y-axis lies in the direction from home plate to  
third base. 
(a)	 What are the coordinates of first base, second base, and 
third base? Use feet as the unit of measurement.
(b)	 If the right fielder is located at 1180, 202, how far is it from 
the right fielder to second base? 
(c)	 If the center fielder is located at 
1220, 2202, 
how far is it from the center fielder to third 
base? 
	 67.	 Distance between Moving Objects  A Ford Focus and a 
Freightliner truck leave an intersection at the same time. 
The Focus heads east at an average speed of 30 miles per 
hour, while the truck heads south at an average speed of  
40 miles per hour. Find an expression for their distance apart 
d (in miles) at the end of t hours. 
	 68.	 Distance of a Moving Object from a Fixed Point  A hot-air 
balloon, headed due east at an average speed of 15 miles 
per hour and at a constant altitude of 100 feet, passes over 
an intersection (see the figure). Find an expression for 
the distance d (measured in feet) from the balloon to the  
intersection t seconds later. 
(a)	 What are the coordinates of first base, second base, and 
third base? Use feet as the unit of measurement.
(b)	 If the right fielder is located at 1310, 152, how far is it from 
the right fielder to second base? 
(c)	 If the center fielder is located at 1300, 3002, how far is it 
from the center fielder to third base? 
	 66.	 Little League Baseball  Refer to Problem 64. Overlay a 
­rectangular coordinate system on a Little League baseball 
diamond so that the origin is at home plate, the positive  

Section 1.2  Graphs of Equations in Two Variables; Intercepts; Symmetry  43
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
Net sales ($ billions)
2007
2009
466
345
2008
Year
2010
2011
2012
2013
350
400
450
500
300
250
200
Net sales ($ billions)
150
50
0
100
	 71.	 Poverty Threshold  A poverty threshold represents the 
minimum annual household income for a family not to be 
considered poor. In 1995, the poverty threshold for a fam-
ily of four with two children under the age of 18 years was  
$15,598. In 2005, the poverty threshold for a family of four 
with two children under the age of 18 years was $19,508. As-
suming poverty thresholds increase in a straight-line fashion, 
use the midpoint formula to estimate the poverty threshold 
of a family of four with two children under the age of 18  
in 2000. 
	 72.	 Write a paragraph that describes a Cartesian plane. Then 
write a second paragraph that describes how to plot points 
in the Cartesian plane. Your paragraphs should include 
the terms “coordinate axes,” “ordered pair,” “coordinates,” 
“plot,” “x-coordinate,” and “y-coordinate.”
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 0	
2.  8	
3.  5	
4.  112 + 602 = 121 + 3600 = 3721 = 612	
5.  A = 1
2 bh	
6.  True
1.2  Graphs of Equations in Two Variables; Intercepts; Symmetry
•	 Solving Equations (Appendix A, Section A.6,  
pp. 987–989)
•	 Solve a Quadratic Equation (Appendix A, Section A.6, 
pp. 990–991)
Preparing for this Section  Before getting started, review the following:
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 50.
	
Objectives	 	1  Graph Equations by Plotting Points (p. 43)
	
	 	2  Find Intercepts from a Graph (p. 45)
	
	 	3  Find Intercepts from an Equation (p. 46)
	
	 	4  Test an Equation for Symmetry with Respect to the x-Axis, the y-Axis,  
and the Origin (p. 46)
	
	 	5  Know How to Graph Key Equations (p. 49)
Graph Equations by Plotting Points
An equation in two variables, say x and y, is a statement in which two expressions 
involving x and y are equal. The expressions are called the sides of the equation. Since an 
equation is a statement, it may be true or false, depending on the value of the variables. 
Any values of x and y that result in a true statement are said to satisfy the equation.
For example, the following are all equations in two variables x and y:
x2 + y2 = 5  2x - y = 6  y = 2x + 5  x2 = y
The first of these, x2 + y2 = 5, is satisfied for x = 1, y = 2, since 12 + 22 = 5. 
Other choices of x and y, such as x = -1, y = -2, also satisfy this equation. It is 
not satisfied for x = 2 and y = 3, since 22 + 32 = 4 + 9 = 13 ≠5.
1

44 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
x
y
 (10, 25)
25
 (1, 7)
 (0, 5)
 (–5, –5)
25
–25
–25
Figure 12  y = 2x + 5
Determining Whether a Point Is on the Graph of an Equation
Determine if the following points are on the graph of the equation 2x - y = 6.
(a)	 12, 32              (b)  12, -22
 (a)	 For the point 12, 32, check to see whether x = 2, y = 3 satisfies the equation 
2x - y = 6.
2x - y = 2122 - 3 = 4 - 3 = 1 ≠6
The equation is not satisfied, so the point 12, 32 is not on the graph of  2x - y = 6.
(b)	 For the point 12, -22,
2x - y = 2122 - 1 -22 = 4 + 2 = 6
The equation is satisfied, so the point 12, -22 is on the graph of 2x - y = 6.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Graphing an Equation by Plotting Points
Graph the equation: y = 2x + 5
 The graph consists of all points 1x, y2 that satisfy the equation. To locate some of 
these points (and get an idea of the pattern of the graph), assign some numbers to x, 
and find corresponding values for y.
If
Then
Point on Graph
x = 0
y = 2102 + 5 = 5
10, 52
x = 1
y = 2112 + 5 = 7
11, 72
x = -5
y = 21 -52 + 5 = -5
1 -5, -52
x = 10
y = 21102 + 5 = 25
110, 252
By plotting these points and then connecting them, we obtain the graph of the  
equation (a line), as shown in Figure 12.
Example 1
Solution
•
Example 2
Solution
•
Figure 11 
Source: T. Rowe Price
18.5
18.5
19.5
17.5
17.5
16.5
16.5
15.5
15.5
14.5
14.5
13.5
13.5
18
18
19
20
17
17
16
16
15
15
14
14
Average Annual Returns (%)
Level of Risk (%)
10%
40%
50%
30%
60%
70%
(30% foreign/70% U.S.)
(100% U.S.)
0%
80%
90%
100%
(100% foreign)
20%
The graph of an equation in two variables x and y consists of the set of points 
in the xy-plane whose coordinates 1x, y2 satisfy the equation.
Graphs play an important role in helping us to visualize the relationships that 
exist between two variables or quantities. Figure 11 shows the relation between 
the level of risk in a stock portfolio and the average annual rate of return. From 
the graph, we can see that when 30% of a portfolio of stocks is invested in foreign 
companies, risk is minimized.

Section 1.2  Graphs of Equations in Two Variables; Intercepts; Symmetry  45
Graphing an Equation by Plotting Points
Graph the equation:  y = x2
 Table 1 provides several points on the graph. Plotting these points and connecting 
them with a smooth curve gives the graph (a parabola) shown in Figure 13.
Example 3
Solution
Table 1 
x
y = x2
(x, y)
-4
16
(-4, 16)
-3
9
(-3, 9)
-2
4
(-2, 4)
-1
1
(-1, 1)
0
0
(0, 0)
1
1
(1, 1)
2
4
(2, 4)
3
9
(3, 9)
4
16
(4, 16)
Figure 13  y = x2
•
x
y
–4
4
(4, 16)
(–4, 16)
(3, 9)
(–3, 9)
(2, 4)
(–2, 4)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(–1, 1)
5
10
15
20
The graphs of the equations shown in Figures 12 and 13 do not show all points. 
For example, in Figure 12, the point 120, 452 is a part of the graph of y = 2x + 5, 
but it is not shown. Since the graph of y = 2x + 5 can be extended out  
indefinitely, we use arrows to indicate that the pattern shown continues. It is important 
when illustrating a graph to present enough of the graph so that any viewer of the 
illustration will “see” the rest of it as an obvious continuation of what is actually 
there. This is referred to as a complete graph.
One way to obtain the complete graph of an equation is to plot enough points 
on the graph for a pattern to become evident. Then these points are connected 
with a smooth curve following the suggested pattern. But how many points are  
sufficient? Sometimes knowledge about the equation tells us. For example, we will 
learn in the next section that if an equation is of the form y = mx + b, then its graph 
is a line. In this case, only two points are needed to obtain the graph.
One purpose of this text is to investigate the properties of equations in order 
to decide whether a graph is complete. Sometimes we shall graph equations by plotting 
points. Shortly, we shall investigate various techniques that will enable us to graph 
an equation without plotting so many points.
Two techniques that sometimes reduce the number of points required to graph 
an equation involve finding intercepts and checking for symmetry.
Find Intercepts from a Graph
The points, if any, at which a graph crosses or touches the coordinate axes are called 
the intercepts. See Figure 14. The x-coordinate of a point at which the graph crosses 
or touches the x-axis is an x-intercept, and the y-coordinate of a point at which the 
graph crosses or touches the y-axis is a y-intercept. 
Finding Intercepts from a Graph
Find the intercepts of the graph in Figure 15. What are its x-intercepts? What are its 
y-intercepts?
 Solution  The intercepts of the graph are the points
1-3, 02, 10, 32, a3
2, 0b, a0, -  4
3b, 10, -3.52, 14.5, 02
The x-intercepts are -3, 3
2, and 4.5; the y-intercepts are -3.5, -  4
3, and 3.
In Example 4, note the following usage: If the type of intercept (x- versus y-) 
is not specified, then report the intercept as an ordered pair. However, if the type 
of intercept is specified, then report the coordinate of the specified intercept. For 
2
Example 4
•
Comment  Another way to obtain  
the graph of an equation is to use a 
graphing utility. Read Section B.2, Using 
a Graphing Utility to Graph Equations, in  
Appendix B.	
■
Figure 14 
x
y
Intercepts
Graph
touches
x-axis
Graph
crosses
x-axis
Graph
crosses
y-axis
Figure 15 
x
y
(0, 3)
(3, 0)
   , 0
(
)
(0,   )
4–3
3–2
(4.5, 0)
(0, 3.5)
4
4
5

46 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
x-intercepts, report the x-coordinate of the intercept; for y-intercepts, report the  
y-coordinate of the intercept.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 1 ( a )
Find Intercepts from an Equation
The intercepts of a graph can be found from its equation by using the fact that 
points on the x-axis have y-coordinates equal to 0, and points on the y-axis have 
x-coordinates equal to 0.
3
Comment  For many equations, finding 
intercepts may not be so easy. In such 
cases, a graphing utility can be used. 
Read the first part of Section B.3, Using 
a Graphing Utility to Locate Intercepts and 
Check for Symmetry, in Appendix B, to 
find out how to locate intercepts using a 
graphing utility.	
■
Table 2 
x
y = x2 −4
(x, y)
-3
5
(-3, 5)
-1
-3
(-1, -3)
1
-3
(1, -3)
3
5
(3, 5)
Figure 16  y = x2 - 4
x
y
 (3, 5)
5
 (2, 0)
 (–1, –3)
 (1, –3)
 (0, –4)
(–3, 5)
 (–2, 0)
5
–5
–5
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Test an Equation for Symmetry with Respect  
to the x-Axis, the y-Axis, and the Origin
Another helpful tool for graphing equations by hand involves symmetry,  
particularly symmetry with respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
Symmetry often occurs in nature. Consider the picture of the butterfly. Do you 
see the symmetry?
•
4
Procedure for Finding Intercepts
	 1.	 To find the x-intercept(s), if any, of the graph of an equation, let y = 0 in 
the equation and solve for x, where x is a real number.
	 2.	 To find the y-intercept(s), if any, of the graph of an equation, let x = 0 in 
the equation and solve for y, where y is a real number.
Finding Intercepts from an Equation
Find the x-intercept(s) and the y-intercept(s) of the graph of y = x2 - 4. Then graph 
y = x2 - 4 by plotting points.
 To find the x-intercept(s), let y = 0 and obtain the equation
x2 - 4 = 0 
1x + 22 1x - 2) = 0 
x + 2 = 0      or  x - 2 = 0 
	
x = -2	
or            x = 2 
The equation has two solutions, -2 and 2. The x-intercepts are -2 and 2.
To find the y-intercept(s), let x = 0 in the equation.
 y = x2 - 4
 = 02 - 4 = -4
The y-intercept is -4.
Since x2 Ú 0 for all x, we deduce from the equation y = x2 - 4 that y Ú -4 for 
all x. This information, the intercepts, and the points from Table 2 enable us to graph 
y = x2 - 4. See Figure 16.
Example 5
Solution
y = x2 - 4 with y = 0
Factor.
Zero@Product Property
Solve.

Section 1.2  Graphs of Equations in Two Variables; Intercepts; Symmetry  47
Figure 17 illustrates the definition. Note that when a graph is symmetric with 
respect to the x-axis, the part of the graph above the x-axis is a reflection (or mirror 
image) of the part below it, and vice versa.
 A graph is said to be symmetric with respect to the x-axis if, for every point 
1x, y2 on the graph, the point 1x, -y2 is also on the graph.
Definition
(x, –y)
(x, y)
(x, –y)
(x, y)
(x, y)
(x, –y)
x
y
Figure 17 
Symmetry with respect to the x-axis
 A graph is said to be symmetric with respect to the y-axis if, for every point 
1x, y2 on the graph, the point 1 -x, y2 is also on the graph.
Definition
Figure 18 illustrates the definition. When a graph is symmetric with respect to 
the y-axis, the part of the graph to the right of the y-axis is a reflection of the part 
to the left of it, and vice versa.
 A graph is said to be symmetric with respect to the origin if, for every point 
1x, y2 on the graph, the point 1 -x, -y2 is also on the graph.
Definition
Figure 19 illustrates the definition. Symmetry with respect to the origin may be 
viewed in three ways:
	 1.	 As a reflection about the y-axis, followed by a reflection about the x-axis
	 2.	 As a projection along a line through the origin so that the distances from the 
origin are equal
	 3.	 As half of a complete revolution about the origin
Points Symmetric with Respect to the Origin
If a graph is symmetric with respect to the origin, and the point 14, 22 is on the 
graph, then the point 1 -4, -22 is also on the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 1  a n d  4 1 ( b )
When the graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to a coordinate axis 
or the origin, the number of points that you need to plot in order to see the pattern 
is reduced. For example, if the graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the 
Example 8
•
Points Symmetric with Respect to the x-Axis
If a graph is symmetric with respect to the x-axis, and the point 13, 22 is on the 
graph, then the point 13, -22 is also on the graph.
Example 6
•
Figure 19 
Symmetry with respect to the origin
(x, y)
(x, y)
(–x, –y)
(–x, –y)
x
y
Figure 18 
Symmetry with respect to the y-axis
(–x, y)
(–x, y)
(x, y)
(x, y)
x
y
Points Symmetric with Respect to the y-Axis
If a graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis and the point 15, 82 is on the graph, 
then the point 1 -5, 82 is also on the graph.
Example 7
•

48 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
y-axis, then once points to the right of the y-axis are plotted, an equal number of 
points on the graph can be obtained by reflecting them about the y-axis. Because 
of this, before we graph an equation, we should first determine whether it has any 
symmetry. The following tests are used for this purpose.
 Tests for Symmetry
To test the graph of an equation for symmetry with respect to the
x-Axis	
Replace y by -y in the equation and simplify. If an equivalent equation 
results, the graph of the equation is symmetric with respect to the x-axis.
y-Axis	
Replace x by -x in the equation and simplify. If an equivalent equation 
results, the graph of the equation is symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
Origin	 Replace x by -x and y by −y in the equation and simplify. If an  
equivalent equation results, the graph of the equation is symmetric 
with respect to the origin.
Testing an Equation for Symmetry
Test y =
4x2
x2 + 1 for symmetry.
 x-Axis:  To test for symmetry with respect to the x-axis, replace y by -y. Since 
-y =
4x2
x2 + 1 is not equivalent to y =
4x2
x2 + 1, the graph of the equation is
	
not symmetric with respect to the x-axis.
y-Axis:  To test for symmetry with respect to the y-axis, replace x by -x. Since
	
  y =
41 -x22
1 -x22 + 1 =
4x2
x2 + 1 is equivalent to y =
4x2
x2 + 1, the graph of the 
equation is symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
Origin:  To test for symmetry with respect to the origin, replace x by -x and y by -y.
 -y =
41 -x22
1 -x22 + 1 
 -y =
4x2
x2 + 1
 y = -  4x2
x2 + 1
 
	
Since the result is not equivalent to the original equation, the graph of the 
equation y =
4x2
x2 + 1 is not symmetric with respect to the origin.
Example 9
Solution
Replace x by -x  and  y  by -y.
Simplify.
Multiply both sides by -1.
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
Figure 20  y =
4x2
x2 + 1
25
25
5
5
Seeing the Concept
Figure 20 shows the graph of y =
4x2
x2 + 1 using a graphing utility. Do you see the symmetry with  
respect to the y-axis?

Section 1.2  Graphs of Equations in Two Variables; Intercepts; Symmetry  49
Know How to Graph Key Equations
The next three examples use intercepts, symmetry, and point plotting to obtain the 
graphs of key equations. It is important to know the graphs of these key equations 
because we use them later. The first of these is y = x3.
Graphing the Equation y = x3 by Finding Intercepts, Checking  
for Symmetry, and Plotting Points
Graph the equation y = x3 by plotting points. Find any intercepts and check for 
symmetry first.
 First, find the intercepts. When x = 0, then y = 0; and when y = 0, then x = 0. The 
origin 10, 02 is the only intercept. Now test for symmetry.
x-Axis:	
Replace y by -y. Since -y = x3 is not equivalent to y = x3, the graph 
is not symmetric with respect to the x-axis.
y-Axis:	
Replace x by -x. Since y = 1 -x23 = -x3 is not equivalent to y = x3, 
the graph is not symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
Origin:	
Replace x by -x and y by -y. Since -y = 1 -x23 = -x3 is equivalent 
to y = x3 (multiply both sides by -1), the graph is symmetric with  
respect to the origin.
To graph y = x3, use the equation to obtain several points on the graph.  
Because of the symmetry, we need to locate only points on the graph for which x Ú 0. 
See Table 3. Since 11, 12 is on the graph, and the graph is symmetric with respect to 
the origin, the point 1 -1, -12 is also on the graph. Plot the points from Table 3 and 
use the symmetry. Figure 21 shows the graph.
5
Example 10
Solution
•
Table 3 
x
y = x3
(x, y)
0
0
(0, 0)
1
1
(1, 1)
2
8
(2, 8)
3
27
(3, 27)
Graphing the Equation x = y2
(a)	 Graph the equation x = y2. Find any intercepts and check for symmetry first.
(b)	 Graph x = y2, y Ú 0.
 (a)	 The lone intercept is 10, 02. The graph is symmetric with respect to the x-axis. 
(Do you see why? Replace y by -y.) Figure 22 shows the graph.
(b)	 If we restrict y so that y Ú 0, the equation x = y2, y Ú 0, may be written 
equivalently as y = 1x. The portion of the graph of x = y2 in quadrant I is 
therefore the graph of y = 1x. See Figure 23.
Example 11
Solution
Comment  To see the graph of the equation x = y 2 on a graphing calculator, you will need to graph two 
equations: Y1 = 1x   and  Y2 = - 1x. We discuss why in Chapter 2. See Figure 24.	
■
Figure 22  x = y2
x
y
 (9, 3)
6
 (4, 2)
 (0, 0)
(1, –1)
10
–2
 (9, –3)
5
 (1, 1)
 (4, –2)
Figure 23  y = 1x
•
x
y
 (9, 3)
6
 (4, 2)
 (0, 0)
10
–2
5
 (1, 1)
Figure 21  y = x3
x
y
 (2, 8)
8
 (1, 1)
 (0, 0)
 (–1, –1)
6
–6
–8
 (–2, –8)
Figure 24 
22
26
6
10
Y2 5 2√x
Y1 5 √x

50 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
Graphing the Equation y = 1
x
Graph the equation y = 1
x. First, find any intercepts and check for symmetry.
 Check for intercepts first. If we let x = 0, we obtain 0 in the denominator, which 
makes y undefined. We conclude that there is no y-intercept. If we let y = 0, we get
the equation 1
x = 0, which has no solution. We conclude that there is no x-intercept.
The graph of y = 1
x does not cross or touch the coordinate axes.
Next check for symmetry:
x-Axis:  Replacing y by -y yields -y = 1
x, which is not equivalent to y = 1
x.
y-Axis:	 Replacing x by -x yields y =
1
-x = -  1
x, which is not equivalent to
	
y = 1
x.
Origin:	 Replacing x by -x and y by -y yields -y = -  1
x, which is equivalent to
	
y = 1
x. The graph is symmetric with respect to the origin.
Now set up Table 4, listing several points on the graph. Because of the  
symmetry with respect to the origin, we use only positive values of x. From Table 4 we 
infer that if x is a large and positive number, then y = 1
x is a positive number close 
to 0. We also infer that if x is a positive number close to 0, then y = 1
x is a large and 
positive number. Armed with this information, we can graph the equation.
Figure 25 illustrates some of these points and the graph of y = 1
x. Observe how 
the absence of intercepts and the existence of symmetry with respect to the origin
were utilized.	
•
Comment  Refer to Example 2 in Appendix B, Section B.3, for the graph of y = 1
x  found  
using a graphing utility.	
■
Example 12
Solution
Table 4 
x
y = 1
x
(x, y)
1
10
10
a 1
10
 , 10b
1
3
3
a1
3
 , 3b
1
2
2
a1
2
 , 2b
1
1
(1, 1)
2
1
2
a2, 1
2b
3
1
3
a3, 1
3b
10
1
10
a10, 1
10b
Figure 25  y = 1
x
x
y
3
3
–3
–3
    , 2
–
1––2
(1, 1) 
2,     
1––2
–2,       
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
1––2
(–1, –1) 
       , –2
1––2
–
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Solve the equation 21x + 32 -  1 = - 7. (pp. 987–989) 
	 2.	 Solve the equation x2 - 9 = 0. (pp. 990–991) 
1.2  Assess Your Understanding
	 3.	 The points, if any, at which a graph crosses or touches the 
coordinate axes are called   
 .
	 4.	 The x-intercepts of the graph of an equation are those  
x-values for which    
 .
	 5.	 If for every point 1x, y2 on the graph of an equation the 
point 1- x, y2 is also on the graph, then the graph is  
symmetric with respect to the    
 .
	 6.	 If the graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the 
y-axis and - 4 is an x-intercept of this graph, then    is also 
an x-intercept.
	 7.	 If the graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the 
origin and 13, - 42 is a point on the graph, then  
  is 
also a point on the graph.
	 8.	 True or False  To find the y-intercepts of the graph of an 
equation, let x = 0 and solve for y. 
	 9.	 True or False  The y-coordinate of a point at which the 
graph crosses or touches the x-axis is an x-intercept. 
	 10.	 True or False  If a graph is symmetric with respect to the 
x-axis, then it cannot be symmetric with respect to the  
y-axis. 
	 11.	 Given that the intercepts of a graph are (–4, 0) and (0, 5), 
choose the statement that is true.
(a)	 The y-intercept is –4, and the x-intercept is 5.
(b)	 The y-intercepts are –4 and 5.
(c)	 The x-intercepts are –4 and 5.
(d)	 The x-intercept is –4, and the y-intercept is 5. 
Concepts and Vocabulary

Section 1.2  Graphs of Equations in Two Variables; Intercepts; Symmetry  51
x
y
–4
4

––2
(, 0)
(0, 0)
(   , 2)
y
–3
3
–2
4 (0, 4)
(0, 0)
(2, 2)
x
9
–9
–9
9
x
y
(0, –9)
(2, –5)
x
y
–5
5
–5
5
(–4, 0)
(0, 2)
(5, 3)
	 12.	 To test whether the graph of an equation is symmetric with 
respect to the origin, replace            in the equation and 
simplify. If an equivalent equation results, then the graph is 
symmetric with respect to the origin.
(a)	 x by –x
(b)	 y by –y
(c)	 x by –x and y by –y
(d)	 x by –y and y by –x 
In Problems 19–30, find the intercepts and graph each equation by plotting points. Be sure to label the intercepts.
Skill Building
In Problems 13–18, determine which of the given points are on the graph of the equation.
	 13.	 Equation: y = x4 - 1x
	
	 Points: 10, 02; 11, 12; 12, 42 
	 14.	 Equation: y = x3 - 21x
	
	 Points: 10, 02; 11, 12; 11, - 12
	 15.	 Equation: y3 = x + 1
	
	 Points: 11, 22; 10, 12; 1-1, 02
	 16.	 Equation: y2 = x2 + 9
	
	 Points: 10, 32; 13, 02; 1- 3, 02 
	
	
	 18.	 Equation: x2 + y2 = 4
	
	 Points: 10, 22; 1- 2, 22; 1 22, 222
	 17.	 Equation: x2 + 4y2 = 4
	
	 Points: 10, 12; 12, 02; a2, 1
2b 
	 19.	 y = x - 6
	 20.	 y = x + 2
	 21.	 y = 3x - 9
	 22.	 y = 2x + 8
	 23.	 y = x2 - 1
	 24.	 y = x2 - 9
	 25.	 y = - x2 + 1
	 26.	 y = - x2 + 4
	 27.	 5x + 2y = 10
	 28.	 2x + 3y = 6
	 29.	 4x2 + y = 4
	 30.	 9x2 + 4y = 36
In Problems 31–40, plot each point. Then plot the point that is symmetric to it with respect to (a) the x-axis; (b) the y-axis; (c) the origin.
	 31.	 13, 42
	 32.	 15, 32
	 33.	 14, - 22
	 34.	 1- 2, 12
	 35.	 1-1, -12
	 36.	 15, - 22
	 37.	 14, 02
	 38.	 1- 3, - 42
	 39.	 1- 3, 02
	 40.	 10, -32
In Problems 41–52, the graph of an equation is given. (a) Find the intercepts. (b) Indicate whether the graph is symmetric with respect to 
the x-axis, the y-axis, or the origin.
	 41.	
	 42.	
43.	
44.	
45.	
46.	
47.	
48.	
49.	
50.	
51.	
52.	
In Problems 53–56, draw a complete graph so that it has the type of symmetry indicated.
	 53.	 y-axis
	 54.	 x-axis
	 55.	 Origin
	 56.	 y-axis
x
y
3
3
–3
–3
x
y
3
3
–3
–3
y
6
6
x
3
3
40
40
x
6
6
y
3
–3
x
y
3
–3
3
3
x
y
3
3
x
y

1
1


––2


––2
x
y
3
4
4
3
y
3
3
x
3
3
y
3
3
x
3
3
−2
−8
8
2
−4
−4
4
4

52 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
In Problems 57–72, list the intercepts and test for symmetry.
	 57.	 y2 = x + 9
	 58.	 y2 = x + 4
	 59.	 y = 2
5 x
	 60.	 y = 2
3 x
	 61.	 x2 + y - 9 = 0
	 62.	 x2 - y - 4 = 0
	 63.	 4x2 + y2 = 4
	 64.	 9x2 + 4y2 = 36
	 65.	 y = x4 - 1
	 66.	 y = x3 - 27
	 67.	 y = x2 + 4
	 68.	 y = x2 - 3x - 4
	 69.	 y = x2 - 4
2x
	 70.	 y =
3x
x2 + 9
	 71.	 y = x4 + 1
2x5
	 72.	 y =
-x3
x2 - 9
In Problems 73–76, draw a quick sketch of the graph of each equation.
	 73.	 x = y2
	 74.	 y = x3
	 75.	 y = 1
x
	 76.	 y = 1x
	 77.	 If 1a, 42 is a point on the graph of y = x2 + 3x, what is a?
	 78.	 If 1a, - 52 is a point on the graph of y = x2 + 6x, what is a?
	 79.	 Given that the point 12, 62 is on the graph of an equation 
that is symmetric with respect to the origin, what other point 
is on the graph? 
	 80.	 If the graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the 
y-axis and 6 is an x-intercept of this graph, name another  
x-intercept. 
	 81.	 If the graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the 
y-axis and 1 is an x-intercept of this graph, name another  
x-intercept. 
	 82.	 If the graph of an equation is symmetric with respect to the 
x-axis and 2 is a y-intercept, name another y-intercept. 
	 83.	 Microphones  In studios and on stages, cardioid microphones 
are often preferred for the richness they add to voices and for 
their ability to reduce the level of sound from the sides and 
rear of the microphone. Suppose one such cardioids pattern 
is given by the equation 1x2 + y2 - 9x22 = 81x2 + 81y2.
(a)	 Find the intercepts of the graph of the equation.
(b)	 Test for symmetry with respect to the x-axis, y-axis, and 
origin.
	 84.	 Solar Energy  The solar electric generating systems at 
Kramer Junction, California, use parabolic troughs to heat 
a heat-transfer fluid to a high temperature. This fluid is used 
to generate steam that drives a power conversion system to 
produce electricity. For troughs 7.5 feet wide, an equation  
for the cross section is 16y2 = 120x - 225.
Applications and Extensions
(a)	 Find the intercepts of the graph of the equation.
(b)	 Test for symmetry with respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, 
and the origin.
Source:  U.S. Department of Energy
	 85.	 (a)	 Graph y = 2x2, y = x, y = 0 x0 , and y = 11x22,  
noting which graphs are the same.
(b)	 Explain why the graphs of y = 2x2 and y = 0 x0  are the 
same.
(c)	 Explain why the graphs of y = x and y = 11x22 are 
not the same.
(d)	 Explain why the graphs of y = 2x2 and y = x are not 
the same.
	 86.	 Explain what is meant by a complete graph.
	 87.	 Draw a graph of an equation that contains two x-intercepts; 
at one the graph crosses the x-axis, and at the other the 
graph touches the x-axis.
	 88.	 Make up an equation with the intercepts 12, 02, 14, 02, and 
10, 12. Compare your equation with a friend’s equation. 
Comment on any similarities.
	 89.	 Draw a graph that contains the points 1-2, -12, 10, 12, 
11, 32, and 13, 52. Compare your graph with those of other 
students. Are most of the graphs almost straight lines? How 
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing

Section 1.3  Lines  53
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 5 - 66          	
2.  5 -  3, 36
1.3  Lines
	
Objectives	 	1  Calculate and Interpret the Slope of a Line  (p. 53)
	
	 	2  Graph Lines Given a Point and the Slope  (p. 56)
	
	 	3  Find the Equation of a Vertical Line  (p. 56)
	
	 	4  Use the Point–Slope Form of a Line; Identify Horizontal Lines  (p. 57)
	
	 	5  Find the Equation of a Line Given Two Points  (p. 58)
	
	 	6  Write the Equation of a Line in Slope–Intercept Form  (p. 58)
	
	 	7  Identify the Slope and y-Intercept of a Line from Its Equation  (p. 59)
	
	 	8  Graph Lines Written in General Form Using Intercepts  (p. 60)
	
	 	9  Find Equations of Parallel Lines  (p. 61)
	
		10  Find Equations of Perpendicular Lines  (p. 62)
In this section we study a certain type of equation that contains two variables, called 
a linear equation, and its graph, a line.
Calculate and Interpret the Slope of a Line
Consider the staircase illustrated in Figure 26. Each step contains exactly the same 
horizontal run and the same vertical rise. The ratio of the rise to the run, called the 
slope, is a numerical measure of the steepness of the staircase. For example, if the 
run is increased and the rise remains the same, the staircase becomes less steep. If 
the run is kept the same but the rise is increased, the staircase becomes more steep. 
This important characteristic of a line is best defined using rectangular coordinates.
1
 Let P = 1x1, y12 and Q = 1x2, y22 be two distinct points. If x1 ≠x2, the 
slope m of the nonvertical line L containing P and Q is defined by the formula
	
m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1  x1 ≠x2	
(1)
If x1 = x2, then L is a vertical line and the slope m of L is undefined (since this 
results in division by 0).
Definition
Figure 27(a) on page 54 provides an illustration of the slope of a nonvertical 
line; Figure 27(b) illustrates a vertical line.
Figure 26 
Rise
Line
Run
many are “curved”? Discuss the various ways in which these 
points might be connected.
	 90.	 An equation is being tested for symmetry with respect to 
the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin. Explain why, if two of 
these symmetries are present, the remaining one must also 
be present.
	 91.	 Draw a graph that contains the points (- 2, 5), (-1, 3), 
and (0, 2) and is symmetric with respect to the y-axis.  
Compare your graph with those of other students; comment 
on any similarities. Can a graph contain these points and be 
symmetric with respect to the x-axis? the origin? Why or 
why not?

54 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
As Figure 27(a) illustrates, the slope m of a nonvertical line may be viewed as
m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
= Rise
Run or as m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
= Change in y
Change in x = ∆y
∆x
That is, the slope m of a nonvertical line measures the amount y changes when x 
changes from x1 to x2. The expression ∆y
∆x is called the average rate of change of y
with respect to x.
Two comments about computing the slope of a nonvertical line may prove 
helpful:
	 1.	 Any two distinct points on the line can be used to compute the slope of the 
line. (See Figure 28 for justification.) Since any two distinct points can be used 
to compute the slope of a line, the average rate of change of a line is always the 
same number.
Figure 28
Triangles ABC and PQR are similar (equal 
angles), so ratios of corresponding sides 
are proportional. Then
Slope using P and Q = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
=
d(B, C)
d(A, C) = Slope using A and B
Figure 27 
Rise = y2 – y1
Q = (x2, y2)
P = (x1, y1)
L
Run = x2 – x1
Slope of L is m = 
(a)
x1
x2
y2
y1
y2 – y1
_______
x2 – x1
, x1 Z x2
Q = (x1, y2)
P = (x1, y1)
L
Slope is undefined; L is vertical
(b)
x1
y2
y1
x
y
x
y
x
y
R
A
C
B
y2 – y1
Q = (x2, y2)
P = (x1, y1)
x2 – x1
	 2.	 The slope of a line may be computed from P = 1x1, y12 to Q = 1x2, y22 or 
from Q to P because
y2 - y1
x2 - x1
= y1 - y2
x1 - x2
Finding and Interpreting the Slope of a Line Given Two Points
The slope m of the line containing the points 11, 22 and 15, -32 may be computed as
m = -3 - 2
5 - 1
= -5
4
= -  5
4 or as m = 2 - 1 -32
1 - 5
=
5
-4 = -  5
4
For every 4-unit change in x, y will change by -5 units. That is, if x increases by  
4 units, then y will decrease by 5 units. The average rate of change of y with respect 
to x is -  5
4.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 3  a n d  1 9
Example 1
•
In Words
The symbol ∆ is the Greek uppercase 
letter delta. In mathematics, ∆ 
is read “change in,” so ∆y
∆x is read 
“change in y divided by change in x.”

Section 1.3  Lines  55
Finding the Slopes of Various Lines Containing the Same Point (2, 3)
Compute the slopes of the lines L1, L2, L3, and L4 containing the following pairs of 
points. Graph all four lines on the same set of coordinate axes.
 L1
 : P = 12, 32  Q1 = 1 -1, -22
 L2
 : P = 12, 32  Q2 = 13, -12
 L3
 : P = 12, 32  Q3 = 15, 32
 L4
 : P = 12, 32  Q4 = 12, 52
 
Let m1, m2, m3, and m4 denote the slopes of the lines L1, L2, L3, and L4,  
respectively. Then
 m1 = -2 - 3
-1 - 2 = -5
-3 = 5
3
 m2 = -1 - 3
3 - 2
= -4
1
= -4
 m3 = 3 - 3
5 - 2 = 0
3 = 0
 m4 is undefined because x1 = x2 = 2
The graphs of these lines are given in Figure 29.
Figure 29 illustrates the following facts:
Example 2
Solution
A rise of 5 divided by a run of 3
•
Figure 29 
x
y
25
5
5
23
Q4 5 (2, 5)
Q1 5 (21, 22)
L4
Q3 5 (5, 3)
Q2 5 (3, 21)
m2 5 24
m4 undefined
P 5 (2, 3)
L3
L3
L2
L1
m1 5 5
3
m3 5 0
m3 5 0
Figure 30 
23
22
2
3
Y6 5 6x
Y4 5 x
Y5 5 2x
Y2 5   x
Y1 5 0
1
4
Y3 5   x
1
2
	 1.	 When the slope of a line is positive, the line slants upward from left to right 
1L12.
	 2.	 When the slope of a line is negative, the line slants downward from left to 
right 1L22.
	 3.	 When the slope is 0, the line is horizontal 1L32.
	 4.	 When the slope is undefined, the line is vertical 1L42.
Seeing the Concept
On the same screen, graph the following equations:
 Y1 = 0  
 Y2 = 1
4
 x
 Y3 = 1
2
 x
 Y4 = x  
 Y5 = 2x  
 Y6 = 6x  
See Figure 30.
Seeing the Concept
On the same screen, graph the following equations:
 Y1 = 0
 Y2 = -  1
4
 x 
 Y3 = -  1
2
 x 
 Y4 = - x
 Y5 = - 2x 
 Y6 = - 6x 
See Figure 31.
Slope of line is 0.
Slope of line is 1
4 .
Slope of line is 1
2 .
Slope of line is 1.
Slope of line is 2.
Slope of line is 6.
Slope of line is 0.
Slope of line is -  1
4 .
Slope of line is -  1
2 .
Slope of line is - 1.
Slope of line is - 2.
Slope of line is - 6.
Figure 31 
Y6 5 26x
Y4 5 2x
Y5 5 22x
Y3 5 2   x
1
2
Y2 5 2   x
Y1 5 0
1
4
23
22
2
3

56 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
x
y
–2
10
Rise = 3
Run = 4
(7, 5)
(3, 2)
5
6
Figure 32 
Figures 30 and 31 on page 55 illustrate that the closer the line is to the vertical 
position, the greater the magnitude of the slope.
Graph Lines Given a Point and the Slope
Graphing a Line Given a Point and a Slope
Draw a graph of the line that contains the point 13, 22 and has a slope of:
(a)	 3
4                          (b)  -  4
5
 (a)	 Slope = Rise
Run . The slope 3
4 means that for every horizontal movement (run)
	
of 4 units to the right, there will be a vertical movement (rise) of 3 units. Start at 
the given point 13, 22 and move 4 units to the right and 3 units up, arriving at the 
point 17, 52. Drawing the line through this point and the point 13, 22 gives the 
graph. See Figure 32.
(b)	 The fact that the slope is
-  4
5 = -4
5
= Rise
Run
means that for every horizontal movement of 5 units to the right, there will be 
a corresponding vertical movement of -4 units (a downward movement). Start 
at the given point 13, 22 and move 5 units to the right and then 4 units down, 
arriving at the point 18, -22. Drawing the line through these points gives the 
graph. See Figure 33.
Alternatively, consider that
-  4
5 =
4
-5 = Rise
Run
so for every horizontal movement of -5 units (a movement to the left), there 
will be a corresponding vertical movement of 4 units (upward). This approach 
leads to the point 1 -2, 62, which is also on the graph of the line in Figure 33.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5  ( G r a p h  t h e  l i n e )
Find the Equation of a Vertical Line
Graphing a Line
Graph the equation: x = 3
 To graph x = 3, we find all points 1x, y2 in the plane for which x = 3. No 
matter what y-coordinate is used, the corresponding x-coordinate always equals 3.  
Consequently, the graph of the equation x = 3 is a vertical line with x-intercept 3 
and undefined slope. See Figure 34.
2
Example 3
Solution
•
3
Example 4
Solution
•
Figure 33 
x
y
–2
10
(8, –2)
(–2, 6)
(3, 2)
6
–2
Run = 5
Run = –5
Rise = 4
Rise = –4
Figure 34  x = 3
x
y
5
1
(3, 3)
(3, 2)
(3, 1)
(3, 0)
(3, 1)
4
1

Section 1.3  Lines  57
Comment  To graph an equation using a graphing utility, we need to express the equation in the form 
y = 5expression in x6. But x = 3 cannot be put in this form. To overcome this, most graphing utilities 
have special commands for drawing vertical lines. DRAW, LINE, PLOT, and VERT are among the more common 
ones. Consult your manual to determine the correct methodology for your graphing utility.	
■
Use the Point–Slope Form of a Line; Identify Horizontal Lines
Let L be a nonvertical line with slope m that contains the point 1x1, y12. See Figure 35. 
For any other point 1x, y2 on L, we have
m = y - y1
x - x1 or y - y1 = m1x - x12
4
Equation of a Vertical Line
A vertical line is given by an equation of the form
x = a
where a is the x-intercept.
Theorem
Example 4 suggests the following result:
Point–Slope Form of an Equation of a Line
An equation of a nonvertical line with slope m that contains the point 1x1, y12 is
	
y - y1 = m1x - x12	
(2)
Theorem
Using the Point–Slope Form of a Line
An equation of the line with slope 4 that contains the point 11, 22 can be found by 
using the point–slope form with m = 4, x1 = 1, and y1 = 2.
 y - y1 = m1x - x12
 y - 2 = 41x - 12
 y = 4x - 2
See Figure 36 for the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5  ( F i n d  t h e  p o i n t - s l o p e  f o r m )
Finding the Equation of a Horizontal Line
Find an equation of the horizontal line containing the point 13, 22.
 Because all the y-values are equal on a horizontal line, the slope of a horizontal line 
is 0. To get an equation, use the point–slope form with m = 0, x1 = 3, and y1 = 2.
 y - y1 = m1x - x12
 y - 2 = 0 # 1x - 32 
 y - 2 = 0
 y = 2
See Figure 37 for the graph.
Example 5
m = 4, x1 = 1, y1 = 2
Solve for y.
•
Example 6
Solution
m = 0, x1 = 3, and y1 = 2
•
Figure 35 
x
y
(x, y)
L
(x1, y1)
x – x1
y – y1
Figure 36  y = 4x - 2
x
y
22
5
(1, 2)
(2, 6)
6
Run 5 1
Rise 5 4
Figure 37  y = 2
(3, 2)
x
y
–1
5
3
1
4

58 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
Example 6 suggests the following result:
Equation of a Horizontal Line
A horizontal line is given by an equation of the form
y = b
where b is the y-intercept.
Theorem
Find the Equation of a Line Given Two Points
Finding an Equation of a Line Given Two Points
Find an equation of the line containing the points 12, 32 and 1-4, 52. Graph the 
line.
 First compute the slope of the line.
m =
5 - 3
-4 - 2 =
2
-6 = -  1
3 
m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
Use the point 12, 32 and the slope m = -  1
3 to get the point–slope form of the  
equation of the line.
y - 3 = -  1
3
 1x - 22 
y - y1 = m(x - x1)
See Figure 38 for the graph.
In the solution to Example 7, we could have used the other point, 1 -4, 52, 
instead of the point 12, 32. The equation that results, although it looks different, is 
equivalent to the equation that we obtained in the example. (Try it for yourself.)
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Write the Equation of a Line in Slope–Intercept Form
Another useful equation of a line is obtained when the slope m and y-intercept b 
are known. In this event, both the slope m of the line and a point 10, b2 on the line 
are known; then use the point–slope form, equation (2), to obtain the following 
equation:
y - b = m1x - 02 or y = mx + b
5
Example 7
Solution
•
6
Slope–Intercept Form of an Equation of a Line
An equation of a line with slope m and y-intercept b is
	
y = mx + b	
(3)
Theorem
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  4 7  a n d  5 3  ( E x p r e s s  a n s w e r  
i n  s l o p e – i n t e r c e p t  f o r m )
Figure 38  y - 3 = - 1
3
 (x - 2)
x
y
–4
10
(–4, 5)
(2, 3)
2
–2

Section 1.3  Lines  59
Seeing the Concept
To see the role that the slope m plays, graph the following lines on the same screen.
 Y1 = 2
 Y2 = x + 2
 Y3 = - x + 2
 Y4 = 3x + 2
 Y5 = - 3x + 2
See Figure 39. What do you conclude about the lines y = mx + 2?
m = 0
m = 1
m = - 1
m = 3
m = - 3
Seeing the Concept
To see the role of the y-intercept b, graph the following lines on the same screen.
 Y1 = 2x
 Y2 = 2x + 1
 Y3 = 2x - 1
 Y4 = 2x + 4
 Y5 = 2x - 4
See Figure 40. What do you conclude about the lines y = 2x + b?
b = 0
b = 1
b = - 1
b = 4
b = - 4
Identify the Slope and y-Intercept of a Line from Its Equation
When the equation of a line is written in slope–intercept form, it is easy to find the 
slope m and y-intercept b of the line. For example, suppose that the equation of a 
line is
y = -2x + 7
Compare this equation to y = mx + b.
 y = -2x + 7
The slope of this line is -2 and its y-intercept is 7.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 3
Finding the Slope and y-Intercept
Find the slope m and y-intercept b of the equation 2x + 4y = 8. Graph the equation.
 To obtain the slope and y-intercept, write the equation in slope–intercept form by 
solving for y.
 2x + 4y = 8
 4y = -2x + 8
 y = -  1
2
 x + 2 
The coefficient of x, -  1
2, is the slope, and the constant, 2, is the y-intercept. Graph 
the line with y-intercept 2 and with slope -  1
2. Starting at the point 10, 22, go to the 
right 2 units and then down 1 unit to the point 12, 12. Draw the line through
these points. See Figure 41.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 9
7
c           c
y =
mx
+ b
Example 8
Solution
y = mx + b
•
Figure 39  y = mx + 2
Y4 5 3x 1 2
Y5 5 23x 1 2
Y1 5 2
Y2 5x 1 2
Y3 52x 1 2
24
4
26
6
Figure 40  y = 2x + b
24
4
Y4 5 2x 1 4
Y5 5 2x 2 4
Y3 5 2x 2 1
Y2 5 2x 1 1 Y1 5 2x
26
6
Figure 41  y = - 1
2x + 2
x
y
–3
3
(0, 2)
(2, 1)
2
1
4

60 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
Graph Lines Written in General Form Using Intercepts
Refer to Example 8. The form of the equation of the line 2x + 4y = 8 is called the 
general form.
8
*Some texts use the term standard form.
 The equation of a line is in general form* when it is written as
	
Ax + By = C	
(4)
where A, B, and C are real numbers and A and B are not both 0.
Definition
If B = 0 in equation (4), then A ≠0 and the graph of the equation is a vertical
line: x = C
A. If B ≠0 in equation (4), then we can solve the equation for y and
write the equation in slope–intercept form as we did in Example 8.
Another approach to graphing equation (4) is to find its intercepts. Remember, 
the intercepts of the graph of an equation are the points where the graph crosses or 
touches a coordinate axis.
Graphing an Equation in General Form Using Its Intercepts
Graph the equation 2x + 4y = 8 by finding its intercepts.
 To obtain the x-intercept, let y = 0 in the equation and solve for x.
 2x + 4y = 8
 2x + 4102 = 8 
 2x = 8
 x = 4
The x-intercept is 4, and the point 14, 02 is on the graph of the equation.
To obtain the y-intercept, let x = 0 in the equation and solve for y.
 2x + 4y = 8
 2102 + 4y = 8 
 4y = 8
 y = 2
The y-intercept is 2, and the point 10, 22 is on the graph of the equation.
Plot the points 14, 02 and 10, 22 and draw the line through the points. See  
Figure 42.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 3
Every line has an equation that is equivalent to an equation written in general 
form. For example, a vertical line whose equation is
x = a
can be written in the general form
1 # x + 0 # y = a 
A = 1, B = 0, C = a
A horizontal line whose equation is
y = b
can be written in the general form
0 # x + 1 # y = b 
A = 0, B = 1, C = b
Example 9
Solution
Let y = 0.
Divide both sides by 2.
Let x = 0.
Divide both sides by 4.
•
Figure 42  2x + 4y = 8
x
y
–3
3
(0, 2)
(4, 0)
4

Section 1.3  Lines  61
Lines that are neither vertical nor horizontal have general equations of the form
Ax + By = C 
A ≠0 and B ≠0
Because the equation of every line can be written in general form, any equation 
equivalent to equation (4) is called a linear equation.
Find Equations of Parallel Lines
When two lines (in the plane) do not intersect (that is, they have no points in  
common), they are parallel. Look at Figure 43. There we have drawn two parallel 
lines and have constructed two right triangles by drawing sides parallel to the  
coordinate axes. The right triangles are similar. (Do you see why? Two angles are 
equal.) Because the triangles are similar, the ratios of corresponding sides are equal.
9
Theorem  Criteria for Parallel Lines
Two nonvertical lines are parallel if and only if their slopes are equal and they 
have different y-intercepts.
The use of the phrase “if and only if” in the preceding theorem means that  
actually two statements are being made, one the converse of the other.
If two nonvertical lines are parallel, then their slopes are equal and they 
have different y-intercepts.
If two nonvertical lines have equal slopes and they have different y-intercepts, 
then they are parallel.
Showing That Two Lines Are Parallel
Show that the lines given by the following equations are parallel.
L1
 : 2x + 3y = 6  L2
 : 4x + 6y = 0
 To determine whether these lines have equal slopes and different y-intercepts, write 
each equation in slope–intercept form.
 L1
 : 2x + 3y = 6       L2
 : 4x + 6y = 0
 3y = -2x + 6  
 6y = -4x
 y = -  2
3
 x + 2  
 y = -  2
3
 x
  Slope = -  2
3
 ;  y@intercept = 2   Slope = -  2
3
 ;  y@intercept = 0
Because these lines have the same slope, -  2
3, but different y-intercepts, the lines are 
parallel. See Figure 44.
Finding a Line That Is Parallel to a Given Line
Find an equation for the line that contains the point 12, -32 and is parallel to the 
line 2x + y = 6.
 Since the two lines are to be parallel, the slope of the line being sought equals the 
slope of the line 2x + y = 6. Begin by writing the equation of the line 2x + y = 6 
in slope–intercept form.
 2x + y = 6
 y = -2x + 6
Example 10
Solution
•
Example 11
Solution
Figure 43  Parallel lines
y
Rise
Run
Run
Rise
x
Figure 44 
y
5
5
L1
L2
5
x

62 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
The slope is -2. Since the line being sought also has slope -2 and contains the 
point 12, -32, use the point–slope form to obtain its equation.
 y - y1 = m1x - x12
 y - 1 -32 = -21x - 22
 y + 3 = -2x + 4
 y = -2x + 1
 2x + y = 1
This line is parallel to the line 2x + y = 6 and contains the point 12, -32. See  
Figure 45.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
Find Equations of Perpendicular Lines
When two lines intersect at a right angle (90°), they are perpendicular. See  
Figure 46.
The following result gives a condition, in terms of their slopes, for two lines to 
be perpendicular.
Point–slope form
m = - 2, x1 = 2, y1 = -3
Simplify.
Slope–intercept form
General form
•
10
Criterion for Perpendicular Lines
Two nonvertical lines are perpendicular if and only if the product of their 
slopes is -1.
Theorem
Here we shall prove the “only if” part of the statement:
If two nonvertical lines are perpendicular, then the product of their slopes  
is -1.
In Problem 130 you are asked to prove the “if” part of the theorem:
If two nonvertical lines have slopes whose product is -1, then the lines are 
perpendicular.
Proof  Let m1 and m2 denote the slopes of the two lines. There is no loss in generality 
(that is, neither the angle nor the slopes are affected) if we situate the lines so that 
they meet at the origin. See Figure 47.  The point A = 11, m22 is on the line having 
slope m2, and the point B = 11, m12 is on the line having slope m1. (Do you see 
why this must be true?)
Suppose that the lines are perpendicular. Then triangle OAB is a right triangle. 
As a result of the Pythagorean Theorem, it follows that
	
3d1O, A2 42 + 3d1O, B2 42 = 3d1A, B2 42	
(5)
Using the distance formula, the squares of these distances are
 3d1O, A2 42 = 11 - 022 + 1m2 - 022 = 1 + m2
2
 3d1O, B2 42 = 11 - 022 + 1m1 - 022 = 1 + m1
2
 3d1A, B2 42 = 11 - 122 + 1m2 - m122 = m2
2 - 2m1
 m2 + m1
2
Figure 45 
y
6
5
6
6
(2, 3)
2x  y  1
2x  y  6
x
Figure 46  Perpendicular lines
y
90°
x
Figure 47 
x
y
Run = 1
O
Rise = m1
Rise = m2
A = (1, m2)
B = (1, m1)
Slope m2
Slope m1
1

Section 1.3  Lines  63
Using these facts in equation (5), we get
11 + m2
22 + 11 + m1
22 = m2
2 - 2m1
 m2 + m1
2
which, upon simplification, can be written as
m1
 m2 = -1
If the lines are perpendicular, the product of their slopes is -1.	
■
You may find it easier to remember the condition for two nonvertical lines to be 
perpendicular by observing that the equality m1
 m2 = -1 means that m1 and m2 are
negative reciprocals of each other; that is,  m1 = -  1
m2
  and  m2 = -  1
m1
.
Finding the Slope of a Line Perpendicular to Another Line
If a line has slope 3
2, any line having slope -  2
3 is perpendicular to it.
Finding the Equation of a Line Perpendicular to a Given Line
Find an equation of the line that contains the point 11, -22 and is perpendicular to 
the line x + 3y = 6. Graph the two lines.
 First write the equation of the given line in slope–intercept form to find its slope.
 x + 3y = 6
 3y = -x + 6
 y = -  1
3
 x + 2 
The given line has slope -  1
3. Any line perpendicular to this line will have slope 3.
Because the point 11, -22 is on this line with slope 3, use the point–slope form of 
the equation of a line.
 y - y1 = m1x - x12 
 y - 1 -22 = 31x - 12
 
 y + 2 = 31x - 12
To obtain other forms of the equation, proceed as follows:
 y + 2 = 3x - 3
 y = 3x - 5
 3x - y = 5
Figure 48 shows the graphs.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 7
Warning  Be sure to use a square screen when you use a graphing calculator to graph perpendicular 
lines. Otherwise, the angle between the two lines will appear distorted. A discussion of square screens 
is given in Section B.5 of Appendix B.	
■
Example 12
•
Example 13
Solution
Proceed to solve for y.
Place in the form y = mx + b.
Point–slope form
m = 3, x1 = 1, y1 = -2
Simplify.
Slope–intercept form
General form
•
Figure 48 
x
y
6
6
4
2
2
4
2
2
4
(1, 2)
y  3x  5
x  3y  6

64 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
In Problems 39–46, find an equation of the line L.
x
y
–2
2
(0, 0)
(2, 1)
2
–1
L
x
y
–2
2
(–2, 1)
(0, 0)
2
–1
L
x
y
–2
2
(–1, 3)
(1, 1)
3
–1
L
x
y
–2
2
(–1, 1)
(2, 2)
2
–1
L
	 39.	
	 40.	
41.	
42.	
21.	 14, 22; 1- 5, 22
	 22.	 1- 3, - 12; 12, - 12
	 23.	 12, 02; 12, 22
	 24.	 1- 1, 22; 1-1, -22
x
y
–2
2
(0, 0)
(2, 1)
2
–1
x
y
–2
2
(–2, 1)
(0, 0)
2
–1
Skill Building
In Problems 13–16, (a) find the slope of the line and (b) interpret the slope.
x
y
–2
2
(–2, 2)
(1, 1)
2
–1
x
y
–2
2
(–1, 1)
(2, 2)
2
–1
	 17.	 14, 22; 13, 42
	 18.	 12, 32; 14, 02
	 19.	 1- 2, 32; 12, 12
	 20.	 1- 1, 12; 12, 32
In Problems 17–24, plot each pair of points and determine the slope of the line containing them. Graph the line.
In Problems 25–32, graph the line that contains the point P and has slope m. In Problems 25–30, find the point-slope form of the  
equation of the line. In Problems 31 and 32, find an equation of the line.
	 25.	 P = 11, 22; m = 3
	 26.	 P = 12, 12; m = 4
	 27.	 P = 11, 32; m = -  2
5
	 28.	 P = 12, 42; m = -  3
4
	 29.	 P = 12, - 42; m = 0
	 30.	 P = 1- 1, 32; m = 0
	 31.	 P = 1- 2, 02; slope undefined
	 32.	 P = 10, 32; slope undefined
In Problems 33–38, the slope and a point on a line are given. Use this information to locate three additional points on the line. Answers may 
vary. [Hint: It is not necessary to find the equation of the line. See Example 3.]
	 33.	 Slope 2; point 1- 2, 32
	 34.	 Slope 4; point 11, 22
	 35.	 Slope 4
3; point 1-3, 22
	 36.	 Slope -  3
2; point 12, - 42
	 37.	 Slope - 1; point 14, 12
	 38.	 Slope - 2; point 1-2, -32
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 The slope of a vertical line is     
; the slope of a 
horizontal line is     
.
	 2.	 For the line 2x + 3y = 6, the x-intercept is  
 and the 
y-intercept is  
.
	 3.	 True or False  The equation 3x + 4y = 6 is written in  
general form. 
	 4.	 True or False  The slope of the line 2y = 3x + 5 is 3. 
	 5.	 True or False  The point 11, 22 is on the line 2x + y = 4. 
	 6.	 Two nonvertical lines have slopes m1 and m2, respectively. 
The lines are parallel if     
 and the     
 
are unequal; the lines are perpendicular if      
.
	 7.	 The lines y = 2x + 3 and y = ax + 5 are parallel if 
a =      
.
	 8.	 The lines y = 2x - 1 and y = ax + 2 are perpendicular if
	
	 a =  
  .
	 9.	 True or False  Perpendicular lines have slopes that are  
reciprocals of one another. 
	 10.	 Choose the formula for finding the slope m of a nonvertical 
line that contains the two distinct points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2).
(a)	 m = y2 - x2
y1 - x1  x1 ≠y1
(b)	 m = y2 - x1
x2 - y1  y1 ≠x2
(c)	 m = x2 - x1
y2 - y1  y1 ≠y2
(d)	 m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1  x1 ≠x2 
	 11.	 If a line slants downward from left to right, then which of the 
following describes its slope?
(a)	 positive    (b)  zero
(c)  negative  	 (d)  undefined 
	 12.	 Choose the correct statement about the graph of the line 
y = - 3.
(a)	 The graph is vertical with x-intercept -3.
(b)	 The graph is horizontal with y-intercept -3.
(c)	 The graph is vertical with y-intercept -3.
(d)	 The graph is horizontal with x-intercept -3. 
1.3  Assess Your Understanding
	 13.	
	 14.	
15.	
16.	

Section 1.3  Lines  65
	 43.	
44.	
45.	
46.	
y = 2x 
 (3, 3)
L is parallel to y = 2x
L
x
y
3
3
–1
y = –x 
 (1, 2)
L
L is parallel to y = –x
x
y
3
3
–1
y = 2x 
L is perpendicular
to y = 2x 
 (1, 2)
L
x
y
3
3
–1
y = –x 
x
y
 (–1, 1)
1
3
–3
L
L is perpendicular
to y = –x 
In Problems 47–72, find an equation for the line with the given properties. Express your answer using either the general form or the  
slope–intercept form of the equation of a line, whichever you prefer.
	 47.	 Slope = 3; containing the point 1-2, 32
	 48.	 Slope = 2; containing the point 14, -32
	 49.	 Slope = 1
2; containing the point 13, 12
	 50.	 Slope = -  2
3; containing the point 11, -12
	 51.	 Containing the points 1- 3, 42 and 12, 52
	 52.	 Containing the points 11, 32 and 1-1, 22
	 53.	 Slope = - 3; y@intercept = 3
	 54.	 Slope = - 2; y@intercept = - 2
	 55.	 x@intercept = - 4; y@intercept = 4
	 56.	 x@intercept = 2; y@intercept = -1
	 57.	 Slope undefined; containing the point 13, 82
	 58.	 Slope undefined; containing the point 12, 42
	 59.	 Vertical; containing the point 14, - 52
	 60.	 Horizontal; containing the point 1-3, 22 
	 61.	 Parallel to the line y = 2x; containing the point 1- 1, 22
	 62.	 Parallel to the line y = - 3x; containing the point 1-1, 22
	 63.	 Parallel to the line x - 2y = - 5; containing the point 10, 02
	 64.	 Parallel to the line 2x - y = - 2; containing the point 10, 02
	 65.	 Parallel to the line y = 5; containing the point 14, 22 
	 66.	 Parallel to the line x = 5; containing the point 14, 22
	 67.	 Perpendicular to the line y = 1
2
 x + 4; containing the point 
11, - 22
	68.	 Perpendicular to the line y = 2x - 3; containing the point 
11, - 22 
	 69.	 Perpendicular to the line x - 2y = - 5; containing the point 
10, 42 
	 70.	 Perpendicular to the line 2x + y = 2; containing the point 
1- 3, 02 
	 71.	 Perpendicular to the line y = 8; containing the point 13, 42
	 72.	 Perpendicular to the line x = 8; containing the point 13, 42
 
In Problems 73–92, find the slope and y-intercept of each line. Graph the line.
	 73.	 y = 2x + 3
	 74.	 y = - 3x + 4
	 75.	 1
3
 x + y = 2
	 76.	 1
2
 y = x - 1
	 77.	 y = 2x + 1
2
	 78.	 y = 1
2
 x + 2
	 79.	 x + 2y = 4
	 80.	 - x + 3y = 6
	 81.	 3x + 2y = 6
	 82.	 2x - 3y = 6
	 83.	 x - y = 2
	 84.	 x + y = 1
	 85.	 y = - 1
	 86.	 x = - 4
	 87.	 x = 2
	 88.	 y = 5
	 89.	 x + y = 0
	 90.	 y - x = 0
	 91.	 3x + 2y = 0
	 92.	 2y - 3x = 0
In Problems 93–102, (a) find the intercepts of the graph of each equation and (b) graph the equation.
	 93.	 2x + 3y = 6
	 94.	 3x - 2y = 6
	 95.	 6x - 4y = 24
	 96.	 -4x + 5y = 40
	 97.	 5x + 3y = 18
	 98.	 7x + 2y = 21
In Problems 105–108, the equations of two lines are given. Determine whether the lines are parallel, perpendicular, or neither.
	106.	 y = 2x - 3 
y = 2x + 4 
	105.	 y = 1
2
 x - 3 
y = - 2x + 4
	108.	 y = 4x + 5 
 
y = -4x + 2
	107.	 y = - 2x + 3 
 
y = -  1
2
 x + 2
	 99.	 x - 2
3
 y = 4
	100.	 1
2
 x + 1
3
 y = 1
	101.	 - 0.3x + 0.4y = 1.2
	103.	 Find an equation of the x-axis. 
	104.	 Find an equation of the y-axis. 
	102.	 0.2x - 0.5y = 1

66 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
22
2
23
3
In Problems 109–112, write an equation of each line. Express your answer using either the general form or the slope–intercept form of the 
equation of a line, whichever you prefer.
24
4
26
6
	 110.
	 111.
	 112.
	 109.
22
2
23
3
22
2
23
3
Applications and Extensions
	113.	 Geometry  Use slopes to determine if the triangle whose 
vertices are 1- 4, 42, 11, 52, and 12, 02 is a right triangle.
	114.	 Geometry  Use slopes to show that the quadrilateral 
whose vertices are 11, - 12, 14, 12, 12, 22, and 15, 42 is a  
parallelogram.
	115.	 Geometry  Use slopes to determine if the quadrilat-
eral whose vertices are 1- 2, 12, 1- 3, 22, 1- 4, - 12 and 
1- 5, 02 is a ­rectangle.
	116.	 Geometry  Use slopes and the distance formula to show that 
the quadrilateral whose vertices are 10, 02, 11, 32, 14, 22, 
and 13, - 12 is a square.
	117.	 Truck Rentals  A truck rental company rents a moving 
truck for one day by charging $33 plus $0.09 per mile. Write 
a linear equation that relates the cost C, in dollars, of rent-
ing the truck to the number x of miles driven. What is the 
cost of renting the truck if the truck is driven 175 miles?  
403 miles? 
	118.	 Cost Equation  The fixed costs of operating a business are 
the costs incurred regardless of the level of production. 
Fixed costs include rent, fixed salaries, and costs of leasing 
machinery. The variable costs of operating a business are 
the costs that change with the level of output. Variable costs  
include raw materials, hourly wages, and electricity. Suppose 
that a manufacturer of jeans has fixed daily costs of $500 
and variable costs of $8 for each pair of jeans manufactured. 
Write a linear equation that relates the daily cost C, in 
dollars, of manufacturing the jeans to the number x of jeans 
manufactured. What is the cost of manufacturing 400 pairs 
of jeans? 740 pairs? 
119.	 Cost of Driving a Car  The annual fixed costs of owning a 
small sedan are $4436, assuming the car is completely paid 
for. The cost to drive the car is approximately $0.16 per mile. 
Write a linear equation that relates the cost C and the num-
ber x of miles driven ­annually. 
	120.	 Wages of a Car Salesperson  Dan receives $375 per week for 
selling new and used cars at a car dealership in Oak Lawn, 
Illinois. In addition, he receives 5% of the profit on any sales 
that he generates. Write a linear equation that represents 
Dan’s weekly salary S when he has sales that generate a 
profit of x dollars. 
	121.	 Electricity 
Rates 
in 
Illinois  Commonwealth 
Edison 
Company supplies electricity to residential customers for 
a monthly customer charge of $15.37 plus 8.21 cents per  
kilowatt-hour for up to 800 kilowatt-hours (kW-hr).
(a)	 Write a linear equation that relates the monthly charge 
C, in dollars, to the number x of kilowatt-hours used in a 
month, 0 … x … 800.
(b)	 Graph this equation.
(c)	 What is the monthly charge for using 200 kilowatt-hours?
(d)	 What is the monthly charge for using 500 kilowatt-hours?
(e)	 Interpret the slope of the line.
Source: Commonwealth Edison Company, January 2014.
	122.	 Electricity Rates in Florida  Florida Power & Light Company 
supplies electricity to residential customers for a monthly 
customer charge of $7.24 plus 9.07 cents per kilowatt-hour 
for up to 1000 kilowatt-hours.
(a)	 Write a linear equation that relates the monthly charge 
C, in dollars, to the number x of kilowatt-hours used in a 
month, 0 … x … 1000.
(b)	 Graph this equation.
(c)	 What is the monthly charge for using 200 kilowatt-
hours?
(d)	 What is the monthly charge for using 500 kilowatt-
hours?
(e)	 Interpret the slope of the line.
Source: Florida Power & Light Company, March 2014.
	123.	 Measuring Temperature  The relationship between Celsius 
(°C) and Fahrenheit (°F) degrees of measuring temperature 
is linear. Find a linear equation relating °C and °F if 0°C 
corresponds to 32°F and 40°C corresponds to 104°F. Use the 
equation to find the Celsius measure of 78°F.
	124.	 Measuring Temperature  The Kelvin (K) scale for measuring 
temperature is obtained by adding 273 to the Celsius  
temperature.

Section 1.3  Lines  67
y
Ramp
Platform
45 in.
x
(a)	 Write a linear equation relating K and °C.
(b)	 Write a linear equation relating K and °F (see Problem 
123).
	125.	 Access Ramp  A wooden access ramp is being built to reach 
a platform that sits 45 inches above the floor. The ramp 
drops 3 inches for every 29-inch run.
(b)	 Find the intercepts of the graph of your equation.
(c)	 Do these intercepts have meaningful interpretation?
(d)	 Use your equation to predict the percent for the year 
2025. Is this result reasonable?
Source: www.childtrendsdatabank.org
	127.	 Product Promotion  A cereal company finds that the num-
ber of people who will buy one of its products in the first  
month that it is introduced is linearly related to the 
amount of money it spends on ­advertising. If it spends 
$10,000 on advertising, then 100,000 boxes of cereal 
will be sold, and if it spends $50,000 on advertising, then 
200,000 boxes of cereal will be sold.
(a)	 Write an equation that relates the amount A spent on 
advertising to the number x of boxes the company aims 
to sell.
(b)	 How much advertising is needed to sell 700,000 boxes 
of cereal?
(c)	 Interpret the slope.
	128.	 Show that the line containing the points 1a, b2 and 1b, a2, 
a ≠b, is perpendicular to the line y = x.  Also show that 
the midpoint of 1a, b2 and 1b, a2 lies on the line y = x.
	129.	 The equation 2x - y = C defines a family of lines, one line 
for each value of C. On one set of coordinate axes, graph the 
members of the family when C = -4, C = 0, and C = 2. 
Can you draw a conclusion from the graph about each  
member of the family?
	130.	 Prove that if two nonvertical lines have slopes whose  
product is - 1, then the lines are perpendicular. [Hint:  
Refer to Figure 47 and use the converse of the Pythagorean 
Theorem.]
(a)	 Write a linear equation that relates the height y of the 
ramp above the floor to the horizontal distance x from 
the platform.
(b)	 Find and interpret the x-intercept of the graph of your 
equation.
(c)	 Design requirements stipulate that the maximum run be 
30 feet (360 inches) and that the maximum slope be a 
drop of 1 inch for each 8 inches of run. Will this ramp 
meet the requirements? Explain.
(d)	 What slope could be used to obtain the 45-inch rise and 
still meet design requirements?
	126.	 Cigarette Use  A report in the Child Trends DataBase  
indicated that in 2000, 20.6% of twelfth grade students  
reported daily use of cigarettes. In 2012, 9.3% of twelfth 
grade students reported daily use of cigarettes.
(a)	 Write a linear equation that relates the percent y of 
twelfth grade students who smoke cigarettes daily to the 
number x of years after 2000.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	131.	 Which of the following equations might have the graph 
shown? (More than one answer is possible.)
(a)	 2x + 3y = 6
(b)	 - 2x + 3y = 6
(c)	 3x - 4y = - 12
(d)	 x - y = 1
(e)	 x - y = - 1
(f)	 y = 3x - 5
(g)	 y = 2x + 3
(h)	 y = - 3x + 3 
	132.	 Which of the following equations might have the graph 
shown? (More than one answer is possible.)
(a)	 2x + 3y = 6
(b)	 2x - 3y = 6
(c)	 3x + 4y = 12
(d)	 x - y = 1
(e)	 x - y = - 1
(f)	 y = - 2x - 1
(g)	 y = -  1
2
 x + 10
(h)	 y = x + 4 
	133.	 The figure shows the graph of two parallel lines. Which of the 
following pairs of equations might have such a graph? 
(a)	 x - 2y = 3 
x + 2y = 7
(b)	 x + y = 2 
x + y = - 1
y
x
y
x
x
y
(c)	 x - y = - 2 
x - y = 1
(d)	 x - y = - 2 
2x - 2y = - 4
(e)	 x + 2y = 2 
x + 2y = - 1
	134.	 The figure shows the graph of two perpendicular lines. 
Which of the following pairs of equations might have such a 
graph? 
(a)	 y - 2x = 2 
y + 2x = - 1
(b)	 y - 2x = 0 
2y + x = 0
(c)	 2y - x = 2 
2y + x = - 2
(d)	 y - 2x = 2 
x + 2y = - 1
(e)	 2x + y = - 2 
2y + x = - 2
	135.	 m is for Slope  The accepted symbol used to denote the 
slope of a line is the letter m. Investigate the origin of this 
practice. Begin by consulting a French dictionary and looking 
up the French word monter. Write a brief essay on your  
findings.
x
y

68 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
Figure 49 shows the graph of a circle. To find the equation, let 1x, y2 represent 
the coordinates of any point on a circle with radius r and center 1h, k2. Then the 
distance between the points 1x, y2 and 1h, k2 must always equal r. That is, by the 
distance formula,
21x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r
or, equivalently,
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r 2
	136.	 Grade of a Road  The term grade is used to describe the  
inclination of a road. How is this term related to the notion 
of slope of a line? Is a 4% grade very steep? Investigate 
the grades of some mountainous roads and determine their 
slopes. Write a brief essay on your findings.
Steep
7% Grade
	138.	 Can the equation of every line be written in slope–intercept 
form? Why? 
	139.	 Does every line have exactly one x-intercept and one  
y-intercept? Are there any lines that have no intercepts?
	140.	 What can you say about two lines that have equal slopes and 
equal y-intercepts? 
	141.	 What can you say about two lines with the same x-intercept 
and the same y-intercept? Assume that the x-intercept is  
not 0. 
	142.	 If two distinct lines have the same slope but different  
x-intercepts, can they have the same y-intercept? 
	143.	 If two distinct lines have the same y-intercept but different 
slopes, can they have the same x-intercept?
	144.	 Which form of the equation of a line do you prefer to use? 
Justify your position with an example that shows that your 
choice is better than another. Have reasons.
	145.	 What Went Wrong?  A student is asked to find the slope of 
the line joining (- 3, 2) and (1, -4). He states that the slope
	
	 is 3
2. Is he correct? If not, what went wrong?
	137.	 Carpentry  Carpenters use the term pitch to describe the 
steepness of staircases and roofs. How is pitch related to 
slope? Investigate typical pitches used for stairs and for 
roofs. Write a brief essay on your findings.
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 72.
	
Objectives	 	1  Write the Standard Form of the Equation of a Circle  (p. 68)
	
	 	2  Graph a Circle  (p. 69)
	
	 	3  Work with the General Form of the Equation of a Circle  (p. 70)
1.4  Circles
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Completing the Square (Appendix A,  
Section A.3, pp. 972–973)
•	 Square Root Method (Appendix A, Section A.6,  
p. 991)
Write the Standard Form of the Equation of a Circle
One advantage of a coordinate system is that it enables us to translate a geometric 
statement into an algebraic statement, and vice versa. Consider, for example, the 
following geometric statement that defines a circle.
1
 A circle is a set of points in the xy-plane that are a fixed distance r from a fixed 
point 1h, k2. The fixed distance r is called the radius, and the fixed point 1h, k2 
is called the center of the circle.
Definition
Figure 49  1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r 2
y
(x, y)
(h, k)
r
x

Section 1.4  Circles  69
 The standard form of an equation of a circle with radius r and center 1h, k2 is
	
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r 2	
(1)
Definition
The standard form of an equation of a circle of radius r with center at the  
origin 10, 02 is
x2 + y2 = r 2
Theorem
 If the radius r = 1, the circle whose center is at the origin is called the unit 
circle and has the equation
x2 + y2 = 1
Definition
Figure 50 
Unit circle x2 + y2 = 1
1
1
1
1
y
x
(0,0)
Writing the Standard Form of the Equation of a Circle
Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with radius 5 and center 1 -3, 62.
 Substitute the values r = 5, h = -3, and k = 6 into equation (1).
 1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r 2
 1x + 322 + 1y - 622 = 25
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Graph a Circle
Graphing a Circle
Graph the equation: 1x + 322 + 1y - 222 = 16
 Since the equation is in the form of equation (1), its graph is a circle. To graph the 
equation, compare the given equation to the standard form of the equation of a 
circle. The comparison yields information about the circle.
Example 1
Solution
•
2
Example 2
Solution
See Figure 50. Notice that the graph of the unit circle is symmetric with respect to 
the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.

70 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
 1x + 322 + 1y - 222 = 16
 1x - 1 -32 22 + 1y - 222 = 42
 1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r 2
We see that h = -3, k = 2, and r = 4. The circle has center 1-3, 22 and a  
radius of 4 units. To graph this circle, first plot the center 1 -3, 22. Since the radius  
is 4, we can locate four points on the circle by plotting points 4 units to the left, to  
the right, up, and down from the center. These four points can then be used as guides 
to obtain the graph. See Figure 51.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 5 ( a )  a n d  ( b )
Finding the Intercepts of a Circle
For the circle 1x + 322 + 1y - 222 = 16, find the intercepts, if any, of its graph.
 This is the equation discussed and graphed in Example 2. To find the x-intercepts, if 
any, let y = 0. Then
 1x + 322 + 1y - 222 = 16
 1x + 322 + 10 - 222 = 16
 
 1x + 322 + 4 = 16
 1x + 322 = 12
 x + 3 = { 212 
 x = -3 { 223 
The x-intercepts are -3 - 223 ≈-6.46 and -3 + 223 ≈0.46.
To find the y-intercepts, if any, let x = 0. Then
 1x + 322 + 1y - 222 = 16
 10 + 322 + 1y - 222 = 16
 9 + 1y - 222 = 16
 1y - 222 = 7
 y - 2 = { 27
 y = 2 { 27
The y-intercepts are 2 - 27 ≈-0.65 and 2 + 27 ≈4.65.
Look back at Figure 51 to verify the approximate locations of the intercepts.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5 ( c )
Work with the General Form of the Equation of a Circle
If we eliminate the parentheses from the standard form of the equation of the circle 
given in Example 2, we get
 1x + 322 + 1y - 222 = 16
 x2 + 6x + 9 + y2 - 4y + 4 = 16
which simplifies to
	
x2 + y2 + 6x - 4y - 3 = 0	
(2)
It can be shown that any equation of the form
x2 + y2 + ax + by + c = 0
has a graph that is a circle, is a point, or has no graph at all. For example, the graph of 
the equation x2 + y2 = 0 is the single point 10, 02. The equation x2 + y2 + 5 = 0, or 
x2 + y2 = -5, has no graph, because sums of squares of real numbers are never negative.
c                      c         c
•
Example 3
Solution
y = 0
Simplify. 
Simplify. 
Apply the Square Root Method.
Solve for x.
•
3
Figure 51  1x + 322 + 1y - 222 = 16
(–3, 6)
(–7, 2)
(–3, 2)
y
6
2
–5
–10
4
(–3, –2)
(1, 2)
x
In Words
The symbol { is read “plus or 
minus.” It means to add and  
subtract the quantity following 
the { symbol. For example, 
5 { 2 means “5 - 2 = 3 or 
5 + 2 = 7.”

Section 1.4  Circles  71
 When its graph is a circle, the equation
x2 + y2 + ax + by + c = 0
is the general form of the equation of a circle.
Definition
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
If an equation of a circle is in general form, we use the method of completing the 
square to put the equation in standard form so that we can identify its center and radius.
Graphing a Circle Whose Equation Is in General Form
Graph the equation: x2 + y2 + 4x - 6y + 12 = 0
 Group the terms involving x, group the terms involving y, and put the constant on 
the right side of the equation. The result is
1x2 + 4x2 + 1y2 - 6y2 = -12
Next, complete the square of each expression in parentheses. Remember that any 
number added on the left side of the equation must also be added on the right.
 1x2 + 4x + 42 + 1y2 - 6y + 92 = -12 + 4 + 9 
	
a4
2 b
2
= 4	
	
a -6
2 b
2
= 9
 1x + 222 + 1y - 322 = 1
This equation is the standard form of the equation of a circle with radius 1 and 
center 1 -2, 32. To graph the equation, use the center 1 -2, 32 and the radius 1. See 
Figure 52.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
Using a Graphing Utility to Graph a Circle
Graph the equation: x2 + y2 = 4
 This is the equation of a circle with center at the origin and radius 2. To graph this 
equation, solve for y.
 x2 + y2 = 4
 y2 = 4 - x2 
 y = { 24 - x2 
There are two equations to graph: first graph Y1 = 24 - x2 and then graph
Y2 = - 24 - x2 on the same square screen. (Your circle will appear oval if you do 
not use a square screen.*) See Figure 53.
Overview
The discussion in Sections 1.3 and 1.4 about lines and circles dealt with two main 
types of problems that can be generalized as follows:
	 1.	 Given an equation, classify it and graph it.
	 2.	 Given a graph, or information about a graph, find its equation.
This text deals with both types of problems. We shall study various equations, 
classify them, and graph them. The second type of problem is usually more difficult 
to solve than the first.
Example 4
Solution
c
6
c
6
Factor.
•
Example 5
Solution
Subtract x2 from each side.
Apply the Square Root Method to solve for y.
•
*The square screen ratio for the TI-84 Plus C calculator is 8:5.
Figure 52  1x + 222 + 1y - 322 = 1
y
4
1
–3
1
(–2, 3)
(–2, 2)
(–3, 3)
(–1, 3)
(–2, 4)
x
Figure 53  x2 + y2 = 4
24
22.5
2.5
4
Y1 5 √42x2
Y2 5 2√42x2

72 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
	 3.	 True or False  Every equation of the form
x2 + y2 + ax + by + c = 0
has a circle as its graph. 
	 4.	 For a circle, the    
 is the distance from the center to 
any point on the circle.
	 5.	 True or False  The radius of the circle x2 + y2 = 9 is 3. 
	 6.	 True or False  The center of the circle
1x + 322 + 1y - 222 = 13
is (3, - 2). 
	 7.	 Choose the equation of a circle with radius 6 and center (3,  –5).
(a)	 1x - 322 + 1y + 522 = 6
(b)	 1x + 322 + 1y - 522 = 36
(c)	 1x + 322 + 1y - 522 = 6
(d)	 1x - 322 + 1y + 522 = 36 
	 8.	 The equation of a circle can be changed from general form 
to standard from by doing which of the following?
(a)	 completing the squares
(b)	 solving for x
(c)	 solving for y
(d)	 squaring both sides 
Concepts and Vocabulary
Are You Prepared? Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 To complete the square of x2 + 10x, you would   
 
(add/subtract) the number     
. (pp. 972–973)
	 2.	 Use the Square Root Method to solve the equation 
1x - 222 = 9. (p. 991) 
1.4  Assess Your Understanding
	 17.	 r = 4; 1h, k2 = 12, - 32
	 18.	 r = 5; 1h, k2 = 14, - 32
	 19.	 r = 7; 1h, k2 = 1- 5, - 22 	 20.	 r = 4; 1h, k2 = 1-2, 12
Skill Building
In Problems 9–12, find the center and radius of each circle. Write the standard form of the equation.
	 9.	
	 10.	
11.	
12.	
x
y
 (2, 1)
 (0, 1)
x
y
 (1, 2)
 (1, 0)
x
y
 (1, 2)
 (4, 2)
x
y
 (0, 1)
(2, 3)
	 13.	 r = 3; 1h, k2 = 10, 02
	 14.	 r = 2; 1h, k2 = 10, 02
	 15.	 r = 2; 1h, k2 = 10, 22
	 16.	 r = 3; 1h, k2 = 11, 02
In Problems 13–22, write the standard form of the equation and the general form of the equation of each circle of radius r and center 1h, k2.  
Graph each circle.
	 21.	 r = 1
2; 1h, k2 = a0, -  1
2b
	 22.	 r = 1
2; 1h, k2 = a1
2, 0b
In Problems 23–36, (a) find the center 1h, k2 and radius r of each circle; (b) graph each circle; (c) find the intercepts, if any.
	 23.	 x2 + 1y - 122 = 1
	 24.	 x2 + y2 = 4
	 25.	 21x - 322 + 2y2 = 8
	 26.	 31x + 122 + 31y - 122 = 6
	 27.	 x2 + y2 + 4x + 2y - 20 = 0
	 28.	 x2 + y2 - 2x - 4y - 4 = 0
	 29.	 x2 + y2 + 4x - 4y - 1 = 0
	 30.	 x2 + y2 - 6x + 2y + 9 = 0
	 31.	 x2 + y2 + x + y - 1
2 = 0
	 32.	 x2 + y2 - x + 2y + 1 = 0
	 33.	 2x2 + 2y2 + 8x + 7 = 0
	 34.	 2x2 + 2y2 - 12x + 8y - 24 = 0
	 35.	 3x2 + 3y2 - 12y = 0
	 36.	 2x2 + 8x + 2y2 = 0
In Problems 37–44, find the standard form of the equation of each circle.
	 37.	 Center 11, 02 and containing the point 1- 3, 22
	 38.	 Center at the origin and containing the point 1-2, 32
	 39.	 Center 1- 3, 12 and tangent to the y-axis
	 40.	 Center 12, 32 and tangent to the x-axis
	 41.	 With endpoints of a diameter at 14, 32 and 10, 12
	 42.	 With endpoints of a diameter at 11, 42 and 1-3, 22
	 43.	 Center 14, - 22 and tangent to the line x = 1
	 44.	 Center 1- 1, 32 and tangent to the line y = 2

Section 1.4  Circles  73
In Problems 45–48, match each graph with the correct equation.
(a)	 1x - 322 + 1y + 322 = 9  (b)  1x + 122 + 1y - 222 = 4  (c)  1x - 122 + 1y + 222 = 4  (d)  1x + 322 + 1y - 322 = 9
	 45.	
46.	
47.	
48.	
24
4
26.4
6.4
26
6
29.6
9.6
24
4
26.4
6.4
26
6
29.6
9.6
	53.	 Weather Satellites  Earth is represented on a map of a 
portion of the solar system so that its surface is the circle 
with equation x2 + y2 + 10x + 8y - 3559 = 0. A weather 
satellite circles 0.7 units above Earth with the center of its 
circular orbit at the center of Earth. Find the general form 
of the equation for the orbit of the satellite on this map.
Applications and Extensions
	 49.	 Find the area of the square in the figure. 
x 2  y2  25
y
x
	 50.	 Find the area of the blue shaded region in the figure, assuming 
the quadrilateral inside the circle is a square. 
x 2  y2  36
y
x
r
r
y
x
	 54.	 The tangent line to a circle may be defined as the line that 
intersects the circle in a single point, called the point of  
tangency. See the figure.
If the equation of the circle is x2 + y2 = r 2 and the equation 
of the tangent line is y = mx + b, show that:
(a)	 r 211 + m22 = b2
[Hint: The quadratic equation x2 + 1mx + b22 = r 2 
has exactly one solution.]
(b)	 The point of tangency is ¢ -r 2
 m
b
, r 2
b ≤.
(c)	 The tangent line is perpendicular to the line containing 
the center of the circle and the point of tangency.
	 55.	 The Greek Method  The Greek method for finding the 
equation of the tangent line to a circle uses the fact that at 
any point on the circle the lines containing the center and 
the tangent line are ­perpendicular. Use this method to find 
an equation of the tangent line to the circle x2 + y2 = 49 at 
the point 11, 4232. 
	 56.	 Use the Greek method described in Problem 55 
to find an equation of the tangent line to the circle 
x2 + y2 - 4x + 6y + 4 = 0 at the point 13, 212 - 32.
	 51.	 Ferris Wheel  A Ferris wheel has a maximum height of  
270 feet and a wheel diameter of 260 feet. Find an 
equation for the wheel if the center of the wheel is 
on the y-axis and y represents the height above the 
ground.
	 52.	 Ferris Wheel  Opening in 2014 in Las Vegas, The High  
Roller observation wheel has a maximum height of 550 feet 
and a diameter of 520 feet, with one full rotation taking  
approximately 30 minutes. Find an equation for the wheel if 
the center of the wheel is on the y-axis.
Source: Las Vegas Review Journal 

74 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
y
x
	 61.	 Which of the following equations might have the graph 
shown? (More than one answer is possible.)
(a)	 1x - 222 + 1y + 322 = 13
(b)	 1x - 222 + 1y - 222 = 8
(c)	 1x - 222 + 1y - 322 = 13
(d)	 1x + 222 + 1y - 222 = 8
(e)	 x2 + y2 - 4x - 9y = 0
(f)	 x2 + y2 + 4x - 2y = 0
(g)	 x2 + y2 - 9x - 4y = 0
(h)	 x2 + y2 - 4x - 4y = 4 
	 57.	 The line x - 2y + 16 = 0 is tangent to a circle at 10, 82. 
The line y = 2x - 1 is tangent to the same circle at 13, 52. 
Find the center of the circle. 
	 58.	 Find an equation of the line containing the centers of the 
two circles 
 x2 + y2 - 4x + 6y + 4 = 0
and
 x2 + y2 + 6x + 4y + 9 = 0
	 59.	 If a circle of radius 2 is made to roll along the x-axis, what is 
an equation for the path of the center of the circle? 
	 60.	 If the circumference of a circle is 6p, what is its radius? 
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
y
x
	 62.	 Which of the following equations might have the graph 
shown? (More than one answer is possible.)
(a)	 1x - 222 + y2 = 3
(b)	 1x + 222 + y2 = 3
(c)	 x2 + 1y - 222 = 3
(d)	 1x + 222 + y2 = 4
(e)	 x2 + y2 + 10x + 16 = 0
(f)	 x2 + y2 + 10x - 2y = 1
(g)	 x2 + y2 + 9x + 10 = 0
(h)	 x2 + y2 - 9x - 10 = 0 
	 63.	 Explain how the center and radius of a circle can be used to graph the circle.
	 64.	 What Went Wrong?  A student stated that the center and radius of the graph whose equation is (x + 3)2 + (y - 2)2 = 16 are 
(3, - 2) and 4, respectively.  Why is this incorrect?
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 add; 25                2.  5 - 1, 56
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Formulas
	
Distance formula (p. 37)	
d = 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122
	
Midpoint formula (p. 40)	
1x, y2 = ax1 + x2
2
, y1 + y2
2
b
	
Slope (p. 53)	
m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
 if x1 ≠x2; undefined if x1 = x2
	
Parallel lines (p. 61)	
Equal slopes 1m1 = m22 and different y-intercepts 1b1 ≠b22
	
Perpendicular lines (p. 62)	
Product of slopes is - 1 1m1 # m2 = - 12
Equations of Lines and Circles
	
Vertical line (p. 57)	
x = a; a is the x-intercept
	
Horizontal line (p. 58)	
y = b; b is the y-intercept
	
Point–slope form of the equation of a line (p. 57)	
y - y1 = m1x - x12; m is the slope of the line, 1x1, y12 is a point on the line
	
Slope–intercept form of the equation of a line (p. 58)	
y = mx + b; m is the slope of the line, b is the y-intercept
	
General form of the equation of a line (p. 60)	
Ax + By = C; A, B not both 0
	
Standard form of the equation of a circle (p. 69)	
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = r 2; r is the radius of the circle, 1h, k2 is the center 
of the circle
	
Equation of the unit circle (p. 69)	
x2 + y2 = 1
	
General form of the equation of a circle (p. 71)	
x2 + y2 + ax + by + c = 0, with restrictions on a, b, and c

Review Exercises  75
Objectives
Section You should be able to …
Examples
Review Exercises
1.1
1	
Use the distance formula (p. 37)
1–3
1(a)–3(a), 29, 30(a), 31
 
2	
Use the midpoint formula (p. 39)
4
1(b)–3(b), 31
1.2
1	
Graph equations by plotting points (p. 43)
1–3
4
 
2	
Find intercepts from a graph (p. 45)
4
5
 
3	
Find intercepts from an equation (p. 46)
5
6–10
 
4	
Test an equation for symmetry with respect to the x-axis,  
the y-axis, and the origin (p. 46)
6–9
6–10
 
5	
Know how to graph key equations (p. 49)
10–12
26, 27
1.3
1	
Calculate and interpret the slope of a line (p. 53)
1, 2
1(c)–3(c), 1(d)–3(d),  
32
 
2	
Graph lines given a point and the slope (p. 56)
3
28
 
3	
Find the equation of a vertical line (p. 56)
4
17
4	
Use the point–slope form of a line; identify horizontal lines (p. 57)
5, 6
16
 
5	
Find the equation of a line given two points (p. 58)
7
18, 19
 
6	
Write the equation of a line in slope–intercept form (p. 58)
8
16, 18–21
 
7	
Identify the slope and y-intercept of a line from its equation (p. 59)
8
22, 23
 
8	
Graph lines written in general form using intercepts (p. 60)
9
24, 25
 
9	
Find equations of parallel lines (p. 61)
10, 11
20
 
10	   Find equations of perpendicular lines (p. 62)
12, 13
21, 30(b)
1.4
1	
Write the standard form of the equation of a circle (p. 68)
1
11, 12, 31
 
2	
Graph a circle (p. 69)
2, 3, 5
13–15
 
3	
Work with the general form of the equation of a circle (p. 70)
4
14, 15
Review Exercises
In Problems 1–3, find the following for each pair of points:
(a)	 The distance between the points
(b)	 The midpoint of the line segment connecting the points
(c)	 The slope of the line containing the points
(d)	 Interpret the slope found in part (c)
	 1.	 10, 02; 14, 22
	 2.	 11, -12; 1-2, 32
	 3.	 14, -42; 14, 82
	 4.	 Graph y = x2 + 4 by plotting points.
	 5.	 List the intercepts of the graph below.
x
y
4
4
2
2
In Problems 6–10, list the intercepts and test for symmetry with respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
	 6.	 3x2 = 2y 
	 7.	 4x2 + y2 = 16
	 8.	 y = x4 + 2x2 + 1
	 9.	 y5 = x2 - 4x
	 10.	 x2 + x + y2 + 2y = 0
In Problems 11 and 12, find the standard form of the equation of the circle whose center and radius are given.
	 11.	 1h, k2 = 1- 3, 42; r = 5
	 12.	 1h, k2 = 1- 1, -22; r = 1
In Problems 13–15, find the center and radius of each circle. Graph each circle. Find the intercepts, if any, of each circle.
	 13.	 x2 + 1y - 122 = 4
	 14.	 x2 + y2 - 2x + 4y - 4 = 0
	 15.	 3x2 + 3y2 - 6x + 12y = 0

76 
CHAPTER 1  Graphs 
In Problems 16–21, find an equation of the line having the given characteristics. Express your answer using either the general form or the 
slope–intercept form of the equation of a line, whichever you prefer.
	 16.	 Slope = - 2;  containing the point 13, - 12
	 18.	 y@intercept = - 2;  containing the point 15, - 32
	 17.	 Horizontal;  containing the point 11, -42
	 19.	 Containing the points 12, - 32 and 14, 12
	 20.	 Parallel to the line 2x - 3y = - 4;  containing the point 1- 5, 32 
	 21.	 Perpendicular to the line x - y = 3; containing the point 1- 3, 52 
In Problems 22 and 23, find the slope and y-intercept of each line. Graph the line, labeling any intercepts.
	 22.	 4x - 5y = - 20
	 23.	 1
2
 x - 1
3
 y = -  1
6
In Problems 24 and 25, find the intercepts and graph each line.
	 24.	 2x - 3y = 12
	 25.	 1
2x + 1
3y = 2
	 26.	 Sketch a graph of y = x3.
	 27.	 Sketch a graph of y = 2x.
	 28.	 Graph the line with slope 2
3 containing the point 11, 22.
	 29.	 Show that the points A = 12, 22, B = 15, 62, and C = 1- 1, - 22 are the vertices of an isosceles triangle.
	30.	 Show that the points A = 11, 22, B = 11, 62, and C = 15, 22 are the vertices of a right triangle in two ways:
(a)	 By using the converse of the Pythagoras Theorem
(b)	 By using the slopes of the lines joining the vertices
	 31.	 The endpoints of the diameter of a circle are 1- 5, 42 and 15, 102. Find the center and radius of the circle. Write the standard 
­equation of the circle.
	 32.	 Show that the points A = 11, 72, B = 12, 32, and C = 13, 12 lie on a line by using slopes.
In Problems 1–3, use P1 = 1- 1, 32 and P2 = 15, - 12.
	 1.	 Find the distance from P1 to P2. 
	 2.	 Find the midpoint of the line segment joining P1 and P2. 
	 3.	 (a)	 Find the slope of the line containing P1 and P2.
(b)	 Interpret this slope.
	 4.	 Graph y = x2 - 9 by plotting points.
	 5.	 Sketch the graph of y2 = x.
	 6.	 List the intercepts and test for symmetry: x2 + y = 9
	 7.	 Write the slope–intercept form of the line with slope - 2 
containing the point 13, - 42. Graph the line.
	 8.	 Write the general form of the circle with center 14, -32 and 
radius 5. 
	 9.	 Find the center and radius of the circle 
	
	 x2 + y2 + 4x - 2y - 4 = 0.	
  
Graph this circle.
	 10.	 For the line 2x + 3y = 6, find a line parallel to it containing 
the point 11, - 12. Also find a line perpendicular to it  
containing the point 10, 32.
Chapter Test
     
 
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.

Chapter Project  77
Chapter Project
The graph below, called a scatter diagram, shows the points  
(291.5, 268), (320, 305), c, (368, 385) in a Cartesian plane. From 
the graph, it appears that the data follow a linear relation.
	 1.	 Imagine drawing a line through the data that appears to fit 
the data well. Do you believe the slope of the line would be 
positive, negative, or close to zero? Why?
	 2.	 Pick two points from the scatter diagram. Treat the zestimate 
as the value of x, and treat the sale price as the corresponding 
value of y. Find the equation of the line through the two 
points you selected.
	 3.	 Interpret the slope of the line.
	 4.	 Use your equation to predict the selling price of a home 
whose zestimate is $335,000.
	 5.	 Do you believe it would be a good idea to use the equation 
you found in part 2 if the zestimate were $950,000? Why or 
why not?
	 6.	 Choose a location in which you would like to live. Go to 
www.zillow.com and randomly select at least ten homes that 
have recently sold.
(a)	Draw a scatter diagram of your data.
(b)	Select two points from the scatter diagram and find the 
equation of the line through the points.
(c)	 Interpret the slope.
(d)	Find a home from the Zillow website that interests 
you under the “Make Me Move” option for which a  
zestimate is available. Use your equation to predict the 
sale price based on the zestimate.
300
320
340
Zestimate ($ thousands)
Sale Price ($ thousands)
360
280
300
320
340
360
380
Zestimate vs. Sale Price
in Oak Park, IL
Internet-based Project
Determining the Selling Price of a Home Determining how 
much to pay for a home is one of the more difficult decisions 
that must be made when purchasing a home. There are many  
factors that play a role in a home’s value. Location, size, number of 
bedrooms, number of bathrooms, lot size, and building materials 
are just a few. Fortunately, the website Zillow.com has developed 
its own formula for predicting the selling price of a home. This  
information is a great tool for predicting the actual sale price. For 
example, the data below show the “zestimate”—the selling price 
of a home as predicted by the folks at Zillow—and the actual  
selling price of the home, for homes in Oak Park, Illinois.
Zestimate  
($ thousands)
Sale Price  
($ thousands)
291.5
268
320
305
371.5
375
303.5
283
351.5
350
314
275
332.5
356
295
300
313
285
368
385

Outline
2.1	
Functions
2.2	
The Graph of a Function
2.3	
Properties of Functions
2.4	
Library of Functions; Piecewise-defined 
Functions
2.5	
Graphing Techniques: Transformations
2.6	
Mathematical Models: Building  
Functions
	
Chapter Review
	
Chapter Test
	
Cumulative Review
	
Chapter Projects
Choosing a Wireless Data Plan
Most consumers choose a cellular provider first and then select an appropriate data 
plan from that provider. The choice as to the type of plan selected depends on your 
use of the device. For example, is online gaming important? Do you want to stream 
audio or video? The mathematics learned in this chapter can help you decide what 
plan is best suited to your particular needs.
—See the Internet-based Chapter Project—
 A Look Back
So far, our discussion has focused on techniques for graphing equations containing 
two variables.
A Look Ahead 
In this chapter, we look at a special type of equation involving two variables 
called a function. This chapter deals with what a function is, how to graph functions, 
properties of functions, and how functions are used in applications. The word 
function apparently was introduced by René Descartes in 1637. For him, a function 
was simply any positive integral power of a variable x. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz 
(1646–1716), who always emphasized the geometric side of mathematics, used 
the word function to denote any quantity associated with a curve, such as the 
coordinates of a point on the curve. Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) employed the 
word to mean any equation or formula involving variables and constants. His 
idea of a function is similar to the one most often seen in courses that precede 
calculus. Later, the use of functions in investigating heat flow equations led to a 
very broad definition that originated with Lejeune Dirichlet (1805–1859), which 
describes a function as a correspondence between two sets. That is the definition 
used in this text.
2
Functions and  
Their Graphs
78

Section 2.1  Functions  79
Determine Whether a Relation Represents a Function
Often there are situations where the value of one variable is somehow linked to the value of 
another variable. For example, an individual’s level of education is linked to annual income. 
Engine size is linked to gas mileage. When the value of one variable is related to the value 
of a second variable, we have a relation. A relation is a correspondence between two sets. 
If x and y are two elements, one from each of these sets, and if a relation exists between 
x and y, then we say that x corresponds to y or that y depends on x, and we write x S y.
There are a number of ways to express relations between two sets. For example, 
the equation y = 3x - 1 shows a relation between x and y. It says that if we take 
some number x, multiply it by 3, and then subtract 1, we obtain the corresponding 
value of y. In this sense, x serves as the input to the relation, and y is the output of 
the relation. This relation, expressed as a graph, is shown in Figure 1.
The set of all inputs for a relation is called the domain of the relation, and the 
set of all outputs is called the range.
In addition to being expressed as equations and graphs, relations can be expressed 
through a technique called mapping. A map illustrates a relation as a set of inputs 
with an arrow drawn from each element in the set of inputs to the corresponding  
element in the set of outputs. Ordered pairs can be used to represent x S y as 1x, y2.
Maps and Ordered Pairs as Relations
Figure 2 shows a relation between states and the number of representatives each 
state has in the House of Representatives. (Source: www.house.gov). The relation 
might be named “number of representatives.”
1
Example 1
2.1	 Functions
•	 Interval Notation (Appendix A, Section A.9,  
pp. 1016–1017)
•	 Solving Inequalities (Appendix A, Section A.9,  
pp. 1019–1022)
•	 Evaluating Algebraic Expressions, Domain of a  
Variable (Appendix A, Section A.1, pp. 950–951)
•	 Rationalizing Denominators (Appendix A,  
Section A.10, p. 1028)
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 90.
	
OBJECTIVES	 1  Determine Whether a Relation Represents a Function  (p. 79)
	
	 	2  Find the Value of a Function  (p. 82)
	
	 	3  Find the Difference Quotient of a Function  (p. 85)
	
	 	4  Find the Domain of a Function Defined by an Equation  (p. 86)
	
	 	5  Form the Sum, Difference, Product, and Quotient of Two Functions  (p. 88)
Figure 1  y = 3x - 1
y
5
25
x
4
2
24
22
(1, 2)
(0, 1)
Figure 2  Number of representatives
Alaska
Arizona
California
Colorado
Florida
North Dakota
State
1
7
9
27
53
Number of
Representatives
In this relation, Alaska corresponds to 1, Arizona corresponds to 9, and so on. Using 
ordered pairs, this relation would be expressed as
5 1Alaska, 12, 1Arizona, 92, 1California, 532, 1Colorado, 72, 1Florida, 272, 1North Dakota, 12 6

80 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
The domain of the relation is {Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida,  
North Dakota}, and the range is {1, 7, 9, 27, 53}. Note that the output “1” is listed only 
once in the range.
One of the most important concepts in algebra is the function. A function is a 
special type of relation. To understand the idea behind a function, let’s revisit the 
relation presented in Example 1. If we were to ask, “How many representatives 
does Alaska have?” you would respond “1.” In fact, each input state corresponds to 
a single output number of representatives.
Let’s consider a second relation, one that involves a correspondence between 
four people and their phone numbers. See Figure 3. Notice that Colleen has two 
telephone numbers. There is no single answer to the question “What is Colleen’s 
phone number?”
Let’s look at one more relation. Figure 4 is a relation that shows a correspondence  
between type of animal and life expectancy. If asked to determine the life  
expectancy of a dog, we would all respond, “11 years.” If asked to determine the life  
expectancy of a rabbit, we would all respond, “7 years.”
Notice that the relations presented in Figures 2 and 4 have something in  
common. What is it? In both of these relations, each input corresponds to exactly 
one output. This leads to the definition of a function.
•
Figure 3  Phone numbers
Figure 4  Animal life expectancy
Figure 5 
Figure 6  Fat content
Source: Each company’s Web site
Dan
Person
Gizmo
Colleen
Phoebe
555 – 2345
Phone Number
549 – 9402
930 – 3956
555 – 8294
839 – 9013
Animal
11
10
7
Life
Expectancy
Dog
Duck
Kangaroo
Rabbit
Let X and Y be two nonempty sets.* A function from X into Y is a relation that 
associates with each element of X exactly one element of Y.
Definition
*The sets X and Y will usually be sets of real numbers, in which case a (real) function results. The two 
sets can also be sets of complex numbers, and then we have defined a complex function. In the broad 
definition (proposed by Lejeune Dirichlet), X and Y can be any two sets.
The set X is called the domain of the function. For each element x in X, the 
corresponding element y in Y is called the value of the function at x, or the image 
of x. The set of all images of the elements in the domain is called the range of the 
function. See Figure 5.
Since there may be some elements in Y that are not the image of some x in X, 
it follows that the range of a function may be a subset of Y, as shown in Figure 5.
Not all relations between two sets are functions. The next example shows how 
to determine whether a relation is a function.
Determining Whether a Relation Is a Function
For each relation in Figures 6, 7, and 8, state the domain and range. Then determine 
whether the relation is a function.
(a)	 See Figure 6. For this relation, the input is the number of calories in a fast-food 
sandwich, and the output is the fat content (in grams).
Example 2
Domain
Y
y
Range
X
x
(Wendy’s 1/4-lb Single) 580
(Burger King Whopper) 650
(Culvers, Deluxe Single) 541
(McDonald's Big Mac) 550
(Five Guys Hamburger) 700
Calories
31
37
29
43
Fat
33

Section 2.1  Functions  81
(b)	 See Figure 7. For this relation, the inputs are gasoline stations in Harris County, 
Texas, and the outputs are the price per gallon of unleaded regular in March 2014.
(c)	 See Figure 8. For this relation, the inputs are the weight (in carats) of pear-cut 
diamonds and the outputs are the price (in dollars).
Figure 7  Unleaded price per gallon
Figure 8  Diamond price
Source: Used with permission of Diamonds.com
Valero
Shell
Texaco
Citgo
Gas Station
$3.19
$3.29
$3.35
Price per Gallon
0.70
Carats
0.75
0.78
0.71
$1529
Price
$1575
$1765
$1798
$1952
(a)	 The domain of the relation is {541, 550, 580, 650, 700}, and the range of the  
relation is {29, 31, 33, 37, 43}. The relation in Figure 6 is a function because each 
element in the domain corresponds to exactly one element in the range.
(b)	 The domain of the relation is {Citgo, Shell, Texaco, Valero}. The range of the 
relation is {$3.19, $3.29, $3.35}. The relation in Figure 7 is a function because 
each element in the domain corresponds to exactly one element in the range. 
Notice that it is okay for more than one element in the domain to correspond 
to the same element in the range (Shell and Citgo both sell gas for $3.29 a 
gallon).
(c)	 The domain of the relation is {0.70, 0.71, 0.75, 0.78} and the range is {$1529, $1575, 
$1765, $1798, $1952}. The relation in Figure 8 is not a function because not every 
element in the domain corresponds to exactly one element in the range. If a 
0.71-carat diamond is chosen from the domain, a single price cannot be assigned 
to it.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
The idea behind a function is its predictability. If the input is known, we can 
use the function to determine the output. With “nonfunctions,” we don’t have this 
predictability. Look back at Figure 6. If asked, “How many grams of fat are in a 
580-calorie sandwich?” we could use the correspondence to answer, “31.” Now consider 
Figure 8. If asked, “What is the price of a 0.71-carat diamond?” we could not give 
a single response because two outputs result from the single input “0.71.” For this 
reason, the relation in Figure 8 is not a function.
We may also think of a function as a set of ordered pairs 1x, y2 in which no 
ordered pairs have the same first element and different second elements. The set of 
all first elements x is the domain of the function, and the set of all second elements y 
is its range. Each element x in the domain corresponds to exactly one element y in 
the range.
Determining Whether a Relation Is a Function
For each relation, state the domain and range. Then determine whether the relation 
is a function.
(a)	 5 11, 42, 12, 52, 13, 62, 14, 72 6
(b)	 5 11, 42, 12, 42, 13, 52, 16, 102 6
(c)	 5 1 -3, 92, 1 -2, 42, 10, 02, 11, 12, 1 -3, 82 6
Solution
•
Example 3
In Words
For a function, no input has more 
than one output. The domain of a 
function is the set of all inputs; 
the range is the set of all outputs.

82 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
(a)	 The domain of this relation is {1, 2, 3, 4}, and its range is {4, 5, 6, 7}. This  
relation is a function because there are no ordered pairs with the same first  
element and different second elements.
(b)	 The domain of this relation is {1, 2, 3, 6}, and its range is {4, 5, 10}. This  
relation is a function because there are no ordered pairs with the same first  
element and different second elements.
(c)	 The domain of this relation is {- 3, - 2, 0, 1}, and its range is {0, 1, 4, 8, 9}. This 
relation is not a function because there are two ordered pairs, 1-3, 92 and 
1 -3, 82, that have the same first element and different second elements.
In Example 3(b), notice that 1 and 2 in the domain both have the same image in the 
range. This does not violate the definition of a function; two different first elements can 
have the same second element. A violation of the definition occurs when two ordered 
pairs have the same first element and different second elements, as in Example 3(c).
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Up to now we have shown how to identify when a relation is a function for  
relations defined by mappings (Example 2) and ordered pairs (Example 3). But 
relations can also be expressed as equations. The circumstances under which  
equations are functions are discussed next.
To determine whether an equation, where y depends on x, is a function, it is often 
easiest to solve the equation for y. If any value of x in the domain corresponds to more 
than one y, the equation does not define a function; otherwise, it does define a function.
Determining Whether an Equation Is a Function
Determine whether the equation y = 2x - 5 defines y as a function of x.
The equation tells us to take an input x, multiply it by 2, and then subtract 5. For any 
input x, these operations yield only one output y, so the equation is a function. For 
example, if x = 1, then y = 2112 - 5 = -3. If x = 3, then y = 2132 - 5 = 1. 
The graph of the equation y = 2x - 5 is a line with slope 2 and y-intercept -5. The 
function is called a linear function.
Determining Whether an Equation Is a Function
Determine whether the equation x2 + y2 = 1 defines y as a function of x.
To determine whether the equation x2 + y2 = 1, which defines the unit circle, is a 
function, solve the equation for y.
 x2 + y2 = 1
 y2 = 1 - x2
 y = { 21 - x2
For values of x for which -1 6 x 6 1, two values of y result. For example, if x = 0, 
then y = {1, so two different outputs result from the same input. This means that 
the equation x2 + y2 = 1 does not define a function.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 7
Find the Value of a Function
Functions are often denoted by letters such as f, F, g, G, and others. If f is a function,  
then for each number x in its domain, the corresponding image in the range is  
designated by the symbol f1x2, read as “ f of x” or as “ f at x.” We refer to f1x2 as the value 
of f at the number x ; f1x2 is the number that results when x is given and the function f  
is applied; f1x2 is the output corresponding to x or f1x2 is the image of x; f1x2
Solution
•
Example 4
Solution
•
Example 5
Solution
•
2

Section 2.1  Functions  83
does not mean “ f times x.” For example, the function given in Example 4 may be 
written as y = f1x2 = 2x - 5. Then f112 = -3 and f132 = 1.
Figure 9 illustrates some other functions. Notice that in every function, for each 
x in the domain, there is one value in the range.
Figure 9 
Figure 10  Input/output machine
Domain
Range
1
1
0
2
1  f(1)  f(1)
0  f(0)
2  f(   2)
x
f(x)  x 2
(a)  f(x)  x 2
Domain
Range
2
1
4
       F(2)
1  F(1)
    F(4)
x
F(x)  
(b)  F(x)  1–x
1–x
1–2
1–4

Domain
Range
0
1
2
4
0  g(0)
1  g(1)
  2  g(2)
2  g(4)
x
g(x)    x
(c)  g(x)    x
Domain
Range
0
2
3
3  G(0)  G(2)  G(3)
x
G(x)  3
(d)  G(x)  3
Sometimes it is helpful to think of a function f as a machine that receives as 
input a number from the domain, manipulates it, and outputs a value. See Figure 10.
The restrictions on this input/output machine are as follows:
	 1.	 It accepts only numbers from the domain of the function.
	 2.	 For each input, there is exactly one output (which may be repeated for different  
inputs).
For a function y = f1x2, the variable x is called the independent variable,  
because it can be assigned any of the permissible numbers from the domain. The 
variable y is called the dependent variable, because its value depends on x.
Any symbols can be used to represent the independent and dependent  
variables. For example, if f is the cube function, then f can be given by f1x2 = x3 
or f1t2 = t3 or f1z2 = z3. All three functions are the same. Each says to cube 
the independent variable to get the output. In practice, the symbols used for the  
independent and dependent variables are based on common usage, such as using C 
for cost in business.
The independent variable is also called the argument of the function. Thinking 
of the independent variable as an argument can sometimes make it easier to find 
the value of a function. For example, if f is the function defined by f1x2 = x3, then 
f tells us to cube the argument. Thus f122 means to cube 2, f1a2 means to cube the 
number a, and f1x + h2 means to cube the quantity x + h.
Finding Values of a Function
For the function f defined by f1x2 = 2x2 - 3x, evaluate
(a)	 f132	
(b)  f1x2 + f132	
(c)  3f1x2	
(d)  f1-x2
(e)	 -f1x2	
(f)  f13x2	
(g)  f1x + 32
Example 6
Input x
Output
y  f(x)
f
x

84 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
(a)	 Substitute 3 for x in the equation for f, f(x) = 2x2 - 3x, to get
f132 = 21322 - 3132 = 18 - 9 = 9
	
The image of 3 is 9.
(b)	 f1x2 + f132 = 12x2 - 3x2 + 192 = 2x2 - 3x + 9
(c)	 Multiply the equation for f by 3.
3f1x2 = 312x2 - 3x2 = 6x2 - 9x
(d)	 Substitute -x for x in the equation for f and simplify.
f1 -x2 = 21 -x22 - 31 -x2 = 2x2 + 3x 
Notice the use of parentheses here.
(e)	 -f1x2 = - 12x2 - 3x2 = -2x2 + 3x
(f)	 Substitute 3x for x in the equation for f and simplify.
f13x2 = 213x22 - 313x2 = 219x22 - 9x = 18x2 - 9x
(g)	 Substitute x + 3 for x in the equation for f and simplify.
 f1x + 32 = 21x + 322 - 31x + 32
 = 21x2 + 6x + 92 - 3x - 9
 = 2x2 + 12x + 18 - 3x - 9
 = 2x2 + 9x + 9
Notice in this example that f1x + 32 ≠f1x2 + f132, f1-x2 ≠-f1x2, and 
3f1x2 ≠f13x2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Most calculators have special keys that allow you to find the value of certain 
commonly used functions. For example, you should be able to find the square 
function f1x2 = x2, the square root function f1x2 = 1x, the reciprocal function
f1x2 = 1
x = x-1, and many others that will be discussed later in this text (such as 
ln x and log x). Verify the results of Example 7, which follows, on your calculator.
Finding Values of a Function on a Calculator
(a)	  f1x2 = x2   
 f11.2342 = 1.2342 = 1.522756
(b)	  F1x2 = 1
x   
 F11.2342 =
1
1.234 ≈0.8103727715
(c)	  g1x2 = 1x    g11.2342 = 11.234 ≈1.110855526
Comment  Graphing calculators can be used to evaluate any function. Figure 11 shows the result 
obtained in Example 6(a) on a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator with the function to be evaluated, 
f (x) = 2x2 - 3x, in Y1.	
Solution
•
Example 7
•
Figure 11  Evaluating f (x) = 2x2 - 3x for x = 3
■

Section 2.1  Functions  85
Implicit Form of a Function
In general, when a function f is defined by an equation in x and y, we say that the 
function f is given implicitly. If it is possible to solve the equation for y in terms of x, 
then we write y = f1x2 and say that the function is given explicitly. For example,
Implicit Form	
Explicit Form
3x + y = 5	
y = f1x2 = -3x + 5
x2 - y = 6	
y = f1x2 = x2 - 6
xy = 4	
y = f1x2 = 4
x
Comment  The explicit form of a  
function is the form required by a  
graphing calculator.	
■
Summary
Important Facts about Functions
(a)  For each x in the domain of a function f, there is exactly one image f1x2 in the range; however, an element in 
the range can result from more than one x in the domain.
(b)  f is the symbol that we use to denote the function. It is symbolic of the equation (rule) that we use to get from 
an x in the domain to f1x2 in the range.
(c)  If y = f1x2, then x is called the independent variable or argument of f, and y is called the dependent variable 
or the value of f at x.
Find the Difference Quotient of a Function
An important concept in calculus involves looking at a certain quotient. For a given 
function y = f1x2, the inputs x and x + h, h ≠0, result in the images f1x2 and 
f1x + h2. The quotient of their differences
f1x + h2 - f1x2
1x + h2 - x
= f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
with h ≠0, is called the difference quotient of f at x.
3
The difference quotient of a function f at x is given by
	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
  h ≠0	
(1)
Definition
The difference quotient is used in calculus to define the derivative, which leads to 
applications such as the velocity of an object and optimization of resources.
When finding a difference quotient, it is necessary to simplify the expression 
in order to cancel the h in the denominator, as illustrated in the following example.
Finding the Difference Quotient of a Function
Find the difference quotient of each function.
(a)	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 3x
(b)	 f1x2 = 4
x
(c)	 f1x2 = 1x
Example 8

86 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
(a)	 f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
= 321x + h22 - 31x + h2 4 - 32x2 - 3x4
h
	
 c
	
f (x + h) = 2(x + h)2 - 3(x + h)
=
21x2 + 2xh + h22 - 3x - 3h - 2x2 + 3x
h
 
Simplify.
= 2x2 + 4xh + 2h2 - 3h - 2x2
h
 
Distribute and combine like terms.
= 4xh + 2h2 - 3h
h
 
Combine like terms.
= h14x + 2h - 32
h
   Factor out h.
= 4x + 2h - 3      Divide out the factor h.
(b)	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
=
4
x + h - 4
x
h
	
f (x + h) =
4
x + h
=
4x - 41x + h2
x1x + h2
h
	
Subtract.
= 4x - 4x - 4h
x1x + h2h 	
Divide and distribute.
=
-4h
x1x + h2h	
Simplify.
= -
4
x1x + h2 	
Divide out the factor h.
(c)	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
= 2x + h - 2x
h
	
f (x + h) = 1x + h
= 2x + h - 2x
h
# 2x + h + 2x
2x + h + 2x
 
Rationalize the numerator.
= 1 2x + h22 - 1 2x22
h1 2x + h + 2x2
 
(A - B )(A + B ) = A2 - B2
=
h
h1 2x + h + 2x2
 1 2x + h22 - 1 2x22 = x + h - x = h
=
1
2x + h + 2x
 
Divide out the factor h.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 9
Find the Domain of a Function Defined by an Equation
Often the domain of a function f is not specified; instead, only the equation defining 
the function is given. In such cases, we agree that the domain of f is the largest set of 
real numbers for which the value f1x2 is a real number. The domain of a function f 
is the same as the domain of the variable x in the expression f1x2.
Finding the Domain of a Function
Find the domain of each of the following functions.
(a)	 f1x2 = x2 + 5x	
(b)  g1x2 =
3x
x2 - 4
(c)  h1t2 = 24 - 3t	
(d)  F(x) = 23x + 12
x - 5
Solution
•
4
Example 9

Section 2.1  Functions  87
(a)	 The function says to square a number and then add five times the number. Since 
these operations can be performed on any real number, the domain of f is the 
set of all real numbers.
(b)	 The function g says to divide 3x by x2 - 4. Since division by 0 is not defined, the 
denominator x2 - 4 can never be 0, so x can never equal -2 or 2. The domain 
of the function g is 5x x ≠-2, x ≠26.
(c)	 The function h says to take the square root of 4 - 3t. But only nonnegative 
numbers have real square roots, so the expression under the square root (the 
radicand) must be nonnegative (greater than or equal to zero). This requires 
that
 4 - 3t Ú 0
 -3t Ú -4
 t … 4
3
	
The domain of h is et ` t … 4
3 f, or the interval a - q, 4
3 d .
(d)	 The function F says to take the square root of 3x + 12 and divide this result 
by x - 5. This requires that 3x + 12 Ú 0, so x Ú -4, and also that x - 5 ≠0, 
so x ≠5. Combining these two restrictions, the domain of F is 
5x x Ú -4,  x ≠56.
The following steps may prove helpful for finding the domain of a function that 
is defined by an equation and whose domain is a subset of the real numbers.
Solution
•
Finding the Domain of a Function Defined by an Equation
	 1.	 Start with the domain as the set of real numbers.
	 2.	 If the equation has a denominator, exclude any numbers that give a zero 
denominator.
	 3.	 If the equation has a radical of even index, exclude any numbers that cause 
the expression inside the radical (the radicand) to be negative.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
If x is in the domain of a function f, we shall say that f  is defined at x, or f(x) 
exists. If x is not in the domain of f, we say that f  is not defined at x, or f(x) does not
exist. For example, if f1x2 =
x
x2 - 1, then f102 exists, but f112 and f1 -12 do not 
exist. (Do you see why?)
We have not said much about finding the range of a function. We will say 
more about finding the range when we look at the graph of a function in the next 
section. When a function is defined by an equation, it can be difficult to find the 
range. Therefore, we shall usually be content to find just the domain of a function 
when the function is defined by an equation. We shall express the domain of a 
function using inequalities, interval notation, set notation, or words, whichever is 
most convenient.
When we use functions in applications, the domain may be restricted by 
physical or geometric considerations. For example, the domain of the function f 
defined by f1x2 = x2 is the set of all real numbers. However, if f is used to obtain 
the area of a square when the length x of a side is known, then we must restrict 
the domain of f to the positive real numbers, since the length of a side can never 
be 0 or negative.
In Words
The domain of g found in  
Example 9(b) is 
5xx ≠- 2, x ≠26.  
This notation is read, “The domain 
of the function g is the set of all 
real numbers x such that x does 
not equal - 2 and x does not 
equal 2.”

88 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Finding the Domain in an  Application
Express the area of a circle as a function of its radius. Find the domain.
See Figure 12. The formula for the area A of a circle of radius r is A = pr 2. Using 
r to represent the independent variable and A to represent the dependent variable, 
the function expressing this relationship is
A1r2 = pr 2
In this setting, the domain is 5r r 7 06. (Do you see why?)
Observe, in the solution to Example 10, that the symbol A is used in two ways: 
It is used to name the function, and it is used to symbolize the dependent variable. 
This double use is common in applications and should not cause any difficulty.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 7
Form the Sum, Difference, Product, and Quotient   
of Two Functions
Next we introduce some operations on functions. Functions, like numbers, can 
be added, subtracted, multiplied, and divided. For example, if f1x2 = x2 + 9 and 
g1x2 = 3x + 5, then
f1x2 + g1x2 = 1x2 + 92 + 13x + 52 = x2 + 3x + 14
The new function y = x2 + 3x + 14 is called the sum function f + g. Similarly,
f1x2 # g1x2 = 1x2 + 92 13x + 52 = 3x3 + 5x2 + 27x + 45
The new function y = 3x3 + 5x2 + 27x + 45 is called the product function f # g.
The general definitions are given next.
Example 10
Solution
•
5
Figure 12  Circle of radius r
A
r
The domain of f + g consists of the numbers x that are in the domains of both 
f and g. That is, domain of f + g =  domain of f ∩domain of g.
The domain of f - g consists of the numbers x that are in the domains of both 
f and g. That is, domain of f - g =  domain of f ∩domain of g.
The domain of f # g consists of the numbers x that are in the domains of both f 
and g. That is, domain of f # g =  domain of f ∩domain of g.
The product f ~ g is the function defined by
1f # g2 1x2 = f1x2 # g1x2
Definition
The difference f −g is the function defined by
1f - g2 1x2 = f1x2 - g1x2
Definition
If f and g are functions:
The sum f + g is the function defined by
1f + g2 1x2 = f1x2 + g1x2
Definition
In Words
The symbol x stands for  
intersection. It means you should 
find the elements that are common 
to two sets.

Section 2.1  Functions  89
The domain of f
g consists of the numbers x for which g1x2 ≠0 and that are in 
the domains of both f and g. That is,
domain of f
g = {x0 g(x) ≠0} ∩domain of f ∩domain of g
Operations on Functions
Let f and g be two functions defined as
f1x2 =
1
x + 2 and g1x2 =
x
x - 1
Find the following functions, and determine the domain in each case.
(a)	 1f + g2 1x2    (b)  1f - g2 1x2    (c)  1f # g2 1x2    (d)  a f
gb 1x2
The domain of f is 5x x ≠-26 and the domain of g is 5x x ≠16.
(a)	  1f + g2 1x2 = f1x2 + g1x2 =
1
x + 2 +
x
x - 1
 =
x - 1
1x + 22 1x - 12 +
x1x + 22
1x + 22 1x - 12 =
x2 + 3x - 1
1x + 22 1x - 12
	
The domain of f + g consists of those numbers x that are in the domains of both 
f and g. Therefore, the domain of f + g is 5x x ≠-2, x ≠16.
(b)	  1f - g2 1x2 = f1x2 - g1x2 =
1
x + 2 -
x
x - 1
 =
x - 1
1x + 22 1x - 12 -
x1x + 22
1x + 22 1x - 12 =
- 1x2 + x + 12
1x + 22 1x - 12
	
The domain of f - g consists of those numbers x that are in the domains of both 
f and g. Therefore, the domain of f - g is 5x x ≠-2, x ≠16.
(c)	 1f # g2 1x2 = f1x2 # g1x2 =
1
x + 2 #
x
x - 1 =
x
1x + 22 1x - 12
	
The domain of f # g consists of those numbers x that are in the domains of both 
f and g. Therefore, the domain of f # g is 5x x ≠-2, x ≠16.
(d)	 a f
gb 1x2 =
f1x2
g1x2 =
1
x + 2
x
x - 1
=
1
x + 2 # x - 1
x
=
x - 1
x1x + 22
	
The domain of f
g consists of the numbers x for which g1x2 ≠0 and that are in 
the domains of both f and g. Since g1x2 = 0 when x = 0, we exclude 0 as well  
as -2 and 1 from the domain. The domain of f
g is 5x x ≠-2, x ≠0, x ≠16.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 7
Example 11
Solution
•
The quotient f
g is the function defined by
a f
gb 1x2 = f1x2
g1x2  g1x2 ≠0
Definition

90 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
In calculus, it is sometimes helpful to view a complicated function as the sum, 
difference, product, or quotient of simpler functions. For example,
F1x2 = x2 + 1x is the sum of f1x2 = x2 and g1x2 = 1x.
H1x2 = x2 - 1
x2 + 1  is the quotient of f1x2 = x2 - 1 and g1x2 = x2 + 1.
Summary
Function	
A relation between two sets of real numbers so that each number x in the first set, the 
domain, has corresponding to it exactly one number y in the second set, the range.
	
A set of ordered pairs 1x, y2 or 1x, f1x2 2 in which no first element is paired with two  
different second elements.
	
The range is the set of y-values of the function that are the images of the x-values in the 
domain.
	
A function f may be defined implicitly by an equation involving x and y or explicitly by 
writing y = f1x2.
Unspecified domain	
If a function f is defined by an equation and no domain is specified, then the domain will be 
taken to be the largest set of real numbers for which the equation defines a real number.
Function notation	
y = f1x2
	
f is a symbol for the function.
	
x is the independent variable, or argument.
	
y is the dependent variable.
	
f1x2 is the value of the function at x, or the image of x.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The inequality - 1 6 x 6 3 can be written in interval  
notation as  
 . (pp. 1016–1017)
	 2.	 If x = - 2, the value of the expression 3x2 - 5x + 1
x  
is  
. (pp. 950–951)
	 3.	 The domain of the variable in the expression x - 3
x + 4 is 
 . (pp. 950–951)
	 4.	 Solve the inequality: 3 - 2x 7 5. Graph the solution  
set. (pp. 1019–1022)
	 5.	 To rationalize the denominator of 
3
25 - 2
, multiply the
	
	 numerator and denominator by 
  (p. 1028)
	 6.	 A quotient is considered rationalized if its denominator  
contains no  
 . (p. 1028)
2.1  Assess Your Understanding
	 7.	 If f is a function defined by the equation y = f1x2, then x 
is called the 
 variable, and y is the 
 
variable.
	 8.	 If the domain of f is all real numbers in the interval 30, 74, 
and the domain of g is all real numbers in the interval 
3 - 2, 54, then the domain of f + g is all real numbers in the 
interval  
.
	 9.	 The domain of f
g consists of numbers x for which g1x2 
0 
that are in the domains of both    and   .
	 10.	 If f1x2 = x + 1 and g1x2 = x3,  
then 
=  x3 - 1x + 12.
	 11.	 True or False  Every relation is a function. 
	 12.	 True or False    The domain of 1f # g2 1x2 consists of the  
numbers x that are in the domains of both f and g. 
	 13.	 True or False  If no domain is specified for a function f, then 
the domain of f is taken to be the set of real numbers. 
	 14.	 True or False  The domain of the function f1x2 = x2 - 4
x
  
is 5xx ≠{26.  
	 15.	 The set of all images of the elements in the domain of a  
function is called the    . 
(a)	 range  (b)  domain  (c)  solution set  (d)  function
	 16.	 The independent variable is sometimes referred to as the 
    of the function. 
(a)	 range  (b)  value  (c)  argument  (d)  definition
	 17.	 The expression 
f(x + h) - f(x)
h
 is called the     of f. 
(a)	 radicand          (b)  image
(c)	 correspondence    (d)  difference quotient
	 18.	 When written as y = f(x), a function is said to be  
defined    . 
(a)	 explicitly           (b)  consistently
(c)	 implicitly           (d)  rationally
Concepts and Vocabulary

Section 2.1  Functions  91
In Problems 19–30, state the domain and range for each relation. Then determine whether each relation represents a function.
	 20.	
Skill Building
Elvis
Person
Colleen
Kaleigh
Marissa
Jan. 8
Birthday
Mar. 15
Sept. 17
	 19.	
Bob
Father
John
Chuck
Beth
Daughter
Diane
Linda
Marcia
	 21.	
22.	
20 Hours
Hours Worked
30 Hours
40 Hours
$200
Salary
$300
$350
$425
Less than 9th grade
9th-12th grade
High School Graduate
Some College
College Graduate
Level of Education
$18,120
$23,251
$36,055
$45,810
$67,165
Average Income
	 23.	  5 12, 62, 1- 3, 62, 14, 92, 12, 102 6 	 24.	 5 1- 2, 52, 1- 1, 32, 13, 72, 14, 122 6
	 25.	 5 10, -22, 11, 32, 12, 32, 13, 72 6
	 26.	 5 11, 32, 12, 32, 13, 32, 14, 32 6
	 27.	 5 1- 4, 42, 1- 3, 32, 1- 2, 22, 1- 1, 12, 1- 4, 02 6 	 28.	 5 1-2, 42, 1-2, 62, 10, 32, 13, 72 6
	 29.	 5 1- 2, 162, 1- 1, 42, 10, 32, 11, 42 6
	 30.	 5 1- 2, 42, 1- 1, 12, 10, 02, 11, 12 6
	 31.	 y = x3 
	 32.	 y = 2x2 - 3x + 4 
	 33.	 y = 0 x0  
	 34.	 y = 1
x 
	 35.	 y = { 21 - 2x 
	 36.	 y2 = 4 - x2 
	 37.	  x = y2 
	 38.	 x + y2 = 1 
	 39.	 y = 3x - 1
x + 2  
	 40.	 y = 2
3 x 
	 41.	 x2 - 4y2 = 1 
	 42.	 2x2 + 3y2 = 1 
In Problems 31–42, determine whether the equation defines y as a function of x.
	 43.	  f1x2 = 3x2 + 2x - 4
	 44.	 f1x2 = - 2x2 + x - 1
	 45.	 f1x2 = x2 - 1
x + 4
	 46.	 f1x2 =
x
x2 + 1
	 47.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + x
	 48.	 f1x2 = 0 x0 + 4
	 49.	 f1x2 = 1 -
1
1x + 222
	 50.	 f1x2 = 2x + 1
3x - 5
In Problems 43–50, find the following for each function:
(a)	f102  (b)  f112  (c)  f1- 12  (d)  f1- x2  (e)  - f1x2  (f)  f1x + 12  (g)  f12x2  (h)  f1x + h2
	 67.	  f1x2 = 3x + 4; g1x2 = 2x - 3
	 68.	 f1x2 = 2x + 1; g1x2 = 3x - 2
	 69.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 3; g1x2 = 4x3 + 1
	 70.	 f1x2 = x - 1; g1x2 = 2x2
In Problems 67–76, for the given functions f and g, find the following. For parts (a)–(d), also find the domain.
(a)	1f + g2 1x2    (b)  1f - g2 1x2    (c)  1f # g2 1x2    (d)  a
f
gb 1x2
(e)	 1f + g2 132    (f)  1f - g2 142    (g)  1f # g2 122    (h)  a
f
gb 112
	 51.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2
	 52.	 f1x2 = - 5x + 4
	 53.	 f1x2 =
x2
x2 + 1
	 54.	 f1x2 =
x
x2 + 1
	 55.	  g1x2 =
x
x2 - 16
	 56.	 h1x2 =
2x
x2 - 4
	 57.	 G1x2 =
x + 4
x3 - 4x 
	 58.	 F1x2 = x - 2
x3 + x
	 59.	 G1x2 = 21 - x 
	 60.	 h1x2 = 23x - 12   
	 61.	 f1x2 =
4
2x - 9
 
	 62.	 p1x2 = A
2
x - 1 
	 63.	 f1x2 =
- x
2- x - 2
 
	 64.	 f1x2 =
x
2x - 4
 
	 65.	 h(z) = 2z + 3
z - 2
	 66.	 P(t) = 2t - 4
3t - 21
In Problems 51–66, find the domain of each function.

92 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
	 71.	 f1x2 = 0 x0 ; g1x2 = x
	 72.	 f1x2 = 1x; g1x2 = 3x - 5
	 73.	 f1x2 = 2x - 1; g1x2 = 24 - x
	 74.	 f1x2 = 1 + 1
x; g1x2 = 1
x
	 75.	 f1x2 = 2x + 1; g1x2 = 2
x
	 76.	 f1x2 = 2x + 3
3x - 2; g1x2 =
4x
3x - 2
	 77.	 Given f1x2 = 3x + 1 and 1f + g2 1x2 = 6 - 1
2
 x, find the 
function g. 
	 78.	 Given f1x2 = 1
x and a
f
gb 1x2 = x + 1
x2 - x, find the function g.
In Problems 79–90, find the difference quotient of f; that is, find 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
, h ≠0, for each function. Be sure to simplify.
	 91.	 Given f(x) = x2 - 3x + 3, find the value(s) for x such that 
f(x) = 31. 
	 92.	 Given f(x) = 5
6x - 3
4, find the value(s) for x such that 
f(x) = - 7
16.                            
	 93.	 If f(x) = 2x3 + Ax2 + 7x - 5 and f(2) = 5, what is the 
value of A? 
	 94.	 If f1x2 = 3x2 - Bx + 4 and f1- 12 = 12, what is the value 
of B ? 
	 95.	 If f(b) = 4b + 4
b - A and f(- 3) = 2, what is the value of A? 
	 96.	 If f1x2 = 2x - B
3x + 4  and f122 = 1
2, what is the value of B ? 
	 97.	 Geometry  Express the perimeter P of a rectangle as a function 
of the length L if the width of the rectangle is twice its length.
	 98.	 Geometry  Express the area A of an isosceles right triangle 
as a function of the length x of one of the two equal sides.
	 99.	 Constructing Functions  Express the gross salary G of a per-
son who earns $17 per hour as a function of the number x of 
hours worked. 
	100.	 Constructing Functions  Tiffany, a commissioned salesperson, 
earns $100 base pay plus $10 per item sold. Express her 
gross salary G as a function of the number x of items sold.
	101.	 Population as a Function of Age  The function
P1y2 = 0.028y2 - 2.678y + 263.590
	
	 represents the population P (in millions) of people in 2005 
that were y years of age or older.
(a)	 Identify the dependent and independent variable.
(b)	 Evaluate P(40).
(c)	 Evaluate P(0).
	102.	 Number of Rooms  The function
N1r2 = - 1.35r 2 + 15.45r - 20.71
	
	 represents the number N of housing units (in millions) in 
2012 that had r rooms, where r is an integer and 2 … r … 9.
(a)	 Identify the dependent and independent variables.
(b)	 Evaluate N(3). Provide a verbal explanation of the 
meaning of N(3).
	103.	 Effect of Gravity on Earth  If a rock falls from a height of 
31 meters on Earth, the height H (in meters) after x seconds 
31 is approximately 
H(x) = 31 - 4.9x2.
(a)	 What is the height of the rock when x = 1.3 seconds?
(b)	 When is the height of the rock 14 meters?
(c)	 When does the rock strike the ground? 
	104.	 Effect of Gravity on Jupiter  If a rock falls from a height of 
20 meters on the planet Jupiter, its height H (in meters) after 
x seconds is approximately
H1x2 = 20 - 13x2
(a)	 What is the height of the rock when x = 1 second? 
x = 1.1 seconds? x = 1.2 seconds?
(b)	 When is the height of the rock 15 meters? When is it  
10 meters? When is it 5 meters?
(c)	 When does the rock strike the ground? 
Applications and Extensions
	 79.	  f1x2 = 4x + 3 
	 80.	 f1x2 = - 3x + 1 
	 81.	 f(x) = 3x2 + 2
	 82.	 f(x) = x2 - 4
	 83.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - 2x + 6
	 84.	 f1x2 = x2 - x + 4
	 85.	 f1x2 =
1
x + 3
	 86.	 f(x) = 1
x2
	 87.	 f(x) =
5x
x - 4
	 88.	 f(x) =
2x
x + 3
	 89.	 f(x) = 2x + 1
	 90.	 f(x) = 2x - 2
	
	 [Hint: Rationalize the
	
	 numerator.]
	105.	 Cost of Trans-Atlantic Travel  An airplane crosses the At-
lantic Ocean (3000 miles) with an airspeed of 550 miles per 
hour. The cost C (in dollars) per passenger is given by
C1x2 = 150 + x
15 + 36,000
x

Section 2.1  Functions  93
	
	 where x is the ground speed 1airspeed { wind2.
(a)	 What is the cost per passenger for quiescent (no wind) 
conditions? 
(b)	 What is the cost per passenger with a head wind of  
50 miles per hour? 
(c)	 What is the cost per passenger with a tail wind of  
100 miles per hour? 
(d)	 What is the cost per passenger with a head wind of  
100 miles per hour? 
	106.	 Cross-sectional Area    The cross-sectional area of a beam 
cut from a log with radius 1 foot is given by the function 
A1x2 = 4x11 - x2, where x represents the length, in feet, 
of half the base of the beam. See the figure. Determine the 
cross-sectional area of the beam if the length of half the base 
of the beam is as follows:
(a)	 One-third of a foot 
(b)	 One-half of a foot 
(c)	 Two-thirds of a foot 
	110.	 Income Tax  Suppose that I1x2 represents the income of an 
individual in year x before taxes and T1x2 represents the 
individual’s tax bill in year x. Determine a function N that 
represents the individual’s net income (income after taxes) 
in year x. 
	111.	 Profit Function  Suppose that the revenue R, in dollars, from 
selling x cell phones, in hundreds, is R1x2 = - 1.7x2 + 320x. 
The cost C, in dollars, from selling x cell phones, in hundreds, 
is C1x2 = 0.06x3 - 3x2 + 85x + 400.
(a)	 Find the profit function, P1x2 = R1x2 - C1x2.
(b)	 Find the profit if x = 12 hundred cell phones are sold.
(c)	 Interpret P(12).
	112.	 Profit Function    Suppose that the revenue R, in dollars, 
from selling x clocks is R1x2 = 30x. The cost C, in dollars, of  
selling x clocks is C1x2 = 0.1x2 + 7x + 400.
(a)	 Find the profit function, P1x2 = R1x2 - C1x2.
(b)	 Find the profit if x = 30 clocks are sold. 
(c)	 Interpret P(30).
	113.	 Stopping Distance  When the driver of a vehicle observes an 
impediment, the total stopping distance involves both the  
reaction distance (the distance the vehicle travels while 
the driver moves his or her foot to the brake pedal) and  
the braking distance (the distance the vehicle travels once the  
brakes are applied). For a car traveling at a speed of  
v miles per hour, the reaction distance R, in feet, can be  
estimated by R(v) = 2.2v. Suppose that the braking distance 
B, in feet, for a car is given by B(v) = 0.03v2 + 0.3v - 13.
(a)	 Find the stopping distance function,
	
	 	
D(v) =  R(v) +  B(v).
(b)	 Find the stopping distance if the car is traveling at a 
speed of 50 mph. 
(c)	 Interpret D(50).
	114.	 Some functions f have the property that f1a + b2 =
f1a2 + f1b2 for all real numbers a and b. Which of the  
following functions have this property? 
(a)	 h1x2 = 2x      (b)  g1x2 = x2
(c)  F1x2 = 5x - 2  (d)  G1x2 = 1
x
A(x)  4x1  x 2
x
1
	107.	 Economics    The participation rate is the number of  
people in the labor force divided by the civilian population  
(excludes military). Let L1x2 represent the size of the labor 
force in year x, and P1x2 represent the civilian population in 
year x. Determine a function that represents the participation 
rate R as a function of x.
	108.	 Crimes  Suppose that V1x2 represents the number of violent  
crimes committed in year x and P1x2 represents the number of 
property crimes committed in year x. Determine a function T 
that represents the combined total of violent crimes and 
property crimes in year x. 
	109.	 Health Care  Suppose that P1x2 represents the percentage 
of income spent on health care in year x and I1x2 represents 
income in year x. Determine a function H that represents 
total health care expenditures in year x. 
	115.	 Are the functions f1x2 = x - 1 and g1x2 = x2 - 1
x + 1  the 
same? Explain.
	116.	 Investigate when, historically, the use of the function  
notation y = f1x2 first appeared.
	117.	 Find a function H that multiplies a number x by 3 and then 
subtracts the cube of x and divides the result by your age.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 118–121 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
118.  List 
the 
intercepts 
and 
test 
for 
symmetry: 
(x + 12)2 + y2 = 16
119.  Determine which of the points (- 1, - 5), (4, 32), or (9, 171)
are on the graph of the equation y = 3x2 - 82x. 
	120.  Find the midpoint of the line segment containing the points 
P1 = (3, - 4) and P2 = (- 6, 0). 
	121.  Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with 
center (h, k) = (4, - 1) and radius r = 3. 
	 1.	 1- 1, 32	
2.  21.5	
3.  5xx ≠- 46	
4.  5xx 6 -16	
5.  25 + 2	
6.  radicals
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
1
1
0

94 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
In applications, a graph often demonstrates more clearly the relationship between 
two variables than, say, an equation or table. For example, Table 1 shows the average 
price of gasoline in the United States for the years 1985–2014 (adjusted for inflation, 
based on 2014 dollars). If we plot these data and then connect the points, we obtain 
Figure 13.
2.2	 The Graph of a Function
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Graphs of Equations (Section 1.2, pp. 43–45)
•	 Intercepts (Section 1.2, pp. 45–46)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 98.
	
OBJECTIVES	 1  Identify the Graph of a Function (p. 94)
	
	 	2  Obtain Information from or about the Graph of a Function (p. 95)
Figure 13  Average retail price of gasoline (2014 dollars)
Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration
Table 1
Year
Price
Year
Price
Year
Price
1985
2.55
1995
1.72
2005
2.74
1986
1.90
1996
1.80
2006
3.01
1987
1.89
1997
1.76
2007
3.19
1988
1.81
1998
1.49
2008
3.56
1989
1.87
1999
1.61
2009
2.58
1990
2.03
2000
2.03
2010
3.00
1991
1.91
2001
1.90
2011
3.69
1992
1.82
2002
1.76
2012
3.72
1993
1.74
2003
1.99
2013
3.54
1994
1.71
2004
2.31
2014
3.43
Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2014
3.50
4.00
3.00
2.50
2.00
Price (dollars per gallon)
1.50
0.50
0.00
1.00
We can see from the graph that the price of gasoline (adjusted for inflation) 
stayed roughly the same from 1986 to 1991 and rose rapidly from 2002 to 2008. The 
graph also shows that the lowest price occurred in 1998. To learn information such 
as this from an equation requires that some calculations be made.
Look again at Figure 13. The graph shows that for each date on the horizontal 
axis, there is only one price on the vertical axis. The graph represents a function, 
although the exact rule for getting from date to price is not given.
When a function is defined by an equation in x and y, the graph of the function 
is the graph of the equation; that is, it is the set of points 1x, y2 in the xy-plane that 
satisfy the equation.
Identify the Graph of a Function
Not every collection of points in the xy-plane represents the graph of a function. 
Remember, for a function, each number x in the domain has exactly one image y  
in the range. This means that the graph of a function cannot contain two points 
with the same x-coordinate and different y-coordinates. Therefore, the graph of a  
function must satisfy the following vertical-line test.
1
Vertical-Line Test
A set of points in the xy-plane is the graph of a function if and only if every 
vertical line intersects the graph in at most one point.
Theorem
In Words
If any vertical line intersects a 
graph at more than one point, 
the graph is not the graph of a 
function.

Section 2.2  The Graph of a Function  95
Identifying the Graph of a Function
Which of the graphs in Figure 14 are graphs of functions?
Example 1
Figure 14 
Figure 15 
x
y
(d)  x2  y2  1
1
1
1
1
(c)  x  y2
x
y
6
3
3
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
(b)  y  x3
x
y
4
4
4
4
(a)  y  x2
x
y
3
3
6
The graphs in Figures 14(a) and 14(b) are graphs of functions, because every vertical 
line intersects each graph in at most one point. The graphs in Figures 14(c) and 14(d) 
are not graphs of functions, because there is a vertical line that intersects each graph 
in more than one point. Notice in Figure 14(c) that the input 1 corresponds to two 
outputs, -1 and 1. This is why the graph does not represent a function.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
Obtain Information from or about the Graph of a Function
If 1x, y2 is a point on the graph of a function f, then y is the value of f at x; that is, 
y = f1x2. Also if y = f1x2, then 1x, y2 is a point on the graph of f. For example, if 
1 -2, 72 is on the graph of f, then f1 -22 = 7, and if f152 = 8, then the point 15, 82 
is on the graph of y = f1x2. The next example illustrates how to obtain information 
about a function if its graph is given.
Obtaining Information from the Graph of a Function
Let f be the function whose graph is given in Figure 15. (The graph of f might  
represent the distance y that the bob of a pendulum is from its at-rest position at time x.  
Negative values of y mean that the pendulum is to the left of the at-rest position, and 
positive values of y mean that the pendulum is to the right of the at-rest position.)
(a)	 What are f102, f a3p
2 b, and f13p2?
(b)	 What is the domain of f ?
(c)	 What is the range of f ?
(d)	 List the intercepts. (Recall that these are the points, if any, where the graph 
crosses or touches the coordinate axes.)
(e)	 How many times does the line y = 2 intersect the graph?
(f)	 For what values of x does f1x2 = -4?
(g)	 For what values of x is f1x2 7 0?
(a)	 Since 10, 42 is on the graph of f, the y-coordinate 4 is the value of f at the  
x-coordinate 0; that is, f102 = 4. In a similar way, when x = 3p
2 , then y = 0, so 
f a3p
2 b = 0. When x = 3p, then y = -4, so f13p2 = -4.
(b)	 To determine the domain of f, notice that the points on the graph of f have  
x-coordinates between 0 and 4p, inclusive; and for each number x between 0 and 
4p, there is a point 1x, f1x2 2 on the graph. The domain of f is 5x 0 … x … 4p6 
or the interval 30, 4p4.
(c)	 The points on the graph all have y-coordinates between -4 and 4, inclusive; and 
for each such number y, there is at least one number x in the domain. The range 
of f is 5y -4 … y … 46 or the interval 3 -4, 44.
Solution
•
2
Example 2
Solution
x
y
4
(2, 4)
(, 4)
(3, 4)
(4, 4)
(0, 4)
2
4
2
, 0
(
)

––2
, 0
(
)
3
––2
, 0
(
)
5
––2
, 0
(
)
7
––2

96 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
(d)	 The intercepts are the points
10, 42, ap
2 , 0b, a3p
2 , 0b, a5p
2 , 0b, and a7p
2 , 0b
(e)	 Draw the horizontal line y = 2 on the graph in Figure 15. Notice that the line 
intersects the graph four times.
(f)	 Since 1p, -42 and 13p, -42 are the only points on the graph for which 
y = f1x2 = -4, we have f1x2 = -4 when x = p and x = 3p.
(g)	 To determine where f1x2 7 0, look at Figure 15 and determine the  
x-values from 0 to 4p for which the y-coordinate is positive. This occurs 
	
on c 0, p
2 b h  a3p
2 , 5p
2 b h a7p
2 , 4pd . Using inequality notation, f1x2 7 0 
	
for 0 … x 6 p
2  or 3p
2
6 x 6 5p
2  or 7p
2
6 x … 4p.
When the graph of a function is given, its domain may be viewed as the shadow 
created by the graph on the x-axis by vertical beams of light. Its range can be viewed 
as the shadow created by the graph on the y-axis by horizontal beams of light. Try 
this technique with the graph given in Figure 15.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 1  a n d  1 5
Obtaining Information about the Graph of a Function
Consider the function: f1x2 = x + 1
x + 2
(a)	 Find the domain of f.
(b)	 Is the point a1, 1
2b on the graph of f ?
(c)	 If x = 2, what is f1x2? What point is on the graph of f ?
(d)	 If f1x2 = 2, what is x? What point is on the graph of f ?
(e)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of f (if any)? What point(s) are on the 
graph of f ?
(a)	 The domain of f is 5x x ≠-26.
(b)	 When x = 1, then
 f112 = 1 + 1
1 + 2 = 2
3 
f1x2 = x + 1
x + 2
	
The point a1, 2
3b is on the graph of f; the point a1, 1
2b is not.
(c)	 If x = 2, then
 f122 = 2 + 1
2 + 2 = 3
4
	
The point ¢2, 3
4≤ is on the graph of f.
(d)	 If f1x2 = 2, then
 x + 1
x + 2 = 2	
f1x2 = 2
 x + 1 = 21x + 22	
Multiply both sides by x + 2.
 x + 1 = 2x + 4	
Distribute.
 x = -3	
Solve for x.
If f1x2 = 2, then x = -3. The point 1 -3, 22 is on the graph of f.
•
Example 3
Solution

Section 2.2  The Graph of a Function  97
(e)	 The x-intercepts of the graph of f are the real solutions of the equation f1x2 = 0 
that are in the domain of f.
x + 1
x + 2 = 0
x + 1 = 0	
Multiply both sides by x + 2.
x = -1	
Subtract 1 from both sides.
	
The only real solution of the equation f1x2 = x + 1
x + 2 = 0 is x = -1, so -1 is 
the only x-intercept. Since f1 -12 = 0, the point (-1, 0) is on the graph of f.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Average Cost Function
The average cost C per computer of manufacturing x computers per day is given by 
the function
C1x2 = 0.56x2 - 34.39x + 1212.57 + 20,000
x
Determine the average cost of manufacturing:
(a)	 30 computers in a day
(b)	 40 computers in a day
(c)	 50 computers in a day
(d)	 Graph the function C = C1x2, 0 6 x … 80.
(e)	 Create a TABLE with TblStart = 1 and ∆Tbl = 1. Which value of x minimizes 
the average cost?
(a)	 The average cost per computer of manufacturing x = 30 computers is
C1302 = 0.5613022 - 34.391302 + 1212.57 + 20,000
30
=  $1351.54
(b)	 The average cost per computer of manufacturing x = 40 computers is
C1402 = 0.5614022 - 34.391402 + 1212.57 + 20,000
40
=  $1232.97
(c)	 The average cost per computer of manufacturing x = 50 computers is
C1502 = 0.5615022 - 34.391502 + 1212.57 + 20,000
50
=  $1293.07
(d)	 See Figure 16 for the graph of C = C1x2.
(e)	 With the function C = C1x2 in Y1, we create Table 2. We scroll down until 
we find a value of x for which Y1 is smallest. Table 3 shows that manufacturing 
x = 41 computers minimizes the average cost at $1231.74 per computer.
•
Example 4
Solution
•
Figure 16  C1x2 = 0.56x2 - 34.39x + 1212.57 + 20,000
x
Table 2 
Table 3 
80
0
4000
0
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5

98 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Summary
Graph of a Function  The collection of points 1x, y2 that satisfies the equation y = f1x2.
Vertical-Line Test	
A collection of points is the graph of a function if and only if every vertical line intersects  
the graph in at most one point.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The intercepts of the equation x2 + 4y2 = 16 are     . 
 (pp. 45–46) 
	 2.	 True or False  The point 1- 2, - 62 is on the graph of the 
equation x = 2y - 2. (pp. 43–45) 
2.2  Assess Your Understanding
x
y
5
4
–3
–5
(2, 4)
(6, 0)
(0, 3)
(4, 3)
(8, –2)
(–3, 0)
(–5, –2)
(–6, –3)
11
(10, 0)
(11, 1)
x
y
2
4
6
4
2
–2
–4
–2
(6, 0)
(5, 3)
(0, 0)
(4, 0)
(2, –2)
(–4, 2)
(–2, 1)
	 3.	 A set of points in the xy-plane is the graph of a function if 
and only if every  
  line intersects the graph in at 
most one point.
	 4.	 If the point 15, - 32 is a point on the graph of f, then 
f1  2 =  
.
	 5.	 Find a so that the point 1- 1, 22 is on the graph of 
f1x2 = ax2 + 4. 
	 6.	 True or False  Every graph represents a function. 
	 7.	 True or False    The graph of a function y = f1x2 always 
crosses the y-axis. 
	 8.	 True or False  The y-intercept of the graph of the function 
y = f1x2, whose domain is all real numbers, is f102. 
	 9.	 If a function is defined by an equation in x and y, then the 
set of points (x, y) in the xy-plane that satisfy the equation is 
called     . 
(a)	 the domain of the function  (b)  the range of the function
(c)	 the graph of the function  (d)  the relation of the function
	 10.	 The graph of a function y = f(x) can have more than one of 
which type of intercept?
(a)	 x-intercept  (b)  y-intercept  (c)  both  (d)  neither 
Concepts and Vocabulary
Skill Building
	 11.	 Use the given graph of the function f to answer parts (a)–(n).
	 12.	 Use the given graph of the function f to answer parts (a)–(n).
(a)	 Find f102 and f1- 62. 
(b)	 Find f162 and f1112. 
(c)	 Is f132 positive or negative? 
(d)	 Is f1- 42 positive or negative? 
(e)	 For what values of x is f1x2 = 0? 
(f)	 For what values of x is f1x2 7 0? 
(g)	 What is the domain of f ? 
(h)	 What is the range of f ? 
(i)	 What are the x-intercepts? 
(j)	 What is the y-intercept? 
(k)	 How often does the line y = 1
2 intersect the graph?
(l)	 How often does the line x = 5 intersect the graph?
(m)	For what values of x does f1x2 = 3? 
(n)	 For what values of x does f1x2 = -2? 
(a)	 Find f102 and f162. 
(b)	 Find f122 and f1- 22. 
(c)	 Is f132 positive or negative? 
(d)	 Is f1- 12 positive or negative? 
(e)	 For what values of x is f1x2 = 0? 
(f)	 For what values of x is f1x2 6 0? 
(g)	 What is the domain of f ?­ 
(h)	 What is the range of f ? 
(i)	 What are the x-intercepts? 
(j)	 What is the y-intercept? 
(k)	 How often does the line y = - 1 intersect the graph?
(l)	 How often does the line x = 1 intersect the graph?
(m)	For what value of x does f1x2 = 3? 
(n)	 For what value of x does f1x2 = -2? 

Section 2.2  The Graph of a Function  99
In Problems 13–24, determine whether the graph is that of a function by using the vertical-line test. If it is, use the graph to find:
(a)	The domain and range    (b) The intercepts, if any    (c) Any symmetry with respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, or the origin
	 17.	
18.	
19.	
20.	
	 21.	
22.	
23.	
24.	
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
3

1
1


––2


––2
x
y


––2


––2

x
y
1
1
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
3
(3, 2)
(4, 3)
x
y
4
4
4
4
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
9
3
1
3
(2, 3)
6
3
x
y
4
3
3
)
(  , 5
1–2
In Problems 25–30, answer the questions about the given function.
	 25.	 f1x2 = - 3x2 + 5x
(a)	 Is the point 1- 1, 22 on the graph of f ? 
(b)	 If x = - 2, what is f1x2? What point is on the graph of f ?
(c)	 If f1x2 = - 2, what is x? What point(s) are on the graph 
of f ?
(d)	 What is the domain of f ? 
(e)	 List the x-intercepts, if any, of the graph of f. 
(f)	 List the y-intercept, if there is one, of the graph of f. 
	 26.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - x - 1
(a)	 Is the point 1- 1, 22 on the graph of f ? 
(b)	 If x = - 2, what is f1x2? What point is on the graph of f ?
(c)	 If f1x2 = - 1, what is x? What point(s) are on the graph 
of f ?
(d)	 What is the domain of f ? 
(e)	 List the x-intercepts, if any, of the graph of f. 
(f)	 List the y-intercept, if there is one, of the graph of f. 
	 27.	  f1x2 = x + 2
x - 6
(a)	 Is the point 13, 142 on the graph of f ? 
(b)	 If x = 4, what is f1x2? What point is on the graph of f ?
(c)	 If f1x2 = 2, what is x? What point(s) are on the graph 
of f ? 
(d)	 What is the domain of f ? 
(e)	 List the x-intercepts, if any, of the graph of f. 
(f)	 List the y-intercept, if there is one, of the graph of f. 
	 28.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2
x + 4
(a)	 Is the point a1, 3
5b on the graph of f ? 
(b)	 If x = 0, what is f1x2? What point is on the graph of f ?
(c)	 If f1x2 = 1
2, what is x? What point(s) are on the graph 
of f ?
(d)	 What is the domain of f ? 
(e)	 List the x-intercepts, if any, of the graph of f. 
(f)	 List the y-intercept, if there is one, of the graph of f. 
	 29.	 f1x2 =
2x
x - 2
(a)	 Is the point a1
2, -  2
3b on the graph of f ? 
(b)	 If x = 4, what is f1x2? What point is on the graph of f ?
(c)	 If f1x2 = 1, what is x? What point(s) are on the graph 
of f ? 
(d)	 What is the domain of f ? 
(e)	 List the x-intercepts, if any, of the graph of f. 
(f)	 List the y-intercept, if there is one, of the graph of f. 
	 30.	 f1x2 =
2x2
x4 + 1
(a)	 Is the point 1- 1, 12 on the graph of f ? 
(b)	 If x = 2, what is f1x2? What point is on the graph of f ?
(c)	 If f1x2 = 1, what is x? What point(s) are on the graph 
of f ? 
(d)	 What is the domain of f ? 
(e)	 List the x-intercepts, if any, of the graph of f. 
(f)	 List the y-intercept, if there is one, of the graph of f. 
	 13.	
14.	
15.	
16.	

100 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
	 31.	 The graphs of two functions, f and g, is illustrated below. Use 
the graph to answer parts (a) through (f).
(a)	 Determine the height of the ball after it has traveled  
8 feet in front of the foul line. 
(b)	 Determine the height of the ball after it has traveled  
12 feet in front of the foul line. 
(c)	 Find additional points and graph the path of the  
basketball.
(d)	 The center of the hoop is 10 feet above the floor and  
15 feet in front of the foul line. Will the ball go through 
the hoop? Why or why not? If not, with what initial  
velocity must the ball be shot in order for the ball to go 
through the hoop?
Source: The Physics of Foul Shots, Discover, Vol. 21, No. 10, 
October 2000
	 34.	 Cross-sectional Area    The cross-sectional area of a beam 
cut from a log with radius 1 foot is given by the function 
A1x2 = 4x21 - x2, where x represents the length, in 
feet, of half the base of the beam. See the figure.
(a)	 Find the domain of A. 
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the function A = A1x2.
(c)	 Create a TABLE with TblStart = 0 and ∆Tbl = 0.1 
for 0 … x … 1. Which value of x maximizes the cross-  
sectional area? What should be the length of the base of 
the beam to maximize the cross-sectional area?
	 35.	 Motion of a Golf Ball    A golf ball is hit with an initial  
velocity of 130 feet per second at an inclination of 45° to the 
horizontal. In physics, it is established that the height h of 
the golf ball is given by the function
h1x2 = - 32x2
1302
+ x
	
	 where x is the horizontal distance that the golf ball has  
traveled.
A(x)  4x1  x 2
x
1
Applications and Extensions
(3, 0)
(7, 0)
(7, 1)
(3, 5)
f(x)
g(x)
(5, 3)
(5, 24)
10
10
210
23
(a)	 1f + g2 132 = ?        (b)  1f + g2 152 = ? 
(c)	 1f - g2 172 = ? 
     (d)  1g - f2 172 = ? 
(e)	 1f # g2 132 = ?          (f)  a
f
gb 152 = ? 
	 32.	 Granny Shots  The last player in the NBA to use an underhand  
foul shot (a “granny” shot) was Hall of Fame forward Rick 
Barry, who retired in 1980. Barry believes that current NBA 
players could increase their free-throw percentage if they 
were to use an underhand shot. Since underhand shots are 
released from a lower position, the angle of the shot must 
be increased. If a player shoots an underhand foul shot,  
releasing the ball at a 70-degree angle from a position 3.5 feet  
above the floor, then the path of the ball can be modeled 
	
	 by the function h1x2 = -  136x2
v2
+ 2.7x + 3.5, where h is
	
	 the height of the ball above the floor, x is the forward distance 
of the ball in front of the foul line, and v is the initial velocity 
with which the ball is shot in feet per second.
(a)	 The center of the hoop is 10 feet above the floor and  
15 feet in front of the foul line. Determine the initial 
velocity with which the ball must be shot in order for the 
ball to go through the hoop. 
(b)	 Write the function for the path of the ball using the velocity 
found in part (a).
(c)	 Determine the height of the ball after it has traveled  
9 feet in front of the foul line. 
(d)	 Find additional points and graph the path of the  
basketball.
Source: The Physics of Foul Shots, Discover, Vol. 21, No. 10, 
October 2000
	 33.	 Free-throw Shots  According to physicist Peter Brancazio, 
the key to a successful foul shot in basketball lies in the 
arc of the shot. Brancazio determined the optimal angle of 
the arc from the free-throw line to be 45 degrees. The arc 
also depends on the velocity with which the ball is shot. If a  
player shoots a foul shot, releasing the ball at a 45-degree 
angle from a position 6 feet above the floor, then the path of 
the ball can be modeled by the function
h1x2 = -  44x2
v2
+ x + 6
	
	 where h is the height of the ball above the floor, x is the  
forward distance of the ball in front of the foul line, and v 
is the initial velocity with which the ball is shot in feet per  
second. Suppose a player shoots a ball with an initial  
velocity of 28 feet per second.

Section 2.2  The Graph of a Function  101
(a)	 Determine the height of the golf ball after it has  
traveled 100 feet. 
(b)	 What is the height after it has traveled 300 feet?
(c)	 What is the height after it has traveled 500 feet?
(d)	 How far was the golf ball hit?
(e)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the function h = h1x2.
(f)	 Use a graphing utility to determine the distance that 
the ball has traveled when the height of the ball is  
90 feet.
(g)	 Create a TABLE with TblStart = 0 and ∆Tbl = 25. To 
the nearest 25 feet, how far does the ball travel before 
it reaches a maximum height? What is the maximum 
height? 
(h)	 Adjust the value of ∆Tbl until you determine the  
distance, to within 1 foot, that the ball travels before it 
reaches its maximum height. 
	 36.	 Effect of Elevation on Weight  If an object weighs m pounds 
at sea level, then its weight W (in pounds) at a height of  
h miles above sea level is given approximately by
W1h2 = ma
4000
4000 + hb
2
(a)	 If Amy weighs 120 pounds at sea level, how much will 
she weigh on Pikes Peak, which is 14,110 feet above sea 
level? 
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the function W = W1h2. 
Use m = 120 pounds.
(c)	 Create a Table with TblStart = 0 and ∆Tbl = 0.5 to see 
how the weight W varies as h changes from 0 to 5 miles.
(d)	 At what height will Amy weigh 119.95 pounds?
(e)	 Does your answer to part (d) seem reasonable?  
Explain.
	 37.	 Cost of Trans-Atlantic Travel    A Boeing 747 crosses the  
Atlantic Ocean (3000 miles) with an airspeed of 500 miles 
per hour. The cost C (in dollars) per passenger is given by
C1x2 = 100 + x
10 + 36,000
x
	
	 where x is the groundspeed 1airspeed { wind2.
(a)	 What is the cost when the groundspeed is 480 miles per 
hour? 600 miles per hour? 
(b)	 Find the domain of C. 
(c)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the function C = C1x2.
(d)	 Create a TABLE with TblStart = 0 and ∆Tbl = 50.
(e)	 To the nearest 50 miles per hour, what groundspeed 
minimizes the cost per passenger? 
	 38.	 Reading and Interpreting Graphs    Let C be the function  
whose graph is given in the next column. This graph  
represents the cost C of manufacturing q computers in a day.
(a)	 Determine C(0). Interpret this value. 
(b)	 Determine C(10). Interpret this value. 
(c)	 Determine C(50). Interpret this value. 
(d)	 What is the domain of C? What does this domain imply 
in terms of daily production? 
(e)	 Describe the shape of the graph.
(f)	 The point (30, 32  000) is called an inflection point.  
Describe the behavior of the graph around the  
inflection point.
	 39.	 Reading and Interpreting Graphs    Let C be the function 
whose graph has been given. This graph represents the cost 
C of using m anytime cell phone minutes in a month for a 
five-person family plan.
(a)	 Determine C (0). Interpret this value. 
(b)	 Determine C (1000). Interpret this value. 
(c)	 Determine C (4000). Interpret this value. 
(d)	 What is the domain of C? What does this domain imply 
in terms of the number of anytime minutes?
(e)	 Describe the shape of the graph.
q
C
10
20
30
40
50
Number of computers
Cost (dollars per day)
70
80
90
100
60
150,000
100,000
50,000
(0, 5000)
(10, 19 000)
(30, 32 000)
(50, 51 000)
(100, 280 000)
200,000
250,000
C
2000
1000
0
5000
0
15000
10000
C, Cost (dollars)
m, Number of minutes
(14400, 1688)
(4000, 440)
(1000, 80)
(0, 80)
	 40.	 Describe how you would find the domain and range of a function if you were given its graph. How would your strategy change if 
you were given the equation defining the function instead of its graph?
	 41.	 How many x-intercepts can the graph of a function have? How many y-intercepts can the graph of a function have?
	 42.	 Is a graph that consists of a single point the graph of a function? Can you write the equation of such a function?
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing

102 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
	 43.	 Match each of the following functions with the graph that best describes the situation.
(a)	 The cost of building a house as a function of its square footage 
(b)	 The height of an egg dropped from a 300-foot building as a function of time 
(c)	 The height of a human as a function of time 
(d)	 The demand for Big Macs as a function of price 
(e)	 The height of a child on a swing as a function of time 
(I)
x
(II)
(III)
x
(IV)
x
(V)
x
y
y
y
y
y
x
(I)
(II)
(III)
(IV)
(V)
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
	 44.	 Match each of the following functions with the graph that best describes the situation.
(a)	 The temperature of a bowl of soup as a function of time 
(b)	 The number of hours of daylight per day over a 2-year period 
(c)	 The population of Florida as a function of time 
(d)	 The distance traveled by a car going at a constant velocity as a function of time 
(e)	 The height of a golf ball hit with a 7-iron as a function of time 
	 45.	 Consider the following scenario: Barbara decides to take 
a walk. She leaves home, walks 2 blocks in 5 minutes at a 
constant speed, and realizes that she forgot to lock the door. 
So Barbara runs home in 1 minute. While at her doorstep, it 
takes her 1 minute to find her keys and lock the door. Barbara 
walks 5 blocks in 15 minutes and then decides to jog home. It 
takes her 7 minutes to get home. Draw a graph of Barbara’s 
distance from home (in blocks) as a function of time.
	 46.	 Consider the following scenario: Jayne enjoys riding her  
bicycle through the woods. At the forest preserve, she gets on her 
bicycle and rides up a 2000-foot incline in 10 minutes. She then 
travels down the incline in 3 minutes. The next 5000 feet is level 
terrain, and she covers the distance in 20 minutes. She rests for 
15 minutes. Jayne then travels 10,000 feet in 30 minutes. Draw a 
graph of Jayne’s distance traveled (in feet) as a function of time.
	 47.	 The following sketch represents the distance d (in miles) 
that Kevin was from home as a function of time t (in hours). 
Answer the questions by referring to the graph. In parts  
(a)–(g), how many hours elapsed and how far was Kevin 
from home during this time?
(a)	 From t = 0 to t = 2
(b)	 From t = 2 to t = 2.5
(c)	 From t = 2.5 to t = 2.8
(d)	 From t = 2.8 to t = 3
(e)	 From t = 3 to t = 3.9
(f)	 From t = 3.9 to t = 4.2
(g)	 From t = 4.2 to t = 5.3
(h)	 What is the farthest distance that Kevin was from home?
(i)	 How many times did Kevin return home? 
	 48.	 The following sketch represents the speed v (in miles per 
hour) of Michael’s car as a function of time t (in minutes).
d(t )
(2, 3)
(2.5, 3)
(2.8, 0)
(3, 0)
(4.2, 2.8)
(5.3, 0)
(3.9, 2.8)
t
v(t )
(2, 30)
(4, 30)
(4.2, 0)
(6, 0)
(9.1, 0)
(7.4, 50)
(8, 38)
(7.6, 38)
(7, 50)
t
(a)	 Over what interval of time was Michael traveling  
fastest?
(b)	 Over what interval(s) of time was Michael’s speed zero?
(c)	 What was Michael’s speed between 0 and 2 minutes?
(d)	 What was Michael’s speed between 4.2 and 6 minutes?
(e)	 What was Michael’s speed between 7 and 7.4 minutes?
(f)	 When was Michael’s speed constant?

Section 2.3  Properties of Functions  103
	 49.	 Draw the graph of a function whose domain is 
5x - 3 … x … 8, x ≠56 
and 
whose 
range 
is 
5y - 1 … y … 2, y ≠06. 
What 
point(s) 
in 
the  
rectangle - 3 … x … 8, - 1 … y … 2 cannot be on the 
graph? Compare your graph with those of other students. 
What differences do you see?
	 50.	 Is there a function whose graph is symmetric with respect to 
the x-axis? Explain.
	 51.	 Explain why the vertical-line test works.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 52–55 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 52.	 Given f (x) = - x2 + x - 3, find f (x - 2). 
	 53.	 Find the distance between the points (3, - 6) and (1, 0). 
	 54.	 Write the equation of the line with slope 2
3 that passes through the point (- 6, 4). 
	 55.	 Find the domain of g(x) = 2
3 x + 4 - 5. 
	 1.	 1- 4, 02, 14, 02, 10, - 22, 10, 22	
2.  False
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
To obtain the graph of a function y = f1x2, it is often helpful to know certain 
properties that the function has and the impact of these properties on the way the 
graph will look.
Determine Even and Odd Functions from a Graph
The words even and odd, when applied to a function f, describe the symmetry that 
exists for the graph of the function.
1
2.3	 Properties of Functions
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Interval Notation (Appendix A, Section A.9, pp. 1016–1017)
•	 Intercepts (Section 1.2, pp. 45–46)
•	 Slope of a Line (Section 1.3, pp. 53–55)
•	 Point–Slope Form of a Line (Section 1.3, p. 57)
•	 Symmetry (Section 1.2, pp. 46–48)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 112.
	
OBJECTIVES	 1  Determine Even and Odd Functions from a Graph  (p. 103)
	
	 	2  Identify Even and Odd Functions from an Equation  (p. 105)
	
	 	3  Use a Graph to Determine Where a Function Is Increasing, Decreasing,  
or Constant  (p. 105)
	
	 	4  Use a Graph to Locate Local Maxima and Local Minima  (p. 106)
	
	 	5  Use a Graph to Locate the Absolute Maximum and the Absolute  
Minimum  (p. 107)
	
	 	6  Use a Graphing Utility to Approximate Local Maxima and Local Minima 
and to Determine Where a Function Is Increasing or Decreasing  (p. 109)
	
	 	7  Find the Average Rate of Change of a Function  (p. 110)

104 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
A function f is even if and only if, whenever the point 1x, y2 is on the graph 
of f, the point 1 -x, y2 is also on the graph. Using function notation, we define an 
even function as follows:
A function f is even if, for every number x in its domain, the number -x is also 
in the domain and
f1 -x2 = f1x2
Definition
A function f is odd if, for every number x in its domain, the number -x is also 
in the domain and
f1 -x2 = -f1x2
Definition
A function f is odd if and only if, whenever the point 1x, y2 is on the graph of f, 
the point 1 -x, -y2 is also on the graph. Using function notation, we define an odd 
function as follows:
Refer to page 48, where the tests for symmetry are listed. The following results 
are then evident.
Figure 17 
A function is even if and only if its graph is symmetric with respect to the  
y-axis. A function is odd if and only if its graph is symmetric with respect to 
the origin.
Theorem
Determining Even and Odd Functions from the Graph
Determine whether each graph given in Figure 17 is the graph of an even function, 
an odd function, or a function that is neither even nor odd.
Example 1
x
y
 (a)
x
y
 (c)
x
y
 (b)
(a)	 The graph in Figure 17(a) is that of an even function, because the graph is  
symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
(b)	 The function whose graph is given in Figure 17(b) is neither even nor odd,  
because the graph is neither symmetric with respect to the y-axis nor symmetric 
with respect to the origin.
(c)	 The function whose graph is given in Figure 17(c) is odd, because its graph is 
symmetric with respect to the origin.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 5 ( a ) ,  ( b ) ,  a n d  ( d )
Solution
•

Section 2.3  Properties of Functions  105
Identify Even and Odd Functions from an Equation
Identifying Even and Odd Functions Algebraically
Determine whether each of the following functions is even, odd, or neither. Then 
determine whether the graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis, with respect to 
the origin, or neither.
(a)	 f1x2 = x2 - 5	
(b)  g1x2 = x3 - 1
(c)	 h1x2 = 5x3 - x	
(d)  F1x2 = 0 x0
(a)	 To determine whether f is even, odd, or neither, replace x by -x in f1x2 = x2 - 5.
f1 -x2 = 1 -x22 - 5 = x2 - 5 = f1x2
	
Since f1 -x2 = f1x2, the function is even, and the graph of f is symmetric with 
respect to the y-axis.
(b)	 Replace x by -x in g1x2 = x3 - 1.
g1 -x2 = 1 -x23 - 1 = -x3 - 1
	
Since 
g1 -x2 ≠g1x2 
and 
g1-x2 ≠-g1x2 = - 1x3 - 12 = -x3 + 1, 
the 
function is neither even nor odd. The graph of g is not symmetric with respect  
to the y-axis, nor is it symmetric with respect to the origin.
(c)	 Replace x by -x in h1x2 = 5x3 - x.
h1 -x2 = 51 -x23 - 1 -x2 = -5x3 + x = - 15x3 - x2 = -h1x2
	
Since h1 -x2 = -h1x2, h is an odd function, and the graph of h is symmetric 
with respect to the origin.
(d)	 Replace x by -x in F1x2 = 0 x0 .
F1 -x2 = 0 -x0 = 0 -10 # 0 x0 = 0 x0 = F1x2
	
Since F1 -x2 = F1x2, F is an even function, and the graph of F is symmetric 
with respect to the y-axis.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 7
Use a Graph to Determine Where a Function Is Increasing, 
Decreasing, or Constant
Consider the graph given in Figure 18. If you look from left to right along the graph 
of the function, you will notice that parts of the graph are going up, parts are going 
down, and parts are horizontal. In such cases, the function is described as increasing, 
decreasing, or constant, respectively.
2
Example 2
Solution
•
3
Figure 18 
x
y
6
5
2
4
(3, 4)
(6, 1)
y = f(x)
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
(6, 0)
(4, 2)
Determining Where a Function Is Increasing, Decreasing,  
or Constant from Its Graph
Determine the values of x for which the function in Figure 18 is increasing. Where is 
it decreasing? Where is it constant?
Example 3

106 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
When determining where a function is increasing, where it is decreasing, and where 
it is constant, we use strict inequalities involving the independent variable x, or we 
use open intervals* of x-coordinates. The function whose graph is given in Figure 18  
is increasing on the open interval 1 -4, 02, or for -4 6 x 6 0. The function is 
decreasing on the open intervals 1 -6, -42 and 13, 62, or for -6 6 x 6 -4 and 
3 6 x 6 6. The function is constant on the open interval 10, 32, or for 0 6 x 6 3.
More precise definitions follow:
Solution
•
*The open interval 1a, b2 consists of all real numbers x for which a 6 x 6 b.
Warning  Describe the behavior of a 
graph in terms of its x-values. Do not say 
the graph in Figure 18 is increasing from 
the point 1- 4, - 22 to the point (0, 4). 
Rather, say it is increasing on the interval 
1- 4, 02.	
■
DefinitioNS  A function f is increasing on an open interval I if, for any 
choice of x1 and x2 in I, with x1 6 x2, we have f1x12 6 f1x22.
A function f is decreasing on an open interval I if, for any choice of x1 and x2 
in I, with x1 6 x2, we have f1x12 7 f1x22.
A function f is constant on an open interval I if, for all choices of x in I, the 
values f1x2 are equal.
Figure 19 illustrates the definitions. The graph of an increasing function goes up 
from left to right, the graph of a decreasing function goes down from left to right, 
and the graph of a constant function remains at a fixed height.
Figure 19 
x
y
f(x1)
l
x1
x 2
f(x 2)
(a)  For x1 < x 2 in l,
   f(x1) < f(x 2);
    f is increasing on I.
x
y
f(x1)
l
x1
x 2
f(x 2)
 (b)  For x1 < x 2 in l,
   f(x1) > f(x 2);
     f is decreasing on I.
x
y
f(x1)
x1
x 2
f(x 2)
 (c)  For all x in I, the values of
        f are equal; f is constant on I.
l
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 3 ,  1 5 ,  1 7 ,  a n d  2 5 ( c )
Use a Graph to Locate Local Maxima and Local Minima
Suppose f is a function defined on an open interval I containing c. If the value of 
f at c is greater than or equal to the values of f on I, then f has a local maximum  
at c.† See Figure 20(a).
If the value of f at c is less than or equal to the values of f on I, then f has a 
local minimum at c. See Figure 20(b).
4
†Some texts use the term relative instead of local.
Figure 20  Local maximum and local minimum
c
x
f(c)
f(c)
(c, f(c))
(c, f(c))
y
f has a local maximum
at c.
(a)
c
x
y
f has a local minimum
at c.
(b)
In Words
If a function is decreasing, then 
as the values of x get bigger, the 
values of the function get smaller. 
If a function is increasing, then as 
the values of x get bigger, the values 
of the function also get bigger. If a 
function is constant, then as the 
values of x get bigger, the values of 
the function remain unchanged.

Section 2.3  Properties of Functions  107
If f has a local maximum at c, then the value of f at c is greater than or equal to 
the values of f near c. If f has a local minimum at c, then the value of f at c is less than 
or equal to the values of f near c. The word local is used to suggest that it is only near c, 
not necessarily over the entire domain, that the value f1c2 has these properties.
Finding Local Maxima and Local Minima from the Graph 
of a Function and Determining Where the Function 
Is Increasing, Decreasing, or Constant
Figure 21 shows the graph of a function f.
(a)	 At what value(s) of x, if any, does f have a local maximum? List the local maximum 
values.
(b)	 At what value(s) of x, if any, does f have a local minimum? List the local minimum 
values.
(c)	 Find the intervals on which f is increasing. Find the intervals on which f is 
decreasing.
The domain of f is the set of real numbers.
(a)	 f has a local maximum at 1, since for all x close to 1, we have f1x2 … f112. The 
local maximum value is f112 = 2.
(b)	 f has local minima at -1 and at 3. The local minimum values are f1 -12 = 1 
and f132 = 0.
(c)	 The function whose graph is given in Figure 21 is increasing for all values of x 
between -1 and 1 and for all values of x greater than 3. That is, the function is 
increasing on the intervals 1 -1, 12 and 13, q 2, or for -1 6 x 6 1 and x 7 3. 
The function is decreasing for all values of x less than -1 and for all values of x 
between 1 and 3. That is, the function is decreasing on the intervals 1 - q, -12 
and 11, 32, or for x 6 -1 and 1 6 x 6 3.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 9  a n d  2 1
Use a Graph to Locate the Absolute Maximum  
and the Absolute Minimum
Look at the graph of the function f given in Figure 22. The domain of f is the closed 
interval 3a, b4. Also, the largest value of f is f1u2 and the smallest value of f is f1v2. 
These are called, respectively, the absolute maximum and the absolute minimum  
of f on 3a, b4.
Example 4
Solution
•
5
Let f be a function defined on some interval I.
A function f has a local maximum at c if there is an open interval in I containing c  
so that, for all x in this open interval, we have f1x2 … f1c2. We call f1c2 a  
local maximum value of f.
A function f has a local minimum at c if there is an open interval in I containing c  
so that, for all x in this open interval, we have f1x2 Ú f1c2. We call f1c2 a  
local minimum value of f.
DefinitioNS
Figure 21 
x
y
–2
3
2
(1, 2)
(–1, 1)
y  f(x)
Warning  The y-value is the local  
maximum value or local minimum value, 
and it occurs at some x-value. For  
example, in Figure 21, we say f  has a local 
maximum at 1 and the local maximum 
value is 2.	
■
Figure 22 
domain: [a, b]
for all x in [a, b], f(x)  f(u)
for all x in [a, b], f(x)  f(v)
absolute maximum: f(u)
absolute minimum: f(v)
(u, f(u))
(a, f(a))
y  f(x)
(b, f(b))
(v, f(v))
a
u
v
b
x
y
Definition  Let f be a function defined on some interval I. If there is  
a number u in I for which f1x2 … f1u2 for all x in I, then f has an absolute  
maximum at u, and the number f1u2 is the absolute maximum of f on I.
If there is a number v in I for which f1x2 Ú f1v2 for all x in I, then f has an  
absolute minimum at v, and the number f1v2 is the absolute minimum of f on I.

108 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
The absolute maximum and absolute minimum of a function f are sometimes 
called the extreme values of f on I.
The absolute maximum or absolute minimum of a function f may not exist. Let’s 
look at some examples.
Finding the Absolute Maximum and the Absolute Minimum  
from the Graph of a Function
For each graph of a function y = f1x2 in Figure 23, find the absolute maximum and 
the absolute minimum, if they exist. Also, find any local maxima or local minima.
Example 5
Figure 23 
(0, 1)
(4, 4)
(3, 6)
(5, 5)
1
3
5
(a)
x
y
6
4
2
(3, 1)
(1, 2)
(5, 3)
1
3
5
(b)
x
y
6
4
2
(2, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 3)
(5, 4)
1
3
5
(c)
x
y
6
4
2
(0, 0)
1
3
5
(d)
x
y
6
4
2
(2, 2)
(1, 4)
(4, 3)
1
3
5
(e)
x
y
6
4
2
(a)	 The function f whose graph is given in Figure 23(a) has the closed interval [0, 5] 
as its domain. The largest value of f is f132 = 6, the absolute maximum. The 
smallest value of f is f102 = 1, the absolute minimum. The function has a local 
maximum of 6 at x = 3 and a local minimum of 4 at x = 4.
(b)	 The function f whose graph is given in Figure 23(b) has the domain 
5x|1 … x … 5, x ≠36. Note that we exclude 3 from the domain because of the 
“hole” at (3, 1). The largest value of f on its domain is f152 = 3, the absolute  
maximum. There is no absolute minimum. Do you see why? As you trace the 
graph, getting closer to the point (3, 1), there is no single smallest value. [As soon 
as you claim a smallest value, we can trace closer to (3, 1) and get a smaller value!] 
The function has no local maxima or minima.
(c)	 The function f whose graph is given in Figure 23(c) has the interval [0, 5] as 
its domain. The absolute maximum of f is f152 = 4. The absolute minimum is 1.  
Notice that the absolute minimum 1 occurs at any number in the interval [1, 2]. 
The function has a local minimum value of 1 at every x in the interval [1, 2], but 
it has no local maximum value.
(d)	 The function f given in Figure 23(d) has the interval 30, q) as its domain. The 
function has no absolute maximum; the absolute minimum is f102 = 0. The 
function has no local maximum or local minimum.
(e)	 The function f in Figure 23(e) has the domain 5x|1 6 x 6 5, x ≠26. The function 
has no absolute maximum and no absolute minimum. Do you see why? The function 
has a local maximum value of 3 at x = 4, but no local minimum value.
In calculus, there is a theorem with conditions that guarantee a function will 
have an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum.
Solution
•
Warning  A function may have an 
absolute maximum or an absolute  
minimum at an endpoint but not a 
local maximum or a local minimum.  
Why? 
Local 
maxima 
and 
local  
minima are found over some open interval I, 
and this interval cannot be created 
around an endpoint.	
■
*Although a precise definition requires calculus, we’ll agree for now that a continuous function is one 
whose graph has no gaps or holes and can be traced without lifting the pencil from the paper.
Extreme Value Theorem
If f is a continuous function* whose domain is a closed interval 3a, b4, then f 
has an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum on 3a, b4.
Theorem

Section 2.3  Properties of Functions  109
The absolute maximum (minimum) can be found by selecting the largest (smallest) 
value of f from the following list:
	 1.	 The values of f at any local maxima or local minima of f in [a, b].
	 2.	 The value of f at each endpoint of [a, b]—that is, f(a) and f(b).
For example, the graph of the function f given in Figure 23(a) is continuous on 
the closed interval [0, 5]. The Extreme Value Theorem guarantees that f has extreme 
values on [0, 5]. To find them, we list
	 1.	 The value of f at the local extrema: f132 = 6, f142 = 4
	 2.	 The value of f at the endpoints: f102 = 1, f152 = 5
The largest of these, 6, is the absolute maximum; the smallest of these, 1, is the  
absolute minimum.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Use a Graphing Utility to Approximate Local Maxima 
and Local Minima and to Determine Where a Function 
Is Increasing or Decreasing
To locate the exact value at which a function f has a local maximum or a local  
minimum usually requires calculus. However, a graphing utility may be used to 
approximate these values using the MAXIMUM and MINIMUM features.
Using a Graphing Utility to Approximate Local Maxima  
and Minima and to Determine Where a Function Is Increasing  
or Decreasing
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to graph f1x2 = 6x3 - 12x + 5 for -2 6 x 6 2.  
Approximate where f has a local maximum and where f has a local minimum.
(b)	 Determine where f is increasing and where it is decreasing.
(a)	 Graphing utilities have a feature that finds the maximum or minimum point 
of a graph within a given interval. Graph the function f for -2 6 x 6 2. The 
MAXIMUM and MINIMUM commands require us to first determine the 
open interval I. The graphing utility will then approximate the maximum or  
minimum value in the interval. Using MAXIMUM, we find that the local maximum 
value is 11.53 and that it occurs at x = -0.82, rounded to two decimal places. See  
Figure 24(a). Using MINIMUM, we find that the local minimum value is -1.53 
and that it occurs at x = 0.82, rounded to two decimal places. See Figure 24(b).
6
Example 6
Solution
Figure 24 
−10
−2
2
30
(a) Local maximum
(b) Local minimum
−10
−2
2
30
(b)	 Looking at Figures 24(a) and (b), we see that the graph of f is increasing from 
x = -2 to x = -0.82 and from x = 0.82 to x = 2, so f is increasing on the  
intervals 1 -2, -0.822 and 10.82, 22, or for -2 6 x 6 -0.82 and 0.82 6 x 6 2. 
The graph is decreasing from x = -0.82 to x = 0.82, so f is decreasing on the 
interval 1 -0.82, 0.822, or for -0.82 6 x 6 0.82.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7
•

110 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Find the Average Rate of Change of a Function
In Section 1.3, we said that the slope of a line can be interpreted as the average rate 
of change. To find the average rate of change of a function between any two points 
on its graph, calculate the slope of the line containing the two points.
7
If a and b, a ≠b, are in the domain of a function y = f1x2, the average rate 
of change of f  from a to b is defined as
	
Average rate of change = ∆y
∆x = f1b2 - f1a2
b - a   a ≠b	
(1)
Definition
The symbol ∆y in equation (1) is the “change in y,” and ∆x is the “change in x.” 
The average rate of change of f is the change in y divided by the change in x.
Finding the Average Rate of Change
Find the average rate of change of f1x2 = 3x2:
(a)	 From 1 to 3	
(b)  From 1 to 5	
(c)  From 1 to 7
(a)	 The average rate of change of f1x2 = 3x2 from 1 to 3 is
 ∆y
∆x = f132 - f112
3 - 1
= 27 - 3
3 - 1 = 24
2 = 12
(b)	 The average rate of change of f1x2 = 3x2 from 1 to 5 is
∆y
∆x = f152 - f112
5 - 1
= 75 - 3
5 - 1 = 72
4 = 18
(c)	 The average rate of change of f1x2 = 3x2 from 1 to 7 is
∆y
∆x = f172 - f112
7 - 1
= 147 - 3
7 - 1
= 144
6
= 24
See Figure 25 for a graph of f1x2 = 3x2. The function f is increasing for x 7 0. 
The fact that the average rate of change is positive for any x1, x2, x1 ≠x2, in the 
interval 11, 72 indicates that the graph is increasing on 1 6 x 6 7. Further, the 
average rate of change is consistently getting larger for 1 6 x 6 7, which indicates 
that the graph is increasing at an increasing rate.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 5
The Secant Line
The average rate of change of a function has an important geometric interpretation. 
Look at the graph of y = f1x2 in Figure 26. Two points are labeled on the graph: 
1a, f1a2 2 and 1b, f1b2 2. The line containing these two points is called the secant 
line; its slope is
msec = f1b2 - f1a2
b - a
Example 7
Solution
•
In Words
The symbol ∆ is the Greek capital 
letter delta and is read “change in.”
Figure 25  f1x2 = 3x2
x
y
40
80
160
120
6
4
2
(3, 27)
(5, 75)
Average rate
of change 5 12
Average rate
of change 5 18
Average rate
of change 5 24
(7, 147)
(0, 0)
(1, 3)

Section 2.3  Properties of Functions  111
Figure 26  Secant line
y
x
b
a
(b, f (b ))
Secant line
(a, f (a ))
I(b ) 2 f (a )
b 2 a
y 5 f (x )
Finding the Equation of a Secant Line
Suppose that g1x2 = 3x2 - 2x + 3.
(a)	 Find the average rate of change of g from -2 to 1.
(b)	 Find an equation of the secant line containing 1 -2, g1-222 and 11, g112 2.
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, draw the graph of g and the secant line obtained in  
part (b) on the same screen.
(a)	 The average rate of change of g1x2 = 3x2 - 2x + 3 from -2 to 1 is
 Average rate of change = g112 - g1 -22
1 - 1 -22
 
 = 4 - 19
3
	
 = -  15
3 = -5	
(b)	 The slope of the secant line containing 1 -2, g1-222 = 1 -2, 192 and 
11, g112 2 = 11, 42 is msec = -5. Use the point–slope form to find an  
equation of the secant line.
 y - y1 = msec1x - x12	
Point–slope form of the secant line
 y - 19 = -51x - 1 -22 2 
x1 = - 2, y1 = g (- 2) = 19, msec = -5
 y - 19 = -5x - 10	
Distribute.
 y = -5x + 9	
Slope–intercept form of the secant line
(c)	 Figure 27 shows the graph of g along with the secant line y = -5x + 9.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
Example 8
Solution
g (1) = 3(1)2 - 2(1) + 3 = 4
g (- 2) = 3(- 2)2 - 2(- 2) + 3 = 19
•
Slope of the Secant Line
The average rate of change of a function from a to b equals the slope of the 
secant line containing the two points 1 a, f1a2 2 and 1b, f1b2 2 on its graph.
Theorem
Figure 27  Graph of g and the secant line
−4
−3
3
24

112 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
In Problems 25–32, the graph of a function is given. Use the graph to find:
(a)	The intercepts, if any
(b)	The domain and range
(c)	The intervals on which the function is increasing, decreasing, or constant
(d)	Whether the function is even, odd, or neither
	 25.	
26.	
27.	
28.
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red. 
	 1.	 The interval 12, 52 can be written as the inequality    . 
(pp. 1016–1017)  
	 2.	 The slope of the line containing the points 1- 2, 32 and 
13, 82 is 
. (pp. 53–55)
	 3.	 Test the equation y = 5x2 - 1 for symmetry with respect to 
the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin. (pp. 46–48) 
	 4.	 Write the point–slope form of the line with slope 5  
containing the point 13, - 22. (p. 57) 
	 5.	 The intercepts of the equation y = x2 - 9 are    . 
(pp. 45–46) 
2.3  Assess Your Understanding
	 6.	 A function f is 
 on an open interval I if, for any 
choice of x1 and x2 in I, with x1 6 x2, we have f1x12 6 f1x22.
	 7.	 A(n) 
 function f is one for which f1- x2 = f1x2 for 
every x in the domain of f; a(n) 
 function f is one for 
which f1- x2 = - f1x2 for every x in the domain of f.
	 8.	 True or False  A function f is decreasing on an open interval 
I if, for any choice of x1 and x2 in I, with x1 6 x2, we have 
f1x12 7 f1x22. 
	 9.	 True or False  A function f has a local maximum at c if 
there is an open interval I containing c such that for all x in 
I, f1x2 … f1c2. 
	 10.	 True or False    Even functions have graphs that are  
symmetric with respect to the origin. 
	 11.	 An odd function is symmetric with respect to    .
(a)	 the x-axis  (b)  the y-axis
(c)	 the origin  (d)  the line y = x 
	 12.	 Which of the following intervals is required to guarantee a 
continuous function will have both an absolute maximum 
and an absolute minimum?
(a)	 (a, b)       (b)  (a, b4
(c)	 3a, b)      (d)  3a, b4 
Concepts and Vocabulary
In Problems 13–24, use the graph of the function f given.
	 13.	 Is f increasing on the interval 1- 8, - 22? 
	 14.	 Is f decreasing on the interval 1- 8, - 42? 
	 15.	 Is f increasing on the interval 1- 2, 62? 
	 16.	 Is f decreasing on the interval 12, 52? 
	 17.	 List the interval(s) on which f is increasing. 
	 18.	 List the interval(s) on which f is decreasing. 
	 19.	 Is there a local maximum at 2? If yes, what is it? 
	 20.	 Is there a local maximum at 5? If yes, what is it? 
	 21.	 List the number(s) at which f has a local maximum. What are the local maximum values? 
	 22.	 List the number(s) at which f has a local minimum. What are the local minimum values? 
	 23.	 Find the absolute maximum of f on 3 - 10, 74. 
	 24.	 Find the absolute minimum of f on 3 - 10, 74. 
Skill Building
x
y
5
10
10
26
25
210
(0, 0)
(28, 24)
(25, 0)
(210, 0)
(22, 6)
(2, 10)
(5, 0)
(7, 3)
x
y
4
4
4
(0, 3)
(4, 2)
(2, 0)
(4, 2)
(2, 0)
x
y
3
3
3
(3, 3)
(3, 3)
(0, 2)
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
x
y
3
3
3
(0, 1)
x
y
3
3
3
(1, 0)

Section 2.3  Properties of Functions  113
x
y
2
2



(, 1)
(, 1)
2

2

(0, 1)
x
y
3
3
–3
–3
(–3, 2)
(–1, 2)
(3, 1)
(1, –1) (2, –1)
)
( , 0
1–3
)
(0, 1–2
x
y
3
3
2
3
(3, 2)
(2, 1)
(2.3, 0)
(2, 2)
(0, 1)
(3, 0)
x
y
4
4
4
(0, 3)
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
x
y
3
3
3
(0, 2)
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
x
y
2
2
π
π
(π, 1)
(π, 1)
2
π
2
π

    , 1

––2


––2
       , 1
(
)
(
)

––2


––2
x
y
2
2


x
y


    , 1

––2


––2
       , 1
(
)
(
)

––2


––2
1
1
	 37.	  f1x2 = 4x3 
	 38.	 f1x2 = 2x4 - x2 
	 39.	 h1x2 = 3x3 + 5 
	 40.	 g1x2 = - 3x2 - 5 
	 41.	 G1x2 = 1x 
	 42.	 F1x2 = 2
3 x 
	 43.	 f1x2 = 2
3 2x2 + 1 
	 44.	 f1x2 = x + 0 x0  
	 45.	 h1x2 =
x
x2 - 1 
	 46.	 g1x2 = 1
x2 
	 47.	 F1x2 = 2x
0 x0  
	 48.	 h1x2 =
-x3
3x2 - 9 
(5, 1)
(3, 3)
(2, 2)
(1, 4)
1
3
5
x
y
4
2
(0, 1)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)
1
3
x
y
4
2
(5, 0)
(4, 4)
(1, 1)
(0, 2)
1
3
5
x
y
4
2
(4, 3)
(3, 4)
(1, 1)
(0, 3)
1
3
5
x
y
4
2
In Problems 37–48, determine algebraically whether each function is even, odd, or neither.
(0, 0)
(2, 3)
(3, 2)
1
3
x
y
4
2
(2, 4)
(0, 2)
1
3
x
y
4
2
(0, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 0)
(3, 1)
1
3
x
y
2
	 57.	  f1x2 = x3 - 3x + 2 1- 2, 22
	 58.	 f1x2 = x3 - 3x2 + 5 1- 1, 32
	 59.	 f1x2 = x4 - x2 1- 2, 22
	 60.	 f1x2 = x5 - x3 1- 2, 22
	 61.	 f1x2 = - 0.4x3 + 0.6x2 + 3x - 2 1- 4, 52
	 62.	 f1x2 = - 0.2x3 - 0.6x2 + 4x - 6 1- 6, 42
	 63.	 f1x2 = - 0.4x4 - 0.5x3 + 0.8x2 - 2 1- 3, 22
	 64.	 f1x2 = 0.25x4 + 0.3x3 - 0.9x2 + 3 1- 3, 22
(2, 0)
(3, 2)
(4, 1)
1
3
x
y
2
In Problems 57–64, use a graphing utility to graph each function over the indicated interval and approximate any local maximum values 
and local minimum values. Determine where the function is increasing and where it is decreasing. Round answers to two decimal places.
	 29.	
30.	
31.	
32.
In Problems 33–36, the graph of a function f is given. Use the graph to find:
(a)	The numbers, if any, at which f has a local maximum. What are the local maximum values?
(b)	The numbers, if any, at which f has a local minimum. What are the local minimum values?
	 33.	
34.	
35.	
36.
In Problems 49–56, for each graph of a function y = f(x), find the absolute maximum and the absolute minimum, if they exist. Identify 
any local maximum values or local minimum values.
	 49.	
50.	
51.	
52.
	 53.	
54.	
55.	
56.

114 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
	 65.	 Find the average rate of change of f1x2 = - 2x2 + 4:
(a)	 From 0 to 2 
(b)	 From 1 to 3 
(c)	 From 1 to 4 
	 66.	 Find the average rate of change of f1x2 = - x3 + 1:
(a)	 From 0 to 2 
(b)	 From 1 to 3 
(c)	 From - 1 to 1
	 67.	 Find the average rate of change of g1x2 = x3 - 2x + 1:
(a)	 From - 3 to - 2 
(b)	 From - 1 to 1 
(c)	 From 1 to 3
	 68.	 Find the average rate of change of h1x2 = x2 - 2x + 3:
(a)	 From - 1 to 1
(b)	 From 0 to 2 
(c)	 From 2 to 5 
	 69.	 f1x2 = 5x - 2
(a)	 Find the average rate of change from 1 to 3. 
(b)	 Find an equation of the secant line containing 11, f1122 
and 13, f1322. 
	 70.	 f1x2 = - 4x + 1
(a)	 Find the average rate of change from 2 to 5. 
(b)	 Find an equation of the secant line containing 12, f1222 
and 15, f1522. 
	 71.	 g1x2 = x2 - 2
(a)	 Find the average rate of change from -2 to 1. 
(b)	 Find an equation of the secant line containing 
1- 2, g1- 222 and 11, g1122. 
	 72.	 g1x2 = x2 + 1
(a)	 Find the average rate of change from -1 to 2. 
(b)	 Find an equation of the secant line containing 
1- 1, g1- 122 and 12, g1222. 
	 73.	 h1x2 = x2 - 2x
(a)	 Find the average rate of change from 2 to 4. 
(b)	 Find an equation of the secant line containing 12, h1222 
and 14, h1422. 
	 74.	 h1x2 = - 2x2 + x
(a)	 Find the average rate of change from 0 to 3. 
(b)	 Find an equation of the secant line containing 10, h1022 
and 13, h1322. 
Mixed Practice
	 79.	 Minimum Average Cost    The average cost per hour in  
dollars, C, of producing x riding lawn mowers can be  
modeled by the function
C1x2 = 0.3x2 + 21x - 251 + 2500
x
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to graph C = C1x2.
(b)	 Determine the number of riding lawn mowers to  
produce in order to minimize average cost. 
(c)	 What is the minimum average cost? 
	 80.	 Medicine Concentration  The concentration C of a medication  
in the bloodstream t hours after being administered is  
modeled by the function
C1t2 = - 0.002x4 + 0.039t3 - 0.285t2 + 0.766t + 0.085
(a)	 After how many hours will the concentration be  
highest? 
(b)	 A woman nursing a child must wait until the concentration 
is below 0.5 before she can feed him. After taking the 
medication, how long must she wait before feeding her 
child? 
	 81.	 Data Plan Cost  The monthly cost C, in dollars, for wireless 
data plans with x gigabytes of data included is shown in the 
table below. Since each input value for x corresponds to  
exactly one output value for C, the plan cost is a function  
of 
the 
number 
of 
data 
gigabytes. 
Thus 
C(x)  
represents the monthly cost for a wireless data plan with  
x gigabytes included.
GB
Cost ($)
GB
Cost ($)
  4
  70
20
150
  6
  80
30
225
10
100
40
300
15
130
50
375
(a)	 Plot the points (4, 70), (6, 80), (10, 100), and so on in a 
Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Draw a line segment from the point (10, 100) to 
(30, 225). What does the slope of this line segment  
represent?
Applications and Extensions
	 75.	 g(x) = x3 - 27x
(a)	 Determine whether g is even, odd, or neither. 
(b)	 There is a local minimum value of - 54 at 3. 
Determine the local maximum value. 
	 76.	 f(x) = - x3 + 12x
(a)	 Determine whether f is even, odd, or neither. 
(b)	 There is a local maximum value of 16 at 2. Determine  
the local minimum value. 
	 77.	 F(x) = - x4 + 8x2 + 8
(a)	 Determine whether F is even, odd, or neither. 
(b)	 There is a local maximum value of 24 at x = 2. Determine 
a second local maximum value. 
(c)	 Suppose the area under the graph of F between 
x = 0 and x = 3 that is bounded from below by the 
x-axis is 47.4 square units. Using the result from part (a),  
determine the area under the graph of F between 
x = - 3 and x = 0 that is  bounded from below by the 
x-axis. 
	 78.	 G(x) = - x4 + 32x2 + 144
(a)	 Determine whether G is even, odd, or neither. 
(b)	 There is a local maximum value of 400 at x = 4. Determine 
a second local maximum value. 
(c)	 Suppose the area under the graph of G between x = 0 
and x = 6 that is bounded from below by the x-axis 
is 1612.8 square units. Using the result from part (a), 
determine the area under the graph of G between 
x = - 6 and x = 0 that is bounded from below by the 
x-axis. 

Section 2.3  Properties of Functions  115
(c)	 Find the average rate of change of the monthly cost 
from 4 to 10 gigabytes. 
(d)	 Find the average rate of change of the monthly cost 
from 10 to 30 gigabytes. 
(e)	 Find the average rate of change of the monthly cost 
from 30 to 50 gigabytes. 
(f)	 What is happening to the average rate of change as the 
gigabytes of data increase?
	 82.	 National Debt  The size of the total debt owed by the United 
States federal government continues to grow. In fact, according  
to the Department of the Treasury, the debt per person  
living in the United States is approximately $53,000 (or over 
$140,000 per U.S. household). The following data represent 
the U.S. debt for the years 2001–2013. Since the debt D  
depends on the year y, and each input corresponds to exactly  
one output, the debt is a function of the year. So D(y)  
represents the debt for each year y.
 
Year
Debt (billions 
of dollars)
 
Year
Debt (billions  
of dollars)
2001
5807
2008
10,025
2002
6228
2009
11,910
2003
6783
2010
13,562
2004
7379
2011
14,790
2005
7933
2012
16,066
2006
8507
2013
16,738
2007
9008
(a)	 Plot the points (2001, 5807), (2002, 6228), and so on in a 
Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Draw a line segment from the point (2001, 5807) to 
(2006, 8507). What does the slope of this line segment 
represent?
(c)	 Find the average rate of change of the debt from 2002 to 
2004. 
(d)	 Find the average rate of change of the debt from 2006 to 
2008. 
(e)	 Find the average rate of change of the debt from 2010 to 
2012. 
(f)	 What appears to be happening to the average rate of 
change as time passes?
	 83.	 Bacterial Growth  A strain of bacteria is placed into a nutri-
ent broth at 30°C and allowed to grow. The data collected 
are shown below. The population is measured in grams and 
the time in hours. Since population P depends on time t and 
each input corresponds to exactly one output, we say that 
population is a function of time; so P(t) represents the popu-
lation at time t.
Time 
(hr), t
Population 
(g), P
0
4.5
5.5
6.5
8
0.06
0.15
0.24
0.36
0.52
(a)	 Find the average rate of change of the population from 
0 to 4.5 hours. 
(b)	 Find the average rate of change of the population from 
6.5 to 8 hours. 
	 84.	 e-Filing Tax Returns    The Internal Revenue Service  
Restructuring and Reform Act (RRA) was signed into 
law by President Bill Clinton in 1998. A major objective of 
the RRA was to promote electronic filing of tax returns. 
The data in the table that follows show the percentage of  
individual income tax returns filed electronically for filing 
years 2004–2012. Since the percentage P of returns filed  
electronically depends on the filing year y, and each input  
corresponds to exactly one output, the percentage of  
returns filed electronically is a function of the filing year; so 
P1y2 represents the percentage of returns filed electronically 
for filing year y.
(a)	 Find the average rate of change of the percentage of  
e-filed returns from 2004 to 2006. 
(b)	 Find the average rate of change of the percentage of  
e-filed returns from 2007 to 2009. 
(c)	 Find the average rate of change of the percentage of  
e-filed returns from 2010 to 2012. 
(d)	 What is happening to the average rate of change as time 
passes? 
Source: Internal Revenue Service
Year
Percentage of
returns e-filed
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
46.5
51.1
53.8
57.1
58.5
67.2
69.8
77.2
82.7
	 85.	 For the function f1x2 = x2, compute the average rate of 
change:
(a)	 From 0 to 1 
(b)	 From 0 to 0.5 
(c)	 From 0 to 0.1 
(d)	 From 0 to 0.01 
(e)	 From 0 to 0.001 
(f)	 Use a graphing utility to graph each of the secant lines 
along with f.
(g)	 What do you think is happening to the secant lines?
(h)	 What is happening to the slopes of the secant lines? Is 
there some number that they are getting closer to? What 
is that number? 
Source: www.treasurydirect.gov

116 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
	 86.	 For the function f1x2 = x2, compute the average rate of 
change:
(a)	 From 1 to 2         (b)  From 1 to 1.5 
(c)	 From 1 to 1.1 
    (d)  From 1 to 1.01 
(e)	 From 1 to 1.001 
(f)	 Use a graphing utility to graph each of the secant lines 
along with f.
(g)	 What do you think is happening to the secant lines?
(h)	 What is happening to the slopes of the secant lines? Is 
there some number that they are getting closer to? What 
is that number? 
Problems 87–94 require the following discussion of a secant line. The slope of the secant line containing the two points 1x, f1x22 and 
1x + h, f1x + h22 on the graph of a function y = f1x2 may be given as
msec =
f1x + h2 - f1x2
1x + h2 - x
=
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
,  h ≠0
In calculus, this expression is called the difference quotient of f.
(a)	Express the slope of the secant line of each function in terms of x and h. Be sure to simplify your answer.
(b)	Find msec for h = 0.5, 0.1, and 0.01 at x = 1. What value does msec approach as h approaches 0?
(c)	Find an equation for the secant line at x = 1 with h = 0.01.
(d)	Use a graphing utility to graph f and the secant line found in part (c) in the same viewing window.
	 87.	 f1x2 = 2x + 5
	 88.	 f1x2 = - 3x + 2
	 89.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x
	 90.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + x
	 91.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 3x + 1
	 92.	 f1x2 = - x2 + 3x - 2
	 93	 f1x2 = 1
x
	 94.	 f1x2 = 1
x2
	 95.	 Draw the graph of a function that has the following properties: 
domain: all real numbers; range: all real numbers; intercepts: 
10, -32 and 13, 02; a local maximum value of - 2 is at - 1; a 
local minimum value of - 6 is at 2. Compare your graph with 
those of others. Comment on any differences.
	 96.	 Redo Problem 95 with the following additional information: 
increasing on 1- q, - 12, 12, q 2; decreasing on 1- 1, 22. 
Again compare your graph with others and comment on any 
differences.
	 97.	 How many x-intercepts can a function defined on an interval 
have if it is increasing on that interval? Explain. 
	 98.	 Suppose that a friend of yours does not understand the idea of 
increasing and decreasing functions. Provide an explanation,  
complete with graphs, that clarifies the idea.
	 99.	 Can a function be both even and odd? Explain.
	100.	 Using a graphing utility, graph y = 5 on the interval 
1- 3, 32. Use MAXIMUM to find the local maximum  
values on 1- 3, 32. Comment on the result provided by the 
calculator.
	101.	 A function f has a positive average rate of change on the 
interval 32, 54. Is f increasing on 32, 54? Explain.
102.	 Show that a constant function f(x) = b has an average 
rate of change of 0. Compute the average rate of change of 
y = 24 - x2 on the interval 3 - 2, 24. Explain how this can 
happen.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 1.	 2 6 x 6 5    2.  1    3.  symmetric with respect to the y-axis    4.  y + 2 = 51x - 32    5.  1- 3, 02, 13, 02, 10, -92
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 103–106 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	103.	 Given f1x2 =
x2
2x + 5, find f1- 32. What is the corresponding 
point on the graph of f ? 
104.	 The rental charge of a moving truck is $40 per day plus a 
mileage charge of $0.80 per mile. Express the cost C to rent 
a moving truck for one day as a function of the number x of 
miles driven. 
105.	 Write the equation of the line perpendicular to y = 3
5
 x - 1 
that contains the point 13, - 12. 
106.	 Find the difference quotient for f1x2 = 3x2 - 5x.
                                                                                  

Section 2.4  Library of Functions; Piecewise-defined Functions  117
Graph the Functions Listed in the Library of Functions
First we introduce a few more functions, beginning with the square root function.
On page 49, we graphed the equation y = 1x. Figure 28 shows a graph of the 
function f1x2 = 1x. Based on the graph, we have the following properties:
1
2.4	 Library of Functions; Piecewise-defined Functions
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Intercepts (Section 1.2, pp. 45–46)
•	 Graphs of Key Equations (Section 1.2:  
Example 3, p. 45; Example 10, p. 49;  
Example 11, p. 49; Example 12, p. 50)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 124.
	
Objectives	 1  Graph the Functions Listed in the Library of Functions  (p. 117)
	
	 	2  Graph Piecewise-defined Functions  (p. 122)
Figure 28  Square root function
Properties of f (x) = !x
	 1.	 The domain and the range are the set of nonnegative real numbers.
	 2.	 The x-intercept of the graph of f1x2 = 1x is 0. The y-intercept of the 
graph of f1x2 = 1x is also 0.
	 3.	 The function is neither even nor odd.
	 4.	 The function is increasing on the interval 10, q 2.
	 5.	 The function has an absolute minimum of 0 at x = 0.
x
y
 (9, 3)
6
 (4, 2)
 (0, 0)
10
–2
5
 (1, 1)
Graphing the Cube Root Function
(a)	 Determine whether f1x2 = 2
3 x is even, odd, or neither. State whether the 
graph of f is symmetric with respect to the y-axis or symmetric with respect to 
the origin.
(b)	 Determine the intercepts, if any, of the graph of f1x2 = 2
3 x.
(c)	 Graph f1x2 = 2
3 x.
(a)	 Because
f1-x2 = 2
3 -x = - 2
3 x = -f1x2
	
the function is odd. The graph of f is symmetric with respect to the origin.
(b)	 The y-intercept is f102 = 2
3 0 = 0. The x-intercept is found by solving the 
equation f1x2 = 0.
 f1x2 = 0
 2
3 x = 0 
f (x) = 2
3 x
 x = 0 
Cube both sides of the equation.
	
The x-intercept is also 0.
(c)	 Use the function to form Table 4 on page 118 and obtain some points on the 
graph. Because of the symmetry with respect to the origin, we find only points 
1x, y2 for which x Ú 0. Figure 29 shows the graph of f1x2 = 2
3 x.
Example 1
Solution

118 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
From the results of Example 1 and Figure 29, we have the following properties 
of the cube root function.
Properties of f(x) = !x
	 1.	 The domain and the range are the set of all real numbers.
	 2.	 The x-intercept of the graph of f1x2 = 2
3 x is 0. The y-intercept of the
	
	 graph of f1x2 = 2
3 x is also 0.
	 3.	 The function is odd. The graph is symmetric with respect to the origin. 
	 4.	 The function is increasing on the interval 1 - q, q 2.
	 5.	 The function does not have any local minima or any local maxima.
3
Figure 29  Cube Root Function
•
x
y = f (x) = !x
(x, y)
0
0
(0, 0)
1
8
1
2
a1
8
 , 1
2b
1
1
(1, 1)
2
2
3 2 ≈1.26
12, 2
3 22
8
2
(8, 2)
Table 4
3
(  ,  )
x
y
3
 (1, 1)
 (1, 1)
 (2,   2 )
 (0, 0)
3
3
3
3
 (2,   2 )
3
1–8
1–2
(  ,  )
1–8
1–2
Graphing the Absolute Value Function
(a)	 Determine whether f1x2 = 0 x0  is even, odd, or neither. State whether the 
graph of f is symmetric with respect to the y-axis, symmetric with respect to the  
origin, or neither.
(b)	 Determine the intercepts, if any, of the graph of f1x2 = 0 x0 .
(c)	 Graph f1x2 = 0 x0 .
(a)	 Because
 f1 -x2 = 0 -x0
 = 0 x0 = f1x2
	
the function is even. The graph of f is symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
(b)	 The y-intercept is f102 = 0 00 = 0. The x-intercept is found by solving the  
equation f1x2 = 0, or 0 x0 = 0. The x-intercept is 0.
(c)	 Use the function to form Table 5 and obtain some points on the graph. Because 
of the symmetry with respect to the y-axis, we only need to find points 1x, y2 for 
which x Ú 0. Figure 30 shows the graph of f1x2 = 0 x0 .
Example 2
Solution
Figure 30  Absolute Value Function •
x
y = f (x) = ∣x ∣
(x, y)
0
0
(0, 0)
1
1
(1, 1)
2
2
(2, 2)
3
3
(3, 3)
Table 5
From the results of Example 2 and Figure 30, we have the following properties 
of the absolute value function.
x
y
3
2
1
 (1, 1)
 (1, 1)
 (2, 2)
 (2, 2)
 (3, 3)
 (3, 3)
 (0, 0)
1
2
3
1
3
1
2

Section 2.4  Library of Functions; Piecewise-defined Functions  119
Below is a list of the key functions that we have discussed. In going through this list, 
pay special attention to the properties of each function, particularly to the shape of 
each graph. Knowing these graphs, along with key points on each graph, will lay the 
foundation for further graphing techniques.
Properties of f(x) = ∣x ∣
	 1.	 The domain is the set of all real numbers. The range of f is 5y y Ú 06.
	 2.	 The x-intercept of the graph of f1x2 = 0 x0  is 0. The y-intercept of the 
graph of f1x2 = 0 x0  is also 0.
	 3.	 The function is even. The graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis. 
	 4.	 The function is decreasing on the interval 1 - q, 02. It is increasing on the 
interval 10, q 2.
	 5.	 The function has an absolute minimum of 0 at x = 0.
Identity Function
f1x2 = x
Square Function
f1x2 = x2
Constant Function
f1x2 = b  b is a real number
Seeing the Concept
Graph y = 0 x0  on a square screen and compare what you see with Figure 30. Note that some graphing 
calculators use abs(x) for absolute value.
Figure 31  Constant Function
See Figure 31.
The domain of a constant function is the set of all real numbers; its range is the 
set consisting of a single number b. Its graph is a horizontal line whose y-intercept 
is b. The constant function is an even function.
x
y
f(x) = b
(0,b)
See Figure 32.
The domain and the range of the identity function are the set of all real  
numbers. Its graph is a line whose slope is 1 and whose y-intercept is 0. The line 
consists of all points for which the x-coordinate equals the y-coordinate. The identity 
function is an odd function that is increasing over its domain. Note that the graph 
bisects quadrants I and III.
Figure 32  Identity Function
x
y
3
3
–3
(1, 1)
(–1, –1)
f(x) = x
(0, 0)
See Figure 33.
The domain of the square function is the set of all real numbers; its range is 
the set of nonnegative real numbers. The graph of this function is a parabola whose 
intercept is at 10, 02. The square function is an even function that is decreasing on 
the interval 1 - q, 02 and increasing on the interval 10, q 2.
Figure 33  Square Function
x
y
4
4
–4
(2, 4)
(0, 0)
(–2, 4)
f(x) = x2
(1, 1)
(–1, 1)

120 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
See Figure 34.
The domain and the range of the cube function are the set of all real numbers. 
The intercept of the graph is at 10, 02. The cube function is odd and is increasing 
on the interval 1 - q, q 2.
Reciprocal Function
f1x2 = 1
x
Absolute Value Function
f1x2 = 0 x0
Cube Root Function
f1x2 = 2
3 x
Square Root Function
f1x2 = 2x
Cube Function
f1x2 = x3
Figure 34  Cube Function
x
y
4
4
4
f(x) = x 3
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
4
Figure 35  Square Root Function
See Figure 35.
The domain and the range of the square root function are the set of nonnegative 
real numbers. The intercept of the graph is at 10, 02. The square root function is 
neither even nor odd and is increasing on the interval 10, q 2.
x
y
5
2
1
f(x) =    x
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(4, 2)
Figure 36  Cube Root Function
See Figure 36.
The domain and the range of the cube root function are the set of all real  
numbers. The intercept of the graph is at 10, 02. The cube root function is an odd 
function that is increasing on the interval 1 - q, q 2.
(  ,  )
x
y
3
 (1, 1)
 (1, 1)
 (2,   2 )
 (0, 0)
3
3
3
3
 (2,   2 )
3
1–8
1–2
(  ,  )
1–8
1–2
Figure 37  Reciprocal Function
Refer to Example 12, page 50, for a discussion of the equation y = 1
x. See 
Figure 37.
The domain and the range of the reciprocal function are the set of all nonzero 
real numbers. The graph has no intercepts. The reciprocal function is decreasing on 
the intervals 1 - q, 02 and 10, q 2 and is an odd function.
Figure 38  Absolute Value Function
See Figure 38.
The domain of the absolute value function is the set of all real numbers; its 
range is the set of nonnegative real numbers. The intercept of the graph is at 10, 02. 
If x Ú 0, then f1x2 = x, and the graph of f is part of the line y = x; if x 6 0, 
then f1x2 = -x, and the graph of f is part of the line y = -x. The absolute value  
function is an even function; it is decreasing on the interval 1 - q, 02 and increasing 
on the interval 10, q 2.
, 2
(
)
1–2
(
)
1–2
x
y
2
2
f(x) =
(1, 1)
(21, 21)
22
1––x
22
22, 2
x
y
3
3
3
f(x) = x
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(2, 2)
(2, 2)

Section 2.4  Library of Functions; Piecewise-defined Functions  121
The notation int1x2 stands for the largest integer less than or equal to x. For 
example,
int112 = 1, int12.52 = 2, inta1
2b = 0, inta -  3
4b = -1, int1p2 = 3
This type of correspondence occurs frequently enough in mathematics that we give 
it a name.
Table 6 
 
x
y = f (x)
      = int (x)
 
(x, y)
-1
-1
(-1, -1)
-  1
2
-1
a-  1
2
 , -1b
-  1
4
-1
a-  1
4
 , -1b
      0
0
(0, 0)
      1
4
0
a1
4
 , 0b
      1
2
0
a1
2
 , 0b
      3
4
0
a3
4
 , 0b
*Some texts use the notation f1x2 = 3x4 instead of int1x2.
Definition  Greatest Integer Function
f1x2 = int1x2* = greatest integer less than or equal to x
We obtain the graph of f1x2 = int1x2 by plotting several points. See Table 6. For  
values of x, -1 … x 6 0, the value of f1x2 = int1x2 is -1; for values of x, 
0 … x 6 1, the value of f is 0. See Figure 39 for the graph.
The domain of the greatest integer function is the set of all real numbers; its range 
is the set of integers. The y-intercept of the graph is 0. The x-intercepts lie in the interval 
30, 12. The greatest integer function is neither even nor odd. It is constant on every 
interval of the form 3k, k + 12, for k an integer. In Figure 39, a solid dot is used to 
indicate, for example, that at x = 1 the value of f is f112 = 1; an open circle is used to 
illustrate that the function does not assume the value of 0 at x = 1.
Although a precise definition requires the idea of a limit (discussed in calculus), 
in a rough sense, a function is said to be continuous if its graph has no gaps or holes 
and can be drawn without lifting a pencil from the paper on which the graph is 
drawn. We contrast this with a discontinuous function. A function is discontinuous 
if its graph has gaps or holes and so cannot be drawn without lifting a pencil from 
the paper.
From the graph of the greatest integer function, we can see why it is also called a 
step function. At x = 0, x = {1, x = {2, and so on, this function is discontinuous 
because, at integer values, the graph suddenly “steps” from one value to another 
without taking on any of the intermediate values. For example, to the immediate 
left of x = 3, the y-coordinates of the points on the graph are 2, and at x = 3 and 
to the immediate right of x = 3, the y-coordinates of the points on the graph are 3. 
Consequently, the graph has gaps in it.
Figure 39  Greatest Integer Function
x
y
4
2
2
2
4
3
Comment  When graphing a function using a graphing utility, typically you can choose  
either connected mode, in which points plotted on the screen are connected, making the graph appear 
without any breaks, or dot mode, in which only the points plotted appear. When graphing the greatest 
integer function with a graphing utility, it may be necessary to be in dot mode. This is to prevent the 
utility from “connecting the dots” when f1x2 changes from one integer value to the next. However, some 
utilities will display the gaps even when in “connected” mode. See Figure 40.	
■
Figure 40  f1x2 = int1x2
22
22
6
D TI-83 Plus, connected mode
6
6
−2
6
−2
(c) TI-84 Plus C
22
22
6
6
E TI-83 Plus, dot mode

122 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
The functions discussed so far are basic. Whenever you encounter one of them, 
you should see a mental picture of its graph. For example, if you encounter the  
function f1x2 = x2, you should see in your mind’s eye a picture like Figure 33.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 1  t h r o u g h  1 8
Graph Piecewise-defined Functions
Sometimes a function is defined using different equations on different parts of its 
domain. For example, the absolute value function f1x2 = 0 x0  is actually defined by 
two equations: f1x2 = x if x Ú 0 and f1x2 = -x if x 6 0. For convenience, these 
equations are generally combined into one expression as
f1x2 = 0 x0 = e
x
if x Ú 0
-x
if x 6 0
When a function is defined by different equations on different parts of its domain, 
it is called a piecewise-defined function.
Analyzing a Piecewise-defined Function
The function f is defined as
f1x2 = c
-2x + 1
if -3 … x 6 1
2
if x = 1
x2
if x 7 1
(a)	 Find f1 -22, f112, and f122.	
(b)  Determine the domain of f.
(c)	 Locate any intercepts.	
(d)  Graph f.
(e)	 Use the graph to find the range of f.	
(f)  Is f continuous on its domain?
(a)	 To find f1 -22, observe that when x = -2, the equation for f is given by 
f1x2 = -2x + 1. So
f1 -22 = -2(-2) + 1 = 5
	
When x = 1, the equation for f is f1x2 = 2. So,
f112 = 2
	
When x = 2, the equation for f is f1x2 = x2. So
f122 = 22 = 4
(b)	 To find the domain of f, look at its definition. Since f is defined for all x greater 
than or equal to -3, the domain of f is 5x x Ú -36, or the interval 3 -3, q 2.
(c)	 The y-intercept of the graph of the function is f102. Because the equation for 
f when x = 0 is f1x2 = -2x + 1, the y-intercept is f102 = -2102 + 1 = 1. 
The x-intercepts of the graph of a function f are the real solutions to the  
equation f1x2 = 0. To find the x-intercepts of f, solve f1x2 = 0 for each “piece” 
of the function, and then determine what values of x, if any, satisfy the condition 
that defines the piece.
	
f1x2 = 0	
f1x2 = 0	
f1x2 = 0
	
-2x + 1 = 0	
- 3 … x 6 1	
2 = 0	
x = 1	
x2 = 0 
x 7 1
	
-2x = -1  	
No solution  	
x = 0
	
x = 1
2
2
Example 3
Solution

Section 2.4  Library of Functions; Piecewise-defined Functions  123
	
The first potential x-intercept, x = 1
2, satisfies the condition -3 … x 6 1, so 
x = 1
2 is an x-intercept. The second potential x-intercept, x = 0, does not satisfy 
the condition x 7 1, so x = 0 is not an x-intercept. The only x-intercept is 1
2. The 
intercepts are (0, 1) and a1
2, 0b.
(d)	 To graph f, graph each “piece.” First graph the line y = -2x + 1 and keep 
only the part for which -3 … x 6 1. Then plot the point 11, 22 because, when 
x = 1, f1x2 = 2. Finally, graph the parabola y = x2 and keep only the part for 
which x 7 1. See Figure 41.
(e)	 From the graph, we conclude that the range of f is 5y y 7 -16, or the interval 
1 -1, q 2.
(f)	 The function f is not continuous because there is a “jump” in the graph at  
x = 1.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1
Cost of Electricity
In the spring of 2014, Duke Energy Progress supplied electricity to residences in 
South Carolina for a monthly customer charge of $6.50 plus 9.971¢ per kilowatt-hour  
(kWh) for the first 800 kWh supplied in the month and 8.971¢ per kWh for all usage 
over 800 kWh in the month.
(a)	 What is the charge for using 300 kWh in a month?
(b)	 What is the charge for using 1500 kWh in a month?
(c)	 If C is the monthly charge for x kWh, develop a model relating the monthly 
charge and kilowatt-hours used. That is, express C as a function of x.
Source: Duke Energy Progress, 2014
(a)	 For 300 kWh, the charge is $6.50 plus (9.971c = $0.09971) per kWh. That is,
Charge =  $6.50 +  $0.09971(300) =  $36.41
(b)	 For 1500 kWh, the charge is $6.50 plus 9.971c per kWh for the first 800 kWh plus 
8.971c per kWh for the 700 in excess of 800. That is,
Charge =  $6.50 +  $0.09971(800) +  $0.08971 (700) =  $ 149.07
(c)	 Let x represent the number of kilowatt-hours used. If 0 … x … 800, then the 
monthly charge C (in dollars) can be found by multiplying x times $0.09971and 
adding the monthly customer charge of $6.50. So if 0 … x … 800, then
C(x) = 0.09971x + 6.50
For  x 7  800, the charge is 0.09971(800) +  6.50 +  0.08971(x - 800), 
since (x - 800) equals the usage in excess of 800 kWh, which costs $0.08971 per 
kWh. That is, if x 7 800, then
C(x) = 0.09971(800) + 6.50 + 0.08971(x - 800)
= 79.768 + 6.50 + 0.08971x - 71.768
= 0.08971x + 14.50
	
The rule for computing C follows two equations:
C1x2 = e0.09971x + 6.50
if 0 … x … 800
0.08971x + 14.50
if x 7 800
 
The Model
	
See Figure 42 for the graph. Note that the two “pieces” are linear, but they have  
different slopes (rates), and meet at the point (800, 86.27).
•
Example 4
Solution
•
Figure 41 
y
8
(1, 1)
4
x
4
(2,4)
(1,2)
)
( , 0
1–2
(0,1)
Figure 42 
x
C
400
(0, 6.50)
(300, 36.41)
(800, 86.27)
(1500, 149.07)
Usage (kWh)
Charge (dollars)
60
120
180
800
1200

124 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Sketch the graph of y = 1x. (p. 49)
	 2.	 Sketch the graph of y = 1
x. (p. 50)
	 3.	 List the intercepts of the equation y = x3 - 8. (pp. 45–46) 
2.4  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 4.	 The function f1x2 = x2 is decreasing on the interval 
.
	 5.	 When functions are defined by more than one equation, 
they are called 
 functions.
	 6.	 True or False   The cube function is odd and is increasing on 
the interval 1- q, q 2. 
	 7.	 True or False    The cube root function is odd and is  
decreasing on the interval 1- q, q 2. 
	 8.	 True or False  The domain and the range of the reciprocal 
function are the set of all real numbers. 
	 9.	 Which of the following functions has a graph that is  
symmetric about the y-axis?
(a)	 y = 2x  (b)  y = x   (c)  y = x3  (d)  y = 1
x 
	 10.	 Consider the following function.
f(x) = c
3x - 2
if
x 6 2
x2 + 5
if
2 … x 6 10
3
if
x Ú 10
	
	 Which “piece(s)” should be used to find the y-intercept?
(a)	 3x - 2  (b)  x2 + 5  (c)  3  (d)  all three 
Skill Building
In Problems 11–18, match each graph to its function.
A.  Constant function	
B.  Identity function	
C.  Square function	
D.  Cube function
E.  Square root function	
F.  Reciprocal function	
G.  Absolute value function	
H.  Cube root function
In Problems 19–26, sketch the graph of each function. Be sure to label three points on the graph.
	 19.	 f1x2 = x2
	 20.	 f1x2 = x
	 21.	 f1x2 = 1x
	 22.	 f1x2 = x3
	 23.	 f1x2 = 0 x0
	 24.	 f1x2 = 1
x
	 25.	 f1x2 = 3
	 26.	 f1x2 = 2
3 x
	 27.	 If f1x2 = c
x2
if x 6 0
2
if x = 0
2x + 1
if x 7 0
	
	 find:  (a)  f1- 22    (b)  f102    (c)  f122 
	 28.	 If f1x2 = c
- 3x
if x 6 -1
0
if x = - 1
2x2 + 1
if x 7 - 1
	
	 find:  (a)  f1- 22    (b)  f1- 12    (c)  f102 
	 29.	 If f1x2 = e2x - 4
if - 1 … x … 2
x3 - 2
if 2 6 x … 3
	
	 find:  (a)  f102 
 (b)  f112 
 (c)  f122 
 (d)  f132 
	 30.	 If  f1x2 = ex3
if - 2 … x 6 1
3x + 2
if 1 … x … 4
	
	 find:  (a)  f1- 12 
 (b)  f102 
 (c)  f112 
 (d)  f(3) 
	 12.	              
	 13.	              
	 14.	            
	 15.	          
	 16.	            
	 17.	                    
	 11.	          
	 18.	              
In Problems 31–42:
(a)	Find the domain of each function.	
(b) Locate any intercepts.	
(c) Graph each function.
(d)	Based on the graph, find the range.	
(e) Is f continuous on its domain?
	 31.	  f1x2 = b2x
if x ≠0
1
if x = 0
	 32.	 f1x2 = b3x
if x ≠0
4
if x = 0
	 33.	 f1x2 = bx + 3
if x 6 - 2
- 2x - 3
if x Ú - 2

Section 2.4  Library of Functions; Piecewise-defined Functions  125
In Problems 43–46, the graph of a piecewise-defined function is given. Write a definition for each function.
	 43.	
44.	
45.	
46.	
47.	 If f1x2 = int12x2, find
(a)	 f11.22    (b)  f11.62    (c)  f1- 1.82 
Applications and Extensions
	 49.	 Tablet Service  A telephone company offers a monthly cel-
lular phone plan for $19.99. It includes 250 anytime minutes 
plus $0.25 per minute for additional minutes. The following 
function is used to compute the monthly cost for a subscriber, 
where x is the number of anytime minutes used.
C(x) = e19.99
if
0 6 x … 250
  0.25x - 42.51
if
x 7 250
	
	 Compute the monthly cost of the cellular phone for use of 
the following anytime minutes.
(a)	 100 
  (b)  320 
  (c)  251 
	 50.	 Parking at O’Hare International Airport    The short-term 
(no more than 24 hours) parking fee F (in dollars) for parking 
x hours on a weekday at O’Hare International Airport’s 
main parking garage can be modeled by the function
F1x2 = c
3
if 0 6 x … 3
5 int1x + 12 + 1
if 3 6 x 6 9
50
if 9 … x … 24
	
	 Determine the fee for parking in the short-term parking  
garage for
(a)	 2 hours 
     (b)  7 hours 
(c)  15 hours 
   (d)  8 hours and 24 minutes 
Source: O’Hare International Airport
	 51.	 Cost of Natural Gas    In March 2014, Laclede Gas had  
the rate schedule (on, right) for natural gas usage in  
single-family residences.
(a)	 What is the charge for using 20 therms in a month?
(b)	 What is the charge for using 150 therms in a month?
(c)	 Develop a function that models the monthly charge C 
for x therms of gas.
(d)	 Graph the function found in part (c).
	 48.	 If f1x2 = intax
2b, find
(a)	 f11.22    (b)  f11.62    (c)  f1-1.82 
x
y
2
2
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(2, 1)
2
x
y
2
2
2
(0, 0)
(2, 1)
(1, 1)
x
y
2
2
(2, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
x
y
2
(2, 2)
(1, 1)
(1, 0)
(0, 2)
2
	 34.	 f1x2 = b - 2x + 3
if x 6 1
3x - 2
if x Ú 1
	 35.	 f1x2 = c
2x + 5
if - 3 … x 6 0
- 3
if x = 0
- 5x
if x 7 0
	 36.	 f1x2 = c
x + 3
if -2 … x 6 1
5
if x = 1
- x + 2
if x 7 1
	 37.	 f1x2 = c
1
x
if x 6 0
2
3 x
if x Ú 0
	 38.	 f1x2 = b1 + x
if x 6 0
x2
if x Ú 0
	 39.	 f1x2 = b2 - x
if -3 … x 6 1
2x
if x 7 1
	 40.	 f1x2 = b 0 x 0
if - 2 … x 6 0
x3
if x 7 0
	 41.	 f1x2 = int12x2
	 42.	 f1x2 = 2 int1x2
Monthly service charge	
$19.50
Delivery charge	
 
First 30 therms	
$0.91686/therm
Over 30 therms	
$0
Natural gas cost	
 
First 30 therms	
$0.3313/therm
Over 30 therms	
$0.5757/therm
Source: Laclede Gas
	 52.	 Cost of Natural Gas    In April 2014, Nicor Gas had the  
following rate schedule for natural gas usage in small 
businesses.
Monthly customer charge	
$72.60
Distribution charge
1st 150 therms 	
$0.1201/therm
Next 4850 therms 	
$0.0549/therm
Over 5000 therms 	
$0.0482/therm
Gas supply charge 	
$0.68/therm
(a)	 What is the charge for using 1000 therms in a month?
(b)	 What is the charge for using 6000 therms in a month?
(c)	 Develop a function that models the monthly charge C 
for x therms of gas.
(d)	 Graph the function found in part (c).
Source: Nicor Gas, 2014

126 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
	 53.	 Federal Income Tax  A tax rate schedule is given in the table. If x equals taxable income and y equals the tax due, construct a 
function y = f(x) for the tax schedule.
If Taxable  
Income is 
Over
 
But Not 
Over
The Tax is  
This  
Amount
 
 
Plus This  
%
Of the  
Excess 
Over
$0
$8,000
$0.00
+
11%
$0
8,000
30,600
880.50
+
17%
8,000
30,600
74,100
4,722.00
+
24%
30,600
74,100
15,162.00
+
32%
74,100
	 54.	 Federal Income Tax  Refer to the 2014 tax rate schedules. If 
x equals taxable income and y equals the tax due, construct 
a function y = f1x2 for Schedule Y-1.
	 55.	 Cost of Transporting Goods    A trucking company  
transports goods between Chicago and New York, a distance  
of 960 miles. The company’s policy is to charge, for each 
pound, $0.50 per mile for the first 100 miles, $0.40 per mile 
for the next 300 miles, $0.25 per mile for the next 400 miles, 
and no charge for the remaining 160 miles.
(a)	 Graph the relationship between the cost of transportation 
in dollars and mileage over the entire 960-mile route.
(b)	 Find the cost as a function of mileage for hauls between 
100 and 400 miles from Chicago. 
(c)	 Find the cost as a function of mileage for hauls between 
400 and 800 miles from Chicago. 
	 56.	 Car Rental Costs  An economy car rented in Florida from 
Enterprise® on a weekly basis costs $185 per week. Extra 
days cost $37 per day until the day rate exceeds the weekly 
rate, in which case the weekly rate applies. Also, any part of 
a day used counts as a full day. Find the cost C of renting 
an economy car as a function of the number x of days used, 
where 7 … x … 14. Graph this function.
	 57.	 Mortgage Fees An adverse market delivery charge rate 
depends on the credit score of the borrower, the amount 
borrowed, and the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio. The LTV ra-
tio is the ratio of amount borrowed to appraised value of 
the home. For example, a homebuyer who wishes to bor-
row $250,000 with a credit score of 730 and an LTV ratio of 
80% will pay 0.75% (0.0075) of $250,000 or $1875. The table 
shows the adverse delivery charge for various credit scores 
and an LTV ratio of 80%. Answer parts (a) through (c).
(a)	 Construct a function C = C(s) where C is the adverse 
market delivery charge and s is the credit score of an indi-
vidual who wishes to borrow $350,000 with an 80% LTV 
ratio.
(b)	 What is the adverse market delivery charge on a 
$350,000 loan with an 80% LTV ratio for a borrower 
whose credit score is 73? 
(c)	 What is the adverse market delivery charge on a 
$350,000 loan with an 80% LTV ratio for a borrower 
whose credit score is 664? 
	 58.	 Minimum Payments for Credit Cards    Holders of credit 
cards issued by banks, department stores, oil companies, and 
so on receive bills each month that state minimum amounts 
that must be paid by a certain due date. The minimum due 
depends on the total amount owed. One such credit card 
company uses the following rules: For a bill of less than $10, 
the entire amount is due. For a bill of at least $10 but less 
than $500, the minimum due is $10. A minimum of $30 is 
due on a bill of at least $500 but less than $1000, a minimum 
of $50 is due on a bill of at least $1000 but less than $1500, 
and a minimum of $70 is due on bills of $1500 or more. Find 
the function f that describes the minimum payment due on 
a bill of x dollars. Graph f.
	 59.	 Wind Chill  The wind chill factor on a certain planet is given 
by the formula below, where v is the wind speed (in meters 
per second) and t is the air temperature (°C).
W = d
t
0 … v 6 1.79
33 -
110.43 + 101v - v2 133 - t2
22.03
1.79 … v … 25
33 - 1.5957133 - t2
v 7 25
	
	 Compute the wind chill for the following:
(a)	 Find the wind chill for an air temperature of 10°C and a 
wind speed of 0.5 m/sec. 
(b)	 Find the wind chill for an air temperature of 10°C and a 
wind speed of 15 m/sec. 
(c)	 Find the wind chill for an air temperature of 10°C and a 
wind speed of 26 m/sec. 
(d)	 An air temperature of 10°C and a wind speed of 
25 m/sec.
(e)	 Explain the physical meaning of the equation  
corresponding to 0 … v 6 1.79.
(f)	 Explain the physical meaning of the equation  
corresponding to v 7 25.
Credit Score
Charge Rate
…659
3.5%
660–679
2.5%
680–699
1.75%
700–719
1%
720–739
0.75%
Ú740
0.25%

Section 2.5  Graphing Techniques: Transformations  127
	 60.	 Wind Chill  Redo Problem 59(a)–(d) for an air temperature 
of - 10°C.
	 61.	 First-class Mail    In 2014 the U.S. Postal Service charged 
$0.98 postage for first-class mail retail flats (such as an 8.5" 
by 11" envelope) weighing up to 1 ounce, plus $0.21 for each  
additional ounce up to 13 ounces. First-class rates do not  
apply to flats weighing more than 13 ounces. Develop a 
model that relates C, the first-class postage charged, for a 
flat weighing x ounces. Graph the function.
Source: United States Postal Service
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	
2.  	
3.  10, - 82, 12, 02
x
y
4
2
(4, 2)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
x
y
2
2
(1, 1)
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
In Problems 62–69, use a graphing utility.
	 62.	 Exploration    Graph y = x2. Then on the same screen 
graph y = x2 + 2, followed by y = x2 + 4, followed by 
y = x2 - 2. What pattern do you observe? Can you predict
	
	 the graph of y = x2 - 4? Of y = x2 + 5?
	 63.	 Exploration    Graph y = x2. Then on the same screen 
graph y = 1x - 222, followed by y = 1x - 422, followed 
by y = 1x + 222. What pattern do you observe? Can you  
predict the graph of y = 1x + 422? Of y = 1x - 522?
	 64.	 Exploration  Graph y = 0 x0 . Then on the same screen graph 
y = 20 x0 , followed by y = 40 x0 , followed by y = 1
2
 0 x0 . 
What pattern do you observe? Can you predict the graph of
	
	 y = 1
4
 0 x0 ? Of y = 50 x0 ?
	 65.	 Exploration  Graph y = x2. Then on the same screen graph 
y = - x2. Now try y = 0 x0  and y = - 0 x0 . What do you  
conclude?
	 66.	 Exploration  Graph y = 1x. Then on the same screen graph 
y = 1 - x. Now try y = 2x + 1 and y = 21- x2 + 1. What 
do you conclude?
	 67.	 Exploration  Graph y = x3. Then on the same screen graph 
y = 1x - 123 + 2. Could you have predicted the result?
	 68.	 Exploration  Graph y = x2, y = x4, and y = x6 on the same 
screen. What do you notice is the same about each graph? 
What do you notice is different?
	 69.	 Exploration  Graph y = x3, y = x5, and y = x7 on the same 
screen. What do you notice is the same about each graph? 
What do you notice is different?
	 70.	 Consider the equation  
y = b1
if x is rational
0
if x is irrational
	
	 Is this a function? What is its domain? What is its range? 
What is its y-intercept, if any? What are its x-intercepts, if 
any? Is it even, odd, or neither? How would you describe its 
graph?
	 71.	 Define some functions that pass through 10, 02 and 
11, 12 and are increasing for x Ú 0. Begin your list with 
y = 1x, y = x, and y = x2. Can you propose a general  
result about such functions?
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 72–75 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
2.5	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations
	
Objectives	 1  Graph Functions Using Vertical and Horizontal Shifts  (p. 128)
	
	 	2  Graph Functions Using Compressions and Stretches  (p. 131)
	
	 	3  Graph Functions Using Reflections about the x-Axis and the y-Axis  (p. 133)
At this stage, if you were asked to graph any of the functions defined by y = x,
y = x2, y = x3, y = 2x, y = 2
3 x, y = 1
x, or y = 0 x0 , your response should be, 
“Yes, I recognize these functions and know the general shapes of their graphs.”  
(If this is not your answer, review the previous section, Figures 32 through 38.)
	 72.	 Given g1x2 = 2x2 - 4 + 7, find x so that g1x2 = 10.
	 73.	 Find the center and radius of the circle x2 + y2 = 6y + 16.
	 74.	 Find the slope of a line parallel to 3x - 4y = 12. 
	 75.	 Use a graphing utility to graph h1x2 = 2x3 - 5x2 - 3x 
on the interval 1- 4, 42 and approximate any local  
maximum values or local minimum values. Round  
answers to two decimal places. 
	
	

128 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Sometimes we are asked to graph a function that is “almost” like one that we 
already know how to graph. In this section, we develop techniques for graphing such 
functions. Collectively, these techniques are referred to as transformations.
Graph Functions Using Vertical and Horizontal Shifts
Vertical Shift Up
Use the graph of f1x2 = x2 to obtain the graph of g1x2 = x2 + 3. Find the domain 
and range of g.
Begin by obtaining some points on the graphs of f and g. For example, when x = 0, 
then y = f102 = 0 and y = g102 = 3. When x = 1, then y = f112 = 1 and 
y = g112 = 4. Table 7 lists these and a few other points on each graph. Notice that 
each y-coordinate of a point on the graph of g is 3 units larger than the y-coordinate 
of the corresponding point on the graph of f. We conclude that the graph of g is  
identical to that of f, except that it is shifted vertically up 3 units. See Figure 43.
1
Example 1
Solution
•
Figure 43 
 
x
y = f (x)  
   = x2
y = g (x)  
   = x2 + 3
- 2
4
7
- 1
1
4
    0
0
3
    1
1
4
    2
4
7
Table 7 
y
5
(1, 4)
(2, 4)
(0, 3)
(1, 1)
(2, 4)
(1, 1)
(1, 4)
(2, 7)
(0, 0)
(2, 7)
y = x2
x
3
3
y = x2 + 3
Up 3
units
The domain of g is all real numbers, or 1 - q, q 2. The range of g is 33, q 2.
Vertical Shift Down
Use the graph of f1x2 = x2 to obtain the graph of g1x2 = x2 - 4. Find the domain 
and range of g.
Table 8 lists some points on the graphs of f and g. Notice that each y-coordinate of g 
is 4 units less than the corresponding y-coordinate of f.
To obtain the graph of g from the graph of f, subtract 4 from each y-coordinate 
on the graph of f. The graph of g is identical to that of f, except that it is shifted  
down 4 units. See Figure 44.
Example 2
Solution
•
Figure 44 
y
4
(2, 0)
(2, 4)
(–2, 4)
(2, 0)
(0, 0)
(0, 4)
y = x2
Down
4 units
Down
4 units
x
4
5
y = x2  4
 
x
y = f (x)  
   = x2
y = g (x)  
   = x2 −4
- 2
4
    0
- 1
1
- 3
    0
0
- 4
    1
1
- 3
    2
4
    0
Table 8 
The domain of g is all real numbers, or 1 - q, q 2. The range of g is 3 -4, q 2.
Note that a vertical shift affects only the range of a function, not the domain. For  
example, the range of f(x) = x2 is 30, q). In Example 1 the range of g is 33, q), 
whereas in Example 2 the range of g is 3 -4, q). The domain for all three functions 
is all real numbers.

Section 2.5  Graphing Techniques: Transformations  129
Exploration  On the same screen, graph each of the following functions:
 Y1 = x2
 Y2 = x2 + 2
 Y3 = x2 - 2
Figure 45 illustrates the graphs. You should have observed a general pattern. With Y1 = x2 on the 
screen, the graph of Y2 = x2 + 2 is identical to that of Y1 = x2, except that it is shifted vertically up  
2 units. The graph of Y3 = x2 - 2 is identical to that of Y1 = x2, except that it is shifted vertically down 
2 units.
Figure 45 
We are led to the following conclusions:
−6
−2
6
6
Y2 = x2 + 2
Y3 = x2 − 2
Y1 = x2
In Words
For y = f (x) + k, k 7 0, add k  
to each y-coordinate on the graph 
of y = f (x) to shift the graph  
up k units.
For y = f (x) - k, k 7 0, subtract 
k from each y-coordinate to shift 
the graph down k units.
If a positive real number k is added to the output of a function y = f1x2, the 
graph of the new function y = f1x2 + k is the graph of f shifted vertically up 
k units.
If a positive real number k is subtracted from the output of a function y = f1x2, 
the graph of the new function y = f1x2 - k is the graph of f shifted vertically 
down k units.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Horizontal Shift to the Right
Use the graph of f1x2 = 1x to obtain the graph of g1x2 = 1x - 2. Find the 
domain and range of g.
The function g1x2 = 1x - 2 is basically a square root function. Table 9 lists some 
points on the graphs of f and g. Note that when f1x2 = 0, then x = 0, and when 
g1x2 = 0, then x = 2. Also, when f1x2 = 2, then x = 4, and when g1x2 = 2, 
then x = 6. Notice that the x-coordinates on the graph of g are 2 units larger than 
the corresponding x-coordinates on the graph of f for any given y-coordinate. 
We conclude that the graph of g is identical to that of f, except that it is shifted  
horizontally 2 units to the right. See Figure 46.
Example 3
Solution
Figure 46 
 
x
y = f (x) 
  = 1x
 
x
y = g (x)  
  = 1x −2
0
0
  2
0
1
1
  3
1
4
2
  6
2
9
3
11
3
Table 9 
x
y
(0, 0)
9
(2, 0)
(4, 2)
Right 2 units
Right 2 units
(6, 2)
y = "x
y = "x − 2
5
The domain of g is [2, q) and the range is [0, q).
Horizontal Shift to the Left
Use the graph of f1x2 = 1x to obtain the graph of g1x2 = 1x + 4. Find the 
domain and range of g.
The function g1x2 = 1x + 4 is basically a square root function. Its graph is the same as 
that of f, except that it is shifted horizontally 4 units to the left. See Figure 47 on page 130.
•
Example 4
Solution

130 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
The domain of g is [-4, q) and the range is [0, q).
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Note that a horizontal shift affects only the domain of a function, not the range. 
For example, the domain of f1x2 = 1x is [0, q). In Example 3 the domain of g is 
[2, q), whereas in Example 4 the domain of g is [-4, q). The range for all three 
functions is [0, q).
•
Figure 47 
Figure 48 
x
y
(0, 0)
5
−5
(4, 2)
(0, 2)
Left 4 units
Left 4 units
(−4, 0)
y = "x
y = "x + 4
5
Exploration  On the same screen, graph each of the following functions:
 Y1 = x2
 Y2 = (x - 3)2
 Y3 = (x + 2)2
Figure 48 illustrates the graphs.
You should have observed the following pattern. With the graph of Y1 = x2 on the screen, the 
graph of Y2 =  (x - 3)2 is identical to that of Y1 = x2, except that it is shifted horizontally to the right 
3 units. The graph of Y3 = (x + 2)2 is identical to that of Y1 = x2, except that it is shifted horizontally 
to the left 2 units.
We are led to the following conclusions:
If the argument x of a function f is replaced by x - h, h 7 0, the graph of the 
new function y = f1x - h2 is the graph of f shifted horizontally right h units. 
If the argument x of a function f is replaced by x + h, h 7 0, the graph of the 
new function y = f1x + h2 is the graph of f shifted horizontally left h units.
In Words
For y = f (x - h), h 7 0, add h to 
each x-coordinate on the graph of 
y = f (x) to shift the graph right 
h units. For y = f (x + h), h 7 0, 
subtract h from each x-coordinate 
on the graph of y = f (x) to shift 
the graph left h units.
−6
−2
6
6
Y3 = (x + 2)2
Y2 = (x − 3)2
Y1 = x2
Observe the distinction between vertical and horizontal shifts. The graph of 
f1x2 = x3 + 2 is obtained by shifting the graph of y = x3 up 2 units, because we 
evaluate the cube function first and then add 2. The graph of g(x) = 1x + 223 is 
obtained by shifting the graph of y = x3 left 2 units, because we add 2 to x before 
we evaluate the cube function.
Vertical and horizontal shifts are sometimes combined.
Combining Vertical and Horizontal Shifts
Graph the function f1x2 =  x + 3 - 5. Find the domain and range of f.
We graph f in steps. First, note that the rule for f is basically an absolute value function,  
so begin with the graph of y =  x as shown in Figure 49(a). Next, to get the  
graph of y =  x + 3, shift the graph of y =  x horizontally 3 units to the left. 
See Figure 49(b). Finally, to get the graph of y =  x + 3 - 5, shift the graph of 
y =  x + 3 vertically down 5 units. See Figure 49(c). Note the points plotted on 
each graph. Using key points can be helpful in keeping track of the transformation 
that has taken place.
Example 5
Solution

Section 2.5  Graphing Techniques: Transformations  131
The domain of f is all real numbers, or 1 - q, q 2. The range of f is [-5, q).
Check:	Graph Y1 = f1x2 =  x + 3 - 5 and compare the graph to  
Figure 49(c).
In Example 5, if the vertical shift had been done first, followed by the horizontal 
shift, the final graph would have been the same. Try it for yourself.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  4 5  a n d  6 9
Graph Functions Using Compressions and Stretches
Vertical Stretch
Use the graph of f1x2 = 1x to obtain the graph of g1x2 = 21x.
To see the relationship between the graphs of f and g, we form Table 10, listing points 
on each graph. For each x, the y-coordinate of a point on the graph of g is 2 times as 
large as the corresponding y-coordinate on the graph of f. The graph of f1x2 = 1x 
is vertically stretched by a factor of 2 to obtain the graph of g1x2 = 21x. For 
example, 11, 12 is on the graph of f, but 11, 22 is on the graph of g. See Figure 50.
•
2
Example 6
Solution
Figure 49 
x
y
(0, 0)
5
Replace x by x + 3;
Horizontal shift
left 3 units
(2, 2)
(−2, 2)
y = 0 x 0
5
(a)
x
y
(−3, 0)
2
Subtract 5:
Vertical shift
down 5 units
(−1, 2)
(−5, 2)
y = 0 x + 30
5
(b)
x
y
(−3, −5)
2
(−1, −3)
(−5, −3)
y = 0 x + 30 − 5
5
(c)
Figure 50 
•
 
x
y = f (x)  
  = 1x
y = g (x)  
  = 21x
0
0
0
1
1
2
4
2
4
9
3
6
Table 10 
x
y
(0, 0)
10
5
(1, 1)
(4, 2)
(9, 3)
(4, 4)
(9, 6)
(1, 2)
y = "x
y = 2"x
5
Vertical Compression
Use the graph of f1x2 = 0 x0  to obtain the graph of g1x2 = 1
2
 0 x0 .
For each x, the y-coordinate of a point on the graph of g is 1
2 as large as the 
corresponding y-coordinate on the graph of f. The graph of f1x2 = 0 x0  is vertically 
compressed by a factor of 1
2 to obtain the graph of g1x2 = 1
2
 0 x0 . For example, 12, 22 is 
on the graph of f, but 12, 12 is on the graph of g. See Table 11 and Figure 51 on page 132.
Example 7
Solution

132 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Figure 51 
•
 
 
x
 
y = f (x)  
  = x 
y = g (x)  
  = 1
2x 
-2
2
1
-1
1
1
2
    0
0
0
    1
1
1
2
    2
2
1
Table 11 
x
y
4
4
4
(2, 2)
(–2, 1)
(0, 0)
(2, 2)
(2, 1)
y =    x
y =x
1–2
When the right side of a function y = f1x2 is multiplied by a positive number a,  
the graph of the new function y = af1x2 is obtained by multiplying each 
y-coordinate on the graph of y = f1x2 by a. The new graph is a vertically  
compressed (if 0 6 a 6 1) or a vertically stretched (if a 7 1) version of the 
graph of y = f1x2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
What happens if the argument x of a function y = f1x2 is multiplied by a  
positive number a, creating a new function y = f1ax2? To find the answer, look at 
the following Exploration.
In Words
For y = af (x), a 7 0, the  
factor a is “outside” the function, 
so it affects the y-coordinates. 
Multiply each y-coordinate on  
the graph of y = f (x) by a.
Exploration  On the same screen, graph each of the following functions:
Y1 = f (x) = 1x  Y2 = f (2x) = 12x  Y3 = f a1
2xb = A
1
2
 x = A
x
2
Create a table of values to explore the relation between the x- and y-coordinates of each function.
Result  You should have obtained the graphs in Figure 52. Look at Table 12(a). Note that (1, 1), (4, 2), 
and (9, 3) are points on the graph of Y1 = 1x. Also, (0.5, 1), (2, 2), and (4.5, 3) are points on the graph of 
Y2 = 22x. For a given y-coordinate, the x-coordinate on the graph of Y2 is 1
2 of the x-coordinate on Y1. 
Figure 52 
0
0
3
4
Y2 = √2x
Y1 = √x
Y3 =
x
2
Ä
Table 12 
(a)
(b)
We conclude that the graph of Y2 = 22x  is obtained by multiplying the x-coordinate of each point on 
the graph of Y1 = 1x by 1
2. The graph of Y2 = 22x is the graph of Y1 = 1x compressed horizontally.
Look at Table 12(b). Notice that (1, 1), (4, 2), and (9, 3) are points on the graph of Y1 = 1x. Also 
notice that (2, 1), (8, 2), and (18, 3) are points on the graph of Y3 = A
x
2. For a given y-coordinate, 
the x-coordinate on the graph of Y3 is 2 times the x-coordinate on Y1. We conclude that the graph of 
Y3 = A
x
2 is obtained by multiplying the x-coordinate of each point on the graph of Y1 = 1x  by 2. 
The graph of Y3 = A
x
2 is the graph of Y1 = 1x stretched horizontally.

Section 2.5  Graphing Techniques: Transformations  133
In Words
For y = f (ax), a 7 0, the  
factor a is “inside” the function, 
so it affects the x-coordinates. 
Multiply each x-coordinate on the 
graph of y = f (x) by 1
a.
Based on the Exploration, we have the following result:
If the argument x of a function y = f1x2 is multiplied by a positive number a, 
then the graph of the new function y = f1ax2 is obtained by multiplying each
x-coordinate of y = f1x2 by 1
a. A horizontal compression results if a 7 1, and 
a horizontal stretch results if 0 6 a 6 1.
Let’s look at an example.
Graphing Using Stretches and Compressions
The graph of y = f1x2 is given in Figure 53. Use this graph to find the graphs of
(a)	 y = 2f1x2	
(b)  y = f13x2
(a)	 The graph of y = 2f1x2 is obtained by multiplying each y-coordinate of 
y = f1x2 by 2. See Figure 54.
(b)	 The graph of y = f13x2 is obtained from the graph of y = f1x2 by multiplying 
each x-coordinate of y = f1x2 by 1
3. See Figure 55.
Example 8
Solution
Figure 53  y = f1x2
Figure 54  y = 2f1x2
Figure 55  y = f13x2
•
(
(
(
(
(
(
x
y
y  f(x)
1
2
1
2
3

 , 1
2
5 , 1
2
3 , 1
2

2
3
2
5
(
(
(
(
(
(
x
y
3
1
2
3
1
2
2

2
 , 2
2
5 , 2
2
3 , 2
2

2
3
2
5
(
(
(
(
(
(
x
y
3
2
1
2
1 
3

2
3
6
 , 1
6
5 , 1
2
 , 1
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  6 3 ( e )  a n d  ( g )
Graph Functions Using Reflections about the x-Axis  
and the y-Axis
Reflection about the x-Axis
Graph the function f1x2 = -x2. Find the domain and range of f.
Solution  Begin with the graph of y = x2, as shown in black in Figure 56. For each 
point (x, y) on the graph of y = x2, the point 1x, -y2 is on the graph of y = -x2, as 
indicated in Table 13. Draw the graph of y = -x2 by reflecting the graph of y = x2 
about the x-axis. See Figure 56.
3
Example 9
Figure 56 
x
y = x 2
y = −x 2
-2
4
-4
-1
1
-1
    0
0
    0
    1
1
-1
    2
4
-4
Table 13 
x
y
4
4
4
(–2, –4)
–4
(–1, –1)
(1, 1)
(2, 4)
(2, –4)
(1, –1)
(1, 1)
(2, 4)
y = x 2
y =  –x 2
The domain of f is all real numbers, or (- q, q). The range of f is (- q, 0].
•

134 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
When the right side of the function y = f1x2 is multiplied by -1, the graph of 
the new function y = -f1x2 is the reflection about the x-axis of the graph of 
the function y = f1x2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Reflection about the y-Axis
Graph the function f1x2 = 1-x. Find the domain and range of f.
To get the graph of f1x2 = 1-x, begin with the graph of y = 1x, as shown in 
Figure 57. For each point 1x, y2 on the graph of y = 1x, the point 1-x, y2 is on 
the graph of y = 1-x. Obtain the graph of y = 1-x by reflecting the graph of 
y = 1x about the y-axis. See Figure 57.
Example 10
Solution
In Words
For y = - f (x), multiply each 
y-coordinate on the graph of 
y = f (x) by - 1.
For y = f (- x), multiply each 
x-coordinate by - 1.
Figure 57 
x
y
4
–5
(–1, 1)
(1, 1)
y =    x
5
(4, 2)
(–4, 2)
y =    –x
(0, 0)
The domain of f is (- q, 0]. The range of f is the set of all nonnegative real numbers, 
or [0, q).
When the graph of the function y = f1x2 is known, the graph of the new  
function y = f1 -x2 is the reflection about the y-axis of the graph of the  
function y = f1x2.
•
Summary of Graphing Techniques
To Graph:	
Draw the Graph of f and:	
Functional Change to f(x)
Vertical shifts	
 	
 
  y = f1x2 + k, k 7 0	
Raise the graph of f by k units.	
Add k to f1x2.
  y = f1x2 - k, k 7 0	
Lower the graph of f by k units.	
Subtract k from f1x2.
Horizontal shifts	
 	
 
  y = f1x + h2, h 7 0	
Shift the graph of f to the left h units.	
Replace x by x + h.
  y = f1x - h2, h 7 0	
Shift the graph of f to the right h units.	
Replace x by x - h.
Compressing or stretching	
 	
 
  y = af1x2, a 7 0	
Multiply each y-coordinate of y = f1x2 by a.	
Multiply f1x2 by a.
 	
  Stretch the graph of f vertically if a 7 1.	
 
 	
  Compress the graph of f vertically if 0 6 a 6 1.	
 
  y = f1ax2, a 7 0	
Multiply each x-coordinate of y = f1x2 by 1
a.	
Replace x by ax.
 	
  Stretch the graph of f horizontally if 0 6 a 6 1.	
 
 	
  Compress the graph of f horizontally if a 7 1.	
 
Reflection about the x-axis	
 	
 
  y = -f1x2	
Reflect the graph of f about the x-axis.	
Multiply f1x2 by -1.
Reflection about the y-axis	
 	
 
  y = f1 -x2	
Reflect the graph of f about the y-axis.	
Replace x by -x.

Section 2.5  Graphing Techniques: Transformations  135
Determining the Function Obtained from a Series 
of Transformations
Find the function that is finally graphed after the following three transformations 
are applied to the graph of y = 0 x0 .
  1.  Shift left 2 units
  2.  Shift up 3 units
  3.  Reflect about the y-axis
  1.  Shift left 2 units:  Replace x by x + 2.	
 y = 0 x + 20
  2.  Shift up 3 units:  Add 3.	
 y = 0 x + 20 + 3
  3.  Reflect about the y-axis:  Replace x by -x.	  y = 0 -x + 20 + 3
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Combining Graphing Procedures
Graph the function f1x2 =
3
x - 2 + 1. Find the domain and range of f.
It is helpful to write f as f (x) = 3a
1
x - 2b + 1. Now use the following steps to  
obtain the graph of f.
Step 1:	  y = 1
x	
Reciprocal function
Step 2:	  y = 3 # a1
xb = 3
x	
Multiply by 3; vertical stretch by a factor of 3.
Step 3:	  y =
3
x - 2	
Replace x  by x - 2; horizontal shift to the right 2 units.
Step 4:	  y =
3
x - 2 + 1	
Add 1; vertical shift up 1 unit.
See Figure 58.
Example 11
Solution
•
Example 12
Solution
Figure 58 
x
4
(1, 1)
(2, )
)
(4, )
)
1–2
(2,
(21, 21)
Multiply by 3;
Vertical stretch
1––x
(a)   y 5
y
4
24
24
Add 1;
Vertical shift
up 1 unit
x
y
4
4
24
24
5–2
3
–––
x –2
3
–––
x –2
(d)   y 5
(1, 22)
   1 1
(3, 4)
Replace x by x 2 2;
Horizontal shift
right 2 units
4
4
(3, 3)
24
3–2
(4,
(c)   y 5
x
y
(1, 3)
3–2
(21, 23)
3––
x 
(b)   y 5 
x
y
4
4
24
24
(1, 23)
The domain of y = 1
x is 5x x ≠06 and its range is 5y y ≠06. Because we
shifted right 2 units and up 1 unit to obtain f, the domain of f is 5x x ≠26 and its 
range is 5y y ≠16.
•

136 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Other orderings of the steps shown in Example 12 would also result in the graph 
of f. For example, try this one:
Step 1:	  y = 1
x	
Reciprocal function
Step 2:	  y =
1
x - 2	
Replace x  by x - 2; horizontal shift to the right 2 units.
Step 3:	  y =
3
x - 2	
Multiply by 3; vertical stretch by a factor of 3.
Step 4:	  y =
3
x - 2 + 1	 Add 1; vertical shift up 1 unit.
Combining Graphing Procedures
Graph the function f1x2 = 21 - x + 2. Find the domain and range of f.
Because horizontal shifts require the form x - h, begin by rewriting f1x2 as
f1x2 = 21 - x + 2 = 2 -(x - 1) + 2. Now use the following steps.
Step 1:	  y = 1x	
Square root function
Step 2:	  y = 2 -x	
Replace x by - x; reflect about the y-axis.
Step 3:	  y = 2 -(x - 1) = 21 - x	 Replace x by x -  1; horizontal shift to the right 1 unit.
Step 4:	  y = 21 - x + 2	
Add 2; vertical shift up 2 units.
See Figure 59.
Example 13
Solution
Hint:  Although the order in which  
transformations are performed can be  
altered, consider using the following  
order for consistency:
  1.  Reflections
  2.  Compressions and stretches
  3.  Shifts
Figure 59 
(1, 1)
5
(4, 2)
(0, 0)
y
5
x
5
(a)   y     x
(1, 1)
x
5
5
y
5
(b)   y    x 
(0, 1)
(3, 2)
(4, 2)
(1, 0)
x
5
5
y
5
(c)   y      (x  1)
       x  1
      1  x
Add 2;
Vertical shift
up 2 units
(0, 3)
(3, 4)
(1, 2)
x
5
5
y
5
(d)   y     1   x  2
Replace x by x  1;
Horizontal shift
right 1 unit
Replace x by x;
Reflect
about y-axis
(0, 0)
The domain of f is (- q, 1] and the range is [2, q).
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
•
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 Suppose that the graph of a function f is known. Then the 
graph of y = f1x - 22 may be obtained by a(n) 
 
shift of the graph of f to the 
 a distance of 2 units.
	 2.	 Suppose that the graph of a function f is known. Then the 
graph of y = f1- x2 may be obtained by a reflection about 
the     
-axis of the graph of the function y = f1x2.
	 3.	 True or False    The graph of y = 1
3
 g(x) is the graph of 
y = g(x) stretched by a factor of 3. 
	 4.	 True or False    The graph of y = - f1x2 is the reflection 
about the x-axis of the graph of y = f1x2. 
	 5.	 Which of the following functions has a graph that is the 
graph of y = 2x shifted down 3 units?
(a)	 y = 2x + 3    (b)  y = 2x - 3
(c)	 y = 2x + 3    (d)  y = 2x - 3 
	 6.	 Which of the following functions has a graph that is the 
graph of y = f (x) compressed horizontally by a factor of 4?
(a)	 y = f (4x)    (b)  y = f ¢1
4
 x≤
(c)	 y = 4f (x)    (d)  y = 1
4
 f ¢x≤ 
2.5  Assess Your Understanding

Section 2.5  Graphing Techniques: Transformations  137
Skill Building
x
y
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
x
y
1
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
In Problems 7–18, match each graph to one of the following functions:
A.  y = x2 + 2	
B.  y = - x2 + 2	
C.  y = 0 x0 + 2	
D.  y = - 0 x0 + 2
E.  y = 1x - 222	
F.  y = - 1x + 222	
G.  y = 0 x - 20 	
H.  y = - 0 x + 20
I.  y = 2x2	
J.  y = - 2x2	
K.  y = 20 x0 	
L.  y = - 20 x0
	 7.	
8.	
9.	
10.	
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
5
3
3
1
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
8
6
6
4
x
y
4
4
4
4
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
4
4
4
4
x
y
3
3
3
3
In Problems 19–26, write the function whose graph is the graph of y = x3, but is:
	 19.	 Shifted to the left 4 units
	 20.	 Shifted to the right 4 units 
In Problems 27–30, find the function that is finally graphed after each of the following transformations is applied to the graph of 
y = 1x in the order stated.
	 27.	 (1)	 Shift up 2 units
(2)	 Reflect about the x-axis
(3)	 Reflect about the y-axis 
	 28.	 (1)	 Reflect about the x-axis
(2)	 Shift right 3 units
(3)	 Shift down 2 units 
	 21.	 Shifted down 4 units 
	 22.	 Shifted up 4 units 
	 24.	 Reflected about the x-axis 
	 24.	 Reflected about the y-axis 
	 26.	 Horizontally stretched by a factor of 4
	 26.	 Vertically stretched by a factor of 4 
	 29.	 (1)	 Shift up 2 units
(2)	 Reflect about the y-axis
(3)	 Shift left 3 units 
	 31.	 If 13, 62 is a point on the graph of y = f1x2, which of the 
following points must be on the graph of y = - f1x2? 
(a)	 16, 32	
(b)  16, - 32
(c)	 13, - 62	
(d)  1-3, 62
	 33.	 If 11, 32 is a point on the graph of y = f1x2, which of the 
following points must be on the graph of y = 2f1x2? 
(a)	 a1, 3
2b	
(b)  12, 32
(c)	 11, 62	
(d)  a1
2, 3b
	 34.	 If 14, 22 is a point on the graph of y = f1x2, which of the 
following points must be on the graph of y = f12x2? 
(a)	 14, 12	
(b)  18, 22
(c)	 12, 22	
(d)  14, 42
	 30.	 (1)	 Reflect about the x-axis
(2)	 Shift up 2 units
(3)	 Shift left 3 units
	 32.	 If 13, 62 is a point on the graph of y = f1x2, which of the 
following points must be on the graph of y = f1-x2? 
(a)	 16, 32	
(b)  16, -32
(c)	 13, - 62	
(d)  1-3, 62
	 11.	
12.	
13.	
14.	
15.	
16.	
17.	
18.	

138 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
	 35.	 Suppose that the x-intercepts of the graph of y = f1x2  
are -5 and 3.
(a)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of y = f1x + 22?
(b)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of y = f1x - 22?
(c)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of y = 4f1x2?
(d)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of y = f1- x2?
	 36.	 Suppose that the x-intercepts of the graph of y = f1x2  
are - 8 and 1.
(a)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of y = f1x + 42?
(b)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of y = f1x - 32?
(c)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of y = 2f1x2?
(d)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of y = f1-x2?
	 37.	 Suppose that the function y = f1x2 is increasing on the 
interval 1- 1, 52.
(a)	 Over what interval is the graph of y = f1x + 22  
increasing? 
(b)	 Over what interval is the graph of y = f1x - 52  
increasing? 
(c)	 What can be said about the graph of y = - f1x2?
(d)	 What can be said about the graph of y = f1- x2?
	 38.	 Suppose that the function y = f1x2 is decreasing on the  
interval 1- 2, 72.
(a)	 Over what interval is the graph of y = f1x + 22  
decreasing? 
(b)	 Over what interval is the graph of y = f1x - 52  
decreasing? 
(c)	 What can be said about the graph of y = -f1x2?
(d)	 What can be said about the graph of y = f1-x2?
In Problems 39–62, graph each function using the techniques of shifting, compressing, stretching, and/or reflecting. Start with the graph 
of the basic function (for example, y = x2) and show all stages. Be sure to show at least three key points. Find the domain and the range 
of each function.
	 39.	  f1x2 = x2 - 1
	 40.	 f1x2 = x2 + 4
	 41.	 g1x2 = x3 - 1
	 42.	 g1x2 = x3 + 1
	 43.	  h1x2 = 2x + 2
	 44.	 h1x2 = 2x + 1
	 45.	  f1x2 = 1x - 123 + 2
	 46.	 f1x2 = 1x + 223 - 3
	 47.	  g1x2 = 41x
	 48.	 g1x2 = 1
2
 1x
	 49.	  f1x2 = - 2
3 x
	 50.	 f1x2 = - 1x
	 51.	 f1x2 = 31x - 222 + 1
	 52.	 f1x2 = 21x + 122 - 3
	 53.	 g1x2 = 30 x + 10 - 3
	 54.	 g1x2 = 22x - 2 + 1
	 55.	  h1x2 = 1 - x - 2
	 56.	 h1x2 = 4
x + 2
	 57.	 f1x2 = - 42x - 1
	 58.	 f1x2 = - 1x + 123 - 1
	 59.	 g1x2 = 422 - x
	 60.	 g1x2 = 20 1 - x0
	 61.	 h1x2 = 2
3 x - 1 + 3
	 62.	 h1x2 = 1
2x
In Problems 63–66, the graph of a function f is illustrated. Use the graph of f as the first step toward graphing each of the following 
functions:
(a)	F1x2 = f1x2 + 3	
(b) G1x2 = f1x + 22	
(c) P1x2 = - f1x2	
(d) H1x2 = f1x + 12 - 2
(e)	Q1x2 = 1
2
 f1x2	
(f) g1x2 = f1- x2	
(g) h1x2 = f12x2
x
y
4
2
(4, 2)
(4, 0)
(2, 2)
(0, 2)
4
2
x
y
4
2
2
(4, 2)
(2, 2)
(4, 2)
4
(2, 2)
4
2
2
π
π
1
1
x
y
π–2
(   , 1)
π–2
π–2

(   , 1)
π–2
π
π
1
1
x
y
(π, 1)
(π, 1)
π–2
π–2

	 63.	
64.	
65.	
66.	
Mixed Practice
In Problems 67–74, complete the square of each quadratic expression. Then graph each function using the technique of shifting.  
(If necessary, refer to Appendix A, Section A.3 to review completing the square.)
	 67.  f1x2 = x2 + 2x	
68.  f1x2 = x2 - 6x	
69.  f1x2 = x2 - 8x + 1	
70.  f1x2 = x2 + 4x + 2
	 71.  f1x2 = 2x2 - 12x + 19	
72.  f1x2 = 3x2 + 6x + 1	
73.  f1x2 = - 3x2 - 12x - 17	
74.  f1x2 = -2x2 - 12x - 13

Section 2.5  Graphing Techniques: Transformations  139
	 76.	 The graph of a function f is illustrated in the figure.
(a)	 Draw the graph of y = 0 f1x2 0 .
(b)	 Draw the graph of y = f1 0 x0 2.
	 75.	 The graph of a function f is illustrated in the figure.
(a)	 Draw the graph of y = 0 f1x2 0 .
(b)	 Draw the graph of y = f1 0 x0 2.
Applications and Extensions
3
3
(1, 1)
(2, 0)
(1, 1)
(2, 1)
2
2
x
y
23
3
(1, 1)
(2, 0)
(21, 21)
(0, 21)
(22, 0)
22
2
x
y
	 84.	 Digital Music Revenues    The total projected worldwide 
digital music revenues R, in millions of dollars, for the years 
2012 through 2017 can be estimated by the function
R1x2 = 28.6x2 + 300x + 4843
	
	 where x is the number of years after 2012.
(a)	 Find R102, R132, and R152 and explain what each  
value represents.
(b)	 Find r1x2 = R1x - 22. 
(c)	 Find r122, r152, and r172 and explain what each value 
represents.
(d)	 In the model r = r1x2, what does x represent?
(e)	 Would there be an advantage in using the model r when 
estimating the projected revenues for a given year  
instead of the model R ?
Source: IFPI Digital Music Report 2013
	 85.	 Temperature Measurements    The relationship between 
the Celsius (°C) and Fahrenheit (°F) scales for measuring  
temperature is given by the equation
F = 9
5
 C + 32
	
	 The relationship between the Celsius (°C) and Kelvin (K) 
scales is K = C + 273. Graph the equation F = 9
5
  C + 32
	
	 using degrees Fahrenheit on the y-axis and degrees Celsius 
on the x-axis. Use the techniques introduced in this section  
to obtain the graph showing the relationship between Kelvin 
and Fahrenheit temperatures.
	 86.	 Period of a Pendulum  The period T (in seconds) of a simple 
pendulum is a function of its length l (in feet) defined by the 
equation
T = 2pA
l
g
	
	 where g ≈32.2 feet per second per second is the acceleration 
due to gravity. (Continued on page 140.)
	 77.	 Suppose 11, 32 is a point on the graph of y = f1x2.
(a)	 What point is on the graph of y = f1x + 32 - 5? 
(b)	 What point is on the graph of y = - 2f1x - 22 + 1? 
(c)	 What point is on the graph of y = f12x + 32? 
	 78.	 Suppose 1- 3, 52 is a point on the graph of y = g1x2.
(a)	 What point is on the graph of y = g1x + 12 - 3? 
(b)	 What point is on the graph of y = - 3g1x - 42 + 3? 
(c)	 What point is on the graph of y = g13x + 92? 
	 79.	 Graph the following functions using transformations.
(a)	 f(x) = int(- x)	
(b)  g(x) = - int(x)
	 80.	 Graph the following functions using transformations
(a)	 f(x) = int(x - 1)	
(b)  g(x) = int(1 - x)
	 81.	 (a)	 Graphf(x) = x - 3 - 3 using transformations.
(b)	 Find the area of the region that is bounded by f and the 
x-axis and lies below the x-axis.
	 82.	 (a)	 Graph f(x) = - 2x - 4 + 4 using transformations.
(b)	 Find the area of the region that is bounded by f and the 
x-axis and lies above the x-axis.
	 83.	 Thermostat Control  Energy conservation experts estimate 
that homeowners can save 5% to 10% on winter heating 
bills by programming their thermostats 5 to 10 degrees lower 
while sleeping. In the graph (top, right), the temperature T 
(in degrees Fahrenheit) of a home is given as a function of 
time t (in hours after midnight) over a 24-hour period.
(a)	 At what temperature is the thermostat set during  
daytime hours? At what temperature is the thermostat 
set overnight? 
(b)	 The 
homeowner 
reprograms 
the 
thermostat 
to y = T1t2 - 2. Explain how this affects the  
temperature in the house. Graph this new function.
(c)	 The 
homeowner 
reprograms 
the 
thermostat 
to y = T1t + 12. Explain how this affects the  
temperature in the house. Graph this new function.
Source: Roger Albright, 547 Ways to Be Fuel Smart, 2000
t
T
0
4
Time (hours after midnight)
Temperature (°) )
56
60
64
68
72
76
80
8
(6, 65)
(21, 72)
12 16 20 24

140 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the function T = T1l2.
(b)	 Now graph the functions T = T1l + 12, T = T1l + 22, 
and T = T1l + 32.
(c)	 Discuss how adding to the length l changes the period T.
(d)	 Now graph the functions T = T12l2, T = T13l2, and 
T = T14l2.
(e)	 Discuss how multiplying the length l by factors of 2, 3, 
and 4 changes the period T.
	 87.	 The equation y = 1x - c22 defines a family of parabolas, 
one parabola for each value of c. On one set of coordinate 
axes, graph the members of the family for c = 0, c = 3, and 
c = -2.
	 88.	 Repeat Problem 87 for the family of parabolas y = x2 + c.
	 89.	 Suppose that the graph of a function f is known. Explain 
how the graph of y = 4f1x2 differs from the graph of 
y = f14x2.
	 90.	 Suppose that the graph of a function f is known. Explain 
how the graph of y = f1x2 - 2 differs from the graph of 
y = f1x - 22.
	 91.	 The area under the curve y = 1x  bounded from below by the 
x-axis and on the right by x = 4 is 16
3  square units. Using the
	
	 ideas presented in this section, what do you think is the area 
under the curve of y = 1- x bounded from below by the 
x-axis and on the left by x = -4? Justify your answer.
	 92.	 Explain how the range of the function f (x) = x2 compares 
to the range of g(x) = f (x) + k.
	 93.	 Explain how the domain of g(x) = 2x compares to the  
domain of g(x - k), where k Ú 0.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 94–97 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 94.	 Determine the slope and y-intercept of the graph of 3x - 5y = 30. 
	 95.	 Determine algebraically if g1x2 = x2 + 2
3x
 is even, odd, or neither. 
	 96.	 Find the average rate of change of f1x2 = x4 - 7x2 + 3x + 9 on the interval [-2, 2]. 
	 97.	 List the intercepts and test for symmetry: y2 = x + 4 
2.6	 Mathematical Models: Building Functions
	
Objective	 1  Build and Analyze Functions  (p. 140)
Build and Analyze Functions
Real-world problems often result in mathematical models that involve functions. 
These functions need to be constructed or built based on the information given. 
In building functions, we must be able to translate the verbal description into the  
language of mathematics. This is done by assigning symbols to represent the  
independent and dependent variables and then by finding the function or rule that 
relates these variables.
Finding the Distance from the Origin to a Point on a Graph
Let P = 1x, y2 be a point on the graph of y = x2 - 1.
(a)	 Express the distance d from P to the origin O as a function of x.
(b)	 What is d if x = 0?
(c)	 What is d if x = 1?
(d)	 What is d if x = 22
2
 ?
1
Example 1

Section 2.6  Mathematical Models: Building Functions  141
(e)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the function d = d1x2, x Ú 0. Rounding to two 
decimal places, find the value(s) of x at which d has a local minimum. [This gives 
the point(s) on the graph of y = x2 - 1 closest to the origin.]
(a)	 Figure 60 illustrates the graph of y = x2 - 1. The distance d from P to O is
d = 21x - 022 + 1y - 022 = 2x2 + y2
	
Since P is a point on the graph of y = x2 - 1, substitute x2 - 1 for y. Then
d1x2 = 2x2 + 1x2 - 122 = 2x4 - x2 + 1
	
The distance d is expressed as a function of x.
(b)	 If x = 0, the distance d is
d102 = 204 - 02 + 1 = 21 = 1
(c)	 If x = 1, the distance d is
d112 = 214 - 12 + 1 = 1
(d)	 If x = 22
2 , the distance d is
da 12
2 b = B a 12
2 b
4
- a 12
2 b
2
+ 1 = B
1
4 - 1
2 + 1 = 13
2
(e)	 Figure 61 shows the graph of Y1 = 2x4 - x2 + 1. Using the MINIMUM  
feature on a graphing utility, we find that when x ≈0.71 the value of d is  
smallest. The local minimum is d ≈0.87 rounded to two decimal places. Since 
d1x2 is even, it follows by symmetry that when x ≈-0.71, the value of d is also 
a local minimum. Since 1 {0.7122 - 1 ≈-0.50, the points 1-0.71, -0.502 and 
10.71, -0.502 on the graph of y = x2 - 1 are closest to the origin.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1
Area of a Rectangle
A rectangle has one corner in quadrant I on the graph of y = 25 - x2, another at 
the origin, a third on the positive y-axis, and the fourth on the positive x-axis. See 
Figure 62.
(a)	 Express the area A of the rectangle as a function of x.
(b)	 What is the domain of A?
(c)	 Graph A = A1x2.
(d)	 For what value of x is the area largest?
(a)	 The area A of the rectangle is A = xy, where y = 25 - x2. Substituting this 
expression for y, we obtain A1x2 = x125 - x22 = 25x - x3.
(b)	 Since 1x, y2 is in quadrant I, we have x 7 0. Also, y = 25 - x2 7 0, which 
implies that x2 6 25, so -5 6 x 6 5. Combining these restrictions, we have the 
domain of A as 5x 0 6 x 6 56, or 10, 52 using interval notation.
(c)	 See Figure 63 on page 142 for the graph of A = A1x2.
(d)	 Using MAXIMUM, we find that the maximum area is 48.11 square units at 
x = 2.89 units, each rounded to two decimal places. See Figure 64.
Solution
•
Example 2
Solution
Figure 60  y = x2 - 1
x
y
2
21
(0, 0)
P5 (x, y)
21
1
2
1
d
Figure 61  d(x) = 2x4 - x2 + 1
2
0
2
Figure 62 
x
y
10
20
30
1
(x, y)
y  25  x 2
5
4
1
2
3
(0,0)

142 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Close Call?
Suppose two planes flying at the same altitude are headed toward each other. One 
plane is flying due south at a groundspeed of 400 miles per hour and is 600 miles 
from the potential intersection point of the planes. The other plane is flying due 
west with a groundspeed of 250 miles per hour and is 400 miles from the potential  
intersection point of the planes. See Figure 65.
(a)	 Build a model that expresses the distance d between the planes as a function of 
time t.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to graph d = d(t). How close do the planes come to each 
other? At what time are the planes closest?
(a)	 Refer to Figure 65. The distance d between the two planes is the hypotenuse of 
a right triangle. At any time t, the length of the north/south leg of the triangle 
is 600 - 400t. At any time t, the length of the east/west leg of the triangle is  
400 - 250t. Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find that the square of the  
distance between the two planes is
d2 = (600 - 400t)2 + (400 - 250t)2
	
Therefore, the distance between the two planes as a function of time is given by 
the model
d(t) = 2(600 - 400t)2 + (400 - 250t)2
(b)	 Figure 66(a) shows the graph of d = d(t). Using MINIMUM, the minimum  
distance between the planes is 21.20 miles, and the time at which the planes are 
closest is after 1.53 hours, each rounded to two decimal places. See Figure 66(b).
Example 3
Solution
Figure 63  A(x) = 25x - x3
5
00
50
Figure 64 
•
5
00
50
Figure 65 
E
N
400 mph
d
Plane
Plane
250 mph
400 miles
600 miles
Figure 66 
•
500
−50
0
2
(a)
(b)
Now Work   p r o b l e m  1 9

Section 2.6  Mathematical Models: Building Functions  143
2.6  Assess Your Understanding
	 1.	 Let P = 1x, y2 be a point on the graph of y = x2 - 8.
(a)	 Express the distance d from P to the origin as a function 
of x. 
(b)	 What is d if x = 0? 
(c)	 What is d if x = 1? 
(d)	 Use a graphing utility to graph d = d1x2.
(e)	 For what values of x is d smallest? 
 
	 2.	 Let P = 1x, y2 be a point on the graph of y = x2 - 8.
(a)	 Express the distance d from P to the point 10, - 12 as a 
function of x. 
(b)	 What is d if x = 0? 
(c)	 What is d if x = - 1? 
(d)	 Use a graphing utility to graph d = d1x2.
(e)	 For what values of x is d smallest? 
	 3.	 Let P = 1x, y2 be a point on the graph of y = 1x.
(a)	 Express the distance d from P to the point 11, 02 as a 
function of x. 
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to graph d = d1x2.
(c)	 For what values of x is d smallest? 
	 4.	 Let P = 1x, y2 be a point on the graph of y = 1
x.
(a)	 Express the distance d from P to the origin as a function 
of x.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to graph d = d1x2.
(c)	 For what values of x is d smallest? 
	 5.	 A right triangle has one vertex on the graph of y = x4, x 7 0 
at 1x, y2, another at the origin, and the third on the positive 
y-axis at 10, y2, as shown in the figure. Express the area A of 
the triangle as a function of x. 
	 6.	 A right triangle has one vertex on the graph of 
y = 9 - x2, x 7 0, at 1x, y2, another at the origin, and the 
third on the positive x-axis at 1x, 02. Express the area A of 
the triangle as a function of x.
	 7.	 A rectangle has one corner in quadrant I on the graph of 
y = 16 - x2, another at the origin, a third on the positive 
y-axis, and the fourth on the positive x-axis. See the figure 
(top, right).
(a)	 Express the area A of the rectangle as a function  
of x. 
(b)	 What is the domain of A? 
(c)	 Graph A = A1x2. For what value of x is A largest?
Applications and Extensions
x
y
4
(x, y)
y  16  x 2
(0,0)
8
16
x
y
y  x 4
(x, y)
(0, y)
(0, 0)
	 8.	 A rectangle is inscribed in a semicircle of radius 2. See the 
figure. Let P = 1x, y2 be the point in quadrant I that is a 
vertex of the rectangle and is on the circle.
x
y
2
P  (x, y)
4  x 2
y 
2
(a)	 Express the area A of the rectangle as a function  
of x. 
(b)	 Express the perimeter p of the rectangle as a  
function of x. 
(c)	 Graph A = A1x2. For what value of x is A largest?
(d)	 Graph p = p1x2. For what value of x is p largest?
	 9.	 A rectangle is inscribed in a circle of radius 2. See the figure. 
Let P = 1x, y2 be the point in quadrant I that is a vertex of 
the rectangle and is on the circle.
x
y
2
P  (x, y)
x 2  y 2  4
2
2
2
(a)	 Express the area A of the rectangle as a function  
of x. 
(b)	 Express the perimeter p of the rectangle as a  
function of x. 
(c)	 Graph A = A1x2. For what value of x is A largest?
(d)	 Graph p = p1x2. For what value of x is p largest?
	 10.	 A circle of radius r is inscribed in a square. See the figure.
r
(a)	 Express the area A of the square as a function of the 
radius r of the circle. 
(b)	 Express the perimeter p of the square as a function  
of r. 

144 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
	 11.	 Geometry  A wire 10 meters long is to be cut into two pieces. 
One piece will be shaped as a square, and the other piece 
will be shaped as a circle. See the figure.
40 miles per hour (see the figure). Build a model that  
expresses the distance d between the cars as a function of 
the time t. 
	
	 [Hint: At t = 0, the cars leave the intersection.]
4x
x
10  4x
10 m
(a)	 Express the total area A enclosed by the pieces of wire 
as a function of the length x of a side of the square.
(b)	 What is the domain of A ?
(c)	 Graph A = A1x2. For what value of x is A smallest?
	 12.	 Geometry  A wire 10 meters long is to be cut into two pieces. 
One piece will be shaped as an equilateral triangle, and the 
other piece will be shaped as a circle.
(a)	 Express the total area A enclosed by the pieces of wire 
as a function of the length x of a side of the equilateral 
triangle.
(b)	 What is the domain of A ?
(c)	 Graph A = A1x2. For what value of x is A smallest?
	 13.	 Geometry  A wire of length 6x is bent into the shape of a circle.
(a)	 Express the circumference of the circle as a function 
of x. 
(b)	 Express the area of the circle as a function of x.
	 14.	 Geometry  A wire of length x is bent into the shape of a square.
(a)	 Express the perimeter p of the square as a function of 
x. 
(b)	 Express the area A of the square as a function of x.
	 15.	 Geometry  A semicircle of radius r = 3x is inscribed in a 
rectangle so that the diameter of the semicircle is the length 
of the rectangle. (See figure.)
3x
x
x
x
r
(a)	 Express the area A of the rectangle as a function of x.
(b)	 Express the perimeter P of the rectangle as a function of x. 
	 16.	 Geometry  An equilateral triangle is inscribed in a circle of 
radius r. See the figure. Express the circumference C of the 
circle as a function of the length x of a side of the triangle.
	
	 [Hint: First show that r 2 = x2
3 .] 
	 17.	 Geometry  An equilateral triangle is inscribed in a circle of 
radius 6r. Express the area A within the circle but outside the 
triangle as a function of the length 5x of the side of the triangle.
5x
5x
5x
6r
	 18.	 Uniform Motion  Two cars leave an intersection at the same 
time. One is headed south at a constant speed of 30 miles 
per hour, and the other is headed west at a constant speed of  
d
N
S
E
W
	 19.	 Uniform Motion  Two cars are approaching an intersection. 
One is 2 miles south of the intersection and is moving at a 
constant speed of 30 miles per hour. At the same time, the 
other car is 3 miles east of the intersection and is moving at 
a constant speed of 40 miles per hour.
(a)	 Build a model that expresses the distance d between the 
cars as a function of time t. 
	
[Hint: At t = 0, the cars are 2 miles south and 3 miles 
east of the intersection, respectively.]
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to graph d = d1t2. For what  
value of t is d smallest?
	 20.	 Inscribing a Cylinder in a Sphere  Inscribe a right circular 
cylinder of height h and radius r in a sphere of fixed radius R. 
See the illustration. Express the volume V of the cylinder as 
a function of h.
	
	 [Hint: V = pr 2
 h. Note also the right triangle.]
Sphere
r
R
h
	 21.	 Inscribing a Cylinder in a Cone  Inscribe a right circular cyl-
inder of height h and radius r = 2x in a cone of fixed radius 
R and fixed height H. See the illustration. Express the vol-
ume V of the cylinder as a function of x.
	
	 [Hint: V = pr 2
 h. Note also the similar triangles.]
r 5 2x
R
H
h

Section 2.6  Mathematical Models: Building Functions  145
	 22.	 Installing Cable TV    MetroMedia Cable is asked to  
provide service to a customer whose house is located 2 miles 
from the road along which the cable is buried. The nearest  
connection box for the cable is located 5 miles down the 
road. See the figure.
(a)	 If the installation cost is $500 per mile along the road 
and $700 per mile off the road, build a model that  
expresses the total cost C of installation as a function of  
the distance x (in miles) from the connection box to  
the point where the cable installation turns off the road. 
Find the domain of C = C1x2.
(b)	 Compute the cost if x = 1 mile. 
(c)	 Compute the cost if x = 3 miles.
(d)	 Graph the function C = C1x2. Use TRACE to see how 
the cost C varies as x changes from 0 to 5.
(e)	 What value of x results in the least cost? 
	 23.	 Time Required to Go from an Island to a Town  An island 
is 2 miles from the nearest point P on a straight shoreline. A 
town is 12 miles down the shore from P. See the illustration.
Box
Stream
House
5 mi
2 mi
x
12 mi
2 mi
12  x
x
d2
P
d1
Island
Town
(a)	 If a person can row a boat at an average speed of 3 miles 
per hour and the same person can walk 5 miles per hour, 
build a model that expresses the time T that it takes to 
go from the island to town as a function of the distance x  
from P to where the person lands the boat.
(b)	 What is the domain of T ? 
(c)	 How long will it take to travel from the island to town if 
the person lands the boat 4 miles from P? 
(d)	 How long will it take if the person lands the boat 8 miles 
from P? 
h
16
4
r
	 24.	 Filling a Conical Tank    Water is poured into a container 
in the shape of a right circular cone with radius 4 feet and 
height 16 feet. See the figure. Express the volume V of the 
water in the cone as a function of the height h of the water.
	
	 [Hint: The volume V of a cone of radius r and height h is 
V = 1
3
 pr 2
 h.] 
	 25.	 Constructing an Open Box  An open box with a square base 
is to be made from a square piece of cardboard 24 inches on 
a side by cutting out a square from each corner and turning 
up the sides. See the figure.
24 in.
24 in.
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
(a)	 Express the volume V of the box as a function of 
the length x of the side of the square cut from each  
corner. 
(b)	 What is the volume if a 3-inch square is cut out?
(c)	 What is the volume if a 10-inch square is cut out? 
(d)	 Graph V = V1x2. For what value of x is V largest?
	 26.	 Constructing an Open Box  An open box with a square base 
is required to have a volume of 10 cubic feet.
(a)	 Express the amount A of material used to make such a 
box as a function of the length x of a side of the square 
base. 
(b)	 How much material is required for a base 1 foot by  
1 foot?
(c)	 How much material is required for a base 2 feet by  
2 feet? 
(d)	 Use a graphing utility to graph A = A1x2. For what 
value of x is A smallest?

146 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 27–30 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 27.	 If the endpoints of a diameter of a circle are 14, - 52 and 1- 6, 32, find the center and radius of the circle. 
	 28.	 Write the function whose graph is the graph of y = x2, but is shifted left four units and down 2 units. 
	 29.	 Find the slope of the line containing the points (3, - 2) and (1, 6). 
	 30.	 Find the domain of h1x2 = b2x - 1
if x 6 -2
3x2
if - 2 6 x … 5 
Chapter Review
Library of Functions
Reciprocal function (p. 120)
f1x2 = 1
x
Absolute value function (p. 120)
f1x2 = 0 x0
Greatest integer function (p. 121)
f1x2 = int1x2
Cube function (p. 120)
f1x2 = x3
Square root function (p. 120)
f1x2 = 1x
Cube root function (p. 120)
f1x2 = 2
3 x
Constant function (p. 119)
f1x2 = b
The graph is a horizontal line with  
y-intercept b.
Identity function (p. 119)
f1x2 = x
The graph is a line with slope 1 and 
y-intercept 0.
Square function (p. 119)
f1x2 = x2
The graph is a parabola with intercept 
at 10, 02.
x
y
f(x) = b
(0,b)
x
y
3
3
–3
(1, 1)
(–1, –1)
(0, 0)
x
y
4
4
–4
(2, 4)
(0, 0)
(–2, 4)
(1, 1)
(–1, 1)
x
y
4
4
4
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
4
x
y
5
2
1
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(4, 2)
(  ,  )
x
y
3
 (1, 1)
 (1, 1)
 (2,   2 )
 (0, 0)
3
3
3
3
 (2,   2 )
3
1–8
1–2
(  ,  )
1–8
1–2
x
y
2
2
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
2
2
x
y
3
3
3
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(2, 2)
(2, 2)
x
y
4
2
2
2
4
3

Chapter Review  147
Things to Know
Function (pp. 79–82)	
A relation between two sets so that each element x in the first set, the domain, has 
corresponding to it exactly one element y in the second set. The range is the set of 
y-values of the function for the x-values in the domain.
	
A function can also be characterized as a set of ordered pairs 1x, y2 in which no first 
element is paired with two different second elements.
Function notation (pp. 82–85)	
y = f1x2
	
f is a symbol for the function.
	
x is the argument, or independent variable.
	
y is the dependent variable.
	
f1x2 is the value of the function at x, or the image of x.
	
A function f may be defined implicitly by an equation involving x and y or explicitly 
by writing y = f1x2.
Difference quotient of f  (p. 85)	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
 h ≠0
Domain (pp. 86–88)	
If unspecified, the domain of a function f defined by an equation is the largest set of 
real numbers for which f1x2 is a real number.
Vertical-line test (p. 94)	
A set of points in the xy-plane is the graph of a function if and only if every vertical 
line intersects the graph in at most one point.
Even function f  (p. 104)	
f1- x2 = f1x2 for every x in the domain (- x must also be in the domain).
Odd function f  (p. 104)	
f1-x2 = - f1x2 for every x in the domain (- x must also be in the domain).
Increasing function (p. 106)	
A function f is increasing on an open interval I if, for any choice of x1 and x2 in I, 
with x1 6 x2, we have f1x12 6 f1x22.
Decreasing function (p. 106)	
A function f is decreasing on an open interval I if, for any choice of x1 and x2 in I, 
with x1 6 x2, we have f1x12 7 f1x22.
Constant function (p. 106)	
A function f is constant on an open interval I if, for all choices of x in I, the values of 
f1x2are equal.
Local maximum (p. 107)	
A function f, defined on some interval I, has a local maximum at c if there is an open 
interval in I containing c such that, for all x in this open interval, f1x2 … f1c2.
Local minimum (p. 107)	
A function f, defined on some interval I, has a local minimum at c if there is an open 
interval in I containing c such that, for all x in this open interval, f1x2 Ú f1c2.
Absolute maximum and 	
Let f denote a function defined on some interval I.
Absolute minimum (p. 107)	
If there is a number u in I for which f1x2 … f1u2 for all x in I, then f has an absolute 
maximum at u, and the number f1u2 is the absolute maximum of f on I.
	
If there is a number v in I for which f1x2 Ú f1v2, for all x in I, then f has an  
absolute minimum at v and the number f1v2 is the absolute minimum of f on I.
Average rate of change of a function (p. 110)	
The average rate of change of f from a to b is
∆y
∆x =
f1b2 - f1a2
b - a  a ≠b
Objectives
Section	 You should be able to  . . .  	
Examples 	
Review Exercises
2.1	
1	
Determine whether a relation represents a function (p. 79) 	
1–5 	
1, 2
	
2	
Find the value of a function (p. 82) 	
6, 7 	
3–5, 39
	
3	
Find the difference quotient of a function (p. 85) 	
8 	
15 
	
4 	 Find the domain of a function defined by an equation (p. 86) 	
9, 10 	
6–11
	
5	
Form the sum, difference, product, and quotient of  
	
	
two functions (p. 88) 	
11	
12–14
2.2 	
1 	 Identify the graph of a function (p. 94) 	
1 	
27, 28
	
2 	 Obtain information from or about the graph  
	
	
of a function (p. 95) 	
2–4 	
16(a)–(e), 17(a), 17(e), 17(g) 

148 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
Section	
You should be able to  . . .  	
Examples 	
Review Exercises
2.3 	
1 	 Determine even and odd functions from a graph (p. 103) 	
1 	
17(f)
	
2 	 Identify even and odd functions from an equation (p. 105) 	
2 	
18–21
	
3 	 Use a graph to determine where a function is increasing,  
	
	
decreasing, or constant (p. 105) 	
3 	
17(b)
	
4 	 Use a graph to locate local maxima and local minima (p. 106) 	
4 	
17(c)
	
5 	 Use a graph to locate the absolute maximum and the  
	
	
absolute minimum (p. 107) 	
5 	
17(d)
	
6 	 Use a graphing utility to approximate local maxima and  
	
	
local minima and to determine where a function is increasing  
	
	
or decreasing (p. 109) 	
6 	
22, 23, 40(d), 41(b)
	
7 	 Find the average rate of change of a function (p. 110) 	
7, 8 	
24–26
2.4 	
1 	 Graph the functions listed in the library of functions (p. 117) 	
1, 2 	
29, 30
	
2 	 Graph piecewise-defined functions (p. 122) 	
3, 4 	
37, 38
2.5 	
1 	 Graph functions using vertical and horizontal shifts (p. 128) 	
1–5, 11–13 	
16(f), 31, 33–36
	
2 	 Graph functions using compressions and stretches (p. 131) 	
6–8, 12 	
16(g), 32, 36
	
3 	 Graph functions using reflections about the x-axis and  
	
	
the y-axis (p. 133) 	
9, 10, 11, 13 	
16(h), 32, 34, 36
2.6 	
1 	 Build and analyze functions (p. 140) 	
1–3 	
40, 41
Review Exercises
In Problems 1 and 2, determine whether each relation represents a function. For each function, state the domain and range.
	 1.	 5 1- 2, 02, 13, 42, 11, 42 6 
	 2.	 5 14, - 12, 12, 12, 14, 22 6 
In Problems 3–5, find the following for each function:
(a)	 f132  (b)  f1-32  (c)  f1- x2  (d)  - f1x2  (e)  f1x - 32  (f)  f13x2
	 3.	 f1x2 =
3x
x2 - 1
	 4.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 4
	 5.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4
x2
In Problems 6–11, find the domain of each function.
	 6.	 f1x2 =
x
x2 - 9
	 7.	 f1x2 = 27 - 2x 
	 8.	 g1x2 =
0 x0
x  
	 9.	 f1x2 =
2x
x2 + 4x - 5
	 10.	 f(x) = 2x + 1
x2 - 4
	 11.	 g(x) =
x
23x + 10
 
In Problems 12–14, find f + g,  f - g,  f # g, and f
g  for each pair of functions. State the domain of each of these functions.
	 12.	 f1x2 = 2 - x; g1x2 = 3x + 1
	 13.	 f1x2 = 4x2 + 3; g1x2 = x - 2
	 14.	 f1x2 = x + 1
x - 1; g1x2 = 1
x
	 15.	 Find the difference quotient of f1x2 = - x2 + 7x + 3; that is,  find  
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
, h ≠0. 
	 16.	 Consider the graph of the function f on the right.
(a)	 Find the domain and the range of f.
(b)	 List the intercepts. 
(c)	 Find f1- 22. 
(d)	 For what value of x does f1x2 = - 3? 
(e)	 Solve f1x2 7 0. 
(f)	 Graph y = f1x - 32.
(g)	 Graph y = f a1
2
 xb.
(h)	 Graph y = - f1x2.
(3, 3)
(2, 1)
(4, 3)
x
y
5
5
4
4
(0, 0)

Chapter Review  149
	 17.	 Use the graph of the function f shown to find:
(a)	 The domain and the range of f.
(b)	 The intervals on which f is increasing, decreasing, or  
constant.
(c)	 The local minimum values and local maximum values.
(d)	 The absolute maximum and absolute minimum.
(e)	 Whether the graph is symmetric with respect to the  
x-axis, the y-axis, or the origin. 
(f)	 Whether the function is even, odd, or neither. 
(g)	 The intercepts, if any.
x
y
26
6
4
24
(4, 3)
(24,23)
(2, 21)
(3, 0)
(22, 1)
(23, 0)
In Problems 18–21, determine (algebraically) whether the given function is even, odd, or neither.
	 18.	 f1x2 = x3 - 4x 
	 19.	 g1x2 = 5 + 2x2
3 + x6  
	 20.	 G1x2 = 1 - x + x3
	 21.	 f1x2 =
3x3
2 + x2 + 2x4 
In Problems 22 and 23, use a graphing utility to graph each function over the indicated interval. Approximate any local maximum values 
and local minimum values. Determine where the function is increasing and where it is decreasing.
	 22.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 5x + 1 1- 3, 32
	 24.	 Find the average rate of change of f1x2 = 8x2 - x:
(a)	 From 1 to 2 
  (b)  From 0 to 1    (c)  From 2 to 4 
In Problems 25 and 26, find the average rate of change from 3 to 5 for each function f. Be sure to simplify.
	 25.	 f1x2 = 2 - 5x 
	
26.  f1x2 = 3x - 4x2 
In Problems 27 and 28, is the graph shown the graph of a function?
	 27.	
28. 
In Problems 29 and 30, graph each function. Be sure to label at least three points.
	 29.	 f1x2 = 0 x0 	
30.  f1x2 = 1x
In Problems 31–36, graph each function using the techniques of shifting, compressing or stretching, and reflections. Identify any  
intercepts of the graph. State the domain and, based on the graph, find the range.
	 31.	 F1x2 = 0 x0 - 4	
32.  g1x2 = - 20 x0 	
33.  h1x2 = 2x - 1
	 34.	 f1x2 = 21 - x	
35.  h1x2 = 1x - 122 + 2	
36.  g1x2 = -21x + 223 - 8
In Problems 37 and 38:
(a)	Find the domain of each function.	
(b) Locate any intercepts.	
(c) Graph each function.
(d)	Based on the graph, find the range.	
(e) Is f continuous on its domain?
	 37.	 f1x2 = b3x
if - 2 6 x … 1
x + 1
if x 7 1
	
38.  f1x2 = c
x
if - 4 … x 6 0
1
if x = 0
3x
if x 7 0
	 39.	 A function f is defined by
	
	        f1x2 = Ax + 5
6x - 2
	
	 If f112 = 4, find A. 
x
y
x
y
	 40.	 Constructing a Closed Box  A closed box with a square base 
is required to have a volume of 10 cubic feet.
(a)	 Build a model that expresses the amount A of material 
used to make such a box as a function of the length x of 
a side of the square base.
(b)	 How much material is required for a base 1 foot by  
1 foot? 
(c)	 How much material is required for a base 2 feet by  
2 feet? 
(d)	 Graph A = A1x2. For what value of x is A smallest?
	 41.	 Area of a Rectangle  A rectangle has one vertex in quadrant I  
on the graph of y = 10 - x2, another at the origin, one on 
the positive x-axis, and one on the positive y-axis.
(a)	 Express the area A of the rectangle as a function of x.
(b)	 Find the largest area A that can be enclosed by the  
rectangle. 
	 23.	 f1x2 = 2x4 - 5x3 + 2x + 1 1- 2, 32

	 1.	 Determine whether each relation represents a function. For 
each function, state the domain and the range.
(a)	 5 12, 52, 14, 62, 16, 72, 18, 82 6 
(b)	 5 11, 32, 14, - 22, 1- 3, 52, 11, 72 6 
(c)	
6.	 Use 
a 
graphing 
utility 
to 
graph 
the 
function 
f1x2 = - x4 + 2x3 + 4x2 - 2 on the interval 1-5, 52. 
Then approximate any local maximum values and local 
minimum values rounded to two decimal places. Determine 
where the function is increasing and where it is decreasing.
	 7.	 Consider the function g1x2 = b2x + 1
if x 6 - 1
x - 4
if x Ú - 1
(a)	 Graph the function.
(b)	 List the intercepts. 
(c)	 Find g1- 52. 
(d)	 Find g122. 
	 8.	 For the function f1x2 = 3x2 - 2x + 4, find the average 
rate of change of f from 3 to 4. 
	 9.	 For the functions f1x2 = 2x2 + 1 and g1x2 = 3x - 2, find 
the following and simplify.
(a)	 1f - g2 1x2
(b)	 1f # g2 1x2
(c)	 f1x + h2 - f1x2
	 10.	 Graph each function using the techniques of shifting,  
compressing or stretching, and reflecting. Start with the 
graph of the basic function and show all stages.
(a)	 h1x2 = - 21x + 123 + 3
(b)	 g1x2 = 0 x + 40 + 2
	 11.	 The variable interest rate on a student loan changes each 
July 1 based on the bank prime loan rate. For the years  
1992–2007, this rate can be approximated by the model
	
	
r1x2 = - 0.115x2 + 1.183x + 5.623, 
	
	 where x is the number of years since 1992 and r is the  
interest rate as a percent.
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to estimate the highest rate during 
this time period. During which year was the interest rate 
the highest? 
(b)	 Use the model to estimate the rate in 2010. Does this 
value seem reasonable?   
Source: U.S. Federal Reserve
	 12.	 A community skating rink is in the shape of a rectangle with 
semicircles attached at the ends. The length of the rectangle 
is 20 feet less than twice the width. The thickness of the ice is 
0.75 inch.
(a)	 Build a model that expresses the ice volume, V, as a 
function of the width, x.
(b)	 How much ice is in the rink if the width is 90 feet?
150 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
y
6
4
2
22
24
x
4
2
24
22
y
6
4
2
22
x
4
2
24
22
y
4
22
24
x
4
24
(0, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 0)
(25, 23)
(22, 0)
(3, 23)
(5, 22)
(d) 
In Problems 2–4, find the domain of each function and evaluate 
each function at x = - 1.
	 2.	 f1x2 = 24 - 5x	
3.  g1x2 =
x + 2
0 x + 20
	 4.	 h1x2 =
x - 4
x2 + 5x - 36
	 5.	 Consider the graph of the function f below.
(a)	 Find the domain and the range of f.
(b)	 List the intercepts.
(c)	 Find f112. 
(d)	 For what value(s) of x does f1x2 = - 3?  
(e)	 Solve f1x2 6 0.
Chapter Test
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.

Chapter Projects  151
In Problems 1–6, find the real solutions of each equation.
	 1.	 3x - 8 = 10 
	
2.  3x2 - x = 0 
	 3.	 x2 - 8x - 9 = 0 
	4.  6x2 - 5x + 1 = 0 
	 5.	 0 2x + 30 = 4 
	
6.  22x + 3 = 2 
In Problems 7–9, solve each inequality. Graph the solution set.
	 7.	 2 - 3x 7 6	
8.  0 2x - 50 6 3	
9.  0 4x + 10 Ú 7
	 10.	 (a)	 Find the distance from P1 = 1-2, - 32 to P2 = 13, - 52.
(b)	 What is the midpoint of the line segment from P1 to P2?
(c)	 What is the slope of the line containing the points P1  
and P2?
Cumulative Review
In Problems 11–14, graph each equation.
	 11.	 3x - 2y = 12	
12.  x = y2
	 13.	 x2 + 1y - 322 = 16	
14.  y = 2x
	 15.	 For the equation 3x2 - 4y = 12, find the intercepts and 
check for symmetry.
	 16.	 Find the slope–intercept form of the equation of the line 
containing the points 1- 2, 42 and 16, 82. 
In Problems 17–19, graph each function.
	 17.	 f1x2 = 1x + 222 - 3
	 18.	 f1x2 = 1
x
	 19.	 f1x2 = e2 - x
if x … 2
0 x0
if x 7 2
Chapter Projects
that include unlimited talk and text. The monthly cost is  
primarily determined by the amount of data used and the 
number of devices.
1.	 Suppose you expect to use 10 gigabytes of data for a 
single smartphone. What would be the monthly cost of 
each plan you are considering?
2.	 Suppose you expect to use 30 gigabytes of data and 
want a personal hotspot, but you still have only a single  
smartphone. What would be the monthly cost of each 
plan you are considering?
3.	 Suppose you expect to use 20 gigabytes of data with 
three smartphones sharing the data. What would be the 
monthly cost of each plan you are considering?
4.	 Suppose you expect to use 20 gigabytes of data with a 
single smartphone and a personal hotspot. What would 
be the monthly cost of each plan you are considering?
5.	 Build a model that describes the monthly cost C, in 
dollars, as a function of the number of data gigabytes 
used, g, assuming a single smartphone and a personal 
hotspot for each plan you are considering.
6.	 Graph each function from Problem 5.
7.	
Based on your particular usage, which plan is best for 
you?
8.	 Now, develop an Excel spreadsheet to analyze the 
various plans you are considering. Suppose you want 
a family plan with unlimited talk and text that offers 
10 gigabytes of shared data and costs $100 per month. 
Additional gigabytes of data cost $15 per gigabyte, extra 
phones can be added to the plan for $15 each per month, 
and each hotspot costs $20 per month. Because wireless 
         Internet-based Project
	 I.	 Choosing a Wireless Data Plan  Collect information from 
your family, friends, or consumer agencies such as Consumer 
Reports. Then decide on a cellular provider, choosing the 
company that you feel offers the best service. Once you have 
selected a service provider, research the various types of  
individual plans offered by the company by visiting the  
provider’s website. Many providers offer family plans  

152 
CHAPTER 2  Functions and Their Graphs
data plans have a cost structure based on piecewise-defined functions, we need an “if/then” statement within Excel to analyze 
the cost of the plan. Use the accompanying Excel spreadsheet as a guide in developing your spreadsheet. Enter into your 
spreadsheet a variety of possible amounts of data and various numbers of additional phones and hotspots.
Monthly fee
A
B
C
D
Allotted data per month (GB)
Data used (GB)
Cost per additional GB of data
Monthly cost of hotspot
Number of hotspots
Monthly cost of additional phone
Number of additional phones
Cost of data
Cost of additional devices/hotspots
Total Cost
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
10
12
1
2
=B8*B7+B10*B9
=B12+B13
$100
$15
$15
$20
=IF(B4<B3,B2,B2+B5*(B4-B3))
  9.	 Write a paragraph supporting the choice in plans that best meets your needs.
10.	 How are “if/then” loops similar to a piecewise-defined function?
Citation: Excel © 2013 Microsoft Corporation. Used with permission from Microsoft.
The following projects are available on the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC).
	 II.	 Project at Motorola:  Wireless Internet Service  Use functions and their graphs to analyze the total cost of various wireless  
Internet service plans.
	III.	 Cost of Cable When government regulations and customer preference influence the path of a new cable line, the Pythagorean 
Theorem can be used to assess the cost of installation.
	IV.	 Oil Spill Functions are used to analyze the size and spread of an oil spill from a leaking tanker.

153
153
The Beta of a Stock
Investing in the stock market can be rewarding and fun, but how does 
one go about selecting which stocks to purchase? Financial investment 
firms hire thousands of analysts who track individual stocks (equities) 
and assess the value of the underlying company. One measure the 
analysts consider is the beta of the stock. Beta measures the risk 
of an individual company’s equity relative to that of a market  
basket of stocks, such as the Standard & Poor’s 500. But how is 
beta computed?
—See the Internet-based Chapter Project I—
 A Look Back
Up to now, our discussion has focused on graphs of equations and functions. We 
learned how to graph equations using the point-plotting method, intercepts, 
and the tests for symmetry. In addition, we learned what a function is and how to 
identify whether a relation represents a function. We also discussed properties of 
functions, such as domain/range, increasing/decreasing, even/odd, and average 
rate of change.
A Look Ahead 
 
Going forward, we will look at classes of functions. This chapter focuses on linear 
and quadratic functions, their properties, and their applications.
3
Linear and Quadratic 
Functions
Outline
3.1	
Properties of Linear Functions and 
Linear Models
3.2	
Building Linear Models from Data
3.3	
Quadratic Functions and Their  
Properties
3.4	
Build Quadratic Models from Verbal 
Descriptions and from Data
3.5	
Inequalities Involving Quadratic  
Functions
 	
Chapter Review
 	
Chapter Test
 	
Cumulative Review
 	
Chapter Projects

154 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Graph Linear Functions
In Section 1.3 we discussed lines. In particular, for nonvertical lines we  
developed the slope–intercept form of the equation of a line y = mx + b. When the  
slope–intercept form of a line is written using function notation, the result is a linear 
function.
1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 160.
	
Objectives	 	1  Graph Linear Functions  (p. 154)
	
	 	2  Use Average Rate of Change to Identify Linear Functions  (p. 154)
	
	 	3  Determine Whether a Linear Function Is Increasing, Decreasing, or  
Constant  (p. 157)
	
	 	4  Build Linear Models from Verbal Descriptions  (p. 158)
3.1  Properties of Linear Functions and Linear Models
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Lines (Section 1.3, pp. 53–61)
•	 Graphs of Equations in Two Variables; Intercepts; 
Symmetry (Section 1.2, pp. 43–50)
•	 Solving Equations (Appendix A, Section A.6, pp. 987–994)
•	 Functions (Section 2.1, pp. 79–88)
•	 The Graph of a Function (Section 2.2, pp. 94–97)
•	 Properties of Functions (Section 2.3, pp. 103–111)
A linear function is a function of the form
f1x2 = mx + b
The graph of a linear function is a line with slope m and y-intercept b. Its domain 
is the set of all real numbers.
Definition
Functions that are not linear are said to be nonlinear.
Graphing a Linear Function
Graph the linear function f1x2 = -3x + 7. What are the domain and the range of f ?
This is a linear function with slope m = -3 and y-intercept b = 7. To graph 
this function, plot the point 10, 72,  the y-intercept, and use the slope to find an  
additional point by moving right 1 unit and down 3 units. See Figure 1. The domain 
and the range of f are each the set of all real numbers.
Alternatively, an additional point could have been found by evaluating the 
function at some x ≠0. For x = 1, f112 = -3112 + 7 = 4 and the point 11, 42 
lies on the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 3 ( a )  a n d  ( b )
Use Average Rate of Change to Identify Linear Functions
Look at Table 1, which shows certain values of the independent variable x and 
corresponding values of the dependent variable y for the function f1x2 = -3x + 7. 
Notice that as the value of the independent variable, x, increases by 1, the value of 
the dependent variable y decreases by 3. That is, the average rate of change of y with 
respect to x is a constant, -3.
Example 1
Solution
•
2
Figure 1  f1x2 = - 3x + 7
x
∆y  3
∆x  1
y
1
3
5
1
3
5
(1, 4)
(0, 7)

Section 3.1  Properties of Linear Functions and Linear Models  155
It is not a coincidence that the average rate of change of the linear function
f1x2 = -3x + 7 is the slope of the linear function. That is, ∆y
∆x = m = -3. The 
following theorem states this fact.
Table 1
x
y = f(x) = −3x + 7
Average Rate of Change =
횫y
횫x
-2
13
 
 
 
10 - 13
-1 - 1 -22 = -3
1
= -3
-1
10
 
 
 
7 - 10
0 - 1 -12 = -3
1
= -3
0
  7
 
 
 
-3
1
  4
 
 
 
-3
2
  1
 
 
 
-3
3
-2
 
Average Rate of Change of a Linear Function
Linear functions have a constant average rate of change. That is, the average 
rate of change of a linear function f1x2 = mx + b is
∆y
∆x = m
Theorem
Proof  The average rate of change of f1x2 = mx + b from x1 to x2, x1 ≠x2, is
 ∆y
∆x = f1x22 - f1x12
x2 - x1
= 1mx2 + b2 - 1mx1 + b2
x2 - x1
 = mx2 - mx1
x2 - x1
= m1x2 - x12
x2 - x1
= m
Based on the theorem just proved, the average rate of change of the function 
g1x2 = -  2
5
 x + 5 is -  2
5.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3 ( c )
As it turns out, only linear functions have a constant average rate of change. 
Because of this, the average rate of change can be used to determine whether a 
function is linear. This is especially useful if the function is defined by a data set.
Using the Average Rate of Change to Identify Linear Functions
(a)	 A strain of E. coli known as Beu 397-recA441 is placed into a Petri dish at  
30° Celsius and allowed to grow. The data shown in Table 2 on the next page are 
collected. The population is measured in grams and the time in hours. Plot the 
ordered pairs 1x, y2 in the Cartesian plane, and use the average rate of change to 
determine whether the function is linear.
	
■
Example 2

156 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
(b)	 The data in Table 3 represent the maximum number of heartbeats that a healthy 
individual of different ages should have during a 15-second interval of time 
while exercising. Plot the ordered pairs 1x, y2 in the Cartesian plane, and use 
the average rate of change to determine whether the function is linear.
Table 4
Time (hours), x
Population (grams), y
Average Rate of Change =
횫y
횫x
0
0.09
 
 
 
0.12 - 0.09
1 - 0
= 0.03
1
0.12
 
 
 
0.04
2
0.16
 
 
 
0.06
3
0.22
 
 
 
0.07
4
0.29
 
 
 
0.10
5
0.39
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
(0, 0.09)
(1, 0.12)
(2, 0.16)
(3, 0.22)
(4, 0.29)
(5, 0.39)
0.09
0.12
0.16
0.22
0.29
0.39
Time
(hours), x
Population
(grams), y
(x, y)
Age, x
(x, y)
Maximum Number
of Heartbeats, y
20
30
40
50
60
70
50   
47.5
45   
42.5
40   
37.5
(20, 50)   
(30, 47.5)
(40, 45)   
(50, 42.5)
(60, 40)   
(70, 37.5)
Source: American Heart Association
Table 3
Compute the average rate of change of each function. If the average rate of change 
is constant, the function is linear. If the average rate of change is not constant, the 
function is nonlinear.
(a)	 Figure 2 shows the points listed in Table 2 plotted in the Cartesian plane. Note 
that it is impossible to draw a straight line that contains all the points. Table 4 
displays the average rate of change of the population.
Solution
Because the average rate of change is not constant, the function is not linear. 
In fact, because the average rate of change is increasing as the value of the 
independent variable increases, the function is increasing at an increasing rate. 
So not only is the population increasing over time, but it is also growing more 
rapidly as time passes.
(b)	 Figure 3 shows the points listed in Table 3 plotted in the Cartesian plane. Note 
that the data in Figure 3 lie on a straight line. Table 5 displays the average 
rate of change of the maximum number of heartbeats. The average rate of 
change of the heartbeat data is constant, -0.25 beat per year, so the function is  
linear.
Figure 2 
Time (hours), x
Population (grams), y
x
y
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
5
4
3
2
0
1
Table 2

Section 3.1  Properties of Linear Functions and Linear Models  157
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Determine Whether a Linear Function Is Increasing,  
Decreasing, or Constant
Look back at the Seeing the Concept on page 55. When the slope m of a linear  
function is positive (m 7 0), the line slants upward from left to right. When the 
slope m of a linear function is negative (m 6 0), the line slants downward from left 
to right. When the slope m of a linear function is zero (m = 0), the line is horizontal.
3
Table 5 
 
Age, x
Maximum Number  
of Heartbeats, y
Average Rate of Change =
횫y
횫x
20
50
 
 
 
47.5 - 50
30 - 20
= -0.25
30
47.5
 
 
 
-0.25
40
45
 
 
 
-0.25
50
42.5
 
 
 
-0.25
60
40
 
 
 
-0.25
70
37.5
 
Figure 3 
•
Age
Heartbeats
x
y
40
45
50
70
60
50
40
20
30
Increasing, Decreasing, and Constant Linear Functions
A linear function f1x2 = mx + b is increasing over its domain if its slope, m, 
is positive. It is decreasing over its domain if its slope, m, is negative. It is constant 
over its domain if its slope, m, is zero.
Theorem
Determining Whether a Linear Function Is Increasing,  
Decreasing, or Constant
Determine whether the following linear functions are increasing, decreasing, or  
constant.
(a)	 f1x2 = 5x - 2	
(b)  g1x2 = -2x + 8
(c)	 s1t2 = 3
4
 t - 4	
(d)  h1z2 = 7
(a)	 For the linear function f1x2 = 5x - 2, the slope is 5, which is positive. The 
function f is increasing on the interval 1 - q, q 2.
(b)	 For the linear function g1x2 = -2x + 8, the slope is -2, which is negative. The 
function g is decreasing on the interval 1 - q, q 2.
(c)	 For the linear function s1t2 = 3
4 t - 4, the slope is 3
4, which is positive. The
	
function s is increasing on the interval 1 - q, q 2.
(d)	 The linear function h can be written as h1z2 = 0z + 7. Because the slope is 0, 
the function h is constant on the interval 1 - q, q 2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3  ( d )
Example 3
Solution
•

158 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Build Linear Models from Verbal Descriptions
When the average rate of change of a function is constant, a linear function can 
model the relation between the two variables. For example, if a recycling company 
pays $0.52 per pound for aluminum cans, then the relation between the price p paid  
and the pounds recycled x can be modeled as the linear function p1x2 = 0.52x, 
with slope m = 0.52 dollar
1 pound .
4
Modeling with a Linear Function
If the average rate of change of a function is a constant m, a linear function f 
can be used to model the relation between the two variables as follows:
f1x2 = mx + b
where b is the value of f at 0; that is, b = f102.
Straight-line Depreciation
Book value is the value of an asset that a company uses to create its balance sheet. 
Some companies depreciate assets using straight-line depreciation so that the value 
of the asset declines by a fixed amount each year. The amount of the decline depends 
on the useful life that the company assigns to the asset. Suppose a company just 
purchased a fleet of new cars for its sales force at a cost of $31,500 per car. The company 
chooses to depreciate each vehicle using the straight-line method over 7 years. This
means that each car will depreciate by +31,500
7
= +4500 per year.
(a)	 Write a linear function that expresses the book value V of each car as a function 
of its age, x, in years.
(b)	 Graph the linear function.
(c)	 What is the book value of each car after 3 years?
(d)	 Interpret the slope.
(e)	 When will the book value of each car be $9000?
	
[Hint: Solve the equation V1x2 = 9000.]
(a)	 If we let V1x2 represent the value of each car after x years, then V102  
represents the original value of each car, so V102 = +31,500. The y-intercept of 
the linear function is $31,500. Because each car depreciates by $4500 per year, 
the slope of the linear function is -4500. The linear function that represents the 
book value V of each car after x years is
V1x2 = -4500x + 31,500
(b)	 Figure 4 shows the graph of V.
(c)	 The book value of each car after 3 years is
 V132 = -4500132 + 31,500
 = +18,000
(d)	 Since the slope of V1x2 = -4500x + 31,500 is -4500, the average rate of 
change of the book value is - $4500/year. So for each additional year that passes, 
the book value of the car decreases by $4500.
Example 4
Solution
Figure 4  V1 x2 = -4500x + 31, 500
31,500
27,000
22,500
18,000
13,500
9000
4500
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Book value ($)
Age of vehicle (years)
x
V

Section 3.1  Properties of Linear Functions and Linear Models  159
(e)	 To find when the book value will be $9000, solve the equation
 V1x2 = 9000
 -4500x + 31,500 = 9000
 -4500x = -22,500
 x = -22,500
-4500
= 5 
The car will have a book value of $9000 when it is 5 years old.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
Supply and Demand
The quantity supplied of a good is the amount of a product that a company is willing 
to make available for sale at a given price. The quantity demanded of a good is the 
amount of a product that consumers are willing to purchase at a given price. Suppose 
that the quantity supplied, S, and the quantity demanded, D, of cellular telephones 
each month are given by the following functions:
 S1p2 = 60p - 900
 D1p2 = -15p + 2850
where p is the price (in dollars) of the telephone.
(a)	 The equilibrium price of a product is defined as the price at which quantity 
supplied equals quantity demanded. That is, the equilibrium price is the price 
at which S1p2 = D1p2. Find the equilibrium price of cellular telephones. 
What is the equilibrium quantity, the amount demanded (or supplied) at the  
equilibrium price?
(b)	 Determine the prices for which quantity supplied is greater than quantity  
demanded. That is, solve the inequality S1p2 7 D1p2.
(c)	 Graph S = S1p2 and D = D1p2, and label the equilibrium point, the point of 
intersection of S and D.
(a)	 To find the equilibrium price, solve the equation S1p2 = D1p2.
 60p - 900 = -15p + 2850 
 60p = -15p + 3750
 75p = 3750
 p = 50
	
The equilibrium price is $50 per cellular phone. To find the equilibrium quantity, 
evaluate either S1p2 or D1p2 at p = 50.
S1502 = 601502 - 900 = 2100
	
The equilibrium quantity is 2100 cellular phones. At a price of $50 per phone, 
the company will produce and sell 2100 phones each month and have no shortages 
or excess inventory.
(b)	 The inequality S1p2 7 D1p2 is
 60p - 900 7 -15p + 2850 
 60p 7 -15p + 3750
 75p 7 3750
 p 7 50
	
If the company charges more than $50 per phone, quantity supplied will  
exceed quantity demanded. In this case the company will have excess phones in  
inventory.
Subtract 31,500 from each side.
Divide by - 4500.
•
Example 5
Solution
S1p2 = 60p - 900;
D (p) = - 15p + 2850
Add 900 to each side.
Add 15p to each side.
Divide each side by 75.
S1p2 7 D1p2
Add 900 to each side.
Add 15p to each side.
Divide each side by 75.

160 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
(c)	 Figure 5 shows the graphs of S = S1p2 and D = D1p2 with the equilibrium 
point labeled.
Figure 5  Supply and demand functions
•
p
50
Equilibrium point
100
Price ($)
Quantity supplied,
Quantity demanded
S 5 S(p)
D 5 D(p)
S, D
3000
2000
1000
(15, 0)
(0, 2850)
(50, 2100)
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Graph y = x2 - 1. (pp. 43–50)
	 2.	 Find the slope of the line joining the points 12, 52 and 
1- 1, 32. (pp. 53–61) 
	 3.	 Find the average rate of change of f1x2 = 3x2 - 2, from 
2 to 4. (pp. 103–111) 
	 4.	 Solve: 60x - 900 = - 15x + 2850. (pp. 987–994) 
	 5.	 If f1x2 = x2 - 4, find f1- 22. (pp. 79–88) 
	 6.	 True or False  The graph of the function f1x2 = x2 is 
increasing on the interval 10, q 2. (pp. 103–111) 
3.1  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 7.	 For the graph of the linear function f1x2 = mx + b, m is 
the 
 and b is the 
.
	 8.	 If the slope m of the graph of a linear function is 
, 
the function is increasing over its domain.
	 9.	 True or False  The slope of a nonvertical line is the average 
rate of change of the linear function. 
	 10.	 True or False  The average rate of change of f1x2 = 2x + 8 
is 8. 
	 11.	 What is the only type of function that has a constant average 
rate of change?
(a)	 linear function	
(b)	 quadratic function
(c)	 step function	
(d)	 absolute value function 
	 12.	 A car has 12,500 miles on its odometer. Say the car is driven an 
average of 40 miles per day. Choose the model that expresses 
the number of miles N that will be on its odometer after x days.
(a)	 N(x) = - 40x + 12,500	
(b)	 N(x) = 40x - 12,500
(c)	 N(x) = 12,500x + 40	
(d)	 N(x) = 40x + 12,500 
Skill Building
In Problems 13–20, a linear function is given.
(a)	Determine the slope and y-intercept of each function.
(b)	Use the slope and y-intercept to graph the linear function.
(c)	Determine the average rate of change of each function.
(d)	Determine whether the linear function is increasing, decreasing, or constant.
	 13.	 f1x2 = 2x + 3	
14.	 g1x2 = 5x - 4	
15.	 p1x2 = - x + 6	
16.	 h1x2 = -3x + 4
	 17.	 h1x2 = -  2
3
 x + 4	
18.	 f1x2 = 1
4
 x - 3	
19.	 G1x2 = - 2	
20.	 F1x2 = 4
In Problems 21–28, determine whether the given function is linear or nonlinear. If it is linear, determine the slope.
	 21.	
22.	
23.	
24.	
x
y = f (x)
-2
4
-1
1
0
-2
1
-5
2
-8
x
y = f (x)
  -2
1/4
  -1
1/2
0
1
1
2
2
4
x
y = f (x)
  -2
  -8
  -1
  -3
0
0
1
1
2
0
x
y = f (x)
  -2
  -4
  -1
0
0
4
1
8
2
12

Section 3.1  Properties of Linear Functions and Linear Models  161
	 25.	
26.	
27.	
28.	
x
y = f (x)
-2
-26
-1
-4
0
2
1
-2
2
-10
x
y = f (x)
-2
-4
-1
-3.5
0
-3
1
-2.5
2
-2
x
y = f (x)
-2
8
-1
8
0
8
1
8
2
8
x
y = f (x)
-2
0
-1
1
0
4
1
9
2
16
Applications and Extensions
	 29.	 Suppose that f1x2 = 4x - 1 and g1x2 = - 2x + 5.
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = 0.	
(b)	 Solve f1x2 7 0.
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2.	
(d)	 Solve f1x2 … g1x2.
(e)	 Graph y = f1x2 and y = g1x2 and label the point that 
represents the solution to the equation f1x2 = g1x2.
	 30.	 Suppose that f1x2 = 3x + 5 and g1x2 = - 2x + 15.
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = 0.	
(b)	 Solve f1x2 6 0.
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2.	
(d)	 Solve f1x2 Ú g1x2.
(e)	 Graph y = f1x2 and y = g1x2 and label the point that 
represents the solution to the equation f1x2 = g1x2.
	 31.	 In parts (a)–(f), use the given figure. 
	 34.	 In parts (a) and (b), use the following figure.
x
y
(63, 52)
(28, 32)
(28, 0)
y  f(x)
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = 32. 
	
(b)	 Solve f1x2 = 52. 
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = 0. 
	 (d)	 Solve f1x2 7 32.
(e)	 Solve f1x2 … 52.	
(f)	 Solve 0 6 f1x2 6 52.
	 32.	 In parts (a)–(f), use the following figure.
(a)	 Solve g1x2 = 20.  	
(b)	 Solve g1x2 = 60. 
(c)	 Solve g1x2 = 0. 
	
(d)	 Solve g1x2 7 20.
(e)	 Solve g1x2 … 60.	
(f)	 Solve 0 6 g1x2 6 60.
	 33.	 In parts (a) and (b), use the given figure.
	 35.	 In parts (a) and (b), use the given figure.
(a)	 Solve the equation: f1x2 = g1x2. 
(b)	 Solve the inequality: g1x2 … f1x2 6 h1x2.
	 36.	 In parts (a) and (b), use the following figure.
(a)	 Solve the equation: f1x2 = g1x2. 
(b)	 Solve the inequality: g1x2 6 f1x2 … h1x2.
	 37.	 The cost C, in dollars, of renting a moving truck for a day 
is given by the function C1x2 = 0.25x + 40, where x is the 
number of miles driven.
(a)	 What is the cost if a person drives x = 80 miles? 
(b)	 If the cost of renting the moving truck is $60, how many 
miles did the person drive? 
(c)	 Suppose that a person wants the cost to be no more than 
$150. What is the maximum number of miles the person 
can drive? 
(d)	 What is the implied domain of C? 
(a)	 Solve the equation: f1x2 = g1x2. 
(b)	 Solve the inequality: f1x2 7 g1x2.
(a)	 Solve the equation: f1x2 = g1x2. 
(b)	 Solve the inequality: f1x2 … g1x2.
(15, 60)
(5, 20)
(15, 0)
x
y
y  g(x)
x
y
(8, 5)
y  g(x)
y  f(x)
x
y
(2, 5)
y  g(x)
y  f(x)
x
y
(8, 15)
(0, 15)
(0, 8)
(11, 8)
y  f(x)
y  h(x)
y  g(x)
x
y
(0, 7)
(4, 7)
(0, 8)
(7,8)
y  h(x)
y  g(x)
y  f(x)

162 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
	 38.	 Phone Charges  The monthly cost C, in dollars, for calls 
from the United States to Germany on a certain phone plan 
is modeled by the function C1x2 = 0.26x + 5, where x is 
the number of minutes used.
(a)	 What is the cost if you talk on the phone for x = 50 
minutes? 
(b)	 Suppose that your monthly bill is $21.64. How many 
minutes did you use the phone? 
(c)	 Suppose that you budget yourself $50 per month for the 
phone. What is the maximum number of minutes that 
you can talk? 
(d)	 What is the implied domain of C if there are 30 days in 
the month? 
	 39.	 Supply and Demand  Suppose that the quantity supplied S 
and the quantity demanded D of T-shirts at a concert are 
given by the following functions where p is the price:
 S1p2 = - 250 + 50p
 D1p2 = 1000 - 75p       
(a)	 Find the equilibrium price for the T-shirts at this 
concert. 
(b)	 Determine the prices for which quantity demanded is 
greater than quantity supplied. 
(c)	 What will eventually happen to the price of the T-shirts 
if the quantity demanded is greater than the quantity 
supplied? 
	 40.	 Supply and Demand  Suppose that the quantity supplied S 
and the quantity demanded D of hot dogs at a baseball game 
are given by the following functions:
 S1p2 = - 2000 + 3000p
 D1p2 = 10,000 - 1000p
where p is the price of a hot dog.
(a)	 Find the equilibrium price for hot dogs at the baseball 
game. What is the equilibrium quantity? 
(b)	 Determine the prices for which quantity demanded is 
less than quantity supplied. 
(c)	 What do you think will eventually happen to the price of hot 
dogs if quantity demanded is less than quantity supplied?
	 41.	 Taxes  The 
function 
T1x2 = 0.151x - 90752 + 907.50  
represents the tax bill T of a single person whose adjusted 
gross income is x dollars for income between $9075 and 
$36,900, inclusive, in 2014.
Source: Internal Revenue Service
(a)	 What is the domain of this linear function?
(b)	 What is a single filer’s tax bill if adjusted gross income is 
$20,000? 
(c)	 Which variable is independent and which is dependent?
(d)	 Graph the linear function over the domain specified in 
part (a).
(e)	 What is a single filer’s adjusted gross income if the tax 
bill is $3671.25? 
	 42.	 Luxury Tax  In 2011, major league baseball signed a labor 
agreement with the players. In this agreement, any team whose 
payroll exceeded $189 million in 2014 had to pay a luxury tax  
of 50%. The linear function T1p2 = 0.501p - 1892  
describes the luxury tax T for a team whose payroll was p  
(in millions of dollars).
Source: Major League Baseball
(a)	 What is the implied domain of this linear function?
(b)	 What was the luxury tax for the New York Yankees, 
whose 2014 payroll was $203.4 million? 
(c)	 Graph the linear function.
(d)	 What is the payroll of a team that pays a luxury tax of 
$15.7 million? 
The point at which a company’s profits equal zero is called the 
company’s break-even point. For Problems 43 and 44, let R represent 
a company’s revenue, let C represent the company’s costs, and let x 
represent the number of units produced and sold each day.
(a)  Find the firm’s break-even point; that is, find x so that R = C.
(b)  Find the values of x such that R1x2 7 C1x2. This represents 
the number of units that the company must sell to earn a profit.
	 43.	  R(x) = 200x
	
	  C(x) = 110.5x + 89,500
	 44.	  R1x2 = 12x
	
	  C1x2 = 10x + 15,000 
	 45.	 Straight-line Depreciation  Suppose that a company has just 
purchased a new computer for $2400. The company chooses 
to depreciate using the straight-line method for 4 years.
(a)	 Write a linear function that expresses the book value of 
the computer as a function of its age.
(b)	 What is the implied domain of the function found in 
part (a)? 
(c)	 Use the graphing tool to graph the linear equation.
(d)	 What is the book value of the computer after 2 years?
(e)	 When will the computer be worth $600?
	 46.	 Straight-line Depreciation  Suppose that a company has just 
purchased a new machine for its manufacturing facility for 
$120,000. The company chooses to depreciate the machine 
using the straight-line method over 10 years.
(a)	 Write a linear model that expresses the book value V of 
the machine as a function of its age x.
(b)	 What is the implied domain of the function found in 
part (a)? 
(c)	 Graph the linear function.
(d)	 What is the book value of the machine after 4 years?
(e)	 When will the machine have a book value of $72,000?
	 47.	 Cost Function  The simplest cost function is the linear 
cost function, C1x2 = mx + b, where the y-intercept b  
represents the fixed costs of operating a business and the 
slope m represents the cost of each item produced. Suppose 
that a small bicycle manufacturer has daily fixed costs of 
$1800, and each bicycle costs $90 to manufacture.
(a)	 Write a linear model that expresses the cost C of  
manufacturing x bicycles in a day. 
(b)	 Graph the model.
(c)	 What is the cost of manufacturing 14 bicycles in a day?
(d)	 How many bicycles could be manufactured for $3780?
	 48.	 Cost Function  Refer to Problem 47. Suppose that the  
landlord of the building increases the bicycle manufacturer’s 
rent by $100 per month.
(a)	 Assuming that the manufacturer is open for business  
20 days per month, what are the new daily fixed costs?
(b)	 Write a linear model that expresses the cost C of  
manufacturing x bicycles in a day with the higher rent.
(c)	 Graph the model.
(d)	 What is the cost of manufacturing 14 bicycles in a day?
(e)	 How many bicycles can be manufactured for $3780?
	 49.	 A truck rental company rents a moving truck for one day 
by charging $36 plus $0.08 per mile. Write a linear equation 
that relates the cost C, in dollars, of renting the truck to the 

Section 3.1  Properties of Linear Functions and Linear Models  163
Memory, m (gigabytes)
Number of Songs, n
8
1750
16
3500
32
7000
64
14,000
Soda, s
Hot Dogs, h
20
0
15
3
10
6
  5
9
number x of miles driven. What is the cost of renting the 
truck if the truck is driven 198 miles? 463 miles?
	 50.	 International Call Plan  A cell phone company offers an  
international plan by charging $30 for the first 80 minutes, 
plus $0.50 for each minute over 80.
(a)	 Write a linear model that relates the cost C, in dollars, of 
talking x minutes, assuming x Ú 80. 
(b)	 What 
is 
the 
cost 
of 
talking 
105 
minutes?  
120 minutes? 
 
Mixed Practice
	 51.	 Building a Linear Model from Data  How many songs 
can an iPod hold? The following data represent the  
memory m and the number of songs, n.
	 52.	 Building a Linear Model from Data  The following data 
represent the various combinations of soda and hot dogs 
that Yolanda can buy at a baseball game with $60.
(a)	 Plot the ordered pairs 1m, n2 in a Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Show that the number of songs n is a linear function of 
the memory m.
(c)	 Determine the linear function that describes the  
relation between m and n. 
(d)	 What is the implied domain of the linear function?
(e)	 Graph the linear function in the Cartesian plane drawn 
in part (a).
(f)	 Interpret the slope.
(a)	 Plot the ordered pairs 1s, h2 in a Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Show that the number of hot dogs purchased h is a  
linear function of the number of sodas purchased s.
(c)	 Determine the linear function that describes the  
relation between s and h. 
(d)	 What is the implied domain of the linear function?
(e)	 Graph the linear function in the Cartesian plane drawn 
in part (a).
(f)	 Interpret the slope.
(g)	 Interpret the values of the intercepts.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 53.	 Which of the following functions might have the graph 
shown? (More than one answer is possible.) 
(a)	 f1x2 = 2x - 7
(b)	 g1x2 = - 3x + 4
(c)	 H1x2 = 5
(d)	 F1x2 = 3x + 4
(e)	 G1x2 = 1
2
 x + 2
y
x
	 54.	 Which of the following functions might have the graph 
shown? (More than one answer is possible.) 
(a)	 f1x2 = 3x + 1
(b)	 g1x2 = - 2x + 3
(c)	 H1x2 = 3
(d)	 F1x2 = - 4x - 1
(e)	 G1x2 = -  2
3
 x + 3
y
x
	 55.	 Under what circumstances is a linear function f1x2 = mx + b odd? Can a linear function ever be even? 
	 56.	 Explain how the graph of f1x2 = mx + b can be used to solve mx + b 7 0.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 57–60 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 57.	 Graph x2 - 4x + y2 + 10y - 7 = 0.
	 58.	 If f1x2 = 2x + B
x - 3  and f152 = 8, what is the value of B? 
	 59.	 Find the average rate of change of f(x) = 3x2 - 5x from	
 
1 to 3. 
	 60.	 Graph g(x) = e
x2
x … 0
2x + 1
x 7 0
2221
x
y
2
1
21
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	
2.  2
3
 	
3.  18	
4.  5506	
5.  0	
6.  True

164 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Draw and Interpret Scatter Diagrams
In Section 3.1, we built linear models from verbal descriptions. Linear models can 
also be constructed by fitting a linear function to data. The first step is to plot the 
ordered pairs using rectangular coordinates. The resulting graph is a scatter diagram.
Drawing and Interpreting a Scatter Diagram
In baseball, the on-base percentage for a team represents the percentage of time that 
the players safely reach base. The data given in Table 6 represent the number of runs 
scored y and the on-base percentage x for teams in the National League during the 
2013 baseball season.
1
Example 1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 167.
	
Objectives	 1  Draw and Interpret Scatter Diagrams  (p. 164)
	
	 	2  Distinguish between Linear and Nonlinear Relations  (p. 165)
	
	 	3  Use a Graphing Utility to Find the Line of Best Fit  (p. 166)
3.2  Building Linear Models from Data
•	 Rectangular Coordinates (Section 1.1, pp. 36–37)
•	 Functions (Section 2.1, pp. 79–88)
•	 Lines (Section 1.3, pp. 53–61)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Table 6
 
Team
On-Base  
Percentage, x
Runs 
Scored, y
 
(x, y)
Arizona
32.3
685
(32.3, 685)
Atlanta
32.1
688
(32.1, 688)
Chicago Cubs
30.0
602
(30.0, 602)
Cincinnati
32.7
698
(32.7, 698)
Colorado
32.3
706
(32.3, 706)
LA Dodgers
32.6
649
(32.6, 649)
Miami
29.3
513
(29.3, 513)
Milwaukee
31.1
640
(31.1, 640)
NY Mets
30.6
619
(30.6, 619)
Philadelphia
30.6
610
(30.6, 610)
Pittsburgh
31.3
634
(31.3, 634)
San Diego
30.8
618
(30.8, 618)
San Francisco
32.0
629
(32.0, 629)
St. Louis
33.2
783
(33.2, 783)
Washington
31.3
656
(31.3, 656)
Source: espn.go.com
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data, treating on-base percentage as the  
independent variable.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to draw a scatter diagram.
(c)	 Describe what happens to runs scored as the on-base percentage increases.
(a)	 To draw a scatter diagram, plot the ordered pairs listed in Table 6, with the  
on-base percentage as the x-coordinate and the runs scored as the y-coordinate. 
See Figure 6(a). Notice that the points in the scatter diagram are not connected.
Solution

Section 3.2  Building Linear Models from Data  165
(b)	 Figure 6(b) shows a scatter diagram using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator.
(c)	 The scatter diagrams show that as the on-base percentage increases, the number 
of runs scored also increases.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1 ( a )
Distinguish between Linear and Nonlinear Relations
Notice that the points in Figure 6 do not follow a perfect linear relation (as they 
do in Figure 3 in Section 3.1). However, the data do exhibit a linear pattern. There 
are numerous possible explanations why the data are not perfectly linear, but one 
easy explanation is the fact that other variables besides on-base percentage (such as 
number of home runs hit) play a role in determining runs scored.
Scatter diagrams are used to help us to see the type of relation that exists 
between two variables. In this text, we will discuss a variety of different relations 
that may exist between two variables. For now, we concentrate on distinguishing 
between linear and nonlinear relations. See Figure 7.
2
Figure 7 
(e) Nonlinear
(d) Nonlinear
(c) Nonlinear
(b) Linear
      y  mx  b, m  0
(a) Linear
      y  mx  b, m  0
Figure 8 
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
Distinguishing between Linear and Nonlinear Relations
Determine whether the relation between the two variables in each scatter diagram 
in Figure 8 is linear or nonlinear.
Example 2
(a)	 Linear    (b)  Nonlinear    (c)  Nonlinear    (d)  Nonlinear
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5
Solution
•
Figure 6  On-base percentage
•
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
32
32.5
33
33.5
0
Runs Scored versus On-base Percentage
in the National League, 2013
Runs Scored
On-base Percentage
800
750
700
650
550
850
500
600
x
y
29450
850
34
(a)
(b)

166 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
This section considers data whose scatter diagrams suggest that a linear relation 
exists between the two variables.
Suppose that the scatter diagram of a set of data appears to indicate a linear 
relationship, as in Figure 7(a) or (b). We might want to model the data by finding 
an equation of a line that relates the two variables. One way to obtain a model for 
such data is to draw a line through two points on the scatter diagram and determine 
the equation of the line.
Finding a Model for Linearly Related Data
Use the data in Table 6 from Example 1.
(a)	 Select two points and find an equation of the line containing the points.
(b)	 Graph the line on the scatter diagram obtained in Example 1(a).
(a)	 Select two points, say 130.6, 6102 and 132.1, 6882. The slope of the line joining 
the points 130.6, 6102 and 132.1, 6882 is
m = 688 - 610
32.1 - 30.6 = 78
1.5 = 52
The equation of the line that has slope 52 and passes through 130.6, 6102 is 
found using the point–slope form with m = 52, x1 = 30.6, and y1 = 610.
 y - y1 = m1x - x12 
 y - 610 = 521x - 30.62 
 y - 610 = 52x - 1591.2
 y = 52x - 981.2
(b)	 Figure 9 shows the scatter diagram with the graph of the line found in part (a).
Example 3
Solution
Point–slope form of a line
x1 = 30.6, y1 = 610, m = 52
The model
Figure 9 
•
(30.6, 610)
(32.1, 688)
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
32
32.5
33
33.5
0
On-base Percentage
Runs Scored versus On-base Percentage
in the National League, 2013
Runs Scored
800
750
700
650
550
850
500
600
x
y
 Select two other points and complete the solution. Graph the line on the 
scatter diagram obtained in Figure 6.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 1 ( b )  a n d  ( c )
Use a Graphing Utility to Find the Line of Best Fit
The model obtained in Example 3 depends on the selection of points, which will 
vary from person to person. So the model that we found might be different from 
the model you found. Although the model in Example 3 appears to fit the data well, 
3

Section 3.2  Building Linear Models from Data  167
there may be a model that “fits them better.” Do you think your model fits the data 
better? Is there a line of best fit? As it turns out, there is a method for finding a 
model that best fits linearly related data (called the line of best fit).*
Finding a Model for Linearly Related Data
Use the data in Table 6 from Example 1.
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit that models the relation between 
on-base percentage and runs scored.
(b)	 Graph the line of best fit on the scatter diagram obtained in Example 1(b).
(c)	 Interpret the slope.
(d)	 Use the line of best fit to predict the number of runs a team will score if their 
on-base percentage is 33.1.
(a)	 Graphing utilities contain built-in programs that find the line of best fit for a 
collection of points in a scatter diagram. Executing the LINear REGression  
program provides the results shown in Figure 10. This output shows the equation 
y = ax + b, where a is the slope of the line and b is the y-intercept. The line of 
best fit that relates on-base percentage to runs scored may be expressed as the 
line
y = 49.40x - 906.29 
The model
(b)	 Figure 11 shows the graph of the line of best fit, along with the scatter diagram.
(c)	 The slope of the line of best fit is 49.40, which means that, for every 1 percent 
increase in the on-base percentage, runs scored increase by 49.40, on average.
(d)	 Letting x = 33.1 in the equation of the line of best fit, we obtain
 y = 49.40133.12 - 906.29 ≈729 runs
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 1 ( d )  a n d  ( e )
Does the line of best fit appear to be a good fit? In other words, does it appear 
to accurately describe the relation between on-base percentage and runs scored?
And just how “good” is this line of best fit? Look again at Figure 10. The 
last line of output is r = 0.896. This number, called the correlation coefficient, r,
-1 … r … 1, is a measure of the strength of the linear relation that exists between 
two variables. The closer  r  is to 1, the more nearly perfect the linear relationship 
is. If r is close to 0, there is little or no linear relationship between the variables. A 
negative value of r, r 6 0, indicates that as x increases, y decreases; a positive value 
of r, r 7 0, indicates that as x increases, y does also. The data given in Table 6, which 
have a correlation coefficient of 0.896, are indicative of a linear relationship with 
positive slope.
Example 4
Solution
•
Figure 11 
29450
850
34
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Plot the points (1, 5), (2, 6), (3, 9), (1, 12) in the Cartesian 
plane. Is the relation 5 11, 52, 12, 62, 13, 92, 11, 122 6 a 
function? Why? (pp. 36 and 79–88)
	 2.	 Find an equation of the line containing the points 11, 42 and 
13, 82. (pp. 53–61) 
3.2  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 3.	 A     
 is used to help us to see what type of 
relation, if any, may exist between two variables.
	 4.	 True or False  The correlation coefficient is a measure of the 
strength of a linear relation between two variables and must 
lie between - 1 and 1, inclusive. 
* We shall not discuss the underlying mathematics of lines of best fit in this text.
Figure 10 

168 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
x
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
y
4
6
7
10
12
14
16
x
3
5
7
9
11
13
y
0
2
3
6
9
11
x
-2
-1
0
1
2
y
-4
0
1
4
5
x
-2
-1
0
1
2
y
7
6
3
2
0
x
-20
-17
-15
-14
-10
y
100
120
118
130
140
x
-30
-27
-25
-20
-14
y
10
12
13
13
18
Skill Building
In Problems 5–10, examine the scatter diagram and determine whether the type of relation is linear or nonlinear.
*In Problems 11–16:
(a)	Draw a scatter diagram.
(b)	Select two points from the scatter diagram, and find the equation of the line containing the points selected.
(c)	Graph the line found in part (b) on the scatter diagram.
(d)	Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit.
(e)	Use a graphing utility to draw the scatter diagram and graph the line of best fit on it.
	 6.	
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0 2 4 6 8 10121416 x
y
	 5.	          
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0 5 10 1520 2530 3540 x
y
	 7.	
8.	
9.	
10.	
11.	
	12.	
13.	
14.	
15.	
16.	
Applications and Extensions
	 17.	 Candy  The following data represent the weight (in grams) 
of various candy bars and the corresponding number of calories.
Hershey’s Milk Chocolate®
Nestle’s Crunch®
Butterﬁnger®
Baby Ruth®
Almond Joy®
Twix® (with caramel)
Snickers®
Heath®
44.28
44.84
61.30
66.45
47.33
58.00
61.12
39.52
230
230
270
280
220
280
280
210
Source: Megan Pocius, student at Joliet Junior College
Calories, y
Weight, x
Candy Bar
(d)	 Graph the line on the scatter diagram drawn in part (a).
(e)	 Use the linear model to predict the number of calories 
in a candy bar that weighs 62.3 grams. 
(f)	 Interpret the slope of the line found in part (c).
	 18.	 Raisins  The following data represent the weight (in grams) 
of a box of raisins and the number of raisins in the box.
Source: Jennifer Maxwell, student at Joliet
             Junior College
42.3
42.7
42.8
42.4
42.6
42.4
42.3
42.5
42.7
42.5
87
91
93
87
89
90
82
86
86
86
Number of Raisins, N
Weight (grams), w
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data, treating weight as 
the independent variable.
(b)	 What type of relation appears to exist between the 
weight of a candy bar and the number of calories?
(c)	 Select two points and find a linear model that contains 
the points.
−2
0
22
12
520
55
35
00
25
10
00
35
45

Section 3.2  Building Linear Models from Data  169
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data, treating weight as 
the independent variable.
(b)	 What type of relation appears to exist between the 
weight of a box of raisins and the number of raisins?
(c)	 Select two points and find a linear model that contains 
the points.
(d)	 Graph the line on the scatter diagram drawn in part (b).
(e)	 Use the linear model to predict the number of raisins in 
a box that weighs 42.5 grams. 
(f)	 Interpret the slope of the line found in part (c).
	 19.	 Video Games and Grade-Point Average  Professor Grant 
Alexander wanted to find a linear model that relates the 
number of hours a student plays video games each week, 
h, to the cumulative grade-point average, G, of the student. 
He obtained a random sample of 10 full-time students at his 
college and asked each student to disclose the number of 
hours spent playing video games and the student’s cumulative 
grade-point average.
Hours of Video Games
per Week, h
Grade-point
Average, G
0
0
2
3
3
5
8
8
10
12
3.49
3.05
3.24
2.82
3.19
2.78
2.31
2.54
2.03
2.51
(d)	 Predict the head circumference of a child who is 26 inches 
tall. 
(e)	 What is the height of a child whose head circumference 
is 17.4 inches? 
25.25
25.75
25
27.75
26.5
27
26.75
26.75
27.5
16.4
16.9
16.9
17.6
17.3
17.5
17.3
17.5
17.5
Source: Denise Slucki, student at Joliet
             Junior College
Height, H
(inches)
Head Circumference, C 
(inches)
(a)	 Explain why the number of hours spent playing video 
games is the independent variable and cumulative 
grade-point average is the dependent variable.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to draw a scatter diagram.
(c)	 Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit that 
models the relation between number of hours of  
video game playing each week and grade-point average.  
Express the model using function notation.
(d)	 Interpret the slope.
(e)	 Predict the grade-point average of a student who plays 
video games for 8 hours each week. 
(f)	 How many hours of video game playing do you think a 
student plays whose grade-point average is 2.40?
	 20.	 Height versus Head Circumference  A pediatrician wanted 
to find a linear model that relates a child’s height, H, to head 
circumference, C. She randomly selects nine children from 
her practice, measures their height and head circumference, 
and obtains the data shown. Let H represent the independent 
variable and C the dependent variable.
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to draw a scatter diagram.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit 
that models the relation between height and head  
circumference. Express the model using function notation.
(c)	 Interpret the slope.
	 21.	 Flight Time and Ticket Price  The following data represent 
nonstop flight time (in minutes) and one-way ticket price 
(in dollars) for flying from Chicago to various cities on  
Southwest Airlines.
City
Time
(minutes), t
Price
(dollars), P
Atlanta, GA
Los Angeles, CA
Nashville, TN
Oklahoma City, OK
Omaha, NE
Ft. Myers, FL
Phoenix, AZ
Houston, TX
Seattle, WA
St. Louis, MO
140
199
108
130
89
175
191
147
196
93
110
260
80
125
85
170
225
155
265
65
Source: Southwest.com, for midmorning ﬂights in
              May 2014
City
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to draw a scatter diagram.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit that 
models the relation between flight time and airfare.  
Express the model using function notation.
(c)	 Interpret the slope.
(d)	 Predict the airfare for a flight from Chicago to Kansas 
City, Missouri, if the flight time is 85 minutes. Round to 
the nearest dollar. 
(e)	 Predict the flight time from Chicago to Baltimore,  
Maryland if the airfare is $120. Round to the nearest 
minute. 

170 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 22.	 Maternal Age versus Down Syndrome  A biologist would 
like to know how the age of the mother affects the incidence 
of Down syndrome. The data to the right represent the age 
of the mother and the incidence of Down syndrome per 
1000 pregnancies. Draw a scatter diagram treating age of the 
mother as the independent variable. Would it make sense to 
find the line of best fit for these data? Why or why not?
	 23.	 Find the line of best fit for the ordered pairs 11, 52 and  
13, 82. What is the correlation coefficient for these data? 
Why is this result reasonable? 
	 24.	 What does a correlation coefficient of 0 imply?
	 25.	 Explain why it does not make sense to interpret the y-intercept 
in Problem 17.
	 26.	 Refer to Problem 19. Solve G1h2 = 0. Provide an  
interpretation of this result. Find G102. Provide an  
interpretation of this result.
Age of Mother, x
Incidence of Down
Syndrome, y
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
2.4
3.1
4   
5   
6.7
8.3
10   
13.3
16.7
22.2
28.6
33.3
50   
Source: Hook, E.B., Journal of the American
              Medical   Association, 249, 2034-2038, 1983.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 27–30 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 27.	 Find an equation for the line containing the points (–1, 5) 
and (3, –3). Express your answer using either the general 
form or the slope-intercept form of the equation of a line, 
whichever you prefer.
	 28.	 Find the domain of f(x) =
x - 1
x2 - 25. 
	29.	 For  f(x) = 5x - 8 and g(x) = x2 - 3x + 4, find (g - f )(x).
	 30.	 Write the function whose graph is the graph of y = x2, but shifted 
to the left 3 units and shifted down 4 units. 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	
2.  y = 2x + 2
No, because the input, 1, 
corresponds to two different 
outputs.
x
y
3
6
9
12
3
2
1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 179.
	
Objectives	 	1  Graph a Quadratic Function Using Transformations  (p. 172)
	
	 	2  Identify the Vertex and Axis of Symmetry of a Quadratic Function  (p. 174)
	
	 	3  Graph a Quadratic Function Using Its Vertex, Axis, and Intercepts  (p. 174)
	
	 	4  Find a Quadratic Function Given Its Vertex and One Other Point  (p. 177)
	
	 	5  Find the Maximum or Minimum Value of a Quadratic Function (p. 178)
3.3  Quadratic Functions and Their Properties
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Intercepts (Section 1.2, pp. 45–46)
•	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations (Section 2.5, pp. 127–136)
•	 Completing the Square (Appendix A,  Section A.3, pp. 972–973)
•	 Quadratic Equations (Appendix A,  
Section A.6, pp. 990–994)

Section 3.3  Quadratic Functions and Their Properties  171
Table 7
Price p per Calculator
(in dollars)
Number of
Calculators, x
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
12,000
11,250
10,500
9,750
9,000
8,250
7,500
A quadratic function is a function of the form
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c
where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠0. The domain of a quadratic  
function is the set of all real numbers.
Definition
Many applications require a knowledge of quadratic functions. For example, 
suppose that Texas Instruments collects the data shown in Table 7, which relate 
the number of calculators sold to the price p (in dollars) per calculator. Since the 
price of a product determines the quantity that will be purchased, we treat price as  
the independent variable. The relationship between the number x of calculators sold 
and the price p per calculator is given by the linear equation
x = 21,000 - 150p
Then the revenue R derived from selling x calculators at the price p per calculator 
is equal to the unit selling price p of the calculator times the number x of units  
actually sold. That is,
R = xp
R1p2 = 121,000 - 150p2p 
= -150p2 + 21,000p
So the revenue R is a quadratic function of the price p. Figure 12 illustrates the 
graph of this revenue function, whose domain is 0 … p … 140, since both x and p 
must be nonnegative.
x = 21,000 - 150p
Figure 12 
  R(p) = - 150p2 + 21,000p
14
0
28
42
84
56
98
Price per calculator (dollars)
112
126
140
800,000
700,000
600,000
500,000
Revenue (dollars)
400,000
200,000
100,000
300,000
70
p
R
In Words
A quadratic function is a function 
defined by a second-degree  
polynomial in one variable.
Quadratic Functions
Here are some examples of quadratic functions.
F1x2 = 3x2 - 5x + 1  g1x2 = -6x2 + 1  H1x2 = 1
2x2 + 2
3x

172 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
A second situation in which a quadratic function appears involves the motion 
of a projectile. Based on Newton’s Second Law of Motion (force equals mass times 
acceleration, F = ma), it can be shown that, ignoring air resistance, the path of a 
projectile propelled upward at an inclination to the horizontal is the graph of a 
quadratic function. See Figure 13 for an illustration.
Graph a Quadratic Function Using Transformations
We know how to graph the square function f1x2 = x2. Figure 14 shows the graph of
three functions of the form f1x2 = ax2, a 7 0, for a = 1, a = 1
2, and a = 3. Note
that the larger the value of a, the “narrower” the graph is, and the smaller the value 
of a, the “wider” the graph is.
Figure 15 shows the graphs of f1x2 = ax2 for a 6 0. Notice that these graphs 
are reflections about the x-axis of the graphs in Figure 14. Based on the results of 
these two figures, general conclusions can be drawn about the graph of f1x2 = ax2. 
First, as 0 a0  increases, the graph is stretched vertically (becomes “taller”), and  
as 0 a0  gets closer to zero, the graph is compressed vertically (becomes “shorter”). 
Second, if a is positive, the graph opens “up,” and if a is negative, the graph  
opens “down.”
1
* Parabolas will be studied using a geometric definition later in this text.
Figure 14 
x
y
–4
4
f(x) =    x 2
4
–4
1–2
f(x) = x 2
f(x) = 3x 2
Figure 15 
x
y
–4
4
4
–4
f(x) = –    x 2
1–2
f(x) = –x 2
f(x) = –3x 2
Figure 13
Path of a cannonball
The graphs in Figures 14 and 15 are typical of the graphs of all quadratic functions, 
which are called parabolas.* Refer to Figure 16, where two parabolas are pictured. 
The one on the left opens up and has a lowest point; the one on the right opens 
down and has a highest point. The lowest or highest point of a parabola is called the 
vertex. The vertical line passing through the vertex in each parabola in Figure 16 is 
called the axis of symmetry (usually abbreviated to axis) of the parabola. Because 
the parabola is symmetric about its axis, the axis of symmetry of a parabola can be 
used to find additional points on the parabola.
The parabolas shown in Figure 16 are the graphs of a quadratic function 
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0. Notice that the coordinate axes are not included in 
the figure. Depending on the values of a, b, and c, the axes could be placed anywhere. 
The important fact is that the shape of the graph of a quadratic function will look 
like one of the parabolas in Figure 16.
In the following example, techniques from Section 2.5 are used to graph a  
quadratic function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0. The method of completing the 
square is used to write the function f in the form f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k.
Graphing a Quadratic Function Using Transformations
Graph the function f1x2 = 2x2 + 8x + 5. Find the vertex and axis of symmetry.
Example 1
Figure 16 
Graphs of a quadratic function,  
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c,  a ≠0
EOpens down
Vertex is
highest point
Axis of
symmetry
a , 0
DOpens up
          
Axis of 
symmetry
Vertex is
lowest point
a . 0

Section 3.3  Quadratic Functions and Their Properties  173
Begin by completing the square on the right side.
 f1x2 = 2x2 + 8x + 5
 = 21x2 + 4x2 + 5
 
 = 21x2 + 4x + 42 + 5 - 8
 = 21x + 222 - 3
The graph of f can be obtained from the graph of y = x2 in three stages, as shown 
in Figure 17. Now compare this graph to the graph in Figure 16(a). The graph of 
f1x2 = 2x2 + 8x + 5 is a parabola that opens up and has its vertex (lowest point) 
at 1 -2, -32. Its axis of symmetry is the line x = -2.
Solution
Factor out the 2 from 2x2 + 8x.
Complete the square of x2 + 4x by  
adding 4. Notice that the factor of 2  
requires that 8 be added and subtracted.
Figure 17 
Replace x
by x  2;
Shift left
2 units
x
y
3
3
(c)   y  2(x  2)2
(1, 2)
(2, 0)
(3, 2)
3
3
Subtract 3;
Shift down
3 units
Axis of 
Symmetry
x  2
Vertex
x
y
3
(d)   y  2(x  2)2  3
(1, 1)
(2, 3)
(3, 1)
3
3
Multiply
by 2;
Vertical
stretch
x
y
3
2
3
2
(b)   y  2x 2
(1, 2)
(0, 0)
(1, 2)
3
3
x
y
(a)   y  x 2
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
3
3
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
The method used in Example 1 can be used to graph any quadratic function 
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0, as follows:
 f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c
 = aax2 + b
a
 xb + c
 = aax2 + b
a
 x + b2
4a2 b + c - aa b2
4a2 b
 = aax + b
2ab
2
+ c - b2
4a
 = aax + b
2ab
2
+ 4ac - b2
4a
These results lead to the following conclusion:
•
Factor out  a from ax2 + bx. 
Complete the square by adding b2
4a2.  
Look closely at this step! 
Factor ; simplify.
c - b2
4a = c # 4a
4a - b2
4a = 4ac - b2
4a
If h = -  b
2a and k = 4ac - b2
4a
, then
	
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c = a1x - h22 + k	
(1)
The graph of f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k is the parabola y = ax2 shifted  
horizontally h units (replace x by x - h) and vertically k units (add k). As a  
result, the vertex is at 1h, k2, and the graph opens up if a 7 0 and down if 
a 6 0. The axis of symmetry is the vertical line x = h.

174 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
For example, compare equation (1) with the solution given in Example 1.
 f1x2 = 21x + 222 - 3
 = 21x - 1 -22 22 + 1 -32
 = a1x - h22 + k
Because a = 2, the graph opens up. Also, because h = -2 and k = -3, its vertex 
is at 1 -2, -32.
Identify the Vertex and Axis of Symmetry  
of a Quadratic Function
We do not need to complete the square to obtain the vertex. In almost every case, 
it is easier to obtain the vertex of a quadratic function f by remembering that 
its x-coordinate is h = -  b
2a. The y-coordinate k can then be found by evaluating f
at -  b
2a. That is, k = f a -  b
2ab.
2
Properties of the Graph of a Quadratic Function
                                         f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c   a ≠0
Vertex = a -  b
2a, f a -  b
2ab b Axis of symmetry: the vertical line x = -  b
2a  (2)
Parabola opens up if a 7 0; the vertex is a minimum point.
Parabola opens down if a 6 0; the vertex is a maximum point.
Locating the Vertex without Graphing
Without graphing, locate the vertex and axis of symmetry of the parabola defined  
by f1x2 = -3x2 + 6x + 1. Does it open up or down?
For this quadratic function, a = -3, b = 6, and c = 1. The x-coordinate of the  
vertex is
h = -  b
2a = -  
6
21 -32 = 1
The y-coordinate of the vertex is
k = f a -  b
2ab = f112 = -31122 + 6112 + 1 = 4
The vertex is located at the point 11, 42. The axis of symmetry is the line x = 1. 
Because a = -3 6 0, the parabola opens down.
Graph a Quadratic Function Using Its Vertex, Axis,  
and Intercepts
The location of the vertex and intercepts, along with knowledge of whether 
the graph opens up or down, usually provides enough information to graph 
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0.
The y-intercept is the value of f at x = 0; that is, the y-intercept is f102 = c.
The x-intercepts, if there are any, are found by solving the quadratic equation
ax2 + bx + c = 0
Example 2
Solution
•
3

Section 3.3  Quadratic Functions and Their Properties  175
This equation has two, one, or no real solutions, depending on whether the  
discriminant b2 - 4ac is positive, 0, or negative. Depending on the value of the  
discriminant, the graph of f has x-intercepts, as follows:
x
y
4
 (1, 4)
4
4
 (2, 1)
 (0, 1)
 (2.15, 0)
 (0.15, 0)
Axis of symmetry
x 1
Figure 19  f(x) = - 3x2 + 6x + 1
The x-Intercepts of a Quadratic Function
	 1.	 If the discriminant b2 - 4ac 7 0, the graph of f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c has 
two distinct x-intercepts so it crosses the x-axis in two places.
	 2.	 If the discriminant b2 - 4ac = 0, the graph of f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c has 
one x-intercept so it touches the x-axis at its vertex.
	 3.	 If the discriminant b2 - 4ac 6 0, the graph of f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c has 
no x-intercepts so it does not cross or touch the x-axis.
Figure 18 illustrates these possibilities for parabolas that open up.
Graphing a Quadratic Function Using Its Vertex,  Axis,  
and Intercepts
(a)	 Use the information from Example 2 and the locations of the intercepts to graph 
f1x2 = -3x2 + 6x + 1.
(b)	 Determine the domain and the range of f.
(c)	 Determine where f is increasing and where it is decreasing.
(a)	 In Example 2, we found the vertex to be at 11, 42 and the axis of symmetry to 
be x = 1. The y-intercept is found by letting x = 0. The y-intercept is f102 = 1. 
The x-intercepts are found by solving the equation f1x2 = 0. This results in the 
equation
-3x2 + 6x + 1 = 0  a = -3, b = 6, c = 1
The discriminant b2 - 4ac = 1622 - 41 -32 112 = 36 + 12 = 48 7 0, so the 
equation has two real solutions and the graph has two x-intercepts. Use the 
quadratic formula to find that
x = -b + 2b2 - 4ac
2a
= -6 + 248
-6
= -6 + 423
-6
≈-0.15
and
x = -b - 2b2 - 4ac
2a
= -6 - 248
-6
= -6 - 423
-6
≈2.15
The x-intercepts are approximately -0.15 and 2.15.
The graph is illustrated in Figure 19. Notice how we used the y-intercept and 
the axis of symmetry, x = 1, to obtain the additional point 12, 12 on the graph.
Example 3
Solution
Figure 18 
  f(x) = ax2 + bx + c, a 7 0
x
x
-intercept
x-intercept
, f
(
(
))
x-intercept
y
D   b2 – 4ac > 0
Two x-intercepts
–
–
b
2a
b
2a
, f
(
(
))
–
–
b
2a
b
2a
(– b
One x-intercept
x
y
E   b2 – 4ac = 0
, 0
2a )
No x-intercepts
F   b2 – 4ac < 0
x
y
Axis of symmetry
b
2a
x = –
b
2a
x = –
b
2a
x = –
Axis of symmetry
Axis of symmetry

176 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
(b)	 The domain of f is the set of all real numbers. Based on the graph, the range of f 
is the interval 1 - q, 44.
(c)	 The function f is increasing on the interval 1 - q, 12 and decreasing on the  
interval 11, q 2.
Graph the function in Example 3 by completing the square and using 
transformations. Which method do you prefer?
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
If the graph of a quadratic function has only one x-intercept or no x-intercepts, 
it is usually necessary to plot an additional point to obtain the graph.
Graphing a Quadratic Function Using Its Vertex,  Axis,  
and Intercepts
(a)	 Graph f1x2 = x2 - 6x + 9 by determining whether the graph opens up or 
down and by finding its vertex, axis of symmetry, y-intercept, and x-intercepts, 
if any.
(b)	 Determine the domain and the range of f.
(c)	 Determine where f is increasing and where it is decreasing.
(a)	 For f1x2 = x2 - 6x + 9, note that a = 1, b = -6, and c = 9. Because 
a = 1 7 0, the parabola opens up. The x-coordinate of the vertex is
h = -  b
2a = -  -6
2112 = 3
The y-coordinate of the vertex is
k = f132 = 1322 - 6132 + 9 = 0
The vertex is at 13, 02. The axis of symmetry is the line x = 3. The y-intercept is 
f102 = 9. Since the vertex 13, 02 lies on the x-axis, the graph touches the x-axis 
at the x-intercept. By using the axis of symmetry and the y-intercept at (0, 9), we 
can locate the additional point 16, 92 on the graph. See Figure 20.
(b)	 The domain of f is the set of all real numbers. Based on the graph, the range of f 
is the interval 30, q 2.
(c)	 The function f is decreasing on the interval 1 - q, 32 and increasing on the  
interval 13, q 2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Graphing a Quadratic Function Using Its Vertex, Axis,  
and Intercepts
(a)	 Graph f1x2 = 2x2 + x + 1 by determining whether the graph opens up or 
down and by finding its vertex, axis of symmetry, y-intercept, and x-intercepts, 
if any.
(b)	 Determine the domain and the range of f.
(c)	 Determine where f is increasing and where it is decreasing.
(a)	 For f1x2 = 2x2 + x + 1, we have a = 2, b = 1, and c = 1. Because a = 2 7 0, 
the parabola opens up. The x-coordinate of the vertex is
h = -  b
2a = -  1
4
•
Example 4
Solution
•
Example 5
Solution
Figure 20  f (x) = x2 - 6x + 9
x
y
3
6
(0, 9)
Axis of symmetry
x  3
6
 (6, 9)
 (3, 0)

Section 3.3  Quadratic Functions and Their Properties  177
The y-coordinate of the vertex is
k = f a -  1
4b = 2a 1
16b + a -  1
4b + 1 = 7
8
The vertex is at a -  1
4, 7
8b. The axis of symmetry is the line x = -  1
4. The 
y-intercept is f102 = 1. The x-intercept(s), if any, satisfy the equation 
2x2 + x + 1 = 0. The discriminant b2 - 4ac = 1122 - 4122 112 = -7 6 0. 
This equation has no real solutions, which means the graph has no x-intercepts.
Use the point (0, 1) and the axis of symmetry x = -  1
4 to locate the additional 
point a -  1
2, 1b on the graph. See Figure 21.
(b)	 The domain of f is the set of all real numbers. Based on the graph, the range of f 
is the interval c 7
8, q b.
(c)	 The function f is decreasing on the interval a - q, -  1
4b and is increasing on the 
interval a -  1
4, q b.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Find a Quadratic Function Given Its Vertex and One Other Point
•
4
Note  In Example 5, since the vertex 
is above the x-axis and the parabola 
opens up, we can conclude that the 
graph of the quadratic function has no  
x-intercepts.	
■
If the vertex 1h, k2 and one additional point on the graph of a quadratic  
function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0, are known, then
	
f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k	
(3)
can be used to obtain the quadratic function.
Finding the Quadratic Function Given Its Vertex  
and One Other Point
Determine the quadratic function whose vertex is 11, -52 and whose y-intercept  
is -3. 
The vertex is 11, -52, so h = 1 and k = -5. Substitute these values into equation (3).
 f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k
 f1x2 = a1x - 122 - 5 
To determine the value of a, use the fact that f102 = -3 (the y-intercept).
 f1x2 = a1x - 122 - 5
 -3 = a10 - 122 - 5 
 -3 = a - 5
 a = 2
The quadratic function we seek is 
f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k = 21x - 122 - 5 = 2x2 - 4x - 3
See Figure 22.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Example 6
Solution
Equation (3)
h = 1, k = -5
x = 0, y = f1 02 = -3
•
Figure 21  f (x) = 2x2 + x + 1
–1
1
1
2
x
y
Axis of
symmetry
x  – 1–4
1–2
(0, 1)
, 1
(
)
–
1–4
7–8
,
(
)
–
Figure 22  f1x2 = 2x2 - 4x - 3
x
y
–2
–1
2
1
4
–4
8
–8
12
4
3
(0, –3)
(1, –5)

178 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Find the Maximum or Minimum Value of a Quadratic Function
The graph of a quadratic function
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c  a ≠0
is a parabola with vertex at a -  b
2a, f a -  b
2ab b. This vertex is the highest point on the 
graph if a 6 0 and the lowest point on the graph if a 7 0. If the vertex is the highest
point 1a 6 02, then f a -  b
2ab is the maximum value of f. If the vertex is the 
lowest point 1a 7 02, then f a -  b
2ab is the minimum value of f.
Finding the Maximum or Minimum Value of a Quadratic Function
Determine whether the quadratic function
f1x2 = x2 - 4x - 5
has a maximum or a minimum value. Then find the maximum or minimum value.
Compare f1x2 = x2 - 4x - 5 to f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c. Then a = 1, b = -4, and 
c = -5. Because a 7 0, the graph of f opens up, which means the vertex is a minimum 
point. The minimum value occurs at
x = -  b
2a = -  -4
2112 = 4
2 = 2
The minimum value is
f a -  b
2ab = f122 = 22 - 4122 - 5 = 4 - 8 - 5 = -9
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7
5
Example 7
Solution
c
a = 1, b = - 4
•
Summary
Steps for Graphing a Quadratic Function f(x) = ax2 + bx + c,  a ≠0
Option 1
Step 1:  Complete the square in x to write the quadratic function in the form f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k.
Step 2:  Graph the function in stages using transformations.
Option 2
Step 1:  Determine whether the parabola opens up 1a 7 02 or down 1a 6 02.
Step 2:  Determine the vertex a -  b
2a, f a -  b
2ab b.
Step 3:  Determine the axis of symmetry, x = -  b
2a.
Step 4:  Determine the y-intercept, f102, and the x-intercepts, if any.
(a)  If b2 - 4ac 7 0, the graph of the quadratic function has two x-intercepts, which are found by solving 
the equation ax2 + bx + c = 0.
(b)  If b2 - 4ac = 0, the vertex is the x-intercept.
(c)  If b2 - 4ac 6 0, there are no x-intercepts.
Step 5:  Determine an additional point by using the y-intercept and the axis of symmetry.
Step 6:  Plot the points and draw the graph.

Section 3.3  Quadratic Functions and Their Properties  179
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 List the intercepts of the equation y = x2 - 9. (pp. 45–46)
	 2.	 Find the real solutions of the equation 2x2 + 7x - 4 = 0. 
(pp. 990–994) 
	 3.	 To complete the square of x2 - 5x, you add the number 
          . (pp. 972–973) 
	 4.	 To graph y = 1x - 422, you shift the graph of y = x2 to the 
   
 a distance of  
 units. (pp. 127–136)
3.3  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 5.	 The graph of a quadratic function is called a(n)   
.
	 6.	 The vertical line passing through the vertex of a parabola is 
called the                 . 
	 7.	 The x-coordinate of the vertex of f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c,
a ≠0, is                   . 
	 8.	 True or False  The graph of f1x2 = 2x2 + 3x - 4 opens up. 
	 9.	 True or False  The y-coordinate of the vertex of 	  
f1x2 = - x2 + 4x + 5 is f122. 
	 10.	 True or False  If the discriminant b2 - 4ac = 0, the graph 
of f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0, will touch the x-axis at its 
vertex. 
	 11.	 If b2 - 4ac 7 0, which of the following conclusions can be 
made about the graph of f(x) = ax2 + bx + c,  a ≠0?
(a)	 The graph has two distinct x-intercepts.
(b)	 The graph has no x-intercepts.
(c)	 The graph has three distinct x-intercepts.
(d)	 The graph has one x-intercept. 
	 12.	 If the graph of f(x) = ax2 + bx + c,  a ≠0, has a maximum 
value at its vertex, which of the following conditions must  
be true?
(a)	 -  b
2a 7 0	
(b)	 - b
2a 6 0
(c)	 a 7 0	
(d)	 a 6 0 
Skill Building
In Problems 13–20, match each graph to one the following functions.
	 13.	 f1x2 = - x2 - 1 
	
14.	 f1x2 = x2 - 1 
	
15.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x + 1 
 	
16.	 f1x2 = x2 - 2x + 1 
	 17.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x 
	
18.	 f1x2 = x2 - 2x + 2 
	
19.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x + 2 
	
20.	 f1x2 = x2 - 2x 
	 A.	  
B.	  
C.	  
D.	  
x
y
3
2
2
1
(1, 0)
(1, 1)
x
y
2
2
2
(0, 1)
x
y
2
2
2
2
(1, 1)
x
y
3
2
2
1
	 E.	  
F.	  
G.	  
H.	  
(0, 1)
x
y
1
2
2
3
(1, 0)
x
y
1
3
2
(1, 1)
x
y
3
1
3
1
(1, 1)
x
y
2
2
2
In Problems 21–32, graph the function f by starting with the graph of y = x2 and using transformations (shifting, compressing, stretching, 
and/or reflecting).
[Hint: If necessary, write f in the form f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k.]
	 21.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 4	
22.	 f1x2 = 1
4
 x2	
23.	 f1x2 = 1x - 322 - 10	
24.	 f1x2 = 1x + 222 - 2
	 25.	 f1x2 = x2 + 4x + 2	
26.	 f1x2 = x2 - 6x - 1	
27.	 f1x2 = 3x2 + 6x	
28.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 4x + 1
	 29.	 f1x2 = - 2x2 + 6x + 2	
30.	 f1x2 = - x2 - 2x	
31.	 f1x2 = 2
3
 x2 + 4
3
 x - 1	
32.	 f1x2 = 1
2
 x2 + x - 1
In Problems 33–48, (a) graph each quadratic function by determining whether its graph opens up or down and by finding its vertex, axis of 
symmetry, y-intercept, and x-intercepts, if any. (b) Determine the domain and the range of the function. (c) Determine where the function 
is increasing and where it is decreasing.
	 33.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x	
34.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4x	
35.	 f1x2 = - x2 + 4x	
36.	 f1x2 = - x2 - 6x
	 37.	 f1x2 = x2 - 2x - 3	
38.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x - 8	
39.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x + 1	
40.	 f1x2 = x2 + 6x + 9

180 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
	 41.	 f1x2 = 4x2 - 2x + 1	
42.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - x + 2	
43.	 f1x2 = - 2x2 + 2x - 3	
44.	 f1x2 = -3x2 + 3x - 2
	 45.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 5x + 3	
46.	 f1x2 = 3x2 + 6x + 2	
47.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - 8x + 2	
48.	 f1x2 = -4x2 - 6x + 2
In Problems 49–54, determine the quadratic function whose graph is given.
	 49.	
	 50.	
51.	
52.	
53.	
54.	
x
y
–3
–2
–1
1
1
2
–2
Vertex: (–1, –2)
(0, –1)
x
y
–1
3
2
5
4
1
8
4
2
(0, 5)
Vertex: (2, 1)
x
y
–6
–3
1
2
–8
4
6
(0, –4)
Vertex: (–3, 5)
(0, –1)
x
y
–1
3
5
1
2
4
–4
Vertex: (2, 3)
(3, 5)
x
y
–1
3
6
8
–2
–4
2
4
Vertex: (1, –3)
(–4, –2)
x
y
–3
–1
1
2
4
6
–4
–2
Vertex: (–2, 6)
In Problems 55–62, determine, without graphing, whether the given quadratic function has a maximum value or a minimum value, and 
then find the value.
	 55.	 f1x2 = - 2x2 + 12x	
56.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 12x	
57.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 12x - 3	
58.	 f1x2 = 4x2 - 8x + 3
	 59.	 f1x2 = - 2x2 + 8x + 3	
60.	 f1x2 = - x2 + 10x - 4	
61.	 f1x2 = 4x2 - 4x	
62.	 f1x2 = - 3x2 + 12x + 1
Mixed Practice
In Problems 63–70, (a) graph each function. (b) Determine the domain and the range of the function. (c) Determine where the function 
is increasing and where it is decreasing.
	 63.	 f(x) = x2 - 2x - 15	
64.	 g(x) = x2 - 2x - 8	
65.	 h(x) = - 2
5
 x + 4	
66.	 f (x) = 3
2
 x - 2
	 67.	 g(x) = - 2(x - 3)2 + 2	
68.	 h(x) = - 3(x + 1)2 + 4	
69.	 f(x) = 2x2 + x + 1	
70.	 F(x) = -4x2 + 20x - 25
Applications and Extensions
	 71.	 The graph of the function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c has its vertex 
at 10, 52 and passes through the point 11, 62. Find a, b, and c.
	 72.	 The graph of the function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c has vertex at 
11, 42 and passes through the point 1-1, -82. Find a, b, and c.
In Problems 73–78, for the given functions f and g:
(a)	Graph f and g on the same Cartesian plane.    (b)  Solve f1x2 = g1x2.
(c)	Use the result of part (b) to label the points of intersection of the graphs of f and g.
(d)	Shade the region for which f1x2 7 g1x2—that is, the region below f and above g.
	 73.	 f1x2 = 2x - 1; g1x2 = x2 - 4	
74.	 f1x2 = - 2x - 1; g1x2 = x2 - 9
	 75.	 f1x2 = - x2 + 4; g1x2 = - 2x + 1	
76.	 f1x2 = - x2 + 9; g1x2 = 2x + 1
	 77.	 f1x2 = - x2 + 5x; g1x2 = x2 + 3x - 4	
78.	 f1x2 = - x2 + 7x - 6; g1x2 = x2 + x - 6
Answer Problems 79 and 80 using the following: A quadratic function of the form f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c with b2 - 4ac 7 0 may also be 
written in the form f1x2 = a1x - r12 1x - r22, where r1 and r2 are the x-intercepts of the graph of the quadratic function.
	 79.	 (a)	 Find a quadratic function whose x-intercepts are - 4 and 
2 with a = 1, a = 2, a = - 2, and a = 6.
(b)	 How does the value of a affect the intercepts? 
(c)	 How does the value of a affect the axis of symmetry?
(d)	 How does the value of a affect the vertex?
(e)	 Compare the x-coordinate of the vertex with the mid-
point of the x-intercepts. What might you conclude?
	 80.	 (a)	 Find a quadratic function whose x-intercepts are -5  
and 3 with a = 1; a = 2; a = - 2; a = 5.
(b)	 How does the value of a affect the intercepts?
(c)	 How does the value of a affect the axis of symmetry?
(d)	 How does the value of a affect the vertex?
(e)	 Compare the x-coordinate of the vertex with the midpoint 
of the x-intercepts. What might you conclude?

Section 3.3  Quadratic Functions and Their Properties  181
	 81.	 Suppose that f1x2 = x2 + 4x - 21.
(a)	 What is the vertex of f? 
(b)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of f ? 
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = - 21 for x. What points are on the graph 
of f ? 
(d)	 Use the information obtained in parts (a)–(c) to graph 
f1x2 = x2 + 4x - 21.
	 82.	 Suppose that f1x2 = x2 + 2x - 8.
(a)	 What is the vertex of f ? 
(b)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of f ? 
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = - 8 for x. What points are on the graph  
of f ? 
(d)	 Use the information obtained in parts (a)–(c) to graph 
f1x2 = x2 + 2x - 8.
	 83.	 Find the point on the line y = x that is closest to the point 
15, - 12. 
[Hint: Express the distance d from the point to the line as a func-
tion of x, and then find the minimum value of 3d1x2 42.]
	 84.	 Find the point on the line y = x + 1 that is closest to the 
point 14, 12. 
	 85.	 Maximizing Revenue  Suppose that the manufacturer of a 
gas clothes dryer has found that, when the unit price is p 
dollars, the revenue R (in dollars) is
R1p2 = - 9p2 + 81,000p
	
	 What unit price should be established for the dryer to maxi-
mize revenue? What is the maximum revenue?
	 86.	 Maximizing Revenue  The John Deere company has found 
that the revenue, in dollars, from sales of riding mowers is a 
function of the unit price p, in dollars, that it charges. If the 
revenue R is
R1p2 = -  1
2
 p2 + 1900p
	
	 what unit price p should be charged to maximize revenue? 
What is the maximum revenue? 
	 87.	 Minimizing Marginal Cost  The marginal cost of a product 
can be thought of as the cost of producing one additional 
unit of output. For example, if the marginal cost of produc-
ing the 50th product is $6.20, it cost $6.20 to increase produc-
tion from 49 to 50 units of output. Suppose the marginal cost 
C (in dollars) to produce x thousand mp3 players is given by 
the function
C1x2 = x2 - 140x + 8700.
(a)	 How many players should be produced to minimize the 
marginal cost? 
(b)	 What is the minimum marginal cost? 
	 88.	 Minimizing Marginal Cost  (See Problem 87.) The marginal 
cost C (in dollars) of manufacturing x cell phones (in thousands) 
is given by
C1x2 = 5x2 - 200x + 4000
(a)	 How many cell phones should be manufactured to  
minimize the marginal cost? 
(b)	 What is the minimum marginal cost? 
	 89.	 Business  The monthly revenue R achieved by sell-
ing x wristwatches is figured to be R1x2 = 75x - 0.2x2. 
The monthly cost C of selling x wristwatches is
C1x2 = 32x + 1600
(a)	 How many wristwatches must the firm sell to maximize 
revenue? What is the maximum revenue?
(b)	 Profit is given as P1x2 = R1x2 - C1x2. What is the 
profit function? 
(c)	 How many wristwatches must the firm sell to maximize 
profit? What is the maximum profit?
(d)	 Provide a reasonable explanation as to why the answers 
found in parts (a) and (c) differ. Explain why a quadratic 
function is a reasonable model for revenue.
	 90.	 Business  The daily revenue R achieved by selling x boxes of 
candy is figured to be R1x2 = 9.5x - 0.04x2. The daily cost 
C of selling x boxes of candy is C1x2 = 1.25x + 250.
(a)	 How many boxes of candy must the firm sell to maximize 
revenue? What is the maximum revenue?
(b)	 Profit is given as P1x2 = R1x2 - C1x2. What is the 
profit function? 
(c)	 How many boxes of candy must the firm sell to maximize 
profit? What is the maximum profit?
(d)	 Provide a reasonable explanation as to why the answers 
found in parts (a) and (c) differ. Explain why a quadratic 
function is a reasonable model for revenue.
	 91.	 Stopping Distance  An accepted relationship between stop-
ping distance, d in feet, and the speed of a car, in mph, is 
d(v) = 1.1v + 0.06v2 on dry, level concrete.
(a)	 How many feet will it take a car traveling 40 mph to stop 
on dry, level concrete? 
(b)	 If an accident occurs 250 feet ahead, what is the maxi-
mum speed at which one can travel to avoid being in-
volved in the accident? 
(c)	 What might the term 1.1v represent? 
	 92.	 Birth Rate of Unmarried Women  In the United States, the 
birth rate B of unmarried women (births per 1000 unmarried 
women) for women whose age is a is modeled by the function 
B(a) = - 0.30a2 + 16.26a - 158.90
(a)	 What is the age of unmarried women with the highest 
birth rate? 
(b)	 What is the highest birth rate of unmarried women?
(c)	 Evaluate and interpret B1402.
Source: National Vital Statistics System, 2013
	 93.	 Let f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c where a, b and c are even integers. 
If x is an integer, check whether f1x2 is an even or odd inte-
ger.
[Hint: x is either an even integer or an odd integer.]
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 94.	 Make up a quadratic function that opens down and has only 
one x-intercept. Compare yours with others in the class. 
What are the similarities? What are the differences?
	 95.	 On one set of coordinate axes, graph the family of parabolas 
f1x2 = x2 + 2x + c for c = - 3,  c = 0, and c = 1.  
Describe the characteristics of a member of this family.
	 96.	 On one set of coordinate axes, graph the family of parabolas 
f1x2 = x2 + bx + 1 for b = - 4,  b = 0, and b = 4.  
Describe the general characteristics of this family.
	 97.	 State the circumstances that cause the graph of a quadratic 
function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c to have no x-intercepts.
	 98.	 Why does the graph of a quadratic function open up if a 7 0 
and down if a 6 0?
	 99.	 Can a quadratic function have a range of 1- q, q 2? Justify 
your answer. 
	100.	 What are the possibilities for the number of times the graphs 
of two different quadratic functions intersect? 

182 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 101–104 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	101.	 Determine whether x2 + 4y2 = 16 is symmetric respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, and/or the origin.
	102.	 Find the domain of f (x) = 28 - 2x. 
	103.	 Find the center and radius of the circle x2 + y2 - 10x + 4y + 20 = 0.
	104.	 Write the function whose graph is the graph of y = 2x, but reflected about the y-axis. 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 10, - 92, 1-3, 02, 13, 02        2.  e - 4, 1
2 f        3.  25
4         4.  right; 4
3.4  Build Quadratic Models from Verbal  
Descriptions and from Data
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 187.
	
Objectives	 	1  Build Quadratic Models from Verbal Descriptions  (p. 182)
	
	 	 2  Build Quadratic Models from Data  (p. 186)
•	 Problem Solving (Appendix A, Section A.8,  
pp. 1006–1012)
•	 Building Linear Models from Data  
(Section 3.2, pp. 164–167)
In this section we will first discuss models in the form of a quadratic function when a 
verbal description of the problem is given. We end the section by fitting a quadratic 
function to data, which is another form of modeling.
When a mathematical model is in the form of a quadratic function, the  
properties of the graph of the function can provide important information about the 
model. In particular, we can use the quadratic function to determine the maximum 
or minimum value of the function. The fact that the graph of a quadratic function 
has a maximum or minimum value enables us to answer questions involving  
optimization—that is, finding the maximum or minimum values in models.
Build Quadratic Models from Verbal Descriptions
In economics, revenue R, in dollars, is defined as the amount of money received 
from the sale of an item and is equal to the unit selling price p, in dollars, of the item 
times the number x of units actually sold. That is,
R = xp
The Law of Demand states that p and x are related: As one increases, the other 
decreases. The equation that relates p and x is called the demand equation. When 
the demand equation is linear, the revenue model is a quadratic function.
Maximizing Revenue
The marketing department at Texas Instruments has found that when certain  
calculators are sold at a price of p dollars per unit, the number x of calculators sold 
is given by the demand equation
x = 21,000 - 150p
(a)	 Find a model that expresses the revenue R as a function of the price p.
(b)	 What is the domain of R?
(c)	 What unit price should be used to maximize revenue?
(d)	 If this price is charged, what is the maximum revenue?
1
Example 1

Section 3.4  Build Quadratic Models from Verbal Descriptions and from Data   183
(e)	 How many units are sold at this price?
(f)	 Graph R.
(g)	 What price should Texas Instruments charge to collect at least $675,000 in revenue?
(a)	 The revenue is R = xp, where x = 21,000 - 150p.
R = xp = 121,000 - 150p2p = -150p2 + 21,000p 
The model
(b)	 Because x represents the number of calculators sold, we have x Ú 0, so 
21,000 - 150p Ú 0. Solving this linear inequality gives p … 140. In addition, 
Texas Instruments will charge only a positive price for the calculator, so p 7 0. 
Combining these inequalities gives the domain of R, which is { p | 0 6 p … 140}.
(c)	 The function R is a quadratic function with a = -150, b = 21,000, and c = 0. 
Because a 6 0, the vertex is the highest point on the parabola. The revenue R is 
a maximum when the price p is
p = -  b
2a = -  21,000
21 -1502 = +70.00
(d)	 The maximum revenue R is
R1702 = -15017022 + 21,0001702 = +735,000
(e)	 The number of calculators sold is given by the demand equation 
x = 21,000 - 150p. At a price of p = +70,
x = 21,000 - 1501702 = 10,500
calculators are sold.
(f)	 To graph R, plot the intercept 1140, 02 and the vertex 170, 735 0002. See Figure 23 
for the graph.
Solution
c
a = - 150, b = 21,000
Figure 24 
Figure 23 
(70, 735 000)
Price per calculator (dollars)
800,000
700,000
600,000
500,000
400,000
200,000
100,000
300,000
14
28
42
56
70
84
98 112 126 140
0
p
R
Revenue (dollars)
(g)	 Graph R = 675,000 and R1p2 = -150p2 + 21,000p on the same Cartesian 
plane. See Figure 24. We find where the graphs intersect by solving
 675,000 = -150p2 + 21,000p
 150p2 - 21,000p + 675,000 = 0
 p2 - 140p + 4500 = 0
 1p - 502 1p - 902 = 0
 p = 50 or p = 90
Add 150p2 - 21,000p to both sides.
Divide both sides by 150.
Factor.
Use the Zero-Product Property.
0
56
14
28
42
Price per calculator (dollars)
70
84
98 112 126 140
800,000
700,000
600,000
500,000
Revenue (dollars)
400,000
200,000
100,000
300,000
p
R
(50, 675 000)
(70, 735 000)
(90, 675 000)

184 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
The graphs intersect at 150, 675 0002 and 190, 675 0002. Based on the graph 
in Figure 24, Texas Instruments should charge between $50 and $90 to earn at 
least $675,000 in revenue.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3
Maximizing the Area Enclosed by a Fence
A farmer has 2000 yards of fence to enclose a rectangular field. What are the dimensions 
of the rectangle that encloses the most area?
Solution 
Figure 25 illustrates the situation. The available fence represents the 
perimeter of the rectangle. If x is the length and w is the width, then
	
2x + 2w = 2000	
(1)
The area A of the rectangle is
A = xw
To express A in terms of a single variable, solve equation (1) for w and substitute 
the result in A = xw. Then A involves only the variable x. [You could also solve  
equation (1) for x and express A in terms of w alone. Try it!]
 2x + 2w = 2000
 2w = 2000 - 2x
 w = 2000 - 2x
2
= 1000 - x
Then the area A is
A = xw = x11000 - x2 = -x2 + 1000x
Now, A is a quadratic function of x.
A1x2 = -x2 + 1000x  a = -1, b = 1000, c = 0
Figure 26 shows the graph of A1x2 = -x2 + 1000x. Because a 6 0, the vertex 
is a maximum point on the graph of A. The maximum value occurs at
x = -  b
2a = -  1000
21 -12 = 500
The maximum value of A is
Aa -  b
2ab = A15002 = -5002 + 100015002 = -250,000 + 500,000 = 250,000
The largest rectangle that can be enclosed by 2000 yards of fence has an area of 
250,000 square yards. Its dimensions are 500 yards by 500 yards.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Analyzing the Motion of a Projectile
A projectile is fired from a cliff 500 feet above the water at an inclination of 45° 
to the horizontal, with a muzzle velocity of 400 feet per second. From physics, the 
height h of the projectile above the water can be modeled by
h1x2 = -32x2
140022 + x + 500
where x is the horizontal distance of the projectile from the base of the cliff. See Figure 27.
•
Example 2
•
Example 3
Figure 27 
1000
2000
3000
4000
500
1000
1500
2500
2000
h (x)
x
458
5000
Figure 25 
x
x
w
w
Figure 26  A(x) = - x2 + 1000x
(500, 250 000)
(0, 0)
(1000, 0)
A
1000
500
250,000
x

Section 3.4  Build Quadratic Models from Verbal Descriptions and from Data   185
(a)	 Find the maximum height of the projectile.
(b)	 How far from the base of the cliff will the projectile strike the water?
(a)	 The height of the projectile is given by a quadratic function.
h1x2 = -32x2
140022 + x + 500 =
-1
5000
 x2 + x + 500
We are looking for the maximum value of h. Because a 6 0, the maximum value 
occurs at the vertex, whose x-coordinate is
x = -  b
2a = -  
1
2a -1
5000b
= 5000
2
= 2500
The maximum height of the projectile is
h125002 =
-1
5000
 1250022 + 2500 + 500 = -1250 + 2500 + 500 = 1750 ft
(b)	 The projectile will strike the water when the height is zero. To find the distance x  
traveled, solve the equation
h1x2 =
-1
5000
 x2 + x + 500 = 0
The discriminant of this quadratic equation is
b2 - 4ac = 12 - 4a -1
5000b 15002 = 1.4
Then
x = -b { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
= -1 { 21.4
2a -1
5000b
≈e -458
5458
Discard the negative solution. The projectile will strike the water at a distance 
of about 5458 feet from the base of the cliff.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
The Golden Gate Bridge
The Golden Gate Bridge, a suspension bridge, spans the entrance to San Francisco 
Bay. Its 746-foot-tall towers are 4200 feet apart. The bridge is suspended from two 
huge cables more than 3 feet in diameter; the 90-foot-wide roadway is 220 feet above 
the water. The cables are parabolic in shape* and touch the road surface at the  
center of the bridge. Find the height of the cable above the road at a distance of  
1000 feet from the center.
See Figure 28 on page 186. Begin by choosing the placement of the coordinate 
axes so that the x-axis coincides with the road surface and the origin coincides with 
the center of the bridge. As a result, the 746-foot towers will be vertical (height 
746 - 220 = 526 feet above the road) and located 2100 feet from the center. Also, 
the cable, which has the shape of a parabola, will extend from the towers, open up, 
and have its vertex at 10, 02. This choice of placement of the axes enables the equation
of the parabola to have the form y = ax2, a 7 0. Note that the points 1 -2100, 5262 
and 12100, 5262 are on the graph.
Solution
•
Example 4
Solution
*A cable suspended from two towers is in the shape of a catenary, but when a horizontal roadway is 
suspended from the cable, the cable takes the shape of a parabola.
Seeing the Concept
Graph
 h(x) =
- 1
5000
 x2 + x + 500
 0 … x … 5500
Use MAXIMUM to find the maximum 
height of the projectile, and use ROOT 
or ZERO to find the distance from the 
base of the cliff to where it strikes the 
water. Compare your results with those  
obtained in Example 3.

186 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Use these facts to find the value of a in y = ax2.
 y = ax2
 526 = a1210022 
 a =
526
1210022
The equation of the parabola is
y =
526
1210022 x2
When x = 1000, the height of the cable is
y =
526
1210022 1100022 ≈119.3 feet
The cable is 119.3 feet above the road at a distance of 1000 feet from the center of 
the bridge.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Build Quadratic Models from Data
In Section 3.2, we found the line of best fit for data that appeared to be linearly 
related. It was noted that data may also follow a nonlinear relation. Figures 29(a) 
and (b) show scatter diagrams of data that follow a quadratic relation.
x = 2100, y = 526
•
2
Figure 28 
220'
(0, 0)
746'
526'
2100'
2100'
x
y
?
(2100, 526)
(2100, 526)
1000'
Figure 29 
y 5 ax 2 1 bx 1 c, a , 0
(b)
y 5 ax 2 1 bx 1 c, a . 0
(a)
Fitting a Quadratic Function to Data
The data in Table 8 on page 187 represent the percentage D of the population that is 
divorced for various ages x in 2012.
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data, treating age as the independent variable. 
Comment on the type of relation that may exist between age and percentage of 
the population divorced.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to find the quadratic function of best fit that models the 
relation between age and percentage of the population divorced.
(c)	 Use the model found in part (b) to approximate the age at which the percentage 
of the population divorced is greatest.
(d)	 Use the model found in part (b) to approximate the highest percentage of the 
population that is divorced.
(e)	 Use a graphing utility to draw the quadratic function of best fit on the scatter diagram.
Example 5

Section 3.4  Build Quadratic Models from Verbal Descriptions and from Data   187
(a)	 Figure 30 shows the scatter diagram, from which it appears the data follow a 
quadratic relation, with a 6 0.
(b)	 Execute the QUADratic REGression program to obtain the results shown in 
Figure 31. The output shows the equation y = ax2 + bx + c. The quadratic 
function of best fit that models the relation between age and percentage  
divorced is
D1x2 = -0.0143x2 + 1.5861x - 28.1886 
The model
where x represents age and D represents the percentage divorced.
(c)	 Based on the quadratic function of best fit, the age with the greatest percentage 
divorced is
-  b
2a = -  
1.5861
21 -0.01432 ≈55 years
(d)	 Evaluate the function D1x2 at x = 55.
D1552 = -0.014315522 + 1.58611552 - 28.1886 ≈15.8 percent
According to the model, 55-year-olds have the highest percentage divorced at 
15.8 percent.
(e)	 Figure 32 shows the graph of the quadratic function found in part (b) drawn on 
the scatter diagram.
Look again at Figure 31. Notice that the output given by the graphing calculator 
does not include r, the correlation coefficient. Recall that the correlation coefficient 
is a measure of the strength of a linear relation that exists between two variables. 
The graphing calculator does not provide an indication of how well the function 
fits the data in terms of r, since a quadratic function cannot be expressed as a linear 
function.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
Solution
•
Table 8
Age, x
Percentage Divorced, D
22
27
32
37
42
50
60
70
80
0.9
3.6
7.4
10.4
12.7
15.7
16.2
13.1
6.5
Source: United States Statistical Abstract, 2012
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Translate the following sentence into a mathematical equation: 
The total revenue R from selling x hot dogs is $3 times the 
number of hot dogs sold. (pp. 1006–1012) 
	 2.	 Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit for the  
following data: (pp. 164–167) 
x
3
5
5
6
7
8
y
10
13
12
15
16
19
3.4  Assess Your Understanding
Figure 30 
150
19
85
Figure 31 
Figure 32 
150
19
85

188 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Applications and Extensions
	 3.	 Maximizing Revenue  The price p (in dollars) and the  
quantity x sold of a certain product obey the demand equation
p = -  1
6
 x + 200
Answer parts (a) through (e).
(a)	 Find a model that expresses the revenue R as a function 
of x. (Remember, R = xp.)
(b)	 What is the domain of R? 
(c)	 What is the revenue if 250 units are sold? 
(d)	 What quantity x maximizes revenue? What is the  
maximum revenue? 
(e)	 What price should the company charge to maximize  
revenue? 
	 4.	 Maximizing Revenue  The price p (in dollars) and the  
quantity x sold of a certain product obey the demand equation
p = -  1
3
 x + 100
(a)	 Find a model that expresses the revenue R as a function of x.
(b)	 What is the domain of R? 
(c)	 What is the revenue if 100 units are sold? 
(d)	 What quantity x maximizes revenue? What is the  
maximum revenue? 
(e)	 What price should the company charge to maximize  
revenue? 
	 5.	 Maximizing Revenue  The price p (in dollars) and the  
quantity x sold of a certain product obey the demand equation
x = - 5p + 100  0 6 p … 20
(a)	 Express the revenue R as a function of x.
(b)	 What is the revenue if 15 units are sold? 
(c)	 What quantity x maximizes revenue? What is the  
maximum revenue? 
(d)	 What price should the company charge to maximize  
revenue? 
(e)	 What price should the company charge to earn at least 
$480 in revenue? 
	 6.	 Maximizing Revenue  The price p (in dollars) and the  
quantity x sold of a certain product obey the demand equation
x = - 20p + 500  0 6 p … 25
(a)	 Express the revenue R as a function of x.
(b)	 What is the revenue if 20 units are sold? 
(c)	 What quantity x maximizes revenue? What is the  
maximum revenue? 
(d)	 What price should the company charge to maximize  
revenue? 
(e)	 What price should the company charge to earn at least 
$3000 in revenue? 
	 7.	 Enclosing a Rectangular Field  David has 480 yards of fenc-
ing and wishes to enclose a rectangular area.
(a)	 Express the area A of the rectangle as a function of the 
width  W of the rectangle. 
(b)	 For what value of W is the area largest? 
(c)	 What is the maximum area? 
	 8.	 Enclosing a Rectangular Field  Beth has 3000 feet of fencing 
available to enclose a rectangular field.
(a)	 Express the area A of the rectangle as a function of x, 
where x is the length of the rectangle.
(b)	 For what value of x is the area largest? 
(c)	 What is the maximum area? 
	 9.	 Enclosing the Most Area with a Fence  Farmer Ed has 8000 
meters of fencing, and wants to enclose a rectangular plot 
that borders on a river. If Farmer Ed does not fence the side 
along the river, what is the largest area that can be enclosed?  
	 10.	 Enclosing the Most Area with a Fence  A farmer with 2000 
meters of fencing wants to enclose a rectangular plot that 
borders on a straight highway. If the farmer does not fence 
the side along the highway, what is the largest area that can 
be enclosed? 
	 11.	 Analyzing the Motion of a Projectile  A projectile is fired 
from a cliff 200 feet above the water at an inclination of 
45° to the horizontal, with a muzzle velocity of 50 feet per  
second. The height h of the projectile above the water is 
modeled by
h1x2 = - 32x2
15022 + x + 200
where x is the horizontal distance of the projectile from the 
face of the cliff.
(a)	 At what horizontal distance from the face of the cliff is 
the height of the projectile a maximum?
(b)	 Find the maximum height of the projectile.
(c)	 At what horizontal distance from the face of the cliff 
will the projectile strike the water? 
(d)	 Using a graphing utility, graph the function h, 
0 … x … 200.
(e)	 Use a graphing utility to verify the solutions found in 
parts (b) and (c).
(f)	 When the height of the projectile is 100 feet above the 
water, how far is it from the cliff? 
	 12.	 Analyzing the Motion of a Projectile  A projectile is fired  
at an inclination of 45° to the horizontal, with a muzzle  
velocity of 100 feet per second. The height h of the projectile is  
modeled by
h1x2 = - 32x2
110022 + x
where x is the horizontal distance of the projectile from the 
firing point.
(a)	 At what horizontal distance from the firing point is the 
height of the projectile a maximum? 
(b)	 Find the maximum height of the projectile. 
(c)	 At what horizontal distance from the firing point will 
the projectile strike the ground? 
(d)	 Using a graphing utility, graph the function h, 
0 … x … 350.
8,000  2x
x
x

Section 3.4  Build Quadratic Models from Verbal Descriptions and from Data   189
(e)	 Use a graphing utility to verify the results obtained in 
parts (b) and (c).
(f)	 When the height of the projectile is 50 feet above the ground, 
how far has it traveled horizontally?   
	 13.	 Suspension Bridge  A suspension bridge with weight  
uniformly distributed along its length has twin towers that 
extend 75 meters above the road surface and are 400 meters 
apart. The cables are parabolic in shape and are suspended 
from the tops of the towers. The cables touch the road surface 
at the center of the bridge. Find the height of the cables at a 
point 100 meters from the center. (Assume that the road is 
level.) 
	 14.	 Architecture  A parabolic arch has a span of 120 feet and 
a maximum height of 25 feet. Choose suitable rectangular  
coordinate axes and find the equation of the parabola. Then 
calculate the height of the arch at points 10 feet, 20 feet, and 
40 feet from the center.
	 15.	 Constructing Rain Gutters  A rain gutter is to be made of 
aluminum sheets that are 12 inches wide by turning up the 
edges 90°. See the illustration.
(a)	 What depth will provide maximum cross-sectional area 
and hence allow the most water to flow? 
(b)	 What depths will allow at least 16 square inches of water 
to flow? 
	 18.	 Architecture  A special window has the shape of a rectangle 
surmounted by an equilateral triangle. See the figure. If the 
perimeter of the window is 16 feet, what dimensions will  
admit the most light?
[Hint: Area of an equilateral triangle = a 13
4 bx2, where x  
is the length of a side of the triangle.]
	 16.	 Norman Windows  A Norman window has the shape of a 
rectangle surmounted by a semicircle of diameter equal to 
the width of the rectangle. See the figure. If the perimeter of 
the window is 20 feet, what dimensions will admit the most 
light (maximize the area)?
[Hint: Circumference of a circle = 2pr; area of a  
circle = pr 2, where r is the radius of the circle.]
	 17.	 Constructing a Stadium  A track and field playing area is in 
the shape of a rectangle with semicircles at each end. See the 
figure. The inside perimeter of the track is to be 1500 meters. 
What should the dimensions of the rectangle be so that the 
area of the rectangle is maximized? 
	 19.	 Chemical Reactions  The rate of a chemical reaction varies, 
depending on the initial amount of a certain compound. In 
general, the reaction rate, V, can be expressed by the follow-
ing formula, where k is a positive constant, and a is the initial 
amount of the compound.
V1x2 = kx1a - x2
The positive constant, k, for one such reaction is 0.7, and the 
initial amount of the compound, a, is 10. For what value of x 
is the rate at maximum?
	 20.	 Calculus: Simpson’s Rule  The figure shows the graph 
of y = ax2 + bx + c. Suppose that the points 1-h, y02, 
10, y12, and 1h, y22 are on the graph. It can be shown that 
the area enclosed by the parabola, the x-axis, and the lines 
x = - h and x = h is
Area = h
3
 12ah2 + 6c2
Show that this area may also be given by
Area = h
3
 1y0 + 4y1 + y22
	 21.	 Use the result obtained in Problem 20 to find the area en-
closed by f(x) = - 3x2 + 6, the x-axis, and the lines x = -1 
and x = 1.
	 22.	 Use the result obtained in Problem 20 to find the area  
enclosed by f1x2 = 2x2 + 8, the x-axis, and the lines 
x = - 2 and x = 2.
	 23.	 Use the result obtained in Problem 20 to find the area en-
closed by f(x) = - x2 + 2x + 4, the x-axis, and the lines 
x = - 4 and x = 4.
	 24.	 Use the result obtained in Problem 20 to find the area  
enclosed by f1x2 = - x2 + x + 4, the x-axis, and the lines 
x = - 1 and x = 1.
x
x
12  2x
12 in.
x
x
x
x
x
(h, y2)
h
h
(h, y0)
(0, y1)
x
y

190 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
	 25.	 Life Cycle Hypothesis  An individual’s income varies with 
his or her age. The following table shows the median income I 
of males of different age groups within the United States 
for 2012. For each age group, let the class midpoint represent 
the independent variable, x. For the class “65 years and  
older,” we will assume that the class midpoint is 69.5.
	 26.	 Height of a Ball  A shot-putter throws a ball at an inclination 
of 45° to the horizontal. The following data represent the height 
of the ball h, in feet, at the instant that it has traveled x feet 
horizontally.
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to draw a scatter diagram of the 
data. Comment on the type of relation that may exist 
between the two variables.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to find the quadratic function of 
best fit that models the relation between age and median 
income. 
(c)	 Use the function found in part (b) to determine the age at 
which an individual can expect to earn the most income.
(d)	 Use the function found in part (b) to predict the peak 
income earned. 
(e)	 With a graphing utility, graph the quadratic function of 
best fit on the scatter diagram.
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to draw a scatter diagram of the 
data. Comment on the type of relation that may exist 
between the two variables.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to find the quadratic function of 
best fit that models the relation between distance and 
height. 
(c)	 Use the function found in part (b) to determine how far 
the ball will travel before it reaches its maximum height. 
(d)	 Use the function found in part (b) to find the maximum 
height of the ball. 
(e)	 With a graphing utility, graph the quadratic function of 
best fit on the scatter diagram.
Mixed Practice
	 27.	 Which Model?  The following data represent the square 
footage and rents (dollars per month) for apartments in 
the La Jolla area of San Diego, California.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of 
the data treating square footage as the independent  
variable. What type of relation appears to exist  
between square footage and rent?
(b)	 Based on your response to part (a), find either a linear or 
a quadratic model that describes the relation between 
square footage and rent. 
(c)	 Use your model to predict the rent for an apartment in 
San Diego that is 875 square feet. 
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data, treating speed as the independent variable. What 
type of relation appears to exist between speed and 
miles per gallon?
Age
15–24 years
25–34 years
35–44 years
45–54 years
55–64 years
65 years and older
19.5
29.5
39.5
49.5
59.5
69.5
Class
Midpoint, x
Median
Income, I
$10,869
$34,113
$45,225
$46,466
$42,176
$27,612
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
25
40
55
65
71
77
77
75
71
64
Height, h
Distance, x
Source: apartments.com, 2014
520
621
718
753
850
968
1020
$1525
$1750
$1785
$1850
$1900
$2130
$2180
Rent per Month, R
Square Footage, x
30
35
40
40
45
50
55
60
65
65
70
18
20
23
25
25
28
30
29
26
25
25
Miles per Gallon, M
Speed, s
	 28.	 Which Model?  An engineer collects the following data 
showing the speed s of a Toyota Camry and its average 
miles per gallon, M.

Section 3.4  Build Quadratic Models from Verbal Descriptions and from Data   191
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 R = 3x        2.  y = 1.7826x + 4.0652
	 30.	 Which Model?  A cricket makes a chirping noise by sliding 
its wings together rapidly. Perhaps you have noticed that the 
number of chirps seems to increase with the temperature.  
The following data list the temperature (in degrees 
Fahrenheit) and the number of chirps per second for the 
striped ground cricket.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data, treating age as the independent variable. What type 
of relation appears to exist between age and birth rate?
(b)	 Based on your response to part (a),  find either a linear or 
a quadratic model that describes the relation between age 
and birth rate. 
(c)	 Use your model to predict the birth rate for 35-year-
old women. 
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of 
the data, treating temperature as the independent  
variable. What type of relation appears to exist between 
temperature and chirps per second?
(b)	 Based on your response to part (a), find either a linear 
or a quadratic model that best describes the relation 
between temperature and chirps per second.
(c)	 Use your model to predict the chirps per second if the 
temperature is 80°F. 
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 31.	 Refer to Example 1 in this section. Notice that if the price 
charged for the calculators is $0 or $140, then the revenue 
is $0. It is easy to explain why revenue would be $0 if the 
price charged were $0, but how can revenue be $0 if the price 
charged is $140?
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 32–35 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 32.	 Find an equation of the line containing the points (1, - 2) and (- 5, 2). 
	 33.	 Find the distance between the points P1 = (4, - 7) and P2 = (- 1, 5). 
	 34.	 Find the equation of the circle with center (– 6, 0) and radius r = 27. 
	 35.	 Find the intercepts of the graph of 3x2 - 4y = 48. 
16
19
22
27
32
37
42
    14.1
51.4
83.1
106.5
  97.3
  48.3
    10.4
Birth Rate, B
Age, a
Source: National Vital Statistics
              System, 2013
Temperature (ºF), x
Chirps per Second, C
88.6
93.3
80.6
69.7
69.4
79.6
80.6
76.3
75.2
20.0
19.8
17.1
14.7
15.4
15.0
16.0
14.4
15.5
Source: Pierce, George W. The Songs of Insects. Cambridge, 
              MA Harvard University Press, 1949, pp. 12 – 21
(b)	 Based on your response to part (a), find either a linear 
model or a quadratic model that describes the relation 
between speed and miles per gallon.
(c)	 Use your model to predict the miles per gallon for a 
Camry that is traveling 63 miles per hour. 
	 29.	 Which Model?  The following data represent the birth  
rate (births per 1000 population) for women whose age is 
a, in 2012.

192 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
graph the function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c and, from the graph, determine 
where it is above the x-axis—that is, where f1x2 7 0. To solve the inequality 
ax2 + bx + c 6 0, a ≠0, graph the function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c and determine 
where the graph is below the x-axis. If the inequality is not strict, include the  
x-intercepts, if any, in the solution.
Solving an Inequality
Solve the inequality x2 - 4x - 12 … 0 and graph the solution set.
Graph the function f1x2 = x2 - 4x - 12.
y-intercept:
x-intercepts (if any):
The y-intercept is -12; the x-intercepts are -2 and 6.
The vertex is at x = -  b
2a = -  -4
2
= 2. Because f122 = -16, the vertex is  
at 12, -162.
See Figure 33 for the graph.
The graph is below the x-axis for -2 6 x 6 6. Because the original inequality 
is not strict, include the x-intercepts. The solution set is 5x0 -2 … x … 66 or, using 
interval notation, 3 -2, 64. See Figure 34 for the graph of the solution set.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Solving an Inequality
Solve the inequality 2x2 6 x + 10 and graph the solution set.
Option 1  Rearrange the inequality so that 0 is on the right side.
 2x2 6 x + 10
 2x2 - x - 10 6 0
This inequality is equivalent to the original inequality.
Example 1
Evaluate f at 0.
Solve f1x2 = 0.
Factor.
Apply the Zero-Product Property.
Solution
f102 = -12
x2 - 4x - 12 = 0
 1x - 62 1x + 22 = 0
 x - 6 = 0 or x + 2 = 0
       
 x = 6 or  
x = -2
•
Example 2
Solution
Subtract x + 10 from both sides.
Figure 33  f (x) = x2 - 4x - 12
x
y
–4
4
8
4
8
–4
–8
–12
–16
(–2, 0)
(6, 0)
(0, –12)
(2, –16)
Figure 34 
x
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Solve Inequalities Involving a Quadratic Function
In this section we solve inequalities that involve quadratic functions. We will accomplish 
this by using their graphs. For example, to solve the inequality
ax2 + bx + c 7 0  a ≠0
1
3.5  Inequalities Involving Quadratic Functions
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Solve Inequalities (Appendix A, Section A.9,  
pp. 1019–1022)
•	 Use Interval Notation (Appendix A, Section A.9,  
pp. 1016–1017)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 194.
	
Objective	 	1  Solve Inequalities Involving a Quadratic Function  (p. 192)

Section 3.5  Inequalities Involving Quadratic Functions  193
The graph is below the x-axis 1f1x2 6 02 between x = -2 and x = 5
2. Because 
the inequality is strict, the solution set is ex ` -2 6 x 6 5
2 f or, using interval  
notation, a -2, 5
2b.
Option 2  If f1x2 = 2x2 and g1x2 = x + 10, then the inequality to be solved is 
f1x2 6 g1x2. Graph the functions f1x2 = 2x2 and g1x2 = x + 10. See Figure 36. 
The graphs intersect where f1x2 = g1x2. Then
 2x2 = x + 10
 
 2x2 - x - 10 = 0
 12x - 52 1x + 22 = 0
 2x - 5 = 0 or x + 2 = 0
 x = 5
2 or      x = -2
f1x2 = g1x2
Factor.
Apply the Zero-Product Property.
The graphs intersect at the points 1 -2, 82 and a5
2, 25
2 b. To solve f1x2 6 g1x2, find 
where the graph of f is below the graph of g. This happens between the points of 
intersection. Because the inequality is strict, the solution set is ex ` -2 6 x 6 5
2 f or, 
using interval notation, a -2, 5
2b.
See Figure 37 for the graph of the solution set.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  5  a n d  1 3
Solving an Inequality
Solve the inequality x2 + x + 1 7 0 and graph the solution set.
Graph the function f1x2 = x2 + x + 1. The y-intercept is 1; there are no
x-intercepts. (Do you see why? Check the discriminant.) The vertex is at
x = -  b
2a = -  1
2. Since f a -  1
2b = 3
4, the vertex is at a -  1
2, 3
4b. The points 11, 32 
and 1 - 1, 12 are also on the graph. See Figure 38.
The graph of f lies above the x-axis for all x. The solution set is the set of all real 
numbers, or (- q, q). See Figure 39.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
•
Example 3
Solution
•
Figure 35  f (x) = 2x2 - x - 10
y
2
4
4
2
(2, 0)
4
2
6
10
 (  , 10.125)
x
(   , 0)
5–2
1–4
Figure 36 
y
4
2
2
4
2
4
6
8
10
12
 (  ,    )
(2, 8)
 f(x)  2x2
 g(x)  x  10
x
5–2
25
––2
Figure 37 
2
4
0
4
2
Figure 38  f1x2 = x2 + x + 1
x
y
 (–1, 1)
 (0, 1)
 (1, 3)
1
2
3
2
–2
–1
(  ,   )
3–4
1–2
Figure 39 
2
4
2
4
0
Next graph the function f1x2 = 2x2 - x - 10 to find where f1x2 6 0.
y-intercept:
x-intercepts (if any): 
The y-intercept is -10; the x-intercepts are -2 and 5
2.
The vertex is at x = -  b
2a = -  -1
4
= 1
4. Because f a1
4b = -10.125, the vertex 
is a1
4, -10.125b. See Figure 35 for the graph.
Evaluate f at 0.
Solve f1x2 = 0. 
Factor.
Apply the Zero-Product  
Property.
 f102 = -10
 2x2 - x - 10 = 0
 
 12x - 52 1x + 22 = 0
 2x - 5 = 0 or x + 2 = 0
 x = 5
2 or x = -2

194 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
y
5
4
2
2
4
5
(4, 0)
(1, 0)
(1.5, 5)
y  g(x)
x
In Problems 7–22, solve each inequality.
	 7.	 x2 + 3x - 10 7 0	
8.	 x2 - 3x - 10 6 0	
  9.	  x2 - 4x 7 0	
10.	 x2 + 8x 7 0
	 11.	 x2 - 1 6 0	
12.	 x2 - 9 6 0	
13.	  x2 + x 7 12	
14.	 x2 + 7x 6 - 12
	 15.	 6x2 6 6 + 5x	
16.	 2x2 6 5x + 3	
17.	 x2 - x + 1 … 0	
18.	 x2 + 2x + 4 7 0
	 19.	 25x2 + 16 6 40x	
20.	 4x2 + 9 6 6x	
21.	 212x2 - 3x2 7 -9	
22.	 61x2 - 12 7 5x
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Solve the inequality - 3x - 2 6 7 (pp. 1019–1022)
	 2.	 Write 1- 2, 7] using inequality notation. (pp. 1016–1017)
3.5  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 3–6, use the figure to solve each inequality.
Mixed Practice
	 23.	 What is the domain of the function f1x2 = 2x2 - 16?
	 24.	 What is the domain of the function f1x2 = 2x - 3x2?
In Problems 25–32, use the given functions f and g.
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = 0.
	(b)	 Solve g1x2 = 0.
	(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2.
	(d)	 Solve f1x2 7 0.
(e)	 Solve g1x2 … 0.
	(f)	 Solve f1x2 7 g1x2.
	(g)	 Solve f1x2 Ú 1.
	 25.	  f1x2 = x2 - 1
	
	  g1x2 = 3x + 3
	 26.	  f1x2 = - x2 + 3
	
	  g1x2 = - 3x + 3
	 27.	  f1x2 = - x2 + 1
	
	  g1x2 = 4x + 1
	 28.	  f1x2 = - x2 + 4
	
	  g1x2 = -x - 2
	 29.	  f1x2 = x2 - 4
	
	  g1x2 = - x2 + 4
	 30.	  f1x2 = x2 - 2x + 1
	
	  g1x2 = - x2 + 1
	 31.	  f1x2 = x2 - x - 2
	
	  g1x2 = x2 + x - 2
	 32.	  f1x2 = - x2 - x + 1
	
	  g1x2 = - x2 + x + 6
Applications and Extensions
	 33.	 Physics  A ball is thrown vertically upward with an initial 
velocity of 80 feet per second. The distance s (in feet) of the 
ball from the ground after t seconds is s1t2 = 80t - 16t2.
(a)	 At what time t will the ball strike the ground? 
(b)	 For what time t is the ball more than 96 feet above the 
ground? 
	 34.	 Physics  A ball is thrown vertically upward with an initial 
velocity of 96 feet per second. The distance s (in feet) of the 
ball from the ground after t seconds is s1t2 = 96t - 16t2.
(a)	 At what time t will the ball strike the ground? 
(b)	 For what time t is the ball more than 128 feet above the 
ground? 
	 35.	 Revenue  Suppose that the manufacturer of a gas clothes 
dryer has found that when the unit price is p dollars, the  
revenue R (in dollars) is
R1p2 = - 4p2 + 4000p
	 3.	
(a)	 g1x2 6 0
(b)	 g1x2 Ú 0
	 4.	
(a)	 f1x2 7 0
(b)	 f1x2 … 0
	 5.	
(a)	 g1x2 Ú f1x2
(b)	 f1x2 7 g1x2
	 6.	
(a)	 f1x2 6 g1x2
(b)	 f1x2 Ú g1x2
y
4
3
3
3
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
y  f(x)
x
y
4
4
4
8
(2, 8)
(1, 2)
(2, 8)
y  g(x)
y  f(x)
x
y
12
3
3
6
(3, 12)
(3, 12)
(1, 3)
y  g(x)
y  f(x)
x
96 ft
s  80t  16t 2 

Chapter Review  195
(a)	 At what prices p is revenue zero? 
(b)	 For what range of prices will revenue exceed $800,000?
	 36.	 Revenue  The John Deere company has found that the  
revenue from sales of heavy-duty tractors is a function of 
the unit price p, in dollars, that it charges. The revenue R, in 
dollars, is given by
R1p2 = -  1
2
 p2 + 1900p
(a)	 At what prices p is revenue zero? 
(b)	 For what range of prices will revenue exceed  
$1,200,000? 
	 37.	 Artillery  A projectile fired from the point (0, 0) at an angle 
to the positive x-axis has a trajectory given by
y = cx - 11 + c22 a
g
2b ax
vb
2
where
x = horizontal distance in meters
y = height in meters
v = initial muzzle velocity in meters per second (m/sec)
g = acceleration due to gravity = 9.81 meters per  
second squared (m/sec2)
c 7 0 is a constant determined by the angle of elevation.
A howitzer fires an artillery round with a muzzle velocity  
of 897 m/sec.
(a)	 If the round must clear a hill 200 meters high at a  
distance of 2000 meters in front of the howitzer, what c 
values are permitted in the trajectory equation?
(b)	 If the goal in part (a) is to hit a target on the ground  
75 kilometers away, is it possible to do so? If so, for what 
values of c? If not, what is the maximum distance the 
round will travel? 
Source: www.answers.com
	 38.	 Runaway Car  Using Hooke’s Law, we can show that the 
work done in compressing a spring a distance of x feet from its
	
	 at-rest position is W = 1
2 kx2, where k is a stiffness constant
	
	 depending on the spring. It can also be shown that the work 
done by a body in motion before it comes to rest is given
	
	 by W∼= w
2g
 v2, where w = weight of the object (in lbs), 
	
	 g = acceleration due to gravity (32.2 ft/sec2), and v =  object’s 
velocity (in ft/sec). A parking garage has a spring shock  
absorber at the end of a ramp to stop runaway cars. The 
spring has a stiffness constant k = 9450 lb/ft and must be able 
to stop a 4000-lb car traveling at 25 mph. What is the least 
compression required of the spring? Express your answer 
using feet to the nearest tenth. 
[Hint: Solve W 7 W∼, x Ú 0].
Source: www.sciforums.com
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 39.	 Show that the inequality 1x - 422 … 0 has exactly one solution.
	 40.	 Show that the inequality 1x - 222 7 0 has one real number 
that is not a solution.
	 41.	 Explain why the inequality x2 + x + 1 7 0 has all real  
numbers as the solution set.
	 42.	 Explain why the inequality x2 - x + 1 6 0 has the empty 
set as the solution set.
	 43.	 Explain the circumstances under which the x-intercepts 
of the graph of a quadratic function are included in the  
solution set of a quadratic inequality.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 44–47 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 5x0 x 7 - 36 or 1- 3, q 2          2.  	- 2 6 x … 7
	 44.	 Determine the domain of f(x) = 210 - 2x. 
	 45.	 Consider the linear function f(x) = 2
3
 x - 6.
(a)	 Find the intercepts of the graph of f. 
(b)	 Graph f.
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Linear function (p. 154)
f1x2 = mx + b 	
Average rate of change = m
	
The graph is a line with slope m and y-intercept b.
	 46.	 Determine algebraically whether f(x) =
-x
x2 + 9 is even, 
odd, or neither. 
	 47.	 Determine whether the graphs of 6x - 3y = 10 and 
2x + y = - 8 are parallel, perpendicular, or neither. 

196 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Quadratic functions (pp. 171–175)
	
f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0	
The graph is a parabola that opens up if a 7 0 and opens down if a 6 0.
	
	
Vertex: a-  b
2a, f a-  b
2ab b
	
	
Axis of symmetry: x = -  b
2a
	
	
y-intercept: f102 = c
	
	
x-intercept(s): If any, found by finding the real solutions of the equation ax2 + bx + c = 0
Objectives
Section	
You should be able to…	
Examples	
Review Exercises
3.1	
1	
Graph linear functions (p. 154)	
1	
1(a)–3(a), 1(c)–3(c)
	
2	
Use average rate of change to identify linear functions (p. 154)	
2	
1(b)–3(b), 4, 5
	
3	
Determine whether a linear function is increasing, decreasing, or constant (p. 157)	
3	
1(d)–3(d)
	
4	
Build linear models from verbal descriptions (p. 158)	
4, 5	
21
3.2	
1	
Draw and interpret scatter diagrams (p. 164)	
1	
29(a), 30(a)
	
2	
Distinguish between linear and nonlinear relations (p. 165)	
2	
29(b), 30(a)
	
3	
Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit (p. 166)	
4	
29(c)
3.3	
1	
Graph a quadratic function using transformations (p. 172)	
1	
6–8
	
2	
Identify the vertex and axis of symmetry of a quadratic function (p. 174)	
2	
9–13
	
3	
Graph a quadratic function using its vertex, axis, and intercepts (p. 174)	
3–5	
9–13
	
4	
Find a quadratic function given its vertex and one other point (p. 177)	
6	
19, 20
	
5	
Find the maximum or minimum value of a quadratic function (p. 178)	
7	
14–16, 22–27
3.4	
1	
Build quadratic models from verbal descriptions (p. 182)	
1–4	
22–28
	
2	
Build quadratic models from data (p. 186)	
5	
30
3.5	
3	
Solve inequalities involving a quadratic function (p. 192)	
1–3	
17, 18
Review Exercises
In Problems 1–3:
(a)	Determine the slope and y-intercept of each linear function.
(b)	Find the average rate of change of each function.
(c)	Graph each function. Label the intercepts.
(d)	Determine whether the function is increasing, decreasing, or constant.
	 1.	 f1x2 = 2x - 5	
2.	 h1x2 = 4
5
 x - 6	
3.	 G1x2 = 4
In Problems 4 and 5, determine whether the function is linear or nonlinear. If the function is linear, state its slope.
	 4.	                                                        
5.	                                                        
x
y = f(x)
-2
-4
-1
-1
0
2
1
5
2
8
x
y = g(x)
-1
-3
0
4
1
7
2
6
3
1
In Problems 6–8, graph each quadratic function using transformations (shifting, compressing, stretching, and/or reflecting).
	 6.	 f1x2 = 1x + 122 - 4	
7.	 f1x2 = - 1x - 422	
8.	 f1x2 = - 31x + 222 + 1

Chapter Review  197
In Problems 9–13, (a) graph each quadratic function by determining whether its graph opens up or down and by finding its vertex, axis of 
symmetry, y-intercept, and x-intercepts, if any. (b) Determine the domain and the range of the function. (c) Determine where the function 
is increasing and where it is decreasing.
	 9.	 f1x2 = 1x - 222 + 2	
10.	 f1x2 = 1
4
 x2 - 16	
11.	 f1x2 = - 4x2 + 4x
	 12.	 f1x2 = 9
2
 x2 + 3x + 1	
13.	 f1x2 = 3x2 + 4x - 1
In Problems 14–16, determine whether the given quadratic function has a maximum value or a minimum value, and then find the value.
In Problems 19 and 20, find the quadratic function for which:
	 19.	 Vertex is (3, 5); y-intercept is −13
	 20.	 Vertex is 1- 2, 22; contains the point 1−1, 52
	 21.	 Sales Commissions  Bill was just offered a sales position for 
a computer company. His salary would be $25,000 per year 
plus 1% of his total annual sales.
(a)	 Find a linear function that relates Bill’s annual salary, S, 
to his total annual sales, x. 
(b)	 If Bill’s total annual sales were $1,000,000, what would 
be Bill’s salary? 
(c)	 What would Bill have to sell to earn $100,000?
(d)	 Determine the sales required of Bill for his salary to  
exceed $150,000.   
	 22.	 Demand Equation  The price p (in dollars) and the quantity x 
sold of a certain product obey the demand equation
p = -  1
10
 x + 150  0 … x … 1500
(a)	 Express the revenue R as a function of x.
(b)	 What is the revenue if 100 units are sold? 
(c)	 What quantity x maximizes revenue?   What is the  
maximum revenue? 
(d)	 What price should the company charge to maximize  
revenue? 
	 23.	 Landscaping  A landscape engineer has 500 feet of border 
to enclose a rectangular pond. What dimensions will result 
in the largest pond? 
	 24.	 Enclosing the Most Area with a Fence  A farmer with 
10,000 meters of fencing wants to enclose a rectangular field 
and then divide it into two plots with a fence parallel to one 
of the sides. See the figure. What is the largest area that can 
be enclosed? 
	 26.	 Minimizing Marginal Cost  Callaway Golf Company has  
determined that the marginal cost C of manufacturing x 
Big Bertha golf clubs may be expressed by the quadratic  
function
C1x2 = 4.9x2 - 617.4x + 19,600
(a)	 How many clubs should be manufactured to minimize 
the marginal cost? 
(b)	 At this level of production, what is the marginal cost?
	 27.	 Maximizing Area  A rectangle has one vertex on the line 
y = 10 - x, x 7 0, another at the origin, one on the positive 
x-axis, and one on the positive y-axis. Express the area A of the 
rectangle as a function of x. Find the largest area A that can 
be enclosed by the rectangle. 
	 28.	 Parabolic Arch Bridge  A horizontal bridge is in the shape 
of a parabolic arch. Given the information shown in the figure, 
what is the height h of the arch 2 feet from shore? 
	 29.	 Bone Length  Research performed at NASA, led by  
Dr. Emily R. Morey-Holton, measured the lengths of the 
right humerus and right tibia in 11 rats that were sent to 
space on Spacelab Life Sciences 2. The data on page 198 were  
collected.
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data, treating length of 
the right humerus as the independent variable.
(b)	 Based on the scatter diagram, do you think that there 
is a linear relation between the length of the right  
humerus and the length of the right tibia? 
10 ft
h
2 ft
20 ft
	 14.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 8x + 5 
	 16.	 f1x2 = - 5x2 + 20x - 11 
	 15.	 f1x2 = - 3x2 + 6x - 7 
In Problems 17 and 18, solve each quadratic inequality.
	 17.	 x2 + 6x - 16 6 0
	 18.	 3x2 Ú 14x + 5
	 25.	 Architecture  A special window in the shape of a rectangle 
with semicircles at each end is to be constructed so that the 
outside perimeter is 100 feet. See the illustration. Find the  
dimensions of the rectangle that maximizes its area.

198 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
(c)	 Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit  
relating length of the right humerus and length of the 
right tibia. 
(d)	 Predict the length of the right tibia on a rat whose right 
humerus is 26.5 millimeters (mm). 
(b)	 The quadratic function of best fit to these data is
R1A2 = - 7.76A2 + 411.88A + 942.72
Use this function to determine the optimal level of  
advertising. 
(c)	 Use the function to predict the total revenue when the 
optimal level of advertising is spent. 
(d)	 Use a graphing utility to verify that the function given in 
part (b) is the quadratic function of best fit.
(e)	 Use a graphing utility to draw a scatter diagram of the 
data, and then graph the quadratic function of best fit on 
the scatter diagram.
	 30.	 Advertising  A small manufacturing firm collected the  
following data on advertising expenditures A (in thousands 
of dollars) and total revenue R (in thousands of dollars).
	 1.	 Consider the linear function f1x2 = - 4x + 3:
(a)	 Find the slope and y-intercept. 
(b)	 What is the average rate of change of f ? 
(c)	 Determine whether f is increasing, decreasing, or constant. 
(d)	 Graph f.
In Problems 2 and 3, find the intercepts, if any, of each quadratic function.
	 2.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - 2x - 8
	 3.	 G1x2 = - 2x2 + 4x + 1
	 4.	 Given that f1x2 = x2 + 3x and g1x2 = 5x + 3, solve f1x2 = g1x2. Graph each function and label the points of intersection.
	 5.	 Graph f1x2 = 1x - 322 - 2 using transformations.
	 6.	 Consider the quadratic function f1x2 = 3x2 - 12x + 4:
(a)	 Determine whether the graph opens up or down. 
(b)	 Determine the vertex. 
(c)	 Determine the axis of symmetry. 
(d)	 Determine the intercepts.
(e)	 Use the information from parts (a)–(d) to graph f.
	 7.	 Determine whether f1x2 = - 2x2 + 12x + 3 has a maximum or a minimum. Then find the maximum or minimum  
value. 
	 8.	 Solve x2 - 10x + 24 Ú 0. 
	 9.	 RV Rental  The weekly rental cost of a 20-foot recreational vehicle is $129.50 plus $0.15 per mile.
(a)	 Find a linear function that expresses the cost C as a function of miles driven m. 
(b)	 What is the rental cost if 860 miles are driven? 
(c)	 How many miles were driven if the rental cost is $213.80? 
Chapter Test
     
 
Source: NASA Life Sciences Data Archive
Right Humerus
(mm), x  
Right Tibia
(mm), y 
24.80
24.59
24.59
24.29
23.81
24.87
25.90
26.11
26.63
26.31
26.84
36.05
35.57
35.57
34.58
34.20
34.73
37.38
37.96
37.46
37.75
38.50
Total Revenue
($1000s)
Advertising
Expenditures ($1000s)
20
22
25
25
27
28
29
31
6101
6222
6350
6378
6453
6423
6360
6231
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data. Comment on the 
type of relation that may exist between the two variables.
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.

	 1.	 Find the distance between the points P = 1- 1, 32 and 
Q = 14, - 22. Find the midpoint of the line segment P to Q.
	 2.	 Which of the following points are on the graph of 
y = x3 - 3x + 1? 
(a)	 1- 2, - 12    (b)  (2, 3)    (c)  (3, 1)
	 3.	 Solve the inequality 5x + 3 Ú 0 and graph the solution set.
	 4.	 Find the equation of the line containing the points 1- 1, 42 
and 12, - 22. Express your answer in slope–intercept form 
and graph the line.
	 5.	 Find the equation of the line perpendicular to the line 
y = 2x + 1 and containing the point (3, 5). Express your 
answer in slope–intercept form and graph both lines.
	 6.	 Graph the equation x2 + y2 - 4x + 8y - 5 = 0.
	 7.	 Does the following relation represent a function? 
5 1- 3, 82, 11, 32, 12, 52, 13, 82 6. 
	 8.	 For the function f defined by f1x2 = x2 - 4x + 1, find:
(a)	 f122 
	
(b)  f1x2 + f122 
(c)	 f1- x2 
	
(d)  - f1x2 
(e)	 f1x + 22 
	
(f)	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
, h ≠0
	 9.	 Find the domain of h1z2 = 3z - 1
6z - 7. 
	 10.	 Is the following graph the graph of a function? 
	 12.	 Is the function f1x2 =
x2
2x + 1 even, odd, or neither? 
	 13.	 Approximate the local maximum values and local minimum 
values of f1x2 = x3 - 5x + 1 on 1-4, 42. Determine 
where the function is increasing and where it is decreasing.
	 14.	 If f1x2 = 3x + 5 and g1x2 = 2x + 1:
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2. 
(b)	 Solve f1x2 7 g1x2.
Cumulative Review
	 15.	 Consider the graph below of the function f.
(a)	 Find the domain and the range of f.
(b)	 Find the intercepts. 
(c)	 Is the graph of f symmetric with respect to the x-axis, the 
y-axis, or the origin? 
(d)	 Find f(2). 
(e)	 For what value(s) of x is f1x2 = 3? 
(f)	 Solve f1x2 6 0. 
(g)	 Graph y = f1x2 + 2.
(h)	 Graph y = f1- x2.
(i)	 Graph y = 2f1x2.
(j)	 Is f even, odd, or neither? 
(k)	 Find the interval(s) on which f is increasing. 
y
x
(4, 3)
(4, 3)
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
x
y
5
5
4
4
(1, 0)
(2, 1)
	 11.	 Consider the function f1x2 =
x
x + 4.
(a)	 Is the point a1, 1
4b on the graph of f ? 
(b)	 If x = - 2, what is f (x)? What point is on the graph  
of f ? 
(c)	 If f1x2 = 2, what is x? What point is on the graph  
of f ? 
Cumulative Review  199

200 
CHAPTER 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
Chapter Projects
		
variable and the percentage change in the stock you 
chose as the dependent variable. The easiest way to 
draw a scatter diagram in Excel is to place the two  
columns of data next to each other (for example, have the  
percentage change in the S&P500 in column F and the  
percentage change in the stock you chose in column G). 
Then highlight the data and select the Scatter Diagram 
icon under Insert. Comment on the type of relation that  
appears to exist between the two variables.
	3.	 Finding beta. To find beta requires that we find the line 
of best fit using least-squares regression. The easiest  
approach is to click inside the scatter diagram. Select the 
Chart Elements icon (+). Check the box for Trendline, 
select the arrow to the right, and choose More Options. 
Select Linear and check the box for Display Equation on 
chart. The line of best fit appears on the scatter diagram. 
See below.
	
	 Internet-based Project
	 I.	 The Beta of a Stock  You want to invest in the stock  
market but are not sure which stock to purchase. Information 
is the key to making an informed investment decision. One 
piece of information that many stock analysts use is the beta 
of the stock. Go to Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Beta_%28finance%29) and research what beta measures 
and what it represents.
1.	
Approximating the beta of a stock.  Choose a well-
known company such as Google or Coca-Cola. Go 
to a website such as Yahoo! Finance (http://finance.
yahoo.com/) and find the weekly closing price of 
the company’s stock for the past year. Then find the  
closing price of the Standard & Poor’s 500 (S&P500) for 
the same time period.
To 
get 
the 
historical 
prices 
in 
Yahoo! 
Finance, 
select 
Historical 
Prices 
from 
the 
left 
menu. Choose the appropriate time period. Select 
Weekly and Get Prices. Finally, select Download to  
Spreadsheet. Repeat this for the S&P500, and copy 
the data into the same spreadsheet. Finally, rearrange 
the data in chronological order. Be sure to expand the  
selection to sort all the data. Now, using the adjusted close 
price, compute the percentage change in price for each
		
week, using the formula % change = P1 - Po
Po
. For 
		
example, if week 1 price is in cell D1 and week 2 price is
		
in cell D2, then % change = D2 - D1
D1
. Repeat this for 
the S&P500 data.
	2.	 Using Excel to draw a scatter diagram.   Treat the 
percentage change in the S&P500 as the independent 
		
The line of best fit for this data is y = 0.9046x + 0.0024. 
You may click on Chart Title or either axis title and  
insert the appropriate names. The beta is the slope of the 
line of best fit, 0.9046. We interpret this by saying, “If the 
S&P500 increases by 1%, then this stock will increase 
by 0.9%, on average.” Find the beta of your stock and  
provide an interpretation. NOTE: Another way to use 
Excel to find the line of best fit requires using the Data 
Analysis Tool Pack under add-ins.
The following projects are available on the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC):
	 II.	 Cannons  A battery commander uses the weight of a missile, its initial velocity, and the position of its gun to determine where the 
missile will travel.
	III.	 First and Second Differences  Finite differences provide a numerical method that is used to estimate the graph of an unknown  
function.
	IV.	 CBL Experiment  Computer simulation is used to study the physical properties of a bouncing ball.
x
0.05
0.1
0.05
0.1
O
y
0.04
0.08
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.06
Series 1
Linear (series 1)
y  0.9046x  0.0024   R2  0.4887

Outline
4.1	
 Polynomial Functions and Models
4.2	
 Properties of Rational Functions
4.3	
 The Graph of a Rational Function
4.4	
 Polynomial and Rational Inequalities
4.5	
 The Real Zeros of a Polynomial  
Function
4.6	
 Complex Zeros; Fundamental  
Theorem of Algebra
 	
Chapter Review
 	
Chapter Test
 	
Cumulative Review
 	
Chapter Projects
 A Look Back
In Chapter 2, we began our discussion of functions. We defined domain, range, 
and independent and dependent variables, found the value of a function, and 
graphed functions. We continued our study of functions by listing the properties 
that a function might have, such as being even or odd, and created a library 
of functions, naming key functions and listing their properties, including their 
graphs.
In Chapter 3, we discussed linear functions and quadratic functions, which 
belong to the class of polynomial functions.
A Look Ahead 
In this chapter, we look at two general classes of functions, polynomial functions 
and rational functions, and examine their properties. Polynomial functions are 
arguably the simplest expressions in algebra. For this reason, they are often used 
to approximate other, more complicated functions. Rational functions are ratios 
of polynomial functions.
Polynomial and  
Rational Functions
201
Day Length
Day length is the length of time each day from the moment the  
upper limb of the sun’s disk appears above the horizon during  
sunrise to the moment when the upper limb disappears below the 
horizon during sunset. The length of a day depends on the day 
of the year as well as the latitude of the location. Latitude gives 
the location of a point on Earth north or south of the equator. 
In the Internet Project at the end of this chapter, we use  
information from the chapter to investigate the relation  
between day length and latitude for a specific day of the year.
—See the Internet-based Chapter Project I—
4

202 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Identify Polynomial Functions and Their Degree
In Chapter 3, we studied the linear function f1x2 = mx + b, which can be written as
f1x2 = a1x + a0
and the quadratic function f1x2 = ax2 + bx + c, a ≠0, which can be written as
f1x2 = a2x2 + a1x + a0  a2 ≠0
Each of these functions is an example of a polynomial function.
1
4.1	 Polynomial Functions and Models
Preparing for this section   Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Polynomials (Appendix A, Section A.3, pp. 966–973)
•	 Using a Graphing Utility to Approximate Local 
Maxima and Local Minima (Section 2.3, p. 109)
•	 Obtain Information from or about the Graph of a 
Function (Section 2.2, pp. 95–97)
•	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations (Section 2.5,  
pp. 127–136)
•	 Intercepts (Section 1.2, pp. 45–46)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 218.
	
Objectives	 	1  Identify Polynomial Functions and Their Degree  (p. 202)
	
	 	2  Graph Polynomial Functions Using Transformations  (p. 206)
	
	 	3  Know Properties of the Graph of a Polynomial Function  (p. 207)
	
	 	4  Analyze the Graph of a Polynomial Function  (p. 214)
	
	 	5  Build Cubic Models from Data  (p. 216)
A polynomial function in one variable is a function of the form
	
f 1x2 = an
 xn + an-1
 xn-1 + g + a1
 x + a0	
(1)
where an, an-1, c, a1, a0 are constants, called the coefficients of the  
polynomial, n Ú 0 is an integer, and x is the variable. If an ≠0, it is called the 
leading coefficient, and n is the degree of the polynomial.
The domain of a polynomial function is the set of all real numbers. 
Definition
The monomials that make up a polynomial are called its terms. If an ≠0, 
anxn is called the leading term; a0 is called the constant term. If all of the coefficients 
are 0, the polynomial is called the zero polynomial, which has no degree.
Polynomials are usually written in standard form, beginning with the nonzero 
term of highest degree and continuing with terms in descending order according to 
degree. If a power of x is missing, it is because its coefficient is zero.
Polynomial functions are among the simplest expressions in algebra. They are 
easy to evaluate: only addition and repeated multiplication are required. Because of 
this, they are often used to approximate other, more complicated functions. In this 
section, we investigate properties of this important class of functions.
Identifying Polynomial Functions
Determine which of the following are polynomial functions. For those that are, state 
the degree; for those that are not, tell why not. Write each polynomial in standard 
form, and then identify the leading term and the constant term.
(a)	 p1x2 = 5x3 - 1
4
 x2 - 9	 (b)  f1x2 = x + 2 - 3x4	 (c)  g1x2 = 1x
(d)	 h1x2 = x2 - 2
x3 - 1	
(e)  G1x2 = 8	
(f)  H1x2 = -2x31x - 122
Example 1
In Words
A polynomial function is a sum of 
monomials.

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  203
(a)	 p is a polynomial function of degree 3, and it is already in standard form. The  
leading term is 5x3, and the constant term is -9.
(b)	 f is a polynomial function of degree 4. Its standard form is f1x2 = -3x4 + x + 2. 
The leading term is -3x4, and the constant term is 2.
(c)	 g is not a polynomial function because g1x2 = 1x = x
1
2, so the variable x is
	
raised to the 1
2 power, which is not a nonnegative integer.
(d)	 h is not a polynomial function. It is the ratio of two distinct polynomials, and the 
polynomial in the denominator is of positive degree.
(e)	 G is a nonzero constant polynomial function so it is of degree 0. The polynomial 
is in standard form. The leading term and constant term are both 8.
(f)	 H1x2 = - 2x31x - 122 = - 2x31x2 - 2x + 12 = - 2x5 + 4x4 - 2x3. So, H is a 
polynomial function of degree 5. Because H1x2 = -2x5 +4x4 - 2x3, the 
leading term is -2x5. Since no constant term is shown, the constant term is 0. Do 
you see a way to find the degree of H without multiplying it out?
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 7  a n d  2 1
We have already discussed in detail polynomial functions of degrees 0, 1, and 2. See 
Table 1 for a summary of the properties of the graphs of these polynomial functions.
Solution
•
Degree
Form
Name
Graph
No degree
f(x) = 0
Zero function
The x-axis
0
f(x) = a0
 , a0 ≠0
Constant function
Horizontal line with y-intercept a0
1
f(x) = a1
 x + a0
 , a1 ≠0
Linear function
Nonvertical, nonhorizontal line with 
slope a1 and y-intercept a0
2
f(x) = a2
 x2 + a1
 x + a0
 , a2 ≠0
Quadratic function
Parabola: graph opens up if a2 7 0; 
graph opens down if a2 6 0
Table 1 
Figure 1 
One objective of this section is to analyze the graph of a polynomial function. If 
you take a course in calculus, you will learn that the graph of every polynomial function  
is both smooth and continuous. By smooth, we mean that the graph contains no sharp 
corners or cusps; by continuous, we mean that the graph has no gaps or holes and  
can be drawn without lifting your pencil from the paper. See Figures 1(a) and (b).
Power Functions
We begin the analysis of the graph of a polynomial function by discussing power 
functions, a special kind of polynomial function.
A power function of degree n is a monomial function of the form
	
f1x2 = axn	
(2)
where a is a real number, a ≠0, and n 7 0 is an integer.
Definition
In Words
A power function is defined by a 
single monomial.
x
y
(a)   Graph of a polynomial function:
         smooth, continuous
x
y
(b)   Cannot be the graph of a
         polynomial function
Corner
Cusp
Gap
Hole

204 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Examples of power functions are
f1x2 = 3x  f1x2 = -5x2  f1x2 = 8x3  f1x2 = -5x4
	
degree 1 	
degree 2 	
degree 3 	
degree 4
The graph of a power function of degree 1, f1x2 = ax, is a straight line, with 
slope a, that passes through the origin. The graph of a power function of degree 2, 
f1x2 = ax2, is a parabola, with vertex at the origin, that opens up if a 7 0 and opens 
down if a 6 0.
If we know how to graph a power function of the form f1x2 = xn, a compression 
or stretch and, perhaps, a reflection about the x-axis will enable us to obtain the graph 
of g1x2 = axn. Consequently, we shall concentrate on graphing power functions of  
the form f1x2 = xn.
We begin with power functions of even degree of the form f1x2 = xn, n Ú 2 
and n even. The domain of f is the set of all real numbers, and the range is the set of 
nonnegative real numbers. Such a power function is an even function. (Do you see 
why?). Its graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis. Its graph always contains 
the origin and the points 1 -1, 12 and 11, 12.
If n = 2, the graph is the familiar parabola y = x2 that opens up, with vertex 
at the origin. If n Ú 4, the graph of f1x2 = xn, n even, will be closer to the x-axis 
than the parabola y = x2 if -1 6 x 6 1, x ≠0, and farther from the x-axis than 
the parabola y = x2 if x 6 -1 or if x 7 1. Figure 2(a) illustrates this conclusion.  
Figure 2(b) shows the graphs of y = x4 and y = x8 for comparison.
Figure 2 
x
3
–3
y
y = x 4
(–1, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
2
4
y = x 8
(b)
x
3
–3
y
y = x2
(–1, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
2
4
f(x) = xn
(a)
n ≥ 4
n even
Figure 2 shows that as n increases, the graph of f1x2 = xn, n Ú 2 and n even, 
tends to flatten out near the origin and is steeper when x is far from 0. For large n, it 
may appear that the graph coincides with the x-axis near the origin, but it does not; 
the graph actually touches the x-axis only at the origin (see Table 2). Also, for large n, 
it may appear that for x 6 -1 or for x 7 1 the graph is vertical, but it is not; it is 
only increasing very rapidly in these intervals. If the graphs were enlarged many 
times, these distinctions would be clear.
 
x = 0.1
x = 0.3
x = 0.5
f (x) = x8
10-8
0.0000656
0.0039063
f (x) = x20
10-20
3.487 # 10-11
0.000001
f (x) = x40
10-40
1.216 # 10-21
9.095 # 10-13
Table 2
Seeing the Concept
Graph Y1 = x4, Y2 = x8, and Y3 = x12 using the viewing rectangle -2 … x … 2, -4 … y … 16. Then 
graph each again using the viewing rectangle -1 … x … 1, 0 … y … 1. See Figure 3. TRACE along one 
of the graphs to confirm that for x close to 0 the graph is above the x-axis and that for x 7 0 the graph 
is increasing.

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  205
Now we consider power functions of odd degree of the form f1x2 = xn, n Ú 3 
and n odd. The domain and the range of f are the set of real numbers. Such a 
power function is an odd function. (Do you see why?). Its graph is symmetric with  
respect to the origin. Its graph always contains the origin and the points 1 -1, -12 
and 11, 12.
The graph of f1x2 = xn when n = 3 has been shown several times and is  
repeated in Figure 4. If n Ú 5, the graph of f1x2 = xn, n odd, will be closer to the 
x-axis than that of y = x3 if -1 6 x 6 1 and farther from the x-axis than that of 
y = x3 if x 6 -1 or if x 7 1. Figure 4 illustrates this conclusion. Figure 5 shows the 
graphs of y = x5 and y = x9 for further comparison.
It appears that each graph coincides with the x-axis near the origin, but it does 
not; each graph actually crosses the x-axis at the origin. Also, it appears that as  
x increases the graphs become vertical, but they do not; each graph is just increasing 
very rapidly.
Figure 3 
(b)
(a)
Y3 5 x12
Y2 5 x 8
Y1 5 x 4
22
24
16
2
Y3 5 x12
Y2 5 x 8
Y1 5 x 4
21
0
1
1
Properties of Power Functions, f (x) = xn, n Is a Positive Even Integer
	 1.	 f is an even function, so its graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
	 2.	 The domain is the set of all real numbers. The range is the set of nonnegative 
real numbers.
	 3.	 The graph always contains the points 1 -1, 12, 10, 02, and 11, 12.
	 4.	 As the exponent n increases in magnitude, the graph is steeper when 
x 6 -1 or x 7 1; but for x near the origin, the graph tends to flatten out 
and lie closer to the x-axis.
Figure 4 
x
y
3
–3
3
(1, 1)
(–1, –1)
(0, 0)
y = x3
y = x n
–3
n ≥ 5
n odd
Figure 5 
x
y
3
–3
3
(1, 1)
(–1, –1)
(0, 0)
y = x 5
y = x 9
–3
Seeing the Concept
Graph Y1 = x3, Y2 = x7, and Y3 = x11 using the viewing rectangle -2 … x … 2, -16 … y … 16. Then 
graph each again using the viewing rectangle -1 … x … 1, -1 … y … 1. See Figure 6. TRACE along 
one of the graphs to confirm that the graph is increasing and crosses the x-axis at the origin.
Figure 6 
(a)
(b)
Y3 5 x11
Y2 5 x 7
Y1 5 x 3
22
216
16
2
Y2 5 x 7
Y3 5 x 11
Y1 5 x 3
21
21
1
1

206 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
To summarize:
Properties of Power Functions, f (x) = xn, n Is a Positive Odd Integer
	 1.	 f is an odd function, so its graph is symmetric with respect to the origin.
	 2.	 The domain and the range are the set of all real numbers.
	 3.	 The graph always contains the points 1 -1, -12, 10, 02, and 11, 12.
	 4.	 As the exponent n increases in magnitude, the graph is steeper when 
x 6 -1 or x 7 1; but for x near the origin, the graph tends to flatten out 
and lie closer to the x-axis.
Graph Polynomial Functions Using Transformations
The methods of shifting, compression, stretching, and reflection (studied in Section 2.5), 
when used with the facts just presented, will enable us to graph polynomial functions 
that are transformations of power functions.
Graphing a Polynomial Function Using Transformations
Graph: f1x2 = 1 - x5
It is helpful to rewrite f as f1x2 = -x5 + 1. Figure 7 shows the required stages.
2
Example 2
Solution
Figure 7 
•
x
y
2
2
Multiply by 1;
reflect
about x-axis
(a)   y  x 5
2
2
x
y
2
2
Add 1;
shift up
1 unit
(b)   y   x 5
2
2
x
y
2
2
(c)   y   x 5  1  1 x 5
2
2
(1, 1)
(1, 2)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
x
y
2
2
Replace x by x  1;
shift right
1 unit
(a)   y   x 4
2
2
x
y
2
2
Multiply by   ;
compression by 
a factor of
(b)   y  ( x  1)4
2
2
x
y
2
2
2
2
(1, 1)
(0, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
0,
(
)
(
)
2,
(1, 0)
1–2
1–2
(c)   y     ( x  1)4
1–2
1–2
1–2
Graphing a Polynomial Function Using Transformations
Graph: f1x2 = 1
21x - 124
Figure 8 shows the required stages.
Example 3
Solution
Figure 8 
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 9  a n d  3 5

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  207
Know Properties of the Graph of a Polynomial Function 
Figure 9 shows the graph of a polynomial function with four x-intercepts. Notice 
that at the x-intercepts, the graph must either cross the x-axis or touch the x-axis. 
Consequently, between consecutive x-intercepts the graph is either above the x-axis 
or below the x-axis.
3
Figure 9  Graph of a polynomial function
x
y
Above
x-axis
Crosses
x-axis
Touches
x-axis
Crosses
x-axis
Below
x-axis
Below
x-axis
Above
x-axis
If a polynomial function f is factored completely, it is easy to locate the  
x-intercepts of the graph by solving the equation f1x2 = 0 and using
the Zero-Product Property. For example, if f1x2 = 1x - 1221x + 32, then the 
solutions of the equation
f1x2 = 1x - 1221x + 32 = 0
are identified as 1 and -3. That is, f112 = 0 and f1 -32 = 0.
If f is a function and r is a real number for which f1r2 = 0, then r is called a 
real zero of f.
Definition
As a consequence of this definition, the following statements are equivalent.
	 1.	 r is a real zero of a polynomial function f.
	 2.	 r is an x-intercept of the graph of f.
	 3.	 x - r is a factor of f.
	 4.	 r is a solution to the equation f1x2 = 0.
So the real zeros of a polynomial function are the x-intercepts of its graph, and 
they are found by solving the equation f1x2 = 0.
Finding a Polynomial Function from Its Zeros
(a)	 Find a polynomial function of degree 3 whose zeros are -3, 2, and 5.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the polynomial found in part (a) to verify your 
result.
(a)	 If r is a real zero of a polynomial function f, then x - r is a factor of f. This means 
that x - 1 -32 = x + 3, x - 2, and x - 5 are factors of f. As a result, any  
polynomial function of the form
f1x2 = a1x + 32 1x - 22 1x - 52
	
where a is a nonzero real number, qualifies. The value of a causes a stretch,  
compression, or reflection, but it does not affect the x-intercepts of the graph. 
Do you know why?
Example 4
Solution

208 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
(b)	 We choose to graph f with a = 1. Then
f1x2 = 1x + 32 1x - 22 1x - 52 = x3 - 4x2 - 11x + 30
	
Figure 10 shows the graph of f. Notice that the x-intercepts are -3, 2, and 5. •
Figure 10  f(x) = x3 - 4x2 - 11x + 30
24
250
40
6
Seeing the Concept
Graph the function found in Example 4 for a = 2 and a = - 1. Does the value of a affect the zeros of f? 
How does the value of a affect the graph of f?
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
If the same factor x - r occurs more than once, r is called a repeated, or  
multiple, zero of f. More precisely, we have the following definition.
*Some books use the terms multiple root and root of multiplicity m.
If 1x - r2m is a factor of a polynomial f and 1x - r2m+1 is not a factor of f, 
then r is called a zero of multiplicity m of f.*
Definition
Identifying Zeros and Their Multiplicities
For the polynomial
f1x2 = 5x21x + 22 ax - 1
2b
4
• 
-2 is a zero of multiplicity 1 because the exponent on the factor x + 2 is 1.
•  0 is a zero of multiplicity 2 because the exponent on the factor x is 2.
• 
1
2 is a zero of multiplicity 4 because the exponent on the factor x - 1
2 is 4.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7 ( a )
Suppose that it is possible to completely factor a polynomial function and, as a 
result, locate all the x-intercepts of its graph (the real zeros of the function). These 
x-intercepts then divide the x-axis into open intervals and, on each such interval, 
the graph of the polynomial will be either above or below the x-axis over the entire 
interval. Let’s look at an example.
Graphing a Polynomial Using Its x-Intercepts
Consider the following polynomial: f1x2 = 1x + 1221x - 22
(a)	 Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of f.
(b)	 Use the x-intercepts to find the intervals on which the graph of f is above the  
x-axis and the intervals on which the graph of f is below the x-axis.
(c)	 Locate other points on the graph, and connect all the points plotted with a 
smooth, continuous curve.
(a)	 The y-intercept is f102 = 10 + 12210 - 22 = -2. 
	
The x-intercepts satisfy the equation
f1x2 = 1x + 1221x - 22 = 0
	
from which we find
 1x + 122 = 0 
 or  x - 2 = 0
 x = -1  or 
 x = 2
	
The x-intercepts are -1 and 2.
Example 5
•
Example 6
Solution
In Words
The multiplicity of a zero is the 
number of times its corresponding 
factor occurs.

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  209
(b)	 The two x-intercepts divide the x-axis into three intervals:
1 - q, -12  1 -1, 22  12, q 2
	
Since the graph of f crosses or touches the x-axis only at x = -1 and x = 2, it 
follows that the graph of f is either above the x-axis 3f1x2 7 04 or below the 
x-axis 3f1x2 6 04 on each of these three intervals. To see where the graph lies, 
we need only pick a number in each interval, evaluate f there, and see whether the 
value is positive (above the x-axis) or negative (below the x-axis). See Table 3.
(c)	 In constructing Table 3, we obtained three additional points on the graph: 
1 -2, -42, 11, -42 and 13, 162. Figure 11 illustrates these points, the intercepts, 
and a smooth, continuous curve (the graph of f) connecting them.
Figure 11  f1x2 = 1x + 1221x - 22 •
 
Interval
(- q, -1)
(-1, 2)
(2, q)
Number chosen
-2
1
3
Value of f
f (-2) = -4
f (1) = -4
f (3) = 16
Location of graph
Below x-axis
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Point on graph
(-2, -4)
(1, -4)
(3, 16)
Table 3 
x
y
6
12
–6
3
(3, 16)
(2, 0)
(–2, –4)
(0, –2)
(1, –4)
(–1, 0)
–2
Look again at Table 3. Since the graph of f1x2 = 1x + 1221x - 22 is below 
the x-axis on both sides of -1, the graph of f touches the x-axis at x = -1, a zero of 
multiplicity 2. Since the graph of f is below the x-axis for x 6 2 and above the x-axis 
for x 7 2, the graph of f crosses the x-axis at x = 2, a zero of multiplicity 1.
This suggests the following results:
If r Is a Zero of Even Multiplicity
Numerically: The sign of f1x2 does not change from one side to the other side of r.
Graphically: The graph of f touches the x-axis at r.
If r Is a Zero of Odd Multiplicity
Numerically: The sign of f1x2 changes from one side to the other side of r.
Graphically: The graph of f crosses the x-axis at r.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7 ( b )
Turning Points
Look again at Figure 11 above. We cannot be sure just how low the graph actually 
goes between x = -1 and x = 2. But we do know that somewhere in the interval 
1 -1, 22 the graph of f must change direction (from decreasing to increasing). The 
points at which a graph changes direction are called turning points.* Each turning 
point yields either a local maximum or a local minimum (see Section 2.3). The  
following result from calculus tells us the maximum number of turning points that 
the graph of a polynomial function can have.
*Graphing utilities can be used to approximate turning points. For most polynomials, calculus is needed 
to find the exact turning points.
2
–1
x

210 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Based on the first part of the theorem, a polynomial function of degree 5 will 
have at most 5 - 1 = 4 turning points. Based on the second part of the theorem, if 
the graph of a polynomial function has three turning points, then the degree of the 
function must be at least 4.
Turning Points
If f is a polynomial function of degree n, then the graph of f has at most n - 1 
turning points.
If the graph of a polynomial function f has n - 1 turning points, then the  
degree of f is at least n.
Theorem
Figure 12  Y1 = 1x + 1221x - 22
Exploration
A graphing utility can be used to locate the turning points of a graph. Graph Y1 = (x + 1)2(x - 2). Use 
MINIMUM to find the location of the turning point for 0 6 x 6 2. See Figure 12.
0
26
2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7 ( c )
Identifying the Graph of a Polynomial Function
Which of the graphs in Figure 13 could be the graph of a polynomial function? For 
those that could, list the real zeros and state the least degree the polynomial can 
have. For those that could not, say why not.
Example 7
Figure 13 
x
y
–2
2
2
–2
x
y
–2
2
2
–2
x
y
–2
2
2
–2
x
y
–3
3
3
–3
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)	 The graph in Figure 13(a) cannot be the graph of a polynomial function because 
of the gap that occurs at x = -1. Remember, the graph of a polynomial function 
is continuous—no gaps or holes. (See Figure 1.)
(b)	 The graph in Figure 13(b) could be the graph of a polynomial function because the 
graph is smooth and continuous. It has three real zeros: -2, 1, and 2. Since the graph 
has two turning points, the degree of the polynomial function must be at least 3.
(c)	 The graph in Figure 13(c) cannot be the graph of a polynomial function because 
of the cusp at x = 1. Remember, the graph of a polynomial function is smooth.
(d)	 The graph in Figure 13(d) could be the graph of a polynomial function. It has 
two real zeros: -2 and 1. Since the graph has three turning points, the degree of 
the polynomial function is at least 4.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 9
Solution
•

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  211
End Behavior
One last remark about Figure 11. For very large values of x, either positive or negative, 
the graph of f1x2 = 1x + 1221x - 22 looks like the graph of y = x3. To see why, 
we write f in the form
f1x2 = 1x + 1221x - 22 = x3 - 3x - 2 = x3 a1 - 3
x2 - 2
x3 b
Now, for large values of x, either positive or negative, the terms 3
x2 and 2
x3 are 
close to 0, so for large values of x,
f1x2 = x3 - 3x - 2 = x3 a1 - 3
x2 - 2
x3 b ≈x3
The behavior of the graph of a function for large values of x, either positive or 
negative, is referred to as its end behavior.
End Behavior
For large values of x, either positive or negative, the graph of the polynomial 
function
f1x2 = an
 xn + an-1
 xn-1 + g + a1
 x + a0  an ≠0
resembles the graph of the power function
y = an
 xn
Theorem
For example, if f1x2 = -2x3 + 5x2 + x - 4, then the graph of f will behave 
like the graph of y = -2x3 for very large values of x, either positive or negative. 
We can see that the graphs of f and y = -2x3 “behave” the same by considering  
Table 4 and Figure 14.
In Words
The end behavior of a polynomial 
function resembles that of its 
leading term.
Figure 14 
x
f(x)
y = −2x3
     10
                -1,494
                -2,000
   100
        -1,949,904
        -2,000,000
   500
   -248,749,504
   -250,000,000
1,000
-1,994,999,004
-2,000,000,000
Table 4
Y2 5 22x 3 1 5x 2 1 x 2 4
Y1 5 22x 3
25
2175
175
5
Notice that as x becomes a larger and larger positive number, the values of f  
become larger and larger negative numbers. When this happens, we say that f is 
unbounded in the negative direction. Rather than using words to describe the 
behavior of the graph of the function, we explain its behavior using notation. We 
can symbolize “the value of f becomes a larger and larger negative number as x  
becomes a larger and larger positive number” by writing f1x2 S - q as x S q 
(read “the values of f approach negative infinity as x approaches infinity”). 
In calculus, limits are used to convey these ideas. There we use the symbolism 
lim  f1x2 = - q, read “the limit of f1x2 as x approaches infinity equals negative
infinity,” to mean that f1x2 S - q as x S q.
xSq
NOTE  Infinity (q) and negative infinity  
(- q) are not numbers. Rather, they are 
symbols that represent unboundedness.
	
■

212 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
When we say that the value of a limit equals infinity (or negative infinity), we 
mean that the values of the function are unbounded in the positive (or negative) 
direction and call the limit an infinite limit. When we discuss limits as x becomes 
unbounded in the negative direction or unbounded in the positive direction, we are 
discussing limits at infinity.
Look back at Figures 2 and 4. Based on the preceding theorem and the previous 
discussion on power functions, the end behavior of a polynomial function can be of 
only four types. See Figure 15.
Figure 15  End behavior of f(x) = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
n ≥ 2 even; an > 0
D
n ≥ 2 even; an < 0
           `
as x     2`
f(x)
           `
as x     `
f(x)
E
n ≥ 3 odd; an > 0
F
n ≥ 3 odd; an < 0
G
           `
as x     `
f(x)
           `
as x     2`
f(x)
           2`
as x     2`
f(x)
           2`
as x     2`
f(x)
           2`
as x     `
f(x)
           2`
as x     `
f(x)
For example, if f1x2 = -2x4 + x3 + 4x2 - 7x + 1, the graph of f will resemble 
the graph of the power function y = -2x4 for large 0 x0 . The graph of f will behave 
like Figure 15(b) for large 0 x0 .
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7 ( d )
Identifying the Graph of a Polynomial Function
Which of the graphs in Figure 16 could be the graph of
f(x) = x4 + ax3 + bx2 - 5x - 6
where a 7 0, b 7 0?
Example 8
Figure 16 
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
The y-intercept of f is f102 = -6. We can eliminate the graph in Figure 16(a), whose 
y-intercept is positive.
We are not able to solve f1x2 = 0 to find the x-intercepts of f, so we move on to 
investigate the turning points of each graph. Since f is of degree 4, the graph of f has 
at most 3 turning points. We eliminate the graph in Figure 16(c) because that graph 
has 5 turning points.
Now we look at end behavior. For large values of x, the graph of f will behave 
like the graph of y = x4. This eliminates the graph in Figure 16(d), whose end behavior 
is like the graph of y = -x4.
Solution

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  213
Only the graph in Figure 16(b) could be the graph of
f1x2 = x4 + ax3 + bx2 - 5x - 6
where a 7 0, b 7 0.
Writing a Polynomial Function from Its Graph
Write a polynomial function whose graph is shown in Figure 17 (use the smallest 
degree possible).
•
Example 9
Figure 17 
x
y
9
15
–9
–21
–15
3
(2, 0)
(0, 0)
(–2, 0)
(–1, 6)
–3
The x-intercepts are -2, 0, and 2. Therefore, the polynomial must have the factors 
1x + 22, x, and 1x - 22, respectively. There are three turning points, so the degree 
of the polynomial must be at least 4. The graph touches the x-axis at x = -2, so -2 
must have an even multiplicity. The graph crosses the x-axis at x = 0 and x = 2, so 
0 and 2 must have odd multiplicities. Using the smallest degree possible (1 for odd 
multiplicity and 2 for even multiplicity), we can write
f1x2 = ax1x + 2221x - 22
All that remains is to find the leading coefficient, a. From Figure 17, the point 1 -1, 62 
must lie on the graph.
6 = a1 -12 1-1 + 2221 -1 - 22  
f (- 1) = 6
6 = 3a
2 = a
The polynomial function f1x2 = 2x1x + 2221x - 22 would have the graph in  
Figure 17.
Check:	Graph Y1 = 2x1x + 2221x - 22 using a graphing utility to verify this 
result.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  7 3  a n d  7 7
Solution
•
Summary
Graph of a Polynomial Function f 1x2 =  an xn + an-1 xn-1 + g + a1x + a0 an 3 0
Degree of the polynomial function f : n
y-intercept: f102 = a0
Graph is smooth and continuous.
Maximum number of turning points: n - 1
At a zero of even multiplicity: The graph of f touches the x-axis.
At a zero of odd multiplicity: The graph of f crosses the x-axis.
Between zeros, the graph of f is either above or below the x-axis.
End behavior: For large 0 x0 , the graph of f behaves like the graph of y = an
 xn.

214 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Analyze the Graph of a Polynomial Function
How to Analyze the Graph of a Polynomial Function
Analyze the factored form of the polynomial function f1x2 = 12x + 12 1x - 322.
4
Example 10
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Determine the end behavior 
of the graph of the function. 
Expand the polynomial:
 f1x2 = 12x + 12 1x - 322 = 12x + 12 1x2 - 6x + 92
 = 2x3 - 12x2 + 18x + x2 - 6x + 9 
Multiply.
 = 2x3 - 11x2 + 12x + 9	
Combine like terms.
The polynomial function f is of degree 3. The graph of f behaves like y = 2x3 for 
large values of  x .
Step 2:  Find the x- and y-intercepts 
of the graph of the function. 
The y-intercept is f102 = 9. To find the x-intercepts, solve f1x2 = 0.
f1x2 = 0
12x + 12 1x - 322 = 0
2x + 1 = 0  or 1x - 322 = 0
x = - 1
2 or	                x = 3
The x-intercepts are - 1
2 and 3.
Step 3:  Determine the zeros of the 
function and their multiplicity. Use 
this information to determine whether 
the graph crosses or touches the 
x-axis at each x-intercept.
The zeros of f are - 1
2 and 3. The zero - 1
2 is a zero of multiplicity 1, so the graph of f 
crosses the x-axis at x = - 1
2. The zero 3 is a zero of multiplicity 2, so the graph of f 
touches the x-axis at x = 3.
Step 4:  Determine the maximum 
number of turning points on the 
graph of the function. 
Because the polynomial function is of degree 3 (Step 1), the graph of the function 
will have at most 3 - 1 = 2 turning points.
Step 5:  Put all the information from 
Steps 1 through 4 together to obtain 
the graph of f. To help establish the 
y-axis scale, find additional points 
on the graph on each side of any 
x-intercept.
Figure 18(a) illustrates the information obtained from Steps 1 through 4. We 
evaluate f at -1, 1, and 4 to help establish the scale on the y-axis.
We find that f1 -12 = -16, f112 = 12, and f142 = 9, so we plot the points 
1 -1, -162, 11, 122, and (4, 9). The graph of f is given in Figure 18(b).
•
Figure 18 
−10
−20
−30
−40
−1
−2
−, 0
(
)
1–2
x
5
4
3
2
1
y
20
10
30
40
(1, 12)
(4, 9)
(0, 9)
(3, 0)
(−1, −16)
(b)
−10
−20
−30
−40
−1
−2
−, 0
(
)
1–2
x
5
4
3
2
1
y
20
10
30
40
(0, 9)
(3, 0)
End behavior:
Resembles
y = 2x 3
y -intercept: 9
End behavior:
Resembles
y = 2x 3
1–2
The graph
crosses the
x-axis at
x = −  .
The graph
touches the
x-axis at
x = 3.
(a)

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  215
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 1
For polynomial functions that have noninteger coefficients and for polynomials  
that are not easily factored, we use a graphing utility early in the analysis. This  
is because the amount of information that can be obtained from algebraic analysis 
is limited.
How to Use a Graphing Utility to Analyze the Graph 
of a Polynomial Function
Analyze the graph of the polynomial function
f1x2 = x3 + 2.48x2 - 4.3155x + 2.484406
Example 11
Summary
Analyzing the Graph of a Polynomial Function
Step 1:  Determine the end behavior of the graph of the function.
Step 2:  Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of the function.
Step 3:  Determine the zeros of the function and their multiplicity. Use this information to determine whether the 
graph crosses or touches the x-axis at each x-intercept.
Step 4:  Determine the maximum number of turning points on the graph of the function.
Step 5:  Use the information in Steps 1 through 4 to draw a complete graph of the function. To help establish the 
y-axis scale, find additional points on the graph on each side of any x-intercept.
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1: Determine the end behavior 
of the graph of the function. 
The polynomial function f is of degree 3. The graph of f behaves like y = x3 for large 
values of  x .
Step 2: Graph the function using a 
graphing utility. 
See Figure 19 for the graph of f.
Figure 19  f(x) = x3 + 2.48x2 - 4.3155x + 2.484406
25
210
15
3
Step 3: Use a graphing utility to 
approximate the x- and y-intercepts 
of the graph. 
The y-intercept is f102 = 2.484406. 
In Example 10, the polynomial function was factored, so it was easy to find the  
x-intercepts algebraically. However, it is not readily apparent how to factor f in 
this example. Therefore, we use a graphing utility’s ZERO (or ROOT or SOLVE)  
feature and find the lone x-intercept to be -3.79, rounded to two decimal places.

216 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
From the graph of f shown in Figure 19, we can see that f has two turning points. 
Using MAXIMUM reveals one turning point is at (-2.28, 13.36), rounded to two 
decimal places. Using MINIMUM shows that the other turning point is at (0.63, 1), 
rounded to two decimal places.
Step 5: Approximate the turning 
points of the graph. 
Step 6: Use the information in  
Steps 1 through 5 to draw a complete 
graph of the function by hand. 
Figure 20 shows a graph of f drawn by hand using the information in Steps 1 through 5.
Figure 20 
–5
2
–6
6
12
x
y
End behavior:
Resembles y = x 3
End behavior:
Resembles y = x 3
(–2.28, 13.36)
(–2, 13.04)
(–3.79, 0)
(0, 2.484406)
(0.63, 1)
(–4, –4.57)
Step 7: Find the domain and the 
range of the function. 
The domain and the range of f are the set of all real numbers.
Step 8: Use the graph to determine 
where the function is increasing and 
where it is decreasing. 
Based on the graph, f is increasing on the intervals 1 - q, -2.282 and 10.63,q 2. 
Also, f is decreasing on the interval 1 -2.28, 0.632.
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 9
Build Cubic Models from Data
In Section 3.2 we found the line of best fit from data, and in Section 3.4 we found 
the quadratic function of best fit. It is also possible to find polynomial functions of 
5
Summary
Using a Graphing Utility to Analyze the Graph of a Polynomial Function
Step 1:  Determine the end behavior of the graph of the function.
Step 2:  Graph the function using a graphing utility.
Step 3:  Use a graphing utility to approximate the x- and y-intercepts of the graph.
Step 4:  Use a graphing utility to create a TABLE to find points on the graph around each x-intercept.
Step 5:  Approximate the turning points of the graph.
Step 6:  Use the information in Steps 1 through 5 to draw a complete graph of the function by hand.
Step 7:  Find the domain and the range of the function.
Step 8:  Use the graph to determine where the function is increasing and where it is decreasing.
Table 5
Step 4: Use a graphing utility to 
create a TABLE to find points on the 
graph around each x-intercept. 
Table 5 below shows values of x on each side of the x-intercept. The points 
1 -4, -4.572 and 1 -2, 13.042 are on the graph.

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  217
best fit. However, most statisticians do not recommend finding polynomials of best 
fit of degree higher than 3.
Data that follow a cubic relation should look like Figure 21(a) or (b).
Figure 21  Cubic relation
y 5 ax3 1 bx2 1 cx 1 d, a . 0
D
y 5 ax3 1 bx2 1 cx 1 d, a , 0
E
A Cubic Function of Best Fit
The data in Table 6 represent the weekly cost C (in thousands of dollars) of printing 
x thousand textbooks.
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data using x as the independent variable and 
C as the dependent variable. Comment on the type of relation that may exist  
between the two variables x and C.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, find the cubic function of best fit C = C1x2 that  
models the relation between number of texts and cost.
(c)	 Graph the cubic function of best fit on your scatter diagram.
(d)	 Use the function found in part (b) to predict the cost of printing 22 thousand 
texts per week.
Solution
(a)	 Figure 22 shows the scatter diagram. A cubic relation may exist between the two 
variables.
(b)	 Upon executing the CUBIC REGression program, we obtain the results  
shown in Figure 23. The output that the utility provides shows us the  
equation y = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d. The cubic function of best fit to the data is 
C1x2 = 0.0155x3 - 0.5951x2 + 9.1502x + 98.4327.
(c)	 Figure 24 shows the graph of the cubic function of best fit on the scatter diagram. 
The function fits the data reasonably well.
Example 12
Table 6
0
5
10
13
17
18
20
23
25
27
100
128.1
144
153.5
161.2
162.6
166.3
178.9
190.2
221.8
Cost, C
($1000s)
Number x of
Textbooks,
(thousands)
Figure 22 
Figure 23 
Figure 24 
22
0
250
30
22
0
250
30
(d)	 Evaluate the function C1x2 at x = 22.
C1222 = 0.015512223 - 0.595112222 + 9.15021222 + 98.4327 ≈176.8
	
The model predicts that the cost of printing 22 thousand textbooks in a week 
will be 176.8 thousand dollars—that is, $176,800.
•

218 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The intercepts of the equation 9x2 + 4y = 36 are 
. 
(pp. 45–46) 
	 2.	 Is the expression 4x3 - 3.6x2 - 12 a polynomial? If so, 
what is its degree? (pp. 966–973) 
	 3.	 To graph y = x2 - 4, you would shift the graph of y = x2 
 
 a distance of 
 units. (pp. 127–136)
	 4.	 Use a graphing utility to approximate (rounded to two decimal 
places) the local maximum value and local minimum value of 
f1x2 = x3 - 2x2 - 4x + 5, for - 3 6 x 6 3. (p. 109)
	 5.	 True or False  The x-intercepts of the graph of a function 
y = f1x2 are the real solutions of the equation f1x2 = 0. 
(pp. 95–97) 
	 6.	 If g152 = 0, what point is on the graph of g? What is the  
corresponding x-intercept of the graph of g? (pp. 95–97) 
4.1  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 7.	 The graph of every polynomial function is both  
 
and   
.
	 8.	 If r is a real zero of even multiplicity of a function f, then the 
graph of f   
 (crosses/touches) the x-axis at r.
	 9.	 The graphs of power functions of the form f1x2 = xn, where 
n is an even integer, always contain the points  
, 
  
, and   
.
	 10.	 If r is a solution to the equation f1x2 = 0, name three  
additional statements that can be made about f and r, 
assuming f is a polynomial function.
	 11.	 The points at which a graph changes direction (from  
increasing to decreasing or decreasing to increasing) are 
called   
.
	 12.	 The graph of the function f1x2 = 3x4 - x3 + 5x2 - 2x - 7 
will behave like the graph of 
 for large values of x.
	 13.	 If f1x2 = - 2x5 + x3 - 5x2 + 7, then 
lim
xS-q f1x2 =    
and lim
xSqf1x2 =
.
	 14.	 Explain what the notation lim
xSq f1x2 = - q means.
	 15.	 The 
of a zero is the number of times its corresponding 
factor occurs. 
(a)	 degree  (b)  multiplicity  (c)  turning point  (d)  limit
	 16.	 The graph of y = 5x6 - 3x4 + 2x - 9 has at most how many  
turning points? 
(a)	 - 9  (b)  14  (c)  6  (d)  5
Skill Building
In Problems 17–28, determine which functions are polynomial functions. For those that are, state the degree. For those that are not, tell 
why not. Write each polynomial in standard form. Then identify the leading term and the constant term.
	 17.	  f1x2 = 4x + x3 
	 18.	 f1x2 = 5x2 + 4x4 
	 19.	 h1x2 = 3 - 1
2x 
	 20.	 g1x2 = 1 - x2
2
 
	 21.	 f1x2 = 1 - 1
x 
	 22.	 f1x2 = x1x - 12 
	 23.	 h1x2 = 1x11x - 12 
	 24.	 g1x2 = x3/2 - x2 + 2 
	 25.	 F1x2 = x2 - 5
x3
 
	 26.	 F1x2 = 5x4 - px3 + 1
2 
	 27.	 G1x2 = - 3x21x + 223 
	 28.	 G1x2 = 21x - 1221x2 + 12 
In Problems 29–42, use transformations of the graph of y = x4  or  y = x5 to graph each function.
	 29.	 f1x2 = 1x + 124
	 30.	 f1x2 = 1x - 225
	 31.	 f1x2 = x4 + 2
	 32.	 f1x2 = x5 - 3
	 33.	 f1x2 = 3x5
	 34.	 f1x2 = 1
2
 x4
	 35.	  f1x2 = - x5
	 36.	 f1x2 = - x4
	 37.	 f1x2 = 1x + 224 - 3
	 38.	 f1x2 = 1x - 125 + 2
	 39.	 f1x2 = 1
21x - 125 - 2
	 40.	 f1x2 = 21x + 124 + 1
	 41.	 f1x2 = 3 - 1x + 224
	 42.	 f1x2 = 4 - 1x - 225

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  219
In Problems 51–56, find the polynomial function with the given zeros whose graph passes through the given point.
In Problems 43–50, form a polynomial function whose real zeros and degree are given. Answers will vary depending on the choice of the 
leading coefficient.
	 43.	 Zeros: - 1, 1, 3; degree 3
	 44.	 Zeros: - 2, 2, 3; degree 3
	 45.	 Zeros: - 4, 0, 2; degree 3
	 46.	 Zeros: - 3, 0, 4; degree 3
	 47.	 Zeros: - 3, - 1, 2, 5; degree 4
	 48.	 Zeros: - 4, -1, 2, 3; degree 4
	 49.	 Zeros: - 2, multiplicity 2; 4, multiplicity 1; degree 3
	 50.	 Zeros: - 1, multiplicity 1; 3, multiplicity 2; degree 3
In Problems 57–68, for each polynomial function:
(a)	List each real zero and its multiplicity.
(b)	Determine whether the graph crosses or touches the x-axis at each x-intercept.
(c)	Determine the maximum number of turning points on the graph.
(d)	Determine the end behavior; that is, find the power function that the graph of f resembles for large values of x.
	 57.	  f1x2 = 31x - 72 1x + 322
	 58.	 f1x2 = 41x + 42 1x + 323
	 59.	 f1x2 = 21x - 32 1x2 + 423
	 60.	 f1x2 = 41x2 + 12 1x - 223
	 61.	 f1x2 = ax - 1
3b
2
1x - 123
	 62.	 f1x2 = - 2ax + 1
2b
2
1x + 423
	 63.	 f1x2 = 1x + 13221x - 224
	 64.	 f1x2 = 1x - 5231x + 422
	 65.	 f1x2 = - 21x2 + 323
	 66.	 f1x2 = 31x2 + 82 1x2 + 922
	 67.	 f1x2 = 4x1x2 - 32
	 68.	 f1x2 = - 2x21x2 - 22
In Problems 69–72, identify which of the graphs could be the graph of a polynomial function. For those that could, list the real zeros  
and state the least degree the polynomial can have. For those that could not, say why not.
	 69.
	 70.
	 71.
x
y
–2
–4
2
4
4
2
–4
–2
x
y
–2
–4
2
4
4
2
–4
–2
x
y
–2
2
2
–2
x
y
2
4
4
2
2
4
2
	 51.	 Zeros: - 2, 0, 2 
	
	 Point: 1- 4, 162
	 52.	 Zeros: - 3, 1, 4
	
	 Point: 16, 1802
	 53.	 Zeros: - 5, -1, 2, 6 
	
	 Point: ¢5
2, 15≤
	 54.	 Zeros: - 1, 0, 2, 4
	
	 Point: ¢1
2, 63≤
	 55.	 Zeros: - 1 (multiplicity 2),   
            0, 3 (multiplicity 2)  
Point: 11,- 482
	 56.	 Zeros: - 1 (multiplicity 2),  
            1 (multiplicity 2)  
Point:  1- 2, 452
	 72.
In Problems 73–76, construct a polynomial function that might have the given graph. (More than one answer may be possible.)
x
y
2
1
0
x
y
2
1
0
x
y
3
2
2
1
–1
–2
1
–1
–2
x
y
3
2
2
1
–1
–2
1
–1
–2
	 73.
	 74.
	 75.
	 76.

220 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
In Problems 77–80, write a polynomial function whose graph is shown (use the smallest degree possible).
	 77.
	 78.
	 79.
	 80.
(1, –8)
x
y
10
–14
–6
6
(3, 8)
x
y
14
–10
–6
6
(2, –50)
x
72
–72
–6
6
y
(–2, 16)
x
–2
2
21
–15
y
In Problems 99–106, analyze each polynomial function f by following Steps 1 through 8 on page 216.
	 99.	 f1x2 = x3 + 0.2x2 - 1.5876x - 0.31752
100.	 f1x2 = x3 - 0.8x2 - 4.6656x + 3.73248
101.	 f1x2 = x3 - 2.91x2 - 7.668x - 3.8151
102.	 f1x2 = x3 + 2.56x2 - 3.31x + 0.89
103.	 f1x2 = x4 - 18.5x2 + 50.2619
104.	 f1x2 = x4 - 2.5x2 + 0.5625
105.	 f1x2 = - 1.2x4 + 0.5x2 - 13x + 2
106.	 f1x2 = 2x4 - px3 + 15x - 4
In Problems 81–98, analyze each polynomial function by following Steps 1 through 5 on page 215.
	 81.	  f1x2 = x21x - 32
	 82.	 f1x2 = x1x + 222
	 83.	 f1x2 = 1x - 12 1x + 322
	 84.	 f1x2 = 1x + 42211 - x2
	 85.	 f1x2 = - 1
21x + 42 1x - 123
	 86.	 f1x2 = - 21x + 22 1x - 223
	 87.	 f1x2 = 1x - 12 1x + 42 1x - 32
	 88.	 f1x2 = 1x + 12 1x - 22 1x + 42
	 89.	 f1x2 = x21x - 32 1x + 42
	 90.	 f1x2 = x21x - 22 1x + 22
	 91.	 f1x2 = 1x - 4221x + 222
	 92.	 f1x2 = 1x + 1221x - 222
	 93.	 f1x2 = x21x - 32 1x - 12
	 94.	 f1x2 = x21x + 32 1x + 12
	 95.	 f1x2 = 1x - 2221x + 22 1x + 42
	 96.	 f1x2 = 5x1x2 - 42 1x + 32
	 97.	 f1x2 = x21x2 + 12 1x + 42
	 98.	 f1x2 = x21x - 22 1x2 + 32
Mixed Practice
In Problems 107–114, analyze each polynomial function by following Steps 1 through 5 on page 215.
[Hint: You will need to first factor the polynomial].
107.	 f1x2 = 4x - x3
108.	 f1x2 = x - x3
109.	 f1x2 = x3 + x2 - 12x
110.	 f1x2 = x3 + 2x2 - 8x
111.	 f1x2 = 2x4 + 12x3 - 8x2 - 48x
112.	 f1x2 = 4x3 + 10x2 - 4x - 10
113.	 f1x2 = - x5 - x4 + x3 + x2
114.	 f1x2 = - x5 + 5x4 + 4x3 - 20x2
In Problems 115–118, construct a polynomial function f with the given characteristics.
115.	 Zeros: - 3, 1, 4; degree 3; y-intercept: 36
116.	 Zeros: - 4, - 1, 2; degree 3; y-intercept: 16
117.	 Zeros: - 5(multiplicity 2); 2 (multiplicity 1); 4 (multiplicity 1); 
degree 4; contains the point (3, 128)
118.	 Zeros: - 4 (multiplicity 1); 0 (multiplicity 3); 2 (multiplicity 1); 
degree 5; contains the point 1- 2, 642
119.	 G1x2 = 1x + 3221x - 22
(a)	 Identify the x-intercepts of the graph of G. 
(b)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of 
y = G1x + 32? 
120.	 h1x2 = 1x + 22 1x - 423
(a)	 Identify the x-intercepts of the graph of h. 
(b)	 What are the x-intercepts of the graph of 
y = h1x - 22? 

Section 4.1  Polynomial Functions and Models  221
121.	 Hurricanes  In 2012, Hurricane Sandy struck the East Coast 
of the United States, killing 147 people and causing an  
estimated $75 billion in damage. With a gale diameter of 
about 1000 miles, it was the largest ever to form over the  
Atlantic Basin. The accompanying data represent the number 
of major hurricane strikes in the Atlantic Basin (category 3, 4, 
or 5) each decade from 1921 to 2010.
123.	 Temperature  The following data represent the temperature  
T (°Fahrenheit) in Kansas City, Missouri, x hours after  
midnight on April 15, 2014.
Applications and Extensions
Major Hurricanes Striking
Atlantic Basin, H
Decade, x
1921–1930, 1
1931–1940, 2
1941–1950, 3
1951–1960, 4
1961–1970, 5
1971–1980, 6
1981–1990, 7
1991–2000, 8
2001–2010, 9
17
16
29
33
27
16
16
27
33
Source: National Oceanic & Atmospheric
              Administration
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
36.1
32.0
39.0
46.2
52.0
55.0
52.0
48.9
Source: The Weather Underground
Temperature (°F), T
Hours after Midnight, x
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data. Comment on 
the type of relation that may exist between the two  
variables.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to find the cubic function of best 
fit that models the relation between decade and number 
of major hurricanes.
(c)	 Use the model found in part (b) to predict the number 
of major hurricanes that struck the Atlantic Basin  
between 1961 and 1970. 
(d)	 With a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data and then graph the cubic function of best fit on the 
scatter diagram.
(e)	 Concern has risen about the increase in the number  
and intensity of hurricanes, but some scientists  
believe this is just a natural fluctuation that could last 
another decade or two. Use your model to predict 
the number of major hurricanes that will strike the 
Atlantic Basin between 2011 and 2020. Is your result 
reasonable? 
122.	 Poverty Rates  The following data represent the percentage 
of families in the United States whose income is below the 
poverty level.
(a)	 With a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data. Comment on the type of relation that appears to 
exist between the two variables.
(b)	 Decide on a function of best fit to these data (linear, 
quadratic, or cubic), and use this function to predict the 
percentage of U.S. families that were below the poverty 
level in 2012 (t = 23). Compare your prediction to the 
actual value of 15.9.
(c)	 Draw the function of best fit on the scatter diagram 
drawn in part (a).
 
Year, t
Percent below 
Poverty Level, p
 
Year, t
Percent below 
Poverty Level, p
1990, 1
13.5
2001, 12
11.7
1991, 2
14.2
2002, 13
12.1
1992, 3
14.8
2003, 14
12.5
1993, 4
15.1
2004, 15
12.7
1994, 5
14.5
2005, 16
12.6
1995, 6
13.8
2006, 17
12.3
1996, 7
13.7
2007, 18
12.5
1997, 8
13.3
2008, 19
13.2
1998, 9
12.7
2009, 20
14.3
1999, 10
11.9
2010, 21
15.3
2000, 11
11.3
2011, 22
15.9
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data. Comment on the type 
of relation that may exist between the two variables.
(b)	 Find the average rate of change in temperature from  
9 am to 12 noon. 
(c)	 What is the average rate of change in temperature from 
3 pm to 6 pm ? 
(d)	 Decide on a function of best fit to these data (linear, 
quadratic, or cubic) and use this function to predict the 
temperature at 5 pm.
(e)	 With a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data and then graph the function of best fit on the  
scatter diagram.
(f)	 Interpret the y-intercept.
124.	 Future Value of Money  Suppose that you make deposits 
of $500 at the beginning of every year into an Individual  
Retirement Account (IRA) earning interest r (expressed as 
a decimal).  At the beginning of the first year, the value of 
the account will be $500; at the beginning of the second year, 
the value of the account, will be
+500 + +500r +  +500 = +50011 + r2 + +500 = 500r + 1000
Value of 1st deposit	
 Value of 2nd deposit
e
6
Source: U.S. Census Bureau

222 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
(a)	 Verify that the value of the account at the beginning of 
the third year is T1r2 = 500r 2 + 1500r + 1500.
(b)	 The account value at the beginning of the fourth year is 
F1r2 = 500r 3 + 2000r 2 + 3000r + 2000. If the annual 
rate of interest is 5% = 0.05, what will be the value of 
the account at the beginning of the fourth year? 
125.	 A Geometric Series  In calculus, you will learn that certain 
functions can be approximated by polynomial functions. We 
will explore one such function now.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, create a table of values with
	
Y1 = f1x2 =
1
1 - x and Y2 = g21x2 = 1 + x + x2 + x3
	
for - 1 6 x 6 1 with ∆Tbl = 0.1.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, create a table of values with
	
Y1 = f1x2 =
1
1 - x and
	
Y2 = g31x2 = 1 + x + x2 + x3 + x4 
	
for - 1 6 x 6 1 with ∆Tbl = 0.1.
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, create a table of values with
	
Y1 = f1x2 =
1
1 - x and 
	
Y2 = g41x2 = 1 + x + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 
	
for - 1 6 x 6 1 with ∆Tbl = 0.1.
(d)	 What do you notice about the values of the function as 
more terms are added to the polynomial? Are there some 
values of x for which the approximations are better?
126.	 Can the graph of a polynomial function have no y-intercept? 
Can it have no x-intercepts? Explain. 
127.	 Write a few paragraphs that provide a general strategy for 
graphing a polynomial function. Be sure to mention the  
following: degree, intercepts, end behavior, and turning points.
128.	 Make up a polynomial that has the following characteristics: 
crosses the x-axis at - 1 and 4, touches the x-axis at 0 and 2, 
and is above the x-axis between 0 and 2. Give your polynomial 
to a fellow classmate and ask for a written critique.
129.	 Make up two polynomials, not of the same degree, with the 
following characteristics: crosses the x-axis at - 2, touches 
the x-axis at 1, and is above the x-axis between - 2 and 1. 
Give your polynomials to a fellow classmate and ask for a 
written critique.
130.	 The graph of a polynomial function is always smooth and 
continuous. Name a function studied earlier that is smooth 
but not continuous. Name one that is continuous but not 
smooth.
131.	 Which of the following statements are true regarding the 
graph of the cubic polynomial f1x2 = x3 + bx2 + cx + d? 
(Give reasons for your conclusions.) 
(a)	 It intersects the y-axis in one and only one point.
(b)	 It intersects the x-axis in at most three points.
(c)	 It intersects the x-axis at least once.
(d)	 For x very large, it behaves like the graph of y = x3.
(e)	 It is symmetric with respect to the origin.
(f)	 It passes through the origin.
132.	 The illustration shows the graph of a polynomial function.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
x
y
(a)	 Is the degree of the polynomial even or odd? 
(b)	 Is the leading coefficient positive or negative? 
(c)	 Is the function even, odd, or neither? 
(d)	 Why is x2 necessarily a factor of the polynomial?
(e)	 What is the minimum degree of the polynomial? 
(f)	 Formulate five different polynomials whose graphs 
could look like the one shown. Compare yours to those 
of other students. What similarities do you see? What 
differences?
133.	 Design a polynomial function with the following  
characteristics: degree 6; four distinct real zeros, one of 
multiplicity 3; y-intercept 3; behaves like y = - 5x6 for large 
values of x. Is this polynomial unique? Compare your 
polynomial with those of other students. What terms will be 
the same as everyone else’s? Add some more characteristics, 
such as symmetry or naming the real zeros. How does this 
modify the polynomial?
	 1.	 1- 2, 02, 12, 02, 10, 92	
2.  Yes; 3	 3.  Down; 4	
4.  Local maximum value 6.48 at x = - 0.67; local minimum value -3 at x = 2
	 5.  True	
6.  (5, 0); 5
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 134–137 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
134.  Find an equation of the line that contains the point 12, - 32 and is perpendicular to the line 5x - 2y = 6. 
135.  Find the domain of the function h1x2 = x - 3
x + 5. 
136.  Find the x-intercepts of the graph of f1x2 = 4x2 + 8x - 3. 
137.  Solve the inequality x2 6 21 - 4x. 

Section 4.2  Properties of Rational Functions  223
Ratios of integers are called rational numbers. Similarly, ratios of polynomial  
functions are called rational functions. Examples of rational functions are
R1x2 =
x2 - 4
x2 + x + 1  F1x2 =
x3
x2 - 4  G1x2 =
3x2
x4 - 1
4.2	 Properties of Rational Functions
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Rational Expressions (Appendix A, Section A.5,  
pp. 979–985)
•	 Polynomial Division (Appendix A, Section A.3,  
pp. 969–971)
•	 Graph of f1x2 = 1
x (Section 1.2, Example 12, p. 50)
•	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations (Section 2.5, 
pp. 127–136)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 230.
	
Objectives	 1  Find the Domain of a Rational Function  (p. 223)
	
	 	2  Find the Vertical Asymptotes of a Rational Function  (p. 226)
	
	 	3  Find the Horizontal or Oblique Asymptote of a Rational Function  (p. 228)
 A rational function is a function of the form
R1x2 = p1x2
q1x2
where p and q are polynomial functions and q is not the zero polynomial. The 
domain of a rational function is the set of all real numbers except those for 
which the denominator q is 0.
Definition
Find the Domain of a Rational Function
Finding the Domain of a Rational Function
(a)	 The domain of R1x2 = 2x2 - 4
x + 5  is the set of all real numbers x except -5; that 
is, the domain is 5x x ≠-56.
(b)	 The domain of R1x2 =
1
x2 - 4 =
1
1x + 22 1x - 22 is the set of all real numbers x 
except -2 and 2; that is, the domain is 5x x ≠-2, x ≠26.
(c)	 The domain of R1x2 =
x3
x2 + 1 is the set of all real numbers.
(d)	 The domain of R1x2 = x2 - 1
x - 1  is the set of all real numbers x except 1; that is, 
the domain is 5x x ≠16.
	
Although x2 - 1
x - 1  reduces to x + 1, it is important to observe that the functions
R1x2 = x2 - 1
x - 1 and f1x2 = x + 1
are not equal, since the domain of R is 5x x ≠16 and the domain of f is the set 
of all real numbers.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
1
Example 1
•

224 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
If R1x2 = p1x2
q1x2  is a rational function, and if p and q have no common factors,
then the rational function R is said to be in lowest terms. For a rational function
R1x2 = p1x2
q1x2  in lowest terms, the real zeros, if any, of the numerator in the domain
of R are the x-intercepts of the graph of R and so will play a major role in the graph 
of R. The real zeros of the denominator of R [that is, the numbers x, if any, for which 
q1x2 = 0], although not in the domain of R, also play a major role in the graph of R.
We have already discussed the properties of the rational function y = 1
x. 
(Refer to Example 12, page 50). The next rational function that we take up is 
H1x2 = 1
x2.
Graphing y = 1
x2
Analyze the graph of H1x2 = 1
x2.
The domain of H1x2 = 1
x2 is the set of all real numbers x except 0. The graph has 
no y-intercept, because x can never equal 0. The graph has no x-intercept because 
the equation H1x2 = 0 has no solution. Therefore, the graph of H will not cross or 
touch either of the coordinate axes. Because
H1-x2 =
1
1 -x22 = 1
x2 = H1x2
H is an even function, so its graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
Table 7 shows the behavior of H1x2 = 1
x2 for selected positive numbers x. (We 
use symmetry to obtain the graph of H when x 6 0.) From the first three rows  
of Table 7, we see that as the values of x approach (get closer to) 0, the values of 
H1x2 become larger and larger positive numbers, so H is unbounded in the positive 
direction. In calculus we use limit notation, lim
xS0 H1x2 = q, which is read “the limit
of H1x2 as x approaches zero equals infinity,” to mean that H1x2 S q as x S 0.
Look at the last four rows of Table 7. As x S q, the values of H1x2  
approach 0 (the end behavior of the graph). In calculus, this is expressed by writing 
lim
xSq H1x2 = 0. Figure 25 shows the graph. Notice the use of red dashed lines to
convey the ideas discussed above.
Example 2
Solution
Warning  The domain of a rational 
function must be found before writing the 
function in lowest terms.	
■
Figure 25  H(x) = 1
x2
•
x
x  0
y  0
y  0
3
3
y
5
2,
(1,  1)
1–4
   ,  4
1–2
(2,
(1,  1)
1–4
(   , 4
1–2
)
(
)
(
)
)
Using Transformations to Graph a Rational Function
Graph the rational function:  R1x2 =
1
1x - 222 + 1
Example 3
x
H(x) = 1
x2
1
2
4
1
100
10,000
1
10,000
100,000,000
1
1
2
1
4
100
1
10,000
10,000
1
100,000,000
Table 7

Section 4.2  Properties of Rational Functions  225
The domain of R is the set of all real numbers except x = 2. To graph R, start with 
the graph of y = 1
x2. See Figure 26 for the steps.
Solution
Figure 26 
•
x  0
x
y
2
3
Replace x by x  2;
shift right
2 units
1
Add 1;
shift up
1 unit
x  2
x  2
y  1
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
x
y
5
3
(3, 1)
(1, 1)
x
y
5
3
(3, 2)
(1, 2)
(b)   y  
1
(x – 2)2
(a)   y  1
x 2
(c)   y                  1   
1
(x  2)2
y  0
y  0
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 5 ( a )  a n d  3 5 ( b )
Asymptotes
Let’s investigate the roles of the vertical line x = 2 and the horizontal line y = 1 
in Figure 26(c).
First, we look at the end behavior of R1x2 =
1
1x - 222 + 1. Table 8(a) shows
the values of R at x = 10, 100, 1000, and 10,000. Note that as x becomes unbounded 
in the positive direction, the values of R approach 1, so lim
xSq R1x2 = 1. From Table 8(b) 
we see that as x becomes unbounded in the negative direction, the values of R  
also approach 1, so lim
xS-q R1x2 = 1.
Even though x = 2 is not in the domain of R, the behavior of the graph of R 
near x = 2 is important. Table 8(c) shows the values of R at x = 1.5, 1.9, 1.99, 1.999, 
and 1.9999. We see that as x approaches 2 for x 6 2, denoted x S 2-, the values of  
R are increasing without bound, so lim
xS2 - R1x2 = q. From Table 8(d), we see that
as x approaches 2 for x 7 2, denoted x S 2+, the values of R are also increasing 
without bound, so lim
xS2 + R1x2 = q.
Table 8 
x
R(x)
       10
          1.0156
     100
          1.0001
   1000
     1.000001
10,000
1.00000001
(a)
(d)
(c)
(b)
x
R(x)
       - 10
          1.0069
     - 100
          1.0001
   - 1000
     1.000001
- 10,000
1.00000001
x
R(x)
       1.5
                      5
       1.9
                 101
     1.99
           10,001
  1.999
     1,000,001
1.9999
100,000,001
x
R(x)
      2.5
                      5
      2.1
                 101
    2.01
           10,001
  2.001
     1,000,001
2.0001
100,000,001
The vertical line x = 2 and the horizontal line y = 1 are called asymptotes of 
the graph of R.
Let R denote a function.
If, as x S - q or as x S q, the values of R1x2 approach some fixed  
number L, then the line y = L is a horizontal asymptote of the graph of R. 
[Refer to Figures 27(a) and (b) on page 226.]
If, as x approaches some number c, the values  R1x2  S q [that is, 
R1x2 S - q or R1x2 S q], then the line x = c is a vertical asymptote of the 
graph of R. [Refer to Figures 27(c) and (d).]
Definition

226 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
A horizontal asymptote, when it occurs, describes the end behavior of the 
graph as x S q or as x S - q. The graph of a function may intersect a horizontal 
asymptote.
A vertical asymptote, when it occurs, describes the behavior of the graph when 
x is close to some number c. The graph of a rational function will never intersect a 
vertical asymptote.
There is a third possibility. If, as x S - q or as x S q, the value of a rational  
function R1x2 approaches a linear expression ax + b, a ≠0, then the line  
y = ax + b, a ≠0, is an oblique (or slant) asymptote of R. Figure 28 shows an oblique 
asymptote. An oblique asymptote, when it occurs, describes the end behavior of the 
graph. The graph of a function may intersect an oblique asymptote.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 7  a n d  3 5 ( c )
Find the Vertical Asymptotes of a Rational Function
The vertical asymptotes of a rational function R1x2 = p1x2
q1x2 , in lowest terms, are
located at the real zeros of the denominator q1x2. Suppose that r is a real zero of q, 
so x - r is a factor of q. As x approaches r, symbolized as x S r, the values of x - r 
approach 0, causing the ratio to become unbounded; that is,  R1x2  S q. Based on 
the definition, we conclude that the line x = r is a vertical asymptote.
2
G As x approaches c, the 
values of R(x)→ `
[          R(x) 5 2`;  
         R(x) 5 `]. That is, 
the points on the graph
of R are getting closer to
the line x 5 c; x 5 c is a
vertical asymptote.
F As x approaches c, the 
values of R(x)→ `  
[          R(x) 5 `;   
         R(x) 5 `]. That is, 
the points on the graph
of R are getting closer to
the line x 5 c; x 5 c is a
vertical asymptote.
E End behavior:
As x → 2`, the values 
of R(x) approach L 
[         R(x) 5 L]. That is, the 
points on the graph of R 
are getting closer to the line 
y 5 L; y 5 L is a horizontal
asymptote.
D End behavior:
As x → `, the values of
R(x ) approach L [       R(x) 5 L].
That is, the points on the graph 
of R are getting closer to
the line y 5 L; y 5 L is a
horizontal asymptote.
x → c1
lim
x → c1
lim
x → c2
lim
x → c2
lim
lim
x → ` 
lim
x → 2` 
y
x
x 5 c
y
x
x 5 c
y 5 L
y
x
y 5 R(x )
y
x
y 5 L
y 5 R(x )
Figure 27 
Figure 28  Oblique asymptote
y
x
Locating Vertical Asymptotes
A rational function R1x2 = p1x2
q1x2, in lowest terms, will have a vertical asymptote 
x = r if r is a real zero of the denominator q. That is, if x - r is a factor of the 
denominator q of a rational function R1x2 = p1x2
q1x2 , in lowest terms, R will 
have the vertical asymptote x = r.
Theorem
Warning  If a rational function is not 
in lowest terms, an application of this 
theorem may result in an incorrect listing 
of vertical asymptotes.	
■
Finding Vertical Asymptotes
Find the vertical asymptotes, if any, of the graph of each rational function.
(a)	 F1x2 = x + 3
x - 1	
(b)  R1x2 =
x
x2 - 4
(c)	 H1x2 =
x2
x2 + 1	
(d)  G1x2 =
x2 - 9
x2 + 4x - 21
Example 4

Section 4.2  Properties of Rational Functions  227
(a)	 F is in lowest terms, and the only zero of the denominator is 1. The line x = 1 is 
the vertical asymptote of the graph of F.
(b)	 R is in lowest terms, and the zeros of the denominator x2 - 4 are -2 and 2. The 
lines x = -2 and x = 2 are the vertical asymptotes of the graph of R.
(c)	 H is in lowest terms, and the denominator has no real zeros because the equation 
x2 + 1 = 0 has no real solutions. The graph of H has no vertical asymptotes.
(d)	 Factor the numerator and denominator of G1x2 to determine whether it is in 
lowest terms.
G1x2 =
x2 - 9
x2 + 4x - 21 = 1x + 32 1x - 32
1x + 72 1x - 32 = x + 3
x + 7  x ≠3
	
The only zero of the denominator of G1x2 in lowest terms is -7. The line 
x = -7 is the only vertical asymptote of the graph of G.
As Example 4 points out, rational functions can have no vertical asymptotes, 
one vertical asymptote, or more than one vertical asymptote.
Multiplicity and Vertical Asymptotes 
Recall from Figure 15 in Section 4.1 that the end behavior of a polynomial function 
is always one of four types. For polynomials of odd degree, the ends of the graph 
go in opposite directions (one up and one down), whereas for polynomials of even 
degree, the ends go in the same direction (both up or both down). 
For a rational function in lowest terms, the multiplicities of the zeros in the  
denominator can be used in a similar fashion to determine the behavior of the graph 
around each vertical asymptote. Consider the following four functions, each with a 
single vertical asymptote, x = 2.
R11x2 =
1
x - 2  R21x2 = -
1
x - 2  R31x2 =
1
1x - 222  R41x2 = -
1
1x - 222
Figure 29 shows the graphs of each function. The graphs of R1 and R2 are 
transformations of the graph of y =  1
x, and the graphs of R3 and R4 are 
transformations of the graph of y =  1
x2.
Based on Figure 29, we can make the following conclusions:
•	 If the multiplicity of the zero that gives rise to a vertical asymptote is odd, the graph  
approaches q on one side of the vertical asymptote and approaches - q on 
the other side.
•	 If the multiplicity of the zero that gives rise to the vertical asymptote is even, 
the graph approaches either q or - q on both sides of the vertical asymptote.
These results are true in general and will be helpful when graphing rational functions 
in the next section.
Solution
•
Warning  In Example 4(a), the vertical 
asymptote is x = 1. Do not say that 
the vertical asymptote is 1.	
■
Figure 29 
(a) Odd multiplicity
lim
xS2-  R1(x) = - q
lim
xS2 +   R1(x) = q
(b) Odd multiplicity
lim
xS2-  R2(x) = q
lim
xS2 +   R2(x) = - q
(c) Even multiplicity
lim
xS2-  R3(x) = q
lim
xS2 +   R3(x) = q
(d) Even multiplicity
lim
xS2-  R4(x) = - q
lim
xS2 +   R4(x) = - q
x  2
y  0
x
5
−1
R1(x)
y
6
−6
x  2
y  0
x
y
5
−1
6
−6
R2(x)
x  2
y  0
x
y
5
−1
6
−6
R3(x)
x  2
y  0
x
y
5
−1
6
−6
R4(x)

228 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Find the Horizontal or Oblique Asymptote  
of a Rational Function
To find horizontal or oblique asymptotes, we need to know how the value of the 
function behaves as x S - q or as x S q. That is, we need to determine the end 
behavior of the function. This can be done by examining the degrees of the numerator  
and denominator, and the respective power functions that each resembles. For 
example, consider the rational function
R1x2 =
3x - 2
5x2 - 7x + 1
The degree of the numerator, 1, is less than the degree of the denominator, 2.  
When  x   is very large, the numerator of R can be approximated by the power 
function y = 3x, and the denominator can be approximated by the power function 
y = 5x2. This means
R1x2 =
3x - 2
5x2 - 7x + 1 ≈3x
5x2 = 3
5x S 0
	
c	
c
	
For |x| very large	
As x S - q or x S q
which shows that the line y = 0 is a horizontal asymptote. This result is true for all 
rational functions that are proper (that is, the degree of the numerator is less than 
the degree of the denominator). If a rational function is improper (that is, if the 
degree of the numerator is greater than or equal to the degree of the denominator), 
there could be a horizontal asymptote, an oblique asymptote, or neither. The following 
summary details how to find horizontal or oblique asymptotes.
3
Finding a Horizontal or Oblique Asymptote of a Rational Function
Consider the rational function
R1x2 =
p1x2
q1x2 =
anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0
bmxm + bm-1xm-1 + g + b1x + b0
in which the degree of the numerator is n and the degree of the denominator 
is m.
	 1.	 If n 6 m (the degree of the numerator is less than the degree of the  
denominator), the line y = 0 is a horizontal asymptote.
	 2.	 If n = m (the degree of the numerator equals the degree of the
	
	 denominator), the line y = an
bm
 is a horizontal asymptote. (That is, the
	
	 horizontal asymptote equals the ratio of the leading coefficients.)
	 3.	 If n = m + 1 (the degree of the numerator is one more than the degree of 
the denominator), the line y = ax + b is an oblique asymptote, which is 
the quotient found using long division.
	 4.	 If n Ú m + 2 (the degree of the numerator is two or more greater than the 
degree of the denominator), there are no horizontal or oblique asymptotes.
	
	 The end behavior of the graph will resemble the power function
	
	 y = an
bm
xn-m.
Note:  A rational function will never have both a horizontal asymptote and an 
oblique asymptote. A rational function may have neither a horizontal nor an 
oblique asymptote.
We illustrate each of the possibilities in Examples 5 through 8.

Section 4.2  Properties of Rational Functions  229
Finding a Horizontal Asymptote
Find the horizontal asymptote, if one exists, of the graph of
R1x2 =
4x3 - 5x + 2
7x5 + 2x4 - 3x
Since the degree of the numerator, 3, is less than the degree of the denominator, 5, 
the rational function R is proper. The line y = 0 is a horizontal asymptote of the 
graph of R.
Finding a Horizontal or Oblique Asymptote
Find the horizontal or oblique asymptote, if one exists, of the graph of
H1x2 =
3x4 - x2
x3 - x2 + 1
Since the degree of the numerator, 4, is exactly one greater than the degree of the  
denominator, 3, the rational function H has an oblique asymptote. Find the  
asymptote by using long division.
3x + 3
x3 - x2 + 1)3x4
-
x2
3x4 - 3x3
+ 3x
3x3 -
x2 - 3x
3x3 - 3x2
+ 3
2x2 - 3x - 3
As a result,
H1x2 =
3x4 - x2
x3 - x2 + 1 = 3x + 3 + 2x2 - 3x - 3
x3 - x2 + 1
As x S - q or as x S q,
2x2 - 3x - 3
x3 - x2 + 1
≈2x2
x3 = 2
x S 0
As x S - q or as x S q, we have H1x2 S 3x + 3. The graph of the rational 
function H has an oblique asymptote y = 3x + 3. Put another way, as x S { q, the 
graph of H will behave like the graph of y = 3x + 3.
Finding a Horizontal or Oblique Asymptote
Find the horizontal or oblique asymptote, if one exists, of the graph of
R1x2 = 8x2 - x + 2
4x2 - 1
Since the degree of the numerator, 2, equals the degree of the denominator, 2,  
the rational function R has a horizontal asymptote equal to the ratio of the leading 
coefficients.
y = an
bm
= 8
4 = 2
To see why the horizontal asymptote equals the ratio of the leading coefficients, 
investigate the behavior of R as x S - q or as x S q. When  x   is very large, 
the numerator of R can be approximated by the power function y = 8x2, and the  
Example 5
Solution
•
Example 6
Solution
•
Example 7
Solution

230 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
denominator can be approximated by the power function y = 4x2. This means that 
as x S - q or as x S q,
R1x2 = 8x2 - x + 2
4x2 - 1
≈8x2
4x2 = 8
4 = 2
The graph of the rational function R has a horizontal asymptote y = 2. The 
graph of R will behave like y = 2 as x S { q.
Finding a Horizontal or Oblique Asymptote
Find the horizontal or oblique asymptote, if one exists, of the graph of
G1x2 = 2x5 - x3 + 2
x3 - 1
Since the degree of the numerator, 5, is greater than the degree of the denominator, 3, 
by more than one, the rational function G has no horizontal or oblique asymptote. 
The end behavior of the graph will resemble the power function y = 2x5-3 = 2x2.
To see why this is the case, investigate the behavior of G as x S - q or as 
x S q. When  x   is very large, the numerator of G can be approximated by the 
power function y = 2x5, and the denominator can be approximated by the power 
function y = x3. This means as x S - q or as x S q,
G1x2 = 2x5 - x3 + 2
x3 - 1
≈2x5
x3 = 2x5-3 = 2x2
Since this is not linear, the graph of G has no horizontal or oblique asymptote. 
The graph of G will behave like y = 2x2 as x S { q.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  4 5 ,  4 7 ,  a n d  4 9
•
Example 8
Solution
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 True or False  The quotient of two polynomial expressions 
is a rational expression. (pp. 979–985)  
	 2.	 What are the quotient and remainder when 3x4 - x2 is 
divided by x3 - x2 + 1. (pp. 969–971)
	 3.	 Graph y = 1
x. (p. 50)
	 4.	 Graph y = 21x + 122 - 3 using transformations.  
(pp. 127–136)
4.2  Assess Your Understanding
	 5.	 True or False  The domain of every rational function is the 
set of all real numbers. 
	 6.	 If, as x S - q or as x S q, the values of R1x2 approach 
some fixed number L, then the line y = L is a 
 of the graph of R.
	 7.	 If, as x approaches some number c, the values of  
R1x2  S q, then the line x = c is a 
 
 
of the graph of R.
	 8.	 For a rational function R, if the degree of the numerator is 
less than the degree of the denominator, then R is 
.
	 9.	 True or False  The graph of a rational function may intersect 
a horizontal asymptote. 
	 10.	 True or False  The graph of a rational function may intersect 
a vertical asymptote. 
	 11.	 If a rational function is proper, then 
 is a horizontal 
asymptote.
	 12.	 True or False If the degree of the numerator of a rational 
function equals the degree of the denominator, then the  
ratio of the leading coefficients gives rise to the horizontal 
asymptote. 
	 13.	 If R1x2 =
p1x2
q1x2  is a rational function and if p and q have no 
common factors, then R is                   . 
(a)	 improper      (b)  proper
(c)	 undefined       (d)  in lowest terms 
	 14.	 Which type of asymptote, when it occurs, describes the  
behavior of a graph when x is close to some number? 
(a)	 vertical  (b)  horizontal  (c)  oblique  (d)  all of these
Concepts and Vocabulary

Section 4.2  Properties of Rational Functions  231
Skill Building
In Problems 15–26, find the domain of each rational function.
	 15.	 R1x2 =
5x2
3 + x 
	 16.	 R1x2 =
4x
x - 3 
	 17.	 H1x2 =
-4x2
1x - 22 1x + 42
	 18.	 G1x2 =
6
1x + 32 14 - x2
	 19.	 Q1x2 =
- x11 - x2
3x2 + 5x - 2
	 20.	 F1x2 =
3x1x - 12
2x2 - 5x - 3
	 21.	 R1x2 =
x
x4 - 1 
	 22.	 R1x2 =
x
x3 - 8 
	 23.	 G1x2 = x - 3
x4 + 1 
	 24.	 H1x2 = 3x2 + x
x2 + 4
	 25.	 F1x2 =
- 21x2 - 42
31x2 + 4x + 42
	26.	 R1x2 =
31x2 - x - 62
41x2 - 92
 
In Problems 27–32, use the graph shown to find
(a)	The domain and range of each function	
(b) The intercepts, if any	
(c) Horizontal asymptotes, if any
(d)	Vertical asymptotes, if any	
(e) Oblique asymptotes, if any
In Problems 33–44, (a) graph the rational function using transformations, (b) use the final graph to find the domain and range, and  
(c) use the final graph to list any vertical, horizontal, or oblique asymptotes.
	 33.	 Q1x2 = 3 + 1
x2
	 34.	 F1x2 = 2 + 1
x
	 35.	 R1x2 =
1
1x - 122
	 36.	 R1x2 = 3
x
	 37.	 G1x2 =
2
1x + 222
	 38.	 H1x2 =
- 2
x + 1
	 39.	 R1x2 =
1
x - 1 + 1
	 40.	 R1x2 =
-1
x2 + 4x + 4
	 41.	 F1x2 = 2 -
1
x + 1
	 42.	 G1x2 = 1 +
2
1x - 322
	 43.	 R1x2 = x - 4
x
	 44.	 R1x2 = x2 - 4
x2
	 30.
	 31.
	 27.
	 29.
	 28.
	 32.
x
y
–4
4
4
–4
x
y
3
3
3
3
(0, 2)
x
y
3
3
3
3
(1, 0)
(1, 2)
(1, 0)
x
y
3
3
3
3
(1, 2)
(1, 1)
(1, 2)
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
3

232 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Applications and Extensions
	 57.	 Gravity  In physics, it is established that the acceleration due 
to gravity, g (in meters/sec2), at a height h meters above sea 
level is given by the formula below.
g1h2 =
3.99 * 1014
16.374 * 106 + h22
	
	 where 6.374 * 106 is the radius of Earth in meters.
(a)	 A certain building is 400 meters tall. What is the 
­acceleration due to gravity at the top of the building?
(b)	 Find the horizontal asymptote of g1h2. 
(c)	 Solve g1h2 = 0. How do you interpret your answer?
	 58.	 Population Model  A rare species of insect was discovered  
in the Amazon Rain Forest. To protect the species,  
environmentalists declared the insect endangered and  
transplanted the insect into a protected area. The population P 
of the insect t months after being transplanted is
P1t2 =
5011 + 0.5t2
2 + 0.01t
(a)	 How many insects were discovered? In other words, 
what was the population when t = 0? 
(b)	 What will the population be after 5 years? 
(c)	 Determine the horizontal asymptote of P1t2. What 
is the largest population that the protected area can  
sustain? 
	 59.	 Resistance in Parallel Circuits  From Ohm’s Law for circuits, 
it follows that the total resistance Rtot of two components 
hooked in parallel is given by the equation
Rtot =
R1R2
R1 + R2
	
	 where R1 and R2 are the individual resistances.
(a)	 Let R1 = 10 ohms, and graph Rtot as a function of R2.
(b)	 Find and interpret any asymptotes of the graph obtained 
in part (a).
(c)	 If R2 = 21R1, what value of R1 will yield an Rtot of 
17 ohms? 
	 60.	 Newton’s Method  In calculus you will learn that if
p1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 +  g + a1x + a0
	
	 is a polynomial function, then the derivative of p1x2 is
p′1x2 = nanxn-1 + 1n - 12an-1xn-2 +  g+ 2a2x + a1
	
	 Newton’s Method is an efficient method for approximating 
the x-intercepts (or real zeros) of a function, such as p1x2. 
The following steps outline Newton’s Method.
	
	 STEP 1:  Select an initial value x0 that is somewhat close to 
the x-intercept being sought.
	
	 STEP 2:  Find values for x using the relation
xn+1 = xn -
p1xn2
p′1xn2 n = 1, 2, c
until you get two consecutive values xn and xn+1 
that agree to whatever decimal place accuracy you 
desire.
	
	 STEP 3: The approximate zero will be xn+1.
Consider the polynomial p1x2 = x3 - 7x - 40.
(a)	 Evaluate p152 and p1- 32. 
(b)	 What might we conclude about a zero of p? Explain.
(c)	 Use Newton’s Method to approximate an x-intercept, r, 
- 3 6 r 6 5,  of p1x2 to four decimal places. 
(d)	 Use a graphing utility to graph p1x2 and verify your 
answer in part (c).
(e)	 Using a graphing utility, evaluate p1r2 to verify your 
result. 
	 61.	 Exploration  The standard form of the rational 
	
	 function R1x2 = mx +  b
cx + d , where c ≠0, 
	
	 is R1x2 =  a¢
1
x -  h≤ +  k. To write a rational function 
in standard form requires long division.
(a)	 Write the rational function R1x2 =  2x +  3
x -  1  in 
standard form by writing R in the form
Quotient +  remainder
divisor
(b)	 Graph R using transformations.
(c)	 Determine the vertical asymptote and the horizontal  
asymptote of R.
	 62.	 Exploration  Repeat 
Problem 
61 
for 
the 
rational
	
	 function  R1x2 =  - 6x +  16
2x -  7 .
In Problems 45–56, find the vertical, horizontal, and oblique asymptotes, if any, of each rational function.
	 49.	 T1x2 =
x3
x4 - 1
	 50.	 P1x2 =
4x2
x3 - 1
	 51.	 F1x2 = x2 + 6x + 5
2x2 + 7x + 5
	 52.	 Q1x2 = 2x2 - 5x - 12
3x2 - 11x - 4
	 53.	 R1x2 = 8x2 + 26x - 7
4x - 1
	 54.	 R1x2 = 6x2 + 7x - 5
3x + 5
	 55.	 F1x2 = x4 - 16
x2 - 2x
	 56.	 G1x2 = x4 - 1
x2 - x
	 45.	 R1x2 =
3x
x + 4
	 46.	 R1x2 = 3x + 5
x - 6
	 47.	 H1x2 =
x3 - 8
x2 - 5x + 6
	 48.	 G1x2 =
x3 + 1
x2 - 5x - 14

Section 4.3  The Graph of a Rational Function  233
	 63.	 If the graph of a rational function R has the vertical  
asymptote x = 4, the factor x - 4 must be present in the 
denominator of R. Explain why.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 67–70 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 67.	 Find the equation of a vertical line passing through the  
point 15, -32. 
	 68.	 Find the average rate of change of f (x) =  -3x2 + 5 from 3 
to 7. 
	 1.	 True	
2.  Quotient: 3x + 3; remainder: 2x2 - 3x - 3	
3.	
4.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
x
y
2
2
2
2
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
x
y
3
3
3
3
(0,1)
(1,3)
Analyze the Graph of a Rational Function
We commented earlier that calculus provides the tools required to graph a polynomial 
function accurately. The same holds true for rational functions. However, we can 
gather together quite a bit of information about their graphs to get an idea of the 
general shape and position of the graph.
How to Analyze the Graph of a Rational Function
Analyze the graph of the rational function: R1x2 = x - 1
x2 - 4
R1x2 = x - 1
x2 - 4 =
x - 1
1x + 22 1x - 22
1
Example 1
4.3	 The Graph of a Rational Function
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Intercepts (Section 1.2, pp. 45–46)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problem on page 245.
	
Objectives	 1  Analyze the Graph of a Rational Function  (p. 233)
	
	 	2  Solve Applied Problems Involving Rational Functions  (p. 244)
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Factor the numerator and 
denominator of R. Find the domain 
of the rational function.
The domain of R is {x x ≠-2, x ≠2}.
	 64.	 If the graph of a rational function R has the horizontal  
asymptote y = 2, the degree of the numerator of R equals 
the degree of the denominator of R. Explain why.
	 65.	 The graph of a rational function cannot have both a horizontal 
and an oblique asymptote? Explain why.
	 66.	 Make up a rational function that has y = 2x + 1 as an 
oblique asymptote. Explain the methodology that you used.
	 69.	 Determine 
whether 
the 
graph 
of 
the 
equation 
2x3 -  xy2 =  4 is symmetric with respect to the x-axis, 
the y-axis, the origin, or none of these. 
	 70.	 What are the points of intersection of the graphs of the 
functions f1x2 = - 3x + 2 and g1x2 = x2 - 2x - 4? 

234 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Step 2: Write R in lowest terms. 
Because there are no common factors between the numerator and denominator,  
R is in lowest terms.
Step 3:  Find and plot the  
intercepts of the graph. Use  
multiplicity to determine the  
behavior of the graph of R at each  
x-intercept. 
Since 0 is in the domain of R, the y-intercept is R(0) = 1
4. Plot the point ¢0, 1
4≤. The 
x-intercepts are found by determining the real zeros of the numerator of R written  
in lowest terms. By solving x - 1 = 0, we find that the only real zero of the  
numerator is 1, so the only x-intercept of the graph of R is 1. Plot the point (1, 0). The 
multiplicity of 1 is odd, so the graph will cross the x-axis at x = 1.
Step 4:  Find the vertical  
asymptotes. Graph each vertical 
asymptote using a dashed line. 
Determine the behavior of the graph 
on either side of each vertical  
asymptote. 
The vertical asymptotes are the zeros of the denominator with the rational  
function in lowest terms. With R written in lowest terms, we find that the graph of 
R has two vertical asymptotes: the lines x = -2 and x = 2. See Figure 30(a). The 
multiplicities of the zeros that give rise to the vertical asymptotes are both odd. 
Therefore, the graph will approach q on one side of each vertical asymptote, and 
will approach - q on the other side.
Step 5:  Find the horizontal or 
oblique asymptote, if one exists. 
Find points, if any, at which  
the graph of R intersects this 
asymptote. Graph the asymptote 
using a dashed line. Plot any points 
at which the graph of R intersects 
the asymptote. 
Because the degree of the numerator is less than the degree of the denominator,  
R is proper and the line y = 0 (the x-axis) is a horizontal asymptote of the graph.  
To determine whether the graph of R intersects the horizontal asymptote, solve the  
equation R1x2 = 0:
 x - 1
x2 - 4 = 0
 x - 1 = 0
 x = 1
The only solution is x = 1, so the graph of R intersects the horizontal asymptote at 11, 02.
Step 6:  Use the zeros of the 
numerator and denominator of R 
to divide the x-axis into intervals. 
Determine where the graph of R  
is above or below the x-axis by  
choosing a number in each interval 
and evaluating R there. Plot the 
points found. 
The zero of the numerator, 1, and the zeros of the denominator, -2 and 2, divide the 
x-axis into four intervals:
1 - q, -22  1 -2, 12  11, 22  12, q 2
Now construct Table 9.
Figure 30(a) shows the asymptotes, the points from Table 9, the y-intercept, and 
the x-intercept.
Step 7:  Use the results obtained in 
Steps 1 through 6 to graph R.
•  The graph crosses the x-axis at x = 1, changing from being above the x-axis  
for x 6 1 to below it for x 7 1. Indicate this on the graph. See Figure 30(b).
•  Since y = 0 (the x-axis) is a horizontal asymptote and the graph lies below the 
x-axis for x 6 -2, we can sketch a portion of the graph by placing a small arrow 
to the far left and under the x-axis.
Table 9
 
Interval
(- q, -2)
(-2, 1)
(1, 2)
(2, q)
Number chosen
-3
-1
3
2
3
Value of R
R(-3) = -0.8
R(-1) = 2
3
Ra3
2b = -  2
7
R(3) = 0.4
Location of graph
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Point on graph
(-3, -0.8)
a-1, 2
3b
a3
2, - 2
7b
(3, 0.4)
2
1
–2
x

Section 4.3  The Graph of a Rational Function  235
•  Since the line x = -2 is a vertical asymptote and the graph lies below the x-axis 
for x 6 -2, we place an arrow well below the x-axis and approaching the line 
x = -2 from the left 1 lim
xS -2-R1x2 = - q 2 .
•­  Since the graph approaches - q on one side of x = -2, and -2 is a zero of 
odd multiplicity, the graph will approach q on the other side of x = -2. That is,
  lim
xS -2+R1x2 = q .  Similar analysis leads to lim
xS 2-R(x) = - q and lim
xS 2+R(x) = q.
Finally, lim
xS -qR(x) = 0 and lim
xS qR(x) = 0.
Figure 30(b) illustrates these conclusions and Figure 30(c) shows the graph of R.
Figure 30 
•
x
3
y
3
(3, 0.4)
(1, 0)
(c)
2–7
3–2(
)
0, 1–4
(
)
x
3
y
3
(3, 0.4)
(1, 0)
2–7
3–2(
)
0, 1–4
(
)
2–3)
(b)
x
3
y
3
−3
−3
(−3, −0.8)
−3
−3
(−3, −0.8)
−3
−3
(−3, −0.8)
x = −2
x = −2
x = 2
x = 2
x = −2
x = 2
y = 0
y = 0
y = 0
(3, 0.4)
(1, 0)
(a)
2–7
3–2(
)
0,
,−
,−
,−
1–4
(
)
(−1,
2–3)
(−1,
2–3)
(−1,
Exploration
Graph the rational function: R(x) = x - 1
x2 - 4
Result The analysis just completed in Example 1 helps us to set the viewing rectangle to obtain a
complete graph. Figure 31(a) shows the graph of R(x) = x - 1
x2 - 4 in connected mode, and Figure 31(b)
shows it in dot mode. Notice in Figure 31(a) that the graph has vertical lines at x = -2 and x = 2. 
This is due to the fact that when a graphing utility is in connected mode, some will connect the 
dots between consecutive pixels, and vertical lines may occur. We know that the graph of R does not  
cross the lines x = -2 and x = 2, since R is not defined at x = -2 or x = 2. So, when graphing 
rational functions, use dot mode if extraneous vertical lines are present in connected mode. Newer 
graphing utilities may not have extraneous vertical lines in connected mode. See Figure 31(c).
Figure 31 
4
24
24
4
4
24
Connected mode with extraneous
vertical lines
(a)
24
4
(b)
Dot mode
24
24
4
4
Connected mode without extraneous
vertical lines
(c)

236 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Analyzing the Graph of a Rational Function
Analyze the graph of the rational function: R1x2 = x2 - 1
x
Step 1:  R1x2 = 1x + 12 1x - 12
x
. The domain of R is 5x x ≠06.
Step 2:  R is in lowest terms.
Step 3:  Because x cannot equal 0, there is no y-intercept. The graph has two  
x-intercepts, -1 and 1, each with odd multiplicity. Plot the points 1 -1, 02 
and 11, 02. The graph will cross the x-axis at both points.
Step 4:  The real zero of the denominator with R in lowest terms is 0, so the graph of 
R has the line x = 0 (the y-axis) as a vertical asymptote. Graph x = 0 using 
a dashed line. The multiplicity of 0 is odd, so the graph will approach q on 
one side of the asymptote x = 0, and - q on the other side.
Step 5:  Since the degree of the numerator, 2, is one greater than the degree of the 
denominator, 1, the rational function will have an oblique asymptote. To 
find the oblique asymptote, use long division.
x
x)x2 - 1
x2
-1
The quotient is x, so the line y = x is an oblique asymptote of the graph. 
Graph y = x using a dashed line.
To determine whether the graph of R intersects the asymptote y = x, 
solve the equation R1x2 = x.
 R1x2 = x2 - 1
x
= x
 x2 - 1 = x2
 -1 = 0   Impossible
The equation x2 - 1
x
= x has no solution, so the graph of R does not intersect 
the line y = x.
Example 2
Solution
Note  Because the denominator of 
the rational function is a monomial, we 
can also find the oblique asymptote as  
follows:
x2 - 1
x
= x2
x - 1
x = x - 1
x
Since 1
x S 0 as x S q, y = x is the 
oblique asymptote.	
■
Summary
Analyzing the Graph of a Rational Function R
Step 1:  Factor the numerator and denominator of R. Find the domain of the rational function.
Step 2:  Write R in lowest terms.
Step 3:  Find and plot the intercepts of the graph. Use multiplicity to determine the behavior of the graph of R at 
each x-intercept.
Step 4:  Find the vertical asymptotes. Graph each vertical asymptote using a dashed line. Determine the behavior of 
the graph of R on either side of each vertical asymptote.
Step 5:  Find the horizontal or oblique asymptote, if one exists. Find points, if any, at which the graph of R intersects 
this asymptote. Graph the asymptote using a dashed line. Plot any points at which the graph of R intersects 
the asymptote.
Step 6:  Use the zeros of the numerator and denominator of R to divide the x-axis into intervals. Determine where 
the graph of R is above or below the x-axis by choosing a number in each interval and evaluating R there. 
Plot the points found.
Step 7:  Use the results obtained in Steps 1 through 6 to graph R.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7

Section 4.3  The Graph of a Rational Function  237
Step 6:  The zeros of the numerator are -1 and 1; the zero of the denominator is 0. 
Use these values to divide the x-axis into four intervals:
1 - q, -12  1 -1, 02  10, 12  11, q 2
Now construct Table 10. Plot the points from Table 10. You should now have 
Figure 32(a).
Note  Notice that R in Example 2 is an 
odd function. Do you see the symmetry  
about the origin in the graph of R in 
Figure 32(c)?	
■
Figure 32 
•
Step 7:  The graph crosses the x-axis at x = −1 and x = 1, changing from being  
below the x-axis to being above it in both cases.
Since the graph of R is below the x-axis for x 6 -1 and is above the 
x-axis for x 7 1, and since the graph of R does not intersect the oblique 
asymptote y = x, the graph of R will approach the line y = x as shown in 
Figure 32(b).
Since the graph of R is above the x-axis for -1 6 x 6 0, the graph of 
R will approach the vertical asymptote x = 0 at the top to the left of x = 0 
[ lim
xS 0-R1x2 = q]; since the graph of R approaches q on one side of the 
asymptote and - q on the other, the graph of R will approach the vertical  
asymptote x = 0 at the bottom to the right of x = 0 [ lim
xS 0 +R(x) = - q]. 
See Figure 32(b).
The complete graph is given in Figure 32(c).
x
3
−3
y
3
−3
(1, 0)
(−1, 0)
2, 3–2
−2, −3–2
−   ,
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
3–2
1–2
, −3–2
1–2
(b)
x
3
−3
y
3
−3
(1, 0)
(−1, 0)
2, 3–2
−2, −3–2
−   , 3–2
1–2
, −3–2
1–2
(c)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
x
3
−3
y
3
−3
(1, 0)
(−1, 0)
2, 3–2
−2, −3–2
−   ,
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
3–2
1–2
, −3–2
1–2
(a)
y = x
x = 0
x = 0
y = x
y = x
x = 0
 
Interval
(- q, -1)
(-1, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, q)
Number chosen
-2
- 1
2
1
2
2
Value of R
R(-2) = - 3
2
Ra- 1
2b = 3
2
Ra1
2b = -  3
2
R(2) = 3
2
Location of graph
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Point on graph
a-2, - 3
2b
a- 1
2, 3
2b
a1
2, - 3
2b
a2, 3
2b
Table 10
1
0
–1
x

238 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Analyzing the Graph of a Rational Function
Analyze the graph of the rational function: R(x) = x4 + 1
x2
Step 1:  R is completely factored. The domain of R is 5x x ≠06.
Step 2:  R is in lowest terms.
Step 3:  There is no y-intercept. Since x4 + 1 = 0 has no real solutions, there are no 
x-intercepts.
Step 4:  R is in lowest terms, so x = 0 (the y-axis) is a vertical asymptote of R. Graph 
the line x = 0 using dashes. The multiplicity of 0 is even, so the graph will 
approach either q or - q on both sides of the asymptote.
Step 5:  Since the degree of the numerator, 4, is two more than the degree of the 
denominator, 2, the rational function will not have a horizontal or oblique 
asymptote. Find the end behavior of R. As  x S q,
R1x2 = x4 + 1
x2
≈x4
x2 = x2
The graph of R will approach the graph of y = x2 as x S - q and as x S q. 
The graph of R does not intersect y = x2. Do you know why? Graph y = x2 
using dashes.
Step 6:  The numerator has no real zeros, and the denominator has one real zero at 0.  
Divide the x-axis into the two intervals
1 - q, 02  10, q 2
and construct Table 11.
Example 3
Solution
Seeing the Concept
Graph R(x) = x2 - 1
x
 and compare what you see with Figure 32(c). Could you have predicted from the 
graph that y = x is an oblique asymptote? Graph y = x and ZOOM-OUT. What do you observe?
Note  Notice that R in Example 3 is an 
even function. Do you see the symmetry 
about the y-axis in the graph of R?	
■
Figure 33 
x
3
3
y
6
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
(b)
x
3
3
y
6
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
(a)
y  x 2
x  0
y  x 2
x  0
Step 7:  Since the graph of R is above the x-axis and does not intersect y = x2, place 
arrows above y = x2 as shown in Figure 33(a). Also, since the graph of R is 
above the x-axis, and the multiplicity of the zero that gives rise to the vertical 
asymptote, x = 0, is even, it will approach the vertical asymptote x = 0 at the 
top to the left of x = 0 and at the top to the right of x = 0. See Figure 33(a).
Figure 33(b) shows the complete graph.
•
 
Interval
(- q, 0)
(0, q)
Number chosen
-1
1
Value of R
R(-1) = 2
R(1) = 2
Location of graph
Above x-axis
Above x-axis
Point on graph
(-1, 2)
(1, 2)
Table 11
0
x

Section 4.3  The Graph of a Rational Function  239
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Analyzing the Graph of a Rational Function
Analyze the graph of the rational function: R1x2 =
3x2 - 3x
x2 + x - 12
Step 1:  Factor R to get
R1x2 =
3x1x - 12
1x + 42 1x - 32
The domain of R is 5x x ≠-4, x ≠36.
Step 2:  R is in lowest terms.
Step 3:  The y-intercept is R102 = 0. Plot the point 10, 02. Since the real solutions 
of the equation 3x1x - 12 = 0 are x = 0 and x = 1, the graph has two  
x-intercepts, 0 and 1, each with odd multiplicity. Plot the points 10, 02 and 
11, 02; the graph will cross the x-axis at both points.
Step 4:  R is in lowest terms. The real solutions of the equation 1x + 42 1x - 32 = 0 
are x = -4 and x = 3, so the graph of R has two vertical asymptotes, the 
lines x = -4 and x = 3. Graph these lines using dashes. The multiplicities 
that give rise to the vertical asymptotes are both odd, so the graph will approach 
q on one side of each vertical asymptote and - q on the other side.
Step 5:  Since the degree of the numerator equals the degree of the denominator, 
the graph has a horizontal asymptote. To find it, form the quotient of the 
leading coefficient of the numerator, 3, and the leading coefficient of the 
denominator, 1. The graph of R has the horizontal asymptote y = 3.
To find out whether the graph of R intersects the asymptote, solve the 
equation R1x2 = 3.
 R1x2 =
3x2 - 3x
x2 + x - 12 = 3
 3x2 - 3x = 3x2 + 3x - 36
 -6x = -36
 x = 6
The graph intersects the line y = 3 at x = 6, and 16, 32 is a point on the 
graph of R. Plot the point 16, 32 and graph the line y = 3 using dashes.
Step 6:  The real zeros of the numerator, 0 and 1, and the real zeros of the denominator, 
-4 and 3, divide the x-axis into five intervals:
1 - q, -42
1-4, 02
10, 12
11, 32
13, q 2
Construct Table 12. See page 240. Plot the points from Table 12. Figure 34(a) 
shows the graph so far.
Step 7:  Since the graph of R is above the x-axis for x 6 -4 and only crosses the 
line y = 3 at 16, 32, as x approaches - q the graph of R will approach 
the horizontal asymptote y = 3 from above 1 lim
xS-qR1x2 = 32. The graph
of R will approach the vertical asymptote x = -4 at the top to the left 
of x = -4 1 lim
xS-4 -R1x2 = q 2 and at the bottom to the right of x = -4
1 lim
xS-4 +R1x2 = - q 2 . The graph of R will approach the vertical asymptote 
Example 4
Solution
Seeing the Concept
Graph R(x) = x4 + 1
x2
 and compare what you see with Figure 33(b). Use MINIMUM to find the two turning 
points. Enter Y2 = x2 and ZOOM-OUT. What do you see?

240 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
x = 3 at the bottom to the left of x = 3 1 lim
xS3-R1x2 = - q 2 and at the top to 
the right of x = 3 1 lim
xS3+R1x2 = q 2.
We do not know whether the graph of R crosses or touches the line y = 3 at 
16, 32. To see whether the graph, in fact, crosses or touches the line y = 3, plot
an additional point to the right of 16, 32. We use x = 7 to find R172 = 63
22 6 3.
The graph crosses y = 3 at x = 6. Because 16, 32 is the only point where the 
graph of R intersects the asymptote y = 3, the graph must approach the line 
y = 3 from below as x S q 1 lim
xSqR1x2 = 32. 
The graph crosses the x-axis at x = 0, changing from being below the x-axis 
to being above. The graph also crosses the x-axis at x = 1, changing from being 
above the x-axis to being below. See Figure 34(b). The complete graph is shown 
in Figure 34(c).
Table 12 
 
Interval
(- q, -4)
(-4, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, 3)
(3, q)
Number chosen
-5
-2
1
2
2
4
Value of R
R(-5) = 11.25
R(-2) = -1.8
Ra1
2b = 1
15
R(2) = -1
R(4) = 4.5
Location of graph
Above x-axis
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Point on graph
(-5, 11.25)
(-2, -1.8)
a1
2, 1
15b
(2, -1)
(4, 4.5)
Figure 34 
•
x
5
(4, 4.5)
(6, 3)
−5
y
10
−10
(a)
(2, −1)
(1, 0)
(0, 0)
(−5, 11.25)
(−2, −1.8)
,
1––
15
1–2(
)
y = 3
x = 3
x = −4
x
y  3
x  3
x  4
5
(4, 4.5)
(6, 3)
5
y
10
–10
(b)
(1, 0)
(0, 0)
(5, 11.25)
(2, 1.8)
(2, 1)
,
1––
15
1–2(
)
7, 63
––
22
(
)
x
y  3
x  3
x  4
5
(4, 4.5)
(6, 3)
5
y
10
–10
(c)
(1, 0)
(0, 0)
(5, 11.25)
(2, 1.8)
(2, 1)
,
1––
15
1–2(
)
7, 63
––
22
(
)
3
1
0
–4
x

Section 4.3  The Graph of a Rational Function  241
Analyzing the Graph of a Rational Function with a Hole
Analyze the graph of the rational function: R1x2 = 2x2 - 5x + 2
x2 - 4
Step 1:  Factor R and obtain
R1x2 = 12x - 12 1x - 22
1x + 22 1x - 22
The domain of R is 5x x ≠-2, x ≠26.
Step 2:  In lowest terms,
R1x2 = 2x - 1
x + 2   x ≠-2, x ≠2
Step 3:  The y-intercept is R102 = - 1
2. Plot the point a0, - 1
2b. The graph has one
	
x-intercept, 1
2, with odd multiplicity. Plot the point ¢ 1
2, 0≤. The graph will
	
cross the x-axis at x = 1
2. See Figure 36(a) on page 243.
Step 4:  Since x + 2 is the only factor of the denominator of R1x2 in lowest terms, 
the graph has one vertical asymptote, x = -2. However, the rational  
function is undefined at both x = 2 and x = -2. Graph the line x = -2 
using dashes. The multiplicity of -2 is odd, so the graph will approach q on 
one side of the vertical asymptote and - q on the other side.
Step 5:  Since the degree of the numerator equals the degree of the denominator, 
the graph has a horizontal asymptote. To find it, form the quotient of the 
leading coefficient of the numerator, 2, and the leading coefficient of the 
denominator, 1. The graph of R has the horizontal asymptote y = 2. Graph 
the line y = 2 using dashes.
Example 5
Solution
Exploration
Graph the rational function: R(x) =
3x2 - 3x
x2 + x - 12
Result Figure 35(a) shows the graph. The graph does not clearly display the behavior of the function 
between the two x-intercepts, 0 and 1. Nor does it clearly display the fact that the graph crosses the 
horizontal asymptote at (6, 3). To see these parts better, graph R for -1 … x … 2 [Figure 35(b)] and for 
4 … x … 60 [Figure 35(c)].
The new graphs reflect the behavior produced by the analysis. Furthermore, we observe two turning 
points, one between 0 and 1 and the other to the right of 6. Rounded to two decimal places, these 
turning points are (0.52, 0.07) and (11.48, 2.75).
Figure 35 
210
210
10
10
(a)
21
21
0.5
2
(b)
42.5
3.5
60
y 5 3
(c)
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1

242 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
To find out whether the graph of R intersects the horizontal asymptote 
y = 2, solve the equation R1x2 = 2.
 R1x2 = 2x - 1
x + 2 = 2
 2x - 1 = 21x + 22
 2x - 1 = 2x + 4
 -1 = 4        Impossible
The graph does not intersect the line y = 2.
Step 6:  Look at the factored expression for R in Step 1. The real zeros of the numerator 
and denominator, -2, 1
2, and 2, divide the x-axis into four intervals:
1- q, -22  a -2, 1
2b  a1
2, 2b  12, q 2
Construct Table 13. Plot the points in Table 13.
Note  The coordinates of the hole were 
obtained by evaluating R in lowest terms
at x = 2. R in lowest terms is 2x - 1
x + 2 ,
which, at x = 2, is 
2(2) - 1
2 + 2
= 3
4.	
■
Exploration
Graph R(x) = 2x2 - 5x + 2
x2 - 4
. Do you see the hole at a2, 3
4b?  TRACE along the graph. Did you obtain an
ERROR at x = 2? Are you convinced that an algebraic analysis of a rational function is required in order 
to accurately interpret the graph obtained with a graphing utility?
Step 7:  From Table 13 we know that the graph of R is above the x-axis for x 6 -2. 
From Step 5 we know that the graph of R does not intersect the  
asymptote y = 2. Therefore, the graph of R will approach y = 2 from  
above as x S - q and will approach the vertical asymptote x = -2 at the 
top from the left.
Since the graph of R is below the x-axis for -2 6 x 6 1
2, the graph will 
approach x = -2 at the bottom from the right. Finally, since the graph of  
R is above the x-axis for x 7 1
2 and does not intersect the horizontal asymptote 
y = 2, the graph of R will approach y = 2 from below as x S q. The graph 
crosses the x-axis at x = 1
2, changing from being below the x-axis to being 
above. See Figure 36(a).
See Figure 36(b) for the complete graph. Since R is not defined at 2, 
there is a hole at the point a2, 3
4b.
 
Interval
(- q, -2)
a-2, 1
2b
a1
2, 2b
(2, q)
Number chosen
-3
-1
1
3
Value of R
R(-3) = 7
R(-1) = -3
R(1) = 1
3
R(3) = 1
Location of graph
Above x-axis
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Above x-axis
Point on graph
(-3, 7)
(-1, -3)
a1, 1
3b
(3, 1)
Table 13
2
–2
1/2
x

Section 4.3  The Graph of a Rational Function  243
As Example 5 shows, the zeros of the denominator of a rational function give 
rise to either vertical asymptotes or holes on the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
Constructing a Rational Function from Its Graph
Find a rational function that might have the graph shown in Figure 37.
Example 6
Figure 36 
•
2
x  2
x  2
y  2
y  2
2
3
4
(3, 7)
(1, 3)
(3, 7)
1
2
2
3
4
1
x
3
2
1
(3, 1)
(1, 3)
, 0
(
)
1–2
0, 
(
)
1–2
0, 
(
)
1–2
3
1,
(
)
1–
y
4
2
6
8
(a)
, 0
(
)
1–2
1,
(
)
1–3
2,
(
)
3–4
x
3
2
1
y
4
2
6
8
(3, 1)
Hole at
(b)
Figure 37 
x
y
15
15
10
10
5
5
x  2
y  2
x  5
10
10
5
5
The numerator of a rational function R1x2 = p1x2
q1x2  in lowest terms determines the
x-intercepts of its graph. The graph shown in Figure 37 has x-intercepts -2 (even 
multiplicity; graph touches the x-axis) and 5 (odd multiplicity; graph crosses the  
x-axis). So one possibility for the numerator is p1x2 = 1x + 2221x - 52.
The denominator of a rational function in lowest terms determines the vertical  
asymptotes of its graph. The vertical asymptotes of the graph are x = -5 and x = 2. 
Since R1x2 approaches q to the left of x = -5 and R1x2 approaches - q to 
the right of x = -5, we know that (x + 5) is a factor of odd multiplicity in q1x2. 
Also,   R1x2 approaches - q on both sides of x = 2, so (x - 2) is a factor of even  
multiplicity in q1x2. A possibility for the denominator is q1x2 = 1x + 52 1x - 222.
So far we have R1x2 = 1x + 2221x - 52
1x + 52 1x - 222.
Solution

244 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
However, the horizontal asymptote of the graph given in Figure 37 is y = 2, so 
we know that the degree of the numerator must equal the degree of the denominator
and that the quotient of leading coefficients must be 2
1. This leads to
R1x2 = 21x + 2221x - 52
1x + 52 1x - 222
Check:	Figure 38 shows the graph of R on a graphing utility. Since Figure 38 
looks similar to Figure 37, we have found a rational function R for the 
graph in Figure 37.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
Solve Applied Problems Involving Rational Functions
Finding the Least Cost of a Can
Reynolds Metal Company manufactures aluminum cans in the shape of a cylinder
with a capacity of 500 cubic centimeters a1
2 literb. The top and bottom of the can are 
made of a special aluminum alloy that costs 0.05. per square centimeter. The sides of 
the can are made of material that costs 0.02. per square centimeter.
(a)	 Express the cost of material for the can as a function of the radius r of the can.
(b)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the function C = C1r2.
(c)	 What value of r will result in the least cost?
(d)	 What is this least cost?
(a)	 Figure 39 illustrates the components of a can in the shape of a right circular  
cylinder. Notice that the material required to produce a cylindrical can of height h  
and radius r consists of a rectangle of area 2prh and two circles, each of area pr 2. 
The total cost C (in cents) of manufacturing the can is therefore
C = Cost of the top and bottom + Cost of the side
= 21pr 22	 # 	 10.052	
+ 	 12prh2	 # 	 10.022
	
3	
3	
3	
3
	
Total area	
Cost/unit	
Total	
Cost/unit
	
of top and	
area	
area of	
area
	
bottom	
	
side
= 0.10pr 2 + 0.04prh
	
There is an additional restriction that the height h and radius r must be chosen so 
that the volume V of the can is 500 cubic centimeters. Since V = pr 2h, we have
500 = pr 2h so h = 500
pr 2
	
Substituting this expression for h, we find that the cost C, in cents, as a function 
of the radius r is
C1r2 = 0.10pr 2 + 0.04pr #  500
pr 2 = 0.10pr 2 + 20
r
= 0.10pr 3 + 20
r
(b)	 See Figure 40 for the graph of C = C1r2.
(c)	 Using the MINIMUM command, the cost is least for a radius of about  
3.17 centimeters.
(d)	 The least cost is C13.172 ≈9.47..
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
•
2
Example 7
Solution
•
Figure 39 
Figure 40 
Figure 38 
215
25
5
10
r
r
Top
Bottom
Area  r 2
Area  r 2
h h
Lateral Surface
Area  2rh
00
60
10

Section 4.3  The Graph of a Rational Function  245
‘Are You Prepared?’  The answer is given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Find the intercepts of the graph of the equation y = x2 - 1
x2 - 4. (pp. 45–46) 
4.3  Assess Your Understanding
	 2.	 True or False    Every rational function has at least one  
asymptote. 
	 3.	 Which type of asymptote will never intersect the graph of a 
rational function? 
(a)	 horizontal   (b)  oblique   (c)  vertical   (d)  all of these
	 4.	 Identify the y-intercept of the graph of 
	
	 R1x2 =
61x - 12
1x + 12 1x + 22.
(a)	 - 3  (b)  - 2  (c)  - 1  (d)  1 
	 5.	 R1x2 =
x1x - 222
x - 2
(a)	 Find the domain of R. 
(b)	 Find the x-intercepts of R. 
	 6.	 True or False  The graph of a rational function sometimes 
has a hole. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
Skill Building
In Problems 7–50, follow Steps 1 through 7 on page 236 to analyze the graph of each function.
	 7.	 R1x2 =
x + 1
x1x + 42
	 8.	 R1x2 =
x
1x - 12 1x + 22
	 9.	 R1x2 = 2x + 4
x - 1
	 10.	 R1x2 = 3x + 3
2x + 4
	 11.	 R1x2 =
6
x2 - x - 6
	 12.	 R1x2 =
3
x2 - 4
	 13.	 P1x2 = x4 + x2 + 1
x2 - 1
	 14.	 Q1x2 = x4 - 1
x2 - 4
	 15.	 H1x2 = x3 - 1
x2 - 9
	 16.	 G1x2 = x3 + 1
x2 + 2x
	 17.	 R1x2 = x2 + x - 12
x2 - 4
	 18.	 R1x2 =
x2
x2 + x - 6
	 19.	 G1x2 =
3x
x2 - 1
	 20.	 G1x2 =
x
x2 - 4
	 21.	 R1x2 =
- 4
1x + 12 1x2 - 92
	 22.	 R1x2 =
3
1x - 12 1x2 - 42
	 23.	 H1x2 = x2 + 4
x4 - 1
	 24.	 H1x2 = x2 - 1
x4 - 16
	 25.	 F1x2 = x2 + 3x + 2
x - 1
	 26.	 F1x2 = x2 - 3x - 4
x + 2
	 27.	 R1x2 = x2 - x - 12
x + 5
	 28.	 R1x2 = x2 + x - 12
x - 4
	 29.	 G1x2 = x2 - x - 12
x + 1
	 30.	 F1x2 = x2 + x - 12
x + 2
	 31.	 R1x2 =
x1x - 122
1x + 323
	 32.	 R1x2 =
1x - 12 1x + 22 1x - 32
x1x - 422
	 33.	 R1x2 = x2 + x - 12
x2 - x - 6
	 34.	 R1x2 = x2 + 3x - 10
x2 + 8x + 15
	 35.	 R1x2 = 8x2 + 26x + 15
2x2 - x - 15
	 36.	 R1x2 = 6x2 - 7x - 3
2x2 - 7x + 6
	 37.	 R1x2 = x2 + x - 30
x + 6
	 38.	 R1x2 = x2 + 5x + 6
x + 3
	 39.	 H1x2 = 2 - 2x
x2 - 1
	 40.	 H1x2 = 3x - 6
4 - x2
	 41.	 F1x2 = x2 - 2x - 15
x2 + 6x + 9
	 42.	 F1x2 = x2 - 5x + 4
x2 - 2x + 1
	 43.	 G1x2 =
2 - x
1x - 122
	 44.	 G1x2 =
x
1x + 222
	 45.	 f1x2 = 2x + 9
x
	 46.	 f1x2 = x + 1
x
	 47.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 16
x
	 48.	 f1x2 = x2 + 1
x
	 49.	 f1x2 = 2x + 9
x3
	 50.	 f1x2 = x + 1
x3

246 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
In Problems 51–54, find a rational function that might have the given graph. (More than one answer might be possible.)
	 51.	
	 52.	
x
x  2
x  2
y  1
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
3
x  1
x  1
y  0
x  3
x  4
y  3
x
y
15
20
10
15
5
5
10
8
10
2
4
6
8
2
4
6
x
5
3
1
4
2
4
3
y
3
2
1
x  1
x  2
y  1
2
	 53.	
54.	
55.	 Drug Concentration  The concentration C of a certain drug 
in a patient’s bloodstream t hours after injection is given by
C1t2 =
t
2t2 + 1 
(a)	 Find the horizontal asymptote of C1t2. What  
happens to the concentration of the drug as t increases?
(b)	 Using your graphing utility, graph C = C1t2.
(c)	 Determine the time at which the concentration is  
highest. 
	 56.	 Drug Concentration  The concentration C of a certain drug 
in a patient’s bloodstream t minutes after injection is given by
C1t2 =
50t
t2 + 25 
(a)	 Find the horizontal asymptote of C1t2. What happens 
to the concentration of the drug as t increases?
(b)	 Using your graphing utility, graph C = C1t2.
(c)	 Determine the time at which the concentration is  
highest. 
	 57.	 Minimum Cost    A rectangular area adjacent to a river is 
to be fenced in; no fence is needed on the river side. The  
enclosed area is to be 1000 square feet. Fencing for the side 
parallel to the river is $5 per linear foot, and fencing for  
the other two sides is $8 per linear foot; the four corner posts  
are $25 apiece. Let x be the length of one of the sides  
perpendicular to the river. 
(a)	 Write a function C1x2 that describes the cost of the project.
(b)	 What is the domain of C? 
(c)	 Use a graphing utility to graph C = C1x2.
(d)	 Find the dimensions of the cheapest enclosure. 
Source: http://dl.uncw.edu/digilib/mathematics/algebra/mat111hb/ 
pandr/rational/rational.html
	 58.	 Doppler Effect  The Doppler effect (named after Christian 
Doppler) is the change in the pitch (frequency) of the sound 
from a source (s) as heard by an observer (o) when one or 
both are in motion. If we assume both the source and the  
observer are moving in the same direction, the relationship is
f′ = faav - vo
v - vs
b
	
	 where   
f′ =  perceived pitch by the observer
fa =  actual pitch of the source
v =  speed of sound in air (assume 772.4 mph)
vo =  speed of the observer
vs =  speed of the source
	
	 Suppose that you are traveling down the road at 45 mph 
and you hear an ambulance (with siren) coming toward you 
from the rear. The actual pitch of the siren is 600 hertz (Hz).
(a)	 Write a function f′(vs) that describes this scenario.
(b)	 If f′ = 620 Hz, find the speed of the ambulance. 
(c)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the function. 
(d)	 Verify your answer from part (b).
Source: www.acs.psu.edu/drussell/ 
Applications and Extensions

Section 4.3  The Graph of a Rational Function  247
	 59.	 Minimizing Surface Area  United Parcel Service has  
contracted you to design a closed box with a square base 
that has a volume of 10,000 cubic inches. See the illustration.
(a)	 Express the surface area S of the box  
as a function of x. 
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, graph the  
function found in part (a). 
(c)	 What is the minimum amount of  
cardboard that can be used to construct 
the box? 
(d)	 What are the dimensions of the box that minimize the 
surface area? 
(e)	 Why might UPS be interested in designing a box that 
minimizes the surface area?
	 60.	 Minimizing Surface Area  United Parcel 
Service has contracted you to design an open 
box with a square base that has a volume of 
5000 cubic inches. See the illustration.
(a)	 Express the surface area S of the box as 
a function of x. 
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, graph the function found in part (a).
(c)	 What is the minimum amount of cardboard that can be 
used to construct the box? 
(d)	 What are the dimensions of the box that minimize the 
surface area? 
(e)	 Why might UPS be interested in designing a box that 
minimizes the surface area?
	 61.	 Cost of a Can  A can in the shape of a right circular cylinder is 
required to have a volume of 500 cubic centimeters. The top 
x
x
y
x
x
y
and bottom are made of material that costs 6¢ per square 
centimeter, while the sides are made of material that costs 
4¢ per square centimeter. 
(a)	 Express the total cost C of the material as a function of 
the radius r of the cylinder. (Refer to Figure 39.) 
(b)	 Graph C = C1r2. For what value of r is the cost C a 
minimum? 
	 62.	 Material Needed to Make a Drum  A steel drum in the shape 
of a right circular cylinder is required to have a volume of  
100 cubic feet. 
(a)	 Express the amount A of material required to make the 
drum as a function of the radius r of the cylinder.
(b)	 How much material is required if the drum’s radius  
is 3 feet? 
(c)	 How much material is required if the drum’s radius  
is 4 feet? 
(d)	 How much material is required if the drum’s radius  
is 5 feet? 
(e)	 Graph A = A(r). For what value of r is A smallest?
Discussion and Writing
	 63.	 Graph each of the following functions:
 y = x2 - 1
x - 1   y = x3 - 1
x - 1
 y = x4 - 1
x - 1    y = x5 - 1
x - 1
	
	 Is x = 1 a vertical asymptote? Why not? What is happening for
	
	 x = 1? What do you conjecture about y = xn - 1
x - 1 , n Ú 1 
an integer, for x = 1?
	 64.	 Graph each of the following functions:
y =
x2
x - 1 y =
x4
x - 1 y =
x6
x - 1 y =
x8
x - 1
	
	 What similarities do you see? What differences?
	 65.	 Write a few paragraphs that provide a general strategy for 
graphing a rational function. Be sure to mention the following: 
proper, improper, intercepts, and asymptotes.
	 66.	 Create a rational function that has the following  
characteristics: crosses the x-axis at 2; touches the x-axis 
at - 1; one vertical asymptote at x = -5 and another at 
x = 6; and one horizontal asymptote, y = 3. Compare 
your function to a fellow classmate’s. How do they differ? 
What are their similarities?
	 67.	 Create a rational function that has the following characteristics: 
crosses the x-axis at 3; touches the x-axis at -2; one vertical  
asymptote, x = 1; and one horizontal asymptote, y = 2. 
Give your rational function to a fellow classmate and ask 
for a written critique of your rational function.
	 68.	 Create a rational function with the following characteristics: 
three real zeros, one of multiplicity 2; y-intercept 1; vertical  
asymptotes, x = - 2 and x = 3; oblique asymptote, 
y = 2x + 1. Is this rational function unique? Compare your 
function with those of other students. What will be the same 
as everyone else’s? Add some more characteristics, such as 
symmetry or naming the real zeros. How does this modify 
the rational function?
	 69.	 Explain the circumstances under which the graph of a  
rational function will have a hole.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 70–73 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 70.	 Find the vertex of the graph of f1x2 = 3x2 - 12x + 7. 
	 71.	 Find the function whose graph is the same as the graph of y = 0 x0  
but shifted down 4 units. 
	 72.	 Find the maximum value of f1x2 = - 2
3
 x2 + 6x - 5. 
	 73.	 Find g (3) where g1x2 = b3x2 - 7x
if x 6 0
5x - 9
if x Ú 0.
 

248 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 ¢0, 1
4≤, 11, 02, 1- 1, 02
Solve Polynomial Inequalities
In this section we solve inequalities that involve polynomials of degree 3 and higher, 
along with inequalities that involve rational functions. To help understand the  
algebraic procedure for solving such inequalities, we use the information obtained 
in the previous three sections about the graphs of polynomial and rational functions. 
The approach follows the same methodology that we used to solve inequalities 
involving quadratic functions.
Solving a Polynomial Inequality Using Its Graph
Solve 1x + 32 1x - 122 7 0 by graphing f1x2 = 1x + 32 1x - 122.
Graph f1x2 = 1x + 32 1x - 122 and determine the intervals of x for which the 
graph is above the x-axis. These values of x result in f1x2 being positive. Using  
Steps 1 through 5 on page 215, we obtain the graph shown in Figure 41.
1
Example 1
Solution
4.4	 Polynomial and Rational Inequalities
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Solving Inequalities (Appendix A, Section A.9,  
pp. 1019–1022)
•	 Solving Quadratic Inequalities (Section 3.5,  
pp. 192–193)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 252.
	
Objectives	 1  Solve Polynomial Inequalities  (p. 248)
	
	 	2  Solve Rational Inequalities  (p. 250)
Figure 41  f (x) = (x + 3)(x - 1)2
6
x
y
22
24
2
3
3
6
9
12
4
(23, 0)
(22, 9)
(1, 0)
End behavior
y = x3
End behavior
y = x3
From the graph, we can see that f1x2 7 0 for -3 6 x 6 1 or x 7 1. The solution 
set is 5x -3 6 x 6 1 or x 7 16 or, using interval notation, 1-3, 12 h 11, q 2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
The results of Example 1 lead to the following approach to solving polynomial 
and rational inequalities algebraically. Suppose that the polynomial or rational  
inequality is in one of the forms
f1x2 6 0  f1x2 7 0  f1x2 … 0  f1x2 Ú 0
•

Section 4.4  Polynomial and Rational Inequalities  249
Locate the zeros of f if f is a polynomial function, and locate the zeros of the  
numerator and the denominator if f is a rational function. If we use these zeros to 
divide the real number line into intervals, we know that on each interval, the graph 
of f is either above the x-axis 3f1x2 7 04 or below the x-axis 3f1x2 6 04. This will 
enable us to identify the solution of the inequality.
How to Solve a Polynomial Inequality Algebraically
Solve the inequality x4 7 x algebraically, and graph the solution set.
Example 2
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Write the inequality so  
that a polynomial expression f is  
on the left side and zero is on the 
right side.
Rearrange the inequality so that 0 is on the right side.
 x4 7 x
 x4 - x 7 0 
Subtract x from both sides of the inequality.
This inequality is equivalent to the one we wish to solve.
Step 2:  Determine the real zeros 
(x-intercepts of the graph) of f.
Find the real zeros of f1x2 = x4 - x by solving x4 - x = 0.
 x4 - x = 0
 x1x3 - 12 = 0 
Factor out x.
 x1x - 12 1x2 + x + 12 = 0 
Factor the difference of two cubes.
x = 0 or  x - 1 = 0 or x2 + x + 1 = 0 
Set each factor equal to zero and solve.
x = 0 or       x = 1
The equation x2 + x + 1 = 0 has no real solutions. Do you see why?
Step 3:  Use the zeros found in 
Step 2 to divide the real number line 
into intervals.
Use the real zeros to separate the real number line into three intervals:
1 - q, 02  10, 12  11, q 2
Step 4:  Select a number in each 
interval, evaluate f at the number, 
and determine whether f (x) is  
positive or negative. If f (x) is positive, 
all values of f in the interval are  
positive. If f (x) is negative, all values 
of f  in the interval are negative.
Select a test number in each interval found in Step 3 and evaluate f1x2 = x4 - x at 
each number to determine whether f1x2 is positive or negative. See Table 14.
Note  If the inequality is not strict (that 
is, if it is … or Ú), include the solutions of 
f (x) = 0 in the solution set.	
■
Since we want to know where f1x2 is positive, conclude that f1x2 7 0 for all  
numbers x for which x 6 0 or x 7 1. Because the original inequality is strict, numbers x 
that satisfy the equation x4 = x are not solutions. The solution set of the inequality 
x4 7 x is {x x 6 0 or x 7 1} or, using interval notation, 1 - q, 02 h 11, q 2.
Figure 42 shows the graph of the solution set.
The Role of Multiplicity in Solving Polynomial Inequalities
In Example 2, we used the number -1 and found that f1x2  is positive for all x 6 0. 
Because the “cut point” of 0 is the result of a zero of odd multiplicity (x is a factor to 
the first power), we know that the sign of f1x2  will change on either side of 0, so for 
•
Figure 42 
–2–1 0 1 2
x
 
 
Interval
(- q, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, q)
Number chosen
-1
1
2
2
Value of f
f (-1) = 2
f a 1
2b = - 7
16
f (2) = 14
Conclusion
Positive
Negative
Positive
Table 14
1
0
x

250 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
0 6 x 6 1, f1x2  will be negative. Similarly, we know that f1x2  will be positive 
for x 7 1, since the multiplicity of the zero 1 is odd. Therefore, the solution set of 
x4 7 x is {x x 6 0 or x 7 16 or, using interval notation, 1 - q, 02 h 11, q 2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Solve Rational Inequalities
Just as we presented a graphical approach to help us understand the algebraic 
procedure for solving inequalities involving polynomials, we present a graphical 
approach to help us understand the algebraic procedure for solving inequalities 
involving rational expressions.
Solving a Rational Inequality Using Its Graph
Solve x - 1
x2 - 4 Ú 0 by graphing R1x2 = x - 1
x2 - 4.
Graph R1x2 = x - 1
x2 - 4 and determine the intervals of x such that the graph is above 
or on the x-axis. These values of x result in R1x2 being positive or zero. We graphed 
R1x2 = x - 1
x2 - 4 in Example 1, Section 4.3 (pp. 233–235). We reproduce the graph in  
Figure 43.
2
Example 3
Solution
Figure 43  R1x2 = x - 1
x2 - 4
x
3
3
y
3
3
(1, 0)
0,
x  2
x  2
1–4
(
3–2(
)
(3, 0.8)

(3, 0.4)
y  0
)
,
2–7
From the graph, we can see that R1x2 Ú 0 for -2 6 x … 1 or x 7 2. The solution 
set is 5x -2 6 x … 1 or x 7 26 or, using interval notation, 1 -2, 14 h 12, q 2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
To solve a rational inequality algebraically, we follow the same approach that 
we used to solve a polynomial inequality algebraically. However, we must also 
identify the zeros of the denominator of the rational function, because the sign of 
a rational function may change on either side of a vertical asymptote. Convince  
yourself of this by looking at Figure 43. Notice that the function values are negative 
for x 6 -2 and are positive for x 7 -2 (but less than 1).
How to Solve a Rational Inequality Algebraically
Solve the inequality 3x2 + 13x + 9
1x + 222
… 3 algebraically, and graph the solution set.
•
Example 4

Section 4.4  Polynomial and Rational Inequalities  251
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Write the inequality so that 
a rational expression f is on the left 
side and zero is on the right side.
Rearrange the inequality so that 0 is on the right side.
3x2 + 13x + 9
1x + 222
… 3
3x2 + 13x + 9
x2 + 4x + 4
- 3 … 0 
Subtract 3 from both sides of the inequality;
3x2 + 13x + 9
x2 + 4x + 4
- 3 #  x2 + 4x + 4
x2 + 4x + 4 … 0 
Multiply 3 by x2 + 4x + 4
x2 + 4x + 4.
3x2 + 13x + 9 - 3x2 - 12x - 12
x2 + 4x + 4
… 0 
Write as a single quotient.
x - 3
1x + 222 … 0 
Combine like terms.
Expand (x + 2)2
Step 2:  Determine the real zeros 
(x-intercepts of the graph) of f and 
the real numbers for which f is  
undefined.
The zero of f1x2 =
x - 3
1x + 222  is 3. Also, f is undefined for x = -2.
Step 3:  Use the zeros and undefined 
values found in Step 2 to divide the 
real number line into intervals.
Use the zero and the undefined value to separate the real number line into three  
intervals:
1 - q, -22 1 -2, 32 13, q 2
Step 4:  Select a number in each 
interval, evaluate f at the number, 
and determine whether f  (x) is positive 
or negative. If f  (x) is positive, all  
values of f in the interval are positive. 
If f  (x) is negative, all values of f in 
the interval are negative.
Select a test number in each interval from Step 3, and evaluate f at each number to 
determine whether f1x2 is positive or negative. See Table 15.
 
Interval
(- q, -2)
(-2, 3)
(3, q)
Number chosen
-3
0
4
Value of f
f(-3) = -6
f (0) = - 3
4
f (4) = 1
36
Conclusion
Negative
Negative
Positive
Table 15
Note  If the inequality is not strict 
(… or Ú), include the solutions of  
f(x) = 0 in the solution set.	
■
Since we want to know where f(x) is negative or zero, we conclude that 
f (x) … 0 for all numbers for which x 6 -2 or -2 6 x … 3. Notice that we do not  
include -2 in the solution because -2 is not in the domain of f. The solution set of the 
inequality 3x2 + 13x + 9
1x + 222
… 3 is {x x 6 -2 or -2 6 x … 3} or, using interval
notation, 1 - q, -22 h 1 -2, 3]. Figure 44 shows the graph of the solution set.
The Role of Multiplicity in Solving Rational Inequalities
In Example 4, we used the number -3 and found that f1x2  is negative for all x 6 -2. 
Because the “cut point” of -2 is the result of a zero of even multiplicity, we know 
the sign of f1x2  will not change on either side of -2, so for -2 6 x 6 3, f1x2 will also 
be negative. Because the “cut point” of 3 is the result of a zero of odd multiplicity,  
the sign of f1x2  will change on either side of 3, so for x 7 3, f1x2  will be positive.
Therefore, the solution set of 3x2 + 13x + 9
1x + 222
… 3 is {x x 6 -2 or -2 6 x … 3} or, 
using interval notation, 1 - q, -22 h 1 -2, 3].
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 3  a n d  3 9
•
Figure 44 
4
2
6
0
2
4
6 x
3
−2
x

252 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Summary
Steps for Solving Polynomial and Rational Inequalities Algebraically
Step 1:  Write the inequality so that a polynomial or rational expression f is on the left side and zero is on the right 
side in one of the following forms:
f1x2 7 0  f1x2 Ú 0  f1x2 6 0  f1x2 … 0
For rational expressions, be sure that the left side is written as a single quotient, and find the domain of f.
Step 2:  Determine the real numbers at which the expression f equals zero and, if the expression is rational, the 
real numbers at which the expression f is undefined.
Step 3:  Use the numbers found in Step 2 to separate the real number line into intervals.
Step 4:  Select a number in each interval and evaluate f at the number.
(a)  If the value of f is positive, then f1x2 7 0 for all numbers x in the interval.
(b)  If the value of f is negative, then f1x2 6 0 for all numbers x in the interval.
If the inequality is not strict 1 Ú or … 2, include the solutions of f1x2 = 0 that are in the domain of f in the 
solution set. Be careful to exclude values of x where f is undefined.
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Solve the inequality 3 - 4x 7 5. Graph the solution set. 
(pp. 1019–1022)
	 2.	 Solve the inequality x2 - 5x … 24. Graph the solution set. 
(pp. 192–193)
	 3.	 Which of the following could be a test number for the interval 
- 2 6 x 6 5?
(a)	 - 3  (b)  - 2  (c)  4  (d)  7 
	 4.	 True or False  The graph of f1x2 =
x
x - 3 is above the x-axis
	
	 for x 6 0 or x 7 3, so the solution set of the inequality
	
	
x
x - 3 Ú 0 is 5xx … 0 or x Ú 36. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
4.4  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 5–8, use the graph of the function f to solve the inequality.
	 6.	 (a)	 f1x2 7 0 
(b)	 f1x2 … 0 
x
y
2
1
0
	 5.	 (a)	 f1x2 6 0 
(b)	 f1x2 Ú 0 
x
y
3
2
2
1
–1
–2
1
–1
–2
	 8.	 (a)	 f1x2 6 0                 
(b)	 f1x2 Ú 0                 
x
y
3
3
3
3
x  1
x  1
y  0
	 7.	 (a)	 f1x2 7 0 
(b)	 f1x2 … 0 
x
5
3
1
4
2
4
3
y
3
2
1
x  1
x  2
y  1
2

Section 4.4  Polynomial and Rational Inequalities  253
In Problems 9–14, solve the inequality by using the graph of the function.
[Hint: The graphs were drawn in Problems 81–86 of Section 4.1.]
	 9.	 Solve f1x2 6 0, where f1x2 = x21x - 32. 
	 10.	 Solve f1x2 … 0, where f1x2 = x1x + 222. 
	 12.	 Solve f1x2 Ú 0, where  f1x2 = 1x + 42211 - x2. 
	 11.	 Solve f1x2 7 0, where f1x2 = 1x - 12 1x + 322. 
	 14.	 Solve f1x2 … 0, where f1x2 = - 21x + 22 1x - 223.
	 13.	 Solve f1x2 6 0, where f1x2 = - 1
21x + 42 1x - 123.
	18.	 Solve R1x2 … 0, where R1x2 = 3x + 3
2x + 4. 
	 17.	 Solve R1x2 Ú 0, where R1x2 = 2x + 4
x - 1 .
	 15.	 Solve R1x2 7 0, where R1x2 =
x + 1
x1x + 42 .
	 16.	 Solve R1x2 6 0, where R1x2 =
x
1x - 12 1x + 22 .
In Problems 15–18, solve the inequality by using the graph of the function.
[Hint: The graphs were drawn in Problems 7–10 of Section 4.3.]
In Problems 19–48, solve each inequality algebraically.
	 20.	 1x - 5221x + 22 6 0 
	 19.	 1x - 52 1x + 222 7 0 
	 21.	  x3 - 4x2 7 0 
	 22.	 x3 + 8x2 6 0 
	 24.	 2x3 7 -8x2 
	 23.	 3x3 6 -15x2 
	 26.	 1x - 12 1x - 22 1x - 32 … 0
	 25.	 1x + 12 1x + 22 1x + 32 … 0
	 28.	 x3 - 2x2 - 3x 7 0
	 27.	 x3 + 2x2 - 3x 7 0 
	 30.	 x4 7 x2 
	 29.	 x4 6 9x2 
	 32.	 x4 7 1 
	 31.	 x3 7 1 
	 33.	  x + 1
x - 1 7 0 
	 34.	 x - 3
x + 1 7 0 
	 35.	
1x - 32 1x + 22
x - 1
… 0
	 36.	
1x - 12 1x + 12
x
… 0
	 38.	
1x - 222
x2 - 1
Ú 0 
	 37.	
1x + 522
x2 - 4
Ú 0 
	 39.	  x + 4
x - 2 … 1 
	 40.	 x + 2
x - 4 Ú 1 
	 42.	 3x - 5
x + 2 … 2 
	 41.	 x - 4
2x + 4 Ú 1 
	 44.	
1
x - 2 6
2
3x - 9 
	 43.	
5
x - 3 7
3
x + 1 
	 46.	
x213 + x2 1x + 42
1x + 52 1x - 12
Ú 0
	 45.	
x1x2 + 12 1x - 22
1x - 12 1x + 12
Ú 0
	 48.	
13 - x2312x + 12
x3 - 1
6 0
	 47.	
12 - x2313x - 22
x3 + 1
6 0
In Problems 49–60, solve each inequality algebraically.
	 49.	 1x + 12 1x - 32 1x - 52 7 0
	 50.	 12x - 12 1x + 22 1x + 52 6 0
	 51.	 7x - 4 Ú - 2x2
	 52.	 x2 + 3x Ú 10 
	 53.	 x + 1
x - 3 … 2 
	 54.	 x - 1
x + 2 Ú - 2 
	 55.	 31x2 - 22 6 21x - 122 + x2 
	 56.	 1x - 32 1x + 22 6 x2 + 3x + 5
	 57.	 6x - 5 6 6
x 
	 58.	 x + 12
x 6 7 
	 59.	 x3 - 9x … 0 
	 60.	 x3 - x Ú 0 
Mixed Practice
In Problems 61–64, (a) graph each function by hand, and (b) solve f1x2 Ú 0.
	 61.	 f1x2 = x2 + 5x - 6
x2 - 4x + 4
	 62.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 9x + 9
x2 - 4
	 63.	 f1x2 = x3 + 2x2 - 11x - 12
x2 - x - 6
	 64.	 f1x2 = x3 - 6x2 + 9x - 4
x2 + x - 20

254 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
	 65.	 For what positive numbers will the cube of a number exceed 
four times its square? 
	 66.	 For what positive numbers will the cube of a number be less 
than the number? 
	 67.	 What is the domain of the function f1x2 = 2x4 - 16?
	 68.	 What is the domain of the function f1x2 = 2x3 - 3x2?
	 69.	 What is the domain of the function g1x2 = A
x - 8
x - 5?
	 70.	 What is the domain of the function f1x2 = A
x - 1
x + 4?
In Problems 71–74, determine where the graph of f is below the graph 
of g by solving the inequality f1x2 … g1x2. Graph f and g together.
jumper (in pounds), K = cord’s stiffness (in pounds per foot),  
L = free length of cord (in feet), and S = stretch (feet). 
(a)	 A 150-pound person plans to jump off a ledge attached 
to a cord of length 35 feet. If the stiffness of the cord is 
no less than 19 pounds per foot, how much will the cord 
stretch? 
(b)	 If safety requirements will not permit the jumper to get 
any closer than 3 feet to the ground, what is the mini-
mum height required for the ledge in part (a)?
	 78.	 Gravitational Force    According to Newton’s Law of  
Universal Gravitation, the attractive force F between two 
bodies is given by
F = G m1m2
r 2
	
	 where   m1, m2 = the masses of the two bodies
 r =  distance between the two bodies
 G =  gravitational constant = 6.6742 * 10-11 
newtons #  meter2 #  kilogram-2
	
	 Suppose an object is traveling directly from Earth to the 
moon. The mass of Earth is 5.9742 * 1024 kilograms, the 
mass of the moon is 7.349 * 1022 kilograms, and the mean 
distance from Earth to the moon is 384,400 kilometers. For 
an object between Earth and the moon, how far from Earth 
is the force on the object due to the moon greater than the 
force on the object due to Earth? 
Source: www.solarviews.com;en.wikipedia.org
	 79.	  Field Trip  A teacher has decided to take her fifth grade 
class to a play. The manager of the theater agreed to discount 
the regular $41 price of the ticket by $0.40 for each ticket 
sold. The cost of the bus, $360, will be split equally among 
each of the students. How many students must attend to keep 
the cost per student at or below $41? 
Applications and Extensions
	 71.	 f1x2 = x4 - 1
	
	 g1x2 = - 2x2 + 2
	 72.	 f1x2 = x4 - 1
	
	 g1x2 = x - 1
	 73.	 f1x2 = x4 - 4
	
	 g1x2 = 3x2
	 74.	 f1x2 = x4
	
	 g1x2 = 2 - x2
	 75.	 Average Cost  Suppose the daily cost C of manufacturing 
bicycles is given by C1x2 = 60x + 5100. Now the aver-
age daily cost is given by C1x2 = 60x + 5100
x
. How many 
bicycles must be produced each day in order for the aver-
age cost to be no more than $120? 
	 76.	 Average Cost  See Problem 75. Suppose that the government 
imposes a $1000-per-day tax on the bicycle manufacturer so 
that the daily cost C of manufacturing x bicycles is now given 
by C1x2 = 80x + 6000. Now the average daily cost C is
	
	 given by C1x2 = 80x + 6000
x
. How many bicycles must be 
	
	 produced each day for the average cost to be no more than 
$100? 
	 77.	 Bungee Jumping  In bungee jumping, a bungee jump is the 
amount the cord will stretch at the bottom of the fall. The 
stiffness of the cord is related to the amount of stretch by  
the equation K =
2W1S + L2
S2
 , where W = weight of 
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 80.	 Make up an inequality that has no solution. Make up one 
that has exactly one solution.
	 81.	 The inequality x4 + 1 6 - 5 has no solution. Explain why.
	 82.	 A student attempted to solve the inequality x + 4
x - 3 … 0 by
	
	 multiplying both sides of the inequality by x - 3 to 
get x + 4 … 0. This led to a solution of 5xx … - 46. 
Is the student correct? Explain.
	 83.	 Write a rational inequality whose solution set is 
{x - 3 6 x … 5}.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 84–87 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 84.	 List the intercepts of 16x + 9y2 = 144. 
	 85.	 Given f1x2 = x2 + 3x - 2, find f1x - 22. 
	 86.	 Find the domain of f1x2 = 3. 
	 87.	 Approximate the turning points of f1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + 4. 
Round the answer to two decimal places.

Section 4.5  The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  255
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 ex ` x 6 - 1
2 f or a- q, - 1
2b	
2.  {x - 3 … x … 8} or [- 3, 8]
1
2
0
1
1–2
–3
0
8
4.5	 The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
Preparing for this section   Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Evaluating Functions (Section 2.1, pp. 82–84)
•	 Factoring Polynomials (Appendix A, Section A.3,  
pp. 971–972)
•	 Synthetic Division (Appendix A, Section A.4,  
pp. 975–978)
•	 Polynomial Division (Appendix A, Section A.3,  
pp. 969–971)
•	 Solve a Quadratic Equation (Appendix A, Section A.6,  
pp. 990–994)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 266.
	
Objectives	 1  Use the Remainder and Factor Theorems  (p. 255)
	
	 	2  Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to Determine the Number of Positive and 
the Number of Negative Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  (p. 258)
	
	 	3  Use the Rational Zeros Theorem to List the Potential Rational Zeros of a 
Polynomial Function  (p. 259)
	
	 	4  Find the Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  (p. 260)
	
	 	5  Solve Polynomial Equations  (p. 262)
	
	 	6  Use the Theorem for Bounds on Zeros  (p. 263)
	
	 	7  Use the Intermediate Value Theorem  (p. 264)
In Section 4.1, we were able to identify the real zeros of a polynomial function  
because either the polynomial function was in factored form or it could be easily 
factored. But how do we find the real zeros of a polynomial function if it is not  
factored or cannot be easily factored?
Recall that if r is a real zero of a polynomial function f, then f1r2 = 0, r is an 
x-intercept of the graph of f, x - r is a factor of f, and r is a solution of the equation 
f1x2 = 0. For example, if x - 4 is a factor of f, then 4 is a real zero of f and 4 is 
a solution to the equation f1x2 = 0. For polynomial functions, we have seen the  
importance of the real zeros for graphing. In most cases, however, the real zeros of a 
polynomial function are difficult to find using algebraic methods. No nice formulas  
like the quadratic formula are available to help us find zeros for polynomials of  
degree 3 or higher. Formulas do exist for solving any third- or fourth-degree polynomial  
equation, but they are somewhat complicated. No general formulas exist for  
polynomial equations of degree 5 or higher. Refer to the Historical Feature at the 
end of this section for more information.
Use the Remainder and Factor Theorems
When one polynomial (the dividend) is divided by another (the divisor), a quotient 
polynomial and a remainder are obtained, the remainder being either the zero 
polynomial or a polynomial whose degree is less than the degree of the divisor. To 
check, verify that
1Quotient2 1Divisor2 + Remainder = Dividend
This checking routine is the basis for a famous theorem called the division  
algorithm* for polynomials, which we now state without proof.
1
*A systematic process in which certain steps are repeated a finite number of times is called an algorithm. 
For example, long division is an algorithm.

256 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
In equation (1), f1x2 is the dividend, g1x2 is the divisor, q1x2 is the quotient, 
and r1x2 is the remainder.
If the divisor g1x2 is a first-degree polynomial of the form
g1x2 = x - c  c a real number
then the remainder r1x2 is either the zero polynomial or a polynomial of degree 0. 
As a result, for such divisors, the remainder is some number, say R, and we may write
	
f1x2 = 1x - c2q1x2 + R	
(2)
This equation is an identity in x and is true for all real numbers x. Suppose that 
x = c. Then equation (2) becomes
f1c2 = 1c - c2q1c2 + R
f1c2 = R
Substitute f1c2 for R in equation (2) to obtain
	
f1x2 = 1x - c2q1x2 + f1c2	
(3)
which proves the Remainder Theorem.
Division Algorithm for Polynomials
If f1x2 and g1x2 denote polynomial functions and if g1x2 is a polynomial 
whose degree is greater than zero, then there are unique polynomial functions 
q1x2 and r1x2 such that
	
f1x2
g1x2 = q1x2 + r1x2
g1x2 or f1x2 = q1x2g1x2 + r1x2	
(1)
	
c	
c	
c	
c
	
dividend	
quotient	
divisor	 remainder
where r1x2 is either the zero polynomial or a polynomial of degree less than 
that of g1x2.
Theorem
Let f be a polynomial function. If f1x2 is divided by x - c, then the remainder 
is f1c2.
Remainder Theorem
Using the Remainder Theorem
Find the remainder when f1x2 = x3 - 4x2 - 5 is divided by
(a)	 x - 3	
(b)  x + 2
(a)	 Either long division or synthetic division could be used, but it is easier to use the 
Remainder Theorem, which says that the remainder is f132.
f132 = 1323 - 41322 - 5 = 27 - 36 - 5 = -14
	
The remainder is -14.
(b)	 To find the remainder when f1x2 is divided by x + 2 = x - (-2), find f(-2).
f1 -22 = 1 -223 - 41 -222 - 5 = -8 - 16 - 5 = -29
	
The remainder is -29.
Compare the method used in Example 1(a) with the method used in Example 1 of 
Appendix A, Section A.4. Which method do you prefer?
Example 1
Solution
•

Section 4.5  The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  257
An important and useful consequence of the Remainder Theorem is the Factor 
Theorem.
Comment  A graphing utility provides another way to find the value of a function using the eVALUEate 
feature. Consult your manual for details. Then check the results of Example 1.	
■
Let f be a polynomial function. Then x - c is a factor of f1x2 if and only if 
f1c2 = 0.
Factor Theorem
The Factor Theorem actually consists of two separate statements:
	 1.	 If f1c2 = 0, then x - c is a factor of f1x2.
	 2.	 If x - c is a factor of f1x2, then f1c2 = 0.
The proof requires two parts.
Proof 
	 1.	 Suppose that f1c2 = 0. Then, by equation (3), we have
f1x2 = 1x - c2q1x2
	
	 for some polynomial q1x2. That is, x - c is a factor of f1x2.
	 2.	 Suppose that x - c is a factor of f1x2. Then there is a polynomial function q 
such that
f1x2 = 1x - c2q1x2
	
	 Replacing x by c, we find that
f1c2 = 1c - c2q1c2 = 0 # q1c2 = 0
	
	 This completes the proof.	
■
One use of the Factor Theorem is to determine whether a polynomial has a 
particular factor.
Using the Factor Theorem
Use the Factor Theorem to determine whether the function
f1x2 = 2x3 - x2 + 2x - 3
has the factor
(a)	 x - 1	
(b)  x + 2
The Factor Theorem states that if f1c2 = 0, then x - c is a factor.
(a)	 Because x - 1 is of the form x - c with c = 1, find the value of f112. We choose 
to use substitution.
f112 = 21123 - 1122 + 2112 - 3 = 2 - 1 + 2 - 3 = 0
	
By the Factor Theorem, x - 1 is a factor of f1x2.
(b)	 To test the factor x + 2, first write it in the form x - c. Since x + 2 = x - 1 -22, 
find the value of f1 -22. We choose to use synthetic division.
-2)2 - 1 2 -3
 -4 10 -24
2 -5 12 -27
Example 2
Solution

258 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
	
Because f1 -22 = -27 ≠0, conclude from the Factor Theorem that 
x - 1 -22 = x + 2 is not a factor of f1x2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
In Example 2(a),  x - 1 was found to be a factor of f. To write f in factored  
form, use long division or synthetic division.
1)2 -1 2 -3
 
2 1 
3
2 
1 3 
0
The quotient is q1x2 = 2x2 + x + 3 with a remainder of 0, as expected. Write f in 
factored form as
f1x2 = 2x3 - x2 + 2x - 3 = 1x - 12 12x2 + x + 32
The next theorem concerns the number of real zeros that a polynomial function 
may have. In counting the zeros of a polynomial, count each zero as many times as 
its multiplicity.
•
Number of Real Zeros
A polynomial function cannot have more real zeros than its degree.
Theorem
Descartes’ Rule of Signs
Let f denote a polynomial function written in standard form.
The number of positive real zeros of f either equals the number of variations 
in the sign of the nonzero coefficients of f1x2 or else equals that number less 
an even integer.
The number of negative real zeros of f either equals the number of variations 
in the sign of the nonzero coefficients of f1 -x2 or else equals that number less 
an even integer.
Theorem
Proof  The proof is based on the Factor Theorem. If r is a real zero of a polynomial  
function f, then f1r2 = 0, and x - r is a factor of f1x2. Each real zero corresponds 
to a factor of degree 1. Because f cannot have more first-degree factors than its  
degree, the result follows.	
■
Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to Determine the Number  
of Positive and the Number of Negative Real Zeros  
of a Polynomial Function
Descartes’ Rule of Signs provides information about the number and location of the 
real zeros of a polynomial function written in standard form (omitting terms with a  
0 coefficient). It utilizes the number of variations in the sign of the coefficients of 
f1x2 and f1 -x2.
For example, the following polynomial function has two variations in the signs 
of the coefficients.
 f1x2 = -3x7 + 4x4 + 3x2 - 2x - 1
	
-  to +	
+ to -
Replacing x by -x gives
 f1 -x2 = -31 -x27 + 41 -x24 + 31 -x22 - 21 -x2 - 1
 = 3x7 + 4x4 + 3x2 + 2x - 1
	
+ to -
which has one variation in sign.
2
We shall not prove Descartes’ Rule of Signs. Let’s see how it is used.

Section 4.5  The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  259
Using the Number of Real Zeros Theorem 
and Descartes’ Rule of Signs
Discuss the real zeros of f1x2 = 3x7 - 4x4 + 3x3 + 2x2 - x - 3.
Because the polynomial is of degree 7 , by the Number of Real Zeros Theorem 
there are at most seven real zeros. Since there are three variations in the sign of the  
nonzero coefficients of f1x2, by Descartes’ Rule of Signs we expect either three  
positive real zeros or one positive real zero. To continue, look at f1-x2.
f1 -x2 = -3x7 - 4x4 - 3x3 + 2x2 + x - 3
There are two variations in sign, so we expect either two negative real zeros or no 
negative real zeros. Equivalently, we now know that the graph of f has either three 
positive x-intercepts or one positive x-intercept and two negative x intercepts or no 
negative x-intercepts.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Use the Rational Zeros Theorem to List the Potential Rational 
Zeros of a Polynomial Function
The next result, called the Rational Zeros Theorem, provides information about the 
rational zeros of a polynomial with integer coefficients.
Example 3
Solution
•
3
Rational Zeros Theorem
Let f be a polynomial function of degree 1 or higher of the form
f1x2 = an
 xn + an-1
 xn-1 + g + a1
 x + a0  an ≠0 a0 ≠0
where each coefficient is an integer. If p
q , in lowest terms, is a rational zero  
of f, then p must be a factor of a0, and q must be a factor of an.
Theorem
Listing Potential Rational Zeros
List the potential rational zeros of
f1x2 = 2x3 + 11x2 - 7x - 6
Because f has integer coefficients, the Rational Zeros Theorem may be used. First, 
list all the integers p that are factors of the constant term a0 = -6 and all the  
integers q that are factors of the leading coefficient a3 = 2.
 p: {1, {2, {3, {6 
Factors of - 6
 q: {1, {2	
Factors of 2
Now form all possible ratios p
q.
p
q
 :  {1
1, {2
1, {3
1, {6
1, {1
2, {2
2, {3
2, {6
2
which simplify to
p
q
 :  {1, {2, {3, {6, { 1
2, { 3
2
If f has a rational zero, it will be found in this list, which contains 12 possibilities.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
Example 4
Solution
•
In Words
For the polynomial function 
f (x) = 2x3 + 11x2 - 7x - 6, 
we know 5 is not a zero, because 
5 is not in the list of potential 
rational zeros. However, - 1 may 
or may not be a zero.

260 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Be sure that you understand what the Rational Zeros Theorem says: For a  
polynomial with integer coefficients, if there is a rational zero, it is one of those 
listed. It may be the case that the function does not have any rational zeros.
Long division, synthetic division, or substitution can be used to test each  
potential rational zero to determine whether it is indeed a zero. To make the work 
easier, integers are usually tested first.
Find the Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
How to Find the Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
Find the real zeros of the polynomial function f1x2 = 2x3 + 11x2 - 7x - 6. Write f 
in factored form.
4
Example 5
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Use the degree of the  
polynomial to determine the  
maximum number of zeros. 
Since f is a polynomial of degree 3, there are at most three real zeros.
Step 2:  Use Descartes’ Rule of 
Signs to determine the possible 
number of positive zeros and  
negative zeros. 
By Descartes’ Rule of Signs, there is one positive real zero. Also, because
f1 -x2 = -2x3 + 11x2 + 7x - 6
there are two negative zeros or no negative zeros.
Step 3:  If the polynomial has integer 
coefficients, use the Rational Zeros 
Theorem to identify those rational 
numbers that potentially can be 
zeros. Use the Factor Theorem to 
determine whether each potential 
rational zero is a zero. If it is, use 
synthetic division or long division 
to factor the polynomial function. 
Repeat Step 3 until all the rational 
zeros of the polynomial function 
have been identified. 
List the potential rational zeros obtained in Example 4:
{1, {2, {3, {6, { 1
2, { 3
2
From our list of potential rational zeros, we will test 6 to determine whether it is 
a zero of f. Because f162 = 780 ≠0, we know that 6 is not a zero of f. Now, let’s 
test whether -6 is a zero. Because f1 -62 = 0, we know that -6 is a zero and 
x - 1 -62 = x + 6 is a factor of f. Use long division or synthetic division to factor f. 
(We will not show the division here, but you are encouraged to verify the results 
shown.) After dividing f by x + 6, the quotient is 2x2 - x - 1, so
 f1x2 = 2x3 + 11x2 - 7x - 6
 = (x + 6)(2x2 - x - 1)
Now any solution of the equation 2x2 - x - 1 = 0 will be a zero of f. The equation 
2x2 - x - 1 = 0 is called a depressed equation of f. Because any solution to the 
equation 2x2 - x - 1 = 0 is a zero of f, work with the depressed equation to find 
the remaining zeros of f.
The depressed equation 2x2 - x - 1 = 0 is a quadratic equation with  
discriminant b2 - 4ac = 1 -122 - 4122 1-12 = 9 7 0. The equation has two real  
solutions, which can be found by factoring.
2x2 - x - 1 = 12x + 12 1x - 12 = 0
2x + 1 = 0       or      x - 1 = 0
x = - 1
2     or       
x = 1
The zeros of f are -6, - 1
2, and 1.
Factor f completely as follows:
 f1x2 = 2x3 + 11x2 - 7x - 6 = 1x + 62 12x2 - x - 12
 = 1x + 62 12x + 12 1x - 12
Notice that all three zeros of f are in the list of potential rational zeros. Also note  
that the zeros confirm what was expected from Descartes’ Rule of Signs.
•

Section 4.5  The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  261
Finding the Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
Find the real zeros of f1x2 = x5 - 7x4 + 19x3 - 37x2 + 60x - 36. Write f in 
factored form.
Step 1:  Because f is a polynomial of degree 5, there are at most five real zeros.
Step 2:  By Descartes’ Rule of Signs, there are five, three, or one positive zeros.  
There are no negative zeros because
f1 -x2 = -x5 - 7x4 - 19x3 - 37x2 - 60x - 36
has no sign variation.
Step 3:  Because the leading coefficient a5 = 1 and there are no negative zeros, the 
potential rational zeros are limited to the positive integers 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 12, 18, and 
36 (the positive factors of the constant term, 36). Test the potential rational zero 1 
first, using synthetic division.
1)1 -7 19 -37 60 -36
          1 -6 13 -24   36
1  
-6  13 -24  36  0
The remainder is f112 = 0, so 1 is a zero and x - 1 is a factor of f. Use the entries 
in the bottom row of the synthetic division to begin factoring f.
f1x2 = x5 - 7x4 + 19x3 - 37x2 + 60x - 36
= 1x - 12 1x4 - 6x3 + 13x2 - 24x + 362
Continue the process using the first depressed equation:
q11x2 = x4 - 6x3 + 13x2 - 24x + 36 = 0
Repeat Step 3:  The potential rational zeros of q1 are still 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 12, 18, and 
36. Test 1 again, since it may be a repeated zero of f.
1)1 -6 13 -24  36
     1  -5  8 -16
1  -5  8 -16    20
Since the remainder is 20, 1 is not a repeated zero. Try 2 next.
2)1 -6 13 -24  36
 
2
 
-8
    10 -28
1
 
-4
   
5
 
-14      8
Since the remainder is 8, 2 is not a zero. Try 3 next.
3)1 -6 13 -24  36
      3  -9 12 -36
1  -3   4 -12    0
Example 6
Solution
Summary
Steps for Finding the Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
Step 1:  Use the degree of the polynomial to determine the maximum number of real zeros.
Step 2:  Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to determine the possible number of positive zeros and negative zeros.
Step 3:  (a)  If the polynomial has integer coefficients, use the Rational Zeros Theorem to identify those rational 
numbers that potentially could be zeros.
(b)  Use substitution, synthetic division, or long division to test each potential rational zero. Each time that 
a zero (and thus a factor) is found, repeat Step 3 on the depressed equation.
In attempting to find the zeros, remember to use (if possible) the factoring techniques that you already 
know (special products, factoring by grouping, and so on).

262 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
The remainder is f132 = 0, so 3 is a zero and x - 3 is a factor of f. Use the bottom 
row of the synthetic division to continue the factoring of f.
f1x2 = x5 - 7x4 + 19x3 - 37x2 + 60x - 36
= 1x - 12 1x - 32 1x3 - 3x2 + 4x - 122
The remaining zeros satisfy the new depressed equation
q21x2 = x3 - 3x2 + 4x - 12 = 0
Notice that q21x2 can be factored by grouping. (Alternatively, Step 3 could be  
repeated to again check the potential rational zero 3. The potential rational zeros  
1 or 2 would no longer be checked, because they have already been eliminated from 
further consideration.) Then
x3 - 3x2 + 4x - 12 = 0
x21x - 32 + 41x - 32 = 0
1x2 + 42 1x - 32 = 0
x2 + 4 = 0 or x - 3 = 0
x = 3
Since x2 + 4 = 0 has no real solutions, the real zeros of f are 1 and 3, with 3 being a 
repeated zero of multiplicity 2. The factored form of f is
f1x2 = x5 - 7x4 + 19x3 - 37x2 + 60x - 36
= 1x - 12 1x - 3221x2 + 42
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
Solve Polynomial Equations
Solving a Polynomial Equation
Find the real solutions of the equation: x5 - 7x4 + 19x3 - 37x2 + 60x - 36 = 0
The real solutions of this equation are the real zeros of the polynomial function
f1x2 = x5 - 7x4 + 19x3 - 37x2 + 60x - 36
Using the result of Example 6, the real zeros of f are 1 and 3. The real solutions of the 
equation x5 - 7x4 + 19x3 - 37x2 + 60x - 36 = 0 are 1 and 3.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7
In Example 6, the quadratic factor x2 + 4 that appears in the factored form of f is 
called irreducible, because the polynomial x2 + 4 cannot be factored over the real 
numbers. In general, a quadratic factor ax2 + bx + c is irreducible if it cannot be 
factored over the real numbers—that is, if it is prime over the real numbers.
Refer to Examples 5 and 6. The polynomial function of Example 5 has three 
real zeros, and its factored form contains three linear factors. The polynomial  
function of Example 6 has two distinct real zeros, and its factored form contains two 
distinct linear factors and one irreducible quadratic factor.
•
5
Example 7
Solution
•
Every polynomial function (with real coefficients) can be uniquely factored into 
a product of linear factors and/or irreducible quadratic factors.
Theorem
We prove this result in Section 4.6, and in fact, we shall draw several additional 
conclusions about the zeros of a polynomial function. One conclusion is worth  
noting now. If a polynomial with real coefficients is of odd degree, it must contain at 
least one linear factor. (Do you see why? Consider the end behavior of polynomial 
functions of odd degree.) This means that it must have at least one real zero.

Section 4.5  The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  263
Use the Theorem for Bounds on Zeros
The work involved in finding the zeros of a polynomial function can be reduced 
somewhat if upper and lower bounds to the zeros can be found. A number M is an 
upper bound to the zeros of a polynomial f if no zero of f is greater than M. The 
number m is a lower bound if no zero of f is less than m. Accordingly, if m is a lower 
bound and M is an upper bound to the zeros of a polynomial function f, then
m …  any zero of f … M
For polynomials with integer coefficients, knowing the values of a lower bound m  
and an upper bound M may enable you to eliminate some potential rational  
zeros—that is, any zeros outside of the interval [m, M].
6
A polynomial function (with real coefficients) of odd degree has at least one 
real zero.
Theorem
Comment  The bounds on the zeros 
of a polynomial provide good choices for 
setting Xmin and Xmax of the viewing 
rectangle. With these choices, all the  
x-intercepts of the graph can be seen.	 ■
Bounds on Zeros
Let f denote a polynomial function whose leading coefficient is positive.
•	 If M 7 0 is a real number and if the third row in the process of synthetic 
division of f by x - M contains only numbers that are positive or zero,  
then M is an upper bound to the zeros of f.
•	 If m 6 0 is a real number and if the third row in the process of synthetic 
division of f by x - m contains numbers that alternate positive (or 0) and 
negative (or 0), then m is a lower bound to the zeros of f.
Theorem
Proof (Outline)  We give only an outline of the proof of the first part of the theorem.  
Suppose that M is a positive real number, and the third row in the process of  
synthetic division of the polynomial f by x - M contains only numbers that are 
positive or 0. Then there are a quotient q and a remainder R such that
f1x2 = 1x - M2q1x2 + R
where the coefficients of q1x2 are positive or 0 and the remainder R Ú 0. Then, for 
any x 7 M, we must have x - M 7 0, q1x2 7 0, and R Ú 0, so that f1x2 7 0. 
That is, there is no zero of f larger than M. The proof of the second part follows similar 
reasoning.	
■
In finding bounds, it is preferable to find the smallest upper bound and largest 
lower bound. This will require repeated synthetic division until a desired pattern 
is observed. For simplicity, we will consider only potential rational zeros that are 
integers. If a bound is not found using these values, continue checking positive  
and/or negative integers until you find both an upper and a lower bound.
Finding Upper and Lower Bounds of Zeros
For the polynomial function f1x2 = 2x3 + 11x2 - 7x - 6, use the Bounds on Zeros 
Theorem to find integer upper and lower bounds to the zeros of f.
From Example 4, the potential rational zeros of f are {1, {2, {3, {6, {1
2, {3
2.
To find an upper bound, start with the smallest positive integer that is a potential  
rational zero, which is 1. Continue checking 2, 3, and 6 (and then subsequent positive 
integers), if necessary, until an upper bound is found. To find a lower bound, start with 
the largest negative integer that is a potential rational zero, which is -1. Continue  
checking -2, -3, and -6 (and then subsequent negative integers), if necessary, until 
a lower bound is found. Table 16 summarizes the results of doing repeated synthetic 
Example 8
Solution
Note  When finding a lower bound,  
remember that a 0 can be treated as  
either positive or negative, but not both. 
For example, 3, 0, 5 would be considered  
to alternate sign, whereas 3, 0, - 5 
would not.	
■

264 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
divisions by showing only the third row of each division. For example, the first row 
of the table shows the result of dividing f1x2 by x - 1.
1)2 11 -7 -6
 2  13 
6
2 13  6 
0
Table 16  Synthetic Division Summary
r
Coefficients of q(x)
Remainder
   1
2
  13
      6
       0
-1
2
    9
-16
     10
-2
2
    7
-21
     36
-3
2
    5
-22
     60
-6
2
-1
   -1
        0
-7
2
-3
    14
-104 
Upper 
bound 
All nonnegative
Lower 
bound 
Alternating 
Signs
For r = 1, the third row of synthetic division contains only numbers that are positive 
or 0, so we know there are no zeros greater than 1. Since the third row of synthetic 
division for r = -7 results in alternating positive (or 0) and negative (or 0) values, 
we know that -7 is a lower bound. There are no zeros less than -7. Notice that in 
looking for bounds, two zeros were discovered. These zeros are 1 and -6.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 9
If the leading coefficient of f is negative, the upper and lower bounds can still be 
found by first multiplying the polynomial by -1. Since -f1x2 = 1-12f1x2, the 
zeros of -f1x2 are the same as the zeros of f1x2.
Use the Intermediate Value Theorem
The next result, called the Intermediate Value Theorem, is based on the fact that the 
graph of a polynomial function is continuous; that is, it contains no “holes” or “gaps.” 
Although the proof of this result requires advanced methods in calculus, it is easy to 
“see” why the result is true. Look at Figure 45.
•
7
Note  Keep track of any zeros that are 
found when looking for bounds.	
■
Intermediate Value Theorem
Let f denote a polynomial function. If a 6 b and if f1a2 and f1b2 are of opposite 
sign, there is at least one real zero of f  between a and b.
Theorem
Using the Intermediate Value Theorem to Locate a Real Zero
Show that f1x2 = x5 - x3 - 1 has a zero between 1 and 2.
Evaluate f at 1 and at 2.
f112 = -1 and f122 = 23
Because f112 6 0 and f122 7 0, it follows from the Intermediate Value Theorem 
that the polynomial function f has at least one zero between 1 and 2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 9
Example 9
Solution
•
Figure 45  If f(a) 6 0 and f(b) 7 0,  
and if f is continuous, there is a zero 
between a and b.
x
a
f(a)
f(b)
y
Zero
b
f (a)
f (b)
y 5 f(x)

Section 4.5  The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  265
Let’s look at the polynomial f of Example 9 more closely. Based on Descartes’ Rule 
of Signs, f  has exactly one positive real zero. Based on the Rational Zeros Theorem, 1 is 
the only potential positive rational zero. Since f112 ≠0, the zero between 1 and 2 is 
irrational. The Intermediate Value Theorem can be used to approximate it.
Approximating the Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function
Step 1:  Find two consecutive integers a and a + 1 such that f has a zero 
between them.
Step 2:  Divide the interval 3a, a + 14 into 10 equal subintervals.
Step 3:  Evaluate f at each endpoint of the subintervals until the Intermediate 
Value Theorem applies; this interval then contains a zero.
Step 4:  Now divide the new interval into 10 equal subintervals and repeat Step 3.
Step 5:  Continue with Steps 3 and 4 until the desired accuracy is achieved.
Approximating a Real Zero of a Polynomial Function
Find the positive zero of f1x2 = x5 - x3 - 1 correct to two decimal places.
From Example 9 we know that the positive zero is between 1 and 2. Divide the  
interval 31, 24 into 10 equal subintervals: 31, 1.14, 31.1, 1.24, 31.2, 1.34, 31.3, 1.44, 
31.4, 1.54, 31.5, 1.64, 31.6, 1.74, 31.7, 1.84, 31.8, 1.94, 31.9, 24. Now find the value 
of f at each endpoint until the Intermediate Value Theorem applies.
 f1x2 = x5 - x3 - 1
 f11.02 = -1	
f11.22 = -0.23968
 f11.12 = -0.72049	
f11.32 = 0.51593
We can stop here and conclude that the zero is between 1.2 and 1.3. Now divide 
the interval 31.2, 1.34 into 10 equal subintervals and proceed to evaluate f at each 
endpoint.
f11.202 = -0.23968
 f11.232 ≈-0.0455613
f11.212 ≈-0.1778185  f11.242 ≈0.025001
f11.222 ≈-0.1131398
 
The zero lies between 1.23 and 1.24, and so, correct to two decimal places, the zero 
is 1.23.
Example 10
Solution
•
Exploration
We examine the polynomial function f given in Example 10. The Theorem on Bounds of Zeros tells us 
that every zero is between -1 and 2. If we graph f using -1 … x … 2 (see Figure 46), we see that f 
has exactly one x-intercept. Using ZERO or ROOT, we find this zero to be 1.24 rounded to two decimal 
places. Correct to two decimal places, the zero is 1.23.
Figure 46 
Comment  The 
TABLE 
feature 
of 
a 
graphing 
calculator 
makes 
the  
computations 
in 
the 
solution 
to  
Example 10 a lot easier.	
■
21
24
4
2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 1
There are many other numerical techniques for approximating the zeros of a 
polynomial. The one outlined in Example 10 (a variation of the bisection method) 
has the advantages that it will always work, it can be programmed rather easily on 
a computer, and each time it is used another decimal place of accuracy is achieved. 
See Problem 119 for the bisection method, which places the zero in a succession of 
intervals, with each new interval being half the length of the preceding one.

266 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Historical Feature
Historical Problems
Problems 1–8 develop the Tartaglia–Cardano solution of the cubic equation 
and show why it is not altogether practical.
	 1.	 Show that the general cubic equation y3 + by2 + cy + d = 0 can 
be transformed into an equation of the form x3 + px + q = 0 by
	
	 using the substitution y = x - b
3 .
	 2.	 In the equation x3 + px + q = 0, replace x by H + K. Let 
3HK = -p, and show that H 3 + K 3 = -q.
	 3.	 Based on Problem 2, we have the two equations
3HK = - p and H 3 + K 3 = - q
Solve for K in 3HK = -p and substitute into H 3 + K 3 = -q.  
Then show that
H = C
3
-q
2
+ B
q2
4 + p3
27
[Hint: Look for an equation that is quadratic in form.]
	 4.	 Use the solution for H from Problem 3 and the equation 
H 3 + K 3 = -q to show that
K = C
3
- q
2
- B
q2
4 + p3
27
	5.	 Use the results from Problems 2 to 4 to show that the solution of 
x3 + px + q = 0 is
x = C
3
- q
2
+ B
q2
4 + p3
27 + C
3
- q
2
- B
q2
4 + p3
27
	 6.	 Use 
the 
result 
of 
Problem 
5 
to 
solve 
the 
equation 
x3 - 6x - 9 = 0. 
	 7.	 Use a calculator and the result of Problem 5 to solve the equation 
x3 + 3x - 14 = 0. 
	 8.	 Use the methods of this section to solve the equation 
x3 + 3x - 14 = 0. 
F
ormulas for the solution of third- and fourth-degree polynomial 
equations exist, and although they are not very practical, they do 
have an interesting history.
In the 1500s in Italy, mathematical contests were a popular pastime, 
and people who possessed methods for solving problems kept them  
secret. (Solutions that were published were already common knowledge.) 
Niccolo of Brescia (1499–1557), commonly referred to as Tartaglia (“the 
stammerer”), had the secret for solving cubic (third-degree) equations, 
which gave him a decided advantage in the contests. Girolamo Cardano 
(1501–1576) found out that Tartaglia had the secret, and, being interested 
in cubics, he requested it from Tartaglia. The reluctant Tartaglia hesitated 
for some time, but finally, swearing Cardano to secrecy with midnight 
oaths by candlelight, told him the secret. Cardano then published the 
solution in his book Ars Magna (1545), giving Tartaglia the credit but rather 
compromising the secrecy. Tartaglia exploded into bitter recriminations, 
and each wrote pamphlets that reflected on the other’s mathematics, 
moral character, and ancestry.
The quartic (fourth-degree) equation was solved by Cardano’s student 
Lodovico Ferrari, and this solution also was included, with credit and this 
time with permission, in the Ars Magna.
Attempts were made to solve the fifth-degree equation in similar ways, 
all of which failed. In the early 1800s, P. Ruffini, Niels Abel, and Evariste  
Galois all found ways to show that it is not possible to solve fifth-degree 
equations by formula, but the proofs required the introduction of new 
methods. Galois’s methods eventually developed into a large part of 
modern algebra.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Find f1- 12 if f1x2 = 2x2 - x. (pp. 82–84) 
	 2.	 Factor the expression 6x2 + x - 2. (pp. 971–972)
	 3.	 Find the quotient and remainder if 3x4 - 5x3 + 7x - 4 is 
divided by x - 3. (pp. 969–971 or 975–978)
	 4.	 Solve x2 + x - 3 = 0. (pp. 990–994)
	 5.	 If f1x2 = q1x2g1x2 + r1x2, the function r1x2 is called  
the   .
(a)	 remainder   (b)  dividend   (c)  quotient   (d)  divisor 
	 6.	 When a polynomial function f is divided by x - c, the 
remainder is 
.
	 7.	 Given f1x2 = 3x4 - 2x3 + 7x - 2, how many sign changes 
are there in the coefficients of f1- x2?
(a)	 0  (b)  1  (c)  2  (d)  3 
	 8.	 True or False  Every polynomial function of degree 3 with 
real coefficients has exactly three real zeros. 
	 9.	 If f is a polynomial function and x - 4 is a factor of f, then 
f142 =
.
	 10.	 True or False  If f is a polynomial function of degree 4 and 
if f122 = 5, then
f1x2
x - 2 = p1x2 +
5
x - 2
	
	 where p1x2 is a polynomial of degree 3. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
4.5  Assess Your Understanding

Section 4.5  The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  267
Skill Building
In Problems 11–20, use the Remainder Theorem to find the remainder when f1x2 is divided by x - c. Then use the Factor Theorem to 
determine whether x - c is a factor of f1x2.
	 11.	 f1x2 = 4x3 - 3x2 - 8x + 4; x - 2 
	 12.	 f1x2 = - 4x3 + 5x2 + 8; x + 3 
	 14.	 f1x2 = 3x4 - 6x3 - 5x + 10; x - 2 
	 13.	 f1x2 = 4x4 - 15x2 - 4; x - 2 
	 16.	 f1x2 = 3x6 + 82x3 + 27; x + 3 
	 15.	 f1x2 = 2x6 - 18x4 + x2 - 9; x + 3 
	 18.	 f1x2 = 4x6 - 64x4 + x2 - 15; x + 4 
	 17.	 f1x2 = x6 - 16x4 + x2 - 16; x + 4 
	 20.	 f1x2 = 2x4 - x3 + 2x - 1; x - 1
2 
	 19.	 f1x2 = 3x4 + x3 - 3x + 1; x + 1
3 
	 21.	 f1x2 = - 4x7 + x3 - x2 + 2
	 22.	 f1x2 = 5x4 + 2x2 - 6x - 5
	 24.	 f1x2 = 2x6 - 3x2 - x + 1
	 23.	 f1x2 = - 3x5 + 4x4 + 2
	 26.	 f1x2 = 3x3 - 2x2 + x + 2
	 25.	 f1x2 = - x3 - x2 + x + 1
	 28.	 f1x2 = - x4 + x2 - 1
	 27.	 f1x2 = x4 + 5x3 - 2
	
	
	 30.	 f1x2 = x5 + x4 + x2 + x + 1
	 29.	 f1x2 = x5 - x4 + x3 - x2 + x - 1
	 32.	 f1x2 = x6 - 1
	
	
	 31.	 f1x2 = x6 + 1
	 33.	 f1x2 = 3x4 - 3x3 + x2 - x + 1
	 34.	 f1x2 = x5 - x4 + 2x2 + 3 
	 36.	 f1x2 = x5 - 6x2 + 9x - 3 
	 35.	 f1x2 = 2x5 - x4 - x2 + 1
	 38.	 f1x2 = - 4x3 - x2 + x + 2
	 37.	 f1x2 = 6x4 - x2 + 2
	 40.	 f1x2 = 6x4 - x2 + 9
	 39.	 f1x2 = - 4x3 + x2 + x + 6
	 42.	 f1x2 = 2x5 - x3 + 2x2 + 12
	
	
	 41.	 f1x2 = 3x5 - x2 + 2x + 18
	
	
	 44.	 f1x2 = 6x4 + 2x3 - x2 + 20
	 43.	 f1x2 = - 6x3 - x2 + x + 10
In Problems 21–32, tell the maximum number of real zeros that each polynomial function may have. Then use Descartes’ Rule of Signs 
to determine how many positive and how many negative zeros each polynomial function may have. Do not attempt to find the zeros.
In Problems 33–44, list the potential rational zeros of each polynomial function. Do not attempt to find the zeros.
	 45.	 f1x2 = x3 + 2x2 - 5x - 6
	 46.	 f1x2 = x3 + 8x2 + 11x - 20
	 48.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - x2 + 2x - 1
	 52.	 f1x2 = 2x4 + x3 - 7x2 - 3x + 3
	 51.	 f1x2 = 2x4 - x3 - 5x2 + 2x + 2
	 54.	 f1x2 = x4 + x3 - 3x2 - x + 2
	 47.	 f1x2 = 2x3 + x2 + 2x + 1
	 50.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - 4x2 - 10x + 20
	 49.	 f1x2 = 3x3 + 6x2 - 15x - 30
In Problems 45–56, use the Rational Zeros Theorem to find all the real zeros of each polynomial function. Use the zeros to factor f over 
the real numbers.
	 53.	 f1x2 = x4 - x3 - 6x2 + 4x + 8
	 56.	 f1x2 = 4x4 + 5x3 + 9x2 + 10x + 2
	 55.	 f1x2 = 3x4 + 4x3 + 7x2 + 8x + 2
	 60.	 3x3 + 4x2 - 7x + 2 = 0 
	 59.	 2x3 - 3x2 - 3x - 5 = 0 
	 57.	 x4 - x3 + 2x2 - 4x - 8 = 0 
	 58.	 2x3 + 3x2 + 2x + 3 = 0 
In Problems 57–68, solve each equation in the real number system.

268 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
In Problems 69–78, find bounds on the real zeros of each polynomial function.
	 62.	 3x3 - x2 - 15x + 5 = 0 
	 64.	 x4 + 4x3 + 2x2 - x + 6 = 0 
	 66.	 x3 - 2
3
 x2 + 8
3
 x + 1 = 0 
	 68.	 2x4 - 19x3 + 57x2 - 64x + 20 = 0 
	 69.	 f1x2 = x4 - 3x2 - 4 
	 79.	 f1x2 = 8x4 - 2x2 + 5x - 1; 30, 14 
	 90.	 f1x2 = x3 + x2 + x - 4 
	 72.	 f1x2 = x4 + x3 - x - 1 
	 82.	 f1x2 = 2x3 + 6x2 - 8x + 2; 3 - 5, - 44   
	 91.	 f1x2 = 2x4 - 3x3 - 4x2 - 8 
	 74.	 f1x2 = 3x4 + 3x3 - x2 - 12x - 12 
	 84.	 f1x2 = x5 - x4 + 7x3 - 7x2 - 18x + 18; 31.4, 1.54
	 76.	 f1x2 = 4x5 - x4 + 2x3 - 2x2 + x - 1 
	 86.	 8x4 - 2x2 + 5x - 1 = 0; 0 … r … 1 
	 78.	 f1x2 = - x4 + 3x3 - 4x2 - 2x + 9 
	 88.	 2x3 + 6x2 - 8x + 2 = 0; - 5 … r … - 4 
	 61.	 2x3 - 11x2 + 10x + 8 = 0 
	 63.	 x4 - 2x3 + 10x2 - 18x + 9 = 0 
	 65.	 x3 + 3
2
 x2 + 3x - 2 = 0 
	 67.	 2x4 + x3 - 24x2 + 20x + 16 = 0 
	 70.	 f1x2 = x4 - 5x2 - 36 
	 80.	 f1x2 = x4 + 8x3 - x2 + 2; 3 - 1, 04 
	 89.	 f1x2 = 2x4 + x2 - 1 
	 71.	 f1x2 = x4 - x3 + x - 1 
	 81.	 f1x2 = 3x3 - 10x + 9; 3 - 3, - 24 
	 92.	 f1x2 = 3x3 - 2x2 - 20 
	 73.	 f1x2 = 3x4 - 3x3 - 5x2 + 27x - 36 
	 83.	 f1x2 = x5 - 3x4 - 2x3 + 6x2 + x + 2; 31.7, 1.84
	 75.	 f1x2 = 4x5 + x4 + x3 + x2 - 2x - 2 
	 85.	 x4 + 8x3 - x2 + 2 = 0; - 1 … r … 0 
	 77.	 f1x2 = - 4x5 + 5x3 + 9x2 + 3x - 12 
	 87.	 3x3 - 10x + 9 = 0; - 3 … r … - 2 
In Problems 79–84, use the Intermediate Value Theorem to show that each polynomial function has a zero in the given interval.
In Problems 85–88, each equation has a solution r in the interval indicated. Use the method of Example 10 to approximate this solution 
correct to two decimal places.
In Problems 89–92, each polynomial function has exactly one positive zero. Use the method of Example 10 to approximate the zero  
correct to two decimal places.
Mixed Practice
In Problems 93–104, graph each polynomial function.
	 96.	 f1x2 = 2x3 + x2 + 2x + 1
	 97.	 f1x2 = x4 + x2 - 2
	 98.	 f1x2 = x4 - 3x2 - 4
	 93.	 f1x2 = x3 + 2x2 - 5x - 6
	 94.	 f1x2 = x3 + 8x2 + 11x - 20
	 95.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - x2 + 2x - 1
	 99.	 f1x2 = 4x4 + 7x2 - 2
100.	 f1x2 = 4x4 + 15x2 - 4
101.	 f1x2 = x4 + x3 - 3x2 - x + 2
102.	 f1x2 = x4 - x3 - 6x2 + 4x + 8
103.	 f1x2 = 4x5 - 8x4 - x + 2
104.	 f1x2 = 4x5 + 12x4 - x - 3
	105.	 Suppose that f1x2 = 3x3 + 16x2 + 3x - 10. Find the zeros of f1x + 32. 
	106.	 Suppose that f1x2 = 4x3 - 11x2 - 26x + 24. Find the zeros of f1x - 22. 

Section 4.5  The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function  269
Applications and Extensions
	107.	 Find k such that f1x2 = x3 - kx2 + kx + 32 has the factor 
x - 4. 
	108.	 Find k such that f1x2 = x4 - kx3 + kx2 + 1 has the factor 
x + 2. 
	109.	 What is the remainder when f1x2 = 9x26 + x11 - x2 + 8x 
is divided by x - 1? 
	110.	 What is the remainder when f1x2 = - 3x17 + x9 - x5 + 2x 
is divided by x + 1? 
111.	 Use the Factor Theorem to prove that x - c is a factor of 
xn - cn for any positive integer n.
112.	 Use the Factor Theorem to prove that x + c is a factor of 
xn + cn if n Ú 1 is an odd integer.
	113.	 One solution of the equation x3 - 5x2 + 7x - 2 = 0 is 2. 
Find the sum of the remaining solutions. 
	114.	 One solution of the equation x3 + 5x2 + 5x - 2 = 0 is - 2. 
Find the sum of the remaining solutions. 
	115.	 Geometry  What is the length of the edge of a cube if, after a 
slice 4 inches thick is cut from one side, the volume remain-
ing is 72 cubic inches? 
	116.	 Geometry  What is the length of the edge of a cube if its 
volume could be doubled by an increase of 6 centimeters in 
one edge, an increase of 12 centimeters in a second edge, and 
a decrease of 4 centimeters in the third edge? 
117.	 Let f1x2 be a polynomial function whose coefficients are  
integers. Suppose that r is a real zero of f and that the leading 
coefficient of f is 1. Use the Rational Zeros Theorem to show 
that r is either an integer or an irrational number.
	118.	 Prove the Rational Zeros Theorem.
	
	 [Hint: Let p
q, where p and q have no common factors except 
1 and - 1, be a zero of the polynomial function
f1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0
	
	 whose coefficients are all integers. Show that
anpn + an-1pn-1q + g + a1pqn-1 + a0qn = 0
	
	 Now, because p is a factor of the first n terms of this equation, 
p must also be a factor of the term a0
 qn. Since p is not a factor  
of q (why?), p must be a factor of a0. Similarly, q must be a 
factor of an.]
	119.	 Bisection Method for Approximating Zeros of a Function f   
Begin with two consecutive integers, a and a + 1, such that 
f1a2 and f1a + 12 have opposite signs. Evaluate f at the mid-
point of a and a + 1. If f1m12 = 0, then m1 is the zero of f. 
Otherwise, f1m12 is of opposite sign to either f1a2 or f1a + 12. 
Suppose that it is f1a2 and f1m12 that are of opposite sign. 
Now evaluate f at the midpoint m2 of a and m1. Repeat this 
process until the desired degree of accuracy is obtained. Note 
that each iteration places the zero in an interval whose length 
is half that of the previous interval. The desired degree of accu-
racy is achieved when the endpoints of the interval agree to the 
required number of decimal places. Use the bisection method 
to approximate the zero of f1x2 = 9x4 - 3x2 + 7x - 1 in 
the interval [0, 1] correct to three decimal places. Verify your 
result using a graphing utility. 
Discussion and Writing
120.	 Is 1
3 a zero of f1x2 = 2x3 + 3x2 - 6x + 7? Explain. 
121.	 Is 1
3 a zero of f1x2 = 4x3 - 5x2 - 3x + 1? Explain. 
122.	 Is 3
5 a zero of f1x2 = 2x6 - 5x4 + x3 - x + 1? Explain. 
123.	 Is 2
3 a zero of f1x2 = x7 + 6x5 - x4 + x + 2? Explain. 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 124–127 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	124.	 If 1- 4, 62 is a point on the graph of y = f1x2, what point must be on 
the graph of y = 2f1x - 32 + 1? 
	125.	 Write f1x2 = - 3x2 + 30x - 4 in the form f1x2 = a1x - h22 + k. 
	126.	 Find the intercepts of the graph of the equation 3x + y2 = 12. 
	127.	 Use the figure to determine the interval(s) on which the function is 
increasing. 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 3	
2.  (3x + 2)(2x - 1)	
3.  Quotient: 3x3 + 4x2 + 12x + 43; Remainder: 125	
4.  - 1 - 113
2
, -1 + 113
2
x
y
6
6
(–3, –2)
(–1, 0)
(–5, 0)
(0, 3)
(2, 6)
(5, 1)
–6

270 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
In Appendix A, Section A.6, we found the real solutions of a quadratic equation. 
That is, we found the real zeros of a polynomial function of degree 2. Then, in 
Section A.7 we found the complex solutions of a quadratic equation. That is, we 
found the complex zeros of a polynomial function of degree 2.
In Section 4.5, we found the real zeros of polynomial functions of degree 3 or 
higher. In this section we will find the complex zeros of polynomial functions of 
degree 3 or higher.
4.6	 Complex Zeros; Fundamental Theorem of Algebra
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Complex Numbers (Appendix A, Section A.7,  
pp. 997–1002) 
•	 Complex Solutions of a Quadratic Equation  
(Appendix A, Section A.7, pp. 1002–1004)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 274.
	
Objectives	 1  Use the Conjugate Pairs Theorem  (p. 271)
	
	 	2  Find a Polynomial Function with Specified Zeros  (p. 272)
	
	 	3  Find the Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function  (p. 273)
 A variable in the complex number system is referred to as a complex variable. 
A complex polynomial function f of degree n is a function of the form
	
f1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0	
(1)
where an, an-1,c, a1, a0 are complex numbers, an ≠0, n is a nonnegative  
integer, and x is a complex variable. As before, an is called the leading coefficient 
of f. A complex number r is called a complex zero of f if f(r) = 0.
Definition
In most of our work, the coefficients in (1) will be real numbers.
We have learned that some quadratic equations have no real solutions, but that 
in the complex number system every quadratic equation has a solution, either real 
or complex. The next result, proved by Karl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) when he 
was 22 years old,* gives an extension to complex polynomials. In fact, this result is 
so important and useful that it has become known as the Fundamental Theorem of 
Algebra.
*In all, Gauss gave four different proofs of this theorem, the first one in 1799 being the subject of his 
doctoral dissertation.
 Every complex polynomial function f of degree n Ú 1 has at least one  
complex zero.
Fundamental 
Theorem of Algebra
We shall not prove this result, as the proof is beyond the scope of this text. 
However, using the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra and the Factor Theorem, we 
can prove the following result:
Every complex polynomial function f of degree n Ú 1 can be factored into n 
linear factors (not necessarily distinct) of the form
	
f(x) = an(x - r1)(x - r2) # g# (x - rn)	
(2)
where an, r1, r2, c, rn are complex numbers. That is, every complex polynomial  
function of degree n Ú 1 has exactly n complex zeros, some of which may  
repeat.
Theorem

Section 4.6  Complex Zeros; Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  271
Proof  Let
f1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0
By the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, f  has at least one zero, say r1. Then, by the 
Factor Theorem, x - r1 is a factor, and
f1x2 = 1x - r12q11x2
where q11x2 is a complex polynomial of degree n - 1 whose leading coefficient is an. 
Repeating this argument n times, we arrive at
f1x2 = 1x - r12 1x - r22 #  g# 1x - rn2qn1x2
where qn1x2 is a complex polynomial of degree n - n = 0 whose leading coefficient 
is also an. That is, qn1x2 = anx0 = an, and so
f1x2 = an1x - r12 1x - r22 # g# 1x - rn2
We conclude that every complex polynomial function f of degree n Ú 1 has  
exactly n (not necessarily distinct) zeros.	
■
Use the Conjugate Pairs Theorem
The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra can be used to obtain valuable information 
about the complex zeros of polynomial functions whose coefficients are real numbers.
1
Let f be a polynomial function whose coefficients are real numbers. If 
r = a + bi is a zero of f, the complex conjugate r = a - bi is also a zero of f.
Conjugate Pairs 
Theorem
In other words, for polynomial functions whose coefficients are real numbers, the 
complex zeros occur in conjugate pairs. This result should not be all that surprising 
since the complex zeros of a quadratic function occurred in conjugate pairs.
Proof  Let
f1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0
where an, an-1, c, a1, a0 are real numbers and an ≠0. If r = a + bi is a zero of f, 
then f1r2 = f1a + bi2 = 0, so
anr n + an-1r n-1 + g + a1r + a0 = 0
Take the conjugate of both sides to get
 anr n + an-1r n-1 + g + a1r + a0 = 0
 anr n + an-1r n-1 + g + a1r + a0 = 0 
 an(r)n + an-1(r)n-1 + g + a1r + a0 = 0
 an(r)n + an-1(r)n-1 + g + a1r + a0 = 0
This last equation states that f1r2 = 0; that is, r = a - bi is a zero of f.	
■
The importance of this result should be clear. Once we know that, say, 3 + 4i is 
a zero of a polynomial function with real coefficients, then we know that 3 - 4i is 
also a zero. This result has an important corollary.
The conjugate of a sum equals the sum 
of the conjugates (see Section A.7).
The conjugate of a product equals the 
product of the conjugates.
The conjugate of a real number equals 
the real number.
A polynomial function f of odd degree with real coefficients has at least one 
real zero.
Corollary
Proof  Because complex zeros occur as conjugate pairs in a polynomial function with 
real coefficients, there will always be an even number of zeros that are not real numbers. 
Consequently, since f is of odd degree, one of its zeros has to be a real number.	
■

272 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
For example, the polynomial function f1x2 = x5 - 3x4 + 4x3 - 5 has at least 
one zero that is a real number, since f is of degree 5 (odd) and has real coefficients.
Using the Conjugate Pairs Theorem
A polynomial function f of degree 5 whose coefficients are real numbers has the 
zeros 1, 5i, and 1 + i. Find the remaining two zeros.
Since f has coefficients that are real numbers, complex zeros appear as conjugate 
pairs. It follows that -5i, the conjugate of 5i, and 1 - i, the conjugate of 1 + i, are 
the two remaining zeros.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Find a Polynomial Function with Specified Zeros
Finding a Polynomial Function Whose Zeros Are Given
Find a polynomial function f of degree 4 whose coefficients are real numbers that 
has the zeros 1, 1, and -4 + i.
Since -4 + i is a zero, by the Conjugate Pairs Theorem, -4 - i must also be a zero 
of f. Because of the Factor Theorem, if f1c2 = 0, then x - c is a factor of f1x2. So f 
can now be written as
f(x) = a(x - 1)(x - 1)3x - (-4 + i)4 3x - (-4 - i)4
where a is any real number. Then
 f (x) = a(x - 1)(x - 1)3x - (-4 + i)4 3x - (-4 - i)4
 = a(x2 - 2x + 1)3(x + 4) - i4 3(x + 4) + i4
 = a(x2 - 2x + 1)[(x + 4)2 - i2]
 = a(x2 - 2x + 1)[x2 + 8x + 16 - (-1)]
 = a(x2 - 2x + 1)(x2 + 8x + 17)
 = a(x4 + 8x3 + 17x2 - 2x3 - 16x2 - 34x + x2 + 8x + 17)
 = a(x4 + 6x3 + 2x2 - 26x + 17)
Example 1
Solution
•
2
Example 2
Solution
•
Exploration
Graph the function f found in Example 2 for a = 1. Does the value of a affect the zeros of f? How does 
the value of a affect the graph of f? What information about f is sufficient to uniquely determine a?
Result  A quick analysis of the polynomial function f tells us what to expect:
At most three turning points.
For large 0 x0 , the graph will behave like y = x4.
A repeated real zero at 1, so the graph will touch the x-axis at 1.
The only x-intercept is 1; the y-intercept is 17.
Figure 47 shows the complete graph. (Do you see why? The graph has exactly three turning points.) The 
value of a causes a stretch or compression; a reflection also occurs if a 6 0. The zeros are not affected.
If any point other than an x-intercept on the graph of f is known, then a can be determined. For  
example, if (2, 3) is on the graph, then f122 = 3 = a1372, so a = 3>37. Why won’t an x-intercept work?
Now we can prove the theorem we conjectured in Section 4.5.
Figure 47
f(x) = x4 + 6x3 + 2x2 -  26x + 17
25
25
50
3
Every polynomial function with real coefficients can be uniquely factored over the 
real numbers into a product of linear factors and/or irreducible quadratic factors.
Theorem
Proof  Every complex polynomial function f of degree n has exactly n zeros and 
can be factored into a product of n linear factors. If its coefficients are real, those 

Section 4.6  Complex Zeros; Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  273
zeros that are complex numbers will always occur as conjugate pairs. As a result, if 
r = a + bi is a complex zero, then so is r = a - bi. Consequently, when the linear 
factors x - r and x - r of f are multiplied, we have
1x - r2 1x - r2 = x2 - 1r + r2x + rr = x2 - 2ax + a2 + b2
This second-degree polynomial has real coefficients and is irreducible (over the real 
numbers). So, the factors of f are either linear or irreducible quadratic factors.	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
Find the Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function
The steps for finding the complex zeros of a polynomial function are the same as 
those for finding the real zeros.
Finding the Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function
Find the complex zeros of the polynomial function
f1x2 = 3x4 + 5x3 + 25x2 + 45x - 18
Write f in factored form.
Step 1:  The degree of f is 4, so f will have four complex zeros.
Step 2:  Since the coefficients of f are real numbers, Descartes’ Rule of Signs can 
be used to obtain information about the real zeros. For this polynomial  
function, there is one positive real zero. There are three negative real zeros 
or one negative real zero, because
f1 -x2 = 3x4 - 5x3 + 25x2 - 45x - 18
has three variations in sign.
Step 3:  Since the coefficients of f are integers, the Rational Zeros Theorem can 
be used to obtain information about the potential rational zeros of f. The  
potential rational zeros are
{ 1
3, { 2
3, {1, {2, {3, {6, {9, {18
Table 17 summarizes some results of synthetic division.
3
Example 3
Solution
Table 17
r
Coefficients of q(x)
Remainder
 
    1
3
    8
33
  78
    60
1 is not a zero.
-1
3
    2
23
  22
-40
-1 is not a zero.
    2
3
 11
47
139
 260
2 is not a zero.
-2
3
-1
27
 -9
     0
-2 is a zero.
Since f1 -22 = 0, then -2 is a zero and x + 2 is a factor of f. The depressed 
equation is
3x3 - x2 + 27x - 9 = 0
Repeat Step 3:  We factor the depressed equation by grouping.
3x3 - x2 + 27x - 9 = 0
 x2(3x - 1) + 9(3x - 1) = 0 
Factor x2 from  3x3 - x2 and 9 from 27× - 9.
 (x2 + 9)(3x - 1) = 0 
Factor out the common factor 3x − 1.
x2 + 9 = 0         or   3x - 1 = 0 
Apply the Zero-Product Property.
   x2 = -9     or        
x = 1
3
x = -3i, x = 3i         or        
x = 1
3

274 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
The four complex zeros of f are e -3i, 3i, -2, 1
3 f.
The factored form of f is
f1x2 = 3x4 + 5x3 + 25x2 + 45x - 18
= 31x + 3i2 1x - 3i2 1x + 22 ax - 1
3b
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
•
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get the wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Find the sum and the product of the complex numbers 3 - 2i 
and -3 + 5i. (pp. 997–1002) 
	 2.	 In the complex number system, find the complex zeros of 
f(x) = x2 + 2x + 2. (pp. 1002–1004) 
	 3.	 Every polynomial function of odd degree with real coefficients 
will have at least  
  real zero(s).
	 4.	 If 3 + 4i is a zero of a polynomial function of degree 5 with 
real coefficients, then so is  
 .
	 5.	 True or False  A polynomial function of degree n with real 
coefficients has exactly n complex zeros. At most n of them 
are real zeros. 
	 6.	 True or False  A polynomial function of degree 4 with real 
coefficients could have - 3, 2 + i, 2 - i, and -3 + 5i as its 
zeros. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
4.6  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 7–16, information is given about a polynomial function f  whose coefficients are real numbers. Find the remaining zeros of f.
	 7.	 Degree 3; zeros: 3, 4 - i 
	 8.	 Degree 3; zeros: 4, 3 + i 
	 9.	 Degree 4; zeros: 1, 2, 2 + i 
	 10.	 Degree 4; zeros: i, 1 + i 
	 11.	 Degree 5; zeros: 0, 1, 2, i 
	 12.	 Degree 5; zeros: 1, i, 2i 
	 13.	 Degree 4; zeros: 2 - i, - i 
	 14.	 Degree 4; zeros: i, 2, - 2 
	 15.	 Degree 6; zeros: i, 3 - 2i, - 2 + i 
	 16.	 Degree 6; zeros: 2, 2 + i, - 3 - i, 0 
	 21.	 Degree 5; zeros: 1, multiplicity 3; 1 + i
	 22.	 Degree 4; zeros: 3, multiplicity 2; - i
In Problems 17–22, find a polynomial function f  with real coefficients having the given degree and zeros. Answers will vary depending on 
the choice of leading coefficient.
	 19.	 Degree 6; zeros: i, 4 - i; 2 + i
	 20.	 Degree 5; zeros: 2; - i; 1 + i
	 17.	 Degree 4; zeros: 3 + 2i; 4, multiplicity 2
	 18.	 Degree 4; zeros: i, 1 + 2i
In Problems 23–30, use the given zero to find the remaining zeros of each polynomial function.
	 27.	 f(x) = x4 - 7x3 + 14x2 - 38x - 60; zero: 1 + 3i
	 28.	 h(x) = x4 - 9x3 + 21x2 + 21x - 130; zero: 3 - 2i
	 29.	 g(x) = 2x5 - 3x4 - 5x3 - 15x2 - 207x + 108; zero: 3i
	 30.	 h(x) = 3x5 + 2x4 + 15x3 + 10x2 - 528x - 352; zero: -4i
	 23.	 g(x) = x3 + 3x2 + 25x + 75; zero: - 5i 
	 24.	 f (x) = x3 - 4x2 + 4x - 16; zero: 2i 
	 25.	 h(x) = 3x4 + 5x3 + 25x2 + 45x - 18; zero: 3i 
	 26.	 f (x) = 2x4 + 5x3 + 5x2 + 20x - 12; zero: -2i 

Section 4.6  Complex Zeros; Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  275
Discussion and Writing
In Problems 31–40, find the complex zeros of each polynomial function. Write f in factored form.
	 39.	 f(x) = 2x4 + x3 - 35x2 - 113x + 65
	 40.	 f(x) = 3x4 - x3 - 9x2 + 159x - 52
	 37.	 f(x) = x4 + 3x3 - 19x2 + 27x - 252
	 38.	 f(x) = x4 + 2x3 + 22x2 + 50x - 75
	 35.	 f(x) = x4 + 13x2 + 36
	 36.	 f(x) = x4 + 5x2 + 4
	 31.	 f(x) = x4 - 1
	 32.	 f(x) = x3 - 1
	 33.	 f(x) = x3 - 8x2 + 25x - 26
	 34.	 f(x) = x3 + 13x2 + 57x + 85
†Courtesy of the Joliet Junior College Mathematics Department
Mixed Practice
	 41.	 Given f1x2 = 2x3 - 14x2 + bx - 3  with f122 = 0, g1x2 = x3 + cx2 - 8x + 30, with the zero x = 3 - i,  and b and c real 
numbers, find 1f # g2 112.- 
	 42.	 Let f be the polynomial function of degree 4 with real coefficients, leading coefficient 1, and zeros x = 3 + i, 2, -2. Let g be the 
polynomial function of degree 4 with intercept 10, - 42 and zeros x = i, 2i. Find 1f + g2 112.† 
	 43.	 The complex zeros of f 1x2 = x4 + 1 For the function f1x2 = x4 + 1:
(a)	 Factor f into the product of two irreducible quadratics. (Hint: complete the square by adding and subtracting 2x2.2
(b)	 Find the zeros of f by finding the zeros of each irreducible quadratic.
In Problems 44 and 45, explain why the facts given are contradictory.
	 44.	 f  is a polynomial function of degree 3 whose coefficients are 
real numbers; its zeros are 2, i, and 3 + i.
	 45.	 f  is a polynomial function of degree 3 whose coefficients are 
real numbers; its zeros are 4 + i, 4 - i, and 2 + i.
	 46.	 f  is a polynomial function of degree 4 whose coefficients are 
real numbers; two of its zeros are - 3 and 4 - i. Explain why 
one of the remaining zeros must be a real number. Write 
down one of the missing zeros.
	 47.	 f  is a polynomial function of degree 4 whose coefficients are 
real numbers; three of its zeros are 2, 1 + 2i, and 1 - 2i. 
Explain why the remaining zero must be a real number.
	 48.	 For the polynomial function f1x2 = x2 + 2ix - 10:
(a)	 Verify that 3 - i is a zero of f.
(b)	 Verify that 3 + i is not a zero of f.
(c)	 Explain why these results do not contradict the  
Conjugate Pairs Theorem.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 49–52 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 49.	 Draw a scatter diagram for the given data.
x
-1
1
2
5
8
10
y
-4
0
3
1
5
7
	 50.	 Given f1x2 = 23 - x, find x so that f1x2 = 5. 
	 51.	 Given f1x2 = 2x - 5 and g1x2 = 3x2 + x - 4, find	
 
1f # g2 1x2. 
	 52.	 Determine if the lines y = 3x - 2 and 2x + 6y = 7 are 
parallel, perpendicular, or neither. 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 Sum: 3i; product: 1 + 21i	
2.  - 1 - i, - 1 + i

276 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Power function (pp. 203–206)
 
f1x2 = xn, n Ú 2 even	
Domain:  all real numbers  Range:  nonnegative real numbers
	
Passes through 1- 1, 12, 10, 02, 11, 12
	
Even function
	
Decreasing on 1- q, 02, increasing on 10, q 2
 
f1x2 = xn, n Ú 3 odd	
Domain:  all real numbers  Range:  all real numbers
	
Passes through 1- 1, - 12, 10, 02, 11, 12
	
Odd function
	
Increasing on 1- q, q 2
Polynomial function (pp. 202, 207–213)
 
f1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1	
Domain:  all real numbers
       
+ g + a1x + a0,  an ≠0	
At most n - 1 turning points
	
End behavior:  Behaves like y = anxn for large x
Real zeros of a polynomial function f (p. 207) 	
Real numbers for which f1x2 = 0; the real zeros of f are the x-intercepts of the 
graph of f.
Rational function (pp. 223–230)
  R1x2 =
p1x2
q1x2  	
Domain:  5xq1x2 ≠06
  p, q are polynomial functions and	
Vertical asymptotes: With R1x2 in lowest terms, if q1r2 = 0 for some real number, 
  q is not the zero polynomial. 	
then x = r is a vertical asymptote.
	
Horizontal or oblique asymptote: See the summary on page 228.
Remainder Theorem (p. 256) 	
If a polynomial function f1x2 is divided by x - c, then the remainder is f1c2.
Factor Theorem (p. 257) 	
x - c is a factor of a polynomial function f1x2 if and only if f1c2 = 0.
Descartes’ Rule of Signs (p. 258) 	
Let f denote a polynomial function written in standard form. The number of positive 
zeros of f either equals the number of variations in sign of the nonzero coefficients 
of f(x) or else equals that number less some even integer. The number of negative 
zeros of f either equals the number of variations in sign of the nonzero coefficients 
of f1- x2 or else equals that number less some even integer.
Rational Zeros Theorem (p. 259) 	
Let f be a polynomial function of degree 1 or higher of the form
	
   
f1x2 = anxn + an-1xn-1 + g + a1x + a0 an ≠0, a0 ≠0
	
where each coefficient is an integer. If p
q, in lowest terms, is a rational zero of f, then 
p must be a factor of a0, and q must be a factor of an.
Intermediate Value Theorem (p. 264) 	
Let f be a polynomial function. If a 6 b and f1a2 and f1b2 are of opposite sign, 
then there is at least one real zero of f between a and b.
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra (p. 270) 	
Every complex polynomial function f of degree n Ú 1 has at least one complex zero.
Conjugate Pairs Theorem (p. 271) 	
Let f be a polynomial function whose coefficients are real numbers.  
If r = a + bi is a zero of f, then its complex conjugate r = a - bi is also a zero of f.

Chapter Review  277
Objectives
Section	
You should be able to  . . .  	
Example(s)	
Review Exercises
4.1	
1	
Identify polynomial functions and their degree (p. 202) 	
1 	
1–4
	
2 	 Graph polynomial functions using transformations (p. 206) 	
2, 3 	
5–7
	
3 	 Know properties of the graph of a polynomial function 
	
	
(p. 207) 	
4–9 	
8–11
	
4 	 Analyze the graph of a polynomial function (p. 214) 	
10, 11 	
8–11
	
5 	 Build cubic models from data (p. 216) 	
12 	
50
4.2	
1 	 Find the domain of a rational function (p. 223) 	
1–3 	
12–14
	
2 	 Find the vertical asymptotes of a rational function (p. 226) 	
4 	
12–14
	
3 	 Find the horizontal or oblique asymptote of a rational  
	
	
function (p. 228) 	
5–8 	
12–14
4.3 	
1 	 Analyze the graph of a rational function (p. 233) 	
1–6 	
15–20
	
2 	 Solve applied problems involving rational functions (p. 244) 	
7 	
49
4.4 	
1 	 Solve polynomial inequalities (p. 248) 	
1, 2 	
21, 22
	
2 	 Solve rational inequalities (p. 250) 	
3, 4 	
23–25
4.5 	
1 	 Use the Remainder and Factor Theorems (p. 255) 	
1, 2 	
26–28
	
2 	 Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to determine the number  
	
	
of positive and the number of negative real zeros of a  
	
	
polynomial function (p. 258) 	
3 	
29, 30
	
3 	 Use the Rational Zeros Theorem to list the potential  
	
	
rational zeros of a polynomial function (p. 259) 	
4 	
31–34
	
4 	 Find the real zeros of a polynomial function (p. 260) 	
5, 6 	
32–34
	
5 	 Solve polynomial equations (p. 262) 	
7 	
35, 36
	
6 	 Use the Theorem for Bounds on Zeros (p. 263) 	
8 	
37, 38
	
7 	 Use the Intermediate Value Theorem (p. 264) 	
9, 10 	
39–42
4.6 	
1 	 Use the Conjugate Pairs Theorem (p. 271) 	
1 	
43, 44
	
2 	 Find a polynomial function with specified zeros (p. 272) 	
2 	
43, 44
	
3 	 Find the complex zeros of a polynomial function (p. 273) 	
3 	
45–48
Review Exercises
In Problems 1–4, determine whether the function is a polynomial function, a rational function, or neither. For those that are polynomial 
functions, state the degree. For those that are not polynomial functions, tell why not.
	 1.	 f1x2 = x7 - 6x5 + 2x4 + x3 + x - 1 	 2.	 f1x2 = x5/2 + 4x2 + 3x1/2 - 5
	 3.	 f1x2 = 3x2 + 5x1/2 - 1
	 4.	 f1x2 = 3
In Problems 5–7, graph each function using transformations (shifting, compressing, stretching, and reflecting). Show all the stages.
	 5.	 f1x2 = 1x + 223	
6.  f1x2 = - 1x - 124	
7.  f1x2 = 1x - 124 + 2
In Problems 8–11, analyze the graph of each polynomial function by following Steps 1 through 5 on page 215.
	 8.	 f1x2 = x1x + 22 1x + 42	
  9.  f1x2 = 1x - 2221x + 42
	 10.  f1x2 = - 2x3 + 4x2	
11.  f1x2 = 1x - 1221x + 32 1x + 12
In Problems 12–14, find the domain of each rational function. Find any horizontal, vertical, or oblique asymptotes.
	 12.	 R1x2 =
x - 4
1x + 322	
13.  R1x2 = 2x2 + 1
x2 - 4 	
14.  R1x2 = x2 + 3x + 2
1x + 222
In Problems 15–20, analyze the graph of  each rational function following the seven steps given on page 236.
	 15.	 R1x2 = 2x - 6
x
	
16.  H1x2 =
x + 2
x1x - 22 	
17.  R1x2 = x2 + x - 6
x2 - x - 6
	 18.	 F1x2 =
x3
x2 - 4	
19.  R1x2 =
2x4
1x - 122	
20.  G1x2 =
x2 - 4
x2 - x - 2

278 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
In Problems 21–25, solve each inequality. Graph the solution set.
	 21.	 x3 + x2 6 4x + 4	
22.  x3 + 4x2 Ú x + 4	
23.  2x - 6
1 - x 6 2	
24. 
1x - 22 1x - 12
x - 3
Ú 0	
25.  x2 - 8x + 12
x2 - 16
7 0
In Problems 26 and 27, find the remainder R when f1x2 is divided by g1x2. Is g a factor of f?
	 26.	 f1x2 = x3 - 3x2 + x + 2; g1x2 = x - 2 
	
27.  f1x2 = x4 - 5x + 6; g1x2 = 2 - x2 
	 28.	 Use synthetic division to find the value of f1x2 = 12x6 - 8x4 + 1 at x = 4. 
In Problems 29 and 30, use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to determine how many positive and negative zeros each polynomial function may 
have. Do not attempt to find the zeros.
	 29.	 - x8 - 4x7 + 3x6 - 9x4 + x3 - x2 + 2 
	 30.	 f(x) = - 6x5 + x4 + 5x3 + x + 1 
	 31.	 List all the potential rational zeros of f1x2 = 12x8 - x7 + 6x4 - x3 + x - 3. 
In Problems 32–34, use the Rational Zeros Theorem to find all the real zeros of each polynomial function. Use the zeros to factor f over 
the real numbers.
	 32.	 f1x2 = x3 - 3x2 - 6x + 8	
33.  f1x2 = 4x3 + 4x2 - 7x + 2	
34.  f1x2 = x4 - 4x3 + 9x2 - 20x + 20
In Problems 35 and 36, solve each equation in the real number system.
	 35.	 2x4 + 2x3 - 11x2 + x - 6 = 0 
	
36.  2x4 + 7x3 + x2 - 7x - 3 = 0 
In Problems 37 and 38, find bounds to the real zeros of each polynomial function.
	 37.	 f1x2 = x3 - x2 - 4x + 2 
	
38.  f1x2 = 2x3 - 7x2 - 10x + 35 
In Problems 39 and 40, use the Intermediate Value Theorem to show that each polynomial function has a zero in the given interval.
	 39.	 f1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + 3x - 1; 30, 24 
	
40.  f1x2 = 8x4 - 4x3 - 2x - 1; 30, 14 
In Problems 41 and 42, each polynomial function has exactly one positive zero. Approximate the zero correct to two decimal places.
	 41.	 f1x2 = x3 - x - 2 
	
42.  f1x2 =  8x4 - 4x3 - 2x - 1 
In Problems 43 and 44, information is given about a complex polynomial f whose coefficients are real numbers. Find the remaining zeros 
of f. Then find a polynomial function with real coefficients that has the zeros.
	 43.	 Degree 3;  zeros: 2 + 3i, 4	
44.  Degree 5;  zeros: 6 - i, 2 + 5i, 3
In Problems 45–48, find the complex zeros of each polynomial function f. Write f in factored form.
	 45.	 f1x2 =  x3 - 3x2 - 6x + 8	
46.  f1x2 =  4x3 + 4x2 - 7x + 2
	 47.	 f1x2 =  x4 - 4x3 + 9x2 - 20x + 20	
48.  f1x2 =  2x4 + 2x3 - 11x2 + x - 6
	 49.	 Making a Can  A can in the shape of a right circular cylinder 
is required to have a volume of 250 cubic centimeters.
(a)	 Express the amount A of material needed to make the 
can as a function of the radius r of the cylinder.
(b)	 How much material is required if the can is of radius  
3 centimeters? 
(c)	 How much material is required if the can is of radius  
5 centimeters? 
(d)	 Graph A = A(r). For what value of r is A smallest?
	 50.	 Housing Prices  The data in the table on the right represent 
the January median new-home prices in the United States 
for the years shown.
(a)	 With a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data. Comment on the type of relation that appears to 
exist between the two variables.
(b)	 Decide on the function of best fit to these data (linear, 
quadratic, or cubic), and use this function to predict 
the median new-home price in the United States for  
January 2020 (t = 9).
Year, t
Median Price, P ($1000s)
2004, 1
209.5
2006, 2
244.9
2008, 3
232.4
2010, 4
218.2
2012, 5
221.7
2014, 6
262.7
(c)	 Draw the function of best fit on the scatter diagram  
obtained in part (a).

	 1.	 Graph f1x2 = 1x - 324 - 2 using transformations.
	 2.	 For the polynomial function g1x2 = 2x3 + 5x2 - 28x - 15,
(a)	 Determine the maximum number of real zeros that the 
function may have. 
(b)	 List the potential rational zeros.
(c)	 Determine the real zeros of g. Factor g over the reals.
(d)	 Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of g.
(e)	 Determine whether the graph crosses or touches the  
x-axis at each x-intercept.
(f)	 Find the power function that the graph of g resembles 
for large values of x. 
(g)	 Put all the information together to obtain the graph  
of g.
	 3.	 Find the complex zeros of f1x2 = x3 - 4x2 + 25x - 100.
	 4.	 Solve 3x3 + 2x - 1 = 8x2 - 4 in the complex number  
system.
In Problems 5 and 6, find the domain of each function. Find any 
horizontal, vertical, or oblique asymptotes.
	 5.	 g1x2 = 2x2 - 14x + 24
x2 + 6x - 40 	
6.  r1x2 = x2 + 2x - 3
x + 1
	 7.	 Sketch the graph of the function in Problem 6. Label all 
intercepts, vertical asymptotes, horizontal asymptotes, and 
oblique asymptotes.
In Problems 8 and 9, write a function that meets the given conditions.
	 8.	 Fourth-degree polynomial with real coefficients; zeros: 
- 2, 0, 3 + i.
	 9.	 Rational function; asymptotes: y = 2, x = 4; domain: 
5xx ≠4, x ≠96
	 10.	 Use the Intermediate Value Theorem to show that the  
function f1x2 = - 2x2 - 3x + 8 has at least one real zero 
on the interval 30, 44.
	 11.	 Solve: x + 2
x - 3 6 2 
	 1.	 Find the distance between the points P = 11, 32 and 
Q = 1- 4, 22. 
	 2.	 Solve the inequality x2 Ú x and graph the solution set.
	 3.	 Solve the inequality x2 - 3x 6 4 and graph the solution set.
	 4.	 Find a linear function with slope - 3 that contains the point 
1- 1, 42. Graph the function. 
	 5.	 Find the equation of the line parallel to the line y = 2x + 1 
and containing the point (3, 5). Express your answer in 
slope–intercept form, and graph the line. 
	 6.	 Graph the equation y = x3.
	 7.	 Does the relation {13, 62, 11, 32, 12, 52, 13, 82} represent a 
function? Why or why not? 
	 8.	 Solve the equation x3 - 6x2 + 8x = 0. 
	 9.	 Solve the inequality 3x + 2 … 5x - 1 and graph the  
solution set.
	 10.	 Find 
the 
center 
and 
the 
radius 
of 
the 
circle 
x2 + 4x + y2 - 2y - 4 = 0. Graph the circle.
	 11.	 For the equation y = x3 - 9x, determine the intercepts and 
test for symmetry.
	 12.	 Find an equation of the line perpendicular to 3x - 2y = 7 
that contains the point 11, 52.
	 13.	 Is the following the graph of a function? Why or why not? 
	 14.	 For the function f1x2 = x2 + 5x - 2, find
(a)	 f132 
	
(b)  f1-x2 
(c)	 - f1x2 
	
(d)  f13x2 
(e)	
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
  h ≠0 
	 15.	 Answer the following questions regarding the function
f1x2 = x + 5
x - 1
(a)	 What is the domain of f ? 
(b)	 Is the point 12, 62 on the graph of f ? 
(c)	 If x = 3, what is f1x2? What point is on the graph of f?
(d)	 If f1x2 = 9, what is x ? What point is on the graph of f?
(e)	 Is f a polynomial or a rational function? 
	 16.	 Graph the function f1x2 = - 3x + 7.
	 17.	 Graph f1x2 = 2x2 - 4x + 1 by determining whether its 
graph opens up or down and by finding its vertex, axis of 
symmetry, y-intercept, and x-intercepts, if any.
	 18.	 Find the average rate of change of f1x2 = x2 + 3x + 1 
from 1 to 2. Use this result to find the equation of the secant 
line containing 11, f1122 and 12, f1222. 
	 19.	 In parts (a) to (f) on page 280, use the following graph.
Cumulative Review
Cumulative Review  279
x
y
x
y
–7
7
7
–7
(2, –6)
(0, –3)
(–3, 5)
Chapter Test
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.

(a)	 Determine the intercepts.
(b)	 Based on the graph, tell whether the graph is symmetric 
with respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, and/or the origin.
(c)	 Based on the graph, tell whether the function is even, 
odd, or neither. 
(d)	 List the intervals on which f is increasing. List the  
intervals on which f is decreasing.
(e)	 List the numbers, if any, at which f has a local maximum. 
What are the local maxima values?
(f)	 List the numbers, if any, at which f has a local minimum. 
What are the local minima values?
	 20.	 Determine algebraically whether the function
f1x2 =
5x
x2 - 9
	
	 is even, odd, or neither. 
	 21.	 For the function f1x2 = e
2x + 1
if
- 3 6 x 6 2
- 3x + 4
if
x Ú 2
(a)	 Find the domain of f. 
(b)	 Locate any intercepts.
280 
CHAPTER 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
(c)	 Graph the function.
(d)	 Based on the graph, find the range.
	 22.	 Graph 
the 
function 
f1x2 = - 31x + 122 + 5 
using  
transformations.
	 23.	 Suppose that f1x2 = x2 - 5x + 1 and g1x2 = -4x - 7.
(a)	 Find f + g and state its domain.
(b)	 Find f
g and state its domain.
	 24.	 Demand Equation  The price p (in dollars) and the quantity x 
sold of a certain product obey the demand equation
p = - 1
10x + 150,  0 … x … 1500
(a)	 Express the revenue R as a function of x.
(b)	 What is the revenue if 100 units are sold? 
(c)	 What quantity x maximizes revenue? What is the  
maximum revenue? 
(d)	 What price should the company charge to maximize  
revenue? 
Chapter Projects
Now click the Add Chart Element menu, select Trendline, 
and then select More Trendline Options. Select the 
Linear radio button and select Display Equation on 
Chart. See Figure 48. Move the Trendline Options  
window off to the side and you will see the linear  
function of best fit displayed on the scatter diagram. Do 
you think the function accurately describes the relation 
between latitude and length of day?
         Internet-based Project
	 I.	 Length of Day  Go to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latitude  
and read about latitude through the subhead “Effect of  
Latitude.” Now go to http://www.orchidculture.com/COD/
daylength.html#0N.
1.	 For a particular day of the year, record in a table the 
length of day for the equator (0°N), 5°N, 10°N, c, 60°N. 
Enter the data into an Excel spreadsheet, TI-graphing 
calculator, or some other spreadsheet capable of finding 
linear, quadratic, and cubic functions of best fit.
2.	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data with latitude as the 
independent variable and length of day as the dependent 
variable using Excel, a TI-graphing calculator, or some 
other spreadsheet. The Chapter 3 project describes how 
to draw a scatter diagram in Excel.
3.	 Determine the linear function of best fit. Graph the linear  
function of best fit on the scatter diagram. To do this in 
Excel, right click on any data point in the scatter diagram. 
Figure 48 

Chapter Projects  281
4.	 Determine the quadratic function of best fit. Graph 
the quadratic function of best fit on the scatter diagram. 
To do this in Excel, click on any data point in the 
scatter diagram. Now click the Add Chart Element 
menu, select Trendline, and then select More Trendline 
Options. Select the Polynomial radio button with Order 
set to 2. Select Display Equation on chart. Move the 
Trendline Options window off to the side and you will 
see the quadratic function of best fit displayed on the 
scatter diagram. Do you think the function accurately 
describes the relation between latitude and length of 
day?
5.	 Determine the cubic function of best fit. Graph the cubic 
function of best fit on the scatter diagram. To do this in 
Excel, click on any data point in the scatter diagram. Now 
click the Add Chart Element menu, select Trendline, and 
then select More Trendline Options. Select the Polynomial 
radio button with Order set to 3. Select Display Equation 
on chart. Move the Trendline Options window off to 
the side and you will see the cubic function of best fit  
displayed on the scatter diagram. Do you think the  
function accurately describes the relation between  
latitude and length of day?
6.	 Which of the three models seems to fit the data best? 
Explain your reasoning.
7.	
Use your model to predict the hours of daylight on the day 
you selected for Chicago (41.85 degrees north latitude).  
Go to the Old Farmer’s Almanac or another website  
to determine the hours of daylight in Chicago for the day 
you selected. How do the two compare?
Citation: Excel © 2013 Microsoft Corporation. Used with permission from Microsoft.
The following project is available at the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC):
	 II.	 Theory of Equations The coefficients of a polynomial function can be found if its zeros are known, an advantage of using polynomials 
in modeling.

282
Outline
5.1	
Composite Functions
5.2	
One-to-One Functions; Inverse  
Functions
5.3	
Exponential Functions
5.4	
Logarithmic Functions
5.5	
Properties of Logarithms
5.6	
Logarithmic and Exponential Equations
5.7	
Financial Models
5.8	
Exponential Growth and Decay Models; 
Newton’s Law; Logistic Growth and 
Decay Models
5.9	
Building Exponential, Logarithmic, and 
Logistic Models from Data
	
Chapter Review
	
Chapter Test
	
Cumulative Review
	
Chapter Projects
Depreciation of Cars
You are ready to buy that first new car. You know that cars lose 
value over time due to depreciation and that different cars 
have different rates of depreciation. So you will research the  
depreciation rates for the cars you are thinking of buying. After 
all, for cars that sell for about the same price, the lower the  
depreciation rate, the more the car will be worth each year.
—See the Internet-based Chapter Project I—
 A Look Back
Until now, our study of functions has concentrated on polynomial and rational 
functions. These functions belong to the class of algebraic functions—that  
is, functions that can be expressed in terms of sums, differences, products, 
quotients, powers, or roots of polynomials. Functions that are not algebraic are 
termed transcendental (they transcend, or go beyond, algebraic functions).
A Look Ahead 
 
In this chapter, we study two transcendental functions: the exponential function 
and the logarithmic function. These functions occur frequently in a wide variety 
of applications, such as biology, chemistry, economics, and psychology.
The chapter begins with a discussion of composite, one-to-one, and inverse 
functions—concepts that are needed to explain the relationship between  
exponential and logarithmic functions.
5
Exponential and 
Logarithmic Functions 

Form a Composite Function
Suppose that an oil tanker is leaking oil and you want to determine the area of the 
circular oil patch around the ship. See Figure 1. It is determined that the oil is leaking 
from the tanker in such a way that the radius of the circular patch of oil around the 
ship is increasing at a rate of 3 feet per minute. Therefore, the radius r of the oil 
patch at any time t, in minutes, is given by r1t2 = 3t. So after 20 minutes, the radius 
of the oil patch is r1202 = 31202 = 60 feet.
The area A of a circle as a function of the radius r is given by A1r2 = pr 2.
The area of the circular patch of oil after 20 minutes is A1602 = p16022 = 3600p 
square feet. Note that 60 = r1202, so A1602 = A1r12022. The argument of the 
function A is the output of the function r!
In general, the area of the oil patch can be expressed as a function of time t 
by evaluating A1r1t2 2 and obtaining A1r1t2 2 = A13t2 = p13t22 = 9pt2. The 
function A1r1t2 2 is a special type of function called a composite function.
As another example, consider the function y = 12x + 322. Let y = f1u2 = u2 
and u = g1x2 = 2x + 3. Then by a substitution process, the original function is 
obtained as follows: y = f1u2 = f1g1x2 2 = 12x + 322.
In general, suppose that f and g are two functions and that x is a number in 
the domain of g. Evaluating g at x yields g1x2. If g1x2 is in the domain of f, then 
evaluating f at g1x2 yields the expression f1g1x2 2. The correspondence from x  
to f1g1x2 2 is called a composite function f ∘g.
1
Figure 1 
5.1  Composite Functions
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 288.
	
Objectives	 	1  Form a Composite Function (p. 283)
	
	 	2  Find the Domain of a Composite Function (p. 284)
•	 Find the Value of a Function (Section 2.1, pp. 82–84)
•	 Domain of a Function (Section 2.1, pp. 86–88)
Given two functions f and g, the composite function, denoted by f ∘g (read as 
“ f composed with g”), is defined by
1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2
The domain of f ∘g is the set of all numbers x in the domain of g such that g1x2 
is in the domain of f.
Definition
Look carefully at Figure 2. Only those values of x in the domain of g for which 
g1x2 is in the domain of f can be in the domain of f ∘g. The reason is that if g1x2 
is not in the domain of f, then f1g1x2 2 is not defined. Because of this, the domain 
of f ∘g is a subset of the domain of g; the range of f ∘g is a subset of the range of f.
Figure 2 
Domain of f ° g
Range of f ° g
Range of g
Domain of f
Domain of g
f ° g
g
f 
g
x
x
g(x)
g(x)
f(g(x))
Range of f
Section 5.1  Composite Functions  283

284 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Figure 3 provides a second illustration of the definition. Here x is the input 
to the function g, yielding g1x2. Then g1x2 is the input to the function f, yielding 
f1g1x2 2. Note that the “inside” function g in f1g1x2 2 is “processed” first.
* Consult your owner’s manual for the appropriate keystrokes.
Evaluating a Composite Function
Suppose that f1x2 = 2x2 - 3 and g1x2 = 4x. Find:
(a)	 1  f ∘g2 112    (b)  1g ∘f 2 112    (c)  1  f ∘f 2 1-22    (d)  1g ∘g2 1 -12
(a)	 1  f ∘g2 112 = f1g112 2 = f142 = 2 # 42 - 3 = 29
(b)	 1g ∘f 2 112 = g1  f112 2 = g1 -12 = 4 # 1 -12 = -4
(c)	 1  f ∘f 2 1-22 = f1f1 -22 2 = f152 = 2 # 52 - 3 = 47
(d)	 1g ∘g2 1-12 = g1g1 -12 2 = g1 -42 = 4 # 1 -42 = -16
Comment  Graphing calculators can be used to evaluate composite functions.*  
Let Y1 = f (x) = 2x2 - 3 and Y2 = g (x) = 4x. Then, using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator, 
find  (f ∘g)(1) as shown in Figure 4. Note that this is the result obtained in Example 1(a).	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Find the Domain of a Composite Function
Finding a Composite Function and Its Domain
Suppose that f1x2 = x2 + 3x - 1 and g1x2 = 2x + 3.
Find:  (a)  f ∘g        (b)  g ∘f
Then find the domain of each composite function.
The domain of f and the domain of g are the set of all real numbers.
(a)	  1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2 = f12x + 32 = 12x + 322 + 312x + 3) - 1
	
 = 4x2 + 12x + 9 + 6x + 9 - 1 = 4x2 + 18x + 17
	
Because the domains of both f and g are the set of all real numbers, the domain 
of f ∘g is the set of all real numbers.
Example 1
Solution
        c           c
 g (x) = 4x         f (x) = 2x2 - 3
g (1) = 4
               c              c
 f (x) = 2x2 - 3       g (x) = 4x
f (1) = - 1
                c
f (- 2) = 2(- 2)2 - 3 = 5
•
                c
g (- 1) = - 4
2
Example 2
Solution
         c
f (x) = x2 + 3x - 1
Figure 3 
INPUT x
OUTPUT f(g(x))
f
g
g(x)
Figure 4 

Section 5.1  Composite Functions  285
(b)	  1g ∘f 2 1x2 = g1 f1x2 2 = g1x2 + 3x - 12 = 21x2 + 3x - 12 + 3
	
 
 = 2x2 + 6x - 2 + 3 = 2x2 + 6x + 1
	
Because the domains of both f and g are the set of all real numbers, the domain 
of g ∘f is the set of all real numbers.	
•
Example 2 illustrates that, in general, f ∘g ≠g ∘f. Sometimes f ∘g does equal 
g ∘f, as we shall see in Example 5.
Look back at Figure 2 on page 283. In determining the domain of the composite 
function 1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2, keep the following two thoughts in mind about the 
input x.
	 1.	 Any x not in the domain of g must be excluded.
	 2.	 Any x for which g1x2 is not in the domain of f must be excluded.
Finding the Domain of f ∘g
Find the domain of f ∘g if f1x2 =
1
x + 2 and g1x2 =
4
x - 1.
For 1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2, first note that the domain of g is 5x x ≠16, so 1 is 
excluded from the domain of f ∘g. Next note that the domain of f is 5x x ≠-26, 
which means that g1x2 cannot equal -2. Solve the equation g1x2 = -2 to 
determine what additional value(s) of x to exclude.
 4
x - 1 = -2
 4 = -21x - 12 
 4 = -2x + 2
 2x = -2
 x = -1
Also exclude -1 from the domain of f ∘g. 
The domain of f ∘g is 5x x ≠-1, x ≠16.
Check:	For x = 1, g1x2 =
4
x - 1 is not defined, so 1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2 is 
not defined.
	
For x = -1, g1 -12 = -2, and 1f ∘g2 1-12 = f1g1-12 2 = f1 -22  
is not defined.	
	
•
Finding a Composite Function and Its Domain
Suppose that f1x2 =
1
x + 2 and g1x2 =
4
x - 1.
Find:  (a)  f ∘g        (b)  f ∘f
Then find the domain of each composite function.
The domain of f is 5x x ≠-26 and the domain of g is 5x x ≠16.
           c
g (x) = 2x + 3
Example 3
Solution
g (x) = - 2
Multiply both sides by x  − 1.
Apply the Distributive Property.
Add 2x to both sides. Subtract 4 from both sides.
Divide both sides by 2.
Example 4
Solution
(a)	 1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2 = f a
4
x - 1 b =
1
4
x - 1 + 2
=
x - 1
4 + 21x - 12 = x - 1
2x + 2 =
x - 1
21x + 12
  c
Multiply by  x - 1
x - 1  .
                     c 
f (x) =
1
x + 2 
In Example 3, the domain of f ∘g was found to be 5x x ≠-1, x ≠16.

286 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
The domain of f ∘g also can be found by first looking at the domain  
of g: 5x x ≠16. Exclude 1 from the domain of f ∘g as a result. Then look 
at f ∘g and note that x cannot equal -1, because x = -1 results in division 
by 0. So exclude -1 from the domain of f ∘g. Therefore, the domain of f ∘g  
is 5x x ≠-1, x ≠16.
(b)	 1  f ∘f 2 1x2 = f1  f1x2 2 = f a
1
x + 2 b =
1
1
x + 2 + 2
=
x + 2
1 + 21x + 22 = x + 2
2x + 5
c 
Multiply by x + 2
x + 2  .
                     c
f (x) =
1
x + 2 
	
The domain of f ∘f consists of all values of x in the domain of f, 5x x ≠-26, 
for which
f1x2 =
1
x + 2 ≠-2   
 
or, equivalently,
x ≠-  5
2
	
The domain of f ∘f is ex ` x ≠-  5
2 , x ≠-2f.
The domain of f ∘f also can be found by recognizing that -2 is not in the 
domain of f and so should be excluded from the domain of f ∘f. Then, looking
at f ∘f, note that x cannot equal -  5
2 . Do you see why? Therefore, the domain
of f ∘f is ex ` x ≠-  5
2 , x ≠-2f.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 7  a n d  2 9
Showing That Two Composite Functions Are Equal
If f1x2 = 3x - 4 and g1x2 = 1
31x + 42, show that
1f ∘g2 1x2 = 1g ∘f2 1x2 = x
for every x in the domain of f ∘g and g ∘f.
 1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2
 = f ax + 4
3
 b 
 = 3ax + 4
3
 b - 4
 
 = x + 4 - 4 = x
 
1
x + 2 = - 2
 1 = - 2(x + 2)
 1 = - 2x - 4
 2x = - 5
 x = -  5
2 
Example 5
Solution
g (x) = 1
3  (x + 4) = x + 4
3
 
f (x) = 3x - 4

Section 5.1  Composite Functions  287
 1g ∘f2 1x2 = g1f1x2 2
 = g13x - 42
 
 = 1
3  3 13x - 42 + 44  
 = 1
3  13x2 = x
We conclude that 1f ∘g2 1x2 = 1g ∘f2 1x2 = x.	
•
In Section 5.2, we shall see that there is an important relationship between  
functions f and g for which 1f ∘g2 1x2 = 1g ∘f2 1x2 = x.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Calculus Application
Some techniques in calculus require the ability to determine the components of a 
composite function. For example, the function H1x2 = 1x + 1 is the composition
of the functions f and g, where f1x2 = 1x and g1x2 = x + 1, because 
H1x2 = 1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2 = f1x + 12 = 1x + 1 .
Finding the Components of a Composite Function
Find functions f and g such that f ∘g = H if H1x2 = 1x2 + 1250.
The function H takes x2 + 1 and raises it to the power 50. A natural way to  
decompose H is to raise the function g1x2 = x2 + 1 to the power 50.  
Let f1x2 = x50 and g1x2 = x2 + 1. Then
 1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2
 = f1x2 + 12
 = 1x2 + 1250 = H1x2
See Figure 5.	
•
Other functions f and g may be found for which f ∘g = H in Example 6. For 
instance, if f1x2 = x2 and g1x2 = 1x2 + 1225, then
1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2 = f1 1x2 + 1225 2 = 3 1x2 + 1225 42 = 1x2 + 1250
Although the functions f and g found as a solution to Example 6 are not unique, 
there is usually a “natural” selection for f and g that comes to mind first.
Finding the Components of a Composite Function
Find functions f and g such that f ∘g = H if H1x2 =
1
x + 1 .
Here H is the reciprocal of g1x2 = x + 1. Let f1x2 = 1
x and g1x2 = x + 1. Then
1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x2 2 = f1x + 12 =
1
x + 1 = H1x2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
f (x) = 3x - 4
g (x) = 1
3  (x + 4)
Example 6
Solution
Example 7
Solution
•
Seeing the Concept
Using a graphing calculator, let
 Y1 = f(x) = 3x - 4
 Y2 = g(x) = 1
3 (x + 4)
 Y3 = f ∘g,  Y4 = g ∘f
Using the viewing window -3 … x … 3,
-2 … y … 2, graph only Y3 and Y4 . What 
do you see? TRACE to verify that Y3 = Y4 .
Figure 5 
x
H
g
f
f(g(x)) = f(x 2 + 1) 
      
H(x) = (x 2 + 1)50
g(x) = x 2 + 1 
= (x 2 + 1)50

288 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Find f132 if f1x2 = - 4x2 + 5x. (pp. 82–84)
	 2.	 Find f13x2 if f1x2 = 4 - 2x2. (pp. 82–84)
	 3.	 Find the domain of the function f1x2 = x2 - 1
x2 - 25 . 
(pp. 86–88) 
5.1  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 4.	 Given two functions f and g, the 
 
 , denoted 
f ∘g, is defined by ( f ∘g)(x) =
 .
	 5.	 True or False If f (x) = x2 and g (x) = 2x + 9, then 
( f ∘g )(4) = 5. 
	 6.	 If f (x) = 2x + 2 and g (x) = 3
x, which of the following 
does ( f ∘g)(x) equal?
(a)	
3
2x + 2
  (b) 
3
2x
+ 2  (c)  A
3
x + 2  (d)  A
3
x + 2
	 7.	 If H = f ∘g and H(x) = 225 - 4x2, which of the following 
cannot be the component functions f and g?
(a)	 f (x) = 225 - x2; g (x) = 4x
(b)	 f (x) = 2x; g (x) = 25 - 4x2
(c)	 f (x) = 225 - x; g (x) = 4x2
(d)	 f (x) = 225 - 4x; g (x) = x2 
	 8.	 True or False The domain of the composite function 
1f ∘g21x2 is the same as the domain of g1x2. 
Skill Building
In Problems 9 and 10, evaluate each expression using the values given in the table.
	 9.	
x
- 3
- 2
- 1
0
1
2
3
f (x)
- 7
- 5
- 3
- 1
3
5
7
g(x)
8
3
0
- 1
0
3
8
(a)  1f ∘g2 112  	
(b)  1f ∘g2 122 
(c)  1g ∘f2 122  	
(d)  1g ∘f2 132 
(e)  1g ∘g2 112  	
(f)  1f ∘f2 132 
	 10.	
x
- 3
- 2
- 1
0
1
2
3
f (x)
11
9
7
5
3
1
- 1
g(x)
- 8
- 3
0
1
0
- 3
- 8
(a)  1f ∘g2 112 
	
(b)  1f ∘g2 1- 12 
(c)  1g ∘f2 1- 12  	
(d)  1g ∘f2 102 
(e)  1g ∘g2 1- 22  	
(f)  1f ∘f2 1- 12 
In Problems 11 and 12, evaluate each expression using the graphs of y = f1x2 and y = g1x2 shown in the figure.
	 11.	 (a)  1g ∘f2 112  	
(b)  1g ∘f2 152 
(c)	 1f ∘g2 102  	
(d)  1f ∘g2 122 
	 12.	 (a)  1g ∘f2 1- 12  	
(b)  1g ∘f2 102 
(c)	 1f ∘g2 1- 12 
	
(d)  1f ∘g2 142 
In Problems 13–22, for the given functions f and g, find:
(a)	1f ∘g2 142      (b)  1g ∘f2 122      (c)  1f ∘f2 112      (d)  1g ∘g2 102
	 13.	 f1x2 = 2x; g1x2 = 3x2 + 1	
14.	 f1x2 = 3x + 2; g1x2 = 2x2 - 1
	 15.	 f1x2 = 2x2; g1x2 = 1 - 3x2	
16.	 f1x2 = 4x2 - 3; g1x2 = 3 - 1
2  x2
	 17.	 f1x2 = 2x + 1; g1x2 = 3x	
18.	 f1x2 = 2x; g1x2 = 2x
	 19.	 f1x2 = 0 x - 20 ; g1x2 =
3
x2 + 2	
20.	 f1x2 = 0 x0 ; g1x2 =
1
x2 + 1
	 21.	 f1x2 = x3>2; g1x2 =
2
x + 1	
22.	 f1x2 =
3
x + 1; g1x2 = 2
3 x
6
2
x
4
6
8
2
2
(1, 3)
(1, 1)
(2, 2)
(5, 1)
(6, 2)
(7, 3)
(7, 5)
(6, 5)
(5, 4)
(1, 4)
(4, 2)
(2, 2)
(8, 4)
(1, 1)
(3, 1)
y  g (x)
y  f (x)
y
4
2

Section 5.1  Composite Functions  289
In Problems 23–38, for the given functions f and g, find:
(a)	f ∘g      (b)  g ∘f      (c)  f ∘f      (d)  g ∘g
State the domain of each composite function.
	 23.	 f1x2 = - x; g1x2 = 2x - 4	
24.	 f1x2 = 2x + 3; g1x2 = 3x
	 25.	 f1x2 = x + 1; g1x2 = x2 + 4	
26.	 f1x2 = 3x + 1; g1x2 = x2
	 27.	  f1x2 = x2; g1x2 = x2 + 4	
28.	 f1x2 = x2 + 1; g1x2 = 2x2 + 3
	 29.	  f1x2 =
3
x - 1; g1x2 = 2
x	
30.	 f1x2 =
1
x + 3; g1x2 = -  2
x
	 31.	 f1x2 =
x
x + 3; g1x2 = 2
x	
32.	 f1x2 =
x
x - 1; g1x2 = -  4
x
	 33.	 f1x2 = 2x - 2; g1x2 = 1 - 2x	
34.	 f1x2 = 2x; g1x2 = 2x + 3
	 35.	 f1x2 = x2 + 4; g1x2 = 2x - 2	
36.	 f1x2 = x2 + 1; g1x2 = 2x - 1
	 37.	 f1x2 = 2x - 1
x - 2 ; g1x2 = x + 4
2x - 5	
38.	 f1x2 = x - 5
x + 1; g1x2 = x + 2
x - 3
In Problems 39–46, show that 1f ∘g2 1x2 = 1g ∘f2 1x2 = x.
	 39.	 f1x2 = 2x; g1x2 = 1
2  x	
40.	 f1x2 = 4x; g1x2 = 1
4  x	
41.	 f1x2 = x + 5; g1x2 = x - 5
	 42.	 f1x2 = x3; g1x2 = 2
3 x	
43.	 f1x2 = 4 - 3x; g1x2 = 1
3  14 - x2	
44.	 f1x2 = 2x - 6; g1x2 = 1
2  1x + 62
	 45.	 f1x2 = 1
x; g1x2 = 1
x	
46.	 f1x2 = ax + b; g1x2 = 1
a  1x - b2 a ≠0
In Problems 47–52, find functions f and g so that f ∘g = H.
	 47.	  H1x2 = 12x + 324 
	
48.	 H1x2 = 11 + x2 23 
	 49.	 H1x2 = 21 - x2  
	
50.	 H1x2 = 2x2 + 1 
	 51.	 H1x2 = 0 2x2 + 30  
	
52.	 H1x2 = 0 2x + 10  
Applications and Extensions
	 53.	 If f1x2 = 7x3 - 8x2 + x - 9 and g1x2 = 3, find  1f ∘g2 1x2
	
	 and 1g ∘f2 1x2. 
	 54.	 If f1x2 = x + 1
x - 1 , find 1f ∘f2 1x2. 
	 55.	 If f1x2 = 2x2 + 4 and g1x2 = 6x + a, find a so that the 
graph of f ∘g crosses the y-axis at 166. 
	 56.	 If f1x2 = 3x2 - 7 and g1x2 = 2x + a, find a so that the 
graph of f ∘g crosses the y-axis at 68. 
In Problems 57 and 58, use the functions f and g to find:
(a)	f ∘g              (b)  g ∘f
(c)	the domain of f ∘g and of g ∘f
(d)	the conditions for which f ∘g = g ∘f
	 57.	 f(x) = nx + t g(x) = cx + m
	 58.	 f1x2 = ax + b
cx + d g1x2 = mx
	 59.	 Surface Area of a Balloon  The surface area S (in square  
meters) of a hot-air balloon is given by 
S1r2 = 4pr 2
	
	 where r is the radius of the balloon (in meters). If the radius r 
is increasing with time t (in seconds) according to the formula 
r1t2 = 3
8  t2, t Ú 0, find the surface area S of the balloon as a 
function of the time t. 
	 60.	 Volume of a Balloon  The volume V (in cubic meters) of 
the hot-air balloon described in Problem 59 is given by
	
	 V1r2 = 4
3
 pr 3. If the radius r is the same function of t as in 
Problem 59, find the volume V as a function of the time t.
	 61.	 Automobile Production  The number N of cars produced 
at a certain factory in one day after t hours of operation is 
given by N1t2 = 100t - 5t2, 0 … t … 10. If the cost C (in 
dollars) of producing N cars is C1N2 = 15,000 + 8000N, 
find the cost C as a function of the time t of operation of the 
factory. 
	 62.	 Environmental Concerns  The spread of oil leaking from a 
tanker is in the shape of a circle. If the radius r (in feet) of 
the spread after t hours is r1t2 = 2001t, find the area A of 
the oil slick as a function of the time t. 
	 63.	 Production Cost  The price p of a certain product and the 
quantity x sold obey the demand equation shown.
p = -  1
4
 x + 500, 0 … x … 2000
Suppose that the cost C of producing x units is 
C = 2x
75
+ 800.
Assuming that all items produced are sold, find the cost C as 
a function of the price p. 
[Hint: Solve for x in the demand equation and then form the 
composite.]

290 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	 64.	 Cost of a Commodity  The price p, in dollars, of a certain  
commodity and the quantity x sold obey the demand equation
p = -  1
5
 x + 200 0 … x … 1000
Suppose that the cost C, in dollars, of producing x units is
C = 1x 
10
+ 400
Assuming that all items produced are sold, find the cost C as 
a function of the price p.
	 65.	 Volume of a Cylinder  The volume V of a right circular cyl-
inder of height h and radius r is V = pr 2 h. If the height is 
six times the radius, express the volume V as a function of 
r. 
	 66.	 Volume of a Cone  The volume V of a right circular cone is
	
	 V = 1
3  pr 2 h. If the height is twice the radius, express the
	
	 volume V as a function of r. 
	 67.	 Foreign Exchange  Traders often buy foreign currency in 
hope of making money when the currency’s value changes. 
For example, on a particular day, one U.S. dollar could pur-
chase 0.7443 Euros, and one Euro could purchase 148.8705 
yen. Let f1x2 represent the number of Euros you can buy 
with x dollars, and let g(x) represent the number of yen you 
can buy with x Euros.
(a)	 Find a function that relates dollars to Euros.
(b)	 Find a function that relates Euros to yen. 
(c)	 Use the results of parts (a) and (b) to find a function 
that relates dollars to yen. That is, find 
1g ∘f2 1x2 = g1f1x22. 
(d)	 What is g1f1100022? 
	 68.	 Temperature Conversion  The function C(F) =  5
9  (F - 32)
	
	 converts a temperature in degrees Fahrenheit, F, to a  
temperature 
in 
degrees 
Celsius, 
C. 
The 
function  
K1C2 = C + 273, converts a temperature in degrees  
Celsius to a temperature in kelvins, K.
(a)	 Find a function that converts a temperature in degrees 
Fahrenheit to a temperature in kelvins.
(b)	 Determine 80 degrees Fahrenheit in kelvins. 
	 69.	 Discounts  The manufacturer of a computer is offering two 
discounts on last year’s model computer. The first discount is 
a $500 rebate and the second discount is 20% off the regular 
price, p.
(a)	 Write a function f that represents the sale price if only 
the rebate applies. 
(b)	 Write a function g that represents the sale price if only 
the 20% discount applies. 
(c)	 Find f ∘g and g ∘f. What does each of these functions 
represent? Which combination of discounts represents a 
better deal for the consumer? 
	70.	 Taxes  Suppose that you work for $15 per hour. Write a  
function that represents gross salary G as a function of 
hours worked h. Your employer is required to withhold 
taxes (federal income tax, Social Security, Medicare) from 
your paycheck. Suppose your employer withholds 20% of 
your income for taxes. Write a function that represents net  
salary N as a function of gross salary G. Find and interpret 
N ∘G.
	 71.	 Let f1x2 = ax + b and g1x2 = bx + a, where a and b are 
integers. If f112 = 6, and f1g11822 - g1f11822 = 20, 
find the product of a and b. 
	 72.	 If f and g are odd functions, show that the composite  
function f ∘g is also odd.
	 73.	 If f is an odd function and g is an even function, show that 
the composite functions f ∘g and g ∘f are both even.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 - 21      2.  4 - 18x2      3.  5xx ≠- 5, x ≠56
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 74–77 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 74.	 Given f(x) = 3x + 8 and g(x) = x - 5, find (f + g) (x),
	
	 ( f - g) (x), ( f # g)(x), and a f
gb(x). State the domain of 
each.
	 75.	 Find the real zeros of f1x2 = x3 + 5x2 - 9x - 45 
	 76.	 Use a graphing utility to graph f (x) = - x3 + 4x - 2 over 
the interval (- 3, 3). Approximate any local maxima and 
local minima. Determine where the function is increasing 
and where it is decreasing.
	 77.	 Find the domain of R(x) = x2 + 6x + 5
x - 3
. Find any 
	
	 horizontal, vertical, or oblique asymptotes.

Section 5.2  One-to-One Functions; Inverse Functions  291
Determine Whether a Function Is One-to-One
Section 2.1 presented four different ways to represent a function: (1) a map,  
(2) a set of ordered pairs, (3) a graph, and (4) an equation. For example, Figures 6 and 7  
illustrate two different functions represented as mappings. The function in Figure 6 
shows the correspondence between states and their populations (in millions). The 
function in Figure 7 shows a correspondence between animals and life expectancies 
(in years).
1
5.2  One-to-One Functions; Inverse Functions
•	 Functions (Section 2.1, pp. 79–88)
•	 Increasing/Decreasing Functions (Section 2.3,  
pp. 105–106)
•	 Rational Expressions (Appendix A, Section A.5,  
pp. 979–985)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
 Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 299.
	
Objectives	 	1  Determine Whether a Function Is One-to-One (p. 291)
	
	 	2  Determine the Inverse of a Function Defined by a Map or a Set  
of Ordered Pairs (p. 293)
	
	 	3  Obtain the Graph of the Inverse Function from the Graph of the  
Function (p. 296)
	
	 	4  Find the Inverse of a Function Defined by an Equation (p. 297)
Figure 6 
Indiana
Washington
South Dakota
North Carolina
Oklahoma
State
6.5
6.9
0.8
9.8
3.8
Population
(in millions)
Dog
Cat
Duck
Lion
Pig
Rabbit
Animal
11
10
7
Life Expectancy
(in years)
Figure 7 
Suppose several people are asked to name a state that has a population of  
0.8 million based on the function in Figure 6. Everyone will respond “South Dakota.” 
Now, if the same people are asked to name an animal whose life expectancy is 11 years 
based on the function in Figure 7, some may respond “dog,” while others may respond 
“cat.” What is the difference between the functions in Figures 6 and 7? In Figure 6, no 
two elements in the domain correspond to the same element in the range. In Figure 7, 
this is not the case: Different elements in the domain correspond to the same element 
in the range. Functions such as the one in Figure 6 are given a special name.
A function is one-to-one if any two different inputs in the domain correspond 
to two different outputs in the range. That is, if x1 and x2 are two different  
inputs of a function f, then f is one-to-one if f(x1) ≠f(x2).
Definition
Put another way, a function f is one-to-one if no y in the range is the image of 
more than one x in the domain. A function is not one-to-one if any two (or more) 
different elements in the domain correspond to the same element in the range. 
So the function in Figure 7 is not one-to-one because two different elements in 
In Words
A function is not one-to-one if 
two different inputs correspond 
to the same output.

292 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
the domain, dog and cat, both correspond to 11 (and also because three different 
elements in the domain correspond to 10). Figure 8 illustrates the distinction among 
one-to-one functions, functions that are not one-to-one, and relations that are not 
functions.
Figure 8 
x3
x1
y1
x 2
y2
One-to-one function:
Each x in the domain has
one and only one image
in the range.
(a)
y3
Domain
Range
x3
x1
y1
x2
Not a one-to-one function:
y1 is the image of both
x1 and x2.
(b)
y3
Domain
Range
x3
x1
y1
y2
Not a function:
x1 has two images,
y1 and y2.
(c)
y3
Determining Whether a Function Is One-to-One
Determine whether the following functions are one-to-one.
(a)	 For the following function, the domain represents the ages of five males, and the 
range represents their HDL (good) cholesterol scores (mg/dL).
Example 1
38
42
46
55
61
Age
57
54
34
38
HDL Cholesterol
(b)	 5 1 -2, 62, 1 -1, 32, 10, 22, 11, 52, 12, 82 6
(a)	 The function is not one-to-one because there are two different inputs, 55 and 61, 
that correspond to the same output, 38.
(b)	 The function is one-to-one because no two distinct inputs correspond to the 
same output.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 3  a n d  1 7
For functions defined by an equation y = f1x2 and for which the graph of f is 
known, there is a simple test, called the horizontal-line test, to determine whether 
f is one-to-one.
Solution
•
Horizontal-line Test
If every horizontal line intersects the graph of a function f in at most one point, 
then f is one-to-one.
Theorem
The reason why this test works can be seen in Figure 9, where the horizontal 
line y = h intersects the graph at two distinct points, 1x1, h2 and 1x2, h2. Since h 
is the image of both x1 and x2  and x1 ≠x2, f is not one-to-one. Based on Figure 9, 
we can state the horizontal-line test in another way: If the graph of any horizontal 
line intersects the graph of a function f at more than one point, then f is not 
one-to-one.
Figure 9 
f(x1) = f(x2) = h and x1 ≠x 2 ;  
f is not a one-to-one function.
x
h
y
(x1, h)
(x2, h)
y  f(x)
y  h
x1
x2

Section 5.2  One-to-One Functions; Inverse Functions  293
Using the Horizontal-line Test
For each function, use its graph to determine whether the function is one-to-one.
(a)	 f1x2 = x2            (b)  g1x2 = x3
(a)	 Figure 10(a) illustrates the horizontal-line test for f1x2 = x2. The horizontal 
line y = 1 intersects the graph of f twice, at 11, 12 and at 1-1, 12, so f is not 
one-to-one.
(b)	 Figure 10(b) illustrates the horizontal-line test for g1x2 = x3. Because every 
horizontal line intersects the graph of g exactly once, it follows that g is  
one-to-one.
Example 2
Solution
Figure 10 
Every horizontal line intersects the graph
exactly once; g is one-to-one.
A horizontal line intersects the graph
twice; f  is not one-to-one.
x
y
23
3
(1, 1)
y 5 x 2
(21, 1)
3
23
D
E
x
y
23
3
y 5 x 3
3
23
y 5 1
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Look more closely at the one-to-one function g1x2 = x3. This function is an 
increasing function. Because an increasing (or decreasing) function will always have 
different y-values for unequal x-values, it follows that a function that is increasing 
(or decreasing) over its domain is also a one-to-one function.
•
A function that is increasing on an interval I is a one-to-one function on I.
A function that is decreasing on an interval I is a one-to-one function on I.
Theorem
Determine the Inverse of a Function Defined by a Map  
or a Set of Ordered Pairs
2
Suppose that f is a one-to-one function. Then, corresponding to each x in the 
domain of f, there is exactly one y in the range (because f is a function); and 
corresponding to each y in the range of f, there is exactly one x in the domain 
(because f is one-to-one). The correspondence from the range of f back to the 
domain of f is called the inverse function of f . The symbol f -1 is used to denote 
the inverse function of f.
Definition
We will discuss how to find inverses for all four representations of functions:  
(1) maps, (2) sets of ordered pairs, (3) graphs, and (4) equations. We begin with  
finding inverses of functions represented by maps or sets of ordered pairs.
Finding the Inverse of a Function Defined by a Map
Find the inverse of the function defined by the map on the next page. Let the  
domain of the function represent certain states, and let the range represent the states’  
populations (in millions). Find the domain and the range of the inverse function.
Example 3
In Words
Suppose that f is a one-to-one 
function so that the input 5  
corresponds to the output 10. 
In the inverse function f -1, the 
input 10 will correspond to the 
output 5.

294 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
The function is one-to-one. To find the inverse function, interchange the elements 
in the domain with the elements in the range. For example, the function receives as 
input Indiana and outputs 6.5 million. So the inverse receives as input 6.5 million and 
outputs Indiana. The inverse function is shown next.
Solution
Indiana
Washington
South Dakota
North Carolina
Oklahoma
State
6.5
6.9
0.8
9.8
3.8
Population
(in millions)
Indiana
Washington
South Dakota
North Carolina
Oklahoma
State
6.5
6.9
0.8
9.8
3.8
Population
(in millions)
The domain of the inverse function is 56.5, 6.9, 0.8, 9.8, 3.86. The range of the  
inverse function is 5Indiana, Washington, South Dakota, North Carolina, Oklahoma6.
If the function f is a set of ordered pairs 1x, y2, then the inverse function of f, 
denoted f -1, is the set of ordered pairs 1y, x2.
Finding the Inverse of a Function Defined  
by a Set of Ordered Pairs
Find the inverse of the following one-to-one function:
51 -3, -272, 1 -2, -82, 1 -1, -12, 10, 02, 11, 12, 12, 82, 13, 2726
State the domain and the range of the function and its inverse.
The inverse of the given function is found by interchanging the entries in each  
ordered pair and so is given by
51 -27, -32, 1 -8, -22, 1 -1, -12, 10, 02, 11, 12, 18, 22, 127, 326
The domain of the function is {-3,  -2, -1,  0,  1,  2,  3}. The range of the function  
is 
{-27,  -8,  -1,  0,  1,  8,  27}. 
The 
domain 
of 
the 
inverse 
function 
is  
{-27, -8, -1, 0,  1, 8, 27}. The range of the inverse function is {-3, -2, -1,  0,  1,  2,  3}.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 7  a n d  3 1
Remember, if f is a one-to-one function, it has an inverse function, f -1. See 
Figure 11.
Based on the results of Example 4 and Figure 11, two facts are now apparent 
about a one-to-one function f and its inverse f -1.
•
Example 4
Solution
•
Figure 11 
f
f 1
Domain of f
Range of f
Domain of f 1
Range of f 1
Domain of f = Range of f -1   Range of f = Domain of f -1
Look again at Figure 11 to visualize the relationship. Starting with x, applying f, and 
then applying f -1 gets x back again. Starting with x, applying f -1, and then applying f 

Section 5.2  One-to-One Functions; Inverse Functions  295
gets the number x back again. To put it simply, what f does, f -1 undoes, and vice 
versa. See the illustration that follows.
        Input x from domain of f	
Apply f	
f (x)	
 Apply f -1	
f -1(f (x)) = x
     Input x from domain of f -1	
 Apply f -1	
f -1(x)	
Apply f	
f (f -1(x)) = x
In other words,
¡
¡
¡
¡
Warning  Be careful !  f -1  is a symbol 
for the inverse function  of f. The -1 used 
in f -1  is not an exponent. That is, f -1  
does not mean the reciprocal of f; 
f -11x2 is not equal to 1
f1x2 .	
■
f -11f1x2 2 = x  where x is in the domain of f
f1f -11x2 2 = x  where x is in the domain of f -1
Consider the function f1x2 = 2x, which multiplies the argument x by 2. 
The inverse function f -1 undoes whatever f does. So the inverse function of f is
f -11x2 = 1
2
 x, which divides the argument by 2. For example, f132 = 2132 = 6
and f -1162 = 1
2162 = 3, so f -1 undoes what f did. This is verified by showing that
f -11  f1x2 2 = f -112x2 = 1
212x2 = x and f1 f -11x2 2 = f a1
2xb = 2a1
2xb = x
See Figure 12.
Verifying Inverse Functions
(a)	 Verify that the inverse of g1x2 = x3 is g-11x2 = 2
3 x.
(b)	 Verify that the inverse of f1x2 = 2x + 3 is f -11x2 = 1
2
 1x - 32.
(a)	 g-11g1x2 2 = g-11x32 = 2
3 x3 = x      for all x in the domain of g
	
g1g-11x2 2 = g1 2
3 x2 = 1 2
3 x23 = x  for all x in the domain of g-1
(b)	 f -1(  f1x2) = f -1(2x + 3) = 1
2
 3(2x + 3) - 34 = 1
2
 (2x) = x
	
f(  f -11x2) = f a1
2
 (x - 3)b = 2c 1
2
 (x - 3)d + 3 = (x - 32 + 3 = x
Verifying Inverse Functions
Verify that the inverse of f1x2 =
1
x - 1 is f -11x2 = 1
x + 1. For what values of x is
f -11 f1x2 2 = x? For what values of x is f1 f -11x2 2 = x?
The domain of f is 5x0 x ≠16 and the domain of f -1 is 5x0 x ≠06. Now
f -11 f1x2 2 = f -1a
1
x - 1b =
1
1
x - 1
+ 1 = x - 1 + 1 = x provided x ≠ 1
f1 f -11x2 2 = f a1
x + 1b =
1
a1
x + 1b - 1
= 1
1
x
= x provided x ≠0
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 5  a n d  3 9
Example 5
Solution
for all x in the	
domain of f
for all x in the 	
domain  of f -1
Example 6
•
Solution
•
Figure 12 
x
f
f 1
(2x) = x
f1(2x) =
f(x) = 2x
1–2

296 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Obtain the Graph of the Inverse Function from the Graph  
of the Function
Suppose that 1a, b2 is a point on the graph of a one-to-one function f defined by 
y = f1x2. Then b = f1a2. This means that a = f -11b2, so 1b, a2 is a point on the 
graph of the inverse function f -1. The relationship between the point 1a, b2 on f 
and the point 1b, a2 on f -1 is shown in Figure 13. The line segment with endpoints 
1a, b2 and 1b, a2 is perpendicular to the line y = x and is bisected by the line 
y = x. (Do you see why?) It follows that the point 1b, a2 on f -1 is the reflection 
about the line y = x of the point 1a, b2 on f.
3
The graph of a one-to-one function f and the graph of its inverse function f -1 
are symmetric with respect to the line y = x.
Theorem
Figure 13 
x
y 5 x
y
b
a
b
a
(b, a)
(a, b)
Figure 14 illustrates this result. Once the graph of f is known, the graph of f -1 
may be obtained by reflecting the graph of f about the line y = x.
Figure 14 
y 5 x
y 5 f(x)
y 5 f 21(x)
(a3, b3)
(a2, b2)
(a1, b1)
(b3, a3)
(b2, a2)
(b1, a1)
x
y
Graphing the Inverse Function
The graph in Figure 15(a) is that of a one-to-one function y = f1x2. Draw the graph 
of its inverse.
Begin by adding the graph of y = x to Figure 15(a). Since the points 
1 -2, -12, 1 -1, 02, and 12, 12 are on the graph of f, the points 1-1, -22, 10, -12,
and 11, 22 must be on the graph of f -1. Keeping in mind that the graph of f -1 is
the reflection about the line y = x of the graph of f, draw the graph of f -1. See 
Figure 15(b).
Example 7
Solution
Figure 15 
•
x
y
3
3
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
(2, 1)
3
3
y  f(x)
(a)
x
y
3
3
(2, 1)
(1, 2)
(1, 0)
(2, 1)
(0, 1)
(1, 2)
3
3
y  f(x)
y  f 1(x)
(b)
y  x
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5

Section 5.2  One-to-One Functions; Inverse Functions  297
Find the Inverse of a Function Defined by an Equation
The fact that the graphs of a one-to-one function f and its inverse function f -1 are 
symmetric with respect to the line y = x tells us more. It says that we can obtain f -1 
by interchanging the roles of x and y in f. Look again at Figure 14. If f is defined 
by the equation
y = f1x2
then f -1 is defined by the equation
x = f1y2
The equation x = f1y2 defines f -1 implicitly. If we can solve this equation for y, we 
will have the explicit form of f -1, that is,
y = f -11x2
Let’s use this procedure to find the inverse of f1x2 = 2x + 3. (Because f is a 
linear function and is increasing, f is one-to-one and so has an inverse function.)
How to Find the Inverse Function
Find the inverse of f1x2 = 2x + 3. Graph f and f -1 on the same coordinate axes.
4
Example 8
Replace f1x2 with y in f1x2 = 2x + 3 and obtain y = 2x + 3. Now interchange the 
variables x and y to obtain
x = 2y + 3
This equation defines the inverse function f -1 implicitly.
To find the explicit form of the inverse, solve x = 2y + 3 for y.
 x = 2y + 3
 2y + 3 = x
 
 2y = x - 3
 y = 1
2 1x - 32 
The explicit form of the inverse function f -1 is
f -11x2 = 1
2 1x - 32
We verified that f and f -1 are inverses in Example 5(b).
The graphs of f1x2 = 2x + 3 and its inverse f -11x2 = 1
2  1x - 32 are shown  
in Figure 16. Note the symmetry of the graphs with respect to the line y = x.
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Replace f1x2 with y. In 
y = f1x2, interchange the variables 
x and y to obtain x = f1y2. This 
equation defines the inverse function 
f -1  implicitly.
Step 2:  If possible, solve the 
implicit equation for y in terms of x 
to obtain the explicit form of f -1 , 
y = f -1(x).
Reflexive Property; If a = b, then b = a.
Subtract 3 from both sides.
Multiply both sides by 1
2.
Step 3:  Check the result by 
showing that f -1(f (x)) = x and 
f (f -1(x)) = x.
•
Figure 16 
y  x
f(x)  2x  3
x
y
5
5
5
5
f 1(x)    (x  3)
1–2
Procedure for Finding the Inverse of a One-to-One Function
Step 1:	 In y = f1x2, interchange the variables x and y to obtain
x = f1y2
This equation defines the inverse function f -1 implicitly.
Step 2:	 If possible, solve the implicit equation for y in terms of x to obtain the 
explicit form of f -1:
y = f -11x2
Step 3:	 Check the result by showing that
f -11f1x2 2 = x and f1f -11x2 2 = x

298 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Finding the Inverse Function
The function
f1x2 = 2x + 1
x - 1   x ≠1
is one-to-one. Find its inverse function and check the result.
Step 1: Replace f1x2 with y and interchange the variables x and y in
y = 2x + 1
x - 1
to obtain
x = 2y + 1
y - 1
Step 2: Solve for y.
 x = 2y + 1
y - 1
 x1y - 12 = 2y + 1 
 xy - x = 2y + 1
 xy - 2y = x + 1
 1x - 22y = x + 1
 y = x + 1
x - 2 
The inverse function is
f -11x2 = x + 1
x - 2  x ≠2 
Replace y by f -1(x).
Step 3:	     Check:
f -11f1x22 = f -1 a2x + 1
x - 1  b =
2x + 1
x - 1  + 1
2x + 1
x - 1  - 2
=
2x + 1 + x - 1
2x + 1 - 21x - 12 = 3x
3 = x, x ≠1
f1f -11x22 = f ax + 1
x - 2 b =
2ax + 1
x - 2 b + 1
x + 1
x - 2 - 1
=
21x + 12 + x - 2
x + 1 - 1x - 22
= 3x
3 = x, x ≠2
Example 9
Solution
Multiply both sides by y - 1. 
Use the Distributive Property.
Subtract 2y from both sides; add x to both sides.
Factor.
Divide by x - 2.
•
Exploration
In Example 9, we found that if f(x) = 2x + 1
x - 1   , then f-1 (x) = x + 1
x - 2  . Compare the vertical and  
horizontal asymptotes of f and f-1 .
Result  The vertical asymptote of f is x = 1, and the horizontal asymptote is y = 2. The vertical  
asymptote of f-1 is x = 2, and the horizontal asymptote is y = 1.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  5 3  a n d  6 7
If a function is not one-to-one, it has no inverse function. Sometimes, though, 
an appropriate restriction on the domain of such a function will yield a new  
function that is one-to-one. Then the function defined on the restricted domain has 
an inverse function. Let’s look at an example of this common practice.
Finding the Inverse of a Domain-restricted Function
Find the inverse of y = f1x2 = x2 if x Ú 0. Graph f and f -1.
The function y = x2 is not one-to-one. [Refer to Example 2(a).] However, restricting 
the domain of this function to x Ú 0, as indicated, results in a new function that 
Example 10
Solution

Section 5.2  One-to-One Functions; Inverse Functions  299
is increasing and therefore is one-to-one. Consequently, the function defined by 
y = f1x2 = x2, x Ú 0, has an inverse function, f -1.
Follow the steps given previously to find f -1.
Step 1:	 In the equation y = x2, x Ú 0, interchange the variables x and y. The result is
x = y2  y Ú 0
This equation defines the inverse function implicitly.
Step 2:	 Solve for y to get the explicit form of the inverse. Because y Ú 0, only one 
solution for y is obtained: y = 1x. So f -11x2 = 1x .
Step 3:	     Check:  f -11f1x2 2 = f -11x2 2 = 2x2 = 0 x0 = x because x Ú 0
f1f -11x2 2 = f1 1x 2 = 1 1x 22 = x
Figure 17 illustrates the graphs of f(x) = x2, x Ú 0, and f -11x2 = 1x .
•
 Summary
1.  If a function f is one-to-one, then it has an inverse function f -1.
2.  Domain of f = Range of f -1; Range of f = Domain of f -1.
3.  To verify that f -1 is the inverse of f, show that f -11f1x2 2 = x for every x in the domain of f and that f1f -11x2 2 = x 
for every x in the domain of f -1.
4.  The graphs of f and f -1 are symmetric with respect to the line y = x.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Is the set of ordered pairs 5 11, 32, 12, 32, 1- 1, 22 6 a 
function? Why or why not? (pp. 79–88)
	 2.	 Where is the function f1x2 = x2 increasing? Where is it  
decreasing? (pp. 105–106) 
	 3.	 What is the domain of f1x2 =
x + 5
x2 + 3x - 18? (pp. 79–88)
	 4.	 Simplify: 
1
x + 1
1
x2 - 1
 (pp. 979–985) 
5.2  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 5.	 If x1 and x2 are two different inputs of a function f, then f is 
one-to-one if 
 .
	 6.	 If every horizontal line intersects the graph of a function f 
at no more than one point, then f is a(n) 
  
function.
	 7.	 If f is a one-to-one function and f(3) = 8, then 
f -1 (8) =
 .
	 8.	 If f -1 denotes the inverse of a function f, then the graphs of 
f and f -1 are symmetric with respect to the line  
 .
	 9.	 If the domain of a one-to-one function f is 34, q 2, then the 
range of its inverse function f -1 is 
 .
	 10.	 True or False  If f and g are inverse functions, then the  
domain of f is the same as the range of g. 
	 11.	 If (- 2, 3) is a point on the graph of a one-to-one function f, 
which of the following points is on the graph of f -1?
(a)	 (3, - 2)    (b)  (2, - 3)    (c)  (-3, 2)    (d)  (-2, -3) 
	 12.	 Suppose f is a one-to-one function with a domain of
	
	 5x0 x ≠36 and a range of ex ` x ≠2
3 f. Which of the  
following is the domain of f -1?
(a)	 5x0 x ≠36	
(b)  All real numbers
(c)	 ex ` x ≠2
3, x ≠3f	
(d)  ex ` x ≠2
3 f 
Skill Building
In Problems 13–20, determine whether the function is one-to-one.
	 13.	
	 14.	
20 Hours
Domain
25 Hours
30 Hours
40 Hours
$200
$300
$350
$425
Range
Bob
Domain
Dave
John
Chuck
Karla
Debra
Dawn
Phoebe
Range
x
y
2
2
f 1(x)    x
y  x
f (x)  x2, x  0
Figure 17 

300 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	 15.	 	
	 16.	
20 Hours
Domain
25 Hours
30 Hours
40 Hours
$200
$350
$425
Range
Bob
Domain
Dave
John
Chuck
Karla
Debra
Phoebe
Range
	 17.	 5 12, 62, 1- 3, 62, 14, 92, 11, 102 6 
	
18.	 5 1- 2, 52, 1- 1, 32, 13, 72, 14, 122 6 
	 19.	 5 11, 22, 12, 82, 13, 182, 14, 322 6 
	
20.	 5 10, 02, 11, 12, 12, 162, 13, 812 6 
In Problems 21–26, the graph of a function f is given. Use the horizontal-line test to determine whether f is one-to-one.
	 21.	
	 22.	
23.	
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
2
3
3
	 24.	
25.	
26.	
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
y
3
3
3
x
In Problems 27–34, find the inverse of each one-to-one function. State the domain and the range of each inverse function.
	27.	
	28.	
Atlanta, GA
Boston, MA
Las Vegas, NV
Miami, FL
Los Angeles, CA
Location
Annual Precipitation
(inches)
49.7
43.8
4.2
61.9
12.8
Source: currentresults.com
Title
Domestic Gross
(millions)
$761
$659
$623
$535
$475
Avatar
Titanic 
Marvel’s The Avengers
The Dark Knight
Star Wars: Episode One –
The Phantom Menace
Source: boxofﬁcemojo.com
	29.	
30.	
30
40
45
Age
$10.59
$12.52
$15.94
Monthly Cost
of Life Insurance
Source: tiaa-cref.org
Virginia
Nevada
Tennessee
Texas
State
5.0%
8.5%
6.7%
5.5%
Unemployment Rate
Source: United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, March 2014
	 31.	 5 1- 3, 52, 1- 2, 92, 1- 1, 22, 10, 112, 11, - 52 6	
32.	 5 1- 2, 22, 1- 1, 62, 10, 82, 11, - 32, 12, 92 6
	 33.	 5 1- 2, - 82, 1- 1, - 12, 10, 02, 11, 12, 12, 82 6	
34.	 5 1- 2, 12, 1- 3, 22, 1- 10, 02, 11, 92, 12, 42 6
In Problems 35–44, verify that the functions f and g are inverses of each other by showing that f1g1x22 = x and g1f1x22 = x. Give any 
values of x that need to be excluded from the domain of f and the domain of g.
	 35.	 f1x2 = 3x + 4; g1x2 = 1
3  1x - 42	
36.	 f1x2 = 3 - 2x; g1x2 = -  1
2  1x - 32
37.	 f1x2 = 2x + 6; g1x2 = 1
2  x - 3	
38.	 f1x2 = 4x - 8; g1x2 = x
4 + 2
	 39.	 f1x2 = x3 - 8; g1x2 = 2
3 x + 8	
40.	 f1x2 = 1x - 222, x Ú 2; g1x2 = 2x + 2

Section 5.2  One-to-One Functions; Inverse Functions  301
	 41.	 f1x2 = x; g1x2 = x	
42.	 f1x2 = 1
x; g1x2 = 1
x
	 43.	 f1x2 = x - 5
2x + 3; g1x2 = 3x + 5
1 - 2x	
44.	 f1x2 = 2x + 3
x + 4 ; g1x2 = 4x - 3
2 - x
In Problems 45–50, the graph of a one-to-one function f is given. Draw the graph of the inverse function f -1.
	 45.	
	 46.	
47.	
48.	
49.	
50.	
x
y
3
3
3
y  x
(1, 2)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
(2, 2)
3
x
y
3
3
3
y  x
(
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(2, 2)
3
1–2
2, )
x
y
3
3
3
3
y  x
(2, 1)
(1, 1)
x
y
3
3
3
3
y  x
(2, 1)
(1, 1)
x
y
3
3
3
3
y  x
x
y
2
2
2
2
y  x
In Problems 51–62, the function f is one-to-one. (a) Find its inverse function f -1 and check your answer. (b) Find the domain and the range 
of f and f -1. (c) Graph f, f -1, and y = x on the same coordinate axes.
	 51.	 f1x2 = - 4x	
52.	 f1x2 = 3x  	
53.	 f1x2 = 4x + 2 
	 54.	 f1x2 = 1 - 3x  	
55.	 f1x2 = x3 + 1  	
56.	 f1x2 = x3 - 1 
	 57.	 f1x2 = x2 + 9, x Ú 0  	
58.	 f1x2 = x2 + 4, x Ú 0	
  59.	 f1x2 = -  3
x 
	 60.	 f1x2 = 4
x  	
61.	 f1x2 =
4
x + 2  	
62.	 f1x2 =
1
x - 2 
In Problems 63–74, the function f is one-to-one. (a) Find its inverse function f -1 and check your answer. (b) Find the domain and the range  
of f and f -1.
	 63.	 f1x2 =
4
2 - x 
	
64.	 f1x2 =
2
3 + x 
	
65.	 f1x2 = - 2x
x - 1 
	 66.	 f1x2 =
3x
x + 2 
	
67.	 f1x2 =
2x
3x - 1 
	
68.	 f1x2 = - 3x + 1
x
 
	 69.	 f1x2 = 2x - 3
x + 4  
	
70.	 f1x2 = 3x + 4
2x - 3 
	
71.	 f1x2 = -3x - 4
x - 2 
	 72.	 f1x2 = 2x + 3
x + 2   	
73.	 f1x2 = x2 + 3
3x2   x 7 0  	
74.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4
2x2 ,  x 7 0 
Applications and Extensions
	 75.	 Use the graph of y = f1x2 given in Problem 45 to evaluate 
the following:
(a)	 f1- 12    (b)  f112    (c)  f -1112 
(d)  f -1122 
	76.	 Use the graph of y = f1x2 given in Problem 46 to evaluate 
the following:
(a)	 f122    (b)  f112    (c)  f -1102 
(d)  f -11- 12 
	 77.	 If f162 = 21 and f is one-to-one, what is f -11212? 
	 78.	 If g1- 52 = 3 and g is one-to-one, what is g-1132? 
	 79.	 The domain of a one-to-one function f is [5, q 2, and its 
range is [- 2, q 2. State the domain and the range of f -1.
	 80.	 The domain of a one-to-one function f is [0, q 2, and its 
range is [5, q 2. State the domain and the range of f -1.
	 81.	 The domain of a one-to-one function g is 1- q, 04, and its 
range is [6, q 2. State the domain and the range of g-1.
	 82.	 The domain of a one-to-one function g is [0, 15], and its 
range is (0, 8). State the domain and the range of g-1.
	 83.	 A function y = f1x2 is increasing on the interval (0, 7). What 
conclusions can you draw about the graph of y = f -11x2?
	84.	 A function y = f1x2 is decreasing on the interval (0, 5). What 
conclusions can you draw about the graph of y = f -11x2? 

302 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	 85.	 Find the inverse of the linear function
f1x2 = mx + b, where m ≠0
	 86.	 Find the inverse of the function
f1x2 = 2r 2 - x2 , 0 … x … r
	 87.	 A function f has an inverse function. If the graph of f lies in 
quadrant III, in which quadrant does the graph of f -1 lie? 
	 88.	 A function f  has an inverse function f -1. If the graph of f  lies 
in quadrant II, in which quadrant does the graph of f -1 lie? 
	 89.	 The function f1x2 = 5  is not one-to-one. Find a suitable  
restriction on the domain of f so that the new function that  
results is one-to-one. Then find the inverse of  f.
	 90.	 The function f1x2 = x4 is not one-to-one. Find a suitable  
restriction on the domain of f so that the new function that  
results is one-to-one. Then find the inverse of the new function .
In applications, the symbols used for the independent and dependent variables are often based on common usage. So, rather than using 
y = f1x2 to represent a function, an applied problem might use C = C1q2 to represent the cost C of manufacturing q units of a good. 
Because of this, the inverse notation f -1 used in a pure mathematics problem is not used when finding inverses of applied problems. Rather, 
the inverse of a function such as C = C1q2 will be q = q1C2. So C = C1q2 is a function that represents the cost C as a function of the 
number q of units manufactured, and q = q1C2 is a function that represents the number q as a function of the cost C. Problems 91–94 
illustrate this idea.
	 91.	 Vehicle Stopping Distance  Taking into account reaction 
time, the distance d (in feet) that a car requires to come to 
a complete stop while traveling r miles per hour is given by 
the following function.
d1r2 = 6.95r - 90.45
(a)	 Express the speed r at which the car is traveling as a func-
tion of the distance d required to come to a complete 
stop. Verify your answer by checking that r1d1r22 = r, 
and d1r1d22 = d.
(b)	 Predict the speed that a car was traveling if the distance 
required to stop was 250 feet. 
	 92.	 Height and Head Circumference  The head circumference C 
of a child is related to the height H of the child (both in 
inches) through the function
H1C2 = 2.15C - 10.53
(a)	 Express the head circumference C as a function of 
height H.
(b)	 Verify that C = C1H2 is the inverse of H = H1C2 by 
showing that H1C1H22 = H and C1H1C22 = C.
(c)	 Predict the head circumference of a child who is  
26 inches tall. 
	 93.	 Ideal Body Weight  The ideal body weight W for men (in 
kilograms) as a function of height h (in inches) is given by 
the following function.
W1h2 = 50 + 2.31h - 592
(a)	 What is the ideal weight of a 6-foot male? 
(b)	 Express the height h as a function of weight W. Verify 
your answer by checking that W1h1W22 = W and 
h1W1h22 = h.
	 94.	 Temperature Conversion  The function F1C2 = 9
5  C + 32
	
	 converts a temperature from C degrees Celsius to F degrees 
Fahrenheit.
(a)	 Express the temperature in degrees Celsius C as a  
function of the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit F.
(b)	 Verify that C = C1F2 is the inverse of F = F1C2 by 
showing that C1F1C22 = C and F1C1F22 = F.
(c)	 What is the temperature in degrees Celsius if it is  
70 degrees Fahrenheit? 
	 95.	 Income Taxes  In a certain country, the following func-
tion represents the income tax T (in dollars) due for a 
person whose adjusted gross income is g dollars, where 
30,600 … g … 74,200.
T1g2 = 4220 + 0.251g - 30,6002
	 96.	 Income Taxes  The function
T1g2 = 1815 + 0.15(g - 18,1502
represents the 2014 federal income tax T (in dollars) due for 
a “married filing jointly” filer whose modified adjusted gross 
income is g dollars, where 18,150 … g … 73,800.
(a)	 What is the domain of the function T?
(b)	 Given that the tax due T is an increasing linear function 
of modified adjusted gross income g, find the range of 
the function T.
(c)	 Find adjusted gross income g as a function of federal 
income tax T. What are the domain and the range of this 
function?
	 97.	 Gravity on Earth  Under certain conditions, if a rock falls 
from a height of 50 meters, the height H (in meters) after t 
seconds is approximated by the following equation.
H1t2 = 50 - 4.9t2
(a)	 In general, quadratic functions are not one-to-one. 
However, the function H(t) is one-to-one. Why? 
(b)	 Find the inverse of H and verify your result.
(c)	 How long will it take a rock to fall 80 meters? 
	 98.	 Period of a Pendulum  The period T (in seconds) of a simple 
pendulum as a function of its length l (in feet) is given by
T1l2 = 2pA
l
32.2 
(a)	 Express the length l as a function of the period T.
(b)	 How long is a pendulum whose period is 3 seconds? 
	 99.	 For
f1x2 = ax + b
cx + d
 ,
find f -11x2. If c ≠0, under what conditions on a, b, c, and d 
is f = f -1 ?   
 

Section 5.3  Exponential Functions  303
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	100.	 Can a one-to-one function and its inverse be equal? What 
must be true about the graph of f for this to happen? Give 
some examples to support your conclusion.
	101.	 Draw the graph of a one-to-one function that contains the 
points 1-2, -32, 10, 02, and 11, 52. Now draw the graph of 
its inverse. Compare your graph to those of other students. 
Discuss any similarities. What differences do you see?
	102.	 Give an example of a function whose domain is the set of 
real numbers and that is neither increasing nor decreasing 
on its domain, but is one-to-one.
[Hint: Use a piecewise-defined function.]
	103.	 Is every odd function one-to-one? Explain. 
	104.	 Suppose that C1g2 represents the cost C, in dollars, of  
manufacturing 
g 
cars. 
Explain 
what 
C -11800,0002  
represents.
	105.	 Explain why the horizontal-line test can be used to identify 
one-to-one functions from a graph.
	106.	 Explain why a function must be one-to-one in order to have 
an inverse that is a function. Use the function y = x2 to 
support your explanation.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 107–110 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	107.	 If  f1x2 = 3x2 - 7x, find  f1x + h2 - f1x2.   
	108.	 Use the techniques of shifting, compressing or stretching, 
and reflections to graph f(x) = - 0 x + 20 + 3.
	109.	 Find 
the 
zeros 
of 
the 
quadratic 
function 
f(x) = 3x2 + 5x + 1. What are the x-intercepts, if any, of 
the graph of the function?
	110.	 Find the domain of R(x) = 6x2 - 11x - 2
2x2 - x - 6 . Find any  
horizontal, vertical, or oblique asymptotes.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 Yes; for each input x there is one output y.	
2.	 Increasing on 10, q 2; decreasing on 1- q, 02
	 3.	 5xx ≠- 6, x ≠36	
4.	
x
1 - x,  x ≠0, x ≠- 1
5.3  Exponential Functions
•	 Exponents (Appendix A, Section A.1, pp. 952–953, 
and Section A.10, pp. 1029–1031)
•	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations (Section 2.5, 
pp. 127–136)
•	 Solving Equations (Appendix A, Section A.6,  
pp. 987–994)
•	 Average Rate of Change (Section 2.3,  
pp. 110–111)
•	 Quadratic Functions (Section 3.3, pp. 170–178)
•	 Linear Functions (Section 3.1, pp. 154–157)
•	 Horizontal Asymptotes (Section 4.2,  
pp. 228–230)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
 Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 314.
	
Objectives	 	1  Evaluate Exponential Functions (p. 303)
	
	 	2  Graph Exponential Functions (p. 307)
	
	 	3  Define the Number e (p. 310)
	
	 	4  Solve Exponential Equations (p. 312)
Evaluate Exponential Functions
Appendix A, Section A.10 gives a definition for raising a real number a to a rational 
power. That discussion provides meaning to expressions of the form
ar
where the base a is a positive real number and the exponent r is a rational number.
But what is the meaning of ax, where the base a is a positive real number and 
the exponent x is an irrational number? Although a rigorous definition requires 
methods discussed in calculus, the basis for the definition is easy to follow: Select a 
1

304 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
rational number r that is formed by truncating (removing) all but a finite number of 
digits from the irrational number x. Then it is reasonable to expect that
ax ≈ar
For example, take the irrational number p = 3.14159c. Then an approximation 
to ap is
ap ≈a3.14
where the digits after the hundredths position have been removed from the value  
for p. A better approximation would be
ap ≈a3.14159
where the digits after the hundred-thousandths position have been removed.  
Continuing in this way, we can obtain approximations to ap to any desired degree 
of accuracy.
Most calculators have an    xy    key or a caret key          for working with exponents.
To evaluate expressions of the form ax, enter the base a, then press the   xy  key 
(or the      key), enter the exponent x, and press  =  (or  ENTER  ).
Using a Calculator to Evaluate Powers of 2
Using a calculator, evaluate:
(a)	 21.4      (b)  21.41      (c)  21.414      (d)  21.4142      (e)  212 
(a)	 21.4 ≈2.639015822	
(b)  21.41 ≈2.657371628
(c)	 21.414 ≈2.66474965	
(d)  21.4142 ≈2.665119089
(d)	 212 ≈2.665144143
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
It can be shown that the familiar laws for rational exponents hold for real exponents.
^
^
Example 1
Solution
•
Table 1 
x
f(x)
0
5
1
10
2
20
3
40
4
80
Laws of Exponents
If s, t, a, and b are real numbers with a 7 0 and b 7 0, then
	
 as # at = as+t    1as2t = ast   
 1ab2s = as # bs	
	
 1 s = 1  
 a-s = 1
as = a1
ab
s
    a0 = 1
	
(1)
Theorem
Introduction to Exponential Growth
Suppose a function f has the following two properties:
	 1.	 The value of f doubles with every 1-unit increase in the independent variable x.
	 2.	 The value of f at x = 0 is 5, so f102 = 5.
Table 1 shows values of the function f for x = 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4.
Let’s find an equation y = f1x2 that describes this function f. The key fact is 
that the value of f doubles for every 1-unit increase in x.
f102 = 5
f112 = 2f102 = 2 # 5 = 5 # 21  
f122 = 2f112 = 215 # 22 = 5 # 22  
f132 = 2f122 = 215 # 22 2 = 5 # 23 
f142 = 2f132 = 215 # 23 2 = 5 # 24 
The pattern leads to
f1x2 = 2f1x - 12 = 215 # 2x-1 2 = 5 # 2x 
Double the value of f at 0 to get the value at 1.
Double the value of f at 1 to get the value at 2.

Section 5.3  Exponential Functions  305
In the definition of an exponential function, the base a = 1 is excluded  
because this function is simply the constant function f1x2 = C # 1x = C. Bases that
are negative are also excluded; otherwise, many values of x would have to be 
excluded from the domain, such as x = 1
2 and x = 3
4 . [Recall that 1-221>2 = 2-2 ,
1 -323>4 = 2
4 1 -323 = 2
4 -27 , and so on, are not defined in the set of real 
numbers.] 
Transformations (vertical shifts, horizontal shifts, reflections, and so on) of 
a function of the form f1x2 = Cax also represent exponential functions. Some  
examples of exponential functions are
f1x2 = 2x   F1x2 = a1
3b
x
+ 5  G1x2 = 2 # 3x-3
For each function, note that the base of the exponential expression is a constant 
and the exponent contains a variable.
In the function f1x2 = 5 # 2x, notice that the ratio of consecutive outputs is 
constant for 1-unit increases in the input. This ratio equals the constant 2, the base 
of the exponential function. In other words,
f112
f102 = 5 # 21
5
= 2  f122
f112 = 5 # 22
5 # 21 = 2  f132
f122 = 5 # 23
5 # 22 = 2  and so on
This leads to the following result.
Warning  It is important to distinguish 
a power function, g1x2 = axn , n Ú 2 
an integer, from an exponential function, 
f1x2 = Cax, a ≠1, a 7 0. In a power 
function, the base is a variable and the 
exponent is a constant. In an exponential 
function, the base is a constant and the 
exponent is a variable.	
■
In Words
For 1-unit changes in the input x 
of an exponential function 
f (x) = Cax , the ratio  
of consecutive outputs is the 
constant a.
x
y
- 1
5
0
2
1
- 1
2
- 4
3
- 7
x
y
- 1
32
0
16
1
8
2
4
3
2
x
y
- 1
2
0
4
1
7
2
11
3
16
An exponential function is a function of the form
f1x2 = Cax
where a is a positive real number 1a 7 02, a ≠1, and C ≠0 is a real number. 
The domain of f is the set of all real numbers. The base a is the growth factor, 
and, because f102 = Ca0 = C, C is called the initial value.
Definition
For an exponential function f1x2 = Cax, a 7 0, a ≠1, and C ≠0, if x is any 
real number, then
f1x + 12
f1x2
= a  or f1x + 12 = af1x2
Theorem
Proof
	
f1x + 12
f1x2
= Cax+1
Cax
= ax+1-x = a1 = a	
■
Identifying Linear or Exponential Functions
Determine whether the given function is linear, exponential, or neither. For those 
that are linear, find a linear function that models the data. For those that are  
exponential, find an exponential function that models the data.
(a)	 	
(b)	
(c) 
Example 2

306 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
For each function, compute the average rate of change of y with respect to x and the 
ratio of consecutive outputs. If the average rate of change is constant, then the function 
is linear. If the ratio of consecutive outputs is constant, then the function is exponential.
Solution
Table 2 
x
y
Average Rate of Change
Ratio of Consecutive Outputs
-1
5
 
 
 
 
∆y
∆x =
2 - 5
0 - (-1) = -3
2
5 
0
2
 
 
 
 
-1 - 2
1 - 0
= -3
-1
2
= - 1
2 
1
-1
 
 
 
 
-4 - (-1)
2 - 1
= -3
-4
-1 = 4 
2
-4
 
 
 
 
-7 - (-4)
3 - 2
= -3
-7
-4 = 7
4 
3
-7
 
 
x
y
Average Rate of Change
Ratio of Consecutive Outputs
-1
32
 
 
 
 
∆y
∆x = 16 - 32
0 - (-1) = -16
16
32 = 1
2
0
16
 
 
 
-8
8
16 = 1
2
1
8
 
 
 
-4
4
8 = 1
2
2
4
 
 
 
-2
2
4 = 1
2
3
2
 
 
x
y
Average Rate of Change
Ratio of Consecutive Outputs
-1
2
 
 
 
 
∆y
∆x =
4 - 2
0 - (-1) = 2
2 
0
4
 
 
 
 
3
7
4
1
7
 
 
 
 
4
11
7
2
11
 
 
 
 
5
16
11
3
16
 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)	 See Table 2(a). The average rate of change for every 1-unit increase in x is -3. 
Therefore, the function is a linear function. In a linear function the average 
rate of change is the slope m, so m = -3. The y-intercept b is the value of 
the function at x = 0, so b = 2. The linear function that models the data is 
f1x2 = mx + b = -3x + 2.
(b)	 See Table 2(b). For this function, the average rate of change from -1 to 0 is -16, 
and the average rate of change from 0 to 1 is -8. Because the average rate 
of change is not constant, the function is not a linear function. The ratio of 
	
consecutive outputs for a 1-unit increase in the inputs is a constant, 1
2. Because
	
the ratio of consecutive outputs is constant, the function is an exponential 
	
function with growth factor a = 1
2. The initial value C of the exponential 

Section 5.3  Exponential Functions  307
	
function is C = 16, the value of the function at 0. Therefore, the exponential
	
function that models the data is g1x2 = Cax = 16 # a1
2b
x
.
(c)	 See Table 2(c). For this function, the average rate of change from -1 to 0 is 2, 
and the average rate of change from 0 to 1 is 3. Because the average rate of 
change is not constant, the function is not a linear function. The ratio of  
consecutive outputs from -1 to 0 is 2, and the ratio of consecutive outputs from 
	
0 to 1 is 7
4. Because the ratio of consecutive outputs is not a constant, the function 
is not an exponential function.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Graph Exponential Functions
If we know how to graph an exponential function of the form f1x2 = ax, then we 
can use transformations (shifting, stretching, and so on) to obtain the graph of any 
exponential function.
First, let’s graph the exponential function f1x2 = 2x.
Graphing an Exponential Function
Graph the exponential function: f1x2 = 2x
The domain of f1x2 = 2x is the set of all real numbers. Begin by locating some 
points on the graph of f1x2 = 2x, as listed in Table 3.
Because 2x 7 0 for all x, the range of f is 10, q 2. Therefore, the graph has 
no x-intercepts, and in fact the graph will lie above the x-axis for all x. As Table 3 
indicates, the y-intercept is 1. Table 3 also indicates that as x S - q, the value of 
f1x2 = 2x gets closer and closer to 0. Therefore, the x-axis 1y = 02 is a horizontal 
asymptote to the graph as x S - q. This provides the end behavior for x large and 
negative.
To determine the end behavior for x large and positive, look again at Table 3. As 
x S q, f1x2 = 2x grows very quickly, causing the graph of f1x2 = 2x to rise very 
rapidly. It is apparent that f is an increasing function and so is one-to-one.
Using all this information, plot some of the points from Table 3 and connect 
them with a smooth, continuous curve, as shown in Figure 18.
•
2
Example 3
Solution
Table 3
x
f(x) = 2x 
- 10
 2-10 ≈0.00098
- 3
2-3 = 1
8
- 2
2-2 = 1
4
- 1
2-1 = 1
2
0
20 = 1
1
21 = 2
2
22 = 4
3
23 = 8
10
210 = 1024
Figure 18  f(x) = 2x
•
x
y
3
(2, 4)
(1, 2)
(0, 1)
(
)
–2,
6
3
1–4
(
)
–1, 1–2
(
)
–3, 1–8
y  0
Graphs that look like the one in Figure 18 occur very frequently in a variety of 
situations. For example, the graph in Figure 19 illustrates the number of Facebook 

308 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
subscribers by year from 2004 to 2013. One might conclude from this graph that the 
number of Facebook subscribers is growing exponentially.
Source: Facebook Newsroom
Figure 19
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2012
2013
2011
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
400
300
200
Subscribers (in millions)
Year
100
0
Later in this chapter, more will be said about situations that lead to exponential 
growth. For now, let’s continue to explore properties of exponential functions.
The graph of f1x2 = 2x in Figure 18 is typical of all exponential functions of 
the form f(x) = ax with a 7 1. Such functions are increasing functions and hence 
are one-to-one. Their graphs lie above the x-axis, pass through the point 10, 12, and 
thereafter rise rapidly as x S q. As x S - q, the x-axis 1y = 02 is a horizontal 
asymptote. There are no vertical asymptotes. Finally, the graphs are smooth and 
continuous with no corners or gaps.
Figure 20 illustrates the graphs of two more exponential functions whose bases 
are larger than 1. Notice that the larger the base, the steeper the graph is when x 7 0, 
and when x 6 0, the larger the base, the closer the graph of the equation is to the 
x-axis.
Properties of the Exponential Function f(x) = ax, a + 1
	 1.	 The domain is the set of all real numbers, or (- q, q) using interval  
notation; the range is the set of positive real numbers, or (0, q) using  
interval notation.
	 2.	 There are no x-intercepts; the y-intercept is 1.
	 3.	 The x-axis 1y = 02 is a horizontal asymptote as x S - q. 3 lim
xS - qax = 04.
	 4.	 f1x2 = ax, a 7 1, is an increasing function and is one-to-one.
	 5.	 The graph of f contains the points a -1, 1
ab, 10, 12, and 11, a2. 
	 6.	 The graph of f is smooth and continuous, with no corners or gaps. See  
Figure 21.
Seeing the Concept
Graph Y1 = 2x and compare what you see to Figure 18. Clear the screen, graph Y1 = 3x and Y2 = 6x, 
and compare what you see to Figure 20. Clear the screen and graph Y1 = 10x and Y2 = 100x.
Now consider f1x2 = ax when 0 6 a 6 1.
Figure 20 
y  0
x
y = 6x
y = 3x
y
–3
3
(1, 3)
(1, 6)
(0, 1)
6
3
(
)
–1, 1–6
(
)
–1, 1–3
Figure 21  f(x) = ax, a 7 1
y 5 0
x
y
(0, 1)
−1, )
1
a
(1, a)
(

Section 5.3  Exponential Functions  309
Graphing an Exponential Function
Graph the exponential function: f1x2 = a1
2b
x
The domain of f1x2 = a1
2b
x
 consists of all real numbers. As before, locate some
points on the graph as shown in Table 4. Because a1
2b
x
7 0 for all x, the range of f
is the interval 10, q 2. The graph lies above the x-axis and has no x-intercepts. The
y-intercept is 1. As x S - q, f1x2 = a1
2b
x
 grows very quickly. As x S q, the 
values of f1x2 approach 0. The x-axis 1y = 02 is a horizontal asymptote as 
x S q. It is apparent that f is a decreasing function and so is one-to-one. Figure 22  
illustrates the graph.
Example 4
Solution
Table 4 
x
f(x) = a1
2 b
x
- 10
a1
2b
-10
= 1024
−3
a1
2b
-3
= 8
−2
a1
2b
-2
= 4
−1
a1
2b
-1
= 2
0
a1
2b
0
= 1
1
a1
2b
1
= 1
2
2
a1
2b
2
= 1
4
3
a1
2b
3
= 1
8
10
a1
2b
10
≈0.00098
Seeing the Concept
Using a graphing utility, simultaneously 
graph:
(a)  Y1 = 3x , Y2 = a1
3b
x
(b)  Y1 = 6x , Y2 = a1
6b
x
Conclude that the graph of Y2 = a1
ab
x
 ,
for a 7 0, is the reflection about the  
y -axis of the graph of Y1 = ax .
Figure 22  f(x) = a1
2b
x
•
x
y
–3
3
(–2, 4)
(–1, 2)
(0, 1)
1,
3,
(
)
(
)
(
) 2,
6
3
1–2
1–4
1–8
y  0
The graph of y = a1
2b
x
 also can be obtained from the graph of y = 2x using
transformations. The graph of y = a1
2b
x
= 2-x is a reflection about the y-axis of
the graph of y = 2x (replace x by -x). See Figures 23(a) and (b).
Figure 23 
x
y
3
(2, 4)
(1, 2)
(0, 1)
(
)
–2,
6
3
1–4
(
)
–1, 1–2
(
)
–3, 1–8
x
y
–3
3
(–2, 4)
(–1, 2)
(0, 1)
1,
3,
(
)
(
)
(
) 2,
6
3
1–2
( )
1–2
1–4
1–8
(a)   y  2x
(b)   y  2x ( )
1–2
y  0
y  0
y 
y  2x
x
Replace x by x;
Reflect about
the y-axis
x
The graph of f1x2 = a1
2b
x
 in Figure 22 is typical of all exponential functions of 
the form f1x2 = ax with 0 6 a 6 1. Such functions are decreasing and one-to-one. 
Their graphs lie above the x-axis and pass through the point 10, 12. The graphs rise 
rapidly as x S - q. As x S q, the x-axis 1y = 02 is a horizontal asymptote. There 
are no vertical asymptotes. Finally, the graphs are smooth and continuous, with no 
corners or gaps.

310 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Figure 24 illustrates the graphs of two more exponential functions whose bases 
are between 0 and 1. Notice that the smaller base results in a graph that is steeper 
when x 6 0. When x 7 0, the graph of the equation with the smaller base is closer 
to the x-axis.
Figure 26 
Properties of the Exponential Function f(x) = ax , 0 * a * 1
	 1.	 The domain is the set of all real numbers, or 1 - q, q 2 using interval  
notation; the range is the set of positive real numbers, or 10, q 2 using 
interval notation.
	 2.	 There are no x-intercepts; the y-intercept is 1.
	 3.	 The x-axis 1y = 02 is a horizontal asymptote as x S q 3 lim
xSq ax = 04.
	 4.	 f1x2 = ax, 0 6 a 6 1, is a decreasing function and is one-to-one.
	 5.	 The graph of f contains the points a -1, 1
a b, 10, 12, and 11, a2.
	 6.	 The graph of f is smooth and continuous, with no corners or gaps. See  
Figure 25.
Graphing Exponential Functions Using Transformations
Graph f1x2 = 2-x - 3 and determine the domain, range, and horizontal asymptote 
of f.
Begin with the graph of y = 2x. Figure 26 shows the stages.
Example 5
Solution
(3, 8)
(2, 4)
(1, 2)
(0, 1)
(
)
(
)
(
)
21, 1–2
x
y
3
10
(23, 8)
(22, 4)
(21, 2)
(0, 1)
1, 1–2
x
y
23
1
10
(23, 5)
(22, 1)
(0, 22)
(21, 21)
1, 2
5–2
x
y
2
10
24
D   y 5 2x
E   y 5 22x
F   y 5 22x 2 3
y 5 23
y 5 0
y 5 0
Replace x by 2x;
reflect
about y-axis
Subtract 3;
shift down
3 units
As Figure 26(c) illustrates, the domain of f1x2 = 2-x - 3 is the interval 1 - q, q 2 
and the range is the interval 1 -3, q 2. The horizontal asymptote of f is the line 
y = -3.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Define the Number e
Many problems that occur in nature require the use of an exponential function 
whose base is a certain irrational number, symbolized by the letter e.
3
Figure 24 
x
( )
(
)
y =       x
y
–3
3
(–1, 3)
(0, 1)
1,
6
3
1–3
1–3
y  0
y =      x
( )
(
)
(–1, 6)
1, 1–6
1–6
Figure 25  f(x) = ax, 0 6 a 6 1
x
y
(0, 1)
(1, a)
(
)
–1, 1–a
y 5 0

Section 5.3  Exponential Functions  311
One way of arriving at this important number e is given next.
*If your calculator does not have one of these keys, refer to your owner’s manual.
Table 6 
x
ex 
- 2
e-2 ≈0.14
- 1
e-1 ≈0.37
0
e0 = 1
1
e1 ≈2.72
2
e2 ≈7.39
Table 5 
n
1
n
1 + 1
n
a1 + 1
nb
n
1
1
2
2
2
0.5
1.5
2.25
5
0.2
1.2
2.48832
10
0.1
1.1
2.59374246
100
0.01
1.01
2.704813829
1,000
0.001
1.001
2.716923932
10,000
0.0001
1.0001
2.718145927
100,000
0.00001
1.00001
2.718268237
1,000,000
0.000001
1.000001
2.718280469
1,000,000,000
10-9
1 + 10-9
2.718281827
The number e is defined as the number that the expression
	
a1 + 1
n b
n
	
(2)
approaches as n S q. In calculus, this is expressed, using limit notation, as
e = lim
nSq a1 + 1
n b
n
Definition
Table 5 illustrates what happens to the defining expression (2) as n takes on  
increasingly large values. The last number in the right column in the table approximates 
e correct to nine decimal places. That is, e = 2.718281827c . Remember, the three dots 
indicate that the decimal places continue. Because these decimal places continue but 
do not repeat, e is an irrational number. The number e is often expressed as a decimal 
rounded to a specific number of places. For example, e ≈2.71828 is rounded to five 
decimal places.
Graphing Exponential Functions Using Transformations
Graph f1x2 = -ex-3 and determine the domain, range, and horizontal asymptote 
of f.
Example 6
Seeing the Concept
Graph Y1 = ex and compare what you see to Figure 27. Use eVALUEate or TABLE to verify the points on 
the graph shown in Figure 27. Now graph Y2 = 2x and Y3 = 3x on the same screen as Y1 = ex . Notice 
that the graph of Y1 = ex lies between these two graphs.
Figure 27  y = ex
(1, e)
0
x
y
3
6
3
(2, e2)
(0, 1)
y  0
(
)
–2, 1–
e2
(
)
–1, 1–e
The exponential function f1x2 = ex, whose base is the number e, occurs with 
such frequency in applications that it is usually referred to as the exponential
function. Indeed, most calculators have the key    ex    or   exp(x) , which may be used
to evaluate the exponential function for a given value of x.*
Now use your calculator to approximate ex for x = -2, x = -1, x = 0, x = 1, 
and x = 2. See Table 6. The graph of the exponential function f1x2 = ex is given in 
Figure 27. Since 2 6 e 6 3, the graph of y = ex lies between the graphs of y = 2x 
and y = 3x. Do you see why? (Refer to Figures 18 and 20.)

312 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
As Figure 28(c) illustrates, the domain of f1x2 = -ex-3 is the interval 1 - q, q 2, 
and the range is the interval 1 - q, 02. The horizontal asymptote is the line y = 0.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
Solve Exponential Equations
Equations that involve terms of the form ax, where a 7 0 and a ≠1, are referred 
to as exponential equations. Such equations can sometimes be solved by appropriately 
applying the Laws of Exponents and property (3):
•
4
Figure 28 
(0, 21)
(1, 2e)
(2, 2e2)
x
y
23
26
3
(3, 21)
(4, 2e)
(5, 2e2)
x
y
23
26
(1, e)
x
y
3
6
3
(2, e2)
(0, 1)
(c) y 5 2ex23
y 5 0
(b) y 5 2e x
(a) y 5 ex
y 5 0
Replace x by
x − 3;
Shift right
3 units.
Multiply by −1;
Reflect about
the x-axis.
y 5 0
(
)
–2, 1–
e2
(
)
–2, – 1–
e2
(
)
1, – 1–
e2
(
)
–1, 1–e
(
)
–1, – 1–e
(
)
2, – 1–e
	
If au = av, then u = v.	
(3)
Property (3) is a consequence of the fact that exponential functions are one-to-one. 
To use property (3), each side of the equality must be written with the same base.
Solving Exponential Equations
Solve each exponential equation.
(a)	 3x+1 = 81        (a)  42x-1 = 8x+3
(a)	 Since 81 = 34, write the equation as
3x+1 = 81 = 34
Now the expressions on both sides of the equation have the same base, 3. Set 
the exponents equal to each other to obtain
 x + 1 = 4
 x = 3
The solution set is {3}.
(b)	
 42x-1 = 8x+3
	
 122 2(2x-1) = 123 2(x+3) 
	
 22(2x-1) = 23(x+3) 
	
 2(2x - 1) = 3(x + 3)
	
 4x - 2 = 3x + 9
	
 x = 11
The solution set is {11}.	
•
Now Work p r o b l e m s  6 5  a n d  7 5
Example 7
Solution
4 = 22; 8 = 23 
1ar 2s = ars 
If au = av , then u = v.
In Words
When two exponential expressions 
with the same base are equal, 
then their exponents are equal.
Begin with the graph of y = ex. Figure 28 shows the stages.
Solution

Section 5.3  Exponential Functions  313
Solving an Exponential Equation
Solve: e-x2 = 1ex22 # 1
e3
Use the Laws of Exponents first to get a single expression with the base e on the 
right side.
1ex22 # 1
e3 = e2x # e-3 = e2x-3
As a result,
 e-x2 = e2x-3
 -x2 = 2x - 3 
 x2 + 2x - 3 = 0
 1x + 32 1x - 12 = 0
 x = -3 or x = 1
The solution set is 5 -3, 16.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 1
Exponential Probability
Between 9:00 pm and 10:00 pm, cars arrive at Burger King’s drive-thru at the rate of 
12 cars per hour (0.2 car per minute). The following formula from statistics can be 
used to determine the probability that a car will arrive within t minutes of 9:00 pm.
F1t2 = 1 - e-0.2t
(a)	 Determine the probability that a car will arrive within 5 minutes of 9 pm (that is, 
before 9:05 pm).
(b)	 Determine the probability that a car will arrive within 30 minutes of 9 pm  
(before 9:30 pm).
(c)	 Graph F using your graphing utility.
(d)	 What value does F approach as t increases without bound in the positive direction?
(a)	 The probability that a car will arrive within 5 minutes is found by evaluating 
F1t2 at t = 5.
F152 = 1 - e-0.2152 ≈0.63212
There is a 63% probability that a car will arrive within 5 minutes.
(b)	 The probability that a car will arrive within 30 minutes is found by evaluating 
F1t2 at t = 30.
F1302 = 1 - e-0.21302 ≈0.9975
There is a 99.75% probability that a car will arrive within 30 minutes.
(c)	 See Figure 29 for the graph of F.
(d)	 As time passes, the probability that a car will arrive increases. The value that F 
	
approaches can be found by letting t S q. Since e-0.2t =
1
e0.2t, it follows that
	
e-0.2t S 0 as t S q. Therefore, F approaches 1 as t gets large. The algebraic  
analysis is confirmed by Figure 29.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1 3
Example 8
Solution
Apply property (3).
Place the quadratic equation in standard form.
Factor.
Use the Zero-Product Property.
Example 9
Solution
c 
Use a calculator.
c 
Use a calculator.
Figure 29  F(t) = 1 - e-0.2t
0
1
0
30

314 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Summary
Properties of the Exponential Function
f1x2 = ax, a 7 1	
Domain: the interval 1 - q, q 2; range: the interval 10, q 2 
x-intercepts: none; y-intercept: 1 
Horizontal asymptote: x-axis 1y = 02 as x S - q 
Increasing; one-to-one; smooth; continuous 
See Figure 21 for a typical graph.
f1x2 = ax, 0 6 a 6 1	
Domain: the interval 1 - q, q 2; range: the interval 10, q 2 
	
x-intercepts: none; y-intercept: 1 
	
Horizontal asymptote: x-axis 1y = 02 as x S q 
	
Decreasing; one-to-one; smooth; continuous 
	
See Figure 25 for a typical graph.
If au = av, then u = v.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 43 =
 ; 82>3 =
 ; 3-2 =
 . (pp. 952–953 and 
pp. 1029–1031)
	 2.	 Solve: x2 + 3x = 4 (pp. 987–994) 
	 3.	 True or False  To graph y = 1x - 223, shift the graph of 
y = x3 to the left 2 units. (pp. 127–136) 
	 4.	 Find the average rate of change of f1x2 = 3x - 5 from 
x = 0 to x = 4. (pp. 110–111) 
	 5.	 True or False  The function f1x2 =
2x
x - 3 has y = 2 as a 
horizontal asymptote. (pp. 228–230) 
5.3  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 6.	 A(n) 
  
 is a function of the form 
f1x2 = Cax , where a 7 0, a ≠1, and C ≠0 are real 
numbers. The base a is the  
  
  and C is the 
 
  
 .
	 7.	 For an exponential function f1x2 = Cax , 
f1x + 12
f1x2
=    .
	 8.	 True or False  The domain of the exponential function 
f1x2 = ax, where a 7 0 and a ≠1, is the set of all real 
numbers. 
	 9.	 True or False  The graph of the exponential function 
f1x2 = ax, where a 7 0 and a ≠1, has no x -intercept. 
	 10.	 The graph of every exponential function f1x2 = ax, where
a 7 0 and a ≠1, passes through three points:          ,          , 
and          .
	 11.	 If 3x = 34, then x =    
 .
	 12.	 True or False  The graphs of y = 3x and y = a1
3b
x
 are  
identical. 
	 13.	 Which of the following exponential functions is an increasing 
function?
(a)	 f1x2 = 0.5x       (b)  f1x2 = a5
2b
x
(c)	 f1x2 = a2
3b
x
    (d)  f1x2 = 0.9 x 
	 14.	 Which of the following is the range of the exponential  
function f1x2 = ax, a 7 0 and a ≠1?
(a)	 (- q, q)    (b)  (- q, 0)
(c)	 (0, q)          (d)  (- q, 0) ∪(0, q) 
Skill Building
In Problems 15–26, approximate each number using a calculator. Express your answer rounded to three decimal places.
	15.	 (a)  2 3.14	
(b)  2 3.141	
(c)  2 3.1415	
(d)  2 p
	16.	 (a)  2 2.7	
(b)  2 2.71	
(c)  2 2.718	
(d)  2 e
	17.	 (a)  2.7 3.1	
(b)  2.71 3.14	
(c)  2.718 3.141	
(d)  e p
	18.	 (a)  3.1 2.7	
(b)  3.14 2.71	
(c)  3.141 2.718	
(d)  p e
	 19.	 a1 + 0.09
12 b
24
 
20.  (1 + 0.04)6 
	 21.	 158a5
6b
8.63
 
	
22.  8.4a1
3b
2.9
 
	 23.	 e-1.3 
24.  e1.2 
	 25.	 83.6e-0.157(9.5)
	 26.  125e0.026(7) 

Section 5.3  Exponential Functions  315
x
f(x)
-1
3
0
6
1
12
2
18
3
30
x
g(x)
-1
2
0
5
1
8
2
11
3
14
x
H(x)
-1
1
4 
0
1
1
4
2
16
3
64
x
F(x)
-1
2
3
0
1
1
3
2
2
9
4
3
27
8
x
f(x)
-1
3
2 
0
3
1
6
2
12
3
24
x
g(x)
-1
6
0
1
1
0
2
3
3
10
x
H(x)
-1
2
0
4
1
6
2
8
3
10
x
F(x)
-1
1
2
0
1
4
1
1
8
2
1
16
3
1
32
	 27.	
	 28.	
29.	
30.	
34.	
31.	
32.	
33.	
In Problems 27–34, determine whether the given function is linear, exponential, or neither. For those that are linear functions, find a linear 
function that models the data; for those that are exponential, find an exponential function that models the data.
	 35.	
36.	
37.	
38.	
In Problems 35–42, the graph of an exponential function is given. Match each graph to one of the following functions.
(A)  y = 3x	
(B)  y = 3-x	
(C)  y = - 3x	
(D)  y = -3-x
(E)  y = 3x - 1	
(F)  y = 3x-1	
(G)  y = 31-x	
(H)  y = 1 - 3x
	 39.	
40.	
41.	
42.	
x
y
2
2
y  0
3
1
x
y
2
3
1
2
y  0
y
2
1
3
2
y  0
x
x
y
2
1
3
2
y  1
x
y
2
3
1
2
y  0
x
y
2
1
3
2
y  0
x
y
2
3
1
2
y  1
x
y
2
3
1
2
y  0
In Problems 43–54, use transformations to graph each function. Determine the domain, range, and horizontal asymptote of each function.
	 43.	 f1x2 = 2x + 1	
44.	 f1x2 = 3x - 2	
45.	 f1x2 = 2x+2	
46.	 f1x2 = 3x-1
	 47.	 f1x2 = 4 # a1
3b
x
	
48.	 f1x2 = 3 # a1
2b
x
	
49.	 f1x2 = - 3x + 1	
50.	 f1x2 = 3-x - 2
	 51.	 f1x2 = 1 - 2x+3	
52.	 f1x2 = 2 + 4x-1	
53.	 f1x2 = 1 - 2-x>3	
54.	 f1x2 = 2 + 3x>2
In Problems 55–62, begin with the graph of y = ex (Figure 27) and use transformations to graph each function. Determine the domain, 
range, and horizontal asymptote of each function.
	 55.	 f1x2 = e-x	
56.	 f1x2 = - ex	
57.	 f1x2 = ex - 1	
58.	 f1x2 = ex+2
	 59.	 f1x2 = 9 - 3e-x	
60.	 f1x2 = 5 - e-x	
61.	 f1x2 = 7 - 3e2x	
62.	 f1x2 = 2 - e-x>2

316 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
In Problems 63–82, solve each equation.
	 63.	 5x = 5-6 
	
64.	 7x = 73 
	
65.	 2-x = 16 
	
66.	 3-x = 81 
	 67.	 a1
4b
x
= 1
64 
	
68.	 a1
5b
x
= 1
25 
	
69.	 5x+3 = 1
5 
	
70.	 22x-1 = 4 
	 71.	 4x2 = 2x  	
72.	 3x3 = 9x 
	
73.	 9-x+15 = 27x 
	
74.	 8-x+14 = 16x 
	 75.	 3x2-7 = 272x 
	
76.	 5x2+8 = 1252x 
	
77.	 92x # 27x2 = 3-1 
	 78.	 4x # 2x2 = 162 
	 79.	 e3x = e2-x 
	
80.	 ex = e3x+8 
	
 81.	 ex2 = e3x # 1
e2 
	
82.	 1e42x # ex2 = e12 
	 83.	 If 4x = 7, what does 4-2x  equal? 
	
84.	 If 2x = 3, what does 4-x  equal? 
	 85.	 If 3-x = 2, what does 32x  equal? 
	
86.	 If 5-x = 3, what does 53x  equal?    
	 87.	 If 9x = 25, what does 3x equal?  	
88.	 If 2-3x =
1
1000, what does 2x equal? 
In Problems 89–92, determine the exponential function whose graph is given.
	 89.	
90.	
91.	
92.	
93.	 Find an exponential function with horizontal asymptote 
y = 2 whose graph contains the points 10, 32 and 11, 52.
	 94.	 Find an exponential function with horizontal asymptote 
y = - 3 whose graph contains the points 10, -22 and 1 -2, 12.
x
y
3
(0, 1)
(1, 3)
(2, 9)
(–1,   )
20
4
8
12
16
–2
1–3
–3
–2
–1
2
1
y  0
x
y
3
(1, 5)
(0, 1)
(–1,   )
20
4
8
12
16
–2
1–5
–3
–2
–1
2
1
y  0
x
y
–1
3
2
1
–10
–30
–20
–40
(–1, –   )
1–6
(2, –36)
(1, –6)
(0, –1)
y  0
x
y
3
2
–4
–12
–8
(–1, –   )
1–e
(2, –e2)
(1, –e)
(0, –1)
y  0
Mixed Practice
	 95.	 Suppose that f (x) = 2x.
(a)	 What is f142? What point is on the graph of f ?
(b)	 If f1x2 = 1
16, what is x ? What point is on the graph  
of f ?
	 96.	 Suppose that f1x2 = 3x.
(a)	 What is f (4)? What point is on the graph of f?
(b)	 If f1x2 = 1
9, what is x ? What point is on the graph  
of f ?
	 97.	 Suppose that g1x2 = 4x + 2.
(a)	 What is g1- 12? What point is on the graph of g ?
(b)	 If g1x2 = 66, what is x ? What point is on the graph  
of g ? 
	 98.	 Suppose that g1x2 = 5x - 3.
(a)	 What is g1- 12? What point is on the graph of g?
(b)	 If g1x2 = 122, what is x ? What point is on the graph  
of g ? 
	 99.	 Suppose that H1x2 = a1
2b
x
- 4.
(a)	 What is H1- 62? What point is on the graph of H ?
(b)	 If H(x) = 12, what is x ? What point is on the graph  
of H ? 
(c)	 Find the zero of H. 
	100.	 Suppose that F1x2 = a1
3b
x
- 3.
(a)	 What is F1- 52? What point is on the graph of F ?
(b)	 If F1x2 = 24, what is x ? What point is on the graph  
of F ? 
(c)	 Find the zero of F. 

Section 5.3  Exponential Functions  317
In Problems 101–104, graph each function. Based on the graph, state the domain and the range, and find any intercepts.
	101.	 f1x2 = ee-x 
if x 6 0
ex 
if x Ú 0
	102.	 f1x2 = eex 
if x 6 0
e-x 
if x Ú 0
	103.	 f1x2 = e - ex 
if x 6 0
- e-x 
if x Ú 0
	104.	 f1x2 = e - e-x 
if x 6 0
- ex 
if x Ú 0
Applications and Extensions
	105.	 Optics  If a single pane of glass obliterates 9% of the light 
passing through it, then the percent p of the light that passes 
through n successive panes is given approximately by the 
following function.
p1n2 = 10010.912n 
(a)	 What percent of light will pass through 5 panes? 
(b)	 What percent of light will pass through 15 panes? 
(c)	 Explain the meaning of the base 0.97 in this problem.
	106.	 Atmospheric Pressure  The atmospheric pressure p on a 
balloon or airplane decreases with increasing height. This 
pressure, measured in millimeters of mercury, is related to 
the height h (in kilometers) above sea level by the function
p1h2 = 760e-0.145h
(a)	 Find the atmospheric pressure at a height of 2 km  
(over a mile). 
(b)	 What is it at a height of 10 kilometers (over 30,000 feet)?
	107.	 Depreciation  The price, p, of a specific used car that is x 
years old is given by the following formula.
p1x2 = 1479610.742x
(a)	 How much does a 3-year old car cost?
(b)	 How much does a 9-year old car cost?
(c)	 Explain the meaning of the base 0.74 in this problem.
	108.	 Healing of Wounds  The normal healing of wounds can be 
modeled by an exponential function. If A0 represents the 
original area of the wound and if A equals the area of the 
wound, then the function
A1n2 = A0
 e-0.35n
	
	 describes the area of a wound after n days following an injury 
when no infection is present to retard the healing. Suppose 
that a wound initially had an area of 100 square millimeters.
(a)	 If healing is taking place, how large will the area of the 
wound be after 3 days? 
(b)	 How large will it be after 10 days? 
	109.	 Advanced-Stage Pancreatic Cancer The percentage of pa-
tients P who have survived t years after initial diagnosis of a 
certain disease is modeled by the function
P1t2 = 10010.82t.
Source: Cancer Treatment Centers of America
(a)	 According to the model, what percent of patients sur-
vive 1 year after initial diagnosis? 
(b)	 What percent of patients survive 4 years after initial 
­diagnosis? 
(c)	 Explain the meaning of the base 0.8 in the context of 
this problem.
	110.	 Endangered Species In a protected environment, the  
population P of a certain endangered species recovers over 
time t (in years) according to the model
P(t) = 30(1.149)t
(a)	 What is the size of the initial population of the species? 
(b)	 According to the model, what will be the population of 
the species in 5 years? 
(c)	 According to the model, what will be the population of 
the species in 10 years? 
(d)	 According to the model, what will be the population of 
the species in 15 years? 
(e)	 What 
is 
happening 
to 
the 
population 
every  
5 years? 
	111.	 Drug Medication  The function
D1h2 = 6e-0.59h
	
	 can be used to find the number of milligrams D of a certain 
drug that is in a patient’s bloodstream h hours after the drug 
has been administered. How many milligrams will be pres-
ent after 1 hour? After 3 hours? 
	112.	 Spreading of Rumors  A model for the number N of people 
in a college community who have heard a certain rumor is
N = P11 - e-0.15d2
	
	 where P is the total population of the community and d is 
the number of days that have elapsed since the rumor began. 
In a community of 1000 students, how many students will 
have heard the rumor after 3 days? 
	113.	 Exponential Probability  Between 12:00 pm and 1:00 pm, 
cars arrive at Citibank’s drive-thru at the rate of 6 cars 
per hour (0.1 car per minute). The following formula from  
probability can be used to determine the probability that a 
car will arrive within t minutes of 12:00 pm.
F1t2 = 1 - e-0.1t
(a)	 Determine the probability that a car will arrive within 
10 minutes of 12:00 pm (that is, before 12:10 pm). 
(b)	 Determine the probability that a car will arrive within 
40 minutes of 12:00 pm (before 12:40 pm). 
(c)	 What value does F approach as t becomes unbounded in 
the positive direction? 
(d)	 Graph F using a graphing utility.
(e)	 Using INTERSECT, determine how many minutes are 
needed for the probability to reach 50%. 
	114.	 Exponential Probability  Between 5:00 pm and 6:00 pm, cars 
arrive at Jiffy Lube at the rate of 9 cars per hour (0.15 car 
per minute). This formula from probability can be used to  
determine the probability that a car will arrive within  
t minutes of 5:00 pm:
F1t2 = 1 - e-0.15t
(a)	 Determine the probability that a car will arrive within 
15 minutes of 5:00 pm (that is, before 5:15 pm). 
(b)	 Determine the probability that a car will arrive within 
30 minutes of 5:00 pm (before 5:30 pm). 
(c)	 What value does F approach as t becomes unbounded in 
the positive direction? 
(d)	 Graph F using a graphing utility.
(e)	 Using INTERSECT, determine how many minutes are 
needed for the probability to reach 60%. 

318 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	115.	 Poisson Probability  Between 5:00 pm and 6:00 pm, cars  
arrive at a McDonald’s drive-thru at the rate of 20 cars per 
hour. The following formula from probability can be used 
to determine the probability that x cars will arrive between 
5:00 pm and 6:00 pm.
P1x2 = 20x
 e-20
x!
	
	 where
x! = x # 1x - 12 # 1x - 22 # g# 3 # 2 # 1
	116.	 Poisson Probability  People enter a line for the Demon Roller 
Coaster at the rate of 4 per minute. The following formula 
from probability can be used to determine the probability 
that x people will arrive within the next minute.
P1x2 = 4x
 e-4
x!
	
	 where
x! = x # 1x - 12 # 1x - 22 # g# 3 # 2 # 1
(a)	 Determine the probability that x = 5 people will arrive 
within the next minute. 
(b)	 Determine the probability that x = 8 people will arrive 
within the next minute. 
	117.	 Relative Humidity  The relative humidity is the ratio  
(expressed as a percent) of the amount of water vapor in 
the air to the maximum amount that it can hold at a specific 
temperature. The relative humidity, R, is found using the fol-
lowing formula 
R = 10a
4221
T+459.4-
4221
D+459.4+2b
(a)	 Determine the relative humidity if the air temperature 
is 46° Fahrenheit and the dew point temperature is 40° 
Fahrenheit. 
(b)	 Determine the relative humidity if the air temperature 
is 75° Fahrenheit and the dew point temperature is 71° 
Fahrenheit. 
(c)	 What is the relative humidity if the air temperature and 
the dew point temperature are the same? 
	118.	 Learning Curve  Suppose that a student has 500 vocabulary 
words to learn. If the student learns 15 words after 5 minutes, 
the function
L1t2 = 50011 - e-0.0061t2
	
	 approximates the number of words L that the student will 
have learned after t minutes.
(a)	 How many words will the student have learned after  
30 minutes?
(b)	 How many words will the student have learned after  
60 minutes?
	119.	 Current in an RL Circuit  The equation governing the 
amount of current I (in amperes) after time t (in seconds) in 
a single RL circuit consisting of a resistance R (in ohms), an  
inductance L (in henrys), and an electromotive force E (in 
volts) is
I = E
R
 31 - e-1R>L2t4

L

R
E
I
E
I
C


R
(a)	 If E = 120 volts, R = 10 ohms, and L = 5 henrys, how 
much current I1 is flowing after 0.3 second? After 0.5 
second? After 1 second?
(b)	 What is the maximum current? 
(c)	 Graph this function I = I11t2, measuring I along the  
y-axis and t along the x-axis.
(d)	 If E = 120 volts, R = 5 ohms, and L = 10 henrys, how 
much current I2 is flowing after 0.3 second? After 0.5 
second? After 1 second?
(e)	 What is the maximum current? 
(f)	 Graph the function I = I21t2 on the same coordinate 
axes as I11t2.
	120.	 Current in an RC Circuit  The equation governing the 
amount of current I (in amperes) after time t (in microsec-
onds) in a single RC circuit consisting of a resistance R (in 
ohms), a capacitance C (in microfarads), and an electromo-
tive force E (in volts) is
I = E
R
 e-t>1RC2
(a)	 If 
E = 120 volts, R = 2000 ohms, 
and 
C = 1.0  
microfarad, 
how 
much 
current 
I1 
is 
flowing  
initially 1t = 02? After 1000 microseconds? After  
3000 microseconds?
(b)	 What is the maximum current? 
(c)	 Graph the function I = I11t2, measuring I along the  
y-axis and t along the x-axis.
(d)	 If 
E = 120 volts, 
R = 1000 ohms, 
and 
C = 2.0  
microfarads, how much current I2 is flowing initially? 
After 1000 microseconds? After 3000 microseconds?
(e)	 What is the maximum current? 
(f)	 Graph the function I = I21t2 on the same coordinate 
axes as I11t2.
	121.	 If f is an exponential function of the form f1x2 = C # ax with 
growth factor 2 and f142 = 14. What is f152? 

Section 5.3  Exponential Functions  319
	122.	 Another Formula for e  Use a calculator to compute the  
values of
2 + 1
2! + 1
3! + g + 1
n!
	
	 for n = 4, 6, 8, and 10. Compare each result with e.
[Hint:  1! = 1, 2! = 2 # 1, 3! = 3 # 2 # 1, 	
n! = n1n - 12 # g# 132 122 112.]
	123.	 Another Formula for e  Use a calculator to compute the var-
ious values of the following expression. Compare the values 
to F.
2 + 1
 
1 + 1
 
2 + 2
 
3 + 3
 
4 + 4
etc.
	124.	 Difference Quotient  If f1x2 = ax, show that
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
= ax # ah - 1
h  h ≠0
	125.	 If f1x2 = ax, show that f1A + B2 = f1A2 # f1B2.
	126.	 If f1x2 = ax, show that f1- x2 =
1
f1x2 .
	127.	 If f1x2 = ax, show that f1ax2 = 3f1x2 4a.
Problems 128 and 129 provide definitions for two other  
transcendental functions.
	128.	 The hyperbolic sine function, designated by sinh x, is  
defined as
sinh x = 1
2
 1ex - e-x2
(a)	 Show that f1x2 = sinh x is an odd function.
(b)	 Graph f1x2 = sinh x using a graphing utility.
	129.	 The hyperbolic cosine function, designated by cosh x, is  
defined as
cosh x = 1
2
 1ex + e-x2
(a)	 Show that f1x2 = cosh x is an even function.
(b)	 Graph f1x2 = cosh x using a graphing utility.
(c)	 Refer to Problem 128. Show that, for every x,
1cosh x22 - 1sinh x22 = 1
	130.	 Historical 
Problem  Pierre 
de 
Fermat 
(1601–1665)  
conjectured that the function
f1x2 = 212x2 + 1
	
	 for x = 1, 2, 3, c, would always have a value equal to a 
prime number. But Leonhard Euler (170791783) showed that 
this formula fails for x = 5. Use a calculator to determine 
the prime numbers produced by f for x = 1, 2, 3, 4. Then 
show that f152 = 641 * 6,700,417, which is not prime.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	131.	 The bacteria in a 4-liter container double every minute.  
After 60 minutes the container is full. How long did it take 
to fill half the container? 
	132.	 Explain in your own words what the number e is. Provide at 
least two applications that use this number.
	133.	 Do you think that there is a power function that increases 
more rapidly than an exponential function whose base is 
greater than 1? Explain.
	134.	 As the base a of an exponential function f1x2 = ax, where
a 7 1, increases, what happens to the behavior of its graph 
for x 7 0? What happens to the behavior of its graph for 
x 6 0?
	135.	 The graphs of y = a-x and y = a1
ab
x
 are identical. Why?
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 136–139 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	136.	 Solve the inequality: x3 + 5x2 … 4x + 20. 
	137.	 Solve the inequality: x + 1
x - 2 Ú 1. 
	138.	 Find the equation of the quadratic function f that has its 
vertex at (3, 5) and contains the point (2, 3). 
	139.	 Consider the quadratic function f (x) = x2 + 2x - 3.
(a)	 Graph f by determining whether its graph opens up 
or down and by finding its vertex, axis of symmetry, 
y-intercept, and x-intercepts, if any.
(b)	 Determine the domain and range of f.
(c)	 Determine where f is increasing and where it is  
decreasing.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 64; 4; 1
9    2.  {- 4, 1}    3.  False    4.  3    5.  True

320 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Recall that a one-to-one function y = f1x2 has an inverse function that is defined 
implicitly by the equation x = f1y2. In particular, the exponential function 
y = f1x2 = ax, where a 7 0 and a ≠1, is one-to-one and hence has an inverse 
function that is defined implicitly by the equation
x = ay  a 7 0  a ≠1
This inverse function is so important that it is given a name, the logarithmic function.
 Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 328.
	
Objectives	 	1  Change Exponential Statements to Logarithmic Statements and  
Logarithmic Statements to Exponential Statements (p. 320)
	
	 	2  Evaluate Logarithmic Expressions (p. 321)
	
	 	3  Determine the Domain of a Logarithmic Function (p. 321)
	
	 	4  Graph Logarithmic Functions (p. 322)
	
	 	5  Solve Logarithmic Equations (p. 326)
5.4  Logarithmic Functions
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION Before getting started, review the following:
 The logarithmic function with base a, where a 7 0 and a ≠1, is denoted by 
y = loga x (read as “ y is the logarithm with base a of x”) and is defined by
y = loga x if and only if x = ay
The domain of the logarithmic function y = loga x is x 7 0.
Definition
As this definition illustrates, a logarithm is a name for a certain exponent. So 
loga  x represents the exponent to which a must be raised to obtain x.
Relating Logarithms to Exponents
(a)	 If y = log3 x, then x = 3y. For example, the logarithmic statement 4 = log3 81 
is equivalent to the exponential statement 81 = 34.
(b)	 If y = log5 x, then x = 5y. For example, -1 = log5a1
5b is equivalent to 1
5 = 5-1.
Change Exponential Statements to Logarithmic Statements 
and Logarithmic Statements to Exponential Statements
The definition of a logarithm can be used to convert from exponential form to  
logarithmic form, and vice versa, as the following two examples illustrate.
Changing Exponential Statements to Logarithmic Statements
Change each exponential statement to an equivalent statement involving a logarithm.
(a)	 1.23 = m	
(b)  eb = 9	
(c)  a4 = 24
Use the fact that y = loga x and x = ay, where a 7 0 and a ≠1, are equivalent.
(a)	 If 1.23 = m, then 3 = log1.2 m.    (b)  If eb = 9, then b = loge 9.
(c)	 If a4 = 24, then 4 = loga 24.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Example 1
•
1
Example 2
Solution
In Words
When you need to evaluate loga x, 
think to yourself “a raised to  
what power gives me x?”
•	 Solving Inequalities (Appendix A, Section A.9, pp. 1019–1022)
•	 Quadratic Inequalities (Section 3.5, pp. 192–193)
•	 Polynomial and Rational Inequalities (Section 4.4, pp. 248–252)
•	 Solve Equations (Appendix A,  
Section A.6, pp. 987–994)

Section 5.4  Logarithmic Functions  321
Changing Logarithmic Statements to Exponential Statements
Change each logarithmic statement to an equivalent statement involving an exponent.
(a)  loga 4 = 5	
(b)  loge b = -3	
(c)  log3 5 = c
(a)	 If loga 4 = 5, then a5 = 4.
(b)	 If loge b = -3, then e-3 = b.
(c)	 If log3 5 = c, then 3c = 5.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
Evaluate Logarithmic Expressions
To find the exact value of a logarithm, write the logarithm in exponential notation 
using the fact that y = loga x is equivalent to ay = x, and use the fact that if au = av, 
then u = v.
Finding the Exact Value of a Logarithmic Expression
Find the exact value of:
(a)	 log2 16	
(b)  log3 1
27
Example 3
Solution
2
Example 4
(a)	 To evaluate log2 16, think “2 raised 
to what power yields 16?” Then,
 y = log2 16
 2y = 16
 2y = 24 
 y = 4
	
Therefore, log2 16 = 4.
Solution
Change to exponential 
form.
16 = 24 
Equate exponents.
(b)	 To evaluate log3 1
27, think “3 raised 
to what power yields 1
27?” Then,
 y = log3 1
27
 3y = 1
27
 3y = 3-3
 
 y = -3
Therefore, log3 1
27 = -3.
Change to exponential 
form.
Equate exponents.
1
27 = 1
33 = 3-3 
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Determine the Domain of a Logarithmic Function
The logarithmic function y = loga x has been defined as the inverse of the exponential 
function y = ax. That is, if f1x2 = ax, then f -11x2 = loga x. Based on the  
discussion in Section 5.2 on inverse functions, for a function f and its inverse f -1,
Domain of f -1 = Range of f and Range of f -1 = Domain of f
Consequently, it follows that
3
Domain of the logarithmic function = Range of the exponential function = 10, q 2
Range of the logarithmic function = Domain of the exponential function = 1 - q, q 2
The next box summarizes some properties of the logarithmic function.
y = loga x 1defining equation: x = ay2
Domain: 0 6 x 6 q  Range: - q 6 y 6 q
The domain of a logarithmic function consists of the positive real numbers, so 
the argument of a logarithmic function must be greater than zero.

322 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Finding the Domain of a Logarithmic Function
Find the domain of each logarithmic function.
(a)	 F1x2 = log21x + 32    (b)  g1x2 = log5a1 + x
1 - xb    (c)  h1x2 = log1>20 x0
(a)	 The domain of F consists of all x for which x + 3 7 0, that is, x 7 -3. Using 
interval notation, the domain of F is 1 -3, q 2.
(b)	 The domain of g is restricted to
1 + x
1 - x 7 0
	
Solve this inequality to find that the domain of g consists of all x between -1 
and 1, that is, -1 6 x 6 1, or, using interval notation, 1 -1, 12.
(c)	 Since 0 x0 7 0, provided that x ≠0, the domain of h consists of all real numbers 
except zero, or, using interval notation, 1 - q, 02 ∪10, q 2.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  4 1  a n d  4 7
Graph Logarithmic Functions
Because exponential functions and logarithmic functions are inverses of each other, 
the graph of the logarithmic function y = loga x is the reflection about the line 
y = x of the graph of the exponential function y = ax, as shown in Figure 30.
For example, to graph y = log2 x, graph y = 2x and reflect it about the line
y = x. See Figure 31. To graph y = log1>3 x, graph y = a1
3b
x
 and reflect it about the 
line y = x. See Figure 32.
Example 5
Solution
4
Figure 31 
(0, 1)
x
y
2
2
2
2
(1, 0)
(1, 2)
(2, 1)
(          )
1
2
, 1
(          )
1
2
1,
y  x
y  2x
y  log2x
Figure 32 
(1, 3)
(3, 1)
x
3
3
3
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(   )
1
3
(       )
1
3
,1
(       )
y  x
y 
y  log1/3x
x
3
1
3 1
,
y
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
The graphs of y = loga x in Figures 30(a) and (b) lead to the following properties.
Properties of the Logarithmic Function f(x) = loga x; a + 0, a 3 1
	 1.	 The domain is the set of positive real numbers, or 10, q 2 using interval  
notation; the range is the set of all real numbers, or 1 - q, q 2 using interval 
notation.
	 2.	 The x-intercept of the graph is 1. There is no y-intercept.
	 3.	 The y-axis 1x = 02 is a vertical asymptote of the graph.
	 4.	 A logarithmic function is decreasing if 0 6 a 6 1 and is increasing if a 7 1.
	 5.	 The graph of f contains the points 11, 02, 1a, 12, and a1
a, -1b.
	 6.	 The graph is smooth and continuous, with no corners or gaps.
x
y 5 loga x
y 5 x
y 5 ax
y
23
3
(1, 0)
(a, 1)
(0, 1)
(1, a)
3
23
(a)   0 , a , 1
( 21,    )   
(   , 21)
1–a
1–a
Figure 30 
(a, 1)
(1, a)
x
y 5 x
y
23
3
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
3
23
(b)  a . 1
y 5 loga x
y 5 ax
1–a
(   ,21)
1–a
(21,   )

Section 5.4  Logarithmic Functions  323
If the base of a logarithmic function is the number e, the result is the natural 
logarithm function. This function occurs so frequently in applications that it is given 
a special symbol, ln (from the Latin, logarithmus naturalis). That is,
In Words
y = loge x is written y = ln x.
	
y = ln x if and only if x = ey	
(1)
Because y = ln x and the exponential function y = ex are inverse functions, the 
graph of y = ln x can be obtained by reflecting the graph of y = ex about the line 
y = x. See Figure 33.
Using a calculator with an  ln  key, we can obtain other points on the graph of 
f1x2 = ln x. See Table 7.
Table 7
x
ln x
1
2 
-0.69
2
0.69
3
1.10
Figure 33 
(
)
(
21,
x
y5x
y5e x
y5In x
y 5 0
x 5 0
y
21
5
23
3
0, 1
)
1, 0
(1, e)
(e, 1)
)
(
1–e
(
)
,21
1–e
Graphing a Logarithmic Function and Its Inverse
(a)	 Find the domain of the logarithmic function f1x2 = -ln1x - 22.
(b)	 Graph f.
(c)	 From the graph, determine the range and vertical asymptote of f.
(d)	 Find f -1, the inverse of f.
(e)	 Find the domain and the range of f -1.
(f)	 Graph f -1.
(a)	 The domain of f consists of all x for which x - 2 7 0, or equivalently, x 7 2. 
The domain of f is {x0 x 7 2}, or 12, q 2 in interval notation.
(b)	 To obtain the graph of y = -ln1x - 22, begin with the graph of y = ln x and 
use transformations. See Figure 34.
Example 6
Solution
Seeing the Concept
Graph Y1 = ex and Y2 = ln x on the 
same square screen. Use eVALUEate to 
verify the points on the graph given in 
Figure 33. Do you see the symmetry of 
the two graphs with respect to the line 
y = x?
Figure 34 
x
x
x
y
3
3
(1, 0)
, 21)
(
(e, 1)
(e, 21)
3
(a)   y 5 In x 
y
(1, 0)
21
21
21
21
21
1
1
1
3
(b)   y 5 2In x 
1–e
1–e
)
(1–e , 1
(
)
y
5
3
1
(3, 0)
(e12, 21)
3
(c)   y 5 2In (x 2 2)
   2,1
x 5 2
x 5 0
x 5 0
Multiply by 2 1;
reflect about the
x-axis.
Replace x by
x 2 2; shift
right 2 units.

324 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
(c)	 The range of f1x2 = -ln1x - 22 is the set of all real numbers. The vertical  
asymptote is x = 2. [Do you see why? The original asymptote 1x = 02 is shifted 
to the right 2 units.]
(d)	 To find f -1, begin with y = -ln1x - 22. The inverse function is defined  
implicitly by the equation
x = -ln1y - 22
Now solve for y.
 -x = ln1y - 22
 e-x = y - 2
 y = e-x + 2
The inverse of f is f -11x2 = e-x + 2.
(e)	 The domain of f -1 equals the range of f, which is the set of all real numbers, 
from part (c). The range of f -1 is the domain of f, which is 12, q 2 in interval 
notation.
(f)	 To graph f -1, use the graph of f in Figure 34(c) and reflect it about the  
line y = x. See Figure 35. We could also graph f -11x2 = e-x + 2 using 
transformations.
Isolate the logarithm.
Change to exponential form.
Solve for y.
Figure 35 
•
x
y
5
5
(21, e12)
(1,    12)
(0, 3)
(3, 0)
21
21
1
 2, 1)
1–e
x 5 2
y 5 2
y 5 x
f 21(x) 5 e 2x 1 2
f (x) 5 2ln(x 2 2)
(e 1 2, 21)
1–e
(
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 3
If the base of a logarithmic function is the number 10, the result is the common 
logarithm function. If the base a of the logarithmic function is not indicated, it is 
understood to be 10. That is,
 y = log x if and only if x = 10y
Figure 36 
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
x
y
2
4
4
2
y  log x
y  x
(           )
1
(          )
,
1
y  10x
1 
–– 
10
,
1 
–– 
10
Because y = log x and the exponential function y = 10x are inverse functions, 
the graph of y = log x can be obtained by reflecting the graph of y = 10x about the 
line y = x. See Figure 36.

Section 5.4  Logarithmic Functions  325
Graphing a Logarithmic Function and Its Inverse
(a)	 Find the domain of the logarithmic function f1x2 = 3 log 1x - 12.
(b)	 Graph f.
(c)	 From the graph, determine the range and vertical asymptote of f.
(d)	 Find f -1 , the inverse of f.
(e)	 Find the domain and the range of f -1.
(f)	 Graph f -1.
(a)  The domain of f consists of all x for which x - 1 7 0, or equivalently, x 7 1. 
The domain of f is {x0 x 7 1},  or 11, q 2 in interval notation.
(b)	 To obtain the graph of y = 3 log1x - 12, begin with the graph of y = log x and 
use transformations. See Figure 37.
Example 7
Solution
Figure 38 
f 21(x) 5 10x/3 1 1
(2, 0)
(0, 2)
x
y
12
10
12
22
4
6
8
10
22
4
6
8
y 5 x
x 5 1
y 5 1
f(x) 5 3 log (x 2 1)
(11, 3)
(3, 11)
Figure 37 
2
x
y
10
12
8
6
Replace x by x – 1;
horizontal shift right
1 unit.
Multiply by 3; vertical
stretch by a factor of 3.
4
2
–2
–2
(10, 1)
(1, 0)
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
x 5 0
x 5 1
2
x
y
10
12
8
6
4
2
–2
–2
(11, 1)
x 5 1
(a) y 5 log x
(b) y 5 log (x 2 1)
(c) y 5 3 log (x 2 1)
2
x
y
10
12
8
6
4
2
–2
–2
(11, 3)
(
11
10,1)
(
1
10,1)
(
11
10,3)
(c)	 The range of f1x2 = 3 log1x - 12 is the set of all real numbers. The vertical 
asymptote is x = 1.
(d)	 Begin with y = 3 log1x - 12. The inverse function is defined implicitly by the 
equation
x = 3 log1y - 12
Proceed to solve for y.
 x
3 = log 1y - 12 
 10x/3 = y - 1
 y = 10x/3 + 1
The inverse of f is f -11x2 = 10x/3 + 1.
(e)	 The domain of f -1 is the range of f, which is the set of all real numbers, from  
part (c). The range of f -1 is the domain of f, which is 11, q 2 in interval notation.
(f)	 To graph f -1, use the graph of f in Figure 37(c) and reflect it about the line y = x. 
See Figure 38. We could also graph f -11x2 = 10x>3 + 1 using transformations.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 1
Isolate the logarithm.
Change to exponential form.
Solve for y.
•

326 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Solve Logarithmic Equations
Equations that contain logarithms are called logarithmic equations. Care must be 
taken when solving logarithmic equations algebraically. In the expression loga M, 
remember that a and M are positive and a ≠1. Be sure to check each apparent 
solution in the original equation and discard any that are extraneous.
Some logarithmic equations can be solved by changing the logarithmic equation 
to exponential form using the fact that y = loga x means ay = x.
Solving Logarithmic Equations
Solve:
(a)	 log314x - 72 = 2        (a)  logx  64 = 2
(a)	 To solve, change the logarithmic equation to exponential form.
 log314x - 72 = 2
 4x - 7 = 32 
 4x - 7 = 9
 4x = 16
 x = 4
Check:	 log314x - 72 = log314 # 4 - 72 = log3  9 = 2 
32 = 9
The solution set is {4}.
(b)	 To solve, change the logarithmic equation to exponential form.
 logx  64 = 2
 x2 = 64
 x = { 264 = {8
Because the base of a logarithm must be positive, discard -8. Check the potential 
solution 8.
Check:	 log8 64 = 2 
82 = 64
The solution set is {8}.	
•
Using Logarithms to Solve an Exponential Equation
Solve: e2x = 5
To solve, change the exponential equation to logarithmic form.
 e2x = 5
 ln 5 = 2x
 
 x = ln 5
2
 ≈0.805
The solution set is e ln 5
2 f.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  8 9  a n d  1 0 1
5
Example 8
Solution
Change to exponential form.
Change to exponential form.
Square Root Method
Example 9
Solution
Change to logarithmic form. 
Exact solution
Approximate solution

Section 5.4  Logarithmic Functions  327
Alcohol and Driving
Blood alcohol concentration (BAC) is a measure of the amount of alcohol in a  
person’s bloodstream. A BAC of 0.04% means that a person has 4 parts alcohol per 
10,000 parts blood in the body. Relative risk is defined as the likelihood of one event 
occurring divided by the likelihood of a second event occurring. For example, if an 
individual with a BAC of 0.02% is 1.4 times as likely to have a car accident as an 
individual who has not been drinking, the relative risk of an accident with a BAC of 
0.02% is 1.4. Recent medical research suggests that the relative risk R of having an 
accident while driving a car can be modeled by an equation of the form
R = ekx
where x is the percent concentration of alcohol in the bloodstream and k is a  
constant.
(a)	 Research indicates that the relative risk of a person having an accident with a 
BAC of 0.02% is 1.4. Find the constant k in the equation.
(b)	 Using this value of k, what is the relative risk if the concentration is 0.17%?
(c)	 Using this same value of k, what BAC corresponds to a relative risk of 100?
(d)	 If the law asserts that anyone with a relative risk of 4 or more should not have 
driving privileges, at what concentration of alcohol in the bloodstream should a 
driver be arrested and charged with DUI (driving under the influence)?
(a)	 For a concentration of alcohol in the blood of 0.02% and a relative risk of 1.4, let 
x = 0.02 and R = 1.4 in the equation and solve for k.
 R = ekx
 1.4 = ek10.022
 
 0.02k = ln 1.4
 k = ln 1.4
0.02 ≈16.82
(b)	 A concentration of 0.17% means x = 0.17. Use k = 16.82 in the equation to 
find the relative risk R:
R = ekx = e116.82210.172 ≈17.5
For a concentration of alcohol in the blood of 0.17%, the relative risk of an  
accident is about 17.5. That is, a person with a BAC of 0.17% is 17.5 times as likely 
to have a car accident as a person with no alcohol in the bloodstream.
(c)	 A relative risk of 100 means R = 100. Use k = 16.82 in the equation R = ekx. 
The concentration x of alcohol in the blood obeys
 100 = e16.82x
 
 16.82x = ln 100
 x = ln 100
16.82 ≈0.27
For a concentration of alcohol in the blood of 0.27%, the relative risk of an 
accident is 100.
(d)	 A relative risk of 4 means R = 4. Use k = 16.82 in the equation R = ekx. The 
concentration x of alcohol in the bloodstream obeys
 4 = e16.82x
 16.82x = ln 4
 x =
ln 4
16.82 ≈0.082
A driver with a BAC of 0.082% or more should be arrested and charged with 
DUI.	
•
Example 10
Solution
R = 1.4; x = 0.02
Change to a logarithmic statement.
Solve for k.
R = ekx, R = 100, k = 16.82
Change to a logarithmic statement.
Solve for x.
Note  A BAC of 0.30% results in a loss 
of consciousness in most people.	
■
Note  In most states, the blood alcohol 
content at which a DUI citation is given  
is 0.08%.	
■

328 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Summary
Properties of the Logarithmic Function
f1x2 = loga x, a 7 1	
Domain: the interval 10, q 2; Range: the interval 1 - q, q 2
1y = loga x means x = ay2	
x-intercept: 1; y-intercept: none; vertical asymptote: x = 0 (y-axis); increasing; 
one-to-one
	
See Figure 39(a) for a typical graph.
f1x2 = loga x, 0 6 a 6 1	
Domain: the interval 10, q 2; Range: the interval 1 - q, q 2
(y = loga x means x = ay)	
x-intercept: 1; y-intercept: none; vertical asymptote: x = 0 (y-axis); decreasing; 
one-to-one
	
See Figure 39(b) for a typical graph.
Figure 39 
x
y 5 loga x
y
23
3
(1, 0)
(a, 1)
, 21
1
a(
(a, 1)
3
(b)   0 , a , 1
x
y
23
3
(1, 0)
3
23
(a)  a . 1
y 5 loga x
, 21)
1
a(
x 5 0
x 5 0
23
)
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Solve each inequality:
(a)	 3x - 7 … 8 - 2x (pp. 1019–1022) 
(b)	 x2 - x - 6 7 0 (pp. 192–193) 
	 2.	 Solve the inequality: x - 1
x + 4 7 0 (pp. 248–252)
	 3.	 Solve: 2x + 3 = 9 (pp. 987–994) 
5.4  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 4.	 The domain of the logarithmic function f1x2 = loga x 
is               . 
	 5.	 The graph of every logarithmic function f1x2 = loga x, where 
a 7 0 and a ≠1, passes through three points:             , 
              , and               .  
	 6.	 If the graph of a logarithmic function f1x2 = loga x, where 
a 7 0 and a ≠1, is increasing, then its base must be larger 
than 
 .
	 7.	 True or False  If y = loga x, then y = ax. 
	 8.	 True or False  The graph of f1x2 = loga x, where a 7 0
and a ≠1, has an x-intercept equal to 1 and no  
y-intercept. 
	 9.	 Select the answer that completes the statement: y =  ln x if 
and only if             .
(a)	 x = ey    (b)  y = ex    (c)  x = 10y    (d)  y = 10x 
	 10.	 Choose the domain of f(x) =  log 3(x + 2).
(a)	 (- q, q)  (b)  (2, q)    (c)  (- 2, q)    (d)  (0, q) 
Skill Building
In Problems 11–18, change each exponential statement to an equivalent statement involving a logarithm.
	 11.	  9 = 32 
	
12.	 16 = 42 
	
13.	 a3 = 2.1 
	
14.	 a2 = 1.6 
	 15.	 3x = 4.6 
	
16.	 2x = 7.2 
	
17.	 e2.2 = M 
	
18.	 ex = 8 
In Problems 19–26, change each logarithmic statement to an equivalent statement involving an exponent.
	 19.	  log2 8 = 3 
	
20.	 log3a1
9b = - 2 
	
21.	 logb 4 = 2 
	
22.	 loga 3 = 6 
	 23.	 log2 6 = x 
	
24.	 log3 2 = x 
	
25.	 ln x = 4 
	
26.	 ln 4 = x 

Section 5.4  Logarithmic Functions  329
In Problems 27–38, find the exact value of each logarithm without using a calculator.
	 27.	  log2 1  	
28.	 log8 8  	
29.	 log3a1
9b 
	
30.	 log5 25 
	 31.	 log1>3 9 
	
32.	 log1>2 16 
	
33.	 log5 2
3 25 
	
34.	 log10 210 
	 35.	 log13  9  	
36.	 log12   4  	
37.	 ln e3  	
38.	 ln1e 
In Problems 39–50, find the domain of each function.
	 39.	 g1x2 = ln1x - 12 
	
40.	 f1x2 = ln1x - 32 
	
41.	  F1x2 = log2 x2 
	 42.	 H1x2 = log5 x3 
	
43.	 g1x2 = 8 + 5 ln12x + 32 
	44.	 f1x2 = 3 - 2 log4ax
2 - 5b 
	 45.	 g1x2 = lna
1
x - 5b 
	
46.	 f1x2 = lna
1
x + 1b 
	
47.	  g1x2 = log5ax + 1
x
b
	 48.	 h1x2 = log3a
x
x - 1b	
49.	 g1x2 =
1
ln x 
	
50.	 f1x2 = 2ln x 
In Problems 51–58, use a calculator to evaluate each expression. Round your answer to three decimal places.
	 51.	 ln 5
3  
	
52.	 ln 5
3 
	
53.	
ln 2
3
- 0.1 
	
54.	
ln 10
3
0.04  
	 55.	
log 15 + log 20
ln 15 + ln 20  
	
56.	 ln 4 + ln 2
log 4 + log 2  
	
57.	
3 log 80 - ln 5
log 5 + ln 20  
	
58.	
2 ln 5 + log 50
log 4 - ln 2  
	 59.	 Find a so that the graph of f1x2 = loga x contains the point 12, 22. 
	 60.	 Find a so that the graph of f1x2 = loga x contains the point a1
2, - 4b. 
In Problems 61–64, graph each function and its inverse on the same set of axes.
	 61.	  f1x2 = 3x; f -11x2 = log3 x	
62.	 f1x2 = 4x; f -11x2 = log4 x
	 63.	 f1x2 = a1
3b
x
; f -11x2 = log1>3 x	
64.	 f1x2 = a1
2b
x
; f -11x2 = log1>2 x
In Problems 65–72, the graph of a logarithmic function is given. Match each graph to one of the following functions:
(A)  y = log3 x	
(B)  y = log31- x2	
(C)  y = - log3 x	
(D)  y = - log31-x2
(E)  y = log3 x - 1	
(F)  y = log31x - 12	
(G)  y = log311 - x2	
(H)  y = 1 - log3 x
	 65.	
66.	
67.	
68.	 	
	 69.	
70.	
71.	
72.	
x
y
5
1
3
3
x  0
x
y
5
3
1
3
x  1
x
y
1
3
5
3
x  0
x
y
5
3
1
3
x  0
x
y
5
3
1
3
x  0
y
x
5
3
1
3
x  0
x
y
5
3
1
3
x  0
x
y
1
3
5
3
x  1
In Problems 73–88, use the given function f.
(a)	Find the domain of f.    (b)  Graph f.    (c)  From the graph, determine the range and any asymptotes of f.
(d)	Find f -1, the inverse of f.    (e)  Find the domain and the range of f -1.    (f)  Graph f -1.
	 73.	 f1x2 = ln1x + 42	
74.	 f1x2 = ln1x - 32	
75.	 f1x2 = - ln1- x2	
76.	 f1x2 = 2 + ln x
	 77.	 f1x2 = - 2 ln 1x + 12	
78.	 f1x2 = ln12x2 - 3	
79.	 f1x2 = 1
2  log x - 5	
80.	 f1x2 = log1x - 42 + 2
	 81.	 f1x2 = 1
2 log12x2	
82.	 f1x2 = log1- 2x2	
83.	 f1x2 = 2 - log31x + 12	
84.	 f1x2 = 3 + log31x + 22
	 85.	 f1x2 = 3ex + 2	
86.	 f1x2 = ex+2 - 3	
87.	 f1x2 = - 3x+1	
88.	 f1x2 = 2x/3 + 4

330 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	 89.	 log3 x = 2 
	
90.	 log5 x = 3 
	
91.	 log313x - 22 = 2  	
92.	 log212x + 12 = 3 
	 93.	 logxa1
8b = 3 
	
94.	 logx 4 = 2 
	
95.	 ln e-2x = 8 
	
96.	 ln ex = 5 
	 97.	 log5 625 = x 
	
98.	 log4 64 = x 
	
99.	 log6  36 = 5x + 3  	
100.	 log3  243 = 2x + 1 
	101.	 e3x = 10 
	
102.	 e-2x = 1
3 
	
103.	 e-2x+1 = 13 
	 104.	 e2x+5 = 8 
	105.	 log51x2 + x + 42 = 2	
106.	 log31x2 + 12 = 2	
107.	 log3  3x = - 1 
	
108.	 log2  8x = -3 
	109.	 8 # 102x-7 = 3	
110.	 5e0.2x = 7  	
111.	 4ex+1 = 5  	
112.	 2 # 102-x = 5
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
Race
Proportion
White
0.724
Black or African American
0.126
American Indian and Alaska Native
0.009
Asian
0.048
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
0.002
Some Other Race
0.062
Two or More Races
0.029
In Problems 89–112, solve each equation.
Mixed Practice
In Problems 115–118, graph each function. Based on the graph, state the domain and the range, and find any intercepts.
	113.	 Suppose that G1x2 = log312x + 12 - 2.
(a)	 What is the domain of G ? 
(b)	 What is G(40)? What point is on the graph of G?
(c)	 If G1x2 = 3, what is x ? What point is on the graph  
of G ? 
(d)	 What is the zero of G? 
	114.	 Suppose that F1x2 = log21x + 12 - 3.
(a)	 What is the domain of F ? 
(b)	 What is F(7)? What point is on the graph of F ?
(c)	 If F1x2 = - 1, what is x ? What point is on the graph  
of F ? 
(d)	 What is the zero of F ? 
	 115.  f1x2 = eln1- x2
if x 6 0
ln x
if x 7 0
	 116.  f1x2 = eln1- x2
if x … -1
- ln1- x2
if - 1 6 x 6 0
	 117.  f1x2 = e - ln x
if 0 6 x 6 1
ln x
if x Ú 1
	 118.  f1x2 = eln x
if 0 6 x 6 1
- ln x
if x Ú 1
Applications and Extensions
	119.	 Chemistry  The pH of a chemical solution is given by the 
formula
pH = - log10 [H+]
	
	 where [H+ ] is the concentration of hydrogen ions in moles 
per liter. Values of pH range from 0 (acidic) to 14 (alkaline).
(a)	 What is the pH of a solution for which [H+ ] is 0.1? 
(b)	 What is the pH of a solution for which [H+ ] is 0.01? 
(c)	 What is the pH of a solution for which [H+ ] is 0.001? 
(d)	 What happens to pH as the hydrogen ion concentration 
decreases? 
(e)	 Determine the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution 
with pH = 3.6. 
(f)	 Determine the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution 
with pH = 7.4. 
	120.	 Diversity Index  Shannon’s diversity index is a measure of 
the diversity of a population. The diversity index is given by 
the formula
H = - 1p1 log p1 + p2 log p2 + g + pn log pn2
	
	 where p1 is the proportion of the population that is species 1, 
p2 is the proportion of the population that is species 2, 
and so on. In this problem, the population is people in the  
United States and the  species is race.
(a)	 According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the distribution of 
race in the United States in 2010 was as follows:
	
Compute the diversity index of the United States in 
2010. 
(b)	 The largest value of the diversity index is given by 
Hmax = log(S), where S is the number of categories of 
race. Compute Hmax. 
(c)	 The evenness ratio is given by EH =
H
Hmax
, where
	
0 … EH … 1. If EH = 1, there is complete evenness. 
Compute the evenness ratio for the United States.
(d)	 Obtain the distribution of race for the United States 
in 2000 from the Census Bureau. Compute Shannon’s 
diversity index. Is the United States becoming more  
diverse? Why? 

Section 5.4  Logarithmic Functions  331
	121.	 Atmospheric Pressure  The atmospheric pressure p on a 
balloon or an aircraft decreases with increasing height. This 
pressure, measured in millimeters of mercury, is related to 
the height h (in kilometers) above sea level by the formula
p = 760e-0.145h.
(a)	 Find the height of an aircraft if the atmospheric pressure 
is 389 millimeters of mercury. 
(b)	 Find the height of a mountain if the atmospheric pres-
sure is 517 millimeters of mercury. 
	122.	 Healing of Wounds  The normal healing of wounds can be 
modeled by an exponential function. If A0 represents the 
original area of the wound, and if A equals the area of the 
wound, then the function
A(n) = A0
 e-0.35n
	
	 describes the area of a wound after n days following an injury 
when no infection is present to retard the healing. Suppose 
that a wound initially had an area of 100 square millimeters.
(a)	 If healing is taking place, after how many days will the 
wound be one-half its original size? 
(b)	 How long before the wound is 10% of its original size?
	123.	 Exponential Probability  Between 12:00 pm and 1:00 pm, 
cars arrive at a bank’s drive-thru at the rate of 6 cars per 
hour (0.1 car per minute). The following formula from statis-
tics can be used to determine the probability that a car will 
arrive within t minutes of 12:00 pm.
F1t2 = 1 - e-0.1t
(a)	 Determine how many minutes are needed for the prob-
ability to reach 40%. 
(b)	 Determine how many minutes are needed for the prob-
ability to reach 70%. 
(c)	 Is it possible for the probability to equal 100%? Explain.
	124.	 Exponential Probability  Between 5:00 pm and 6:00 pm, cars 
arrive at Jiffy Lube at the rate of 9 cars per hour (0.15 car per 
minute). The following formula from statistics can be used 
to determine the probability that a car will arrive within  
t minutes of 5:00 pm.
F1t2 = 1 - e-0.15t
(a)	 Determine how many minutes are needed for the  
probability to reach 50%. 
(b)	 Determine how many minutes are needed for the  
probability to reach 80%. 
	125.	 Drug Medication  The formula
D = 25e-0.4h
	
	 can be used to find the number of milligrams D of a certain 
drug that is in a patient’s bloodstream h hours after the drug 
was administered. When the number of milligrams reaches 
4, the drug is to be administered again. What is the time be-
tween injections? 
	126.	 Spreading of Rumors  A model for the number N of people 
in a college community who have heard a certain rumor is
N = P11 - e-0.15d2
	
	 where P is the total population of the community and d is 
the number of days that have elapsed since the rumor began. 
In a community of 1000 students, how many days will elapse 
before 450 students have heard the rumor?
	127.	 Current in an RL Circuit  The equation governing the 
amount of current I (in amperes) after time t (in seconds) in 
a simple RL circuit consisting of a resistance R (in ohms), an 
inductance L (in henrys), and an electromotive force E (in 
volts) is
I = E
R
 31 - e-1R>L2t4
	
	 If E = 12 volts, R = 10 ohms, and L = 5 henrys, how long 
does it take to obtain a current of 0.5 ampere? Of 1.0 ampere? 
Graph the equation. 
	128.	 Learning Curve  Psychologists sometimes use the function
L1t2 = A11 - e-kt2
	
	 to measure the amount L learned at time t. Here A  
represents the amount to be learned, and the number k 
measures the rate of learning. Suppose that a student has an 
amount A of 200 vocabulary words to learn. A psychologist  
determines that the student has learned 20 vocabulary 
words after 5 minutes.
(a)	 Determine the rate of learning k. 
(b)	 Approximately how many words will the student have 
learned after 10 minutes? 
(c)	 After 15 minutes? 
(d)	 How long does it take for the student to learn  
180 words? 
Loudness of Sound  Problems 129–132 use the following discussion: The loudness L1x2, measured in decibels (dB), of a sound of  
intensity x, measured in watts per square meter, is defined as L1x2 = 10 log x
I0
, where I0 = 10-12 watt per square meter is the least 
intense sound that a human ear can detect. Determine the loudness, in decibels, of each of the following sounds.
	129.	 A sound with intensity of x = 10-11 watt per square me-
ter. 
	130.	 Amplified rock music: intensity of 10-1 watt per square  
meter. 
	131.	 A sound with intensity of x = 10-1 watt per square meter.
	132.	 Diesel truck traveling 40 miles per hour 50 feet away: intensity 
10 times that of a passenger car traveling 50 miles per hour 
50 feet away, whose loudness is 70 decibels. 
The Richter Scale  Problems 133 and 134 on the next page use the following discussion: The Richter scale is one way of converting  
seismographic readings into numbers that provide an easy reference for measuring the magnitude M of an earthquake. All earthquakes 
are compared to a zero-level earthquake whose seismographic reading measures 0.001 millimeter at a distance of 100 kilometers from the 
epicenter. An earthquake whose seismographic reading measures x millimeters has magnitude M1x2, given by
M1x2 = log¢ x
x0
≤
where x0 = 10-3 is the reading of a zero-level earthquake the same distance from its epicenter. In Problems 133 and 134, determine the 
magnitude of each earthquake.

332 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 139–142 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
Age in Years
New
1
2
3
4
5
$38,000
$36,600
$32,400
$28,750
$25,400
$21,200
	133.	 Magnitude of an Earthquake  An earthquake whose seis-
mographic reading measures x millimeters has magnitude 
M(x), given by
M1x2 = log¢ x
x0
≤
	
	 where x0 = 10-3 is the reading of a zero-level earthquake 
the same distance from its epicenter. Determine the mag-
nitude of an earthquake with a seismographic reading of 
122,899 millimeters 100 kilometers from the center. 
	134.	 Magnitude of an Earthquake  San Francisco in 1906:  
seismographic reading of 50,119 millimeters 100 kilometers 
from the center 
	135.	 Alcohol and Driving  The concentration of alcohol in a per-
son’s blood is measurable. Suppose that the relative risk R 
(given as a percent) of having an accident while driving a car 
can be modeled by the equation
R = 3ekx
	
	 where x is the variable concentration of alcohol in the blood 
and k is a constant.
(a)	 Suppose that a concentration of alcohol in the blood of 
0.04 results in a 10% relative risk (R = 10) of an acci-
dent. Find the constant k in the equation.
(b)	 Using the value of k found in part (a), what is the rela-
tive risk if the concentration is 0.12? 
(c)	 Using the same value of k found in part (a), what con-
centration of alcohol corresponds to a relative risk of 
100%? 
(d)	 Using the value of k found in part (a), if the law asserts 
that anyone with a relative risk of having an accident of 
15% or more should not have driving privileges, at what 
concentration of alcohol in the blood should a driver be 
arrested and charged? 
(e)	 Compare this situation with that of Example 10. If you 
were a lawmaker, which situation would you support? 
Give your reasons.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	136.	 Is there any function of the form y = xa, 0 6 a 6 1, that 
increases more slowly than a logarithmic function whose 
base is greater than 1? Explain.
	137.	 In the definition of the logarithmic function, the base a is not 
allowed to equal 1. Why?
	138.	 Critical Thinking  In buying a new car, one consideration 
might be how well the price of the car holds up over time. 
Different makes of cars have different depreciation rates. 
One way to compute a depreciation rate for a car is given 
here. Suppose that the current prices of a certain automobile 
are as shown in the table.
	
	 Use the formula New = Old1eRt2 to find R, the annual 
depreciation rate, for a specific time t. When might be the 
best time to trade in the car? Consult the NADA (“blue”) 
book and compare two like models that you are interested 
in. Which has the better depreciation rate?
	139.	 Find the real zeros of g(x) = 4x4 - 37x2 + 9. What are the 
x-intercepts of the graph of g?
	140.	 Find the average rate of change of f(x) = 9x from 1
2 to 1. 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 (a)  x … 3    (b)  x 6 -2 or x 7 3    2.  x 6 -4 or x 7 1    3.  {3} 
	141.	 Use the Intermediate Value Theorem to show that the function 
f(x) = 4x3 - 2x2 - 7 has a real zero in the interval [1, 2].
	142.	 A complex polynomial function f of degree 4 with real  
coefficients has the zeros - 1, 2, and 3 - i. Find the  
remaining zero(s) of f. Then find a polynomial function 
that has the zeros.
5.5  Properties of Logarithms
	
Objectives	 	1  Work with the Properties of Logarithms  (p. 332)
	
	 	2  Write a Logarithmic Expression as a Sum or Difference of  
Logarithms  (p. 334)
	
	 	3  Write a Logarithmic Expression as a Single Logarithm  (p. 335)
	
	 	4  Evaluate Logarithms Whose Base Is Neither 10 Nor e  (p. 337)
Work with the Properties of Logarithms
Logarithms have some very useful properties that can be derived directly from the 
definition and the laws of exponents.
1

Section 5.5  Properties of Logarithms  333
Establishing Properties of Logarithms
(a)	 Show that loga 1 = 0.      (a)  Show that loga a = 1.
(a)	 This fact was established when we graphed y = loga x (see Figure 30 on page 322). 
To show the result algebraically, let y = loga 1. Then
 y = loga 1
 ay = 1
 ay = a0
 
 y = 0
 loga 1 = 0
 
(b)	 Let y = loga a. Then
 y = loga a
 ay = a
 ay = a1
 
 y = 1
 loga a = 1
 
To summarize:
Example 1
Solution
Change to exponential form.
a0 = 1 since a 7 0, a ≠1
Equate exponents.
y = loga  1
Change to exponential form.
a = a1
Equate exponents.
y = loga  a
•
loga 1 = 0  loga a = 1
Properties of Logarithms
In the properties given next, M and a are positive real numbers, a ≠1, and  
r is any real number.
  The number loga M is the exponent to which a must be raised to obtain M. 
That is,
	
aloga M = M	
(1)
  The logarithm with base a of a raised to a power equals that power. That is,
	
loga ar = r	
(2)
Theorem
The proof uses the fact that y = ax and y = loga x are inverse functions.
Proof of Property (1)  For inverse functions,
f1f -11x2 2 = x for all x in the domain of f -1
Use f1x2 = ax and f -11x2 = loga x to find
f1f -11x2 2 = aloga x = x for x 7 0
Now let x = M to obtain aloga M = M, where M 7 0.	
■
Proof of Property (2)  For inverse functions,
f -11f1x2 2 = x for all x in the domain of f
Use f1x2 = ax and f -11x2 = loga x to find
f -11f1x2 2 = loga ax = x for all real numbers x
Now let x = r to obtain loga ar = r, where r is any real number.	
■

334 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Using Properties (1) and (2)
(a)	 2log2 p = p      (b)  log0.2 0.2-12 = - 22      (c)  ln ekt = kt
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Other useful properties of logarithms are given next.
Example 2
•
Properties of Logarithms
In the following properties, M, N, and a are positive real numbers, a ≠1, and 
r is any real number.
The Log of a Product Equals the Sum of the Logs
	
loga1MN2 = loga M + loga N	
(3)
The Log of a Quotient Equals the Difference of the Logs
	
logaaM
N b = loga M - loga N	
(4)
The Log of a Power Equals the Product of the Power and the Log
	
loga Mr = r loga M	
(5)
	
 ar = er ln a	
(6)
Theorem
We shall derive properties (3), (5), and (6) and leave the derivation of property 
(4) as an exercise (see Problem 109).
Proof of Property (3)  Let A = loga M and let B = loga N. These expressions are 
equivalent to the exponential expressions
aA = M and aB = N
Now
 loga1MN2 = loga1aA
 aB2 = loga aA+B
 = A + B
 = loga M + loga N
Proof of Property (5)  Let A = loga M. This expression is equivalent to
aA = M
Now
 loga Mr = loga1aA2r = loga arA 
 = rA
 = r loga M
Proof of Property (6)  Property (1), with a = e, gives
eln M = M
Now let M = ar and apply property (5).
eln ar
= er ln a = ar
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
Write a Logarithmic Expression as a Sum  
or Difference of Logarithms
Logarithms can be used to transform products into sums, quotients into differences, 
and powers into factors. Such transformations prove useful in certain types of calculus 
problems.
Law of Exponents
Property (2) of logarithms
■
Law of Exponents
Property (2) of logarithms
■
■
2

Section 5.5  Properties of Logarithms  335
Writing a Logarithmic Expression as a Sum of Logarithms
Write loga1x2x2 + 12, x 7 0, as a sum of logarithms. Express all powers as factors.
 loga1x2x2 + 12 = loga x + loga 2x2 + 1  
 = loga x + loga1x2 + 121>2
 = loga x + 1
2
 loga1x2 + 12  
Writing a Logarithmic Expression as a Difference of Logarithms
Write
ln 
x2
1x - 123  x 7 1
as a difference of logarithms. Express all powers as factors.
	
 ln 
x2
1x - 123 =  ln x2 - ln1x - 123 = 2 ln x - 3 ln1x - 12
Writing a Logarithmic Expression as a Sum  
and Difference of Logarithms
Write
loga 2x2 + 1
x31x + 124 x 7 0
as a sum and difference of logarithms. Express all powers as factors.
 loga 2x2 + 1
x31x + 124 = loga 2x2 + 1 - loga3x31x + 1244
 = loga 2x2 + 1 - 3loga x3 + loga1x + 1244
 = loga1x2 + 121>2 - loga x3 - loga1x + 124
 = 1
2 loga1x2 + 12 - 3 loga x - 4 loga1x + 12
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
Write a Logarithmic Expression as a Single Logarithm
Another use of properties (3) through (5) is to write sums and/or differences of 
logarithms with the same base as a single logarithm. This skill will be needed to 
solve certain logarithmic equations discussed in the next section.
Writing Expressions as a Single Logarithm
Write each of the following as a single logarithm.
(a)	 loga 7 + 4 loga 3      (b)  2
3 ln 8 - ln152 - 12
(c)	 loga x + loga 9 + loga1x2 + 12 - loga 5
Example 3
Solution
loga1M # N2 = loga  M + loga  N
•
loga  Mr = r loga  M
Example 4
Solution
•
 c    	
 c 
loga aM
N b = loga  M - loga  N         loga  Mr = r loga  M   
Example 5
Solution
Property (4)
Property (3)
Property (5)
•
3
Example 6
Warning  In using properties (3) 
through (5), be careful about the  
values that the variable may assume. For 
example, the domain of the variable for 
loga  x is x 7 0 and for loga1x - 12 is 
x 7 1. If these functions are added, the 
domain is x 7 1. That is, the equality
loga  x + loga1x - 12 = loga3x1x - 124
is true only for x 7 1.	
■

336 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
(a)	  loga 7 + 4 loga 3 = loga 7 + loga 34 
	
 = loga 7 + loga 81
	
 = loga17 # 812
 
	
 = loga 567
(b)	  2
3
 ln 8 - ln152 - 12 = ln 82>3 - ln125 - 12 
	
 = ln 4 - ln 24
 
	
 = lna 4
24b
 
	
 = lna1
6b
	
 = ln 1 - ln 6
	
 = -ln 6
 
(c)	  loga x + loga 9 + loga1x2 + 12 - loga 5 = loga19x2 + loga1x2 + 12 - loga 5
	
 = loga39x1x2 + 12 4 - loga 5
	
 = logaJ
9x1x2 + 12
5
R
WARNING  A common error that some students make is to express the logarithm of a sum as the 
sum of logarithms.
	
loga1M + N2  is not equal to loga  M + loga  N
 
loga1MN2 = loga  M + loga  N 
  
Another common error is to express the difference of logarithms as the quotient of logarithms.
	
loga  M - loga  N is not equal to loga  M
loga  N 
 
loga  M - loga  N = logaaM
N b 
   
A third common error is to express a logarithm raised to a power as the product of the power times 
the logarithm.
	
1loga  M2r is not equal to r loga  M
 
loga  Mr = r loga M	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  5 7  a n d  6 3
Two other important properties of logarithms are consequences of the fact that 
the logarithmic function y = loga x is a one-to-one function.
Solution
r  loga  M = loga  Mr 
loga  M + loga  N = loga1M # N2
r loga  M = loga  Mr 
82/3  = (
328)2 = 22 = 4
loga  M - loga  N = logaaM
N b
ln 1 = 0
•
Properties of Logarithms
In the following properties, M, N, and a are positive real numbers, a ≠1.
	
If M = N, then loga M = loga N.	
(7)
	
If loga M = loga N, then M = N.	
(8)
Theorem
Property (7) is used as follows: Starting with the equation M = N, “take the 
logarithm of both sides” to obtain loga M = loga N.
Properties (7) and (8) are useful for solving exponential and logarithmic equations, 
a topic discussed in the next section.

Section 5.5  Properties of Logarithms  337
Evaluate Logarithms Whose Base Is Neither 10 Nor e
Logarithms with base 10—common logarithms—were used to facilitate arithmetic 
computations before the widespread use of calculators. (See the Historical Feature 
at the end of this section.) Natural logarithms—that is, logarithms whose base is 
the number e—remain very important because they arise frequently in the study of 
natural phenomena.
Common logarithms are usually abbreviated by writing log, with the base  
understood to be 10, just as natural logarithms are abbreviated by ln, with the base 
understood to be e.
Most calculators have both  log  and  ln  keys to calculate the common  
logarithm and the natural logarithm of a number, respectively. Let’s look at an  
example to see how to approximate logarithms having a base other than 10 or e.
Approximating a Logarithm Whose Base Is Neither 10 Nor e
Approximate log27. Round the answer to four decimal places.
Remember, evaluating log2 7 means answering the question “2 raised to what  
exponent equals 7?” Let y = log2 7. Then 2y = 7. Because 22 = 4 and 23 = 8, the 
value of log27 is between 2 and 3.
 2y = 7
 ln 2y = ln 7
 y ln 2 = ln 7
 y = ln 7
ln 2 
 y ≈2.8074
Example 7 shows how to approximate a logarithm whose base is 2 by changing 
to logarithms involving the base e. In general, the Change-of-Base Formula is used.
4
Example 7
Solution
Property (7)
Property (5)
Exact value
Approximate value rounded to four decimal places
•
Change-of-Base Formula
If a ≠1, b ≠1, and M are positive real numbers, then
	
loga M = logb M
logb a 	
(9)
Theorem
Proof  Let y = loga M. Then
 ay = M
 logb ay = logb M
 y logb a = logb M
 y = logb M
logb a  
 loga M = logb M
logb a
Because calculators have keys only for  log  and  ln , in practice, the  
Change-of-Base Formula uses either b = 10 or b = e. That is,
Property (7)
Property (5)
Solve for y.
y = loga  M
■
	
loga M = log M
log a and loga M = ln M
ln a 	
(10)

338 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Using the Change-of-Base Formula
Approximate:
(a)	 log5 89	
(b)  log12 25
Round answers to four decimal places.
Example 8
(a)	 log5 89 = log 89
log 5   ≈1.949390007
0.6989700043
	
 ≈2.7889
or
	
log5 89 = ln 89
ln 5   ≈4.48863637
1.609437912
	
 ≈2.7889
Solution
(b)	 log12 25 = log 15
log 12 =
1
2 log 5
1
2 log 2
	
 = log 5
log 2 ≈2.3219
or
	
log12 25 = ln 25
ln 22
 =
1
2 ln 5
1
2 ln 2
	
 = ln 5
ln 2 ≈2.3219
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 3  a n d  7 1
Comment  To graph logarithmic functions when the base is different from e or 10 requires the  
Change-of-Base Formula. For example, to graph y = log2  x, graph either y = ln x
ln 2 or y = log x
log 2 . 	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 9
Summary
Properties of Logarithms
In the list that follows, a, b, M, N, and r are real numbers. Also, a 7 0, a ≠1, b 7 0, b ≠1, M 7 0, and N 7 0.
Definition	
y = loga x means x = ay
Properties of Logarithms	
loga 1 = 0	
loga a = 1	
loga Mr = r loga M
	
aloga M = M	
loga ar = r	
          ar = er ln a
	
loga1MN2 = loga M + loga N	
logaaM
N b = loga M - loga N
	
If M = N, then loga M = loga N.	
If loga M = loga N, then M = N.
Change-of-Base Formula	
loga M = logb M
logb a
Historical Feature
L
ogarithms were invented about 1590 by 
John Napier (1550–1617) and Joost Bürgi 
(1552–1632), 
working 
independently.  
Napier, whose work had the greater influence, 
was a Scottish lord, a secretive man whose 
neighbors were inclined to believe him to 
be in league with the devil. His approach to  
logarithms was very different from ours; it was 
based on the relationship between arithmetic 
and geometric sequences, discussed in a later 
chapter, and not on the inverse function relationship of logarithms 
to exponential functions (described in Section 5.4). Napier’s tables, 
published in 1614, listed what would now be called natural 
logarithms of sines and were rather difficult to use. A London professor, 
Henry Briggs, became interested in the tables and visited Napier. In 
their conversations, they developed the idea of common logarithms, 
which were published in 1617. The importance of this tool for calculation 
was immediately recognized, and by 1650 common logarithms were 
being printed as far away as China. They remained an important 
calculation tool until the advent of the inexpensive handheld calculator 
about 1972, which has decreased their calculational—but not their 
theoretical—importance.
A side effect of the invention of logarithms was the popularization of 
the decimal system of notation for real numbers.
John Napier 
(1550–1617)

Section 5.5  Properties of Logarithms  339
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 loga  1 =
 
	 2.	 aloga M =
 
	 3.	 loga  ar =
 
	 4.	 loga (MN) =
 +
 
	 5.	 logaaM
N b =
 -
 
	 6.	 loga  Mr =
 
	 7.	 If log8 M =
log5 7
log5 8, then M =
 .
	 8.	 True or False  ln1x + 32 - ln12x2 =
ln1x + 32
ln12x2
 
	 9.	 True or False  log213x42 = 4 log213x2 
	 10.	 True or False  loga2
3 b =
log 2
log 3 
	 11.	 Choose the expression equivalent to 2x.
(a)	 e2x    (b)  ex ln 2    (c)  e log 2 x    (d)  e2 ln x 
	 12.	 Writing  log a x -  log a y + 2 log a z as a single logarithm  
results in which of the following?
(a)	  log a (x - y + 2z)    (b)   log a axz2
y b
(c)	  log a a2xz
y b	
(d)   log a a x
yz2b 
5.5  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 13–28, use properties of logarithms to find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
	 13.	 log2 2-13 
	
14.	 log3 371 
	
15.	 ln e-4 
	
16.	 ln e12 
	 17.	 eln 8  	
18.	 2log2 7  	
19.	 log8 2 + log8 4  	
20.	 log6 9 + log6 4 
	 21.	 log8 16 - log8 2  	
22.	 log6 18 - log6 3  	
23.	 log2 6 # log6 8  	
24.	 log3 8 # log8 9 
	 25.	 5log5 6+log5 7 
	
26.	 3log3 5-log3 4 
	
27.	 eloge2 9  	
28.	 eloge2 16 
In Problems 29–36, suppose that ln 2 = a and ln 3 = b. Use properties of logarithms to write each logarithm in terms of a and b.
	 29.	 ln 2
3 
	
30.	 ln 6 
	
31.	 ln 0.5 
	
32.	 ln 1.5 
	 33.	 ln 27 
	
34.	 ln 8 
	
35.	 ln A
4
 2
3 
	
36.	 ln 2
5 6 
In Problems 37–56, write each expression as a sum and/or difference of logarithms. Express powers as factors.
	 37.	 log3 x
9 
	
38.	 log5 125x2 
	
39.	 log7  x5 
	
40.	 log2 z3 
	 41.	 ln e
x 
	
42.	 ln1ex2 
	
43.	 ln1xex2   
	
44.	 ln x
ex 
	 45.	 log2a a
b2b a 7 0, b 7 0	
46.	 loga1u2
 v32 u 7 0, v 7 0	
47.	 ln1x21 + x22 x 7 0
	 48.	 ln1x2 21 - x2 0 6 x 6 1	
49.	 log5¢ 2
3 x2 + 1
x2 - 1 ≤ x 7 1	
50.	 log2¢
x3
x - 3≤ x 7 3
	 51.	 logJ
x1x + 22
1x + 322 R x 7 0	
52.	 logJx3 2x + 1
1x - 222 R x 7 2	
53.	 lnJ
1x - 422
x2 - 1 R
2>3 x 7 4
	 54.	 lnJx2 - x - 2
1x + 422 R
1>3 x 7 2	
55.	 lnJ5x2 2
3 1 - x
41x + 122 R 0 6 x 6 1	
56.	 ln 5x21 + 3x
1x - 423  x 7 4
In Problems 57–70, write each expression as a single logarithm.
	 57.	 3 log5 u + 4 log5 v 
	
58.	 2 log3 u - log3 v 
	
59.	 log2a1
xb + log2¢ 1
x2≤ 
	 60.	 log3 1x - log3 x3 
	
61.	 log1x2 + 3x + 22 - 2 log1x + 12	 	 	
62.	 log41x2 - 12 - 5 log41x + 12
	 63.	 lna
x
x - 1b + lnax + 1
x
b - ln1x2 - 12	 64.	 log¢x2 + 2x - 3
x2 - 4
≤- log¢x2 + 7x + 6
x + 2
≤	 65.	 21 log3 1
3 x + log319x22 - log3 9
	 66.  8 log2 23x - 2 - log2a4
xb + log2 4	
67.	 1
3 log1x3 + 12 + 1
2
 log1x2 + 12	
68.	 2 loga15x32 - 1
2 loga12x + 32
	 69.	 3 log513x + 12 - 2 log512x - 12 - log5 x	
70.	 2 log21x + 12 - log21x + 32 - log21x - 12

340 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
In Problems 71–78, use the Change-of-Base Formula and a calculator to evaluate each logarithm. Round your answer to three decimal places.
	 71.	 log3 21 
	
72.	 log5 18 
	
73.	 log1>2 15 
	
74.	 log1>3 71 
	 75.	 log15  8 
	
76.	 log12 7 
	
77.	 logp  22 
	
78.	 logp e 
In Problems 79–84, graph each function using a graphing utility and the Change-of-Base Formula.
	 79.	 y = log4 x	
80.	 y = log5 x	
81.	 y = log41x - 32
	 82.	 y = log21x + 22	
83.	 y = logx+21x - 22	
84.	 y = logx-11x + 12
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 87–96, express y as a function of x. The constant C is a positive number.
	 87.	 ln y = ln 8x + ln C 
	
88.	 ln y = ln1x + C2 
	 89.	 ln y = ln x + ln (x + 10) + ln C 
	
90.	 ln y = 2 ln x - ln1x + 12 + ln C 
	 91.	 ln y = 17x + ln C 
	
92.	 ln y = - 2x + ln C 
	 93.	 ln (y - 8) = - 3x + ln C 
	
94.	 ln1y + 42 = 5x + ln C 
	 95.	 3 ln y = 1
2  ln  (2x + 5) - 1
3 ln (x + 2) + ln C	
96.	 2 ln y = -  1
2 ln x + 1
3 ln1x2 + 12 + ln C
	 97.	 Find the value of log4 14 # log14 24 # log24 34 # log34 44 # log44 54 # log54 64. 
	 98.	 Find the value of log2 4 # log4 6 # log6 8. 
	 99.	 Find the value of log15 16 # log16 17 # g# logn (n + 1) # logn+1 15 . 
	100.	 Find the value of log2 2 # log2 4 #  g # log2 2n. 
	101.	 Show that loga1x + 2x2 - 12 + loga1x - 2x2 - 12 = 0.
	102.	 Show that loga11x + 2x - 12 + loga11x - 2x - 12 = 0.
	103.	 Show that ln11 + e2x2 = 2x + ln11 + e-2x2.
	104.	 Difference Quotient  If f1x2 = loga x, show that 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
= logaa1 + h
x b
1>h
, h ≠0.
	105.	 If f1x2 = loga x, show that - f1x2 = log1>a x.	
106.	 If f1x2 = loga x, show that f1AB2 = f1A2 + f1B2.
	107.	 If f1x2 = loga x, show that f a1
xb = - f1x2.	
108.	 If f1x2 = loga x, show that f1xa2 = af1x2.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	111.	 Graph Y1 = log1x22 and Y2 = 2 log1x2 using a graphing 
utility. Are they equivalent? What might account for any  
differences in the two functions?
	112.	 Write an example that illustrates why 1loga x2r ≠r loga x.
	113.	 Write an example that illustrates why	
 
	
	 log21x + y2 ≠log2 x + log2 y.
	114.	 Does 3log3 (-5) = - 5? Why or why not?
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 115–118 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	115.	 Use a graphing utility to solve x3 - 3x2 - 4x + 8 = 0. 
Round answers to two decimal places. 
	116.	 Without solving, determine the character of the solutions of 
the quadratic equation 4x2 - 28x + 49 = 0 in the complex  
number system.
	117.	 Find the real zeros of 
f1x2 = 5x5 + 44x4 + 116x3 + 95x2 - 4x - 4
	118.	 Graph f(x) = 22 - x using the techniques of shifting,  
compressing or stretching, and reflecting. State the  
domain and the range of f.
	109.	 Show that logaaM
N b = loga M - loga N, where a, M, and N 
are positive real numbers and a ≠1.
	110.	 Show that logaa 1
Nb = - loga N, where a and N are positive 
real numbers and a ≠1.
	 86.	 If f1x2 = log2 x, g1x2 = 2x, and h1x2 = 4x, find:
(a)	 1f ∘g2 1x2. What is the domain of f ∘g?
(b)	 1g ∘f2 1x2. What is the domain of g ∘f?
(c)	 1f ∘g2 132 
(d)	 1f ∘h2 1x2. What is the domain of f ∘h?
(e)	 1f ∘h2 182 
Mixed Practice
	 85.	 If f1x2 = ln x, g1x2 = ex, and h1x2 = x2, find:
(a)	 1f ∘g2 1x2. What is the domain of f ∘g?
(b)	 1g ∘f2 1x2. What is the domain of g ∘f?
(c)	 1f ∘g2 152 
(d)	 1f ∘h2 1x2. What is the domain of f ∘h?
(e)	 1f ∘h2 1e2 

Section 5.6  Logarithmic and Exponential Equations  341
Solve Logarithmic Equations
In Section 5.4 we solved logarithmic equations by changing a logarithmic expression 
to an exponential expression. That is, we used the definition of a logarithm:
1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 345.
	
Objectives	 	1  Solve Logarithmic Equations (p. 341)
	
	 	2  Solve Exponential Equations (p. 343)
	
	 	3  Solve Logarithmic and Exponential Equations Using a Graphing  
Utility (p. 344)
5.6  Logarithmic and Exponential Equations
•	 Solving Equations Using a Graphing Utility  
(Appendix B, Section B.4, pp. 1040–1041)
•	 Solving Quadratic Equations (Appendix A, Section A.6, 
pp. 990–994)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
y = loga  x is equivalent to x = ay  a 7 0 a ≠1
For example, to solve the equation log211 - 2x2 = 3, write the logarithmic  
equation as an equivalent exponential equation 1 - 2x = 23 and solve for x.
 log211 - 2x2 = 3
 1 - 2x = 23 
 -2x = 7
 x = -  7
2
You should check this solution for yourself.
For most logarithmic equations, some manipulation of the equation (usually using 
properties of logarithms) is required to obtain a solution. Also, to avoid extraneous 
solutions with logarithmic equations, determine the domain of the variable first.
Let’s begin with an example of a logarithmic equation that requires using the 
fact that a logarithmic function is a one-to-one function:
Change to exponential form.
Simplify.
Solve.
If loga  M = loga  N, then M = N  M, N, and a are positive and a ≠1
Solving a Logarithmic Equation
Solve:  2 log5 x = log5 9
The domain of the variable in this equation is x 7 0. Note that each logarithm has 
the same base, 5. Then find the exact solution as follows:
 2 log5 x = log5 9
 log5 x2 = log5 9
 
 x2 = 9
 
 x = 3 or x = -3
Recall that the domain of the variable is x 7 0. Therefore, - 3 is extraneous and 
must be discarded.
Example 1
Solution
r loga  M = loga  Mr 
If  loga  M = loga  N, then M = N.

342 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Check:	  2 log5 3 ≟log5 9
	
 log5 32 ≟log5 9 
	
log5 9 = log5 9
The solution set is 536.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Often one or more properties of logarithms are needed to rewrite the equation 
as a single logarithm. In the next example, the log of a product property is used.
Solving a Logarithmic Equation
Solve:  log51x + 62 + log51x + 22 = 1
The domain of the variable requires that x + 6 7 0 and x + 2 7 0, so x 7 -6 and 
x 7 -2. This means any solution must satisfy x 7 -2. To obtain an exact solution, 
first express the left side as a single logarithm. Then change the equation to an 
equivalent exponential equation.
 log51x + 62 + log51x + 22 = 1
 log53 1x + 62 1x + 22 4 = 1
 
 1x + 62 1x + 22 = 51 = 5
 x2 + 8x + 12 = 5
 x2 + 8x + 7 = 0
 1x + 72 1x + 12 = 0
 x = -7 or x = -1
Only x = -1 satisfies the restriction that x 7 -2, so x = -7 is extraneous. The 
solution set is 5 -16, which you should check.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Solving a Logarithmic Equation
Solve:  ln x = ln1x + 62 - ln1x - 42
The domain of the variable requires that x 7 0, x + 6 7 0, and x - 4 7 0. As a 
result, the domain of the variable here is x 7 4. Begin the solution using the log of 
a difference property.
 ln x = ln1x + 62 - ln1x - 42
 ln x = lnax + 6
x - 4b
 
 x = x + 6
x - 4 
 x1x - 42 = x + 6
 x2 - 4x = x + 6
 x2 - 5x - 6 = 0
 
 1x - 62 1x + 12 = 0
 x = 6 or x = -1
Because the domain of the variable is x 7 4, discard -1 as extraneous. The solution 
set is {6}, which you should check.	
•
r loga  M = loga  Mr 
Example 2
Solution
loga  M + loga  N = loga (MN)
Change to exponential form.
Multiply out.
Place the quadratic equation in standard form.
Factor.
Zero-Product Property
Example 3
Solution
In M -  ln N =  lnaM
N b
If ln M =  ln N, then M =  N.
Multiply both sides by x - 4.
Multiply out.
Place the quadratic equation in standard form.
Factor.
Zero-Product Property
Warning  A negative solution is not 
automatically extraneous. You must 
determine 
whether 
the 
potential  
solution causes the argument of any  
logarithmic expression in the equation to 
be negative or 0.	
■

Section 5.6  Logarithmic and Exponential Equations  343
Warning  In using properties of logarithms to solve logarithmic equations, avoid using the  
property loga xr = r loga x, when r is even. The reason can be seen in this example:
Solve: log3 x2 = 4
Solution: The domain of the variable x is all real numbers except 0.
(a)  log3 x2 = 4	
(b)  log3 x2 = 4 
	
x2 = 34 = 81 
	
	
2 log3 x = 4 
x 7 0
	
x = - 9 or x = 9	
	
log3 x = 2
	
	
	
x = 9
Both - 9 and 9 are solutions of log3 x2 = 4 (as you can verify). The solution in part (b) does not find 
the solution - 9 because the domain of the variable was further restricted due to the application of 
the property loga xr = r loga x.	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1
Solve Exponential Equations
In Sections 5.3 and 5.4, we solved exponential equations algebraically by expressing  
each side of the equation using the same base. That is, we used the one-to-one  
property of the exponential function:
2
If au = av, then u = v  a 7 0 a ≠1
For example, to solve the exponential equation 42x+1 = 16, notice that 16 = 42 and  
apply the property above to obtain the equation 2x + 1 = 2, from which we find x = 1
2.
Not all exponential equations can be readily expressed so that each side of the 
equation has the same base. For such equations, algebraic techniques often can be 
used to obtain exact solutions.
Solving Exponential Equations
Solve:  (a)  2x = 5	
(b)  8 # 3x = 5
(a)	 Because 5 cannot be written as an integer power of 2 (22 = 4 and 23 = 8), write 
the exponential equation as the equivalent logarithmic equation.
 2x = 5
 x = log
2 5 = ln 5
ln 2
Alternatively, the equation 2x = 5 can be solved by taking the natural logarithm 
(or common logarithm) of each side.
 2x = 5
 ln 2x = ln 5
 x ln 2 = ln 5
 x = ln 5
ln 2  
 ≈2.322 
The solution set is e ln 5
ln 2 f.
(b)	  8 # 3x = 5
	
 3x = 5
8 
Example 4
Solution
                  c
Change-of-Base Formula (10), Section 5.5
If M = N, then ln M = ln N.
In Mr = r ln M
Exact solution
Approximate solution
Solve for 3x .

344 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
 x = log3a5
8b =
lna5
8b
ln 3  
≈-0.428
The solution set is •
lna5
8b
ln 3
¶.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Solving an Exponential Equation
Solve: 5x-2 = 33x+2
Because the bases are different, first apply property (7), Section 5.5 (take the natural 
logarithm of each side), and then use a property of logarithms. The result is an  
equation in x that can be solved.
 5x-2 = 33x+2
 ln 5x-2 = ln 33x+2
 
 1x - 22 ln 5 = 13x + 22 ln 3
 
 1ln 52x - 2 ln 5 = 13 ln 32x + 2 ln 3 
 1ln 52x - 13 ln 32x = 2 ln 3 + 2 ln 5
 
 1ln 5 - 3 ln 32x = 21ln 3 + ln 52
 
 x = 21ln 3 + ln 52
ln 5 - 3 ln 3
 
 ≈-3.212
 
The solution set is e
21ln 3 + ln 52
ln 5 - 3 ln 3 f.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 3
Solving an Exponential Equation That Is Quadratic in Form
Solve:  4x - 2x - 12 = 0
Note that 4x = 1222x = 2(2x) = 12x22, so the equation is quadratic in form and can 
be written as
12x22 - 2x - 12 = 0 
Let u = 2x; then u2 - u - 12 = 0.
Now factor as usual.
 
  12x - 42 12x + 32 = 0
 
 2x - 4 = 0 or 
 2x + 3 = 0
 
 2x = 4  
 2x = -3 
The equation on the left has the solution x = 2, since 2x = 4 = 22; the equation on the 
right has no solution, since 2x 7 0 for all x. The only solution is 2. The solution set is 526.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
Solve Logarithmic and Exponential Equations  
Using a Graphing Utility
The algebraic techniques introduced in this section to obtain exact solutions apply 
only to certain types of logarithmic and exponential equations. Solutions for other 
types are generally studied in calculus, using numerical methods. For such types, we 
can use a graphing utility to approximate the solution.
Exact solution
Approximate solution
•
Example 5
Solution
If M = N, ln M = ln N.
ln Mr = r ln M
Distribute.
Place terms involving x on the left.
Factor.
Exact solution
Approximate solution
•
Example 6
Solution
(u - 4)(u + 3) = 0
 u - 4 = 0 or  u + 3 = 0
             u = 2x = 4   u = 2x = -3
•
3
Note:  Because of the properties of 
logarithms, exact solutions involving  
logarithms often can be expressed in 
multiple ways. For example, the solution 
to 5x-2 = 33x+2 from Example 5 can be
expressed equivalently as 
2ln 15
ln 5 - ln 27
or as ln 225
ln(5/27), among others. Do you see
why?	
■

Section 5.6  Logarithmic and Exponential Equations  345
Solving Equations Using a Graphing Utility
Solve:  x + ex = 2
Express the solution(s) rounded to two decimal places.
The solution is found by graphing Y1 = x + ex and Y2 = 2. Since Y1 is an increasing 
function (do you know why?), there is only one point of intersection for Y1 and Y2. 
Figure 40 shows the graphs of Y1 and Y2. Using the INTERSECT command reveals 
that the solution is 0.44, rounded to two decimal places.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
Example 7
Solution
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Solve x2 - 7x - 30 = 0. (pp. 990–994)
	 2.	 Solve 1x + 322 - 41x + 32 + 3 = 0. (pp. 990–994)
	 3.	 Approximate the solution(s) to x3 = x2 - 5 using a  
graphing utility. (pp. 1040–1041)
	 4.	 Approximate the solution(s) to x3 - 2x + 2 = 0 using a 
graphing utility. (pp. 1040–1041) 
5.6  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 5–40, solve each logarithmic equation. Express irrational solutions in exact form and as a decimal rounded to three decimal 
places.
	 5.	 log 1x + 62 = 1 
	
6.	 log4  x = 2 
	
7.	 log313x - 12 = 2 
	 8.	 log215x2 = 4 
	
9.	 log512x + 32 = log5 3 
	
10.	 log41x + 22 = log4 8 
	 11.	 -2 log4 x = log4 9 
	
12.	 1
2 log3 x = 2 log3 2 
	
13.	 3 log2 x = -log2 27 
	 14.	 2 log5 x = 3 log5 4 
	
15.	 2 log31x + 42 - log3 9 = 2 
	
16.	 3 log21x - 12 + log2 4 = 5 
	 17.	 log x + log 1x - 212 = 2 
	
18.	 log x + log1x + 152 = 2 
	
19.	 log12x2 - log1x - 32 = 1 
	 20.	 log12x + 12 = 1 + log1x - 22  	
21.	 log21x + 72 + log21x + 82 = 1 
	
22.	 log61x + 42 + log61x + 32 = 1 
	 23.	 log51x + 32 = 1 - log51x - 12 
	 24.	 log81x + 62 = 1 - log81x + 42 
	
25.	 ln1x + 12 - ln x = 2
	 26.	 ln x + ln1x + 22 = 4	
27.	 log21x + 12 + log21x + 72 = 3	
28.	 log31x + 12 + log31x + 42 = 2
	 29.	 log41x2 - 92 - log41x + 32 = 3 
	
30.	 log1>31x2 + x2 - log1>31x2 - x2 = -1 
	 31.	 loga1x - 12 - loga1x + 62 = loga1x - 22 - loga1x + 32 
	
32.	 loga x + loga1x - 22 = loga1x + 42 
	 33.	  log3 x - 2 log3 5 =  log3 (x + 1) - 2 log3 10 
	
34.	 2 log5 (x - 3) -  log5 8 =  log5 2 
	 35.	 3( log7 x -  log7 2) = 2 log7 4 
	
36.	 2 log6 (x + 2) = 3 log6 2 +  log6 4 
	 37.	  log (x - 1) = 1
3 log 2 
	
38.	 2 log13 (x + 2) =  log13 (4x + 7) 
	 39.	  ln x - 32 ln x + 2 = 0 
	
40.	 ( log3 x)2 - 5( log3 x) = 6 
In Problems 41–68, solve each exponential equation. Express irrational solutions in exact form and as a decimal rounded to three decimal 
places.
	 41.	 5-x = 25 
	
42.	 2x-5 = 8 
	
43.	 2x = 10	
44.	 3x = 14
	 45.	 2-x = 1.5	
46.	 8-x = 1.2	
47.	 0.3140.2x2 = 0.2	
48.	 5123x2 = 8
	 49.	 2x+1 = 51-2x	
50.	 31-2x = 4x	
51.	 a4
3b
1-x
= 5x	
52.	 a3
5b
x
= 71-x
	 53.	 1.2x = 10.52 -x 
	
54.	 0.31+x = 1.72x-1	
55.	 ex+3 = px	
56.	 p1-x = ex
Figure 40 
0
4
1
Y2 5 2
Y1 5 x 1ex

346 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	 57.	 32x + 3x - 2 = 0 
	
58.	 22x + 2x - 12 = 0	
59.	 22x + 2x+2 - 12 = 0 
	
60.	 32x + 3x+1 - 4 = 0 
	 61.	 16x + 4x+1 - 3 = 0	
62.	 9x - 3x+1 + 1 = 0	
63.	 36x - 6 # 6x = - 9	
64.	 25x - 8 # 5x = -16
	 65.	 2 # 49x + 11 # 7x + 5 = 0	
66.	 3 # 4x + 4 # 2x + 8 = 0	
67.	 3x - 14 # 3-x = 5	
68.	 4x - 10 # 4-x = 3
In Problems 69–82, use a graphing utility to solve each equation. Express your answer rounded to two decimal places.
	 69.	 log21x - 12 - log61x + 22 = 2 
	
70.	 log51x + 12 - log41x - 22 = 1 
	 71.	 ex = - x 
	
72.	 e2x = x + 2 
	 73.	 ex = x3 
	
74.	 ex = x2 
	 75.	 ln12x2 = - x + 2 
	
76.	 ln x = - x 
	
77.	 ln x = - x2 
	
78.	 ln x = x3 - 1 
	 79.	 ex - ln x = 4 
	 80.	 ex + ln x = 4 
	
81.	 e-x = - ln x 
	
82.	 e-x = ln x 
Mixed Practice
In Problems 83–94, solve each equation. Express irrational solutions in exact form and as a decimal rounded to three decimal places.
	 95.	 f1x2 = log21x + 32 and g1x2 = log213x + 12.
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = 3. What point is on the graph of f ? 
(b)	 Solve g1x2 = 4. What point is on the graph of g? 
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2. Do the graphs of f and g intersect? 
If so, where? 
(d)	 Solve 1f + g2 1x2 = 7. 
(e)	 Solve 1f - g2 1x2 = 2. 
	 96.	 f1x2 = log31x + 52 and g1x2 = log31x - 12.
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = 2. What point is on the graph of f? 
(b)	 Solve g1x2 = 3. What point is on the graph of g? 
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2. Do the graphs of f and g  
intersect? If so, where? 
(d)	 Solve 1f + g2 1x2 = 3. 
(e)	 Solve 1f - g2 1x2 = 2. 
	 97.	 (a)	 If f1x2 = 3x+1 and g1x2 = 2x+2, graph f and g on the 
same Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Find the point(s) of intersection of the graphs of f and 
g by solving f1x2 = g1x2. Round answers to three 
decimal places. Label any intersection points on the 
graph drawn in part (a). 
(c)	 Based on the graph, solve f1x2 7 g1x2. 
	 98.	 (a)	 If f1x2 = 5x-1 and g1x2 = 2x+1, graph f and g on the 
same Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Find the point(s) of intersection of the graphs of f 
and g by solving f1x2 = g1x2. Label any intersection 
points on the graph drawn in part (a). 
(c)	 Based on the graph, solve f1x2 7 g1x2. 
	 99.	 (a)	 Graph f1x2 = 3x and g1x2 = 10 on the same  
Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Shade the region bounded by the y-axis, f1x2 = 3x, 
and g1x2 = 10 on the graph drawn in part (a).
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2 and label the point of intersection 
on the graph drawn in part (a). 
	100.	 (a)	 Graph f1x2 = 2x and g1x2 = 12 on the same  
Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Shade the region bounded by the y-axis, f1x2 = 2x, 
and g1x2 = 12 on the graph drawn in part (a).
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2 and label the point of intersection 
on the graph drawn in part (a). 
	101.	 (a)	 Graph f1x2 = 2x+1 and g1x2 = 2-x+2 on the same 
Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Shade the region bounded by the y-axis, f1x2 = 2x+1, 
and g1x2 = 2-x+2 on the graph drawn in part (a).
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2 and label the point of intersection 
on the graph drawn in part (a).
	102.	 (a)	 Graph f1x2 = 3-x+1 and g1x2 = 3x-2 on the same 
Cartesian plane.
(b)	 Shade the region bounded by the y-axis, f1x2 = 3-x+1, 
and g1x2 = 3x-2 on the graph drawn in part (a).
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2 and label the point of intersection 
on the graph drawn in part (a). 
	103.	 (a)	 Graph f1x2 = 2x - 4.
(b)	 Find the zero of f. 
(c)	 Based on the graph, solve f1x2 6 0. 
	104.	 (a)	 Graph g1x2 = 3x - 9.
(b)	 Find the zero of g. 
(c)	 Based on the graph, solve g1x2 7 0. 
	 86.	 log9 x + 3 log3 x = 14 
	 87.	 12
3 222-x = 2x2 
	 88.	 log2 xlog2 x = 4 
	 92.	 ex - e-x
2
= - 2 
	 93.	 log5 x + log3 x = 1
[Hint: Use the Change-of-Base Formula.]
	 94.	 log2 x + log6 x = 3   
	 83.	 log21x + 12 - log4 x = 1 
[ Hint: Change log4 x to base 2.]
	 84.	 log213x + 22 - log4 x = 3
	 85.	 log16 x + log4 x + log2 x = 7 
	 89.	 ex + e-x
2
= 1 
[ Hint: Multiply each side by ex.]
	 90.	 ex + e-x
2
= 3
	 91.	 ex - e-x
2
= 2

Section 5.6  Logarithmic and Exponential Equations  347
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 110–113 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
Applications and Extensions
	105.	 A Population Model  The population of a certain coun-
try in 1999 was 287 million people. In addition, the popu-
lation of the country was growing at a rate of 1.0% per 
year. Assuming that this growth rate continues, the model 
P(t) = 287(1.010)t-1999 represents the population P (in 
millions of people) in year t. 
(a)	 According to this model, when will the population of the 
country reach 307 million people? 
(b)	 According to this model, when will the population of the 
country reach 394 million people? 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
(b)	 According to this model, when will the population of the 
world be 12.5 billion people? 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
	107.	 Depreciation  The value V of a certain automobile that is t 
years old can be modeled by V1t2 = 14,16210.832t.
(a)	 According to the model, when will the car be worth 
$8000? 
(b)	 According to the model, when will the car be worth 
$3000? 
(c)	 According to the model, when will the car be worth 
$1000? 
Source: Kelley Blue Book
	106.	 A Population Model  The population of the world in 2014 
was 7.14 billion people and was growing at a rate of 1.1% per 
year. Assuming that this growth rate continues, the model 
P1t2 = 7.1411.0112t-2014 represents the population P (in 
billions of people) in year t.
(a)	 According to this model, when will the population of the 
world be 9 billion people? 
	108.	 Depreciation  The value V of a Honda Civic LX that is  
t years old can be modeled by V1t2 = 18,95510.9052t.
(a)	 According to the model, when will the car be worth 
$16,000? 
(b)	 According to the model, when will the car be worth 
$10,000? 
(c)	 According to the model, when will the car be worth 
$7500? 
Source: Kelley Blue Book
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	109.	 Fill in the reason for each step in the following two solutions.
	110.	 Solve:  4x3 + 3x2 - 25x + 6 = 0
	111.	 Determine whether the function 5(0, - 4), (2, - 2), (4, 0),	
(6, 2)6 is one-to-one. 
	112.	 For f(x) =
x
x - 2 and g(x) = x + 5
x - 3, find f ∘g. Then find 
the domain of f ∘g.
	113.	 Find the domain of f(x) = 2x + 3 + 2x - 1. 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 5 - 3, 106    2.  5 - 2, 06    3.  5 - 1.436    4.  5 - 1.776
Solve:  log31x - 122 = 2
Solution A	
Solution B
log31x - 122 = 2	
log31x - 122 = 2
1x - 122 = 32 = 9                	
2 log31x - 12 = 2               
1x - 12 = {3               	
log31x - 12 = 1               
x - 1 = - 3 or x - 1 = 3               	
x - 1 = 31 = 3               
x = - 2 or x = 4               	
x = 4               
Both solutions given in Solution A check. Explain what caused the solution x = - 2 to be lost in Solution B.

348 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Determine the Future Value of a Lump Sum of Money
Interest is money paid for the use of money. The total amount borrowed (whether 
by an individual from a bank in the form of a loan or by a bank from an individual in 
the form of a savings account) is called the principal. The rate of interest, expressed 
as a percent, is the amount charged for the use of the principal for a given period of 
time, usually on a yearly (that is, per annum) basis.
1
 Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 354.
	
Objectives	 	1  Determine the Future Value of a Lump Sum of Money  (p. 348)
	
	 	2  Calculate Effective Rates of Return  (p. 351)
	
	 	3  Determine the Present Value of a Lump Sum of Money  (p. 352)
	
	 	4  Determine the Rate of Interest or the Time Required to Double a Lump 
Sum of Money (p. 353)
5.7  Financial Models
•	 Simple Interest (Appendix A, Section A.8, pp. 1007–1008)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION Before getting started, review the following:
* Most banks use a 360-day “year.” Why do you think they do?
Simple Interest Formula
If a principal of P dollars is borrowed for a period of t years at a per annum 
interest rate r, expressed as a decimal, the interest I charged is
	
I = Prt	
(1)
Theorem
Interest charged according to formula (1) is called simple interest.
In problems involving interest, the term payment period is defined as follows.
Annually:	
Once per year	
Monthly:	
12 times per year
Semiannually:	 Twice per year	
Daily:	
365 times per year*
Quarterly:	
Four times per year
When the interest due at the end of a payment period is added to the principal 
so that the interest computed at the end of the next payment period is based on this 
new principal amount 1old principal + interest2, the interest is said to have been 
compounded. Compound interest is interest paid on the principal and on previously 
earned interest.
Computing Compound Interest
A credit union pays interest of 2% per annum compounded quarterly on a certain 
savings plan. If $1000 is deposited in such a plan and the interest is left to accumulate, 
how much is in the account after 1 year?
Use the simple interest formula, I = Prt. The principal P is $1000 and the rate of
interest is 2, = 0.02. After the first quarter of a year, the time t is 1
4 year, so the 
interest earned is
I = Prt = 1+10002 10.022 a1
4b = +5
Example 1
Solution

Section 5.7  Financial Models  349
The new principal is P + I = $1000 + $5 = $1005. At the end of the second  
quarter, the interest on this principal is
I = 1$10052 10.022 a1
4b = $5.03
At the end of the third quarter, the interest on the new principal of 
$1005 + $5.03 = $1010.03 is
I = 1$1010.032 10.022 a1
4b = $5.05
Finally, after the fourth quarter, the interest is
I = 1$1015.082 10.022 a1
4b = $5.08
After 1 year the account contains $1015.08 + $5.08 = $1020.16.	
•
The pattern of the calculations performed in Example 1 leads to a general 
formula for compound interest. For this purpose, let P represent the principal to 
be invested at a per annum interest rate r that is compounded n times per year, so
the time of each compounding period is 1
n years. (For computing purposes, r is 
expressed as a decimal.) The interest earned after each compounding period is given 
by formula (1).
Interest = principal * rate * time = P # r # 1
n = P # a r
n b
The amount A after one compounding period is
A = P + P # a r
n b = P # a1 + r
n b
After two compounding periods, the amount A, based on the new principal 
P # a1 + r
n b, is
A = P # a1 + r
n b + P # a1 + r
n b a r
n b = P # a1 + r
n b # a1 + r
n b = P # a1 + r
n b
2
After three compounding periods, the amount A is
A = P # a1 + r
n b
2
+ P # a1 + r
n b
2
a r
n b = P # a1 + r
n b
2 # a1 + r
n b = P # a1 + r
n b
3
Continuing this way, after n compounding periods (1 year), the amount A is
A = P # a1 + r
n b
n
Because t years will contain n # t compounding periods, the amount after t years is
A = P # a1 + r
n b
nt
New
principal
Interest 
on new principal
c
Factor out P # a1 + r
nb
8
8
Compound Interest Formula
The amount A after t years due to a principal P invested at an annual interest 
rate r, expressed as a decimal, compounded n times per year is
	
A = P # a1 + r
n b
nt
	
(2)
Theorem

350 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
For example, to rework Example 1, use P = $1000, r = 0.02, n = 4 (quarterly 
compounding), and t = 1 year to obtain
A = P # a1 + r
n b
nt
= 1000a1 + 0.02
4 b
4#1
= $1020.16
In equation (2), the amount A is typically referred to as the future value of the 
account, and P is called the present value.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Comparing Investments Using Different Compounding Periods
Investing $1000 at an annual rate of 10% compounded annually, semiannually,  
quarterly, monthly, and daily will yield the following amounts after 1 year:
Annual compounding 1n = 12:	
 A = P # 11 + r2
	
 = 1$10002 11 + 0.102 = $1100.00
Semiannual compounding 1n = 22:	
 A = P # a1 + r
2b
2
	
 = 1$10002 11 + 0.0522 = $1102.50
Quarterly compounding 1n = 42:	
 A = P # a1 + r
4b
4
	
 = 1$10002 11 + 0.02524 = $1103.81
Monthly compounding 1n = 122:	
 A = P # a1 +
r
12b
12
	
 = 1$10002 a1 + 0.10
12 b
12
= $1104.71
Daily compounding 1n = 3652:	
 A = P # a1 +
r
365b
365
	
 = 1$10002 a1 + 0.10
365 b
365
= $1105.16
From Example 2, note that the effect of compounding more frequently is that 
the amount after 1 year is higher: $1000 compounded 4 times a year at 10% results 
in $1103.81, $1000 compounded 12 times a year at 10% results in $1104.71, and 
$1000 compounded 365 times a year at 10% results in $1105.16. This leads to the 
following question: What would happen to the amount after 1 year if the number of 
times that the interest is compounded were increased without bound?
Let’s find the answer. Suppose that P is the principal, r is the per annum interest 
rate, and n is the number of times that the interest is compounded each year. The 
amount A after 1 year is
A = P # a1 + r
n b
n
Rewrite this expression as follows:
Example 2
•
 A = P # a1 + r
n b
n
= P # £1 + 1
n
r
≥
n
=  P # C £1 + 1
n
r
≥
n>r
S
r
= P # c a1 + 1
h b
h
d
r
  (3)
c
h = n
r
Exploration
To observe the effects of compounding  
interest monthly on an initial deposit of $1, 
graph Y1 = a1 +
r
12b
12x
 with r = 0.06
and r = 0.12 for 0 … x … 30. What is 
the future value of $1 in 30 years when 
the interest rate per annum is r = 0.06 
(6%)? What is the future value of $1 in  
30 years when the interest rate per annum 
is r = 0.12 (12%)? Does doubling the  
interest rate double the future value?

Section 5.7  Financial Models  351
Now suppose that the number n of times that the interest is compounded per
year gets larger and larger; that is, suppose that n S q. Then h = n
r S q, and the 
expression in brackets in equation (3) equals e. That is, A S Per.
Table 8 compares a1 + r
n b
n
, for large values of n, to er for r = 0.05, r = 0.10,
r = 0.15, and r = 1. The larger that n gets, the closer a1 + r
n b
n
 gets to er. No matter
how frequent the compounding, the amount after 1 year has the definite ceiling Per.
Table 8
 
11 + r
n2n
 
 
n = 100
n = 1000
n = 10,000
er
r = 0.05
1.0512580
1.0512698
1.051271
1.0512711
r = 0.10
1.1051157
1.1051654
1.1051704
1.1051709
r = 0.15
1.1617037
1.1618212
1.1618329
1.1618342
r = 1
2.7048138
2.7169239
2.7181459
2.7182818
y
When interest is compounded so that the amount after 1 year is Per, the interest 
is said to be compounded continuously.
Continuous Compounding
The amount A after t years due to a principal P invested at an annual interest 
rate r compounded continuously is
	
A = Pert	
(4)
Theorem
Using Continuous Compounding
The amount A that results from investing a principal P of $1000 at an annual rate r 
of 10% compounded continuously for a time t of 1 year is
A = $1000e0.10 = 1$10002 11.105172 = $1105.17
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Calculate Effective Rates of Return
Suppose that you have $1000 and a bank offers to pay you 3% annual interest on 
a savings account with interest compounded monthly. What annual interest rate 
must be earned for you to have the same amount at the end of the year as if the 
interest had been compounded annually (once per year)? To answer this question, 
first determine the value of the $1000 in the account that earns 3% compounded 
monthly.
 A = +1000a1 + 0.03
12 b
12
 = $1030.42
So the interest earned is $30.42. Using I = Prt with t = 1, I = +30.42, and P = $1000, 
the annual simple interest rate is 0.03042 = 3.042,. This interest rate is known as 
the effective rate of interest.
The effective rate of interest is the annual simple interest rate that would 
yield the same amount as compounding n times per year, or continuously, after  
1 year.
Example 3
•
2
Use A = P a1 + r
n b
n
  with P = +1000, r = 0.03, n = 12.

352 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Computing the Effective Rate of Interest—Which Is the Best Deal?
Suppose you want to buy a 5-year certificate of deposit (CD). You visit three banks 
to determine their CD rates. American Express offers you 2.15% annual interest 
compounded monthly, and First Internet Bank offers you 2.20% compounded  
quarterly. Discover offers 2.12% compounded daily. Determine which bank is 
offering the best deal.
The bank that offers the best deal is the one with the highest effective interest rate.
American Express
First Internet Bank
Discover
 re = a1 + 0.0215
12
b
12
- 1  re = a1 + 0.022
4
b
4
- 1
 re = a1 + 0.0212
365 b
365
- 1
 ≈1.02171 - 1
 ≈1.02218 - 1
 ≈1.02143 - 1
 = 0.02171
 = 0.02218
 = 0.02143
 = 2.171,
 = 2.218,
 = 2.143,
The effective rate of interest is highest for First Internet Bank, so First Internet 
Bank is offering the best deal.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Determine the Present Value of a Lump Sum of Money
When people in finance speak of the “time value of money,” they are usually referring 
to the present value of money. The present value of A dollars to be received at a 
future date is the principal that you would need to invest now so that it will grow 
to A dollars in the specified time period. The present value of money to be received 
at a future date is always less than the amount to be received, since the amount to 
be received will equal the present value (money invested now) plus the interest 
accrued over the time period.
The compound interest formula (2) is used to develop a formula for present 
value. If P is the present value of A dollars to be received after t years at a per  
annum interest rate r compounded n times per year, then, by formula (2),
A = P # a1 + r
n b
nt
To solve for P, divide both sides by a1 + r
n b
nt
. The result is
A
a1 + r
n b
nt = P or P = A # a1 + r
n b
-nt
Example 4
Solution
3
Effective Rate of Interest
The effective rate of interest re of an investment earning an annual interest  
rate r is given by
Compounding n times per year:   re = a1 + r
n b
n
- 1
Continuous compounding:  
 re = er - 1
Theorem

Section 5.7  Financial Models  353
To derive (6), solve formula (4) for P.
Computing the Value of a Zero-Coupon Bond
A zero-coupon (noninterest-bearing) bond can be redeemed in 10 years for $1000. 
How much should you be willing to pay for it now if you want a return of
(a)	 8% compounded monthly?      (b)  7% compounded continuously?
(a)	 To find the present value of $1000, use formula (5) with A = $1000,
n = 12, r = 0.08, and t = 10.
P = A # a1 + r
n b
-nt
= $1000a1 + 0.08
12 b
-121102
= $450.52
For a return of 8% compounded monthly, pay $450.52 for the bond.
(b)	 Here use formula (6) with A = $1000, r = 0.07, and t = 10.
P = Ae-rt = $1000e-10.0721102 = $496.59
For a return of 7% compounded continuously, pay $496.59 for the bond.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Determine the Rate of Interest or the Time Required to Double 
a Lump Sum of Money
Rate of Interest Required to Double an Investment
What annual rate of interest compounded annually is needed in order to double an 
investment in 5 years?
If P is the principal and P is to double, then the amount A will be 2P. Use the  
compound interest formula with n = 1 and t = 5 to find r.
 A = P # a1 + r
n b
nt
 2P = P # 11 + r25
 
 2 = 11 + r25 
 1 + r = 2
5 2 
 r = 2
5 2 - 1 ≈1.148698 - 1 = 0.148698
The annual rate of interest needed to double the principal in 5 years is 14.87%.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1
Example 5
Solution
•
4
Example 6
Solution
A = 2P, n = 1, t = 5
Divide both sides by P.
Take the fifth root of each side.
•
Present Value Formulas
The present value P of A dollars to be received after t years, assuming a per 
annum interest rate r compounded n times per year, is
	
P = A # a1 + r
n b
-nt
	
(5)
If the interest is compounded continuously, then
	
P = Ae-rt	
(6)
Theorem

354 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Time Required to Double or Triple an Investment
(a)	 How long will it take for an investment to double in value if it earns 5%  
compounded continuously?
(b)	 How long will it take to triple at this rate?
(a)	 If P is the initial investment and P is to double, then the amount A will be 2P. 
Use formula (4) for continuously compounded interest with r = 0.05.
 A = Pert
 2P = Pe0.05t
 
 2 = e0.05t 
 0.05t = ln 2
 t = ln 2
0.05 ≈13.86
It will take about 14 years to double the investment.
(b)	 To triple the investment, let A = 3P in formula (4).
 A = Pert
 3P = Pe0.05t
 
 3 = e0.05t 
 0.05t = ln 3
 t = ln 3
0.05 ≈21.97
It will take about 22 years to triple the investment.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5
Example 7
Solution
A = 2P, r = 0.05
Divide out the P ’s.
Rewrite as a logarithm.
Solve for t.
A = 3P, r = 0.05
Divide out the P ’s.
Rewrite as a logarithm.
Solve for t.
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 What is the interest due when $500 is borrowed for 6 months at 
a simple interest rate of 6% per annum? (pp. 1007–1008) 
	 2.	 If you borrow $5000 and, after 9 months, pay off the loan in 
the amount of $5500, what per annum rate of interest was 
charged? (pp. 1007–1008) 
5.7  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 3.	 The total amount borrowed (whether by an individual from 
a bank in the form of a loan or by a bank from an individual 
in the form of a savings account) is called the 
 
	 4.	 If a principal of P dollars is borrowed for a period of t years 
at a per annum interest rate r, expressed as a decimal, the 
interest I charged is 
 =
 . Interest charged  
according to this formula is called 
  
 .
	 5.	 In problems involving interest, if the payment period of the 
interest is quarterly, then interest is paid 
  times per 
year.
	 6.	 The 
  
  
  
  is the annual simple  
interest rate that would yield the same amount as compounding 
n times per year, or continuously, after 1 year.
Skill Building
In Problems 7–14, find the amount that results from each investment.
	 7.	 $100 invested at 4% compounded quarterly after a period of 
2 years 
	 8.	 $50 invested at 6% compounded monthly after a period of  
3 years 
	 9.	 $300 invested at 12% compounded monthly after a period 
of 1 1
2 years 
	 10.	 $500 invested at 8% compounded quarterly after a period of 
2 1
2 years 
	 11.	 $700 invested at 6% compounded daily after a period of  
2 years 
	 12.	 $600 invested at 5% compounded daily after a period of  
3 years 

Section 5.7  Financial Models  355
In Problems 15–22, find the principal needed now to get each amount; that is, find the present value.
	 13.	 $1000 invested at 11% compounded continuously after a 
period of 2 years 
	 14.	 $400 invested at 7% compounded continuously after a  
period of 3 years 
	 15.	 To get $100 after 2 years at 6% compounded monthly 
	 16.	 To get $75 after 3 years at 8% compounded quarterly 
	 17.	 To get $800 after 3 1
2 years at 7% compounded monthly
	 18.	 To get $1000 after 2 1
2 years at 6% compounded daily
	 19.	 To get $300 after 4 years at 3% compounded daily 
	 20.	 To get $600 after 2 years at 4% compounded quarterly 
	 21.	 To get $800 after 2 1
2 years at 8% compounded continuously
	 22.	 To get $80 after 3 1
4 years at 9% compounded continuously
In Problems 27–30, determine the rate that represents the better deal.
	 27.	 9% compounded quarterly or 9 1
4, compounded annually
	 28.	 6% compounded quarterly or 6 1
4, compounded annually
	 29.	 8% compounded semiannually or 7.9% compounded daily
	 30.	 9% compounded monthly or 8.8% compounded daily
	 31.	 What rate of interest compounded annually is required to 
double an investment in 3 years? 
	 32.	 What rate of interest compounded annually is required to 
double an investment in 6 years? 
	 33.	 What rate of interest compounded annually is required to 
triple an investment in 5 years? 
	 34.	 What rate of interest compounded annually is required to 
triple an investment in 10 years? 
	 35.	 (a)	 How long does it take for an investment to double in 
value if it is invested at 8% compounded monthly?
(b)	 How long does it take if the interest is compounded  
continuously? 
	 36.	 (a)	 How long does it take for an investment to triple in value 
if it is invested at 6% compounded monthly?
(b)	 How long does it take if the interest is compounded  
continuously? 
	 37.	 What rate of interest compounded quarterly will yield an 
effective interest rate of 7%?   
	 38.	 What rate of interest compounded continuously will yield 
an effective interest rate of 6%? 
Applications and Extensions
	 39.	 Time Required to Reach a Goal  If Tanisha has $1000 to in-
vest at 7% per annum compounded semiannually, how long 
will it be before she has $1400? If the compounding is con-
tinuous, how long will it be? 
	 40.	 Time Required to Reach a Goal  If Angela has $100 to  
invest at 2.5% per annum compounded monthly, how 
long will it be before she has $175? If the compounding is  
continuous, how long will it be? 
	 41.	 Time Required to Reach a Goal  How many years will it 
take for an initial investment of $50,000 to grow to $75,000? 
Assume a rate of interest of 16% compounded continuously.
	 42.	 Time Required to Reach a Goal  How many years will it 
take for an initial investment of $25,000 to grow to $80,000? 
Assume a rate of interest of 7% compounded continuously.
	 43.	 Price Appreciation of Homes  What will a $160,000 house 
cost 7 years from now if the price appreciation for homes 
over that period averages 8% compounded annually? 
	 44.	 Credit Card Interest  A department store charges 1.25% 
per month on the unpaid balance for customers with charge 
accounts (interest is compounded monthly). A customer 
charges $200 and does not pay her bill for 6 months. What is 
the bill at that time? 
	 45.	 Saving for a Car  Jerome will be buying a used car for $6000 
in 3 years. How much money should he ask his parents for 
now so that, if he invests it at 8% compounded continuously, 
he will have enough to buy the car? 
	 46.	 Paying off a Loan  John requires $3000 in 6 months to pay 
off a loan that has no prepayment privileges. If he has the 
$3000 now, how much of it should he save in an account  
paying 3% compounded monthly so that in 6 months he will 
have exactly $3000? 
	 47.	 Return on a Stock  Jerry is contemplating the purchase of 
100 shares of a stock selling for $22 per share. The stock pays 
no dividends. The history of the stock indicates that it should 
grow at an annual rate of 13% per year. Use annual com-
pounding to determine how much the 100 shares of stock 
will be worth in 5 years. 
	 48.	 Return 
on 
an 
Investment  A 
business 
purchased  
for $650,000 in 2010 is sold in 2013 for $850,000. What is the 
annual rate of return for this investment? 
	 49.	 Comparing Savings Plans  Jim places $10,000 in a bank  
account that pays 10.6% compounded continuously. After 
2 years, will he have enough money to buy a car that costs 
$12,375? If another bank will pay Jim 11% compounded 
semiannually, is it offering a better deal?
	 50.	 Savings Plans  On January 1, Kim places $1000 in a  
certificate of deposit that pays 6.8% compounded  
continuously and matures in 3 months. Then Kim places 
the $1000 and the interest in a passbook account that pays 
5.25% compounded monthly. How much does Kim have in 
the passbook account on May 1? 
In Problems 23–26, find the effective rate of interest.
	 23.	 For 5% compounded quarterly 
	 24.	 For 6% compounded monthly 
	 25.	 For 6% compounded continuously 
	 26.	 For 5% compounded continuously 

356 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	 51.	 Comparing IRA Investments  Trish invests $6000 in her 
IRA in a bond trust that pays 8% interest compounded 
semiannually. Sean invests $6000 in his IRA in a certificate 
of deposit that pays 7.9% compounded continuously. Who 
has more money after 20 years, Trish or Sean?
	 52.	 Comparing Two Alternatives  Suppose that April has access 
to an investment that will pay 10% interest compounded 
continuously. Which is better: to be given $1000 now so that 
she can take advantage of this investment opportunity or to 
be given $1325 after 3 years?
	 53.	 College Costs  A survey estimates the current average cost 
of college to be $31,058 per year.
(a)	 If the average cost of college increases by 7.3% each 
year, what will be the average cost of college 14 years 
from now? 
(b)	 If a savings plan offers a rate of 5.2% compounded con-
tinuously, how much should be put in the plan now to pay 
for 1 year of college 14 years from now? 
	 54.	 Analyzing Interest Rates on a Mortgage  Colleen and Bill 
have just purchased a house for $650,000, with the seller 
holding a second mortgage of $100,000. They promise to 
pay the seller $100,000 plus all accrued interest 5 years from 
now. The seller offers them three interest options on the  
second mortgage:
(a)	 Simple interest at 6% per annum
(b)	 5.5% interest compounded monthly
(c)	 5.25% interest compounded continuously
	
	 Which option is best? That is, which results in paying the 
least interest on the loan?
	55.	 2009 Federal Stimulus Package  If the government finances 
$111 billion worth of 10-year bonds at a fixed rate of 1.6% 
compounded semiannually, how much would it have to pay 
back when the bonds mature? How much interest was paid 
to finance the bonds? 
Source: U.S. Treasury Department
	 56.	 Per Capita Federal Debt  In 2014, the federal debt was 
about $17.5 trillion. In 2014, the U.S. population was about 
317 million. Assuming that the federal debt is increasing 
about 6.4% per year and the U.S. population is increasing 
about 0.7% per year, determine the per capita debt (total 
debt divided by population) in 2030. 
Problems 57–62 require the following discussion. Inflation is a term used to describe the erosion of the purchasing power of money. For 
example, if the annual inflation rate is 3%, then $1000 worth of purchasing power now will have only $970 worth of purchasing power in 
1 year because 3% of the original $1000 (0.03 × 1000 = 30) has been eroded due to inflation. In general, if the rate of inflation averages r 
per annum over n years, the amount A that $P will purchase after n years is 
A = P11 - r2n,
where r is expressed as a decimal.
	 57.	 Inflation  If the inflation rate averages 3.4%, how much will 
$2,000 purchase in 3 years? 
	 58.	 Inflation  If the inflation rate averages 2%, what will be the 
purchasing power of $1000 in 3 years? 
	 59.	 Inflation  If the amount that $2000 will purchase is only  
$1850 after 3 years, what was the average inflation rate?
	 60.	 Inflation  If the purchasing power of $1000 is only $930 after 
2 years, what was the average inflation rate? 
	 61.	 Inflation  If the average inflation rate is 3.7%, how long is it 
until purchasing power is cut in half? 
	 62.	 Inflation  If the average inflation rate is 3.7%, how long is it 
until the purchasing power is cut in half? 
Problems 63–66 involve zero-coupon bonds. A zero-coupon bond is a bond that is sold now at a discount and will pay its face value at the 
time when it matures; no interest payments are made.
	 63.	 Zero-Coupon Bonds  A zero-coupon bond can be redeemed 
in 20 years for $10,000. How much should you be willing to 
pay for it now if you want a return of:
(a)	 8% compounded quarterly? 
(b)	 8% compounded continuously? 
	64.	 Zero-Coupon 
Bonds  A 
child’s 
grandparents 
are  
considering buying an $80,000 face-value, zero-coupon bond 
at her birth so that she will have enough money for her college 
education 17 years later. If they want a rate of return of 6% 
compounded annually, what should they pay for the bond?
	 65.	 Zero-Coupon Bonds  How much should a $15,000 face val-
ue zero-coupon bond, maturing in 15 years, be sold for now 
if its rate of return is to be 7.3% compounded annually?
	 66.	 Zero-Coupon Bonds  If Pat pays $15,334.65 for a $25,000 
face-value, zero-coupon bond that matures in 8 years, what 
is his annual rate of return? 
	 67.	 Time to Double or Triple an Investment  The following for-
mula can be used to find the number of years t required to 
multiply an investment m times when r is the per annum 
interest rate compounded n times a year.
t =
ln m
n lna1 + r
nb
(a)	 How many years will it take to double the value of an 
IRA that compounds quarterly at the rate of 13%?
(b)	 How many years will it take to triple the value of a sav-
ings account that compounds annually at an annual rate 
of 7%? 
(c)	 Give a derivation of this formula.

Section 5.7  Financial Models  357
Problems 69–72 require the following discussion. The consumer price index (CPI) indicates the relative change in price over time for a 
fixed basket of goods and services. In general, if the rate of inflation averages r% over n years, then the CPI after n years is
CPI = CPI0a1 +
r
100b
n
where CPI0  is the CPI index at the beginning of the n-year period.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
	 68.	 Time to Reach an Investment Goal  The formula
t = ln A - ln P
r
	
	 can be used to find the number of years t required for an 
investment P to grow to a value A when compounded con-
tinuously at an annual rate r.
(a)	 How long will it take to increase an initial investment of 
$1000 to $4500 at an annual rate of 5.75%? 
(b)	 What annual rate is required to increase the value of a 
$2000 IRA to $30,000 in 35 years? 
(c)	 Give a derivation of this formula.
	 69.	 Consumer Price Index 
(a)	 The CPI was 152.9 for 1995 and 197.8 for 2002. Assuming 
that annual inflation remained constant for this time pe-
riod, determine the average annual inflation rate. 
(b)	 Using the inflation rate from part (a), in what year will 
the CPI reach 262? 
	 70.	 Consumer Price Index  If the current CPI is 234.2 and the 
average annual inflation rate is 2.8%, what will be the CPI 
in 5 years? 
	 71.	 Consumer Price Index  If the average annual inflation rate 
is 2.3%, how long will it take for the CPI index to dou-
ble? 
	 72.	 Consumer Price Index  The base period for the CPI changed 
in 1998. Under the previous weight and item structure, the 
CPI for 1995 was 456.5. If the average annual inflation rate 
was 5.57%, what year was used as the base period for the 
CPI? 
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 73.	 Explain in your own words what the term compound interest 
means. What does continuous compounding mean?
	 74.	 Explain in your own words the meaning of present value.
	 75.	 Critical Thinking  You have just contracted to buy a house 
and will seek financing in the amount of $100,000. You go 
to several banks. Bank 1 will lend you $100,000 at the rate 
of 4.125% amortized over 30 years with a loan origination 
fee of 0.45%. Bank 2 will lend you $100,000 at the rate of 
3.375% amortized over 15 years with a loan origination fee 
of 0.95%. Bank 3 will lend you $100,000 at the rate of 4.25% 
amortized over 30 years with no loan origination fee. Bank 4 
will lend you $100,000 at the rate of 3.625% amortized over 
15 years with no loan origination fee. Which loan would you 
take? Why? Be sure to have sound reasons for your choice. 
Use the information in the table to assist you. If the amount 
of the monthly payment does not matter to you, which loan 
would you take? Again, have sound reasons for your choice. 
Compare your final decision with others in the class. Discuss.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 76–79 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 76.	 Find the remainder R when f (x) = 6x3 + 3x2 + 2x - 11 
is divided by g(x) = x - 1. Is g a factor of f ? 
	77.	 The function f(x) =
x
x - 2 is one-to-one. Find f -1.
	 78.	 Find the real zeros of
f(x) = x5 - x4 - 15x3 - 21x2 - 16x - 20.
Then write f in factored form.
	 79.	 Solve:  log 2(x + 3) = 2 log 2(x - 3) 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 $15      2.  13 1
3 %
Monthly
Payment
Loan
Origination Fee
$485
$709
$492
$721
Bank 1
Bank 2
Bank 3
Bank 4
$450
$950
$0
$0

358 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Find Equations of Populations That Obey the Law  
of Uninhibited Growth
Many natural phenomena have been found to follow the law that an amount A  
varies with time t according to the function
1
5.8  Exponential Growth and Decay Models;  
Newton’s Law; Logistic Growth and Decay Models
	
Objectives	 	1  Find Equations of Populations That Obey the Law of Uninhibited Growth 
(p. 358)
	
	 	2  Find Equations of Populations That Obey the Law of Decay (p. 360)
	
	 	3  Use Newton’s Law of Cooling (p. 361)
	
	 	4  Use Logistic Models (p. 363)
	
A1t2 = A0
 ekt	
(1)
Here A0 is the original amount 1t = 02 and k ≠0 is a constant.
If k 7 0, then equation (1) states that the amount A is increasing over time; 
if k 6 0, the amount A is decreasing over time. In either case, when an amount A  
varies over time according to equation (1), it is said to follow the exponential law, or 
the law of uninhibited growth 1k 7 02 or decay 1k 6 02. See Figure 41.
For example, in Section 5.7, continuously compounded interest was shown to 
follow the law of uninhibited growth. In this section we shall look at some additional 
phenomena that follow the exponential law.
Cell division is the growth process of many living organisms, such as amoebas, 
plants, and human skin cells. Based on an ideal situation in which no cells die and 
no by-products are produced, the number of cells present at a given time follows the 
law of uninhibited growth. Actually, however, after enough time has passed, growth 
at an exponential rate will cease as a consequence of factors such as lack of living 
space and dwindling food supply. The law of uninhibited growth accurately models 
only the early stages of the cell division process.
The cell division process begins with a culture containing N0 cells. Each cell in 
the culture grows for a certain period of time and then divides into two identical cells. 
Assume that the time needed for each cell to divide in two is constant and does not 
change as the number of cells increases. These new cells then grow, and eventually 
each divides in two, and so on.
Uninhibited Growth of Cells
A model that gives the number N of cells in a culture after a time t has passed 
(in the early stages of growth) is
	
N1t2 = N0
 ekt  k 7 0	
(2)
where N0 is the initial number of cells and k is a positive constant that  
represents the growth rate of the cells.
Using formula (2) to model the growth of cells employs a function that yields 
positive real numbers, even though the number of cells being counted must be an 
integer. This is a common practice in many applications.
A
(a)   A(t )  A0ekt, k  0
t
A 0
Figure 41 
Exponential growth
Exponential decay
t
A
A 0
(b)   A(t )  A0ekt, k  0

Section 5.8  Exponential Growth and Decay Models; Newton’s Law; Logistic Growth and Decay Models   359
Bacterial Growth
A colony of bacteria that grows according to the law of uninhibited growth is  
modeled by the function N1t2 = 100e0.045t, where N is measured in grams and t is 
measured in days.
(a)	 Determine the initial amount of bacteria.
(b)	 What is the growth rate of the bacteria?
(c)	 What is the population after 5 days?
(d)	 How long will it take for the population to reach 140 grams?
(e)	 What is the doubling time for the population?
(a)	 The initial amount of bacteria, N0, is obtained when t = 0, so
N0 = N102 = 100e0.045102 = 100 grams
(b)	 Compare N1t2 = 100e0.045t to N1t2 = N0 ekt. The value of k, 0.045, indicates a 
growth rate of 4.5%.
(c)	 The population after 5 days is N152 = 100e0.045152 ≈125.2 grams.
(d)	 To find how long it takes for the population to reach 140 grams, solve the  
equation N1t2 = 140.
 100e0.045t = 140
 e0.045t = 1.4
 0.045t = ln 1.4
 t = ln 1.4
0.045 
 ≈7.5 days
The population reaches 140 grams in about 7.5 days.
(e)	 The population doubles when N1t2 = 200 grams, so the doubling time is found 
by solving the equation 200 = 100e0.045t for t.
 200 = 100e0.045t
 2 = e0.045t 
 ln 2 = 0.045t
 t =
ln 2
0.045 
 ≈15.4 days
The population doubles approximately every 15.4 days.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1
Bacterial Growth
A colony of bacteria increases according to the law of uninhibited growth.
(a)	 If N is the number of cells and t is the time in hours, express N as a function of t.
(b)	 If the number of bacteria doubles in 3 hours, find the function that gives the 
number of cells in the culture.
(c)	 How long will it take for the size of the colony to triple?
(d)	 How long will it take for the population to double a second time (that is, to  
increase four times)?
(a)	 Using formula (2), the number N of cells at time t is
N1t2 = N0
 ekt
where N0 is the initial number of bacteria present and k is a positive number.
Example 1
Solution
Divide both sides of the equation by 100.
Rewrite as a logarithm.
Divide both sides of the equation by 0.045.
Divide both sides of the equation by 100.
Rewrite as a logarithm.
Divide both sides of the equation by 0.045.
•
Example 2
Solution

360 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
(b)	 To find the growth rate k, note that the number of cells doubles in 3 hours, so
N132 = 2N0
But N132 = N0
 ek132, so
 N0
 ek132 = 2N0
 e3k = 2
 3k = ln 2
 k = 1
3 ln 2 ≈0.23105
The function that models this growth process is therefore
N(t) = N0 e0.23105t
(c)	 The time t needed for the size of the colony to triple requires that N = 3N0. 
Substitute 3N0 for N to get
 3N0 = N0 e0.23105t
 3 = e0.23105t
 0.23105t = ln 3
 t =
ln 3
0.23105 ≈4.755 hours
It will take about 4.755 hours, or 4 hours and 45 minutes, for the size of the 
colony to triple.
(d)	 If a population doubles in 3 hours, it will double a second time in 3 more hours, 
for a total time of 6 hours.
Find Equations of Populations That Obey the Law of Decay
Radioactive materials follow the law of uninhibited decay.
Divide both sides by N0.
Write the exponential equation as a logarithm.
•
2
Uninhibited Radioactive Decay
The amount A of a radioactive material present at time t is given by
	
A1t2 = A0
 ekt  k 6 0	
(3)
where A0 is the original amount of radioactive material and k is a negative 
number that represents the rate of decay.
All radioactive substances have a specific half-life, which is the time required for 
half of the radioactive substance to decay. Carbon dating uses the fact that all living 
organisms contain two kinds of carbon, carbon-12 (a stable carbon) and carbon-14  
(a radioactive carbon with a half-life of 5730 years). While an organism is living, the 
ratio of carbon-12 to carbon-14 is constant. But when an organism dies, the original 
amount of carbon-12 present remains unchanged, whereas the amount of carbon-14 
begins to decrease. This change in the amount of carbon-14 present relative to the 
amount of carbon-12 present makes it possible to calculate when the organism died.
Estimating the Age of Ancient Tools
Traces of burned wood along with ancient stone tools in an archeological dig in 
Chile were found to contain approximately 1.67% of the original amount of  
carbon-14. If the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years, approximately when was the 
tree cut and burned?
Example 3

Section 5.8  Exponential Growth and Decay Models; Newton’s Law; Logistic Growth and Decay Models   361
Using formula (3), the amount A of carbon-14 present at time t is
A1t2 = A0
 ekt
where A0 is the original amount of carbon-14 present and k is a negative number. We 
first seek the number k. To find it, we use the fact that after 5730 years, half of the
original amount of carbon-14 remains, so A157302 = 1
2
 A0. Then
 1
2
 A0 = A0
 ek157302
 1
2 = e5730k 
 5730k = ln 1
2 
 k =
1
5730 ln 1
2 ≈-0.000120968
Formula (3) therefore becomes
A(t) = A0 e -0.000120968t
If the amount A of carbon-14 now present is 1.67% of the original amount, it 
follows that
 0.0167A0 = A0 e -0.000120968t
 0.0167 = e -0.000120968t 
 -0.000120968t = ln 0.0167
 t =
ln 0.0167
-0.000120968 ≈33,830 years
The tree was cut and burned about 33,830 years ago. Some archeologists use this 
conclusion to argue that humans lived in the Americas nearly 34,000 years ago, 
much earlier than is generally accepted.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3
Use Newton’s Law of Cooling
Newton’s Law of Cooling* states that the temperature of a heated object decreases 
exponentially over time toward the temperature of the surrounding medium.
Solution
Divide both sides of the equation by A 0.
Rewrite as a logarithm.
Divide both sides of the equation by A 0.
Rewrite as a logarithm.
3
*Named after Sir Isaac Newton (1643–1727), one of the cofounders of calculus.
Newton’s Law of Cooling
The temperature u of a heated object at a given time t can be modeled by the 
following function:
	
u1t2 = T + 1u0 - T2ekt  k 6 0	
(4)
where T is the constant temperature of the surrounding medium, u0 is the  
initial temperature of the heated object, and k is a negative constant.
Using Newton’s Law of Cooling
An object is heated to 100°C (degrees Celsius) and is then allowed to cool in a room 
whose air temperature is 30°C.
(a)	 If the temperature of the object is 80°C after 5 minutes, when will its temperature 
be 50°C?
(b)	 Determine the elapsed time before the temperature of the object is 35°C.
(c)	 What do you notice about the temperature as time passes?
Example 4

362 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
(a)	 Using formula (4) with T = 30 and u0 = 100, the temperature u(t) (in degrees 
Celsius) of the object at time t (in minutes) is
	
u1t2 = 30 + 1100 - 302ekt = 30 + 70ekt	
(5)
where k is a negative constant. To find k, use the fact that u = 80 when t = 5. 
Then
 u1t2 = 30 + 70ekt
 80 = 30 + 70ek152 
 50 = 70e5k 
 e5k = 50
70 
 5k = ln 5
7 
 k = 1
5 ln 5
7 ≈-0.0673
Formula (5) therefore becomes
	
u(t) = 30 + 70e -0.0673t	
(6)
To find t when u = 50°C, solve the equation
 50 = 30 + 70e -0.0673t
 20 = 70e -0.0673t 
 e -0.0673t = 20
70
 -0.0673t = ln 2
7 
 t =
ln 2
7
-0.0673 ≈18.6 minutes
The temperature of the object will be 50°C after about 18.6 minutes, or 18 minutes, 
36 seconds.
(b)	 Use equation (6) to find t when u = 35°C.
 35 = 30 + 70e -0.0673t
 5 = 70e -0.0673t 
 e -0.0673t = 5
70
 -0.0673t = ln 5
70 
 t =
ln 5
70 
-0.0673 ≈39.2 minutes
The object will reach a temperature of 35°C after about 39.2 minutes.
(c)	 Look at equation (6). As t increases, the exponent -0.0673t becomes unbounded 
in the negative direction. As a result, the value of e -0.0673t approaches zero, so the 
value of u, the temperature of the object, approaches 30°C, the air temperature 
of the room.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Solution
u(5) =  80
Simplify.
Solve for e5k.
Rewrite as a logarithm.
Solve for k.
Simplify.
Rewrite as a logarithm.
Solve for t.
Simplify.
Rewrite as a logarithm.
Solve for t.

Section 5.8  Exponential Growth and Decay Models; Newton’s Law; Logistic Growth and Decay Models   363
Use Logistic Models
The exponential growth model A1t2 = A0
 ekt, k 7 0, assumes uninhibited growth, 
meaning that the value of the function grows without limit. Recall that cell division 
could be modeled using this function, assuming that no cells die and no by-products 
are produced. However, cell division eventually is limited by factors such as living 
space and food supply. The logistic model, given next, can describe situations where 
the growth or decay of the dependent variable is limited.
4
Logistic Model
In a logistic model, the population P after time t is given by the function
	
P1t2 =
c
1 + ae-bt	
(7)
where a, b, and c are constants with a 7 0 and c 7 0. The model is a growth 
model if b 7 0; the model is a decay model if b 6 0.
The number c is called the carrying capacity (for growth models) because the 
value P1t2 approaches c as t approaches infinity; that is, lim
tSq  P1t2 = c. The number
0 b0  is the growth rate for b 7 0 and the decay rate for b 6 0. Figure 42(a) shows 
the graph of a typical logistic growth function, and Figure 42(b) shows the graph of 
a typical logistic decay function.
Figure 42 
(0, P(0))
t
P(t)
y  c
 c
1–2
Inflection point
(a) P(t) 5
, b . 0
c
1 1 ae2bt
Logistic growth
(0, P(0))
 c
1–2
t
P(t)
y  c
Inflection point
Logistic decay
(b) P(t) 5
, b , 0
c
1 1 ae2bt
Properties of the Logistic Model, Equation (7)
	 1.	 The domain is the set of all real numbers. The range is the interval 10, c2, 
where c is the carrying capacity.
	 2.	 There are no x-intercepts; the y-intercept is P102.
	 3.	 There are two horizontal asymptotes: y = 0 and y = c.
	 4.	 P1t2 is an increasing function if b 7 0 and a decreasing function if b 6 0.
	 5.	 There is an inflection point where P1t2 equals 1
2 of the carrying capacity.
	
	 The inflection point is the point on the graph where the graph changes 
from being curved upward to being curved downward for growth functions, 
and the point where the graph changes from being curved downward to 
being curved upward for decay functions.
	 6.	 The graph is smooth and continuous, with no corners or gaps.
Based on the figures, the following properties of logistic functions emerge.

364 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Figure 43 
0
250
250
25
Y2 5 115
Y1 5
230
1 1 56.5e20.37x
Fruit Fly Population
Fruit flies are placed in a half-pint milk bottle with a banana (for food) and yeast 
plants (for food and to provide a stimulus to lay eggs). Suppose that the fruit fly 
population after t days is given by
P1t2 =
230
1 + 56.5e-0.37t
(a)	 State the carrying capacity and the growth rate.
(b)	 Determine the initial population.
(c)	 What is the population after 5 days?
(d)	 How long does it take for the population to reach 180?
(e)	 Use a graphing utility to determine how long it takes for the population to reach 
one-half of the carrying capacity.
(a)	 As t S q, e-0.37t S 0 and P1t2 S 230
1 . The carrying capacity of the half-pint 
	
bottle is 230 fruit flies. The growth rate is 0 b0 = 0 0.370 = 37, per day.
(b)	 To find the initial number of fruit flies in the half-pint bottle, evaluate P102.
 P102 =
230
1 + 56.5e-0.37102 =
230
1 + 56.5 = 4
So, initially, there were 4 fruit flies in the half-pint bottle.
(c)	 After 5 days the number of fruit flies in the half-pint bottle is 
P152 =
230
1 + 56.5e-0.37152 ≈23 fruit flies
After 5 days, there are approximately 23 fruit flies in the bottle.
(d)	 To determine when the population of fruit flies will be 180, solve the equation 
P1t2 = 180.
 
230
1 + 56.5e-0.37t = 180
 230 = 18011 + 56.5e-0.37t2
 1.2778 = 1 + 56.5e-0.37t 
 0.2778 = 56.5e-0.37t 
 0.0049 = e-0.37t 
 ln10.00492 = -0.37t
 t ≈14.4 days
It will take approximately 14.4 days (14 days, 10 hours) for the population to 
reach 180 fruit flies.
(e)	 One-half of the carrying capacity is 115 fruit flies. Solve P1t2 = 115 by graphing
	
Y1 =
230
1 + 56.5e-0.37t and Y2 = 115 and using INTERSECT. See Figure 43. The
	
population will reach one-half of the carrying capacity in about 10.9 days  
(10 days, 22 hours).	
•
Look at Figure 43. Notice the point where the graph reaches 115 fruit flies  
(one-half of the carrying capacity): The graph changes from being curved upward to 
Example 5
Solution
Divide both sides by 180.
Subtract 1 from both sides.
Divide both sides by 56.5.
Rewrite as a logarithmic expression.
Divide both sides by −0.37.

Section 5.8  Exponential Growth and Decay Models; Newton’s Law; Logistic Growth and Decay Models   365
being curved downward. Using the language of calculus, we say the graph changes 
from increasing at an increasing rate to increasing at a decreasing rate. For any  
logistic growth function, when the population reaches one-half the carrying capacity, 
the population growth starts to slow down.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Exploration
On the same viewing rectangle, graph
Y1 =
500
1 + 24e-0.03t  and  Y2 =
500
1 + 24e-0.08t
 
What effect does the growth rate 0 b0  have on the logistic growth function?
Wood Products
The EFISCEN wood product model classifies wood products according to their  
life-span. There are four classifications: short (1 year), medium short (4 years), medium 
long (16 years), and long (50 years). Based on data obtained from the European 
Forest Institute, the percentage of remaining wood products after t years for wood 
products with long life-spans (such as those used in the building industry) is given by
P1t2 =
100.3952
1 + 0.0316e0.0581t
(a)	 What is the decay rate?
(b)	 What is the percentage of remaining wood products after 10 years?
(c)	 How long does it take for the percentage of remaining wood products to  
reach 50%?
(d)	 Explain why the numerator given in the model is reasonable.
(a)	 The decay rate is 0 b0 = 0 -0.05810 = 5.81, per year.
(b)	 Evaluate P1102.
P1102 =
100.3952
1 + 0.0316e0.05811102 ≈95.0
So 95% of long-life-span wood products remain after 10 years.
(c)	 Solve the equation P1t2 = 50.
 
100.3952
1 + 0.0316e0.0581t = 50
 100.3952 = 5011 + 0.0316e0.0581t2
 2.0079 = 1 + 0.0316e0.0581t 
 1.0079 = 0.0316e0.0581t 
 31.8956 = e0.0581t 
 ln131.89562 = 0.0581t
 t ≈59.6 years
It will take approximately 59.6 years for the percentage of long-life-span wood 
products remaining to reach 50%.
(d)	 The numerator of 100.3952 is reasonable because the maximum percentage of 
wood products remaining that is possible is 100%.	
•
Example 6
Solution
Divide both sides by 50.
Subtract 1 from both sides.
Divide both sides by 0.0316.
Rewrite as a logarithmic expression.
Divide both sides by 0.0581.

366 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Applications and Extensions
	 1.	 Growth of an Insect Population  The size P of a certain 
insect population at time t (in days) obeys the function 
P1t2 = 900e0.07t.
(a)	 Determine the number of insects at t = 0 days. 
(b)	 What is the growth rate of the insect population?
(c)	 What is the population after 10 days? 
(d)	 When will the insect population reach 1170?
(e)	 When will the insect population double?
	 2.	 Growth of Bacteria  The number N of bacteria present in 
a culture at time t (in hours) obeys the law of uninhibited 
growth N1t2 = 1000e0.01t.
(a)	 Determine the number of bacteria at t = 0 hours. 
(b)	 What is the growth rate of the bacteria?
(c)	 What is the population after 4 hours? 
(d)	 When will the number of bacteria reach 1700?
(e)	 When will the number of bacteria double?
	 3.	 Radioactive Decay  Strontium-90 is a radioactive material 
that decays according to the function A1t2 = A0e1-0.0244t2, 
where A0 is the initial amount present and A is the amount 
present at time t (in years). Assume that a scientist has a 
sample of 800 grams of strontium-90.
(a)	 What is the decay rate of strontium-90?
(b)	 How much strontium-90 is left after 20 years?
(c)	 When will only 200 grams of strontium-90 be left?
(d)	 What is the half-life of strontium-90? 
	 4.	 Radioactive Decay  Iodine-131 is a radioactive material that 
decays according to the function A1t2 = A0
 e-0.087t, where 
A0 is the initial amount present and A is the amount present 
at time t (in days). Assume that a scientist has a sample of 
100 grams of iodine-131.
(a)	 What is the decay rate of iodine-131?
(b)	 How much iodine-131 is left after 9 days? 
(c)	 When will 70 grams of iodine-131 be left? 
(d)	 What is the half-life of iodine-131? 
	 5.	 Growth of a Colony of Mosquitoes  The population of a  
colony of mosquitoes obeys the law of uninhibited growth. 
(a)	 If N is the population of the colony and t is the time in 
days, express N as a function of t. 
(b)	 If there are 1000 mosquitoes initially and there are 
1400 after 1 day, what is the size of the colony after 2 
days? 
(c)	 How long is it until there are 50,000 mosquitoes? 
	 6.	 Bacterial Growth  A culture of bacteria obeys the law of  
uninhibited growth.
(a)	 If N is the number of bacteria in the culture and t is the 
time in hours, express N as a function of t. 
(b)	 If 500 bacteria are present initially and there are 800  
after 1 hour, how many will be present in the culture 
after 5 hours? 
(c)	 How long is it until there are 20,000 bacteria? 
	 7.	 Population Growth  The population of a southern city  
follows the exponential law.
(a)	 If N is the population of the city and t is the time in 
years, express N as a function of t. 
(b)	 If the population doubled in size over an 18-month  
period and the current population is 10,000, what will 
the population be 2 years from now? 
	 8.	 Population Decline  The population of a midwestern city 
follows the exponential law.
(a)	 If N is the population of the city and t is the time in 
years, express N as a function of t.
(b)	 If the population decreased from 900,000 to 800,000 
from 2008 to 2010, what will the population be in 2012?
	 9.	 Radioactive Decay  The half-life of radium is 1690 years. If 
40 grams are present now, how much will be present in 460 
years? 
	 10.	 Radioactive Decay  The half-life of radioactive potassium is 
1.3 billion years. If 10 grams is present now, how much will be 
present in 100 years? In 1000 years?
	 11.	 Estimating the Age of a Tree  The half-life of carbon-14 is 
5600 years. If a piece of charcoal made from the wood of 
a tree shows only 72% of the carbon-14 expected in living 
matter, when did the tree die? 
	 12.	 Estimating the Age of a Fossil  A fossilized leaf contains 
70% of its normal amount of carbon-14. How old is the  
fossil? 
	 13.	 Cooling Time of a Pizza Pan  A pizza pan is removed at  
2:00 pm from an oven whose temperature is fixed at 400°F 
into a room that is a constant 72°F. After 5 minutes, the pizza 
pan is at 300°F.
(a)	 At what time is the temperature of the pan 135°F?
(b)	 Determine the time that needs to elapse before the pan 
is 220°. 
(c)	 What do you notice about the temperature as time 
­passes? 
5.8  Assess Your Understanding
	 14.	 Newton’s Law of Cooling  A thermometer reading 72°F is 
placed in a refrigerator where the temperature is a constant 38°F.
(a)	 If the thermometer reads 60°F after 2 minutes, what will 
it read after 7 minutes? 
(b)	 How long will it take before the thermometer reads 
39°F? 
(c)	 Determine the time that must elapse before the  
thermometer reads 45°F. 
(d)	 What do you notice about the temperature as time  
passes? 
	 15.	 Newton’s Law of Heating  A thermometer reading 9°C is 
brought into a room with a constant temperature of 28°C. 
If the thermometer reads 15°C after 2 minutes, what will it 
read after being in the room for 4 minutes? For 9 minutes?
[Hint: You need to construct a formula similar to  
equation (4).] 

Section 5.8  Exponential Growth and Decay Models; Newton’s Law; Logistic Growth and Decay Models   367
*Author’s Note: Surprisingly, the chemical formulas for glucose and fructose are the same: This is not a typo.
	 16.	 Warming Time of a Beer Stein  A beer stein has a temperature 
of 28°F. It is placed in a room with a constant temperature 
of 70°F. After 10 minutes, the temperature of the stein  
has risen to 35°F. What will the temperature of the stein  
be after 30 minutes? How long will it take the stein to 
reach a temperature of 45°F? (See the hint given for  
Problem 15.) 
	 17.	 Decomposition of Chlorine in a Pool  Under certain water 
conditions, the free chlorine (hypochlorous acid, HOCl) 
in a swimming pool decomposes according to the law of  
uninhibited decay. After shocking his pool, Geoff tested the 
water and found the amount of free chlorine to be 2.6 parts 
per million (ppm). Twenty-four hours later, Geoff tested the 
water again and found the amount of free chlorine to be 2.3 ppm. 
What will be the reading after 2 days (that is, 48 hours)? 
When the chlorine level reaches 1.0 ppm, Geoff must shock 
the pool again. How long can Geoff go before he must shock 
the pool again? 
	 18.	 Decomposition of Dinitrogen Pentoxide  At 45°C, dinitrogen 
pentoxide (N2O5) decomposes into nitrous dioxide (NO2) 
and oxygen (O2) according to the law of uninhibited  
decay. An initial amount of 0.25 M N2O5  (M is a measure of  
concentration known as molarity) decomposes to 0.15 M 
N2O5  in 17 minutes. What concentration of N2O5  will remain 
after 30 minutes? How long will it take until only 0.01 M 
N2O5  remains? 
	 19.	 Decomposition of Sucrose  Reacting with water in an acidic 
solution at 35°C, sucrose (C12H22O11 ) decomposes into 
glucose (C6H12O6 ) and fructose (C6H12O6 )* according 
to the law of uninhibited decay. An initial concentration 
of 0.40 M of sucrose decomposes to 0.36 M sucrose in  
30 minutes. What concentration of sucrose will remain  
after 2 hours? How long will it take until only 0.10 M sucrose 
remains? 
	 20.	 Decomposition of Salt in Water  Salt (NaCl) decomposes in 
water into sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl-) ions according 
to the law of uninhibited decay. If the initial amount of salt 
is 25 kilograms and, after 10 hours, 15 kilograms of salt is left, 
how much salt is left after 1 day? How long does it take until
	
	 1
2 kilogram of salt is left? 
	 21.	 Radioactivity from Chernobyl  After the release of  
radioactive material into the atmosphere from a nuclear  
power plant in a country in 1980, the hay in that country was 
contaminated by a radioactive isotope (half-life 6 days). If it 
is safe to feed the hay to cows when 9% of the radioactive iso-
tope remains, how long did the farmers need to wait to use this 
hay? 
	 22.	 Word Users  According to a survey by Olsten Staffing  
Services, the percentage of companies reporting usage of 
Microsoft Word t years since 1984 is given by
P1t2 =
99.744
1 + 3.014e-0.799t
(a) What is the growth rate in the percentage of Microsoft 
Word users? 
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph P = P1t2.
(c) What was the percentage of Microsoft Word users  
in 1990? 
(d) During what year did the percentage of Microsoft Word 
users reach 90%? 
(e) Explain why the numerator given in the model is  
reasonable. What does it imply?
	 23.	 Home Computers  The logistic model
P1t2 =
95.4993
1 + 0.0405e0.1968t
represents the percentage of households that do not own a 
personal computer t years since 1984.
(a) Evaluate and interpret P102. 
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph P = P1t2.
(c) What percentage of households did not own a personal 
computer in 1995? 
(d) In what year did the percentage of households that do 
not own a personal computer reach 10%? 
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce
	 24.	 Farmers  The logistic model
W1t2 =
14,656,248
1 + 0.059e0.057t
represents the number of farm workers in the United States 
t years after 1910.
(a) Evaluate and interpret W102. 
(b) Use a graphing utility to graph W = W1t2.
(c) How many farm workers were there in the United States 
in 2010? 
(d) When did the number of farm workers in the United 
States reach 10,000,000? 
(e) According to this model, what happens to the number of 
farm workers in the United States as t approaches q? 
Based on this result, do you think that it is reasonable to 
use this model to predict the number of farm workers in 
the United States in 2060? Why?
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture
	 25.	 Birthdays  The logistic model
P1n2 =
113.3198
1 + 0.115e0.0912n
models the probability that, in a room of n people, no two 
people share the same birthday.
(a) Use a graphing utility to graph P = P1n2.
(b) In a room of n = 15 people, what is the probability that 
no two share the same birthday? 
(c) How many people must be in a room before the  
probability that no two people share the same birthday 
falls below 10%? 
(d) What happens to the probability as n increases? Explain 
what this result means.
	 26.	 Population of an Endangered Species  Environmentalists 
often capture an endangered species and transport the  
species to a controlled environment where the species 
can produce offspring and regenerate its population.  
Suppose that six American bald eagles are captured,  
transported to Montana, and set free. Based on experience,  
the environmentalists expect the population to grow according 
to the model
P1t2 =
500
1 + 83.33e-0.162t
where t is measured in years. (continued on the next page)

368 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
(a)	 Determine the carrying capacity of the environment.
(b)	 What is the growth rate of the bald eagle? 
(c)	 What is the population after 3 years? 
(d)	 When will the population be 300 eagles? 
(e)	 How long does it take for the population to reach  
one-half of the carrying capacity? 
	 27.	 The Challenger Disaster  After the Challenger disaster in 
1986, a study was made of the 23 launches that preceded 
the fatal flight. A mathematical model was developed  
involving the relationship between the Fahrenheit  
temperature x around the O-rings and the number y of 
eroded or leaky primary O-rings. The model stated that
y =
6
1 + e-15.085-0.1156x2
where the number 6 indicates the 6 primary O-rings on the 
spacecraft.
(a)	 What is the predicted number of eroded or leaky  
primary O-rings at a temperature of 100°F?
(b)	 What is the predicted number of eroded or leaky  
primary O-rings at a temperature of 60°F? 
(c)	 What is the predicted number of eroded or leaky  
primary O-rings at a temperature of 30°F? 
(d)	 Graph the equation using a graphing utility. At what 
temperature is the predicted number of eroded or leaky 
O-rings 1? 3? 5? 
Source: Linda Tappin, “Analyzing Data Relating to the 
Challenger Disaster,” Mathematics Teacher, Vol. 87, 
No. 6, September 1994, pp. 457–460.
Problems 
28 
and 
29 
use 
the 
following 
discussion:  
Uninhibited growth can be modeled by exponential functions other 
than A(t) = A0ekt. For example, if an initial population P0  
requires n units of time to double, then the function P(t) = P0 # 2t>n 
models the size of the population at time t. Likewise, a population 
requiring n units of time to triple can be modeled by P(t) = P0 # 3t>n.
	 28.	 Growth of a Human Population  The population of a town 
is growing exponentially.
(a)	 If its population doubled in size over an 8-year period and 
the current population is 25,000, write an exponential 
function of the form P(t) = P0 # 2t>n that models the 
population. 
(b)	 What will the population be in 3 years? 
(c)	 When will the population reach 80,000? 
(d)	 Express the model from part (a) in the form A(t) = A0ekt.
	 29.	 Growth of an Insect Population  Unhibited growth can be 
modeled by exponential functions other than A1t2 = A0ekt. 
For example, if an initial population P0 requires n units of 
	
	 time of triple, then the function P1t2 = P0132t>n models the
	
	 size of the population at time t. An insect population grows 
exponentially. Complete the parts a through d below.
(a)	 If the population triples in 30 days, and 40 insects are 
present initially, write an exponential function of the 
form P1t2 = P0132t>n that models the population.
(b)	 What will the population be in 47 days? 
(c)	 When will the population reach 640? 
(d)	 Express the model from part (a) in the form A(t) = A0ekt.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 30–33 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 30.	 Find the equation of the linear function f that passes 
through the points (4, 1) and (8, - 5). 
	31.	 Determine whether the graphs of the linear functions
	
	 f (x) = 5x - 1 and g(x) = 1
5x + 1 are parallel,
	
	 perpendicular, or neither. 
	32.	 Write the logarithmic expression  ln ax21y
z
b as the sum 
and/or difference of logarithms. Express powers as factors.
	33.	 Rationalize the denominator of 10
2
3 25
. 

Section 5.9  Building Exponential, Logarithmic, and Logistic   Models from Data   369
In Section 3.2 we discussed how to find the linear function of best fit 1y = ax + b2, 
in Section 3.4 we discussed how to find the quadratic function of best fit 
1y = ax2 + bx + c2, and in Section 4.1 we discussed how to find the cubic function 
of best fit 1y = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d2.
In this section we discuss how to use a graphing utility to find equations of 
best fit that describe the relation between two variables when the relation is 
thought to be exponential 1y = abx2, logarithmic 1y = a + b ln x2, or logistic
¢y =
c
1 + ae-bx ≤. As before, we draw a scatter diagram of the data to help to  
determine the appropriate model to use.
Figure 44 shows scatter diagrams that will typically be observed for the three 
models. Below each scatter diagram are any restrictions on the values of the 
parameters.
	
Objectives	  	    1  Build an Exponential Model from Data (p. 369)
	
	  	    2  Build a Logarithmic Model from Data (p. 371)
	
	  	    3  Build a Logistic Model from Data (p. 371)
5.9  Building Exponential, Logarithmic, and Logistic  
  Models from Data
•	 Building Linear Models from Data (Section 3.2,  
pp. 164–167)
•	 Building Cubic Models from Data (Section 4.1,  
pp. 216–217)
•	 Building Quadratic Models from Data (Section 3.4, 
pp. 186–187)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Figure 44 
y 5 ab x, 0 , b , 1, a . 0
Exponential
y
x
y 5 abx, a . 0, b . 1
Exponential
y
x
y 5 a 1b In x, a . 0, b , 0
Logarithmic
y
x
y 5 a 1b In x, a . 0, b . 0
Logarithmic
y
x
y
x
1 1ae2bx
c
y 5
, a . 0, b . 0, c . 0
Logistic
Most graphing utilities have REGression options that fit data to a specific type 
of curve. Once the data have been entered and a scatter diagram obtained, the type 
of curve that you want to fit to the data is selected. Then that REGression option is 
used to obtain the curve of best fit of the type selected.
The correlation coefficient r will appear only if the model can be written as a 
linear expression. As it turns out, r will appear for the linear, power, exponential, 
and logarithmic models, since these models can be written as a linear expression. 
Remember, the closer 0 r0  is to 1, the better the fit.
Build an Exponential Model from Data
We saw in Section 5.7 that the future value of money behaves exponentially, and we 
saw in Section 5.8 that growth and decay models also behave exponentially. The next 
example shows how data can lead to an exponential model.
1

370 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Fitting an Exponential Function to Data
Mariah deposited $20,000 in a well-diversified mutual fund 6 years ago. The data in 
Table 9 represent the value of the account at the beginning of each year for the last 
7 years.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram with year as the independent 
variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build an exponential model from the data.
(c)	 Express the function found in part (b) in the form A = A0
 ekt.
(d)	 Graph the exponential function found in part (b) or (c) on the scatter diagram.
(e)	 Using the solution to part (b) or (c), predict the value of the account after 10 years.
(f)	 Interpret the value of k found in part (c).
(a)	 Enter the data into the graphing utility and draw the scatter diagram as shown 
in Figure 45.
(b)	 A graphing utility fits the data in Table 9 to an exponential model of the form 
y = abx using the EXPonential REGression option. Figure 46 shows that 
y = abx = 19,820.4311.0855682x. Notice that 0 r0 = 0.999, which is close to 1, 
indicating a good fit.
Example 1
Solution
Table 9
Year, x
Account Value, y
0
20,000
1
21,516
2
23,355
3
24,885
4
27,484
5
30,053
6
32,622
0
21
40,000
7
Figure 45 
Figure 46 
(c)	 To express y = abx in the form A = A0
 ekt, where x = t and y = A, proceed as 
follows:
abx = A0
 ekt
If x = t = 0, then a = A0. This leads to
 bx = ekt
 bx = 1ek2t
 b = ek
 
Because y = abx = 19,820.4311.0855682x, this means that a = 19,820.43 and 
b = 1.085568.
a = A0 = 19,820.43 and b = ek = 1.085568
To find k, rewrite ek = 1.085568 as a logarithm to obtain
k = ln11.0855682 ≈0.08210
As a result, A = A0
 ekt = 19,820.43e0.08210t.
(d)	 See Figure 47 for the graph of the exponential function of best fit.
(e)	 Let t = 10 in the function found in part (c). The predicted value of the account 
after 10 years is
A = A0ekt = 19,820.43e0.082101102 ≈+45,047
(f)	 The value of k = 0.08210 = 8.210% represents the annual growth rate of 
the account. It represents the rate of interest earned, assuming the account is  
growing continuously.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1
x = t
Figure 47 
0
21
40,000
7

Section 5.9  Building Exponential, Logarithmic, and Logistic   Models from Data   371
Build a Logarithmic Model from Data
Some relations between variables follow a logarithmic model.
Fitting a Logarithmic Function to Data
Jodi, a meteorologist, is interested in finding a function that explains the relation  
between the height of a weather balloon (in kilometers) and the atmospheric pressure 
(measured in millimeters of mercury) on the balloon. She collects the data shown in 
Table 10.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the data with atmospheric 
pressure as the independent variable.
(b)	 It is known that the relation between atmospheric pressure and height follows a 
logarithmic model. Using a graphing utility, build a logarithmic model from the 
data.
(c)	 Draw the logarithmic function found in part (b) on the scatter diagram.
(d)	 Use the function found in part (b) to predict the height of the weather balloon 
if the atmospheric pressure is 560 millimeters of mercury.
(a)	 Enter the data into the graphing utility, and draw the scatter diagram. See  
Figure 48.
(b)	 A graphing utility fits the data in Table 10 to a logarithmic function of the form 
y = a + b ln x by using the LOGarithm REGression option. See Figure 49. The 
logarithmic model from the data is
h1p2 = 45.7863 - 6.9025 ln p
where h is the height of the weather balloon and p is the atmospheric pressure. 
Notice that 0 r0  is close to 1, indicating a good fit.
(c)	 Figure 50 shows the graph of h1p2 = 45.7863 - 6.9025 ln p on the scatter diagram.
2
Example 2
Solution
Atmospheric
Pressure, p
Height, h
760
740
725
700
650
630
600
580
550
0
0.184
0.328
0.565
1.079
1.291
1.634
1.862
2.235
Table 10
Figure 48 
525
20.2
775
2.4
Figure 49 
Figure 50 
20.2
525
2.4
775
(d)	 Using the function found in part (b), Jodi predicts the height of the weather  
balloon when the atmospheric pressure is 560 to be
 h15602 = 45.7863 - 6.9025 ln 560
 ≈2.108 kilometers
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5
Build a Logistic Model from Data
Logistic growth models can be used to model situations for which the value of the 
dependent variable is limited. Many real-world situations conform to this scenario. 
For example, the population of the human race is limited by the availability of natural 
resources such as food and shelter. When the value of the dependent variable is 
limited, a logistic growth model is often appropriate.
•
3

372 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Fitting a Logistic Function to Data
The data in Table 11 represent the amount of yeast biomass in a culture after t hours.
Example 3
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the data with time as the  
independent variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build a logistic model from the data.
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, graph the function found in part (b) on the scatter  
diagram.
(d)	 What is the predicted carrying capacity of the culture?
(e)	 Use the function found in part (b) to predict the population of the culture at 
t = 19 hours.
(a)	 See Figure 51 for a scatter diagram of the data.
(b)	 A graphing utility fits the data in Table 11 to a logistic growth model of the form
	
y =
c
1 + ae-bx by using the LOGISTIC regression option. See Figure 52. The 
logistic model from the data is
y =
663.0
1 + 71.6e-0.5470x
where y is the amount of yeast biomass in the culture and x is the time.
(c)	 See Figure 53 for the graph of the logistic model.
Solution
Figure 51 
0
22
700
20
Figure 52 
Figure 53 
0
22
700
20
Table 11
Time 
(hours)
Yeast 
Biomass
Time 
(hours)
Yeast 
Biomass
Time 
(hours)
Yeast 
Biomass
0
9.6
7
257.3
14
640.8
1
18.3
8
350.7
15
651.1
2
29.0
9
441.0
16
655.9
3
47.2
10
513.3
17
659.6
4
71.1
11
559.7
18
661.8
5
119.1
12
594.8
6
174.6
13
629.4
Source: Tor Carlson (Über Geschwindigkeit and Grösse der Hefevermehrung in Würze, 
Biochemische Zeitschrift, Bd. 57, pp. 313–334, 1913)
(d)	 Based on the logistic growth model found in part (b), the carrying capacity of 
the culture is 663.
(e)	 Using the logistic growth model found in part (b), the predicted amount of yeast 
biomass at t = 19 hours is
y =
663.0
1 + 71.6e-0.5470(19) ≈661.5
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
•

Section 5.9  Building Exponential, Logarithmic, and Logistic   Models from Data   373
Applications and Extensions
	 1.	 Biology  A strain of E-coli Beu 397-recA441 is placed into  
a nutrient broth at 30° Celsius and allowed to grow. The  
following data are collected. Theory states that the number 
of bacteria in the petri dish will initially grow according to 
the law of uninhibited growth. The population is measured 
using an optical device in which the amount of light that 
passes through the petri dish is measured.
(d) Graph the exponential function found in part (b) or (c) 
on the scatter diagram
(e) Use the model to predict the amount of ethanol that will 
be produced in 2015. 
(f) Interpret the meaning of k in the function found in part (c).
	 3.	 Advanced-Stage Breast Cancer  The data in the table below 
represents the percentage of patients who have survived  
after diagnosis of advanced-stage breast cancer at 6-month 
intervals of time.
5.9  Assess Your Understanding
Source: Dr. Polly Lavery, Joliet
              Junior College
Population , y
Time  (hours), x
0
2.5
3.5
4.5
6
0.09
0.18
0.26
0.35
0.50
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram treating time as the independent 
variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build an exponential model 
from the data. 
(c)	 Express the function found in part (b) in the form 
N(t) = N0
 ekt. 
(d)	 Graph the exponential function found in part (b) or (c) 
on the scatter diagram.
(e)	 Use the exponential function from part (b) or (c) to  
predict the population at x = 7 hours. 
(f)	 Use the exponential function from part (b) or (c) to  
predict when the population will reach 0.75. 
	 2.	 Ethanol Production  The data in the table below represent 
ethanol production (in billions of gallons) in the United 
States from 2000 to 2013.
Source: Renewable Fuels Association, 2014
 
 
     Year
Ethanol  
Produced  
(billion gallons)
 
 
Year
Ethanol  
Produced  
(billion gallons)
2000 (x = 0)
1.6
2007 (x = 7)
6.5
2001 (x = 1)
1.8
2008 (x = 8)
9.3
2002 (x = 2)
2.1
2009 (x = 9)
10.9
2003 (x = 3)
2.8
2010 (x = 10)
13.3
2004 (x = 4)
3.4
2011 (x = 11)
13.9
2005 (x = 5)
3.9
2012 (x = 12)
13.2
2006 (x = 6)
4.9
2013 (x = 13)
13.3
Source: Cancer Treatment Centers of America
Time after Diagnosis (years)
Percentage Surviving
0.5
95.7
1
83.6
1.5
74.0
2
58.6
2.5
47.4
3
41.9
3.5
33.6
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of 
the data with time after diagnosis as the independent  
variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build an exponential model 
from the data. 
(c)	 Express the function found in part (b) in the form 
A(t) = A0ekt. 
(d)	 Graph the exponential function found in part (b) or (c) 
on the scatter diagram.
(e)	 What 
percentage 
of 
patients 
diagnosed 
with  
advanced-stage cancer are expected to survive for  
4 years after initial diagnosis? 
(f)	 Interpret the meaning of k in the function found in  
part (c).
	 4.	 Chemistry  A chemist has a 100-gram sample of a  
radioactive material. He records the amount of radioactive 
material every week for 7 weeks and obtains the following 
data: (continued on the next page)
(a) Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data using 0 for 2000, 1 for 2001, and so on, as the  
independent variable.
(b) Using a graphing utility, build an exponential model 
from the data. 
(c) Express the function found in part (b) in the form 
A(t) = A0ekt. 
Week
Weight
(in grams)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
100.0
88.3
75.9
69.4
59.1
51.8
45.5

374 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2012
 
Year
Dairy Farms  
(thousands)
Milk Produced 
(billion pounds)
1980
334
128
1985
269
143
1990
193
148
1995
140
155
2000
105
167
2005
78
177
2010
63
193
(a) Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram with 
week as the independent variable.
(b) Using a graphing utility, build an exponential model 
from the data. 
(c) Express the function found in part (b) in the form 
A1t2 = A0
 ekt. 
(d) Graph the exponential function found in part (b) or (c) 
on the scatter diagram.
(e) From the result found in part (b), determine the half-life 
of the radioactive material. 
(f) How much radioactive material will be left after  
50 weeks?
(g) When will there be 20 grams of radioactive material?
	 5.	 Milk Production  The data in the table below represent the 
number of dairy farms (in thousands) and the amount of 
milk produced (in billions of pounds) in the United States 
for various years.
(a) Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the data 
with the number of dairy farms as the independent variable.
(b) Using a graphing utility, build a logarithmic model from 
the data. 
(c) Graph the logarithmic function found in part (b) on the 
scatter diagram.
(d) In 2008, there were 67 thousand dairy farms in the United 
States. Use the function in part (b) to predict the amount 
of milk produced in 2008. 
(e) The actual amount of milk produced in 2008 was 190 
billion pounds. How does your prediction in part (d) 
compare to this? 
	 6.	 Cable Rates  The data (top, right) represent the average 
monthly rate charged for expanded basic cable television in 
the United States from 1995 to 2012. A market researcher 
believes that external factors, such as the growth of satellite 
television and internet programming, have affected the cost 
of basic cable. She is interested in building a model that will 
describe the average monthly cost of basic cable.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of 
the data using 0 for 1995, 1 for 1996, and so on, as the  
independent variable and average monthly rate as the 
dependent variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build a logistic model from the data.
(c)	 Graph the logistic function found in part (b) on the  
scatter diagram.
(d)	 Based on the model found in part (b), what is the maximum 
possible average monthly rate for basic cable? 
(e)	 Use the model to predict the average rate for basic cable 
in 2017. 
 
Year
Average Monthly Rate 
(dollars)
1995 (x = 0)
22.35
1996 (x = 1)
24.28
1997 (x = 2)
26.31
1998 (x = 3)
27.88
1999 (x = 4)
28.94
2000 (x = 5)
31.22
2001 (x = 6)
33.75
2002 (x = 7)
36.47
2003 (x = 8)
38.95
2004 (x = 9)
41.04
2005 (x = 10)
43.04
2006 (x = 11)
45.26
2007 (x = 12)
47.27
2008 (x = 13)
49.65
2009 (x = 14)
52.37
2010 (x = 15)
54.44
2011 (x = 16)
57.46
2012 (x = 17)
61.63
Source: Federal Communications Commission, 2013
	 7.	 Population Model  The following data represent the  
population of the United States. An ecologist is interested in 
building a model that describes the population of the United 
States.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
Population
Year
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
76,212,168
92,228,496
106,021,537
123,202,624
132,164,569
151,325,798
179,323,175
203,302,031
226,542,203
248,709,873
281,421,906
308,745,538
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data using years since 1900 as the independent variable 
and population as the dependent variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build a logistic model from the 
data.
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, draw the function found in  
part (b) on the scatter diagram.
(d)	 Based on the function found in part (b), what is the  
carrying capacity of the United States? 
(e)	 Use the function found in part (b) to predict the  
population of the United States in 2012. 
(f)	 When will the United States population be 350,000,000?
(g) Compare actual U.S. Census figures to the predictions 
found in parts (e) and (f). Discuss any differences.

Section 5.9  Building Exponential, Logarithmic, and Logistic   Models from Data   375
	 8.	 Population Model  The data on the right represent the world 
population. An ecologist is interested in building a model 
that describes the world population.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data using years since 2000 as the independent variable 
and population as the dependent variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build a logistic model from the data.
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, draw the function found in  
part (b) on the scatter diagram.
(d)	 Based on the function found in part (b), what is the  
carrying capacity of the world? 
(e)	 Use the function found in part (b) to predict the  
population of the world in 2020. 
(f)	 When will world population be 10 billion? 
Year
Population
(billions)
6.17
6.24
6.32
6.40
6.47
6.55
6.63
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Year
Population
(billions)
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
6.71
6.79
6.86
6.94
7.02
7.10
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
	 9.	 Cell Phone Towers  The following data represent the number of cell sites in service in the United States from 1985 to 2012 at the 
end of June each year.
Source: ©2013 CTIA-The Wireless Association®. All Rights Reserved.
 
Year
Cell Sites  
(thousands)
 
Year
Cell Sites  
(thousands)
 
Year
Cell Sites  
(thousands)
1985 (x = 1)
0.6
1995 (x = 11)
19.8
2004 (x = 20)
174.4
1986 (x = 2)
1.2
1996 (x = 12)
24.8
2005 (x = 21)
178.0
1987 (x = 3)
1.7
1997 (x = 13)
38.7
2006 (x = 22)
197.6
1988 (x = 4)
2.8
1998 (x = 14)
57.7
2007 (x = 23)
210.4
1989 (x = 5)
3.6
1999 (x = 15)
74.2
2008 (x = 24)
220.5
1990 (x = 6)
4.8
2000 (x = 16)
95.7
2009 (x = 25)
245.9
1991 (x = 7)
6.7
2001 (x = 17)
114.1
2010 (x = 26)
251.6
1992 (x = 8)
8.9
2002 (x = 18)
131.4
2011 (x = 27)
256.9
1993 (x = 9)
11.6
2003 (x = 19)
147.7
2012 (x = 28)
285.6
1994 (x = 10)
14.7
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the data using 1 for 1985, 2 for 1986, and so on, as the independent variable 
and number of cell sites as the dependent variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build a logistic model from the data.
(c)	 Graph the logistic function found in part (b) on the scatter diagram.
(d)	 What is the predicted carrying capacity for cell sites in the United States? 
(e)	 Use the model to predict the number of cell sites in the United States at the end of June 2017. 
Age
Total
Cholesterol
27
40
50
60
70
80
189
205
215
210
210
194
Mixed Practice
	 10.	 Age versus Total Cholesterol  The following data represent 
the age and average total cholesterol for adult males at  
various ages.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data using age, x, as the independent variable and total 
cholesterol, y, as the dependent variable.
(b)	 Based on the scatter diagram drawn in part (a), decide 
on a model (linear, quadratic, cubic, exponential,  
logarithmic, or logistic) that you think best describes 
the relation between age and total cholesterol. Be sure 
to justify your choice of model. 
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, find the model of best fit.
(d)	 Using a graphing utility, draw the model of best fit on 
the scatter diagram drawn in part (a).
(e)	 Use your model to predict the total cholesterol of a 
35-year-old male. 

376 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	 11.	 Golfing  The data below represent the expected  
percentage of putts that will be made by professional golfers  
on the PGA Tour depending on distance. For example, it is 
expected that 99.3% of 2-foot putts will be made.
	 12.	 Income versus Crime Rate  The following data represent 
property crime rate against individuals (crimes per 1000 
households) and their household income (in dollars) in the 
United States in 2009.
Property
Crime Rate
Income
Level
201.1
157.0
141.6
134.1
139.7
120.0
5000
11,250
20,000
30,000
42,500
62,500
Source: Statistical Abstract of the 
United States, 2012
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data with distance as the independent variable.
(b)	 Based on the scatter diagram drawn in part (a), decide 
on a model (linear, quadratic, cubic, exponential,  
logarithmic, or logistic) that you think best describes 
the relation between distance and expected percentage. 
Be sure to justify your choice of model. 
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, find the model of best fit.
(d)	 Graph the function found in part (c) on the scatter  
diagram.
(e) Use the function found in part (c) to predict what  
percentage of 30-foot putts will be made. 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 13–16 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 13.	 Construct a polynomial function that might have the graph 
shown. (More than one answer is possible.)
	 14.	 Rationalize the denominator of 3
22
. 
	 15.	 Find the remainder R when f1x2 = 3x3 + 11x2 + 4x - 5 
is divided by g1x2 = x + 2. Is g a factor of f? 
 
x
y
4
2
–4
–2
4
2
–4
–2
	 16.	 Graph the equation (x - 3)2 + y2 = 25.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data using income, x, as the independent variable and 
crime rate, y, as the dependent variable.
(b)	 Based on the scatter diagram drawn in part (a),  
decide on a model (linear, quadratic, cubic, exponential, 
logarithmic, or logistic) that you think best describes 
the relation between income and crime rate. Be sure to 
justify your choice of model. 
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, find the model of best fit.
(d)	 Using a graphing utility, draw the model of best fit on 
the scatter diagram you drew in part (a).
(e)	 Use your model to predict the crime rate of a household 
whose income is $55,000. 
Source: TheSandTrap.com Distance 
Distance	
Expected 	
Distance 	
Expected 
(feet)	
Percentage	
(feet)	
Percentage
2	
99.3	
14	
25.0
3	
94.8	
15	
22.0
4	
85.8	
16	
20.0
5	
74.7	
17	
19.0
6	
64.7	
18	
17.0
7	
55.6	
19	
16.0
8	
48.5	
20	
14.0
9	
43.4	
21	
13.0
10	
38.3	
22	
12.0
11	
34.2	
23	
11.0
12	
30.1	
24	
11.0
13	
27.0	
25	
10.0

Chapter Review  377
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Composite function (p. 283)	
1f ∘g2 1x2 = f1g1x22 The domain of f ∘g is the set of all numbers x in the domain of g 
for which g1x2 is in the domain of f.
One-to-one function f  (p. 291)	
A function for which any two different inputs in the domain correspond to two  
different outputs in the range
	
	
	
For any choice of elements x1, x2 in the domain of f, if x1 ≠x2, then f1x12 ≠f1x22.
Horizontal-line test (p. 292)	
If every horizontal line intersects the graph of a function f in at most one point, f is 
one-to-one.
Inverse function f −1  of f  (pp. 293–298)	
Domain of f = range of f -1; range of f = domain of f -1
 
	
	
	
 f -11f1x22 = x for all x in the domain of f
	
	
	
f1f -11x22 = x for all x in the domain of f -1
	
	
	
The graphs of f and f -1 are symmetric with respect to the line y = x.
Properties of the exponential 
function (pp. 308, 310)	
f1x2 = Cax a 7 1, C 7 0	
Domain: the interval 1- q, q 2
	
	
	
	
Range: the interval 10, q 2
	
	
	
	
x-intercepts: none; y-intercept: C
	
	
	
	
Horizontal asymptote: x-axis 1y = 02 as x S - q
	
	
	
	
Increasing; one-to-one; smooth; continuous
	
	
	
	
See Figure 21 for a typical graph.
	
	
	
f1x2 = Cax 0 6 a 6 1, C 7 0	
Domain: the interval 1- q, q 2
	
	
	
	
Range: the interval 10, q 2
	
	
	
	
x-intercepts: none; y-intercept: C
	
	
	
	
Horizontal asymptote: x-axis 1y = 02 as x S q
	
	
	
	
Decreasing; one-to-one; smooth; continuous
	
	
	
	
See Figure 25 for a typical graph.
Number e (p. 311)	
Number approached by the expression a1 + 1
nb
n
 as n S q; that is, lim
nSqa1 + 1
nb
n
= e.
Property of exponents (p. 312)	
If au = av, then u = v.
Properties of the logarithmic	
f1x2 = loga x a 7 1	
Domain: the interval 10, q 2 
function (pp. 322–328)	
1y = loga x means x = ay2	
Range: the interval 1- q, q 2
	
	
	
	
x-intercept: 1; y-intercept: none
	
	
	
	
Vertical asymptote: x = 0 (y-axis)
	
	
	
	
Increasing; one-to-one; smooth; continuous
	
	
	
	
See Figure 39(a) for a typical graph.
	
	
	
f1x2 = loga x 0 6 a 6 1	
Domain: the interval 10, q 2
	
	
	
1y = loga x means x = ay2	
Range: the interval 1- q, q 2
	
	
	
	
x-intercept: 1; y-intercept: none
	
	
	
	
Vertical asymptote: x = 0 (y-axis)
	
	
	
	
Decreasing; one-to-one; smooth; continuous
	
	
	
	
See Figure 39(b) for a typical graph.
Natural logarithm (p. 323)	
y = ln x means x = ey.
Properties of logarithms (pp. 333–334, 336)	
loga 1 = 0  loga a = 1    aloga M = M  loga ar = r    ar = er ln a
	
	
	
loga1MN2 = loga M + loga N    logaaM
N b = loga M - loga N
	
	
	
loga Mr = r loga M
	
	
	
If M = N, then loga M = loga N.   
	
	
	
If loga M = loga N, then M = N.

378 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Formulas
Change-of-Base Formula (p. 337)	
loga M =
logb M
logb a
Compound Interest Formula (p. 349)	
A = P # a1 + r
nb
nt
Continuous compounding (p. 351) 	
A = Pert
Effective rate of interest (p. 352)	
Compounding n times per year: re = a1 + r
nb
n
- 1
	
	
	
Continuous compounding: re = er - 1
Present Value Formulas (p. 353)	
P = A # a1 + r
nb
-nt or P = Ae-rt
Uninhibited Growth and decay (pp. 358, 360)	
A(t) = A0
 ekt
Newton’s Law of Cooling (p. 361)	
u(t) = T + (u0 - T )ekt k 6 0
Logistic model (p. 363) 	
P(t) =
c
1 + ae-bt
Objectives
Section	
You should be able to . . .	
Example(s)	
Review Exercises
5.1	
1	
Form a composite function (p. 283)	
1, 2, 4, 5	
1–6
	
2	
Find the domain of a composite function (p. 284)	
2–4	
4–6
5.2	
1	
Determine whether a function is one-to-one (p. 291)	
1, 2	
7(a), 8
	
2	
Determine the inverse of a function defined by a map or  
	
	
a set of ordered pairs (p. 293)	
3, 4	
7(b)
	
3	
Obtain the graph of the inverse function from the graph  
	
	
of the function (p. 296)	
7	
8
	
4	
Find the inverse of a function defined by an equation (p. 297)	
8, 9, 10	
9–12
5.3	
1	
Evaluate exponential functions (p. 303)	
1	
13(a), (c), 46(a)
	
2	
Graph exponential functions (p. 307)	
3–6	
30–32
	
3	
Define the number e (p. 310)	
p. 311
	
4	
Solve exponential equations (p. 312)	
7, 8	
34, 35, 38, 40, 46(b)
5.4	
1	
Change exponential statements to logarithmic statements  
	
	
and logarithmic statements to exponential statements (p. 320)	
2, 3	
14, 15
	
2	
Evaluate logarithmic expressions (p. 321)	
4	
13(b), (d), 18, 45(b),  
	
	
	
	
47(a), 48
	
3	
Determine the domain of a logarithmic function (p. 321)	
5	
16, 17, 33(a)
	
4	
Graph logarithmic functions (p. 322)	
6, 7	
29, 33(b), 45(a)
	
5	
Solve logarithmic equations (p. 326)	
8, 9	
36, 39, 45(c), 47(b)
5.5	
1	 Work with the properties of logarithms (p. 332)	
1, 2	
19, 20
	
2	 Write a logarithmic expression as a sum or difference 
	
	
of logarithms (p. 334)	
3–5	
21–24
	
3	 Write a logarithmic expression as a single logarithm (p. 335)	
6	
25–27
	
4	
Evaluate logarithms whose base is neither 10 nor e (p. 337)	
7, 8	
28
5.6	
1	
Solve logarithmic equations (p. 341)	
1–3	
36, 42
	
2	
Solve exponential equations (p. 343)	
4–6	
37, 41, 43, 44
	
3	
Solve logarithmic and exponential equations using a  
	
	
graphing utility (p. 344)	
7	
34–44
5.7	
1	
Determine the future value of a lump sum of money (p. 348)	
1–3	
49
	
2	
Calculate effective rates of return (p. 351)	
4	
49
	
3	
Determine the present value of a lump sum of money (p. 352)	
5	
50
	
4	
Determine the rate of interest or the time required to double  
	
	
a lump sum of money (p. 353)	
6, 7	
49

Chapter Review  379
Section	 You should be able to . . .	
Example(s)	
Review Exercises
5.8	
1	
Find equations of populations that obey the law of  
	
	
uninhibited growth (p. 358)	
1, 2	
53
	
2	
Find equations of populations that obey the law of  
	
	
decay (p. 360)	
3	
51, 54
	
3	
Use Newton’s Law of Cooling (p. 361)	
4	
52
	
4	
Use logistic models (p. 363)	
5, 6	
55
5.9	
1	
Build an exponential model from data (p. 369)	
1	
56
	
2	
Build a logarithmic model from data (p. 371)	
2	
57
	
3	
Build a logistic model from data (p. 371)	
3	
58
Review Exercises
In Problems 1–3, for the given functions fand g, find:
(a)  1f ∘g2 122        (b)  1g ∘f2 1- 22        (c)  1f ∘f2 142        (d)  1g ∘g2 1-12
	 1.	 f1x2 = 3 - 4x; g1x2 = 3x2 - 10	
2.	 f1x2 = 2x + 2; g1x2 = 2x2 + 1	
3.	 f1x2 = 2x2 - 1; g1x2 = 3x - 5
In Problems 4–6, find f ∘g, g ∘f, f ∘f, and g ∘g for each pair of functions. State the domain of each composite function.
	 4.	 f1x2 = 2 - x; g1x2 = 3x + 1	
5.	 f1x2 = 2x - 1; g1x2 = x2 + 3x + 1 	
6.	 f1x2 = x + 1
x - 1; g1x2 = 1
x
	 7.	 (a) Verify that the function is one-to-one. (b) Find the inverse of the given function.
	
	 For the function 5 13, 22, 15, 102, 12, 52, 17, 32 6 
	 8.	 State why the graph of the function is one-to-one. Then draw the graph of the inverse function f -1.
	
	
In Problems 9–12, each function is one-to-one. Find the inverse of each function and check your answer.
	 9.	 f1x2 = 2x + 3
5x - 2 
	
10.	 f1x2 =
1
x - 1 
	 11.	 f1x2 = 2x - 2	
12.	 f1x2 = x1>3 + 1 
In Problem 13, f(x) = 3x and g(x) = log3 x.
	 13.	 If f1x2 = 4x and g1x2 = log2 x, evaluate each of the following.  (a)  f122 
(b)  g1162      (c)  f1- 32 
    (d)  ga1
8b 
	 14.	 Convert 35 = z to an equivalent statement involving a logarithm. 
	 15.	 Convert log3 z = 7 to an equivalent statement involving an exponent. 
In Problems 16 and 17, find the domain of each logarithmic function.
	 16.	 f1x2 = log13x - 22	
17.	 H1x2 = log21x2 - 3x + 22
In Problems 18–20, find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
	 18.	 log3 27 
	
19.	 ln e12 
	
20.	 2log2 0.4 
In Problems 21–24, write each expression as the sum and/or difference of logarithms. Express powers as factors.
	 21.	 log5 axy
z2 b, x 7 0, y 7 0, z 7 0 	
22.	 log21a2 2b24 a 7 0, b 7 0
	 23.	 ln a
2x2 + 1y
2x
b, x 7 0, y 7 0 	
24.	 ln¢
2x + 3
x2 - 3x + 2≤
2 x 7 2
x
y
4
–4
4
–4
(3, 3)
y = x
(2, 0)
(0, –2)
(–1, –3)

380 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
In Problems 25–27, write each expression as a single logarithm.
	 25.	 1
2 log2 x3 - 3 log2 1x2 + 12, x 7 0 
	
26.	 3 ln x2 1
2 ln 3 - 43ln1x2 + 32 - ln 2x4 
	 27.	 1
2 ln1x2 + 12 - 4 ln1
2 - 1
2
 3ln1x - 42 + ln x4 
	 28.	 Use the Change-of-Base Formula and a calculator to evaluate log4 19. Round your answer to three decimal places. 
	29.	 Graph y = log3 x using a graphing utility and the Change-of-Base Formula.
In Problems 30–33, use the given function f to:
(a)	Find the domain of f.                   (b)  Graph f.  	(c)  From the graph, determine the range and any asymptotes of f.
(d)	Find f -1, the inverse function of f.  (e)  Find the domain and the range of f -1.  (f)  Graph f -1.
	 30.	 f1x2 = 2x-3	
31.	 f1x2 = 1 + 3-x	
32.	 f1x2 = 3ex-2	
33.	 f1x2 = 1
2 ln1x + 32
In Problems 34–44, solve each equation. Express any irrational solution in exact form and as a decimal rounded to three decimal places.
	 34.	 53x+7 = 25 
	
35.	 3x2+x = 23	
36.	 logx 64 = - 3 
	
37.	 5x = 3x+2
	 38.	 252x = 5x2-12 
	
39.	 log3 2x - 2 = 2 
	
40.	 8 = 4x2 # 25x 
	
41.	 2x # 5 = 10x 
	 42.	 log7 1x + 22 + log71x - 42 = 1 
	43.	 e1-x = 5 
	
44.	 9x + 4 # 3x - 3 = 0
	 45.	 Suppose that f1x2 = log21x - 22 + 1.
(a)	 Graph f.
(b)	 What is f162? What point is on the graph of f ?
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = 4. What point is on the graph of f ?
(d)	 Based on the graph drawn in part (a), solve f1x2 7 0.
(e)	 Find f -11x2. Graph f -1 on the same Cartesian plane  
as f.
	 46.	 Amplifying Sound  An amplifier’s power output P (in watts) 
is related to its decibel voltage gain d by the formula
P = 25e0.1d
(a)	 Find the power output for a decibel voltage gain of  
4 decibels. 
(b)	 For a power output of 50 watts, what is the decibel  
voltage gain? 
(a)	 How many years will it take for a piece of machinery to 
decline in value from $90,000 to $10,000 if the annual 
rate of depreciation is 0.20 (20%)? 
(b)	 How many years will it take for a piece of machinery to 
lose half of its value if the annual rate of depreciation is 
15%? 
	 49.	 Funding a College Education  A child’s grandparents  
purchase a $10,000 bond fund that matures in 18 years to 
be used for her college education. The bond fund pays 4%  
interest compounded semiannually. How much will the 
bond fund be worth at maturity? What is the effective rate 
of interest? How long will it take the bond to double in value 
under these terms? 
	 50.	 Funding a College Education  A child’s grandparents 
wish to purchase a bond that matures in 18 years to be 
used for her college education. The bond pays 4% interest  
compounded semiannually. How much should they pay so 
that the bond will be worth $85,000 at maturity? 
	 51.	 Estimating the Date When a Prehistoric Man Died  The 
bones of a prehistoric man found in the desert of New 
Mexico contain approximately 5% of the original amount 
of carbon-14. If the half-life of carbon-14 is 5730 years,  
approximately how long ago did the man die?
	
	
 
	 52.	 Temperature of a Skillet   A skillet is removed from an oven 
where the temperature is 450°F and placed in a room where 
the temperature is 70°F. After 5 minutes, the temperature of 
the skillet is 400°F. How long will it be until its temperature 
is 150°F? 
	 53.	 World Population  The annual growth rate of the world’s 
population in 2014 was k = 1.1, = 0.011. The population 
of the world in 2014 was 7,137,577,750. Letting t = 0  
represent 2014, use the uninhibited growth model to predict 
the world’s population in the year 2024. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
	 54.	 Radioactive Decay  The half-life of radioactive cobalt is  
5.27 years. If 100 grams of radioactive cobalt is present now, 
how much will be present in 20 years? In 40 years?
	 47.	 Limiting Magnitude of a Telescope  A telescope is limited 
in its usefulness by the brightness of the star that it is aimed 
at and by the diameter of its lens. One measure of a star’s 
brightness is its magnitude; the dimmer the star, the larger 
its magnitude. A formula for the limiting magnitude L of a 
telescope—that is, the magnitude of the dimmest star that it 
can be used to view—is given by
L = 9 + 5.1 log d
where d is the diameter (in inches) of the lens.
(a)	 What is the limiting magnitude of a 3.5-inch telescope?
(b)	 What diameter is required to view a star of  
magnitude 14?
	 48.	 Salvage Value  The number of years n for a piece of  
machinery to depreciate to a known salvage value can be 
found using the formula
n =
log s - log i
log (1 - d)
where s is the salvage value of the machinery, i is its initial 
value, and d is the annual rate of depreciation.

Chapter Review  381
	 55.	 Logistic Growth  The logistic growth model
P1t2 =
0.8
1 + 1.67e-0.16t
represents the proportion of new cars with a global positioning 
system (GPS). Let t = 0 represent 2006, t = 1 represent 
2007, and so on.
(a)	 What proportion of new cars in 2006 had a GPS? 
(b)	 Determine the maximum proportion of new cars that 
have a GPS. 
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, graph P = P1t2.
(d)	 When will 75% of new cars have a GPS? 
	 56.	 Rising Tuition  The following data represent the average  
in-state tuition and fees (in 2013 dollars) at public four-year 
colleges and universities in the United States from the  
academic year 1983–84 to the academic year 2013–14.
Source: The College Board
Academic Year
Tuition and Fees (2013 dollars)
1983–84 (x = 0)
2684
1988–89 (x = 5)
3111
1993–94 (x = 10)
4101
1998–99 (x = 15)
4648
2003–04 (x = 20)
5900
2008–09 (x = 25)
7008
2013–14 (x = 30)
8893
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram with  
academic year as the independent variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build an exponential model 
from the data. 
(c)	 Express the function found in part (b) in the form 
A(t) = A0ekt. 
(d)	 Graph the exponential function found in part (b) or (c) 
on the scatter diagram.
(e)	 Predict the academic year when the average tuition will 
reach $12,000. 
	 57.	 Wind Chill Factor  The data (top, right) represent the wind 
speed (mph) and the wind chill factor at an air temperature 
of 15°F.
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram with 
wind speed as the independent variable.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build a logarithmic model from 
the data. 
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, draw the logarithmic function 
found in part (b) on the scatter diagram.
(d)	 Use the function found in part (b) to predict the wind 
chill factor if the air temperature is 15°F and the wind 
speed is 23 mph. 
Wind Chill
Factor (ºF)
Wind Speed
(mph)
7
3
0
22
24
25
27
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Source: U.S. National Weather
              Service
	 58.	 Spreading of a Disease  Jack and Diane live in a small town 
of 50 people. Unfortunately, both Jack and Diane have a 
cold. Those who come in contact with someone who has 
this cold will themselves catch the cold. The following data  
represent the number of people in the small town who have 
caught the cold after t days.
Number of People
with Cold, C
Days, t
2
4
8
14
22
30
37
42
44
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram of the 
data. Comment on the type of relation that appears to 
exist between the number of days that have passed and 
the number of people with a cold.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, build a logistic model from the 
data.
(c)	 Graph the function found in part (b) on the scatter  
diagram.
(d)	 According to the function found in part (b), what is the 
maximum number of people who will catch the cold? 
In reality, what is the maximum number of people who 
could catch the cold? 
(e)	 Sometime between the second day and the third day,  
10 people in the town had a cold. According to the model 
found in part (b), when did 10 people have a cold?
(f)	 How long will it take for 46 people to catch the cold?

	 1.	 Given f1x2 = x + 2
x - 2 and g1x2 = 2x + 5, find:
(a)	 f ∘g and state its domain
(b)	 1g ∘f 2 1- 22 
(c)	 1f ∘g2 1- 22 
	 2.	 Determine whether the function is one-to-one.
(a)	 y = 4x2 + 3 
(b)  y = 2x + 3 - 5 
	 3.	 Find the inverse of f1x2 =
2
3x - 5 and check your answer. 
State the domain and the range of f and f -1.
	 4.	 If the point 13, - 52 is on the graph of a one-to-one function f, 
what point must be on the graph of f -1 ? 
In Problems 5–7, solve each equation.
	 5.	 3x = 243 
	
6.	 logb 16 = 2 
	 7.	 log5 x = 4 
In Problems 8–11, use a calculator to evaluate each expression. 
Round your answer to three decimal places.
	 8.	 e3 + 2 
	
9.	 log 20 
	 10.	 log3  21 
	
11.	 ln 133 
In Problems 12 and 13, use the given function f.
(a)	Find the domain of f.
(b)	Graph f.
(c)	From the graph, determine the range and any asymptotes 
of f.
(d)	Find f -1, the inverse of f.
(e)	Find the domain and the range of f -1.
(f)	 Graph f -1.
	 12.	 f1x2 = 4x+1 - 2
	 13.	 f1x2 = 1 - log51x - 22
In Problems 14–19, solve each equation.
	 14.	 5x+2 = 125 
	
15.	 log (x + 9) = 2 
	 16.	 8 - 2e-x = 4	
17.	 log (x2 + 3) = log (x + 6)
	 18.	 7x+3 = ex	
19.	 log2 (x - 4) + log2 (x + 4) = 3
	 20.	 Write log2¢
4x3
x2 - 3x - 18≤ as the sum and/or difference of 
logarithms. Express powers as factors.
	 21.	 A 50-mg sample of a radioactive substance decays to  
34 mg after 30 days. How long will it take for there to be  
2 mg remaining? 
	 22.	 (a)	 If $1000 is invested at 5% compounded monthly, how 
much is there after 8 months? 
(b)	 If you want to have $1000 in 9 months, how much do 
you need to place in a savings account now that pays 5% 
compounded quarterly? 
(c)	 How long does it take to double your money if you can 
invest it at 6% compounded annually? 
	 23.	 The decibel level, D, of sound is given by the equation
	
	 D = 10 log¢ I
I0
≤, where I is the intensity of the sound and 
I0 = 10-12 watt per square meter.
(a)	 If the shout of a single person measures 80 decibels, how 
loud would the sound be if two people shouted at the 
same time? That is, how loud would the sound be if the 
intensity doubled? 
(b)	 The pain threshold for sound is 125 decibels. If the  
Athens Olympic Stadium 2004 (Olympiako Stadio 
Athinas ‘Spyros Louis’) can seat 74,400 people, how 
many people in the crowd need to shout at the same 
time for the resulting sound level to meet or exceed  
the pain threshold? (Ignore any possible sound  
dampening.) 
Chapter Test
     
 
	 1.	 Is the following graph the graph of a function? If it is, is the 
function one-to-one? 
	 5.	 Graph the line 2x - 4y = 16.
	 6.	 (a)	 Graph the quadratic function f1x2 = - x2 + 2x - 3 by 
determining whether its graph opens up or down and 
by finding its vertex, axis of symmetry, y-intercept, and  
x-intercept(s), if any.
(b)	 Solve f1x2 … 0. 
	 7.	 Determine the quadratic function whose graph is given in 
the figure. 
Cumulative Review
x
y
4
–4
4
–4
	 2.	 For the function f1x2 = 2x2 - 3x + 1, find the following:
(a)	 f132 
(b)  f1- x2    (c)  f1x + h2
	 3.	 Determine which of the following points are on the graph of 
x2 + y2 = 1. 
(a)  a1
2, 1
2b      (b)  a1
2, 23
2 b
	 4.	 Solve the equation 31x - 22 = 41x + 52. 
y
x
50
–10
(0, 24)
Vertex:
(4, –8)
8
4
–2
382 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.

Age Range
Median Age, x
Percent Stopped, y
16–19
17.5
18.2
20–29
24.5
16.8
30–39
34.5
11.3
40–49
44.5
9.4
50–59
54.5
7.7
Ú60
69.5
3.8
	 8.	 Graph f1x2 = 31x + 123 - 2 using transformations.
	 9.	 Given that f1x2 = x2 + 2 and g1x2 =
2
x - 3, find 1f ∘g2 1x2
	
	 and state its domain. What is 1f ∘g2 152?
	 10.	 For the polynomial function f1x2 = 4x3 + 9x2 - 30x - 8:
(a)	 Find the real zeros of f. 
(b)	 Determine the intercepts of the graph of f.
(c)	 Use a graphing utility to approximate the local maxima 
and local minima.
(d)	 Draw a complete graph of f. Be sure to label the  
intercepts and turning points.
	 11.	 For the function g1x2 = 3x + 2:
(a)	 Graph g using transformations. State the domain, range, 
and horizontal asymptote of g.
(b)	 Determine the inverse of g. State the domain, range, and 
vertical asymptote of g-1. 
(c)	 On the same graph as g, graph g-1.
	 12.	 Solve the equation: 4x-3 = 82x
	 13.	 Solve the equation: log31x + 12 + log312x - 32 = log9 9 
	 14.	 Suppose that f1x2 = log31x + 22. Solve:
(a)	 f1x2 = 0 
    (b)  f1x2 7 0
(c)	 f1x2 = 3 
	 15.	 Data Analysis   The following data represent the percent of 
all drivers by age who have been stopped by the police for 
any reason within the past year. The median age represents 
the midpoint of the upper and lower limit for the age range.
(a)	 Using your graphing utility, draw a scatter diagram  
of the data treating median age, x, as the independent 
variable.
(b)	 What type of model do you feel best describes the  
relation between median age and percent stopped?  
You may choose from among linear, quadratic, cubic, 
exponential, logarithmic, and logistic models.
(c)	 Provide a justification for the model that you selected in 
part (b). 
Chapter Projects
Internet-based Project
	 I.	 Depreciation of Cars  Kelley Blue Book is a guide that  
provides the current retail price of cars. You can access the 
Kelley Blue Book at your library or online at www.kbb.com.
	1.	 Identify three cars that you are considering purchasing, 
and find the Kelley Blue Book value of the cars for  
0 (brand new), 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 years of age. Online, the 
value of the car can be found by selecting What should 
I pay for a used car? Enter the year, make, and model 
of the car you are selecting. To be consistent, we will  
assume the cars will be driven 12,000 miles per year, so a 
1-year-old car will have 12,000 miles, a 2-year-old car will 
have 24,000 miles, and so on. Choose the same options 
for each year, and finally determine the suggested retail 
price for cars that are in Excellent, Good, and Fair shape. 
You should have a total of 16 observations (1 for a brand 
new car, 3 for a 1-year-old car, 3 for a 2-year-old car, and 
so on).
	2.	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data with age as the  
independent variable and value as the dependent variable 
using Excel, a TI-graphing calculator, or some other 
spreadsheet. The Chapter 3 project describes how to 
draw a scatter diagram in Excel.
	3.	 Determine the exponential function of best fit. Graph 
the exponential function of best fit on the scatter  
diagram. To do this in Excel, click on any data point 
in the scatter diagram. Now select the Chart Element  
icon (+). Check the box for Trendline, select the arrow to 
the right, and choose More Options. Select the Exponential  
radio button and select Display Equation on Chart. See  
Figure 54 on page 384. Move the Trendline Options  
window off to the side, and you will see the exponential 
function of best fit displayed on the scatter diagram. Do 
you think the function accurately describes the relation 
between age of the car and suggested retail price?
Chapter Projects  383

384 
CHAPTER 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
	 4.	 The exponential function of best fit is of the form y = Cerx, 
where y is the suggested retail value of the car and x is the 
age of the car (in years). What does the value of C represent? 
What does the value of r represent? What is the depreciation 
rate for each car that you are considering?
	 5.	 Write a report detailing which car you would purchase based 
on the depreciation rate you found for each car.
Figure 54 
Citation: Excel © 2013 Microsoft Corporation. Used with permission from Microsoft.
The following projects are available on the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC):
	 II.	 Hot Coffee  A fast-food restaurant wants a special container to hold coffee. The restaurant wishes the container to quickly cool the 
coffee from 200° to 130°F and keep the liquid between 110° and 130°F as long as possible. The restaurant has three containers to 
select from. Which one should be purchased?
	III.	 Project at Motorola  Thermal Fatigue of Solder Connections Product reliability is a major concern of a manufacturer. Here a  
logarithmic transformation is used to simplify the analysis of a cell phone’s ability to withstand temperature change.

385
Length of Day Revisited
The length of a day depends upon the day of the year as well as the latitude 
of the location. Latitude gives the location of a point on Earth north or 
south of the equator. In Chapter 4, we found a model that describes the  
relation between the length of day and latitude for a specific day of the 
year. In the Internet Project at the end of this chapter, we will find a model 
that describes the relation between the length of day and day of the year 
for a specific latitude.
—See the Internet-based Chapter Project I—
 A Look Back
In Chapter 2, we began our discussion of functions. We defined domain and 
range and independent and dependent variables; we found the value of a 
function and graphed functions. We continued our study of functions by listing 
properties that a function might have, like being even or odd, and we created a 
library of functions, naming key functions and listing their properties, including 
the graph.
A Look Ahead 
 
In this chapter we define the trigonometric functions, six functions that have 
wide application. We shall talk about their domain and range, see how to find 
values, graph them, and develop a list of their properties.
There are two widely accepted approaches to the development of the  
trigonometric functions: one uses right triangles; the other uses circles,  
especially the unit circle. In this book, we develop the trigonometric functions 
using the unit circle. In Chapter 8, we present right triangle trigonometry.
6
Trigonometric 
Functions
Outline
6.1	
Angles and Their Measure
6.2	
Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle 
Approach
6.3	
Properties of the Trigonometric  
Functions
6.4	
Graphs of the Sine and Cosine  
Functions
6.5	
Graphs of the Tangent, Cotangent, 
Cosecant, and Secant Functions
6.6	
Phase Shift; Sinusoidal Curve Fitting
	
Chapter Review
	
Chapter Test
	
Cumulative Review
	
Chapter Projects

386 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
A ray, or half-line, is that portion of a line that starts at a point V on the line and 
extends indefinitely in one direction. The starting point V of a ray is called its vertex. 
See Figure 1.
If two rays are drawn with a common vertex, they form an angle. We call one 
ray of an angle the initial side and the other the terminal side. The angle formed is 
identified by showing the direction and amount of rotation from the initial side to 
the terminal side. If the rotation is in the counterclockwise direction, the angle is 
positive; if the rotation is clockwise, the angle is negative. See Figure 2.
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 395.
	
Objectives	 1  Convert between Decimals and Degrees, Minutes, Seconds  
Measures for Angles  (p. 388)
	
	 	2  Find the Length of an Arc of a Circle  (p. 389)
	
	 	3  Convert from Degrees to Radians and from Radians to Degrees  (p. 390)
	
	 	4  Find the Area of a Sector of a Circle  (p. 393)
	
	 	5  Find the Linear Speed of an Object Traveling in Circular Motion  (p. 394)
6.1  Angles and Their Measure
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Area and Circumference of a Circle (Appendix A, 
Section A.2, p. 960)
•	 Uniform Motion (Appendix A, Section A.8,  
pp. 1009–1011)
Lowercase Greek letters, such as a (alpha), b (beta), g (gamma), and u (theta), 
will often be used to denote angles. Notice in Figure 2(a) that the angle a is  
positive because the direction of the rotation from the initial side to the terminal side 
is counterclockwise. The angle b in Figure 2(b) is negative because the rotation is 
clockwise. The angle g in Figure 2(c) is positive. Notice that the angle a in Figure 2(a) 
and the angle g in Figure 2(c) have the same initial side and the same terminal side. 
However, a and g are unequal, because the amount of rotation required to go from 
the initial side to the terminal side is greater for angle g than for angle a.
An angle u is said to be in standard position if its vertex is at the origin of a rectangular 
coordinate system and its initial side coincides with the positive x-axis. See Figure 3.
Figure 1  A ray or half-line
V
Ray
Line
Figure 2 
Terminal side 
Initial side
Vertex
a
Terminal side 
Initial side
Vertex
b
Terminal side 
Initial side
Vertex
g
(a)   Counterclockwise
 
  rotation
 
  Positive angle
(b)   Clockwise rotation
 
  Negative angle
(c)   Counterclockwise
 
  rotation
 
  Positive angle
Figure 3 
Standard position of an angle
y
x
Initial side
Terminal side
Vertex
u
(a)
u is in standard position;
u is positive
y
x
Initial side
Terminal side
Vertex
u
(b)
u is in standard position;
u is negative

Section 6.1  Angles and Their Measure  387
When an angle u is in standard position, the terminal side will lie either in a 
quadrant, in which case we say that u lies in that quadrant, or the terminal side will 
lie on the x-axis or the y-axis, in which case we say that u is a quadrantal angle. For 
example, the angle u in Figure 4(a) lies in quadrant II, the angle u in Figure 4(b) lies 
in quadrant IV, and the angle u in Figure 4(c) is a quadrantal angle.
Historical Note  One counterclockwise  
rotation was said to measure 360° 
because 
the 
Babylonian 
year 
had  
360 days.	
■
Angles are measured by determining the amount of rotation needed for the 
initial side to become coincident with the terminal side. The two commonly used 
measures for angles are degrees and radians.
Degrees
The angle formed by rotating the initial side exactly once in the counterclockwise 
direction until it coincides with itself (1 revolution) is said to measure 360 degrees,
abbreviated 360°. One degree, 1°, is 1
360 revolution. A right angle is an angle that 
measures 90°, or 1
4 revolution; a straight angle is an angle that measures 180°, or 
1
2 revolution. See Figure 5. As Figure 5(b) shows, it is customary to indicate a right 
angle by using the symbol .
It is also customary to refer to an angle that measures u degrees as an angle of 
u degrees.
Drawing an Angle
Draw each angle.
(a)	 45°          (b)  -90°          (c)  225°          (d)  405°
Example 1
(a)	 An angle of 45° is 1
2 of a right angle. 
See Figure 6.
(b)	 An angle of -90° is 1
4 revolution in 
the clockwise direction. See Figure 7.
Solution
Figure 4 
y
x
u
(a)
u lies in quadrant II
y
x
u
(b)
u lies in quadrant IV
(c)
u is a quadrantal angle
y
x
u
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
I
Figure 5 
(a)
1 revolution
counterclockwise, 360°
Initial side
Terminal side
Vertex
(b) right angle,    revolution
counterclockwise, 90°
Initial side
Terminal
side
Vertex
(c)
Initial side
Terminal side Vertex
1–4
straight angle,    revolution
counterclockwise, 180°
1–2
Figure 6  45° angle
Terminal side
Initial side
45°
Vertex
Figure 7  −90° angle
Initial side
Terminal
side
90°
Vertex

388 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
(c)	 An angle of 225° consists of a  
rotation through 180° followed by a 
rotation through 45°. See Figure 8.
(d)	 An angle of 405° consists of 
1 revolution (360°) followed by a  
rotation through 45°. See Figure 9.
Comment  Graphing calculators (and 
some scientific calculators) have the 
ability to convert from degrees, minutes, 
seconds to decimal form, and vice versa. 
Consult your owner’s manual.	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Convert between Decimals and Degrees, Minutes, Seconds 
Measures for Angles
Although subdivisions of a degree may be obtained by using decimals, the terms
minute and second are also used. One minute, denoted by 1′, is defined as 1
60 degree.
One second, denoted by 1″, is defined as 
1
60 minute, or equivalently as, 
1
3600 degree. An angle of, say, 30 degrees, 40 minutes, 10 seconds is written 
compactly as 30°40′10″. To summarize:
•
1
	
1 counterclockwise revolution = 360°	
(1)
1° = 60′  1′ = 60″
It is sometimes necessary to convert from the degrees, minutes, seconds notation 
1D°M′S″2 to a decimal form, and vice versa.
Converting between Degrees, Minutes, Seconds,  
and Decimal Forms
(a)	 Convert 50°6′21″ to a decimal in degrees. Round the answer to four decimal 
places.
(b)	 Convert 21.256° to the D°M′S″ form. Round the answer to the nearest second.
(a)	 Because 1′ = a 1
60b
5
 and 1″ = a 1
60b
=
= a 1
60 # 1
60b
5
, convert as follows:
 50°6′21″ = 50° + 6′ + 21″ = 50° + 6 # 1′ + 21 # 1″
 = 50° + 6 # a 1
60b
5
+ 21 # a 1
60 # 1
60b
5
 ≈50° + 0.1° + 0.0058°
 = 50.1058°
Example 2
Solution
Convert minutes and  
seconds to degrees.
Figure 8  225° angle
Terminal side
Initial side
225°
Vertex
Figure 9  405° angle
Terminal side
Initial side
405°
Vertex

Section 6.1  Angles and Their Measure  389
(b)	 Because 1° = 60′ and 1′ = 60″, proceed as follows:
 21.256° = 21° + 0.256°
 = 21° + (0.256) # 1°
 = 21° + 10.2562 160′2
 = 21° + 15.36′
 = 21° + 15′ + 0.36′
 = 21° + 15′ + (0.36) # 1′
 = 21° + 15′ + 10.362 160″2
 = 21° + 15′ + 21.6″
 ≈21°15′22″
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 3  a n d  2 9
In many applications, such as describing the exact location of a star or the  
precise position of a ship at sea, angles measured in degrees, minutes, and even seconds 
are used. For calculation purposes, these are transformed to decimal form. In other 
applications, especially those in calculus, angles are measured using radians.
Radians
A central angle is a positive angle whose vertex is at the center of a circle. The rays of 
a central angle subtend (intersect) an arc on the circle. If the radius of the circle is r  
and the length of the arc subtended by the central angle is also r, then the measure 
of the angle is 1 radian. See Figure 10(a).
For a circle of radius 1, the rays of a central angle with measure 1 radian subtend 
an arc of length 1. For a circle of radius 3, the rays of a central angle with measure  
1 radian subtend an arc of length 3. See Figure 10(b).
Convert fraction of degree to 	 
minutes; 1° = 60′.
Convert fraction of minute to	   
seconds; 1′ = 60″.
Round to the nearest second.
•
Find the Length of an Arc of a Circle
Now consider a circle of radius r and two central angles, u and u1, measured in radians. 
Suppose that these central angles subtend arcs of lengths s and s1, respectively, as 
shown in Figure 11. From geometry, the ratio of the measures of the angles equals 
the ratio of the corresponding lengths of the arcs subtended by these angles; that is,
	
u
u1
= s
s1
	
(2)
2
Figure 10 
Terminal side
Initial side
(a)
r
r
r
1 radian
Terminal side
Initial side
1
3
(b)
1
3
1 radian
Figure 11  u
u1
= s
s1
s
u
u1
r
s1

390 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Suppose that u1 = 1 radian. Refer again to Figure 10(a). The length s1 of the arc 
subtended by the central angle u1 = 1 radian equals the radius r of the circle. Then 
s1 = r, so equation (2) reduces to
	
u
1 = s
r or s = ru	
(3)
Arc Length
For a circle of radius r, a central angle of u radians subtends an arc whose 
length s is
	
s = ru	
(4)
Theorem
NOTE  Formulas must be consistent with regard to the units used. In equation (4), we write
s = ru
To see the units, however, we must go back to equation (3) and write
 u radians
1 radian = s  length units
r  length units
 s length units = r length units u radians
1 radian
The radians divide out, leaving
s length units = (r length units)u 
s = r u
where u appears to be “dimensionless” but, in fact, is measured in radians. So, in using the formula 
s = r u, the dimension for u is radians, and any convenient unit of length (such as inches or meters) 
may be used for s and r.	
■
Finding the Length of an Arc of a Circle
Find the length of the arc of a circle of radius 2 meters subtended by a central angle 
of 0.25 radian.
Use equation (4) with r = 2 meters and u = 0.25. The length s of the arc is
s = ru = 210.252 = 0.5 meter
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
Convert from Degrees to Radians and from Radians to Degrees
With two ways to measure angles, it is important to be able to convert from one to 
the other. Consider a circle of radius r. A central angle of 1 revolution will subtend 
an arc equal to the circumference of the circle (Figure 12). Because the circumference 
of a circle of radius r equals 2pr, we substitute 2pr for s in equation (4) to find that, 
for an angle u of 1 revolution,
 s = ru
 2pr = ru
 u = 2p radians
From this, we have
Example 3
Solution
•
3
u = 1 revolution; s = 2pr
Solve for u.
	
1 revolution = 2p radians	
(5)
Figure 12   
1 revolution = 2p radians
1 revolution
s  2p
r
r

Section 6.1  Angles and Their Measure  391
Since 1 revolution = 360°, we have
360° = 2p radians
Dividing both sides by 2 yields
*Some students prefer instead to use the proportion 
Degree
180°
= Radian
p
, then substitute for what is 
given, and solve for the measurement sought.
	
180° = p radians	
(6)
	
1 degree =
p
180 radian  1 radian = 180
p  degrees	
(7)
Divide both sides of equation (6) by 180. Then
1 degree =
p
180 radian
Divide both sides of (6) by p. Then
180
p  degrees = 1 radian
We have the following two conversion formulas:*
Converting from Degrees to Radians
Convert each angle in degrees to radians.
(a)	 60°        (b)  150°        (c)  -45°        (d)  90°        (e)  107°
(a)	 60° = 60 # 1 degree = 60 # p
180 radian = p
3 radians
(b)	 150° = 150 # 1° = 150 # p
180 radian = 5p
6  radians
(c)	 -45° = -45 # p
180 radian = -  p
4 radian
(d)	 90° = 90 # p
180 radian = p
2 radians
(e)	 107° = 107 # p
180 radian ≈1.868 radians
Example 4, parts (a)–(d), illustrates that angles that are “nice” fractions of a  
revolution are expressed in radian measure as fractional multiples of p, rather than as
decimals. For example, a right angle, as in Example 4(d), is left in the form p
2  radians,
which is exact, rather than using the approximation p
2 ≈3.1416
2
= 1.5708 radians. 
When the fractions are not “nice,” we use the decimal approximation of the angle, 
as in Example 4(e).
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 5  a n d  6 1
Example 4
Solution
•

392 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Converting Radians to Degrees
Convert each angle in radians to degrees.
(a)  p
6 radian	
(b)  3p
2  radians	
(c)  -  3p
4  radians
(d)  7p
3  radians	
(e)  5 radians
(a)	 p
6 radian = p
6 # 1 radian = p
6 # 180
p  degrees = 30°
(b)	 3p
2  radians = 3p
2 # 180
p  degrees = 270°
(c)	 -  3p
4  radians = -  3p
4 # 180
p  degrees = -135°
(d)	 7p
3  radians = 7p
3 # 180
p  degrees = 420°
(e)	 5 radians = 5 # 180
p  degrees ≈286.48°
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Table 1 lists the degree and radian measures of some commonly encountered 
angles. You should learn to feel equally comfortable using either measure for these 
angles.
Example 5
Solution
•
Table 1 
Degrees
0°
30°
45°
60°
90°
120°
135°
150°
180°
Radians
0
p
6
p
4
p
3
p
2
2p
3
3p
4
5p
6
p
Degrees
 
210°
225°
240°
270°
300°
315°
330°
360°
Radians
 
7p
6
5p
4
4p
3
3p
2
5p
3
7p
4
11p
6
2p
Finding the Distance between Two Cities
The latitude of a location L is the measure of the angle formed by a ray drawn 
from the center of Earth to the equator and a ray drawn from the center of Earth 
to L. See Figure 13(a). Sioux Falls, South Dakota, is due north of Dallas, Texas. Find 
the distance between Sioux Falls (43° 33′ north latitude) and Dallas (32° 46′ north  
latitude). See Figure 13(b). Assume that the radius of Earth is 3960 miles.
Example 6
Figure 13 
North Pole
South Pole
L
u°
North Pole
South Pole
)
b
(
)
a
(
Equator
Dallas
Sioux Falls
43°33'
32°46'
Equator

Section 6.1  Angles and Their Measure  393
The measure of the central angle between the two cities is 43° 33′ - 32° 46′ = 10° 47′. 
Use equation (4), s = ru. But remember first to convert the angle of 10° 47′ to radians.
u = 10°47′ ≈10.7833° = 10.7833 #  p
180
  radian ≈0.188 radian
c
47′ = 47a 1
60 b°
Use u = 0.188 radian and r = 3960 miles in equation (4). The distance between the 
two cities is
s = ru = 3960 #  0.188 ≈744 miles
When an angle is measured in degrees, the degree symbol will always be shown. 
However, when an angle is measured in radians, the usual practice is to omit the word
 radians. So if the measure of an angle is given as p
6, it is understood to mean p
6 radian.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 0 7
Find the Area of a Sector of a Circle
Consider a circle of radius r. Suppose that u, measured in radians, is a central angle 
of this circle. See Figure 14. We seek a formula for the area A of the sector (shown 
in blue) formed by the angle u.
Now consider a circle of radius r and two central angles u and u1, both measured 
in radians. See Figure 15. From geometry, we know that the ratio of the measures 
of the angles equals the ratio of the corresponding areas of the sectors formed by 
these angles. That is,
u
u1
= A
A1
Suppose that u1 = 2p radians. Then A1 = area of the circle = pr 2. Solving  
for A, we find
 A = A1 u
u1
= pr 2 u
2p = 1
2 r 2
 u
Solution
•
4
 c
 A1 = pr 2
 u1 = 2p
Note  If the measure of an angle is given 
as 5, it is understood to mean 5 radians; 
if the measure of an angle is given as 5°, 
it means 5 degrees.	
■
Area of a Sector
The area A of the sector of a circle of radius r formed by a central angle  
of u radians is
	
A = 1
2 r 2
 u	
(8)
Theorem
Finding the Area of a Sector of a Circle
Find the area of the sector of a circle of radius 2 feet formed by an angle of 30°. 
Round the answer to two decimal places.
Use equation (8) with r = 2 feet and u = 30° = p
6  radian. [Remember, in equation (8), 
u must be in radians.]
A = 1
2 r 2
 u = 1
2 1222 p
6 = p
3 ≈1.05
The area A of the sector is 1.05 square feet, rounded to two decimal places.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 9
Example 7
Solution
•
Figure 14  Sector of a Circle
A
r
u
Figure 15  u
u1
= A
A1
A1
u1
A
r
u

394 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Find the Linear Speed of an Object Traveling in Circular Motion
Earlier we defined the average speed of an object as the distance traveled divided 
by the elapsed time. For motion along a circle, we distinguish between linear speed 
and angular speed.
5
Suppose that an object moves around a circle of radius r at a constant speed.  
If s is the distance traveled in time t around this circle, then the linear speed v 
of the object is defined as
	
v = s
t	
(9)
Definition
As this object travels around the circle, suppose that u (measured in radians) is 
the central angle swept out in time t. See Figure 16.
The angular speed v (the Greek letter omega) of this object is the angle u 
(measured in radians) swept out, divided by the elapsed time t; that is,
	
v = u
t 	
(10)
Definition
Angular speed is the way the turning rate of an engine is described. For example, 
an engine idling at 900 rpm (revolutions per minute) is one that rotates at an angular 
speed of
900 revolutions
minute
= 900  revolutions 
minute
# 2p 
radians
 revolution = 1800p radians
minute
There is an important relationship between linear speed and angular speed:
linear speed = v = s
t = ru
t = rau
t b = r # v
	 	
c	
 c 	
c
	 	
(9)	
s = ru	
(10)
	
v = rv	
(11)
where v is measured in radians per unit time.
When using equation (11), remember that v = s
t (the linear speed) has the
dimensions of length per unit of time (such as feet per second or miles per hour),  
r (the radius of the circular motion) has the same length dimension as s, and v (the 
angular speed) has the dimensions of radians per unit of time. If the angular speed is 
given in terms of revolutions per unit of time (as is often the case), be sure to convert 
it to radians per unit of time using the fact that 1 revolution = 2p radians before 
attempting to use equation (11).
Finding Linear Speed
A child is spinning a rock at the end of a 2-foot rope at a rate of 180 revolutions per 
minute (rpm). Find the linear speed of the rock when it is released.
Look at Figure 17. The rock is moving around a circle of radius r = 2 feet. The  
angular speed v of the rock is
v = 180 revolutions
minute
= 180  revolutions 
minute
# 2p 
radians
 revolution = 360p radians
minute
Example 8
Solution
Figure 16  v = s
t
u
s
r
Time t
t  0

Section 6.1  Angles and Their Measure  395
From equation (11), the linear speed v of the rock is
v = rv = 2 feet # 360p radians
minute = 720p feet
minute ≈2262 feet
minute
The linear speed of the rock when it is released is 2262 ft/min ≈25.7 mi/h.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 9
•
Historical Feature
T
rigonometry was developed by Greek astronomers, who regarded 
the sky as the inside of a sphere, so it was natural that triangles 
on a sphere were investigated early (by Menelaus of Alexandria 
about ad 100) and that triangles in the plane were studied much later. 
The first book containing a systematic treatment of plane and spherical 
trigonometry was written by the Persian astronomer Nasir Eddin (about 
ad 1250).
Regiomontanus (1436–1476) is the person most responsible for 
moving trigonometry from astronomy into mathematics. His work 
was improved by Copernicus (1473–1543) and Copernicus’s student  
Rhaeticus (1514–1576). Rhaeticus’s book was the first to define the 
six trigonometric functions as ratios of sides of triangles, although 
he did not give the functions their present names. Credit for this is 
due to Thomas Finck (1583), but Finck’s notation was by no means  
universally accepted at the time. The notation was finally stabilized by the  
textbooks of Leonhard Euler (1707–1783).
Trigonometry has since evolved from its use by surveyors, navigators, 
and engineers to present applications involving ocean tides, the rise and 
fall of food supplies in certain ecologies, brain wave patterns, and many 
other phenomena.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 What is the formula for the circumference C of a circle of 
radius r? What is the formula for the area A of a circle of 
radius r? (p. 960) 
	 2.	 If a particle has a speed of r feet per second and travels a 
distance d (in feet) in time t (in seconds), then d =   
 . 
(pp. 1009–1011)
6.1 Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 3.	 An angle u is in 
 
 if its vertex is at the 
origin of a rectangular coordinate system and its initial side 
coincides with the positive x-axis.
	 4.	 A 
 
 is a positive angle whose vertex is at the 
center of a circle.
	 5.	 If the radius of a circle is r and the length of the arc  
subtended by a central angle is also r, then the measure of 
the angle is 1    . 
(a)	 degree  (b)  minute  (c)  second  (d)  radian
	 6.	 On a circle of radius r, a central angle of u radians subtends 
an arc of length s =
; the area of the sector formed by
	
	 this angle u is A =  
 .
	 7.	 180° =     radians 
(a)	 p
2   (b)  p  (c)  3p
2   (d)  2p
	 8. An object travels around a circle of radius r with constant 
speed. If s is the distance traveled in time t around the circle 
and u is the central angle (in radians) swept out in time t,
	
	 then the linear speed of the object is v =
 and the angular 
speed of the object is v =
 .
	 9.	 True or False  The angular speed v of an object traveling 
around a circle of radius r is the angle u (measured in radians) 
swept out, divided by the elapsed time t. 
	 10.	 True or False  For circular motion on a circle of radius r,  
linear speed equals angular speed divided by r. 
Skill Building
In Problems 11–22, draw each angle.
	11.	 30°	
12.	 60°	
13.	 - 120°	
14.	 135°	
15.	 540°	
16.  450°
	17.	 4p
3 	
18.	 3p
4
19.	 -  2p
3
20.	 -  p
6
21.	 21p
4
22.	 16p
3
In Problems 23–28, convert each angle to a decimal in degrees. Round your answer to two decimal places.
23. 40°10′25″
24. 61°42′21″	
25.	 73°40′40″ 
	
26.  50°14′20″	
27.	 98°22′45″ 
28. 9°9′9″
Figure 17 
r = 2

396 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
In Problems 29–34, convert each angle to D°M′S″ form. Round your answer to the nearest second.
29. 40.32°
30. 61.24°
31. 29.411°
32. 18.255°
33. 44.01°
34. 19.99°
In Problems 35–46, convert each angle in degrees to radians. Express your answer as a multiple of p.
	 35.	 30° 
	
36.	 120° 
	
37.	 330° 
	
38.	 240° 
	
39.	 - 30° 
	
40.	 -60° 
	 41.	 270° 
	
42.	 180° 
	
43.	 - 225° 
	
44.	 - 135° 
	
45.	 - 180° 
	
46. -90° 
In Problems 47–58, convert each angle in radians to degrees.
	 47.	 p
3  
	
48.	 5p
6  
	
49.	 -  2p
3  
	
50.	 -  5p
4  
	
51.	  4p 
	
52.   p
2  
	 53.	  5p
12   	
54.	  p
12  15° 
	
55. 	- p 
	
56. 	 -  p
2  
	
57.	  -  3p
4  
	
58. 	 -  p
6  
In Problems 59–64, convert each angle in degrees to radians. Express your answer in decimal form, rounded to two decimal places.
	 59.	 73° 
	
60.	 17° 
	
61.	 - 40° 
	
62.	 - 51° 
	
63.	 350° 
	
64.  125° 
In Problems 65–70, convert each angle in radians to degrees. Express your answer in decimal form, rounded to two decimal places.
	 65.	 0.75 
	
66.	 3.14 
	
67.	 3 
	
68.	 2 
	
69.	 22 
	
70.	  6.32 
In Problems 71–78, s denotes the length of the arc of a circle of radius r subtended by the central angle u. Find the missing quantity. Round 
answers to three decimal places.
	 71.	 r = 10 meters, u = 1
2 radian, s = ? 
	
72.	 r = 6 feet, u = 2 radians, s = ? 
	 73.	 u = 1
4 radian, s = 6 centimeters, r = ? 
	
74.	 u = 1
3 radian, s = 2 feet, r = ? 
	 75.	 r = 6 meters, s = 8 meters, u = ? 
	
76.	 r = 5 miles, s = 3 miles, u = ? 
	 77.	 r = 3 meters, u = 120°, s = ? 
.	
78.	 r = 2 inches, u = 30°, s = ? 
In Problems 79–86, A denotes the area of the sector of a circle of radius r formed by the central angle u. Find the missing quantity. Round 
answers to three decimal places.
	 79.	 r = 10 meters, u = 1
2 radian, A = ? 
	
80.	  r = 6 feet, u = 2 radians, A = ? 
	 81.	  u = 1
4 radian, A = 6 square centimeters, r = ?  	
82.	  u = 1
3 radian, A = 2 square feet, r = ?
	 83.	  r = 6 meters, A = 8 square meters, u = ? 
	
84.	  r = 5 miles, A = 3 square miles, u = ?
	 85.	  r = 3 meters, u = 120°, A = ? 
	
86.	  r = 2 inches, u = 30°, A = ? 
In Problems 87–90, find the length s and area A. Round answers to three decimal places.
	 87.	
88.	
89.	  	
90. 	
Applications and Extensions
	 91.	 Movement of a Minute Hand The minute hand of a clock is  
4 inches long. How far does the tip of the minute hand move 
in 20 minutes? 
	 92.	 Movement of a Pendulum A pendulum swings through an 
angle of 20° each second. If the pendulum is 40 inches long, 
how far does its tip move each second? Round answers to 
two decimal places. 
	 93.	 Area of a Sector Find the area of the sector of a circle of  
radius 5 meters formed by an angle of 90°. 
	 94.	 Area of a Sector Find the area of the sector of a circle of  
radius 3 centimeters formed by an angle of 60°. Round the 
answer to two decimal places. 
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
2 ft
A
3
π
s
4 m
A
6
π
s
12 yd
70˚
A
s
9 cm
s
A
50˚

Section 6.1  Angles and Their Measure  397
7 in.
9 in.
	 95.	 Watering a Lawn A 
water sprinkler sprays 
water over a distance 
of 36 feet while rotat-
ing through an angle 
of 150°. What area of 
lawn receives water?
	
	
on this bicycle, through how many revolutions per minute 
are the wheels turning? 
96.	 Designing a Water Sprinkler  An engineer is asked to design 
a water sprinkler that will cover a field of 100 square yards 
that is in the shape of a sector of a circle of radius 15 yards. 
Through what angle should the sprinkler rotate?
	 97.	 Windshield Wiper  The windshield of a car has a total length 
of arm and blade of 9 inches, and rotates back and forth 
through an angle of 84°. What is the area of the portion of 
the windshield cleaned by the 7-in wiper blade?
	 98.	 Windshield Wiper  The arm and blade of a windshield wiper  
have a total length of 30 inches. If the blade is 24 inches 
long and the wiper sweeps out an angle of 125°, how much  
window area can the blade clean? 
	 99.	 Motion on a Circle  An object is traveling around a circle 
with a radius of 12 centimeters. If in 40 seconds a central 
angle of 1
6 radian is swept out, what are the linear and angu-
lar speeds of the object? 
100.	 Motion on a Circle  An object is traveling around a circle 
with a radius of 2 meters. If in 20 seconds the object travels  
5 meters, what is its angular speed? What is its linear speed?
	101.	 Amusement Park Ride  A gondola on an amusement park 
ride spins at a speed of 11 revolutions per minute. If the gon-
dola is 23 feet from the ride’s center, what is the linear speed 
of the gondola in miles per hour? 
	102.	 Amusement Park Ride  A centrifugal force ride, similar to 
the Gravitron, spins at a speed of 22 revolutions per minute. If 
the diameter of the ride is 13 meters, what is the linear speed 
of the passengers in kilometers per hour? 
	103.	 Blu-ray Drive  A drive has a maximum speed of 10,000 revo-
lutions per minute. If a disc has a diameter of 14 cm, what is 
the linear speed, in km/h, of a point 6 cm from the center if 
the disc is spinning at a rate of 8000 revolutions per minute? 
	104.	 DVD Drive  A DVD drive has a maximum speed of 7200 
revolutions per minute. If a DVD has a diameter of 12 cm, 
what is the linear speed, in km/h, of a point 5 cm from the 
disc’s center if it is spinning at a rate of 5400 revolutions per 
minute? 
	105.	 Bicycle Wheels The diameter of each wheel of a bicycle is  
26 inches. If you are traveling at a speed of 40 miles per hour 
106. Car Wheels  The radius of each wheel of a car is 15 inches. 
If the wheels are turning at the rate of 3 revolutions per 
second, how fast is the car moving? Express your answer in 
inches per second and in miles per hour.
In Problems 107–110, the latitude of a location L is the angle 
formed by a ray drawn from the center of Earth to the Equator 
and a ray drawn from the center of Earth to L. See the figure.
36 ft
150˚
North Pole
South Pole
L
u
Equator
107.	 Distance between Cities  City A is due north of City B. Find 
the distance between City A (37°7′ north latitude) and City 
B (21°55′ north latitude). Assume that the radius of Earth is 
3960 miles.
	108.	 Distance between Cities  Charleston, West Virginia, is 
due north of Jacksonville, Florida. Find the distance  
between Charleston (38°21′ north latitude) and Jacksonville 
(30°20′ north latitude). Assume that the radius of Earth is  
3960 miles. 
	109.	 Linear Speed on a Planet  A planet rotates on an axis 
through its poles and 1 revolution takes 1 day (1 day is 18 
hours). The distance from the axis to a location on the planet 
30° north latitude is about 2166.5 miles. Therefore, a location 
on the planet at 30° north latitude is spinning on a circle of 
radius 2166.5 miles. Compute the linear speed on the surface 
of the planet at 30° north latitude. 
	110.	 Linear Speed on Earth  Earth rotates on an axis through its 
poles. The distance from the axis to a location on Earth at 40° 
north latitude is about 3033.5 miles. Therefore, a location on 
Earth at 40° north latitude is spinning on a circle of radius 
3033.5 miles. Compute the linear speed on the surface of 
Earth at 40° north latitude. 
	111.	 Speed of a Planet’s Moon  The mean distance of a moon 
from a planet is 2.5 * 105 miles. Assuming that the orbit of 
the moon around the planet is circular and that 1 revolution 
takes 24.3 days (1 day is 26 hours), find the linear speed of the 
moon. Express your answer in miles per hour. 

398 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
	112.	 Speed of Earth The mean distance of Earth from the Sun is 
9.29 * 107 miles. Assuming that the orbit of Earth around 
the Sun is circular and that 1 revolution takes 365 days, find 
the linear speed of Earth. Express your answer in miles per 
hour. 
	113.	 Pulleys Two pulleys, one with radius 4 inches and one 
with radius 9 inches, are connected by a belt. (See the  
figure.) If the 4-inch pulley is caused to rotate at 5 revolutions 
per minute, determine the revolutions per minute of the 
9-inch pulley. 
[Hint: The linear speeds of the pulleys are the same; both 
equal the speed of the belt.]
[Hint: Consult the figure. When a person at Q sees the first 
rays of the Sun, a person at P is still in the dark. The person 
at P sees the first rays after Earth has rotated so that P is 
at the location Q. Now use the fact that at the latitude of  
Ft. Lauderdale in 24 hours an arc of length 2p135592 miles 
is subtended.]
	114.	 Ferris Wheels A neighborhood carnival has a Ferris wheel 
whose radius is 30 feet. You measure the time it takes for 
one revolution to be 70 seconds. What is the linear speed (in 
feet per second) of this Ferris wheel? What is the angular 
speed in radians per second? 
	115.	 Computing the Speed of a River Current  To approximate 
the speed of the current of a river, a circular paddle wheel 
with radius 5 ft. is lowered into the water. If the current 
causes the wheel to rotate at a speed of 15 revolutions per 
minute, what is the speed of the current? 
	116.	 Spin Balancing Tires A spin balancer rotates the wheel of 
a car at 480 revolutions per minute. If the diameter of the 
wheel is 26 inches, what road speed is being tested? Express 
your answer in miles per hour. At how many revolutions per 
minute should the balancer be set to test a road speed of  
80 miles per hour? 
117.	 The Cable Cars of San Francisco At a museum you can see 
the four cable lines that are used to pull cable cars up and 
down a hill. Each cable travels at a speed of 8.65 miles per 
hour, caused by a rotating wheel whose diameter is 9.5 feet. 
How fast is the wheel rotating? Express your answer in revo-
lutions per minute. 
	118.	 Difference in Time of Sunrise Naples, Florida, is about  
90 miles due west of Ft. Lauderdale. How much sooner 
would a person in Ft. Lauderdale first see the rising Sun than 
a person in Naples? See the hint. 
	119.	 Let the Dog Roam    A dog is attached to a 35-foot rope  
fastened to the outside corner of a fenced-in garden that 
measures 30 feet by 36 feet. Assuming that the dog cannot  
enter the garden, compute the exact area that the dog can  
wander. 
	120.	 Area of a Region  The measure of arc BE
¬ is 2p. Find the exact 
area of the portion of the rectangle ABCD that falls outside of 
the circle whose center is at A.*  
3559 
miles
P Q
Sun
90 miles
Rotation
of Earth
Naples, P
N
S
W
E
Fort 
Lauderdale, Q
†Any circle drawn on the surface of Earth that divides Earth into two 
equal hemispheres.
	121.	 Keeping Up with the Sun  How fast would an object have 
to travel on the surface of Jupiter at the equator to keep up 
with the Sun (that is, so the Sun would appear to remain in 
the same position in the sky)? Use the facts that the radius 
of Jupiter is approximately 44,360 miles and its revolution is 
approximately 10 hours. 
	122.	 Nautical Miles  A nautical mile equals the length of arc  
subtended by a central angle of 1 minute on a great circle† 
on the surface of Earth. See the figure on the next page. If 
the radius of Earth is taken as 3960 miles, express 1 nautical 
mile in terms of ordinary, or statute, miles. 
A
E
B
C
D
ED = 7
—
*Courtesy of the Joliet Junior College Mathematics Department
9 in.
4 in.
5 ft.

Section 6.1  Angles and Their Measure  399
minimum of 200 feet. The commissioner of parks and recreation  
is making plans for a new 60-foot field. Because of limited  
ground availability, he will use the minimum required  
distance to the outfield fence. To increase safety, however, 
he plans to include a 10-foot-wide warning track on the  
inside of the fence. To further increase safety, the fence and 
warning track will extend both directions into foul territory. 
In total, the arc formed by the outfield fence (including the 
extensions into the foul territories) will be subtended by a 
central angle at home plate measuring 96°, as illustrated.
(a)	 Determine the length of the outfield fence. 
(b)	 Determine the area of the warning track. 
124.	 Designing a Little League Field  For a 60-foot Little League 
Baseball field, the distance from home base to the nearest 
fence (or other obstruction) in fair territory should be a  
	123.	 Approximating the Circumference of Earth  Eratosthenes 
of Cyrene (276–195 bc) was a Greek scholar who lived and 
worked in Cyrene and Alexandria. One day while visiting 
in Syene he noticed that the Sun’s rays shone directly down 
a well. On this date 1 year later, in Alexandria, which is  
500 miles due north of Syene he measured the angle of the 
Sun to be about 7.2 degrees. See the figure. Use this information 
to approximate the radius and circumference of Earth.
North Pole
South Pole
1 nautical mile
1 minute
Equator
Source: www.littleleague.org
[Note: There is a 90° angle between the two foul lines. Then 
there are two 3° angles between the foul lines and the dotted 
lines shown. The angle between the two dotted lines outside 
the 200-foot foul lines is 96°.]
125. Pulleys  Two pulleys, one with radius r1 and the other with 
radius r2, are connected by a belt. The pulley with radius r1 
rotates at v1 revolutions per minute, whereas the pulley with
	
	 radius r2 rotates at v2 revolutions per minute. Show that
	
	
r1
r2
= v2
v1
Outfield Fence
Foul Line
200'
10' Warning
Track
96°
200'
Foul Line
200'
	134.	 Find the zero of f (x) = 3x + 7.
                  135.  Find the domain of h1x2 =
3x
x2 - 9. 
	136.	 Write the function that is finally graphed if all of the following transformations are applied to the graph of y =   x .
(a)	 Shift left 3 units.  (b)  Reflect about the x-axis.  (c)  Shift down 4 units.
	137.	 Find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of R1x2 =
3x2 - 12
x2 - 5x - 14. 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 134–137 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	126.	 Do you prefer to measure angles using degrees or radians? 
Provide justification and a rationale for your choice.
	127.	 What is 1 radian? What is 1 degree?
	128.	 Which angle has the larger measure: 1 degree or 1 radian? 
Or are they equal?
	129.	 Explain the difference between linear speed and angular speed.
	130.	 For a circle of radius r, a central angle of u degrees subtends
	
	 an arc whose length s is s =
p
180 ru. Discuss whether this
	
	 statement is true or false. Defend your position.
	131.	 Discuss why ships and airplanes use nautical miles to  
measure distance. Explain the difference between a nautical 
mile and a statute mile.
	132.	 Investigate the way that speed bicycles work. In particular, 
explain the differences and similarities between 5-speed and 
9-speed derailleurs. Be sure to include a discussion of linear 
speed and angular speed.
	133.	 In Example 6, we found that the distance between Dallas, 
Texas and Sioux Falls, South Dakota is approximately 744 miles. 
According to mapquest.com, the distance is approximately 
850 miles. What might account for the difference?
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
1. C = 2pr; A = pr 2          2. r # t
Syene
500 miles
Alexandria
7.2

400 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
We now introduce the trigonometric functions using the unit circle.
The Unit Circle
Recall that the unit circle is a circle whose radius is 1 and whose center is at the 
origin of a rectangular coordinate system. Also recall that any circle of radius r has 
circumference of length 2pr. Therefore, the unit circle 1radius = 12 has a circumference 
of length 2p. In other words, for 1 revolution around the unit circle the length of 
the arc is 2p units.
The following discussion sets the stage for defining the trigonometric functions 
using the unit circle.
Let t be any real number. Position the t-axis so that it is vertical with the  
positive direction up. Place this t-axis in the xy-plane so that t = 0 is located at the 
point 11, 02 in the xy-plane.
If t Ú 0, let s be the distance from the origin to t on the t-axis. See the red  
portion of Figure 18(a). Beginning at the point 11, 02 on the unit circle, travel 
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 412.
	
Objectives	 	1  Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions Using a Point on 
the Unit Circle  (p. 402)
	
	 	2  Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions of Quadrantal 
Angles  (p. 403)
	
	 	3  Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions of p
4 = 45°  (p. 405)
	
	 	4  Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions of p
6 = 30° and 
p
3 = 60°  (p. 406)
	
	 	5  Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions for Integer Multiples 
of p
6 = 30°, p
4 = 45°, and p
3 = 60°  (p. 408)
	
	 	6  Use a Calculator to Approximate the Value of a Trigonometric  
Function  (p. 410)
	
	 	7  Use a Circle of Radius r to Evaluate the Trigonometric Functions  (p. 411)
6.2  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach
•	 Geometry Essentials (Appendix A, Section A.2,  
pp. 958–962)
•	 Unit Circle (Section 1.4, p. 69)
•	 Symmetry (Section 1.2, pp. 46–48)
•	 Functions (Section 2.1, pp. 79–90)
Preparing for this section Before getting started, review the following:
Figure 18 
y
x
t
0
s  t units
1
1
1
1
1
1
(1, 0)
s  t units
P  (x, y)
(a)
y
x
t
0
s |t | units
(1, 0)
s  |t | units
P  (x, y)
(b)

Section 6.2  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  401
s = t units in the counterclockwise direction along the circle, to arrive at the point 
P = 1x, y2. In this sense, the length s = t units is being wrapped around the unit 
circle.
If t 6 0, we begin at the point 11, 02 on the unit circle and travel s = 0 t0  units 
in the clockwise direction to arrive at the point P = 1x, y2. See Figure 18(b).
If t 7 2p or if t 6 -2p, it will be necessary to travel around the unit circle 
more than once before arriving at the point P. Do you see why?
Let’s describe this process another way. Picture a string of length s = 0 t0  units 
being wrapped around a circle of radius 1 unit. Start wrapping the string around the 
circle at the point 11, 02. If t Ú 0, wrap the string in the counterclockwise direction; 
if t 6 0, wrap the string in the clockwise direction. The point P = 1x, y2 is the point 
where the string ends.
This discussion tells us that, for any real number t, we can locate a unique point 
P = 1x, y2 on the unit circle. We call P the point on the unit circle that corresponds 
to t. This is the important idea here. No matter what real number t is chosen, there is 
a unique point P on the unit circle corresponding to it. The coordinates of the point 
P = 1x, y2 on the unit circle corresponding to the real number t are used to define 
the six trigonometric functions of t.
Let t be a real number and let P = 1x, y2 be the point on the unit circle that 
corresponds to t.
The sine function associates with t the y-coordinate of P and is denoted by
sin t = y
The cosine function associates with t the x-coordinate of P and is denoted by
cos t = x
If x ≠0, the tangent function associates with t the ratio of the y-coordinate to 
the x-coordinate of P and is denoted by
tan t = y
x
If y ≠0, the cosecant function is defined as
csc t = 1
y
If x ≠0, the secant function is defined as
sec t = 1
x
If y ≠0, the cotangent function is defined as
cot t = x
y
Definition
Notice in these definitions that if x = 0, that is, if the point P is on the y-axis, 
then the tangent function and the secant function are undefined. Also, if y = 0, 
that is, if the point P is on the x-axis, then the cosecant function and the cotangent  
function are undefined.
In Words
The point P = (x, y)  on the unit 
circle corresponding to a real 
number t is given by (cos t, sin t).

402 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Because we use the unit circle in these definitions of the trigonometric  
functions, they are sometimes referred to as circular functions.
Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions Using  
a Point on the Unit Circle
Finding the Values of the Six Trigonometric Functions Using a Point 
on the Unit Circle
Let t be a real number and let P = a - 1
2, 23
2 b be the point on the unit circle that 
corresponds to t. Find the values of sin t, cos t, tan t, csc t, sec t, and cot t.
See Figure 19. We follow the definition of the six trigonometric functions, using
P = a - 1
2, 23
2 b = 1x, y2. Then, with x = - 1
2  and  y = 23
2 , we have
 sin t = y = 23
2   
 cos t = x = - 1
2  
 tan t = y
x =
23
2
- 1
2
= - 23
 csc t = 1
y =
1
23
2
= 223
3    sec t = 1
x =
1
- 1
2
= -2   cot t = x
y =
- 1
2
23
2
= -  23
3
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Trigonometric Functions of Angles
Let P = 1x, y2 be the point on the unit circle corresponding to the real number t. 
See Figure 20(a). Let u be the angle in standard position, measured in radians, 
whose terminal side is the ray from the origin through P. Suppose u subtends an arc  
of length s on the unit circle. See Figure 20(b). Since the unit circle has radius 1 unit, 
if s =  t   units, then from the arc length formula s = r u , we have u = t radians. 
See Figures 20(c) and (d).
1
Example 1
Solution
WARNING  When writing the values of 
the trigonometric functions, do not  
forget the argument of the function.
sin t = 23
2  
   sin = 23
2
 
	
■
Figure 20 
y
x
u
s
(1, 0)
P  (x, y)
(b)
y
x
u  t radians
u  t radians
s  t units,
t  0
s  |t| units,
t  0
(1, 0)
P  (x, y)
P  (x, y)
(c)
y
x
(1, 0)
(d)
y
x
t
1
(1, 0)
1
P  (x, y)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
(a)
The point P = 1x, y2 on the unit circle that corresponds to the real number t 
is also the point P on the terminal side of the angle u = t radians. As a result, we 
can say that
sin t = sin u 
and so on. We can now define the trigonometric functions of the angle u.
	
	 	
c	
c
       Real number                   u = t radians
Figure 19 
y
x
t
P 
,
(1, 0)
1–2
  3
––2

•

Section 6.2  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  403
Even though the trigonometric functions can be viewed both as functions of 
real numbers and as functions of angles, it is customary to refer to trigonometric 
functions of real numbers and trigonometric functions of angles collectively as the 
trigonometric functions. We shall follow this practice from now on.
If an angle u is measured in degrees, we shall use the degree symbol when writing 
a trigonometric function of u, as, for example, in sin 30° and tan 45°. If an angle u is 
measured in radians, then no symbol is used when writing a trigonometric function 
of u, as, for example, in cos p and sec p
3 .
Finally, since the values of the trigonometric functions of an angle u are  
determined by the coordinates of the point P = 1x, y2 on the unit circle  
corresponding to u, the units used to measure the angle u are irrelevant. For example, it
does not matter whether we write u = p
2  radians or u = 90°. The point on the unit
circle corresponding to this angle is P = 10, 12. As a result,
sin p
2 = sin 90° = 1 and cos p
2 = cos 90° = 0
Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions  
of Quadrantal Angles
To find the exact value of a trigonometric function of an angle u or a real number t 
requires that we locate the point P = 1x, y2 on the unit circle that corresponds to t. This 
is not always easy to do. In the examples that follow, we will evaluate the trigonometric 
functions of certain angles or real numbers for which this process is relatively easy. A 
calculator will be used to evaluate the trigonometric functions of most other angles.
Finding the Exact Values of the Six Trigonometric  
Functions of Quadrantal Angles
Find the exact values of the six trigonometric functions of:
(a)	 u = 0 = 0°	
(b)  u = p
2 = 90°
(c)	 u = p = 180°	
(d)  u = 3p
2
= 270°
(a)	 The point on the unit circle that corresponds to u = 0 = 0° is P = 11, 02. See 
Figure 21(a). Then using x = 1 and y = 0
 sin 0 = sin 0° = y = 0   cos 0 = cos 0° = x = 1
 tan 0 = tan 0° = y
x = 0   sec 0 = sec 0° = 1
x = 1
Since the y-coordinate of P is 0, csc 0 and cot 0 are not defined.
2
Example 2
Solution
If u = t radians, the six trigonometric functions of the angle U are defined as
sin u = sin t
cos u = cos t
tan u = tan t
csc u = csc t
sec u = sec t
cot u = cot t
Definition
Figure 21
1
1
21
21
y
x
P 5 (1, 0)
u 5 0 5 0°
(a)  u = 0 = 0° 

404 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
(b)	 The point on the unit circle that corresponds to u = p
2 = 90° is P = 10, 12. See 
Figure 21(b). Then
 sin p
2 = sin 90° = y = 1   cos p
2 = cos 90° = x = 0
 csc p
2 = csc 90° = 1
y = 1   cot p
2 = cot 90° = x
y = 0
	
Since the x-coordinate of P is 0, tan p
2  and sec p
2  are not defined.
(c)	 The point on the unit circle that corresponds to u = p = 180° is P = 1 -1, 02. 
See Figure 21(c). Then
 sin p = sin 180° = y = 0   cos p = cos 180° = x = -1
 tan p = tan 180° = y
x = 0   sec p = sec 180° = 1
x = -1
	
Since the y-coordinate of P is 0, csc p and cot p are not defined.
(d)	 The point on the unit circle that corresponds to u = 3p
2
= 270° is P = 10, -12. 
See Figure 21(d). Then
 sin 3p
2
= sin 270° = y = -1   cos 3p
2
= cos 270° = x = 0
 csc 3p
2
= csc 270° = 1
y = -1   cot 3p
2
= cot 270° = x
y = 0
	
Since the x-coordinate of P is 0, tan 3p
2  and sec 3p
2  are not defined.
Table 2 summarizes the values of the trigonometric functions found in  
Example 2.
•
Quadrantal Angles
U (Radians)
U (Degrees)
sin U
cos U
tan U
csc U
sec U
cot U
0
0°
0
1
0
Not defined
    1
Not defined
p
2
90°
1
0
Not defined
    1
Not defined
0
p
180°
0
- 1
0
Not defined
- 1
Not defined
3p
2
270°
- 1
0
Not defined
- 1
Not defined
0
Table 2
There is no need to memorize Table 2. To find the value of a trigonometric 
function of a quadrantal angle, draw the angle and apply the definition, as we did 
in Example 2.
Finding Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions of Angles  
That Are Integer Multiples of Quadrantal Angles
Find the exact value of:
(a)	 sin13p2	
(b)  cos1 -270°2
Example 3
1
1
1
1
y
x
P  (0, 1)
u 
 90°
π
2
Figure 21  (b)  u = p
2 = 90°
1
1
y
x
P  (1, 0)
u  π  180°
1
1
Figure 21  (c)  u = p = 180°
1
1
y
x
P  (0, 1)
1
1
u 
 270°
π
2
3
Figure 21  (d)  u = 3p
2
= 270°

Section 6.2  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  405
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 1  a n d  6 1
Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric  
Functions of P
4 = 45°
Finding the Exact Values of the Trigonometric  
Functions of P
4 = 45°
Find the exact values of the six trigonometric functions of p
4 = 45°.
We seek the coordinates of the point P = 1x, y2 on the unit circle that corresponds 
to u = p
4 = 45°. See Figure 23. First, observe that P lies on the line y = x. (Do you 
see why? Since u = 45° = 1
2 # 90°, P must lie on the line that bisects quadrant I.) 
Since P = 1x, y2 also lies on the unit circle, x2 + y2 = 1, it follows that
 x2 + y2 = 1
 x2 + x2 = 1
 2x2 = 1
 x =
1
22
= 22
2   y = 22
2
Then
3
Example 4
Solution
y = x, x 7 0, y 7 0
(a)	 See Figure 22(a). The point P on 
the unit circle that corresponds 
to u = 3p is P = 1 -1, 02, so 
sin13p2 = y = 0.
(b)	 See Figure 22(b). The point P on 
the unit circle that corresponds 
to u = -270° is P = 10, 12, so 
cos1 -270°2 = x = 0.
Solution
Figure 22 
1
1
y
x
P  (1, 0)
1
1
u  3
(a)  u = 3p
1
21
21
1
y
x
P 5 (0, 1)
u 5 2270°
(b) u = -270°
•
Figure 23  u = 45°
1
1
1
1
45°
y
x
P  (x, y)
y  x
x 2  y 2  1
 sin p
4 = sin 45° = 22
2   
 cos p
4 = cos 45° = 22
2   
 tan p
4 = tan 45° =
22
2
22
2
= 1
 csc p
4 = csc 45° =
1
22
2
= 22   sec p
4 = sec 45° =
1
22
2
= 22   cot p
4 = cot 45° =
22
2
22
2
= 1
•

406 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Finding the Exact Value of a Trigonometric Expression
Find the exact value of each expression.
(a)	 sin 45° cos 180°    (b)  tan p
4 - sin 3p
2     (c)  asec p
4 b
2
+ csc p
2
(a)	 sin 45° cos 180° = 22
2 # 1-12 = -  22
2
	
	 	
c 	
c
	
	 	
From Example 4	
From Table 2
(b)	 tan p
4 - sin 3p
2
= 1 - 1-12 = 2
	
	 	
c 	
c
	
	 	
From Example 4	
From Table 2
(c)	 asec p
4 b
2
+ csc p
2 = 1 2222 + 1 = 2 + 1 = 3
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5
Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric  
Functions of P
6 = 30° and P
3 = 60°
Consider a right triangle in which one of the angles is p
6 = 30°. It then follows that 
the third angle is p
3 = 60°. Figure 24(a) illustrates such a triangle with hypotenuse 
of length 1. Our problem is to determine a and b.
Begin by placing next to the triangle in Figure 24(a) another triangle congruent 
to the first, as shown in Figure 24(b). Notice that we now have a triangle whose three 
angles each equal 60°. This triangle is therefore equilateral, so each side is of length 1.
Example 5
Solution
•
4
Figure 24  30°- 60°- 90° triangle
60°
30°
a
(a)
b
c  1
c  1
c  1
60°
60°
30° 30°
a
a
(b)
b
1
60°
30°
a 
b 
1
2
(c)
3
2
This means the base is 2a = 1, and so a = 1
2. By the Pythagorean Theorem,  
b satisfies the equation a2 + b2 = c2, so we have
 a2 + b2 = c2
 1
4 + b2 = 1
 b2 = 1 - 1
4 = 3
4
 b = 23
2
This results in Figure 24(c).
a = 1
2
 , c = 1
b 7 0 because b 
 is the length of the
side of a triangle.

Section 6.2  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  407
Finding the Exact Values of the Trigonometric  
Functions of P
3 = 60°
Find the exact values of the six trigonometric functions of p
3 = 60°.
Position the triangle in Figure 24(c) so that the 60° angle is in standard position. 
See Figure 25. The point on the unit circle that corresponds to u = p
3 = 60° is
P = a1
2, 23
2 b. Then
 sin p
3 = sin 60° = 23
2   
 cos p
3 = cos 60° = 1
2
 csc p
3 = csc 60° =
1
23
2
=
2
23
= 223
3    sec p
3 = sec 60° = 1
1
2
= 2
 tan p
3 = tan 60° =
23
2
1
2
= 23  
 cot p
3 = cot 60° =
1
2
23
2
=
1
23
= 23
3
Finding the Exact Values of the Trigonometric  
Functions of P
6 = 30°
Find the exact values of the trigonometric functions of p
6 = 30°.
Position the triangle in Figure 24(c) so that the 30° angle is in standard position.
See Figure 26. The point on the unit circle that corresponds to u = p
6 = 30° is
P = a 23
2 , 1
2b. Then
 sin p
6 = sin 30° = 1
2  
 cos p
6 = cos 30° = 23
2
 csc p
6 = csc 30° = 1
1
2
= 2  
 sec p
6 = sec 30° =
1
23
2
=
2
23
= 223
3
 tan p
6 = tan 30° =
1
2
23
2
=
1
23
= 23
3    cot p
6 = cot 30° =
23
2
1
2
= 23
Table 3 on the next page summarizes the information just derived for 
p
6 = 30°, p
4 = 45°, and p
3 = 60°. Until you memorize the entries in Table 3, you 
should draw an appropriate diagram to determine the values given in the table.
Example 6
Solution
•
Example 7
Solution
•
Figure 25  u = p
3 = 60°
1
60°
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
y
x
P  (x, y)      ,      
(
)
x 2  y 2  1
3
2
1
2
3
Figure 26  u = p
6 = 30°
1
30°
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
y
x
P  (x, y)         ,    
x2  y2  1
3
2
1
2
3
(
)

408 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 1
Constructing a Rain Gutter
A rain gutter is to be constructed of aluminum sheets 12 inches wide. After marking  
off a length of 4 inches from each edge, this length is bent up at an angle u. See 
Figure 27. The area A of the opening may be expressed as a function of u as
A1u2 = 16 sin u1cos u + 12
Find the area A of the opening for u = 30°, u = 45°, and u = 60°.
Solution 
For u = 30°: A130°2 = 16 sin 30°1cos 30° + 12
	
	 = 16a1
2b a 23
2
+ 1b = 423 + 8 ≈14.93
The area of the opening for u = 30° is about 14.93 square inches.
 For u = 45°: A145°2 = 16 sin 45°1cos 45° + 12
 = 16a 22
2 b a 22
2
+ 1b = 8 + 822 ≈19.31
The area of the opening for u = 45° is about 19.31 square inches.
 For u = 60°: A160°2 = 16 sin 60°1cos 60° + 12
 = 16a 23
2 b a1
2 + 1b = 1223 ≈20.78
The area of the opening for u = 60° is about 20.78 square inches.
Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions  
for Integer Multiples of P
6 = 30°, P
4 = 45°, and P
3 = 60°
We know the exact values of the trigonometric functions of p
4 = 45°. Using
symmetry,  we can find the exact values of the trigonometric functions of 
3p
4
= 135°, 5p
4
= 225°, and 7p
4
= 315°. The point on the unit circle corresponding
to p
4 = 45° is a 22
2 , 22
2 b. See Figure 28. Using symmetry with respect to the
y-axis, the point a -  22
2 , 22
2 b is the point on the unit circle that corresponds to
the angle 3p
4 = 135°. Similarly, using symmetry with respect to the origin, the 
Example 8
•
5
Table 3 
U (Radians)
U (Degrees)
sin U
cos U
tan U
csc U
sec U
cot U
p
6
30°
1
2
23
2
23
3
2
223
3
23
p
4
45°
22
2
22
2
1
22
22
1
p
3
60°
23
2
1
2
23
223
3
2
23
3
Figure 27 
u
u
4 in.
12 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.

––4
1
1
1
1
y
x
  2
––2
  2
––2

)
,
(



(
  2
––2
  2
––2
)
,
(
  2
––2
  2
––2
)
,
  2
––2
  2
––2
)
,
(
5
–––
4
7
–––
4
3
–––
4
Figure 28 

Section 6.2  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  409
point a - 22
2 , - 22
2 b is the point on the unit circle that corresponds to the angle
5p
4
= 225°. Finally, using symmetry with respect to the x-axis, the point a 22
2 , - 22
2 b
is the point on the unit circle that corresponds to the angle 7p
4
= 315°.
Finding Exact Values for Multiples of P
4 = 45°
Find the exact value of each expression.
(a)	 cos 5p
4     (b)  sin 135°    (c)  tan 315°    (d)  sina -  p
4 b    (e)  cos 11p
4
(a)	 From Figure 28, we see the point a -  22
2 , -  22
2 b corresponds to 5p
4 , so 
cos 5p
4
= x = -  22
2 .
(b)	 Since 135° = 3p
4 , the point 
a -  22
2 , 22
2 b corresponds to 135°, so 
sin 135° = 22
2 .
(c)	 Since 315° = 7p
4 , the point 
a 22
2 , -  22
2 b corresponds to 315°, so
	
tan 315° =
- 22
2
22
2
= -1.
(d)	 The point a 22
2 , -  22
2 b corresponds to -  p
4, so sina -  p
4 b = -  22
2 .
(e)	 The point a -  22
2 , 22
2 b corresponds to 11p
4 , so cos 11p
4
= -  22
2 .
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  5 1  a n d  5 5
The use of symmetry also provides information about certain integer multiples 
of the angles p
6 = 30° and p
3 = 60°. See Figures 29 and 30.
Example 9
Solution
•
Figure 29 
1
1
  3
––2
1–2

)
,
(
  3
––2
1–2)
,
(
1–2
  3
––2

 )
,
(
1–2
  3
––2  )
,
(
7
–––
6
5
–––
6
11
–––
6

––6
1
1
y
x
Figure 30 
4
–––
3
1
1
1
1
y
x
  3
––2




)
,
(
  3
––2
1–2
)
,
(
1–2
  3
––2 )
,
(
1–2
  3
––2 )
,
(
2
–––
3
5
–––
3

––3
1
2

410 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Finding Exact Values for Multiples of P
6 = 30° or P
3 = 60°
Based on Figures 29 and 30, we see that
(a)	 cos 210° = cos 7p
6
= -  23
2 	
(b)  sin1-60°2 = sina -  p
3 b = -  23
2
(c)	 tan 5p
3
=
-  23
2
1
2
= - 23	
(d)  cos 8p
3  = cos 2p
3
= -  1
2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Use a Calculator to Approximate the Value  
of a Trigonometric Function
Before getting started, you must first decide whether to enter the angle in the  
calculator using radians or degrees and then set the calculator to the correct MODE. 
Check your instruction manual to find out how your calculator handles degrees and 
radians. Your calculator has keys marked sin ,  cos , and tan . To find the values of 
the remaining three trigonometric functions, secant, cosecant, and cotangent, use the 
fact that, if P = 1x, y2 is a point on the unit circle on the terminal side of u, then
sec u = 1
x =
1
cos u  csc u = 1
y =
1
sin u  cot u = x
y = 1
y
x
=
1
tan u
Using a Calculator to Approximate the Value  
of a Trigonometric Function
Use a calculator to find the approximate value of:
(a)  cos 48°          (b)  csc 21°          (c)  tan p
12
Express your answer rounded to two decimal places.
(a)	 First, set the MODE to receive degrees. Rounded to two decimal places,
cos 48° = 0.6691306 ≈0.67
(b)	 Most calculators do not have a csc key. The manufacturers assume that the 
user knows some trigonometry. To find the value of csc 21°, use the fact that 
csc 21° =
1
sin 21° . Rounded to two decimal places,
csc 21° ≈2.79
(c)	 Set the MODE to receive radians. Figure 31 shows the solution using a TI-84 
Plus C graphing calculator. Rounded to two decimal places,
tan p
12 ≈0.27
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 5
Example 10
•
6
Example 11
Solution
•
WARNING  On your calculator the  
second functions sin–1, cos–1, and tan–1 
do not represent the reciprocal of sin, 
cos, and tan.	
■
Figure 31 

Section 6.2  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  411
Use a Circle of Radius r to Evaluate  
the Trigonometric Functions
Until now, finding the exact value of a trigonometric function of an angle u required 
that we locate the corresponding point P = 1x, y2 on the unit circle. In fact, though, 
any circle whose center is at the origin can be used.
Let u be any nonquadrantal angle placed in standard position. Let P = 1x, y2 
be the point on the circle x2 + y2 = r 2 that corresponds to u, and let P* = 1x*, y*2 
be the point on the unit circle that corresponds to u. See Figure 32, where u is shown 
in quadrant II.
Notice that the triangles OA*P* and OAP are similar; as a result, the ratios of 
corresponding sides are equal.
 y*
1 = y
r   x*
1 = x
r   y*
x* = y
x
 1
y* = r
y   1
x* = r
x   x*
y* = x
y
These results lead us to formulate the following theorem:
7
Figure 32 
y
u
P*  (x*, y*)
P  (x, y)
x
O
r
A
x
A* x*
y*
 1
x 2  y 2  1
x 2  y 2  r 2
y
For an angle u in standard position, let P = 1x, y2 be the point on the terminal 
side of u that is also on the circle x2 + y2 = r 2. Then
 sin u = y
r  
 cos u = x
r  
 tan u = y
x x ≠0
 csc u = r
y y ≠0   sec u = r
x x ≠0   cot u = x
y y ≠0
Theorem
Finding the Exact Values of the Six Trigonometric Functions
Find the exact values of each of the six trigonometric functions of an angle u if 
14, -32 is a point on its terminal side in standard position.
See Figure 33. The point 14, -32 is on a circle that has a radius of  
r = 242 + 1-322 = 216 + 9 = 225 = 5 with the center at the origin.
For the point 1x, y2 = 14, -32, we have x = 4 and y = -3. Since r = 5, we find
 sin u = y
r = - 3
5   cos u = x
r = 4
5   tan u = y
x = - 3
4
 csc u = r
y = - 5
3   sec u = r
x = 5
4   cot u = x
y = - 4
3
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 7
Example 12
Solution
•
Historical Feature
T
 he name sine for the sine function arose from a medieval  
confusion. The name comes from the Sanskrit word jiva  
(meaning chord), first used in India by Araybhata the Elder (ad 510).  
He really meant half-chord, but abbreviated it. This was brought into 
Arabic as jiba, which was meaningless. Because the proper Arabic 
word jaib would be written the same way (short vowels are not written 
out in Arabic), jiba was pronounced as jaib, which meant bosom or  
hollow, and jiba remains as the Arabic word for sine to this day. Scholars  
translating the Arabic works into Latin found that the word sinus also 
meant bosom or hollow, and from sinus we get sine.
The name tangent, due to Thomas Finck (1583), can be understood 
by looking at Figure 34 on page 412. The line segment DC is tangent 
to the circle at C. If d(O, B) = d(O, C) = 1, then the length of the line  
segment DC is
d(D, C) =
d(D, C)
1
=
d(D, C)
d(O, C) = tan a
Figure 33 
6
6
(4, 3)
6
6
y
x
r  5
x2  y2  25
u
continued

412 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
The old name for the tangent is umbra versa (meaning turned  
shadow), referring to the use of the tangent in solving height problems 
with shadows.
The names of the remaining functions came about as follows. If a 
and b are complementary angles, then cos a = sin b. Because b is the 
complement of a, it was natural to write the cosine of a as sin co a.  
Probably for reasons involving ease of pronunciation, the co migrated to 
the front, and then cosine received a three-letter abbreviation to match 
sin, sec, and tan. The two other cofunctions were similarly treated,  
except that the long forms cotan and cosec survive to this day in some 
countries.
Figure 34 
a
B
D
C
A
O
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 In a right triangle, with legs a and b and hypotenuse c, the 
Pythagorean Theorem states that 
  . (p. 958)
	 2.	 The value of the function f1x2 = 3x - 7 at 5 is 
 . 
(pp. 79–90)
	 3.	 True or False  For a function y = f1x2, for each x in  
the domain, there is exactly one element y in the range.  
(pp. 79–90) 
	 4.	 If two triangles are similar, then corresponding angles 
are 
  and the lengths of corresponding sides are 
  
 . (pp. 958–962)
	 5.	 What point is symmetric with respect to the y-axis to the
	
	 point a1
2, 23
2 b? (pp. 46–48) 
	 6.	 If 1x, y2 is a point on the unit circle in quadrant IV and if
	
	 x = 23
2 , what is y? (p. 69) 
6.2  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	
7. 	Which function takes as input a real number t that  
corresponds to a point P = (x, y) on the unit circle and  
outputs the x-coordinate? 
(a)  sine    (b)  cosine    (c)  tangent    (d)  secant
	 8.	 The point on the unit circle that corresponds to u = p
2  is 
P =
.
	 9.	 The point on the unit circle that corresponds to u = p
4  is
	
	 P =
.
	 10.	 The point on the unit circle that corresponds to u = p
3  is 
(a)	 a1
2, 23
2 b	
(b)  a 22
2 , 22
2 b
(c)	 a 23
2 , 1
2b	
(d)  a23, 223
3
b 
	 11.	 For any angle u in standard position, let P = (x, y) be the 
point on the terminal side of u that is also on the circle 
x2 + y2 = r 2. Then, sin u =    and cos u =
.
	 12.	 True or False  Exact values can be found for the sine of any 
angle. 
Skill Building
In Problems 13–20, P = 1x, y2 is the point on the unit circle that corresponds to a real number t. Find the exact values of the six  
trigonometric functions of t.
	 13.	 a 23
2 , 1
2b	
14.	 a1
2, - 23
2 b	
15.	 a- 1
5, 226
5
b	
16.	 a- 2
5, 221
5
b
	 17.	 a 22
2 , 22
2 b	
18.	 a- 22
2 , 22
2 b	
19.	 a- 25
3 , - 2
3b	
20.	 a222
3
, - 1
3b

Section 6.2  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  413
In Problems 21–30, find the exact value. Do not use a calculator.
	 21.	 sin 11p
2  
	
22.	 cos17p2 
	
23.	 cot 7p
2   	
24.	 tan16p2  	
25.	 sec18p2 
	 26.	 csc 11p
2   	
27.	 sin1- 3p2  	
28.	 cosa-  3p
2 b  	
29.	 tan1- 3p2 
	
30.	 sec1-p2 
In Problems 31–46, find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
	 31.	 sin 30° - cos 45°	
32.	 sin 45° + cos 60°	
33.	 cos 180° - sin 180°  	
34.	 sin 90° + tan 45° 
	 35.	 sin 45° cos 45° 
	
36.	 tan 45° cos 30° 
	
37.	 sec 30° cot 45° 
	
38.	 csc 45° tan 60° 
	 39.	 5 cos 90° - 8 sin 270°  	
40.	 4 sin 90° - 3 tan 180°  	
41.	 2 sin p
3 - 3 tan p
6   	
42.	 2 sin p
4 + 3 tan p
4  
	 43.	 3 csc p
3 + cot p
4   	
44.	 2 sec p
4 + 4 cot p
3  
	45.	 sec p - csc p
2   	
46.	 csc p
2 + cot p
2  
In Problems 47–64, find the exact values of the six trigonometric functions of the given angle. If any are not defined, say “not defined.” 
Do not use a calculator.
	 47.	 2p
3 	
48.	 5p
6 	
49.	 240°	
50.	 210°	
51.	 3p
4 	
52.	11p
4 	
53.	 13p
6 	
54.	 8p
3 	
55.	 405°	
56.	 390°	
57.	 -  p
3 	
58.	-  p
6
	 59.	 -240°	
60.	 - 135°	
61.	 5p
2 	
62.	 5p	
63.	 -  13p
6 	
64.	-  14p
3
In Problems 65–76, use a calculator to find the approximate value of each expression rounded to two decimal places.
	 65.	 sin 28° 
	
66.	 cos 14° 
	
67.	 cot 70° 
	
68.	 sec 21° 
	 69.	 sin p
8  
	
70.	 tan p
10 
	
71.	 csc 5p
13  
	
72.	 cot p
12 
	 73.	 tan 1 
	
74.	 sin 1 
	
75.	 tan 1° 
	
76.	 sin 1° 
In Problems 77–84, a point on the terminal side of an angle u in standard position is given. Find the exact value of each of the six  
trigonometric functions of u.
	 77.	 1-3, 42	
78.	 15, - 122	
79.	 1- 1, - 22	
80.	 12, -32
	 81.	 1-1, 12	
82.	 1-2, - 22	
83.	 10.3, 0.42	
84.	 a1
3, 1
4b
	 85.	 Find the exact value of:
	
sin 45° + sin 135° + sin 225° + sin 315° 
	 86.	 Find the exact value of:
	
tan 60° + tan 150° 
	 87.	 Find the exact value of:
	
sin 40° + sin 130° + sin 220° + sin 310° 
	 88.	 Find the exact value of:
	
tan 40° + tan 140° 
	 89.	 If f1u2 = sin u = 0.1, find f1u + p2. 
	 90.	 If f1u2 = cos u = 0.3, find f1u + p2. 
	 91.	 If f1u2 = tan u = 3, find f1u + p2. 
	 92.	 If f1u2 = cot u = - 2, find f1u + p2. 
	 93.	 If sin u = 1
5, find csc u. 
	 94.	 If cos u = 2
3, find sec u. 
In Problems 95–106, f1u2 = sin u and g1u2 = cos u. Find the exact value of each function below if u = 60°. Do not use a calculator.
	 95.	 g1u2 
	
96.	 f1u2 
	
97.	 gau
2b 
	
98.	 f au
2b 
	 99.	 3g1u242 
	
100.	 3f1u242 
	
101.	 g12u2 
	
102.	 f12u2 
	103.	 2g1u2 
	
104.	 2f1u2  	
105.	 g1-u2 
	
106.	 f1- u2 

414 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
U
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0001
0.00001
tan u
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
f 1u2 = tan u
u
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0001
0.00001
cos u - 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
g1u2 = cos u - 1
u
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mixed Practice
In Problems 107–116, f(x) = sin x, g(x) = cos x, h(x) = 2x, and p(x) = x
2. Find the value of each of the following:
	107.	 (f + g)(30°) 
	
108.	 (f - g)(60°) 
	
109.	 (f # g)a3p
4 b 
	
110.	 (f # g)a4p
3 b 
	111.	 (f ∘h)ap
6 b 
	
112.	 (g ∘p)(60°) 
	
113.	 (p ∘g)(315°) 
	
114.	 (h ∘f )a5p
6 b 
115.	 (a)	 Find f ap
4 b. What point is on the graph of f ?
(b)	 Assuming f is one-to-one*, use the result of part (a) to 
find a point on the graph of f -1.
(c)	 What point is on the graph of y = f ax + p
4 b - 3 
if x = p
4? 
116.	 (a)	 Find gap
6 b. What point is on the graph of g?
(b)	 Assuming g is one-to-one*, use the result of part (a) to 	 
find a point on the graph of g-1.
(c)	 What point is on the graph of y = 2gax - p
6 b  if x = p
6? 
Applications and Extensions
	117.	 Find two negative and three positive angles, expressed in  
radians, for which the point on the unit circle that 
	
	 corresponds to each angle is a-  1
2, 23
2 b.
	118.	 Find two negative and three positive angles, expressed in  
radians, for which the point on the unit circle that 
	
	 corresponds to each angle is a-  22
2 , 22
2 b.
119.	  Use a calculator in radian mode to complete the following table.
	
	  What can be concluded about the value of f1u2 = tan u
u
 as u approaches 0?
120.	  Use a calculator in radian mode to complete the following table.
	
	 What can you conclude about the value of g1u2 = cos u - 1
u
 as u approaches 0?
For Problems 121–124, use the following discussion.
Projectile Motion  The path of a projectile fired at an inclination u  
to the horizontal with initial speed v0 is a parabola (see the figure).
The range R of the projectile, that is, the horizontal distance that 
the projectile travels, is found by using the function
R1u2 =
v2
0 sin12u2
g
where g ≈32.2 feet per second per second ≈9.8 meters  
per second per second is the acceleration due to gravity. The  
maximum height H of the projectile is given by the function
H1u2 =
v2
0 1sin u22
2g
*In Section 7.1, we discuss the necessary domain restriction so that the function is one-to-one.
Height, H
Range, R
v0 = Initial speed
θ

Section 6.2  Trigonometric Functions: Unit Circle Approach  415
In Problems 121–124, find the range R and maximum height H.
	121.	 The projectile is fired at an angle of 45° to the horizontal 
with an initial speed of 150 feet per second.
	122.	 The projectile is fired at an angle of 30° to the horizontal 
with an initial speed of 150 meters per second.
	123.	 The projectile is fired at an angle of 50° to the horizontal 
with an initial speed of 951 feet per second.
	124.	 The projectile is fired at an angle of 50° to the horizontal 
with an initial speed of 200 feet per second.
125.	 Inclined Plane See the figure.
	
	 If friction is ignored, the time t (in seconds) required for  
a block to slide down an inclined plane (see the figure) is 
given by the formula t
t1u2 = A
2a
g sin u cos u ,
	
	 where a is the length (in feet) of the base and g ≈32 feet 
per second per second is the acceleration due to gravity. 
	
	 How long does it take a block to slide down an inclined 
plane with base a = 70 feet when
(a)	 u = 30°
(b)	 u = 45°
(c)	 u = 60°
u
a
u
x
Ocean
Beach
Paved path
1 mi
2 mi
2 mi
u
u
River
x
	127.	 Calculating the Time of a Trip Two homes are located 4 
miles apart, each 1 mile from a road that parallels the ocean. 
Sally can jog 4 mph along the road, but only 2 mph in the 
sand. Because of a river between the two houses, it is neces-
sary to jog on the sand to the road, continue on the road, and 
then jog on the sand to get from one house to the other. For 
0° 6 u 6 90°, the time T to get from one house to the other 
is a function of u, as shown.
T1u2 = 1 +
2
2 sin u -
1
2 tan u,  0° 6 u 6 90°
	126.	 Piston Engines In a certain piston engine, the distance x (in 
centimeters) from the center of the drive shaft to the head of 
a piston is given by the function below, where u is the angle 
between the crank and the path of the piston head. See the 
figure. Find x when u = 30° and u = 45°.
x1u2 = sin u + 249 + 0.6 sin12u2
(a) Calculate the time T for u = 30°. How long is Sally on 
the paved road?
(b) Calculate the time T for u = 45°. How long is Sally on 
the paved road?
(c) Calculate the time T for u = 60°. How long is Sally on 
the paved road?
(d) Calculate the time T for u = 90°. Describe the path  
taken. Why can’t the formula for T be used?
	128.	 Designing Fine Decorative Pieces 
Spheres of fixed radius R will be 
enclosed in a cone of height h and 
radius r. The volume V of the cone 
can be expressed as a function of 
the slant angle u of the cone by the 
formula below. What volume V is  
required to enclose a sphere of  
radius 2 centimeters in a cone whose 
slant angle u is 30°? 45°? 60°?
V1u2 = 1
3 pR3 
11 + sec u23
1tan u22
 ,  0° 6 u 6 90°
	
	
 
 
O
r
R
h
θ

416 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Use the following to answer Problems 129–132. The viewing  
angle, u, of an object is the angle the object forms at the lens of the  
viewer’s eye. This is also known as the perceived or angular size of the  
object. The viewing angle is related to the object’s height, H, and 
distance from the viewer, D, through the formula  tan u
2 = H
2D.
	129.	 Tailgating  While driving, Arletha observes the car in front 
of her with a viewing angle of 26°. If the car is 5.5 feet wide, 
how close is Arletha to the car in front of her? 
	130.	 Viewing Distance  The Washington Monument in Washington, 
D.C. is 555 feet tall. If a tourist sees the monument with a 
viewing angle of 8°, how far away, to the nearest foot, is she 
from the monument? 
	131.	 Tree Height  A forest ranger views a tree that is 190 feet 
away with a viewing angle of 21°. How tall is the tree? 
	132.	 Radius of the Moon  An astronomer observes the moon 
with a viewing angle of 0.52°. If the moon’s average distance 
from Earth is 384,400 km, what is its radius to the nearest 
kilometer? 
	133.	 Let u be the measure of an angle, in radians, in standard  
position with p 6 u 6 3p
2 . Find the exact y-coordinate of the 
intersection of the terminal side of u with the unit circle, given 
cos u +  sin2 u = 19
25
 . State the answer as a single fraction. 
	134.	 Let u be the measure of an angle, in radians, in standard  
position with p
2 6 u 6 p. Find the exact x-coordinate of the
	
	 intersection of the terminal side of u with the unit circle, given 
cos2 u -  sin u = - 1
9. State the answer as a single fraction,
	
	 completely simplified, with rationalized denominator. 
	135.	 Projectile Motion  An object is 
propelled upward at an angle 
u, 45° 6 u 6 90°, to the hori-
zontal with an initial velocity 
of v0 feet per second from the 
base of an inclined plane that 
makes an angle of 45° with the 
horizontal. See the illustration. 
	
	    If air resistance is ignored, the distance R that it travels up 
the inclined plane as a function of u is given by
R1u2 = v2
022
32
 3sin12u2 - cos12u2 - 14
In Problems 137 and 138, use the figure to approximate the value of 
the six trigonometric functions at t to the nearest tenth. Then use a  
calculator to approximate each of the six trigonometric functions at t.
137.	 (a)  t = 1 	
(b)  t = 5.1
138.	 (a)  t = 2 	
(b)  t = 4
R
45°
θ
y
x
M
L
O
1
1
(cos u, sin u)
1
1
u
u
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
2
1
6
5
4
3
Unit Circle
b
a
(a) Find the distance R that the object travels along the  
inclined plane if the initial velocity is 32 feet per second 
and u = 60°.
(b) Graph R = R1u2 if the initial velocity is 32 feet per  
second.
(c) What value of u makes R largest? 
	136.	 If u, 0 6 u 6 p, is the angle between the positive x-axis and 
a nonhorizontal, nonvertical line L, show that the slope m  
of L equals tan u. The angle u is called the inclination of L.
[Hint: See the illustration, where we have drawn the line M 
parallel to L and passing through the origin. Use the fact 
that M intersects the unit circle at the point 1cos u, sin u2.]
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	139.	 Write a brief paragraph that explains how to quickly  
compute the trigonometric functions of 30°, 45°, and 60°.
	140.	 Write a brief paragraph that explains how to quickly  
compute the trigonometric functions of 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270°.
	141.	 How would you explain the meaning of the sine function to 
a fellow student who has just completed college algebra?
	  142.	 Draw a unit circle. Label the angles 0, p
6, p
4, p
3, . . . , 7p
4 , 
11p
6 , 2p and the coordinates of the points on the unit circle 
	
	
that correspond to each of these angles. Explain how  
symmetry can be used to find the coordinates of points 
on the unit circle for angles whose terminal sides are in  
quadrants II, III, and IV.

Section 6.3  Properties of the Trigonometric Functions  417
Determine the Domain and the Range  
of the Trigonometric Functions
Let u be an angle in standard position, and let P = 1x, y2 be the point on the unit 
circle that corresponds to u. See Figure 35. Then, by the definition given earlier,
1
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 143–146 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in  
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
143.	 State the domain of f1x2 = ln15x + 22. 
144.	 Given that the polynomial function P1x2 = x4 - 5x3 - 9x2 + 155x - 250 has zeros of 4 + 3i and 2, find the remaining 
zeros of the function. 
145.	 Find the remainder when P1x2 = 8x4 - 2x3 + x - 8 is divided by x + 2. 
146.	 Sidewalk Area  A sidewalk with a uniform width of 3 feet is to be placed around a circular garden with a diameter	
  
of 24 feet. Find the exact area of the sidewalk.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 c2 = a2 + b2	
2.  8	
3.  True	
4.  equal; proportional	
5.  a- 1
2, 23
2 b	
6.  -  1
2
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 428.
	
Objectives	 	1  Determine the Domain and the Range of the Trigonometric Functions (p. 417)
	
	 	2  Determine the Period of the Trigonometric Functions (p. 419)
	
	 	3  Determine the Signs of the Trigonometric Functions in a Given  
Quadrant (p. 421)
	
	 	4  Find the Values of the Trigonometric Functions Using Fundamental  
Identities (p. 422)
	
	 	5  Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions of an Angle Given 
One of the Functions and the Quadrant of the Angle (p. 424)
	
	 	6  Use Even–Odd Properties to Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric 
Functions (p. 427)
6.3  Properties of the Trigonometric Functions
•	 Functions (Section 2.1, pp. 79–90)
•	 Identity (Appendix A, Section A.6, p. 987)
•	 Even and Odd Functions (Section 2.3, pp. 103–105)
Preparing for this section Before getting started, review the following:
 sin u = y  
 cos u = x  
 tan u = y
x x ≠0
 csc u = 1
y y ≠0   sec u = 1
x x ≠0   cot u = x
y y ≠0
For sin u and cos u, there is no concern about dividing by 0, so u can be any 
angle. It follows that the domain of the sine function and cosine function is the set 
of all real numbers.
Figure 35 
y
x
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
u
P  (x, y)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
O

418 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
For the cotangent function and cosecant function, the y-coordinate of P = 1x, y2 
cannot be 0 since this results in division by 0. See Figure 35. On the unit circle, there 
are two such points, 11, 02 and 1 -1, 02. These two points correspond to the angles 
010°2 and p1180°2 or, more generally, to any angle that is an integer multiple of 
p1180°2, such as 010°2, {p1 {180°2, {2p1 {360°2, {3p1{540°2, and so on. 
Such angles must therefore be excluded from the domain of the cotangent function 
and cosecant function.
The domain of the sine function is the set of all real numbers.
The domain of the cosine function is the set of all real numbers.
For the tangent function and secant function, the x-coordinate of P = 1x, y2 
cannot be 0 since this results in division by 0. See Figure 35. On the unit circle, there 
are two such points, 10, 12 and 10, -12. These two points correspond to the angles
p
2  190°2 and 3p
2  1270°2 or, more generally, to any angle that is an odd integer multiple
of p
2  190°2, such as { p
2  1 {90°2, { 3p
2  1{270°2, { 5p
2  1{450°2, and so on. Such
angles must be excluded from the domain of the tangent function and secant function.
The domain of the tangent function is the set of all real numbers, except 
odd integer multiples of p
2  190°2.
The domain of the secant function is the set of all real numbers, except 
odd integer multiples of p
2  190°2.
The domain of the cotangent function is the set of all real numbers,  
except integer multiples of p1180°2.
The domain of the cosecant function is the set of all real numbers, except 
integer multiples of p1180°2.
Next we determine the range of each of the six trigonometric functions. Refer 
again to Figure 35. Let P = 1x, y2 be the point on the unit circle that corresponds 
to the angle u. It follows that -1 … x … 1 and -1 … y … 1. Since sin u = y and 
cos u = x, we have
-1 … sin u … 1  -1 … cos u … 1
The range of both the sine function and the cosine function consists of all real 
numbers between -1 and 1, inclusive. Using absolute value notation, we have 
0 sin u0 … 1 and 0 cos u0 … 1.
If u is not an integer multiple of p1180°2, then csc u = 1
y. Since y = sin u and
0 y0 = 0 sin u0 … 1, it follows that 0 csc u0 =
1
0 sin u0 =
1
0 y0 Ú 1 a1
y … -1 or 1
y Ú 1b.
Since csc u = 1
y, the range of the cosecant function consists of all real numbers less
than or equal to -1 or greater than or equal to 1. That is,
csc u … -1 or csc u Ú 1

Section 6.3  Properties of the Trigonometric Functions  419
If u is not an odd integer multiple of p
2  190°2, then sec u = 1
x. Since x = cos u and
0 x0 = 0 cos u0 … 1, it follows that 0 sec u0 =
1
0 cos u0 =
1
0 x0 Ú 1 a1
x … -1 or 1
x Ú 1b.
Since sec u = 1
x, the range of the secant function consists of all real numbers less
than or equal to -1 or greater than or equal to 1. That is,
Function
Symbol
Domain
Range
sine
f(u) = sin u
All real numbers
All real numbers from -1 to 1, inclusive
cosine
f(u) = cos u
All real numbers
All real numbers from -1 to 1, inclusive
tangent
f(u) = tan u
All real numbers, except odd integer multiples of p
2
  (90°)
All real numbers
cosecant
f(u) = csc u
All real numbers, except integer multiples of p (180°)
All real numbers greater than or equal to 
1 or less than or equal to -1
secant
f(u) = sec u
All real numbers, except odd integer multiples of p
2
  (90°)
All real numbers greater than or equal to 
1 or less than or equal to -1
cotangent
f(u) = cot u
All real numbers, except integer multiples of p (180°)
All real numbers
Table 4
sec u … -1 or sec u Ú 1
The range of both the tangent function and the cotangent function is the set of 
all real numbers.
- q 6 tan u 6 q  - q 6 cot u 6 q
You are asked to prove this in Problems 121 and 122.
Table 4 summarizes these results.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 7
Determine the Period of the Trigonometric Functions
Look at Figure 36. This figure shows that for an angle of p
3  radians the corresponding
point P on the unit circle is a1
2, 23
2 b. Notice that, for an angle of p
3 + 2p radians, 
the corresponding point P on the unit circle is also a1
2, 23
2 b. Then
 sin p
3 = 23
2   and  sinap
3 + 2pb = 23
2
 cos p
3 = 1
2 
 and  cosap
3 + 2pb = 1
2
This example illustrates a more general situation. For a given angle u, measured 
in radians, suppose that we know the corresponding point P = 1x, y2 on the unit 
circle. Now add 2p to u. The point on the unit circle corresponding to u + 2p is 
identical to the point P on the unit circle corresponding to u. See Figure 37. The 
values of the trigonometric functions of u + 2p are equal to the values of the  
corresponding trigonometric functions of u.
If we add (or subtract) integer multiples of 2p to u, the values of the sine and 
cosine function remain unchanged. That is, for all u
2
Figure 36  sinap
3 + 2pb = sin p
3
 ; 
 cosap
3 + 2pb = cos p
3
y
x
P 
,
1–2
  3
––2
1
1
1
1
–3
 2
–3
Figure 37  sin (u + 2pk) = sin u;
cos (u + 2pk) = cos u
y
x
1
 1
1
1
P  (x, y)
u  2p
u

420 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Functions that exhibit this kind of behavior are called periodic functions.
	
sin1u + 2pk2 = sin u  cos1u + 2pk2 = cos u	
(1)
where k is any integer.
A function f is called periodic if there is a positive number p such that,  
whenever u is in the domain of f, so is u + p, and
f1u + p2 = f1u2
If there is a smallest such number p, this smallest value is called the  
(fundamental) period of f.
Definition
Based on equation (1), the sine and cosine functions are periodic. In fact, 
the sine and cosine functions have period 2p. You are asked to prove this fact in 
Problems 123 and 124. The secant and cosecant functions are also periodic with 
period 2p, and the tangent and cotangent functions are periodic with period p. You 
are asked to prove these statements in Problems 125 through 128.
These facts are summarized as follows:
Periodic Properties
 sin1u + 2p2 = sin u  cos1u + 2p2 = cos u  tan1u + p2 = tan u
 csc1u + 2p2 = csc u  sec1u + 2p2 = sec u  cot1u + p2 = cot u
In Words
Tangent and cotangent have  
period p; the others have  
period 2p.
Because the sine, cosine, secant, and cosecant functions have period 2p, once we 
know their values over an interval of length 2p, we know all their values; similarly, 
since the tangent and cotangent functions have period p, once we know their values 
over an interval of length p, we know all their values.
Finding Exact Values Using Periodic Properties
Find the exact value of:
(a)	 sin 17p
4           (b)  cos15p2          (c)  tan 5p
4
(a)	 It is best to sketch the angle first, as shown in Figure 38(a). Since the period of 
the sine function is 2p, each full revolution can be ignored  leaving the angle p
4 . 
Then
sin 17p
4
= sinap
4 + 4pb = sin p
4 = 22
2
(b)	 See Figure 38(b). Since the period of the cosine function is 2p, each full revolution 
can be ignored leaving the angle p. Then
cos15p2 = cos1p + 4p2 = cos p = -1
(c)	 See Figure 38(c). Since the period of the tangent function is p, each 
half-revolution can be ignored leaving the angle p
4 . Then
tan 5p
4
= tanap
4 + pb = tan p
4 = 1
Example 1
Solution

Section 6.3  Properties of the Trigonometric Functions  421
The periodic properties of the trigonometric functions will be very helpful to us 
when we study their graphs later in the chapter.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Determine the Signs of the Trigonometric Functions  
in a Given Quadrant
Let P = 1x, y2 be the point on the unit circle that corresponds to the angle u. If 
we know in which quadrant the point P lies, then we can determine the signs of 
the trigonometric functions of u. For example, if P = 1x, y2 lies in quadrant IV, as 
shown in Figure 39, then we know that x 7 0 and y 6 0. Consequently,
 sin u = y 6 0   cos u = x 7 0   tan u = y
x 6 0
 csc u = 1
y 6 0   sec u = 1
x 7 0   cot u = x
y 6 0
Table 5 lists the signs of the six trigonometric functions for each quadrant. See 
also Figure 40.
3
Figure 38 
•
y
x
u 17
–––
4
(a)
y
x
u  5
(b)
y
x
u  5
–––
4
(c)
Table 5
Quadrant of P
sin U, csc U
cos U, sec U
tan U, cot U
I
Positive
Positive
Positive
II
Positive
Negative
Negative
III
Negative
Negative
Positive
IV
Negative
Positive
Negative
Figure 39   
u in quadrant IV, x 7 0, y 6 0
y
x
1
1
1
1
P  (x, y ), x  0, y  0
u
Figure 40  Signs of the trigonometric functions
y
x
(a)
II (–, +)
I (+, +)
sin u  0, csc u  0
others negative
All positive
tan u  0, cot u  0
others negative
cos u  0, sec u  0
others negative
III (–, –)
IV (+, –)
y
x
(b)
 +
 +
–
–
y
x
–
 +
–
+
y
x
–
 +
+
–
sine
cosecant
cosine
secant
tangent
cotangent

422 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Finding the Quadrant in Which an Angle U Lies
If sin u 6 0 and cos u 6 0, name the quadrant in which the angle u lies.
Let P = 1x, y2 be the point on the unit circle corresponding to u. Then  
sin u = y 6 0 and cos u = x 6 0. Because points in quadrant III have x 6 0  
and y 6 0, u lies in quadrant III.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Find the Values of the Trigonometric Functions Using  
Fundamental Identities
If P = 1x, y2 is the point on the unit circle corresponding to u, then
 sin u = y  
 cos u = x  
 tan u = y
x if x ≠0
 csc u = 1
y if y ≠0   sec u = 1
x if x ≠0   cot u = x
y if y ≠0
Based on these definitions, we have the reciprocal identities:
Example 2
Solution
•
4
Reciprocal Identities
	
csc u =
1
sin u  sec u =
1
cos u  cot u =
1
tan u	
(2)
Quotient Identities
	
tan u = sin u
cos u  cot u = cos u
sin u	
(3)
The proofs of identities (2) and (3) follow from the definitions of the  
trigonometric functions. (See Problems 129 and 130.)
If sin u and cos u are known, identities (2) and (3) make it easy to find the values 
of the remaining trigonometric functions.
Finding Exact Values Using Identities When Sine  
and Cosine Are Given
Given sin u = 25
5  and cos u = 225
5
, find the exact values of the four remaining
trigonometric functions of u using identities.
Based on a quotient identity from (3), we have
tan u = sin u
cos u =
25
5
225
5
= 1
2
Example 3
Solution
Two other fundamental identities are the quotient identities.

Section 6.3  Properties of the Trigonometric Functions  423
Then we use the reciprocal identities from (2) to get
csc u =
1
sin u =
1
25
5
=
5
25
= 25  sec u =
1
cos u =
1
225
5
=
5
225
= 25
2   cot u =
1
tan u = 1
1
2
= 2
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5
The equation of the unit circle is x2 + y2 = 1 or, equivalently,
y2 + x2 = 1
If P = 1x, y2 is the point on the unit circle that corresponds to the angle u, then 
y = sin u and x = cos u, so we have
	
1sin u22 + 1cos u22 = 1	
(4)
It is customary to write sin2 u instead of 1sin u22, cos2 u instead of 1cos u22, and 
so on. With this notation, we can rewrite equation (4) as
	
sin2 u + cos2 u = 1	
(5)
If cos u ≠0, we can divide each side of equation (5) by cos2 u.
 sin2 u
cos2 u + cos2 u
cos2 u =
1
cos2 u
 a sin u
cos ub
2
+ 1 = a
1
cos ub
2
Now use identities (2) and (3) to get
	
tan2 u + 1 = sec2 u	
(6)
Similarly, if sin u ≠0, we can divide equation (5) by sin2 u and use identities (2) 
and (3) to get 1 + cot2 u = csc2 u, which we write as
	
cot2 u + 1 = csc2 u	
(7)
Collectively, the identities in (5), (6), and (7) are referred to as the Pythagorean 
identities.
Fundamental Identities
 tan u = sin u
cos u 
  
 cot u = cos u
sin u
 csc u =
1
sin u 
 sec u =
1
cos u 
 cot u =
1
tan u
 sin2 u + cos2 u = 1   tan2 u + 1 = sec2 u   cot2 u + 1 = csc2 u
Finding the Exact Value of a Trigonometric Expression  
Using Identities
Find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
(a)  tan 20° - sin 20°
cos 20°	
(b)  sin2 p
12 +
1
sec2 p
12
Example 4

424 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
(a)	  tan 20° - sin 20°
cos 20° = tan 20° - tan 20° = 0
(b)	  sin2 p
12 +
1
sec2 p
12
= sin2 p
12 + cos2 p
12 = 1
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 9
Find the Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions  
of an Angle Given One of the Functions and the Quadrant  
of the Angle
Many problems require finding the exact values of the remaining trigonometric 
functions when the value of one of them is known and the quadrant in which u lies 
can be found. There are two approaches to solving such problems. One approach 
uses a circle of radius r; the other uses identities.
When using identities, sometimes a rearrangement is required. For example, the 
Pythagorean identity
sin2 u + cos2 u = 1
can be solved for sin u in terms of cos u (or vice versa) as follows:
 sin2 u = 1 - cos2 u
 sin u = { 21 - cos2 u
where the + sign is used if sin u 7 0 and the -  sign is used if sin u 6 0. Similarly, 
in tan2 u + 1 = sec2 u, we can solve for tan u (or sec u), and in cot2 u + 1 = csc2 u, 
we can solve for cot u (or csc u).
Finding Exact Values Given One Value and the Sign of Another
Given that sin u = 1
3 and cos u 6 0, find the exact value of each of the remaining 
five trigonometric functions.
Suppose that P = 1x, y2 is the point on a circle that corresponds to u. Since
sin u =  1
3 7 0 and cos u 6 0, the point P = 1x, y2 is in quadrant II. Because
sin u = 1
3 = y
r, we let y = 1 and r = 3. The point P = 1x, y2 = 1x, 12 that 
corresponds to u lies on the circle of radius 3 centered at the origin: x2 + y2 = 9. 
See Figure 41.
To find x, we use the fact that x2 + y2 = 9, y = 1, and P is in quadrant II 
1so x 6 02.
 x2 + y2 = 9
 x2 + 12 = 9
 x2 = 8
 x = -222
Solution
 c
 sin u
cos u = tan u
•
	
 æ	
 æ
 cos u =
1
sec u               sin2 u + cos2 u = 1
5
Example 5
Option 1 
Using a Circle
y = 1
x 6 0
Figure 41 
y
x
 3
u
P  (x, 1)
x 2  y 2  9
3
3
3
O

Section 6.3  Properties of the Trigonometric Functions  425
Since x = -222 , y = 1, and r = 3, we find that
 cos u = x
r = -  212
3    tan u = y
x =
1
-222
= -  22
4   
 
 
 csc u = r
y = 3
1 = 3   sec u = r
x =
3
-222
= -  322
4    cot u = x
y = -222
1
= -222
First, solve the identity sin2 u + cos2 u = 1 for cos u.
 sin2 u + cos2 u = 1
 cos2 u = 1 - sin2 u
 cos u = { 21 - sin2 u
Because cos u 6 0, choose the minus sign and use the fact that sin u = 1
3.
 cos u = - 21 - sin2 u = - A1 - 1
9 = - A
8
9 = -  222
3
Now we know the values of sin u and cos u, so we can use quotient and reciprocal 
identities to get
 tan u = sin u
cos u =
1
3
-222
3
=
1
-222
= -  22
4    cot u =
1
tan u = -222
 sec u =
1
cos u =
1
-222
3
=
-3
222
= -  322
4    csc u =
1
sin u = 1
1
3
= 3
Option 2 
Using Identities
 c
                 sin u = 1
3
•
Finding the Values of the Trigonometric Functions of U When the 
Value of One Function Is Known and the Quadrant of U Is Known
Given the value of one trigonometric function and the quadrant in which u lies, 
the exact value of each of the remaining five trigonometric functions can be 
found in either of two ways.
Option 1  Using a Circle of Radius r
Step 1:	 Draw a circle centered at the origin showing the location of the  
angle u and the point P = 1x, y2 that corresponds to u. The radius of 
	
the circle that contains P = 1x, y2 is r = 2x2 + y2.
Step 2:	 Assign a value to two of the three variables x, y, r based on the value 
of the given trigonometric function and the location of P.
Step 3:	 Use the fact that P lies on the circle x2 + y2 = r 2 to find the value of 
the missing variable.
Step 4:	 Apply the theorem on page 411 to find the values of the remaining 
trigonometric functions.
Option 2  Using Identities
Use appropriately selected identities to find the value of each remaining  
trigonometric function.

426 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Given the Value of One Trigonometric Function and the Sign  
of Another, Find the Values of the Remaining Ones
Given that tan u = 1
2 and sin u 6 0, find the exact value of each of the remaining 
five trigonometric functions of u.
Step 1:	 Since tan u = 1
2 7 0 and sin u 6 0, the point P = 1x, y2 that corresponds 
to u lies in quadrant III. See Figure 42.
Step 2:	 Since tan u = 1
2 = y
x and u lies in quadrant III, let x = -2 and y = -1.
Step 3:	 With x = -2 and y = -1, then r = 2x2 + y2 = 21 -222 + 1-122 = 25, 
so P lies on the circle x2 + y2 = 5.
Step 4:	 Apply the theorem on page 411 using x = -2, y = -1, and r = 25.
Example 6
Option 1 
Using a Circle
 sin u = y
r = -1
25
= - 25
5    cos u = x
r = -2
25
= - 225
5   
 
 
 csc u = r
y = 25
-1 = - 25   sec u = r
x = 25
-2 = - 25
2   cot u = x
y = -2
-1 = 2
•
Because the value of tan u is known, use the Pythagorean identity that involves
tan u, that is, tan2 u + 1 = sec2 u. Since tan u = 1
2 7 0 and sin u 6 0, then u lies in 
quadrant III, where sec u 6 0.
 tan2 u + 1 = sec2 u
 a1
2b
2
+ 1 = sec2 u
 sec2 u = 1
4 + 1 = 5
4
 sec u = -  25
2
Now we know tan u = 1
2 and sec u = -  15
2 . Using reciprocal identities, we find
 cos u =
1
sec u =
1
- 25
2
= -  2
25
= - 225
5
 cot u =
1
tan u = 1
1
2
= 2
To find sin u, use the following reasoning:
 tan u = sin u
cos u so sin u = (tan u)(cos u) = a1
2b # a - 225
5
b = - 25
5
 csc u =
1
sin u =
1
- 25
5
= - 5
25
= - 25
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Option 2 
Using Identities
Pythagorean identity
tan u = 1
2
Proceed to solve for sec u.
sec u 6 0
•
Figure 42  tan u = 1
2
 ; u in quadrant III
3
3
P  (2, 1)
3
3
y
x
x2  y2  5
u

Section 6.3  Properties of the Trigonometric Functions  427
Use Even–Odd Properties to Find the Exact Values  
of the Trigonometric Functions
Recall that a function f is even if f1 -u2 = f1u2 for all u in the domain of f ; a 
function f is odd if f1 -u2 = -f1u2 for all u in the domain of f. We will now show 
that the trigonometric functions sine, tangent, cotangent, and cosecant are odd  
functions and the functions cosine and secant are even functions.
6
Even–Odd Properties
 sin1 -u2 = -sin u   cos1 -u2 = cos u   tan1-u2 = -tan u
 csc1 -u2 = -csc u   sec1 -u2 = sec u   cot1-u2 = -cot u
Proof 
Let P = 1x, y2 be the point on the unit circle that corresponds to the angle u.  
See Figure 43. Using symmetry, the point Q on the unit circle that corresponds to the 
angle -u will have coordinates 1x, -y2. Using the definition of the trigonometric  
functions, we have
sin u = y  sin1 -u2 = -y  cos u = x  cos1-u2 = x
so
sin1 -u2 = -y = -sin u  cos1 -u2 = x = cos u
Now, using these results and some of the fundamental identities, we have
 tan1-u2 = sin1 -u2
cos1 -u2 = -sin u
cos u
= -tan u   cot1-u2 =
1
tan1-u2 =
1
-tan u = -cot u
 sec1-u2 =
1
cos1 -u2 =
1
cos u = sec u  
 csc1-u2 =
1
sin1 -u2 =
1
-sin u = -csc u
■
Finding Exact Values Using Even–Odd Properties
Find the exact value of:
(a)  sin1 -45°2      (b)  cos1 -p2      (c)  cota -  3p
2 b      (d)  tana -  37p
4 b
(a)	 sin1-45°2 = -sin 45° = -  22
2 	
(b)  cos1 -p2 = cos p = -1
(c)	 cota -  3p
2 b = -cot 3p
2
= 0
(d)	 tana -  37p
4 b = -tan 37p
4
= -tanap
4 + 9pb = -tan p
4 = -1
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 9
Example 7
Solution
c
Odd function
c
Even function
c
Odd function
•
c
Period is p.
c
Odd function
In Words
Cosine and secant are even  
functions; the others are odd 
functions.
Figure 43 
y
x
u
u
A  (1, 0)
1
 1
1
1
Q  (x, y)
P  (x, y)
O

428 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The domain of the function f 1x2 = x + 1
2x + 1 is 
. 
 (pp. 79–90)
	 2.	 A function for which f1x2 = f1- x2 for all x in the domain 
of f is called a(n)  
  function. (pp. 103–105)
	 3.	 True or False  The function f1x2 = 1x is even.	
  
(pp. 103–105) 
	 4.	 True or False  The equation x2 + 2x = 1x + 122 - 1 is an 
identity. (p. 987) 
6.3  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 5.	 The sine, cosine, cosecant, and secant functions have period 
; the tangent and cotangent functions have period 
.
	 6.	 The domain of the tangent function is                       .
	
7.	 Which of the following is not in the range of the sine  
function?
(a) p
4     (b) 3
2    (c)- 0.37    (d) - 1 
	 8.	 Which of the following functions is even?
(a) cosine    (b) sine    (c) tangent    (d) cosecant 
	 9.	 sin2 u + cos2 u =   .
	 10.	 True or False   sec u =
1
sin u 
Skill Building
In Problems 11–26, use the fact that the trigonometric functions are periodic to find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a  
calculator.
	 11.	 sin 405° 
	
12.	 cos 420° 
	
13.	 sin 390°  	
14.	 tan 405° 
	
15.	 sec 540°  	
16.  csc 450° 
	 17.	 sec 420° 
	
18.	 cot 390°  	
19.	 sin 9p
4  
	
20.	 cos 33p
4  
	
21.	 csc 9p
2   	
22.  tan121p2 
	 23.	 cot 17p
4  
	
24.	 sec 17p
4   	
25.	 sec 25p
6  
	
26.	 tan 19p
6  
In Problems 27–34, name the quadrant in which the angle u lies.
	 27.	 sin u 7 0,  cos u 6 0 
	
28.	 sin u 6 0,  cos u 7 0 
	
29.	cos u 7 0,  tan u 7 0 
	 30.	 sin u 6 0,  tan u 6 0 
	 31.	 cos u 6 0,  tan u 7 0 
	 32.	 cos u 7 0,  tan u 6 0 
	
33.	csc u 7 0,  cos u 6 0 
	
34.	 sec u 6 0,  sin u 7 0 
In Problems 35–42, sin u and cos u are given. Find the exact value of each of the four remaining trigonometric functions.
	 35.	 sin u = -  3
5, cos u = 4
5	
36.	 sin u = 4
5, cos u = -  3
5	
37.	 sin u = -  25
5 , cos u = -  225
5
	 38.	 sin u = 225
5
, cos u = 25
5 	
39.	 sin u = 23
2 , cos u = 1
2	
40.	 sin u = 1
2, cos u = 23
2
	 41.	 sin u = 222
3
, cos u = -  1
3	
42.	 sin u = -  1
3, cos u = 222
3
In Problems 43–58, find the exact value of each of the remaining trigonometric functions of u.
	 43.	 sin u = 12
13, u in quadrant II	
44.	 cos u = 3
5, u in quadrant IV	
45.	 sin u = -  5
13, u in quadrant III
	 46.	 cos u = -  4
5, u in quadrant III	
47.	 cos u = 4
5, 270° 6 u 6 360°	
48.	 sin u = 5
13, 90° 6 u 6 180°
	 49.	 sin u = -  2
3, p 6 u 6 3p
2 	
50.	 cos u = -  1
3, p
2 6 u 6 p	
51.	 cos u = -  1
4, tan u 7 0
	 52.	 sin u = 2
3, tan u 6 0	
53.	 csc u = 3,  cot u 6 0	
54.	 sec u = 2,  sin u 6 0
	 55.	 cot u = 4
3, cos u 6 0	
56.	 tan u = 3
4, sin u 6 0	
57.	 sec u = - 2,  tan u 7 0
	 58.	 tan u = -  1
3, sin u 7 0 
 
 
  

Section 6.3  Properties of the Trigonometric Functions  429
In Problems 59–76, use the even–odd properties to find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
	 59.	 sin1- 60°2 
	
60.	 cos1- 30°2 
	
61.	 sin1- 135°2 
	 62.	 tan1- 30°2 
	
63.	 csc1-30°2 
	 64.	 sec1- 60°2 
	
65.	 cos1- 270°2 
	
66.	 sin1- 90°2  	
67.	 sin1- p2 
	
68.	 tana-  p
4 b 
	 69.	 sina-  p
3 b 
	
70.	 cosa-  p
4 b 
	
71.	 sina-  3p
2 b  	
72.	 tan1-p2  	
73.	 sec1-p2 
	 74.	 csca-  p
4 b 
	
75.	 csca-  p
3 b 
	
76.	 seca-  p
6 b 
In Problems 77–88, use properties of the trigonometric functions to find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
	 77.	 sec2 18° - tan2 18°  	
78.	 sin2 40° + cos2 40°  	
79.	 sin 80° csc 80°  	
80.	 tan 10° cot 10° 
	 81.	 cot 20° - cos 20°
sin 20°  	
82.	 tan 40° - sin 40°
cos 40°  	
83.	 tan 200° # cot 20°  	
84.	 cos 400° # sec 40° 
	 85.	 seca-  p
18b # cos 37p
18  
	
86.	 sina-  p
12b csc 25p
12   	
87.	
sin 70°
cos1- 430°2 + tan1- 70°2 	 88.	
sin1-20°2
cos 380°
+ tan 200° 
	 89.	 If sin u = 0.3, find the value of:
            sin u + sin1u + 2p2 + sin1u + 4p2 
	 90.	 If cos u = 0.2, find the value of:
             cos u + cos1u + 2p2 + cos1u + 4p2 
	 91.	 If tan u = 3, find the value of:
                tan u + tan1u + p2 + tan1u + 2p2 
	 92.	 If cot u = - 2, find the value of:
             cot u + cot1u - p2 + cot1u - 2p2 
	 93.	 Find the exact value of:
         sin 1° + sin 2° + sin 3° + g + sin 358° + sin 359° 
	 94.	 Find the exact value of:
         cos 1° + cos 2° + cos 3° + g + cos 358° + cos 359° 
	 95.	 What is the domain of the sine function?
	 96.	 What is the domain of the cosine function?
	 97.	 For what numbers u is f1u2 = tan u not defined?
	 98.	 For what numbers u is f1u2 = cot u not defined?
	 99.	 For what numbers u is f1u2 = sec u not defined?
	100.	 For what numbers u is f1u2 = csc u not defined?
	101.	 What is the range of the sine function? 
	102.	 What is the range of the cosine function? 
	103.	 What is the range of the tangent function? 
	104.	 What is the range of the cotangent function? 
	105.	 What is the range of the secant function? 
	106.	 What is the range of the cosecant function? 
	107.	 Is the sine function even, odd, or neither? Is its graph  
symmetric? With respect to what? 
	108.	 Is the cosine function even, odd, or neither? Is its graph  
symmetric? With respect to what? 
	109.	 Is the tangent function even, odd, or neither? Is its graph 
symmetric? With respect to what? 
	110.	 Is the cotangent function even, odd, or neither? Is its graph 
symmetric? With respect to what? 
	111.	 Is the secant function even, odd, or neither? Is its graph  
symmetric? With respect to what? 
112.	 Is the cosecant function even, odd, or neither? Is its graph 
symmetric? With respect to what? 
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 113–118, use the periodic and even–odd properties.
	113.	 If f1x2 = cos1x2 and f1a2 = 1
2, find the exact value of the 
following.
(a)	 f1- a2 
  (b)  f1a2 + f1a + 2p2 + f1a + 4p2 
	114.	 If f1u2 = cos u and f1a2 = 1
4, find the exact value of:
(a)	 f1- a2 
  (b)  f1a2 + f1a + 2p2 + f1a - 2p2 
	115.	 If f1x2 = cot1x2 and f1a2 = 2, find the exact value of the 
following.
(a)  f1- a2 
  (b)  f1a2 + f1a + p2 + f1a + 2p2 
	116.	 If f1u2 = cot u and f1a2 = - 3, find the exact value of:
(a)  f1- a2 
(b)  f1a2 + f1a + p2 + f1a + 4p2 
	117.	 If f1x2 = sec1x2 and f1a2 = -11, find the exact value of 
the following.
(a)  f1- a2 
  (b)  f1a2 + f1a + 2p2 + f1a + 4p2 

430 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
	118.	 If f1u2 = csc u and f1a2 = 2, find the exact value of:
(a)	 f1-a2 
  (b)  f1a2 + f1a + 2p2 + f1a + 4p2 
	119.	 Calculating the Time of a Trip  From a parking lot you 
want to walk to a house on the ocean. The house is located  
1480 ft down a paved path that parallels the beach, which 
is 740 ft wide. Along the path, you can walk 330 ft/min, 
but on the beach you can only walk 130 ft/min. Calculate 
the time T if you walk directly from the parking lot to the 
house. 
	120.	 Calculating the Time of a Trip  Two oceanfront homes are 
located 8 miles apart on a straight stretch of beach, each a 
distance of 1 mile from a paved path that parallels the ocean. 
Sally can jog 8 miles per hour on the paved path, but only 
3 miles per hour in the sand on the beach. Because a river 
flows directly between the two houses, it is necessary to jog 
in the sand to the road, continue on the path, and then jog 
directly back in the sand to get from one house to the other. 
See the illustration. The time T to get from one house to the 
other as a function of the angle u shown in the illustration is
T1u2 = 1 +
2
3 sin u -
1
4 tan u  0 6 u 6 p
2
(a)	 Calculate the time T for tan u = 1
4. 
(b)	 Describe the path taken.
(c)	 Explain why u must be larger than 14°.
Beach
Ocean
Paved path
740 ft
1480 ft
Forest
x
u
Parking lot
	121.	 Show that the range of the tangent function is the set of all 
real numbers.
	122.	 Show that the range of the cotangent function is the set of all 
real numbers.
1	23.	 Show that the period of f1u2 = sin u is 2p.
[Hint: 
Assume 
that 
0 6 p 6 2p 
exists 
so 
that 
sin1u + p2 = sin u for all u. Let u = 0 to find p. Then let
u = p
2  to obtain a contradiction.] 
	124.	 Show that the period of f1u2 = cos u is 2p.
	125.	 Show that the period of f1u2 = sec u is 2p.
1	26.	 Show that the period of f1u2 = csc u is 2p.
	127.	 Show that the period of f1u2 = tan u is p.
	128.	 Show that the period of f1u2 = cot u is p.
	129.	 Prove the reciprocal identities csc u =
1
sin u
 , sec u =
1
cos u
 , 
and cot u =
1
tan u
 .
	130.	 Prove the quotient identities given in formula (3).
	131.	 Establish the identity,
1sin u cos f22 + 1sin u sin f22 + cos2 u = 1.
Ocean
Beach
Paved path
1 mi
4 mi
4 mi
u
u
River
x
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	132.	 Write down five properties of the tangent function. Explain 
the meaning of each.
1	33.	 Describe your understanding of the meaning of a periodic 
function.
	134.	 Explain how to find the value of sin 390° using periodic 
properties.
	135.	 Explain how to find the value of cos1-45°2 using even–odd 
properties.
	136.	 Explain how to find the value of sin 390° and cos (-45°)  
using the unit circle.

Section 6.4  Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions  431
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
1.  exx ≠-  1
2 f	
2.  even	
3.  False	
4.  True
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 137–140 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 137.	 Given: f1x2 = x2 - 3 and g1x2 = x - 7, find 1f ∘g2 1x2. 
	 138.	 Graph f(x) = - 2x2 + 12x - 13 using transformations. Find the vertex and the axis of symmetry.  
	 139.	 Solve exactly: ex-4 = 6 
140.  Find the real zeros of f(x) = x3 - 9x2 + 3x - 27. 
Since we want to graph the trigonometric functions in the xy-plane, we shall use 
the traditional symbols x for the independent variable (or argument) and y for the 
dependent variable (or value at x) for each function. So the six trigonometric functions 
can be written as
 y = f1x2 = sin x   y = f1x2 = cos x   y = f1x2 = tan x
 y = f1x2 = csc x   y = f1x2 = sec x   y = f1x2 = cot x
Here the independent variable x represents an angle, measured in radians. In calculus, 
x will usually be treated as a real number. As noted earlier, these are equivalent 
ways of viewing x.
The Graph of the Sine Function y = sin x
Because the sine function has period 2p, it is only necessary to graph y = sin x on 
the interval 30, 2p4. The remainder of the graph will consist of repetitions of this 
portion of the graph.
To begin, consider Table 6 on page 432, which lists some points on the graph 
of y = sin x, 0 … x … 2p. As the table shows, the graph of y = sin x, 0 … x … 2p, 
begins at the origin. As x increases from 0 to p
2 , the value of y = sin x increases
from 0 to 1; as x increases from p
2  to p to 3p
2 , the value of y decreases from 1 to 0 to -1;  
6.4	 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations (Section 2.5, pp. 127–136)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 441.
	
Objectives	 1  Graph Functions of the Form y = A sin1vx2 Using Transformations  (p. 432)
	
	 	2  Graph Functions of the Form y = A cos1vx2 Using Transformations  (p. 434)
	
	 	3  Determine the Amplitude and Period of Sinusoidal Functions  (p. 435)
	
	 	4  Graph Sinusoidal Functions Using Key Points  (p. 437)
	
	 	5  Find an Equation for a Sinusoidal Graph  (p. 440)
*
*For those who wish to include phase shifts here, Section 6.6 can be covered immediately after Section 6.4 
without loss of continuity.

432 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
as x increases from 3p
2  to 2p, the value of y increases from -1 to 0. Plotting the
points listed in Table 6 and connecting them with a smooth curve yields the graph 
shown in Figure 44.
Figure 44  y = sin x, 0 … x … 2p
Table 6
x
y = sin x
(x, y)
0
0
10, 02
p
6
1
2
ap
6
 , 1
2b
p
2
1
ap
2
 , 1b
5p
6
1
2
a5p
6
 , 1
2b
p
0
(p, 0)
7p
6
- 1
2
a7p
6
 , - 1
2b
3p
2
-1
a3p
2
 , -1b
11p
6
- 1
2
a11p
6
 , - 1
2b
2p
0
(2p, 0)

––6
x
y
1

2
1
(   ,   )
1–2
(    ,   )
1–2
x
2
(   , 1)
(0, 0)
(, 0)
(2, 0)

––2
5
–––
6
(    ,   )
1–2
7
–––
6
(     ,   )
1–2
11
––––
6
(    , 1)
3
–––
2

––2
3
–––
2
The graph in Figure 44 is one period, or cycle, of the graph of y = sin x. To 
obtain a more complete graph of y = sin x, continue the graph in each  
direction, as shown in Figure 45.
Figure 45  y = sin x, - q 6 x 6 q
x
2
2
p
2
2
p
p
( 
, 21)
(   , 1)
(     , 21)
3p
–––
2
(    , 1)
5p
–––
2
y
1
21
p
––2
p
––2
p
––2
2p
––2
3p
–––
2
5p
–––
2
The graph of y = sin x illustrates some of the facts already discussed about the 
sine function.
Properties of the Sine Function y = sin x
	 1.	 The domain is the set of all real numbers.
	 2.	 The range consists of all real numbers from -1 to 1, inclusive.
	 3.	 The sine function is an odd function, as the symmetry of the graph with 
respect to the origin indicates.
	 4.	 The sine function is periodic, with period 2p.
	 5.	 The x-intercepts are c, -2p, -p, 0, p, 2p, 3p,c; the y-intercept is 0.
	 6.	 The maximum value is 1 and occurs at x = c, - 3p
2 , p
2, 5p
2 , 9p
2 ,c;
	
	 the minimum value is -1 and occurs at x = c, - p
2 , 3p
2 , 7p
2 , 11p
2 ,c.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Graph Functions of the Form y = A sin(Vx)  
Using Transformations
Graphing Functions of the Form y = A sin(Vx)  
Using Transformations
Graph y = 3 sin x using transformations. Use the graph to determine the domain 
and the range of the function.
1
Example 1

Section 6.4  Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions  433
Figure 46 illustrates the steps.
Solution
Figure 46 
x
2
2
p
p
p
––2
( , 3)
(   , 1)
p
––2
(     , 1)
5p
–––
2
y
1
p
––2
p
––2
3p
–––
2
5p
–––
2
x
y
2p
p
23
3
1
p–2
3p
–––
2
p
–––
2
(a)  y 5 sin x
Multiply by 3;
vertical stretch
by a factor of 3
(b)  y 5 3 sin x
2
2p
(2   , 21)
p
––2
(     , 21)
 3p
–––
2
(     , 23)
 3p
–––
2
21
The domain of y = 3 sin x is the set of all real numbers, or 1- q, q 2. The range is 
5y -3 … y … 36, or 3 -3, 34.
Graphing Functions of the Form y = A sin(Vx)  
Using Transformations
Graph y = -sin(2x) using transformations. Use the graph to determine the domain 
and the range of the function.
Figure 47 illustrates the steps.
•
Example 2
Solution
Figure 47 
Replace x by 2x;
Horizontal compression
by a factor of 1–2

––4

––4
3
–––
4
x
y
1
1


(     , 1)


––2

––2

(c)  y   sin (2x)
(     , 1)
 3 
–––
4

––4
(   , 1)
Period 

––4
Multiply by 1;
Reflect about the
xaxis 

––2

––2
3
–––
2
5
–––
2
x
y
1
1

(     , 1)
 
––2

(b)  y   sin x

––2
(   , 1)
3
–––
2
(     , 1)

Period 2
2
(a)  y  sin x
x


     
(   , 1)

––2
(     , 1)
(     , 1)
 3 
–––
2
y
1

––2

––2
3
–––
2
5
–––
2
5
–––
2
1

––2
(   , 1)
2

The domain of y = -sin(2x) is the set of all real numbers, or 1- q, q 2. The range 
is 5y -1 … y … 16, or 3 -1, 14.
Note in Figure 47(c) that the period of the function y = -sin(2x) is p because
of the horizontal compression of the original period 2p by a factor of 1
2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5  u s i n g  t r a n s f o r m a t i o n s
The Graph of the Cosine Function y = cos x
The cosine function also has period 2p. Proceed as with the sine function by  
constructing Table 7 on page 434, which lists some points on the graph of y = cos x, 
0 … x … 2p. As the table shows, the graph of y = cos x, 0 … x … 2p, begins at the
point 10, 12. As x increases from 0 to p
2  to p, the value of y decreases from 1 to 0 to
-1; as x increases from p to 3p
2  to 2p, the value of y increases from -1 to 0 to 1. As 
before, plot the points in Table 7 to get one period or cycle of the graph. See Figure 48.
•

434 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
A more complete graph of y = cos x is obtained by continuing the graph in 
each direction, as shown in Figure 49.
Figure 48  y = cos x, 0 … x … 2p
Table 7
x
y = cos x
(x, y)
0
1
(0, 1)
p
3
1
2
ap
3
 , 1
2b
p
2
0
ap
2
 , 0b
2p
3
- 1
2
a2p
3
 , - 1
2b
p
-1
(p, -1)
4p
3
- 1
2
a4p
3
 , - 1
2b
3p
2
0
a3p
2
 , 0b
5p
3
1
2
a5p
3
 , 1
2b
2p
1
(2p, 1)

––3
x

2
(   ,   )
1–2
(    ,   )
1–2
(0, 1)
(2, 1)
(, 1)
5
–––
3
(    ,   )
1–2
2
–––
3
(    ,   )
1–2
4
–––
3

––2
3
–––
2
y
1
1
Figure 49  y = cos x, - q 6 x 6 q
x


2



( , 1)

( , 1)

(2
, 1)
y
1
1

––2

––2
3
–––
2
5
–––
2
The graph of y = cos x illustrates some of the facts already discussed about the 
cosine function.
Properties of the Cosine Function
	 1.	 The domain is the set of all real numbers.
	 2.	 The range consists of all real numbers from -1 to 1, inclusive.
	 3.	 The cosine function is an even function, as the symmetry of the graph with 
respect to the y-axis indicates.
	 4.	 The cosine function is periodic, with period 2p.
	 5.	 The x-intercepts are c, - 3p
2 , - p
2 , p
2 , 3p
2 , 5p
2 ,c; the y-intercept is 1.
	 6.	 The maximum value is 1 and occurs at x = c, -2p, 0, 2p, 4p, 6p,c; 
the minimum value is -1 and occurs at x = c, -p, p, 3p, 5p,c.
Graph Functions of the Form y = A cos(Vx)  
Using Transformations
Graphing Functions of the Form y = A cos(Vx)  
Using Transformations
Graph y = 2 cos13x2 using transformations. Use the graph to determine the domain 
and the range of the function.
Figure 50 shows the steps.
2
Example 3
Solution
Figure 50 
y
1
(a)   y 5 cos x
21
x
2p
3p
–––
2
5p
–––
2
(2p, 1)
p
p
––2
(p, 21)
2p
(2p, 21)
5p
–––
2
3p
–––
2
p
––2
2p
––2
2p
––2
x
y
2
22
p
2p
2p
(b)   y 5 2 cos x
(2p, 22)
(2p, 2)
(p, 22)
5p
–––
6
2p
–––
3
2p
–––
3
p
––2
p
––6
p
––3
2
2
p
––6
p
––3
p
––3
p
––3
x
y
2
22
(c)   y 5 2 cos (3x)
(   , 22)
(2  , 22)
(     , 2)
Multiply by 2;
Vertical stretch
by a factor of 2
1
––3
Replace x by 3x;
Horizontal
compression by
a factor of

Section 6.4  Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions  435
The domain of y = 2 cos13x2 is the set of all real numbers, or 1 - q, q 2. The 
range is 5y -2 … y … 26, or 3 -2, 24.
Notice in Figure 50(c) that the period of the function y = 2 cos13x2 is 2p
3
because of the compression of the original period 2p by a factor of 1
3.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3  u s i n g  t r a n s f o r m a t i o n s
Sinusoidal Graphs
Shift the graph of y = cos x to the right p
2  units to obtain the graph of
y = cosax - p
2 b. See Figure 51(a). Now look at the graph of y = sin x in 
Figure 51(b). Notice that the graph of y = sin x is the same as the graph of 
y = cosax - p
2 b.
•
Figure 51 
(b)   y  sin x
x
y
1
1


2

––2

––2
3
–––
2
5
–––
2

––2

––2
3
–––
2
5
–––
2
x
y
1
1
(a)   y  cos x   y  cos (x    ) 
–2


2
Based on Figure 51, we conjecture that
sin x = cosax - p
2 b
(We shall prove this fact in Chapter 7.) Because of this relationship, the graphs 
of functions of the form y = A sin1vx2 or y = A cos1vx2 are referred to as  
sinusoidal graphs.
Determine the Amplitude and Period of Sinusoidal Functions
Figure 52 uses transformations to obtain the graph of y = 2 cos x. Note that the 
values of y = 2 cos x lie between -2 and 2, inclusive.
3
Seeing the Concept
Graph Y1 = sin x and Y2 = cosax - p
2 b. 
How many graphs do you see?
x
y
1
1

p
p
2p
(a)   y  cos x
(b)   y  2 cos x
p
––2
p
––2
3p
–––
2
5p
–––
2
(2p, 1)
(p, 1)
(p, 1)
Multiply by 2;
Vertical stretch
by a factor of 2
x
y
1
2
1
2
p
p
2p
p
––2
p
––2
3p
–––
2
5p
–––
2
(p, 2)
(p, 2)
(2p, 2)
In general, the values of the functions y = A sin x and y = A cos x, where 
A ≠0, will always satisfy the inequalities
- 0 A0 … A sin x … 0 A0 and - 0 A0 … A cos x … 0 A0
respectively. The number 0 A0  is called the amplitude of y = A sin x or y = A cos x. 
See Figure 53 on page 436.
Figure 52 

436 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Figure 54 uses transformations to obtain the graph of y = cos13x2. Note that the  
period of this function is 2p
3 , because of the horizontal compression of the original 
period 2p by a factor of 1
3.
Figure 53  y = A sin x, A 7 0; period = 2p
x
y
A
2A
p
2p
2p
––2
p
––2
3p
–––
2
5p
–––
2
Figure 54 
(a) y  cos x
x
y
1
1



2

––2

––2
1––3
3
–––
2
5
–––
2
(2, 1)
(, 1)
(, 1)
Replace x by 3x ;
Horizontal compression
by a factor of    
(b) y  cos (3x)
y
1
, 1)
(
1
2
–––
3

––6

––3

––3



––2

2
–––
3

, 1)
(
2
–––
3
, 1
(
(, 1)
1 period
x

5
–––
6
2
–––
3

––2

––3

––6
)

––3 , 1
(
)
If v 7 0, the functions y = sin1vx2 and y = cos1vx2 will have period 
T = 2p
v . To see why, recall that the graph of y = sin1vx2 is obtained from the 
graph of y = sin x by performing a horizontal compression or stretch by a factor 1
v. 
This horizontal compression replaces the interval 30, 2p4, which contains one period 
of the graph of y = sin x, by the interval c 0, 2p
v d , which contains one period of the 
graph of y = sin1vx2. So the function y = cos13x2, graphed in Figure 54(b), with 
v = 3, has period 2p
v = 2p
3 .
One period of the graph of y = sin1vx2 or y = cos1vx2 is called a cycle. 
Figure 55 illustrates the general situation. The blue portion of the graph is one  
cycle.
Figure 55  y = A sin (vx), A 7 0, v 7 0; period = 2p
v
x
y
A
2A
p
––v
2p
–––
v
When graphing y = sin(vx) or y = cos1vx2, we want v to be positive. To 
graph either y = sin1 -vx2, v 7 0, or y = cos1 -vx2, v 7 0, use the even–odd 
properties of the sine and cosine functions as follows:
sin1 -vx2 = -sin1vx2 and cos1 -vx2 = cos1vx2
This provides an equivalent form in which the coefficient of x in the argument is 
positive. For example,
sin1 -2x2 = -sin12x2 and cos1 -px2 = cos1px2
Because of this, we can assume that v 7 0.
Note  Recall that a function f is even 
if f (-x) = f (x); a function f is odd if 
f (-x) = -f (x). Since the sine function is 
odd, sin(- x) = - sin x; since the cosine 
function is even, cos(- x) = cos x.	
■

Section 6.4  Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions  437
Finding the Amplitude and Period of a Sinusoidal Function
Determine the amplitude and period of y = 3 sin14x2.
Comparing y = 3 sin14x2 to y = A sin1vx2, note that A = 3 and v = 4. From 
equation (1),
Amplitude = 0 A0 = 3  Period = T = 2p
v = 2p
4
= p
2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
Graph Sinusoidal Functions Using Key Points
So far, we have graphed functions of the form y = A sin1vx2 or y = A cos1vx2 
using transformations. We now introduce another method that can be used to graph 
these functions.
Figure 56 shows one cycle of the graphs of y = sin x and y = cos x on the  
interval 30, 2p4. Notice that each graph consists of four parts corresponding to the 
four subintervals:
c 0, p
2 d , c p
2 , pd , c p, 3p
2 d , c 3p
2 , 2pd
Each subinterval is of length p
2  (the period 2p divided by 4, the number of 
parts), and the endpoints of these intervals x = 0, x = p
2, x = p, x = 3p
2 , x = 2p
give rise to five key points on each graph:
For y = sin x:  10, 02, ap
2 , 1b, 1p, 02, a3p
2 , -1b, 12p, 02
For y = cos x:  10, 12, ap
2 , 0b, 1p, -12, a3p
2 , 0b, 12p, 12
Example 4
Solution
•
4
If v 7 0, the amplitude and period of y = A sin1vx2 and y = A cos1vx2 are 
given by
	
Amplitude = 0 A0  Period = T = 2p
v 	
(1)
Theorem
Figure 56 
x
y
1
(0, 1)
x
y
(a) y  sin x
(b) y  cos x
1
(    , 1)
(0, 0)
(, 0)
(, 1)
(2, 0)
(2, 1)

––2
(    , 0)

––2
(     , 1)
1
1
3
–––
2
(     , 0)
3
–––
2

438 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Graphing a Sinusoidal Function Using Key Points
Graph y = 3 sin14x2 using key points.
Example 5
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Determine the amplitude 
and period of the sinusoidal function. 
Comparing y = 3 sin14x2 to y = A sin1vx2, note that A = 3 and v = 4, so the 
amplitude is  A  = 3 and the period is 2p
v = 2p
4
= p
2 . Because the amplitude is 3,  
the graph of y = 3 sin14x2 will lie between -3 and 3 on the y-axis. Because the 
period is p
2 , one cycle will begin at x = 0 and end at x = p
2 .
Step 2:  Divide the interval J0, 2p
v R  
into four subintervals of the same 
length.
Divide the interval c 0, p
2 d  into four subintervals, each of length p
2 , 4 = p
8 , as 
follows:
c 0, p
8 d  c p
8, p
8 + p
8 d = c p
8, p
4 d  c p
4, p
4 + p
8 d = c p
4, 3p
8 d   c 3p
8 , 3p
8
+ p
8 d = c 3p
8 , p
2 d
The endpoints of the subintervals are 0, p
8, p
4, 3p
8 , p
2 . These values represent the  
x-coordinates of the five key points on the graph.
Step 3:  Use the endpoints of the 
subintervals from Step 2 to obtain 
five key points on the graph. 
To obtain the y-coordinates of the five key points of y = 3 sin14x2, multiply the  
y-coordinates of the five key points for y = sin x in Figure 56(a) by A = 3. The five 
key points are
10, 02 ap
8, 3b ap
4, 0b a3p
8 , -3b ap
2, 0b
Step 4: Plot the five key points and 
draw a sinusoidal graph to obtain 
the graph of one cycle. Extend the 
graph in each direction to make it 
complete. 
Plot the five key points obtained in Step 3, and fill in the graph of the sine curve 
as shown in Figure 57(a). Extend the graph in each direction to obtain the  
complete graph shown in Figure 57(b). Notice that additional key points appear 
every p
8  radian.
Note  The five key points could also be 
obtained by evaluating y = 3 sin (4x) at 
each endpoint .	
■
Figure 57 
(    , 3)
(a)
3
–––
8
x
y
3
3
y
(    , 3)
(0, 0)

–––8
(    , 0)

–––4
(    , 3)

–––8
(    , 3)

–––8
(    , 0)
(0, 0)

–––
4
(    , 0)
(–   , 0)
(    , 0)

–––2
(     ,          
3)
3
–––
8
(    , 3)
5
–––
8
x
3
–3
(b) y  3 sin (4x)
3
–––
8
5
–––
8
–
––4

––4

––2
–
––8

––8

––8
3
–––
8

––
2

––
4
Check:	Graph y = 3 sin14x2 using transformations. Which graphing method 
do you prefer?
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5  u s i n g  k e y  p o i n t s
•
Summary
Steps for Graphing a Sinusoidal Function of the Form y = A sin(vx) or y = A cos(vx) Using Key Points
Step 1:  Determine the amplitude and period of the sinusoidal function.
Step 2:  Divide the interval c 0, 2p
v d  into four subintervals of the same length.
Step 3:  Use the endpoints of these subintervals to obtain five key points on the graph.
Step 4:  Plot the five key points, and draw a sinusoidal graph to obtain the graph of one cycle. Extend the graph in 
each direction to make it complete.

Section 6.4  Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions  439
Graphing a Sinusoidal Function Using Key Points
Graph y = 2 sina - p
2
 xb using key points.
Since the sine function is odd, use the equivalent form:
y = -2 sinap
2
 xb
Step 1:  Comparing y = -2 sinap
2
 xb to y = A sin1vx2, note that A = -2 
and v = p
2. The amplitude is 0 A0 = |-2| = 2, and the period is 
	
T = 2p
v = 2p
p
2
= 4. The graph of y = -2 sinap
2
 xb lies between -2 and 2
	
on the y-axis. One cycle will begin at x = 0 and end at x = 4.
Step 2:  Divide the interval 30, 44 into four subintervals, each of length 4 , 4 = 1. 
The x-coordinates of the five key points are
	
0	
0 + 1 = 1	
1 + 1 = 2	
2 + 1 = 3	
3 + 1 = 4
1st x-coordinate 
2nd x-coordinate 
3rd x-coordinate 
4th x-coordinate 
5th x-coordinate
Step 3:  Since y = -2 sinap
2
 xb, multiply the y-coordinates of the five key points in 
Figure 56(a) by A = -2. The five key points on the graph are
10, 02 11, -22 12, 02 13, 22 14, 02
Step 4:  Plot these five points, and fill in the graph of the sine function as shown in 
Figure 58(a). Extend the graph in each direction to obtain Figure 58(b).
Example 6
Solution
Figure 58 
x
y
2
–2
(b) y  2 sin (   x)
3
5
1
1
x
(a)
3
1
(2, 0)
(4, 0)
(0, 0)
(2, 0)
(1, 2)
(5, 2)
2
–2
y
(0, 0)
(2, 0)
(4, 0)
(3, 2)
(1, 2)
(3, 2)
(1, 2)

––
2
Check:	Graph y = 2 sin a - p
2
 xb using transformations. Which graphing 
method do you prefer?
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9  u s i n g  k e y  p o i n t s
If the function to be graphed is of the form y = A sin1vx2 + B [or 
y = A cos1vx2 + B], first graph y = A sin1vx2 [or y = A cos1vx2] and then use 
a vertical shift.
Graphing a Sinusoidal Function Using Key Points
Graph y = -4 cos1px2 - 2 using key points. Use the graph to determine the  
domain and the range of y = -4 cos(px) - 2.
•
Example 7
Comment  To 
graph 
a 
sinusoidal 
function of the form y = A sin(vx) or 
y = A cos(vx) using a graphing utility, 
use the amplitude to set Ymin and Ymax,  
and use the period to set Xmin, and Xmax. 
	
■

440 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Begin by graphing the function y = -4 cos1px2. Comparing y = -4 cos1px2 with 
y = A cos1vx2, note that A = -4 and v = p. The amplitude is 0 A0 = 0 -40 = 4,
and the period is T = 2p
v = 2p
p = 2.
The graph of y = -4 cos1px2 will lie between -4 and 4 on the y-axis. One 
cycle will begin at x = 0 and end at x = 2.
Divide the interval 30, 24 into four subintervals, each of length 2 , 4 = 1
2. The 
x-coordinates of the five key points are
	
0	
0 + 1
2 = 1
2	
1
2 + 1
2 = 1	
1 + 1
2 = 3
2	
3
2 + 1
2 = 2
 
 1st x-coordinate 	 2nd x-coordinate 	
3rd x-coordinate 	 4th x-coordinate 	
5th x-coordinate
Since y = -4 cos1px2, multiply the y-coordinates of the five key points of 
y = cos x shown in Figure 56(b) by A = -4 to obtain the five key points on the 
graph of y = -4 cos1px2:
10, -42 a1
2, 0b 11, 42 a3
2, 0b 12, -42
Plot these five points, and fill in the graph of the cosine function as shown in 
Figure 59(a). Extend the graph in each direction to obtain Figure 59(b), the graph of 
y = -4 cos1px2.
A vertical shift down 2 units gives the graph of y = -4 cos1px2 - 2, as shown 
in Figure 59(c).
Solution
Figure 59 
x
y
4
2
24 (0, 24)
(2, 24)
(1, 4)
(   , 0)
22
(a)
2
1
(   , 0)
1––2
3––2
y
4
–4
–1
(0, 24)
(21, 4)
(2   , 0)
2
(b) y 5 24 cos (px)
2
1
(2, 24)
(1, 4)
(   , 0)
–2
1––
(   , 0)
(   , 0)
2
(c) y 5 24 cos (px) 2 2
Vertical shift
1–
3
2
5–
–
–
(21, 2)
Subtract 2;
down 2 units
x
y
2
–6
1
2
–1
(0, 26)
(2, 26)
(1, 2)
(2   , 22)
2
   , 22)
x
–
1––
( 1––2
   , 22)
( 3––2
The domain of y = -4 cos1px2 - 2 is the set of all real numbers, or 1 - q, q 2. 
The range of y = -4 cos1px2 - 2 is {y   -6 … y … 2}, or 3 -6, 24.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Find an Equation for a Sinusoidal Graph
Finding an Equation for a Sinusoidal Graph
Find an equation for the graph shown in Figure 60.
•
5
Example 8
Figure 60 
x
y
3
3
1
1
––2
5––4
1––2
1––4
3
––4

1
––4

Period

Section 6.4  Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions  441
The graph has the characteristics of a cosine function. Do you see why? The maximum  
value, 3, occurs at x = 0. So the equation can be viewed as a cosine function
y = A cos1vx2 with A = 3 and period T = 1. Then 2p
v = 1, so v = 2p. The cosine 
function whose graph is given in Figure 60 is
y = A cos1vx2 = 3 cos12px2
Check:	Graph Y1 = 3 cos12px2 and compare the result with Figure 60.
Finding an Equation for a Sinusoidal Graph
Find an equation for the graph shown in Figure 61.
Solution
•
Example 9
Figure 61 
x
y
2
2
2
2
3
5
4
1
1
Period
The graph is sinusoidal, with amplitude 0 A0 = 2. The period is 4, so 2p
v = 4, or
 v = p
2 . Since the graph passes through the origin, it is easier to view the equation as 
a sine function,† but note that the graph is actually the reflection of a sine function 
about the x-axis (since the graph is decreasing near the origin). This requires that 
A = -2. The sine function whose graph is given in Figure 61 is
y = A sin1vx2 = -2 sinap
2
 xb
Check:	Graph Y1 = -2 sinap
2xb and compare the result with Figure 61.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  5 7  a n d  6 1
Solution
•
†The equation could also be viewed as a cosine function with a horizontal shift, but viewing it as a sine function is easier.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Use transformations to graph y = 3x2. (pp. 127–136)
	 2.	 Use transformations to graph y = 22x. (pp. 127–136)
6.4  Assess Your Understanding
	 3.	 The maximum value of y = sin x, 0 … x … 2p, is  
 and 
occurs at x =  
.
	 4.	 The function y = A sin1vx2, A 7 0, has amplitude 3 and 
period 2; then A =    and v =  
.
	 5.	 The function y = 3 cos16x2 has amplitude  
 and 
period   .
	 6.	 True or False  The graphs of y = sin x and y = cos x are 
identical except for a horizontal shift. 
	 7.	 True or False  For y = 2 sin1px2, the amplitude is 2 and the 
period is p
2 . 
	 8.	 True or False  The graph of the sine function has infinitely 
many x-intercepts. 
	 9.	 One period of the graph of y =  sin (vx) or y =  cos (vx) is 
called a(n)  
.
(a)	 amplitude            (b)  phase shift
(c)	 transformation        (d)  cycle 
	 10.	 To graph y = 3 sin (- 2x) using key points, the equivalent 
form  
 could be graphed instead.
(a)	 y = - 3 sin (- 2x)      (b)  y = -2 sin (3x)
(c)	 y = 3 sin (2x)         (d)  y = -3 sin (2x) 
Concepts and Vocabulary

442 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Skill Building
	 11.	  f(x) = sin x
(a)	 What is the y-intercept of the graph of f? 
(b)	 For what numbers x, - p … x … p, is the graph of f  
increasing?
(c)	 What is the absolute maximum of f? 
(d)	 For what numbers x, 0 … x … 2p, does f1x2 = 0? 
(e)	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does f1x2 = 1? 
Where does f1x2 = - 1?
(f)	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does f1x2 = - 1
2?
(g)	 What are the x-intercepts of f?
	 12.	 g1x2 = cos x
(a)	 What is the y-intercept of the graph of g? 
(b)	 For what numbers x, - p … x … p, is the graph of g  
decreasing? 
(c)	 What is the absolute minimum of g? 
(d)	 For what numbers x, 0 … x … 2p, does g1x2 = 0?
(e)	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does g1x2 = 1? 
Where does g1x2 = - 1?
(f)	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does g1x2 = 23
2 ?
(g)	 What are the x-intercepts of g?
In Problems 13–22, determine the amplitude and period of each function without graphing.
	 13.	 y = 3 cos x
	 14.	 y = 2 sin x
	 15.	 y = - sina1
2
 xb
	 16.	 y = -4 cos12x2
	 17.	  y = 6 sin1px2
	 18.	 y = - 3 cos13x2
	 19.	 y = 4
3
 sina2
3
 xb
	 20.	 y = - 1
2
 cosa3
2
 xb
	 21.	 y = 9
5
 cosa- 3p
2
 xb
	 22.	 y = 5
3
 sina- 2p
3
 xb
In Problems 23–32, match the given function to one of the graphs (A)–(J).
x
y
2
2
2
2
4
(A)
x
y
2
2
2
2
4
(B)
x
y
2
2
2
2
4
(C)
x
y
2
2
(D)
2
3


5
x
y
2
2
2
2
1
1
4
3
5
(E)
x
y
2
2
2
2
1
1
4
3
5
(F)
x
y
2
2
2
2
4
(G)
x
y
3
3
(I)

–2
–2

x
y
3
3
(H)

–2
3
–––
4
5
–––
4

–4
–4

––2

x
y
3
3
(J)
3
–––
4
5
–––
4
–4
–4

	 23.	 y = 2 cosap
2
 xb 
	 24.	 y = 2 sinap
2
 xb 
	 25.	 y = 3 cos12x2 
	 26.	 y = 2 cosa1
2
 xb 
	 27.	 y = 2 sina1
2
 xb 
	 28.	 y = -3 sin12x2 
	 29.	 y = - 2 cosap
2
 xb 
	 30.	 y = - 2 cosa1
2
 xb 
	 31.	 y = -2 sina1
2
 xb 
	 32.	 y = 3 sin12x2 

Section 6.4  Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions  443
In Problems 33–56, graph each function using transformations or the method of key points. Be sure to label key points and show at least 
two cycles. Use the graph to determine the domain and the range of each function.
	 33.	 y = 3 sinx
	 37.	 y = sin13x2
	 41.	 y = 2 cosa1
4xb
	 45.	 y = 3 cos x + 2
	 49.	 y = - 6 sinap
3
 xb + 4
	 53.	 y = 9
5 cosa- 3p
2
 xb
	 34.	 y = 4 cos x
	 38.	 y = cos14x2
	 42.	 y = 2 sina1
2
 xb
	 46.	 y = 2 sin x + 3
	 50.	 y = - 3 cosap
4xb + 2
	 54.	 y = 5
3 sina- 2p
3
 xb
	 35.	  y = - 4 sin x
	 39.	  y = sin1- 2x2
	 43.	 y = - 1
2
 cos12x2
	 47.	 y = 4 sinap
2xb - 2
	 51.	 y = 2 - 4 cos13x2
	 55.	 y = - 1
2 sinap
8
 xb + 3
2
	 36.	 y = -3 cos x
	 40.	 y = cos1-2x2
	 44.	 y = -4 sina1
8xb
	 48.	 y = 5 cos1px2 - 3
	 52.	 y = 5 - 3 sin12x2
	 56.	 y = - 3
2 cosap
4
 xb + 1
2
In Problems 57–60, write the equation of a sine function that has the given characteristics.
	 57.	 Amplitude: 3
	
	 Period: p
	 58.	 Amplitude: 2
	
	 Period: 4p
	 59.	 Amplitude: 4
	
	 Period: 1
	 60.	 Amplitude: 3
	
	 Period: 2
In Problems 61–74, find an equation for each graph.
	 61.	
	 63.	
65.	
67.	
62.	
64.	
66.	
68.	
x
y
4 2
4
6
2
5
8
10
5
x
y
4 2
6
2
10
4
4
x
y
2
2
4
3
3
x
y
2 1
3
1
2
4
5
2
2
y
5–4
1–2
1–4
1–2
1
x

3–4
3–4

y
3–2
5–2
1–2
1–2
1
2
1
x

5–2
5–2

y
1
1
2
–––
3
4
–––
3
2
–––
3

x
y

2



x
	 70.	
x
y
2
1
3
––4
3––4
3
––2

x
y

2
––––
3
2
––––
3
4
––––
3
1––2

3
––2

	 69.	

444 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
	 71.	
	 72.	
	 73.	
	 74.	
22
23
3
6
22
22
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
24
4
2
24
4

Mixed Practice
In Problems 75–78, find the average rate of change of f from 0 to p
2 .
	 75.	 f1x2 = sin x
	 76.	 f1x2 = cos x
	 77.	 f1x2 = sin x
2
	 78.	 f1x2 = cos12x2
In Problems 79–82, find 1f ∘g2 1x2 and 1g ∘f2 1x2, and graph each of these functions.
In Problems 83 and 84, graph each function.
	 83.	 f1x2 = c
sin x
0 … x 6 5p
4
cos x
5p
4
… x … 2p
	 79.	  f1x2 = sin x
	
	  g1x2 = 4x
	 80.	  f1x2 = cos x
	
	  g1x2 = 1
2 x
	 81.	  f1x2 = - 2x
	
	  g1x2 = cos x
	 82.	  f1x2 = -3x
	
	  g1x2 = sin x
	 84.	 g1x2 = b2 sin x
0 … x … p
cos x + 1
p 6 x … 2p
Applications and Extensions
	 85.	 Alternating Current (ac) Circuits  The current I, in amperes, 
flowing through an ac (alternating current) circuit at time t, 
in seconds, is
	
	
I1t2 = 220 sin160pt2   t Ú 0
	
	 What is the period? What is the amplitude? Graph this  
function over two periods.
	 86.	 Alternating Current (ac) Circuits  The current I, in amperes, 
flowing through an ac (alternating current) circuit at time t, 
in seconds, is
	
	
I1t2 = 120 sin130pt2   t Ú 0
	
	 What is the period? What is the amplitude? Graph this  
function over two periods.
	 87.	 Alternating Current (ac) Generators  The voltage V, in volts, 
produced by an ac generator at time t, in seconds, is
	
	
V1t2 = 220 sin1120pt2
(a)	 What is the amplitude? What is the period?
(b)	 Graph V over two periods, beginning at t = 0.
(c)	 If a resistance of R = 10 ohms is present, what is the 
current I?
	
[Hint: Use Ohm’s Law, V = IR.]
(d)	 What are the amplitude and period of the current I?
(e)	 Graph I over two periods, beginning at t = 0.
	 88.	 Alternating Current (ac) Generators  The voltage V, in volts, 
produced by an ac generator at time t, in seconds, is
	
	
V1t2 = 120 sin1120pt2
(a)	 What is the amplitude? What is the period?
(b)	 Graph V over two periods, beginning at t = 0.
(c)	 If a resistance of R = 20 ohms is present, what is the 
current I?
	
[Hint: Use Ohm’s Law, V = IR.]
(d)	 What are the amplitude and period of the current I?
(e)	 Graph I over two periods, beginning at t = 0.
	 89.	 Alternating Current (ac) Generators    The voltage V  
produced by an ac generator is sinusoidal. As a function of 
time, the voltage V is
	
	
V1t2 = V0 sin12pft2
	
	 where f is the frequency, the number of complete  
oscillations (cycles) per second. [In the United States and 
Canada, f is 60 hertz (Hz).] The power P delivered to a  
resistance R at any time t is defined as
P1t2 =
3V1t2 42
R
(a)	 Show that P1t2 = V0
2
R  sin212pft2.
(continued on the next page)

Section 6.4  Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions  445
(b)	 The graph of P is shown in the figure. Express P as a 
sinusoidal function.
	 91.	 Biorhythms  In the theory of biorhythms, a sine function of 
the form
P1t2 = 50 sin1vt2 + 50
	
	 is used to measure the percent P of a person’s potential at 
time t, where t is measured in days and t = 0 is the day the 
person is born. Three characteristics are commonly measured:
Physical potential: period of 23 days
Emotional potential: period of 28 days
Intellectual potential: period of 33 days
(a)	 Find v for each characteristic.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, graph all three functions on the 
same screen.
(c)	 Is there a time t when all three characteristics have 
100, potential? When is it? 
(d)	 Suppose that you are 20 years old today 1t = 7305 days2. 
Describe your physical, emotional, and intellectual  
potential for the next 30 days.
P
V0
2
––
R
1–2f 
3–4f 
1–f 
1–4f 
t
Power in an ac generator
15 ft
28 ft
14 ft
(c)	 Deduce that
sin212pft2 = 1
2
 31 - cos14pft2 4
	 90.	 Bridge Clearance    A one-lane highway runs through a  
tunnel in the shape of one-half a sine curve cycle. The  
opening is 28 feet wide at road level and is 15 feet tall at its 
highest point.
(a)	 Find an equation for the sine curve that fits the opening. 
Place the origin at the left end of the opening.
(b)	 If the road is 14 feet wide with 7-foot shoulders on each 
side, what is the height of the tunnel at the edge of the 
road? 
Source: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interstate_Highway_standards  
and Ohio Revised Code
	 92.	 Graph y = 0 cos x0 , - 2p … x … 2p.
	 93.	 Graph y = 0 sin x0 , - 2p … x … 2p.
In Problems 94–97, the graphs of the given pairs of functions intersect  
infinitely many times. In each problem, find four of these points of 
intersection.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 98.	 Explain how you would scale the x-axis and y-axis before 
graphing y = 3 cos1px2.
	 99.	 Explain the term amplitude as it relates to the graph of a 
sinusoidal function.
	100.	 Explain the term period as it relates to the graph of a  
sinusoidal function.
	101.	 Explain how the amplitude and period of a sinusoidal graph 
are used to establish the scale on each coordinate axis.
	102.	 Find an application in your major field that leads to a  
sinusoidal graph. Write a summary of your findings.
 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 103–106 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	103.	 If f1x2 = x2 - 5x + 1, find 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
.
	104.	 Find the vertex of the graph of g1x2 = - 3x2 + 12x - 7. 
	105.	 Find the intercepts of the graph of h1x2 = 3   x + 2   - 1.
	106.	 Solve:  3x - 215x + 162 = - 3x + 418 + x2
	 96.	 y = 2 sin x
	
	 y = - 2
	 97.	 y = 2 tan x
	
	 y = -2
	 94.	 y = sin x
	
	 y = 1
2
	 95.	 y = -cos x
	
	 y = 1
2

446 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
The Graph of the Tangent Function y = tan x
Because the tangent function has period p, we only need to determine the 
graph over some interval of length p. The rest of the graph will consist of 
repetitions of that graph. Because the tangent function is not defined at
c, - 3p
2 , - p
2 , p
2 , 3p
2 , c, we will concentrate on the interval a - p
2 , p
2 b, of 
length p, and construct Table 8, which lists some points on the graph of y = tan x, 
- p
2 6 x 6 p
2 . We plot the points in the table and connect them with a smooth 
curve. See Figure 62 for a partial graph of y = tan x, where - p
3 … x … p
3 .
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 Vertical stretch by a factor of 3	
2.  Horizontal compression by a factor of 1
2
x
y
2
1
4
2
1
2
(1, 3)
(0, 0)
(1, 3)
x
y
4
3
(2, 2)
(0, 0)
(       )
1
2
, 1
6.5	 Graphs of the Tangent, Cotangent,  
Cosecant, and Secant Functions
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Vertical Asymptotes (Section 4.2, pp. 226–227)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 451.
	
Objectives	 	1  Graph Functions of the Form y = A tan (vx) + B  
and y = A cot (vx) + B  (p. 448)
	
	 	2  Graph Functions of the Form y = A csc (vx) + B  
and y = A sec (vx) + B  (p. 450)
Figure 62  y = tan x, - p
3 … x … p
3
Table 8
x
y = tan x
(x, y)
- p
3
- 23 ≈-1.73
a- p
3
 , - 23b
- p
4
-1
a- p
4
 , -1b
- p
6
- 23
3
≈-0.58
a- p
6
 , - 23
3 b
0
0
(0, 0)
p
6
23
3
≈0.58
ap
6
 , 23
3 b
p
4
1
ap
4
 , 1b
p
3
23 ≈1.73
ap
3
 , 23b
x
y
3
1
1
3

 3


3
(   , 1)
(0, 0)
(   ,      )
(   ,      )
(       ,         )

(       , 1)

(       ,      )

––2


––3


––6


––6

––6

––6

––2

––4

––4

––3

––3

––3
3
––3
3
––3
3
––3
3––3

Section 6.5  Graphs of the Tangent, Cotangent, Cosecant, and Secant Functions   447
To complete one period of the graph of y = tan x, we need to investigate the 
behavior of the function as x approaches - p
2  and p
2 . We must be careful, though, 
because y = tan x is not defined at these numbers. To determine this behavior, we 
use the identity
tan x = sin x
cos x
See Table 9. If x is close to p
2 ≈1.5708 but remains less than p
2 , then sin x will
be close to 1, and cos x will be positive and close to 0. (To see this, refer to the graphs 
of the sine function and the cosine function.) So the ratio sin x
cos x will be positive and 
large. In fact, the closer x gets to p
2 , the closer sin x gets to 1 and cos x gets to 0, so
tan x approaches q alim
xSp
2
-tan x = q b. In other words, the vertical line x = p
2  is a 
vertical asymptote to the graph of y = tan x.
Table 9 
x
sin x
cos x
y = tan x
p
3 ≈1.05
23
2
1
2
23 ≈1.73
1.5
0.9975
0.0707
14.1
1.57
0.9999
7.96 * 10-4
1255.8
1.5707
0.9999
9.6 * 10-5
10,381
p
2 ≈1.5708
1
0
Undefined
If x is close to - p
2  but remains greater than - p
2 , then sin x is close to -1, 
and cos x is positive and close to 0. The ratio sin x
cos x approaches - q 
a lim
xS - p
2
+tan x = - q b. In other words, the vertical line x = - p
2  is also a vertical  
asymptote to the graph.
With these observations, one period of the graph can be completed. Obtain the 
complete graph of y = tan x by repeating this period, as shown in Figure 63.
Check: Graph Y1 = tan x and 
compare the result with Figure 63.  
Use TRACE to see what happens
as x gets close to p
2  but remains 
less than p
2 .
Figure 63  y = tan x, - q 6 x 6 q, x not equal to odd multiples of p
2, - q 6 y 6 q
x
y
1
1
2
2



––2

––2


5
–––
2
3
–––
2
5
–––
2
3
–––
2
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
(     , 1)

––4
(     , 1)

––4
The graph of y = tan x in Figure 63 illustrates the following properties.

448 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  7  a n d  1 5
Graph Functions of the Form y =  A tan(Vx) + B 
and y = A cot(Vx) + B
For tangent functions, there is no concept of amplitude since the range of the tangent  
function is 1 - q, q 2. The role of A in y = A tan 1vx2 + B is to provide the 
magnitude of the vertical stretch. The period of y = tan x is p, so the period of
y = A tan 1vx2 + B is p
v, caused by the horizontal compression of the graph by a
factor of 1
v. Finally, the presence of B indicates that a vertical shift is required.
Graphing Functions of the Form y = A tan(Vx) + B
Graph y = 2 tan x - 1. Use the graph to determine the domain and the range of  
the function y = 2 tan x - 1.
Figure 64 shows the steps using transformations.
1
Example 1
Solution
Properties of the Tangent Function
	 1.	 The domain is the set of all real numbers, except odd multiples of p
2 .
	 2.	 The range is the set of all real numbers.
	 3.	 The tangent function is an odd function, as the symmetry of the graph with 
respect to the origin indicates.
	 4.	 The tangent function is periodic, with period p.
	 5.	 The x-intercepts are c, -2p, -p, 0, p, 2p, 3p, c; the y-intercept is 0.
	 6.	 Vertical asymptotes occur at x = c, - 3p
2 , - p
2 , p
2 , 3p
2 ,c.
Figure 64 
y
y
x
1
p
p
––2
p
––2
2
3p
–––
2
(   , 1)
(0, 0)
(p, 0)
(0, 0)
(p, 0)
p
––4
(2   , 21)
p
––4
(a) y 5 tan x
(b) y 5 2 tan x
x
1
2
1
2
21
2
22
p
p
––2
p
––2
2
3p
–––
2
(   , 2)
p
––4
(2   , 22)
p
––4
Multiply by 2;
Vertical stretch
by a factor of 2
Subtract 1;
Vertically shift
down 1 unit
x 5
x 5
x 5
x 5
x 5
x 5
y
(c) y 5 2 tan x 21
x
21
(p, 21)
p
––2
p
––2
2
3p
–––
2
(   , 1)
(0, 21)
p
––4
(2   , 23)
p
––4
x 5
x 5
x 5
The domain of y = 2 tan x - 1 is ex ` x ≠kp
2 , k is an odd integer f, and the 
range is the set of all real numbers, or 1 - q, q 2.
Graphing Functions of the Form y = A tan(Vx) + B
Graph y = 3 tan12x2. Use the graph to determine the domain and the range of 
y = 3 tan12x2.
•
Example 2
Check: Graph Y1 = 2 tan x - 1 
to verify the graph shown in  
Figure 64(c).

Section 6.5  Graphs of the Tangent, Cotangent, Cosecant, and Secant Functions   449
The domain of y = 3 tan 12x2 is ex `  x ≠kp
4 , k is an odd integer f, and the 
range is the set of all real numbers, or 1 - q, q 2.
Check:	Graph Y1 = 3 tan12x2 to verify the graph in Figure 65(c).
Note in Figure 65(c) that the period of y = 3 tan12x2 is p
2  because of the  
compression of the original period p by a factor of 1
2. Notice that the asymptotes  
are x = - p
4, x = p
4, x = 3p
4 , and so on, also because of the compression.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
The Graph of the Cotangent Function y = cot x
The graph of y = cot x can be obtained in the same manner as the graph of y = tan x. 
The period of y = cot x is p. Because the cotangent function is not defined for integer  
multiples of p, concentrate on the interval 10, p2. Table 10 lists some points on the 
graph of y = cot x, 0 6 x 6 p. As x approaches 0 but remains greater than 0, the 
value of cos x will be close to 1, and the value of sin x will be positive and close to 0.
The ratio cos x
sin x = cot x will be positive and large; so as x approaches 0, with x 7 0, 
then cot x approaches q 1lim
xS0+cot x = q 2. Similarly, as x approaches p but 
remains less than p, the value of cos x will be close to -1, and the value of sin x 
will be positive and close to 0. So the ratio cos x
sin x = cot x will be negative and will 
approach - q as x approaches p 1 lim
xSp-cot x = - q 2. Figure 66 shows the graph.
•
Figure 65 
y
x
1
(0, 0)
(, 0)



––2

––2

3
–––
2
(   , 1)

––4
(   , 1)

––4
Multiply by 3;
Vertical stretch by
a factor of 3
Replace x by 2x ;
Horizontal compression
by a factor of
(a) y  tan x
(c) y  3 tan (2x )
x 
x 
x 
y
(0, 0)
3
3
3
y
(b) y  3 tan x
x
(0, 0)
(, 0)

––2

––2

3
–––
2
(    , 3)
5
–––
4
(    , 3)
5
–––
8
(    , 3)
3
–––
8
1––2
(    , 3)

––4
(    ,3)
3
––4
(   , 3)

––4
x 
x 

––4
x 
x 
x

––4

3
–––
4
(   , 3)

––8
(   , 3)

––8
(   , 0)

––2
x 
x 
(    , 1)
5
–––
4
(    , 1)
3
–––
4
Figure 66  y = cot x, - q 6 x 6 q, x not equal to integer multiples of p, - q 6 y 6 q
Table 10 
x
y = cot x
(x, y)
p
6
23
ap
6
 , 23b
p
4
1
ap
4
 , 1b
p
3
23
3
ap
3
 , 23
3 b
p
2
0
ap
2
 , 0b
2p
3
- 23
3
a2p
3
 , - 23
3 b
3p
4
-1
a3p
4
 , -1b
5p
6
- 23
a5p
6
 , - 23b
x

2
–2
–
y
–1
1
3
––2
–
––2
–2
3
––2
3
–––
4
5
––2
x 
x 
x 
x  0
(     , 1)

––4
(    , 1)
x 
Figure 65 shows the steps using transformations.
Solution

450 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
The graph of y = A cot1vx2 + B has characteristics similar to those of the 
tangent function. The cotangent function y = A cot1vx2 + B has period p
v. The
cotangent function has no amplitude. The role of A is to provide the magnitude of 
the vertical stretch; the presence of B indicates that a vertical shift is required.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
The Graphs of the Cosecant Function and the Secant Function
The cosecant and secant functions, sometimes referred to as reciprocal functions, 
are graphed by making use of the reciprocal identities
csc x =
1
sin x and sec x =
1
cos x
For example, the value of the cosecant function y = csc x at a given number x 
equals the reciprocal of the corresponding value of the sine function, provided that 
the value of the sine function is not 0. If the value of  sin x is 0, then x is an integer 
multiple of p. At such numbers, the cosecant function is not defined. In fact, the 
graph of the cosecant function has vertical asymptotes at integer multiples of p. 
Figure 67 shows the graph.
Figure 67  y = csc x, - q 6 x 6 q, x not equal to integer multiples of p, 0 y0 Ú 1
Figure 68  y = sec x, - q 6 x 6 q, x not equal to odd multiples of p
2, 0 y0 Ú 1
x
y
1
(   , 1)
Using the idea of reciprocals, the graph of y = sec x can be obtained in a similar 
manner. See Figure 68.
3
–––
2
x  
3
–––
2
x  

––2
x  

––2
x  
y  sec x
x
y
1
(, 1)
(, 1)
(0, 1)
y  cos x
2


1
Graph Functions of the Form y = A csc(Vx) + B  
and y = A sec(Vx) + B
The role of A in these functions is to set the range. The range of y = csc x is 
{y y … -1 or y Ú 1} or {y   y Ú 1}; the range of y = A csc x is 5y  y Ú  A 6
2

Section 6.5  Graphs of the Tangent, Cotangent, Cosecant, and Secant Functions   451
because of the vertical stretch of the graph by a factor of  A . Just as with the sine 
and cosine functions, the period of y = csc1vx2 and y = sec1vx2 becomes 2p
v
because of the horizontal compression of the graph by a factor of 1
v. The presence 
of B indicates that a vertical shift is required.
Graphing Functions of the Form y = A csc (Vx) + B
Graph y = 2 csc x - 1. Use the graph to determine the domain and the range of 
y = 2 csc x - 1.
We use transformations. Figure 69 shows the required steps.
Example 3
Solution
Figure 69 
x
y
1
x
y
1
2
Multiply by 2;
Vertical stretch
by a factor of 2
x
y
1
2
Subtract 1;
Vertical shift
down 1 unit
(    , 2)
(    , 1)
(    , 1)
(a) y  csc x
(b) y  2 csc x
(c) y  2 csc x 1
The domain of y = 2 csc x - 1 is {x x ≠kp, k is an integer6 and the range is 
5y y … -3 or y Ú 16, or, using interval notation, 1 - q, -34 h 31, q 2.
Check:	Graph Y1 = 2 csc x - 1 to verify the graph shown in Figure 69.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The graph of y = 3x - 6
x - 4  has a vertical asymptote. What  
is it? (pp. 225–227)
	 2.	 True or False  If x = 3 is a vertical asymptote of a rational 
function R, then lim
xS3 R(x)  = q. (pp. 225–227) 
	 3.	 The graph of y = tan x is symmetric with respect to the  
 
  and has vertical asymptotes at  
.
	 4.	 The graph of y = sec x is symmetric with respect to the 
 
  and has vertical asymptotes at  
.
	 5.	 It is easiest to graph y = sec x by first sketching the graph  
of   
. 
(a)	 y = sin x  (b)  y = cos x  (c)  y = tan x  (d)   y = csc x
	 6.	 True or False  The graphs of y = tan x, y = cot x, y = sec x, 
and 
y = csc x 
each 
have 
infinitely 
many 
vertical  
asymptotes. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
6.5  Assess Your Understanding

452 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
	 7.	 What is the y-intercept of y = tan x? 
	 8.	 What is the y-intercept of y = cot x? 
Skill Building
In Problems 7–16, if necessary, refer to the graphs of the functions to answer each question.
	 17.	 y = - 2 tan x
	 18.	 y = 3 tan x
	 19.	 y = - 3 cot x
	 20.	 y = 4 cot x
	 21.	 y = tanap
2
 xb
	 22.	 y = tana1
2
 xb
	 23.	 y = cota1
4
 xb
	 24.	 y = cotap
4
 xb
	 25.	 y = 1
2 csc x
	 26.	 y = 2 sec x
	 27.	 y = - 4 sec x
	 28.	 y = - 3 csc x
	 29.	 y = 4 seca1
2
 xb
	 30.	 y = 1
2 csc(2x)
	 31.	 y = - 3 secap
2
 xb
	 32.	 y = - 2 csc(px)
	 33.	 y = 2 cot x - 1
	 34.	 y = tana1
4
 xb + 1
	 35.	 y = csca3p
2
 xb
	 36.	 y = seca2p
3
 xb + 2
	 37.	 y = 1
2 tana1
4
 xb - 2
	 38.	 y = 3 cota1
2
 xb - 2
	 39.	 y = 3 seca1
4
 xb + 1
	 40.	 y = 2 csca1
3
 xb - 1
In Problems 17–40, graph each function. Be sure to label key points and show at least two cycles. Use the graph to determine the domain 
and the range of each function.
Mixed Practice
In Problems 41–44, find the average rate of change of f from 0 to p
6 .
	 41.	 f1x2 = tan x
	 42.	 f1x2 = sec x
	 43.	 f1x2 = tan12x2
	 44.	 f1x2 = sec12x2
In Problems 45–48, find ( f ∘g)(x) and (g ∘f )(x), and graph each of these functions.
	 45.	  f1x2 = tan x
	
	  g1x2 = 4x
	 46.	  f1x2 = 2 sec x
	
	  g1x2 = 1
2 x
	 47.	  f1x2 = - 2x
	
	  g1x2 = cot  x
	 48.	  f1x2 = 1
2
 x
	
	  g1x2 = 2 csc x
In Problems 49 and 50, graph each function.
	 49.	 f1x2 = e
tan x
0 … x 6 p
2
0
x = p
2
sec x
p
2 6 x … p
	 50.	 g1x2 = c
csc x
0 6 x 6 p
0
x = p
cot x
p 6 x 6 2p
	 9.	 What is the y-intercept of y = csc x
	 11.	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does csc x = 1? For 
what numbers x does csc x = - 1?
	 13.	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does the graph of 
y = csc x have vertical asymptotes? 
	 15.	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does the graph of 
y = tan x have vertical asymptotes?
	 10.	 What is the y-intercept of y = sec x? 
	 12.	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does sec x = 1? For 
what numbers x does sec x = - 1
	 14.	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does the graph of 
y = sec x have vertical asymptotes?
	 16.	 For what numbers x, - 2p … x … 2p, does the graph of 
y = cot x have vertical asymptotes?

Section 6.5  Graphs of the Tangent, Cotangent, Cosecant, and Secant Functions   453
	 51.	 Carrying a Ladder around a Corner  Two hallways, one of 
width 3 feet, the other of width 4 feet, meet at a right angle. 
See the illustration.
	
	 The beacon light on top of the fire truck is located 10 feet 
from the wall and has a light on each side. If the beacon 
light rotates 1 revolution every 2 seconds, then a model for  
determining the distance d, in feet, that the beacon of light is 
from point A on the wall after t seconds is given by
d1t2 = 10 tan1pt2 
(a)	 Graph d1t2 = 10 tan1pt2  for 0 … t … 2.
(b)	 For what values of t is the function undefined? Explain 
what this means in terms of the beam of light on the 
wall.
(c)	 Fill in the following table.
t
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
d(t) = 10 tan(Pt)
 
Applications and Extensions
(a)	 Show that the length L of the ladder shown as a function 
of the angle u is
L1u2 = 3 sec u + 4 csc u
(b)	 Graph L = L1u2, 0 6 u 6 p
2 .
(c)	 For what value of u is L the least?  
(d)	 What is the length of the longest ladder that can be carried 
around the corner? Why is this also the least value of L?
	 52.	 A Rotating Beacon  Suppose that a fire truck is parked in 
front of a building as shown in the figure.
(d)	 Compute 
d10.12 - d102
0.1 - 0
, 
d10.22 - d10.12
0.2 - 0.1
, and so on,  
for each consecutive value of t. These are called first 
	
differences.
(e)	 Interpret the first differences found in part (d). What 
is happening to the speed of the beam of light as d  
increases?
	 53.	 Exploration  Graph
y = tan x and y = -cotax + p
2 b
	
	 Do you think that tan x = - cotax + p
2 b?
	 1.	 x = 4	
2.  True
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
u
4 ft
3 ft
L
F I R E   L A N E
d
10 ft
A
 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 54–57 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 54.	 Investment  If $8000 is invested in an account earning 4% interest compounded monthly, how much will be in the account after 
7 years? Round to two decimal places. 
 
	 55.	 Find the zero(s) of the function f1x2 = 1ex - 12ln 1x + 22. 
	 56.	 Solve: 9x-1 = 3x2-5
	 57.	 Use the slope and the y-intercept to graph the linear function f (x) = 1
4
 x - 3.

454 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Graph Sinusoidal Functions of the Form 
y = A sin(Vx −F) + B
We have seen that the graph of y = A sin 1vx2, v 7 0, has amplitude 0 A0  and 
period T = 2p
v . One cycle can be drawn as x varies from 0 to 2p
v , or, equivalently, 
as vx varies from 0 to 2p. See Figure 70.
Now consider the graph of
y = A sin 1vx - f2
which may also be written as
y = A sinc vax - f
v b d
where v 7 0 and f (the Greek letter phi) are real numbers. The graph is a sine curve 
with amplitude  A . As vx - f varies from 0 to 2p, one period will be traced out. 
This period begins when
vx - f = 0  or x = f
v
and ends when
vx - f = 2p or x = f
v + 2p
v
See Figure 71.
Notice that the graph of y = A sin 1vx - f2 = A sinc vax - f
v b d  is the same
as the graph of y = A sin1vx2, except that it has been shifted ` f
v `  units (to the
right if f 7 0 and to the left if f 6 0). This number f
v is called the phase shift of 
the graph of y = A sin1vx - f2.
1
6.6	 Phase Shift; Sinusoidal Curve Fitting
	
Objectives	 	1  Graph Sinusoidal Functions of the Form y = A sin(vx - f) + B  (p. 454)
	
	 	2  Build Sinusoidal Models from Data  (p. 457)
Figure 70  One cycle of 
y = A sin(vx), A 7 0, v 7 0
x
y
A
2A
Period 5 2p
–––v
2p
–––v
Note  The beginning and end of the  
period can also be found by solving  
the inequality:
 0 … vx - f … 2p
 f … vx … 2p + f
	
 f
v … x … 2p
v
+ f
v	
■
For the graphs of y = A sin1vx - f2 or y = A cos1vx - f2, v 7 0,
Amplitude = 0 A0  Period = T = 2p
v   Phase shift = f
v
The phase shift is to the left if f 6 0 and to the right if f 7 0.
Figure 71  One cycle of 
y = A sin1vx - f2, A 7 0, 
v 7 0, f 7 0
x
y
A
A
Period 
Phase
shift
2
–––
v
f
–––v
2
–––
v

f
––v
Finding the Amplitude, Period, and Phase Shift of a Sinusoidal 
Function and Graphing It
Find the amplitude, period, and phase shift of y = 3 sin12x - p2, and graph the 
function.
Use the same four steps used to graph sinusoidal functions of the form 
y = A sin 1vx2 or y = A cos 1vx2 given on page 438.
Step 1:  Compare
y = 3 sin12x - p2 = 3 sinc 2ax - p
2 b d
Example 1
Solution

Section 6.6  Phase Shift; Sinusoidal Curve Fitting  455
to
y = A sin1vx - f2 = A sinc vax - f
v b d
Note that A = 3, v = 2, and f = p. The graph is a sine curve with amplitude  
0 A0 = 3, period T = 2p
v = 2p
2
= p, and phase shift = f
v = p
2 .
Step 2:  The graph of y = 3 sin12x - p2 will lie between -3 and 3 on the y-axis. One 
cycle will begin at x = f
v = p
2  and end at x = f
v + 2p
v = p
2 + p = 3p
2 . 
	
To find the five key points, divide the interval c p
2 , 3p
2 d  into four subintervals, 
each of length p , 4 = p
4
 , by finding the following values of x:
     
p
2         p
2 + p
4 = 3p
4     3p
4
+ p
4 = p    p + p
4 = 5p
4     5p
4
+ p
4 = 3p
2
1st x-coordinate 
2nd x-coordinate 
 3rd x-coordinate  
  4th x-coordinate  
  5th x-coordinate
Step 3:  Use these values of x to determine the five key points on the graph:
ap
2 , 0b a3p
4 , 3b 1p, 02 a5p
4 , -3b a3p
2 , 0b
Step 4:  Plot these five points and fill in the graph of the sine function as  
shown in Figure 72(a). Extend the graph in each direction to obtain  
Figure 72(b).
Note  The interval defining one cycle can 
also be found by solving the inequality
 0 … 2x - p … 2p
Then
     p … 2x … 3p
	
  p
2 … x
… 3p
2 	
■
Figure 72 
(    , 3)
9
–––
4
(    , 0)
3
–––
2
(    , 3)
7
–––
4
(    , 3)
(a)
5
–––
4
5
–––
4
(    , 0)
3
–––
2
(    , 3)
3
–––
4
3
–––
4
x
3
2
1
1
2
3
(, 0)
(    , 0)

–––
2

–––
4

–––
2

–––
4
(    , 3)
(b)
5
–––
4
5
–––
4
(    , 0)
5
–––
2
(    , 3)
3
–––
4
3
–––
4
x
y
y
3
2
1

1
2
3
9
–––
4
7
–––
4

–––
4
(π, 0)
(2π, 0)
(    , 0)

–––
2
(    , 3)

–––
4
(    , 0)

–––
2
(    , 3)

–––
4
The graph of y = 3 sin 12x - p2 = 3 sinc 2ax - p
2 b d  may also be obtained  
using transformations. See Figure 73.
1
2
1

2
1
2

–––2

2

2

2
Multiply by 3;
Vertical stretch
by a factor of 3
Replace x by 2x;
Horizontal compression
by a factor of    
Replace x by x    
Shift right
   units
(a) y  sin x
(b) y  3 sin x
(c) y  3 sin (2x)
(d) y  3 sin [2 (x    )]
 3 sin (2x  )
y
3
3
y
x
2 x
3
3
y




x
3
3
y
x
;
(    , 1)
3
–––
2
(    , 3)
3
–––
2
(    , 1)

–––
2
(    , 3)

–––
2
(    , 3)
(    , 3)

–––
4

–––
4
(    , 3)
(    , 3)
3
–––
4
3
–––
4
Figure 73 
•
Check:	Graph Y1 = 3 sin(2x - p) using a graphing utility to verify Figure 73(d).
To graph a sinusoidal function of the form y = A sin1vx - f2 + B, first graph 
the function y = A sin1vx - f2 and then apply a vertical shift.

456 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Finding the Amplitude, Period, and Phase Shift of a Sinusoidal 
Function and Graphing It
Find the amplitude, period, and phase shift of y = 2 cos14x + 3p2 + 1, and graph 
the function.
Step 1:  Compare
y = 2 cos14x + 3p2 = 2 cosc 4ax + 3p
4 b d
to
y = A cos1vx - f2 = A cosc vax - f
v b d
Note that A = 2, v = 4, and f = -3p. The graph is a cosine curve with  
amplitude 0 A0 = 2, period T = 2p
v = 2p
4 = p
2, and phase shift = f
v = - 3p
4 .
Step 2:  The graph of y = 2 cos 14x + 3p2 will lie between -2 and 2 on the y-axis.
One cycle begins at x = f
v = - 3p
4  and ends at x = f
v + 2p
v  =
- 3p
4
+ p
2 = - p
4 . To find the five key points, divide the interval 
c - 3p
4 , - p
4 d  into four subintervals, each of the length p
2 , 4 = p
8
 , by 
finding the following values.
Example 2
Solution
Note  The interval defining one cycle can 
also be found by solving the inequality
 0 … 4x + 3p … 2p
Then
 - 3p … 4x … - p
	
 - 3p
4
… x … - p
4	
■
     
-  3p
4     -  3p
4
+ p
8 = -  5p
8     -  5p
8
+ p
8 = -  p
2     -  p
2 + p
8 = -  3p
8     -  3p
8
+ p
8 = -  p
4
1st x-coordinate  
 
2nd x-coordinate 
 
 
 
3rd x-coordinate 
 
 
  4th x-coordinate 
 
 
  5th x-coordinate
Step 3:  The five key points on the graph of y = 2 cos14x + 3p2 are
a - 3p
4 , 2b a - 5p
8 , 0b a - p
2 , -2b a - 3p
8 , 0b a - p
4 , 2b
Step 4:  Plot these five points and fill in the graph of the cosine function as shown in 
Figure 74(a). Extend the graph in each direction to obtain Figure 74(b), the 
graph of y = 2 cos14x + 3p2.
Step 5:  A vertical shift up 1 unit gives the final graph. See Figure 74(c).
Add 1;
Vertical shift 
up 1 unit
x
y
2
2

––2

––4

––8

––8

––4
3
–––
8
5
–––
8
(    , 2)

–––
4
(    , 2)

–––
4
(    , 2)

–––
2
x
y
2
2

––2

––4

––8

––8
3
–––
8
5
–––
8
3
–––
4
(    , 2)
3
–––
4
(    , 2)

–––
4
(    , 2)

–––
2
(a)
x
y
3
2

––2

––4

––8

––8

––4
3
–––
8
5
–––
8
(    , 3)

–––
4
(    , 1)

–––8
(    , 3)

–––
4
(    , 1)

–––
2
(c) y  2 cos (4x  3)  1
(b) y  2 cos (4x  3)
Figure 74 
•

Section 6.6  Phase Shift; Sinusoidal Curve Fitting  457
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3
Add 1;
Vertical shift
up 1 unit
3p
4
1
4
3p
4
Replace x by 4x;
Horizontal compression
by a factor of   
;
Replace x by x 1   
Shift left       units
p
2
p
4
(a) y 5 2 cos x
(b) y 5 2 cos (4x)
22
2p
p
2
y
x
22
2
y
x
(    , 22)
(p, 22)
(2p, 2)
p
–––
4
(    , 2)
p
–––
2
x
y
2
22
2p
––2
2p
––4
2p
––8
p
––8
p
––4
23p
–––
8
25p
–––
8
23p
–––
4
(2    , 2)
3p
–––
4
(2    , 2)
p
–––
4
(    , 2)
p
–––
4
(2    , 22)
p
–––
2
3p
4
(c) y 5 2 cos [4 (x 1    )]
    5 2 cos (4x 1 3p)
x
y
3
22
2p
––2
2p
––4
2p
––8
p
––8
p
––4
23p
–––
8
25p
–––
8
23p
–––
4
(2    , 3)
3p
–––
4
(2    , 3)
p
–––
4
(    , 3)
p
–––
4
(    , 1)
p
–––8
(2    , 21)
p
–––
2
(d) y 5 2 cos (4x 1 3p)11
(2    , 1)
p
–––8
(2    , 1)
3p
–––
8
(2    , 1)
5p
–––
8
Summary
Steps for Graphing Sinusoidal Functions y = A sin(Vx −F) + B or y = A cos(Vx −F) + B
Step 1:  Determine the amplitude 0 A0 , period T = 2p
v , and phase shift f
v.
Step 2:  Determine the starting point of one cycle of the graph, f
v. Determine the ending point of one cycle of the 
graph, f
v + 2p
v . Divide the interval c f
v , f
v + 2p
v d  into four subintervals, each of length 2p
v , 4.
Step 3:  Use the endpoints of the subintervals to find the five key points on the graph.
Step 4:  Plot the five key points, and connect them with a sinusoidal graph to obtain one cycle of the graph. Extend 
the graph in each direction to make it complete.
Step 5:  If B ≠0, apply a vertical shift.
Build Sinusoidal Models from Data
Scatter diagrams of data sometimes resemble the graph of a sinusoidal function. 
Let’s look at an example.
The data given in Table 11 on the next page represent the average monthly  
temperatures in Denver, Colorado. Since the data represent average monthly  
temperatures collected over many years, the data will not vary much from year to 
year and so will essentially repeat each year. In other words, the data are periodic. 
Figure 76 shows the scatter diagram of these data, where x = 1 represents January, 
x = 2 represents February, and so on.
Notice that the scatter diagram looks like the graph of a sinusoidal function.  
We choose to fit the data to a sine function of the form
y = A sin 1vx - f2 + B
where A, B, v, and f are constants.
2
The graph of y = 2 cos 14x + 3p2 + 1 = 2 cos c 4ax + 3p
4 b d + 1 may also be  
obtained using transformations. See Figure 75.
Figure 75 
•

458 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Finding a Sinusoidal Function from Temperature Data
Fit a sine function to the data in Table 11.
Begin with a scatter diagram of the data for one year. See Figure 77.   The data will be 
fitted to a sine function of the form
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B
Step 1:  To find the amplitude A, compute
 Amplitude = largest data value - smallest data value
2
 = 74.2 - 30.0
2
= 22.1
To see the remaining steps in this process, superimpose the graph of the 
function y = 22.1 sin x, where x represents months, on the scatter diagram.
Figure 78 shows the two graphs. To fit the data, the graph needs to be 
shifted vertically, shifted horizontally, and stretched horizontally.
Step 2:  Determine the vertical shift by finding the average of the highest and lowest 
data values.
Vertical shift = 74.2 + 30.0
2
= 52.1
Now superimpose the graph of y = 22.1 sin x + 52.1 on the scatter diagram.  
See Figure 79 on the next page.
We see that the graph needs to be shifted horizontally and stretched 
horizontally.
Step 3:  It is easier to find the horizontal stretch factor first. Since the temperatures 
repeat every 12 months, the period of the function is T = 12. Because
T = 2p
v = 12,
v = 2p
12 = p
6
Example 3
Solution
Figure 76  Denver average monthly 
temperature
0
12
2
4
6
8
10
75
30
y
x
Table 11
January, 1
February, 2
March, 3
April, 4
May, 5
June, 6
July, 7
August, 8
September, 9
October, 10
November, 11
December, 12
30.7
32.5
40.4
47.4
57.1
67.4
74.2
72.5
62.4
50.9
38.3
30.0
Source: U.S. National Oceanic and
              Atmospheric  Administration
Month, x
Average Monthly
Temperature, °F
Figure 77 
Figure 78 
0
75
25
y
12
6
x
−25
0
75
25
y
12
6
3
9
x

Section 6.6  Phase Shift; Sinusoidal Curve Fitting  459
Now superimpose the graph of y = 22.1 sinap
6
 xb + 52.1 on the scatter 
diagram. See Figure 80, where it is clear that the graph still needs to be 
shifted horizontally.
Step 4:  To determine the horizontal shift, use the period T = 12 and divide the 
interval 30, 124 into four subintervals of length 12 , 4 = 3:
30, 34, 33, 64, 36, 94, 39, 124
The sine curve is increasing on the interval 10, 32 and is decreasing on the 
interval 13, 92, so a local maximum occurs at x = 3. The data indicate that 
a maximum occurs at x = 7 (corresponding to July’s temperature), so the 
graph of the function must be shifted 4 units to the right by replacing x by 
x - 4. Doing this yields
y = 22.1 sinap
6 1x - 42 b + 52.1
Multiplying 
out 
reveals 
that 
a 
sine 
function 
of 
the 
form 
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B that fits the data is
y = 22.1 sinap
6
 x - 2p
3 b + 52.1
The graph of y = 22.1 sinap
6
 x - 2p
3 b + 52.1 and the scatter diagram 
of the data are shown in Figure 81.
The steps to fit a sine function
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B
to sinusoidal data follow.
•
Figure 79 
0
75
25
y
12
6
x
Figure 80 
0
75
25
y
12
6
x
Figure 81 
0
75
25
y
12
6
x
Steps for Fitting a Sine Function y = A sin1Vx −F2 + B to Data
Step 1:  Determine A, the amplitude of the function.
Amplitude = largest data value - smallest data value
2
Step 2:  Determine B, the vertical shift of the function.
Vertical shift = largest data value + smallest data value
2
Step 3:  Determine v. Since the period T, the time it takes for the data to  
repeat, is T = 2p
v , we have
v = 2p
T
Step 4:  Determine the horizontal shift of the function by using the period 
of the data. Divide the period into four subintervals of equal length. 
Determine the x-coordinate for the maximum of the sine function 
and the x-coordinate for the maximum value of the data. Use this
information to determine the value of the phase shift, f
v.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 9 ( a ) – ( c )
Let’s look at another example. Since the number of hours of sunlight in a day 
cycles annually, the number of hours of sunlight in a day for a given location can be 
modeled by a sinusoidal function.

460 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
The longest day of the year (in terms of hours of sunlight) occurs on the day of 
the summer solstice. For locations in the Northern Hemisphere, the summer solstice 
is the time when the Sun is farthest north. In 2014, the summer solstice occurred 
on June 21 (the 172nd day of the year) at 6:51 am EDT. The shortest day of the 
year occurs on the day of the winter solstice, the time when the Sun is farthest south 
(for locations in the Northern Hemisphere). In 2014, the winter solstice occurred on 
December 21 (the 355th day of the year) at 6:03 pm (EST).
Finding a Sinusoidal Function for Hours of Daylight
According to the Old Farmer’s Almanac, the number of hours of sunlight in Boston 
on the day of the summer solstice is 15.30, and the number of hours of sunlight on 
the day of the winter solstice is 9.08.
(a)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form y = A sin1vx - f2 + B that fits the 
data.
(b)	 Use the function found in part (a) to predict the number of hours of sunlight in 
Boston on April 1, the 91st day of the year.
(c)	 Graph the function found in part (a).
(d)	 Look up the number of hours of sunlight for April 1 in the Old Farmer’s  
Almanac and compare it to the results found in part (b).
Source: The Old Farmer’s Almanac, www.almanac.com/rise
(a)  Step 1:   Amplitude = largest data value - smallest data value
2
	
 = 15.30 - 9.08
2
= 3.11
Step 2:   Vertical shift = largest data value + smallest data value
2
	
 = 15.30 + 9.08
2
= 12.19
Step 3:  The data repeat every 365 days. Since T = 2p
v = 365, we find
v = 2p
365
So far, we have y = 3.11 sina 2p
365
  x - fb + 12.19.
Step 4:  To determine the horizontal shift, use the period T = 365 and divide 
the interval 30, 3654 into four subintervals of length 365 , 4 = 91.25:
30, 91.254, 391.25, 182.54, 3182.5, 273.754, 3273.75, 3654
The sine curve is increasing on the interval 10, 91.252 and is  
decreasing on the interval 191.25, 273.752, so a local maximum  
occurs at x = 91.25. Since the maximum occurs on the summer solstice 
at x = 172, we must shift the graph of the function 172 - 91.25 = 
80.75 units to the right by replacing x by x - 80.75. Doing this yields
y = 3.11 sina 2p
365
 1x - 80.752 b + 12.19
Next, multiply out to obtain a sine function of the form 
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B that fits the data.
y = 3.11 sina 2p
365
 x - 323p
730 b + 12.19
Example 4
Solution

Section 6.6  Phase Shift; Sinusoidal Curve Fitting  461
(b)	 To predict the number of hours of daylight on April 1, let x = 91 in the function 
found in part (a) and obtain
 y = 3.11 sina 2p
365 # 91 - 323
730
 pb + 12.19
 ≈12.74
	
The prediction is that there will be about 12.74 hours = 12 hours, 44 minutes of 
sunlight on April 1 in Boston.
(c)	 The graph of the function found in part (a) is given in Figure 82.
(d)	 According to the Old Farmer’s Almanac, there will be 12 hours 45 minutes of 
sunlight on April 1 in Boston.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5
Certain graphing utilities (such as the TI-83, TI-84 Plus C, and TI-89) have the 
capability of finding the sine function of best fit for sinusoidal data. At least four 
data points are required for this process.
Finding the Sine Function of Best Fit
Use a graphing utility to find the sine function of best fit for the data in Table 11. 
Graph this function with the scatter diagram of the data.
Enter the data from Table 11 and execute the SINe REGression program. The result 
is shown in Figure 83.
The output that the graphing utility provides shows the equation
y = a sin1bx + c2 + d
The sinusoidal function of best fit is
y = 21.43 sin10.56x - 2.442 + 51.71
where x represents the month and y represents the average temperature.
Figure 84 shows the graph of the sinusoidal function of best fit on the scatter  
diagram.
•
Example 5
Solution
Figure 82 
08
16
400
Figure 83 
Figure 84 
•
025
75
13
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 9 ( d )  a n d  ( e )
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 For the graph of y = A sin1vx - f2, the number f
v is 
called the  
   
 .
	 2.	 True or False    A graphing utility requires only two data 
points to find the sine function of best fit. 
6.6  Assess Your Understanding

462 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Skill Building
In Problems 3–14, find the amplitude, period, and phase shift of each function. Graph each function. Be sure to label key points.  
Show at least two periods.
	 3.	 y = 4 sin12x - p2
	 4.	 y = 3 sin13x - p2
	 6.	 y = 2 cosa3x + p
2 b
	 9.	 y = 2 cos12px + 42 + 4
	 12.	 y = 3 cos1px - 22 + 5
	 5.	 y = 3 cos12x + p2
	 7.	 y = - 2 cosa2x - p
2 b
	 10.	 y = 4 sin 1px + 22 - 5
	 13.	 y = - 3 cosa- 2x + p
2 b
	 8.	 y = - 3 sina2x + p
2 b
	 11.	 y = 2 cos12px - 42 - 1
	 14.	 y = -  3 sina-2x + p
2 b
In Problems 15–18, write the equation of a sine function that has the given characteristics.
	 15.	 Amplitude: 3
	
	 Period: p
2
	
	 Phase shift: 2 
	 16.	 Amplitude: 2
	
	 Period: p
	
	 Phase shift: 1
2
	 17.	 Amplitude: 2
	
	 Period: p
	
	 Phase shift: - 2
	 18.	 Amplitude: 3
	
	 Period: 3p
	
	 Phase shift: -  1
3
	 19.	 y = 2 tan14x - p2
	 20.	 y = 1
2 cot12x - p2
	 21.	 y = 3 csca2x - p
4 b
	 22.	 y = 1
2 sec13x - p2
	 23.	 y = - cota2x + p
2 b
	 24.	 y = - tana3x + p
2 b
	 25.	 y = - sec12px + p2
	 26.	 y = -csc a-  1
2
 px + p
4 b
Mixed Practice
In Problems 19–26, apply the methods of this and the previous section to graph each function. Be sure to label key points and show at 
least two periods.
Applications and Extensions
	 27.	 Alternating Current (ac) Circuits  The current I, in amperes, 
flowing through an ac (alternating current) circuit at time t, 
in seconds, is
I1t2 = 120 sina30pt - p
3 b  t Ú 0
	
	 What is the period? What is the amplitude? What is the 
phase shift? Graph this function over two periods.
	 28.	 Alternating Current (ac) Circuits  The current I, in amperes, 
flowing through an ac (alternating current) circuit at time t, 
in seconds, is
I1t2 = 220 sina60pt - p
6 b  t Ú 0
	
	 What is the period? What is the amplitude? What is the 
phase shift? Graph this function over two periods.
	 29.	 Hurricanes    Hurricanes are categorized using the Saffir-
Simpson Hurricane Scale, with winds 111–130 miles per 
hour (mph) corresponding to a category 3 hurricane, winds 
131–155 mph corresponding to a category 4 hurricane, and 
winds in excess of 155 mph corresponding to a category 
5 hurricane. The following data represent the number of  
major hurricanes in the Atlantic Basin (category 3, 4, or 5) 
each decade from 1921 to 2010.
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data.
(b)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form  
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B that models the data.
(c)	 Draw the sinusoidal function found in part (b) on the 
scatter diagram.
(d)	 Use a graphing utility to find the sinusoidal function of 
best fit.
(e)	 Graph the sinusoidal function of best fit on a scatter  
diagram of the data.
Decade, x
Major Hurricanes, H
1921–1930, 1
17
1931–1940, 2
16
1941–1950, 3
29
1951–1960, 4
33
1961–1970, 5
27
1971–1980, 6
16
1981–1990, 7
16
1991–2000, 8
27
2001–2010, 9
33
	 30.	 Monthly Temperature  The data on the next page represent 
the average monthly temperatures for Washington, D.C.
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data for one period.
(b)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form  
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B that models the data.
Source:  U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric  
Administration

Section 6.6  Phase Shift; Sinusoidal Curve Fitting  463
(c)	 Draw the sinusoidal function found in part (b) on the 
scatter diagram.
(d)	 Use a graphing utility to find the sinusoidal function of 
best fit.
(e)	 Graph the sinusoidal function of best fit on a scatter  
diagram of the data.
January, 1
February, 2
March, 3
April, 4
May, 5
June, 6
July, 7
August, 8
September, 9
October, 10
November, 11
December, 12
36.0
39.0
46.8
56.8
66.0
75.2
79.8
78.1
71.0
59.5
49.6
39.7
Source: U.S. National Oceanic and
              Atmospheric Administration
Month, x
Average Monthly
Temperature, °F
January, 1
February, 2
March, 3
April, 4
May, 5
June, 6
July, 7
August, 8
September, 9
October, 10
November, 11
December, 12
28.1
32.1
42.2
53.0
62.7
72.0
75.4
74.2
66.9
55.0
43.6
31.6
Source: U.S. National Oceanic and
              Atmospheric Administration
Month, x
Average Monthly
Temperature, °F
January, 1
February, 2
March, 3
April, 4
May, 5
June, 6
July, 7
August, 8
September, 9
October, 10
November, 11
December, 12
32.9
35.8
43.6
53.7
62.9
72.4
77.0
75.1
67.8
56.1
46.5
36.7
Source: U.S. National Oceanic and
              Atmospheric Administration
Month, x
Average Monthly
Temperature, °F
	 31.	 Monthly Temperature    The following data represent the  
average monthly temperatures for Indianapolis, Indiana.
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data for one period.
(b)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B 
that models the data.
(c)	 Draw the sinusoidal function found in part (b) on the 
scatter diagram.
(d)	 Use a graphing utility to find the sinusoidal function of 
best fit.
(e)	 Graph the sinusoidal function of best fit on a scatter  
diagram of the data.
	 32.	 Monthly Temperature    The following data represent the  
average monthly temperatures for Baltimore, Maryland.
(a)	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data for one period.
(b)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form 
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B that models the data.
(c)	 Draw the sinusoidal function found in part (b) on the 
scatter diagram.
(d)	 Use a graphing utility to find the sinusoidal function of 
best fit.
(e)	 Graph the sinusoidal function of best fit on a scatter  
diagram of the data.
	 33.	 Tides  Suppose that the length of time between consecutive  
high tides is approximately 12.5 hours. According to the  
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, on 
a particular day in a city in Georgia, high tide occurred at 
3:36 am (3.6000 hours) and low tide occurred at 10:06 am 
(10.1000 hours). Water heights are measured as the amounts 
above or below the mean lower low water. The height of the 
water at high tide was 8.2 feet and the height of the water at 
low tide was - 0.6 foot. Answer parts (a) through (c) below.
(a)	 Approximately when will the next high tide occur?
(b)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B
	
that fits the data.
(c)	 Use the function found in part (b) to predict the height 
of the water at the next high tide. 
	 34.	 Tides  The length of time between consecutive high tides 
is 12 hours and 25 minutes. According to the National  
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, on Saturday,  
April 26, 2014, in Sitka, Alaska, high tide occurred  
at 12:06 am (0.10 hours) and low tide occurred at 6:24 am 
(6.4 hours). Water heights are measured as the amounts 
above or below the mean lower low water. The height of the 
water at high tide was 9.97 feet, and the height of the water 
at low tide was 0.59 feet.
(a)	 Approximately when will the next high tide occur?
(b)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B 
	
that models the data.
(c)	 Use the function found in part (b) to predict the height 
of the water at 6 pm. 

464 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
	 35.	 Hours of Daylight  According to the Old Farmer’s Almanac, 
in Miami, Florida, the number of hours of sunlight on the 
summer solstice of 2014 was 13.75, and the number of hours 
of sunlight on the winter solstice was 10.52.
(a)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form 
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B 
	
that models the data.
(b)	 Use the function found in part (a) to predict the number 
of hours of sunlight on April 1, the 91st day of the year.
(c)	 Draw a graph of the function found in part (a).
(d)	 Look up the number of hours of sunlight for April 1 
in the Old Farmer’s Almanac, and compare the actual 
hours of daylight to the results found in part (b).
	 36.	 Hours of Daylight  According to the Old Farmer’s Almanac, 
in Detroit, Michigan, the number of hours of sunlight on the 
summer solstice of 2014 was 15.27, and the number of hours 
of sunlight on the winter solstice was 9.07.
(a)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B 
	
that models the data.
(b)	 Use the function found in part (a) to predict the number 
of hours of sunlight on April 1, the 91st day of the year.
(c)	 Draw a graph of the function found in part (a).
(d)	 Look up the number of hours of sunlight for April 1 
in the Old Farmer’s Almanac, and compare the actual 
hours of daylight to the results found in part (b).
	 37.	 Hours of Daylight  According to the Old Farmer’s Almanac, 
in Anchorage, Alaska, the number of hours of sunlight on 
the summer solstice of 2014 was 19.37, and the number of 
hours of sunlight on the winter solstice was 5.45.
(a)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B 
	
that models the data.
(b)	 Use the function found in part (a) to predict the number 
of hours of sunlight on April 1, the 91st day of the year.
(c)	 Draw a graph of the function found in part (a).
(d)	 Look up the number of hours of sunlight for April 1 
in the Old Farmer’s Almanac, and compare the actual 
hours of daylight to the results found in part (b).
	 38.	 Hours of Daylight  According to the Old Farmer’s Almanac, 
in Honolulu, Hawaii, the number of hours of sunlight on the 
summer solstice of 2014 was 13.42, and the number of hours 
of sunlight on the winter solstice was 10.83.
(a)	 Find a sinusoidal function of the form 
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B 
	
that models the data.
(b)	 Use the function found in part (a) to predict the number 
of hours of sunlight on April 1, the 91st day of the year.
(c)	 Draw a graph of the function found in part (a).
(d)	 Look up the number of hours of sunlight for April 1 
in the Old Farmer’s Almanac, and compare the actual 
hours of daylight to the results found in part (b).
Discussion and Writing
	 39.	 Explain how the amplitude and period of a sinusoidal graph 
are used to establish the scale on each coordinate axis.
	 40.	 Find an application in your major field that leads to a  
sinusoidal graph. Write an account of your findings.
 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 41–44 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 41.	 Given f1x2 = 4x + 9
2
, find f -11x2.
	 42.	 Determine the interest rate required for an investment of $1500 to be worth $1800 after 3 years if interest is compounded  
quarterly. Round your answer to two decimal places. 
	 43.	 Find an equation of the line parallel to the line y = 2
3
 x - 4 that passes through the point (6, 1).   
	 44.	 Find the exact distance between the points 14, - 12 and 110, 32.
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Definitions
Angle in standard position (p. 386)	
Vertex is at the origin; initial side is along the positive x-axis.
1 Degree (1°) (p. 387)	
1° =
1
360 revolution
1 Radian (p. 389)	
The measure of a central angle of a circle whose rays subtend an arc that is the same 
length as the radius of the circle.
Trigonometric functions 	
P =  (x, y) is the point on the unit circle corresponding to u = t radians. 
(p. 401)	
	
	
sin t = sin u = y            cos t = cos u = x           tan t = tan u = y
x x ≠0
	
	
csc t = csc u = 1
y y ≠0  sec t = sec u = 1
x x ≠0  cot t = cot u = x
y y ≠0

Chapter Review  465
Trigonometric functions using a circle	
For an angle u in standard position, P = 1x, y2 is the point on the terminal side of u that 
of radius r (p. 411)	
is also on the circle x2 + y2 = r 2.
	
	
 sin u = y
r  
 cos u = x
r  
 tan u = y
x x ≠0
	
	
 csc u = r
y y ≠0   sec u = r
x x ≠0   cot u = x
y y ≠0
Periodic function (p. 420)	
f1u + p2 = f1u2, for all u, p 7 0, where the smallest such p is the fundamental period.
Formulas
 1 counterclockwise
 revolution = 360° (p. 387–388)	
1° =
p
180
  radian (p. 357); 1 radian = 180
p
  degrees (p. 357)
           = 2p radians (p. 390)
Arc length: s = r u (p. 391) 	
u is measured in radians; s is the length of the arc subtended by the central angle u  
of the circle of radius r.
Area of a sector: A = 1
2
 r 2u (p. 393) 	
A is the area of the sector of a circle of radius r formed by a central angle of u radians.
Linear speed: v = s
t  (p. 394) 	
v is the linear speed along the circle of radius r; v is the angular speed (measured in 
Angular speed:  v = u
t  (p. 394)  
              v = rv (p. 394)	
radians per unit time).
Table of Values (pp. 404 and 408)
x
–4
–3
–6
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)

0, 2
–2
3
––2
7
––4
3
––4
5
––6
7
––6
11
–––
6
4
––3
5
––3
2
––3
5
––4
330
300
240
210
150
30
120
60
90
270
0, 360
180
315
225
135
45
y
1–2
(
)
, 
––2
3
1–2
(
)
,
––2
3
1–2(
)
, ––2
3
1–2(
)
, ––2
3
1–2
(
)
, 

––2
3
1–2
(
)
,

––2
3
(
)
, 
––2
2
––2
2
(
)
,
––2
2
––2
2
1–2 )
, 
––2
3
(
1–2 )
,
––2
3
(
(
)
, 
 ––2
2
––2
2
(
)
,
 ––2
2
––2
2
U (Radians)
U (Degrees)
sin U
cos U
tan U
csc U
sec U
cot U
0
    0°
0
1
0
Not defined
1
Not defined
p
6
  30°
1
2
23
2
23
3
2
223
3
23
p
4
  45°
22
2
22
2
1
22
22
1
p
3
  60°
23
2
1
2
23
223
3
2
23
3
p
2
  90°
1
0
Not defined
1
Not defined
0
p
180°
0
-1
0
Not defined
-1
Not defined
3p
2
270°
-1
0
Not defined
-1
Not defined
0
The Unit Circle (pp. 408–409)

466 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Fundamental Identities (pp. 422–423)
 tan u = sin u
cos u   cot u = cos u
sin u
 csc u =
1
sin u   sec u =
1
cos u   cot u =
1
tan u
 sin2 u + cos2 u = 1   tan2 u + 1 = sec2 u   cot2 u + 1 = csc2 u
Properties of the Trigonometric Functions (pp. 417–420, 427)
y = sin x (p. 432)
Domain: - q 6 x 6 q
Range: - 1 … y … 1
Periodic: period = 2p1360°2
Odd function
–2
x 


2
5
––2
y
1
1
y = cos x (p. 434)
Domain: - q 6 x 6 q
Range: - 1 … y … 1
Periodic: period = 2p1360°2
Even function
–2
–2
x

3
––2

2
5
––2
y
1
1
y = tan x (p. 448)
Domain: - q 6 x 6 q, except odd integer  
  multiples of p
2
 190°2
Range: - q 6 y 6 q
Periodic: period = p1180°2
Odd function
Vertical asymptotes at odd integer multiples of p
2

––2



–2
x
3
––2
5
––2
5
––2
3
––2
y
1
1
y = cot x (p. 449)
Domain: - q 6 x 6 q, except integer multiples  
  of p(180°)
Range: - q 6 y 6 q
Periodic: period = p1180°2
Odd function
Vertical asymptotes at integer multiples of p
–2
–2
x
3
–––
2
5
–––
2
 3
–––
2
y
1
1
y = csc x (p. 450)
Domain: - q 6 x 6 q, except integer multiples  
  of p1180°2
Range: 0 y0 Ú 1 1y … -1 or y Ú 12
Periodic: period = 2p1360°2
Odd function
Vertical asymptotes at integer multiples of p
–2
x
3
–––
2
y
1
1
y  sin x
y  csc x
y = sec x (p. 450)
Domain: - q 6 x 6 q, except odd integer  
  multiples of p
2
 190°2
Range: 0 y0 Ú 1 1y … -1 or y Ú 12
Periodic: period = 2p1360°2
Even function
Vertical asymptotes at odd integer multiples of p
2

––2
–2
x
3
––2
 3
–––
2
y
1
1
y  cos x
y  sec x

Chapter Review  467
Sinusoidal Graphs
y = A sin1vx2 + B, v 7 0
Period = 2p
v  (pp. 437, 454)
y = A cos1vx2 + B, v 7 0
Amplitude = 0 A0  (pp. 437, 454)
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B = A sinc vax - f
v b d + B
Phase shift = f
v (p. 454)
y = A cos1vx - f2 + B = A cosc vax - f
v b d + B
 
Objectives
Section
You should be able to...
Example(s)
Review Exercises
6.1
1  Convert between decimals and degrees, minutes, seconds measures for 
angles (p. 388)
2
48
 
2  Find the length of an arc of a circle (p. 389)
3
49, 50
 
3  Convert from degrees to radians and from radians to degrees (p. 390)
4–6
1–4
 
4  Find the area of a sector of a circle (p. 393)
7
49
 
5  Find the linear speed of an object traveling in circular motion (p. 394)
8
51, 52
6.2
1  Find the exact values of the trigonometric functions using a point on 
the unit circle (p. 402)
1
45, 55
 
2  Find the exact values of the trigonometric functions of quadrantal 
angles (p. 403)
2, 3
9, 55
 
3  Find the exact values of the trigonometric functions of p
4 = 45° (p. 405)
4, 5
5, 6
 
4  Find the exact values of the trigonometric functions of p
6 = 30° and 
p
3 = 60° (p. 406)
6–8
5, 6
 
5  Find the exact values of the trigonometric functions for integer 
multiples of p
6 = 30°, p
4 = 45°, and p
3 = 60° (p. 408)
9, 10
7, 8, 10, 55
 
6  Use a calculator to approximate the value of a trigonometric  
function (p. 410)
11
41, 42
 
7  Use a circle of radius r to evaluate the trigonometric functions (p. 411)
12
46
6.3
1  Determine the domain and the range of the trigonometric  
functions (p. 417)
pp. 417–419
47
 
2  Determine the period of the trigonometric functions (p. 419)
1
47
 
3  Determine the signs of the trigonometric functions in a given  
quadrant (p. 421)
2
43, 44
 
4  Find the values of the trigonometric functions using fundamental 
identities (p. 422)
3, 4
11–15
 
5  Find the exact values of the trigonometric functions of an angle given 
one of the functions and the quadrant of the angle (p. 424)
5, 6
16–23
 
6  Use even–odd properties to find the exact values of the trigonometric 
functions (p. 427)
7
13–15
6.4
1  Graph functions of the form y = A sin(vx) using transformations  
(p. 432)
1, 2
24
 
2  Graph functions of the form y = A cos(vx) using transformations  
(p. 434)
3
25
(continued)

468 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
 
3  Determine the amplitude and period of sinusoidal functions (p. 435)
4
33–38
 
4  Graph sinusoidal functions using key points (p. 437)
5–7
24, 25, 35
 
5  Find an equation for a sinusoidal graph (p. 440)
8, 9
39, 40
6.5
1  Graph functions of the form y = A tan(vx) + B and 
y = A cot(vx) + B (p. 448)
1, 2
27
 
2  Graph functions of the form y = A csc(vx) + B and 
y = A sec(vx) + B (p. 450)
3
29
6.6
1  Graph sinusoidal functions of the form y = A sin1vx - f2 + B  
(p. 454)
1, 2
31, 35–38, 53(d)
 
2  Build sinusoidal models from data (p. 457)
3–5
54
Review Exercises
In Problems 1 and 2, convert each angle in degrees to radians. Express your answer as a multiple of p.
	 1.	 225° 
	
2.  54° 
In Problems 3 and 4, convert each angle in radians to degrees.
	 3.	 7p
4  
	
4.  - 4p
2
 
In Problems 5–15, find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
	 5.	 cot p
4
- 2 sin p
3  
	
6.	 3 sin 45° - 4 tan p
6  
	
7.	 4 cos (5p>4) - 3 cot (- p>6) 
	 8.	 seca-  p
3 b - cota-  5p
4 b 
	
9.	 cos1- p2 + sina3p
2 b 
	
10.	 cos 540° - tan1-405°2 
	 11.	 cos2 40° + a
1
cosec2 40° b 
	
12.	 sec 50° cos 50° 
	
13.	
cos1- 50°2
cos150°2  
	 14. 
sin1- 40°2
sin 40°
 
	
15.	 cosec1290°2 cos1- 20°2 
In Problems 16–23, find the exact value of each of the remaining trigonometric functions.
	 16.	 sin u = 4
5, u is acute	
17.	 cot u = -  3
4, sin u 7 0	
18.	 cosec u = -  13
12, cos u 7 0
19.  cos u = -  7
25, u in quadrant III
20.	 sin u = -  5
13, 3p
2
6 u 6 2p
21.	 tan u = 2
5
 , 0 6 u 6 90°
22.	 sec u = 3, 3p
2
6 u 6 2p	
23.	 cot u = - 2, p
2 6 u 6 p
In Problems 24–32, graph each function. Each graph should contain at least two periods. Use the graph to determine the domain and the 
range of each function.
	 24.	 y = 2 sin14x2	
25.	 y = - 3 cos12x2	
26.	 y = tan1x + p2
	 27.	 y = -2 tan13x2	
28.	 y = cotax + p
4 b	
29.	 y = 4 sec (2x)
	 30.	 y = cscax + p
4 b	
31.	 y = 4 sin(2x + 4) - 2	
32.	 y = 5 cotax
3 - p
4 b
In Problems 33 and 34, determine the amplitude and period of each function without graphing.
	 33.	 y = 4 sin13x2	
34.	 y = - 2 cos13px2
In Problems 35–38, find the amplitude, period, and phase shift of each function. Graph each function. Show at least two periods.
35.	 y = 4 sin13x2	
36.	 y = - cosa1
2
 x + p
2 b	
37.	 y = 1
2 sina3
2
 x - pb	
38.	 y = -  2
3 cos1px - 62

Chapter Review  469
In Problems 39 and 40, find a function whose graph is given.
	 39. 
	
  40. 
	 41.	 Use a calculator to approximate sin p
8 . Round the answer to 
two decimal places. 
	 42.	 Use a calculator to approximate sec 10°. Round the answer 
to two decimal places. 
	 43.	 Determine the signs of the six trigonometric functions of an 
angle u whose terminal side is in quadrant II.
	 44.	 Name the quadrant u lies in if cos u 7 0 and tan u 6 0. 
	 45.	 Find the exact values of the six trigonometric functions of t  
if P = a-  1
5, 216
5
b is the point on the unit circle that  
corresponds to t.
	 46.	 Find the exact value of sin t, cos t, and tan t if P = (- 2, 5) is 
the point on the circle that corresponds to t.
	 47.	 What are the domain and range of the cosecant function? 
What is the period?
	 48.	 (a)  Convert the angle 32°20′35″ to a decimal in degrees. 
Round the answer to two decimal places. 
(b)	 Convert the angle 63.18° to D°M′S″ form. Express the 
answer to the nearest second. 
	 49.	 Find the length of the arc subtended by a central angle of 60° 
on a circle of radius 3 feet. What is the area of the sector?
	 50.	 The minute hand of a clock is 8 inches long. How far does 
the tip of the minute hand move in 30 minutes? How far 
does it move in 20 minutes?
	 51.	 Angular Speed of a Race Car  A race car is driven around 
a circular track at a constant speed of 45 miles per hour. 
	
	 If the diameter of the circular track is 1
4 mile, what is the 
angular speed of the car? Express your answer in revolu-
tions per hour (which is equivalent to laps per hour).
	 52.	 Lighthouse Beacons  The Montauk Point Lighthouse on 
Long Island has dual beams (two light sources opposite each 
other). Ships at sea observe a blinking light every 5 seconds. 
What rotation speed is required to achieve this?
	 53.	 Alternating Current  The current I, in amperes, flowing 
through an ac (alternating current) circuit at time t is
I1t2 = 220 sina30pt + p
6 b,  t Ú 0
(a) What is the period?
(b) What is the amplitude?
(c) What is the phase shift?
(d) Graph this function over two periods.
	 54.	 Monthly Temperature  The data below represent the  
average monthly temperatures for Phoenix, Arizona.
(a)  Draw a scatter diagram of the data for one period.
(b)  Find a sinusoidal function of the form 
y = A sin1vx - f2 + B that fits the data.
(c)  Draw the sinusoidal function found in part (b) on the 
scatter diagram.
(d)  Use a graphing utility to find the sinusoidal function of 
best fit.
(e)  Graph the sinusoidal function of best fit on the scatter 
diagram.
 
January, 1
Month, m
Average Monthly
Temperature, T
56
February, 2
60
March, 3
65
April, 4
73
May, 5
82
June, 6
91
July, 7
95
August, 8
September, 9
October, 10
November, 11
December, 12
94
88
77
64
55
SOURCE: U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration

470 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
x
y
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Angle: 
P 
Angle:
P 
Angle:
P 
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
Angle:
P  
P 

—6

—4

—3
11
——
6
5
——
3
7
——
4
	 55.	 Unit Circle On the given unit circle, fill in the missing 
angles (0 … u … 2p) and the corresponding points P.
In Problems 1–3, convert each angle in degrees to radians. Express 
your answer as a multiple of p.
	 1.	 260° 
	
2.  - 400° 
	
3.  13° 
In Problems 4–6, convert each angle in radians to degrees.
	 4.	 -  p
8
	
5.  9p
2
	
6.  3p
4
In Problems 7–12, find the exact value of each expression.
	 7.	 sin p
6  
	
8.  cosa-  5p
4 b - cos 3p
4  
	 9.	 cos(- 120°) 
	
10.  tan 330° 
	 11.	 sin p
2 - tan 19p
4  
	
12.  2 sin2 60° - 3 cos 45°
In Problems 13–16, use a calculator to evaluate each expression. 
Round your answer to three decimal places.
	 13.	 sin 17°
	 14.  cos 2p
5
	 15.  sec 229°
	 16.  cot 28p
9
	 17.	 Fill in each table entry with the sign of each function.
sin U
cos U
tan U
sec U
csc U
cot U
u in QI
u in QII
u in QIII
u in QIV
 
	 18.	 If f1x2 = sin x and f1a2 = 3
5,   find f1-a2. 
In Problems 19–21, find the value of the remaining five	   
trigonometric functions of u.
	 19.	 sin u = 5
7, u in quadrant II	
20.  cos u = 2
3, 3p
2
6 u 6 2p
	 21.	 tan u = -  12
5 , p
2 6 u 6 p
In Problems 22–24, the point (x, y) is on the terminal side of  
angle u in standard position. Find the exact value of the given  
trigonometric function.
	 22.	 (2, 7), sin u 
	
23.  (- 5, 11), cos u
	 24.	 (6, - 3), tan u
Chapter Test
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.

Cumulative Review  471
*Annus was stripped of his medal after refusing to cooperate with  
postmedal drug testing.
In Problems 25 and 26, graph the function.
	 25.	 y = 2 sinax
3 - p
6 b	
26.  y = tana- x + p
4 b + 2
	 27.	 Write an equation for a sinusoidal graph with the following 
properties:
A = - 3  period = 2p
3   phase shift = -  p
4
	 28.	 Logan has a garden in the shape of a sector of a circle; the 
outer rim of the garden is 25 feet long and the central angle 
of the sector is 50°. She wants to add a 3-foot-wide walk to 
the outer rim. How many square feet of paving blocks will 
she need to build the walk? 
	 29.	 Hungarian Adrian Annus won the gold medal for the  
hammer throw at the 2004 Olympics in Athens with a  
winning distance of 83.19 meters.* The event consists of  
swinging a 16-pound weight attached to a wire 190 centimeters 
long in a circle and then releasing it. Assuming his release is 
at a 45°angle to the ground, the hammer will travel a distance 
	
	 of v0
2
g  meters, where g = 9.8 meters/second2 and v0 is the
	
	 linear speed of the hammer when released. At what rate 
(rpm) was he swinging the hammer upon release? 
	 1.	 Find the real solutions, if any, of the equation 
2x2 + x - 1 = 0.
	 2.	 Find an equation for the line with slope - 3 containing the 
point (- 2, 5).
	 3.	 Find an equation for a circle of radius 4 and center at the 
point (0, - 2). 
	 4.	 Discuss the equation 2x - 3y = 12. Graph it.
	 5.	 Discuss 
the 
equation 
x2 + y2 - 2x + 4y - 4 = 0. 
Graph it.
	 6.	 Use 
transformations 
to 
graph 
the 
function 
y = (x - 3)2 + 2.
Cumulative Review
	 12.	 Find an exponential function for the following graph.  
Express your answer in the form y = Abx.
	 13.	 Find a sinusoidal function for the following graph.
–6
–4
–2
2
4
6
4
6
8
y
y  0
x
2
(1, 6)
(0, 2)
–6
–3
3
6
–3
3
y
x
(–6, –3)
(6, –3)
	 7.	 Sketch a graph of each of the following functions. Label at 
least three points on each graph.
(a)	 y = x2	
(b)  y = x3
(c)  y = ex	
(d)  y = ln x
(e)  y = sin x	
(f)  y = tan x
	 8.	 Find the inverse function of f1x2 = 3x - 2.
	 9.	 Find the exact value of (sin 14°)2 + (cos 14°)2 - 3.
	 10.	 Graph y = 3 sin(2x).
	 11.	 Find the exact value of tan p
4 - 3 cos p
6 + csc p
6 .
	 14.	 (a)	 Find a linear function that contains the points (- 2, 3) 
and (1, - 6). What is the slope? What are the intercepts 
of the function? Graph the function. Be sure to label the 
intercepts.
(b)	 Find a quadratic function with vertex (1, - 6) that 
contains the point (- 2, 3).  What are the intercepts of the  
function? Graph the function.
(c)	 Show that there is no exponential function of the form 
f(x) = aex that contains the points (- 2, 3) and (1, - 6).
	 15.	 (a)	 Find a polynomial function of degree 3 whose y-intercept 
is 5 and whose x-intercepts are -2, 3, and 5. Graph the 
function.
(b)	 Find a rational function whose y-intercept is 5 and whose 
x-intercepts are - 2, 3, and 5 that has the line x = 2 as a 
vertical asymptote. Graph the function.

Chapter Projects
(e)  Now, install the Solver feature of Excel. To do 
this, click the File tab, and then select Options. 
Select Add-Ins. In the drop-down menu entitled  
“Manage,” choose Excel Add-ins, and then click  
Go . . . . Check the box entitled “Solver Add-in” and 
click OK. The Solver add-in is now available in the 
Data tab. Choose Solver. Fill in the screen below:
         Internet-based Project
	 I.	 Length of Day Revisited  Go to http://en.wikipedia.org/ 
wiki/latitude and read about latitude. Then go to 
http://www.orchidculture.com/COD/daylength.html.
1.	 For a particular latitude, record in a table the length of 
day for the various days of the year. For January 1, use 1 
as the day, for January 16, use 16 as the day, for February 1,  
use 32 as the day, and so on. Enter the data into an Excel 
spreadsheet using column B for the day of the year and 
column C for the length of day.
2.	 Draw a scatter diagram of the data with day of the year 
as the independent variable and length of day as the 
dependent variable using Excel. (The Chapter 3 project 
describes how to draw a scatter diagram in Excel.)
3.	 Determine the sinusoidal function of best fit, 
y = A sin(Bx + C) + D, as follows:
(a)  Enter initial guesses for the values of A, B, C, and D 
into column A with the value of A in cell A1, B in 
cell A2, C in cell A3, and D in cell A4.
(b)  Enter “=A$1*sin(A$2*B1+A$3)+A$4” into cell 
D1. Copy this cell entry into the cells below D1 
for as many rows as there are data. For example, if  
column C goes to row 23, then column D should also 
go to row 23.
(c)  Enter “=(D1- C1)^2” into cell E1. Copy this entry 
below as described in part 3(b).
(d)  The idea behind curve fitting is to make the sum of 
the squared differences between what is predicted 
and actual observations as small as possible. Enter 
“=sum(E1..E#)” into cell A6, where # represents 
the row number of the last data point. For example,  
if you have 23 rows of data, enter “=sum(E1..E23)” 
in cell A6.
472 
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
Citation: Excel © 2013 Microsoft Corporation. Used with 
permission from Microsoft.
Click Solve. The values for A, B, C, and D are 
located in cells A1–A4. What is the sinusoidal  
function of best fit?
(continued )

Chapter Projects  473
The following projects are available on the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC):
	 II.	 Tides  Data from a tide table are used to build a sine function that models tides.
	III.	 Project at Motorola  Digital Transmission over the Air  Learn how Motorola Corporation transmits digital sequences by  
modulating the phase of the carrier waves.
	IV.	 Identifying Mountain Peaks in Hawaii  The visibility of a mountain is affected by its altitude, its distance from the viewer, and the 
curvature of Earth’s surface. Trigonometry can be used to determine whether a distant object can be seen.
	 V.	 CBL Experiment  Technology is used to model and study the effects of damping on sound waves.
4.	 Determine the longest day of the year according to your 
model. What is the day length on the longest day of the 
year? Determine the shortest day of the year according 
to your model. What is the day length on the shortest day 
of the year?
5.	 On which days is the day length exactly 12 hours  
according to your model?
6.	 Look up the day on which the vernal equinox and 
autumnal equinox occur. How do they match up with the 
results obtained in part 5?
7.	
Do you think your model accurately describes the  
relation between day of the year and length of day?
8.	 Use your model to predict the hours of daylight for 
the latitude you selected for various days of the year. 
Go to the Old Farmer’s Almanac or other website 
(such as http://astro.unl.edu/classaction/animations/
coordsmotion/daylighthoursexplorer.html) to determine 
the hours of daylight for the latitude you selected. How 
do the two compare?

Mapping Your Mind
The ability to organize material in your mind is key to understanding. You have 
been exposed to a lot of concepts at this point in the course, and it is a worthwhile 
exercise to organize the material. In the past, we might organize material using 
index cards or an outline. But in today’s digital world, we can use interesting 
software that enables us to digitally organize the material that is in our mind 
and share it with anyone on the Web.
—See the Internet-based Chapter Project I—
 A Look Back
Chapter 5 introduced inverse functions and developed their properties,  
particularly the relationship between the domain and range of a function and 
those of its inverse. We learned that the graphs of a function and its inverse are 
symmetric with respect to the line y = x.
Chapter 5 continued by defining two transcendental functions: the exponential 
function and the inverse of the exponential function, the logarithmic function. 
Chapter 6 defined six more transcendental functions, the trigonometric functions, 
and discussed their properties.
A Look Ahead 
The first two sections of this chapter define the six inverse trigonometric  
functions and investigate their properties. Section 7.3 discusses equations that 
contain trigonometric functions. Sections 7.4 through 7.7 continue the derivation  
of identities. These identities play an important role in calculus, the physical 
and life sciences, and economics, where they are used to simplify complicated 
expressions.
Analytic Trigonometry
474
Outline
7.1	
The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent 
Functions
7.2	
The Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
(Continued)
7.3	
Trigonometric Equations
7.4	
Trigonometric Identities
7.5	
Sum and Difference Formulas
7.6	
Double-angle and Half-angle  
Formulas
7.7	
Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product 
Formulas
	
Chapter Review
	
Chapter Test
	
Cumulative Review
	
Chapter Projects
7

Section 7.1  The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions  475
In Section 5.2 we discussed inverse functions, and we concluded that if a function 
is one-to-one, it will have an inverse function. We also observed that if a function is 
not one-to-one, it may be possible to restrict its domain in some suitable manner so 
that the restricted function is one-to-one. For example, the function y = x2 is not 
one-to-one; however, if the domain is restricted to x Ú 0, the function is one-to-one.
Other properties of a one-to-one function f and its inverse function f -1 that 
were discussed in Section 5.2 are summarized next.
	 1.	 f -11f1x2 2 = x for every x in the domain of f, and f1f -11x22 = x for every x 
in the domain of f -1.
	 2.	 The domain of f = the range of f -1, and the range of f = the domain of f -1.
	 3.	 The graph of f and the graph of f -1 are reflections of one another about the 
line y = x.
	 4.	 If a function y = f1x2 has an inverse function, the implicit equation of the 
inverse function is x = f1y2. If we solve this equation for y, we obtain the 
explicit equation y = f -11x2.
The Inverse Sine Function
Figure 1 shows the graph of y = sin x. Because every horizontal line y = b, where b 
is between -1 and 1, inclusive, intersects the graph of y = sin x infinitely many times, 
it follows from the horizontal-line test that the function y = sin x is not one-to-one.
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 484.
	
Objectives	 	1  Find the Exact Value of an Inverse Sine Function  (p. 476)
	
	 	2  Find an Approximate Value of an Inverse Sine Function  (p. 477)
	
	 	3  Use Properties of Inverse Functions to Find Exact Values of Certain  
Composite Functions  (p. 478)
	
	 	4  Find the Inverse Function of a Trigonometric Function  (p. 483)
	
	 	5  Solve Equations Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions  (p. 484)
7.1  The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions
• Inverse Functions (Section 5.2, pp. 291–299)
• Values of the Trigonometric Functions (Section 6.2, 
pp. 402–411)
• Properties of the Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions 
(Section 6.3, pp. 417–427)
• Graphs of the Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions 
(Sections 6.4, pp. 431–435 and 6.5, pp. 446–449)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
*Although there are many other ways to restrict the domain and obtain a one-to-one function,  
mathematicians have agreed to use the interval c -  p
2 , p
2 d  to define the inverse of y = sin x.
Figure 1  y = sin x, - q 6 x 6 q, -1 … y … 1
2p–2
p–2
x
p
3p
––2
2p
2p
y
21
1
y 5 b,
 21  b  1
However, if the domain of y = sin x is restricted to the interval c -  p
2 , p
2 d , the 
restricted function
y = sin x  -  p
2 … x … p
2
is one-to-one and has an inverse function.* See Figure 2.
Figure 2 
y = sin x, -  p
2 … x … p
2
 , - 1 … y … 1
2p–2
2p–2
p–2
p–2
p–2
x
21
1
y
21
1
, 21
(
)
(
)
p–2 , 1
2

476 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
An equation for the inverse of y = f1x2 = sin x is obtained by interchanging 
x and y. The implicit form of the inverse function is x = sin y, -  p
2 … y … p
2 . The  
explicit form is called the inverse sine of x and is symbolized by y = f -11x2 = sin-1 x.
Note  Remember, the domain of a 
function f equals the range of its inverse, 
function f -1, and the range of a function f 
equals the domain of its inverse function 
f -1. Because the restricted domain of 
the sine function is c - p
2, p
2 d , the range
of inverse sine function is c - p
2, p
2 d , 
and because the range of the sine  
function is [- 1, 1], the domain of the  
inverse sine function is [- 1, 1].	
■
	
y = sin-1 x  means x = sin y	
	
where -1 … x … 1 and -  p
2 … y … p
2 	
(1)
Because y = sin-1 x means x = sin y, y = sin-1 x is read as “y is the angle or 
real number whose sine equals x,” or, alternatively, is read “y is the inverse sine of x.” 
Be careful about the notation used. The superscript -1 that appears in y = sin-1 x 
is not an exponent but the symbol used to denote the inverse function f -1 of f. (To 
avoid confusion, some texts use the notation y = Arcsin x instead of y = sin-1 x.)
The inverse of a function f receives as input an element from the range of f 
and returns as output an element in the domain of f. The restricted sine function, 
y = f1x2 = sin x, receives as input an angle or real number x in the interval
c -  p
2 , p
2 d  and outputs a real number in the interval 3 -1, 14. Therefore, the inverse
sine function, y = sin-1 x, receives as input a real number in the interval 3 -1, 14 
or -1 … x … 1, its domain, and outputs an angle or real number in the interval
c -  p
2 , p
2 d  or -  p
2 … y … p
2 , its range.
The graph of the inverse sine function can be obtained by reflecting the  
restricted portion of the graph of y = f1x2 = sin x about the line y = x, as shown 
in Figure 3.
Check: Graph Y1 = sin x and Y2 = sin–1x. Compare the result with Figure 3.
Find the Exact Value of an Inverse Sine Function
For some numbers x, it is possible to find the exact value of y = sin-1 x.
Finding the Exact Value of an Inverse Sine Function
Find the exact value of:  sin-1 1
Let u = sin-1 1. Then u is the angle, -  p
2 … u … p
2 , whose sine equals 1.
 u = sin-1 1   -  p
2 … u … p
2
 sin u = 1  
 -  p
2 … u … p
2  
Now look at Table 1 and Figure 4. 
1
Example 1
Solution
By definition of y = sin-1 x
Table 1
U
-  p
2
-  p
3
-  p
4
-  p
6
0
p
6
p
4
p
3
p
2
sin U
-1
-  23
2
-  22
2
-  1
2
0
1
2
22
2
23
2
1
The only angle u in the interval c -  p
2 , p
2 d  whose sine is 1 is p
2 . (Note that sin 5p
2
also equals 1, but 5p
2  lies outside the interval c -  p
2 , p
2 d , which is not allowed.) So
sin-1 1 = p
2
Figure 3 
y = sin-1 x, - 1 … x … 1, -  p
2 … y … p
2
(1,   )
(–1,     )
(    , –1)
(  , 1)
––2
––2
––2
–2
–2
x
–1
1
y
–1
1
––2
–2
–2
y = sin x
y = x
y = sin–1x

Section 7.1  The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions  477
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Finding the Exact Value of an Inverse Sine Function
Find the exact value of:  sin-1a -  1
2b
Let u = sin-1a -  1
2b. Then u is the angle,  -  p
2 … u … p
2 , whose sine equals -  1
2.
 u = sin-1a -  1
2b   -  p
2 … u … p
2
 sin u = -  1
2  
 -  p
2 … u … p
2
(Refer to Table 1 and Figure 4, if necessary.) The only angle in the interval c -  p
2 , p
2 d  
whose sine is -  1
2 is -  p
6 , so
sin-1a -  1
2b = -  p
6
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Find an Approximate Value of an Inverse Sine Function
For most numbers x, the value y = sin-1 x must be approximated.
Finding an Approximate Value of an Inverse Sine Function
Find an approximate value of each of the following functions:
(a)	 sin-1 1
3	
(b)  sin-1a -  1
4b
Express the answer in radians rounded to two decimal places.
(a)	 Because the angle is to be measured in radians, first set the mode of the  
calculator to radians.* Rounded to two decimal places,
sin-1 1
3 = 0.34
Example 2
Solution
•
2
Example 3
Solution
Figure 4 
•
2p–2
p–2
u
p
3p
––2
2p
2p
5p
––2
21
1
≤ u ≤
p–2
p–2
2
*On most calculators, the inverse sine is obtained by pressing  SHIFT  or  2nd ,  followed by   sin  . On 
some calculators,  sin-1  is pressed first, then 1>3 is entered; on others, this sequence is reversed. Consult 
your owner’s manual for the correct sequence.

478 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
(b)	 Figure 5 shows the solution using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator in radian 
mode. Rounded to two decimal places, sin-1a -  1
4b = -0.25.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Use Properties of Inverse Functions to Find Exact Values  
of Certain Composite Functions
Recall from the discussion of functions and their inverses in Section 5.2, that 
f -11f1x2 2 = x for all x in the domain of f and that f1f -11x2 2 = x for all x in the 
domain of f -1. In terms of the sine function and its inverse, these properties are of 
the form
3
	
 f -11f1x2 2 = sin-11sin x2 = x   where  -  p
2 … x … p
2 	
(2a)
	
 f1f -11x2 2 = sin1sin-1 x2 = x   where  -1 … x … 1	
(2b)
Finding the Exact Value of Certain Composite Functions
Find the exact value of each of the following composite functions.
(a)	 sin-1asin p
8 b	
(b)  sin-1asin 5p
8 b
(a)	 The composite function sin-1asin p
8 b follows the form of property (2a).
	
Because p
8  is in the interval c -  p
2, p
2 d , property (2a) can be used. Then
sin-1asin p
8 b = p
8
(b)	 The composite function sin-1asin 5p
8 b follows the form of property (2a), but
5p
8  is not in the interval c -  p
2, p
2 d . To use (2a), first find an angle u in the
interval c -  p
2, p
2 d  for which sin u = sin 5p
8 . Then, using (2a), 
sin-1asin 5p
8 b = sin-11sin u2 = u
Figure 6 illustrates that sin 5p
8
= y = sin 3p
8 . Since 3p
8  is in the interval 
c -  p
2, p
2 d , this means
sin-1asin 5p
8 b = sin-1asin 3p
8 b = 3p
8
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Finding the Exact Value of Certain Composite Functions
Find the exact value, if any, of each composite function.
(a)	 sin1sin-1 0.52        (b)  sin1sin-1 1.82
Example 4
Solution
c
Use property (2a).
•
Example 5
Figure 6  sin 5p
8
= sin 3p
8
y
x
x 2  y 2  1
(x, y)
(x, y)
1
1
1
1
3
–––
8
3
–––
8
5
–––
8
Figure 5 

Section 7.1  The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions  479
(a)	 The composite function sin1sin-1 0.52 follows the form of property (2b), and 0.5 
is in the interval 3 -1, 14. Using (2b) reveals that
sin1sin-1 0.52 = 0.5
(b)	 The composite function sin1sin-1 1.82 follows the form of property (2b). Since
	
the domain of the inverse sine function is 3-1, 14, sin-1 1.8 is not defined. 
Therefore, sin1sin-1 1.82 is also not defined.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
The Inverse Cosine Function
Figure 7 shows the graph of y = cos x. Because every horizontal line y = b, where 
b is between -1 and 1, inclusive, intersects the graph of y = cos x infinitely many 
times, it follows that the cosine function is not one-to-one.
Solution
*This is the generally accepted restriction to define the inverse cosine function.
Figure 7  y = cos x, - q 6 x 6 q, - 1 … y … 1
2p–2
p–2
x
p
3p
–––
2
2p
2p
5p
–––
2
y
21
1
y 5 b
21  b  1
However, if the domain of y = cos x is restricted to the interval 30, p4, the 
restricted function
y = cos x  0 … x … p
is one-to-one and has an inverse function.* See Figure 8.
An equation for the inverse of y = f1x2 = cos x is obtained by interchanging x 
and y. The implicit form of the inverse function is x = cos y, 0 … y … p. The explicit 
form is called the inverse cosine of x and is symbolized by y = f -11x2 = cos-1 x  
(or by y = Arccos x).
	
y = cos-1 x means x = cos y	
	
where -1 … x … 1 and 0 … y … p	
(3)
Definition
Here y is the angle whose cosine is x. Because the range of the cosine function, 
y = cos x, is -1 … y … 1, the domain of the inverse function y = cos-1 x is 
-1 … x … 1. Because the restricted domain of the cosine function, y = cos x, is 
0 … x … p, the range of the inverse function y = cos-1 x is 0 … y … p.
The graph of y = cos-1 x can be obtained by reflecting the restricted portion of 
the graph of y = cos x about the line y = x, as shown in Figure 9.
Check:	Graph Y1 = cos x and Y2 = cos-1 x. Compare the result with  
Figure 9.
Figure 8 
y = cos x, 0 … x … p, - 1 … y … 1
p–2
x
p
y
21
(0, 1)
(p, 21)
Figure 9 
y = cos-1 x, - 1 … x … 1, 0 … y … p
x
–1
y
y = x
–1
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
–2

(, –1)
y = cos x
–2
(–1, )

y = cos–1 x

480 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Finding the Exact Value of an Inverse Cosine Function
Find the exact value of:  cos-1 0
Let u = cos-1 0. Then u is the angle, 0 … u … p, whose cosine equals 0.
 u = cos-1 0   0 … u … p
 cos u = 0  
 0 … u … p
Look at Table 2 and Figure 10.
Example 6
Solution
Table 2
U
cos U
0
1
 p
6
 13
2
 p
4
 12
2
 p
3
 1
2
 p
2
0
 2p
3
  -  1
2
 3p
4
  -  12
2
 5p
6
  -  13
2
p
  -1
Figure 10 
2p–2
p–2
u
p
3p
–2
2p
2p
5p
–2
21
1
0 ≤ u ≤ p
The only angle u within the interval 30, p4 whose cosine is 0 is p
2 . [Note that cos 3p
2
and cos a -  p
2 b also equal 0, but they lie outside the interval 30, p4, so these values 
are not allowed.] Therefore,
cos-1 0 = p
2
Finding the Exact Value of an Inverse Cosine Function
Find the exact value of:  cos-1a -  12
2 b
Let u = cos-1a -  12
2 b. Then u is the angle, 0 … u … p, whose cosine equals -  12
2 .
 u = cos-1a -  12
2 b   0 … u … p
 cos u = -  12
2   
 0 … u … p
Look at Table 2 and Figure 11.
The only angle u within the interval 30, p4 whose cosine is -  12
2  is 3p
4 , so
cos-1a -  12
2 b = 3p
4
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
For the cosine function and its inverse, the following properties hold.
•
Example 7
Solution
•
Figure 11 
π
1
2
2
−
3π
4
−1
0  … u … π
u
	
 f -11f1x2 2 = cos-11cos x2 = x  where  0 … x … p 	
(4a)
	
 f1f -11x2 2 = cos1cos-1 x2 = x  where  -1 … x … 1	
(4b)

Section 7.1  The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions  481
Using Properties of Inverse Functions to Find the Exact Value  
of Certain Composite Functions
Find the exact value of:
(a)	 cos-1acos p
12b	
(b)  cos3cos-11 -0.42 4
(c)  cos-1c cosa -  2p
3 b d           (d)  cos1cos-1 p2
(a)	 cos-1acos p
12b = p
12               p
12 is in the interval [0, p]; use property (4a).
(b)	 cos3cos-11 -0.42 4 = -0.4 
- 0.4 is in the interval [- 1, 1]; use property (4b).
(c)	 The angle -  2p
3  is not in the interval 30, p4 so property (4a) cannot be 
used. However, because the cosine function is even, cosa -  2p
3 b = cos 2p
3 . 
Because 2p
3  is in the interval 30, p4, property (4a) can be used, and
	
cos-1c cos a-  2p
3 b d = cos-1acos 2p
3 b = 2p
3 .
(d)	 Because p is not in the interval 3 -1, 14, the domain of the inverse cosine  
function, cos-1 p is not defined. This means the composite function cos1cos-1p2 
is also not defined.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 9  a n d  5 5
The Inverse Tangent Function
Figure 12 shows the graph of y = tan x. Because every horizontal line intersects the 
graph infinitely many times, it follows that the tangent function is not one-to-one.
However, if the domain of y = tan x is restricted to the interval a -  p
2 , p
2 b, the 
restricted function
y = tan x  -  p
2 6 x 6 p
2
is one-to-one and so has an inverse function.* See Figure 13.
Example 8
Solution
2p
3  is in the interval 30, p4; use 14a2.
*This is the generally accepted restriction.
Figure 13
y = tan x, -  p
2 6 x 6 p
2
 , - q 6 y 6 q
–2
–2
–2
x
y
1
1
x 
–2
x 
Figure 12
y = tan x, - q 6 x 6 q, x not equal to odd multiples of p
2
 , - q 6 y 6 q
–2
–2
x

3
–––
2

2
2
5
–––
2

3
–––
2
y
1
1
5
–––
2
 5
–––
2
x 
 3
–––
2
x 
3
–––
2
x 
5
–––
2
x 

––2
x 

––2
x 

482 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
An equation for the inverse of y = f1x2 = tan x is obtained by interchanging x 
and y. The implicit form of the inverse function is x = tan y, -  p
2 6 y 6 p
2 .
The explicit form is called the inverse tangent of x and is symbolized by
y = f -11x2 = tan-1 x (or by y = Arctan x).
Check: Graph Y1 = tan x and 
Y2 = tan-1 x. Compare the result 
with Figure 14.
	
y = tan-1 x means x = tan y	
	
where - q 6 x 6 q and -  p
2 6 y 6 p
2 	
(5)
Definition
Here y is the angle whose tangent is x. The domain of the function y = tan-1 x 
is - q 6 x 6 q, and its range is -  p
2 6 y 6 p
2 . The graph of y = tan-1 x can be
obtained by reflecting the restricted portion of the graph of y = tan x about the line 
y = x, as shown in Figure 14.
Figure 14  y = tan-1 x, - q 6 x 6 q, -  p
2 6 y 6 p
2
–p–2
–p–2
p–2
p–2
x
y
–1
1
y = tan–1 x
y = tan x
y = x
2p–2
y 5
2p–2
x 5
p–2
y 5
p–2
x 5
Finding the Exact Value of an Inverse Tangent Function
Find the exact value of:
(a)	 tan-1 1                  (b)  tan-11 - 232
(a)	 Let u = tan-1 1. Then u is the angle, -  p
2 6 u 6 p
2 , whose tangent equals 1.
 u = tan-1 1   -  p
2 6 u 6 p
2
 tan u = 1   
 -  p
2 6 u 6 p
2
Look at Table 3. The only angle u within the interval a -  p
2 , p
2 b whose 
tangent is 1 is p
4 , so
tan-1 1 = p
4
Example 9
Solution

Section 7.1  The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions  483
(b)	 Let u = tan-11 - 232. Then u is the angle, -  p
2 6 u 6 p
2 , whose tangent  
equals - 23.
 u = tan-11 - 232   -  p
2 6 u 6 p
2
 tan u = - 23  
 -  p
2 6 u 6 p
2
Look at Table 3. The only angle u within the interval a -  p
2 , p
2 b whose 
tangent is - 23 is -  p
3 , so
tan-11 - 232 = -  p
3
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
For the tangent function and its inverse, the following properties hold.
•
Table 3
U
tan U
 -  p
2
Undefined
 -  p
3
  - 23
 -  p
4
  -1
 -  p
6
  -  13
3
0
0
 p
6
 13
3
 p
4
1
 p
3
 23
 p
2
Undefined
 f -11f1x2 2 = tan-11tan x2 = x
 where  -  p
2 6 x 6 p
2
 f1f -11x2 2 = tan1tan-1 x2 = x   where - q 6 x 6 q
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
Find the Inverse Function of a Trigonometric Function
Finding the Inverse Function of a Trigonometric Function
(a) Find the inverse function f -1 of f1x2 = 2 sin x - 1, -  p
2 … x … p
2 . 
(b) Find the range of f and the domain and range of f -1.
(a)	 The function f is one-to-one and so has an inverse function. Follow the steps on  
page 297 for finding the inverse function.
 y = 2 sin x - 1
 x = 2 sin y - 1
 x + 1 = 2 sin y
 sin y = x + 1
2
 y = sin-1 x + 1
2
 
The inverse function is f -11x2 = sin-1 x + 1
2
.
(b)	 To find the range of f, solve y = 2 sin x - 1 for sin x, and use the fact that 
-1 … sin x … 1.
 y = 2 sin x - 1
 sin x = y + 1
2
4
Example 10
Solution
Interchange x and y.
Solve for y.
Apply the definition (1).

484 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
 -1 … y + 1
2
… 1
 -2 … y + 1 … 2
 -3 … y … 1
The range of f is 5y -3 … y … 16, or 3 -3, 14 using interval notation.
The domain of f -1 equals the range of f, 3 -3, 14.
The range of f -1 equals the domain of f, c -  p
2, p
2 d .
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
Solve Equations Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions
Equations that contain inverse trigonometric functions are called inverse  
trigonometric equations.
Solving an Equation Involving an Inverse Trigonometric Function
Solve the equation:  3 sin–1x = p
To solve an equation involving a single inverse trigonometric function, first isolate 
the inverse trigonometric function.
 3 sin–1 x = p
 sin–1x = p
3 
 x = sin p
3
 x = 13
2
The solution set is e 13
2 f.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 7
•
5
Example 11
Solution
Divide both sides by 3.
y = sin-1 x  means  x =  sin y.
•
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 What are the domain and the range of y = sin x?  
(pp. 417–427)
	 2.	 A suitable restriction on the domain of the function 
f1x2 = 1x - 122 to make it one-to-one would be                . 
(pp. 291–299)
	 3.	 If the domain of a one-to-one function is 33, q 2, the range 
of its inverse is  
 . (pp. 291–299)
	 4.	 True or False The graph of y = cos x is decreasing on the 
interval 10, p2. (pp. 431–435) 
	 5.	 tan p
4 =      
 ; sin p
3 =     
    (pp. 402–411)
	 6.	 sina-  p
6 b =     
 ; cos p =      
 . (pp. 402–411)
7.1  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 7.	 y = sin-1 x means  
, where - 1 … x … 1 and 
-  p
2 … y … p
2 .
	 8.	 cos-1 1cos x2 = x, where  
 .
	 9.	 tan1tan-1 x2 = x, where  
 .
	 10.	 True or False  The domain of y = sin-1 x is	
 
-  p
2 … x … p
2 . 
	 11.	 True or False  sin1sin-1 02 = 0 and cos1cos-1 02 = 0. 
	 12.	 True or False   y = tan-1 x means x = tan y, where
	
	 - q 6 x 6 q and -  p
2 6 y 6 p
2 . 
Note  The range of f also can be found 
using transformations. The range of 
y = sin x is 3 - 1, 14. The range of 
y = 2 sin x is 3 - 2, 24 due to the  
vertical stretch by a factor of 2. The 
range of f (x) = 2 sin x - 1 is 3 - 3, 14 
due to the shift down of 1 unit.	
■

Section 7.1  The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions  485
	 13.	 Which of the following inequalities describes	
  
where sin-11sin x2 = x?
(a)  - q 6 x 6 q        (b)  0 … x … p
(c)  - 1 … x … 1             (d)  -  p
2 … x … p
2  
(a)	 f -1(x) = tan-1(2x); - q 6 x 6 q
(b)	 f -1(x) = 2 tan-1 x; - q 6 x 6 q
(c)	 f -1(x) = 1
2 tan-1 x; - q 6 x 6 q
(d)	 f -1(x) = tan-1a1
2
 xb; - q 6 x 6 q 
Skill Building
In Problems 15–26, find the exact value of each expression.
	 15.	 sin-1 0  	
16.	 cos-1 1  	
17.	 cos-11- 12 
	
18.	 sin-11- 12 
	 19.	 tan-1 0  	
20.	 tan-11- 12 
	
21.	 sin-1 12
2  
	
22.	 tan-1 13
3  
	 23.	 sin-1a-  13
2 b 
	
24.	 tan-1 23 
	
25.	 cos-1a-  13
2 b 
	
26.	 sin-1a-  12
2 b 
In Problems 27–38, use a calculator to find the value of each expression rounded to two decimal places.
	 27.	 sin-1 0.1 
	
28.	 cos-1 0.6 
	
29.	 tan-1 0.2 
	
30.	 tan-1 5 
	 31.	 sin-1 1
8 
	
32.	 cos-1 7
8 
	
33.	 tan-11- 32 
	
34.	 tan-11-0.42 
	 35.	 cos-11- 0.442 
	
36.	 sin-11- 0.122 
	
37.	 sin-1 13
5  
	
38.	 cos-1 12
3  
In Problems 39–58, find the exact value, if any, of each composite function. If there is no value, say it is “not defined.” Do not use a  
calculator.
	 39.	 cos-1acos 4p
5 b 
	
40.	 sin-1c sin a-  p
10b d  
	
41.	 sin-1c sina-  3p
7 b d  
	
42.	 tan-1c tana-  3p
8 b d  
	 43.	 sin-1asin 9p
8 b 
	
44.	 cos-1c cosa-  5p
3 b d  
	
45.	 tan-1atan 4p
5 b 
	
46.	 tan-1c tana-  2p
3 b d  
	 47.	 sin-1c sina-  3p
4 b d  
	
48.	 cos-1c cosa-  p
4 b d   
	
49.	 tan-1c tana-  3p
2 b d    	
50.	 tan-1c tana p
2 b d  
	 51.	 sinasin-1 1
4b 
	
52.	 cosc cos-1a-  2
3b d  
	
53.	 tan3tan-11- 22 4  	
54.	 tan1tan-142  
	 55.	 cos1cos-11.22  	
56.	 sin3sin-11- 22 4  	
57.	 sin3sin-11- 1.52 4 
	
58.	 tan1tan-1p2 
In Problems 59–66, find the inverse function f -1 of each function f. Find the range of f and the domain and range of f -1.
	 59.	 f1x2 = 2 tan x - 3; -  p
2 6 x 6 p
2 	
60.	 f1x2 = 5 sin x + 2; -  p
2 … x … p
2  
	 61.	 f1x2 = - 2 cos13x2; 0 … x … p
3 	
62.	 f1x2 = 3 sin12x2; -  p
4 … x … p
4
	 63.	 f1x2 = cos1x + 22 + 1; - 2 … x … p - 2	
64.	 f1x2 = - tan1x + 12 - 3; - 1 - p
2 6 x 6 p
2 - 1 
	 65.	 f1x2 = 2 cos13x + 22; -  2
3 …  x … -  2
3 + p
3 	
66.	 f1x2 = 3 sin12x + 12; -  1
2 - p
4 … x … -  1
2 + p
4  
In Problems 67–74, find the exact solution of each equation.
	 67.	 4 sin–1x = p 
	
68.	 2 cos–1 x = p 
	
69.	 - 6 sin–113x2 = p 
	 70.	 3 cos-112x2 = 2p     
	
71.	 - 4 tan-1 x = p 
	
72.	 3 tan–1 x = p  
	 73.	 5 sin–1 x - 2p = 2 sin–1 x - 3p 
	
74.	 4 cos-1 x - 2p = 2 cos–1 x  
	 14.	 Choose the inverse function f -1 of 
f (x) = 1
2
 tan x, - p
2 6 x 6 p
2  

486 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 75–80, use the following discussion. The formula
D = 24J1 -
cos-11tan i tan u2
p
R
can be used to approximate the number of hours of daylight D 
when the declination of the Sun is i° at a location u° north latitude 
for any date between the vernal equinox and autumnal equinox. 
The declination of the Sun is defined as the angle i between the 
equatorial plane and any ray of light from the Sun. The latitude of a 
location is the angle u between the Equator and the location on the 
surface of Earth, with the vertex of the angle located at the center of 
Earth. See the figure. To use the formula, cos-11tan i tan u2 must 
be expressed in radians.
(d)	 Thanks to the symmetry of the orbital path of Earth 
around the Sun, the number of hours of daylight on the 
winter solstice may be found by computing the number 
of hours of daylight on the summer solstice and 
	
subtracting this result from 24 hours. Compute the  
number of hours of daylight for this location on the  
winter solstice. What do you conclude about daylight for 
a location at 66°30′ north latitude?
	 81.	 Being the First to See the Rising Sun Cadillac Mountain,  
elevation 1530 feet, is located in Acadia National Park, Maine, 
and is the highest peak on the east coast of the United States. 
It is said that a person standing on the summit will be the first 
person in the United States to see the rays of the rising Sun. 
How much sooner would a person atop Cadillac Mountain 
see the first rays than a person standing below, at sea level?
N
Pole
Equator
i°
N
Pole
Equator
u°
Sun
u° North latitude
	 75.	 Approximate the number of hours of daylight in city A, state B  
(29°42′ north latitude), for the following dates in parts (a) 
through (c).
(a)	 Summer solstice 1i = 23.5°2 
(b)	 Vernal equinox 1i = 0°2 
(c)	 July 4 1i = 22°48′2 
	 76.	 Approximate the number of hours of daylight in New York, 
New York (40°45′ north latitude), for the following dates:
(a)	 Summer solstice 1i = 23.5°2 
(b)	 Vernal equinox 1i = 0°2 
(c)	 July 4 1i = 22°48′2 
	 77.	 Approximate the number of hours of daylight in city A, state B 
(23°48′ north latitude), for the following dates in parts (a) 
through (c).
(a)	 Summer solstice 1i = 23.5°2 
(b)	 Vernal equinox 1i = 0°2 
(c)	 July 4 1i = 22°48′2 
	 78.	 Approximate the number of hours of daylight in Anchorage, 
Alaska (61°10′ north latitude), for the following dates:
(a)	 Summer solstice 1i = 23.5°2 
(b)	 Vernal equinox 1i = 0°2 
(c)	 July 4 1i = 22°48′2 
	 79.	 Approximate the number of hours of daylight at the Equa-
tor (0° north latitude) for the following dates in parts (a) 
through (C). Then complete part (d).
(a)	 Summer solstice 1i = 23.5°2 
(b)	 Vernal equinox 1i = 0°2 
(c)	 July 4 1i = 22°48′2 
(d)	 What do you conclude about the number of hours 
of daylight throughout the year for a location at the  
Equator? 
	 80.	 Approximate the number of hours of daylight for any  
location that is 66°30′ north latitude for the following dates:
(a)	 Summer solstice 1i = 23.5°2 
(b)	 Vernal equinox 1i = 0°2 
(c)	 July 4 1i = 22°48′2 
2710
miles
Rotation
of Earth
P
D
Q
s
First rays
Sun
u
[Hint: Consult the figure. When the person at D sees the first 
rays of the Sun, the person at P does not. The person at P 
sees the first rays of the Sun only after Earth has rotated 
so that P is at location Q. Compute the length of the arc 
subtended by the central angle u. Then use the fact that at 
the latitude of Cadillac Mountain, in 24 hours a length of 
2p127102 ≈17027.4 miles is subtended.] 
	 82.	 Movie Theater Screens Suppose that a movie theater has a 
screen that is 28 feet tall. When you sit down, the bottom of 
the screen is 6 feet above your eye level. The angle formed 
by drawing a line from your eye to the bottom of the screen 
and another line from your eye to the top of the screen is 
called the viewing angle. In the figure, u is the viewing angle. 
Suppose that you sit x feet from the screen. The viewing  
angle u is given by the function
u1x2 = tan-1a34
x b - tan-1a6
xb
6 feet
28 feet
u
(a)	 What is your viewing angle if you sit 10 feet from the 
screen? 15 feet? 20 feet?
(b)	 If there are 5 feet between the screen and the first row of 
seats and there are 3 feet between each row and the row 
behind it, which row results in the largest viewing angle? 
                                

Section 7.1  The Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions  487
(c)	 Using a graphing utility, graph
u1x2 = tan-1a34
x b - tan-1a6
xb
What value of x results in the largest viewing angle?
	 83.	 Area under a Curve The area under the graph of y =
1
1 + x2
	
	 and above the x-axis between x = a and x = b is given by
tan-1 b - tan-1 a
	
	 See figure. Answer parts (a) and (b).
	 84.	 Area under a Curve The area under the graph of
	
	 y =
1
21 - x2 and above the x-axis between x = a and 
x = b is given by
sin-1 b - sin-1 a
	
	 See the figure.
y
1
0.5
x
2
22
b
a
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 87–90 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
Problems 85 and 86 require the following discussion:
The shortest distance between two points on Earth’s surface can be determined from the latitude and 
longitude of the two locations. For example, if location 1 has (lat, lon) = (a1, b1) and location 2 
has (lat, lon) = (a2, b2), the shortest distance between the two locations is approximately
d = r  cos-1[1cos a1 cos b1 cos a2 cos b22 + 1cos a1 sin b1 cos a2 sin b22 + 1sin a1 sin a22],
where r = radius of Earth ≈3960 miles and the inverse cosine function is expressed in radians. 
Also, N latitude and E longitude are positive angles, and S latitude and W longitude are negative 
angles.
	 85.	 Shortest Distance from Chicago to Honolulu Find the  
shortest distance from Chicago, latitude 41°50′N, longitude 
87°37′W, to Honolulu, latitude 21°18′N, longitude 157°50′W. 
Round your answer to the nearest mile. 
	 86.	 Shortest Distance from Honolulu to Melbourne, Australia 
Find the shortest distance from Honolulu to Melbourne, 
Australia, latitude 37°47′S, longitude 144°58′E. Round your 
answer to the nearest mile. 
(a)	 Find the exact area under the graph of y =
1
1 + x2 and
	
above the x-axis between x = 0 and x = 23.   
(b)	 Find the exact area under the graph of y =
1
1 + x2 and
	
above the x-axis between x = -  13
3  and x = 1.       
y
3
x
x  1
x  1
b
a
1
1
(a)	 Find the exact area under the graph of y =
1
21 - x2
	
and above the x-axis between x = 0 and x = 13
2 . 
(b)	 Find the exact area under the graph of y =
1
21 - x2
	
and above the x-axis between x = -  1
2 and x = 1
2. 
Source: www.infoplease.com
City
Latitude
Longitude
Chicago, IL
41°50’N
87°37’W
Honolulu, HI
21°18’N
157°50’W
Melbourne, 
Australia
37°47’S
144°58’E 
	 87.	 Solve exactly: 103x + 4 = 11 
	 88.	 State why the graph of the function f shown to the right is one-to-one.
	
	 Then draw the graph of the inverse function f -1.
	
	 Hint: The graph of y = x is given.
	 89.	 The exponential function f (x) = 1 + 2x is one-to-one. Find f -1. 
	 90.	 Find the exact value: sin p
3 cos p
3  
x
y
4
4
4
4
y = x
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
(   , 1)
1–2
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 domain: the set of all real numbers; range: - 1 … y … 1    	2.  Two answers are possible: x … 1 or x Ú 1
	 3.	 33, q 2    	 4.  True    5.  1; 13
2     6.  -  1
2; - 1

488 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Find the Exact Value of Expressions Involving the Inverse  
Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions
Finding the Exact Value of Expressions Involving Inverse  
Trigonometric Functions
Find the exact value of:  sinatan-1 1
2b
Let u = tan-1 1
2. Then tan u = 1
2, where - p
2 6 u 6 p
2. We seek sin u. Because 
tan u 7 0, it follows that 0 6 u 6 p
2, so u lies in quadrant I. Because tan u = 1
2 = y
x,
let 
x = 2 
and 
y = 1. 
Since 
r = d1O, P2 = 222 + 12 = 25, 
the 
point  
P = 1x, y2 = 12, 12 is on the circle x2 + y2 = 5. See Figure 15. Then, with 
x = 2, y = 1, and r = 25, it follows that
 sinatan-1 1
2b = sin u =
1
25
= 25
5
æsin u = y
r
Finding the Exact Value of Expressions Involving Inverse  
Trigonometric Functions
Find the exact value of:  cosc sin-1a - 1
3b d
Solution  Let u = sin-1a - 1
3b. Then sin u = - 1
3 and - p
2 … u … p
2.  We seek cos u. 
Because sin u 6 0, it follows that - p
2 … u 6 0, so u lies in quadrant IV. Since 
sin u = -1
3
= y
r, let y = -1 and r = 3. The point P = 1x, y2 = 1x, -12, x 7 0, 
is on a circle of radius 3, x2 + y2 = 9. See Figure 16. Then
 x2 + y2 = 9
 x2 + 1 -122 = 9       y = - 1
 x2 = 8
 x = 222 
x 7 0
1
Example 1
Solution
•
Example 2
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 491.
	
Objectives	 	1  Find the Exact Value of Expressions Involving the Inverse Sine, Cosine, 
and Tangent Functions  (p. 488)
	
	 	2  Define the Inverse Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent Functions  (p. 489)
	
	 	3  Use a Calculator to Evaluate sec-1 x, csc-1 x, and cot-1 x  (p. 490)
	
	 	4  Write a Trigonometric Expression as an Algebraic Expression  (p. 491)
7.2  The Inverse Trigonometric Functions (Continued)
• Finding Exact Values Given the Value of a  
Trigonometric Function and the Quadrant of the 
Angle (Section 6.3, pp. 424–426)
• Graphs of the Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent  
Functions (Section 6.5, pp. 449–451)
• Domain and Range of the Secant, Cosecant, and 
Cotangent Functions (Section 6.3, pp. 417–419)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following concepts:
Figure 15  tan u = 1
2
O
u
y
x
x 2  y 2  5
P  (2, 1)
5
Figure 16  sin u = -  1
3
O
u
y
x
x 2  y 2  9
P  (x, 1)
3

Section 7.2  The Inverse Trigonometric Functions (Continued)  489
Using x = 222, y = -1, and r = 3 gives the result
 cosc sin-1a - 1
3b d = cos u = 222
3
	
æcos u = x
r
Finding the Exact Value of Expressions Involving Inverse  
Trigonometric Functions
Find the exact value of:  tanc cos-1a - 1
3b d
Let u = cos-1a - 1
3b. Then cos u = - 1
3 and 0 … u … p. We seek tan u. Because 
cos u 6 0, it follows that p
2 6 u … p, so u lies in quadrant II. Since cos u = -1
3
= x
r,
let x = -1 and r = 3. The point P = 1x, y2 = 1 -1, y2, y 7 0, is on a circle of 
radius r = 3, x2 + y2 = 9. See Figure 17. Then
 x2 + y2 = 9
 (-1)2 + y2 = 9      x = - 1
 y2 = 8
 y = 222 
y 7 0
Then, x = -1, y = 222, and r = 3, which means
 tanc cos-1a -  1
3b d = tan u = 222
-1
= -222
	
ætan u = y
x
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  9  a n d  2 7
Define the Inverse Secant, Cosecant,  
and Cotangent Functions
The inverse secant, inverse cosecant, and inverse cotangent functions are defined 
as follows:
•
Example 3
Solution
•
2
Figure 17  cos u = -  1
3
O
y
x
x 2  y 2  9
P  (1, y)
3
u
	
y = sec-1 x means x = sec y	
(1)
where 0 x0 Ú 1 and 0 … y … p, y ≠p
2
*
	
y = csc-1 x means x = csc y	
(2)
where 0 x0 Ú 1 and - p
2 … y … p
2, y ≠0†
	
y = cot-1 x means x = cot y	
(3)
where - q 6 x 6 q and 0 6 y 6 p
Definition
*Most books use this definition. A few use the restriction 0 … y 6 p
2 , p … y 6 3p
2 .
†Most books use this definition. A few use the restriction - p 6 y … - p
2 , 0 6 y … p
2 .
You are encouraged to review the graphs of the cotangent, cosecant, and secant 
functions in Figures 66, 67, and 68 in Section 6.5 to help you to see the basis for these 
definitions.

490 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Finding the Exact Value of an Inverse Cosecant Function
Find the exact value of:  csc-1 2
Let u = csc-1 2. We seek the angle u, - p
2 … u … p
2, u ≠0, whose cosecant equals 2  
aor, equivalently, whose sine equals 1
2b.
 u = csc-1 2   - p
2 … u … p
2,  u ≠0
 csc u = 2        - p
2 … u … p
2,  u ≠0 
sin u = 1
2
The only angle u in the interval - p
2 … u … p
2, u ≠0, whose cosecant is 2 
c sin u = 1
2 d  is p
6, so csc-1 2 = p
6.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Use a Calculator to Evaluate sec−1 x, csc−1 x, and cot−1 x
Most calculators do not have keys for evaluating the inverse cotangent, cosecant, 
and secant functions. The easiest way to evaluate them is to convert to an inverse 
trigonometric function whose range is the same as the one to be evaluated. In this 
regard, notice that y = cot-1 x and y = sec-1 x, except where undefined, each have 
the same range as y = cos-1 x; y = csc-1 x, except where undefined, has the same 
range as y = sin-1 x.
Approximating the Value of Inverse Trigonometric Functions
Use a calculator to approximate each expression in radians rounded to two decimal 
places.
(a)	 sec-1 3      (b)  csc-11 -42      (c)  cot-1 1
2      (d)  cot-11-22
First, set your calculator to radian mode.
(a)	 Let u = sec-1 3. Then sec u = 3 and 0 … u … p, u ≠p
2. Now find cos u  
because y = cos-1x has the same range as y = sec-1x, except where undefined. 
Because sec u =
1
cos u = 3, this means cos u = 1
3. Then u = cos-1 1
3 and
 sec-1 3 = u = cos-1 1
3 ≈1.23
	
c
	
Use a calculator.
(b)	 Let u = csc-11 -42. Then csc u = -4, - p
2 … u … p
2, u ≠0. Now find sin u  
because y = sin-1x has the same range as y = csc-1x, except where undefined. 
Because csc u =
1
sin u = -4, this means sin u = - 1
4. Then u = sin-1a - 1
4b, and
csc-11-42 = u = sin-1a - 1
4b ≈-0.25
(c)	 Let u = cot-1 1
2. Then cot u = 1
2, 0 6 u 6 p. So u lies in quadrant I. Now find 
cos u because y = cos-1x has the same range as y = cot-1x, except where  
undefined. Use Figure 18 to find that cos u =
1
25
, 0 6 u 6 p
2. 
Example 4
Solution
•
3
Example 5
Solution
Note  Remember that the range of
y = sin-1 x is c -  p
2, p
2 d ; the range of
y = cos-1 x is 30, p4.	
■
Figure 18  cot u = 1
2
 , 0 6 u 6 p
O
u
y
x
x 2  y 2  5
P  (1, 2)
5

Section 7.2  The Inverse Trigonometric Functions (Continued)  491
	
So u = cos-1a 1
25
b, and
cot-1 1
2 = u = cos-1a 1
25
b ≈1.11
(d)	 Let u = cot-11 -22. Then cot u = -2, 0 6 u 6 p. These facts indicate  
that u lies in quadrant II. Now find cos u. Use Figure 19 to find that
	
cos u = - 2
25
, p
2 6 u 6 p. This means  u = cos-1a - 2
25
b, and
cot-11-22 = u = cos-1a - 2
25
b ≈2.68
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
Write a Trigonometric Expression as an Algebraic Expression
Writing a Trigonometric Expression as an Algebraic Expression
Write sin1tan-1 u2 as an algebraic expression containing u.
Let u = tan-1 u so that tan u = u, - p
2 6 u 6 p
2, - q 6 u 6 q. This means 
sec u 7 0. Then
•
4
Example 6
Solution
Figure 19  cot u = - 2, 0 6 u 6 p
O
u
y
x
x 2  y 2  5
P  (2, 1)
5
sin(tan-1 u) = sin u = sin u # cos u
cos u = tan u cos u = tan u
sec u =
tan u
21 + tan2 u
=
u
21 + u2
	
c          	
c 	
c
	
Multiply by 1: cos u
cos u.                sin u
cos u = tan u      sec2 u = 1 + tan2 u
	
sec u 7 0
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 What is the domain and the range of y = sec x? (pp. 417–419)
	 2.	 True or False  The graph of y = sec x is one-to-one on the 
interval c 0, p
2 ≤ and on the interval ap
2, pd . (pp. 449–451)
	 3.	 If tan u = 1
2, - p
2 6 u 6 p
2, then sin u =               . 
  
(pp. 424–426)
7.2  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 4.	 y = sec-1 x means    
   , where 0 x0     
    and 
       … y …         , y ≠p
2.
	 5.	 To find the inverse secant of a real number x such that 
x Ú 1, convert the inverse secant to an inverse    
   .
	 6.	 True or False  It is impossible to obtain exact values for the 
inverse secant function. 
	 7.	 True or False  csc-1 0.5 is not defined. 
	 8.	 True or False  The domain of the inverse cotangent  
function is the set of real numbers. 
Skill Building
In Problems 9–36, find the exact value of each expression.
	 9.	 cosasin-1 22
2 b 
	 10.	 sinacos-1 1
2b 
	 11.	 tanc sin-1a- 1
2b d  
	 12.	 tanc cos-1a- 23
2 b d     

492 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
	 13.	 cotc sin-1a- 1
2b d   
	 14.	 secacos-1 1
2b 
	 15.	  sec1tan-1 232  
	 16.	 csc1tan-1 12 
	 17.	 cosc sin-1a- 23
2 b d
	 18.	 sin3tan-11- 12 4 
	 19.	  cscc cos-1a- 23
2 b d  
	 20.	 secc sin-1a- 1
2b d  
	 21.	 tan-1acot 2p
3 b 
	 22.	 cos-1asin 5p
4 b  
	 23.	 cos-1c tana- p
4 b d  
	 24.	 sin-1c cosa- 7p
6 b d  
	 25.	 tanacos-1 1
3b 
	 26.	 tanasin-1 1
3b 
	 27.	 secatan-1 1
2b 
	 28.	 cosasin-1 22
3 b 
	 29.	 csc3tan-11- 22 4  
	 30.	 cotc sin-1a- 22
3 b d  
	 31.	 cotc cos-1a- 23
3 b d
	 32.	 sin3tan-11- 32 4 
	 33.	 cscatan-1 1
2b 
	 34.	 secasin-1 225
5
b 
	 35.	 cos-1asin 7p
6 b 
	 36.	 sin-1acos 3p
4 b 
	 37.	 cot-1 1 
	 38.	 cot-1 23 
	 39.	 csc-11- 12 
	 40.	 csc-1 22 
	 41.	 sec-11- 22 
	 42.	 sec-1 223
3
 
	 43.	 csc-1a- 223
3
b 
	 44.	 cot-1a- 23
3 b 
In Problems 37–44, find the exact value of each expression.
In Problems 45–56, use a calculator to find the value of each expression rounded to two decimal places.
	 45.	 sec-1 4 
	 46.	 csc-1 5 
	 47.	 sec-11- 32 
	 48.	 cot-1 2 
	 49.	 cot-1a- 1
2b 
	 50.	 csc-11- 32 
	 51.	 cot-11- 8.12 
	 52.	 cot-11- 252 
	 53.	 sec-1a- 4
3b 
	 54.	 csc-1a- 3
2b 
	 55.	 cot-11- 2102 
	 56.	 cot-1a- 3
2b 
In Problems 57–66, write each trigonometric expression as an algebraic expression in u.
	 57.	 cos1tan-1 u2
	 58.	 sin1cos-1 u2
	 59.	  tan1cos-1 u2
60.	  tan1sin-1 u2 
61.	 sin1cot-1 u2
62.	 sin1sec-1 u2 
63.	 cos1sec-1 u2
64.	 cos1csc-1 u2 
	 65.	 tan1sec-1 u2 
66.	  tan1cot-1 u2 
Mixed Practice
In Problems 67–78, f1x2 = sin x, - p
2 … x … p
2 , g1x2 = cos x, 0 … x … p, and h1x2 = tan x, - p
2 6 x 6 p
2. Find the exact value  
of each composite function.
	 67.	 gaf -1a12
13b b 
	
68.  f ag-1a 5
13b b 
	
69.  g-1af a7p
4 b b 
	
70.  f -1aga5p
6 b b 
	 71.	  haf -1a- 3
5b b 
	
72.  hag-1a- 4
5b b 
	
73.  gah-1a12
5 b b 
	
74.  f ah-1a 5
12b b 
	 75.	 g-1af a- 4p
3 b b 
	
76.  g-1af a- 5p
6 b b 
	
77.  hag-1a- 1
4b b 
	
78.  haf -1a- 2
5b b 

Section 7.2  The Inverse Trigonometric Functions (Continued)  493
Applications and Extensions
Problems 79 and 80 require the following discussion: When granular materials are allowed to fall freely, they form 
conical (cone-shaped) piles. The naturally occurring angle of slope, measured from the horizontal, at which the 
loose material comes to rest is called the angle of repose and varies for different materials. The angle of repose u is 
related to the height h and base radius r of the conical pile by the equation u = cot-1 r
h. See the illustration.
	 79.	 Angle of Repose: Deicing Salt When certain granular materials are stored in a pile 15 feet high, the diameter 
of the base of the pile is 25 feet. 
(a)	 Find the angle of repose for the material.
(b)	 What is the base diameter of a pile that is 17 feet high? 
(c)	 What is the height of a pile that has a base diameter of approximately 122 feet? 
	 80.	 Angle of Repose: Bunker Sand  The steepness of sand bunkers on a golf course is affected by the angle of repose of the sand 
(a larger angle of repose allows for steeper bunkers). A freestanding pile of loose sand from a United States Golf Association 
(USGA) bunker had a height of 4 feet and a base diameter of approximately 6.68 feet.
(a)	 Find the angle of repose for USGA bunker sand. 
(b)	 What is the height of such a pile if the diameter of the base is 8 feet? 
(c)	 A 6-foot-high pile of loose Tour Grade 50/50 sand has a base diameter of approximately 8.44 feet. Which type of sand (USGA 
or Tour Grade 50/50) would be better suited for steep bunkers? 
Source: 2004 Annual Report, Purdue University Turfgrass Science Program
r
h
u
	 81.	 Artillery A projectile fired into the first quadrant from the origin of a coordinate system will pass through the point (x, y)
	
	 at time t according to the relationship cot u =
2x
2y + gt2 where u is the angle of elevation of the launcher and g is the
	
	 acceleration due to gravity (32.2 feet/second2). An artilleryman is firing at an enemy bunker located 2475 feet up the side of a hill 
that is 6300 feet away. He fires a round, and exactly 2.82 seconds later he scores a direct hit.
(a)	 What angle of elevation did he use? 
(b)	 If the angle of elevation is also given by sec u = v0t
x , where v0 is the muzzle velocity of the weapon, find the muzzle velocity of 
the artillery piece he used. 
Source: www.egwald.com/geometry/projectile3d.php
	 82.	 Using a graphing utility, graph y = cot-1x.
	 83.	 Using a graphing utility, graph y = sec-1x.
	 84.	 Using a graphing utility, graph y = csc-1x.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 Domain: ex ` x ≠odd integer multiples of  p
2 f; range: 5y … -1 or y Ú 16      2.  True      3.   25
5
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 85.	 Explain in your own words how you would use your  
calculator to find the value of cot-1 10.
	 86.	 Consult three books on calculus and write down the  
definition in each of y = sec-1 x and y = csc-1 x. Compare 
these with the definitions given in this book.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 87–90 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 87.	 Find the complex zeros of f1x2 = x4 + 21x2 - 100. 
	 88.	 Determine algebraically whether f1x2 = x3 + x2 - x is even, odd, or neither. 
	 89.  Convert 315° to radians. 
	 90.	 Find the length of the arc subtended by a central angle of 75° on a circle of radius 6 inches. Give both the exact length and  
an approximation rounded to two decimal places. 

494 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 499.
	
Objectives	 	1  Solve Equations Involving a Single Trigonometric Function  (p. 494)
	
	 	2  Solve Trigonometric Equations Using a Calculator  (p. 497)
	
	 	3  Solve Trigonometric Equations Quadratic in Form  (p. 497)
	
	 	4  Solve Trigonometric Equations Using Fundamental Identities  (p. 498)
	
	 	5  Solve Trigonometric Equations Using a Graphing Utility  (p. 499)
7.3  Trigonometric Equations
• Solving Equations (Appendix A, Section A.6,  
pp. 987–994)
• Values of the Trigonometric Functions (Section 6.2, 
pp. 402–411)
• Using a Graphing Utility to Solve Equations  
(Appendix B, Section B.4, pp. 1040–1041)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Solve Equations Involving a Single Trigonometric Function
In this section, we discuss trigonometric equations—that is, equations involving 
trigonometric functions that are satisfied only by some values of the variable (or, 
possibly, are not satisfied by any values of the variable). The values that satisfy the 
equation are called solutions of the equation.
Checking Whether a Given Number Is a Solution  
of a Trigonometric Equation
Determine whether u = p
4  is a solution of the equation 2 sin u - 1 = 0. Is u = p
6  
a solution?
Replace u by p
4  in the given equation. The result is
2 sin p
4 - 1 = 2 # 12
2
- 1 = 22 - 1 ≠0
Therefore, p
4  is not a solution.
1
Example 1
Solution
Next replace u by p
6  in the equation. The result is
2 sin p
6 - 1 = 2 # 1
2 - 1 = 0
Therefore, p
6  is a solution of the given equation. 
•
The equation given in Example 1 has other solutions besides u = p
6 . For example,
u = 5p
6  is also a solution, as is u = 13p
6 . (You should check this for yourself.) 
In fact, the equation has an infinite number of solutions due to the periodicity of 
the sine function, as can be seen in Figure 20 where we graph y = 2 sin x - 1.  
Each x-intercept of the graph represents a solution to the equation 
2 sin x - 1 = 0.
Unless the domain of the variable is restricted, we need to find all the solutions 
of a trigonometric equation. As the next example illustrates, finding all the solutions 
can be accomplished by first finding solutions over an interval whose length equals 
the period of the function and then adding multiples of that period to the solutions 
found.

Section 7.3  Trigonometric Equations  495
Figure 20 
–2

–2
–6
x
3
––2
7
––6
13
–––
6
5
––6
y
1
3
1
y  2 sin x 1
Finding All the Solutions of a Trigonometric Equation
Solve the equation: cos u = 1
2
Give a general formula for all the solutions. List eight of the solutions.
Solution  The period of the cosine function is 2p. In the interval 30, 2p2, there are  
two angles u for which cos u = 1
2
 : u = p
3  and u = 5p
3 . See Figure 21. Because the
cosine function has period 2p, all the solutions of cos u = 1
2 may be given by the 
general formula
u = p
3 + 2kp or u = 5p
3
+ 2kp
Eight of the solutions are
- 5p
3 , - p
3 , p
3 , 5p
3 , 7p
3 , 11p
3 , 13p
3 , 17p
3
Check:	To verify the solutions, graph Y1 = cos x and Y2 = 1
2 and determine  
where the graphs intersect. (Be sure to graph in radian mode.) See 
	
Figure 22. The graph of Y1 intersects the graph of Y2 at x = 1.05 a ≈p
3 b,
	
5.24 a ≈5p
3 b, 7.33 a ≈7p
3 b, and 11.52 a ≈11p
3 b, rounded to two 
	
decimal places.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 7
In most of the work we do, we shall be interested only in finding solutions of 
trigonometric equations for 0 … u 6 2p.
Solving a Linear Trigonometric Equation
Solve the equation:  2 sin u + 23 = 0, 0 … u 6 2p
First solve the equation for sin u.
 2 sin u + 23 = 0
 2 sin u = - 23  
 sin u = -  13
2  
Example 2
k any integer
•
        k = - 1                  k = 0                 k = 1                       k = 2
(1111)1111*          (1)1*             (11)11*             (1111)1111*
Example 3
Solution
Subtract  13 from both sides.
Divide both sides by 2.
Figure 21 
y
x
x 2  y 2  1
u 
(  , y)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
–3
1–2
1–2
(   , y)
u  5
–––
3
Figure 22 
4p
Y2 5 1
2
Y1 5 cos x
21
1
0
In Words
Solving the equation cos u = 1
2 
means finding all the angles u 
whose cosine is 1
2.

496 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
In the interval 30, 2p2, there are two angles u for which sin u = -  13
2 : u = 4p
3  and 
u = 5p
3 . The solution set is e 4p
3 , 5p
3 f.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
When the argument of the trigonometric function in an equation is a multiple 
of u, the general formula must be used to solve the equation.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation
Solve the equation:  sin12u2 = 1
2, 0 … u 6 2p
In the interval 30, 2p2, the sine function equals 1
2 at p
6  and 5p
6 . See Figure 23(a).  
Therefore, 2u must equal p
6   or  5p
6 . Here’s the problem, however. The period of 
y = sin12u2 is 2p
2
= p. So, in the interval 30, 2p2, the graph of y = sin12u2  
completes two cycles, and the graph of y = sin12u2 intersects the graph of y = 1
2 
four times. See Figure 23(b). For this reason, there are four solutions to the equation  
sin12u2 = 1
2 in 30, 2p2. To find these solutions, write the general formula that  
gives all the solutions.
 2u = p
6 + 2kp  or  2u = 5p
6
+ 2kp 
 u = p
12 + kp  or
 u = 5p
12 + kp
Then
 u = p
12 + 1-12p = -11p
12
	
 u = 5p
12 + 1-12p = -7p
12
 u = p
12 + 102p = p
12
	
 u = 5p
12 + 102p = 5p
12
 u = p
12 + 112p = 13p
12
	
 u = 5p
12 + 112p = 17p
12
 u = p
12 + 122p = 25p
12
	
 u = 5p
12 + 122p = 29p
12
In the interval 30, 2p2, the solutions of sin12u2 = 1
2 are u = p
12, u = 5p
12 , u = 13p
12 ,
and u = 17p
12 . The solution set is e p
12, 5p
12 , 13p
12 , 17p
12 f. 
•
Example 4
Solution
k any integer
Divide by 2.
 k = - 1
 k = 0
 k = 1
 k = 2
x
y
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
(x,   )
(x,   )

––6
1–2
1–2
(a)
x2  y2  1
2u  
5
–––
6
2u  
Figure 23 
1
y
y 
1
2

u
1––2
(b)
WARNING  In solving a trigonometric 
equation for u, 0 … u 6 2p, in which 
the argument is not u (as in Example 4), 
you must write down all the solutions 
first and then list those that are in the 
interval [0, 2p). Otherwise, solutions 
may be lost. For example, in solving
sin(2u) = 1
2
 , if you merely write the 
solutions 2u = p
6 and 2u = 5p
6
 , you
will find only u = p
12 and u = 5p
12 and 
miss the other solutions.	
■
This means the graph of y = sin12u2 intersects the line y = 1
2 at the 
Check:	Verify these solutions by graphing Y1 = sin12x2 and Y2 = 1
2  
for 0 … x … 2p.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation
Solve the equation:   tanau - p
2 b = 1, 0 … u 6 2p
Example 5
points a p
12, 1
2b, a5p
12, 1
2b, a13p
12 , 1
2b, and  a17p
12 , 1
2b in the interval 30, 2p2.
•

Section 7.3  Trigonometric Equations  497
The period of the tangent function is p. In the interval 30, p2, the tangent function 
has the value 1 when the argument is p
4 . Because the argument is u - p
2  in the given 
equation, write the general formula that gives all the solutions.
 u - p
2 = p
4 + kp
 u = 3p
4
+ kp
In the interval 30, 2p2, u = 3p
4  and u = 3p
4
+ p = 7p
4  are the only solutions.
The solution set is e 3p
4 , 7p
4 f.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Solve Trigonometric Equations Using a Calculator
The next example illustrates how to solve trigonometric equations using a calculator. 
Remember that the function keys on a calculator will only give values consistent 
with the definition of the function.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation with a Calculator
Use a calculator to solve the equation tan u = -2, 0 … u 6 2p. Express any  
solutions in radians, rounded to two decimal places.
To solve tan u = -2 on a calculator, first set the mode to radians. Then use the  
 tan-1 key to obtain
u = tan-11 -22 ≈-1.1071487
Rounded to two decimal places, u = tan-11 -22 = -1.11 radian. Because of the 
definition of y = tan-1 x, the angle u that is obtained is the angle -  p
2 6 u 6 p
2 for
which tan u = -2. Because we seek solutions for which 0 … u 6 2p, we express the 
angle as 2p - 1.11. See the blue portion of Figure 24.
Another angle for which tan u = -2 is p - 1.11. See the red portion of  
Figure 24. The angle p - 1.11 is the angle in quadrant II, where tan u = -2.  
The solutions for tan u = -2, 0 … u 6 2p, are
u = 2p - 1.11 ≈5.17 radians and u = p - 1.11 ≈2.03 radians
The solution set is {5.17, 2.03}.	
•
WARNING  Example 6 illustrates that caution must be exercised when solving trigonometric  
equations on a calculator. Remember that the calculator supplies an angle only within the restrictions 
of the definition of the inverse trigonometric function. To find the remaining solutions, you must  
identify other quadrants, if any, in which a solution may be located.	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Solve Trigonometric Equations Quadratic in Form
Many trigonometric equations can be solved by applying techniques that we already 
know, such as applying the quadratic formula (if the equation is a second-degree 
polynomial) or factoring.
Solution
k any integer
•
2
Example 6
Solution
3
Figure 24  tan u = - 2
(21, 2)
(1, 22)
x
y
2
1
–1
–2
–1
2
1
–2
u = p21.11 
u = 2p21.11 
u = 21.11 

498 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Quadratic in Form
Solve the equation: 2 sin2 u - 3 sin u + 1 = 0, 0 … u 6 2p
This equation is a quadratic equation (in sin u) that can be factored.
 2 sin2 u - 3 sin u + 1 = 0  
 
 12 sin u - 12 1sin u - 12 = 0  
 
 2 sin u - 1 = 0 or  sin u - 1 = 0
 sin u = 1
2 or 
 sin u = 1
Solving each equation in the interval 30, 2p2 yields
u = p
6  u = 5p
6   u = p
2
The solution set is e p
6 , 5p
6 , p
2 f.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
Solve Trigonometric Equations Using Fundamental Identities
When a trigonometric equation contains more than one trigonometric function, 
identities sometimes can be used to obtain an equivalent equation that contains 
only one trigonometric function.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Using Identities
Solve the equation: 3 cos u + 3 = 2 sin2 u, 0 … u 6 2p
The equation in its present form contains a sine and a cosine. However, a form of the 
Pythagorean Identity, sin2 u + cos2 u = 1, can be used to transform the equation into 
an equivalent one containing only cosines.
 3 cos u + 3 = 2 sin2 u 
 
 3 cos u + 3 = 211 - cos2 u2  
 3 cos u + 3 = 2 - 2 cos2 u 
 
 2 cos2 u + 3 cos u + 1 = 0 
 
 12 cos u + 12 1cos u + 12 = 0 
 
 2 cos u + 1 = 0   or   cos u + 1 = 0
 cos u = -  1
2  or 
 cos u = -1 
Solving each equation in the interval 30, 2p2 yields
u = 2p
3   u = 4p
3   u = p
The solution set is e 2p
3 , p, 4p
3 f.
Check:	Graph Y1 = 3 cos x + 3 and Y2 = 2 sin2 x, 0 … x … 2p, and find the 
points of intersection. How close are your approximate solutions to the 
exact ones found in Example 8?
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Using Identities
Solve the equation: cos2 u + sin u = 2, 0 … u 6 2p
Example 7
Solution
2x2 - 3x + 1 = 0, x = sin u
(2x - 1)(x - 1) = 0
Use the Zero-Product Property.
•
4
Example 8
Solution
sin2 u = 1 - cos2 u
Quadratic in cos u
Factor
Use the Zero-Product Property.
•
Example 9

Section 7.3  Trigonometric Equations  499
This equation involves two trigonometric functions: sine and cosine. By using a  
Pythagorean Identity, we can express the equation in terms of just sine functions.
 cos2 u + sin u = 2
 11 - sin2 u2 + sin u = 2 
 sin2 u - sin u + 1 = 0
This is a quadratic equation in sin u. The discriminant is 
b2 - 4ac = 1 - 4 = -3 6 0. 
Therefore, the equation has no real solution. The solution set is the empty set, ∅.
Check:	Graph Y1 = cos2 x + sin x and Y2 = 2 to see that the two graphs never 
intersect, so the equation Y1 = Y2 has no real solution.
Solve Trigonometric Equations Using a Graphing Utility
The techniques introduced in this section apply only to certain types of  
trigonometric equations. Solutions for other types are usually studied in calculus, 
using numerical methods.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Using a Graphing Utility
Solve:  5 sin x + x = 3
Express the solution(s) rounded to two decimal places.
This type of trigonometric equation cannot be solved by previous methods. A  
graphing utility, though, can be used here. Each solution of this equation is the  
x-coordinate of a point of intersection of the graphs of Y1 = 5 sin x + x and Y2 = 3. 
See Figure 25.
There are three points of intersection; the x-coordinates provide the solutions. 
Use INTERSECT, to find
x = 0.52  x = 3.18  x = 5.71
The solution set is {0.52, 3.18, 5.71}.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 3
Solution
cos2 u = 1 - sin2 u
•
5
Example 10
Solution
•
Figure 25 
Y1 5 5 sin x 1 x
4p
2p
Y2 5 3
28
14
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Solve: 3x - 5 = - x + 1 (pp. 987–994) 
	 2.	 sinap
4 b =  
 ; cosa8p
3 b =  
  (pp. 402–411)
	 3.	 Find the real solutions of 4x2 - x - 5 = 0. (pp. 987–994)
	 4.	 Find the real solutions of x2 - x - 1 = 0. (pp. 987–994)
	 5.	 Find the real solutions of 12x - 122 - 312x - 12 - 4 = 0. 
(pp. 987–994) 
	 6.	 Use a graphing utility to solve 5x3 - 2 = x - x2. Round  
answers to two decimal places. (pp. 1040–1041) 
7.3  Assess Your Understanding

500 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 7.	 True or False  Most trigonometric equations have unique 
solutions. 
	 8.	 True or False  Two solutions of the equation sin u = 1
2 
	
	 are p
6 and 5p
6 . 
	 9.	 True or False  The set of all solutions of the equation tan u = 1
	
	 is given by eu ` u = p
4 + kp, k is any integer f. 
	 10.	 True or False  The equation sin u = 2 has a real solution 
that can be found using a calculator. 
	 11.	 If all solutions of a trigonometric equation are given by the
	
	 general formula u = p
6 + 2kp or u = 11p
6
+ 2kp, where k is
	
	 any integer, then which of the following is not a solution of 
the equation?
(a)	 35p
6     (b)  23p
6     (c)  13p
6     (d)  7p
6  
	 12.	 Suppose u = p
2  is the only solution of a trigonometric 
	
	 equation in the interval 0 … u 6 2p. Assuming a period  
of 2p, which of the following formulas gives all solutions of 
the equation, where k is any integer?
(a)	 u = p
2 + 2kp	
(b)  u = p
2 + kp
(c)	 u = kp
2 	
(d)  u = p + kp
2
 
Skill Building
In Problems 13–36, solve each equation on the interval 0 … u 6 2p.
	 13.	 2 sin u + 3 = 2 
	
14.	 1 - cos u = 1
2 
	
15.	 cos u + 1 = 0 
	 16.	 2 sin u + 1 = 0  
	
17.	 23 cot u + 1 = 0  
	
18.	 tan u + 1 = 0 
	 19.	 5 csc u - 3 = 2 
	
20.	 4 sec u + 6 = - 2  
	
21.	 4 sin u + 323 = 23 
	 22.	 322 cos u + 2 = - 1  
	
23.	 tan2 u = 1
3 
	
24.	 4 cos2 u = 1  
	 25.	 4 cos2 u - 3 = 0 
	
26.	 2 sin2 u - 1 = 0  
	
27.	 sin13u2 = - 1 
	 28.	 tan u
2 = 23  
	
29.	 tan12u2 = - 1 
	
30.	 cos12u2 = -  1
2 
	 31.	 cot 2u
3 = - 23 
	
32.	 sec 3u
2 = - 2 
	
33.	 sina3u + p
18b = 1 
	 34.	 cosa2u - p
2 b = - 1  
	 35.	 cosau
3 - p
4 b = 1
2 
	
36.	 tanau
2 + p
3 b = 1  
In Problems 37–46, solve each equation. Give a general formula for all the solutions. List six solutions.
	 37.	 sin u = 1
2	
38.	 tan u = 1	
39.	 cos u = - 13
2 	
40.	 tan u = - 13
3  
	 41.	 sin u = 12
2 	
42.	 cos u = 0	
43.	 sin12u2 = - 1	
44.	 cos12u2 = -  1
2 
	 45.	 tan u
2 = - 1	
46.	 sin u
2 = -  13
2  
In Problems 47–58, use a calculator to solve each equation on the interval 0 … u 6 2p. Round answers to two decimal places.
	 47.	 sin u = 0.4 
	
48.	 cos u = 0.6 
	
49.	 cot u = 2 
	
50.	 tan u = 5  
	 51.	 sin u = - 0.2 
	 52.	 cos u = - 0.9  
	53.	 csc u = - 3 
	
54.	 sec u = -4  
	 55.	 4 cot u = - 5	
56.	 5 tan u + 9 = 0 	
57.	 4 cos u + 3 = 0	
58.	 3 sin u - 2 = 0 

Section 7.3  Trigonometric Equations  501
In Problems 59–82, solve each equation on the interval 0 … u 6 2p.
	 59.	 sin2 u - 1 = 0	
60.	 2 cos2 u + cos u = 0  
	
61.	 2 sin2 u - sin u - 1 = 0
	 62.	 2 cos2 u + cos u - 1 = 0	
63.	 1cot u + 12 acsc u - 1
2b = 0	
64.	 1tan u - 12 1sec u - 12 = 0 
	 65.	 cos2 u - sin2 u + sin u = 0	
66.	 sin2 u - cos2 u = 1 + cos u 	
67.	 2 sin2 u = 311 - cos1- u22 
	 68.	 sin2 u = 61cos1- u2 + 12 	
69.	 cos u - sin1- u2 = 0 
	
70.	 cos u = -sin1- u2 
	 71.	 tan u = cot u 
	
72.	  tan  u = 2 sin u 	
73.	 sin2 u = 2 cos u + 2
	 74.	 1 + sin u = 2 cos2 u  
	
75.	 2 cos2 u - 7 cos u - 4 = 0 
	
76.	 2 sin2 u - 5 sin u + 3 = 0 
	 77.	 411 + sin u2 = cos2 u 
	
78.	 311 - cos u2 = sin2 u  
	
79.	 csc2 u = cot u + 1 
	 80.	 tan2 u = 3
2 sec u 	
81.	 sec u = tan u + cot u	
82.	 sec2 u + tan  u = 0 
In Problems 83–94, use a graphing utility to solve each equation. Express the solution(s) rounded to two decimal places.
	 83.	 x + 5 cos x = 0	
84.	 x - 4 sin x = 0	
85.	 19x + 8 cos x = 2 
	 86.	 22x - 17 sin x = 3  
	
87.	 sin x - cos x = x 
	
88.	 sin x + cos x = x  
	 89.	 x2 + 3 sin x = 0	
90.	 x2 - 2 cos x = 0  
	
91.	 x2 = x + 3 cos12x2
92.	 x2 - 2 sin12x2 = 3x 	
93.	 4 cos13x2 - ex = 1, x 7 0	
94.	 6 sin x - ex = 2, x 7 0 
Mixed Practice
	 95.	 What are the zeros of f1x2 = 4 sin2 x - 3 on the interval 
30, 2p4? 
	 96.	 What are the zeros of f1x2 = 2 cos 13x2 + 1 on the 
interval 30, p4? 
	 97.	 f1x2 = 3 sin x
(a)	 Find the zeros of f on the interval 3 - 2p, 4p4.
(b)	 Graph f1x2 = 3 sin x on the interval 3 - 2p, 4p4.
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = 3
2 on the interval 3 - 2p, 4p4. What
	
points are on the graph of f? Label these points on the 
graph drawn in part (b).
(d)	 Use the graph drawn in part (b) along with the results of
	
part (c) to determine the values of x such that f1x2 7 3
2 
on the interval 3 - 2p, 4p4.
	 98.	 f1x2 = 2 cos x
(a)	 Find the zeros of f on the interval 3 -2p, 4p4.
(b)	 Graph f1x2 = 2 cos x on the interval 3 -2p, 4p4.
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = - 23 on the interval 3 -2p, 4p4. What 
points are on the graph of f? Label these points on the 
graph drawn in part (b).
(d)	 Use the graph drawn in part (b) along with the  
results of part (c) to determine the values of x such that
	
f1x2 6 - 23 on the interval 3 -2p, 4p4.
	 99.	 f1x2 = 4 tan x
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = - 4. 
(b)	 For what values of x is f1x2 6 -4 on the interval
	
a-  p
2, p
2 b? 
	100.	 f1x2 = cot x
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = - 23. 
(b)	 For what values of x is f1x2 7 - 23 on the interval 
10, p2? 

502 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
	101.	 (a) Graph f1x2 = 3 sin12x2 + 2 and g1x2 = 7
2 on the 
same Cartesian plane for the interval 30, p4.
(b) Solve f1x2 = g1x2 on the interval 30, p4, and label 
the points of intersection on the graph drawn in part (a).
(c) Solve f1x2 7 g1x2 on the interval 30, p4.
(d) Shade the region bounded by f1x2 = 3 sin12x2 + 2
 
and g1x2 = 7
2 between the two points found in part (b) 
on the graph drawn in part (a).
	102.	 (a) Graph f1x2 = 2 cos x
2 + 3 and g1x2 = 4 on the same 
Cartesian plane for the interval 30, 4p4.
(b) Solve f1x2 = g1x2 on the interval 30, 4p4, and label 
the points of intersection on the graph drawn in part (a).
(c) Solve f1x2 6 g1x2 on the interval 30, 4p4.
(d) Shade the region bounded by f1x2 = 2 cos x
2 + 3 and
 
g1x2 = 4 between the two points found in part (b) on 
the graph drawn in part (a).
Applications and Extensions
	105.	 Blood Pressure  The pressure of a fluid flowing through a 
closed system, P, after t seconds can be modeled by the func-
tion
P(t) = 100 + 50 sina7p
3 tb
(a) In the interval [0, 1], determine the times at which the 
pressure of the fluid is 100 mmHg. 
(b) In the interval [0, 1], determine the times at which the 
pressure of the fluid is 150 mmHg. 
(c) In the interval [0, 1], determine the times at which the 
pressure of the fluid is between 100 and 105 mmHg.
	106.	 The Ferris Wheel  In 1893, George Ferris engineered the 
Ferris wheel. It was 250 feet in diameter. If a Ferris wheel 
makes 1 revolution every 40 seconds, then the function
h1t2 = 125 sina0.157t - p
2 b + 125
 
 represents the height h, in feet, of a seat on the wheel as a 
function of time t, where t is measured in seconds. The ride 
begins when t = 0.
(a) During the first 40 seconds of the ride, at what time t is 
an individual on the Ferris wheel exactly 125 feet above 
the ground? 
(b) During the first 80 seconds of the ride, at what time t is 
an individual on the Ferris wheel exactly 250 feet above 
the ground? 
(c) During the first 40 seconds of the ride, over what interval 
of time t is an individual on the Ferris wheel more than 
125 feet above the ground? 
	107.	 Holding Pattern  An airplane is asked to stay within a 
holding pattern near Chicago’s O’Hare International 
Airport. 
The 
function 
d1x2 = 70 sin10.65x2 + 150  
represents the distance d, in miles, of the airplane from the 
airport at time x, in minutes.
(a) When the plane enters the holding pattern, x = 0, how 
far is it from O’Hare? 
(b) During the first 20 minutes after the plane enters the 
holding pattern, at what time x is the plane exactly 
100 miles from the airport?
(c) During the first 20 minutes after the plane enters the 
holding pattern, at what time x is the plane more than 
100 miles from the airport?
(d) While the plane is in the holding pattern, will it ever be 
within 70 miles of the airport? Why? 
	108.	 Projectile Motion  A golfer hits a golf ball with an 
initial velocity of 100 miles per hour. The range R of the 
ball as a function of the angle u to the horizontal is given by 
R1u2 = 672 sin12u2, where R is measured in feet.
(a) At what angle u should the ball be hit if the golfer wants 
the ball to travel 450 feet (150 yards)? 
(b) At what angle u should the ball be hit if the golfer wants 
the ball to travel 540 feet (180 yards)? 
(c) At what angle u should the ball be hit if the golfer wants 
the ball to travel at least 480 feet (160 yards)?
(d) Can the golfer hit the ball 720 feet (240 yards)? 
	109.	 Heat Transfer In the study of heat transfer, the equation 
x + tan x = 0 occurs. Graph Y1 = -x and Y2 = tan x for 
x Ú 0. Conclude that there are an infinite number of points 
of intersection of these two graphs. Now find the first two 
positive solutions of x + tan x = 0 rounded to two decimal 
places. 
	110.	 Carrying a Ladder around a Corner Two hallways, one of 
width 3 feet, the other of width 4 feet, meet at a right angle. See 
the illustration on page 503. It can be shown that the length L 
of the ladder as a function of u is L1u2 = 4 csc u + 3 sec u.
(a) In calculus, you will be asked to find the length of the 
longest ladder that can turn the corner by solving the 
equation
3 sec u tan u - 4 csc u cot u = 0 0° 6 u 6 90°
 
Solve this equation for u. 
	103.	 (a) Graph f1x2 = - 4 cos x and g1x2 = 2 cos x + 3 on 
the same Cartesian plane for the interval 30, 2p4.
(b) Solve f1x2 = g1x2 on the interval 30, 2p4, and label 
the points of intersection on the graph drawn in part (a).
(c) Solve f1x2 7 g1x2 on the interval 30, 2p4.
(d) Shade the region bounded by f1x2 = - 4 cos x and 
g1x2 = 2 cos x + 3 between the two points found in 
part (b) on the graph drawn in part (a).
104.	 (a) Graph f1x2 = 2 sin x and g1x2 = -2 sin x + 2 on 
the same Cartesian plane for the interval 30, 2p4.
(b) Solve f1x2 = g1x2 on the interval 30, 2p4, and label 
the points of intersection on the graph drawn in part (a).
(c) Solve f1x2 7 g1x2 on the interval 30, 2p4.
(d) Shade the region bounded by f1x2 = 2 sin x and 
g1x2 = - 2 sin x + 2 between the two points found in 
part (b) on the graph drawn in part (a).

Section 7.3  Trigonometric Equations  503
(b)	 What is the length of the longest ladder that can be  
carried around the corner? 
(c)	 Graph L = L1u2, 0° … u … 90°, and find the angle u 
that minimizes the length L.
(d)	 Compare the result with the one found in part (a).  
Explain why the two answers are the same.
	111.	 Projectile Motion The horizontal distance that a projectile 
will travel in the air (ignoring air resistance) is given by the 
equation
R1u2 =
v2
0 sin12u2
g
       
	
	 where v0 is the initial velocity of the projectile, u is the angle 
of elevation, and g is acceleration due to gravity (9.8 meters 
per second squared).
(a)	 If you can throw a baseball with an initial speed of 34.8 
meters per second, at what angle of elevation u should 
you direct the throw so that the ball travels a distance of 
107 meters before striking the ground?
(b)	 Determine the maximum distance that you can throw 
the ball. 
(c)	 Graph R = R1u2, with v0 = 34.8 meters per second.
(d)	 Verify the results obtained in parts (a) and (b) using a 
graphing utility.
	112.	 Projectile Motion Refer to Problem 111.
(a)	 If you can throw a baseball with an initial speed of  
40 meters per second, at what angle of elevation u should 
you direct the throw so that the ball travels a distance of 
110 meters before striking the ground?
(b)	 Determine the maximum distance that you can throw 
the ball. 
(c)	 Graph R = R1u2, with v0 = 40 meters per second.
(d)	 Verify the results obtained in parts (a) and (b) using a 
graphing utility.
u
4 ft
3 ft
L
The following discussion of Snell’s Law of Refraction* (named  
after Willebrord Snell, 1580–1626) is needed for Problems 113–120. 
Light, sound, and other waves travel at different speeds, depending 
on the medium (air, water, wood, and so on) through which they 
pass. Suppose that light travels from a point A in one medium, 
where its speed is v1, to a point B in another medium, where its 
speed is v2. Refer to the figure, where the angle u1 is called the angle 
of incidence and the angle u2 is the angle of refraction. Snell’s Law, 
which can be proved using calculus, states that
sin u1
sin u2
= v1
v2
The ratio v1
v2
 is called the index of refraction. Some values are given
in the table shown to the right.
	114.	 The index of refraction of light in passing from a vacuum 
into dense flint glass is 1.66. If the angle of incidence is 50°, 
determine the angle of refraction. 
	115.	 Suppose that light travels from one medium, where its speed 
is v1, to another medium, where its speed is v2. The angle u1 
is called the angle of incidence and the angle  u2 is the angle 
	
	 of refraction. Snell’s Law states that sin u1
sin u2
= v1
v2
. The ratio 
v1
v2
 is called the index of refraction. A scientist measured the
	
	 values in the given table for u1 and u2 for a light beam pass-
ing from air into water. Do these values agree with Snell’s 
Law? If so, what index of refraction results? (Assume that 
the index of refraction of light passing from air into water is 
appoximately 1.33) 
A
B
Angle of
refraction
Angle of
incidence
Incident ray,
speed v1
Refracted ray,
speed v2
u1
u2
	113.	 The index of refraction of light in passing from a vacuum 
into water is 1.33. If the angle of incidence is 20°, determine 
the angle of refraction. 
Some Indexes of Refraction
Medium
Index of Refraction†
Water
1.33
Ethyl alcohol (20°C)
1.36
Carbon disulfide
1.63
Air (1 atm and 0°C)
1.00029
Diamond
2.42
Fused quartz
1.46
Glass, crown
1.52
Glass, dense flint
1.66
Sodium chloride
1.54
U1
U2
U1
U2
10°
8°
50°
35°0′
20°
15°30′
60°
42°15′
30°
23°15′
70°
44°45′
40°
29°0′
80°
50°0′
*Because this law was also deduced by René Descartes in France, it is 
also known as Descartes’ Law.
† For light of wavelength 589 nanometers, measured with respect to a 
vacuum. The index with respect to air is negligibly different in most cases.

504 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
*Adapted from Halliday, Resnick, and Walker, Fundamentals of Physics, 
10th ed., 2014, John Wiley & Sons.
	116.	 Bending 
Light  The 
speed 
of 
yellow 
sodium 
light  
(wavelength, 589 nanometers) in a certain liquid is measured 
to be 1.92 * 108 meters per second. What is the index of  
refraction of this liquid, with respect to air, for sodium light?*
[Hint: The speed of light in air is approximately 2.998 * 108 
meters per second.] 
	117.	 Bending Light  A beam of light traveling in air makes an 
angle of incidence of 38° on a slab of transparent mate-
rial, and the refracted beam makes an angle of refraction 
of 28°. Find the index of refraction of the material. 
	118.	 Bending Light  A light ray with a wavelength of  
589 nanometers (produced by a sodium lamp) traveling 
through air makes an angle of incidence of 30° on a smooth, 
flat slab of crown glass. Find the angle of refraction.* 
	119.	 A light beam passes through a thick slab of material whose 
index of refraction is n2. Show that the emerging beam is 
parallel to the incident beam.*
	120.	 Brewster’s Law  If the angle of incidence and the angle of 
refraction are complementary angles, the angle of incidence 
is referred to as the Brewster angle uB. The Brewster angle 
is related to the indices of refraction of the two media, n1 
and n2, by the equation n1 sin uB = n2 cos uB, where n1 is 
the index of refraction of the incident medium and n2 is the  
index of refraction of the refractive medium. Determine the 
Brewster angle for a light beam traveling through water (at 
30°C) that makes an angle of incidence with a smooth, flat 
slab of crown glass. The index of refraction for water is 1.26 
and the index of refaction for crown glass is 1.49 
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	121.	 Explain in your own words how you would use your  
calculator to solve the equation cos x = - 0.6, 0 … x 6 2p. 
How would you modify your approach to solve the equation 
cot x = 5, 0 6 x 6 2p?
	122.	 Explain why no further points of intersection (and  
therefore no further solutions) exist in Figure 25 for x 6 - p 
or x 7 4p.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 123–126 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	123.	 Convert 6x = y to an equivalent statement involving a logarithm. 
	124.	 Find the zeros of f(x) = 2x2 - 9x + 8. 
	125.	 Given  sin u = - 110
10  and cos u = 3210
10
, find the exact value of each of the four remaining trigonometric functions.
	126.	 Determine the amplitude, period, and phase shift of the function y = 2 sin (2x - p). Graph the function. Show at least two periods.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 e 3
2 f    2.  12
2 ; -  1
2    3.  e - 1, 5
4 f    4.  e 1 - 25
2
, 1 + 25
2
f    5.  e0, 5
2 f    6.  50.766
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 509.
	
Objectives	 	1  Use Algebra to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions  (p. 505)
	
	 	2  Establish Identities  (p. 506)
7.4  Trigonometric Identities
• Fundamental Identities (Section 6.3, p. 423)
• Even–Odd Properties (Section 6.3, p. 427)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
This section establishes some additional identities involving trigonometric  
functions. First, let’s review the definition of an identity.
 Two functions f and g are identically equal if
f1x2 = g1x2
for every value of x for which both functions are defined. Such an equation 
is referred to as an identity. An equation that is not an identity is called a  
conditional equation.
Definition

Section 7.4  Trigonometric Identities  505
For example, the following are identities:
1x + 122 = x2 + 2x + 1  sin2 x + cos2 x = 1   csc x =
1
sin x
The following are conditional equations:
 2x + 5 = 0
 
 sin x = 0
 
 sin x = cos x
The following summarizes the trigonometric identities that have been  
established thus far.
True only if x = - 5
2
True only if x = kp, k an integer
True only if x = p
4 + 2kp or x = 5p
4
+ 2kp, k an integer
Quotient Identities
tan u = sin u
cos u   cot u = cos u
sin u
Reciprocal Identities
csc u =
1
sin u   sec u =
1
cos u   cot u =
1
tan u
Pythagorean Identities
sin2 u + cos2 u = 1  tan2 u + 1 = sec2 u
cot2 u + 1 = csc2 u
Even–Odd Identities
 sin1 -u2 = -sin u   cos1 -u2 = cos u   tan1-u2 = -tan u
 csc1 -u2 = -csc u   sec1 -u2 = sec u   cot1-u2 = -cot u
This list comprises what shall be referred to as the basic trigonometric identities.  
These identities should not merely be memorized, but should be known (just as you 
know your name rather than have it memorized). In fact, minor variations of a basic 
identity are often used. For example,
sin2 u = 1 - cos2 u or cos2 u = 1 - sin2 u
might be used instead of sin2 u + cos2 u = 1. For this reason, among others, it is  
very important to know these relationships and be comfortable with variations of 
them.
Use Algebra to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions
The ability to use algebra to manipulate trigonometric expressions is a key skill that 
one must have to establish identities. Four basic algebraic techniques are used to 
establish identities:
	 1.	 Rewriting a trigonometric expression in terms of sine and cosine only
	 2.	 Multiplying the numerator and denominator of a ratio by a “well-chosen 1”
	 3.	 Writing sums of trigonometric ratios as a single ratio
	 4.	 Factoring
1

506 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Using Algebraic Techniques to Simplify  
Trigonometric Expressions
(a)	 Simplify cot u
csc u by rewriting each trigonometric function in terms of sine and 
cosine functions.
(b)	 Show that 
cos u
1 + sin u = 1 - sin u
cos u
 by multiplying the numerator and denominator 
by 1 - sin u.
(c)	 Simplify 1 + sin u
sin u
+ cot u - cos u
cos u
 by rewriting the expression as a single ratio.
(d)	 Simplify 
sin2 v - 1
tan v sin v - tan v by factoring.
(a)	 cot u
csc u =
cos u
sin u
1
sin u
= cos u
sin u # sin u
1
= cos u
(b)	  
cos u
1 + sin u =
cos u
1 + sin u # 1 - sin u
1 - sin u = cos u11 - sin u2
1 - sin2 u
	
	
 = cos u11 - sin u2
cos2 u
= 1 - sin u
cos u
(c)	 1 + sin u
sin u
+ cot u - cos u
cos u
= 1 + sin u
sin u
# cos u
cos u + cot u - cos u
cos u
# sin u
sin u
	
 = cos u + sin u cos u + cot u sin u - cos u sin u
sin u cos u
 = cos u + cot u sin u
sin u cos u
	
=
cos u + cos u
sin u # sin u
sin u cos u
= cos u + cos u
sin u cos u
=
2 cos u
sin u cos u =
2
sin u
(d)	
sin2 v - 1
tan v sin v - tan v = 1sin v + 12 1sin v - 12
tan v1sin v - 12
= sin v + 1
tan v
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 1 ,  1 3 ,  a n d  1 5
Establish Identities
In the examples that follow, the directions read “Establish the identity….”  This 
is accomplished by starting with one side of the given equation (usually the side 
containing the more complicated expression) and, using appropriate basic identities 
and algebraic manipulations, arriving at the other side. The selection of appropriate 
basic identities to obtain the desired result is learned only through experience and 
lots of practice.
Establishing an Identity
Establish the identity: csc u # tan u = sec u
Example 1
Solution
 æ Multiply by a well@chosen 1: 1 - sin u
1 - sin u.
 æ cot u = cos u
sin u
•
2
Example 2

Section 7.4  Trigonometric Identities  507
Start with the left side, because it contains the more complicated expression, and 
apply a reciprocal identity and a quotient identity.
csc u # tan u =
1
 sin u #  sin u 
cos u =
1
cos u = sec u
The right side has been reached, so the identity is established.	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Establishing an Identity
Establish the identity: sin21 -u2 + cos21 -u2 = 1
Begin with the left side and, because the arguments are -u, apply Even–Odd  
Identities.
 sin21 -u2 + cos21 -u2 = 3sin1 -u2 42 + 3cos1 -u2 42
 = 1 -sin u22 + 1cos u22 
 = 1sin u22 + 1cos u22
 = 1
Establishing an Identity
Establish the identity: 
sin21 -u2 - cos21 -u2
sin1 -u2 - cos1 -u2
= cos u - sin u
Observe that the left side contains the more complicated expression. Also, the left 
side contains expressions with the argument -u, whereas the right side contains 
expressions with the argument u. So start with the left side and apply Even–Odd 
Identities.
 sin21 -u2 - cos21 -u2
sin1 -u2 - cos1 -u2
= 3sin1 -u2 42 - 3cos1 -u2 42
sin1 -u2 - cos1 -u2
 = 1 -sin u22 - 1cos u22
-sin u - cos u
 
 = 1sin u22 - 1cos u22
-sin u - cos u
 
 = 1sin u - cos u2 1 sin u + cos u 2
- 1 sin u + cos u 2
 
 = cos u - sin u 
Establishing an Identity
Establish the identity: 
1 + tan u
1 + cot u = tan u
 1 + tan u
1 + cot u = 1 + tan u
1 +
1
tan u
= 1 + tan u
tan u + 1
tan u
 = tan u1 1 + tan u 2
 tan u + 1 
= tan u
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 5  a n d  2 9
Solution
Example 3
Solution
Even–Odd Identities
Pythagorean Identity •
Example 4
Solution
Even–Odd Identities
Simplify.
Factor.
Divide out and simplify.•
Example 5
Solution
•
Note  A graphing utility can be used 
to provide evidence of an identity. For 
example, If we graph Y1 = csc u # tan u 
and Y2 = sec u, the graphs appear to 
be the same. This provides evidence that 
Y1 = Y2. However, it does not prove their 
equality. A graphing utility cannot be used 
to establish an identity—identities must 
be established algebraically.	
■

508 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
When sums or differences of quotients appear, it is usually best to rewrite them 
as a single quotient, especially if the other side of the identity consists of only one 
term.
Establishing an Identity
Establish the identity: 
sin u
1 + cos u + 1 + cos u
sin u
= 2 csc u
The left side is more complicated. Start with it and add.
 
sin u
1 + cos u + 1 + cos u
sin u
= sin2 u + 11 + cos u22
11 + cos u2 1sin u2
 = sin2 u + 1 + 2 cos u + cos2 u
11 + cos u2 1sin u2
 = 1sin2 u + cos2 u2 + 1 + 2 cos u
11 + cos u2 1sin u2
 =
2 + 2 cos u
11 + cos u2 1sin u2
 =
21 1 + cos u 2
1 1 + cos u 2 1sin u2
 =
2
sin u
 = 2 csc u
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
Sometimes it helps to write one side in terms of sine and cosine functions only.
Establishing an Identity
Establish the identity: 
tan v + cot v
sec v csc v
= 1
 tan v + cot v
sec v csc v
=
sin v
cos v + cos v
sin v
1
cos v #
1
sin v
=
sin2 v + cos2 v
cos v sin v
1
cos v sin v
              =
1
cos v sin v # cos v sin v
1
= 1
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
Sometimes, multiplying the numerator and the denominator by an appropriate 
factor simplifies an expression.
Example 6
Solution
Add the quotients.
Multiply out in  
the numerator.
Regroup.
Pythagorean Identity
Factor and cancel.
Reciprocal Identity •
Example 7
Solution
              æ
Change to sines  
and cosines.
              æ
Add the quotients  
in the numerator.
•
 æ
Divide the quotients;
sin2 v + cos2 v = 1.

Section 7.4  Trigonometric Identities  509
Establishing an Identity
Establish the identity: 
1 - sin u
cos u
=
cos u
1 + sin u
Start with the left side and multiply the numerator and the denominator by 1 + sin u. 
(Alternatively, we could multiply the numerator and the denominator of the right 
side by 1 - sin u.)
 1 - sin u
cos u
= 1 - sin u
cos u
# 1 + sin u
1 + sin u 
 =
1 - sin2 u
cos u11 + sin u2
 =
cos2 u
cos u11 + sin u2
 
 =
cos u
1 + sin u
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
Although a lot of practice is the only real way to learn how to establish  
identities, the following guidelines should prove helpful.
Example 8
Solution
Multiply the numerator and the  
denominator by 1 + sin u.
1 - sin2 u = cos2 u
•
Divide out cos u.
Warning  Be careful not to handle 
identities to be established as if they 
were conditional equations. You cannot 
establish an identity by such methods 
as adding the same expression to each 
side and obtaining a true statement. 
This practice is not allowed, because the 
original statement is precisely the one 
that you are trying to establish. You do 
not know until it has been established 
that it is, in fact, true.	
■
Guidelines for Establishing Identities
	 1.	 It is almost always preferable to start with the side containing the more 
complicated expression.
	 2.	 Rewrite sums or differences of quotients as a single quotient.
	 3.	 Sometimes it will help to rewrite one side in terms of sine and cosine  
functions only.
	 4.	 Always keep the goal in mind. As you manipulate one side of the  
expression, keep in mind the form of the expression on the other side.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 True or False  sin2 u = 1 - cos2 u. (p. 423)
	 2.	 True or False  sin 1- u2 + cos 1-u2 = cos u - sin u. (p. 427) 
7.4  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 3.	 Suppose that f and g are two functions with the same  
domain. If f1x2 = g1x2 for every x in the domain, the  
equation is called a(n)    
 . Otherwise, it is called a(n) 
  
  equation.
	 4.	 tan2 u - sec2 u =     
 .
	 5.	 cos1-u2 - cos u =       
 .
	 6.	 True or False  sin1- u2 + sin u = 0 for any value of u. 
	 7.	 True or False  In establishing an identity, it is often easiest to 
just multiply both sides by a well-chosen nonzero expression 
involving the variable. 
	 8.	 True or False  tan u # cos u = sin u for any u ≠12k + 12 p
2 .
	 9.	 Which of the following equations is not an identity?
(a)	 cot2 u + 1 = csc2 u	
(b)  tan(- u) = -tan u
(c)	 tan u = cos u
sin u	
(d)  csc u =
1
sin u 
	 10.	 The expression 
1
1 - sin u +
1
1 + sin u simplifies to which of 
the following?
(a)	 2 cos2 u    (b)  2 sec2 u    (c)  2 sin2 u    (d)  2 csc2 u 

510 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Skill Building
	 11.	 Rewrite in terms of sine and cosine functions:
tan u # csc u. 
	 12.	 Rewrite in terms of sine and cosine functions:
cot u # sec u. 
In Problems 21–100, establish each identity.
	 21.	 csc u # cos u = cot u	
22.	 sec u # sin u = tan u	
23.	 1 + cot21- u2 = csc2 u
	 24.	 1 + tan21- u2 = sec2 u 	
25.	 cos u1tan u + cot u2 = csc u	
26.	 sin u1cot u + tan u2 = sec u
	 27.	 sin u csc u - cos2 u = sin2 u	
28.	 tan u cot u - cos2 u = sin2 u 	
29.	 1sec u - 12 1sec u + 12 = tan2 u
	 30.	 1csc u - 12 1csc u + 12 = cot2 u	
31.	 1csc u + cot u2 1csc u - cot u2 = 1	
32.	 1sec u + tan u2 1sec u - tan u2 = 1 
	 33.	 11 - cos2 u2 11 + cot2 u2 = 1	
34.	 cos2 u11 + tan2 u2 = 1 	
35.	 tan2 u cos2 u + cot2 u sin2 u = 1
	 36.	 1sin u + cos u22 + 1sin u - cos u22 = 2 	 37. csc4 u - csc2 u = cot4 u + cot2 u	
38.	 sec4 u - sec2 u = tan4 u + tan2 u 
	 39.	 csc u - cot u =
sin u
1 + cos u	
40.	 sec u - tan u =
cos u
1 + sin u 	
41.	 9 sec2 u - 5 tan2 u = 5 + 4 sec2 u
	 42.	 3 sin2 u + 4 cos2 u = 3 + cos2 u 	
43.	 1 -
sin2 u
1 - cos u = - cos u	
44.	 1 -
cos2 u
1 + sin u = sin u 
	 45.	 csc v - 1
csc v + 1 = 1 - sin v
1 + sin v	
46.	 1 + tan v
1 - tan v = cot v + 1
cot v - 1 	
47.	 sec u
csc u + sin u
cos u = 2 tan u
	 48.	 sec u
csc u + sin u
cos u = 2 tan u  	
49.	 cos u + 1
cos u - 1 = 1 + sec u
1 - sec u	
50.	 1 + sin u
1 - sin u = csc u + 1
csc u - 1 
	 51.	 1 - sin v
cos v
+
cos v
1 - sin v = 2 sec v	
52.	
cos v
1 + sin v + 1 + sin v
cos v
= 2 sec v	
53.	 1 -
sin2 u
1 + cos u = cos u
	 54.	
sin u
sin u - cos u =
1
1 - cot u 	
55.	 1 - sin u
1 + sin u = 1sec u - tan u22	
56.	 1 - cos u
1 + cos u = 1csc u - cot u22
	 57.	
cot u
1 - tan u +
tan u
1 - cot u = 1 + tan u + cot u	
58.	
cos u
1 - tan u +
sin u
1 - cot u = sin u + cos u 
	 59.	
sin u cos u
cos2 u - sin2 u =
tan u
1 - tan2 u	
60.	 tan u +
cos u
1 + sin u = sec u 	
61.	 sin u - cos u + 1
sin u + cos u - 1 = sin u + 1
cos u
	 62.	 tan u + sec u - 1
tan u - sec u + 1 = tan u + sec u 	
63.	 sec u - cos u
sec u + cos u =
sin2 u
1 + cos2 u	
64.	 tan u - cot u
tan u + cot u = sin2 u - cos2 u 
	 65.	 tan u - cot u
tan u + cot u + 2 cos2 u = 1	
66.	 tan u - cot u
tan u + cot u + 1 = 2 sin2 u 	
67.	
sec u
1 + sec u = 1 - cos u
sin2 u
	 68.	 sec u + tan u
cot u + cos u = tan u sec u 	
69.	 1 - cot2 u
1 + cot2 u + 2 cos2 u = 1	
70.	 1 - tan2 u
1 + tan2 u + 1 = 2 cos2 u 
	 71.	 sec u - csc u
sec u csc u
= sin u - cos u	
72.	 sin2 u - tan u
cos2 u - cot u = tan2 u	
73.	 tan u + cot u = sec u csc u
	 74.	 sec u - cos u = sin u tan u 	
75.	 1 + sin u
1 - sin u - 1 - sin u
1 + sin u = 4 tan u sec u	 76.	
1
1 - sin u +
1
1 + sin u = 2 sec2 u 
In Problems 11–20, simplify each trigonometric expression by following the indicated direction.
	 13.	 Multiply 
cos u
1 - sin u by 1 + sin u
1 + sin u . 
	 14.	 Multiply 
sin u
1 + cos u by 1 - cos u
1 - cos u . 
	 15.	 Rewrite over a common denominator:
sin u + cos u
cos u
+ cos u - sin u
sin u
 
	 16.	 Rewrite over a common denominator:
1
1 - cos v +
1
1 + cos v 
	 18.	 Multiply and simplify: 
1sin u + cos u2 1sin u + cos u2 - 1
sin u cos u
	 17.	 Multiply and simplify: 
1tan u + 12 1tan u + 12 - sec2 u
tan u
 
	 20.	 Factor and simplify: 3 sin2 u + 4 sin u + 1
sin2 u + 2 sin u + 1  
	 19.	 Factor and simplify: 
cos2 u - 1
cos2 u - cos u 

Section 7.4  Trigonometric Identities  511
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 True        2.  True
	 77.	 1 + sin u
1 - sin u = 1sec u + tan u22	
78.	
sec u
1 - sin u = 1 + sin u
cos3 u
 	
79.	 sec2 v - tan2 v + tan v
sec v
= sin v + cos v
	 80.	
1sec v - tan v22 + 1
csc v1sec v - tan v2 = 2 tan v 	
81.	 sin u + cos u
sin u
- cos u - sin u
cos u
= sec u csc u
	 82.	 sin u + cos u
cos u
- sin u - cos u
sin u
= sec u csc u 	
83.	 sin3 u + cos3 u
1 - 2 cos2 u
= sec u - sin u
tan u - 1
	 84.	 sin3 u + cos3 u
sin u + cos u
= 1 - sin u cos u 	
85.	 cos u + sin u - sin3 u
sin u
= cot u + cos2 u	 86.	cos2 u - sin2 u
1 - tan2 u
= cos2 u 
	 87.	 1 - 2 cos2 u
sin u cos u
= tan u - cot u	
88.	
12 cos2 u - 122
cos4 u - sin4 u = 1 - 2 sin2 u 	
89.	 1 + cos u + sin u
1 + cos u - sin u = sec u + tan u
	 90.	 1 + sin u + cos u
1 + sin u - cos u = 1 + cos u
sin u
 	
91.	 12a sin u cos u22 + a21cos2 u - sin2 u22 = a2
	 92.	 1a sin u + b cos u22 + 1a cos u - b sin u22 = a2 + b2 
	 93.	 1tan a + tan b2 11 - cot a cot b2 + 1cot a + cot b2 11 - tan a tan b2 = 0
	 94.	 tan a + tan b
cot a + cot b = tan a tan b 
	 95.	 1sin a - cos b22 + 1cos b + sin a2 1cos b - sin a2 = - 2 cos b1sin a - cos b2
	 96.	 1sin a + cos b22 + 1cos b + sin a2 1cos b - sin a2 = 2 cos b1sin a + cos b2 
	 97.	 ln 0 tan u0 = ln 0 sin u0 - ln 0 cos u0 	
98.	 ln 0 sec u0 = - ln 0 cos u0  
	 99.	 ln 0 sec u + tan u0 + ln 0 sec u - tan u0 = 0	
100.	 ln 0 1 + cos u0 + ln 0 1 - cos u0 = 2 ln 0 sin u0  
In Problems 101–104, show that the functions f and g are identically equal.
	101.	 f1x2 = cos x # cot x  g1x2 = csc x - sin x	
102.	 f1x2 = sin x # tan x  g1x2 = sec x - cos x 
	103.	 f1u2 = tan u + sec u  g1u2 =
cos u
1 - sin u	
104.	 f1u2 = 1 - sin u
cos u
-
cos u
1 + sin u  g1u2 = 0 
Applications and Extensions
	105.	 Searchlights  A searchlight casts a spot of light on a wall lo-
cated 65 meters from the searchlight. The acceleration r.. of 
the spot of light is found to be r.. = 1050 sec u12 sec2 u - 12. 
Show that this is equivalent to
	
	
r.. = 1050 a1 + sin2 u
cos3 u
b.
	106.	 Optical Measurement  Optical methods of measurement 
often rely on the interference of two light waves. If two 
light waves, identical except for a phase lag, are mixed  
together, the resulting intensity, or irradiance, is given by
	
	
It = 4A2 
(csc  u - 1)(sec  u + tan  u)
csc  u sec  u
. 
	
	 Show that this is equivalent to It = 12A cos  u22.
Source: Experimental Techniques, July/August 2002
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	107.	 Write a few paragraphs outlining your strategy for  
establishing identities.
	108.	 Write down the three Pythagorean Identities.
	109.	 Why do you think it is usually preferable to start with the 
side containing the more complicated expression when  
establishing an identity?
	110.	 Make up an identity that is not a basic identity.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 111–114 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	111.	 Determine whether f(x) = - 3x2 + 120x + 50 has a maximum or a minimum value, and then find the value. 
	112.	 Given f(x) = x + 1
x - 2 and g(x) = 3x - 4, find f ∘g. 
	113.	 Find the exact values of the six trigonometric functions of an angle u in standard position if (- 12, 5) is a point on its terminal side.
	114.	 Find the average rate of change of f(x) =  cos x from 0 to p
2. 

512 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 487.
	
Objectives	 	1  Use Sum and Difference Formulas to Find Exact Values  (p. 513)
	
	 	2  Use Sum and Difference Formulas to Establish Identities  (p. 516)
	
	 	3  Use Sum and Difference Formulas Involving Inverse Trigonometric  
Functions  (p. 518)
	
	 	4  Solve Trigonometric Equations Linear in Sine and Cosine  (p. 519)
7.5  Sum and Difference Formulas
•	 Distance Formula (Section 1.1, p. 37)
• Values of the Trigonometric Functions (Section 6.2, 
pp. 402–411)
• Finding Exact Values Given the Value of a  
Trigonometric Function and the Quadrant of the 
Angle (Section 6.3, p. 424–425)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
This section continues the derivation of trigonometric identities by obtaining  
formulas that involve the sum or the difference of two angles, such as cos1a + b2,
cos1a - b2, and sin1a + b2. These formulas are referred to as the sum and 
difference formulas. We begin with the formulas for cos1a + b2 and cos1a - b2.
Sum and Difference Formulas for the Cosine Function
	
 cos1a + b2 = cos a cos b - sin a sin b	
(1)
	
 cos1a - b2 = cos a cos b + sin a sin b	
(2)
Theorem
Proof  We will prove formula (2) first. Although this formula is true for all numbers 
a and b, we shall assume in our proof that 0 6 b 6 a 6 2p. Begin with the unit 
circle and place the angles a and b in standard position, as shown in Figure 26(a). 
The point P1 lies on the terminal side of b, so its coordinates are 1cos b, sin b2; and 
the point P2 lies on the terminal side of a, so its coordinates are 1cos a, sin a2.
1
O
21
a 2 b
1
21
y
x
P3 5 (cos( a 2 b), sin( a 2 b))
x2 1 y2 5 1
x2 1 y2 5 1
A 5 (1, 0)
E
1
O
21
a
a 2 b
b
1
21
y
x
P2 5 (cos a, sin a)
P1 5 (cos b, sin b)
D
Figure 26 
Now place the angle a - b in standard position, as shown in Figure 26(b). The 
point A has coordinates 11, 02, and the point P3 is on the terminal side of the angle 
a - b, so its coordinates are 1cos1a - b2, sin1a - b2 2.
Looking at triangle OP1
 P2 in Figure 26(a) and triangle OAP3 in Figure 26(b), 
note that these triangles are congruent. (Do you see why? SAS: two sides and the 
In Words
Formula (1) states that the 
cosine of the sum of two angles 
equals the cosine of the first angle 
times the cosine of the second 
angle minus the sine of the first 
angle times the sine of the second 
angle.

Section 7.5  Sum and Difference Formulas  513
included angle, a - b, are equal.) As a result, the unknown side of triangle OP1 P2 
and the unknown side of triangle OAP3 must be equal; that is,
d1A, P32 = d1P1, P22
Now use the distance formula to obtain
 23cos1a - b2 - 142 + 3sin1a - b2 - 042 = 21cos a - cos b22 + 1sin a - sin b22 
 3cos1a - b2 - 142 + sin21a - b2 = 1cos a - cos b22 + 1sin a - sin b22 
 cos21a - b2 - 2 cos1a - b2 + 1 + sin21a - b2 = cos2 a - 2 cos a cos b + cos2 b 
     
 + sin2 a - 2 sin a sin b + sin2 b
 2 - 2 cos1a - b2 = 2 - 2 cos a cos b - 2 sin a sin b 
 -2 cos1a - b2 = -2 cos a cos b - 2 sin a sin b 
 cos1a - b2 = cos a cos b + sin a sin b
 
d(A, P3) = d(P1
 , P2)
Square both sides.
Multiply out the squared terms.
Apply a Pythagorean Identity  
(3 times).
Subtract 2 from each side.
Divide each side by -2.
This is formula (2).	
■
The proof of formula (1) follows from formula (2) and the Even–Odd Identities. 
Because a + b = a - 1 -b2, it follows that
 cos1a + b2 = cos3a - 1 -b2 4
 = cos a cos1 -b2 + sin a sin1 -b2 
 = cos a cos b - sin a sin b 
Use Sum and Difference Formulas to Find Exact Values
One use of formulas (1) and (2) is to obtain the exact value of the cosine of an angle 
that can be expressed as the sum or difference of angles whose sine and cosine are 
known exactly.
Using the Sum Formula to Find an Exact Value
Find the exact value of cos 75°.
Because 75° = 45° + 30°, use formula (1) to obtain
 cos 75° = cos145° + 30°2 = cos 45° cos 30° - sin 45° sin 30°
 = 12
2 # 13
2
- 12
2 # 1
2 = 1
4
 1 26 - 222
Using the Difference Formula to Find an Exact Value
Find the exact value of cos p
12.
 cos p
12 = cosa3p
12 - 2p
12 b = cosap
4 - p
6 b
 = cos p
4 cos p
6 + sin p
4 sin p
6 
 = 12
2 # 13
2
+ 12
2 # 1
2 = 1
4
 1 26 + 222
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 3  a n d  1 9
Use formula (2).
Even–Odd Identities
1
Example 1
Solution
          c
Formula (1)
•
Example 2
Solution
Use formula (2).
•

514 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Another use of formulas (1) and (2) is to establish other identities. Two important 
identities conjectured earlier, in Section 6.4, are given next.
	
 cosap
2 - ub = sin u	
(3a)
	
 sinap
2 - ub = cos u	
(3b)
Proof  To prove formula (3a), use the formula for cos1a - b2 with a = p
2   
and b = u.
 cosap
2 - ub = cos p
2 cos u + sin p
2 sin u
 = 0 # cos u + 1 # sin u
 = sin u
To prove formula (3b), make use of the identity (3a) just established.
sinap
2 - ub = cosc p
2 - ap
2 - ub d = cos u
Also, because
 cosap
2 - ub = cosc - au - p
2 b d = cosau - p
2 b
and because
 cosap
2 - ub = sin u
it follows that cosau - p
2 b = sin u. The graphs of y = cosau - p
2 b and y = sin u 
are identical.
Having established the identities in formulas (3a) and (3b), we now can derive 
the sum and difference formulas for sin1a + b2 and sin1a - b2.
Proof   sin1a + b2 = cosc p
2 - 1a + b2 d
 = cosc ap
2 - ab - b d
 = cosap
2 - abcos b + sinap
2 - absin b 
 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b 
 sin1a - b2 = sin3a + 1 -b2 4
 = sin a cos1 -b2 + cos a sin1 -b2 
 = sin a cos b + cos a1 -sin b2 
 = sin a cos b - cos a sin b
■
c
Use (3a).
c
Even Property of Cosine
c
3(a)
Formula (3a)
Formula (2)
Formulas (3a) and (3b)
Use the sum formula 
for sine just obtained.
Even–Odd Identities
■
Seeing the Concept
Graph Y1 = cosap
2 - xb and Y2 = sin x
on the same screen. Does doing this  
demonstrate the result 3(a)? How would 
you demonstrate the result 3(b)?

Section 7.5  Sum and Difference Formulas  515
Using the Sum Formula to Find an Exact Value
Find the exact value of sin 7p
12 .
 sin 7p
12 = sina3p
12 + 4p
12 b = sinap
4 + p
3 b
 = sin p
4 cos p
3 + cos p
4 sin p
3
 = 12
2 # 1
2 + 12
2 # 13
2
= 1
4
 1 22 + 262
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Using the Difference Formula to Find an Exact Value
Find the exact value of sin 80° cos 20° - cos 80° sin 20°.
The form of the expression sin 80° cos 20° - cos 80° sin 20° is that of the right side of 
formula (5) for sin1a - b2 with a = 80° and b = 20°. That is,
sin 80° cos 20° - cos 80° sin 20° = sin180° - 20°2 = sin 60° = 13
2
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 7  a n d  3 1
Finding Exact Values
Say it is known that sin a = 4
5, p
2 6 a 6 p, and that sin b = -  2
25
= -  225
5
,
p 6 b 6 3p
2 . Find the exact value of each of the following.
(a)	 cos a      (b)  cos b      (c)  cos1a + b2      (d)  sin1a + b2
(a)	 Because sin a = 4
5 = y
r and p
2 6 a 6 p, let y = 4 and r = 5, and place a in
	
quadrant II. The point P = 1x, y2 = 1x, 42, x 6 0, is on a circle of radius 5, 
x2 + y2 = 25. See Figure 27. Then
 x2 + y2 = 25
 x2 + 16 = 25           
y = 4
 x2 = 25 - 16 = 9 
 x = -3         
x 6 0
	
Then
cos a = x
r = -  3
5
Example 3
Solution
Formula (4)
•
Example 4
Solution
•
Example 5
Solution
Sum and Difference Formulas for the Sine Function
	
 sin1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b	
(4)
	
 sin1a - b2 = sin a cos b - cos a sin b	
(5)
Theorem
Figure 27  sin a = 4
5
 , p
2 6 a 6 p
a
y
x
x 2  y 2  25
(x, 4)
5
5
5
5
5
In Words
Formula (4) states that the sine 
of the sum of two angles equals 
the sine of the first angle times the 
cosine of the second angle plus  
the cosine of the first angle times 
the sine of the second angle.

516 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
	
Alternatively, cos a can be found using identities, as follows:
cos a = - 21 - sin2 a = - A1 - 16
25 = - A
9
25 = -  3
5
(b)	 Because sin b = -2
25
= y
r and p 6 b 6 3p
2 , let y = -2 and r = 25, and 
	
place b in quadrant III. The point P = 1x, y2 = 1x, -22, x 6 0, is on a circle 
	
of radius 25, x2 + y2 = 5. See Figure 28. Then
 x2 + y2 = 5
 x2 + 4 = 5   
y = - 2
 x2 = 1
 x = -1 
x 6 0
	
Then
cos b = a
r = -1
15 = -  15
5
	
    Alternatively, cos b can be found using identities, as follows:
cos b = - 21 - sin2 b = - A1 - 4
5 = - A
1
5 = -  15
5
(c)	 Use the results found in parts (a) and (b) and formula (1) to obtain
 cos1a + b2 = cos a cos b - sin a sin b
 = -  3
5
 a -  15
5 b - 4
5
 a -  225
5
b = 1125
25
(d)	  sin1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b
 = 4
5
 a -  15
5 b + a -  3
5b a -  215
5
b = 215
25
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 5 ( a ) ,  ( b ) ,  a n d  ( c )
Use Sum and Difference Formulas to Establish Identities
Establishing an Identity
Establish the identity: 
cos1a - b2
sin a sin b
= cot a cot b + 1
 cos1a - b2
sin a sin b
= cos a cos b + sin a sin b
sin a sin b
 = cos a cos b
sin a sin b + sin a sin b
sin a sin b
 = cos a
sin a # cos b
sin b + 1
 = cot a cot b + 1
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  4 9  a n d  6 1
 æ 
•
2
Example 6
Solution
•
Figure 28  sin b = - 2
15
 , p 6 b 6 3p
2
b
y
x
x 2  y 2  5
(x, 2)

5
5
 5
5
5

Section 7.5  Sum and Difference Formulas  517
Use the identity tan u = sin u
cos u and the sum formulas for sin1a + b2 and 
cos1a + b2 to derive a formula for tan1a + b2.
Proof  tan1a + b2 = sin1a + b2
cos1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b
cos a cos b - sin a sin b
Now divide the numerator and the denominator by cos a cos b.
 tan1a + b2 =
sin a cos b + cos a sin b
cos a cos b
cos a cos b - sin a sin b
cos a cos b
=
sin a  cos b 
cos a  cos b +
 cos a  sin b
 cos a  cos b
 cos a   cos b 
 cos a   cos b - sin a sin b
cos a cos b
 =
sin a
cos a + sin b
cos b
1 - sin a
cos a # sin b
cos b
=
tan a + tan b
1 - tan a tan b
Proof  Use the sum formula for tan1a + b2 and Even–Odd Properties to get the 
difference formula.
tan1a - b2 = tan3a + 1-b2 4 =
tan a + tan1 -b2
1 - tan a tan1 -b2 =
tan a - tan b
1 + tan a tan b
We have proved the following results:
■
■
Warning  Be 
careful 
when 
using  
formulas (6) and (7). These formulas can 
be used only for angles a and b for which 
tan a and tan b are defined. That is,  
they can be used for all angles except odd
integer multiples of p
2
 .	
■
Sum and Difference Formulas for the Tangent Function
	
 tan1a + b2 =
tan a + tan b
1 - tan a tan b	
(6)
	
 tan1a - b2 =
tan a - tan b
1 + tan a tan b	
(7)
Theorem
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 5  a n d  3 5 ( d )
Establishing an Identity
Prove the identity:  tan1u + p2 = tan u
tan1u + p2 =
tan u + tan p
1 - tan u tan p =
tan u + 0
1 - tan u # 0 = tan u
Example 7 verifies that the tangent function is periodic with period p, a fact that was 
discussed earlier.
Establishing an Identity
Prove the identity:  tanau + p
2 b = -cot u
Formula (6) cannot be used because tan p
2 is not defined. Instead, proceed as follows:
 tanau + p
2 b =
sinau + p
2 b
cosau + p
2 b
=
sin u cos p
2 + cos u sin p
2
cos u cos p
2 - sin u sin p
2
 = 1sin u2 102 + 1cos u2 112
1cos u2 102 - 1sin u2 112 =
cos u
-sin u = -cot u
Example 7
Solution
•
Example 8
Solution
•
In Words
Formula (6) states that the 
tangent of the sum of two angles 
equals the tangent of the first 
angle plus the tangent of the  
second angle, all divided by  
1 minus their product.

518 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Use Sum and Difference Formulas Involving Inverse  
Trigonometric Functions
Finding the Exact Value of an Expression Involving Inverse  
Trigonometric Functions
Find the exact value of:  sinacos-1 1
2 + sin-1 3
5b
We seek the sine of the sum of two angles, a = cos-1 1
2 and b = sin-1 3
5. Then
cos a = 1
2  0 … a … p and sin b = 3
5  -  p
2 … b … p
2
Use Pythagorean Identities to obtain sin a and cos b. Because sin a Ú 0 and 
cos b Ú 0 (do you know why?), this means that
 sin a = 21 - cos2 a = A1 - 1
4 = A
3
4 = 13
2
 cos b = 21 - sin2 b = A1 - 9
25 = A
16
25 = 4
5
As a result,
 sinacos-1 1
2 + sin-1 3
5b = sin1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b
 = 13
2 # 4
5 + 1
2 # 3
5 = 423 + 3
10
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 7
Writing a Trigonometric Expression as an Algebraic Expression
Write sin1sin-1 u + cos-1 v2 as an algebraic expression containing u and v (that is, 
without any trigonometric functions). Give the restrictions on u and v.
First, for sin-1 u, the restriction on u is -1 … u … 1, and for cos-1 v, the restriction 
on v is -1 … v … 1. Now let a = sin-1 u and b = cos-1 v. Then
 sin a = u  -  p
2 … a … p
2 -1 … u … 1 
 cos b = v  0 … b … p -1 … v … 1
Because -  p
2 … a … p
2 , this means that cos a Ú 0. As a result,
cos a = 21 - sin2 a = 21 - u2
Similarly, because 0 … b … p, this means that sin b Ú 0. Then
sin b = 21 - cos2 b = 21 - v2
As a result,
 sin1sin-1 u + cos-1 v2 = sin1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b
 = uv + 21 - u2 21 - v2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 7
3
Example 9
Solution
•
Example 10
Solution
•
Note  In Example 9 sin a also can be
found by using cos a = 1
2 = x
r
 , so
x = 1 and r = 2. Then y = 13 and
sin a = y
r = 13
2
 . Also, cos b can be
found in a similar fashion.	
■

Section 7.5  Sum and Difference Formulas  519
Solve Trigonometric Equations Linear in Sine and Cosine
Sometimes it is necessary to square both sides of an equation to obtain expressions 
that allow the use of identities. Remember, squaring both sides of an equation may 
introduce extraneous solutions. As a result, apparent solutions must be checked.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Linear in Sine and Cosine
Solve the equation:  sin u + cos u = 1, 0 … u 6 2p
Attempts to use available identities do not lead to equations that are easy to solve. 
(Try it yourself.) So, given the form of this equation, square each side.
 sin u + cos u = 1
 1sin u + cos u22 = 1
 sin2 u + 2 sin u cos u + cos2 u = 1
 2 sin u cos u = 0 
 sin u cos u = 0
Setting each factor equal to zero leads to
sin u = 0 or cos u = 0
The apparent solutions are
u = 0  u = p  u = p
2  u = 3p
2
Because both sides of the original equation were squared, these apparent  
solutions must be checked to see whether any are extraneous.
 u = 0 :  sin 0 + cos 0 = 0 + 1 = 1
 u = p:  sin p + cos p = 0 + 1 -12 = -1
 u = p
2
 :  sin p
2 + cos p
2 = 1 + 0 = 1
 u = 3p
2
 :  sin 3p
2
+ cos 3p
2
= -1 + 0 = -1
The values u = p and u = 3p
2  are extraneous. The solution set is e0, p
2 f .
Start with the equation
sin u + cos u = 1
and divide each side by 22. (The reason for this choice will become apparent 
shortly.) Then
1
22
 sin u +
1
22
 cos u =
1
22
The left side now resembles the formula for the sine of the sum of two angles, one of 
which is u. The other angle is unknown (call it f.) Then
	
sin1u + f2 = sin u cos f + cos u sin f =
1
22
= 12
2 	
(8)
where
cos f =
1
22
= 12
2    sin f =
1
22
= 12
2   0 … f 6 2p
4
Example 11
Option 1
Square each side.
Remove parentheses.
sin2 u + cos2 u = 1
A solution
Not a solution
A solution
Not a solution
•
Option 2

520 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
The angle f is therefore p
4 . As a result, equation (8) becomes
sinau + p
4 b = 12
2
In the interval 30, 2p2, there are two angles whose sine is 12
2
 : p
4  and 3p
4 . See 
Figure 29. As a result,
 u + p
4 = p
4 or  u + p
4 = 3p
4
 u = 0 or 
 u = p
2
The solution set is e0, p
2 f.
This second option can be used to solve any linear equation in the variables 
sin u and cos u.
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Linear in sin U and cos U
Solve:
	
a sin u + b cos u = c	
(9)
where a, b, and c are constants and either a ≠0 or b ≠0.
Divide each side of equation (9) by 2a2 + b2. Then
	
a
2a2 + b2 sin u +
b
2a2 + b2 cos u =
c
2a2 + b2	
(10)
There is a unique angle f, 0 … f 6 2p, for which
	
cos f =
a
2a2 + b2 and sin f =
b
2a2 + b2	
(11)
Figure 30 shows the situation for a 7 0 and b 7 0. Equation (10) may be written as
sin u cos f + cos u sin f =
c
2a2 + b2
or, equivalently,
	
sin1u + f2 =
c
2a2 + b2	
(12)
where f satisfies equation (11).
If 
0 c0 7 2a2 + b2, then sin1u + f2 7 1 or sin1u + f2 6 -1, and 
equation (12) has no solution.
If 0 c0 … 2a2 + b2, then the solutions of equation (12) are
u + f = sin-1 
c
2a2 + b2 or u + f = p - sin-1 
c
2a2 + b2
Because the angle f is determined by equations (11), these give the solutions to 
equation (9).	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 5
•
Example 12
Solution
Figure 29 
y
x
x 2  y 2  1
1
1
1
1
–4
(x,     )
––2
2
3
–––
4
(x,     )
––2
2
Figure 30 
x
y
f
P = (a, b)
  cos f = 
sin f = 
a2  b2
a2  b2
b
a2  b2
a
x 2  y 2  a2  b2

Section 7.5  Sum and Difference Formulas  521
Summary
Sum and Difference Formulas
 cos1a + b2 = cos a cos b - sin a sin b       cos1a - b2 = cos a cos b + sin a sin b
 sin1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b       sin1a - b2 = sin a cos b - cos a sin b
 tan1a + b2 =
tan a + tan b
1 - tan a tan b      
 tan1a - b2 =
tan a - tan b
1 + tan a tan b
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The distance d from the point 12, - 32 to the point 15, 12 is 
    
 . (p. 37)
	 2.	 If sin u = 4
5 and u is in quadrant II, then cos u =     
 . 
(pp. 424–426)
	 3.	 (a)	 sin p
4 # cos p
3 =   
 . (pp. 402–411)
(b)	 tan p
4 - sin p
6 =   
 . (pp. 402–411)
	 4.	 If sin a = -  4
5, p 6 a 6 3p
2 , then cos a =   
 	 .  
(pp. 424–426)
7.5  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 5.	 cos1a + b2 = cos a cos b 
 sin a sin b
	 6.	 sin1a - b2 = sin a cos b 
 cos a sin b
	 7.	 True or False  sin1a + b2 = sin a + sin b + 2 sin a sin b
	 8.	 True or False  tan 75° = tan 30° + tan 45° 
	 9.	 True or False  cosap
2 - ub = cos u 
	 10.	 True or False  If f1x2 = sin x and g1x2 = cos x, then 
g1a + b2 = g1a2g1b2 - f1a2f1b2 
	 11.	 Choose the expression that completes the sum formula for 
tangent functions: tan(a + b) =                     
(a)	 tan a + tan b
1 - tan a tan b    (b)  tan a - tan b
1 + tan a tan b
(c)	 tan a + tan b
1 + tan a tan b    (d)  tan a - tan b
1 - tan a tan b
	 12.	 Choose the expression that is equivalent	  
to sin 60° cos 20° + cos 60° sin 20°. 
(a)	 cos 40°    (b)  sin 40°    (c)  cos 80°    (d)  sin 80°
Skill Building
In Problems 13–24, find the exact value of each expression.
	 13.	 cos 165°	
14.	 sin 105°	
15.	 tan 15° 
	
16.	 tan 195°	
17.	 sin p
12	
18.	 sin 5p
12  
	 19.	 cos 7p
12 	
20.	 tan 7p
12 	
21.	 sin 17p
12 	
22.	 tan 19p
12 	
23.	 cota-  5p
12 b	
24.	 seca-  p
12b 
In Problems 25–34, find the exact value of each expression.
	 25.	 sin 20° cos 80° - cos 20° sin 80° 
	
26.	 sin 20° cos 10° + cos 20° sin 10°  
	 27.	 cos 70° cos 20° - sin 70° sin 20°  	
28.	 cos 40° cos 10° + sin 40° sin 10° 
	 29.	 tan 40° - tan 10°
1 + tan 40° tan 10° 	
30.	
tan 20° + tan 25°
1 - tan 20° tan 25°  
	 31.	 sin p
12
 cos 7p
12 - cos p
12 sin 7p
12  
	
32.	 cos 5p
12 cos 7p
12 - sin 5p
12 sin 7p
12  
	 33.	 sin p
18 cos 5p
18 + cos p
18 sin 5p
18  
	
34.	 cos p
12 cos 5p
12 + sin 5p
12 sin p
12  
In Problems 35–40, find the exact value of each of the following under the given conditions:
(a)	sin1a + b2    (b)  cos1a + b2    (c)  sin1a - b2    (d)  tan1a - b2
	 35.	 sin a = 3
5, 0 6 a 6 p
2; cos b = 225
5
, -  p
2 6 b 6 0	
36.	 cos a = 15
5 , 0 6 a 6 p
2; sin b = -  4
5, -  p
2 6 b 6 0

522 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
	 37.	 tan a = 5
12, p 6 a 6 3p
2 ; sin b = -  1
2, p 6 b 6 3p
2 	
38.	 tan a = -  4
3, p
2 6 a 6 p; cos b = 1
2, 0 6 b 6 p
2  
	 39.	 cos a = 1
2, -  p
2 6 a 6 0; sin b = 1
3, 0 6 b 6 p
2 	
40.	 sin a = 5
13, -  3p
2
6 a 6 -p; tan b = - 23, p
2 6 b 6 p 
	 41.	 If sin u = 1
3, u in quadrant II, find the exact value of:
(a)	 cos u 
      (b)  sinau + p
6 b
(c)	 cosau - p
3 b      (d)  tanau + p
4 b
	 42.	 If cos u = 1
4, u in quadrant IV, find the exact value of:
(a)	 sin u  
      (b)  sinau - p
6 b
(c)	 cosau + p
3 b      (d)  tanau - p
4 b  
In Problems 43–48, use the figures to evaluate each function if f (x) = sin x, g(x) = cos x, and h1x2 = tan x.
	 43.	 g1a + b2 
	
44.	 f1a + b2  
	 45.	 f1a - b2 
	
46.	 g1a - b2  
	 47.	 h1a - b2 
	
48.	 h1a + b2  
In Problems 49–74, establish each identity.
	 49.	 sinap
2 + ub = cos u	
50.	 cosap
2 + ub = - sin u	
51.	 cos1p - u2 = -cos u
	 52.	 sin1p - u2 = sin u 	
53.	 cos1p + u2 = - cos u	
54.	 sin1p + u2 = -sin u 
	 55.	 tan12p - u2 = - tan u	
56.	 tan1p - u2 = - tan u 	
57.	 cosa3p
2
+ ub = sin u
	 58.	 sina3p
2
+ ub = - cos u 	
59.	 cos1a + b2 + cos1a - b2 = 2 cos a cos b
	 60.	 sin1a + b2 + sin1a - b2 = 2 sin a cos b 	
61.	
sin1a + b2
sin a cos b = 1 + cot a tan b
	 62.	
sin1a + b2
cos a cos b = tan a + tan b	
63.	
cos1a - b2
sin a cos b
= cot a + tan b
	 64.	
cos1a + b2
cos a cos b = 1 - tan a tan b 	
65.	
cos1a + b2
cos1a - b2 = 1 - tan a tan b
1 + tan a tan b	
66.	
sin1a + b2
sin1a - b2 = tan a + tan b
tan a - tan b 	
67.	 cot1a - b2 = cot a cot b + 1
cot b - cot a 	
68.	 cot1a + b2 = cot a cot b - 1
cot b + cot a  	
69.	 sec1a - b2 =
sec a sec b
1 + tan a tan b	
70.	 sec1a + b2 =
csc a csc b
cot a cot b - 1 	
71.	 cos1a - b2 cos1a + b2 = cos2 a - sin2 b	
72.	 sin1a - b2 sin1a + b2 = sin2 a - sin2 b 	
73.	 cos1u + kp2 = 1- 12k cos u, k any integer	
74.	 sin1u + kp2 = 1- 12k sin u,  k any integer
In Problems 75–86, find the exact value of each expression.
	 75.	 sinasin-1 13
2
+ cos-1 1b 
	
76.	 sinasin-1 1
2 + cos-1 0b  
	
77.	 sinc sin-1 3
5 - cos-1a-  4
5b d  
	 78.	 sinc sin-1a-  4
5b - tan-1 3
4 d  
	
79.	 cosc tan-1 5
12 - sin-1a-  3
5b d  
	
80.	 cosatan-1 4
3 + cos-1 5
13b  
y
x
(x, 1)
x2  y2  4
a
y
x
(   , y)
x2  y2  1
b
1–3

Section 7.5  Sum and Difference Formulas  523
	 81.	 cosatan-1 4
3 + cos-1 12
13b 
	
82.	 cosasin-1 5
13 - tan-1 3
4b  
	
83.	 tanap
4 - cos-1 3
5b 
	 84.	 tanasin-1 3
5 + p
6 b  
	
85.	 tanacos-1 4
5 + sin-1 1b 
	
86.	 tanasin-1 4
5 + cos-1 1b  
In Problems 87–92, write each trigonometric expression as an algebraic expression containing u and v. Give the restrictions required on 
u and v.
	 87.	 cos1cos-1 u + sin-1 v2	
88.	 sin1sin-1 u - cos-1 v2	
89.	 cos1tan-1 u + tan-1 v2
	 90.	 sin1tan-1 u - sin-1 v2 	
91.	 sec1tan-1 u + cos-1 v2	
92.	 tan1sin-1 u - cos-1 v2 
In Problems 93–98, solve each equation on the interval 0 … u 6 2p.
	 93.	 23 sin u + cos u = 1 
	
94.	 sin u - 23 cos u = 1  
	
95.	 sin u + cos u = 22 
	 96.	 sin u - cos u = - 22 
	
97.	 cot u + csc u = - 23 
	
98.	  tan u + 23 =  sec u  
Applications and Extensions
	 99.	 Show that sin-1 v + cos-1 v = p
2 .	
100.	 Show that tan-1 v + cot-1 v = p
2 .
	101.	 Show that tan-11
v = p
2 - tan-1 v, if v 7 0.	
102.	 Show that cot-1 ev = tan-1 e-v.
	103.	 Show that sin1sin-1 v + cos-1 v2 = 1.	
104.	 Show that cos1sin-1 v + cos-1 v2 = 0.
	105.	 Calculus  Show that the difference quotient for f1x2 = sin x 
is given by the following
 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
=
sin1x + h2 - sin x
h
 = cos x # sin h
h
- sin x # 1 - cos h
h
	106.	 Calculus  Show that the difference quotient for f1x2 = cos x 
is given by
 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
=
cos1x + h2 - cos x
h
 = - sin x # sin h
h
- cos x # 1 - cos h
h
	107.	 One, Two, Three
(a)	 Show that tan1tan-1 1 + tan-1 2 + tan-1 32 = 0.
(b)	 Conclude from part (a) that
tan-1 1 + tan-1 2 + tan-1 3 = p
Source: College Mathematics Journal, Vol. 37, No. 3,  
May 2006
	108.	 Electric Power  In an alternating current (ac) circuit, the  
instantaneous power p at time t is given by
p1t2 = VmIm cos f sin21vt2 - VmIm sin f sin1vt2 cos1vt2
Show that this is equivalent to
p1t2 = VmIm sin1vt2 sin1vt - f2
Source: HyperPhysics, hosted by Georgia State University
	109.	 Geometry: Angle between Two Lines  Let L1 and L2 denote 
two nonvertical intersecting lines, and let u denote the acute 
angle between L1 and L2, as shown in the figure. Show that
tan u = m2 - m1
1 + m1
 m2
where m1 and m2 are the slopes of L1 and L2 respectively.
[Hint: Use the facts that tan u1 = m1 and tan u2 = m2.]
	110.	 If a + b + g = 180° and
cot u = cot a + cot b + cot g 0 6 u 6 90°
show that
sin3 u = sin1a - u2 sin1b - u2 sin1g - u2
	111.	 If tan a = x + 1 and tan b = x - 1, show that
2 cot1a - b2 = x2.
x
y
u2
u
L1
L2
u1

524 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 5    2.  -  3
5    3. (a) 12
4     	(b)  1
2    4.  -  3
5
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	112.	 Discuss the following derivation:
 tanau + p
2 b =
tan u + tan p
2
1 - tan u tan p
2
 =
tan u
tan p
2
+ 1
1
tan p
2
- tan u
=
0 + 1
0 - tan u =
1
- tan u = - cot u
Can you justify each step? 
	113.	 Explain why formula (7) cannot be used to show that
tanap
2 - ub = cot u
Establish this identity by using formulas (3a) and (3b).
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 114–117 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	114.	 Determine the points of intersection of the graphs of f1x2 = x2 + 5x + 1 and g1x2 = - 2x2 - 11x - 4
	
	 by solving f1x2 = g1x2.                         
	115.	 Convert 17p
6  to degrees. 
	116.	 Find the area of the sector of a circle of radius 6 centimeters formed by an angle of 45°. Give both the exact area and  
an approximation rounded to two decimal places. 
	117.	 Given  tan u = - 2, 270° 6 u 6 360°, find the exact value of the remaining five trigonometric functions.
7.6  Double-angle and Half-angle Formulas
	
Objectives	 	1  Use Double-angle Formulas to Find Exact Values (p. 525)
	
	 	2  Use Double-angle Formulas to Establish Identities (p. 525)
	
	 	3  Use Half-angle Formulas to Find Exact Values (p. 528)
In this section, formulas for sin12u2, cos12u2, sina1
2 ub, and cosa1
2 ub are  
established in terms of sin u and cos u. They are derived using the sum formulas.
In the sum formulas for sin1a + b2 and cos1a + b2, let a = b = u. Then
 sin1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b
 sin1u + u2 = sin u cos u + cos u sin u
 sin12u2 = 2 sin u cos u
and
 cos1a + b2 = cos a cos b - sin a sin b
 cos1u + u2 = cos u cos u - sin u sin u
 cos12u2 = cos2 u - sin2 u
An application of the Pythagorean Identity sin2 u + cos2 u = 1 results in two 
other ways to express cos12u2.
cos12u2 = cos2 u - sin2 u = 11 - sin2 u2 - sin2 u = 1 - 2 sin2 u

Section 7.6  Double-angle and Half-angle Formulas  525
and
cos12u2 = cos2 u - sin2 u = cos2 u - 11 - cos2 u2 = 2 cos2 u - 1
The following theorem summarizes the Double-angle Formulas.
Double-angle Formulas
	
 sin12u2 = 2 sin u cos u
	
(1)
	
 cos12u2 = cos2 u - sin2 u	
(2)
	
 cos12u2 = 1 - 2 sin2 u
	
(3)
	
 cos12u2 = 2 cos2 u - 1
	
(4)
Theorem
Use Double-angle Formulas to Find Exact Values
Finding Exact Values Using Double-angle Formulas
If sin u = 3
5, p
2 6 u 6 p, find the exact value of:
(a)	 sin12u2        (b)  cos12u2
(a)	 Because sin12u2 = 2 sin u cos u and because sin u = 3
5 is known, begin by  
finding cos u. Since sin u = 3
5 = y
r , p
2 6 u 6 p, let y = 3 and r = 5, and
	
place u in quadrant II. The point P = 1x, y2 = 1x, 32 is on a circle of radius 5, 
x2 + y2 = 25. See Figure 31. Then 
 x2 + y2 = 25
 
 x2 = 25 - 9 = 16
 x = -4
 
This means that cos u = x
r = -4
5 . Now use formula (1) to obtain
sin12u2 = 2 sin u cos u = 2a3
5b a -  4
5b = -  24
25
(b)	 Because sin u = 3
5 is given, it is easiest to use formula (3) to get cos12u2.
cos12u2 = 1 - 2 sin2 u = 1 - 2a 9
25b = 1 - 18
25 = 7
25
WARNING  In finding cos(2u) in Example 1(b), a version of the Double-angle Formula, formula (3), was
used. Note that it is not possible to use the Pythagorean identity cos(2u) = { 21 - sin2(2u) ,
with sin(2u) = -  24
25
 , because there is no way of knowing which sign to choose.	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  9 ( a )  a n d  ( b )
Use Double-angle Formulas to Establish Identities
Establishing Identities
(a)	 Develop a formula for tan12u2 in terms of tan u.
(b)	 Develop a formula for sin13u2 in terms of sin u and cos u.
(a)	 In the sum formula for tan1a + b2, let a = b = u. Then
 tan1a + b2 =
tan a + tan b
1 - tan a tan b
 tan1u + u2 =
tan u + tan u
1 - tan u tan u
1
Example 1
Solution
y = 3
x 6 0
•
2
Example 2
Solution
Figure 31  sin u = 3
5
 , p
2 6 u 6 p
u
y
x
x 2  y 2  25
(x, 3)
5
5
5
5
5

526 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
(b)	 To get a formula for sin13u2, write 3u as 2u + u, and use the sum formula.
sin13u2 = sin12u + u2 = sin12u2 cos u + cos12u2 sin u
	
Now use the Double-angle Formulas to get
 sin13u2 = 12 sin u cos u2 1cos u2 + 1cos2 u - sin2 u2 1sin u2
 = 2 sin u cos2 u + sin u cos2 u - sin3 u
 = 3 sin u cos2 u - sin3 u
The formula obtained in Example 2(b) also can be written as
 sin13u2 = 3 sin u cos2 u - sin3 u = 3 sin u11 - sin2 u2 - sin3 u
 = 3 sin u - 4 sin3 u
That is, sin13u2 is a third-degree polynomial in the variable sin u. In fact, 
sin1nu2, n a positive odd integer, can always be written as a polynomial of  
degree n in the variable sin u.*
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 7
Rearranging the Double-angle Formulas (3) and (4) leads to other formulas 
that will be used later in this section.
Begin with formula (3) and solve for sin2 u.
 cos12u2 = 1 - 2 sin2 u
 2 sin2 u = 1 - cos12u2
•
*Because of the work done by P. L. Chebyshëv, these polynomials are sometimes called Chebyshëv 
polynomials.
	
tan12u2 =
2 tan u
1 - tan2 u	
(5)
	
sin2 u = 1 - cos12u2
2
	
(6)
	
cos2 u = 1 + cos12u2
2
	
(7)
Similarly, using formula (4), solve for cos2 u.
 cos12u2 = 2 cos2 u - 1
 2 cos2 u = 1 + cos12u2
Formulas (6) and (7) can be used to develop a formula for tan2 u.
tan2 u = sin2 u
cos2 u =
1 - cos12u2
2
1 + cos12u2
2
	
tan2 u = 1 - cos12u2
1 + cos12u2 	
(8)
Formulas (6) through (8) do not have to be memorized since their derivations 
are so straightforward.
Formulas (6) and (7) are important in calculus. The next example illustrates a 
problem that arises in calculus requiring the use of formula (7).

Section 7.6  Double-angle and Half-angle Formulas  527
Establishing an Identity
Write an equivalent expression for cos4 u that does not involve any powers of sine 
or cosine greater than 1.
The idea here is to apply formula (7) twice.
 cos4 u = 1cos2 u22 = a
1 + cos12u2
2
b
2
 
 = 1
4
 31 + 2 cos12u2 + cos212u2 4
 = 1
4 + 1
2 cos12u2 + 1
4 cos212u2
 = 1
4 + 1
2 cos12u2 + 1
4
 e
1 + cos3212u2 4
2
f 
 = 1
4 + 1
2 cos12u2 + 1
8
 31 + cos14u2 4
 = 3
8 + 1
2 cos12u2 + 1
8 cos14u2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Solving a Trigonometric Equation Using Identities
Solve the equation:  sin u cos u = -  1
2, 0 … u 6 2p
The left side of the given equation is in the form of the Double-angle Formula 
2 sin u cos u = sin12u2, except for a factor of 2. Multiply each side by 2.
 sin u cos u = -  1
2
 2 sin u cos u = -1
 sin12u2 = -1
The argument here is 2u. Write the general formula that gives all the solutions 
of this equation, and then list those that are in the interval 30, 2p2. Because
sin a3p
2
+ 2pkb = -1, for any integer k, this means that
Example 3
Solution
Formula (7)
Formula (7)
•
Example 4
Solution
Multiply each side by 2.
Double-angle Formula
 2u = 3p
2
+ 2kp
 u = 3p
4
+ kp
 u = 3p
4
+ 1-12p = -  p
4 , u = 3p
4
+ 102p = 3p
4 , u = 3p
4
+ 112p = 7p
4 , u = 3p
4
+ 122p = 11p
4
k any integer
	  c	
 c	
 c	
 c
 k = -1	
 k = 0	
 k = 1	
 k = 2
The solutions in the interval 30, 2p2 are
u = 3p
4 ,  u = 7p
4
The solution set is e 3p
4 , 7p
4 f.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
•

528 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Projectile Motion
An object is propelled upward at an angle u to the horizontal with an initial  
velocity of v0 feet per second. See Figure 32. If air resistance is ignored, the  
range R—the horizontal distance that the object travels—is given by the function
R1u2 = 1
16
 v0
2 sin u cos u
(a)	 Show that R1u2 = 1
32
 v2
0 sin12u2.
(b)	 Find the angle u for which R is a maximum.
(a)	 Rewrite the given expression for the range using the Double-angle Formula 
sin12u2 = 2 sin u cos u. Then
R1u2 = 1
16
 v0
2 sin u cos u = 1
16
 v0
2 2 sin u cos u
2
= 1
32
 v0
2 sin12u2
(b)	 In this form, the largest value for the range R can be found. For a fixed initial 
speed v0, the angle u of inclination to the horizontal determines the value of R. 
The largest value of a sine function is 1, which occurs when the argument 2u is 
90°. For maximum R, it follows that
 2u = 90°
 u = 45°
An inclination to the horizontal of 45° results in the maximum range.	
•
Use Half-angle Formulas to Find Exact Values
Another important use of formulas (6) through (8) is to prove the Half-angle 
Formulas. In formulas (6) through (8), let u = a
2 . Then
Example 5
Solution
3
Figure 32 
R
θ
	sin2 a
2 = 1 - cos a
2
  cos2 a
2 = 1 + cos a
2
  tan2 a
2 = 1 - cos a
1 + cos a	 (9)
The identities in box (9) will prove useful in integral calculus.
Solving for the trigonometric functions on the left sides of equations (9) gives 
the Half-angle Formulas.
Half-angle Formulas
	
 sin a
2 = { A
1 - cos a
2
	
(10)
	
 cos a
2 = { A
1 + cos a
2
	
(11)
	
 tan a
2 = { A
1 - cos a
1 + cos a	
(12)
where the + or -  sign is determined by the quadrant of the angle a
2 .
Theorem
Finding Exact Values Using Half-angle Formulas
Use a Half-angle Formula to find the exact value of:
(a)	 cos 15°        (b)  sin1 -15°2
(a)	 Because 15° = 30°
2 , use the Half-angle Formula for cos a
2 with a = 30°. Also,
	
because 15° is in quadrant I, cos 15° 7 0, so choose the + sign in using  
formula (11):
Example 6
Solution

Section 7.6  Double-angle and Half-angle Formulas  529
 cos 15° = cos 30°
2
= A
1 + cos 30°
2
 = C
1 + 13>2
2
= C
2 + 13
4
=  22 + 13
2
(b)	 Use the fact that sin1 -15°2 = -sin 15°, and then apply formula (10a).
 sin1-15°2 = -sin 30°
2
= - A
1 - cos 30°
2
 = - C
1 - 13>2
2
= - C
2 - 13
4
= -  32 - 23
2
It is interesting to compare the answer found in Example 6(a) with the answer 
to Example 2 of Section 7.5. There it was calculated that
cos p
12 = cos 15° = 1
4
 1 26 + 222
Based on this and the result of Example 6(a),
1
4
 1 26 + 222 and 32 + 23
2
are equal. (Since each expression is positive, you can verify this equality by squaring 
each expression.) Two very different-looking, yet correct, answers can be obtained, 
depending on the approach taken to solve a problem.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Finding Exact Values Using Half-angle Formulas
If cos a = -  3
5, p 6 a 6 3p
2 , find the exact value of:
(a)	 sin a
2        (b)  cos a
2        (c)  tan a
2
First, observe that if p 6 a 6 3p
2 , then p
2 6 a
2 6 3p
4 . As a result, a
2 lies in  
quadrant II.
(a)	 Because a
2 lies in quadrant II, sin a
2 7 0, so use the + sign in formula (10)  
to get
 sin a
2 = A
1 - cos a
2
= R
1 - a -  3
5b
2
 = R
8
5
2 = A
4
5 =
2
25
= 225
5
(b)	 Because a
2 lies in quadrant II, cos a
2 6 0, so use the -  sign in formula (11)  
to get
 cos a
2 = - A
1 + cos a
2
= - R
1 + a -  3
5b
2
 = -  R
2
5
2 = -  1
25
= -  15
5
•
Example 7
Solution

530 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
(c)	 Because a
2 lies in quadrant II, tan a
2 6 0, so use the -  sign in formula (12)  
to get
tan a
2 = - A
1 - cos a
1 + cos a = -
b
1 - a -  3
5b
1 + a -  3
5b
= -
b
8
5
2
5
= -2
Another way to solve Example 7(c) is to use the results of parts (a) and (b).
tan a
2 =
sin a
2
cos a
2
=
225
5
-  15
5
= -2
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  9 ( c )  a n d  ( d )
There is a formula for tan a
2 that does not contain + and -  signs, making it 
more useful than formula (12). To derive it, use the formulas
1 - cos a = 2 sin2 a
2 
Formula (9)
and
sin a = sinc 2aa
2 b d = 2 sin a
2 cos a
2 
Double-angle Formula (1)
Then
1 - cos a
sin a
=
2 sin2 a
2
2 sin a
2 cos a
2
=
sin a
2
cos a
2
= tan a
2
Because it also can be shown that
1 - cos a
sin a
=
sin a
1 + cos a
this results in the following two Half-angle Formulas:
•
Half-angle Formulas for tan A
2
	
tan a
2 = 1 - cos a
sin a
=
sin a
1 + cos a	
(13)
With this formula, the solution to Example 7(c) can be obtained as follows:
 cos a = -  3
5
  p 6 a 6 3p
2
 sin a = - 21 - cos2 a = - A1 - 9
25 = - A
16
25 = -  4
5
Then, by equation (13),
tan a
2 = 1 - cos a
sin a
=
1 - a -  3
5b
-  4
5
=
8
5
-  4
5
= -2

Section 7.6  Double-angle and Half-angle Formulas  531
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 cos12u2 = cos2 u -  
=  
- 1 = 1 -  
.
	 2.	 sin2 u
2 =
 
2
.
	 3.	 tan u
2 = 1 - cos u
 
.
	 4.	 True or False  tan12u2 =
2 tan u
1 - tan2 u 
	 5.	 True or False   sin12u2 has two equivalent forms:
2 sin u cos u and sin2 u - cos2 u 
	 6.	 True or False  tan12u2 + tan12u2 = tan14u2 
	 7.	 Choose the expression that completes the Half-angle  
Formula for cosine functions: cos a
2 =                
(a)	 { A
1 - cos a
2
	
(b)  { A
1 + cos a
2
(c)	 { A
cos a - sin a
2
	
(d)  { A
1 - cos a
1 + cos a 
	 8.	 If sin  a = { A
1 - cos u
2
, then which of the following  
describes how the value of u is related to the value of a?
(a)	 u = a    (b)  u = a
2    (c)  u = 2a    (d)  u = a2 
7.6  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 9–20, use the information given about the angle u, 0 … u 6 2p, to find the exact value of:
(a)	sin12u2      (b)  cos12u2      (c)  sin u
2      (d)  cos u
2
	 9.	 sin u = 3
5, 0 6 u 6 p
2 	
10.	 cos u = 3
5, 0 6 u 6 p
2 	
11.	 tan u = 1
2, p 6 u 6 3p
2
	 12.	 tan u = 4
3, p 6 u 6 3p
2  	
13.	 sin u = -  13
3 , 3p
2
6 u 6 2p	
14.	 cos u = -  16
3 , p
2 6 u 6 p 
	 15.	 csc u = - 25, cos u 6 0	
16.	 sec u = 3, sin u 7 0 	
17.	 sec u = 2, csc u 6 0
	 18.	 cot u = - 2, sec u 6 0 	
19.	 cot u = 3, cos u 6 0	
20.	 tan u = -3, sin u 6 0 
In Problems 21–30, use the Half-angle Formulas to find the exact value of each expression.
	 21.	 sin 22.5° 
	
22.	 cos 22.5° 
	
23.	 tan 9p
8  
	
24.	 tan 7p
8   
	 25.	 sin 195° 
	
26.	 cos 165° 
	
27.	 csc 7p
8 	
28.	 sec 15p
8  
	 29.	 cosa-  3p
8 b 
	
	 	
30.	 sina-  p
8 b  
In Problems 31–42, use the figures to evaluate each function, given that f1x2 = sin x, g1x2 = cos x, and h1x2 = tan x.
y
x
(a, 2)
x2  y2  5
u
y
x
(  , b)
x2  y2  1
a
1–4
	 31.	 g12u2
	
32.	 f12u2  
	
33.	 f  au
2b 
	 34.	gau
2b 
	 35.	 hau
2b 
	
36.	 h12u2  
	
37.	 f12a2 
	
38.	 g12a2  
	 39.	 gaa
2 b 
	
40.	 f aa
2 b  
	
41.	 h12a2 
	
42.	 haa
2 b  
	 43.	 Show that sin4 u = 3
8 - 1
2 cos12u2 + 1
8 cos14u2.
	 44.	 Show that sin14u2 = 1cos u2 14 sin u - 8 sin3 u2.
	 45.	 Develop a formula for cos13u2 as a third-degree polynomial 
in the variable cos u.
	 46.	 Develop a formula for cos14u2 as a fourth-degree  
polynomial in the variable cos u.

532 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
In Problems 49–70, establish each identity.
	 49.	 cot u - tan u
cot u + tan u = cos12u2	
50.	 cos4 u - sin4 u = cos12u2 	
51.	 cot12u2 = 1
2
 1cot u - tan u2
	 52.	 cot12u2 = cot2 u - 1
2 cot u
 	
53.	 csc12u2 = 1
2 sec u csc u	
54.	 sec12u2 =
sec2 u
2 - sec2 u 
	 55.	 14 sin u cos u2 11 - 2 sin2 u2 = sin14u2	 56.	cos212u2 - sin212u2 = cos14u2 	
57.	 sin2 u cos2 u = 1
8
 31 - cos14u2 4
	 58.	
cos12u2
1 + sin12u2 = cot u - 1
cot u + 1 	
59.	 csc2 u
2 =
2
1 - cos u	
60.	 sec2 u
2 =
2
1 + cos u 
	 61.	 tan v
2 = csc v - cot v	
62.	 cot2 v
2 = sec v + 1
sec v - 1 	
63.	 1 - 1
2 sin12u2 = sin3 u + cos3 u
sin u + cos u
	 64.	 cos u =
1 - tan2 u
2
1 + tan2 u
2
 	
65.	 cos u + sin u
cos u - sin u - cos u - sin u
cos u + sin u = 2 tan12u2
	 66.	
sin13u2
sin u
-
cos13u2
cos u
= 2 	
67.	 tan13u2 = 3 tan u - tan3 u
1 - 3 tan2 u
	 68.	 tan u + tan1u + 120°2 + tan1u + 240°2 = 3 tan13u2	
69.	 ln 0 cos u0 = 1
2
 1ln 0 1 + cos12u2 0 - ln 22
	 70.	 ln 0 sin u0 = 1
2
 1ln 0 1 - cos12u2 0 - ln 22 
In Problems 71–80, solve each equation on the interval 0 … u 6 2p.
	 71.	 cos12u2 + 6 sin2 u = 4	
72.	 cos12u2 = 2 - 2 sin2 u	
73.	 sin12u2 = cos u 
	 74.	 cos12u2 = cos u  
	
75.	 cos12u2 + cos14u2 = 0	
76.	 sin12u2 + sin14u2 = 0 
	 77.	 cos12u2 + 5 cos u + 3 = 0 
	
78.	 3 - sin u = cos12u2  
	 79.	 tan12u2 + 2 cos u = 0 
	
80.	 tan12u2 + 2 sin u = 0  
	 47.	 Find an expression for sin15u2 as a fifth-degree polynomial 
in the variable sin u.
	 48.	 Find an expression for cos15u2 as a fifth-degree polynomial 
in the variable cos u.
Mixed Practice
In Problems 81–92, find the exact value of each expression.
	 81.	 sina2 sin-1 1
2b 
	
82.	 sinc 2 sin-1 13
2 d  
	
83.	 cosa2 sin-1 3
5b 
	
84.	 cosa2 cos-1 4
5b 
	 85.	 tanc 2 cos-1a-  3
5b d  
	
86.	 tana2 tan-1 3
4b 
	
87.	 sina2 cos-1 4
5b 
	
88.	 cosc 2 tan-1a-  4
3b d  
	 89.	 sin2a1
2 cos-1 3
5b 
	
90.	 cos2a1
2 sin-1 3
5b 
	
91.	 seca2 tan-1 3
4b 
	
92.	 cscc 2 sin-1a-  3
5b d  
In Problems 93–95, find the real zeros of each trigonometric function on the interval 0 … u 6 2p.
	 93.	 f1x2 = sin12x2 - sin x 
	
94.	 f1x2 = cos12x2 + cos x 
	
95.	 f1x2 = cos12x2 + sin2 x 
Applications and Extensions
	 96.	 Constructing a Rain Gutter  A rain gutter is to be constructed 
of aluminum sheets 12 inches wide. After marking off a 
length of 4 inches from each edge, the builder bends this 
length up at an angle u. See the illustration. The area A of 
the opening as a function of u is given by
A1u2 = 16 sin u1cos u + 12 0° 6 u 6 90°
θ
θ
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
12 in.

Section 7.6  Double-angle and Half-angle Formulas  533
(a)	 In calculus, you will be asked to find the angle u that 
maximizes A by solving the equation
cos12u2 + cos u = 0, 0° 6 u 6 90°
Solve this equation for u. 
(b)	 What is the maximum area A of the opening?
(c)	 Graph A = A1u2, 0° … u … 90°, and find the angle u 
that maximizes the area A. Also find the maximum area. 
	 97.	 Laser Projection  In a laser projection system, the opti-
cal or scanning angle u is related to the throw distance D 
from the scanner to the screen and the projected image 
width W by the equation
D =
1
2W
csc u - cot u
	
	 Use the given information to answer parts (a) and (b).
(a)	 Show that the projected image width is given by
W = 2D tan u
2
(b)	 Find the optical angle if the throw distance is 14 feet and 
the projected image width is 6.5 feet. 
Source: Pangolin Laser Systems, Inc.
	 98.	 Product of Inertia The product of inertia for an area about 
inclined axes is given by the formula
Iuv = Ix sin u cos u - Iy sin u cos u + Ixy1cos2 u - sin2 u2
Show that this is equivalent to
Iuv =
Ix - Iy
2
 sin12u2 + Ixy cos12u2
Source: Adapted from Hibbeler, Engineering Mechanics: 
Statics, 13th ed., Pearson © 2013.
	 99.	 Projectile Motion  An object is propelled upward at an  
angle u, 45° 6 u 6 90°, to the horizontal with an initial  
velocity of v0 feet per second from the base of a plane that 
makes an angle of 45° with the horizontal. See the illustration. 
If air resistance is ignored, the distance R that it travels up 
the inclined plane is given by the function
R1u2 = v2
0
 22
16
 cos u1sin u - cos u2
(c)	 What is the maximum distance R if v0 = 32 feet per 
second? 
(d)	 Graph R = R1u2, 45° … u … 90°, and find the angle u 
that maximizes the distance R. Also find the maximum 
distance. Use v0 = 32 feet per second. Compare the  
results with the answers found in parts (b) and (c).
	100.	 Sawtooth Curve  An oscilloscope often displays a sawtooth 
curve. This curve can be approximated by sinusoidal curves 
of varying periods and amplitudes. A first approximation to 
the sawtooth curve is given by
y = 1
2 sin12px2 + 1
4 sin14px2
Show that y = sin12px2 cos21px2.
(a)	 Show that
R1u2 = v2
0
 22
32
 3sin12u2 - cos12u2 - 14
(b)	 In calculus, you will be asked to find the angle u that 
maximizes R by solving the equation
sin12u2 + cos12u2 = 0
	
Solve this equation for u. 
45°
R
θ
50mv
V1
2B. Gm.V
Trig
TVline
OH1
Obase1
	101.	 Area of an Isosceles Triangle Show that the area A of an 
isosceles triangle whose equal sides are of length s, and u is 
the angle between them is
A = 1
2
 s2 sin u
[Hint: See the illustration. The height h bisects the angle u 
and is the perpendicular bisector of the base.]
h
s
s
u
	102.	 Geometry A rectangle is inscribed in a semicircle of radius 1. 
See the illustration.
y
x
u
1
(a)	 Express the area A of the rectangle as a function of the 
angle u shown in the illustration. 
(b)	 Show that A1u2 = sin12u2. 
(c)	 Find the angle u that results in the largest area A. 
(d)	 Find the dimensions of this largest rectangle.
	103.	 If x = 2 tan u, express sin12u2 as a function of x.
	104.	 If x = 2 tan u, express cos12u2 as a function of x.
	105.	 Find the value of the number C:
1
2 cos2 x + C = 1
4 cos12x2 
	106.	 Find the value of the number C:
1
2 cos2 x + C = 1
4 cos12x2 

534 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
	107.	 If z = tan a
2 , show that cot a = 1 - z2
2z
.
	108.	 If z = tan a
2 , show that cos a = 1 - z2
1 + z2.
	109.	 Graph 
f1x2 = sin2 x =
1 - cos12x2
2
 
for 
0 … x … 2p  
by using transformations.
	110.	 Repeat Problem 109 for g1x2 = cos2 x.
	111.	 Use the fact that
cos p
12 = 1
4
 1 26 + 222
to find sin p
24 and cos p
24.
	112.	 Show that
cos p
8 = 32 + 22
2
and use it to find sin p
16 and cos p
16.
	113.	 Show that
sin3 u + sin31u + 120°2 + sin31u + 240°2 = -  3
4 sin13u2
	114.	 If tan u = a tan u
3, express tan u
3 in terms of a.
	115.	 For cos (2x) + (2m - 1)sin x + m - 1 = 0, find m such 
that there is exactly one real solution for x, - p
2 … x … p
2.†
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	116.	 Go to the library and research Chebyshëv polynomials. Write a report on your findings.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 117–120 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	117.	 Find an equation of the line that contains the point (2, - 3) and is perpendicular to the line y = - 2x + 9. 
	118.	 Graph f(x) = - x2 + 6x + 7. Label the vertex and any intercepts.
	119.	 Find the exact value of  sin ¢2p
3 ≤-  cos ¢4p
3 ≤. 
	120.	 Graph y = -2 cos ¢p
2x≤. Show at least two periods.
7.7  Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas
	
Objectives	 	1  Express Products as Sums (p. 534)
	
	 	2  Express Sums as Products (p. 535)
Express Products as Sums
Sum and difference formulas can be used to derive formulas for writing the products 
of sines and/or cosines as sums or differences. These identities are usually called the 
Product-to-Sum Formulas.
1
Product-to-Sum Formulas
	
 sin a sin b = 1
2
 3cos1a - b2 - cos1a + b24	
(1)
	
 cos a cos b = 1
2
 3cos1a - b2 + cos1a + b24	
(2)
	
 sin a cos b = 1
2
 3sin1a + b2 + sin1a - b24	
(3)
Theorem
These formulas do not have to be memorized. Instead, remember how they are 
derived. Then, when you want to use them, either look them up or derive them, as 
needed.
†Courtesy of Joliet Junior College Mathematics Department

Section 7.7  Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas  535
To derive formulas (1) and (2), write down the sum and difference formulas for 
the cosine:
	
 cos1a - b2 = cos a cos b + sin a sin b	
(4)
	
 cos1a + b2 = cos a cos b - sin a sin b	
(5)
To derive formula (1), subtract equation (5) from equation (4) to get
cos1a - b2 - cos1a + b2 = 2 sin a sin b
from which
sin a sin b = 1
2
 3cos1a - b2 - cos1a + b2 4
To derive formula (2), add equations (4) and (5) to get
cos1a - b2 + cos1a + b2 = 2 cos a cos b
from which
cos a cos b = 1
2
 3cos1a - b2 + cos1a + b2 4
To derive Product-to-Sum Formula (3), use the sum and difference formulas for 
sine in a similar way. (You are asked to do this in Problem 53.)
Expressing Products as Sums
Express each of the following products as a sum containing only sines or only  
cosines.
(a)	 sin16u2 sin14u2      (b)  cos13u2 cos u      (c)  sin13u2 cos15u2
(a)	 Use formula (1) to get
 sin16u2 sin14u2 = 1
2
 3cos16u - 4u2 - cos16u + 4u2 4
 = 1
2
 3cos12u2 - cos110u2 4
(b)	 Use formula (2) to get
 cos13u2 cos u = 1
2
 3cos13u - u2 + cos13u + u2 4
 = 1
2
 3cos12u2 + cos14u2 4
(c)	 Use formula (3) to get
 sin13u2 cos15u2 = 1
2
 3sin13u + 5u2 + sin13u - 5u2 4
 = 1
2
 3sin18u2 + sin1-2u2 4 = 1
2
 3sin18u2 - sin12u2 4
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Express Sums as Products
The Sum-to-Product Formulas are given next.
Example 1
Solution
•
2
Sum-to-Product Formulas
	
 sin a + sin b = 2 sin a + b
2
 cos a - b
2
	
(6)
	
 sin a - sin b = 2 sin a - b
2
 cos a + b
2
	
(7)
	
 cos a + cos b = 2 cos a + b
2
 cos a - b
2
	
(8)
	
 cos a - cos b = -2 sin a + b
2
 sin a - b
2
	
(9)
Theorem

536 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Formula (6) is derived here. The derivations of formulas (7) through (9) are left 
as exercises (see Problems 54 through 56).
Proof 
 2 sin a + b
2
 cos a - b
2
= 2 # 1
2
 c sinaa + b
2
+ a - b
2
b + sinaa + b
2
- a - b
2
b d
 = sin 2a
2 + sin 2b
2
= sin a + sin b
Expressing Sums (or Differences) as Products
Express each sum or difference as a product of sines and/or cosines.
(a)	 sin15u2 - sin13u2        (b)  cos13u2 + cos12u2
(a)	 Use formula (7) to get
 sin15u2 - sin13u2 = 2 sin 5u - 3u
2
 cos 5u + 3u
2
 = 2 sin u cos14u2
(b)	  cos13u2 + cos12u2 = 2 cos 3u + 2u
2
 cos 3u - 2u
2
	
 = 2 cos 5u
2  cos u
2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
c
Product-to-Sum Formula (3)
■
Example 2
Solution
Formula (8)
•
7.7  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 1–6, find the exact value of each expression.
	 1.	 cos 285° # cos 195°  
	
2.	 sin 195° # cos 75° 
	
3.	 sin 75° + sin 15° 
	 4.	 sin 285° # sin 75°  
	
5.	 sin 255° - sin 15° 
	
6.	 cos 255° - cos 195°  
In Problems 7–16, express each product as a sum containing only sines or only cosines.
	 7.	 sin14u2 sin12u2
	 8.	 cos14u2 cos12u2
	 9.	 sin13u2 sin15u2
	 10.	 sin14u2 cos12u2 
	 11.	 sin14u2 cos16u2
	 12.	  cos13u2 cos15u2
	 13.	 cos13u2 cos14u2
	 14.	  sin u sin12u2
	 15.	 sin u
2 cos 5u
2
	 16.	 sin 3u
2  cos u
2 
In Problems 17–24, express each sum or difference as a product of sines and/or cosines.
	 17.	 sin14u2 - sin12u2	
18.	 sin14u2 + sin12u2	
19.	 cos15u2 - cos13u2	
20.	 cos12u2 + cos14u2 
	 21.	 cos u + cos13u2	
22.	 sin u + sin13u2 	
23.	 sin u
2 - sin 3u
2 	
24.	 cos u
2 - cos 3u
2  
In Problems 25–42, establish each identity.
	 25.	
cos u + cos13u2
2 cos12u2
= cos u	
26.	
sin u + sin13u2
2 sin12u2
= cos u 	
27.	
cos u - cos13u2
sin13u2 - sin u = tan12u2
	 28.	
sin14u2 + sin12u2
cos14u2 + cos12u2 = tan13u2 	
29.	
cos u - cos15u2
sin u + sin15u2 = tan12u2	
30.	
cos u - cos13u2
sin u + sin13u2 = tan u 
	 31.	 sin u3sin13u2 + sin15u2 4 = cos u3cos13u2 - cos15u2 4	
32.	 sin u3sin u + sin13u2 4 = cos u3cos u - cos13u2 4 
	 33.	
sin14u2 - sin18u2
cos14u2 - cos18u2 = - cot16u2	
34.	
sin14u2 + sin18u2
cos14u2 + cos18u2 = tan16u2 
	 35.	
cos14u2 - cos18u2
cos14u2 + cos18u2 = tan12u2 tan16u2	
36.	
sin14u2 + sin18u2
sin14u2 - sin18u2 = -  
tan16u2
tan12u2  

Section 7.7  Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas  537
	 37.	 cos a + cos b
cos a - cos b = - cot a + b
2
 cot a - b
2
	
38.	 sin a + sin b
sin a - sin b = tan a + b
2
 cot a - b
2
 
	 39.	 sin a - sin b
cos a - cos b = - cot a + b
2
	
40.	 sin a + sin b
cos a + cos b = tan a + b
2
 
	 41.	 1 - cos12u2 + cos14u2 - cos16u2 = 4 sin u cos12u2 sin13u2        42.  1 + cos12u2 + cos14u2 + cos16u2 = 4 cos u cos12u2 cos13u2 
In Problems 43–46, solve each equation on the interval 0 … u 6 2p.
	 43.	 cos12u2 + cos14u2 = 0 
	
44.	 sin12u2 + sin 14u2 = 0  
	 45.	 sin14u2 - sin16u2 = 0 
	 46.	 cos14u2 - cos16u2 = 0 
Applications and Extensions
	 47.	 Touch-Tone Phones On a Touch-Tone phone, each button 
produces a unique sound. The sound produced is the sum of 
two tones, given by
y = sin12plt2 and y = sin12pht2
	
	 where l and h are the low and high frequencies (cycles per 
second) shown on the illustration. For example, if you touch 7, 
the low frequency is l = 852 cycles per second and the high 
frequency is h = 1209 cycles per second. The sound emitted 
when you touch 7 is
y = sin32p18522t4 + sin32p112092t4
necessary to compute moments of inertia with respect to a set 
of rotated axes. These moments are given by the equations
 Iu = Ix cos2 u + Iy sin2 u - 2Ixy sin u cos u
and
 Iv = Ix sin2 u + Iy cos2 u + 2Ixy sin u cos u
Use the Product-to-Sum formulas to show that
Iu =
Ix + Iy
2
+
Ix - Iy
2
 cos(2u) - Ixy sin(2u)
and
Iv =
Ix + Iy
2
-
Ix - Iy
2
 cos(2u) + Ixy sin(2u)
Source: Adapted from Hibbeler, Engineering Mechanics: 
Statics, 13th ed., Pearson © 2013.
	 50.	 Projectile Motion  The range R of a projectile propelled 
downward from the top of an inclined plane at an angle u to 
the inclined plane is given by
R1u2 =
2v0
2 sin u cos1u - f2
g cos2 f
where v0 is the initial velocity of the projectile, f is the angle 
the plane makes with respect to the horizontal, and g is  
acceleration due to gravity.
(a)	 Show that for fixed v0 and f, the maximum range down 
the incline is given by Rmax =
v0
2
g11 - sin f2 .
(b)	 Determine the maximum range if the projectile has an 
initial velocity of 50 meters/second, the angle of the 
plane is f = 35°, and g = 9.8 meters/second2. 
	 51.	 If a + b + g = p, show that
sin12a2 + sin12b2 + sin12g2 = 4 sin a sin b sin g
	 52.	 If a + b + g = p, show that
tan a + tan b + tan g = tan a tan b tan g    
	 53.	 Derive formula (3).	
54.	 Derive formula (7).
	 55.	 Derive formula (8).	
56.	 Derive formula (9).
697
cycles/sec
770
cycles/sec
852
cycles/sec
941
cycles/sec
1477
 cycles/sec
1336
 cycles/sec
1209
 cycles/sec
11
22
33
44
55
66
77
88
99
**
00
##
Touch-Tone phone
(a)	 Write this sound as a product of sines and/or cosines.
(b)	 Determine the maximum value of y. 
(c)	 Graph the sound emitted when 7 is touched.
	 48.	 Touch-Tone Phones
(a)	 Write, as a product of sines and/or cosines, the sound 
emitted when the # key is touched.
(b)	 Determine the maximum value of y. 
(c)	 Graph the sound emitted when the # key is touched.
	 49.	 Moment of Inertia  The moment of inertia I of an object is a 
measure of how easy it is to rotate the object about some 
fixed point. In engineering mechanics, it is sometimes  
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 57–60 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 57.	 Solve: 27x-1 = 9x+5 
   
58.  For y = 5 cos (4x - p), find the amplitude, the period, and the phase shift.
	 59.	 Find the exact value of  cos ¢csc -1 7
5≤. 
	 60.	 Find the inverse function f -1 of f (x) = 3 sin x - 5, - p
2 … x …
p
2 . Find the range of f and the domain and range of f -1.

538 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Definitions of the six inverse trigonometric functions
	
 y = sin-1 x  means  x = sin y  where  - 1 … x … 1, -  p
2 … y … p
2 	
(p. 476)
	
 y = cos-1 x  means  x = cos y  where  - 1 … x … 1, 0 … y … p	
(p. 479)
	
 y = tan-1 x  means  x = tan y  where  - q 6 x 6 q, -  p
2 6 y 6 p
2   (p. 482)
	
 y = sec-1 x  means  x = sec y  where  0 x0 Ú 1, 0 … y … p, y ≠p
2 	
(p. 489)
	
 y = csc-1 x  means  x = csc y  where  0 x0 Ú 1, -  p
2 … y … p
2 , y ≠0	 (p. 489)
	
 y = cot-1 x  means  x = cot y  where  - q 6 x 6 q, 0 6 y 6 p	
(p. 489)
Sum and Difference Formulas (pp. 512, 515, and 517)
	
 cos1a + b2 = cos a cos b - sin a sin b	
 cos1a - b2 = cos a cos b + sin a sin b
	
 sin1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b	
 sin1a - b2 = sin a cos b - cos a sin b
	
 tan1a + b2 =
tan a + tan b
1 - tan a tan b	
 tan1a - b2 =
tan a - tan b
1 + tan a tan b
Double-angle Formulas (pp. 525 and 526)
	
sin12u2 = 2 sin u cos u	
cos12u2 = cos2 u - sin2 u	
tan12u2 =
2 tan u
1 - tan2 u
	
cos12u2 = 2 cos2 u - 1	
cos12u2 = 1 - 2 sin2 u
Half-angle Formulas (pp. 528 and 530)
	
sin2 a
2 = 1 - cos a
2
	
cos2 a
2 = 1 + cos a
2
	
tan2 a
2 = 1 - cos a
1 + cos a
	
sin a
2 = { A
1 - cos a
2
 	
cos a
2 =
{ A
1 + cos a
2
	
tan a
2 = { A
1 - cos a
1 + cos a = 1 - cos a
sin a
=
sin a
1 + cos a
where the + or -  sign is determined by the quadrant of a
2.
Product-to-Sum Formulas (p. 534)
	
sin a sin b = 1
2
 3cos1a - b2 - cos1a + b2 4
	
cos a cos b = 1
2
 3cos1a - b2 + cos1a + b2 4
	
sin a cos b = 1
2
 3sin1a + b2 + sin1a - b2 4
Sum-to-Product Formulas (p. 535)
	
sin a + sin b = 2 sin a + b
2
 cos a - b
2
	
sin a - sin b = 2 sin a - b
2
 cos a + b
2
	
cos a + cos b = 2 cos a + b
2
 cos a - b
2
 	
cos a - cos b = - 2 sin a + b
2
 sin a - b
2

Chapter Review  539
Objectives
Section	 You should be able to . . .	
Example(s)	
Review Exercises
7.1	
1	
Find the exact value of an inverse sine function (p. 476)	
1, 2, 6, 7, 9	
1–6
	
2	
Find an approximate value of an inverse sine function (p. 477)	
3	
76–78
	
3	
Use properties of inverse functions to find exact values of certain  
	
	
composite functions (p. 478)	
4, 5, 8	
9–17
	
4	
Find the inverse function of a trigonometric function (p. 483)	
10	
24, 25
	
5	
Solve equations involving inverse trigonometric functions (p. 484)	
11	
84, 85
7.2	
1	
Find the exact value of expressions involving the inverse sine, cosine,  
	
	
and tangent functions (p. 488)	
1–3	
18–21, 23
	
2	
Define the inverse secant, cosecant, and cotangent functions (p. 489)	
4	
7, 8, 22
	
3	
Use a calculator to evaluate sec-1 x, csc-1 x, and cot-1 x (p. 490)	
5	
79, 80
	
4	 Write a trigonometric expression as an algebraic expression (p. 491)	
6	
26, 27
7.3	
1	
Solve equations involving a single trigonometric function (p. 494)	
1–5	
64–68
	
2	
Solve trigonometric equations using a calculator (p. 497)	
6	
69
	
3	
Solve trigonometric equations quadratic in form (p. 497)	
7	
72
	
4	
Solve trigonometric equations using fundamental identities (p. 498)	
8, 9	
70, 71, 73
	
5	
Solve trigonometric equations using a graphing utility (p. 499)	
10	
81–83
7.4	
1	
Use algebra to simplify trigonometric expressions (p. 505)	
1	
28–44
	
2	
Establish identities (p. 506)	
2–8	
28–36
7.5	
1	
Use sum and difference formulas to find exact values (p. 513)	
1–5	
45–50, 53–57(a)–(d), 86
	
2	
Use sum and difference formulas to establish identities (p. 516)	
6–8	
37, 38
	
3	
Use sum and difference formulas involving inverse trigonometric  
	
	
functions (p. 518)	
9, 10	
58–61
	
4	
Solve trigonometric equations linear in sine and cosine (p. 519)	
11, 12	
75
7.6	
1	
Use double-angle formulas to find exact values (p. 525)	
1	
53–57(e), (f), 62, 63, 87
	
2	
Use double-angle formulas to establish identities (p. 525)	
2–5	
40, 41, 74
	
3	
Use half-angle formulas to find exact values (p. 528)	
6, 7	
51, 52, 53–57(g), (h), 86
7.7	
1	
Express products as sums (p. 534)	
1	
42
	
2	
Express sums as products (p. 535)	
2	
43, 44
Review Exercises
In Problems 1–8, find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
	 1.	 sin-1 1 
	
2.	 cos-1 0 
	
3.	 tan-1 1 
	
4.	 sin-1a-  1
2b 
	 5.	 cos-1a-  13
2 b 
	
6.	 tan-11 - 232 
	
7.	 sec-122 
	
8.	 cot-11- 12 
In Problems 9–23, find the exact value, if any, of each composite function. If there is no value, say it is “not defined.” Do not use a calculator.
	 9.	 sin-1asin 3p
8 b 
	
10.	 cos-1acos 3p
4 b 
	
11.	 tan-1atan 2p
3 b 
	
12.	 cos-1acos 15p
7 b 
	 13.	 sin-1c sina- 8p
9 b d  
	
14.	 sin1sin-1  0.92 
	
15.	 cos(cos-1  0.6) 
	
16.	  tan 3tan-1 54 
	 17.	 cos3cos-11- 1.62 4	
18.	 sin-1acos 2p
3 b 
	
19.	 cos-1atan 3p
4 b 
	
20.	 tanc sin-1a-  13
2 b d    

540 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry
	 21.	 secatan-1 13
3 b 
	
22.	 sinacot-1 3
4b 
	
23.	 tanc sin-1a-  4
5b d  
In Problems 24 and 25, find the inverse function f -1 of each function f. Find the range of f and the domain and range of f -1.
	 24.	 f1x2 = 2 sin13x2 -  p
6 … x …
p
6
	 25.	 f1x2 = - cos x + 3  0 … x … p
In Problems 26 and 27, write each trigonometric expression as an algebraic expression in u.
	 26.	 cos1sin-1  u2 
	
27.	 tan1csc-1 u2 
In Problems 28–44, establish each identity.
	 28.	 tan u cot u - sin2 u = cos2 u	
29.	 cos2 u11 + tan2 u2 = 1	
30.	 5 cos2 u + 3 sin2 u = 3 + 2 cos2 u
	 31.	 1 - cos u
sin u
+
sin u
1 - cos u = 2 csc u	
32.	
cos u
cos u - sin u =
1
1 - tan u	
33.	
csc u
1 + csc u = 1 - sin u
cos2 u
	 34.	 sec u - cos u = sin u tan u	
35.	 1 + cos u
cosec u
=
sin3 u
1 - cos u	
36.	 1 - 2 sin2 u
sin u cos u
= cot u - tan u
	 37.	
sin1a - b2
cos a cos b = tan a - tan b	
38.	
cos1a - b2
cos a cos b = 1 + tan a tan b	
39.	 11 + cos u2 tan u
2 = sin u
	 40.	 2 cot u cot12u2 = cot2 u - 1	
41.	 1 - 8 sin2 u cos2 u = cos14u2	
42.	
sin13u2 cos u - sin u cos13u2
sin12u2
= 1
	 43.	
sin12u2 + sin14u2
cos12u2 + cos14u2 = tan13u2	
44.	
cos12u2 - cos14u2
cos12u2 + cos14u2 - tan u tan13u2 = 0
In Problems 45–52, find the exact value of each expression.
	 45.	 cos 75° 
	
46.	 sin 135° 
	 47.	 sin 7p
12  
	
48.	 tan 5p
4  
	 49.	 sin 50° cos 40° + sin 40° cos 50° 
	
50.	 cos 100° cos 10° + sin 100° sin 10° 
	 51.	 cot p
12 
	
52.	 cos 3p
8  
In Problems 53–57, use the information given about the angles a and b to find the exact value of:
(a)  sin1a + b2	
(b)  cos1a + b2	
(c)  sin1a - b2	
(d)  tan1a + b2
(e)  sin12a2	
(f)  cos12b2	
(g)  sin b
2	
(h)  cos a
2
	 53.	 cos a = 3
4, 0 6 a 6 p
2; cos b = 3
5, p
2 6 b 6 p	
54.	 cosec a = 3, 0 6 a 6 p
2; cosec b = -2, -  p
2 6 b 6 0
	 55.	 tan a = 3
4, p 6 a 6 3p
2 ; tan b = 12
5 , 0 6 b 6 p
2 	
56.	 sec a = 2, -  p
2 6 a 6 0; sec b = 3, 3p
2
6 b 6 2p
	 57.	 sin a = -  2
3, p 6 a 6 3p
2 ; cos b = -  2
3, p 6 b 6 3p
2
In Problems 58–63, find the exact value of each expression.
	 58.	 sinc tan-1 a7
3b + tan-1a-  3
5b d  
	
59.	 tanc cos-1 a- 5
12b - cos-1 a3
4b d  
	 60.	 tanc sin-1a-  1
2b - tan-1 3
4 d  
	
61.	 cosc tan-11- 12 + cos-1a-  4
5b d  
	 62.	 sinc 2 cos-1a-  3
5b d  
	
63.	 cosa2 tan-1 4
3b 

Chapter Test  541
In Problems 64–75, solve each equation on the interval 0 … u 6 2p.
	 64.	 cos u = 1
2 
	
65.	 tan u + 23 = 0 
	
66.	 sin12u2 + 1 = 0 
	 67.	 tan12u2 = 0 
	
68.	 sec2 u = 4 
	
69.	 0.2 sin u = 0.05 
	 70.	 sin u + sin12u2 = 0 
	
71.	 sin12u2 - cos u - 2 sin u + 1 = 0 
	 72.	 2 sin2 u - 3 sin  u + 1 = 0 
	
73.	 4 sin2 u = 1 + 4 cos u 
	 74.	 sin12u2 = 22 cos u 
	
75.	 sin u - cos u = 1 
In Problems 76–80, use a calculator to find an approximate value for each expression, rounded to two decimal places.
	 76.	 sin-1 0.7 
	
77.	 tan-11- 22 
	
78.	 cos-11- 0.22 
	 79.	 sec-1 3 
	
80.	 cot-11- 42 
In Problems 81–83, use a graphing utility to solve each equation on the interval 0 … x … 2p. Approximate any solutions rounded to two 
decimal places.
	 81.	 2x = 5 cos x 
	
82.	 2 sin x + 3 cos x = 4x 
	
83.	 sin x = ln x 
In Problems 84 and 85, find the exact solution of each equation.
	 84.	 - 3 sin-1 x = p 
	
85.	 2 cos-1 x + p = 4 cos-1 x 
	 86.	 Use a half-angle formula to find the exact value of sin 15°. Then use a difference formula to find the exact value of sin 15°. Show 
that the answers you found are the same.
	 87.	 If you are given the value of cos u and want the exact value of cos12u2, what form of the Double-angle Formula for cos12u2 is most 
efficient to use?
In Problems 1–6, find the exact value of each expression. Express angles in radians.
	 1.	 sec-1a 2
23
b 
	
2.	 sin-1a-  12
2 b 
	
3.	 sin-1asin 11p
5 b 
	 4.	 tanatan-1 7
3b 
	
5.	 cot1csc-1 2102  	
6.	 secacos-1a-  3
4b b 
In Problems 7–10, use a calculator to evaluate each expression. Express angles in radians rounded to two decimal places.
	 7.	 sin-1 0.382 
	
8.	 sec-1 1.4 
	
9.	 tan-1 3 
	
10.	 cot-1 5 
In Problems 11–16 establish each identity.
	 11.	 csc u + cot u
sec u + tan u = sec u - tan u
csc u - cot u	
12.	 sin u tan u + cos u = sec u	
13.	 tan u + cot u = 2 csc12u2
	 14.	
sin1a + b2
tan a + tan b = cos a cos b	
15.	 sin13u2 = 3 sin u - 4 sin3 u	
16.	 tan u - cot u
tan u + cot u = 1 - 2 cos2 u
In Problems 17–24 use sum, difference, product, or half-angle formulas to find the exact value of each expression.
	 17.	 cos 15° 
	
18.	 tan 75° 
	
19.	 sina1
2 cos-1 3
5b 
	 20.	 tana2 sin-1 6
11b 
	
21.	 cosasin-1 2
3 + tan-1 3
2b  	
22.	 sin 75° cos 15° 
	 23.	 sin 75° + sin 15° 
	
24.	 cos 65° cos 20° + sin 65° sin 20° 
Chapter Test
     
 
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.

In Problems 25–29, solve each equation on 0 … u 6 2p.
	 25.	 4 sin2 u - 3 = 0 
	
26.	 - 3 cosap
2 - ub = tan u	
27.	 cos2 u + 2 sin u cos u - sin2 u = 0
	 28.	 sin1u + 12 = cos u 
	
29.	 4 sin2 u + 7 sin u = 2 
Cumulative Review
	 1.	 Find the real solutions, if any, of the equation 
3x2 + x - 1 = 0.
	 2.	 Find an equation for the line containing the points 1- 2, 52 
and 14, - 12. What is the distance between these points? 
What is their midpoint?
	 3.	 Test the equation 3x + y2 = 9 for symmetry with respect to 
the x-axis, y-axis, and origin. List the intercepts.
	 4.	 Use transformations to graph the equation y = 0 x - 30 + 2.
	 5.	 Use transformations to graph the equation y = 3ex - 2.
	 6.	 Use transformations to graph the equation
y = cos ax - p
2 b - 1
	 7.	 Graph each of the following functions. Label at least three 
points on each graph. Name the inverse function of each and 
show its graph.
(a)	 y = x3	
(b)  y = ex
(c)	 y = sin x, -  p
2 … x … p
2
(d)	 y = cos x, 0 … x … p
	 8.	 If sin u = -  1
3 and p 6 u 6 3p
2 , find the exact value of:
(a)	 cos u 
	
(b)  tan u 
	
(c)  sin12u2 
(d)	 cos12u2 
	
(e)  sina1
2 ub	
(f)  cosa1
2 ub
	 9.	 Find the exact value of cos1tan-1 22. 
	 10.	 If sin a = 1
3, p
2 6 a 6 p, and cos b = -  1
3, p 6 b 6 3p
2 , 
find the exact value of:
(a)	 cos a 
	
(b)  sin b 
	
(c)  cos12a2 
(d)	 cos1a + b2  
	(e)  sin b
2 
	 11.	 Consider the function
f1x2 = 2x5 - x4 - 4x3 + 2x2 + 2x - 1
(a)	 Find the real zeros and their multiplicity.
(b)	 Find the intercepts.
(c)	 Find the power function that the graph of f resembles 
for large 0 x0 .   
(d)	 Graph f using a graphing utility.
(e)	 Approximate the turning points, if any exist.
(f)	 Use the information obtained in parts (a)–(e) to sketch 
a graph of f by hand.
(g)	 Identify the intervals on which f is increasing,  
decreasing, or constant.
	 12.	 If f1x2 = 2x2 + 3x + 1 and g1x2 = x2 + 3x + 2, solve:
(a)	 f1x2 = 0 
	
(b)  f1x2 = g1x2 
(c)	 f1x2 7 0	
(d)  f1x2 Ú g1x2
542 
CHAPTER 7  Analytic Trigonometry

Chapter Projects  543
Chapter Projects
Internet-based Project
	 I.	 Mapping Your Mind  The goal of this project is to organize 
the material learned in Chapters 6 and 7 in our minds. To 
do this, we will use mind-mapping software called Mindomo. 
Mindomo is free software that enables you to organize your 
thoughts digitally and share these thoughts with anyone on 
the Web. By organizing your thoughts, you can see the big 
picture and then communicate this big picture to others. You 
are also able to see how various concepts are related to each 
other.
	1.	 Go to http://www.mindomo.com and register. Learn how 
to use Mindomo. A video on using Mindomo can be 
found at http://www.screencast.com/t/ZPwJQDs4
	2.	 Use an Internet search engine to research Mind  
Mapping. Write a few paragraphs that explain the history 
and benefit of mind mapping.
	3.	 Create a MindMap that explains the following:
(a)  The six trigonometric functions and their properties 
(including the inverses of these functions)
(b)  The fundamental trigonometric identities
When creating your map, be creative! Perhaps you can 
share ideas about when a particular identity might be 
used, or when a particular identity cannot be used.
	4.	 Share the MindMap so that students in your class can 
view it.
The following projects are available on the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC):
	 II.	 Waves  Wave motion is described by a sinusoidal equation. The Principle of Superposition of two waves is discussed.
	III.	 Project at Motorola  Sending Pictures Wirelessly The electronic transmission of pictures is made practical by image compression, 
mathematical methods that greatly reduce the number of bits of data used to compose the picture.
	IV.	 Calculus of Differences  Finding consecutive difference quotients is called finding finite differences and is used to analyze the graph 
of an unknown function.

544
Outline
8.1	
Right Triangle Trigonometry;  
               Applications 
8.2	
The Law of Sines  
8.3	
The Law of Cosines 
8.4	
Area of a Triangle 
8.5	
Simple Harmonic Motion; Damped 
Motion; Combining Waves 
	
Chapter Review 
	
Chapter Test 
	
Cumulative Review 
	
Chapter Projects 
 A Look Back
In Chapter 6, we defined the six trigonometric functions using the unit circle. In 
particular, we learned to evaluate the trigonometric functions. We also learned 
how to graph sinusoidal functions. In Chapter 7, we defined the inverse  
trigonometric functions and solved equations involving the trigonometric  
functions.
A Look Ahead 
In this chapter, we define the trigonometric functions using right triangles and 
then use the trigonometric functions to solve applied problems. The first four 
sections deal with applications involving right triangles and oblique triangles, 
triangles that do not have a right angle. To solve problems involving oblique 
triangles, we will develop the Law of Sines and the Law of Cosines. We will also 
develop formulas for finding the area of a triangle.
The final section deals with applications of sinusoidal functions involving 
simple harmonic motion and damped motion.
Applications of 
Trigonometric Functions
 8
The Lewis and Clark Expedition
In today’s world of GPS and smart phone apps  
that can precisely track one’s whereabouts, it is  
difficult to fathom the magnitude of the challenge 
that confronted Meriwether Lewis and William Clark 
in 1804.
But Lewis and Clark managed. Commissioned 
by President Thomas Jefferson to explore the newly 
purchased Louisiana Territory, the co-captains led 
their expedition—the Corps of Discovery—on a 
journey that took nearly two and a half years and 
carried them more than 7000 miles. Starting at  
St. Louis, Missouri, they traveled up the Missouri 
River, across the Great Plains, over the Rocky  
Mountains, down the Columbia River to the Pacific Ocean, and then back.  
Along the way, using limited tools such as a compass and octant, they created  
more than 130 maps of the area with remarkable detail and accuracy.
—See Chapter Project II—

Section 8.1  Right Triangle Trigonometry; Applications  545
Find the Value of Trigonometric Functions  
of Acute Angles Using Right Triangles
A triangle in which one angle is a right angle 190°2 is called a right triangle. Recall 
that the side opposite the right angle is called the hypotenuse, and the remaining 
two sides are called the legs of the triangle. In Figure 1(a), the hypotenuse is labeled 
as c to indicate that its length is c units, and, in a like manner, the legs are labeled as a 
and b. Because the triangle is a right triangle, the Pythagorean Theorem tells us that
a2 + b2 = c2
Figure 1(a) also shows the angle u. The angle u is an acute angle: that is,
0° 6 u 6 90° for u measured in degrees and 0 6 u 6 p
2  for u measured in radians.
Place u in standard position, as shown in Figure 1(b). Then the coordinates of the 
point P are 1a, b2. Also, P is a point on the terminal side of u that is on the circle 
x2 + y2 = c2. (Do you see why?)
1
8.1	 Right Triangle Trigonometry; Applications
• Pythagorean Theorem (Appendix A, Section A.2,  
pp. 958–959)
• Trigonometric Equations (Section 7.3, pp. 494–499)
Preparing for this section Before getting started, review the following:
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 552.
	
OBJECTIVES	 1  Find the Value of Trigonometric Functions of Acute Angles Using Right
	
	 	    Triangles (p. 545)
	
	 	2  Use the Complementary Angle Theorem (p. 547)
	
	 	3  Solve Right Triangles (p. 547)
	
	 	4  Solve Applied Problems (p. 548)
Figure 1  Right triangle with acute angle u
a
b
c
Hypotenuse
(a)
u
Figure 2  Right triangle
c
b
a
Hypotenuse
Opposite u
Adjacent to u
u
Now apply the theorem on page 411 for evaluating trigonometric functions  
using a circle of radius c, x2 + y2 = c2. By referring to the lengths of the sides of the 
triangle by the names hypotenuse 1c2, opposite 1b2, and adjacent 1a2, as indicated 
in Figure 2, the trigonometric functions of u can be expressed as ratios of the sides 
of a right triangle.
	
 sin u =
Opposite
Hypotenuse = b
c    csc u = Hypotenuse
Opposite
= c
b	
 cos u =
Adjacent
Hypotenuse = a
c  
 sec u = Hypotenuse
Adjacent
= c
a	
(1)
	
 tan u = Opposite
Adjacent = b
a  
 cot u = Adjacent
Opposite = a
b	
Notice that each trigonometric function of the acute angle u is positive.
a
b
c
y
x
P  (a, b)
O
u
(b)
x 2  y 2  c2

546 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Finding the Value of  Trigonometric Functions from a Right Triangle
Find the exact value of the six trigonometric functions of the angle u in Figure 3.
In Figure 3 the two given sides of the triangle are
c = Hypotenuse = 5, a = Adjacent = 3
To find the length of the opposite side, use the Pythagorean Theorem.
 1Adjacent22 + 1Opposite22 = 1Hypotenuse22
 32 + 1Opposite22 = 52
 1Opposite22 = 25 - 9 = 16
 Opposite = 4
Now that the lengths of the three sides are known, use the ratios in equations (1) to 
find the value of each of the six trigonometric functions.
 sin u =
Opposite
Hypotenuse = 4
5  cos u =
Adjacent
Hypotenuse = 3
5  tan u = Opposite
Adjacent = 4
3
 csc u = Hypotenuse
Opposite
= 5
4  sec u = Hypotenuse
Adjacent
= 5
3  cot u = Adjacent
Opposite = 3
4
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
The values of the trigonometric functions of an acute angle are ratios of the 
lengths of the sides of a right triangle. This way of viewing the trigonometric  
functions leads to many applications and, in fact, was the point of view used by early 
mathematicians (before calculus) in studying the subject of trigonometry.
Constructing a Rain Gutter
A rain gutter is to be constructed of aluminum sheets 12 inches wide. See  
Figure 4(a). After marking off a length of 4 inches from each edge, the sides are  
bent up at an angle u. See Figure 4(b).
(a) Express the area A of the opening as a function of u.
	
[Hint: Let b denote the vertical height of the bend.]
(b)	 Graph A = A1u2. Find the angle u that makes A largest. (This bend will allow 
the most water to flow through the gutter.)
(a)	 Look again at Figure 4(b). The area A of the opening is the sum of the areas 
of two congruent right triangles and one rectangle. Look at Figure 4(c), which 
shows the triangle on the right in Figure 4(b) redrawn. We see that
cos u = a
4 so a = 4 cos u  sin u = b
4 so b = 4 sin u
The area of the triangle is
area = 1
2 1base2 1height2 = 1
2 ab = 1
2 14 cos u2 14 sin u2 = 8 sin u cos u
So the area of the two congruent triangles together is 16 sin u cos u.
	
The rectangle has length 4 and height b, so its area is
4b = 414 sin u2 = 16 sin u
Example 1
Solution
•
Example 2
Solution
Figure 3
5
Opposite
3
u
Figure 4 
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
12 in.
4 in.
4 in.
b
(b)
(a)
b
a
4
b
a
(c)

Section 8.1  Right Triangle Trigonometry; Applications  547
Figure 5 
Figure 6 
Figure 7  Right triangle
c
a
b
Adjacent to A
opposite B
Adjacent to B
opposite A
B
A
c
a
b
B
A
The area A of the opening is
 A = area of the two triangles + area of the rectangle
 A1u2 = 16 sin u cos u + 16 sin u = 16 sin u1cos u + 12
(b)	 Figure 5 shows the graph of A = A1u2. Using MAXIMUM, the angle u that 
makes A largest is 60°.
Use the Complementary Angle Theorem
Two acute angles are called complementary if their sum is a right angle, or 90°. 
Because the sum of the angles of any triangle is 180°, it follows that, for a right  
triangle, the sum of the acute angles is 90°, so the two acute angles are complementary.
Refer now to Figure 6, which labels the angle opposite side b as B and the angle 
opposite side a as A. Notice that side b is adjacent to angle A and side a is adjacent 
to angle B. As a result,
 sin B = b
c = cos A   cos B = a
c = sin A   tan B = b
a = cot A 
     
 csc B = c
b = sec A   sec B = c
a = csc A   cot B = a
b = tan A
    (2)
Because of these relationships, the functions sine and cosine, tangent and cotangent, 
and secant and cosecant are called cofunctions of each other. The identities (2) may 
be expressed in words as follows:
Complementary Angle Theorem
Cofunctions of complementary angles are equal.
Examples of this theorem are given next:
	
Complementary angles	
Complementary angles	
Complementary angles
sin 30° = cos 60°  tan 40° = cot 50°  sec 80° = csc 10°
	
Cofunctions 	
Cofunctions	
 Cofunctions
Using the Complementary Angle Theorem
(a)	 sin 62° = cos190° - 62°2 = cos 28°
(b)	 tan p
12 = cotap
2 - p
12b = cot 5p
12
(c)   sin2 40° + sin2 50° = sin2 40° + cos2 40° = 1
	
	
c
	
	
sin 50° = cos 40°
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
Solve Right Triangles
In the discussion that follows, we will always label a right triangle so that side a is 
opposite angle A, side b is opposite angle B, and side c is the hypotenuse, as shown 
in Figure 7. To solve a right triangle means to find the missing lengths of its sides 
and the measurements of its angles. We shall follow the practice of expressing the 
lengths of the sides rounded to two decimal places and expressing angles in degrees 
rounded to one decimal place. (Be sure that your calculator is in degree mode.)
•
2
Theorem
Example 3
•
3
T
T
 c
 c
T
T
T
T
 c
 c
 c
 c
0°
90°
28
24

548 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
To solve a right triangle, we need to know one of the acute angles A or B and a 
side, or else two sides (in which case the Pythagorean Theorem can be used). Also, 
because the sum of the angles of a triangle is 180°, the sum of the angles A and B in 
a right triangle must be 90°.
For the right triangle shown in Figure 7, we have
c2 = a2 + b2  A + B = 90°
Solving a Right Triangle
Use Figure 8. If b = 2 and A = 40°, find a, c, and B.
Since A = 40° and A + B = 90°, it follows that B = 50°. To find the sides a and c, 
use the facts that
tan 40° = a
2 and cos 40° = 2
c
Now solve for a and c.
a = 2 tan 40° ≈1.68 and c =
2
cos 40° ≈2.61
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
Solving a Right Triangle
Use Figure 9. If a = 3 and b = 2, find c, A, and B.
Since a = 3 and b = 2, then, by the Pythagorean Theorem, we have
 c2 = a2 + b2 = 32 + 22 = 9 + 4 = 13
 c = 213 ≈3.61
To find angle A, use the fact that
tan A = 3
2 so A = tan-1 3
2
Use a calculator with the mode set to degrees to find that A = 56.3° rounded to one 
decimal place. Since A + B = 90°, this means that B = 33.7°.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Solve Applied Problems*
In addition to developing models using right triangles, we can use right triangle  
trigonometry to measure heights and distances that are either awkward or impossible 
to measure by ordinary means. When using right triangles to solve these problems, 
pay attention to the known measures. This will indicate what trigonometric function 
to use. For example, if you know the measure of an angle and the length of the side 
adjacent to the angle, and wish to find the length of the opposite side, you would use 
the tangent function. Do you know why?
Theorem
Example 4
Solution
•
Example 5
Solution
•
4
Figure 8 
Figure 9 
40
c
B
2
a
c
A
B
3
2
Note  To avoid round-off errors when  
using a calculator, we will store unrounded  
values in memory for use in subsequent  
calculations.	
■
*In applied problems, it is important that answers be reported with both justifiable accuracy and 
appropriate significant figures. In this chapter we shall assume that the problem data are accurate 
to the number of significant digits resulting in sides being rounded to two decimal places and angles 
being rounded to one decimal place.

Section 8.1  Right Triangle Trigonometry; Applications  549
Finding the Width of a River
A surveyor can measure the width of a river 
by setting up a transit* at a point C on one 
side of the river and taking a sighting of a 
point A on the other side. Refer to Figure 10. 
After turning through an angle of 90° at C, 
the surveyor walks a distance of 200 meters 
to point B. Using the transit at B, the angle 
u is measured and found to be 20°. What is 
the width of the river rounded to the nearest 
meter?
As seen in Figure 10, the width of the river is the 
length of side b, and a and u are known. Use the 
facts that b is opposite u and a is adjacent to u 
and write
tan u = b
a
which leads to
 tan 20° =
b
200
 b = 200 tan 20° ≈72.79 meters
The width of the river is 73 meters, rounded to the nearest meter.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Finding the Inclination of a Mountain Trail
A straight trail leads from the Alpine Hotel, elevation 8000 feet, to a scenic  
overlook, elevation 11,100 feet. The length of the trail is 14,100 feet. What is the  
inclination (grade) of the trail? That is, what is the angle B in Figure 11?
Figure 11 shows that the length of the side opposite angle B is 11,100 -  8000 =  
3100 feet, and the length of the hypotenuse is 14,100 feet. The angle B obeys the 
equation
sin B =
3100
14,100
Using a calculator,
B = sin-1 3100
14,100 ≈12.7°
The inclination (grade) of the trail is approximately 12.7°.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
Vertical heights can sometimes be measured using either the angle of elevation 
or the angle of depression. If a person is looking up at an object, the acute angle 
measured from the horizontal to a line of sight to the object is called the angle of 
elevation. See Figure 12(a).
Example 6
Solution
•
Example 7
Solution
•
Figure 11 
Figure 10 
a  200 m
C
B
A
b
 20°
u
3100 ft
Trail
14,100 ft
Overlook
elevation
11,100 ft
Elevation
8000 ft
B
Hotel
*An instrument used in surveying to measure angles.

550 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
If a person is looking down at an object, the acute angle made by the line  
of sight to the object and the horizontal is called the angle of depression. See  
Figure 12(b).
Finding the Height of a Cloud
Meteorologists find the height of a cloud using an instrument called a ceilometer. 
A ceilometer consists of a light projector that directs a vertical light beam up to the 
cloud base and a light detector that scans the cloud to detect the light beam. See 
Figure 13(a). At Midway Airport in Chicago, a ceilometer was employed to find the 
height of the cloud cover. It was set up with its light detector 300 feet from its light 
projector. If the angle of elevation from the light detector to the base of the cloud 
was 75°, what was the height of the cloud cover?
Figure 13(b) illustrates the situation. To find the height h, use the fact that 
tan 75° =
h
300, so
h = 300 tan 75° ≈1120 feet
The ceiling (height to the base of the cloud cover) was approximately 1120 feet.
Now Work p r o b l e m  5 1
The idea behind Example 8 can also be used to find the height of an object that 
is positioned above ground level.
Finding the Height of a Statue on a Building
Adorning the top of the Board of Trade building in Chicago is a statue of Ceres, the 
Roman goddess of wheat. From street level, two observations are taken 400 feet 
from the center of the building. The angle of elevation to the base of the statue is 
found to be 55.1° and the angle of elevation to the top of the statue is 56.5°. See  
Figure 14(a). What is the height of the statue?
Example 8
Solution
•
Example 9
Figure 13 
Cloud
height h
Light projector
Base b
Light detector
Vertical
light
beam
u
(a)
(b)
300 ft
h
75°
Illuminated spot
on base of clouds
Figure 12 
Horizontal
(a) Angle of elevation
Object
Angle of elevation
Line of sight
Horizontal
Object
(b) Angle of depression
Angle of depression
Line of sight

Section 8.1  Right Triangle Trigonometry; Applications  551
Figure 14(b) shows two triangles that replicate Figure 14(a). The height of the 
statue of Ceres will be b′ - b. To find b and b′, refer to Figure 14(b).
Solution
400 ft
(a)
55.1°
56.5°
400 ft
(b)
55.1°
b
400 ft
56.5°
b′
Figure 14 
Figure 15 
3960 mi
3960 mi
362 ft
u
s
 tan 55.1° =
b
400   
 tan 56.5° = b′
400
 b = 400 tan 55.1° ≈573.39    b′ = 400 tan 56.5° ≈604.33
The height of the statue is approximately 604.33 - 573.39 = 30.94 feet ≈31 feet.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
The Gibb’s Hill Lighthouse, Southampton, Bermuda
In operation since 1846, the Gibb’s Hill Lighthouse stands 117 feet high on a hill  
245 feet high, so its beam of light is 362 feet above sea level. A brochure states that 
the light can be seen on the horizon about 26 miles distant. Verify the accuracy of 
this statement.
Figure 15 illustrates the situation. The central angle u, positioned at the center of 
Earth, radius 3960 miles, obeys the equation
	
cos u =
3960
3960 + 362
5280
≈0.999982687  1 mile = 5280 feet
Solving for u yields
u ≈cos-1(0.999982687) ≈0.33715° ≈20.23′
The brochure does not indicate whether the distance is measured in nautical miles 
or statute miles. Let’s calculate both distances.
The distance s in nautical miles (refer to Problem 122, p. 398) is the measure of 
the angle u in minutes, so s ≈20.23 nautical miles.
The distance s in statute miles is given by the formula s = ru, where u is 
measured in radians. Then, since
 u ≈0.33715° ≈0.00588 radian
c  
	
1° =
p
180 radian
•
Example 10
Solution

552 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
this means that
s = ru ≈139602 10.005882 ≈23.3 miles
In either case, it would seem that the brochure overstated the distance somewhat.
In navigation and surveying, the direction or bearing from a point O to a point P  
equals the acute angle u between the ray OP and the vertical line through O, the 
north–south line.
Figure 16 illustrates some bearings. Notice that the bearing from O to P1 is  
denoted by the symbolism N30°E, indicating that the bearing is 30° east of north. In 
writing the bearing from O to P, the direction north or south always appears first, 
followed by an acute angle, followed by east or west. In Figure 16, the bearing from 
O to P2 is S50°W, and from O to P3 it is N70°W.
Finding the Bearing of an Object
In Figure 16, what is the bearing from O to an object at P4
 ?
The acute angle between the ray OP4 and the north–south line through O is 20°.  
The bearing from O to P4 is S20°E.
Finding the Bearing of an Airplane
A Boeing 777 aircraft takes off from O’Hare Airport on runway 2 LEFT, which has a 
bearing of N20°E.* After flying for 1 mile, the pilot of the aircraft requests permission 
to turn 90° and head toward the northwest. The request is granted. After the plane goes 
2 miles in this direction, what bearing should the control tower use to locate the aircraft?
Figure 17 illustrates the situation. After flying 1 mile from the airport O (the control 
tower), the aircraft is at P. After turning 90° toward the northwest and flying 2 miles, 
the aircraft is at the point Q. In triangle OPQ, the angle u obeys the equation
tan u = 2
1 = 2 so u = tan-1 2 ≈63.4°
The acute angle between north and the ray OQ is 63.4° - 20° = 43.4°. The bearing 
of the aircraft from O to Q is N43.4°W.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 3
•
Example 11
Solution
•
Example 12
Solution
•
Figure 16 
N70°W
P3
P1
P4
P2
S50°W
N30°E
20°
50°
70°
O
30°
N
S
E
W
Figure 17 
P
Q
O
20°
2
θ
1
Runway 2 LEFT
N
S
E
W
*In air navigation, the term azimuth denotes the positive angle measured clockwise from the north (N) 
to a ray OP. In Figure 16, the azimuth from O to P1 is 30°; the azimuth from O to P2 is 230°; the azimuth 
from O to P3 is 290°. In naming runways, the units digit is left off the azimuth. Runway 2 LEFT means 
the left runway with a direction of azimuth 20° (bearing N20°E). Runway 23 is the runway with azimuth 
230° and bearing S50°W.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 In a right triangle, if the length of the hypotenuse is 5 and the 
length of one of the other sides is 3, what is the length of the 
third side? (pp. 958–959) 
	 2.	 If u is an acute angle, solve the equation tan u = 1
2. Express
	
	 your answer in degrees, rounded to one decimal place.  
(pp. 494–499) 
	 3.	 If u is an acute angle, solve the equation sin u = 1
2.  
(pp. 494–499) 
8.1  Assess Your Understanding

Section 8.1  Right Triangle Trigonometry; Applications  553
In Problems 19–28, find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
19.  sin 38° - cos 52° 
20.  tan 12° - cot 78° 
21.   cos 40°
sin 50° 
22.   cos 10°
sin 80° 
23.   1 + tan2 5° - csc2 85° 
24.   1 - cos2 20° - cos2 70° 
25.   cot 40° - sin 50°
sin 40° 
26.   tan 20° - cos 70°
cos 20° 
27.   sec 35° csc 55° - tan 35° cot 55° 
28.   cos 35° sin 55° + sin 35° cos 55° 
In Problems 29–42, use the right triangle shown below. Then, using the given information, solve the triangle.
29.  b = 5, B = 20°;  find a, c, and A	
30.  b = 4, B = 10°;  find a, c, and A
31.  a = 7, B = 50°;  find b, c, and A	
32.  a = 6, B = 40°;  find b, c, and A
33.  b = 6, A = 20°;  find a, c, and B	
34.  b = 4, A = 10°;  find a, c, and B
35.   a = 6, A = 40°;  find b, c, and B	
36.   a = 5, A = 25°;  find b, c, and B
	 37.	 c = 10, A = 40°;  find b, a, and B	
38.  c = 9, B = 20°;  find b, a, and A
39.	 a = 5, b = 3;  find c, A, and B	
40.  a = 2, b = 8;  find c, A, and B
	*41.	  b = 4, c = 6;  find a, A, and B	
42.   a = 2, c = 5;  find b, A, and B
	 4.	 True or False sin 52° = cos 48°. 
	 5.	 The sum of the measures of the two acute angles in a right 
triangle is 
 .
(a)  45°	
(b)  90°	
(c)  180°	
(d)  360° 
	 6.	 When you look up at an object, the acute angle measured 
from the horizontal to a line-of-sight observation of the  
object is called the  
  
   
 .
	 7.	 True or False In a right triangle, if two sides are known, we 
can solve the triangle. 
	 8.	 True or False In a right triangle, if we know the two acute 
angles, we can solve the triangle. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
Skill Building
In Problems 9–18, find the exact value of the six trigonometric functions of the angle u in each figure.
9.	
5
12
u
	
10.
3
4
u
	
11.
3
3
u
	
12.
3
2
u
	
13.
3
4
u
	 14.
2
4
u
	
15. 
2
u
3
	
16. 
1
2
u
	
17. 
2
u
5
	
18. 
1
u
5
c
a
b
A
B
	43.	 Geometry The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 4 inches. If 
one leg is 2 inches, find the degree measure of each angle.
44. Geometry The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 3 feet. If one 
leg is 1 foot, find the degree measure of each angle.
45. Geometry A right triangle has a hypotenuse of length  
8 inches. If one angle is 35°, find the length of each leg.
46. Geometry A right triangle has a hypotenuse of length  
10 centimeters. If one angle is 40°, find the length of each leg.
	 47.	 Geometry A right triangle contains a 25° angle.
(a)	 If one leg is of length 5 inches, what is the length of the 
hypotenuse? 
(b)	 There are two answers. How is this possible?
Applications and Extensions
	 48.	 Geometry A right triangle contains an angle of p
8  radian.
(a)	 If one leg is of length 3 meters, what is the length of the 
hypotenuse? 
(b)	 There are two answers. How is this possible?
	 49.	 Finding the Width of a Gorge  Find the distance from A to C 
across the gorge illustrated in the figure. 
A
C
20˚
B
170 ft.

554 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	 57.	 Finding the Speed of a Truck  A state trooper is hidden  
30 feet from a highway. One second after a truck  
passes, the angle u between the highway and the line of  
observation from the patrol car to the truck is measured. 
See the illustration.
(a)	 If the angle measures 15°, how fast is the truck  
traveling? Express the answer in feet per second and in 
miles per hour. 
(b)	 If the angle measures 20°, how fast is the truck  
traveling? Express the answer in feet per second and in 
miles per hour. 
(c)	 If the speed limit is 55 miles per hour and a speeding 
ticket is issued for speeds of 5 miles per hour or more 
over the limit, for what angles should the trooper issue a 
ticket? 
	 58.	 Security  A security camera in a neighborhood bank is 
mounted on a wall 9 feet above the floor. What angle of 
depression should be used if the camera is to be directed 
to a spot 6 feet above the floor and 12 feet from the 
wall? 
	 59.	 Parallax  One method of measuring the distance from Earth 
to a star is the parallax method. The idea behind computing 
this distance is to measure the angle formed between the 
Earth and the star at two different points in time. Typically, 
the measurements are taken so that the side opposite the 
angle is as large as possible. Therefore, the optimal approach 
is to measure the angle when Earth is on opposite sides of 
the Sun, as shown in the figure.
(a) Proxima Centauri is 4.22 light-years from Earth. If 
1 light-year is about 5.9 trillion miles, how many miles is 
Proxima Centauri from Earth? 
(b) The mean distance from Earth to the Sun is 93,000,000 
miles. What is the parallax of Proxima Centauri? 
	 50.	 Finding the Distance across a Pond  Find the distance from 
A to C across the pond illustrated in the figure. 
	 51.	 The Eiffel Tower  Find the height of the tower using the 
information given in the illustration. 
	 52.	 Finding the Distance of a Ship from Shore  A person in a 
small boat, offshore from a vertical cliff known to be 100 feet 
in height, takes a sighting of the top of the cliff. If the angle 
of elevation is found to be 25°, how far offshore is the boat? 
	 53.	 Finding the Distance to a Plateau  Suppose that you are 
headed toward a plateau 50 meters high. If the angle of  
elevation to the top of the plateau is 20°, how far are you 
from the base of the plateau? 
	 54.	 Finding the Reach of a Ladder  A 22-foot extension ladder 
leaning against a building makes a 70° angle with the ground. 
How far up the building does the ladder touch? 
	 55.	 Finding the Angle of Elevation of the Sun  At 10 am 
on April 26, 2009, a building 300 feet high cast a shadow  
50 feet long. What was the angle of elevation of the Sun? 
	 56.	 Directing a Laser Beam  A laser beam is to be directed  
through a small hole in the center of a circle of radius  
10 feet. The origin of the beam is 35 feet from the circle (see 
the figure). At what angle of elevation should the beam be 
aimed to ensure that it goes through the hole? 
40°
A
C
B
100 ft
85.551˚
50 ft
Laser
?
10 ft
35 ft
30 ft
1 sec
u
PD
Earth's
orbit
Earth at time 1
Earth at time 2
Parallax
Star
Sun

Section 8.1  Right Triangle Trigonometry; Applications  555
	 68.	 Photography  A camera is mounted on a tripod 4 feet high 
at a distance of 10 feet from George, who is 6 feet tall. See 
the illustration. If the camera lens has angles of depression 
and elevation of 20°, will George’s feet and head be seen 
by the lens? If not, how far back will the camera need to be 
moved to include George’s feet and head? 
	 69.	 Finding the Distance between Two Objects  A blimp,  
suspended in the air at a height of 500 feet, lies directly over 
a line from Soldier Field to the Adler Planetarium on Lake 
Michigan (see the figure). If the angle of depression from 
the blimp to the stadium is 32° and from the blimp to the 
planetarium is 23°, find the distance between Soldier Field 
and the Adler Planetarium. 
	 60.	 Parallax  See Problem 59. 61 Cygni, sometimes called  
Bessel’s Star (after Friedrich Bessel, who measured the  
distance from Earth to the star in 1838), is a star in the 
constellation Cygnus.
(a) 61 Cygni is 11.14 light-years from Earth. If 1 light-year is 
about 5.9 trillion miles, how many miles is 61 Cygni from 
Earth? 
(b) The mean distance from Earth to the Sun is 93,000,000 
miles. What is the parallax of 61 Cygni? 
	 61.	 Washington Monument  The angle of elevation of the Sun 
is 35.1° at the instant the shadow cast by the Washington 
Monument is 789 feet long. Use this information to calculate 
the height of the monument. 
	 62.	 Finding the Length of a Mountain Trail  A straight trail with 
an inclination of 17° leads from a hotel at an elevation of 
9000 feet to a mountain lake at an elevation of 11,200 feet. 
What is the length of the trail? 
	 63.	 Finding the Bearing of an Aircraft  A DC-9 aircraft leaves 
Midway Airport from runway 4 RIGHT, whose bearing is
 
 N40°E. After flying for 1
2 mile, the pilot requests permission
	
	 to turn 90° and head toward the southeast. The permission is 
granted. After the airplane goes 1 mile in this direction, what 
bearing should the control tower use to locate the aircraft? 
	 64.	 Finding the Bearing of a Ship  A ship leaves the port of  
Miami with a bearing of S80°E and a speed of 15 knots. 
After 1 hour, the ship turns 90° toward the south. After  
2 hours, maintaining the same speed, what is the bearing to 
the ship from port? 
	 65.	 Niagara Falls Incline Railway  Situated between Portage 
Road and the Niagara Parkway directly across from the  
Canadian Horseshoe Falls, the Falls Incline Railway is a  
funicular that carries passengers up an embankment to  
Table Rock Observation Point. If the length of the track is 
51.8 meters and the angle of inclination is 36°2′, determine 
the height of the embankment. 
	
	 Source: www.niagaraparks.com
	 66.	 Willis Tower  Willis Tower in Chicago is the second tallest 
building in the United States and is topped by a high antenna. 
A surveyor on the ground makes the following measurement:
	
	 1.  The angle of elevation from his position to the top of the 
building is 34°.
	
2.  The distance from his position to the top of the building 
is 2593 feet.
	
3.  The distance from his position to the top of the antenna is 
2743 feet.
	
	 (a)	 How far away from the (base of the) building is the  
surveyor located? 
	
	 (b)	 How tall is the building? 
	
	 (c)	 What is the angle of elevation from the surveyor to the 
top of the antenna? 
	
	 (d)	 How tall is the antenna? 
	
	 Source: Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat
	 67.	 Constructing a Highway  A highway whose primary  
directions are north–south is being constructed along the west 
coast of Florida. Near Naples, a bay obstructs the straight path 
of the road. Since the cost of a bridge is prohibitive, engineers 
decide to go around the bay. The illustration shows the path 
that they decide on and the measurements taken. What is the 
length of highway needed to go around the bay? 
US
41
3 mi.
1 mi.
130°
140°
4'
20°
20°
6'
10'
Lake Michigan
Adler
Planetarium
Soldier Field
23°
32°
500 ft
	 70.	 Hot-Air Balloon  While taking a ride in a hot-air balloon in 
Napa Valley, Francisco wonders how high he is. To find out, 
he chooses a landmark that is to the east of the balloon and 
measures the angle of depression to be 54°. A few minutes 
later, after traveling 100 feet east, the angle of depression  
to the same landmark is determined to be 61°. Use this  
information to determine the height of the balloon. 
	 71.	 Mt. Rushmore  To measure the height of Lincoln’s caricature  
on Mt. Rushmore, two sightings 800 feet from the base of the 
mountain are taken. If the angle of elevation to the bottom 
of Lincoln’s face is 32° and the angle of elevation to the top 
is 35°, what is the height of Lincoln’s face? 

556 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	 76.	 Shooting Free Throws in Basketball  The eyes of a basketball  
player are 6 feet above the floor. The player is at the  
free-throw line, which is 15 feet from the center of the basket 
rim (see the figure). What is the angle of elevation from the 
player’s eyes to the center of the rim? 
	
	 [Hint: The rim is 10 feet above the floor.]
	 77.	 Geometry  Find the value of the angle u in degrees rounded 
to the nearest tenth of a degree. 
20 ft
New
beam
40 ft
10 ft
20 ft
38 ft
?
15 ft
6 ft
?
10 ft
4
2
u
	 78.	 Surveillance Satellites  A surveillance satellite circles Earth 
at a height of h miles above the surface. Suppose that d 
is the distance, in miles, on the surface of Earth that can 
be observed from the satellite. See the illustration on the  
following page.
*(a)  Find an equation that relates the central angle u to the 
height h.
(b)  Find an equation that relates the observable distance d  
and u. 
*(c)  Find an equation that relates d and h.
(d)  If d is to be 2500 miles, how high must the satellite orbit 
above Earth? 
(e) If the satellite orbits at a height of 300 miles, what  
distance d on the surface can be observed? 
	 72.	 The CN Tower  The CN Tower, located in Toronto, Canada, is  
the tallest structure in the Americas. While visiting  
Toronto, a tourist wondered what the height of the tower 
above the top of the Sky Pod is. While standing 4000 feet 
from the tower, she measured the angle to the top of the 
Sky Pod to be 20.1°. At this same distance, the angle of  
elevation to the top of the tower was found to be 24.4°. Use 
this information to determine the height of the tower above 
the Sky Pod. 
	 73.	 Chicago Skyscrapers  The angle of inclination from the base 
of the John Hancock Center to the top of the main structure  
of the Willis Tower is approximately 10.3°. If the main  
structure of the Willis Tower is 1451 feet tall, how far apart 
are the two skyscrapers? Assume the bases of the two  
buildings are at the same elevation. 
	
	 Source: www.emporis.com
	 74.	 Estimating the Width of the Mississippi River  A tourist at  
the top of the Gateway Arch (height, 630 feet) in St. Louis,  
Missouri, observes a boat moored on the Illinois side of 
the Mississippi River 2070 feet directly across from the 
Arch. She also observes a boat moored on the Missouri side  
directly across from the first boat (see diagram). Given that
	
	 B = cot-1 67
55, estimate the width of the Mississippi River at 
the St. Louis riverfront. 
	
	 Source: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
	 75.	 Finding the Pitch of a Roof  A carpenter is preparing to 
put a roof on a garage that is 20 feet by 40 feet by 20 feet. 
A steel support beam 38 feet in length is positioned in the  
center of the garage. To support the roof, another beam will 
be attached to the top of the center beam (see the figure). 
At what angle of elevation is the new beam? In other words, 
what is the pitch of the roof? 
B
Boat
Boat
IL
MO
2070 ft
630 ft
A

Section 8.1  Right Triangle Trigonometry; Applications  557
	 80.	 One World Trade Center  One World Trade Center (1WTC) 
is the centerpiece of the rebuilding of the World Trade  
Center in New York City. The tower is 1776 feet tall  
(including its spire). The angle of elevation from the base of 
an office building to the tip of the spire is 34°. The angle of 
elevation from the helipad on the roof of the office building 
to the tip of the spire is 20°.
(a)	 How far away is the office building from One World 
Trade Center? Assume the side of the tower is vertical. 
Round to the nearest foot. 
(b)	 How tall is the office building? Round to the nearest 
foot. 
	*79.	 Calculating Pool Shots  A pool player located at X wants to 
shoot the white ball off the top cushion and hit the red ball 
dead center. He knows from physics that the white ball will 
come off a cushion at the same angle as it hits the cushion. 
Where on the top cushion should he hit the white ball? 
θ
3960
d
h
3960
1.5 ft
1.8 ft
2.7 ft
3 ft
1 ft
5 ft
3 ft
X
	 84.	 Determine whether x - 3 is a factor of  
x4 + 2x3 - 21x2 + 19x - 3. 
	 85.	 Find the exact value of sin 15°. 
Hint: 15° = 45° - 30°
	 86.	 Evaluate 
f1x2 - f142
x - 4
, where f1x2 = 2x for	
 
x = 5, 4.5, and 4.1. Round results to three decimal places.
	 87.	 Solve 2 sin2 u -  sin u - 1 = 0 for 0 … u 6 2p. 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 84–87 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
348
208
1776
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 81.	 Explain how you would measure the width of the Grand 
Canyon from a point on its ridge.
	 82.	 Explain how you would measure the height of a TV tower 
that is on the roof of a tall building.
	 83.	 The Gibb’s Hill Lighthouse, Southampton, Bermuda  In 
operation since 1846, the Gibb’s Hill Lighthouse stands 
117 feet high on a hill 245 feet high, so its beam of light 
is 362 feet above sea level. A brochure states that ships  
40 miles away can see the light and planes flying at 10,000 
feet can see it 120 miles away. Verify the accuracy of these 
statements. What assumption did the brochure make about 
the height of the ship?
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.   4	
2.   26.6°	
3.   30°

558 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
If none of the angles of a triangle is a right angle, the triangle is called oblique. 
An oblique triangle will have either three acute angles or two acute angles and one 
obtuse angle (an angle between 90° and 180°). See Figure 18.
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 564.
	
Objectives	 	1  Solve SAA or ASA Triangles  (p. 559)
	
	 	2  Solve SSA Triangles  (p. 560)
	
	 	3  Solve Applied Problems  (p. 562)
8.2  The Law of Sines
• Trigonometric Equations (Section 7.3, pp. 494–499)
•	 Difference Formula for the Sine Function  
(Section 7.5, p. 515)
• Geometry Essentials (Appendix A, Section A.2,  
pp. 958–962)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
*The length of one side must be known because knowing only the angles will reveal only a family of 
similar triangles.
Case 1:  One side and two angles are known (ASA or SAA).
Case 2:  Two sides and the angle opposite one of them are known (SSA).
Case 3:  Two sides and the included angle are known (SAS).
Case 4:  Three sides are known (SSS).
Figure 10 illustrates the four cases, where the known measurements are shown 
in blue.
Warning  Oblique triangles cannot be 
solved using the methods of Section 8.1. 
Do you know why?	
■
In the discussion that follows, an oblique triangle is always labeled so that side a  
is opposite angle A, side b is opposite angle B, and side c is opposite angle C, as 
shown in Figure 19.
To solve an oblique triangle means to find the lengths of its sides and the  
measurements of its angles. To do this, we need to know the length of one side,* along 
with (i) two angles, (ii) one angle and one other side, or (iii) the other two sides. There 
are four possibilities to consider.
Figure 18 
(a)  All angles are acute
Obtuse angle
(b)  Two acute angles and one obtuse angle
Figure 20 
S
A
Case 1: ASA
A
S
S
A
Case 2: SSA
S
A
Case 1: SAA
S
S
Case 3: SAS
A
A
S
S
S
Case 4: SSS
The Law of Sines is used to solve triangles for which Case 1 or 2 holds. Cases 3 
and 4 are considered when we study the Law of Cosines in the next section.
Figure 19  Oblique triangle
c
a
b
B
C
A
Law of Sines
For a triangle with sides a, b, c and opposite angles A, B, C, respectively,
	
sin A
a
= sin B
b
= sin C
c
 	
(1)
Theorem

Section 8.2  The Law of Sines  559
A proof of the Law of Sines is given at the end of this section. 
The Law of Sines actually consists of three equalities:
Note  Although it is not a check, the 
reasonableness of answers can be  
verified by determining whether the  
longest side is opposite the largest  
angle and the shortest side is opposite 
the smallest angle.	
■
sin A
a
= sin B
b   sin A
a
= sin C
c   sin B
b
= sin C
c
 
	
A + B + C = 180°	
(2)
Formula (1) is a compact way to write these three equations.
Typically, applying the Law of Sines to solve triangles uses the fact that the sum 
of the angles of any triangle equals 180°; that is,
Solve SAA or ASA Triangles
The first two examples show how to solve a triangle when one side and two angles 
are known (Case 1: SAA or ASA).
Using the Law of Sines to Solve an SAA Triangle
Solve the triangle:  A = 40°, B = 60°, a = 4
Figure 21 shows the triangle to be solved. The third angle C is found using equation (2).
 A + B + C = 180°
 40° + 60° + C = 180°
 C = 80°
Now use the Law of Sines (twice) to find the unknown sides b and c.
sin A
a
= sin B
b   sin A
a
= sin C
c
 
Because a = 4, A = 40°, B = 60°, and C = 80°, we have
sin 40°
4
= sin 60°
b   sin 40°
4
= sin 80°
c
 
Solving for b and c yields
b = 4 sin 60°
sin 40°
≈5.39  c = 4 sin 80°
sin 40°
≈6.13
Notice in Example 1 that b and c are found by working with the given side a. 
This is better than finding b first and working with a rounded value of b to find c.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Using the Law of Sines to Solve an ASA Triangle
Solve the triangle:  A = 35°, B = 15°, c = 5
Figure 22 illustrates the triangle to be solved. Two angles are known (A = 35° and 
B = 15°). Find the third angle using equation (2):
 A + B + C = 180°
 35° + 15° + C = 180°
 C = 130°
Now the three angles and one side 1c = 52 of the triangle are known. To find the 
remaining two sides a and b, use the Law of Sines (twice).
1
Example 1
Solution
•
Example 2
Solution
Figure 21 
c
C
b
40
60
4
Figure 22 
35
15
5
a
b
C

560 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
 sin A
a
 = sin C
c   
 sin B
b
 = sin C
c
 
 sin 35°
a
 = sin 130°
5   
 sin 15°
b
 = sin 130°
5
 
 a = 5 sin 35°
sin 130°  ≈3.74     b = 5 sin 15°
sin 130°  ≈1.69
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Solve SSA Triangles
Case 2 (SSA), which applies to triangles for which two sides and the angle opposite 
one of them are known, is referred to as the ambiguous case, because the known 
information may result in one triangle, two triangles, or no triangle at all. Suppose that 
sides a and b and angle A are given, as illustrated in Figure 23. The key to determining 
how many triangles, if any, may be formed from the given information lies primarily 
with the relative size of side a, the height h, and the fact that h = b sin A.
•
2
Figure 23  sin A = h
b
a
h
A
b
Figure 24  a 6 h = b sin A
a
A
b
h 5 b sin A
Figure 25  a = h = b sin A
a
A
b
h 5 b sin A
Figure 26  b sin A 6 a and a 6 b 
Figure 27  a Ú b
a
a
A
b
a
A
b
h 5 b sin A
No Triangle  If a 6 h = b sin A, then 
side a is not sufficiently long to form a 
triangle. See Figure 24.
One Right Triangle  If a = h = b sin A, 
then side a is just long enough to form a 
right triangle. See Figure 25.
Two Triangles  If h = b sin A 6 a and 
a 6 b, then two distinct triangles can 
be formed from the given information. 
See Figure 26.
One Triangle  If a Ú b, only one triangle 
can be formed. See Figure 27.
Fortunately, it is not necessary to rely on an illustration or on complicated  
relationships to draw the correct conclusion in the ambiguous case. The Law of Sines 
will lead us to the correct determination. Let’s see how.
Using the Law of Sines to Solve an SSA Triangle (No Solution)
Solve the triangle:  a = 2, c = 1, C = 50°
Because a = 2, c = 1, and C = 50° are known, use the Law of Sines to find the angle A.
 sin A
a
 = sin C
c
 
 sin A
2
 = sin 50°
1
 
 sin A = 2 sin 50° ≈1.53
Since there is no angle A for which sin A 7 1, there can be no triangle with the  
given measurements. Figure 28 illustrates the measurements given. Note that no 
matter how side c is positioned, it will never touch side b to form a triangle.
Example 3
Solution
•
Figure 28 
a 5 2
c 5 1
b
50

Section 8.2  The Law of Sines  561
Using the Law of Sines to Solve an SSA Triangle (One Solution)
Solve the triangle:  a = 3, b = 2, A = 40°
See Figure 29(a). Because a = 3, b = 2, and A = 40° are known, use the Law of 
Sines to find the angle B.
 sin A
a
= sin B
b
 
Then
 sin 40°
3
= sin B
2
 
 sin B = 2 sin 40°
3
≈0.43
There are two angles B, 0° 6 B 6 180°, for which sin B ≈0.43.
B1 ≈25.4° and B2 ≈180° - 25.4° = 154.6°
The second possibility, B2 ≈154.6°, is ruled out, because A = 40° makes 
A + B2 ≈194.6° 7 180°. Now use B1 ≈25.4° to find that
C = 180° - A - B1 ≈180° - 40° - 25.4° = 114.6°
The third side c may now be determined using the Law of Sines.
 sin A
a
= sin C
c
 
 sin 40°
3
= sin 114.6°
c
 
 c = 3 sin 114.6°
sin 40°
≈4.24
Figure 29(b) illustrates the solved triangle.
Using the Law of Sines to Solve an SSA Triangle (Two Solutions)
Solve the triangle:  a = 6, b = 8, A = 35°
Because a = 6, b = 8, and A = 35° are known, use the Law of Sines to find the 
angle B.
 sin A
a
= sin B
b
 
Then
 sin 35°
6
= sin B
8
 
 sin B = 8 sin 35°
6
≈0.76
B1 ≈49.9° or B2 ≈180° - 49.9° = 130.1°
Both choices of B result in A + B 6 180°. There are two triangles, one  
containing the angle B1 ≈49.9° and the other containing the angle B2 ≈130.1°. 
See Figure 30(a). 
The third angle C is either
 C1 = 180° - A - B1 ≈95.1° or  C2 = 180° - A - B2 ≈14.9°
Example 4
Solution
•
Example 5
Solution
	
c 	
c
	
 A = 35°
	
 A = 35°
	
 B1 = 49.9° 	
 B2 = 130.1°
Note  The angle B1  was determined
by finding the value of sin-1 a 2 sin 40°
3
 b.
Using the rounded value and evaluating 
sin-1 10.432 will yield a slightly different 
result.	
■
Figure 29(a) 
40
2
3
c
C
B
Figure 29(b) 
40
2
3
c  4.24
C  114.6
B  25.4
Figure 30(a) 
35°
8
6
6

562 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
The third side c obeys the Law of Sines, so
 sin A
a
= sin C1 
c1   
 sin A
a
= sin C2 
c2 
 
 sin 35°
6
= sin 95.1°
c1   
 sin 35°
6
= sin 14.9°
c2 
 
 c1 = 6 sin 95.1°
sin 35°
≈10.42     c2 = 6 sin 14.9°
sin 35°
≈2.69
The two solved triangles are illustrated in Figure 30(b).
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 5  a n d  3 1
Solve Applied Problems
Finding the Height of a Mountain
To measure the height of a mountain, a surveyor takes two sightings of the peak at a 
distance 900 meters apart on a direct line to the mountain.* See Figure 31(a). The first 
observation results in an angle of elevation of 47°, and the second results in an angle 
of elevation of 35°. If the transit is 2 meters high, what is the height h of the mountain?
•
3
Example 6
* For simplicity, assume that these sightings are at the same level.
Figure 31 
2 m
900 m
(a)
35
47
35
47
h
900 m
(b)
2 m
h
c
b
A
C
Figure 30(b) 
C1  95.1
C2  14.9
B1  49.9
B2  130.1
c2  2.69
c1  10.42
35
8
6
6
Figure 31(b) shows the triangles that replicate the illustration in Figure 31(a). Since 
C + 47° = 180°, this means that C = 133°. Also, since A + C + 35° = 180°, this 
means that A = 180° - 35° - C = 145° - 133° = 12°. Use the Law of Sines to find c.
sin A
a
 = sin C
c
 
 
c = 900 sin 133°
sin 12°
 ≈3165.86
Using the larger right triangle gives
 sin 35° = b
c 
 
 b = 3165.86 sin 35° ≈1815.86 ≈1816 meters
The height of the peak from ground level is approximately 1816 + 2 = 1818 meters.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 7
Rescue at Sea
Coast Guard Station Zulu is located 120 miles due west of Station X-ray. A ship at sea 
sends an SOS call that is received by each station. The call to Station Zulu indicates 
that the bearing of the ship from Zulu is N40°E (40° east of north). The call to Station 
X-ray indicates that the bearing of the ship from X-ray is N30°W (30° west of north).
(a)	 How far is each station from the ship?
(b)	 If a helicopter capable of flying 200 miles per hour is dispatched from the  
nearest station to the ship, how long will it take to reach the ship?
Solution
A = 12°, C = 133°, a = 900
•
Example 7

Section 8.2  The Law of Sines  563
(a)	 Figure 32 illustrates the situation. The angle C is found to be
C = 180° - 50° - 60° = 70°
The Law of Sines can now be used to find the two distances a and b that are needed.
 sin 50°
a
= sin 70°
120  
 a = 120 sin 50°
sin 70°
≈97.82 miles
 sin 60°
b
= sin 70°
120  
 b = 120 sin 60°
sin 70°
≈110.59 miles
Station Zulu is about 111 miles from the ship, and Station X-ray is about  
98 miles from the ship.
(b)	 The time t needed for the helicopter to reach the ship from Station X-ray is 
found by using the formula
1Rate, r2 1Time, t2 = Distance, a
Then
t = a
r = 97.82
200
≈0.49 hour ≈29 minutes
It will take about 29 minutes for the helicopter to reach the ship.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Proof of the Law of Sines  To prove the Law of Sines, construct an altitude of length h  
from one of the vertices of a triangle. Figure 33(a) shows h for a triangle with three 
acute angles, and Figure 33(b) shows h for a triangle with an obtuse angle. In each 
case, the altitude is drawn from the vertex at B. Using either illustration
 sin C = h
a 
from which
	
 h = a sin C	
(3)
From Figure 33(a), it also follows that
 sin A = h
c 
from which
	
 h = c sin A	
(4)
From Figure 33(b), it follows that
 sin1180° - A2 = sin A = h
c 
which again gives
h = c sin A
Thus, whether the triangle has three acute angles or has two acute angles and 
one obtuse angle, equations (3) and (4) hold. As a result, the expressions for h in 
equations (3) and (4) are equal. That is,
 a sin C = c sin A
Solution
•
c
sin 1180° - A2 = sin 180° cos A - cos 180° sin A = sin A
Figure 32 
Zulu
b
a
C
N
S
W
E
60
30
X-ray
50
40
120 mi
Figure 33 
c
a
h
A
C
b
D
B
c
a
h
A
180 2 A
C
B
b
E

564 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
from which
	
 sin A
a
 = sin C
c
 	
(5)
In a similar manner, constructing the altitude h′ from the vertex of angle A, as 
shown in Figure 34, reveals that
sin B = h′
c and sin C = h′
b  
Equating the expressions for h′ gives
h′ = c sin B = b sin C
from which
	
sin B
b
= sin C
c
 	
(6)
When equations (5) and (6) are combined, the result is equation (1), the Law of Sines.
■
Figure 34 
c
a
h
A
C
B
b
D
h
c
a
A
C
B
b
E
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The difference formula for the sine function is	
 
sin1A - B2 =             . (p. 515) 
	 2.	 If u is an acute angle, solve the equation cos u = 23 
2
.  
(pp. 494–499) 
8.2  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 4.	 If none of the angles of a triangle is a right angle, the triangle 
is called                  .
(a) oblique    (b)  obtuse    (c)  acute    (d)  scalene
	 5.	 For a triangle with sides a, b, c and opposite angles A, B, C,
	
	 the Law of Sines states that                                             .
	 6.	 True or False  An oblique triangle in which two sides and an 
angle are given always results in at least one triangle. 
	 7.	 True or False  The Law of Sines can be used to solve  
triangles where three sides are known. 
	 8.	 Triangles for which two sides and the angle opposite 
one of them are known (SSA) are referred to as the 
  
    
 .
Skill Building
In Problems 9–16, solve each triangle.
	 13.	
14.	
15.	
16.	
45
40
7
c
a
C
5
10
5
b
a
C
40
100
2
c
a
A
30
100
6
c
a
C
	 9.	
	 10.	
11.	
45
95
5
a
b
A
a
b
C
40
4
45
85
50
3
c
a
B
30
125
10
c
a
A
	 12.	
In Problems 17–24, solve each triangle.
	 17.	 A = 50°, C = 20°, a = 3	
18.	 A = 40°, B = 20°, a = 2	
19.	 A = 70°, B = 60°, c = 4
	 20.	 B = 70°, C = 10°, b = 5	
21.	 B = 10°, C = 100°, b = 2	
22.	 A = 110°, C = 30°, c = 3
	 23.	 A = 40°, B = 40°, c = 2	
24.	 B = 20°, C = 70°, a = 1 
2
5
3
x
	 3.	 The two triangles shown are similar. Find the missing length. 
(pp. 958–962) 

Section 8.2  The Law of Sines  565
In Problems 25–36, two sides and an angle are given. Determine whether the given information results in one triangle, two triangles, or no 
triangle at all. Solve any resulting triangle(s).
	 25.	 a = 3, b = 2, A = 50°	
26.	 b = 4, c = 3, B = 40°	
27.	 a = 2, c = 1, A = 120°
	 28.	 b = 5, c = 3, B = 100°	
29.	 b = 2, c = 3, B = 40° 
	
30.	 a = 4, b = 5, A = 60°
	 31.	 b = 4, c = 6, B = 20°	
32.	 a = 3, b = 7, A = 70° 
	
33.	 b = 4, c = 5, B = 95° 
	 34.	 a = 2, c = 1, C = 100° 
	
35.	 b = 4, c = 5, B = 40°	
36.	 a = 2, c = 1, C = 25°
Applications and Extensions
	 37.	 Finding the Length of a Ski Lift  Consult the figure. To find 
the length of the span of a proposed ski lift from A to B, a 
surveyor measures the angle DAB to be 25° and then walks 
off a distance of L = 1100 feet to C and measures the angle 
ACB to be 15°. What is the distance from A to B? 
	 41.	 Land Dimensions  A triangular plot of land has one side 
along a straight road measuring 201 feet. A second side 
makes a 23° angle with the road, and the third side makes 
a 22° angle with the road. How long are the other two 
sides? 
	 42.	 Distance between Runners  Two runners in a marathon 
determine that the angles of elevation of a news helicopter 
covering the race are 38° and 45°. If the helicopter is  
1700 feet directly above the finish line, how far apart are the 
runners? 
	 43.	 Landscaping  Pat needs to determine the height of a tree  
before cutting it down to be sure that it will not fall on a 
nearby fence. The angle of elevation of the tree from one 
position on a flat path from the tree is 30°, and from a second 
position 40 feet farther along this path it is 20°. What is the 
height of the tree? 
	 44.	 Construction  A loading ramp 10 feet long that makes an 
angle of 18° with the horizontal is to be replaced by one that 
makes an angle of 12° with the horizontal. How long is the 
new ramp? 
	 45.	 Commercial Navigation  Adam must fly home to St. Louis 
from a business meeting in Oklahoma City. One flight option 
flies directly to St. Louis, a distance of about 461.1 miles.  
A second flight option flies first to Kansas City and then 
connects to St. Louis. The bearing from Oklahoma City to 
Kansas City is N29.6°E, and the bearing from Oklahoma 
City to St. Louis is N57.7°E. The bearing from St. Louis to 
Oklahoma City is S57.7°W, and the bearing from St. Louis 
to Kansas City is N79.4°W. How many more frequent flyer 
miles will Adam receive if he takes the connecting flight 
rather than the direct flight? 
Source: www.landings.com
	 46.	 Time Lost to a Navigation Error  In attempting to fly from 
city P to city Q, an aircraft followed a course that was 10° in  
error, as indicated in the figure. After flying a distance of 50 
miles, the pilot corrected the course by turning at point R and 
flying 300 miles farther. If the constant speed of the aircraft was 
250 miles per hour, how much time was lost due to the error?
15
L
A
C
D
B
25
	 38.	 Finding the Height of a Mountain  Use the illustration in 
Problem 37 to find the height QD of the mountain.
	 39.	 Finding the Height of an Airplane  An aircraft is spotted 
by two observers who are 1000 feet apart. As the airplane  
passes over the line joining them, each observer takes a 
sighting of the angle of elevation to the plane, as indicated in 
the figure. How high is the airplane? 
50
25
1000 ft
P
Q
	 40.	 Finding the Height of the Bridge over the Royal Gorge  The 
highest bridge in the world is the bridge over the Royal 
Gorge of the Arkansas River in Colorado. Sightings to the 
same point at water level directly under the bridge are taken 
from each side of the 880-foot-long bridge, as indicated in 
the figure. How high is the bridge? 
Source: Guinness Book of World Records
69.2
65.5
h
880 ft
	 47.	 Rescue at Sea  Coast Guard Station Able is located 150 miles 
due south of Station Baker. A ship at sea sends an SOS call 
that is received by each station. The call to Station Able  
indicates that the ship is located N55°E; the call to Station 
Baker indicates that the ship is located S60°E.
(continued on next page)
10
50 mi
300 mi
R
P
Q

566 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
* On February 27, 1964, the government of Italy requested aid in preventing the tower from toppling. A multinational task force of engineers,  
mathematicians, and historians was assigned and met on the Azores islands to discuss stabilization methods. After over two decades of work on the 
subject, the tower was closed to the public in January 1990. During the time that the tower was closed, the bells were removed to relieve it of some 
weight, and cables were cinched around the third level and anchored several hundred meters away. Apartments and houses in the path of the tower 
were vacated for safety concerns. After a decade of corrective reconstruction and stabilization efforts, the tower was reopened to the public on  
December 15, 2001. Many methods were proposed to stabilize the tower, including the addition of 800 metric tons of lead counterweights to the raised 
end of the base. The final solution was to remove 38 cubic meters of soil from underneath the raised end. The tower has been declared stable for at 
least another 300 years.
Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leaning_Tower_of_Pisa
(a)	 How far is each station from the ship? 
(b)	 If a helicopter capable of flying 200 miles per hour is 
dispatched from the station nearest the ship, how long 
will it take to reach the ship? 
 
	 48.	 Distance to the Moon  At exactly the same time, Tom and 
Alice measured the angle of elevation to the moon while 
standing exactly 300 km apart. The angle of elevation to the 
moon for Tom was 49.8974°, and the angle of elevation to 
the moon for Alice was 49.9312°. See the figure. To the nearest 
1000 km, how far was the moon from Earth when the 
measurement was obtained? 
	 51.	 Constructing a Highway  U.S. 41, a highway whose primary 
directions are north–south, is being constructed along the 
west coast of Florida. Near Naples, a bay obstructs the straight 
path of the road. Since the cost of a bridge is prohibitive,  
engineers decide to go around the bay. The illustration shows 
the path that they decide on and the measurements taken. 
What is the length of highway needed to go around the bay? 
	 49.	 Finding the Lean of the Leaning Tower of Pisa  The famous 
Leaning Tower of Pisa was originally 184.5 feet high.* At a 
distance of 123 feet from the base of the tower, the angle 
of elevation to the top of the tower is found to be 60°. Find 
∠ RPQ indicated in the figure. Also, find the perpendicular 
distance from R to PQ. 
Moon
300 km
Tom
Alice
49.8974
49.9312
P
Q
R
60
123 ft
184.5 ft
	 50.	 Crankshafts on Cars  On a certain automobile, the crankshaft 
is 3 inches long and the connecting rod is 9 inches long (see 
the figure, top, right). At the time when ∠OPQ is 15°, how 
far is the piston (P) from the center (O) of the crankshaft?
Q
P
O
3 in.
9 in.
15
2 mi
Ocean
140
Pelican
Bay
Highway
U.S. 41
1–8 mi
1–8 mi
135
Clam
Bay
41
	 52.	 Calculating Distances at Sea  The navigator of a ship at sea 
spots two lighthouses that she knows to be 3 miles apart 
along a straight seashore. She determines that the angles  
formed between two line-of-sight observations of the  
lighthouses and the line from the ship directly to shore are 
15° and 35°. See the illustration.
(a)	 How far is the ship from lighthouse P? 
(b)	 How far is the ship from lighthouse Q? 
(c)	 How far is the ship from shore? 
35
Ocean
3 mi
15
P
Q

Section 8.2  The Law of Sines  567
	 53.	 Designing an Awning  An awning that covers a sliding glass 
door that is 88 inches tall forms an angle of 50° with the wall. 
The purpose of the awning is to prevent sunlight from entering 
the house when the angle of elevation of the Sun is more 
than 65°. See the figure. Find the length L of the awning.
See the figure. Suppose that the elongation angle for  
Mercury is 15°. Use this information to find the possible  
distances between Earth and Mercury.
Source: Guinness Book of World Records
	 56.	 Determining the Height of an Aircraft  Two sensors are 
spaced 700 feet apart along the approach to a small airport. 
When an aircraft is nearing the airport, the angle of elevation 
from the first sensor to the aircraft is 20°, and from the  
second sensor to the aircraft it is 15°. Determine how high 
the aircraft is at this time. 
	 57.	 Mercury  The distance from the Sun to Earth is approximately 
149,600,000 kilometers (km). The distance from the Sun to 
Mercury is approximately 57,910,000 km. The elongation 
angle a is the angle formed between the line of sight from 
Earth to the Sun and the line of sight from Earth to Mercury.  
	 54.	 Finding Distances  A forest ranger is walking on a path  
inclined at 5° to the horizontal directly toward a 100-foot-tall 
fire observation tower. The angle of elevation from the path 
to the top of the tower is 40°. How far is the ranger from the 
tower at this time? 
65
Step
88
50
L
100 ft
path
horizontal
40
5
	 55.	 Great Pyramid of Cheops  One of the original Seven  
Wonders of the World, the Great Pyramid of Cheops was 
built about 2580 bc. Its original height was 480 feet 11 inches, 
but owing to the loss of its topmost stones, it is now shorter.  
Find the current height of the Great Pyramid using the  
information given in the illustration. 
40.3°
46.27°
100 ft
200 ft
Mercury
Sun
Mercury
Earth

	 58.	 Venus  The distance from the Sun to Earth is approximately 
149,600,000 km. The distance from the Sun to Venus is  
approximately 108,200,000 km. The elongation angle a is 
the angle formed between the line of sight from Earth to the 
Sun and the line of sight from Earth to Venus. Suppose that 
the elongation angle for Venus is 10°. Use this information 
to find the possible distances between Earth and Venus.
	 59.	 The Original Ferris Wheel  George Washington Gale Ferris, 
Jr., designed the original Ferris wheel for the 1893 World’s 
Columbian Exposition in Chicago, Illinois. The wheel had 
36 equally spaced cars each the size of a school bus. The  
distance between adjacent cars was approximately 22 feet. 
Determine the diameter of the wheel to the nearest foot. 
Source: Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, www.clpgh.org
	 60.	 Mollweide’s Formula  For any triangle, Mollweide’s Formula 
(named after Karl Mollweide, 1774–1825) states that
a + b
c
=
cosc 1
21A - B2 d
sina1
2
 Cb
 
Derive it.
[Hint: Use the Law of Sines and then a Sum-to-Product 
Formula. Notice that this formula involves all six parts of 
a triangle. As a result, it is sometimes used to check the 
solution of a triangle.]
	 61.	 Mollweide’s 
Formula  Another 
form 
of 
Mollweide’s  
Formula is
a - b
c
=
sinc 1
21A - B2 d
cosa1
2
 Cb
 
Derive it.
	 62.	 For any triangle, derive the formula
a = b cos C + c cos B
[Hint: Use the fact that sin A = sin1180° - B - C2. ]
	 63.	 Law of Tangents  For any triangle, derive the Law of Tangents:
a - b
a + b =
tanc 1
21A - B2 d
tanc 1
21A + B2 d
 
[Hint: Use Mollweide’s Formula.]

568 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 69–72 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 64.	 Circumscribing a Triangle  Show that
sin A
a
= sin B
b
= sin C
c
= 1
2r 
	
	 where r is the radius of the circle circumscribing the triangle 
PQR whose sides are a, b, and c, as shown in the figure.
[Hint: Draw the diameter PP′. Then 	
 
B = ∠PQR =  ∠PP′R, and angle ∠PRP′ = 90°.]
P
R
Q
P
b
c
a
B
C
A
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 65.	 Make up three problems involving oblique triangles. One 
should result in one triangle, the second in two triangles, and 
the third in no triangle.
	 66.	 What do you do first if you are asked to solve a triangle and 
are given one side and two angles?
	 67.	 What do you do first if you are asked to solve a triangle and 
are given two sides and the angle opposite one of them?
	 68.	 Solve Example 6 using right-triangle geometry. Comment 
on which solution, using the Law of Sines or using right  
triangles, you prefer. Give reasons.
	 69.	 Solve: 3x3 +   4x2 -  27x -  36  =   0
	 70.	 Find the exact distance between P1 =  ( -1,  -7) and 
P2 =  ( 2,  -1).  Then approximate the distance to two  
decimal places.  
	 71.	 Find the exact value of  tan  c cos-1a-  7
8b d  .
	 72.	 Graph y = 4 sin a1
2
 xb. Show at least two periods.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 sin A cos B - cos A sin B    	 2.  30° or p
6     3.  15
2  
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 571.
	
Objectives	 	1  Solve SAS Triangles  (p. 569)
	
	 	2  Solve SSS Triangles  (p. 570)
	
	 	3  Solve Applied Problems  (p. 570)
8.3  The Law of Cosines
• Trigonometric Equations (Section 7.3, pp. 494–499)
•	 Distance Formula (Section 1.1, p. 37)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
In the previous section, the Law of Sines was used to solve Case 1 (SAA or ASA) 
and Case 2 (SSA) of an oblique triangle. In this section, the Law of Cosines is 
derived and used to solve Cases 3 and 4.
Case 3:  Two sides and the included angle are known (SAS).
Case 4:  Three sides are known (SSS).
Law of Cosines
For a triangle with sides a, b, c and opposite angles A, B, C, respectively,
	
 c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C	
(1)
	
 b2 = a2 + c2 - 2ac cos B 	
(2)
	
 a2 = b2 + c2 - 2bc cos A	
(3)
Theorem

Section 8.3  The Law of Cosines  569
Proof  Only formula (1) is proved here. Formulas (2) and (3) may be proved using 
the same argument.
Begin by strategically placing a triangle on a rectangular coordinate system so 
that the vertex of angle C is at the origin and side b lies along the positive x-axis. 
Regardless of whether C is acute, as in Figure 35(a), or obtuse, as in Figure 35(b), 
the vertex of angle B has coordinates 1a cos C, a sin C2. The vertex of angle A has 
coordinates 1b, 02.
Use the distance formula to compute c2.
 c2 = 1b - a cos C22 + 10 - a sin C22 
 = b2 - 2ab cos C + a2 cos2 C + a2 sin2 C
 = b2 - 2ab cos C + a2 1cos2 C + sin2 C2
 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C
Each of formulas (1), (2), and (3) may be stated in words as follows:
	
■
*The Law of Sines can be used if the angle sought is opposite the smaller side, thus ensuring that it is 
acute. (In Figure 36, use the Law of Sines to find A, the angle opposite the smaller side.)
Law of Cosines
The square of one side of a triangle equals the sum of the squares of the other 
two sides, minus twice their product times the cosine of their included angle.
Theorem
Observe that if the triangle is a right triangle (so that, say, C = 90°), formula (1) 
becomes the familiar Pythagorean Theorem: c2 = a2 + b2. The Pythagorean 
Theorem is a special case of the Law of Cosines!
Solve SAS Triangles
The Law of Cosines is used to solve Case 3 (SAS), which applies to triangles for 
which two sides and the included angle are known.
Using the Law of Cosines to Solve an SAS Triangle
Solve the triangle:  a = 2, b = 3, C = 60°
See Figure 36. Because two sides, a and b, and the included angle, C = 60°, are 
known, the Law of Cosines makes it easy to find the third side, c.
 c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C
 = 22 + 32 - 2 # 2 # 3 #  cos 60° 
 = 13 - a12 # 1
2 b = 7
 c = 27 
Side c is of length 17. To find the angles A and B, either the Law of Sines or the Law 
of Cosines may be used. It is preferable to use the Law of Cosines because it will lead to 
an equation with one solution. Using the Law of Sines would lead to an equation with 
two solutions that would need to be checked to determine which solution fits the given 
data.* We choose to use formulas (2) and (3) of the Law of Cosines to find A and B.
For A:
 a2 = b2 + c2 - 2bc cos A
 2bc cos A = b2 + c2 - a2 
 cos A = b2 + c2 - a2 
2bc
= 9 + 7 - 4
2 # 327 
=
12
627 
= 227 
7
 
 A = cos-1 227 
7
≈40.9°
1
Example 1
Solution
a = 2, b = 3, C = 60°
C
a
c
b
(b, 0)
(a cos C, a sin C)
O
(a)  Angle C is acute
y
x
B
A
y
x
C
B
A
a
c
O
(a cos C, a sin C)
b
(b, 0)
(b)  Angle C is obtuse
Figure 35 
Figure 36 
60°
2
3
B
A
c

570 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
For B:
 b2 = a2 + c2 - 2ac cos B
 cos B = a2 + c2 - b2 
2ac
= 4 + 7 - 9
427 
=
2
427 
= 27 
14  
 B = cos-1 27 
14  ≈79.1°
Notice that A + B + C = 40.9° + 79.1° + 60° = 180°, as required.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Solve SSS Triangles
The next example illustrates how the Law of Cosines is used when three sides of a 
triangle are known, Case 4 (SSS).
Using the Law of Cosines to Solve an SSS Triangle
Solve the triangle:  a = 4, b = 3, c = 6
See Figure 37. To find the angles A, B, and C, proceed as in the solution to  
Example 1.
For A:
 cos A = b2 + c2 - a2 
2bc
= 9 + 36 - 16
2 # 3 # 6
= 29
36 
 A = cos-1 29
36 ≈36.3°
For B:
 cos B = a2 + c2 - b2 
2ac
= 16 + 36 - 9
2 # 4 # 6
= 43
48 
 B = cos-1 43
48 ≈26.4°
Now use A and B to find C:
C = 180° - A - B ≈180° - 36.3° - 26.4° = 117.3°
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Solve Applied Problems
Correcting a Navigational Error
A motorized sailboat leaves Naples, Florida, bound for Key West, 150 miles 
away. Maintaining a constant speed of 15 miles per hour, but encountering heavy  
crosswinds and strong currents, the crew finds, after 4 hours, that the sailboat is off 
course by 20°.
(a)	 How far is the sailboat from Key West at this time?
(b)	 Through what angle should the sailboat turn to correct its course?
(c)	 How much time has been added to the trip because of this? (Assume that the 
speed remains at 15 miles per hour.)
•
2
Example 2
Solution
•
3
Example 3
Note  The angle B could also have 
been found by using the fact that the  
sum 
A + B + C = 180°, 
so 
B = 180° -
40.9° - 60° = 79.1°. 
However, using the Law of Cosines  
twice allows for a check.	
■
Figure 37 
B
A
C
6
4
3

Section 8.3  The Law of Cosines  571
See Figure 38. With a speed of 15 miles per hour, the sailboat has gone 60 miles after 
4 hours. The distance x of the sailboat from Key West is to be found, along with the 
angle u that the sailboat should turn through to correct its course.
(a)	 To find x, use the Law of Cosines, because two sides and the included angle are 
known.
 x2 = 1502 + 602 - 211502 1602 cos 20° ≈9185.53
 x ≈95.8
The sailboat is about 96 miles from Key West.
(b)	 With all three sides of the triangle now known, use the Law of Cosines again to 
find the angle A opposite the side of length 150 miles.
 1502 = 962 + 602 - 21962 1602 cos A
 9684 = -11,520 cos A
 cos A ≈-0.8406
 A ≈147.2°
So,
u = 180° - A ≈180° - 147.2° = 32.8°
The sailboat should turn through an angle of about 33° to correct its course.
(c)	 The total length of the trip is now 60 + 96 = 156 miles. The extra 6 miles will 
only require about 0.4 hour, or 24 minutes, more if the speed of 15 miles per hour 
is maintained.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
Solution
•
Historical Feature
T
 he Law of Sines was known vaguely long before it was explicitly stated 
by Nasir Eddin (about ad 1250). Ptolemy (about ad 150) was aware of 
it in a form using a chord function instead of the sine function. But it 
was first clearly stated in Europe by Regiomontanus, writing in 1464.
The Law of Cosines appears first in Euclid’s Elements (Book II), but in 
a well-disguised form in which squares built on the sides of triangles are 
added and a rectangle representing the cosine term is subtracted. It was 
thus known to all mathematicians because of their familiarity with Euclid’s 
work. An early modern form of the Law of Cosines, that for finding the 
angle when the sides are known, was stated by François Viète (in 1593).
The Law of Tangents (see Problem 63 in Section 8.2) has become  
obsolete. In the past it was used in place of the Law of Cosines, because  
the Law of Cosines was very inconvenient for calculation with  
logarithms or slide rules. Mixing of addition and multiplication is now 
very easy on a calculator, however, and the Law of Tangents has been 
shelved along with the slide rule.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Write the formula for the distance d from P1 = 1x1, y12 to 
P2 = 1x2, y22. (p. 37) 
	 2.	 If u is an acute angle, solve the equation cos u = 12 
2 .  
(pp. 494–499) 
8.3  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 3.	 If three sides of a triangle are given, the Law of  
  is 
used to solve the triangle.
	 4.	 If one side and two angles of a triangle are given, which law 
can be used to solve the triangle?
(a)	 Law of Sines	
(b)  Law of Cosines
(c) Either a or b 
(d)  The triangle cannot be solved. 
	 5.	 If two sides and the included angle of a triangle are given, 
which law can be used to solve the triangle?
(a)	 Law of Sines	
(b)  Law of Cosines
(c) Either a or b 
(d)  The triangle cannot be solved. 
	 6.	 True or False  Given only the three sides of a triangle, there 
is insufficient information to solve the triangle. 
	 7.	 True or False  The Law of Cosines states that the square of 
one side of a triangle equals the sum of the squares of the 
other two sides, minus twice their product. 
	 8.	 True or False A special case of the Law of Cosines is the 
Pythagorean Theorem. 
Figure 38 
Key West
Naples
60
A
150
θ
x
20°
N
S
W
E

572 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
20°
2
5
b
C
A
Skill Building
In Problems 9–16, solve each triangle.
	 13.	
 
 
	 14.	
15.	 	

 
	 16.	
9.	
	 10.	
11.	
45°
2
4
b
A
C
30
4
3
a
B
C
95°
2
3
c
B
A
6
5
8
C
A
B
8
5
4
C
A
B
	 12.	
9
6
4
C
A
B
3
4
4
C
A
B
In Problems 17–32, solve each triangle.
	 17.	 a = 2, c = 1, B = 10°	
18.	 a = 3, b = 4, C = 40°	
19.	 a = 6, b = 4, C = 60°
	 20.	 b = 1, c = 3, A = 80°	
21.	 b = 4, c = 1, A = 120°	
22.	 a = 3, c = 2, B = 110°
	 23.	 a = 3, c = 2, B = 90°	
24.	 a = 2, b = 2, C = 50°	
25.	 a = 4, b = 5, c = 3
	 26.	 a = 12, b = 13, c = 5	
27.	 a = 3, b = 3, c = 2	
28.	 a = 2, b = 2, c = 2
	 29.	 a = 4, b = 3, c = 6	
30.	 a = 5, b = 8, c = 9	
31.	 a = 9, b = 7, c = 10
	 32.	 a = 10, b = 8, c = 5 
Mixed Practice
In Problems 33–42, solve each triangle using either the Law of Sines or the Law of Cosines.
	 33.	 B = 20°, C = 75°, b = 5	
34.	 A = 50°, B = 55°, c = 9	
35.	 a = 6, b = 8, c = 9
	 36.	 a = 14, b = 7, A = 85°	
37.	 B = 35°, C = 65°, a = 15	
38.	 a = 4, c = 5, B = 55°
	 39.	 A = 10°, a = 3, b = 10	
40.	 A = 65°, B = 72°, b = 7	
41.	 b = 5, c = 12, A = 60°
	 42.	 a = 10, b = 10, c = 15 
Applications and Extensions
	 43.	 Distance to the Green  A golfer hits an errant tee shot that 
lands in the rough. A marker in the center of the fairway is 
130 yards from the center of the green. While standing on 
the marker and facing the green, the golfer turns 110° toward 
his ball. He then paces off 30 yards to his ball. How far is the 
ball from the center of the green? 
(a)	 How far is it directly from Ft. Myers to Orlando? 
(b)	 What bearing should the pilot use to fly directly from  
Ft. Myers to Orlando? 
130 yd
30 yd
110
marker
ball
	 44.	 Navigation  An airplane flies due north from Ft. Myers to 
Sarasota, a distance of 150 miles, and then turns through an 
angle of 50° and flies to Orlando, a distance of 100 miles. See 
the figure.
50°
100 mi
150 mi
Orlando
Sarasota
Ft. Myers

Section 8.3  The Law of Cosines  573
	 45.	 Avoiding a Tropical Storm  A cruise ship maintains a  
speed of 23 knots (nautical miles per hour) sailing from San 
Juan to Barbados, a distance of 600 nautical miles. To avoid 
a tropical storm, the captain heads out of San Juan at a di-
rection of 13° off a direct heading to Barbados. The captain 
maintains the 23-knot speed for 12 hours, after which time 
the path to Barbados becomes clear of storms.
(a)	 Through what angle should the captain turn to head  
directly to Barbados? 
(b)	 Once the turn is made, how long will it be before the 
ship reaches Barbados if the same 23-knot speed is 
maintained? 
	 49.	 Finding the Length of a Guy Wire  The height of a radio 
tower is 500 feet, and the ground on one side of the tower 
slopes upward at an angle of 10° (see the figure).
(a)	 How long should a guy wire be if it is to connect to the 
top of the tower and be secured at a point on the sloped 
side 100 feet from the base of the tower? 
(b)	 How long should a second guy wire be if it is to connect 
to the middle of the tower and be secured at a position 
100 feet from the base on the flat side? 
13$
Barbados
San Juan
600
	 46.	 Revising a Flight Plan  In attempting to fly from Chicago to 
Louisville, a distance of 330 miles, a pilot inadvertently took 
a course that was 10° in error, as indicated in the figure.
(a)	 If the aircraft maintains an average speed of 220 miles 
per hour, and if the error in direction is discovered after 
15 minutes, through what angle should the pilot turn to 
head toward Louisville? 
(b)	 What new average speed should the pilot maintain so 
that the total time of the trip is 90 minutes? 
10°
Error detected
here
330 mi
Louisville
Chicago
	 47.	 Major League Baseball Field  Suppose a certain baseball  
diamond is a square 65 feet on a side. The pitching rubber 
is located 41.5 feet from home plate on a line joining home 
plate and second base.
(a)	 How far is it from the pitching rubber to first base? 
(b)	 How far is it from the pitching rubber to second base? 
(c)	 If a pitcher faces home plate, through what angle does 
he need to turn to face first base? 
	 48.	 Little League Baseball Field  According to Little League 
baseball official regulations, the diamond is a square 60 feet 
on a side. The pitching rubber is located 46 feet from home 
plate on a line joining home plate and second base.
(a)	 How far is it from the pitching rubber to first base?
(b)	 How far is it from the pitching rubber to second base?
(c)	 If a pitcher faces home plate, through what angle does 
he need to turn to face first base? 
	 50.	 Finding the Length of a Guy Wire  A radio tower 500 feet 
high is located on the side of a hill with an inclination to the 
horizontal of 5°. See the figure. How long should two guy 
wires be if they are to connect to the top of the tower and 
be secured at two points 100 feet directly above and directly 
below the base of the tower? 
	 51.	 Wrigley Field, Home of the Chicago Cubs  The distance 
from home plate to the fence in dead center in Wrigley Field 
is 400 feet (see the figure). How far is it from the fence in 
dead center to third base? 
100 ft
500 ft
100 ft
10°
100 ft
100 ft
5°
500 ft
90 ft
90 ft
400 ft

574 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	 52.	 Little League Baseball  The distance from home plate to the 
fence in dead center at the Oak Lawn Little League field is 
280 feet. How far is it from the fence in dead center to third 
base? 
[Hint: The distance between the bases in Little League is 
60 feet.]
	 53.	 Building a Swing Set  Clint is building a wooden swing set 
for his children. Each supporting end of the swing set is to be 
an A-frame constructed with two 10-foot-long 4 by 4’s joined 
at a 45° angle. To prevent the swing set from tipping over, 
Clint wants to secure the base of each A-frame to concrete 
footings. How far apart should the footings for each A-frame 
be? 
	 54.	 Rods and Pistons  Rod OA rotates about the fixed point O 
so that point A travels on a circle of radius r. Connected to 
point A is another rod AB of length L 7 2r, and point B is 
connected to a piston. See the figure. Show that the distance x  
between point O and point B is given by
x = r cos u + 2r 2 cos2 u + L2 - r 2  
where u is the angle of rotation of rod OA.
	 55.	 Geometry  Show that the length d of a chord of a circle of 
radius r is given by the formula
d = 2r sin u
2 
where u is the central angle formed by the radii to the ends 
of the chord. See the figure. Use this result to derive the fact 
that sin u 6 u, where u 7 0 is measured in radians.
	 56.	 For any triangle, show that
cos C
2 = B
s1s - c2
ab
where s = 1
2  1a + b + c2.
[Hint: Use a Half-angle Formula and the Law of Cosines.]
	 57.	 For any triangle, show that
sin C
2 = B
1s - a2 1s - b2
ab
  
where s = 1
2  1a + b + c2.
	 58.	 Use the Law of Cosines to prove the identity
cos A
a
+ cos B
b
+ cos C
c
= a2 + b2 + c2 
2abc
 
A
O
L
x
r
θ
B
d
r
r
θ
O
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 59.	 What do you do first if you are asked to solve a triangle and 
are given two sides and the included angle?
	 60.	 What do you do first if you are asked to solve a triangle and 
are given three sides?
	 61.	 Make up an applied problem that requires using the Law of 
Cosines.
	 62.	 Write down your strategy for solving an oblique triangle.
	 63.	 State the Law of Cosines in words.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 64–67 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 64.	 Graph: R(x) = 2x + 1
x - 3
	 65.	 Solve 4x = 3x+1. If the solution is irrational, express it both 
in exact form and as a decimal rounded to three places.
	 66.	 Given  tan u = - 226
5
 and  cos u = - 5
7, find the exact  
value of each of the four remaining trigonometric functions.
	 67.	 Find an equation for the graph. 
x
y
3
23
p
–4
3p
–––
8
5p
–––
8
2
p
–8
p
–8
p
––4
p
––2
2
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 d = 21x2 - x1 22 + 1y2 - y1 22        2.  u = 45° or p
4 

Section 8.4  Area of a Triangle  575
In this section, several formulas for calculating the area of a triangle are derived. 
The most familiar of these follows.
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problem on page 577.
	
Objectives	 	1  Find the Area of SAS Triangles  (p. 575)
	
	 	2  Find the Area of SSS Triangles  (p. 576)
8.4  Area of a Triangle
• Geometry Essentials (Appendix A, Section A.2, pp. 958–962)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Note  Typically, A is used for area.  
However, because A is also used as the 
measure of an angle, K is used here for 
area to avoid confusion.	
■
The area K of a triangle is
	
K = 1
2
 bh	
(1)
where b is the base and h is an altitude drawn to that base.
Theorem
Proof  Look at the triangle in Figure 39. Around the triangle construct a rectangle of 
height h and base b, as shown in Figure 40.
Triangles 1 and 2 in Figure 40 are equal in area, as are triangles 3 and 4. 
Consequently, the area of the triangle with base b and altitude h is exactly half the 
area of the rectangle, which is bh.
Figure 39 
h
b
Figure 40 
■
h
b
2
3
1
4
Find the Area of SAS Triangles
If the base b and the altitude h to that base are known, then the area of such a triangle 
can be found using formula (1). Usually, though, the information required to use 
formula (1) is not given. Suppose, for example, that two sides a and b and the included 
angle C are known. See Figure 41. Then the altitude h can be found by noting that
h
a = sin C
so
h = a sin C
Using this fact in formula (1) produces
K = 1
2
 bh = 1
2
 b1a sin C2 = 1
2
 ab sin C
The area K of the triangle is given by the formula
1
	
K = 1
2
 ab sin C	
(2)
Figure 41 
h
b
a
C

576 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Dropping altitudes from the other two vertices of the triangle leads to the  
following corresponding formulas:
	
 K = 1
2
 bc sin A	
(3)
	
 K = 1
2
 ac sin B	
(4)
It is easiest to remember these formulas by using the following wording:
The area K of a triangle equals one-half the product of two of its sides times 
the sine of their included angle.
Theorem
Finding the Area of an SAS Triangle
Find the area K of the triangle for which a = 8, b = 6, and C = 30°.
See Figure 42. Use formula (2) to get
K = 1
2  ab sin C = 1
2 # 8 # 6 # sin 30° = 12 square units
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Find the Area of SSS Triangles
If the three sides of a triangle are known, another formula, called Heron’s Formula 
(named after Heron of Alexandria), can be used to find the area of a triangle.
Example 1
Solution
•
2
Heron’s Formula
The area K of a triangle with sides a, b, and c is
	
K = 2s1s - a2 1s - b2 1s - c2 	
(5)
where s = 1
2  1a + b + c2.
Theorem
Finding the Area of an SSS Triangle
Find the area of a triangle whose sides are 4, 5, and 7.
Let a = 4, b = 5, and c = 7. Then
s = 1
2  1a + b + c2 = 1
2  14 + 5 + 72 = 8
Heron’s Formula gives the area K as
K = 2s1s - a2 1s - b2 1s - c2 = 28 # 4 # 3 # 1 = 296 = 426 square units
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Proof of Heron’s Formula  The proof given here uses the Law of Cosines and is 
quite different from the proof given by Heron.
From the Law of Cosines,
c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C
Example 2
Solution
•
8
30˚
6
c
B
A
Figure 42 

Section 8.4  Area of a Triangle  577
and the Half-angle Formula,
cos2  C
2 = 1 + cos C
2
 
it follows that
 cos2  C
2  = 1 + cos C
2
=
1 + a2 + b2 - c2 
2ab
 
2
 
 = a2 + 2ab + b2 - c2 
4ab
= 1a + b22 - c2 
4ab
 
 = 1a + b - c2 1a + b + c2
4ab
= 21s - c2 # 2s
4ab
= s1s - c2
ab
 
Similarly, using sin2 C
2 = 1 - cos C
2
 , it follows that
	
sin2 C
2 = 1s - a2 1s - b2
ab
 	
(7)
Now use formula (2) for the area.
 K = 1
2
 ab sin C
 = 1
2
 ab # 2 sin C
2  cos C
2  
 
 = ab B
(s - a)(s - b)
ab
   B
s(s - c)
ab
 = 2s1s - a2 1s - b2 1s - c2 
c
Factor.
(6)
	
c
 a + b - c = a + b + c - 2c
  
 = 2s - 2c = 21s - c2
sin C = sinc 2a C
2 b d = 2 sin C
2 cos C
2 
Use equations (6) and (7).
■
Historical Feature
H
eron’s Formula (also known as Hero’s Formula) was first  
expressed by Heron of Alexandria (first century ad), who 
had, besides his mathematical talents, a good deal of  
engineering skills. In various temples his mechanical devices  
produced effects that seemed supernatural, and visitors presumably 
were thus moved to generosity. Heron’s book Metrica, on making 
such devices, has survived and was discovered in 1896 in the city of  
Constantinople.
Heron’s Formulas for the area of a triangle caused some mild  
discomfort in Greek mathematics, because a product with two factors 
was an area and one with three factors was a volume, but four factors 
seemed contradictory in Heron’s time.
‘Are You Prepared?’ The answer is given at the end of these exercises. If you get the wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The area K of a triangle whose base is b and whose height is h is 
  . (pp. 958–962)
8.4  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 2.	 If two sides a and b and the included angle C are known 
in a triangle, then the area K is found using the formula
	
	 K =                      .
	 3.	 The area K of a triangle with sides a, b, and c is
	
	 K =
, where s =                           .
	 4.	 True or False  The area of a triangle equals one-half the 
product of the lengths of two of its sides times the sine of 
their included angle. 
	 5.	 Given two sides of a triangle, b and c, and the included  
angle A, the altitude h from angle B to side b is given  
by                . 
(a)	 1
2ab sin A    (b)  b sin A    (c)  c sin A    (d)  1
2bc sin A
	 6.	 Heron’s Formula is used to find the area of                       
triangles.
(a)	 ASA    (b)  SAS    (c)  SSS    (d)  AAS 

578 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
20°
2
5
b
C
A
In Problems 15–26, find the area of each triangle. Round answers to two decimal places.
	 15.	 a = 2, c = 1, B = 10° 
	
16.	 a = 3,  b = 4,  C = 40° 
	
  17.	 a = 6,  b = 4,  C = 60° 
	 18.	 b = 1, c = 3, A = 80° 
	
19.	 b = 4, c = 1, A = 120° 
	
20.	 a = 3, c = 2, B = 110° 
	 21.	 a = 4, b = 5, c = 3 
	
22.	 a = 12, b = 13, c = 5  	
23.	 a = 3,  b = 3,  c = 2 
	 24.	 a = 2, b = 2, c = 2 
	
25.	 a = 4, b = 3, c = 6 
	
26.	 a = 5, b = 8, c = 9 
Skill Building
In Problems 7–14, find the area of each triangle. Round answers to two decimal places.
	 7.	 	
	 8.	 	
	 9.	 	
	 13.	 	
	 14.	 	
45°
2
4
b
A
C
30
4
3
a
B
C
95°
2
3
c
B
A
6
5
8
C
A
B
8
5
4
C
A
B
9
6
4
C
A
B
3
4
4
C
A
B
	 11.	 	
	 12.	 	
	 10.	
Applications and Extensions
	 27.	 Area of an ASA Triangle  If two angles and the included 
side are given, the third angle is easy to find. Use the Law of 
Sines to show that the area K of a triangle with side a and 
angles A, B, and C is
K = a2 sin B sin C
2 sin A
 
	 28.	 Area of a Triangle  Prove the two other forms of the  
formula given in Problem 27.
K = b2 sin A sin C
2 sin B  and K = c2 sin A sin B
2 sin C
 
In Problems 29–34, use the results of Problem 27 or 28 to find the area of each triangle. Round answers to two decimal places.
	 29.	 A = 70°, B = 10°, a = 10 
	
30.	 A = 50°, C = 20°, a = 3 
	
31.	 B = 40°, C = 70°, b = 10 
	 32.	 A = 70°, B = 60°, c = 4 
	
33.	 A = 120°, C = 40°, c = 6 
	
34.	 B = 10°, C = 100°, b = 2 
	 35.	 Area of a Segment  Find the area of the segment (shaded in 
blue in the figure) of a circle whose radius is 6 feet, formed 
by a central angle of 50°. 
[Hint: Subtract the area of the triangle from the area of the 
sector to obtain the area of the segment.]
	 38.	 Amount of Material to Make a Tent  A cone-shaped tent is 
made from a circular piece of canvas 24 feet in diameter by 
removing a sector with central angle 100° and connecting 
the ends. What is the surface area of the tent? 
	 39.	 Dimensions of Home Plate  The dimensions of home plate 
at any major league baseball stadium are shown. Find the 
area of home plate. 
	 36.	 Area of a Segment  Find the area of the segment of a circle 
whose radius is 5 inches, formed by a central angle of 40°.
	 37.	 Cost of a Triangular Lot  The dimensions of a triangular lot 
are 170 feet by 104 feet by 146 feet. If the price of such land  
is $3 per square foot, how much does the lot cost? 
50$
6
12 in.
12 in.
17 in.
8.5 in.
8.5 in.

Section 8.4  Area of a Triangle  579
	 43.	 The Flatiron Building  Completed in 1902 in New York City, 
the Flatiron Building is triangular shaped and bounded 
by 22nd Street, Broadway, and 5th Avenue. The building  
measures approximately 87 feet on the 22nd Street 
side, 190 feet on the Broadway side, and 173 feet on the  
5th Avenue side. Approximate the ground area covered by 
the building. 
Source: Sarah Bradford	
 
Landau and Carl W. Condit,	
 
Rise of the New York 	  
Skyscraper: 1865–1913. 	
 
New Haven, CT: Yale 	 
University Press, 1996
	 40.	 Computing Areas  See the figure. Find the area of the 
shaded region enclosed in a semicircle of diameter  
10 inches. The length of the chord PQ is 8 inches. 
[Hint: Triangle PQR is a right triangle.]
	 41.	 Geometry  Consult the figure below, which shows a circle 
of radius r with center at O. Find the area K of the shaded  
region as a function of the central angle u. 
	 44.	 Bermuda Triangle  The Bermuda Triangle is roughly defined 
by Hamilton, Bermuda; San Juan, Puerto Rico; and Fort 
Lauderdale, Florida. The distances from Hamilton to Fort 
Lauderdale, Fort Lauderdale to San Juan, and San Juan 
to Hamilton are approximately 1028, 1046, and 965 miles,  
respectively. Ignoring the curvature of Earth, approximate 
the area of the Bermuda Triangle. 
Source: www.worldatlas.com
	 45.	 Geometry  Refer to the figure. If 0 OA0 = 1, show that:
(a)	 Area ∆OAC = 1
2 sin a cos a
(b)	 Area ∆OCB = 1
2  0 OB0 2 sin b cos b
(c)	 Area ∆OAB = 1
2  0 OB0  sin1a + b2
(d)	 0 OB0 = cos a
cos b 
(e)	 sin1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b
[Hint: Area ∆OAB = Area ∆OAC + Area ∆OCB]
8
Q
R
P
10
O
θ
	 42.	 Approximating the Area of a Lake  To approximate the area 
of a lake, a surveyor walks around the perimeter of the lake, 
taking the measurements shown in the illustration. Using this 
technique, what is the approximate area of the lake?
[Hint: Use the Law of Cosines on the three triangles shown, 
and then find the sum of their areas.] 
80 ft
20 ft
35 ft
40 ft
45 ft
100°
15°
	 46.	 Geometry  Refer to the figure, in which a unit circle is drawn. 
The line segment DB is tangent to the circle and u is acute.
(a)	 Express the area of ∆OBC in terms of sin u and cos u.
(b)	 Express the area of ∆OBD in terms of sin u and cos u.
(c)	 The area of the sector OBC of the circle is 1
2
 u, where u
	
is measured in radians. Use the results of parts (a) and (b) 
and the fact that
Area ∆OBC 6 Area OBC 6 Area ∆OBD
	
to show that
1 6
u
sin u 6
1
cos u 
¬
¬
B
C
A
D
O
1
α
β
y
x
θ
C
O
1
1
21
21
B
D

580 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	 48.	 Another Cow Problem  If the barn in Problem 47 is  
rectangular, 10 feet by 20 feet, what is the maximum grazing 
area for the cow? 
	 49.	 Perfect Triangles  A perfect triangle is one having integers 
for sides for which the area is numerically equal to the 
perimeter. Show that the triangles with the given side 
lengths are perfect.
(a)	 9, 10, 17            (b)  6, 8, 10
	 50.	 If h1, h2, and h3  are the altitudes dropped from P, Q, and R, 
respectively, in a triangle (see the figure), show that
1
h1 +
1
h2 +
1
h3 = s
K 
where K is the area of the triangle and s = 1
2  1a + b + c2.
[Hint: h1 = 2K
a  .]
Barn
Rope
A2
A 3
A1
10
10
h1
a
Q
P
R
B
C
A
c
b
	 51.	 Show that a formula for the altitude h from a vertex to the 
opposite side a of a triangle is
h = a sin B sin C
sin A
 
	 52.	 A triangle has vertices A = (0, 0), B = (1, 0), and C, where 
C is the point on the unit circle corresponding to an angle 
of 105° when it is drawn in standard position. Find the exact 
area of the triangle. State the answer in simplified form with 
a rationalized denominator.
Inscribed Circle   For Problems 53–56, the lines that bisect each angle of 
a triangle meet in a single point O, and the perpendicular distance r  
from O to each side of the triangle is the same. The circle with  
center at O and radius r is called the inscribed circle of the triangle 
(see the figure).
Q
a
O
b
c
r
r
r
R
P
C
2
C
2
B
2
A
2
A
2
B
2
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 57.	 What do you do first if you are asked to find the area of a triangle and are given two sides and the included angle?
	 58.	 What do you do first if you are asked to find the area of a triangle and are given three sides?
	 59.	 State the area of an SAS triangle in words.
* Suggested by Professor Teddy Koukounas of Suffolk Community College, who learned of it from an old farmer in Virginia. Solution provided by  
Professor Kathleen Miranda of SUNY at Old Westbury.
	 47.	 The Cow Problem*  A cow is tethered to one corner of a 
square barn, 10 feet by 10 feet, with a rope 100 feet long. 
What is the maximum grazing area for the cow?
[See the illustration that follows.] 
	 53.	 Apply the formula from Problem 51 to triangle OPQ to 
show that
r =
c sin A
2  sin B
2  
cos C
2  
 
	 54.	 Use the result of Problem 53 and the results of Problems 56 
and 57 in Section 8.3 to show that
cot C
2 = s - c
r
 
where s = 1
2 1a + b + c2.
	 55.	 Show that
cot A
2 + cot B
2 + cot C
2 = s
r 
	 56.	 Show that the area K of triangle PQR is K = rs, where 
s = 1
2  1a + b + c2. Then show that
r = C
(s - a)(s - b)(s - c)
s
  

Section 8.5  Simple Harmonic Motion; Damped Motion; Combining Waves  581
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 60–63 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 60.	 Without graphing, determine whether the quadratic function
	
	 f (x) = - 3x2 + 12x + 5 has a maximum value or a minimum 
value, and then find the value. 
	 61.	 Solve the inequality: x + 1
x2 - 9 … 0 
	 62.	 P = a- 27
3 , 22
3 b is the point on the unit circle that 
	
	 corresponds to a real number t. Find the exact values of the 
six trigonometric functions of t.
	 63.	 Establish the identity: csc u - sin u = cos u cot u
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answer
	 1.	 K = 1
2
 bh
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problem on page 587.
	
Objectives	 	1  Build a Model for an Object in Simple Harmonic Motion  (p. 581)
	
	 	2  Analyze Simple Harmonic Motion  (p. 583)
	
	 	3  Analyze an Object in Damped Motion  (p. 584)
	
	 	4  Graph the Sum of Two Functions  (p. 585)
8.5  Simple Harmonic Motion; Damped Motion;  
  Combining Waves
•	 Sinusoidal Graphs (Section 6.4, pp. 435–440)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Build a Model for an Object in Simple Harmonic Motion
Many physical phenomena can be described as simple harmonic motion. Radio and 
television waves, light waves, sound waves, and water waves exhibit motion that is 
simple harmonic.
The swinging of a pendulum, the vibrations of a tuning fork, and the bobbing of a 
weight attached to a coiled spring are examples of vibrational motion. In this type of 
motion, an object swings back and forth over the same path. In Figure 43, the point B 
is the equilibrium (rest) position of the vibrating object. The amplitude is the distance 
from the object’s rest position to its point of greatest displacement (either point A or 
point C in Figure 43). The period is the time required to complete one vibration—that 
is, the time it takes to go from, say, point A through B to C and back to A.
1
Simple harmonic motion is a special kind of vibrational motion in which 
the acceleration a of the object is directly proportional to the negative of its  
displacement d from its rest position. That is, a = -kd, k 7 0.
For example, when the mass hanging from the spring in Figure 43 is pulled 
down from its rest position B to the point C, the force of the spring tries to restore 
the mass to its rest position. Assuming that there is no frictional force* to retard the 
motion, the amplitude will remain constant. The force increases in direct proportion 
to the distance that the mass is pulled from its rest position. Since the force increases 
directly, the acceleration of the mass of the object must do likewise, because (by 
Newton’s Second Law of Motion) force is directly proportional to acceleration. As 
a result, the acceleration of the object varies directly with its displacement, and the 
motion is an example of simple harmonic motion.
*If friction is present, the amplitude will decrease with time to 0. This type of motion is an example of 
damped motion, which is discussed later in this section.
Tuning fork
Figure 43  Coiled spring
Compressed
A
B
C
Rest
Stretched
Amplitude
Amplitude

582 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Simple harmonic motion is related to circular motion. To see this relationship, 
consider a circle of radius a, with center at 10, 02. See Figure 44. Suppose that 
an object initially placed at 1a, 02 moves counterclockwise around the circle at a  
constant angular speed v. Suppose further that after time t has elapsed the object 
is at the point P = 1x, y2 on the circle. The angle u, in radians, swept out by the  
ray  OP>
 in this time t is
u = vt 
v = u
t
The coordinates of the point P at time t are
 x = a cos u = a cos1vt2
 y = a sin u = a sin1vt2
Corresponding to each position P = 1x, y2 of the object moving about the circle, 
there is the point Q = 1x, 02, called the projection of P on the x-axis. As P moves 
around the circle at a constant rate, the point Q moves back and forth between the 
points 1a, 02 and 1 -a, 02 along the x-axis with a motion that is simple harmonic. 
Similarly, for each point P there is a point Q′ = 10, y2, called the projection of P 
on the y-axis. As P moves around the circle, the point Q′ moves back and forth 
between the points 10, a2 and 10, -a2 on the y-axis with a motion that is simple 
harmonic. Simple harmonic motion can be described as the projection of constant 
circular motion on a coordinate axis.
To put it another way, again consider a mass hanging from a spring where the mass 
is pulled down from its rest position to the point C and then released. See Figure 45(a). 
The graph shown in Figure 45(b) describes the displacement d of the object from its 
rest position as a function of time t, assuming that no frictional force is present.
Figure 44 
x
y
θ
(2a, 0)
(a, 0)
(0, a)
(0, 2a)
Q′5 (0, y)
Q 5 (x, 0)
P 5 (x, y)
O
Figure 45 
(a)
(b)
A
d
t
B
C
Simple Harmonic Motion
An object that moves on a coordinate axis so that the displacement d from its 
rest position at time t is given by either
d = a cos1vt2 or d = a sin1vt2
where a and v 7 0 are constants, moves with simple harmonic motion. The 
motion has amplitude 0 a0  and period 2p
v .
Theorem
The frequency f of an object in simple harmonic motion is the number of  
oscillations per unit time. Since the period is the time required for one oscillation, it 
follows that the frequency is the reciprocal of the period; that is,
f = v
2p  v 7 0

Figure 46 
Rest position
t = 0
d
5
0
−5
Build a Model for an Object in Harmonic Motion
Suppose that an object attached to a coiled spring is pulled down a distance of  
5 inches from its rest position and then released. If the time for one oscillation is  
3 seconds, develop a model that relates the displacement d of the object from its rest 
position after time t (in seconds). Assume no friction.
The motion of the object is simple harmonic. See Figure 46. When the object is  
released 1t = 02, the displacement of the object from the rest position is -5 units 
(since the object was pulled down). Because d = -5 when t = 0, it is easier to use 
the cosine function*
d = a cos1vt2
to describe the motion. Now the amplitude is 0 -50 = 5 and the period is 3, so
a = -5 and 2p
v = period = 3, so v = 2p
3  
An equation that models the motion of the object is
d = -5 cosc 2p
3   td
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5
Analyze Simple Harmonic Motion
Analyzing the Motion of an Object
Suppose that the displacement d (in meters) of an object at time t (in seconds)  
satisfies the equation
d = 10 sin15t2
(a)	 Describe the motion of the object.
(b)	 What is the maximum displacement from its resting position?
(c) What is the time required for one oscillation?
(d) What is the frequency?
Observe that the given equation is of the form
d = a sin1vt2  d = 10 sin(5t)
where a = 10 and v = 5.
(a)	 The motion is simple harmonic.
(b)	 The maximum displacement of the object from its resting position is the  
amplitude: 0 a0 = 10 meters.
(c) The time required for one oscillation is the period:
Period = 2p
v = 2p
5  seconds
(d) The frequency is the reciprocal of the period.
Frequency = f =
5
2p oscillation per second
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Example 1
Solution
•
2
Example 2
Solution
•
Note  In the solution to Example 1, 
a = -5 because the object is initially 
pulled down. (If the initial direction is up, 
then use a = 5.)	
■
* No phase shift is required when a cosine function is used.
Section 8.5  Simple Harmonic Motion; Damped Motion; Combining Waves  583

584 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Analyze an Object in Damped Motion
Most physical phenomena are affected by friction or other resistive forces. These 
forces remove energy from a moving system and thereby damp its motion. For 
example, when a mass hanging from a spring is pulled down a distance a and 
released, the friction in the spring causes the distance that the mass moves from 
its at-rest position to decrease over time. As a result, the amplitude of any real  
oscillating spring or swinging pendulum decreases with time due to air resistance, 
friction, and so forth. See Figure 47.
3
Figure 47 
a
a
t
A model that describes this phenomenon maintains a sinusoidal component, 
but the amplitude of this component will decrease with time to account for the 
damping effect. In addition, the period of the oscillating component will be affected 
by the damping. The next result, from physics, describes damped motion.
Damped Motion
The displacement d of an oscillating object from its at-rest position at time t is 
given by
d1t2 = ae-bt>(2m) cos¢B
v2 - b2 
4m2  t≤
where b is the damping factor or damping coefficient and m is the mass of the 
oscillating object. Here 0 a0  is the displacement at t = 0, and 2p
v   is the period 
under simple harmonic motion (no damping).
Theorem
Notice that for b = 0 (zero damping), we have the formula for simple harmonic 
motion with amplitude 0 a0  and period 2p
v  .
Analyzing a Damped Vibration Curve
Analyze the damped vibration curve
d1t2 = e-t>p cos t t Ú 0
The displacement d is the product of y = e-t>p  and y = cos t. Using properties of 
absolute value and the fact that 0 cos t0 … 1, it follows that
0 d1t2 0 = 0 e-t>p cos t0 =  0 e-t>p 0 0 cos t0 … 0 e-t>p 0 = e-t>p 
As a result,
-e-t>p … d1t2 … e-t>p 
This means that the graph of d will lie between the graphs of y = e-t>p  and 
y = -e-t>p, called the bounding curves of d.
Example 3
Solution
       c
 e-t>p 7 0

Also, the graph of d will touch these graphs when 0 cos t0 = 1; that is, when 
t = 0, p, 2p, and so on. The x-intercepts of the graph of d occur when cos t = 0,
that is, at p
2, 3p
2 , 5p
2 , and so on. See Table 1.
Table 1
t
0
P
2 
P
3P
2  
2P
e-t>p 
1
e-1>2 
e-1 
e-3>2 
e-2 
cos t
1
0
-1
0
1
d(t) = e-t>p  cos t
1
0
-e-1 
0
e-2 
Point on graph of d
(0, 1)
ap
2, 0b
(p, -e-1 )
a3p
2   , 0b
(2p, e-2 )
The graphs of y = cos t, y = e-t>p, y = -e-t>p, and d1t2 = e-t>p cos t are shown in 
in Figure 48.
Figure 48 
•
d(t) = e−t/p cos t
y = cos t
t
1
2p
21
p–2
3p
2
y = −e−t/p
y = e−t/p
p
d
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Graph the Sum of Two Functions
Many physical and biological applications require the graph of the sum of two 
functions, such as
f1x2 = x + sin x or g1x2 = sin x + cos12x2
For example, if two tones are emitted, the sound produced is the sum of the 
waves produced by the two tones. See Problem 57 for an explanation of Touch-Tone 
phones.
To graph the sum of two (or more) functions, use the method of adding  
y-coordinates described next.
Graphing the Sum of Two Functions
Use the method of adding y-coordinates to graph f1x2 = x + sin x.
First, graph the component functions,
y = f11x2 = x  y = f21x2 = sin x
4
Example 4
Solution
Figure 49 
Y3 5 2e2x/p
Y1 5 e2x/p cosx
Y2 5 e2x/p
0
21
1
2p
Exploration
Graph Y1 = e-x>p  cos x, along with Y2 = e-x>p and Y3 = -e-x>p , for 0 … x … 2p. Determine where 
Y1  has its first turning point (local minimum). Compare this to where Y1  intersects Y3  .
Result  Figure 49 shows the graphs of Y1 = e-x>p  cos x, Y2 = e-x>p , and Y3 = -e-x>p. Using  
MINIMUM, the first turning point occurs at x ≈2.83; Y1  INTERSECTS Y3  at x = p ≈3.14.
Section 8.5  Simple Harmonic Motion; Damped Motion; Combining Waves  585

586 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
on the same coordinate system. See Figure 50(a). Now, select several values
of x say x = 0, x = p
2 , x = p, x = 3p
2 , and x = 2p, and use them to compute
f1x2 = f11x2 + f21x2. Table 2 shows the computations. Plot these points and  
connect them to get the graph, as shown in Figure 50(b).
Table 2
x
0
P
2 
P
3P
2  
2P
y = f1 (x) = x
0
p
2 
p
3p
2  
2p
y = f2 (x) = sin x
0
1
0
-1
0
f(x) = x + sin x
0
p
2 + 1 ≈2.57
p
3p
2  - 1 ≈3.71
2p
Point on graph of f
(0, 0)
ap
2  , 2.57b
(p, p)
a3p
2   , 3.71b
(2p, 2p)
Figure 50
x
1
–2

2
(a)
(b)
1
2
3
4
5
6
–2
3
––2
y
y  x
y  x
x
1
–2

2
1
1
, 2.57
(, )
(2, 2)
)
(
, 3.71)
(
1
2
3
4
5
6
–2
–2
3
––2
3
––2
y
y  sin x
f(x)  x  sin x
y  sin x
In Figure 50(b), notice that the graph of f1x2 = x + sin x intersects the line 
y = x whenever sin x = 0. Also, notice that the graph of f is not periodic.
Check:	 Graph Y1 = x, Y2 = sin x, and Y3 = x + sin x and compare the result 
with Figure 50(b). Use INTERSECT to verify that the graphs of Y1  
and Y3  intersect when sin x = 0.
The next example shows a periodic graph.
Graphing the Sum of  Two Sinusoidal Functions
Use the method of adding y-coordinates to graph
f1x2 = sin x + cos12x2
Table 3 shows the steps for computing several points on the graph of f. Figure 51 on 
page 587 illustrates the graphs of the component functions, y = f11x2 = sin x and 
y = f21x2 = cos12x2, and the graph of f1x2 = sin x + cos12x2, which is shown 
in red.
•
Example 5
Solution
Table 3
x
− P
2
0
P
2 
P
3P
2  
2P
y = f1 (x) = sin x
-1
0
1
0
-1
0
y = f2 (x) = cos(2x)
-1
1
-1
1
-1
1
f(x) = sin x + cos(2x)
-2
1
0
1
-2
1
Point on graph of f
a-  p
2  , -2b
(0, 1)
ap
2  , 0b
(p, 1)
a3p
2   , -2b
(2p, 1)

Notice that f is periodic, with period 2p.
Check:	 Graph Y1 = sin x, Y2 = cos12x2, and Y3 = sin x + cos12x2 and  
compare the result with Figure 51.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
•
Figure 51 
y  cos (2x)
x
1
2
–2

2
1
2
–2
3
––2
y
f(x)  sin x  cos (2x) 
y  sin x
‘Are You Prepared?’ The answer is given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The amplitude A and period T of f1x2 = 5 sin14x2 are    
   and 
  . (pp. 435–440)
8.5  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 2.	 The motion of an object obeys the equation d = 4 cos16t2. 
Such motion is described as  
   
. The  
number 4 is called the  
.
	 3.	 When a mass hanging from a spring is pulled down and then 
released, the motion is called  
   
  if there is 
no frictional force to retard the motion, and the motion is 
called  
  if there is such friction.
	 4.	 True or False  If the distance d of an object from its rest  
position at time t is given by a sinusoidal graph, the motion 
of the object is simple harmonic motion. 
Skill Building
In Problems 5–8, an object attached to a coiled spring is pulled down a distance a from its rest position and then released. Assuming that 
the motion is simple harmonic with period T, write an equation that relates the displacement d of the object from its rest position after  
t seconds. Also assume that the positive direction of the motion is up.
	 5.	  a = 5; T = 2 seconds 
	
6.	 a = 10; T = 3 seconds 
	 7.	 a = 4; T = p
2 seconds 
	
8.	 a = 6; T = p seconds 
	 9.	 Rework Problem 5 under the same conditions, except that 
at time t = 0, the object is at its resting position and moving 
down. 
	 10.	 Rework Problem 6 under the same conditions, except that 
at time t = 0, the object is at its resting position and moving 
down. 
	 11.	 Rework Problem 7 under the same conditions, except that 
at time t = 0, the object is at its resting position and moving 
down. 
	 12.	 Rework Problem 8 under the same conditions, except that 
at time t = 0, the object is at its resting position and moving 
down. 
In Problems 13–20, the displacement d (in meters) of an object at time t (in seconds) is given.
(a)	Describe the motion of the object.
(b)	What is the maximum displacement from its resting position?
(c)	What is the time required for one oscillation?
(d)	What is the frequency?
	 13.	 d = 5 sin13t2	
14.	 d = 4 sin12t2	
15.	 d = 5 cosap
2  tb	
16.	 d = 6 cos1pt2
	 17.	 d = - 2 cos12t2	
18.	 d = - 3 sina1
2
 tb	
19.	 d = 4 + 3 sin1pt2	
20.	 d = 6 + 2 cos12pt2
Section 8.5  Simple Harmonic Motion; Damped Motion; Combining Waves  587

588 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
In Problems 21–24, graph each damped vibration curve for 0 … t … 2p.
	 21.	 d1t2 = e-t>p cos12t2	
22.	 d1t2 = e-t>2p cos12t2	
23.	 d1t2 = e-t>4p cos t	
24.	 d1t2 = e-t>2p cos t
In Problems 25–32, use the method of adding y-coordinates to graph each function.
	 25.	 f1x2 = x + cos x	
26.	 f1x2 = x + cos12x2	
27.	 f1x2 = x - cos x
	 28.	 f1x2 = x - sin x	
29.	 f1x2 = sin12x2 + cos x	
30.	 f1x2 = sin x + cos x
	 31.	 g1x2 = cos12x2 + cos x	
32.	 g1x2 = sin x + sin12x2
Mixed Practice
In Problems 33–38, (a) use the Product-to-Sum Formulas to express each product as a sum, and (b) use the method of adding  
y-coordinates to graph each function on the interval 30,  2p4.
	 33.	 f1x2 = sin12x2 sin x	
34.	 F1x2 = sin13x2 sin x	
35.	 G1x2 = cos14x2 cos 12x2
	 36.	 h1x2 = cos12x2 cos1x2	
37.	 H1x2 = 2 sin13x2 cos1x2	
38.	 g1x2 = 2 sin x cos13x2
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 39–44, an object of mass m (in grams) attached to a coiled spring with damping factor b (in grams per second) is pulled down 
a distance a (in centimeters) from its rest position and then released. Assume that the positive direction of the motion is up and the period 
is T (in seconds) under simple harmonic motion.
(a)	Write an equation that relates the displacement d of the object from its rest position after t seconds.
(b)	Graph the equation found in part (a) for 5 oscillations using a graphing utility.
	 39.	 m = 25, a = 10, b = 0.7, T = 5	
40.	 m = 20, a = 15, b = 0.75, T = 6
	 41.	 m = 30, a = 18, b = 0.6, T = 4	
42.	 m = 15, a = 16, b = 0.65, T = 5
	 43.	 m = 10, a = 5, b = 0.8, T = 3	
44.	 m = 10, a = 5, b = 0.7, T = 3
In Problems 45–50, the distance d (in meters) of the bob of a pendulum of mass m (in kilograms) from its rest position at time t (in seconds) 
is given. The bob is released from the left of its rest position and represents a negative direction.
(a)	Describe the motion of the object. Be sure to give the mass and damping factor.
(b)	What is the initial displacement of the bob? That is, what is the displacement at t = 0?
(c)	Graph the motion using a graphing utility.
(d)	What is the displacement of the bob at the start of the second oscillation?
(e)	What happens to the displacement of the bob as time increases without bound?
	 45.	 d = -20e-0.7t>40 cos¢ Ca2p
5 b
2
- 0.49
1600 t≤	
46.	 d = - 20e-0.8t>40 cos¢ Ca2p
5 b
2
- 0.64
1600 t≤
	 47.	 d = - 30e-0.6t>80 cos¢ Ca2p
7 b
2
- 0.36
6400 t≤	
48.	 d = - 30e-0.5t>70 cos¢ Cap
2 b
2
- 0.25
4900 t≤
	 49.	 d = - 15e-0.9t>30 cos¢ Cap
3 b
2
- 0.81
900  t≤	
50.	 d = - 10e-0.8t>50 cos¢ Ca2p
3 b
2
- 0.64
2500 t≤
	 51.	 Loudspeaker  A loudspeaker diaphragm is oscillating 
in simple harmonic motion described by the equation 
d = a cos1vt2 with a frequency of 627 hertz (cycles per 
second) and a maximum displacement of 0.50 millimeter. 
Find v and then determine the equation that describes the 
movement of the diaphragm. 
	 52.	 Colossus  Added to Six Flags St. Louis in 1986, the Colossus 
is a giant Ferris wheel. Its diameter is 165 feet, it rotates 
at a rate of about 1.6 revolutions per minute, and the  
bottom of the wheel is 15 feet above the ground. Determine an  
equation that relates a rider’s height above the ground at 
time t. Assume the passenger begins the ride at the bottom 
of the wheel.
Source: Six Flags Theme Parks, Inc.
	 53.	 Tuning Fork  The end of a tuning fork moves in simple  
harmonic motion described by the equation d = a sin1vt2. 
If a tuning fork for the note A above middle C on an  
even-tempered scale has a frequency of 440 hertz (cycles per 
second), find v. If the maximum displacement of the end 
of the tuning fork is 0.01 millimeter, determine the equation 
that describes the movement of the tuning fork.
	 54.	 Tuning Fork  The end of a tuning fork moves in simple  
harmonic motion described by the equation d = a sin(vt). 
If a tuning fork for the note E above middle C on an 
even-tempered scale (E4) has a frequency of approximately 
329.63 hertz (cycles per second), find v. If the maximum  
displacement of the end of the tuning fork is 0.025 millimeter, 
determine the equation that describes the movement of the 
tuning fork. 
Source: David Lapp. Physics of Music and Musical  
Instruments. Medford, MA: Tufts University, 2003

	 55.	 Charging a Capacitor  See the illustration. If a charged  
capacitor is connected to a coil by closing a switch, energy 
is transferred to the coil and then back to the capacitor in 
an oscillatory motion. The voltage V (in volts) across the  
capacitor will gradually diminish to 0 with time t (in seconds).
(a)	 Graph the function relating V and t:
V1t2 = e-t>3 cos1pt2  0 … t … 3
(b)	 At what times t will the graph of V touch the graph  
of y = e-t>3? When does the graph of V touch the graph 
of y = - e-t>3?
(c)	 When will the voltage V be between - 0.4 and 0.4 volt?
Use a graphing utility to graph this function for 
0 … x … 4 and compare the result to the graphs obtained 
in parts (a) and (b).
(d)	 What do you think the next approximation to the  
sawtooth curve is?
	 57.	 Touch-Tone Phones  On a Touch-Tone phone, each button 
produces a unique sound. The sound produced is the sum of 
two tones, given by
y = sin12plt2 and y = sin12pht2
	
	 where l and h are the low and high frequencies (cycles per 
second) shown in the illustration. For example, if you touch 7, 
the low frequency is l = 852 cycles per second and the high 
frequency is h = 1209 cycles per second. The sound emitted 
by touching 7 is
y = sin32p18522t4 + sin32p112092t4
	
	 Use a graphing utility to graph the sound emitted by  
touching 7.
	 56.	 The Sawtooth Curve  An oscilloscope often displays a  
sawtooth curve. This curve can be approximated by sinusoidal 
curves of varying periods and amplitudes.
(a)	 Use a graphing utility to graph the following function, 
which can be used to approximate the sawtooth curve.
f1x2 = 1
2 sin12px2 + 1
4 sin14px2  0 … x … 4
(b)	 A better approximation to the sawtooth curve is given 
by
f1x2 = 1
2  sin12px2 + 1
4 sin14px2 + 1
8 sin18px2
Use a graphing utility to graph this function for 
0 … x … 4 and compare the result to the graph obtained 
in part (a).
(c)	 A third and even better approximation to the sawtooth 
curve is given by
f1x2 = 1
2 sin12px2 + 1
4 sin14px2 + 1
8 sin18px2 + 1
16 sin116px2
	 58.	 Use a graphing utility to graph the sound emitted by  
the * key on a Touch-Tone phone. See Problem 57.
	 59.	 CBL Experiment  Pendulum motion is analyzed to estimate 
simple harmonic motion. A plot is generated with the  
position of the pendulum over time. The graph is used to find 
a sinusoidal curve of the form y = A cos 3B1x - C2 4 + D. 
Determine the amplitude, period, and frequency. 
	 60.	 CBL Experiment  The sound from a tuning fork is collected 
over time. A model of the form y = A cos 3B1x - C24 is 
fitted to the data. Determine the amplitude, frequency, and 
period of the graph. 
	
	 (Activity 23, Real-World Math with the CBL System.)
Capacitor
Switch
Coil
+
–
50mv
V1
2B. Gm.V
Trig
TVline
OH1
Obase1
697
cycles/sec
770
cycles/sec
852
cycles/sec
941
cycles/sec
1477
 cycles/sec
1336
 cycles/sec
1209
 cycles/sec
Touch-Tone phone
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
*
0
#
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
*
0
#
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 61.	 Use 
a 
graphing 
utility 
to 
graph 
the 
function 
f1x2 = sin x
x  , x 7 0. Based on the graph, what do you  
conjecture about the value of  sin x
x   for x close to 0?
	 62.	 Use a graphing utility to graph y = x sin x, y = x2 sin x, and
	
	 y = x3 sin x for x 7 0. What patterns do you observe?
	 63.	 Use a graphing utility to graph y = 1
x sin x, y =
1
x2  sin x, and 
y =
1
x3  sin x for x 7 0. What patterns do you observe?
	 64.	 How would you explain to a friend what simple harmonic 
motion is? How would you explain damped motion?
Section 8.5  Simple Harmonic Motion; Damped Motion; Combining Waves  589

590 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Formulas
	
Law of Sines (p. 558)	
sin A
a
= sin B
b
= sin C
c
	
Law of Cosines (p. 568)	
 c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C
	
	
 b2 = a2 + c2 - 2ac cos B
	
	
 a2 = b2 + c2 - 2bc cos A
	
Area of a triangle (pp. 575–576)	
K = 1
2
 bh   K = 1
2
 ab sin C   K = 1
2
 bc sin A  K = 1
2
 ac sin B
	
	
K = 2s1s - a2 1s - b2 1s - c2 where s = 1
2
 1a + b + c2
	 65.	 The function f(x) = x - 3
x - 4, x ≠4, is one-to-one. Find its 
inverse function. 
	 66.	 Write as a single logarithm:  log7 x + 3 log7 y -  log7 (x + y) 
	 67.	 Solve:  log (x + 1) +  log (x - 2) = 1 
	 68.	 Given  cos a = 4
5, 0 6 a 6 p
2, find the exact value of:
	
	 (a)	  cos a
2 
(b)   sin a
2 
(c)   tan a
2 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answer
	 1.	 A = 5; T = p
2
 
 
 
Section
	
You should be able to N
Example(s)
Review Exercises
8.1
1	
Find the value of trigonometric functions of acute  
angles using right triangles (p. 545)
1, 2
1, 2, 27
 
2	
Use the complementary angle theorem (p. 547)
3
3–5
 
3	
Solve right triangles (p. 547)
4, 5
6, 7, 27
 
4	
Solve applied problems (p. 548)
6–12
28–31, 36–38
8.2
1	
Solve SAA or ASA triangles (p. 559)
1, 2
8, 19
 
2	
Solve SSA triangles (p. 560)
3–5
9, 10, 12, 16, 18
 
3	
Solve applied problems (p. 562)
6, 7
32, 33
8.3
1	
Solve SAS triangles (p. 569)
1
11, 15, 20
 
2	
Solve SSS triangles (p. 570)
2
13, 14, 17
 
3	
Solve applied problems (p. 570)
3
34
8.4
1	
Find the area of SAS triangles (p. 575)
1
21, 22, 26, 35
 
2	
Find the area of SSS triangles (p. 576)
2
23, 24
8.5
1	
Build a model for an object in simple harmonic motion (p. 581)
1
39
 
2	
Analyze simple harmonic motion (p. 583)
2
40, 41
 
3	
Analyze an object in damped motion (p. 584)
3
42, 43
 
4	
Graph the sum of two functions (p. 585)
4, 5
44
Objectives
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 65–68 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.

Chapter Review  591
Review Exercises
In Problems 1 and 2, find the exact value of the six trigonometric functions of the angle u in each figure.
	 1.	  
u
3
4
	
2.	 
u
2
4
In Problems 3–5, find the exact value of each expression. Do not use a calculator.
	 3.	 cos 62° - sin 28° 
	
4.  tan 70°
cot 20° 
	
5.  cos2 40° + cos2 50° 
In Problems 6 and 7, solve each triangle.
	 6.	  
10
20°
A b
a
	
7.	 
5
2
A
B
a
In Problems 8–20, find the remaining angle(s) and side(s) of each triangle, if it (they) exists. If no triangle exists, say “No triangle.”
	 8.	 A = 30°, B = 75°, b = 5	
9.	 A = 100°, a = 5, c = 2	
10.	 a = 3, c = 1, C = 110°
	 11.	 a = 3, c = 1, B = 100°	
12.	 a = 4, b = 6, A = 50°	
13.	 a = 2, b = 3, c = 1
	 14.	 a = 6, b = 8, c = 4	
15.	 a = 1, b = 3, C = 40°	
16.	 a = 3, b = 5, C = 40°
	 17.	 a = 1, b = 1
2, c = 4
3	
18.	 a = 3, A = 10°, b = 4	
19.	 a = 4, A = 20°, B = 100°
	 20.	 c = 5, b = 4, A = 70°
In Problems 21–25, find the area of each triangle.
	 21.	 a = 2, b = 3, C = 40° 
	
22.	 a = 7, c = 10, B = 60° 
	 23.	 a = 4, b = 3, c = 5 
	 24.	 a = 4, b = 2, c = 5 
	
25.	 B = 40°, C = 60°, b = 4 
	 26.	 Area of a Segment  Find the area of the segment of a 
circle whose radius is 8 inches formed by a central angle  
of 30°. 
	 27.	 Geometry  The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 7 feet. 
If one leg is 4 feet, find the degree measure of each  
angle. 
	 28.	 Finding the Width of a River  Find the distance from A to C 
across the river illustrated in the figure. 
	 30.	 Finding the Speed of a Glider  From a glider 200 feet above 
the ground, two sightings of a stationary object directly in 
front are taken 1 minute apart (see the figure). What is the 
speed of the glider? 
	 29.	 Finding the Distance to Shore  The Willis Tower in Chicago 
is 1454 feet tall and is situated about 1 mile inland from the 
shore of Lake Michigan, as indicated in the figure on the top 
right. An observer in a pleasure boat on the lake directly in 
front of the Willis Tower looks at the top of the tower and 
measures the angle of elevation as 5°. How far offshore is 
the boat? 
50 ft
C
B
A
25°
5°
1 mi
1454 ft
Lake Michigan
40°
10°
200 ft
	 31.	 Finding the Grade of a Mountain Trail  A straight trail with 
a uniform inclination leads from a hotel, elevation 5000 feet, to 
a lake in a valley, elevation 4100 feet. The length of the trail is 
4100 feet. What is the inclination (grade) of the trail? 

592 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	 32.	 Finding the Height of a Helicopter  Two observers 
simultaneously measure the angle of elevation of a  
helicopter. One angle is measured as 25°, the other as 40° 
(see the figure). If the observers are 100 feet apart and the 
helicopter lies over the line joining them, how high is the 
helicopter? 
	 35.	 Approximating the Area of a Lake  To approximate the 
area of a lake, Cindy walks around the perimeter of the lake,  
taking the measurements shown in the illustration. Using 
this technique, what is the approximate area of the lake?
[Hint: Use the Law of Cosines on the three triangles shown 
and then find the sum of their areas.] 
	 33.	 Constructing a Highway  A highway whose primary  
directions are north–south is being constructed along 
the west coast of Florida. Near Naples, a bay obstructs 
the straight path of the road. Since the cost of a bridge is  
prohibitive, engineers decide to go around the bay. The  
illustration shows the path that they decide on and the  
measurements taken. What is the length of highway needed  
to go around the bay? 
3 mi
Gulf
120°
1–4 mi
1–4 mi
115°
Clam
Bay
	 34.	 Correcting 
a 
Navigational 
Error  A 
sailboat 
leaves  
St. Thomas bound for an island in the British West Indies, 
200 miles away. Maintaining a constant speed of 18 miles 
per hour, but encountering heavy crosswinds and strong  
currents, the crew finds, after 4 hours, that the sailboat is off 
course by 15°. 
(a)	 How far is the sailboat from the island at this time?
(b)	 Through what angle should the sailboat turn to correct 
its course? 
(c)	 How much time has been added to the trip because of 
this? (Assume that the speed remains at 18 miles per 
hour.) 
British
West Indies
15°
200 mi
St. Thomas
50°
100°
100'
125'
50'
50'
70'
	 36.	 Finding the Bearing of a Ship  The Majesty leaves the Port at 
Boston for Bermuda with a bearing of S80°E at an average 
speed of 10 knots. After 1 hour, the ship turns 90° toward 
the southwest. After 2 hours at an average speed of 20 knots, 
what is the bearing of the ship from Boston? 
	 37.	 Drive Wheels of an Engine  The drive wheel of an engine is 
13 inches in diameter, and the pulley on the rotary pump is 
5 inches in diameter. If the shafts of the drive wheel and the 
pulley are 2 feet apart, what length of belt is required to join 
them as shown in the figure? 
6.5 in.
2.5 in.
2 ft.
	 38.	 Rework Problem 37 if the belt is crossed, as shown in the 
figure. 
6.5 in.
2.5 in.
2 ft.
	 39.	 An object attached to a coiled spring is pulled down 
a distance a = 3  units from its rest position and then  
released. Assuming that the motion is simple harmonic 
with period T = 4  seconds, develop a model that relates 
the displacement d of the object from its rest position after 
t seconds. Also assume that the positive direction of the  
motion is up. 

In Problems 40 and 41, the displacement d (in feet) of an object from its rest position at time t (in seconds) is given.
(a)	Describe the motion of the object.
(b)	What is the maximum displacement from its rest position?
(c)	What is the time required for one oscillation?
(d)	What is the frequency?
	 40.	 d = 6 sin12t2	
41.  d = - 2 cos1pt2
	 42.	 An object of mass m = 40  grams attached to a coiled spring with damping factor b = 0.75 gram/second is pulled down a distance 
a = 15  centimeters from its rest position and then released. Assume that the positive direction of the motion is up and the period 
is T = 5  seconds under simple harmonic motion.
(a)	 Develop a model that relates the displacement d of the object from its rest position after t seconds.
(b) Graph the equation found in part (a) for 5 oscillations.
	 43.	 The displacement d (in meters) of the bob of a pendulum of mass m (in kilograms) from its rest position at time t (in seconds) is given
	
	 as d = - 15e-0.6t>40 cos¢ Ca2p
5 b
2
- 0.36
1600
 t≤
(a)	 Describe the motion of the object.
(b)	 What is the initial displacement of the bob? That is, what is the displacement at t = 0?
(c)	 Graph the motion using a graphing utility.
(d)	 What is the displacement of the bob at the start of the second oscillation?
(e)	 What happens to the displacement of the bob as time increases without bound?
	 44.	 Use the method of adding y-coordinates to graph y = 2 sin x + cos 12x2.
	 1.	 Find the exact value of the six trigonometric functions of the 
angle u in the figure.            
u
3
6
	 2.	 Find the exact value of sin 40° -  cos 50°. 
Chapter Test
In Problems 3–5, use the given information to determine the three remaining parts of each triangle.
	 3.	  
52
C
17
a
19
B
 	
4. 
41
22
C
12
c
b
	
5. 
C
8
10
5
A
B
In Problems 6–8, solve each triangle.
	 6.  A = 55°, C = 20°, a = 4	
7.  a = 3, b = 7, A = 40°	
8.  a = 8, b = 4, C = 70°
	 9.	 Find the area of the triangle described in Problem 8.
	 10.	 Find the area of the triangle described in Problem 5.
	 11.	 A 12-foot ladder leans against a building. The top of the  
ladder leans against the wall 10.5 feet from the ground. What 
is the angle formed by the ground and the ladder? 
	 12.	 A hot-air balloon is flying at a height of 600 feet and is  
directly above the Marshall Space Flight Center in  
Huntsville, Alabama. The pilot of the balloon looks down 
at the airport that is known to be 5 miles from the Marshall 
Space Flight Center. What is the angle of depression from 
the balloon to the airport? 
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.
Chapter Test  593

594 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
	 14.	 Find the area of the quadrilateral shown. 
	 15.	 Madison wants to swim across Lake William from the fishing 
lodge (A) to the boat ramp (B), but she wants to know the 
distance first. Highway 20 goes right past the boat ramp and 
County Road 3 goes to the lodge. The two roads intersect  
at point (C), 4.2 miles from the ramp and 3.5 miles from 
the lodge. Madison uses a transit to measure the angle of  
intersection of the two roads to be 32°. How far will she need 
to swim? 
	 17.	 The area of the triangle shown below is 5426 square units; 
find the lengths of the sides. 
Hwy 20 4.2 miles
CR 3
3.5 miles
C
A
B
Lake
William
32
	 16.	 Given that △OAB is an isosceles triangle and the shaded 
sector is a semicircle, find the area of the entire region. 
Express your answer as a decimal rounded to two 
places. 
40
O
5
B
A
7x
5x
6x
	 18.	 Logan is playing on her swing. One full swing (front to back 
to front) takes 6 seconds and at the peak of her swing she is 
at an angle of 42° with the vertical. If her swing is 5 feet long, 
and we ignore all resistive forces, build a model that relates 
her horizontal displacement (from the rest position) after 
time t. 
	 1.	 Find the real solutions, if any, of the equation 3x2 + 1 = 4x.
	 2.	 Find an equation for the circle with center at the point 
1- 5, 12 and radius 3. Graph this circle.
	 3.	 Determine the domain of the function
f1x2 = 2x2 - 3x - 4 
	 4.	 Graph the function y = 3 sin1px2.
	 5.	 Graph the function y = - 2 cos12x - p2.
	 6.	 If tan u = - 2 and 3p
2
6 u 6 2p, find the exact value of:
(a)  sin u	
(b)  cos u	
(c)  sin12u2
(d)  cos12u2 
	
(e)  sina1
2
 ub	
(f)  cosa1
2
 ub
	 7.	 Graph each of the following functions on the interval 30, 44:
(a)	 y = ex	
(b)	 y = sin x
(c)	 y = ex sin x	
(d)	 y = 2x + sin x
	 8.	 Sketch the graph of each of the following functions:
(a)	 y = x	
(b)	 y = x2
(c)	 y = 1x	
(d)	 y = x3
(e)	 y = ex	
(f)	 y = ln x
(g)	 y = sin x	
(h)	 y = cos x
(i)	 y = tan x
	 9.	 Solve the triangle in which side a is 20, side c is 15, and angle 
C is 40°.
	 10.	 In the complex number system, solve the equation
3x5 - 10x4 + 21x3 - 42x2 + 36x - 8 = 0
	 11.	 Analyze the graph of the rational function
R1x2 = 2x2 - 7x - 4
x2 + 2x - 15
	 12.	 Solve 3x = 12. Round your answer to two decimal places.
	 13.	 Solve log31x + 82 + log3 x = 2. 
	 14.	 Suppose that f1x2 = 4x + 5 and g1x2 = x2 + 5x - 24.
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = 0.	
(b)	 Solve f1x2 = 13. 
(c)	 Solve f1x2 = g1x2.	
(d)	 Solve f1x2 7 0.
(e)	 Solve g1x2 … 0.	
(f)	 Graph y = f1x2.
(g)	 Graph y = g1x2.
Cumulative Review
6
B
C
A
8
	 13.	 Find the area of the shaded region enclosed in a semicircle 
of diameter 8 centimeters. The length of the chord AB is  
6 centimeters. 
[Hint: Triangle ABC is a right triangle.]
72
11
8
7
5

O
A
P
B
b
a
c
Q
C
Chapter Projects  595
Chapter Projects
2.	 Apply the Law of Cosines to triangles OPQ and CPQ to 
find two expressions for the length of PQ.
3.	 Subtract the expressions in part (2) from each other. Solve 
for the term containing cos c.
4.	 Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find another value for 
OQ2 - CQ2 and OP2 - CP2. Now solve for cos c.
5.	 Replacing the ratios in part (4) by the cosines of the sides 
of the spherical triangle, you should now have the Law of 
Cosines for spherical triangles:
cos c = cos a cos b + sin a sin b cos C
Source: For the spherical Law of Cosines; see Mathematics 
from the Birth of Numbers by Jan Gullberg. W. W. Norton 
&Co., Publishers, 1996, pp. 525–528.
I.	 Spherical Trigonometry  When the distance between two 
locations on the surface of Earth is small, the distance can be 
computed in statutory miles. Using this assumption, the Law 
of Sines and the Law of Cosines can be used to approximate 
distances and angles. However, Earth is a sphere, so as the 
distance between two points on its surface increases, the 
linear distance gets less accurate because of curvature. Under 
this circumstance, the curvature of Earth must be considered 
when using the Law of Sines and the Law of Cosines.
1.	 Draw a spherical triangle and label the vertices A, B, and 
C. Then connect each vertex by a radius to the center O 
of the sphere. Now draw tangent lines to the sides a and b 
of the triangle that go through C. Extend the lines OA and 
OB to intersect the tangent lines at P and Q, respectively. 
See the figure. List the plane right triangles. Determine 
the measures of the central angles.
II.	 The Lewis and Clark Expedition  Lewis and Clark followed 
several rivers in their trek from what is now Great Falls, 
Montana, to the Pacific coast. First, they went down the 
Missouri and Jefferson rivers from Great Falls to Lemhi, 
Idaho. Because the two cities are at different longitudes and 
different latitudes, the curvature of Earth must be accounted 
for when computing the distance that they traveled. Assume 
that the radius of Earth is 3960 miles.
1.	 Great Falls is at approximately 47.5°N and 111.3°W. 
Lemhi is at approximately 45.5°N and 113.5°W. (Assume 
that the rivers flow straight from Great Falls to Lemhi on 
the surface of Earth.) This line is called a geodesic line. 
Apply the Law of Cosines for a spherical triangle to find 
the angle between Great Falls and Lemhi. (The central 
angles are found by using the differences in the latitudes 
and longitudes of the towns. See the diagram.) Then find 
the length of the arc joining the two towns. (Recall s = ru.)
Lemhi
Great
Falls
North
South
a
b
c
2.	 From Lemhi, they went up the Bitteroot River and the 
Snake River to what is now Lewiston and Clarkston on 
the border of Idaho and Washington. Although this is not 
really a side to a triangle, make a side that goes from Lemhi 
to Lewiston and Clarkston. If Lewiston and Clarkston are 
at about 46.5°N 117.0°W, find the distance from Lemhi 
using the Law of Cosines for a spherical triangle and the 
arc length.
3.	 How far did the explorers travel just to get that far?
4.	 Draw a plane triangle connecting the three towns. If the 
distance from Lewiston to Great Falls is 282 miles, and if 
the angle at Great Falls is 42° and the angle at Lewiston 
is 48.5°, find the distance from Great Falls to Lemhi and 
from Lemhi to Lewiston. How do these distances compare 
with the ones computed in parts (1) and (2)?
Source: For Lewis and Clark Expedition: American 
Journey: The Quest for Liberty to 1877, Texas Edition. 
Prentice Hall, 1992, p. 379.
Source: For map coordinates: National Geographic Atlas 
of the World, published by National Geographic Society, 
1981, pp. 108–109.

596 
CHAPTER 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
The following projects are available at the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC):
III.	Project at Motorola:  How Can You Build or Analyze a Vibration Profile? Fourier functions not only are important to analyze 
vibrations, but they are also what a mathematician would call interesting. Complete the project to see why.
IV.	Leaning Tower of Pisa  Trigonometry is used to analyze the apparent height and tilt of the Leaning Tower of Pisa.
  V.	Locating Lost Treasure  Clever treasure seekers who know the Law of Sines are able to find a buried treasure efficiently.
VI.	Jacob’s Field  Angles of elevation and the Law of Sines are used to determine the height of the stadium wall and the distance from 
home plate to the top of the wall.

597
597
 A Look Back, A Look Ahead 
This chapter is in two parts: Polar Coordinates (Sections 9.1–9.3) and Vectors 
(Sections 9.4–9.7). They are independent of each other and may be covered in 
either order.
Sections 9.1–9.3: In Chapter 1 we introduced rectangular coordinates  
(the xy-plane) and discussed the graph of an equation in two variables involving  
x and y. In Sections 9.1 and 9.2, we introduce polar coordinates, an alternative to 
rectangular coordinates, and discuss graphing equations that involve polar  
coordinates. In Section 5.3, we discussed raising a real number to a real power.  
In Section 9.3, we extend this idea by raising a complex number to a real power. 
As it turns out, polar coordinates are useful for the discussion.
Sections 9.4–9.7: We have seen in many chapters that we are often  
required to solve an equation to obtain a solution to applied problems. In the 
last four sections of this chapter, we develop the notion of a vector and show 
how it can be used to model applied problems in physics and engineering.
9
Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Outline
9.1	
Polar Coordinates
9.2	
Polar Equations and Graphs
9.3	
The Complex Plane;  
De Moivre’s Theorem
9.4	
Vectors
9.5	
The Dot Product
9.6	
Vectors in Space
9.7	
The Cross Product
	
Chapter Review
	
Chapter Test
	
Cumulative Review
	
Chapter Projects
How Airplanes Fly
Four aerodynamic forces act on an airplane in flight: lift, drag, thrust, and weight (gravity).
Drag is the resistance of air molecules hitting the airplane (the backward force), 
thrust is the power of the airplane’s engine (the forward force), lift is the upward force, 
and weight is the downward force. So for airplanes to fly and stay airborne, the thrust 
must be greater than the drag, and the lift must be greater than the 
weight (so, drag opposes thrust, and lift opposes weight).
This is certainly the case when an airplane takes off or climbs. 
However, when it is in straight and level flight, the opposing 
forces of lift and weight are balanced. During a descent, weight 
exceeds lift, and to slow the airplane, drag has to overcome thrust.
Thrust is generated by the airplane’s engine (propeller or jet), weight is created 
by the natural force of gravity acting on the airplane, and drag comes from friction 
as the plane moves through air molecules. Drag is also a reaction to lift, and this lift  
must be generated by the airplane in flight. This is done by the wings of the airplane.
A cross section of a typical airplane wing shows the top surface to be more curved 
than the bottom surface. This shaped profile is called an airfoil (or aerofoil), and the 
shape is used because an airfoil generates significantly more lift than opposing drag. 
In other words, it is very efficient at generating lift.
During flight, air naturally flows over and beneath the wing and is deflected  
upward over the top surface and downward beneath the lower surface. Any difference 
in deflection causes a difference in air pressure (pressure gradient), and because of the 
airfoil shape, the pressure of the deflected air is lower above the airfoil than below it. 
As a result the wing is “pushed” upward by the higher pressure beneath, or, you can 
argue, it is “sucked” upward by the lower pressure above.
Source: Adapted from Pete Carpenter. How Airplanes Fly—The Basic Principles of Flight 
http://www.rc-airplane-world.com/how-airplanes-fly.html, 
accessed June 2014. © rc-airplane-world.com
—See Chapter Project I—

598 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
So far, we have always used a system of rectangular coordinates to plot points in 
the plane. Now we are ready to describe another system, called polar coordinates. 
In many instances, polar coordinates offer certain advantages over rectangular 
coordinates.
In a rectangular coordinate system, you will recall, a point in the plane is  
represented by an ordered pair of numbers 1x, y2, where x and y equal the signed 
distances of the point from the y-axis and the x-axis, respectively. In a polar coordinate 
system, we select a point, called the pole, and then a ray with vertex at the pole, 
called the polar axis. See Figure 1. Comparing the rectangular and polar coordinate 
systems, note that the origin in rectangular coordinates coincides with the pole in 
polar coordinates, and the positive x-axis in rectangular coordinates coincides with 
the polar axis in polar coordinates.
Plot Points Using Polar Coordinates
A point P in a polar coordinate system is represented by an ordered pair of numbers 
1r, u2. If r 7 0, then r is the distance of the point from the pole; u is an angle (in 
degrees or radians) formed by the polar axis and a ray from the pole through the 
point. We call the ordered pair 1r, u2 the polar coordinates of the point. See Figure 2.
As an example, suppose that a point P has polar coordinates a2, p
4 b. Locate P 
by first drawing an angle of p
4  radian, placing its vertex at the pole and its initial side
along the polar axis. Then go out a distance of 2 units along the terminal side of the 
angle to reach the point P. See Figure 3.
1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 605.
	
Objectives	 	1  Plot Points Using Polar Coordinates  (p. 598)
	
	 	2  Convert from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates  (p. 600)
	
	 	3  Convert from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates  (p. 602)
	
	 	4  Transform Equations between Polar and Rectangular Forms  (p. 604)
9.1  Polar Coordinates
•	 Rectangular Coordinates (Section 1.1, pp. 36–38)
•	 Definition of the Trigonometric Functions  
(Section 6.2, pp. 401 and 411)
•	 Inverse Tangent Function (Section 7.1, pp. 481–483)
•	 Completing the Square (Appendix A,   
Section A.3, pp. 972–973)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Figure 2 
O Pole
Polar axis
P 5 (r, u)
r
u
Figure 3 
P   2,
(
)
–4
O Pole
Polar axis
2
–4
In using polar coordinates 1r, u2, it is possible for r to be negative. When this 
happens, instead of the point being on the terminal side of u, it is on the ray from 
the pole extending in the direction opposite the terminal side of u at a distance 0 r0  
units from the pole. See Figure 4 for an illustration.
For example, to plot the point a -3, 2p
3 b, use the ray in the opposite direction 
of 2p
3  and go out 0 -30 = 3 units along that ray. See Figure 5.
Figure 1 
x
O
Pole
Polar axis
y

Section 9.1  Polar Coordinates  599
Plotting Points Using Polar Coordinates
Plot the points with the following polar coordinates:
(a)	 a3, 5p
3 b      (b)  a2, -  p
4 b      (c)  13, 02      (d)  a -2, p
4 b
Figure 6 shows the points.
Example 1
Solution
Figure 4 
O
P 5 (r, u), r , 0
u
_r _
Figure 5 
3, 
(
)
2
––
3
2
––
3
O
Figure 6 
3,    
5p
––3
5p
––3
O
D
(
2,
O
p–4
2
p–4
 2
E
(
O
(3, 0)
F
O
22,
p–4
p–4
G
(
)
)
)
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 1 ,  1 9 ,  a n d  2 9
Recall that an angle measured counterclockwise is positive and an angle  
measured clockwise is negative. This convention has some interesting consequences 
related to polar coordinates.
Finding Several Polar Coordinates of a Single Point
Consider again the point P with polar coordinates a2, p
4 b, as shown in Figure 7(a). 
Because p
4 , 9p
4 , and -  7p
4  all have the same terminal side, this point P also can be 
located by using the polar coordinates a2, 9p
4 b or the polar coordinates a2, -  7p
4 b,
as shown in Figures 7(b) and (c). The point a2, p
4 b can also be represented by the 
polar coordinates a -2, 5p
4 b. See Figure 7(d).
•
Example 2
Figure 7 
•
O
(a)
P   2, –4
–4
(
)
O
P   2,
9
––4
(b)
9
–––
4
(
)
P   2,
7
–––
4
O

 7
––4
(c)
(
)
–4
O
P   2,     
5
––4
(d)
5
––4
(
)
2
2
2
2

600 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Finding Other Polar Coordinates of a Given Point
Plot the point P with polar coordinates a3, p
6 b, and find other polar coordinates 
1r, u2 of this same point for which:
(a)	 r 7 0, 2p … u 6 4p            (b)  r 6 0, 0 … u 6 2p
(c)	 r 7 0, -2p … u 6 0
The point a3, p
6 b is plotted in Figure 8.
(a)	 Add 1 revolution 12p radians2 to the angle p
6  to get 
P =  a3, p
6 + 2pb = a3, 13p
6 b. 
See Figure 9.
(b)	 Add 1
2 revolution 1p radians2 to the angle p
6 , and replace 3 by -3 to get
	
P = a -3, p
6 + pb = a -3, 7p
6 b. See Figure 10.
(c)	 Subtract 2p from the angle p
6  to get P = a3, p
6 - 2pb = a3, -  11p
6 b. See 
Figure 11.
Example 3
Solution
Figure 9 
P   3,
13
–––
6
13
–––
6
O
(
)
Figure 10 
P   3,
7
––6
7
––6
O
(
)
Figure 11 
•
P   3, 
11
–––
6
11
–––
6
O
(
)
Figure 8 
P   3,
–6
–6
O
(
)
These examples show a major difference between rectangular coordinates and 
polar coordinates. A point has exactly one pair of rectangular coordinates; however, 
a point has infinitely many pairs of polar coordinates.
Summary
A point with polar coordinates 1r, u2, u in radians, can also be represented by either of the following:
1r, u + 2pk2 or 1 -r, u + p + 2pk2  k any integer
The polar coordinates of the pole are 10, u2, where u can be any angle.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
Convert from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates
Sometimes it is necessary to convert coordinates or equations in rectangular 
form to polar form, and vice versa. To do this, recall that the origin in rectangular  
coordinates is the pole in polar coordinates and that the positive x-axis in rectangular 
coordinates is the polar axis in polar coordinates.
2
Conversion from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates
If P is a point with polar coordinates 1r, u2, the rectangular coordinates 1x, y2 
of P are given by
	
x = r cos u  y = r sin u	
(1)
Theorem

Section 9.1  Polar Coordinates  601
Proof  Suppose that P has the polar coordinates 1r, u2. We seek the rectangular 
coordinates 1x, y2 of P. Refer to Figure 12.
If r = 0, then, regardless of u, the point P is the pole, for which the rectangular 
coordinates are 10, 02. Formula (1) is valid for r = 0.
If r 7 0, the point P is on the terminal side of u, and r = d1O, P2 = 2x2 + y2. 
Because
cos u = x
r   sin u = y
r
this means
x = r cos u  y = r sin u
If r 6 0 and u is in radians, the point P = 1r, u2 can be represented as 
1 -r, p + u2, where -r 7 0. Because
cos1p + u2 = -cos u =
x
-r   sin1p + u2 = -sin u =
y
-r
this means
	
x = r cos u  y = r sin u	
■
Converting from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates
Find the rectangular coordinates of the points with the following polar coordinates:
(a)	 a6, p
6 b        (b)  a -4, -  p
4 b
Use formula (1): x = r cos u and y = r sin u.
(a)	 Figure 13(a) shows a6, p
6 b plotted. Notice that a6, p
6 b lies in quadrant I of the 
rectangular coordinate system. So both the x-coordinate and the y-coordinate 
will be positive. Substituting r = 6 and u = p
6  gives
 x = r cos u = 6 cos p
6 = 6 # 13
2  = 323
 y = r sin u = 6 sin p
6 = 6 # 1
2 = 3
The rectangular coordinates of the point a6, p
6 b are 1323, 32, which lies in 
quadrant I, as expected.
(b)	 Figure 13(b) shows a -4, -  p
4 b plotted. Notice that a -4, -  p
4 b lies in quadrant II 
of the rectangular coordinate system. Substituting r = -4 and u = -  p
4  gives
 x = r cos u = -4 cosa -  p
4 b = -4 # 12 
2  = -222
 y = r sin u = -4 sina -  p
4 b = -4a -  12 
2 b = 222
The rectangular coordinates of the point a -4, -  p
4 b are 1 -222 , 222 2, 
which lies in quadrant II, as expected.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  4 1  a n d  5 3
Example 4
Solution
•
Comment  Many 
calculators 
have 
the capability of converting from polar  
coordinates to rectangular coordinates. 
Consult your owner’s manual for the 
proper keystrokes. In most cases this 
procedure is tedious, so you will probably 
find that using formula (1) is faster.	
■
Figure 12 
P
O
x
x
y
y
r
u
Figure 13 
x
3   3
6,
6
3
–6
–6
(a)
y
(
)
4
x
2   2
4, 
2   2
–4
–4
(b)

y
(
)

602 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Convert from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates
Converting from rectangular coordinates 1x, y2 to polar coordinates 1r, u2 is a little 
more complicated. Notice that each solution begins by plotting the given rectangular 
coordinates.
How to Convert from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar  
Coordinates with the Point on a Coordinate Axis
Find polar coordinates of a point whose rectangular coordinates are 10, 32.
3
Example 5
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Plot the point (x, y) and 
note the quadrant the point lies in 
or the coordinate axis the point lies 
on.
The point 10, 32 lies on the y-axis a distance of 3 units from the origin (pole), so r = 3.
Plot the point 10, 32 in a rectangular  
coordinate system. See Figure 14. The point 
lies on the positive y-axis.
Step 2:  Determine the distance r 
from the origin to the point. 
Step 3:  Determine u. 
A ray with vertex at the pole through 10, 32 forms an angle u = p
2 with the polar axis.
Polar coordinates for this point can be given by a3, p
2 b. Other possible  
representations include a -3, - p
2 b and a3, 5p
2 b.
•
Figure 15 shows polar coordinates of points that lie on either the x-axis or the 
y-axis. In each illustration, a 7 0.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7
How to Convert from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar  
Coordinates with the Point in a Quadrant
Find the polar coordinates of a point whose rectangular coordinates are 12, -22.
Example 6
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Plot the point (x, y) and 
note the quadrant the point lies in 
or the coordinate axis the point  
lies on. 
Plot the point 12, -22 in a rectangular 
coordinate system. See Figure 16. The point 
lies in quadrant IV.
Figure 14 
(x, y)  (0, 3)
x
y
3
–2
Figure 15 
x
(r, u) 5 (a, 0)
(x, y) 5 (a, 0)
a
y
D[\5aa.
p–2
p–2
x
(r, u) 5  a,   
(x, y) 5  (0, a)   
a
y
E[\5aa.
(
)
x
(r, u) 5 (a, p)
(x, y) 5 (2a, 0)
p
a
y
F[\52aa.
(r, u) 5  a,
x
a
y
G[\52aa.
(x, y)5(0,2a)
3p
–––
2
3p
–––
2
(
)
Figure 16 
21
1
21
22
2
(x, y) 5 (2, 22)
u
x
y
r

Section 9.1  Polar Coordinates  603
Find u by recalling that  tan u = y
x, so u =  tan-1 y
x, -  p
2 6 u 6 p
2 . Because 12, -22 
lies in quadrant IV, this means that -  p
2 6 u 6 0. As a result,
u = tan-1  y
x = tan-1 a -2
2 b = tan-1 1-12 = -  p
4 
A set of polar coordinates for the point 12, -22 is a222, - p
4 b. Other possible 
representations include a222, 7p
4  b and a -222, 3p
4  b.
Converting from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates
Find polar coordinates of a point whose rectangular coordinates are 1 -1, - 23 2.
Step 1:	 See Figure 17. The point lies in quadrant III.
Step 2:	 The distance r from the origin to the point 1 -1, - 23 2 is
r = 31 -122 + 1 - 23 22 = 24 = 2
Step 3:	 To find u, use a = tan-1 y
x = tan-1  - 13
-1
= tan-1 23, - p
2 6 a 6 p
2.
Since the point 1 -1, - 23 2 lies in quadrant III and the inverse tangent 
function gives an angle in quadrant I, add p to the result to obtain an angle 
in quadrant III.
u = p + tan-1 a - 13
-1 b = p + tan-1 23 = p + p
3 = 4p
3
A set of polar coordinates for this point is a2, 4p
3 b. Other possible  
representations include a -2, p
3 b and a2, -  2p
3 b.
Figure 18 shows how to find polar coordinates of a point that lies in a quadrant 
when its rectangular coordinates 1x, y2 are given.
•
Example 7
Solution
•
Comment  Many calculators have the 
capability of converting from rectangular  
coordinates 
to 
polar 
coordinates.  
Consult your owner’s manual for the 
proper keystrokes.	
■
Step 2:  Determine the distance r 
from the origin to the point using 
r = 2x2 + y 2. 
r = 2x2 + y2 = 21222 +  1 -222 = 28 = 222
Step 3:  Determine u. 
r 5   x 2 1 y 2
u 5 tan21
D
x
y
(x, y)
r 5   x 2 1 y 2
u 5 p 1  tan21
E
x
y
(x, y)
r 5   x 2 1 y 2
u 5 p 1 tan21
F
x
y
(x, y)
r 5   x 2 1 y 2
u 5 tan21
G
(x, y)
x
y
u
r
u
r
u
r
u
r
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
Figure 18 
The preceding discussion provides the formulas
	
r 2 = x2 + y2   tan u = y
x   if x ∙0	
(2)
Figure 17 
(x, y) 5 (21, 2   3)
u
x
r
y

604 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
To use formula (2) effectively, follow these steps:
Steps for Converting from Rectangular to Polar Coordinates
Step 1:	 Always plot the point 1x, y2 first, as shown in Examples 5, 6, and 7. 
Note the quadrant the point lies in or the coordinate axis the point 
lies on.
Step 2:	 If x = 0 or y = 0, use your illustration to find r. 	
 
If x ∙ 0 and y ∙ 0, then r = 2x2 + y2.
Step 3:	 Find u. If x = 0 or y = 0, use your illustration to find u. 	
 
If x ∙0 and y ∙0, note the quadrant in which the point lies.
Quadrant I or IV:  u = tan-1  y
x
Quadrant II or III:  u = p + tan-1  y
x
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
Transform Equations between Polar and Rectangular Forms
Formulas (1) and (2) can also be used to transform equations from polar form to 
rectangular form, and vice versa. Two common techniques for transforming an  
equation from polar form to rectangular form are
	 1.	 Multiplying both sides of the equation by r
	 2.	 Squaring both sides of the equation
Transforming an Equation from Polar to Rectangular Form
Transform the equation r = 6 cos u from polar coordinates to rectangular  
coordinates, and identify the graph.
Multiplying each side by r makes it easier to apply formulas (1) and (2).
 r = 6 cos u
 r 2 = 6r cos u
 x2 + y2 = 6x
This is the equation of a circle. Complete the square to obtain the standard form of 
the equation.
 x2 + y2 = 6x
 1x2 - 6x2 + y2 = 0  
 1x2 - 6x + 92 + y2 = 9  
 1x - 322 + y2 = 9  
This is the standard form of the equation of a circle with center 13, 02 and radius 3.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 7
Transforming an Equation from Rectangular to Polar Form
Transform the equation 4xy = 9 from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates.
4
Example 8
Solution
Multiply each side by r.
r2 = x2 + y 2 ; x = r cos u
General form
Complete the square in x.
Factor.
•
Example 9

Section 9.1  Polar Coordinates  605
Use formula (1): x = r cos u and y = r sin u.
 4xy = 9
 41r cos u2 1r sin u2 = 9
 4r 2 cos u sin u = 9
This is the polar form of the equation. It can be simplified as follows:
 2r 2 12 sin u cos u2 = 9 
 2r 2 sin12u2 = 9 
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
Solution
x = r cos u, y = r sin u
Factor out 2r2.
Double-angle Formula
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Plot the point whose rectangular coordinates are 13, - 12.  
What quadrant does the point lie in? (pp. 36–38)
	 2.	 To complete the square of x2 + 6x, add 	      
 .  
(pp. 972–973)
	 3.	 If P = 1a, b2 is a point on the terminal side of the angle u
	
	 at a distance r from the origin, then tan u =         . 
(p. 411)
	 4.	 tan-1 1- 12 =  
 . (pp. 481– 483)
9.1  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 5.	 The origin in rectangular coordinates coincides with 
the   
  in polar coordinates; the positive x-axis in  
rectangular coordinates coincides with the   
  
  in 
polar coordinates.
	 6.	 If P is a point with polar coordinates (r, u), the rectangular 
coordinates (x, y) of P are given by x =   
  and 
y =   
 .
	 7.	 For the point with polar coordinates a1, - p
2 b, which of 
	
	 the following best describes the location of the point in a 
rectangular coordinate system?
(a)	 in quadrant IV	
(b)  on the y-axis
(c)	 in quadrant II	
(d)  on the x-axis 
	 8.	 The point a5, p
6 b can also be represented by which of the 
following polar coordinates?
(a)	 a5, - p
6 b	
(b)  a-5, 13p
6 b
(c)	 a5, - 5p
6 b	
(d)  a-5, 7p
6 b 
	 9.	 True or False  In the polar coordinates (r, u), r can be negative.
	 10.	 True or False  The polar coordinates of a point are unique.
Skill Building
In Problems 11–18, match each point in polar coordinates with either A, B, C, or D on the graph.
	 11.	  a2, -  11p
6 b 
	
12.	 a- 2, -  p
6 b 
	
13.	 a2, 7p
6 b 
	
14.	 a- 2, p
6 b 
	 15.	 a-2, 5p
6 b 
	
16.	 a2, 5p
6 b 
	
17.	 a2, 11p
6 b 
	
18.	 a- 2, 7p
6 b 
In Problems 19–32, plot each point given in polar coordinates.
π
6
C
D
B
A
2
	 19.	  13, 90°2	
20.	 14, 270°2	
21.	 1- 3, p2	
22.	 1- 2, 02	
23.  a5, 5p
3 b
	 24.	 a6, p
6 b	
25.	 1- 3, 120°2	
26.	 1- 2, 135°2	
27.	 a2, -  5p
4 b	
28.  a4, -  2p
3 b
	 29.	  a- 1, -  p
3 b	
30.	 a- 3, -  3p
4 b	
31.	 a- 3, -  p
2 b	
32.	 1- 2, -p2
In Problems 33–40, plot each point given in polar coordinates, and find other polar coordinates 1r, u2 of the point for which:
(a)	r 7 0, - 2p … u 6 0      (b)  r 6 0, 0 … u 6 2p      (c)  r 7 0, 2p … u 6 4p
	 33.	 a5, 2p
3 b	
34.	 a4, 3p
4 b	
35.	 1- 3, 4p2	
36.	 1- 2, 3p2
	 37.	 12, p2	
38.	 a1, p
2 b	
39.	 a- 2, -  2p
3 b	
40.	 a- 3, -  p
4 b

606 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
In Problems 41–56, polar coordinates of a point are given. Find the rectangular coordinates of each point.
	 41.	  a3, p
2 b 
	
42.	 a4, 3p
2 b 
	
43.	 1- 3, p2 
	
44.	 1- 2, 02 
	 45.	 15, 300°2 
	
46.	 16, 150°2 
	
47.	 a- 2, 2p
3 b 
	
48.	 a- 2, 3p
4 b 
	 49.	 a-3, -  3p
4 b 
	
50.	 a- 1, -  p
3 b 
	 51.	 1- 3, - 90°2 
	
52.	 1- 2, - 180°2 
	 53.	  17.5, 110°2 
	
54.	 1- 3.1, 182°2 
	
55.	 18.1, 5.22 
	
56.	 16.3, 3.82 
In Problems 57–68, the rectangular coordinates of a point are given. Find polar coordinates for each point.
	 57.	 13, 02 
	
58.	 10, 22 
	
59.	 10, - 22 
	
60.	 1- 1, 02 
	 61.	  11, -12 
	
62.	 1- 3, 32 
	
63.	 1 - 2, - 223 2 
	
64.	 1 23 , 12 
	 65.	 1-0.8, - 2.12 
	 66.	 11.3, - 2.12 
	
67.	 1- 2.3, 0.22 
	
68.	 18.3, 4.22 
In Problems 69–76, the letters x and y represent rectangular coordinates. Write each equation using polar coordinates 1r, u2.
	 69.	 x2 + y2 = x	
70.	 2x2 + 2y2 = 3 
	
71.	  x2 = 4y	
72.	 y2 = 2x
	 73.	 4x2  y = 1 
	 74.	 2xy = 1	
75.	 y = - 3 
	
76.	 x = 4 
In Problems 77–84, the letters r and u represent polar coordinates. Write each equation using rectangular coordinates 1x, y2.
	 77.	 r = cos u	
78.	 r = sin u + 1	
79.	 r = sin u - cos u	
80.	 r 2 = cos u
	 81.	 r = 4 
	
82.	 r = 2 
	
83.	 r =
3
3 - cos u	
84.	 r =
4
1 - cos u
Applications and Extensions
	 85.	 Chicago  In Chicago, the road system is set up like a  
Cartesian plane, where streets are indicated by the number 
of blocks they are from Madison Street and State Street. 
For example, Wrigley Field in Chicago is located at 1060 
West Addison, which is 10 blocks west of State Street and 
36 blocks north of Madison Street. Treat the intersection of 
Madison Street and State Street as the origin of a coordinate 
system, with east being the positive x-axis.
(a)	 Write the location of Wrigley Field using rectangular  
coordinates. 
(b)	 Write the location of Wrigley Field using polar  
coordinates. Use the east direction for the polar axis.  
Express u in degrees.
(c)	 U.S. Cellular Field, home of the White Sox, is located 
at 35th and Princeton, which is 3 blocks west of State 
Street and 35 blocks south of Madison. Write the  
location of U.S. Cellular Field using rectangular  
coordinates. 
(d)	 Write the location of U.S. Cellular Field using polar  
coordinates. Use the east direction for the polar axis.  
Express u in degrees.
	 86.	 Show that the formula for the distance d between two points 
P1 = 1r1 , u1 2 and P2 = 1r2 , u2 2 is
d = 2r 1
2 + r 2
2 - 2r1  r2 cos1u2 - u1 2
City of Chicago, Illinois
Addison Street
Addison Street
35th Street
1 mile
1 km
Wrigley Field
1060 West Addison
U.S. Cellular Field
35th and Princeton
Madison Street
35th Street
State Street
N
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 87.	 In converting from polar coordinates to rectangular  
coordinates, what formulas will you use?
	 88.	 Explain how to convert from rectangular coordinates to  
polar coordinates.
	 89.	 Is the street system in your town based on a rectangular  
coordinate system, a polar coordinate system, or some other 
system? Explain.

Section 9.2  Polar Equations and Graphs  607
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 90–93 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 90.	 Solve:  log 41x + 32 -  log 41x - 12 = 2 
	 91.	 Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to determine the possible 
number of positive or negative real zeros for the function 
f1x2 = - 2x3 + 6x2 - 7x - 8. 
	 92.	 Find the midpoint of the line segment connecting the 
points 1- 3, 72 and a1
2, 2b. 
	 93.	 Given that the point (3, 8) is on the graph of y = f1x2, 
what is the corresponding point on the graph of 
y = - 2f1x + 32 + 5? 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	                                     ; quadrant IV	
2.  9	
3.  b
a	
4.  - p
4
x
y
2
2
2
2
4
(3, 1)
 Now Work  the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 619.
	
Objectives	 	1  Identify and Graph Polar Equations by Converting to Rectangular  
Equations  (p. 608)
	
	 	2  Test Polar Equations for Symmetry  (p. 611)
	
	 	3  Graph Polar Equations by Plotting Points  (p. 612)
9.2  Polar Equations and Graphs
•	 Symmetry (Section 1.2, pp. 46– 48)
•	 Circles (Section 1.4, pp. 68–71)
•	 Even–Odd Properties of Trigonometric Functions 
(Section 6.3, p. 427)
•	 Difference Formulas for Sine and Cosine  
(Section 7.4, pp. 512 and 515)
•	 Values of the Sine and Cosine Functions at Certain 
Angles (Section 6.2, pp. 403– 410)
Preparing for this Section  Before getting started, review the following:
Just as a rectangular grid may be used to plot points given by rectangular coordinates, 
such as the points (−3, 1) and (1, 2) shown in Figure 19(a), a grid consisting of concentric 
circles (with centers at the pole) and rays (with vertices at the pole) can be used
to plot points given by polar coordinates, such as the points a4, 5p
4 b and a2, p
4 b 
shown in Figure 19(b). Such polar grids are used to graph polar equations.
Figure 19 
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5
u 5
u 5
u 5
u 5
u 5
p–2
3p
––2
7p
––4
p–4
3p
––4
5p
––4
x
24
2221
23
4
2
3
1
O
y
2
4
24
1
23
3
22
(1, 2)
(23, 1)
DRectangular grid
O
r 5 5
r 5 3
r 5 1
2,
4,(
)
(
)
EPolar grid
p–4
5p
––4

608 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Figure 21 u = p
4, or y = x
x
2
1
5
4
3
O
y
p–4
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5p–2
u 53p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
Identify and Graph Polar Equations by Converting  
to Rectangular Equations
One method that can be used to graph a polar equation is to convert the equation to 
rectangular coordinates. In the following discussion, 1x, y2 represents the rectangular 
coordinates of a point P, and 1r, u2 represents polar coordinates of the point P.
Identifying and Graphing a Polar Equation (Circle)
Identify and graph the equation: r = 3
Convert the polar equation to a rectangular equation.
 r = 3
 r 2 = 9 
 x2 + y2 = 9 
The graph of r = 3 is a circle, with center at the pole and radius 3. See Figure 20.
1
Example 1
Solution
Square both sides.
r2 = x2 + y 2
 An equation whose variables are polar coordinates is called a polar equation. 
The graph of a polar equation consists of all points whose polar coordinates 
satisfy the equation.
Definition
Figure 20  r = 3, or x2 + y2 = 9
•
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
p–2
3p
––2
7p
––4
p–4
u 5
u 5
u 5
u 5
u 5
u 5
3p
––4
5p
––4
2
1
5
4
3
O
y
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Identifying and Graphing a Polar Equation (Line)
Identify and graph the equation: u = p
4
Convert the polar equation to a rectangular equation.
 u = p
4
 tan u = tan p
4 
 y
x = 1
 y = x
The graph of u = p
4  is a line passing through the pole making an angle of p
4  with 
the polar axis. See Figure 21.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
Example 2
Solution
Take the tangent of both sides.
tan u = y
x ; tan p
4 = 1
•

Section 9.2  Polar Equations and Graphs  609
Identifying and Graphing a Polar Equation (Horizontal Line)
Identify and graph the equation: r sin u = 2
Example 3
Comment  A graphing utility can be 
used to graph polar equations. Read  
Using a Graphing Utility to Graph a Polar 
Equation, Appendix B, Section B.8.	
■
Figure 23  r cos u = -3, or x = -3
•
Because y = r sin u, we can write the 
equation as
y = 2
Therefore, the graph of r sin u = 2 is a 
horizontal line 2 units above the pole. 
See Figure 22.
Solution
Figure 22  r sin u = 2, or y = 2
•
x
5
4
3
2
O
y
1
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5p–2
u 53p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
Identifying and Graphing a Polar Equation (Vertical Line)
Identify and graph the equation: r cos u = -3
Example 4
Since x = r cos u, we can write the 
equation as
x = -3
Therefore, the graph of r cos u = -3 
is a vertical line 3 units to the left of 
the pole. See Figure 23.
Solution
x
O
y
4
5
2 3
1
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5p–2
u 53p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
Examples 3 and 4 lead to the following results. (The proofs are left as exercises. 
See Problems 83 and 84.)
Let a be a real number. Then the graph of the equation
r sin u = a
is a horizontal line. It lies a units above the pole if a Ú 0 and lies 0 a0  units  
below the pole if a 6 0.
The graph of the equation
r cos u = a
is a vertical line. It lies a units to the right of the pole if a Ú 0 and lies 0 a0  units 
to the left of the pole if a 6 0.
Theorem
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1

610 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Figure 25 
r = - 2 cos u, or (x + 1)2 + y2 = 1
x
O
4
5
2
3
1
y
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5p–2
u 53p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
Identifying and Graphing a Polar Equation (Circle)
Identify and graph the equation: r = 4 sin u
To transform the equation to rectangular coordinates, multiply each side by r.
r 2 = 4r sin u
Now use the facts that r 2 = x2 + y2 and y = r sin u. Then
 x2 + y2 = 4y
 x2 + 1y2 - 4y2 = 0
 x2 + 1y2 - 4y + 42 = 4
 x2 + 1y - 222 = 4
This is the standard equation of a circle with center at 10, 22 in rectangular 
coordinates and radius 2. See Figure 24.
Identifying and Graphing a Polar Equation (Circle)
Identify and graph the equation: r = -2 cos u
To transform the equation to rectangular coordinates, multiply each side by r.
 r 2 = -2r cos u
 x2 + y2 = -2x
 
 x2 + 2x + y2 = 0
 1x2 + 2x + 12 + y2 = 1
 1x + 122 + y2 = 1
This is the standard equation of a circle with center at 1 -1, 02 in rectangular  
coordinates and radius 1. See Figure 25.
Example 5
Solution
Complete the square in y.
Factor.
•
Example 6
Solution
Multiply both sides by r.
r2 = x2 + y 2 ; x = r cos u
Complete the square in x.
Factor.
•
Exploration
Using a square screen, graph r1 = sin u, r2 = 2 sin u, and r3 = 3 sin u. Do you see the pattern? Clear 
the screen and graph r1 = -sin u, r2 = -2 sin u, and r3 = -3 sin u. Do you see the pattern? Clear the 
screen and graph r1 = cos u, r2 = 2 cos u, and r3 = 3 cos u. Do you see the pattern? Clear the screen 
and graph r1 = -cos u, r2 = -2 cos u, and r3 = -3 cos u. Do you see the pattern?
Based on Examples 5 and 6 and the Exploration above, we are led to the  
following results. (The proofs are left as exercises. See Problems 85–88.)
Let a be a positive real number. Then
	
Equation	
Description
(a)  r = 2a sin u	
Circle: radius a; center at 10, a2 in rectangular coordinates
(b)  r = -2a sin u	 Circle: radius a; center at 10, -a2 in rectangular coordinates
(c)  r = 2a cos u	
Circle: radius a; center at 1a, 02 in rectangular coordinates
(d)  r = -2a cos u	 Circle: radius a; center at 1 -a, 02 in rectangular coordinates
Each circle passes through the pole.
Theorem
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Figure 24 
r = 4 sin u, or x2 + (y - 2)2 = 4
x
O
y
4
5
2
3
1
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5p–2
u 53p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4

Section 9.2  Polar Equations and Graphs  611
The method of converting a polar equation to an identifiable rectangular  
equation to obtain the graph is not always helpful, nor is it always necessary. Usually, 
a table is created that lists several points on the graph. By checking for symmetry, it 
may be possible to reduce the number of points needed to draw the graph.
Test Polar Equations for Symmetry
In polar coordinates, the points 1r, u2 and 1r, -u2 are symmetric with respect to the 
polar axis (and to the x-axis). See Figure 26(a). The points 1r, u2 and 1r, p - u2 are
symmetric with respect to the line u = p
2  (the y-axis). See Figure 26(b). The points 
1r, u2 and 1 -r, u2 are symmetric with respect to the pole (the origin). See Figure 26(c).
2
D
Points symmetric with
respect to the polar axis
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
2
1
5
4
3
O
y
u
(r, u)
(r, 2u)
p
––2
E
Points symmetric with
respect to the line u 5
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
p–2
3p
––2
7p
––4
p–4
u 5
u 5
u 5
u 5
u 5
3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
2
1
5
4
3
O
y
u
(r, u)
u
(r, p 2 u)
(r, u 1 p)
u 1 p
F
Points symmetric with
respect to the pole
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
2
1
5
4
3
y
O
u
(2r, u)
(r, u)
p 2 u
2u
Figure 26 
Tests for Symmetry
Symmetry with Respect to the Polar Axis (x-Axis)
In a polar equation, replace u by -u. If an equivalent equation results, the 
graph is symmetric with respect to the polar axis.
Symmetry with Respect to the Line U ∙P
2  (y-Axis)
In a polar equation, replace u by p - u. If an equivalent equation results, 
the graph is symmetric with respect to the line u = p
2 .
Symmetry with Respect to the Pole (Origin)
In a polar equation, replace r by -r or u by u + p. If an equivalent  
equation results, the graph is symmetric with respect to the pole.
Theorem
The following tests are a consequence of these observations.
The three tests for symmetry given here are sufficient conditions for symmetry, 
but they are not necessary conditions. That is, an equation may fail these tests and
still have a graph that is symmetric with respect to the polar axis, the line u = p
2 , or
the pole. For example, the graph of r = sin12u2 turns out to be symmetric with
respect to the polar axis, the line u = p
2 , and the pole, but only the test for symmetry
with respect to the pole (replace u by u + p) works. See also Problems 89–91.

612 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Graph Polar Equations by Plotting Points
Graphing a Polar Equation (Cardioid)
Graph the equation:  r = 1 - sin u
Check for symmetry first.
Polar Axis:  Replace u by -u. The result is
r = 1 - sin1 -u2 = 1 + sin u 
 sin (-u) = - sin u
The test fails, so the graph may or may not be symmetric with respect to the polar 
axis.
The Line U ∙P
2
 :  Replace u by p - u. The result is
 r = 1 - sin1p - u2 = 1 - 1sin p cos u - cos p sin u2
 = 1 - 30 # cos u - 1 -12 sin u4 = 1 - sin u
The test is satisfied, so the graph is symmetric with respect to the line u = p
2 .
The Pole:  Replace r by -r. Then the result is -r = 1 - sin u, so r = -1 + sin u. 
The test fails. Replace u by u + p. The result is
 r = 1 - sin(u + p)
 = 1 - 3sin u cos p + cos u sin p4
 = 1 - 3sin u # (-1) + cos u # 04
 = 1 + sin u
This test also fails, so the graph may or may not be symmetric with respect to the 
pole.
Next, identify points on the graph by assigning values to the angle u and calculating 
the corresponding values of r. Due to the periodicity of the sine function and the
symmetry with respect to the line u = p
2 , just assign values to u from -  p
2  to p
2 , as 
given in Table 1.
Now plot the points 1r, u2 from Table 1 and trace out the graph, beginning at
the point a2, -  p
2 b and ending at the point a0, p
2 b. Then reflect this portion of the 
graph about the line u = p
2  (the y-axis) to obtain the complete graph. See Figure 27.
3
Example 7
Solution
Table 1
U
r ∙1 ∙sin U
- p
2 
  1 - (-1) = 2
- p
3 
  1 - a-  13
2  b ≈1.87
- p
6 
  1 - a-  1
2b = 3
2 
0
  1 - 0 = 1
 p
6
  1 - 1
2 = 1
2
 p
3
  1 - 23
2  ≈0.13
 p
2
  1 - 1 = 0
The curve in Figure 27 is an example of a cardioid (a heart-shaped curve).
Figure 27  r = 1 - sin u
•
x
y
2
1
(1, 0)
(0,   )
(2,      )
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
p–6
2
p–2
2
(1.87,     )
p–3
2
3–2
p–6
p–2
(  ,    )
1–2
(0.13,   )
p–3
(  ,      )
Exploration
Graph r1 = 1 + sin u. Clear the screen 
and graph r1 = 1 - cos u. Clear the 
screen and graph r1 = 1 + cos u. Do 
you see a pattern?

Section 9.2  Polar Equations and Graphs  613
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Graphing a Polar Equation (Limaçon without an Inner Loop)
Graph the equation: r = 3 + 2 cos u
Check for symmetry first.
Polar Axis: Replace u by -u. The result is
r = 3 + 2 cos1 -u2 = 3 + 2 cos u 
cos (- u) =  cos u
The test is satisfied, so the graph is symmetric with respect to the polar axis.
The Line U ∙P
2
 : Replace u by p - u. The result is
 r = 3 + 2 cos1p - u2 = 3 + 21cos p cos u + sin p sin u2
 = 3 - 2 cos u
The test fails, so the graph may or may not be symmetric with respect to the  
line u = p
2 .
The Pole:  Replace r by -r. The test fails, so the graph may or may not be symmetric 
with respect to the pole. Replace u by u + p. The test fails, so the graph may or may 
not be symmetric with respect to the pole.
Next, identify points on the graph by assigning values to the angle u and 
calculating the corresponding values of r. Due to the periodicity of the cosine function 
and the symmetry with respect to the polar axis, just assign values to u from 0 to p, 
as given in Table 2.
Now plot the points 1r, u2 from Table 2 and trace out the graph, beginning at the 
point 15, 02 and ending at the point 11, p2. Then reflect this portion of the graph 
about the polar axis (the x-axis) to obtain the complete graph. See Figure 28.
Example 8
Solution
Table 2
U
r ∙3 ∙2 cos U
0
3 + 2(1) = 5
p
6
3 + 2a 23
2 b ≈4.73
p
3
3 + 2a1
2b = 4
p
2
3 + 2(0) = 3
2p
3
3 + 2a-  1
2b = 2
5p
6
3 + 2a-  23
2  b ≈1.27
p
3 + 2(-1) = 1
Cardioids are characterized by equations of the form
 r = a11 + cos u2   r = a11 + sin u2
 r = a11 - cos u2   r = a11 - sin u2
where a 7 0. The graph of a cardioid passes through the pole.
Definition
Figure 28  r = 3 + 2 cos u
•
x
O
y
4
2
u = 0
u = p
u = 
3
1
p–2
u = 3p
––2
u = 7p
––4
u = p–4
u = 3p
––4
u = 5p
––4
5
(5, 0)
(2,    )
(4.73,   )
p–6
(1.27,    )
(1, p)
5p
––6
2p
––3
(3,   )
p–2
(4,   )
p–3
The curve in Figure 28 is an example of a limaçon (a French word for snail) 
without an inner loop.
Exploration
Graph r1 = 3 - 2 cos u. Clear the screen 
and graph r1 = 3 + 2 sin u. Clear the 
screen and graph r1 = 3 - 2 sin u. Do 
you see a pattern?

614 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
Graphing a Polar Equation (Limaçon with an Inner Loop)
Graph the equation: r = 1 + 2 cos u
First, check for symmetry.
Polar Axis:  Replace u by -u. The result is
r = 1 + 2 cos1 -u2 = 1 + 2 cos u
The test is satisfied, so the graph is symmetric with respect to the polar axis.
The Line  U ∙P
2
 : Replace u by p - u. The result is
 r = 1 + 2 cos1p - u2 = 1 + 21cos p cos u + sin p sin u2
 
 = 1 - 2 cos u
The test fails, so the graph may or may not be symmetric with respect to the  
line u = p
2 .
The Pole:  Replace r by -r. The test fails, so the graph may or may not be symmetric 
with respect to the pole. Replace u by u + p. The test fails, so the graph may or may 
not be symmetric with respect to the pole.
Next, identify points on the graph of r = 1 + 2 cos u by assigning values to the 
angle u and calculating the corresponding values of r. Due to the periodicity of the 
cosine function and the symmetry with respect to the polar axis, just assign values to u  
from 0 to p, as given in Table 3.
Now plot the points 1r, u2 from Table 3, beginning at 13, 02 and ending 
at 1 -1, p2. See Figure 29(a). Finally, reflect this portion of the graph about the  
polar axis (the x-axis) to obtain the complete graph. See Figure 29(b).
Example 9
Solution
Table 3 
U
  r ∙1 ∙2 cos U
0
  1 + 2(1) = 3
p
6
  1 + 2a 23
2 b ≈2.73
p
3
  1 + 2a1
2b = 2
p
2
  1 + 2(0) = 1
2p
3
  1 + 2a-  1
2b = 0
5p
6
  1 + 2a-  23
2 b ≈-0.73
p
  1 + 2(-1) = -1
Limaçons without an inner loop are characterized by equations of the form
 r = a + b cos u   r = a + b sin u
 r = a - b cos u   r = a - b sin u
where a 7 0, b 7 0, and a 7 b. The graph of a limaçon without an inner loop 
does not pass through the pole.
Definition
The curve in Figure 29(b) is an example of a limaçon with an inner loop.
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u = 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
2
4
y
2,p–3
1,
(–1, p)
p–2
20.73,5p
––6
0,2p
––3
2.73,
(3, 0)
p–6
D
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
Er 5 1 1 2 cos u
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
2
4
y
2,p–3
1,
(21, p)
p–2
20.73,5p
–6
2.73,
(3, 0)
p–6
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
0,2p
––3
(
)
Figure 29 
•
Exploration
Graph r1 = 1 - 2 cos u. Clear the screen 
and graph r1 = 1 + 2 sin u. Clear the 
screen and graph r1 = 1 - 2 sin u. Do 
you see a pattern?

Section 9.2  Polar Equations and Graphs  615
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Graphing a Polar Equation (Rose)
Graph the equation: r = 2 cos12u2
Check for symmetry.
Polar Axis:  Replace u by -u. The result is
r = 2 cos321 - u2 4 = 2 cos12u2
The test is satisfied, so the graph is symmetric with respect to the polar axis.
The Line U ∙P
2
 :   Replace u by p - u. The result is
r = 2 cos321p - u2 4 = 2 cos12p - 2u2 = 2 cos12u2
The test is satisfied, so the graph is symmetric with respect to the line u = p
2 .
The Pole:  Since the graph is symmetric with respect to both the polar axis and the 
line u = p
2 , it must be symmetric with respect to the pole.
Next, construct Table 4. Because of the periodicity of the cosine function and the 
symmetry with respect to the polar axis, the line u = p
2 , and the pole, consider only 
values of u from 0 to p
2 .
Plot and connect these points as shown in Figure 30(a). Finally, because of symmetry, 
reflect this portion of the graph first about the polar axis (the x-axis) and then about 
the line u = p
2  (the y-axis) to obtain the complete graph. See Figure 30(b).
Example 10
Solution
Table 4 
U
r ∙2 cos(2U)
0
2(1) = 2
p
6
2a1
2b = 1
p
4
2(0) = 0
p
3
2a-  1
2b = -1
p
2
2(-1) = -2
Limaçons with an inner loop are characterized by equations of the form
 r = a + b cos u   r = a + b sin u
 r = a - b cos u   r = a - b sin u
where a 7 0, b 7 0, and a 6 b. The graph of a limaçon with an inner loop 
passes through the pole twice.
Definition
The curve in Figure 30(b) is called a rose with four petals.
Exploration
Graph r1 = 2 cos14u2; clear the screen 
and graph r1 = 2 cos16u2. How many 
petals did each of these graphs have?
Clear the screen and graph, in order, 
each on a clear screen, r1 = 2 cos13u2,
r1 = 2 cos15u2, and r1 = 2 cos17u2. 
What do you notice about the number of 
petals?
D
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
2
1
5
4
y
3
21,p–3
1, p–6
0, p–4
(2, 0)
(
)
(
)
(
)
Er 5 2 cos (2u)
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
5
4
y
3
(2, 0)
2
1,p–6
(
)
21,p–3
(
)
22, p–2
(
)
22, p–2
(
)
Figure 30 
•

616 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
Graphing a Polar Equation (Lemniscate)
Graph the equation:  r 2 = 4 sin12u2
We leave it to you to verify that the graph is symmetric with respect to the pole. 
Because of the symmetry with respect to the pole, consider only those values  
of u between u = 0 and u = p. Note that there are no points on the graph
for p
2 6 u 6 p (quadrant II), since r 2 6 0 for such values. Table 5 lists points on  
the graph for values of u = 0 through u = p
2 . The points from Table 5 where r Ú 0 
are plotted in Figure 31(a). The remaining points on the graph may be obtained by 
using symmetry. Figure 31(b) shows the final graph drawn.
Example 11
Solution
Table 5 
U
r2 ∙4 sin(2U)
r
0
4(0) = 0
0
p
6
4a 13
2 b = 223
{1.9
p
4
4(1) = 4
{2
p
3
4a 23
2 b = 223
{1.9
p
2
4(0) = 0
0
Rose curves are characterized by equations of the form
r = a cos1nu2  r = a sin1nu2  a ∙0
and have graphs that are rose shaped. If n ∙0 is even, the rose has 2n petals; 
if n ∙{1 is odd, the rose has n petals.
Definition
The curve in Figure 31(b) is an example of a lemniscate (from the Greek word 
for ribbon).
Figure 31 
•
D
x
u = 0
u = p
u = p–2
u = 3p
––2
u = 7p
––4
u = p–4
u = 3p
––4
u = 5p
––4
1
2
y
1.9,p–6
1.9, p–3
2, p–4
(
(
)
)
(
)
1.9,
(
)
p–6
Er 2 = 4 sin (2u)
x
u = 0
u = p
u = p–2
u = 3p
––2
u = 7p
––4
u = p–4
u = 3p
––4
u = 5p
––4
1
2
y
(
)
1.9,
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
p–3 (
)
2, p–4
Lemniscates are characterized by equations of the form
r 2 = a2 sin12u2  r 2 = a2 cos12u2
where a ∙0, and have graphs that are propeller shaped.
Definition
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
Graphing a Polar Equation (Spiral)
Graph the equation:  r = eu>5
The tests for symmetry with respect to the pole, the polar axis, and the line u = p
2
fail. Furthermore, there is no number u for which r = 0, so the graph does not pass 
through the pole. Observe that r is positive for all u, r increases as u increases, r S 0 
Example 12
Solution

Section 9.2  Polar Equations and Graphs  617
as u S - q, and r S q as u S q. With the help of a calculator, the values in Table 6  
can be obtained. See Figure 32.
Table 6
U
r ∙eU>5 
-  3p
2  
0.39
-p
0.53
-  p
2 
0.73
-  p
4 
0.85
0
1
p
4
1.17
p
2
1.37
p
1.87
3p
2
2.57
2p
3.51
Table 7 
Lines
Description
Line passing through the pole  
  making an angle a with the  
  polar axis
Vertical line
Horizontal line
Rectangular equation
y = (tan a)x
          x = a
         y = b
Polar equation
u = a
r cos u = a
r sin u = b
Typical graph
Circles
Description
Center at the pole, radius a
Passing through the pole, 
  tangent to the line   u = p
2, 
  center on the polar axis,  
  radius a
Passing through the pole, tangent  
  to the polar axis, center on the 
  line   u = p
2 , radius a
Rectangular equation
  x2 + y2 = a2, a 7 0
  x2 + y2 = {2ax, a 7 0
  x2 + y2 = {2ay, a 7 0
Polar equation
  r = a, a 7 0
  r = {2a cos u, a 7 0
  r = {2a sin u, a 7 0
Typical graph
(continued)
Figure 32  r = eu/5
•
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
4
y
2
1.17, p–4
(
)
(3.51, 2p)
(1, 0)
1.37, p–2
(
2.57,
)
3p
––2
(
)
(1.87, p)
The curve in Figure 32 is called a logarithmic spiral, since its equation may be 
written as u = 5 ln r and it spirals infinitely both toward the pole and away from it.
Classification of Polar Equations
The equations of some lines and circles in polar coordinates and their corresponding 
equations in rectangular coordinates are given in Table 7. Also included are the 
names and graphs of a few of the more frequently encountered polar equations.
y
x

y
x
y
x
y
x
a
a
y
x
a
y
x

618 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Sketching Quickly
If a polar equation involves only a sine (or cosine) function, you can quickly obtain 
its graph by making use of Table 7, periodicity, and a short table.
Sketching the Graph of a Polar Equation Quickly
Graph the equation: r = 2 + 2 sin u
You should recognize the polar equation: Its graph is a cardioid. The period of sin u  
is 2p, so form a table using 0 … u … 2p, compute r, plot the points 1r, u2, and 
sketch the graph of a cardioid as u varies from 0 to 2p. See Table 8 and Figure 33.
Example 13
Solution
Table 8 
U
r ∙2 ∙2 sin U
0
2 + 2(0) = 2
p
2
2 + 2(1) = 4
p
2 + 2(0) = 2
3p
2
2 + 2(-1) = 0
2p
2 + 2(0) = 2
Table 7  (Continued)
Other Equations
Name
Cardioid
Limaçon without inner loop
Limaçon with inner loop
Polar equations
  r = a { a cos u, a 7 0
  r = a { b cos u, 0 6 b 6 a
  r = a { b cos u, 0 6 a 6 b
 
  r = a { a sin u, a 7 0
  r = a { b sin u, 0 6 b 6 a
  r = a { b sin u, 0 6 a 6 b
Typical graph
Name
Lemniscate
Rose with three petals
Rose with four petals
Polar equations
  r2 = a2  cos(2u), a ∙0
  r = a sin(3u), a 7 0
 r = a sin(2u), a 7 0
 
  r2 = a2  sin(2u), a ∙0
  r = a cos(3u), a 7 0
 r = a cos(2u), a 7 0
Typical graph
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
Figure 33  r = 2 + 2 sin u
•
x
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
y
5
4
3
2
(2, p)
(2, 0)
1
3p
––2
(
)
0,
p
––2
(
)
4,
Calculus Comment  For those of you who are planning to study calculus, a  
comment about one important role of polar equations is in order.

Section 9.2  Polar Equations and Graphs  619
In rectangular coordinates, the equation x2 + y2 = 1, whose graph is the unit 
circle, is not the graph of a function. In fact, it requires two functions to obtain the 
graph of the unit circle:
y1 = 21 - x2  
Upper semicircle      y2 = - 21 - x2 
Lower semicircle
In polar coordinates, the equation r = 1, whose graph is also the unit circle, does 
define a function. For each choice of u, there is only one corresponding value of r, 
that is, r = 1. Since many problems in calculus require the use of functions, the  
opportunity to express nonfunctions in rectangular coordinates as functions in polar 
coordinates becomes extremely useful.
Note also that the vertical-line test for functions is valid only for equations in 
rectangular coordinates.
Historical Feature
P
olar coordinates seem to have been  
invented by Jakob Bernoulli (1654–1705) 
in about 1691, although, as with most 
such ideas, earlier traces of the notion exist. 
Early users of calculus remained committed to  
rectangular coordinates, and polar coordinates 
did not become widely used until the early 
1800s. Even then, it was mostly geometers who 
used them for describing odd curves. Finally, about the mid-1800s,  
applied mathematicians realized the tremendous simplification that  
polar coordinates make possible in the description of objects with  
circular or cylindrical symmetry. From then on, their use became  
widespread.
Jakob Bernoulli 
(1654–1705)
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 If the rectangular coordinates of a point are 14, - 62, 
the point symmetric to it with respect to the origin is  
   
 . (pp. 46– 48)
	 2.	 The difference formula for cosine is cos1A - B2 =            . 
(p. 512) 
	 3.	 The standard equation of a circle with center at 1-2, 52 and 
radius 3 is             . (pp. 68–71) 
	 4.	 Is the sine function even, odd, or neither? (p. 427) 
	 5.	 sin 5p
4
=  
. (pp. 403–410)
	 6.	 cos 2p
3
=  
 . (pp. 403– 410)
9.2  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 7.	 An equation whose variables are polar coordinates is called 
a(n)   
    
.
	 8.	 True or False  The tests for symmetry in polar coordinates 
are always conclusive. 
	 9.	 To test whether the graph of a polar equation may be  
symmetric with respect to the polar axis, replace u by   
 .
	 10.	 To test whether the graph of a polar equation may be symmetric
	
	 with respect to the line u = p
2 , replace u by    
 .
	 11.	 True or False  A cardioid passes through the pole. 
	 12.	 Rose curves are characterized by equations of the form 
r = a cos (nu) or r = a sin (nu), a ∙0. If n ∙0 is even, 
the rose has   
  petals; if n ∙{1 is odd, the rose has 
     
 petals.
	 13.	 For a positive real number a, the graph of which of the  
following polar equations is a circle with radius a and center 
at (a, 0) in rectangular coordinates?
(a)  r = 2a sin u	
(b)  r = - 2a sin u
(c)  r = 2a cos u	
(d)  r = -2a cos u 
	 14.	 In polar coordinates, the points 1r, u2 and 1- r, u2 are  
symmetric with respect to which of the following?
(a)	 the polar axis (or x-axis)    (b)  the pole (or origin)
(c)	 the line u = p
2  (or y-axis)    (d)  the line u = p
4  	
 
	
	
	
         (or y = x) 
Skill Building
In Problems 15–30, transform each polar equation to an equation in rectangular coordinates. Then identify and graph the equation.
	 15.	  r = 4	
16.	 r = 2	
17.	  u = p
3 	
18.	 u = -  p
4
	 19.	 r cos u = 4	
20.	 r sin u = 4	
21.	  r cos u = - 2	
22.	 r sin u = - 2

620 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
	 23.	 r = 2 cos u	
24.	 r = 2 sin u	
25.	 r = - 4 cos u	
26.	 r = - 4 sin u
	 27.	 r csc u = 8	
28.	 r sec u = 4	
29.	 r sec u = - 4	
30.	 r csc u = -2
In Problems 31–38, match each of the graphs (A) through (H) to one of the following polar equations.
	 31.	 u = p
4  
	
32.	 r = 2 
	
33.	 r cos u = 2 
	
34.	 r = 2 cos u 
	 35.	 r = 2 sin u 
	
36.	 r = 1 + cos u 
	
37.	 r sin u = 2 
	
38.	 u = 3p
4  
x
O
y
2
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
$
x
O
y
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 
3
1
p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
%
x
O
y
2
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
&
x
O
y
2
4
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
'
x
O
y
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 
3
1
p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
(
x
O
y
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 
3
1
p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
)
x
O
y
4
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 
2
p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
*
x
O
y
2
u 5 0
u 5 p
u 5 p–2
u 5 3p
––2
u 5 7p
––4
u 5 p–4
u 5 3p
––4
u 5 5p
––4
+
In Problems 39–62, identify and graph each polar equation.
	 39.	 r = 2 + 2 cos u	
40.	 r = 1 + sin u	
41.	 r = 2 - 2 cos u	
42.	 r = 3 - 3 sin u
	 43.	 r = 2 - cos u	
44.	 r = 2 + sin u	
45.	 r = 4 - 2 cos u	
46.	 r = 4 + 2 sin u
	 47.	 r = 1 + 2 sin u	
48.	 r = 1 - 2 sin u	
49.	 r = 2 + 4 cos u	
50.	 r = 2 - 3 cos u
	 51.	 r = 3 cos12u2	
52.	 r = 2 sin13u2	
53.	 r = 3 cos14u2	
54.	 r = 4 sin15u2
	 55.	 r 2 = 9 cos12u2	
56.	 r 2 = sin12u2	
57.	 r = 3u	
58.	 r = 2u
	 59.	 r = 3 + cos u	
60.	 r = 1 - cos u	
61.	 r = 4 cos13u2	
62.	 r = 1 - 3 cos u
Mixed Practice
In Problems 63–68, graph each pair of polar equations on the same polar grid. Find the polar coordinates of the point(s) of intersection 
and label the point(s) on the graph.
	 63.	 r = 8 cos u; r = 2 sec u	
64.	 r = 8 sin u; r = 4 csc u	
65.	 r = sin u; r = 1 + cos u
	 66.	 r = 3; r = 2 + 2 cos u	
67.	 r = 1 + sin u; r = 1 + cos u	
68.	 r = 1 + cos u; r = 3 cos u
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 69–72, the polar equation for each graph is either r = a + b cos u or r = a + b sin u, a 7 0. Select the correct equation and 
find the values of a and b.
	 69.	                                                                            
	 70.	
x
y
u5
u5
u5
u5 p
u5 0
u5
u5
u5
2
0
4 6 8
1, 
(2, 0) 
10
(
)
5p
²²
4
7p
²²
4
3p
²²
2
3p
²²
4
p²2
p²2
p²4
x
y
u5
u5
u5
u5 p
u5 0
u5
u5
u5
2
0
4 6 8
3, 
(6, p) 
10
(
)
5p
²²
4
7p
²²
4
3p
²²
4
3p
²²
2
p²2
p²2
p²4

Section 9.2  Polar Equations and Graphs  621
	 71.	                                                                     
	 72.	
In Problems 73–82, graph each polar equation.
	 73.	 r =
2
1 - cos u  (parabola)	
74.	 r =
2
1 - 2 cos u  (hyperbola)
	 75.	 r =
1
3 - 2 cos u  (ellipse)	
76.	 r =
1
1 - cos u  (parabola)
	 77.	 r = u, u Ú 0  (spiral of Archimedes)	
78.	 r = 3
u  (reciprocal spiral)
	 79.	 r = csc u - 2, 0 6 u 6 p  (conchoid)	
80.	 r = sin u tan u  (cissoid)
	 81.	 r = tan u, -  p
2 6 u 6 p
2   (kappa curve)	
82.	 r = cos u
2
x
y
u5
u5
u5
u5 p
u5 0
u5
u5
u5
2
0
4 6 8
10, 
(7, 0) 
10
(
)
5p
²²
4
3p
²²
2
7p
²²
4
3p
²²
4
p²2
p²2
p²4
x
y
u5
u5
u5 p
u5 0
u5
u5
u5
1
0
2 3 4
5, 
(1, 0) 
5
(
)
5p
²²
4
7p
²²
4
3p
²²
2
3p
²²
4
p²2
p²2
u5p²4
	 83.	 Show that the graph of the equation r sin u = a is a  
horizontal line a units above the pole if a Ú 0 and 0 a0  units 
below the pole if a 6 0.
	 84.	 Show that the graph of the equation r cos u = a is a vertical 
line a units to the right of the pole if a Ú 0 and 0 a0  units to 
the left of the pole if a 6 0.
	 85.	 Show that the graph of the equation r = 2a sin u, a 7 0, is a 
circle of radius a with center at 10, a2 in rectangular  
coordinates.
	 86.	 Show that the graph of the equation r = -2a sin u, a 7 0, is a 
circle of radius a with center at 10, -a2 in rectangular  
coordinates.
	 87.	 Show that the graph of the equation r = 2a cos u, a 7 0, is 
a circle of radius a with center at 1a, 02 in rectangular  
coordinates.
	 88.	 Show that the graph of the equation r = -2a cos u, a 7 0, is 
a circle of radius a with center at 1-a, 02 in rectangular 
coordinates.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 89.	 Explain why the following test for symmetry is valid:  
Replace r by - r and u by - u in a polar equation. If an  
equivalent equation results, the graph is symmetric with 
	
	 respect to the line u = p
2  (y-axis).
(a)	 Show that the test on page 577 fails for r 2 = cos u, yet 
this new test works.
(b)	 Show that the test on page 577 works for r 2 = sin u, yet 
this new test fails.
	 90.	 Write down two different tests for symmetry with respect to the 
polar axis. Find examples in which one test works and the other 
fails. Which test do you prefer to use? Justify your answer.
	 91.	 The tests for symmetry given on page 577 are sufficient, but 
not necessary. Explain what this means.
	 92.	 Explain why the vertical-line test used to identify functions 
in rectangular coordinates does not work for equations  
expressed in polar coordinates.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 93–96 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 93.	 Solve: 
5
x - 3 Ú 1 
	 94.	 Convert 7p
3  radians to degrees. 
	 95.	 Determine the amplitude and period of y = - 2 sin (5x) 
without graphing. 
	 96.	 Find any asymptotes for the graph of
R1x2 =
x + 3
x2 - x - 12.
 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 1- 4, 62    2.  cos A cos B + sin A sin B    3.  1x + 222 + 1y - 522 = 9    4.  Odd    5.  -  12
2     	6.  -  1
2

622 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Figure 34  Complex plane
y
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
x
z 5 x 1 yi
O
Plot Points in the Complex Plane
Complex numbers are discussed in Appendix A, Section A.7. In that discussion, we 
were not prepared to give a geometric interpretation of a complex number. Now 
we are ready.
A complex number z = x + yi can be interpreted geometrically as the point 
1x, y2 in the xy-plane. Each point in the plane corresponds to a complex number, and 
conversely, each complex number corresponds to a point in the plane. The collection 
of such points is referred to as the complex plane. The x-axis is referred to as the real 
axis, because any point that lies on the real axis is of the form z = x + 0i = x, a real 
number. The y-axis is called the imaginary axis, because any point that lies on it is of 
the form z = 0 + yi = yi, a pure imaginary number. See Figure 34.
Plotting a Point in the Complex Plane
Plot the point corresponding to z = 13 - i in the complex plane.
1
Example 1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 628.
	
Objectives	 	1  Plot Points in the Complex Plane  (p. 622)
	
	 	2  Convert a Complex Number between Rectangular Form and Polar 
Form  (p. 623)
	
	 	3  Find Products and Quotients of Complex Numbers in Polar Form  (p. 624)
	
	 	4  Use De Moivre’s Theorem  (p. 625)
	
	 	5  Find Complex Roots  (p. 626)
9.3  The Complex Plane; De Moivre’s Theorem
•	 Complex Numbers (Appendix A, Section A.7,  
pp. 997–1002)
•	 Values of the Sine and Cosine Functions at Certain 
Angles (Section 6.2, pp. 403–410)
•	 Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine and Cosine 
(Section 7.4, pp. 512 and 515)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
The point corresponding to z = 23 - i has the 
rectangular coordinates 123, -12. This point, 
located in quadrant IV, is plotted in Figure 35.
Solution
Figure 35 
•
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
22
2
2
22
z 5   3 2 i
O
Let z = x + yi be a complex number. The magnitude or modulus of z, denoted 
by 0 z0 , is defined as the distance from the origin to the point 1x, y2. That is,
	
0 z0 = 2x2 + y2	
(1)
Definition
See Figure 36 for an illustration.
This definition for 0 z0  is consistent with the definition for the absolute value of 
a real number: If z = x + yi is real, then z = x + 0i and
0 z0 = 2x2 + 02 = 2x2 = 0 x0
For this reason, the magnitude of z is sometimes called the absolute value of z.
Figure 36 
y
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
x
z 5 x 1 yi
O
_ z _ 5   x2 1 y 2

Section 9.3  The Complex Plane; De Moivre’s Theorem  623
Recall that if z = x + yi, then its conjugate, denoted by z, is z = x - yi. 
Because zz = x2 + y2, which is a nonnegative real number, it follows from  
equation (1) that the magnitude of z can be written as
	
0 z0 = 2zz	
(2)
Convert a Complex Number between Rectangular  
Form and Polar Form
When a complex number is written in the standard form z = x + yi, it is in 
rectangular, or Cartesian, form, because 1x, y2 are the rectangular coordinates 
of the corresponding point in the complex plane. Suppose that 1r, u2 are polar  
coordinates of this point. Then
	
x = r cos u  y = r sin u	
(3)
2
If r Ú 0 and 0 … u 6 2p, the complex number z = x + yi may be written in 
polar form as
	
z = x + yi = 1r cos u2 + 1r sin u2i = r1cos u + i sin u2	
(4)
Definition
See Figure 37.
If z = r1cos u + i sin u2 is the polar form of a complex number,* the angle u,
0 … u 6 2p, is called the argument of z.
Also, because r Ú 0, we have r = 2x2 + y2. From equation (1), it follows that 
the magnitude of z = r1cos u + i sin u2 is
0 z0 = r
Writing a Complex Number in Polar Form
Write an expression for z = 23 - i in polar form.
The point, located in quadrant IV, is plotted in Figure 35. Because x = 23 and 
y = -1, it follows that
r = 2x2 + y2 = 31 23 22 + 1-122 = 24 = 2
so
sin u = y
r = -1
2   cos u = x
r = 23
2   0 … u 6 2p
The angle u, 0 … u 6 2p, that satisfies both equations is u = 11p
6 . With 
u = 11p
6  and r = 2, the polar form of z = 23 - i is
z = r1cos u + i sin u2 = 2acos 11p
6
+ i sin 11p
6 b
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Plotting a Point in the Complex Plane and Converting  
from Polar to Rectangular Form
Plot the point corresponding to z = 21cos 30° + i sin 30°2 in the complex plane, 
and write an expression for z in rectangular form.
Example 2
Solution
•
Example 3
*Some texts abbreviate the polar form using z = r(cos u + i sin u) = r cis u.
Figure 37 
y
r
z
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
x
z 5 x 1 yi 5 r(cos u 1 i sin u),
r ≥ 0, 0 ≤ u , 2p 
O
u

624 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Figure 38  z = 23 + i
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
22
2
2
2
z 5 2(cos 308 1 i sin 308)
O
308
To plot the complex number z = 21cos 30° + i sin 30°2, plot the point whose polar 
coordinates are 1r, u2 = 12, 30°2, as shown in Figure 38. In rectangular form,
z = 21cos 30° + i sin 30°2 = 2a 13
2
+ 1
2  ib = 23 + i
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
Find Products and Quotients of Complex Numbers  
in Polar Form
The polar form of a complex number provides an alternative method for finding 
products and quotients of complex numbers.
Solution
•
3
In Words
The magnitude of a complex  
number z is r, and its argument  
is u, so when
z = r (cos u + i sin u)
the magnitude of the product 
(quotient) of two complex  
numbers equals the product  
(quotient) of their magnitudes; 
the argument of the product 
(quotient) of two complex  
numbers is determined by the  
sum (difference) of their  
arguments.
Let z1 = r11cos u1 + i sin u12 and z2 = r21cos u2 + i sin u22 be two complex 
numbers. Then
	
z1
 z2 = r1r2 3cos1u1 + u22 + i sin1u1 + u22 4	
(5)
If z2 ∙0, then
	
z1
z2
= r1
r2
  3cos1u1 - u22 + i sin1u1 - u22 4	
(6)
Theorem
Proof  We will prove formula (5). The proof of formula (6) is left as an exercise  
(see Problem 68).
 z1
 z2 = 3r11cos u1 + i sin u12 4 3r21cos u2 + i sin u22 4
 = r1r23 1cos u1 + i sin u12 1cos u2 + i sin u22 4
 = r1
 r23 1cos u1 cos u2 - sin u1 sin u22 + i1sin u1 cos u2 + cos u1 sin u22 4
 = r1
 r23cos1u1 + u22 + i sin1u1 + u22 4
Let’s look at an example of how this theorem can be used.
Finding Products and Quotients of Complex Numbers in Polar Form
If z = 31cos 20° + i sin 20°2 and w = 51cos 100° + i sin 100°2, find the following 
(leave your answers in polar form).
(a)	 zw        (b)  z
w
(a)	  zw = 331cos 20° + i sin 20°2 4 351cos 100° + i sin 100°2 4
	
 = 13 # 52 3cos120° + 100°2 + i sin120° + 100°2 4
	
 = 151cos 120° + i sin 120°2
(b)	  z
w =
31cos 20° + i sin 20°2
51cos 100° + i sin 100°2
	
 = 3
5  3cos120° - 100°2 + i sin120° - 100°2 4
	
 = 3
5  3cos1-80°2 + i sin1-80°2 4
	
 = 3
5 1cos 280° + i sin 280°2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5
■
Example 4
Solution
Apply equation (5).
Apply equation (6).
•
The argument must lie between 
0° and 360°.

Section 9.3  The Complex Plane; De Moivre’s Theorem  625
Use De Moivre’s Theorem
De Moivre’s Theorem, stated by Abraham De Moivre (1667–1754) in 1730, but 
already known to many people by 1710, is important for the following reason:  
The fundamental processes of algebra are the four operations of addition,  
subtraction, multiplication, and division, together with powers and the extraction  
of roots. De Moivre’s Theorem allows the last two fundamental algebraic operations 
to be applied to complex numbers.
De Moivre’s Theorem, in its most basic form, is a formula for raising a complex 
number z to the power n, where n Ú 1 is a positive integer. Let’s try to conjecture 
the form of the result.
Let z = r1cos u + i sin u2 be a complex number. Then equation (5) yields
 n = 2:  z2 = r 2 3cos12u2 + i sin12u2 4
 n = 3:  z3 = z2 # z
 
 
 = 5r 2 3cos12u2 + i sin12u2 4 6 3r1cos u + i sin u2 4
 
 
 = r 3 3cos13u2 + i sin13u2 4
 n = 4:  z4 = z3 # z
 
 
 = 5r 3 3cos13u2 + i sin13u2 4 6 3r1cos u + i sin u2 4
 
 
 = r 4 3cos14u2 + i sin14u2 4
Do you see the pattern?
4
Equation (5)
Equation (5)
Equation (5)
De Moivre’s Theorem
If z = r1cos u + i sin u2 is a complex number, then
	
zn = r n 3cos1nu2 + i sin1nu2 4	
(7)
where n Ú 1 is a positive integer.
Theorem
The proof of De Moivre’s Theorem requires mathematical induction (which is 
not discussed until Section 12.4), so it is omitted here. The theorem is actually true 
for all integers, n. You are asked to prove this in Problem 69.
Using De Moivre’s Theorem
Write 321cos 20° + i sin 20°2 43 in the standard form a + bi.
321cos 20° + i sin 20°2 43 = 233cos13 # 20°2 + i sin13 # 20°24
 = 81cos 60° + i sin 60°2
 = 8a1
2 + 23
2   ib = 4 + 423i
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Using De Moivre’s Theorem
Write 11 + i25 in the standard form a + bi.
To apply De Moivre’s Theorem, first write the complex number in polar form. Since
the magnitude of 1 + i is 212 + 12 = 12, begin by writing
1 + i = 22  a 1
12 +
1
12 ib = 22  acos p
4 + i sin p
4 b
Example 5
Solution
Apply De Moivre’s Theorem.
•
Example 6
Solution
Note  In the solution of Example 6, the 
approach used in Example 2 could also be 
used to write 1 + i  in polar form.	
■

626 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Now
 11 + i25 = c 22  acos p
4 + i sin p
4 b d
5
 = 1 22 25 c cosa5 # p
4 b + i sina5 # p
4 b d
 = 422  acos 5p
4
+ i sin 5p
4 b
 = 422  c -  1
12 + a -  1
12bid = -4 - 4i
Find Complex Roots
Let w be a given complex number, and let n Ú 2 denote a positive integer. Any 
complex number z that satisfies the equation
zn = w
is a complex nth root of w. In keeping with previous usage, if n = 2, the solutions 
of the equation z2 = w are called complex square roots of w, and if n = 3, the  
solutions of the equation z3 = w are called complex cube roots of w.
•
5
Finding Complex Roots
Let w = r1cos u0 + i sin u02 be a complex number, and let n Ú 2 be an integer. 
If w ∙0, there are n distinct complex nth roots of w, given by the formula
	
zk = 2
n r  Jcos¢ u0
n + 2kp
n  ≤+ i sin¢ u0
n + 2kp
n  ≤R 	
(8)
where k = 0, 1, 2,c, n - 1.
Theorem
Proof (Outline)  We will not prove this result in its entirety. Instead, we shall show 
only that each zk in equation (8) satisfies the equation zk
n = w, proving that each zk 
is a complex nth root of w.
 zn
k = b2
n r Jcos¢ u0
n + 2kp
n ≤+ i sin¢ u0
n + 2kp
n ≤R r
n
 = 12
n r 2n bcosJn¢u0
n + 2kp
n ≤R + i sinJn¢u0
n + 2kp
n ≤Rr 
 = r3cos1u0 + 2kp2 + i sin1u0 + 2kp2 4
 = r1cos u0 + i sin u02 = w
So each zk, k = 0, 1, c, n - 1, is a complex nth root of w. To complete the proof, 
we would need to show that each zk, k = 0, 1, c, n - 1, is, in fact, distinct and that 
there are no complex nth roots of w other than those given by equation (8).	
■
Finding Complex Cube Roots
Find the complex cube roots of -1 + 13i. Leave your answers in polar form, with 
the argument in degrees.
First, express -1 + 13i in polar form using degrees.
-1 + 23i = 2a -  1
2 + 13
2  ib = 21cos 120° + i sin 120°2
Apply De Moivre’s Theorem.
Simplify.
Periodic Property
Example 7
Solution

Section 9.3  The Complex Plane; De Moivre’s Theorem  627
The three complex cube roots of -1 + 13i = 21cos 120° + i sin 120°2 are
 zk = 2
3 2  c cosa120°
3
+ 360°k
3
b + i sina120°
3
+ 360°k
3
b d
   
 = 2
3 2  3cos140° + 120°k2 + i sin140° + 120°k2 4  k = 0, 1, 2
so
 z0 = 2
3 2 3cos140° + 120° # 02 + i sin140° + 120° # 02 4 = 2
3 2 1cos 40° + i sin 40°2
z1 = 2
3 2 3cos140° + 120° # 12 + i sin140° + 120° # 12 4 = 2
3 2 1cos 160° + i sin 160°2
z2 = 2
3 2 3cos140° + 120° # 22 + i sin140° + 120° # 224 = 2
3 2 1cos 280° + i sin 280°2
Notice that all of the three complex cube roots of -1 + 13i have the same 
magnitude, 2
3 2. This means that the points corresponding to each cube root lie the 
same distance from the origin; that is, the three points lie on a circle with center at
the origin and radius 2
3 2. Furthermore, the arguments of these cube roots are 40°, 160°,
and 280°, the difference of consecutive pairs being 120° = 360°
3
. This means that the
three points are equally spaced on the circle, as shown in Figure 39. These results are 
not coincidental. In fact, you are asked to show that these results hold for complex 
nth roots in Problems 65 through 67.
•
Warning  Most 
graphing 
utilities 
will provide only the answer z 0 to the  
calculation (-1 + 13 i ) ¿ (1/3). The 
paragraph following Example 7 explains 
how to obtain z1  and z2 from z 0 .	
■
Figure 39 
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
1
21
22
1
21
22
2
2
z0 5  3 2(cos 408 1 i sin 408)
O
408
z1 5  3 2(cos 1608 1 i sin 1608)
z2 5  3 2(cos 2808 1 i sin 2808)
 3 2)2
x2 1 y2 5 (
1208
1208
1208
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
Historical Feature
T
 he 
Babylonians, 
Greeks, 
and 
Arabs  
considered square roots of negative  
quantities to be impossible and equations 
with complex solutions to be unsolvable. The 
first hint that there was some connection  
between real solutions of equations and complex 
numbers 
came 
when 
Girolamo 
Cardano  
(1501–1576) and Tartaglia (1499–1557) found 
real roots of cubic equations by taking cube roots 
of complex quantities. For centuries thereafter, 
mathematicians worked with complex numbers without much belief 
in their actual existence. In 1673, John Wallis appears to have been 
the first to suggest the graphical representation of complex numbers, 
a truly significant idea that was not pursued further until about 1800. 
Several people, including Karl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855), then  
rediscovered the idea, and graphical representation helped to establish 
complex numbers as equal members of the number family. In practical  
applications, complex numbers have found their greatest uses in the 
study of alternating current, where they are a commonplace tool, and in 
the field of subatomic physics.
John Wallis
Historical Problems
	 1.	 The quadratic formula works perfectly well if the coefficients are complex numbers. Solve the following. 
(a)  z2 - (2 + 5i)z - 3 + 5i = 0 
        (b)  z2 - (1 + i)z - 2 - i = 0 

628 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The conjugate of - 4 - 3i is    
 . (pp. 997–1002)
	 2.	 The sum formula for the sine function is 	 
sin1A + B2 =                . (p. 515) 
	 3.	 The sum formula for the cosine function is	
 
 cos1A + B2 =                . (p. 512) 
	 4.	 sin 120° =                   ; cos 240° =                    . (pp. 403–410)
9.3  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 5.	 In the complex plane, the x-axis is referred to as the 
    
  axis, and the y-axis is called the    
  axis.
	 6.	 When a complex number z is written in the polar form 
z = r1cos u + i sin u2, the nonnegative number r is 
the   
  or   
  of z, and the angle u, 
0 … u 6 2p, is the   
  of z.
	 7.	 Let z1 = r11cos u1 + i sin u12 and z2 = r21cos u2 + i sin u22 
be two complex numbers. Then	  
z1z2 =   
  3cos 1  
2 + i sin 1  
24.
	 8.	 If 
z = r(cos u + i sin u) 
is 
a 
complex 
number,  
then zn =    
  3cos1  
2 + i sin1  
2 4.
	 9.	 Every nonzero complex number will have exactly   
 
distinct complex cube roots.
	 10.	 True or False  The polar form of a nonzero complex number 
is unique. 
	 11.	 If z = x + yi is a complex number, then ∙z∙ equals which of 
the following?
(a)  x2 + y2  	
(b)  ∙x∙+ ∙y∙
(c)  2x2 + y2	
(d)  2∙x∙+ ∙y∙ 
	 12.	 If z1 = r1( cos u1 + i sin u1) and z2 = r2( cos u2 + i sin u2)
	
	 are complex numbers, then z1
z2
, z2 ∙0, equals which of the 
following?
(a)	 r1
r2
3cos (u1 - u2) + i sin (u1 - u2)4
(b) r1
r2
c cos au1
u2
b + i sin au1
u2
b d
(c)	 r1
r2
3cos (u1 + u2) - i sin (u1 + u2)4
(d) r1
r2
c cos au1
u2
b - i sin au1
u2
b d  
Skill Building
In Problems 13–24, plot each complex number in the complex plane and write it in polar form. Express the argument in degrees.
	 13.	  1 + i	
14.	 - 1 + i	
15.	 1 - 23i	
16.	 23 - i	
17.  - 2	
18.  -3i
	 19.	 923 + 9i	
20.	 4 - 4i	
21.	 2 + 23i	
22.	 3 - 4i	
23.  25 - i	
24.  -2 + 3i
In Problems 25–34, write each complex number in rectangular form.
	 25.	 21cos 120° + i sin 120°2 
	
26.	 31cos 210° + i sin 210°2 
	
27.	 2acos 5p
6
+ i sin 5p
6 b 
	 28.	 4acos 7p
4
+ i sin 7p
4 b 
	
29.	 4acos p
2 + i sin p
2 b 
	
30.	 3acos 3p
2
+ i sin 3p
2 b 
	 31.	 0.41cos 200° + i sin 200°2	
32.	 0.21cos 100° + i sin 100°2 
	 33.	 3acos p
10 + i sin p
10b 
	
34.	 2acos p
18 + i sin p
18b 
In Problems 35–42, find zw and z
w . Leave your answers in polar form.
	 35.	  z = 21cos 40° + i sin 40°2	
36.	 z = cos 120° + i sin 120°	
37.	  z = 21cos 80° + i sin 80°2
	
	  w = 41cos 20° + i sin 20°2	
	  w = cos 100° + i sin 100°	
	 w = 61cos 200° + i sin 200°2
	 38.	  z = 31cos 130° + i sin 130°2	
39.	  z = 4acos 3p
8
+ i sin 3p
8 b	
40.	  z = 2acos p
8 + i sin p
8 b
	
 w = 41cos 270° + i sin 270°2
	
	 w = 2acos 9p
16 + i sin 9p
16 b	
	 w = 2acos p
10 + i sin p
10b
	 41.	  z = 1 - i	
42.	  z = 2 + 2i
	
	  w = 1 - 23i	
	 w = 23 - i
In Problems 43–54, write each expression in the standard form a + bi.
	 43.	  341cos 40° + i sin 40°2 43	
44.	 331cos 80° + i sin 80°2 43 
	 45.	 c 22  acos 5p
16 + i sin 5p
16 b d
4
 
	 46.	 c 2acos p
10 + i sin p
10b d
5
	
47.	 c 1
2  1cos 72° + i sin 72°2 d
5
	
48.	 3 23  1cos 10° + i sin 10°2 46 

Section 9.3  The Complex Plane; De Moivre’s Theorem  629
	 49.	 c 23  acos 5p
18 + i sin 5p
18 b d
6
	
50.	 c 25  acos 3p
16 + i sin 3p
16 b d
4
	
  51.	 1 23 - i26 
	 52.	 11 - i25 
	
53.	 11 - 25i28 
	
54.	 1 22 - i26 
In Problems 55–62, find all the complex roots. Leave your answers in polar form with the argument in degrees.
	 55.	 The complex cube roots of 1 + i	
56.	 The complex fourth roots of 23 - i
	 57.	 The complex cube roots of - 8 - 8i	
58.	 The complex fourth roots of 4 - 423i
	 59.	 The complex cube roots of - 8	
60.	 The complex fourth roots of - 16i
	 61.	 The complex fifth roots of - i 	
62.	 The complex fifth roots of i
Applications and Extensions
	 63.	 Find the four complex fourth roots of unity (1) and plot them.
	 64.	 Find the six complex sixth roots of unity (1) and plot them.
	 65.	 Show that each complex nth root of a nonzero complex 
number w has the same magnitude.
	 66.	 Use the result of Problem 65 to draw the conclusion that 
each complex nth root lies on a circle with center at the  
origin. What is the radius of this circle?
	 67.	 Refer to Problem 66. Show that the complex nth roots of a 
nonzero complex number w are equally spaced on the circle.
	 68.	 Prove formula (6).
	 69.	 Prove that De Moivre’s Theorem is true for all integers n by 
assuming it is true for integers n Ú 1 and then showing it is 
true for 0 and for negative integers.
Hint: Multiply the numerator and the denominator by the 
conjugate of the denominator, and use even-odd properties.
	 70.	 Mandelbrot Sets
(a)	 Consider the expression an = 1an-1 22 + z, where z is 
some complex number (called the seed) and a0 = z.  
Compute a11=a0
2 + z2, a21=a1
2 + z2, a31=a2
2 + z2, a4, a5, 
and a6 for the following seeds: z1 = 0.1 - 0.4i, 
z2 = 0.5 + 0.8i, z3 = - 0.9 + 0.7i, z4 = -1.1 + 0.1i, 
z5 = 0 - 1.3i, and z6 = 1 + 1i.
(b)	 The dark portion of the graph represents the set of 
all values z = x + yi that are in the Mandelbrot set. 
	
Determine which complex numbers in part (a) are in this
	
set by plotting them on the graph. Do the complex  
numbers that are not in the Mandelbrot set have any 
common characteristics regarding the values of a6 found 
in part (a)?
(c)	 Compute 0 z0 = 2x2 + y2 for each of the complex 
numbers in part (a). Now compute 0 a6 0  for each of 
the complex numbers in part (a). For which complex  
numbers is 0 a6 0 … 0 z0  and 0 z0 … 2? Conclude that the 
criterion for a complex number to be in the Mandelbrot 
set is that 0 an 0 … 0 z0  and 0 z0 … 2.
–2
–1
y
1
Imaginary axis
x
1
Real axis
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 71–74 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 71.	 Find the area of the triangle with a = 8, b = 11, 
and C = 113°. 
	 72.	 Convert 240° to radians. Express your answer as a  
multiple of p. 
	 73.	 Find the exact distance between the points (- 3, 4) and 
(2, - 1). 
	74.	 Determine whether f(x) = 5x2 - 12x + 4 has a maximum 
value or a minimum value, and then find the value. 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 - 4 + 3i      2.  sin A cos B + cos A sin B      3.  cos A cos B - sin A sin B      	4.  13
2 ; -  1
2

630 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
In simple terms, a vector (derived from the Latin vehere, meaning “to carry”) is a 
quantity that has both magnitude and direction. It is customary to represent a vector 
by using an arrow. The length of the arrow represents the magnitude of the vector, 
and the arrowhead indicates the direction of the vector.
Many quantities in physics can be represented by vectors. For example, the  
velocity of an aircraft can be represented by an arrow that points in the direction of 
movement; the length of the arrow represents the speed. If the aircraft speeds up, 
we lengthen the arrow; if the aircraft changes direction, we introduce an arrow in the 
new direction. See Figure 40. Based on this representation, it is not surprising that 
vectors and directed line segments are somehow related.
Geometric Vectors
If P and Q are two distinct points in the xy-plane, there is exactly one line containing 
both P and Q [Figure 41(a)]. The points on that part of the line that joins P to Q, 
including P and Q, form what is called the line segment PQ [ Figure 41(b) ]. Ordering 
the points so that they proceed from P to Q results in a directed line segment from 
P to Q, or a geometric vector, which is denoted by PQ >
. In a directed line segment 
PQ >
, P is called the initial point and Q the terminal point, as indicated in Figure 41(c).
9.4  Vectors
	
Objectives	 	1  Graph Vectors  (p. 632)
	
	 	2  Find a Position Vector  (p. 632)
	
	 	3  Add and Subtract Vectors Algebraically  (p. 634)
	
	 	4  Find a Scalar Multiple and the Magnitude of a Vector  (p. 635)
	
	 	5  Find a Unit Vector  (p. 635)
	
	 	6  Find a Vector from Its Direction and Magnitude  (p. 636)
	
	 	7  Model with Vectors  (p. 637)
*Boldface letters will be used to denote vectors, to distinguish them from numbers. For handwritten 
work, an arrow is placed over the letter to signify a vector. For example, write a vector by hand as v >.
Figure 40 
Figure 41 
P
Q
(a)   Line containing P and Q
(b)   Line segment PQ
P
Q
Terminal
point
Initial
point
(c)   Directed line segment PQ
P
Q
The magnitude of the directed line segment PQ >
 is the distance from the point P  
to the point Q; that is, it is the length of the line segment. The direction of PQ >
 is 
from P to Q. If a vector v* has the same magnitude and the same direction as the 
directed line segment PQ >
, write
v = PQ >
The vector v whose magnitude is 0 is called the zero vector, 0. The zero vector 
is assigned no direction.
Two vectors v and w are equal, written
v = w
if they have the same magnitude and the same direction.
For example, the three vectors shown in Figure 42 have the same magnitude and 
the same direction, so they are equal, even though they have different initial points 
and different terminal points. As a result, it is useful to think of a vector simply as 
an arrow, keeping in mind that two arrows (vectors) are equal if they have the same 
direction and the same magnitude (length).
Figure 42  Equal vectors
R
S
P
Q
T
U

Section 9.4  Vectors  631
Adding Vectors Geometrically
The sum v + w of two vectors is defined as follows: Position the vectors v and w so 
that the terminal point of v coincides with the initial point of w, as shown in Figure 43. 
The vector v + w is then the unique vector whose initial point coincides with the 
initial point of v and whose terminal point coincides with the terminal point of w.
Vector addition is commutative. That is, if v and w are any two vectors, then
v + w = w + v
Figure 44 illustrates this fact. (Observe that the commutative property is  
another way of saying that opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal and parallel.)
Vector addition is also associative. That is, if u, v, and w are vectors, then
u + 1v + w2 = 1u + v2 + w
Figure 45 illustrates the associative property for vectors.
The zero vector 0 has the property that
v + 0 = 0 + v = v
for any vector v.
If v is a vector, then -v is the vector that has the same magnitude as v, but 
whose direction is opposite to v, as shown in Figure 46.
Furthermore,
v + 1 -v2 = 0
If v and w are two vectors, then the difference v - w is defined as
v - w = v + 1 -w2
Figure 47 illustrates the relationships among v, w, v + w, and v - w.
Multiplying Vectors by Numbers Geometrically
When dealing with vectors, real numbers are referred to as scalars. Scalars are 
quantities that have only magnitude. Examples of scalar quantities from physics are 
temperature, speed, and time. We now define how to multiply a vector by a scalar.
If a is a scalar and v is a vector, the scalar multiple av is defined as follows:
	 1.	If a 7 0, av is the vector whose magnitude is a times the magnitude of v 
and whose direction is the same as that of v.
	 2.	If a 6 0, av is the vector whose magnitude is 0 a0  times the magnitude of v 
and whose direction is opposite that of v.
	 3.	If a = 0 or if v = 0, then av = 0.
Definition
See Figure 48 for some illustrations.
For example, if a is the acceleration of an object of mass m due to a force F  
being exerted on it, then, by Newton’s second law of motion, F = ma. Here, ma is 
the product of the scalar m and the vector a.
Figure 48  Scalar multiples
1v
2v
v
Figure 44  v + w = w + v
v  w
w  v
w
v
v
w
Figure 43  Adding vectors
v  w
Initial point of v
Terminal point of w
w
v
Figure 45 
(u + v) + w = u + (v + w)
w
u  v
v  w
u
v
Figure 46  Opposite vectors
v
 v
Figure 47 
v  w
v  w
w
 w
v
v

632 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Scalar multiples have the following properties:
0v = 0  1v = v  
 -1v = -v
1a + b2v = av + bv   a1v + w2 = av + aw
a1bv2 = 1ab2v
Graph Vectors
Graphing Vectors
Use the vectors illustrated in Figure 49 to graph each of the following vectors:
(a)	 v - w      (b)  2v + 3w      (c)  2v - w + u
 Solution  Figure 50 shows each graph.
1
Example 1
Figure 50 
•
v  w
(a)  v  w
2v  3w
(b)  2v  3w
2v  w  u
(c)  2v  w  u
 w
v
2v
3w
u
 w
2v
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 1  a n d  1 3
Magnitude of Vectors
The symbol 7v7  represents the magnitude of a vector v. Since 7v7  equals the length 
of a directed line segment, it follows that 7v7  has the following properties:
Properties of 7 v7
If v is a vector and if a is a scalar, then
(a)  7v7 Ú 0	
(b)  7v7 = 0 if and only if v = 0
(c)  7 -v7 = 7v7 	
(d)  7av7 = 0 a0 7v7
Theorem
Property (a) is a consequence of the fact that distance is a nonnegative number. 
Property (b) follows because the length of the directed line segment PQ >
 is positive 
unless P and Q are the same point, in which case the length is 0. Property (c) follows 
because the length of the line segment PQ equals the length of the line segment QP. 
Property (d) is a direct consequence of the definition of a scalar multiple.
A vector u for which 7u7 = 1 is called a unit vector.
Definition
Find a Position Vector
To compute the magnitude and direction of a vector, an algebraic way of representing  
vectors is needed.
2
An algebraic vector v is represented as
v = 8a, b9
where a and b are real numbers (scalars) called the components of the vector v.
Definition
Figure 49 
w
u
v

Section 9.4  Vectors  633
A rectangular coordinate system is used to represent algebraic vectors in the 
plane. If v = 8a, b9 is an algebraic vector whose initial point is at the origin, then v 
is called a position vector. See Figure 51. Notice that the terminal point of the  
position vector v = 8a, b9 is P = 1a, b2.
The next result states that any vector whose initial point is not at the origin is 
equal to a unique position vector.
Figure 53 
Suppose that v is a vector with initial point P1 = 1x1, y12, not necessarily the 
origin, and terminal point P2 = 1x2, y22. If v = P1P2
>
, then v is equal to the 
position vector
	
v = 8x2 - x1, y2 - y19	
(1)
Theorem
To see why this is true, look at Figure 52.
Figure 52  v = 8a, b9 = 8x2 - x1 , y2 - y19
a
b
v
P 5 (a, b)
a
A
v
P2 5 (x2, y2)
P1 5 (x1, y1)
x2 2 x1
y2 2 y1
Q
O
b
x
y
Triangle OPA and triangle P1P2Q are congruent. [Do you see why? The line 
segments have the same magnitude, so d1O, P2 = d1P1, P22; and they have the 
same direction, so ∠POA = ∠P2
 P1Q. Since the triangles are right triangles, we 
have angle–side–angle.] It follows that corresponding sides are equal. As a result, 
x2 - x1 = a and y2 - y1 = b, so v may be written as
v = 8a, b9 = 8x2 - x1, y2 - y19
Because of this result, any algebraic vector can be replaced by a unique position 
vector, and vice versa. This flexibility is one of the main reasons for the wide use of 
vectors.
Finding a Position Vector
Find the position vector of the vector v = P1P2
>
 if P1 = 1 -1, 22 and P2 = 14, 62.
 Solution  By equation (1), the position vector equal to v is
v = 84 - 1 -12, 6 - 29 = 85, 49
See Figure 53.
Example 2
•
y
v  <5, 4>
(5, 4)
P2  (4, 6)
P1  (1, 2)
O
5
5
x
Figure 51  Position vector v
y
P  (a, b)
x
 v = <a, b>
O
In Words
An algebraic vector represents 
“driving directions” to get from the 
initial point to the terminal point 
of a vector. So if v = 85, 49, 
travel 5 units right and 4 units up 
from the initial point to arrive at 
the terminal point.

634 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Two position vectors v and w are equal if and only if the terminal point of v is 
the same as the terminal point of w. This leads to the following result:
Equality of Vectors
Two vectors v and w are equal if and only if their corresponding components 
are equal. That is,
If v = 8a1, b19 and w = 8a2, b29
then  v = w if and only if a1 = a2  and b1 = b2.
Theorem
We now present an alternative representation of a vector in the plane that is 
common in the physical sciences. Let i denote the unit vector whose direction is 
along the positive x-axis; let j denote the unit vector whose direction is along the 
positive y-axis. Then i = 81, 09 and j = 80, 19, as shown in Figure 54. Any vector 
v = 8a, b9 can be written using the unit vectors i and j as follows:
v = 8a, b9 = a81, 09 + b80, 19 = ai + bj
The quantities a and b are called the horizontal and vertical components of v,  
respectively. For example, if v = 85, 49 = 5i + 4j, then 5 is the horizontal  
component and 4 is the vertical component.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1
Add and Subtract Vectors Algebraically
The sum, difference, scalar multiple, and magnitude of algebraic vectors are defined 
in terms of their components.
3
Let 
v = a1i + b1j = 8a1, b19 
and 
w = a2i + b2j = 8a2, b29 
be 
two  
vectors, and let a be a scalar. Then
	
v + w = 1a1 + a22i + 1b1 + b22j = 8a1 + a2, b1 + b29	
(2)
	
v - w = 1a1 - a22i + 1b1 - b22j = 8a1 - a2, b1 - b29	
(3)
	
av = 1aa12i + 1ab12j = 8aa1, ab19	
(4)
	
7v7 = 2a2
1 + b2
1	
(5)
Definition
These definitions are compatible with the geometric definitions given earlier in 
this section. See Figure 55.
Figure 55 
a2
a2
b1
b2
b2
a1
y
v 1 w
(a2, b2)
(a1, b1)
(a1 1 a2, b1 1 b2)
O
x
DIllustration of property (2)
aa1
b1
ab1
a1
y
av
(a1, b1)
(aa1, ab1)
O
x
EIllustration of property (4), a . 0 
b1
b1
y
P1 5 (a1, b1)
O
x
F
a2
1 1 b2
1
a1
Illustration of property (5):
|| v || 5 Distance from O to P1
|| v || 5 
w
v
v
v
In Words
To add two vectors, add  
corresponding components. To 
subtract two vectors, subtract 
corresponding components.
Figure 54  Unit vectors i and j
y
j
i
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
x

Section 9.4  Vectors  635
Adding and Subtracting Vectors
If v = 2i + 3j = 82, 39 and w = 3i - 4j = 83, -49, find:
(a)	 v + w          (b)  v - w
(a)	 v + w = 12i + 3j2 + 13i - 4j2 = 12 + 32i + 13 - 42j = 5i - j
or
	
v + w = 82, 39 + 83, -49 = 82 + 3, 3 + 1 -42 9 = 85, -19
(b)	 v - w = 12i + 3j2 - 13i - 4j2 = 12 - 32i + 33 - 1-42 4j = -i + 7j
or
	
v - w = 82, 39 - 83, -49 = 82 - 3, 3 - 1 -42 9 = 8 -1, 79
Find a Scalar Multiple and the Magnitude of a Vector
Finding Scalar Multiples and Magnitudes of Vectors
If v = 2i + 3j = 82, 39 and w = 3i - 4j = 83, -49, find:
(a)	 3v          (b)  2v - 3w          (c)  ‘v‘
(a)	 3v = 312i + 3j2 = 6i + 9j
or
	
3v = 382, 39 = 86, 99
(b)	  2v - 3w = 212i + 3j2 - 313i - 4j2 = 4i + 6j - 9i + 12j
	
 = -5i + 18j
or
	
 2v - 3w = 282, 39 - 383, -49 = 84, 69 - 89, -129
	
 = 84 - 9, 6 - 1 -122 9 = 8 -5, 189
(c)	 7v7 = 72i + 3j7 = 222 + 32 = 213
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 7  a n d  4 3
For the remainder of the section, we will express a vector v in the form ai + bj.
Find a Unit Vector
Recall that a unit vector u is a vector for which 7u7 = 1. In many applications, it is 
useful to be able to find a unit vector u that has the same direction as a given vector v.
Example 3
Solution
•
4
Example 4
Solution
•
5
Unit Vector in the Direction of v
For any nonzero vector v, the vector
	
u =
v
7 v 7 	
(6)
is a unit vector that has the same direction as v.
Theorem
Proof  Let v = ai + bj. Then 7v7 = 2a2 + b2 and
u =
v
7 v 7 =
ai + bj
2a2 + b2 =
a
2a2 + b2  i +
b
2a2 + b2  j

636 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
The vector u is in the same direction as v, since 7v7 7 0. Furthermore,
7u7 = B
a2
a2 + b2 +
b2
a2 + b2 = B
a2 + b2
a2 + b2 = 1
That is, u is a unit vector in the direction of v.	
■
As a consequence of this theorem, if u is a unit vector in the same direction as 
a vector v, then v may be expressed as
	
v = 7v7u	
(7)
This way of expressing a vector is useful in many applications.
Finding a Unit Vector
Find a unit vector in the same direction as v = 4i - 3j.
Find 7v‘ first.
7v7 = 74i - 3j7 = 216 + 9 = 5
Now multiply v by the scalar 1
7 v 7 = 1
5. A unit vector in the same direction as v is
v
7 v 7 = 4i - 3j
5
= 4
5 i - 3
5 j
Check:	This vector is indeed a unit vector because
" v
7v7
" = Ba4
5b
2
+ a -  3
5b
2
= B
16
25 + 9
25 = B
25
25 = 1
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 3
Find a Vector from Its Direction and Magnitude
If a vector represents the speed and direction of an object, it is called a velocity 
vector. If a vector represents the direction and amount of a force acting on an object, 
it is called a force vector. In many applications, a vector is described in terms of its 
magnitude and direction, rather than in terms of its components. For example, a ball 
thrown with an initial speed of 25 miles per hour at an angle of 30° to the horizontal 
is a velocity vector.
Suppose that we are given the magnitude ‘v‘ of a nonzero vector v and the 
direction angle a, 0° … a 6 360°, between v and i. To express v in terms of ‘v‘  
and a, first find the unit vector u having the same direction as v.
Look at Figure 56. The coordinates of the terminal point of u are 1cos a, sin a2. 
Then u = cos a i + sin a j and, from equation (7),
Example 5
Solution
•
6
	
v = ‘v‘ 1cos a i + sin a j2	
(8)
where a is the direction angle between v and i.
Figure 56  v = 7v7 (cos a i + sin a j)
1
1
y
x

i
j
(cos , sin )
u
v

Section 9.4  Vectors  637
Figure 57 
y
x
12.5 j
21.65 i
12.5
21.65
v = 25(cos 30°i + sin 30°j)
25
30°
Finding a Vector When Its Magnitude and Direction Are Given
A ball is thrown with an initial speed of 25 miles per hour in a direction that makes 
an angle of 30° with the positive x-axis. Express the velocity vector v in terms of i 
and j. What is the initial speed in the horizontal direction? What is the initial speed 
in the vertical direction?
The magnitude of v is 7v7 = 25 miles per hour, and the angle between the direction 
of v and i, the positive x-axis, is a = 30°. By equation (8),
Example 6
Solution
v = 7v7 1cos ai + sin aj2 = 251cos 30°i + sin 30°j2
                           = 25a 13
2  i + 1
2 jb = 2513
2
 i + 25
2  j
The initial speed of the ball in the horizontal direction is the horizontal component
of v, 2523
2
 ≈21.65 miles per hour. The initial speed in the vertical direction is the 
vertical component of v, 25
2 = 12.5 miles per hour. See Figure 57.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 9
Finding the Direction Angle of a Vector
Find the direction angle a of v = 4i - 4j.
See Figure 58. The direction angle a of v = 4i - 4j can be found by solving
tan a = -4
4
= -1
Because 0° … a 6 360°, the direction angle is a = 315°.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 5
Model with Vectors
Because forces can be represented by vectors, two forces “combine” the way that 
vectors “add.” If F1 and F2 are two forces simultaneously acting on an object, the 
vector sum F1 + F2 is the resultant force. The resultant force produces the same 
effect on the object as that obtained when the two forces F1 and F2 act on the object. 
See Figure 59.
Finding the Actual Speed and Direction of an Aircraft
A Boeing 737 aircraft maintains a constant airspeed of 500 miles per hour headed 
due south. The jet stream is 80 miles per hour in the northeasterly direction.
(a)	 Express the velocity va of the 737 relative to the air and the velocity vw of the jet 
stream in terms of i and j.
(b)	 Find the velocity of the 737 relative to the ground.
(c)	 Find the actual speed and direction of the 737 relative to the ground.
•
Example 7
Solution
•
7
Example 8
Figure 58 
x

v  4i  4j
(4,4)
4
4
Figure 59  Resultant force
F1 + F2
Resultant
F1
F2
Orlando
Naples
Miami
Wind
N
S
W
E

638 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
(a)	 Set up a coordinate system in which north (N) is along the positive y-axis. See 
Figure 60. The velocity of the 737 relative to the air is va = -500j. The velocity 
of the jet stream  vw has magnitude 80 and direction NE (northeast), so the angle 
between vw and i is 45°. Express vw in terms of i and j as
vw = 801cos 45° i + sin 45° j2 = 80a 22
2  i + 22
2  jb = 4022  1i + j2
(b)	 The velocity of the 737 relative to the ground vg is
vg = va + vw = -500j + 40221i + j2 = 4022 i + 14022 - 5002j
(c)	 The actual speed of the 737 is
7vg7 = 31402222 + 14022 - 50022 ≈447 miles per hour
To find the actual direction of the 737 relative to the ground, determine the 
direction angle of vg. The direction angle is found by solving
tan a = 4022 - 500
4022
Then a ≈-82.7°. The 737 is traveling S 7.3° E.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 7
Finding the Weight of a Piano
Two movers require a magnitude of force of 300 pounds to push a piano up a ramp 
inclined at an angle 20° from the horizontal. How much does the piano weigh?
Let F1 represent the force of gravity, F2 represent the force required to move the 
piano up the ramp, and F3 represent the force of the piano against the ramp. See  
Figure 61. The angle between the ground and the ramp is the same as the angle between 
F1 and F3 because triangles ABC and BDE are similar, so ∠BAC = ∠DBE = 20°. 
To find the magnitude of F1 (the weight of the piano), calculate
 sin 20° = 7 F2 7
7 F1 7 = 300
7 F1 7
         7F17 = 300 lb
sin 20° ≈877 lb
The piano weighs approximately 877 pounds.
An object is said to be in static equilibrium if the object is at rest and  
the sum of all forces acting on the object is zero—that is, if the resultant force is 0.
Analyzing an Object in Static Equilibrium
A box of supplies that weighs 1200 pounds is suspended by two cables attached to 
the ceiling, as shown in Figure 62. What are the tensions in the two cables?
Draw a force diagram using the vectors as shown in Figure 63. The tensions in 
the cables are the magnitudes 7F17  and 7F27  of the force vectors F1 and F2. The 
magnitude of the force vector F3 equals 1200 pounds, the weight of the box. Now write 
each force vector in terms of the unit vectors i and j. For F1 and F2, use equation (8). 
Remember that a is the angle between the vector and the positive x-axis.
Solution
•
Example 9
Solution
•
Example 10
Solution
Figure 60 
W
N
S
vg
500
E
y
x
500
vw
va  500j
Figure 61 
20°
20°
A
B
D
C
E
F3
F1
F2

Section 9.4  Vectors  639
  F1 = 7F17 1cos 150°i + sin 150°j2 = 7F17 a -  13
2  i + 1
2 jb = -  13
2  7F17i + 1
2  7F17j
 F2 = 7F27 1cos 45°i + sin 45°j2 = 7F27 a 12
2  i + 12
2  jb = 12
2
 7F27 i + 12
2   7F27j
  F3 = -1200j
For static equilibrium, the sum of the force vectors must equal zero.
F1 + F2 + F3 = -  13
2
 7F17 i + 1
2
 7F17 j + 12
2
 7F27 i + 12
2   7F27j - 1200j = 0
The i component and j component will each equal zero. This results in the two equations
	
 -  13
2
 7F17 + 12
2   7F27 = 0	
(9)
	
 1
2
 7F17 + 12
2   7F27 - 1200 = 0	
(10)
Solve equation (9) for 7F27  to obtain
	
7F27 = 23
12  7F17 	
(11)
Substituting into equation (10) and solving for 7F17  yields
 1
2
 7F17 + 12
2   a 13
12  7F17 b - 1200 = 0
             1
2
 7F17 + 13
2   7F17 - 1200 = 0
                                       1 + 13
2
 7F17 = 1200
                                               7F17 =
2400
1 + 13 ≈878.5 pounds
Substituting this value into equation (11) gives 7F27.
7F27 = 13
12  7F17 = 13
12 #
2400
1 + 13 ≈1075.9 pounds
The left cable has tension of approximately 878.5 pounds, and the right cable has 
tension of approximately 1075.9 pounds.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 7
•
Historical Feature
T
 he history of vectors is surprisingly  
complicated for such a natural concept. 
In the xy-plane, complex numbers do 
a good job of imitating vectors. About 1840,  
mathematicians became interested in finding a 
system that would do for three dimensions what 
the complex numbers do for two dimensions. 
Hermann Grassmann (1809–1877), in Germany, 
and William Rowan Hamilton (1805–1865), in  
Ireland, both attempted to find solutions.
Hamilton’s system was the quaternions, which are best thought 
of as a real number plus a vector; they do for four dimensions  
what complex numbers do for two dimensions. In this system the  
order of multiplication matters; that is, ab 3 ba. Also, two products of 
vectors emerged, the scalar product (or dot product) and the vector 
product (or cross product).
Grassmann’s abstract style, although easily read today, was almost 
impenetrable during the nineteenth century, and only a few of his ideas 
were appreciated. Among those few were the same scalar and vector 
products that Hamilton had found.
About 1880, the American physicist Josiah Willard Gibbs  
(1839–1903) worked out an algebra involving only the simplest  
concepts: the vectors and the two products. He then added some  
calculus, and the resulting system was simple, flexible, and well adapted 
to expressing a large number of physical laws. This system remains in 
use essentially unchanged. Hamilton’s and Grassmann’s more extensive 
systems each gave birth to much interesting mathematics, but little  
of it is seen at elementary levels.
Josiah Gibbs 
(1839–1903)
Figure 62 
30°
30°
45°
45°
1200
pounds
Figure 63  Force diagram
y
30°
x
F1
F2
F3
45°
150°

640 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Skill Building
In Problems 11–18, use the vectors in the figure at the right to graph each of the following vectors.
	 11.	 v + w	
12.	 u + v
	 13.	 3v	
14.	 2w
	 15.	 u - v	
16.	 v - w
	 17.	 2u - 3v + w	
18.	 3v + u - 2w
In Problems 19–26, use the figure at the right. Determine whether each statement given is true or false.
	 19.	 K + G = F 
	
20.	 A + B = F 
	 21.	 G + H + E = D 
	
22.	 C = D - E + F 
	 23.	 H - C = G - F 
	
24.	 E + D = G + H 
	 25.	 A + B + C + H + G = 0 
	
26.	 A + B + K + G = 0 
	 27.	 If 7v7 = 4, what is 73v7? 
	
28.	 If 7v7 = 2, what is 7 - 4v7? 
In Problems 29–36, the vector v has initial point P and terminal point Q. Write v in the form ai + bj; that is, find its position vector.
	 29.	 P = 10, 02; Q = 1- 3, - 52 
	
30.	 P = 10, 02; Q = 13, 42 
	 31.	 P = 13, 22; Q = 15, 62 
	
32.	 P = 1- 3, 22; Q = 16, 52 
	 33.	 P = 1- 1, 42; Q = 16, 22 
	
34.	 P = 1- 2, - 12; Q = 16, - 22 
	 35.	 P = 11, 12; Q = 12, 22 
	
36.	 P = 11, 02; Q = 10, 12 
In Problems 37–42, find 7v7.
	 37.	 v = 3i - 4j  	
38.	 v = - 5i + 12j 
	
39.	 v = - i - j 
	 40.	 v = i - j 
	
41.	 v = 6i + 2j 
	
42.	 v = - 2i + 3j 
In Problems 43–48, find each quantity if v = 3i - 5j and w = - 2i + 3j.
	 43.	  2v + 3w 
	
44.	 3v - 2w 
	
45.	 7v + w7  
	 46.	 7v - w7  
	
47.	 7v7 + 7w7  
	
48.	 7v7 - 7w7  
In Problems 49–54, find the unit vector in the same direction as v.
	 49.	 v = - 3j  	
50.	 v = 5i 
	
51.	 v = - 5i + 12j 
	 52.	 v = 3i - 4j 
	
53.	  v = i - j 
	
54.	 v = 2i - j 
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 A  
 is a quantity that has both magnitude and  
direction.
	 2.	 If v is a vector, then v + (- v) =
 . 
	 3.	 A vector u for which 7u7 = 1 is called a(n) 
  vector.
	 4.	 If v = 6a, b7 is an algebraic vector whose initial point is 
the origin, then v is called a(n)   
 vector.
	 5.	 If v = ai + bj, then a is called the   
 component 
of v and b is called the   
 component of v.
	 6.	 If F1 and F2 are two forces simultaneously acting on an  
object, the vector sum F1 + F2 is called the   
 force.
	 7.	 True or False  Force is an example of a vector. 
	 8.	 True or False  Mass is an example of a vector. 
	 9.	 If v is a vector with initial point (x1, y1) and terminal point 
(x2, y2), then which of the following is the position vector 
that equals v?
(a)	 8x2 - x1, y2 - y19    (b)  8x1 - x2, y1 - y29
(c)	 h x2 - x1
2
, y2 - y1
2
i    (d)  h x1 + x2
2
, y1 + y2
2
i 
	 10.	 If v is a nonzero vector with direction angle a, 0 ° … a 6 360 °, 
between v and i, then v equals which of the following?
(a)	 7v7(cos ai -  sin aj)  (b)  7v7(cos ai + sin aj)
(c)	 7v7(sin ai - cos aj)    (d)  7v7(sin ai + cos aj)
9.4  Assess Your Understanding
v
u
w
G
B
K
F
A
H
C
D
E

Section 9.4  Vectors  641
In Problems 59–64, write the vector v in the form ai + bj, given its magnitude 7v7  and the angle a it makes with the positive x-axis.
	 59.	 7v7 = 5, a = 60°	
60.	 7v7 = 8, a = 45°	
61.	 7v7 = 3, a = 240°
	 62.	 7v7 = 14, a = 120°	
63.	 7v7 = 15, a = 315°	
64.	 7v7 = 25, a = 330°
In Problems 65–72, find the direction angle of v .
	 65.	 v = 3i + 3j 
	
66.	 v = i + 23j 
	
67.	 v = - 5i - 5j 
	
68.	 v = - 323i + 3j 
	 69.	 v = 6i - 4j 
	
70.	 v = 4i - 2j 
	
71.	 v = - i + 3j 
	
72.	 v = -i - 5j 
	 55.	 Find a vector v whose magnitude is 4 and whose component 
in the i direction is twice the component in the j direction.
	 56.	 Find a vector v whose magnitude is 3 and whose component 
in the i direction is equal to the component in the j direction.
	 57.	 If v = 2i - j and w = xi + 3j, find all numbers x for which 
7v + w7 = 5. 
	 58.	 If P = 1- 3, 12 and Q = 1x, 42, find all numbers x such 
that the vector represented by PQ >
 has length 5. 
Applications and Extensions
	 73.	 Force Vectors  A child pulls a wagon with a force of  
15 pounds. The handle of the wagon makes an angle of 60° 
with the ground. Express the force vector F in terms of i and j.
	 74.	 Force Vectors  A man pushes a wheelbarrow up an incline 
of 20° with a force of 100 pounds. Express the force vector F 
in terms of i and j. 
	 75.	 Resultant Force  Two forces of magnitude 70 newtons (N) 
and 60 newtons act on an object at angles of 30° and - 45° 
with the positive x-axis as shown in the figure. Find the direc-
tion and magnitude of the resultant force; that is, find F1 + F2.
	 78.	 Finding the Actual Speed and Direction of an Aircraft   An 
Airbus A320 jet maintains a constant airspeed of 500 mph 
headed due west. The jet stream is 100 mph in the south- 
easterly direction.
(a)	 Express the velocity va of the A320 relative to the air 
and the velocity vw of the jet stream in terms of i and j.
(b)	 Find the velocity of the A320 relative to the ground.
(c)	 Find the actual speed and direction of the A320 relative 
to the ground. 
	 79.	 Ground Speed and Direction of an Airplane  An airplane 
has an airspeed of 500 kilometers per hour bearing N45°E. 
The wind velocity is 80 kilometers per hour in the direction 
N30°W. Find the resultant vector representing the path of 
the plane relative to the ground. What is the ground speed 
of the plane? What is its direction?
	 80.	 Ground Speed and Direction of an Airplane  An airplane 
has an airspeed of 600 km/h bearing S30°E. The wind velocity 
is 40 km/h in the direction S45°E. Find the resultant vector 
representing the path of the plane relative to the ground. 
What is the groundspeed of the plane? What is its direction?
	 81.	 Weight of a Boat  A magnitude of 700 pounds of force is  
required to hold a boat and its trailer in place on a ramp 
whose incline is 11° to the horizontal. What is the combined 
weight of the boat and its trailer? 
	 82.	 Weight of a Car  A magnitude of 1200 pounds of force is 
required to prevent a car from rolling down a hill whose 
incline is 15° to the horizontal. What is the weight of the 
car? 
	 83.	 Correct Direction for Crossing a River  A river has a con-
stant current of 3 kilometers per hour. At what angle to a 
boat dock should a motorboat, capable of maintaining a con-
stant speed of 15 kilometers per hour, be headed in order to
	
	 reach a point directly opposite the dock? If the river is 3
4 
kilometer wide, how long will it take to cross?
	 76.	 Resultant Force  Two forces of magnitude 30 newtons (N) 
and 70 N act on an object at angles of 45° and 120° with the 
positive x-axis, as shown in the figure. Find the direction and 
magnitude of the resultant force; that is, find F1 + F2.
	 77.	 Finding the Actual Speed and Direction of an Aircraft  A  
jumbo jet maintains a constant airspeed of 550 miles per 
hour (mi/hr) headed due north. The jet stream is 110 mi/hr 
in the northeasterly direction.
(a)	 Express the velocity va of the jet relative to the air and 
the velocity vw of the jet stream in terms of i and j.
(b)	 Find the velocity of the jet relative to the ground.
(c)	 Find the actual speed and direction of the jet relative to 
the ground. 
y
2458
308
x
__F1__ 5 70 N
__F2__ 5 60 N
y
120°
45°
x
F1  30 N
F2  70 N
Current
Boat
Direction of boat
due to current

642 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
	 84.	 Finding the Correct Compass Heading  The pilot of an  
aircraft wishes to head directly east but is faced with a wind 
speed of 40 mph from the northwest. If the pilot maintains 
an airspeed of 250 mph, what compass heading should be 
maintained to head directly east? What is the actual speed 
of the aircraft? 
	 85.	 Charting a Course  A helicopter pilot needs to travel to a 
regional airport 25 miles away. She flies at an actual heading 
of N16.26°E with an airspeed of 120 mph, and there is a wind 
blowing directly east at 20 mph.
(a)	 Determine the compass heading that the pilot needs to 
reach her destination. 
(b)	 How long will it take her to reach her destination? 
Round to the nearest minute. 
	 86.	 Crossing a River  A captain needs to pilot a boat across a 
river that is 2 km wide. The current in the river is 2 km/h and 
the speed of the boat in still water is 10 km/h. The desired 
landing point on the other side is 1 km upstream.
(a)	 Determine the direction in which the captain should 
aim the boat. 
(b)	 How long will the trip take? 
	 87.	 Static Equilibrium  A weight of 1700 pounds is suspended 
from two cables as shown in the figure. What is the  
tension in the two cables? 
	 90.	 Static Equilibrium  Repeat Problem 89 if the angle on the 
left is 3.8°, the angle on the right is 2.6°, and the weight of the 
tightrope walker is 135 pounds. 
	 91.	 Static Friction  A 20-pound box sits at rest on a horizontal 
surface, and there is friction between the box and the  
surface. One side of the surface is raised slowly to create a 
ramp. The friction force f opposes the direction of motion 
and is proportional to the normal force FN exerted by the 
surface on the box. The proportionality constant is called 
the coefficient of friction, m. When the angle of the ramp, u, 
reaches 20°, the box begins to slide. Find the value of m to 
two decimal places. 
	 88.	 Static Equilibrium  A weight of 800 pounds is suspended 
from two cables, as shown in the figure. What are the  
tensions in the two cables? 
35°
50°
800
pounds
	 89.	 Static Equilibrium  A tightrope walker located at a certain 
point deflects the rope as indicated in the figure. If the weight 
of the tightrope walker is 150 pounds, how much tension is in 
each part of the rope? 
	 94.	 Muscle Force  Two muscles exert force on a bone at the 
same point. The first muscle exerts a force of 800 N at a  
10° angle with the bone. The second muscle exerts a force of 
710 N at a 35° angle with the bone. What are the direction 
and magnitude of the resulting force on the bone? 
150 pounds
3.78
4.18
20 pounds
u
FN
f
	 92.	 Inclined Ramp  A 2-pound weight is attached to a 3-pound 
weight by a rope that passes over an ideal pulley. The smaller 
weight hangs vertically, while the larger weight sits on a 
frictionless inclined ramp with angle u. The rope exerts a 
tension force T on both weights along the direction of the 
rope. Find the angle measure for u that is needed to keep 
the larger weight from sliding down the ramp. Round your 
answer to the nearest tenth of a degree. 
	 93.	 Inclined Ramp  A box sitting on a horizontal surface is  
attached to a second box sitting on an inclined ramp by a rope 
that passes over an ideal pulley. The rope exerts a tension 
force T on both weights along the direction of the rope, and 
the coefficient of friction between the surface and boxes is 
0.5. If the box on the right weighs 120 pounds and the angle 
of the ramp is 34°,  how much must the box on the left weigh for 
the system to be in static equilibrium? 
3 pounds
2 pounds
u
T
T
T
T
F1
F2
W2
FN2
34°
FN1
W1
308
358
1700
pounds

Section 9.4  Vectors  643
	 95.	 Truck Pull  At a county fair truck pull, two pickup trucks are 
attached to the back end of a monster truck as illustrated 
in the figure. One of the pickups pulls with a force of 1000 
pounds and the other pulls with a force of 4000 pounds with 
an angle of 30° between them. With how much force must 
the monster truck pull in order to remain unmoved?
[Hint: Find the resultant force of the two trucks.] 
(a)	 Determine the new coordinates of 13, -12 if it is  
translated by v = 8 - 4, 59. 
(b)	 Illustrate this translation graphically.
	 96.	 Removing a Stump  A farmer wishes to remove a stump 
from a field by pulling it out with his tractor. Having  
removed many stumps before, he estimates that he will 
need 6 tons (12,000 pounds) of force to remove the stump.  
However, his tractor is only capable of pulling with a force of 
7000 pounds, so he asks his neighbor to help. His neighbor’s 
tractor can pull with a force of 5500 pounds. They attach  
the two tractors to the stump with a 40° angle between the 
forces, as shown in the figure.
(a)	 Assuming the farmer’s estimate of a needed 6-ton force 
is correct, will the farmer be successful in removing the 
stump?
(b)	 Had the farmer arranged the tractors with a 25° angle 
between the forces, would he have been successful in  
removing the stump? 
	 98.	 Computer Graphics  Refer to Problem 97. The points 
1-3, 02, 1-1, - 22, 13, 12, and 11, 32 are the vertices of a 
parallelogram ABCD.
(a)	 Find the new vertices of a parallelogram A′B′C′D′ if it 
is translated by v = 83, - 29.
(b)	 Find the new vertices of a parallelogram A′B′C′D′ if it 
is translated by -  1
2 v.
	 99.	 Static Equilibrium  Show on the following graph the force 
needed for the object at P to be in static equilibrium.
x
5
5
y
5
5
(2, 4)
(5, 2)
(3, 2)
u'
u
v
v
40˚
5500 lb
7000 lb
	 97.	 Computer Graphics  The field of computer graphics utilizes 
vectors to compute translations of points. For example, if the 
point 1-3, 22 is to be translated by v = 85, 29, then the new 
location will be u′ = u + v = 8 - 3, 29 + 85, 29 = 82, 49. 
F1
F2
F3
F4
P
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	100.	 Explain in your own words what a vector is. Give an  
example of a vector.
	101.	 Write a brief paragraph comparing the algebra of complex 
numbers and the algebra of vectors.
	102.	 Explain the difference between an algebraic vector and a 
position vector.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 103–106 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	103.	 Solve triangle ABC: a = 4, b = 1, and C = 100° 
	104.	 Find the real zeros of  f1x2 = - 3x3 + 12x2 + 36x. 
	105.	 Find the exact value of  tan c  cos-1a1
2b d . 
	106.	 Find the amplitude, period, and phase shift of 
y = 3
2 cos (6x + 3p). Graph the function, showing at least 
two periods.
30˚
1000 lb
4000 lb
As illustrated in the figure, the point 1-3, 22 is translated  
to 12, 42 by v.
Source: Phil Dadd. Vectors and Matrices: A Primer.  
www.gamedev.net/reference/articles/article1832.asp

644 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Find the Dot Product of Two Vectors
The definition for a product of two vectors is somewhat unexpected. However, such 
a product has meaning in many geometric and physical applications.
1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problem on page 649.
	
Objectives	 	1  Find the Dot Product of Two Vectors  (p. 644)
	
	 	2  Find the Angle between Two Vectors  (p. 645)
	
	 	3  Determine Whether Two Vectors Are Parallel  (p. 646)
	
	 	4  Determine Whether Two Vectors Are Orthogonal  (p. 646)
	
	 	5  Decompose a Vector into Two Orthogonal Vectors  (p. 646)
	
	 	6  Compute Work  (p. 648)
9.5  The Dot Product
•	 Law of Cosines (Section 8.3, p. 568)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
If v = a1
 i + b1
  j and w = a2
 i + b2
  j are two vectors, the dot product v # w is 
defined as
	
v # w = a1a2 + b1
 b2	
(1)
Definition
Finding Dot Products
If v = 2i - 3j and w = 5i + 3j, find:
(a)  v # w    (b)  w # v    (c)  v # v    (d)  w # w    (e)  7v7     (f)  7w7
(a)	 v # w = 2152 + 1-323 = 1	
(b)  w # v = 5122 + 31-32 = 1
(c)	 v # v = 2122 + 1 -32 1-32 = 13	
(d)  w # w = 5152 + 3132 = 34
(e)	 7v7 = 222 + 1 -322 = 213	
(f)  7w7 = 252 + 32 = 234
Since the dot product v # w of two vectors v and w is a real number (a scalar), it 
is sometimes referred to as the scalar product.
The results obtained in Example 1 suggest some general properties of the dot 
product.
Example 1
Solution
•
Properties of the Dot Product
If u, v, and w are vectors, then
Commutative Property
	
u # v = v # u	
(2)
Distributive Property
	
u # 1v + w2 = u # v + u # w	
(3)
	
 v # v = 7v7 2	
(4)
	
 0 # v = 0
	
(5)
Theorem
Comment  A scalar multiple av is a  
vector. A dot product u # v is a scalar 
(real number).	
■

Section 9.5  The Dot Product  645
Proof  We prove properties (2) and (4) here and leave properties (3) and (5) as  
exercises (see Problems 38 and 39).
To prove property (2), let u = a1
 i + b1
 j and v = a2i + b2
 j. Then
u # v = a1
 a2 + b1
 b2 = a2
 a1 + b2
 b1 = v # u
To prove property (4), let v = ai + bj. Then
v # v = a2 + b2 = 7v7 2
Find the Angle between Two Vectors
One use of the dot product is to calculate the angle between two vectors.
Let u and v be two vectors with the same initial point A. Then the vectors u, v, and 
u - v form a triangle. The angle u at vertex A of the triangle is the angle between the 
vectors u and v. See Figure 64. We wish to find a formula for calculating the angle u.
The sides of the triangle have lengths 7v7,7u7, and 7u - v7, and u is the  
included angle between the sides of length 7v7  and 7u7. The Law of Cosines 
(Section 8.3) can be used to find the cosine of the included angle.
7u - v7 2 = 7u7 2 + 7v7 2 - 27u7 7v7 cos u
Now use property (4) to rewrite this equation in terms of dot products.
	
1u - v2 # 1u - v2 = u # u + v # v - 27u7 7v7 cos u	
(6)
Then apply the distributive property (3) twice on the left side of (6) to obtain
 1u - v2 # 1u - v2 = u # 1u - v2 - v # 1u - v2
 = u # u - u # v - v # u + v # v
 = u # u + v # v - 2 u # v
Combining equations (6) and (7) gives
 u # u + v # v - 2 u # v = u # u + v # v - 27u7 7v7 cos u
 u # v = 7u7 7v7 cos u
■
2
 c
Property (2)
(7)
Figure 64 
A
u
v
u 2 v
u
Angle between Vectors
If u and v are two nonzero vectors, the angle u, 0 … u … p, between u and v is 
determined by the formula
	
cos u =
u # v
7 u 7 7 v 7 	
(8)
Theorem
Finding the Angle U between Two Vectors
Find the angle u between u = 4i - 3j and v = 2i + 5j.
Find u # v, 7u7, and 7v7.
 u # v = 4122 + 1 -32 152 = -7
 7u7 = 242 + 1 -322 = 5
 7v7 = 222 + 52 = 229
By formula (8), if u is the angle between u and v, then
cos u =
u # v
7 u 7 7 v 7 =
-7
5229
 ≈-0.26
Therefore, u ≈cos-11 -0.262 ≈105°. See Figure 65.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  9 ( a )  a n d  ( b )
Example 2
Solution
•
Figure 65 
y
u 5 4i 2 3j
v 5 2i 1 5j
u
x

646 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Determine Whether Two Vectors Are Parallel
Two vectors v and w are said to be parallel if there is a nonzero scalar a so that 
v = aw. In this case, the angle u between v and w is 0 or p.
Determining Whether Two Vectors Are Parallel
The vectors v = 3i - j and w = 6i - 2j are parallel, since v = 1
2
 w. Furthermore, 
since
cos u =
v # w
7 v 7 7 w 7 =
18 + 2
210 240
=
20
2400
= 1
the angle u between v and w is 0.
Determine Whether Two Vectors Are Orthogonal
If the angle u between two nonzero vectors v and w is p
2 , the vectors v and w are 
called orthogonal.* See Figure 66.
Since cos p
2 = 0, it follows from formula (8) that if the vectors v and w are
orthogonal, then v # w = 0.
On the other hand, if v # w = 0, then v = 0 or w = 0 or cos u = 0. If cos u = 0,
then u = p
2 , and v and w are orthogonal. If v or w is the zero vector, then, since the
zero vector has no specific direction, we adopt the convention that the zero vector 
is orthogonal to every vector.
3
Example 3
•
4
*Orthogonal, perpendicular, and normal are all terms that mean “meet at a right angle.” It is customary 
to refer to two vectors as being orthogonal, to two lines as being perpendicular, and to a line and a plane 
or a vector and a plane as being normal.
Two vectors v and w are orthogonal if and only if
v # w = 0
Theorem
Determining Whether Two Vectors Are Orthogonal
The vectors
v = 2i - j and w = 3i + 6j
are orthogonal, since
v # w = 6 - 6 = 0
See Figure 67.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 ( c )
Decompose a Vector into Two Orthogonal Vectors
The last section discussed how to add two vectors to find the resultant vector. Now, 
the reverse problem is discussed, namely that of decomposing a vector into the sum 
of two components.
In many physical applications, it is necessary to find “how much” of a vector is 
applied in a given direction. Look at Figure 68. The force F due to gravity is pulling 
straight down (toward the center of Earth) on the block. To study the effect of  
gravity on the block, it is necessary to determine how much of F is actually pushing 
the block down the incline 1F1 2 and how much is pressing the block against the 
incline 1F2 2, at a right angle to the incline. Knowing the decomposition of F often 
enables us to determine when friction (the force holding the block in place on the 
incline) is overcome and the block will slide down the incline.
Suppose that v and w are two nonzero vectors with the same initial point P. 
We seek to decompose v into two vectors: v1, which is parallel to w, and v2, which 
is orthogonal to w. See Figure 69(a) and (b). The vector v1 is called the vector  
projection of v onto w.
Example 4
•
5
Figure 66  v is orthogonal to w.
v
w
Figure 67 
x
y
w  3i  6j
v  2i  j
Figure 68 
F1
F2
F

Section 9.5  The Dot Product  647
The vector v1 is obtained as follows: From the terminal point of v, drop a  
perpendicular to the line containing w. The vector v1 is the vector from P to the foot 
of this perpendicular. The vector v2 is given by v2 = v - v1. Note that v = v1 + v2, 
the vector v1  is parallel to w, and the vector v2 is orthogonal to w. This is the  
decomposition of v that was sought.
Now we seek a formula for v1 that is based on a knowledge of the vectors v  
and w. Since v = v1 + v2, we have
	
v # w = 1v1 + v22 # w = v1# w + v2 # w	
(9)
Since v2 is orthogonal to w, we have v2 # w = 0. Since v1 is parallel to w, we have 
v1 = aw for some scalar a. Equation (9) can be written as
 v # w = aw # w = a7w7 2
 a = v # w
7 w 7 2
Then
v1 = aw = v # w
7 w 7 2  w
v1 = aw ; v2# w = 0
Figure 69 
P
v
w
v1
v2
(a)
v
w
v1
v2
P
(b)
If v and w are two nonzero vectors, the vector projection of v onto w is
	
v1 = v # w
7 w 7 2  w	
(10)
The decomposition of v into v1 and v2, where v1 is parallel to w, and v2 is  
orthogonal to w, is
	
v1 = v # w
7 w 7 2  w  v2 = v - v1	
(11)
Theorem
Decomposing a Vector into Two Orthogonal Vectors
Find the vector projection of v = i + 3j onto w = i + j. Decompose v into two  
vectors, v1 and v2, where v1 is parallel to w, and v2 is orthogonal to w.
Use formulas (10) and (11).
 v1 = v # w
7 w 7 2 w =
1 + 3
1 2222  w = 2w = 21i + j2
  v2 = v - v1 = 1i + 3j2 - 21i + j2 = -i + j
See Figure 70.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Finding the Force Required to Hold a Wagon on a Hill
A wagon with two small children as occupants weighs 100 pounds and is on a hill 
with a grade of 20°. What is the magnitude of the force that is required to keep the 
wagon from rolling down the hill?
 Solution  See Figure 71. We wish to find the magnitude of the force v that is  
acting to cause the wagon to roll down the hill. A force with the same magnitude in 
the opposite direction of v will keep the wagon from rolling down the hill. The force 
of gravity is orthogonal to the level ground, so the force of the wagon due to gravity 
can be represented by the vector
Fg = -100j
Example 5
Solution
•
Example 6
Figure 70 
x
y
w  i  j
v  i  3j
v2  i  j
v1  2(i  j)
20°
w
Fg
v
Figure 71 

648 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Determine the vector projection of Fg  onto w, which is the force parallel to the hill. 
The vector w is given by
w = cos 20°i +  sin 20°j
The vector projection of Fg  onto w is
 v =
Fg # w
7 w 7 2 w
 =
-100(sin 20°)
1 2cos2 20° + sin2 20° 22 (cos 20°i + sin 20°j)
 = -34.2(cos 20°i + sin 20°j)
The magnitude of v is 34.2 pounds, so the magnitude of the force required to keep 
the wagon from rolling down the hill is 34.2 pounds.
Compute Work
In elementary physics, the work W done by a constant force F in moving an object 
from a point A to a point B is defined as
W = 1magnitude of force2 1distance2 = 7F7 7AB >7
Work is commonly measured in foot-pounds or in newton-meters (joules).
In this definition, it is assumed that the force F is applied along the line of  
motion. If the constant force F is not along the line of motion, but instead is at an 
angle u to the direction of the motion, as illustrated in Figure 72, then the work W 
done by F in moving an object from A to B is defined as
	
W = F # AB >
	
(12)
This definition is compatible with the force-times-distance definition, since
 W = 1amount of force in the direction of AB >
2 1distance2
 = 7projection of F on AB7 7AB >7 = F # AB >
7 AB >
7 2  7AB >7 7AB >7 = F # AB >
Computing Work
A girl is pulling a wagon with a force of 50 pounds. How much work is done in  
moving the wagon 100 feet if the handle makes an angle of 30° with the ground? See  
Figure 73(a).
•
6
c
Use formula 1102.
Example 7
Figure 73 
(a)
30°
30°
50(cos 30°)i
50(sin 30°)j
x
y
F
(0, 0)
(100, 0)
(b)
F  50
Position the vectors in a coordinate system in such a way that the wagon is moved 
from 10, 02 to 1100, 02. The motion is from A = 10, 02 to B = 1100, 02, so 
AB >
= 100i. The force vector F, as shown in Figure 73(b), is
F = 501cos 30°i + sin 30°j2 = 50a 13
2   i + 1
2  jb = 251 23 i + j2
By formula (12), the work done is
W = F # AB >
= 251 23 i + j2 # 100 i = 250023 foot@pounds
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
Solution
•
Figure 72 
A
A
B
F
u

Section 9.5  The Dot Product  649
Historical Feature
W
e stated in the Historical Feature in Section 9.4 that  
complex numbers were used as vectors in the plane before 
the general notion of a vector was clarified. Suppose that we 
make the correspondence
 Vector 4 Complex number
 a i + b j 4 a + bi
 c i + d j 4 c + di
Show that
(a i + b j) # (c i + d j) = real part [(a + bi )(c + di)]
This is how the dot product was found originally. The imaginary part 
is also interesting. It is a determinant and represents the area of the  
parallelogram whose edges are the vectors. See Section 9.7. This is close 
to some of Hermann Grassmann’s ideas and is also connected with the  
scalar triple product of three-dimensional vectors.
‘Are You Prepared?’ The answer is given at the end of these exercises. If you get the wrong answer, read the page listed in red.
	 1.	 In a triangle with sides a, b, c and angles A, B, C, the Law of Cosines states that               . (p. 568) 
9.5  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 2.	 If v = a1i + b1 j and w = a2i + b2 j are two vectors, then 
the 
 
 is defined as v # w = a1a2 + b1b2.
	 3.	 If v # w = 0, then the two vectors v and w are 
.
	 4.	 If v = 3w, then the two vectors v and w are 
.
	 5.	 True or False  Given two nonzero vectors v and w, it is  
always possible to decompose v into two vectors, one parallel 
to w and the other orthogonal to w. 
	 6.	 True or False  Work is a physical example of a vector.
	 7.	 The angle u, 0 … u … p, between two nonzero vectors u 
and v can be found using which of the following formulas?
(a)	  sin u =
7 u 7
7 v 7           (b)   cos u =
7 u 7
7 v 7
(c)	  sin u =
u # v
7 u 7 7 v 7     (d)   cos u =
u # v
7 u 7 7 v 7  
	 8.	 If two nonzero vectors v and w are orthogonal, then the  
angle between them has which of the following measures?
(a)  p    (b)  p
2     (c)  3p
2     (d)  2p 
Skill Building
In Problems 9–18, (a) find the dot product v # w; (b) find the angle between v and w; (c) state whether the vectors are parallel, orthogonal, 
or neither.
	 9.	 v = i - j, w = i + j	
10.	 v = i + j, w = - i + j	
11.	 v = 2i + 2j, w = i + 2j
	 12.	 v = 2i + j, w = i - 2j	
13.	 v = i + 23j, w = i - j	
14.	 v = 23i - j, w = i + j
	 15.	 v = 3i - 4j, w = 9i - 12j	
16.	 v = 3i + 4j, w = - 6i - 8j
	 17.	 v = i, w = - 3j	
18.	 v = 4i, w = j
	 19.	 Find a so that the vectors v = i - aj 	
 
and w = 2i + 3j are orthogonal. 
	 20.  Find b so that the vectors v = i + j 	
 
and w = i + bj are orthogonal. 
In Problems 21–26, decompose v into two vectors v1 and v2, where v1 is parallel to w, and v2 is orthogonal to w.
	 21.	  v = 2i - 3j, w = i - j	
22.	 v = - 3i + 2j, w = 2i + j	
23.	 v = 2i - j, w = i - 2j
	 24.	 v = i - j, w = -i - 2j	
25.	 v = i - 3j, w = 4i - j	
26.	 v = 3i + j, w = -2i - j
Applications and Extensions
	 27.	 Given vectors u = i + 2j and v = 5i + yj, find y so that the 
angle between the vectors is 30°.† 
	 28.	 Given vectors u = xi + 2j and v = 7i - 3j, find x so that 
the angle between the vectors is 30°. 
	 29.	 Computing Work  Find the work W done by a force of  
7 pounds acting in the direction 60° to the horizontal in 
moving an object 9 feet from 10, 02 to 19, 02. 
†Courtesy of the Joliet Junior College Mathematics Department
	 30.	 Computing Work  A wagon is pulled horizontally by exerting 
 a force of 20 pounds on the handle at an angle of 30° with 
the horizontal. How much work is done in moving the  
wagon 100 feet? 
	31.	 Solar Energy  The amount of energy collected by a solar 
panel depends on the intensity of the sun’s rays and the area 
of the panel. Let the vector I represent the intensity, in watts 

650 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
per square centimeter, having the direction of the sun’s rays. 
Let the vector A represent the area, in square centimeters, 
whose direction is the orientation of a solar panel. See the 
figure. The total number of watts collected by the solar panel 
is given by W = 0 i # A0 .
	 35.	 Ramp Angle  Timmy and Larry are using a ramp to load  
furniture into a truck. While rolling a 290-pound piano up 
the ramp, they discover that the truck is too full with other  
furniture for the piano to fit. Larry holds the piano in place 
on the ramp while Timmy repositions other items to make 
room for it in the truck. If the angle of inclination of the 
ramp is 15°, how many pounds of force must Larry exert to 
hold the piano in position? 
A
I
	
	 Suppose that R = 80.75, - 1.759 and A = 80.3, 19.
(a)	 Find 7R7  and 7A7 , and interpret the meaning of each.
(b)	 Compute V and interpret its meaning.
(c)	 If the gauge is to collect the maximum volume of rain, 
what must be true about R and A?
	 33.	 Braking Load  A Toyota Sienna with a gross weight of  
5300 pounds is parked on a street with an 8° grade. See the 
figure. Find the magnitude of the force required to keep  
the Sienna from rolling down the hill. What is the magnitude 
of the force perpendicular to the hill?
	
	 Suppose i = 8 - 0.02, - 0.039 and A = 8300, 4009. Answer 
parts (a)–(c). 
(a)	 Find 7i7  and 7A7 .
(b)	 Compute W.
(c)	 If the solar panel is to collect the maximum number of 
watts, what must be true about I and A?
	 32.	 Rainfall 
Measurement  Let 
the 
vec-
tor R represent the amount of rainfall, in 
inches, whose direction is the inclination 
of the rain to a rain gauge. Let the vec-
tor A represent the area, in square inches, 
whose direction is the orientation of the  
opening of the rain gauge. See the figure. 
The volume of rain collected in the gauge, in 
cubic inches, is given by V = 0 R # A0 , even 
when the rain falls in a slanted direction or 
the gauge is not perfectly vertical.
A
R
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Weight 5 5300 pounds
8°
290 lb
15˚
	 36.	 Incline Angle  A bulldozer exerts 1000 pounds of force to 
prevent a 5000-pound boulder from rolling down a hill.  
Determine the angle of inclination of the hill. 
	 37.	 Find the acute angle that a constant unit force vector makes 
with the positive x-axis if the work done by the force in  
moving a particle from 10, 02 to 17, 02 equals 5. 
	 38.	 Prove the distributive property:
u # 1v + w2 = u # v + u # w
	 39.	 Prove property (5): 0 # v = 0.
	 40.	 If v is a unit vector and the angle between v and i is a, show 
that v = cos ai + sin aj.
	 41.	 Suppose that v and w are unit vectors. If the angle between v 
and i is a and the angle between w and i is b, use the idea of 
the dot product v # w to prove that
cos1a - b2 = cos a cos b + sin a sin b
	 42.	 Show that the projection of v onto i is 1v # i2i. Then show 
that we can always write a vector v as
v = 1v # i2i + 1v # j2j
	 43.	 (a)	 If u and v have the same  
magnitude, show that u + v and 
u - v are orthogonal.
(b)	 Use this to prove that an angle 
inscribed in a semicircle is a 
right angle (see the figure).
u
v
v
	 34.	 Braking Load  A Chevrolet Silverado with a gross weight  
of 4500 pounds is parked on a street with a 10° grade. Find 
the magnitude of the force required to keep the Silverado 
from rolling down the hill. What is the magnitude of the force  
perpendicular to the hill?
	 44.	 Let v and w denote two nonzero vectors. Show that the  
vector v - aw is orthogonal to w if a = v # w
7 w 7 2.
	 45.	 Let v and w denote two nonzero vectors. Show that the  
vectors 7w7v + 7v7w and 7w7v - 7v7w are orthogonal.
	 46.	 In the definition of work given in this section, what is the 
work done if F is orthogonal to AB >
?
	 47.	 Prove the polarization identity,
7u + v7 2 - 7u - v7 2 = 41u # v2
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 48.	 Create an application (different from any found in the text) that requires a dot product.

‘Are You Prepared?’ Answer
	 1.	 c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 49–52 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 49.	 Find the average rate of change of f(x) = x3 - 5x2 + 27 
from - 3 to 2. 
	 50.	 Find the exact value of 5 cos 60° + 2 tan p
4. Do not use a 
calculator. 
	 51.	 Establish the identity: (1 -  sin2 u)(1 +  tan2 u) = 1
	 52.	 Volume of a Box An open-top box is made from a sheet of 
metal by cutting squares from each corner and folding up 
the sides. The sheet has a length of 19 inches and a width of 
13 inches. If x is the length of one side of the square to be 
cut out, write a function, V(x), for the volume of the box in 
terms of x.
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problem on page 658.
	
Objectives	 1  Find the Distance between Two Points in Space  (p. 652)
	
	 	2  Find Position Vectors in Space  (p. 653)
	
	 	3  Perform Operations on Vectors  (p. 653)
	
	 	4  Find the Dot Product  (p. 655)
	
	 	5  Find the Angle between Two Vectors  (p. 655)
	
	 	6  Find the Direction Angles of a Vector  (p. 656)
9.6  Vectors in Space
• Distance Formula (Section 1.1, p. 37)
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
Rectangular Coordinates in Space
In the plane, each point is associated with an ordered pair of real numbers. In space, 
each point is associated with an ordered triple of real numbers. Through a fixed 
point, called the origin O, draw three mutually perpendicular lines: the x-axis, the 
y-axis, and the z-axis. On each of these axes, select an appropriate scale and the  
positive direction. See Figure 74.
The direction chosen for the positive z-axis in Figure 74 makes the system  
right-handed. This conforms to the right-hand rule, which states that if the index 
finger of the right hand points in the direction of the positive x-axis and the middle 
finger points in the direction of the positive y-axis, then the thumb will point in the 
direction of the positive z-axis. See Figure 75.
2
2
4
2
2
2
4
2
4
O
y
x
z
Figure 74 
Section 9.6  Vectors in Space  651
O
y
x
z
Figure 75 

652 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Find the Distance between Two Points in Space
The formula for the distance between two points in space is an extension of the  
Distance Formula for points in the plane given in Section 1.1.
1
3
Plane z  3
Plane y  4
4
(b)
y
x
z
x  0
yz-plane
z  0
xy-plane
y  0
xz-plane
(a)
y
x
z
Figure 77 
2
4
2
(2, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 4)
(2, 3, 4)
(0, 3, 0)
(2, 3, 0)
4
6
8
2
4
y
x
z
Figure 76 
Associate with each point P an ordered triple 1x, y, z2 of real numbers, the 
coordinates of P. For example, the point 12, 3, 42 is located by starting at the origin 
and moving 2 units along the positive x-axis, 3 units in the direction of the positive 
y-axis, and 4 units in the direction of the positive z-axis. See Figure 76.
Figure 76 also shows the location of the points 12, 0, 02, 10, 3, 02, 10, 0, 42, 
and 12, 3, 02. Points of the form 1x, 0, 02 lie on the x-axis, and points of the forms 
10, y, 02  and 10, 0, z2 lie on the y-axis and z-axis, respectively. Points of the form 
1x, y, 02  lie in a plane called the xy-plane. Its equation is z = 0. Similarly, points 
of the form 1x, 0, z2 lie in the xz-plane (equation y = 0), and points of the form 
10, y, z2  lie in the yz-plane (equation x = 0). See Figure 77(a). By extension of 
these ideas, all points obeying the equation z = 3 will lie in a plane parallel to and 
3 units above the xy-plane. The equation y = 4 represents a plane parallel to the 
xz-plane and 4 units to the right of the plane y = 0. See Figure 77(b).
The proof, which we omit, utilizes a double application of the Pythagorean Theorem.
Using the Distance Formula
Find the distance from P1 = 1 -1, 3, 22 to P2 = 14, -2, 52.
 d = 234 - 1 -12 42 + 3 -2 - 342 + 35 - 242 = 225 + 25 + 9 = 259	 •
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Example 1
Solution
Distance Formula in Space
If P1 = 1x1, y1, z12 and P2 = 1x2, y2, z22 are two points in space, the distance d  
from P1 to P2 is
	
d = 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122 + 1z2 - z122	
(1)
Theorem

Section 9.6  Vectors in Space  653
Find Position Vectors in Space
To represent vectors in space, we introduce the unit vectors i, j, and k whose 
directions are along the positive x-axis, the positive y-axis, and the positive z-axis, 
respectively. If v is a vector with initial point at the origin O and terminal point at 
P = 1a, b, c2, then we can represent v in terms of the vectors i, j, and k as
v = ai + bj + ck
See Figure 78.
The scalars a, b, and c are called the components of the vector v = ai + bj + ck, 
with a being the component in the direction i, b the component in the direction j, 
and c the component in the direction k.
A vector whose initial point is at the origin is called a position vector. The next 
result states that any vector whose initial point is not at the origin is equal to a 
unique position vector.
Suppose that v is a vector with initial point P1 = 1x1, y1, z12, not necessarily
the origin, and terminal point P2 = 1x2, y2, z22. If v = P1P2
>
 , then v is equal to 
the position vector
	
v = 1x2 - x12i + 1y2 - y12j + 1z2 - z12k	
(2)
Figure 79 illustrates this result.
2
Theorem
y
x
z
v  ai  bj  ck
k
j
i 
P  (a, b, c)
O
Figure 78 
y
x
z
v  P1P2  (x2  x1)i  (y2  y1)j  (z2  z1)k
P2  (x2, y2, z2)
P1  (x1, y1, z1)
O
Figure 79 
Finding a Position Vector
Find the position vector of the vector v = P1
 P2 >
 if P1 = 1 -1, 2, 32 and P2 = 14, 6, 22.
 By equation (2), the position vector equal to v is
	
v = 34 - 1 -12 4i + 16 - 22j + 12 - 32k = 5i + 4j - k	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
Perform Operations on Vectors
Equality, addition, subtraction, scalar product, and magnitude can be defined in 
terms of the components of a vector.
Example 2
Solution
3
 Let v = a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k and w = a2
 i + b2
 j + c2
 k be two vectors, and let a 
be a scalar. Then
 v = w if and only if a1 = a2, b1 = b2, and c1 = c2
 v + w = 1a1 + a22i + 1b1 + b22j + 1c1 + c22k
 v - w = 1a1 - a22i + 1b1 - b22j + 1c1 - c22k
 av = 1aa12i + 1ab12j + 1ac12k
 ‘v‘ = 2a2
1 + b2
1 + c2
1
Definition

654 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
v = ‘v‘u
Finding a Unit  Vector
Find the unit vector in the same direction as v = 2i - 3j - 6k.
 Find ‘v‘ first.
‘v‘ = ‘2i - 3j - 6k‘ = 24 + 9 + 36 = 249 = 7
Example 5
Solution
These definitions are compatible with the geometric definitions given in Section 9.4 
for vectors in a plane.
Adding and Subtracting Vectors
If v = 2i + 3j - 2k and w = 3i - 4j + 5k, find:
(a)	 v + w        (b)  v - w
 (a)	  v + w = 12i + 3j - 2k2 + 13i - 4j + 5k2
	
 = 12 + 32i + 13 - 42j + 1 -2 + 52k
	
 = 5i - j + 3k
(b)	  v - w = 12i + 3j - 2k2 - 13i - 4j + 5k2
	
 = 12 - 32i + 33 - 1 -42 4j + 3 -2 - 54k
	
 = -i + 7j - 7k
	
•
Finding Scalar Products and Magnitudes
If v = 2i + 3j - 2k and w = 3i - 4j + 5k, find:
(a)	 3v        (b)  2v - 3w        (c)  ‘v‘
 (a)	 3v = 312i + 3j - 2k2 = 6i + 9j - 6k
(b)	  2v - 3w = 212i + 3j - 2k2 - 313i - 4j + 5k2
	 = 4i + 6j - 4k - 9i + 12j - 15k = -5i + 18j - 19k
(c)	 ‘v‘ = ‘2i + 3j - 2k‘ = 222 + 32 + 1 -222 = 217	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 3  a n d  3 9
Recall that a unit vector u is one for which ‘u‘ = 1. In many applications, it is 
useful to be able to find a unit vector u that has the same direction as a given vector v.
Unit Vector in the Direction of v
For any nonzero vector v, the vector
u =
v
‘v‘
is a unit vector that has the same direction as v.
As a consequence of this theorem, if u is a unit vector in the same direction as 
a vector v, then v may be expressed as
Example 3
Solution
Example 4
Solution
Theorem

Section 9.6  Vectors in Space  655
Now multiply v by the scalar 1
‘v‘ = 1
7. The result is the unit vector
	
u =
v
‘v‘ = 2i - 3j - 6k
7
= 2
7
 i - 3
7
 j - 6
7
 k	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Find the Dot Product
The definition of dot product in space is an extension of the definition given for 
vectors in a plane.
 If v = a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k and w = a2
 i + b2
 j + c2
 k are two vectors, the dot 
product v ~ w is defined as
	
v # w = a1
 a2 + b1
 b2 + c1
 c2	
(3)
Finding Dot Products
If v = 2i - 3j + 6k and w = 5i + 3j - k, find:
(a)	 v ~ w    	
(b)  w ~ v	
(c)  v ~ v
(d)	 w ~ w	
(e)  ‘v‘	
(f)  ‘w‘
 (a)	 v ~ w = 2152 + 1 -323 + 61 -12 = -5
(b)	 w ~ v = 5122 + 31 -32 + 1 -12 162 = -5
(c)	 v ~ v = 2122 + 1 -32 1-32 + 6162 = 49
(d)	 w ~ w = 5152 + 3132 + 1 -12 1-12 = 35
(e)	 ‘v‘ = 222 + 1 -322 + 62 = 249 = 7
(f)	 ‘w‘ = 252 + 32 + 1 -122 = 235	
•
The dot product in space has the same properties as the dot product in the plane.
Properties of the Dot Product
If u, v, and w are vectors, then
Commutative Property
u ~ v = v ~ u
Distributive Property
u ~ 1v + w2 = u ~ v + u ~ w
 v ~ v = ‘v‘2
 0 ~ v = 0
Find the Angle between Two Vectors
The angle u between two vectors in space follows the same formula as for two  
vectors in the plane.
4
Definition
Example 6
Solution
Theorem
5

656 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
y
x
z
0  a  , 0  b  , 0  g  
a
b
g
C  (0, 0, c)
v
A  (a, 0, 0)
P  (a, b, c)
B  (0, b, 0)
Figure 80  Direction angles 
Finding the Angle between Two Vectors
Find the angle u between u = 2i - 3j + 6k and v = 2i + 5j - k.
 Compute the quantities u ~ v, ‘u‘, and ‘v‘.
 u ~ v = 2122 + 1 -32 152 + 61 -12 = -17
 ‘u‘ = 222 + 1 -322 + 62 = 249 = 7
 ‘v‘ = 222 + 52 + 1 -122 = 230
By formula (4), if u is the angle between u and v, then
cos u =
u ~ v
‘u‘ ‘v‘ =
-17
7230
≈-0.443
Thus, u ≈cos -11 -0.4432 ≈116.3°.	
• 
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
Find the Direction Angles of a Vector
A nonzero vector v in space can be described by specifying its magnitude and its 
three direction angles a, b, and g. These direction angles are defined as
 a = the angle between v and i, the positive x@axis, 0 … a … p
 b = the angle between v and j, the positive y@axis, 0 … b … p
 g = the angle between v and k, the positive z@axis, 0 … g … p
See Figure 80.
Example 7
Solution
6
Angle between Vectors
If u and v are two nonzero vectors, the angle u, 0 … u … p, between u and v is 
determined by the formula
	
cos u =
u ~ v
‘u‘ ‘v‘ 	
(4)
Theorem

Section 9.6  Vectors in Space  657
Our first goal is to find expressions for a, b, and g in terms of the components 
of a vector. Let v = ai + bj + ck denote a nonzero vector. The angle a between v 
and i, the positive x-axis, obeys
cos a =
v ~ i
‘v‘ ‘i‘ =
a
‘v‘
Similarly,
cos b =
b
‘v‘ and cos g =
c
‘v‘
Since ‘v‘ = 2a2 + b2 + c2, the following result is obtained.
Direction Angles
If v = ai + bj + ck is a nonzero vector in space, the direction angles a, b, and 
g obey
cos a =
a
2a2 + b2 + c2 =
a
‘v‘  cos b =
b
2a2 + b2 + c2 =
b
‘v‘
	cos g =
c
2a2 + b2 + c2 =
c
‘v‘
	 (5)
Theorem
The numbers cos a, cos b, and cos g are called the direction cosines of the  
vector v.
Finding the Direction Angles of a Vector
Find the direction angles of v = -3i + 2j - 6k.
 ‘v‘ = 21 -322 + 22 + 1 -622 = 249 = 7
Using the formulas in equation (5), we have
 cos a = -3
7     cos b = 2
7    cos g = -6
7
	
a ≈115.4°	
b ≈73.4°             g ≈149.0°
Example 8
Solution
•
Property of the Direction Cosines
If a, b, and g are the direction angles of a nonzero vector v in space, then
	
cos2 a + cos2 b + cos2 g = 1	
(6)
Theorem
The proof is a direct consequence of the equations in (5).
Based on equation (6), when two direction cosines are known, the third is  
determined up to its sign. Knowing two direction cosines is not sufficient to uniquely 
determine the direction of a vector in space.
Finding a Direction Angle of a Vector
The vector v makes an angle of a = p
3  with the positive x-axis, an angle of b = p
3  
with the positive y-axis, and an acute angle g with the positive z-axis. Find g.
Example 9

658 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
‘Are You Prepared?’  The answer is given at the end of these exercises. If you get the wrong answer, read the page listed in red.
	 1.	 The distance d from P1 = 1x1, y12 to P2 = 1x2, y22 is d =  _______. (p. 37) 
9.6  Assess Your Understanding
 By equation (6), we have
 cos2ap
3 b + cos2ap
3 b + cos2 g = 1
 
 a1
2b
2
+ a1
2b
2
+ cos2 g = 1
 cos2 g = 1
2
 cos g = 22
2  or cos g = -  22
2
 g = p
4 or g = 3p
4
Since g must be acute, g = p
4.	
•
The direction cosines of a vector give information about only the direction 
of the vector; they provide no information about its magnitude. For example, any 
vector that is parallel to the xy-plane and makes an angle of p
4  radian with the  
positive x-axis and y-axis has direction cosines
cos a = 22
2   cos b = 22
2   cos g = 0
However, if the direction angles and the magnitude of a vector are known, the vector 
is uniquely determined.
Writing a Vector in Terms of Its Magnitude and Direction Cosines
Show that any nonzero vector v in space can be written in terms of its magnitude and 
direction cosines as
Solution
0 6 g 6 p
2
Example 10
	
v = ‘v‘ 3 1cos a2i + 1cos b2j + 1cos g2k4	
(7)
 Let v = ai + bj + ck. From the equations in (5), note that
a = ‘v‘ cos a  b = ‘v‘ cos b  c = ‘v‘ cos g
Substituting gives
 v = ai + bj + ck = ‘v‘ 1cos a2i + ‘v‘ 1cos b2j + ‘v‘ 1cos g2k
 = ‘v‘ 3 1cos a2i + 1cos b2j + 1cos g2k4
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 9
Example 10 shows that the direction cosines of a vector v are also the components 
of the unit vector in the direction of v.
Solution
•

Section 9.6  Vectors in Space  659
	 2.	 In space, points of the form 1x, y, 02 lie in a plane called  
the 
.
	 3.	 If v = ai + bj + ck is a vector in space, the scalars a, b, c are 
called the 
 of v.
	 4.	 The squares of the direction cosines of a vector in space add 
up to 
.
	 5.	 True or False  In space, the dot product of two vectors is a 
positive number. 
	 6.	 True or False  A vector in space may be described by  
specifying its magnitude and its direction angles. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
In Problems 7–14, describe the set of points 1x, y, z2 defined by the equation(s).
	 7.	 x = 0	
8.  y = 0	
9.  z = 2	
10.   y = 3
	 11.	 z = - 3	
12.  x = - 4	
13.  x = 3 and z = 1	
14.  x = 1 and y = 2
In Problems 15–20, find the distance from P1 to P2.
	 15.	 P1 = 10, 0, 02 and P2 = 14, 1, 22 
	
16.  P1 = 10, 0, 02 and P2 = 11, - 2, 32 
	 17.	 P1 = 1- 2, 2, 32 and P2 = 14, 0, - 32 
	
18.  P1 = 1- 1, 2, - 32 and P2 = 10, -2, 12 
	 19.	 P1 = 12, - 3, - 32 and P2 = 14, 1, -12 
	
20.  P1 = 14, - 2, - 22 and P2 = 13, 2, 12 
In Problems 21–26, opposite vertices of a rectangular box whose edges are parallel to the coordinate axes are given. List the coordinates 
of the other six vertices of the box.
	 21.	 10, 0, 02; 14, 2, 22	
22.  10, 0, 02; 12, 1, 32	
23.  15, 6, 12; 13, 8, 22
	 24.	 11, 2, 32; 13, 4, 52	
25.  1- 2, - 3, 02; 1- 6, 7, 12	
26.  1- 1, 0, 22; 14, 2, 52
In Problems 27–32, the vector v has initial point P and terminal point Q. Write v in the form ai + bj + ck; that is, find its position vector.
	 27.	 P = 10, 0, 02; Q = 1- 3, - 5, 42 
	
28.	 P = 10, 0, 02; Q = 13, 4, - 12 
	 29.	 P = 13, 2, - 12; Q = 15, 6, 02 
	
30.	 P = 1- 3, 2, 02; Q = 16, 5, -12 
	 31.	 P = 1- 1, 4, - 22; Q = 16, 2, 22 
	
32.	 P = 1- 2, - 1, 42; Q = 16, - 2, 42 
Skill Building
In Problems 33–38, find ‘v‘.
	 33.	 v = 3i - 6j - 2k 
	
34.  v = - 6i + 12j + 4k 
	
35.  v = - i - j + k 
	 36.	 v = i - j + k 
	
37.  v = 6i + 2j - 2k 
	
38.  v = - 2i + 3j - 3k 
In Problems 39–44, find each quantity if v = 3i - 5j + 2k and w = - 2i + 3j - 2k.
	 39.	 2v + 3w 
	
40.  3v - 2w 
	
41.  ‘v + w‘ 
	 42.	 ‘v - w‘ 
	
43.  ‘v‘ + ‘w‘ 
	
44.  ‘v‘ - ‘w‘ 
In Problems 45–50, find the unit vector in the same direction as v.
	 45.	 v = - 3j 
	
46.  v = 5i 
	
47.  v = 3i - 6j - 2k 
	 48.	 v = - 6i + 12j + 4k	
49.  v = 2i - j + k 
	 50.	 v = i + j + k 
In Problems 51–58, find the dot product v ~ w and the angle between v and w.
	 51.	 v = i - j, w = i + j + k 
	
52.  v = i + j, w = - i + j - k  
	 53.	 v = 2i + 2j - k, w = i + 2j + 3k 
	
54.  v = 2i + j - 3k, w = i + 2j + 2k  
	 55.	 v = i + 3j + 2k, w = i - j + k 
 	
56.  v = 3i - j + 2k, w = i + j - k  
 	57.	 v = 3i - 4j + k, w = 6i - 8j + 2k 
	
58.  v = 3i + 4j + k, w = 6i + 8j + 2k  
In Problems 59 – 66, find the direction angles of each vector. Write each vector in the form of equation (7).
	 59.	 v = 3i - 6j - 2k	
60.  v = - 6i + 12j + 4k	
61.  v = i - j - k	
62.  v = i + j + k
	 63.	 v = j + k	
64.  v = i + j	
65.  v = 2i + 3j - 4k	
66.  v = 3i - 5j + 2k

660 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
	 1.	 21x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answer
Applications and Extensions
	 67.	 Robotic Arm  Consider the double-jointed robotic arm 
shown in the figure. Let the lower arm be modeled by 
a = 83, 4, 19, the middle arm be modeled by b = 81, - 4, 49,
	
	 and the upper arm be modeled by c = 83, - 5, 29, where 
units are in feet.
In Problems 69 and 70, find an equation of a sphere with radius r  
and center P0.
	 69.	 r = 4; P0 = 13, 2, 22 
	 70.	 r = 2; P0 = 11, 2, 22 
In Problems 71–76, find the radius and center of each sphere.
[Hint: Complete the square in each variable.]
	 71.	 x2 + y2 + z2 - 2x - 6y = 6 
	 72.	 x2 + y2 + z2 + 2x - 2z = - 1 
	 73.	 x2 + y2 + z2 - 2x + 6y + 4z = - 5 
	 74.	 x2 + y2 + z2 + 18x = 0 
	 75.	 2x2 + 2y2 + 2z2 - 16x - 12z = - 41 
	 76.	 3x2 + 3y2 + 3z2 + 6x - 6y = 3 
The work W done by a constant force F in moving an object 
from a point A in space to a point B in space is defined as 
W = F ~ AB >
. Use this definition in Problems 77–79.
	 77.	 Work  Find the work done by a force of 3 newtons acting 
in the direction - 2i - 2j - k in moving an object 4 meters  
from (0, 0, 0) to (0, 4, 0).  
	 78.	 Work  Find the work done by a force of 1 newton acting in 
the direction 2i + 2j + k in moving an object 3 meters from 
10, 0, 02 to 11, 2, 22. 
	 79.	 Work  Find the work done in moving an object along a vector 
u = - 3i + 5j - 4k if the applied force is F = 3i - j - 2k. 
c
b
a
(a)  Find a vector d that represents the position of the hand.
(b)  Determine the distance of the hand from the origin.
	 68.	 The Sphere  In space, the collection of all points that are the 
same distance from some fixed point is called a sphere. See 
the illustration. The constant distance is called the radius, 
and the fixed point is the center of the sphere. Show that an  
equation of a sphere with center at 1x0, y0, z02 and radius r is
1x - x022 + 1y - y022 + 1z - z022 = r 2
	
	 [Hint: Use the Distance Formula (1).]
y
x
z
P  (x, y, z)
P0  (x0, y0, z0)
r
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 80–83 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 80.	 Solve:  
3
x - 2 Ú 5 
	 81.	 Given f(x) = 2x - 3 and g(x) = x2 + x - 1, find (f ∘g)(x).
	 82.	 Find the exact value of sin 80° cos 50° − cos 80° sin 50°. 
	 83.	 Solve the triangle. 
B
A
c
3
6

Section 9.7  The Cross Product  661
Find the Cross Product of Two Vectors
For vectors in space, and only for vectors in space, a second product of two vectors 
is defined, called the cross product. The cross product of two vectors in space is also 
a vector that has applications in both geometry and physics.
1
9.7  The Cross Product
	
Objectives	 1  Find the Cross Product of Two Vectors  (p. 661)
	
	 	2  Know Algebraic Properties of the Cross Product  (p. 662)
	
	 	3  Know Geometric Properties of the Cross Product  (p. 663)
	
	 	4  Find a Vector Orthogonal to Two Given Vectors  (p. 664)
	
	 	5  Find the Area of a Parallelogram  (p. 664)
 If v = a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k and w = a2
 i + b2
 j + c2
 k are two vectors in space, the 
cross product v * w is defined as the vector
	 v * w = 1b1
 c2 - b2
 c12i - 1a1
 c2 - a2
 c12j + 1a1
 b2 - a2
 b12k	
(1)
Definition
Notice that the cross product v * w of two vectors is a vector. Because of this, 
it is sometimes referred to as the vector product.
Finding a Cross Product Using Equation (1)
If v = 2i + 3j + 5k and w = i + 2j + 3k, find v * w.
  v * w = 13 # 3 - 2 # 52i - 12 # 3 - 1 # 52j + 12 # 2 - 1 # 32k 
Equation (1)
 = 19 - 102i - 16 - 52j + 14 - 32k
 = -i - j + k
	
Determinants* may be used as an aid in computing cross products. A 2 by 2 
determinant, symbolized by
` a1
a2
b1
b2
`
has the value a1
 b2 - a2
 b1;  that is,
` a1
a2
b1
b2
` = a1
 b2 - a2
 b1
A 3 by 3 determinant has the value
3
A
a1
a2
B
b1
b2
C
c1
c2
3 = ` b1
b2
c1
c2
` A - ` a1
a2
c1
c2
` B + ` a1
a2
b1
b2
` C
Example 1
Solution
•
*Determinants are discussed in detail in Section 11.3.

662 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Evaluating Determinants
(a)	 ` 2
1
3
2 ` = 2 # 2 - 1 # 3 = 4 - 3 = 1
(b)	  3
A
2
1
B
3
2
C
5
3
3 = ` 3
2
5
3 ` A - ` 2
1
5
3 ` B + ` 2
1
3
2 ` C
	
 = 19 - 102A - 16 - 52B + 14 - 32C
	
 = -A - B + C
	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
The cross product of the vectors v = a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k and w = a2
 i + b2
 j + c2
 k, 
that is,
v * w = 1b1
 c2 - b2
 c12i - 1a1
 c2 - a2
 c12j + 1a1
 b2 - a2
 b12k
may be written symbolically using determinants as
v * w = 3
i
a1
a2
j
b1
b2
k
c1
c2
3 = ` b1
b2
c1
c2
` i - ` a1
a2
c1
c2
` j + ` a1
a2
b1
b2
` k
Using Determinants to Find Cross Products
If v = 2i + 3j + 5k and w = i + 2j + 3k, find:
(a)	 v * w      (b)  w * v      (c)  v * v      (d)  w * w
 (a)	 v * w = 3
i
2
1
j
3
2
k
5
3
3 = ` 3
2
5
3 ` i - ` 2
1
5
3 ` j + ` 2
1
3
2 ` k = -i - j + k
(b)	 w * v = 3
i
1
2
j
2
3
k
3
5
3 = ` 2
3
3
5 ` i - ` 1
2
3
5 ` j + ` 1
2
2
3 ` k = i + j - k
(c)	  v * v = 3
i
2
2
j
3
3
k
5
5
3  = ` 3
3
5
5 ` i - ` 2
2
5
5 ` j + ` 2
2
3
3 ` k = 0i - 0j + 0k = 0
(d)	  w * w = 3
i
1
1
j
2
2
k
3
3
3
	
 = ` 2
2
3
3 ` i - ` 1
1
3
3 ` j + ` 1
1
2
2 ` k = 0i - 0j + 0k = 0	
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Know Algebraic Properties of the Cross Product
Notice in Examples 3(a) and (b) that v * w and w * v are negatives of one  
another. From Examples 3(c) and (d), one might conjecture that the cross product of a  
vector with itself is the zero vector. These and other algebraic properties of the cross 
product are given next.
Example 2
Example 3
Solution
2

Section 9.7  The Cross Product  663
Proof  We will prove properties (2) and (4) here and leave properties (3) and (5) as 
exercises (see Problems 60 and 61).
To prove property (2), let u = a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k. Then
 u * u = 3
i
a1
a1
j
b1
b1
k
c1
c1
3 = ` b1
b1
c1
c1
` i - ` a1
a1
c1
c1
` j + ` a1
a1
b1
b1
` k
 = 0i - 0j + 0k = 0
To prove property (4), let u = a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k and v = a2
 i + b2
 j + c2
 k. Then
	  a1u * v2 = a3 1b1
 c2 - b2
 c12i - 1a1
 c2 - a2
 c12j + 1a1
 b2 - a2
 b12k4	
	
 = a1b1
 c2 - b2
 c12i - a1a1
 c2 - a2
 c12j + a1a1
 b2 - a2
 b12k	
(6)
Since au = aa1
 i + ab1
 j + ac1
 k, we have
	 1au2 * v = 1ab1
 c2 - b2ac12i - 1aa1
 c2 - a2ac12j + 1aa1
 b2 - a2ab12k	
	
 = a1b1
 c2 - b2
 c12i - a1a1
 c2 - a2
 c12j + a1a1
 b2 - a2
 b12k
	
(7)
Based on equations (6) and (7), the first part of property (4) follows. The second part 
can be proved in like fashion.	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
Know Geometric Properties of the Cross Product
Geometric Properties of the Cross Product
Let u and v be vectors in space.
u * v is orthogonal to both u and v.	
(8)
7u * v7 = 7u7 7v7 sin u,	
(9)
where u is the angle between u and v.
7u * v7 is the area of the parallelogram
having u ∙0 and v ∙0 as adjacent sides.	
(10)
u * v = 0 if and only if u and v are parallel.	
(11)
c 
Apply (1).
3
Theorem
Algebraic Properties of the Cross Product
If u, v, and w are vectors in space and if a is a scalar, then
	
 u * u = 0
	
(2)
	
 u * v = - 1v * u2
	
(3)
	
 a1u * v2 = 1au2 * v = u * 1av2	
(4)
	
 u * 1v + w2 = 1u * v2 + 1u * w2
	
(5)
Theorem

664 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Find the Area of a Parallelogram
Proof of Property (10)  Suppose that u and v are adjacent sides of a parallelogram. 
See Figure 83. Then the lengths of these sides are 7u7  and 7v7. If u is the angle 
between u and v, then the height of the parallelogram is 7v7 sin u and its area is
 Area of parallelogram = Base * Height = 7u7 3 7v7 sin u4 = 7u * v7
Finding the Area of a Parallelogram
Find the area of the parallelogram whose vertices are P1 = 10, 0, 02, 
P2 = 13, -2, 12, P3 = 1 -1, 3, -12, and P4 = 12, 1, 02.
5
j
c
Property (9)
Example 5
v
u
u
Figure 83 
Proof of Property (8)  Let u = a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k and v = a2
 i + b2
 j + c2
 k. Then
u * v = 1b1
 c2 - b2
 c12i - 1a1
 c2 - a2
 c12j + 1a1
 b2 - a2
 b12k
Now compute the dot product u ~ 1u * v2.
 u ~ 1u * v2 = 1a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k2 # 3 1b1
 c2 - b2
 c12i - 1a1
 c2 - a2
 c12j + 1a1
 b2 - a2
 b12k4
 = a11b1
 c2 - b2
 c12 - b11a1
 c2 - a2
 c12 + c11a1
 b2 - a2
 b12 = 0
Since two vectors are orthogonal if their dot product is zero, it follows that u and 
u * v are orthogonal. Similarly, v ~ 1u * v2 = 0, so v and u * v are orthogonal. 
■
Find a Vector Orthogonal to Two Given Vectors
As long as the vectors u and v are not parallel, they will form a plane in space. 
See Figure 81. Based on property (8), the vector u * v is normal to this plane. As  
Figure 81 illustrates, there are essentially (without regard to magnitude) two vectors 
normal to the plane containing u and v. It can be shown that the vector u * v is the 
one determined by the thumb of the right hand when the other fingers of the right 
hand are cupped so that they point in a direction from u to v. See Figure 82.*
Finding a Vector Orthogonal to Two Given Vectors
Find a vector that is orthogonal to u = 3i - 2j + k and v = -i + 3j - k.
 Based on property (8), such a vector is u * v.
4
Example 4
Solution
*This is a consequence of using a “right-handed” coordinate system.
u
v
Figure 82 
u
v
Figure 81 
u * v = 3
i
j
k
3
-2
1
-1
3
-1
3 = 12 - 32i - 3 -3 - 1-12 4j + 19 - 22k = -i + 2j + 7k
The vector -i + 2j + 7k is orthogonal to both u and v.
Check:	 Two vectors are orthogonal if their dot product is zero.
 u ~ 1 -i + 2j + 7k2 = 13i - 2j + k2 ~ 1 -i + 2j + 7k2 = -3 - 4 + 7 = 0
 v ~ 1 -i + 2j + 7k2 = 1 -i + 3j - k2 ~ 1 -i + 2j + 7k2 = 1 + 6 - 7 = 0
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 1
The proof of property (9) is left as an exercise. See Problem 62.
•

Section 9.7  The Cross Product  665
Warning  Not all pairs of vertices 
give rise to a side. For example, P1P4 >
 
is a diagonal of the parallelogram since 
P1P3 >
+ P3P4 >
= P1P4 >
. Also, P1P3 >
 and 
P2P4 >
 are not adjacent sides; they are 
parallel sides.	
■
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 True or False  If u and v are parallel vectors, then u * v = 0. 
	
2.	 True or False  For any vector v, v * v = 0. 
	 3.	 True or False  If u and v are vectors, then u * v + v * u = 0. 
	 5.	 True or False  7u * v7 = 7u7 7v7 cos u, where u is the angle 
between u and v. 
	 6.	 True or False  The area of the parallelogram having u and v 
as adjacent sides is the magnitude of the cross product of u 
and v. 
9.7  Assess Your Understanding
In Problems 7–14, find the value of each determinant.
Skill Building
	
7.   ` 3
1
4
2 `  
 
	 8.  ` - 2
2
5
- 3 `  
 
	 9.  ` - 4
5
0
3 `  
 
	 10.  `
6
-2
5
-1 `  
	 11.	 3
A
0
3
B
2
1
C
4
3
3
	 12.	 3
A
2
1
B
1
3
C
4
1
3  
	 13.	 3
A
1
0
B
- 2
2
C
- 3
- 2
3  
	 14.	 3
A
-1
5
B
3
0
C
5
- 2
3
	 4.	 True or False  u * v is a vector that is parallel to both u  
and v. 
 Two adjacent sides of this parallelogram are
u = P1
 P2 >
= 3i - 2j + k and v = P1
 P3 >
= -i + 3j - k
Since u * v = -i + 2j + 7k (Example 4), the area of the parallelogram is
Area of parallelogram = 7u * v7 = 21 + 4 + 49 = 254 = 326 square units
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Proof of Property (11)  The proof requires two parts. If u and v are parallel, then 
there is a scalar a such that u = av.  Then
 u * v = 1av2 * v = a1v * v2 = 0
If u * v = 0, then, by property (9), we have
7u * v7 = 7u7 7v7 sin u = 0
Since u ∙0 and v ∙0, we must have sin u = 0, so u = 0 or u = p. In either case, 
since u is the angle between u and v, then u and v are parallel.	
j
Solution
•
c
Property (2)
c
Property (4)
In Problems 15–22, find (a) v * w, (b) w * v, (c) w * w, and (d) v * v.
	 15.	 v = 2i - 3j + k 
w = 3i - 2j - k
	 16.	 v = - i + 3j + 2k 
w = 3i - 2j - k
	 17.	 v = i + j 
w = 2i + j + k
	 18.	 v = i - 4j + 2k 
w = 3i + 2j + k
	 19.	 v = 3i + j + 3k 
w = i - k
	 20.	 v = 2i - j + 2k 
w = j - k
	 21.	 v = 2i - 3j 
w = 3j - 2k
	 22.	 v = i - j - k 
w = 4i - 3k

666 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
In Problems 23–44, use the given vectors u, v, and w to find each expression.
u = 2i - 3j + k  v = - 3i + 3j + 2k  w = i + j + 3k
	 23.	 v * w 
 	
24.	 u * v 
	
25.	 w * v 
	 26.	 v * u 
	
27.	 w * w 
	
28.	 v * v 
	 29.	 v * 14w2 
	
30.	 13u2 * v 
	
31.	 1- 3v2 * w 
	 32.	 u * 12v2 
 	
33.	 v ~ 1v * w2 
	
34.	 u ~ 1u * v2 
	 35.	 1u * v2 ~ w 
	
36.	 u ~ 1v * w2 
 	
37.	 1v * u2 ~ w 
	 38.	 v ~ 1u * w2 
 	
39.	 1w * w2 * v 
 	
40.	 u * 1v * v2 
	 41.	 Find a vector orthogonal to both u and v.	
42.  Find a vector orthogonal to both u and w.
	 43.	 Find a vector orthogonal to both u and j + k. 	
44.  Find a vector orthogonal to both u and i + j.
In Problems 45–48, find the area of the parallelogram with one corner at P1 and adjacent sides P1
 P2 >
 and P1
 P3 >
.
	 45.	 P1 = 10, 0, 02, P2 = 12, 3, 12, P3 = 1- 2, 4, 12 
 	
46.  P1 = 10, 0, 02, P2 = 11, 2, 32, P3 = 1-2, 3, 02 
	 47.	 P1 = 1- 2, 0, 22, P2 = 12, 1, - 12, P3 = 12, - 1, 22 
 	48.  P1 = 11, 2, 02, P2 = 1- 2, 3, 42, P3 = 10, -2, 32 
In Problems 49–52, find the area of the parallelogram with vertices P1, P2, P3, and P4.
	 49.	 P1 = 11, 1, 22, P2 = 11, 2, 32, P3 = 1- 2, 3, 02,
	
	 P4 = 1- 2, 4, 12 
50.  P1 = 12, 1, 12, P2 = 12, 3, 12, P3 = 1-2, 4, 12,
	
 	P4 = 1- 2, 6, 12 
	 51.	 P1 = 1- 1, 1, 12, P2 = 1- 1, 2, 22, P3 = 1- 3, 4, - 52,
	
	 P4 = 1- 3, 5, - 42 
52.  P1 = 11, 2, - 12, P2 = 14, 2, - 32, P3 = 16, -5, 22,
	
 	P4 = 19, - 5, 02 
Applications and Extensions
53.	 Find a unit vector normal to the plane containing 
u = i - 2j - k and v = - i + 3j - k.
	 54.	 Find a unit vector normal to the plane containing 
v = 2i + 3j - k and w = - 2i - 4j - 3k.
	 55.	 Volume of a Parallelepiped  A parallelepiped is a prism 
whose faces are all parallelograms. Let A, B, and C be the 
vectors that define the parallelepiped shown in the figure. 
The volume V of the parallelepiped is given by the formula 
V = 0 (A * B) # C0 .
C
B
A
	
	 Find the volume of the parallelepiped with edges 
A = 4i - 4j + 7k, B = i + 7j + k, and C = 5i - 3j + 7k. 
 
	 56.	 Volume of a Parallelepiped  Refer to Problem 55. Find 
the volume of a parallelepiped whose defining vectors are 
A = i + 6k, B = 2i + 3j - 8k, and C = 8i -5j + 6k
	 57.	 Prove for vectors u and v that
7u * v7 2 = 7u7 27v7 2 - 1u ~ v22
	
	 [Hint: Proceed as in the proof of property (4), computing 
first the left side and then the right side.]
	 58.	 Show that if u and v are orthogonal, then
7u * v7 = 7u7 7v7
	 59.	 Show that if u and v are orthogonal unit vectors, then u * v 
is also a unit vector.
	 60.	 Prove property (3).
	 61.	 Prove the following property (5).
u * (v + w) = (u * v) + (u * w)
	 62.	 Prove property (9).
	
	 [Hint: Use the result of Problem 57 and the fact that if u is 
the angle between u and v, then u ~ v = 7u7 7v7 cos u.]
	 63.	 If u ~ v = 0 and u * v = 0, what, if anything, can you conclude about u and v?
Discussion and Writing

Chapter Review  667
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Polar Coordinates (pp. 598–605)
Relationship between polar  
coordinates 1r, u2 and rectangular  
coordinates 1x, y2 (pp. 600 and 603)
x = r cos u, y = r sin u
r 2 = x2 + y2, tan u = y
x, x ∙0
Polar form of a complex number (p. 623)
If z = x + yi, then z = r1cos u + i sin u2,
where r = 0 z0 = 2x2 + y2, sin u = y
r , cos u = x
r , 0 … u 6 2p.
De Moivre’s Theorem (p. 625)
If z = r1cos u + i sin u2, then zn = r n3cos1nu2 + i sin1nu2 4,  
where n Ú 1 is a positive integer.
nth root of a complex number 
w = r1cos u0 + i sin u02 (p. 626)
zk = 1
n r c cosau0
n + 2kp
n b + i sin au0
n + 2kp
n b d , k = 0, c , n - 1, 
where n Ú 2 is an integer
Vectors (pp. 630–639)
Quantity having magnitude and direction; equivalent to a directed line  
segment PQ
¡
Position vector (pp. 633 and 653)
Vector whose initial point is at the origin
Unit vector (pp. 632 and 654)
Vector whose magnitude is 1
Dot product (pp. 644 and 655)
If v = a1
 i + b1
 j and w = a2
 i + b2
 j, then v # w = a1a2 + b1b2.
If v = a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k and w = a2
 i + b2
 j + c2
 k,  
then  v # w = a1a2 + b1b2 + c1c2.
Angle u between two nonzero  
vectors u and v (pp. 645 and 656)
cos u =  u # v
7u7 7v 7
Direction angles of a  
vector in space (p. 657)
If v = ai + bj + ck, then v = 7v7 3 1cos a2i + 1cos b2j + 1cos g2k4,
where cos a =
a
7v7 , cos b =
b
7v7 ,  and  cos g =
c
7 v 7 .
Cross product (p. 661)
If v = a1
 i + b1
 j + c1
 k and w = a2
 i + b2
 j + c2
 k,
then v * w = 3b1
 c2 - b2
 c14i - 3a1
 c2 - a2
 c14j + 3a1
 b2 - a2
 b14k.
Area of a parallelogram (p. 664)
7u * v7 = 7u7 7v7 sin u, where u is the angle between the two adjacent sides
u and v.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 64–67 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your mind 
so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 64.	 Find the exact value of  cos-1a 1
22
b. 
	 65.	 Find two pairs of polar coordinates (r, u ), one with r 7 0 and the other with r 6 0, for the point with rectangular coordinates 
(- 8, - 15). Express u  in radians. 
	 66.	 For f1x2 = 7x-1 + 5, find f -1(x). 
 
	 67.	 Use properties of logarithms to write log4 2x
z3  as a sum or difference of logarithms. Express powers as factors. 

668 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
Review Exercises
In Problems 1–3, plot each point given in polar coordinates, and find its rectangular coordinates.
	 1.	 a3, p
6 b	
2.  a- 2, 4p
3 b	
3.  a- 3, -  p
2 b
In Problems 4–6, the rectangular coordinates of a point are given. Find two pairs of polar coordinates 1r, u2 for each point, one with r 7 0 
and the other with r 6 0. Express u in radians.
	 4.	 1- 8, - 82	
5.  1- 23, 12	
6.  1- 5, 02
Section 
You should be able to…
Example(s)
Review Exercises
9.1
1	
Plot points using polar coordinates (p. 598)
1–3
1–3
 
2	
Convert from polar coordinates to rectangular coordinates (p. 600)
4
1–3
 
3	
Convert from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates (p. 602)
5–7
4–6
 
4	
Transform equations between polar and rectangular forms (p. 604)
8, 9
7(a)–10(a)
9.2
1	
Identify and graph polar equations by converting to rectangular 
equations (p. 608)
1– 6
7(b)–10(b)
 
2	
Test polar equations for symmetry (p. 611)
7–10
11–13
 
3	
Graph polar equations by plotting points (p. 612)
7–13
11–13
9.3
1	
Plot points in the complex plane (p. 622)
1
16–18
 
2	
Convert a complex number between rectangular form and polar form 
(p. 623)
2, 3
14–18
 
3	
Find products and quotients of complex numbers in polar form  
(p. 624)
4
19–21
 
4	
Use De Moivre’s Theorem (p. 625)
5, 6
22–25
 
5	
Find complex roots (p. 626)
7
26
9.4
1	
Graph vectors (p. 632)
1
27, 28
 
2	
Find a position vector (p. 632)
2
29, 30
 
3	
Add and subtract vectors algebraically (p. 634)
3
31
 
4	
Find a scalar multiple and the magnitude of a vector (p. 635)
4
29, 30, 32–34
 
5	
Find a unit vector (p. 635)
5
35
 
6	
Find a vector from its direction and magnitude (p. 636)
6
36, 37
 
7	
Model with vectors (p. 637)
8–10
59, 60
9.5
1	
Find the dot product of two vectors (p. 644)
1
46, 47
 
2	
Find the angle between two vectors (p. 645)
2
46, 47
 
3	
Determine whether two vectors are parallel (p. 646)
3
50–52
 
4	
Determine whether two vectors are orthogonal (p. 646)
4
50–52
 
5	
Decompose a vector into two orthogonal vectors (p. 646)
5, 6
53, 54, 62
 
6	
Compute work (p. 648)
7
61
9.6
1 	 Find the distance between two points in space (p. 652)
1
38
 
2 	 Find position vectors in space (p. 653)
2
39
 
3 	 Perform operations on vectors (p. 653)
3–5
40-42
 
4 	 Find the dot product (p. 655)
6
48, 49
 
5 	 Find the angle between two vectors (p. 655)
7
48, 49
 
6 	 Find the direction angles of a vector (p. 656)
8–10
55
9.7
1 	 Find the cross product of two vectors (p. 661)
1–3
43, 44
 
2 	 Know algebraic properties of the cross product (p. 662)
p. 662
57, 58
 
3 	 Know geometric properties of the cross product (p. 663)
p. 663
56
 
4 	 Find a vector orthogonal to two given vectors (p. 664)
4
45
 
5 	 Find the area of a parallelogram (p. 664)
5
56
Objectives

Chapter Review  669
In Problems 7–10, the variables r and u represent polar coordinates. (a) Write each polar equation as an equation in rectangular coordinates 
1x, y2. (b) Identify the equation and graph it.
 	 7.	  r = 2 sin u	
8.  r = 5	
9.	 u = p
4 	
10.  r 2 + 4r sin u - 8r cos u = 5
In Problems 11–13, sketch the graph of each polar equation. Be sure to test for symmetry.
	 11.	 r = 4 cos u	
12.  r = 3 - 3 sin u	
13.  r = 4 - cos u
In Problems 14 and 15, write each complex number in polar form. Express each argument in degrees.
	 14.	 - 6 + 4i 
	
15.  4 - 3i 
In Problems 16–18, write each complex number in the standard form a + bi, and plot each in the complex plane.
	 16.	 21cos 150° + i sin 150°2 
	
17.  3acos 2p
3
+ i sin 2p
3 b 
	
 18.  0.11cos 350° + i sin 350°2 
In Problems 19–21, find zw and z
w . Leave your answers in polar form.
	 19.	  z = 2(cos 40° + i sin 40°) 
 w = - 2(cos 10° + i sin 10°)
	 20.	  z = 3acos 5p
6
+ i sin 5p
6 b
	
	  w = 4acos p
6 + i sin p
6 b
	 21.	  z = 61cos 325° + i sin 325°2 
 w = (cos 35° + i sin 35°)
In Problems 22–25, write each expression in the standard form a + bi.
	 22.	 321cos 10° + i sin 10°2 46  
	
23.  c 25 acos a7p
12 b + i sin a7p
12 b d
3
 
	
24.	 11 + i28 
	 25.  18 + 6i24 
	
26.  Find all the complex fifth roots of 32.
In Problems 27 and 28, use the figure to the right to graph each of the following:
	 27.	 u + v        	
28.  2u + 3v
In Problems 29 and 30, the vector v is represented by the directed line segment PQ
¡. Write v in the form ai + bj and find 7v7.
	 29.	 P = 11, - 22; Q = 13, - 62 
	
30.  P = 10, - 22; Q = 1- 1, 12  
In Problems 31–35, use the vectors v = -2i + j and w = 4i - 3j to find:
	 31.	 v + w 
	
32.  4v - 3w 
	
33.  7v7  
	 34.	 7v7 + 7w7  
	
35.	 Find a unit vector in the same direction as v.
v
u
In Problems 40–45, use the vectors v = 3i + j - 2k and w = - 3i + 2j - k to find each expression.
	 40.	 4v - 3w 
	
41.  7v - w7  
	
42.  7v7 - 7w7  
	 43.	 v * w 
	
44.  v # (v * w) 
	
45.  Find a unit vector orthogonal to both v and w.
In Problems 46–49, find the dot product v ~ w and the angle between v and w.
	 46.	 v = - 2i + j, w = 4i - 3j 
47.  v = i - 3j, w = - i + j 
	 48.	 v = i + j + k, w = i - j + k 
49.  v = 4i - j + 2k, w = i - 2j - 3k 
In Problems 50–52, determine whether v and w are parallel, orthogonal, or neither.
	 50.	 v = 2i + 3j; w = - 4i - 6j          	 51.  v = - 2i + 2j; w = - 3i + 2j         
52.  v = 3i - 2j; w = 4i + 6j
	 36.  Find the vector v in the xy-plane with magnitude 3 if the 
direction angle of v is 60°.
	 37.	 Find the direction angle between i and v = -i + 23 j.
In Problems 53 and 54, decompose v into two vectors, one parallel to w and the other orthogonal to w.
	 53.	 v = 2i + j; w = - 4i + 3j	
54.  v = 2i + 3j; w = 3i + j
	 55.	 Find the direction angles of the vector v = 3i - 4j + 2k.	
56.  Find the area of the parallelogram with vertices P1 = 11, 1, 12, 
P2 = 12, 3, 42, P3 = 16, 5, 22, and P4 = 17, 7, 52.
	 57.	 If u * v = 2i - 3j + k, what is v * u? 
	
58.  Suppose that u = 3v. What is u * v? 
	 38.	 Find the distance from P1 = 11, 3, -22 to P2 = 14, - 2, 12.
	 39.	 A vector v has initial point P = 11, 3, -22 and terminal 
point Q = 14, - 2, 12. Write v in the form v = ai + bj + ck.

670 
CHAPTER 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
 	59.	 Actual Speed and Direction of a Swimmer  A swimmer 
can maintain a constant speed of 5 miles per hour. If the 
swimmer heads directly across a river that has a current 
moving at the rate of 2 miles per hour, what is the actual  
speed of the swimmer? (See the figure.) If the river is  
1 mile wide, how far downstream will the swimmer end up 
from the point directly across the river from the starting 
point? 
Current
Swimmer's
direction
Direction
of swimmer
due to current
	 60.	 Static Equilibrium  A weight of 2000 pounds is suspended  
from two cables, as shown in the figure. What are the  
tensions in the two cables? 
40°
30°
2000
pounds
	 61.	 Computing Work  Find the work done by a force of 5 pounds 
acting in the direction 60° to the horizontal in moving an  
object 20 feet from 10, 02 to 120, 02. 
	 62.	 Braking Load  A moving van with a gross weight of 8000 
pounds is parked on a street with a 5° grade. Find the  
magnitude of the force required to keep the van from 
rolling down the hill. What is the magnitude of the force  
perpendicular to the hill? 
In Problems 1–3, plot each point given in polar coordinates.
	 1.	 a2, 3p
4 b	
2.  a3, -  p
6 b	
3.  a- 4, p
3 b
	 4.	 Convert 12, 2232 from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates 1r, u2, where r 7 0 and 0 … u 6 2p. 
In Problems 5–7, convert the polar equation to a rectangular equation. Graph the equation.
	 5.	 r = 7 
	
6.  tan u = 3 
	
7.  r sin2 u + 8 sin u = r 
In Problems 8 and 9, test the polar equation for symmetry with respect to the pole, the polar axis, and the line u = p
2 .
	 8.	 r 2 cos u = 5 	
9.  r = 5 sin u cos2 u
In Problems 10–12, perform the given operation, where z = 21cos 85° + i sin 85°2 and w = 31cos 22° + i sin 22°2. Write your answer 
in polar form.
	 10.	 z # w 
	
11.  w
z  
	
12.  w5 
	 13.	  Find all the complex cube roots of - 8 + 823i. Then plot them in the complex plane.
In Problems 14–18, P1 = 1322, 7222 and P2 = 1822, 2222.
	 14.	 Find the position vector v equal toP1P2
¡.   
Chapter Test
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel. 
	 15.	 Find 7v7. 
	 16.	 Find the unit vector in the direction of v. 
	 17.	 Find the direction angle of v. 
	 18.	 Decompose 
v 
into 
its 
vertical 
and 
horizontal  
components. 
In Problems 19–22, v1 = 84, 69, v2 = 8 - 3, - 69, v3 = 8 - 8, 49, and 
v4 = 810, 159.
	 19.	 Find the vector v1 + 2v2 - v3. 
	 20.	 Which two vectors are parallel? 
	 21.	 Which two vectors are orthogonal? 
	 22.	 Find the angle between the vectors v1 and v2. 
In Problems 23–25, use the vectors u = 2i - 3j + k and 
v = - i + 3j + 2k.
	 23.	 Find u * v. 
	 24.	 Find the direction angles for u.
	 25.	 Find the area of the parallelogram that has u and v as 
adjacent sides. 
	 26.	 A 1200-pound chandelier is to be suspended over a large 
ballroom; the chandelier will be hung on two cables of equal 
length whose ends will be attached to the ceiling, 16 feet 
apart. The chandelier will be free-hanging so that the ends 
of the cable will make equal angles with the ceiling. If the 
top of the chandelier is to be 16 feet from the ceiling, what is 
the minimum tension each cable must be able to endure?

	 1.	 Find the real solutions, if any, of the equation ex2-9 = 1.
	 7.	 Graph the function y = 0 sin x0 .
	 8.	 Graph the function y = sin0 x0 .
	 9.	 Find the exact value of sin-1a-  1
2b.  
	 10.	 Graph the equations x = 3 and y = 4 on the same set of 
rectangular axes.
	 11.	 Graph the equations r = 2 and u = p
3  on the same set of 
polar axes.
	 12.	 What are the amplitude and period of y = -4 cos(px)?
Cumulative Review
	 2.	 Find an equation for the line containing the origin that 
makes an angle of 30° with the positive x-axis.
	 3.	 Find an equation for the circle with center at the point 10, 12 
and radius 3. Graph this circle.
	 4.	 What is the domain of the function f1x2 = ln11 - 2x2?
	 5.	 Test the equation x2 + y3 = 2x4 for symmetry with respect 
to the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
	 6.	 Graph the function y = 0 ln x0 .
Chapter Projects  671
The following projects are available at the Instructors’ Resource Center (IRC):
	 II.	 Project at Motorola  Signal Fades Due to Interference Complex trigonometric functions are used to ensure that a cellphone has 
optimal reception as the user travels up and down an elevator.
	III.	 Compound Interest  The effect of continuously compounded interest is analyzed using polar coordinates.
	IV.	 Complex Equations  Analysis of complex equations illustrates the connections between complex and real equations. At times, using 
complex equations is more efficient for proving mathematical theorems.
Chapter Projects
Source: www.aeromuseum.org
	 I.	 Modeling Aircraft Motion  Four aerodynamic forces act on 
an airplane in flight: lift, weight, thrust, and drag. While an 
aircraft is in flight, these four forces continuously battle each 
other. Weight opposes lift, and drag opposes thrust. See the 
diagram below. In balanced flight at constant speed, the lift 
and weight are equal, and the thrust and drag are equal.
Lift
Weight
Thrust
Drag
	
	 In 1903 the Wright brothers made the first controlled  
powered flight. The weight of their plane was approximately 
700 pounds (lb). Newton’s Second Law of Motion states 
that force = mass * acceleration 1F = ma2. If the mass is 
measured in kilograms (kg) and acceleration in meters per
	
	 second squared (m/sec2), then the force will be measured in 
newtons (N). 3note: 1 N = 1 kg # m/sec2.4
	5.	 If 1 kg = 2.205 lb, convert the weight of the Wright 
brothers’ plane to kilograms.
	6.	 If acceleration due to gravity is a = 9.80 m/sec2, 
determine the force due to weight on the Wright  
brothers’ plane.
	7.	
What must be true about the lift force of the Wright 
brothers’ plane for it to get off the ground?
	8.	 The weight of a fully loaded Cessna 170B is 2200 lb. What 
lift force is required to get this plane off the ground?
	9.	 The maximum gross weight of a Boeing 747 is 255,000 lb. 
What lift force is required to get this jet off the ground?
	2.	 What will happen to the aircraft if the lift is decreased 
while the weight is held constant?
	3.	 What will happen to the aircraft if the thrust is increased 
while the drag is held constant?
	4.	 What will happen to the aircraft if the drag is increased 
while the thrust is held constant?
	1.	 What will happen to the aircraft if the lift is held  
constant while the weight is decreased (say, from burning 
off fuel)?

672
The Orbit of Comet Hale-Bopp
The orbits of Comet Hale-Bopp and Earth can be modeled using ellipses, the 
subject of Section 10.3. The Internet-based Project at the end of this chapter 
explores the possibility of Comet Hale-Bopp colliding with Earth.
—See the Internet-based Chapter Project I—
 A Look Back
In Chapter 1, we introduced rectangular coordinates and showed how geometry 
problems can be solved algebraically. We defined a circle geometrically and then 
used the distance formula and rectangular coordinates to obtain an equation for 
a circle.
A Look Ahead 
In this chapter, geometric definitions are given for the conics, and the distance 
formula and rectangular coordinates are used to obtain their equations.
Historically, Apollonius (200 bc) was among the first to study conics and  
discover some of their interesting properties. Today, conics are still studied  
because of their many uses. Paraboloids of revolution (parabolas rotated about 
their axes of symmetry) are used as signal collectors (the satellite dishes used 
with radar and dish TV, for example), as solar energy collectors, and as reflectors 
(telescopes, light projection, and so on). The planets circle the Sun in  
approximately elliptical orbits. Elliptical surfaces can be used to reflect signals 
such as light and sound from one place to another. A third conic, the hyperbola, 
can be used to determine the location of lightning strikes.
The Greeks used Euclidean geometry to study conics. However, we shall use 
the more powerful methods of analytic geometry, which uses both algebra and 
geometry, for our study of conics.
Analytic Geometry
Outline
10.1	 Conics
10.2	 The Parabola
10.3	 The Ellipse
10.4	 The Hyperbola
10.5	 Rotation of Axes; General  
Form of a Conic
10.6	 Polar Equations of Conics
10.7	 Plane Curves and Parametric Equations
 	
Chapter Review
 	
Chapter Test
 	
Cumulative Review
 	
Chapter Projects
10

Section 10.1  Conics  673
Know the Names of the Conics
The word conic derives from the word cone, which is a geometric figure that can be 
constructed in the following way: Let a and g be two distinct lines that intersect at 
a point V. Keep the line a fixed. Now rotate the line g about a, while maintaining 
the same angle between a and g. The collection of points swept out (generated) by the 
line g is called a right circular cone. See Figure 1. The fixed line a is called the axis 
of the cone; the point V is its vertex; the lines that pass through V and make the same 
angle with a as g are generators of the cone. Each generator is a line that lies entirely 
on the cone. The cone consists of two parts, called nappes, that intersect at the vertex.
1
10.1  Conics
	
Objective	 	1  Know the Names of the Conics  (p. 673)
Conics, an abbreviation for conic sections, are curves that result from the intersection 
of a right circular cone and a plane. The conics we shall study arise when the plane 
does not contain the vertex, as shown in Figure 2. These conics are circles when the 
plane is perpendicular to the axis of the cone and intersects each generator; ellipses 
when the plane is tilted slightly so that it intersects each generator, but intersects 
only one nappe of the cone; parabolas when the plane is tilted farther so that it is 
parallel to one (and only one) generator and intersects only one nappe of the cone; 
and hyperbolas when the plane intersects both nappes.
If the plane contains the vertex, the intersection of the plane and the cone is a 
point, a line, or a pair of intersecting lines. These are usually called degenerate conics.
Conic sections are used in modeling many different applications. For example, 
parabolas are used in describing searchlights and telescopes (see Figures 14 and 
15 on page 679). Ellipses are used to model the orbits of planets and whispering  
galleries (see pages 689–690). And hyperbolas are used to locate lightning strikes 
and model nuclear cooling towers (see Problems 76 and 77 in Section 10.4).
Vertex, V
Nappes
g
Generators
Axis, a
Figure 1  Right circular cone 
Figure 2 
(a)   Circle
Axis
(a)   Circle
(b)   Ellipse
Axis
(c)   Parabola
Axis
Generator
(d)   Hyperbola
Axis

674 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
In Section 3.3, we learned that the graph of a quadratic function is a parabola. 
In this section, we give a geometric definition of a parabola and use it to obtain an 
equation.
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 680.
	
Objectives	 	1  Analyze Parabolas with Vertex at the Origin  (p. 674)
	
	 	2  Analyze Parabolas with Vertex at  (h, k)  (p. 677)
	
	 	3  Solve Applied Problems Involving Parabolas  (p. 679)
10.2  The Parabola
•	 Distance Formula (Section 1.1, p. 37)
•	 Symmetry (Section 1.2, pp. 46–48)
•	 Square Root Method (Appendix A, Section A.6, p. 991)
•	 Complete the Square (Appendix A,  
Section A.3, pp. 972–973)
•	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations (Section 2.5, 
pp. 127–136)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
 A parabola is the collection of all points P in the plane that are the same  
distance d from a fixed point F as they are from a fixed line D. The point F is 
called the focus of the parabola, and the line D is its directrix. As a result, a 
parabola is the set of points P for which
	
d1F, P2 = d1P, D2	
(1)
Definition
Figure 3 shows a parabola (in blue). The line through the focus F and perpendicular 
to the directrix D is called the axis of symmetry of the parabola. The point of 
intersection of the parabola with its axis of symmetry is called the vertex V.
Because the vertex V lies on the parabola, it must satisfy equation (1): 
d1F, V2 = d1V, D2. The vertex is midway between the focus and the directrix. 
We shall let a equal the distance d1F, V2 from F to V. Now we are ready to derive 
an equation for a parabola. To do this, we use a rectangular system of coordinates  
positioned so that the vertex V, focus F, and directrix D of the parabola are conveniently 
located.
Analyze Parabolas with Vertex at the Origin
If we choose to locate the vertex V at the origin 10, 02, we can conveniently position the 
focus F on either the x-axis or the y-axis. First, consider the case where the focus F  
is on the positive x-axis, as shown in Figure 4. Because the distance from F to V  
is a, the coordinates of F will be 1a, 02 with a 7 0. Similarly, because the distance 
from V to the directrix D is also a, and because D must be perpendicular to the 
x-axis (since the x-axis is the axis of symmetry), the equation of the directrix D must 
be x = -a.
Now, if P = 1x, y2 is any point on the parabola, P must satisfy equation (1):
d1F, P2 = d1P, D2
So we have
 21x - a22 + 1y - 022  = 0 x + a0
 1x - a22 + y2 = 1x + a22 
 x2 - 2ax + a2 + y2 = x2 + 2ax + a2
 y2 = 4ax
1
Use the Distance Formula.
Square both sides.
Multiply out.
Simplify.
Figure 3  Parabola
a
a
2a
Axis of symmetry
F
P
d(F, P)
d(P, D)
V
Directrix D
Figure 4 
y
(0, 0)
P 5 (x, y)
V
d(F, P)
d(P, D)
F 5 (a, 0)
(2a, y)
D: x 5 2a
x

Section 10.2  The Parabola  675
Recall that a is the distance from the vertex to the focus of a parabola. When 
graphing the parabola y2 = 4ax it is helpful to determine the “opening” by finding 
the points that lie directly above or below the focus 1a, 02. This is done by letting 
x = a in y2 = 4ax, so y2 = 4a1a2 = 4a2, or y = {2a. The line segment joining the 
two points, 1a, 2a2 and 1a, -2a2, is called the latus rectum; its length is 4a.
Finding the Equation of a Parabola and Graphing It
Find an equation of the parabola with vertex at 10, 02 and focus at 13, 02. Graph 
the equation.
The distance from the vertex 10, 02 to the focus 13, 02 is a = 3. Based on equation (2), 
the equation of this parabola is
 y2 = 4ax
 y2 = 12x
To graph this parabola, find the two points that determine the latus rectum by letting 
x = 3. Then
 y2 = 12x = 12132 = 36
 y = {6
The points 13, 62 and 13, -62 determine the latus rectum. These points help  
graph the parabola because they determine the “opening.” See Figure 5.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
By reversing the steps used to obtain equation (2), it follows that the graph of an 
equation of the form of equation (2), y2 = 4ax, is a parabola; its vertex is at 10, 02, 
its focus is at 1a, 02, its directrix is the line x = -a, and its axis of symmetry is  
the x-axis.
For the remainder of this section, the direction “Analyze the equation” will 
mean to find the vertex, focus, and directrix of the parabola and graph it.
Analyzing the Equation of a Parabola
Analyze the equation:  y2 = 8x
 Solution  The equation y2 = 8x is of the form y2 = 4ax, where 4a = 8, so a = 2.  
Consequently, the graph of the equation is a parabola with vertex at 10, 02 and focus 
on the positive x-axis at 1a, 02 = 12, 02. The directrix is the vertical line x = -2. 
The two points that determine the latus rectum are obtained by letting x = 2. Then 
y2 = 16, so y = {4. The points 12, -42 and 12, 42 determine the latus rectum. See 
Figure 6 for the graph.
Example 1
Solution
a = 3
Solve for y.
•
Example 2
•
Equation of a Parabola: Vertex at (0, 0), Focus at (a, 0), a + 0
The equation of a parabola with vertex at 10, 02, focus at 1a, 02, and directrix 
x = -a, a 7 0, is
	
y2 = 4ax	
(2)
Theorem
Comment  To 
graph 
the 
parabola 
y 2 = 12x discussed in Example 1, 
graph the two functions Y1 = 112x  
and 
Y2 = - 112x  . 
Do 
this 
and  
compare what you see with Figure 5.	
■
Figure 5  y 2 = 12x 
F  (3, 0)
D: x  3
x
y
V
(3, 6)
Latus
rectum
(0, 0)
(3, 6)
6
6
6
6
Figure 6  y 2 = 8x
D: x  2
x
y
5
5
5
5
V
F  (2, 0)
(2, 4)
(2, 4)
Latus rectum
(0, 0)

676 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Recall that we obtained equation (2) after placing the focus on the positive  
x-axis. If the focus is placed on the negative x-axis, positive y-axis, or negative y-axis, 
a different form of the equation for the parabola results. The four forms of the  
equation of a parabola with vertex at 10, 02 and focus on a coordinate axis a distance a  
from 10, 02 are given in Table 1, and their graphs are given in Figure 7. Notice that 
each graph is symmetric with respect to its axis of symmetry.
Table 1 
Equations of a Parabola: Vertex at (0, 0); Focus on an Axis; a + 0 
Vertex
Focus
Directrix
Equation
Description
(0, 0)
(a, 0)
x = -a
y2 = 4ax
Axis of symmetry is the x-axis, opens right
(0, 0)
(-a, 0)
x = a
y2 = -4ax
Axis of symmetry is the x-axis, opens left
(0, 0)
(0, a)
y = -a
x2 = 4ay
Axis of symmetry is the y-axis, opens up
(0, 0)
(0, -a)
y = a
x2 = -4ay
Axis of symmetry is the y-axis, opens down
Analyzing the Equation of a Parabola
Analyze the equation: x2 = -12y
The equation x2 = -12y is of the form x2 = -4ay, with a = 3. Consequently, the 
graph of the equation is a parabola with vertex at 10, 02, focus at 10, -32, and 
directrix the line y = 3. The parabola opens down, and its axis of symmetry is the 
y-axis. To obtain the points defining the latus rectum, let y = -3. Then x2 = 36, so 
x = {6. The points 1 -6, -32 and 16, -32 determine the latus rectum. See Figure 8  
for the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 1
Finding the Equation of a Parabola
Find the equation of the parabola with focus at 10, 42 and directrix the line y = -4. 
Graph the equation.
Solution  A parabola whose focus is at 10, 42 and whose directrix is the horizontal 
line y = -4 will have its vertex at 10, 02. (Do you see why? The vertex is midway 
between the focus and the directrix.) Since the focus is on the positive y-axis at 
10, 42, the equation of this parabola is of the form x2 = 4ay, with a = 4. That is,
 x2 = 4ay = 4142y = 16y
Letting y = 4 yields x2 = 64, so x = {8. The points 18, 42 and 1–8, 42 determine
the latus rectum. Figure 9 shows the graph of x 2 = 16y.
Example 3
Solution
•
Example 4
 c
 a = 4
•
Figure 7 
x
Gx 2 5 24ay
V
x
y
Fx 2 5 4ay
V
y
Ey 2 5 24ax
V
x
y
V
Dy 2 5 4ax
x
y
F 5 (0, 2a)
D: y 5 a
F 5 (0, a)
D: y 5 2a
D: x 5 a
F 5 (2a, 0)
D: x 5 2a
F 5 (a, 0)
Figure 8  x2 = - 12y
D: y  3
F  (0, 3)
(6, 3)
(6, 3)
(0, 0)
x
y
6
6
6
V
Figure 9  x2 = 16y
x
y
V
10
(0, 0)
(8, 4)
(8, 4)
10
10
10
D: y  4
F  (0,4)

Section 10.2  The Parabola  677
Finding the Equation of a Parabola
Find the equation of a parabola with vertex at 10, 02 if its axis of symmetry is the
x-axis and its graph contains the point a -  1
2 , 2b. Find its focus and directrix, and 
graph the equation.
The vertex is at the origin, the axis of symmetry is the x-axis, and the graph contains 
a point in the second quadrant, so the parabola opens to the left. From Table 1, note 
that the form of the equation is
y2 = -4ax
Because the point a -  1
2 , 2b is on the parabola, the coordinates x = -  1
2 , y = 2
must satisfy y2 = -4ax. Substituting x = -  1
2  and y = 2 into this equation leads to
 4 = -4aa -  1
2 b 
 a = 2
The equation of the parabola is
y2 = -4122x = -8x
The focus is at 1 -2, 02 and the directrix is the line x = 2. Letting x = -2 gives 
y2 = 16, so y = {4. The points 1 -2, 42 and 1 -2, -42 determine the latus rectum. 
See Figure 10.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
Analyze Parabolas with Vertex at (h, k)
If a parabola with vertex at the origin and axis of symmetry along a coordinate axis 
is shifted horizontally h units and then vertically k units, the result is a parabola 
with vertex at 1h, k2 and axis of symmetry parallel to a coordinate axis. The  
equations of such parabolas have the same forms as those in Table 1, but with x 
replaced by x - h (the horizontal shift) and y replaced by y - k (the vertical shift). 
Table 2 gives the forms of the equations of such parabolas. Figures 11(a)–(d) on 
page 678 illustrate the graphs for h 7 0, k 7 0.
Note  It is not recommended that Table 2 be memorized. Rather, use transformations (shift 
horizontally h units, vertically k units), along with the fact that a represents the distance  
from the vertex to the focus, to determine the various components of a parabola. It is also helpful to 
remember that parabolas of the form “x2 = ” open up or down, while parabolas of the form “y 2 = ” 
open left or right.	
■
Example 5
Solution
y 2 = -4ax ; x = -  1
2  , y = 2
•
2
Table 2 
Equations of a Parabola: Vertex at (h, k); Axis of Symmetry Parallel to a Coordinate Axis; a + 0 
Vertex
   Focus
 Directrix
           Equation
Description
(h, k)
(h + a, k)
x = h - a
(y - k)2 = 4a(x - h)
Axis of symmetry is parallel to the x-axis, 
opens right
(h, k)
(h - a, k)
x = h + a
(y - k)2 = -4a(x - h)
Axis of symmetry is parallel to the x-axis, 
opens left
(h, k)
(h, k + a)
y = k - a
(x - h)2 = 4a(y - k)
Axis of symmetry is parallel to the y-axis, 
opens up
(h, k)
(h, k - a)
y = k + a
(x - h)2 = -4a(y - k)
Axis of symmetry is parallel to the y-axis, 
opens down
Figure 10  y2 = - 8x
x
y
V
(2, 4)
(2, 4)
(0, 0)
5
5
5
5
1–2
(  , 2)
F  (2, 0)
D: x  2

678 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Finding the Equation of a Parabola, Vertex Not at the Origin
Find an equation of the parabola with vertex at 1 -2, 32 and focus at 10, 32. Graph 
the equation.
The vertex 1 -2, 32 and focus 10, 32 both lie on the horizontal line y = 3 (the axis 
of symmetry). The distance a from the vertex 1 -2, 32 to the focus 10, 32 is a = 2. 
Also, because the focus lies to the right of the vertex, the parabola opens to the right. 
Consequently, the form of the equation is
1y - k22 = 4a1x - h2
where 1h, k2 = 1 -2, 32 and a = 2. Therefore, the equation is
 1y - 322 = 4 # 23x - 1 -22 4
 1y - 322 = 81x + 22
To find the points that define the latus rectum, let x = 0, so that 1y - 322 = 16. 
Then y - 3 = {4, so y = -1 or y = 7. The points 10, -12 and 10, 72 determine 
the latus rectum; the line x = -4 is the directrix. See Figure 12.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1
Polynomial equations define parabolas whenever they involve two variables 
that are quadratic in one variable and linear in the other.
Analyzing the Equation of a Parabola
Analyze the equation:  x2 + 4x - 4y = 0
To analyze the equation x2 + 4x - 4y = 0, complete the square involving the  
variable x.
 x2 + 4x - 4y = 0
 x2 + 4x = 4y
 x2 + 4x + 4 = 4y + 4 
 1x + 222 = 41y + 12 
This equation is of the form 1x - h22 = 4a1y - k2, with h = -2, k = -1, and 
a = 1. The graph is a parabola with vertex at 1h, k2 = 1 -2, -12 that opens up. The 
focus is at 1 -2, 02, and the directrix is the line y = -2. See Figure 13.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Example 6
Solution
•
Example 7
Solution
Isolate the terms involving x on the left side.
Complete the square on the left side.
Factor.
•
Figure 11 
y
V 5 (h, k)
Axis of
symmetry
x 5 h
x
y
V 5 (h, k)
Axis of
symmetry
x 5 h
y
V 5 (h, k)
Axis of
symmetry
y 5 k
x
y
V 5 (h, k)
Axis of
symmetry
y 5 k
F 5 (h, k 1 a)
D: y 5 k 2 a
F 5 (h, k 2 a)
D: y 5 k 1 a
F 5 (h 2 a, k)
D: x 5 h 1 a
F 5 (h 1 a, k)
D: x 5 h 2 a
F(x 2 h)2 5 4a(y 2 k)
G(x 2 h)2 5 24a(y 2 k)
E(y 2 k)2 5 24a(x 2 h)
D(y 2 k)2 5 4a(x 2 h)
x
x
Figure 12  (y - 3)2 = 8(x + 2)
x
y
V 5 (22, 3)
(0, 21)
(0, 7)
8
24
6
26
Axis of
symmetry
y 5 3
D: x 5 24
F 5 (0, 3)
Figure 13  x2 + 4x - 4y = 0
x
24
4
23
Axis of
symmetry
x 5 22
V 5 (22, 21)
y
4
D: y 5 22
F 5 (22, 0)
(24, 0)
(0, 0)

Section 10.2  The Parabola  679
Solve Applied Problems Involving Parabolas
Parabolas find their way into many applications. For example, as discussed in  
Section 3.4, suspension bridges have cables in the shape of a parabola. Another 
property of parabolas that is used in applications is their reflecting property.
Suppose that a mirror is shaped like a paraboloid of revolution, a surface 
formed by rotating a parabola about its axis of symmetry. If a light (or any other 
emitting source) is placed at the focus of the parabola, all the rays emanating from 
the light will reflect off the mirror in lines parallel to the axis of symmetry. This  
principle is used in the design of searchlights, flashlights, certain automobile  
headlights, and other such devices. See Figure 14.
Conversely, suppose that rays of light (or other signals) emanate from a distant 
source so that they are essentially parallel. When these rays strike the surface of a 
parabolic mirror whose axis of symmetry is parallel to these rays, they are reflected 
to a single point at the focus. This principle is used in the design of some solar  
energy devices, satellite dishes, and the mirrors used in some types of telescopes. 
See Figure 15.
3
Satellite Dish
A satellite dish is shaped like a paraboloid of revolution. The signals that emanate 
from a satellite strike the surface of the dish and are reflected to a single point, where 
the receiver is located. If the dish is 8 feet across at its opening and 3 feet deep at its 
center, at what position should the receiver be placed? That is, where is the focus?
Figure 16(a) shows the satellite dish. On a rectangular coordinate system, draw the 
parabola used to form the dish so that the vertex of the parabola is at the origin and 
its focus is on the positive y-axis. See Figure 16(b).
Example 8
Solution
The form of the equation of the parabola is
x2 = 4ay
Figure 14  Searchlight
Light at 
focus
Rays of light
Figure 15  Telescope
Figure 16 
E
x
y
4
22
2
24
0
2
4
(4, 3)
(24, 3)
8'
3'
3'
8'
D
USA
Cable
F 5 (0, a)

680 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
and its focus is at 10, a2. Since 14, 32 is a point on the graph, this gives
 42 = 4a132 
 a = 4
3 
The receiver should be located 1 1
3 feet (1 foot, 4 inches) from the base of the dish, 
along its axis of symmetry.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 5
x2 = 4ay; x = 4, y = 3
Solve for a.
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The formula for the distance d from P1 = 1x1, y12 to
	
	 P2 = 1x2, y22  is d =   
  . (p. 37)
	 2.	 To complete the square of x2 - 4x, add    
 . (pp. 972–973)
	 3.	 Use the Square Root Method to find the real solutions of 
1x + 422 = 9. (p. 991) 
	 4.	 The point that is symmetric with respect to the x-axis to the 
point 1- 2, 52 is              . (pp. 46–48) 
	 5.	 To graph y = 1x - 322 + 1, shift the graph of y = x2  to 
the right      
  units and then     
  1 unit. (pp. 127–136)
10.2  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 6.	 A(n) 
  is the collection of all points in the plane that are the same distance from a fixed point as they are from a  
fixed line.
	 7.	 The line through the focus and perpendicular to the directrix is called the  
  of the parabola.
	 8.	 For the parabola y2 = 4ax, the line segment joining the two points (a, 2a) and (a, - 2a) is called the   
  .
Answer Problems 9–12 using the figure.
	 9.	 If a 7 0, the equation of the parabola is of the form 
(a)	 1y - k22 = 4a1x - h2	
(b)	 1y - k22 = - 4a1x - h2
(c)	 1x - h22 = 4a1y - k2	
(d)	 1x - h22 = - 4a1y - k2
	 10.	 The coordinates of the vertex are 
 .
	 11.	 If a = 4, then the coordinates of the focus are                       .
(a)	 1- 1, 22  (b)  13, - 22  (c)  17, 22  (d)  13, 62 
	 12.	 If a = 4, then the equation of the directrix is                     .
(a)	 x = - 3  (b)  x = 3  (c)  y = - 2  (d)  y = 2 
Skill Building
In Problems 13–20, the graph of a parabola is given. Match each graph to its equation.
(A)  y2 = 4x
(B)  x2 = 4y
(C)  y2 = - 4x
(D)  x2 = - 4y
(E)  1y - 122 = 41x - 12
(F)  1x + 122 = 41y + 12
(G)  1y - 122 = - 41x - 12
(H)  1x + 122 = - 41y + 12
	 13. 
	
14. 
	
15. 
	
16. 
	 17. 
	
18. 
	
19. 
	
20. 
(2, 1)
x
y
2
2
2
2
x
y
3
2
2
(1, 1)
1
x
y
2
2
2
(1, 1)
2
(2, 1)
x
y
2
2
2
2
(1, 1)
x
y
2
2
2
2
(1, 2)
x
y
2
2
2
2
(1, 2)
x
y
2
2
2
2
(1, 1)
x
y
2
1
3
2
x
y
V 5 (3, 2)
D
F

Section 10.2  The Parabola  681
In Problems 21–38, find the equation of the parabola described. Find the two points that define the latus rectum, and graph the equation.
	 21.	 Focus at 14, 02; vertex at 10, 02 
	
22.	 Focus at 10, 22; vertex at 10, 02 
	 23.	 Focus at 1- 4, 02; vertex at 10, 02 
	
24.	 Focus at 10, - 32; vertex at 10, 02 
	 25.	 Focus at 10, - 12; directrix the line y = 1 
	
26.	 Focus at 1- 2, 02; directrix the line x = 2 
	 27.	 Directrix the line x = -  1
2; vertex at 10, 02 
	
28.	 Directrix the line y = -  1
2; vertex at 10, 02 
	 29.	 Vertex at 10, 02; axis of symmetry the y-axis; containing the 
point 12, 32
	30.	   Vertex at 10, 02; axis of symmetry the x-axis; containing the 
point 12, 32
	 31.	 Vertex at 12, - 32; focus at 12, - 52 
	
32.	 Vertex at 14, - 22; focus at 16, -22 
	 33.	 Vertex at 13, 02; focus at 13, - 22 
	
34.	 Vertex at 1- 1, - 22; focus at 10, -22
	 35.	 Focus at 12, 42; directrix the line x = - 4  	
36.	 Focus at 1- 3, 42;  directrix the line y = 2
	 37.	 Focus at 1- 4, 42; directrix the line y = - 2	
38.	 Focus at 1- 3, - 22; directrix the line x = 1
In Problems 39–56, find the vertex, focus, and directrix of each parabola. Graph the equation.
	 39.	 y2 = 8x	
40.	 x2 = 4y	
41.	 y2 = - 16x	
42.	 x2 = -4y
	 43.	 1x + 422 = 161y + 22	
44.	 1y - 222 = 81x + 12	
45.	 1y + 122 = - 41x - 22	
46.	 1x - 322 = - 1y + 12
	 47.	 1x - 222 = 41y - 32	
48.	 1y + 322 = 81x - 22	
49.	 y2 - 4y + 4x + 4 = 0	
50.	 x2 + 6x - 4y + 1 = 0
	 51.	 y2 - 2y = 8x - 1	
52.	 x2 + 8x = 4y - 8	
53.	 x2 - 4x = 2y	
54.	 y2 + 2y - x = 0
	 55.	 y2 + 12y = - x + 1	
	 	
56.	 x2 - 4x = y + 4
In Problems 57–64, write an equation for each parabola.
Applications and Extensions
	 65.	 Satellite Dish  A satellite dish is shaped like a paraboloid of 
revolution. The signals that emanate from a satellite strike 
the surface of the dish and are reflected to a single point, 
where the receiver is located. If the dish is 16 feet across at 
its opening and 5 feet deep at its center, at what position 
should the receiver be placed?
	 66.	 Constructing a TV Dish  A cable TV receiving dish is in the 
shape of a paraboloid of revolution. Find the location of 
the receiver, which is placed at the focus, if the dish is 6 feet 
across at its opening and 2 feet deep.
	 67.	 Constructing a Flashlight  The reflector of a flashlight is 
in the shape of a paraboloid of revolution. Its diameter is  
4 centimeters and its depth is 1 centimeter. How far from the 
vertex should the light bulb be placed so that the rays will be 
reflected parallel to the axis?
	 68.	 Constructing a Headlight  A sealed-beam headlight is in 
the shape of a paraboloid of revolution. The bulb, which is 
placed at the focus, is 1 inch from the vertex. If the depth is 
to be 2 inches, what is the diameter of the headlight at its 
opening? 
	 69.	 Suspension Bridge  The cables of a suspension bridge are in 
the shape of a parabola, as shown in the figure. The towers 
supporting the cable are 600 feet apart and 80 feet high.  
If the cables touch the road surface midway between the 
towers, what is the height of the cable from the road at a 
point 150 feet from the center of the bridge? 
	 57.	
58.	
59.	
60.	
(0, 1)
(1, 2)
x
y
2
2
2
(1, 2)
(2, 1)
x
y
2
2
2
2
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
x
y
2
2
2
(0, 1)
(2, 0)
x
y
2
2
2
2
	 61.	
62.	
63.	
64.	
(0, 1)
(2, 2)
x
y
2
2
2
2
(0, 1)
(1, 1)
x
y
2
2
2
2
(0, 1)
(2, 0)
x
y
2
2
2
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
x
y
2
2
2
2
150 ft
?
600 ft
80 ft

682 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
	 70.	 Suspension Bridge  The cables of a suspension bridge are in 
the shape of a parabola. The towers supporting the cable are 
400 feet apart and 100 feet high. If the cables are at a height of 
10 feet midway between the towers, what is the height of the 
cable at a point 50 feet from the center of the bridge? 
	 71.	 Searchlight  A searchlight is shaped like a paraboloid of 
revolution. If the light source is located 2 feet from the base 
along the axis of symmetry and the opening is 10 feet across, 
how deep should the searchlight be? 
	 72.	 Searchlight  A searchlight is shaped like a paraboloid of 
revolution. If the light source is located 2 feet from the base 
along the axis of symmetry and the depth of the searchlight
	
	 is 4 feet, what should the width of the opening be? 
	 73.	 Solar Heat  A mirror is shaped like a paraboloid of  
revolution and will be used to concentrate the rays of the 
sun at its focus, creating a heat source. (See the figure.) If 
the mirror is 26 feet across at its opening and is 12 feet deep, 
where will the heat source be concentrated?
	 77.	 Gateway Arch  An arch-shaped monument is often mistak-
en to be parabolic in shape. In fact, it is a catenary, which has 
a more complicated formula than a parabola.The arch is 475 
feet high and 444 feet wide at its base. Complete parts (a), 
(b), and (c).
(a)	 Find the equation of a parabola with the same  
dimensions. Let x equal the horizontal distance from the 
center of the arc.
(b)	 The table gives the height of the arch at various widths; 
find the corresponding heights for the parabola found in 
(a). 
Width (ft)
Height (ft)
417
100
354
237.5
248
375
	 74.	 Reflecting Telescope  A reflecting telescope contains a  
mirror shaped like a paraboloid of revolution. If the mirror 
is 4 inches across at its opening and is 3 inches deep, where 
will the collected light be concentrated?
	 75.	 Parabolic Arch Bridge  A bridge is built in the shape of 
a parabolic arch. The bridge has a span of 120 feet and a  
maximum height of 25 feet. See the illustration. Choose a 
suitable rectangular coordinate system and find the height 
of the arch at distances of 10, 30, and 50 feet from the center.
(c)	 Do the data support the notion that the arch is in the 
shape of a parabola? 
	 78.	 Show that an equation of the form 
Ax2 + Ey = 0  A ≠0, E ≠0
	
	 is the equation of a parabola with vertex at 10, 02 and axis of 
symmetry the y-axis. Find its focus and directrix.
	 79.	 Show that an equation of the form 
Cy2 + Dx = 0  C ≠0, D ≠0
	
	 is the equation of a parabola with vertex at 10, 02 and axis 
of symmetry the x-axis. Find its focus and directrix.
	 80.	 Show that the graph of an equation of the form 
Ax2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  A ≠0
(a)	 Is a parabola if E ≠0.
(b)	 Is a vertical line if E = 0 and D2 - 4AF = 0.
(c)	 Is two vertical lines if E = 0 and D2 - 4AF 7 0.
(d)	 Contains no points if E = 0 and D2 - 4AF 6 0.
	 81.	 Show that the graph of an equation of the form
Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  C ≠0
(a)	 Is a parabola if D ≠0.
(b)	 Is a horizontal line if D = 0 and E2 - 4CF = 0.
(c)	 Is two horizontal lines if D = 0 and E2 - 4CF 7 0.
(d)	 Contains no points if D = 0 and E2 - 4CF 6 0.
	 76.	 Parabolic Arch Bridge  A bridge is to be built in the shape 
of a parabolic arch and is to have a span of 100 feet. The 
height of the arch a distance of 40 feet from the center is to 
be 10 feet. Find the height of the arch at its center. 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 82–85 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 82.	 For x = 9y2 - 36, list the intercepts and test for symmetry.
	 83.	 Solve: 4x+1 = 8x-1 
	 84.	 Given tan u = - 5
8, p
2 6 u 6 p, find the exact value of 
each of the remaining trigonometric functions.
	 85.	 Find the exact value: tan c cos-1a- 3
7b d  
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.  21x2 - x1 22 + 1y2 - y1 22      2.  4    3.  5 - 7, - 16    4.  1- 2, - 52    5.  3; up   
Sun’s
rays
26'
12'
25 ft
120 ft

Section 10.3  The Ellipse  683
The definition contains within it a physical means for drawing an ellipse. Find a 
piece of string (the length of this string is the constant referred to in the definition). 
Then take two thumbtacks (the foci) and stick them into a piece of cardboard so 
that the distance between them is less than the length of the string. Now attach the 
ends of the string to the thumbtacks and, using the point of a pencil, pull the string 
taut. See Figure 17.   Keeping the string taut, rotate the pencil around the two thumbtacks.  
The pencil traces out an ellipse, as shown in Figure 17.
In Figure 17, the foci are labeled F1  and F2. The line containing the foci is called 
the major axis. The midpoint of the line segment joining the foci is the center of 
the ellipse. The line through the center and perpendicular to the major axis is the 
minor axis.
The two points of intersection of the ellipse and the major axis are the vertices, 
V1  and V2, of the ellipse. The distance from one vertex to the other is the length of 
the major axis. The ellipse is symmetric with respect to its major axis, with respect 
to its minor axis, and with respect to its center.
Analyze Ellipses with Center at the Origin
With these ideas in mind, we are ready to find the equation of an ellipse in a rectangular 
coordinate system. First, place the center of the ellipse at the origin. Second,  
position the ellipse so that its major axis coincides with a coordinate axis, say the 
x-axis, as shown in Figure 18. If c is the distance from the center to a focus, one 
focus will be at F1 = 1 -c, 02 and the other at F2 = 1c, 02. As we shall see, it is 
1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 690.
	
Objectives	 	1  Analyze Ellipses with Center at the Origin  (p. 683)
	
	 	2  Analyze Ellipses with Center at  (h, k)  (p. 687)
	
	 	3  Solve Applied Problems Involving Ellipses  (p. 689)
10.3  The Ellipse
•	 Distance Formula (Section 1.1, p. 37)
•	 Complete the Square (Appendix A,  
Section A.3, pp. 972–973)
•	 Intercepts (Section 1.2, pp. 45–46)
•	 Symmetry (Section 1.2, pp. 46–48)
•	 Circles (Section 1.4, pp. 68–71)
•	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations  
(Section 2.5, pp. 127–136)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
 An ellipse is the collection of all points in the plane the sum of whose distances 
from two fixed points, called the foci, is a constant.
Definition
Figure 17  Ellipse
V1
P
V2
Center
F1
F2
Minor axis
Major axis
Figure 18 
x
y
P 5 (x, y)
d (F2, P)
d (F1, P)
F1 5 (2c, 0)
F2 5 (c, 0)

684 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
convenient to let 2a denote the constant distance referred to in the definition. Then, 
if P = 1x, y2 is any point on the ellipse,
 d1F1, P2 + d1F2, P2 = 2a
 
 21x + c22 + y2 + 21x - c22 + y2 = 2a
 21x + c22 + y2 = 2a - 21x - c22 + y2
 1x + c22 + y2 = 4a2 - 4a21x - c22 + y2
        
 + 1x - c22 + y2
 x2 + 2cx + c2 + y2 = 4a2 - 4a21x - c22 + y2
        
 + x2 - 2cx + c2 + y2 
 4cx - 4a2 = -4a21x - c22 + y2
 cx - a2 = -a21x - c22 + y2
 1cx - a222 = a23 1x - c22 + y24
 c2x2 - 2a2cx + a4 = a21x2 - 2cx + c2 + y22
 1c2 - a22x2 - a2y2 = a2c2 - a4
 1a2 - c22x2 + a2y2 = a21a2 - c22
The sum of the distances from P  
to the foci equals a constant, 2a.
Use the Distance Formula.
Isolate one radical.
Square both sides.
Multiply out.
Simplify; isolate the radical.
Divide each side by 4.
Square both sides again.
Multiply out.
Rearrange the terms.
Multiply each side by -1;
factor a2 on the right side.
(1)
To obtain points on the ellipse off the x-axis, it must be that a 7 c. To see why, 
look again at Figure 18. Then
 d1F1, P2 + d1F2, P2 7 d1F1, F22 
 2a 7 2c
 
 a 7 c
Because a 7 c 7 0, this means a2 7 c2, so a2 - c2 7 0. Let b2 = a2 - c2, b 7 0. 
Then a 7 b and equation (1) can be written as
 b2x2 + a2y2 = a2
 b2 
 x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1
As you can verify, the graph of this equation has symmetry with respect to the 
x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
Because the major axis is the x-axis, find the vertices of this ellipse by letting
 y = 0. The vertices satisfy the equation x2
a2 = 1, the solutions of which are x = {a.
Consequently, the vertices of this ellipse are V1 = 1 -a, 02 and V2 = 1a, 02. The 
y-intercepts of the ellipse, found by letting x = 0, have coordinates 10, -b2 and 
10, b2. The four intercepts, 1a, 02, 1 -a, 02, 10, b2, and 10, -b2, are used to graph 
the ellipse.
The sum of the lengths of two sides of a triangle 
is greater than the length of the third side.
d(F1  , P ) + d(F2  , P ) = 2a, d(F1  , F2) = 2c
Divide each side by a2b2 .
Equation of an Ellipse: Center at (0, 0); Major Axis along the x-Axis
An equation of the ellipse with center at 10, 02, foci at 1 -c, 02 and 1c, 02, and 
vertices at 1 -a, 02 and 1a, 02 is
	
x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1  where a 7 b 7 0 and b2 = a2 - c2 	
(2)
The major axis is the x-axis. See Figure 19.
Theorem
Figure 19 
x
y
(0, b)
(0, 2b)
b
a
c
V1 5 (2a, 0)
V2 5 (a, 0)
F1 5 (2c, 0)
F2 5 (c, 0)

Section 10.3  The Ellipse  685
Notice in Figure 19 the points 10, 02, 1c, 02, and 10, b2 form a right triangle.
Because b2 = a2 - c2 1or b2 + c2 = a22, the distance from the focus at 1c, 02 to 
the point 10, b2 is a.
This can be seen another way. Look at the two right triangles in Figure 19. They 
are congruent. Do you see why? Because the sum of the distances from the foci to 
a point on the ellipse is 2a, it follows that the distance from 1c, 02 to 10, b2 is a.
Finding an Equation of an Ellipse
Find an equation of the ellipse with center at the origin, one focus at 13, 02, and a 
vertex at 1 -4, 02. Graph the equation.
The ellipse has its center at the origin, and since the given focus and vertex lie on 
the x-axis, the major axis is the x-axis. The distance from the center, 10, 02, to one of 
the foci, 13, 02, is c = 3. The distance from the center, 10, 02, to one of the vertices, 
1 -4, 02, is a = 4. From equation (2), it follows that
b2 = a2 - c2 = 16 - 9 = 7
so an equation of the ellipse is
x2
16 + y2
7 = 1
Figure 20 shows the graph.
In Figure 20, the intercepts of the equation are used to graph the ellipse. 
Following this practice will make it easier for you to obtain an accurate graph of  
an ellipse.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Comment  The intercepts of the ellipse also provide information about how to set the viewing  
rectangle for graphing an ellipse. To graph the ellipse
x2
16 + y 2
7 = 1
discussed in Example 1, set the viewing rectangle using a square screen that includes the intercepts, 
perhaps –4.8 … x … 4.8, –3 … y … 3. Then solve the equation for y :
 x2
16 + y 2
7 = 1
 y 2
7 = 1 - x2
16 
 y 2 = 7¢1 - x2
16 ≤ 
 y = {B
7¢1 - x2
16 ≤  
Now graph the two functions
Y1 = C7¢1 - x2
16 ≤   and Y2 = - C7¢1 - x2
16 ≤ 
Figure 21 shows the result.	
■
Example 1
Solution
•
Subtract  x2
16  from each side.
Multiply both sides by 7.
Take the square root of each side.
Figure 20  x2
16 +
y2
7 = 1
V1  (4, 0)
V2  (4, 0)
x
y
5
5
5
5
(0,      )
7
(0,       )
7
F2  (3, 0)
F1  (3, 0)
Figure 21 
3
23
24.8
4.8
x 2
16
Y1 5
7 1 2
(
)
x 2
16
Y2 5 2
7 1 2
(
)

686 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
An equation of the form of equation (2), with a2 7 b2, is the equation of an 
ellipse with center at the origin, foci on the x-axis at 1–c, 02 and 1c, 02, where 
c2 = a2 - b2, and major axis along the x-axis.
For the remainder of this section, the direction “Analyze the equation” will 
mean to find the center, major axis, foci, and vertices of the ellipse and graph it.
Analyzing the Equation of an Ellipse
Analyze the equation: 
x2
25 + y2
9 = 1
The equation is of the form of equation (2), with a2 = 25 and b2 = 9. The equation 
is that of an ellipse with center 10, 02 and major axis along the x-axis. The vertices 
are at 1 {a, 02 = 1 {5, 02. Because b2 = a2 - c2 , this means
c2 = a2 - b2 = 25 - 9 = 16
The foci are at 1 {c, 02 = 1 {4, 02. Figure 22 shows the graph.
Example 2
Solution
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
If the major axis of an ellipse with center at 10, 02 lies on the y-axis, the foci are 
at 10, -c2 and 10, c2. Using the same steps as before, the definition of an ellipse 
leads to the following result.
Equation of an Ellipse: Center at (0, 0); Major Axis along the y-Axis
An equation of the ellipse with center at 10, 02, foci at 10, -c2 and 10, c2, and 
vertices at 10, -a2 and 10, a2 is
	
x2
b2 + y2
a2 = 1  where a 7 b 7 0 and b2 = a2 - c2 	
(3)
The major axis is the y-axis.
Theorem
Figure 23 illustrates the graph of such an ellipse. Again, notice the right triangle  
formed by the points at 10, 02, 1b, 02, and 10, c2,  so that a2 = b2 + c2 1or b2 = a2 - c22.
Look closely at equations (2) and (3). Although they may look alike, there is 
a difference! In equation (2), the larger number, a2, is in the denominator of the 
x2@term, so the major axis of the ellipse is along the x-axis. In equation (3), the larger 
number, a2, is in the denominator of the y2@term, so the major axis is along the 
y-axis.
Figure 22  x2
25 +
y2
9 = 1
•
x
y
6
6
6
V2  (5, 0)
F2  (4, 0)
F1  (4, 0)
V1  (5, 0)
(0, 3)
(0, 3)
Figure 23  x2
b2 +
y2
a2 = 1, a 7 b 7 0
x
b
a
c
y
(b, 0)
(2b, 0)
V2
 5 (0, a)
V1
 5 (0, 2a)
F2
 5 (0, c)
F1
 5 (0, 2c)

Section 10.3  The Ellipse  687
Analyzing the Equation of an Ellipse
Analyze the equation:  9x2 + y2 = 9
To put the equation in proper form, divide each side by 9.
x2 + y2
9 = 1
The larger denominator, 9, is in the y2@term so, based on equation (3), this is 
the equation of an ellipse with center at the origin and major axis along the  
y-axis. Also, a2 = 9, b2 = 1, and c2 = a2 - b2 =  9 - 1 = 8. The vertices are at 
10, {a2 = 10, {32, and the foci are at 10, {c2 = 10, {2122. The x-intercepts 
are at 1{b, 02 = 1{1, 02.  Figure 24 shows the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Finding an Equation of an Ellipse
Find an equation of the ellipse having one focus at 10, 22 and vertices at 10, -32 and 
10, 32. Graph the equation.
Plot the given focus and vertices, and note that the major axis is the y-axis.  
Because the vertices are at 10, -32 and 10, 32, the center of this ellipse is at their 
midpoint, the origin. The distance from the center, 10, 02, to the given focus, 10, 22, 
is c = 2. The distance from the center, 10, 02, to one of the vertices, 10, 32, is a = 3. 
So b2 = a2 - c2 = 9 - 4 = 5. The form of the equation of this ellipse is given by 
equation (3).
 x2
b2 + y2
a2 = 1
 x2
5 + y2
9 = 1
Figure 25 shows the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
A circle may be considered a special kind of ellipse. To see why, let a = b in 
equation (2) or (3). Then
 x2
a2 + y2
a2 = 1
 x2 + y2 = a2 
This is the equation of a circle with center at the origin and radius a. The value of c is
c2 = a2 - b2 = 0
This indicates that the closer the two foci of an ellipse are to the center, the more 
the ellipse will look like a circle.
Analyze Ellipses with Center at (h, k)
If an ellipse with center at the origin and major axis coinciding with a coordinate axis is 
shifted horizontally h units and then vertically k units, the result is an ellipse with center 
at 1h, k2 and major axis parallel to a coordinate axis. The equations of such ellipses 
have the same forms as those given in equations (2) and (3), except that x is replaced 
by x - h (the horizontal shift) and y is replaced by y - k (the vertical shift). Table 3  
(on the next page) gives the forms of the equations of such ellipses, and Figure 26 shows 
their graphs.
Example 3
Solution
•
Example 4
Solution
•
c
a = b
2
Figure 24  9x2 + y2 = 9
x
y
3
3
3
3
V1  (0, 3)
V2  (0, 3)
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
F1  (0, 2   2)
F2  (0, 2   2)
Figure 25  x2
5 +
y2
9 = 1
x
y
(     , 0)
3
3
3
3
V2
  (0, 3)
V1
  (0, 3)
5
(     , 0)
5
F2
  (0, 2)
F1
  (0, 2)

688 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Finding an Equation of an Ellipse, Center Not at the Origin
Find an equation for the ellipse with center at 12, -32, one focus at 13, -32, and 
one vertex at 15, -32. Graph the equation.
The center is at 1h, k2 = 12, -32, so h = 2 and k = -3. Plot the center, focus, and 
vertex, and note that the points all lie on the line y = -3. Therefore, the major axis 
is parallel to the x-axis. The distance from the center 12, -32 to a focus 13, -32 
is c = 1; the distance from the center 12, -32 to a vertex 15, -32 is a = 3. Then 
b2 = a2 - c2 = 9 - 1 = 8. The form of the equation is
 1x - h22
a2
+ 1y - k22
b2
= 1
 1x - 222
9
+ 1y + 322
8
= 1
To graph the equation, use the center 1h, k2 = 12, -32 to locate the vertices. 
The major axis is parallel to the x-axis, so the vertices are a = 3 units left and right 
of the center 12, -32. Therefore, the vertices are
V1 = 12 - 3, -32 = 1 -1, -32 and V2 = 12 + 3, -32 = 15, -32
Since c = 1 and the major axis is parallel to the x-axis, the foci are 1 unit left and 
right of the center. Therefore, the foci are
F1 = 12 - 1, -32 = 11, -32 and F2 = 12 + 1, -32 = 13, -32
Finally, use the value of b = 212  to find the two points above and below the center.
12, -3 - 2222 and 12, -3 + 2222
Figure 27 shows the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
Example 5
Solution
h = 2, k = - 3, a = 3, b = 222 
•
Note  It is not recommended that  
Table 3 be memorized. Rather, use  
transformations (shift horizontally h units, 
vertically k units), along with the fact 
that a represents the distance from the 
center to the vertices, c represents the 
distance from the center to the foci, and 
b2 = a2 - c2 (or c2 = a2 - b2 ).	
■
Table 3
Equations of an Ellipse: Center at (h, k); Major Axis Parallel to a Coordinate Axis
Center
Major Axis
    Foci
Vertices
Equation
(h, k)
Parallel to the x-axis
(h + c, k)
(h + a, k)
(x - h)2
a2
+
(y - k)2
b2
= 1
 
(h - c, k)
(h - a, k)
a 7 b 7 0 and b2 = a2 - c2 
(h, k)
Parallel to the y-axis
(h, k + c)
(h, k + a)
(x - h)2
b2
+
(y - k)2
a2
= 1
 
(h, k - c)
(h, k - a)
a 7 b 7 0 and b2 = a2 - c2 
Figure 26 
x
(h 1 a, k)
(h , k)
(h 2 a, k)
x
(h, k 1 a)
(h , k)
(h, k 2 a)
D
E
Major axis
(h 1 c, k)
(h 2 c, k) 
Major axis
(h, k 1 c)
(h, k 2 c) 
y
y
(x 2 h)2
––––––
a2
(y 2 k)2
––––––
b2
1
5 1
(x 2 h)2
––––––
b2
(y 2 k)2
––––––
a2
1
5 1
Figure 27  (x - 2)2
9
+ (y + 3)2
8
= 1
x
y
6
2
2
(2, 3  2      )
2
(2, 3  2      )
(2, 3)
V2  (5, 3)
V1  (1, 3)
2
F1
F2

Section 10.3  The Ellipse  689
Analyzing the Equation of an Ellipse
Analyze the equation:  4x2 + y2 - 8x + 4y + 4 = 0
Complete the squares in x and in y.
 4x2 + y2 - 8x + 4y + 4 = 0
 4x2 - 8x + y2 + 4y = -4
 41x2 - 2x2 + 1y2 + 4y2 = -4
 41x2 - 2x + 12 + 1y2 + 4y + 42 = -4 + 4 + 4 
 41x - 122 + 1y + 222 = 4
 1x - 122 + 1y + 222
4
= 1
This is the equation of an ellipse with center at 11, -22 and major axis parallel
to the y-axis. Since a2 = 4 and b2 = 1, we have c2 = a2 - b2 = 4 - 1 = 3. The 
vertices are at 1h, k { a2 = 11, -2 { 22, or 11, -42 and 11, 02. The foci are at
1h, k { c2 = 11, -2 { 132, or 11, -2 - 132 and 11, -2 + 132. Figure 28 
shows the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Solve Applied Problems Involving Ellipses
Ellipses are found in many applications in science and engineering. For example, 
the orbits of the planets around the Sun are elliptical, with the Sun’s position at a 
focus. See Figure 29.
Example 6
Solution
Group like variables; place the 
constant on the right side.
Factor out 4 from the first two 
terms.
Complete each square.
Factor.
Divide each side by 4.
•
3
Stone and concrete bridges are often shaped as semielliptical arches. Elliptical 
gears are used in machinery when a variable rate of motion is required.
Ellipses also have an interesting reflection property. If a source of light (or 
sound) is placed at one focus, the waves transmitted by the source will reflect off the 
ellipse and concentrate at the other focus. This is the principle behind whispering 
galleries, which are rooms designed with elliptical ceilings. A person standing at one 
focus of the ellipse can whisper and be heard by a person standing at the other focus, 
because all the sound waves that reach the ceiling are reflected to the other person.
A Whispering Gallery
The whispering gallery in the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago is  
47.3 feet long. The distance from the center of the room to the foci is 20.3 feet. Find 
an equation that describes the shape of the room. How high is the room at its center?
Source: Chicago Museum of Science and Industry Web site; www.msichicago.org
Example 7
Figure 28 
4x2 + y2 - 8x + 4y + 4 = 0
x
y
4
(1, 2    3 )
(1, 2    3 )
(1, 4)
(0, 2)
(2, 2)
(1, 2)
(1, 0)
Figure 29 
Asteroids
Mars
Earth
Venus
Jupiter

690 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Set up a rectangular coordinate system so that the center of the ellipse is at the  
origin and the major axis is along the x-axis. The equation of the ellipse is
x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1
Since the length of the room is 47.3 feet, the distance from the center of the room to
each vertex (the end of the room) will be 47.3
2
= 23.65 feet; so a = 23.65 feet. The
distance from the center of the room to each focus is c = 20.3 feet. See Figure 30.
Because b2 = a2 - c2, this means that b2 = 23.652 - 20.32 = 147.2325. An 
equation that describes the shape of the room is given by
x2
23.652 +
y2
147.2325 = 1
The height of the room at its center is b = 1147.2325 ≈12.1 feet.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
Solution
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The distance d from P1 = 12, - 52 to P2 = 14, - 22 is 
d =                . (p. 37) 
	 2.	 To complete the square of x2 - 3x, add 
 . (pp. 972–973)
	 3.	 Find the intercepts of the equation y2 = 16 - 4x2. 
 (pp. 45–46) 
	 4.	 The point that is symmetric with respect to the y-axis to the 
point 1- 2, 52 is               . (pp. 46–48) 
	 5.	 To graph y = 1x + 122 - 4, shift the graph of y = x2  to the 
(left/right)              unit(s) and then (up/down)              unit(s). 
(pp. 127–136) 
	 6.	 The standard equation of a circle with center at 12, -32 and 
radius 1 is               . (pp. 68–71) 
10.3  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 7.	 A(n) 
  is the collection of all points in the plane the 
sum of whose distances from two fixed points is a constant.
	 8.	 For an ellipse, the foci lie on a line called the                . 
(a)	 minor axis	
(b)  major axis
(c)	 directrix	
(d)  latus rectum
	 9.	 For the ellipse x2
4 + y2
25 = 1, the vertices are the points 
  and 
 .
	 10.	 For the ellipse x2
25 + y2
9 = 1, the value of a is 
 , the 
value of b is 
 , and the major axis is the 
 -axis.
	 11.	 If the center of an ellipse is 12, - 32, the major axis is  
parallel to the x-axis, and the distance from the center of the 
ellipse to its vertices is a = 4 units, then the coordinates of 
the vertices are 
  and 
 .
	 12.	 If the foci of an ellipse are 1- 4, 42 and 16, 42, then the  
coordinates of the center of the ellipse are                 . 
(a)  (1, 4)        (b)  (4, 1)
(c)  (1, 0)        (d)  (5, 4)
Skill Building
In Problems 13–16, the graph of an ellipse is given. Match each graph to its equation.
Figure 30 
y
15
x
25
25
(20.3, 0)
(23.65, 0)
(23.65, 0)
(20.3, 0)
(0, 12.1)
(A)  x2
4 + y2 = 1    (B)  x2 +
y2
4 = 1    (C)  x2
16 +
y2
4 = 1    (D)  x2
4 +
y2
16 = 1
	 13. 
	
14. 
	
15. 
	
16. 
x
y
2
2
4
4
x
y
4
4
2
2
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
3

Section 10.3  The Ellipse  691
36
9
Applications and Extensions
	 69.	 Semielliptical Arch Bridge  An arch in the shape of the  
upper half of an ellipse is used to support a bridge that is to 
span a river 36 meters wide. The center of the arch is 9 meters 
above the center of the river. (See the figure.) Write an equa-
tion for the ellipse in which the x-axis coincides with the water 
level and the y-axis passes through the center of the arch.
	 70.	 Semielliptical Arch Bridge  The arch of a bridge is a  
semiellipse with a horizontal major axis. The span is 30 feet, 
and the top of the arch is 10 feet above the major axis. The 
roadway is horizontal and is 2 feet above the top of the arch. 
Find the vertical distance from the roadway to the arch at 
5-foot intervals along the roadway.
	 71.	 Whispering Gallery  A hall 100 feet in length is to be designed 
as a whispering gallery. If the foci are located 30 feet from the 
center, how high will the ceiling be at the center?   
	 72.	 Whispering Gallery  Jim, standing at one focus of a  
whispering gallery, is 6 feet from the nearest wall. His friend 
is standing at the other focus, 100 feet away. What is the 
length of this whispering gallery? How high is its elliptical 
ceiling at the center? 
In Problems 17–26, analyze each equation. That is, find the center, vertices, and foci of each ellipse and graph it.
	 17.	 x2
25 + y2
4 = 1	
18.	 x2
9 + y2
4 = 1	
19.	 x2 + y2
16 = 1	
20.	 x2
9 + y2
25 = 1	
21.	 4x2 + y2 = 16
	 22.	 x2 + 9y2 = 18	
23.	 4y2 + 9x2 = 36	
24.	 4y2 + x2 = 8	
25.	 x2 + y2 = 4	
26.	 x2 + y2 = 16
In Problems 27–38, find an equation for each ellipse. Graph the equation.
	 27.	 Center at 10, 02;  focus at 13, 02;  vertex at 15, 02	
28.	 Center at 10, 02;  focus at 1- 1, 02;  vertex at 13, 02
	 29.	 Center at 10, 02;  focus at 10, - 42;  vertex at 10, 52	
30.	 Center at 10, 02;  focus at 10, 12;  vertex at 10, -22
	 31.	 Foci at 10, {22;  length of the major axis is 8	
32.	 Foci at 1{2, 02;  length of the major axis is 6
	 33.	 Focus at 10, - 42;  vertices at 10, {82	
34.	 Focus at 1- 4, 02;  vertices at 1{5, 02
	 35.	 Vertices at 1{4, 02;  y-intercepts are {1	
36.	 Foci at 10, {32;  x-intercepts are {2
	 37.	 Vertices at 1{5, 02; c = 2	
38.	 Center at 10, 02;  vertex at 10, 42;  b = 1
In Problems 39–42, write an equation for each ellipse.
	 39.	
40.	
41.	
42.	
In Problems 43–54, analyze each equation; that is, find the center, foci, and vertices of each ellipse. Graph each equation.
	 43.	
1x + 422
9
+
1y + 222
4
= 1	
44.	
1x - 322
4
+
1y + 122
9
= 1	
45.	 91x - 322 + 1y + 222 = 18
	 46.	 1x + 522 + 41y - 422 = 16	
47.	  x2 + 4x + 4y2 - 8y + 4 = 0	
48.	 x2 + 3y2 - 12y + 9 = 0
	 49.	 4x2 + 3y2 + 8x - 6y = 5 	
50.	 2x2 + 3y2 - 8x + 6y + 5 = 0	
51.	 x2 + 9y2 + 6x - 18y + 9 = 0
	 52.	 9x2 + 4y2 - 18x + 16y - 11 = 0	
53.	 9x2 + y2 - 18x = 0	
54.	 4x2 + y2 + 4y = 0
In Problems 55–64, find an equation for each ellipse. Graph the equation.
	 55.	 Center at 12, - 22;  vertex at 17, - 22;  focus at 14, - 22	
56.	 Center at 1- 3, 12;  vertex at 1-3, 32;  focus at 1-3, 02
	 57.	 Foci at 11, 22 and 1- 3, 22;  vertex at 1- 4, 22	
58.	 Vertices at 14, 32 and 14, 92;  focus at 14, 82
	 59.	 Vertices at 12, 52 and 12, - 12; c = 2	
60.	 Foci at 15, 12 and 1- 1, 12;  length of the major axis is 8
61.	 Center at 11, 22;   focus at 11, 42;   contains the point 12, 22	
62.	 Center at 11, 22;  focus at 14, 22;  contains the point 11, 32
	 63.	 Center at 11, 22;  vertex at 11, 42;  	
64.	 Center at 11, 22;  vertex at 14, 22;  contains the point 11, 52
	
	 contains the point 11 +  23 , 32
In Problems 65–68, graph each function. Be sure to label all the intercepts. [Hint: Notice that each function is half an ellipse.]
	 65.	 f1x2 = 216 - 4x2 	
66.	 f1x2 = 29 - 9x2 	
67.	 f1x2 = - 264 - 16x2 	
68.	 f1x2 = - 24 - 4x2 
x
y
3
3
3
3
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
3
3
3
3
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
x
y
3
3
3
3

692 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
	 73.	 Semielliptical Arch Bridge  A bridge is built in the shape of 
a semielliptical arch. The bridge has a span of 160 feet and a 
maximum height of 20 feet. Choose a suitable rectangular  
coordinate system and find the height of the arch at a distance 
of 40 feet from the center. 
	 74.	 Semielliptical Arch Bridge  A bridge is to be built in the 
shape of a semielliptical arch and is to have a span of 100 feet. 
The height of the arch, at a distance of 40 feet from the center, 
is to be 10 feet. Find the height of the arch at its center. 
	 75.	 Racetrack Design  Consult the figure. A racetrack is in the 
shape of an ellipse, 270 feet long and 70 feet wide. What is 
the width 10 feet from a vertex? 
†Courtesy of the Joliet Junior College Mathematics Department
270 ft
10 ft
?
70 ft
Major
axis
Sun
Center
Perihelion
Aphelion
Mean distance
	 76.	 Semielliptical Arch Bridge  An arch for a bridge over 
a highway is in the form of half an ellipse. The top of the 
arch is 20 feet above the ground level (the major axis). The  
highway has four lanes, each 12 feet wide; a center safety 
strip 8 feet wide; and two side strips, each 4 feet wide. What 
should the span of the bridge be (the length of its major axis) 
if the height 28 feet from the center is to be 13 feet? 
	 77.	 Installing a Vent Pipe  A homeowner is putting in a  
fireplace that has a 4-inch-radius vent pipe. He needs to cut 
an elliptical hole in his roof to accommodate the pipe. If the
	
	 pitch of his roof is 5
4  (a rise of 5, run of 4), what are the 
	
	 dimensions of the hole?
Source: www.doe.virginia.gov
	 78.	 Volume of a Football  A football is in the shape of a prolate 
spheroid, which is simply a solid obtained by rotating an 
	
	 ellipse ax2
a2 +
y2
b2 = 1b about its major axis. An inflated NFL
	
	 football averages 11.125 inches in length and 28.25 inches in 
center circumference. If the volume of a prolate spheroid is
	
	 4
3  pab2 , how much air does the football contain? (Neglect
	
	 material thickness). 
Source: www.answerbag.com
In Problems 79–83, use the fact that the orbit of a planet about the 
Sun is an ellipse, with the Sun at one focus. The aphelion of a planet 
is its greatest distance from the Sun, and the perihelion is its shortest 
distance. The mean distance of a planet from the Sun is the length of 
the semimajor axis of the elliptical orbit. See the illustration.
	 79.	 Elliptical Orbit  The mean distance from a planet to its star 
is 73 million miles. If the apoapsis of the planet is 75.5 million 
miles, what is the periapsis? Write an equation for the orbit of 
the planet around the star.
	 80.	 Mars  The mean distance of Mars from the Sun is 142 million 
miles. If the perihelion of Mars is 128.5 million miles, what is 
the aphelion? Write an equation for the orbit of Mars about 
the Sun.
	 81.	 Elliptical Orbit  The apoapsis of a planet is 484 million miles. 
If the star is 30.6 million miles from the center of the orbit, what 
is the periapsis. What is the mean distance? Write an equation 
for the orbit of the planet around the star.
	 82.	 Pluto  The perihelion of Pluto is 4551 million miles, and the 
distance from the center of its elliptical orbit to the Sun is 
897.5 million miles. Find the aphelion of Pluto. What is the 
mean distance of Pluto from the Sun? Write an equation for 
the orbit of Pluto about the Sun.
	 83.	 Elliptical Orbit  A planet orbits a star in an elliptical orbit with 
the star located at one focus. The perihelion of the planet is 
7 million miles. The eccentricity e of a conic section is e = c
a. 
	
	 If the eccentricity of the orbit is 0.65, find the aphelion of the 
planet. 
	 84.	 A rectangle is inscribed in an ellipse with major axis of 
length 14 meters and minor axis of length 4 meters. Find the 
maximum area of a rectangle inscribed in the ellipse. Round 
your answer to two decimal places.† 
	 85.	 Let D be the line given by the equation x + 2 = 0. Let E be 
the conic section given by the equation x2 + 5y2 = 20. Let 
the point C be the vertex of E with the smaller x-coordinate, 
and let B be the endpoint of the minor axis of E with the larger  
y-coordinate. Determine the exact y-coordinate of the point M  
on D that is equidistant from points B and C.† 
	 86.	 Show that an equation of the form
Ax2 + Cy2 + F = 0  A ≠0, C ≠0, F ≠0
	
	 where A and C are of the same sign and F is of opposite sign,
(a)	 is the equation of an ellipse with center at 10, 02 if 
A ≠C.
(b)	 is the equation of a circle with center 10, 02 if A = C.
	 87.	 Show that the graph of an equation of the form
Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  A ≠0, C ≠0
	
	 where A and C are of the same sign,
(a)	 is an ellipse if D2
4A + E2
4C - F is the same sign as A.
(b)	 is a point if D2
4A + E2
4C - F = 0.
(c)	 contains no points if D2
4A + E2
4C - F is of opposite sign 
to A.
Discussion and Writing
	 88.	 The eccentricity e of an ellipse is defined as the number c
a, where a is the distance of a vertex from the center and c is the distance 
	
	 of a focus from the center. Because a 7 c, it follows that e 6 1. Write a brief paragraph about the general shape of each of the 
following ellipses. Be sure to justify your conclusions.
(a)  Eccentricity close to 0	
	
(b)  Eccentricity = 0.5	
	
(c)  Eccentricity close to 1

Section 10.4  The Hyperbola  693
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 89–92 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 89.	 Find the zeros of the quadratic function	   
f(x) = (x - 5)2 - 12.   What are the x-intercepts, if any, of 
the graph of the function?
	 90.	 Find the domain of the rational function f(x) = 2x - 3
x - 5 .
	
	 Find any horizontal, vertical, or oblique asymptotes.
	 91.	 Find the work done by a force of 80 pounds acting in the 
direction of 50° to the horizontal in moving an object 12 
feet from (0, 0) to (12, 0). Round the answer to one decimal 
place. 
	 92.	 Solve the right triangle shown.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.  213    2.  9
4    3.  1- 2, 02, 12, 02, 10, - 42, 10, 42    4.  12, 52    5.  left; 1; down; 4    6.  1x - 222 + 1y + 322 = 1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 703.
	
Objectives	 	1  Analyze Hyperbolas with Center at the Origin  (p. 693)
	
	 	2  Find the Asymptotes of a Hyperbola  (p. 698)
	
	 	3  Analyze Hyperbolas with Center at  (h, k)  (p. 700)
	
	 	4  Solve Applied Problems Involving Hyperbolas  (p. 701)
10.4  The Hyperbola
•	 Distance Formula (Section 1.1, p. 37)
•	 Complete the Square (Appendix A, Section A.3,  
pp. 972–973)
•	 Intercepts (Section 1.2, pp. 45–46)
•	 Symmetry (Section 1.2, pp. 46–48)
•	 Asymptotes (Section 4.2, pp. 226–230)
•	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations (Section 2.5, 
pp. 127–136)
•	 Square Root Method (Appendix A, Section A.6, p. 991)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
 A hyperbola is the collection of all points in the plane the difference of whose 
distances from two fixed points, called the foci, is a constant.
Definition
Figure 31  Hyperbola
F2
Transverse
axis
Conjugate
axis
F1
Center
V1
V2
Figure 31 illustrates a hyperbola with foci F1  and F2. The line containing the 
foci is called the transverse axis. The midpoint of the line segment joining the foci 
is the center of the hyperbola. The line through the center and perpendicular to the 
transverse axis is the conjugate axis. The hyperbola consists of two separate curves, 
called branches, that are symmetric with respect to the transverse axis, conjugate 
axis, and center. The two points of intersection of the hyperbola and the transverse 
axis are the vertices, V1  and V2 , of the hyperbola.
Analyze Hyperbolas with Center at the Origin
With these ideas in mind, we are now ready to find the equation of a hyperbola in 
the rectangular coordinate system. First, place the center at the origin. Next, position 
1
14
528
b
B
c

694 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
the hyperbola so that its transverse axis coincides with a coordinate axis. Suppose 
that the transverse axis coincides with the x-axis, as shown in Figure 32.
If c is the distance from the center to a focus, one focus will be at F1 = 1 -c, 02 
and the other at F2 = 1c, 02. Now we let the constant difference of the distances 
from any point P = 1x, y2 on the hyperbola to the foci F1  and F2  be denoted 
by {2a, where a 7 0. (If P is on the right branch, the + sign is used; if P is on the 
left branch, the -  sign is used.) The coordinates of P must satisfy the equation
d1F1, P2 - d1F2, P2 = {2a
 21x + c22 + y2 - 21x - c22 + y2 = {2a
 21x + c22 + y2 = {2a + 21x - c22 + y2
 1x + c22 + y2 = 4a2 { 4a21x - c22 + y2
 
+ 1x - c22 + y2
Next multiply out.
 x2 + 2cx + c2 + y2 = 4a2 { 4a21x - c22 + y2 + x2 - 2cx + c2 + y2
 4cx - 4a2 = {4a21x - c22 + y2
 cx - a2 = {a21x - c22 + y2
 1cx - a222 = a23 1x - c22 + y2 4 
 c2x2 - 2ca2
 x + a4 = a21x2 - 2cx + c2 + y22
 c2
 x2 + a4 = a2
 x2 + a2
 c2 + a2
 y2
 1c2 - a22x2 - a2
 y2 = a2 c2 - a4
 1c2 - a22x2 - a2
 y2 = a21c2 - a22
 
To obtain points on the hyperbola off the x-axis, it must be that a 6 c. To see 
why, look again at Figure 32.
 d1F1, P2 6 d1F2, P2 + d1F1, F22 
 d1F1, P2 - d1F2, P2 6 d1F1, F22
 2a 6 2c
 
 a 6 c
Since a 6 c, we also have a2 6 c2 , so c2 - a2 7 0. Let b2 = c2 - a2 , b 7 0. 
Then equation (1) can be written as
 b2
 x2 - a2
 y2 = a2
 b2 
 x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1
To find the vertices of the hyperbola defined by this equation, let y = 0. 
The vertices satisfy the equation x2
a2 = 1, the solutions of which are x = {a.
Consequently, the vertices of the hyperbola are V1 = 1 -a, 02 and V2 = 1a, 02. 
Notice that the distance from the center 10, 02 to either vertex is a.
Difference of the distances from 
P to the foci equals {2a.
Use the Distance Formula.
Isolate one radical.
Square both sides. 
Simplify; isolate the radical.
Divide each side by 4.
Square both sides.
Multiply out.
Distribute and simplify. 
Rearrange terms.
Factor a2 on the right side.
(1)
Use triangle F1PF2.
P is on the right branch, so
d(F1, P ) - d(F2
 , P ) = 2a;
d1F1,  F22 = 2c.
Divide each side by a2b2.
Figure 32
d1F1 , P2 - d1F2 , P2 = {2a 
x
y
P  (x, y)
Transverse
axis
d(F2, P )
d(F1, P )
F2
  (c, 0)
F1
  (c, 0)

Section 10.4  The Hyperbola  695
See Figure 33. As you can verify, the hyperbola defined by equation (2) is 
symmetric with respect to the x-axis, y-axis, and origin. To find the y-intercepts, if
any, let x = 0 in equation (2). This results in the equation y2
b2 = -1, which has no 
real solution, so the hyperbola defined by equation (2) has no y-intercepts. In fact,
since x2
a2 - 1 = y2
b2 Ú 0, it follows that x2
a2 Ú 1. There are no points on the graph 
for -a 6 x 6 a.
Finding and Graphing an Equation of a Hyperbola
Find an equation of the hyperbola with center at the origin, one focus at 13, 02, and 
one vertex at 1 -2, 02. Graph the equation.
The hyperbola has its center at the origin. Plot the center, focus, and vertex. Since 
they all lie on the x-axis, the transverse axis coincides with the x-axis. One focus 
is at 1c, 02 = 13, 02, so c = 3. One vertex is at 1 -a, 02 = 1-2, 02, so a = 2. 
From equation (2), it follows that b2 = c2 - a2 = 9 - 4 = 5, so an equation of the  
hyperbola is
x2
4 - y2
5 = 1
To graph a hyperbola, it is helpful to locate and plot other points on the graph.  
For example, to find the points above and below the foci, let x = {3. Then
 x2
4 - y2
5 = 1
 1 {322
4
- y2
5 = 1
 
 9
4 - y2
5 = 1
 y2
5 = 5
4 
 y2 = 25
4  
 y = {5
2 
The points above and below the foci are a {3, 5
2 b and a {3, -  5
2 b. These points 
determine the “opening” of the hyperbola. See Figure 34.
Example 1
Solution
x = {3
•
Equation of a Hyperbola: Center at (0, 0); Transverse Axis along the x-Axis
An equation of the hyperbola with center at 10, 02, foci at 1-c, 02 and 1c, 02, 
and vertices at 1 -a, 02 and 1a, 02 is
	
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1  where b2 = c2 - a2 	
(2)
The transverse axis is the x-axis.
Theorem
Figure 33
x2
a2 -
y2
b2 = 1, b2 = c2 - a2 
F2
 5 (c, 0)
F1
 5 (2c, 0)
x
y
V2
 5 (a, 0)
V1
 5 (2a, 0)
Transverse
axis
Figure 34  x2
4 -
y2
5 = 1
x
y
F 2
  (3, 0)
F1
  (3, 0)
5
5
5
5
V2
  (2, 0)
(
)
3,
V1
  (2, 0)
5–2
(
)
3, 5–2
(
)
3, 5–2
(
)
 3,5–2

696 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Comment  To graph the hyperbola x2
4 - y 2
5 = 1 discussed in Example 1, graph the two  
functions Y1 = 25 C
x2
4 - 1  and Y2 = - 25 C
x2
4 - 1 . Do this and compare the result with 
Figure 34.	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
An equation of the form of equation (2) is the equation of a hyperbola with 
center at the origin, foci on the x-axis at 1 -c, 02 and 1c, 02, where c2 = a2 + b2, 
and transverse axis along the x-axis.
For the next two examples, the direction “Analyze the equation” will mean to 
find the center, transverse axis, vertices, and foci of the hyperbola and graph it.
Analyzing the Equation of a Hyperbola
Analyze the equation: 
x2
16 - y2
4 = 1
The given equation is of the form of equation (2), with a2 = 16 and b2 = 4. The graph 
of the equation is a hyperbola with center at 10, 02 and transverse axis along the  
x-axis. Also, c2 = a2 + b2 = 16 + 4 = 20. The vertices are at 1 {a, 02 = 1 {4, 02, 
and the foci are at 1 {c, 02 = 1 {215, 02.
To locate the points on the graph above and below the foci, let x = {215. 
Then
 x2
16 - y2
4 = 1
 1{22522
16
- y2
4 = 1
 
 20
16 - y2
4 = 1
 5
4 - y2
4 = 1
 y2
4 = 1
4 
 y = {1
The points above and below the foci are 1 {215, 12 and 1{215, -12. See 
Figure 35.
Example 2
Solution
x = {225 
•
Figure 35  x2
16 -
y2
4 = 1
Equation of a Hyperbola: Center at (0, 0); Transverse Axis along the y-Axis
An equation of the hyperbola with center at 10, 02, foci at 10, -c2 and 10, c2, 
and vertices at 10, -a2 and 10, a2 is
	
y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1  where b2 = c2 - a2 	
(3)
The transverse axis is the y-axis.
Theorem
x
V1 = (–4, 0) V2 = (4, 0)
F1 =
(–2      , 0)
y
–5
5
4
–4
5
(–2      , 1)
5
(–2      , –1)
5
(2      , 1)
5
(2      , –1)
5
       F2 =
(2      , 0)
5

Section 10.4  The Hyperbola  697
Figure 36 shows the graph of a typical hyperbola defined by equation (3).
An equation of the form of equation (2), x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1, is the equation of a
hyperbola with center at the origin, foci on the x-axis at 1 -c, 02 and 1c, 02, where
c2 = a2 + b2 , and transverse axis along the x-axis.
An equation of the form of equation (3), y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1, is the equation of a
hyperbola with center at the origin, foci on the y-axis at 10, -c2 and 10, c2, where 
c2 = a2 + b2 , and transverse axis along the y-axis.
Notice the difference in the forms of equations (2) and (3). When the y2@term 
is subtracted from the x2@term, the transverse axis is along the x-axis. When the 
x2@term is subtracted from the y2@term, the transverse axis is along the y-axis.
Analyzing the Equation of a Hyperbola
Analyze the equation:  4y2 - x2 = 4
To put the equation in proper form, divide each side by 4:
y2 - x2
4 = 1
Since the x2@term is subtracted from the y2@term, the equation is that of a hyperbola 
with center at the origin and transverse axis along the y-axis. Also, comparing the 
above equation to equation (3), note that a2 = 1, b2 = 4, and c2 = a2 + b2 = 5. 
The vertices are at 10, {a2 = 10, {12, and the foci are at 10, {c2 = 10, { 152.
To locate points on the graph to the left and right of the foci, let y = { 15. 
Then
 4y2 - x2 = 4
 41 { 2522 - x2 = 4
 
 20 - x2 = 4
 x2 = 16
 x = {4 
Four other points on the graph are 1 {4, 152 and 1 {4, - 152. See Figure 37.
Finding an Equation of a Hyperbola
Find an equation of the hyperbola that has one vertex at 10, 22 and foci at 10, -32 
and 10, 32. Graph the equation.
Since the foci are at 10, -32 and 10, 32, the center of the hyperbola, which is at 
their midpoint, is the origin. Also, the transverse axis is along the y-axis. The given  
information also reveals that c = 3, a = 2, and b2 = c2 - a2 = 9 - 4 = 5. The 
form of the equation of the hyperbola is given by equation (3):
 y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1
 y2
4 - x2
5 = 1
Let y = {3 to obtain points on the graph on either side of each focus. See Figure 38.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Example 3
Solution
y = { 25
•
Example 4
Solution
•
Figure 36
y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1, b2 = c2 - a2
x
V1 5 (0, 2a)
V2 5 (0, a)
y
F2 5 (0, c)
F 1 5 (0, 2c)
Figure 37  4y2 - x2 = 4
x
y
–6
6
6
–6
V1 = (0, –1)
V2 = (0, 1)
F1 = (0, –      )
5
F2 = (0,     )
5
(–4,      )
5
(4, –     )
5
(4,      )
5
(–4, –     )
5
Figure 38 
y2
4 - x2
5 = 1
x
V1 = (0, –2)
V2 = (0, 2)
y
–5
5
5
2
5(
)
, 3
2
5
(–
)
, 3
2
5(
)
, –3
2
5
(–
)
, –3
F1 = (0, –3)
F2 = (0, 3)
–5

698 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Look at the equations of the hyperbolas in Examples 2 and 4. For the hyperbola 
in Example 2, a2 = 16 and b2 = 4, so a 7 b; for the hyperbola in Example 4, a2 = 4 
and b2 = 5, so a 6 b. This indicates that for hyperbolas, there are no requirements 
involving the relative sizes of a and b. Contrast this situation to the case of an ellipse, 
in which the relative sizes of a and b dictate which axis is the major axis. Hyperbolas 
have another feature to distinguish them from ellipses and parabolas: hyperbolas 
have asymptotes.
Find the Asymptotes of a Hyperbola
Recall from Section 4.2 that a horizontal or oblique asymptote of a graph is a line 
with the property that the distance from the line to points on the graph approaches 0 
as x S - q or as x S q. Asymptotes provide information about the end behavior 
of the graph of a hyperbola.
2
Asymptotes of a Hyperbola
The hyperbola x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1 has the two oblique asymptotes
	
y = b
a  x and y = -  b
a  x	
(4)
Theorem
Proof  Begin by solving for y in the equation of the hyperbola.
 x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1
 y2
b2 = x2
a2 - 1
 y2 = b2¢ x2
a2 - 1≤
Since x ≠0, the right side can be rearranged in the form
 y2 = b2  x2
a2   ¢1 - a2
x2 ≤
 y = {bx
a   B1 - a2
x2  
Now, as x S - q or as x S q, the term a2
x2  approaches 0, so the expression under the 
radical approaches 1. So as x S - q or as x S q, the value of y approaches { bx
a ;
that is, the graph of the hyperbola approaches the lines
y = -  b
a  x and y = b
a  x
These lines are oblique asymptotes of the hyperbola.	
■
The asymptotes of a hyperbola are not part of the hyperbola, but they do serve 
as a guide for graphing a hyperbola. For example, suppose that we want to graph 
the equation
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1

Section 10.4  The Hyperbola  699
Begin by plotting the vertices 1 -a, 02 and 1a, 02. Then plot the points 10, -b2 
and 10, b2 and use these four points to construct a rectangle, as shown in Figure 39.
The diagonals of this rectangle have slopes b
a  and -  b
a , and their extensions are the
asymptotes of the hyperbola, y = b
a  x and y = -  b
a  x. If we graph the asymptotes, we
can use them to establish the “opening” of the hyperbola and avoid plotting other 
points.
Asymptotes of a Hyperbola
The hyperbola y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1 has the two oblique asymptotes
	
y = a
b  x and y = -  a
b  x	
(5)
Theorem
You are asked to prove this result in Problem 84.
For the remainder of this section, the direction “Analyze the equation” will 
mean to find the center, transverse axis, vertices, foci, and asymptotes of the  
hyperbola and graph it.
Analyzing the Equation of a Hyperbola
Analyze the equation: 
y2
4 - x2 = 1
Solution  Since the x2@term is subtracted from the y2@term, the equation is of the 
form of equation (3) and is a hyperbola with center at the origin and transverse axis 
along the y-axis. Comparing this equation to equation (3), note that a2 = 4, b2 = 1, 
and c2 = a2 + b2 = 5. The vertices are at 10, {a2 = 10, {22, and the foci are  
at 10, {c2 = 10, { 152. Using equation (5) with a = 2 and b = 1, the asymptotes
are the lines y = a
b x = 2x and y = -  a
b x = -2x. Form the rectangle containing
the points 10, {a2 = 10, {22 and 1 {b, 02 = 1 {1, 02. The extensions of the  
diagonals of this rectangle are the asymptotes. Now graph the asymptotes and the 
hyperbola. See Figure 40.
Analyzing the Equation of a Hyperbola
Analyze the equation:  9x2 - 4y2 = 36
Divide each side of the equation by 36 to put the equation in proper form.
x2
4 - y2
9 = 1
The center of the hyperbola is the origin. Since the y2@term is subtracted from the 
x2@term, the transverse axis is along the x-axis, and the vertices and foci will lie on the
x-axis. Using equation (2), note that a2 = 4, b2 = 9, and c2 = a2 + b2 = 13. The 
vertices are a = 2 units left and right of the center at 1 {a, 02 = 1{2, 02, the foci 
Example 5
•
Example 6
Solution
Figure 39  x2
a2 -
y2
b2 = 1
x
y
(0, b)
(0, 2b)
V1 5 (2a, 0)
V2 5 (a, 0)
y 5   x
b–a
y 5 2  x
b–a
Figure 40 
y2
4 - x2 = 1
x
V1  (0,  2)
V2  (0, 2)
y  2x
y  2x
y
5
5
5
5
F2  (0,    5)
F1  (0,    5)

700 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
are c = 113  units left and right of the center at 1 {c, 02 = 1{ 113, 02, and the 
asymptotes have the equations
y = b
a  x = 3
2  x and y = -  b
a  x = -  3
2  x
To graph the hyperbola, form the rectangle containing the points 1{a, 02 and 
10, {b2, that is, 1 -2, 02, 12, 02, 10, -32, and 10, 32. The extensions of the diagonals 
of this rectangle are the asymptotes. See Figure 41 for the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1
Analyze Hyperbolas with Center at (h, k)
If a hyperbola with center at the origin and transverse axis coinciding with a  
coordinate axis is shifted horizontally h units and then vertically k units, the result 
is a hyperbola with center at 1h, k2 and transverse axis parallel to a coordinate axis. 
The equations of such hyperbolas have the same forms as those given in equations 
(2) and (3), except that x is replaced by x - h (the horizontal shift) and y is replaced 
by y - k (the vertical shift). Table 4 gives the forms of the equations of such  
hyperbolas. See Figure 42 for typical graphs.
•
3
Note  It is not recommended that  
Table 4 be memorized. Rather, use  
transformations (shift horizontally h units, 
vertically k units), along with the fact 
that a represents the distance from the 
center to the vertices, c represents the 
distance from the center to the foci, and 
b2 = c2 - a2 (or c2 = a2 +  b2).	
■
Table 4 
Equations of a Hyperbola: Center at (h, k); Transverse Axis Parallel to a Coordinate Axis
 
Center
Transverse 
Axis
 
Foci
 
Vertices
 
Equation
 
Asymptotes
(h, k)
Parallel to the 
x-axis
(h { c, k)
(h { a, k)
(x - h)2
a2
-
(y - k)2
b2
= 1, b2 = c2 - a2 
y - k = { b
a  (x - h)
(h, k)
Parallel to the 
y-axis
(h, k { c)
(h, k { a)
(y - k)2
a2
- (x - h)2
b2
= 1, b2 = c2 - a2 
y - k = { a
b  (x - h)
Figure 41  9x2 - 4y2 = 36
x
y
25
25
5
5
(0, 3)
V2 5 (2, 0)
V1 5 (22, 0)
(0, 23)
x
3–2
y 5 2
y 5
x
3–2
F2 5 (   13, 0)
F1 5 (2   13, 0)
Figure 42
x
y
V2
V1
(h, k)
Transverse
axis
(h, k)
Transverse
axis
x
y
V2
V1
E25 1
(y 2 k)2 
–––––––
a2
(x 2 h)2 
––––––
b2
D25 1
(x 2 h)2 
–––––––
a2
(y 2 k)2 
––––––
b2
F2
F1
F2
F1
Finding an Equation of a Hyperbola, Center Not at the Origin
Find an equation for the hyperbola with center at 11, -22, one focus at 14, -22, 
and one vertex at 13, -22. Graph the equation.
The center is at 1h, k2 = 11, -22, so h = 1 and k = -2. Since the center, focus, 
and vertex all lie on the line y = -2, the transverse axis is parallel to the x-axis. The 
distance from the center 11, -22 to the focus 14, -22 is c = 3; the distance from 
Example 7
Solution

Section 10.4  The Hyperbola  701
the center 11, -22 to the vertex 13, -22 is a = 2. Then b2 = c2 - a2 = 9 - 4 = 5. 
The equation is
 1x - h22
a2
- 1y - k22
b2
= 1
 1x - 122
4
- 1y + 222
5
= 1
See Figure 43.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 1
Analyzing the Equation of a Hyperbola
Analyze the equation: 
-x2 + 4y2 - 2x - 16y + 11 = 0
Complete the squares in x and in y.
 -x2 + 4y2 - 2x - 16y + 11 = 0
 - 1x2 + 2x2 + 41y2 - 4y2 = -11
 - 1x2 + 2x + 12 + 41y2 - 4y + 42 = -11 - 1 + 16
 - 1x + 122 + 41y - 222 = 4
 1y - 222 - 1x + 122
4
= 1
This is the equation of a hyperbola with center at 1-1, 22 and transverse  
axis parallel to the y-axis.   Also, a2 = 1 and b2 = 4, so c2 = a2 + b2 = 5.  Since
the transverse axis is parallel to the y-axis, the vertices and foci are located 
a and c units above and below the center, respectively. The vertices are  
at 
1h, k { a2 = 1 -1, 2 { 12, or 
1 -1, 12 and 
1-1, 32. The foci are
at 1h, k { c2 = 1 -1, 2 { 252. The asymptotes are y - 2 = 1
2  1x + 12 and
y - 2 = -  1
2  1x + 12. Figure 44 shows the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
Solve Applied Problems Involving Hyperbolas
Look at Figure 45. Suppose that three microphones are located at points O1, O2, 
and O3  (the foci of the two hyperbolas). In addition, suppose that a gun is fired  
at S and the microphone at O1  records the gunshot 1 second after the microphone 
at O2 . Because sound travels at about 1100 feet per second, we conclude that the 
microphone at O1  is 1100 feet farther from the gunshot than O2 . We can model this 
situation by saying that S lies on a branch of a hyperbola with foci at O1  and O2.  
(Do you see why? The difference of the distances from S to O1  and from S  
to O2  is the constant 1100.) If the third microphone at O3  records the gunshot  
2 seconds after O1, then S will lie on a branch of a second hyperbola with foci at O1  
and O3. In this case, the constant difference will be 2200. The intersection of the two 
hyperbolas will identify the location of S.
Lightning Strikes
Suppose that two people standing 1 mile apart both see a flash of lightning. After a 
period of time, the person standing at point A hears the thunder. One second later, 
the person standing at point B hears the thunder. If the person at B is due west of 
•
Example 8
Solution
Group terms.
Complete each square.
Factor.
Divide each side by 4.
•
4
Example 9
Figure 43  (x - 1)2
4
-
(y + 2)2
5
= 1
x
y
26
6
(1, 22 1   5)
4
26 (1, 22 2   5)
(1, 22)
V1 5 (21, 22)
V2 5 (3, 22)
Transverse
axis F1 5 (22, 22)
F2 5 (4, 22)
Figure 44 
- x2 + 4y2 - 2x - 16y + 11 = 0
x
y
5
Transverse
axis
5
5
F2 (1, 2    5 )
V2  (1, 3)
V1  (1, 1)
F1 (1, 2     5 )
(1, 2)
(3, 2)
Figure 45 
O3
O1
O2
S

702 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
the person at A and the lightning strike is known to occur due north of the person 
standing at point A, where did the lightning strike occur?
See Figure 46, in which the ordered pair 1x, y2 represents the location of the lightning 
strike. Sound travels at 1100 feet per second, so the person at point A is 1100 feet 
closer to the lightning strike than the person at point B. Since the difference of the 
distance from 1x, y2 to B and the distance from 1x, y2 to A is the constant 1100, the 
point 1x, y2 lies on a hyperbola whose foci are at A and B.
Solution
Figure 46 
North
1 mile  5280 feet
East
B  (2640, 0) (a, o)
(a, o)
A  (2640, 0)
(x, y)
An equation of the hyperbola is
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1
where 2a = 1100, so a = 550.
Because the distance between the two people is 1 mile (5280 feet) and each 
person is at a focus of the hyperbola, this means
 2c = 5280
 c = 5280
2
= 2640
Since b2 = c2 - a2 = 26402 - 5502 = 6,667,100, the equation of the hyperbola 
that describes the location of the lightning strike is
x2
5502 -
y2
6,667,100 = 1
Refer to Figure 46. Since the lightning strike occurred due north of the individual at 
the point A = 12640, 02, let x = 2640 and solve the resulting equation.
 26402
5502 -
y2
6,667,100 = 1
 -  
y2
6,667,100 = -22.04
 
 y2 = 146,942,884
 y = 12,122
 
x = 2640
Subtract 26402
5502  from both sides.
Multiply both sides by -6,667,100.
y 7 0 since the lightning strike  
occurred in quadrant I.
232640 - 1 -26402 42 + 112,122 - 022 - 212640 - 264022 + 112,122 - 022 = 1100
	
as required.
•
The lightning strike occurred 12,122 feet north of the person standing at point A.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 5
Check:	 The difference between the distance from 12640, 121222 to the person 
at the point B = 1 -2640, 02 and the distance from 12640, 121222  
to the person at the point A = 12640, 02 should be 1100. Using the 
distance formula, the difference of the distances is

Section 10.4  The Hyperbola  703
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The distance d from P1 = 13, - 42 to P2 = 1- 2, 12 is  
d =
 . (p. 37)
	 2.	 To complete the square of x2 + 5x, add 
 . (pp. 972–973)
	 3.	 Find the intercepts of the equation y2 = 9 + 4x2.  
(pp. 45–46) 
	 4.	 True or False  The equation y2 = 9 + x2  is symmetric with 
respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin. (pp. 46–48)
	 5.	 To graph y = 1x - 523 - 4, shift the graph of y = x3  
to the (left/right) 
  unit(s) and then (up/down) 
  
unit(s). (pp. 127–136) 
	 6.	 Find the vertical asymptotes, if any, and the horizontal or
	
	 oblique asymptote, if any, of y = x2 - 9
x2 - 4 . (pp. 226–230) 
10.4  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 7.	 A(n)   
 is the collection of points in the plane 
the difference of whose distances from two fixed points is  
a constant.
	 8.	 For a hyperbola, the foci lie on a line called the   
 
  
.
Answer Problems 9–11 using the figure to the right.
	 12.	 In a hyperbola, if a = 3 and c = 5, then b =              . 
(a)	 1    (b)  2    (c)  4    (d)  8
	 13.	 For the hyperbola x2
4 -
y2
9 = 1, the value of a is 
 , the
	
	 value of b is 
 , and the transverse axis is the 
 -axis.
	 14.	 For the hyperbola 
y2
16 - x2
81 = 1, the asymptotes are
	
	
  and 
 .
x
y
V2
V1
(h, k)
Transverse
axis
F2
F1
	 9.	 The equation of the hyperbola is of the form
(a)	
1x - h22
a2
-
1y - k22
b2
= 1
(b)	
1y - k22
a2
-
1x - h22
b2
= 1 
(c)	
1x - h22
a2
+
1y - k22
b2
= 1
(d)	
1x - h22
b2
+
1y - k22
a2
= 1
	 10.	 If the center of the hyperbola is (2, 1) and a = 3, then the 
coordinates of the vertices are 
  and 
 .
	 11.	 If the center of the hyperbola is (2, 1) and c = 5, then the 
coordinates of the foci are 
  and   
 .
Skill Building
In Problems 15–18, the graph of a hyperbola is given. Match each graph to its equation.
(A)  x2
4 - y2 = 1        (B)  x2 -
y2
4 = 1        (C) 
y2
4 - x2 = 1        (D)  y2 - x2
4 = 1
	 15. 
	
16. 
	
17. 
	
18. 
x
y
3
3
3
3
x
y
4
4
4
4
x
y
4
4
4
4
x
y
3
3
3
3
In Problems 19–28, find an equation for the hyperbola described. Graph the equation.
	 19.	 Center at 10, 02; focus at 13, 02; vertex at 11, 02	
20.	 Center at 10, 02; focus at 10, 52; vertex at 10, 32
	 21.	 Center at 10, 02; focus at 10, - 62; vertex at 10, 42	
22.	 Center at 10, 02; focus at 1- 3, 02; vertex at 12, 02
	 23.	 Focus at 10, 62; vertices at 10, - 22 and 10, 22	
24.	 Foci at 1- 5, 02 and 15, 02; vertex at 13, 02

704 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
	 25.	 Vertices at 1- 4, 02 and 14, 02; asymptote the line y = 2x	
26.	 Vertices at 10, - 62 and 10, 62; asymptote the line y = 2x
27.	 Foci at 10, - 22 and 10, 22; asymptote the line y = - x	
28.	 Foci at 1- 4, 02 and 14, 02; asymptote the line y = -x 
In Problems 29–36, find the center, transverse axis, vertices, foci, and asymptotes. Graph each equation.
	 29.	 y2
16 - x2
4 = 1	
30.	 x2
25 -
y2
9 = 1	
31.	 4x2 - y2 = 16	
32.	 4y2 - x2 = 16
	 33.	 x2 - y2 = 4	
34.	 y2 - 9x2 = 9	
35.	 2x2 - y2 = 4	
36.	 y2 - x2 = 25
In Problems 37–40, write an equation for each hyperbola.
	 37.	
38.	
39.	
40.	
x
y
3
3
3
3
y  x
y  x
x
y
3
3
3
3
y  x
y  x
x
y
5
5
10
10
y  2 x
y  2 x
x
y
5
5
5
5
y  2 x
y  2 x
In Problems 41–48, find an equation for the hyperbola described. Graph the equation.
	 41.	 Center at 14, - 12; focus at 17, - 12; vertex at 16, - 12	
42.	 Center at 1- 3, 12; focus at 1- 3, 62; vertex at 1-3, 42
	 43.	 Center at 11, 42; focus at 1- 2, 42; vertex at 10, 42	
44.	 Center at 1- 3, - 42; focus at 1- 3, -82; vertex at 1-3, -22
	 45.	 Focus at 1- 4, 02 vertices at 1- 4, 42 and 1- 4, 22	
46.	 Foci at 13, 72 and 17, 72; vertex at 16, 72
	 47.	 Vertices at 11, - 32 and 11, 12; 	 
asymptote the line y + 1 = 3
2  1x - 12
	 48.	 Vertices at 1- 1, - 12 and 13, - 12; 	
 
asymptote the line y + 1 = 3
2  1x - 12
In Problems 49–62, find the center, transverse axis, vertices, foci, and asymptotes. Graph each equation.
	 49.	
1y + 322
4
-
1x - 222
9
= 1	
50.	
1x - 222
4
-
1y + 322
9
= 1	
51.	 1x + 422 - 91y - 322 = 9
	 52.	 1y - 222 - 41x + 222 = 4	
53.	 1y - 322 - 1x + 222 = 4	
54.	 1x + 122 - 1y + 222 = 4
	 55.	 x2 - y2 - 2x - 2y - 1 = 0	
56.	 y2 - x2 - 4y + 4x - 1 = 0	
57.	 2x2 - y2 + 4x + 4y - 4 = 0
	 58.	 y2 - 4x2 - 4y - 8x - 4 = 0	
59.	 2y2 - x2 + 2x + 8y + 3 = 0	
60.	 4x2 - y2 - 24x - 4y + 16 = 0
	 61.	 x2 - 3y2 + 8x - 6y + 4 = 0	
62.	 y2 - 4x2 - 16x - 2y - 19 = 0
In Problems 63–66, graph each function. Be sure to label any intercepts. [Hint: Notice that each function is half a hyperbola.]
	 63.	 f1x2 = - 29 + 9x2	
64.	 f1x2 = 216 + 4x2	
65.	 f1x2 = 2- 1 + x2	
66.	 f1x2 = - 2- 25 + x2
Mixed Practice
In Problems 67–74, analyze each equation.
	 67.	
(x - 3)2
4
-
y2
25 = 1	
68.	
(y + 2)2
16
-
(x - 2)2
4
= 1	
69.	 x2 = 16(y - 3)
	 70.	 y2 = - 12(x + 1)	
71.	 25x2 + 9y2 - 250x + 400 = 0	
72.	 x2 + 36y2 - 2x + 288y + 541 = 0
	 73.	 x2 - 6x - 8y - 31 = 0	
74.	 9x2 - y2 - 18x - 8y - 88 = 0
Applications and Extensions
	 75.	 Fireworks Display  Suppose that two people standing  
2 miles apart both see the burst from a fireworks display. 
After a period of time the first person, standing at point A, 
hears the burst. One second later the second person, standing 
at point B, hears the burst. If the person at point B is due 
west of the person at point A, and if the display is known 
to occur due north of the person at point A, where did the 
fireworks display occur? 
	 76.	 Lightning Strikes  Suppose that two people standing 1 mile 
apart both see a flash of lightning. After a period of time 
the first person, standing at point A, hears the thunder. 
Two seconds later the second person, standing at point B, 
hears the thunder. If the person at point B is due west of the  
person at point A, and if the lightning strike is known to occur 
due north of the person standing at point A, where did the 
lightning strike occur? 
	 77.	 Nuclear Power Plant  The cross-section of a nuclear power 
plant’s cooling tower is in the shape of a hyperbola. Suppose 

Section 10.4  The Hyperbola  705
the tower has a base diameter of 234 meters and the diam-
eter at its narrowest point, 64 meters above the ground, is 78 
meters. If the diameter at the top of the tower is 156 meters, 
how tall is the tower? 
	 78.	 An Explosion  Two recording devices are set 2400 feet apart, 
with the device at point A to the west of the device at point B.  
At a point between the devices 300 feet from point B,  
a small amount of explosive is detonated. The recording 
devices record the time until the sound reaches each. How 
far directly north of point B should a second explosion be 
done so that the measured time difference recorded by the 
devices is the same as that for the first detonation? 
	 79.	 Rutherford’s Experiment  In an article, there was a dsecrip-
tion about the motion of alpha particles as they are shot at a 
piece of gold foil 0.00004 cm thick. The figure shows a diagram 
from the scientist’s paper that indicates that the deflected  
alpha particles follow the path of one branch of a hyperbola.
telescope in 1672. The focus of the parabolic mirror and the 
rear focus of the hyperbolic mirror are the same point. The 
rays are collected by the parabolic mirror, then are reflected 
toward the (common) focus, and thus are reflected by the 
hyperbolic mirror through the opening to its front focus, 
where the eyepiece is located. If the equation of the hyperbola
	
	 is y2
9 - x2
16 = 1 and the focal length (distance from the 
	
	 vertex to the focus) of the parabola is 6, find the equation of 
the parabola.
Source: www.enchantedlearning.com
	 81.	 The eccentricity e of a hyperbola is defined as the number c
a ,
	
	 where a is the distance of a vertex from the center, and c is the  
distance of a focus from the center. Because c 7 a, it follows 
that e 7 1. Describe the general shape of a hyperbola whose 
eccentricity is close to 1. What is the shape if e is very large?
	 82.	 A hyperbola for which a = b is called an equilateral  
hyperbola. Find the eccentricity e of an equilateral  
hyperbola. 
[Note: The eccentricity of a hyperbola is defined in Problem 81.]
	 83.	 Two hyperbolas that have the same set of asymptotes are 
called conjugate. Show that the hyperbolas
x2
4 - y2 = 1 and y2 - x2
4 = 1
	
	 are conjugate. Graph each hyperbola on the same set of  
coordinate axes.
	 84.	 Prove that the hyperbola
y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1
	
	 has the two oblique asymptotes
y = a
b  x and y = -  a
b  x
	 85.	 Show that the graph of an equation of the form
Ax2 + Cy2 + F = 0  A ≠0, C ≠0, F ≠0
	
	 where A and C are opposite in sign, is a hyperbola with  
center at 10, 02.
	 86.	 Show that the graph of an equation of the form
Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  A ≠0, C ≠0
	
	 where A and C are opposite in sign,
(a)	 is a hyperbola if D2
4A + E2
4C - F ≠0.
(b)	 is two intersecting lines if D2
4A + E2
4C - F = 0.
x
45
y
(a)	 Find an equation of the asymptotes under this scenario.
(b)	 If the vertex of the path of the alpha particles is 4 cm 
from the center of the hyperbola, find a model that  
describes the path of the particle.
	 80.	 Hyperbolic Mirrors  Hyperbolas have interesting reflective 
properties that make them useful for lenses and mirrors. For 
example, if a ray of light strikes a convex hyperbolic mirror 
on a line that would (theoretically) pass through its rear  
focus, it is reflected through the front focus. This property, 
and that of the parabola, were used to develop the Cassegrain 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 87–90 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 87.	 For y = 3
2 cos (6x + 3p), find the amplitude, period, and
	
	 phase shift. Then graph the function, showing at least two 
periods.
	 88.	 Solve the triangle described: a = 7, b = 10, and C = 100°. 
	 89.	 Find the rectangular coordinates of the point with the polar 
coordinates a12, - p
3 b. 
	90.	 Transform the polar equation r = 6 sin u to an equation 
in rectangular coordinates. Then identify and graph the  
equation.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.  522     2.  25
4      3.  10, - 32, 10, 32    4.  True    5.  right; 5; down; 4    6.  Vertical: x = - 2, x = 2; horizontal: y = 1

706 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
In this section, we show that the graph of a general second-degree polynomial  
equation containing two variables x and y—that is, an equation of the form
	
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0	
(1)
where A, B, and C are not simultaneously 0—is a conic. We shall not concern  
ourselves here with the degenerate cases of equation (1), such as x2 + y2 = 0, whose 
graph is a single point 10, 02; or x2 + 3y2 + 3 = 0, whose graph contains no points; 
or x2 - 4y2 = 0, whose graph is two lines, x - 2y = 0 and x + 2y = 0.
We begin with the case where B = 0. In this case, the term containing xy is not 
present, so equation (1) has the form
Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
where either A ≠0 or C ≠0.
Identify a Conic
We have already discussed the procedure for identifying the graph of this kind of 
equation; we complete the squares of the quadratic expressions in x or y, or both. 
Once this has been done, the conic can be identified by comparing it to one of the 
forms studied in Sections 10.2 through 10.4.
In fact, though, the conic can be identified directly from the equation without 
completing the squares.
1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 712.
	
Objectives	 	1  Identify a Conic  (p. 706)
	
	 	2  Use a Rotation of Axes to Transform Equations  (p. 707)
	
	 	3  Analyze an Equation Using a Rotation of Axes  (p. 709)
	
	 	4  Identify Conics without a Rotation of Axes  (p. 711)
10.5  Rotation of Axes; General Form of a Conic
•	 Sum Formulas for Sine and Cosine (Section 7.5,  
pp. 515 and 512)
•	 Half-angle Formulas for Sine and Cosine  
(Section 7.6, p. 528)
•	 Double-angle Formulas for Sine and Cosine  
(Section 7.6, p. 525)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Identifying Conics without Completing the Squares
Excluding degenerate cases, the equation
	
Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0	
(2)
where A and C are not both equal to zero:
(a)  Defines a parabola if AC = 0.
(b)  Defines an ellipse (or a circle) if AC 7 0.
(c)  Defines a hyperbola if AC 6 0.
Theorem
Proof
(a)  If AC = 0, then either A = 0 or C = 0, but not both, so the form of equation (2) 
is either
Ax2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  A ≠0
or
Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  C ≠0

Section 10.5  Rotation of Axes; General Form of a Conic  707
Using the results of Problems 80 and 81 at the end of Section 10.2, it follows 
that, except for the degenerate cases, the equation is a parabola.
(b)  If AC 7 0, then A and C have the same sign. Using the results of Problem 87 at 
the end of Section 10.3, except for the degenerate cases, the equation is an ellipse.
(c)  If AC 6 0, then A and C have opposite signs. Using the results of Problem 86  
at the end of Section 10.4, except for the degenerate cases, the equation is a 
hyperbola.	
■
We will not be concerned with the degenerate cases of equation (2). However, 
in practice, you should be alert to the possibility of degeneracy.
Identifying a Conic without Completing the Squares
Identify the graph of each equation without completing the squares.
(a)	 3x2 + 6y2 + 6x - 12y = 0      (b)  2x2 - 3y2 + 6y + 4 = 0
(c)	 y2 - 2x + 4 = 0
(a)	 Compare the given equation to equation (2), and conclude that A = 3 and 
C = 6. Since AC = 18 7 0, the equation defines an ellipse.
(b)	 Here A = 2 and C = -3, so AC = -6 6 0. The equation defines a hyperbola.
(c)	 Here A = 0 and C = 1, so AC = 0. The equation defines a parabola.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Although we can now identify the type of conic represented by any equation of 
the form of equation (2) without completing the squares, we still need to complete the 
squares if we desire additional information about the conic, such as its graph.
Use a Rotation of Axes to Transform Equations
Now let’s turn our attention to equations of the form of equation (1), where B ≠0. 
To discuss this case, we introduce a new procedure: rotation of axes.
In a rotation of axes, the origin remains fixed while the x-axis and y-axis are 
rotated through an angle u to a new position; the new positions of the x-axis and the 
y-axis are denoted by x′ and y′, respectively, as shown in Figure 47(a).
Now look at Figure 47(b). There the point P has the coordinates 1x, y2 relative 
to the xy-plane, while the same point P has coordinates 1x′, y′2 relative to the 
x′y′@plane. We seek relationships that will enable us to express x and y in terms of 
x′, y′, and u.
As Figure 47(b) shows, r denotes the distance from the origin O to the point P, 
and a denotes the angle between the positive x′@axis and the ray from O through P. 
Then, using the definitions of sine and cosine, we have
	
 x′ = r cos a  
 y′ = r sin a
	
(3)
	
 x = r cos1u + a2   y = r sin1u + a2	
(4)
Now
 x = r cos1u + a2
 = r1cos u cos a - sin u sin a2 
 = 1r cos a2 1cos u2 - 1r sin a2 1sin u2
 = x′ cos u - y′ sin u
Similarly,
 y = r sin1u + a2
 = r1sin u cos a + cos u sin a2 
 = x′ sin u + y′ cos u 
Example 1
Solution
•
2
Apply the Sum Formula for cosine.
By equation (3)
Apply the Sum Formula for sine.
By equation (3)
Figure 47 
y
x
θ
θ
O
D
y
x
x
θ
α
O
E
y
r
P 5 (x, y) 5 (x′, y′)
y′
x′
y′
x′
x′
y′

708 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Rotating Axes
Express the equation xy = 1 in terms of new x′y′@coordinates by rotating the axes 
through a 45° angle. Discuss the new equation.
Let u = 45° in equation (5). Then
 x = x′ cos 45° - y′ sin 45° = x′ 22
2
- y′ 22
2
= 22
2   1x′ - y′2
 y = x′ sin 45° + y′ cos 45° = x′ 22
2
+ y′ 22
2
= 22
2   1x′ + y′2
Substituting these expressions for x and y in xy = 1 gives
 c 22
2
 1x′ - y′2 d c 22
2
 1x′ + y′2 d = 1
 1
2
 1x′2 - y′22 = 1
 x′2
2
- y′2
2
= 1
This is the equation of a hyperbola with center at 10, 02 and transverse axis 
along the x′@axis. The vertices are at 1 { 12, 02 on the x′@axis; the asymptotes are  
y′ = x′ and y′ = -x′ (which correspond to the original x- and y-axes). See Figure 48  
for the graph.
As Example 2 illustrates, a rotation of axes through an appropriate angle can 
transform a second-degree equation in x and y containing an xy-term into one in x′ 
and y′ in which no x′ y′@term appears. In fact, we will show that a rotation of axes 
through an appropriate angle will transform any equation of the form of equation (1) 
into an equation in x′ and y′ without an x′ y′@term.
To find the formula for choosing an appropriate angle u through which to rotate 
the axes, begin with equation (1),
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  B ≠0
Next rotate through an angle u using the rotation formulas (5).
 A1x′ cos u - y′ sin u22 + B1x′ cos u - y′ sin u2 1x′ sin u + y′ cos u2
 + C1x′ sin u + y′ cos u22 + D1x′ cos u - y′ sin u2
 + E1x′ sin u + y′ cos u2 + F = 0
Expanding and collecting like terms gives
Example 2
Solution
•
(6)
Rotation Formulas
If the x- and y-axes are rotated through an angle u, the coordinates 1x, y2 of a 
point P relative to the xy-plane and the coordinates 1x′, y′2 of the same point 
relative to the new x′@ and y′@axes are related by the formulas
	
x = x′ cos u - y′ sin u  y = x′ sin u + y′ cos u	
(5)
Theorem
 1A cos2 u + B sin u cos u + C sin2 u2x′2 + 3B1cos2 u - sin2 u2 + 21C - A2 1sin u cos u2 4x′ y′
 + 1A sin2 u - B sin u cos u + C cos2 u2y′2 
 + 1D cos u + E sin u2x′
 + 1 -D sin u + E cos u2y′ + F = 0
In equation (6), the coefficient of x′ y′ is
B1cos2 u - sin2 u2 + 21C - A2 1sin u cos u2
Figure 48  xy = 1
y
x
45°
1
1
2
2
2 
1 
1 
2
y′
x′
2
(      , 0)
2
(      , 0)

Section 10.5  Rotation of Axes; General Form of a Conic  709
Since we want to eliminate the x′ y′@term, we select an angle u so that this  
coefficient is 0.
 B1cos2 u - sin2 u2 + 21C - A2 1sin u cos u2 = 0
 B cos12u2 + 1C - A2 sin12u2 = 0
 B cos12u2 = 1A - C2 sin12u2
 cot12u2 = A - C
B
   B ≠0
Double-angle  
Formulas
Warning  Be careful if you use a  
calculator to solve equation (7).
1.  If cot12u2 = 0, then 2u = 90° and 
u = 45°.
2.  If cot12u2 ≠0, first find cos12u2. 
Then use the inverse cosine function 
key(s) to obtain 2u,  0° 6 2u 6 180°. 
Finally, divide by 2 to obtain the 
correct acute angle u.	
■
*Any rotation through an angle u that satisfies cot12u2 = A - C
B
  will eliminate the x′ y′@term. However, 
the final form of the transformed equation may be different (but equivalent), depending on the angle 
chosen.
To transform the equation
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  B ≠0
into an equation in x′ and y′ without an x′ y′@term, rotate the axes through an 
angle u that satisfies the equation
	
cot12u2 = A - C
B
 	
(7)
Theorem
Equation (7) has an infinite number of solutions for u. We shall adopt the  
convention of choosing the acute angle u that satisfies (7). There are two possibilities:
If cot12u2 Ú 0, then 0° 6 2u … 90°, so 0° 6 u … 45°.
If cot12u2 6 0, then 90° 6 2u 6 180°, so 45° 6 u 6 90°.
Each of these results in a counterclockwise rotation of the axes through an 
acute angle u.*
Analyze an Equation Using a Rotation of Axes
For the remainder of this section, the direction “Analyze the equation” will mean 
to transform the given equation so that it contains no xy-term and to graph the 
equation.
Analyzing an Equation Using a Rotation of Axes
Analyze the equation: x2 + 23 xy + 2y2 - 10 = 0
Since an xy-term is present, the axes must rotate. Using A = 1, B = 13 , and 
C = 2 in equation (7), the appropriate acute angle u through which to rotate the 
axes satisfies the equation
cot12u2 = A - C
B
= -1
13 = -  13
3    0° 6 2u 6 180°
Since cot12u2 = -  13
3  , this means 2u = 120°, so u = 60°. Using u = 60° in the 
rotation formulas (5) yields
 x = x′cos 60° - y′sin 60° = 1
2  x′ - 23
2   y′ = 1
2  1x′ - 23 y′2
 y = x′sin 60° + y′cos 60° = 23
2   x′ + 1
2  y′ = 1
2  1 23 x′ + y′2
3
Example 3
Solution

710 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Substituting these values into the original equation and simplifying gives
 x2 + 23 xy + 2y2 - 10 = 0
 1
41x′ - 23 y′22 + 23  c 1
21x′ - 23 y′2 d c 1
21 23 x′ + y′2 d + 2c 1
41 23 x′ + y′22 d = 10
Multiply both sides by 4 and expand to obtain
 x′2 - 223 x′ y′ + 3y′2 + 23 1 23 x′2 - 2x′ y′ - 23 y′2 2 + 213x′2 + 223 x′ y′ + y′2 2 = 40
 10x′2 + 2y′2 = 40
 x′2
4
+ y′2
20 = 1
This is the equation of an ellipse with center at 10, 02 and major axis along the 
y′@axis. The vertices are at 10, {2152 on the y′@axis. See Figure 49 for the graph.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m   3 1
In Example 3, the acute angle u through which to rotate the axes was easy to 
find because of the numbers used in the given equation. In general, the equation
cot12u2 = A - C
B
  will not have such a “nice” solution. As the next example shows,
we can still find the appropriate rotation formulas without using a calculator  
approximation by applying Half-angle Formulas.
Analyzing an Equation Using a Rotation of Axes
Analyze the equation:  4x2 - 4xy + y2 + 525 x + 5 = 0
Letting A = 4, B = -4, and C = 1 in equation (7), the appropriate angle u through 
which to rotate the axes satisfies
cot12u2 = A - C
B
=
3
-4 = -  3
4 
To use the rotation formulas (5), we need to know the values of sin u and cos u. 
Because we seek an acute angle u, we know that sin u 7 0 and cos u 7 0. Use the 
Half-angle Formulas in the form
sin u = B
1 - cos12u2
2
    cos u = B
1 + cos12u2
2
 
Now we need to find the value of cos12u2. Because cot12u2 = -  3
4 , then 
90° 6 2u 6 180° (Do you know why?), so cos12u2 = -  3
5 . Then
 sin u = B
1 - cos12u2
2
= R
1 - a -  3
5b
2
= B
4
5 =
2
25
= 215
5
 cos u = B
1 + cos12u2
2
= R
1 + a -  3
5b
2
= B
1
5 =
1
25
= 15
5
With these values, the rotation formulas (5) are
 x = 15
5
 x′ - 215
5
 y′ = 15
5
 1x′ - 2y′2
 y = 215
5
 x′ + 15
5
 y′ = 15
5
 12x′ + y′2
•
Example 4
Solution
Figure 49  x′2
4
+
y′2
20 = 1
60°
y
x
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
(0, 2      )
(0, 2      )
y ′
x ′
5
5

Section 10.5  Rotation of Axes; General Form of a Conic  711
Multiply both sides by 5 and expand to obtain
 41x′2 - 4x′ y′ + 4y′22 - 412x′2 - 3x′ y′ - 2y′22
 + 4x′2 + 4x′y′ + y′2 + 251x′ - 2y′2 = -25
 25y′2 - 50y′ + 25x′ = -25
 y′2 - 2y′ + x′ = -1
 y′2 - 2y′ + 1 = -x′ 
 1y′ - 122 = -x′
This is the equation of a parabola with vertex at 10, 12 in the x′y′@plane. The axis 
of symmetry is parallel to the x′@axis. Use a calculator to solve sin u = 215
5  , and
find that u ≈63.4°. See Figure 50 for the graph.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 7
Identify Conics without a Rotation of Axes
Suppose that we are required only to identify (rather than analyze) the graph of an 
equation of the form
	
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  B ≠0	
(8)
Applying the rotation formulas (5) to this equation gives an equation of the 
form
	
A′ x′2 + B′ x′ y′ + C′ y′2 + D′ x′ + E′ y′ + F′ = 0	
(9)
where A′, B′, C′, D′, E′, and F′ can be expressed in terms of A, B, C, D, E, F and the 
angle u of rotation (see Problem 53). It can be shown that the value of B2 - 4AC in 
equation (8) and the value of B′2 - 4A′ C′ in equation (9) are equal no matter what 
angle u of rotation is chosen (see Problem 55). In particular, if the angle u of rotation 
satisfies equation (7), then B′ = 0 in equation (9), and B2 - 4AC = -4A′ C′. Since 
equation (9) then has the form of equation (2),
A′ x′2 + C′ y′2 + D′ x′ + E′ y′ + F′ = 0
we can identify its graph without completing the squares, as we did in the beginning 
of this section. In fact, now we can identify the conic described by any equation of 
the form of equation (8) without a rotation of axes.
Combine like terms.
Divide by 25.
Complete the square in y′.
•
4
Identifying Conics without a Rotation of Axes
Except for degenerate cases, the equation
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
(a)  Defines a parabola if B2 - 4AC = 0.
(b)  Defines an ellipse (or a circle) if B2 - 4AC 6 0.
(c)  Defines a hyperbola if B2 - 4AC 7 0.
Theorem
You are asked to prove this theorem in Problem 56.
Figure 50  ( y′ - 1)2 = - x′
63.4°
y
x
x′
(0, 1)
y′
 4x2 - 4xy + y2 + 525x + 5 = 0
4c 15
5
 1x′ - 2y′2 d
2
- 4c 15
5
 1x′ - 2y′2 d c 15
5
 12x′ + y′2 d 
 + c 15
5
 12x′ + y′2 d
2
+ 525 c 15
5
 1x′ - 2y′2 d = -5
Substituting these values in the original equation and simplifying gives

712 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Identifying a Conic without a Rotation of Axes
Identify the graph of the equation:   8x2 - 12xy + 17y2 - 425x - 225y - 15 = 0
Here A = 8, B = -12, and C = 17, so B2 - 4AC = -400. Since B2 - 4AC 6 0, 
the equation defines an ellipse.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Example 5
Solution
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The sum formula for the sine function is	   
sin1A + B2 =             . (p. 515)   
	 2.	 The Double-angle Formula for the sine function is 
sin12u2 =               . (p. 525) 
	 3.	 If u is acute, the Half-angle Formula for the sine function is 
sin u
2 =              . (p. 528) 
	 4.	 If u is acute, the Half-angle Formula for the cosine function 
is cos u
2 =              . (p. 528) 
10.5  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 5.	 To transform the equation
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  B ≠0
	
	 into one in x′ and y′ without an x′y′@term, rotate the axes 
through an acute angle u that satisfies the equation              .
	 6.	 Except for degenerate cases, the equation
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
	
	 defines a(n)    
   if B2 - 4AC = 0.
	 7.	 Except for degenerate cases, the equation
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
	
	 defines an ellipse if    
 .
	 8.	 True or False  The equation ax2 + 6y2 - 12y = 0 defines 
an ellipse if a 7 0. 
	 9.	 True or False  The equation 3x2 + Bxy + 12y2 = 10	
  
defines a parabola if B = - 12. 
	 10.	 True or False  To eliminate the xy-term from the equation 
x2 - 2xy + y2 - 2x + 3y + 5 = 0, rotate the axes through 
an angle u, where cot u = B2 - 4AC. 
Skill Building
In Problems 11–20, identify the graph of each equation without completing the squares.
	 11.	  x2 + 4x + y + 3 = 0 
	
12.	 2y2 - 3y + 3x = 0 
	 13.	 2x2 + y2 - 8x + 4y + 2 = 0 
	
14.	 6x2 + 3y2 - 12x + 6y = 0 
	 15.	 4x2 - 3y2 - 8x + 6y + 1 = 0 
	
16.	 3x2 - 2y2 + 6x + 4 = 0 
	 17.	 y2 - 8x2 - 2x - y = 0 
	
18.	 2y2 - x2 - y + x = 0 
	 19.	 2x2 + 2y2 - 8x + 8y = 0 
	
20.	 x2 + y2 - 8x + 4y = 0 
In Problems 21–30, determine the appropriate rotation formulas to use so that the new equation contains no xy-term.
	 21.	 x2 - 4xy + y2 - 3 = 0	
22.	 x2 + 4xy + y2 - 3 = 0
	 23.	 3x2 - 10xy + 3y2 - 32 = 0	
24.	 5x2 + 6xy + 5y2 - 8 = 0
	 25.	 11x2 + 1023xy + y2 - 4 = 0	
26.	 13x2 - 623xy + 7y2 - 16 = 0
	 27.	 x2 + 4xy + 4y2 + 525y + 5 = 0	
28.	 4x2 - 4xy + y2 - 825x - 1625y = 0
	 29.	 34x2 - 24xy + 41y2 - 25 = 0	
30.	 25x2 - 36xy + 40y2 - 12213x - 8213y = 0
In Problems 31–42, rotate the axes so that the new equation contains no xy-term. Analyze and graph the new equation. Refer to  
Problems 21–30 for Problems 31–40.
	 31.	  x2 + 4xy + y2 - 3 = 0	
32.	 x2 - 4xy + y2 - 3 = 0
	 33.	 3x2 - 10xy + 3y2 - 32 = 0	
34.	 5x2 + 6xy + 5y2 - 8 = 0

Section 10.5  Rotation of Axes; General Form of a Conic  713
	 35.	 11x2 + 1023xy + y2 - 4 = 0	
36.	 13x2 - 623xy + 7y2 - 16 = 0
	 37.	  4x2 - 4xy + y2 - 825x - 1625y = 0	
38.	 x2 + 4xy + 4y2 + 525y + 5 = 0
	 39.	 34x2 - 24xy + 41y2 - 25 = 0	
40.	 25x2 - 36xy + 40y2 - 12213x - 8213y = 0
	 41.	 16x2 + 24xy + 9y2 - 60x + 80y = 0	
42.	 16x2 + 24xy + 9y2 - 130x + 90y = 0
In Problems 43–52, identify the graph of each equation without applying a rotation of axes.
	 43.	  x2 + 3xy - 2y2 + 3x + 2y + 5 = 0 
	
44.	 2x2 - 3xy + 4y2 + 2x + 3y - 5 = 0 
	 45.	 2x2 - 3xy + 2y2 - 4x - 2 = 0 
	
46.	 x2 - 7xy + 3y2 - y - 10 = 0 
	 47.	 10x2 + 12xy + 4y2 - x - y + 10 = 0 
	
48.	 9x2 + 12xy + 4y2 - x - y = 0 
	 49.	 4x2 + 12xy + 9y2 - x - y = 0 
	
50.	 10x2 - 12xy + 4y2 - x - y - 10 = 0 
	 51.	 3x2 + 2xy + y2 + 4x - 2y + 10 = 0 
	
52.	 3x2 - 2xy + y2 + 4x + 2y - 1 = 0 
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 53–56, apply the rotation formulas (5) to
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
to obtain the equation
A′ x′2 + B′ x′ y′ + C′ y′2 + D′ x′ + E′ y′ + F′ = 0
	 53.	 Express A′, B′, C′, D′, E′, and F′ in terms of A, B, C, D, E, 
F, and the angle u of rotation.
[Hint: Refer to equation (6).]
	 54.	 Show that A + C = A′ + C′, which proves that A + C is 
invariant; that is, its value does not change under a rotation 
of axes.
	 55.	 Refer to Problem 54. Show that B2 - 4AC is invariant.
	 56.	 Prove that, except for degenerate cases, the equation
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
(a)	 Defines a parabola if B2 - 4AC = 0.
(b)	 Defines an ellipse (or a circle) if B2 - 4AC 6 0.
(c)	 Defines a hyperbola if B2 - 4AC 7 0.
	 57.	 Use the rotation formulas (5) to show that distance is invariant 
under a rotation of axes. That is, show that the distance 
from P1 = 1x1, y12 to P2 = 1x2, y22 in the xy-plane equals 
the distance from P1 = 1x=
1, y=
12 to P2 = 1x=
2, y=
22 in  
the x′ y′@plane.
	 58.	 Show that the graph of the equation x1>2 + y1>2 = a1>2  is 
part of the graph of a parabola.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 59.	 Formulate a strategy for analyzing and graphing an  
equation of the form
Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
	 60.	 Explain how your strategy presented in Problem 59 changes 
if the equation is of the form
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 61–64 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	61.	 Solve the triangle described: a = 7, b = 9, and c = 11.
	 62.	 Find the area of the triangle described: a = 14, b = 11, 
and C = 30°. 
	 63.	 Transform 
the 
equation 
xy = 1 
from 
rectangular  
coordinates to polar coordinates. 
	 64.	 Write the complex number 2 - 5i in polar form.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.  sin A cos B + cos A sin B      2.  2 sin u cos u      3.  B
1 - cos u
2
       4.  B
1 + cos u
2
 

714 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Analyze and Graph Polar Equations of Conics
In Sections 10.2 through 10.4, we gave separate definitions for the parabola, ellipse, 
and hyperbola based on geometric properties and the distance formula. This section 
presents an alternative definition that simultaneously defines all these conics. As we 
shall see, this approach is well suited to polar coordinate representation. (Refer to 
Section 9.1.)
1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’problems on page 718.
	
Objectives	 	1  Analyze and Graph Polar Equations of Conics  (p. 714)
	
	 	2  Convert the Polar Equation of a Conic to a Rectangular Equation  (p. 718)
10.6  Polar Equations of Conics
•	 Polar Coordinates (Section 9.1, pp. 598–605)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Let D denote a fixed line called the directrix; let F denote a fixed point called 
the focus, which is not on D; and let e be a fixed positive number called the 
eccentricity. A conic is the set of points P in the plane such that the ratio of  
the distance from F to P to the distance from D to P equals e. That is, a conic is the 
collection of points P for which
	
d1F, P2
d1D, P2 = e	
(1)
If e = 1, the conic is a parabola.
If e 6 1, the conic is an ellipse.
If e 7 1, the conic is a hyperbola.
Definition
Observe that if e = 1, the definition of a parabola in equation (1) is exactly the 
same as the definition used earlier in Section 10.2.
In the case of an ellipse, the major axis is a line through the focus perpendicular 
to the directrix. In the case of a hyperbola, the transverse axis is a line through  
the focus perpendicular to the directrix. For both an ellipse and a hyperbola, the 
eccentricity e satisfies
	
e = c
a 	
(2)
where c is the distance from the center to the focus, and a is the distance from the 
center to a vertex.
Just as we did earlier using rectangular coordinates, we derive equations for the 
conics in polar coordinates by choosing a convenient position for the focus F and 
the directrix D. The focus F is positioned at the pole, and the directrix D is either 
parallel or perpendicular to the polar axis.
Suppose that we start with the directrix D perpendicular to the polar axis at a 
distance p units to the left of the pole (the focus F ). See Figure 51.
If P = 1r, u2 is any point on the conic, then, by equation (1),
	
d1F, P2
d1D, P2 = e or d1F, P2 = e # d1D, P2	
(3)
Figure 51 
θ
p
d(D, P)
P 5 (r, θ)
Q
Polar
axis
r
Pole O
(Focus F)
Directrix D

Section 10.6  Polar Equations of Conics  715
Now use the point Q obtained by dropping the perpendicular from P to the polar 
axis to calculate d1D, P2.
d1D, P2 = p + d1O, Q2 = p + r cos u
Using this expression and the fact that d1F, P2 = d1O, P2 = r in equation (3) 
gives
 d1F, P2 = e # d1D, P2
 r = e1p + r cos u2
 r = ep + er cos u
 r - er cos u = ep
 r11 - e cos u2 = ep
 r =
ep
1 - e cos u 
Polar Equation of a Conic; Focus at the Pole; Directrix Perpendicular to 
the Polar Axis a Distance p to the Left of the Pole
The polar equation of a conic with focus at the pole and directrix perpendicular 
to the polar axis at a distance p to the left of the pole is
	
r =
ep
1 - e cos u 	
(4)
where e is the eccentricity of the conic.
Theorem
Analyzing and Graphing the Polar Equation of a Conic
Analyze and graph the equation:  r =
4
2 - cos u 
The given equation is not quite in the form of equation (4), since the first term in  
the denominator is 2 instead of 1. Divide the numerator and denominator by 2 to 
obtain
r =
2
1 - 1
2
 cos u
  
This equation is in the form of equation (4), with
e = 1
2  and  ep = 2 
Then
 1
2
 p = 2, so p = 4
Since e = 1
2 6 1, the conic is an ellipse. One focus is at the pole, and the 
directrix is perpendicular to the polar axis, a distance of p = 4 units to the left of 
the pole. It follows that the major axis is along the polar axis. To find the vertices, let
u = 0 and u = p. The vertices of the ellipse are 14, 02 and a4
3, pb. The midpoint 
of the vertices, a4
3, 0b in polar coordinates, is the center of the ellipse.
Example 1
Solution
r =
ep
1 - e cos u

716 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
[Do you see why? The vertices 14, 02 and a4
3, pb in polar coordinates are 14, 02 
and a -  4
3, 0b in rectangular coordinates. The midpoint in rectangular coordinates 
is a4
3, 0b, which is also a4
3, 0b in polar coordinates.] Then a = distance from the 
center to a vertex = 8
3 . Using a = 8
3  and e = 1
2  in equation (2), e = c
a yields 
c = ae = 4
3 . Finally, using a = 8
3  and c = 4
3  in b2 = a2 - c2 yields
 b2 = a2 - c2 = 64
9 - 16
9 = 48
9  
 b = 423
3
 
Figure 52 shows the graph.
•
Table 5
Polar Equations of Conics (Focus at the Pole, Eccentricity e)
Equation
Description
(a) r =
ep
1 - e cos u 
Directrix is perpendicular to the polar axis at a distance p units to the left of the pole.
(b) r =
ep
1 + e cos u 
Directrix is perpendicular to the polar axis at a distance p units to the right of the pole.
(c) r =
ep
1 + e sin u 
Directrix is parallel to the polar axis at a distance p units above the pole.
(d) r =
ep
1 - e sin u 
Directrix is parallel to the polar axis at a distance p units below the pole.
Eccentricity
If e = 1, the conic is a parabola; the axis of symmetry is perpendicular to the directrix.
If e 6 1, the conic is an ellipse; the major axis is perpendicular to the directrix.
If e 7 1, the conic is a hyperbola; the transverse axis is perpendicular to the directrix.
Exploration
Graph r1 =
4
2 + cos u  and compare the result with Figure 52. What do you conclude? Clear the screen 
and graph r1 =
4
2 - sin u  and then r1 =
4
2 + sin u  . Compare each of these graphs with Figure 52.
 What do you conclude?
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Equation (4) was obtained under the assumption that the directrix was  
perpendicular to the polar axis at a distance p units to the left of the pole. A similar 
derivation (see Problem 43), in which the directrix is perpendicular to the polar axis 
at a distance p units to the right of the pole, results in the equation
r =
ep
1 + e cos u 
In Problems 44 and 45, you are asked to derive the polar equations of conics 
with focus at the pole and directrix parallel to the polar axis. Table 5 summarizes the 
polar equations of conics.
Figure 52  r =
4
2 - cos u
Polar
axis
Directrix
F
(4, 0)
4–3( , 0)
4–3( , π)
3
4
3

Section 10.6  Polar Equations of Conics  717
Analyzing and Graphing the Polar Equation of a Conic
Analyze and graph the equation:  r =
6
3 + 3 sin u 
To place the equation in proper form, divide the numerator and denominator by 3 
to get
r =
2
1 + sin u 
Referring to Table 5, conclude that this equation is in the form of equation (c) with
 e = 1 and ep = 2
 p = 2 
The conic is a parabola with focus at the pole. The directrix is parallel to the 
polar axis at a distance 2 units above the pole; the axis of symmetry is perpendicular
to the polar axis. The vertex of the parabola is at a1, p
2 b. (Do you see why?) See
Figure 53 for the graph. Notice that we plotted two additional points, 12, 02 and 
12, p2, to assist in graphing.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Analyzing and Graphing the Polar Equation of a Conic
Analyze and graph the equation:  r =
3
1 + 3 cos u 
This equation is in the form of equation (b) in Table 5. This means that
 e = 3 and ep = 3
 p = 1 
This is the equation of a hyperbola with a focus at the pole. The directrix is  
perpendicular to the polar axis, 1 unit to the right of the pole. The transverse axis 
is along the polar axis. To find the vertices, let u = 0 and u = p. The vertices are 
a3
4, 0b and a -  3
2, pb. The center, which is at the midpoint of a3
4, 0b and a -  3
2, pb,
is a9
8, 0b. Then c = distance from the center to a focus = 9
8 . Since e = 3, it follows 
from equation (2), e = c
a , that a = 3
8 . Finally, using a = 3
8  and c = 9
8  in
 b2 = c2 - a2 gives
 b2 = c2 - a2 = 81
64 - 9
64 = 72
64 = 9
8 
 b =
3
212 = 312
4
Figure 54 shows the graph. Notice that we plotted two additional points, a3, p
2 b 
and a3, 3p
2 b, on the left branch and used symmetry to obtain the right branch. 
The asymptotes of this hyperbola were found in the usual way by constructing the 
rectangle shown.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
Example 2
Solution
e = 1
•
Example 3
Solution
e = 3
•
Figure 53  r =
6
3 + 3 sin u
Polar
axis
Directrix
F
(2, 0)
(2, π)
2
π 
  
(1,   )
Figure 54  r =
3
1 + 3 cos u
Polar
axis
O
(  , 0)
3–4
(  , 0)
9–8
(2  , π)
3–2
(3,   )
π–2
(3,    )
3π
–––
2
b 5 3   2
––––
4

718 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Convert the Polar Equation of a Conic  
to a Rectangular Equation
Converting a Polar Equation to a Rectangular Equation
Convert the polar equation
r =
1
3 - 3 cos u 
to a rectangular equation.
The strategy here is to rearrange the equation and square each side before using the 
transformation equations.
 r =
1
3 - 3 cos u 
 3r - 3r cos u = 1
 3r = 1 + 3r cos u
 9r 2 = 11 + 3r cos u22
 91x2 + y22 = 11 + 3x22 
 
 9x2 + 9y2 = 9x2 + 6x + 1
 9y2 = 6x + 1
This is the equation of a parabola in rectangular coordinates.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
2
Example 4
Solution
Rearrange the equation.
Square each side.
x2 + y 2 = r2 ; x = r cos u
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 If 1x, y2 are the rectangular coordinates of a point P and 
1r, u2 are its polar coordinates, then x =         and y =         .  
(pp. 598–605) 
	 2.	 Transform the equation r = 6 cos u from polar coordinates 
to rectangular coordinates. (pp. 598–605) 
10.6  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 3.	 A 
    is the set of points P in the plane such that the 
ratio of the distance from a fixed point called the 
    
to P to the distance from a fixed line called the    
    
to P equals a constant e.
	 4.	 The eccentricity e of a parabola is        
  , of an ellipse it 
is     
  , and of a hyperbola it is     
  .
	 5.	 True or False  If 1r, u2 are polar coordinates, the equation 
r =
2
2 + 3 sin u  defines a hyperbola. 
	 6.	 True or False  The eccentricity e of an ellipse is c
a, where a is
	
	 the distance of a vertex from the center and c is the distance 
of a focus from the center. 
Skill Building
In Problems 7–12, identify the conic that each polar equation represents. Also give the position of the directrix.
	 7.	 r =
3
1 - sin u	
8.	 r =
1
1 + cos u	
9.	 r =
2
1 + 2 cos u
	 10.	 r =
4
2 - 3 sin u	
11.	 r =
3
4 - 2 cos u	
12.	 r =
6
8 + 2 sin u
In Problems 13–24, analyze each equation and graph it.
	 13.	 r =
1
1 + cos u	
14.	 r =
3
1 - sin u	
15.	 r =
10
5 + 4 cos u	
16.	 r =
8
4 + 3 sin u
	 17.	 r =
9
3 - 6 cos u	
18.	 r =
12
4 + 8 sin u	
19.	 r =
8
2 + 4 cos u	
20.	 r =
8
2 - sin u
	 21.	 r12 - cos u2 = 2	
22.	 r13 - 2 sin u2 = 6	
23.	 r =
3 csc u
csc u - 1	
24.	 r =
6 sec u
2 sec u - 1

Section 10.6  Polar Equations of Conics  719
In Problems 25–36, convert each polar equation to a rectangular equation.
	 25.	  r =
1
1 + cos u	
26.	 r =
3
1 - sin u	
27.	 r =
10
5 + 4 cos u	
28.	 r =
8
4 + 3 sin u
	 29.	 r =
12
4 + 8 sin u	
30.	 r =
9
3 - 6 cos u	
31.	 r =
8
2 + 4 cos u	
32.	 r =
8
2 - sin u
	 33.	 r12 - cos u2 = 2	
34.	 r13 - 2 sin u2 = 6	
35.	 r =
3 csc u
csc u - 1	
36.	 r =
6 sec u
2 sec u - 1
In Problems 37–42, find a polar equation for each conic. For each, a focus is at the pole.
	 37.	 e = 1; directrix is parallel to the polar axis, 2 units below the 
pole.
	 38	 e = 1; directrix is parallel to the polar axis, 1 unit above the 
pole.
	 39.	 e = 2
3; directrix is parallel to the polar axis, 3 units above the 
pole.
	 40.	 e = 4
5; directrix is perpendicular to the polar axis, 3 units to 
the left of the pole.
	 41.	 e = 5; directrix is perpendicular to the polar axis, 5 units to 
the right of the pole.
	 42.	 e = 6; directrix is parallel to the polar axis, 2 units below the 
pole.
Applications and Extensions
	 43.	 Derive equation (b) in Table 5:
r =
ep
1 + e cos u
	 44.	 Derive equation (c) in Table 5:
r =
ep
1 + e sin u
	 45.	 Derive equation (d) in Table 5:
r =
ep
1 - e sin u
	 46.	 Orbit of Mercury  The planet Mercury travels around the 
Sun in an elliptical orbit given approximately by
r =
13.4422107
1 - 0.206 cos u
	
	 where r is measured in miles and the Sun is at the pole. Find 
the distance from Mercury to the Sun at aphelion (greatest 
distance from the Sun) and at perihelion (shortest distance 
from the Sun). See the figure. Use the aphelion and perihelion 
to graph the orbit of Mercury using a graphing utility.
Perihelion
Mercury
Aphelion
Sun
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 47–50 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 47.	 Find the area of the triangle described: a = 7, b = 8, 
and c = 10. Round the answer to two decimal places. 
	 48.	 Without graphing, determine the amplitude and period  
of y = 4 cosa1
5xb. 
	 49.	 Solve 2 cos2 x + cos x - 1 = 0,  0 … x 6 2p
	 50.	 For v = 10i - 24j, find 7v7. 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 r cos u; r sin u      2.  x2 + y2 = 6x or 1x - 322 + y2 = 9

720 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Equations of the form y = f1x2, where f is a function, have graphs that are  
intersected no more than once by any vertical line. The graphs of many of the conics 
and certain other, more complicated graphs do not have this characteristic. Yet each 
graph, like the graph of a function, is a collection of points 1x, y2 in the xy-plane; that 
is, each is a plane curve. This section discusses another way of representing such graphs.
Comment  Most graphing utilities have 
the capability of graphing parametric  
equations. 
See 
Section 
B.9 
in  
Appendix B.	
■
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problem on page 729.
	
Objectives	 	1  Graph Parametric Equations  (p. 720)
	
	 	2  Find a Rectangular Equation for a Curve Defined Parametrically  (p. 721)
	
	 	3  Use Time as a Parameter in Parametric Equations  (p. 723)
	
	 	4  Find Parametric Equations for Curves Defined by Rectangular  
Equations  (p. 726)
10.7  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations
•	 Amplitude and Period of Sinusoidal Graphs (Section 6.4, pp. 435–437)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Let x = f1t2 and y = g1t2, where f and g are two functions whose common 
domain is some interval I. The collection of points defined by
1x, y2 = 1f1t2, g1t2 2
is called a plane curve. The equations
x = f1t2  y = g1t2
where t is in I, are called parametric equations of the curve. The variable t is 
called a parameter.
Graph Parametric Equations
Parametric equations are particularly useful in describing movement along a curve. 
Suppose that a curve is defined by the parametric equations
x = f1t2  y = g1t2  a … t … b
where f and g are each defined over the interval a … t … b. For a given value of t, 
we can find the value of x = f1t2 and y = g1t2, obtaining a point 1x, y2 on the 
curve. In fact, as t varies over the interval from t = a to t = b, successive values of t  
give rise to a directed movement along the curve; that is, the curve is traced out in 
a certain direction by the corresponding succession of points 1x, y2. See Figure 55. 
The arrows show the direction, or orientation, along the curve as t varies from a to b.
Graphing a Curve Defined by Parametric Equations
Graph the curve defined by the parametric equations
	
x = 3t2  y = 2t  -2 … t … 2	
(1)
For each number t, -2 … t … 2, there corresponds a number x and a number y. 
For example, when t = -2, then x = 31 -222 = 12 and y = 21-22 = -4. 
When t = 0, then x = 0 and y = 0. Set up a table listing various choices of the  
parameter t and the corresponding values for x and y, as shown in Table 6. Plotting 
these points and connecting them with a smooth curve leads to Figure 56. The arrows 
in Figure 56 are used to indicate the orientation.
1
Example 1
Solution
Figure 55 
x
A 5 (f(a), g(a))
B 5 (f(b), g(b))
P 5 (f(t), g(t))
t 5 a
t 5 b
y

Section 10.7  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  721
Exploration
Graph the following parametric equations using a graphing utility with Xmin = 0, Xmax = 15, 
Ymin = -5, Ymax = 5, and Tstep = 0.1.
1.  x = 3t2
4   , y = t, -4 … t … 4
2.  x = 3t2 + 12t + 12, y = 2t + 4, -4 … t … 0
3.  x = 3t 
2
3  , y = 22
3 t, -8 … t … 8
Compare these graphs to Figure 56. Conclude that parametric equations defining a curve are not 
unique; that is, different parametric equations can represent the same graph.
Exploration
Graph
 
x =
3y2
4
 aY1 = B
4x
3   and Y2 = - B
4x
3 b
in FUNction mode with Xmin = 0,
 Xmax = 15, 
Ymin = -5, 
Ymax = 5. 
Compare this graph with  Figure 56.  
Why do the graphs differ?
Table 6
t
x
y
(x, y)
-2
12
-4
(12, -4)
-1
  3
-2
(3, -2)
0
  0
0
(0, 0)
1
  3
2
(3, 2)
2
12
4
(12, 4)
Find a Rectangular Equation for a Curve Defined  
Parametrically
The curve given in Example 1 should be familiar. To identify it accurately, find 
the corresponding rectangular equation by eliminating the parameter t from the  
parametric equations given in Example 1:
x = 3t2  y = 2t  -2 … t … 2
Solve for t in y = 2t, obtaining t = y
2, and substitute this expression in the other 
equation to get
 x = 3t2 = 3ay
2b
2
= 3y2
4
This equation, x = 3y2
4  , is the equation of a parabola with vertex at 10, 02 and axis 
of symmetry along the x-axis.
Note that the parameterized curve defined by equation (1) and shown in
Figure 56 is only a part of the parabola x = 3y2
4  . The graph of the rectangular equation 
obtained by eliminating the parameter will, in general, contain more points than the 
original parameterized curve. Care must therefore be taken when a parameterized 
curve is graphed after eliminating the parameter. Even so, eliminating the parameter t 
of a parameterized curve to identify it accurately is sometimes a better approach than 
plotting points. However, the elimination process sometimes requires a little ingenuity.
Finding the Rectangular Equation of a Curve  
Defined Parametrically
Find the rectangular equation of the curve whose parametric equations are
x = a cos t  y = a sin t   
- q 6 t 6 q
where a 7 0 is a constant. Graph this curve, indicating its orientation.
2
 æ
   t = y
2 
Example 2
Figure 56  x = 3t2, y = 2t, - 2 … t … 2 •
x
5
10
(0, 0)
(3, 2)
(12, 4)
(12, 4)
(3, 2)
y
4
4

722 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
The presence of sines and cosines in the parametric equations suggests using a  
Pythagorean Identity. In fact, since
cos t = x
a    sin t = y
a
this means that
 cos2 t + sin2 t = 1
 ax
ab
2
+ ay
ab
2
= 1
 x2 + y2 = a2
The curve is a circle with center at 10, 02 and radius a. As the parameter t increases,
say from t = 0 [the point 1a, 02] to t = p
2  [the point 10, a2] to t = p [the point
1 -a, 02], note that the corresponding points are traced in a counterclockwise  
direction around the circle. The orientation is as indicated in Figure 57.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m s  7  a n d  1 9
Let’s analyze the curve in Example 2 further. The domain of each parametric 
equation is - q 6 t 6 q. That means the graph in Figure 57 is actually being  
repeated each time that t increases by 2p.
If we wanted the curve to consist of exactly 1 revolution in the counterclockwise 
direction, we could write
x = a cos t  y = a sin t  0 … t … 2p
This curve starts at t = 0 [the point 1a, 02] and, proceeding counterclockwise 
around the circle, ends at t = 2p [also the point 1a, 02].
If we wanted the curve to consist of exactly three revolutions in the  
counterclockwise direction, we could write
x = a cos t  y = a sin t  -2p … t … 4p
or
x = a cos t  y = a sin t  0 … t … 6p
or
x = a cos t  y = a sin t  2p … t … 8p
Describing Parametric Equations
Find rectangular equations for the following curves defined by parametric  
equations. Graph each curve.
(a)	 x = a cos t y = a sin t 0 … t … p, a 7 0
(b)	 x = -a sin t y = -a cos t 0 … t … p, a 7 0
(a)	 Eliminate the parameter t using a Pythagorean Identity.
 cos2 t + sin2 t = 1
 ax
ab
2
+ ay
ab
2
= 1
 x2 + y2 = a2
The curve defined by these parametric equations lies on a circle with radius a and 
center at 10, 02. The curve begins at the point 1a, 02, when t = 0; passes through
the point 10, a2, when t = p
2; and ends at the point 1 -a, 02, when t = p.
The parametric equations define the upper semicircle of a circle of radius a 
with a counterclockwise orientation. See Figure 58. The rectangular equation is
y = 2a2 - x2   -a … x … a
Solution
•
Example 3
Solution
Figure 57  x = a cos t, y = a sin t
y
x
(0, a)
(2a, 0)
(a, 0)
Figure 58
x = a cos t, y = a sin t, 0 … t … p, a 7 0
y
x
(0, a)
(2a, 0)
(a, 0)

Section 10.7  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  723
(b)	 Eliminate the parameter t using a Pythagorean Identity.
 sin2 t + cos2 t = 1
 a x
-ab
2
+ a y
-ab
2
= 1
 x2 + y2 = a2
The curve defined by these parametric equations lies on a circle with radius a and 
center at 10, 02. The curve begins at the point 10, -a2, when t = 0; passes through
the point 1-a, 02, when t = p
2; and ends at the point 10, a2, when t = p. The
parametric equations define the left semicircle of a circle of radius a with a 
clockwise orientation. See Figure 59. The rectangular equation is
x = - 2a2 - y2  -a … y … a
•
Figure 59  x = - a sin t, y = - a cos t, 
0 … t … p, a 7 0
Seeing the Concept
Graph x = cos t, y = sin t for 0 … t … 2p. Compare to Figure 57. Graph x = cos t, y = sin t for 
0 … t … p. Compare to Figure 58. Graph x = - sin t, y = -cos t for 0 … t … p. Compare to Figure 59.
Example 3 illustrates the versatility of parametric equations for replacing  
complicated rectangular equations, while providing additional information about 
orientation. These characteristics make parametric equations very useful in  
applications, such as projectile motion.
Use Time as a Parameter in Parametric Equations
If we think of the parameter t as time, then the parametric equations x = f1t2 and 
y = g1t2 of a curve C specify how the x- and y-coordinates of a moving point vary 
with time.
For example, we can use parametric equations to model the motion of an object, 
sometimes referred to as curvilinear motion. Using parametric equations, we can 
specify not only where the object travels—that is, its location 1x, y2—but also when 
it gets there—that is, the time t.
When an object is propelled upward at an inclination u to the horizontal with 
initial speed v0, the resulting motion is called projectile motion. See Figure 60(a).
In calculus it is shown that the parametric equations of the path of a projectile 
fired at an inclination u to the horizontal, with an initial speed v0, from a height h 
above the horizontal, are
3
	
x = 1v0 cos u2t  y = -  1
2
 gt2 + 1v0 sin u2t + h	
(2)
where t is the time and g is the constant acceleration due to gravity (approximately 
32 ft/sec/sec, or 9.8 m/sec/sec). See Figure 60(b).
Projectile Motion
Suppose that Jim hit a golf ball with an initial velocity of 150 feet per second at an 
angle of 30° to the horizontal. See Figure 61.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that describe the position of the ball as a function of time.
(b)	 How long was the golf ball in the air?
(c)	 When was the ball at its maximum height? Determine the maximum height of 
the ball.
(d)	 Determine the distance that the ball traveled.
(e)	 Using a graphing utility, simulate the motion of the golf ball by simultaneously 
graphing the equations found in part (a).
Example 4
y
x
(0, a)
(2a, 0)
(0, 2a)
Figure 61 
30°
Figure 60 
θ
vo
D
x
θ
h
(x(t), y(t))
vo
E
y

724 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
(a)	 We have v0 = 150 ft/sec, u = 30°, h = 0 ft (the ball is on the ground), and 
g = 32 ft/sec2 (since the units are in feet and seconds). Substitute these values 
into equations (2) to get
 x = 1v0 cos u2t = 1150 cos 30°2t = 7523 t
 y = -  1
2
 gt2 + 1v0 sin u2t + h = -  1
2
 1322t2 + 1150 sin 30°2t + 0
 = -16t2 + 75t
(b)	 To determine the length of time that the ball was in the air, solve the equation 
y = 0.
 -16t2 + 75t = 0
 t1 -16t + 752 = 0
 t = 0 sec or t = 75
16 = 4.6875 sec
The ball struck the ground after 4.6875 seconds.
(c)	 Notice that the height y of the ball is a quadratic function of t, so the maximum 
height of the ball can be found by determining the vertex of y = -16t2 + 75t. 
The value of t at the vertex is
t = -b
2a = -75
-32 = 2.34375 sec
The ball was at its maximum height after 2.34375 seconds. The maximum height 
of the ball is found by evaluating the function y at t = 2.34375 seconds.
Maximum height = -1612.3437522 + 7512.343752 ≈87.89 feet
(d)	 Since the ball was in the air for 4.6875 seconds, the horizontal distance that the 
ball traveled is
x = 17523 24.6875 ≈608.92 feet
(e)	 Enter the equations from part (a) into a graphing utility with Tmin = 0, 
Tmax = 4.7, and Tstep = 0.1. Use ZOOM-SQUARE to avoid any distortion 
to the angle of elevation. See Figure 62.
Exploration
Simulate the motion of a ball thrown straight up with an initial speed of 100 feet per second 
from a height of 5 feet above the ground. Use PARametric mode with Tmin = 0, Tmax = 6.5, 
Tstep = 0.1, Xmin = 0, Xmax = 5, Ymin = 0, and Ymax = 180. What happens to the speed with 
which the graph is drawn as the ball goes up and then comes back down? How do you interpret this 
physically? Repeat the experiment using other values for Tstep. How does this affect the experiment?
[Hint: In the projectile motion equations, let u = 90°, v0 = 100, h = 5, and g = 32. Use x = 3 instead 
of x = 0 to see the vertical motion better.]
Result In Figure 63(a) the ball is going up. In Figure 63(b) the ball is near its highest point. Finally, in 
Figure 63(c), the ball is coming back down.
Solution
•
Figure 63 
180
0
5
0
(t ' 0.7)
(a)
180
0
5
0
(t ' 3)
(b)
180
0
5
0
(t ' 4)
(c)
Notice that as the ball goes up, its speed decreases, until at the highest point it is zero. Then the 
speed increases as the ball comes back down.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Figure 62 
247
2157
220
630

Section 10.7  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  725
A graphing utility can be used to simulate other kinds of motion as well. Let’s 
work again Example 5 from Appendix A, Section A.8.
Simulating Motion
Tanya, who is a long-distance runner, runs at an average speed of 8 miles per hour. Two 
hours after Tanya leaves your house, you leave in your Honda and follow the same 
route. If your average speed is 40 miles per hour, how long will it be before you catch 
up to Tanya? See Figure 64. Use a simulation of the two motions to verify the answer.
Example 5
Figure 64 
Time t
2 hr
t  2
t  2
t  0
Begin with two sets of parametric equations: one to describe Tanya’s motion, the 
other to describe the motion of the Honda. We choose time t = 0 to be when Tanya 
leaves the house. If we choose y1 = 2 as Tanya’s path, then we can use y2 = 4 
as the parallel path of the Honda. The horizontal distances traversed in time t 
1Distance = Rate * Time2 are
Tanya: x1 = 8t  Honda: x2 = 401t - 22
The Honda catches up to Tanya when x1 = x2.
 8t = 401t - 22
 8t = 40t - 80
 -32t = -80
 t = -80
-32 = 2.5
The Honda catches up to Tanya 2.5 hours after Tanya leaves the house.
In PARametric mode with Tstep = 0.01, simultaneously graph
 Tanya: x1 = 8t  Honda:  x2 = 401t - 22
 y1 = 2  
 y2 = 4
for 0 … t … 3.
Figure 65 shows the relative positions of Tanya and the Honda for t = 0, 
t = 2, t = 2.25, t = 2.5, and t = 2.75.
Solution
Figure 65 
•
5
40
t 50
00
5
40
t 52
00
5
40
t 52.25
00
5
40
t 52.5
00
5
40
t 52.75
00

726 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Find Parametric Equations for Curves Defined  
by Rectangular Equations
We now take up the question of how to find parametric equations of a given curve.
If a curve is defined by the equation y = f1x2, where f is a function, one way 
of finding parametric equations is to let x = t. Then y = f1t2 and
x = t y = f1t2  t in the domain of f
are parametric equations of the curve.
Finding Parametric Equations for a Curve Defined  
by a Rectangular Equation
Find two different pairs of parametric equations for the equation y = x2 - 4.
For the first pair of parametric equations, let x = t. Then the parametric equations are
x = t y = t2 - 4  - q 6 t 6 q
A second pair of parametric equations is found by letting x = t3. Then the  
parametric equations become
x = t3 y = t6 - 4  - q 6 t 6 q
Care must be taken when using the second approach in Example 6, since the 
substitution for x must be a function that allows x to take on all the values stipulated 
by the domain of f. For example, letting x = t2 so that y = t4 - 4 does not result in 
equivalent parametric equations for y = x2 - 4, since only points for which x Ú 0 
are obtained; yet the domain of y = x2 - 4 is {x0 x is any real number}.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
Finding Parametric Equations for an Object in Motion
Find parametric equations for the ellipse
x2 + y2
9 = 1
where the parameter t is time (in seconds) and
(a)	 The motion around the ellipse is clockwise, begins at the point 10, 32, and 
requires 1 second for a complete revolution.
(b)	 The motion around the ellipse is counterclockwise, begins at the point 11, 02, 
and requires 2 seconds for a complete revolution.
Solution
(a)	 See Figure 66. Since the motion begins at the point 10, 32, we want x = 0 and 
y = 3 when t = 0. Furthermore, since the given equation is an ellipse, begin  
by letting
x = sin1vt2 y = 3 cos1vt2
for some constant v. These parametric equations satisfy the equation of the 
ellipse. Furthermore, with this choice, when t = 0 we have x = 0 and y = 3.
For the motion to be clockwise, the motion has to begin with the value of x 
increasing and the value of y decreasing as t increases. This requires that v 7 0. 
4
Example 6
Solution
•
Example 7
Figure 66  x2 +
y2
9 = 1
y
x
(0, 3)
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 3)

Section 10.7  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  727
[Do you know why? If v 7 0, then x = sin1vt2 is increasing when t 7 0 is near 
zero, and y = 3 cos1vt2 is decreasing when t 7 0 is near zero.] See the red part 
of the graph in Figure 66.
Finally, since 1 revolution requires 1 second, the period 2p
v = 1, so v = 2p.
Parametric equations that satisfy the conditions stipulated are
	
x = sin12pt2  y = 3 cos12pt2  0 … t … 1	
(3)
(b)	 See Figure 67. Since the motion begins at the point 11, 02, we want x = 1 and 
y = 0 when t = 0. The given equation is an ellipse, so begin by letting
x = cos1vt2  y = 3 sin1vt2
for some constant v. These parametric equations satisfy the equation of the 
ellipse. Furthermore, with this choice, when t = 0 we have x = 1 and y = 0.
For the motion to be counterclockwise, the motion has to begin with the 
value of x decreasing and the value of y increasing as t increases. This requires 
that v 7 0. (Do you know why?) Finally, since 1 revolution requires 2 seconds,
the period is 2p
v = 2, so v = p. The parametric equations that satisfy the  
conditions stipulated are
	
x = cos1pt2  y = 3 sin1pt2  0 … t … 2	
(4)
Either equations (3) or equations (4) can serve as parametric equations for the ellipse
x2 + y2
9 = 1 given in Example 7. The direction of the motion, the beginning point, 
and the time for 1 revolution give a particular parametric representation.
 Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
The Cycloid
Suppose that a circle of radius a rolls along a horizontal line without slipping. As the 
circle rolls along the line, a point P on the circle will trace out a curve called a cycloid 
(see Figure 68). We now seek parametric equations* for a cycloid.
•
*Any attempt to derive the rectangular equation of a cycloid would soon demonstrate how complicated 
the task is.
We begin with a circle of radius a and take the fixed line on which the circle 
rolls as the x-axis. Let the origin be one of the points at which the point P comes 
in contact with the x-axis. Figure 68 illustrates the position of this point P after the 
circle has rolled somewhat. The angle t (in radians) measures the angle through 
which the circle has rolled.
Figure 67  x 2 +
y 2
9 = 1
y
x
(0, 3)
(0, 3)
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
Figure 68  Cycloid
x
O
X
A
B
Y
C
2a
a
t
y
P

728 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Since we require no slippage, it follows that
Arc AP = d1O, A2
The length of the arc AP is given by s = ru, where r = a and u = t radians. Then
at = d1O, A2  s = r u, where r = a and u = t
The x-coordinate of the point P is
d1O, X2 = d1O, A2 - d1X, A2 = at - a sin t = a1t - sin t2
The y-coordinate of the point P is
d1O, Y2 = d1A, C2 - d1B, C2 = a - a cos t = a11 - cos t2
The parametric equations of the cycloid are
* In Greek, brachistochrone means “the shortest time” and tautochrone means “equal time.”
	
x = a1t - sin t2  y = a11 - cos t2	
(5)
Applications to Mechanics
If a is negative in equation (5), we obtain an inverted cycloid, as shown in  
Figure 69(a). The inverted cycloid occurs as a result of some remarkable  
applications in the field of mechanics. We shall mention two of them: the  
brachistochrone and the tautochrone.*
Figure 69 
(a)   Inverted cycloid
A
B
(b)   Curve of quickest descent
A
B
Q
(c)   All reach Q at
        the same time
The brachistochrone is the curve of quickest descent. If a particle is constrained to 
follow some path from one point A to a lower point B (not on the same vertical line) 
and is acted on only by gravity, the time needed to make the descent is least if the 
path is an inverted cycloid. See Figure 69(b). This remarkable discovery, which has 
been attributed to many famous mathematicians (including Johann Bernoulli and 
Blaise Pascal), was a significant step in creating the branch of mathematics known 
as the calculus of variations.
To define the tautochrone, let Q be the lowest point on an inverted cycloid. If 
several particles placed at various positions on an inverted cycloid simultaneously 
begin to slide down the cycloid, they will reach the point Q at the same time, as 
indicated in Figure 69(c). The tautochrone property of the cycloid was used by 
Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695), the Dutch mathematician, physicist, and astronomer, 
to construct a pendulum clock with a bob that swings along a cycloid (see Figure 70). 
In Huygens’s clock, the bob was made to swing along a cycloid by suspending the 
bob on a thin wire constrained by two plates shaped like cycloids. In a clock of this 
design, the period of the pendulum is independent of its amplitude.
Exploration
Graph 
x = t - sin t,  y = 1 - cos t, 
0 … t … 3p, using your graphing utility
with Tstep = p
36 and a square screen.
Compare your results with Figure 68.
Figure 70 
Cycloid
Cycloid
Cycloid

Section 10.7  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  729
‘Are You Prepared?’ The answer is given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The function f1x2 = 3 sin14x2 has amplitude     
  and period          . (pp. 435–437)
10.7  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 2.	 Let x = f1t2 and y = g1t2, where f and g are two functions 
whose common domain is some interval I. The collection of 
points defined by 1x, y2 = 1f1t2, g1t22 is called a(n)   
  
   
 . The variable t is called a(n)   
 .
	 3.	 The parametric equations x = 2 sin t, y = 3 cos t define 
a(n)   
 .
	 4.	 If a circle rolls along a horizontal line without slippage, a 
fixed point P on the circle will trace out a curve called a(n) 
  
 .
	 5.	 True or False  Parametric equations defining a curve are 
unique. 
	 6.	 True or False  Curves defined using parametric equations 
have an orientation. 
Skill Building
In Problems 7–26, graph the curve whose parametric equations are given, and show its orientation. Find the rectangular equation of  
each curve.
	 7.	 x = 3t + 2, y = t + 1; 0 … t … 4	
8.	 x = t - 3, y = 2t + 4; 0 … t … 2
	 9.	 x = 22t, y = 4t ; t Ú 0	
10.	 x = t + 2, y = 1t ; t Ú 0
	 11.	 x = 1t + 4, y = 1t - 4; t Ú 0	
12.	 x = t2 + 4, y = t2 - 4; - q 6 t 6 q
	 13.	 x = 2t - 4, y = 4t2; - q 6 t 6 q	
14.	 x = 3t2, y = t + 1; - q 6 t 6 q
	 15.	 x = et, y = e-t; t Ú 0	
16.	 x = 2et, y = 1 + et; t Ú 0
	 17.	 x = t3>2 + 1, y = 1t; t Ú 0	
18.	 x = 1t, y = t3>2 ; t Ú 0
	 19.	 x = 2 cos t, y = 3 sin t ; 0 … t … 2p	
20.	 x = 2 cos t, y = 3 sin t; 0 … t … p
	 21.	 x = 2 cos t, y = sin t; 0 … t … p
2 	
22.	 x = 2 cos t, y = 3 sin t ; - p … t … 0
	 23.	 x = csc t, y = cot t; p
4 … t … p
2 	
24.	 x = sec t, y = tan t; 0 … t … p
4
	 25.	 x = t2, y = ln t; t 7 0	
26.	 x = sin2 t, y = cos2 t; 0 … t … 2p
In Problems 27–34, find two different pairs of parametric equations for each rectangular equation.
	 27.	 y = - 8x + 3	
28.	 y = 4x - 1	
29.	 y = - 2x2 + 1	
30.	 y = x2 + 1
	 31.	 y = x4 + 1	
32.	 y = x3	
33.	 x = y3>2	
34.	 x = 1y
In Problems 35–38, find parametric equations that define the curve shown.
	 35.	
36.	
37.	
38.	
x
2
6
4
(7, 5)
(2, 0)
y
4
2
6
x
1
3
1
2
2
(1, 2)
(3, 2)
y
2
1
2
3
1
x
1
3
1
2
3
2
y
2
1
2
1
x
2
2
(0, 4)
y
(0, 4)
2
2
In Problems 39–42, find parametric equations for an object that moves along the ellipse x2
4 +
y2
9 = 1 with the motion described.
	 39.	 The motion begins at 12, 02, is clockwise, and requires  
2 seconds for a complete revolution.
	 40.	 The motion begins at 10, 32, is counterclockwise, and  
requires 1 second for a complete revolution.
	 41.	 The motion begins at 12, 02, is counterclockwise, and 
requires 3 seconds for a complete revolution.
	 42.	 The motion begins at 10, 32, is clockwise, and requires  
1 second for a complete revolution.

730 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
In Problems 43 and 44, the parametric equations of four curves are given. Graph each of them, indicating the orientation.
	 43.	  C1  : x = t, y = 21 - t2; - 1 … t … 1
 C2  : x = sin t, y = cos t; 0 … t … 2p
 C3  : x = cos t, y = sin t; 0 … t … 2p
 C4  : x = 21 - t2, y = t; - 1 … t … 1
	 44.	  C1  : x = t, y = t2; - 4 … t … 4
 C2  : x = cos t, y = 1 - sin2 t; 0 … t … p
 C3  : x = et, y = e2t; 0 … t … ln 4
 C4  : x = 1t, y = t; 0 … t … 16
In Problems 45–48, use a graphing utility to graph the curve defined by the given parametric equations.
	 45.	 x = sin t + cos t, y = sin t - cos t
	 46.	 x = t sin t, y = t cos t, t 7 0
	 47.	  x = 4 sin t + 2 sin12t2
 y = 4 cos t + 2 cos12t2
	 48.	  x = 4 sin t - 2 sin12t2
 y = 4 cos t - 2 cos12t2
Applications and Extensions
	 49.	 Projectile Motion  Bob throws a ball straight up with an  
initial speed of 50 feet per second from a height of 6 feet.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the motion of the 
ball as a function of time.   
(b)	 How long is the ball in the air? 
(c)	 When is the ball at its maximum height? Determine the 
maximum height of the ball.   
(d)	 Simulate the motion of the ball by graphing the  
equations found in part (a).
	 50.	 Projectile Motion  Alice throws a ball straight up with an 
initial speed of 40 feet per second from a height of 5 feet.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the motion of the 
ball as a function of time.   
(b)	 How long is the ball in the air? 
(c)	 When is the ball at its maximum height? Determine the 
maximum height of the ball. 
(d)	 Simulate the motion of the ball by graphing the  
equations found in part (a).
	 51.	 Catching a Train  Bill’s train leaves at 8:06 am and 
accelerates at the rate of 2 meters per second per second. Bill, 
who can run 5 meters per second, arrives at the train station  
5 seconds after the train has left and runs for the train.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the motions of 
the train and Bill as a function of time.
[Hint: The position s at time t of an object having 
acceleration a is s = 1
2
 at2.]
(b)	 Determine algebraically whether Bill will catch the 
train. If so, when? 
(c)	 Simulate the motion of the train and Bill by  
simultaneously graphing the equations found in part (a).
	 52.	 Catching a Bus  Jodi’s bus leaves at 5:30 pm and accelerates 
at the rate of 3 meters per second per second. Jodi, who can 
run 5 meters per second, arrives at the bus station 2 seconds 
after the bus has left and runs for the bus.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the motions of 
the bus and Jodi as a function of time.
[Hint: The position s at time t of an object having 
acceleration a is s = 1
2
 at2.]
(b)	 Determine algebraically whether Jodi will catch the bus. 
If so, when? 
(c)	 Simulate the motion of the bus and Jodi by graphing  
simultaneously the equations found in part (a).
	 53.	 Projectile Motion  Ichiro throws a baseball with an  
initial speed of 145 feet per second at an angle of 20° to the  
horizontal. The ball leaves Ichiro’s hand at a height of 5 feet.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the position of 
the ball as a function of time.
(b)	 How long is the ball in the air? 
(c)	 Determine the horizontal distance that the ball travels.
(d)	 When is the ball at its maximum height? Determine the 
maximum height of the ball.   
(e)	 Using a graphing utility, simultaneously graph the  
equations found in part (a).
	 54.	 Projectile Motion  Mark Texeira hit a baseball with an  
initial speed of 125 feet per second at an angle of 40° to the  
horizontal. The ball was hit at a height of 3 feet above the 
ground.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the position of 
the ball as a function of time.
(b)	 How long was the ball in the air? 
(c)	 Determine the horizontal distance that the ball  
traveled.
(d)	 When was the ball at its maximum height? Determine 
the maximum height of the ball. 
(e)	 Using a graphing utility, simultaneously graph the  
equations found in part (a).
	 55.	 Projectile Motion  Suppose that Adam hits a golf ball off  
a cliff 300 meters high with an initial speed of 40 meters per 
second at an angle of 45° to the horizontal.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the position of 
the ball as a function of time.
(b)	 How long is the ball in the air? 
(c)	 Determine the horizontal distance that the ball travels.
(d)	 When is the ball at its maximum height? Determine the 
maximum height of the ball.   
(e)	 Using a graphing utility, simultaneously graph the  
equations found in part (a).
	 56.	 Projectile Motion  Suppose that Karla hits a golf ball off a 
cliff 300 meters high with an initial speed of 40 meters per 
second at an angle of 45° to the horizontal on the Moon 
(gravity on the Moon is one-sixth of that on Earth).
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the position of 
the ball as a function of time.
(b)	 How long is the ball in the air? 
(c)	 Determine the horizontal distance that the ball travels.
(d)	 When is the ball at its maximum height? Determine the 
maximum height of the ball.   
(e)	 Using a graphing utility, simultaneously graph the  
equations found in part (a).

Section 10.7  Plane Curves and Parametric Equations  731
	 57.	 Uniform Motion  A Toyota Camry (traveling east at  
40 mph) and a Chevy Impala (traveling north at 30 mph) are 
heading toward the same intersection. The Camry is 5 miles 
from the intersection when the Impala is 4 miles from the 
intersection. See the figure.
ground, at an angle of 45°. Use g = 32 ft/sec2 as the acceler-
ation due to gravity and ignore any air resistance. Complete 
parts (a) through (d).
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the position of 
the ball as a function of time.
(b)	 What is the maximum height of the ball if it leaves the 
bat with a speed of 120 miles per hour? Give your an-
swer in feet. 
(c)	 What is the ball’s horizontal distance from home plate at 
its maximum height? Give your answer in feet. 
(d)	 If the ball is hit straight down the third base line, will it 
clear the wall? If it does, by how many feet does it clear 
the wall? 
	 60.	 Projectile Motion  The position of a projectile fired with an 
initial velocity v0 feet per second and at an angle u to the 
horizontal at the end of t seconds is given by the parametric 
equations
x = 1v0 cos u2t  y = 1v0 sin u2t - 16t2
See the illustration.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the motion of the 
Camry and the Impala.
(b)	 Find a formula for the distance between the cars as a 
function of time. 
(c)	 Graph the function in part (b) using a graphing utility.
(d)	 What is the minimum distance between the cars? When 
are the cars closest? 
(e)	 Simulate the motion of the cars by simultaneously 
graphing the equations found in part (a).
	 58.	 Uniform Motion  A Cessna (heading south at 120 mph)  
and a Boeing 747 (heading west at 600 mph) are flying  
toward the same point at the same altitude. The Cessna is 100 
miles from the point where the flight patterns intersect, and 
the 747 is 550 miles from this intersection point. See the figure.
5 mi
40 mph
30 mph
4 mi
DRIVE
THRU
N
S
E
W
550 mi
100 mi
120 mph
600 mph
N
S
E
W
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the motion of the 
Cessna and the 747.
(b)	 Find a formula for the distance between the planes as a 
 function of time. 
(c)	 Graph the function in part (b) using a graphing utility.
(d)	 What is the minimum distance between the planes? 
When are the planes closest? 
(e)	 Simulate the motion of the planes by simultaneously 
graphing the equations found in part (a).
	 59.	 The Green Monster  The left field wall at a baseball park is 
310 feet down the third base line from home plate; the wall 
itself 38 feet high. A batted ball must clear the wall to be 
a home run. Suppose a ball leaves the bat, 3 feet off the 
R
θ
(a)	 Obtain the rectangular equation of the trajectory, and 
identify the curve.
(b)	 Show that the projectile hits the ground 1y = 02 when 
t = 1
16
 v0 sin u.
(c)	 How far has the projectile traveled (horizontally) when 
it strikes the ground? In other words, find the range R.
(d)	 Find the time t when x = y. Next find the horizontal 
distance x and the vertical distance y traveled by the
	
projectile in this time. Then compute 2x2 + y2. This is 
the distance R, the range, that the projectile travels up a 
plane inclined at 45° to the horizontal 1x = y2. See the 
following illustration. (See also Problem 99 in Section 7.6.)
	 61.	 Show that the parametric equations for a line passing 
through the points 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22 are
 x = 1x2 - x12t + x1
 y = 1y2 - y12t + y1 - q 6 t 6 q
What is the orientation of this line?
	 62.	 Hypocycloid  The hypocycloid is a curve defined by the 
parametric equations
x1t2 = cos3 t y1t2 = sin3 t 0 … t … 2p
(a)	 Graph the hypocycloid using a graphing utility.
(b)	 Find a rectangular equation of the hypocycloid.
R
45°
θ

732 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 63.	 In Problem 62, we graphed the hypocycloid. Now graph the 
rectangular equations of the hypocycloid. Did you obtain a 
complete graph? If not, experiment until you do.
	 64.	 Look up the curves called hypocycloid and epicycloid. Write 
a report on what you find. Be sure to draw comparisons with 
the cycloid.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 65–68 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 65.	 Graph the equation 3x - 4y = 8 on the xy-plane.
	 66.	 Graph y = 2 cos12x2 + sinax
2b on the xy-plane.
	 67.	 The International Space Station (ISS) orbits Earth at a 
height of approximately 248 miles above the surface. What 
is the distance, in miles, on the surface of Earth that can  
be observed from the ISS? Assume that Earth’s radius is 
3960 miles. 
Source: nasa.gov
	 68.	 The displacement d (in meters) of an object at time t  
(in seconds) is given by d = 2 cos14t2.
(a)	 Describe the motion of the object. 
(b)	 What is the maximum displacement of the object from 
its rest position? 
(c)	 What is the time required for 1 oscillation? 
(d)	 What is the frequency? 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answer
	 1.	 3; p
2
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Equations
Parabola (pp. 674–680)	
See Tables 1 and 2 (pp. 676 and 677).
Ellipse (pp. 683–690)	
See Table 3 (p. 688).
Hyperbola (pp. 693–702)	
See Table 4 (p. 700).
General equation of a conic (p. 711)	
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0	
Parabola if B2 - 4AC = 0
	
	
	
	
Ellipse (or circle) if B2 - 4AC 6 0
	
	
	
	
Hyperbola if B2 - 4AC 7 0
Polar equations of a conic with focus  
at the pole (pp. 714–718)	
See Table 5 (p. 716).
Parametric equations of a curve (p. 720)	
x = f1t2, y = g1t2, t is the parameter
Definitions
Parabola (p. 674)	
Set of points P in the plane for which d1F, P2 = d1P, D2, where F is the focus 
	
	
	
and D is the directrix
Ellipse (p. 683)	
Set of points P in the plane the sum of whose distances from two fixed points 
	
	
	
(the foci) is a constant
Hyperbola (p. 693)	
Set of points P in the plane the difference of whose distances from two fixed points  
	
	
	
(the foci) is a constant
Conic in polar coordinates (p. 714)	
d1F, P2
d1D, P2 = e	
Parabola if e = 1
	
	
	
	
Ellipse if e 6 1
	
	
	
	
Hyperbola if e 7 1
Formulas
Rotation formulas (p. 708)	
 x = x′ cos u - y′ sin u
	
	
	
 y = x′ sin u + y′ cos u
Angle u of rotation that  
eliminates the x′ y′@term (p. 709)	
cot12u2 = A - C
B  0° 6 u 6 90°

Chapter Review  733
Objectives
Section	 	
You should be able to . . .	
Example(s)	
Review Exercises
10.1	
1	
Know the names of the conics (p. 673)	
	
1–16
10.2	
1	 Analyze parabolas with vertex at the origin (p. 674)	
1–5	
1, 11
	
2	 Analyze parabolas with vertex at 1h, k2 (p. 677)	
6, 7	
4, 6, 9, 14
	
3	
Solve applied problems involving parabolas (p. 679)	
8	
39
10.3	
1	 Analyze ellipses with center at the origin (p. 683)	
1–4	
3, 13
	
2	 Analyze ellipses with center at 1h, k2 (p. 687)	
5, 6	
8, 10, 16, 38
	
3	
Solve applied problems involving ellipses (p. 689)	
7	
40
10.4	
1	 Analyze hyperbolas with center at the origin (p. 693)	
1–4	
2, 5, 12, 37
	
2	
Find the asymptotes of a hyperbola (p. 698)	
5, 6	
2, 5, 7
	
3	 Analyze hyperbolas with center at 1h, k2 (p. 700)	
7, 8	
7, 15, 17, 18
	
4	
Solve applied problems involving hyperbolas (p. 701)	
9	
41
10.5	
1	
Identify a conic (p. 706)	
1	
19, 20
	
2	
Use a rotation of axes to transform equations (p. 707)	
2	
24–26
	
3	 Analyze an equation using a rotation of axes (p. 709)	
3, 4	
24–26, 44
	
4	
Identify conics without a rotation of axes (p. 711)	
5	
21–23
10.6	
1	 Analyze and graph polar equations of conics (p. 714)	
1–3	
27–29
	
2	
Convert the polar equation of a conic to a rectangular equation (p. 718)	
4	
30, 31
10.7	
1	
Graph parametric equations (p. 720)	
1	
32–34
	
2	
Find a rectangular equation for a curve defined parametrically (p. 721)	
2, 3	
32–34
	
3	
Use time as a parameter in parametric equations (p. 723)	
4, 5	
42, 43
	
4	
Find parametric equations for curves defined by rectangular  
	
	
equations (p. 726)	
6, 7	
35, 36
Review Exercises
In Problems 1–10, identify each equation. If it is a parabola, give its vertex, focus, and directrix; if it is an ellipse, give its center, vertices, and 
foci; if it is a hyperbola, give its center, vertices, foci, and asymptotes.
	 1.	 x2 = 12y	
2.	 x2
9 - y2
16 = 1	
3.	 x2
36 + y2
9 = 1
	 4.	 1y - 122 - 8x + 24 = 0	
5.	 4x2 - y2 = 8	
6.	 4x2 + 12x + 8y - 15 = 0 
	 7.	 9x2 + 18x - 16y2 + 32y = 151	
8.	 6x2 - 12x + 5y2 + 30y - 9 = 0	
9.	 9y2 - 36x + 18y + 27 = 0
	 10.	 9x2 + 4y2 - 18x + 8y = 23
In Problems 11–18, find an equation of the conic described. Graph the equation.
	 11.	 Parabola; focus at 1- 2, 02; directrix the line x = 2
	 12.	 Hyperbola; center at 10,  02; focus at 10,  42; 	
 
vertex at 10, - 22
	 13.	 Ellipse; foci at 1- 3, 02 and 13, 02; vertex at 14, 02
	 14.	 Parabola; vertex at 12, - 32; focus at 12, - 42
	 15.	 Hyperbola; center at 1- 2, - 32; focus at 1- 4, - 32; 	
 
vertex at 1- 3, - 32
	 16.	 Ellipse; foci at 1- 4, 22 and 1- 4, 82; vertex at 1-4, 102
	 17.	 Center at 1- 1, 22; a = 3; c = 4; transverse axis parallel 
to the x-axis
	 18.	 Vertices at 10, 12 and 16, 12; asymptote the line 3y + 2x = 9
In Problems 19–23, identify each conic without completing the squares and without applying a rotation of axes.
	 19.	 y2 + 4x + 3y - 8 = 0 
	 20.	 x2 + 2y2 + 4x - 8y + 2 = 0 
	 21.	 9x2 - 12xy + 4y2 + 8x + 12y = 0 
	 22.	 4x2 + 10xy + 4y2 - 9 = 0 
	 23.	 x2 - 2xy + 3y2 + 2x + 4y - 1 = 0 

734 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
In Problems 24–26, rotate the axes so that the new equation contains no xy-term. Analyze and graph the new equation.
	 24.	 2x2 + 5xy + 2y2 - 9
2 = 0
	 25.	 6x2 + 4xy + 9y2 - 20 = 0
	 26.	 4x2 - 12xy + 9y2 + 12x + 8y = 0
In Problems 27–29, identify the conic that each polar equation represents, and graph it.
	 27.	 r =
4
1 - cos u
	 28.	 r =
6
2 - sin u
	 29.	 r =
8
4 + 8 cos u
In Problems 30 and 31, convert each polar equation to a rectangular equation.
	 30.	 r =
2
1 - sin u
	 31.	 r =
8
4 + 8 cos u
In Problems 32–34, graph the curve whose parametric equations are given, and show its orientation. Find the rectangular equation of  
each curve.
	 32.	 x = 4t - 2, y = 1 - t; - q 6 t 6 q 
	 33.	 x = 3 sin t, y = 4 cos t + 2; 0 … t … 2p
	 34.	 x = sec2 t, y = tan2 t; 0 … t … p
4  
	 35.	 Find two different pairs of parametric equations for y = - 2x + 4.
	 36.	 Find parametric equations for an object that moves along the ellipse x2
16 +
y2
9 = 1, where the motion begins at 14, 02, is 
counterclockwise, and requires 4 seconds for a complete revolution.
	 37.	 Find an equation of the hyperbola whose foci are the 
vertices of the ellipse 4x2 + 9y2 = 36 and whose vertices 
are the foci of this ellipse.
	 38.	 Describe the collection of points in a plane so that the  
distance from each point to the point 13, 02 is three-fourths
	
	 of its distance from the line x = 16
3 .
	 39.	 Searchlight  A searchlight is shaped like a paraboloid of 
revolution. If a light source is located 1 foot from the vertex 
along the axis of symmetry and the opening is 2 feet across, 
how deep should the mirror be in order to reflect the light 
rays parallel to the axis of symmetry?
	 40.	 Semielliptical Arch Bridge  A bridge is built in the shape of 
a semielliptical arch. The bridge has a span of 60 feet and a 
maximum height of 20 feet. Find the height of the arch at 
distances of 5, 10, and 20 feet from the center.
	 41.	 Calibrating Instruments  In a test of their recording devices,  
a team of seismologists positioned two of the devices  
2000 feet apart, with the device at point A to the west of 
the device at point B. At a point between the devices and 
200 feet from point B, a small amount of explosive was 
detonated and a note made of the time at which the sound 
reached each device. A second explosion is to be carried 
out at a point directly north of point B. How far north 
should the site of the second explosion be chosen so that 
the measured time difference recorded by the devices for 
the second detonation is the same as that recorded for the 
first detonation? 
	 42.	 Uniform Motion  Mary’s train leaves at 7:15   am and  
accelerates at the rate of 3 meters per second per second. 
Mary, who can run 6 meters per second, arrives at the train 
station 2 seconds after the train has left.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the motion of the 
train and Mary as a function of time.
[Hint: The position s at time t of an object having  
acceleration a is s = 1
2
 at2.]
(b)	 Determine algebraically whether Mary will catch the 
train. If so, when? 
(c)	 Simulate the motions of the train and Mary by  
simultaneously graphing the equations found in part (a).
	 43.	 Projectile Motion  Drew Brees throws a football with an 
initial speed of 80 feet per second at an angle of 35° to the 
horizontal. The ball leaves Brees’s hand at a height of 6 feet.
(a)	 Find parametric equations that model the position of 
the ball as a function of time.
(b)	 How long is the ball in the air? 
(c)	 When is the ball at its maximum height? Determine the 
maximum height of the ball. 
(d)	 Determine the horizontal distance that the ball travels.
(e)	 Using a graphing utility, simultaneously graph the  
equations found in part (a).
	 44.	 Formulate a strategy for discussing and graphing an  
equation of the form
Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0

In Problems 1–3, identify each equation. If it is a parabola, give its vertex, focus, and directrix; if an ellipse, give its center, vertices, and foci; 
if a hyperbola, give its center, vertices, foci, and asymptotes.
	 1.	
1x + 122
4
-
y2
9 = 1	
2.	 8y = 1x - 122 - 4	
3.	 2x2 + 3y2 + 4x - 6y = 13
In Problems 4–6, find an equation of the conic described; graph the equation.
	 4.	 Parabola: focus 1- 1, 4.52, vertex 1- 1, 32	
5.	 Ellipse: center 10, 02, vertex 10, -42, focus 10, 32
	 6.	 Hyperbola: center 12, 22, vertex 12, 42, contains the point 12 + 210, 52
In Problems 7–9, identify each conic without completing the square or rotating axes.
	 7.	 2x2 + 5xy + 3y2 + 3x - 7 = 0	
8.	 3x2 - xy + 2y2 + 3y + 1 = 0	
9.	 x2 - 6xy + 9y2 + 2x - 3y - 2 = 0  
	 10.	 Given the equation 41x2 - 24xy + 34y2 - 25 = 0, rotate the axes so that there is no xy-term. Analyze and graph the new equation.
	 11.	 Identify the conic represented by the polar equation r =
3
1 - 2 cos u. Find the rectangular equation.
	 12.	 Graph the curve whose parametric equations are given, and show its orientation. Find the rectangular equation for the curve.
x = 3t - 2 y = 1 - 2t 0 … t … 9
	 13.	 A parabolic reflector (paraboloid of revolution) is used by TV crews at football games to pick up the referee’s announcements, 
quarterback signals, and so on. A microphone is placed at the focus of the parabola. If a certain reflector is 4 feet wide and 1.5 feet 
deep, where should the microphone be placed? 
Chapter Test
     
 
	 1.	 For f1x2 = - 3x2 + 5x - 2, find 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
   h ≠0
	 2.	 In the complex number system, solve the equation
9x4 + 33x3 - 71x2 - 57x - 10 = 0
	 3.	 For what numbers x is 6 - x Ú x2 ? 
	 4.	 (a)  Find the domain and range of y = 3x + 2.
(b)	 Find the inverse of y = 3x + 2 and state its domain and 
range.
	 5.	 f1x2 = log4 1x - 22
(a)	 Solve f1x2 = 2. 
(b)	 Solve f1x2 … 2. 
Cumulative Review
	 6.	 Find an equation for each of the following graphs.
(a)  Line:	
(b)	 Circle:	
	 (c)  Ellipse:
(d)  Parabola:	
(e)	 Hyperbola:	
	 (f)  Exponential:
x
y
2
1
–2
x
y
2
2
–1
4
x
y
2
3
–3
–2
x
y
2
1
–1
x
y
2
2
–2
–2
(3, 2)
(1, 4)
x
y
(0, 1)
 (1,   ) 
1–4
	 7.	 Find all the solutions of the equation sin12u2 = 0.5.
	 8.	 Find a polar equation for the line containing the origin that 
makes an angle of 30° with the positive x-axis.
	 9.	 Find a polar equation for the circle with center at the  
point 10, 42 and radius 4. Graph this circle. 
	 10.	 What is the domain of the function f1x2 =
3
sin x + cos x  ?
	 11.	 Solve the equation cot12u2 = 1, where 0° 6 u 6 90°. 
	 12.	 Find the rectangular equation of the curve
x = 5 tan t  y = 5 sec2 t  -  p
2 6 t 6 p
2  
Cumulative Review  735
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.

736 
CHAPTER 10  Analytic Geometry
Chapter Projects
the perihelion is its shortest distance. The mean distance of a 
planet from the Sun is the length of the semimajor axis of the 
elliptical orbit. See the illustration.
1.	
Research the history of Comet Hale-Bopp on the  
Internet. In particular, determine the aphelion and  
perihelion. Often these values are given in terms of  
astronomical units. What is an astronomical unit? What 
is it equivalent to in miles? In kilometers? What is the 
orbital period of Comet Hale-Bopp? When will it next 
be visible from Earth? How close does it come to Earth?
2.	
Find a model for the orbit of Comet Hale-Bopp around 
the Sun. Use the x-axis as the major axis.
3.	
Comet Hale-Bopp has an orbit that is roughly  
perpendicular to that of Earth. Find a model for the  
orbit of Earth using the y-axis as the major axis.
4.	
Use a graphing utility or some other graphing technology 
to graph the paths of the orbits. Based on the graphs, do 
the paths of the orbits intersect? Does this mean that 
Comet Hale-Bopp will collide with Earth?
	
	 Internet-based Project
	 I.	 Comet Hale-Bopp  The orbits of planets and some comets 
about the Sun are ellipses, with the Sun at one focus. The 
aphelion of a planet is its greatest distance from the Sun, and 
The following projects can be found at the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC):
	 II.	 The Orbits of Neptune and Pluto  The astronomical body known as Pluto and the planet Neptune travel around the Sun in  
elliptical orbits. Pluto, at times, comes closer to the Sun than Neptune, the outermost planet. This project examines and analyzes 
the two orbits.
	III.	 Project at Motorola  Distorted Deployable Space Reflector Antennas An engineer designs an antenna that will deploy in space to 
collect sunlight.
	IV.	 Constructing a Bridge over the East River  The size of ships using a river and fluctuations in water height due to tides or flooding 
must be considered when designing a bridge that will cross a major waterway.
	 V.	 Systems of Parametric Equations  Which approach to use when solving a system of equations depends on the form of the system 
and on the domains of the equations.
Major
axis
Sun
Center
Perihelion
Aphelion
Mean distance

Outline
11.1	 Systems of Linear Equations:  
Substitution and Elimination
11.2	 Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices
11.3	 Systems of Linear Equations:  
Determinants
11.4	 Matrix Algebra
11.5	 Partial Fraction Decomposition
11.6	 Systems of Nonlinear Equations
11.7	 Systems of Inequalities
11.8	 Linear Programming
	
Chapter Review
	
Chapter Test
	
Cumulative Review
	
Chapter Projects
 A Look Back
In Appendix A and Chapters 3, 4, 5, and 7 we solved various kinds of equations 
and inequalities involving a single variable.
A Look Ahead 
 
In this chapter we take up the problem of solving equations and inequalities 
containing two or more variables. There are various ways to solve such problems.
The method of substitution for solving equations in several variables dates 
back to ancient times.
The method of elimination, although it had existed for centuries, was put into  
systematic order by Karl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) and by Camille Jordan (1838–1922).
The theory of matrices was developed in 1857 by Arthur Cayley (1821–1895), 
although only later were matrices used as we use them in this chapter. Matrices 
have become a very flexible instrument, useful in almost all areas of mathematics.
The method of determinants was invented by Takakazu Seki Kôwa (1642–1708) 
in 1683 in Japan and by Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz (1646–1716) in 1693 in 
Germany. Cramer’s Rule is named after Gabriel Cramer (1704–1752) of Switzerland, 
who popularized the use of determinants for solving linear systems.
Section 11.5, on partial fraction decomposition, provides an application of systems 
of equations. This particular application is one that is used in integral calculus.
Section 11.8 introduces linear programming, a modern application of linear 
inequalities. This topic is particularly useful for students interested in operations 
research.
11
Systems of Equations 
and Inequalities
737
Economic Outcomes
Annual Earnings of Young Adults
For both males and females, earnings increase with education: full-time 
workers with at least a bachelor’s degree have higher median earnings  
than those with less education. For example, in 2012, male college  
graduates ages 25–34 earned 67% more than male high school  
completers ages 25–34. In the same age range, females with a bachelor’s 
or higher degree earned 72% more than female high school completers. 
Males and females who dropped out of high school earned 25% and 
28% less, respectively, than male and female high school completers.
The median earnings of young adults who had at least a bachelor’s 
degree declined in the 1970s relative to their counterparts who were 
high school completers, before increasing between 1980 and 2012. 
Males with a bachelor’s degree or higher had earnings 19% higher than 
male high school completers in 1980 and had earnings 67% higher 
in 2012. Among females, those with at least a bachelor’s degree  
had earnings 34% higher than female high school completers in 1980,  
compared with earnings 72% higher in 2012.
—See Chapter Project I—

738 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Movie Theater Ticket Sales
A movie theater sells tickets for $8.00 each, with seniors receiving a discount of 
$2.00. One evening the theater took in $3580 in revenue. If x represents the number 
of tickets sold at $8.00 and y the number of tickets sold at the discounted price of 
$6.00, write an equation that relates these variables.
 Each nondiscounted ticket brings in $8.00, so x tickets will bring in 8x dollars.  
Similarly, y discounted tickets bring in 6y dollars. Because the total brought in is 
$3580, we must have
8x + 6y = 3580
In Example 1, suppose that we also know that 525 tickets were sold that evening. 
Then we have another equation relating the variables x and y:
x + y = 525
The two equations
b8x + 6y = 3580
x + y =
525
form a system of equations.
In general, a system of equations is a collection of two or more equations, each 
containing one or more variables. Example 2 gives some illustrations of systems of 
equations.
Examples of Systems of Equations
(a)	 b
2x +
y =
5
-4x + 6y = -2 
(1) Two equations containing two variables, x and y
(2)
(b)	 b x + y2 = 5
2x + y
= 4	
(1) Two equations containing two variables, x and y
(2)
Example 1
Solution
•
Example 2
11.1  Systems of Linear Equations: Substitution  
and Elimination
•	 Linear Equations (Appendix A, Section A.6, pp. 987–989)
•	 Lines (Section 1.3, pp. 53–63)
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
Now Work  the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 748.
	
Objectives	 1  Solve Systems of Equations by Substitution  (p. 740)
	
	 	2  Solve Systems of Equations by Elimination  (p. 741)
	
	 	3  Identify Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing  
Two Variables  (p. 743)
	
	 	4  Express the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations Containing  
Two Variables  (p. 743)
	
	 	5  Solve Systems of Three Equations Containing Three Variables  (p. 744)
	
	 	6  Identify Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing Three  
Variables  (p. 746)
	
	 	7  Express the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations Containing 
Three Variables  (p. 747)

Section 11.1  Systems of Linear Equations: Substitution and Elimination   739
(c)	 c
x +
y +
z = 6
3x - 2y + 4z = 9
x -
y -
z = 0
 
(1) Three equations containing three variables, x, y, and z
(2)
(3)
(d)	 bx + y + z = 5
x - y
= 2	
(1) Two equations containing three variables, x, y, and z
(2)
(e)	 d
x + y +
z = 6
2x
+ 2z = 4
y +
z = 2
x
= 4
	
(1) Four equations containing three variables, x, y, and z
(2)
(3)
(4)
We use a brace to remind us that we are dealing with a system of equations, and 
we number each equation in the system for convenient reference.
A solution of a system of equations consists of values for the variables that are 
solutions of each equation of the system. To solve a system of equations means to 
find all solutions of the system.
For example, x = 2, y = 1 is a solution of the system in Example 2(a), because
b
2x +
y =
5
-4x + 6y = -2 
(1)
(2) 
b 2122 +
1
=
4 + 1 =
5
-4122 + 6112 = -8 + 6 = -2
This solution may also be written as the ordered pair 12, 12.
A solution of the system in Example 2(b) is x = 1, y = 2, because
b x + y2 = 5
2x + y
= 4 
(1)
(2) 
b
1
+ 22 = 1 + 4 = 5
2112 + 2
= 2 + 2 = 4
Another solution of the system in Example 2(b) is x = 11
4 , y = -  3
2, which you can 
check for yourself.
A solution of the system in Example 2(c) is x = 3, y = 2, z = 1, because
c
x +
y +
z = 6
3x - 2y + 4z = 9
x -
y -
z = 0
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
 
c
3
+
2
+
1
= 6
3132 - 2122 + 4112 = 9 - 4 + 4 = 9
3
-
2
-
1
= 0
This solution may also be written as the ordered triplet 13, 2, 12.
Note that x = 3, y = 3, z = 0 is not a solution of the system in Example 2(c).
c
x +
y +
z = 6
3x - 2y + 4z = 9
x -
y -
z = 0
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
 
c
3
+
3
+
0
= 6
3132 - 2132 + 4102 = 3 ≠9
3
-
3
-
0
= 0
Although x = 3, y = 3, and z = 0 satisfy equations (1) and (3), they do not satisfy 
equation (2). Any solution of the system must satisfy each equation of the system.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
When a system of equations has at least one solution, it is said to be consistent. 
When a system of equations has no solution, it is called inconsistent.
An equation in n variables is said to be linear if it is equivalent to an equation 
of the form
a1
 x1 + a2
 x2 + g + an
 xn = b
where x1, x2,c, xn are n distinct variables, a1, a2,c, an, b are constants, and at 
least one of the a’s is not 0.
Some examples of linear equations are
2x + 3y = 2  5x - 2y + 3z = 10  8x + 8y - 2z + 5w = 0
•

740 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
If each equation in a system of equations is linear, we have a system of linear 
equations. The systems in Examples 2(a), (c), (d), and (e) are linear, whereas the 
system in Example 2(b) is nonlinear. In this chapter we shall solve linear systems in 
Sections 11.1 to 11.3. Nonlinear systems are discussed in Section 11.6.
We begin by discussing a system of two linear equations containing two 
variables. The problem of solving such a system can be viewed as a geometry 
problem. The graph of each equation in such a system is a line. So a system of 
two linear equations containing two variables represents a pair of lines. The lines 
may (1) intersect, or (2) be parallel, or (3) be coincident (that is, identical).
	 1.	 If the lines intersect, the system of equations has one solution, given by the 
point of intersection. The system is consistent and the equations are independent. 
See Figure 1(a).
	 2.	 If the lines are parallel, the system of equations has no solution, because the 
lines never intersect. The system is inconsistent. See Figure 1(b).
	 3.	 If the lines are coincident (the lines lie on top of each other), the system of equations 
has infinitely many solutions, represented by the totality of points on the line. 
The system is consistent and the equations are dependent. See Figure 1(c).
Figure 1
Consistent and Independent     Inconsistent               Consistent and Dependent
Graphing a System of Linear Equations
Graph the system: b   2x +
y = -1
-4x + 6y = 42 
(1)
(2)
 First, solve each equation for y. This is equivalent to writing each equation in slope–
intercept form. Equation (1) in slope–intercept form is y = -2x - 1, which has
slope -2 and y-intercept -1. Equation (2) in slope–intercept form is y = 2
3
 x + 7,
which has slope 2
3 and y-intercept 7.  Figure 2 shows their graphs.
From the graph in Figure 2, we see that the lines intersect, so the system given 
in Example 3 is consistent. The graph can also be used as a means of approximating 
the solution. For this system, the solution appears to be the point 1-3, 52.
Seeing the Concept
Graph the lines 2x + y = -1 (Y1 = -2x - 1) and -4x + 6y = 42 aY2 = 2
3
 x + 7b, and compare 
what you see with Figure 2. Use INTERSECT to verify that the point of intersection is (-3, 5).
Solve Systems of Equations by Substitution
Most of the time we must use algebraic methods to obtain exact solutions. A number 
of methods are available for solving systems of linear equations algebraically. In this 
section, we introduce two methods: substitution and elimination. We illustrate the 
method of substitution by solving the system given in Example 3.
Example 3
Solution
•
1
Figure 2 
x
y
Parallel lines; system
has no solution
(b)
x
y
Intersecting lines; system
has one solution
(a)
x
y
Coincident lines; system
has infinitely many solutions
(c)
Solution
x
y
–6
6
24x 1 6y 5 42
2x 1 y 5 21
10
–2

Section 11.1  Systems of Linear Equations: Substitution and Elimination   741
How to Solve a System of Linear Equations by Substitution
Solve: b
2x +
y = -1
-4x + 6y =  42 
(1)
(2)
Example 4
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Pick one of the equations, 
and solve for one of the variables in 
terms of the remaining variable(s).
Solve equation (1) for y.
 2x + y = -1	
Equation (1)
 y = -2x - 1 
Subtract 2x from each side of (1).
Step 2:  Substitute the result into 
the remaining equation(s).
Substitute -2x - 1 for y in equation (2). The result is an equation containing just 
the variable x, which we can solve.
 -4x + 6y = 42	
Equation (2)
 -4x + 61 -2x - 12 = 42	
Substitute - 2x - 1 for y in (2).
Step 3:  If one equation in one  
variable results, solve this equation. 
Otherwise, repeat Steps 1 and 2  
until a single equation with one  
variable remains.
 -4x - 12x - 6 = 42	
Distribute.
 -16x - 6 = 42	
Combine like terms.
 -16x = 48	
Add 6 to both sides.
 x =
48
-16 
Divide both sides by - 16.
 x = -3	
Simplify.
Step 4:  Find the values of  
the remaining variables by  
back-substitution. 
Because we know that x = -3, we can find the value of y by back-substitution,  
that is, by substituting -3 for x in one of the original equations. Equation (1) seems 
easier to work with, so we will back-substitute into equation (1).
 2x + y = -1	
Equation (1)
 21 -32 + y = -1	
Substitute - 3 for x in equation (1).
 -6 + y = -1	
Simplify.
 y = -1 + 6 
Add 6 to both sides.
 y = 5	
Simplify.
Step 5:  Check the solution found. 
We have x = -3 and y = 5. Verify that both equations are satisfied (true) for these 
values.
b
2x + y = -1    21-32 + 5 = -6 + 5 = -1
-4x + 6y = 42    -41 -32 + 6152 = 12 + 30 = 42
The solution of the system is x = -3 and y = 5. The solution can also be written as 
the ordered pair 1 -3, 52.
Now Use Substitution to Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Solve Systems of Equations by Elimination
A second method for solving a system of linear equations is the method of 
elimination. This method is usually preferred over substitution if substitution 
leads to fractions or if the system contains more than two variables. Elimination 
also provides the necessary motivation for solving systems using matrices (the 
subject of Section 11.2).
The idea behind the method of elimination is to replace the original system of 
equations by an equivalent system so that adding two of the equations eliminates a 
variable. The rules for obtaining equivalent equations are the same as those studied 
earlier. However, we may also interchange any two equations of the system and/or 
replace any equation in the system by the sum (or difference) of that equation and 
a nonzero multiple of any other equation in the system.
•
2
In Words
When using elimination, get the 
coefficients of one of the variables 
to be negatives of each other.

742 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
An example will give you the idea. As you work through the example, pay 
particular attention to the pattern being followed.
How to Solve a System of Linear Equations by Elimination
Solve: b 2x + 3y =
1
-x +
y = -3 
(1)
(2)
Example 5
Rules for Obtaining an Equivalent System of Equations
	 1.	 Interchange any two equations of the system.
	 2.	 Multiply (or divide) each side of an equation by the same nonzero constant.
	 3.	 Replace any equation in the system by the sum (or difference) of that 
equation and a nonzero multiple of any other equation in the system.
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Multiply both sides of one 
or both equations by a nonzero 
constant so that the coefficients 
of one of the variables are additive 
inverses. 
Multiply both sides of equation (2) by 2 so that the coefficients of x in the two 
equations are additive inverses.
 e2x + 3y =
1
-x + y = -3	
(1)
(2)
 e
2x + 3y = 1
21 -x + y2 = 21 -32 
(1)
(2)  Multiply by 2.
 e
2x + 3y =
1
-2x + 2y = -6	
(1)
(2)
Step 2:  Add the equations to  
eliminate the variable. Solve the 
resulting equation for the remaining 
unknown.
 e
2x + 3y =
1
-2x + 2y = -6 
(1)
(2)
 5y = -5 
Add equations (1) and (2).
 y = -1 
Divide both sides by 5.
Step 3:  Back-substitute the value 
of the variable found in Step 2 into 
one of the original equations to find 
the value of the remaining variable. 
Back-substitute y = -1 into equation (1) and solve for x.
 2x + 3y = 1 
Equation (1)
 2x + 31 -12 = 1 
Substitute y = - 1 into equation (1).
 2x - 3 = 1	
Simplify.
 2x = 4	
Add 3 to both sides.
 x = 2	
Divide both sides by 2.
Step 4:  Check the solution found. 
The check is left to you.
The solution of the system is x = 2 and y = -1. The solution also can be written as 
the ordered pair 12, -12.
Now Use Elimination to Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Movie Theater Ticket Sales
A movie theater sells tickets for $8.00 each, with seniors receiving a discount of 
$2.00. One evening the theater sold 525 tickets and took in $3580 in revenue. How 
many of each type of ticket were sold?
If x represents the number of tickets sold at $8.00 and y the number of tickets sold at the 
discounted price of $6.00, then the given information results in the system of equations
b8x + 6y = 3580
x +
y =
525 
(1)
(2)
•
Example 6
Solution

Section 11.1  Systems of Linear Equations: Substitution and Elimination   743
Using the method of elimination, first multiply the second equation by -6, and then 
add the equations.
b
8x + 6y =
3580
-6x - 6y = -3150
2x = 430
x = 215
 
 
 
Add the equations.
 
Since x + y = 525, then y = 525 - x = 525 - 215 = 310. So 215 nondiscounted 
tickets and 310 senior discount tickets were sold.
Identify Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing  
Two Variables
The previous examples dealt with consistent systems of equations that had a single 
solution. The next two examples deal with two other possibilities that may occur, the 
first being a system that has no solution.
An Inconsistent System of Linear Equations
Solve: 
b2x +
y = 5
4x + 2y = 8 
(1)
(2)
We choose to use the method of substitution and solve equation (1) for y.
 2x + y = 5	
(1)
 y = -2x + 5 
Subtract 2x from each side.
Now substitute -2x + 5 for y in equation (2) and solve for x.
 4x + 2y = 8	
(2)
 4x + 21 -2x + 52 = 8	
Substitute  y = - 2x + 5 in (2).
 4x - 4x + 10 = 8	
Multiply out.
 0 = -2 
Subtract 10 from both sides.
This statement is false. Conclude that the system has no solution and is therefore 
inconsistent.
Figure 3 illustrates the pair of lines whose equations form the system in Example 7. 
Notice that the graphs of the two equations are lines, each with slope -2; one has a 
y-intercept of 5, the other a y-intercept of 4. The lines are parallel and have no point 
of intersection. This geometric statement is equivalent to the algebraic statement that 
the system has no solution.
Seeing the Concept
Graph the lines 2x + y = 5 (Y1 = -2x + 5) and 4x + 2y = 8 (Y2 = -2x + 4), and compare what 
you see with Figure 3. How can you be sure that the lines are parallel?
Express the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations 
Containing Two Variables
Solving a System of Dependent Equations
Solve: b
2x +
y =
4
-6x - 3y = -12  
(1)
(2)
•
3
Example 7
Solution
•
4
Example 8
Figure 3 
x
y
–4
4
y = –2x + 5
y = –2x + 4
8
–2

744 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
We choose to use the method of elimination.
 b
2x +
y =
4
-6x - 3y = -12	 (1)
(2)
 e
6x + 3y =
12
-6x - 3y = -12	
(1) Multiply each side of equation (1) by 3.
(2)
 0 =
0	
Add equations (1) and (2).
The statement 0 = 0 is true. This means the equation 6x + 3y = 12 is equivalent  
to -6x - 3y = -12. Therefore, the original system is equivalent to a system  
containing one equation, so the equations are dependent. This means that any values 
of x and y that satisfy 6x + 3y = 12 or, equivalently, 2x + y = 4 are solutions. For 
example, x = 2, y = 0; x = 0, y = 4; x = -2, y = 8; x = 4, y = -4; and so on, are 
solutions. There are, in fact, infinitely many values of x and y for which 2x + y = 4, 
so the original system has infinitely many solutions. We will write the solution of the 
original system either as
y = -2x + 4, where x can be any real number
or as
x = -  1
2
 y + 2, where y can be any real number.
The solution can also be expressed as {(x, y)  y = -2x + 4, x is any real number} 
or as e1x, y2 ` x = -   1
2
 y + 2, y is any real number f.
Figure 4 illustrates the system given in Example 8. Notice that the graphs  
of the two equations are lines, each with slope -2 and each with y-intercept 4. The 
lines are coincident. Notice also that equation (2) in the original system is -3 times 
equation (1), indicating that the two equations are dependent.
For the system in Example 8, some of the infinite number of solutions can be 
written down by assigning values to x and then finding y = -2x + 4.
If x = -1, then y = -21 -12 + 4 = 6.
If x = 0, then y = 4.
If x = 2, then y = 0.
The ordered pairs 1 -1, 62, 10, 42, and 12, 02 are three of the points on the line in 
Figure 4.
Seeing the Concept
Graph the lines 2x + y = 4 (Y1 = -2x + 4) and -6x - 3y = -12 (Y2 = -2x + 4), and compare 
what you see with Figure 4. How can you be sure that the lines are coincident?
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 7  a n d  3 1
Solve Systems of Three Equations Containing Three Variables
Just like a system of two linear equations containing two variables, a system of three 
linear equations containing three variables has (1) exactly one solution (a consistent 
system with independent equations), or (2) no solution (an inconsistent system), or 
(3) infinitely many solutions (a consistent system with dependent equations).
The problem of solving a system of three linear equations containing three 
variables can be viewed as a geometry problem. The graph of each equation in 
such a system is a plane in space. A system of three linear equations containing 
three variables represents three planes in space. Figure 5 illustrates some of the 
possibilities.
Solution
•
5
Figure 4  y = - 2x + 4
x
y
–4
4
, 3
(
)
(2, 0)
(3, –2)
(0, 4)
(–1, 6)
2x + y = 4
–6x – 3y = –12
8
–2
1–2

Section 11.1  Systems of Linear Equations: Substitution and Elimination   745
Recall that a solution to a system of equations consists of values for the 
variables that are solutions of each equation of the system. For example, x = 3, 
 y = -1, z = -5, or, using an ordered triplet, 1 3, -1, -52, is a solution to the  
system of equations
c
x +
y +
z =
-3
2x - 3y + 6z = -21
-3x + 5y
= -14
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
 
   
3 + 1 -12 + 1 -52 = -3
2132 - 31-12 + 61-52 = 6 + 3 - 30 = -21
-3132 + 51 -12 = -9 - 5 = -14
because these values of the variables are solutions of each equation.
Typically, when solving a system of three linear equations containing three 
variables, we use the method of elimination. Recall that the idea behind the method 
of elimination is to form equivalent equations so that adding two of the equations 
eliminates a variable.
Solving a System of Three Linear Equations with Three Variables
Use the method of elimination to solve the system of equations.
c
x +
y -
z = -1
4x - 3y + 2z = 16
2x - 2y - 3z =
5
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
For a system of three equations, attempt to eliminate one variable at a time, using 
pairs of equations, until an equation with a single variable remains. Our strategy 
for solving this system will be to use equation (1) to eliminate the variable x from 
equations (2) and (3). We can then treat the new equations (2) and (3) as a system 
with two unknowns. Alternatively, we could use equation (1) to eliminate either  
y or z from equations (2) and (3). Try one of these approaches for yourself.
Begin by multiplying each side of equation (1) by -4 and adding the result 
to equation (2). (Do you see why? The coefficients of x are now negatives of one 
another.) We also multiply equation (1) by -2 and add the result to equation (3). 
Notice that these two procedures result in the elimination of the variable x from 
equations (2) and (3).
Example 9
Solution
Figure 5 
Consistent system;
one solution
Solution
Solutions
Solutions
(a)
Consistent system;
infinite number of solutions
(b)
Inconsistent system; 
no solution
(c)
 b x +
y -
z = -1
4x - 3y + 2z = 16   (1) Multiply by - 4.
(2)
 
 
  e -4x - 4y + 4z =
4
4x - 3y + 2z = 16  
	
-7y + 6z = 20     Add
 b x +
y -
z = -1
2x - 2y - 3z =
5   (1) Multiply by - 2.
(3)
 
 
  e -2x - 2y + 2z = 2
2x - 2y - 3z = 5   
	
-4y - z =  7      Add
(1) 
(2)
c
x + y - z = -1
-7y + 6z = 20
-4y - z =
7
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1) 
(3)
Now concentrate on the new equations (2) and (3), treating them as a system of 
two equations containing two variables. It is easiest to eliminate z. Multiply each 

746 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
side of equation (3) by 6, and add equations (2) and (3). The result is the new  
equation (3).
-7y + 6z = 20
-4y -
z =
7  (2)
(3) Multiply by 6. 
-7y + 6z = 20
-24y - 6z = 42  
	
-31y   = 62     Add
(2) 
(3)
c
x + y - z = -1
-7y + 6z = 20
-31y
= 62
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Now solve equation (3) for y by dividing both sides of the equation by -31.
c
x +
y -
z =
-7y + 6z =
y
=
-1
20
-2
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Back-substitute y = -2 in equation (2) and solve for z.
 -7y + 6z = 20 
(2)
 -71 -22 + 6z = 20 
Substitute y = - 2 in (2).
 6z = 6	
Subtract 14 from both sides of the equation.
 z = 1	
Divide both sides of the equation by 6.
Finally, back-substitute y = -2 and z = 1 in equation (1) and solve for x.
 x + y - z = -1 
(1)
 x + 1 -22 - 1 = -1 
Substitute y = - 2 and z = 1 in (1).
 x - 3 = -1 
Simplify.
 x = 2    Add 3 to both sides.
The solution of the original system is x = 2, y = -2, z = 1, or, using an ordered 
triplet, 1 2, -2, 12. You should check this solution.
Look back over the solution given in Example 9. Note the pattern of removing 
one of the variables from two of the equations, followed by solving this system of 
two equations and two unknowns. Although which variables to remove is your 
choice, the methodology remains the same for all systems.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
Identify Inconsistent Systems of Equations  
Containing Three Variables
Identify an Inconsistent System of Linear Equations
Solve: 
c
2x +
y - z = -2
x + 2y - z = -9
x - 4y + z =
1
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Our strategy is the same as in Example 9. However, in this system, it seems easiest to 
eliminate the variable z first. Do you see why?
Multiply each side of equation (1) by -1, and add the result to equation (2). 
Also, add equations (2) and (3). Here equation (2) is used twice and becomes  
equation (1) in the new system.
•
6
Example 10
Solution
2x +
y - z = -2
x + 2y - z = -9   (1) Multiply by - 1.
(2)
 
 
 -2x -
y + z =
2
x + 2y - z = -9   
	
-x +  y  = -7      Add
	
 x + 2y - z = -9
x - 4y + z =
1   
	
2x - 2y  = -8      Add
(1) 
(2)
c
x + 2y - z = -9
-x +
y
= -7
2x - 2y
= -8
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(2) 
(3)

Section 11.1  Systems of Linear Equations: Substitution and Elimination   747
Now concentrate on the new equations (2) and (3), treating them as a system of two 
equations containing two variables. Multiply each side of equation (2) by 2, and add 
the result to equation (3).
Equation (3) has no solution, so the system is inconsistent.
Express the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations  
Containing Three Variables
Solving a System of Dependent Equations
Solve: 
c
x - 2y -
z =
8
2x - 3y +
z = 23
4x - 5y + 5z = 53
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Our plan is to eliminate x from equations (2) and (3). Multiply each side of equation (1) 
by -2, and add the result to equation (2). Also, multiply each side of equation (1)  
by -4, and add the result to equation (3).
•
7
Example 11
Solution
-x +
y = -7
2x - 2y = -8  (2) Multiply by 2.
(3)
 
-2x + 2y = -14
2x - 2y =
-8   
	
0 = -22     Add
(2) 
(3)
c
x + 2y - z =
-9
-x + y
=
-7
0 = -22
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Treat equations (2) and (3) as a system of two equations containing two variables, 
and eliminate the variable y by multiplying both sides of equation (2) by -3 and 
adding the result to equation (3).
x - 2y - z = 8
2x - 3y + z = 23  (1) Multiply by - 2.
(2)
 
 
 -2x + 4y + 2z = -16
2x - 3y +
z =
23 
	
y + 3z =  7     Add
x - 2y -
z = 8
4x - 5y + 5z = 53  (1) Multiply by - 4.
(3)
 
  -4x + 8y + 4z = -32
4x - 5y + 5z =
53 
  
	
3y + 9z =  21       Add
(1) 
(2)
c
x - 2y - z =
8
y + 3z =
7
3y + 9z = 21
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1) 
(3)
y + 3z =
7
3y + 9z = 21  (2) Multiply by - 3.
(3)
 
-3y - 9z = -21
3y + 9z =
21   
Add
	
0 =   0
c
x - 2y -
z = 8
y + 3z = 7
0 = 0
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
The original system is equivalent to a system containing two equations, so the 
equations are dependent and the system has infinitely many solutions. If we solve 
equation (2) for y, we can express y in terms of z as y = -3z + 7. Substitute this 
expression into equation (1) to determine x in terms of z.
 x - 2y - z = 8	
(1)
 x - 21 -3z + 72 - z = 8	
Substitute y = -3z + 7 in (1).
 x + 6z - 14 - z = 8	
Multiply out.
 x + 5z = 22	
Combine like terms.
 x = -5z + 22 
Solve for x.
We will write the solution to the system as
ex = -5z + 22
y = -3z +
7  where z can be any real number.

748 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
This way of writing the solution makes it easier to find specific solutions of 
the system. To find specific solutions, choose any value of z and use the equations 
x = -5z + 22 and y = -3z + 7 to determine x and y. For example, if z = 0, then 
x = 22 and y = 7, and if z = 1, then x = 17 and y = 4.
Using ordered triplets, the solution is
51x, y, z2   x = -5z + 22, y = -3z + 7, z is any real number6
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Two distinct points in the Cartesian plane determine a unique line. Given 
three noncollinear points, we can find the unique quadratic function whose graph 
contains these three points.
Curve Fitting
Find real numbers a, b, and c so that the graph of the quadratic function 
y = ax2 + bx + c contains the points 1 -1, -42, 11, 62, and 13, 02.
The three points must satisfy the equation y = ax2 + bx + c.
•
Example 12
Solution
Figure 6  y = - 2x2 + 5x + 3
x
y
–4
–2
4
2
(3, 0)
(1, 6)
(–1, –4)
2
4
6
–5
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Solve the equation: 3x + 4 = 8 - x. (pp. 987–989) 
	 2.	 (a)	 Graph the line: 3x + 4y = 12.
(b)	 What is the slope of a line parallel to this line? 
(pp. 53–63)
11.1  Assess Your Understanding
	 3.	 If a system of equations has no solution, it is said to be 
.
	 4.	 If a system of equations has one solution, the system is 
 and the equations are 
.
	 5.	 If the only solution to a system of two linear equations  
containing two unknowns is x = 3, y = - 2, then the lines 
intersect at the point 
 .
	 6.	 If the lines that make up a system of two linear equations are 
coincident, then the system is 
 and the equations 
are 
.
	 7.	 If a system of two linear equations in two variables is 
inconsistent, which of the following best describes the graphs 
of the lines in the system?
(a)	 intersecting 
(b)  parallel
(c)	 coincident 
  (d)  perpendicular  
	 8.	 If a system of dependent equations containing three variables 
has the general solution
	
	 {(x, y, z)x = - z + 4, y = - 2z + 5, z is any real number}
 	
	 which of the following is one of the infinite number of  
solutions of the system?
(a)	 (1, - 1, 3)   (b)  (0, 4, 5)   (c)  (4, - 3, 0)   (d)  (-1, 5, 7)
Concepts and Vocabulary
For the point 1-1, -42 we have:
-4 = a1-122 + b1-12 + c
-4 = a - b + c
For the point 11, 62 we have:
6 = a1122 + b112 + c
6 = a + b + c
For the point 13, 02 we have:
0 = a1322 + b132 + c
0 = 9a + 3b + c
Determine a, b, and c so that each equation is satisfied. That is, solve the following 
system of three equations containing three variables:
c
a -
b + c = -4
a +
b + c =
6
9a + 3b + c =
0
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Solving this system of equations, we obtain a = -2, b = 5, and c = 3. So the 
quadratic function whose graph contains the points 1 -1, -42, 11, 62, and 13, 02 is
y = -2x2 + 5x + 3 
y = ax2 + bx + c, a = - 2, b = 5, c = 3
Figure 6 shows the graph of the function, along with the three points.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 3
•

Section 11.1  Systems of Linear Equations: Substitution and Elimination   749
Skill Building
In Problems 9–18, verify that the values of the variables listed are solutions of the system of equations.
9.	 e2x -
y = 5
5x + 2y = 8 
	
	 x = 2, y = - 1; 12, - 12
13.	 •
x - y = 3
1
2x + y = 3
 
	
	 x = 4, y = 1; 14, 12
14.	 e
x - y = 3
-3x + y = 1 
	
	 x = - 2, y = - 5; 1- 2, - 52
15.	 c
3x + 3y + 2z =
4
x -
y -
z =
0
2y - 3z = - 8
 
	
	 x = 1, y = - 1, z = 2;
	
	 11, - 1, 22
16.	 c
4x
-
z = 7
8x + 5y -
z = 0
- x -
y + 5z = 6
 
	
	 x = 2, y = -3, z = 1;
	
	 12, -3, 12
	 11.	 c
3x - 4y =
4
1
2
 x - 3y = -  1
2
 
	
	 x = 2, y = 1
2; a2, 1
2b
12.	 d
2x + 1
2
 y =
 
 3x - 4y =
 
 0
-  19
2
 
	
	 x = -  1
2, y = 2; a-  1
2, 2b
10.	 b3x + 2y =
2
x - 7y = - 30 
	
	 x = - 2, y = 4; 1- 2, 42
17.	 c
3x + 3y + 2z =
4
x - 3y +
z = 10
5x - 2y - 3z =
8
 
	
	 x = 2, y = - 2, z = 2; 12, - 2, 22
18.	 c
4x
- 5z =
6
5y -
z = - 17
- x - 6y + 5z =
24
 
	
	 x = 4, y = - 3, z = 2; 14, - 3, 22
In Problems 19–56, solve each system of equations. If the system has no solution, say that it is inconsistent. For Problems 19–30, graph 
the lines of the system.
19.	 bx + y = 8
x - y = 4
23.	 b
3x = 24
x + 2y =
0
	27.	 b2x +
y = 1
4x + 2y = 3 
	 31.	 b x + 2y = 4
2x + 4y = 8
35.	 c
2x + 3y = 6
x -
y = 1
2
	 39.	 b 3x - 5y =
3
15x + 5y = 21 
   
20.	 bx + 2y = - 7
x +
y = - 3
24.	 b4x + 5y = - 3
- 2y = - 8
	 28.	 b
x -
y = 5
- 3x + 3y = 2 
   
32.	 b3x -
y =
7
9x - 3y = 21
36.	 c
1
2
 x +
y = - 2
x - 2y =
8
	 40.	 c
2x -   y = - 1
x + 1
2
 y =
3
2
 
   
	 21.	  b5x -
y = 21
2x + 3y = - 12
25.	 b3x - 6y = 2
5x + 4y = 1
29.	 b 2x -
y = 0
4x + 2y = 12
33.	 b 2x - 3y = - 1
10x +
y = 11
37.	 d
1
2
 x + 1
3
 y =
3
1
4
 x - 2
3
 y = - 1
41.	 d
1
x + 1
y = 8
3
x - 5
y = 0
22.	 b x + 3y =
5
2x - 3y = - 8
26.	 c
2x + 4y = 2
3
3x - 5y = -10
30.	 c
3x + 3y = -1
4x +
y =
8
3
34.	 b3x -
2y = 0
5x + 10y = 4
38.	 d
1
3
 x - 3
2
 y =
3
4
 x + 1
3
 y =
-5
11
42.	 d
4
x - 3
y
= 0
6
x + 3
2y = 2
c Hint: Let u = 1
x and v = 1
y, and solve for u and v. Then x = 1
u 
and y = 1
v.d
43.	 c
x -
y
=
6
2x
- 3z = 16
2y +
z =
4
44.	 c
2x +
y
=
- 4
- 2y + 4z =
0
3x
- 2z = - 11
	 45.	  c
x - 2y + 3z =
7
2x +
y +
z =
4
- 3x + 2y - 2z = - 10

750 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
46.	 c
2x +
y - 3z =
0
-2x + 2y +
z = - 7
3x - 4y - 3z =
7
	 47.	 c
x -
y - z = 1
2x + 3y + z = 2
3x + 2y
= 0
48.	 c
2x - 3y - z = 0
- x + 2y + z = 5
3x - 4y - z = 1
49.	 c
x -
y -
z =
1
-x + 2y - 3z = -4
3x - 2y - 7z =
0
50.	 c
2x - 3y -
z = 0
3x + 2y + 2z = 2
x + 5y + 3z = 2
51.	 c
2x - 2y + 3z = 6
4x - 3y + 2z = 0
- 2x + 3y - 7z = 1
52.	 c
3x - 2y + 2z =
6
7x - 3y + 2z = -1
2x - 3y + 4z =
0
	 53.	 c
x +
y -
z =
6
3x - 2y +
z = - 5
x + 3y - 2z = 14
	 54.	 c
x -
y +
z =
- 4
2x - 3y + 4z = - 15
5x +
y - 2z =
12
	 55.	 c
x + 2y -
z = - 3
2x - 4y +
z = -7
- 2x + 2y - 3z =
4
	 56.	 c
x + 4y - 3z = -8
3x -
y + 3z = 12
x +
y + 6z =
1
Applications and Extensions
57.	 The perimeter of a rectangular floor is 200 feet. Find the  
dimensions of the floor if the length is three times the width.
58.	 The length of fence required to enclose a rectangular field 
is 3000 meters. What are the dimensions of the field if it is 
known that the difference between its length and width is  
50 meters?
59.	 Orbital Launches  One year there was a total of 69 com-
mercial and noncommercial orbital launches worldwide. In 
addition, the number of noncommercial orbital launches 
was one more than three times the number of commercial 
orbital launches. Determine the number of commercial and 
noncommercial orbital launches.
60.	 Movie Theater Tickets  A movie theater charges $9.00 for 
adults and $7.00 for senior citizens. On a day when 325 people 
paid for admission, the total receipts were $2495. How many 
who paid were adults? How many were seniors?
	 61.	 Mixing Nuts  A store sells cashews for $4.00 per pound and 
peanuts for $1.50 per pound. The manager decides to mix  
20 pounds of peanuts with some cashews and sell the mix-
ture for $2.00 per pound. How many pounds of cashews 
should be mixed with the peanuts so that the mixture 
will produce the same revenue as would selling the nuts  
separately? 
	 62.	 Mixing a Solution  A chemist wants to make 14 liters of a 40% 
acid solution. She has solutions that are 30% acid and 65% acid. 
How much of each must she mix? 
	 63.	 Presale Order    A wireless store owner takes presale or-
ders for a new smartphone and tablet. He gets 330 preor-
ders for the smartphone and 160 orders for the tablet. The 
combined sale of the preorders is $304,000. If the price of a 
smartphone and a tablet together is $1135, find the cost of 
one smartphone and the cost of one tablet. 
	 64.	 Financial Planning  A recently retired couple needs $12,000 
per year to supplement their Social Security. They have 
$150,000 to invest to obtain this income. They have decided 
on two investment options: AA bonds yielding 10% per  
annum and a Bank Certificate yielding 5%.
(a)	 How much should be invested in each to realize exactly 
$12,000?
(b)	 If, after 2 years, the couple requires $14,000 per year in 
income, how should they reallocate their investment to 
achieve the new amount?
	 66.	 Computing Wind Speed  The average airspeed of a single-
engine aircraft is 150 miles per hour. If the aircraft flew 
the same distance in 2 hours with the wind as it flew in  
3 hours against the wind, what was the wind speed? 
67.	 Restaurant Management    A restaurant manager wants to 
purchase 200 sets of dishes. One design costs $10 per set, 
while another costs $45 per set. If she wants to use her en-
tire budget of $4100, how many of each design should be 
ordered?
68.	 Cost of Fast Food  One group of people purchased 10 hot 
dogs and 5 soft drinks at a cost of $35.00. A second bought  
7 hot dogs and 4 soft drinks at a cost of $25.25. What is the 
cost of a single hot dog? A single soft drink?
1200
miles
5 hours
6 hours
We paid $35.00.
How much is one hot dog?
How much is one soda?
HOT DOGS
SODA
We paid $25.25.
How much is one hot dog?
How much is one soda?
HOT DOGS
SODA
65.	 Computing Wind Speed  With a tail wind, a small aircraft 
can fly 1200 miles in 5 hours. Against this same wind, the 
plane can fly the same distance in 6 hours. Find the average 
wind speed and the average airspeed of the plane.

Section 11.1  Systems of Linear Equations: Substitution and Elimination   751
	 69.	 Computing a Refund  The grocery store we use does not 
mark prices on its goods. My wife went to this store, bought 
four packages of bacon and five cartons of eggs, and paid 
a total of $21.41. Not knowing that she went to the store, 
I also went to the same store, purchased five packages of 
bacon and four cartons of eggs, and paid a total of $23.41. 
Now we want to return four packages of bacon and four 
cartons of eggs. How much will be refunded? 
70.	 Finding the Current of a Stream  Pamela requires 3 hours to 
swim 15 miles downstream on the Illinois River. The return 
trip upstream takes 5 hours. Find Pamela’s average speed in 
still water. How fast is the current? (Assume that Pamela’s 
speed is the same in each direction.)
	 71.	 Pharmacy  A doctor’s prescription calls for a daily intake 
containing 30 mg of vitamin C and 20 mg of vitamin D. Your 
pharmacy stocks two compounds that can be used: one con-
tains 50% vitamin C and 50% vitamin D, the other 40%  
vitamin C and 20% vitamin D. How many milligrams of each 
compound should be mixed to fill the prescription? 
	
	
	 72.	 Pharmacy    A doctor’s prescription calls for the creation  
of pills that contain 12 units of vitamin B12 and 12 units of 
vitamin E. Your pharmacy stocks two powders that can be 
used to make these pills: One contains 20% vitamin B12  
and 30% vitamin E, the other 40% vitamin B12 and 20% 
vitamin E. How many units of each powder should be mixed 
in each pill?  
	73.	 Curve Fitting     Find real numbers a, b, and c so that the 
graph of the function y = ax2 + bx + c contains the points 
1- 1, 52, 13, 82, and 10, 22. 
	 74.	 Curve Fitting    Find real numbers a, b, and c so that the 
graph of the function y = ax2 + bx + c contains the points 
1- 1, - 22, 11, - 42, and 12, 42. 
	 75.	 IS–LM Model in Economics  In economics, the IS curve 
is a linear equation that represents all combinations of  
income Y and interest rates r that maintain an  
equilibrium in the market for goods in the economy. 
The LM curve is a linear equation that represents all  
combinations of income Y and interest rates r that  
maintain an equilibrium in the market for money in the 
economy. In an economy, suppose the equilibrium level 
of income (in millions of dollars) and interest rates sat-
isfy the system of equations.  
b0.06Y - 6000r = 120
0.06Y + 7000r = 900
	
	 Find the equilibrium level of income and interest rates.
	 76.	 IS–LM Model in Economics  In economics, the IS curve is a 
linear equation that represents all combinations of income 
Y and interest rates r that maintain an equilibrium in the 
market for goods in the economy. The LM curve is a linear 
equation that represents all combinations of income Y and 
interest rates r that maintain an equilibrium in the market 
for money in the economy. In an economy, suppose that 
the equilibrium level of income (in millions of dollars) and  
interest rates satisfy the system of equations 
b0.05Y - 1000r = 10
0.05Y + 800r = 100
	
	 Find the equilibrium level of income and interest rates.
	 77.	 Electricity: Kirchhoff’s Rules  An application of Kirchhoff’s 
Rules to the circuit shown results in the following system of 
equations. 
c
  
I2 = I1 + I3
5 - 3I1 - 5I2 = 0
10 - 5I2 - 8I3 = 0
	
	 Find the currents I1, I2, I3.
3Ω
5Ω
l2
l1
l3
8Ω
10 V
1
2
1
2
5 V
Source: Physics for Scientists & Engineers, 9th ed., by  
Serway. © 2013 Cengage Learning.
	 78.	 Electricity: Kirchhoff’s Rules  An application of Kirchhoff’s 
Rules to the circuit shown below results in the following  
system of equations:
c
I3 = I1 + I2
8 = 4I3 + 6I2
8I1 = 4 + 6I2
	
	 Find the currents I1, I2, and I3.
 
 
l2
3Ω
5Ω
1Ω
1Ω


4 V
12 V
8Ω


l1
l3
Source: Physics for Scientists & Engineers, 9th ed., by  
Serway. © 2013 Cengage Learning.
79.	 Theater Revenues    A Broadway theater has 800 seats,  
divided into orchestra, main, and balcony seating. Orchestra 
seats sell for $50, main seats for $40, and balcony seats for 
$25.  If all the seats are sold, the gross revenue to the theater 
is $30,150. If all the main and balcony seats are sold, but only 
half the orchestra seats are sold, the gross revenue is $26,150. 
How many are there of each kind of seat?
	 80.	 Theater Revenues    A movie theater charges $11.00 for 
adults, $6.50 for children, and $9.00 for senior citizens. 
One day the theater sold 405 tickets and collected $3315 in  
receipts. Twice as many children’s tickets were sold as adult 
tickets. How many adults, children, and senior citizens went 
to the theater that day? 

752 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
81.	 Nutrition  A dietitian wishes a patient to have a meal that 
has 82 grams of protein, 125.5 grams of carbohydrates, and 
690 milligrams of calcium. The hospital food service tells the 
dietitian that the dinner for today is chicken, corn, and milk. 
Each serving of chicken has 40 grams of protein, 45 grams of 
carbohydrates, and 100 milligrams of calcium. Each serving 
of corn has 3 grams of protein, 16 grams of carbohydrates, 
and 10 milligrams of calcium. Each glass of milk has 8 grams 
of protein, 13 grams of carbohydrates, and 260 milligrams of 
calcium. How many servings of each food should the dieti-
tian provide for the patient?
82.	 Investments    Kelly has $20,000 to invest. As her financial 
planner, you recommend that she diversify into three  
investments: Treasury bills that yield 5% simple interest, 
Treasury bonds that yield 7% simple interest, and corporate 
bonds that yield 10% simple interest. Kelly wishes to earn 
$1390 per year in income. Also, Kelly wants her investment  
in Treasury bills to be $3000 more than her investment in  
corporate bonds. How much money should Kelly place in each 
investment?
83.	 Prices of Fast Food  One group of customers bought 10 de-
luxe hamburgers, 10 orders of large fries, and 8 large colas 
for $35.60. A second group ordered 8 deluxe hamburgers,  
10 large fries, and 9 large colas and paid $32.20. Is there suffi-
cient information to determine the price of each food item? 
Assume that the hamburgers cost between $1.50 and $2.50, 
the fries between $0.50 and $1.50, and the colas between 
$0.60 and $0.90.
84.	 Prices of Fast Food  Use the information given in Problem 83.  
Suppose that a third group purchased 3 deluxe hamburgers,  
2 large fries, and 4 large colas for $10.95. Now is there  
sufficient information to determine the price of each food 
item? If so, determine each price.
	 85.	 Painting a House  Three painters Beth, Bill, and Edie, work-
ing together, can paint the exterior of a home in 12 hours. 
Bill and Edie together have painted a similar house in  
15 hours. One day, all three worked on this same kind of 
house for 5 hours, after which Edie left. Beth and Bill re-
quired 10 more hours to finish. Assuming no gain or loss in 
efficiency, how long should it take each person to complete 
such a job alone? 
	 86.	 Make up a system of three linear equations containing three 
variables that has:
(a)	 No solution
(b)	 Exactly one solution
(c)	 Infinitely many solutions
	
	 Give the three systems to a friend to solve and critique.
	 87.	 Write a brief paragraph outlining your strategy for solving a 
system of two linear equations containing two variables.
	 88.	 Do you prefer the method of substitution or the method 
of elimination for solving a system of two linear equations  
containing two variables? Give your reasons.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 89–92 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
89.	 Graph f(x) = - 31-x + 2.
90.	 Find the complex zeros of f1x2 = x4 - 32x2 - 144.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 516                  2.  (a)                    (b)  -  3
4
x
y
4
(0, 3)
(4, 0)
–2
–2
2
2
	 91.	 Find the exact value of  sin -1c  sin ¢ - 10p
9 ≤d . 
	 92.	 Write - 23 + i in polar form. Express each argument  
in degrees. 

Section 11.2    Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices  753
The systematic approach of the method of elimination for solving a system of linear 
equations provides another method of solution that involves a simplified notation.
Consider the following system of linear equations:
b x + 4y = 14
3x - 2y =
0
If we choose not to write the symbols used for the variables, we can represent this 
system as
J1
4
3
-2 2 14
0R
where it is understood that the first column represents the coefficients of the  
variable x, the second column the coefficients of y, and the third column the  
constants on the right side of the equal signs. The vertical bar serves as a reminder 
of the equal signs. The large square brackets are used to denote a matrix in algebra.
11.2  Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices
	
OBJECTIVES	 1  Write the Augmented Matrix of a System of Linear Equations  (p. 753)
	
	 	2  Write the System of Equations from the Augmented Matrix  (p. 754)
	
	 	3  Perform Row Operations on a Matrix  (p. 755)
	
	 	4  Solve a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices  (p. 756)
 A matrix is defined as a rectangular array of numbers:
F
a11
 a12
g
a1j
g
a1n
a21
 a22
g
a2j
g
a2n
f
 f
f
f
ai1
 ai2
g
aij
g
ain
f
 f
f
f
am1
 am2
g
amj
g
amn
V      (1) 
Definition
Row 1
Row 2
f
Row i
f
Row m
Column 1	
Column 2	
Column j	
Column n
Each number aij of the matrix has two indexes: the row index i and the column 
index j. The matrix shown in display (1) has m rows and n columns. The numbers aij  
are usually referred to as the entries of the matrix. For example, a23 refers to the 
entry in the second row, third column.
Write the Augmented Matrix of a System of Linear Equations
Now we will use matrix notation to represent a system of linear equations. The 
matrix used to represent a system of linear equations is called an augmented matrix. 
In writing the augmented matrix of a system, the variables of each equation must be 
on the left side of the equal sign and the constants on the right side. A variable that 
does not appear in an equation has a coefficient of 0.
Writing the Augmented Matrix of a System of Linear Equations
Write the augmented matrix of each system of equations.
(a)	 b3x - 4y = -6
2x - 3y = -5 
(1)
(2)    (b)  c
2x -
y + z = 0
x +
z - 1 = 0
x + 2y - 8 = 0
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
1
Example 1

754 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
(a)	 The augmented matrix is
J3
-4
2
-3 2 -6
-5R
(b)	 Care must be taken that the system be written so that the coefficients of all 
variables are present (if any variable is missing, its coefficient is 0). Also, all 
constants must be to the right of the equal sign. We need to rearrange the given 
system as follows:
c
2x -
y + z = 0
x +
z - 1 = 0
x + 2y - 8 = 0
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
c
2x -
y +
z = 0
x + 0 # y +
z = 1
x +
2y + 0 # z = 8
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
	
The augmented matrix is
C
2
-1
1
1
0
1
1
2
0 3 
0
1
8
S
If we do not include the constants to the right of the equal sign (that is, to 
the right of the vertical bar in the augmented matrix of a system of equations), 
the resulting matrix is called the coefficient matrix of the system. For the systems  
discussed in Example 1, the coefficient matrices are
J3
-4
2
-3R and C
2
-1
1
1
0
1
1
2
0
S
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Write the System of Equations from the Augmented Matrix
Writing the System of Linear Equations  
from the Augmented Matrix
Write the system of linear equations that corresponds to each augmented matrix.
(a)	 J
5
2
-3
1 2 
13
-10R         (b)  C
3
-1
-1
2
0
2
0
1
1 3 
7
8
0
S
(a)	 The matrix has two rows and so represents a system of two equations. The two 
columns to the left of the vertical bar indicate that the system has two variables. 
If x and y are used to denote these variables, the system of equations is
b
5x + 2y =
13
-3x +
y = -10 
(1)
(2)
(b)	 Since the augmented matrix has three rows, it represents a system of three 
equations. Since there are three columns to the left of the vertical bar, the system 
contains three variables. If x, y, and z are the three variables, the system of 
equations is
c
3x - y -
z = 7
2x
+ 2z = 8
y +
z = 0
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Solution
•
2
Example 2
Solution
•
Caution  Be sure variables and constants 
are lined up correctly before writing the 
augmented matrix.	
■

Section 11.2    Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices  755
Perform Row Operations on a Matrix
Row operations on a matrix are used to solve systems of equations when the system 
is written as an augmented matrix. There are three basic row operations.
3
Row Operations
	 1.	 Interchange any two rows.
	 2.	 Replace a row by a nonzero multiple of that row.
	 3.	 Replace a row by the sum of that row and a constant nonzero multiple 
of some other row.
These three row operations correspond to the three rules given earlier for  
obtaining an equivalent system of equations. When a row operation is performed 
on a matrix, the resulting matrix represents a system of equations equivalent to the 
system represented by the original matrix.
For example, consider the augmented matrix
J1
2
4
-1 2 3
2R
Suppose that we want to apply a row operation to this matrix that results in a 
matrix whose entry in row 2, column 1 is a 0. The row operation to use is
	
Multiply each entry in row 1 by -4, and add the result
to the corresponding entries in row 2.
	
If we use R2 to represent the new entries in row 2 and r1 and r2 to represent the 
original entries in rows 1 and 2, respectively, we can represent the row operation in 
the statement above by
R2 = -4r1 + r2
Then
 J1
2
4
-1 2 3
2R S J
1
2
-4112 + 4
-4122 + 1 -12 2 
3
-4132 + 2R = J1
2
0
-9 2 
3
-10R
	
æ
	
R2 = - 4r1 + r2
As desired, we now have the entry 0 in row 2, column 1.
Applying a Row Operation to an Augmented Matrix
Apply the row operation R2 = -3r1 + r2 to the augmented matrix
J1
-2
3
-5 2 2
9R
The row operation R2 = -3r1 + r2 says that the entries in row 2 are to be replaced 
by the entries obtained after multiplying each entry in row 1 by -3 and adding the 
result to the corresponding entries in row 2.
Example 3
Solution
 J1
-2
3
-5 2 2
9R S J
1
-2
-3112 + 3
1 -32 1-22 + 1 -52 2 
2
-3122 + 9R = J1
-2
0
1 2 2
3R
	
æ
	
R2 = - 3r1 + r2
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9

756 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Finding a Particular Row Operation
Find a row operation that will result in the augmented matrix
J1
-2
0
1 2 2
3R
having a 0 in row 1, column 2.
We want a 0 in row 1, column 2. Because there is a 1 in row 2, column 2, this result 
can be accomplished by multiplying row 2 by 2 and adding the result to row 1. That 
is, apply the row operation R1 = 2r2 + r1.
Example 4
Solution
 J1
-2
0
1 2 2
3R S J2102 + 1
2112 + 1-22
0
1
 2 2132 + 2
3
R = J1
0
0
1 2 8
3R
	
æ
	
R1 = 2r2 + r1
•
A word about the notation introduced here. A row operation such as 
R1 = 2r2 + r1 changes the entries in row 1. Note also that for this type of row 
operation, we change the entries in a given row by multiplying the entries in some 
other row by an appropriate nonzero number and adding the results to the original 
entries of the row to be changed.
Solve a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices
To solve a system of linear equations using matrices, use row operations on the  
augmented matrix of the system to obtain a matrix that is in row echelon form.
4
A matrix is in row echelon form when the following conditions are met:
	 1.	 The entry in row 1, column 1 is a 1, and only 0’s appear below it.
	 2.	 The first nonzero entry in each row after the first row is a 1, only 0’s appear 
below it, and the 1 appears to the right of the first nonzero entry in any row 
above.
	 3.	 Any rows that contain all 0’s to the left of the vertical bar appear at the 
bottom.
Definition
For example, for a system of three equations containing three variables, x, y, and z, 
with a unique solution, the augmented matrix is in row echelon form if it is of the form
C
1
a
b
0
1
c
0
0
1 3 
d
e
f
S
where a, b, c, d, e, and f are real numbers. The last row of this augmented matrix 
states that z = f. We can then determine the value of y using back-substitution  
with z = f, since row 2 represents the equation y + cz = e. Finally, x is determined 
using back-substitution again.
Two advantages of solving a system of equations by writing the augmented 
matrix in row echelon form are the following:
	 1.	 The process is algorithmic; that is, it consists of repetitive steps that can be 
programmed on a computer.
	 2.	 The process works on any system of linear equations, no matter how many 
equations or variables are present.
The next example shows how to solve a system of linear equations by writing its 
augmented matrix in row echelon form.

Section 11.2    Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices  757
Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices
Solve: c
2x + 2y
 =
6
x +
y + z =
1
3x + 4y - z = 13
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Example 5
Step-by-Step Solution
Step 1:  Write the augmented 
matrix that represents the system. 
Write the augmented matrix of the system.
£
2
2
0
1
1
1
3
4
-1 3 
6
1
13
§
Step 2:  Perform row operations 
that result in the entry in row 1,  
column 1 becoming 1.
To get a 1 in row 1, column 1, interchange rows 1 and 2. [Note that this is equivalent 
to interchanging equations (1) and (2) of the system.]
£
1
1
1
2
2
0
3
4
-1 3  
1
6
13
§
Step 3:  Perform row operations 
that leave the entry in row 1,  
column 1 a 1, while causing the 
entries in column 1 below row 1  
to become 0’s. 
Next, we want a 0 in row 2, column 1 and a 0 in row 3, column 1. Use the row  
operations R2 = -2r1 + r2 and R3 = -3r1 + r3 to accomplish this. Note that row 1 
is unchanged using these row operations. Also, do you see that performing these row 
operations simultaneously is the same as doing one followed by the other?
 C
1
1
1
2
2
0
3
4
-1 3 
1
6
13
S S C
1
1
1
0
0
-2
0
1
-4 3 
1
4
10
S
æ
 R2 = - 2r1 + r2
 R3 = - 3r1 + r3
Step 4:  Perform row operations 
that result in the entry in row 2,  
column 2 becoming 1 with 0’s  
below it. 
We want the entry in row 2, column 2 to be 1. We also want to have a 0 below the 1 in 
row 2, column 2. Interchanging rows 2 and 3 will accomplish both goals.
 C
1
1
1
0
0
-2
0
1
-4 3 
1
4
10
S S C
1
1
1
0
1
-4
0
0
-2 3 
1
10
4
S
Step 5:  Repeat Step 4 to get a 1 
in row 3, column 3. 
To obtain a 1 in row 3, column 3, use the row operation R3 = -  1
2 r3. The result is
 C
1
1
1
0
1
-4
0
0
-2 3 
1
10
4
S S C
1
1
1
0
1
-4
0
0
1 3 
1
10
-2
S
	
æ
	
R3 = -  1
2r3
Step 6:  The matrix on the right in 
Step 5 is the row echelon form of 
the augmented matrix. Use  
back-substitution to solve the  
original system. 
The third row of the augmented matrix represents the equation z = -2. Using 
z = -2, back-substitute into the equation y - 4z = 10 (from the second row) and 
obtain
 y - 4z = 10
 y - 41 -22 = 10 
z = - 2
 y = 2  
Solve for y.

758 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Finally, back-substitute y = 2 and z = -2 into the equation x + y + z = 1 (from 
the first row) and obtain
 x + y + z = 1
 x + 2 + 1 -22 = 1 
y = 2, z = - 2
 x = 1 
Solve for x.
The solution of the system is x = 1, y = 2, z = -2, or, using an ordered triplet, 
11, 2, -22.
•
Matrix Method for Solving a System of Linear Equations  
(Row Echelon Form)
Step 1:  Write the augmented matrix that represents the system.
Step 2:  Perform row operations to get the entry 1 in row 1, column 1.
Step 3:  Perform row operations that leave the entry 1 in row 1, column 1  
unchanged, while causing 0’s to appear below it in column 1.
Step 4:  Perform row operations to get the entry 1 in row 2, column 2, but 
leave the entries in columns to the left unchanged. If it is impossible 
to place a 1 in row 2, column 2, proceed to place a 1 in row 2, column 3. 
Once a 1 is in place, perform row operations to place 0’s below it.
(Place any rows that contain only 0’s on the left side of the vertical 
bar, at the bottom of the matrix.)
Step 5:  Now repeat Step 4 to get a 1 in the next row, but one column to the 
right. Continue until the bottom row or the vertical bar is reached.
Step 6:  The matrix that results is the row echelon form of the augmented 
matrix. Analyze the system of equations corresponding to it to solve 
the original system.
Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices 
(Row Echelon Form)
Solve: c
x -
y +
z =
8
2x + 3y -
z = -2
3x - 2y - 9z =
9
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Step 1:  The augmented matrix of the system is
C
1
-1
1
2
3
-1
3
-2
-9 3 
8
-2
9
S
Step 2:  Because the entry 1 is already present in row 1, column 1, go to Step 3.
Step 3:  Perform the row operations R2 = -2r1 + r2 and R3 = -3r1 + r3. Each of 
these leaves the entry 1 in row 1, column 1 unchanged, while causing 0’s to 
appear under it.
 C
1
-1
1
2
3
-1
3
-2
-9 3 
8
-2
9
S S C
1
-1
1
0
5
-3
0
1
-12 3 
8
-18
-15
S
	
æ
	
 R2 = - 2r1 + r2
	
 R3 = - 3r1 + r3
Example 6
Solution
In Words
To obtain an augmented matrix  
in row echelon form:
•  Add rows, interchange rows, 
or multiply a row by a nonzero 
constant.
•  Work from top to bottom and 
left to right.
•  Get 1’s in the main diagonal 
with 0’s below the 1’s.
•  Once the entry in row 1,  
column 1 is 1 with 0’s below it, 
do not use row 1 in your row 
operations. 
•  Once the entries in row 1,  
column 1 and row 2, column 2 
are 1 with 0’s below, do not  
use row 1 or 2 in your row 
operations (and so on).

Section 11.2    Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices  759
Step 4:  The easiest way to obtain the entry 1 in row 2, column 2 without altering 
column 1 is to interchange rows 2 and 3 (another way would be to multiply
row 2 by 1
5, but this introduces fractions).
C
1
-1
1
0
1
-12
0
5
-3 3 
8
-15
-18
S
To get a 0 under the 1 in row 2, column 2, perform the row operation 
R3 = -5r2 + r3.
 C
1
-1
1
0
1
-12
0
5
-3 3 
8
-15
-18
S S C
1
-1
1
0
1
-12
0
0
57 3 
8
-15
57
S
æ
 R3 = - 5r2 + r3
Step 5:  Continuing, obtain a 1 in row 3, column 3 by using R3 = 1
57
 r3.
 C
1
-1
1
0
1
-12
0
0
57 3 
8
-15
57
S S C
1
-1
1
0
1
-12
0
0
1 3 
8
-15
1
S
æ
 R3 =
1
57
 r3
Step 6:  The matrix on the right is the row echelon form of the augmented matrix. 
The system of equations represented by the matrix in row echelon form is
c
x - y +
z =
8
y - 12z = -15
 
 
z =
1
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Using z = 1, back-substitute to get
bx - y +
1
=
8
y - 12112 = -15 
(1)
(2) ¡    
bx - y =
7
y = -3 
(1)
(2)
	
Simplify.
We get y = -3 and, back-substituting into x - y = 7, we find that x = 4.  
The solution of the system is x = 4, y = -3, z = 1, or, using an ordered 
triplet, 14, -3, 12.
Sometimes it is advantageous to write a matrix in reduced row echelon form. 
In this form, row operations are used to obtain entries that are 0 above (as well as 
below) the leading 1 in a row. For example, the row echelon form obtained in the 
solution to Example 6 is
C
1
-1
1
0
1
-12
0
0
1 3 
8
-15
1
S
To write this matrix in reduced row echelon form, proceed as follows:
 C
1
-1
1
0
1
-12
0
0
1 3 
8
-15
1
S S C
1
0
-11
0
1
-12
0
0
1 3 
-7
-15
1
S S C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1 3 
4
-3
1
S
	
æ	
æ
	
 R1 = r2 + r1	
 R1 = 11r3 + r1
	
 R2 = 12r3 + r2
•

760 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
The matrix is now written in reduced row echelon form. The advantage of 
writing the matrix in this form is that the solution to the system, x = 4, 
y = -3, z = 1, is readily found, without the need to back-substitute. Another  
advantage will be seen in Section 11.4, where the inverse of a matrix is  
discussed. The method used to write a matrix in reduced row echelon form is called  
Gauss-Jordan elimination.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 9  a n d  4 9
The matrix method for solving a system of linear equations also identifies  
systems that have infinitely many solutions and systems that are inconsistent.
Solving a Dependent System of Linear Equations Using Matrices
Solve: c
6x -
y -
z =
4
-12x + 2y + 2z = -8
5x +
y -
z =
3
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Start with the augmented matrix of the system and proceed to obtain a 1 in row 1, 
column 1 with 0’s below.
Example 7
Solution
 C
6
-1
-1
-12
2
2
5
1
-1 3 
4
-8
3
S S C
1
-2
0
-12
2
2
5
1
-1 3 
1
-8
3
S S C
1
-2
0
0
-22
2
0
11
-1 3 
1
4
-2
S
	
æ	
æ
	
 R 1 = - 1r3 + r1	
 R2 = 12r1 + r2
	
	
 R3 = - 5r1 + r3
Obtaining a 1 in row 2, column 2 without altering column 1 can be accomplished by 
R2 = -  1
22
 r2 , by R3 = 1
11
 r3 and interchanging rows 2 and 3, or by R2 = 23
11
 r3 + r2. 
We shall use the first of these.
 C
1
-2
0
0
-22
2
0
11
-1 3 
1
4
-2
S S D
1
-2
0
0
1
-  1
11
0
11
-1
 4 
1
-  2
11
-2
T S D
1
-2
0
0
1
-  1
11
0
0
0
 4 
1
-  2
11
0
T
	
æ	
æ
	
R2 = -  1
22
 r2	
R3 = - 11r2 + r3
This matrix is in row echelon form. Because the bottom row consists entirely  
of 0’s, the system actually consists of only two equations.
c
x - 2y =
1
y - 1
11
 z = -  2
11
 
(1)
(2)
 
 
To make it easier to write down some of the solutions, we express both x and y in 
terms of z.
From the second equation, y = 1
11
 z - 2
11. Now back-substitute this solution 
for y into the first equation to get
x = 2y + 1 = 2a 1
11
 z - 2
11b + 1 = 2
11
 z + 7
11

Section 11.2    Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices  761
The original system is equivalent to the system
d
x = 2
11
 z + 7
11
y = 1
11
 z - 2
11
      where z can be any real number
Let’s look at the situation. The original system of three equations is equivalent 
to a system containing two equations. This means that any values of x, y, z that 
satisfy both
x = 2
11
 z + 7
11 and y = 1
11
 z - 2
11
will be solutions. For example, z = 0, x = 7
11, y = -  2
11; z = 1, x = 9
11, y = -  1
11; 
and z = -1, x = 5
11, y = -  3
11 are some of the solutions of the original system.
There are, in fact, infinitely many values of x, y, and z for which the two equations are 
satisfied. That is, the original system has infinitely many solutions. We will write the 
solution of the original system as
d
x = 2
11
 z + 7
11
y = 1
11
 z - 2
11
  where z can be any real number
or, using ordered triplets, as
e 1x, y, z2 ` x = 2
11z + 7
11, y = 1
11z - 2
11, z any real number f
We can also find the solution by writing the augmented matrix in reduced row 
echelon form. Starting with the row echelon form, we have
 D
1
-2
0
0
1
-  1
11
0
0
0
 4 
1 
-  2
11
0
T S E
1
0
-  2
11
0
1
-  1
11
0
0
0
 5 
7
11
-  2
11
0
U
	
æ
	
 R1 = 2r2 + r1
The matrix on the right is in reduced row echelon form. The corresponding system 
of equations is
d
x - 2
11
 z =
7
11
y - 1
11
 z = -  2
11
 
    where z can be any real number
or, equivalently,
d
x = 2
11
 z + 7
11
y = 1
11
 z - 2
11
  where z can be any real number
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
(1)
(2)
•
(1)
(2)

762 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Solving an Inconsistent System of Linear Equations  
Using Matrices
Solve: 
c
x +
y +
z = 6
2x -
y -
z = 3
x + 2y + 2z = 0
Begin with the augmented matrix.
Example 8
Solution
 C
1
1
1
2
-1
-1
1
2
2 3 
6
3
0
S S C
1
1
1
0
-3
-3
0
1
1 3 
6
-9
-6
S S C
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
-3
-3 3 
6
-6
-9
S S C
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0 3 
6
-6
-27
S
	
æ	
æ	
æ
	
R2 = - 2r1 + r2	
Interchange rows 2 and 3.	
R3 = 3r2 + r3
	
R3 = - 1r1 + r3
This matrix is in row echelon form. The bottom row is equivalent to the equation
0x + 0y + 0z = -27
which has no solution. The original system is inconsistent.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
The matrix method is especially effective for systems of equations for which 
the number of equations and the number of variables are unequal. Here, too, such a  
system is either inconsistent or consistent. If it is consistent, it will have either  
exactly one solution or infinitely many solutions.
Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices
Solve: 
d
x - 2y +
z =
0
2x + 2y - 3z = -3
y -
z = -1
-x + 4y + 2z = 13
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Begin with the augmented matrix.
 D
1
-2
1
2
2
-3
0
1
-1
-1
4
2
 4 
0
-3
-1
13
T S D
1
-2
1
0
6
-5
0
1
-1
0
2
3
 4 
0
-3
-1
13
T S D
1
-2
1
0
1
-1
0
6
-5
0
2
3
 4 
0
-1
-3
13
T
	
æ	
æ
	
R2 = - 2r1 + r2	
Interchange rows 2 and 3.
	
R4 = r1 + r4
 S D
1
-2
1
0
1
-1
0
0
1
0
0
5
 4 
0
-1
3
15
T S D
1
-2
1
0
1
-1
0
0
1
0
0
0
 4 
0
-1
3
0
T
	
æ	
æ
	
R3 = - 6r2 + r3	
R4 = - 5r3 + r4
	
R4 = - 2r2 + r4
•
Example 9
Solution

Section 11.2    Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices  763
We could stop here, since the matrix is in row echelon form, and back-substitute 
z = 3 to find x and y. Or we can continue and obtain the reduced row echelon form.
D
1
-2
1
0
1
-1
0
0
1
0
0
0
 4 
0
-1
3
0
T  S D
1
0
-1
0
1
-1
0
0
1
0
0
0
 4 
-2
-1
3
0
T S D
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
 4 
1
2
3
0
T
	
æ	
æ
	
R1 = 2r2 + r1	
R1 = r3 + r1
	
	
R2 = r3 + r2
The matrix is now in reduced row echelon form, and we can see that the solution is 
x = 1, y = 2, z = 3, or, using an ordered triplet, 11, 2, 32.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
Financial Planning
Adam and Michelle require an additional $25,000 in annual income (beyond their 
pension benefits). They are rather risk averse and have narrowed their investment 
choices down to Treasury notes that yield 3%, Treasury bonds that yield 5%, and 
corporate bonds that yield 6%. They have $600,000 to invest and want the amount 
invested in Treasury notes to equal the total amount invested in Treasury bonds and 
corporate bonds. How much should they place in each investment?
Let n, b, and c represent the amounts invested in Treasury notes, Treasury bonds, and 
corporate bonds, respectively. There is a total of $600,000 to invest, which means that 
the sum of the amounts invested in Treasury notes, Treasury bonds, and corporate 
bonds should equal $600,000. The first equation is
n + b + c = 600,000 
(1)
If $100,000 were invested in Treasury notes, the income would be 0.031$100,0002 =
$3000. In general, if n dollars were invested in Treasury notes, the income would be 
0.03n. Since the total income is to be $25,000, the second equation is
0.03n + 0.05b + 0.06c = 25,000 
(2)
The amount invested in Treasury notes should equal the sum of the amounts invested  
in Treasury bonds and corporate bonds, so the third equation is
n = b + c or n - b - c = 0 
(3)
We have the following system of equations:
c
n +
b +
c = 600,000
0.03n + 0.05b + 0.06c = 25,000
n -
b -
c = 0
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Begin with the augmented matrix and proceed as follows:
•
Example 10
Solution
C
1
1
1
0.03
0.05
0.06
1
-1
-1 3 
600,000
25,000
0
S S C
1
1
1
0
0.02
0.03
0
-2
-2 3 
600,000
7000
-600,000
S
	
æ
	
R2 = - 0.03r1 + r2
	
R3 = - r1 + r3
S C
1
1
1
0
1
1.5
0
-2
-2  3 
600,000
350,000
-600,000
S S C
1
1
1
0
1
1.5
0
0
1  3 
600,000
350,000
100,000
S
	
æ	
æ
	
R2 =
1
0.02
 r2	
R3 = 2r2 + r3

764 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
The matrix is now in row echelon form. The final matrix represents the system
c
n + b + c = 600,000
b + 1.5c = 350,000
c = 100,000
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
From equation (3), we determine that Adam and Michelle should invest $100,000 
in corporate bonds. Back-substitute $100,000 into equation (2) to find that  
b = 200,000, so Adam and Michelle should invest $200,000 in Treasury bonds. 
Back-substitute these values into equation (1) and find that n = $300,000, 
so $300,000 should be invested in Treasury notes.
•
23.	 C
1
- 3
2
2
- 5
3
- 3
- 6
4 3 
- 6
- 4
6
S 
R2 = - 2r1 + r2
R3 = 3r1 + r3
24.	 C
1
- 3
- 4
6
- 5
6
- 1
1
4 3 
- 6
- 6
6
S 
R2 = - 6r1 + r2
R3 = r1 + r3
Comment  Most graphing utilities have  
the capability to put an augmented  
matrix into row echelon form (ref) and also 
reduced row echelon form (rref). See the  
Appendix B, Section B.7, for a discussion.	 ■
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 An m by n rectangular array of numbers is called a(n) 
.
	 2.	 The matrix used to represent a system of linear equations is 
called a(n) 
 matrix.
11.2  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 7–18, write the augmented matrix of the given system of equations.
7.	 b x - 5y = 5
4x + 3y = 6
8.	 b3x + 4y = 7
4x - 2y = 5
9.	  b2x + 3y - 6 = 0
4x - 6y + 2 = 0
10.	 b
9x - y = 0
3x -
y - 4 = 0
11.	 b0.01x - 0.03y = 0.06
0.13x + 0.10y = 0.20
12.	 d
4
3
 x - 3
2
 y = 3
4
-  1
4
 x + 1
3
 y = 2
3
13.	 c
x -
y +
z = 10
3x + 3y =
5
x +
y + 2z =
2
14.	 c
5x -
y -
z = 0
x +
y = 5
2x - 3z = 2
15.	 c
x +
y -
z = 2
3x - 2y = 2
5x + 3y -
z = 1
16.	 c
2x + 3y - 4z =
0
x - 5z +
2 =
0
x + 2y - 3z = - 2
17.	 d
x -
y -
z = 10
2x +
y + 2z = - 1
- 3x + 4y
=
5
4x - 5y +
z =
0
18.	 c
x -
y + 2z -
w =
5
x + 3y - 4z + 2w =
2
3x - y - 5z -
w = - 1
In Problems 19–26, write the system of equations corresponding to each augmented matrix. Then perform the indicated row operation(s) 
on the given augmented matrix.
19.	 J1
- 3
2
- 5 2 - 2
5R R2 = - 2r1 + r2
 
20.	 J1
- 3
2
- 5 2 - 3
- 4R R2 = - 2r1 + r2
 
21.	 C
1
- 3
4
3
- 5
6
- 5
3
4 3 
3
6
6
S 
R2 = - 3r1 + r2
R3 = 5r1 + r3
22.	 C
1
- 3
3
- 4
- 5
- 3
- 3
- 2
4 3 
- 5
- 5
6
S 
R2 = 4r1 + r2
R3 = 3r1 + r3
	 3.	 The notation a35 refers to the entry in the 
 row  
and 
 column of a matrix.
	 4.	 True or False    The matrix C
1
3
0
1
0
0 3 
-2
5
0
S  is in row 
	
	 echelon form. 
	 5.	 Which of the following matrices is in reduced row echelon 
form?
(a)	 J1
2
3
- 1 2 
9
- 1R   (b)  J1
0
0
1 2 1
4R
(c)	 J1
2
0
0 2 9
28R     (d)  J1
2
0
1 2 9
4R  
	 6.	 Which of the following statements accurately describes the
	
	 system represented by the matrix C
1
5
-2
0
1
3
0
0
0 3 
3
-2
5
S?
(a)	 The system has one solution.
(b)	 The system has infinitely many solutions.
(c)	 The system has no solution.
(d)	 The number of solutions cannot be determined. 

Section 11.2    Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices  765
25.	 C
5
- 3
1
2
- 5
6
- 4
1
4 3 
- 2
- 2
6
S 
R1 = - 2r2 + r1
R3 = 2r2 + r3
26.	 C
4
- 3
- 1
3
- 5
2
- 3
- 6
4 3 
2
6
6
S 
R1 = -r2 + r1
R3 =
r2 + r3
In Problems 27–38, the reduced row echelon form of a system of linear equations is given. Write the system of equations corresponding  
to the given matrix. Use x, y; or x, y, z; or x1, x2, x3, x4 as variables. Determine whether the system is consistent or inconsistent. If it is  
consistent, give the solution.
27.	 J1
0
0
1 2 
5
- 1R  
28.	 J1
0
0
1 2 - 4
0R  
29.	  C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0 3 
1
2
3
S  
30.	 C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0 3 
0
0
2
S  
31.	 C
1
0
2
0
1
- 4
0
0
0 3 
- 1
- 2
0
S
32.	 C
1
0
4
0
1
3
0
0
0 3 
4
2
0
S
33.	 C
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
2 3 
1
2
3
S
34.	 C
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
1
3 3 
1
2
0
S
35.	 C
1
0
0
4
0
1
1
3
0
0
0
0 3 
2
3
0
S
36.	 C
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
2 3 
1
2
3
S
37.	 D
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
2
0
0
1
- 1
0
0
0
0
 4 
- 2
2
0
0
T
38.	 D
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
 4 
1
2
3
0
T
In Problems 39–74, solve each system of equations using matrices (row operations). If the system has no solution, say that it is inconsistent.
	 39.	 bx + y = 8
x - y = 4 
	 45.	 c
2x + 3y = 6
x -
y = 1
2
 
	 42.	 •
3x + 3y = 3
4x + 2y = 8
3
 
43.	 b x + 2y = 4
2x + 4y = 8
44.	 b3x -
y =
7
9x - 3y = 21
	 48.	 c
2x - y = - 1
x + 1
2y =
3
2
 
	 41.	 b 2x - 4y = -2
3x + 2y =
3 
	 40.	 bx + 2y = 5
x +
y = 3 
	 46.	 c
1
2x +
y = - 2
x - 2y =
8 
	 47.	 b 3x - 5y =
3
15x + 5y = 21 
	 49.	  c
x -
y =
6
2x - 3z = 16
2y +
z =
4
 
	 50.	 c
2x +
y =
-4
- 2y + 4z =
0
3x - 2z = - 11
 
51.	 c
x - 2y + 3z =
7
2x +
y +
z =
4
- 3x + 2y - 2z = - 10
52.	 c
2x +
y - 3z =
0
- 2x + 2y +
z = - 7
3x - 4y - 3z =
7
	 53.	 c
2x - 2y - 2z = 2
2x + 3y +
z = 2
3x + 2y = 0
 
	 54.	 c
2x - 3y - z = 0
- x + 2y + z = 5
3x - 4y - z = 1
 
55.	 c
- x +
y +
z = - 1
- x + 2y - 3z = - 4
3x - 2y - 7z =
0
56.	 c
2x - 3y -
z = 0
3x + 2y + 2z = 2
x + 5y + 3z = 2
	 57.	 c
2x - 2y + 3z = 6
4x - 3y + 2z = 0
- 2x + 3y - 7z = 1
 
	 58.	 c
3x - 2y + 2z =
6
7x - 3y + 2z = - 1
2x - 3y + 4z =
0
 
59.	 c
x +
y -
z =
6
3x - 2y +
z = -5
x + 3y - 2z = 14
60.	 c
x -
y +
z =
- 4
2x - 3y + 4z = - 15
5x +
y - 2z =
12
61.	 c
x + 2y -
z = - 3
2x - 4y +
z = - 7
- 2x + 2y - 3z =
4
62.	 c
x + 4y - 3z = -8
3x -
y + 3z = 12
x +
y + 6z =
1

766 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
	 63.	 e
3x +
y -
z = 2
3
2x -
y +
z = 1
4x + 2y = 8
3
 
	 64.	 d
 
 x + y = 1
2x -
y + z = 1
x + 2y + z = 8
3
 
65.	 d
x + y + z + w =
4
2x - y + z =
0
3x + 2y + z - w =
6
x - 2y - 2z + 2w = - 1
66.	 d
x + y + z + w =
4
- x + 2y + z =
0
2x + 3y + z - w =
6
- 2x + y - 2z + 2w = - 1
67.	 c
x + 2y +
z = 1
2x -
y + 2z = 2
3x +
y + 3z = 3
68.	 c
x + 2y -
z = 3
2x -
y + 2z = 6
x - 3y + 3z = 4
69.	 b x -
y +
z = 5
3x + 2y - 2z = 0
70.	 b 2x + y -
z = 4
- x + y + 3z = 1
71.	  d
2x + 3y -
z = 3
x -
y -
z = 0
- x +
y +
z = 0
x +
y + 3z = 5
	 72.	 d
x - 3y +
z = 1
2x -
y - 4z = 0
x - 3y + 2z = 1
 x - 2y = 5
 
73.	 b4x + y +
z -
w = 4
x - y + 2z + 3w = 3
74.	 c
- 4x + y = 5
2x - y +
z - w = 5
z + w = 4
75.	 Curve Fitting  Find the function y = ax2 + bx + c whose 
graph contains the points 11, 72, 1- 3, -172, and 13, 72.
76.	 Curve Fitting  Find the function y = ax2 + bx + c whose 
graph contains the points 11, - 12, 13, -12, and 1- 2, 142.
	 77.	 Curve Fitting  Find the function
 f1x2 = ax3 + bx2 + cx + d
	
	 for which f1- 32 = - 64, f1- 12 = 4, f112 = 8, and 
f122 = 16. 
	 78.	 Curve Fitting  Find the function
f1x2 = ax3 + bx2 +cx + d
	
	 for which f1- 22 = - 10, f1- 12 = 3, f112 = 5, and 
f132 = 15. 
	 79.	 Nutrition  A dietitian at a hospital wants a patient to have a 
meal that has 73 grams of protein, 51 grams of carbohydrates, 
and 68 milligrams of vitamin A. The hospital food service tells 
the dietitian that the dinner for today is salmon steak, baked 
eggs, and acorn squash. Each serving of salmon steak has  
40 grams of protein, 20 grams of carbohydrates, and 1 mil-
ligram of vitamin A. Each serving of baked eggs contains  
15 grams of protein, 3 grams of carbohydrates, and 15 milli-
grams of vitamin A. Each serving of acorn squash contains  
3 grams of protein, 25 grams of carbohydrates, and 37 milligrams 
of vitamin A. How many servings of each food should the dieti-
tian provide for the patient?   
80.	 Nutrition  A dietitian at General Hospital wants a patient 
to have a meal that has 47 grams (g) of protein, 58 g of  
carbohydrates, and 630 milligrams (mg) of calcium. The  
hospital food service tells the dietitian that the dinner for  
today is pork chops, corn on the cob, and 2% milk.  
Each serving of pork chops has 23 g of protein, 0 g of  
carbohydrates, and 10 mg of calcium. Each serving of corn 
on the cob contains 3 g of protein, 16 g of carbohydrates, and  
10 mg of calcium. Each glass of 2% milk contains 9 g of protein,  
13 g of carbohydrates, and 300 mg of calcium. How many  
servings of each food should the dietitian provide for the patient?
81.	 Financial Planning    A person has $20,000 to invest. As 
the person’s financial consultant, you recommend that the 
money be invested in Treasury bills that yield 4%, Treasury 
bonds that yield 8%, and corporate bonds that yield 12%. 
The person wants to have an annual income of $1560, and 
the amount invested in corporate bonds must be half that in-
vested in Treasury bills. Find the amount in each investment.
82.	 Landscaping  A landscape company is hired to plant trees in 
three new subdivisions. The company charges the developer  
for each tree planted, an hourly rate to plant the trees, and  
a fixed delivery charge. In one subdivision it took 166 labor  
hours to plant 250 trees for a cost of $7520. In a second  
subdivision it took 124 labor hours to plant 200 trees for a cost 
of $5945. In the final subdivision it took 200 labor hours to 
plant 300 trees for a cost of $8985. Determine the cost for each 
tree, the hourly labor charge, and the fixed delivery charge.
Source: www.bx.org
	 83.	 Production    To manufacture an automobile requires  
painting, drying, and polishing. Epsilon Motor Company 
produces three types of cars, the Delta, the Beta, and the 
Sigma. Each Delta requires 9 hours for painting, 2 hours for 
drying, and 3 hours for polishing. A Beta requires 33 hours 
for painting, 8 hours for drying, and 4 hours for polishing, 
and a Sigma requires 8 hours for painting, 1 hour for drying, 
and 2 hours for polishing. If the company has 419 hours for 
painting, 89 hours for drying, and 68 hours for polishing per 
month, how many of each type of car are produced? 
	
	
	 84.	 Production    A Florida juice company completes the  
preparation of its products by sterilizing, filling, and labeling 
bottles. Each case of orange juice requires 9 minutes (min) 
for sterilizing, 6 min for filling, and 1 min for labeling. Each 
case of grapefruit juice requires 10 min for sterilizing, 4 min 
for filling, and 2 min for labeling. Each case of tomato juice 
requires 12 min for sterilizing, 4 min for filling, and 1 min 
for labeling. If the company runs the sterilizing machine for 
398 min, the filling machine for 164 min, and the labeling 
machine for 58 min, how many cases of each type of juice are 
prepared? 
Applications and Extensions

Section 11.2    Systems of Linear Equations: Matrices  767
	 85.	 Electricity: Kirchhoff’s Rules  An application of Kirchhoff’s 
Rules to the circuit shown results in the following system of 
equations. 
e
- 8 + 16 - 2I2 = 0
16 = 9I4 + I1
8 = 9I3 + I1
I3 + I4 = I1
 
	 86.	 Electricity: Kirchhoff’s Rules  An application of Kirchhoff’s 
Rules to the circuit shown results in the following system of 
equations:
c
I1 = I3 + I2
24 - 6I1 - 3I3 = 0
12 + 24 - 6I1 - 6I2 = 0
 
	
	 Find the currents I1, I2, and I3.
 
 
	
	 Find the currents I1, I2, I3, I4.
9V
l2
l1
l3
l4
2V
1
2
1
2
16 V
8 V
1V
9V
4
3
l3
l1
5
12 V
l2




24 V
1
2
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 91.	 Write a brief paragraph or two outlining your strategy for 
solving a system of linear equations using matrices.
	 92.	 When solving a system of linear equations using matrices, 
do you prefer to place the augmented matrix in row echelon  
form or in reduced row echelon form? Give reasons for your 
choice.
	 93.	 Make up a system of three linear equations containing three 
variables that has:
(a)	 No solution
(b)  Exactly one solution
(c)	 Infinitely many solutions
	
	 Give the three systems to a friend to solve and critique.
Source: Ibid., Prob. 38, p. 791.
	 87.	 Financial Planning    Three retired couples each require 
an additional annual income of $2000 per year. As their  
financial consultant, you recommend that they invest some 
money in Treasury bills that yield 8%, some money in  
corporate bonds that yield 12%, and some money in  
junk bonds that yield 16%. Prepare a table for each couple 
showing the various ways that their goals can be achieved:
(a)	 If the first couple has $15,000 to invest.
(b)	 If the second couple has $20,000 to invest.
(c)	 If the third couple has $30,000 to invest.
(d)	 What advice would you give each couple regarding the 
amount to invest and the choices available?
88.	 Financial Planning  A young couple has $25,000 to invest. 
As their financial consultant, you recommend that they  
invest some money in Treasury bills that yield 7%, some 
money in corporate bonds that yield 9%, and some  
money in junk bonds that yield 11%. Prepare a table showing  
the various ways that this couple can achieve the following 
goals:
(a)	 $1500 per year in income
(b)	 $2000 per year in income
(c)	 $2500 per year in income
(d)	 What advice would you give this couple regarding the 
income that they require and the choices available?
	
	 [Hint: Higher yields generally carry more risk.]
89.	 Pharmacy  A doctor’s prescription calls for a daily intake of 
a supplement containing 40 mg of vitamin C and 50 mg of  
vitamin D. Your pharmacy stocks three supplements that can 
be used: one contains 20% vitamin C and 30% vitamin D; a 
second, 40% vitamin C and 20% vitamin D; and a third, 30% 
vitamin C and 20% vitamin D. Create a table showing several 
possible combinations that could be used to fill the prescription.
90.	 Pharmacy    A doctor’s prescription calls for the creation 
of pills that contain 12 units of vitamin B12 and 12 units of  
vitamin E. Your pharmacy stocks three powders that can be 
used to make these pills: one contains 20% vitamin B12 and 
30% vitamin E; a second, 40% vitamin B12 and 20% vitamin E;  
and a third, 30% vitamin B12 and 40% vitamin E. Create a 
table showing the possible combinations of these powders 
that could be mixed in each pill. Hint: 10 units of the first 
powder contains 10(0.2) = 2 units of vitamin B12.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 94–97 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
94.	 Solve: x2 - 3x 6 6 + 2x
95.	 Graph: f 1x2 = 2x2 - x - 1
x2 + 2x + 1
96.	 State the domain of f 1x2 = - ex+5 - 6.
	 97.	 Use a calculator to approximate  cos-11-0.752 in radians, 
rounded to two decimal places. 

768 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
The preceding section described a method of using matrices to solve a system of 
linear equations. This section deals with yet another method for solving systems 
of linear equations; however, it can be used only when the number of equations 
equals the number of variables. Although the method will work for any system 
(provided that the number of equations equals the number of variables), it is most 
often used for systems of two equations containing two variables or three equations  
containing three variables. This method, called Cramer’s Rule, is based on the  
concept of a determinant.
Evaluate 2 by 2 Determinants
1
11.3  Systems of Linear Equations: Determinants
	
Objectives	 	1  Evaluate 2 by 2 Determinants  (p. 768)
	
	 	2  Use Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Two Equations Containing  
Two Variables  (p. 769)
	
	 	3  Evaluate 3 by 3 Determinants  (p. 771)
	
	 	4  Use Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Three Equations Containing  
Three Variables  (p. 773)
	
	 	5  Know Properties of Determinants  (p. 774)
If a, b, c, and d are four real numbers, the symbol
D = 2 a
b
c
d
2
is called a 2 by 2 determinant. Its value is the number ad - bc; that is,
	
D = 2 a
b
c
d
2 = ad - bc	
(1)
Definition
The following illustration may be helpful for remembering the value of  
a 2 by 2 determinant:
3
a   
b
 
 
 
c
  
d
3
Minus
bc
 
= ad - bc
ad
Evaluating a 2 : 2 Determinant
Evaluate: 
2 3
-2
6
1
2
 2 3
-2
6
1
2 = 132 112 - 162 1-22
 = 3 - 1 -122
 = 15
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Example 1
Solution
•

Section 11.3    Systems of Linear Equations: Determinants  769
Use Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Two Equations  
Containing Two Variables
Let’s see the role that a 2 by 2 determinant plays in the solution of a system of two 
equations containing two variables. Consider the system
	
bax + by = s
cx + dy = t 
(1)
(2)	
(2)
We use the method of elimination to solve this system.
Provided that d ≠0 and b ≠0, this system is equivalent to the system
badx + bdy = sd
bcx + bdy = tb 
(1) Multiply by d.
(2) Multiply by b.
Subtract the second equation from the first equation and obtain
b 1ad - bc2x + 0 # y = sd - tb
bcx + bdy = tb
 
(1)
(2)
Now the first equation can be rewritten using determinant notation.
2 a
b
c
d
2 x = 2 s
b
t
d
2
If D = 2 a
b
c
d
2 = ad - bc ≠0, solve for x to get
	
x =
2 s
b
t
d
2
2 a
b
c
d
2
=
2 s
b
t
d
2
D
	
(3)
Return now to the original system (2). Provided that a ≠0 and c ≠0, the 
system is equivalent to
b acx + bcy = cs
acx + ady = at 
(1) Multiply by c.
(2) Multiply by a.
Subtract the first equation from the second equation and obtain
b acx +
bcy
=
cs
0 # x + 1ad - bc2y = at - cs 
(1)
(2)
The second equation can now be rewritten using determinant notation.
2 a
b
c
d
2 y = 2 a
s
c
t
2
If D = 2 a
b
c
d
2 = ad - bc ≠0, solve for y to get
	
y =
2 a
s
c
t
2
2 a
b
c
d
2
=
2 a
s
c
t
2
D
	
(4)
Equations (3) and (4) lead to the following result, called Cramer’s Rule.
2

770 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
In the derivation given for Cramer’s Rule, we assumed that none of the numbers 
a, b, c, and d was 0. In Problem 65 you will be asked to complete the proof under the 
less stringent condition that D = ad - bc ≠0.
Now look carefully at the pattern in Cramer’s Rule. The denominator in the 
solution (6) is the determinant of the coefficients of the variables.
bax + by = s
cx + dy = t  D = 2 a
b
c
d
2
In the solution for x, the numerator is the determinant, denoted by Dx, formed by 
replacing the entries in the first column (the coefficients of x) of D by the constants 
on the right side of the equal sign.
Dx = 2 s
b
t
d
2
In the solution for y, the numerator is the determinant, denoted by Dy, formed by 
replacing the entries in the second column (the coefficients of y) of D by the constants 
on the right side of the equal sign.
Dy = 2 a
s
c
t
2
Cramer’s Rule then states that if D ≠0,
	
x = Dx
D  y =
Dy
D 	
(7)
Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Determinants
Use Cramer’s Rule, if applicable, to solve the system
b3x - 2y =
4
6x +
y = 13 
(1)
(2)
The determinant D of the coefficients of the variables is
D = 2 3
-2
6
1
2 = 132 112 - 162 1-22 = 15
Example 2
Solution
Cramer’s Rule for Two Equations Containing Two Variables
The solution to the system of equations
	
bax + by = s
cx + dy = t 
(1)
(2)	
(5)
is given by
	
x =
2 s
b
t
d
2
2 a
b
c
d
2  y =
2 a
s
c
t
2
2 a
b
c
d
2
	
(6)
provided that
D = 2 a
b
c
d
2 = ad - bc ≠0
Theorem

Section 11.3    Systems of Linear Equations: Determinants  771
Because D ≠0, Cramer’s Rule (7) can be used.
 x = Dx
D =
2 4
-2
13
1
2
15
     y =
Dy
D =
2 3
4
6
13
2
15
 = 142 112 - 1132 1-22
15
   = 132 1132 - 162 142
15
 = 30
15  
 = 15
15
 = 2  
 = 1
The solution is x = 2, y = 1, or, using an ordered pair, (2, 1).
In attempting to use Cramer’s Rule, if the determinant D of the coefficients 
of the variables is found to equal 0 (so that Cramer’s Rule cannot be used), then 
the system either is consistent with dependent equations or is inconsistent. To  
determine whether the system has no solution or infinitely many solutions, solve the 
system using the methods of Section 11.1 or 11.2.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Evaluate 3 by 3 Determinants
To use Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of three equations containing three  
variables, we need to define a 3 by 3 determinant.
A 3 by 3 determinant is symbolized by
	
3
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
3 	
(8)
in which a11, a12, c, a33 are real numbers.
As with matrices, we use a double subscript to identify an entry by indicating its 
row and column numbers. For example, the entry a23 is in row 2, column 3.
The value of a 3 by 3 determinant may be defined in terms of 2 by 2 determinants 
by the following formula:
	
 Minus	
 Plus
	
∂	
∂
	
 3
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
3 = a11 2 a22
a23
a32
a33
2 - a12 2 a21
a23
a31
a33
2 + a13 2 a21
a22
a31
a32
2 	
(9)
	
c	
c	
c
	
2 by 2 	
2 by 2 	
2 by 2 
	
determinant 	
determinant 	
determinant 
	
left after 	
left after 	
left after 
	
removing the row 	 removing the row	 removing the row 
	
and column 	
and column 	
and column 
	
containing a11	
containing a12	
containing a13
The 2 by 2 determinants shown in formula (9) are called minors of the 3 by 3  
determinant. For an n by n determinant, the minor Mij of entry aij is the determinant 
that results from removing the ith row and the jth column.
Finding Minors of a 3 by 3 Determinant
For the determinant A = 3
2
-1
3
-2
5
1
0
6
-9
3 , find: (a) M12  (b) M23
•
3
Example 3
In Words
The graphic below should help you 
visualize the minor of a11 in a 3 by 
3 determinant:
3
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
3

772 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
(a)	 M12 is the determinant that results from removing the first row and the second 
column from A.
Solution
A = 3
2
-1
3
-2
5
1
0
6
-9
3  M12 = 2 -2
1
0
-9
2 = 1-22 1-92 - 102 112 = 18
(b)	 M23 is the determinant that results from removing the second row and the third 
column from A.
A = 3
2
-1
3
-2
5
1
0
6
-9
3  M23 = 2 2
-1
0
6
2 = 122 162 - 102 1-12 = 12
•
Referring to formula (9), note that each element aij in the first row of the 
determinant is multiplied by its minor, but sometimes this term is added and other 
times subtracted. To determine whether to add or subtract a term, we must consider 
the cofactor.
For an n by n determinant A, the cofactor of entry aij, denoted by Aij, is given by
Aij = 1 -12i+jMij
where Mij is the minor of entry aij.
Definition
The exponent of 1 -12i+j is the sum of the row and column of the entry aij,  
so if i + j is even, 1 -12i+j will equal 1, and if i + j is odd, 1 -12i+j will equal -1.
To find the value of a determinant, multiply each entry in any row or column 
by its cofactor and sum the results. This process is referred to as expanding across a 
row or column. For example, the value of the 3 by 3 determinant in formula (9) was 
found by expanding across row 1.
Expanding down column 2 gives
 3
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
3 = 1-121+2
 a12 2 a21
a23
a31
a33
2 + 1-122+2
 a22 2 a11
a13
a31
a33
2 + 1-123+2
 a32 2 a11
a13
a21
a23
2
	
æ
	
Expand down column 2.
Expanding across row 3 gives
 3
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
3 = 1-123+1
 a31 2 a12
a13
a22
a23
2 + 1-123+2
 a32 2 a11
a13
a21
a23
2 + 1-123+3
 a33 2 a11
a12
a21
a22
2
	
æ
	
Expand across row 3.
It can be shown that the value of a determinant does not depend on the choice 
of the row or column used in the expansion. However, expanding across a row or 
column that has an entry equal to 0 reduces the amount of work needed to compute 
the value of the determinant.
Evaluating a 3 : 3 Determinant
Find the value of the 3 by 3 determinant: 
3
3
0
-1
4
6
2
8
-2
3
3
Example 4

Section 11.3    Systems of Linear Equations: Determinants  773
Because of the 0 in row 1, column 2, it is easiest to expand across row 1 or down 
column 2. We choose to expand across row 1.
Solution
 3
3
0
-1
4
6
2
8
-2
3
3 = 1-121+1
 # 3 # 2
6
2
-2
3
2 + 1-121+2
 # 0 # 2 4
2
8
3
2 + 1-121+3 # 1-12 # 2 4
6
8
-2
2
 = 3118 - 1 -42 2 - 0 + 1 -12 1-8 - 482
 = 31222 + 1 -12 1-562
 = 66 + 56 = 122
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Use Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Three Equations  
Containing Three Variables
Consider the following system of three equations containing three variables.
	
c
a11
 x + a12
 y + a13
 z = c1
a21
 x + a22
 y + a23
 z = c2
a31
 x + a32
 y + a33
 z = c3
	
(10)
It can be shown that if the determinant D of the coefficients of the variables is not 0, 
that is, if
D = 3
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
3 ≠0
then the unique solution of system (10) is given by
4
 D = 3
2
1
-1
-1
2
4
1
-2
-3
3 = 1-121+1
 # 2 # 2
2
4
-2
-3
2 + 1-121+2
 # 1 # 2 -1
4
1
-3
2 + 1-121+31-12 2 -1
2
1
-2
2
 = 2122 - 11 -12 + 1 -12 102
 = 4 + 1 = 5
Cramer’s Rule for Three Equations Containing Three Variables
If D ≠0, the solution of the system in (10) is
x = Dx
D  y =
Dy
D  z =
Dz
D
where
Dx = 3
c1
a12
a13
c2
a22
a23
c3
a32
a33
3  Dy = 3
a11
c1
a13
a21
c2
a23
a31
c3
a33
3  Dz = 3
a11
a12
c1
a21
a22
c2
a31
a32
c3
3
Theorem
Do you see the similarity between this pattern and the pattern observed earlier 
for a system of two equations containing two variables?
Using Cramer’s Rule
Use Cramer’s Rule, if applicable, to solve the following system:
c
2x +
y -
z =
3
-x + 2y + 4z = -3
x - 2y - 3z =
4
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
The value of the determinant D of the coefficients of the variables is
Example 5
Solution

774 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Because D ≠0, proceed to find the values of Dx, Dy, and Dz. To find Dx, replace the 
coefficients of x in D with the constants and then evaluate the determinant.
 Dx = 3
3
1
-1
-3
2
4
4
-2
-3
3 = 1-121+1
 # 3 # 2
2
4
-2
-3
2 + 1-121+2
 # 1 # 2 -3
4
4
-3
2 + 1-121+31-12 2 -3
2
4
-2
2
 = 3122 - 11 -72 + 1 -12 1-22 = 15
 Dy = 3
2
3
-1
-1
-3
4
1
4
-3
3 = 1-121+1
 # 2 # 2 -3
4
4
-3
2 + 1-121+2
 # 3 # 2 -1
4
1
-3
2 + 1-121+31-12 2 -1
-3
1
4
2
 = 21 -72 - 31 -12 + 1 -12 1-12 = -10
 Dz = 3
2
1
3
-1
2
-3
1
-2
4
3 = 1-121+1
 # 2 # 2
2
-3
-2
4
2 + 1-121+2
 # 1 # 2 -1
-3
1
4
2 + 1-121+3
 # 3 # 2 -1
2
1
-2
2
 = 2122 - 11 -12 + 3102 = 5
As a result,
x = Dx
D = 15
5 = 3  y =
Dy
D = -10
5
= -2  z =
Dz
D = 5
5 = 1
The solution is x = 3, y = -2, z = 1, or, using an ordered triplet, 13, -2, 12.
Cramer’s Rule cannot be used when the determinant of the coefficients of the 
variables, D, is 0. But can anything be learned about the system other than it is not 
a consistent and independent system if D = 0? The answer is yes!
•
Cramer’s Rule with Inconsistent or Dependent Systems
•	 If D = 0 and at least one of the determinants Dx, Dy, or Dz is different 
from 0, then the system is inconsistent and the solution set is ∅, or {  }.
•	 If D = 0 and all the determinants Dx, Dy, and Dz equal 0, then the  
system is consistent and dependent, so there are infinitely many solutions.  
The system must be solved using row reduction techniques.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
Know Properties of Determinants
Determinants have several properties that are sometimes helpful for obtaining  
their value. We list some of them here.
5
The value of a determinant changes sign if any two rows (or any two columns) 
are interchanged.	
(11)
Theorem
If all the entries in any row (or any column) equal 0, the value of the  
determinant is 0. 	
(12)
Theorem
Proof for 2 by 2 Determinants
	
2 a
b
c
d
2 = ad - bc and 2 c
d
a
b
2 = bc - ad = - 1ad - bc2	
■
Demonstrating Theorem (11)
2 3
4
1
2
2 = 6 - 4 = 2  2 1
2
3
4
2 = 4 - 6 = -2
Example 6
•

Section 11.3    Systems of Linear Equations: Determinants  775
Proof  Expand across the row (or down the column) containing the 0’s.	
■
If any two rows (or any two columns) of a determinant have corresponding 
entries that are equal, the value of the determinant is 0. 	
(13)
Theorem
If any row (or any column) of a determinant is multiplied by a nonzero number k,  
the value of the determinant is also changed by a factor of k. 	
(14)
Theorem
If the entries of any row (or any column) of a determinant are multiplied by a  
nonzero number k and the result is added to the corresponding entries of another 
row (or column), the value of the determinant remains unchanged. 	
(15)
Theorem
In Problem 68, you are asked to prove this result for a 3 by 3 determinant in 
which the entries in column 1 equal the entries in column 3.
Demonstrating Theorem (13)
 3
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
3 = 1-121+1
 # 1 # 2 2
3
5
6
2 + 1-121+2
 # 2 # 2 1
3
4
6
2 + 1-121+3
 # 3 # 2 1
2
4
5
2
 = 11 -32 - 21 -62 + 31 -32 = -3 + 12 - 9 = 0
Example 7
•
In Problem 67, you are asked to prove this result for a 3 by 3 determinant using 
row 2.
Demonstrating Theorem (14)
 2 1
2
4
6
2 = 6 - 8 = -2
 2 k
2k
4
6
2 = 6k - 8k = -2k = k1-22 = k 2 1
2
4
6
2
Example 8
•
In Problem 69, you are asked to prove this result for a 3 by 3 determinant  
using rows 1 and 2.
Demonstrating Theorem (15)
 2 3
4
5
2
2 = -14  2 3
4
5
2
2 S 2 -7
0
5
2
2 = -14
	
æ
	
 Multiply row 2 by -2 and add to row 1.
Example 9
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
•
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 D = 2 a
b
c
d
2 =
.
	 2.	 Using Cramer’s Rule, the value of x that satisfies the system of 
	
	 equations e2x + 3y =
5
x - 4y = - 3 is x =
` 2
3
1
- 4 `
.
	 3.	 True or False  A determinant can never equal 0. 
	 4.	 True or False  When using Cramer’s Rule, if D = 0, then the 
system of linear equations is inconsistent. 
	 5.	 True or False  If any row (or any column) of a determinant  
is multiplied by a nonzero number k, the value of the  
determinant remains unchanged. 
	 6.	 If any two rows of a determinant are interchanged, its value 
is best described by which of the following?
(a)	 changes sign  (b)  becomes zero  (c)  remains the same
(d)	 no longer relates to the original value 
11.3  Assess Your Understanding

776 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Skill Building
In Problems 7–14, find the value of each determinant.
	 7.	 2
6
4
- 1
3
2  
	 8.	 2 8
-3
4
2
2  
	 9.	 2 - 3
- 1
4
2
2  
	 10.	 2 -4
2
- 5
3
2  
	 11.	 3
3
4
2
1
- 1
5
1
2
- 2
3  
	 12.	 3
1
3
- 2
6
1
- 5
8
2
3
3  
	 13.	 3
4
- 1
2
6
- 1
0
1
- 3
4
3  
	 14.	 3
3
-9
4
1
4
0
8
- 3
1
3  
In Problems 15–42, solve each system of equations using Cramer’s Rule if it is applicable. If Cramer’s Rule is not applicable, say so.
15.	  bx + y = 8
x - y = 4
16.	 b x + 2y = 5
x -
y = 3
17.	 b5x -
y = 13
2x + 3y = 12
18.	 b x + 3y =
5
2x - 3y = - 8
19.	 b
3x = 24
x + 2y =
0
20.	 b4x + 5y = - 3
- 2y = - 4
21.	 b3x - 6y = 24
5x + 4y = 12
22.	 b2x + 4y = 16
3x - 5y = - 9
23.	 b3x - 2y = 4
6x - 4y = 0
24.	 b - x + 2y = 5
4x - 8y = 6
25.	 b2x - 4y = - 2
3x + 2y =
3
26.	 •
3x + 3y = 3
4x + 2y = 8
3
27.	 b 2x -
3y = - 1
10x + 10y =
5
28.	 b3x -
2y = 0
5x + 10y = 4
29.	 •
2x + 3y = 6
x -
y = 1
2
30.	 •
1
2
 x +
y = -2
x - 2y =
8
31.	 b 3x - 5y =
3
15x + 5y = 21
32.	 •
2x - y = - 1
x + 1
2
 y = 3
2
33.	 c
x +
y -
z =
6
3x - 2y +
z = -5
x + 3y - 2z = 14
34.	 c
x -
y +
z =
- 4
2x - 3y + 4z = - 15
5x +
y - 2z =
12
35.	 c
x + 2y -
z = - 3
2x - 4y +
z = - 7
- 2x + 2y - 3z =
4
36.	 c
x + 4y - 3z = -8
3x -
y + 3z = 12
x +
y + 6z =
1
37.	 c
x - 2y + 3z = 1
3x +
y - 2z = 0
2x - 4y + 6z = 2
38.	 c
x -
y + 2z =
5
3x + 2y =
4
- 2x + 2y - 4z = - 10
39.	 c
x + 2y -
z = 0
2x - 4y +
z = 0
- 2x + 2y - 3z = 0
40.	 c
x + 4y - 3z = 0
3x -
y + 3z = 0
x +
y + 6z = 0
41.	 c
x - 2y + 3z = 0
3x +
y - 2z = 0
2x - 4y + 6z = 0
42.	 c
x - y + 2z = 0
3x + 2y = 0
- 2x + 2y - 4z = 0
In Problems 43–50, use properties of determinants to find the value of each determinant if it is known that
3
x
y
z
u
v
w
1
2
3
3 = 4
	 43.	 3
1
2
3
u
v
w
x
y
z
3  
	 44.	 3
x
y
z
u
v
w
2
4
6
3  
	 45.	 3
x
y
z
- 3
- 6
- 9
u
v
w
3  
	 46.	 3
1
2
3
x - u
y - v
z - w
u
v
w
3  
	 47.	 3
1
2
3
x - 3
y - 6
z - 9
2u
2v
2w
3  
	 48.	 3
x
y
z - x
u
v
w - u
1
2
2
3  
	 49.	 3
1
2
3
2x
2y
2z
u - 1
v - 2
w - 3
3  
	 50.	 3
x + 3
y + 6
z + 9
3u - 1
3v - 2
3w - 3
1
2
3
3  

Section 11.3    Systems of Linear Equations: Determinants  777
	 51.	 2 x
x
4
3
2 = 5 
	 52.	 2 x
1
3
x
2 = - 2 
	 53.	 3
x
1
1
4
3
2
- 1
2
5
3 = 2 
Mixed Practice
In Problems 51–56, solve for x.
	 54.	 3
3
2
4
1
x
5
0
1
- 2
3 = 0 
	 55.	 3
x
2
3
1
x
0
6
1
- 2
3 = 7
	 56.	 3
x
1
2
1
x
3
0
1
2
3 = -4x 
Applications and Extensions
57.	 Geometry: Equation of a Line    An equation of the line 
containing the two points 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22 may be  
expressed as the determinant shown below. Prove this result 
by expanding the determinant and comparing the result to the 
two-point form of the equation of a line.
3
x
y
1
x1
y1
1
x2
y2
1
3 = 0
58.	 Geometry: Collinear Points    Using the result obtained in 
Problem 57, show that three distinct points 1x1, y12, 1x2, y22, 
and 1x3, y32 are collinear (lie on the same line) if and  
only if
3
x1
y1
1
x2
y2
1
x3
y3
1
3 = 0
	 59.	 Geometry: Area of a Triangle    A triangle has vertices 
(x1, y1), (x2, y2), and (x3, y3). The area of the triangle is given
	
	 by the absolute value of D, where D = 1
2 3
x1
x2
x3
y1
y2
y3
1
1
1
3 . 
	
	 Use this formula to find the area of a triangle with vertices 
(4, 6), (7, 4), and (8, 8). 
60.	 Geometry: Area of a Polygon  The formula from Problem 59  
can be used to find the area of a polygon. To do so, divide 
the polygon into non-overlapping triangular regions and 
find the sum of the areas. Use this approach to find the area 
of the given polygon. 
	 61.	 Geometry: Area of a Polygon  Another approach for finding the 
area of a polygon by using determinants is to use the formula
	    A = 1
2¢ ` x1
y1
x2
y2
` + ` x2
y2
x3
y3
` + ` x3
y3
x4
y4
` + c + ` xn
yn
x1
y1
` ≤
	
	 where (x1, y1), (x2, y2), c, (xn, yn) are the n corner points 
in counterclockwise order. Use this formula to compute the 
area of the polygon from Problem 60 again. Which method 
do you prefer? 
62.	 Show that the formula in Problem 61 yields the same  
result as the formula using Problem 59. 
	 63.	 Geometry: Equation of a Circle  An equation of the circle 
containing the distinct points (x1, y1), (x2, y2), and (x3, y3) 
can be found using the equation below.
∞
1
1
1
1
x
x1
x2
x3
y
y1
y2
y3
x2 + y2
x2
1 + y2
1
x2
2 + y2
2
x2
3 + y2
3
∞= 0
	
	 Find the equation of the circle containing the points 
(2, 7), (- 2, 9), and (3, 4). Write the equation in standard 
form. 
64.	 Show that 3
x2
x
1
y2
y
1
z2
z
1
3 = 1y - z2 1x - y2 1x - z2.
65.	 Complete the proof of Cramer’s Rule for two equations 
containing two variables.
	
	 [Hint: In system (5), page 770, if a = 0, then b ≠0 and 
c ≠0, since D = - bc ≠0. Now show that equation (6) 
provides a solution of the system when a = 0. Then three 
cases remain: b = 0, c = 0, and d = 0.]
66.	 Interchange columns 1 and 3 of a 3 by 3 determinant. Show 
that the value of the new determinant is -1 times the value 
of the original determinant.
67.	 Multiply each entry in row 2 of a 3 by 3 determinant by the 
number k, k ≠0. Show that the value of the new determinant 
is k times the value of the original determinant.
68.	 Prove that a 3 by 3 determinant in which the entries in  
column 1 equal those in column 3 has the value 0.
69.	 Prove that if row 2 of a 3 by 3 determinant is multiplied  
by k, k ≠0, and the result is added to the entries  
in row 1, there is no change in the value of the determinant.
x
y
(8, 4)
(6, 8)
(1, 6)
(21, 3)
(6, 22)

778 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Section 11.2 defined a matrix as a rectangular array of real numbers and used an 
augmented matrix to represent a system of linear equations. There is, however, a 
branch of mathematics, called linear algebra, that deals with matrices in such a way 
that an algebra of matrices is permitted. This section provides a survey of how this 
matrix algebra is developed.
Before getting started, recall the definition of a matrix.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 70–73 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 70.	 For the points P = (-4, 3) and Q = (5, - 1) write the vector v represented by the directed line segment PQ
S
 in the form 
ai + bj and find v. 
	 71.	 List the potential rational zeros of the polynomial function P(x) = 2x3 - 5x2 + x - 10. 
72.	 Graph f (x) = (x + 1)2 - 4 using transformations (shifting, compressing, stretching, and/or reflecting).
	 73.	 Find the exact value of  tan 42° -  cot 48° without using a calculator. 
11.4  Matrix Algebra
	
Objectives	 	1  Find the Sum and Difference of Two Matrices  (p. 779)
	
	 	2  Find Scalar Multiples of a Matrix  (p. 781)
	
	 	3  Find the Product of Two Matrices  (p. 782)
	
	 	4  Find the Inverse of a Matrix  (p. 786)
	
	 	5  Solve a System of Linear Equations Using an Inverse Matrix  (p. 790)
 A matrix is defined as a rectangular array of numbers:
F
a11
 a12
g
a1j
g
a1n
a21
 a22
g
a2j
g
a2n
f
 f
f
f
ai1
 ai2
g
aij
g
ain
f
 f
f
f
am1
 am2
g
amj
g
amn
V
Definition
Row 1
Row 2
f
Row i
f
Row m
Column 1	
Column 2	
Column j	
Column n
Each number aij of the matrix has two indexes: the row index i and the column 
index j. The matrix shown here has m rows and n columns. The numbers aij are  
usually referred to as the entries of the matrix. For example, a23 refers to the entry 
in the second row, third column.
Arranging Data in a Matrix
In a survey of 900 people, the following information was obtained:
200 males
Thought federal defense spending was too high
150 males
Thought federal defense spending was too low
45 males
Had no opinion
315 females
Thought federal defense spending was too high
125 females
Thought federal defense spending was too low
65 females
Had no opinion
Example 1

Section 11.4  Matrix Algebra  779
We can arrange these data in a rectangular array as follows:
 
Too High
Too Low
No Opinion
Male
200
150
45
Female
315
125
65
or as the matrix
J200
150
45
315
125
65 R
This matrix has two rows (representing male and female) and three columns  
(representing “too high,” “too low,” and “no opinion”).
The matrix developed in Example 1 has 2 rows and 3 columns. In general, a 
matrix with m rows and n columns is called an m by n matrix. The matrix developed 
in Example 1 is a 2 by 3 matrix and contains 2 # 3 = 6 entries. An m by n matrix will 
contain m # n entries.
If an m by n matrix has the same number of rows as columns, that is, if m = n, 
then the matrix is a square matrix.
Examples of Matrices
(a)	 J
5
0
-6
1R  
A 2 by 2 square matrix      (b)  31 0 34 
A 1 by 3 matrix
(c)	 C
6
-2
4
4
3
5
8
0
1
S  
A 3 by 3 square matrix
Find the Sum and Difference of Two Matrices
We begin our discussion of matrix algebra by first defining equivalent matrices 
and then defining the operations of addition and subtraction. It is important to 
note that these definitions require both matrices to have the same number of rows 
and the same number of columns as a condition for equality and for addition and 
subtraction.
Matrices usually are represented by capital letters, such as A, B, and C.
•
Example 2
•
1
Two matrices A and B are equal, written as
A = B
provided that A and B have the same number of rows and the same number 
of columns and each entry aij in A is equal to the corresponding entry bij in B.
Definition
For example,
 J
2
1
0.5
-1R = C
24
1
1
2
-1
S and J3
2
1
0
1
-2R = J 29
24
1
0
1
2
3 -8R
 J4
1
6
1R ≠J4
0
6
1R
 J4
1
2
6
1
2R ≠J4
1
2
3
6
1
2
4 R
Because the entries in row 1, column 2 are not equal
Because the matrix on the left has 3 columns and  
the matrix on the right has 4 columns

780 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Suppose that A and B represent two m by n matrices. The sum, A + B, is defined as 
the m by n matrix formed by adding the corresponding entries aij of A and bij of B. The 
difference, A −B, is defined as the m by n matrix formed by subtracting the entries bij 
in B from the corresponding entries aij in A. Addition and subtraction of matrices are 
allowed only for matrices having the same number m of rows and the same number n of 
columns. For example, a 2 by 3 matrix and a 2 by 4 matrix cannot be added or subtracted.
Adding and Subtracting Matrices
Suppose that
A = J2
4
8
-3
0
1
2
3R and B = J -3
4
0
1
6
8
2
0 R
Find:  (a)  A + B            (b)  A - B
(a)	  A + B = J2
4
8
-3
0
1
2
3R + J -3
4
0
1
6
8
2
0 R
 = J2 + 1-32
4 + 4
8 + 0
-3 + 1
0 + 6
1 + 8
2 + 2
3 + 0R  
Add corresponding entries.
 = J -1
8
8
-2
6
9
4
3R
(b)	  A - B = J2
4
8
-3
0
1
2
3R - J -3
4
0
1
6
8
2
0 R
 = J2 - 1-32
4 - 4
8 - 0
-3 - 1
0 - 6
1 - 8
2 - 2
3 - 0R  
Subtract corresponding entries.
 = J
5
0
8
-4
-6
-7
0
3R
Seeing the Concept
Graphing utilities can make the sometimes tedious process of matrix algebra easy. In fact, most 
graphing calculators can handle matrices as large as 9 by 9, some even larger ones. Enter the matrices 
from Example 3 into a graphing utility. Name them A and B. Figure 7 shows the results of adding and 
subtracting A and B.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Many of the algebraic properties of sums of real numbers are also true for sums 
of matrices. Suppose that A, B, and C are m by n matrices. Then matrix addition is 
commutative. That is,
Example 3
Solution
•
Commutative Property of Matrix Addition
A + B = B + A
Associative Property of Matrix Addition
1A + B2 + C = A + 1B + C2
Figure 7  Matrix addition and  
subtraction
Matrix addition is also associative. That is,
Although we shall not prove these results, the proofs, as the following example 
illustrates, are based on the commutative and associative properties for real numbers.

Section 11.4  Matrix Algebra  781
Demonstrating the Commutative Property of Matrix Addition
 J2
3
-1
4
0
7R + J -1
2
1
5
-3
4R = J2 + 1-12
3 + 2
-1 + 1
4 + 5
0 + 1-32
7 + 4R
 = J -1 + 2
2 + 3
1 + 1-12
5 + 4
-3 + 0
4 + 7R
 = J -1
2
1
5
-3
4R + J2
3
-1
4
0
7R
A matrix whose entries are all equal to 0 is called a zero matrix. Each of the 
following matrices is a zero matrix.
J0
0
0
0R  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J0
0
0
0
0
0R              
30 0 04 
Zero matrices have properties similar to the real number 0. If A is an m by n 
matrix and 0 is the m by n zero matrix, then
A + 0 = 0 + A = A
Example 4
•
2 by 2 square 
zero matrix
2 by 3 zero 
matrix
1 by 3 zero 
matrix
In other words, a zero matrix is the additive identity in matrix algebra.
Find Scalar Multiples of a Matrix
We can also multiply a matrix by a real number. If k is a real number and A is  
an m by n matrix, the matrix kA is the m by n matrix formed by multiplying each 
entry aij in A by k. The number k is sometimes referred to as a scalar, and the  
matrix kA is called a scalar multiple of A.
Operations Using Matrices
Suppose that
A = J
3
1
5
-2
0
6R  B = J4
1
0
8
1
-3R  C = J
9
0
-3
6R
Find:  (a)  4A        (b)  1
3
 C        (c)  3A - 2B
(a)	 4A = 4J
3
1
5
-2
0
6R = J 4 # 3
4 # 1
4 # 5
41 -22
4 # 0
4 # 6R = J 12
4
20
-8
0
24R
(b)	 1
3
 C = 1
3
 J
9
0
-3
6R = D
1
3 # 9
1
3 # 0
1
3
 1-32
1
3 # 6
T = J
3
0
-1
2R
(c)	  3A - 2B = 3J
3
1
5
-2
0
6R - 2J4
1
0
8
1
-3R
 = J 3 # 3
3 # 1
3 # 5
31 -22
3 # 0
3 # 6R - J2 # 4
2 # 1
2 # 0
2 # 8
2 # 1
21-32 R
 = J
9
3
15
-6
0
18R - J 8
2
0
16
2
-6R
 = J
9 - 8
3 - 2
15 - 0
-6 - 16
0 - 2
18 - 1 -62 R
 = J
1
1
15
-22
-2
24R
2
Example 5
Solution
•

782 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Check:	Enter the matrices A, B, and C into a graphing utility. Then find 
4A, 1
3
 C,  and 3A - 2B.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Some of the algebraic properties of scalar multiplication are listed next. Let h 
and k be real numbers, and let A and B be m by n matrices. Then
Properties of Scalar Multiplication
 k1hA2 = 1kh2A
 1k + h2A = kA + hA
 k1A + B2 = kA + kB
Find the Product of Two Matrices
Unlike the straightforward definition for adding two matrices, the definition for 
multiplying two matrices is not what might be expected. In preparation for this 
definition, we need the following definitions:
3
A row vector R is a 1 by n matrix
R = 3r1 r2 g rn4
A column vector C is an n by 1 matrix
C = D
c1
c2
f
cn
T
The product RC of R times C is defined as the number
RC = 3r1 r2   g   rn4 D
c1
c2
f
cn
T = r1
 c1 + r2
 c2 + g + rn
 cn
Definition
Notice that a row vector and a column vector can be multiplied only if they 
contain the same number of entries.
The Product of a Row Vector and a Column Vector
If R = 33
-5
24 and C = C
3
4
-5
S, then
 RC = 33
-5
24 C
3
4
-5
S  = 3 # 3 + 1 -524 + 21 -52 = 9 - 20 - 10 = -21
Example 6
•

Section 11.4  Matrix Algebra  783
Using Matrices to Compute Revenue
A clothing store sells men’s shirts for $40, silk ties for $20, and wool suits for $400. 
Last month, the store had sales consisting of 100 shirts, 200 ties, and 50 suits. What 
was the total revenue due to these sales?
Set up a row vector R to represent the prices of these three items and a column  
vector C to represent the corresponding number of items sold. Then
	
Prices	
Number
	
Shirts Ties Suits	
sold
R = 340
20
4004  C = C
100
200
50
S  
Shirts
Ties
Suits
The total revenue obtained is the product RC. That is,
RC = 340
20
4004 C
100
200
50
S
= 40 # 100 + 20 # 200 + 400 # 50 = $28,000
	
Shirt revenue	 Tie revenue	 Suit revenue	 Total revenue
The definition for multiplying two matrices is based on the definition of a row 
vector times a column vector.
Example 7
Solution
c
c
c
c
•
Let A denote an m by r matrix and let B denote an r by n matrix. The  
product AB is defined as the m by n matrix whose entry in row i, column j is the 
product of the ith row of A and the jth column of B.
Definition
The definition of the product AB of two matrices A and B, in this order,  
requires that the number of columns of A equals the number of rows of B; otherwise, 
no product is defined.
	
A	
B
	
m by r	
r by n
	
	
Must be same
	
	
for AB to be defined
	
	
AB is m by n.
An example will help to clarify the definition.
Multiplying Two Matrices
Find the product AB if
A = J2
4
-1
5
8
0R and B = C
2
5
1
4
4
8
0
6
-3
1
-2
-1
S
First, observe that A is 2 by 3 and B is 3 by 4. The number of columns in A 
equals the number of rows in B, so the product AB is defined and will be  
a 2 by 4 matrix.
Example 8
Solution
In Words
To find the product AB, the  
number of columns in A must 
equal the number of rows in B.

784 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Suppose we want the entry in row 2, column 3 of AB. To find it, find the product 
of the row vector from row 2 of A and the column vector from column 3 of B.
	
Column 3 of B
35 8 04 C
1
0
-2
S = 5 # 1 + 8 # 0 + 01-22 = 5
So far, we have
	
Column 3
	
T
AB = J        
    
5
  R  
 
d Row 2
Now, to find the entry in row 1, column 4 of AB, find the product of row 1 of A and 
column 4 of B.
	
Column 4 of B
32 4 -14 C
4
6
-1
S = 2 # 4 + 4 # 6 + 1-12 1-12 = 33
Continuing in this fashion, we find AB.
Row 2 of A
Row 1 of A
 AB = J2
4
-1
5
8
0R C
2
5
1
4
4
8
0
6
-3
1
-2
-1
S
 = G
Row 1 of A
Row 1 of A
Row 1 of A
Row 1 of A
times
times
times
times
column 1 of B
column 2 of B
column 3 of B
column 4 of B
 
 
 
 
Row 2 of A
Row 2 of A
Row 2 of A
Row 2 of A
times
times
times
times
column 1 of B
column 2 of B
column 3 of B
column 4 of B
W
 = J2 # 2 + 4 # 4 + 1-12 1-32
2 # 5 + 4 # 8 + 1-121
2 # 1 + 4 # 0 + 1-12 1-22
331from earlier2
5 # 2 + 8 # 4 + 01 -32
5 # 5 + 8 # 8 + 0 # 1
51from earlier2
5 # 4 + 8 # 6 + 01 -12 R
 = J23
41
4
33
42
89
5
68 R
•
Check:	Enter the matrices A and B. Then find AB. (See what happens if you 
try to find BA.)
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
Notice that for the matrices given in Example 8, the product BA is not defined 
because B is 3 by 4 and A is 2 by 3.
Multiplying Two Matrices
If
A = J2
1
3
1
-1
0R and B = C
1
0
2
1
3
2
S
find:    (a)  AB        (b)  BA
Example 9

Section 11.4  Matrix Algebra  785
(a)	 AB = J2
1
3
1
-1
0R C
1
0
2
1
3
2
S = J 13
7
-1
-1R
	
2 by 3 	
3 by 2 	
2 by 2
(b)	 BA = C
1
0
2
1
3
2
S J2
1
3
1
-1
0R = C
2
1
3
5
1
6
8
1
9
S
	
3 by 2 	
2 by 3 	
3 by 3
Notice in Example 9 that AB is 2 by 2 and BA is 3 by 3. It is possible for both 
AB and BA to be defined and yet be unequal. In fact, even if A and B are both  
n by n matrices so that AB and BA are each defined and n by n, AB and BA will 
usually be unequal.
Multiplying Two Square Matrices
If
A = J2
1
0
4R and B = J -3
1
1
2R
find:    (a)  AB        (b)  BA
(a)	 AB = J2
1
0
4R J -3
1
1
2R = J -5
4
4
8R
(b)	 BA = J -3
1
1
2R J2
1
0
4R = J -6
1
2
9R
The preceding examples demonstrate that an important property of real  
numbers, the commutative property of multiplication, is not shared by matrices. In 
general:
Solution
•
Example 10
Solution
•
Matrix multiplication is not commutative.
Theorem
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 5  a n d  1 7
Next, consider two of the properties of real numbers that are shared by matrices. 
Assuming that each product and sum is defined, the following is true:
Associative Property of Matrix Multiplication
A1BC2 = 1AB2C
Distributive Property
A1B + C2 = AB + AC
For an n by n square matrix, the entries located in row i, column i, 1 … i … n, 
are called the diagonal entries or the main diagonal. The n by n square matrix whose 

786 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
diagonal entries are 1’s, and all other entries are 0’s, is called the identity matrix In. 
For example,
I2 = J1
0
0
1R  I3 = C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S
and so on.
Multiplication with an Identity Matrix
Let
A = J -1
2
0
0
1
3R and B = C
3
2
4
6
5
2
S
Find:    (a)  AI3        (b)  I2
 A        (c)  BI2
(a)	 AI3 = J -1
2
0
0
1
3R C
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S = J -1
2
0
0
1
3R = A
(b)	  I2
 A = J1
0
0
1R J -1
2
0
0
1
3R = J -1
2
0
0
1
3R = A
(c)	 BI2 = C
3
2
4
6
5
2
S J1
0
0
1R = C
3
2
4
6
5
2
S = B
Example 11 demonstrates the following property:
Example 11
Solution
•
Identity Property
If A is an m by n matrix, then
Im
 A = A and AIn = A
If A is an n by n square matrix,
AIn = In
 A = A
An identity matrix has properties similar to those of the real number 1. In other 
words, the identity matrix is a multiplicative identity in matrix algebra.
Find the Inverse of a Matrix
4
Let A be a square n by n matrix. If there exists an n by n matrix A-1 (read as 
“A inverse”) for which
AA -1 = A -1
 A = In
then A -1 is called the inverse of the matrix A.
Definition
Not every square matrix has an inverse. When a matrix A does have an inverse A-1, 
then A is said to be nonsingular. If a matrix A has no inverse, it is called singular.
Note  If the determinant of A is zero,  
A is singular. (Refer to Section 11.3.)	
■

Section 11.4  Matrix Algebra  787
Multiplying a Matrix by Its Inverse
Show that the inverse of
A = J3
1
2
1R is A -1 = J
1
-1
-2
3R
We need to show that AA-1 = A-1
 A = I2.
 AA-1 = J3
1
2
1R J
1
-1
-2
3R = J1
0
0
1R = I2
 A-1
 A = J
1
-1
-2
3R J3
1
2
1R = J1
0
0
1R = I2
The following shows one way to find the inverse of
A = J3
1
2
1R
Suppose that A-1 is given by
	
            A-1 = Jx
y
z
w R 	
(1)
where x, y, z, and w are four variables. Based on the definition of an inverse, if A has 
an inverse, then
 AA-1 = I2
       c 3
1
2
1d c x
y
z
w d = c 1
0
0
1d
 J3x + z
3y + w
2x + z
2y + w R = J1
0
0
1R
Because corresponding entries must be equal, it follows that this matrix equation is 
equivalent to two systems of linear equations.
b3x + z = 1
2x + z = 0  b3y + w = 0
2y + w = 1
The augmented matrix of each system is
	
J3
1
2
1 2 1
0R  J3
1
2
1 2 0
1R 	
(2)
The usual procedure would be to transform each augmented matrix into reduced 
row echelon form. Notice, though, that the left sides of the augmented matrices are 
equal, so the same row operations (see Section 11.2) can be used to reduce each one. 
It is more efficient to combine the two augmented matrices (2) into a single matrix, 
as shown next.
J3
1
2
1 2 1
0
0
1R
Next, use row operations to transform the matrix into reduced row echelon form.
 J3
1
2
1 2 1
0
0
1R S J1
0
2
1 2 1
-1
0
1R
	
c
	
R1 = - 1r2 + r1
	
 S J1
0
0
1 2 
1
-1
-2
3R 	
(3)
	
c
	
R2 = - 2r1 + r2
Example 12
Solution
•

788 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Matrix (3) is in reduced row echelon form.
Now reverse the earlier step of combining the two augmented matrices in (2), 
and write the single matrix (3) as two augmented matrices.
J1
0
0
1 2 
1
-2R and J1
0
0
1 2 -1
3R
The conclusion from these matrices is that x = 1, z = -2, and y = -1, w = 3. 
Substituting these values into matrix (1) results in
A -1 = J
1
-1
-2
3R
Notice in display (3) that the 2 by 2 matrix to the right of the vertical bar is, 
in fact, the inverse of A. Also notice that the identity matrix I2 is the matrix that  
appears to the left of the vertical bar. These observations and the procedures used 
to get display (3) will work in general.
*For 2 * 2 matrices there is a simple formula that can be used. See Problem 89.
Procedure for Finding the Inverse of a Nonsingular Matrix*
To find the inverse of an n by n nonsingular matrix A, proceed as follows:
Step 1:  Form the matrix 3A In4.
Step 2:  Transform the matrix 3A In4 into reduced row echelon form.
Step 3:  The reduced row echelon form of 3A In4 will contain the identity 
matrix In on the left of the vertical bar; the n by n matrix on the right 
of the vertical bar is the inverse of A.
In Words
If A is nonsingular, begin with 
the matrix 3AI n4, and after 
transforming it into reduced row 
echelon form, you end up with the 
matrix 3I n A-14.
Finding the Inverse of a Matrix
The matrix
A = C
1
1
0
-1
3
4
0
4
3
S
is nonsingular. Find its inverse.
First, form the matrix
3A I34 = C
1
1
0
-1
3
4
0
4
3 3 
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S
Next, use row operations to transform 3A I34 into reduced row echelon form.
Example 13
Solution
 C
1
1
0
-1
3
4
0
4
3 3 
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S S C
1
1
0
0
4
4
0
4
3 3 
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
S S D
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
4
3
 4 
1
0
0
1
4
1
4
0
0
0
1
T
	
æ	
æ
	
R2 = r1 + r2	
R2 = 1
4
 r2
 S E
1
0
-1
0
1
1
0
0
-1
 5 
3
4
-  1
4
0
1
4
1
4
0
-1
-1
1
U S E
1
0
-1
0
1
1
0
0
1
 5 
3
4
-  1
4
0
1
4
1
4
0
1
1
-1
U  S E
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
 5 
7
4
3
4
-1
-  3
4
-  3
4
1
1
1
-1
U
	
æ	
æ	
æ
	
R1 = - 1r2 + r1	
R3 = - 1r3	
R1 = r3 + r1
	
R3 = - 4r2 + r3	
R2 = - 1r3 + r2

Section 11.4  Matrix Algebra  789
The matrix 3A I34 is now in reduced row echelon form, and the identity matrix I3 is 
on the left of the vertical bar. The inverse of A is
A-1 = E
7
4
3
4
-1
-  3
4
-  3
4
1
1
1
-1
U
You should verify that this is the correct inverse by showing that
AA-1 = A-1
 A = I3
Check:	Enter the matrix A into a graphing utility. Figure 8 shows A-1.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
If transforming the matrix 3A In4 into reduced row echelon form does not 
result in the identity matrix In to the left of the vertical bar, then A is singular and 
has no inverse.
Showing That a Matrix Has No Inverse
Show that the matrix A = J4
6
2
3R  has no inverse.
Begin by writing the matrix [A0 I2].
3A I24 = J4
6
2
3 2 1
0
0
1R
Then use row operations to transform 3A I24 into reduced row echelon form.
3A I24 = J4
6
2
3 2 1
0
0
1R S £
1
3
2
2
3 † 
1
4
0
0
1
§ S D
1
3
2
0
0 4 
1
4
0
-  1
2
1
T
	
æ	
æ
	
R1 = 1
4
 r1	
R2 = -2r1 + r2
The matrix 3A I24 is sufficiently reduced to see that the identity matrix cannot  
appear to the left of the vertical bar, so A is singular and has no inverse.
It can be shown that if the determinant of a matrix is 0, the matrix is singular. 
For example, the determinant of matrix A from Example 14 is
` 4
6
2
3 ` = 4 # 3 - 6 # 2 = 0
Check:	Enter the matrix A. Try to find its inverse. What happens?
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
•
Example 14
Solution
•
Figure 8  Inverse matrix

790 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Solve a System of Linear Equations Using an Inverse Matrix
Inverse matrices can be used to solve systems of equations in which the number of 
equations is the same as the number of variables.
Using the Inverse Matrix to Solve a System of Linear Equations
Solve the system of equations: 
c
x +
y
=
3
-x + 3y + 4z = -3
4y + 3z =
2
Let
A = C
1
1
0
-1
3
4
0
4
3
S  X = C
x
y
z
S  B = C
3
-3
2
S
Then the original system of equations can be written compactly as the matrix equation
	
AX = B	
(4)
From Example 13, the matrix A has the inverse A-1. Multiply each side of equation (4) 
by A-1.
 AX = B
 A-11AX2 = A-1
 B 
Multiply both sides by A-1.
 1A-1
 A2X = A-1
 B 
Associative Property of matrix multiplication
 I3
 X = A-1
 B 
Definition of an inverse matrix
 X = A-1
 B 
Property of the identity matrix	
(5)
Now use (5) to find X = C
x
y
z
S.
X = C
x
y
z
S = A-1
 B = E
7
4
3
4
-1
-  3
4
-  3
4
1
1
1
-1
U C
3
-3
2
S = C
1
2
-2
S
	
æ
	
Example 13
The solution is x = 1, y = 2, z = -2, or, using an ordered triplet, 11, 2, -22.
The method used in Example 15 to solve a system of equations is particularly 
useful when it is necessary to solve several systems of equations in which the 
constants appearing to the right of the equal signs change, while the coefficients 
of the variables on the left side remain the same. See Problems 41–60 for some 
illustrations. Be careful; this method can be used only if the inverse exists. If it 
does not exist, row reduction must be used since the system is either inconsistent 
or dependent.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
5
Example 15
Solution
•

Section 11.4  Matrix Algebra  791
11.4  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
Historical Feature
Historical Problems
	 1.	 Matrices and Complex Numbers 
Frobenius emphasized in his  
research how matrices could be used to mimic other mathematical 
systems. Here, we mimic the behavior of complex numbers using 
matrices. Mathematicians call such a relationship an isomorphism.
Complex number · Matrix
a + bi · J
a
b
- b
aR
	
	 Note that the complex number can be read off the top line of the 
matrix. Then
2 + 3i · J
2
3
- 3
2R and J4
- 2
2
4R · 4 - 2i
	
	 (a)  Find the matrices corresponding to 2 - 5i and 1 + 3i.
	
	 (b)  Multiply the two matrices.
	
	 (c)  Find the corresponding complex number for the matrix found 
in part (b). 
	
	 (d)  Multiply 2 - 5i and 1 + 3i. The result should be the same as 
that found in part (c). 
	
	 The process also works for addition and subtraction. Try it for  
yourself.
2.	 Compute (a + bi)(a - bi) using matrices. Interpret the result.
	 3.	 Cayley’s Definition of Matrix Multiplication 
Cayley devised 
matrix multiplication to simplify the following problem:
bu = ar + bs
v = cr + ds  bx = ku + lv
y = mu + nv
	
	 (a)  Find x and y in terms of r and s by substituting u and v from the 
first system of equations into the second system of equations.
	
	 (b)  Use the result of part (a) to find the 2 by 2 matrix A in
Jx
yR = AJr
s R
	
	 (c)  Now look at the following way to do it. Write the equations in 
matrix form.
Ju
v R = Ja
b
c
dR Jr
s R  Jx
yR = J k
l
m
nR Ju
v R
	
	     so
Jx
yR = J k
l
m
nR Ja
b
c
dR Jr
s R
	
	     Do you see how Cayley defined matrix multiplication?
M
atrices were invented in 1857 by  
Arthur Cayley (1821–1895) as a way 
of efficiently computing the result of 
substituting one linear system into another  
(see Historical Problem 3). The resulting system  
had incredible richness, in the sense that a 
wide variety of mathematical systems could 
be mimicked by the matrices. Cayley and his 
friend James J. Sylvester (1814–1897) spent much of the rest of their 
lives elaborating the theory. The torch was then passed to Georg 
Frobenius (1849–1917), whose deep investigations established  
a central place for matrices in modern mathematics. In 1924,  
rather to the surprise of physicists, it was found that matrices (with  
complex numbers in them) were exactly the right tool for describing  
the behavior of atomic systems. Today, matrices are used in a wide 
variety of applications.
Arthur Cayley 
(1821–1895)
	 1.	 A matrix that has the same number of rows as columns  
is called a(n) 
 matrix.
	 2.	 True or False  Matrix addition is commutative. 
	 3.	 True or False  If A and B are square matrices, 	
 
then AB = BA, 
	 4.	 Suppose that A is a square n by n matrix that is nonsingular.  
The matrix B for which AB = BA = In is called the 
 of the matrix A.
	 5.	 True or False  The identity matrix has properties similar to 
those of the real number 1. 
	 6.	 If AX = B represents a matrix equation where A is a 
nonsingular matrix, then we can solve the equation using 
X =
.
	 7.	 To find the product AB of two matrices A and B, which of 
the following must be true?
(a)	 The number of columns in A must equal the number of 
rows in B.
(b)	 The number of rows in A must equal the number of  
columns in B.
(c)	 A and B must have the same number of rows and the 
same number of columns.
(d)	 A and B must both be square matrices. 
	 8.	 A matrix that has no inverse is called which of the  
following?
(a)	 zero matrix        (b)  nonsingular matrix
(c)	 identity matrix      (d)  singular matrix   

792 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Skill Building
In Problems 9–24, use the following matrices to evaluate the given expression.
A = J0
3
- 5
1
2
6R  B = J
4
1
0
- 2
3
- 2R  C = C
4
1
6
2
- 2
3
S
9.	 A + B
10.	 A - B
11.	 4A
12.	 - 3B
13.	 3A - 2B
14.	 2A + 4B
15.	 AC
16.	 BC
17.	 CA
18.	 CB
19.	 C1A + B2
20.	 1A + B2C
21.	 AC - 3I2
22.	 CA + 5I3
23.	 CA - CB
24.	 AC + BC
In Problems 25–30, find the product.
25.	 J2
- 2
1
0R J2
1
4
6
3
- 1
3
2R
26.	 J4
1
2
1R J - 6
6
1
0
2
5
4
- 1R
27.	 J1
2
3
0
- 1
4R C
1
2
-1
0
2
4
S
28.	 C
1
- 1
- 3
2
0
5
S J2
8
- 1
3
6
0R
29.	 C
1
0
1
2
4
1
3
6
1
S C
1
3
6
2
8
- 1
S
30.	 C
4
- 2
3
0
1
2
- 1
0
1
S C
2
6
1
-1
0
2
S
In Problems 31–40, each matrix is nonsingular. Find the inverse of each matrix.
31.	 J2
1
1
1R
32.	 J
3
- 1
- 2
1R
33.	 J6
5
2
2R
34.	 J - 4
1
6
- 2R
35.	 J2
1
a
aR a ≠0
36.	 Jb
3
b
2R b ≠0
37.	 C
1
- 1
1
0
- 2
1
- 2
- 3
0
S
38.	 C
1
0
2
- 1
2
3
1
- 1
0
S
39.	 C
1
1
1
3
2
- 1
3
1
2
S
40.	 C
3
3
1
1
2
1
2
- 1
1
S
In Problems 41–60, use the inverses found in Problems 31–40 to solve each system of equations.
41.	 b2x + y = 8
x + y = 5
42.	 b
3x - y = 8
- 2x + y = 4
43.	 b2x + y = 0
x + y = 5
44.	 b
3x - y = 4
- 2x + y = 5
45.	 b6x + 5y = 7
2x + 2y = 2
46.	 b - 4x +
y =
0
6x - 2y = 14
47.	 b 6x + 5y = 13
2x + 2y =
5
48.	 b - 4x +
y =
5
6x - 2y = - 9
49.	 b2x +
y = - 3
ax + ay = - a a ≠0
53.	 c
x -
y +
z =
0
-2y +
z = - 1
- 2x - 3y = - 5
54.	 c
x + 2z =
6
- x + 2y + 3z = - 5
x -
y =
6
55.	 d
x -
y +
z = 2
- 2y +
z = 2
- 2x - 3y = 1
2
56.	 d
x + 2z =
2
- x + 2y + 3z = -  3
2
x -
y =
2
50.	 bbx + 3y = 2b + 3
bx + 2y = 2b + 2 b ≠0
51.	 c
2x +
y = 7
a
ax + ay = 5 a ≠0
52.	 bbx + 3y = 14
bx + 2y = 10 b ≠0
57.	 c
x +
y +
z = 9
3x + 2y -
z = 8
3x +
y + 2z = 1
58.	 c
3x + 3y + z = 8
x + 2y + z = 5
2x -
y + z = 4
59.	 e
x +
y +
z =
2
3x + 2y -
z = 7
3
3x +
y + 2z = 10
3
60.	 c
3x + 3y + z = 1
x + 2y + z = 0
2x -
y + z = 4
In Problems 61–66, show that each matrix has no inverse.
61.	 J4
2
2
1R
62.	 C - 3
1
2
6
- 1
S
63.	 J15
3
10
2R
64.	 J - 3
0
4
0R
65.	 C
- 3
1
- 1
1
- 4
- 7
1
2
5
S
66.	 C
1
1
- 3
2
- 4
1
- 5
7
1
S

Section 11.4  Matrix Algebra  793
In Problems 67–70, use a graphing utility to find the inverse, if it exists, of each matrix. Round answers to two decimal places.
67.	 C
25
61
- 12
18
- 2
4
8
35
21
S
68.	 C
18
- 3
4
6
- 20
14
10
25
- 15
S
69.	 D
44
21
18
6
- 2
10
15
5
21
12
- 12
4
- 8
- 16
4
9
T
70.	 D
16
22
-3
5
21
-17
4
8
2
8
27
20
5
15
- 3
- 10
T
In Problems 71–74, use the idea behind Example 15 with a graphing utility to solve the following systems of equations. Round answers 
to two decimal places.
71.	 c
25x + 61y - 12z = 10
18x - 12y +
7y = - 9
3x +
4y -
z = 12
72.	 c
25x + 61y - 12z = 15
18x - 12y +
7z = - 3
3x +
4y -
z = 12
73.	 c
25x + 61y - 12z = 21
18x - 12y +
7z =
7
3x +
4y -
z = - 2
74.	 c
25x + 61y - 12z = 25
18x - 12y +
7z = 10
3x +
4y -
z = - 4
Mixed Practice
In Problems 75–82, algebraically solve each system of equations using any method you wish.
Applications and Extensions
75.	 b2x + 3y = 11
5x + 7y = 24
76.	 b2x + 8y = - 8
x + 7y = - 13
77.	 c
x - 2y + 4z = 2
- 3x + 5y - 2z = 17
4x - 3y
= - 22
78.	 c
2x + 3y -
z = -2
4x +
3z = 6
6y - 2z = 2
79.	 c
5x -
y + 4z = 2
- x +
5y - 4z = 3
7x + 13y - 4z = 17
80.	 c
3x + 2y -
z = 2
2x +
y +
6z = - 7
2x + 2y - 14z = 17
81.	 c
2x - 3y + z = 4
- 3x + 2y - z = - 3
- 5y + z = 6
82.	 c
-4x + 3y + 2z = 6
3x +
y -
z = -2
x + 9y +
z = 6
83.	 College Tuition  Nikki and Joe take classes at a community 
college and a local university. The number of credit hours 
taken and the cost per credit hour (tuition only) are shown 
below.
	 85.	 Computing the Cost of Production   The Acme Steel Company  
is a producer of stainless steel and aluminum containers. On a 
certain day, the following stainless steel containers were manu-
factured: 250 with 10-gallon capacity, 750 with 5-gallon capacity, 
and 600 with 1-gallon capacity. On the same day, the follow-
ing aluminum containers were manufactured: 650 with 10-gallon  
capacity, 550 with 5-gallon capacity, and 800 with 1-gallon capacity. 
Answer the following to compute the daily cost of production.
(a)	 Find a 2 by 3 matrix that represents the above data. 
(b)	 Find a 3 by 1 matrix that represents the amount of material 
if the amount of material used in the 10-gallon containers 
is 15 pounds, the amount used in the 5-gallon containers is 
9 pounds, and the amount used in the 1-gallon containers is 
4 pounds.
(c)	 Multiply the 2 by 3 matrix found in part (a) and the 3 by 
1 matrix found in part (b) to get a 2 by 1 matrix showing 
the day’s usage of material. What is the resultant matrix?
(d)	 If stainless steel costs Acme $0.10 per pound and  
aluminum costs $0.05 per pound, find a 1 by 2 matrix 
that represents the cost of each.
(e)	 Multiply the matrices found in parts (c) and (d) to determine  
the total cost of the day’s production. 
86.	 Computing Profit    Rizza Ford has two locations, one in 
the city and the other in the suburbs. In January, the city  
location sold 400 subcompacts, 250 intermediate-size 
cars, and 50 SUVs; in February, it sold 350 subcompacts,  
100 intermediates, and 30 SUVs. At the suburban location in 
January, 450 subcompacts, 200 intermediates, and 140 SUVs  
were sold. In February, the suburban location sold  
350 subcompacts, 300 intermediates, and 100 SUVs.
(a)	 Find 2 by 3 matrices that summarize the sales data for 
each location for January and February (one matrix for 
each month).
 
CC
LU
Nikki
9
9
Joe
6
6
 
Cost per Credit Hour
CC
$71.00
LU
$158.30
(a)	 Write a matrix A for the credit hours taken by each  
student and a matrix B for the cost per credit hour.
(b)	 Compute AB and interpret the results.
Sources: lc.edu, siue.edu
84.	 School Loan Interest    Jamal and Stephanie both have 
school loans issued from the same two banks. The amounts  
borrowed and the monthly interest rates are given next  
(interest is compounded monthly).
 
Lender 1
Lender 2
Jamal
$4000
$3000
Stephanie
$2500
$3800
 
Monthly Interest Rate
Lender 1
0.011 (1.1%)
Lender 2
0.006 (0.6%)
(a)	 Write a matrix A for the amounts borrowed by each  
student and a matrix B for the monthly interest rates.
(b)	 Compute AB and interpret the result.
(c)	 Let C = J1
1R . Compute A(C + B) and interpret the 
result.

794 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
(b)	 Use matrix addition to obtain total sales for the 2-month 
period.
(c)	 The profit on each kind of car is $100 per subcompact, 
$150 per intermediate, and $200 per SUV. Find a 3 by  
1 matrix representing this profit.
(d)	 Multiply the matrices found in parts (b) and (c) to get a 
2 by 1 matrix showing the profit at each location.
87.	 Cryptography  One method of encryption is to use a matrix  
to encrypt the message and then use the corresponding  
inverse matrix to decode the message. The encrypted  
matrix, E, is obtained by multiplying the message matrix, M, 
by a key matrix, K. The original message can be retrieved by 
multiplying the encrypted matrix by the inverse of the key 
matrix. That is, E = M # K and M = E # K-1. Complete parts 
(a) through (c) below.
(a)	 Given the key matrix K = C
2
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
S , find its 	
 
	
inverse, K-1. 
(b)	 Use the result from part (a) to decode the encrypted
	
matrix E = C
86
61
46
39
32
27
17
16
2
S .
(c)	 Each entry in your result for part (b) represents the  
position of a letter in the English alphabet 1A = 1,  B = 2, 
C = 3, and so on2. Decode the letters from left to right, 
starting in the first row. What is the original message?
88.	 Economic Mobility    The relative income of a child (low,  
medium, or high) generally depends on the relative income 
of the child’s parents. The matrix P, given by
	
Parent’s Income
	
L	
M	
H
P = C
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.5
0.6
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.4
S
	
	 is called a left stochastic transition matrix. For example, the 
entry P21 = 0.5 means that 50% of the children of low- 
relative-income parents will transition to the medium level 
of income. The diagonal entry Pi i represents the percent 
of children who remain in the same income level as their  
parents. Assuming that the transition matrix is valid from 
one generation to the next, compute and interpret P2.
Source: Understanding Mobility in America, April 2006
89.	 Consider the 2 by 2 square matrix
A = Ja
b
c
dR
	
	 If D = ad - bc ≠0, show that A is nonsingular and that
A-1 = 1
D
 J
d
- b
- c
aR
Use the following discussion for Problems 90–91.
In graph theory, an adjacency matrix, A, is a way of representing 
which nodes (or vertices) are connected. For a simple directed 
graph, each entry, aij, is either 1 (if a direct path exists from node  
i to node j) or 0 (if no direct path exists from node i to node j).
For example, consider the following graph and corresponding 
adjacency matrix.
L
M  Child’s income
H
D
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
T
4
2
1
3
Page
1
Page
3
Page
4
Page
2
Page
5
The entry a14 is 1 because a direct path exists from node 1 to  
node 4. However, the entry a41 is 0 because no path exists from 
node 4 to node 1. The entry a33 is 1 because a direct path exists 
from node 3 to itself. The matrix Bk = A + A2 + c + Ak  
indicates the number of ways to get from node i to node j within  
k moves (steps). 
90.	 Website Map    A content map can be used to show how  
different pages on a website are connected. For example, 
the following content map shows the relationship among 
the five pages of a certain website with links between pages 
represented by arrows.
	
	 The concept map can be represented by a 5 by 5 adjacency 
matrix where each entry, aij, is either 1 (if a link exists from 
page i to page j) or 0 (if no link exists from page i to page j).
(a)	 Write the 5 by 5 adjacency matrix that represents the 
given concept map.
(b)	 Explain the significance of the entries on the main  
diagonal in your result from part (a).
(c)	 Find and interpret A2.
	 91.	 Three-Click Rule    An unofficial, and often contested,  
guideline for website design is to make all website content  
available to a user within three clicks. The webpage  
adjacency matrix for a certain website is given by
A = E
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
U
(a)	 Find B3. Does this website adhere to the Three-Click Rule?
(b)	 Which page can be reached the most number of ways 
from page 1 within three clicks? 
92.	 Computer Graphics: Translating    An important aspect of 
computer graphics is the ability to transform the coordinates 
of points within a graphic. For transformation purposes, a
	
	 point (x, y) is represented as the column matrix X = £
x
y
1
§ . 
	
	 To translate a point (x, y) horizontally h units and vertically
	
	 k units, we use the translation matrix S = £
1
0
h
0
1
k
0
0
1
§  and

Section 11.5  Partial Fraction Decomposition  795
	
	 compute the matrix product SX. The translation is to the 
right for h 7 0 and to the left for h 6 0. Likewise, the  
translation is up for k 7 0 and down for k 6 0. 
The transformed coordinates are the first two entries in the 
resulting column matrix.
(a)	 Write the translation matrix needed to translate a point 
3 units to the left and 5 units up.
(b)	 Find and interpret S -1.
93.	 Computer Graphics: Rotating  An important aspect of com-
puter graphics is the ability to transform the coordinates of 
points within an image. For transformation purposes, a point 
1x, y2 is represented as the column matrix X = £
x
y
1
§ . To 
	
	 rotate a point, multiply a point’s column matrix by an ap-
propriate rotation matrix R to form the matrix product RX. 
For example to rotate a point 30° in the counterclockwise 
direction, the rotation matrix is below. 
R = E
23
2
-
 1
2
0
1
2
23
2
0
0
0
1
U.
	
	 Use this information to answer parts (a) and (b) below. 
(a)	 Write the coordinates of the point (10, 8) after it has 
been rotated 30° in the counterclockwise direction.
(b)	 Find and interpret R-1.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 94.	 Create a situation different from any found in the text that 
can be represented by a matrix.
	 95.	 Explain why the number of columns in matrix A must equal 
the number of rows in matrix B when finding the product AB.
	 96.	 If a, b, and c ≠0 are real numbers with ac = bc, then a = b. 
Does this same property hold for matrices? In other words, 
if A, B, and C are matrices and AC = BC, must A = B?
	 97.	 What is the solution of the system of equations AX = 0  
if A-1 exists? Discuss the solution of AX = 0 if A-1 does 
not exist.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 98–101 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 98.	 Write a polynomial function with minimum degree and  
leading 
coefficient 
1 
that 
has 
zeros 
x = 3  
(multiplicity 2), x = 0 (multiplicity 3), and x = - 2  
(multiplicity 1). 
	 99.	 For v = -2i - j and w = 2i + j, find the dot product v # w  
and the angle between v and w. 
11.5  Partial Fraction Decomposition
•	 Identity (Appendix A, Section A.6, p. 987)
•	 Proper and Improper Rational Functions  
(Section 4.2, p. 228)
•	 Factoring Polynomials (Appendix A,  
Section A.3, pp. 971–972)
•	 Complex Zeros; Fundamental Theorem of Algebra 
(Section 4.6, pp. 270–274)
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
Consider the problem of adding two rational expressions:
3
x + 4 and 
2
x - 3
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 802.
	
OBJECTIVES	 1  Decompose P
Q
  Where Q Has Only Nonrepeated Linear Factors  (p. 796)
	
	 	2  Decompose P
Q
  Where Q Has Repeated Linear Factors  (p. 798)
	
	 	3  Decompose P
Q
  Where Q Has a Nonrepeated Irreducible  
Quadratic Factor  (p. 800)
	
	 	4  Decompose P
Q
  Where Q Has a Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor  (p. 801)
	100.	 Solve: 
5x
x + 2 =
x
x - 2 
	101.	 Write cos( csc -1u) as an algebraic expression in u.

796 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
The result is
3
x + 4 +
2
x - 3 = 31x - 32 + 21x + 42
1x + 42 1x - 32
=
5x - 1
x2 + x - 12
The reverse procedure, starting with the rational expression 
5x - 1
x2 + x - 12 and 
writing it as the sum (or difference) of the two simpler fractions 
3
x + 4 and 
2
x - 3,
is referred to as partial fraction decomposition, and the two simpler fractions are 
called partial fractions. Decomposing a rational expression into a sum of partial 
fractions is important in solving certain types of calculus problems. This section 
presents a systematic way to decompose rational expressions.
Recall that a rational expression is the ratio of two polynomials, say P and Q ≠0. 
Assume that P and Q have no common factors. Recall also that a rational expression
P
Q is called proper if the degree of the polynomial in the numerator is less than the 
degree of the polynomial in the denominator. Otherwise, the rational expression is
called improper.
Because any improper rational expression can be reduced by long division to a 
mixed form consisting of the sum of a polynomial and a proper rational expression, 
we shall restrict the discussion that follows to proper rational expressions.
The partial fraction decomposition of the rational expression P
Q, in lowest terms,
depends on the factors of the denominator Q. Recall from Section 4.6 that any  
polynomial whose coefficients are real numbers can be factored (over the real  
numbers) into products of linear and/or irreducible quadratic factors. This means
that the denominator Q of the rational expression P
Q will contain only factors of one 
or both of the following types:
	 •	 Linear factors of the form x - a, where a is a real number.
	 •	 Irreducible quadratic factors of the form ax2 + bx + c, where a, b, and c are 
real numbers, a ≠0, and b2 - 4ac 6 0 (which guarantees that ax2 + bx + c 
cannot be written as the product of two linear factors with real coefficients).
As it turns out, there are four cases to be examined. We begin with the case  
for which Q has only nonrepeated linear factors. Throughout we assume the rational
expression P
Q is in lowest terms.
Decompose P
Q
  Where Q Has Only Nonrepeated Linear Factors
1
Case 1:  Q has only nonrepeated linear factors.
Under the assumption that Q has only nonrepeated linear factors, the  
polynomial Q has the form
Q1x2 = 1x - a12 1x - a22 # g# 1x - an2
where no two of the numbers a1, a2, c, an are equal. In this case, the partial 
fraction decomposition of P
Q is of the form
	
P1x2
Q1x2 =
A1
x - a1
+
A2
x - a2
+ g +
An
x - an
	
(1)
where the numbers A1, A2, c, An are to be determined.

Section 11.5  Partial Fraction Decomposition  797
We show how to find these numbers in the example that follows.
Nonrepeated Linear Factors
Find the partial fraction decomposition of  
x
x2 - 5x + 6.
First, factor the denominator,
x2 - 5x + 6 = 1x - 22 1x - 32
and notice that the denominator contains only nonrepeated linear factors. Then  
decompose the rational expression according to equation (1):
	
x
x2 - 5x + 6 =
A
x - 2 +
B
x - 3	
(2)
where A and B are to be determined. To find A and B, clear the fractions by multiplying 
each side by 1x - 22 1x - 32 = x2 - 5x + 6. The result is
	
x = A1x - 32 + B1x - 22	
(3)
or
x = 1A + B2x + 1 -3A - 2B2
This equation is an identity in x. Equate the coefficients of like powers of x to get
b1 =
A +
B
0 = -3A - 2B 
Equate the coefficients of x: 1x = (A + B)x.
Equate the constants: 0 = - 3A - 2B.
This system of two equations containing two variables, A and B, can be solved using 
whatever method you wish. Solving it yields
A = -2  B = 3
From equation (2), the partial fraction decomposition is
x
x2 - 5x + 6 =
-2
x - 2 +
3
x - 3
Check:	The decomposition can be checked by adding the rational expressions.
 -2
x - 2 +
3
x - 3 = -21x - 32 + 31x - 22
1x - 22 1x - 32
=
x
1x - 22 1x - 32
 =
x
x2 - 5x + 6
The numbers to be found in the partial fraction decomposition can sometimes 
be found more readily by using suitable choices for x (which may include complex 
numbers) in the identity obtained after fractions have been cleared. In Example 1, 
the identity after clearing fractions is equation (3):
x = A1x - 32 + B1x - 22
Let x = 2 in this expression, and the term containing B drops out, leaving 
2 = A1 -12, or A = -2. Similarly, let x = 3, and the term containing A drops out, 
leaving 3 = B. As before, A = -2 and B = 3.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Example 1
Solution
•

798 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Decompose P
Q
  Where Q Has Repeated Linear Factors
2
Case 2:  Q has repeated linear factors.
If the polynomial Q has a repeated linear factor, say 1x - a2n, n Ú 2 an integer, 
then, in the partial fraction decomposition of P
Q, allow for the terms
A1
x - a +
A2
1x - a22 + g +
An
1x - a2n
where the numbers A1, A2, c, An are to be determined.
Repeated Linear Factors
Find the partial fraction decomposition of 
x + 2
x3 - 2x2 + x.
First, factor the denominator,
x3 - 2x2 + x = x1x2 - 2x + 12 = x1x - 122
and notice that the denominator has the nonrepeated linear factor x and the repeated 
linear factor 1x - 122. By Case 1, the term A
x  must be in the decomposition; and by 
Case 2, the terms 
B
x - 1 +
C
1x - 122 must be in the decomposition.
Now write
	
x + 2
x3 - 2x2 + x = A
x +
B
x - 1 +
C
1x - 122	
(4)
Again, clear fractions by multiplying each side by x3 - 2x2 + x = x1x - 122. The 
result is the identity
	
x + 2 = A1x - 122 + Bx1x - 12 + Cx	
(5)
Let x = 0 in this expression and the terms containing B and C drop out, leaving 
2 = A1 -122, or A = 2. Similarly, let x = 1, and the terms containing A and B drop 
out, leaving 3 = C. Then equation (5) becomes
x + 2 = 21x - 122 + Bx1x - 12 + 3x
Let x = 2 (any choice other than 0 or 1 will work as well). The result is
 4 = 21122 + B122 112 + 3122
 4 = 2 + 2B + 6
 2B = -4
 B = -2
Therefore, A = 2, B = -2, and C = 3.
From equation (4), the partial fraction decomposition is
x + 2
x3 - 2x2 + x = 2
x +
-2
x - 1 +
3
1x - 122
Example 2
Solution
•

Section 11.5  Partial Fraction Decomposition  799
Repeated Linear Factors
Find the partial fraction decomposition of 
x3 - 8
x21x - 123.
The denominator contains the repeated linear factors x2 and 1x - 123. The partial 
fraction decomposition takes the form
	
x3 - 8
x21x - 123 = A
x + B
x2 +
C
x - 1 +
D
1x - 122 +
E
1x - 123	
(6)
As before, clear fractions and obtain the identity
x3 - 8 = Ax1x - 123 + B1x - 123 + Cx21x - 122 + Dx21x - 12 + Ex2	 (7)
Let x = 0. (Do you see why this choice was made?) Then
 -8 = B1 -12
 B = 8
Let x = 1 in equation (7). Then
-7 = E
Use B = 8 and E = -7 in equation (7), and collect like terms.
Example 3
Solution
 x3 - 8 = Ax1x - 123 + 81x - 123
 
+ Cx21x - 122 + Dx21x - 12 - 7x2
 x3 - 8 - 81x3 - 3x2 + 3x - 12 + 7x2 = Ax1x - 123
 
+ Cx21x - 122 + Dx21x - 12
 -7x3 + 31x2 - 24x = x1x - 12 3A1x - 122 + Cx1x - 12 + Dx4
 x1x - 12 1-7x + 242 = x1x - 12 3A1x - 122 + Cx1x - 12 + Dx4
 -7x + 24 = A1x - 122 + Cx1x - 12 + Dx	
(8)
Now work with equation (8). Let x = 0. Then
24 = A
Let x = 1 in equation (8). Then
17 = D
Use A = 24 and D = 17 in equation (8).
-7x + 24 = 241x - 122 + Cx1x - 12 + 17x
Let x = 2 and simplify.
 -14 + 24 = 24 + C122 + 34
 -48 = 2C
 -24 = C
The numbers A, B, C, D, and E are all now known. So, from equation (6),
x3 - 8
x21x - 123 = 24
x + 8
x2 +
-24
x - 1 +
17
1x - 122 +
-7
1x - 123
Now Work Example 3 by solving the system of five equations containing 
five variables that the expansion of equation (7) leads to.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
•

800 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
The final two cases involve irreducible quadratic factors. A quadratic factor 
is irreducible if it cannot be factored into linear factors with real coefficients. A  
quadratic expression ax2 + bx + c is irreducible whenever b2 - 4ac 6 0. For  
example, x2 + x + 1 and x2 + 4 are irreducible.
Decompose P
Q
  Where Q Has a Nonrepeated Irreducible  
Quadratic Factor
3
Case 3:  Q contains a nonrepeated irreducible quadratic factor.
If Q contains a nonrepeated irreducible quadratic factor of the form 
ax2 + bx + c, then, in the partial fraction decomposition of P
Q, allow for the 
term
Ax + B
ax2 + bx + c
where the numbers A and B are to be determined.
Nonrepeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor
Find the partial fraction decomposition of  3x - 5
x3 - 1.
Factor the denominator,
x3 - 1 = 1x - 12 1x2 + x + 12
Notice that it has a nonrepeated linear factor x - 1 and a nonrepeated irreducible 
quadratic factor x2 + x + 1. Allow for the term 
A
x - 1 by Case 1, and allow for the 
term Bx + C
x2 + x + 1 by Case 3. Then
	
3x - 5
x3 - 1 =
A
x - 1 +
Bx + C
x2 + x + 1	
(9)
Multiply each side of equation (9) by x3 - 1 = 1x - 12 1x2 + x + 12 to obtain the 
identity
	
3x - 5 = A1x2 + x + 12 + 1Bx + C2 1x - 12	
(10)
Expand the identity in (10) to obtain
3x - 5 = 1A + B2x2 + 1A - B + C2x + 1A - C2
This identity leads to the system of equations
•
A + B
=
0
A - B + C =
3
A
- C = -5
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
Example 4
Solution

Section 11.5  Partial Fraction Decomposition  801
The solution of this system is A = -  2
3, B = 2
3, C = 13
3 . Then, from equation (9),
3x - 5
x3 - 1 =
-  2
3
x - 1 +
2
3
 x + 13
3
x2 + x + 1
Now Work Example 4 using equation (10) and assigning values to x.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Decompose P
Q
  Where Q Has a Repeated Irreducible  
Quadratic Factor
•
4
Case 4:  Q contains a repeated irreducible quadratic factor.
If the polynomial Q contains a repeated irreducible quadratic factor 
1ax2 + bx + c2n, n Ú 2, n an integer, then, in the partial fraction decomposition 
of P
Q, allow for the terms
A1
 x + B1
ax2 + bx + c +
A2
 x + B2
1ax2 + bx + c22 + g +
An
 x + Bn
1ax2 + bx + c2n
where the numbers A1, B1, A2, B2, c, An, Bn are to be determined.
Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor
Find the partial fraction decomposition of x3 + x2
1x2 + 422.
The denominator contains the repeated irreducible quadratic factor 1x2 + 422, so 
write
	
x3 + x2
1x2 + 422 = Ax + B
x2 + 4
+
Cx + D
1x2 + 422	
(11)
Clear fractions to obtain
x3 + x2 = 1Ax + B2 1x2 + 42 + Cx + D
Collecting like terms yields the identity
x3 + x2 = Ax3 + Bx2 + 14A + C2x + 4B + D
Equating coefficients results in the system
d
A = 1
B = 1
4A + C = 0
4B + D = 0
The solution is A = 1, B = 1, C = -4, D = -4. From equation (11),
x3 + x2
1x2 + 422 = x + 1
x2 + 4 +
-4x - 4
1x2 + 422
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5
Example 5
Solution
•

802 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Skill Building
In Problems 5–12, tell whether the given rational expression is proper or improper. If improper, rewrite it as the sum of a polynomial 
and a proper rational expression.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 True or False  The equation 1x - 122 - 1 = x1x - 22 is 
an example of an identity. (p. 987) 
	 2.	 True or False  The rational expression 5x2 - 1
x3 + 1  is proper. 
	
	 (p. 228) 
	 3.	 Factor completely: 3x4 + 6x3 + 3x2 (pp. 971–972)
	 4.	 True or False    Every polynomial with real numbers as  
coefficients can be factored into products of linear and/or 
irreducible quadratic factors. (p. 272) 
11.5  Assess Your Understanding
	 5.	
x
x2 - 1 
	 6.	 5x + 2
x3 - 1 
7.	 x2 + 5
x2 - 4
8.	 3x2 - 2
x2 - 1
9.	 5x3 + 2x - 1
x2 - 4
10.	 3x4 + x2 - 2
x3 + 8
11.	
x1x - 12
1x + 42 1x - 32
12.	
2x1x2 + 42
x2 + 1
In Problems 13–46, find the partial fraction decomposition of each rational expression.
	 13.	  
4
x1x - 12  
14.	
3x
1x + 22 1x - 12
	 15.	
1
x1x2 + 12  
16.	
1
1x + 12 1x2 + 42
17.	
x
1x - 12 1x - 22
18.	
3x
1x + 22 1x - 42
19.	  
x2
1x - 1221x + 12
20.	
x + 1
x21x - 22
21.	  
1
x3 - 8
22.	 2x + 4
x3 - 1
23.	
x2
1x - 1221x + 122
24.	
x + 1
x21x - 222
25.	
x - 3
1x + 22 1x + 122
26.	
x2 + x
1x + 22 1x - 122
27.	
x + 4
x21x2 + 42
28.	
10x2 + 2x
1x - 1221x2 + 22
29.	
x2 + 2x + 3
1x + 12 1x2 + 2x + 42
30.	 x2 - 11x - 18
x1x2 + 3x + 32
31.	
x
13x - 22 12x + 12
32.	
1
12x + 32 14x - 12
33.	
x
x2 + 2x - 3
34.	
x2 - x - 8
1x + 12 1x2 + 5x + 62
35.	  x2 + 2x + 3
1x2 + 422
36.	
x3 + 1
1x2 + 1622
37.	
7x + 3
x3 - 2x2 - 3x
38.	 x3 + 1
x5 - x4
39.	
x2
x3 - 4x2 + 5x - 2
40.	
x2 + 1
x3 + x2 - 5x + 3
41.	
x3
1x2 + 1623
42.	
x2
1x2 + 423
43.	
4
2x2 - 5x - 3
44.	
4x
2x2 + 3x - 2
	 45.	 2x + 3
x4 - 9x2 
	 46.	
x2 + 9
x4 - 2x2 - 8 
Mixed Practice
In Problems 47–54, use the division algorithm to rewrite each improper rational expression as the sum of a polynomial and a proper 
rational expression. Find the partial fraction decomposition of the proper rational expression. Finally, express the improper rational 
expression as the sum of a polynomial and the partial fraction decomposition.
47.	 x3 + x2 - 3
x2 + 3x - 4
48.	 x3 - 3x2 + 1
x2 + 5x + 6
49.	
x3
x2 + 1
50.	 x3 + x
x2 + 4
51.	 x4 - 5x2 + x - 4
x2 + 4x + 4
52.	 x4 + x3 - x + 2
x2 - 2x + 1
53.	 x5 + x4 - x2 + 2
x4 - 2x2 + 1
54.	 x5 - x3 + x2 + 1
x4 + 6x2 + 9

Section 11.6  Systems of Nonlinear Equations  803
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 True    2.  True    3.  3x21x + 122    4.  True 
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 55–58 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 55.	 Credit Card Balance    Nick has a credit card balance of 
$4200. If the credit card company charges 18% interest 
compounded daily, and Nick does not make any payments 
on the account, how long will it take for his balance to  
double? Round to two decimal places. 
	 56.	 Given f 1x2 = x + 4 and g1x2 = x2 - 3x, find (g ∘ f ) (- 3).
	 57.	 Find the exact value of  sec 52° cos 308°.
	 58.	 Plot the point given by the polar coordinates ¢ - 1, 5p
4 ≤ and 
find its rectangular coordinates.
11.6  Systems of Nonlinear Equations
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Lines (Section 1.3, pp. 53–63)
•	 Circles (Section 1.4, pp. 68–71)
•	 Parabolas (Section 10.2, pp. 674–678)
•	 Ellipses (Section 10.3, pp. 683–689)
•	 Hyperbolas (Section 10.4, pp. 693–701)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 808.
	
Objectives	 1  Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution  (p. 803)
	
	 	2  Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination  (p. 804)
Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution
In Section 11.1, we observed that the solution to a system of linear equations could 
be found geometrically by determining the point(s) of intersection (if any) of the 
equations in the system. Similarly, in solving systems of nonlinear equations, the 
solution(s) also represent(s) the point(s) of intersection (if any) of the graphs of 
the equations.
There is no general method for solving a system of nonlinear equations. 
Sometimes substitution is best; other times elimination is best; and sometimes  
neither of these methods works. Experience and a certain degree of imagination are 
your allies here.
Before we begin, two comments are in order.
	 •	 If the system contains two variables and if the equations in the system are easy 
to graph, then graph them. By graphing each equation in the system, you can get 
an idea of how many solutions a system has and approximately where they are 
located.
	 •	 Extraneous solutions can creep in when solving nonlinear systems, so it is  
imperative to check all apparent solutions.
Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution
Solve the following system of equations:
b3x
- y = -2
2x2 - y =
0 
(1)
(2)
First, notice that the system contains two variables and that we know how to graph 
each equation. Equation (1) is the line y = 3x + 2, and equation (2) is the parabola
y = 2x2. See Figure 9 on the next page. The system apparently has two solutions.
1
Example 1
Solution

804 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
To use substitution to solve the system, we choose to solve equation (1) for y.
 3x - y = -2
 
Equation (1)
 y = 3x + 2
Substitute this expression for y in equation (2). The result is an equation containing 
just the variable x, which we can then solve.
   2x2 - y = 0 
Equation (2)
   2x2 - 13x + 22 = 0 
Substitute 3x + 2 for y.
   2x2 - 3x - 2 = 0 
Remove parentheses.
   12x + 12 1x - 22 = 0 
Factor.
 2x + 1 = 0    or  x - 2 = 0 
Apply the Zero-Product Property.
  x = -  1
2  or      x = 2
Use these values for x in y = 3x + 2 to find
y = 3a -  1
2b + 2 = 1
2 or y = 3122 + 2 = 8
The apparent solutions are x = -  1
2, y = 1
2 and x = 2, y = 8.
Check:	For x = -  1
2, y = 1
2
 ,
d
3a -  1
2b
- 1
2 = -  3
2
- 1
2 = -2
2a -  1
2b
2
- 1
2 = 2a1
4b - 1
2 =
0
 
(1)
(2)
For x = 2, y = 8,
b 3122 - 8 =
6 - 8 = -2
21222 - 8 = 2142 - 8 =
0 
(1)
(2)
Each solution checks. The graphs of the two equations intersect at the points
a -  1
2, 1
2b and 12, 82, as shown in Figure 9.
Check:	Graph 3x - y = -2 1Y1 = 3x + 22 and 2x2 - y = 0 1Y2 = 2x22, and 
compare what you see with Figure 9. Use INTERSECT (twice) to find 
the two points of intersection.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5  u s i n g  s u b s t i t u t i o n
Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination
Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination
Solve: bx2 + y2 = 13
x2 - y
=
7 
(1) A circle
(2) A parabola
First graph each equation, as shown in Figure 10. Based on the graph, we expect 
four solutions. Notice that subtracting equation (2) from equation (1) eliminates the 
variable x.
bx2 + y2 = 13
x2 - y
= 7
y2 + y
= 6
 
 
Subtract.
•
2
Example 2
Solution
Figure 9 
x
y
–6
6
3x – y = –2
(y = 3x + 2)
2x 2 – y = 0
(y = 2x 2)
10
–2
(2, 8)
(
)
,
1–2
1–2
–

Section 11.6  Systems of Nonlinear Equations  805
This quadratic equation in y can be solved by factoring.
 y2 + y - 6 = 0
 1y + 32 1y - 22 = 0
 y = -3 or y = 2
Use these values for y in equation (2) to find x.
If y = 2, then x2 = y + 7 = 9, so x = 3 or -3.
If y = -3, then x2 = y + 7 = 4, so x = 2 or -2.
There are four solutions: x = 3, y = 2; x = -3, y = 2; x = 2, y = -3; and 
x = -2, y = -3.
You should verify that, in fact, these four solutions also satisfy equation (1), so 
all four are solutions of the system. The four points, 13, 22, 1-3, 22, 12, -32, and 
1 -2, -32, are the points of intersection of the graphs. Look again at Figure 10.
Check:	Graph x2 + y2 = 13 and x2 - y = 7. (Remember that to graph 
x2 + y2 = 13 requires two functions: Y1 = 213 - x2 and  
Y2 = - 213 - x2.2 Use INTERSECT to find the points of intersection.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3  u s i n g  e l i m i n a t i o n
Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations
Solve: bx2 - y2 = 4
y = x2 
(1)  A hyperbola
(2)  A parabola  
Solution  Either substitution or elimination can be used here. To use substitution, 
replace x2 by y in equation (1).
 x2 - y2 = 4 
Equation (1)
 y - y2 = 4 
y = x2
 y2 - y + 4 = 0 
Place in standard form.
This is a quadratic equation. Its discriminant is 1-122 - 4 # 1 # 4 = 1 - 16 = -15 6 0. 
The equation has no real solutions, so the system is inconsistent. The graphs of these 
two equations do not intersect. See Figure 11.
Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination
Solve: c
x2 + x + y2 - 3y + 2 = 0
x + 1 + y2 - y
x
= 0
 
(1)
(2)
First, multiply equation (2) by x to eliminate the fraction. The result is an equivalent 
system because x cannot be 0. [Look at equation (2) to see why.]
bx2 + x + y2 - 3y + 2 = 0
x2 + x + y2 - y = 0 
(1)
(2) x ≠0
Now subtract equation (2) from equation (1) to eliminate x. The result is
 -2y + 2 = 0
 y = 1 
Solve for y.
•
Example 3
•
Example 4
Solution
Figure 10 
x
y
–6
6
(3, 2)
(–3, 2)
(2, –3)
(–2, –3)
x 2 + y 2 = 13
x 2 – y = 7
(y = x 2 – 7)
2
–8
Figure 11 
x
y
–5
5
y = x2
(2, 4)
(–2, 4)
x 2 – y2 = 4
(3,       )
5
–5
(3, –       )
(–3,     )
(–3, –       )
5
5
5
5

806 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
To find x, back-substitute y = 1 in equation (1).
 x2 + x + y2 - 3y + 2 = 0	
Equation (1)
 x2 + x + 1 - 3 + 2 = 0	
Substitute 1 for y.
 x2 + x = 0	
Simplify.
 x1x + 12 = 0	
Factor.
 x = 0 or x = -1 
Apply the Zero-Product Property.
Because x cannot be 0, the value x = 0 is extraneous, so discard it.
Check:	Check x = -1, y = 1:
c
1-122 + 1-12 + 12 - 3112 + 2 = 1 - 1 + 1 - 3 + 2 = 0
-1 + 1 + 12 - 1
-1
= 0 +
0
-1 = 0
 
(1)
(2)
The solution is x = -1, y = 1. The point of intersection of the graphs of the  
equations is 1 -1, 12.
In Problem 55 you are asked to graph the equations given in Example 4. Be sure 
to show holes in the graph of equation (2) for x = 0.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 9  a n d  4 9
Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations
Solve: 
b3xy - 2y2 = -2
9x2 + 4y2 = 10 
(1)
(2)
Multiply equation (1) by 2, and add the result to equation (2), to eliminate the  
y2 terms.
•
Example 5
Solution
b
6xy - 4y2 = -4
9x2 + 4y2 = 10
9x2 + 6xy =
6
3x2 + 2xy =
2
(1)
(2) 
Add. 
Divide each side by 3.
Since x ≠0 (do you see why?), solve for y in this equation to get
	
y = 2 - 3x2
2x   x ≠0	
Now substitute for y in equation (2) of the system.
 9x2 + 4y2 = 10	
Equation (2)
 9x2 + 4¢ 2 - 3x2
2x
≤
2
= 10	
Substitute y = 2 - 3x2
2x
 .
 9x2 + 4 - 12x2 + 9x4
x2
= 10	
Expand and simplify.
 9x4 + 4 - 12x2 + 9x4 = 10x2 
Multiply both sides by x2.
 18x4 - 22x2 + 4 = 0	
Subtract 10x2 from both sides.
 9x4 - 11x2 + 2 = 0	
Divide both sides by 2.

Section 11.6  Systems of Nonlinear Equations  807
This quadratic equation (in x2) can be factored:
19x2 - 22 1x2 - 12 = 0
9x2 - 2 = 0       or  x2 - 1 = 0
x2 = 2
9       or      x2 = 1
x = { A
2
9 = { 22
3   or       x = {1
To find y, use the fact that y = 2 - 3x2
2x
.
If  x = 22
3
 :  y = 2 - 3x2
2x
=
2 - 2
3
2a 22
3 b
=
4
222
= 22
If  x = -  22
3
 :  y = 2 - 3x2
2x
=
2 - 2
3
2a-  22
3 b
=
4
-222
= - 22
If  x = 1:  y = 2 - 3x2
2x
= 2 - 31122
2
= -  1
2
If  x = -1:  y = 2 - 3x2
2x
= 2 - 31 -122
-2
= 1
2
The system has four solutions: a 12
3 , 22b, a -  12
3 , - 22b, a1, -  1
2b, a -1, 1
2b. 
Check them for yourself.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
The next example illustrates an imaginative solution to a system of nonlinear 
equations.
Running a Long-Distance Race
In a 50-mile race, the winner crosses the finish line 1 mile  
ahead of the second-place runner and 4 miles ahead  
of the third-place runner. Assuming that each runner  
maintains a constant speed throughout the race, by 
how many miles does the second-place runner beat the  
third-place runner?
Let v1, v2, and v3 denote the speeds of the first-, second-, and third-place runners, 
respectively. Let t1 and t2 denote the times (in hours) required for the first-place 
runner and the second-place runner to finish the race. Then the following system of 
equations results:
d
50 = v1
 t1
49 = v2
 t1
46 = v3
 t1
50 = v2
 t2
 
(1) First@place runner goes 50 miles in t1 hours. 
(2) Second@place runner goes 49 miles in t1 hours. 
(3) Third@place runner goes 46 miles in t1 hours. 
(4) Second@place runner goes 50 miles in t2
  hours.
•
Example 6
Solution
3 miles
1 mile

808 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
We seek the distance d of the third-place runner from the finish at time t2. At 
time t2, the third-place runner has gone a distance of v3
 t2 miles, so the distance d 
remaining is 50 - v3
 t2. Now
 d = 50 - v3
 t2
 = 50 - v3¢t1 # t2
t1
≤
 = 50 - 1v3
 t12 # t2
t1
 = 50 - 46 #
50
v2
50
v1
	
e
From (3), v3
 t 1 = 46
From (4), t 2 = 50
v2
From (1), t 1 = 50
v1
 = 50 - 46 # v1
v2
 = 50 - 46 # 50
49	
From the quotient of (1) and (2).
 ≈3.06 miles
•
Historical Feature
Historical Problem
A papyrus dating back to 1950 bc contains the following problem:  
“A given surface area of 100 units of area shall be represented as the 
sum of two squares whose sides are to each other as 1 is to 3
4
 .”
Solve for the sides by solving the system of equations
c
x2 + y2 = 100
x = 3
4
 y
 
I
n the beginning of this section, it was stated that imagination and 
experience are important in solving systems of nonlinear equations. 
Indeed, these kinds of problems lead into some of the deepest and 
most difficult parts of modern mathematics. Look again at the graphs in 
Examples 1 and 2 of this section (Figures 9 and 10). Example 1 has two 
solutions, and Example 2 has four solutions. We might conjecture that 
the number of solutions is equal to the product of the degrees of the 
equations involved. This conjecture was indeed made by Étienne Bézout 
(1730–1783), but working out the details took about 150 years. It turns 
out that arriving at the correct number of intersections requires counting 
not only the complex number intersections, but also those intersections 
that, in a certain sense, lie at infinity. For example, a parabola and a line 
lying on the axis of the parabola intersect at the vertex and at infinity. This 
topic is part of the study of algebraic geometry.
11.6  Assess Your Understanding
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Graph the equation: y = 3x + 2 (pp. 53–63)
	 2.	 Graph the equation: y + 4 = x2 (pp. 674–678)
	 3.	 Graph the equation: y2 = x2 - 1 (pp. 693–701)
	 4.	 Graph the equation: x2 + 4y2 = 4 (pp. 683–689)
Skill Building
In Problems 5–24, graph each equation of the system. Then solve the system to find the points of intersection.
5.	 by = x2 + 1
y = x + 1
6.	 by = x2 + 1
y = 4x + 1
7.	 by = 236 - x2
y = 8 - x
8.	 by = 24 - x2
y = 2x + 4
9.	 by = 1x
y = 2 - x
10.	 by = 1x
y = 6 - x
11.	 bx = 2y
x = y2 - 2y
12.	 by = x - 1
y = x2 - 6x + 9
13.	 b
x2 + y2 = 4
x2 + 2x + y2 = 0
14.	 b
x2 + y2 = 8
x2 + y2 + 4y = 0
15.	  b
y = 3x - 5
x2 + y2 = 5
16.	 bx2 + y2 = 10
y
= x + 2

Section 11.6  Systems of Nonlinear Equations  809
17.	 bx2 + y2 = 4
y2 - x = 4
18.	 bx2 + y2 = 16
x2 - 2y = 8
19.	 b
xy = 4
x2 + y2 = 8
20.	 b x2 = y
xy = 1
21.	 bx2 + y2 = 4
y
= x2 - 9
22.	 bxy = 1
y = 2x + 1
23.	 by = x2 - 4
y = 6x - 13
24.	 bx2 + y2 = 10
xy = 3  
25.	 b2x2 + y2 = 18
xy =
4
26.	 bx2 - y2 = 21
x
+ y
=
7
27.	 b
y
= 2x + 1
2x2 + y2 = 1
31.	 b4x2 - 3xy + 9y2 = 15
2x + 3y =
5
32.	 b2y2 - 3xy + 6y + 2x + 4 = 0
2x - 3y + 4 = 0
33.	 bx2 - 4y2 + 7 = 0
3x2 + y2 = 31
37.	 bx2 + 2xy = 10
3x2 - xy =
2
38.	 b5xy + 13y2 + 36 = 0
xy + 7y2 = 6
	 39.	 b
2x2 + y2 = 2
x2 - 2y2 + 8 = 0 
46.	 d
1
x4 - 1
y4 = 1
1
x4 + 1
y4 = 4
47.	  bx2 - 3xy + 2y2 = 0
x2 + xy = 6
48.	 bx2 - xy - 2y2 = 0
xy + x + 6 = 0
28.	 bx2 - 4y2 = 16
2y - x =
2
29.	  b
x + y + 1 =
0
x2 + y2 + 6y - x = - 5
30.	 b2x2 - xy + y2 = 8
xy = 4
34.	 b 3x2 - 2y2 + 5 = 0
2x2 -
y2 + 2 = 0
35.	 b7x2 - 3y2 + 5 =
0
3x2 + 5y2 = 12
36.	 b x2 - 3y2 + 1 = 0
2x2 - 7y2 + 5 = 0
43.	 d
5
x2 - 2
y2 + 3 = 0
3
x2 + 1
y2 = 7
44.	 d
2
x2 - 3
y2 + 1 = 0
6
x2 - 7
y2 + 2 = 0
	 45.	 d
1
x4 + 6
y4 = 6
2
x4 - 2
y4 = 19
 
	 40.	 by2 - x2 + 4 = 0
2x2 + 3y2 = 6 
41.	 b x2 + 2y2 = 16
4x2 -
y2 = 24
42.	 b4x2 + 3y2 =
4
2x2 - 6y2 = - 3
49.	  c
y2 + y + x2 - x - 2 = 0
y + 1 + x - 2
y
= 0
50.	 c
x3 - 2x2 + y2 + 3y - 4 = 0
x - 2 +
y2 - y
x2
= 0
	 51.	 b
logxy = 3
logx14y2 = 5 
In Problems 25–54, solve each system. Use any method you wish.
52.	 blogx12y2 = 3
logx14y2 = 2
53.	 b
ln x = 4 ln y
log3x = 2 + 2 log3y
54.	 b
ln x = 5 ln y
log2x = 3 + 2 log2y
55.	 Graph the equations given in Example 4.
56.	 Graph the equations given in Problem 49.
In Problems 57–64, use a graphing utility to solve each system of equations. Express the solution(s) rounded to two decimal places.
57.	 by = x2>3
y = e-x
58.	 by = x3>2
y = e-x
59.	 bx2 + y3 = 2
x3
 y = 4
60.	 bx3 + y2 = 2
x2
 y = 4
61.	 bx4 + y4 = 12
xy2 =
2
62.	 bx4 + y4 = 6
xy = 1
63.	 bxy = 2
y = ln x
64.	 bx2 + y2 = 4
y
= ln x
Mixed Practice
In Problems 65–70, graph each equation and find the point(s) of intersection, if any.
65.	 The line x + 2y = 0 and  
the circle 1x - 122 + 1y - 122 = 5
66.	 The line x + 2y + 6 = 0 and  
the circle 1x + 122 + 1y + 122 = 5
67.	 The circle 1x - 122 + 1y + 222 = 4 and  
the parabola y2 + 4y - x + 1 = 0
68.	 The circle 1x + 222 + 1y - 122 = 4 and  
the parabola y2 - 2y - x - 5 = 0
69.	 y =
4
x - 3 and the circle x2 - 6x + y2 + 1 = 0
70.	 y =
4
x + 2 and the circle x2 + 4x + y2 - 4 = 0

810 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Applications and Extensions
	 71.	 The difference of two numbers is 2 and the sum of their 
squares is 74. Find the numbers. 
	 72.	 The sum of two numbers is 7 and the difference of their 
squares is 21. Find the numbers. 
	 73.	 The product of two numbers is 16 and the sum of their 
squares is 32. Find the numbers. 
	 74.	 The product of two numbers is 10 and the difference of their 
squares is 21. Find the numbers. 
75.	 The difference of two numbers is the same as their product, 
and the sum of their reciprocals is - 15. Find the numbers.
76.	 The sum of two numbers is the same as their product, and 
the difference of their reciprocals is 3. 
	 77.	 The ratio of a to b is 4
7.  The sum of a and b is 44. What is the 
ratio of a + b to b - a? 
78.	 The ratio of a to b is 4:3. The sum of a and b is 14. What is the 
ratio of a - b to a + b?
	 79.	 Geometry  The perimeter of a rectangle is 22 inches and its 
area is 28 square inches. What are its dimensions? 
	 80.	 Geometry  An area of 52 square feet is to be enclosed by 
two squares whose sides are in the ratio of 2:3. Find the sides 
of the squares. 
	 81.	 Geometry    Two circles have circumferences that add up 
to 24p centimeters and areas that add up to 74p square 
centimeters. Find the radius of each circle. 
	 82.	 Geometry    The altitude of an isosceles triangle drawn to 
its base is 3 centimeters, and its perimeter is 18 centimeters. 
Find the length of its base. 
	 83.	 The Tortoise and the Hare  In an 18-meter race between a 
tortoise and a hare, the tortoise leaves 23 minutes before the 
hare. The hare, by running at an average speed of 0.5 meter  
per hour faster than the tortoise, crosses the finish line  
1 minutes before the tortoise. What are the average speeds 
of the tortoise and the hare? 
	 86.	 Constructing a Cylindrical Tube    A rectangular piece of 
cardboard, whose area is 216 square centimeters, is made 
into a cylindrical tube by joining together two sides of the 
rectangle. See the figure. If the tube is to have a volume  
of 224 cubic centimeters, what size cardboard should you 
start with?   
21 meters
y
x
x
y
x
y
y  x 2
2
3
1
2
3
1
1
2
3
4
5
1
(2, 4)
y  mx  b
	 84.	 Running a Race    In a 1-mile race, the winner crosses the  
finish line 10 feet ahead of the second-place runner and 
20 feet ahead of the third-place runner. Assuming that each 
runner maintains a constant speed throughout the race,  
by how many feet does the second-place runner beat the 
third-place runner? 
	 85.	 Constructing a Box  A rectangular piece of cardboard, whose 
area is 209 square centimeters, is made into an open box by 
cutting a 2-centimeter square from each corner and turning 
up the sides. If the box is to have a volume of 210 cubic cen-
timeters, what size cardboard should you start with? 
	 87.	 Fencing  A farmer has 100 feet of fence available to enclose a 
500 square foot region in the shape of adjoining squares, with 
sides of length x and y. The big square has sides of length x 
and the small square has sides of length y. Find x and y.
	 88.	 Bending Wire  A wire 60 feet long is cut into two pieces. Is it 
possible to bend one piece into the shape of a square and the 
other into the shape of a circle so that the total area enclosed 
by the two pieces is 100 square feet? If this is possible, find 
the length of the side of the square and the radius of the 
circle. 
89.	 Geometry  Find formulas for the length L and width W of a 
rectangle in terms of its area A and perimeter P.
90.	 Geometry  Find formulas for the base b and one of the equal 
sides l of an isosceles triangle in terms of its altitude h and 
perimeter P.
	 91.	 Descartes’ Method of Equal Roots  Descartes’ method for 
finding tangents depends on the idea that, for many graphs, 
the tangent line at a given point is the unique line that  
intersects the graph at that point only. We will apply 
his method to find an equation of the tangent line to the  
parabola y = x2 at the point 12, 42. See the figure.

Section 11.6  Systems of Nonlinear Equations  811
	
	 First, we know that the equation of the tangent line must be 
in the form y = mx + b. Using the fact that the point 12, 42 
is on the line, we can solve for b in terms of m and get the 
equation y = mx + 14 - 2m2. Now we want 12, 42 to be 
the unique solution to the system
by = x2
y = mx + 4 - 2m
	
	 From this system, we get x2 - mx + 12m - 42 = 0. By 
using the quadratic formula, we get
x =
m { 2m2 - 412m - 42
2
	
	 To obtain a unique solution for x, the two roots must be 
equal; in other words, the discriminant m2 - 412m - 42 
must be 0. Complete the work to get m, and write an  
equation of the tangent line. 
In Problems 92–98, use Descartes’ method from Problem 91 to find an equation of the line tangent to each graph at the given point.
	 92.	 x2 + y2 = 10; at 11, 32 
	 93.	 y = x2 - 3; at 1- 2, 12 
	 94.	 x2 + y = 5; at 1- 2, 12 
	 95.	 3x2 + 3y2 = 6; at 11, 12 
	 96.	 3x2 + y2 = 7; at 1- 1, 22 
	 97.	 2x2 - 2y2 = - 10; at 1- 2, 32 
	 98.	 2y2 - x2 = 14; at 12, 32 
99.	 If r1 and r2 are two solutions of a quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0, it can be shown that
r1 + r2 = -  b
a and r1
 r2 = c
a
	
	 Solve this system of equations for r1 and r2 assuming a 7 0 and r1 Ú r2.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	100.	 A circle and a line intersect at most twice. A circle and a  
parabola intersect at most four times. Deduce that a circle 
and the graph of a polynomial of degree 3 intersect at most 
six times. What do you conjecture about a polynomial of 
degree 4? What about a polynomial of degree n? Can you 
explain your conclusions using an algebraic argument?
	101.	 Suppose that you are the manager of a sheet metal shop.  
A customer asks you to manufacture 10,000 boxes, each box 
being open on top. The boxes are required to have a square 
base and a 9-cubic-foot capacity. You construct the boxes by 
cutting out a square from each corner of a square piece of 
sheet metal and folding along the edges.
(a)	 What are the dimensions of the square to be cut if the 
area of the square piece of sheet metal is 100 square 
feet?
(b)	 Could you make the box using a smaller piece of sheet 
metal? Make a list of the dimensions of the box for  
various pieces of sheet metal.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 102–105 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
102.	 Find the real zeros of f (x) = 7x2 + 6x - 8.
	103.	 Find an equation of the line with slope - 2
5 that passes through the point (10, - 7). 
104.	 Given  cot u = 24
7  and cos u 6 0, find the exact value of each of the remaining trigonometric functions.
	105.	 Finding the Grade of a Mountain Trail  A straight trail with uniform inclination leads from a hotel, elevation 5300 feet, to a lake 
in the valley, elevation 4100 feet. The length of the trail is 4420 feet. What is the inclination (grade) of the trail? 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	
2.	
3.	
4.	
x
y
22
22
2
2
(21,21)
(0, 2)
x
y
25
5
5
25
(22, 0)
(0, 24)
(2, 0)
x
y
25
5
5
25
(21, 0)
(1, 0)
x
y
(22, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 21)
(2, 0)
5
25
25
5

812 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
11.7  Systems of Inequalities
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Solving Linear Inequalities (Appendix A, Section A.9,  
pp. 1019–1020)
•	 Lines (Section 1.3, pp. 53–63)
•	 Circles (Section 1.4, pp. 68–71)
•	 Graphing Techniques: Transformations  
(Section 2.5, pp. 127–136)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 817.
	
Objectives	 1  Graph an Inequality  (p. 812)
	
	 	2  Graph a System of Inequalities  (p. 814)
Appendix A, Section A.9 discusses inequalities in one variable. This section discusses 
inequalities in two variables.
Examples of Inequalities in Two Variables
(a)	 3x + y … 6        (b)  x2 + y2 6 4        (c)  y2 7 x
Graph an Inequality
An inequality in two variables x and y is satisfied by an ordered pair 1a, b2 if, when 
x is replaced by a and y by b, a true statement results. The graph of an inequality 
in two variables x and y consists of all points 1x, y2 whose coordinates satisfy the 
inequality.
Graphing an Inequality
Graph the linear inequality:  3x + y … 6
Begin by graphing the equation
3x + y = 6
formed by replacing (for now) the … symbol with an = sign. The graph of the  
equation is a line. See Figure 12(a). This line is part of the graph of the inequality 
because the inequality is nonstrict, so the line is drawn as a solid line. (Do you see 
why? We are seeking points for which 3x + y is less than or equal to 6.)
Example 1
•
1
Example 2
Solution
Figure 12 
(5, 5)
(21, 2)
(22, 22)
(4, 21)
x
y
26
6
5
22
EGraph of3x 1 y    6
(5, 5)
(21, 2)
(22, 22)
(4, 21)
x
y
26
6
5
22
D3x 1 y 5 6
Now test a few randomly selected points to see whether they belong to the graph 
of the inequality.

Section 11.7  Systems of Inequalities  813
x
y
–3
3
3
–3
(0, 0)
(4, 0)
x 2  y 2  4
	
3x + y " 6	
Conclusion
14, -12	
3142 + 1 -12 = 11 7 6	
Does not belong to the graph
15, 52	
3152 + 5 = 20 7 6	
Does not belong to the graph
1 -1, 22	
31 -12 + 2 = -1 … 6	
Belongs to the graph
1 -2, -22	
31 -22 + 1 -22 = -8 … 6	
Belongs to the graph
Look again at Figure 12(a). Notice that the two points that belong to the graph 
both lie on the same side of the line, and the two points that do not belong to the 
graph lie on the opposite side. As it turns out, all the points that satisfy the inequality 
will lie on one side of the line or on the line itself. All the points that do not satisfy 
the inequality will lie on the other side. The graph we seek consists of all points that 
lie on the line or on the same side of the line as 1 -1, 22 and 1-2, -22. This graph 
is shown as the shaded region in Figure 12(b).
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
The graph of any inequality in two variables may be obtained in a like way. The 
steps to follow are given next.
•
Steps for Graphing an Inequality
Step 1:  Replace the inequality symbol by an equal sign, and graph the  
resulting equation. If the inequality is strict, use dashes; if it is  
nonstrict, use a solid mark. This graph separates the xy-plane into two 
or more regions.
Step 2:  In each region, select a test point P.
(a)  If the coordinates of P satisfy the inequality, so do all the points in 
that region. Indicate this by shading the region.
(b)  If the coordinates of P do not satisfy the inequality, none of the 
points in that region does.
Note  The strict inequalities are  
6 and 7. The nonstrict inequalities  
are … and Ú .	
■
Graphing an Inequality
Graph: x2 + y2 … 4
Step 1:  Graph the equation x2 + y2 = 4, a circle of radius 2, center at the origin.  
A solid circle will be used because the inequality is not strict.
Step 2:  Use two test points, one inside the circle, the other outside.
 Inside  10, 02: x2 + y2 = 02 + 02 = 0 … 4	
Belongs to the graph
 Outside  14, 02: x2 + y2 = 42 + 02 = 16 7 4 
Does not belong to the graph
All the points inside and on the circle satisfy the inequality. See Figure 13.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
Linear Inequalities
A linear inequality is an inequality in one of the forms
Ax + By 6 C  Ax + By 7 C  Ax + By … C  Ax + By Ú C
where A and B are not both zero.
The graph of the corresponding equation of a linear inequality is a line that 
separates the xy-plane into two regions called half-planes. See Figure 14.
As shown, Ax + By = C is the equation of the boundary line, and it divides 
the plane into two half-planes: one for which Ax + By 6 C and the other for 
which Ax + By 7 C. Because of this, for linear inequalities, only one test point is 
required.
Example 3
Solution
•
Figure 13  x2 + y2 … 4
Figure 14 
Ax  By  C
x
y

814 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Graphing Linear Inequalities
Graph:  (a)  y 6 2                         (b)  y Ú 2x
Example 4
Figure 15  y 6 2
•
Figure 16  y Ú 2x
(a)	 Points on the horizontal line y = 2 
are not part of the graph of the  
inequality, so the graph is shown as 
a dashed line. Since 10, 02 satisfies 
the inequality, the graph consists of 
the half-plane below the line y = 2. 
See Figure 15.
(b)	 Points on the line y = 2x are part 
of the graph of the inequality, so the 
graph is shown as a solid line. Use 
13, 02 as a test point. It does not 
satisfy the inequality 30 6 2 # 34. 
Points in the half-plane on the  
opposite side of 13, 02 satisfy the  
inequality. See Figure 16.
Solution
y
y  2
1
3
3
5
1
1
3
5
(0, 0) 3
Graph of
y  2
5
x
y
2
4
2
2
4
2
4
y  2x
(3, 0)
Graph of
y ≥ 2x
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 3
Graph a System of Inequalities
The graph of a system of inequalities in two variables x and y is the set of all points 
1x, y2 that simultaneously satisfy each inequality in the system. The graph of a 
system of inequalities can be obtained by graphing each inequality individually and 
then determining where, if at all, they intersect.
Graphing a System of Linear Inequalities
Graph the system: 
b x + y Ú 2
2x - y … 4
Begin by graphing the lines x + y = 2 and 2x - y = 4 using a solid line since 
both inequalities are nonstrict. Use the test point 10, 02 on each inequality. For  
example, 10, 02 does not satisfy x + y Ú 2, so shade above the line x + y = 2. See 
Figure 17(a). Also, 10, 02 does satisfy 2x - y … 4, so shade above the line 
2x - y = 4. See Figure 17(b). The intersection of the shaded regions (in purple) 
gives the result presented in Figure 17(c).
2
Example 5
Solution
Comment  A graphing utility can be 
used to graph inequalities. To see how, 
read Section B.6 in Appendix B.	
■
(0, 0)
Graph of
2x  y ≤ 4
x
y
2
4
4
2
2
4
2
4
(b)
(0, 0)
Graph of
x  y ≥ 2
x
y
2
4
4
2
2
4
2
4
(a)
x
y
2
4
4
2
2
4
2
4
x  y ≥ 2
2x  y ≤ 4
Graph of
(c)
2x  y  4
x  y  2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Figure 17 
•

Section 11.7  Systems of Inequalities  815
Graphing a System of Linear Inequalities
Graph the system: bx + y … 2
x + y Ú 0
See Figure 18. The overlapping purple-shaded region between the two boundary 
lines is the graph of the system.
Example 6
Solution
Figure 18 
•
x  y ≤ 2
x  y ≥ 0
Graph of
x
y
3
3
3
3
x  y  2
x  y  0
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
Graphing a System of Linear Inequalities
Graph the systems:
(a)	 e2x - y Ú 0
2x - y Ú 2	
(b)  ex + 2y … 2
x + 2y Ú 6
Example 7
(a)	 See Figure 19. The overlapping  
purple-shaded region is the graph 
of the system. Note that the graph of 
the system is identical to the graph of 
the single inequality 2x - y Ú 2.
(b)	 See Figure 20. Here, because no 
overlapping region results, there 
are no points in the xy-plane that  
simultaneously satisfy each inequality. 
The system has no solution.
Solution
Figure 19 
•
2x  y ≥ 0
 2x  y ≥ 2
Graph of
x
y
3
3
3
3
2x  y  2
2x  y  0
y
4
4
4
6
x x  2y  6
x  2y  2
Figure 20 
Graphing a System of Nonlinear Inequalities
Graph the region below the graph of x + y = 2 and above the graph of y = x2 - 4 
by graphing the system
b
y Ú x2 - 4
x + y … 2
Label all points of intersection.
Figure 21 on the next page shows the graph of the region above the graph of the 
parabola y = x2 - 4 and below the graph of the line x + y = 2. The points of  
intersection are found by solving the system of equations
b
y = x2 - 4
x + y = 2
Example 8
Solution

816 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Use substitution to find
 x + 1x2 - 42 = 2
 x2 + x - 6 = 0
 1x + 32 1x - 22 = 0
 x = -3 or x = 2
The two points of intersection are 1 -3, 52 and 12, 02.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 7
Graphing a System of Four Linear Inequalities
Graph the system: d
x + y Ú 3
2x + y Ú 4
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
Solution  See Figure 22. The two inequalities x Ú 0 and y Ú 0 require the graph 
of the system to be in quadrant I, which is shaded light gray. Concentrate on the  
remaining two inequalities. The intersection of the graphs of these two inequalities 
and quadrant I is shown in dark purple.
Financial Planning
A retired couple can invest up to $25,000. As their financial adviser, you recommend 
that they place at least $15,000 in Treasury bills yielding 2% and at most $5000 in 
corporate bonds yielding 3%.
(a)	 Using x to denote the amount of money invested in Treasury bills and y to  
denote the amount invested in corporate bonds, write a system of linear inequalities 
that describes the possible amounts of each investment. Assume that x and y are 
in thousands of dollars.
(b)	 Graph the system.
(a)	 The system of linear inequalities is
e
x Ú
0
y Ú
0
x + y … 25
x Ú 15
y …
5
 
(b)	 See the shaded region in Figure 23. Note that the inequalities x Ú 0 and y Ú 0 
require that the graph of the system be in quadrant I.
The graph of the system of linear inequalities in Figure 23 is bounded, because 
it can be contained within some circle of sufficiently large radius. A graph that  
cannot be contained in any circle is unbounded. For example, the graph of the  
system of linear inequalities in Figure 22 is unbounded, since it extends indefinitely 
in the positive x and positive y directions.
•
Example 9
•
Example 10
Solution
x and y are nonnegative variables since they represent 
money invested, in thousands of dollars. 
The total of the two investments, x + y, cannot 
exceed $25,000. 
At least $15,000 in Treasury bills 
At most $5000 in corporate bonds
•
Figure 21 
x
y
–4
4
–4
x + y = 2
y = x2 – 4
(–3, 5)
4
(2, 0)
Figure 22 
1
1
x
5
1
x  y  3
2x  y  4
5
1
solution
(1, 2)
(0, 4)
(3, 0)
y
Figure 23 
x
y
30
30
20
10
20
10
x + y = 25
x = 15
y = 5
(20, 5)
(15, 5)
(15, 0)
(25, 0)
(in thousands)
(in thousands)

Section 11.7  Systems of Inequalities  817
Notice in Figures 22 and 23 that those points that belong to the graph and are 
also points of intersection of boundary lines have been plotted. Such points are  
referred to as vertices or corner points of the graph. The system graphed in  
Figure 22 has three corner points: 10, 42, 11, 22, and 13, 02. The system graphed in 
Figure 23 has four corner points: 115, 02, 125, 02, 120, 52, and 115, 52.
These ideas will be used in the next section in developing a method for solving 
linear programming problems, an important application of linear inequalities.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Solve the inequality:  3x + 4 6 8 - x (pp. 1019–1020) 
	 2.	 Graph the equation: 3x - 2y = 6 (pp. 53–63)
	 3.	 Graph the equation: x2 + y2 = 9 (pp. 68–71)
	 4.	 Graph the equation: y = x2 + 4 (pp. 127–136)
	 5.	 True or False  The lines 2x + y = 4 and 4x + 2y = 0 are 
parallel. (pp. 61–62) 
	 6.	 The graph of y = 1x - 222 may be obtained by shifting the 
graph of 
 to the (left/right) a distance of 
 
units. (pp. 127–136) 
11.7  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 7.	 When graphing an inequality in two variables, use 
 
if the inequality is strict; if the inequality is nonstrict, use a 
 
 mark.
	 8.	 The graph of the corresponding equation of a linear inequality 
is a line that separates the xy-plane into two regions. The two 
regions are called 
.
	 9.	 True or False  The graph of a system of inequalities must 
have an overlapping region. 
	 10.	 If a graph of a system of linear inequalities cannot be  
contained in any circle, then it is 
.
Skill Building
In Problems 11–22, graph each inequality.
11.	 x Ú 0
12.	 y Ú 0
13.	  x Ú 4
14.	 y … 2
15.	  2x + y Ú 6
16.	 3x + 2y … 6
17.	  x2 + y2 7 1
18.	 x2 + y2 … 9
19.	 y … x2 - 1
20.	 y 7 x2 + 2
21.	 xy Ú 4
22.	 xy … 1
In Problems 23–34, graph each system of linear inequalities.
23.	  b x + y … 2
2x + y Ú 4
24.	 b3x -
y Ú 6
x + 2y … 2
25.	 b2x -
y …
4
3x + 2y Ú - 6
26.	 b 4x - 5y … 0
2x -
y Ú 2
27.	 b2x - 3y … 0
3x + 2y … 6
28.	 b4x -
y Ú 2
x + 2y Ú 2
29.	  b x - 2y … 6
2x - 4y Ú 0
30.	 bx + 4y … 8
x + 4y Ú 4
31.	 b 2x + y Ú - 2
2x + y Ú
2
32.	 bx - 4y … 4
x - 4y Ú 0
33.	 b2x + 3y Ú 6
2x + 3y … 0
34.	 b2x + y Ú 0
2x + y Ú 2
In Problems 35–42, graph each system of inequalities.
35.	 bx2 + y2 … 9
x
+ y
Ú 3
36.	 ex2 + y2 Ú 9
x + y
… 3
37.	  by Ú x2 - 4
y … x
- 2
38.	 by2 … x
y
Ú x
39.	 bx2 + y2 … 16
y Ú x2 - 4
40.	 bx2 + y2 … 25
y … x2 - 5
41.	 bxy Ú 4
y Ú x2 + 1
42.	 by + x2 … 1
y Ú x2 - 1

818 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
In Problems 43–52, graph each system of linear inequalities. Tell whether the graph is bounded or unbounded, and label the corner points.
43.	 d
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
2x +
y … 6
x + 2y … 6
44.	 d
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
x +
y Ú 4
2x + 3y Ú 6
45.	  d
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
x + y Ú 2
2x + y Ú 4
46.	 d
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
3x + y … 6
2x + y … 2
47.	 e
x Ú
0
y Ú
0
x +
y Ú
2
2x + 3y … 12
3x +
y … 12
48.	 e
x Ú
0
y Ú
0
x + y Ú
1
x + y …
7
2x + y … 10
49.	 e
x Ú
0
y Ú
0
x + y Ú
2
x + y …
8
2x + y … 10
50.	 e
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
x +
y Ú 2
x +
y … 8
x + 2y Ú 1
51.	 d
x Ú
0
y Ú
0
x + 2y Ú
1
x + 2y … 10
52.	 f
x Ú
0
y Ú
0
x + 2y Ú
1
x + 2y … 10
x +
y Ú
2
x +
y …
8
	 53.	
54.	
55.	
56.	
x
y
2
8
2
(4, 2)
8
(0, 6)
(0, 0)
(4, 0)
x
y
4
8
2
(6, 5)
(0, 5)
(0, 2)
8
(2, 0)
(6, 0)
x
y
40
20
(20, 30)
(20, 20)
(0, 15)
(0, 50)
(15, 15)
50
30
10
x
y
10
5
22
(5, 6)
(5, 2)
(4, 0)
(0, 3)
(0, 6)
7
24
In Problems 53–56, write a system of linear inequalities for the given graph.
Applications and Extensions
	 57.	 Financial Planning  A retired couple has up to $50,000 to 
invest. As their financial adviser, you recommend that they 
place at least $35,000 in Treasury bills yielding 1% and at 
most $10,000 in corporate bonds yielding 3%.
(a)	 Using x to denote the amount of money invested in 
Treasury bills and y to denote the amount invested in 
corporate bonds, write a system of linear inequalities 
that describes the possible amounts of each investment.
(b)	 Graph the system and label the corner points.
	 58.	 Manufacturing Trucks    Mike’s Toy Truck Company  
manufactures two models of toy trucks, a standard model  
and a deluxe model. Each standard model requires 2 
hours (h) for painting and 3 h for detail work; each deluxe  
model requires 3 h for painting and 4 h for detail work. Two  
painters and three detail workers are employed by the  
company, and each works 40 h per week.
(a)	 Using x to denote the number of standard-model trucks 
and y to denote the number of deluxe-model trucks, 

Section 11.8  Linear Programming  819
write a system of linear inequalities that describes the 
possible numbers of each model of truck that can be 
manufactured in a week.
(b)	 Graph the system and label the corner points.
	 59.	 Blending Coffee  Bill’s Coffee House, a store that specializes 
in coffee, has available 75 pounds (lb) of A grade coffee 
and 120 lb of B grade coffee. These will be blended into 
1-lb packages as follows: an economy blend that contains  
4 ounces (oz) of A grade coffee and 12 oz of B grade coffee, 
and a superior blend that contains 8 oz of A grade coffee and 
8 oz of B grade coffee.
(a)	 Using x to denote the number of packages of the 
economy blend and y to denote the number of packages 
of the superior blend, write a system of linear inequalities 
that describes the possible numbers of packages of each 
kind of blend.
(b)	 Graph the system and label the corner points.
	 60.	 Mixed Nuts  Nola’s Nuts, a store that specializes in selling 
nuts, has available 90 pounds (lb) of cashews and 120 lb of 
peanuts. These are to be mixed in 12-ounce (oz) packages as 
follows: a lower-priced package containing 8 oz of peanuts 
and 4 oz of cashews, and a quality package containing 6 oz  
of peanuts and 6 oz of cashews.
(a)	 Use x to denote the number of lower-priced packages, 
and use y to denote the number of quality packages. 
Write a system of linear inequalities that describes the 
possible numbers of each kind of package.
(b)	 Graph the system and label the corner points.
	 61.	 Transporting Goods  A small truck can carry no more than 
1600 pounds (lb) of cargo and no more than 150 cubic feet (ft3) 
of cargo. A printer weighs 20 lb and occupies 3 ft3 of space. 
A microwave oven weighs 30 lb and occupies 2 ft3 of space.
(a)	 Using x to represent the number of microwave ovens 
and y to represent the number of printers, write a system 
of linear inequalities that describes the number of ovens 
and printers that can be hauled by the truck.
(b)	 Graph the system and label the corner points.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 62–65 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 62.	 Find the average rate of change of f (x) = 9 x from 1
2 to 2. 
63.	 Write the polar equation 3r =  sin u as an equation in rectangular coordinates. Identify the equation and graph it.
	 64.	 Use the Intermediate Value Theorem to show that f1x2 = 6x2 + 5x - 6 has a real zero on the interval 3 - 1, 24. 
	 65.	 Solve the equation 2cos2 u - cos u - 1 = 0 on the interval 0 … u 6 2p. 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 5xx 6 16 or 1- q, 12
	 2.	
3.	
4.	
x
y
22
22
2
2
(2, 0)
(0,23)
x
y
25
5
5
25
(23, 0)
(0, 3)
(0, 23)
(3, 0)
x
y
25
5
8
22
(21, 5)
(0, 4)
(1, 5)
	 5.	 True
	 6.	 y = x2; right; 2
11.8  Linear Programming
	
Objectives	 	1  Set Up a Linear Programming Problem  (p. 820)
	
	 	2  Solve a Linear Programming Problem  (p. 820)
Historically, linear programming evolved as a technique for solving problems 
involving resource allocation of goods and materials for the U.S. Air Force during 
World War II. Today, linear programming techniques are used to solve a wide variety  
of problems, such as optimizing airline scheduling and establishing telephone lines. 
Although most practical linear programming problems involve systems of several 
hundred linear inequalities containing several hundred variables, we limit our  

820 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
discussion to problems containing only two variables, because we can solve such 
problems using graphing techniques.*
Set Up a Linear Programming Problem
Let’s begin by returning to Example 10 of the previous section.
Financial Planning
A retired couple has up to $25,000 to invest. As their financial adviser, you recommend 
that they place at least $15,000 in Treasury bills yielding 2% and at most $5000 in 
corporate bonds yielding 3%. Develop a model that can be used to determine how 
much money they should place in each investment so that income is maximized.
The problem is typical of a linear programming problem. The problem requires that 
a certain linear expression, the income, be maximized. If I represents income, x the 
amount invested in Treasury bills at 2%, and y the amount invested in corporate 
bonds at 3%, then
I = 0.02x + 0.03y
Assume, as before, that I, x, and y are in thousands of dollars.
The linear expression I = 0.02x + 0.03y is called the objective function. Further, 
the problem requires that the maximum income be achieved under certain conditions,  
or constraints, each of which is a linear inequality involving the variables. (See  
Example 10 in Section 11.7.) The linear programming problem may be modeled as
Maximize  I = 0.02x + 0.03y
subject to the conditions that
e
x Ú   0
  y Ú
0
x + y … 25
x Ú 15
y … 5
In general, every linear programming problem has two components:
	 1.	 A linear objective function that is to be maximized or minimized
	 2.	 A collection of linear inequalities that must be satisfied simultaneously
1
Example 1
Solution
•
*The simplex method is a way to solve linear programming problems involving many inequalities and 
variables. This method was developed by George Dantzig in 1946 and is particularly well suited for  
computerization. In 1984, Narendra Karmarkar of Bell Laboratories discovered a way of solving large 
linear programming problems that improves on the simplex method.
A linear programming problem in two variables x and y consists of maximizing 
(or minimizing) a linear objective function
z = Ax + By  A and B are real numbers, not both 0
subject to certain conditions, or constraints, expressible as linear inequalities 
in x and y.
Definition
Solve a Linear Programming Problem
To maximize (or minimize) the quantity z = Ax + By, we need to identify points 
1x, y2 that make the expression for z the largest (or smallest) possible. But not all 
points 1x, y2 are eligible; only those that also satisfy each linear inequality (constraint) 
can be used. Each point 1x, y2 that satisfies the system of linear inequalities (the  
constraints) is a feasible point. Linear programming problems seek the feasible 
point(s) that maximizes (or minimizes) the objective function.
Look again at the linear programming problem in Example 1.
2

Section 11.8  Linear Programming  821
Analyzing a Linear Programming Problem
Consider the linear programming problem
Maximize  I = 0.02x + 0.03y
subject to the conditions that
e
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
x + y … 25
x Ú 15
y … 5
Graph the constraints. Then graph the objective function for I = 0, 0.3, 0.45, 0.55, 
and 0.6.
Figure 24 shows the graph of the constraints. We superimpose on this graph the 
graph of the objective function for the given values of I.
For I = 0, the objective function is the line 0 = 0.02x + 0.03y.
For I = 0.3, the objective function is the line 0.3 = 0.02x + 0.03y.
For I = 0.45, the objective function is the line 0.45 = 0.02x + 0.03y.
For I = 0.55, the objective function is the line 0.55 = 0.02x + 0.03y.
For I = 0.6, the objective function is the line 0.6 = 0.02x + 0.03y.
Example 2
Solution
Figure 24 
•
x
y
30
20
10
5
25
15
10
5
x 1 y 5 25
x 5 15
y 5 5
(20, 5)
(15, 5)
(15, 0)
(25, 0)
(in thousands)
I 5 0.6
I 5 0.55
I 5 0.45
I 5 0.3
I 5 0
One condition for a linear programming problem in two variables to have a 
solution is that the graph of the feasible points be bounded. (Refer to page 816.)
If none of the feasible points maximizes (or minimizes) the objective function 
or if there are no feasible points, the linear programming problem has no solution.
Consider the linear programming problem posed in Example 2, and look 
again at Figure 24. The feasible points are the points that lie in the shaded region.  
For example, 120, 32 is a feasible point, as are 115, 52, 120, 52, 118, 42, and so on. 
To find the solution of the problem requires finding a feasible point 1x, y2 that 
makes I = 0.02x + 0.03y as large as possible. Notice that as I increases in value 
A solution to a linear programming problem consists of a feasible point  
that maximizes (or minimizes) the objective function, together with the  
corresponding value of the objective function.
Definition

822 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
from I = 0 to I = 0.3 to I = 0.45 to I = 0.55 to I = 0.6, the result is a collection of 
parallel lines. Further, notice that the largest value of I that can be obtained using 
feasible points is I = 0.55, which corresponds to the line 0.55 = 0.02x + 0.03y. 
Any larger value of I results in a line that does not pass through any feasible 
points. Finally, notice that the feasible point that yields I = 0.55 is the point 
120, 52, a corner point. These observations form the basis of the following results, 
which are stated without proof.
Procedure for Solving a Linear Programming Problem
Step 1:  Write an expression for the quantity to be maximized (or minimized). 
This expression is the objective function.
Step 2:  Write all the constraints as a system of linear inequalities, and graph 
the system.
Step 3:  List the corner points of the graph of the feasible points.
Step 4:  List the corresponding values of the objective function at each corner 
point. The largest (or smallest) of these is the solution.
Location of the Solution of a Linear Programming Problem
If a linear programming problem has a solution, it is located at a corner point 
of the graph of the feasible points.
If a linear programming problem has multiple solutions, at least one of them is 
located at a corner point of the graph of the feasible points.
In either case, the corresponding value of the objective function is unique.
Theorem
We shall not consider linear programming problems that have no solution. As 
a result, we can outline the procedure for solving a linear programming problem as 
follows:
Solving a Minimum Linear Programming Problem
Minimize the expression
z = 2x + 3y
subject to the constraints
y … 5  x … 6  x + y Ú 2  x Ú 0  y Ú 0
Step 1:  The objective function is z = 2x + 3y.
Step 2:  We seek the smallest value of z that can occur if x and y are solutions of the 
system of linear inequalities
e
y … 5
x … 6
x + y Ú 2
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
Step 3:  The graph of this system (the set of feasible points) is shown as the shaded 
region in Figure 25. The corner points have also been plotted.
Step 4:  Table 1 lists the corner points and the corresponding values of the objective 
function. From the table, the minimum value of z is 4, and it occurs at the 
point 12, 02.
Example 3
Solution
Figure 25 
x
y
4
7
2
(6, 5)
(0, 5)
(0, 2)
8
(2, 0)
(6, 0)
x  6
y  5
x  y  2

Section 11.8  Linear Programming  823
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  5  a n d  1 1
Maximizing Profit
At the end of every month, after filling orders for its regular customers, a coffee  
company has some pure Colombian coffee and some special-blend coffee remaining.  
The practice of the company has been to package a mixture of the two coffees  
into 1-pound (lb) packages as follows: a low-grade mixture containing 4 ounces (oz)  
of Colombian coffee and 12 oz of special-blend coffee, and a high-grade mixture  
containing 8 oz of Colombian and 8 oz of special-blend coffee. A profit of $0.30 per  
package is made on the low-grade mixture, whereas a profit of $0.40 per package is  
made on the high-grade mixture. This month, 120 lb of special-blend coffee and  
100  lb of pure Colombian coffee remain. How many packages of each mixture  
should be prepared to achieve a maximum profit? Assume that all packages  
prepared can be sold.
Step 1:  Begin by assigning symbols for the two variables.
 x = Number of packages of the low@grade mixture
 y = Number of packages of the high@grade mixture
	
If P denotes the profit, then
P =  $0.30x +  $0.40y 
Objective function
Step 2:  The goal is to maximize P subject to certain constraints on x and y. Because x  
and y represent numbers of packages, the only meaningful values for x and y  
are nonnegative integers. This yields the two constraints
x Ú 0  y Ú 0 
Nonnegative constraints
	
There is only so much of each type of coffee available. For example, the total 
amount of Colombian coffee used in the two mixtures cannot exceed 100 lb, 
or 1600 oz. Because 4 oz are used in each low-grade package and 8 oz are 
used in each high-grade package, this leads to the constraint
4x + 8y … 1600 
Colombian coffee constraint
	
Similarly, the supply of 120 lb, or 1920 oz, of special-blend coffee leads to the  
constraint
12x + 8y … 1920 
Special-blend coffee constraint
	
The linear programming problem may be stated as
Maximize  P = 0.3x + 0.4y
	
subject to the constraints
x Ú 0  y Ú 0  4x + 8y … 1600  12x + 8y … 1920
Example 4
Solution
 
Corner Point (x, y)
Value of the Objective Function 
z = 2x + 3y
(0, 2)
z = 2(0) + 3(2) = 6
(0, 5)
z = 2(0) + 3(5) = 15
(6, 5)
z = 2(6) + 3(5) = 27
(6, 0)
z = 2(6) + 3(0) = 12
(2, 0)
z = 2(2) + 3(0) = 4
Table 1 
•

824 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Figure 26 
•
Table 2 
Corner Point 
(x, y)
Value of Profit  
P = 0.3x + 0.4y
(0, 0)
P = 0
(0, 200)
P = 0.3(0) + 0.4(200) = $80
(40, 180)
P = 0.3(40) + 0.4(180) = $84
(160, 0)
P = 0.3(160) + 0.4(0) = $48
x
y
240
(0, 0)
(0, 200)
4x  8y  1600
20
60
100
140
180
220
260
300
340
380
140
100
60
20
12x  8y  1920
(40, 180)
(160, 0)
Step 3:  The graph of the constraints (the feasible points) is illustrated in Figure 26. 
List the corner points, and evaluate the objective function at each point.
Step 4:  Table 2 shows that the maximum profit, $84, is achieved with 40 packages of 
the low-grade mixture and 180 packages of the high-grade mixture.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
11.8  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 A linear programming problem requires that a linear  
expression, called the 
  
, be 
maximized or minimized.
	 2.	 True or False    If a linear programming problem has a  
solution, it is located at a corner point of the graph of the 
feasible points. 
Skill Building
In Problems 3–8, find the maximum and minimum value of the given objective function of a linear programming problem. The figure 
illustrates the graph of the feasible points.
	 3.	 z = x + y 
	 4.	 z = 2x + 3y 
	 5.	  z = x + 10y 
	 6.	 z = 10x + y 
	 7.	 z = 5x + 7y 
	 8.	 z = 7x + 5y 
In Problems 9–18, solve each linear programming problem.
	 9.	 Maximize z = 2x + y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + y … 6, x + y Ú 1 
	 10.	 Maximize z = x + 3y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + y Ú 3, x … 5, y … 7 
	 11.	 Minimize z = 2x + 5y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + y Ú 2, x … 5, y … 3 
	 12.	 Minimize z = 3x + 4y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, 2x + 3y Ú 6, x + y … 8 
	 13.	 Maximize z = 3x + 5y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + y Ú 2, 2x + 3y … 12, 3x + 2y … 12 
	 14.	 Maximize z = 5x + 3y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + y Ú 2, x + y … 8, 2x + y … 10 
	 15.	 Minimize z = 5x + 4y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + y Ú 2, 2x + 3y … 12, 3x + y … 12 
	 16.	 Minimize z = 2x + 3y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + y Ú 3, x + y … 9, x + 3y Ú 6 
	 17.	 Maximize z = 5x + 2y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + y … 10, 2x + y Ú 10, x + 2y Ú 10 
	 18.	 Maximize z = 2x + 4y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, 2x + y Ú 4, x + y … 9 
x
y
8
8
5
(5, 6)
(4, 0)
(5, 2)
(0, 3)
4
1
(0, 6)

Section 11.8  Linear Programming  825
Applications and Extensions
19.	 Maximizing Profit   A manufacturer of skis produces two 
types: downhill and cross-country. Use the following table to 
determine how many of each kind of ski should be produced 
to achieve a maximum profit. What is the maximum profit? 
What would the maximum profit be if the time available for 
manufacturing were increased to 48 hours?
the client insists that the amount invested in T-bills must 
equal or exceed the amount placed in the junk bond?
(b)	 How much should the broker recommend that the  
client place in each investment to maximize income if 
the client insists that the amount invested in T-bills must 
not exceed the amount placed in the junk bond?
24.	 Production Scheduling    In a factory, machine 1 produces 
8-inch (in.) pliers at the rate of 60 units per hour (h) and 
6-in. pliers at the rate of 70 units/h. Machine 2 produces 8-in.  
pliers at the rate of 40 units/h and 6-in. pliers at the rate of  
20 units/h. It costs $50/h to operate machine 1, and machine 2 
costs $30/h to operate. The production schedule requires that 
at least 240 units of 8-in. pliers and at least 140 units of 6-in.  
pliers be produced during each 10-h day. Which combination of 
machines will cost the least money to operate?
25.	 Managing a Meat Market  A meat market combines ground 
beef and ground pork in a single package for meat loaf. 
The ground beef is 75% lean (75% beef, 25% fat) and costs 
the market $0.75 per pound (lb). The ground pork is 60% 
lean and costs the market $0.45/lb. The meat loaf must be 
at least 70% lean. If the market wants to use at least 50 lb 
of its available pork, but no more than 200 lb of its available 
ground beef, how much ground beef should be mixed with 
ground pork so that the cost is minimized?
 
 
Downhill
Cross-
country
Time  
Available
Manufacturing time per ski
2 hours
1 hour
40 hours
Finishing time per ski
1 hour
1 hour
32 hours
Profit per ski
$70
$50
 
 
Soybeans
Wheat
Preparation cost per acre
$60
$30
Workdays required per acre
3
4
Profit per acre
$180
$100
20.	 Farm Management  A farmer has 70 acres of land available 
for planting either soybeans or wheat. The cost of preparing 
the soil, the workdays required, and the expected profit per 
acre planted for each type of crop are given in the following 
table.
	
	 The farmer cannot spend more than $1800 in preparation 
costs and cannot use a total of more than 120 workdays. How 
many acres of each crop should be planted to maximize the 
profit? What is the maximum profit? What is the maximum 
profit if the farmer is willing to spend no more than $2400 on 
preparation?
21.	 Banquet Seating  A banquet hall offers two types of tables 
for rent: 6-person rectangular tables at a cost of $28 each and 
10-person round tables at a cost of $52 each. Kathleen would 
like to rent the hall for a wedding banquet and needs tables 
for 250 people. The hall can have a maximum of 35 tables, 
and the hall has only 15 rectangular tables available. How 
many of each type of table should be rented to minimize 
cost and what is the minimum cost?
Source: facilities.princeton.edu
	 22.	 Spring Break    The student activities department of a  
community college plans to rent buses and vans for a 
spring-break trip. Each bus has 40 regular seats and  
1 special seat designed to accommodate travelers with  
disabilities. Each van has 8 regular seats and 3 special  
seats. The rental cost is $350 for each van and $975 for 
each bus. If 320 regular and 36 special seats are required 
for the trip, how many vehicles of each type should be 
rented to minimize cost?   
Source: www.busrates.com
23.	 Return on Investment  An investment broker is instructed 
by her client to invest up to $20,000, some in a junk bond 
yielding 9% per annum and some in Treasury bills yielding 
7% per annum. The client wants to invest at least $8000 in 
T-bills and no more than $12,000 in the junk bond.
(a)	 How much should the broker recommend that the  
client place in each investment to maximize income if 
75% lean
ground beef
60% lean
ground pork
70% lean
meat loaf
Flavoring
Milk-fat products
Shipping weight
Proﬁt
20 oz
20 oz
6 lbs
$0.90
24 oz
12 oz
5 lbs
$0.75
Premium
Regular
	 26.	 Ice Cream  The Mom and Pop Ice Cream Company makes 
two kinds of chocolate ice cream: regular and premium. The 
properties of 1 gallon (gal) of each type are shown in the 
table:
	
	 In addition, current commitments require the company to 
make at least 1 gal of premium for every 4 gal of regular. 
Each day, the company has available 725 pounds (lb) of  
flavoring and 425 lb of milk-fat products. If the company can 
ship no more than 3000 lb of product per day, how many 
gallons of each type should be produced daily to maximize 
profit? 
Source: www.scitoys.com/ingredients/ice_cream.html
27.	 Maximizing Profit on Ice Skates  A factory manufactures 
two kinds of ice skates: racing skates and figure skates.  
The racing skates require 6 work-hours in the fabrication 
department, whereas the figure skates require 4 work-hours 
there. The racing skates require 1 work-hour in the finishing 

826 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
department, whereas the figure skates require 2 work-hours 
there. The fabricating department has available at most 120 
work-hours per day, and the finishing department has no 
more than 40 work-hours per day available. If the profit on 
each racing skate is $10 and the profit on each figure skate 
is $12, how many of each should be manufactured each day 
to maximize profit? (Assume that all skates made are sold.)
	 28.	 Financial Planning    A retired couple have up to $50,000 
to place in fixed-income securities. Their financial adviser  
suggests two securities to them: one is an AAA bond that 
yields 8% per annum; the other is a certificate of deposit 
(CD) that yields 4%. After careful consideration of the  
alternatives, the couple decide to place at most $20,000 
in the AAA bond and at least $15,000 in the CD. They  
also instruct the financial adviser to place at least as much 
in the CD as in the AAA bond. How should the financial  
adviser proceed to maximize the return on their  
investment? 
	 29.	 Product Design  An entrepreneur is having a design group 
produce at least six samples of a new kind of fastener that 
he wants to market. It costs $9.00 to produce each metal  
fastener and $4.00 to produce each plastic fastener. He 
wants to have at least two of each version of the fastener and 
needs to have all the samples 24 hours (h) from now. It takes  
4 h to produce each metal sample and 2 h to produce each 
plastic sample. To minimize the cost of the samples, how 
many of each kind should the entrepreneur order? What 
will be the cost of the samples? 
30.	 Animal Nutrition  Kevin’s dog Amadeus likes two kinds of 
canned dog food. Gourmet Dog costs 40 cents a can and 
has 20 units of a vitamin complex; the calorie content is  
75 calories. Chow Hound costs 32 cents a can and has  
35 units of vitamins and 50 calories. Kevin likes Amadeus 
to have at least 1175 units of vitamins a month and at least 
2375 calories during the same time period. Kevin has space 
to store only 60 cans of dog food at a time. How much of 
each kind of dog food should Kevin buy each month to 
minimize his cost?
	 31.	 Airline Revenue    An airline has two classes of service: 
first class and coach. Management’s experience has been 
that each aircraft should have at least 8 but no more than  
16 first-class seats and at least 80 but no more than  
120 coach seats.
(a)	 If management decides that the ratio of first class to 
coach seats should never exceed 1:12, with how many 
of each type of seat should an aircraft be configured to 
maximize revenue? 
(b)	 If management decides that the ratio of first class to 
coach seats should never exceed 1:8, with how many 
of each type of seat should an aircraft be configured to 
maximize revenue? 
(c)	 If you were management, what would you do?
	
[Hint: Assume that the airline charges $C for a coach 
seat and $F for a first-class seat; C 7 0, F 7 C.]
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 32.	 Explain in your own words what a linear programming problem is and how it can be solved.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 33–36 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 33.	 Solve: 25x+3 = 5x-4 
	 34.	 Graph y = - tan ¢x - p
2 ≤ for at least two periods. Use the 
graph to determine the domain and range.
	 35.	 Radioactive Decay  The half-life of titanium-44 is 63 years. 
How long will it take 200 grams to decay to 75 grams? 
Round to one decimal place. 
	 36.	 Find the equation of the line that is parallel to y = 3x + 11 
and passes through the point (- 2, 1). 
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Systems of equations (pp. 738–748)
Systems with no solutions are inconsistent.	
Systems with a solution are consistent.
Consistent systems of linear equations have either a unique solution (independent) or an infinite number of solutions (dependent).
Matrix (p. 753)	
Rectangular array of numbers, called entries
Augmented matrix (p. 753)
Row operations (p. 755)
Row echelon form (p. 756)
Reduced row echelon form (p. 759)
Determinants and Cramer’s Rule (pp. 768–775)
Matrix Algebra (pp. 778–790)
m by n matrix (p. 779)
Matrix with m rows and n columns
Identity matrix In (p. 786)
An n by n square matrix whose diagonal entries are 1’s, while all other entries are 0’s

Chapter Review  827
Inverse of a matrix (p. 786)
A-1 is the inverse of A if AA-1 = A-1
 A = In.
Nonsingular matrix (p. 786)
A square matrix that has an inverse
Linear programming problem (p. 820)
Maximize (or minimize) a linear objective function, z = Ax + By, subject to certain conditions, or constraints, expressible as linear 
inequalities in x and y. A feasible point 1x, y2 is a point that satisfies the constraints (linear inequalities) of a linear programming 
problem.
Location of the solution of a linear programming problem (p. 822)
If a linear programming problem has a solution, it is located at a corner point of the graph of the feasible points. If a linear  
programming problem has multiple solutions, at least one of them is located at a corner point of the graph of the feasible points.  
In either case, the corresponding value of the objective function is unique.
Objectives
Section
 
You should be able to . . .
Example(s)
Review Exercises
11.1
1
Solve systems of equations by substitution (p. 740)
4
1–7, 56, 59
 
2
Solve systems of equations by elimination (p. 741)
5, 6
1–7, 56, 59
 
3
Identify inconsistent systems of equations containing two variables (p. 743)
7
5, 54
 
4
Express the solution of a system of dependent equations containing  
two variables (p. 743)
 
8
 
7, 53
 
5
Solve systems of three equations containing three variables (p. 744)
9, 12
8–10, 55, 57, 60
 
6
Identify inconsistent systems of equations containing three variables (p. 746)
10
10
 
7
Express the solution of a system of dependent equations containing  
three variables (p. 747)
 
11
 
9
11.2
1
Write the augmented matrix of a system of linear equations (p. 753)
1
20–25
 
2
Write the system of equations from the augmented matrix (p. 754)
2
11, 12
 
3
Perform row operations on a matrix (p. 755)
3, 4
20–25
 
4
Solve a system of linear equations using matrices (p. 756)
5–10
20–25
11.3
1
Evaluate 2 by 2 determinants (p. 768)
1
26
 
2
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of two equations containing  
two variables (p. 769)
 
2
 
29, 30
 
3
Evaluate 3 by 3 determinants (p. 771)
4
27, 28
 
4
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of three equations containing  
three variables (p. 773)
 
5
 
31
 
5
Know properties of determinants (p. 774)
6–9
32, 33
11.4
1
Find the sum and difference of two matrices (p. 779)
3, 4
13
 
2
Find scalar multiples of a matrix (p. 781)
5
14
 
3
Find the product of two matrices (p. 782)
6–11
15, 16
 
4
Find the inverse of a matrix (p. 786)
12–14
17–19
 
5
Solve a system of linear equations using an inverse matrix (p. 790)
15
20–25
11.5
1
Decompose P
Q where Q has only nonrepeated linear factors (p. 796)
1
34
 
2
Decompose P
Q where Q has repeated linear factors (p. 798)
2, 3
35
 
3
Decompose P
Q where Q has a nonrepeated irreducible quadratic  
factor (p. 800)
4
36, 38
 
4
Decompose P
Q where Q has a repeated irreducible quadratic factor (p. 801)
5
37
11.6
1
Solve a system of nonlinear equations using substitution (p. 803)
1, 3
39–43
 
2
Solve a system of nonlinear equations using elimination (p. 804)
2, 4, 5
39–43
11.7
1
Graph an inequality (p. 812)
2–4
44, 45
 
2
Graph a system of inequalities (p. 814)
5–10
46–50, 58
11.8
1
Set up a linear programming problem (p. 820)
1
61
 
2
Solve a linear programming problem (p. 820)
2–4
51, 52, 61

828 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
Review Exercises
In Problems 1–10, solve each system of equations using the method of substitution or the method of elimination. If the system has no 
solution, say that it is inconsistent.
1.	 b3x + 5y = 2
x - 5y = 1
2.	 c
3x - 4y = 4
x - 3y = 1
2
3.	 b x - 2y - 4 = 0
3x + 2y - 4 = 0
4.	 b2x + 5y = 7
x + 2y = 3
5.	 c
x - 3y + 4 = 0
1
2
 x - 3
2
 y + 4
3 = 0
6.	 b2x + 3y - 13 = 0
3x - 2y = 0
7.	 e 3x +
y = 4
6x + 2y = 5
8.	 c
x + 2y -
z =
6
2x -
y + 3z = -13
3x - 2y + 3z = - 16
9.	 c
2x - 4y +
z = - 15
x + 2y - 4z =
27
5x - 6y - 2z =
- 3
10.	 c
x - 4y + 3z = 15
- 3x +
y - 5z = - 5
- 7x - 5y - 9z = 10
In Problems 11 and 12, write the system of equations that corresponds to the given augmented matrix.
	 11.	 J3
2
1
4 2 
8
- 1R  
	 12.	 C
3
2
5
2
0
7
- 4
1
- 3 3 
- 1
3
2
S  
In Problems 13–16, use the following matrices to compute each expression.
A = C
1
- 2
3
0
0
4
S  B = J
3
4
- 1
- 2
1
0R  C = C
- 1
3
5
2
2
4
S
13.	 A + C
14.	 6A
15.	 AB
16.	 BC
In Problems 17–19, find the inverse, if there is one, of each matrix. If there is no inverse, say that the matrix is singular.
	 17.	 J4
6
1
3R  
18.	 C
1
3
3
1
2
1
1
- 1
2
S
	 19.	 J3
- 2
6
- 4R  
In Problems 20–25, solve each system of equations using matrices. If the system has no solution, say that it is inconsistent.
20.	 b 3x -
2y = 1
10x + 10y = 5
21.	 c
5x - 6y - 3z =
6
4x - 7y - 2z = - 3
3x +
y - 7z =
1
22.	 c
2x + y +
z = 5
4x - y - 3z = 1
8x + y -
z = 5
23.	 c
3x -
y -
z = 2
x - 2y + 3z = - 1
5x +
y - 2z = 0
24.	 c
x -
y + z = 0
x -
y - 5z - 6 = 0
2x - 2y +
z - 1 = 0
25.	 d
x -
y -
z -
t =
1
2x +
y -
z + 2t =
3
x - 2y - 2z - 3t =
0
3x - 4y +
z + 5t = - 3
In Problems 26–28, find the value of each determinant.
	 26.	 2 3
4
1
3
2  
	 27.	 3
5
- 3
1
2
0
- 1
1
4
7
3  
	 28.	 3
2
1
- 3
5
0
1
2
6
0
3  
In Problems 29–31, use Cramer’s Rule, if applicable, to solve each system.
29.	 b x - 2y = 4
3x + 2y = 4
30.	 b2x + 3y - 13 = 0
3x - 2y = 0
31.	 c
x + 2y -
z =
6
2x -
y + 3z = -13
3x - 2y + 3z = - 16
In Problems 32 and 33, use properties of determinants to find the value of each determinant if it is known that 2 x
y
a
b
2 = 8.
	 32.	 2 a
b
3x
3y
2  
	 33.	 2 y
x
b
a
2  

Chapter Review  829
In Problems 34–38, find the partial fraction decomposition of each rational expression.
34.	
6
x1x - 42
35.	
x - 4
x21x - 12
36.	
x
1x2 + 92 1x + 12
37.	
x3
1x2 + 422
38.	
x2
1x2 + 12 1x2 - 12
In Problems 39–43, solve each system of equations.
39.	 b3x - y + 5 = 0
x2 + y = 5
40.	 b2xy + y2 = 10
3y2 - xy =
2
41.	 bx2 + y2 = 6y
x2 = 3y
42.	 b3x2 + 4xy + 5y2 = 8
x2 + 3xy + 2y2 = 0
	 43.	 c
x2 - 3x + y2 + y = - 2
x2 - x
y
+ y + 1 =
0
 
In Problems 44 and 45 graph each inequality.
44.	 3x + 4y … 12
45.	 y … x2
In Problems 46–48, graph each system of inequalities. Tell whether the graph is bounded or unbounded, and label the corner points.
46.	 b - 2x + y … 2
x + y Ú 2
47.	 d
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
x +
y … 4
2x + 3y … 6
48.	 d
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
2x +
y … 8
x + 2y Ú 2
In Problems 49 and 50, graph each system of inequalities.
49.	 bx2 + y2 … 16
x
+ y
Ú 2
50.	 b y … x2
xy … 4
In Problems 51 and 52, solve each linear programming problem.
	 51.	 Maximize z = 3x + 4y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, 3x + 2y Ú 6, x + y … 8 
	 52.	 Minimize z = 3x + 5y  subject to  x Ú 0, y Ú 0, x + y Ú 1, 3x + 2y … 12, x + 3y … 12 
	 53.	 Find A so that the system of equations has infinitely many 
solutions. 
b x - 2y = 3
3x - 6y = A
54.	 Find A so that the system in Problem 53 is inconsistent.
	 55.	 Curve Fitting  Find the quadratic function y = ax2 + bx + c 
that passes through the three points 10, 12, 11, 02, and 
1- 2, 12. 
	 56.	 Blending Coffee     A coffee distributor is blending a new  
coffee that will cost $6.90 per pound. It will consist of a blend 
of $6.00-per-pound coffee and $9.00-per-pound coffee. What 
amounts of each type of coffee should be mixed to achieve 
the desired blend? 
	
	 [Hint: Assume that the weight of the blended coffee is  
100 pounds.]
	 57.	 Cookie Orders    A cookie company makes three kinds of 
cookies (oatmeal raisin, chocolate chip, and shortbread) 
packaged in small, medium, and large boxes. The small 
box contains 1 dozen oatmeal raisin and 1 dozen chocolate 
chip; the medium box has 2 dozen oatmeal raisin, 1 dozen  
chocolate chip, and 1 dozen shortbread; the large box  
contains 2 dozen oatmeal raisin, 2 dozen chocolate chip, and 
3 dozen shortbread. If you require exactly 15 dozen oatmeal 
raisin, 10 dozen chocolate chip, and 11 dozen shortbread, 
how many of each size box should you buy?
	 58.	 Mixed Nuts    A store that specializes in selling nuts has  
available 72 pounds (lb) of cashews and 120 lb of peanuts. 
These are to be mixed in 12-ounce (oz) packages as follows: 
a lower-priced package containing 8 oz of peanuts and 4 oz 
of cashews, and a quality package containing 6 oz of peanuts 
and 6 oz of cashews.
(a)	 Use x to denote the number of lower-priced packages, 
and use y to denote the number of quality packages. 
Write a system of linear inequalities that describes the 
possible numbers of each kind of package.
(b)	 Graph the system and label the corner points.
	 59.	 Determining the Speed of the Current of the Aguarico  
River  On a recent trip to the Cuyabeno Wildlife Reserve in 
the Amazon region of Ecuador, Mike took a 100-kilometer 
trip by speedboat down the Aguarico River from Chiritza to 
the Flotel Orellana. As Mike watched the Amazon unfold, 
he wondered how fast the speedboat was going and how fast 
the current of the white-water Aguarico River was. Mike 
timed the trip downstream at 2.5 hours and the return trip at 
3 hours. What were the two speeds?
$6.90/lb
$9.00/lb
$6.00/lb

830 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
	 60.	 Constant Rate Jobs  If Bruce and Bryce work together for 
1 hour and 20 minutes, they will finish a certain job. If Bryce 
and Marty work together for 1 hour and 36 minutes, the 
same job can be finished. If Marty and Bruce work together, 
they can complete this job in 2 hours and 40 minutes. How 
long would it take each of them, working alone, to finish  
the job? 
	 61.	 Minimizing Production Cost    A factory produces gasoline 
engines and diesel engines. Each week the factory is obligated 
to deliver at least 20 gasoline engines and at least 15 diesel  
engines. Due to physical limitations, however, the factory  
cannot make more than 60 gasoline engines or more than  
40 diesel engines in any given week. Finally, to prevent layoffs, a 
total of at least 50 engines must be produced. If gasoline engines 
cost $450 each to produce and diesel engines cost $550 each to 
produce, how many of each should be produced per week to 
minimize the cost? What is the excess capacity of the factory? 
That is, how many of each kind of engine are being produced 
in excess of the number that the factory is obligated to deliver?
	 62.	 Describe four ways of solving a system of three linear 
equations containing three variables. Which method do 
you prefer? Why?
In Problems 1–4, solve each system of equations using the method  
of substitution or the method of elimination.  
If the system has no solution, say that it is inconsistent.
1.	 b - 2x +
y = - 7
4x + 3y =
9
2.	 c
1
3
 x -
2y =
1
5x - 30y = 18
Chapter Test
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.
14.	 c x + 1
4
 y = 7
8x + 2y = 56
	 15.	 c
x + 2y +
4z = - 3
2x + 7y + 15z = - 12
4x + 7y + 13z = - 10
 
	 16.	 c
2x + 2y - 3z =
5
x -
y + 2z =
8
3x + 5y - 8z = - 2
 
3.	 c
x -
y + 2z =
5
3x + 4y -
z = - 2
5x + 2y + 3z =
8
4.	 d
3x + 2y -
8z = - 3
- x - 2
3
 y +
z =
1
6x - 3y + 15z =
8
5.	 Write the augmented matrix corresponding to the system of 
equations: c
4x - 5y +
z =
0
- 2x -
y + 6
= - 19
x + 5y - 5z =
10
6.	 Write the system of equations corresponding to the  
augmented matrix: C
3
2
4
1
0
8
- 2
1
3
 3  
- 6
2
- 11
S
In Problems 7–10, use the given matrices to compute each  
expression.
A = C
1
- 1
0
- 4
3
2
S   B = J1
- 2
5
0
3
1R   C = C
4
6
1
- 3
- 1
8
S
7.	 2A + C
8.	 A - 3C
9.	 CB
10.	 BA
In Problems 11 and 12, find the inverse of each nonsingular  
matrix.
11.	 A = J3
2
5
4R
12.	 B = C
1
- 1
1
2
5
- 1
2
3
0
S
In Problems 13–16, solve each system of equations using matrices. 
If the system has no solution, say that it is inconsistent.
	 13.	 b6x + 3y = 12
2x -
y = - 2 
In Problems 17 and 18, find the value of each determinant.
	 17.	 2 - 2
5
3
7
2  
18.  3
2
- 4
6
1
4
0
- 1
2
- 4
3  
In Problems 19 and 20, use Cramer’s Rule, if possible, to solve each 
system.
	 19.	 b4x + 3y = - 23
3x - 5y = 19
 
	 20.	 c
4x - 3y + 2z =
15
- 2x +
y - 3z = - 15
5x - 5y + 2z =
18
 
In Problems 21 and 22, solve each system of equations.
	 21.	 b3x2 + y2 = 12
y2 = 9x 
	 22.	 b2y2 - 3x2 = 5
y
-
x
= 1 
23.	 Graph the system of inequalities: b x2 +
y2 … 100
4x
- 3y
Ú 0

Chapter Projects  831
In Problems 1–6, solve each equation.
Cumulative Review
In Problems 24 and 25, find the partial fraction decomposition of 
each rational expression.
	 24.	 3x + 7
1x + 322 
25. 
4x2 - 3
x1x2 + 322
26.	 Graph the system of inequalities. Tell whether the graph is 
bounded or unbounded, and label all corner points.
d
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
x + 2y Ú 8
2x - 3y Ú 2
	 27.	 Maximize 
z = 5x + 8y 
subject 
to 
the 
constraints 
x Ú 0, 2x + y … 8, and x - 3y … - 3. 
	 28.	 Megan went clothes shopping and bought 2 pairs of flare 
jeans, 2 camisoles, and 4 T-shirts for $90.00. At the same 
store, Paige bought one pair of flare jeans and 3 T-shirts for 
$42.50, while Kara bought 1 pair of flare jeans, 3 camisoles,  
and 2 T-shirts for $62.00. Determine the price of each  
clothing item. 
	 1.	 2x2 - x = 0 
	 2.	 23x + 1 = 4 
	 3.	 2x3 - 3x2 - 8x - 3 = 0 
	 4.	 3x = 9x+1 
	 5.	 log31x - 12 + log312x + 12 = 2 
	 6.	 3x = e 
	 7.	 Determine whether the function g1x2 =
2x3
x4 + 1 is even, odd, or
	
	 neither. Is the graph of g symmetric with respect to the x-axis, 
y-axis, or origin? 
8.	 Find the center and radius of the circle 
x2 + y2 - 2x + 4y - 11 = 0 
	
	 Graph the circle.
9.	 Graph f1x2 = 3x-2 + 1 using transformations. What are 
the domain, range, and horizontal asymptote of f  ?
10.	 The function f1x2 =
5
x + 2 is one-to-one. Find f -1. Find the 
domain and the range of f and the domain and the range  
of f -1.
11.	 Graph each equation.
(a)	 y = 3x + 6	
(b)  x2 + y2 = 4
(c)	 y = x3	
(d)  y = 1
x
(e)	 y = 1x	
(f)  y = ex
(g)	 y = ln x	
(h)  2x2 + 5y2 = 1
(i)	 x2 - 3y2 = 1	
(j)  x2 - 2x - 4y + 1 = 0
12.	 f1x2 = x3 - 3x + 5
(a)	 Using a graphing utility, graph f and approximate the 
zero(s) of f.
(b)	 Using a graphing utility, approximate the local maxima 
and the local minima.
(c)	 Determine the intervals on which f is increasing.
Chapter Projects
	 I.	 Markov Chains A Markov chain (or process) is one in which 
future outcomes are determined by a current state. Future 
outcomes are based on probabilities. The probability of  
moving to a certain state depends only on the state  
previously occupied and does not vary with time. An  
example of a Markov chain is the maximum education 
achieved by children based on the highest educational level 
attained by their parents, where the states are (1) earned 
college degree, (2) high school diploma only, (3) elementary 
school only. If pij is the probability of moving from state i to 
state j, the transition matrix is the m * m matrix
P = C
p11
p12
c
p1m
f
f
 
f
pm1
pm2
c
pmm
S

832 
CHAPTER 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
	
	 The table represents the probabilities for the highest  
educational level of children based on the highest educational  
level of their parents. For example, the table shows that 
the probability p21 is 40% that parents with a high-school  
education (row 2) will have children with a college education 
(column 1).
Highest 
Educational 
Level of 
Parents
Maximum Education That Children Achieve
College
High School
Elementary
College
80%
18%
  2%
High school
40%
50%
10%
Elementary
20%
60%
20%
1.	 Convert the percentages to decimals.
2.	 What is the transition matrix?
3.	 Sum across the rows. What do you notice? Why do you 
think that you obtained this result?
4.	 If P is the transition matrix of a Markov chain, the 1i, j2th 
entry of Pn (nth power of P) gives the probability of  
passing from state i to state j in n stages. What is the 
probability that the grandchild of a college graduate is a 
college graduate?
5.	 What is the probability that the grandchild of a high 
school graduate finishes college?
6.	 The row vector v102 = 30.317 0.565 0.1184 represents 
the proportion of the U.S. population 25 years or older 
that has college, high school, and elementary school, 
respectively, as the highest educational level in 2013.* In 
a Markov chain the probability distribution v1k2 after k 
stages is v 1k2 = v102Pk, where Pk is the kth power of the 
transition matrix. What will be the distribution of highest 
educational attainment of the grandchildren of the current 
population?
7.	
Calculate P3, P4, P5, c. Continue until the matrix does 
not change. This is called the long-run or steady-state 
distribution. What is the long-run distribution of highest 
educational attainment of the population?
	
*Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
The following projects are available at the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC).
	 II.	 Project at Motorola:  Error Control Coding The high-powered engineering needed to ensure that wireless communications are 
transmitted correctly is analyzed using matrices to control coding errors.
	III.	 Using Matrices to Find the Line of Best Fit Have you wondered how our calculators get a line of best fit? See how to find the line 
by solving a matrix equation.
	IV.	 CBL Experiment Simulate two people walking toward each other at a constant rate. Then solve the resulting system of equations to 
determine when and where they will meet.

833
Outline
12.1	 Sequences
12.2	 Arithmetic Sequences
12.3	 Geometric Sequences; Geometric Series
12.4	 Mathematical Induction
12.5	 The Binomial Theorem
	
Chapter Review
	
Chapter Test
	
Cumulative Review
	
Chapter Projects
UN Projects World Population 
Will Hit 9.6 Billion by 2050
The population of the planet is expected to reach 9.6 billion 
by 2050, according to a new UN report—a slightly larger 
number than anticipated, because fertility projections have 
increased in nations where women have the most children.
More than half of this projected demographic growth will be 
in Africa, which continues to add people even as population growth 
in the world at large slows down.
“Although population growth has slowed for the world as a whole, 
this report reminds us that some developing countries, especially in  
Africa, are still growing rapidly,” said Under-Secretary-General for  
Economic and Social Affairs Wu Hongbo, in the UN report.
World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision notes that the population 
in the developed regions of the world should remain stable at around 1.3 billion until 
2050 thanks to trends of low fertility, while the world’s 49 least-developed countries 
are projected to double in population size.
The new figures do not mean that world population growth has started to speed up 
again. As countries industrialize, they tend to undergo “demographic transition,” wherein  
high death and birth rates are slowly replaced with low birth and death rates. It’s a  
demographic shift often helped along by an increase in the granting of rights for women.
Some experts suspect that the world population will plateau around 2060, and there’s 
a possibility that—after a transitional period of a higher death rate than birth rate—world 
birth and death rates could actually even out, keeping the human population stable.
Source: Faine Greenwood, June 14, 2013, 11:36. GlobalPost® (www.globalpost.com/ 
dispatch/news/science/130614/un-projects-world-population-will-hit-96-billion-2050)
—See the Internet-based Chapter Project I—
 A Look Back, A Look Ahead 
This chapter may be divided into three independent parts: Sections 12.1–12.3, 
Section 12.4, and Section 12.5.
In Chapter 2, we defined a function and its domain, which was usually some 
set of real numbers. In Sections 12.1–12.3, we discuss a sequence, which is a 
function whose domain is the set of positive integers.
Throughout this text, where it seemed appropriate, we have given proofs of 
many of the results. In Section 12.4, a technique for proving theorems involving 
natural numbers is discussed.
In Appendix A, Section A.3, there are formulas for expanding 1x + a22 and 
1x + a23. In Section 12.5, we discuss the Binomial Theorem, a formula for the 
expansion of (x + a)n, where n is any positive integer.
The topics introduced in this chapter are covered in more detail in courses 
titled Discrete Mathematics. Applications of these topics can be found in the 
fields of computer science, engineering, business and economics, the social  
sciences, and the physical and biological sciences.
12
Sequences; Induction; 
the Binomial Theorem

834 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
When you hear the word sequence as it is used in the phrase “a sequence of events,” 
you probably think of a collection of events, one of which happens first, another  
second, and so on. In mathematics, the word sequence also refers to outcomes that 
are first, second, and so on.
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 840.
	
Objectives	 	1  Write the First Several Terms of a Sequence (p. 834)
	
	 	2  Write the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula (p. 837)
	
	 	3  Use Summation Notation (p. 838)
	
	 	4  Find the Sum of a Sequence (p. 839)
12.1  Sequences
•	 Functions (Section 2.1, pp. 79–85)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
a1 = f112 = 1 a2 = f122 = 1
2 a3 = f132 = 1
3 a4 = f142 = 1
4
 c an = f1n2 = 1
n c
8      8     8      8            8
	
first term	
second term	
third term	
fourth term	
nth term
A sequence is a function whose domain is the set of positive integers.
Definition
Write the First Several Terms of a Sequence
A sequence is usually represented by listing its values in order. For example, the 
sequence whose graph is given in Figure 1(b) might be represented as
f112, f122, f132, f142, c or 1, 1
2, 1
3, 1
4, c
The list never ends, as the ellipsis indicates. The numbers in this ordered list are 
called the terms of the sequence.
In dealing with sequences, subscripted letters are used such as a1 to represent 
the first term, a2 for the second term, a3 for the third term, and so on.
For the sequence f1n2 = 1
n , this means
1
In a sequence, then, the inputs are 1, 2, 3, . . . . Because a sequence is a function,  
it will have a graph. Figure 1(a) shows the graph of the function f1x2 = 1
x, x 7 0. 
If all the points on this graph were removed except those whose x-coordinates are 
positive integers—that is, if all points were removed except 11, 12, a2, 1
2b, a3, 1
3b,
and so on—the remaining points would be the graph of the sequence f1n2 = 1
n , as
shown in Figure 1(b). Note that n is used to represent the independent variable in a 
sequence. This serves to remind us that n is a positive integer.
Figure 1 
2,
3,
4,
n
f(n)
4
3
2
1
(1, 1)
3
2
1
1–2
1–3
1–4
(
)
(
)
)
x
y
4
3
2
1
(1, 1)
3
2
1
2,
(
) (
) (
)
4,
1–2
1–3
1–4
(
3,
f(x) 5    , x . 0
1–x
f(n) 5    , n a positive integer
1–n
(b)
(a)

Section 12.1  Sequences  835
In other words, the traditional function notation f1n2 is typically not used for 
sequences. For this particular sequence, we have a rule for the nth term, which is
an = 1
n , so it is easy to find any term of the sequence.
When a formula for the nth term (sometimes called the general term) of a  
sequence is known, the entire sequence can be represented by placing braces 
around the formula for the nth term.
For example, the sequence whose nth term is bn = a1
2b
n
 may be represented as
5bn6 = e a1
2b
n
f
or by
b1 = 1
2, b2 = 1
4, b3 = 1
8,c, bn = a1
2b
n
,c
Writing the First Several Terms of a Sequence
Write down the first six terms of the following sequence and graph it.
5an6 = e n - 1
n
f
The first six terms of the sequence are
a1 = 1 - 1
1
= 0, a2 = 2 - 1
2
= 1
2, a3 = 3 - 1
3
= 2
3, a4 = 3
4, a5 = 4
5, a6 = 5
6
See Figure 2 for the graph.
COMMENT  Graphing utilities can be used to write the terms of a sequence and graph them.  
Figure 3 shows the sequence given in Example 1 generated on a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator. 
The first few terms of the sequence are shown on the viewing window. Press the right arrow key to 
scroll right to see the remaining terms of the sequence. Figure 4 shows a graph of the sequence. Note 
that the first term of the sequence is barely visible since it lies on the x-axis. TRACEing the graph will 
enable you to see the terms of the sequence. The TABLE feature can also be used to generate the 
terms of the sequence. See Table 1.
Example 1
Solution
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
Writing the First Several Terms of a Sequence
Write down the first six terms of the following sequence and graph it.
5bn6 = e 1 -12n+1a2
n b f
Example 2
Figure 2  5an6 = e n - 1
n
f
5
3
1
(1, 0)
1.0
0.6
0.2
0.8
0.4
6
4
2
2, 1–2
3, 2–3
4, 3–4
5, 4–5
6, 5–6
n
an
(
) (
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
Figure 3 
Figure 4 
1
00
7
Table 1
■

836 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Figure 5  {bn} = e(- 1)n+1a2
nb f
n
5
3
1
(1, 2)
2
1
–1
4
2
(2, –1)
3, 2–3
1–3
6, –
1–2
4, –
5, 2–5
bn
6
(
) (
)
(
)
(
)
The first six terms of the sequence are
b1 = 1-121+1a2
1b = 2 b2 = 1-122+1a2
2b = -1 b3 = 1-123+1a2
3b = 2
3
b4 = -  1
2	
b5 = 2
5	
b6 = -  1
3
Solution
See Figure 5 for the graph.
Note that in the sequence 5bn6 in Example 2, the signs of the terms alternate. 
This occurs when we use factors such as 1 -12n+1, which equals 1 if n is odd and -1 
if n is even, or 1 -12n, which equals -1 if n is odd and 1 if n is even.
Writing the First Several Terms of a Sequence
Write down the first six terms of the following sequence and graph it.
5cn6 = c
n
if n is even
1
n 
if n is odd
 s
Solution  The first six terms of the sequence are
c1 = 1
1 = 1 c2 = 2 c3 = 1
3 c4 = 4 c5 = 1
5 c6 = 6
See Figure 6 for the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
Note that the formulas that generate the terms of a sequence are not unique. 
For example, the terms of the sequence in Example 3 could also be found using
5dn6 = 5n(-1)n6
Sometimes a sequence is indicated by an observed pattern in the first few terms 
that makes it possible to infer the makeup of the nth term. In the examples that  
follow, enough terms of the sequence are given so that a natural choice for the nth 
term is suggested.
Determining a Sequence from a Pattern
(a)	 e, e2 
2 , e3 
3 , e4 
4 , c	
 an = en 
n
(b)	 1, 1
3, 1
9, 1
27, c	
 bn =
1
3n-1 
(c)	 1, 3, 5, 7, c	
 cn = 2n - 1
(d)	 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, c	
 dn = n2
(e)	 1, -  1
2, 1
3, -  1
4, 1
5, c	
 en = 1-12n-1a1
n b
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
The Factorial Symbol
Some sequences in mathematics involve a special product called a factorial.
•
Example 3
•
Example 4
If n Ú 0 is an integer, the factorial symbol n! is defined as follows:
 0! = 1  1! = 1
 n! = n1n - 12 # c# 3 # 2 # 1  if n Ú 2
Definition
Figure 6  {cn} = •
n  if n is even
1
n  if n is odd ¶
5
3
1
5
3
1
6
4
2
6
4
2
3,
(2, 2)
(1, 1)
(4, 4)
(6, 6)
1–3
5, 1–5
n
cn
(
)
(
)

Section 12.1  Sequences  837
For example, 2! = 2 # 1 = 2, 3! = 3 # 2 # 1 = 6, 4! = 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 = 24, and so on. 
Table 2 lists the values of n! for 0 … n … 6.
Because
n! = n1n - 12 1n - 22 # c# 3 # 2 # 1
the formula
8
                              (n - 1)!
Exploration
Use your calculator’s factorial key to see 
how fast factorials increase in value. Find 
the value of 69!. What happens when you 
try to find 70!? In fact, 70! is larger than 
10100 (a googol).
Table 2
n
n!
0
1
1
1
2
2
3
6
4
24
5
120
6
720
n! = n1n - 12!
can be used to find successive factorials. For example, because 6! = 720,
7! = 7 # 6! = 717202 = 5040
and
8! = 8 # 7! = 8150402 = 40,320
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Write the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula
A second way of defining a sequence is to assign a value to the first (or the first few) 
term(s) and specify the nth term by a formula or equation that involves one or more 
of the terms preceding it. Such sequences are said to be defined recursively, and the 
rule or formula is called a recursive formula.
Writing the Terms of a Recursively Defined Sequence
Write down the first five terms of the following recursively defined sequence.
s1 = 1  sn = nsn-1
The first term is given as s1 = 1. To get the second term, use n = 2 in the formula  
sn = nsn-1 to get s2 = 2s1 = 2 # 1 = 2. To get the third term, use n = 3 in the 
formula to get s3 = 3s2 = 3 # 2 = 6. To get a new term requires knowing the value of 
the preceding term. The first five terms are
 s1 = 1
 s2 = 2 # 1 = 2
 s3 = 3 # 2 = 6
 s4 = 4 # 6 = 24
 s5 = 5 # 24 = 120
Do you recognize this sequence? sn = n!
Writing the Terms of a Recursively Defined Sequence
Write down the first five terms of the following recursively defined sequence.
u1 = 1  u2 = 1  un = un-2 + un-1
The first two terms are given. Finding each successive term requires knowing the 
previous two terms. That is,
 u1 = 1
 u2 = 1
 u3 = u1 + u2 = 1 + 1 = 2
 u4 = u2 + u3 = 1 + 2 = 3
 u5 = u3 + u4 = 2 + 3 = 5
2
Example 5
Solution
•
Example 6
Solution
•

838 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
The sequence given in Example 6 is called the Fibonacci sequence, and the 
terms of this sequence are called Fibonacci numbers. These numbers appear in a 
wide variety of applications (see Problems 85–88).
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  3 5  a n d  4 3
Use Summation Notation
It is often important to find the sum of the first n terms of a sequence 5an6—that is,
a1 + a2 + a3 + g + an
Rather than writing down all these terms, we can use summation notation to express 
the sum more concisely:
a1 + a2 + a3 + g + an = a
n
k=1
  ak
The symbol Σ (the Greek letter sigma, which is an S in our alphabet) is simply 
an instruction to sum, or add up, the terms. The integer k is called the index of the 
sum; it tells where to start the sum and where to end it. The expression
a
n
k=1
  ak
is an instruction to add the terms ak of the sequence 5an6 starting with k = 1 and 
ending with k = n. The expression is read as “the sum of ak from k = 1 to k = n.”
Expanding Summation Notation
Write out each sum.
(a)	 a
n
k=1
  1
k	
(b)  a
n
k=1
  k!
(a)	 a
n
k=1
  1
k = 1 + 1
2 + 1
3 + g + 1
n	
(b)  a
n
k=1
  k! = 1! + 2! + g + n!
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
Writing a Sum in Summation Notation
Express each sum using summation notation.
(a)	 12 + 22 + 32 + g + 92	
(b)  1 + 1
2 + 1
4 + 1
8 + g +
1
2 n-1
(a)	 The sum 12 + 22 + 32 + g + 92 has 9 terms, each of the form k2, and starts at 
k = 1 and ends at k = 9:
12 + 22 + 32 + g + 92 = a
9
k=1
  k2
(b)	 The sum
1 + 1
2 + 1
4 + 1
8 + g +
1
2 n-1
has n terms, each of the form 1
2k-1 , and starts at k = 1 and ends at k = n:
1 + 1
2 + 1
4 + 1
8 + g +
1
2 n-1 = a
n
k=1
  1
2 k-1
3
Example 7
Solution
•
Example 8
Solution
•

Section 12.1  Sequences  839
The index of summation need not always begin at 1 or end at n; for example, the 
sum in Example 8(b) could also be expressed as
a
n-1
k=0
  1
2 k = 1 + 1
2 + 1
4 + g +
1
2 n-1
Letters other than k may be used as the index. For example,
a
n
j=1
  j! and a
n
i=1
  i!
both represent the same sum given in Example 7(b).
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
Find the Sum of a Sequence
The following theorem lists some properties of sequences using summation  
notation. These properties are useful for adding the terms of a sequence.
4
Properties of Sequences
If 5an6 and 5bn6 are two sequences and c is a real number, then
a
n
k=1
1cak2 = ca1 + ca2 + g + can = c1a1 + a2 + g + an2 = c a
n
k=1
 ak (1)
	a
n
k=1
1ak + bk2 = a
n
k=1
 ak + a
n
k=1
 bk	
(2)
	a
n
k=1
1ak - bk2 = a
n
k=1
 ak - a
n
k=1
 bk	
(3)
	 a
n
k=j+1
 ak = a
n
k=1
 ak - a
j
k=1
 ak  where 0 6 j 6 n	
(4)
Theorem
The proof of property (1) follows from the distributive property of real  
numbers. The proofs of properties (2) and (3) are based on the commutative and  
associative properties of real numbers. Property (4) states that the sum from j + 1 
to n equals the sum from 1 to n minus the sum from 1 to j. It can be helpful to  
employ this property when the index of summation begins at a number larger than 1.
The next theorem provides some formulas for finding the sum of certain 
sequences.
Formulas for Sums of Sequences
	a
n
k=1
 c = c + c + g + c = cn  c is a real number	
(5)
	a
n
k=1
 k = 1 + 2 + 3 + g + n = n1n + 12
2
	
(6)
	a
n
k=1
 k2 = 12 + 22 + 32 + g + n2 = n1n + 12 12n + 12
6
	
(7)
	a
n
k=1
 k3 = 13 + 23 + 33 + g + n3 = c
n1n + 12
2
 d
2
	
(8)
Theorem
8
              n  terms
The proof of formula (5) follows from the definition of summation notation. 
You are asked to prove formula (6) in Problem 92. The proofs of formulas (7)  
and (8) require mathematical induction, which is discussed in Section 12.4.

840 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Notice the difference between formulas (5) and (6). In (5) the constant c is  
being summed from 1 to n, while in (6) the index of summation k is being summed 
from 1 to n.
Finding the Sum of a Sequence
Find the sum of each sequence.
(a)	 a
5
k=1
13k2	
(b)  a
10
k=1
1k3 + 12
(c)	 a
24
k=1
1k2 - 7k + 22	
(d)  a
20
k=6
14k22
(a)	  a
5
k=1
13k2 = 3 a
5
k=1
 k
	
  = 3a
515 + 12
2
b 
	
  = 31152
	
  = 45
(b)	  a
10
k=1
1k3 + 12 = a
10
k=1
 k3 + a
10
k=1
 1
	
 = a
10110 + 12
2
b
2
+ 11102
	
 = 3025 + 10
	
 = 3035
(c)	  a
24
k=1
1k2 - 7k + 22 = a
24
k=1
 k2 - a
24
k=1
17k2 + a
24
k=1
 2
	
 = a
24
k=1
 k2 - 7 a
24
k=1
 k + a
24
k=1
 2
	
 = 24124 + 12 12 # 24 + 12
6
- 7a
24124 + 12
2
b + 21242
	
 = 4900 - 2100 + 48
	
 = 2848
(d)	 Notice that the index of summation starts at 6. We use property (4) as follows:
 a
20
k=6
14k22 = 4 a
20
k=6
 k2 = 4J a
20
k=1
 k2 - a
5
k=1
 k2 R = 4J
201212 1412
6
- 5162 1112
6
R
 = 432870 - 554 = 11,260
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 3
Example 9
Solution
Property (1)
Formula (6)
Property (2)
Formulas (8) and (5)
Properties (2) and (3)
Property (1)
Formulas (7), (6), (5)
                     æ                     æ                                                  æ
            Property (1) Property (4)                                  Formula (7)
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 For the function f1x2 = x - 1
x
, find f122 and f132.	
  
(pp. 79–85)
	 2.	 True or False A function is a relation between two sets D 
and R so that each element x in the first set D is related to 
exactly one element y in the second set R. (pp. 79–85)
12.1  Assess Your Understanding

Section 12.1  Sequences  841
Skill Building
In Problems 9–14, evaluate each factorial expression.
	 9.  10! 
	
10.  9! 
	
11.   9!
6! 
	
12.  12!
10! 
	
13.  3! 7!
4!  
	
14.  5! 8!
3!  
In Problems 15–26, write down the first five terms of each sequence.
	 15.	 {sn} = 5n6 
	
16.	 {sn} = 5n2 + 16	
17.	 {an} = e
n
n + 2 f	
18.	 {bn} = e 2n + 1
2n
f
	 19.	  {cn} = 5 1- 12n+1  n26	
20.	 {dn} = e1- 12n-1a
n
2n - 1bf	
21.	 {sn} = b
2n
3n + 1 r	
22.	 {sn} = e a4
3b
n
f
	 23.	 {tn} = b
1- 12n
1n + 12 1n + 22 r	
24.	 {an} = b 3n
n  r	
25.	 {bn} = b n
en r	
26.	 {cn} = b n2
2n r
In Problems 27–34, the given pattern continues. Write down the nth term of a sequence {an} suggested by the pattern.
	 27.	  1
2, 2
3, 3
4, 4
5, c 
	
28.	
1
1 # 2, 1
2 # 3, 1
3 # 4, 1
4 # 5, c	
29.	 1, 1
2, 1
4, 1
8, c 
	 30.	 2
3, 4
9, 8
27, 16
81,c 
	 31.	 1, - 1, 1, - 1, 1, - 1, c	
32.	 1, 1
2, 3, 1
4, 5, 1
6, 7,  1
8, c	
33.	 1, - 2, 3, - 4, 5, - 6, c	
34.	 2, -4, 6, -8, 10,c
In Problems 35–48, a sequence is defined recursively. Write down the first five terms.
	 35.	 a1 = 2; an = 3 + an-1	
36.	 a1 = 3; an = 4 - an-1	
37.	 a1 = - 2; an = n + an-1
	 38.	 a1 = 1; an = n - an-1	
39.	 a1 = 5; an = 2an-1	
40.	 a1 = 2; an = -an-1
	 41.	 a1 = 3; an = an-1
n 	
42.	 a1 = - 2; an = n + 3an-1	
43.	  a1 = 1; a2 = 2; an = an-1 # an-2
	 44.	 a1 = - 1; a2 = 1; an = an-2 + nan-1	 45.	 a1 = A; an = an-1 + d	
46.	 a1 = A; an = ran-1, r ≠0
	 47.	 a1 = 22; an = 22 + an-1	
48.	 a1 = 22; an = A
an-1
2
In Problems 49–58, write out each sum.
	 49.	 a
n
k=1
1k + 22	
50.	 a
n
k=1
12k + 12	
51.	 a
n
k=1
 k2
2 	
52.	 a
n
k=1
1k + 122	
53.	 a
n
k=0
  1
3k
	 54.	 a
n
k=0
 a3
2b
k
	
55.	 a
n-1
k=0
  1
3k+1	
56.	 a
n-1
k=0
12k + 12	
57.	 a
n
k=2
1- 12k ln k	
58.	 a
n
k=3
1-12k+1  2k
In Problems 59–68, express each sum using summation notation.
	 59.	 1 + 2 + 3 + g + 20 
	
60.	 13 + 23 + 33 + g + 83 
	 61.	  1
2 + 2
3 + 3
4 + g +
13
13 + 1 
	
62.	 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 + g + 321122 - 14 
	 63.	 1 - 1
3 + 1
9 - 1
27 + g + 1- 126 ¢ 1
36 ≤ 
	
64.	 2
3 - 4
9 + 8
27 - g + 1- 1212a2
3b
11
 
	 65.	 3 + 32
2 + 33
3 + g + 3n
n  
	
66.	 1
e + 2
e2 + 3
e3 + g + n
en 
	 67.	 a + 1a + d2 + 1a + 2d2 + g + 1a + nd2	
68.	 a + ar + ar 2 + g + ar n-1 
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 3.	 A(n) 
  is a function whose domain is the set of 
positive integers.
	 4.	 True or False The notation a5 represents the fifth term of a 
sequence. 
	 5.	 True or False If n Ú 2 is an integer, then
n! =  n1n - 12g3 # 2 # 1.  
	 6.	 The sequence a1 = 5, an = 3an-1 is an example of a(n)  
                       sequence. 
(a)	 alternating	
(b)  recursive
(c)	 Fibonacci	
(d)  summation
	 7.	 The notation a1 + a2 + a3 + g + an = a
n
k=1
 ak is an 
example of 
  notation.
	 8.	 a
n
k=1
 k = 1 + 2 + 3 + g + n =                       .
(a)	 n!	
(b) 
n 1n + 12
2
(c)	 nk	
(d) 
n 1n + 12 12n + 12
6
 

842 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
In Problems 69–80, find the sum of each sequence.
	 69.	 a
40
k=1
 5 
	
70.	 a
50
k=1
 8 
	
71.	 a
40
k=1
 k 
	
72.	 a
24
k=1
1- k2
	 73.	  a
20
k=1
15k + 32 
	
74.	 a
26
k=1
13k - 72 
	
75.	 a
16
k=1
1k2 + 42 
	
76.	 a
14
k=0
1k2 - 42 
	 77.	 a
60
k=10
1  2k2 
	
78.	 a
40
k=8
1- 3k2
	
79.	 a
20
k=5
 k3 
	
80.	 a
24
k=4
 k3 
Applications and Extensions
	 81.	 Credit Card Debt  John has a balance of $3000 on his  
Discover card that charges 1% interest per month on any 
unpaid balance. John can afford to pay $200 toward the bal-
ance each month. His balance each month after making a 
$200 payment is given by the recursively defined sequence
B0 = $3000  Bn = 1.01Bn-1 - 200
	
	 Determine John’s balance after making the first payment. 
That is, determine B1 . 
	 82.	 Trout Population  A pond currently has 2000 trout in it.  
A fish hatchery decides to add an additional 20 trout  
each month. It is also known that the trout population is 
growing at a rate of 3% per month. The size of the population 
after n months is given by the recursively defined sequence
p0 = 2000  pn = 1.03pn-1 + 20
	
	 How many trout are in the pond after 2 months? That is, 
what is p2? 
	 83.	 Car Loans  Phil bought a car by taking out a loan for $26,300 
at 0.9% interest per month. Phil’s normal monthly payment 
is $485.32 per month, but he decides that he can afford to 
pay $125 extra toward the balance each month. His balance 
each month is given by the recursively defined sequence 
given below.
B0 = $26,300  Bn = 1.009Bn-1 - 610.32
	
	 Determine Phil’s balance after making the first payment. 
That is, determine B1. 
	 84.	 Environmental Control  The Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) determines that Maple Lake has 250 tons 
of pollutant as a result of industrial waste and that 10% of 
the pollutant present is neutralized by solar oxidation every  
year. The EPA imposes new pollution control laws that  
result in 15 tons of new pollutant entering the lake each year. 
The amount of pollutant in the lake after n years is given by 
the recursively defined sequence
p0 = 250  pn = 0.9pn-1 + 15
	
	 Determine the amount of pollutant in the lake after 2 years. 
That is, determine p2 . 
	 85.	 Growth of a Rabbit Colony  A colony of rabbits begins with 
one pair of mature animals, which will produce a pair of  
offspring (one male, one female) after two months. Assume 
that all rabbits mature in 2 months and produce a pair of  
offspring (one male, one female) after 4 months. If no rab-
bits ever die, how many pairs of mature rabbits are there 
after 10 months? 
[Hint: A Fibonacci sequence models this colony.]
	 86.	 Fibonacci Sequence  Let
un = 11 + 25 2n - 11 - 25 2n
2n 25
	
	 define the nth term of a sequence.
(a)	 Show that u1 = 1 and u2 = 1.
(b)	 Show that un+2 = un+1 + un .
(c)	 Draw the conclusion that 5un6 is a Fibonacci sequence.
	 87.	 The Pascal Triangle  Divide the triangular array shown 
(called Pascal triangle) using diagonal lines as indicated. 
Find the sum of the numbers in each diagonal row. Is the 
sequence recognizable? 
1 mature
pair
1 mature
pair
2 mature
pairs
3 mature
pairs
1
6
15
20
15
6
1
1
5
10
10
5
1
1
4
6
4
1
1
3
3
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
	 88.	 Fibonacci Sequence  Use the result of Problem 86 to do the 
following problems.
(a)	 Write the first 11 terms of the Fibonacci sequence.
(b)	 Write the first 10 terms of the ratio un+1
un
.
(c)	 As n gets large, what number does the ratio approach? 
This number is referred to as the golden ratio. Rectangles 
whose sides are in this ratio were considered pleasing 
to the eye by the Greeks. For example, the façade of  
the Parthenon was constructed using the golden ratio.
(d)	 Write down the first 10 terms of the ratio un
un+1
.
(e)	 As n gets large, what number does the ratio approach? 
This number is referred to as the conjugate golden  
ratio. This ratio is believed to have been used in the 
construction of the Great Pyramid in Egypt. The ratio 
equals the sum of the areas of the four face triangles 
divided by the total surface area of the Great Pyramid.

Section 12.1  Sequences  843
	 89.	 Approximating f(x) = ex  In calculus, it can be shown that
f1x2 = ex = a
q
k=0
 xk
k!
	
	 We can approximate the value of f1x2 = ex for any x using 
the following sum
f1x2 = ex ≈a
n
k=0
 xk
k!
	
	 for some n.
(a)	 Approximate f (1.3) with n = 4 
(b)	 Approximate f (1.3) with n = 7. 
(c)	 Use a calculator to approximate f (1.3). 
(d)	 Using trial and error, along with a graphing utility’s  
SEQuence mode, determine the value of n required to 
approximate f (1.3) correct to eight decimal places. 
	 90.	 Approximating f(x) = ex  Refer to Problem 89.
(a)	 Approximate f1 - 2.42 with n = 3. 
(b)	 Approximate f1- 2.42 with n = 6. 
(c)	 Use a calculator to approximate f1 - 2.42.
(d)	 Using trial and error, along with a graphing utility’s  
SEQuence mode, determine the value of n required to 
approximate f1- 2.42 correct to eight decimal places.
	 91.	 Bode’s Law  In 1772, Johann Bode published the following 
formula for predicting the mean distances, in astronomical 
units (AU), of the planets from the sun:
a1 = 0.4  an = 0.4 + 0.3 # 2n-2
	
	 where n Ú 2 is the number of the planet from the sun.
(a)	 Determine the first eight terms of this sequence.
(b)	 At the time of Bode’s publication, the known planets were 
Mercury (0.39 AU), Venus (0.72 AU), Earth (1 AU), Mars 
(1.52 AU), Jupiter (5.20 AU), and Saturn (9.54 AU). How do 
the actual distances compare to the terms of the sequence?
(c)	 The planet Uranus was discovered in 1781, and the  
asteroid Ceres was discovered in 1801. The mean orbital 
distances from the sun to Uranus and Ceres* are 19.2 
AU and 2.77 AU, respectively. How well do these values 
fit within the sequence?
(d)	 Determine the ninth and tenth terms of Bode’s sequence.
(e)	 The planets Neptune and Pluto* were discovered in 
1846 and 1930, respectively. Their mean orbital distances 
from the sun are 30.07 AU and 39.44 AU, respectively. 
How do these actual distances compare to the terms of 
the sequence?
(f)	 On July 29, 2005, NASA announced the discovery of a 
dwarf planet* (n = 11), which has been named Eris. Use 
Bode’s Law to predict the mean orbital distance of Eris 
from the sun. Its actual mean distance is not yet known, but 
Eris is currently about 97 astronomical units from the sun.
Source: NASA
	 92.	 Show that
1 + 2 + g + 1n - 12 + n =
n1n + 12
2
[Hint: Let
 S = 1 + 2 + g + 1n - 12 + n
 S = n + 1n - 12 + 1n - 22 + g + 1
	
	 Add these equations. Then
 2S = [1 + n] + [2 + 1n - 12] + g + [n + 1]
	
	 Now complete the derivation.]
*Ceres, Haumea, Makemake, Pluto, and Eris are referred to as dwarf 
planets.
8
                                 n terms in bracket
Computing Square Roots  A method for approximating 1p can 
be traced back to the Babylonians. The formula is given by the  
recursively defined sequence
a0 = k  an = 1
2aan-1 +
p
an-1
b
where k is an initial guess as to the value of the square root. Use this 
recursive formula to approximate the following square roots by finding 
a5 . Compare this result to the value provided by your calculator.
	 93.  25     
94.  28     
95.  221     
96.  289
	 97.	 Triangular Numbers  A triangular number is a term of the 
sequence shown below
u1 = 1 un+1 = un + 1n + 12
	
	 Write down the first seven triangular numbers.
	 98.	 For the sequence given in Problem 97, show that
un+1 =
1n + 12 1n + 22
2
.
	 99.	 For the sequence given in Problem 97, show that
un+1 + un = 1n + 122
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	100.	 Investigate various applications that lead to a Fibonacci 
sequence, such as in art, architecture, or financial markets. 
Write an essay on these applications.
	101.	 Write a paragraph that explains why the numbers found in 
Problem 97 are called triangular.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 102–105 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	102.	 If $2500 is invested at 3% compounded monthly, find the amount that results after a period of 2 years. 
	103.	 Write the complex number - 1 - i in polar form. Express the argument in degrees. 
	104.	 For v = 2i - j and w = i + 2j, find the dot product v # w. 
	105.	 Find an equation of the parabola with vertex (- 3, 4) and focus (1, 4). 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 f122 = 1
2; f132 = 2
3      2.  True

844 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Determine Whether a Sequence Is Arithmetic
When the difference between successive terms of a sequence is always the same 
number, the sequence is called arithmetic.
1
12.2  Arithmetic Sequences
	
Objectives	 	1  Determine Whether a Sequence Is Arithmetic (p. 844)
	
	 	2  Find a Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence (p. 845)
	
	 	3  Find the Sum of an Arithmetic Sequence (p. 846)
* Sometimes called an arithmetic progression.
An arithmetic sequence* may be defined recursively as a1 = a, an - an-1 = d, 
or as
	
a1 = a  an = an-1 + d	
(1)
where a1 = a and d are real numbers. The number a is the first term, and the 
number d is called the common difference.
Definition
The terms of an arithmetic sequence with first term a1 and common difference d  
follow the pattern
a1 a1 + d a1 + 2d a1 + 3d c
Determining Whether a Sequence Is Arithmetic
The sequence
4, 6, 8, 10,c
is arithmetic since the difference of successive terms is 2. The first term is a1 = 4, and 
the common difference is d = 2.
Determining Whether a Sequence Is Arithmetic
Show that the following sequence is arithmetic. Find the first term and the common 
difference.
5sn6 = 53n + 56
The first term is s1 = 3 # 1 + 5 = 8. The nth term and the 1n - 12st term of the 
sequence 5sn6 are
sn = 3n + 5 and sn-1 = 31n - 12 + 5 = 3n + 2
Their difference d is
d = sn - sn-1 = 13n + 52 - 13n + 22 = 5 - 2 = 3
Since the difference of any two successive terms is the constant 3, the sequence 5sn6 
is arithmetic, and the common difference is 3.
Determining Whether a Sequence Is Arithmetic
Show that the sequence 5tn6 = 54 - n6 is arithmetic. Find the first term and the 
common difference.
Example 1
•
Example 2
Solution
•
Example 3

Section 12.2  Arithmetic Sequences  845
The first term is t1 = 4 - 1 = 3. The nth term and the 1n - 12st term are
tn = 4 - n and tn-1 = 4 - 1n - 12 = 5 - n
Their difference d is
d = tn - tn-1 = 14 - n2 - 15 - n2 = 4 - 5 = -1
Since the difference of any two successive terms is the constant -1, 5tn6 is an  
arithmetic sequence whose common difference is -1.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Find a Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence
Suppose that a is the first term of an arithmetic sequence whose common difference 
is d. We seek a formula for the nth term, an . To see the pattern, consider the first 
few terms.
 a1 = a
 a2 = a1 + d = a1 + 1 # d
 a3 = a2 + d = 1a1 + d2 + d = a1 + 2 # d
 a4 = a3 + d = 1a1 + 2 # d2 + d = a1 + 3 # d
 a5 = a4 + d = 1a1 + 3 # d2 + d = a1 + 4 # d
 f
 an = an-1 + d = 3a1 + 1n - 22d4 + d = a1 + 1n - 12d
This leads to the following result:
Solution
•
2
nth Term of an Arithmetic Sequence
For an arithmetic sequence 5an6 whose first term is a1 and whose common 
difference is d, the nth term is determined by the formula
	
an = a1 + 1n - 12d	
(2) 
Theorem
Finding a Particular Term of an Arithmetic Sequence
Find the 41st term of the arithmetic sequence: 2, 6, 10, 14, 18, c
The first term of this arithmetic sequence is a1 = 2, and the common difference is 
d = 4. By formula (2), the nth term is
an = 2 + 1n - 124 
an = a1 + (n - 1)d ; a1 = 2, d = 4
The 41st term is
a41 =  2 + 141 - 12 # 4 = 162
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
Finding a Recursive Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence
The 8th term of an arithmetic sequence is 75, and the 20th term is 39.
(a)	 Find the first term and the common difference.
(b)	 Give a recursive formula for the sequence.
(c)	 What is the nth term of the sequence?
Example 4
Solution
•
Example 5

846 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
(a)	 Formula (2) states that an = a1 + 1n - 12d. As a result,
ba8
= a1 +
7d = 75
a20 = a1 + 19d = 39
This is a system of two linear equations containing two variables, a1 and d, which 
can be solved by elimination. Subtracting the second equation from the first gives
 -12d = 36
 d = -3
With d = -3, use a1 + 7d = 75 to find that a1 = 75 - 7d = 75 - 71-32 = 96. 
The first term is a1 = 96, and the common difference is d = -3.
(b)	 Using formula (1), a recursive formula for this sequence is
a1 = 96  an = an-1 - 3
(c)	 Using formula (2), a formula for the nth term of the sequence 5an6 is
an = a1 + 1n - 12d = 96 + 1n - 12 1-32 = 99 - 3n
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 7  a n d  3 1
Find the Sum of an Arithmetic Sequence
The next result gives two formulas for finding the sum of the first n terms of an 
arithmetic sequence.
Solution
•
3
Sum of the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence
Let 5an6 be an arithmetic sequence with first term a1 and common difference d.  
The sum Sn of the first n terms of 5an6 may be found in two ways:
Sn = a1 + a2 + a3 + g + an
	
 = n
2 32a1 + 1n - 12d4	
(3)
	
 = n
2 1a1 + an2
	
(4)
Theorem
Proof
 Sn = a1 + a2 + a3 + g + an
 = a1 + 1a1 + d2 + 1a1 + 2d2 + g + [a1 + 1n - 12d]
 = 1a1 + a1 + g + a12 + [d + 2d + g + 1n - 12d]
 = na1 + d[1 + 2 + g + 1n - 12]
 = na1 + dc
1n - 12n
2
d
 = na1 + n
2 1n - 12d
 = n
2 [2a1 + 1n - 12d]
 = n
2 [a1 + a1 + 1n - 12d]
 = n
2 1a1 + an2
There are two ways to find the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence. 
Notice that formula (3) involves the first term and common difference, whereas 
formula (4) involves the first term and the nth term. Use whichever form is easier.
Sum of first n terms
Formula (2)
Rearrange terms.
8
              n terms
Formula 6, Section 12.1
Factor out n
2 ; this is formula (3).
Use formula (2); this is formula (4).
■
Exploration
Graph the recursive formula from  
Example 5, a1 = 96, an = an-1 - 3,  
using a graphing utility. Conclude that 
the graph of the recursive formula behaves 
like the graph of a linear function. How is 
d, the common difference, related to m, 
the slope of a line?

Section 12.2  Arithmetic Sequences  847
Finding the Sum of an Arithmetic Sequence
Find the sum Sn of the first n terms of the sequence 5an6 = 53n + 56; that is, find
8 + 11 + 14 + g + 13n + 52 = a
n
k=1
13k + 52
The sequence 5an6 = 53n + 56 is an arithmetic sequence with first term a1 = 8 
and nth term an = 3n + 5. To find the sum Sn, use formula (4).
Sn = a
n
k=1
13k + 52 = n
2 38 + 13n + 52 4 = n
2 13n + 132
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Finding the Sum of an Arithmetic Sequence
Find the sum: 60 + 64 + 68 + 72 + g + 120
This is the sum Sn of an arithmetic sequence {an} whose first term is a1 = 60 and 
whose common difference is d = 4. The nth term is an = 120. Use formula (2) to 
find n.
 an = a1 + 1n - 12d
 120 = 60 + 1n - 12 # 4 
 60 = 41n - 12
 15 = n - 1
 n = 16
Now use formula (4) to find the sum S16.
60 + 64 + 68 + g + 120 = S16 = 16
2 160 + 1202 = 1440
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Creating a Floor Design
A ceramic tile floor is designed in the shape of a trapezoid 20 feet wide at the 
base and 10 feet wide at the top. See Figure 7. The tiles, which measure 12 inches 
by 12 inches, are to be placed so that each successive row contains one fewer tile  
than the preceding row. How many tiles will be required?
Example 6
Solution
    c
Sn = n
2 (a1 + an )
•
Example 7
Solution
Formula (2)
an = 120, a1 = 60, d = 4
Simplify. 
Simplify.
Solve for n.
•
    c
Sn = n
2 (a1 + an )
Example 8
Figure 7 

848 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
The bottom row requires 20 tiles and the top row, 10 tiles. Since each successive row 
requires one fewer tile, the total number of tiles required is
S = 20 + 19 + 18 + g + 11 + 10
This is the sum of an arithmetic sequence; the common difference is -1. The number  
of terms to be added is n = 11, with the first term a1 = 20 and the last term a11 = 10. 
The sum S is
S = n
2 1a1 + a112 = 11
2 120 + 102 = 165
In all, 165 tiles will be required.
Solution
•
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 In a(n) 
  sequence, the difference between 
successive terms is a constant.
	 2.	 True or False  For an arithmetic sequence {an} whose first 
term is a1 and whose common difference is d, the nth term is 
determined by the formula an = a1 + nd. 
	 3.	 If the 5th term of an arithmetic sequence is 12 and the common 
difference is 5, then the 6th term of the sequence is 
 .
	 4.	 True or False  The sum Sn of the first n terms of an  
arithmetic sequence {an} whose first term is a1 can be found
	
	 using the formula Sn = n
2 1a1 + an2. 
	 5.	 An arithmetic sequence can always be expressed as a(n) 
                 sequence. 
(a)  Fibonacci	
(b)  alternating
(c)  geometric	
(d)  recursive 
	 6.	 If an = - 2n + 7 is the nth term of an arithmetic sequence, 
the first term is                . 
(a)  - 2	
(b)  0
(c)  5	
(d)  7
12.2  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 7–16, show that each sequence is arithmetic. Find the common difference, and write out the first four terms.
	 7.	 {sn} = 5n + 46	
8.	 {sn} = 5n - 56 	
 9.	  {an} = 52n - 56	
10.	 {bn} = 53n + 16	
11.	 {cn} = 56 - 2n6
	 12.	 {an} = 54 - 2n6	
13.	 {tn} = e 1
2 - 1
3 nf	
14.	 {tn} = e 2
3 + n
4 f	
15.	 {sn} = 5ln 3n6	
16.	 {sn} = 5eln n6
In Problems 17–24, find the nth term of the arithmetic sequence {an} whose initial term a and common difference d are given. What is the 
51st term?
	 17.	 a1 = 2; d = 3	
18.	 a1 = - 2; d = 4	
19.	 a1 = 5; d = - 3	
20.	 a1 = 6; d = -2
	 21.	 a1 = 0; d = 1
2	
22.	 a1 = 1; d = -  1
3	
23.	 a1 = 22; d = 22	
24.	 a1 = 0; d = p
In Problems 25–30, find the indicated term in each arithmetic sequence.
	 25.	 100th term of 2, 4, 6, c 
	
26.	 80th term of - 1, 1, 3, c 
	
27.	 90th term of 1, - 2, -5, c 
	 28.	 80th term of 5, 0, - 5, c 
	
29.	 80th term of 2, 5
2, 3, 7
2, c 
	
30.	 70th term of 225, 425, 625, c
In Problems 31–38, find the first term and the common difference of the arithmetic sequence described. Give a recursive formula for the 
sequence. Find a formula for the nth term.
	 31.	 8th term is 8;  20th term is 44	
32.	 4th term is 3;  20th term is 35	
33.	 9th term is - 5;  15th term is 31
	 34.	 8th term is 4;  18th term is - 96	
35.	 15th term is 0;  40th term is - 50	
36.	 5th term is - 2;  13th term is 30
	 37.	 14th term is - 1;  18th term is - 9	
38.	 12th term is 4;  18th term is 28
In Problems 39–56, find each sum.
	 39.	  1 + 3 + 5 + g + 12n - 12 
	
40.	 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2n 
	
41.	 7 + 12 + 17 + g + 12 + 5n2 
	 42.	 -1 + 3 + 7 + g + 14n - 52	
43.	 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 70 
	
44.	 1 + 3 + 5 + g + 59 
	 45.	 5 + 9 + 13 + g + 49 
	
46.	 2 + 5 + 8 + g + 41 
	
47.	 73 + 78 + 83 + 88 + g + 558 
	 48.	 7 + 1 - 5 - 11 - g-  299 
	
49.	 4 + 4.5 + 5 + 5.5 + g + 100	
50.	 8 + 8 1
4 + 8 1
2 + 8 3
4 + 9 + g + 50 
	 51.	 a
80
n=1
12n - 52 
	
52.	 a
90
n=1
13 - 2n2 
	
53.	 a
100
n=1
a6 - 1
2  nb 
	
54.	 a
80
n=1
a1
3 n + 1
2b 
	 55.	 The sum of the first 120 terms of the sequence 
14, 16, 18, 20, c. 
	 56.	 The sum of the first 46 terms of the sequence 
2, - 1, - 4, - 7, c. 

Section 12.2  Arithmetic Sequences  849
Applications and Extensions
	 57.	 Find x so that x + 4, 5x + 4, and 4x + 1 are consecutive 
terms of an arithmetic sequence.
	 58.	 Find x so that 2x, 3x + 2, and 5x + 3 are consecutive terms 
of an arithmetic sequence. 
	 59.	 How many terms must be added in an arithmetic sequence 
whose first term is 18 and whose common difference is 7 to 
obtain a sum of 5889? 
	 60.	 How many terms must be added in an arithmetic sequence 
whose first term is 78 and whose common difference is - 4 
to obtain a sum of 702? 
	 61.	 Theater Seating  A Theater has 17 seats in the first row and 
31 rows in all. Each successive row contains one additional 
seat. How many seats are in the theater? 
	 62.	 Football Stadium  The corner section of a football  
stadium has 15 seats in the first row and 40 rows in all. Each 
successive row contains two additional seats. How many 
seats are in this section? 
	 64.	 Constructing a Brick Staircase  A brick staircase has a  
total of 30 steps. The bottom step requires 100 bricks. Each  
successive step requires two fewer bricks than the prior step.
(a)	 How many bricks are required for the top step? 
(b)	 How many bricks are required to build the staircase?
	 65.	 Cooling Air  As a parcel of air rises, it cools at the rate of 
3.5°F per 1000 feet until it reaches its dew point. If the 
ground temperature is 77°F, write a formula for the se-
quence of temperatures, {Tn}, of a parcel of air that has risen 
n thousand feet. What is the temperature of a parcel of air if 
it has risen 6000 feet? 
Source: National Aeronautics and Space Administration
	 66.	 Citrus Ladders  Ladders used by fruit pickers are typically 
tapered with a wide bottom for stability and a narrow top 
for ease of picking. If the bottom rung of such a ladder is  
49 inches wide and the top rung is 24 inches wide, how many 
rungs does the ladder have if each rung is 2.5 inches shorter 
than the one below it? How much material would be needed 
to make the rungs for the ladder described? 
Source: www.stokesladders.com
	 67.	 Seats in an Amphitheater  An outdoor amphitheater has  
27 seats in the first row, 29 in the second row, 31 in the third 
row, and so on. There are 28 rows altogether. How many can 
the amphitheater seat? 
	 68.	 Stadium Construction  How many rows are in the corner 
section of a stadium containing 2040 seats if the first row has 
10 seats and each successive row has 4 additional seats? 
	 69.	 Salary  Suppose that you just received a job offer with a 
starting salary of $35,000 per year and a guaranteed raise 
of $2000 per year. How many years will it take before your 
aggregate salary is $440,000? 
[Hint: 
Your 
aggregate 
salary 
after 
2 
years 
is 
$35,000 + 1$35,000 + $20002.]
	 63.	 Creating a Mosaic  A mosaic is designed in the shape of an 
equilateral triangle, 16 feet on each side. Each tile in the  
mosaic is in the shape of an equilateral triangle, 12 inches 
to a side. The tiles are to alternate in color as shown in the  
illustration. How many tiles of each color will be 
required? 
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 70.	 Make up an arithmetic sequence. Give it to a friend and ask 
for its 20th term.
	 71.	 Describe the similarities and differences between arithmetic 
sequences and linear functions.

850 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Determine Whether a Sequence Is Geometric
When the ratio of successive terms of a sequence is always the same nonzero  
number, the sequence is called geometric.
1
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 72–75 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 72.	 If a credit card charges 15.3% interest compounded monthly, find the effective rate of interest. 
	 73.	 The vector v has initial point P = 1-1, 22and terminal point Q = 13, - 42. Write v in the form ai + bj; that is, find its position vector. 
	74.	 Analyze and graph the equation: 25x2 + 4y2 = 100
	 75.	 Find the inverse of the matrix c 2
0
3
- 1d , if there is one; otherwise, state that the matrix is singular.  C
1
2
0
3
2
-1
S
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 858.
	
Objectives	 	1  Determine Whether a Sequence Is Geometric (p. 850)
	
	 	2  Find a Formula for a Geometric Sequence (p. 851)
	
	 	3  Find the Sum of a Geometric Sequence (p. 852)
	
	 	4  Determine Whether a Geometric Series Converges or Diverges (p. 853)
	
	 	5  Solve Annuity Problems (p. 856)
12.3  Geometric Sequences; Geometric Series
•	 Compound Interest (Section 5.7, pp. 348–354)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION Before getting started, review the following:
*Sometimes called a geometric progression.
A geometric sequence* may be defined recursively as a1 = a, an
an-1
= r, or as
	
a1 = a  an = ran-1	
(1)
where a1 = a and r ≠0 are real numbers. The number a1 is the first term, and 
the nonzero number r is called the common ratio.
Definition
The terms of a geometric sequence with first term a1 and common ratio r follow 
the pattern
a1 a1r a1r 2 a1r 3 c
Determining Whether a Sequence Is Geometric
The sequence
2, 6, 18, 54, 162, c
is geometric because the ratio of successive terms is 3; a6
2 = 18
6 = 54
18 = g = 3b. 
The first term is a1 = 2, and the common ratio is 3.
Determining Whether a Sequence Is Geometric
Show that the following sequence is geometric.
5sn6 = 52-n6
Find the first term and the common ratio.
Example 1
•
Example 2

Section 12.3  Geometric Sequences; Geometric Series  851
The first term is s1 = 2-1 = 1
2 . The nth term and the 1n - 12st term of the 
sequence 5sn6 are
sn = 2-n  and sn-1 = 2-1n-12
Their ratio is
sn
sn-1
=
2-n
2-1n-12 = 2-n+ 1n-12 = 2-1 = 1
2
Because the ratio of successive terms is the nonzero constant 1
2, the sequence 5sn6 
is geometric with common ratio 1
2 .
Determining Whether a Sequence Is Geometric
Show that the following sequence is geometric.
5tn6 = 53 # 4n6
Find the first term and the common ratio.
The first term is t1 = 3 # 41 = 12. The nth term and the 1n - 12st term are
tn = 3 # 4n  and tn-1 = 3 # 4n-1
Their ratio is
tn
tn-1
=
3 # 4n
3 # 4n-1 = 4n- 1n-12 = 4
The sequence, 5tn6, is a geometric sequence with common ratio 4.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Find a Formula for a Geometric Sequence
Suppose that a1 is the first term of a geometric sequence with common ratio r ≠0. We 
seek a formula for the nth term, an . To see the pattern, consider the first few terms:
 a1 = a1 # 1 = a1r 0 
 a2 = ra1 = a1r 1 
 a3 = ra2 = r1a1r2 = a1r 2 
 a4 = ra3 = r1a1r 22 = a1r 3 
 a5 = ra4 = r1a1r 32 = a1r 4 
 f
 an = ran-1 = r1a1r n-22 = a1r n-1 
This leads to the following result:
Solution
•
Example 3
Solution
•
2
nth Term of a Geometric Sequence
For a geometric sequence 5an6 whose first term is a1 and whose common ratio 
is r, the nth term is determined by the formula
	
an = a1r n-1   r ≠0	
(2)
Theorem
Finding a Particular Term of a Geometric Sequence
(a)	 Find the nth term of the geometric sequence: 10, 9, 81
10, 729
100 c
(b)	 Find the 9th term of this sequence.
(c)	 Find a recursive formula for this sequence.
Example 4

852 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
(a)	 The first term of this geometric sequence is a1 = 10, and the common ratio is
	
9
10 . (Use 9
10 or 
81
10
9 = 9
10 or any two successive terms.) Then, by formula (2), the 
nth term is
an = 10 a 9
10b
n-1
  an = a1r n-1 ; a1 = 10, r =
9
10 
(b)	 The 9th term is
a9 = 10a 9
10b
9-1
= 10a 9
10b
8
= 4.3046721
(c)	 The first term in the sequence is 10, and the common ratio is r = 9
10 . Using 
formula (1), the recursive formula is a1 = 10, an = 9
10 an-1 .
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 9 ,  2 7 ,  a n d  3 5
Find the Sum of a Geometric Sequence
Solution
•
3
Exploration
Use a graphing utility to find the ninth 
term of the sequence given in Example 4. 
Use it to find the 20th and 50th terms. 
Now use a graphing utility to graph the 
recursive formula found in Example 4(c). 
Conclude that the graph of the recursive 
formula behaves like the graph of an 
exponential function. How is r, the  
common ratio, related to a, the base of 
the exponential function y = ax?
Sum of the First n Terms of a Geometric Sequence
Let 5an6 be a geometric sequence with first term a1 and common ratio r, 
where r ≠0, r ≠1. The sum Sn of the first n terms of 5an6 is
	
 Sn = a1 + a1r + a1r 2 + g + a1r n-1 = a
n
k=1
 a1r k-1	
	
 = a1 #  1 - r n
1 - r    r ≠0, 1
	
(3)
Theorem
Proof  The sum Sn of the first n terms of 5an6 = 5a1r n-16 is
	
Sn = a1 + a1r + g + a1r n-1	
(4)
Multiply each side by r to obtain
	
rSn = a1r + a1r 2 + g + a1r n	
(5)
Now, subtract (5) from (4). The result is
 Sn - rSn = a1 - a1r n
 11 - r2Sn = a111 - r n2
Since r ≠1, solve for Sn.
	
Sn = a1 #  1 - r n
1 - r 	
■
Finding the Sum of the First n Terms of a Geometric Sequence
Find the sum Sn of the first n terms of the sequence e a1
2b
n
f; that is, find
1
2 + 1
4 + 1
8 + g + a1
2b
n
= a
n
k=1
 1
2 a1
2b
k-1
Example 5

Section 12.3  Geometric Sequences; Geometric Series  853
The sequence e a1
2b
n
f is a geometric sequence with a1 = 1
2 and r = 1
2 . Use  
formula (3) to get
 Sn = a
n
k=1 
1
2 a1
2b
k-1
= 1
2 + 1
4 + 1
8 + g + a1
2b
n
 = 1
2 D
1 - a1
2b
n
1 - 1
2
 T
 = 1
2 D
1 - a1
2b
n
1
2
 T
 = 1 - a1
2b
n
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 1
Using a Graphing Utility to Find the Sum  
of a Geometric Sequence
Use a graphing utility to find the sum of the first 15 terms of the sequence e a1
3b
n
f; 
that is, find
1
3 + 1
9 + 1
27 + g + a1
3b
15
= a
15
k=1
 1
3 a1
3b
k-1
Figure 8 shows the result using a TI-84 Plus C  graphing calculator. The sum of the 
first 15 terms of the sequence e a1
3b
n
f is approximately 0.4999999652.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Determine Whether a Geometric Series  
Converges or Diverges
Solution
Formula (3); a1 = 1
2 , r = 1
2 
•
Example 6
Solution
•
4
An infinite sum of the form
a1 + a1 r + a1r 2 + g + a1r n-1 + g
with first term a1 and common ratio r, is called an infinite geometric series and 
is denoted by
a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1
Definition
Based on formula (3), the sum Sn of the first n terms of a geometric series is
	
Sn = a1 #  1 - r n
1 - r =
a1
1 - r -
a1r n
1 - r	
(6)
Figure 8 

854 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
If this finite sum Sn approaches a number L as n S q, then the infinite geometric 
series a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1 converges to L and L is called the sum of the infinite geometric 
series. The sum is written as
L = a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1
A series that does not converge is called a divergent series.
NOTE  In calculus, limit notation is used, 
and the sum is written
L = lim
nSq  Sn = lim
nSq a
n
k=1
 a1 r k-1 = a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1
■
Convergence of an Infinite Geometric Series
If 0 r0 6 1, the infinite geometric series a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1 converges. Its sum is
	
a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1 =
a1
1 - r	
(7)
Theorem
Intuitive Proof  Since 0 r0 6 1, it follows that 0 r n0  approaches 0 as n S q. Then,
based on formula (6), the term a1r n
1 - r approaches 0, so the sum Sn approaches 
a1
1 - r 
as n S q.	
■
Determining Whether a Geometric Series  
Converges or Diverges
Determine whether the geometric series
a
q
k=1
 2 a2
3b
k-1
= 2 + 4
3 + 8
9 + g
converges or diverges. If it converges, find its sum.
Comparing a
q
k=1
 2 a2
3b
k-1
 to a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1, the first term is a1 = 2 and the common ratio
is r = 2
3. Since 0 r0 6 1, the series converges. Use formula (7) to find its sum:
a
q
k=1
 2 a2
3b
k-1
= 2 + 4
3 + 8
9 + g =
2
1 - 2
3
= 6
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 3
Repeating Decimals
Show that the repeating decimal 0.999 c equals 1.
The decimal 0.999c = 0.9 + 0.09 + 0.009 + g = 9
10 +
9
100 +
9
1000 + g is an
infinite geometric series. Write it in the form a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1 and use formula (7).
0.999c = 9
10 +
9
100 +
9
1000 + g = a
 q
k=1
 9
10k = a
q
k=1
 
9
10 # 10k-1 = a
q
k=1
 9
10 a 1
10b
k-1
Example 7
Solution
•
Example 8
Solution

Section 12.3  Geometric Sequences; Geometric Series  855
Compare this series to a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1 and note that a1 = 9
10 and r = 1
10. Since  r 6 1, 
the series converges and its sum is
0.999c =
9
10
1 - 1
10
=
9
10
9
10
= 1
The repeating decimal 0.999cequals 1.
Pendulum Swings
Initially, a pendulum swings through an arc of 18 inches. See Figure 9. On each  
successive swing, the length of the arc is 0.98 of the previous length.
(a)	 What is the length of the arc of the 10th swing?
(b)	 On which swing is the length of the arc first less than 12 inches?
(c)	 After 15 swings, what total distance will the pendulum have swung?
(d)	 When it stops, what total distance will the pendulum have swung?
(a)	 The length of the first swing is 18 inches.
	
The length of the second swing is 0.98(18) inches.
	
The length of the third swing is 0.9810.982 1182 = 0.9821182 inches.
	
The length of the arc of the 10th swing is
10.98291182 ≈15.007 inches
(b)	 The length of the arc of the nth swing is 10.982n-11182. For this to be exactly  
12 inches requires that
 10.982n-11182 = 12
 10.982n-1 = 12
18 = 2
3 
 n - 1 = log0.98a2
3b
 n = 1 +
lna2
3b
ln 0.98 ≈1 + 20.07 = 21.07
	
The length of the arc of the pendulum exceeds 12 inches on the 21st swing and 
is first less than 12 inches on the 22nd swing.
(c)	 After 15 swings, the pendulum will have swung the following total distance L:
	
L = 18 + 0.981182 + 10.98221182 + 10.98231182 + g + 10.982141182
	
1st	
2nd	
3rd	
4th	
15th
	
This is the sum of a geometric sequence. The common ratio is 0.98; the first term 
is 18. The sum has 15 terms, so
L = 18 #  1 - 0.9815
1 - 0.98
≈18113.072 ≈235.3 inches
	
The pendulum will have swung through approximately 235.3 inches after 15 swings.
(d)	 When the pendulum stops, it will have swung the following total distance T:
T = 18 + 0.981182 + 10.98221182 + 10.98231182 + g
	
This is the sum of an infinite geometric series. The common ratio is r = 0.98; the 
first term is a1 = 18. Since 0 r 0 6 1, the series converges. Its sum is
T =
a1
1 - r =
18
1 - 0.98 = 900
	
The pendulum will have swung a total of 900 inches when it finally stops.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 7
•
Example 9
Solution
Divide both sides by 18.
Express as a logarithm.
Solve for n; use the Change 
of Base Formula.
•
Figure 9 
18"

856 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Solve Annuity Problems
Section 5.7 developed the compound interest formula, which gives the future 
value when a fixed amount of money is deposited in an account that pays interest  
compounded periodically. Often, though, money is invested in small amounts at 
periodic intervals. An annuity is a sequence of equal periodic deposits. The periodic 
deposits may be made annually, quarterly, monthly, or daily.
When deposits are made at the same time that the interest is credited, the  
annuity is called ordinary. We will deal only with ordinary annuities here. The 
amount of an annuity is the sum of all deposits made plus all interest paid.
Suppose that the interest rate that an account earns is i percent per payment 
period (expressed as a decimal). For example, if an account pays 12% compounded 
monthly (12 times a year), then i = 0.12
12
= 0.01. If an account pays 8% compounded
quarterly (4 times a year), then i = 0.08
4
= 0.02.
To develop a formula for the amount of an annuity, suppose that $P is deposited  
each payment period for n payment periods in an account that earns i percent per 
payment period. When the last deposit is made at the nth payment period, the first 
deposit of $P has earned interest compounded for n - 1 payment periods, the 
second deposit of $P has earned interest compounded for n - 2 payment periods, 
and so on. Table 3 shows the value of each deposit after n deposits have been made.
5
Table 3
Deposit
1
2
3
c
n - 1
n
Amount
P(1 + i)n-1
P(1 + i)n-2
P(1 + i)n-3
c
P(1 + i)
P
The amount A of the annuity is the sum of the amounts shown in Table 3; that is,
 A = P # 11 + i2n-1 + P # 11 + i2n-2 + g + P # 11 + i2 + P
 = P31 + 11 + i2 + g + 11 + i2n-1 4
The expression in brackets is the sum of a geometric sequence with n terms and a 
common ratio of 11 + i2. As a result,
 A = P31 + 11 + i2 + g + 11 + i2n-2 + 11 + i2n-1 4
 = P 1 - 11 + i2n
1 - 11 + i2 = P 1 - 11 + i2n
-i
= P 11 + i2n - 1
i
The following result has been established:
Amount of an Annuity
Suppose that P is the deposit in dollars made at the end of each payment 
period for an annuity paying i percent interest per payment period. The amount A  
of the annuity after n deposits is
	
A = P 11 + i2n - 1
i
	
(8)
Theorem
Note  In using formula (8), remember that when the nth deposit is made, the first deposit has earned 
interest for n - 1 compounding periods.	
■
Determining the Amount of an Annuity
To save for retirement, Brett decides to place $4000 into an individual retirement 
account (IRA) each year for the next 30 years. What will the value of the IRA be 
when Brett makes his 30th deposit? Assume that the rate of return of the IRA is 7% 
per annum compounded annually. (This is the historical rate of return in the stock 
market.)
Example 10

Section 12.3  Geometric Sequences; Geometric Series  857
This is an ordinary annuity with n = 30 annual deposits of P = $4000. The rate of
interest per payment period is i = 0.07
1
= 0.07. The amount A of the annuity after 
30 deposits is
A = $4000 11 + 0.07230 - 1
0.07
≈$4000194.460786322 ≈$377,843.15
Determining the Amount of an Annuity
To save for her daughter’s college education, Miranda decides to put $50 aside  
every month in a credit union account paying 10% interest compounded monthly. 
She begins this savings program when her daughter is 3 years old. How much will 
she have saved by the time she makes the 180th deposit? How old is her daughter 
at this time?
This is an annuity with P = $50, n = 180, and i = 0.10
12  . The amount A saved is
A = $50 
a1 + 0.10
12 b
180
- 1
0.10
12
≈$501414.470352 ≈$20,723.52
Because there are 12 deposits per year, when the 180th deposit is made
180
12  = 15 years have passed, and Miranda’s daughter is 18 years old.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 1
Solution
•
Example 11
Solution
•
 Historical Feature
S
equences are among the oldest objects of 
mathematical investigation, having been 
studied for over 3500 years. After the initial 
steps, however, little progress was made until 
about 1600.
Arithmetic and geometric sequences appear  
in the Rhind papyrus, a mathematical text  
containing 85 problems copied around 1650 bc by 
the Egyptian scribe Ahmes from an earlier work 
(see Historical Problem 1). Fibonacci (ad 1220) wrote about problems 
similar to those found in the Rhind papyrus, leading one to suspect that 
Fibonacci may have had material available that is now lost. This material 
would have been in the non-Euclidean Greek tradition of Heron (about 
ad 75) and Diophantus (about ad 250). One problem, again modified 
slightly, is still with us in the familiar puzzle rhyme “As I was going to  
St. Ives c” (see Historical Problem 2).
The Rhind papyrus indicates that the Egyptians knew how to add up 
the terms of an arithmetic or geometric sequence, as did the Babylonians.  
The rule for summing up a geometric sequence is found in Euclid’s  
Elements (Book IX, 35, 36), where, like all Euclid’s algebra, it is presented 
in a geometric form.
Investigations of other kinds of sequences began in the 1500s, when 
algebra became sufficiently developed to handle the more complicated 
problems. The development of calculus in the 1600s added a powerful 
new tool, especially for finding the sum of an infinite series, and the  
subject continues to flourish today.
Fibonacci
Historical Problems
	 1.	 Arithmetic sequence problem from the Rhind papyrus (statement  
modified slightly for clarity) One hundred loaves of bread are to be  
divided among five people so that the amounts that they receive form 
an arithmetic sequence. The first two together receive one-seventh of 
what the last three receive. How many loaves does each receive?
[Partial answer: First person receives 1 2
3 loaves.]
	 2.	 The following old English children’s rhyme resembles one of the 
Rhind papyrus problems.
As I was going to St. Ives
I met a man with seven wives
 
Each wife had seven sacks
Each sack had seven cats
Each cat had seven kits [kittens]
Kits, cats, sacks, wives
How many were going to St. Ives?
(a)  Assuming that the speaker and the cat fanciers met by traveling 
in opposite directions, what is the answer? 
(b)  How many kittens are being transported? 
(c)  Kits, cats, sacks, wives; how many? 

858 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 If $1000 is invested at 4% per annum compounded  
semiannually, how much is in the account after 2 years?  
(pp. 348–354) 
	 2.	 How much do you need to invest now at 5% per annum  
compounded monthly so that in 1 year you will have 
$10,000? (pp. 348–354) 
12.3  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 3.	 In a(n) 
  sequence, the ratio of successive terms 
is a constant.
	 4.	 If 0 r0 6 1, the sum of the geometric series a
q
k=1
 ar k-1 is
	
	
 .
	 5.	 If a series does not converge, it is called a(n)  
   
 .
	 6.	 True or False  A geometric sequence may be defined  
recursively. 
	 7.	 True or False  In a geometric sequence, the common ratio is 
always a positive number. 
	 8.	 True or False  For a geometric sequence with first term a1 
and common ratio r, where r ≠0, r ≠1, the sum of the first
	
	 n terms is Sn = a1 # 1 - r n
1 - r  . 
Skill Building
In Problems 9–18, show that each sequence is geometric. Then find the common ratio and write out the first four terms.
	 9.	 {sn} = 53n6	
10.	 {sn} = 5 1- 52n6	
11.	  {an} = e - 3a1
2b
n
f	
12.	 {bn} = e a5
2b
n
f	
13.	 {cn} = b 2n-1
4  r
	 14.	 {dn} = b 3n
9  r	
15.	 {en} = 52n>36	
16.	 {fn} = 532n6	
17.	 {tn} = b 3n-1
2n  r	
18.	 {un} = b 2n
3n-1 r
In Problems 19–26, find the fifth term and the nth term of the geometric sequence whose initial term a1 and common ratio r are given.
	 19.	 a1 = 2; r = 3	
20.	 a1 = -2; r = 4	
21.	 a1 = 5; r = - 1	
22.	 a1 = 6; r = -2
	 23.	 a1 = 0; r = 1
2	
24.	 a1 = 1; r = -  1
3	
25.	 a1 = 22; r = 22	
26.	 a1 = 0; r = 1
p
In Problems 27–32, find the indicated term of each geometric sequence.
	 27.	  7th term of 1, 1
2, 1
4, c 
	
28.	 8th term of 1, 3, 9, c 
	
29.	 9th term of 1, -1, 1, c 
	 30.	 10th term of - 1, 2, - 4, c 
	
31.	 8th term of 0.4, 0.04, 0.004, c	
32.	 7th term of 0.1, 1.0, 10.0, c
In Problems 33–40, find the nth term an of each geometric sequence. When given, r is the common ratio.
	 33.	 7, 14, 28, 56,  c	
34.	 5, 10, 20, 40,  c	
35.	  - 3, 1, -  1
3, 1
9,  c	
36.	 4, 1, 1
4, 1
16,  c
	 37.	 a6 = 243; r = - 3	
38.	 a2 = 7; r = 1
3	
39.	 a2 = 7; a4 = 1575	
40.	 a3 = 1
3; a6 = 1
81
In Problems 41–46, find each sum.
	 41.	  1
4 + 2
4 + 22
4 + 23
4 + g + 2n-1
4 	
42.	 3
9 + 32
9 + 33
9 + g + 3n
9 	
43.	 a
n
k=1
 a2
3b
k
 
	 44.	 a
n
k=1
 4 # 3k-1 
	
45.	 - 1 - 2 - 4 - 8 - g- 12n-12	
46.	 2 + 6
5 + 18
25 + g + 2a3
5b
n-1
For Problems 47–52, use a graphing utility to find the sum of each geometric sequence.
	 47.	 1
4 + 2
4 + 22
4 + 23
4 + g + 214
4 	
48.	 3
9 + 32
9 + 33
9 + g + 315
9 	
49.	 a
15
n=1
 a2
3b
n
	 50.	 a
15
n=1
 4 # 3n-1	
51.	 - 1 - 2 - 4 - 8 - g - 214	
52.	 2 + 6
5 + 18
25 + g + 2a3
5b
15

Section 12.3  Geometric Sequences; Geometric Series  859
In Problems 53–68, determine whether each infinite geometric series converges or diverges. If it converges, find its sum.
	 53.	  1 + 1
3 + 1
9 + g	
54.	 2 + 4
3 + 8
9 + g	
55.	 8 + 4 + 2 + g	
56.	 6 + 2 + 2
3 + g
	 57.	 2 - 1
2 + 1
8 - 1
32 + g	
58.	 1 - 3
4 + 9
16 - 27
64 + g	
59.	 8 + 12 + 18 + 27 + g	
60.	 9 + 12 + 16 + 64
3 + g
	 61.	 a
q
k=1
 5a1
4b
k-1
	
62.	 a
q
k=1
 8a1
3b
k-1
	
63.	 a
q
k=1
 1
2
 # 3k-1 
	
64.	 a
 q
k=1
 3 a3
2b
k-1
 
	 65.	 a
q
k=1
 6a-  2
3b
k-1
	
66.	 a
q
k=1
 4 a-  1
2b
k-1
	
67.	 a
q
k=1
 3 a2
3b
k
	
68.	 a
q
k=1
 2 a3
4b
k
Mixed Practice
In Problems 69–82, determine whether the given sequence is arithmetic, geometric, or neither. If the sequence is arithmetic, find the  
common difference; if it is geometric, find the common ratio. If the sequence is arithmetic or geometric, find the sum of the first 50 terms.
	 69.	 5n + 26	
70.	 52n - 56	
71.	 54n26 
	
72.	 55n2 + 16 
	 73.	 e3 - 2
3 nf
	 74.	 e8 - 3
4 nf	
75.	 1, 3, 6, 10, c	
76.	 2, 4, 6, 8, c	
77.	 e a2
3b
n
f	
78.	 e a5
4b
n
f
	 79.	 - 1, 2, - 4, 8, c	
80.	 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, c	
81.	 53n>26	
82.	 5 1- 12n6 
Applications and Extensions
	 83.	 Find x so that x, x + 4, and x + 7 are consecutive terms of a 
geometric sequence. 
	 84.	 Find x so that x - 1, x, and x + 2 are consecutive terms of a 
geometric sequence. 
	 85.	 Salary Increases  Suppose that you have just been hired at 
an annual salary of $23,000 and expect to receive annual in-
creases of 8%. What will your salary be when you begin your 
seventh year? 
	 86.	 Equipment Depreciation  A new piece of equipment cost a 
company $15,000. Each year, for tax purposes, the company  
depreciates the value by 15%. What value should the  
company give the equipment after 5 years? 
	 87.	 Pendulum Swings  Initially, a pendulum swings through an 
arc of 4 feet. On each successive swing, the length of the arc 
is 0.9 of the previous length.
(a)	 What is the length of the arc of the ninth swing? 
(b)	 On which swing is the length of the arc first less than  
2 feet? 
(c)	 After 15 swings, what total length will the pendulum 
have swung? 
(d)	 When it stops, what total length will the pendulum have 
swung? 
	 88.	 Bouncing Balls  A ball is dropped from a height of 30 feet.  
Each time it strikes the ground, it 	
 
bounces up to 0.8 of the 
previous height.
(a)	 What height will the 
ball bounce up to 
after it strikes the 
ground for the third 
time? 
(b)	 How high will it bounce after it strikes the ground for 
the nth time? 
(c)	 How many times does the ball need to strike the ground 
before its bounce is less than 6 inches? 
(d)	 What total vertical distance does the ball travel before it 
stops bouncing? 
	 89.	 Retirement  An employee contributes $50 each month to 
her 401(k). What will be the value of her 401(k) after the 
300th deposit (25 years) if the per annum rate of return is 
assumed to be 12% compounded monthly? 
	 90.	 Saving for a Home  Jolene wants to purchase a new home. 
Suppose that she invests $400 per month into a mutual 
fund. If the per annum rate of return of the mutual fund is  
assumed to be 10% compounded monthly, how much will 
Jolene have for a down payment after the 36th deposit  
(3 years)? 
	 91.	 Tax-Sheltered Annuity  Don contributes $300 at the end of 
each quarter to a Tax-Sheltered Annuity (TSA). What will 
the value of the TSA be after the 80th deposit (20 years) 
if the per annum rate of return is assumed to be 7% com-
pounded quarterly? 
	 92.	 Retirement  Ray contributes $1000 to an individual  
retirement account (IRA) semiannually. What will the value  
of the IRA be when Ray makes his 30th deposit (after  
15 years) if the per annum rate of return is assumed to be 
10% compounded semiannually? 
	 93.	 Sinking Fund  Scott and Alice want to purchase a vacation 
home in 10 years and need $50,000 for a down payment. 
How much should they place in a savings account each 
month if the per annum rate of return is assumed to be 5% 
compounded monthly? 
	 94.	 Sinking Fund  For a child born in 2002, the cost of a 4-year 
college education at a public university is projected to 
be $160,000. Assuming an 8% per annum rate of return  
compounded monthly, how much must be contributed to a 
college fund every month to have $160,000 in 18 years when 
the child begins college? 
30'
24' 19.2'

860 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
	 95.	 Grains of Wheat on a Chess Board  In an old fable, a  
commoner who had saved the king’s life was told he could 
ask the king for any just reward. Being a shrewd man, the 
commoner said, “A simple wish, sire. Place one grain of wheat 
on the first square of a chessboard, two grains on the second 
square, four grains on the third square, continuing until you 
have filled the board. This is all I seek.” Compute the total 
number of grains needed to do this to see why the request, 
seemingly simple, could not be granted. (A chessboard  
consists of 8 * 8 = 64 squares.) 
1, 0.90, 0.902, 0.903, 0.904,c
	
	 The sum of this infinite geometric series is called the  
multiplier. What is the multiplier if individuals spend 90% of 
every additional dollar that they earn? 
	 98.	 Multiplier  Refer to Problem 97. Suppose that the marginal 
propensity to consume throughout the U.S. economy is 0.95. 
What is the multiplier for the U.S. economy? 
	 99.	 Stock Price  One method of pricing a stock is to discount the 
stream of future dividends of the stock. Suppose that a stock 
pays $P per year in dividends, and historically, the dividend 
has been increased i % per year. If you desire an annual rate 
of return of t %, this method of pricing a stock states that the 
price that you should pay is the present value of an infinite  
stream of payments:
Price = P + P1 + i
1 + t + Pa1 + i
1 + tb
2
+ Pa1 + i
1 + tb
3
+ g
	
	 The price of the stock is the sum of an infinite geometric  
series. Suppose that a stock pays an annual dividend of  
$3.00 and, historically, the dividend has been increased 2% 
per year. You desire an annual rate of return of 10%. What 
is the most you should pay for the stock? 
	100.	 Stock Price  Refer to Problem 99. Suppose that a stock pays 
an annual dividend of $2.50, and historically, the dividend 
has increased 4% per year. You desire an annual rate of  
return of 11%. What is the most that you should pay for the 
stock? 
	101.	 A Rich Man’s Promise  A rich man promises to give 
you $1000 on September 1. Each day thereafter he will
	
	 give you 17
20 of what he gave you the previous day. What is
	
	 the first date on which the amount you receive is less than 
$0.01? How much have you received when this happens?
	102.	 Seating Revenue  A special section in the end zone of a  
football stadium has 2 seats in the first row and 14 rows total. 
Each successive row has 2 seats more than the row before. In 
this particular section, the first seat is sold for 1 cent, and each 
following seat sells for 5% more than the previous seat. Find 
the total revenue generated if every seat in the section is sold. 
Round only the final answer, and state the final answer in  
dollars rounded to two decimal places. (JJC)† 
	 96.	 Look at the figure. What fraction of the square is  
eventually shaded if the indicated shading process continues 
indefinitely?                                                     
	 97.	 Multiplier  Suppose that, throughout the U.S. economy,  
individuals spend 90% of every additional dollar that they 
earn. Economists would say that an individual’s marginal 
propensity to consume is 0.90. For example, if Jane earns an 
additional dollar, she will spend 0.9112 = $0.90 of it. The 
individual who earns $0.90 (from Jane) will spend 90% of it, 
or $0.81. This process of spending continues and results in an 
infinite geometric series as follows:
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	103.	 Critical Thinking  You are interviewing for a job and receive 
two offers for a five-year contract:
A:  $40,000 to start, with guaranteed annual increases  
of 6% for the first 5 years
B:  $44,000 to start, with guaranteed annual increases  
of 3% for the first 5 years
	
	 Which offer is better if your goal is to be making as much as 
possible after 5 years? Which is better if your goal is to make 
as much money as possible over the contract (5 years)?
	104.	 Critical Thinking  Which of the following choices, A or B, 
results in more money?
A:  To receive $1000 on day 1, $999 on day 2, $998 on 
day 3, with the process to end after 1000 days
B:  To receive $1 on day 1, $2 on day 2, $4 on day 3, for 
19 days
	105.	 Critical 
Thinking  You 
have 
just 
signed 
a 
7-year  
professional football league contract with a beginning salary 
of $2,000,000 per year. Management gives you the following 
options with regard to your salary over the 7 years.
1.	 A bonus of $100,000 each year
2.	 An annual increase of 4.5% per year beginning after  
1 year
3.	 An annual increase of $95,000 per year beginning after  
1 year
	
	 Which option provides the most money over the 7-year  
period? Which the least? Which would you choose? Why?
	106.	 Critical Thinking  Suppose you were offered a job in which 
you would work 8 hours per day for 5 workdays per week 
for 1 month at hard manual labor. Your pay the first day 
would be 1 penny. On the second day your pay would be 
two pennies; the third day 4 pennies. Your pay would double 
on each successive workday. There are 22 workdays in the 
month. There will be no sick days. If you miss a day of work, 
there is no pay or pay increase. How much do you get paid 
if you work all 22 days? How much do you get paid for the 
†Courtesy of the Joliet Junior College Mathematics Department.

Section 12.4  Mathematical Induction  861
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 111–114 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in 
your mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
22nd workday? What risks do you run if you take this job 
offer? Would you take the job?
	107.	 Can a sequence be both arithmetic and geometric? Give 
reasons for your answer.
	108.	 Make up a geometric sequence. Give it to a friend and ask 
for its 20th term.
	109.	 Make up two infinite geometric series, one that has a sum 
and one that does not. Give them to a friend and ask for the 
sum of each series.
	110.	 Describe the similarities and differences between geometric 
sequences and exponential functions.
	111.	 Use the Change-of-Base Formula and a calculator to evaluate log7 62. Round the answer to three decimal places. 
	112.	 Find the unit vector in the same direction as v = 8i - 15j.                                                                                    
	113.	 Find the equation of the hyperbola with vertices at (- 2, 0) and (2, 0) and a focus at (4, 0). 
	114.	 Find the value of the determinant: †
3
1
0
0
- 2
6
4
- 1
- 2
† . 
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 $1082.43        2.  $9513.28
12.4  Mathematical Induction
	
Objective	 	1  Prove Statements Using Mathematical Induction (p. 861)
Prove Statements Using Mathematical Induction
Mathematical induction is a method for proving that statements involving natural 
numbers are true for all natural numbers.*
For example, the statement “2n is always an even integer” can be proved for all 
natural numbers n by using mathematical induction. Also, the statement “the sum 
of the first n positive odd integers equals n2,” that is,
	
1 + 3 + 5 + g + 12n - 12 = n2	
(1)
can be proved for all natural numbers n by using mathematical induction.
Before stating the method of mathematical induction, let’s try to gain a sense of 
the power of the method. We shall use the statement in equation (1) for this purpose 
by restating it for various values of n = 1, 2, 3, c.
n = 1­	
The sum of the first positive odd integer is 12; 1 = 12.­
n = 2­	
The sum of the first 2 positive odd integers is 22;  
1 + 3 = 4 = 22.­	
n = 3	
The sum of the first 3 positive odd integers is 32; 
1 + 3 + 5 = 9 = 32.­
n = 4­	
The sum of the first 4 positive odd integers is 42; 
1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 16 = 42.­
Although from this pattern we might conjecture that statement (1) is true for any 
choice of n, can we really be sure that it does not fail for some choice of n? The 
method of proof by mathematical induction will, in fact, prove that the statement 
is true for all n.
1
*Recall that the natural numbers are the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, c. In other words, the terms natural  
numbers and positive integers are synonymous.

862 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
We shall not prove this principle. However, the following physical interpretation 
illustrates why the principle works. Think of a collection of natural numbers obeying 
a statement as a collection of infinitely many dominoes. See Figure 10.
Now, suppose that two facts are given:
	 1.	 The first domino is pushed over.
	 2.	 If one domino falls over, say the kth domino, so will the next one, the 1k + 12st 
domino.
Is it safe to conclude that all the dominoes fall over? The answer is yes, because if 
the first one falls (Condition I), the second one does also (by Condition II); and if 
the second one falls, so does the third (by Condition II); and so on.
Using Mathematical Induction
Show that the following statement is true for all natural numbers n.
	
1 + 3 + 5 + g + 12n - 12 = n2	
(2)
First show that statement (2) holds for n = 1. Because 1 = 12, statement (2) is true 
for n = 1. Condition I holds.
Next, show that Condition II holds. From statement (2), assume that
	
1 + 3 + 5 + g + 12k - 12 = k2	
(3)
is true for some natural number k.
Now show that, based on equation (3), statement (2) holds for k + 1. Look at the sum 
of the first k + 1 positive odd integers to determine whether this sum equals 1k + 122.
 1 + 3 + 5 + g + [21k + 12 - 1] = [1 + 3 + 5 + g + 12k - 12] + 12k + 12
 = k2 + 12k + 12
 = k2 + 2k + 1 = 1k + 122
Conditions I and II are satisfied; by the Principle of Mathematical Induction,  
statement (2) is true for all natural numbers n.
Using Mathematical Induction
Show that the following statement is true for all natural numbers n.
2n 7 n
First, show that the statement 2n 7 n holds when n = 1. Because 21 = 2 7 1, the 
inequality is true for n = 1. Condition I holds.
Next, assume, for some natural number k, that 2k 7 k. Now show that the 
formula holds for k + 1; that is, show that 2k+1 7 k + 1.
2k+1 = 2 # 2k 7 2 # k = k + k Ú k + 1
If 2k 7 k, then 2k+1 7 k + 1, so Condition II of the Principle of Mathematical 
Induction is satisfied. The statement 2n 7 n is true for all natural numbers n.
Example 1
Solution
8
                = k2 by equation (3)
•
Example 2
Solution
                                   c                                     c
	
We know that	
k Ú 1
	
2k 7 k.
•
The Principle of Mathematical Induction
Suppose that the following two conditions are satisfied with regard to a statement 
about natural numbers:
CONDITION I:­	
The statement is true for the natural number 1. ­
CONDITION II:­	
If the statement is true for some natural number k,  
it is also true for the next natural number k + 1.­
Then the statement is true for all natural numbers.
Theorem
Figure 10 

Section 12.4  Mathematical Induction  863
Using Mathematical Induction
Show that the following formula is true for all natural numbers n.
	
1 + 2 + 3 + g + n = n1n + 12
2
	
(4)
First, show that formula (4) is true when n = 1. Because
111 + 12
2
= 1122
2
= 1
Condition I of the Principle of Mathematical Induction holds.
Next, assume that formula (4) holds for some k, and determine whether the formula 
then holds for k + 1. Assume that
	
1 + 2 + 3 + g + k = k1k + 12
2
  for some k	
(5)
Now show that
1 + 2 + 3 + g + 1k + 12 = 1k + 12 3 1k + 12 + 14
2
= 1k + 12 1k + 22
2
as follows:
 1 + 2 + 3 + g + 1k + 12 = [1 + 2 + 3 + g + k] + 1k + 12
 = k(k + 1)
2
+ 1k + 12
 = k2 + k + 2k + 2
2
 = k2 + 3k + 2
2
= (k + 1)(k + 2)
2
Condition II also holds. As a result, formula (4) is true for all natural numbers n.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1
Using Mathematical Induction
Show that 3n - 1 is divisible by 2 for all natural numbers n.
First, show that the statement is true when n = 1. Because 31 - 1 = 3 - 1 = 2 is 
divisible by 2, the statement is true when n = 1. Condition I is satisfied.
Next, assume that the statement holds for some k, and determine whether the 
statement holds for k + 1. Assume that 3k - 1 is divisible by 2 for some k. Now 
show that 3k+1 - 1 is divisible by 2.
 3k+1 - 1 = 3k+1 - 3k + 3k - 1
 = 3k13 - 12 + 13k - 12 = 3k # 2 + 13k - 12
Because 3k # 2 is divisible by 2 and 3k - 1 is divisible by 2, it follows that 
3k # 2 + 13k - 12 = 3k+1 - 1 is divisible by 2. Condition II is also satisfied. As a 
result, the statement “ 3n - 1 is divisible by 2” is true for all natural numbers n.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
Example 3
Solution
8
            =
k(k + 1)
2
	 by equation (5)
•
Example 4
Solution
Subtract and add 3k.
•
Warning  The conclusion that a statement involving natural numbers is true for all natural numbers is 
made only after both Conditions I and II of the Principle of Mathematical Induction have been satisfied. 
Problem 28 demonstrates a statement for which only Condition I holds, and the statement is not true 
for all natural numbers. Problem 29 demonstrates a statement for which only Condition II holds, and 
the statement is not true for any natural number.	
■

864 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Skill Building
In Problems 1–22, use the Principle of Mathematical Induction to show that the given statement is true for all natural numbers n.
	 1.	 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2n = n1n + 12	
2.	 1 + 5 + 9 + g + 14n - 32 = n12n - 12
	 3.	 3 + 4 + 5 + g + 1n + 22 = 1
2 n1n + 52	
4.	 3 + 5 + 7 + g + 12n + 12 = n1n + 22
	 5.	 2 + 5 + 8 + g + 13n - 12 = 1
2 n13n + 12	
6.	 1 + 4 + 7 + g + 13n - 22 = 1
2 n13n - 12
	 7.	 1 + 2 + 22 + g + 2n-1 = 2n - 1	
8.	 1 + 3 + 32 + g + 3n-1 = 1
213n - 12
	 9.	 1 + 4 + 42 + g + 4n-1 = 1
314n - 12	
10.	 1 + 5 + 52 + g + 5n-1 = 1
415n - 12
	 11.	
1
1 # 2 +
1
2 # 3 +
1
3 # 4 + g +
1
n1n + 12 =
n
n + 1	
12.	
1
1 # 3 +
1
3 # 5 +
1
5 # 7 + g +
1
12n - 12 12n + 12 =
n
2n + 1
	 13.	 12 + 22 + 32 + g + n2 = 1
6 n1n + 12 12n + 12	
14.	 13 + 23 + 33 + g + n3 = 1
4 n21n + 122
	 15.	 4 + 3 + 2 + g + 15 - n2 = 1
2 n19 - n2	
16.	 - 2 - 3 - 4 - g - 1n + 12 = -  1
2 n1n + 32
	 17.	 1 # 2 + 2 # 3 + 3 # 4 + g + n1n + 12 = 1
3 n1n + 121n + 22	
18.	 1# 2 + 3# 4 + 5# 6 + g+ 12n - 1212n2 = 1
3 n1n + 1214n - 12
	 19.	 n2 + n is divisible by 2.	
20.	 n3 + 2n is divisible by 3.
	 21.	 n2 - n + 2 is divisible by 2.	
22.	 n1n + 12 1n + 22 is divisible by 6.
12.4  Assess Your Understanding
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 23–27, prove each statement.
	 23.	 If x 7 4, then xn 7 4.
	 24.	 If 0 6 x 6 1, then 0 6 xn 6 1.
	 25.	 a - b is a factor of an - bn.
[Hint: ak+1 - bk+1 = a1ak - bk2 + bk1a - b2]
	 26.	 a + b is a factor of a2n+1 + b2n+1.
	 27.	 (1 + g)n Ú 1 + gn, for g 7 0
	 28.	 Show that the statement “n2 - n + 41 is a prime number” is 
true for n = 1 but is not true for n = 41.
	 29.	 Show that the formula
2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2n = n2 + n + 9
	
	 obeys Condition II of the Principle of Mathematical  
Induction. That is, show that if the formula is true for some k, 
it is also true for k + 1. Then show that the formula is false 
for n = 1.
	 30.	 Use mathematical induction to prove that if r ≠1, then
a + ar + ar 2 + g + ar n-1 = a 1 - r n
1 - r
	 31.	 Use mathematical induction to prove the following.
 a + 1a + 19d2 + 1a + 38d2
 + g + 3a + 1n - 1219d4 = na + 19d 
n1n - 12
2
	 32.	 Extended 
Principle 
of 
Mathematical 
Induction  The 
Extended Principle of Mathematical Induction states that if  
Conditions I and II hold, that is,
(I)	  A statement is true for a natural number j.
(II)  If the statement is true for some natural number k Ú j, 
then it is also true for the next natural number k + 1.
	
	 then the statement is true for all natural numbers Ú j. Use  
the Extended Principle of Mathematical Induction to show 
that the number of diagonals in a convex polygon of n sides
	
	 is 1
2 n1n - 32.
[Hint: Begin by showing that the result is true when n = 4 
(Condition I).]
	 33.	 Geometry  Use the Extended Principle of Mathematical 
Induction to show that the sum of the interior angles of a 
convex polygon of n sides equals 1n - 22 # 180°.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 34.	 How would you explain the Principle of Mathematical Induction to a friend?

Section 12.5  The Binomial Theorem  865
Formulas have been given for expanding 1x + a2n for n = 2 and n = 3. The 
Binomial Theorem* is a formula for the expansion of 1x + a2n for any positive 
integer n. If n = 1, 2, 3, and 4, the expansion of 1x + a2n is straightforward.
 1x + a21 = x + a
 
 1x + a22 = x2 + 2ax + a2
 
 1x + a23 = x3 + 3ax2 + 3a2x + a3
 1x + a24 = x4 + 4ax3 + 6a2x2 + 4a3  x + a4 
Notice that each expansion of 1x + a2n begins with xn and ends with an. From 
left to right, the powers of x are decreasing by 1, while the powers of a are increasing 
by 1. Also, the number of terms equals n + 1. Notice, too, that the degree of each 
monomial in the expansion equals n. For example, in the expansion of 1x + a23, 
each monomial 1x3, 3ax2, 3a2x, a32 is of degree 3. As a result, it is reasonable to 
conjecture that the expansion of 1x + a2n would look like this:
1x + a2n = xn + ——— axn-1 + ——— a2  xn-2 + g + ——— an-1  x + an
where the blanks are numbers to be found. This is in fact the case, as will be seen 
shortly.
Before we can fill in the blanks, we need to introduce the symbol a  n
j b.
Evaluate a  n
j b
The symbol a  n
j b, read “ n taken j at a time,” is defined next.
Two terms, beginning with x1  and  
ending with a1 
Three terms, beginning with x 2   
and ending with a2 
Four terms, beginning with x 3   
and ending with a3 
Five terms, beginning with x4   
and ending with a4 
1
Comment  On a graphing calculator,  
the symbol a  n
j b may be denoted by  
the key  nCr .	
■
	 37.	 Solve the system: e4x + 3y = - 7
2x - 5y = 16  
	 38.	 For A = c 1
2
- 1
0
1
4d  and B = £
3
- 1
1
0
- 2
2
§ , find A # B. 
308
458
500 kg
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 35–38 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 35.	 Solve: log22x + 5 = 4 
	 36.	 A mass of 500 kg is suspended from two cables, as shown in the figure. What are the tensions in the two cables? 
12.5  The Binomial Theorem
	
Objectives	 	1  Evaluate a  n
j b (p. 865)
	
	 	2  Use the Binomial Theorem (p. 867)
*The name binomial is derived from the fact that x + a is a binomial; that is, it contains two terms.

866 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Evaluating an
j b
Find:
(a)	 a3
1b      (b)  a4
2b      (c)  a8
7b      (d)   a65
15b
(a)	 a3
1b =
3!
1!13 - 12! =
3!
1! 2! = 3 # 2 # 1
112 # 12 = 6
2 = 3
(b)	 a4
2b =
4!
2!14 - 22! =
4!
2! 2! =
4 # 3 # 2 # 1
12 # 12 12 # 12 = 24
4 = 6
(c)	  a8
7b =
8!
7!18 - 72! =
8!
7! 1! = 8 #  7! 
 7! # 1! = 8
1 = 8
(d)	 Figure 11 shows the solution using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator. So
a65
15b ≈2.073746998 * 1014
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5
Four useful formulas involving the symbol a  n
j b are
Example 1
Solution
 æ
 8! = 8 # 7!
•
If j and n are integers with 0 … j … n, the symbol a  n
j b is defined as
	
a  n
j b =
n!
j!1n - j2!	
(1)
Definition
an
0 b = 1  an
1 b = n  a
n
n - 1b = n  an
nb = 1
Proof   an
0 b =
n!
0!1n - 02! =
n!
0! n! = 1
1 = 1
 an
1 b =
n!
1!1n - 12! =
n!
1n - 12! = n1n - 12  !
1n - 12  ! = n
You are asked to prove the remaining two formulas in Problem 45.
Suppose that the values of the symbol a  n
j b are arranged in a triangular display, 
as shown next and in Figure 12.
a0
0b
a1
0b a1
1b
a2
0b a2
1b a2
2b
a3
0b a3
1b a3
2b a3
3b
a4
0b a4
1b a4
2b a4
3b a4
4b
a5
0b a5
1b a5
2b a5
3b a5
4b a5
5b
■
Figure 11 

Section 12.5  The Binomial Theorem  867
This display is called the Pascal triangle, named after Blaise Pascal (1623–1662), 
a French mathematician.
The Pascal triangle has 1’s down the sides. To get any other entry, add the two 
nearest entries in the row above it. The shaded triangles in Figure 12 illustrate this 
feature of the Pascal triangle. Based on this feature, the row corresponding to n = 6 
is found as follows:
1  5  10  10  5  1
1  6  15  20  15  6  1
This addition always works (see the theorem on page 869).
Although the Pascal triangle provides an interesting and organized display of
the symbol a  n
j b, in practice it is not all that helpful. For example, if you wanted to
know the value of a12
 5 b, you would need to produce 13 rows of the triangle before 
seeing the answer. It is much faster to use definition (1).
Use the Binomial Theorem
n = 5 S
n = 6 S
2
1
5
10
10
5
1
4
6
4
1
3
3
1
2
1
1
n = 0
n = 1
n = 2
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
1
1
1
1
1
j  5
j  4
j  3
j  2
j  1
j  0
Figure 12  The Pascal triangle
Binomial Theorem
Let x and a be real numbers. For any positive integer n, we have
1x + a2n = an
0 bxn + an
1 baxn-1 + g + a  n
j baj
 xn-j + g + an
nban
                  = a
n
j=0
 a  n
j bxn-j  aj	
(2)
Theorem
Now you know why it was necessary to introduce the symbol a  n
j b; these symbols
are the numerical coefficients that appear in the expansion of 1x + a2n. Because of
this, the symbol a  n
j b is called a binomial coefficient.
Expanding a Binomial
Use the Binomial Theorem to expand 1x + 225.
In the Binomial Theorem, let a = 2 and n = 5. Then
1x + 225 = a5
0bx5 + a5
1b2x4 + a5
2b22
 x3 + a5
3b23
 x2 + a5
4b24
 x + a5
5b25
 = 1 # x5 + 5 # 2x4 + 10 # 4x3 + 10 # 8x2 + 5 # 16x + 1 # 32
 = x5 + 10x4 + 40x3 + 80x2 + 80x + 32
Example 2
Solution
c 
Use equation (2).
c
Use row n = 5 of the Pascal triangle or formula (1) for ¢  n
j ≤.
•

868 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Expanding a Binomial
Expand 12y - 324 using the Binomial Theorem.
First, rewrite the expression 12y - 324 as 32y + 1 -32 44. Now use the Binomial 
Theorem with n = 4, x = 2y, and a = -3.
 32y + 1-32 44 = a4
0b 12y24 + a4
1b 1-32 12y23 + a4
2b 1-32212y22
 
+ a4
3b 1-32312y2 + a4
4b 1-324
 = 1 # 16y4 + 41 -328y3 + 6 # 9 # 4y2 + 41 -2722y + 1 # 81
 = 16y4 - 96y3 + 216y2 - 216y + 81
In this expansion, note that the signs alternate because a = -3 6 0.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Finding a Particular Coefficient in a Binomial Expansion
Find the coefficient of y8 in the expansion of 12y + 3210.
Write out the expansion using the Binomial Theorem.
12y + 3210 = a10
0 b 12y210 + a10
1 b 12y291321 + a10
2 b 12y281322 + a10
3 b12y271323
 
+ a10
4 b 12y261324 + g + a10
9 b 12y2 1329 + a10
10b 13210
From the third term in the expansion, the coefficient of y8 is
a10
2 b 12281322 = 10!
2! 8! # 28 # 9 = 10 # 9 #  8! 
2 #  8! # 28 # 9 = 103,680
As this solution demonstrates, the Binomial Theorem can be used to find a  
particular term in an expansion without writing the entire expansion.
Example 3
Solution
c
Use row n = 4 of the Pascal triangle or formula (1) for ¢  n
j ≤.
•
Example 4
Solution
•
Based on the expansion of 1x + a2n, the term containing xj is
	
a n
n - jban-j  xj	
(3)
Example 4 can be solved by using formula (3) with n = 10, a = 3, x = 2y, and 
j = 8. Then the term containing y8 is
a
10
10 - 8b310-812y28 = a10
2 b # 32 # 28 # y8 = 10!
2! 8! # 9 # 28
 y8
                                 = 10 # 9 #  8! 
2 #  8! # 9 # 28  y8 = 103,680y8

Section 12.5  The Binomial Theorem  869
Finding a Particular Term in a Binomial Expansion
Find the 6th term in the expansion of 1x + 229.
Expand using the Binomial Theorem until the 6th term is reached.
 1x + 229 = a9
0bx9 + a9
1bx8 # 2 + a9
2bx7 # 22 + a9
3bx6 # 23 + a9
4bx5 # 24
 
+ a9
5bx4 # 25 + g
The 6th term is
a9
5bx4 # 25 =
9!
5! 4! # x4 # 32 = 4032x4
The 6th term in the expansion of 1x + 229, which has 10 terms total, contains x4. 
(Do you see why?) By formula (3), the 6th term is
a 9
9 - 4b29-4  x4 = a9
5b25  x4 =
9!
5! 4! # 32x4 = 4032x4
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 9  a n d  3 5
The following theorem shows that the triangular addition feature of the Pascal  
triangle illustrated in Figure 12 always works.
Example 5
Solution A
Solution B
•
If n and j are integers with 1 … j … n, then
	
a 
n
j - 1b + an
j b = an + 1
j
b	
(4)
Theorem
Proof 
 a 
n
j - 1b + an
j b =
n!
1j - 12!3n - 1j - 12 4! +
n!
j!1n - j2!
 =
n!
1j - 12!1n - j + 12! +
n!
j!1n - j2!
 =
jn!
j1j - 12!1n - j + 12! +
1n - j + 12n!
j!1n - j + 12 1n - j2!
 =
jn!
j!1n - j + 12! + 1n - j + 12n!
j!1n - j + 12!
 = jn! + 1n - j + 12n!
j!1n - j + 12!
 = n!1j + n - j + 12
j!1n - j + 12!
 =
n!1n + 12
j!1n - j + 12! =
1n + 12!
j![1n + 12 - j]! = an + 1
j
b
Multiply the first term by 
j
j and 
the second term by 
n - j + 1
n - j + 1  
to make the denominators equal.
■

870 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Historical Feature
T
 he case n = 2 of the Binomial Theorem, 
(a + b)2, was known to Euclid in 300 bc, 
but the general law seems to have been 
discovered by the Persian mathematician and 
astronomer Omar Khayyám (1048–1131), who is 
also well known as the author of the Rubáiyát, a 
collection of four-line poems making observations 
on the human condition. Omar Khayyám did 
not state the Binomial Theorem explicitly, but he 
claimed to have a method for extracting third, 
fourth, fifth roots, and so on. A little study shows that one must know 
the Binomial Theorem to create such a method.
The heart of the Binomial Theorem is the formula for the numerical 
coefficients, and, as we saw, they can be written in a symmetric triangular 
form. The Pascal triangle appears first in the books of Yang Hui (about 
1270) and Chu Shih-chieh (1303). Pascal’s name is attached to the  
triangle because of the many applications he made of it, especially to 
counting and probability. In establishing these results, he was one of the 
earliest users of mathematical induction.
Many people worked on the proof of the Binomial Theorem, 
which was finally completed for all n (including complex numbers) by  
Niels Abel (1802–1829).
Omar Khayyám 
(1048–1131)
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 The 
  
  is a triangular display of the 	
 
binomial coefficients.
	 2.	 an
0 b =
  and an
1 b =
 . 
	 3.	 True or False  a  n
j b =
j!
1n - j2! n! 
	 4.	 The 
   
  can be used to expand  
expressions like 12x + 326.
12.5  Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 5–16, evaluate each expression.
	 5.	  a5
3b 
	
6.	 a7
3b 
	
7.	 a7
5b 
	
8.	 a9
7b 
	 9.	 a50
49b 
	
10.	 a100
98 b 
	
11.	 a1000
1000b  	
12.	 a1000
0
b 
	 13.	 a55
23b 
	
14.	 a60
20b 
	
15.	 a47
25b 
	 16.	 a37
19b 
In Problems 17–28, expand each expression using the Binomial Theorem.
	 17.	 1x + 125	
18.	 1x - 125	
19.	 1x - 226	
20.	 1x + 325
	 21.	  13x + 124	
22.	 12x + 325	
23.	 1x2 + y225	
24.	 1x2 - y226
	 25.	 1 1x + 22 26	
26.	 1 1x - 23 24	
27.	 1ax + by25	
28.	 1ax - by24
In Problems 29–42, use the Binomial Theorem to find the indicated coefficient or term.
	 29.	 The coefficient of x6 in the expansion of 1x + 3210 
	
30.	 The coefficient of x3 in the expansion of 1x - 3210
	 31.	 The coefficient of x7 in the expansion of 12x - 1212	
32.	 The coefficient of x3 in the expansion of 12x + 1212 
	 33.	 The coefficient of x7 in the expansion of 12x + 329 
	
34.	 The coefficient of x2 in the expansion of 12x - 329
	 35.	  The 5th term in the expansion of 1x + 327 
	
36.	 The 3rd term in the expansion of 1x - 327 
	 37.	 The 3rd term in the expansion of 13x - 229 
	
38.	 The 6th term in the expansion of 13x + 228 
	 39.	 The coefficient of x0 in the expansion of ax2 + 1
xb
12
 
	
40.	 The coefficient of x0 in the expansion of ¢x - 1
x2 ≤
9
 
	 41.	 The coefficient of x4 in the expansion of ax -
2
1xb
10
 
	
42.	 The coefficient of x2 in the expansion of a1x +
3
1xb
8
 

Chapter Review  871
Applications and Extensions
	 43.	 Use the Binomial Theorem to find the numerical value of 
11.000126 correct to five decimal places. 
[Hint: 11.000126 = 11 + 10-426]
	 44.	 Use the Binomial Theorem to find the numerical value of 
10.99826 correct to five decimal places. 
	 45.	 Show that a n
n - 1b = n and an
nb = 1.
	 46.	 Show that if n and j are integers with 0 … j … n, then,
a  n
j b = a n
n - jb
	
	 Conclude that the Pascal triangle is symmetric with respect 
to a vertical line drawn from the topmost entry.
	 47.	 If n is a positive integer, show that
an
0 b + an
1 b + g + an
nb = 2n
[Hint: 2n = 11 + 12n; now use the Binomial Theorem.]
	 48.	 If n is a positive integer, show that
an
0 b - an
1 b + an
2 b - g + 1-12nan
nb = 0
	 49.	 Evaluate.
	
	 a5
0b a1
3b
5
+ a5
1b a1
3b
4
a2
3b + a5
2b a1
3b
3
a2
3b
2
        + a5
3b a1
3b
2
a2
3b
3
+ a5
4b a1
3b a2
3b
4
+ a5
5b a2
3b
5
 
	 50.	 Stirling’s Formula  An approximation for n!, when n is large, 
is given by
n! ≈22npan
e b
n
a1 +
1
12n - 1b
	
	 Calculate 12!, 20!, and 25! on your calculator. Then use  
Stirling’s formula to approximate 12!, 20!, and 25!.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 51–54 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 51.	 Solve 6x = 5x+1. Express the answer both in exact form 
and as a decimal rounded to three decimal places. 
	 52.	 For v = 2i + 3j and w = 3i - 2j:
(a)	 Find the dot product v # w. 
(b)	 Find the angle between v and w. 
(c)	 Are the vectors parallel, orthogonal, or neither? 
	 53.	 Solve the system of equations:
•
  x - y - z = 0
2x + y + 3z = - 1
4x + 2y - z = 12
 
 
	 54.	 Graph the system of inequalities. Tell whether the graph is 
bounded or unbounded, and label the corner points.
µ
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
x + y … 6
2x + y … 10
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Sequence (p. 834)	
A function whose domain is the set of positive integers
Factorials (p. 836)	
0! = 1, 1! = 1, n! = n1n - 12 # g# 3 # 2 # 1 if n Ú 2 is an integer
Arithmetic sequence	
a1 = a, an = an-1 + d, where a1 = a = first term, d = common difference 
(pp. 844 and 845)	
an = a1 + 1n - 12d
Sum of the first n terms of 	
Sn = n
2 32a1 + 1n - 12d4 = n
2 1a1 + an2 
an arithmetic sequence (p. 846)
Geometric sequence 	
a1 = a, an = ran-1, where a1 = a = first term, r = common ratio 
(pp. 850 and 851)	
an = a1 r n-1 r ≠0
Sum of the first n terms of  
a geometric sequence (p. 852)	
Sn = a1 1 - r n
1 - r  r ≠0, 1 
Infinite geometric series (p. 853)	
a1 + a1 r + g + a1 r n-1 + g = a
q
k=1
 a1 r k-1
Sum of a convergent infinite  
geometric series (p. 854)	
If 0 r0 6 1, a
q
k=1
 a1 r k-1 =
a1
1 - r

872 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
Amount of an annuity (p. 856)	
A = P 
(1 + i)n - 1
i
, where P =  the deposit (in dollars) made at the end of each payment 
	
period, i = interest rate per payment period, and A =  the amount of the annuity after  
n deposits.
Principle of Mathematical	
If the following two conditions are satisfied, 
Induction (p. 862)	
  Condition I:  The statement is true for the natural number 1.
	
  Condition II:  If the statement is true for some natural number k, it is also true for k + 1 
then the statement is true for all natural numbers.
Binomial coefficient (p. 866)	
a  n
j b =
n!
j!1n - j2!
The Pascal triangle (p. 867)	
See Figure 12.
Binomial Theorem (p. 867)	
1x + a2n = an
0bxn + an
1baxn-1 + g + a n
j baj  xn-j + g + an
nban = a
n
j=0
a n
j bxn-j aj
Objectives
Section	
You should be able to…	
Example(s)	
Review Exercises
12.1	
1	 Write the first several terms of a sequence (p. 834)	
1–4	
1, 2
	
2	 Write the terms of a sequence defined by a recursive 	
5, 6	
3, 4 
	
	
formula (p. 837)	
3	
Use summation notation (p. 838)	
7, 8	
5, 6
	
4	
Find the sum of a sequence (p. 839)	
9	
13, 14
12.2	
1	
Determine whether a sequence is arithmetic (p. 844)	
1–3	
7–12
	
2	
Find a formula for an arithmetic sequence (p. 845)	
4, 5	
17, 19–21, 34(a)
	
3	
Find the sum of an arithmetic sequence (p. 846)	
6–8	
7, 10, 14, 34(b), 35
12.3	
1	
Determine whether a sequence is geometric (p. 850)	
1–3	
7–12
	
2	
Find a formula for a geometric sequence (p. 851)	
4	
11, 18, 36(a)–(c), 38
	
3	
Find the sum of a geometric sequence (p. 852)	
5, 6	
9, 11, 15, 16
	
4	
Determine whether a geometric series converges or	
7–9	
22–25, 36(d) 
	
	
diverges (p. 853)
	
5	
Solve annuity problems (p. 856)	
10, 11	
37
12.4	
1	
Prove statements using mathematical induction (p. 861)	
1–4	
26–28
12.5	
1	
Evaluate a n
j b (p. 865)	
1	
29
	
2	
Use the Binomial Theorem (p. 867)	
2–5	
30–33
Review Exercises
In Problems 1–4, write down the first five terms of each sequence.
	 1.	 {an} = e 1-12na2n + 1
n + 3 b f	
2.	 {cn} = b 3n
n3 r	
3.	 a1 = 3; an = 2
3 an-1	
4.	 a1 = 2; an = 2 - an-1	
5.	 Write out a
4
k=1
14k + 22. 
	 6.	 Express 1 - 1
2 + 1
3 - 1
4 + g + 1
13  using summation notation. 
In Problems 7–12, determine whether the given sequence is arithmetic, geometric, or neither. If the sequence is arithmetic, find the common 
difference and the sum of the first n terms. If the sequence is geometric, find the common ratio and the sum of the first n terms.
	 7.	 {an} = 5n + 56	
8.	 {cn} = 52n36 
	
9.	 {sn} = 523n6
	 10.	 2, 10, 18, 26, c	
11.	 3, 3
2, 3
4, 3
8, 3
16, c	
12.	 2
3, 3
4, 4
5, 5
6, c 

In Problems 13–16, find each sum.
	 13.	 a
30
k=1
 1k2 + 22 
	
14.	 a
40
k=1
1- 2k + 82 
	
15.	 a
7
k=1
 a1
3b
k
 
	 16.	 a
10
k=1
1-22k 
In Problems 17–19, find the indicated term in each sequence. [Hint: Find the general term first.]
	 17.	 11th term of 1, 7, 13, 19, c 
	
18.	 11th term of 1, 1
10, 1
100,c 
	
19.	 9th term of 22, 222, 322, c 
In Problems 20 and 21, find a general formula for each arithmetic sequence.
	 20.	 7th term is 31; 20th term is 96 
	 21.	 8th term is 15, 15th term is 29 
In Problems 22–25, determine whether each infinite geometric series converges or diverges. If it converges, find its sum.
	 22.	 3 + 1 + 1
3 + 1
9 + g	
23.	 5 - 1 + 1
5 - 1
25 + g
	 24.	 1
2 + 3
4 + 9
8 + g	
25.	 a
q
k=1
 4a1
2b
k-1
In Problems 26–28, use the Principle of Mathematical Induction to show that the given statement is true for all natural numbers.
	 26.	 7 + 14 + 21 + g + 7n = 7n
2 1n + 12	
27.	 4 + 20 + 100 + g + 4 # 5k = 5k+1 - 1
	 28.	 12 + 42 + 72 + g + 13n - 222 = 1
2 n16n2 - 3n - 12
	 29.	 Evaluate: a5
2b 
In Problems 30 and 31, expand each expression using the Binomial Theorem.
	 30.	 12x + 326	
31.	 1x - 725
	 32.	 Find the coefficient of x7 in the expansion of 1x + 229 
	 33.	 Find the coefficient of x2 in the expansion of 12x + 127. 
	 34.	 Constructing a Brick Staircase  A brick staircase has a total 
of 25 steps. The bottom step requires 80 bricks. Each step 
thereafter requires three fewer bricks than the prior step.
(a)	 How many bricks are required for the top step? 
(b)	 How many bricks are required to build the staircase?
	 35.	 Creating a Floor Design  A mosaic tile floor is designed in 
the shape of a trapezoid 26 feet wide at the base and 8 feet 
wide at the top. The tiles, 12 inches by 12 inches, are to be 
placed so that each successive row contains two fewer tiles 
than the row below. How many tiles will be required? 
	 36.	 Bouncing Balls  A ball is dropped from a height of 20 feet. 
Each time it strikes the ground, it bounces up to three-quarters 
of the height of the previous bounce.
(a)	 What height will the ball bounce up to after it strikes the 
ground for the 3rd time?
(b)	 How high will it bounce after it strikes the ground for 
the nth time?
(c)	 How many times does the ball need to strike the ground 
before its bounce is less than 6 inches? 
(d)	 What total distance does the ball travel before it stops 
bouncing? 
	 37.	 Retirement Planning  Chris gets paid once a month and 
contributes $200 each pay period into his 401(k). If Chris 
plans on retiring in 20 years, what will be the value of his 
401(k) if the per annum rate of return of the 401(k) is 10% 
compounded monthly?  
	 38.	 Salary Increases  Your friend has just been hired at an an-
nual salary of $40,000. If she expects to receive annual in-
creases of 6%, what will her salary be as she begins her 7th 
year? 
Chapter Review  873

	 12.	 Determine whether the infinite geometric series
256 - 64 + 16 - 4 + g
	
	 converges or diverges. If it converges, find its sum.
	 13.	 Expand 13m + 225 using the Binomial Theorem.
	 14.	 Use the Principle of Mathematical Induction to show that 
the given statement is true for all natural numbers.
a1 + 1
1b a1 + 1
2b a1 + 1
3b g a1 + 1
nb = n + 1
	 15.	 A new car sold for $31,000. If the vehicle loses 15% of 
its value each year, how much will it be worth after 10 
years? 
	 16.	 A weightlifter begins his routine by benching 100 pounds 
and increases the weight by 30 pounds for each set. If he 
does 10 repetitions in each set, what is the total weight lifted 
after 5 sets? 
	 1.	 Find all the solutions, real and complex, of the equation
0 x2 0 = 9 
	 2.	 (a)	 Graph the circle x2 + y2 = 100 and the 	
 
parabola y = 3x2.
(b)	 Solve the system of equations: bx2 + y2 = 100
y
= 3x2
(c)	 Where do the circle and the parabola intersect?
	 3.	 Solve the equation: 2ex = 5 
	 4.	 Find an equation of the line with slope 5 and x-intercept 2.
	 5.	 Find the standard equation of the circle whose center is the 
point 1- 1, 22 if 13, 52 is a point on the circle.
	 6.	 f1x2 =
3x
x - 2 and g1x2 = 2x + 1
Find:
(a)	 1f ∘g2 122  	
(b)  1g ∘f 2 142 
(c)	 1f ∘g2 1x2	
(d)  The domain of 1f ∘g2 1x2
(e)	 1g ∘f2 1x2	
(f)  The domain of 1g ∘f2 1x2
(g)	 The function g-1	
(h)  The function f -1 and its
	
and its domain	
domain
	 7.	 Find the equation of an ellipse with center at the origin, a 
focus at 10, 32, and a vertex at 10, 42.
	 8.	 Find the equation of a parabola with vertex at 1-1, 22 and 
focus at 1- 1, 32. 
	 9.	 Find the polar equation of a circle with center at 10, 42 that 
passes through the pole. What is the rectangular equation?
	 10.	 Solve the equation
2 sin2 x - sin x - 3 = 0, 0 … x 6 2p 
	 11.	 Find the exact value of cos-11- 0.52. 
	 12.	 If sin u = 1
4 and u is in the second quadrant, find:
(a)	 cos u	
(b)  tan u
(c)	 sin12u2	
(d)  cos12u2
(e)	 sin a1
2 ub
Cumulative Review
874 
CHAPTER 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
In Problems 1 and 2, write down the first five terms of each  
sequence.
	 1.	 {sn} = b n2 - 1
n + 8 r	
2.  a1 = 4, an = 3an-1 + 2
In Problems 3 and 4, write out each sum. Evaluate each sum.
	 3.	 a
3
k=1
1- 12k+1 ¢k + 1
k2
 ≤	
4.  a
4
k=1
 c a2
3b
k
- kd
	 5.	 Write the following sum using summation notation.
-  2
5 + 3
6 - 4
7 + g + 11
14 
Chapter Test
     
 
In Problems 6–11, determine whether the given sequence is arithmetic,  
geometric, or neither. If the sequence is arithmetic, find the  
common difference and the sum of the first n terms. If the sequence 
is geometric, find the common ratio and the sum of the first n terms.
	 6.	 6, 12, 36, 144, c 
	
7.	 e -  1
2 # 4n f
	 8.	 - 2, - 10, - 18, - 26, c	
9.	 e -  n
2 + 7f
	 10.	 25, 10, 4, 8
5, c	
11.	 e 2n - 3
2n + 1 f 
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel. 

Chapter Projects  875
Chapter Projects
and death rates are given as the number of live births per 
1000 population. Each must be computed as the number  
of births (deaths) per individual. For example, in 2014,  
the birth rate was 13.42 per 1000 and the death rate was 
8.15 per 1000, so
b = 13.42
1000 = 0.01342, while d = 8.15
1000 = 0.00815.
Next, using data from the Immigration and  
Naturalization Service at www.fedstats.gov, determine 
the net immigration into the United States for the same 
year used to obtain b and d.
	2.	 Determine the value of r, the growth rate of the population.
	3.	 Find a recursive formula for the population of the United 
States.
	4.	 Use the recursive formula to predict the population of 
the United States in the following year. In other words, 
if data are available up to the year 2014, predict the U.S. 
population in 2015.
	5.	 Does your prediction seem reasonable? Explain.
	6.	 Repeat Problems 1–5 for Uganda using the CIA World 
Factbook (in 2014, the birth rate was 47.17 per 1000 and 
the death rate was 10.97 per 1000).
	7.	
Do your results for the United States (a developed  
country) and Uganda (a developing country) seem in 
line with the article in the chapter opener? Explain.
	8.	 Do you think the recursive formula found in Problem 3 
will be useful in predicting future populations? Why or 
why not?
Internet-based Project
	 I.	 Population Growth  The size of the population of the  
United States essentially depends on its current population, 
the birth and death rates of the population, and immigration. 
Let b represent the birth rate of the U.S. population, and let 
d represent its death rate. Then r = b - d represents the 
growth rate of the population, where r varies from year to 
year. The U.S. population after n years can be modeled using 
the recursive function
pn = 11 + r2pn-1 + I
where I represents net immigration into the United States.
	1.	 Using data from the CIA World Factbook at  
www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/index.html,  
determine the birth and death rates in the United States 
for the most recent year that data are available. Birth rates 
The following projects are available at the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC):
	 II.	 Project at Motorola  Digital Wireless Communication Cell phones take speech and change it into digital code using only zeros and 
ones. See how the code length can be modeled using a mathematical sequence.
	III.	 Economics  Economists use the current price of a good and a recursive model to predict future consumer demand and to determine 
future production.
	IV.	 Standardized Tests  Many tests of intelligence, aptitude, and achievement contain questions asking for the terms of a mathematical 
sequence.

Outline
13.1	 Counting
13.2	 Permutations and Combinations
13.3	 Probability
 	
Chapter Review
 	
Chapter Test
 	
Cumulative Review
 	
Chapter Projects
Purchasing a Lottery Ticket
In recent years, the jackpot prizes for the nation’s two major multistate lotteries, 
Mega Millions and Powerball, have climbed to all-time highs. This has happened 
since Powerball (in January 2012) and Mega Millions (in October 2013) made 
it more difficult to win their top prizes. The probability of winning the Mega  
Millions jackpot is now about 1 in 259 million, and the probability for Powerball 
is about 1 in 175 million.
With such improbable chances of winning the jackpots, one might wonder 
if there ever comes a point when purchasing a lottery ticket is worthwhile. One 
important consideration in making this determination is the expected profit. 
For a game of chance, the expected profit is a measure of how much a player 
will profit (or lose) if she or he plays the game a large number of times.
The project at the end of this chapter explores the expected profits from  
playing Mega Millions and Powerball and examines how the expected profit is 
related to the jackpot amounts.
—See Chapter Project I—
A Look Back
We introduced sets in Appendix A, Section A.1, and have been using them to 
represent solutions of equations and inequalities and to represent the domain 
and range of functions.
A Look Ahead
Here we discuss methods for counting the number of elements in a set and  
consider the role of sets in probability.
13
Counting and  
Probability
876

Section 13.1  Counting  877
Counting plays a major role in many diverse areas, such as probability, statistics, and 
computer science; counting techniques are a part of a branch of mathematics called 
combinatorics.
Find All the Subsets of a Set
We begin by reviewing the ways in which two sets can be compared.
If two sets A and B have precisely the same elements, we say that A and B are 
equal and write A = B.
If each element of a set A is also an element of a set B, we say that A is a subset 
of B and write A ⊆B.
If A ⊆B and A ≠B, we say that A is a proper subset of B and write A ⊂B.
If A ⊆B, every element in set A is also in set B, but B may or may not have 
additional elements. If A ⊂B, every element in A is also in B, and B has at least 
one element not found in A.
Finally, we agree that the empty set, ∅, is a subset of every set; that is,
∅⊆A  for any set A
Finding All the Subsets of a Set
Write down all the subsets of the set 5a, b, c6.
To organize the work, write down all the subsets with no elements, then those with 
one element, then those with two elements, and finally those with three elements. 
This gives all the subsets. Do you see why?
0 Elements	
1 Element	
2 Elements	
3 Elements
∅	
{a}, {b}, {c}	
{a, b}, {b, c}, {a, c}	
{a, b, c}
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Count the Number of Elements in a Set
As you count the number of students in a classroom or the number of pennies 
in your pocket, what you are really doing is matching, on a one-to-one basis,  
each object to be counted with the set of counting numbers, 1, 2, 3, c, n, for some 
number n. If a set A matched up in this fashion with the set 51, 2, c, 256, you 
would conclude that there are 25 elements in the set A. The notation n1A2 = 25 is 
used to indicate that there are 25 elements in the set A.
Because the empty set has no elements, we write
n1∅2 = 0
If the number of elements in a set is a nonnegative integer, the set is finite. 
Otherwise, it is infinite. We shall concern ourselves only with finite sets.
Look again at Example 1. A set with 3 elements has 23 = 8 subsets. This result 
can be generalized.
1
Example 1
Solution
•
2
13.1  Counting
•	 Sets (Appendix A, Section A.1, pp. 945–947)
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 881.
	
Objectives	 	1  Find All the Subsets of a Set  (p. 877)
	
	 	2  Count the Number of Elements in a Set  (p. 877)
	
	 	3  Solve Counting Problems Using the Multiplication Principle  (p. 879)
In Words
The notation n(A) means “the  
number of elements in set A.”

878 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
If A is a set with n elements, then A has 2n subsets.
For example, the set 5a, b, c, d, e6 has 25 = 32 subsets.
Analyzing Survey Data
In a survey of 100 college students, 35 were registered in College Algebra, 52 were 
registered in Computer Science I, and 18 were registered in both courses.
(a)	 How many students were registered in College Algebra or Computer Science I?
(b)	 How many were registered in neither course?
(a)	 First, let  A = set of students in College Algebra
 B = set of students in Computer Science I
	
Then the given information tells us that
n1A2 = 35  n1B2 = 52  n1A ∩B2 = 18
	
Refer to Figure 1. Since n1A ∩B2 = 18, the common part of the circles  
representing set A and set B has 18 elements. In addition, the remaining portion  
of the circle representing set A will have 35 - 18 = 17 elements. Similarly,  
the remaining portion of the circle representing set B has 52 - 18 = 34  
elements. This means that 17 + 18 + 34 = 69 students were registered in  
College Algebra or Computer Science I.
(b)	 Since 100 students were surveyed, it follows that 100 - 69 = 31 were registered 
in neither course.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 7  a n d  2 7
The solution to Example 2 contains the basis for a general counting formula. 
If we count the elements in each of two sets A and B, we necessarily count twice 
any elements that are in both A and B—that is, those elements in A ∩B. To count 
correctly the elements that are in A or B—that is, to find n(A ∪B)—we need to 
subtract those in A ∩B from n(A) + n(B).
Example 2
Solution
•
Figure 1 
Counting Formula
If A and B are finite sets,
	
n1A ∪B2 = n1A2 + n1B2 - n1A ∩B2	
(1) 
Theorem
Addition Principle of Counting
If two sets A and B have no elements in common, that is,
	
if A ∩B = ∅,  then n1A ∪B2 = n1A2 + n1B2	
(2) 
Theorem
Refer to Example 2. Using formula (1), we have
 n1A ∪B2 = n1A2 + n1B2 - n1A ∩B2
 = 35 + 52 - 18
 = 69
There are 69 students registered in College Algebra or Computer Science I.
A special case of the counting formula (1) occurs if A and B have no elements 
in common. In this case, A ∩B = ∅, so n1A ∩B2 = 0.
Universal set
A
18 34
31
17
B

Section 13.1  Counting  879
Formula (2) can be generalized.
General Addition Principle of Counting
If, for n sets A1, A2, c, An, no two have elements in common, then
	 n1A1 ∪A2 ∪g∪An2 = n1A12 + n1A22 + g + n1An2	
(3) 
Theorem
Counting
Table 1 lists the level of education for all United States residents 25 years of age or 
older in 2013.
Example 3
Level of Education
Number of U.S. Residents at Least 25 Years Old
Not a high school graduate
24,517,000
High school graduate
61,704,000
Some college, but no degree
34,805,000
Associate’s degree
20,367,000
Bachelor’s degree
41,575,000
Advanced degree
23,931,000
Table 1
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
(a)	 How many U.S. residents 25 years of age or older had an associate’s degree or  
a bachelor’s degree?
(b)	 How many U.S. residents 25 years of age or older had an associate’s degree,  
a bachelor’s degree, or an advanced degree?
Let A represent the set of associate’s degree holders, B represent the set of bachelor’s 
degree holders, and C represent the set of advanced degree holders. No two of the 
sets A, B, and C have elements in common (although the holder of an advanced  
degree certainly also holds a bachelor’s degree, the individual would be part of the 
set for which the highest degree has been conferred). Then
n1A2 = 20,367,000  n1B2 = 41,575,000  n1C2 = 23,931,000
(a)	 Using formula (2),
n1A ∪B2 = n1A2 + n1B2 = 20,367,000 + 41,575,000 = 61,942,000
	
There were 61,942,000 U.S. residents 25 years of age or older who had an  
associate’s degree or a bachelor’s degree.
(b)	 Using formula (3),
 n1A ∪B ∪C2 = n1A2 + n1B2 + n1C2
 = 20,367,000 + 41,575,000 + 23,931,000
 = 85,873,000
	
There were 85,873,000 U.S. residents 25 years of age or older who had an associate’s 
degree, a bachelor’s degree, or an advanced degree.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1
Solve Counting Problems Using the Multiplication Principle
Counting the Number of Possible Meals
The fixed-price dinner at Mabenka Restaurant provides the following choices:
Appetizer: 	
soup or salad
Entrée: 	
baked chicken, broiled beef patty, beef liver, or roast beef au jus
Dessert:	
ice cream or cheese cake
How many different meals can be ordered?
Solution
•
3
Example 4

880 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
Ordering such a meal requires three separate decisions:
Choose an Appetizer 	
Choose an Entrée 	
Choose a Dessert
2 choices 	
4 choices 	
2 choices
Look at the tree diagram in Figure 2. Note that for each choice of appetizer, there 
are 4 choices of entrées. And for each of these 2 # 4 = 8 choices, there are 2 choices 
for dessert. A total of
2 # 4 # 2 = 16
different meals can be ordered.
Solution
Figure 2 
Cheese cake
Ice cream
Soup, chicken, ice cream 
Soup, chicken, cheese cake
Cheese cake
Ice cream
Chicken
Patty
Liver
Beef
Chicken
Patty
Liver
Beef
Soup
Salad
Soup, patty, ice cream 
Soup, patty, cheese cake
Cheese cake
Ice cream
Soup, liver, ice cream 
Soup, liver, cheese cake
Cheese cake
Ice cream
Soup, beef, ice cream 
Soup, beef, cheese cake
Cheese cake
Ice cream
Salad, chicken, ice cream 
Salad, chicken, cheese cake
Cheese cake
Ice cream
Salad, patty, ice cream 
Salad, patty, cheese cake
Cheese cake
Ice cream
Salad, liver, ice cream 
Salad, liver, cheese cake
Cheese cake
Ice cream
Salad, beef, ice cream 
Salad, beef, cheese cake
Dessert
Entrée
Appetizer
Multiplication Principle of Counting
If a task consists of a sequence of choices in which there are p selections for the 
first choice, q selections for the second choice, r selections for the third choice, 
and so on, the task of making these selections can be done in
p # q # r # c
different ways.
Theorem
Example 4 demonstrates a general principle of counting.
•
Forming Codes
How many two-symbol code words can be formed if the first symbol is an uppercase 
letter and the second symbol is a digit?
It sometimes helps to begin by listing some of the possibilities. The code consists of 
an uppercase letter followed by a digit, so some possibilities are A1, A2, B3, X0, and 
so on. The task consists of making two selections: The first selection requires choosing  
an uppercase letter (26 choices), and the second task requires choosing a digit  
(10 choices). By the Multiplication Principle, there are
26 # 10 = 260
different code words of the type described.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Example 5
Solution
•

Section 13.1  Counting  881
13.1  Assess Your Understanding
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The               of A and B consists of all elements in either  
A or B or both. (pp. 945–947) 
	 2.	 The               of A with B consists of all elements in both  
A and B. (pp. 945–947) 
	 5.	 If each element of a set A is also an element of a set B, we 
say that A is a 
 of B and write A 
 B.
	 6.	 If the number of elements in a set is a nonnegative integer, 
we say that the set is 
.
	
7.	 The Counting Formula states that if A and B are finite sets, 
then n(A ∪B) =
.
	 9.	 Write down all the subsets of 5a, b, c, d6.
	 10.	 Write down all the subsets of 5a, b, c, d, e6.
	 11.	 If n1A2 = 15, n1B2 = 20, and n1A ∩B2 = 10, 	 
find n1A ∪B2. 
	 12.	 If n1A2 = 30, n1B2 = 40, and n1A ∪B2 = 45, 	 
find n1A ∩B2. 
	 3.	 True or False  The intersection of two sets is always a subset 
of their union. (pp. 945–947) 
	 4.	 True or False  If A is a set, the complement of A is the set 
of all the elements in the universal set that are not in A. 
(pp. 945–947) 
	 8.	 True or False    If a task consists of a sequence of three  
choices in which there are p selections for the first choice, 
q selections for the second choice, and r selections for the 
third choice, then the task of making these selections can be 
done in p # q # r different ways. 
	 13.	 If 
n1A ∪B2 = 50, n1A ∩B2 = 10, and 
n1B2 = 20,  
find n1A2. 
	 14.	 If n1A ∪B2 = 60, n1A ∩B2 = 40, and n1A2 = n1B2, 
find n1A2. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
Skill Building
In Problems 15–22, use the information given in the figure.
	 15.	 How many are in set A? 
	 16.	 How many are in set B? 
	 17.	 How many are in A or B? 
	 18.	 How many are in A and B? 
Applications and Extensions
	 23.	 Shirts and Ties  A man has 10 shirts and 3 ties. How many  
different shirt and tie arrangements can he wear? 
	 24.	 Blouses and Skirts  A woman has 5 blouses and 8 skirts. How 
many different outfits can she wear? 
	 25.	 Four-digit Numbers  How many different five-digit numbers 
can be formed using the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 if the 
first digit cannot be 0? Repeated digits are allowed. 
	 26.	 Five-digit Numbers  How many five-digit numbers can be 
formed using the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 if the first 
digit cannot be 0 or 1? Repeated digits are allowed. 
	 27.	 Analyzing Survey Data  In a consumer survey of 500 peo-
ple, 124 indicated that they would be buying a major appli-
ance within the next month, 70 indicated that they would 
buy a car, and 24 said that they would buy both a major  
appliance and a car. How many will purchase neither? How 
many will purchase only a car? 
	 28.	 Analyzing Survey Data  In a student survey, 200 indicated 
that they would attend Summer Session I, and 150 indicated  
Summer Session II. If 75 students plan to attend both  
summer sessions, and 275 indicated that they would attend  
neither session, how many students participated in the  
survey? 
	 19.	 How many are in A but not C? 
	 20.	 How many are not in A? 
	 21.	 How many are in A and B and C? 
	 22.	 How many are in A or B or C? 
	 29.	 Analyzing Survey Data  In a survey of 100 investors in the 
stock market,
50 owned shares in IBM
40 owned shares in AT&T
45 owned shares in GE
20 owned shares in both IBM and GE
15 owned shares in both AT&T and GE
20 owned shares in both IBM and AT&T
5 owned shares in all three
(a)	 How many of the investors surveyed did not have shares 
in any of the three companies? 
(b)	 How many owned just IBM shares? 
(c)	 How many owned just GE shares? 
(d)	 How many owned neither IBM nor GE? 
(e)	 How many owned either IBM or AT&T but no GE? 
	 30.	 Classifying Blood Types    Human blood is classified as  
either Rh+ or Rh- . Blood is also classified by type: A, if it 
contains an A antigen but not a B antigen; B, if it contains 
a B antigen but not an A antigen; AB, if it contains both A 
and B antigens; and O, if it contains neither antigen. Draw 
a Venn diagram illustrating the various blood types. Based 
on this classification, how many different kinds of blood 
are there?
A
B
C
15
3
15
10
5 2
4
2
U

882 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
	 31.	 Demographics  The data shown below represent the marital 
status of males 18 years old and older in a country. Use this 
data to determine the number of these males in each group 
described below.
Source: Current Population Survey
Number (in millions)
Marital Status
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Never married
55.4
2.8
11.2
45.0
Source: Current Population Survey
Number (in millions)
Marital Status
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Never married
66.2
11.2
14.4
30.5
(a)	 Determine the number of males 18 years old and older 
who are married or never married. 
(b)	 Determine the number of males 18 years old and older 
who are married, divorced, or never married.
	 32.	 Demographics    The following data represent the marital  
status of females 18 years old and older in the U.S. in 2013.
(a)	 Determine the number of females 18 years old and  
older who are widowed or divorced. 
(b)	 Determine the number of females 18 years old and older  
who are married, widowed, or divorced. 
	 33.	 Stock Portfolios  As a financial planner, you are asked to  
select one stock from each of the following groups: 8 local 
stocks, 6 national stocks, and 12 global stocks. How many 
different portfolios are possible? 
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 34.	 Make up a problem different from any found in the text that 
requires the addition principle of counting to solve. Give it 
to a friend to solve and critique.
	 35.	 Investigate the notion of counting as it relates to infinite 
sets. Write an essay on your findings.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 36–39 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 36.	 Graph (x - 2)2 + (y + 1)2 = 9.
	 37.	 If the sides of a triangle are a = 2, b = 2, and c = 3, find 
the measures of the three angles. Round to the nearest 
tenth. 
	 38.	 Find all the real zeros of the function 
f (x) = (x - 2)(x2 - 3x - 10).
	 39.	 Solve: log3 x + log3 2 = - 2  
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 union
2.  	intersection
       3.  True
4.  True
13.2  Permutations and Combinations
•	 Factorial (Section 12.1, p. 836)
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 888.
	
Objectives	 	1  Solve Counting Problems Using Permutations Involving  
n Distinct Objects  (p. 882)
	
	 	2  Solve Counting Problems Using Combinations  (p. 885)
	
	 	3  Solve Counting Problems Using Permutations Involving  
n Nondistinct Objects  (p. 887)
Solve Counting Problems Using Permutations  
Involving n Distinct Objects
1
A permutation is an ordered arrangement of r objects chosen from n objects.
Definition

Section 13.2  Permutations and Combinations  883
Three types of permutations are discussed:
	 1.	 The n objects are distinct (different), and repetition is allowed in the selection 
of r of them. [Distinct, with repetition]
	 2.	 The n objects are distinct (different), and repetition is not allowed in the selection 
of r of them, where r … n. [Distinct, without repetition]
	 3.	 The n objects are not distinct, and all of them are used in the arrangement. 
[Not distinct]
We take up the first two types here and deal with the third type at the end of 
this section.
The first type of permutation (n distinct objects, repetition allowed) is handled 
using the Multiplication Principle.
Counting Airport Codes [Permutation: Distinct,  
with Repetition]
The International Airline Transportation Association (IATA) assigns three-letter 
codes to represent airport locations. For example, the airport code for Ft. Lauderdale, 
Florida, is FLL. Notice that repetition is allowed in forming this code. How many 
airport codes are possible?
An airport code is formed by choosing 3 letters from 26 letters and arranging them 
in order. In the ordered arrangement, a letter may be repeated. This is an example of 
a permutation with repetition in which 3 objects are chosen from 26 distinct objects.
The task of counting the number of such arrangements consists of making three 
selections. Each selection requires choosing a letter of the alphabet (26 choices). By 
the Multiplication Principle, there are
26 # 26 # 26 = 263 = 17,576
possible airport codes.
The solution given to Example 1 can be generalized.
Example 1
Solution
•
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
Now let’s consider permutations in which the objects are distinct and repetition 
is not allowed.
Forming Codes [Permutation: Distinct, without Repetition]
Suppose that a three-letter code is to be formed using any of the 26 uppercase  
letters of the alphabet, but no letter is to be used more than once. How many different 
three-letter codes are there?
Some of the possibilities are ABC, ABD, ABZ, ACB, CBA, and so on. The task  
consists of making three selections. The first selection requires choosing from  
26 letters. Since no letter can be used more than once, the second selection requires 
choosing from 25 letters. The third selection requires choosing from 24 letters.  
(Do you see why?) By the Multiplication Principle, there are
26 # 25 # 24 = 15,600
different three-letter codes with no letter repeated.
Example 2
Solution
•
Permutations: Distinct Objects with Repetition
The number of ordered arrangements of r objects chosen from n objects, in 
which the n objects are distinct and repetition is allowed, is nr.
Theorem

884 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
For the second type of permutation, we introduce the following notation.
The notation P(n, r) represents the number of ordered arrangements of r objects 
chosen from n distinct objects, where r … n and repetition is not allowed.
For example, the question posed in Example 2 asks for the number of ways in 
which the 26 letters of the alphabet can be arranged, in order, using three nonrepeated 
letters. The answer is
P126, 32 = 26 # 25 # 24 = 15,600
Lining People Up
In how many ways can 5 people be lined up?
The 5 people are distinct. Once a person is in line, that person will not be repeated 
elsewhere in the line; and, in lining people up, order is important. This is a permutation 
of 5 objects taken 5 at a time, so 5 people can be lined up in
P15, 52 = 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 = 120 ways
	
5 factors
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5
To arrive at a formula for P1n, r2, note that the task of obtaining an ordered 
arrangement of n objects in which only r … n of them are used, without repeating 
any of them, requires making r selections. For the first selection, there are n choices; 
for the second selection, there are n - 1 choices; for the third selection, there are 
n - 2 choices; c; for the rth selection, there are n - 1r - 12 choices. By the 
Multiplication Principle, this means
	
1st 	 2nd 	
3rd 	
r th
P1n, r2 = n # 1n - 12 # 1n - 22 #  g # 3n - 1r - 12 4
= n # 1n - 12 # 1n - 22 #  g # 1n - r + 12
This formula for P1n, r2 can be compactly written using factorial notation.*
Example 3
Solution
e
•
*Recall that 0! = 1, 1! = 1, 2! = 2 # 1,c, n! = n1n - 12 #  c # 3 # 2 # 1.
 P1n, r2 = n # 1n - 12 # 1n - 22 #  g # 1n - r + 12
 = n # 1n - 12 # 1n - 22 #  g # 1n - r + 12 # 1n - r2 #  g # 3 # 2 # 1
1n - r2 #  g # 3 # 2 # 1 =
n!
1n - r2!
Permutations of r Objects Chosen from n Distinct Objects  
without Repetition
The number of arrangements of n objects using r … n of them, in which
	 1.	 the n objects are distinct,
	 2.	 once an object is used it cannot be repeated, and
	 3.	 order is important, 
is given by the formula
	
P1n, r2 =
n!
1n - r2!	
(1)
Theorem

Section 13.2  Permutations and Combinations  885
Computing Permutations
Evaluate:  (a)  P17, 32      (b)  P16, 12      (c)   P152, 52
Parts (a) and (b) are each worked two ways.
(a)	 P17, 32 = 7 # 6 # 5 = 210
	
	
3 factors
	
or
P17, 32 =
7!
17 - 32! = 7!
4! = 7 # 6 # 5 #  4! 
 4! 
= 210
(b)	 P16, 12 = 6 = 6
	
	
1 factor
	
or
P16, 12 =
6!
16 - 12! = 6!
5! = 6 #  5! 
 5! 
= 6
(c)	 Figure 3 shows the solution using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator. So
P152, 52 = 311,875,200
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
The Birthday Problem
All we know about Shannon, Patrick, and Ryan is that they have different birthdays. 
If all the possible ways this could occur were listed, how many would there be?  
Assume that there are 365 days in a year.
This is an example of a permutation in which 3 birthdays are selected from a possible 
365 days, and no birthday may repeat itself. The number of ways this can occur is
P1365, 32 =
365!
1365 - 32! = 365 # 364 # 363 #  362! 
 362! 
= 365 # 364 # 363 = 48,228,180
There are 48,228,180 ways in which three people can all have different birthdays.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Solve Counting Problems Using Combinations
In a permutation, order is important. For example, the arrangements ABC, CAB, 
BAC, care considered different arrangements of the letters A, B, and C. In many 
situations, though, order is unimportant. For example, in the card game of poker, the 
order in which the cards are received does not matter; it is the combination of the 
cards that matters.
Example 4
Solution
c
5
•
Example 5
Solution
•
2
Figure 3  P(52, 5)
A combination is an arrangement, without regard to order, of r objects selected 
from n distinct objects without repetition, where r … n. The notation C1n, r2
represents the number of combinations of n distinct objects using r of them.
Definition
Listing Combinations
List all the combinations of the 4 objects a, b, c, d taken 2 at a time. What is C(4, 2)?
One combination of a, b, c, d taken 2 at a time is
ab
Example 6
Solution

886 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
Exclude ba from the list because order is not important in a combination (this means 
that we do not distinguish ab from ba). The list of all combinations of a, b, c, d taken 
2 at a time is
ab, ac, ad, bc, bd, cd
so
C14, 22 = 6
A formula for C1n, r2 can be found by noting that the only difference between 
a permutation of type 2 (distinct, without repetition) and a combination is that order 
is disregarded in combinations. To determine C1n, r2, eliminate from the formula 
for P1n, r2 the number of permutations that are simply rearrangements of a given 
set of r objects. This can be determined from the formula for P1n, r2 by calculating 
P1r, r2 = r!. So, dividing P1n, r2 by r! gives the desired formula for C1n, r2:
 C1n, r2 =
P1n, r2
r!
=
n!
1n - r2!
r!
=
n!
1n - r2! r!
	
	
We have proved the following result:
•
 c
Use formula (1).
Number of Combinations of n Distinct Objects Taken r at a Time
The number of arrangements of n objects using r … n of them, in which
	 1.	 the n objects are distinct,
	 2.	 once an object is used, it cannot be repeated, and
	 3.	 order is not important,
is given by the formula
	
C1n, r2 =
n!
1n - r2! r!	
(2)
Theorem
Based on formula (2), we discover that the symbol C1n, r2 and the symbol an
r b
for the binomial coefficients are, in fact, the same. The Pascal triangle (see  
Section 12.5) can be used to find the value of C1n, r2. However, because it is more 
practical and convenient, we will use formula (2) instead.
Using Formula (2)
Use formula (2) to find the value of each expression.
(a)	 C13, 12    (b)  C16, 32    (c)  C1n, n2    (d)  C1n, 02      (e)  C152, 52
(a)	 C13, 12 =
3!
13 - 12!1! =
3!
2!1! = 3 #  2 # 1
 2 # 1 # 1 = 3
(b)	 C16, 32 =
6!
16 - 32!3! = 6 # 5 # 4 #  3! 
3! #  3! 
=
 6 # 5 # 4
 6 
= 20
(c)	 C1n, n2 =
n!
1n - n2!n! =
 n! 
0! n! = 1
1 = 1
Example 7
Solution

Section 13.2  Permutations and Combinations  887
(d)	 C1n, 02 =
n!
1n - 02!0! =
 n! 
 n! 0! = 1
1 = 1
(e)	 Figure 4 shows the solution using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator.
C152, 52 = 2,598,960
	
The value of the expression is 2,598,960.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Forming Committees
How many different committees of 3 people can be formed from a pool of 7 people?
The 7 people are distinct. More important, though, is the observation that the order 
of being selected for a committee is not significant. The problem asks for the number 
of combinations of 7 objects taken 3 at a time.
C17, 32 =
7!
4!3! = 7 # 6 # 5 #  4! 
 4! 3!
= 7 #  6 # 5
 6 
= 35
Thirty-five different committees can be formed.
Forming Committees
In how many ways can a committee consisting of 2 faculty members and  
3 students be formed if 6 faculty members and 10 students are eligible to serve 
on the committee?
The problem can be separated into two parts: the number of ways in which the faculty  
members can be chosen, C(6, 2), and the number of ways in which the student  
members can be chosen, C(10, 3). By the Multiplication Principle, the committee  
can be formed in
 C16, 22 # C110, 32 =
6!
4!2! # 10!
7!3! = 6 # 5 #  4! 
 4! 2! # 10 # 9 # 8 #  7! 
 7! 3!
 = 30
2 # 720
6
= 1800 ways
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Solve Counting Problems Using Permutations  
Involving n Nondistinct Objects
Forming Different Words
How many different words (real or imaginary) can be formed using all the letters in 
the word REARRANGE?
Each word formed will have 9 letters: 3 R’s, 2 A’s, 2 E’s, 1 N, and 1 G. To construct 
each word, we need to fill in 9 positions with the 9 letters:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
The process of forming a word consists of five tasks.
Task 1:  Choose the positions for the 3 R’s.
Task 2:  Choose the positions for the 2 A’s.
Task 3:  Choose the positions for the 2 E’s.
Task 4:  Choose the position for the 1 N.
Task 5:  Choose the position for the 1 G.
•
Example 8
Solution
•
Example 9
Solution
•
3
Example 10
Solution
Figure 4  C(52, 5)

888 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
Task 1 can be done in C19, 32 ways. There then remain 6 positions to be filled,  
so Task 2 can be done in C16, 22 ways. There remain 4 positions to be filled, so Task 3  
can be done in C14, 22 ways. There remain 2 positions to be filled, so Task 4 can 
be done in C12, 12 ways. The last position can be filled in C11, 12 way. Using the  
Multiplication Principle, the number of possible words that can be formed is
 C19, 32 # C16, 22 # C14, 22 # C12, 12 # C11, 12 =
9!
3! #  6! #
 6! 
2! #  4! #
 4! 
2! #  2! #
 2! 
1! #  1! #
 1! 
0! # 1!
 =
9!
3! # 2! # 2! # 1! # 1! = 15,120
15,120 possible words can be formed.
The form of the expression before the answer to Example 10 is suggestive of 
a general result. Had all the letters in REARRANGE been different, there would 
have been P19, 92 = 9! possible words formed. This is the numerator of the answer. 
The presence of 3 R’s, 2 A’s, and 2 E’s reduces the number of different words, as the 
entries in the denominator illustrate. This leads to the following result:
•
Permutations Involving n Objects That Are Not Distinct
The number of permutations of n objects of which n1 are of one kind, n2 are of 
a second kind, c, and nk are of a kth kind is given by
	
n!
n1! # n2! # g# nk!	
(3)
where n = n1 + n2 + g + nk.
Theorem
Arranging Flags
How many different vertical arrangements are there of 8 flags if 4 are white, 3 are 
blue, and 1 is red?
We seek the number of permutations of 8 objects, of which 4 are of one kind, 3 are 
of a second kind, and 1 is of a third kind. Using formula (3), we find that there are
8!
4! # 3! # 1! = 8 # 7 # 6 # 5 #  4! 
 4! # 3! # 1!
= 280 different arrangements
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
Example 11
Solution
•
13.2  Assess Your Understanding
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 0! =   
; 1! =   
 . (p. 836)
	 2.	 True or False  n! =
1n + 12!
n
. (p. 836) 
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 3.	 A(n) 
 is an ordered arrangement of  
r objects chosen from n objects.
	 4.	 A(n) 
 is an arrangement of r objects  
chosen from n distinct objects, without repetition and  
without regard to order.
	 5.	 P1n, r2 =
.
	 6.	 C1n, r2 =
.

Section 13.2  Permutations and Combinations  889
Skill Building
In Problems 7–14, find the value of each permutation.
	 7.	  P16, 22 
	 8.	 P17, 22 
	 9.	 P14, 42 
	 10.	 P18, 82 
	 11.	 P17, 02 
	 12.	 P19, 02 
	 13.	 P18, 42 
	 14.	 P18, 32 
In Problems 15–22, use formula (2) to find the value of each combination.
	 15.	  C18, 22 
	 16.	 C18, 62 
	 17.	 C17, 42 
	 18.	 C16, 22 
	 19.	 C115, 152 
	 20.	 C118, 12 
	 21.	 C126, 132 
	 22.	 C118, 92 
Applications and Extensions
	 23.	 List all the ordered arrangements of 5 objects k, n, o, p, and 
q choosing 3 at a time without repetition. What is P15, 32?
	 24.	 List all the ordered arrangements of 5 objects a, b, c, d, and e 
choosing 2 at a time without repetition. What is P15, 22?
	 25.	 List all the ordered arrangements of 4 objects 3, 4, 5, and 6 
choosing 3 at a time without repetition. What is P14, 32?
	 26.	 List all the ordered arrangements of 6 objects 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6  
choosing 3 at a time without repetition. What is P16, 32?
	 27.	 List all the combinations of 7 objects a, b, c, d, e, f, and g 
taken 2 at a time. What is C17, 22?
	 28.	 List all the combinations of 5 objects a, b, c, d, and e taken 2 
at a time. What is C15, 22?
	 29.	 List all the combinations of 6 objects 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 taken 
4 at a time. What is C16, 42? 
	 30.	 List all the combinations of 6 objects 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 taken 3  
at a time. What is C16, 32?
	 31.	 Forming Codes  How many three-letter codes can be formed 
using the letters A, B, C, D, and E? Repeated letters are 
allowed. 
	 32.	 Forming Codes  How many two-letter codes can be formed 
using the letters A, B, C, D, and E? Repeated letters are  
allowed. 
	 33.	 Forming Numbers  How many three-digit numbers can be 
formed using the digits from 0 to 3? Repeated digits are  
allowed. 
	 34.	 Forming Numbers  How many three-digit numbers can be 
formed using the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9? Repeated 
digits are allowed.
	 35.	 Lining People Up    In how many ways can 6 people be  
lined up? 
	 36.	 Stacking Boxes  In how many ways can 5 different boxes be 
stacked? 
	 37.	 Forming Codes  How many different two-letter codes are 
there if only the letters A, B, C, D, E, and F can be used and 
no letter can be used more than once? 
	 38.	 Forming Codes  How many different four-letter codes are 
there if only the letters A, B, C, D, E, and F can be used and 
no letter can be used more than once? 
	 39.	 Stocks on the NYSE    Companies whose stocks are listed 
on a stock exchange have their company name represented 
by either 3, 4, or 5 letters (repetition of letters is allowed). 
What is the maximum number of companies that can be 
listed? 
	 40.	 Stocks on the NASDAQ  Companies whose stocks are listed 
on the NASDAQ stock exchange have their company name 
represented by either 4 or 5 letters (repetition of letters is 
allowed). What is the maximum number of companies that 
can be listed on the NASDAQ? 
	 41.	 Establishing Committees    In how many ways can a  
committee of 2 students be formed from a pool of 4 students?
	 42.	 Establishing Committees    In how many ways can a  
committee of 3 professors be formed from a department 
that has 8 professors? 
	 43.	 Possible Answers on a True/False Test    How many  
arrangements of answers are possible for a true/false test  
with 5 questions? 
	 44.	 Possible Answers on a Multiple-choice Test    How many 
arrangements of answers are possible in a multiple-choice 
test with 5 questions, each of which has 4 possible answers?
	 45.	 Arranging Books  Five different mathematics books are to 
be arranged on a student’s desk. How many arrangements 
are possible? 
	 46.	 Forming License Plate Numbers    How many different  
license plate numbers can be made using 2 letters followed 
by 4 digits selected from the digits 0 through 9, if:
(a)	 Letters and digits may be repeated? 
(b)	 Letters may be repeated, but digits may not be repeated?
(c)	 Neither letters nor digits may be repeated? 
	 47.	 Birthday Problem  In how many ways can 3 people each 
have different birthdays? Assume that there are 365 days in 
a year. 
	 48.	 Birthday Problem  In how many ways can 5 people all have 
different birthdays? Assume that there are 365 days in a 
year. 
	 49.	 Forming a Committee  A student dance committee is to be 
formed consisting of 3 boys and 2 girls. If the membership 
is to be chosen from 8 boys and 5 girls, how many different 
committees are possible? 

890 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
	 50.	 Forming a Committee  The student relations committee of 
a college consists of 2 administrators, 3 faculty members, 
and 5 students. Four administrators, 8 faculty members, and  
20 students are eligible to serve. How many different  
committees are possible? 
	 51.	 Forming Words  How many different 6-letter words (real 
or imaginary) can be formed from the letters in the word 
BANANA? 
	 52.	 Forming Words  How many different 11-letter words (real 
or imaginary) can be formed from the letters in the word 
MATHEMATICS? 
	 53.	 Selecting Objects  An urn contains 7 white balls and 4 red 
balls. Three balls are selected. In how many ways can the  
3 balls be drawn from the total of 11 balls:
(a)	 If 2 balls are white and 1 is red? 
(b)	 If all 3 balls are white? 
(c)	 If all 3 balls are red? 
	 54.	 Selecting Objects  An urn contains 15 red balls and 10 white 
balls. Five balls are selected. In how many ways can the  
5 balls be drawn from the total of 25 balls:
(a)	 If all 5 balls are red? 
(b)	 If 3 balls are red and 2 are white? 
(c)	 If at least 4 are red balls? 
	 55.	 Senate Committees  The U.S. Senate has 100 members. Suppose  
that it is desired to place each senator on exactly 1 of 7  
possible committees. The first committee has 21 members, 
the second has 10, the third has 14, the fourth has 6, the fifth 
has 13, and the sixth and seventh have 18 apiece. In how 
many ways can these committees be formed? 
	 56.	 Football Teams    A defensive football squad consists of  
25 players. Of these, 10 are linemen, 10 are linebackers, and  
5 are safeties. How many different teams of 5 linemen,  
3 linebackers, and 3 safeties can be formed? 
	 57.	 Baseball  A children’s baseball league has teams of 8 players. 
How many batting orders is it possible for the team’s manager 
to use? (All 8 players can bat.)
	 58.	 Baseball  In the National Baseball League, the pitcher usually 
bats ninth. If this is the case, how many batting orders is it 
possible for a manager to use? 
	 59.	 Baseball Teams  A baseball team has 23 members. Of these, 
3 are pitchers and the remaining 20 can play any other posi-
tion. How many different teams of 9 players can be formed? 
Note that a baseball team consists of 1 pitcher and 8 other 
players. 
	 60.	 World Series  In the World Series the American League team 
1A2 and the National League team 1N2 play until one team 
wins four games. If the sequence of winners is designated by 
letters (for example, NAAAA means that the National League 
team won the first game and the American League won the 
next four), how many different sequences are possible? 
	 61.	 Basketball Teams  A basketball team has 6 players who play 
guard (2 of 5 starting positions). How many different teams 
are possible, assuming that the remaining 3 positions are 
filled and it is not possible to distinguish a left guard from a 
right guard? 
	 62.	 Basketball Teams    On a basketball team of 12 players,  
2 play only center, 3 play only guard, and the rest play forward  
(5 players on a team: 2 forwards, 2 guards, and 1 center). 
How many different teams are possible, assuming that it is 
not possible to distinguish a left guard from a right guard or 
a left forward from a right forward? 
	 63.	 Combination Locks  A combination lock displays 40 numbers. 
To open it, you turn to a number, then rotate clockwise to 
a second number, and then counterclockwise to the third 
number. The three numbers must be distinct.
(a)	 How many different lock combinations are there?
(b)	 Comment on the description of such a lock as a  
combination lock.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 64.	 Create a problem different from any found in the text that 
requires a permutation to solve. Give it to a friend to solve 
and critique.
	 65.	 Create a problem different from any found in the text that 
requires a combination to solve. Give it to a friend to solve 
and critique.
	 66.	 Explain the difference between a permutation and a  
combination. Give an example to illustrate your explanation.

Section 13.3    Probability  891
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 67–70 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 67.	 Find the area of the sector of a circle of radius 4 feet and central 
angle u if the arc length subtended by u is 5 feet. 
	 68.	 If f(x) = 2x - 1 and g(x) = x2 + x - 2, find (g ∘f )(x). 
 
	 69.	 Give exact values for sin 75° and cos 15°.
	 70.	 Find the 5th term of the geometric sequence with first term 
a1 =  5  and common ratio r = - 2. 
	 1.	 1; 1
	 2.	 False
13.3  Probability
	
Objectives	 	1  Construct Probability Models  (p. 891)
	
	 	2  Compute Probabilities of Equally Likely Outcomes  (p. 893)
	
	 	3  Find Probabilities of the Union of Two Events  (p. 895)
	
	 	4  Use the Complement Rule to Find Probabilities (p. 896)
Probability is an area of mathematics that deals with experiments that yield random 
results, yet admit a certain regularity. Such experiments do not always produce the 
same result or outcome, so the result of any one observation is not predictable. 
However, the results of the experiment over a long period do produce regular  
patterns that enable us to make predictions with remarkable accuracy.
Tossing a Fair Coin
If a fair coin is tossed, the outcome is either a head or a tail. On any particular 
throw, we cannot predict what will happen, but if we toss the coin many times, we 
observe that the number of times that a head comes up is approximately equal to 
the number of times that a tail comes up. It seems reasonable, therefore, to assign 
a probability of 1
2 that a head comes up and a probability of 1
2 that a tail comes up.
Construct Probability Models
The discussion in Example 1 constitutes the construction of a probability model for 
the experiment of tossing a fair coin once. A probability model has two components: 
a sample space and an assignment of probabilities. A sample space S is a set whose 
elements represent all the possibilities that can occur as a result of the experiment. 
Each element of S is called an outcome. To each outcome a number is assigned, 
called the probability of that outcome, which has two properties:
	 1.	 The probability assigned to each outcome is nonnegative.
	 2.	 The sum of all the probabilities equals 1.
Example 1
•
1
A probability model with the sample space
S = 5e1, e2, c, en6
where e1, e2, c, en are the possible outcomes and P1e12, P1e22, c, P1en2 
are the respective probabilities of these outcomes, requires that
	
P1e12 Ú 0, P1e22 Ú 0, c, P1en2 Ú 0	
(1)
	
a
n
i=1
 P1ei2 = P1e12 + P1e22 + g + P1en2 = 1	
(2) 
Definition

892 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
Determining Probability Models
In a bag of M&Ms,TM the candies are colored red, green, blue, brown, yellow, and 
orange. A candy is drawn from the bag and the color is recorded. The sample space 
of this experiment is 5red, green, blue, brown, yellow, orange6. Determine which 
of the following are probability models.
Example 2
Outcome
Probability
red
0.3
green
0.15
blue
0
brown
0.15
yellow
0.2
orange
0.2
Outcome
Probability
red
0.1
green
0.1
blue
0.1
brown
0.4
yellow
0.2
orange
0.3
Outcome
Probability
red
    0.3
green
- 0.3
blue
    0.2
brown
    0.4
yellow
    0.2
orange
    0.2
Outcome
Probability
red
0
green
0
blue
0
brown
0
yellow
1
orange
0
(a)	
(b)	
(c)	
(d)	
(a)	 This model is a probability model because all the outcomes have probabilities 
that are nonnegative, and the sum of the probabilities is 1.
(b)	 This model is not a probability model because the sum of the probabilities is not 1.
(c)	 This model is not a probability model because P(green) is less than 0. Remember 
that all probabilities must be nonnegative.
(d)	 This model is a probability model because all the outcomes have probabilities that 
are nonnegative, and the sum of the probabilities is 1. Notice that P(yellow) = 1, 
meaning that this outcome will occur with 100% certainty each time that the  
experiment is repeated. This means that the bag of M&MsTM contains only  
yellow candies.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Constructing a Probability Model
An experiment consists of rolling a fair die once. A die is a cube with each face having 1, 
2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 dots on it. See Figure 5. Construct a probability model for this experiment.
A sample space S consists of all the possibilities that can occur. Because rolling the 
die will result in one of six faces showing, the sample space S consists of
S = 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 66
Because the die is fair, one face is no more likely to occur than another. As a result, 
our assignment of probabilities is
 P112 = 1
6   P122 = 1
6
 P132 = 1
6   P142 = 1
6
 P152 = 1
6   P162 = 1
6
Solution
•
Example 3
Solution
•
Figure 5  A six-sided die

Section 13.3    Probability  893
Now suppose that a die is loaded (weighted) so that the probability assignments 
are
P112 = 0 P122 = 0 P132 = 1
3 P142 = 2
3 P152 = 0 P162 = 0
This assignment would be made if the die were loaded so that only a 3 or 4 could 
occur and the 4 was twice as likely as the 3 to occur. This assignment is consistent 
with the definition, since each assignment is nonnegative, and the sum of all the 
probability assignments equals 1.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Constructing a Probability Model
An experiment consists of tossing a coin. The coin is weighted so that heads (H) 
is three times as likely to occur as tails (T). Construct a probability model for this 
experiment.
The sample space S is S = 5H, T6. If x denotes the probability that a tail occurs,
P1T2 = x and P1H2 = 3x
The sum of the probabilities of the possible outcomes must equal 1, so
 P1T2 + P1H2 = x + 3x = 1
 4x = 1
 x = 1
4
Assign the probabilities
P1T2 = 1
4  P1H2 = 3
4
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
In working with probability models, the term event is used to describe a set of 
possible outcomes of the experiment. An event E is some subset of the sample space S.  
The probability of an event E, E ≠∅, denoted by P1E2, is defined as the sum 
of the probabilities of the outcomes in E. We can also think of the probability of 
an event E as the likelihood that the event E occurs. If E = ∅, then P1E2 = 0;  
if E = S, then P1E2 = P1S2 = 1.
Compute Probabilities of Equally Likely Outcomes
When the same probability is assigned to each outcome of the sample space, the 
experiment is said to have equally likely outcomes.
Example 4
Solution
•
2
In Words
P(S) = 1 means that one of the 
outcomes in the sample space 
must occur in an experiment.
Probability for Equally Likely Outcomes
If an experiment has n equally likely outcomes, and if the number of ways in 
which an event E can occur is m, then the probability of E is
	
P1E2 = Number of ways that E can occur
Number of possible outcomes
= m
n 	
(3)
If S is the sample space of this experiment,
	
P1E2 = n1E2
n1S2 	
(4)
Theorem

894 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
Calculating Probabilities of Events Involving Equally  
Likely Outcomes
Calculate the probability that in a 3-child family there are 2 boys and 1 girl. Assume 
equally likely outcomes.
Begin by constructing a tree diagram to help in listing the possible outcomes of the 
experiment. See Figure 6, where B stands for “boy” and G for “girl”. The sample 
space S of this experiment is
S = 5BBB, BBG, BGB, BGG, GBB, GBG, GGB, GGG6
so n(S) = 8.
We wish to know the probability of the event E: “having two boys and one girl.” 
From Figure 6, we conclude that E = 5BBG, BGB, GBB6, so n1E2 = 3. Since 
the outcomes are equally likely, the probability of E is
P1E2 = n1E2
n1S2 = 3
8
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 7
So far, we have calculated probabilities of single events. Now we compute  
probabilities of multiple events, which are called compound probabilities.
Computing Compound Probabilities
Consider the experiment of rolling a single fair die. Let E represent the event “roll 
an odd number,” and let F represent the event “roll a 1 or 2.”
(a)	 Write the event E and F. What is n1E ∩F2?
(b)	 Write the event E or F. What is n1E ∪F2?
(c)	 Compute P1E2. Compute P1F2.
(d)	 Compute P1E ∩F2.
(e)	 Compute P1E ∪F2.
The sample space S of the experiment is 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 66, so n1S2 = 6. Since the 
die is fair, the outcomes are equally likely. The event E: “roll an odd number” is 
51, 3, 56, and the event F: “roll a 1 or 2” is 51, 26, so n1E2 = 3 and n1F2 = 2.
(a)	 In probability, the word and means the intersection of two events. The event E 
and F is
E ∩F = 51, 3, 56 ∩51, 26 = 516  n1E ∩F2 = 1
(b)	 In probability, the word or means the union of the two events. The event E or F 
is
E ∪F = 51, 3, 56 ∪51, 26 = 51, 2, 3, 56  n1E ∪F2 = 4
(c)	 Use formula (4). Then
P1E2 = n1E2
n1S2 = 3
6 = 1
2  P1F2 = n1F2
n1S2 = 2
6 = 1
3
(d)	 P1E ∩F2 = n1E ∩F2
n1S2
= 1
6
(e)	 P1E ∪F2 = n1E ∪F2
n1S2
= 4
6 = 2
3
Example 5
Solution
•
Example 6
Solution
•
Figure 6 
B
B
B
B
3rd child
2nd child
1st child
B
B
B
G
G
G
G
GGG
GGB
GBG
GBB
BGG
BGB
BBG
BBB
G
G
G

Section 13.3    Probability  895
Find Probabilities of the Union of Two Events
The next formula can be used to find the probability of the union of two events.
3
This result is a consequence of the Counting Formula discussed earlier, in 
Section 13.1.
For example, formula (5) can be used to find P1E ∪F2 in Example 6(e). Then
P1E ∪F2 = P1E2 + P1F2 - P1E ∩F2 = 1
2 + 1
3 - 1
6 = 3
6 + 2
6 - 1
6 = 4
6 = 2
3
as before.
Computing Probabilities of the Union of Two Events
If P1E2 = 0.2, P1F2 = 0.3, and P1E ∩F2 = 0.1, find the probability of E or F. 
That is, find P1E ∪F2.
Use formula (5).
 Probability of E or F = P1E ∪F2 = P1E2 + P1F2 - P1E ∩F2
 = 0.2 + 0.3 - 0.1 = 0.4
A Venn diagram can sometimes be used to obtain probabilities. To construct a  
Venn diagram representing the information in Example 7, draw two sets E  
and F. Begin with the fact that P1E ∩F2 = 0.1. See Figure 7(a). Then, since 
P1E2 = 0.2 and P1F2 = 0.3, fill in E with 0.2 - 0.1 = 0.1 and fill in F with 
0.3 - 0.1 = 0.2. See Figure 7(b). Since P1S2 = 1, complete the diagram by  
inserting 1 - 10.1 + 0.1 + 0.22 = 0.6 outside the circles. See Figure 7(c). Now 
it is easy to see, for example, that the probability of F but not E is 0.2. Also, the  
probability of neither E nor F is 0.6.
Example 7
Solution
•
For any two events E and F,
	
P1E ∪F2 = P1E2 + P1F2 - P1E ∩F2	
(5) 
Theorem
Mutually Exclusive Events
If E and F are mutually exclusive events,
	
P1E ∪F2 = P1E2 + P1F2	
(6) 
Theorem
Figure 7 
(a)
E
F
S
0.1
(b) 
E
F
S
0.1
0.2
0.1
(c)
E
F
S
0.1
0.2
0.6
0.1
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
If events E and F are disjoint so that E ∩F = ∅, we say they are mutually 
exclusive. In this case, P1E ∩F2 = 0, and formula (5) takes the following form:

896 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
Computing Probabilities of the Union of Two Mutually  
Exclusive Events
If P1E2 = 0.4 and P1F2 = 0.25, and E and F are mutually exclusive, find P1E ∪F2.
Since E and F are mutually exclusive, use formula (6).
P1E ∪F2 = P1E2 + P1F2 = 0.4 + 0.25 = 0.65
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 7
Use the Complement Rule to Find Probabilities
Recall that if A is a set, the complement of A, denoted A, is the set of all elements 
in the universal set U that are not in A. We similarly define the complement of an 
event.
Example 8
Solution
•
4
Complement of an Event
Let S denote the sample space of an experiment, and let E denote an event. The 
complement of E, denoted E, is the set of all outcomes in the sample space S  
that are not outcomes in the event E.
Definition
The complement of an event E—that is, E—in a sample space S has the following 
two properties:
E ∩E = ∅  E ∪ E = S
Since E and  E are mutually exclusive, it follows from (6) that
P1E ∪ E2 = P1S2 = 1  P1E2 + P1 E2 = 1  P1 E2 = 1 - P1E2
We have the following result:
Computing Probabilities of Complementary Events
If E represents any event and  E represents the complement of E, then
	
P1 E2 = 1 - P1E2	
(7)
Theorem
Computing Probabilities Using Complements
On the local news the weather reporter stated that the probability of rain tomorrow 
is 40%. What is the probability that it will not rain?
The complement of the event “rain” is “no rain.”
P1no rain2 = 1 - P1rain2 = 1 - 0.4 = 0.6
There is a 60% chance of no rain tomorrow.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
Birthday Problem
What is the probability that in a group of 10 people, at least 2 people have the same 
birthday? Assume that there are 365 days in a year and that a person is as likely to 
be born on one day as another, so all the outcomes are equally likely.
Example 9
Solution
•
Example 10

Section 13.3    Probability  897
First determine the number of outcomes in the sample space S. There are 365 
possibilities for each person’s birthday. Since there are 10 people in the group, 
there are 36510 possibilities for the birthdays. [For one person in the group,  
there are 365 days on which his or her birthday can fall; for two people, there are 
(365)(365) = 3652 pairs of days; and, in general, using the Multiplication Principle, 
for n people there are 365n possibilities.] So
n1S2 = 36510
We wish to find the probability of the event E: “at least two people have the same 
birthday.” It is difficult to count the elements in this set; it is much easier to count the 
elements of the complementary event E: “no two people have the same birthday.”
Find n1 E2 as follows: Choose one person at random. There are 365 possibilities 
for his or her birthday. Choose a second person. There are 364 possibilities for this 
birthday, if no two people are to have the same birthday. Choose a third person. 
There are 363 possibilities left for this birthday. Finally, arrive at the tenth person. 
There are 356 possibilities left for this birthday. By the Multiplication Principle, the 
total number of possibilities is
n1 E2 = 365 # 364 # 363 #  g # 356
The probability of the event  E is
P1 E2 = n1 E2
n1S2 = 365 # 364 # 363 #  g # 356
36510
≈0.883
The probability of two or more people in a group of 10 people having the same 
birthday is then
P1E2 = 1 - P1 E2 ≈1 - 0.883 = 0.117
The birthday problem can be solved for any group size. The following table gives 
the probabilities for two or more people having the same birthday for various group
sizes. Notice that the probability is greater than 1
2 for any group of 23 or more people.
Solution
•
Number of People
5
10
15
20
21
22
23
24
25
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Probability 
That Two or 
More Have the 
Same Birthday
0.027
0.117
0.253
0.411
0.444
0.476
0.507
0.538
0.569
0.706
0.891
0.970
0.994
0.99916 0.99991 0.99999
Historical Feature
S
et theory, counting, and probability first took 
form as a systematic theory in an exchange  
of letters (1654) between Pierre de Fermat  
(1601–1665) and Blaise Pascal (1623–1662). 
They discussed the problem of how to divide 
the stakes in a game that is interrupted before  
completion, knowing how many points each  
player needs to win. Fermat solved the problem  
by listing all possibilities and counting the  
favorable ones, whereas Pascal made use of the 
triangle that now bears his name. As mentioned in the text, the entries 
in Pascal’s triangle are equivalent to C(n, r). This recognition of the role  
of C(n, r) in counting is the foundation of all further developments.
The first book on probability, the work of Christiaan Huygens  
(1629–1695), appeared in 1657. In it, the notion of mathematical  
expectation is explored. This allows the calculation of the profit or loss 
that a gambler might expect, knowing the probabilities involved in the 
game (see the Historical Problem that follows).
Although Girolamo Cardano (1501–1576) wrote a treatise on  
probability, it was not published until 1663 in Cardano’s collected works, 
and this was too late to have had any effect on the early development 
of the theory.
Blaise Pascal 
(1623–1662)
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 1
(continued on next page)

898 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
13.3  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
In 1713, the posthumously published Ars Conjectandi of Jakob  
Bernoulli (1654–1705) gave the theory the form it would have until 
1900. Recently, both combinatorics (counting) and probability have  
undergone rapid development, thanks to the use of computers.
A final comment about notation. The notations C(n, r) and P(n, r)  
are variants of a form of notation developed in England after 1830.
The notation an
r b for C(n, r) goes back to Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) 
but is now losing ground because it has no clearly related symbolism 
of the same type for permutations. The set symbols ∪ and ∩ were  
introduced by Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932) in 1888 in a slightly different  
context. The inclusion symbol ⊂was introduced by E. Schroeder  
(1841–1902) about 1890. We owe the treatment of set theory in the text 
to George Boole (1815–1864), who wrote A + B for A ∪B and AB for 
A ∩B (statisticians still use AB for A ∩B).
Historical Problem
	 1.	 The Problem Discussed by Fermat and Pascal 
A game between 
two equally skilled players, A and B, is interrupted when A needs 
2 points to win and B needs 3 points. In what proportion should  
the stakes be divided?
(a)   Fermat’s solution 
List all possible outcomes that can occur  
as a result of four more plays. Comparing the probabilities for A 
to win and for B to win then determines how the stakes should 
be divided.
(b)   Pascal’s solution 
Use combinations to determine the  
number of ways that the 2 points needed for A to win could 
occur in four plays. Then use combinations to determine  
the number of ways that the 3 points needed for B to win 
could occur. This is trickier than it looks, since A can win 
with 2 points in two plays, in three plays, or in four plays.  
Compute the probabilities, and compare them with the  
results in part (a).
	 1.	 When the same probability is assigned to each outcome of 
a sample space, the experiment is said to have 
 
 outcomes.
	 2.	 The 
 of an event E is the set of all outcomes 
in the sample space S that are not outcomes in the event E.
	 3.	 True or False    The probability of an event can never  
equal 0. 
	 4.	 True or False    In a probability model, the sum of all  
probabilities is 1. 
Skill Building
	 5.	 In a probability model, which of the following numbers 
could be the probability of an outcome? 
0 0.01 0.35 - 0.4 1 1.4
	 6.	 In a probability model, which of the following numbers 
could be the probability of an outcome? 
1.5 1
2 3
4 2
3 0 -  1
4
 
	 7.	 Determine whether the following is a probability model. 
	 9.	 Determine whether the following is a probability model. 
	 8.	 Determine whether the following is a probability model. 
	 10.	 Determine whether the following is a probability model. 
Outcome
Probability
1
0.2
2
0.3
3
0.1
4
0.4
Outcome
Probability
Steve
0.4
Bob
0.3
Faye
0.1
Patricia
0.2
Outcome
Probability
Linda
0.3
Jean
0.2
Grant
0.1
Jim
0.3
Outcome
Probability
Erica
    0.3
Joanne
    0.2
Laura
    0.1
Donna
    0.5
Angela
- 0.1

Section 13.3    Probability  899
In Problems 11–16, construct a probability model for each experiment.
	 11.	 Tossing a fair coin twice
	 12.	 Tossing two fair coins once
	 13.	 Tossing two fair coins and then a fair die
	 14.	 Tossing a fair coin, a fair die, and then a fair coin
	 15.	 Tossing three fair coins once
	 16.	 Tossing one fair coin three times
In Problems 17–22, use the following spinners to construct a 
probability model for each experiment.
2
1
4
Spinner I
(4 equal areas)
3
Yellow
Red
Green
Spinner II
(3 equal areas)
Forward
Backward
Spinner III
(2 equal areas)
	 17.	 Spin spinner I, then spinner II. What is the probability of 
getting a 2 or a 4, followed by Red?
	 18.	 Spin spinner III, then spinner II. What is the probability of 
getting Forward, followed by Yellow or Green?
	 19.	 Spin spinner I, then II, then III. What is the probability of  
getting a 1, followed by Red or Green, followed by  
Backward?
	 20.	 Spin spinner II, then I, then III. What is the probability of 
getting Yellow, followed by a 2 or a 4, followed by Forward?
	 21.	 Spin spinner I twice, then spinner II. What is the probability 
of getting a 2, followed by a 2 or a 4, followed by Red or 
Green?
	 22.	 Spin spinner III, then spinner I twice. What is the  
probability of getting Forward, followed by a 1 or a 3,  
followed by a 2 or a 4?
In Problems 23–26, consider the experiment of tossing a coin 
twice. The table lists six possible assignments of probabilities for 
this experiment. Using this table, answer the following questions.
 
Sample Space
Assignments
HH
HT
TH
TT
A
1
4
1
4
1
4
1
4
B
0
0
0
1
C
3
16
5
16
5
16
3
16
D
1
2
1
2
-  1
2
1
2
E
1
4
1
4
1
4
1
8
F
1
9
2
9
2
9
4
9
	 23.	 Which of the assignments of probabilities is(are) consistent 
with the definition of a probability model? 
	 24.	 Which of the assignments of probabilities should be used if 
the coin is known to be fair? 
	 25.	 Which of the assignments of probabilities should be used if 
the coin is known to always come up tails? 
	 26.	 Which of the assignments of probabilities should be used if 
tails is twice as likely as heads to occur? 
	 27.	 Assigning Probabilities  A coin is weighted so that heads is 
four times as likely as tails to occur. What probability should 
be assigned to heads? to tails?  
	 28.	 Assigning Probabilities  A coin is weighted so that tails is 
twice as likely as heads to occur. What probability should be 
assigned to heads? to tails?  
	 29.	 Assigning Probabilities    A die is weighted so that an  
odd-numbered face is twice as likely to occur as an  
even-numbered face. What probability should be assigned to 
each face?
	 30.	 Assigning Probabilities    A die is weighted so that a six  
cannot appear. All the other faces occur with the same  
probability. What probability should be assigned to each face?
For Problems 31–34, the sample space is S = 51, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
7, 8, 9, 106. Suppose that the outcomes are equally likely.
	 31.	 Compute the probability of the event E = 51, 2, 36. 
	 32.	 Compute the probability of the event F = 53, 5, 9, 106. 
	 33.	 Compute the probability of the event E: “an even number.” 
	 34.	 Compute the probability of the event F: “an odd number.”
For Problems 35 and 36, an urn contains 5 white marbles,  
10 green marbles, 8 yellow marbles, and 7 black marbles.
	 35.	 If one marble is selected, determine the probability that it is 
white. 
	 36.	 If one marble is selected, determine the probability that it is 
black. 
In Problems 37–40, assume equally likely outcomes.
	 37.	 Determine the probability of having 3 boys in a 3-child  
family. 
	 38.	 Determine the probability of having 3 girls in a 3-child  
family. 
	 39.	 Determine the probability of having 1 girl and 3 boys in a 
4-child family. 
	 40.	 Determine the probability of having 2 girls and 2 boys in a 
4-child family. 
For Problems 41–44, two fair dice are rolled.
	 41.	 Determine the probability that the sum of the faces is 7.
	 42.	 Determine the probability that the sum of the faces is 11.
	 43.	 Determine the probability that the sum of the faces is 3.
	 44.	 Determine the probability that the sum of the faces is 12.

900 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
In Problems 45–48, find the probability of the indicated event if 
P1A2 = 0.25 and P1B2 = 0.45.
	 45.	 P1A ∪B2 if P1A ∩B2 = 0.15 
	 46.	 P1A ∩B2 if P1A ∪B2 = 0.6 
	 47.	  P1A ∪B2 if A, B are mutually exclusive 
	 48.	 P1A ∩B2 if A, B are mutually exclusive 
	 49.	 If P1A2 = 0.60, P1A ∪B2 = 0.85, and P1A ∩B2 = 0.05, 
find P1B2. 
	 50.	 If P1B2 = 0.30, P1A ∪B2 = 0.65, and P1A ∩B2 = 0.15, 
find P1A2. 
	 51.	 Automobile Theft  According to the Insurance Information  
Institute, in 2012 there was a 12% probability that an  
automobile theft in the United States would be cleared by 
arrests. If an automobile theft case from 2012 is randomly 
selected, what is the probability that it was not cleared by 
an arrest? 
	 52.	 Pet Ownership    According to the American Pet Products  
Manufacturers Association’s 2013–2014 National Pet Owners 
Survey, there is a 68% probability that a U.S. household 
owns a pet. If a U.S. household is randomly selected, what is 
the probability that it does not own a pet? 
	 53.	 Cat Ownership  According to the American Pet Products  
Manufacturers Association’s 2013–2014 National Pet Owners 
Survey, there is a 37% probability that a U.S. household 
owns a cat. If a U.S. household is randomly selected, what is 
the probability that it does not own a cat? 
	 54.	 Doctorate Degrees    According to the National Science 
Foundation, in 2012 there was a 16.5% probability that a 
doctoral degree awarded at a U.S. university was awarded 
in engineering. If a 2012 U.S. doctoral recipient is randomly 
selected, what is the probability that his or her degree was 
not in engineering? 
	 55.	 Online Gambling  According to a Casino FYI survey, 6.4% 
of U.S. adults admitted to having spent money gambling  
online. If a U.S. adult is selected at random, what is the  
probability that he or she has never spent any money  
gambling online? 
	 56.	 Girl Scout Cookies    According to the Girl Scouts of  
America, 9% of all Girl Scout cookies sold are shortbread/
trefoils. If a box of Girl Scout cookies is selected at random, 
what is the probability that it does not contain shortbread/ 
trefoils? 
For Problems 57–60, a golf ball is selected at random from a  
container. If the container has 9 white balls, 8 green balls, and  
3 orange balls, find the probability of each event.
	 57.	 The golf ball is white or green. 
	 58.	 The golf ball is white or orange. 
	 59.	 The golf ball is not white. 
	 60.	 The golf ball is not green. 
	 61.	 On The Price Is Right, there is a game in which a bag is 
filled with 3 strike chips and 5 numbers. Let’s say that the  
numbers in the bag are 0, 1, 3, 6, and 9. What is the probability of  
selecting a strike chip or the number 1? 
	 62.	 Another game on The Price Is Right requires the contestant 
to spin a wheel with the numbers 5, 10, 15, 20, c, 100. What 
is the probability that the contestant spins 100 or 30?   
Problems 63–66 are based on a survey of annual incomes in 100 households. The following table gives the data.
Income
$0–24,999
$25,000–49,999
$50,000–74,999
$75,000–99,999
$100,000 or more
Number  
of households
24
24
18
12
22
	 63.	 What is the probability that a household has an annual  
income of $75,000 or more? 
	 64.	 What is the probability that a household has an annual  
income between $25,000 and $74,999, inclusive? 
	 65.	 What is the probability that a household has an annual  
income of less than $50,000? 
	 66.	 What is the probability that a household has an annual  
income of $50,000 or more? 
	 67.	 Surveys  In a survey about the number of TV sets in a house, 
the following probability table was constructed:
Number  
of TV sets
 
0
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4 or more
Probability
0.05
0.24
0.33
0.21
0.17
	
	 Find the probability of a house having:
(a)	 1 or 2 TV sets 
      (b)  1 or more TV sets 
(c)	 3 or fewer TV sets 
(d)  3 or more TV sets 
(e)	 Fewer than 2 TV sets 
  (f)  Fewer than 1 TV set 
(g)	 1, 2, or 3 TV sets 
      (h)  2 or more TV sets 
	 68.	 Checkout Lines    Through observation, it has been  
determined that the probability for a given number of  
people waiting in line at the “5 items or less” checkout  
register of a supermarket is as follows:
Number  
waiting in line
 
0
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4 or more
Probability
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.24
0.31
	
	 Find the probability of:
(a)	 At most 2 people in line 
(b)	 At least 2 people in line 
(c)	 At least 1 person in line 
	 69.	 In a certain precalculus class, there are 18 freshmen and  
15 sophomores. Of the 18 freshmen, 10 are male, and of 
the 15 sophomores, 8 are male. Find the probability that a  
randomly selected student is:
(a)	 A freshman or female 
  (b)  A sophomore or male 

Chapter Review  901
	 70.	 The faculty of the mathematics department at Joliet Junior 
College is composed of 4 females and 9 males. Of the 4 females, 
2 are under age 40, and of the 9 males, 3 are under age 40. Find 
the probability that a randomly selected faculty member is:
(a)	 Female or under age 40 
(b)	 Male or over age 40 
	 71.	 Birthday Problem    What is the probability that at least  
2 people in a group of 12 people have the same birthday? 
Assume that there are 365 days in a year. 
	 72.	 Birthday Problem    What is the probability that at least  
2 people in a group of 35 people have the same birthday? 
Assume that there are 365 days in a year. 
	 73.	 Winning a Lottery  Powerball is a multistate lottery in which 
5 white balls from a drum with 59 balls and 1 red ball from 
a drum with 35 balls are selected. For a $2 ticket, players get 
one chance at winning the jackpot by matching all 6 numbers.  
What is the probability of selecting the winning numbers on 
a $2 play?
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 74–77 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 74.	 To graph 
g1x2 = 0 x + 20 - 3, shift the graph of  
f1x2 = 0 x0   number  units  left/right  and then  number   
units  up/down . 
	 75.	 Find the rectangular coordinates of the point whose polar
	
	 coordinates are a6, 2p
3 b. 
	 76.	 Solve: log5 (x + 3) =  2 
	 77.	 Solve the given system using matrices. 
c
3x + y + 2z =
1
2x - 2y + 5z =
5
x + 3y + 2z = - 9
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Counting formula (p. 878)	
n1A ∪B2 = n1A2 + n1B2 - n1A ∩B2
Addition Principle of Counting (p. 878) 	
If A ∩B = ∅, then n1A ∪B2 = n1A2 + n1B2.
Multiplication Principle of Counting (p. 880) 	
If a task consists of a sequence of choices in which there are p selections 
for the first choice, q selections for the second choice, and so on, the task 
of making these selections can be done in p # q #  g different ways.
Permutation (p. 882) 	
An ordered arrangement of r objects chosen from n objects
Number of permutations: Distinct, with repetition (p. 883)	
nr
	
The n objects are distinct (different), and repetition is allowed in the 
selection of r of them.
Number of permutations: Distinct, without repetition (p. 884)	
P1n, r2 = n1n - 12 #  g # 3n - 1r - 12 4 =
n!
1n - r2!
	
The n objects are distinct (different), and repetition is not allowed in the 
selection of r of them, where r … n.
Combination (p. 885) 	
An arrangement, without regard to order, of r objects selected  
from n distinct objects, where r … n
Number of combinations (p. 886) 	
C1n, r2 =
P1n, r2
r!
=
n!
1n - r2! r!
Number of permutations: Not distinct (p. 888) 	
n!
n1
 !n2
 !gnk
 !
	
The number of permutations of n objects of which n1 are of one kind,  
n2 are of a second kind, c, and nk are of a kth kind,  
where n = n1 + n2 + g + nk
Sample space (p. 891) 	
Set whose elements represent the possible outcomes that can occur as a 
result of an experiment
Probability (p. 891) 	
A nonnegative number assigned to each outcome of a sample space; the 
sum of all the probabilities of the outcomes equals 1.

902 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
Probability for equally likely outcomes (p. 893) 	
P1E2 =
n1E2
n1S2
	
The same probability is assigned to each outcome.
Probability of the union of two events (p. 895)	
P(E ∪F) = P(E) + P(F) - P(E ∩F)
Probability of the complement of an event (p. 896) 	
P1 E2 = 1 - P1E2
Objectives
Section	 You should be able to . . . 	
Example(s)	
Review Exercises
13.1	
1	
Find all the subsets of a set (p. 877)	
1 	
1
	
2	
Count the number of elements in a set (p. 877)	
2, 3 	
2–9
	
3	
Solve counting problems using the Multiplication  
	
	
Principle (p. 879)	
4, 5 	
12, 13, 17, 18
13.2	
1	
Solve counting problems using permutations involving  
	
	
n distinct objects (p. 882)	
1–5 	
10, 14, 19, 22(a)
	
2	
Solve counting problems using combinations (p. 885)	
6–9 	
11, 15, 16, 21
	
3	
Solve counting problems using permutations involving  
	
	
n nondistinct objects (p. 887)	
10, 11 	
20
13.3	
1	
Construct probability models (p. 891)	
2–4 	
22(b)
	
2	
Compute probabilities of equally likely outcomes (p. 893)	
5, 6 	
22(b), 23(a), 24, 25
	
3	
Find probabilities of the union of two events (p. 895)	
7, 8 	
26
	
4	
Use the Complement Rule to find probabilities (p. 896)	
9, 10 	
22(c), 23(b)
In Problems 4–9, use the information supplied in the figure.
	 4.	 How many are in A? 
    5.  How many are in A or B? 
	 6.	 How many are in A and C? 
	
7.	 How many are not in B? 
	 8.	 How many are in neither A nor C? 
	 9.	 How many are in B but not in C? 
Review Exercises
	 1.	 Write down all the subsets of the set 5Dave, Joanne, Erica6.
	 2.	 If n1A2 = 8, n1B2 = 12, and n1A ∩B2 = 3,  
find n1A ∪B2. 
	 3.	 If n1A2 = 12, n1A ∪B2 = 30,  and  n1A ∩B2 = 6, 	
 
find n1B2.
6
4
5
20
20
C
B
U
A
0
1
2
In Problems 10 and 11, compute the given expression.
	 10.	 P18, 32 
      11.  C18, 32 
	 18.	 License Plate Possibilities    A license plate consists of  
1 letter, excluding O and I, followed by a 4-digit number that 
cannot have a 0 in the lead position. How many different 
plates are possible? 
	 19.	 Binary Codes  Using the digits 0 and 1, how many different 
numbers consisting of 8 digits can be formed?
	 20.	 Arranging Flags  How many different vertical arrangements 
are there of 15 flags if 6 are white, 5 are blue, 3 are red, and 1 
is yellow? 
	 21.	 Forming Committees  A group of 9 people is going to be 
formed into committees of 4, 3, and 2 people. How many 
committees can be formed if:
(a)	 A person can serve on any number of committees?
(b)	 No person can serve on more than one committee?
	 22.	 Birthday Problem  For this problem, assume that a year has 
365 days.
(a)	 In how many ways can 18 people have different birthdays?
	 12.	 Stocking a Store  A garment store sells denim and corduroy 
jeans. Each pair of jeans comes in 4 colors and 6 sizes. How 
many pairs of jeans are required for a complete assortment?
	 13.	 Baseball  On a given day, the American Baseball League 
schedules 7 games. How many different outcomes are possible, 
assuming that each game is played to completion? 
	 14.	 Choosing Seats  If 4 people enter a bus that has 9 vacant 
seats, in how many ways can they be seated? 
	 15.	 Choosing a Team  In how many ways can a squad of 4 relay 
runners be chosen from a track team of 8 runners? 
	 16.	 Football  In how many ways can 2 teams from 32 teams in 
the UEFA Champions League be chosen without regard to 
which team is at home? 
	 17.	 Telephone Numbers    Using the digits 0, 1, 2, c, 9, how 
many 7-digit numbers can be formed if the first digit cannot 
be 0 or 9 and if the last digit is greater than or equal to 2 and 
less than or equal to 3? Repeated digits are allowed.

Chapter Test  903
In Problems 1–4, a survey of 70 college freshmen asked whether 
students planned to take biology, chemistry, or physics during their 
first year. Use the diagram to answer each question.
	 11.	 On February 20, 2004, the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles 
unveiled the state’s new license plate format. The plate  
consists of three letters (A–Z) followed by 4 digits (0–9).  
Assume that all letters and digits may be used, except that 
the third letter cannot be O, I, or Z. If repetitions are allowed, 
how many different plates are possible? 
	 12.	 Kiersten applies for admission to the University of Southern 
California (USC) and Florida State University (FSU). She 
estimates that she has a 60% chance of being admitted to 
USC, a 70% chance of being admitted to FSU, and a 35% 
chance of being admitted to both universities.
(a)	 What is the probability that she will be admitted to  
either USC or FSU? 
(b)	 What is the probability that she will not be admitted to 
FSU? 
	 13.	 A cooler contains 8 bottles of Pepsi, 5 bottles of Coke,  
4 bottles of Mountain Dew, and 3 bottles of IBC.
(a)	 What is the probability that a bottle chosen at random is 
Coke? 
(b)	 What is the probability that a bottle chosen at random is 
either Pepsi or IBC? 
	 14.	 A study on the age distribution of students at a community 
college yielded the following data:
Age
17 and under 18–20 21–24 25–34 35–64 65 and over
Probability
0.03
???
0.23
0.29
0.25
0.01
	
	 What must be the probability that a randomly selected  
student at the college is between 18 and 20 years old? 
	 15.	 In a certain lottery, there are ten balls numbered 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Of these, five are drawn in order. If you 
pick five numbers that match those drawn in the correct  
order, you win $1,000,000. What is the probability of  
winning such a lottery? 
	 16.	 If you roll a die five times, what is the probability that you 
obtain exactly 2 fours?
Chapter Test
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.
(b)	 What is the probability that no 2 people in a group of  
18 people have the same birthday? 
(c)	 What is the probability that at least 2 people in a group 
of 18 people have the same birthday? 
	 23.	 Unemployment    According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor  
Statistics, 7.4% of the U.S. labor force was unemployed in 
2013.
(a)	 What is the probability that a randomly selected member 
of the U.S. labor force was unemployed in 2013? 
(b)	 What is the probability that a randomly selected  
member of the U.S. labor force was not unemployed in 
2013? 
	 24.	 A box of 200 electric bulbs contains 25 defective bulbs. If 
you take out one bulb at random, what is the probability that 
it will be defective? 
	 25.	 Each of the numbers, 1, 2, c , 50 is written on an index 
card, and the cards are shuffled. If a card is selected at ran-
dom, what is the probability that the number on the card is 
even? What is the probability that the card selected names a 
multiple of 4? 
	 26.	 At the Milex tune-up and brake repair shop, the manager 
has found that a car will require a tune-up with a probability 
of 0.6, a brake job with a probability of 0.1, and both with a 
probability of 0.02.
(a)	 What is the probability that a car requires either a  
tune-up or a brake job? 
(b)	 What is the probability that a car requires a tune-up but 
not a brake job? 
(c)	 What is the probability that a car requires neither a 
tune-up nor a brake job? 
15
22
9
2
7
8
4
U
Biology
Chemistry
Physics
	 1.	 How many of the surveyed students plan to take physics 
during their first year? 
	 2.	 How many of the surveyed students do not plan to take  
biology, chemistry, or physics during their first year? 
	 3.	 How many of the surveyed students plan to take only  
biology and chemistry during their first year? 
	 4.	 How many of the surveyed students plan to take physics or 
chemistry during their first year? 
In Problems 5–7, compute the value of the given expression.
	 5.	 7! 
    6.  P110, 62 
    7.  C111, 52 
	 8.	 M&M’s® offers customers the opportunity to create their 
own color mix of candy. There are 21 colors to choose from, 
and customers are allowed to select up to 6 different colors. 
How many different color mixes are possible, assuming that 
no color is selected more than once and 6 different colors 
are chosen? 
	 9.	 How many distinct 8-letter words (real or imaginary) can be 
formed from the letters in the word REDEEMED? 
	 10.	 In horse racing, an exacta bet requires the bettor to  
pick the first two horses in the exact order. If there are 
8 horses in a race, in how many ways could you make an 
exacta bet? 

904 
CHAPTER 13  Counting and Probability
	 1.	 Solve: 3x2 - 2x = - 1
	 2.	 Graph f1x2 = x2 + 4x - 5 by determining whether the 
graph opens up or down and by finding the vertex, axis of 
symmetry, and intercepts.
	 3.	 Graph f1x2 = 21x + 122 - 4 using transformations.
	 4.	 Solve: 0 x - 40 … 0.01 
	 5.	 Find the complex zeros of
f1x2 = 5x4 - 9x3 - 7x2 - 31x - 6
	 6.	 Graph g1x2 = 3x-1 + 5 using transformations. Determine 
the domain, the range, and the horizontal asymptote of g.
	
7.	 What is the exact value of log39? 
	 8.	 Solve: log213x - 22 + log2x = 4 
	 9.	 Solve the system: c
x - 2y +
z =
15
3x +
y - 3z =
-8
- 2x + 4y -
z = - 27
 
	 10.	 What is the 33rd term in the sequence -3, 1, 5, 9, c? What 
is the sum of the first 20 terms? 
	 11.	 Graph: y = 3 sin12x + p2
	 12.	 Solve the following triangle and find its area.
Cumulative Review
5
a
40°
9
B
C
Chapter Projects
Mega Millions is a multistate lottery in which a player 
selects five different “white” numbers from 1 to 75 and one 
“gold” number from 1 to 15. The probability model shown in 
Table 3 lists the possible cash prizes and their corresponding 
probabilities.
1.	 Verify that Table 3 is a probability model.
2.	 To win the jackpot, a player must match all six numbers. 
Verify the probability given in Table 3 of winning the jackpot.
For questions 3–6, assume a single jackpot winner so that the 
jackpot does not have to be shared.
3.	 If the jackpot is $20,000,000, calculate the expected cash 
prize.
4.	 If a ticket costs $1, what is the expected financial result 
from purchasing one ticket? Interpret (give the meaning 
of) this result.
	 I.	 The Lottery and Expected Profit When all of the possible 
outcomes in a probability model are numeric quantities, 
useful statistics can be computed for such models. The 
expected value, or mean, of such a probability model is 
found by multiplying each possible numeric outcome 
by its corresponding probability and then adding these 
products.
For example, Table 2 provides the probability model for 
rolling a fair six-sided die. The expected value, E(x), is
E(x) = 1 # 1
6 + 2 # 1
6 + 3 # 1
6 + 4 # 1
6 + 5 # 1
6 + 6 # 1
6 = 3.5
When a fair die is rolled repeatedly, the average of the  
outcomes will approach 3.5.
Table 2
Outcome
Probability
1
1
6
2
1
6
3
1
6
4
1
6
5
1
6
6
1
6
Table 3
Cash Prize
Probability
Jackpot
0.00000000386
$1,000,000
0.00000005408
$5000
0.00000135192
$500
0.00001892689
$50
0.00009328256
$5
0.00342036036
$2
0.01770813839
$1
0.04674948535
$0
0.93200839659

Chapter Projects  905
5.	 If the jackpot is $100,000,000, what is the expected 
cash prize? What is the expected financial result from  
purchasing one $1 ticket? Interpret this result.
6.	 What amount must the jackpot be so that a profit from 
one $1 ticket is expected?
7.	
Research the Powerball lottery, and create a probability 
model similar to Table 3 for it. Repeat questions 3–6 for 
Powerball. Be sure to adjust the price for a Powerball 
ticket. Based on what you have learned, which lottery 
would you prefer to play? Justify your decision.
The following projects are available at the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC):
	 II.	 Project at Motorola  Probability of Error in Digital Wireless Communications Transmission errors in digital communications 
can often be detected by adding an extra digit of code to each transmitted signal. Investigate the probability of identifying an  
erroneous code using this simple coding method.
	III.	 Surveys Polling (or taking a survey) is big business in the United States. Take and analyze a survey; then consider why different 
pollsters might get different results.
	IV.	 Law of Large Numbers The probability that an event occurs, such as a head in a coin toss, is the proportion of heads you expect in 
the long run. A simulation is used to show that as a coin is flipped more and more times, the proportion of heads gets close to 0.5.
	 V.	 Simulation Electronic simulation of an experiment is often an economical way to investigate a theoretical probability. Develop a 
theory without leaving your desk.

906
Outline
14.1	 Finding Limits Using Tables and Graphs
14.2	 Algebra Techniques for Finding Limits
14.3	 One-sided Limits; Continuous Functions
14.4	  The Tangent Problem; The Derivative
14.5	  The Area Problem; The Integral
 	
Chapter Review
 	
Chapter Test
 	
Chapter Projects
Thomas Malthus on Population Growth
In the late 1700s, the British economist Thomas Malthus presented a report that 
criticized those who thought that life was going to continue to improve for humans. 
Malthus put his report together quickly and titled it An Essay on 
the Principle of Population as it Affects the Future Improvement of 
Society, with Remarks on the Speculations of Mr. Godwin,  
M. Condorcet, and Other Writers.
Malthus argued that because the human population tends to  
increase geometrically (1, 2, 4, 16, and so on) and that food supplies 
will likely only increase arithmetically (1, 2, 3, 4,  and so on), populations 
will naturally be held in check due to food shortages. Malthus also 
suggested that there are other checks on population growth (and 
he considered these natural and a good thing). Nonetheless, he was  
concerned that poverty is inevitable and will continue. 
Malthus used historical data to suggest that population growth 
has been doubling every twenty-five years in the United States (still 
in the early stages of development back in the late 18th Century). 
Malthus surmised that the youth of the country along with the vast 
amount of areas conducive to farming would lead to a birth rate 
that exceeded most countries in the world.
Malthus believed there are two “checks” that control the 
population growth. One type are called preventative checks—these are checks 
that decrease the birth rate. The second type are called positive checks—these 
are checks that increase the death rate. Positive checks include war, famine, and 
natural disasters. Malthus believed that fear of famine was a major reason the 
birth rate may decrease. After all, who would want to have a child knowing the 
child may suffer from hunger, or worse, starvation? 
—See Chapter Project I—
A Look Back
In this text we have studied a variety of functions: polynomial functions  
(including linear and quadratic functions), rational functions, exponential and 
logarithmic functions, trigonometric functions, and the inverse trigonometric 
functions. For each of these, we found their domain and range, intercepts,  
symmetry, if any, and asymptotes, if any, and we graphed them. We also  
discussed whether these functions were even, odd, or neither and determined 
on what intervals they were increasing and decreasing. We also discussed the 
idea of their average rate of change.
A Look Ahead
In calculus, other properties are discussed, such as finding limits of functions, 
determining where functions are continuous, finding the derivative of functions, 
and finding the integral of functions. In this chapter, we give an introduction to 
these properties. After you have completed this chapter, you will be well  
prepared for a first course in calculus.
A Preview of Calculus:  
The Limit, Derivative,  
and Integral of a Function
14

Section 14.1  Finding Limits Using Tables and Graphs  907
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 910.
	
Objectives	 	1  Find a Limit Using a Table (p. 907)
	
	 	2  Find a Limit Using a Graph (p. 909)
14.1  Finding Limits Using Tables and Graphs
• Piecewise–defined Functions (Section 2.4, pp. 122–123)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
The idea of the limit of a function is what connects algebra and geometry to the 
mathematics of calculus. In working with the limit of a function, we encounter notation 
of the form
Table 1
x
  2.99
2.999
2.9999 S
d
3.0001
3.001
3.01
f(x) ∙5x2
44.701
44.97
44.997
S
d 45.003
45.03
45.301
lim
xSc f1x2 = N
This is read as “the limit of f1x2 as x approaches c equals the number N.” Here f 
is a function defined on some open interval containing the number c; f need not be 
defined at c, however.
The meaning of lim
xSc f1x2 = N may be described as follows:
For all x approximately equal to c, with x ∙c, the corresponding value of f  
is approximately equal to N.
As x gets closer to c, but remains unequal to c, the corresponding value of f 
gets closer to N.
Another description of lim
xSc f1x2 = N is
Find a Limit Using a Table
Tables generated with the help of a calculator are useful for finding limits.
Finding a Limit Using a Table
Find: 
lim
xS315x22
Here f1x2 = 5x2 and c = 3. Choose a value for x close to 3, such as 2.99. Then select 
additional numbers that get closer to 3 but remain less than 3. Next choose values of 
x greater than 3, such as 3.01, that get closer to 3. Finally, evaluate f at each choice 
to obtain Table 1.
1
Example 1
Solution
From Table 1, as x gets closer to 3, the value of f1x2 = 5x2 appears to get closer 
to 45. This suggests that
lim
xS315x22 = 45
•

908 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
When choosing the values of x in a table, the number to start with and the  
subsequent entries are arbitrary. However, the entries should be chosen so that the 
table makes it clear what number the corresponding values of f are getting close to.
COMMENT  A graphing utility with a TABLE feature can be used to generate the entries.  
Table 2 shows the result using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator.	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Finding a Limit Using a Table
Find:  (a)  lim
xS2 x2 - 4
x - 2           (b)  lim
xS21x + 22
(a)	 Here f1x2 = x2 - 4
x - 2  and c = 2. Notice that the domain of f is 5x∙x ∙26, so f
is not defined at 2. Proceed to choose values of x close to 2 and evaluate f at 
each choice, as shown in Table 3.
Example 2
Solution
Table 2
 
Table 3
x
1.99
1.999
1.9999
S
d
2.0001
2.001
2.01
f(x) ∙x2 ∙4
x ∙2
3.99
3.999
3.9999
S
d
4.0001
4.001
4.01
Table 4 
x
1.99
1.999
1.9999
S
d
2.0001
2.001
2.01
g(x) ∙x ∙2
3.99
3.999
3.9999
S
d
4.0001
4.001
4.01
Table 3 suggests that as x gets closer to 2, the value of f1x2 = x2 - 4
x - 2  gets 
closer to 4. That is,
lim
xS2 x2 - 4
x - 2 = 4
(b)	 Here g1x2 = x + 2 and c = 2. The domain of g is all real numbers. See Table 4.
Infer that as x gets closer to 2, the value of g1x2 gets closer to 4. That is,
lim
xS21x + 22 = 4
Check:	 Use a graphing utility with a TABLE feature to verify the results obtained 
in Example 2.
The conclusion that lim
xS21x + 22 = 4 could have been obtained without the use
of Table 4; as x gets closer to 2, it follows that x + 2 will get closer to 2 + 2 = 4.
Also, for part (a), you are right if you make the observation that for x ∙2,
f1x2 = x2 - 4
x - 2 =
 1x - 22 1x + 22
 x - 2 
= x + 2  x ∙2
Therefore,
lim
xS2 x2 - 4
x - 2 = lim
xS21x + 22 = 4
Let’s look at an example for which the factoring technique used above does 
not work.
•

Section 14.1  Finding Limits Using Tables and Graphs  909
Finding a Limit Using a Table
Find: 
lim
xS0 sin x
x
First, observe that the domain of the function f1x2 = sin x
x  is 5x0 x ∙06. Create 
Table 5, where x is measured in radians.
Example 3
Solution
Table 5 
x (radians)
- 0.03
- 0.02
- 0.01
S
d
0.01
0.02
0.03
f(x) ∙sin x
x
0.99985
0.99993
0.99998
S
d
0.99998
0.99993
0.99985
Table 5 suggests that lim
xS0 sin x
x
= 1.
Check:	 Use a graphing utility with a TABLE feature to verify the results obtained 
in Example 3.
Find a Limit Using a Graph
The graph of a function f can also be of help in finding limits. See Figure 1. In each 
graph, notice that as x gets closer to c, the value of f gets closer to the number N. 
We conclude that
lim
xSc f1x2 = N
This is the conclusion regardless of the value of f at c. In Figure 1(a), f1c2 = N, 
and in Figure 1(b), f1c2 ∙N. Figure 1(c) illustrates that lim
xSc f1x2 = N, even if f 
is not defined at c.
•
2
Figure 1 
y  f(x)
f(c) not defined; lim f(x)  N
(c)
N
c
x
x
x
y
c
x
y  f(x)
f(c)  N; lim f(x)  N
(b)
f(c)
N
c
x
x
x
y
c
x
y  f(x)
N
c
x
x
x
y
f(c)  N; lim f(x)  N
(a)
c
x
Figure 2 
2
4
6
2
2
4
(2, 3)
x
y
Finding a Limit by Graphing
Find: 
lim
xS2 f1x2  if 
f1x2 = e3x - 2
3
if x ∙2
if x = 2
The function f is a piecewise-defined function. Its graph is shown in Figure 2. We 
conclude from the graph that lim
xS2 f1x2 = 4.
Notice in Example 4 that the value of f at 2—that is, f122 = 3—plays no role in 
the conclusion that lim
xS2 f1x2 = 4. In fact, even if f were undefined at 2, it would still
be the case that lim
xS2 f1x2 = 4.
Now  Work  p r o b l e m s  1 7  a n d  2 3
Example 4
Solution
•

910 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Sometimes there is no single number that the values of f get closer to as x gets 
closer to c. In this case, we say that f  has no limit as x approaches c or that lim
xSc f1x2 
does not exist.
A Function That Has No Limit at 0
Find: 
lim
xS0 f1x2 if f1x2 = ex
1
if x … 0
if x 7 0
See Figure 3. As x gets closer to 0 but remains negative, the value of f also gets closer 
to 0. As x gets closer to 0 but remains positive, the value of f always equals 1. Since 
there is no single number that the values of f are close to when x is close to 0, we 
conclude that lim
xS0 f1x2 does not exist.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 7
Using a Graphing Utility to Find a Limit
Find: 
lim
xS2 x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
x4 - 2x3 + x - 2
Table 6 shows the solution, from which we conclude that
lim
xS2 x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
x4 - 2x3 + x - 2 = 0.889
rounded to three decimal places.
Example 5
Solution
•
Example 6
Solution
•
Figure 3  f (x) = e x
if x … 0
1
if x 7 0
2
4
2
2
4
2
x
y
Table 6 
 
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
In the next section, we will see how algebra can be used to obtain exact limits 
of functions like the one in Example 6.
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Graph f1x2 = b3x - 2
if x ∙2
3
if x = 2  (pp. 122–123)
	
	
	 2.	 If f1x2 = bx
if x … 0
1
if x 7 0  what is f102? (pp. 122–123)
14.1  Assess Your Understanding
	 3.	 The limit of a function y = f1x2 as x approaches c is
	
	 denoted by the symbol 
.
	 4.	 If a function f has no limit as x approaches c, then we say
	
	 that lim
xSc f1x2  
  
  
.
	 5.	 True or False  lim
xSc f1x2 = N may be described by saying
	
	 that the value of f1x2 gets closer to N as x gets closer to c 
but remains unequal to c. 
	 6.	 True or False  lim
xSc f1x2 exists and equals some number for
	
	 any function f as long as c is in the domain of f. 
Concepts and Vocabulary

Section 14.1  Finding Limits Using Tables and Graphs  911
Skill Building
In Problems 7–16, use a table to find the indicated limit.
	
7.	 lim
xS214x32 
	
8.	 lim
xS312x2 + 12 
	
9.	 lim
xS0 x + 1
x2 + 1 
	
10.	 lim
xS0 2 - x
x2 + 4 
	 11.	 lim
xS4 x2 - 4x
x - 4  
	
12.	 lim
xS3 x2 - 9
x2 - 3x 
	
13.	 lim
xS01ex + 12 
	
14.	 lim
xS0 ex - e-x
2
 
	 15.	 lim
xS0 cos x - 1
x
, x in radians 
	
16.	 lim
xS0 tan x
x
, x in radians 
In Problems 17–22, use the graph shown to determine whether the limit exists. If it does, find its value. 
	 17.	  lim
xS2 f1x2 
	 18.	  lim
xS4 f1x2 
	 19.	  lim
xS2 f1x2 
3
3
4
2
(2, 3)
x
y
3
3
4
2
x
y
(4, 3)
4
4
2
x
y
2
(2, 2)
	 20.	  lim
xS2 f1x2 
	 21.	  lim
xS3 f1x2 
	 22.	  lim
xS4 f1x2 
2
4
4
1
3
x
y
2
(2, 1)
3
6
6
x
y
3
(3, 6)
4
8
8
2
6
x
y
4
In Problems 23–42, graph each function. Use the graph to find the indicated limit, if it exists.
	 23.	 lim
xS4 f1x2, f1x2 = 3x + 1	
24.	 lim
xS-1 f1x2, f1x2 = 2x - 1	
25.	 lim
xS2 f1x2, f1x2 = 1 - x2
	 26.	 lim
xS-1 f1x2, f1x2 = x3 - 1	
27.	 lim
xS-3 f1x2, f1x2 = 0 2x0 	
28.	 lim
xS4 f1x2, f1x2 = 31x
	 29.	 lim
xSp>2 f1x2, f1x2 = sin x	
30.	 lim
xSp f1x2, f1x2 = cos x	
31.	 lim
xS0 f1x2, f1x2 = ex
	 32.	 lim
xS1 f1x2, f1x2 = ln x	
33.	 lim
xS-1 f1x2, f1x2 = 1
x	
34.	 lim
xS2 f1x2, f1x2 = 1
x2
	 35.	 lim
xS0 f1x2, f1x2 = bx2
2x
if x Ú 0
if x 6 0 	
36.	 lim
xS0 f1x2, f1x2 = bx - 1
3x - 1
if x 6 0
if x Ú 0
	 37.	 lim
xS1 f1x2, f1x2 = b3x
x + 1
if x … 1
if x 7 1 	
38.	 lim
xS2 f1x2, f1x2 = bx2
2x - 1
if x … 2
if x 7 2
	 39.	 lim
xS0 f1x2, f1x2 = c
x
1
3x
if x 6 0
if x = 0
if x 7 0
	
40.	 lim
xS0 f1x2, f1x2 = b
1
- 1
if x 6 0
if x 7 0
	 41.	 lim
xS0 f1x2, f1x2 = bsin x
x2
if x … 0
if x 7 0 	
42.	 lim
xS0 f1x2, f1x2 = bex
1 - x
if x 7 0
if x … 0
In Problems 43–48, use a graphing utility to find the indicated limit rounded to two decimal places.
	 43.	 lim
xS1 x3 - x2 + x - 1
x4 - x3 + 2x - 2 
	
44.	 lim
xS-1 x3 + x2 + 3x + 3
x4 + x3 + 2x + 2 
	
45.	 lim
xS2 x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
x2 + x - 6
 
	 46.	 lim
xS1 x3 - x2 + 3x - 3
x2 + 3x - 4
 
	
47.	 lim
xS-1 
x3 + 2x2 + x
x4 + x3 + 2x + 2 
	
48.	 lim
xS3 x3 - 3x2 + 4x - 12
x4 - 3x3 + x - 3  

912 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
	 49.	 Let A = 12, - 32 and B = 16, - 112 be points in the plane. 
Find the distance between the points and the midpoint of the 
line segment connecting the points. 
	 50.	 Find the center, foci, and vertices of the ellipse
1x - 222
9
+
1y + 122
13
= 1
	 51.	 Logan invests $4000 at an annual interest rate of 6%. 
How much money will she have after 10 years if interest is 
compounded continuously? 
	 52.	 Assuming r 7 0 and 0 … u 6 2p, find the polar coordinates 
of the point whose rectangular coordinates are 1- 2, 2232.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 49–52 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 See Figure 2 on page 909.	
2.	 f102 = 0
We mentioned in the previous section that algebra can sometimes be used to find 
the exact value of a limit. This is accomplished by developing two formulas involving 
limits and several properties of limits.
In Words
The limit of a constant is the 
constant.
In Words
The limit of x as x approaches c 
is c.
Two Formulas: lim
xSc b and lim
xSc x
Limit of a Constant
For the constant function f1x2 = b,
	
lim
xSc f1x2 = lim
xSc b = b	
(1)
where c is any number.
Limit of x
For the identity function f1x2 = x,
	
lim
xSc f1x2 = lim
xSc x = c	
(2)
where c is any number.
Theorem
Graphs are used to establish formulas (1) and (2). Since the graph of a constant 
function is a horizontal line, it follows that no matter how close x is to c, the  
corresponding value of f equals b. That is, lim
xSc b = b. See Figure 4.
See Figure 5. For any choice of c, as x gets closer to c, the corresponding value 
of f is x, which is just as close to c. That is, lim
xSc x = c.
Figure 4 
lim
xSc b = b
x
y
f(x)  b
c
(0, b)
Figure 5 
  lim
xSc x = c
f(x)  x
c
c
x
y
(c, c)
14.2  Algebra Techniques for Finding Limits
	
Objectives	 	1  Find the Limit of a Sum, a Difference, and a Product  (p. 913)
	
	 	2  Find the Limit of a Polynomial  (p. 914)
	
	 	3  Find the Limit of a Power or a Root  (p. 915)
	
	 	4  Find the Limit of a Quotient  (p. 916)
	
	 	5  Find the Limit of an Average Rate of Change  (p. 917)

Section 14.2  Algebra Techniques for Finding Limits  913
Using Formulas (1) and (2)
(a)  lim
xS3 5 = 5    (b)  lim
xS3 x = 3    (c)  lim
xS0 (-8) = -8    (c) 
lim
xS-1>2 x = -  1
2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Formulas (1) and (2), when used with the properties that follow, enable us to evaluate 
limits of more complicated functions.
Find the Limit of a Sum, a Difference, and a Product
In the following properties, we assume that f and g are two functions for which both 
lim
xSc f1x2 and lim
xSc g1x2 exist.
Example 1
•
1
Limit of a Sum
	
lim
xSc3f1x2 + g1x2 4 = lim
xSc f1x2 + lim
xSc g1x2	
(3)
Theorem
Finding the Limit of a Sum
Find: 
lim
xS-31x + 42
The limit we seek involves the sum of two functions: f1x2 = x and g1x2 = 4. From 
formulas (1) and (2), 
lim
xS-3 f1x2 = lim
xS-3 x = -3 and lim
xS-3 g1x2 = lim
xS-3 4 = 4
From formula (3), it follows that
lim
xS-31x + 42 = lim
xS-3x + lim
xS-34 = -3 + 4 = 1
Example 2
Solution
•
Limit of a Difference
	
lim
xSc3f1x2 - g1x2 4 = lim
xSc f1x2 - lim
xSc g1x2	
(4)
Theorem
Finding the Limit of a Difference
Find: 
lim
xS416 - x2
The limit we seek involves the difference of two functions: f1x2 = 6 and g1x2 = x. 
From formulas (1) and (2), 
lim
xS4 f1x2 = lim
xS4 6 = 6 and lim
xS4 g1x2 = lim
xS4 x = 4
From formula (4), it follows that
lim
xS416 - x2 = lim
xS4 6 - lim
xS4 x = 6 - 4 = 2
Example 3
Solution
•
Limit of a Product
	
lim
xSc3f1x2 # g1x2 4 = 3lim
xSc f1x2 4 3lim
xSc g1x2 4	
(5)
Theorem
Finding the Limit of a Product
Find: 
lim
xS-51 -4x2
Example 4
In Words
The limit of the sum of two  
functions equals the sum of their 
limits.
In Words
The limit of the difference of two 
functions equals the difference of 
their limits.
In Words
The limit of the product of two 
functions equals the product of 
their limits.

914 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
The limit we seek involves the product of two functions: f1x2 = -4 and g1x2 = x. 
From formulas (1) and (2), 
lim
xS-5 f1x2 = lim
xS-51 -42 = -4 and lim
xS-5 g1x2 = lim
xS-5 x = -5
From formula (5), it follows that
lim
xS-51 -4x2 = 3 lim
xS-5 1 -42 4 3 lim
xS-5 x4 = 1 -42 1-52 = 20
Finding Limits Using Algebraic Properties
Find:  (a)  lim
xS-213x - 52      (b)  lim
xS215x22
(a)	  lim
xS-213x - 52 = lim
xS-213x2 - lim
xS-2 5 = 3 lim
xS-2 34 3 lim
xS-2 x4 - lim
xS-2 5
	
 = 132 1-22 - 5 = -6 - 5 = -11
(b)	  lim
xS215x22 = 3 lim
xS2 54 3 lim
xS2 x24 = 5 lim
xS21x # x2 = 53 lim
xS2 x4 3 lim
xS2 x4
	
 = 5 # 2 # 2 = 20
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Notice in the solution to part (b) that lim
xS215x22 = 5 # 22.
Solution
•
Example 5
Solution
•
Limit of a Monomial
If n Ú 1 is a positive integer and a is a constant, then
	
lim
xSc1axn2 = acn	
(6)
for any number c.
Theorem
Proof
lim (axn) = [lim a][lim xn] = a[lim (x · x · x · . . . · x)]
n factors
c
x
= a[lim x][lim x][lim x] . . . [lim x]
n factors
= a · c · c · c · . . . · c = acn
n factors
c
x
c
x
c
x
c
x
c
x
c
x
c
x
Finding the Limit of a Monomial
Find: 
lim
xS21 -4x32
lim
xS21 -4x32 = -4 # 23 = -4 # 8 = -32
Find the Limit of a Polynomial
Since a polynomial is a sum of monomials, we can use formula (6) and the repeated 
use of formula (3) to obtain the following result:
■
Example 6
Solution
•
2
Limit of a Polynomial
If P is a polynomial function, then
	
lim
xSc P1x2 = P1c2	
(7)
for any number c.
Theorem

Section 14.2  Algebra Techniques for Finding Limits  915
Proof  If P is a polynomial function—that is, if
P1x2 = an
 xn + an-1
 xn-1 + g + a1
 x + a0
then
 lim
xSc P1x2 = lim
xSc3an
 xn + an-1
 xn-1 + g + a1
 x + a04
 = lim
xSc1an
 xn2 + lim
xSc1an-1
 xn-12 + g + lim
xSc1a1
 x2 + lim
xSc a0
 = an
 cn + an-1
 cn-1 + g + a1
 c + a0
 = P1c2
Finding the Limit of a Polynomial
Find: 
lim
xS235x4 - 6x3 + 3x2 + 4x - 24
 lim
xS235x4 - 6x3 + 3x2 + 4x - 24 = 5 # 24 - 6 # 23 + 3 # 22 + 4 # 2 - 2
 = 5 # 16 - 6 # 8 + 3 # 4 + 8 - 2
 = 80 - 48 + 12 + 6 = 50
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 7
Find the Limit of a Power or a Root
■
Example 7
Solution
•
3
Limit of a Power or Root
If lim
xSc f1x2 exists and if n Ú 2 is a positive integer, then
	
lim
xSc3f1x2 4n = 3lim
xScf1x2 4n	
(8)
and
	
lim
xSc 2
n f1x2 = 5
n
 lim
xSc f1x2	
(9)
In formula (9), we require that both 2
n f1x2 and 5
n
 lim
xSc f1x2 be defined.
Theorem
Look carefully at equations (8) and (9) and compare each side.
Finding the Limit of a Power or a Root
Find:  (a)  lim
xS113x - 524    (b)  lim
xS0 25x2 + 8    (c)  lim
xS-115x3 - x + 324>3
(a)	 lim
xS113x - 524 = 3 lim
xS113x - 52 44 = 1-224 = 16
(b)	 lim
xS0 25x2 + 8 = 5 lim
xS0 (5x2 + 8) = 28 = 222
(c)	 lim
xS-115x3 - x + 324>3 = 5 
3  lim
xS-1 (5x3 - x + 3)4
	
 = 5 
3  [ lim
xS-1 (5x3 - x + 3)]4 = 2
3
 1-124 = 2
3
 1 = 1
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Example 8
Solution
•
In Words
To find the limit of a polynomial as 
x approaches c, all we need to do is 
evaluate the polynomial at c.

916 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Find the Limit of a Quotient
4
Limit of a Quotient
	
lim
xScc f1x2
g1x2 d =
lim
xSc f1x2
lim
xSc g1x2 	
(10)
provided that lim
xSc g1x2 ∙0.
Theorem
Finding the Limit of a Quotient
Find: 
lim
xS1 5x3 - x + 2
3x + 4
The limit we seek involves the quotient of two functions: f1x2 = 5x3 - x + 2 and 
g1x2 = 3x + 4. First, find the limit of the denominator g1x2.
lim
xS1 g1x2 = lim
xS113x + 42 = 7
Since the limit of the denominator is not zero, proceed to use formula (10).
lim
xS1 5x3 - x + 2
3x + 4
=
lim
xS115x3 - x + 22
lim
xS113x + 42
= 6
7
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
When the limit of the denominator is zero, formula (10) cannot be used. In such 
cases, other strategies need to be used. Let’s look at two examples.
Finding the Limit of a Quotient
Find:  (a)  lim
xS3 x2 - x - 6
x2 - 9
      (b)  lim
xS0 5x - sin x
x
(a)	 The limit of the denominator equals zero, so formula (10) cannot be used.  
Instead, notice that the expression can be factored as
x2 - x - 6
x2 - 9
=
1x - 32 1x + 22
1x - 32 1x + 32
When computing a limit as x approaches 3, we are interested in the values of the 
function when x is close to 3 but unequal to 3. Since x ∙3, we can divide out 
the 1x - 32 >s. Formula (10) can then be used.
lim
xS3 x2 - x - 6
x2 - 9
= lim
xS3 
 1x - 32 1x + 22
 1x - 32 1x + 32 =
lim
xS31x + 22
lim
xS31x + 32 = 5
6
(b)	 Again, the limit of the denominator is zero. In this situation, perform the  
indicated operation and divide by x.
lim
xS0 5x - sin x
x
= lim
xS0c 5x
x - sin x
x
d = lim
xS0 5 x 
 x - lim
xS0 sin x
x
= 5 - 1 = 4
Example 9
Solution
•
Example 10
Solution
•
 c
Refer to Example 3, 
Section 14.1
 c
Limit of 
a difference
In Words
The limit of the quotient of two 
functions equals the quotient 
of their limits, provided that the 
limit of the denominator is not 
zero.

Section 14.2  Algebra Techniques for Finding Limits  917
Finding Limits Using Algebraic Properties
Find: 
lim
xS2 x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
x4 - 2x3 + x - 2
The limit of the denominator is zero, so formula (10) cannot be used. We factor the 
expression.
 x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
x4 - 2x3 + x - 2 =
x21x - 22 + 41x - 22
x31x - 22 + 11x - 22 = 1x2 + 42 1x - 22
1x3 + 12 1x - 22
	
c
	
Factor by grouping
Then
lim
xS2 x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
x4 - 2x3 + x - 2 = lim
xS2 1x2 + 42 1x - 22 
1x3 + 12 1x - 22 = 8
9
which is exact.
Compare the exact solution above with the approximate solution found in 
Example 6 of Section 14.1.
Find the Limit of an Average Rate of Change
Finding the Limit of an Average Rate of Change
Find the limit as x approaches 2 of the average rate of change of the function
f1x2 = x2 + 3x
from 2 to x.
The average rate of change of f from 2 to x is
∆y
∆x =
f1x2 - f122
x - 2
= 1x2 + 3x2 - 10
x - 2
= 1x + 52 1x - 22
x - 2
The limit of the average rate of change is
lim
xS2 
f1x2 - f122
x - 2
= lim
xS2 1x2 + 3x2 - 10
x - 2
= lim
xS2 1x + 52 1x - 22 
 x - 2 
= 7
Example 11
Solution
•
5
Example 12
Solution
•
Summary
To find exact values for lim
xSc f1x2, try the following:
1.  If f is a polynomial function, lim
xSc f1x2 = f1c2. (formula (7))
2.  If f is a polynomial raised to a power or is the root of a polynomial, use formula (8) or (9) with formula (7).
3.  If f is a quotient and the limit of the denominator is not zero, use the fact that the limit of a quotient is the 
quotient of the limits. (formula (10))
4.  If f is a quotient and the limit of the denominator is zero, use other techniques, such as factoring.
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 The limit of the product of two functions equals the  
 
of their limits.
	 2.	 lim
xSc b =  
.
	 3.	 lim
xSc x =  
.
	 4.	 True or False  The limit of a polynomial function as x  
approaches 5 equals the value of the polynomial at 5. 
	 5.	 True or False  The limit of a rational function at 5 equals the 
value of the rational function at 5. 
	 6.	 True or False  The limit of a quotient equals the quotient of 
the limits. 
14.2  Assess Your Understanding

918 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
In Problems 7–42, find each limit algebraically.
	
7.	 lim
xS1 5 
	
8.	 lim
xS11- 32 
	
9.	 lim
xS4 x 
	
10.	 lim
xS-3 x 
	 11.	 lim
xS-215x2 
	
12.	 lim
xS41- 3x2 
	
13.	 lim
xS215x42 
	
14.	 lim
xS-312x32 
	 15.	 lim
xS213x + 22 
	
16.	 lim
xS312 - 5x2 
	
17.	 lim
xS-113x2 - 5x2 
	
18.	 lim
xS218x2 - 42 
	 19.	 lim
xS115x4 - 3x2 + 6x - 92 
		 	
20.	 lim
xS-118x5 - 7x3 + 8x2 + x - 42 
	 21.	 lim
xS11x2 + 123 
	
22.	 lim
xS213x - 422 
	
23.	 lim
xS1 25x + 4 
	
24.	 lim
xS0 21 - 2x 
	 25.	 lim
xS0 x2 - 4
x2 + 4 
	
26.	 lim
xS2 3x + 4
x2 + x 
	
27.	 lim
xS213x - 225>2 
	
28.	 lim
xS-112x + 125>3 
	 29.	 lim
xS2 x2 - 4
x2 - 2x 
	
30.	 lim
xS-1 x2 + x
x2 - 1 
	
31.	 lim
xS-3 x2 - x - 12
x2 - 9
 
	
32.	 lim
xS-3 x2 + x - 6
x2 + 2x - 3 
	 33.	 lim
xS1 x3 - 1
x - 1  
	
34.	 lim
xS1 x4 - 1
x - 1  
	
35.	 lim
xS-1 
1x + 122
x2 - 1  
	
36.	 lim
xS2 x3 - 8
x2 - 4 
	 37.	 lim
xS1 x3 - x2 + x - 1
x4 - x3 + 2x - 2 
	
38.	 lim
xS-1 x3 + x2 + 3x + 3
x4 + x3 + 2x + 2 
	
39.	 lim
xS2 x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
x2 + x - 6
 
	 40.	 lim
xS1 x3 - x2 + 3x - 3
x2 + 3x - 4
 
	
41.	 lim
xS-1 
x3 + 2x2 + x
x4 + x3 + 2x + 2 
	
42.	 lim
xS3 x3 - 3x2 + 4x - 12
x4 - 3x3 + x - 3  
In Problems 43–52, find the limit as x approaches c of the average rate of change of each function from c to x.
	 43.	 c = 2; f1x2 = 5x - 3 
	
44.	 c = - 2; f1x2 = 4 - 3x 
	
45.	 c = 3; f1x2 = x2 
	 46.	 c = 3; f1x2 = x3 
	
47.	 c = - 1; f1x2 = x2 + 2x 
	
48.	 c = - 1; f1x2 = 2x2 - 3x 
	 49.	 c = 0; f1x2 = 3x3 - 2x2 + 4 
	
50.	 c = 0; f1x2 = 4x3 - 5x + 8 
	 51.	 c = 1; f1x2 = 1
x 
	
52.	 c = 1; f1x2 = 1
x2 
In Problems 53–56, use the properties of limits and the facts that
lim
xS0 sin x
x
= 1  lim
xS0 cos x - 1
x
= 0  lim
xS0 sin x = 0  lim
xS0 cos x = 1
where x is in radians, to find each limit.
	 53.	 lim
xS0 tan x
x
 
	
54.	 lim
xS0 
sin12x2
x
  2
	
	 [Hint:  Use a Double-angle Formula.]
	 55.	 lim
xS0 3 sin x + cos x - 1
4x
 
	
56.	 lim
xS0 
sin2 x + sin x1cos x - 12
x2
 
Skill Building
	 57.	 Graph the function f1x2 = x3 + x2 + 1.
	 58.	 Find the inverse of the function g1x2 = 2x + 3
x + 1 .
	 59.	 Give the exact value of sin-123
2 . 
	 60.	 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand 1x + 224.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 57–60 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.

Section 14.3    One-sided Limits; Continuous Functions  919
Find the One-sided Limits of a Function
Earlier we described lim
xSc f1x2 = N by saying that as x gets closer to c but remains
unequal to c, the corresponding values of f get closer to N. Whether we use a 
numerical argument or the graph of the function f, the variable x can get closer to c  
in only two ways: by approaching c from the left, through numbers less than c, or by 
approaching c from the right, through numbers greater than c.
If we approach c from only one side, we have a one-sided limit. The notation
1
lim
xSc- f1x2 = L
is called the left limit. It is read “the limit of f1x2 as x approaches c from the left 
equals L” and may be described by the following statement:
As x gets closer to c but remains less than c, the corresponding value of f  
gets closer to L.
The notation x S c- is used to remind us that x is less than c.
The notation
lim
xSc+ f1x2 = R
is called the right limit. It is read “the limit of f1x2 as x approaches c from the right 
equals R” and may be described by the following statement:
As x gets closer to c, but remains greater than c, the corresponding value of f 
gets closer to R.
The notation x S c+ is used to remind us that x is greater than c.
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 923.
	
Objectives	 	1  Find the One-sided Limits of a Function  (p. 919)
	
	 	2  Determine Whether a Function Is Continuous  (p. 921)
14.3  One-sided Limits; Continuous Functions
• Library of Functions (Section 2.4, pp. 117–122)
• Piecewise-defined Functions (Section 2.4, pp. 122–123)
• Polynomial Functions (Section 4.1, pp. 202–217)
• Properties of Rational Functions  
(Section 4.2, pp. 223–230)
• The Graph of a Rational Function  
(Section 4.3, pp. 233–244)
• Properties of the Exponential Function  
(Section 5.3, pp. 308 and 310)
• Properties of the Logarithmic Function  
(Section 5.4, p. 322)
• Properties of the Trigonometric Functions  
(Section 6.4, pp. 432 and 434, and Section 6.5,  
pp. 448–450)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
In Words
x S c+ means x is approaching c  
from the right, so x 7 c.
In Words
x S c- means x is approaching c  
from the left, so x 6 c.

920 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Figure 6 illustrates left and right limits.
Figure 6
Figure 7
x
x
y
lim
R
c
x
(b)
x
x
y
lim
L
c
x
(a)
The left and right limits can be used to determine whether lim
xSc f1x2 exists. See 
Figure 7.
x
y
lim f(x)  lim f(x)
L  R
c
c
x
(a)
c
x
x
y
lim f(x)  lim f(x)
R
c
c
x
(b)
c
x
L
As Figure 7(a) illustrates, lim
xSc f1x2 exists and equals the common value of the
left limit and the right limit 1L = R2. In Figure 7(b), we see that lim
xSc f1x2 does not 
exist because L ∙R. This leads to the following result.
Suppose that lim
xSc- f1x2 = L and lim
xSc+ f1x2 = R. Then lim
xSc f1x2 exists if and 
only if L = R. Furthermore, if L = R, then lim
xSc f1x2 = L = R.
Theorem
Collectively, the left and right limits of a function are called one-sided limits of 
the function.
Finding One-sided Limits of a Function
For the function
f1x2 = c
2x - 1
1
x - 2
if x 6 2
if x = 2
if x 7 2
find:  (a)  lim
xS2- f1x2      (b)  lim
xS2+ f1x2      (c)  lim
xS2 f1x2
Figure 8 shows the graph of f.
(a)	 To find lim
xS2- f (x), look at the values of f when x is close to 2 but less than 2.
Since f1x2 = 2x - 1 for such numbers, we conclude that
lim
xS2- f1x2 = lim
xS2-12x - 12 = 3
(b)	 To find lim
xS2+ f1x2, look at the values of f when x is close to 2 but greater than 2.
Since f1x2 = x - 2 for such numbers, we conclude that
lim
xS2+ f1x2 = lim
xS2+1x - 22 = 0
(c)	 Since the left and right limits are unequal, lim
xS2 f1x2 does not exist.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 1  a n d  3 5
Example 1
Solution
•
Figure 8 
x
y
2
22
22
2
(2, 1)
4

Section 14.3    One-sided Limits; Continuous Functions  921
Determine Whether a Function Is Continuous
We have observed that f1c2, the value of the function f at c, plays no role in 
determining the one-sided limits of f at c. What is the role of the value of a  
function at c and its one-sided limits at c? Let’s look at some of the possibilities. See  
Figure 9.
2
Figure 9 
(b)
x
y
lim f(x) 5 lim f(x), so lim f(x) exists;
lim f(x) 5 f(c)
f(c)
y 5 f(x)
c2
c
x
(a)
c1
x
c
x
c
x
x
y
lim f(x) ﬁ lim f(x), so lim f(x) does not exist;
f(c) is deﬁned 
f(c)
y 5 f(x)
c2
c
x
(d)
c1
x
c
x
x
y
lim f(x) 5 lim f(x), so lim f(x) exists;
lim f(x) ﬁ f(c)
f(c)
y 5 f(x)
c2
c
x
c1
x
c
x
c
x
x
y
lim f(x) ﬁ lim f(x), so lim f(x) does not exist;
f(c) is not deﬁned 
y 5 f(x)
c
c
x
(e)
c
x
c
x
x
y
lim f(x) 5 lim f(x), so lim f(x) exists;
f(c) is not deﬁned
y 5 f(x)
c
c
x
(c)
c
x
c
x
x
y
lim f(x) 5 f(c) ﬁ lim f(x),
so lim f(x) does not exist;
f(c) is deﬁned
y 5 f(x)
c
c
x
(f)
c
x
c
x
Much earlier in this text, we stated that a function f was continuous if its 
graph could be drawn without lifting pencil from paper. Figure 9 reveals that the 
only graph that has this characteristic is the graph in Figure 9(a), for which the 
one-sided limits at c each exist and are equal to the value of f at c. This leads us to the  
following definition.
A function f is continuous at c if
1.	 f is defined at c; that is, c is in the domain of f so that f1c2 equals a number.
2.	 lim
xSc- f1x2 = f1c2
3.	 lim
xSc+ f1x2 = f1c2
In other words, a function f is continuous at c if
lim
xSc f1x2 = f1c2
Definition
If f is not continuous at c, we say that f is discontinuous at c. Each function 
whose graph appears in Figures 9(b) to 9(f) is discontinuous at c.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 7
Look again at formula (7) on page 914. Based on (7), we conclude that a  
polynomial function is continuous at every number.
Look at formula (10) on page 916 and suppose f and g are polynomial functions. 
We conclude that a rational function is continuous at every number, except any at 
which it is not defined. At numbers where a rational function is not defined, either 
a hole appears in the graph or else an asymptote appears.

922 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Determining the Numbers at Which a Rational  
Function Is Continuous
(a)	 Determine the numbers at which the rational function
R1x2 =
x - 2
x2 - 6x + 8
is continuous.
(b)	 Use limits to analyze the graph of R near 2 and near 4.
(c)	 Graph R.
(a)	 Since R1x2 =
x - 2
1x - 22 1x - 42 , the domain of R is 5x∙x ∙2, x ∙46.
	
R is a rational function and it is defined at every number except 2 and 4. 
We conclude that R is continuous at every number except 2 and 4. (Condition 1 
of the definition is violated.)
(b)	 To determine the behavior of the graph near 2 and near 4, look at lim
xS2 R1x2 and 
lim
xS4 R1x2.
For lim
xS2 R1x2, we have
lim
xS2 R1x2 = lim
xS2 
 x - 2 
 1x - 22 1x - 42 = lim
xS2 
1
x - 4 = -  1
2
As x gets closer to 2, the graph of R gets closer to -  1
2. Since R is not defined at 2, 
the graph will have a hole at a2, -  1
2b.
For lim
xS4 R1x2, we have
lim
xS4 R1x2 = lim
xS4 
 x - 2 
 1x - 22 1x - 42 = lim
xS4 
1
x - 4
If x 6 4 and x is getting closer to 4, the value of 
1
x - 4 is negative and is becoming 
unbounded; that is, lim
xS4- R1x2 = - q.
If x 7 4 and x is getting closer to 4, the value of 
1
x - 4 is positive and is becoming 
unbounded; that is, lim
xS4+ R1x2 = q.
Since 0 R1x2 0 S q for x close to 4, the graph of R will have a vertical asymptote 
at x = 4.
(c)	 It is easiest to graph R by observing that if x ∙2, then
R1x2 =
 x - 2 
 1x - 22 1x - 42 =
1
x - 4
	
Therefore, the graph of R is the graph of y = 1
x shifted to the right 4 units with 
a hole at a2, -  1
2b. See Figure 10.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 3
The exponential, logarithmic, sine, and cosine functions are continuous at every 
number in their domain. The tangent, cotangent, secant, and cosecant functions are 
continuous except at numbers for which they are not defined, where asymptotes 
occur. The square root function and absolute value function are continuous at  
every number in their domain. The function f1x2 = int1x2 is continuous except for 
x = an integer, where a jump occurs in the graph.
Piecewise-defined functions require special attention.
Example 2
Solution
•
Figure 10  R(x) =
x - 2
x2 - 6x + 8
1
2
1
2
2
x  4
4
6
x
y
 1
2

Section 14.3    One-sided Limits; Continuous Functions  923
Determining Where a Piecewise-defined Function Is Continuous
Determine the numbers at which the following function is continuous.
f1x2 = c
x2
x + 1
5 - x
if x … 0
if 0 6 x 6 2
if 2 … x … 5
The “pieces” of f—that is, y = x2, y = x + 1, and y = 5 - x—are each continuous 
for every number since they are polynomials. In other words, when we graph the 
pieces, we will not lift our pencil. When we graph the function f, however, we have 
to be careful, because the pieces change at x = 0 and at x = 2. So the numbers we 
need to investigate for f are x = 0 and x = 2.
 At x = 0:  f102 = 02 = 0
 lim
xS0- f1x2 = lim
xS0- x2 = 0
 lim
xS0+ f1x2 = lim
xS0+1x + 12 = 1
Since lim
xS0+ f1x2 ∙f102, f is not continuous at x = 0.
 At x = 2:  f122 = 5 - 2 = 3
 lim
xS2- f1x2 = lim
xS2-1x + 12 = 3
 lim
xS2+ f1x2 = lim
xS2+15 - x2 = 3
So f is continuous at x = 2.
The graph of f, given in Figure 11, demonstrates the conclusions drawn above.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  5 3  a n d  6 1
Example 3
Solution
•
Summary
Library of Functions: Continuity Properties
Function
Domain
Property
Polynomial function
All real numbers
Continuous at every number in the domain
Rational function R1x2 = P1x2
Q1x2 , 
P, Q are polynomials
5x∙Q1x2 ∙06
Continuous at every number in the domain  
Hole or vertical asymptote where R is  
undefined
Exponential function
All real numbers
Continuous at every number in the domain
Logarithmic function
Positive real numbers
Continuous at every number in the domain
Sine and cosine functions
All real numbers
Continuous at every number in the domain
Tangent and secant  
functions
All real numbers, except  
odd integer multiples of p
2
Continuous at every number in the domain 
Vertical asymptotes at odd integer multiples of p
2
Cotangent and cosecant  
functions
All real numbers, except  
integer multiples of p
Continuous at every number in the domain  
Vertical asymptotes at integer multiples of p
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 For the function f1x2 = c
x2
if x … 0
x + 1
if 0 6 x 6 2
5 - x
if 2 … x … 5
,
find f102 and f122. (pp. 122–123) 
	 2.	 What are the domain and range of f1x2 = ln x? (p. 322)
	 3.	 True 
or 
False  The exponential function 
f1x2 = ex  
is increasing on the interval 1- q, q 2. (p. 308) 
14.3  Assess Your Understanding
Figure 11 
f (x) = •
x2
if x … 0
x + 1
if 0 6 x 6 2
5 - x
if 2 … x … 5
x
y
2
3
4
2
2
2
(0, 0)
(2, 3)
4
6

924 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Skill Building
In Problems 13–32, use the accompanying graph of y = f1x2.
	 13.	 What is the domain of f?	
14.	 What is the range of f?
	 15.	 Find the x-intercept(s), if any, of f.	
16.	 Find the y-intercept(s), if any, of f. 
	 17.	 Find f1- 82 and f1- 42. 
	
18.	 Find f122 and f162. 
	 19.	 Find lim
xS-6- f1x2. 
	
20.	 Find lim
xS-6+ f1x2. 
	 21.	 Find lim
xS-4- f1x2. 
	
22.	 Find lim
xS-4+ f1x2. 
	 23.	 Find lim
xS2- f1x2. 
	
24.	 Find lim
xS2+ f1x2. 
	 25.	 Does lim
xS4 f1x2 exist? If it does, what is it? 
	
26.	 Does lim
xS0 f1x2 exist? If it does, what is it? 
	 27.	 Is f continuous at - 4? 
	
28.	 Is f continuous at - 6? 
	
29.	 Is f continuous at 0? 
	 30.	 Is f continuous at 2? 
	
31.	 Is f continuous at 4? 
	
32.	 Is f continuous at 5? 
In Problems 33–44, find the one-sided limit.
	 33.	 lim
xS1+12x + 32 
	
34.	 lim
xS2-14 - 2x2 
	
35.	 lim
xS1-12x3 + 5x2 
	
36.	
lim
xS-2+13x2 - 82 
	 37.	
lim
xSp>2+ sin x 
	
38.	 lim
xSp-13 cos x2 
	
39.	 lim
xS2+ x2 - 4
x - 2  
	
40.	 lim
xS1- x3 - x
x - 1  
	 41.	 lim
xS-1- x2 - 1
x3 + 1 
	
42.	 lim
xS0+ x3 - x2
x4 + x2 
	
43.	
lim
xS-2+ x2 + x - 2
x2 + 2x
 
	
44.	
lim
xS-4- x2 + x - 12
x2 + 4x
 
In Problems 45–60, determine whether f is continuous at c.
	 45.	 f1x2 = x3 - 3x2 + 2x - 6 c = 2 
	
46.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - 6x + 5 c = - 3 
	 47.	 f1x2 = x2 + 5
x - 6 c = 3 
	
48.	 f1x2 = x3 - 8
x2 + 4 c = 2 
	
49.	 f1x2 = x + 3
x - 3 c = 3 
	 50.	 f1x2 = x - 6
x + 6 c = - 6 
	
51.	 f1x2 = x3 + 3x
x2 - 3x c = 0 
	
52.	 f1x2 = x2 - 6x
x2 + 6x c = 0 
y
2
4
2
(2, 3)
(6, 2)
4
6
x
	 4.	 Name the trigonometric functions that have asymptotes.  
 (pp. 432, 434, 448–450) 
	 5.	 True or False  Some rational functions have holes in their 
graph. (pp. 241–243) 
	 6.	 True or False  Every polynomial function has a graph that 
can be traced without lifting pencil from paper. (pp. 202–203) 
	
7.	 If we approach c from only one side, then we have a(n) 
 
 limit.
	 8.	 The notation 
 is used to describe the fact 
that as x gets closer to c but remains greater than c, the value 
of f1x2 gets closer to R.
	 9.	 If lim
xSc f1x2 = f1c2, then f is  
 at  
.
	 10.	 True or False  For any function f, 
lim
xSc- f1x2 = lim
xSc+ f1x2. 
	 11.	 True or False  If f is continuous at c, then 
lim
xSc+ f1x2 = f1c2. 
	 12.	 True or False  Every polynomial function is continuous at 
every real number. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 53.	 f1x2 = c
x3 + 3x
x2 - 3x
1
 
 if x ∙0
if x = 0 c = 0 
	 54.	 f1x2 = c
x2 - 6x
x2 + 6x
- 2
if x ∙0
 
 
if x = 0 c = 0 
	 55.	 f1x2 = c
x3 + 3x
x2 - 3x
- 1
if x ∙0
 
 
if x = 0 c = 0 
	 56.	 f1x2 = c
x2 - 6x
x2 + 6x
- 1
if x ∙0
 
 
if x = 0 c = 0 

Section 14.3    One-sided Limits; Continuous Functions  925
	 57.	 f1x2 = e
x3 - 1
x2 - 1
2
3
x + 1
if x 6 1
 
 
if x = 1
if x 7 1
 
 
 c = 1 
	 58.	 f1x2 = e
x2 - 2x
x - 2
2
x - 4
x - 1
if x 6 2
 
 
if x = 2
if x 7 2
 
 
 c = 2 
	 59.	 f1x2 = d
2ex
2
x3 + 2x2
x2
if x 6 0
if x = 0
if x 7 0
 
 
 c = 0 
	 60.	 f1x2 = d
3 cos x
3
x3 + 3x2
x2
if x 6 0
if x = 0
if x 7 0
 
 
 c = 0 
In Problems 61–72, find the numbers at which f is continuous. At which numbers is f discontinuous?
	 61.	 f1x2 = 2x + 3	
62.	 f1x2 = 4 - 3x	
63.	 f1x2 = 3x2 + x	
64.	 f1x2 = - 3x3 + 7
	 65.	 f1x2 = 4 sin x	
66.	 f1x2 = - 2 cos x	
67.	 f1x2 = 2 tan x	
68.	 f1x2 = 4 csc x
	 69.	 f1x2 = 2x + 5
x2 - 4	
70.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4
x2 - 9	
71.	 f1x2 = x - 3
ln x 	
72.	 f1x2 =
ln x
x - 3
In Problems 73–76, discuss whether R is continuous at each number c. Use limits to analyze the graph of R at c. Graph R.
	 73.	 R1x2 = x - 1
x2 - 1, c = - 1 and c = 1	
74.	 R1x2 = 3x + 6
x2 - 4 , c = - 2 and c = 2
	 75.	 R1x2 = x2 + x
x2 - 1, c = - 1 and c = 1	
76.	 R1x2 = x2 + 4x
x2 - 16, c = - 4 and c = 4
In Problems 77–82, determine where each rational function is undefined. Determine whether an asymptote or a hole appears at such  
numbers.
	 77.	 R1x2 = x3 - x2 + x - 1
x4 - x3 + 2x - 2	
78.	 R1x2 = x3 + x2 + 3x + 3
x4 + x3 + 2x + 2	
79.	 R1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
x2 + x - 6
	 80.	 R1x2 = x3 - x2 + 3x - 3
x2 + 3x - 4
	
81.	 R1x2 =
x3 + 2x2 + x
x4 + x3 + 2x + 2	
82.	 R1x2 = x3 - 3x2 + 4x - 12
x4 - 3x3 + x - 3
For Problems 83–88, use a graphing utility to graph the functions R given in Problems 77–82. Verify the solutions found for Problems 77–82.
	 89.	 Name three functions that are continuous at every real  
number.
	 90.	 Create a function that is not continuous at the number 5.
Discussion and Writing
	 91.	 Find any vertical or horizontal asymptotes for the graph of 
f1x2 = 3x - 4
x - 4 . 
	 92.	 Evaluate the permutation P(5, 3) 
	 93.	 Write 5 ln x + 2 ln y - 4 ln z  as a single natural logarithm.
	 94.	 Write the augmented matrix for the following system:
 3x + y + 2z = 4
 x + 2z = 5
 y - 3z = -2
c
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 91–94 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
	 1.	 f102 = 0; f122 = 3	
2.	 Domain: 5x∙x 7 06; range 5y∙- q 6 y 6 q 6	
3.	 True
	 4.	 Secant, cosecant, tangent, cotangent	
5.	 True	
6.	 True
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers

926 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
The Tangent Problem
One question that motivated the development of calculus was a geometry problem, 
the tangent problem. This problem asks, “What is the slope of the tangent line to the 
graph of a function y = f1x2 at a point P on its graph?” See Figure 12.
We first need to define what is meant by a tangent line. In high school geometry, 
the tangent line to a circle at a point is defined as the line that intersects the circle at 
exactly that one point. Look at Figure 13. Notice that the tangent line just touches 
the graph of the circle.
Figure 12 
x
y
y  f(x)
Tangent line
to f at P
P
Figure 13 
P
Tangent line
This definition, however, does not work in general. Look at Figure 14. The lines 
L1 and L2 intersect the graph at only one point P, but neither just touches the graph 
at P. Further, the tangent line LT shown in Figure 15 touches the graph of f at P  
but also intersects the graph elsewhere. So how should we define the tangent line to 
the graph of f at a point P?
Figure 14 
x
y
L2
L1
P
Figure 15 
x
y
LT
P
Find an Equation of the Tangent Line  
to the Graph of a Function
The tangent line LT to the graph of a function y = f1x2 at a point P necessarily 
contains the point P. To find an equation for LT using the point–slope form of the 
equation of a line, we need to find the slope mtan of the tangent line.
1
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 931.
	
Objectives	 	1  Find an Equation of the Tangent Line to the Graph of a Function  (p. 926)
	
	 	2  Find the Derivative of a Function  (p. 928)
	
	 	3  Find Instantaneous Rates of Change  (p. 929)
	
	 	4  Find the Instantaneous Speed of a Particle  (p. 929)
14.4  The Tangent Problem; The Derivative
• Point–Slope Form of a Line (Section 1.3, p. 57)
• Average Rate of Change (Section 2.3, pp. 110–111)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION Before getting started, review the following:

Section 14.4  The Tangent Problem; The Derivative  927
Suppose that the coordinates of the point P are 1c, f1c22. Locate another 
point Q = 1x, f1x2 2 on the graph of f. The line containing P and Q is a secant line. 
(Refer to Section 2.3.) The slope msec of the secant line is
msec = f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
Now look at Figure 16.
As we move along the graph of f from Q toward P, we obtain a succession of  
secant lines. The closer we get to P, the closer the secant line is to the tangent line LT.  
The limiting position of these secant lines is the tangent line LT. Therefore, the 
limiting value of the slopes of these secant lines equals the slope of the tangent line. 
Also, as we move from Q toward P, the values of x get closer to c. Therefore,
mtan = lim
xSc msec = lim
xSc f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
The tangent line to the graph of a function y = f1x2 at a point P = 1c, f1c2 2 
on its graph is defined as the line containing the point P whose slope is
	
mtan = lim
xSc f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
	
(1)
provided that this limit exists.
Definition
If mtan exists, an equation of the tangent line is
	
y - f1c2 = mtan1x - c2	
(2)
Theorem
Finding an Equation of the Tangent Line
Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of f(x) = x2
4  at the point a1, 1
4b. 
Graph f and the tangent line.
The tangent line contains the point a1, 1
4b. The slope of the tangent line to the  
graph of f(x) = x2
4  at a1, 1
4b is
 mtan = lim
xS1 
f1x2 - f112
x - 1
= lim
xS1 
x2
4 - 1
4
x - 1 = lim
xS1 x2 - 1
41x - 12
              = lim
xS1 
 1x - 12 1x + 12
4 1x - 12 
 = lim
xS1 x + 1
4
= 1
2
An equation of the tangent line is
 y - 1
4 = 1
2
 1x - 12
 y = 1
2
 x - 1
4
Figure 17 shows the graph of y = x2
4  and the tangent line at a1, 1
4b.
Now Work p r o b l e m  1 1
Example 1
Solution
y - f(c) = mtan(x - c)
•
Figure 16  Secant lines
x
y
Q  (x, f(x))
Q1  (x1, f(x1))
LT
P  (c, f(c))
y  f(x)
c
Figure 17 
x
y
y 
x 
1,
1
1
2
1
2
1
4
1
4
1
2
y  4
x 2
)
(

928 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Find the Derivative of a Function
The limit in formula (1) has an important generalization: it is called the derivative 
of f at c.
2
Let y = f1x2 denote a function f. If c is a number in the domain of f, then the 
derivative of f at c, denoted by f′(c) and read “f prime of c,” is defined as
	
f′1c2 = lim
xSc f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
	
(3)
provided that this limit exists.
Definition
Finding the Derivative of a Function
Find the derivative of f1x2 = 2x2 - 5x at 2. That is, find f′(2).
Since f122 = 21222 - 5122 = -2, we have
f1x2 - f122
x - 2
= 12x2 - 5x2 - 1-22
x - 2
= 2x2 - 5x + 2
x - 2
= 12x - 12 1x - 22
x - 2
The derivative of f at 2 is
f′122 = lim
xS2 f1x2 - f122
x - 2
= lim
xS2 12x - 12 1x - 22 
 x - 2 
= 3
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Example 2 provides a way of finding the derivative at 2 analytically. Graphing 
utilities have built-in procedures to approximate the derivative of a function at any 
number c. Consult your owner’s manual for the appropriate keystrokes.
Finding the Derivative of a Function Using a Graphing Utility
Use a graphing utility to find the derivative of f1x2 = 2x2 - 5x at 2. That is, find f′122.
Solution  Figure 18 shows the solution using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator.* 
As shown, f′122 = 3.
Example 2
Solution
•
Example 3
Figure 18 
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
Finding the Derivative of a Function
Find the derivative of f1x2 = x2 at c. That is, find f′(c).
Since f1c2 = c2, we have
f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
= x2 - c2
x - c
= 1x + c2 1x - c2
x - c
The derivative of f at c is
f′1c2 = lim
xSc f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
= lim
xSc 1x + c2 1x - c2 
 x - c 
= 2c
•
Example 4
Solution
•
*The TI-84 Plus C uses an alternative notation for the derivative of f at c, namely d
dx f (x)0 x=c.

Section 14.4  The Tangent Problem; The Derivative  929
As Example 4 illustrates, the derivative of f1x2 = x2 exists and equals 2c for 
any number c. In other words, the derivative is itself a function, and using x for 
the independent variable, we can write f′(x) = 2x. The function f′ is called the  
derivative function of f  or the derivative of f . We also say that f is differentiable. 
The instruction “differentiate f” means “find the derivative of f.”
Find Instantaneous Rates of Change
The average rate of change of a function f from c to x is
∆y
∆x = f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
The limit as x approaches c of the average rate of change of f, based on formula (3), is 
the derivative of f at c.
3
The derivative of f at c is also called the instantaneous rate of change of f with 
respect to x at c. That is,
	¢
Instantaneous rate of
change of f with respect to x at c≤= f′1c2 = lim
xSc 
f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
	
(4)
Definition
Finding the Instantaneous Rate of Change
The volume V of a right circular cone of height h = 6 feet and radius r feet is
V = V1r2 = 1
3
 pr 2h = 2pr 2. If r is changing, find the instantaneous rate of change
of the volume V with respect to the radius r at r = 3.
The instantaneous rate of change of V with respect to r at r = 3 is the derivative 
V′(3).
 V′132 = lim
rS3 
V1r2 - V132
r - 3
= lim
rS3 2pr 2 - 18p
r - 3
= lim
rS3 
2p1r 2 - 92
r - 3
 = lim
rS332p1r + 32 4 = 12p
At the instant r = 3 feet, the volume of the cone is changing with respect to r  
at a rate of 12p ≈37.699 cubic feet per 1-foot change in the radius.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Find the Instantaneous Speed of a Particle
If s = f1t2 denotes the position of a particle at time t, then the average speed of the 
particle from c to t is
	
Change in position
Change in time
= ∆s
∆t = f1t2 - f1c2
t - c
	
(5)
Example 5
Solution
•
4
The limit as t approaches c of the expression in formula (5) is the instantaneous 
speed of the particle at c or the velocity of the particle at c. That is,
	
aInstantaneous speed of
a particle at time c
b = f′1c2 = lim
tSc f1t2 - f1c2
t - c
	
(6)
Definition

930 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Finding the Instantaneous Speed of a Particle
In physics it is shown that the height s of a ball thrown straight up with an initial 
speed of 80 feet per second (ft/sec) from a rooftop 96 feet high is
s = s1t2 = -16t2 + 80t + 96
where t is the elapsed time that the ball is in the air. The ball misses the rooftop on 
its way down and eventually strikes the ground. See Figure 19.
(a)	 When does the ball strike the ground? That is, how long is the ball in the air?
(b)	 At what time t will the ball pass the rooftop on its way down?
(c)	 What is the average speed of the ball from t = 0 to t = 2?
(d)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball at time t0?
(e)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball at t = 2?
(f)	 When is the instantaneous speed of the ball equal to zero?
(g)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball as it passes the rooftop on the way down?
(h)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball when it strikes the ground?
(a)	 The ball strikes the ground when s = s1t2 = 0.
 -16t2 + 80t + 96 = 0
 t2 - 5t - 6 = 0
 1t - 62 1t + 12 = 0
 t = 6 or t = -1
Discard the solution t = -1. The ball strikes the ground after 6 sec.
(b)	 The ball passes the rooftop when s = s1t2 = 96.
 -16t2 + 80t + 96 = 96
 t2 - 5t = 0
 t1t - 52 = 0
 t = 0 or t = 5
Discard the solution t = 0. The ball passes the rooftop on the way down  
after 5 sec.
(c)	 The average speed of the ball from t = 0 to t = 2 is
∆s
∆t = s122 - s102
2 - 0
= 192 - 96
2
= 48 ft/sec
(d)	 The instantaneous speed of the ball at time t0 is the derivative s′1t02; that is,
 s′1t02 = lim
tSt0 s1t2 - s1t02
t - t0
 = lim
tSt0 1-16t2 + 80t + 962 - 1-16t2
0 + 80t0 + 962
t - t0
 = lim
tSt0 
-163t2 - t2
0 - 5t + 5t04
t - t0
 = lim
tSt0 -163 1t + t02 1t - t02 - 51t - t02 4
t - t0
 = lim
tSt0 -163 1t + t0 - 52 1t - t02 4
 t - t0 
= lim
tSt03 -161t + t0 - 52 4
	
	
 = -1612t0 - 52 ft/sec
Replace t0 by t. The instantaneous speed of the ball at time t is
s′1t2 = -1612t - 52 ft/sec
Example 6
Solution
Figure 19 
96 ft
Roof
top

Section 14.4  The Tangent Problem; The Derivative  931
(e)	 At t = 2 sec, the instantaneous speed of the ball is
s′122 = -1612 # 2 - 52 = -161 -12 = 16 ft/sec
(f)	 The instantaneous speed of the ball is zero when
 s′1t2 = 0
 -1612t - 52 = 0
 t = 5
2 = 2.5 sec
(g)	 The ball passes the rooftop on the way down when t = 5. The instantaneous 
speed at t = 5 is
s′152 = -16110 - 52 = -80 ft/sec
At t = 5 sec, the ball is traveling -80 ft/sec. When the instantaneous rate of 
change is negative, it means that the direction of the object is downward. The 
ball is traveling 80 ft/sec in the downward direction when t = 5 sec.
(h)	 The ball strikes the ground when t = 6. The instantaneous speed when t = 6 is
s′162 = -16112 - 52 = -112 ft/sec
The speed of the ball at t = 6 sec is -112 ft/sec. Again, the negative value  
implies that the ball is traveling downward.
•
Exploration
Determine the vertex of the quadratic 
function given in Example 6. What do 
you conclude about the velocity when 
s(t) is a maximum?
Summary
The derivative of a function y = f1x2 at c is defined as
f′1c2 = lim
xSc f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
In geometry, f′(c) equals the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at the point 1c, f1c22.
In physics, f′(c) equals the instantaneous speed (velocity) of a particle at time c, where s = f1t2 is the 
position of the particle at time t.
In applications, if two variables are related by the function y = f1x2, then f′(c) equals the instantaneous 
rate of change of y with respect to x at c.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Find an equation of the line with slope 5 containing the 
point 12, - 42. (p. 57) 
	 2.	 True or False  The average rate of change of a function f 
from a to b is
f1b2 + f1a2
b + a
  (pp. 110–111) 
14.4  Assess Your Understanding
	 3.	 If lim
xSc 
f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
 exists, it equals the slope of the  
 
  
 to the graph of f at the point 1c, f1c22.
	 4.	 If lim
xSc 
f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
 exists, it is called the  
 of f at c.
	 5.	 If s = f1t2 denotes the position of a particle at time t, the 
derivative f′1c2 is the  
 of the particle at c.
	 6.	 True or False  The tangent line to a function is the limiting 
position of a secant line. 
	
7.	 True or False  The slope of the tangent line to the graph of f 
at 1c, f1c22 is the derivative of f at c. 
	 8.	 True or False  The velocity of a particle whose position at 
time t is s1t2 is the derivative s′1t2. 
Concepts and Vocabulary

932 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Skill Building
In Problems 9–20, find the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at the given point. Graph f and the tangent line.
	 9.	 f1x2 = 3x + 5 at 11, 82	
10.	 f1x2 = - 2x + 1 at 1- 1, 32	
11.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2 at 1- 1, 32
	 12.	 f1x2 = 3 - x2 at 11, 22	
13.	 f1x2 = 3x2 at 12, 122	
14.	 f1x2 = - 4x2 at 1- 2, - 162
	 15.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + x at 11, 32	
16.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - x at 10, 02	
17.	 f1x2 = x2 - 2x + 3 at 1- 1, 62
	 18.	 f1x2 = - 2x2 + x - 3 at 11, - 42	
19.	 f1x2 = x3 + x at 12, 102	
20.	 f1x2 = x3 - x2 at 11, 02
In Problems 21–32, find the derivative of each function at the given number.
	 21.	 f1x2 = - 4x + 5 at 3 
	
22.	 f1x2 = - 4 + 3x at 1 
	
23.	 f1x2 = x2 - 3 at 0 
	 24.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 1 at - 1 
	
25.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 3x at 1 
	
26.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - 4x at 2 
	 27.	 f1x2 = x3 + 4x at - 1 
	
28.	 f1x2 = 2x3 - x2 at 2 
	
29.	 f1x2 = x3 + x2 - 2x at 1 
	 30.	 f1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + x at - 1 
	
31.	 f1x2 = sin x at 0 
	
32.	 f1x2 = cos x at 0 
In Problems 33–42, use a graphing utility to find the derivative of each function at the given number.
	 33.	 f1x2 = 3x3 - 6x2 + 2 at - 2 
	
34.	 f1x2 = - 5x4 + 6x2 - 10 at 5 
	 35.	 f1x2 =
- x3 + 1
x2 + 5x + 7 at 8 
	
36.	 f1x2 = - 5x4 + 9x + 3
x3 + 5x2 - 6  at - 3 
	 37.	 f1x2 = x sin x at p
3 	
38.	 f1x2 = x sin x at p
4 	
39.	 f1x2 = x2 sin x at p
3
	 40.	 f1x2 = x2 sin x at p
4 	
41.	 f1x2 = ex sin x at 2	
42.	 f1x2 = e-x sin x at 2
	 43.	 Instantaneous Rate of Change  The volume V of a right 
circular cylinder of height 6 feet and radius r feet is 
V = V1r2 = 6pr 2. Find the instantaneous rate of change of 
the volume with respect to the radius r at r = 9. 
	 44.	 Instantaneous Rate of Change  The surface area S of 
a sphere of radius r feet is S = S1r2 = 4pr 2. Find the 
instantaneous rate of change of the surface area with respect 
to the radius r at r = 2. 
	 45.	 Instantaneous Rate of Change  The volume V of a sphere of
	
	 radius r feet is V = V1r2 = 4
3 pr 3. Find the instantaneous
	
	 rate of change of the volume with respect to the radius r at 
r = 5. 
	 46.	 Instantaneous Rate of Change  The volume V of a cube of 
side x meters is V = V1x2 = x3. Find the instantaneous rate 
of change of the volume with respect to the side x at x = 3.
	 47.	 Instantaneous Speed of a Ball  In physics it is shown that the 
height s of a ball thrown straight up with an initial speed of 
128 ft/sec from ground level is
s = s1t2 = - 16t2 + 128t
	
	 where t is the elapsed time that the ball is in the air.
(a)	 When does the ball strike the ground? That is, how long 
is the ball in the air? 
(b)	 What is the average speed of the ball from t = 0 to 
t = 2? 
(c)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball at time t?
(d)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball at t = 2?
(e)	 When is the instantaneous speed of the ball equal to 
zero? 
(f)	 How high is the ball when its instantaneous speed equals 
zero? 
(g)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball when it 
strikes the ground? 
	 48.	 Instantaneous Speed of a Ball  In physics it is shown that the 
height s of a ball thrown straight down with an initial speed 
of 48 ft/sec from a rooftop 160 feet high is
s = s1t2 = - 16t2 - 48t + 160
	
	 where t is the elapsed time that the ball is in the air.
(a)	 When does the ball strike the ground? That is, how long 
is the ball in the air? 
(b)	 What is the average speed of the ball from t = 0 to 
t = 1? 
 
(c)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball at time t?
(d)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball at t = 1?
(e)	 What is the instantaneous speed of the ball when it 
strikes the ground? 
	 49.	 Instantaneous Speed on the Moon  An astronaut throws a 
ball down into a crater on the moon. The height s (in feet) of 
the ball from the bottom of the crater after t seconds is given 
in the following table:
Applications and Extensions
0
Time, t
(in seconds)
Distance, s
(in feet)
1000
1
987
2
969
3
945
4
917
5
883
6
843
7
800
8
749

Section 14.5  The Area Problem; The Integral  933
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 y = 5x - 14          2.  False
(a) Find the average speed from t = 1 to t = 4 seconds.
(b) Find the average speed from t = 1 to t = 3 seconds.
(c) Find the average speed from t = 1 to t = 2 seconds.
(d)	 Using a graphing utility, find the quadratic function of 
best fit.
(e)	 Using the function found in part (d), determine the 
instantaneous speed at t = 1 second.
	 50.	 Instantaneous Rate of Change  The data to the right  
represent the total revenue R (in dollars) received from  
selling x bicycles at Tunney’s Bicycle Shop.
(a) Find the average rate of change in revenue from x = 25 
to x = 150 bicycles. 
(b) Find the average rate of change in revenue from x = 25 
to x = 102 bicycles. 
(c) Find the average rate of change in revenue from x = 25 
to x = 60 bicycles. 
(d)	 Using a graphing utility, find the quadratic function of 
best fit. 
(e)	 Using the function found in part (d), determine the 
instantaneous rate of change of revenue at x = 25 
bicycles. 
0
Number of
Bicycles, x
Total Revenue, R
(in dollars)
0
25
28,000
60
45,000
102
53,400
150
59,160
190
62,360
223
64,835
249
66,525
	 51.	 Find the vertex and focus of the parabola 
 
x2 - 2x - 2y + 7 = 0. 
	 52.	 Solve the system by substitution:  ey = x + 4
x2 - y = - 2 
                                                                                     
	 53.	 Evaluate the combination: C(5, 3)
	 54.	 Find the area of the given triangle, rounded to two decimal 
places. 
13
6
9
A
B
C
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 51–54 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
The Area Problem
The development of the integral, like that of the derivative, was originally  
motivated to a large extent by a problem in geometry: the area problem.
Area Problem
Suppose that y = f1x2 is a function whose domain is a closed interval 3a, b4. 
We assume that f1x2 Ú 0 for all x in 3a, b4. Find the area enclosed by the 
graph of f, the x-axis, and the vertical lines x = a and x = b.
Figure 20 illustrates the area problem. We refer to the area A shown as the area 
under the graph of f from a to b.
Figure 20  Area problem
Area A
y 5 f(x)
Area A 5 area under the graph
       of f from a to b
x
a
b
y
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 938.
	
Objectives	 	1  Approximate the Area under the Graph of a Function (p. 934)
	
	 	2  Approximate Integrals Using a Graphing Utility (p. 938)
14.5  The Area Problem; The Integral
• Geometry Formulas (Appendix A, Section A.2,  
pp. 959–960)
• Summation Notation (Section 12.1, pp. 838–839)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:

934 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
For a constant function f1x2 = k and for a linear function f1x2 = mx + B, we 
can solve the area problem using formulas from geometry. See Figures 21(a) and (b).
Figure 21 
f(x) 5 k
b 2 a
f(x) 5 mx 1 B
f(b)
f(a)
x
x
k
k
y
y
a
b
A
A
a
b
(b)
(a)
b 2 a
A 5 area of rectangle
   5 height 3 base
   5 k(b 2 a)
A 5 area of trapezoid 
   5
[f(b) 1 f(a)](b 2 a)
2
1
For most other functions, no formulas from geometry are available.
We begin by discussing a way to approximate the area under the graph of a 
function f from a to b.
Approximate the Area under the Graph of a Function
We use rectangles to approximate the area under the graph of a function f. We 
do this by partitioning or dividing the interval 3a, b4 into subintervals of equal 
length. On each subinterval, we form a rectangle whose base is the length of the 
subinterval and whose height is f1u2 for some number u in the subinterval. Look at  
Figure 22.
1
Figure 22
y 5 f(x)
y 5 f(x)
f(u4)
x
x
y
y
b 2 a
2
a 5 u1
a
u2
4 subintervals
(b)
2 subintervals
(a)
b 2 a
2
b
b 2 a
4
b 2 a
4
b 2 a
4
b 2 a
4
u1
u3
b 5 u4
u2
f(u1)
f(u2)
f(u1)
f(u2)
f(u3)
In Figure 22(a), the interval 3a, b4 is partitioned into two subintervals, each of 
length b - a
2
, and the number u is chosen as the left endpoint of each subinterval.
In Figure 22(b), the interval 3a, b4 is partitioned into four subintervals, each of 
length b - a
4
, and the number u is chosen as the right endpoint of each subinterval.
The area A under f from a to b is approximated by adding the areas of the 
rectangles formed by the partition.
Using Figure 22(a),
 Area A ≈area of first rectangle + area of second rectangle
 = f1u12 b - a
2
+ f1u22 b - a
2

Section 14.5  The Area Problem; The Integral  935
Using Figure 22(b),
 Area A ≈area of first rectangle + area of second rectangle
  
+ area of third rectangle + area of fourth rectangle
 = f1u12 b - a
4
+ f1u22 b - a
4
+ f1u32 b - a
4
+ f1u42 b - a
4
In approximating the area under the graph of a function f from a to b, the choice of 
the number u in each subinterval is arbitrary. For convenience, we shall always pick 
u as either the left endpoint of each subinterval or the right endpoint. The choice 
of how many subintervals to use is also arbitrary. In general, the more subintervals 
used, the better the approximation will be. Let’s look at a specific example.
Approximating the Area under the Graph of f(x) ∙2x from 0 to 1
Approximate the area A under the graph of f1x2 = 2x from 0 to 1 as follows:
(a)	 Partition 30, 14 into two subintervals of equal length and choose u as the left 
endpoint.
(b)	 Partition 30, 14 into two subintervals of equal length and choose u as the right 
endpoint.
(c)	 Partition 30, 14 into four subintervals of equal length and choose u as the left 
endpoint.
(d)	 Partition 30, 14 into four subintervals of equal length and choose u as the right 
endpoint.
(e) Compare the approximations found in parts (a)–(d) with the actual area.
Solution  (a)  Partition 30, 14 into two subintervals, each of length 1
2, and choose u 
as the left endpoint. See Figure 23(a). The area A is approximated as
 A ≈f102 a1
2b + f a1
2b a1
2b
 = 102 a1
2b + 112 a1
2b
 
 = 1
2 = 0.5
(b)	 Partition 30, 14 into two subintervals, each of length 1
2, and choose u as the right 
endpoint. See Figure 23(b). The area A is approximated as
 A ≈f a1
2b a1
2b + f112 a1
2b
 = 112 a1
2b + 122 a1
2b
 = 3
2 = 1.5
(c)	 Partition 30, 14 into four subintervals, each of length 1
4, and choose u as the left 
endpoint. See Figure 23(c). The area A is approximated as
 A ≈f102 a1
4b + f a1
4b a1
4b + f a1
2b a1
4b + f a3
4b a1
4b
 = 102 a1
4b + a1
2b a1
4b + 112 a1
4b + a3
2b a1
4b
 = 3
4 = 0.75
Example 1
f(0) = 2 # 0 = 0; f a1
2 b = 2 # 1
2 = 1
Figure 23 
2
1
2
1
(a)
f(0)
f(x)  2x
x
y
2
1
2 subintervals; u’s are left endpoints
2
1
1
0
f(  )
2
1
2
1
2
1
f(1)
f(x)  2x
x
y
2
1
2 subintervals; u’s are right endpoints
1
0
2
1
(b)
f(  )
2
1
(c)
f(0)
f(x)  2x
x
y
2
1
4 subintervals; u’s are left endpoints
1
0
f(  )
4
1
f(  )
2
1
f(  )
4
3
4
3
2
1
4
1

936 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
(d)	 Partition 30, 14 into four subintervals, each of length 1
4, and choose u as the 
right endpoint. See Figure 23(d). The area A is approximated as
 A ≈f a1
4b a1
4b + f a1
2b a1
4b + f a3
4b a1
4b + f112 a1
4b
 = a1
2b a1
4b + 112 a1
4b + a3
2b a1
4b + 122 a1
4b
 = 5
4 = 1.25
(e)	 The actual area under the graph of f1x2 = 2x from 0 to 1 is the area of a right 
triangle whose base is of length 1 and whose height is 2. The actual area A is 
therefore
A = 1
2 base * height = a1
2b 112 122 = 1
Now look at Table 7, which shows the approximations to the area under the 
graph of f1x2 = 2x from 0 to 1 for n = 2, 4, 10, and 100 subintervals. Notice that the 
approximations to the actual area improve as the number of subintervals increases.
Figure 23 (continued)
•
(d)
f(1)
f(x)  2x
x
y
2
1
4 subintervals; u’s are right endpoints
1
0
f(  )
4
f(  )
2
f(  )
4
2
1
4
3
4
1
1
1
3
Table 7
Using left endpoints:
n
2
4
10
100
 
Area
0.5
0.75
0.9
0.99
Using right endpoints:
n
2
4
10
100
 
Area
1.5
1.25
1.1
1.01
You are asked to confirm the entries in Table 7 in Problem 31.
There is another useful observation about Example 1. Look again at Figures 
23(a)–(d) and at Table 7. Since the graph of f1x2 = 2x is increasing on 30, 14, the 
choice of u as the left endpoint gives a lower-bound estimate to the actual area, while 
choosing u as the right endpoint gives an upper-bound estimate. Do you see why?
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Approximating the Area under the Graph of f(x) ∙x2
Approximate the area under the graph of f1x2 = x2 from 1 to 5 as follows:
(a)	 Using four subintervals of equal length
(b)	 Using eight subintervals of equal length
In each case, choose the number u to be the left endpoint of each subinterval.
(a) See Figure 24. Using four subintervals of equal length, the interval 31, 54 is 
partitioned into subintervals of length 5 - 1
4
= 1 as follows:
31, 24  32, 34  33, 44  34, 54
Each of these subintervals is of length 1. Choosing u as the left endpoint of each 
subinterval, the area A under the graph of f1x2 = x2 is approximated by
 Area A ≈f112 112 + f122 112 + f132 112 + f142 112
 = 1 + 4 + 9 + 16 = 30
(b) See Figure 25 on the next page. Using eight subintervals of equal length, the 
interval 31, 54 is partitioned into subintervals of length 5 - 1
8
= 0.5 as follows:
	     31, 1.54 31.5, 24 32, 2.54 32.5, 34 33, 3.54 33.5, 44 34, 4.54 34.5, 54
Example 2
Solution
Figure 24 
f(x)  x 2
x
y
5
15
25
4 subintervals; each of length 1
f(1) f(2) f(3) f(4)
5
0
1
2
4
3

Section 14.5  The Area Problem; The Integral  937
Each of these subintervals is of length 0.5. Choosing u as the left endpoint of 
each subinterval, the area A under the graph of f1x2 = x2 is approximated by
 Area A ≈f112 10.52 + f11.52 10.52 + f122 10.52 + f12.52 10.52
 
+ f132 10.52 + f13.52 10.52 + f142 10.52 + f14.52 10.52
 = 3f112 + f11.52 + f122 + f12.52 + f132 + f13.52 + f142 + f14.52 4 10.52
 = 31 + 2.25 + 4 + 6.25 + 9 + 12.25 + 16 + 20.254 10.52
 = 35.5
•
In general, we approximate the area under the graph of a function y = f1x2 
from a to b as follows:
	 1.	 Partition the interval 3a, b4 into n subintervals of equal length. The length ∆x 
of each subinterval is then
∆x = b - a
n
	 2.	 In each of these subintervals, pick a number u and evaluate the function f 
at each u. This results in n numbers u1, u2, c , un and n functional values 
f1u12, f1u22, c , f1un2.
	 3.	 Form n rectangles with base equal to ∆x, the length of each subinterval, and 
with height equal to the functional value f1ui2, i = 1, 2, c , n. See Figure 26.
	 4.	 Add up the areas of the n rectangles.
 A1 + A2 + g+ An = f1u12 ∆x + f1u22 ∆x + g + f1un2 ∆x
 = a
n
i=1
 f1ui2 ∆x
This number is the approximation to the area under the graph of f from a to b.
Definition of Area
We have observed that the larger the number n of subintervals used, the better the 
approximation to the area. If we let n become unbounded, we obtain the exact area 
under the graph of f from a to b.
Area under a Graph
Let f denote a function whose domain is a closed interval 3a, b4 and suppose
f1x2 Ú 0 on 3a, b4. Partition 3a, b4 into n subintervals, each of length
∆x = b - a
n
. In each subinterval,  pick a number ui, i = 1, 2, c , n, and evaluate
f1ui2. Form the products f1ui2 ∆x and add them up, obtaining the sum
a
n
i=1
 f1ui2 ∆x
If the limit of this sum exists as n S q, that is,
if  lim
nSq a
n
i=1
 f1ui2 ∆x  exists
it is defined as the area under the graph of f from a to b. If this limit exists, it 
is denoted by
L
b
a
 f1x2 dx
which is read as “the integral from a to b of f1x2.”
Definition
Figure 25 
f(x)  x 2
x
y
5
15
25
8 subintervals; each of length 1/2
f(1)
f(1.5)
f(2)
f(4)
f(4.5)
5
0
1
3
f(3)
f(2.5)
f(3.5)
Figure 26 
y 5 f(x)
x
y
a
b
Dx
Dx
Dx
Dx
u1
u3
un
u2
f(u1)
f(u2)
f(u3)
f(un)

938 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Approximate Integrals Using a Graphing Utility
Using a Graphing Utility to Approximate an Integral
Use a graphing utility to approximate the area under the graph of f1x2 = x2 from 1 
to 5. That is, evaluate the integral
L
5
1
 x2 dx
Solution 
Figure 27 shows the result using a TI-84 Plus C calculator. Consult your 
owner’s manual for the proper keystrokes.
The value of the integral is 124
3 .
In calculus, techniques are given for evaluating integrals to obtain exact answers.
2
Example 3
•
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 The formula for the area A of a rectangle of length l and 
width w is  
. (p. 959)
	 2.	 a
4
k=1
 12k + 12 =  
. (pp. 838–839)
14.5  Assess Your Understanding
	 3.	 The integral from a to b of f1x2 is denoted by  
.
	 4.	 The area under the graph of f from a to b is denoted by 
 
.
Concepts and Vocabulary
In Problems 5 and 6, refer to the illustration. The interval 31, 34 is 
partitioned into two subintervals 31, 24 and 32, 34.
y  f(x)
1
2
f(1)  1, f(2)  2, f(3)  4
f(3)  4
f(2)  2
f(1)  1
3
x
y
A
	 7.	 Approximate the area A, choosing u as the left endpoint of 
each subinterval. 
	 8.	 Approximate the area A, choosing u as the right endpoint of 
each subinterval. 
	 9.	 The function f1x2 = 3x is defined on the interval 30, 64.
(a)	 Graph f.
 
In (b)–(e), approximate the area A under f from 0 to 6 
as follows:
(b)	 Partition 30, 64 into three subintervals of equal length 
and choose u as the left endpoint of each subinterval.
(c)	 Partition 30, 64 into three subintervals of equal length 
and choose u as the right endpoint of each subinterval.
(d)	 Partition 30, 64 into six subintervals of equal length and 
choose u as the left endpoint of each subinterval.
(e)	 Partition 30, 64 into six subintervals of equal length and 
choose u as the right endpoint of each subinterval.
(f)	 What is the actual area A?
	 10.	 Repeat Problem 9 for f1x2 = 4x.
	 11.	 The function f1x2 = - 3x + 9 is defined on the interval 
30, 34.
(a)	 Graph f.
 
In (b)–(e), approximate the area A under f from 0 to 3 
as follows:
(b)	 Partition 30, 34 into three subintervals of equal length 
and choose u as the left endpoint of each subinterval.
(c)	 Partition 30, 34 into three subintervals of equal length 
and choose u as the right endpoint of each subinterval.
(d)	 Partition 30, 34 into six subintervals of equal length and 
choose u as the left endpoint of each subinterval.
Skill Building
	 5.	 Approximate the area A, choosing u as the left endpoint of 
each subinterval. 
	 6.	 Approximate the area A, choosing u as the right endpoint of 
each subinterval. 
In Problems 7 and 8, refer to the illustration. The interval 30, 84 is 
partitioned into four subintervals 30, 24, 32, 44, 34, 64, and 36, 84.
y  f(x)
2
4
8
6
f(0)  10, f(2)  6, f(4)  7, f(6)  5, f(8)  1
10
5
x
y
Figure 27 

Chapter Review  939
(e)	 Partition 30, 34 into six subintervals of equal length and 
choose u as the right endpoint of each subinterval.
(f)	 What is the actual area A?
	 12.	 Repeat Problem 11 for f1x2 = - 2x + 8.
In Problems 13–22, a function f is defined over an interval 3a, b4.
(a)	Graph f, indicating the area A under f from a to b.
(b)	Approximate the area A by partitioning 3a, b4 into four 
subintervals of equal length and choosing u as the left 
endpoint of each subinterval.
(c)	Approximate the area A by partitioning 3a, b4 into eight 
subintervals of equal length and choosing u as the left 
endpoint of each subinterval.
(d)	Express the area A as an integral.
(e)	Use a graphing utility to approximate the integral.
	 13.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2, 30, 44	
14.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4, 32, 64
	 15.	 f1x2 = x3, 30, 44	
16.	 f1x2 = x3, 31, 54
	 17.	 f1x2 = 1
x, 31, 54	
18.	 f1x2 = 1x, 30, 44
	 19.	 f1x2 = ex, 3 - 1, 34	
20.	 f1x2 = ln x, 33, 74
	 21.	 f1x2 = sin x, 30, p4	
22.	 f1x2 = cos x, c 0, p
2 d
In Problems 23–30, an integral is given.
(a)	What area does the integral represent?
(b)	Provide a graph that illustrates this area.
(c)	Use a graphing utility to approximate this area.
	 23.	
L
4
0
 13x + 12 dx	
24.	
L
3
1
 1-2x + 72 dx
	 25.	
L
5
2
 1x2 - 12 dx	
26.	
L
4
0
 116 - x22 dx
	 27.	
L
p>2
0
 sin x dx	
28.	
L
p>4
-p>4
 cos x dx
	 29.	
L
2
0
 ex dx	
30.	
L
2e
e
 ln x dx
	 31.	 Confirm the entries in Table 7.
[Hint:  Review the formula for the sum of an arithmetic 
sequence.]
	 32.	 Consider the function f1x2 = 21 - x2 whose domain is 
the interval 3 - 1, 14.
(a)	 Graph f.
(b)	 Approximate the area under the graph of f from -1 
to 1 by dividing 3 - 1, 14 into five subintervals, each of 
equal length.
(c)	 Approximate the area under the graph of f from -1 
to 1 by dividing 3 - 1, 14 into ten subintervals, each of 
equal length.
(d)	 Express the area as an integral.
(e)	 Evaluate the integral using a graphing utility.
(f)	 What is the actual area?
	 33.	 Graph the function f1x2 =  log2 x.
	 34.	 If A = c 1
2
3
4d  and B = c 5
6
0
7
8
1d , find AB. 
35.  If 
f1x2 = 2x2 + 3x + 1, 
find 
f1x + h2 - f1x2
h
 
and
	
	simplify. 
36.  Find the partial fraction decomposition of 
16
1x - 22 1x + 222.
Retain Your Knowledge
Problems 33–36 are based on material learned earlier in the course. The purpose of these problems is to keep the material fresh in your 
mind so that you are better prepared for the final exam.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 A = lw        2.  24
Chapter Review
Things to Know
Limit (p. 907)
 
	
lim
xSc f1x2 = N
As x gets closer to c, x∙c, the value of f gets closer to N.
Limit formulas (p. 912)
 
	
lim
xSc b = b
The limit of a constant is the constant.
	
lim
xSc x = c
The limit of x as x approaches c is c.

940 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
Limit properties (pp. 913, 915, 916)
 
	
lim
xSc3f1x2 + g1x2 4 = lim
xSc f1x2 + lim
xSc g1x2
The limit of a sum equals the sum of the limits.
	
lim
xSc3f1x2 - g1x2 4 = lim
xSc f1x2 - lim
xSc g1x2
The limit of a difference equals the difference of the limits.
	
lim
xSc3f1x2 # g1x2 4 = lim
xSc f1x2 # lim
xSc g1x2
The limit of a product equals the product of the limits.
	
lim
xScc
f1x2
g1x2 d =
lim
xSc f1x2
lim
xSc g1x2  1lim
xSc g1x2 ∙02
The limit of a quotient equals the quotient of the limits, provided that 
the limit of the denominator is not zero.
	
lim
xSc3f1x2 4n = [lim
xSc f1x2]n
Provided lim
xSc f(x) exists, n Ú 2 an integer.
	
lim
xSc2
n f1x2 = 2
n lim
xSc f(x)
Provided 2
n f(x) and 2
n lim
xSc f(x) are both defined, n Ú 2 an integer.
Limit of a polynomial (p. 914)
Derivative of a function (p. 928)
	
lim
xSc P1x2 = P1c2, where P is a polynomial
f′1c2 = lim
xSc 
f1x2 - f1c2
x - c
, provided that the limit exists
Continuous function (p. 921)
Area under a graph (p. 937)
	
A function f is continuous at c if
lim
xSc f1x2 = f1c2 
The area under the graph of f from a to b is
L
b
a
 f1x2 dx = lim
nSq a
n
i=1
 f1ui2 ∆x, provided that the limit exists
Section
You should be able to N
Example(s)
Review Exercises
14.1
1	 Find a limit using a table (p. 907)
1–3
1–11
 
2	 Find a limit using a graph (p. 909)
4–6
21–27
14.2
1	 Find the limit of a sum, a difference, and a product (p. 913)
2–6
1
 
2	 Find the limit of a polynomial (p. 914)
7
1, 2
 
3	 Find the limit of a power or a root (p. 915)
8
2, 3, 5
 
4	 Find the limit of a quotient (p. 916)
9–11
6–11
 
5	 Find the limit of an average rate of change (p. 917)
12
30–32
14.3
1	 Find the one-sided limits of a function (p. 919)
1
4, 21–24
 
2	 Determine whether a function is continuous (p. 921)
2, 3
12–15, 26–29
14.4
1	 Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of a function (p. 926)
1
30–32
 
2	 Find the derivative of a function (p. 928)
2–4
33–37
 
3	 Find instantaneous rates of change (p. 929)
5
39
 
4	 Find the instantaneous speed of a particle (p. 929)
6
38
14.5
1	 Approximate the area under the graph of a function (p. 934)
1, 2
40–42
 
2	 Approximate integrals using a graphing utility (p. 938)
3
41(e), 42(e), 43(c), 44(c)
Objectives
In Problems 1–11, find the limit.
	 1.	 lim
xS317x2 - x + 42 
	
2.	 lim
xS-21x2 + 122 
	
3.	 lim
xS5 2x2 + 11 
	
4.	 lim
xS4 216 - x2 
	 5.	 lim
xS215x + 623>2 
	
6.	 lim
xS-1 x2 + x + 2
x2 - 9
 
	
7.	 lim
xS5 x - 5
x2 - 25 
	
8.	 lim
xS5 
x2 - 25
x2 - x - 20 
	 9.	 lim
xS-1 x2 - 1
x3 - 1 
	
10.	 lim
xS3 
x2 - 9
2x3 - 6x2 + 5x - 15   	 11.	 lim
xS3 3x4 - 6x3 + 2x - 4
x3 - 2x2 + x - 2  
In Problems 12–15, determine whether f is continuous at c.
	 12.	 f1x2 = 2x3 + x2 - 5x + 3 c = 3 
	
13.	 f1x2 = x2 - 4
x + 2 c = - 2 
	 14.	 f1x2 = c
x2 - 4
x + 2
4
if x ∙- 2
 
 
if x = - 2 c = -2 
	
15.	 f1x2 = c
x2 - 9
x + 3
-6
if x ∙- 3
if x = -3
 ; c = - 3 
Review Exercises

Chapter Review  941
In Problems 16–27, use the accompanying graph of y = f1x2.
	 16.	 What is the domain of f? 
	 17.	 What is the range of f? 
	 18.	 Find the x-intercept(s), if any, of f. 
	 19.	 Find the y-intercept(s), if any, of f. 
	 20.	 Find f1- 62 and f1- 42. 
	 21.	 Find lim
xS-4- f1x2. 
	 22.	 Find lim
xS-4 + f1x2. 
	
23.	 Find lim
xS2- f1x2. 
	
24.	 Find lim
xS2 + f1x2. 
	 25.	 Does lim
xS0 f1x2 exist? If it does, what is it? 
	
26.	 Is f continuous at 0? 
	
27.	 Is f continuous at 4? 
	 28.	 Discuss whether R1x2 =
x + 4
x2 - 16 is continuous at c = - 4 and c = 4. Use limits to analyze the graph of R at c.
	 29.	 Determine where the rational function R1x2 = x3 - 2x2 + 4x - 8
x2 - 11x + 18
 is undefined. Determine whether an asymptote or a hole  
appears at such numbers.
In Problems 30–32, find the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at the given point. Graph f and the tangent line.
	 30.	 f1x2 = 2x2 + 8x at 11, 102	
31.	 f1x2 = x2 + 2x - 3 at 1- 1, - 42	
32.	 f1x2 = x3 + x2 at 12, 122
In Problems 33–35, find the derivative of each function at the number indicated.
	 33.	 f1x2 = - 3x2 + 7 at x = 2 
	
34.	 f1x2 = x2 - 3x + 2 at x = 1 
	
35.	 f1x2 = 3x2 - 7x + 6 at x = 3 
In Problems 36 and 37, find the derivative of each function at the number indicated using a graphing utility.
	 36.	 f1x2 = 4x4 - 3x3 + 6x - 9 at - 2 
	
37.	 f1x2 = x3 tan x at p
6  
y
2
4
4
6
x
2
	 38.	 Instantaneous Speed of a Ball  In physics it is shown that the 
height s of a ball thrown straight up with an initial speed of 
96 ft/sec from a rooftop 112 feet high is
s = s1t2 = - 16t2 + 96t + 112
	
	 where t is the elapsed time that the ball is in the air. The ball 
misses the rooftop on its way down and eventually strikes 
the ground.
(a) When does the ball strike the ground? That is, how long 
is the ball in the air? 
(b) At what time t will the ball pass the rooftop on its way 
down? 
(c) What is the average speed of the ball from t = 0 to 
t = 2? 
(d) What is the instantaneous speed of the ball at time t?
(e) What is the instantaneous speed of the ball at t = 2?
(f) When is the instantaneous speed of the ball equal to 
zero? 
(g) What is the instantaneous speed of the ball as it passes 
the rooftop on the way down? 
(h) What is the instantaneous speed of the ball when it 
strikes the ground? 
	 39.	 Instantaneous Rate of Change  The following data  
represent the revenue R (in dollars) received from selling x 
wristwatches at Wilk’s Watch Shop.
Wristwatches, x
0
Revenue, R
0
25
2340
40
3600
50
4375
90
6975
130
8775
160
9600
200
10,000
9900
9375
220
250
12
6
3
9
(a) Find the average rate of change of revenue from x = 25 
to x = 130 wristwatches.
(b) Find the average rate of change of revenue from x = 25 
to x = 90 wristwatches.
(c) Find the average rate of change of revenue from x = 25 
to x = 50 wristwatches.
(d) Using a graphing utility, find the quadratic function of 
best fit.
(e) Using the function found in part (d), determine the 
instantaneous rate of change of revenue at x = 25 
wristwatches.

942 
CHAPTER 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
	 40.	 The function f1x2 = 2x + 3 is defined on the interval 
30, 44.
(a)	 Graph f.
	
In (b)–(e), approximate the area A under f from x = 0 
to x = 4 as follows:
(b)	 Partition 30, 44 into four subintervals of equal length 
and choose u as the left endpoint of each subinterval.
(c)	 Partition 30, 44 into four subintervals of equal length 
and choose u as the right endpoint of each subinterval.
(d)	 Partition 30, 44 into eight subintervals of equal length 
and choose u as the left endpoint of each subinterval.
(e)	 Partition 30, 44 into eight subintervals of equal length 
and choose u as the right endpoint of each subinterval.
(f)	 What is the actual area A? 
In Problems 41 and 42, a function f is defined over an interval 3a, b4.
(a)	Graph f, indicating the area A under f from a to b.
(b)	Approximate the area A by partitioning 3a, b4 into three 
subintervals of equal length and choosing u as the left 
endpoint of each subinterval.
(c)	Approximate the area A by partitioning 3a, b4 into six 
subintervals of equal length and choosing u as the left 
endpoint of each subinterval.
(d)	Express the area A as an integral.
(e)	Use a graphing utility to approximate the integral.
	 41.	 f1x2 = 4 - x2, 3 - 1, 24
42.	 f1x2 = 1
x2, 31, 44
In Problems 43 and 44, an integral is given.
(a)	What area does the integral represent?
(b)	Provide a graph that illustrates this area.
(c)	Use a graphing utility to approximate this area.
	 43.	
L
3
-1
 19 - x22 dx    44. 
L
1
-1
 ex dx
In Problems 1–6, find each limit.
	 1.	 lim
xS3 1 -x2 + 3x - 52 
	
2.	
lim
xS2 + 
0 x - 20
3x - 6  
	
3.	
lim
xS-6 27 - 3x 
	 4.	 lim
xS-1 x2 - 4x - 5
x3 + 1
 
	
5.	 lim
xS5 3 13x2 1x - 2224 
	
6.	
lim
xS p
4
 
tan x
1 + cos2 x 
Chapter Test
  
	 7.	 Determine the value for k that will make the function  
continuous at c = 4. 
f1x2 = c
x2 - 9
x + 3
kx + 5
if x … 4
 
 
if x 7 4
In Problems 8–12, use the accompanying graph of y = f1x2.
y
4
x
4
	 12.	 Determine whether f is continuous at each of the following 
numbers. If it is not, explain why not.
(a)  x = - 2        (b)  x = 1
(c)  x = 3            (d)  x = 4
	 13.	 Determine where the rational function
R1x2 = x3 + 6x2 - 4x - 24
x2 + 5x - 14
	
	 is undefined. Determine whether an asymptote or a hole  
appears at such numbers.
	 14.	 For the function f1x2 = 4x2 - 11x - 3:
(a) Find the derivative of f at x = 2. 
(b) Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of f at 
the point12, - 92. 
(c) Graph f and the tangent line.
	 15.	 The function f1x2 = 216 - x2 is defined on the interval 
30, 44.
(a) Graph f.
(b) Partition 30, 44 into eight subintervals of equal length 
and choose u as the left endpoint of each subinterval. 
Use the partition to approximate the area under the 
graph of f and above the x-axis from x = 0 to x = 4.
(c) Find the exact area of the region and compare it to the 
approximation in part (b). 
	 8.	 Find lim
xS3 + f1x2 
	 9.	 Find lim
xS3- f1x2 
	 10.	 Find lim
xS -2 
 f1x2 
	 11.	 Does lim
xS1 
 f1x2 exist? If so, what is it? If not, explain why not.
The Chapter Test Prep Videos are step-by-step solutions available in  
, or on this text’s 
 Channel. Flip back to the Resources  
for Success page for a link to this text’s YouTube channel.

	 16.	 Write the integral that represents the shaded area. Do not 
attempt to evaluate. 
y
x
8
4
4
8
f(x) = –x2 + 5x + 3
	 17.	 A particle is moving along a straight line according to some 
position function s = s1t2. The distance s (in feet) of the  
particle, from its starting point after t seconds is given in the 
table. Find the average rate of change of distance from t = 3 
to t = 6 seconds.
t
s
0
0
1
2.5
2
14
3
31
4
49
5
89
6
137
7
173
8
240
Chapter Projects
	
2.  Graph Y1 = f1t2, where f1t2 represents the logistic 
growth function of best fit found in part (a).
	
3.  Determine the instantaneous rate of growth of population 
in 1960 using the numerical derivative function on your 
graphing utility.
	
4.  Use the result from part (c) to predict the population in 
1961. What was the actual population in 1961?
	
5.  Determine the instantaneous growth of population in 
1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010. What is happening to 
the instantaneous growth rate as time passes? Is Malthus’ 
contention of a geometric growth rate accurate?
	
6.  Using the numerical derivative function on your graphing 
utility, graph Y2 = f′(t), where f′(t) represents the 
derivative of f1t2 with respect to time. Y2 is the growth 
rate of the population at any time t.
	
7.  Using the MAXIMUM function on your graphing utility, 
determine the year in which the growth rate of the 
population is largest. What is happening to the growth rate 
in the years following the maximum? Find this point on the 
graph of Y1 = f1t2.
	
8.  Evaluate lim
tSq f1t2. This limiting value is the carrying 
capacity of Earth. What is the carrying capacity of Earth?
	
9.  What do you think will happen if the population of 
Earth exceeds the carrying capacity? Do you think that 
agricultural output will continue to increase at the same 
rate as population growth? What effect will urban sprawl 
have on agricultural output?
I.	 World Population  Thomas Malthus believed that “population, 
when unchecked, increases in a geometrical progression 
of such nature as to double itself every twenty-five years.” 
However, the growth of population is limited because the 
resources available to us are limited in supply. If Malthus’ 
conjecture were true, geometric growth of the world’s 
population would imply that
Pt
Pt-1
= r + 1, where r is the growth rate
	
1.  Using  world population data and a graphing utility, find 
the logistic growth function of best fit, treating the year as 
the independent variable. Let t = 0 represent 1950, t = 1 
represent 1951, and so on, until you have entered all the years 
and the corresponding populations up to the current year.
The following projects are available on the Instructor’s Resource Center (IRC).
II.	 Project at Motorola: Curing Rates  Engineers at Motorola use calculus to find the curing rate of a sealant.
III.	Finding the Profit-maximizing Level of Output  A manufacturer uses calculus to maximize profit.
Chapter Projects  943

This page intentionally left blank 

945
Appendix A
Review
Outline
A.1	
Algebra Essentials
A.2	
Geometry Essentials
A.3	
Polynomials
A.4	
Synthetic Division
A.5	
Rational Expressions
A.6	
Solving Equations
A.7	
Complex Numbers; Quadratic Equations  
in the Complex Number System
A.8	
Problem Solving: Interest, Mixture, Uniform 
Motion, Constant Rate Job Applications
A.9	
Interval Notation; Solving Inequalities
A.10	 nth Roots; Rational Exponents 
A.1  Algebra Essentials
	
Objectives	 	1  Work with Sets (p. 945)
	
	 	2  Graph Inequalities (p. 949)
	
	 	3  Find Distance on the Real Number Line (p. 949)
	
	 	4  Evaluate Algebraic Expressions (p. 950)
	
	 	5  Determine the Domain of a Variable (p. 951)
	
	 	6  Use the Laws of Exponents (p. 952)
	
	 	7  Evaluate Square Roots (p. 953)
	
	 	8  Use a Calculator to Evaluate Exponents (p. 954)
PREPARING FOR THIS section  Before getting started, read “To the Student” at the beginning  
of this book.
Work with Sets
A set is a well-defined collection of distinct objects. The objects of a set are called its 
elements. By well-defined, we mean that there is a rule that enables us to determine 
whether a given object is an element of the set. If a set has no elements, it is called 
the empty set, or null set, and is denoted by the symbol ∅.
For example, the set of digits consists of the collection of numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. If we use the symbol D to denote the set of digits, then we can write
D = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}
In this notation, the braces { } are used to enclose the objects, or elements, in the 
set. This method of denoting a set is called the roster method. A second way to 
denote a set is to use set-builder notation, where the set D of digits is written as
1
c
c
c
$%+++&26
   Read as “D is the set of all x such that x is a digit.”
D =     {               x         0    x is a digit }

946 
Appendix A  Review
Using Set-builder Notation and the Roster Method
(a)	 E = {x0 x is an even digit} = {0, 2, 4, 6, 8}
(b)	 O = {x0 x is an odd digit} = {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}
Because the elements of a set are distinct, we never repeat elements. For  
example, we would never write {1, 2, 3, 2}; the correct listing is {1, 2, 3}. Because a 
set is a collection, the order in which the elements are listed is immaterial. {1, 2, 3}, 
{1, 3, 2}, {2, 1, 3}, and so on, all represent the same set.
If every element of a set A is also an element of a set B, then A is a subset of B, 
which is denoted A ⊆B. If two sets A and B have the same elements, then A equals B, 
which is denoted A = B.
For example, {1, 2, 3} ⊆{1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and {1, 2, 3} = {2, 3, 1}.
Example 1
•
 If A and B are sets, the intersection of A with B, denoted A ∩B, is the set 
consisting of elements that belong to both A and B. The union of A with B, 
denoted A ∪B, is the set consisting of elements that belong to either A or B, 
or both.
Definition
Finding the Intersection and Union of Sets
Let A = {1, 3, 5, 8}, B = {3, 5, 7}, and C = {2, 4, 6, 8}. Find:
(a)	 A ∩B        (b)  A ∪B        (c)  B ∩1A ∪C2
 (a)	 A ∩B = {1, 3, 5, 8} ∩{3, 5, 7} = {3, 5}
(b)	 A ∪B = {1, 3, 5, 8} ∪{3, 5, 7} = {1, 3, 5, 7, 8}
(c)	  B ∩1A ∪C2 = {3, 5, 7} ∩1{1, 3, 5, 8} ∪{2, 4, 6, 8}2
	
 = {3, 5, 7} ∩{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8} = {3, 5}
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
When working with sets, it is common practice to designate a universal set U, 
the set consisting of all the elements to be considered. With a universal set  
designated, elements of the universal set not found in a given set can be considered.
Example 2
Solution
•
 If A is a set, the complement of A, denoted A, is the set consisting of all the 
elements in the universal set that are not in A.*
Definition
Finding the Complement of a Set
If the universal set is U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} and if A = {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}, then 
A = {2, 4, 6, 8}.
It follows from the definition of complement that A ∪ A = U and A ∩ A = ∅. 
Do you see why?
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
It is often helpful to draw pictures of sets. Such pictures, called Venn diagrams, 
represent sets as circles enclosed in a rectangle. The rectangle represents the universal 
set. Such diagrams often make it easier to visualize various relationships among sets. 
See Figure 1.
Example 3
•
*Some books use the notation A′ or Ac for the complement of A.
Figure 1 
Universal set
A
B
C

Section A.1  Algebra Essentials  947
The Venn diagram in Figure 2(a) illustrates that A ⊆B. The Venn diagram 
in Figure 2(b) illustrates that A and B have no elements in common, that is, that 
A ∩B = ∅. The sets A and B in Figure 2(b) are disjoint.
Figures 3(a), 3(b), and 3(c) use Venn diagrams to illustrate the definitions of 
intersection, union, and complement, respectively.
Figure 2 
A
B
Universal set
(b)   A  B 5 
         disjoint sets
Universal set
subset
A
B
(a)   A  B
Figure 3 
A
B
Universal set
(b)   A     B
       union
(a)   A     B
Universal set
A
B
                intersection
Universal set
A
(c)   A
complement
A
Real Numbers
Real numbers are represented by symbols such as
25, 0, -3, 1
2, -  5
4, 0.125, 22, p, 2
3 -2, 0.666c
The set of counting numbers, or natural numbers, contains the numbers in 
the set {1, 2, 3, 4, c}. (The three dots, called an ellipsis, indicate that the  
pattern continues indefinitely.) The set of integers contains the numbers in the 
set {c, -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, c}. A rational number is a number that can be 
expressed  as a quotient a
b of two integers, where the integer b cannot be 0. Examples 
of rational numbers are 3
4, 5
2, 0
4, and -  2
3. Since a
1 = a for any integer a, every 
integer is also a rational number. Real numbers that are not rational are called  
irrational. Examples of irrational numbers are 22 and p (the Greek letter pi), 
which equals the constant ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a circle.  
See Figure 4.
Real numbers can be represented as decimals. Rational real numbers have 
decimal representations that either terminate or are nonterminating with repeating
blocks of digits. For example, 3
4 = 0.75, which terminates; and 2
3 = 0.666c, in
which the digit 6 repeats indefinitely. Irrational real numbers have decimal  
representations that neither repeat nor terminate. For example, 22 = 1.414213c 
and p = 3.14159. c In practice, the decimal representation of an irrational  
number is given as an approximation. We use the symbol ≈ (read as “approximately
 equal to”) to write 22 ≈1.4142 and p ≈3.1416.
Figure 4  p = C
d
C
d

948 
Appendix A  Review
Two frequently used properties of real numbers are given next.
Suppose that a, b, and c are real numbers.
Distributive Property
a # 1b + c2 = ab + ac
Zero-Product Property
If ab = 0, then either a = 0 or b = 0 or both equal 0.
The Distributive Property can be used to remove parentheses:
21x + 32 = 2x + 2 # 3 = 2x + 6
The Zero-Product Property will be used to solve equations (Section A.6). For 
example, if 2x = 0, then 2 = 0 or x = 0. Since 2 ≠0, it follows that x = 0.
The Real Number Line
The real numbers can be represented by points on a line called the real number line. 
There is a one-to-one correspondence between real numbers and points on a line. 
That is, every real number corresponds to a point on the line, and each point on the 
line has a unique real number associated with it.
Pick a point on the line somewhere in the center, and label it O. This point, 
called the origin, corresponds to the real number 0. See Figure 5. The point  
1 unit to the right of O corresponds to the number 1. The distance between 0 and 1  
determines the scale of the number line. For example, the point associated with the 
number 2 is twice as far from O as 1. Notice that an arrowhead on the right end of 
the line indicates the direction in which the numbers increase. Points to the left of 
the origin correspond to the real numbers -1, -2, and so on. Figure 5 also shows
the points associated with the rational numbers - 1
2 and 1
2 and with the irrational 
numbers 12 and p.
 The real number associated with a point P is called the coordinate of P, and the 
line whose points have been assigned coordinates is called the real number line.
Definition
The real number line consists of three classes of real numbers, as shown in 
Figure 6.
	 1.	 The negative real numbers are the coordinates of points to the left of the  
origin O.
	 2.	 The real number zero is the coordinate of the origin O.
	 3.	 The positive real numbers are the coordinates of points to the right of the  
origin O.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Figure 6 
3
2
1
Zero
Negative
real numbers
Positive
real numbers
1–2
1–2
0
O
1
3–2
3–2
2
3
Figure 5  Real number line
3
2
1
1–2
1–2
0
1 
2
3
Scale
1 unit
O
2 units
2
In Words
If a product equals 0, then one or 
both of the factors is 0.

Section A.1  Algebra Essentials  949
Graph Inequalities
An important property of the real number line follows from the fact that, given two 
numbers (points) a and b, either a is to the left of b, or a is at the same location  
as b, or a is to the right of b. See Figure 7.
If a is to the left of b, then “a is less than b,” which is written a 6 b. If a is to 
the right of b, then “a is greater than b,” which is written a 7 b. If a is at the same 
location as b, then a = b. If a is either less than or equal to b, then a … b. Similarly, 
a Ú b means that a is either greater than or equal to b. Collectively, the symbols 
6, 7, …, and Ú are called inequality symbols.
Note that a 6 b and b 7 a mean the same thing. It does not matter whether 
we write 2 6 3 or 3 7 2.
Furthermore, if a 6 b or if b 7 a, then the difference b - a is positive. Do you 
see why?
An inequality is a statement in which two expressions are related by an inequality 
symbol. The expressions are referred to as the sides of the inequality. Inequalities 
of the form a 6 b or b 7 a are called strict inequalities, whereas inequalities of the 
form a … b or b Ú a are called nonstrict inequalities.
The following conclusions are based on the discussion so far.
2
Figure 7 
b
a
(c)   a . b
a
b
(b)   a 5 b
a
b
(a)   a , b
 a 7 0 is equivalent to a is positive
 a 6 0 is equivalent to a is negative
The inequality a 7 0 is sometimes read as “a is positive.” If a Ú 0, then either a 7 0 
or a = 0, and this is read as “a is nonnegative.”
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 7  a n d  3 7
Graphing Inequalities
(a)	 On the real number line, graph all numbers x for which x 7 4.
(b)	 On the real number line, graph all numbers x for which x … 5.
 (a)	 See Figure 8. Notice that we use a left parenthesis to indicate that the  
number 4 is not part of the graph.
(b)	 See Figure 9. Notice that we use a right bracket to indicate that the number 5 is 
part of the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Find Distance on the Real Number Line
The absolute value of a number a is the distance from 0 to a on the number line. 
For example, -4 is 4 units from 0, and 3 is 3 units from 0. See Figure 10. That is, the 
absolute value of -4 is 4, and the absolute value of 3 is 3.
A more formal definition of absolute value is given next.
Example 4
Solution
•
3
The absolute value of a real number a, denoted by the symbol 0 a0 , is defined 
by the rules
0 a0 = a if a Ú 0  and  0 a0 = -a if a 6 0
Definition
Figure 8  x 7 4
7
6
5
4
3
2
0
1
–2 –1
Figure 9  x … 5
7
6
5
4
3
2
0
1
2 1
Figure 10 
5
4
4 units
3 units
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4

950 
Appendix A  Review
For example, because -4 6 0, the second rule must be used to get  
0 -40 = - 1 -42 = 4.
Computing Absolute Value
(a)	 0 80 = 8        (b)  0 00 = 0        (c)  0 -150 = - 1 -152 = 15
Look again at Figure 10. The distance from -4 to 3 is 7 units. This distance 
is the difference 3 - 1 -42, obtained by subtracting the smaller coordinate from 
the larger. However, since 0 3 - 1 -42 0 = 0 70 = 7 and 0 -4 - 30 = 0 -70 = 7, we 
can use absolute value to calculate the distance between two points without being  
concerned about which is smaller.
Example 5
•
If P and Q are two points on a real number line with coordinates a and b,  
respectively, the distance between P and Q, denoted by d1P, Q2, is
d1P, Q2 = 0 b - a0
Definition
Since 0 b - a0 = 0 a - b0 , it follows that d1P, Q2 = d1Q, P2.
Finding Distance on a Number Line
Let P, Q, and R be points on a real number line with coordinates -5, 7, and -3,  
respectively. Find the distance
(a)	 between P and Q        (b)  between Q and R
 See Figure 11.
Example 6
Solution
Figure 11 
5
7
P
R
Q
2
3
4
5
6
1
0
1
2
3
4
d(P, Q)  7  (5)  12
d(Q, R)   3  7   10
(a)	 d1P, Q2 = 0 7 - 1 -52 0 = 0 120 = 12
(b)	 d1Q, R2 = 0 -3 - 70 = 0 -100 = 10
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Evaluate Algebraic Expressions
Remember, in algebra we use letters such as x, y, a, b, and c to represent numbers. If 
the letter used is to represent any number from a given set of numbers, it is called 
a variable. A constant is either a fixed number, such as 5 or 13, or a letter that  
represents a fixed (possibly unspecified) number.
Constants and variables are combined using the operations of addition,  
subtraction, multiplication, and division to form algebraic expressions. Examples of 
algebraic expressions include
x + 3  
3
1 - t  7x - 2y
To evaluate an algebraic expression, substitute a numerical value for each 
variable.
•
4

Section A.1  Algebra Essentials  951
Evaluating an Algebraic Expression
Evaluate each expression if x = 3 and y = -1.
(a)	 x + 3y    (b)  5xy    (c) 
3y
2 - 2x    (d)  0 -4x + y0
 (a)	 Substitute 3 for x and -1 for y in the expression x + 3y.
 x + 3y = 3 + 31 -12 = 3 + 1 -32 = 0
(b)	 If x = 3 and y = -1, then
5xy = 5132 1-12 = -15
(c)	 If x = 3 and y = -1, then
3y
2 - 2x =
31 -12
2 - 2132 =
-3
2 - 6 = -3
-4 = 3
4
(d)	 If x = 3 and y = -1, then
0 -4x + y0 = 0 -4132 + 1 -12 0 = 0 -12 + 1 -12 0 = 0 -130 = 13
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  5 1  a n d  5 9
Example 7
Solution
 c
 x = 3, y = - 1
•
Determine the Domain of a Variable
In working with expressions or formulas involving variables, the variables may be 
allowed to take on values from only a certain set of numbers. For example, in the 
formula for the area A of a circle of radius r, A = pr 2, the variable r is necessarily
restricted to the positive real numbers. In the expression 1
x, the variable x cannot 
take on the value 0, since division by 0 is not defined.
5
The set of values that a variable may assume is called the domain of the  
variable.
Definition
Finding the Domain of a Variable
The domain of the variable x in the expression
5
x - 2
is 5x0 x ≠26 since, if x = 2, the denominator becomes 0, which is not defined.
Circumference of a Circle
In the formula for the circumference C of a circle of radius r,
C = 2pr
the domain of the variable r, representing the radius of the circle, is the set of  
positive real numbers, 5r0 r 7 06. The domain of the variable C, representing the 
circumference of the circle, is also the set of positive real numbers, 5C0 C 7 06.
In describing the domain of a variable, we may use either set notation or words, 
whichever is more convenient.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 9
Example 8
•
Example 9
•

952 
Appendix A  Review
Use the Laws of Exponents
Integer exponents provide a shorthand notation for representing repeated  
multiplications of a real number. For example,
23 = 2 # 2 # 2 = 8    34 = 3 # 3 # 3 # 3 = 81
6
If a is a real number and n is a positive integer, then the symbol an represents 
the product of n factors of a. That is,
	
an = a # a # c# a	
(1)
Definition
u
n factors
In the definition it is understood that a1 = a.  Furthermore,  a2 = a# a, a3 = a# a# a, 
and so on. In the expression an, a is called the base and n is called the exponent, or 
power. We read an as “a raised to the power n” or as “a to the nth power.” We usually 
read a2 as “a squared” and a3 as “a cubed.”
In working with exponents, the operation of raising to a power is performed 
before any other operation. As examples,
	
4 # 32 = 4 # 9 = 36    22 + 32 = 4 + 9 = 13
	
-24 = -16	
5 # 32 + 2 # 4 = 5 # 9 + 2 # 4 = 45 + 8 = 53
Parentheses are used to indicate operations to be performed first. For example,
1 -224 = 1 -22 1-22 1-22 1-22 = 16  12 + 322 = 52 = 25
WARNING  Be careful with minus signs 
and exponents.
-24 = - 1 # 24 = - 16
whereas
1- 224 = 1- 221- 221- 221- 22 = 16
 
■
If a ≠0, then
a0 = 1
Definition
If a ≠0 and if n is a positive integer, then
a-n = 1
an
Definition
Whenever you encounter a negative exponent, think “reciprocal.”
Evaluating Expressions Containing Negative Exponents
(a)	 2-3 = 1
23 = 1
8      (b)  x-4 = 1
x4      (c)  a1
5b
-2
=
1
a1
5b
2 = 1
1
25
= 25
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  8 7  a n d  1 0 7
The following properties, called the Laws of Exponents, can be proved using the 
preceding definitions. In the list, a and b are real numbers, and m and n are integers.
Example 10
•

Section A.1  Algebra Essentials  953
Using the Laws of Exponents
Write each expression so that all exponents are positive.
(a)	 x5
 y-2
x3
 y  x ≠0, y ≠0	
(b)  ¢ x-3
3y-1 ≤
-2 x ≠0, y ≠0
 (a)	 x5
 y-2
x3
 y
= x5
x3 # y-2
y
= x5-3 # y-2-1 = x2
 y-3 = x2 # 1
y3 = x2
y3
(b)	 ¢ x-3
3y-1 ≤
-2
=
1x-32 -2
13y-12 -2 =
x6
3-21y-12 -2 =
x6
1
9
 y2
= 9x6
y2
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  8 9  a n d  9 9
Evaluate Square Roots
A real number is squared when it is raised to the power 2. The inverse of squaring 
is finding a square root. For example, since 62 = 36 and 1-622 = 36, the  
numbers 6 and -6 are square roots of 36.
The symbol 1 , called a radical sign, is used to denote the principal, or  
nonnegative, square root. For example, 136 = 6.
Example 11
Solution
•
7
Laws of Exponents
am
 an = am+n  1am2n = amn  1ab2n = an
 bn
am
an = am-n =
1
an-m if a ≠0  aa
b b
n
= an
bn if b ≠0
Theorem
In Words
136 means “give me the  
nonnegative number whose  
square is 36.”
If a is a nonnegative real number, the nonnegative number b such that b2 = a 
is the principal square root of a, and is denoted by b = 1a.
Definition
The following comments are noteworthy:
	 1.	 Negative numbers do not have square roots (in the real number system),  
because the square of any real number is nonnegative. For example, 1-4 is not 
a real number, because there is no real number whose square is -4.
	 2.	 The principal square root of 0 is 0, since 02 = 0. That is, 10 = 0.
	 3.	 The principal square root of a positive number is positive.
	 4.	 If c Ú 0, then 1 1c22 = c. For example, 1 1222 = 2 and 11322 = 3.
Evaluating Square Roots
(a)	 264 = 8          (b)  A
1
16 = 1
4          (c)  1 21.422 = 1.4
Examples 12(a) and (b) are examples of square roots of perfect squares, since 
64 = 82 and 1
16 = a1
4b
2
.
Example 12
•

954 
Appendix A  Review
Consider the expression 2a2. Since a2 Ú 0, the principal square root of a2 
is defined whether a 7 0 or a 6 0. However, since the principal square root is  
nonnegative, we need an absolute value to ensure the nonnegative result. That is,
	
2a2 = 0 a0     a any real number	
(2)
Using Equation (2)
(a)	 212.322 = 0 2.30 = 2.3          (b)  21 -2.322 = 0 -2.30 = 2.3
(c)	 2x2 = 0 x0
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 5
Calculators
Calculators are incapable of displaying decimals that contain a large number of  
digits. For example, some calculators are capable of displaying only eight digits. 
When a number requires more than eight digits, the calculator either truncates or 
rounds. To see how your calculator handles decimals, divide 2 by 3. How many digits 
do you see? Is the last digit a 6 or a 7? If it is a 6, your calculator truncates; if it is a 7,  
your calculator rounds.
There are different kinds of calculators. An arithmetic calculator can only add, 
subtract, multiply, and divide numbers; therefore, this type is not adequate for this 
course. Scientific calculators have all the capabilities of arithmetic calculators and 
also contain function keys labeled ln, log, sin, cos, tan, xy, inv, and so on. Graphing 
calculators have all the capabilities of scientific calculators and contain a screen on 
which graphs can be displayed. We use the  symbol whenever a graphing calculator 
needs to be used. In this text the use of a graphing calculator is optional.
Use a Calculator to Evaluate Exponents
Your calculator has either a caret key, ^, or an xy  key, that is used for computations 
involving exponents.
Exponents on a Graphing Calculator
Evaluate:  12.325
Solution  Figure 12 shows the result using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 2 5
Example 13
•
8
Example 14
•
Figure 12 
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 A(n)  
  is a letter used in algebra to represent any 
number from a given set of numbers.
	 2.	 On the real number line, the real number zero is the  
coordinate of the  
 .
A.1  Assess Your Understanding

Section A.1  Algebra Essentials  955
	 7.	 True or False  The product of two negative real numbers is 
always greater than zero. 
	 8.	 True or False  The distance between two distinct points on 
the real number line is always greater than zero. 
	 9.	 True or False  The absolute value of a real number is always 
greater than zero. 
	 10.	 True or False  To multiply two expressions having the same 
base, retain the base and multiply the exponents. 
	23.	 On the real number line, label the points with coordinates 0, 1, - 1, 5
2, - 2.5, 3
4, and 0.25.
	24.	 Repeat Problem 23 for the coordinates 0, - 2, 2, - 1.5, 3
2, 1
3, and 2
3.
In Problems 25–34, replace the question mark by 6, 7, or =, whichever is correct.
	 25.	 1
2 ? 0 
	 26.	 5 ? 6 
	 27.	 - 1 ? - 2 
	 28.	 - 3 ? -  5
2 
	 29.	 p ? 3.14 
	 30.	 22 ? 1.41 
	 31.	 1
2 ? 0.5 
	 32.	 1
3 ? 0.33 
	 33.	 2
3 ? 0.67 
	 34.	 1
4 ? 0.25 
Skill Building
In Problems 11–22, use U = universal set = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}, A = {1, 3, 4, 5, 9}, B = {2, 4, 6, 7, 8}, and C = {1, 3, 4, 6} to find  
each set.
	 11.	 A ∪B	
12.	 A ∪C	
13.	 A ∩B 
	
14.	 A ∩C 
	 15.	 1A ∪B2 ∩C 
	
16.	 1A ∩B2 ∪C 
	
17.	 A 
	
18.	 C 
	 19.	A ∩B	
20.	 B ∪C 
	
21.	 A ∪B	
22.	 B ∩C 
In Problems 41–44, graph the numbers x on the real number line.
In Problems 35–40, write each statement as an inequality.
	 35.	 x is positive 
	 36.	 z is negative 
	 37.	 x is less than 2 
	 38.	 y is greater than - 5 
	 39.	 x is less than or equal to 1 
	 40.	 x is greater than or equal to 2 
	 41.	 x Ú -2
	 42.	 x 6 4
	43.	 x 7 -1
	44.	 x … 7
In Problems 45–50, use the given real number line to compute each distance.
	 45.	 d1C, D2 
	 46.	 d1C, A2 
	 47.	 d1D, E2 
	 48.	 d1C, E2 
	 49.	 d1A, E2 
	 50.	 d1D, B2 
In Problems 51–58, evaluate each expression if x = - 2 and y = 3.
	 51.	 x + 2y 
	 52.	 3x + y 
	 53.	 5xy + 2 
	 54.	 -2x + xy 
	 55.	
2x
x - y 
	 56.	 x + y
x - y 
	 57.	 3x + 2y
2 + y  
	 58.	 2x - 3
y
 
A
B
C
D
E
2
3
4
5
6
1
0
1
2
3
4
	 3.	 An inequality of the form a 7 b is called a(n) 
  
inequality.
	 4.	 In the expression 24, the number 2 is called the 
 and 4 
is called the 
.
	 5.	 If a is a nonnegative real number, then which inequality 
statement best describes a?
(a)	 a 6 0    (b)  a 7 0    (c)  a … 0    (d)  a Ú 0 
	 6.	 Let a and b be nonzero real numbers and m and n be  
integers. Which of the following is not a law of exponents?
(a)	 aa
bb
n
= an
bn     (b)  1am2n = am+n
(c)	 am
an = am-n  
 
(d)  1ab2n = anbn 

956 
Appendix A  Review
	 69.	 x2 - 1
x
 
	 70.	 x2 + 1
x
 
	 71.	
x
x2 - 9 
	 72.	
x
x2 + 9 
In Problems 69–76, determine which of the values (a) through (d), if any, must be excluded from the domain of the variable in each  
expression.
(a)	 x = 3        (b)	x = 1        (c)	x = 0        (d)	x = - 1
	 73.	
x2
x2 + 1 
	 74.	
x3
x2 - 1 
	 75.	 x2 + 5x - 10
x3 - x
 
	 76.	 - 9x2 - x + 1
x3 + x
 
In Problems 77–80, determine the domain of the variable x in each expression.
	 77.	
4
x - 5 
	 78.	
- 6
x + 4 
	 79.	
x
x + 4 
	 80.	 x - 2
x - 6 
In Problems 81–84, use the formula C = 5
9
 1F - 322 for converting degrees Fahrenheit into degrees Celsius to find the Celsius measure 
of each Fahrenheit temperature.
	 81.	 F = 32° 
	 82.	 F = 212° 
	 83.	 F = 77° 
	 84.	 F = -4° 
In Problems 85–96, simplify each expression.
	 85.	 1- 422 
	 86.	 - 42 
	 87.	 4-2 
	 88.	 - 4-2 
	 89.	 3-6 # 34 
	 90.	 4-2 # 43 
	 91.	 13-22 -1 
	 92.	 12-12 -3 
	 93.	 225 
	 94.	 236 
	 95.	 21- 422 
	 96.	 21- 322 
In Problems 97–106, simplify each expression. Express the answer so that all exponents are positive. Whenever an exponent is 0 or negative, 
we assume that the base is not 0.
	 97.	 18x322 
	 98.	 1- 4x22 -1 
	 99.	 1x2
 y-122 
	100.	 1x-1
 y23 
	101.	 x2
 y3
xy4  
	102.	 x-2
 y
xy2  
	103.	
1- 223
 x41yz22
32
 xy3
 z
	104.	
4x-21yz2 -1
23
 x4
 y
 
	105.	 ¢ 3x-1
4y-1≤
-2
 
	106.	 ¢ 5x-2
6y-2≤
-3
 
	127.	 1- 2.826 
	128.	 - 12.826 
	129.	 1- 8.112 -4 
	130.	 - 18.112 -4 
	119.	 Find the value of the expression 2x3 - 3x2 + 5x - 4 if x = 2. What is the value if x = 1? 
	120.	 Find the value of the expression 4x3 + 3x2 - x + 2 if x = 1. What is the value if x = 2? 
	121.	 What is the value of 
166624
122224
 ? 
	
122.  What is the value of 10.12312023
 ? 
In Problems 123–130, use a calculator to evaluate each expression. Round your answer to three decimal places.
	123.	 18.226 
	124.	 13.725 
	125.	 16.12 -3 
	126.	 12.22 -5 
In Problems 107–118, find the value of each expression if x = 2 and y = - 1.
107.	 2xy-1 
	108.	 - 3x-1
 y 
	109.	 x2 + y2 
	110.	 x2
 y2 
	111.	 1xy22 
	112.	 1x + y22 
	113.	 2x2 
	114.	 11x22 
	115.	 2x2 + y2 
	116.	 2x2 + 2y2 
	117.	 xy 
	118.	 yx 
In Problems 59–68, find the value of each expression if x = 3 and y = - 2.
	 59.	 0 x + y0  
	 60.	 0 x - y0  
	 61.	 0 x0 + 0 y0  
	 62.	 0 x0 - 0 y0  
	 63.	
0 x0
x  
	 64.	
0 y0
y  
	 65.	 0 4x - 5y0  
	 66.	 0 3x + 2y0  
	 67.	 0 0 4x0 - 0 5y0 0  
	 68.	 30 x0 + 20 y0  

Section A.1  Algebra Essentials  957
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 131–140, express each statement as an equation involving the indicated variables.
	131.	 Area of a Rectangle  The area A of a rectangle is the  
product of its length l and its width w. 
	136.	 Perimeter of an Equilateral Triangle  The perimeter P of an 
equilateral triangle is 3 times the length x of one side. 
	137.	 Volume of a Sphere  The volume V of a sphere is 4
3 times p 
times the cube of the radius r. 
C
d
	132.	 Perimeter of a Rectangle  The perimeter P of a rectangle is 
twice the sum of its length l and its width w. 
	133.	 Circumference of a Circle  The circumference C of a circle is 
the product of p and its diameter d. 
	134.	 Area of a Triangle  The area A of a triangle is one-half the 
product of its base b and its height h. 
	135.	 Area of an Equilateral Triangle  The area A of an  
equilateral triangle is 13
4  times the square of the length x of  
one side. 
	138.	 Surface Area of a Sphere  The surface area S of a sphere is  
4 times p times the square of the radius r. 
	139.	 Volume of a Cube  The volume V of a cube is the cube of 
the length x of a side. 
l
w
A
h
b
x
x
x
r
x
x
x
	140.	 Surface Area of a Cube  The surface area S of a cube is 6 
times the square of the length x of a side. 
	141.	 Manufacturing Cost  The weekly production cost C of  
manufacturing x watches is given by the formula 
C = 4000 + 2x, where the variable C is in dollars.
(a)	 What is the cost of producing 1000 watches? 
(b)	 What is the cost of producing 2000 watches? 
	142.	 Balancing a Checkbook  At the beginning of the month, 
Mike had a balance of $210 in his checking account. During 
the next month, he deposited $80, wrote a check for $120, 
made another deposit of $25, and wrote two checks: one for 
$60 and the other for $32. He was also assessed a monthly 
service charge of $5. What was his balance at the end of the 
month? 
In Problems 143 and 144, write an inequality using an absolute 
value to describe each statement.
	143.	 x is at least 6 units from 4. 
	144.	 x is more than 5 units from 2. 
	145.	 U.S. Voltage  In the United States, normal household  
voltage is 110 volts. It is acceptable for the actual voltage x 
to differ from normal by at most 5 volts. A formula that  
describes this is
0 x - 1100 … 5
(a)	 Show that a voltage of 108 volts is acceptable. 
(b)	 Show that a voltage of 104 volts is not acceptable. 
	146.	 Foreign Voltage  In other countries, normal household  
voltage is 220 volts. It is acceptable for the actual voltage x 
to differ from normal by at most 8 volts. A formula that  
describes this is
0 x - 2200 … 8
(a)	 Show that a voltage of 214 volts is acceptable.
(b)	 Show that a voltage of 209 volts is not acceptable. 
	147.	 Making Precision Ball Bearings  The FireBall Company 
manufactures ball bearings for precision equipment. One 
of its products is a ball bearing with a stated radius of  
3 centimeters (cm). Only ball bearings with a radius within 
0.01 cm of this stated radius are acceptable. If x is the radius 
of a ball bearing, a formula describing this situation is
0 x - 30 … 0.01
(a)	 Is a ball bearing of radius x = 2.999 acceptable? 
(b)	 Is a ball bearing of radius x = 2.89 acceptable? 
	148.	 Body Temperature  Normal human body temperature is 
98.6°F. A temperature x that differs from normal by at least 
1.5°F is considered unhealthy. A formula that describes this is
0 x - 98.60 Ú 1.5
(a)	 Show that a temperature of 97°F is unhealthy.
(b)	 Show that a temperature of 100°F is not unhealthy.
	149.	 Does 1
3 equal 0.333? If not, which is larger? By how much?
	150.	 Does 2
3 equal 0.666? If not, which is larger? By how much?

958 
Appendix A  Review
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	151.	 Is there a positive real number “closest” to 0? 
	152.	 Number game I’m thinking of a number! It lies between 1 
and 10; its square is rational and lies between 1 and 10. The 
number is larger than p. Correct to two decimal places 
(that is, truncated to two decimal places), name the number. 
Now think of your own number, describe it, and challenge a  
fellow student to name it. 
	153.	 Write a brief paragraph that illustrates the similarities and 
differences between “less than” 162 and “less than or equal 
to” 1…2.
	154.	 Give a reason why the statement 5 6 8 is true.
Use the Pythagorean Theorem and Its Converse
The Pythagorean Theorem is a statement about right triangles. A right triangle is one 
that contains a right angle—that is, an angle of 90°. The side of the triangle opposite 
the 90° angle is called the hypotenuse; the remaining two sides are called legs. In 
Figure 13 we have used c to represent the length of the hypotenuse and a and b to 
represent the lengths of the legs. Notice the use of the symbol        to show the 90° angle. 
We now state the Pythagorean Theorem. 
1
	
Objectives	 	1  Use the Pythagorean Theorem and Its Converse  (p. 958)
	
	 	2  Know Geometry Formulas  (p. 959)
	
	 	3  Understand Congruent Triangles and Similar Triangles  (p. 960)
A.2  Geometry Essentials
In a right triangle, the square of the length of the hypotenuse is equal to the 
sum of the squares of the lengths of the legs. That is, in the right triangle shown 
in Figure 13,
	
c2 = a2 + b2	
(1)
Pythagorean 
Theorem
Finding the Hypotenuse of a Right Triangle
In a right triangle, one leg has length 4 and the other has length 3. What is the length 
of the hypotenuse?
 Since the triangle is a right triangle, we use the Pythagorean Theorem with a = 4 
and b = 3 to find the length c of the hypotenuse. From equation (1),
 c2 = a2 + b2
 c2 = 42 + 32 = 16 + 9 = 25
 c = 225 = 5
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
The converse of the Pythagorean Theorem is also true.
Example 1
Solution
•
 In a triangle, if the square of the length of one side equals the sum of the 
squares of the lengths of the other two sides, the triangle is a right triangle. The 
90° angle is opposite the longest side.
Converse of the 
Pythagorean 
Theorem
Figure 13  A right triangle
b
Leg
a
Leg
Hypotenuse
c
90°

Section A.2  Geometry Essentials  959
Figure 15 
1483 ft
3960 mi
d
Verifying That a Triangle Is a Right Triangle
Show that a triangle whose sides are of lengths 5, 12, and 13 is a right triangle.  
Identify the hypotenuse.
 Solution  Square the lengths of the sides.
52 = 25  122 = 144  132 = 169
Example 2
Notice that the sum of the first two squares (25 and 144) equals the third square 
(169). That is, because 52 + 122 = 132, the triangle is a right triangle. The longest 
side, 13, is the hypotenuse. See Figure 14.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Applying the Pythagorean Theorem
The tallest building in the world is Burj Khalifa in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, at 
2717 feet and 163 floors. The observation deck is 1483 feet above ground level. How 
far can a person standing on the observation deck see (with the aid of a telescope)? 
Use 3960 miles for the radius of Earth.
Source: Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat
 Solution 
From the center of Earth, draw two radii: one through Burj Khalifa 
and the other to the farthest point a person can see from the observation deck. See 
Figure 15. Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to the right triangle.
Since 1 mile = 5280 feet,   1483 feet = 1483
5280 mile. Then
 d2 + 1396022 = a3960 + 1483
5280b
2
 d2 = a3960 + 1483
5280b
2
- 1396022 ≈2224.58
 d ≈47.17
A person can see more than 47 miles from the observation deck.
•
Example 3
Figure 14 
5
12
13
90°
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 5
Know Geometry Formulas
Certain formulas from geometry are useful in solving algebra problems.
For a rectangle of length l and width w,
•
2
Area = lw  Perimeter = 2l + 2w
For a triangle with base b and altitude h,
Area = 1
2
 bh
l
w
h
b

960 
Appendix A  Review
For a circle of radius r (diameter d = 2r),
Area = pr 2  Circumference = 2pr = pd
Volume = lwh  Surface area = 2lh + 2wh + 2lw
Volume = 4
3
 pr 3  Surface area = 4pr 2
Volume = pr 2
 h  Surface area = 2pr 2 + 2prh
For a closed rectangular box of length l, width w, and height h,
For a sphere of radius r,
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 1
Using Geometry Formulas
A Christmas tree ornament is in the shape of a semicircle on top of a triangle. How 
many square centimeters (cm2) of copper is required to make the ornament if the 
height of the triangle is 6 cm and the base is 4 cm?
 See Figure 16. The amount of copper required equals the shaded area. This area is 
the sum of the areas of the triangle and the semicircle. The triangle has height h = 6 
and base b = 4. The semicircle has diameter d = 4, so its radius is r = 2.
 Area = Area of triangle + Area of semicircle
 = 1
2
 bh + 1
2
 pr 2 = 1
2
 142 162 + 1
2
 p # 22
 
 = 12 + 2p ≈18.28 cm2
About 18.28 cm2 of copper is required.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Understand Congruent Triangles and Similar Triangles
Throughout the text we will make reference to triangles. We begin with a discussion 
of congruent triangles. According to dictionary.com, the word congruent means 
“coinciding exactly when superimposed.” For example, two angles are congruent if 
they have the same measure, and two line segments are congruent if they have the 
same length.
Example 4
Solution
b = 4; h = 6; r = 2
•
3
For a closed right circular cylinder of height h and radius r,
Two triangles are congruent if each pair of corresponding angles have the same 
measure and each pair of corresponding sides are the same length.
Definition
In Figure 17, corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding sides are 
equal in length: a = d, b = e, and c = f. As a result, these triangles are congruent.
In Words
Two triangles are congruent if 
they have the same size and 
shape.
Figure 16 
l
4
6
r
d
h
w
l
r
r
h

Section A.2  Geometry Essentials  961
Actually, it is not necessary to verify that all three angles and all three sides are 
the same measure to determine whether two triangles are congruent.
Figure 17  Congruent triangles
b
a
c
e
d
f
100°
30°
50°
30°
50°
100°
Determining Congruent Triangles
	 1.	 Angle–Side–Angle Case  Two triangles are congruent if two of the angles 
are equal and the lengths of the corresponding sides between the two angles 
are equal.
For example, in Figure 18(a), the two triangles are congruent because 
two angles and the included side are equal.
	 2.	 Side–Side–Side Case  Two triangles are congruent if the lengths of the 
corresponding sides of the triangles are equal.
For example, in Figure 18(b), the two triangles are congruent because 
the three corresponding sides are all equal.
	 3.	 Side–Angle–Side Case  Two triangles are congruent if the lengths of two 
corresponding sides are equal and the angles between the two sides are the 
same.
For example, in Figure 18(c), the two triangles are congruent because 
two sides and the included angle are equal.
Figure 18 
80
10
(a)
(b)
(c)
80
10
15
7
8
8
20
15
8
20
40
40
40
7
8
40
We contrast congruent triangles with similar triangles.
Two triangles are similar if the corresponding angles are equal and the lengths 
of the corresponding sides are proportional.
Definition
For example, the triangles in Figure 19 are similar because the corresponding 
angles are equal. In addition, the lengths of the corresponding sides are proportional 
because each side in the triangle on the right is twice as long as each corresponding 
side in the triangle on the left. That is, the ratio of the corresponding sides 
is a constant: d
a = e
b = f
c = 2.
In Words
Two triangles are similar if they 
have the same shape, but  
(possibly) different sizes.
It is not necessary to verify that all three angles are equal and all three sides are 
proportional to determine whether two triangles are congruent.
Figure 19  Similar triangles
a
b
c
30
30
70
70
80
80
d 5 2a
e 5 2b
f 5 2c

962 
Appendix A  Review
 Because the triangles are similar, corresponding angles are equal. So A = 90°, 
B = 60°, and C = 30°. Also, the corresponding sides are proportional. That is,
3
5 = 6
x. We solve this equation for x.
 3
5 = 6
x
 5x # 3
5 = 5x # 6
x
 3x = 30
 x = 10
The missing length is 10 units.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Solution
Multiply both sides by 5x.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by 3.
•
Determining Similar Triangles
	 1.	 Angle–Angle Case  Two triangles are similar if two of the corresponding 
angles are equal.
For example, in Figure 20(a), the two triangles are similar because two 
angles are equal.
	 2.	 Side–Side–Side Case  Two triangles are similar if the lengths of all three 
sides of each triangle are proportional.
For example, in Figure 20(b), the two triangles are similar because
10
30 = 5
15 = 6
18 = 1
3
	 3.	 Side–Angle–Side Case  Two triangles are similar if two corresponding 
sides are proportional and the angles between the two sides are equal.
For example, in Figure 20(c), the two triangles are similar because 
4
6 = 12
18 = 2
3 and the angles between the sides are equal.
35
35
120
10
30
5
15
18
12
4
18
6
6
80
80
(a)
(b)
(c)
120
Figure 20 
Using Similar Triangles
Given that the triangles in Figure 21 are similar, find the missing length x and the 
angles A, B, and C.
Example 5
Figure 21 
6
3
5
B
A
C
x
30
60
90

Section A.2  Geometry Essentials  963
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 A(n) 
 triangle is one that contains an angle of  
90 degrees. The longest side is called the 
.
	 2.	 For a triangle with base b and altitude h, a formula for the
	
	 area A is 
.
	 3.	 The formula for the circumference C of a circle of radius r is 
.
	 4.	 Two triangles are 
 if corresponding angles are equal 
and the lengths of the corresponding sides are proportional.
	 5.	 Which of the following is not a case for determining  
congruent triangles?
(a)	 Angle–Side–Angle	
(b)  Side–Angle–Side
(c)	 Angle–Angle–Angle	
(d)  Side-Side-Side 
	 6.	 Choose the formula for the volume of a sphere of radius r.
(a)	 4
3
 pr 2    (b)  4
3
 pr 3    (c)  4pr 3    (d)  4pr 2 
	 7.	 True or False  In a right triangle, the square of the length of 
the longest side equals the sum of the squares of the lengths 
of the other two sides. 
	 8.	 True or False  The triangle with sides of lengths 6, 8, and 10 
is a right triangle. 
	 9.	 True or False  The surface area of a sphere of radius r is
	
	 4
3
 pr 2. 
	 10.	 True or False  The triangles shown are congruent. 
A.2  Assess Your Understanding
29
29
30
30
10
10
100
100
25
25
	 12.	 True or False  The triangles shown are similar. 
120
120
2
3
4
3
	 11.	 True or False  The triangles shown are similar. 
In Problems 19–26, the lengths of the sides of a triangle are given. Determine which are right triangles. For those that are, identify the  
hypotenuse.
	 19.	 3, 4, 5 
	 20.	 6, 8, 10 
	 21.	 4, 5, 6 
	 22.	 2, 2, 3 
	 23.	 7, 24, 25 
	 24.	 10, 24, 26 
	 25.	 6, 4, 3 
	 26.	 5, 4, 7 
	 27.	 Find the area A of a rectangle with length 4 inches and width 2 inches. 
	 28.	 Find the area A of a rectangle with length 9 centimeters and width 4 centimeters. 
	 29.	 Find the area A of a triangle with height 4 inches and base 2 inches. 
	 30.	 Find the area A of a triangle with height 9 centimeters and base 4 centimeters. 
	 31.	 Find the area A and circumference C of a circle of radius 5 meters. 
	 32.	 Find the area A and circumference C of a circle of radius 2 feet. 
	 33.	 Find the volume V and surface area S of a closed rectangular box with length 8 feet, width 4 feet, and height 7 feet.
	 34.	 Find the volume V and surface area S of a closed rectangular box with length 9 inches, width 4 inches, and height 8 inches.
	 35.	 Find the volume V and surface area S of a sphere of radius 4 centimeters. 
	 36.	 Find the volume V and surface area S of a sphere of radius 3 feet. 
	 37.	 Find the volume V and surface area S of a closed right circular cylinder with radius 9 inches and height 8 inches.
	 38.	 Find the volume V and surface area S of a closed right circular cylinder with radius 8 inches and height 9 inches.
In Problems 13–18, the lengths of the legs of a right triangle are given. Find the hypotenuse.
	 13.	 a = 5, b = 12 
	 14.	 a = 6, b = 8 
	 15.	 a = 10, b = 24 
	 16.	 a = 4, b = 3 
	 17.	 a = 7, b = 24 
	 18.	 a = 14, b = 48 
Skill Building

964 
Appendix A  Review
	 43.	
44.	
45.	
46.	
	 39.	
40.	
41.	
42.	
In Problems 39–42, find the area of the shaded region.
6
B
A
C
x
12
16
75
75
30
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
30
x
B
A
C
20
45
60
95
25
8
x
C
A
B
10
50
50
5
125
G
H
2
ft
6 ft
C
D
B
A
F
E
E
B
G
F
A
C
D
6'
4'
20'
3'
In Problems 43–46, the triangles in each pair are similar. Find the missing length x and the missing angles A, B, and C.
	 47.	 How many feet has a wheel with a diameter of 16 inches 
traveled after four revolutions?   
	 48.	 How many revolutions will a circular disk with a diameter of 
4 feet have completed after it has rolled 20 feet? 
	 49.	 In the figure shown, ABCD is a square, with each side of 
length 6 feet. The width of the border (shaded portion)  
between the outer square EFGH and ABCD is 2 feet. Find 
the area of the border. 
	 51.	 Architecture  A Norman window consists of a rectangle 
surmounted by a semicircle. Find the area of the Norman 
window shown in the illustration. How much wood frame is 
needed to enclose the window?
Applications and Extensions
	 50.	 Refer to the figure. Square ABCD has an area of 100 square 
feet; square BEFG has an area of 16 square feet. What is the 
area of the triangle CGF ? 
	 52.	 Construction  A circular swimming pool that is 20 feet in 
diameter is enclosed by a wooden deck that is 3 feet wide. 
What is the area of the deck? How much fence is required to 
enclose the deck?
8
B
A
C
x
2
4
30
90
60

Section A.2  Geometry Essentials  965
	 53.	 How Tall Is the Great Pyramid?  The ancient Greek  
philosopher Thales of Miletus is reported on one occasion 
to have visited Egypt and calculated the height of the Great 
Pyramid of Cheops by means of shadow reckoning. Thales 
knew that each side of the base of the pyramid was 252 paces 
and that his own height was 2 paces. He measured the length 
of the pyramid’s shadow to be 114 paces and determined the 
length of his shadow to be 3 paces. See the illustration. Using 
similar triangles, determine the height of the Great Pyramid 
in terms of the number of paces. 
	 54.	 The Bermuda Triangle  Karen is doing research on the  
Bermuda Triangle which she defines roughly by Hamilton, 
Bermuda; San Juan, Puerto Rico; and Fort Lauderdale, Florida. 
On her atlas Karen measures the straight-line distances from 
Hamilton to Fort Lauderdale, Fort Lauderdale to San Juan, 
and San Juan to Hamilton to be approximately 57 millimeters 
(mm), 58 mm, and 53.5 mm respectively. If the actual  
distance from Fort Lauderdale to San Juan is 1046 miles,  
approximate the actual distances from San Juan to Hamilton 
and from Hamilton to Fort Lauderdale.
	55.	 How Far Can You See?  The conning tower of the U.S.S. 
Silversides, a World War II submarine now permanently 
stationed in Muskegon, Michigan, is approximately 20 feet 
above sea level. How far can you see from the conning tower?
	 56.	 How Far Can You See?  A person who is 6 feet tall is standing 
on the beach in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and looks out onto 
the Atlantic Ocean. Suddenly, a ship appears on the horizon. 
How far is the ship from shore? 
	 57.	 How Far Can You See?  The deck of a destroyer is 100 feet 
above sea level. How far can a person see from the deck? 
How far can a person see from the bridge, which is 150 feet 
above sea level? 
	58.	 Suppose that m and n are positive integers with m 7 n. If 
a = m2 - n2, b = 2mn, and c = m2 + n2, show that a, b, 
and c are the lengths of the sides of a right triangle. (This 
formula can be used to find the sides of a right triangle that 
are integers, such as 3, 4, 5; 5, 12, 13; and so on. Such triplets 
of integers are called Pythagorean triples.)
In Problems 55–57, use the facts that the radius of Earth is 3960 miles and 1 mile = 5280 feet.
	 59.	 You have 1000 feet of flexible pool siding and intend to  
construct a swimming pool. Experiment with rectangular-shaped 
pools with perimeters of 1000 feet. How do their areas vary? 
What is the shape of the rectangle with the largest area? 
Now compute the area enclosed by a circular pool with a 
perimeter (circumference) of 1000 feet. What would be your 
choice of shape for the pool? If rectangular, what is your 
preference for dimensions? Justify your choice. If your only 
consideration is to have a pool that encloses the most area, 
what shape should you use?
	 60.	 The Gibb’s Hill Lighthouse, Southampton, Bermuda,  in 
operation since 1846, stands 117 feet high on a hill 245 
feet high, so its beam of light is 362 feet above sea level. A  
brochure states that the light itself can be seen on the horizon 
about 26 miles distant. Verify the accuracy of this information. 
The brochure further states that ships 40 miles away can 
see the light and that planes flying at 10,000 feet can see 
it 120 miles away. Verify the accuracy of these statements. 
What assumption did the brochure make about the height of  
the ship?
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
Source: Diggins, Julie E, String Straightedge and Shadow:  
The Story of Geometry, 2003, Whole Spirit Press,  
http://wholespiritpress.com.
40 miles
120 miles

966 
Appendix A  Review
We have described algebra as a generalization of arithmetic in which letters are 
used to represent real numbers. From now on, we shall use the letters at the end 
of the alphabet, such as x, y, and z, to represent variables and use the letters at the  
beginning of the alphabet, such as a, b, and c, to represent constants. In the  
expressions 3x + 5 and ax + b, it is understood that x is a variable and that a and 
b are constants, even though the constants a and b are unspecified. As you will find 
out, the context usually makes the intended meaning clear.
Recognize Monomials
1
A.3  Polynomials
	
Objectives	 	1  Recognize Monomials  (p. 966)
	
	 	2  Recognize Polynomials  (p. 966)
	
	 	3  Know Formulas for Special Products  (p. 968)
	
	 	4  Divide Polynomials Using Long Division  (p. 969)
	
	 	5  Factor Polynomials  (p. 971)
	
	 	6  Complete the Square  (p. 972)
NOTE  The nonnegative integers are the 
integers 0, 1, 2, 3,….	
■
A monomial in one variable is the product of a constant and a variable raised 
to a nonnegative integer power. A monomial is of the form
axk
where a is a constant, x is a variable, and k Ú 0 is an integer. The constant a is 
called the coefficient of the monomial. If a ≠0, then k is called the degree of 
the monomial.
Definition
Examples of Monomials
Monomial	
Coefficient	
Degree
(a)	 6x2	
6	
2
(b)	 - 22x3 	
- 22	
3
(c)	 3	
3	
0 
(d)	 -5x 	
-5	
1 
(e)	 x4	
1	
4 
Examples of Nonmonomial Expressions
(a)	 3x1>2 is not a monomial, since the exponent of the variable x is 1
2, and 1
2 is not a 
nonnegative integer.
(b)	 4x-3 is not a monomial, since the exponent of the variable x is -3, and -3 is not 
a nonnegative integer.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Recognize Polynomials
Two monomials with the same variable raised to the same power are called like 
terms. For example, 2x4 and -5x4 are like terms. In contrast, the monomials 2x3 and 
2x5 are not like terms.
Example 1
Since 3 = 3 # 1 = 3x0, x ≠0
Since -5x = -5x1
•
Since x4 = 1 # x4
Example 2
•
2

Section A.3  Polynomials  967
We can add or subtract like terms using the Distributive Property. For example,
2x2 + 5x2 = 12 + 52x2 = 7x2 and 8x3 - 5x3 = 18 - 52x3 = 3x3
The sum or difference of two monomials having different degrees is called a 
binomial. The sum or difference of three monomials with three different degrees is 
called a trinomial. For example,
x2 - 2 is a binomial.
x3 - 3x + 5 is a trinomial.
2x2 + 5x2 + 2 = 7x2 + 2 is a binomial.
*The notation an is read as “a sub n.” The number n is called a subscript and should not be confused 
with an exponent. We use subscripts to distinguish one constant from another when a large or  
undetermined number of constants are required.
A polynomial in one variable is an algebraic expression of the form
	
an
 xn + an-1
 xn-1 + g + a1
 x + a0	
(1)
where an, an-1,c, a1, a0 are constants,* called the coefficients of the polynomial,  
n Ú 0 is an integer, and x is a variable. If an ≠0, it is called the leading  
coefficient, anxn is called the leading term, and n is the degree of the polynomial.
Definition
The monomials that make up a polynomial are called its terms. If all of the  
coefficients are 0, the polynomial is called the zero polynomial, which has no degree.
Polynomials are usually written in standard form, beginning with the nonzero 
term of highest degree and continuing with terms in descending order according to 
degree. If a power of x is missing, it is because its coefficient is zero.
Examples of Polynomials
Polynomial	
Coefficients	
Degree
-8x3 + 4x2 - 6x + 2	
-8, 4, -6, 2	
3
3x2 - 5 = 3x2 + 0 # x + 1 -52	
3, 0, -5	
2
8 - 2x + x2 = 1 # x2 + 1 -22x + 8	
1, -2, 8	
2
5x + 22 = 5x1 + 22	
5, 22	
1
3 = 3 # 1 = 3 # x0	
3	
0
0	
0	
No degree
Although we have been using x to represent the variable, letters such as y and 
z are also commonly used.
3x4 - x2 + 2 is a polynomial (in x) of degree 4.
9y3 - 2y2 + y - 3 is a polynomial (in y) of degree 3.
z5 + p is a polynomial (in z) of degree 5.
Algebraic expressions such as
1
x and x2 + 1
x + 5
are not polynomials. The first is not a polynomial because 1
x = x-1 has an exponent
that is not a nonnegative integer. Although the second expression is the quotient of 
two polynomials, the polynomial in the denominator has degree greater than 0, so 
the expression cannot be a polynomial.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
Example 3
•
In Words
A polynomial is a sum of  
monomials.

968 
Appendix A  Review
Know Formulas for Special Products
Certain products, which we call special products, occur frequently in algebra. For 
example, we can find the product of two binomials using the FOIL (First, Outer, 
Inner, Last) method.
3
= ax #
 cx + ax #
 d + b #
 cx + b #
 d
= acx2 + adx + bcx + bd
= acx2 + (ad + bc)x + bd
(ax + b)(cx + d ) = ax(cx + d ) + b(cx + d )
Using FOIL
(a)	 1x - 32 1x + 32 = x2 + 3x - 3x - 9 = x2 - 9
                                                                F            O             I            L
(b)	 1x + 222 = 1x + 22 1x + 22 = x2 + 2x + 2x + 4 = x2 + 4x + 4
(c)	 1x - 322 = 1x - 32 1x - 32 = x2 - 3x - 3x + 9 = x2 - 6x + 9
(d)	 1x + 32 1x + 12 = x2 + x + 3x + 3 = x2 + 4x + 3
(e)	 12x + 12 13x + 42 = 6x2 + 8x + 3x + 4 = 6x2 + 11x + 4
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 5
Some products have been given special names because of their form. In the list 
that follows, x and a are real numbers.
Example 4
•
Difference of Two Squares
	
1x - a2 1x + a2 = x2 - a2	
(2)
Squares of Binomials, or Perfect Squares
	
 1x + a22 = x2 + 2ax + a2	
(3a)
	
 1x - a22 = x2 - 2ax + a2	
(3b)
Cubes of Binomials, or Perfect Cubes
	
 1x + a23 = x3 + 3ax2 + 3a2
 x + a3	
(4a)
	
 1x - a23 = x3 - 3ax2 + 3a2
 x - a3	
(4b)
Difference of Two Cubes
	
1x - a2 1x2 + ax + a22 = x3 - a3	
(5)
Sum of Two Cubes
	
1x + a2 1x2 - ax + a22 = x3 + a3	
(6)
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  4 9 ,  5 3 ,  a n d  5 7
2         2        2        2
   First           Outer          Inner           Last
Outer
First
Inner
Last

Section A.3  Polynomials  969
Divide Polynomials Using Long Division
The procedure for dividing two polynomials is similar to the procedure for dividing 
two integers.
Dividing Two Integers
Divide 842 by 15.
 
 
Divisor S
 
 
 
 
 
56
15)842
75
92
90
2
 
d  Quotient
d  Dividend
d  5 # 15 (subtract)
 
d  6 # 15 (subtract)
d  Remainder
So, 842
15 = 56 + 2
15.
In the long-division process detailed in Example 5, the number 15 is called the 
divisor, the number 842 is called the dividend, the number 56 is called the quotient, 
and the number 2 is called the remainder.
To check the answer obtained in a division problem, multiply the quotient by 
the divisor and add the remainder. The answer should be the dividend.
4
Example 5
Solution
•
Note  Remember, a polynomial is in  
standard form when its terms are  
written in descending powers of x.	
■
1Quotient2 1Divisor2 + Remainder = Dividend
For example, we can check the results obtained in Example 5 as follows:
1562 1152 + 2 = 840 + 2 = 842
To divide two polynomials, we first must write each polynomial in standard 
form. The process then follows a pattern similar to that of Example 5. The next  
example illustrates the procedure.
Dividing Two Polynomials
Find the quotient and the remainder when
3x3 + 4x2 + x + 7 is divided by x2 + 1
 Each polynomial is in standard form. The dividend is 3x3 + 4x2 + x + 7, and the 
divisor is x2 + 1.
Step 1:	 Divide the leading term of the dividend, 3x3, by the leading term of the  
divisor, x2. Enter the result, 3x, over the term 3x3, as follows:
3x
x2 + 1)3x3 + 4x2 + x + 7
Step 2:	 Multiply 3x by x2 + 1, and enter the result below the dividend.
3x
x2 + 1)3x3 + 4x2 +
x + 7
3x3
+ 3x
  
Example 6
Solution
c 
Align the 3x term under the x  
to make the next step easier.
 
 
d 3x # (x2 + 1) = 3x3 + 3x

970 
Appendix A  Review
Step 3:	 Subtract and bring down the remaining terms.
3x
x2 + 1)3x3 + 4x2 +
x + 7
3x3
+ 3x
4x2 - 2x + 7
 
 
 
d  Subtract (change the signs and add).
d  Bring down the 4x2 and the 7.
Step 4:	 Repeat Steps 1–3 using 4x2 - 2x + 7 as the dividend.
3x
+ 4
x2 + 1)3x3 + 4x2 +
x + 7
3x3
+ 3x
4x2 - 2x + 7
4x2
+ 4
-2x + 3
 
d
 
 
d  Divide 4x 2 by x 2 to get 4.
d  Multiply x 2 + 1 by 4; subtract.
 
Since x2 does not divide -2x evenly (that is, the result is not a monomial), the 
process ends. The quotient is 3x + 4, and the remainder is -2x + 3.
Check: 1Quotient2 1Divisor2 + Remainder
 = 13x + 42 1x2 + 12 + 1 -2x + 32
 = 3x3 + 3x + 4x2 + 4 + 1 -2x + 32
 = 3x3 + 4x2 + x + 7 = Dividend
Then
 3x3 + 4x2 + x + 7
x2 + 1
= 3x + 4 + -2x + 3
x2 + 1  
The next example combines the steps involved in long division.
Dividing Two Polynomials
Find the quotient and the remainder when
x4 - 3x3 + 2x - 5 is divided by x2 - x + 1
 In setting up this division problem, it is necessary to leave a space for the missing x2 
term in the dividend.
 
Divisor S
Subtract S
 
Subtract S
 
Subtract S
 
 
x2 - 2x
- 3
x2 - x + 1)x4 - 3x3
+ 2x - 5
x4 -
x3 +
x2
-2x3 -
x2 + 2x - 5
-2x3 + 2x2 - 2x
-3x2 + 4x - 5
-3x2 + 3x - 3
x - 2
 
d  Quotient
d  Dividend
 
 
 
 
 
d  Remainder
Check: 1Quotient2 1Divisor2 + Remainder
 = 1x2 - 2x - 32 1x2 - x + 12 + x - 2
 = x4 - x3 + x2 - 2x3 + 2x2 - 2x - 3x2 + 3x - 3 + x - 2
 = x4 - 3x3 + 2x - 5 = Dividend
As a result,
x4 - 3x3 + 2x - 5
x2 - x + 1
= x2 - 2x - 3 +
x - 2
x2 - x + 1
•
Example 7
Solution
•
Comment  If the degree of the divisor is 
greater than the degree of the dividend, 
then the process ends.	
■

Section A.3  Polynomials  971
The process of dividing two polynomials leads to the following result: 
Let Q be a polynomial of positive degree, and let P be a polynomial whose 
degree is greater than or equal to the degree of Q. The remainder after  
dividing P by Q is either the zero polynomial or a polynomial whose degree is 
less than the degree of the divisor Q.
Theorem
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 5
Factor Polynomials
Consider the following product:
12x + 32 1x - 42 = 2x2 - 5x - 12
The two polynomials on the left side are called factors of the polynomial on the 
right side. Expressing a given polynomial as a product of other polynomials, that is, 
finding the factors of a polynomial, is called factoring.
We shall restrict our discussion here to factoring polynomials in one variable 
into products of polynomials in one variable, where all coefficients are integers. We 
call this factoring over the integers.
Any polynomial can be written as the product of 1 times itself or as -1 times 
its additive inverse. If a polynomial cannot be written as the product of two other 
polynomials (excluding 1 and -1), then the polynomial is said to be prime. When a 
polynomial has been written as a product consisting only of prime factors, it is said 
to be factored completely. Examples of prime polynomials (over the integers) are
2  3  5  x  x + 1  x - 1  3x + 4  x2 + 4
The first factor to look for in a factoring problem is a common monomial  
factor present in each term of the polynomial. If one is present, use the Distributive 
Property to factor it out.
Identifying Common Monomial Factors
 
 
Polynomial
Common 
Monomial 
Factor
 
Remaining 
Factor
 
 
Factored Form
2x + 4
2
x + 2
2x + 4 = 21x + 22
3x - 6
3
x - 2
3x - 6 = 31x - 22
2x2 - 4x + 8
2
x2 - 2x + 4
2x2 - 4x + 8 = 21x2 - 2x + 42
8x - 12
4
2x - 3
8x - 12 = 412x - 32
x2 + x
x
x + 1
x2 + x = x1x + 12
x3 - 3x2
x2
x - 3
x3 - 3x2 = x21x - 32
6x2 + 9x
3x
2x + 3
6x2 + 9x = 3x12x + 32
Notice that, once all common monomial factors have been removed from a 
polynomial, the remaining factor is either a prime polynomial of degree 1 or a  
polynomial of degree 2 or higher. (Do you see why?)
The list of special products (2) through (6) given earlier provides a list of  
factoring formulas when the equations are read from right to left. For example, 
equation (2) states that if the polynomial is the difference of two squares, x2 - a2, 
it can be factored into 1x - a2 1x + a2. The following example illustrates several 
factoring techniques.
5
Example 8
•
Comment  Over the real numbers, 
3x + 4 factors into 31x + 4
32. It is the 
noninteger 4
3 that causes 3x + 4 to be 
prime over the integers.	
■

972 
Appendix A  Review
Factoring Polynomials
Factor completely each polynomial.
(a)  x4 - 16	
(b)  x3 - 1	
(c)  9x2 - 6x + 1
(d)  x2 + 4x - 12	
(e)  3x2 + 10x - 8	
(f)  x3 - 4x2 + 2x - 8
 (a)	 x4 - 16 = 1x2 - 42 1x2 + 42 = 1x - 22 1x + 22 1x2 + 42 
(b)	 x3 - 1 = 1x - 12 1x2 + x + 12
(c)	 9x2 - 6x + 1 = 13x - 122
(d)	 x2 + 4x - 12 = 1x + 62 1x - 22
(e)	 3x2 + 10x - 8 = 13x - 22 1x + 42 
(f)	  x3 - 4x2 + 2x - 8 = 1x3 - 4x22 + 12x - 82
	
 = x21x - 42 + 21x - 42 = 1x2 + 22 1x - 42
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  8 5 ,  1 0 1 ,  a n d  1 3 5
Example 9
Solution
 c	
	
 c
 Difference of squares	
Difference of squares
 c	
	
 Difference of cubes
 c	
	
 Perfect square
	
	
 c
 The product of 6 and - 2 is - 12, and the sum of 6 and - 2 is 4.
12x - 2x = 10x
3x2	
  - 8
 c	
	
 Group terms
•
 c	
	
 c
 Distributive Property                         Distributive Property
T
T
T
T
 c
 c
 c
 c
Comment  The technique used in part 
(f) is called factoring by grouping.	
■
Complete the Square
The idea behind completing the square in one variable is to “adjust” an expression 
of the form x2 + bx to make it a perfect square. Perfect squares are trinomials of 
the form
x2 + 2ax + a2 = (x + a)2 or x2 - 2ax + a2 = (x - a)2
For example, x2 + 6x + 9 is a perfect square because x2 + 6x + 9 = (x + 3)2. And 
p2 - 12p + 36 is a perfect square because p2 - 12p + 36 = (p - 6)2.
So how do we “adjust” x2 + bx to make it a perfect square? We do it by adding 
a number. For example, to make x2 + 6x a perfect square, add 9. But how do we 
know to add 9? If we divide the coefficient of the first-degree term, 6, by 2, and then 
square the result, we obtain 9. This approach works in general.
6
Warning  To use a1
2
 bb
2
 to complete
the square, the coefficient of the x2 
term must be 1.	
■
Completing the Square of x 2 + bx
Identify the coefficient of the first-degree term. Multiply this coefficient by 1
2 
and then square the result. That is, determine the value of b in x2 + bx and 
compute a1
2
 bb
2
.

Section A.3  Polynomials  973
Completing the Square
Determine the number that must be added to each expression to complete the 
square. Then factor the expression.
Start
Add
Result
Factored Form
y2 + 8y
a1
2 #  8b
2
= 16
y2 + 8y + 16
(y + 4)2
x2 + 12x
a1
2 # 12b
2
= 36
x2 + 12x + 36
(x + 6)2
a2 - 20a
a1
2 # (-20)b
2
= 100
a2 - 20a + 100
(a - 10)2
p2 - 5p
a1
2 # (-5)b
2
= 25
4
p2 - 5p + 25
4
ap - 5
2b
2
Notice that the factored form of a perfect square is either
x2 + bx + ab
2 b
2
= ax + b
2 b
2 or x2 - bx + ab
2 b
2
= ax - b
2 b
2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 2 5
Are you wondering why we refer to making an expression a perfect square 
as “completing the square”? Look at the square in Figure 22. Its area is (y + 4)2. 
The yellow area is y2 and each orange area is 4y (for a total area of 8y). The sum of 
these areas is y2 + 8y. To complete the square, we need to add the area of the green 
region: 4 # 4 = 16. As a result, y2 + 8y + 16 = (y + 4)2.
Example 10
•
Figure 22 
y
4
Area 5 y 2
Area 5 4y
Area
5 4y
4
y
Concepts and Vocabulary 
	 1.	 The polynomial 3x4 - 2x3 + 13x2 - 5 is of degree        . 
The leading coefficient is     
.
	 2.	 1x2 - 42 1x2 + 42 =   
 .
	 3.	 1x - 22 1x2 + 2x + 42 =  
 .
	 4.	 True or False  4x-2 is a monomial of degree - 2. 
	 5.	 True or False  1x + a2 1x2 + ax + a2 = x3 + a3. 
	 6.	 True or False  The polynomial x2 + 4 is prime. 
	
7.	 True or False  3x3 - 2x2 - 6x + 4 = 13x - 22 1x2 + 22.
	 8.	 To complete the square of the expression x2 + 5x, you
	
	 would  
  the number   
  .
	 9.	 To check division, the expression that is being divided, the 
dividend, should equal the product of the  
  and the 
 
  plus the   
 .
	 10.	 The monomials that make up a polynomial are called which 
of the following?
(a)	 terms  (b)  variables  (c)  factors  (d)  coefficients 
	 11.	 Choose the degree of the monomial 3x4.
(a)	 3    (b)  7    (c)  4    (d)  2 
	 12.	 Choose the best description of x2 - 64.
(a)	 Prime    (b)  Difference of two squares
(c)	 Difference of two cubes    (d)  Perfect Square 
	 13.	 Choose the complete factorization of 4x2 - 8x - 60.
(a)	 21x + 32 1x - 52    (b)	 41x2 - 2x - 152
(c)	 12x + 62 12x - 102  (d)	 41x + 32 1x - 52 
	 14.	 To complete the square of x2 + bx, use which of the following?
(a)	 12b22  (b)  2b2  (c)  a1
2
 bb
2
  (d)  1
2
 b2 
A.3 Assess Your Understanding

974 
Appendix A  Review
Skill Building 
In Problems 15–24, tell whether the expression is a monomial. If it is, name the variable and the coefficient and give the degree of the  
monomial. If it is not a monomial, state why not.
	15.	 2x3	
16.	 - 4x2	
17.	 8
x	
18.	 - 2x-3
19.	 -2x3 + 5x2
	20.	 6x5
 - 8x2	
21.	
8x
x2 - 1	
22.	 -
2x2
x3 + 1	
23.	 x2 + 2x - 5
24.	 3x2 + 4
In Problems 25–34, tell whether the expression is a polynomial. If it is, give its degree. If it is not, state why not.
	 25.	 3x2 - 5 
	
26.	 1 - 4x 
	
27.	 5 
	
28.	 - p 
	
29.	 3x2 - 5
x 
	 30.	 3
x + 2 
	
31.	 2y3 - 22 
	
32.	 10z2 + z 
	
33.	 x2 + 5
x3 - 1 
	
34.	 3x3 + 2x - 1
x2 + x + 1  
In Problems 35–60, add, subtract, or multiply, as indicated. Express your answer as a single polynomial in standard form.
	 35.	 1x2 + 4x + 52 + 13x - 32 
	
36.	 1x3 + 3x2 + 22 + 1x2 - 4x + 42
	37.	 1x3 - 2x2 + 5x + 102 - 12x2 - 4x + 32	
38.	 1x2 - 3x - 42 - 1x3 - 3x2 + x + 52
	 39.	 61x3 + x2 - 32 - 412x3 - 3x22 
	
40.	 814x3 - 3x2 - 12 - 614x3 + 8x - 22
	 41.	 91y2 - 3y + 42 - 611 - y22 
	
42.	 811 - y32 + 411 + y + y2 + y32
	 43.	 x1x2 + x - 42 
	
44.	 4x21x3 - x + 22	
45.	 1x + 22 1x + 42 
	 46.	 1x + 32 1x + 52 
	
47.	 12x + 52 1x + 22 
	
48.	 13x + 12 12x + 12 
	 49.	 1x - 72 1x + 72 
	
50.	 1x - 12 1x + 12 
	
51.	 12x + 32 12x - 32 
	 52.	 13x + 22 13x - 22 
	
 53.	 1x + 422 
	
54.	 1x - 522 
	 55.	 12x - 322 
	
56.	 13x - 422 
	
57.	 1x - 223 
	 58.	 1x + 123 
	
59.	 12x + 123 
	
60.	 13x - 223
In Problems 61–76, find the quotient and the remainder. Check your work by verifying that
1Quotient2 1Divisor2 + Remainder = Dividend
	61.	 4x3 - 3x2 + x + 1  divided by  x + 2	
62.	 3x3 - x2 + x - 2  divided by  x + 2
	 63.	 4x3 - 3x2 + x + 1  divided by  x2 
	
64.	 3x3 - x2 + x - 2  divided by  x2 
	 65.	 5x4 - 3x2 + x + 1  divided by  x2 + 2	
66.	 5x4 - x2 + x - 2  divided by  x2 + 2
	 67.	 4x5 - 3x2 + x + 1  divided by  2x3 - 1	
68.	 3x5 - x2 + x - 2  divided by  3x3 - 1 
	 69.	 2x4 - 3x3 + x + 1  divided by  2x2 + x + 1	
70.	 3x4 - x3 + x - 2  divided by  3x2 + x + 1
	 71.	 -4x3 + x2 - 4  divided by  x - 1	
72.	 - 3x4 - 2x - 1  divided by  x - 1
	73.	 1 - x2 + x4  divided by  x2 + x + 1	
74.	 1 - x2 + x4  divided by  x2 - x + 1
	 75.	 x3 - a3  divided by  x - a 
	
76.	 x5 - a5  divided by  x - a
In Problems 77–124, factor completely each polynomial. If the polynomial cannot be factored, say it is prime.
	 77.	 x2 - 36 
	 78.	 x2 - 9 
	
79.	 2 - 8x2	
80.	 3 - 27x2
	81.	 x2 + 11x + 10	
82.	 x2 + 5x + 4	
83.	 x2 - 10x + 21	
84.	 x2 - 6x + 8
	85.	 4x2 - 8x + 32	
86.	 3x2 - 12x + 15	
87.	 x2 + 4x + 16	
88.	 x2 + 12x + 36
	 89.	 15 + 2x - x2	
90.	 14 + 6x - x2	
91.	 3x2 - 12x - 36	
92.	 x3 + 8x2 - 20x
	93.	 y4 + 11y3 + 30y2	
94.	 3y3 - 18y2 - 48y	
95.	 4x2 + 12x + 9	
96.	 9x2 - 12x + 4
	 97.	 6x2 + 8x + 2	
98.	 8x2 + 6x - 2	
99.	 x4 - 81	
100.	 x4 - 1
	101.	 x6 - 2x3 + 1	
102.	 x6 + 2x3 + 1	
103.	 x7 - x5	
104.	 x8 - x5
	105.	 16x2 + 24x + 9	
106.	 9x2 - 24x + 16	
107.	 5 + 16x - 16x2	
108.	 5 + 11x - 16x2
	109.	 4y2 - 16y + 15	
110.	 9y2 + 9y - 4	
111.	 1 - 8x2 - 9x4	
112.	 4 - 14x2 - 8x4
	113.	 x1x + 32 - 61x + 32	
114.	 513x - 72 + x13x - 72	 115.	 1x + 222 - 51x + 22  	
116.	 1x - 122 - 21x - 12
	117.	 13x - 223 - 27	
118.	 15x + 123 - 1 
	
119.	 31x2 + 10x + 252 - 41x + 52
	120.	 71x2 - 6x + 92 + 51x - 32	
121.	 x3 + 2x2 - x - 2	
122.	 x3 - 3x2 - x + 3
	123.	 x4 - x3 + x - 1 
	
124.	 x4 + x3 + x + 1 

Section A.4  Synthetic Division  975
In Problems 125–130, determine the number that should be added to complete the square of each expression. Then factor each expression.
	125.	 x2 + 10x 
	
126.	 p2 + 14p 
	
127.	 y2 - 6y 
	128.	 x2 - 4x 
	
129.	 x2 - 1
2x 
	
130.	 x2 + 1
3x 
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 131–140, expressions that occur in calculus are given. Factor completely each expression.
	131.	 213x + 422 + 12x + 32 # 213x + 42 # 3 
	 132.	 512x + 122 + 15x - 62 # 212x + 12 # 2 
	133.	 2x12x + 52 + x2 # 2 
	
134.	 3x218x - 32 + x3 # 8 
	135.	 21x + 32 1x - 223 + 1x + 322 # 31x - 222	
136.	 41x + 5231x - 122 + 1x + 524 # 21x - 12
	137.	 14x - 322 + x # 214x - 32 # 4 
	
138.	 3x213x + 422 + x3 # 213x + 42 # 3 
	139.	 213x - 52 # 312x + 123 + 13x - 522 # 312x + 122 # 2	
140.	 314x + 522 # 415x + 122 + 14x + 523 # 215x + 12 # 5
	141.	 Show that x2 + 4 is prime.	
142.	 Show that x2 + x + 1 is prime.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	143.	 Explain why the degree of the product of two nonzero  
polynomials equals the sum of their degrees.
	144.	 Explain why the degree of the sum of two polynomials of 
different degrees equals the larger of their degrees.
	145.	 Give a careful statement about the degree of the sum of two 
polynomials of the same degree.
	146.	 Do you prefer to memorize the rule for the square of a  
binomial 1x + a22 or to use FOIL to obtain the product? 
Write a brief position paper defending your choice.
	147.	 Make up a polynomial that factors into a perfect square.
	148.	 Explain to a fellow student what you look for first when  
presented with a factoring problem. What do you do next?
A.4  Synthetic Division
	
Objective	 	1  Divide Polynomials Using Synthetic Division (p. 975)
Divide Polynomials Using Synthetic Division
To find the quotient as well as the remainder when a polynomial of degree 1 or 
higher is divided by x - c, a shortened version of long division, called synthetic 
division, makes the task simpler.
To see how synthetic division works, first consider long division for dividing the 
polynomial 2x3 - x2 + 3 by x - 3.
2x2 + 5x
+ 15
x - 3)2x3 -
x2
+
3
2x3 - 6x2
5x2
5x2 - 15x
15x +
3
15x - 45
48
 
d  Quotient
 
 
 
 
 
 
d  Remainder
Check: 1Divisor2 # 1Quotient2 + Remainder
 = 1x - 32 12x2 + 5x + 152 + 48
 = 2x3 + 5x2 + 15x - 6x2 - 15x - 45 + 48
 = 2x3 - x2 + 3
1

976 
Appendix A  Review
The process of synthetic division arises from rewriting the long division in a 
more compact form, using simpler notation. For example, in the long division on the 
previous page, the terms in blue are not really necessary because they are identical 
to the terms directly above them. With these terms removed, we have
2x2 + 5x
+ 15
x - 3)2x3 -  x2
+  3
- 6x2
5x2
- 15x
15x
- 45
48
Most of the x’s that appear in this process can also be removed, provided that we 
are careful about positioning each coefficient. In this regard, we will need to use 0 as 
the coefficient of x in the dividend, because that power of x is missing. Now we have
2x2 + 5x + 15
x - 3)2
- 1
0
3
- 6
5
- 15
15
- 45
48
We can make this display more compact by moving the lines up until the numbers 
in blue align horizontally.
2x2 + 5x + 15
x - 3)2
- 1
0
3
- 6
- 15 - 45
~
5
15
48
 
Row 1
Row 2
Row 3
Row 4
Because the leading coefficient of the divisor is always 1, the leading coefficient 
of the dividend will also be the leading coefficient of the quotient. So we place the 
leading coefficient of the quotient, 2, in the circled position. Now, the first three 
numbers in row 4 are precisely the coefficients of the quotient, and the last number 
in row 4 is the remainder. Since row 1 is not really needed, we can compress the 
process to three rows, where the bottom row contains both the coefficients of the 
quotient and the remainder.
x - 3)2
- 1
0
3
- 6 - 15 - 45
2
5
15
48
 
Row 1
Row 2 (subtract)
Row 3
Recall that the entries in row 3 are obtained by subtracting the entries in row 2 
from those in row 1. Rather than subtracting the entries in row 2, we can change the 
sign of each entry and add. With this modification, our display will look like this:
x - 3)2
- 1
0
3
6
15
45
2
5
15
48
 
Row 1
Row 2 (add)
Row 3
*  3S
*  3S
*  3S

Section A.4  Synthetic Division  977
c
c
*  3S
*  3S
e
e
Using Synthetic Division to Find the Quotient and Remainder
Use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder when
x3 - 4x2 - 5 is divided by x - 3
 Step 1:	 Write the dividend in descending powers of x. Then copy the coefficients, 
remembering to insert a 0 for any missing powers of x.
1 -4 0 -5 
Row 1
Step 2:	 Insert the usual division symbol. In synthetic division, the divisor is of the 
form x - c, and c is the number placed to the left of the division symbol. 
Here, since the divisor is x - 3, insert 3 to the left of the division symbol.
3)1 -4 0 -5 
Row 1
Step 3:	 Bring the 1 down two rows, and enter it in row 3.
3)1 -4 0 -5
T
1
 
Row 1
Row 2
Row 3
Step 4:	 Multiply the latest entry in row 3 by 3, and place the result in row 2, one 
column over to the right.
 
Step 5:	 Add the entry in row 2 to the entry above it in row 1, and enter the sum in 
row 3.
 
Step 6:	 Repeat Steps 4 and 5 until no more entries are available in row 1.
Step 7:	 The final entry in row 3, the -14, is the remainder; the other entries in row 3, 
the 1, -1, and -3, are the coefficients (in descending order) of a polynomial 
whose degree is 1 less than that of the dividend. This is the quotient. That is,
Quotient = x2 - x - 3  Remainder = -14
Example 1
Solution
Row 1
Row 2
Row 3
3)1 -4 0 -5
3
1
3)1 -4 0 -5
3
1
-1
Row 1
Row 2
Row 3
3)1 -4 0 -5
3 -3 -9
1 -1 -3 -14
Row 1
Row 2
Row 3
Notice that the entries in row 2 are three times the prior entries in row 3. Our 
last modification to the display replaces the x - 3 by 3. The entries in row 3 give the 
quotient and the remainder, as shown next.
Let’s go through an example step by step.
2x2 + 5x + 15
Quotient
3)2
-1
0
3
6   15
45
2
5
15
48
48
Row 1
Row 2 (add)
Row 3
 Remainder
*  3S
*  3S
*  3S

978 
Appendix A  Review
	 1.	 To check division, the expression that is being divided, the dividend, should equal the product of the 
 and the 
 plus 
the 
.
	 2.	 To divide 2x3 - 5x + 1 by x + 3 using synthetic division, the first step is to write 
  )
 .
	 3.	 Choose the division problem that cannot be done using synthetic division.
(a)	 2x3 - 4x2 + 6x - 8  is divided by  x - 8  	
(b)  x4 - 3  is divided by  x + 1 
(c)	 x5 + 3x2 - 9x + 2  is divided by  x + 10  	
(d)  x4 - 5x3 + 3x2 - 9x + 13  is divided by  x2 + 5 
	 4.	 Choose the correct conclusion based on the following synthetic division:
 
- 5)2 
3 - 38 - 15
- 10    35 
15
2 - 7 -
 3
 0
(a)	 x + 5  is a factor of         2x3 + 3x2 - 38x - 15	
(b)  x - 5  is a factor of         2x3 + 3x2 - 38x - 15
(c)	 x + 5  is not a factor of  2x3 + 3x2 - 38x - 15	
(d)  x - 5  is not a factor of  2x3 + 3x2 - 38x - 15 
	 5.	 True or False  In using synthetic division, the divisor is always a polynomial of degree 1, whose leading coefficient is 1. 
	 6.
	
True or False
 
- 2)5 
3 2 
1
 - 10 14 - 32
5 - 7 16 - 31
   means   5x3 + 3x2 + 2x + 1
x + 2
= 5x2 - 7x + 16 +
- 31
x + 2. 
Concepts and Vocabulary
A.4  Assess Your Understanding
	 7.	 x3 - x2 + 2x + 4 is divided by x - 2
	 8.	 x3 + 2x2 - 3x + 1 is divided by x + 1
Skill Building
In Problems 7–18, use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder when:
	 9.	 3x3 + 2x2 - x + 3 is divided by x - 3
	 10.	 - 4x3 + 2x2 - x + 1 is divided by x + 2
	 11.	 x5 - 4x3 + x is divided by x + 3
	 12.	 x4 + x2 + 2 is divided by x - 2
	 13.	 4x6 - 3x4 + x2 + 5 is divided by x - 1
	 14.	 x5 + 5x3 - 10 is divided by x + 1
Check: 1Divisor2 1Quotient2 + Remainder
 = 1x - 32 1x2 - x - 32 + 1-142
 = 1x3 - x2 - 3x - 3x2 + 3x + 92 + 1 -142
 = x3 - 4x2 - 5 = Dividend
Let’s do an example in which all seven steps are combined.
Using Synthetic Division to Verify a Factor
Use synthetic division to show that x + 3 is a factor of
2x5 + 5x4 - 2x3 + 2x2 - 2x + 3
 The divisor is x + 3 = x - (-3), so place -3 to the left of the division symbol. Then 
the row 3 entries will be multiplied by -3, entered in row 2, and added to row 1.
-3)2 
5 -2 
2 -2 
3
-6 
3 -3 
3 -3
2 -1 
1 -1 
1 
0
 
Row 1
Row 2
Row 3
Because the remainder is 0, we have
1Divisor2 1Quotient2 + Remainder
= 1x + 32 12x4 - x3 + x2 - x + 12 = 2x5 + 5x4 - 2x3 + 2x2 - 2x + 3
As we see, x + 3 is a factor of 2x5 + 5x4 - 2x3 + 2x2 - 2x + 3.
As Example 2 illustrates, the remainder after division gives information about 
whether the divisor is, or is not, a factor. We shall have more to say about this in Chapter 4.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  9  a n d  1 9
•
Example 2
Solution
•

Section A.5  Rational Expressions  979
	 25.	 4x6 - 64x4 + x2 - 15; x + 4 
	 26.	 x6 - 16x4 + x2 - 16; x + 4 
	 27.	 2x4 - x3 + 2x - 1; x - 1
2 
	 28.	 3x4 + x3 - 3x + 1; x + 1
3 
	 29.	 Find the sum of a, b, c, and d if
x3 - 2x2 + 3x + 5
x + 2
= ax2 + bx + c +
d
x + 2 
Applications and Extensions
	 30.	 When dividing a polynomial by x - c, do you prefer to use long division or synthetic division? Does the value of c make a  
difference to you in choosing? Give reasons.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 19.	 4x3 - 3x2 - 8x + 4; x - 2 
	 20.	 - 4x3 + 5x2 + 8; x + 3 
In Problems 19–28, use synthetic division to determine whether x - c is a factor of the given polynomial.
	 15.	 0.1x3 + 0.2x is divided by x + 1.1
	 16.	 0.1x2 - 0.2 is divided by x + 2.1
	 17.	 x5 - 1 is divided by x - 1
	 18.	 x5 + 1 is divided by x + 1
	 21.	 3x4 - 6x3 - 5x + 10; x - 2 
	 22.	 4x4 - 15x2 - 4; x - 2 
	 23.	 3x6 + 82x3 + 27; x + 3 
	 24.	 2x6 - 18x4 + x2 - 9; x + 3 
A.5  Rational Expressions
	
Objectives	 	1  Reduce a Rational Expression to Lowest Terms  (p. 979)
	
	 	2  Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions  (p. 980)
	
	 	3  Add and Subtract Rational Expressions  (p. 981)
	
	 	4  Use the Least Common Multiple Method  (p. 982)
	
	 	5  Simplify Complex Rational Expressions  (p. 983)
Reduce a Rational Expression to Lowest Terms
If we form the quotient of two polynomials, the result is called a rational expression. 
Some examples of rational expressions are
(a)  x3 + 1
x
      (b)  3x2 + x - 2
x2 + 5
      (c) 
x
x2 - 1      (d) 
xy2
1x - y22
Expressions (a), (b), and (c) are rational expressions in one variable, x, whereas (d) 
is a rational expression in two variables, x and y.
Rational expressions are described in the same manner as rational numbers. In 
expression (a), the polynomial x3 + 1 is called the numerator, and x is called the  
denominator. When the numerator and denominator of a rational expression contain 
no common factors (except 1 and -1), we say that the rational expression is reduced 
to lowest terms, or simplified.
The polynomial in the denominator of a rational expression cannot be equal to 0
because division by 0 is not defined. For example, for the expression x3 + 1
x
, x cannot 
take on the value 0. The domain of the variable x is 5x0 x ≠06.
A rational expression is reduced to lowest terms by factoring completely the 
numerator and the denominator and canceling any common factors by using the 
Cancellation Property:
1
WARNING  Apply 
the 
Cancellation 
Property only to rational expressions 
written in factored form. Be sure to  
cancel only common factors, not  
common terms!	
■
	
a c 
b c = a
b  if b ≠0, c ≠0	
(1)

980 
Appendix A  Review
Reducing a Rational Expression to Lowest Terms
Reduce each rational expression to lowest terms.
(a)	 x2 + 4x + 4
x2 + 3x + 2        (b)  x3 - 8
x3 - 2x2        (c) 
8 - 2x
x2 - x - 12
 (a)	 x2 + 4x + 4
x2 + 3x + 2 =
 1x + 22 1x + 22
 1x + 22 1x + 12 = x + 2
x + 1  x ≠-2, -1
(b)	 x3 - 8
x3 - 2x2 =
 1x - 22 1x2 + 2x + 42
x2 1x - 22 
= x2 + 2x + 4
x2
  x ≠0, 2
(c)	
8 - 2x
x2 - x - 12 =
214 - x2
1x - 42 1x + 32 = 21 -12 1x - 42 
 1x - 42 1x + 32 = -
2
x + 3 x ≠-3, 4
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7
Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions
The rules for multiplying and dividing rational expressions are the same as the rules
for multiplying and dividing rational numbers. If a
b and c
d, b ≠0, d ≠0, are two 
rational expressions, then
Example 1
Solution
•
2
	
a
b # c
d = ac
bd  if b ≠0, d ≠0	
(2)
	
a
b
c
d
= a
b # d
c = ad
bc  if b ≠0, c ≠0, d ≠0	
(3)
In using equations (2) and (3) with rational expressions, be sure first to factor 
each polynomial completely so that common factors can be canceled. Leave your 
answer in factored form.
Multiplying and Dividing Rational Expressions
Perform the indicated operation and simplify the result. Leave your answer in  
factored form.
(a)	 x2 - 2x + 1
x3 + x
#
4x2 + 4
x2 + x - 2          (b) 
x + 3
x2 - 4
x2 - x - 12
x3 - 8
 (a)	  x2 - 2x + 1
x3 + x
#
4x2 + 4
x2 + x - 2 =
1x - 122
x1x2 + 12 #
41x2 + 12
1x + 22 1x - 12
	
 =
1x - 12 2 142 1x2 + 12 
x  1x2 + 12 1x + 22 1x - 12 
	
 = 41x - 12
x1x + 22  x ≠-2, 0, 1
Example 2
Solution

Section A.5  Rational Expressions  981
(b)	  
x + 3
x2 - 4
x2 - x - 12
x3 - 8
= x + 3
x2 - 4 #
x3 - 8
x2 - x - 12
	
 =
x + 3
1x - 22 1x + 22 # 1x - 22 1x2 + 2x + 42
1x - 42 1x + 32
	
 =
 1x + 32   1x - 22 1x2 + 2x + 42
 1x - 22 1x + 22 1x - 42 1x + 32 
	
 =
x2 + 2x + 4
1x + 22 1x - 42  x ≠-3, -2, 2, 4
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 5  a n d  2 1
Add and Subtract Rational Expressions
The rules for adding and subtracting rational expressions are the same as the rules 
for adding and subtracting rational numbers. If the denominators of two rational 
expressions to be added (or subtracted) are equal, then add (or subtract) the  
numerators and keep the common denominator.
•
3
If a
b and c
b are two rational expressions, then
	
a
b + c
b = a + c
b   a
b - c
b = a - c
b   if b ≠0	
(4)
In Words
To add (or subtract) two  
rational expressions with the 
same denominator, keep the  
common denominator and add  
(or subtract) the numerators.
Adding Rational Expressions with Equal Denominators
Perform the indicated operation and simplify the result. Leave your answer in  
factored form.
2x2 - 4
2x + 5 + x + 3
2x + 5  x ≠-  5
2
  2x2 - 4
2x + 5 + x + 3
2x + 5 = 12x2 - 42 + 1x + 32
2x + 5
 = 2x2 + x - 1
2x + 5
= 12x - 12 1x + 12
2x + 5
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
If the denominators of two rational expressions to be added or subtracted are 
not equal, we can use the general formulas for adding and subtracting rational 
expressions.
Example 3
Solution
•
	
 a
b + c
d = a # d
b # d + b # c
b # d = ad + bc
bd   if b ≠0, d ≠0	
(5a)
	
 a
b - c
d = a # d
b # d - b # c
b # d = ad - bc
bd   if b ≠0, d ≠0	
(5b)

982 
Appendix A  Review
Subtracting Rational Expressions with Unequal Denominators
Perform the indicated operation and simplify the result. Leave your answer in  
factored form.
x2
x2 - 4 - 1
x  x ≠-2, 0, 2
  x2
x2 - 4 - 1
x =
x2
x2 - 4 # x
x - x2 - 4
x2 - 4 # 1
x = x21x2 - 1x2 - 42 112
1x2 - 42 1x2
 =
x3 - x2 + 4
1x - 22 1x + 22 1x2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 5
Use the Least Common Multiple Method
If the denominators of two rational expressions to be added (or subtracted) have 
common factors, we usually do not use the general rules given by equations (5a) 
and (5b). Just as with fractions, we apply the least common multiple (LCM) method. 
The LCM method uses the polynomial of least degree that has each denominator 
polynomial as a factor.
Example 4
Solution
 æ
(5b)
•
4
The LCM Method for Adding or Subtracting Rational Expressions
The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Method requires four steps:
Step 1:	 Factor completely the polynomial in the denominator of each rational 
expression.
Step 2:	 The LCM of the denominator is the product of each of these factors 
raised to a power equal to the greatest number of times that the factor 
occurs in the polynomials.
Step 3:	 Write each rational expression using the LCM as the common  
denominator.
Step 4:	 Add or subtract the rational expressions using equation (4).
We begin with an example that requires only Steps 1 and 2.
Finding the Least Common Multiple
Find the least common multiple of the following pair of polynomials:
x1x - 1221x + 12 and 41x - 12 1x + 123
 Step 1:	 The polynomials are already factored completely as
x1x - 1221x + 12 and 41x - 12 1x + 123
Step 2:	 Start by writing the factors of the left-hand polynomial. (Or you could start 
with the one on the right.)
x1x - 1221x + 12
	
Now look at the right-hand polynomial. Its first factor, 4, does not appear 
in our list, so we insert it.
4x1x - 1221x + 12
Example 5
Solution

Section A.5  Rational Expressions  983
	
The next factor, x - 1, is already in our list, so no change is necessary. The 
final factor is 1x + 123. Since our list has x + 1 to the first power only, we 
replace x + 1 in the list by 1x + 123. The LCM is
4x1x - 1221x + 123
Notice that the LCM is, in fact, the polynomial of least degree that contains 
x1x - 1221x + 12 and 41x - 12 1x + 123 as factors.
Using the Least Common Multiple to Add Rational Expressions
Perform the indicated operation and simplify the result. Leave your answer in  
factored form.
x
x2 + 3x + 2 + 2x - 3
x2 - 1  x ≠-2, -1, 1
 Step 1:	 Factor completely the polynomials in the denominators.
 x2 + 3x + 2 = 1x + 22 1x + 12
 x2 - 1 = 1x - 12 1x + 12
Step 2:	 The LCM is 1x + 22 1x + 12 1x - 12. Do you see why?
Step 3:	 Write each rational expression using the LCM as the denominator.
•
Example 6
Solution
æ
Multiply numerator and  
denominator by x - 1 to get 
the LCM in the denominator.
 
x
x2 + 3x + 2 =
x
1x + 22 1x + 12 =
x
1x + 22 1x + 12 # x - 1
x - 1 =
x1x - 12
1x + 22 1x + 12 1x - 12
 2x - 3
x2 - 1 =
2x - 3
1x - 12 1x + 12 =
2x - 3
1x - 12 1x + 12 # x + 2
x + 2 =
12x - 32 1x + 22
1x - 12 1x + 12 1x + 22
Multiply numerator and  
denominator by x + 2 to get  
the LCM in the denominator.
æ
Step 4:	 Now add by using equation (4).
 
x
x2 + 3x + 2 + 2x - 3
x2 - 1 =
x1x - 12
1x + 22 1x + 12 1x - 12 +
12x - 32 1x + 22
1x + 22 1x + 12 1x - 12
 = 1x2 - x2 + 12x2 + x - 62
1x + 22 1x + 12 1x - 12
 =
3x2 - 6
1x + 22 1x + 12 1x - 12 =
31x2 - 22
1x + 22 1x + 12 1x - 12
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
Simplify Complex Rational Expressions
When sums and/or differences of rational expressions appear as the numerator  
and/or denominator of a quotient, the quotient is called a complex rational  
expression.* For example,
1 + 1
x
1 - 1
x
 and 
x2
x2 - 4 - 3
x - 3
x + 2 - 1
•
5
*Some texts use the term complex fraction.

984 
Appendix A  Review
are complex rational expressions. To simplify a complex rational expression means 
to write it as a rational expression reduced to lowest terms. This can be accomplished 
in either of two ways.
Simplifying a Complex Rational Expression
Option 1:  Treat the numerator and denominator of the complex rational  
expression separately, performing whatever operations are indicated 
and simplifying the results. Follow this by simplifying the resulting 
rational expression.
Option 2:  Find the LCM of the denominators of all rational expressions that 
appear in the complex rational expression. Multiply the numerator 
and denominator of the complex rational expression by the LCM 
and simplify the result.
We use both options in the next example. By carefully studying each method, 
you can discover situations in which one method may be easier to use than the other.
Simplifying a Complex Rational Expression
Simplify: 
1
2 + 3
x
x + 3
4
  x ≠-3, 0
 Option 1: First, perform the indicated operation in the numerator, and then 
divide.
 
1
2 + 3
x
x + 3
4
=
1 # x + 2 # 3
2 # x
x + 3
4
=
x + 6
2x
x + 3
4
= x + 6
2x #
4
x + 3
 
 =
1x + 62 # 4
2 # x # 1x + 32 =
 2 # 2 # 1x + 62
 2 # x # 1x + 32 = 21x + 62
x1x + 32
Option 2: The rational expressions that appear in the complex rational expression are
1
2, 3
x, x + 3
4
The LCM of their denominators is 4x. Multiply the numerator and 
denominator of the complex rational expression by 4x and then simplify.
 
1
2 + 3
x
x + 3
4
=
4x # a1
2 + 3
xb
4x # ax + 3
4
b
=
4x # 1
2 + 4x # 3
x
4x # 1x + 32
4
 =
 2 # 2x # 1
 2 + 4 x # 3
 x 
 4 x # 1x + 32
 4 
=
2x + 12
x1x + 32 =
21x + 62
x1x + 32  
Example 7
Solution
æ	
æ 
 Rule for adding quotients          Rule for dividing quotients
æ	
 
 Rule for multiplying quotients
æ Multiply the  
numerator and  
denominator by 4x.
æ Use the Distributive Property 
in the numerator.
•
æ	
æ
Simplify.                Factor.

Section A.5  Rational Expressions  985
Simplifying a Complex Rational Expression
Simplify: 
x2
x - 4 + 2
2x - 2
x
- 1
   x ≠0, 2, 4
 We will use Option 1.
 
x2
x - 4 + 2
2x - 2
x
- 1
=
x2
x - 4 + 21x - 42
x - 4
2x - 2
x
- x
x
=
x2 + 2x - 8
x - 4
2x - 2 - x
x
 =
1x + 42 1x - 22
x - 4
x - 2
x
= 1x + 42 1x - 22 
x - 4
#
x
 x - 2 
 = x1x + 42
x - 4
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 3
Example 8
Solution
•
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 When the numerator and denominator of a rational  
expression contain no common factors (except 1 and - 1), 
the rational expression is in  
   
 .
	 2.	 LCM is an abbreviation for   
   
   
 .
	 3.	 True or False  The rational expression 2x3 - 4x
x - 2  is reduced 
to lowest terms. 
	 4.	 True or False  The LCM of 2x3 + 6x2 and 6x4 + 4x3 is 
4x31x + 12. 
	 5.	 Choose the statement that is not true. Assume b ≠0, c ≠0, 
and d ≠0 as necessary.
(a)	 ac
bc = a
b  	
(b)  a
b + c
b = a + c
b
(c)	 a
b - c
d = ad - bc
bd
    (d) 
a
b
c
d
= ac
bd 
	 6.	 Choose the rational expression that simplifies to -1.
(a)	 a - b
b - a    (b)  a - b
a - b    (c)  a + b
a - b    (d)  b - a
b + a 
A.5 Assess Your Understanding
Skill Building
In Problems 7–14, reduce each rational expression to lowest terms.
	 7.	 3x + 9
x2 - 9 
	
8.	 4x2 + 8x
12x + 24 
	
9.	 x2 - 2x
3x - 6  
	
10.	 15x2 + 24x
3x2
 
	 11.	
24x2
12x2 - 6x 
	
12.	 x2 + 4x + 4
x2 - 4
 
	
13.	
y2 - 25
2y2 - 8y - 10 
	 14.	
3y2 - y - 2
3y2 + 5y + 2 
In Problems 15–36, perform the indicated operation and simplify the result. Leave your answer in factored form.
	15.	 3x + 6
5x2 #
x
x2 - 4	
16.	 3
2x #
x2
6x + 10 
	
17.	
4x2
x2 - 16 # x3 - 64
2x
	
18.	
12
x2 + x # x3 + 1
4x - 2
	 19.	
8x
x2 - 1
10x
x + 1
 
	
20.	
x - 2
4x
x2 - 4x + 4
12x
 
	
21.	
4 - x
4 + x
4x
x2 - 16
 
	
22.	
3 + x
3 - x
x2 - 9
9x3
 
	23.	
x2
2x - 3 -
4
2x - 3	
24.	
3x2
2x - 1 -
9
2x - 1	
25.	
x
x2 - 4 + 1
x	
26.	 x - 1
x3
+
x
x2 + 1

986 
Appendix A  Review
	27.	
x
x2 - 7x + 6 -
x
x2 - 2x - 24	
28.	
x
x - 3 -
x + 1
x2 + 5x - 24	
29.	
4x
x2 - 4 -
2
x2 + x - 6
	30.	
3x
x - 1 -
x - 4
x2 - 2x + 1	
31.	
3
1x - 1221x + 12 +
2
1x - 12 1x + 122	
32.	
2
1x + 2221x - 12 -
6
1x + 22 1x - 122
	 33.	
1 + 1
x
1 - 1
x
 
	
34.	
4 + 1
x2
3 - 1
x2
 
	
35.	
x - 2
x + 2 + x - 1
x + 1
x
x + 1 - 2x - 3
x
	
36.	
2x + 5
x
-
x
x - 3
x2
x - 3 -
1x + 122
x + 3
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 37–44, expressions that occur in calculus are given. Reduce each expression to lowest terms.
	 37.	
12x + 32 # 3 - 13x - 52 # 2
13x - 522
 
	38. 
14x + 12 # 5 - 15x - 22 # 4
15x - 222
 
	 39. 
x # 2x - 1x2 + 12 # 1
1x2 + 122
 
	 40.	
x # 2x - 1x2 - 42 # 1
1x2 - 422
 
	41. 
13x + 12 # 2x - x2 # 3
13x + 122
 
	
42. 
12x - 52 # 3x2 - x3 # 2
12x - 522
 
	 43.	
1x2 + 12 # 3 - 13x + 42 # 2x
1x2 + 122
 
	
44.	
1x2 + 92 # 2 - 12x - 52 # 2x
1x2 + 922
 
	45.	 The Lensmaker’s Equation  The focal length f of a lens with 
index of refraction n is
1
f = 1n - 12 J 1
R1
+ 1
R2
R
	
	 where R1 and R2 are the radii of curvature of the front and 
back surfaces of the lens. Express f as a rational expression.  
Evaluate the rational expression for n = 1.5, R1 = 0.1 meter, 
and R2 = 0.2 meter.
	46.	 Electrical Circuits  An electrical circuit contains three  
resistors connected in parallel. If the resistance of each is 
R1, R2, and R3 ohms, respectively, their combined resistance 
R is given by the formula
1
R = 1
R1
+ 1
R2
+ 1
R3
	
	 Express R as a rational expression. Evaluate R for 
R1 = 5 ohms, R2 = 4 ohms, and R3 = 10 ohms.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 47.	 The following expressions are called continued fractions:
1 + 1
x, 1 +
1
1 + 1
x
, 1 +
1
1 +
1
1 + 1
x
, 1 +
1
1 +
1
1 +
1
1 + 1
x
, c
	
	 Each simplifies to an expression of the form
ax + b
bx + c
	
	 Trace the successive values of a, b, and c as you “continue” the fraction. Can you discover the patterns that these values follow? Go 
to the library and research Fibonacci numbers. Write a report on your findings.
	 48.	 Explain to a fellow student when you would use the LCM 
method to add two rational expressions. Give two examples 
of adding two rational expressions, one in which you use the 
LCM and the other in which you do not.
	 49.	 Which of the two methods given in the text for simplifying 
complex rational expressions do you prefer? Write a brief 
paragraph stating the reasons for your choice.

Section A.6  Solving Equations  987
An equation in one variable is a statement in which two expressions, at least one  
containing the variable, are equal. The expressions are called the sides of the  
equation. Since an equation is a statement, it may be true or false, depending on  
the value of the variable. Unless otherwise restricted, the admissible values of the  
variable are those in the domain of the variable. These admissible values of the  
variable, if any, that result in a true statement are called solutions, or roots, of  
the equation. To solve an equation means to find all the solutions of the equation.
For example, the following are all equations in one variable, x:
x + 5 = 9  x2 + 5x = 2x - 2  x2 - 4
x + 1 = 0  2x2 + 9 = 5
The first of these statements, x + 5 = 9, is true when x = 4 and false for any 
other choice of x. That is, 4 is a solution of the equation x + 5 = 9. We also say 
that 4 satisfies the equation x + 5 = 9, because, when 4 is substituted for x, a true  
statement results.
Sometimes an equation will have more than one solution. For example, the equation
x2 - 4
x + 1 = 0
has x = -2 and x = 2 as solutions.
Usually, we will write the solution of an equation in set notation. This set is 
called the solution set of the equation. For example, the solution set of the equation 
x2 - 9 = 0 is 5 -3, 36.
Some equations have no real solution. For example, x2 + 9 = 5 has no real 
solution, because there is no real number whose square, when added to 9, equals 5.
An equation that is satisfied for every value of the variable for which both sides 
are defined is called an identity. For example, the equation
3x + 5 = x + 3 + 2x + 2
is an identity, because this statement is true for any real number x.
Preparing for this section  Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Factoring Polynomials (Appendix A, Section A.3,  
pp. 971–972)
•	 Zero-Product Property (Appendix A, Section A.1,  
p. 948)
•	 Square Roots (Appendix A, Section A.1,  
pp. 953–954)
•	 Absolute Value (Appendix A, Section A.1,  
pp. 949–950)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’  problems on page 994.
	
Objectives	  	1  Solve Equations by Factoring (p. 989)
	
	 	2  Solve Equations Involving Absolute Value (p. 989)
	
	 	3  Solve a Quadratic Equation by Factoring (p. 990)
	
	 	4  Solve a Quadratic Equation by Completing the Square (p. 991)
	
	 	5  Solve a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula (p. 992)
A.6  Solving Equations
One method for solving an equation is to replace the original equation by a 
succession of equivalent equations, equations having the same solution set, 
until an equation with an obvious solution is obtained.
For example, consider the following succession of equivalent equations:
 2x + 3 = 13
 2x = 10
 x = 5
We conclude that the solution set of the original equation is 556.
How do we obtain equivalent equations? In general, there are five ways.

988 
Appendix A  Review
Whenever it is possible to solve an equation in your head, do so. For example,
The solution of  2x = 8  is  x = 4.
The solution of  3x - 15 = 0  is  x = 5.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Solving an Equation
Solve the equation: 3x - 5 = 4
Replace the original equation by a succession of equivalent equations.
 3x - 5 = 4
 13x - 52 + 5 = 4 + 5 
Add 5 to both sides.
 3x = 9	
Simplify.
 3x
3 = 9
3	
Divide both sides by 3.
 x = 3	
Simplify.
The last equation, x = 3, has the single solution 3. All these equations are equivalent, 
so 3 is the only solution of the original equation, 3x - 5 = 4.
Example 1
Solution
Procedures That Result in Equivalent Equations
1.  Interchange the two sides of the equation:
	
Replace  3 = x by x = 3
2.  Simplify the sides of the equation by combining like terms, eliminating 
parentheses, and so on:
	
Replace	
 1x + 22 + 6 = 2x + 1x + 12
	
by	
 x + 8 = 3x + 1
3.  Add or subtract the same expression on both sides of the equation:
	
Replace	
 3x - 5 = 4
	
by	
 13x - 52 + 5 = 4 + 5
4.  Multiply or divide both sides of the equation by the same nonzero  
expression:
	
Replace	
  3x
x - 1 =
6
x - 1  x ≠1
	
by     3x
x - 1 # 1x - 12 =
6
x - 1 # 1x - 12
5.  If one side of the equation is 0 and the other side can be factored, then we 
may use the Zero-Product Property* and set each factor equal to 0:
	
Replace	
  x1x - 32 = 0
	
by	
 x = 0 or x - 3 = 0
Warning  Squaring both sides of an 
equation does not necessarily lead to 
an equivalent equation. For example, 
x = 3 has one solution, but x2 = 9 
has two solutions, x = - 3 and x = 3. 
	
■
*The Zero-Product Property says that if ab = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0 or both equal 0.

Section A.6  Solving Equations  989
Check:	 Check the solution by substituting 3 for x in the original equation.
3x - 5 = 3132 - 5 = 9 - 5 = 4
The solution checks. The solution set is 536.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  2 9  a n d  3 5
Solve Equations by Factoring
Solving Equations by Factoring
Solve the equations:  (a)  x3 = 4x        (b)  x3 - x2 - 4x + 4 = 0
 (a)	 Begin by collecting all terms on one side. This results in 0 on one side and an 
expression to be factored on the other.
 x3 = 4x
 x3 - 4x = 0
 x1x2 - 42 = 0
 x1x - 22 1x + 22 = 0
x = 0 or x - 2 = 0 or x + 2 = 0
x = 0 or 	
x = 2 or	
 x = -2
Check:   x = -2:  1 -223 = -8 and 41 -22 = -8 
	
	  x = 0: 
 03 = 0 and 4 # 0 = 0
	
	  x = 2: 
 23 = 8 and 4 # 2 = 8
	
The solution set is 5 -2, 0, 26.
(b)	 Group the terms of x3 - x2 - 4x + 4 = 0 as follows:
1x3 - x22 - 14x - 42 = 0
	
Factor out x2 from the first grouping and 4 from the second.
x21x - 12 - 41x - 12 = 0
	
This reveals the common factor 1x - 12, so
 1x2 - 42 1x - 12 = 0  
 1x - 22 1x + 22 1x - 12 = 0  
 x - 2 = 0 or x + 2 = 0 or x - 1 = 0
	
x = 2	
x = -2	
x = 1
Check:
x = -2: 1 -223 - 1 -222 - 41 -22 + 4 = -8 - 4 + 8 + 4 = 0 
x = 1: 13 - 12 - 4112 + 4 = 1 - 1 - 4 + 4 = 0
x = 2: 23 - 22 - 4122 + 4 = 8 - 4 - 8 + 4 = 0
The solution set is 5 -2, 1, 26.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Solve Equations Involving Absolute Value
On the real number line, there are two points whose distance from the origin is  
5 units, −5 and 5, so the equation 0 x0 = 5 will have the solution set 5 -5, 56.
•
1
Example 2
Solution
Factor.
Factor again.
Apply the Zero-Product Property.
Solve for x.
-2 is a solution.
0 is a solution.
4 is a solution.
Factor again.
Apply the Zero-Product Property.
Solve for x.
-2 is a solution
1 is a solution.
2 is a solution.
•
2

990 
Appendix A  Review
Solving an Equation Involving Absolute Value
Solve the equation: 
0 x + 40 = 13
 There are two possibilities.
 x + 4 = 13  or  x + 4 = -13
 x = 9  or 
 x = -17
The solution set is 5 -17, 96.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 1
Solve a Quadratic Equation by Factoring
Example 3
Solution
•
3
 A quadratic equation is an equation equivalent to one of the form
	
ax2 + bx + c = 0	
(1)
where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠0.
Definition
A quadratic equation written in the form ax2 + bx + c = 0 is said to be in 
standard form.
Sometimes, a quadratic equation is called a second-degree equation because, 
when it is in standard form, the left side is a polynomial of degree 2.
When a quadratic equation is written in standard form, it may be possible to 
factor the expression on the left side into the product of two first-degree polynomials. 
Then, by using the Zero-Product Property and setting each factor equal to 0, the 
resulting linear equations can be solved to obtain the solutions of the quadratic 
equation.
Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring
Solve the equation:  2x2 = x + 3
 Put the equation 2x2 = x + 3 in standard form by subtracting x and 3 from both 
sides.
 2x2 = x + 3
 2x2 - x - 3 = 0
The left side may now be factored as
12x - 32 1x + 12 = 0 
Factor.
so that
 2x - 3 = 0 or  x + 1 = 0
 x = 3
2  
 x = -1
The solution set is e -1, 3
2 f.
When the left side factors into two linear equations with the same solution, the 
quadratic equation is said to have a repeated solution. This solution is also called a 
root of multiplicity 2, or a double root.
Example 4
Solution
Subtract x and 3 from both sides.
Use the Zero-Product Property.
Solve.
•

Section A.6  Solving Equations  991
Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring
Solve the equation:  9x2 - 6x + 1 = 0
 This equation is already in standard form, and the left side can be factored.
 9x2 - 6x + 1 = 0
 13x - 12 13x - 12 = 0
so
x = 1
3 or x = 1
3 
Solve for x.
This equation has only the repeated solution 1
3. The solution set is e 1
3 f.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 9
The Square Root Method
Suppose that we wish to solve the quadratic equation
	
x2 = p	
(2)
where p Ú 0 is a nonnegative number. Proceeding as in the earlier examples,
 x2 - p = 0
 1x - 1p2 1x + 1p2 = 0
 x = 1p or x = - 1p
We have the following result:
Example 5
Solution
Factor.
•
Put in standard form.
Factor (over the real numbers).
Solve.
	
If x2 = p and p Ú 0, then x = 1p or x = - 1p.	
(3)
When statement (3) is used, it is called the Square Root Method. In  
statement (3), note that if p 7 0 the equation x2 = p has two solutions, x = 1p 
and x = - 1p. We usually abbreviate these solutions as x = { 1p, which is read 
as “x equals plus or minus the square root of p.”
For example, the two solutions of the equation
x2 = 4
are
                                                        x = { 24 
Use the Square Root Method.
and, since 24 = 2, we have
x = {2
The solution set is 5 -2, 26.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 3
Solve a Quadratic Equation by Completing the Square
Solving a Quadratic Equation by Completing the Square
Solve by completing the square:  2x2 - 8x - 5 = 0
First, rewrite the equation so that the constant is on the right side.
 2x2 - 8x - 5 = 0
 2x2 - 8x = 5
4
Example 6
Solution
Add 5 to both sides.

992 
Appendix A  Review
Next, divide both sides by 2 so that the coefficient of x2 is 1. (This enables us to 
complete the square at the next step.)
x2 - 4x = 5
2
Finally, complete the square by adding 4 to both sides.
	
 x2 - 4x + 4 = 5
2 + 4	
Add 4 to both sides.
	
 1x - 222 = 13
2 	
Factor on the left; simplify on the right.
	
 x - 2 = { A
13
2 	
Use the Square Root Method.
	
 x - 2 = { 226
2
	
A
13
2
= 113
12
= 113
12
 # 12
12 = 126
2
	
 x = 2 { 226
2
The solution set is e2 - 226
2
, 2 + 226
2
f.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 7
Solve a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula
We can use the method of completing the square to obtain a general formula for 
solving any quadratic equation
ax2 + bx + c = 0  a ≠0
As in Example 6, rearrange the terms as
ax2 + bx = -c 
a 7 0
Since a 7 0, divide both sides by a to get
x2 + b
a
 x = -  c
a
Now the coefficient of x2 is 1. To complete the square on the left side, add the square 
of 1
2 of the coefficient of x; that is, add
a1
2 # b
a b
2
= b2
4a2
to both sides. Then
 x2 + b
a
 x + b2
4a2 = b2
4a2 - c
a
	
 ax + b
2ab
2
= b2 - 4ac
4a2
        b2
4a2 - c
a =
b2
4a2 - 4ac
4a2 = b2 - 4ac
4a2
	
(4)
Provided that b2 - 4ac Ú 0, we can now use the Square Root Method to get
 x + b
2a = { B
b2 - 4ac
4a2
 x + b
2a = { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
 
•
5
The square root of a quotient equals 
the quotient of the square roots. 
Also, 24a2 = 2a since a 7 0.
Note  There is no loss in generality 
to assume that a 7 0, since if a 6 0  
we can multiply by - 1 to obtain an  
equivalent equation with a positive  
leading coefficient.	
■
Note  If we wanted an approximation, 
say rounded to two decimal places, of 
these solutions, we would use a calculator 
to get {- 0.55, 4.55}.	
■

Section A.6  Solving Equations  993
 x = -  b
2a { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
 
Add -  b
2a to both sides.
 = -b { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
	
Combine the quotients on the right.
What if b2 - 4ac is negative? Then equation (4) states that the left expression 
(a real number squared) equals the right expression (a negative number). Since this 
is impossible for real numbers, we conclude that if b2 - 4ac 6 0, the quadratic 
equation has no real solution. (We discuss quadratic equations for which the 
quantity b2 - 4ac 6 0 in detail in the next section.)
Quadratic Formula
Consider the quadratic equation
ax2 + bx + c = 0  a ≠0
If b2 - 4ac 6 0, this equation has no real solution.
If b2 - 4ac Ú 0, the real solution(s) of this equation is (are) given by the  
quadratic formula:
	
x = -b { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
	
(5)
Theorem
The quantity b2 −4ac is called the discriminant of the quadratic equation, because 
its value tells us whether the equation has real solutions. In fact, it also tells us how many 
solutions to expect.
Discriminant of a Quadratic Equation
For a quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0, a ≠0:
	 1.	 If b2 - 4ac 7 0, there are two unequal real solutions.
	 2.	 If b2 - 4ac = 0, there is a repeated solution, a double root.
	 3.	 If b2 - 4ac 6 0, there is no real solution.
When asked to find the real solutions of a quadratic equation, always evaluate 
the discriminant first to see if there are any real solutions.
Solving a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula
Use the quadratic formula to find the real solutions, if any, of the equation
3x2 - 5x + 1 = 0
The equation is in standard form, so compare it to ax2 + bx + c = 0 to find a, b, 
and c.
 3x2 - 5x + 1 = 0
 ax2 + bx + c = 0 
a = 3, b = - 5, c = 1
Example 7
Solution

994 
Appendix A  Review
With a = 3, b = -5, and c = 1, evaluate the discriminant b2 - 4ac.
b2 - 4ac = 1 -522 - 4132 112 = 25 - 12 = 13
Since b2 - 4ac 7 0, there are two real solutions, which can be found using the  
quadratic formula.
x = -b { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
=
- 1-52 { 213
2132
= 5 { 213
6
The solution set is e 5 - 213
6
, 5 + 213
6
f.
Solving a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula
Use the quadratic formula to find the real solutions, if any, of the equation
3x2 + 2 = 4x
 The equation, as given, is not in standard form.
 3x2 + 2 = 4x
 3x2 - 4x + 2 = 0
 ax2 + bx + c = 0
With a = 3, b = -4, and c = 2, the discriminant is
b2 - 4ac = 1 -422 - 4132 122 = 16 - 24 = -8
Since b2 - 4ac 6 0, the equation has no real solution.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  9 3  a n d  9 9
•
Example 8
Solution
Put in standard form.
Compare to standard form.
•
SUMMARY
Procedure for Solving a Quadratic Equation
To solve a quadratic equation, first put it in standard form:
ax2 + bx + c = 0
Then:
Step 1:  Identify a, b, and c.
Step 2:  Evaluate the discriminant, b2 - 4ac.
Step 3:  (a)  If the discriminant is negative, the equation has no real solution.
	
(b)  If the discriminant is zero, the equation has a repeated real solution.
	
(c)  If the discriminant is positive, the equation has two distinct real solutions.
If you can easily spot factors, use the factoring method to solve the equation. Otherwise, use the quadratic formula 
or the method of completing the square.
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Factor x2 - 5x - 6. (pp. 971–972) 
	 2.	 Factor 2x2 - x - 3. (pp. 971–972) 
	 3.	 The solution set of the equation 1x - 32 13x + 52 = 0 is 
__________. (p. 948) 
	 4.	 True or False 2x2 = 0 x0 . (pp. 953–954) 
A.6  Assess Your Understanding

Section A.6  Solving Equations  995
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 5.	 An equation that is satisfied for every choice of the variable 
for which both sides are defined is called a(n)  
.
	 6.	 True or False  The solution of the equation 3x - 8 = 0 is 3
8.
	
7.	 True or False  Some equations have no solution. 
	 8.	 To solve the equation x2 + 5x = 0 by completing the 
	
	 square, you would  
 the number 
 to both sides.
	 9.	 The quantity b2 - 4ac is called the  
 of a 
quadratic equation. If it is  
, the equation has no 
real solution.
	 10.	 True or False Quadratic equations always have two real  
solutions. 
	 11.	 True or False  If the discriminant of a quadratic equation 
is positive, then the equation has two solutions that are  
negatives of one another. 
	 12.	 An admissible value for the variable that makes the equation 
a true statement is called a(n)               of the equation.
	
	 (a)	 identity    (b)  solution    (c)  degree    (d)  model 
	 13.	 A quadratic equation is sometimes called a     equation.
	
	 (a)	 first-degree     (b)  second-degree
	
	 (c)  third-degree    (d)  fourth-degree 
	 14.	 Which of the following quadratic equations is in standard 
form?
(a)	 x2 - 7x = 5          (b)  9 = x2
(c)  (x + 5)(x - 4) = 0    (d)  0 = 5x2 - 6x - 1 
Skill Building
In Problems 15–80, solve each equation.
	 15.	 3x = 21 
	
16.	 3x = - 24 
	
17.	 5x + 15 = 0 
	
18.	 3x + 18 = 0 
	 19.	 2x - 3 = 5 
	
20.	 3x + 4 = - 8 
	
21.	 1
3 x = 5
12 
	
22.	 2
3 x = 9
2 
	 23.	 6 - x = 2x + 9 
	
24.	 3 - 2x = 2 - x 
	
25.	 213 + 2x2 = 31x - 42	
26.	 312 - x2 = 2x - 1 
	 27.	 8x - 12x + 12 = 3x - 10	
28.	 5 - 12x - 12 = 10	
29.	 1
2 x - 4 = 3
4 x 
	
30.	 1 - 1
2 x = 5 
	 31.	 0.9t = 0.4 + 0.1t 
	
32.	 0.9t = 1 + t 
	
33.	 2
y + 4
y = 3 
	
34.	 4
y - 5 = 5
2y 
	 35.	 1x + 72 1x - 12 = 1x + 122 
	
36.	 1x + 22 1x - 32 = 1x - 322 
	
37.	 z1z2 + 12 = 3 + z3 
	 38.	 w14 - w22 = 8 - w3 
	
39.	 x2 = 9x 
	
40.	 x3 = x2 
	 41.	 t3 - 9t2 = 0 
	
42.	 4z3 - 8z2 = 0 
	
43.	
3
2x - 3 =
2
x + 5 
	 44.	
-2
x + 4 =
- 3
x + 1 
	
45.	 1x + 22 13x2 = 1x + 22 162 
	
46.	 1x - 52 12x2 = 1x - 52 142 
	 47.	
2
x - 2 =
3
x + 5 +
10
1x + 52 1x - 22   	
48.	
1
2x + 3 +
1
x - 1 =
1
12x + 32 1x - 12   	
49.	 0 2x0 = 6 
	 50.	 0 3x0 = 12 
	
51.	 0 2x + 30 = 5 
	
52.	 0 3x - 10 = 2 
	 53.	 0 1 - 4t0 = 5 
	
54.	 0 1 - 2z0 = 3 
	
55.	 0 - 2x0 = 8 
	
56.	 0 -x0 = 1 
	 57.	 0 - 20 x = 4 
	
58.	 0 30 x = 9 
	
59.	 0 x - 20 = -  1
2  	
60.	 0 2 - x0 = -1 
	 61.	 0 x2 - 40 = 0 
	
62.	 0 x2 - 90 = 0 
	
63.	 0 x2 - 2x0 = 3 
	
64.	 0 x2 + x0 = 12 
	 65.	 0 x2 + x - 10 = 1  	
66.	 0 x2 + 3x - 20 = 2  	
67.	 x2 = 4x 
	
68.	 x2 = -8x 
	 69.	 z2 + 4z - 12 = 0	
70.	 v2 + 7v + 12 = 0	
71.	 2x2 - 5x - 3 = 0	
72.	 3x2 + 5x + 2 = 0
	 73.	 x1x - 72 + 12 = 0	
74.	 x1x + 12 = 12 
	
75.	 4x2 + 9 = 12x 
	
76.	 25x2 + 16 = 40x 
	 77.	 6x - 5 = 6
x 
	
78.	 x + 12
x = 7 
	
79.	
41x - 22
x - 3
+ 3
x =
- 3
x1x - 32 	
80.	
5
x + 4 = 4 +
3
x - 2
In Problems 81–86, solve each equation by the Square Root Method.
	 81.	 x2 = 25 
	
82.	 x2 = 36 
	
83.	 1x - 122 = 4 
	 84.	 1x + 222 = 1 
	
85.	 12y + 322 = 9 
	
86.	 13x - 222 = 4 

996 
Appendix A  Review
In Problems 87–92, solve each equation by completing the square.
	 87.	 x2 + 4x = 21 
	
88.	 x2 - 6x = 13  	
89.	 x2 - 1
2 x - 3
16 = 0 
	 90.	 x2 + 2
3 x - 1
3 = 0 
	
91.	 3x2 + x - 1
2 = 0	
92.	 2x2 - 3x - 1 = 0
In Problems 93–104, find the real solutions, if any, of each equation. Use the quadratic formula.
	 93.	 x2 - 4x + 2 = 0	
94.	 x2 + 4x + 2 = 0	
95.	 x2 - 5x - 1 = 0
	 96.	 x2 + 5x + 3 = 0	
97.	 2x2 - 5x + 3 = 0	
98.	 2x2 + 5x + 3 = 0
	 99.	 4y2 - y + 2 = 0	
100.	 4t2 + t + 1 = 0	
101.	 4x2 = 1 - 2x
	102.	 2x2 = 1 - 2x	
103.	 x2 + 23 x - 3 = 0	
104.	 x2 + 22 x - 2 = 0
In Problems 105–110, use the discriminant to determine whether each quadratic equation has two unequal real solutions, a repeated real 
solution, or no real solution without solving the equation.
	105.	 x2 - 5x + 7 = 0	
106.	 x2 + 5x + 7 = 0	
107.	 9x2 - 30x + 25 = 0
	108.	 25x2 - 20x + 4 = 0	
109.	 3x2 + 5x - 8 = 0	
110.	 2x2 - 3x - 4 = 0
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 111–116, solve each equation. The letters a, b, and c are constants.
	111.	 ax - b = c, a ≠0 
	
112.	 1 - ax = b, a ≠0 
	113.	 x
a + x
b = c, a ≠0, b ≠0, a ≠- b
114.	 a
x + b
x = c, c ≠0 
	
115.	
1
x - a +
1
x + a =
2
x - 1 
	
116.	 b + c
x + a = b - c
x - a, c ≠0, a ≠0 
Problems 117–122 list some formulas that occur in applications. Solve each formula for the indicated variable.
	117.	 Electricity 1
R = 1
R1
+ 1
R2 for R 
	
118.	 Finance A = P11 + rt2 for r 
	119.	 Mechanics F = mv2
R  for R 
	
120.	 Chemistry PV = nRT for T 
	121.	 Mathematics S =
a
1 - r for r 
	
122.	 Mechanics v = - gt + v0 for t 
	123.	 Show that the sum of the roots of a quadratic equation is -  b
a .
	124.	 Show that the product of the roots of a quadratic equation is c
a.
	125.	 Find k such that the equation kx2 + x + k = 0 has a repeated 
real solution.
	126.	 Find k such that the equation x2 - kx + 4 = 0 has a repeated 
real solution. 
	127.	 Show 
that 
the 
real 
solutions 
of 
the 
equation 
ax2 + bx + c = 0 are the negatives of the real solutions of 
the equation ax2 - bx + c = 0. Assume that b2 - 4ac Ú 0.
	128.	 Show 
that 
the 
real 
solutions 
of 
the 
equation  
ax2 + bx + c = 0 are the reciprocals of the real solutions of 
the equation cx2 + bx + a = 0. Assume that b2 - 4ac Ú 0.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	129.	 Which of the following pairs of equations are equivalent? 
Explain. 
(a)	 x2 = 9; x = 3
(b)	 x = 29; x = 3
(c)	 1x - 12 1x - 22 = 1x - 122; x - 2 = x - 1
	130.	 The equation
5
x + 3 + 3 = 8 + x
x + 3
	
	 has no solution, yet when we go through the process of  
solving it, we obtain x = - 3. Write a brief paragraph to  
explain what causes this to happen.

Section A.7  Complex Numbers; Quadratic Equations in the Complex Number System   997
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 1x - 62 1x + 12            2.  12x - 32 1x + 12           3.  e -  5
3, 3f                   4.  True
Complex Numbers
One property of a real number is that its square is nonnegative. For example, there 
is no real number x for which
x2 = -1
To remedy this situation, we introduce a new number called the imaginary unit.
A.7	 Complex Numbers; Quadratic Equations  
in the Complex Number System*
	
OBJECTIVES	 1  Add, Subtract, Multiply, and Divide Complex Numbers  (p. 998)
	
	 	2  Solve Quadratic Equations in the Complex Number System  (p. 1002)
This should not surprise you. If our universe were to consist only of integers, 
there would be no number x for which 2x = 1. This was remedied by introducing
numbers such as 1
2 and 2
3, the rational numbers. If our universe were to consist only 
of rational numbers, there would be no x whose square equals 2. That is, there would 
be no number x for which x2 = 2. To remedy this, we introduced numbers such as 
12 and 2
3 5, the irrational numbers. Recall that the real numbers consist of the 
rational numbers and the irrational numbers. Now, if our universe were to consist 
only of real numbers, then there would be no number x whose square is -1. To 
remedy this, we introduce the number i, whose square is -1.
 The imaginary unit, which we denote by i, is the number whose square is -1. 
That is,
i2 = -1
Definition
*This section may be omitted without any loss of continuity.
	131.	 Find an equation that has no solution and give it to a fellow 
student to solve. Ask the fellow student to write a critique of 
your equation.
	132.	 Describe three ways you might solve a quadratic equation. 
State your preferred method; explain why you chose it.
	133.	 Explain the benefits of evaluating the discriminant of a  
quadratic equation before attempting to solve it.
	134.	 Find three quadratic equations: one having two distinct  
solutions, one having no real solution, and one having  
exactly one real solution.
	135.	 The word quadratic seems to imply four (quad), yet a  
quadratic equation is an equation that involves a polynomial 
of degree 2. Investigate the origin of the term quadratic as 
it is used in the expression quadratic equation. Write a brief 
essay on your findings.

998 
Appendix A  Review
In the progression outlined, each time we encountered a situation that was  
unsuitable, a new number system was introduced to remedy the situation. The number 
system that results from introducing the number i is called the complex number system.
 Complex numbers are numbers of the form a + bi, where a and b are real 
numbers. The real number a is called the real part of the number a + bi; the 
real number b is called the imaginary part of a + bi; and i is the imaginary  
unit, so i2 = -1.
Definition
For example, the complex number -5 + 6i has the real part -5 and the  
imaginary part 6.
When a complex number is written in the form a + bi, where a and b are real 
numbers, it is in standard form. However, if the imaginary part of a complex number 
is negative, such as in the complex number 3 + 1 -22i, we agree to write it instead 
in the form 3 - 2i.
Also, the complex number a + 0i is usually written merely as a. This serves to 
remind us that the real numbers are a subset of the complex numbers. Similarly, the 
complex number 0 + bi is usually written as bi. Sometimes the complex number bi 
is called a pure imaginary number.
Add, Subtract, Multiply, and Divide Complex Numbers
Equality, addition, subtraction, and multiplication of complex numbers are defined so 
as to preserve the familiar rules of algebra for real numbers. Two complex numbers 
are equal if and only if their real parts are equal and their imaginary parts are equal.
1
Equality of Complex Numbers
	
a + bi = c + di  if and only if  a = c and b = d	
(1)
Sum of Complex Numbers
	
1a + bi2 + 1c + di2 = 1a + c2 + 1b + d2i	
(2)
Two complex numbers are added by forming the complex number whose real 
part is the sum of the real parts and whose imaginary part is the sum of the imaginary 
parts.
To subtract two complex numbers, use this rule:
Difference of Complex Numbers
	
1a + bi2 - 1c + di2 = 1a - c2 + 1b - d2i	
(3)
Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers
(a)	 13 + 5i2 + 1 -2 + 3i2 = 33 + 1 -22 4 + 15 + 32i = 1 + 8i
(b)	 16 + 4i2 - 13 + 6i2 = 16 - 32 + 14 - 62i = 3 + 1 -22i = 3 - 2i
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 5
Example 1
•

Section A.7  Complex Numbers; Quadratic Equations in the Complex Number System   999
Products of complex numbers are calculated as illustrated in Example 2.
Multiplying Complex Numbers
 15 + 3i2 # 12 + 7i2 =  5 # 12 + 7i2 + 3i12 + 7i2 = 10 + 35i + 6i + 21i2
	
c	
c
	
Distributive Property	
Distributive Property
	
   = 10 + 41i + 211 -12
	
c
	
i2 = -1
	
    = -11 + 41i
Based on the procedure of Example 2, the product of two complex numbers is 
defined as follows:
Example 2
•
Product of Complex Numbers
	
1a + bi2 # 1c + di2 = 1ac - bd2 + 1ad + bc2i	
(4)
Do not bother to memorize formula (4). Instead, whenever it is necessary to 
multiply two complex numbers, follow the usual rules for multiplying two binomials, 
as in Example 2, remembering that i2 = -1. For example,
 12i2 12i2 = 4i2 = 41 -12 = -4
 12 + i2 11 - i2 = 2 - 2i + i - i2 = 3 - i
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 1
Algebraic properties for addition and multiplication, such as the commutative, 
associative, and distributive properties, hold for complex numbers. The property 
that every nonzero complex number has a multiplicative inverse, or reciprocal,  
requires a closer look.
Note  The conjugate of a complex number 
can be found by changing the sign of the 
imaginary part.	
■
 If z = a + bi is a complex number, then its conjugate, denoted by z, is defined as
z = a + bi = a - bi
Definition
For example, 2 + 3i = 2 - 3i and -6 - 2i = -6 + 2i.
Multiplying a Complex Number by Its Conjugate
Find the product of the complex number z = 3 + 4i and its conjugate z.
 Since z = 3 - 4i, we have
zz = 13 + 4i2 13 - 4i2 = 9 - 12i + 12i - 16i2 = 9 + 16 = 25
The result obtained in Example 3 has an important generalization.
Example 3
Solution
•
The product of a complex number and its conjugate is a nonnegative real number. 
That is, if z = a + bi, then
	
zz = a2 + b2	
(5)
Theorem

1000 
Appendix A  Review
Proof  If z = a + bi, then
	
zz = 1a + bi2 1a - bi2 = a2 - 1bi22 = a2 - b2
 i2 = a2 + b2	
■
To express the reciprocal of a nonzero complex number z in standard form, 
multiply the numerator and denominator of 1
z by z. That is, if z = a + bi is a nonzero
complex number, then
 
1
a + bi = 1
z = 1
z # z
z = z
zz = a - bi
a2 + b2
	
 c
	
Use (5).
	
 =
a
a2 + b2 -
b
a2 + b2 i
Writing the Reciprocal of a Complex Number in Standard Form
Write 
1
3 + 4i in standard form a + bi; that is, find the reciprocal of 3 + 4i.
 The idea is to multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate of 3 + 4i, 
that is, by the complex number 3 - 4i. The result is
1
3 + 4i =
1
3 + 4i # 3 - 4i
3 - 4i = 3 - 4i
9 + 16 = 3
25 - 4
25
 i
To express the quotient of two complex numbers in standard form, multiply the 
numerator and denominator of the quotient by the conjugate of the denominator.
Writing the Quotient of Two Complex Numbers in Standard Form
Write each of the following in standard form.
(a)	 1 + 4i
5 - 12i	
(b)  2 - 3i
4 - 3i
 (a)	  1 + 4i
5 - 12i = 1 + 4i
5 - 12i # 5 + 12i
5 + 12i = 5 + 12i + 20i + 48i2
25 + 144
 
	
	
 = -43 + 32i
169
= -  43
169 + 32
169
 i
(b)	  2 - 3i
4 - 3i = 2 - 3i
4 - 3i # 4 + 3i
4 + 3i = 8 + 6i - 12i - 9i2
16 + 9
 = 17 - 6i
25
= 17
25 - 6
25
 i
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
Writing Other Expressions in Standard Form
If z = 2 - 3i and w = 5 + 2i, write each of the following expressions in standard 
form.
(a)	 z
w	
(b)  z + w	
(c)  z + z
Example 4
Solution
•
Example 5
Solution
•
Example 6

Section A.7  Complex Numbers; Quadratic Equations in the Complex Number System   1001
 (a)	 z
w = z # w
w # w = 12 - 3i2 15 - 2i2
15 + 2i2 15 - 2i2 = 10 - 4i - 15i + 6i2
25 + 4
	
	
= 4 - 19i
29
= 4
29 - 19
29
 i
(b)	 z + w = 12 - 3i2 + 15 + 2i2 = 7 - i = 7 + i
(c)	 z + z = 12 - 3i2 + 12 + 3i2 = 4
The conjugate of a complex number has certain general properties that will be 
useful later.
For a real number a = a + 0i, the conjugate is a = a + 0i = a - 0i = a.
Solution
•
The conjugate of a real number is the real number itself.
Theorem
Other properties that are direct consequences of the definition of the conjugate 
are given next. In each statement, z and w represent complex numbers.
The conjugate of the conjugate of a complex number is the complex number 
itself.
	
1z2 = z	
(6)
The conjugate of the sum of two complex numbers equals the sum of their 
conjugates.
	
z + w = z + w	
(7)
The conjugate of the product of two complex numbers equals the product of 
their conjugates.
	
z # w = z # w	
(8) 
Theorem
The proofs of equations (6), (7), and (8) are left as exercises.
Powers of i
The powers of i follow a pattern that is useful to know.
	
i1 = i	
i5 = i4 # i = 1 # i = i
	
i2 = -1	
i6 = i4 # i2 = -1
	
i3 = i2 # i = -1 # i = -i	
i7 = i4 # i3 = -i
	
i4 = i2 # i2 = 1 -12 1-12 = 1	
i8 = i4 # i4 = 1
And so on. The powers of i repeat with every fourth power.
Evaluating Powers of i
(a)	 i27 = i24 # i3 = 1i426 # i3 = 16 # i3 = -i
(b)	 i101 = i100 # i1 = 1i4225 # i = 125 # i = i
Example 7
•

1002 
Appendix A  Review
Writing the Power of a Complex Number in Standard Form
Write 12 + i23 in standard form.
 Use the special product formula for 1x + a23.
1x + a23 = x3 + 3ax2 + 3a2
 x + a3
Using this special product formula,
	
 12 + i23 = 23 + 3 # i # 22 + 3 # i2 # 2 + i3
	
 = 8 + 12i + 61 -12 + 1 -i2
	
 = 2 + 11i
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 3
Solve Quadratic Equations in the Complex Number System
Quadratic equations with a negative discriminant have no real number solution. 
However, if we extend our number system to allow complex numbers, quadratic 
equations will always have a solution. Since the solution to a quadratic equation 
involves the square root of the discriminant, we begin with a discussion of square 
roots of negative numbers.
Example 8
Solution
•
2
Note  Another way to find (2 + i)3 is 
to multiply out (2 + i)2 (2 + i).	
■
Warning  In writing 1- N = 1N i, 
be sure to place i outside the 1   
symbol.	
■
 If N is a positive real number, we define the principal square root of −N,  
denoted by 1-N, as
2-N = 2N i
where i is the imaginary unit and i2 = -1.
Definition
Evaluating the Square Root of a Negative Number
(a)	 1-1 = 11 i = i
(b)	 1-4 = 14 i = 2i
(c)	 1-8 = 18 i = 212 i
Solving Equations
Solve each equation in the complex number system.
(a)	 x2 = 4	
(b)  x2 = -9
 (a)	 x2 = 4 
x = { 24 = {2
	
The equation has two solutions, -2 and 2. The solution set is 5 -2, 26.
(b)	 x2 = -9 
x = { 2-9 = { 29 i = {3i
	
The equation has two solutions, -3i and 3i. The solution set is 5 -3i, 3i6.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  5 1  a n d  5 5
Example 9
•
Example 10
Solution
•

Section A.7  Complex Numbers; Quadratic Equations in the Complex Number System   1003
Warning  When working with square roots of negative numbers, do not set the square 
root of a product equal to the product of the square roots (which can be done with positive  
real numbers). To see why, look at this calculation: We know that 1100 = 10. However, it is also true 
that 100 = 1- 252 1- 42, so
 10 = 2100 = 21- 252 1- 42 = 2- 252- 4 = 1 225 i2 1 24 i2 = 15i2 12i2 = 10i 2 = - 10
	
 c
	
Here is the error.	
 ■
Because we have defined the square root of a negative number, we can now 
restate the quadratic formula without restriction.
Solving a Quadratic Equation in the Complex Number System
Solve the equation x2 - 4x + 8 = 0 in the complex number system.
 Here a = 1, b = -4, c = 8, and b2 - 4ac = 1 -422 - 4112182 = -16. Using  
equation (9), we find that
x =
- 1-42 { 2-16
2112
= 4 { 216 i
2
= 4 { 4i
2
= 2(2 { 2i)
2
= 2 { 2i
The equation has two solutions: 2 - 2i and 2 + 2i. 
The solution set is 52 - 2i, 2 + 2i6.
Check:	  2 + 2i: 12 + 2i22 - 412 + 2i2 + 8 = 4 +  8i + 4i2 -  8 -  8i +  8 
= 4 + 4i2
 = 4 - 4 = 0
 2 - 2i: 12 - 2i22 - 412 - 2i2 + 8 = 4 -  8i + 4i2 -  8 +  8i +  8 
 = 4 - 4 = 0
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
The discriminant b2 - 4ac of a quadratic equation still serves as a way to 
determine the character of the solutions.
Example 11
Solution
•
Quadratic Formula
In the complex number system, the solutions of the quadratic equation 
ax2 + bx + c = 0, where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠0, are given 
by the formula
	
x = -b { 2b2 - 4ac
2a
	
(9) 
Theorem
Character of the Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
In the complex number system, consider a quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0 
with real coefficients.
	 1.	 If b2 - 4ac 7 0, the equation has two unequal real solutions.
	 2.	 If b2 - 4ac = 0, the equation has a repeated real solution, a double root.
	 3.	 If b2 - 4ac 6 0, the equation has two complex solutions that are not real. 
The solutions are conjugates of each other.

1004 
Appendix A  Review
The third conclusion in the display is a consequence of the fact that if 
b2 - 4ac = -N 6 0, then by the quadratic formula, the solutions are
x = -b + 2b2 - 4ac
2a
= -b + 2-N
2a
= -b + 2N i
2a
= -b
2a + 2N
2a
 i
and
x = -b - 2b2 - 4ac
2a
= -b - 2-N
2a
= -b - 2N i
2a
= -b
2a - 2N
2a
 i
which are conjugates of each other.
Determining the Character of the Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
Without solving, determine the character of the solutions of each equation.
(a)	 3x2 + 4x + 5 = 0	
(b)  2x2 + 4x + 1 = 0	
(c)  9x2 - 6x + 1 = 0
 (a)	 Here a = 3, b = 4, and c = 5, so b2 - 4ac = 16 - 4132 152 = -44. The 
solutions are two complex numbers that are not real and are conjugates of each 
other.
(b)	 Here a = 2, b = 4, and c = 1, so b2 - 4ac = 16 - 8 = 8. The solutions are 
two unequal real numbers.
(c)	 Here a = 9, b = -6, and c = 1, so b2 - 4ac = 36 - 4192 112 = 0. The  
solution is a repeated real number—that is, a double root.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 5
Example 12
Solution
•
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 True or False  The square of a complex number is  
sometimes negative. 
	 2.	 12 + i2 12 - i2 =   
.
	 3.	 True or False  In the complex number system, a quadratic 
equation has four solutions. 
	 4.	 In the complex number 5 + 2i, the number 5 is called the 
 
 part; the number 2 is called the  
 part; 
the number i is called the  
  
.
	 5.	 True or False  The conjugate of 2 + 5i is - 2 - 5i. 
	 6.	 True or False  All real numbers are complex numbers. 
	 7.	 True or False   If 2 - 3i is a solution of a quadratic equation 
with real coefficients, then - 2 + 3i is also a solution. 
	 8.	 Which of the following is the principal square root of - 4?
(a)	 - 2i    (b)  2i    (c)  - 2    (d)  2 
	 9.	 Which operation involving complex numbers requires the 
use of a conjugate?
(a)	 division      (b)  multiplication
(c)	 subtraction    (d)  addition 
	 10.	 Powers of i repeat every     power.
(a)	 second    (b)  third    (c)  fourth    (d)  fifth 
A.7  Assess Your Understanding  
Skill Building
In Problems 11–48, perform the indicated operation, and write each expression in the standard form a + bi.
	 11.	 12 - 3i2 + 16 + 8i2  	
12.	 14 + 5i2 + 1- 8 + 2i2	
13.	 1- 3 + 2i2 - 14 - 4i2	
14.	 13 - 4i2 - 1-3 - 4i2 
	 15.	  12 - 5i2 - 18 + 6i2	
16.	 1- 8 + 4i2 - 12 - 2i2	
17.	 312 - 6i2 
	
18.	 - 412 + 8i2 
	 19.	 2i12 - 3i2 
	
20.	 3i1- 3 + 4i2 
	
21.	  13 - 4i2 12 + i2 
	 22.	 15 + 3i2 12 - i2 
	 23.	 1-6 + i2 1- 6 - i2 
	
24.	 1- 3 + i2 13 + i2 
	
25.	
10
3 - 4i 
	
26.	
13
5 - 12i 
	 27.	 2 + i
i
 
	
28.	 2 - i
- 2i  
	
29.	 6 - i
1 + i 
	
30.	 2 + 3i
1 - i  
	 31.	 a1
2 + 23
2
 ib
2
 
	
32.	 a 23
2
- 1
2
 ib
2
 
	
33.	 11 + i22 
	
34.	 11 - i22 

Section A.7  Complex Numbers; Quadratic Equations in the Complex Number System   1005
	 35.	 i23 
	
36.	 i14 
	
37.	 i-15  	
38.	 i-23 
	 39.  i6 - 5 
	 40.	 4 + i3 
	
41.	 6i3 - 4i5 
	
42.	 4i3 - 2i2 + 1 
	
43.	  11 + i23 
	 44.  13i24 + 1 
	 45.	 i711 + i22  	
46.	 2i411 + i22  	
47.	 i6 + i4 + i2 + 1  	
48.	 i7 + i5 + i3 + i 
In Problems 49–54, perform the indicated operations, and express your answer in the form a + bi.
	 49.	 2- 4 
	
50.	 2- 9 
	
51.	  2- 25 
	 52.	 2- 64 
	
53.	 213 + 4i2 14i - 32 
	
54.	 214 + 3i2 13i - 42 
In Problems 55–74, solve each equation in the complex number system.
	 55.	  x2 + 4 = 0 
	
56.	 x2 - 4 = 0 
	
57.	 x2 - 16 = 0 
	
58.	 x2 + 25 = 0 
	 59.	 x2 - 6x + 13 = 0	
60.	 x2 + 4x + 8 = 0	
61.	  x2 - 6x + 10 = 0	
62.	 x2 - 2x + 5 = 0
	 63.	 8x2 - 4x + 1 = 0	
64.	 10x2 + 6x + 1 = 0	
65.	 5x2 + 1 = 2x	
66.	 13x2 + 1 = 6x
	 67.	 x2 + x + 1 = 0	
68.	 x2 - x + 1 = 0	
69.	 x3 - 8 = 0	
70.	 x3 + 27 = 0
	 71.	 x4 = 16 
	
72.	 x4 = 1 
	
73.	 x4 + 13x2 + 36 = 0	
74.	 x4 + 3x2 - 4 = 0
In Problems 75–80, without solving, determine the character of the solutions of each equation in the complex number system.
	 75.	  3x2 - 3x + 4 = 0	
76.	 2x2 - 4x + 1 = 0	
77.	 2x2 + 3x = 4
	 78.	 x2 + 6 = 2x	
79.	 9x2 - 12x + 4 = 0	
80.	 4x2 + 12x + 9 = 0
	 81.	 2 + 3i is a solution of a quadratic equation with real  
coefficients. Find the other solution. 
	 82.	 4 - i is a solution of a quadratic equation with real  
coefficients. Find the other solution. 
In Problems 83–86, z = 3 - 4i and w = 8 + 3i. Write each expression in the standard form a + bi.
	 83.	 z + z  	
84.	 w - w 
	
85.	 zz 
	
86.	 z - w 
Applications and Extensions
	 87.	 Electrical Circuits  The impedance Z, in ohms, of a circuit 
element is defined as the ratio of the phasor voltage V, in 
volts, across the element to the phasor current I, in amperes, 
	
	 through the elements. That is, Z = V
I . If the voltage across a 
	
	 circuit element is 18 +  i volts and the current through the  
element is 3 - 4 i amperes, determine the impedance. 
	 88.	 Parallel Circuits  In an ac circuit with two parallel pathways,  
the total impedance Z, in ohms, satisfies the formula
	
	 1
Z = 1
Z1
+ 1
Z2
, where Z1 is the impedance of the first pathway
	
	 and Z2 is the impedance of the second pathway. Determine 
the total impedance if the impedances of the two pathways 
are Z1 = 2 + i ohms and Z2 = 4 - 3i ohms. 
	 89.	 Use z = a + bi to show that z + z = 2a and z - z = 2bi.
	 90.	 Use z = a + bi to show that z = z.
	 91.	 Use z = a + bi and w = c + di to show
	
	 that z + w =z + w.
	 92.	 Use z = a + bi and w = c + di to show that z # w = z # w.
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 93.	 Explain to a friend how you would add two complex  
numbers and how you would multiply two complex numbers.  
Explain any differences between the two explanations.
	 94.	 Write a brief paragraph that compares the method used to 
rationalize the denominator of a radical expression and the 
method used to write the quotient of two complex numbers 
in standard form.
	 95.	 Use an Internet search engine to investigate the origins of 
complex numbers. Write a paragraph describing what you 
find, and present it to the class.
	 96.	 Explain how the method of multiplying two complex  
numbers is related to multiplying two binomials.
	 97.	 What Went Wrong?  A student multiplied 2-9 and 2-9 
as follows:
 2- 9 # 2- 9 = 2(- 9)(- 9)
 = 281
 = 9
	
	 The instructor marked the problem incorrect. Why?

1006 
Appendix A  Review
A.8	 Problem Solving: Interest, Mixture, Uniform Motion,  
Constant Rate Job Applications
	
Objectives	 1  Translate Verbal Descriptions into Mathematical Expressions (p. 1006)
	
	 	2  Solve Interest Problems  (p. 1007)
	
	 	3  Solve Mixture Problems  (p. 1008)
	
	 	4  Solve Uniform Motion Problems  (p. 1009)
	
	 	5  Solve Constant Rate Job Problems  (p. 1011)
Applied (word) problems do not come in the form “Solve the equation .c” Instead, 
they supply information using words, a verbal description of the real problem. So, to 
solve applied problems, we must be able to translate the verbal description into the 
language of mathematics. This can be done by using variables to represent unknown 
quantities and then finding relationships (such as equations) that involve these  
variables. The process of doing all this is called mathematical modeling. An equation 
that describes a relationship among the variables is called a model.
Any solution to the mathematical problem must be checked against the  
mathematical problem, the verbal description, and the real problem. See Figure 23 
for an illustration of the modeling process.
Figure 23  
The modeling process
Real 
problem
Verbal
description
Language of
mathematics
Mathematical 
problem
Solution
Check
Check
Check
The icon                  is a Model It! icon.
It indicates that the discussion  
or problem involves modeling.
Translate Verbal Descriptions into Mathematical Expressions
Translating Verbal Descriptions into Mathematical Expressions
(a)	 For uniform motion, the average speed of an object equals the distance traveled 
divided by the time required.
Translation: If r is the speed, d the distance, and t the time, then r = d
t .
(b)	 Let x denote a number.
	
The number 5 times as large as x is 5x.
	
The number 3 less than x is x - 3.
	
The number that exceeds x by 4 is x + 4.
	
The number that, when added to x, gives 5 is 5 - x.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9
Always check the units used to measure the variables of an applied problem. 
In Example 1(a), if r is measured in miles per hour, then the distance d must be 
1
Example 1
•

Section A.8  Problem Solving: Interest, Mixture, Uniform Motion, Constant Rate Job Applications   1007
Steps for Solving Applied Problems
Step 1:	 Read the problem carefully, perhaps two or three times. Pay particular 
attention to the question being asked in order to identify what you are 
looking for. Identify any relevant formulas you may need (d = rt, 
A = pr 2, etc.). If you can, determine realistic possibilities for the answer.
Step 2:	 Assign a letter (variable) to represent what you are looking for, and if 
necessary, express any remaining unknown quantities in terms of this 
variable.
Step 3:	 Make a list of all the known facts, and translate them into mathematical 
expressions. These may take the form of an equation or an inequality 
involving the variable. If possible, draw an appropriately labeled 
diagram to assist you. Sometimes, creating a table or chart helps.
Step 4:	 Solve for the variable, and then answer the question.
Step 5:	 Check the answer with the facts in the problem. If it agrees, 
congratulations! If it does not agree, try again.
Solve Interest Problems
Interest is money paid for the use of money. The total amount borrowed (whether 
by an individual from a bank in the form of a loan, or by a bank from an  
individual in the form of a savings account) is called the principal. The rate of  
interest, expressed as a percent, is the amount charged for the use of the principal 
for a given period of time, usually on a yearly (that is, per annum) basis.
2
Simple Interest Formula
If a principal of P dollars is borrowed for a period of t years at a per annum 
interest rate r, expressed as a decimal, the interest I charged is
	
I = Prt	
(1)
Interest charged according to formula (1) is called simple interest. When using 
formula (1), be sure to express r as a decimal. For example, if the rate of interest is 
4%, then r = 0.04.
Finance: Computing Interest on a Loan
Suppose that Juanita borrows $500 for 6 months at the simple interest rate of 9% 
per annum. What is the interest that Juanita will be charged on the loan? How much 
does Juanita owe after 6 months?
 The rate of interest is given per annum, so the actual time that the money is borrowed 
must be expressed in years. The interest charged would be the principal, $500, times
the rate of interest (9, = 0.09), times the time in years, 1
2
 :
Interest charged = I = Prt = 15002 10.092 a1
2b = +22.50
After 6 months, Juanita will owe what she borrowed plus the interest:
+500 + +22.50 = +522.50
Example 2
Solution
•
expressed in miles, and the time t must be expressed in hours. It is a good practice 
to check units to be sure that they are consistent and make sense.

1008 
Appendix A  Review
Financial Planning
Candy has $70,000 to invest and wants an annual return of $2800, which requires an  
overall rate of return of 4%. She can invest in a safe, government-insured certificate 
of deposit, but it pays only 2%. To obtain 4%, she agrees to invest some of her money 
in noninsured corporate bonds paying 7%. How much should be placed in each  
investment to achieve her goal?
 Step 1:  The question is asking for two dollar amounts: the principal to invest in the 
corporate bonds and the principal to invest in the certificate of deposit.
Step 2:  Let b represent the amount (in dollars) to be invested in the bonds. Then 
70,000 - b is the amount that will be invested in the certificate. (Do you  
see why?)
Step 3:  We set up a table:
 
Principal ($)
Rate
Time (yr)
Interest ($)
Bonds
b
7% = 0.07
1
0.07b
Certificate
70,000 - b
2% = 0.02
1
0.02(70,000 - b)
Total
70,000
4% = 0.04
1
0.04(70,000) = 2800
Since the combined interest from the investments is equal to the total interest,  
we have
Bond interest + Certificate interest = Total interest
0.07b + 0.02170,000 - b2  = 2800
(Note that the units are consistent: the unit is dollars on each side.)
Step 4:  0.07b + 1400 - 0.02b = 2800
 0.05b = 1400
 b = 28,000
Candy should place $28,000 in the bonds and +70,000 - +28,000 = +42,000 
in the certificate.
Step 5:  The interest on the bonds after 1 year is 0.071+28,0002 = +1960; the 
interest on the certificate after 1 year is 0.021+42,0002 = +840. The total 
annual interest is $2800, the required amount.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 9
Solve Mixture Problems
Oil refineries sometimes produce gasoline that is a blend of two or more types of 
fuel; bakeries occasionally blend two or more types of flour for their bread. These 
problems are referred to as mixture problems because they combine two or more 
quantities to form a mixture.
Blending Coffees
The manager of a Starbucks store decides to experiment with a new blend of coffee. 
She will mix some B grade Colombian coffee that sells for $5 per pound with some 
A grade Arabica coffee that sells for $10 per pound to get 100 pounds of the new 
blend. The selling price of the new blend is to be $7 per pound, and there is to be no 
difference in revenue between selling the new blend and selling the other types. How 
many pounds of the B grade Colombian coffee and how many pounds of the A grade 
Arabica coffees are required?
 Let c represent the number of pounds of the B grade Colombian coffee. Then 
100 - c equals the number of pounds of the A grade Arabica coffee. See Figure 24.
Example 3
Solution
Simplify,
Divide both sides by 0.05.
•
3
Example 4
Solution

Section A.8  Problem Solving: Interest, Mixture, Uniform Motion, Constant Rate Job Applications   1009
Since there is to be no difference in revenue between selling the A and B grades 
separately and selling the blend, we have
Figure 24 
$5 per pound
+
B Grade
Colombian
c pounds
+
$10 per pound
=
A Grade
Arabica
100 − c pounds
=
$7 per pound
Blend
100 pounds
Revenue from B grade     +     Revenue from A grade     =        Revenue from blend
ePrice per pound
of B grade
f ePounds of
B grade f + ePrice per pound
of A grade
f ePounds of
A grade f = ePrice per pound
of blend
f ePounds of
blend
f
	
+5	
# 	
c	
+ 	
+10	
# 	 1100 - c2	 = 	
+7	
# 	
100
Now solve the equation:
 5c + 101100 - c2 = 700
 5c + 1000 - 10c = 700
 -5c = -300
 c = 60
The manager should blend 60 pounds of B grade Colombian coffee with 
100 - 60 = 40 pounds of A grade Arabica coffee to get the desired blend.
Check:	The 60 pounds of B grade coffee would sell for 1+52 1602 = +300, and 
the 40 pounds of A grade coffee would sell for 1+102 1402 = +400; the 
total revenue, $700, equals the revenue obtained from selling the blend, 
as desired.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 3
Solve Uniform Motion Problems
Objects that move at a constant speed are said to be in uniform motion. When the 
average speed of an object is known, it can be interpreted as that object’s constant 
speed. For example, a bicyclist traveling at an average speed of 25 miles per hour 
can be considered in uniform motion with a constant speed of 25 miles per hour.
•
4
Uniform Motion Formula
If an object moves at an average speed (rate) r, the distance d covered in  
time t is given by the formula
	
d = rt	
(2)
That is, Distance = Rate # Time.
Physics: Uniform Motion
Tanya, who is a long-distance runner, runs at an average speed of 8 miles per hour 
(mi>h). Two hours after Tanya leaves your house, you leave in your Honda and  
follow the same route. If your average speed is 40 mi>h, how long will it be before 
you catch up to Tanya? How far will each of you be from your home?
Example 5

1010 
Appendix A  Review
 Refer to Figure 25. We use t to represent the time (in hours) that it takes the 
Honda to catch up to Tanya. When this occurs, the total time elapsed for Tanya is  
t + 2 hours because she left 2 hours earlier.
Solution
Figure 25 
Time t
2 h
t 5 0
Time t
t 5 0
Set up the following table:
 
Rate  
mi/h
Time  
h
Distance  
mi
Tanya
8
t + 2
8(t + 2)
Honda
40
t
40t
The distance traveled is the same for both, which leads to the equation
 81t + 22 = 40t
 8t + 16 = 40t
 32t = 16
 t = 1
2
  hour
It will take the Honda 1
2 hour to catch up to Tanya. Each will have gone 20 miles.
Check:	In 2.5 hours, Tanya travels a distance of 12.52 182 = 20 miles. In 1
2 hour, 
the Honda travels a distance of a1
2b 1402 = 20 miles.
Physics: Uniform Motion
A motorboat heads upstream a distance of 24 miles on a river whose current is running 
at 3 miles per hour (mi/h). The trip up and back takes 6 hours. Assuming that the 
motorboat maintained a constant speed relative to the water, what was its speed?
 See Figure 26. Use r to represent the constant speed of the motorboat  
relative to the water. Then the true speed going upstream is r - 3 mi/h, and the 
true speed going downstream is r + 3 mi/h. Since Distance = Rate # Time, then 
Time = Distance
Rate
. Set up a table.
 
Rate  
mi/h
Distance 
mi
time
h
= Distance
Rate
Upstream
r - 3
24
24
r - 3
Downstream
r + 3
24
24
r + 3
•
Example 6
Solution
Figure 26 
24 miles
r 2 3 mi/h
r 1 3 mi/h

Section A.8  Problem Solving: Interest, Mixture, Uniform Motion, Constant Rate Job Applications   1011
The total time up and back is 6 hours, which gives the equation
 24
r - 3 +
24
r + 3 = 6
 241r + 32 + 241r - 32
1r - 32 1r + 32
= 6
 
Add the quotients on the left.
 48r
r 2 - 9 = 6
 
Simplify.
 48r = 61r 2 - 92 
Multiply both sides by r2 - 9.
 6r 2 - 48r - 54 = 0
 
Place in standard form.
 r 2 - 8r - 9 = 0
 
Divide by 6.
 1r - 92 1r + 12 = 0
 
Factor.
 r = 9 or r = -1
 
Apply the Zero-Product Property and solve.
Discard the solution r = -1 mi/h and conclude that the speed of the motorboat 
relative to the water is 9 mi/h.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  2 9
Solve Constant Rate Job Problems
Here we look at jobs that are performed at a constant rate. The assumption is that 
if a job can be done in t units of time, then 1
t  of the job is done in 1 unit of time. In 
other words, if a job takes 4 hours, then 1
4 of the job is done in 1 hour.
Working Together to Do a Job
At 10 am Danny is asked by his father to weed the garden. From past experience, Danny 
knows that this will take him 4 hours, working alone. His older brother Mike, when it 
is his turn to do this job, requires 6 hours. Since Mike wants to go golfing with Danny 
and has a reservation for 1 pm, he agrees to help Danny. Assuming no gain or loss of 
efficiency, when will they finish if they work together? Can they make the golf date?
 Set up Table 1. In 1 hour, Danny does 1
4 of the job, and in 1 hour, Mike does 1
6 of the 
job. Let t be the time (in hours) that it takes them to do the job together. In 1 hour, 
then, 1
t  of the job is completed. Reason as follows:
aPart done by Danny
in 1 hour
b + aPart done by Mike
in 1 hour
b = aPart done together
in 1 hour
b
From Table 1,
 1
4 + 1
6 = 1
t  
The model.
 3
12 + 2
12 = 1
t  
LCD = 12 on the left.
 5
12 = 1
t  
Simplify.
 5t = 12 
Multiply both sides by 12t.
 t = 12
5  
Divide each side by 5.
Working together, Mike and Danny can do the job in 12
5  hours, or 2 hours, 24 minutes. 
They should make the golf date, since they will finish at 12:24 pm.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 5
•
5
Example 7
Solution
•
Table 1 
 
 
Hours to 
Do Job
Part of  
Job Done 
in 1 Hour
Danny
4
1
4
Mike
6
1
6
Together
t
1
t

1012 
Appendix A  Review
The next example is one that you will probably see again in a slightly different form 
if you study calculus.
Constructing a Box
From each corner of a square piece of sheet metal, remove a square of side 
9 centimeters. Turn up the edges to form an open box. If the box is to hold 144 cubic 
centimeters 1cm32, what should be the dimensions of the piece of sheet metal?
 We use Figure 27 as a guide. We have labeled by x the length of a side of the square 
piece of sheet metal. The box will be of height 9 centimeters, and its square base will 
measure x - 18 on each side. The volume V 1Length * Width * Height2 of the 
box is therefore
V = 1x - 182 1x - 182 # 9 = 91x - 1822
Example 8
Solution
Figure 27 
Volume  9(x  18)(x  18)
x cm
x  18
x  18
x  18
x  18
x cm
9 cm
9 cm
9 cm
9 cm
9 cm
9 cm
9 cm
9 cm
9 cm
Since the volume of the box is to be 144 cm3, we have
 91x - 1822 = 144
 1x - 1822 = 16
 x - 18 = {4
 x = 18 { 4
 x = 22 or x = 14
We discard the solution x = 14 (do you see why?) and conclude that the sheet metal 
should be 22 centimeters by 22 centimeters.
Check:	If we begin with a piece of sheet metal 22 centimeters by 22 centimeters, 
cut out a 9-centimeter square from each corner, and fold up the edges,  
we get a box whose dimensions are 9 by 4 by 4 and whose volume is 
9 * 4 * 4 = 144 cm3, as required.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 7
V = 144
Divide each side by 9.
Use the Square Root Method.
•
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 1.	 The process of using variables to represent unknown  
quantities and then finding relationships that involve these 
variables is referred to as  
   
  .
	 2.	 The money paid for the use of money is  
  .
	 3.	 Objects that move at a constant speed are said to be in 
 
   
  .
	 4.	 True or False   The amount charged for the use of principal 
for a given period of time is called the rate of interest. 
	 5.	 True or False    If an object moves at an average speed r, 
the distance d covered in time t is given by the formula 
d = rt. 
A.8  Assess Your Understanding

Section A.8  Problem Solving: Interest, Mixture, Uniform Motion, Constant Rate Job Applications   1013
	 6.	 Suppose that you want to mix two coffees in order to obtain 
100 pounds of a blend. If x represents the number of pounds 
of coffee A, write an algebraic expression that represents the 
number of pounds of coffee B.
	
	 (a)  100 - x    (b)  x - 100
	
	 (c)  100 x          (d)  100 + x 
	 7.	 Which of the following is the simple interest formula?
(a)	 I = rt
P  (b)  I = Prt  (c)  I = P
rt  (d)  I = P + rt 
	 8.	 If it takes 5 hours to complete a job, what fraction of the job 
is done in 1 hour?
(a)	 4
5      (b)  5
4        (c)  1
5      (d)  1
4 
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 9–18, translate each sentence into a mathematical equation. Be sure to identify the meaning of all symbols.
	 9.	 Geometry  The area of a circle is the product of the number 
p and the square of the radius.
	 10.	 Geometry  The circumference of a circle is the product of 
the number p and twice the radius.
	 11.	 Geometry  The area of a square is the square of the length of 
a side. 
	 12.	 Geometry  The perimeter of a square is four times the length 
of a side.
	 13.	 Physics  Force equals the product of mass and acceleration.
	 14.	 Physics  Pressure is force per unit area.
	 15.	 Physics  Work equals force times distance.
	 16.	 Physics  Kinetic energy is one-half the product of the mass 
and the square of the velocity.
	 17.	 Business    The total variable cost of manufacturing  
x dishwashers is $150 per dishwasher times the number of 
dishwashers manufactured.
	 18.	 Business    The total revenue derived from selling  
x dishwashers is $250 per dishwasher times the number of 
dishwashers sold.
	 19.	 Financial Planning  Betsy, a recent retiree, requires $6000 
per year in extra income. She has $50,000 to invest and 
can invest in B-rated bonds paying 15% per year or in a  
certificate of deposit (CD) paying 7% per year. How much 
money should Betsy invest in each to realize exactly $6000 
in interest per year. 
	 20.	 Financial Planning  After 2 years, Betsy (see Problem 19) 
finds that she will now require $7000 per year. Assuming 
that the remaining information is the same, how should the 
money be reinvested? 
	 21.	 Banking  A bank loaned out $12,000, part of it at the rate of 
8% per year and the rest at the rate of 18% per year. If the 
interest received totaled $1000, how much was loaned at 8%?
	 22.	 Banking  Wendy, a loan officer at a bank, has $1,000,000 to 
lend and is required to obtain an average return of 18% per 
year. If she can lend at the rate of 19% or at the rate of 16%, 
how much can she lend at the 16% rate and still meet her 
requirement? 
	 23.	 Blending Teas    The manager of a store that specializes in  
selling tea decides to experiment with a new blend. She will 
mix some Earl Grey tea that sells for $5 per pound with some  
Orange Pekoe tea that sells for $3 per pound to get 100 pounds 
of the new blend. The selling price of the new blend is to be 
$4.50 per pound, and there is to be no difference in revenue 
between selling the new blend and selling the other types. How 
many pounds of the Earl Grey tea and of the Orange Pekoe tea 
are required? 
	 24.	 Business: Blending Coffee  A coffee manufacturer wants to 
market a new blend of coffee that sells for $3.90 per pound 
by mixing two coffees that sell for $2.75 and $5 per pound, 
respectively. What amounts of each coffee should be blended 
to obtain the desired mixture?
	
	 [Hint: Assume that the total weight of the desired blend is 
100 pounds.] 
	 25.	 Business: Mixing Nuts  A nut store normally sells cashews 
for $9.00 per pound and almonds for $3.50 per pound. But 
at the end of the month the almonds had not sold well, so, 
in order to sell 60 pounds of almonds, the manager decided 
to mix the 60 pounds of almonds with some cashews and 
sell the mixture for $7.50 per pound. How many pounds of 
cashews should be mixed with the almonds to ensure no 
change in the revenue? 
	 26.	 Business: Mixing Candy  A candy store sells boxes of candy 
containing caramels and cremes. Each box sells for $12.50 
and holds 30 pieces of candy (all pieces are the same size). If 
the caramels cost $0.25 to produce and the cremes cost $0.45 
to produce, how many of each should be in a box to yield a 
profit of $3? 
	 27.	 Physics: Uniform Motion    A motorboat can maintain a  
constant speed of 16 miles per hour relative to the water. 
The boat travels upstream to a certain point in 20 minutes; 
the return trip takes 15 minutes. What is the speed of the 
current? See the figure. 
	 28.	 Physics: Uniform Motion    A motorboat heads upstream 
on a river that has a current of 3 miles per hour. The trip 
upstream takes 5 hours, and the return trip takes 2.5 hours. 
What is the speed of the motorboat? (Assume that the boat 
maintains a constant speed relative to the water.) 
	 29.	 Physics: Uniform Motion    A motorboat maintained a  
constant speed of 15 miles per hour relative to the water in 
going 10 miles upstream and then returning. The total time 
for the trip was 1.5 hours. Use this information to find the 
speed of the current. 
	 30.	 Physics: Uniform Motion    Two cars enter the Florida  
Turnpike at Commercial Boulevard at 8:00 am, each 
heading for Wildwood. One car’s average speed is 10 miles  
per hour more than the other’s. The faster car arrives at 
	
	 Wildwood at 11:00 am, 1
2 hour before the other car. What 
was the average speed of each car? How far did each travel?

1014 
Appendix A  Review
	 31.	 Moving Walkways    The speed of a moving walkway is 
typically about 2.5 feet per second. Walking on such a  
moving walkway, it takes Karen a total of 40 seconds to  
travel 50 feet with the movement of the walkway and then 
back again against the movement of the walkway. What is 
Karen’s normal walking speed? 
Source: Answers.com
	 32.	 High-Speed Walkways    Toronto’s Pearson International 
Airport has a high-speed version of a moving walkway. If 
Liam walks while riding this moving walkway, he can travel 
280 meters in 60 seconds less time than if he stands still on the 
moving walkway. If Liam walks at a normal rate of 1.5 meters 
per second, what is the speed of the walkway? 
Source: Answers.com
	 33.	 Tennis    A regulation doubles tennis court has an area of 
2808 square feet. If it is 6 feet longer than twice its width, 
determine the dimensions of the court. 
Source: United States Tennis Association
	 34.	 Laser Printers  It takes an HP LaserJet M451dw laser printer  
16 minutes longer to complete an 840-page print job  
by itself than it takes an HP LaserJet CP4025dn to  
complete the same job by itself. Together the two printers 
can complete the job in 15 minutes. How long does it take 
each printer to complete the print job alone? What is the 
speed of each printer?
Source: Hewlett-Packard
	 35.	 Working Together on a Job    Trent can deliver his  
newspapers in 30 minutes. It takes Lois 20 minutes to do 
the same route. How long would it take them to deliver the 
newspapers if they worked together? 
	 36.	 Working Together on a Job  Patrice, by himself, can paint 
four rooms in 10 hours. If he hires April to help, they can do 
the same job together in 6 hours. If he lets April work alone, 
how long will it take her to paint four rooms? 
	 37.	 Enclosing a Garden  A gardener has 46 feet of fencing to be 
used to enclose a rectangular garden that has a border 2 feet 
wide surrounding it. See the figure.
(a)	 If the length of the garden is to be twice its width, what 
will be the dimensions of the garden? 
(b)	 What is the area of the garden? 
(c)	 If the length and width of the garden are to be the same, 
what will be the dimensions of the garden?
(d)	 What will be the area of the square garden?
	 39.	 Football  A tight end can run the 100-yard dash in 12 seconds.  
A defensive back can do it in 10 seconds. The tight end 
catches a pass at his own 20-yard line with the defensive 
back at the 15-yard line. (See the figure-top, right.) If no 
other players are nearby, at what yard line will the defensive 
back catch up to the tight end? 
	
	 [Hint: At time t = 0, the defensive back is 5 yards behind 
the tight end.]
1  0
2  0
3  0
4  0
1  0
2  0
3  0
4  0
SOUTH
TE
DB
2 ft
2 ft
	 38.	 Construction  A pond is enclosed by a wooden deck that is  
3 feet wide. The fence surrounding the deck is 100 feet long.
(a)	 If the pond is square, what are its dimensions?
(b)	 If the pond is rectangular and the length of the pond is 
to be three times its width, what are its dimensions?
(c)	 If the pond is circular, what is its diameter? 
(d)	 Which pond has the larger area? 
	 40.	 Computing Business Expense    Therese, an outside  
salesperson, uses her car for both business and pleasure. Last 
year, she traveled 30,000 miles, using 900 gallons of gasoline. 
Her car gets 40 miles per gallon on the highway and 25 in 
the city. She can deduct all highway travel, but no city travel, 
on her taxes. How many miles should Therese deduct as a  
business expense? 
	 41.	 Mixing Water and Antifreeze  How much water should be 
added to 1 gallon of pure antifreeze to obtain a solution that 
is 60% antifreeze?
	 42.	 Mixing Water and Antifreeze    The cooling system of a  
certain foreign-made car has a capacity of 15 liters. If the  
system is filled with a mixture that is 40% antifreeze, how 
much of this mixture should be drained and replaced by 
pure antifreeze so that the system is filled with a solution 
that is 60% antifreeze? 
	 43.	 Chemistry: Salt Solutions    How much water must be  
evaporated from 32 ounces of a 4% salt solution to make a 
6% salt solution? 
	 44.	 Chemistry: Salt Solutions    How much water must be  
evaporated from 240 gallons of a 3% salt solution to  
produce a 5% salt solution? 
	 45.	 Purity of Gold  The purity of gold is measured in karats, 
with pure gold being 24 karats. Other purities of gold are 
expressed as proportional parts of pure gold. Thus, 18-karat 
	
	 gold is 18
24, or 75% pure gold; 12-karat gold is 12
24, or 50%
	
	 pure gold; and so on. How much 12-karat gold should be 
mixed with pure gold to obtain 60 grams of 16-karat gold?
	 46.	 Chemistry: Sugar Molecules  A sugar molecule has twice as 
many atoms of hydrogen as it does oxygen and one more 
atom of carbon than of oxygen. If a sugar molecule has a 
total of 45 atoms, how many are oxygen? How many are  
hydrogen? 

Section A.8  Problem Solving: Interest, Mixture, Uniform Motion, Constant Rate Job Applications   1015
Start
mi
1–4
mi
3–4
mi
1–2
Mike
Dan
	 47.	 Running a Race  Mike can run the mile in 6 minutes, and 
Dan can run the mile in 9 minutes. If Mike gives Dan a head 
start of 1 minute, how far from the start will Mike pass Dan?
	
	 How long does it take? See the figure. 
this pool. After two hours, the 2-hp pump breaks down. How 
long will it take the larger pump to finish emptying the pool?
	 53.	 A Biathlon    Suppose that you have entered an 87-mile  
biathlon that consists of a run and a bicycle race. During 
your run, your average speed is 6 miles per hour, and during 
your bicycle race, your average speed is 25 miles per hour. 
You finish the race in 5 hours. What is the distance of the 
run? What is the distance of the bicycle race?
	 54.	 Cyclists  Two cyclists leave a city at the same time, one going 
east and the other going west. The westbound cyclist bikes  
5 mph faster than the eastbound cyclist. After 6 hours they 
are 246 miles apart. How fast is each cyclist riding?
	 55.	 Comparing Olympic Heroes  In the 2012 Olympics, Usain 
Bolt of Jamaica won the gold medal in the 100-meter race 
with a time of 9.69 seconds. In the 1896 Olympics, Thomas 
Burke of the United States won the gold medal in the 
100-meter race in 12.0 seconds. If they ran in the same race, 
repeating their respective times, by how many meters would 
Bolt beat Burke? 
	 56.	 Constructing a Coffee Can  A 39-ounce can of Hills Bros.® 
coffee requires 188.5 square inches of aluminum. If its height 
is 7 inches, what is its radius? [Hint: The surface area S of a 
closed right circular cylinder is S = 2pr 2 + 2prh, where r is 
the radius and h is the height.] 
	 48.	 Range of an Airplane    An air rescue plane averages  
300 miles per hour in still air. It carries enough fuel for  
5 hours of flying time. If, upon takeoff, it encounters a 
head wind of 30 mi/h, how far can it fly and return safely?  
(Assume that the wind remains constant.) 
	 49.	 Emptying Oil Tankers  An oil tanker can be emptied by the 
main pump in 4 hours. An auxiliary pump can empty the 
tanker in 9 hours. If the main pump is started at 9 am, when 
should the auxiliary pump be started so that the tanker is 
emptied by noon? 
	 50.	 Cement Mix  A 20-pound bag of Economy brand cement 
mix contains 25% cement and 75% sand. How much pure 
cement must be added to produce a cement mix that is 40% 
cement? 
	 51.	 Emptying a Tub    A bathroom tub will fill in 15 minutes 
with both faucets open and the stopper in place. With both  
faucets closed and the stopper removed, the tub will empty 
in 20 minutes. How long will it take for the tub to fill if both 
faucets are open and the stopper is removed? 
	 52.	 Using Two Pumps  A 5-horsepower (hp) pump can empty a 
pool in 5 hours. A smaller, 2-hp pump empties the same pool 
in 8 hours. The pumps are used together to begin emptying 
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	 59.	 Critical Thinking  You are the manager of a clothing store 
and have just purchased 100 dress shirts for $20.00 each.  
After 1 month of selling the shirts at the regular price, you 
plan to have a sale giving 40% off the original selling price. 
However, you still want to make a profit of $4 on each shirt 
at the sale price. What should you price the shirts at initially 
to ensure this? If, instead of 40% off at the sale, you give 
50% off, by how much is your profit reduced?
	 60.	 Critical Thinking    Make up a word problem that requires  
solving a linear equation as part of its solution. Exchange  
problems with a friend. Write a critique of your friend’s problem.
	 61.	 Critical Thinking  Without solving, explain what is wrong 
with the following mixture problem: How many liters of 
25% ethanol should be added to 20 liters of 48% ethanol 
to obtain a solution of 58% ethanol? Now go through an 
algebraic solution. What happens?
	 62.	 Computing Average Speed    In going from Chicago to  
Atlanta, a car averages 45 miles per hour, and in going from 
Atlanta to Miami, it averages 55 miles per hour. If Atlanta 
is halfway between Chicago and Miami, what is the average 
speed from Chicago to Miami? Discuss an intuitive solution. 
Write a paragraph defending your intuitive solution. Then 
solve the problem algebraically. Is your intuitive solution the 
same as the algebraic one? If not, find the flaw.
	 63.	 Speed of a Plane    On a recent flight from Phoenix to  
Kansas City, a distance of 919 nautical miles, the plane arrived  
20 minutes early. On leaving the aircraft, I asked the captain, 
“What was our tail wind?” He replied, “I don’t know, but our 
ground speed was 550 knots.” Has enough information been 
provided for you to find the tail wind? If possible, find the 
tail wind. (1 knot = 1 nautical mile per hour)
	 57.	 Constructing a Box  An open box is to be constructed from 
a square piece of sheet metal by removing a square of side 
1 foot from each corner and turning up the edges. If the box 
is to hold 4 cubic feet, what should be the dimension of the 
sheet metal? 
	 58.	 Constructing a Box  Rework Problem 57 if the piece of 
sheet metal is a rectangle whose length is twice its width.
39 oz.
7 in.

1016 
Appendix A  Review
Suppose that a and b are two real numbers and a 6 b. The notation a 6 x 6 b 
means that x is a number between a and b. The expression a 6 x 6 b is equivalent 
to the two inequalities a 6 x and x 6 b. Similarly, the expression a … x … b is 
equivalent to the two inequalities a … x and x … b. The remaining two possibilities, 
a … x 6 b and a 6 x … b, are defined similarly.
Although it is acceptable to write 3 Ú x Ú 2, it is preferable to reverse the  
inequality symbols and write instead 2 … x … 3 so that the values go from smaller 
to larger, reading from left to right.
A statement such as 2 … x … 1 is false because there is no number x for which 
2 … x and x … 1. Finally, never mix inequality symbols, as in 2 … x Ú 3.
Use Interval Notation
Let a and b represent two real numbers with a 6 b.
1
A.9	 Interval Notation; Solving Inequalities
Preparing for this section Before getting started, review the following:
•	 Algebra Essentials (Appendix A, Section A.1, pp. 945–954)
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 1022.
	
Objectives	 	1  Use Interval Notation (p. 1016)
	
	 	2  Use Properties of Inequalities (p. 1017)
	
	 	3  Solve Inequalities (p. 1019)
	
	 	4  Solve Combined Inequalities (p. 1020)
	
	 	5  Solve Inequalities Involving Absolute Value (p. 1021)
 An open interval, denoted by (a, b), consists of all real numbers x for which 
a 6 x 6 b.
A closed interval, denoted by [a, b], consists of all real numbers x for which 
a … x … b.
The half-open, or half-closed, intervals are (a, b], consisting of all real  
numbers x for which a 6 x … b, and [a, b), consisting of all real numbers x  
for which a … x 6 b.
Definition
In each of these definitions, a is called the left endpoint and b the right endpoint of 
the interval.
The symbol q (read as “infinity”) is not a real number, but notation used to  
indicate unboundedness in the positive direction. The symbol - q (read as “negative 
infinity”) also is not a real number, but notation used to indicate unboundedness in 
the negative direction. The symbols q and - q are used to define five other kinds 
of intervals:
[a, ˆ)	
Consists of all real numbers x for which x Ú a
(a, ˆ)	
Consists of all real numbers x for which x 7 a
(−ˆ, a]	
Consists of all real numbers x for which x … a
(−ˆ, a)	
Consists of all real numbers x for which x 6 a
(−ˆ, ˆ)	
Consists of all real numbers
Note that q and - q are never included as endpoints, since neither is a real number.
Table 2 summarizes interval notation, corresponding inequality notation, and 
their graphs.
In Words
The notation [a, b] represents all  
real numbers between a and b,  
inclusive. The notation (a, b)  
represents all real numbers between 
a and b, not including either a or b.

Section A.9  Interval Notation; Solving Inequalities  1017
Writing Inequalities Using Interval Notation
Write each inequality using interval notation.
(a)	 1 … x … 3    (b)  -4 6 x 6 0    (c)  x 7 5    (d)  x … 1
 (a)	 1 … x … 3 describes all real numbers x between 1 and 3, inclusive. In interval 
notation, we write 31, 34.
(b)	 In interval notation, -4 6 x 6 0 is written 1 -4, 02.
(c)	 In interval notation, x 7 5 is written 15, q 2.
(d)	 In interval notation, x … 1 is written 1 - q, 14.
Writing Intervals Using Inequality Notation
Write each interval as an inequality involving x.
(a)	 31, 42      (b)  12, q 2      (c)  32, 34      (d)  1- q, -34
 (a)	 31, 42 consists of all real numbers x for which 1 … x 6 4.
(b)	 12, q 2 consists of all real numbers x for which x 7 2.
(c)	 32, 34 consists of all real numbers x for which 2 … x … 3.
(d)	 1 - q, -34 consists of all real numbers x for which x … -3.
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 5 ,  2 7 ,  a n d  3 5
Use Properties of Inequalities
The product of two positive real numbers is positive, the product of two negative 
real numbers is positive, and the product of 0 and 0 is 0. For any real number a, the 
value of a2 is 0 or positive; that is, a2 is nonnegative. This is called the nonnegative 
property.
Example 1
Solution
•
Example 2
Solution
•
2
a
b
a
a
b
a
b
b
a
a
a
a
The open interval (a, b)
The closed interval [a, b]
The half-open interval [a, b)
The half-open interval (a, b]
The interval [a, ∞)
The interval (a, ∞)
The interval (−∞, a]
The interval (−∞, a)
The interval (−∞, ∞)
a < x < b
a # x # b
a # x < b
a < x # b
x $ a
x > a
x # a
x < a
All real numbers
Inequality
Graph
Interval
Table 2 
Nonnegative Property
For any real number a,
	
a2 Ú 0	
(1)
In Words
The square of a real number is 
never negative.

1018 
Appendix A  Review
When the same number is added to both sides of an inequality, an equivalent 
inequality is obtained. For example, since 3 6 5, then 3 + 4 6 5 + 4 or 7 6 9. This 
is called the addition property of inequalities.
In Words
The addition property states 
that the sense, or direction, of 
an inequality remains unchanged 
if the same number is added to 
each side.
Addition Property of Inequalities
For real numbers a, b, and c,
	
If a 6 b, then a + c 6 b + c	
(2a)
	
If a 7 b, then a + c 7 b + c	
(2b)
Now let’s see what happens when each side of an inequality is multiplied by 
a nonzero number. Begin with 3 6 7 and multiply each side by 2. The numbers 6  
and 14 that result obey the inequality 6 6 14.
Now start with 9 7 2 and multiply each side by -4. The numbers -36 and -8 
that result obey the inequality -36 6 -8.
Note that the effect of multiplying both sides of 9 7 2 by the negative 
number -4 is that the direction of the inequality symbol is reversed.
These results illustrate the following general multiplication properties for 
inequalities:
In Words
Multiplying by a negative number 
reverses the inequality.
In Words
The multiplication properties 
state that the sense, or direction, 
of an inequality remains the same if 
each side is multiplied by a positive 
real number, whereas the direction 
is reversed if each side is multiplied 
by a negative real number.
Multiplication Properties for Inequalities
For real numbers a, b, and c,
	If a 6 b and if c 7 0, then ac 6 bc	
	If a 6 b and if c 6 0, then ac 7 bc	
(3a)
	If a 7 b and if c 7 0, then ac 7 bc	
	If a 7 b and if c 6 0, then ac 6 bc	
(3b)
Multiplication Property of Inequalities
(a)	 If 2x 6 6, then 1
2
 12x2 6 1
2
 162 or x 6 3.
(b)	 If x
-3 7 12, then -3a x
-3b 6 -31122 or x 6 -36.
(c)	 If -4x 6 -8, then -4x
-4 7 -8
-4 or x 7 2.
(d)	 If -x 7 8, then 1 -12 1-x2 6 1 -12 182 or x 6 -8.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  4 9
Example 3
•
In Words
The reciprocal property states 
that the reciprocal of a positive 
real number is positive and that 
the reciprocal of a negative real 
number is negative.
Reciprocal Property for Inequalities
If a 7 0, then 1
a 7 0    If 1
a 7 0, then a 7 0	
(4a)
If a 6 0, then 1
a 6 0    If 1
a 6 0, then a 6 0	
(4b)

Section A.9  Interval Notation; Solving Inequalities  1019
Solve Inequalities
An inequality in one variable is a statement involving two expressions, at least 
one containing the variable, separated by one of the inequality symbols: 6, …, 7, 
or Ú. To solve an inequality means to find all values of the variable for which the  
statement is true. These values are called solutions of the inequality.
For example, the following are all inequalities involving one variable x:
x + 5 6 8  2x - 3 Ú 4  x2 - 1 … 3  x + 1
x - 2 7 0
As with equations, one method for solving an inequality is to replace it by a 
series of equivalent inequalities until an inequality with an obvious solution, such 
as x 6 3, is obtained. Equivalent inequalities are obtained by applying some of the 
same properties that are used to find equivalent equations. The addition property 
and the multiplication properties for inequalities form the basis for the following 
procedures.
3
Procedures That Leave the Inequality Symbol Unchanged
	 1.	 Simplify both sides of the inequality by combining like terms and eliminating 
parentheses:
Replace  x + 2 + 6 7 2x + 51x + 12
      by      x + 8 7 7x + 5
	 2.	 Add or subtract the same expression on both sides of the inequality:
Replace        3x - 5 6 4
      by 
13x - 52 + 5 6 4 + 5
	 3.	 Multiply or divide both sides of the inequality by the same positive 
expression:
Replace  4x 7 16 by 4x
4 7 16
4
Procedures That Reverse the Sense or Direction of the Inequality Symbol
	 1.	 Interchange the two sides of the inequality:
Replace  3 6 x by x 7 3
	 2.	 Multiply or divide both sides of the inequality by the same negative  
expression:
Replace 
-2x 7 6 by -2x
-2 6
6
-2
As the examples that follow illustrate, we solve inequalities using many of 
the same steps that we would use to solve equations. In writing the solution of an 
inequality, either set notation or interval notation may be used, whichever is more 
convenient.

1020 
Appendix A  Review
Solving an Inequality
Solve the inequality 4x + 7 Ú 2x - 3, and graph the solution set.
	
 4x + 7 Ú 2x - 3
 4x + 7 - 7 Ú 2x - 3 - 7	
Subtract 7 from both sides.
	
 4x Ú 2x - 10	
Simplify.
	
 4x - 2x Ú 2x - 10 - 2x	
Subtract 2x from both sides.
	
 2x Ú -10	
Simplify.
	
 2x
2 Ú -10
2
	
 x Ú -5	
Simplify.
The solution set is 5x x Ú -56 or, using interval notation, all numbers in the 
interval 3 -5, q 2. See Figure 28 for the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 1
Solve Combined Inequalities 
Solving a Combined Inequality
Solve the inequality -5 6 3x - 2 6 1, and graph the solution set.
 Recall that the inequality
-5 6 3x - 2 6 1
is equivalent to the two inequalities
-5 6 3x - 2 and 3x - 2 6 1
Solve each of these inequalities separately.
 -5 6 3x - 2	
 3x - 2 6 1
 -5 + 2 6 3x - 2 + 2 	
Add 2 to both sides.	
 3x - 2 + 2 6 1 + 2
 -3 6 3x	
Simplify.	
 3x 6 3
 -3
3
6 3x
3 	
Divide both sides by 3.	
 3x
3 6 3
3
 -1 6 x	
Simplify.	
 x 6 1
The solution set of the original pair of inequalities consists of all x for which
-1 6 x and x 6 1
This may be written more compactly as 5x -1 6 x 6 16. In interval notation, the 
solution is 1 -1, 12. See Figure 29 for the graph.
Observe in the preceding process that solving each of the two inequalities required 
exactly the same steps. A shortcut to solving the original inequality algebraically is to 
deal with the two inequalities at the same time, as follows:
-5 6
-5 + 2 6
-3 6
-3
3
6
-1 6
3x - 2
3x - 2 + 2
3x
3x
3
x
6 1
6 1 + 2
6 3
6 3
3
6 1
 
Now Work  p r o b l e m  7 7
Example 4
Solution
Divide both sides by 2. (The direction 
of the inequality symbol is unchanged.)
•
4
Example 5
Solution
•
Add 2 to each part. 
Simplify. 
Divide each part by 3.
Simplify.
Figure 28  x Ú - 5
2
3
6
4
5
1
Figure 29  -1 6 x 6 1
2
1
1
0
2
3

Section A.9  Interval Notation; Solving Inequalities  1021
Using the Reciprocal Property to Solve an Inequality
Solve the inequality 14x - 12 -1 7 0, and graph the solution set.
 Recall that 14x - 12 -1 =
1
4x - 1. The Reciprocal Property states that if 1
a 7 0, 
then a 7 0.
 14x - 12 -1 7 0
 
1
4x - 1 7 0
 
 4x - 1 7 0
 4x 7 1
 x 7 1
4
The solution set is ex0 x 7 1
4 f, that is, all x in the interval a1
4, q b. Figure 30  
illustrates the graph.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 7
Solve Inequalities Involving Absolute Value
Solving an Inequality Involving Absolute Value
Solve the inequality 0 x0 6 4, and graph the solution set.
 We are looking for all points whose coordinate x is a distance less than 4 units 
from the origin. See Figure 31 for an illustration. Because any x between -4 and 4  
satisfies the condition 0 x0 6 4, the solution set consists of all numbers x for which 
-4 6 x 6 4, that is, all x in the interval 1 -4, 42.
Solving an Inequality Involving Absolute Value
Solve the inequality 0 x0 7 3, and graph the solution set.
 We are looking for all points whose coordinate x is a distance greater than 3 units 
from the origin. Figure 32 illustrates the situation. Any number x less than -3 
or greater than 3 satisfies the condition 0 x0 7 3. The solution set consists of all  
numbers x for which x 6 -3 or x 7 3, that is, all x in 1 - q, -32 ∪13, q 2.*
Examples 7 and 8 illustrate the following results:
Example 6
Solution
Reciprocal Property
Add 1 to both sides.
Divide both sides by 4.
•
5
Example 7
Solution
•
Example 8
Solution
•
*Recall that the symbol ∪ stands for the union of two sets. Refer to page 946 if necessary.
 If a is any positive number, then
	
0 u0 6 a is equivalent to -a 6 u 6 a
	
(5)
	
0 u0 … a is equivalent to -a … u … a
	
(6)
	
0 u0 7 a is equivalent to u 6 -a or u 7 a	
(7)
	
0 u0 Ú a is equivalent to u … -a or u Ú a	
(8)
Theorem
Figure 30  x 7 1
4
1
0
1–4
Figure 31  0 x0 6 4
4
3
2
1
0
O
1
3 2
5 4
Less than 4 units
from origin O
Figure 32  0 x0 7 3
4
3
2
1
0
1
3 2
5 4

1022 
Appendix A  Review
Solving an Inequality Involving Absolute Value
Solve the inequality 0 2x + 40 … 3, and graph the solution set.
 
Example 9
Solution
 
 
-3 …
-3 - 4 …
-7 …
-7
2
…
-  7
2 …
0 2x + 40
 
2x + 4
2x + 4 - 4
2x
2x
2
x
… 3
 
… 3
… 3 - 4
… -1
… -1
2
… -  1
2
The solution set is ex 2 -  7
2 … x … -  1
2 f, that is, all x in the interval c -  7
2, -  1
2 d . See 
Figure 33 for a graph of the solution set.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 3
Solving an Inequality Involving Absolute Value
Solve the inequality 0 2x - 50 7 3, and graph the solution set.
 0 2x - 50 7 3
2x - 5 6
2x - 5 + 5 6
2x 6
2x
2 6
x 6
-3
-3 + 5
2
2
2
1
 or  
 or 
 or 
 or 
 
 
 
or
 
2x - 5 7
2x - 5 + 5 7
2x 7
2x
2 7
x 7
3
3 + 5
8
8
2
4
The solution set is 5x x 6 1 or x 7 46, that is, all x in 1 - q, 12 ∪14, q 2. See 
Figure 34 for a graph of the solution set.
WARNING  A common error to be avoided is to attempt to write the solution x 6 1 or x 7 4 
as the combined inequality 1 7 x 7 4, which is incorrect, since there are no numbers x for which 
 x 6 1 and x 7 4. Another common error is to “mix” the symbols and write 1 6 x 7 4, which makes 
no sense. 	
■
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 9
This follows the form of statement (6); the expression 
u = 2x + 4 is inside the absolute value bars.
Apply statement (6).
Subtract 4 from each part.
Simplify.
Divide each part by 2.
Simplify.
•
Example 10
Solution
This follows the form of statement (7); the expression u = 2x - 5 
is inside the absolute value bars.
Apply statement (7).
Add 5 to each part.
Simplify.
Divide each part by 2.
Simplify.
•
Figure 33  0 2x + 40 … 3
4
2
0
22
25
1–2
2
7–2
2
Figure 34  0 2x - 50 7 3
4
5
6
3
2
1
0
21
22
7
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages listed in red.
	 1.	 Graph the inequality: x Ú - 2. (pp. 948–949)
	 2.	 True or False  - 5 7 - 3 (pp. 948–949) 
	 3.	 0 - 20 =       
 . (p. 949)
	 4.	 True or False  0 x0 Ú 0 for any real number x. (pp. 949–950)
A.9  Assess Your Understanding
Concepts and Vocabulary
	 5.	 If each side of an inequality is multiplied by a(n)  
  
number, then the sense of the inequality symbol is reversed.
	 6.	 A(n)  
   
 , denoted 3a, b4, consists of all real 
numbers x for which a … x … b.
	
7.	 The solution set of the equation 0 x0 = 5 is 5 
  6.
	 8.	 The solution set of the inequality 0 x0 6 5 is	
  
5x
6.
	 9.	 True or False  The equation 0 x0 = -2 has no solution. 
	 10.	 True or False  The inequality 0 x0 Ú -2 has the set of real 
numbers as the solution set. 

Section A.9  Interval Notation; Solving Inequalities  1023
	 11.	 Which of the following will change the direction, or sense, of 
an inequality?
(a)	 Dividing each side by a positive number
(b)	 Interchanging sides
(c)	 Adding a negative number to each side
(d)	 Subtracting a positive number from each side 
	 12.	 Which pair of inequalities is equivalent to 0 6 x … 3?
(a)	 x 7 0 and x Ú 3        (b)  x 6 0 and x Ú 3
(c)	 x 7 0 and x … 3        (d)  x 6 0 and x … 3 
	 13.	 Which of the following pairs of inequalities is equivalent  
to 0 x0 7 4?
(a)	 x 7 - 4 and x 6 4    (b)  x 6 - 4 and x 6 4
(c)  x 7 - 4 or x 7 4       (d)  x 6 - 4 or x 7 4 
	 14.	 Which of the following has no solution?
(a)	 0 x0 6 - 5  (b)  0 x0 … 0  (c)  0 x0 7 0  (d)  0 x0 Ú 0 
Skill Building
In Problems 15–20, express the graph shown in blue using interval notation. Also express each as an inequality involving x.
	 15.	
16.	
17.	
18.	
19.	
20.	
In Problems 21–26, an inequality is given. Write the inequality obtained by:
(a)	Adding 3 to each side of the given inequality.
(b)	Subtracting 5 from each side of the given inequality.
(c)	Multiplying each side of the given inequality by 3.
(d)	Multiplying each side of the given inequality by - 2.
	 21.	 3 6 5       
22.  2 7 1       
23.  4 7 -3          
24.  - 3 7 -5       
25.  2x + 1 6 2       
26.  1 - 2x 7 5
In Problems 27–34, write each inequality using interval notation, and illustrate each inequality using the real number line.
	 27.	 0 … x … 4 
	
28.	 - 1 6 x 6 5 
	
29.	 4 … x 6 6 
	
30.	 - 2 6 x 6 0 
	 31.	 x Ú 4 
	
32.	 x … 5 
	
33.	 x 6 -4 
	
34.	 x 7 1 
In Problems 35–42, write each interval as an inequality involving x, and illustrate each inequality using the real number line.
	 35.	 32, 54 
	
36.	 11, 22 
	
37.	 1- 3, - 22 
	
38.	 30, 12 
	 39.	 34, q 2 
	
40.	 1- q, 24 
	
41.	 1- q, - 32 
	
42.	 1- 8, q 2 
In Problems 43–56, fill in the blank with the correct inequality symbol.
	 43.	 If x 6 5, then x - 5    
 0.	
44.	 If x 6 -4, then x + 4    
 0.
	 45.	 If x 7 - 4, then x + 4    
 0.	
46.	 If x 7 6, then x - 6    
 0.
	 47.	 If x Ú - 4, then 3x    
 - 12.	
48.	 If x … 3, then 2x    
 6.
	 49.	 If x 7 6, then - 2x    
 - 12.	
50.	 If x 7 -2, then - 4x    
 8.
	 51.	 If x Ú 5, then - 4x    
 - 20.	
52.	 If x … -4, then - 3x    
 12.
	 53.	 If 2x 7 6, then x    
 3.	
54.	 If 3x … 12, then x    
 4.
	 55.	 If - 1
2 x … 3, then x    
 - 6.	
56.	 If - 1
4 x 7 1, then x    
 - 4.
In Problems 57–104, solve each inequality. Express your answer using set notation or interval notation. Graph the solution set.
	 57.	 x + 1 6 5 
	
58.	 x - 6 6 1 
	
59.	 1 - 2x … 3 
	 60.	 2 - 3x … 5 
	
61.	 3x - 7 7 2 
	
62.	 2x + 5 7 1 
	 63.	 3x - 1 Ú 3 + x 
	
64.	 2x - 2 Ú 3 + x 
	
65.	 - 21x + 32 6 8 
	 66.	 -311 - x2 6 12 
	
67.	 4 - 311 - x2 … 3	
68.	 8 - 412 - x2 … - 2x
	 69.	 1
2 1x - 42 7 x + 8 
	
70.	 3x + 4 7 1
3 1x - 22 
	
71.	 x
2 Ú 1 - x
4 
	 72.	 x
3 Ú 2 + x
6 
	
73.	 0 … 2x - 6 … 4 
	
74.	 4 … 2x + 2 … 10 
	 75.	 - 5 … 4 - 3x … 2 
	
76.	 - 3 … 3 - 2x … 9 
	
77.	 - 3 6 2x - 1
4
6 0 
	 78.	 0 6 3x + 2
2
6 4 
	
79.	 1 6 1 - 1
2 x 6 4 
	
80.	 0 6 1 - 1
3 x 6 1 
3
2
0
1
–1
2
1
–1
0
–2
3
2
0
1
–1
2
1
–1
0
–2
3
2
0
1
–1
3
2
0
1
–1

1024 
Appendix A  Review
	 81.	 1x + 22 1x - 32 7 1x - 12 1x + 12	
82.	 1x - 12 1x + 12 7 1x - 32 1x + 42	
83.	 x14x + 32 … 12x + 122
	 84.	 x19x - 52 … 13x - 122 
	
85.	 1
2 … x + 1
3
6 3
4 
	
86.	 1
3 6 x + 1
2
… 2
3 
	 87.	 14x + 22 -1 6 0 
	
88.	 12x - 12 -1 7 0 
	
89.	 0 6 2
x 6 3
5 
	 90.	 0 6 4
x 6 2
3 
	
91.	 0 6 12x - 42 -1 6 1
2 
	
92.	 0 6 13x + 62 -1 6 1
3 
	 93.	 0 2x0 6 8 
	
94.	 0 3x0 6 12 
	
95.	 0 3x0 7 12 
	 96.	 0 2x0 7 6 
	
97.	 0 2x - 10 … 1 
	
98.	 0 2x + 50 … 7 
	 99.	 0 1 - 2x0 7 3	
100.	 0 2 - 3x0 7 1	
101.	 0 - 4x0 + 0 - 50 … 9 
	102.	 0 - x0 - 0 40 … 2 
	
103.	 0 - 2x0 Ú 0 - 40 	
104.	 0 - x - 20 Ú 1
Applications and Extensions
	105.	 Express the fact that x differs from 2 by less than 1
2 as an 
inequality involving an absolute value. Solve for x.
	106.	 Express the fact that x differs from - 1 by less than 1 as an 
inequality involving an absolute value. Solve for x.
	107.	 Express the fact that x differs from - 3 by more than 2 as an 
inequality involving an absolute value. Solve for x.
	108.	 Express the fact that x differs from 2 by more than 3 as an 
inequality involving an absolute value. Solve for x.
	109.	 What is the domain of the variable in the expression
	
	 23x + 6 ?
	110.	 What is the domain of the variable in the expression 
28 + 2x ? 
	111.	 A young adult may be defined as someone older than 21, 
but less than 30 years of age. Express this statement using 
inequalities. 
	112.	 Middle-aged may be defined as being 40 or more and less 
than 60. Express this statement using inequalities.
	113.	 Life Expectancy    The Social Security Administration  
determined that an average 30-year-old male in 2014 could 
expect to live at least 51.9 more years and that an average 
30-year-old female in 2014 could expect to live at least 55.6 
more years.
(a)	 To what age could an average 30-year-old male expect 
to live? Express your answer as an inequality.
(b)	 To what age could an average 30-year-old female expect 
to live? Express your answer as an inequality.
(c)	 Who can expect to live longer, a male or a female? By 
how many years?
Source: Social Security Administration, 2014
	114.	 General Chemistry For a certain ideal gas, the volume V  
(in cubic centimeters) equals 20 times the temperature T (in 
degrees Celsius). If the temperature varies from 80° to 120° C 
inclusive, what is the corresponding range of the volume of 
the gas? 
	115.	 Real Estate  A real estate agent agrees to sell an apartment 
complex according to the following commission schedule: 
$45,000 plus 25% of the selling price in excess of $900,000. 
Assuming that the complex will sell at some price between 
$900,000 and $1,100,000 inclusive, over what range does the 
agent’s commission vary? How does the commission vary as 
a percent of selling price?
	116.	 Sales Commission  A used car salesperson is paid a  
commission of $25 plus 40% of the selling price in excess 
of owner’s cost. The owner claims that used cars typically 
sell for at least owner’s cost plus $200 and at most owner’s 
cost plus $3000. For each sale made, over what range can the  
salesperson expect the commission to vary?
	117.	 Federal Tax Withholding  The percentage method of  
withholding for federal income tax (2014) states that a single 
person whose weekly wages, after subtracting withholding 
allowances, are over $753, but not over $1762, shall have 
$97.75 plus 25% of the excess over $753 withheld. Over what 
range does the amount withheld vary if the weekly wages 
vary from $900 to $1100, inclusive?
Source: Employer’s Tax Guide. Internal Revenue Service, 2014.
	118.	 Exercising  Sue wants to lose weight. For healthy weight 
loss, the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM)  
recommends 200 to 300 minutes of exercise per week. For 
the first six days of the week, Sue exercised 40, 45, 0, 50, 
25, and 35 minutes. How long should Sue exercise on the  
seventh day in order to stay within the ACSM guidelines?
119.	 Electricity Rates  Commonwealth Edison Company’s charge 
for electricity in January 2014 was 8.21¢ per kilowatt-hour. 
In addition, each monthly bill contains a customer charge of 
$15.37. If last year’s bills ranged from a low of $72.84 to a high 
of $237.04, over what range did usage vary (in kilowatt-hours)?
Source: Commonwealth Edison Co., 2014.
JAN
2014
NOV
2065
JULY
2069

Section A.9  Interval Notation; Solving Inequalities  1025
	120.	 Water Bills  The Village of Oak Lawn charges homeowners  
$57.07 per quarter-year plus $5.81 per 1000 gallons for water 
usage in excess of 10,000 gallons. In 2014 one homeowner’s 
quarterly bill ranged from a high of $150.03 to a low of 
$97.74. Over what range did water usage vary?
Source: Village of Oak Lawn, Illinois, January 2014.
	121.	 Markup of a New Car  The markup over dealer’s cost of 
a new car ranges from 12% to 18%. If the sticker price is 
$18,000, over what range will the dealer’s cost vary?
	122.	 IQ Tests A standard intelligence test has an average score of 
100. According to statistical theory, of the people who take 
the test, the 2.5% with the highest scores will have scores 
of more than 1.96s above the average, where s (sigma, a  
number called the standard deviation) depends on the  
nature of the test. If s = 12 for this test and there is (in  
principle) no upper limit to the score possible on the test, 
write the interval of possible test scores of the people in the 
top 2.5%.
	123.	 Computing Grades In your Economics 101 class, you have 
scores of 68, 82, 87, and 89 on the first four of five tests. To get 
a grade of B, the average of the first five test scores must be 
greater than or equal to 80 and less than 90.
(a)	 Solve an inequality to find the range of the score that 
you need on the last test to get a B. 
(b)	 What score do you need if the fifth test counts double?
	124.	 “Light” Foods For food products to be labeled “light,” 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration requires that the  
altered product must either contain at least one-third fewer  
calories than the regular product or it must contain at least 
one-half less fat than the regular product. If a serving of  
Miracle Whip® Light contains 20 calories and 1.5 grams of fat, 
then what must be true about either the number of calories or 
the grams of fat in a serving of regular Miracle Whip®?
	125.	 Arithmetic Mean  If a 6 b, show that a 6 a + b
2
6 b. The 
number a + b
2
 is called the arithmetic mean of a and b.
	126.	 Refer to Problem 125. Show that the arithmetic mean of a 
and b is equidistant from a and b.
	127.	 Geometric Mean  If 0 6 a 6 b, show that a 6 1ab 6 b. 
The number 1ab is called the geometric mean of a and b.
	128.	 Refer to Problems 125 and 127. Show that the geometric 
mean of a and b is less than the arithmetic mean of a and b.
	129.	 Harmonic Mean  For 0 6 a 6 b, let h be defined by
1
h = 1
2 a1
a + 1
bb
	
	 Show that a 6 h 6 b. The number h is called the harmonic 
mean of a and b.
	130.	 Refer to Problems 125, 127, and 129. Show that the  
harmonic mean of a and b equals the geometric mean 
squared divided by the arithmetic mean.
	131.	 Another Reciprocal Property  Prove that if 0 6 a 6 b, then
	
	 0 6 1
b 6 1
a.
What do I need to get a B?
68
87
82
89
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	132.	 Make up an inequality that has no solution. Make up one 
that has exactly one solution.
	133.	 The inequality x2 + 1 6 - 5 has no real solution. Explain 
why.
	134.	 Do you prefer to use inequality notation or interval notation 
to express the solution to an inequality? Give your reasons. 
Are there particular circumstances when you prefer one to 
the other? Cite examples.
	135.	 How would you explain to a fellow student the  
underlying reason for the multiplication properties for  
inequalities (page 1018)? That is, the sense or direction of 
an inequality remains the same if each side is multiplied by 
a positive real number, whereas the direction is reversed if 
each side is multiplied by a negative real number?
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	
4
2
0
    2.  False    3.  2    4.  True

1026 
Appendix A  Review
Now Work the ‘Are You Prepared?’ problems on page 1031.
	
Objectives	 	1  Work with nth Roots (p. 1026)
	
	 	2  Simplify Radicals (p. 1027)
	
	 	3  Rationalize Denominators (p. 1028)
	
	 	4  Solve Radical Equations (p. 1029)
	
	 	5  Simplify Expressions with Rational Exponents (p. 1029)
A.10  nth Roots; Rational Exponents
•	 Exponents, Square Roots (Appendix A, Section A.1, pp. 952–954)
PREPARING FOR THIS SECTION  Before getting started, review the following:
Work with nth Roots
1
Notice that if a is negative and n is even, then 2
n a is not defined. When it  
is defined, the principal nth root of a number is unique.
The symbol 2
n a for the principal nth root of a is called a radical; the integer 
n is called the index, and a is called the radicand. If the index of a radical is 2, we
call 2
2 a the square root of a and omit the index 2 by simply writing 1a. If the index
is 3, we call 2
3 a the cube root of a.
Simplifying Principal nth Roots
(a)	 2
3 8 = 2
3 23 = 2	
(b)  2
3 -64 = 2
3 1 -423 = -4
(c)	 A
4 1
16 = B
4 a1
2b
4
= 1
2	
(d)  2
6 1 -226 = 0 -20 = 2
These are examples of perfect roots, since each simplifies to a rational number. 
Notice the absolute value in Example 1(d). If n is even, then the principal nth root 
must be nonnegative.
Example 1
•
In general, if n Ú 2 is an integer and a is a real number, we have
	
 2
n an = a   if n Ú 3 is odd 	
(1a)
	
 2
n an = 0 a0   if n Ú 2 is even	
(1b)
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1
Radicals provide a way of representing many irrational real numbers. For  
example, it can be shown that there is no rational number whose square is 2. Using 
radicals, we can say that 12 is the positive number whose square is 2.
In Words
The symbol 2a
n
 means “give me 
the number that, when raised to 
the power n, equals a.”
The principal nth root of a real number a, n Ú 2 an integer, symbolized by 
2
n a, is defined as follows:
2
n a = b means a = bn
where a Ú 0 and b Ú 0 if n is even and a, b are any real numbers if n is odd.
Definition

Section A.10  nth Roots; Rational Exponents  1027
Using a Calculator to Approximate Roots
Use a calculator to approximate 2
5 16.
 Solution  Figure 35 shows the result using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 1 7
Simplify Radicals
Let n Ú 2 and m Ú 2 denote integers, and let a and b represent real numbers. 
Assuming that all radicals are defined, we have the following properties:
Example 2
•
2
Properties of Radicals
	
 2
n ab = 2
n a 2
n b	
(2a)
	
 A
n a
b = 2
n a
2
n b
  b ≠0
	
(2b)
	
 2
n am = (2
n a2m 	
(2c)
When used in reference to radicals, the direction to “simplify” will mean to  
remove from the radicals any perfect roots that occur as factors.
Simplifying Radicals
(a)	 232 = 216 # 2 = 216 # 22 = 422
(b)	 2
3 16 = 2
3 8 # 2 = 2
3 8 # 2
3 2 = 2
3 23 # 2
3 2 = 22
3 2
(c)	 2
3 -16x4 = 2
3 -8 # 2 # x3 # x = 2
3 1 -8x32 12x2
	
 = 2
3 1 -2x23 # 2x = 2
3 1 -2x23 # 2
3 2x = -2x2
3 2x
(d)	 B
4
  16x5
81
= B
4
  24
 x4
 x
34
= B
4 a2x
3 b
4 # x = B
4 a2x
3 b
4 # 2
4 x = ` 2x
3 `  2
4 x
Now Work  p r o b l e m s  1 5  a n d  2 1
Two or more radicals can be combined, provided that they have the same index 
and the same radicand. Such radicals are called like radicals.
Combining Like Radicals
(a)	  -8212 + 23 = -824 # 3 + 23
	
 = -8 # 24 23 + 23
	
 = -1623 + 23 = -1523
Example 3
c
(2a)
               c 
Factor out 16,  
a perfect square.
               c
Factor out 8,  
a perfect cube.
c
(2a)
c
Group perfect  
cubes.
c
Factor perfect 
cubes inside radical.
c
(2a)
•
Example 4
Figure 35 

1028 
Appendix A  Review
(b)	  2
3 8x4 + 2
3 -x + 42
3 27x = 2
3 23
 x3x + 2
3 -1 # x + 42
3 33
 x
 
	
 = 2
3 12x23 # 2
3 x + 2
3 -1 # 2
3 x + 42
3 33 # 2
3 x
	
 = 2x2
3 x - 1 # 2
3 x + 122
3 x
	
 = 12x + 112 2
3 x
Now Work  p r o b l e m  3 9
Rationalize Denominators
When radicals occur in quotients, it is customary to rewrite the quotient so that the 
new denominator contains no radicals. This process is referred to as rationalizing 
the denominator.
The idea is to multiply by an appropriate expression so that the new denominator 
contains no radicals. For example:
•
3
If a Denominator	
	
To Obtain a Denominator
Contains the Factor	
Multiply by	
Free of Radicals
23	
23	
1 2322 = 3
23 + 1	
23 - 1	
1 2322 - 12 = 3 - 1 = 2
22 - 3	
22 + 3	
1 2222 - 32 = 2 - 9 = -7
25 - 23	
25 + 23	
1 2522 - 1 2322 = 5 - 3 = 2
2
3 4	
2
3 2	
2
3 4 # 2
3 2 = 2
3 8 = 2
In rationalizing the denominator of a quotient, be sure to multiply both the numerator 
and the denominator by the expression.
Rationalizing Denominators
Rationalize the denominator of each expression.
(a) 
4
22
            (b)  23
2
3 2
            (c)  1x - 2
1x + 2, x Ú 0
 (a)	
4
22
=
4
22
# 22
22
=
422
1 2222 = 422
2
= 222
(b)	 23
2
3 2
= 23
2
3 2
# 2
3 4
2
3 4
= 23 2
3 4
2
3 8
= 23 2
3 4
2
(c)	  1x - 2
1x + 2 = 1x - 2
1x + 2 # 1x - 2
1x - 2 = 1 1x - 222
1 1x22 - 22
	
 = 1 1x22 - 41x + 4
x - 4
= x - 41x + 4
x - 4
Now Work  p r o b l e m  5 3
Example 5
Solution
æ
Multiply by 22
22
 .
æ
Multiply by 2
3 4
2
3 4
 .
•

Section A.10  nth Roots; Rational Exponents  1029
Solve Radical Equations
When the variable in an equation occurs in a square root, cube root, and so on—that 
is, when it occurs in a radical—the equation is called a radical equation. Sometimes 
a suitable operation will change a radical equation to one that is linear or quadratic. 
A commonly used procedure is to isolate the most complicated radical on one side 
of the equation and then eliminate it by raising each side to a power equal to the 
index of the radical. Care must be taken, however, because apparent solutions 
that are not, in fact, solutions of the original equation may result. These are called 
extraneous solutions. Therefore, we need to check all answers when working with 
radical equations, and we check them in the original equation.
Solving a Radical Equation
Find the real solutions of the equation: 2
3 2x - 4 - 2 = 0
 The equation contains a radical whose index is 3. Isolate it on the left side.
	
 2
3 2x - 4 - 2 = 0
	
 2
3 2x - 4 = 2 
Add 2 to both sides.
Now raise each side to the third power (the index of the radical is 3) and solve.
	
 1 2
3 2x - 423 = 23	
Raise each side to the power 3.
	
 2x - 4 = 8	
Simplify.
	
 2x = 12	
Add 4 to both sides.
	
 x = 6	
Divide both sides by 2.
Check:	 2
3 2162 - 4 - 2 = 2
3 12 - 4 - 2 = 2
3 8 - 2 = 2 - 2 = 0
The solution set is 566.
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 3
4
Example 6
Solution
•
Simplify Expressions with Rational Exponents
Radicals are used to define rational exponents.
5
 If a is a real number and n Ú 2 is an integer, then
	
a1>n = 2
n a	
(3)
provided that 2
n a exists.
Definition
Note that if n is even and a 6 0, then 2
n a and a1>n do not exist.
Writing Expressions Containing Fractional Exponents as Radicals
(a)	 41>2 = 24 = 2	
(b)  81>2 = 28 = 222
(c)	 1 -2721>3 = 2
3 -27 = -3	
(d)  161>3 = 2
3 16 = 22
3 2
Example 7
•
 If a is a real number and m and n are integers containing no common factors, 
with n Ú 2, then
	
am>n = 2
n am = 1 2
n a2m	
(4)
provided that 2
n a exists.
Definition

1030 
Appendix A  Review
We have two comments about equation (4):
	 1.	 The exponent m
n  must be in lowest terms, and n Ú 2 must be positive.
	 2.	 In simplifying the rational expression am>n, either 2
n am or 12
n a2m may  
be used, the choice depending on which is easier to simplify. Generally, taking the 
	
	 root first, as in 1 2
n a2m, is easier.
Using Equation (4)
(a)	 43>2 = 1 2423 = 23 = 8	
(b)  1 -824>3 = 1 2
3 -824 = 1-224 = 16
(c)	 1322 -2>5 = 1 2
5 322 -2 = 2-2 = 1
4	 (d)  256>4 = 253>2 = 1 22523 = 53 = 125
Now Work  p r o b l e m  6 7
It can be shown that the Laws of Exponents hold for rational exponents. The 
next example illustrates using the Laws of Exponents to simplify.
Simplifying Expressions Containing Rational Exponents
Simplify each expression. Express your answer so that only positive exponents  
occur. Assume that the variables are positive.
(a)	 1x2>3
 y2 1x-2
 y21>2      (b)  ¢ 2x1>3
y2>3 ≤
-3
      (c)  ¢ 9x2
 y1>3
x1>3
 y
≤
1>2
 (a)	  1x2>3
 y2 1x-2
 y21>2 = 1x2>3
 y2 3 1x-221>2
 y1>24
	
 = x2>3
 yx-1
 y1>2
	
 = 1x2>3 # x-12 1y # y1>22
	
 = x-1>3
 y3>2
 
	
 = y3>2
x1>3
(b)	 ¢ 2x1>3
y2>3 ≤
-3
= ¢ y2>3
2x1>3 ≤
3
=
1y2>323
12x1>323 =
y2
231x1>323 = y2
8x
(c)	 ¢ 9x2
 y1>3
x1>3
 y
≤
1>2
= ¢ 9x2- 11>32
y1- 11>32 ≤
1>2
= ¢ 9x5>3
y2>3 ≤
1>2
=
91>21x5>321>2
1y2>321>2
= 3x5>6
y1>3
Now Work  p r o b l e m  8 7
The next two examples illustrate some algebra that you will need to know for 
certain calculus problems.
Writing an Expression as a Single Quotient
Write the following expression as a single quotient in which only positive exponents 
appear.
1x2 + 121>2 + x # 1
2
 1x2 + 12 -1>2 # 2x
Example 8
•
Example 9
Solution
•
Example 10

Section A.10  nth Roots; Rational Exponents  1031
  1x2 + 121>2 + x # 1
 2 
 1x2 + 12 -1>2 #  2 x = 1x2 + 121>2 +
x2
1x2 + 121>2
 = 1x2 + 121>21x2 + 121>2 + x2
1x2 + 121>2
 = 1x2 + 12 + x2
1x2 + 121>2
 =
2x2 + 1
1x2 + 121>2
Now Work  p r o b l e m  9 3
Factoring an Expression Containing Rational Exponents
Factor and simplify:  4
3
 x1>312x + 12 + 2x4>3
 Begin by writing 2x4>3 as a fraction with 3 as the denominator.
 4
3
 x1>312x + 12 + 2x4>3 = 4x1>3(2x + 1)
3
+ 6x4>3
3
= 4x1>3(2x + 1) + 6x4>3
3
 = 2x1>3[2(2x + 1) + 3x]
3
= 2x1>3(7x + 2)
3
Now Work  p r o b l e m  1 0 5
Solution
•
Example 11
Solution
c
Add the two fractions
c
Simplify
c
2 and x1>3  are common factors
•
	 3.	 In the symbol 2
n a, the integer n is called the 
.
	 4.	 We call 2
3 a the 
  
 of a.
	 5.	 Let n Ú 2 and m Ú 2 be integers, and let a and b be real 
numbers. Which of the following is not a property of  
radicals? Assume all radicals are defined.
(a)	 A
n a
b = 2
n a
2
n b
	
(b)  2
n a + b = 2
n a + 2
n b
(c)	 2
n ab = 2
n a2
n b	
(d)  2
n am = 12
n a2m 
	 6.	 If a is a real number and n Ú 2 is an integer, then which of
	
	 the following expressions is equivalent to 2
n a, provided that 
it exists?
(a)	 a-n    (b)  an    (c)   
1
an    (d)	 a1>n 
Concepts and Vocabulary
‘Are You Prepared?’  Answers are given at the end of these exercises. If you get a wrong answer, read the pages in red.
	 1.	 1-322 =  ; - 32 =  
 (pp. 952–953)
	 2.	 216 =   ; 21- 422 =   (pp. 953–954)
A.10  Assess Your Understanding
	 7.	 Which of the following phrases best defines like radicals?
(a)	 Radical expressions that have the same index
(b)	 Radical expressions that have the same radicand
(c)	 Radical expressions that have the same index and the 
same radicand 
(d)	 Radical expressions that have the same variable
	 8.	 To rationalize the denominator of the expression 
12
1 - 13
 , 
multiply both the numerator and the denominator by which 
of the following?
(a)	 23    (b)  22    (c)  1 + 23    (d)  1 - 23 
	 9.	 True or False  2
5 - 32 = - 2 
	 10.	 True or False  2
4 1- 324 = - 3 

1032 
Appendix A  Review
Skill Building
In Problems 11–48, simplify each expression. Assume that all variables are positive when they appear.
	 11.	 2
3 27  	
12.	 2
4 16  	
13.	 2
3 - 8 
	
14.	 2
3 - 1 
	 15.	 28 
	
16.	 2
3 54 
	
17.	 2
3 - 8x4 
	
18.	 2
4 48x5 
	 19.	 2
4 x12
 y8 
	
20.	 2
5 x10
 y5 
	
21.	 B
4
 x9
 y7
xy3  
	
22.	 B
3
3xy2
81x4
 y2 
	 23.	 236x 
	
24.	 29x5 
	
25.	 2
4 162x9 y12 
	
26.	 2
3 - 40x14 y10 
	 27.	 23x2 212x 
	
28.	 25x 220x3 
	
29.	 125 2
3 922 
	
30.	 12
3 3 21024 
	 31.	 13262 12222 
	
32.	 15282 1- 3232 
	 33.	 322 + 422 
	
34.	 625 - 425 
	 35.	 - 218 + 228 
	
36.	 2212 - 3227 
	
37.	 123 + 32 123 - 12 
	
38.	 125 - 22 125 + 32
	 39.	 52
3 2 - 22
3 54 
	
40.	 92
3 24 - 2
3 81 
	
41.	 12x - 122 
	
42.	 12x + 2522
	 43.	 2
3 16x4 - 2
3 2x	
44.	 2
4 32x + 2
4 2x5	
45.	 28x3 - 3250x	
46.	 3x29y + 4225y 
	 47.	 2
3 16x4
 y - 3x2
3 2xy + 52
3 - 2xy4 
	
48.	 8xy - 225x2
 y2 + 2
3 8x3
 y3 
In Problems 49–62, rationalize the denominator of each expression. Assume that all variables are positive when they appear.
	 49.	
1
22
 
	
50.	
2
23
 
	
51.	 - 23
25
 
	
52.	 - 23
28
 
	 53.	
23
5 - 22
 
	
54.	
22
27 + 2
 
	
55.	 2 - 25
2 + 325
 
	
56.	 23 - 1
223 + 3
 
	 57.	
5
22 - 1
 
	
58.	
- 3
25 + 4
 
	
59.	
5
2
3 2
 
	
60.	 - 2
2
3 9
 
	 61.	 2x + h - 2x
2x + h + 2x
 
	
62.	 2x + h + 2x - h
2x + h - 2x - h
 
In Problems 63–66, solve each equation.
	 63.	 2
3 2t - 1 = 2 
	
64.	 2
3 3t + 1 = - 2 
	
65.	 215 - 2x = x 
	
66.	 212 - x = x 
In Problems 67–82, simplify each expression.
	 67.	 82>3  	
68.	 43>2  	
69.	 1- 2721>3 
	
70.	 163>4 
	 71.	 163>2 
	
72.	 253>2 
	
73.	 9-3>2 
	
74.	 16-3>2 
	 75.	 a9
8b
3>2
 
	
76.	 a27
8 b
2>3
 
	
77.	 a8
9b
-3>2
 
	
78.	 a 8
27b
-2>3
 
	 79.	 1- 10002 -1>3 
	
80.	 - 25-1>2 
	
81.	 a- 64
125b
-2>3
 
	
82.	 - 81-3>4 
In Problems 83–90, simplify each expression. Express your answer so that only positive exponents occur. Assume that the variables are 
positive.
	 83.	 x3>4
 x1>3
 x-1>2 
	
84.	 x2>3
 x1>2
 x-1>4 
	
85.	 1x3
 y621>3 
	
86.	 1x4y823>4 
	 87.	
1x2
 y21>31xy222>3
x2>3
 y2>3
 
	
88.	
1xy21>41x2
 y221>2
1x2y23>4
 
	
89.	
116x2
 y-1>323>4
1xy221>4
 
	
90.	
14x-1
 y1>323>2
1xy23>2
 
Applications and Extensions
In Problems 91–104, expressions that occur in calculus are given. Write each expression as a single quotient in which only positive  
exponents and/or radicals appear.
	 91.	
x
11 + x21>2 + 211 + x21>2  x 7 - 1 
	
92.	 1 + x
2x1>2 + x1>2  x 7 0 

	 93.	 2x1x2 + 121>2 + x2 # 1
2
 1x2 + 12 -1>2 # 2x 
	
94.	 1x + 121>3 + x # 1
3
 1x + 12 -2>3  x ≠-1 
	95.	 24x + 3 #
1
22x - 5
+ 2x - 5 #
1
524x + 3  x 7 5	
96.	
2
3 8x + 1
32
3 1x - 222 +
2
3 x - 2
242
3 18x + 122  x ≠2, x ≠-  1
8
	 97.	
21 + x - x #
1
221 + x
1 + x
  x 7 -1 
	
98.	
2x2 + 1 - x #
2x
22x2 + 1
x2 + 1
 
	 99.	
1x + 421>2 - 2x1x + 42 -1>2
x + 4
  x 7 -4 
	
100.	
19 - x221>2 + x219 - x22 -1>2
9 - x2
  -3 6 x 6 3 
	101.	
x2
1x2 - 121>2 - 1x2 - 121>2
x2
  x 6 - 1 or x 7 1 	
102.	
1x2 + 421>2 - x21x2 + 42 -1>2
x2 + 4
 
	103.	
1 + x2
22x
- 2x2x
11 + x222   x 7 0 
	
104.	
2x11 - x221>3 + 2
3
 x311 - x22 -2>3
11 - x222>3
  x ≠-1, x ≠1 
In Problems 105–114, expressions that occur in calculus are given. Factor each expression. Express your answer so that only positive  
exponents occur.
	105.	 1x + 123>2 + x # 3
2
 1x + 121>2  x Ú -1 
	 106.	 1x2 + 424>3 + x # 4
3
 1x2 + 421>3 # 2x 
	107.	 6x1>21x2 + x2 - 8x3>2 - 8x1>2  x Ú 0	
108.	 6x1>212x + 32 + x3>2 # 8  x Ú 0 
	109.	 31x2 + 424>3 + x # 41x2 + 421>3 # 2x 
	
110.	 2x13x + 424>3 + x2 # 413x + 421>3 
	111.	 413x + 521>312x + 323>2 + 313x + 524>312x + 321>2 x Ú -  3
2	 112.	 616x + 121>314x - 323>2 + 616x + 124>314x - 321>2  x Ú 3
4
	113.	 3x-1>2 + 3
2
 x1>2  x 7 0 
	
114.	 8x1>3 - 4x-2>3  x ≠0 
h
v
v0
V = 40h2 A
96
h - 0.608
	
	 where h is the height of the gasoline (in inches) as measured on a depth stick.
(a)	 If h = 12 inches, how many gallons of gasoline are in the tank? 
(b)	 If h = 1 inch, how many gallons of gasoline are in the tank? 
	124.	 Inclined Planes  The final velocity v of an object in feet per second (ft>sec) after it slides down a frictionless inclined plane of 
height h feet is
v = 264h + v0
2
	
	 where v0 is the initial velocity (in ft/sec) of the object.
(a)	 What is the final velocity v of an object that slides down a frictionless inclined 
plane of height 4 feet? Assume that the initial velocity is 0. 
(b)	 What is the final velocity v of an object that slides down a frictionless inclined 
plane of height 16 feet? Assume that the initial velocity is 0. 
(c)	 What is the final velocity v of an object that slides down a frictionless inclined 
plane of height 2 feet with an initial velocity of 4 ft/sec? 
In Problems 115–122, use a calculator to approximate each radical. Round your answer to two decimal places.
	115.	 22 
	
116.	 27 
	
117.	 2
3 4 
	
118.	 2
3 - 5 
	119.	 2 + 23
3 - 25
 
	
120.	 25 - 2
22 + 4
 
	
121.	 32
3 5 - 22
23
 
	
122.	 223 - 2
3 4
22
 
	123.	 Calculating the Amount of Gasoline in a Tank  A Shell station stores its gasoline in underground tanks that are right circular  
cylinders lying on their sides. See the illustration. The volume V of gasoline in the tank (in gallons) is given by the formula
Section A.10  nth Roots; Rational Exponents  1033

1034 
Appendix A  Review
Explaining Concepts: Discussion and Writing
	127.	 Give an example to show that 2a2 is not equal to a. Use it to explain why 2a2 = 0 a0 .
‘Are You Prepared?’ Answers
	 1.	 9; -9                2.  4; 4
Problems 125 and 126 require the following information.
Period of a Pendulum  The period T, in seconds, of a pendulum of length l, in feet, may be approximated using the formula
T = 2p A
l
32
In Problems 125 and 126, express your answer both as a square root and as a decimal.
	125.	 Find the period T of a pendulum whose length is 64 feet. 
	126.	 Find the period T of a pendulum whose length is 16 feet. 

All graphing utilities (that is,  all graphing calculators and all computer software graphing  
packages) graph equations by plotting points on a screen. The screen itself actually 
consists of small rectangles called pixels. The more pixels the screen has, the better the 
resolution. Most graphing calculators have 50 to 100 pixels per inch; most smartphones  
have 300 to 450 pixels per inch. When a point to be plotted lies inside a pixel, the pixel 
is turned on (lights up). The graph of an equation is a collection of pixels. Figure 1 
shows how the graph of y = 2x looks on a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator.
The screen of a graphing utility will display the coordinate axes of a rectangular 
coordinate system. However, the scale must be set on each axis. The smallest and 
largest values of x and y to be included in the graph must also be set. This is called setting  
the viewing rectangle or viewing window. Figure 2 shows a typical viewing window.
To select the viewing window, values must be given to the following expressions:
Xmin:	
the smallest value of x
Xmax:	
the largest value of x
Xscl:	
the number of units per tick mark on the x-axis
Ymin:	
the smallest value of y
Ymax:	
the largest value of y
Yscl:	
the number of units per tick mark on the y-axis
Figure 3 illustrates these settings and their relation to the Cartesian coordinate system.
1035
Appendix B
Graphing Utilities
Outline
B.1	
The Viewing Rectangle
B.2	
Using a Graphing Utility to Graph Equations
B.3	
Using a Graphing Utility to Locate Intercepts  
and Check for Symmetry
B.4	
Using a Graphing Utility to Solve Equations
B.5	
Square Screens
B.6	
Using a Graphing Utility to Graph  
Inequalities
B.7	
Using a Graphing Utility to Solve Systems  
of Linear Equations
B.8	
Using a Graphing Utility to Graph  
a Polar Equation
B.9	
Using a Graphing Utility to Graph  
Parametric Equations
B.1  The Viewing Rectangle
Figure 1  y = 2x
Figure 2  Viewing window
Figure 3 
If the scale used on each axis is known, the minimum and maximum values 
of x and y shown on the screen can be determined by counting the tick marks. 
Look again at Figure 2. For a scale of 1 on each axis, the minimum and maximum  
values of x are -10 and 10, respectively; the minimum and maximum values of y are  

1036 
Appendix B  Graphing Utilities
also -10 and 10. If the scale is 2 on each axis, then the minimum and maximum 
values of x are -20 and 20, respectively; and the minimum and maximum values  
of y are -20 and 20, respectively.
Conversely, if the minimum and maximum values of x and y are known, the 
scales can be determined by counting the tick marks displayed. This text follows the 
practice of showing the minimum and maximum values of x and y in illustrations  
so that the reader will know how the viewing window was set. See Figure 4. The 
numbers outside of the viewing window stand for
 Xmin = -3   Ymin = -4
 Xmax = 3   Ymax = 4
 Xscl = 1  
 Yscl = 2
Finding the Coordinates of a Point Shown on a Graphing  
Utility Screen
Find the coordinates of the point shown in Figure 5. Assume that the coordinates 
are integers.
Solution  First note that the viewing window used in Figure 5 is
 Xmin = -3   Ymin = -4
 Xmax = 3   Ymax = 4
 Xscl = 1  
 Yscl = 2
The point shown is 2 tick units to the left of the origin on the horizontal axis 
1scale = 12 and 1 tick up on the vertical axis 1scale = 22. The coordinates of the 
point shown are 1 -2, 22.
Example 1
•
In Problems 1–4, determine the coordinates of the points shown. Tell in which quadrant each point lies. Assume that the coordinates are integers.
B.1  Exercises
	 5.	 	
	 6.	
7.	 	
	 8.	 	
	 9.	 	
	 10.	
1.	
                      
2.	
                                
3.	
                                
4.	
                     
In Problems 5–10, determine the viewing window used.
Figure 4 
4
−4
−3
3
Figure 5 
4
−4
−3
3
10
−10
−5
5
10
−10
−5
5
5
−5
−5
5
10
−10
−10
10
4
−4
−6
6
2
−2
−3
3
3
−1
−6
6
4
−12
−9
9
2
10
3
9
4
−22
−10
8

Section B.2  Using a Graphing Utility to Graph Equations  1037
From Examples 2 and 3 in Section 1.2, recall that a graph can be obtained by  
plotting points in a rectangular coordinate system and connecting them. Graphing 
utilities perform these same steps when graphing an equation. For example, the 
TI-84 Plus C determines 265 evenly spaced input values,* starting at Xmin and 
ending at Xmax; uses the equation to determine the output values; plots these 
points on the screen; and finally (if in the connected mode) draws a line between 
consecutive points.
To graph an equation in two variables x and y using a graphing utility requires 
that the equation be written in the form y = 5expression in x6. If the original 
equation is not in this form, replace it by equivalent equations until the form 
y = 5expression in x6 is obtained.
B.2  Using a Graphing Utility to Graph Equations
*These input values depend on the values of Xmin and Xmax. For example, if Xmin = - 10  and Xmax = 10, 
then the first input value will be - 10 and the next input value will be - 10 +
10 - 1- 102
 264
= - 9.9242, 
and so on.
In Problems 11–16, select a setting so that each of the given points will lie within the viewing rectangle.
	 11.	 1- 10, 52, 13, -22, 14, - 12	
12.	 15, 02, 16, 82, 1-2, - 32	
13.	 140, 202, 1- 20, -802, 110, 402
	 14.	 1- 80, 602, 120, - 302, 1- 20, -402	
15.	 10, 02, 1100, 52, 15, 1502	
16.	 10, - 12, 1100, 502, 1- 10, 302
**Some graphing utilities have a ZOOM-STANDARD feature that automatically sets the viewing 
window to the standard viewing window and graphs the equation.
Steps for Graphing an Equation Using a Graphing Utility
Step 1:	 Solve the equation for y in terms of x.
Step 2:	 Get into the graphing mode of the graphing utility. The screen will 
usually display Y1 =   , prompting you to enter the expression  
involving x found in Step 1. (Consult your manual for the correct 
way to enter the expression; for example, y = x2 might be entered as  
x^2 or as x*x or as x xy 2).
Step 3:	 Select the viewing window. Without prior knowledge about the  
behavior of the graph of the equation, it is common to select the  
standard viewing window** initially. The viewing window is then  
adjusted based on the graph that appears. In this text the standard 
viewing window is
 Xmin = -10   Ymin = -10
 Xmax = 10   Ymax = 10
 Xscl = 1  
 Yscl = 1
Step 4:	 Graph.
Step 5:	 Adjust the viewing window until a complete graph is obtained.
Graphing an Equation on a Graphing Utility
Graph the equation:  6x2 + 3y = 36
 Step 1:	 Solve for y in terms of x.
 6x2 + 3y = 36
 3y = -6x2 + 36 
 y = -2x2 + 12
Example 1
Solution
Subtract 6x2 from both sides of the equation.
Divide both sides of the equation by 3 and simplify.

1038 
Appendix B  Graphing Utilities
Step 2:	 From the Y1 =  screen, enter the expression -2x2 + 12 after the prompt.
Step 3:	 Set the viewing window to the standard viewing window.
Step 4:	 Graph. The screen should look like Figure 6.
Step 5: 	The graph of y = -2x2 + 12 is not complete. The value of Ymax must be 
increased so that the top portion of the graph is visible. After increasing 
the value of Ymax to 12, we obtain the graph in Figure 7. The graph is now  
complete.
Look again at Figure 7. Although a complete graph is shown, the graph might 
be improved by adjusting the values of Xmin and Xmax. Figure 8 shows the graph 
of y = -2x2 + 12 using Xmin = -4 and Xmax = 4. Do you think this is a better 
choice for the viewing window?
Creating a Table and Graphing an Equation
Create a table and graph the equation:  y = x3
 Most graphing utilities have the capability of creating a table of values for an equation.  
(Check your manual to see if your graphing utility has this capability.) Table 1  
illustrates a table of values for y = x3 on a TI-84 Plus C. See Figure 9 for the graph.
Example 2
Solution
In Problems 1–16, graph each equation using the following viewing windows:
(a)	  Xmin = - 5
	
 Xmax = 5
	
 Xscl = 1
	
 Ymin = - 4
	
 Ymax = 4
	
 Yscl = 1
(b)	  Xmin = - 10
	
 Xmax = 10
	
 Xscl = 2
	
 Ymin = - 8
	
 Ymax = 8
	
 Yscl = 2
B.2  Exercises
	 1.	 y = x + 2	
2.	 y = x - 2	
3.	 y = - x + 2	
4.	 y = - x - 2
	 5.	 y = 2x + 2	
6.	 y = 2x - 2	
7.	 y = - 2x + 2	
8.	 y = - 2x - 2
	 9.	 y = x2 + 2	
10.	 y = x2 - 2	
11.	 y = - x2 + 2	
12.	 y = - x2 - 2
	 13.	 3x + 2y = 6	
14.	 3x - 2y = 6	
15.	 - 3x + 2y = 6	
16.	 - 3x - 2y = 6
	 17–32.  For each of the above equations, create a table, - 5 … x … 5, and list points on the graph.
Figure 6  y = - 2x2 + 12
10
−10
−10
10
Figure 7  y = - 2x2 + 12 
•
12
−10
−10
10
Figure 8  y = - 2x2 + 12
12
−10
−4
4
Figure 9  y = x3
•
10
−10
−3
3
Table 1

Value and Zero (or Root)
Most graphing utilities have an eVALUEate feature that, given a value of x, 
determines the value of y for an equation. This feature can be used to evaluate an 
equation at x = 0 to determine the y-intercept. Most graphing utilities also have a 
ZERO (or ROOT) feature that can be used to determine the x-intercept(s) of an 
equation.
Finding Intercepts Using a Graphing Utility
Use a graphing utility to find the intercepts of the equation y = x3 - 8.
 Figure 10(a) shows the graph of y = x3 - 8.
The eVALUEate feature of a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator accepts as input a 
value of x and determines the value of y. Letting x = 0, we find that the y-intercept 
is -8. See Figure 10(b).
The ZERO feature of a TI-84 Plus C is used to find the x-intercept(s).  
See Figure 10(c). The x-intercept is 2.
Example 1
Solution
•
B.3  Using a Graphing Utility to Locate Intercepts  
 and Check for Symmetry
Graphing the Equation y = 1
x 
Graph the equation y = 1
x. Based on the graph, infer information about intercepts 
and symmetry.
 Figure 11 shows the graph. Infer from the graph that there are no intercepts; also 
infer that symmetry with respect to the origin is a possibility. The TABLE feature 
on a graphing utility can provide further evidence of symmetry with respect to the 
origin. Using a TABLE, observe that for any ordered pair 1x, y2, the ordered pair 
1-x, -y2 is also a point on the graph.
Example 2
Solution
Figure 10 
10
−20
−5
5
(a)
10
−20
−5
5
(b)
10
−20
−5
5
(c)
Figure 11 
•
4
−4
−3
3
Y1 5 x
1
Section B.3  Using a Graphing Utility to Locate Intercepts and Check for Symmetry  1039

1040 
Appendix B  Graphing Utilities
For many equations, there are no algebraic techniques that lead to a solution. For 
such equations, a graphing utility can often be used to investigate possible solutions.  
When a graphing utility is used to solve an equation, approximate solutions  
usually are obtained. Unless otherwise stated, this text follows the practice of giving 
approximate solutions rounded to two decimal places.
The ZERO (or ROOT) feature of a graphing utility can be used to find the 
solutions of an equation when one side of the equation is 0. In using this feature to 
solve equations, make use of the fact that the x-intercepts (or zeros) of the graph of 
an equation are found by letting y = 0 and solving the equation for x. Solving an 
equation for x when one side of the equation is 0 is equivalent to finding where the 
graph of the corresponding equation crosses or touches the x-axis.
Using ZERO (or ROOT) to Approximate Solutions of an Equation
Find the solution(s) of the equation x2 - 6x + 7 = 0. Round answers to two  
decimal places.
 The solutions of the equation x2 - 6x + 7 = 0 are the same as the x-intercepts of 
the graph of Y1 = x2 - 6x + 7. Begin by graphing the equation. See Figure 12(a).
From the graph there appear to be two x-intercepts (solutions to the equation): 
one between 1 and 2, the other between 4 and 5.
Using the ZERO (or ROOT) feature of the graphing utility, determine that 
the x-intercepts, and thus the solutions to the equation, are x = 1.59 and x = 4.41, 
rounded to two decimal places. See Figures 12(b) and (c).
Example 1
Solution
•
In Problems 1–6, use ZERO (or ROOT) to approximate the smaller of the two x-intercepts of each equation. Express the answer rounded 
to two decimal places.
	 1.	 y = x2 + 4x + 2 
	
2.	 y = x2 + 4x - 3 
	
3.	 y = 2x2 + 4x + 1 
	 4.	 y = 3x2 + 5x + 1 
	
5.	 y = 2x2 - 3x - 1 
	
6.	 y = 2x2 - 4x - 1 
In Problems 7–12, use ZERO (or ROOT) to approximate the positive x-intercepts of each equation. Express each answer rounded to two 
decimal places.
	 7.	 y = x3 + 3.2x2 - 16.83x - 5.31 
	
8.	 y = x3 + 3.2x2 - 7.25x - 6.3 
	 9.	 y = x4 - 1.4x3 - 33.71x2 + 23.94x + 292.41 
	
10.	 y = x4 + 1.2x3 - 7.46x2 - 4.692x + 15.2881 
	 11.	 y = x3 + 19.5x2 - 1021x + 1000.5 
	
12.	 y = x3 + 14.2x2 - 4.8x - 12.4 
B.3  Exercises
B.4  Using a Graphing Utility to Solve Equations
A second method for solving equations using a graphing utility involves the  
INTERSECT feature of the graphing utility. This feature is used most effectively 
when one side of the equation is not 0.
Figure 12 
8
−2
−1
7
(a)
8
−2
−1
7
(b)
8
−1
7
(c)
−2

Section B.4  Using a Graphing Utility to Solve Equations  1041
Using INTERSECT to Approximate Solutions of an Equation
Find the solution(s) of the equation 31x - 22 = 51x - 12.
 Begin by graphing each side of the equation as follows: graph Y1 = 31x - 22 and 
Y2 = 51x - 12. See Figure 13(a).
At the point of intersection of the graphs, the value of the y-coordinate is the 
same. Conclude that the x-coordinate of the point of intersection represents the 
solution of the equation. Do you see why? The INTERSECT feature on a graphing 
utility determines the point of intersection of the graphs. Using this feature, find that 
the graphs intersect at 1 -0.5, -7.52. See Figure 13(b). The solution of the equation 
is therefore x = -0.5.
Example 2
Solution
•
Summary
The following steps can be used for approximating solutions of equations.
Steps for Approximating Solutions of Equations Using ZERO (or ROOT)
Step 1:  Write the equation in the form 5expression in x6 = 0.
Step 2:  Graph Y1 = 5expression in x6.
	
Be sure that the graph is complete. That is, be sure that all the intercepts are shown on the screen.
Step 3:  Use ZERO (or ROOT) to determine each x-intercept of the graph.
Steps for Approximating Solutions of Equations Using INTERSECT
Step 1:  Graph Y1 = 5expression in x on the left side of the equation6.
	
Graph Y2 = 5expression in x on the right side of the equation6.
Step 2:  Use INTERSECT to determine each x-coordinate of the point(s) of intersection, if any.
	
Be sure that the graphs are complete. That is, be sure that all the points of intersection are shown on the screen.
Solving a Radical Equation
Find the real solutions of the equation 2
3 2x - 4 - 2 = 0.
 Figure 14 shows the graph of the equation Y1 = 2
3 2x - 4 - 2. From the graph, 
there is one x-intercept near 6. Using ZERO (or ROOT), find that the x-intercept  
is 6. The only solution is x = 6.
Example 3
Solution
Figure 13 
5
−15
−4
4
(a)
5
−15
−4
4
(b)
Figure 14 
•
1
−4
−1
10

1042 
Appendix B  Graphing Utilities
Most graphing utilities have a rectangular screen. Because of this, using the same 
settings for both x and y will result in a distorted view. For example, Figure 15 shows 
the graph of the line y = x connecting the points 1 -10, -102 and 110, 102.
We expect the line to bisect the first and third quadrants, but it doesn’t. The  
selections for Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax must be adjusted so that a square 
screen results. On the TI-84 Plus C, this is accomplished by setting the ratio of x to 
y at 8:5.* For example, if
 Xmin = -16   Ymin = -10
 Xmax = 16   Ymax = 10
then the ratio of x to y is
Xmax - Xmin
Ymax - Ymin = 16 - 1 -162
10 - 1 -102 = 32
20 = 8
5
for a ratio of 8:5, resulting in a square screen.
Examples of   Viewing Rectangles That Result in Square Screens
Example 1
*Some graphing utilities have a built-in function that automatically squares the screen. For example, the 
TI-84 Plus C has a ZSquare function that does this. Some graphing utilities require a ratio other than 8:5 
to square the screen. For example, the HP 48G requires the ratio of x to y to be 2:1 for a square screen. 
Consult your manual.
B.5  Square Screens
(a)	  Xmin = -8
	
 Xmax =
8
	
 Xscl =
1
	
 Ymin = -5
	
 Ymax =
5
	
 Yscl =
1
(b)	  Xmin = -16
	
 Xmax =
16
	
 Xscl =
1
	
 Ymin = -10
	
 Ymax =
10
	
 Yscl =
1
(c)	  Xmin = -24
	
 Xmax =
24
	
 Xscl =
3
	
 Ymin = -15
	
 Ymax =
15
	
 Yscl =
3
•
Figure 16 shows the graph of the line y = x on a square screen using the  
viewing rectangle given in part (b). Notice that the line now bisects the first and 
third quadrants. Compare this illustration to Figure 15.
In Problems 1–8, determine which of the given viewing rectangles result in a square screen.
	 1.	  Xmin = -8 
	
	  Xmax =
8
	
	
 Xscl =
2
	
	  Ymin = - 5
	
	  Ymax =
5
	
	
 Yscl =
2
	 2.	  Xmin = - 5 
	
	  Xmax =
5
	
	
 Xscl =
1
	
	  Ymin = - 4
	
	  Ymax =
4
	
	
 Yscl =
1
	 3.	  Xmin =
0 
	
	  Xmax =
16
	
	
 Xscl =
4
	
	  Ymin = - 2
	
	  Ymax =
8
	
	
 Yscl =
2
	 4.	  Xmin = -16 
	
	  Xmax =
16
	
	
 Xscl =
8
	
	  Ymin = -10
	
	  Ymax =
10
	
	
 Yscl =
5
B.5  Exercises
	 5.	  Xmin = -6 
	
	  Xmax =
6
	
	
 Xscl =
1
	
	  Ymin = - 2
	
	  Ymax =
2
	
	
 Yscl = 0.5
	 6.	  Xmin = - 8 
	
	  Xmax =
8
	
	
 Xscl =
4
	
	  Ymin = - 5
	
	  Ymax =
5
	
	
 Yscl =
1
	 7.	  Xmin = - 3 
	
	  Xmax =
5
	
	
 Xscl =
1
	
	  Ymin = - 2
	
	  Ymax =
3
	
	
 Yscl =
1
	 8.	  Xmin = -10 
	
	  Xmax =
14
	
	
 Xscl =
2
	
	  Ymin = -7
	
	  Ymax =
8
	
	
 Yscl =
3
	 9.	 If Xmin = - 4, Xmax = 12, and Xscl = 1, how should Ymin, Ymax, and Yscl be selected so that the viewing rectangle contains 
the point 14, 82 and the screen is square?
	 10.	 If Xmin = - 6, Xmax = 10, and Xscl = 2, how should Ymin, Ymax, and Yscl be selected so that the viewing rectangle contains 
the point 14, 82 and the screen is square?
Figure 15  y = x
10
(10, 10)
−10
(−10, −10)
−10
10
Figure 16  y = x
10
(10, 10)
−10
(−10, −10)
−16
16

Graphing an Inequality Using a Graphing Utility
Use a graphing utility to graph:  3x + y - 6 … 0
 Begin by graphing the equation 3x + y - 6 = 0 1Y1 = -3x + 62. See Figure 17. 
As with graphing by hand, select test points from each region and determine  
whether they satisfy the inequality. To test the point 1-1, 22, for example,  
enter 31-12 + 2 - 6 … 0. See Figure 18(a). The 1 that appears indicates that  
the statement entered (the inequality) is true. When the point 15, 52 is tested,  
a 0 appears, indicating that the statement entered is false. Thus, 1-1, 22 is a part of 
the graph of the inequality, and 15, 52 is not. Figure 18(b) shows the graph of the 
inequality on a TI-84 Plus C.*
Example 1
Solution
*Consult your owner’s manual for shading techniques.
B.6  Using a Graphing Utility to Graph Inequalities
Steps for Graphing an Inequality Using a Graphing Utility
Step 1:	 Replace the inequality symbol by an equal sign, solve the equation for y,  
and graph the equation.
Step 2:	 In each region, select a test point P and determine whether the  
coordinates of P satisfy the inequality.
	
(a)  If the test point satisfies the inequality, then so do all the points in 
the region. Indicate this by using the graphing utility to shade the 
region.
	
(b)  If the coordinates of P do not satisfy the inequality, then neither 
will any of the other points in that region.
B.7  Using a Graphing Utility to Solve Systems  
  of Linear Equations
Most graphing utilities have the capability to put the augmented matrix of a system of 
linear equations in row echelon form. The next example, Example 6 from Section 11.2,  
page 758 demonstrates this feature using a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator.
Figure 17 
10
−10
−2
6
Y1 5 23x 1 6
Figure 18 
•
(a)
10
−10
−2
6
(b)
Section B.7  Using a Graphing Utility to Solve Systems of Linear Equations  1043

1044 
Appendix B  Graphing Utilities
Solving a System of Linear Equations Using a Graphing Utility
Solve: 
c
x -
y +
z =
8
2x + 3y -
z = -2
3x - 2y - 9z =
9
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
 
 The augmented matrix of the system is
C
1
-1
1
2
3
-1
3
-2
-9
  3 
8
-2
9
 S
Enter this matrix into a graphing utility and name it A. See Figure 19(a). Using the 
REF (row echelon form) command on matrix A, the results shown in Figure 19(b) 
are obtained. If the entire matrix does not fit on the screen, scroll right to see the 
rest of it.
Example 1
Solution
The system of equations represented by the matrix in row echelon form is
E
1
-  2
3 
-3
0
1
15
13 
0
0
1
  
5 
3
-
 
24
13 
1
 U e
x - 2
3  y -
3z =
3
y + 15
13  z = -  24
13 
z =
1
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
 
Using z = 1, back-substitute to get
d
x - 2
3  y -
3112 =
3
y + 15
13  112 = -  24
13 
            
d
x - 2
3  y =
6
y = - 39
13 = -3
 
(1)
(2)
 
Solve the second equation for y to find that y = -3. Back-substitute y = -3
into x - 2
3  y = 6 to find that x = 4. The solution of the system is x = 4, y = -3,
z = 1.
Notice that the row echelon form of the augmented matrix using the graphing 
utility differs from the row echelon form obtained in Chapter 11 (p. 759), yet both 
matrices provide the same solution! This is because the two solutions used different 
row operations to obtain the row echelon form. In all likelihood, the two solutions  
parted ways in Step 4 of the algebraic solution, where fractions were avoided by  
interchanging rows 2 and 3.
Most graphing utilities also have the ability to put a matrix in reduced row  
echelon form.  Figure 20 shows the reduced row echelon form of the augmented  
matrix from Example 1 using the rref command on a TI-84 Plus C graphing calculator. 
Using this command, note that the solution of the system is x = 4, y = -3, z = 1.
(1)
(2)  ¡
        Simplify.
•
Figure 19 
(a)
(b)
Figure 20 

Section B.9    Using a Graphing Utility to Graph Parametric Equations  1045
Most graphing utilities require the following steps in order to obtain the graph of a 
polar equation. Be sure to be in POLAR mode.
B.8  Using a Graphing Utility to Graph a Polar Equation
Graphing a Polar Equation Using a Graphing Utility
Step 1:	 Set the mode to POLar. Solve the equation for r in terms of u.
Step 2:	 Select the viewing rectangle in polar mode. Besides setting Xmin, 
Xmax, Xscl, and so forth, the viewing rectangle in polar mode  
requires setting the minimum and maximum values for u and an  
increment setting for u (ustep). In addition, a square screen and radian 
measure should be used.
Step 3:	 Enter the expression involving u that you found in Step 1. (Consult 
your manual for the correct way to enter the expression.)
Step 4:	 Graph.
Graphing a Polar Equation Using a Graphing Utility
Use a graphing utility to graph the polar equation r sin u = 2.
 Step 1:	 Solve the equation for r in terms of u.
 r sin u = 2
 r =
2
sin u
Step 2:	 From the POLAR mode, select the viewing rectangle.
 umin = 0  
 Xmin = -8   Ymin = -5
 umax = 2p   Xmax = 8   Ymax = 5
 ustep = p
24    Xscl = 1  
 Yscl = 1
ustep determines the number of points that the graphing utility will plot. For 
example, if ustep is p
24 , the graphing utility will evaluate r at u = 01umin2,
 p
24 , 2p
24 , 3p
24 , and so forth, up to 2p1umax2. The smaller ustep is, the more 
points the graphing utility will plot. Experiment with different values for 
umin, umax, and ustep to see how the graph is affected.
Step 3:	 Enter the expression 2
sin u after the prompt r1 =   .
Step 4:	 Graph.
The graph is shown in Figure 21.
Example 1
Solution
•
B.9  Using a Graphing Utility to Graph Parametric Equations
Most graphing utilities have the capability of graphing parametric equations. The 
following steps are usually required to obtain the graph of parametric equations. 
Check your owner’s manual to see how yours works.
Figure 21  r sin u = 2
5
−5
−8
8

1046 
Appendix B  Graphing Utilities
Graphing a Curve Defined by Parametric Equations  
Using a Graphing Utility
Graph the curve defined by the parametric equations
x = 3t2  y = 2t  -2 … t … 2
 Step 1:	 Enter the equations x1t2 = 3t2, y1t2 = 2t with the graphing utility in 
PARAMETRIC mode.
Step 2:	 Select the viewing window. The interval is -2 … t … 2, so select the following  
square viewing window:
 Tmin = -2   Xmin = 0   Ymin = -5
 Tmax = 2   Xmax = 16   Ymax = 5
 Tstep = 0.1   Xscl = 1  
 Yscl = 1
Choose Tmin = -2 and Tmax = 2 because -2 … t … 2. Finally, the choice 
for Tstep will determine the number of points that the graphing utility will 
plot. For example, with Tstep at 0.1, the graphing utility will evaluate x and y 
at t = -2, -1.9, -1.8, and so on. The smaller the Tstep, the more points the 
graphing utility will plot. Experiment with different values of Tstep to see 
how the graph is affected.
Step 3:	 Graph. Watch the direction in which the graph is drawn. This direction shows 
the orientation of the curve.
The graph shown in Figure 22 is complete.
Example 1
Solution
•
Graphing Parametric Equations Using a Graphing Utility
Step 1:	 Set the mode to PARAMETRIC. Enter x1t2 and y1t2.
Step 2:	 Select the viewing window. In addition to setting Xmin, Xmax, Xscl, 
and so on, the viewing window in parametric mode requires setting 
minimum and maximum values for the parameter t and an increment 
setting for t (Tstep).
Step 3:	 Graph.
Exploration
Graph the following parametric equations using a graphing utility with Xmin = 0, Xmax = 16, 
Ymin = -5, Ymax = 5, and Tstep = 0.1.
1.  x = 3t2
4 , y = t, -4 … t … 4
2.  x = 3t2 + 12t + 12, y = 2t + 4, -4 … t … 0
3.  x = 3t2>3 , y = 22
3 t, -8 … t … 8
Compare these graphs to Figure 22. Conclude that parametric equations defining a curve are not 
unique; that is, different parametric equations can represent the same graph.
Exploration
In FUNCTION mode, graph x =
3y2 
4   aY1 = A
4x
3    and Y2 = - A
4x
3   b with Xmin = 0, Xmax = 16,
Ymin = -5, Ymax = 5. Compare this graph with Figure 22. Why do the graphs differ?
Figure 22   
x = 3t2, y = 2t, - 2 … t … 2
0
−5
5
16

1047
Answers
	15. (a) Quadrant II	
(b) x-axis
(c) Quadrant III	
(d) Quadrant I
(e) y-axis	
(f) Quadrant IV
y
6
x
7
D  (6, 5)
B  (6, 0)
A  (3, 2)
E  (0, 3)
F  (6, 3)
C  (2, 2)
17. The points will be on a 
vertical line that is 2 units to 
the right of the y-axis.
y
5
x
5
(2, 4)
(2, 1)
(2, 0)
(2, 3)
(2, 1)
19. 15
21. 110
23. 2117
25. 129
27. 515
29. 0 a0 22
31.  d(A, B) = 113
 d(B, C) = 113
 d(A, C) = 126
 (113)2 + (113)2 = (126)2
 Area = 13
2  square units
y
5
x
5
B  (1, 3)
A  (2, 5)
C  (1, 0)
33.  d(A, B) = 1145
 d(B, C) = 2129
 d(A, C) = 129
 (129)2 + (2129)2 = (1145)2
 Area = 29 square units
y
6
26
x
6
26
B 5 (3, 25)
C 5 (21, 5)
A 5 (26, 3)
57. a s
2, s
2 b  63. 9012 ≈127.28 ft  65. (a) (90, 0), (90, 90), (0, 90)  (b) 512161 ≈232.43 ft  (c) 301149 ≈366.20 ft
67. d = 50t  mi  69. (a) (2.65,  1.6)  (b) Approximately 1.285 units
1.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 50)
	 3. intercepts  4. y = 0  5. y-axis  6. 4  7. (- 3,  4)  8. T  9. F  10. F  11. d  12. c  13. (0, 0) is on the graph.  15. (0, 1) and (- 1, 0) are on  
the graph.  17. (0, 1) and (2, 0) are on the graph.
	19. (6, 0), (0, - 6)
y
3
26
x
6
23
(6, 0)
(0, 26)
y 5 x 2 6
21. (3, 0), (0, - 9)
y
10
x
10
210
(0, 29)
(3, 0)
y 5 3x 2 9
23. (- 1, 0), (1, 0), (0, - 1)
y
5
x
5
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
y  x2  1
25. (- 1, 0), (1, 0), (0, 1)
y
5
25
x
5
25
(21, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
y 5 2x2 1 1
27. (2, 0), (0, 5)
y
23
x
5
7
25
(0, 5)
(2, 0)
5x 1 2y  5  10
29. (- 1, 0), (1, 0), (0, 4)
y
5
x
5
25
(0, 4)
(1, 0)
(21, 0)
4x2 1 y 5 4
31.
y
5
x
5
(b)  (3, 4)
(a)  (3, 4)
(c)  (3, 4)
(3, 4)
33.
y
5
25
x
5
25
(a) 5 (4, 2)
(4, 22)
(b) 5 (24, 22)
(c) 5  (24, 2)
35.
y
5
25
x
5
25
(c) 5 (1, 1)
(21, 21) (b) 5 (1, 21)
(a) 5  (21, 1)
37.
y
5
25
x
5
25
(a) 5 (4, 0)
(4, 0)
(c) 5  (24, 0)
(b) 5  (24, 0)
35.  d(A, B) = 4
 d(B, C) = 2
 d(A, C) = 215
 42 + 22 = (215)2
 Area = 4  square units
y
5
25
x
5
25
A 5 (4, 23)
C 5 (2, 1)
B 5 (4, 1)
37. (4, 0)	
39. a3, - 1
2 b
41. a - 1, - 1
2 b	 43. aa
2, a
2 b
39.
y
5
25
x
5
25
(c) 5 (3, 0)
(b) 5 (3, 0)
(a) 5  (23, 0)
(23, 0)
41. (a) (- 1,  0), (1, 0)
(b) Symmetric with respect to the  
x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin
43. (a) (- 2, 0), (0, - 3), (2, 0)
(b) Symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
45. (a) (- 2, 0), (0, 2) (0, - 2), (2, 0) 
(b) Symmetric with respect to the 
x-axis, y-axis, and the origin.
47. (a) (- 4, 0), (0, 0), (4, 0) 
(b) Symmetric with respect to the origin.
49. (a) (x, 0), - 1 … x … 2
(b) Not symmetric to  
x-axis, y-axis, or origin.
51. (a) No intercepts
(b) Symmetric with respect to the x-axis.
53.
y
5
25
x
5
25
(5, 3)
(5, 23)
(24, 0)
(0, 22)
(0, 2)
55.
y
5
25
x
5
25
(22, 2)
(2, 2)
(0, 0)
(0, 4)
57. (- 9, 0), (0, 3), (0, 3); symmetric with respect to the x-axis.  59. (0, 0); symmetric with respect 
to the origin.  61. (0, 9), (3, 0), (- 3, 0); symmetric with respect to the y-axis
63. (- 1, 0), (1, 0), (0, - 2), (0, 2); symmetric with respect to the x-axis, y-axis, and origin.
65. (- 1, 0), (1, 0), (0, - 1); symmetric with respect to the y-axis.  67. (0, 4); symmetric  
with ­respect to the y-axis.  69. (- 2, 0), (2, 0); symmetric with respect to the origin.   
71. No intercepts; symmetric with respect to the origin.
Chapter 1  Graphs
1.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 40)
	 7. x-coordinate or abscissa; y-coordinate or ordinate  8. quadrants  9. midpoint  10. F  11. F  12. T  13. b  14. a

1048 
Answers  Section 1.2
1.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 64)
	 1. undefined; 0  2. 3; 2  3. T  4. F  5. T  6. m1 = m2; y-intercepts; m1m2 = - 1  7. 2  8. - 1
2  9. F  10. d  11. c  12. b 
73. 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 21)
75. 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(1, 1)
(21, 21)
77. a = - 4 or a = 1  85. (a) y = 2x2 and y =  x  have the same graph.  (b) 2x2 =  x 
(c) x Ú 0 for y = (1x)2, while x can be any real number for y = x.  (d) y Ú 0 for y = 2x2
	13. (a) Slope = 1
2 
(b) If x increases by  
2 units, y will increase 
by 1 unit.
15. (a) Slope = 1
3 
(b) If x increases by  
3 units, y will  
increase by 1 unit.
17.  Slope = - 2
y
8
22
x
8
22
(3, 4)
(4, 2)
19.  Slope = - 1
2
y
5
x
5
(2, 1)
(2, 3)
21.  Slope = 0
y
5
25
x
5
25
(4, 2)
(25, 2)
23. Slope undefined
y
5
25
x
5
25
(2, 2)
(2, 0)
25.
y
8
x
5
(2, 5)
3
1
P  (1, 2)
y  2  3(x  1)
27.
y
8
2
x
8
2
(6, 1)
P  (1, 3)
5
2
y  3   2
5 (x  1)
29.
y
5
5
x
5
5
P  (2, 4)
y  4
31.
y
5
5
x
5
5
P  (2, 0)
x  2
33. (- 1, 5); (0, 7); (1, 9) 
35. (0, 6); (3, 10); (6, 14) 
37. (5, 0); (6, - 1); (7, - 2) 
39. x - 2y = 0 or y = 1
2x 
41. x - 3y = - 4 or y = 1
3
 x + 4
3  43. x + y = 3 or y = - x + 3  45. x - y = - 2 or y = x + 2  47. 3x - y = - 9 or y = 3x + 9 
49. x - 2y = 1 or y = 1
2x - 1
2  51. x - 5y = - 23 or y = 1
5x + 23
5   53. 3x + y = 3 or y = - 3x + 3  55. x - y = - 4 or y = x + 4 
57. x = 3; no slope–intercept form  59. x = 4  61. 2x - y = - 4 or y = 2x + 4  63. x - 2y = 0 or x = 1
2
 x  65. y = 2 
67. 2x + y = 0 or y = - 2x  69. 2x + y = 4 or y = - 2x + 4  71. x = 3; no slope-intercept form. 
73.  Slope = 2; y@intercept = 3
y
8
x
5
(1, 5)
(0, 3)
75.  Slope = - 1
3; y@intercept = 2
y
5
25
x
5
25
(23, 3)
(3, 1)
(0, 2)
77.  Slope = 2; y@intercept = 1
2
y
5
25
x
5
25
1
2
0, 
5
2
1, 
79.  Slope = - 1
2; y@intercept = 2
y
5
x
5
(0, 2)
(4, 0)
81.  Slope = - 3
2; y@intercept = 3
y
5
25
x
5
25
(2, 0)
(0, 3)
(4, 23)
83.  Slope = 1; y@intercept = - 2
y
5
25
x
5
25
(2, 0)
(1, 21)
(0, 22)
85.  Slope = 0; y@intercept = - 1 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(0, 21)
87. Slope undefined; no y-intercept 
y
5
25
x
5
25
89.  Slope = - 1; y@intercept = 0
y
5
25
x
5
25
(22, 2)
(0, 0)
91.  Slope = - 3
2; y@intercept = 0 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(22, 3)
(2, 23)
(0, 0)
93. (a) x-intercept: 3; y-intercept: 2
(b) 
y
5
x
5
(0, 2)
(3, 0)
95. (a) x-intercept: 4; y-intercept: - 6
(b) 
y
4
26
x
5
25
(4, 0)
(0, 26)
97. (a) x-intercept: 18
5 ; y-intercept: 6
(b) 
y
10
210
x
5
25
(0, 6)
, 
18
5
0
99. (a) x-intercept: 4; y-intercept: - 6
(b) 
y
4
x
5
25
26
(4, 0)
(0, 26)
101. (a) x-intercept: - 4; y-intercept: 3
(b) 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(0, 3)
(24, 0)
103. y = 0
105. Perpendicular
107. Neither
109. y = - x + 1 or x + y = 1
111. y = - 1
2x - 1 or x + 2y = - 2 

Answers  Review Exercises  1049
121. (a) C = 0.0821x + 15.37, 0 … x … 800 
(b) 
(c) +31.79  (d) +56.42 
(e) Each additional kW-h used adds 
$0.0821 to the bill. 
y
x
100
(800, 81.05)
(0, 15.37)
80
60
40
20
0 100
300
500
700
900
Cost (dollars)
kW-h
129. All have the same slope, 2; the lines are parallel.
y
6
x
5
(0, 4)
(0, 0)
(0, 2)
2x  y  0
2x  y  2
2x  y  4
131. (b), (c), (e), (g)  133. (c)  139. No; no  141. They are the same line. 
143. Yes, if the y-intercept is 0. 
1.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 72)
	 3. F  4. radius  5. T  6. F  7. d  8. a  9. Center (2, 1); radius = 2; (x - 2)2 + (y - 1)2 = 4
	11. Center (1, 2); radius = 22; (x - 1)2 + (y - 2)2 = 2
13. x2 + y2 = 9; 
x2 + y2 - 9 = 0
y
5
25
x
5
25
(0, 0)
19. (x + 5)2 + (y + 2)2 = 49; 
x2 + y2 + 10x + 4y - 20 = 0
y
10
10
x
5
15
(5, 2)
15. x2 + (y - 2)2 = 4;
x2 + y2 - 4y = 0
y
5
x
5
(0, 2)
17. (x - 2)2 + (y + 3)2 = 16; 
x2 + y2 - 4x + 6y - 3 = 0
y
2
28
x
7
23
(2, 23)
21. x2 + ay + 1
2 b
2
= 1
4; 
x2 + y2 + y = 0
y
2
22
x
2
22
1
2
0, 2
23. (a) (h, k) = (0, 1); r = 1
(b) 
(c) (0, 0); (0, 2) 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(0, 1)
25. (a) (h, k) = (3, 0); r = 2 
(b) 
(c) (1, 0); (5, 0)
y
5
x
6
(3, 0)
27. (a) (h, k) = (- 2, - 1); r = 5 
(b) 
(c) (- 2 { 216, 0); (0, - 1 { 121)
y
5
5
x
5
5
(2, 1)
29. (a) (h, k) = (- 2, 2); r = 3 
(b) 
(c) (- 2 { 15, 0); (0, 2 { 15) 
y
6
x
4
(2, 2)
31. (a) (h, k) = a - 1
2, - 1
2 b; r = 1
(b) 
(c) a - 1 { 23
2
, 0b; a0, - 1 { 23
2
b 
y
2
22
x
2
22
1
2
, 2
1
2
2
33. (a) (h, k) = (3, - 2); r = 5
(b) 
(c) (3 { 121, 0); (0, - 6), (0, 2) 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(22, 0)
35. (a) (h, k) = (0, 2); r = 2
(b) 
(c) (0, 0), (0, 4) 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(0, 2)
37. (x - 1)2 + y2 = 20  39. (x + 3)2 + (y - 1)2 = 9  41. (x - 2)2 + (y - 2)2 = 5  43. (x - 4)2 + (y + 2)2 = 9  45. (d)  47. (a) 
59. y = 2  61. (b), (c), (e), (g) 
Review Exercises (page 75)
	 1. (a) 215  (b) (2, 1)  (c) 1
2  (d) For each run of 2, there is a rise of 1.  2. (a) 5  (b) a - 1
2, 1b  (c) - 4
3  (d) For each run of 3, there is a rise of - 4.
	 3. (a) 12  (b) (4, 2)  (c) undefined  (d) no change in x
	 4.
y
9
x
5
(2, 8)
(1, 5)
(0, 4)
(1, 5)
(2, 8)
5. (- 4, 0), (0, 2), (0, 0), (0, - 2), (2, 0)  8. (0, 1); symmetric with respect to the y-axis  10. (0, 0), (- 1, 0), (0, - 2); no symmetry 
12.  (x + 1)2 + (y + 2)2 = 1 
13. Center (0, 1); radius = 2
Intercepts: (- 13, 0), (13, 0), 
(0, - 1), (0, 3) 
y
x
5
5
(0, 1)
14. Center (1, - 2); radius = 3
Intercepts: (1 - 15, 0), (1 + 15, 0),  
    (0, - 2 - 212), (0, - 2 + 212) 
y
x
5
5
(1, 2)
15. Center (1, - 2); radius = 15
Intercepts: (0, 0), (2, 0), (0, - 4)
y
x
5
5
(1, 2)
16. 2x + y = 5 or y = - 2x + 5
18. x + 5y = - 10 or y = - 1
5x - 2
20. 2x - 3y = - 19 or y = 2
3x + 19
3

1050 
Answers  Review Exercises
26.
y
x
10
5
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
y  x3
22.  Slope = 4
5; y@intercept = 4 
y
x
6
4
(0, 4)
(5, 0)
23. Slope = 3
2; y-intercept = 1
2
y
x
2.5
2.5
1
2
0, 
1
3
,

0
24. Intercepts: (6, 0), (0, −4) 
y
x
5
3
(0, 4)
(6, 0)
25. Intercepts: (4, 0), (0, 6) 
y
x
2
5
(4, 0)
(0, 6)
27.
y
x
5
10
(9, 3)
(4, 2)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
y  x
28. y
x
5
5
(4, 4)
(1, 2)
Chapter Test (page 76)
	 1. d = 2113  2. (2, 1)  3. (a) m = - 2
3  (b) For every 3-unit change in x,y will change by - 2 units. 
	 4.
y
1
x
5
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
(2, 5)
(1, 8)
(1, 8)
(2, 5)
(0, 9)
5. 
y
5
x
10
(9, 3)
(4, 2)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(4, 2)
(9, 3)
6. Intercepts: 
(- 3, 0), (3, 0), (0, 9); 
symmetric with  
respect to the y-axis
7. y = - 2x + 2
y
5
x
5
(0, 2)
(1, 0)
(3, 4)
8. x2 + y2 - 8x + 6y = 0
y
5
x
4
(2, 1)
9. Center: (- 2, 1); 
radius: 3
10. Parallel line: y = - 2
3x - 1
3; perpendicular line: y = 3
2
 x + 3 
Chapter 2  Functions and Their Graphs
2.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 90)
	 7. independent; dependent  8. [0, 5]  9. ≠; f; g  10. 1g - f2 1x2  11. F  12. T  13. F  14. F  15. a  16. c  17. d  18. a
19. Function; Domain: {Elvis, Colleen, Kaleigh, Marissa}; Range: {January 8, March 15, September 17}  21. Function; Domain: {Less than 9th grade, 
9th – 12th grade, High School Graduate, Some College, College Graduate}; Range: {$18,120, $23,251, $36,055, $45,810, $67,165}  23. Not a function; 
Domain: {- 3, 2, 4}; Range: {6, 9, 10}  25. Function; Domain: {1, 2, 3, 4}; Range: {3, 5, 7, 12}  27. Not a function; Domain: {- 4, - 3, - 2, - 1};  
Range: {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}  29. Function; Domain: {- 2, - 1, 0, 1}; Range: {3, 4, 16}  31. Function  33. Function
35. Not a function  37. Not a function  39. Function  41. Not a function  43. (a) - 4  (b) 1  (c) - 3  (d) 3x2 - 2x - 4  (e) - 3x2 - 2x + 4 
(f) 3x2 + 8x + 1  (g) 12x2 + 4x - 4  (h) 3x2 + 6xh + 3h2 + 2x + 2h - 4  45. (a) - 1
4  (b)  0  (c) 0  (d) x2 - 1
- x + 4  (e) x2 + 1
x + 4  
(f) x2 + 2x
x + 5   (g) 4x2 - 1
2x + 4   (h) x2 + 2xh + h2 - 1
x + h + 4
  47. (a) 0  (b) 12  (c) 0  (d) 2x2 - x  (e) - 2x2 + x  (f) 2x2 + 3x + 2  (g) 24x2 + 2x 
(h) 2x2 + 2xh + h2 + x + h  49. (a) 3
4  (b) 8
9  (c) 0  (d) 
1
(- x + 2)2  (e) 
1
(- x + 2)2 - 1  (f) 1 -
1
(x + 3)2  (g) 1 -
1
4(x + 1)2 
(h) 1 -
1
(x + h + 2)2  51. All real numbers  53. All real numbers  55. {x0 x ≠- 4, x ≠4}  57. {x0 x ≠- 2, x ≠0, x ≠2}  59. {x  x … 1} 
61. {x0 x 7 9}  63. {x0 x 6 - 2}  65. {z0 z Ú - 3, z ≠2}  67. (a) 1f + g2 1x2 = 5x + 1; All real numbers  (b) 1f - g2 1x2 = x + 7; All real 
numbers  (c) 1f # g2 1x2 = 6x2 - x - 12; All real numbers  (d) a
f
g b 1x2 = 3x + 4
2x - 3; e x ` x ≠3
2 f  (e) 16  (f) 11  (g) 10  (h) - 7 
69. (a) 1f + g2 1x2 = 4x2 + 2x2 + 4; All real numbers  (b) 1f - g2 1x2 = - 4x3 + 2x2 + 2; All real numbers 
(c) 1f # g2 1x2 = 8x5 + 12x3 + 2x2 + 3; All real numbers  (d) a
f
g b 1x2 = 2x2 + 3
4x3 + 1
; e x ` x ≠- 2
3 2
2 f  (e) 130  (f) - 222  (g) 363  (h) 1 
71. (a) 1f + g2 1x2 = 0 x0 + x; All real numbers  (b) 1f - g2 1x2 = 0 x0 - x; All real numbers 
(c) 1f # g2 1x2 = x0 x0 ; All real numbers  (d) a
f
g b 1x2 =
0 x0
x ;  All real numbers  (e) 6  (f) 0  (g) 4  (h) 1 
73. (a) 1f + g2 1x2 = 2x - 1 + 24 - x; {x0 1 … x … 4}  (b) 1f - g2 1x2 = 2x - 1 - 24 - x; {x0 1 … x … 4} 
(c) 1f # g2 1x2 = 2- x2 + 5x - 4; {x0 1 … x … 4}  (d) a
f
g b 1x2 = A
x - 1
4 - x; {x0 1 … x … 4}  (e) 22 + 1  (f) 23  (g) 22  (h) 0 
75. (a) 1f + g2 1x2 = 2x + 1 + 2
x; {x  x Ú - 1, and x ≠0}  (b) 1f - g2 1x2 = 2x + 1 - 2
x; {x  x Ú - 1, and x ≠0} 
(c) 1f # g2 1x2 = 22x + 1
x
; {x  x Ú - 1, and x ≠0}  (d) a
f
g b 1x2 = x2x + 1
2
; {x  x Ú - 1, and x ≠0}  (e) 8
3  (f) 25 - 1
2  (g) 23  (h) 22
2  

Answers  Section 2.3  1051
77. g1x2 = 5 - 7
2  x  79. 4  81. 2x + h  83. 6x + 3h - 2  85. 
- 1
1x + h + 32 1x + 32   87. 
20
1x + h - 42 1x - 42  
89. 
1
2x + h + 1 + 2x + 1
 
115. No; domain of f is all real numbers; domain of g is 5x x ≠- 16  117. H1x2 = 3x - x3
age
118. Intercepts: (- 16, 0), (- 8, 0); x-axis symmetry  119. (4, 32)  120. a - 3
2, - 2b  121. (x - 4)2 + (y + 1)2 = 9 
2.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 98)
3. vertical  4. 5; - 3  5. a = - 2  6. F  7. F  8. T  9. c  10. a  11. (a) f102 = 3; f1- 62 = - 3  (b) f162 = 0; f1112 = 1  (c) Positive  (d) Negative 
(e) - 3, 6, and 10  (f) - 3 6 x 6 6; 10 6 x … 11  (g) {x0 - 6 … x … 11}  (h) {y0 - 3 … y … 4}  (i) - 3, 6, 10  (j) 3  (k) 3 times  (l) Once
(m) 0, 4  (n) - 5, 8  13. Function  (a) Domain: all real numbers; Range: {y  y 7 0}  (b) (0, 1)  (c) None  15. Function  (a) Domain: 
{x0 - p … x … p}; Range: {y0 - 1 … y … 1}  (b) a - p
2  , 0b, ap
2  , 0b, 10, 12  (c) y -axis  17. Not a function  19. Function  (a) Domain: 
{x0 0 … x … 4}; Range: {y0 0 … y 6 3}  (b) (0, 0)m  (c) None  21. Function  (a) Domain: {x  x Ú - 3}; Range: {y0 y Ú 0}  (b) 1- 3, 02,  
(2, 0), (0, 2)  (c) None  23. Function  (a) Domain: all real numbers; Range: {y0 y … 5}  (b) (- 1, 0), (2, 0), (0, 4)  (c) None  25. (a) No 
(b) f1- 22 = - 22; 1- 2, - 222  (c) - 1
3, 2; 12, - 22, a - 1
3 , - 2b  (d) All real numbers  (e) 0, 5
3  (f) 0  27. (a) No  (b) f142 = - 3; 14, - 32 
(c) 14; (14, 2)  (d) {x0 x ≠6}  (e) - 2  (f) - 1
3  29. (a) Yes  (b) f142 = 4; (4, 4)  (c) - 2; 1- 2, 12  (d) {x  x ≠2}  (e) 0  (f) 0 
33. (a) Approximately 10.4 ft high 
(b) Approximately 9.9 ft high 
(c) 
35. (a) About 81.07 ft  (b) About 129.59 ft  (c) About 26.63 ft 
(d) About 528.13 ft 
(e) 
h
x
10
5
0
5 10 15 20 25
(8, 10.4)
(12, 9.9)
(22.6, 0)
(20, 3.6)
(15, 8.4)
(0, 6)
150
00
550
(d) The ball will not go through 
the hoop; h1152 ≈8.4 ft. If 
v = 30 ft/sec, h1152 = 10 ft. 
(f) About 115.07 ft and 413.05 ft  (g) 275 ft; 
maximum height shown in the table is  
131.8 ft  (h) 264 ft 
47. (a) 2 hr elapsed during which Kevin was between 0 and 3 mi from home  (b) 0.5 hr elapsed during 
which Kevin was 3 mi from home  (c) 0.3 hr elapsed during which Kevin was between 0 and 3 mi from 
home  (d) 0.2 hr elapsed during which Kevin was 0 mi from home  (e) 0.9 hr elapsed during which 
Kevin was between 0 and 2.8 mi from home  (f) 0.3 hr elapsed during which Kevin was 2.8 mi from 
home  (g) 1.1 hr elapsed during which Kevin was between 0 and 2.8 mi from home  (h) 3 mi   
(i) Twice  49. No points whose x-coordinate is 5 or whose y-coordinate is 0 can be on the graph. 
52. - x2 + 5x - 9  53. 2210  54. y = 2
3
 x + 8  55. (- q, q) 
37. (a) $223; $220   (b) {x x 7 0}
  (c)
500
00
1000
(d)
41. The x-intercepts can number anywhere from 0 to infinitely many. 
There is at most one y-intercept.
43. (a) III  (b) IV  (c) I  (d) V  (e) II 
45.
y
x
5
4
3
2
1
0
10
20
Distance (blocks)
Time (minutes)
(5, 2)
(7, 0)
(6, 0)
(22, 5)
(29, 0)
(e) 600 mi/h
2.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 112)
6. increasing  7. even; odd  8. T  9. T  10. F  11. c  12. d  13. Yes  15. No  17. 1- 8, - 22; 10, 22; 15, 72  19. Yes; 10 
21. - 2, 2; 6, 10  23. f (2) = 10  25. (a) 1- 2, 02, 10, 32, 12, 02  (b) Domain: {x0 - 4 … x … 4} or [- 4, 4]; Range: {y0 0 … y … 3} or [0, 3]
(c) Increasing on 1- 2, 02 and (2, 4); Decreasing on 1- 4, - 22 and (0, 2)  (d) Even  27. (a) (1, 0)  (b) Domain: {x  x 7 0} or (0, q); Range: all real 
numbers  (c) Increasing on 10, q 2  (d) Neither
29. (a) a - p
2 , 0b, 10, 12, ap
2 , 0b  (b) Domain: {x0 - p … x … p} or [- p, p]; Range: {y0 - 1 … y … 1} or [- 1, 1]
(c) Increasing on (- p, 0); Decreasing on (0, p)  (d) Even  31. (a) (- 2.3, 0), (3, 0), (0, 1)  (b) Domain: {x0 - 3 … x … 3} or [- 3, 3]; 
Range: {y0 - 2 … y … 2} or [- 2, 2]  (c) Increasing on (- 3, - 2) and (0, 2); Decreasing on 12, 32; Constant on 1- 2, 02 and (1, 2) 
(d) Neither  33. (a) 0; 2  (b) - 1, 1; 0, 0  35. (a) 0; 1  (b) p, p; - 1, - 1  37. Odd  39. Neither  41. Neither  43. Even  45. Even  47. Odd 
49. Absolute maximum: f(1) = 4; absolute minimum: f(5) = 1; local maximum: f(3) = 3; local minimum: f(2) = 2  51. Absolute maximum: none; 
absolute minimum: f (0) = 1; local maximum: none; local minimum: none  53. Absolute maximum: ƒ(2) = 4; absolute minimum: none; local maximum: 
ƒ(2) = 4; local minimum: ƒ(0) = 2  55. Absolute maximum: none; absolute minimum: none; local maximum: none; local minimum: none

1052 
Answers  Section 2.3
57. 
Increasing: 1- 2, - 12, 11, 22
Decreasing: 1- 1, 12
Local maximum: f1- 12 = 4
Local minimum: f112 = 0
59.
Increasing: 1- 0.71, 02, 10.71, 22
Decreasing: 1- 2, - 0.712, 10, 0.712
Local maximum: f102 = 0
Local minima: f1- 0.712 = - 0.25, 
f10.712 = - 0.25
2
2
1
2
61.	
Increasing: 1- 1.16, 2.162 
Decreasing: 1- 4, - 1.162, 12.16, 52
Local maximum: f12.162 = 3.25 
Local minimum: f1- 1.162 = - 4.05 
63.
Increasing: 1- 3, - 1.572, 10, 0.642 
Decreasing: 1- 1.57, 02, 10.64, 22 
Local maxima: f1- 1.572 = - 0.52, 
f10.642 = - 1.87
Local minimum: f102 = - 2 
4
2
0
2
5
4
8
5
2
3
10
2
65. (a) - 4  (b) - 8  (c) - 10  67. (a) 17  (b) - 1  (c) 11  69. (a) 5  (b) y = 5x - 2  71. (a) - 1  (b) y = - x  73. (a) 4  (b) y = 4x - 8 
75. (a) Odd  (b) Local maximum value: 54 at x = - 3  77. (a) Even  (b) Local maximum value: 24 at x = - 2  (c) 47.4 sq. units
79. (a) 
(b) 10 riding lawn mowers
(c) $239/mower
81. (a), (b)
(c) $5/gigabyte 
(d) $6.25/gigabyte 
(e) $7.50/gigabyte 
(f) The average rate of change 
is increasing as the number 
of gigabytes increases.
85. (a) 1  (b) 0.5  (c) 0.1  (d) 0.01
(e) 0.001 
(f) 
(g) They are getting closer to the  
tangent line at (0, 0).
(h) They are getting closer to 0.
0
2500
40
0
y
x
400
320
240
160
80
0
10 20 30 40 50
Cost (dollars)
Gigabytes
2
3
2
3
y = x
y = 0.5x
y = 0.1x
y = 0.01x
y = 0.001x
y = x2
97. At most one  99. Yes; the function f1x2 = 0 is both even and odd.  101. Not necessarily. It just means f152 7 f122. 
103. f (- 3) = - 9; (- 3, - 9)  104. C(x) = 0.80x + 40  105. y = - 5
3x + 4  106. 6x - 5 + 3h 
2.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 124)
4. (- q, 0)  5. piecewise-defined  6. T  7. F  8. F  9. b  10. a  11. C  13. E  15. B  17. F 
27. (a) 4  (b) 2  (c) 5  29. (a) - 4  (b) - 2  (c) 0  (d) 25 
87. (a) 2
(b) 2; 2; 2; 2 
(c) y = 2x + 5 
(d) 
89. (a) 2x + h + 2 
(b) 4.5; 4.1; 4.01; 4 
(c) y = 4.01x -  1.01 
(d) 
91. (a) 4x + 2h - 3 
(b) 2; 1.2; 1.02; 1 
(c) y = 1.02x - 1.02 
(d) 
93. (a) -
1
1x + h2x 
(b) - 2
3; - 10
11; - 100
101; - 1 
(c) y = - 100
101  x + 201
101 
(d) 
10
10
10
10
10
5
2
3
10
2
5
4
2
2
2
4
	19.
21.
23.
25.
y
20
10
x
5
25
(2, 4)
(0, 0)
(22, 4)
y
5
25
x
7
23
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(4, 2)
y
5
25
x
5
25
(22, 2)
(0, 0)
(2, 2)
y
5
4
x
4
4
(2, 3)
(0, 3)
(2, 3)

Answers  Section 2.5  1053
43. f1x2 = e x
if - 1 … x … 0
1
if    0 6 x … 2 (Other answers are possible.) 
45. f1x2 = e 2x + 2
if - 1 … x … 0
x
   if x 7 0
 (Other answers are possible.) 
47. (a) 2  (b) 3  (c) - 4 
51. (a) $44.46  (b) $126.03 
(c) C(x) = e 1.24816x + 19.50
if  0 … x … 30
0.5757x + 39.6738
if x 7 30
 
(d) 
31. (a) All real numbers 
(b) (0, 1) 
(c) 
(d) {y0 y ≠0}; 1- q, 02 h 10, q 2 
(e) Discontinuous at x = 0 
33. (a) All real numbers 
(b) 1- 3, 02, a - 3
2, 0b, 10, - 32
(c) 
(d) {y y … 1}; 1- q, 14 
(e) Continuous 
35. (a) {x x Ú - 3}; 3 - 3, q) 
(b) a - 5
2, 0b, 10, - 32
(c) 
(d) {y y 6 5}; 1- q, 52 
(e) Discontinuous at x = 0. 
y
x
2.5
2.5
(0, 1)
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
y
2
28
x
5
25
(0, 23)
(22, 1)
(23, 0)
y
6
9
x
6
4
(1, 5)
(0, 3)
(3, 1)
(0, 5)
39. (a) {x x Ú - 3, x ≠1}; 3 - 3, 1)h 11, q 2 
(b) 10, 22
(c) 
(d) {y y 7 1}; 11, q 2 
(e) Discontinuous at x = 1 
41. (a)  All real numbers
(b) 1x, 02 for 0 … x 6 1
2 
(c) 
(d) Set of integers
(e) Discontinuous at 
x = k
2, where k is an 
integer. 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(23, 5)
(4, 2)
(0, 2)
y
x
5
5
C
x
100
150
50
0
50
100
150
Charge (dollars)
Usage (therms)
(150, 126.03)
(30, 56.94)
(0, 19.50)
55. (a) 
(b) C1x2 = 10 + 0.4x  (c) C1x2 = 70 + 0.25x 
(400, 170)
y
x
275
100
1000
500
200
Cost (dollars)
Distance (miles)
(800, 270)
(960, 270)
(0, 0)
(100, 50)
 C(x) =   
0.98
if
0 6 x … 1
1.19
if
1 6  x … 2
1.40
if
2 6 x … 3
1.61
if
3 6 x … 4
1.82
if
4 6 x … 5
2.03
if
5 6 x … 6
2.24
if
6 6 x … 7
2.45
if
7 6 x … 8
2.66
if
8 6 x … 9
2.87
if
9 6 x … 10
3.08
if
10 6 x … 11
3.29
if
11 6 x … 12
3.50
if
12 6 x … 13
 
63. Each graph is that of y = x2, but shifted horizontally. If y = 1x - k22, k 7 0, the shift is right k units; if y = 1x + k22, k 7 0, the shift is left k 
units.  65. The graph of y = - f1x2 is the reflection about the x-axis of the graph of y = f1x2.  67. Yes. The graph of y = 1x - 123 + 2 is the graph 
of y = x3 shifted right 1 unit and up 2 units.  69. They all have the same general shape. All three go through the points 1- 1, - 12, (0, 0), and (1, 1). 
As the exponent increases, the steepness of the curve increases (except near x = 0).  72. { 213  73. (h, k) = (0, 3); r = 5 
74. 3
4   75. local max: f (- 0.26) ≈0.41;
                    local min: f (1.93) ≈- 10.04 
2.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 136)
1. horizontal; right  2. y  3. F  4. T  5. d  6. a  7. E  9. D  11. A  13. C  15. J  17. K  19. y = 1x + 423  21. y = x3 - 4  23. y = - x3
25. y = 1
64x3  27. y = - 12- x + 22  29. y = 2- x - 3 + 2  31. c  33. c  35. (a) - 7 and 1  (b) - 3 and 5  (c) - 5 and 3  (d) - 3 and 5 
37. (a) 1- 3, 32  (b) (4, 10)  (c) Decreasing on 1- 1, 52  (d) Decreasing on 1- 5, 12 
61.
C
x
0.98
2
Postage (dollars)
Weight (ounces)
1.40
1.82
2.24
2.66
3.08
3.50
4 6 8 10 12
i
37. (a) All real numbers 
(b) 10, 02 
(c) 
(d) All real numbers 
(e) Discontinuous at x = 0 
y
5
25
x
5
25
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(21, 21)

1054 
Answers  Section 2.5
39.
Domain: 1- q, q 2; 
Range: 3 - 1, q) 
41.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 1- q, q 2 
43.
Domain: 3 - 2, q);
Range: 30, q) 
45.
Domain: 1- q, q 2;
Range: 1- q, q 2 
47.
Domain: 30, q);
Range: 30, q) 
y
x
2.5
2.5
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
y
5
25
x
5
25
(21, 22)
(0, 21)
(1, 0)
y
x
5
5
(2, 2)
(2, 0)
(1, 1)
y
x
5
5
(2, 3)
(1, 2)
(0, 1)
y
x
9
8
(4, 8)
(1, 4)
(0, 0)
49.
Domain: 1- q, q 2; 
Range: 1- q, q 2 
51.
Domain: 1- q, q 2 
Range: 31, q 2 
53.
Domain: 3 - q, q 2 
Range: 3 - 3, q 2 
55.
Domain: 1- q, 04; 
Range: 3 - 2, q 2 
57.
Domain: 31, q 2 
Range: 1- q, 04 
y
x
10
10
(8, 2)
(8, 2)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
y
5
25
x
5
25
(3, 4)
(2, 1)
(1, 4)
y
5
25
x
5
25
(0, 0)
(22, 0)
(21, 23)
y
x
5
5
(4, 0)
(0, 2)
(1, 1)
y
1
29
x
9
21
(1, 0)
(2, 24)
(5, 28)
59.
Domain: 1- q, 24 
Range: 30, q 2 
61.
Domain: 1- q, q 2 
Range: 1- q, q 2 
63. (a) F1x2 = f1x2 + 3 
(b) G1x2 = f1x + 22 
(c) P1x2 = - f1x2 
y
8
22
x
5
25
(2, 0)
(1, 4)
(22, 8)
y
5
25
x
10
210
(27, 1)
(0, 2)
(9, 5)
y
x
7
5
(0, 5)
(2, 5)
(4, 3)
(4, 1)
y
x
5
3
(0, 2)
(2, 0)
(2, 2)
(6, 2)
y
x
5
5
(4, 0)
(4, 2)
(0, 2) (2, 2)
(d) H1x2 = f1x + 12 - 2
(e) Q1x2 = 1
2 f1x2 
(f) g1x2 = f1- x2 
(g) h1x2 = f12x2 
65. (a) F1x2 = f1x2 + 3
y
x
3
4
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
(3, 2)
(5, 4)
y
x
5
5
(0, 1)
(2, 1)
(4, 0)
(4, 1)
y
x
5
5
(0, 2)
(2, 2)
(4, 0)
(4, 2)
y
x
5
5
(0, 2)
(1, 2)
(2, 0)
(2, 2)
y
8
22
x
p
2p
(0, 4)
(p, 2)
(2p, 2)
77. (a) (- 2, 2)
(b) (3, - 5)  (c) (- 1, 3)
(b) G1x2 = f1x + 22 
(c) P1x2 = - f1x2 
(d) H1x2 = f1x + 12 - 2 
y
2
22
x
2p
22p
(22, 1)
(2p22, 21)
(p22, 21)
y
2
22
x
p
2p
(0, 21)
(p, 1)
(2p, 1)
y
4
24
x
2p
22p
(21, 21)
(2p21, 23)
(p21, 23)
(e) Q1x2 = 1
2 f1x2 
(f) g1x2 = f1- x2 
y
2
22
x
p
2p
1
2
2p, 2
1
2
p, 2
1
2
0, 
y
2
22
x
p
2p
(0, 1)
(2p, 21)
(p, 21)
(g) h1x2 = f12x2 
67. f1x2 = 1x + 122 - 1  69. f1x2 = 1x - 422 - 15   71. f1x2 = 21x - 322 + 1  73. f1x2 = - 31x + 222 - 5 
y
21
1
x
2
(0, 1)
p
2 , 
2
21
p
2 , 21
p
2
p
2
y
x
5
5
(2, 0)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
y
x
7.5
9
(8, 1)
(0, 1)
(4, 15)
y
x
5
5
(4, 3)
(3, 1)
(2, 3)
y
x
1
5
(2, 5)
(3, 8)
(1, 8)
75. (a)
(b)
79. (a) 
(b) 
y
x
2.5
2.5
(2, 0)
(1, 1)
(2, 1)
(1, 1)
y
x
2.5
2.5
(2, 0)
(1, 1)
(2, 0)
(1, 1)
y
x
5
5
5
5
y
x
5
5
5
5

Answers  Section 2.6  1055
89. The graph of y = 4f(x) is a vertical stretch by a factor of 4. The graph of y = f (4x) is a horizontal compression by a factor of 1
4.
91. 16
3  sq. units  93. The domain of g(x) = 2x is 30, q). The graph of g(x - k) is the graph of g shifted k units to the right, so the domain of 
g(x - k) is 3k, q).  94. m = 3
5; b = - 6  95. Odd  96. 3  97. Intercepts: (0, - 2), (0, 2), (- 4, 0); x-axis symmetry
85.
87.
F
C
320
(100, 212)
(0, 32)
256
192
128
64
0
20 40 60 80 100
F
K
320
(373, 212)
(273, 32)
256
192
128
64
0 280 310
350
y
x
9
5
c  2
c  0
c  3
81. (a) 
(b) 9 square units
y
x
5
7
(6, 0)
(3, 3)
(0, 0)
83. (a) 72°F; 65°F
(b) The temperature decreases by 2° to 70°F 
during the day and 63°F overnight.
(c) The time at which the temperature adjusts between the 
daytime and overnight settings is moved to 1 hr sooner. 
It begins warming up at 5:00 am instead of 6:00 am, and it 
begins cooling down at 8:00 pm instead of 9:00 pm.
Time (hours after 
midnight)
T
t
76
72
68
64
60
0
5
Temperature (F)
10 15 20 25
Time (hours after 
midnight)
Temperature (F)
T
t
76
72
68
64
60
0
5 10 15 20 25
2.6 Assess Your Understanding (page 143)
	 1. (a) d1x2 = 2x4 - 15x2 + 64 
(b) d102 = 8 
(c) d112 = 250 ≈7.07 
(d) 
(e) d is smallest when x ≈- 2.74 or x ≈2.74 
	 3. (a) d1x2 = 2x2 - x + 1 
(b) 
(c) d is smallest when x = 0.5. 
	 7. (a) A1x2 = x116 - x2 2 
(b) Domain: {x0 0 6 x 6 4} 
(c) The area is largest when x ≈2.31. 
40
10
5
10
0
2
2
0
0
30
4
0
	 9. (a) A1x2 = 4x24 - x2 
(b) p1x2 = 4x + 424 - x2 
(d) p is largest when x ≈1.41. 
11. (a) A1x2 = x2 + 25 - 20x + 4x2
p
(b) Domain: {x0 0 6 x 6 2.5} 
(c) A is smallest when x ≈1.40 m. 
(c) A is largest when x ≈1.41. 
0
10
2
0
0
12
2
0
8
00
2.5
19. (a) d1t2 = 22500t2 - 360t + 13 
(b) d is smallest when t ≈0.07 hr. 
23. (a) T1x2 = 12 - x
5
+ 2x2 + 4
3
 
(b) {x 0 … x … 12} 
(c) 3.09 hr
(d) 3.55 hr
25. (a) V1x2 = x124 - 2x22 
(b) 972 in.3  
(c) 160 in.3  
(d) V is largest when x = 4.
27. (h, k) = (- 1, - 1); r = 241  28. y = (x + 4)2 - 2 
29. m = - 4   30.  (- q, - 2) ∪(- 2, 5] 
0
5
0.2
0
0
1100
12
0

1056 
Answers  Review Exercises
Review Exercises (page 148)
2. Not a function  3. (a) 2  (b) - 2  (c) -
3x
x2 - 1
  (d) -
3x
x2 - 1
  (e) 
31x - 22
x2 - 4x + 3
  (f) 
6x
4x2 - 1
  4. (a) 0  (b) 0  (c) 2x2 - 4  (d) - 2x2 - 4 
(e) 2x2 - 4x  (f) 22x2 - 1  5. (a) 0  (b) 0  (c) x2 - 4
x2
  (d) - x2 - 4
x2
  (e) 
x1x - 42
1x - 222  (f) x2 - 1
x2
 
6. {x0 x ≠- 3, x ≠3}  8. {x0 x ≠0}  10. [- 1, 2) ∪(2, q) 
12. 1f + g2 1x2 = 2x + 3; Domain: all real numbers
1f - g2 1x2 = - 4x + 1; Domain: all real numbers
1f # g2 1x2 = - 3x2 + 5x + 2; Domain: all real numbers
a
f
g b 1x2 = 2 - x
3x + 1 ; Domain: e x 2 x ≠- 1
3 f 
14. 1f + g2 1x2 = x2 + 2x - 1
x1x - 12  ; Domain: {x x ≠0, x ≠1} 
1f - g2 1x2 =
x2 + 1
x1x - 12 ; Domain: {x x ≠0, x ≠1} 
1f # g2 1x2 =
x + 1
x1x - 12; Domain: {x x ≠0, x ≠1} 
a
f
g b 1x2 =
x1x + 12
x - 1
 ; Domain: {x x ≠0, x ≠1} 
16. (a) Domain: {x0 - 4 … x … 3}; Range: {y0 - 3 … y … 3}
(b) (0, 0)  (c) - 1  (d) - 4  (e) {x0 0 6 x … 3} 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
y
5
x
5
(1, 3)
(1, 1)
(3, 0)
(6, 3)
y
5
x
10
(4, 1)
(8, 3)
(0, 0)
(6, 3)
y
5
x
5
(0, 0)
(3, 3)
(4, 3)
(2, 1)
17. (a) Domain: {x0 x … 4} or (- q, 4]
Range: {y0 y … 3}  or (- q, 3]
(b) Increasing on (- q, - 2) and (2, 4); Decreasing on (- 2, 2)
(c) Local maximum value is 1 and occurs at x = - 2. 
Local minimum value is - 1 and occurs at x = 2. 
(d) Absolute maximum: f (4) = 3
 Absolute minimum: none
(e) No symmetry
(f) Neither
(g) x -intercepts: - 3, 0, 3 y -intercept: 0
18. Odd  20. Neither 
22.
Local maximum value: 4.04 at x = - 0.91 
Local minimum value: - 2.04 at x = 0.91 
Increasing: 1- 3, - 0.912; 10.91, 32 
Decreasing: 1- 0.91, 0.912 
23.
Local maximum value: 1.53 at x = 0.41 
Local minima values: 0.54 at  
x = - 0.34 and - 3.56 at x = 1.80
Increasing: 1- 0.34, 0.412; 11.80, 32 
Decreasing: 1- 2, - 0.342; 10.41, 1.802 
20
3
20
3
40
2
6
3
24. (a) 23  (b) 7  (c) 47  25. - 5  26. - 17  27. No  28. Yes
29.	
30.
y
5
x
5
(4, 4)
(4, 4)
(0, 0)
y
5
x
5
(4, 2)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
31.
Intercepts: 1- 4, 02, 14, 02, 10, - 42
Domain: all real numbers
Range: {y y Ú - 4} or 3 - 4, q)
32.
Intercept: (0, 0)
Domain: all real numbers
Range: {y y … 0} or (- q, 04 
33.
Intercept: (1, 0)
Domain: {x x Ú 1} or 31, q) 
Range: {y y Ú 0} or 30, q) 
34.
Intercepts: (0, 1), (1, 0)
Domain: {x x … 1} or (- q, 14 
Range: {y y Ú 0} or 30, q) 
y
2
x
5
(0, 0)
(2, 4)
(2, 4)
y
5
x
7
(1, 0)
(5, 2)
(2, 1)
y
x
5
5
(3, 2)
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
35.
Intercept: (0, 3)
Domain: all real numbers
Range: {y y Ú 2} or 32, q) 
36.
Intercepts: (0, –24),
(- 2 - 2
3 4, 0) or about  
(- 3.6, 0)
Domain: all real numbers
Range: all real numbers
37. (a) {x x 7 - 2} or 1- 2, q 2
(b) (0, 0)
(c) 
(d) {y y 7 - 6} or 1- 6, q 2
(e) Discontinuous at x = 1 
38. (a) {x x Ú - 4} or [- 4, q 2 
(b) (0, 1)
(c) 
(d) {y - 4 … y 6 0 or y 7 0}  
or 3 - 4, 0) ∪10, q 2 
(e) Discontinuous at x = 0 
y
x
5
5
(1, 2)
(2, 3)
(0, 3)
y
x
30
3
(0, 24)
(3, 6)
(3.6, 0)
(2, 8)
(1, 10)
y
x
5
5
(2, 3)
(1, 3)
(1, 2)
(2, 6)
y
x
5
5
(1, 3)
(0, 1)
(4, 4)
y
5
x
5
(0, 4)
(2, 2)
(4, 0)
(2, 2)
(4, 0)

Answers  Cumulative Review  1057
41. (a) A1x2 = 10x - x3 
(b) The largest area that can be enclosed by the 
rectangle is approximately 12.17 square units.
A is smallest when x ≈ 2.15 ft.
40. (a) A(x) = 2x2 + 40
x  
(b) 42 ft2  (c) 28 ft2
(d) 
0
100
7
Chapter Test (page 150)
	 1. (a) Function; domain: {2, 4, 6, 8}; range: {5, 6, 7, 8}  (b) Not a function  (c) Not a function  (d) Function; domain; all real numbers; 
range: {y0 y Ú 2}  2. Domain: e x ` x … 4
5 f; f1- 12 = 3  3. Domain: {x0 x ≠- 2}; g1- 12 = 1  4. Domain: {x x ≠- 9, x ≠4}; h1- 12 = 1
8 
	 5. (a) Domain: {x0 - 5 … x … 5}; range: {y0 - 3 … y … 3}  (b) (0, 2), 1- 2, 02, and (2, 0)  (c) f112 = 3  (d) x = - 5 and x = 3 
(e) {x 0 - 5 … x 6 - 2 or 2 6 x … 5} or [- 5, - 22 ∪12, 5]  6. Local maxima values: f1- 0.852 ≈- 0.86; f12.352 ≈15.55; local minimum value: 
f102 = - 2; the function is increasing on the intervals 1- 5, - 0.852 and (0, 2.35) and decreasing on the intervals 1- 0.85, 02 and (2.35, 5).
	 7. (a) 
10. (a) 
(b) 
	 9. (a) 1f - g2 1x2 = 2x2 - 3x + 3 
(b) 1f # g2 1x2 = 6x3 - 4x2 + 3x - 2 
(c) f1x + h2 - f1x2 = 4xh + 2h2 
(b) 10, - 42, (4, 0)
(c) g1- 52 = - 9 
(d) g122 = - 2 
8. 19
y
x
3
5
y
x
10
2.5
(0, 1)
(1, 3)
(2, 5)
y
x
10
10
(2, 4)
(4, 2)
(6, 4)
39. A = 11 
11. (a) 8.67% occurring in 1997 1x ≈52  (b) The model predicts that the interest rate will be - 10.343,. This is not reasonable.
12. (a) V1x2 = x2
8 - 5x
4 + px2
64   (b) 1297.61 ft3 
Cumulative Review (page 151)
	 1. {6}  2. e 0, 1
3 f  3. {- 1, 9}  4. e 1
3, 1
2 f  5. e -  7
2, 1
2 f  6. e 1
2 f 
	 7. e x ` x 6 - 4
3 f; a - q, - 4
3 b  8. {x0 1 6 x 6 4} ; 11, 42                 9. e x ` x … - 2 or x Ú 3
2 f; (- q, - 24 h c 3
2 , q b 
4 
3

	10. (a) distance: 129  (b) midpoint: a1
2, - 4b  (c) slope: -  2
5
1
4
2
3 
2
11.
12.
13.
14.
15. Intercepts: (0, - 3), (- 2, 0), (2, 0); 
symmetry with respect to the y-axis
16. y = 1
2x + 5
y
3
x
7
(0, 6)
(4, 0)
y
5
x
5
(1, 1)
(4, 2)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(4, 2)
y
8
x
5
(0, 1)
(4, 3)
(0, 7)
(4, 3)
(0, 3)
y
5
x
5
(4, 2)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
17.
18.
19.
y
5
x
5
(4, 1)
(2, 3)
(0, 1)
y
5
x
5
(1, 1)
1
3
3, 
1
2

2,
y
5
x
5
(4, 4)
(2, 0)
(0, 2)

1058 
Answers  Section 3.1
Chapter 3  Linear and Quadratic Functions
3.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 160)
7. slope; y-intercept  8. positive  9. T  10. F  11. a  12. d
13. (a) m = 2; b = 3
    (b) 
    (c) 2  (d) Increasing
15. (a) m = - 1; b = 6
    (b) 
    (c) - 1  (d) Decreasing
17. (a) m = - 2
3; b = 4
    (b) 
    (c) - 2
3  (d) Decreasing
19. (a) m = 0; b = - 2
    (b) 
    (c) 0  (d) Constant
21. Linear; - 3  23. Linear
25. Linear  27. Nonlinear
y
x
8
8
(1, 5)
2
1
(0, 3)
y
2
−2
8
x
2 4 6 8
−2
(1, 1)
(0, 4)
3
y
2
6
−2
8
x
2 4 6 8
−2
(3, 2)
(0, 4)
2
3
y
5
−5
x
5
−5
(0, −2)
41. (a) 5x 9075 … x … 36 9006 or 39075, 36 9004
    (b) $2546.25
    (c) The independent variable is adjusted gross 
income, x.
      The dependent variable is the tax bill, T.
    (d) 
    (e) $27,500
T
x
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
12,000
30,000
Tax Bill ($)
Adjusted Gross Income ($)
(9075, 907.50)
(36 900, 5081.25)
(20 000, 2546.25)
47. (a) C1x2 = 90x + 1800
    (b) 
    (c) $3060
    (d) 22 bicycles
C(x)
x
1000
2000
3000
0
4
8
12
Cost (dollars)
Number of Bicycles
49. (a) C1x2 = 0.89x + 31.95  (b) $129.85; $236.65
51. (a) 
    (b) Since each input (memory) corresponds to 
a single output (number of songs), we know 
that number of songs is a function of memory. 
Also, because the average rate of change is a 
constant 218.75 songs per gigabyte, the  
function is linear.
    (c) n(m) = 218.75 m  (d) 5m m Ú 06 or 30, q)
(e) 
(f) If memory increases by 1 GB, then the 
number of songs increases by 218.75.
53. (d), (e)  55. b = 0; yes, f(x) = b
57.
n
m
16,000
12,000
8,000
4,000
0
16 32 48 64
Number of Songs
Memory (gigabytes)
n
m
16,000
12,000
8,000
4,000
0
16 32 48 64
Number of Songs
Memory (gigabytes)
y
x
2
10
(2, −5)
58. 6
59. 7
60.
y
x
5
5
(−1, 1)
(−2, 4)
(1, 2)
(4, 3)
3.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 167)
3. scatter diagram  4. T  5. Linear relation, m 7 0  7. Linear relation, m 7 0  9. Nonlinear relation
11. (a) 
    (b) Answers will vary. Using (4, 6) and (8, 14), y = 2x - 2.
(c) 
(d) y = 2.0357x - 2.3571
(e) 
20
00
10
20
00
10
20
00
10

Answers  Section 3.3  1059
13. (a) 
    (b) Answers will vary. Using (- 2, 7) and (2, 0), y = - 7
4x + 7
2.
(c) 
(d) y = - 1.8x + 3.6
(e) 
8
3
2
3
8
3
2
3
8
3
2
3
15. (a) 
    (b) Answers will vary. Using (- 30, 10) and (- 14, 18); y = 1
2x + 25.
(c) 
(d) y = 0.4421x + 23.4559
(e) 
25
0
0
240
25
0
0
240
25
0
0
240
17. (a) 
    (b) Linear with positive slope
(c) Answers will vary. Using the 
points (39.52, 210) and  
(66.45, 280), 
y = 2.599x + 107.288.
(d) 
(e) 269 calories
(f) If the weight of a candy bar is 
increased by 1 gram, the  
number of calories will  
increase by 2.599, on average.
y
x
280
260
240
220
200
38
Number of Calories
Weight (grams)
46 54 62 70
y
x
280
260
240
220
200
38
Number of Calories
Weight (grams)
46 54 62 70
19. (a) The independent variable is the number 
of hours spent playing video games, and 
cumulative grade-point average is the 
dependent variable, because we are using 
number of hours playing video games to 
predict (or explain) cumulative grade-
point average.
(b) 
4
1 0
13
(c) G(h) = - 0.0942h + 3.2763
(d) If the number of hours playing video games in a 
week increases by 1 hour, the cumulative grade-
point average decreases 0.09, on average.
(e) 2.52
(f) Approximately 9.3 hours
21. (a) 
    (b) y = 0.5426x + 63.2336
    (c) If the flight time increases by 1 minute, then the ticket 
price increases by about $0.5426, on average.
    (d) $109  (e) 105 minutes
23. y = 1.5x + 3.5; r = 1; The linear relationship between two points is perfect.
25. A value of x = 0 does not make sense.
27. 2x + y = 3 or y = - 2x + 3
28. 5x x ≠- 5, x ≠56
29. (g - f)(x) = x2 - 8x + 12
30. y = (x + 3)2 - 4
250
50
50
300
3.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 179)
5. parabola  6. axis or axis of symmetry  7. - b
2a  8. T  9. T  10. T  11. a  12. d  13. E  15. A  17. B  19. D
21.
23.
y
8
−2
x
5
−5
(1, 6)
(0, 4)
(−1, 6)
y
8
−12
x
8
−2
(3, −10)
(4, −9)
(2, −9)
y
x
5
5
(0, 2)
(3, 1)
(2, 2)
(1, 1)
(4, 2)
y
10
−10
x
5
−5
(−1, −3)
(−2, 0)
(0, 0)
y
8
x
6
−4
(3, 2)
(0, 2)
13
2
3
2 , 
29. f1x2 = - 2ax - 3
2 b
2
+ 13
2
25. f1x2 = 1x + 222 - 2
27. f1x2 = 31x + 122 - 3

1060 
Answers  Section 3.3
31. f1x2 = 2
3
 1x + 122 - 5
3
33. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: [- 1, q 2
    (c) Decreasing: 1- q, - 12
      Increasing: 1- 1, q 2
35. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: 1- q, 4]
    (c) Increasing: 1- q, 22
      Decreasing: 12, q 2
37. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: [- 4, q 2
    (c) Decreasing: 1- q, 12
      Increasing: 11, q 2
39. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: 30, q)
    (c) Decreasing: (- q, - 1)
          Increasing: (- 1, q)
y
5
−5
x
5
(−2, −1)
(0, −1)
5
3
−1, −
y
x
2
5
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(2, 0)
x  1
y
−5
5
x
x = 2
8
−2
(2, 4)
(4, 0)
(0, 0)
y
5
−5
x
5
−5
x = 1
(1, −4)
(0, −3)
(3, 0)
(−1, 0)
y
x
5
5
(0, 1)
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
x  1
41. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: c 3
4, q b
    (c) Decreasing: a - q, 1
4 b
          Increasing: a1
4, q b
43. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: a - q, - 5
2 d
    (c) Increasing: a - q, 1
2 b
          Decreasing: a1
2, q b
45. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: c - 1
8, q b
    (c) Decreasing: a - q, - 5
4 b
      Increasing: a - 5
4, q b
47. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: c - 10
3 , q b
(c) Decreasing: a - q, 4
3 b
    Increasing: a - 4
3, q b
y
2
x
1
−1
(0, 1)
1
2 , 1 
1
4
3
4
,  
1
4
x =
y
x
2
5
x  1
2
,
1
2
5
2

(0, 3)
(1, 3)
y
8
x
4
(1.58, 0)
(0.42, 0)
(1, 1)
(0, 2)
x  1
y
2
x
1
−1
(0, 1)
1
2 , 1 
1
4
3
4
,  
1
4
x =
49. f1x2 = 1x + 122 - 2 = x2 + 2x - 1  51. f1x2 = - 1x - 222 + 3 = - x2 + 4x - 1  53. f1x2 = 21x - 122 - 3 = 2x2 - 4x - 1
55. Maximum value: 18  57. Minimum value; - 21  59. Maximum value: 11  61. Minimum value: - 1
63. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: 3 - 16, q 2
    (c) Decreasing: 1- q, 12
      Increasing: 11, q 2
65. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: 1- q, q 2
    (c) Decreasing: 1- q, q 2
67. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: 1- q, 24
    (c) Increasing: 1- q, 32
      Decreasing: 13, q 2
69. (a) 
    (b) Domain: 1- q, q 2
      Range: J 7
8, q ≤
    (c) Decreasing: ¢ - q, - 1
4 ≤
      Increasing: ¢ - 1
4, q ≤
y
x
2
7
(3, 0)
(5, 0)
(1, 16)
y
x
10
12
(0, 4)
(10, 0)
y
x
2
7
(3, 2) (4, 0)
(2, 0)
(0, 16)
(6, 16)
y
x
8
5
(0, 1)
1
,
1
2

,
1 
4
7 
8

73. (a), (c), (d)
    (b) 5 - 1, 36
75. (a), (c), (d)
    (b) 5 - 1, 36
77. (a), (c), (d)
    (b) 5 - 1, 26
y
x
6
5
(1, 3)
(3, 5)
y
x
1
5
(1, 3)
(3, 5)
y
x
10
10
(2, 6)
(1, 6)
81. (a) 1- 2, - 252
    (b) - 7, 3
    (c) - 4, 0; 1- 4, - 212, 10, - 212
    (d) 
95. 
y
x
12
10
(3, 0)
(7, 0)
(0, 21)
(4, 21)
(2, 25)
y
x
5
5
y  x2  2x  3
y  x2  2x  1
y  x2  2x
97. b2 - 4ac 6 0  99. No
101. Symmetric with respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin
102. 5x x … 46 or 1- q, 4]
103. Center 15, - 22; radius = 3
104. y = 1- x

Answers  Section 3.5  1061
3.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 187)
5. (a) R1x2 = - 1
5
 x2 + 20x  (b) $255  (c) 50; $500  (d) $10  (e) Between $8 and $12
11. (a) 625
16 ≈39 ft  (b) 7025
32
≈219.5 ft  (c) About 170 ft
    (d)
240
00
200
(f) When the height is 100 ft, the 
projectile is about 135.7 ft from 
the cliff.
13. 18.75 m  15.  (a) 3 in. (b) Between 2 in. and 4 in.
25. (a) 
      The data appear to follow a 
quadratic relation with a 6 0.
50,000
150
75
50,000
150
75
(b) I(x) = - 44.759x2 + 4295.356x - 55,045.418
(c) About 48.0 years of age
(d) Approximately $48,007
(e) 
27. (a) 
      The data appear to be linearly related with positive slope.
    (b) R1x2 = 1.229x + 917.385  (c) $1993
29. (a) 
      The data appear to follow a quadratic relation with a 6 0.
    (b) B1a2 = - 0.547a2 + 31.190a - 342.218  (c) 79.357
2300
500
1400
1100
120
100
45
32. 2x + 3y = - 4 or y = - 2
3
 x - 4
3  33. 13  34. 1x + 622 + y2 = 7  35. (0, - 12), (- 4, 0), (4, 0)
3.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 194)
3. (a) 5x x 6 - 1 or x 7 46; 1- q, - 12 h 14, q 2  (b) 5x - 1 … x … 46; [- 1, 4]
5. (a) 5x - 2 … x … 16; [- 2, 1]  (b) 5x x 6 - 2 or x 7 16; 1- q, - 22 h 11, q 2
7. 5x x 6 - 5 or x 7 26; 1- q, - 52 h 12, q 2  9. 5x x 6 0 or x 7 46; 1- q, 02 h 14, q 2  11. 5x - 1 6 x 6 16; 1- 1, 12
13. 5x x 6 - 4 or x 7 36; 1- q, - 42 h 13, q 2  15. e x ` - 2
3 6 x 6 3
2 f; a - 2
3, 3
2 b  17. No real solution  19. No real solution
21. e x ` x 6 - 2
3 or x 7 3
2 f; a - q, - 2
3 b h a3
2, q b  23. 5x x … - 4 or x Ú 46; 1- q, - 4] h [4, q 2  25. (a) 5 - 1, 16  (b) 5 - 16  (c) 5 - 1, 46
(d) 5x x 6 - 1 or x 7 16; 1- q, - 12 h 11, q 2  (e) 5x x … - 16; 1- q, - 1]  (f) 5x x 6 - 1 or x 7 46; 1- q, - 12 h 14, q 2
(g) 5x x … - 22 or x Ú 226; 1 - q, - 224 h 3 22, q 2
27. (a) 5 - 1, 16  (b) e - 1
4 f  (c) 5 - 4, 06  (d) 5x - 1 6 x 6 16; 1- 1, 12  (e) e x ` x … - 1
4 f; a - q, - 1
4 d   (f) 5x - 4 6 x 6 06; 1- 4, 02  (g) 506
29. (a) 5 - 2, 26  (b) 5 - 2, 26  (c) 5 - 2, 26  (d) 5x x 6 - 2 or x 7 26; 1- q, - 22 h 12, q 2  (e) 5x x … - 2 or x Ú 26; 1- q, - 2] h [2, q 2
(f) 5x x 6 - 2 or x 7 26; 1- q, - 22 h 12, q 2  (g) 5x x … - 25 or x Ú 256; 1 - q, - 254 h 3 25, q 2
31. (a) 5 - 1, 26  (b) 5 - 2, 16  (c) {0}  (d) 5x x 6 - 1 or x 7 26; 1- q, - 12 h 12, q 2  (e) 5x - 2 … x … 16; [- 2, 1]
(f) 5x x 6 06; 1- q, 02  (g) e x ` x … 1 - 213
2
 or x Ú 1 + 213
2
f; a - q, 1 - 213
2
d  h c 1 + 213
2
, q b
33. (a) 5 sec  (b) The ball is more than 96 ft above the ground for time t between 2 and 3 sec, 2 6 t 6 3.
35. (a) $0, $1000  (b) The revenue is more than $800,000 for prices between $276.39 and $723.61, +276.39 6 p 6 +723.61.
37. (a) 5c  0.112 6 c 6 81.9076; (0.112, 81.907)  (b) It is possible to hit a target 75 km away if c = 0.651 or c = 1.536.
44. 5x x … 56  45. (a) 19, 02, 10, - 62  (b)               
46. Odd  47. Neither  
y
x
5
5
(0, −6)
(9, 0)

1062 
Answers  Review Exercises
Review Exercises (page 196)
1. (a) m = 2; b = - 5  (b) 2
  (c)  
  (d) Increasing
2. (a) m = 4
5; b = - 6  (b) 4
5
  (c) 
  (d) Increasing
3. (a) m = 0; b = 4  (b) 0
  (c) 
  (d) Constant
5. Nonlinear
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. (a) 
  (b) Domain: (- q, q)
      Range: 32, q)
  (c) Decreasing: (- q, 2)
      Increasing: (2, q)
10. (a) 
    (b) Domain: (- q, q)
      Range: 3 - 16, q)
    (c) Decreasing: (- q, 0)
      Increasing: (0, q)
11. (a) 
    (b) Domain: (- q, q)
      Range: (- q, 14
    (c) Increasing: a - q, 1
2 b
      Decreasing: a1
2, q b
12. (a) 
    (b) Domain: (- q, q)
      Range: c 1
2, qb
    (c) Decreasing: a - q, - 1
3 b
      Increasing: a - 1
3, qb
13. (a) 
    (b) Domain: (- q, q)
      Range: c - 7
3, qb
    (c) Decreasing: a - q, - 2
3 b
      Increasing: a - 2
3, q b
y
x
2
5
(0, 5)
(1, 3)
, 0
5
2
y
2
x
8
(0, 6)
(5, 2)
, 0
15
2
y
5
x
5
(0, 4) (4, 4)
(3, 4)
y
5
x
5
(22, 23)
(21, 24)
(0, 23)
y
x
5
8
(5, 1)
(3, 1)
(4, 0)
y
x
5
5
(2, 1)
(3, 2)
(1, 2)
y
x
8
8
(2, 2)
(4, 6)
(0, 6)
x  2
y
x
2
10
(8, 0)
(0, 16)
(8, 0)
y
x
2.5
2.5
(1, 0)
(0, 0)
1
2
1
,
x  1
2
y
x
2.5
(0, 1)
,
1
3

1
2
x  1
3
2.5
y
x
5
5
(0.22, 0)
(1.55, 0)
(0, 1)
x  2
3
,
2
3

7
3

14. Minimum value; 1  17. 5x - 8 6 x 6 26; 1- 8, 22  18. e x ` x … - 1
3 or x Ú 5 f; a - q, - 1
3 d h [5, q 2
21. (a) S1x2 = 0.01x + 25,000  (b) +35,000  (c) +7,500,000  (d) x 7 +12,500,000
22. (a) R(x) = - 1
10
 x2 + 150x  (b) $14,000  (c) 750; $56,250  (d) $75  24. 4,166,666.7 m2
25. The side with the semicircles should be 50
p  ft; the other side should be 25 ft.  26. (a) 63 clubs  (b) $151.90  27. A(x) = - x2 + 10x; 25 sq. units 
28. 3.6 ft  29. (a) 
(b) About $26.5 thousand
(c) $6408 thousand
(e)
6500
6400
6300
6200
6100
20
Total Revenue
(thousands of dollars)
Advertising
(thousands of dollars)
25
30
6500
15
6000
35
30. (a) Quadratic, a 6 0
(b) yes   (c) y = 1.3902 x + 1.1140
(d) 37.95  mm
y
38
37
36
35
34
24
Tibia (mm)
Humerus (mm)
25 26 27 28
x
Chapter Test (page 198)
1. (a) Slope: - 4; y-intercept: 3
  (b) - 4  (c) Decreasing
  (d) 
y
x
5
5
(0, 3)
(1, 1)
y
x
21
4
(0, 0)
(3, 18)
(1, 2)
(3, 0)
y
x
9
8
(0, 7)
(6, 7)
(2, 1)
(4, 1)
(3, 2)
2. a - 4
3, 0b, (2, 0), (0, - 8)
3. a2 - 26
2
, 0b, a2 + 26
2
, 0b, (0, 1)
4. 5 - 1, 36
5.
6. (a) Opens up

Answers  Section 4.1  1063
y
x
10
10
(2, 8)
x  2
(0, 4)
(4, 4)
(0.37, 0)
(3.63, 0)
  (b) 12, - 82
  (c) x = 2
  (d) x-intercepts: 6 - 226
3
, 6 + 226
3
; y-intercept: 4
	
(e) 
7. Maximum value; 21
8. 5x x … 4 or x Ú 66; (- q, 44 ∪36, q)
9. (a) C(m) = 0.15m + 129.50  (b) $258.50  (c) 562 miles
Cumulative Review (page 199)
1. 522; a3
2, 1
2 b  2. 1- 2, - 12 and (2, 3) are on the graph.
3. e x ` x Ú - 3
5 f; c - 3
5, q b
4. y = - 2x + 2
5. y = - 1
2
 x + 13
2
6. 1x - 222 + 1y + 422 = 25
7. Yes  8. (a) - 3  (b) x2 - 4x - 2  (c) x2 + 4x + 1  (d) - x2 + 4x - 1  (e) x2 - 3  (f) 2x + h - 4  9. e z ` z ≠7
6 f
10. Yes  11. (a) No  (b) - 1; (- 2, - 1) is on the graph.  (c) - 8; (- 8, 2) is on the graph.  12. Neither  13. Local maximum value is 5.30 and occurs at 
x = - 1.29. Local minimum value is - 3.30 and occurs at x = 1.29. Increasing: 1- 4, - 1.292 and (1.29, 4); Decreasing: 1- 1.29, 1.292
14. (a) - 4  (b) 5x x 7 - 46 or 1- 4, q 2
15. (a) Domain: 5x - 4 … x … 46; Range: 5y - 1 … y … 36  (b) 1- 1, 02, 10, - 12, 11, 02  (c) y-axis  (d) 1  (e) - 4 and 4  (f) 5x - 1 6 x 6 16
3 
5

y
x
5
5
(2, 2)
(1, 4)
y
x
9
5
(3, 5)
y
x
10
10
(7, 4)
(2, 4)
(2, 9)
(3, 4)
(2, 1)
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
y
x
5
5
(4, 5)
(2, 3)
(1, 2)
(1, 2)
(2, 3)
(4, 5)
(0, 1)
y
5
5
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
(2, 1)
(4, 3)
(2, 1)
(4, 3)
x
y
10
5 x
(1, 0)
(0, 2)
(1, 0)
(2, 2)
(4, 6)
(2, 2)
(4, 6)
Chapter 4  Polynomial and Rational Functions
4.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 218)
7. smooth; continuous  8. touches  9. 1- 1, 12; 10, 02; 11, 12  10. r is a real zero of f ; r is an x-intercept of the graph of f ; x - r is a factor of f.
11. turning points  12. y = 3x4   13. q; - q  14. As x increases in the positive direction, f1x2 decreases without bound.  15. b  16. d
17. Yes; degree 3; f1x2 = x3 + 4x; leading term: x3; constant term: 0  19. Yes; degree 1; h1x2 = 3 - 1
2 x; leading term: - 1
2 x; constant term: 3
21. No; x is raised to the –1 power  23. No; x is raised to the 1
2 power  25. No; x is raised to the - 1  and - 3 powers.
27. Yes; degree 5; G1x2 = - 3x5 - 18x4 - 36x3 - 24x2; leading term: - 3x5
29.
31.
33.
35.
37.
y
x
5
5
(0, 1)
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
y
5
x
5
(0, 2)
(1, 3)
(1, 3)
5
5
y
5
x
5
(0, 0)
1, 1
2
1, 1
2
5
5
y
5
x
5
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
y
5
x
5
(3, 2)
(2, 3)
(1, 2)
5
5
39.
y
5
x
5
(1, 2)
(0, 2.5)
(2, 1.5)
5
5
41.
y
5
x
5
(3, 2)
(2, 3)
(1, 2)
5
5
43. f1x2 = x3 - 3x2 - x + 3 for a = 1  45. f1x2 = x3 + 2x2 - 8x for a = 1
47. f1x2 = x4 - 3x3 - 15x2 + 19x + 30 for a = 1  49. f1x2 = x3 - 12x - 16 for a = 1
51. f(x) = - 1
3x3 + 4
3 x  53. f(x) = - 16
49x4 - 32
49x3 + 496
49 x2 - 512
49 x - 960
49
55. f1x2 = - 3x5 + 12x4 + 6x3 - 36x2 - 27x  57. (a) 7, multiplicity 1; - 3, multiplicity 2   
(b) Graph touches the x-axis at - 3 and crosses it at 7.  (c) 2  (d) y = 3x3 
(j) Even  (k) (0, 4)

1064 
Answers  Section 4.1
59. (a) 3, multiplicity 1  (b) Graph crosses the x-axis at 3.  (c) 6  (d) y = 2x7  61. (a) 1
 3 , multiplicity 2; 1, multiplicity 3  (b) Graph touches the 
x-axis at 1
 3  and crosses the x-axis at 1.  (c) 4  (d) y = x5   63. (a) - 23, multiplicity 2; 2, multiplicity 4  (b) Graph touches the x-axis at - 23 and 
at 2.  (c) 5  (d) y = x6   65. (a) No real zeros.  (b) Graph neither touches nor crosses the x-axis.  (c) 5  (d) y = - 2x6   67. (a) - 23, 23, 0, 
multiplicity 1  (b) Graph crosses the x-axis at - 13, 13, 0.  (c) 2  (d) y = 4x3   69. Could be; zeros: - 1, 1, 2;  
Least degree is 3.  71. Cannot be the graph of a polynomial; gap at x = 0  73. f1x2 = x1x - 12 1x - 22
75. f1x2 = - 1
 2 1x + 12 1x - 12 1x - 22  77. f1x2 = 0.21x + 42 1x + 1221x - 32  79. f1x2 = x21x + 32 1x + 12 1x - 22
81. Step 1:  y = x3 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: 0, 3; y-intercept: 0
    Step 3:  0: multiplicity 2, touches; 3: multiplicity 1, crosses
    Step 4:  At most 2 turning points
    Step 5:  f1- 12 = - 4; f122 = - 4; f142 = 16
y
24
x
5
(4, 16)
(3, 0)
(0, 0)
(2, 4)
(1, 4)
83. Step 1:  y = x3
    Step 2:  x@intercepts: 1, - 3; y@intercepts: - 9
    Step 3:  - 3: multiplicity 2, touches; 1: multiplicity 1, crosses.
    Step 4:  At most 2 turning points
    Step 5:  f1- 42 = - 5; f1- 12 = - 8; f122 = 25
y
30
x
5
(2, 25)
(1, 0)
(3, 0)
(4, 5)
(1, 8)
(0, 9)
85. Step 1:  y = - 1
2x4 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: - 4, 1; y-intercept: 2
    Step 3:  - 4: multiplicity 1, crosses; 1: multiplicity 3, crosses.
    Step 4:  3
    Step 5:  f1- 52 = - 108; f1- 32 = 32; f132 = - 28
87. Step 1:  y = x3 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: 1, - 4, 3; y-intercept: - 12
    Step 3:  - 4, 1, 3: multiplicity 1, crosses
    Step 4:  2
    Step 5:  f1- 52 = - 48; f1- 22 = 30; f122 = - 6; f142 = 24
y
40
x
5
(4, 0)
(3, 32)
(5, 108)
(1, 0)
(0, 2)
(3, 28)
y
40
x
5
(0, 12)
(4, 24)
(1, 0)
(3, 0)
(2, 6)
(4, 0)
(5, 48)
(2, 30)
89. Step 1:  y = x4 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: 0, 3, - 4; y-intercepts: 0
    Step 3:  - 4, 3: multiplicity 1, crosses; 0: multiplicity 2, touches
    Step 4:  3
    Step 5:  f1- 32 = - 54; f1- 22 = - 40; 
           f112 = - 10; f122 = - 24
91. Step 1:  y = x4 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: 4, - 2; y-intercept: 64
    Step 3:  - 2, 4: multiplicity 2, touches
    Step 4:  3
    Step 5:  f1- 32 = 49; f122 = 64; f152 = 49
y
20
x
5
(0, 0)
(3, 0)
(1, 10)
(2, 24)
(4, 0)
(2, 40)
(3, 54)
y
90
x
5
(2, 0)
(3, 49)
(5, 49)
(0, 64)
(2, 64)
(4, 0)
93. Step 1:  y = x4
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: 0, 3, 1; y-intercept: 0
    Step 3:  0: multiplicity 2, touches; 1, 3: multiplicity 1, crosses
    Step 4:  3
    Step 5:  f1- 12 = 8;  f a1
2 b = 5
16;  f 122 = - 4; f142 = 48
95. Step 1:  y = x4
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: 2, - 2, - 4; y-intercept: 32
    Step 3:  2: multiplicity 2, touches; - 2, - 4: multiplicity 1, crosses
    Step 4:  3
    Step 5:  f1- 52 = 147; f1- 32 = - 25; f1- 12 = 27;  f132 = 35 
97. Step 1:  y = x5 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: 0, - 4; y-intercept: 0
    Step 3: 0: multiplicity 2, touches;  
- 4: multiplicity 1, crosses
    Step 4:  4
    Step 5:  f1- 52 = - 650; f1- 32 = 90;  f1- 22 = 40; f112 = 10 
y
54
x
5
(1, 8)
(2, 4)
(0, 0)
(1, 0)
(3, 0)
,
5
16
1
2
(4, 48)
y
200
x
5
(2, 0)
(4, 0)
(2, 0)
(3, 35)
(0, 32)
(3, 25)
y
160
x
5
(0, 0)
(1, 10)
(4, 0)
(2, 40)
(3, 90)

Answers  Section 4.1  1065
99. Step 1:  y = x3 
    Step 2:
2
2
2
2
y
2.5
x
2.5
(1.5, 1.13)
(1.26, 0)
(0.66, 0.99)
(0.5, 0.40)
(0.80, 0.57)
(0.20, 0)
(1.26, 0)
(1.5, 0.86)
(0, 0.32)
    Step 3:  x-intercepts: - 1.26, - 0.20, 1.26  
y-intercept: - 0.31752
    Step 4:
    Step 5:  1- 0.80, 0.572; 10.66, - 0.992
    Step 6:
    Step 7:  Domain: 1- q, q 2;  
Range: 1- q, q 2
    Step 8:  Increasing on 1- q, - 0.802
and 10.66, q 2
          Decreasing on 1- 0.80, 0.662
101. Step 1:  y = x3 
    Step 2:
    Step 3:  x-intercepts: - 0.9, 4.71
            y-intercept: - 3.8151
15
3
30
6
y
15
x
6
(0.9, 0)
(2, 8.12)
(2.84, 26.16)
(2, 22.79)
(0, 3.82)
(5, 10.10)
4
30
    Step 4:
    Step 5:  1- 0.9, 02; 12.84, - 26.162
    Step 6:
    Step 7:  Domain: 1- q, q 2; 
Range: 1- q, q 2
    Step 8:  Increasing on 1- q, - 0.92  
and 12.84, q 2
          Decreasing on 1- 0.9, 2.842
    Step 5:  10, 50.262; 1- 3.04, - 35.302, 13.04, - 35.302
    Step 6:
103. Step 1:  y = x4 
    Step 2:
60
5
40
5
    Step 3:  x-intercepts: - 3.90, - 1.82, 1.82, 3.90
           y-intercept: 50.2619
    Step 4:
y
60
x
5
(1.82, 0)
(3.90, 0)
(4, 10.26)
(3.04, 35.30)
(2.5, 26.3)
(2.5, 26.3)
(3.04, 35.30)
(1.82, 0)
(3.90, 0)
(0, 50.26)
(4.25, 42.36)
5
40
    Step 7:  Domain: 1- q, q 2; Range: 3 - 35.30, q 2
    Step 8:  Increasing on 1- 3.04, 02 and 13.04, q2
            Decreasing on 1- q, - 3.042  
and 10, 3.042
105. Step 1:  y = - 1.2x4 
    Step 2:
5
3
5
3
y
5
x
3
(0.81, 3.21)
(1.47, 0)
(1.7, 3.63)
(1.25, 2.31)
(0.91, 0)
(0, 2)
3
5
    Step 3:  x-intercepts: - 1.47, 0.91;
           y-intercept: 2
    Step 4:
    Step 5:  10.81, 3.212
    Step 6:
    Step 7:  Domain: 1- q, q 2; 
Range: 1- q, 3.214
    Step 8:  Increasing on 1- q, - 0.812 
Decreasing on 1- 0.81, q 2
107. f1x2 = - x1x + 22 1x - 22
    Step 1:  y = - x3 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: - 2, 0, 2; y-intercept: 0
    Step 3:  - 2, 0, 2: multiplicity 1, crosses
    Step 4:  At most 2 turning points
    Step 5:  f1- 32 = 15; f1- 12 = - 3; 
f112 = 3; f132 = - 15
y
20
x
5
(3, 15)
(2, 0)
(0, 0)
(1, 3)
(2, 0)
(3, 15)
(1, 3)
y
50
x
5
(4, 0)
(2, 20)
(5, 40)
(2, 12)
(0, 0)
(4, 32)
(3, 0)
y
700
x
3
(2, 0)
(6, 0)
(1, 30)
(7, 630)
(4, 192)
(1, 42)
(0, 0)
(2, 0)
(3, 270)
113. f1x2 = - x2 1x + 122 1x - 12
    Step 1:  y = - x5 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: - 1, 0, 1; y-intercept: 0
    Step 3:  1: multiplicity 1, crosses; - 1, 0:  
multiplicity 2, touches
    Step 4:  At most 4 turning points
    Step 5:  f1-1.52 = 1.40625; f1- 0.542 = 0.10;  
f10.742 = 0.43; f11.22 = - 1.39392
   
y
2.5
x
2.5
(0.54, 0.10)
(1, 0)
(1.5, 1.40625)
(1.2, 1.39392)
(1, 0)
(0, 0)
(0.74, 0.43)
109. f1x2 = x1x + 42 1x - 32
    Step 1:  y = x3 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: - 4, 0, 3; y-intercept: 0
    Step 3:  - 4, 0, 3: multiplicity 1, crosses
    Step 4:  At most 2 turning points
    Step 5:  f1- 52 = - 40; f1- 22 = 20; 
f122 = - 12; f142 = 32
   
111. f1x2 = 2x1x + 62 1x - 22 1x + 22
    Step 1:  y = 2x4 
    Step 2:  x-intercepts: - 6, - 2, 0, 2;  
y-intercept: 0
    Step 3:  - 6, - 2, 0, 2: multiplicity 1, crosses
    Step 4:  At most 3 turning points
    Step 5:  f1- 72 = 630; f1- 42 = - 192; 
f1- 12 = 30; f112 = - 42; 
f132 = 270

1066 
Answers  Section 4.1
115. f1x2 = 31x + 32 1x - 12 1x - 42  117. f1x2 = - 21x + 522 1x - 22 1x - 42  119. (a) - 3, 2  (b) - 6, - 1
(c) ≈24
(d) 
(e) ≈54; no
H
x
50
40
30
20
10
0
2 4 6 8 10
123. (a) 
        The relation appears to be cubic.
(b) 2.4°/h  (c) 1°/h
(d) T1x2 = - 0.01308x3 + 0.4674x2 - 3.4159x + 41.1929; 53.9°F
(e) 
(f) The predicted temperature at midnight is 41.2°F.
35
00
10
T
x
60
54
48
42
36
30
0
6
12
24
18
60
025
27
125. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) As more terms are added, the values of the polynomial function get closer to 
the values of f. The approximations near 0 are better than those near - 1 or 1.
121. (a) 
        The relation appears to be cubic.
(b) H1x2 = 0.3948x3 - 5.9563x2 + 26.1965x - 7.4127
131. 1a2 - 1d2  134. y = - 2
5 x -  11
5   135. 5x x ≠- 56  136. - 2- 27
2
, - 2 + 27
2
  137. (- 7, 3)
4.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 230)
5. F  6. horizontal asymptote  7. vertical asymptote  8. proper  9. T  10. F  11. y = 0  12. T  13. d  14. a  15. All real numbers except - 3; 
5x0 x ≠- 36  17. All real numbers except 2 and - 4; 5x0 x ≠2, x ≠- 46  19. All real numbers except - 2 and  1
3; e x ` x ≠- 2, x ≠1
3 f
21. All real numbers except 1 and - 1; 5x0 x ≠- 1, x ≠16  23. All real numbers  25. All real numbers except - 2.5x0 x ≠- 26
27. (a) Domain: 5x0 x ≠26; range: 5y0 y ≠16  (b) 10, 02  (c) y = 1  (d) x = 2  (e) None
29. (a) Domain: 5x0 x ≠06; Range: 5y0 y … - 2 or y Ú 26  (b) None  (c) None  (d) x = 0  (e) y = - x
31. (a) Domain: 5x0 x ≠- 1, x ≠16 Range: All real numbers  (b) 10, 02  (c) y = 0  (d) x = - 1, x = 1  (e) None
33. (a) 
(b) Domain: 5x x ≠06; Range: 5y y 7 36
(c) Vertical asymptote: x = 0;  
Horizontal asymptote: y = 3
35. (a) 
(b) Domain: 5x x ≠16; range: 5y y 7 06
(c) Vertical asymptote: x = 1; 
horizontal asymptote: y = 0
37. (a) 
(b) Domain: 5x x ≠- 26; Range: 5y y 7 06
(c) Vertical asymptote: x = - 2;  
Horizontal asymptote: y = 0
y
10
x
5
(1, 4)
(1, 4)
x  0
y  3
5
y
10
x
5
(0, 1)
(2, 1)
x  1
y  0
y
5
x
2
(1, 2)
(3, 2)
x  2
y  0
5
2
39. (a) 
(b) Domain: 5x x ≠16; Range: 5y y ≠16
(c) Vertical asymptote: x = 1;  
Horizontal asymptote: y = 1
41. (a) 
(b) Domain: 5x x ≠- 16; Range: 5y y ≠26
(c) Vertical asymptote: x = - 1;  
Horizontal asymptote: y = 2
43. (a) 
(b) Domain: 5x x ≠06; Range: 5y y ≠16
(c) Vertical asymptote: x = 0;  
Horizontal asymptote: y = 1
y
5
x
5
(0, 0)
(2, 2)
x  1
y  1
5
5
y
5
x
5
(2, 3)
(0, 1)
x  1
y  2
5
5
y
5
−5
x
5
−5
(5, 3)
(5, −3)
(0, −2)
(0, 2)
(−4, 0)

Answers  Section 4.3  1067
45. Vertical asymptote: x = - 4; horizontal asymptote: y = 3  47. Vertical asymptote: x = 3; oblique asymptote: y = x + 5
49. Vertical asymptotes: x = 1, x = - 1; horizontal asymptote: y = 0  51. Vertical asymptote: x = - 5
 2 ; Horizontal asymptote: y = 1
 2 
53. Vertical asymptote: none; oblique asymptote: y = 2x + 7  55. Vertical asymptote: x = 0; No horizontal or oblique asymptote
59. (a) 
(b) Horizontal: Rtot = 10; as the resistance of R2  
increases without bound, the total resistance 
approaches 10 ohms, the resistance R1 .
(c) R1 ≈103.5 ohms
Rtot
R2
5
10
0
5 10 15 20 25
y
x
10
10
5
5
x  1
y  2
y  2
(0, 3)
(2, 7)
4.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 245)
2. False  3. c  4. a  5. (a) 5x x ≠26  (b) 0  6. True
7. 1. Domain:  {x x ≠0, x ≠- 4}  2. R is in lowest terms  3. no y-intercept; x-intercept: - 1
  4. R is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = 0, x = - 4  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 0, intersected at 1- 1, 02
  6.	
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 4)
Below x-axis
4
1
(4, 1)
Above x-axis
(1, 0)
R(  )  
Below x-axis
0
(0, )
1
R(1) 
Above x-axis
5
2
R(2)  1
4
 1
2
2
5
2
7
R(5)  
4
5

(5,      )
4
5

(1,   )
2
5
(   ,      )
2
7

1
2

1
2
(2,   )
1
4
7. 
9. 1. R1x2 =
21x + 22
 x - 1
; Domain: 5x x ≠16  2. R is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: - 4 x-intercept: - 2
  4. R is in lowest terms; vertical asymptote: x = 1  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 2, not intersected
  7. 
  7. 
13. 1. P1x2 =
1x2 + x + 12 1x2 - x + 12
 1x + 12 1x - 12
 ; Domain: 5x x ≠- 1, x ≠16  2. P is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: - 1; no x-intercept
    4. P is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = - 1, x = 1  5. No horizontal or oblique asymptote
    6. 
11. 1. 
6
 1x - 32 1x + 22; Domain: 5x x ≠- 2, x ≠36  2. R is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: - 1; no x-intercept
    4. R is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = - 2, x = 3  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 0, not intersected
    6. 
  6. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 2)
Above x-axis
2
1
(2, 1)
(0, 4)
(2, 8)
Below x-axis
(1, )
Above x-axis
3
2
0
R(2)  8
R(3)  1 
2
R(0)  4 
(3,   )
1
2
y
2
x
5
(3, 1)
(0, 1)
(4, 1)
x  3
x  2
y  0
(1, 1)
5
2
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 2)
Above x-axis
2
3
(2, 3)
(3, 1)
(0, 1)
Below x-axis
(3, )
(4, 1)
Above x-axis
3
4
0
R(4)  1
R(0)  1
R(3)  1
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of P
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 1)
Above x-axis
1
1
(1, 1)
(2, 7)
(0, 1)
Below x-axis
(1, )
(2, 7)
Above x-axis
2
2
0
P(2)  7
P(0)  1
P(2)  7
y
10
10
x
5
(2, 0)
(0, 4)
(2, 8)
(4, 4)
(3, 5)
x  1
y  2
  7. 
y
6
x
5
(0, 1)
(2, 7)
(2, 7)
x  1
x  1
y
2.5
x
4
(1, 0)
x  0
x  4
y  0
4
5
5, 


2
7
,
1
2
2, 1
4
1,  2
5
61. (a) R1x2 = 2 +
5
x - 1 = 5a
1
x - 1 b + 2
(b) 
(c) Vertical asymptote: x = 1;  
horizontal asymptote: y = 2
67. x = 5  68. - 30
69. x@axis symmetry
70. 1- 3, 112, 12, - 42

1068 
Answers  Section 4.3
  7. 
  7.
  7. 
17.  1. R1x2 =
1x + 42 1x - 32
 1x + 22 1x - 22; Domain: 5x0 x ≠- 2, x ≠26  2. R is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: 3; x-intercepts: - 4, 3
    4. R is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = - 2, x = 2  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 1, intersected at 18, 12
    6. 
19.  1. G1x2 =
3x
 1x + 12 1x - 12; Domain: 5x x ≠- 1, x ≠16  2. G is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: 0; x-intercept: 0
    4. G is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = - 1, x = 1  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 0, intersected at 10, 02
    6. 
    4. H is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = 3, x = - 3  5. Oblique asymptote: y = x, intersected at a 1
 9, 1
 9 b
    6. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of H
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 3)
(4, 9.3)
(2, 1.4)
(4, 9)
Below x-axis
3
1
(3, 1)
Above x-axis
(1, 3)
Below x-axis
3
(3, )
4
2
Above x-axis
4
0
H(0)  1
9
H(4)  9.3
H(2)  1.4
H(4)  9
(0,   )
1
9
y
8
x
10
(4, 9.3)
(2, 1.4)
(4, 9)
(1, 0)
x  3
x  3
y  x
0, 1
9
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 4)
Above x-axis
4
2
(4, 2)
(3, 1.2)
(2.5, 1.44)
(0, 3)
(8, 1)
Below x-axis
(2, 2)
Above x-axis
2
3
(2, 3)
2.5
R(2.5)  1.44
Below x-axis
7
3
R(3)  1.2
R(0)  3
0
R(7)  2 
3
(3, )
8
R(8)  1
Above x-axis
(7,   )
2 
3
y
2
x
10
(4, 0)
(8, 1)
(3, 0)
(0, 3)
x  2
y  1
x  2
5
5
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of G
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 1)
Below x-axis
1
0
(1, 0)
(2, 2)
Above x-axis
(0, 1)
G(  )  2
Below x-axis
1
(1, )
(2, 2)
2
G(2)  2
Above x-axis
2
1
2
G(2)  2
1 
2

1
2
G(  )  2
1
2
(   , 2)
1 
2

( ,      )
2
1
2
y
5
x
5
(2, 2)
(0, 0)
(2, 2)
y  0
x  1
x  1
5
  7. 
21. 1. R1x2 =
- 4
 1x + 12 1x + 32 1x - 32; Domain: 5x x ≠- 3, x ≠- 1, x ≠36  2. R is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: 4
9 ; x-intercepts: None
    4. R is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = - 3, x = - 1, x = 3  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 0, not intersected
    6. 
23. 1. H1x2 =
x2 + 4
 1x2 + 12 1x + 12 1x - 12
; Domain: 5x x ≠- 1, x ≠16  2. H is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: - 4; no x-intercepts
    4. H is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = - 1 and x = 1  5. Horizontal asymptote y = 0, not intersected.
    6. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 3)
(4, 0.19)
(2, 0.8)
(4, 0.11)
Above x-axis
3
1
(3, 1)
Below x-axis
(1, 3)
Above x-axis
3
(3 )
4
Below x-axis
4
2
0
R(0)  4
9
R(4)  0.19
R(4)  0.11
R(2)  0.8
(0,   )
4
9
y
2
x
5
(4, 0.19)
(2, 0.8)
(4, 0.11)
(1, 0.25)
x  3
x  1
2
5
y  0
x  3
0, 4
9
  7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of H
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 1)
2
2
H(2) 
Above x-axis
(2,     )
(1, 1)
1
1
0
H(0)  4
Below x-axis
(0, 4)
(1, )
H(2) 
Above x-axis
8
15
8
15
(2,     )
8
15
8
15
y
x
5
3
(0, 4)
2, 8
15
2, 8
15
x  1 x  1
y  0
5
25. 1. F1x2 =
1x + 22 1x + 12
 x - 1
; Domain: 5x x ≠- 16  2. F is in lowest terms.  3. y-intercept: - 2; x-intercept: - 2, - 1
    4. F is in lowest terms; vertical asymptote: x = 1  5. Oblique asymptote: y = x + 4; not intersected.
    6.	
  7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of F
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 2)
(3, 0.5)
(0, 2)
(2, 12)
(1.5, 0.1)
Below x-axis
2
1
(2, 1)
Above x-axis
(1, 1)
Below x-axis
1
(1, )
2
Above x-axis
3
1.5
0
F(2)  12
F(3)  0.5
F(1.5)  0.1
F(0)  2
y
5
16
x
(0, 22)
(2, 12)
(3, 10)
(22, 0)
(21, 0)
x 5 1
y 5 x 1 4
15. 1. H1x2 =
1x - 12 1x2 + x + 12
 1x + 32 1x - 32
; Domain: 5x x ≠- 3, x ≠36  2. H is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: 1
 9 ; x-intercept: 1

Answers  Section 4.3  1069
27. 1. R1x2 =
1x - 42 1x + 32
 x + 5
; Domain: 5x x ≠- 56  2. R is in lowest terms.  3. y-intercept: - 12
5 ; x-intercept: - 3 and 4
33. 1. R1x2 =
1x + 42 1x - 32
 1x + 22 1x - 32; Domain: 5x x ≠- 2, x ≠36  2. In lowest terms, R1x2 = x + 4
 x + 2  3. y-intercept: 2; x-intercept: - 4
    4. Vertical asymptote: x = - 2; hole at a3, 7
5 b  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 1, not intersected
    6.	
  7. 
    4. R is in lowest terms; vertical asymptote: x = - 5  5. Oblique asymptote: y = x - 6; not intersected
    6.	
  7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 5)
(7, 22)
(0, 2.4)
(5, 0.8)
(4, 8)
Below x-axis
5
3
(5, 3)
Above x-axis
(3, 4)
Below x-axis
4
(4, )
5
Above x-axis
7
4
0
R(5)  0.8
R(7)  22
R(4)  8
R(0)  2.4
y
10
x
10
(4, 0)
(0, 2.4)
(3, 0)
(7, 22)
x  5
y  x  6
10
40
29. 1. G1x2 =
1x + 32 1x - 42
 x + 1
; Domain: 5x x ≠- 16  2. G is in lowest terms.  3. y-intercept: - 12; x-intercept: - 3 and 4
    4. G is in lowest terms; vertical asymptote: x = - 1  5. Oblique asymptote: y = x - 2; not intersected
    6.	
  7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of G
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 3)
Below x-axis
3
1
(3, 1)
Above x-axis
(1, 4)
0
G(0)  12
Below x-axis
4
(4, )
5
G(5) 
Above x-axis
4
2
(5,    )
(4,    )
(2, 6)
(0, 12)
G(4)  
G(2)  6
8–3
8–3
4–3
4–3
x
5
(4, 0)
(0, 12)
(3, 0)
(2, 6)
y  x  2
y
9
x  1
5
31. 1. Domain: 5x x ≠- 36  2. R is in lowest terms   3. y-intercept: 0; x-intercepts: 0, 1    4. Vertical asymptote: x = - 3
    5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 1, not intersected
    6.	
  7.
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 3)
Above x-axis
(4, 100)
(1, 0.5)
3
0
(3, 0)
Below x-axis
(0, 1)
R(  )  0.003
Above x-axis
1
(1, )
2
R(2)  0.016
Above x-axis
(2, 0.016)
4
1
R(4)  100
R(1)  0.5
1–2
1–2
(  , 0.003)
1–2
y
10
x
10
y
0.01
1.25
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
See enlarged
view at right.
Enlarged view
x
x  3
y  1
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 4)
Above x-axis
(3, 1)
4
2
(4, 2)
Below x-axis
(2, 3)
0
R(0)  2
Above x-axis
(0, 2)
3
(3, )
4
R(4) 
Above x-axis
5
3
R(5) 
R(3)  1
1–3
4–3
(4,   )
4–3
(5,   )
1–3
y
x
10
(0, 2)
(3, 1)
(4, 0)
3, 7
5
4, 4
3
5, 1
3
x  2
y  1
5
35. 1. R1x2 =
14x + 32 12x + 52
 12x + 52 1x - 32 ; Domain: e x ` x ≠- 5
2, x ≠3 f  2. In lowest terms, R1x2 = 4x + 3
 x - 3   3. y-intercept: - 1; x-intercept: - 3
4
    4. Vertical asymptote: x = 3; hole at a - 5
2, 14
11 b  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 4; not intersected.
    6.	
  7. 
y
20
4
x
12
(0, 1)
(6, 9)
x  3
y  4
, 0
 3
4

14
11
5
2 ,
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
Above x-axis
Above x-axis
Below x-axis
3
2.5
(3, )
(6, 9)
(0, 1)
6
0
R(6)  9
R(0)  1
Above x-axis
3
1
R(1)  1
4
R(3)  3
2
3
4

(3,   )
3
2
(, 2.5)
(1,   )
1
4
(     ,      )
3
4

2.5
(   , 3)
3
4

37. 1. R1x2 =
1x + 62 1x - 52
 x + 6
; Domain: 5x x ≠- 66  2. In lowest terms, R1x2 = x - 5  3. y-intercept: - 5; x-intercept: 5
    4. Vertical asymptote: none; hole at 1- 6, - 112  5. Oblique asymptote: y = x - 5 intersected at all points except x = - 6
    6.	
  7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 6)
Below x-axis
6
5
(6, 5)
(7, 12)
(0, 5)
Below x-axis
(5, )
(6, 1)
Above x-axis
7
6
0
R(6)  1
R(0)  5
R(7)  12
y
8
x
10
(6, 11)
(0, 5)
(5, 0)
10
12

1070 
Answers  Section 4.3
    4. Vertical asymptote: x = - 1; hole at 1- 1, 12  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 0; not intersected
    6.	
  7.
y
5
−5
x
−5
5
(0, 4)
(2, −2)
y = 1
x = 1
Q5,    R
1
4
(4, 0)
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of F
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 1)
Above x-axis
1
4
(1, 4)
(0, 4)
(2, 2)
Below x-axis
(4, )
Above x-axis
0
5
2
F(0)  4
F(2)  2
F(5) 
1
4
5(  ,   )
1
4
41. 1. F1x2 =
1x - 52 1x + 32
1x + 32 1x + 32; Domain: {x x ≠- 3}  2. In lowest terms, F1x2 = x - 5
x + 3  3. y-intercept: - 5
3; x-intercept: 5
    4. Vertical asymptote: x = - 3;  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 1; not intersected
    6.	
  7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of H
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(2`, 23)
Above x-axis
23
5
(23, 5)
(24, 9)
Below x-axis
(5, `)
Above x-axis
24
6
0
9
1
9
2 5
3
2
0(  ,       )
5
3
6(  ,   )
1
9
y
10
x
−10
10
(−4, 9)
y = 1
x = −3
Q6,    R
1
9
Q0,  −  R
5
3
(5, 0)
43. 1. G1x2 =
2 - x
1x - 122; Domain: 5x x ≠16  2. G is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: 2; x-intercept: 2
    4. Vertical asymptote: x = 1  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 0; intersected at (2, 0)
    6.	
  7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of H
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 1)
Above x-axis
1
2
(1, 2)
(0, 2)
Above x-axis
(2, )
Below x-axis
0
3
2
2
3
2
3
2 2
(  ,   )
2
2
1
4
3(  ,      )
1
4
y
3
−1
x
7
−3
(0, 2)
x = 1
y = 0
Q3, −  R
1
4
Q   ,  2R
3
2
(2, 0)
45. 1. f1x2 = 2x2 + 9
 x
; Domain: 5x x ≠06  2. f is in lowest terms  3. No y-intercept; no x-intercepts
    4. Vertical asymptote: x = 0  5. Oblique asymptote: y = 2x; not intersected
    6.	
  7.	
x  0
y
15
x
5
(3, 9)
(1, 11)
(1, 11)
(3, 9)
y  2x
5
15
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of f
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 0)
Below x-axis
0
(0, )
(1, 11)
(1, 11)
Above x-axis
1
1
f(1)  11
f(1)  11
47. 1. f1x2 = 2x3 + 16
 x
 =
21x + 22 1x2 - 2x + 42
 x
; Domain: 5x x ≠06  2. f is in lowest terms  3. No y-intercept; x-intercept: - 2
    4. Vertical asymptote: x = 0  5. No horizontal or oblique asymptote
    6.	
  7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of f
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(2`, 22)
Above x-axis
22
0
(22, 0)
(23, 16)
(21, 214)
Below x-axis
(0, `)
(1, 18)
Above x-axis
23
1
21
f(1) 5 18
f(21) 5 214
f(23) 5 16
y
18
x
6
−6
(2, 16)
(1, 18)
(−2, 0)
x  0
49. 1. f1x2 = 2x4 + 9
 x3
; Domain: 5x x ≠06  2. f is in lowest terms  3. no y-intercept; no x-intercepts
    4. Vertical asymptote: x = 0  5. Oblique asymptote: y = 2x; not intersected
    6.	
  7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of f
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 0)
Below x-axis
0
(0, )
(2, 5.125)
(2, 5.125)
Above x-axis
2
2
f(2)  5.125
f(2)  5.125
y
10
x
10
(2, 5.125)
(2, 5.125)
x  0
y  2x
10
10
51. One possibility: R1x2 =
x2
 x2 - 4
  53. One possibility: R1x2 =
31x + 22 1x - 122
 1x + 32 1x - 422
39. 1. H1x2 =
- 21x - 12
1x + 12 1x - 12; Domain: 5x x ≠- 1, x ≠16  2. In lowest terms, H1x2 = -
2
x + 1  3. y-intercept: - 2; no x-intercept

Answers  Historical Problems  1071
55. (a) t-axis; C1t2 S 0
    (b) 
    (c) 0.71 h after injection
57. (a) C1x2 = 16x + 5000
 x
+ 100
    (b) x 7 0
    (c) 
    (d) Approximately 17.7 ft by 56.6 ft  
(longer side parallel to river)
59. (a) S1x2 = 2x2 + 40,000
 x
    (b) 
    (c) 2784.95 in.2
    (d) 21.54 in. * 21.54 in. * 21.54 in.
    (e) To minimize the cost of materials 
needed for construction
0.4
00
12
10,000
00
300
10,000
00
60
61. (a) C1r2 = 12pr 2 + 4000
 r
(b) 
The cost is smallest when r = 3.76 cm.
63. No. Each function is a quotient of polynomials, but it is not written in lowest terms. Each  
function is undefined for x = 1; each graph has a hole at x = 1. 
69. If there is a common factor between the numerator and the denominator, and the factor yields 
a real zero, then the graph will have a hole.
70. (2, - 5)  71. y = 0 x0  -  4  72. 17
2   73. g(3) = 6
15. 5x0  - 4 6 x 6 - 1 or x 7 06; 1- 4, - 12 ∪10, q 2  17. 5x0 x … - 2 or x 7 16; 1- q, - 2] ∪11, q 2  19. 5x0 x 7 56; 15, q 2
21. 5x0 x 7 46; 14, q 2  23. 5x0 x 6 - 56; 1- q, - 52  25. 5x0 x … - 3 or - 2 … x … - 16; 1- q, 34 ∪3 -2, - 14
27. 5x0 - 3 6 x 6 0 or x 7 16; 1- 3, 02 ∪11, q 2  29. 5x0 - 3 6 x 6 0 or 0 6 x 6 36; 1- 3, 02 ∪10, 32  31. 5x0 x 7 16; 11, q 2
33. 5x0 x 6 - 1 or x 7 16; 1- q, - 12 ∪11, q 2  35. 5x0 x … - 2 or 1 6 x … 36; 1- q, - 24 ∪11, 34  37. 5x0 x 6 - 2 or x 7 26;
1- q, - 22 ∪12, q 2  39. 5x0 x 6 26; 1- q, 22  41. 5x0 - 8 … x 6 - 26; 3 - 8, - 22  43. 5x0 - 7 6 x 6 - 1 or x 7 36; 1- 7, - 12 ∪13, q 2
45. 5x0 x 6 - 1 or 0 … x 6 1 or x Ú 26; 1- q, - 12 ∪30, 12 ∪32, q 2  47. e x 1 6 x 6 2
3 or x 7 2 f; a - 1, 2
3 b ∪12, q 2
49. 5x0 - 1 6 x 6 3 or  x 7 56; 1- 1, 32 ∪15, q 2  51. e x ` x … - 4 or x Ú 1
 2 f; 1- q, - 44 ∪c 1
 2, q b  53. 5x0 x 6 3 or x Ú 76;
1- q, 32 ∪[7, q 2  55. 5x0 x 6 26; 1- q, 22  57. e x ` x 6 - 2
3 or 0 6 x 6 3
2 f; a - q, - 2
3 b ∪a0, 3
2 b  59. 5x0 x … - 3 or 0 … x … 36;
1- q, - 34 ∪30, 34
61. (a) 
(b) 1- q, - 64 ∪31, 22 ∪12, q 2
6000
00
10
4.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 252)
3. c  4. F  5. (a) 5x0 - 1 6 x 6 1 or x 7 26; 1- 1, 12 ∪12, q 2  (b) 5x0 x … - 1 or 1 … x … 26; 1- q, - 14 ∪31, 24
7. (a) 5x0 x 6 - 1 or - 1 6 x 6 1 or x 7 36; 1- q, - 12 ∪1- 1, 12 ∪13, q 2  (b) 5x0 1 … x 6 2 or 2 6 x … 36; 31, 22 ∪12, 34
9. 5x0 x 6 0 or 0 6 x 6 36; 1- q, 02 ∪10, 32  11. 5x x 7 16; 11, q 2  13. 5x0 x 6 - 4 or x 7 16; 1- q, - 42 ∪11, q 2
y
10
x
10
(1, 0)
(6, 0)
,
3
2

0
, 9
4
10
, 15
2
4
x  2
y  1
63. (a) 
(b) 3 - 4, - 22 ∪3 - 1, 32 ∪13, q 2
65. 5x0 x 7 46; 14, q 2
67. 5x0 x … - 2 or x Ú 26; 1- q, - 24 ∪32, q 2
y
10
x
10
(4, 0)
(1, 0)
(0, 2)
, 28
5
3
y  x 3
x  2
71.
   
f1x2 … g1x2 if - 1 … x … 1
y
2.5
x
2.5
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
f(x)  x4  1
g(x)  2x2  2
y
32
x
2.5
(2, 12)
(2, 12)
f(x)  x4  4
g(x)  3x2
73.
   
f1x2 … g1x2 if - 2 … x … 2
84. (0, - 4), (0, 4), (9, 0)
85. x2 - x - 4  86. (- q, q)
87. (0, 4), (1.33, 2.81)
Historical Problems (page 266)
1.
 ax - b
 3 b
3
+ bax - b
 3 b
2
+ cax - b
 3 b + d = 0
    x3 - bx2 + b2 x
 3
- b3
 27 + bx2 - 2b2 x
 3
+ b3
 9 + cx - bc
 3 + d = 0
   
 x3 + ac - b2
 3 bx + a2b3
 27 - bc
 3 + db = 0
    Let p = c - b2
 3 and q = 2b3
 27 - bc
 3 + d. Then x3 + px + q = 0.
2.          
 1H + K23 + p1H + K2 + q = 0
              H3 + 3H2 K + 3HK2 + K3 + pH + pK + q = 0
                  
 Let 3HK = - p.
    H3 - pH - pK + K3 + pH + pK + q = 0, H3 + K3 = - q

1072 
Answers  Historical Problems
3. 
 3HK = - p
 
 K = -
p
 3H 
 
 H3 + a -
p
 3H b
3
 = - q
 
 H3 -
p3
 27H3 = - q
 
 27H6 - p3 = - 27qH3 
   27H6 + 27qH3 - p3 = 0
 
 H3 =
- 27q { 2127q22 - 41272 1- p32
 2 # 27
 
 
 H3 =
- q
 2  { C
272 q2
 22 12722
+
41272p3
 22 12722
 
 
 H3 =
- q
 2  { C
q2
 4 +
p3
 27 
 
 H =
3
 C
- q
 2
+ B
q2 
 4
+ p3 
 27
  Choose the positive root for now.
4.  H3 + K3 = - q
 
 K3 = - q - H3 
 
 K3 = - q - J
- q
 2
+ C
q2
 4 +
p3
 27 R
 
 K3 =
- q
 2
- C
q2
 4 +
p3
 27
 
 K =
3 C
- q
 2  - A
q2
 4 +   p3
 27 
5. x = H + K
   x
3
 = D
- q
 2
+ C
q2
 4 +
p3
 27 
3
 +  D
- q
 2
- C
q2
 4 +
p3
 27
   (Note that if we had used the negative root in 3, the result would have 
been the same.)
6. x = 3  7. x = 2  8. x = 2
4.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 266)
5. a  6. f1c2  7. b  8. F  9. 0  10. T  11. R = f122 = 8; no  13. R = f122 = 0; yes  15. R = f1- 32 = 0; yes
17. R = f1- 42 = 0; yes  19. R = f a - 1
 3 b = 2; no  21. 7; 3 or 1 positive; 2 or 0 negative  23. 5; 1 positive; 0 negative
25. 3; 1 positive; 2 or 0 negative  27. 4; 1 positive; 1 negative  29. 5; 5 or 4 positive; 0 negative  31. 6; 0 positive; 0 negative
33. {1, {1
3  35. {1, {1
2  37. {1, {2, {1
2, {1
3, {2
3, {1
6  39. {1, {2, {1
2, {1
4, {3, {3
2, {3
4, {6
41. {1, {1
3, {2, {2
3, {3, {6, {9, {18  43. {1, { 1
2, {1
3, {1
6, {2, {2
3, {5, {5
2, {5
3, {5
6, {10, {10
3
45. - 3, - 1, 2; f1x2 = 1x + 32 1x + 12 1x - 22  47. - 1
2 ; f1x2 = 2ax + 1
2 b 1x2 + 12  49. - 2, 25, - 25; f1x2 = 31x + 22 1x - 252 1x + 252
51. - 1
2, 1, 22, - 22; f1x2 = 2ax + 1
2 b 1x - 12 1x - 222 1x + 222  53. 2, multiplicity 2; - 2, - 1; f1x2 = 1x + 22 1x + 12 1x - 222
55. - 1
3, - 1; f1x2 = 3ax + 1
3 b 1x + 12 1x2 + 22  57. 5 - 1, 26  59. e 5
2 f  61. e - 1
2, 2, 4 f  63.  516  65. e 1
2 f  67. e - 4, - 1
2, 2 f
69. LB = - 2; UB = 2  71. LB = - 1; UB = 1  73. LB = - 3; UB = 2  75. LB = - 1; UB = 1  77. LB = - 2; UB = 2
79. f102 = - 1; f112 = 10  81. f1- 32 = - 42; f1- 22 = 5  83. f11.72 = 0.35627; f11.82 = - 1.021  85. r = - 0.60  87. r = - 2.17
89. r = 0.70  91. 2.53
93.
95.
97.
99.
y
30
x
5
(1, 0)
(2, 4)
(3, 0)
(4, 18)
(0, 6)
(2, 0)
(3, 24)
y
5
x
5
(0, 1)
(1, 2)
, 0
1
2
y
2.5
x
2.5
(1, 0)
(0, 2)
(1, 0)
y
2
x
2.5
(0, 2)
, 0
1
2
, 0
 1
2
101.
103.
105. - 8, - 4, - 7
3
111. If f1x2 = xn - cn, then f1c2 = cn - cn = 0, so x - c is a factor of f.
117. All the potential rational zeros are integers, so r either is an integer or 
is not a rational zero (and is therefore irrational).
y
16
x
5
(1, 0)
(2, 0)
(1.5, 1.5625)
(1, 0)
(0, 2)
(2, 12)
y
4
x
5
(1, 9)
(1, 3)
(0, 2)
(2, 0)
, 0
 2
2
, 0
2
2
121. No; by the Rational Zeros Theorem, 1
3 is not a potential rational zero.  123. No; by the Rational Zeros Theorem, 2
3 is not a potential rational zero.
124. (- 1, 13)  125. f (x) = - 3(x - 5)2 + 71  126. 10, - 2232, 10, 2232, 14, 02  127. 1- 3, 22 and 15, q 2
4.6 Assess Your Understanding (page 274)
3. one  4. 3 - 4i  5. T  6. F  7. 4 + i  9. 2 - i  11. - i  13. 2 + i, i  15. - i, 3 + 2i, - 2 - i
17. f1x2 = x4 - 14x3 + 77x2 - 200x + 208; a = 1  19. f1x2 = x6 - 12x5 + 55x4 - 120x3 + 139x2 - 108x + 85; a = 1
21. f1x2 = x5 - 5x4 + 11x3 - 13x2 + 8x - 2; a = 1  23. 5i, - 3  25. - 3i, - 2, 1
3  27. 3 + 2i, - 2, 5  29. - 3i, - 3, 1
2, 4

Answers  Review Exercises  1073
31. - 1, 1, - i, i; f1x2 = 1x + 12 1x - 12 1x + i2 1x - i2
33. 2, 3 - 2i, 3 + 2i; f1x2 = 1x - 22 1x - 3 + 2i2 1x - 3 - 2i2  35. - 3i, - 2i, 2i, 3i; f1x2 = 1x + 3i2 1x + 2i2 1x - 2i2 1x - 3i2
37. - 7, 4, - 3i, 3i; f1x2 = 1x + 72 1x - 42 1x + 3i2 1x - 3i2  39. - 4, 1
3, 2 - 3i, 2 + 3i; f1x2 = 31x + 42 ax - 1
3 b 1x - 2 + 3i2 1x - 2 - 3i2
41. 130  43. (a) f1x2 = 1x2 - 22x + 12 1x2 + 22x + 12  (b) - 22
2 - 22
2 i, - 22
2
+ 22
2 i, 22
2 - 22
2 i, 22
2
+ 22
2 i
45. Zeros that are complex numbers must occur in conjugate pairs; or a polynomial with real coefficients of odd degree must have at least one real zero.
47. If the remaining zero were a complex number, its conjugate would also be a zero, creating a polynomial of degree 5. 
49.
y
7
−5
−2
x
10
50. 5 - 226
51. 6x3 - 13x2 - 13x + 20
52.  perpendicular
Review Exercises (page 277)
3. Neither  4. Polynomial of degree 0
5.
6.
7.
y
15
x
2
(0, 8)
(2, 0)
(4, 8)
y
4
x
7
(1, 0)
(2, 1)
(0, 1)
y
18
x
3
(1, 2)
(0, 3)
(2, 3)
8. 1. y = x3 
  2. x-intercepts: - 4, - 2, 0; y-intercept: 0
  3. - 4, - 2, 0 (all multiplicity 1), crosses
  4. 2
  5. f1- 52 = - 15; f1- 32 = 3; 
f1- 12 = - 3; f112 = 15
9. 1. y = x3 
  2. x-intercepts: - 4, 2; y-intercept: 16
  3. - 4, multiplicity 1, crosses; 2, multiplicity 
2, touches
  4. 2
  5. f1- 52 = - 49; f1- 22 = 32; f132 = 7
10. 1. y = - 2x3 
    2. f1x2 = - 2x2 1x - 22  
x-intercepts: 0, 2; y-intercept: 0
    3. 0, multiplicity 2, touches; 2, multiplicity 1, 
crosses
    4. 2
    5. f1- 12 = 6; f112 = 2; f132 = - 18
y
20
2
(1, 15)
(0, 0)
(1, 3)
(4, 0)
(3, 3)
(2, 0)
(5, 15)
x
y
60
x
10
(3, 7)
(0, 16)
(2, 0)
(5, 49)
(4, 0)
(2, 32)
y
20
6
(1, 2)
(0, 0)
(2, 0)
(3, 18)
(1, 6)
x
11. 1. y = x4
    2. x-intercepts: - 3, - 1, 1; y-intercept: 3
    3. - 3, - 1 (both multiplicity 1), crosses; 1, multiplicity 2, touches
    4. 3
    5. f1- 42 = 75; f1- 22 = - 9; f122 = 15
y
80
x
5
(1, 0)
(0, 3)
(2, 15)
(2, 9)
(3, 0)
(1, 0)
(4, 75)
15. 1. R1x2 =
21x - 32
 x
 ; domain: 5x0 x ≠06  2. R is in lowest terms  3. no y-intercept; x-intercept: 3
    4. R is in lowest terms; vertical asymptote: x = 0  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 2; not intersected
    6.	
7.
14. Domain: 5x x ≠- 26; horizontal asymptote: y = 1;  
vertical asymptote: x = - 2
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 0)
2
Above x-axis
(2, 5)
0
3
Below x-axis
(3, )
R(4) 
Above x-axis
(0, 3)
1
R(2)  5
R(1)  4
1–2
(1, 4)
4
(4,   )
1–2
y
10
x
10
(1, 4)
(3, 0)
(2, 5)
y  2
x  0
4, 1
2

1074 
Answers  Review Exercises
16. 1. Domain: 5x0 x ≠0, x ≠26  2. H is in lowest terms  3. no y-intercept; x-intercept: - 2
    4. H is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = 0, x = 2  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 0; intersected at 1- 2, 02
    6.	
 7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of H
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 2)
0
(2, 0)
(0, 2)
1
H(1)  3
Below x-axis
(1, 3)
2
2
(2, )
3
3
1
H(3)   1––
15
H(1)  1–3
H(3) 5–3
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Above x-axis
(1,   )
1–3
(3,    )
1––
15
(3,   )
5–3
y
5
x
5
(1, 3)
(2, 0)
3,  1
15
3, 5
3
1, 1
3
x  2
x  0
17. 1. R1x2 =
1x + 32 1x - 22
 1x - 32 1x + 22 ; domain: 5x0 x ≠- 2, x ≠36  2. R is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: 1; x-intercepts: - 3, 2
    4. R is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = - 2, x = 3  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 1; intersected at 10, 12
    6.	
 7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 3)
Above x-axis
(3, 2)
Below x-axis
(2, 2)
0
R(0)  1
Above x-axis
3
2
2
3
(2, 3)
Below x-axis
(3, )
4
Above x-axis
4
(0, 1)
R(4)  7––3
(4,    )
7––3
R(4)  3––7
R(  )  9––
11
5–2
R(  ) 11
––9
5–2
(   ,    )
9––
11
5–2
(   ,    )
11
–– 
9
5–2
(4,    )
3––7
5–2
5–2
y
x
5
5
(2, 0)
(0, 1)
(3, 0)
4, 7
3
,11
9
5
2
4, 3
7
    ,  9
11
5
2
y  1
x  2
x  3
18. 1. F1x2 =
x3 
 1x + 22 1x - 22 ; domain: 5x0 x ≠- 2, x ≠26  2. F is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: 0; x-intercept: 0
    4. F is in lowest terms; vertical asymptotes: x = - 2, x = 2  5. Oblique asymptote: y = x; intersected at 10, 02
    6.	
7. 
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of F
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 2)
0
(2, 0)
(0, 2)
Below x-axis
2
(2, )
3
1
3
F(3)  27 
––5
1
F(     )  1 –3
1
F(3) 27
––5
Below x-axis
Above x-axis
Above x-axis
(1,   )
1–3
(3,    )
27
––5
(3,    )
27–5
F(1)  1 –3
(  ,      )
1–3

2
1
y
4
x
10
(0, 0)
3, 27
5
1, 1
3
3, 27
5
y  x
x  2
x  2
1,  1
3
19. 1. Domain: 5x0 x ≠16  2. R is in lowest terms  3. y-intercept: 0; x-intercept: 0
    4. R is in lowest terms; vertical asymptote: x = 1  5. No oblique or horizontal asymptote
    6.	
7.
y
40
x
5
(0, 0)
(2, 32)
2, 32
9
, 1
2
1
2
x  1
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of R
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 0)
2
Above x-axis
(2,    )
0
1
Above x-axis
(1, )
R(2)  32
Above x-axis
(0, 1)
R(2)  
2
(2, 32)
32
––9
32
––9
(   ,    )
1–2
1–2
R(  )  
1–2
1–2
1–2
20. 1. G1x2 =
1x + 22 1x - 22
 1x + 12 1x - 22 ; domain: 5x0 x ≠- 1, x ≠26  2. In lowest terms, G1x2 = x + 2
 x + 1   3. y-intercept: 2; x-intercept: - 2
    4. Vertical asymptote: x = - 1; hole at a2, 4
3 b  5. Horizontal asymptote: y = 1, not intersected
    6.	
7.
Interval
Number Chosen
Value of G
Location of Graph
Point on Graph
(, 2)
Above x-axis
2
(2, 1)
Below x-axis
(1, 2)
0
G(0)  2
Above x-axis
(0, 2)
1
2
(2, )
3
Above x-axis
3
G            1
G(3)  1–2
G(3)  5–4
(3,   )
1–2
(3,    )
5–4
(   )
3–2
(   , 1)
3–2
   3–2
y
5
x
5
(0, 2)
(2, 0)
3, 5
4
2, 4
3
3, 1
2
x  1
y  1
 3
2 , 1
21. 5x0 x 6 - 2 or - 1 6 x 6 26; 
1- q, - 22 ∪1- 1, 22
22. 5x0 - 4 … x … - 1 or x Ú 16 
    3 - 4, - 14 ∪31, q 2
23. 5x0 x 6 1 or x 7 26; 1- q, 12 ∪12, q 2
2
2
1
4
1
1
1
2
24. 5x0 1 … x … 2 or x 7 36; 31, 24 ∪13, q 2
25. 5x0 x 6 - 4 or  2 6 x 6 4 or  x 7 66;
1- q, - 42 ∪12, 42 ∪16, q 2
3
2
1
4
6
4
2
28. f142 = 47,105  30. 1 positive; 2 or 0 negative  31. {1, {3, {1
2, {3
2, {1
3, {1
4, {3
4, {1
6, { 1
12   32. - 2, 1, 4; f1x2 = 1x + 22 1x - 12 1x - 42
33. 1
2 , multiplicity 2; - 2;  f1x2 = 4ax - 1
2 b
2
 1x + 22  34. 2, multiplicity 2; f1x2 = 1x - 222 1x2 + 52  35. 5 - 3, 26  36. e - 3, - 1, - 1
2, 1 f

Answers  Cumulative Review  1075
37. lb: - 2; ub: 3  38. lb: - 3; ub: 5  40. f102 = - 1;  f112 = 1  41. 1.52  42. 0.93  45. - 2, 1, 4;  f1x2 = 1x + 22 1x - 12 1x - 42
46. - 2, 1
2  1multiplicity 22; f1x2 = 41x + 22 ax - 1
2 b
2
   47. 2 (multiplicity 2),  - 15i, 15i; f1x2 = 1x + 15i2 1x - 15i2 1x - 222 
48. - 3, 2, - 12 
 2  i, 12 
 2  i; f1x2 = 21x + 32 1x - 22 ax + 12 
 2  ib ax - 12 
 2  ib
49. (a) A1r2 = 2pr 2 + 500
 r  
    (b) 223.22 cm2 
    (c) 257.08 cm2 
    (d) 
      A is smallest when r ≈3.41 cm.
50. (a)
      The relation appears to be cubic.
    (b) P1t2 = 4.4926t3 - 45.5294t2 + 136.1209t + 115.4667; ≈+928,000.
    (c) 
1000
00
8
280
0190
7
280
0190
7
Chapter Test (page 279)
1.
2. (a) 3
  (b) 
p
q : {1
2, {1, {3
2, {5
2, {3, {5, {15
2 , {15
  (c) - 5, - 1
2, 3; g1x2 = 1x + 52 12x + 12 1x - 32
  (d) y-intercept: - 15; x-intercepts: - 5, - 1
2, 3
(e) Crosses at - 5, - 1
2, 3
(f) y = 2x3 
y
7
x
8
(4, 1)
(2, 1)
(3, 2)
(g) 
y
60
x
5
(3, 0)
(2, 35)
(0, 15) (1, 36)
0

,
1
2
(3, 60)
(2, 45)
(5, 0)
3. 4, - 5i, 5i  4. e 1, 5 - 161 
 6
, 5 + 161 
 6
 f  5. Domain: 5x0 x ≠- 10, x ≠46; asymptotes: x = - 10, y = 2
6. Domain: 5x0 x ≠- 16; asymptotes: x = - 1, y = x + 1
7.
8. Answers may vary. One possibility is  
f1x2 = x4 - 4x3 - 2x2 + 20x.
y
5
x
5
(0, 3)
(3, 0)
(1, 0)
x  1
y  x  1
Cumulative Review (page 279)
1. 126   2. 5x0 x … 0 or x Ú 16; 
1- q, 04 or 31, q 2
  9. Answers may vary. One possibility is r1x2 =
21x - 92 1x - 12
 1x - 42 1x - 92  .
10. f102 = 8; f142 = - 36  
Since f102 = 8 7 0 and f142 = - 36 6 0, the Intermediate Value Theorem guarantees that there 
is at least one real zero between 0 and 4.
11. 5x0 x 6 3 or x 7 86; 1- q, 32 ∪18, q 2
3. 5x0 - 1 6 x 6 46; 1- 1, 42	
4. f1x2 = - 3x + 1	
5. y = 2x - 1	
6.
0
1
1
4
y
5
x
5
(1, 4)
y
6
x
5
(3, 5)
y
10
x
10
(1, 1)
(2, 8)
(2, 8)
(1, 1)
0
1
2
3
7. Not a function; 3 has two images.  8. 50, 2, 46  9. e x ` x Ú 3
2 f; c 3
2, q b
10. Center: 1- 2, 12; radius: 3
y
5
x
2
(1, 1)
(2, 4)
(2, 1)
(2, 2)
(5, 1)
11. x-intercepts: - 3, 0, 3; y-intercept: 0; symmetric with respect to the origin
12. y = - 2
3 x + 17
3    13. Not a function; it fails the vertical-line test.
14. (a) 22  (b) x2 - 5x - 2  (c) - x2 - 5x + 2  (d) 9x2 + 15x - 2  (e) 2x + h + 5
15. (a) 5x0 x ≠16  (b) No; 12, 72 is on the graph.  (c) 4; 13, 42 is on the graph.  (d) 7
4; a7
4, 9b is on the graph. 
    (e) Rational

1076 
Answers  Cumulative Review
16.	
17.
18. 6; y = 6x - 1
19. (a) x-intercepts: - 5, - 1, 5; y-intercept: - 3
    (b) No symmetry
    (c) Neither
    (d) Increasing: 1- q, - 32 and 12, q 2; decreasing: 1- 3, 22
    (e) A local maximum value of 5 occurs at x = - 3.
    (f) A local minimum value of - 6 occurs at x = 2.
20. Odd
21. (a) Domain: 5x0 x 7 - 36 or 1- 3, q 2
    (b) x-intercept: - 1
2 ; y-intercept: 1
    (c) 
    (d) Range: 5y0 y 6 56 or 1- q, 52
y
8
x
8
(0, 7)
, 0
7
3
y
6
x
3
x  1
(0, 1)
(1, 1)
1  2
2 , 0

1  2
2 , 0

y
8
x
2
(0, 2)
(1, 5)
(2, 2)
y
5
x
5
(2, 2)
(0, 1)
(2, 5)
(3, 5)

, 0
1
2
22.
23. (a) 1f + g2 1x2 = x2 - 9x - 6; domain: all real numbers
    (b) a
f
 g b 1x2 = x2 - 5x + 1
 - 4x - 7  ; domain: e x ` x ≠- 7
4 f
24. (a) R1x2 = - 1
 10 x2 + 150x
    (b) +14,000
    (c) 750, +56,250
    (d) +75
Chapter 5  Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
5.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 288)
4. composite function; f(g(x))  5. F  6. c  7. a  8. F  9. (a) 5  (b) 11  (c) 0  (d) 0  (e) 1  (f) 7  11. (a) 3  (b) 4  (c) 1  (d) - 2
13. (a) 98  (b) 49  (c) 4  (d) 4  15.  (a) 4418  (b) - 191  (c) 8  (d) - 2  17. (a) 213  (b) 323  (c) 322 + 1  (d) 0  19.  (a) 1
17  (b) 1
5 
(c) 1  (d) 1
2  21. (a) 2110
25
  (b) 412 - 2
7
  (c) 1  (d) 2
3  23. (a) (f ∘g)(x) = 6x + 3; all real numbers  (b) (g ∘f)(x) = 6x + 9; all real numbers
(c) (f ∘f)(x) = 4x + 9; all real numbers  (d) (g ∘g)(x) = 9x; all real numbers  25. (a) (f ∘g)(x) = x2 + 5; All real numbers
(b) (g ∘f)(x) = x2 + 2x + 5; All real numbers  (c) (f ∘f)(x) = x + 2; All real numbers  (d) (g ∘g)(x) = x4 + 8x2 + 20; All real numbers
27. (a) (f ∘g)(x) = x4 + 8x2 + 16; all real numbers  (b) (g ∘f)(x) = x4 + 4; all real numbers  (c) (f ∘f)(x) = x4; all real numbers
(d) (g ∘g)(x) = x4 + 8x2 + 20; all real numbers  29. (a) (f ∘g)(x) =
3x
2 - x; 5x x ≠0, x ≠26  (b) (g ∘f)(x) =
2(x - 1)
3
; 5x x ≠16
(c) (f ∘f)(x) =
3(x - 1)
4 - x ; 5x x ≠1, x ≠46  (d) (g ∘g)(x) = x; 5x x ≠06   31. (a) (f ∘g)(x) =
2
x + 3x; e x x ≠- 2
3; x ≠0 f 
(b) (g ∘f)(x) =
2(x + 3)
x
; 5x x ≠- 3, x ≠06   (c) (f ∘f)(x) =
x
4x + 9; e x x ≠- 3, x ≠- 9
4 f   (d) (g ∘g)(x) = x; 5x x ≠06
33. (a) (f ∘g)(x) = 2- 2x - 1; e x x … - 1
2 f  (b) (g ∘f)(x) = 1 - 22x - 2; 5x x Ú 26  (c) (f ∘f)(x) = 32x - 2 - 2; 5x x Ú 66
(d) (g ∘g)(x) = 4x - 1; All real numbers  35. (a) (f ∘g)(x) = x + 2; 5x x Ú 26  (b) (g ∘f)(x) = 2x2 + 2; All real numbers
(c) (f ∘f)(x) = x4 + 8x2 + 20; All real numbers  (d) (g ∘g)(x) = 32x - 2 - 2; 5x x Ú 66  37. (a) (f ∘g)(x) = -
13
3x - 14; e x ` x ≠5
2, x ≠14
3 f
(b) (g ∘f)(x) = - 6x - 9
x - 8 ; 5x x ≠2; x ≠86  (c) (f ∘f)(x) = x; 5x x ≠26  (d) (g ∘g)(x) = - 9x - 16
8x - 33; e x ` x ≠5
2, x ≠33
8 f
39. ( f ∘g)(x) = f(g(x)) = f a1
2xb = 2a1
2xb = x; (g ∘f )(x) = g( f (x)) = g(2x) = 1
2
 (2x) = x
41. (f ∘g)(x) = f(g(x)) = f(x - 5) = x - 5 + 5 = x; (g ∘f)(x) = g(f(x)) = g(x + 5) = x + 5 - 5 = x
43. ( f ∘g)(x) = f(g(x)) = f a1
3 (4 - x)b = 4 - 3a1
3 (4 - x)b = 4 - 4 + x = x; (g ∘f)(x) = g(f(x)) = g(4 - 3x) = 1
3 (4 - (4 - 3x)) = 1
3 (3x) = x
45. ( f ∘g)(x) = f(g(x)) = f a1
x b = 1
1
x
=  1 # x
1 = x; (g ∘f)(x) = g(ƒ(x)) = ga1
x b = 1
1
x
= 1 # x
1 = x
47. f(x) = x4; g(x) = 2x + 3 (Other answers are possible.)  49. f(x) = 2x; g(x) = 1 - x2 (Other answers are possible.)
51. f(x) =  x ; g(x) = 2x2 + 3 (Other answers are possible.)  73. f is an odd function, so f(- x) = - f(x). g is an even function, so g(- x) = g(x). Then 
(f ∘g)(- x) = f(g(- x)) = f(g(x)) = (f ∘g)(x). So f ∘g is even. Also, (g ∘f)(- x) = g(f(- x)) = g(- f(x)) = g(f(x)) = (g ∘f)(x), so g ∘f is even.
74. (f + g)(x) = 4x + 3; Domain: all real numbers
    (f - g)(x) = 2x + 13; Domain: all real numbers
    (f ∘g)(x) = 3x2 - 7x - 40; Domain: all real numbers
    ¢
f
g ≤(x) = 3x + 8
x - 5
 ; Domain: 5x x ≠56
75. - 5, - 3, 3
76. 
    Local minimum: - 5.08 at x = - 1.15
    Local maximum: 1.08 at x = 1.15
    Decreasing: (- 3, - 1.15); (1.15, 3)
    Increasing: (- 1.15, 1.15)
77. Domain: 5x x ≠36
    Vertical asymptote: x = 3
    Oblique asymptote: y = x + 9
10
3
10
3

Answers  Section 5.2  1077
29. 
    Domain: {5.0,, 8.5,, 6.7,, 5.5,}
    Range: {Virginia, Nevada, Tennessee, Texas}
5.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 299)
5. f(x1) ≠f(x2)  6. one-to-one  7. 3  8. y = x  9. [4, q 2  10. T  11. a  12. d  13. one-to-one  15. Not one-to-one
17. not one-to-one  19. One-to-one  21. one-to-one  23. Not one-to-one  25. Not one-to-one
27. 
    Domain: {49.7, 43.8, 4.2, 61.9, 12.8} 
    Range: {Atlanta, Boston, Las Vegas, Miami, Los Angeles}
49.7
43.8
4.2
61.9
12.8
Annual
Rainfall
(inches)
Location
Atlanta, Georgia
Boston, Massachusetts
Las Vegas, Nevada
Miami, Florida
Los Angeles, California
Unemployment Rate
11%
5.5%
5.1%
6.3%
State
Virginia
Nevada
Tennessee
Texas
31. 5 15, - 32, 19, - 22, 12, - 12, 111, 02, 1- 5, 12 6
    Domain: 55, 9, 2, 11, - 56
    Range: 5 - 3, - 2, - 1, 0, 16
33. 5 1- 8, - 22, 1- 1, - 12, 10, 02, 11, 12, 18, 22 6
    Domain: 5 - 8, - 1, 0, 1, 86
    Range: 5 - 2, - 1, 0, 1, 26
35.  f1g1x22 = f a1
3 1x - 42 b = 3c 1
3 1x - 42 d + 4 = (x - 4) + 4 = x
     g1f1x22 = g13x + 42 = 1
3 [13x + 42 - 4] = 1
3 13x2 = x
37.  f1g1x22 = f a1
2x - 3b = 2a1
2x - 3b + 6 = x - 6 + 6 = x
     g1f1x22 = g12x + 62 = 1
2
 12x + 62 - 3 = x + 3 - 3 = x
39. f1g1x22 = f12
3 x + 82 = 12
3 x + 823 - 8 = 1x + 82 - 8 = x
    g1f1x22 = g1x3 - 82 = 2
3 1x3 - 82 + 8 = 2
3 x3 = x
41. ƒ1g1x22 = ƒ1x2 = x
    g1ƒ1x22 = g1x2 = x
43.  f1g1x22 = f a3x + 5
1 - 2x b =
3x + 5
1 - 2x - 5
2a3x + 5
1 - 2x b + 3
=
a3x + 5
1 - 2x - 5b 11 - 2x2
a2a3x + 5
1 - 2x b + 3b 11 - 2x2
         
 =
3x + 5 - 511 - 2x2
213x + 52 + 311 - 2x2 = 3x + 5 - 5 + 10x
6x + 10 + 3 - 6x = 13x
13 = x, x ≠1
2
     g1f1x22 = ga x - 5
2x + 3 b =
3a x - 5
2x + 3 b + 5
1 - 2 a x - 5
2x + 3 b
=
31x - 52 + 512x + 32
112x + 32 - 21x - 52
         
 = 3x - 15 + 10x + 15
2x + 3 - 2x + 10
= 13x
13 = x, x ≠- 3
2
45. 	
47. 	
y
2.5
x
2.5
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
(2, 2)
f 1
f 1
(0, 1)
y  x
y
2
x
2
f 1
y  x
(1, 1)
(1, 2)
2
2
y
2
x
2
f 1
y  x
2
2
49. 
51. (a) f -1(x) = - 1
4x
     
f(f -1(x)) = f a - 1
4xb = - 4a - 1
4xb = x
     
f -1(f(x)) = f -1(- 4x) = - 1
4(- 4x) = x
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = All real numbers
      Range of f = Domain of f -1 = All real numbers
    (c) 
53. (a) f -11x2 = x
4 - 1
2
       f(f -1(x)) = f ax
4 - 1
2 b = 4ax
4 - 1
2 b + 2
               = (x - 2) + 2 = x
       f -1(f(x)) = f -1(4x + 2) = 4x + 2
4
- 1
2
               = ax + 1
2 b - 1
2 = x
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = All real numbers;
      Range of f = Domain of f -1 = All real numbers
    (c) 
y
5
x
5
y  x
f 1(x)  
x
1
4
f(x)  4x
5
5
y
5
x
5
y  x
f 1(x) 

x
4
1
2
f(x)  4x  2

1078 
Answers  Section 5.2
55. (a) f -11x2 = 2
3 x - 1
       f1f -11x22 = f12
3 x - 12
                 = 12
3 x - 123 + 1 = x - 1 + 1 = x
       f -11f1x22 = f -11x3 + 12
                 = 2
3 1x3 + 12 - 1 = 2
3 x3 = x 
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = All real numbers;
      Range of f = Domain of f -1 = All real numbers
    (c) 
y
5
x
5
y  x
f(x)  x3  1
f 1(x) 
x  1
3
5
5
57. (a) f -1(x) = 2x - 9, x Ú 9
     
f(f -1(x)) = f(2x - 9) = (2x - 9)2 + 9 = x - 9 + 9 = x
     
f -1(f(x)) = f -1(x2 + 9) = 2(x2 + 9) - 9 = 2x2 =  x = x, x Ú 0
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = 5x x Ú 06;
      Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 5x x Ú g6
    (c) 
y
16
x
16
y  x
f(x)  x2  9
f 1(x) 
x  9
44
59. (a) f -1(x) = - 3
x
     
f(f -1(x)) = f a - 3
x b = - 3
- 3
x
= - 3 # a - x
3 b = x
     
f -1(f(x)) = f -1a - 3
x b = f -1a - 3
x b = - 3
- 3
x
= - 3 # a - x
3 b = x
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = 5x x ≠06;
      Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 5x x ≠06
    (c) 
61. (a) f -11x2 = 4 - 2x
x
     
f1f -11x22 = ƒa4 - 2x
x
b =
4
4 - 2x
x
+ 2
=
4x
4 - 2x + 2x2 = 4x
4 = x
     
f -11f1x22 = f -1a
4
x + 2 b =
4 - 2a
4
x + 2 b
4
x + 2
= 4x + 8 - 8
x
= 4x
4 = x
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = 5x x ≠- 26;
      Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 5x x ≠06
    (c) 
y
5
x
5
y  x
f(x)  f 1(x)  3
x
5
5
y
5
x
5
y  x
y  0
x  0
f(x) 
4 
x  2
f(x) 
4 
x  2
y  2
x  2
f 1(x) 
 2
4
x
f 1(x) 
 2
4
x
5
5
63. (a) f -11x2 = 2 - 4
x
     
f1f -11x22 = ƒa2 - 4
x b =
4
2 - a2 - 4
x b
= 4
4
x
= 4 # x
4 = x
     
f -11f1x22 = f -1a
4
2 - x b = 2 - 4 a2 - x
4
b = 2 - 12 - x2 = x
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = 5x x ≠26; Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 5x x ≠06
65.  (a) f -11x2 =
x
x + 2
       f1f -11x22 = ƒa
x
x + 2 b
2a
x
x + 2 b
x
x + 2 - 1
= -
a2a
x
x + 2 b b 1x + 22
a
x
x + 2 - 1b 1x + 22
 =
- 2x
x - 1x + 22 = - 2x
- 2 = x
       f -11f1x22 = f -1a - 2x
x - 1 b =
-
2x
x - 1
-
2x
x - 1 + 2
=
a -
2x
x - 1 b 1x - 12
a -
2x
x - 1 + 2b 1x - 12
 =
- 2
- 2x + 2x - 2 = - 2x
- 2 = x
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = 5x x ≠16; Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 5x x ≠- 26

Answers  Section 5.2  1079
67.  (a) f -11x2 =
x
3x - 2
       f1f -11x22 = ƒa
x
3x - 2 b =
2a
x
3x - 2 b
3a
x
3x - 2 b - 1
 =
2x
3x - 13x - 22 = 2x
2 = x
       f -11f1x22 = f -1a
2x
3x - 1 b =
2x
3x - 1
3a
2x
3x - 1 b - 2
 =
2x
6x - 213x - 12 = 2x
2 = x
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = e x x ≠1
3 f; Range of f = Domain of f -1 = e x ` x ≠2
3 f
69. (a) f -11x2 = 4x + 3
2 - x
       f1f -11x22 = ƒa4x + 3
2 - x b =
2a4x + 3
2 - x b - 3
4x + 3
2 - x + 4
=
214x + 32 - 312 - x2
4x + 3 + 412 - x2
 = 8x + 6 - 6 + 3x
4x + 3 + 8 - 4x = 11x
11 = x
       f -11f1x22 = f -1a2x - 3
x + 4 b =
4a2x - 3
x + 4 b + 3
2 - 2x - 3
x + 4
=
412x - 32 + 31x + 42
21x + 42 - 12x - 32  = 8x - 12 + 3x + 12
2x + 8 - 2x + 3  = 11x
11 = x
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = 5x x ≠- 46; Range of f -1 = Domain of f = 5x0 x ≠26
71. (a) f -11x2 = 2x - 4
x + 3
     
f1f -11x22 = ƒa2x - 4
x + 3 b =
- 3a2x - 4
x + 3 b - 4
2x - 4
x + 3 - 2
=
- 312x - 42 - 41x + 32
2x - 4 - 21x + 32
 = - 6x + 12 - 4x - 12
2x - 4 - 2x - 6
= - 10x
- 10 = x
     
f -11f1x22 = f -1a - 3x - 4
x - 2
b =
2a - 3x - 4
x - 2
b - 4
- 3x - 4
x - 2
+ 3
=
21- 3x - 42 - 41x - 22
- 3x - 4 + 31x - 22
 = - 6x - 8 - 4x + 8
- 3x - 4 + 3x - 6 = - 10x
- 10 = x
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = {x x ≠2}; Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 5x x ≠- 36 
73. (a) f -11x2 = A
3
3x - 1
     
f1f -11x22 = ƒa A
3
3x - 1 b =
a A
3
3x - 1 b
2
+ 3
3a A
3
3x - 1 b
2
=
3
3x - 1 + 3
3a
3
3x - 1 b
=
a
3
3x - 1 + 3b 13x - 12
a3a
3
3x - 1 b b 13x - 12
=
3 + 313x - 12
3132
= 3 + 9x - 3
9
= 9x
9 = x
     
f -11f1x22 + f -1ax2 + 3
3x2
b =
H
3
3ax2 + 3
3x2
b - 1
=
H
3
x2 + 3
x2
- 1
=
H
3
1 + 3
x2 - 1
=
H
3
3
x2
= B 132 ax2
3 b = 2x2 =  x = x, x 7 0
    (b) Domain of f = Range of f -1 = 5x x 7 06; Range of f = Domain of f -1 = e x x 6 1
3 f
107. 6xh + 3h2 - 7h  108. 
109. Zeros: - 5 - 213
6
, - 5 + 213
6
, x-intercepts: - 5 - 213
6
, - 5 + 213
6
110. Domain: e x ` x ≠
- 3
2, x ≠2 f; Vertical asymptote: x = - 3
2, 
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 3
y
5
−5
x
3
−4

1080 
Answers  Section 5.3
57. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 7 - 16 or 1- 1, q 2
    Horizontal asymptote: y = - 1
53. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 6 16 or 1- q, 12
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 1
49. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 6 16 or 1- q, 12
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 1
47. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 7 06 or 10, q 2
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 0
45. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 7 06 or 10, q 2
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 0
5.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 314)
6. Exponential function; growth factor; initial value  7. a  8. T  9. T  10. a - 1, 1
a b; (0, 1); (1, a)  11. 4  12. F  13. b  14. c  15. (a) 8.815  (b) 8.821 
(c) 8.824  (d) 8.825  17.  (a) 21.738  (b) 22.884  (c) 23.119  (d) 23.141  19. 1.196  21. 32.758  23. 0.273  25. 18.813  27. Neither 
29. Exponential; F1x2 = Cax = 1 # a3
2 b
x
= a3
2 b
x
  31. Neither  33. Exponential; F1x2 = Cax = 1
4 a1
2 b
x
  35. F  37. H  39. C  41. G
y
9
x
2.5
y  1
3
2
1,
(0, 2)
(1, 3)
y
5
x
5
(0, 4)
y  0
(1, 2)
1
2
3,
5
5
y
12
x
3
3
(0, 4)
4
3
1, 
(1, 12)
y  0
y
5
x
5
y  1
2
3
1,
(1, 2)
(0, 0)
5
5
43. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 7 16 or 11, q 2
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 1
51. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 6 16 or 1- q, 12
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 1
y
2
x
5
(3, 0)
y  1
(1, 3)
(0, 7)
5
8
y
5
x
5
y  1
(0, 0)
1
2
3, 
(3, 1)
5
5
y
8
x
5
y  0
(0, 1)
(1, e)
(2, e2)
1
e
1, 
y
8
−2
x
5
−5
(−1, −0.63)
(2, 6.39)
(1, 1.72)
y = 1
59. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 6 96 or 1- q, 92
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 9
61. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 6 76 or 1- q, 72
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 7
y
8
x
5
y  9
(0, 6)
5
1
y
8
x
5
(0, 4)
y  7
5
2
63. 5 - 66  65. 5 - 46  67. 526  69. 5 - 46  71. e 0, 1
2 f
73. 566  75. 5 - 1, 76  77. e - 1, - 1
3 f  79. e 1
2 f  81. 51, 26  83. 1
49
85. 1
4  87. 5  89. f1x2 = 5x  91. f1x2 = - ex  93. f(x) = 3x + 2
95. (a) 16; (4, 16)  (b) - 4; a - 4, 1
16 b  97.  (a) 9
4; a - 1, 9
4 b  (b) 3; (3, 66)
99.  (a) 60; 1- 6, 602  (b) - 4; 1- 4, 122  (c) - 2
55. 
    Domain: All real numbers
    Range: 5y y 7 06 or 10, q 2
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 0
101. 
    Domain: 1- q, q 2
    Range: [1, q 2
    Intercept: (0, 1)
103. 
    Domain: 1- q, q 2
    Range: [- 1, 02
    Intercept: 10, - 12
y
8
x
5
(0, 1)
(1, e)
(1, e)
(2, e2)
(2, e2)
y
3
x
5
y  0
(0, 1)
1
e2
2, 
1
e2
2, 
1
e
1, 
1
e
1, 
119. (a) 5.41 amp, 7.59 amp, 10.38 amp  (b) 12 amp
(d) 3.34 amp, 5.31 amp, 9.44 amp
(e) 24 amp 
(c), (f) 
I
30
t
5
I2 (t)  24(1  e0.5t)
I1 (t)  12(1  e2t)
125. f (A + B) = aA+B = aA # aB = f (A) # f (B)  127. f (ax) = aax = (ax)a = 3f (x)4a
129. (a)  f (- x) = 1
2
 (e-x + e-(-x))
             = 1
2(e-x + ex)
             = 1
2(ex + e-x)
             = f(x)
(b) 
6
6
1
6
y = 1
2 (ex + e−x)
 (c) (cosh x)2 - (sinh x)2
    = c 1
2(ex + e-x) d
2
- c 1
2(ex - e-x) d
2
    = 1
4 3e2x + 2 + e-2x - e2x + 2 - e-2x4
    = 1
4(4) = 1
131. 59 minutes  135. a-x = (a-1)x = ¢ 1
a ≤
x
  136. (- q, - 54 h 3 - 2, 24  137. (2, q)  138. f(x) = - 2x2 + 12x - 13
139.  (a) 
y
x
5
5
(1, 0)
(0, 3)
(2, 3)
(3, 0)
(1, 4)
x  1
 (b) Domain: (- q, q); Range: 3 - 4, q)
 (c) Decreasing: (- q, - 1); Increasing: (- 1, q)
113.  (a) 0.632  (b) 0.982  (c) 1
(d) 
1
00
40
y = 1−e−0.1t
(e) About 7 min

Answers  Section 5.4  1081
5.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 328)
4. 5x x 7 06 or 10, q 2  5. a1
a, - 1b, 11, 02, 1a, 12  6. 1  7. F  8. T  9. a  10. c  11. 2 = log3 9  13. 3 = loga 2.1  15. x = log3 4.6 
17. x = ln M  19. 23 = 8  21. b2 = 4  23. 2x = 6  25. e4 = x  27. 0  29. - 2  31. - 2  33. 2
3  35. 4  37. 3  39. 5x x 7 16; 11, q 2
41. All real numbers except 0; 5x x ≠06; (- q, 0) h
 (0, q)  43. e x x 7 - 3
2 f; a - 3
2, q b  45. 5x x 7 56; 15, q 2
47. 5x x 6 - 1 or x 7 06; 1- q, - 12 h 10, q 2  49. 5x x 7 0 and x ≠16;10, 12 ∪11, q 2  51. 0.536  53. 4.055  55. 0.434  57. 1.110  59. 22
61. 
y
5
x
5
(0, 1)
(1, 3)
(3, 1)
(1, 0)
y  x
, 1
1
3
1, 1
3
f(x)  3x
f 1(x)  log3 x
y
3
x
y  x
(1, 3)
(3, 1)
, 1
1
3
1, 1
3
f 1(x)  log1/3x
3
3
3
63. 
65. F  67. H  69. C  71. G
73. (a) Domain: 1- 4, q 2
    (b) 
    (c) Range: 1- q, q 2 
Vertical asymptote: x = - 4
    (d) f -1(x) = ex - 4
    (e) Domain of f -1: (- q, q) 
Range of f -1: (- 4, q)
    (f) 
75. (a) Domain: 1- q, 02
    (b) 
    (c) Range: 1- q, q 2  
Vertical asymptote: x = 0
    (d) f -1(x) = - e-x
    (e) Domain of f -1: 1- q, q 2 
Range of f -1: (- q, 0)
    (f) 
77. (a) Domain: 1- 1, q 2
    (b) 
    (c) Range: 1- q, q 2 
Vertical asymptote: x = - 1
    (d) f -1(x) = e-x>2 - 1
    (e) Domain of f -1:1- q, q 2 
Range of f -1: (- 1, q)
    (f) 
y
5
x
2
(3, 0)
x  4
y
5
x
5
y  4
(0, 3)
y
x
5
5
x  0
(1, 0)
y
2
x
8
y  0
(0, 1)
y
5
x
5
x  1
(0, 0)
y
8
x
6
(0, 0)
y  1
79. (a) Domain: 10, q 2
    (b) 
    (c) Range: 1- q, q 2 
Vertical asymptote: x = 0
    (d) f -1(x) = 1021x+52
    (e) Domain of f-1: 1- q, q 2 
Range of f -1: (0, q)
    (f) 
81. (a) Domain: 10, q 2
    (b) 
    (c) Range: 1- q, q 2 
Vertical asymptote: x = 0
    (d) f -1(x) = 1
2 # 102x
    (e) Domain of f-1: 1- q, q 2 
Range of f -1: (0, q)
    (f) 
83. (a) Domain: 1- 1, q 2
    (b) 
    (c) Range: 1- q, q 2 
Vertical asymptote: x = - 1
    (d) f -1(x) = 32 - x - 1
    (e) Domain of f-1: 1- q, q 2 
Range of f -1: (- 1, q)
    (f) 
x  0
y
2
x
8
(1, 5)
y  0
y
x
5
3
(5, 1)
x  0
y
2.5
x
8
1
2
5, 
1
2
0
,
y  0
y
x
8
5
1
2
5
,
1
2
0, 
y
5
x
8
(2, 1)
(0, 2)
x  1
y  1
y
5
x
8
(1, 2)
(2, 0)

1082 
Answers  Section 5.4
85.  (a) Domain: 1- q, q 2
     (b) 
     (c) Range: 12, q 2 
Horizontal asymptote: y = 2
     (d) f -1(x) =  lnax - 2
3
b
     (e) Domain of f-1: 12, q 2 
Range of f -1: (- q, q)
     (f) 
87.  (a) Domain: 1- q, q 2
     (b) 
     (c) Range: 1- q, 02 
Horizontal asymptote: y = 0
     (d) f -1(x) = log31- x2 - 1
     (e) Domain of f-1: 1- q, 02 
Range of f -1: (- q, q)
     (f) 
y  2
y
8
x
5
(0, 5)
x  2
y
2
x
7
(5, 0)
y
10
x
5
y  0
(0, 3)
(1, 1)
y
5
x
10
x  0
(1, 1)
(3, 0)
89. 596  91. e 11
3 f  93. e 1
2 f  95. 5 - 46 
97. 546  99. e - 1
5 f  101. e ln 10
3
f 
103. e 1 - ln 13 
2
f
105. e - 1 - 285
2
, - 1 + 285
2
f 
107. 5 - 16  109. e 1
2
 a7 + log 3
8 b f 
111. e - 1 + In 5
4 f
113.  (a) e x ` x 7 - 1
2 f; a - 1
2, q b
     (b) 2; (40, 2)  (c) 121; (121, 3)  (d) 4
115. 
    Domain: 5x x ≠06
    Range: 1- q, q 2
    Intercepts: 1- 1, 02, (1, 0)
117. 
    Domain: 5x x 7 06
    Range: 5y y Ú 06
    Intercept: (1, 0)
127. 0.2695 s
    0.8959 s
y
5
x
5
x  0
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
x  0
y
x
2.5
5
(1, 0)
y
x
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
2.0
0.4
0
1.2
Amperes
Seconds
(0.8959, 1)
(0.2695, 0.5)
137. Because y = log1 x means 1y = 1 = x, which cannot be true for x ≠1  139. Zeros: - 3, - 1
2, 1
2, 3; x-intercepts: - 3, - 1
2, 1
2, 3
140. 12  141. f(1) = - 5; f (2) = 17  142. 3 + i; f(x) = x4 - 7x3 + 14x2 + 2x - 20; a = 1
5.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 339)
1. 0  2. M  3. r  4. loga M; loga N  5. loga M; loga N  6. r loga M  7. 7  8. F  9. F  10. F  11. b  12. b  13. - 13  15. - 4  17. 8  19. 1  21. 1
23. 3  25. 42  27. 3  29. a - b  31. b - a  33. 3b  35. 1
4 1a - b2  37. log3 x - 2  39. 5 log7 x  41. 1 - ln x  43. ln x + x  45. log2 a - 2 log2 b
47. ln x + 1
2 ln11 + x22  49. 1
3 log31x2 + 12 - log51x + 12 - log51x - 12  51. log x + log1x + 22 - 2 log1x + 32 
53. 4
3 ln1x - 42 - 2
3 ln1x + 12 - 2
3 ln1x - 12  55. ln 5 + 2 ln x + 1
3 ln11 - x2 - ln 4 - 2 ln1x + 12  57. log5 u3v4  59. log2 a 1
x3 b 
61. log ax + 2
x + 1 b  63. - 2 ln1x - 12  65. log31x92  67. log 3 2
3 x3 + 1 # 2x2 + 14  69. log5c
13x + 123
x12x - 122 d   71. 2.771  73. - 3.880  75. 5.615 
77. 0.303  79. y =
log x
log 4	
81. y =
log1x - 32
log 4
	
83. y =
log1x - 22
log1x + 22
3
1
3
4
7
3
0
3
8
2
0
2
85. (a) 1f ∘g2 1x2 = x; 5x x is any real number6 or 1- q, q 2
    (b) 1g ∘f2 1x2 = x; 5x x 7 06 or 10, q 2  (c) 5
    (d) 1f ∘h2 1x2 = ln x2; 5x x ≠06 or (- q, 0) h (0, q)  (e) 2
101. loga1x + 2x2 - 12 + loga1x - 2x2 - 12 = loga3 1x + 2x2 - 12 1x - 2x2 - 12 4 = loga[x2 - 1x2 - 12] = loga 1 = 0
103. ln11 + e2x2 = ln[e2x1e-2x + 12] = ln e2x + ln1e-2x + 12 = 2x + ln11 + e-2x2
105. y = f1x2 = loga x; ay = x implies ay = a1
a b
-y
= x, so - y = log1>a x = - f1x2.
107. f1x2 = loga x; fa1
x b = loga 1
x = loga 1 - loga x = - f1x2

Answers  Section 5.8  1083
109. loga M
N = loga1M # N-12 = loga M + loga N-1 = loga M - loga N, since aloga N-1 = N-1 implies a-loga N-1 = N; that is, loga N = - loga N-1.
115. {- 1.78, 1.29, 3.49}  116. A repeated real solution (double root)  117. - 2, 1
5, - 5 - 221
2
, - 5 + 221
2
118. 
y
10
−10
x
10
−10
    Domain: 5x x … 26 or (- q, 2]
    Range: 5y y Ú 06 or [0, q)
27. 50.1236  29. 526  31. e 9
2 f  33. e 1
3 f  35. 542
3 26  37. 5 2
3 2 + 16  39. 5e, e46  41. 5 - 26
43. 5log2106 = e ln 10
ln 2 f ≈53.3226  45. 5 - 5.5856  47. 5 - 1.4626
49. 50.2346  51. 50.1526  53. 506  55. 520.7286  57. 506  59. 516  61. e log41 - 2 + 272 f ≈5 - 0.3156  63. 5log6 36 
65. No real solution  67. 5log3 76 ≈51.7716  69. 512.156  71. 5 - 0.576  73. 51.86, 4.546  75. 51.166  77. 50.656  79. 50.05, 1.486 
81. 50.576  83. {1}  85. 5166  87. e - 1, 2
3 f  89. 506  91. 5ln12 + 252 6 ≈51.4446  93. e e
ln 5# ln 3
ln 15 f ≈51.9216  95.  (a) 556; (5, 3) 
(b) 556; (5, 4)  (c) 516; yes, at (1, 2)  (d) 556  (e) e - 1
11 f
97. (a), (b) 
    (c) 5x x 7 0.7106 or 10.710, q 2
y
x
5
5
1
2
, 22
f(x)  2x  1
g(x)  2x  2
y
x
5
5
f(x)  2x  4
y  4
y
18
x
2.5
(0.710, 6.541)
f(x)  3x  1
g(x)  2x  2
y
18
x
3
f(x)  3x 
g(x)  10
(log3 10, 10)
99. (a), (b), (c) 
101. (a), (b), (c) 
103. (a) 
    (b) 2  (c) 5x x 6 26 or 1- q, 22
110. e - 3, 1
4, 2 f
111. one-to-one
112. (f ∘g)(x) =
x + 5
- x + 11; 5x x ≠3, x ≠116
113. 5x x Ú 16, or 31, q)
5.7 Assess Your Understanding (page 354)
3. principal  4. I; Prt; simple interest  5. 4  6. effective rate of interest  7. $108.29  9. $358.84  11. $789.24  13. $1246.08  15. $88.72  17. $626.61
19. $266.08  21. $654.98  23. 5.095%  25. 6.184%  27. 9% compounded annually  29. 7.9% compounded annually  31. 25.992%  33. 24.573%
35. (a) About 8.69 yr  (b) About 8.66 yr  37. 6.823%  61. 34.31 yr  76. R = 0; yes  77. f -1(x) =
2x
x - 1  78. - 2, 5; f(x) = (x + 2)2 (x - 5) (x2 + 1)
79. 566
5.8 Assess Your Understanding (page 366)
7. (a) N(t) = N0ekt  (b) 25,198
23. (a) In 1984, 91.8% of households did 
not own a personal computer.
    (b) 
    (c) 70.6%  (d) During 2011
100
00
40
120
00
100
6
00
100
25. (a) 
    (b) 0.78, or 78%
    (c) 50 people
    (d) As n increases, the probability decreases.
27. (a) 9.23 * 10-3, or about 0
    (b) 0.81, or about 1
    (c) 5.01, or about 5
    (d) 57.91°, 43.99°, 30.07°
30. f(x) = - 3
2x + 7  31. Neither  32. 2 ln x + 1
2 ln y - ln z  33. 22
3 5
5.6 Assess Your Understanding (page 345)
5. 546  7. e 10
3 f  9. 506  11. e 1
3 f  13. e 1
3 f  15. 556  17. 5256  19. e 15
4 f  21. 5 - 66  23. 526  25. 50.1576

1084 
Answers  Section 5.9
    (d) 
    (e) 5.1%
11. (a) 
    (b) Exponential
    (c) y = 115.5779(0.9012)x
5.9 Assess Your Understanding (page 373)
1
1
0
7
1
0
1
1
0
7
100
020
4
100
020
4
210
20110
380
210
20110
380
320,000,000
10
50,000,000
120
10
50,000,000
320,000,000
120
300
00
30
00
300
30
0
110
0
30
00
110
30
1. (a) 
  (b) y = 0.090311.33842x
  (c) N1t2 = 0.0903e0.2915t
  (d) 
  (e) 0.69
  (f) After about 7.26 hr
3. (a) 
  (b) y = 118.722610.70132x
  (c) A(t) = 118.7226e-0.3548t
  (d) 
  (e) 28.7%
  (f) k = - 0.3548 = - 35.48% is the exponential 
growth rate. It represents the rate at which 
the percentage of patients surviving  
advanced-stage breast cancer is decreasing.
5. (a) 
  (b) y = 330.0549 - 34.5008 ln x
  (c) 
  (d) 185 billion pounds
  (e) Under by 5 billion pounds
7.  (a) 
  (b) y =
762,176,844.4
1 + 8.7428e-0.0162x
  (c) 
  (d) 762,176,844
  (e) Approximately 315,203,288  (f) 2023
9. (a) 
  (b) y =
286.2055
1 + 226.8644e-0.2873x
  (c) 
  (d) 286.2 thousand cell sites
  (e) 281.3 thousand cell sites
13. f(x) = 1
3(x + 3)(x + 1)2(x - 2)  14. 322
2
  15. R = 7; no  16. 
Review Exercises (page 379)
2. (a) 211  (b) 1  (c) 326 + 2  (d) 19 
4. 1f ∘g2 1x2 = 1 - 3x, all real numbers; 1g ∘f2 1x2 = 7 - 3x, all real numbers; 1f ∘f2 1x2 = x, all real numbers; 1g ∘g2 1x2 = 9x + 4, all real numbers
6. 1f ∘g2 1x2 = 1 + x
1 - x, 5x x ≠0, x ≠16; 1g ∘f2 1x2 = x - 1
x + 1, 5x x ≠- 1, x ≠16; 1f ∘f2 1x2 = x, 5x x ≠16; 1g ∘g2 1x2 = x, 5x x ≠06
8. 
y
5
x
5
y  x
(2, 0)
(0, 2)
(3, 3)
(3, 1)
9. f -11x2 = 2x + 3
5x - 2
   f1f -11x22 =
2a2x + 3
5x - 2 b + 3
5a2x + 3
5x - 2 b - 2
= x
   f -11f1x22 =
2a2x + 3
5x - 2 b + 3
5a2x + 3
5x - 2 b - 2
= x
  Domain of f = range of f -1 = all real numbers except  2
5
  Range of f = domain of f -1 = all real numbers except  2
5
10. f -11x2 = x + 1
x
     f1f -11x22 =
1
x + 1
x
- 1
= x
     f -11f1x22 =
1
x - 1 + 1
1
x - 1
= x
    Domain of f = range of f -1 = all real numbers except 1
    Range of f = domain of f -1 = all real numbers except 0
y
10
−10
x
10
−10
11. f -1(x) = x2 + 2, x Ú 0
    f (f -1(x)) = 2x2 + 2 - 2 =  x  = x, x Ú 0
    f -1( f (x)) = (2x - 2)2 + 2 = x
    Domain of f =  range of f -1 = 32, q)
    Range of f =  domain of f -1 = 30, q)
12. f -1(x) = (x - 1)3;
    f ( f -1(x)) = ((x - 1)3)1>3 + 1 = x
    f -1( f (x)) = (x1>3 + 1 - 1)3 = x
    Domain of f = range of f -1 = (- q, q)
    Range of f = domain of f -1 = (- q, q)
16. e x ` x 7 2
3 f; a2
3, qb
17. 5x x 6 1 or x 7 26; 1- q, 12 h 12, q 2
20. 0.4  22. 8 log2 a + 2 log2 b

Answers  Chapter Test  1085
24. 2 ln (2x + 3) - 2 ln (x - 1) - 2 ln (x - 2)  27. ln c 162x2 + 1
2x(x - 4)
d   28. 2.124
29. 
3
1
3
10
y
9
x
9
y  0
(3, 1)
(4, 2)
y
5
x
5
x  0
(2, 4)
(1, 3)
30. (a) Domain of f: 1- q, q 2
    (b) 
    (c) Range of f: 10, q 2 
      Horizontal asymptote: y = 0
    (d) f -11x2 = 3 + log2 x
    (e) Domain of f -1: 10, q 2 
Range of f -1: 1- q, q 2
 (f) 
31. (a) Domain of f: (- q, q)
    (b) 
    (c) Range of f: (1, q)  
Horizontal asymptote: y = 1
    (d) f -1(x) = - log3(x - 1)
    (e) Domain of f -1: (1, q)  
Range of f -1: (- q, q)
    (f) 
32. (a) Domain of f: (- q, q)
    (b) 
    (c) Range of f: (0, q)  
Horizontal asymptote: y = 0
    (d) f -1(x) = 2 + ln ¢ x
3 ≤
    (e) Domain of f -1: (0, q)  
Range of f -1: (- q, q)
    (f) 
33. (a) Domain of f: 1- 3, q 2
    (b) 
    (c) Range of f: 1- q, q 2 
Vertical asymptote: x = - 3
    (d) f -11x2 = e2x - 3
    (e) Domain of f -1: 1- q, q 2 
Range of f -1: 1- 3, q 2
    (f) 
y
5
x
5
y  1
(1, 4)
(0, 2)
y
5
x
5
x  1
(2, 0)
(4, 1)
y
5
x
5
y  0
(2, 3)
3
e
1,
y
5
x
5
x  0
(3, 2)
, 1
3
e
y
5
x
5
x  3
(2, 0)
1
2
0,
ln3
y
5
x
5
y  3
(0, 2)
1
2 ln3, 0
35. e - 1 - 23
2
, - 1 + 23
2
f ≈5 - 1.366, 0.3666   36. e 1
4 f   37. e
2 ln 3
ln 5 - ln 3 f ≈54.3016   38. 5 - 2, 66   39. 5836   40. e 1
2, - 3 f
41. 516  43. 51 - ln 56 ≈5 - 0.6096  44. e log31- 2 + 27 2 f = c
ln 1- 2 + 27 2
ln 3
s ≈5 - 0.3986
45. (a), (e) 
    (b) 3; (6, 3)
y
14
x
10
y  x
f 1(x)  2x1  2
f(x)  log2 (x  2)  1
0, 5
2
, 0
5
2
(3, 6)
(6, 3)
    (c) 10; (10, 4)
    (d) e x ` x 7 5
2 f or a5
2, q b
    (e) f -11x2 = 2x-1 + 2
46. (a) 37.3 W  (b) 6.9 dB  47. (a) 11.77  (b) 9.56 in.
48. (a) 9.85 yr  (b) 4.27 yr  49. $20,398.87; 4.04%; 17.5 yr
50. $41,668.97  51. 24,765 yr ago  52. 55.22 min, or 55 min, 13 sec
53. 7,967,521,519  54. 7.204 g; 0.519 g
55. (a) 0.3  (b) 0.8
    (c) 
    (d) In 2026
1
00
25
56. (a) 
    (b) y = 2638.26(1.0407)x
    (c) A(t) = 2638.26e0.0399x
    (d) 
    (e) 2021–22
10,000
5
0
35
5
0
10,000
35
57. (a) 
    (b) y = 18.921 - 7.096 ln x
    (c) 
    (d) Approximately - 3°F
10
10
40
0
10
10
40
0
58. (a) 
    (b) C =
46.9292
1 + 21.2733e-0.7306t
    (c) 
    (d) About 47 people; 50 people
    (e) 2.4 days; during the tenth hour of day 3
    (f) 9.5 days
50
1
0
9
1
50
1
0
9
Chapter Test (page 382)
1. (a) f ∘g = 2x + 7
2x + 3; domain: e x ` x ≠- 3
2 f  (b) 1g ∘f2 1- 22 = 5  (c) 1f ∘g2 1- 22 = - 3
2. (a) The function is not one-to-one.  (b) The function is one-to-one.

1086 
Answers  Chapter Test
12. (a) Domain of f: 5x - q 6 x 6 q 6 or (- q, q)
    (b) 
    (c) Range of f: 5y y 7 - 26 or (- 2, q); 
Horizontal asymptote: y = - 2
    (d) f -1 (x) = log4 (x + 2) - 1
    (e) Domain of f -1: 5x0 x 7 - 26 or (- 2, q)
      Range of f -1: 5y 0 - q 6 y 6 q 6 or (- q, q)
    (f) 
13. (a) Domain of f: 5x x 7 26 or (2, q)
    (b) 
    (c) Range of f: 5y - q 6 y 6 q 6 or (- q, q);  
vertical asymptote: x = 2
    (d) f -1 (x) = 51-x+2
    (e) Domain of f -1: 5x0 - q 6 x 6 q 6or (- q, q)
      Range of f -1: 5y y 7 26 or (2, q)
    (f) 
y
16
x
2.5
(0, 2)
(1, 1)
y  2
x  2
y
5
x
5
(2, 0)
(1, 1)
x  2
y
8
x
18
(7, 0)
(3, 1)
y
8
x
8
(0, 7)
(1, 3)
y  2
14. 516  15. 5916  16. 5 - ln 26 ≈5 - 0.6936  17. e 1 - 213
2
, 1 + 213
2
f ≈5 - 1.303, 2.3036  18. e
3 ln 7
1 - ln 7 f ≈5 - 6.1726
19. 52266 ≈54.8996  20. 2 + 3 log2 x - log21x - 62 - log21x + 32  21. About 250.39 days  22. (a) $1033.82  (b) $963.42  (c) 11.9 yr
23. (a) About 83 dB  (b) The pain threshold will be exceeded if 31,623 people shout at the same time.
Cumulative Review (page 382)
1. Yes; no  2. (a) 10  (b) 2x2 + 3x + 1  (c) 2x2 + 4xh + 2h2 - 3x - 3h + 1  3. a1
2, 23
2 b is on the graph.  4. 5 - 266
5.                   6. (a)                 (b) 5x - q 6 x 6 q 6  7. f1x2 = 21x - 422 - 8 = 2x2 - 16x + 24      8. 
9. f1g1x22 =
4
1x - 322 + 2; domain: 5x x ≠36; 3
10. (a) Zeros: - 4, - 1
4, 2 
(b) x-intercepts: - 4, - 1
4, 2;      
y-intercept: - 8
(c) Local maximum value of 60.75  
occurs at x = - 2.5.
    Local minimum value of - 25  
occurs at x = 1.
 (d) 
y
x
10
10
(8, 0)
(0, 4)
y
x
10
10
(1, 2)
(0, 3)
y
x
10
5
(0, 1)
(1, 2)
y
70
x
5
(2, 0)
(1, 25)
(4, 0)
(0, 8)
0
,
1
4

5
2
,
3
4

60
y
x
5
5
(0, 3)
(3, 0)
g1(x)
g(x)
y  2
x  2
y  x
11. (a), (c) 
        Domain g = range g-1 = 1- q, q 2
        Range g = domain g-1 = 12, q 2
    (b) g-11x2 = log31x - 22
0
20
0
80
12. e- 3
2 f  13. 526 
14. (a) 5 - 16  (b) 5x x 7 - 16 or 1- 1, q 2  (c) 5256
15.  (a) 
 (b) Logarithmic; y = 49.293 - 10.563 ln x
 (c) Highest value of  r
3. f -11x2 = 2 + 5x
3x
; domain of f = e x ` x ≠5
3 f, range of f = 5y y ≠06; domain of f -1 = 5x x ≠06; range of f -1 = e y ` y ≠5
3 f
4. The point 1- 5, 32 must be on the graph of f -1.  5. x = 5  6. b = 4  7. x = 625  8. e3 + 2 ≈22.086  9. log 20 ≈1.301
10. log3 21 = ln 21
ln 3 ≈2.771  11. ln 133 ≈4.890

Answers  Section 6.2  1087
CHAPTER 6  Trigonometric Functions
6.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 395)
3. standard position  4. central angle  5. d  6. ru; 1
2 r 2u  7. b  8. s
t; u
t   9. T  10. F
11. 
30
  13. 
135
  15. 
5408 
  17. 
4P
3
  19. 
–2P
3
  21. 
21P
4
23. 40.17°  25. 73.68°  27. 98.38°  29. 40°19′12″  31. 29°24′40″  33. 44°0′36″  35. p
6   37. 11p
6   39. - p
6   41. 3p
2   43. - 5p
4   45. - p  47. 60°
49. - 120°  51. 720°  53. 75°  55. - 180°  57. - 135°  59. 1.27  61. - 0.70  63. 6.11  65. 42.97°  67. 171.89°  69. 81.03°  71. 5 m  73. 24 cm
75. 1.333  77. 6.283 m  79. 25 m2  81. 6.928 cm  83. 0.444  85. 9.425 in2   87. 4.189 m2  89. 35.343 cm2  125. v1 = r1v1, v2 = r2v2, and v1 = v2, 
    so r1v1 = r2v2 and r1
r2
= v2
v1
.  134. x = - 7
3  135. 5x x ≠{36  136. y = -  x + 3  -  4  137. HA: y = 3; VA: x = 7
6.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 412)
7. b  8. (0, 1)  9. a 22
2 , 22
2 b  10. a  11. 
y
r; x
r  12. F  13. sin t = 1
2; cos t = 23
2 ; tan t = 23
3 ; csc t = 2; sec t = 223
3
; cot t = 23
15. sin t = 226
5
; cos t = - 1
5; tan t = - 226; csc t = 526
12 ; sec t = - 5; cot t = - 26
12   17. sin t = 22
2 ; cos t = 22
2 ; 
tan t = 1; csc t = 22; sec t = 22; cot t = 1  19. sin t = - 2
3; cos t = - 25
3 ; tan t = 225
5
; csc t = - 3
2; sec t = - 325
5
; cot t = 25
2
21. - 1  23. 0  25. 1  27. 0  29. 0  31. 1 - 22
2
  33. - 1  35. 1
2  37. 223
3
  39. 8  41. 0  43. 222 + 423
3
  45. - 2
47. sin 2p
3
= 23
2 ; cos 2p
3
= - 1
2; tan 2p
3
= - 23; csc 2p
3
= 223
3
;sec 2p
3
= - 2; cot 2p
3
= - 23
3
49. sin 240° = - 23
2 ; cos 240° = - 1
2; tan 240° = 23; csc 240° = - 223
3
; sec 240° = - 2; cot 240° = 23
3
51. sin 3p
4
= 22
2 ; cos 3p
4
= - 22
2 ; tan 3p
4
= - 1; csc 3p
4
= 22; sec 3p
4
= - 22; cot 3p
4
= - 1
53. sin 13p
6
= 1
2; cos 13p
6
= 23
2 ; tan 13p
6
= 23
3 ; csc 13p
6
= 2; sec 13p
6
= 223
3
; cot 13p
6
= 23
55. sin 405° = 22
2 ; cos 405° = 22
2 ; tan 405° = 1; csc 405° = 22; sec 405° = 22; cot 405° = 1
57. sina - p
3 b = - 23
2 ; cosa - p
3 b = 1
2; tana - p
3 b = - 23; csc a - p
3 b = - 223
3
; sec a - p
3 b = 2; cot a - p
3 b = - 23
3
59. sin1- 240°2 = 23
2 ; cos1- 240°2 = - 1
2; tan1- 240°2 = - 23; csc1- 240°2 = 223
3
; sec1- 240°2 = - 2; cot1- 240°2 = - 23
3
61. sin 5p
2
= 1; cos 5p
2
= 0; tan 5p
2  is undefined; csc 5p
2
= 1; sec 5p
2  is undefined; cot 5p
2
= 0
63.  sin a - 13p
6 b = - 1
2;  cos a - 13p
6 b = 23
2 ;  tan a - 13p
6 b = - 23
3 ;  csc a - 13p
6 b = - 2;  sec a - 13p
6 b = 223
3
;  cot a - 13p
6 b = - 23
65. 0.47  67. 0.36  69. 0.38  71. 1.07  73. 1.56  75. 0.02  77. sin u = 4
5; cos u = - 3
5; tan u = - 4
3; csc u = 5
4; sec u = - 5
3; cot u = - 3
4
79. sin u = - 225
5
; cos u = - 25
5 ; tan u = 2; csc u = - 25
2 ; sec u = - 25; cot u = 1
2
81. sin u = 22
2 ; cos u = - 22
2 ; tan u = - 1; csc u = 22; sec u = - 22; cot u = - 1
83. sin u = 4
5; cos u = 3
5; tan u = 4
3; csc u = 5
4; sec u = 5
3; cot u = 3
4  85. 0  87. 0  89. - 0.1  91. 3  93. 5  95. 1
2  97. 23
2   99. 1
4  101. 23
103. 1  105. 1
2  107. 1 + 23
2
  109. - 1
2  111. 23
2   113. 22
4   115. (a) 22
2  ; ap
4 , 22
2 b  (b) a 22
2 , p
4 b  (c) ap
4 , - 2b

1088 
Answers  Section 6.2
135. (a) 16.56 ft  (b)                          (c) 67.5°
450
20
90
137. (a) values estimated to the nearest tenth: 
sin 1 ≈0.8; cos 1 ≈0.5; tan 1 ≈1.6; csc 1 ≈1.3; sec 1 ≈2.0; cot 1 ≈0.6; 
actual values to the nearest tenth: sin 1 ≈0.8; cos 1 ≈0.5; tan 1 ≈1.6;
csc 1 ≈1.2; sec 1 ≈1.9; cot 1 ≈0.6
    (b) values estimated to the nearest tenth: sin 5.1 ≈- 0.9; cos 5.1 ≈0.4;
tan 5.1 ≈- 2.3; csc 5.1 ≈- 1.1; sec 5.1 ≈2.5; cot 5.1 ≈- 0.4; actual  
values to the nearest tenth: sin 5.1 ≈- 0.9; cos 5.1 ≈0.4; tan 5.1 ≈- 2.4;
csc 5.1 ≈- 1.1; sec 5.1 ≈2.6; cot 5.1 ≈- 0.4
143. e x ` x 7 - 2
5 f or ¢ - 2
5, q ≤  144. 4 - 3i, - 5  145. R = 134  146. 81p ft2
6.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 428)
5. 2p; p  6. All real numbers except odd multiples of p
2   7. b  8. a  9. 1  10. F  11. 22
2   13. 1
2  15. - 1  17. 2  19. 22
2   21. 1  23. 1  25. 223
3
27. II  29. I  31. III  33. II  35. tan u = - 3
4; cot u = - 4
3; sec u = 5
4; csc u = - 5
3  37. sin u = - 25
5 ; cos u = - 225
5
; tan u = 1
2; csc u = - 25; 
sec u = - 25
2 ; cot u = 2  39. sin u = 23
2 ; cos u = 1
2; tan u = 23; csc u = 223
3
; sec u = 2; cot u = 23
3  
41. sin u = 222
3
; cos u = - 1
3; tan u = - 222; csc u = 322
4
; sec u = - 3; cot u = - 22
4
43. cos u = - 5
13; tan u = - 12
5 ; csc u = 13
12; sec u = - 13
5 ; cot u = - 5
12 
45. sin u = - 5
13; cos u = - 12
13; tan u = 5
12; csc u = - 13
5 ; sec u = - 13
12; cot u = 12
5
47. sin u = - 3
5; cos u = 4
5; tan u = - 3
4; csc u = - 5
3; sec u = 5
4; cot u = - 4
3 
49. sin u = - 2
3; cos u = - 25
3 ; tan u = 225
5
; csc u = - 3
2; sec u = - 325
5
; cot u = 25
2
51. sin u = 2
3; cos u = - 25
3 ; tan u = - 225
5
; csc u = 3
2; sec u = - 325
5
; cot u = - 25
2  
53. sin u = 1
3; cos u = - 222
3
; tan u = - 22
4 ; csc u = 3; sec u = - 322
4
; cot u = - 222 
55. sin u = - 3
5; cos u = - 4
5; tan u = 3
4; csc u = - 5
3; sec u = - 5
4; cot u = 4
3 
57. sin u = - 23
2 ; cos u = - 1
2; tan u = 23; csc u = - 223
3
; sec u = - 2; cot u = 23
3  
59. - 23
2   61. - 22
2   63. - 2  65. 0  67. 0  69. - 23
2   71. 1  73. - 1  75. - 223
3
  77. 1  79. 1  81. 0  83. 1  85. 1  87. 0  89. 0.9  91. 9 
93. 0  95. All real numbers  97. Odd multiples of p
2   99. Odd multiples of p
2   101. - 1 … y … 1  103. All real numbers  105.  y Ú 1 
107. Odd; yes; origin  109. Odd; yes; origin  111. Even; yes; y-axis
137. ( f ∘g)(x) = x2 - 14x + 46    138.                                                             139. 5ln 6 + 46    140. 9
(2, 3)
(3, 5)
(4, 3)
y
6
-6
-6
6 x
x  3
Vertex: (3, 5)
axis of symmetry: x = 3
6.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 441)
3. 1; p
2   4. 3; p  5. 3; p
3   6. T  7. F  8. T  9. d  10. d  11. (a) 0  (b) - p
2 6 x 6 p
2   (c) 1  (d) 0, p, 2p
(e) f1x2 = 1 for x = - 3p
2 , p
2 ; f1x2 = - 1 for x = - p
2 , 3p
2   (f) - 5p
6 , - p
6 , 7p
6 , 11p
6   (g) 5x0 x = kp, k an integer6  13. Amplitude = 3; period = 2p
15. Amplitude = 1; period = 4p  17. Amplitude = 6; period = 2  19. Amplitude = 4
3; period = 3p  21. Amplitude = 9
5; period = 4
3 
23. E  25. 1  27. B  29. G  31. J 

Answers  Section 6.4  1089
33. 
Domain: 1- q, q 2 
Range: 3 - 3, 34
35.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 3 - 4, 44
37.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 3 - 1, 14
39.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 3 - 1, 14
41.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 3 - 2, 24
43.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: c - 1
2, 1
2 d
45.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 3 - 1, 54
47. 
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 3 - 6, 24
49.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 3 - 2, 104
51.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 3 - 2, 64
53.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: c - 5
3, 5
3 d
55.
Domain: 1- q, q 2
Range: 31, 24
3P
2 , 
3
y
5
5
x
(0, 0)
2P
(2P, 0)
(P, 0)
(
2P, 0)
P
2 , 3
P
2 , 
3
3P
2 , 4
3P
2 , 4
P
2 , 4
P
2 , 4

y
5
5
x
2P
2P
(2P, 0)
(0, 0)

5P
6 , 1
2P
3
2P
3
, 0
P
3 , 0
P
6 , 1
y
2
x
P
2 , 
1
P
3
(0, 0)
, 0
, 0
2
3P
4 , 1
P
2 , 0
P
4 , 1

P
4 , 1
y
1.25
x
(0, 0)
2P
2P
(P, 0)
y
2
x
8P
(0, 2)
(8P, 2)
(
8P, 2)
(6P, 0)
(
4P
8P
, 
2)
(4P, 
2)
(2P, 0)
(
2P, 0)
5P
4 , 0
3P
4 , 0
y
2.5
x
2P
2P
P
4 , 0
P
2
1
2
, 
,
1
2
0,
1
2


P
2 , 2
P
2 , 2
3P
2 , 2
y
6
4
x
(0, 5)
2P
2P
(2P, 5)
(P, 
1)
(
P, 
1)
4
5
x
(
2, 
2)
(2, 
2)
(4, 
2)
(1, 2)
(3, 
6)
(
1, 
6)
(0, 
2)
3
y
23
y
10
10
x
(3, 4)
(0, 4)
(3, 4)
(6, 4)
10
10
, 10
9
2
3
2 , 2
9 
2 , 2
3
2 , 10
P
3 , 6
P
2 , 2
P
6 , 2
P
6 , 2
P
2 , 2
P
3 , 6
2P
4
2P
4
y
7
3
x
(0, 
2)
3
2 , 0
9
4
5
3
,
3
4
5
3
,
y
2
2
x
(3, 0)
(0, 0)
2
22
3
2
8,
3
2
0,
3
2
16,
(4, 1)
y
2.5
x
(12, 2)
(
4, 2)
16
16
57. y = {3 sin12x2  59. y = {4 sin12px2  61. y = 5 cosap
4 xb  63. y = - 2 sinap
2
 xb  65. y = - 5
2 cos1px2  67. y = - p cos x
69. y = - 1
2 sin a3
2
 xb - 1  71. y = - 2 cos1px2  73. y = 4 sin12x2  75. 2
p  77. 12
p
79. 1f ∘g2 1x2 = sin 14x2
1g ∘f2 1x2 = 4 sin x
81. 1f ∘g2 1x2 = - 2 cos x
1g ∘f2 1x2 = cos1- 2x2
83.
87. (a) Amplitude = 220 V 
Period = 1
60 s
(b), (e)
85. Period = 1
30 s 
Amplitude = 220 amp
(c) I1t2 = 22 sin 1120pt2
(d) Amplitude = 22 amp 
Period = 1
60 s
y
1.25
x
P
0
,
P
2

P
2
0
,
y
5
5
x
2P
2P
P
2
4
,
3P
2 , 4
y
2.25
x
2P
(0, 2)
(2P, 2)
(P, 2)
y
1.25
x
P
P
2
, 1
(P, 1)
y
x
1.25
2
(2, 1)
(0, 0)
(, 0)

2
1
,
3
2
0
,
5
4
 
2
,  2
I
220
t
220
1 
15
1 
30
V
I
220
22
t
220
22
89. (a) P1t2 =
[V0 sin 12pft2]2
R
=
V0
2
R  sin 212pft2  (b) Since the graph of P has amplitude 
V0
2
2R and period 1
2f  and is of the form y = A cos1vt2 + B, 
    then A = -
V0
2
2R and B =
V0
2
2R. Since 1
2f = 2p
v , then v = 4pf. Therefore, P1t2 = -
V0
2
2R cos 14pft2 +
V0
2
2R =
V0
2
2R [1 - cos14pft2].

1090 
Answers  Section 6.4
91. (a) Physical potential: v = 2p
23 ; emotional potential: v = p
14; intellectual potential: v = 2p
33
(b) 
(c) No 
(d) Physical potential peaks at 15 days after 20th birthday. Emotional 
potential is 50  at 17 days, with a maximum at 10 days and a minimum 
at 24 days. Intellectual potential starts fairly high, drops to a  
minimum at 13 days, and rises to a maximum at 29 days.
103. 2x + h - 5  104. (2, 5)  105. (0, 5), a -  5
3, 0b, a -  7
3, 0b  106. {- 8}
6.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 451)
3. origin; odd multiples of p
2   4. y-axis; odd multiples of p
2   5. b  6. T  7. 0  9. no y-intercept
11. csc x = 1 when x = - 3p
2 , p
2 ; csc x = - 1 when x = - p
2 , 3p
2   13. - 2p, - p, 0, p, 2p  15. - 3p
2 , - p
2 , p
2 , 3p
2
17.
Domain: e x ` x ≠kp
2 ,  k is an odd integer f
Range: 1- q, q 2
19.
Domain: 5x x ≠kp,  k is an integer6
Range: 1- q, q 2
21.
Domain: 5x|x does not equal an odd integer6
Range: 1- q, q 2
93.
00
100
36
y
4
x
P
2P
P
4 , 22
P
4
2
, 2
24
y
15
x
P
4 , 23
P
4
2
, 3
P
2P
215
y
4
x
5
1
2 , 1
1
2

, 1
23. 
Domain: 5x|x ≠4kp, k is an integer6
Range: 1- q, q 2
25.
Domain: 5x0 x ≠kp,  k is an integer6
Range: e y ` y … - 1
2 or y Ú 1
2 f
27.
Domain: e x ` x ≠kp
2 , k is an odd integer f
y
5
x
4P
(P, 1)
(P, 1)
y
2
x
P
P
2
1
2
,   
3P
2
3P
2
1
2
, 2 
3P
2
1
2
,  
2
P
2
1
2
, 2
2
22
2
y
x
2P
P
2P
(P, 4)
(0, 24)
(2P, 24)
(2P, 4)
10
210
y
1.25
x
2P
29.
Domain:5x0 x ≠kp, k is an odd integer6
Range: 5y0 y … - 4 or y Ú 46
31.
Domain: 5x0 x does not equal an odd integer6
Range: 5y0 y … - 3 or y Ú 36
33.
Domain: 5x0 x ≠kp, k is an integer6
Range:  1- q, q 2
35.
Domain:  e x ` x ≠2
3
 k, k is an integer f
Range: 5y | y … - 1 or y Ú 16
37.
Domain: 5x0 x ≠2pk, k is an integer6
Range: 1- q, q 2
39.
Domain: 5x0 x ≠2pk, k is an odd integer6
Range: 5y | y … - 2 or y Ú 46
y
16
x
5P
(0, 4)
(2P, 4)
(2P, 4)
y
8
2
22
24
4
x
(2, 3)
(0, 23)
(22, 3)
28
y
10
210
x
P
2P
P
2 , 21
3P
4 , 1
2
P
2 , 21
2
P
4 , 1
y
4
24
x
1
21
1
3 , 1
1
3
2
, 21
(21, 1)
(1, 21)
y
3
27
x
2P
22P
P
2 , 1
3P
2 , 1
3P
2 , 25
P
2 , 25 
(2P, 22)
(P, 22)
2
2
y
10
x
8P
28P
(8P, 4)
(28P, 4)
(24P, 22)
(4P, 22)
(0, 4)

Answers  Section 6.6  1091
49.
51. (a) L1u2 =
3
cos u +
4
sin u
          = 3 sec u + 4 csc u
53.
(b) 
(c) ≈0.83  (d) ≈9.86 ft
54. $10,580.11  55. 0, - 1
56. 5 - 1, 36    57.
41. 213
p   43. 613
p   45. 1f ∘g2 1x2 = tan14x2     
1g ∘f2 1x2 = 4 tan x                         47. 1f ∘g2 1x2 = - 2 cot x           
1g ∘f2 1x2 =  cot (- 2x)
y
1
x
P
4
P
16 , 1
P
16

, 1
y
5
x
P
2
P
4
4
,
4
,
P
4

P
2

y
5
x
2P
y
2.5
x
P
y
x
2.5

(, 1)
(0, 0)

4
1
,

2
0
,
3
4
, 2
x  
2
00
25

2
y
5
x
3P
2
y  tan x
y
5
x
3P
2
y  cot 
P
2
x 
y
x
6
26
26
18
(0, 23)
(4, 22)
1. phase shift  2. False
3. Amplitude = 4
Period = p
Phase shift = p
2
5. Amplitude = 3
Period = p
Phase shift = - p
2
7. Amplitude = 2
Period = p
Phase shift = p
4
6.6 Assess Your Understanding (page 461)
y
5
x
2P
(P, 0)
P
2 , 0
P
4 , 24
5P
4 , 24
3P
2 , 0
7P
4 , 4
3P
4 , 4
y
3
x
P
P
2
P
2
P
2
, 3
2
P
4 , 0
2
(0, 23)
(P, 23)
3P
4 , 0
3P
2
3P
2
, 3
P
4 , 0
P
2 , 3
23
2
y
22
2
x
P
P
4 , 2
2
(0, 0)
(P, 0)
3P
4
3P
2
, 2
5P
4 , 22
P
4 , 22
P
2
P
2
P
2
, 0
2
9. Amplitude = 2
Period = 1
Phase shift = - 2
p
11. Amplitude = 2
Period = 1
Phase shift = 2
p
13. Amplitude = 3
Period = p
Phase shift = p
4
15. y = 3 sin3141x - 224 or
 y = 3 sin14x - 82
17. y = 2 sin 321x + 224 or 
y = 2 sin12 x + 42
19.
21.
23.
25.
y
6
4
x
1
21
1
2
2
P
2
, 2
2
P
2
, 6
3
2
2
P
2
, 2
2
P
1 2
, 6
y
23
1
x
1
21
2
P
1
2
2
, 23
2
P, 1
2
P 2 1, 1
y
5
25
x
P
2P
P
2 , 0
P
4 , 23
P
4 , 3
2
P
2 , 0
2
(0, 0)
P
4 , 0
P
4 , 0
2
P
2
3P
16, 2
2
5P
16, 22
2
3P
16, 22
5P
16, 2
y
5
x
(0, 0)
5P
8 , 3
2
3P
8 , 3
7P
8 , 23
P
8, 23
y
5
x
P
2
x 5 P
8
x 5 2
x 5 5P
8
3P
8
x 5 27P
8
3P
8 , 1
2
3P
8 , 21
y
2.5
x
P
8, 21
2
P
8 , 1
P
2
(0, 0)
x 5 P
4
x 5
P
4
2
1
2 , 1
1
2

, 1
y
3
x
1
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
x  1
4
x  3
4
x 
3
4

x 
1
4


1092 
Answers  Section 6.6
27. Period = 1
15
  s
Amplitude = 120 amp
Phase shift = 1
90
  s
29. (a) 
(b) 
y = 8.5 sin c 2p
5
  ax - 11
4 b d + 24.5 
or 
y = 8.5 sin a2p
5  x - 11p
10 b + 24.5
(c) 
(d) y = 9.46 sin (1.247x + 2.096) + 24.088
(e) 
2
15
I
120
t
H
10
5
10
20
30
x
H
10
5
10
20
30
x
010
40
10
31. (a) 
(b) y = 23.65 sin c p
6 1x - 42 d + 51.75 or y = 23.65 sinap
6 x - 2p
3 b + 51.75
(c) 
(d) y = 24.25 sin10.493x - 1.9272 + 51.61
(e) 
y
20
5
10
50
80
x
y
20
5
10
50
80
x
014
86
13
35. (a) y = 1.615 sina 2p
365 x - 1.39b + 12.135
    (b) 12.42 h
    (c) 
    (d) The actual hours of sunlight on April 1, 2014, were 12.43 hours. 
This is close to the predicted amount of 12.42 hours.
37. (a) y = 6.96 sina 2p
365 x - 1.39b + 12.41
(b) 13.63 h
(c) 
(d) The actual hours of sunlight on April 1, 2014, were 13.37 hours. 
This is close to the predicted amount of 13.63 hours.
41. f -11x2 = 2x - 9
4
  42. 6.12%  43. y = 2
3x - 3 or 2x - 3y = 9  44. 2213
x
10
150
280
420
y
20
x
10
150
280
420
y
20
Review Exercises (page 468)
6. 322
2
- 423
3
  8. 3  10. 0  12. 1  14. - 1  16. cos u = 3
5; tan u = 4
3; csc u = 5
4; sec u = 5
3; cot u = 3
4 
20. cos u = 12
13; tan u = -  5
12; csc u = -  13
5 ; sec u = 13
12; cot u = -  12
5   22. sin u = -  222
3
; cos u = 1
3; tan u = - 222; csc u = -  322
4
; cot u = -  22
4
23. sin u = 25
5 ; cos u = -  225
5
; tan u = -  1
2; csc u = 25; sec u = -  25
2
24.
    Domain: (- q, q)
    Range: 3 - 2, 24
25.
    Domain: (- q, q)
    Range: 3 - 3, 34
26.
    Domain: e x 2 x ≠kp
2 , k is an odd integer f
    Range: 1- q, q 2
y
2.5
x
P
3P
8
, 22
P
8
2
,
y
5
x
P
P
2
3
,
(P, 23)
y
5
x
P
2
27.
    Domain: e x 2 x ≠p
6 +  k # p
3 , k is an integer f
     Range: 19 q, q 2
28.
    Domain: e x 2 x ≠-  p
4 + kp, k is an integer f
       Range: 1- q, q 2
29.
    Domain: e x 2 x ≠kp
4 , k is an odd integer f
    Range: {y y … - 4 or y Ú 4}
y
x
8
P
6
2
x 5 P
2
y
5
x
P
x 5 3P
4
y
x
5P
4
23
P
2
, 24

Answers  Chapter Test  1093
30.
    Domain: e x 2 x ≠-  p
4 + kp, k is an integer f
       Range: {y y … - 1 or y Ú 1}
31.
    Domain: (- q, q)
    Range: [- 6, 2]
32.
  Domain: ex 2 x ≠3p
4
+ k # 3p, k is an integerf
  Range: 1- q, q 2
y
x
5
4P
y
x
7
5
y
25
x
5P
34. Amplitude = 2; Period = 2
3
35. Amplitude = 4
    Period = 2p
3
    Phase shift = 0
36. Amplitude = 1
    Period = 4p
    Phase shift = - p
37. Amplitude = 1
2
    Period = 4p
3
    Phase shift = 2p
3
38. Amplitude = 2
3
    Period = 2
    Phase shift = 6
p
y
x
5
P
P
2
, 24
P
6
4
,
y
x
5P
2.5
y
x
2P
1.25
y
x
12
P
2
3
39. y = 5 cos
 x
4  40. y = - 7sina
 p
4 xb  41. 0.38  42. 1.02  44. IV  46. sin t = 5229
29
, cos t = -  2229
29
, tan t = -  5
2 
48. (a) 32.34°  (b) 63°10′48″  50. 8p ≈25.13 in.; 16p
3
≈16.76 in.  52. 0.1 revolution/sec = p
5  radian/sec
53. (a) 1
15
    (b) 220
    (c) -  1
180
    (d) 
54. (a) 
    (b) y =  20 sinc p
6 1x -  42 d + 75 or
      y =  20 sin ap
6 x -  2p
3 b + 75
(c) 
(d) y = 19.81 sin(0.543x - 2.296) + 75.66
(e) 
2
15
I
220
t
220
y
50
5
10
70
90
x
y
50
5
10
70
90
x
040
100
13
55.
1
P
3
P
4
P
2
P
6
11P
6
7P
4
5P
3
3P
2
4P
3
5P
4
7P
6
5P
6
3P
4
2P
3
P
0
y
x
 (21, 0)
 (0, 21)
 (0, 1)
 (1, 0)
3
2
1
2
,
Ï
2
3
2
1
2
,
Ï
2
2
3
2
1
2
,
Ï
2
3
2
1
2
,
Ï
2
2
,
Ï
2
2
2
Ï
2
2
,
Ï
2
2
2
Ï
2
2
2
,
Ï
2
2
Ï
2
2
2
,
Ï
2
2
Ï
1
2
3
2
, Ï
2
1
2
3
2
,
Ï
2
2
1
2
3
2
,
Ï
2
1
2
3
2
, Ï
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
P 5
Chapter Test (page 470)
  1. 13p
9   2. - 20p
9   3. 13p
180   4. - 22.5°  5. 810°  6. 135°  7. 1
2  8. 0  9. - 1
2  10. - 13
3   11. 2  12. 
311 - 122
2
  13. 0.292  14. 0.309

1094 
Answers  Chapter Test
25.
y
5
x
5P
(2P, 2)
(5P, 22)
(24P , 2)
(2P , 22)
0
,
11P
2
2
0
,
5P
2
2
0
,
7P
2
P
2
0
,
Cumulative Review (page 471)
  1. e - 1, 1
2 f  2. y - 5 = - 31x + 22 or y = - 3x - 1  3. x2 + 1y + 222 = 16
15. - 1.524  16. 2.747  17.	
18. - 3
5
27. y = - 3 sina3x + 3p
4 b
28. 78.93 ft2
29. 143.5 rpm
26.
y
4
x
P
(0, 3)
(2P, 3)
  4. A line; slope 2
3; intercepts (6, 0) and 10, - 42
y
5
x
10
(0, 4)
(6, 0)
19.  cos u = -  216
7
; tan u = -  516
12 ; csc u = 7
5; sec u = -  716
12 ; cot u = -  216
5
  20.  sin u = -  15
3 ; tan u = -  15
2 ;  csc u = -  315
5
;
 sec u = 3
2;  cot u = -  215
5
  21.  sin u = 12
13; cos u = -  5
13; csc u = 13
12; sec u = -  13
5 ; cot u = -  5
12  22. 7153
53
  23. -  51146
146
  24. -  1
2
5. A circle; center 11, - 22; radius 3 
6.
y
2
x
5
(1, 2)
y
8
x
6
(3, 2)
(4, 3)
(2, 3)
 
sin U
cos U
tan U
sec U
csc U
cot U
U in QI
+
+
+
+
+
+
U in QII
+
-
-
-
+
-
U in QIII
-
-
+
-
-
+
U in QIV
-
+
-
+
-
-
  7. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
y
4.5
x
2.5
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
y
2.5
x
2.5
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
y
4.5
x
2.5
(1, e)
(0, 1)
1
e
1,
y
3
x
3
(e, 1)
(1, 0)
1
e 1
,
y
3
x

(0, 0)

2
1
,

2
,

1
y
2.5
x
P
(0, 0)
p
4
1
,
p
4
,
2
21
  8. f -11x2 = 1
3
 1x + 22  9. - 2  10.                      11. 3 - 313
2
  12. y = 213x2  13. y = 3 cos ap
6 xb
y
5
x
P
P
2
(0, 0)
p
4
3
,
p
2
0
,
0
,
p
2
2
p
4
,
2
23
3p
4
,
2
3
3p
4
,23
14. (a) f1x2 = - 3x - 3;
      m = - 3; 1- 1, 02, 10, - 32
(b) f1x2 = 1x - 122 - 6; 10, - 52,
    1- 16 + 1, 02, 116 + 1, 02
y
4
x
5
(2, 3)
(1, 0)
(0, 3)
(1, 6)
y
4
x
5
(2, 3)
(1.45, 0)
(1, 6)
(3.45, 0)
(c) We have that y = 3 when x = - 2 and y = - 6 when x = 1. 
Both points satisfy y = aex. Therefore, for 1- 2, 32 we have  
3 = ae-2, which implies that a = 3e2. But for 11, - 62 we have 
- 6 = ae1, which implies that a = - 6e-1. Therefore, there is no 
exponential function y = aex that contains 1- 2, 32 and 11, - 62.
15. (a) f1x2 = 1
6 1x + 22 1x - 32 1x - 52
(b) R1x2 = -
1x + 22 1x - 32 1x - 52
31x - 22
y
10
x
6
(3, 0)
(5, 0)
(0, 5)
(2, 0)
y
10
x
4
(5, 0)
(0, 5)
(3, 0)
(2, 0)

Answers  Section 7.3  1095
7.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 499)
7. F  8. T  9. T  10. F  11. d  12. a  13. e 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  15. 5p6  17. e 2p
3 , 5p
3 f  19. e p
2 f  21. e 4p
3 , 5p
3 f  23. e p
6 , 5p
6 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f
25. e p
6 , 5p
6 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  27. e p
2 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  29. e 3p
8 , 7p
8 , 11p
8 , 15p
8
f  31. e 5p
4 f  33. e 3p
4 , 7p
4 f  35. e 7p
4 f
37. e u ` u = p
6 + 2kp, u = 5p
6
+ 2kp f; p
6 , 5p
6 , 13p
6 , 17p
6 , 25p
6 , 29p
6   39. e u ` u = 5p
6
+ 2kp, u = 7p
6
+ 2kp f; u = 5p
6 , 7p
6 , 17p
6 , 19p
6 , 29p
6 , 31p
6
41. e u ` u = p
4 + 2kp, u = 3p
4
+ 2kp f; u = p
4 , 3p
4 , 9p
4 , 11p
4 , 17p
4 , 19p
4   43. e u ` u = 3p
4
+ kp f; u = 3p
4 , 7p
4 , 11p
4 , 15p
4 , 19p
4 , 23p
4
45. e u ` u = 3p
2
+ 2kp f; u = 3p
2 , 7p
2 , 11p
2 , 15p
2 , 19p
2 , 23p
2   47. 50.41, 2.736  49. 50.46, 3.616  51. 53.34, 6.086  53. 53.48, 5.946
55. 52.47, 5.616  57. 52.42, 3.866  59. e p
2 , 3p
2 f  61. e p
2 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  63. e 3p
4 , 7p
4 f  65. e p
2 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f  67. e 0, p
3 , 5p
3 f  69. e 3p
4 , 7p
4 f
71. e p
4 , 3p
4 , 5p
4 , 7p
4 f  73. 5p6  75. e p
2 f  77. e 3p
2 f  79. e p
4 , p
2 , 5p
4 , 3p
2 f  81. No real solution  83. - 1.31, 1.98, 3.84  85. - 0.30
87. - 1.26  89. - 1.02, 1.02  91. - 0.62, 0.81  93. 0.31  95. p
3 , 2p
3 , 4p
3 , 5p
3
7.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 491)
4. x = sec y; Ú 1; 0; p  5. cosine  6. F  7. T  8. T  9. 22
2   11. - 23
3   13. - 23  15. 2  17. 1
2  19. 2  21. - p
6   23. p  25. 22
4   27. 25
2
29. - 25
2   31. - 22
2   33. 25  35. 2p
3   37. p
6   39. - p
2   41. 2p
3   43. - p
3   45. 1.32  47. 1.91  49. 2.03  51. 3.02  53. 2.42  55. 2.84
57. 
1
21 + u2  59. 21 - u2
u
  61. 
1
21 + u2  63. 1
u  65. 2u2 - 1  67. 5
13  69. 3p
4   71. - 3
4  73. 5
13  75. p
6   77. - 215
83.
5
5
0

87. - 5i, 5i, - 2, 2  88. Neither  89. 7p
4   90. 5p
2
≈7.85 in.
Chapter 7  Analytic Trigonometry
7.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 484)
7. x = sin y  8. 0 … x … p  9. - q 6 x 6 q  10. F  11. T  12. T  13. d  14. a  15. 0  17. p  19. 0  21. p
4   23. - p
3   25. 5p
6   27. 0. 10  29. 0.20
31. 0.13  33. - 1.25  35. 2.03  37. 0.35  39. 4p
5   41. - 3p
7   43. - p
8   45. - p
5   47. - p
4   49. Not defined  51. 1
4  53. - 2  55. Not defined   
57. Not defined
59. f -11x2 = tan-1 x + 3
2
    Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 1- q, q 2
    Range of f -1 = c - p
2 , p
2 d
61. f -11x2 = 1
3 cos-1a- x
2 b
    Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 3 - 2, 24
    Range of f -1 = c0, p
3 d
63. f -11x2 = cos-11x - 12 - 2
    Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 30, 24
    Range of f -1 = 3 - 2, p, - 24
65. f -11x2 = 1
3 cos-1ax
2 b -  2
3
    Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 3 - 2, 24
    Range of f -1 = c - 2
3, - 2
3 + p
3 d
87. b
log 7
3
r  88. The graph passes the horizontal-line test.
89. f -11x2 = log21x - 12  90. 23
4
y
5
x
5
y
x
(0, 1)
(1, 2)
1, 1
2
67. e 22
2 f  69. e - 1
6 f  71. 5 - 16  73. e - 23
2 f

1096 
Answers  Section 7.3
97. (a) - 2p, - p, 0, p, 2p, 3p, 4p  (b) 
(c) e - 11p
6 , - 7p
6 , p
6 , 5p
6 , 13p
6 , 17p
6
f
(d) e x ` - 11p
6
6 x 6 - 7p
6  or p
6 6 x 6 5p
6  or 13p
6
6 x 6 17p
6
f
y
5
x
2P
g(x)  2 cos x  3
f(x)  4 cos x
4P
3 , 2
2P
3 , 2
y
3.75
x
5P
6 ,
3P
P
6
3
2
3
2
13P
6 , 3
2
17P
6 , 3
2
11P
6 , 3
2
,

7P
6 , 3
2

99. (a) e x ` x = - p
4 + kp, k is any integer f  (b) - p
2 6 x 6 - p
4  or a - p
2 , - p
4 b
101. (a), (d)                              (b) e p
12 , 5p
12 f
    (c) e x ` p
12 6 x 6 5p
12 f or a p
12 , 5p
12 b
103. (a), (d)                                  (b) e 2p
3 , 4p
3 f
    (c) e x ` 2p
3
6 x 6 4p
3 f or a2p
3 , 4p
3 b
y
7
x
P
5P
12 , 7
2
P
12 , 7
2
g(x)  7 
2
f(x)  3 sin(2x)  2
107. (a) 150 mi  (b) 6.06, 8.44, 15.72, 18.11 min  (c) Before 6.06 min, between 8.44 and 15.72 min, and after 18.11 min  (d) No  109. 2.03, 4.91
0º0
90º
130
111. (a) 30°, 60°  (b) 123.6 m
    (c) 
119. If u is the original angle of incidence and f is the angle of refraction, then sin u
sin f = n2. 
The angle of incidence of the emerging beam is also f, and the index of refraction is 1
n2
. 
Thus, u is the angle of refraction of the emerging beam.
123. x = log6y  124. 9 - 217
4
, 9 + 217
4
  125. tan u = - 1
3; csc u = - 210; sec u = 210
3
; cot u = - 3
y
x
3P
2.5
126. Amplitude: 2
    Period: π
    Phase shift: p
2
7.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 509)
3. identity; conditional  4. - 1  5. 0  6. T  7. F  8. T  9. c  10. b  11. 
1
cos u  13. 1 + sin u
cos u
  15. 
1
sin u cos u  17. 2  19. cos u + 1
cos u
21. csc u # cos u =
1
sin u # cos u = cos u
sin u = cot u  23. 1 + cot21- u2 = 1 + 1- cot u22 = 1 + cot2 u = csc2 u
25. cos u1tan u + cot u2 = cos ua sin u
cos u + cos u
sin u b = cos uasin2 u + cos2 u
cos u sin u
b = cos ua
1
cos u sin u b =
1
sin u = csc u
27. sin u csc u - cos2 u = sin u #
1
sin u - cos2 u = 1 - cos2 u = sin2 u  29. 1sec u - 12 1sec u + 12 = sec2 u - 1 = tan2 u
31. 1csc u + cot u2 1csc u - cot u2 = csc2 u - cot2 u = 1  33. 11 - cos2 u2 11 + cot2 u2 = sin2 u # csc2 u = sin2 u #
1
sin2 u
= 1
35. tan2 u cos2 u + cot2 u sin2 u = sin2 u
cos2 u
 # cos2 u + cos2 u
sin2 u
 # sin2 u = sin2 u + cos2 u = 1
37. csc4 u - csc2 u = csc2 u1csc2 u - 12 = 1cot2 u + 12cot2 u = cot4 u + cot2 u
39. csc u - cot u =
1
sin u - cos u
sin u = a1 - cos u
sin u
b # a1 + cos u
1 + cos u b =
1 - cos2 u
sin u11 + cos u2 =
sin2 u
sin u11 + cos u2 =
sin u
1 + cos u
41. 9 sec2 u - 5 tan2 u = 4 sec2 u + 5 sec2 u - 5 tan2 u = 4 sec2 u + 51sec2 u - tan2 u2 = 4 sec2 u + 5 # 1 = 5 + 4 sec2 u
43. 1 -
sin2 u
1 - cos u = 1 - 1 - cos2 u
1 - cos u = 1 -
11 - cos u2 11 + cos u2
1 - cos u
= 1 - 11 + cos u2 = 1 - 1 - cos u = - cos u
45. csc v - 1
csc v + 1 =
1
sin v - 1
1
sin v + 1
=
a
1
sin v - 1bsin v
a
1
sin v + 1bsin v
= 1 - sin v
1 + sin v 

Answers  Section 7.4  1097
47. csc u - 1
cot u
= csc u - 1
cot u
 # csc u + 1
csc u + 1 =
csc2 u - 1
cot u1csc u + 12 =
cot2 u
cot u1csc u + 12 =
cot u
csc u + 1
49. cos u + 1
cos u - 1 =
1
sec u + 1
1
sec u - 1
=
1 + sec u
sec u
1 - sec u
sec u
= 1 + sec u
1 - sec u
51. 1 - sin v
cos v
+
cos v
1 - sin v =
11 - sin v22 + cos2v
cos v11 - sin v2
= 1 - 2 sin v + sin2v + cos2v
cos v11 - sin v2
=
2 - 2 sin v
cos v11 - sin v2 =
211 - sin v2
cos v11 - sin v2 =
2
cos v = 2 sec v
53. 1 -
sin2 u
1 + cos u = 1 - 1 - cos2 u
1 + cos u = 1 -
11 - cos u2 11 + cos u2
1 + cos u
= 1 - 11 - cos u2 = cos u
55. 1sec u - tan u22 = sec2u - 2 sec u tan u + tan2u =
1
cos2 u
- 2 sin u
cos2 u
+ sin2 u
cos2 u
= 1 - 2 sin u + sin2 u
cos2u
=
11 - sin u22
1 - sin2 u
 
 
=
11 - sin u22
11 - sin u2 11 + sin u2 = 1 - sin u
1 + sin u
57. 
cot u
1 - tan u +
tan u
1 - cot u =
cos u
sin u
1 - sin u
cos u
+
sin u
cos u
1 - cos u
sin u
=
cos u
sin u
cos u - sin u
cos u
+
sin u
cos u
sin u - cos u
sin u
=
cos2 u
sin u(cos u - sin u) +
sin2 u
cos u(sin u - cos u)
 
= - cos2 u # cos u + sin2 u # sin u
sin u cos u1sin u - cos u2
=
sin3 u - cos3 u
sin u cos u1sin u - cos u2 =
1sin u - cos u2 1sin2 u + sin u cos u + cos2 u2
sin u cos u1sin u - cos u2
= sin2 u + sin u cos u + cos2 u
sin u cos u
 
=
sin2 u
sin u cos u + sin u cos u
sin u cos u +
cos2 u
sin u cos u = sin u
cos u + 1 + cos u
sin u = 1 + tan u + cot u
59. 
sin u cos u
cos2 u - sin2 u
=
1sin u cos u2 #
1
cos2 u
1cos2 u - sin2 u2 #
1
cos2 u
=
sin u
cos u
1 - sin2 u
cos2 u
=
tan u
1 - tan2 u
61. sin u - cos u + 1
sin u + cos u - 1 =
1sin u - cos u2 + 1
1sin u + cos u2 - 1 # 1sin u + cos u2 + 1
1sin u + cos u2 + 1 = sin2 u - cos2 u + sin u + cos u + sin u - cos u + 1
1sin u + cos u22 - 1
 =
sin2 u - cos2 u + 2 sin u + 1
sin2 u + 2 sin u cos u + cos2 u - 1
=
sin2 u - 11 - sin2 u2 + 2 sin u + 1
2 sin u cos u + 1 - 1
 = 2 sin2 u + 2 sin u
2 sin u cos u
=
2 sin u1sin u + 12
2 sin u cos u
= sin u + 1
cos u
63. sec u - cos u
sec u + cos u =
1
cos u - cos2 u
cos u
1
cos u + cos2 u
cos u
=
1 - cos2 u
cos u
1 + cos2 u
cos u
= 1 - cos2 u
1 + cos2 u
=
sin2 u
1 + cos2 u
65. tan u - cot u
tan u + cot u + 2 cos2 u =
sin u
cos u - cos u
sin u
sin u
cos u + cos u
sin u
+ 2 cos2 u =
sin2 u - cos2 u
cos u sin u
sin2 u + cos2 u
cos u sin u
+ 2 cos2 u = sin2 u - cos2 u
1
+ 2 cos 2u = sin2 u + cos2 u = 1
67. 
sec u
1 + sec u =
1
cos u
1 +
1
cos u
=
1
cos u
cos u + 1
cos u
= a
1
1 + cos u b # a1 - cos u
1 - cos ub = 1 - cos u
1 - cos2 u
= 1 - cos u
sin2 u
69. 1 - cot2 u
1 + cot2 u
+ 2 cos2 u = 1 - cot2 u
csc2 u
+ 2 cos2 u =
1
csc2 u
 - cot2 u
csc2 u
+ 2 cos2 u = sin2 u -
cos2 u
sin2 u
1
sin2 u
+ 2 cos2 u
   = sin2 u - cos2 u + 2 cos2 u = sin2 u + cos2 u = 1
71. sec u - csc u
sec u csc u
=
sec u
sec u csc u -
csc u
sec u csc u =
1
csc u -
1
sec u = sin u - cos u
73. tan u + cot u = sin u
cos u + cos u
sin u = sin2 u + cos2 u
sin u cos u
=
1
sin u cos u =
1
cos u #
1
sin u = sec u csc u
75. 1 + sin u
1 - sin u - 1 - sin u
1 + sin u =
11 + sin u22 - 11 - sin u22
11 - sin u2 11 + sin u2
=
1 + 2 sin u + sin2 u - 11 - 2 sin u + sin2 u2
1 - sin2 u
= 4 sin u
cos2 u
= 4 # sin u
cos u #
1
cos u = 4 tan u sec u
77. 1 + sin u
1 - sin u =
11 + sin u2 11 + sin u2
11 - sin u2 11 + sin u2 =
11 + sin u22
1 - sin2 u
=
11 + sin u22
cos2 u
= a1 + sin u
cos u
b
2
= a
1
cos u + sin u
cos u b
2
= 1sec u + tan u22
79. sec2 v - tan2 v + tan v
sec v
= 1 + tan v
sec v
=  
1 + sin v
cos v
1
cos v
=
cos v + sin v
cos v
 
1
cos v 
= cos v + sin v

1098 
Answers  Section 7.4
81. sin u + cos u
sin u
 - cos u - sin u
cos u
= sin u
sin u + cos u
sin u - cos u
cos u + sin u
cos u = 1 + cos u
sin u - 1 + sin u
cos u = cos2 u + sin2 u
cos u sin u
=
1
cos u sin u = sec u csc u
83.  sin3 u + cos3 u
1 - 2 cos2 u
=
1sin u + cos u2 1sin2 u - sin u cos u + cos2 u2
1 - cos2 u - cos2 u
=
1sin u + cos u2 1sin2 u + cos2 u - sin u cos u2
sin2 u - cos2 u
   =
1sin u + cos u2 11 - sin u cos u2
1sin u + cos u2 1sin u - cos u2
= 1 - sin u cos u
sin u - cos u  #
1
cos u
1
cos u
=
1
cos u - sin u
sin u
cos u - 1
= sec u - sin u
tan u - 1
85. cos u + sin u - sin3 u
sin u
= cos u
sin u + sin u
sin u - sin3 u
sin u = cot u + 1 - sin2 u = cot u + cos2 u
87. 1 - 2 cos2 u
sin u cos u
= 1 - cos2 u - cos2 u
sin u cos u
= sin2 u - cos2 u
sin u cos u
=
sin2 u
sin u cos u -
cos2 u
sin u cos u = sin u
cos u - cos u
sin u = tan u - cot u
89. 1 + cos u + sin u
1 + cos u - sin u =
11 + cos u2 + sin u
11 + cos u2 - sin u # 11 + cos u2 + sin u
11 + cos u2 + sin u =
1 + 2 cos u + cos2 u + 2 sin u11 + cos u2 + sin2 u
1 + 2 cos u + cos2 u - sin2 u
=
1 + 2 cos u + cos2 u + 2 sin u11 + cos u2 + 1 - cos2 u
1 + 2 cos u + cos2 u - 11 - cos2 u2
=
2 + 2 cos u + 2 sin u11 + cos u2
2 cos u + 2 cos2 u
=
211 + cos u2 + 2 sin u11 + cos u2
2 cos u11 + cos u2
 =
211 + cos u2 11 + sin u2
2 cos u11 + cos u2
= 1 + sin u
cos u
=
1
cos u + sin u
cos u = sec u + tan u
91. 12a sin u cos u22 + a21cos2 u - sin2 u22 = 4a2 sin2 u cos2 u + a21cos4 u - 2 cos2 u sin2 u + sin4 u2
= a214 sin2 u cos2 u + cos4 u - 2 cos2 u sin2 u + sin4 u2 = a21cos4 u + 2 cos2 u sin2 u + sin4 u2 = a21cos2 u + sin2 u22 = a21122 = a2
93. 1tan a + tan b2 11 - cot a cot b2 + 1cot a + cot b2 11 - tan a tan b2
 = tan a + tan b - tan a cot a cot b - tan b cot a cot b + cot a + cot b - cot a tan a tan b - cot b tan a tan b
 = tan a + tan b - cot b - cot a + cot a + cot b - tan b - tan a = 0
95. 1sin a - cos b22 + 1cos b + sin a2 1cos b - sin a2 = sin2 a - 2 sin a cos b + cos2 b + cos2 b - sin2 a = - 2 sin a cos b + 2 cos2 b
= - 2 cos b1sin a - cos b2
97. ln0 tan u0 = ln ` sin u
cos u ` = ln0 sin u0  -  ln0 cos u0
99. ln0 sec u + tan u0 + ln0 sec u - tan u0 = ln1 0 sec u + tan u0 # 0 sec u - tan u0 2 = ln0 sec2 u - tan2 u0 = ln0 tan2 u + 1 - tan2 u0 = ln0 10 = 0
101. f1x2 = cos x # cot x = cos x # cos x
sin x = cos2 x
sin x  = 1 - sin2 x
sin x
=
1
sin x - sin2 x
sin x = csc x - sin x = g1x2
103.  f1u2 = tan u + sec u = sin u
cos u +
1
cos u = 1 + sin u
cos u
= 1 + sin u
cos u
# 1 - sin u
1 - sin u =
1 - sin2 u
cos u11 - sin u2 =
cos2 u
cos u11 - sin u2
   
=
cos u
1 - sin u = g1u2
111. Maximum, 1250  112. 1f ∘g2 1x2 = x - 1
x - 2  113. sin u = 5
13; cos u = - 12
13; tan u = - 5
12; csc u = 13
5 ; sec u = - 13
12; cot u = - 12
5   114. - 2
p
7.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 521)
5. -   6. -   7. F  8. F  9. F  10. T  11. a  12. d  13. - 1
4
 1 22 + 262  15. 2 - 23  17. 1
4122 - 222  19. 1
4
 1 22 - 262
21. - 1
4
 1 26 + 222  23. - 2 + 23  25. - 23
2   27. 0  29. 23
3   31. - 1  33. 23
2   35. (a) 225
25   (b) 1125
25
  (c) 225
5
  (d) 2
37. (a) 12 + 523
26
  (b) 1223 - 5
26
  (c) 523 - 12
26
  (d) 240 - 16923
407
  39. (a) 1 - 226
6
  (b) 23 + 222
6
  (c) - 1 - 226
6
  (d) - 923 - 822
5
41. (a) - 222
3
  (b) - 222 + 23
6
  (c) - 222 + 23
6
  (d) 9 - 422
7
  43. 23 + 222
6
  45. 1 + 226
6
  47. - 822 + 923
5
49. sinap
2 + ub = sin p
2
 cos u + cos p
2
 sin u = 1 # cos u + 0 # sin u = cos u
51. cos1p - u2 = cos p # cos u + sin p # sin u = - 1 # cos u # sin u = - cos u
53. cos1p + u2 = cos p # cos u - sin p # sin u = - 1 # cos u - 0 # sin u = - cos u
55. tan12p - u2 =
tan 2p - tan u
1 + tan 2p # tan u =
0 - tan u
1 + 0 # tan u = - tan u
1
= - tan u
57. cosa3p
2
+ ub = cos 3p
2 # cos u - sin 3p
2 # sin u = 0 # cos u - 1- 12 # sin u = sin u

Answers  Section 7.6  1099
59. cos1a + b2 + cos1a - b2 = cos a cos b - sin a sin b + cos a cos b + sin a sin b = 2 cos a cos b
61. 
sin1a + b2
sin a cos b =
sin a cos b + cos a sin b
sin a cos b
=
sin a cos b
sin a cos b +
cos a sin b
sin a cos b = 1 + cot a tan b
63. 
cos1a - b2
sin a cos b
=
cos a cos b + sin a sin b
sin a cos b
=
cos a cos b
sin a cos b +
sin a sin b
sin a cos b = cot a + tan b
65. 
cos1a + b2
cos1a - b2 =  
cos a cos b - sin a sin b
cos a cos b + sin a sin b =
cos a cos b - sin a sin b
cos a cos b
cos a cos b + sin a sin b
cos a cos b
=
cos a cos b
cos a cos b -
sin a sin b
cos a cos b
cos a cos b
cos a cos b +
sin a sin b
cos a cos b
=
1 - tan a tan b
1 + tan a tan b
67. cot1a - b2 =  
cos1a - b2
sin1a - b2 =
cos a cos b + sin a sin b
sin a cos b - cos a sin b =
cos a cos b + sin a sin b
sin a sin b
sin a cos b - cos a sin b
sin a sin b
=
cos a cos b
sin a sin b +
sin a sin b
sin a sin b
sin a cos b
sin a sin b -
cos a sin b
sin a sin b
=
cot a cot b + 1
cot b - cot a
69. sec1a - b2 =
1
cos1a - b2 =
1
cos a cos b + sin a sin b =
1
cos a cos b
cos a cos b + sin a sin b
cos a cos b
=
1
cos a #
1
cos b
cos a cos b
cos a cos b +
sin a sin b
cos a cos b
=
sec a sec b
1 + tan a tan b
71. cos1a - b2 cos1a + b2 = 1cos a cos b + sin a sin b2 1cos a cos b - sin a sin b2 = cos2 a cos2 b - sin2 a sin2 b
= cos2 a11 - sin2 b2 - 11 - cos2 a2sin2 b = cos2 a - cos2 a sin2 b - sin2 b + cos2 a sin2 b = cos2 a - sin2 b
73. cos1u + kp2 = cos u # cos kp - sin u # sin kp = 1cos u2 1- 12k - 1sin u2 102 = 1- 12k cos u, k any integer
75. 23
2   77. - 24
25  79. 33
65  81. 16
65  83. 4
3  85. 4
3  87. u21 - v2 - v21 - u2: - 1 … u … 1; - 1 … v … 1
89. 
1 - uv
2u2 + 1 # 2v2 + 1
; q 6 u 6 q, - q 6 v 6 q  91. 
2u2 + 1
v - u21 - v2; - q 6 u 6 q, - 1 … v … 1  93. e 0, 2p
3 f  95. e p
4 f  97. e 5p
3 f
113. tan p
2  is not defined; tanap
2 - ub =
sinap
2 - ub
cosap
2 - ub
= cos u
sin u = cot u.
114. a - 1
3, - 5
9 b, (- 5, 1)  115. 510°  116. 9p
2  cm2≈14.14 cm2  117. sin u = - 225
5
; cos u = 25
5 ; csc u = - 25
2 ; sec u = 25; cot u = - 1
2
7.6 Assess Your Understanding (page 531)
1. sin2u; 2 cos2u; 2 sin2u  2. 1 - cos u  3. sin u  4. T  5. F  6. F  7. b  8. c  9. (a) 24
25  (b) 7
25  (c) 210
10   (d) 3210
10
11. (a) 4
5  (b) 3
5  (c) C
5 + 225
10
  (d) C
5 - 225
10
  13. (a) - 222
3
  (b) 1
3  (c) C
3 - 26
6
  (d) C
3 + 26
6
15. (a) 4
5  (b) 3
5  (c) C
5 + 225
10
  (d) C
5 - 225
10
  17. (a) - 23
2   (b) - 1
2  (c) 1
2  (d) - 23
2
19. (a) 3
5  (b) 4
5  (c) 1
2 C
10 + 3210
5
  (d) 1
2 C
10 - 3210
5
  21. 32 - 22
2
  23. - 1 + 22  25. - 32 - 23
2
 
27. 12 + 222 32 - 22  29. 32 - 22
2
  31. - 3
5  33. 
31015 + 252
10
  35.  1 + 25
2
  37. 215
8
  39. - 26
4   41. - 215
7
 
43. sin4 u = 1sin2 u22 = a
1 - cos12u2
2
b
2
= 1
4  [1 - 2 cos12u2 + cos2 12u2] = 1
4 - 1
2  cos12u2 + 1
4  cos2 12u2
= 1
4 - 1
2  cos12u2 + 1
4  a
1 + cos14u2
2
b = 1
4 - 1
2  cos12u2 + 1
8 + 1
8  cos14u2 = 3
8 - 1
2  cos12u2 + 1
8  cos14u2
45. cos13u2 = 4 cos3 u - 3 cos u  47. sin15u2 = 16 sin5 u - 20 sin3 u + 5 sin u 
49. cot u - tan u
cot u + tan u =
cos u
sin u - sin u
cos u
cos u
sin u + sin u
cos u
=
cos2 u - sin2 u
sin u cos u
cos2 u + sin2 u
sin u cos u
= cos2 u - sin2 u
sin u cos u
#
sin u cos u
cos2 u + sin2 u
= cos2 u - sin2 u
1
= cos12u2

1100 
Answers  Section 7.6
51. cot12u2 =
1
tan12u2 =
1
2 tan u 
1 - tan2 u
= 1 - tan2 u
2 tan u
= 1
2 a
1
tan u - tan2 u
tan u b = 1
2
 1cot u - tan u2
53. csc12u2 =
1
sin12u2 =
1
2 sin u cos u = 1
2 #
1
cos u #
1
sin u = 1
2 sec u csc u 
55. 14 sin u cos u2 11 - 2 sin2 u2 = 212 sin u cos u2 11 - 2 sin2 u2 = 2 sin 2u cos 2u = sin12 # 2u2 = sin14u2
57. sin2 u cos2 u = 1
4 14 sin2 u cos2 u2 = 1
4 12 sin u cos u22 = 1
4 3sin12u2 42 = 1
4 # c
1 - cos14u2
2
d = 1
8 31 - cos14u2 4
59. csc2 au
2 b =
1
sin2 au
2 b
=
1
1 - cos u
2
=
2
1 - cos u
61. tan v
2 = 1 - cos v
sin v
=
1
sin v - cos v
sin v = csc v - cot v
63. sin3 u + cos3 u
sin u + cos u
=
1sin u + cos u2 1sin2 u - sin u cos u + cos2 u2
sin u + cos u
= sin2 u - sin u cos u + cos2 u 
 
= 1sin2 u + cos2 u2 - 1
2 12 sin u cos u2 = 1 - 1
2  sin12u2
65. cos u + sin u
cos u - sin u - cos u - sin u
cos u + sin u =
1cos u + sin u22 - 1cos u - sin u22
1cos u - sin u2 1cos u + sin u2
=
cos2 u + 2 cos u sin u + sin2 u - 1cos2 u + 2 cos u sin u + sin2 u2
cos2 u - sin2 u
 
= cos2 u + 2 cos u sin u + sin2 u - cos2 u + 2 cos u sin u - sin2 u
cos2 u - sin2 u
= 4 cos u sin u
cos12u2
=
212 sin u cos u2
cos12u2
=
2 sin12u2
cos12u2
= 2 tan12u2
67. tan13u2 = tan1u + 2u2 =
tan u + tan12u2
1 - tan u tan12u2 =
tan u +
2 tan u
1 - tan2 u
1 -
tan u12 tan u2
1 - tan2 u
= tan u - tan3 u + 2 tan u
1 - tan2 u - 2 tan2 u
= 3 tan u - tan3 u
1 - 3 tan2 u
69. 1
2 # 1ln0 1 + cos12u2 0 - ln 22 = 1
2 # ln ` 1 + cos 2u
2
` = lna `
1 + cos12u2
2
`
1/2
b = ln1 0 cos2 u0 1/22 = ln0 cos u0   71. e p
3 , 2p
3 , 4p
3 , 5p
3 f 
73. e p
6 , p
2 , 5p
6 , 3p
2 f  75. e p
6 , p
2 , 5p
6 , 7p
6 , 3p
2 , 11p
6
f  77. e 2p
3 , 4p
3 f  79. e 0, p
3 , p, 5p
3 f  81. 23
2   83. 7
25  85. 24
7   87. 24
25  89. 1
5  91. 25
7  
93. 0, p
3 , p, 5p
3   95. p
2 , 3p
2  
99.  (a) R =
v0
2 22
16
  cos u 1sin u - cos u2 
 = 
v0
2 22
32
  12 cos u sin u - 2 cos2u2
 = 
v0
2 22
32
  [sin 12u2 - cos 12u2 - 1]
(b) 3p
8  or 67.5° 
(c) 3212 - 222 ≈18.75 ft
(d) 
u = 67.5°
a3p
8  radiansb makes R largest.
R = 18.75 ft
45º0
90º
20
y
1.25
x
2P
109.
111. sin p
24 = 22
4
 44 - 36 - 22
cos p
24 = 22
4
 44 + 36 + 22
117. y = 1
2
 x - 4  118.
y
x
(21, 0)
(3, 16)
(0, 7)
(7, 0)
y
x
2
22
22
2
24
(24, 22)
(22, 2)
(0, 22)
(2, 2)
(4, 22)
4
119. 23 + 1
2
  120.
7.7 Assess Your Understanding (page 536)
1. - 1
4  3. 26
2   5. - 26
2   7. 1
2
 [cos12u2 - cos16u2]  9. 1
2 3cos12u2 - cos18u2 4  11. 1
2 3sin110u2 - sin12u2 4 
13. 1
2 3cos u + cos17u2 4  15. 1
2 3sin13u2 - sin12u2 4  17. 2 sin u cos13u2  19. - 2 sin14u2sin u  21. 2 cos12u2cos u  23. - 2 sin u
2 cos u 
25. 
cos u + cos13u2
2 cos12u2
=
2 cosau + 3u
2
b cosau - 3u
2
b
2 cos12u2
=
2 cos12u2 cos1- u2
2 cos12u2
= cos1- u2 = cos u 
27. 
cos u - cos13u2
sin13u2 - sin u =
- 2 sinau + 3u
2
bsinau - 3u
2
b
2 sina3u - u
2
bcosa3u + u
2
b
=
- 2 sin12u2 sin1- u2
2 sin u cos12u2
=
- 1- sin u2sin12u2
sin u cos12u2
= tan12u2

Answers  Review Exercises  1101
29. 
cos u - cos15u2
sin u + sin15u2 =
- 2 sinau + 5u
2
bsinau - 5u
2
b
2 sinau + 5u
2
bcosau - 5u
2
b
=
- 2 sin13u2 sin1- 2u2
2 sin13u2 cos1- 2u2
=
- 1- sin 2u2
cos12u2
= tan12u2
31. sin u3sin13u2 + sin15u2 4 = sin uc2 sina3u + 5u
2
b cosa3u - 5u
2
b d = sin u32 sin14u2 cos1- u2 4
 
= cos u32 sin14u2sin u4 = cos uc2 # 1
2 3cos13u2 - cos15u2 4 d = cos u3cos13u2 - cos15u2 4
33. 
sin14u2 - sin18u2
cos14u2 - cos18u2 =
2 sina4u - 8u
2
bcosa4u + 8u
2
b
- 2 sina4u + 8u
2
bsina4u - 8u
2
b
=
2 sin1- 2u2cos16u2
- 2 sin16u2sin1- 2u2 =
cos16u2
- sin16u2 = - cot16u2
35. 
sin14u2 + sin18u2
sin14u2 - sin18u2 =
2 sina4u + 8u
2
bcosa4u - 8u
2
b
- 2 sina4u - 8u
2
bcosa4u + 8u
2
b
=
2 sin16u2cos1- 2u2
2 sin1- 2u2cos16u2 =
sin16u2cos12u2
- sin12u2cos16u2 = - tan16u2cot12u2 = -
tan16u2
tan12u2
37. 
cos a + cos b
cos a - cos b =
2 cos a
a + b
2
b cos a
a - b
2
b
- 2 sin a
a + b
2
b sin a
a - b
2
b
= -
cos a
a + b
2
b
sin a
a + b
2
b
 #
cos a
a - b
2
b
sin a
a - b
2
b
= - cot a
a + b
2
b cot a
a - b
2
b
39. 
sin a - sin b
cos a - cos b =
2 sin a
a - b
2
bcosa
a + b
2
b
- 2 sina
a + b
2
bsina
a - b
2
b
= -
cosa
a + b
2
b
sina
a + b
2
b
= - cota
a + b
2
b
41. 1 - cos12u2 + cos14u2 - cos16u2 = 3cos u - cos16u2 4 + 3cos14u2 - cos12u2 4
= - 2 sina0 + 6u
2
bsina0 - 6u
2
b - 2 sina2u + 4u
2
bsina2u - 4u
2
b
= - 2 sin13u2sin1- 3u2 - 2 sin13u2sin1u2 = 2 sin213u2 - 2 sin13u2sin u
= 2 sin13u2 3sin13u2 - sin u4 = 2 sin13u2 c2 sina3u - u
2
bcosa3u + u
2
b d
= 2 sin13u2 32 sin u cos12u2 4 = 4 sin u cos12u2sin13u2
43. e p
6 , p
2 , 5p
6 , 7p
6 , 3p
2 , 11p
6
f 
45. e 0, p
10, 3p
10 , p
2 , 7p
10 , 9p
10 , p, 11p
10 , 13p
10 , 3p
2 , 17p
10 , 19p
10 f
Review Exercises (page 539)
1. p
2   2. p
2   3. p
4   4. - p
6   5. 5p
6   6. - p
3   7. p
4   8. 3p
4   9. 3p
8   10. 3p
4   11. - p
3   12. p
7   13. - p
9   14. 0.9  15. 0.6  16. 5  17. Not defined 
18. - p
6   19. p  20. - 23  21. 223
3
  22. 4
5  23. - 4
3  24. f -1(x) = 1
3
 sin-1ax
2 b; Range of f = Domain of f -1 = [- 2, 2]; Range of f -1 = c - p
6 , p
6 d  
25. f -11x2 =  cos-113 - x2; Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 32, 44; Range of f -1 = 30, p4  26. 21 - u2  27. 
 u
u2u2 - 1
 
28. tan u cot u -  sin2 u = 1 -  sin2 u = cos2 u  30. 5 cos2 u + 3 sin2 u = 2 cos2 u + 31cos2 u + sin2 u2 = 3 + 2 cos2 u
31. 1 - cos u
sin u
+
sin u
1 - cos u =
11 - cos u22 + sin2u
sin u11 - cos u2
= 1 - 2 cos u + cos2u + sin2u
sin u11 - cos u2
=
211 - cos u2
sin u11 - cos u2 = 2 csc u
32. 
cos u
cos u - sin u =
cos u
cos u
cos u - sin u
cos u
=
1
1 - sin u
cos u
=
1
1 - tan u  33. 
csc u
1 + csc u =
1
sin u
1 +
1
sin u
=
1
1 + sin u =
1
1 + sin u # 1 - sin u
1 - sin u = 1 - sin u
1 - sin2u
= 1 - sin u
cos2u
36. cot u - tan u = cos u
sin u - sin u
cos u = cos2u - sin2u
sin u cos u
= 1 - 2 sin2u
sin u cos u
38. 
cos1a - b2
cos a cos b =
cos a cos b + sin a sin b
cos a cos b
=
cos a cos b
cos a cos b +
sin a sin b
cos a cos b = 1 + tan a tan b
47. (a) y = 2 sin12061pt2 cos1357pt2
  (b) ymax = 2
  (c) 
57. {13}  58. Amplitude: 5; Period: p
2 ; Phase shift: p
4   59. 226
7
60. f -11x2 = sin-1ax + 5
3
b; Range of f = Domain of f -1 = 3 - 8, - 24; Range of f -1 = c - p
2 , p
2 d
2
2
0.01
0

1102 
Answers  Review Exercises
39. 11 + cos u2 atan u
2 b = 11 + cos u2 #
sin u
1 + cos u = sin u
40. 2 cot u cot 2u = 2acos u
sin u b acos 2u
sin 2u b =
2 cos u1cos2u - sin2u2
2 sin2u cos u
= cos2u - sin2u
sin2u
= cot2u - 1
41. 1 - 8 sin2u cos2u = 1 - 212 sin u cos u22 = 1 - 2 sin212u2 = cos14u2
42. 
sin13u2cos u - sin u cos13u2
sin12u2
=
sin12u2
sin12u2 = 1  43. 
sin12u2 + sin14u2
cos12u2 + cos14u2 =
2 sin13u2 cos1- u2
2 cos13u2 cos1- u2 = tan13u2
44. 
cos12u2 - cos14u2
cos12u2 + cos14u2 - tan u tan13u2 =
- 2 sin13u2 sin1- u2
2 cos13u2 cos1- u2
- tan u tan13u2 = tan13u2 tan u - tan u tan13u2 = 0
55.  (a) - 63
65  (b) 16
65  (c) 33
65  (d) - 63
16  (e) 24
25  (f) - 119
169  (g) 2213
13
  (h) - 210
10   56. (a) - 23 - 222
6
  (b) 1 - 226
6
  (c) - 23 + 222
6
(d) 822 + 923
23
  (e) - 23
2   (f) - 7
9  (g) 23
3   (h) 23
2   57.  (a) 1  (b) 0  (c) - 1
9  (d) Not defined  (e) 425
9
  (f) - 1
9  (g) 230
6
(h) - 2633 - 25
6
  60. - 48 + 2523
39
  61. - 22
10
  62. - 24
25  63. - 7
25  64. e p
3 , 5p
3 f  65. e 2p
3 , 5p
3 f  66. e 3p
4 , 7p
4 f
67. e 0, p
2 , p, 3p
2 f  68. e p
3 , 2p
3 , 4p
3 , 5p
3 f  69. 50.25, 2.896  70. e 0, 2p
3 , p, 4p
3 f  71. e 0, p
6 , 5p
6 f  72. e p
6 , p
2 , 5p
6 f  73. e p
3 , 5p
3 f
74. e p
4 , p
2 , 3p
4 , 3p
2 f  75. e p
2 , p f  76. 0.78  77. - 1.11  78. 1.77  79. 1.23  80. 2.90  81. 51.116  82. 50.876  83. 52.226  84. e - 23
2 f  85. {0}
86. sin 15° = B
1 - cos 30°
2
= T
1 - 23
2
2
  = C
2 - 23
4
  = 22 - 13
2
;
sin 15° = sin(45° - 30°) = sin 45° cos 30° - cos 45° sin 30°  = 22
2 # 23
2
- 22
2 # 1
2  = 26
4
- 22
4   = 26 - 22
4
 ;
J 42 - 23
2
R
2
= 2 - 23
4
 = 
412 - 232
4 #  4
 = 8 - 423
16
 = 6 - 2212 + 2
16
 = ¢ 26 - 22
4
≤
2
87. cos12u2 = 2 cos2u - 1
Chapter Test (page 541)
1. p
6   2. - p
4   3. p
5   4. 7
3  5. 3  6. - 4
3  7. 0.39  8. 0.78  9. 1.25  10. 0.20 
11. csc u + cot u
sec u + tan u =  csc u + cot u
sec u + tan u # csc u - cot u
csc u - cot u =  
csc2u - cot2u
1sec u + tan u2 1csc u - cot u2 =  
1
1sec u + tan u2 1csc u - cot u2
=
1
1sec u + tan u2 1csc u - cot u2 # sec u - tan u
sec u - tan u =  
sec u - tan u
1sec2u - tan2u2 1csc u - cot u2
= sec u - tan u
csc u - cot u
12. sin u tan u + cos u = sin u # sin u
cos u + cos u = sin2u
cos u + cos2u
cos u = sin2u + cos2u
cos u
=
1
cos u = sec u
13. tan u + cot u = sin u
cos u + cos u
sin u =
sin2u
sin u cos u +
cos2u
sin u cos u = sin2u + cos2u
sin u cos u
=
1
sin u cos u =
2
2 sin u cos u =
2
sin12u2 = 2 csc12u2
14. 
sin1a + b2
tan a + tan b =
sin a cos b + cos a sin b
sin a
cos a +
sin b
cos b
=
sin a cos b + cos a sin b
sin a cos b
cos a cos b +
cos a sin b
cos a cos b
=
sin a cos b + cos a sin b
sin a cos b + cos a sin b
cos a cos b
=
sin a cos b + cos a sin b
1
#
cos a cos b
sin a cos b + cos a sin b = cos a cos b
15. sin13u2 = sin1u + 2u2 = sin u cos12u2 + cos u sin12u2 = sin u # 1cos2 u - sin2 u2 + cos u # 2 sin u cos u = sin u cos2 u - sin3  u + 2 sin u cos2u
= 3 sin u cos2 u - sin3 u = 3 sin u11 - sin2 u2 - sin3 u = 3 sin u - 3 sin3 u - sin3 u = 3 sin u - 4 sin3 u
16. tan u - cot u
tan u + cot u =
sin u
cos u - cos u
sin u
sin u
cos u + cos u
sin u
=
sin2u - cos2u
sin u cos u
sin2u + cos2u
sin u cos u
= sin2u - cos2u
sin2u + cos2u
=
11 - cos2u2 - cos2u
1
= 1 - 2 cos2u  17. 1
41 26 + 222
18. 2 + 23  19. 25
5   20. 12285
49
  21. 
2213 1 25 - 32
39
  22. 2 + 23
4
  23. 26
2   24. 22
2   25. e p
3 , 2p
3 , 4p
3 , 5p
3 f  26. 50, 1.911, p, 4.3736 
27. e 3p
8 , 7p
8 , 11p
8 , 15p
8
f  28. 50.285, 3.4276  29. 50.253, 2.8896 
Cumulative Review (page 542)
1. e - 1 - 213
6
, - 1 + 213
6
f  2. y + 1 = - 11x - 42, or x + y = 3; 622; (1, 2)  3. x-axis symmetry; 10, - 32, (0, 3), (3, 0)

Answers  Section 8.2  1103
4.
5.
6.
y
8
x
8
(6, 5)
(3, 2)
(0, 5)
y
5
x
6
(0, 1)
y  2
y
0.5
x
2P
7. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d)
y
2.5
x
2.5
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
y  x3
f 1(x)  x
3
y
5
x
5
(0, 1)
(1, e)
f 1(x)  ln x
1
e
1,
y  ex
y
1.25
x
P
(0, 0)
f 1(x)  sin1 x
P
2
,

1
P
2 , 1
y  sin x
P
2
1, 
P
2
1,
y
3
x
P
(0, 1)
f 1(x)  cos1 x
P
2 , 0
y  cos x
(P, 1)
(1, P)
8. (a) - 222
3
  (b) 22
4   (c) 422
9
  (d) 7
9  (e) C
3 + 222
6
  (f) - C
3 - 222
6
  9. 25
5   10. (a) - 222
3
  (b) - 222
3
  (c) 7
9  (d) 422
9
  (e) 26
3
(g) Increasing: 1- q, - 12, 1- 0.29, 0.692, 11, q 2
Decreasing: 1- 1, - 0.292, 10.69, 12
11. (a) f1x2 = 12x - 12 1x - 1221x + 122;
1
2 multiplicity 1; 1 and - 1 multiplicity 2
  (b) 10, - 12; a1
2 , 0b; 1- 1, 02; (1, 0)  (c) y = 2x5
  (d) 
(e) Local minimum value - 1.33 at x = - 0.29, 
Local minimum value 0 at x = 1
Local maximum value 0 at x = - 1,  
Local maximum value 0.10 at x = 0.69
 (f) 
12. (a) e - 1, - 1
2 f
  (b) 5 - 1, 16
  (c) 1- q, - 12 h a - 1
2, q b
  (d) (- q, - 14 h 31, q)
y
1.25
x
1.25
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)
1
2
0
,
(0.69, 0.10)
(0.29, 1.33)
2
2
2
2
Chapter 8  Applications of Trigonometric Functions
8.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 552)
4. F  5. b  6. angle of elevation  7. T  8. F  9.  sin u = 5
13; cos u = 12
13; tan u = 5
12; cot u = 12
5 ; sec u = 13
12; csc u = 13
5
11. sin u = 22
2 ; cos u = 22
2 ;  tan u = 1;  csc u = 22;  sec u = 22; cot u = 1
13. sin u = 3
4; cos u = 27
4 ;  tan u = 327
4
;  csc u = 4
3;  sec u = 427
7
; cot u = 27
3
15. sin u = 227
7
; cos u = 221
7
;  tan u = 223
3
;  csc u = 27
2 ;  sec u = 221
3
; cot u = 23
2
17. sin u = 25
5 ; cos u = 225
5
;  tan u = 1
2;  csc u = 25;  sec u = 25
2 ; cot u = 2
19. 0  21. 1  23. 0  25. 0  27. 1  29. a ≈13.74, c ≈14.62, A = 70°  31. b ≈8.34, c ≈10.89, A = 40°  33. a ≈2.18, c ≈6.39, B = 70° 
35. b ≈7.15, c ≈9.33, B = 50°  37. a ≈6.43, b ≈7.66, B = 50°  39. c ≈5.83, A ≈59.0°, B ≈31.0°  41. a ≈4.47, A ≈48.2°, B = 41.8° 
45. 4.59 in.; 6.55 in.  47. (a) 5.52 in. or 11.83 in.  53. 137.37 m  55. 80.5°  57. (a) 111.96 ft/sec or 76.3 mi/h   (b) 82.42 ft/sec or 56.2 mi/h  
(c) Under 18.8°   59. (a) 2.4898 * 1013 miles  (b) 0.000214°  61. 554.52 ft  63. S76.6°E  65. The embankment is 30.5 m high.  67. 3.83 mi 
69. 1978.09 ft  71. 60.27 ft  73. The buildings are 7984 ft apart.  77. 38.9° 
79. The white ball should hit the top cushion 4.125 ft from the upper left corner.  84. Yes  85. 26 - 22
4
 or 22 - 13
2
86. 0.236, 0.243, 0.248  87. e p
2 , 7p
6 , 11p
6
f
8.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 564)
4. a  5. sin A
a
= sin B
b
= sin C
c
  6. F  7. F  8. ambiguous case  9. a ≈3.23, b ≈3.55, A = 40°  11. a ≈8.45, c ≈16.38, A = 25°
13. a ≈3.35, b ≈1.68, C = 165°  15. a ≈11.82, c ≈9.19, C = 50°  17. b ≈3.68, c ≈1.34, B = 110°  19. a ≈4.91, b ≈4.52, C = 50°

1104 
Answers  Section 8.2
8.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 571)
3. Cosines  4. a  5. b  6. F  7. F  8. T  9. b ≈2.95, A ≈28.7°, C ≈106.3°  11. b ≈3.19, A ≈12.4°, C = 147.6° 
13. A ≈125.1°, B ≈30.8°, C = 24.1°  15. A ≈127.2°, B ≈32.1°, C ≈20.7°  17. b ≈1.03, A ≈160.3°, C = 9.7° 
19. c ≈5.29, A ≈79.1°, B = 40.9°  21. a ≈4.58, C ≈10.9°, B = 49.1°  23. b ≈3.61, A ≈56.3°, C = 33.7° 
25. A ≈53.1°, B = 90°, C = 36.9°  27. A ≈70.5°, B ≈70.5°, C = 39.0°  29. A ≈36.3°, B ≈26.4°, C = 117.3° 
31. A ≈60.9°, B ≈42.8°, C = 76.3°  33. A = 85°, a = 14.56, c = 14.12  35. A = 40.8°, B = 60.6°, C = 78.6°  37. A = 80°, b = 8.74, c = 13.80 
39. Two triangles: B1 = 35.4°, C1 = 134.6°, c1 = 12.29; B2 = 144.6°, C2 = 25.4°, c2 = 7.40  41. B = 24.5°, C = 95.5°, a = 10.44
49. (a) 492.6 ft  (b) 269.3 ft  51. 342.33 ft  53. The footings should be 7.65 ft apart.
y
5
x
5P
(0, 0)
(23P, 4)
(24P, 0)
(22P, 0)
(4P, 0)
(2P, 0)
(2P, 24)
(3P, 24)
(P, 4)
63. a - b
a + b =
a - b
c
 
a + b
c
 
=
sinc 1
2  1A - B2 d
cos C
2  
 
cosc 1
2  1A - B2 d
sin C
2  
 
=
tanc 1
2  1A - B2 d
cot C
2  
=
tanc 1
2  1A - B2 d
tanap
2  - C
2  b
=
tanc 1
2  1A - B2 d
tanc 1
2  1A + B2 d
 
69. e - 3, - 4
3, 3 f  70. 325 ≈6.71  71. - 115
7
  72. 
55. Suppose 0 6 u 6 p. Then, by the Law of Cosines, d2 = r 2 + r 2 - 2r 2 cos u = 4r 2 a1 - cos u
2
 b 1 d = 2rB
1 - cos u
2
 = 2r sin u
2 .
Since, for any angle in 10, p2, d is strictly less than the length of the arc subtended by u, that is, d 6 ru, then 2r sin u
2 6 ru, or 2 sin u
2 6 u. 
Since cos u
2 6 1, then, for 0 6 u 6 p, sin u = 2 sin u
2  cos u
2 6 2 sin u
2 6 u. If u Ú p, then, since sin u … 1, sin u 6 u. Thus sin u 6 u for all u 7 0.
57.  sin C
2  = A
1 - cos C
2
 = R
1 - a2 + b2 - c2 
2ab
 
2
 = B
2ab - a2 - b2 + c2 
4ab
 = B
c2 - 1a - b22 
4ab
 = B
1c + a - b2 1c + b - a2
4ab
                = B
12s - 2b2 12s - 2a2
4ab
= B
1s - a2 1s - b2
ab
64.
y
x
8
5
22
x = 3
y = 2
(4, 9)
1
2 , 0
2
1
3
0, 2
11
2
5, 
65. e
ln 3
ln 4 - ln 3 f ≈{3.819}
66. sin u = 216
7
; csc u = 716
12 ; sec u = - 7
5; cot u = - 516
12
67. y = - 3 sin(4x)
8.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 577)
2. 1
2 ab sin C  3. 2s(s - a)(s - b)(s - c) ; 1
2 (a + b + c)  4. T  5. c  6. c  7. 2.83  9. 1.71  11. 14.98  13. 9.56  15. 0.17  17. 10.39  19. 1.73 
21. 6  23. 2.83  25. 5.33  27. K = 1
2
 ab sin C = 1
2
 a sin Caa sin B
sin A  b = a2 sin B sin C
2 sin A
   39. The area of home plate is about 216.5 in.2 
45. (a) Area ∆OAC = 1
2   OC  AC = 1
2 #  OC
1
 #  AC
1
= 1
2  sin a cos a
(b) Area ∆OCB = 1
2   BC  OC = 1
2   OB 2  
 BC
 OB  #  OC
 OB = 1
2   OB 2 sin b cos b
(c) Area ∆OAB = 1
2   BD  OA = 1
2   OB  
 BD
 OB = 1
2   OB  sin1a + b2
21. a ≈10.82, c ≈11.34, A = 70°  23. C = 100°, a ≈1.31, b ≈1.31  25. One triangle; B ≈30.7°, C ≈99.3°, c ≈3.86  27. One triangle: 
B ≈34.4°, C ≈25.7°, b ≈1.30  29. Two triangles: A1 ≈65.4°, C1 ≈74.6°, a1 ≈2.83 or A2 ≈34.6°, C2 ≈105.4°, a1 ≈1.77  31. Two triangles; 
C1 ≈30.9°, A1 ≈129.1°, a1 ≈9.07 or C2 ≈149.1°, A2 ≈10.9°, a2 ≈2.20  33. No triangle  35. Two triangles: A1 ≈86.5°, C1 ≈53.5°, a1 = 6.21 
or A2 ≈13.5°, C1 ≈126.5°, a1 ≈1.45  39. 335.16 ft  43. The tree is 39.4 ft high.  45. Adam receives 100.6 more frequent flyer miles. 
47. (a) Station Able is about 143.33 mi from the ship: Station Baker is about 135.58 mi from the ship.  (b) Approximately 41 min  49. 84.7°; 183.72 ft 
51. 2.64 mi  53. 38.5 in.  55. 449.36 ft  57. 187,600,000 km or 101,440,000 km 
61. a - b
c
= a
c - b
c = sin A
sin C - sin B
sin C = sin A - sin B
sin C
=
2 sinaA - B
2
 b cosaA + B
2
 b
2 sin C
2   cos C
2  
=
sinaA - B
2
 b cosap
2  - C
2  b
sin C
2   cos C
2  
=
sinaA - B
2
 b
cos C
2  
 

Answers  Section 8.5  1105
(d) cos a
cos b =
 OC
1
 
 OC
 OB  
=  OB
(e) Area ∆OAB = Area ∆OAC + Area ∆OCB
1
2  OB sin(a + b) = 1
2 sin a cos a + 1
2  OB2 sin b cos b
sin(a + b) =
1
 OB  sin a cos  a +  OB sin b cos b
sin(a + b) =
 cos b
 cos a sin a cos a +  cos a
 cos b  sin b cos b
sin(a + b) =  sin a cos b +  cos a sin b
47. 31,145 ft2  51. K = 1
2
 ah = 1
2
 ab sin C 1 h = b sin C = a sin B sin C
sin A
 
53. ∠POQ = 180° - aA
2 + B
2  b = 180° - 1
2 (180° - C) = 90° + C
2  , and  sin a90° + C
2  b = cos a- C
2  b = cos C
2  , since cosine is an even function. 
Therefore, r =
c sin A
2   sin B
2  
 sin a90° + C
2  b
=
c sin A
2   sin B
2  
 cos C
2  
 .
55.  cot A
2 + cot B
2 + cot C
2 = s - a
r
+ s - b
r
+ s - c
r
=
3s - (a + b + c)
r
= 3s - 2s
r
= s
r 
60. Maximum value; 17  61. (- q, - 3) ∪[- 1, 3)
62. sin t = 12
3 , cos t = - 17
3 , tan t = - 114
7
, csc t = 312
2
, sec t = - 317
7
, cot t = - 114
2
63. csc u - sin u =
1
sin u - sin u = 1 - sin2 u
sin u
= cos2 u
sin u = cos u # cos u
sin u = cos u cot u
8.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 587)
2. Simple harmonic; amplitude  3. Simple harmonic; damped  4. T  5. d = - 5 cos1pt2  7. d = - 4 cos14t2  9. d = - 5 sin1pt2 
11. d = - 6 sin12t2  13. (a) Simple harmonic  (b) 5 m  (c) 2p
3    sec  (d) 3
2p  oscillation/sec  15. (a) Simple harmonic  (b) 5 m  (c) 4 s
(d) 1
4 oscillation/s  17. (a) Simple harmonic  (b) 2 m  (c) p s  (d) 1
p oscillation/s  19. (a) Simple harmonic  (b) 3 m
(c) 2 s  (d) 1
2 oscillation/s
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
y
1.25
t
2P
y
1
21
x
2P
y
3P
x
2P
y  x
y  cos x
y
2P
P
2P
2P
22P
P
x
3P
2P
y 5 2cos x 
y 5 x 
y
2
x
3P
y 5 cos x 
y 5 sin(2x)
2P
22
P
31.
33. (a) f(x) = 1
2  3cos x - cos (3x)4 
(b) 
35. (a) G(x) = 1
2 3cos(6x) + cos(2x)4 
(b) 
y
2
x
2P
y 5 cos x 
y 5 cos(2x)
21
y
1
x
2P
cos x
y  1 
2
cos(3x)
y  1 
2
y
1
x
2P
cos(2x)
y  1 
2
cos(6x)
y  1 
2
37. (a) H(x) = sin(4x) + sin(2x)
(b) 
39. (a) d = - 10e -0.7t>50 cos aB
4p2 
25
- 0.49
2500
 tb
(b) 
41. (a) d = - 18e -0.6t>60 cos aB
p2 
4
- 0.36
3600
 tb
(b) 
y
2
x
2P
y  sin(2x)
y  sin(4x)
10
10
25
0
18
18
20
0

1106 
Answers  Section 8.5
43. (a) d = - 5e -0.8t>20 cos aB
4p2 
9
- 0.64
400
 tb
(b) 
45. (a) The motion is damped. The bob has 
mass m = 20 kg with a damping factor 
of 0.7 kg/sec.
(b) 20 m leftward
(c) 
(d) 18.33 m leftward  (e) d S 0
47. (a) The motion is damped. The bob has 
mass m = 40 kg with a damping factor 
of 0.6 kg/sec.
(b) 30 m leftward
(c) 
(d) 28.47 m leftward  (e) d S 0
49. (a) The motion is damped. The bob has 
mass m = 15 kg with a damping factor 
of 0.9 kg/sec.
(b) 15 m leftward
(c) 
(d) 12.53 m leftward  (e) d S 0
55. (a) 
(b) At t = 0, t = 2; at t = 1, t = 3
(c) During the approximate intervals 
0.35 6 t 6 0.67, 1.29 6 t 6 1.75, and 
2.19 6 t … 3
57.
5
5
15
0
20
20
25
0
30
30
35
0
15
15
30
0
V
1.25
t
3
2.5
2.5
2
0
61.  f (x) = sin x
x
 
63. y = 1
x  sin x
y =
1
x2 
  sin x 
y =
1
x3 
  sin x
1
0.3
5p
0
1
0.3
5p
0
0.1
0.06
7p
0
0.05
0.015
3p
0
65. f -1(x) = 4x - 3
x - 1   66. log7a
xy3
x + y b  67. {4}  68. (a) 3110
10
  (b) 110
10   (c) 1
3
Review Exercises (page 591)
	 1. sin u = 4
5; cos u = 3
5; tan u = 4
3; cot u = 3
4; sec u = 5
3; csc u = 5
4  2.  sin u = 23
2 ; cos u = 1
2; tan u = 23; cot u = 23
3 ; sec u = 2; csc u = 223
3
	 3. 0  5. 1  6. A = 70°, b ≈3.42, a ≈9.40  7. a ≈4.58, A ≈66.4°, B ≈23.6°  9. B ≈56.8°, C ≈23.2°, b ≈4.25  10. No triangle 
11. b ≈3.32, A ≈62.8°, C ≈17.2°  13. No triangle  15. c ≈2.32, A ≈16.1°, B ≈123.9°  17. A ≈39.6°, B ≈18.6°, C ≈121.9° 
18. Two triangles: B1 ≈13.4°, C1 ≈156.6°, c1 ≈6.86 or B2 ≈166.6°, C2 ≈3.4°, c2 ≈1.02
19. b ≈11.52, c ≈10.13, C ≈60°  20. a ≈5.23, B ≈46.0°, C ≈64.0°  21. 1.93  23. 6  24. 3.80 
28. 23.32 ft  29. 2.15 mi  30. 132.55 ft/min  31. 12.7°  32. 29.97 ft  33. 6.22 mi  34. (a) 131.8 mi  (b) 23.1°  (c) 0.21 hr
35. 8798.67 sq ft  36. S4.0°E  37. 76.94 in.  38. 79.69 in.  39. d = - 3 cos ap
2
 tb
40. (a) Simple harmonic  (b) 6 ft  (c) p s  (d) 1
p oscillation/s
41. (a) Simple harmonic  (b) 2 ft  (c) 2 s  (d) 1
2 oscillation/s
42. (a) d = - 15e-0.75t>80  cos a B
4p2
25 - 0.5625
6400
 tb
(b) 
15
15
25
0
43. (a) The motion is damped. The bob has mass m = 20 kg  
with a damping factor of 0.6 kg/s.
    (b) 15 m leftward      (c) 
    (d) 13.92 m leftward
    (e) d S 0
15
15
25
0
44.
y
2
x
y 5 2 sin x
y 5 cos(2x)
2P

Answers  Cumulative Review  1107
Chapter Test (page 593)
	 1. sin u = 25
5 ; cos u = 225
5
; tan u = 1
2; csc u = 25; sec u = 25
2 ; cot u = 2  2. 0  3. a = 15.88, B ≈57.5°, C ≈70.5°
	 4. b ≈6.85, C = 117°, c ≈16.30  5. A ≈52.4°, B ≈29.7°, C ≈97.9°  6. b ≈4.72, c ≈1.67, B = 105°  7. No triangle
	 8. c ≈7.62, A ≈80.5°, B ≈29.5°  9. 15.04 square units  10. 19.81 square units  11. 61.0°  12. 1.3°  13. The area of the shaded region is 9.26 cm2.
14. 54.15 square units  15. Madison will have to swim about 2.23 miles.  16. 12.63 square units  17. The lengths of the sides are 15, 18, and 21.
18. d = 5(sin 42°) sinapt
3 b or d ≈3.346 sinapt
3 b
Cumulative Review (page 594)
	 1. e 1
3 , 1 f	
2. 1x + 522 + 1y - 122 = 9	
3. 5x x … - 1 or x Ú 46	
4.	
5.
	 6. (a) -  225
5
  (b) 25
5   (c) -  4
5  (d) -  3
5  (e) B
5 - 15
10
  (f) - B
5 + 15
10
y
5
x
1
(5, 1)
y
3
x
2.5
y
2.5
x
P
	 7. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
00
4
60
1.5
1.5
4
0
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
y
1.25
x
2P
y
1.25
x
2P
y
2
x
P
	 8. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
y
5
x
5
y
10
x
5
y
5
x
5
y
5
x
5
y
9
x
5
y
5
x
8
9. Two triangles: A1 ≈59.0°, B1 ≈81.0°, b1 ≈23.05 or 
A2 ≈121.0°, B2 ≈19.0°, b2 ≈7.59
10. e - 2i, 2i, 1
3 , 1, 2 f
10
50
4
0
00
4
8
11. R1x2 =
12x + 12 1x - 42
1x + 52 1x - 32 ;  Domain: 5x x ≠- 5, x ≠36
    Intercepts: a -  1
2 , 0b, (4, 0), a0, 4
15 b
    No symmetry
    Vertical asymptotes: x = - 5, x = 3
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 2
    Intersects: a26
11 , 2b
12. 52.266  13. 516  14. (a) e -  5
4 f  (b) 526  (c) e - 1 - 3213
2
, - 1 + 3213
2
f  (d) e x ` x 7 -  5
4 f or a -  5
4 , q b
10
8
8
4
y
10
x
10
(4, 0)
1
2 , 0

4
15
0, 
26
11 , 2
(e) {x|- 8 … x … 3} or [- 8, 3]
(f) 
(g) 
y
6
x
5
(0, 5)
(1.25, 0)
y
15
x
10
(3, 0)
(8, 0)
(2.5, 30.25)
(0, 24)

1108 
Answers  Section 9.1
Chapter 9  Polar Coordinates; Vectors
9.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 605)
5. pole; polar axis  6. r cos u; r sin u  7. b   8. d  9. T  10. F  11. A  13. C  15. D  17. D 
41. 13, 02  43. 13, 02  45. 1 - 323, 32  47. 1 22, - 222  49. a322
2
, 322
2
b  51. 10, 32   53. 1- 2.57, 7.052  55. 13.79, - 7.162 
57. 13, 02  59. a2, - p
2 b  61. a 22 , -  p
4 b  63. a2, p
6 b  65. 12.25, - 1.932  67. 19.30, 0.472  69. r = cos u  71. r 2 cos2 u - 4r sin u = 0 
73. r 3 cos2 u sin u = 1
4  75. r sin u = - 3  77. x2 + y2 - x = 0 or ax - 1
2 b
2
+ y2 = 1
4   79. ax + 1
2 b
2
+ ay - 1
2 b
2
= 1
2  81. x2 + y2 = 4 
83. 64ax - 3
8 b
2
+ 72y2 = 81  90. e 19
15 f  91. 2 or 0 positive real zeros; 1 negative real zero  92. a - 5
4, 9
2 b  93. 10, - 112
19.
90
(3, 90)
O
21.
(23, P)
P
O
23.
O
5P
3
5P
3
5,
25.
1208
(23, 1208)
O
27.
O
5P
4
2, 2
5P
4
2
29.
O
P
3

P
3
1, 
31.
33.
(a) a5, -  4p
3 b  (b) a - 5, 5p
3 b  (c) a5, 8p
3 b
35.
(a) r 7 0, - 2p … u 6 0 13, - p2
(b) r 6 0, 0 … u 6 2p 1- 3, 02
(c) r 7 0, 2p … u 6 4p 13, 3p)
P
2
2
P
2
23, 2
O
2P
3
2P
3
5,
O
(23, 4P)
4P
O
15. x2 + y2 = 16; circle, radius 4,  
center at pole
17. y = 23 x; line through pole, 
making an angle of p
3   with polar axis
19. x = 4; a vertical line 4 units to the right of 
the pole.
9.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 619)
7. polar equation  8. F  9. - u  10. p - u  11. T  12. 2n; n  13. c  14. b
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1 2
3 4 5
U  P
U  0
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
P
3
U 
y
x
1
2 3 4 5
U  P
U  0
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
1
2 3
5
U 5 P
U 5 0
4
37. 
O
P
(2, P)
(a) r 7 0, - 2p … u 6 0 12, - p2
(b) r 6 0, 0 … u 6 2p 1- 2, 02
(c) r 7 0, 2p … u 6 4p 12, 3p2
39. 
2P
3
22, 2
2P
3
2
O
(a) r 7 0, - 2p … u 6 0 a2, -  5p
3 b 
(b) r 6 0, 0 … u 6 2p a - 2, 4p
3 b 
(c) r 7 0, 2p … u 6 4p a2, 7p
3 b 

Answers  Section 9.2  1109
21. x = - 2; vertical line 2 units to the left  
of the pole
23. 1x - 122 + y2 = 1; circle, radius 1,  
center (1, 0) in rectangular coordinates
25. 1x + 222 + y2 = 4; Circle, radius 2, center 
1- 2, 02 in rectangular coordinates
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2 3 4 5
U  P
U  0
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2 3 4 5
U  P
U  0
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
1
2 3 4 5
U 5 P
U 5 0
27. x + 1y - 422 = 16; circle, radius 4, center 
10, 42 in rectangular coordinates
29. 1x + 222 + y2 = 4; Circle, radius 2, center 
1- 2, 02 in rectangular coordinates
31. A  33. B  35. G  37. C
39. Cardioid
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
2
4 6 8 10
U 5 P
U 5 0
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
2
4 6 8 10
U 5 P
U 5 0
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2 3
5
U  P
U  0
4
41. Cardioid
43. Limaçon without an inner loop
45. Limaçon without inner loop
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
1
2 3
5
U 5 P
U 5 0
4
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
2 3
5
U 5 P
U 5 0
4
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
4 6
10
U  P
U  0
8
47. Limaçon with inner loop
49. Limaçon with an inner loop.
51. Rose
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2 3
5
U  P
U  0
4
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
2 4
6
10
U 5 P
U 5 0
8
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2
3
5
U  P
U  0
4

1110 
Answers  Section 9.2
53. Rose
55. Lemniscate
57. Spiral
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
3
5
U 5 P
U 5 0
4
1
2
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
3
5
U  P
U  0
4
1
2
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
400
U 5 P
U 5 0
800
75.
77.
79.
59. Limaçon without an inner loop.
61. Rose
63.
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
1
2 3
5
U 5 P
U 5 0
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
4 5
U 5 P
U 5 0
1
2 3
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
4 6
10
U  P
U  0
8
2
P
3
4, 
P
3
4, 
65.
67.
73.
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
U  P
U  0
2
P
2
1, 
(0, P)
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
U  P
U  0
2
P
4
,
2  2
2
5P
4
,
2  2
2
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2 3 4 5
U  P
U  0
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
U  P
U  0
1
3
2
3
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
P
3P
5P
U  P
U  0
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2 3 4 5
U  P
U  0
89. (a)  r 2 =  cos u; r 2 =  cos1p - u2
            
 r 2 = - cos u
            Not equivalent; test fails.
             1- r22 =  cos1- u2
            
 r 2 =  cos u
            New test works.
81.
83. r sin u = a 
        y = a
(b)  r 2 =  sin u: r 2 =  sin1p - u2
 r 2 =  sin u
Test works.
 1- r22 =  sin1- u2
 r 2 = - sin u
Not equivalent; new test fails.
85.	
 r = 2a sin u
 r 2 = 2ar sin u
 x2 + y2 = 2ay
 x2 + y2 - 2ay = 0
 x2 + 1y - a22 = a2 
Circle, radius a , center at 10, a2 
in rectangular coordinates
87.
 r = 2a cos u
 r 2 = 2ar cos u
 x2 + y2 = 2ax
 x2 - 2ax + y2 = 0
 1x - a22 + y2 = a2 
Circle, radius a , center at 1a, 02 
in rectangular coordinates
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2 3 4 5
U  P
U  0

Answers  Section 9.3  1111
93. {x0 3 6 x … 8}, or (3, 8]  94. 420°  95. Amplitude = 2; period = 2p
5   96. Horizontal asymptote: y = 0   
Vertical asymptote: x = 4
13.
22 1cos 45° + i sin 45°2
15.
21cos 300° + i sin 300°2
17.
21cos 180° + i sin 180°2
Historical Problems (page 627)
1. (a) 1 + 4i, 1 + i  (b) - 1, 2 + i
9.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 628)
5. real; imaginary  6. magnitude; modulus; argument  7. r1 r2 ; u1 + u2 ; u1 + u2   8. r n ; nu; nu  9. three  10. T  11. c  12. a
1
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
1
1
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
1
2
21
22
2
22
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
2
22
25. - 1 + 23i  27. 222 - 222i  29. 4i  31. - 0.376 - 0.137i  33. 2.853 + 0.927i 
35. zw = 81cos 60° + i sin 60°2; z
w = 1
2  1cos 20° + i sin 20°2  37. 1
3 1cos 240° + i sin 240°2  39. 2 acos 29p
16
+ i sin 29p
16 b 
41. 22
2 1cos 15° + i sin 15°2  43. - 32 + 3223i  45. - 222 - 222i  47. 1
32  49. 27
2 - 2723
2
 i  51. - 64  53. - 1264 - 286.217i
55. 2
6 21cos 15° + i sin 15°2, 2
6 21cos 135° + i sin 135°2, 2
6 21cos 255° + i sin 255°2
57. 22
6 21cos 75° + i sin 75°2; 22
6 21cos 195° + i sin 195°2; 22
6 21cos 315° + i sin 315°2
59. 21cos 60° + i sin 60°2; 21cos 180° + i sin 180°2; 21cos 300° + i sin 300°2
61. cos 54° + i sin 54°; cos 126° + i sin 126°; cos 198° + i sin 198°; cos 270° + i sin 270°; cos 342° + i sin 342°
19.
181cos 30° + i sin 30°2
21.
271cos 40.9° + i sin 40.9°2
23.
261cos 335.9° + i sin 335.9°2
9
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
9
29
18
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
1
21
2
2
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
1
21
3
63. 1, i, - 1, - i
65. Look at formula (8).  zk  = 1
n r  for all k. 
67. Look at formula (8). The zk  are spaced apart by an angle of 2p
n  .
1
1
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
i
i
69. Assume the theorem is true for n Ú 1.
For n = 0:
 z0 = r 03cos(0 # u) + i sin(0 # u)4
 1 = 1 # 3cos(0) + i sin(0)4
 1 = 1 # 31 + 04
 1 = 1 True
For negative integers:
 z-n = (zn)-1 = (r n[cos(nu) + i sin(nu)])-1 with n Ú 1
 =
1
r n[cos(nu) + i sin(nu)]
 =
1
r n[cos(nu) + i sin(nu)] # cos(nu) - i sin(nu)
cos(nu) - i sin(nu)
 =
cos(nu) - i sin(nu)
r n(cos2(nu) + sin2(nu))
 =
cos(nu) - i sin(nu)
r n
 = r -n[cos(nu) - i sin(nu)]
 = r -n[cos(- nu) + i sin(- nu)]
Thus, De Moivre’s Theorem is true for all integers.
71. ≈40.50  72. 4
3
 p  73. 522  74. Minimum: f a6
5 b = - 16
5  

1112 
Answers  Section 9.4
9.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 640)
1. vector  2. 0  3. unit  4. position  5. horizontal; vertical  6. resultant  7. T  8. F  9. a  10. b
11.
13.
15.
17.
19. F  21. T  23. F  25. T  27. 12  29. v = - 3i - 5j  31. v = 2i + 4j  33. v = 7i - 2j  35. v = i + j  37. 5  39. 22  41. 2210  43. - j
45. 25  47. 234 + 213  49. - j  51. - 5
13
 i + 12
13
  j  53. 12
2   i -  12
2   j  55. v =  815
5
  i +  415
5
  j, or v = -  815
5
  i -  415
5
  j
57. 5 - 2 + 221 , - 2 - 221 6  59. v =  5
2  i +  523
2
  j  61. - 3
2
 i - 323
2
  j  63. 1522
2
 i - 1522
2
  j  65. 45°  67. 225°  69. 326.3°  71. 108.4°
v  w
v
w
3v
u
u 2 v 
2v
2u
23v
2u 2 3v 1 w
w
97. (a) 1- 1, 42
(b) 
99.
103. c ≈4.29; A ≈66.7°; B ≈13.3°  104. - 2, 0, 6  105. 23
85. (a) N7.05°E  (b) 12 min  91. m = 0.36
106. Amplitude = 3
2
 ; period = p
3
Phase shift = - p
2
y
5
x
5
u
v
u
v
(3, 1)
(4, 5)
(1, 4)
P
F2
F1
F4
F3
y
2.5
x
P
3
3
2
P
3 , 2
Historical Problem (page 649)
1ai + bj2 # 1ci + dj2 = ac + bd
Real part [1a + bi2 1c + di2] = real part[1a - bi2 1c + di2] = real part[ac + adi - bci - bdi2] = ac + bd
9.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 649)
2. dot product  3. orthogonal  4. parallel  5. T  6. F  7. d  8. b  9. (a) 0  (b) 90°  (c) orthogonal  11. (a) 6  (b) 18.4°  (c) neither 
13. (a) 1 - 23  (b) 105°  (c) neither  15. (a) 75  (b) 0°  (c) parallel  17. (a)  0  (b) 90°  (c) orthogonal
19. 2
3   21. v1 = 5
2  i -  5
2  j, v2 = - 1
2  i -  1
2  j  23. v1 = - 1
5
 i - 2
5
  j, v2 = 6
5
 i + 3
5
  j  25. v1 = 28
17
 i - 7
17
  j, v2 = - 11
17
 i - 44
17
  j 
33. Force required to keep the Sienna from rolling down the hill: 737.6 lb; force perpendicular to the hill: 5248.4 lb
39. Let v = ai + bj. Then 0 # v = 0a + 0b = 0.
41. v = cos ai + sin aj, 0 … a … p; w = cos bi + sin bj, 0 … b … p. If u is the angle between v and w, then v # w = cos u, 
since 7 v7 = 1 and 7 w7 = 1. Now u = a - b or u = b - a. Since the cosine function is even, 
v # w = cos(a - b). Also, v # w = cos a cos b + sin a sin b. So cos(a - b) = cos a cos b + sin a sin b.
43. (a) If u = a1i + b1j and v = a2i + b2j, then, since 7 u7 = 7 v7 , a1
2 + b1
2 = 7 u7 2 = 7 v7 2 = a2
2 + b2
2, 
1u + v2 # 1u - v2 = 1a1 + a22 1a1 - a22 + 1b1 + b22 1b1 - b22 = 1a1
2 + b1
22 - 1a2
2 + b2
22 = 0.
(b) The legs of the angle can be made to correspond to vectors u + v and u - v.
45. 1 7 w7 v + 7 v7 w2 # 1 7 w7 v - 7 v7 w2 = 7 w7 2 v # v - 7 w7 7 v7 v # w + 7 v7 7 w7 w # v - 7 v7 2 w # w = 7 w7 2 v # v - 7 v7 2 w # w = 7 w7 2 7 v7 2 - 7 v7 2 7 w7 2 = 0
47. 7 u + v7 2 - 7 u - v7 2 = 1u + v2 # 1u + v2 - 1u - v2 # 1u - v2 = 1u # u + u # v + v # u + v # v2 - 1u # u - u # v - v # u + v # v2     
                                                                                                                    = 21u # v2 + 21v # u2 = 41u # v2
49. 12  50. 9
2  51.  11 - sin2u2 11 + tan2u2 = 1cos2u2 1sec2u2
 = cos2u #
1
cos2u
 = 1
52. V(x) = x(19 - 2x)(13 - 2x), or V(x) = 4x3 - 64x2 + 247x
9.6 Assess Your Understanding (page 658)
	 2. xy-plane   3. components   4. 1  5. F  6. T  7. All points of the form 10, y, z2  9. All points of the form (x, y, 2)  11. All points of 
the form 1x, y, - 32  13. All points of the form 13, y, 12  15. 221  17. 2219  19. 226  21. 10, 0, 02, 14, 0, 02, 14, 2, 02, 10, 2, 02; 
10, 0, 22, 14, 0, 22, 10, 2, 22, 14, 2, 22  23. 15, 6, 12, 13, 6, 12, 15, 8, 12, and 13, 8, 12; 13, 8, 22, 15, 6, 22, 13, 6, 22, and 15, 8, 22 
25. 1- 2, - 3, 02, 1- 6, - 3, 02, 1- 2, 7, 02, 1- 6, 7, 02; 1- 6, 7, 12, 1- 2, - 3, 12, 1- 2, 7, 12, and 1- 6, - 3, 12  27. v = - 3i - 5j + 4k  
	29. v = 2i + 4j + k  31. v = 7i - 2j + 4k   33. 7  35. 23  37. 2211  39. - j - 2k  41. 25  43. 238 + 217  45. - j   47. 3
7
 i -  6
7
 j -  2
7
 k

Answers  Review Exercises  1113
	49. 26
3 i - 26
6 j + 26
6 k   51. v # w = 0; u = 90°  53. v # w = 3, u ≈74.5°  55. v # w = 0, u = 90°  57. v # w = 52, u = 0° 
	59. a ≈64.6°; b ≈149.0°; g ≈106.6°; v = 71cos 64.6°i + cos 149.0°j + cos 106.6°k2 
	61. a ≈54.7°; b ≈125.3°; g ≈125.3°; v = 231cos 54.7° i + cos 125.3° j + cos 125.3° k2 
63. a = 90°; b = 45°; g = 45°; v = 221cos 90° i + cos 45° j + cos 45° k2 
	65. a ≈68.2°; b ≈56.1°; g ≈138.0°; v = 2291cos 68.2° i + cos 56.1° j + cos 138.0° k2 
80. e x ` 2 6 x … 13
5 f or a2, 13
5 d   81. 2x2 + 2x - 5  82. 1
2  83. c = 325 ≈6.71; A ≈26.6°; B ≈63.4°
9.7 Assess Your Understanding (page 665)
	 1. T  2. T  3. T  4. F  5. F  6. T  7. 2  9. - 12  11. 2A + 12B - 6C  13. 10A + 2B + 2C  15. (a) 5i + 5j + 5k  (b) - 5i - 5j - 5k
(c) 0  (d) 0  17.  (a) i - j - k  (b) - i + j + k  (c) 0  (d) 0  19. (a) - i + 6j - k  (b) - i - 6j + k  (c) 0  (d) 0  21. (a) 6i + 4j + 6k 
(b) - 6i - 4j - 6k  (c) 0  (d) 0  23. 7i + 11j - 6k  25. - 7i - 11j + 6k  27. 0  29. 28i + 44j - 24k  31. - 21i - 33j + 18k  33. 0  35. - 25 
37. 25  39. 0  41. Any vector of the form c(- 9i - 7j - 3k), where c is a nonzero scalar  43. Any vector of the form c1- 4i - 2j + 2k2 where c is a 
nonzero scalar  45. 2213  47. 2217    49. 234  51. 2998  64. p
4   65. (17, 4.22), (- 17, 1.08)  66. f -1(x) = log7 (x - 5) + 1 
67. 1
2
 log4 x - 3log4 z 
	 1. a323
2
, 3
2 b
P
6
3, 
O
P
6
2. 11, 232
4P
3
2,
4P
3
O
3. (0, 3)
P
2

P
2
3, 
O
Review Exercises (page 668)
7. (a) x2 +  1y - 122 = 1  (b) circle, radius 1, 
center (0, 1) in rectangular coordinates
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2
U  P
U  0
8. (a) x2 + y2 = 25  (b) circle, radius 5, center 
at pole
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1 2
3 4
U  P
U  0
5
9. (a) x - y = 0  (b) line through pole, 
making an angle of p
4  with polar axis
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1 2
3 4 5
U  P
U  0
10. (a) 1x -  422 +  1y + 222 = 25  (b) circle, 
radius 5, center 14, - 22in rectangular 
coordinates
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
4
U  P
U  0
8
11. Circle; radius 2, center at (2, 0) in 
rectangular coordinates; symmetric with 
respect to the polar axis
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2 3
5
U  P
U  0
(4, 0)
P
3
2, 
P
2
0, 
12. Cardioid; symmetric with respect to the line 
u = p
2
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
2
4 6
10
8
U  P
U  0
P
2
0, 
(3, 0)
P
2
6, 

1114 
Answers  Review Exercises
13. Limaçon without inner loop; symmetric with 
respect to the polar axis
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
1
2
5
4
U  P
U  0
P
2
4, 
(3, 0)
(5, P)
3P
2
4,
15. 51cos 323.1° + i sin 323.1°2
16. - 23 + i
2
2
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
2
2
17. - 3
2 + 323
2
 i
2
2
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
3
1
18. 0.10 - 0.02i
0.10
0.02
Imaginary
axis
Real
axis
0.06
0.06
27. 
v
u
u  v
28. 
2u  3v
3v
2u
29. v = 2i - 4j; 7 v7 = 225  30. v = - i + 3j; 7 v7 = 210  31. 2i - 2j  32. - 20i + 13j  33. 25 
34. 25 + 5 ≈7.24  35. - 225
5
 i +  25
5
 j  36. v =  3
2
 i +  323
2
 j  37. 120°  38. 243 ≈6.56 
39. v = 3i - 5j + 3k  40. 21i - 2j - 5k  41. 238  42. 0  43. 3i + 9j + 9k  44. 0 
45. 219
19
 i + 3219
19
 j + 3219
19
 k or - 219
19
 i - 3219
19
 j - 3219
19
 k 
46. v # w = - 11; u ≈169.7°  47. v # w = - 4; u ≈153.4°  48. v # w = 1; u ≈70.5°  49. v # w = 0; u = 90° 
50. Parallel  51. Neither  52. Orthogonal  53. v1 = 4
5
 i -  3
5
 j; v2 = 6
5
 i +  8
5
 j  54. v1 = 9
10 13i + j2; v2 = -  7
10i + 21
10j 
55. a ≈56.1°; b ≈138°; g ≈68.2°  56. 2283  57. - 2i + 3j - k  58. 0  59. 229 ≈5.39 mi/h 0.4 mi  60. Left cable: 1843.21 lb; right cable: 
1630.41 lb  61. 50 ft-lb  62. A force of 697.2 lb is needed to keep the van from rolling down the hill. The magnitude of the force perpendicular to the 
hill is 7969.6 lb.
Chapter Test (page 670)
	 1–3. 
P
2
P
3
P
4 P
6
0
3P
4
2,
P
3
4,
P
6
3, 
4. a4, p
3 b  5. x2 + y2 = 49
                        
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
U  P
U  0
6. 
y
x = 3 or y = 3x
       
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
U  P
U  0
	 7. 8y = x2
     
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
3P
2
U 
7P
4
U 
P
2
U 
P
4
U 
y
x
U  P
U  0
	 8. r 2 cos u = 5 is symmetric about the pole, the polar axis, and the line u = p
2 .
	 9. r = 5 sin u cos2 u is symmetric about the line u = p
2 . The tests for symmetry about the pole and the polar 
axis fail, so the graph of r = 5 sin u cos2 u may or may not be symmetric about the pole or the polar axis.
	10. z # w = 61cos 107° + i sin 107°2   11. w
z = 3
2 1cos 297° + i sin 297°2
	12. w5 = 2431cos 110° + i sin 110°2
	13. z0 = 22
3 21cos 40° + i sin 40°2, z1 = 22
3 21cos 160° + i sin 160°2, z2 = 22
3 21cos 280° + i sin 280°2
2
Imaginary axis
Real axis
40
2
z1  22(cos 160  i sin 160)
3
z0  22(cos 40  i sin 40)
3
z2  22(cos 280  i sin 280)
3
14. v = 8522, - 5229  15. 7 v7 = 10  16. u =  v
7 v7 = h 22
2 , - 22
2 i  17. 315° off the positive x-axis  18. v = 522i - 522j 
19. v1 + 2v2 - v3 = 86, - 109  20. Vectors v1  and v4 are parallel.  21. Vectors v2 and v3 are orthogonal.  22. 172.87°  23. - 9i - 5j + 3k 
24. a ≈57.7°, b ≈143.3°, g ≈74.5°  25. 2115  26. The cable must be able to endure a tension of approximately 670.82 lb.

Answers  Section 10.2  1115
Cumulative Review (page 671)
	 1. 5 - 3, 36  2. y = 23
3 x  3. x2 +  1y - 122 = 9                                4. e x ` x 6 1
2 f or a - q, 1
2 b  5. Symmetry with respect to the y-axis
	 6. 
y
x
4
2
(1, 0)
(e, 1)
1
e 1
,
7. 
y
1.25
x
2P
8. 
y
1.25
x
2P
9. -  p
6
y
x
5
5
(0, 2)
(3, 1)
(0, 1)
(3, 1)
(0, 4)
	10. 
y
4.5
x
4
x  3
y  4
11. 
3P
4
U 
5P
4
U 
7P
4
U 
P
4
U 
P
3
U 
y
x
1
2
U  P
r  2
U  0
12. Amplitude: 4; period: 2
Chapter 10  Analytic Geometry
10.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 680)
6. parabola  7. axis of symmetry  8. latus rectum  9. c  10. (3, 2)  11. d  12. c   13. B  15. E  17. H  19. C
21. y2 = 16x
23. x2 = - 12y
25. y2 = - 8x
27. x2 = 2y
29. x2 = 4
3y
31. (x - 2)2 = - 8(y + 3)
33. (y + 2)2 = 4(x + 1)
35. (x + 3)2 = 4(y - 3)
y
20
x
20
(4, 8)
(4, 8)
D: x  4
F  (4, 0)
V  (0, 0)
y
10
x
10
(6, 3)
(6, 3)
D: y  3
F  (0, 3)
V  (0, 0)
y
5
x
5
(2, 4)
(2, 4)
D: x  2
F  (2, 0)
V  (0, 0)
1
2
1, 
1
2
0, 
y
2.5
x
2.5
(2, 2)
(2, 2)
1
2
D: y  
F  
V  (0, 0)
1
2
1,
y
4
x
2.5
(2, 3)
(2, 3)
,
2
3
1
3

,
2
3
1
3
1
3
0, 
F  
1
3
D: y  
V  (0, 0)
y
10
x
10
(2, 5)
(6, 5)
D: y  1
F  (2, 5)
V  (2, 3)
y
5
x
5
(0, 4)
(0, 0)
D: x  2
F  (0, 2)
V  (1, 2)
y
8
x
2
(1, 4)
(5, 4)
D: y  2
F  (3, 4)
V  (3, 3)
37. 1y + 222 = - 81x + 12
39. Vertex: (0, 0); focus: (0, 1); 
directrix: y = - 1
41. Vertex: (0, 0); focus: 1- 4, 02; 
directrix: x = 4
43. Vertex: 1- 1, 22; focus: (1, 2); 
directrix: x = - 3
y
2
x
2
(3, 2)
F  (3, 2)
V  (1, 2)
D: x  1
(3, 6)
y
2.5
x
2.5
(2, 1)
(2, 1)
V  (0, 0)
D: y  1
F  (0, 1)
y
10
x
10
(4, 8)
(4, 8)
D: x  4
F  (4, 0)
V  (0, 0)
y
8
x
5
(1, 6)
(1, 2)
V  (1, 2)
F  (1, 2)
D: x  3
45. Vertex: 13, - 12; focus: 
a3, - 5
4 b; directrix: y = - 3
4
47. Vertex: 12, - 32; focus: 
14, - 32; directrix: x = 0
49. Vertex: (0, 2); focus: 1- 1, 22; 
directrix: x = 1
51. Vertex: 1- 4, - 22; focus: 
1- 4, - 12; directrix: y = - 3
y
1
x
3
V  (3, 1)
5
4
3, 
F  
3
4
D: y  
y
2
x
8
V  (2, 3)
F  (4, 3)
(4, 7)
(4, 1)
D: x  0
y
8
x
2
(1, 0)
D: x  1
F  (1, 2)
V  (0, 2)
(1, 4)
y
5
x
1
(6, 1)
(2, 1)
V  (4, 2)
F  (4, 1)
D: y  3

1116 
Answers  Section 10.2
55. Vertex: (2, - 8); focus: a2, - 31
4 b; 
directrix: y = - 33
4
53. Vertex: 1- 1, - 12; focus: 
a - 3
4, - 1b; directrix: x = - 5
4
57. 1y - 122 = x  59. 1y - 122 = - 1x - 22
61. x2 = 41y - 12  63. y2 = 1
2
 1x + 22
69. 20 ft  75. 24.31 ft, 18.75 ft, 7.64 ft
y
2.5
x
2.5
5
4
D: x  
V  (1, 1)
F  
3
4
,

1
,
3 
4
1 
2


,
3 
4
3 
2


y
1
x
8
V  (2, 8)
31
4
2, 
F  
33
4
D: y  
79.  Cy2 + Dx = 0, C ≠0, D ≠0
 Cy2 = - Dx
 y2 = - D
Cx
This is the equation of a parabola with vertex at (0, 0) and axis of symmetry the x-axis.
The focus is a - D
4C, 0b; the directrix is the line x = D
4C. The parabola opens to the 
right if - D
C 7 0 and to the left if - D
C 6 0.
81.  Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0, C ≠0
 Cy2 + Ey = - Dx - F
 y2 + E
Cy = - D
Cx - F
C
 ay + E
2Cb
2
= - D
Cx - F
C + E2
4C2
 ay + E
2Cb
2
= - D
Cx + E2 - 4CF
4C2
(a) If D ≠0, then the equation may be written as
ay + E
2Cb
2
= - D
C ax - E2 - 4CF
4CD
b.
This is the equation of a parabola with vertex at aE2 - 4CF
4CD
, - E
2Cb  
and axis of symmetry parallel to the x-axis.
(b)–(d) If D = 0, the graph of the equation contains no points if E2 - 4CF 6 0, 
is a single horizontal line if E2 - 4CF = 0, and is two horizontal lines if 
E2 - 4CF 7 0.
82. (0, 2), (0, - 2), (- 36, 0); symmetric with respect to the x-axis.  83. {5}
84. sin u = 5289
89
; cos u = - 8289
89
; csc u = 289
5
; sec u = - 289
8
; cot u = - 8
5  85. - 2210
3
10.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 690)
7. ellipse  8. b  9. (0, - 5); (0, 5)  10. 5; 3; x  11. (- 2, - 3); (6, - 3)  12. a  13. D  15. A
17. Vertices: 1- 5, 02, (5, 0)
Foci: (- 221, 0), (221, 0)
19. Vertices: 10, 42, 10, - 42
Foci: 10, 2152 10, - 2152
21. x2
4 +
y2
16 = 1
Vertices: (0, - 4), (0, 4)
Foci: (0, - 223), (0, 223)
23. x2
4 +
y2
9 = 1
Vertices: 10, 32, 10, - 32
Foci: 10, 252, 10, - 252
y
5
x
5
(0, 2)
(5, 0)
(5, 0)
(0, 2)
(21, 0)
(21, 0)
y
5
x
5
(0, 4)
(1, 0)
(21, 0)
(0, 24)
(0,         )
15
(0, 2        )
15
25
25
y
5
x
5
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
(0, 2     3)

(0, 2     3)

y
5
x
5
(22, 0)
(2, 0)
(0, 3)
(0, 23)
(0,        )
5
(0, 2       )
5
25
25
25. x2
4 +
y2
4 = 1
Vertices: 1- 2, 02, 12, 02, 
10, - 22, 10, 22 Focus: 10, 02
27. x2
25 +
y2
16 = 1
29. x2
9 +
y2
25 = 1
31. x2
12 +
y2
16 = 1
y
5
x
5
(0, 22)
(22, 0)
(2, 0)
(0, 2)
25
25
y
5
x
4
(0, 4)
(5, 0)
(3, 0)
(5, 0)
(3, 0)
(0, 4)
y
2
x
5
(0, 4)
(0, 5)
(3, 0)
(3, 0)
(0, 5)
(0, 4)
y
5
x
5
(0, 4)
(0, 2)
(0, 22)
(0, 24)
(2     3, 0)
(22     3, 0)
33. x2
48 +
y2
64 = 1
35. x2
16 + y2 = 1
37. x2
25 +
y2
21 = 1
39. 1x + 122 +
1y + 122
4
= 1
41. x2
4 + 1y - 122 = 1
y
10
x
10
(0, 8)
(0, 4)
(0, 28)
(0, 24)
(4     3, 0)
(24     3, 0)
210
210
y
x
4
(0, 21)
(0, 1) (4, 0)
(24, 0)
(    15, 0)
(2    15, 0)
24
y
5
5 x
(2, 0)
(5, 0)
(22, 0)
(25, 0)
(0,         )
21
(0, 2        )
21
25
25

Answers  Section 10.3  1117
43. Center: 1- 4, - 22;  
Vertices: 1- 7, - 22, 1- 1, - 22;  
Foci: 1 - 4 + 25, - 22, 1 - 4 - 25, - 22
45. Center: 13, - 22;  
Foci: 13, 22, 13, - 62;  
Vertices: 13, - 2 + 3222, 13, - 2 - 3222
47. 
1x + 222
4
+ 1y - 122 = 1 
Center: 1- 2, 12; vertices: 1- 4, 12, (0, 1);
foci: 1 - 2 - 23, 12, 1 - 2 + 23, 12
y
5
3 x
(21, 22)
(24, 22)
(24, 24)
(24, 0)
(27, 22)
(24 1     5, 22)
(24 2     5, 22)
y
3
7 x
(3, 2)
(3, 26)
(3, 22)
(3, 22 2 3     2 )
(3, 22 1 3     2 )
(3 1     2, 22)
(3 2     2, 22)
y
5
5
x
(0, 1)
(4, 1)
(2, 2)
(2, 1)
(2, 0)
(2         , 1)
3
(2         , 1)
3
49. Center: 1- 1, 12;  
Foci: 1- 1, 02, 1- 1, 22;  
Vertices: 1- 1, - 12, 1- 1, 32
51. Center: 1- 3, 12;  
Foci: 1 - 3 + 222, 12, 1 - 3 - 222, 12;  
Vertices: 10, 12, 1- 6, 12
53. Center: 11, 02;  
Foci: 11, 2222, 11, - 2222;  
Vertices: 11, 32, 11, - 32
y
5
x
5
(21, 2)
(21, 3)
(21, 1)
(21, 0)
(21, 21)
(21 1     3, 1)
(21 2     3, 1)
25
25
y
4
26
22
x
(0, 1)
(23, 2)
(23, 1)
(23, 0)
(26, 1)
(23 1 2     2, 1)
(23 2 2     2, 1)
y
3
2
4 x
(1, 23)
(2, 0)
(0, 0)
(1, 3)
(1, 0)
(1, 22     2 )
(1, 2     2 )
23
55. 
1x - 222
25
+
1y + 222
21
= 1
61. 
1x - 122
10
+ 1y - 222 = 1
67.
57. 
1x + 122
9
+
1y - 222
5
= 1
63. 
1x - 122
4
+
1y - 222
4
= 1
59. 
1x - 222
5
+
1y - 222
9
= 1
65.
y
3
6
x
(2, 2)
(0, 2)
(3, 2)
(4, 2)
(7, 2)
(2, 2      21)

(2, 2      21)

y
25
5
5 x
(1, 2)
(2, 2)
(21, 2)
(23, 2)
(24, 2)
(21, 2 1     5 )
(21, 2 2     5 )
25
y
5
x
5
(2, 5)
(2, 2)
(2, 4)
(2, 0)
(2, 21)
(2 2     5, 2)
(2 1     5, 2)
25
25
y
5
4
22
x
(4, 2)
(1, 2)
(1, 1)
(1, 3)
(
2, 2)
(1 1
10, 2)
(1 2 
10, 2)
21
y
6
5 x
(1, 4)
(1, 0)
(21, 2)
(3, 2)
(1, 2)
y
6
x
2.5
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
y
2
x
2.5
(2, 0)
(2, 0)
(0, 8)
87. Ax2 + Cy2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0  A ≠0, C ≠0
Ax2 + Dx + Cy2 + Ey = - F
A¢x2 + D
Ax≤+ C¢y2 + E
Cy ≤= - F
A¢x + D
2A≤
2
+ C¢y + E
2C≤
2
= - F + D2
4A + E2
4C
  (a) If D2
4A + E2
4C - F is of the same sign as A (and C), this is the equation of an ellipse with center at ¢ - D
2A, - E
2C≤.
  (b) If D2
4A + E2
4C - F, the graph is the single point ¢ - D
2A, - E
2C≤.
  (c) If D2
4A + E2
4C - F is of the sign opposite that of A (and C), the graph contains no points, because in this case, the left side has the sign opposite 
that of the right side.
89. Zeros: 5 - 223, 5 + 223; x-intercepts: 5 - 223, 5 + 223  90. Domain: 5x x ≠56; Horizontal asymptote: y = 2; Vertical asymptote: x = 5
91. 617.1 ft-lb  92. b ≈10.94, c ≈17.77, B = 38°
77. The elliptical hole will have a major axis of length 2241 in. and a minor axis of length 8 in.

1118 
Answers  Section 10.4
19. x2 -
y2
8 = 1
21. 
y2
16 - x2
20 = 1
y
5
x
5
V1  (1, 0)
V2  (1, 0)
F1  (3, 0)
F2  (3, 0)
(0, 22)
(0, 22)
y  22x
y  22x
y
10
x
10
V2  (0, 4)
F2  (0, 6)
V1  (0, 4)
F1  (0, 6)
y             x
5
2
5

y             x
5
2
5

(2       , 0)
5
(2       , 0)
5
10.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 703)
7. hyperbola  8. transverse axis  9. b  10. (2, 4); (2, - 2)  11. (2, 6); (2, - 4)  12. c  13. 2; 3; x  14. y = - 4
9x; y = 4
9x  15. C  17. D
23. 
y2
4 - x2
32 = 1
25. x2
16 -
y2
64 = 1 
27. 
y2
2 - x2
2 = 1
y
10
x
10
V1 5 (0, 22)
V1 5 (0, 2)
F2 5 (0, 6)
F1 5 (0, 26)
y 5 2       x
4
y 5        x
4
(4    2, 0)
(24    2, 0)
2
2
210
210
y
10
x
V2 5 (4, 0)
V1 5 (24, 0)
y 5 2x
y 5 22x
(0, 8)
(0, 28)
F2 5 (4    5, 0)
F1 5 (24    5, 0)
210
y
3
23
x
3
F 5 (0, 2)
F 5 (0, 22)
y 5 x
y 5 2x
(    2, 0)
(2    2, 0)
V1 5 (0, 2    2)
V2 5 (0,     2)
23
29. 
y2
16 - x2
4 = 1
Center: 10, 02
Transverse axis: y-axis
Vertices: 10, 42, 10, - 42
Foci: 10, 2252 10, - 2252
Asymptotes: y = {2x
31. x2
4 -
y2
16 = 1
Center: (0, 0)
Transverse axis: x-axis
Vertices: 1- 2, 02, (2, 0)
Foci: 1 - 225, 02, 1225, 02
Asymptotes: y = {2x
33. x2 - y2 = 4
Center: 10, 02
Transverse axis: x-axis
Vertices: 12, 02, 1- 2, 02
Foci: 1222, 02 1 - 222, 02
Asymptotes: y = {x
y
5
x
5
V1 5 (0, 24)
(2, 0)
(22, 0)
V2 5 (0, 4)
y 5 22x
y 5 2x
F2 5 (0, 2    5 )
F1 5 (0, 22     5 )
25
25
y
5
x
5
V2  (2, 0)
V1  (2, 0)
y  2x
y  2x
(0, 4)
(0, 4)
F2  (2       , 0)
5
F1  (2       , 0)
5
y
5
x
5
y 5 2x
y 5 x
(0, 22)
(0, 2)
V1 5 (22, 0)
V2 5 (2, 0)
F2 5 (2    2, 0)
F1 5 (22    2, 0)
25
25
35. 2x2 - y2 = 4
Center: 10, 02
Transverse axis: x-axis
Vertices: 1 22, 02, 1 - 22, 02
Foci: 1 26, 02 1 - 26, 02
Asymptotes: y = { 22x
y
5
x
5
(0, 2)
(0, 22)
F2 5 (    6, 0)
F1 5 (2     6, 0)
V2 5 (    2, 0)
V1 5 (2    2, 0)
y 5     2 x
y 5 2     2 x
25
25
37. y2 - x2 = 1
39. x2
4 -
y2
16 = 1
41. 
1x - 422
4
-
1y + 122
5
= 1
43. 1x - 122 -
1y - 422
8
= 1
45. 1y - 322 -
1x + 422
8
= 1
y
4
x
9
V2  (6, 1)
F2  (7, 1)
V1  (2, 1)
F1  (1, 1)
(4, 1)
(4, 1        )
5
(4, 1        )
5
5
y  1         (x  4)
2
5
y  1         (x  4)
2
y
8
x
5
F1 5 (22, 4)
F2 5 (4, 4)
V1 5 (0, 4)
V2 5 (2, 4)
(1, 4)
(1, 4 1 2     2)
(1, 4 2 2     2)
y 2 4 5 2     2(x 2 1)
y 2 4 5 22     2(x 2 1)
25
22
y
8
x
2
F2 5 (24, 6)
(24, 3)
V2 5 (24, 4)
F1 5 (24, 0)
V1 5 (24, 2)
y 2 3 5 2       (x 1 4)
4
2
y 2 3 5       (x 1 4)
4
2
(24 1 2     2, 3)
(24 2 2     2, 3)
47. 
1x - 122
4
-
1y + 122
9
= 1
49. 
1y + 322
4
-
1x - 222
9
= 1
Center: 12, - 32
Transverse axis: parallel to the y-axis
Vertices: 12, - 12, 12, - 52
Foci: 12, - 3 - 2132 12, - 3 + 2132
Asymptotes: y + 3 = {2
3 1x - 22
y
2
x
7
(2, 23)
(5, 23)
(21, 23)
V2 5 (2, 21)
V1 5 (2, 25)
y 1 3 5     (x 2 2)
2
3
y 1 3 5 2   (x 2 2)
2
3
F2 5 (2, 23 1     13 )
F1 5 (2, 23 2     13 )
23
28
y
4
x
5
(1, 21)
(1, 2)
 
        , 21)
13
F1 5 (1 2 
F2 5 (1 1
V1 5 (21, 21)
V2 5 (3, 21)
         , 21)
13
    3
2
y 1 1 5 2
(x 2 1)
3
2
y 1 1 5
(x 2 1)
(1, 24)
25
26

Answers  Section 10.4  1119
51. 
1x + 422
9
- 1y - 322 = 1
Center: 1- 4, 32
Transverse axis: parallel to the x-axis
Vertices: 1- 7, 32, 1- 1, 32
Foci: 1 - 4 - 210, 32 1 - 4 + 210, 32
Asymptotes: y - 3 = {1
3
 1x + 42
53. 1y - 322 - 1x + 222 = 4
Center: 1- 2, 32
Transverse axis: parallel to the y-axis
Vertices: 1- 2, 52, 1- 2, 12
Foci: 1 - 2, 3 - 2222 1 - 2, 3 + 2222
Asymptotes: y - 3 = {1x + 22
55. 1x - 122 - 1y + 122 = 1
Center: 11, - 12
Transverse axis: parallel to x-axis
Vertices: 10, - 12, 12, - 12
Foci: 11 - 22, - 12, 11 + 22, - 12
Asymptotes: y + 1 = { 1x - 12
y
7
x
1
(24, 3)
(24, 4)
(24, 2)
V2 5 (21, 3)
V1 5 (27, 3)
y 2 3 5    (x 1 4)
1
3
y 2 3 5 2   (x 1 4)
1
3
F1 5 (24 2
10, 3)
F2 5 (24 1
10, 3)
29
23
y
8
x
3
(0, 3)
(22, 3)
(24, 3)
y 2 3 5 x 1 2
y 2 3 5 2(x 1 2)
V2 5 (22, 1)
V1 5 (22, 5)
F1 5 (22, 3 1 2     2 )
F2 5 (22, 3 2 2     2 )
22
27
y
2
x
4
(1, 0)
(1, 2)
y  1  x  1
y  1  (x  1)
V2  (2, 1)
F2  (1         , 1)
2
V1  (0, 1)
F1  (1         , 1)
2
57. 
1y - 222
4
- 1x + 122 = 1
Center: 1- 1, 22
Transverse axis: parallel to the x-axis
Vertices: 1- 2, 22, 10, 22
Foci: 11 - 23, 22 1 - 1 + 23, 22
Asymptotes: y - 2 = { 221x + 12
59. 
1y + 222
2
-
1x - 122
4
= 1
Center: 11, - 22
Transverse axis: parallel to the y-axis
Vertices: 11, - 2 - 222, 11, - 2 + 222
Foci: 11, - 2 - 262 11, - 2 + 262
Asymptotes: y + 2 = { 22
2 1x - 12
61. 
1x + 422
9
-
1y + 122
3
= 1
Center: 1- 4, - 12
Transverse axis: parallel to the x-axis
Vertices: 1- 7, - 12, 1- 1, - 12
Foci: 1 - 4 - 223, - 12 1 - 4 + 223, - 12
Asymptotes: y + 1 = { 23
3 1x + 42
63. 
65. 
67. Center: (3, 0)
Transverse axis: parallel to x-axis
Vertices: (1, 0), (5, 0)
Foci: (3 - 229, 0), (3 + 229, 0)
Asymptotes: y = {5
2
 (x - 3)
y
28
x
5
25
y 5 3x
y 5 23x
y
2
22
22
x
2
y 5 x
y 5 2x
y
10
x
10
(3, 5)
(3, 0)
(3, 5)
F1  (3  29, 0)
F2  (3  29, 0)
V2  (1, 0)
V1  (5, 0)
69. Vertex: (0, 3); focus: (0, 7); 
directrix: y = - 1
71. 
(x - 5)2
9
+
y2
25 = 1
Center: (5, 0); vertices: (5, 5), (5, - 5);
foci: (5, - 4), (5, 4)
73. (x - 3)2 = 8(y + 5)
Vertex: (3, - 5); focus: (3, - 3);
directrix: y = - 7
y
8
x
10
V  (0, 3)
F  (0, 7)
D: y  1
y
5
x
9
(5, 0)
(2, 0)
(8, 0)
V2  (5, 5)
F2  (5, 4)
V1  (5, 5)
F1  (5, 4)
y
2
x
10
D: y  7
V  (3, 5)
F  (3, 3)
y
7
x
5
V2 5 (0, 2)
V1 5 (22, 2)
(21, 2 2     2)
(21, 2 1     2)
y 2 2 5     2(x 1 1)
y 2 2 5 2     2(x 1 1)
F2 5 (21 1
3, 2)
F1 5 (21 2
3, 2)
(21, 2) 25
23
y
3
x
6
y 1 2 5 2 2 (x 2 1)
y 1 2 5 2
(x 2 1)
(21, 22)
(3, 22)
(1, 22)
F1 5 (1, 22 2     6)
V1 5 (1, 22 2     2)
V2 5 (1, 22 1     2)
F2 5 (1, 22 1     6)
2
2
24
27
y
25
5
x
(24, 21)
y 1 1 5 3
(x 1 4)
y 1 1 5 2 3
(x 1 4)
V1 5 (27, 21)
V2 5 (21, 21)
(24 , 21 1     3)
3
3
(24 , 21 2     3)
F2 5 (24 1 2     3, 21)
F1 5 (24 2 2     3, 21)
75. The fireworks display is 50,138 ft north of the person at point A.
83. x2
4 - y2 = 1; asymptotes y = {1
2x
y2 - x2
4 = 1; asymptotes y = {1
2x
y
2.5
x
1.5
(2, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
(2, 0)
x2
4  y2   1
x2
4  1
y2 
y  
x
1
2
y 
x
1
2
85.  Ax2 + Cy2 + F = 0
 Ax2 + Cy2 = - F
If A and C are of opposite sign and F ≠0, this equation may be written as 
x2
a - F
Ab
+
y2
a - F
Cb
= 1, 
where - F
A and - F
C are opposite in sign. This is the equation of a hyperbola with center (0, 0). The transverse 
axis is the x-axis if - F
A 7 0; the transverse axis is the y-axis if - F
A 6 0.

1120 
Answers  Section 10.4
87. Amplitude = 3
2
 ; Period = p
3
 ; Phase shift = - p
2  
y
x
2.5
P
3
,
P
3
3
2
2
88. c ≈13.16, A ≈31.6°, B = 48.4°  89. 16, - 6232
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
U 5 P
U 5 0
1
3 4
5
6
2
90. x2 + (y - 3)2 = 9; circle, radius 3,  
center at (0, 3) in rectangular coordinates
10.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 712)
5. cot12u2 = A - C
B
  6. parabola  7. B2 - 4AC 6 0  8. T  9. T  10. F  11. Parabola  13. Ellipse  15. Hyperbola
17. Hyperbola  19. Circle  21. x = 22
2
 1x′ - y′2; y = 22
2
 1x′ + y′2  23. x = 22
2
 1x′ - y′2; y = 22
2
 1x′ + y′2
25. x = 1
2
 123x′ - y′2; y = 1
2
 1x′ + 23y′2  27. x = 25
5
 1x′ - 2y′2; y = 25
5
 12x′ + y′2  29. x = 1
5
 14x′ - 3y′2; y = 1
5
 13x′ + 4y′2
31. u = 45° (see Problem 21)
x′2 -
y′2
3
= 1
Hyperbola
Center at origin
Transverse axis is the x′@axis.
Vertices at 1{1, 02
33. u = 45° (see Problem 23)
y′2
4
- x′2
16 = 1 
Hyperbola
Center at 10, 02
Transverse axis is the y′-axis
Vertices at 10, {22
35. u = 30° (see Problem 25)
x′2
1
4
-
y′2
1
= 1 
Hyperbola
Center at 10, 02
Transverse axis is the x′-axis
Vertices at 1{0.5, 02
y
x
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
2.5
x
y
2.5
y
x
(0, 2)
(0, 22)
5
x9
5
y9
25
25
y
x
1
2 , 0
2
1
2 , 0
1
1
x9
y9
21
21
37. u ≈63° (see Problem 27)
y′2 = 8x′
Parabola
Vertex at (0, 0)
Focus at (2, 0)
39. u ≈36.9° (see Problem 29)
x′2
1
+
y′2
1
2
= 1 
Ellipse
Center at 10, 02
Major axis is the x′-axis
Vertices at 1{1, 02
41. u ≈36.9° 
x′2 = - 4y′ 
Parabola
Vertex at 10, 02
Focus at 10, - 12
y
5
x
x
y
5
(2, 0)
y
x
(21, 0)
(1, 0)
2
2
x9
y9
22
22
y
x
y9
x9
2
2
(0, 21)
22
22
43. Hyperbola  45. Ellipse  47. Ellipse  49. Parabola  51. Ellipse
53. Refer to equation (6):  A′ = A cos2 u + B sin u cos u + C sin2 u
 B′ = B1cos2 u - sin2 u2 + 21C - A2 1sin u cos u2
 C′ = A sin2 u - B sin u cos u + C cos2 u
 D′ = D cos u + E sin u
 E′ = - D sin u + E cos u
 F′ = F
55. Use Problem 53 to find B′2 - 4A′C′. After much cancellation, B′2 - 4A′C′ = B2 - 4AC.

Answers  Section 10.7  1121
57. The distance between P1 and P2 in the x′y′@plane equals 21x2
 = - x1
 =22 + 1y2
 = - y1
 =22.
Assuming that x′ = x cos u - y sin u and y′ = x sin u + y cos u, then 
 1x2
 = - x1
 =22 = 1x2 cos u - y2 sin u - x1 cos u + y1 sin u22
 = cos2 u1x2 - x122 - 2 sin u cos u1x2 - x12 1y2 - y12 + sin2 u1y2 - y122, and
 1y2
 = - y1
 =22 = 1x2 sin u + y2 cos u - x1 sin u - y1 cos u22 = sin2 u1x2 - x122 + 2 sin u cos u1x2 - x12 1y2 - y12 + cos2 u1y2 - y122.
Therefore,  1x2
 = - x1
 =22 + 1y2
 = - y1
 =22 = cos2 u1x2 - x122 + sin2 u1x2 - x122 + sin2 u1y2 - y122 + cos2 u1y2 - y122
 = 1x2 - x1221cos2 u + sin2 u2 + 1y2 - y1221sin2 u + cos2 u2 = 1x2 - x122 + 1y2 - y122.
61. A ≈39.4°, B ≈54.7°, C ≈85.9°  62. 38.5  63. r 2 cos u sin u = 1  64. 2291cos 291.8° + i sin 291.8°2
10.6 Assess Your Understanding (page 718)
3. conic; focus; directrix  4. 1; 61; 71  5. T  6. T  7. Parabola; directrix is parallel to the polar axis, 3 units below the pole.
9. Hyperbola; directrix is perpendicular to the polar axis, 1 unit to the right of the pole.
11. Ellipse; directrix is perpendicular to the polar axis, 3
2 units to the left of the pole.
13. Parabola; directrix is perpendicular to the 
polar axis, 1 unit to the right of the pole; 
vertex is at a1
2, 0b.
15. Ellipse; directrix is perpendicular to the 
polar axis, 5
2 units to the right of the pole; 
vertices are at a10
9 , 0b and 110, p2
17. Hyperbola; directrix is perpendicular to the 
polar axis, 3
2 units to the left of the pole; 
vertices are at 1- 3, 02 and 11, p2.
19. Hyperbola; directrix is perpendicular to the 
polar axis, 2 units to the right of the pole; 
vertices are at a4
3, 0b and 1- 4, p2
21. Ellipse; directrix is perpendicular to the 
polar axis, 2 units to the left of the pole; 
vertices are at 12, 02 and a2
3, pb
23. Ellipse; directrix is perpendicular to the 
polar axis, 6 units to the left of the pole; 
vertices are at 16, 02 and 12, p2
y
x
Directrix
P
2
1, 
3P
2
1, 
1
2 , 0
Polar
axis
2
2
y
x
Polar
axis
P
2
2, 
3P
2
2, 
(10, P)
10
9 , 0
Directrix
y
x
Polar
axis
Directrix
(3, 0)
P
2
3, 
3P
2
3, 
(1, P)
5
5
y
x
(24, P)
Polar
axis
Directrix
3P
2
4, 
P
2
4, 
4
3 , 0
6
22
26
y
x
Polar
axis
Directrix
(2, 0)
3P
2
1, 
P
2
1, 
2
3, P
2
3
23
22
y
x
Polar
axis
O
Directrix
(6, 0)
3P
2
3, 
P
2
3, 
(2, P)
25. y2 + 2x - 1 = 0  27. 9x2 + 25y2 = 80x - 100 = 0  29. x2 - 3y2 + 12y - 9 = 0  31. 3x2 - y2 - 16x + 16 = 0
33. 3x2 + 4y2 - 4x - 4 = 0  35. x2 - 6y - 9 = 0  37. r =
2
1 - sin u  39. r =
6
3 + 2 sin u  41. r =
25
1 + 5 cos u
43. Use d1D, P2 = p - r cos u in the derivation of equation (a) in Table 5.
45. Use d1D, P2 = p + r sin u in the derivation of equation (a) in Table 5.
47. 27.81  48. Amplitude = 4; Period = 10p  49. b p
3 , p, 5p
3 f  50. 26
10.7 Assess Your Understanding (page 729)
2. plane curve; parameter  3. ellipse  4. cycloid  5. F  6. T
7.
x - 3y + 1 = 0
9.
y = 2x2
11.
y = x - 8
13.
y = 1x + 422
y
x
6
12
y
x
8
6
4
2
2
3
1
y
x
10
210
24
10
210
4
y
x
28
8
22
2
15.
y = 1
x
17.
x = y3 + 1
19.
x2
4 +
y2
9 = 1
21.
x2
4 + y2 = 1
y
x
2
2
1
y
x
2
4
21
22
y
x
5
5
y
x
2
1
0
2
1
0

1122 
Answers  Section 10.7
23.
x2 - y2 = 1
25.
y = 1
2 ln x
27. x = t	
or	 x = t - 1
y = t2 + 1	
or	 y = t2 - 2t + 2
29. x = t	
or	 x = t - 1
y = - 2t2 + 1	 or	 y = - 2t2 + 4t - 1
31. x = t	
or	 x = 2
4 t - 1
y = t4 + 1	
or	 y = t
33.  x = t	
or	  x = t3
 y = t2/3, t Ú 0 	 	
 y = t2, t Ú 0
35. x = 1, y = - t + 1; - 1 … t … 3 
37. x = cos ap
2 1t - 12 b, y = 4 sin ap
2 1t - 12 b, 0 … t … 2
39. x = 2 cos1pt2, y = - 3 sin1pt2, 0 … t … 2
41. 2 cos a2p
3
 tb, y = 3 sin a2p
3
 tb, 0 … t … 3
y
x
1
1
(     2, 1)
( 1, 0)
y
x
2
5
23
43. 
C1
 
y
x
1
21
21
1
     
C2
 
y
x
1
1
21
21
     
C3
 
y
x
1
1
21
21
     
C4
 
y
x
1
21
1
21
45.                               	
47. 
2
23
22
3
6
26
24
6
49. (a)  x = 3
       y = - 16t2 + 50t + 6
    (b) 3.24 s
    (c) 1.56 s; 45.06 ft
    (d)  
51. (a) Train: x1 = t2, y1 = 1;
      Bill: x2 = 51t - 52, y2 = 3
    (b) Bill won’t catch the train.
    (c) 
53. (a)  x = 1145 cos 20°2t
       y = - 16t2 + 1145 sin 20°2t + 5
    (b) 3.20 s
    (c) 435.65 ft
    (d) 1.55 s; 43.43 ft
    (e) 
50
0
5
0
5
0
Bill
Train
100
0
t  8
170
0
120
440
55. (a)  x = 140 cos 45°2t
       y = - 4.9t2 + 140 sin 45°2t + 300
  (b) 11.23 s
  (c) 317.52 m
  (d) 2.89 s; 340.82 m
  (e) 
400
160
0
320
57. (a) Camry: x = 40t - 5, y = 0; Chevy Impala: x = 0, y = 30t - 4
    (b) d = 2140t - 522 + 130t - 422
    (c) 
    (d) 0.2 mi; 7.68 min
    (e) 
7
00
0.2
4
6
4
6
61. The orientation is from 1x1, y12 to 1x2, y22.
65.                     66. 
y
x
6
4
2
2
4
6
22
22
24
26
24
26
y
3
x
2P
y 5 2 cos(2x)
sin
y 5 
x
2
67. Approximately 2733 miles  68. (a) Simple harmonic  (b) 2 m  (c) p
2
  s  (d) 2
p oscillations/s

Answers  Review Exercises  1123
11. y2 = - 8x
12. 
y2
4 - x2
12 = 1
13. x2
16 +
y2
7 = 1
y
x
5
5
V  (0, 0)
F  (2, 0)
(2, 4)
(2, 4)
D: x  2
y
x
5
5
F1  (0, 4)
V1  (0, 2)
V2  (0, 2)
F2  (0, 4)
y   3
3 x
3
y  3 x
(23, 0)
(23, 0)
y
x
5
5
F1  (3, 0)
V1  (4, 0)
F2  (3, 0)
V2  (4, 0)
(0, 7)
(0, 7 )
Review Exercises (page 733)
5. x2
2 -
y2
8 = 1: Hyperbola; center (0, 0), vertices 1 22, 02 and 1 - 22, 02, foci 1 210, 02 and 1 - 210, 02, asymptotes y = 2x and y = - 2x
10. 
1x - 122
4
+
1y + 122
9
= 1: Ellipse; center 11, - 12, vertices (1, 2) and 11, - 42, foci 11, - 1 + 252 and 11, - 1 - 252
27. Parabola; directrix is perpendicular to the 
polar axis 4 units to the left of the pole; 
vertex is 12, p2.
28. Ellipse; directrix is parallel to the  
polar axis 6 units below the pole; 
vertices are a6, p
2 b and a2, 3p
2 b.
29. Hyperbola; directrix is perpendicular to 
the polar axis 1 unit to the right of the pole; 
vertices are a2
3, 0b and 1- 2, p2.
y
x
5
5
3P
2
4, 
Polar
axis
Directrix
(2, P)
P
2
4, 
y
x
5
5
Polar
axis
(3, P)
(3, 0)
P
2
6, 
Directrix
3P
2
2, 
y
x
1
3
(2, P)
2
3 , 0
Polar
axis
Directrix
3P
2
2, 
P
2
2, 
31. 3x2 - y2 - 8x + 4 = 0
32.
x + 4y = 2
33.
x2
9 +
1y - 222
16
= 1
34.
1 + y = x
y
x
2
2
(2, 1)
(2, 0)
y
x
7
5
(3, 2)
(0, 2)
(0, 6)
(3, 2)
(0, 2)
y
x
2
(1, 0)
(2, 1)
2
14. 1x - 222 = - 41y + 32
15. 1x + 222 -
1y + 322
3
= 1
16. 
1x + 422
16
+
1y - 522
25
= 1
y
x
2
2
V1  (3, 3)
F1  (4, 3)
V2  (1, 3)
F2  (0, 3)
(2, 3 3 )
(2, 3 3 )
(2, 3)
y  3  3 (x  2)
y  3  3 (x  2)
x
y
9
10
V2  (4, 10)
V1  (4, 0)
F2  (4, 8)
F1  (4, 2)
(8, 5)
(4, 5)
(0, 5)
y
x
2
8
D: y  2
F  (2, 4)
V  (2, 3)
(0, 4)
(4, 4)
17. 
1x + 122
9
-
1y - 222
7
= 1
18. 
1x - 322
9
-
1y - 122
4
= 1
y
x
12
(1, 2 7 )
(1, 2 7 )
y  2          (x  1)
7 
3
y  2          (x  1)
7 
3
8
V1  (4, 2)
F1  (5, 2)
V2  (2, 2)
F2  (3, 2)
(1, 2)
y
x
5
5
y  1       (x  3)
2 
3
y  1       (x  3)
2 
3
V1  (0, 1)
F1  (3  13,  1)
F2  (3  13,  1)
V2  (6, 1)
(3, 3) (3, 1)
(3, 1)
19. Parabola  20. Ellipse
21. Parabola  22. Hyperbola
23. Ellipse
24. x′2 -
y′2
9
= 1
Hyperbola
Center at the origin
Transverse axis the x′@axis
Vertices at 1{1, 02
25. x′2
2
+
y′2
4
= 1
Ellipse
Center at origin
Major axis the y′@axis
Vertices at 10, {22
26. y′2 = - 4213
13
 x′
Parabola
Vertex at the origin
Focus on the x′@axis at a - 213
13 , 0b
y
x
5
5
x
y
(1, 0)
(1, 0)
y
x
2
(0, 2)
y
x
(0, 2)
y
x
5
5
x
y

1124 
Answers  Review Exercises
35.  x = t, y = - 2t + 4, - q 6 t 6 q  36. x = 4 cosap
2
 tb, y = 3 sinap
2
 tb, 0 … t … 4  37. x2
5 -
y2
4 = 1  38. The ellipse x2
16 +
y2
7 = 1 
     x = t - 4
- 2 , y = t, - q 6 t 6 q
39. 1
4 ft or 3 in.  40. 19.72 ft, 18.86 ft, 14.91 ft  41. 450 ft
42. (a) Train: x1 = 3
2
 t2, y1 = 1
      Mary: x2 = 6(t - 2), y2 = 3
  (b) Mary won’t catch the train.
  (c) 
5
Mary
Train
0
100
t  8
43. (a)  x = 180 cos 35°2t
       y = - 16t2 + 180 sin 35°2t + 6
    (b) 2.9932 s
    (c) 1.4339 s; 38.9 ft
    (d) 196.15 ft
  (e) 
50
0
50
250
Chapter Test (page 735)
1. Hyperbola; center: 1- 1, 02; vertices: 1- 3, 02 and (1, 0); foci: 1 - 1 - 213, 02 and 1 - 1 + 213, 02; asymptotes: y = - 3
2
 1x + 12 and y = 3
2
 1x + 12
2. Parabola; vertex: a1, - 1
2 b; focus: a1, 3
2 b; directrix: y = - 5
2
3. Ellipse; center: 1- 1, 12; foci: 1 - 1 - 23, 12 and 1 - 1 + 23, 12; vertices: 1- 4, 12 and (2, 1)
4. 1x + 122 = 61y - 32
5. x2
7 +
y2
16 = 1
6. 
1y - 222
4
-
1x - 222
8
= 1
y
x
9
5
V  (1, 3)
F  (1, 4.5)
(4, 4.5)
(2, 4.5)
D: y  1.5
y
x
5
5
V2  (0, 4)
F2
F1
V1  (0, 4)
(7, 0)
(7, 0)
y
x
8
8
V2  (2, 0)
V1  (2, 4)
(2  22, 2)
(2  22, 2)
(2  10, 5)
F2
F1
(2, 2)
7. Hyperbola    8. Ellipse    9. Parabola
y
x
5
5
2
1
y
x
y
x
5
45
(1, 0)
(10, 1)
(25, 2)
(2, 1)
10. x′2 + 2y′2 = 1. This is the equation of 
an ellipse with center at (0, 0) in the 
x′y′@plane. The vertices are at 1- 1, 02 and 
(1, 0) in the x′y′@plane.
11. Hyperbola; (x + 2)2 -
y2
3 = 1  12. y = 1 - B
x + 2
3
13. The microphone should be located 2
3 ft from the base of the reflector, along its axis of symmetry.
Cumulative Review (page 735)
1. - 6x + 5 -  3h  2. e - 5, - 1
3, 2 f  3. 5x  - 3 … x … 26 or [- 3, 2]  4. (a) Domain: 1- q, q 2; range: 12, q 2
(b) y = log3 (x − 2); domain: 12, q 2; range: 1- q, q 2  5. (a) 5186  (b) (2, 18]
6. (a) y = 2x -  2  (b) (x -  2)2 + y2 = 4  (c) x2
9  + 
y2
4 = 1  (d) y = 2(x -  1)2  (e) y2 -  x2
3 = 1  (f) y = 4x
7. u = p
12 { pk, k is any integer; u = 5p
12 { pk, k is any integer  8. u = p
6
9. r = 8 sin u                    10. e x ` x ≠3p
4
{ pk, k is an integer f  11. 522.5°6  12. y = x2
5  + 5
y
x
10
10

Answers  Section 11.2  1125
19. x = 6, y = 2; (6, 2)
21. x = 3, y = - 6; (3, - 6)
23. x = 8, y = - 4; (8, - 4)
y
10
x
10
(6, 2)
x 2 y 5 4
x 1 y 5 8
y
10
x
10
2x 1 3y 5 212
5x 2 y 5 21
(3, 6)
y
10
x
10
3x 5 24
x 1 2y 5 0
(8, 4)
y
1
x
1
,
1
3
1
6

3x  6y  2
5x  4y  1
25. x = 1
3, y = - 1
6 ; a1
3, -  1
6 b
27. Inconsistent
29. x = 3
2, y = 3; a3
2, 3b
y
2
x
2
2x  y  1
4x  2y  3
y
5
x
5
2x  y  0
4x  2y  12
, 3
3
2
Chapter 11  Systems of Equations and Inequalities
11.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 748)
3. inconsistent  4. consistent; independent  5. (3, - 2)  6. consistent; dependent  7. b  8. a  9. e 2122 -
1- 12 = 5
5122 + 21- 12 = 8
11. d
 3122 - 4a1
2 b = 4
1
2
 122 - 3a1
2 b = - 1
2
  13. c
4 - 1 = 3
1
2
 142 + 1 = 3
  15. c
3112 + 31- 12 + 2122 = 4
1 -
1- 12 -
2 = 0
21- 12 - 3122 = - 8
  17. c
3122 + 31- 22 + 2122 =
4
2  - 31- 22 + 2 
= 10
5122 - 21- 22 - 3122 =   8     
31. {(x, y) x = 4 - 2y, y is any real number}, or e (x, y) ` y = 4 - x
2
, x is any real number f  33. x = 1, y = 1; (1, 1)  35. x = 3
2, y = 1; a3
2, 1b
37. x = 4, y = 3; (4, 3)  39. x = 4
3, y = 1
5; a4
3, 1
5 b  41. x = 1
5, y = 1
3; a1
5, 1
3 b  43. x = 8, y = 2, z = 0; (8, 2, 0)
45. x = 2, y = - 1, z = 1; (2, - 1, 1)  47. Inconsistent  49. {(x, y, z) x = 5z - 2, y = 4z - 3; z is any real number}  51. Inconsistent
53. x = 1, y = 3, z = - 2; (1, 3, - 2)  55. x = - 3, y = 1
2, z = 1; a - 3, 1
2, 1b
y
y = 2
x
6
(1, 1)
(0, 21)
6
26
26
90. - 2i, 2i, - 6, 6 
91. p
9   92. 2(cos 150° + i sin 150°)
89.
11.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 764)
1. matrix  2. augmented  3. third; fifth  4. T  5. b  6. c  7. c1
- 5
4
3
2  5
6 d   9. c2
3
4
- 6
2  
6
- 2 d   11. c0.01
- 0.03
0.13
0.10
2  0.06
0.20 d
13. C
1
- 1
1
3
3
0
1
1
2
3  
10
5
2
S   15. C
1
1
- 1
3
- 2
0
5
3
- 1
3  
2
2
1
S   17. D
1
- 1
- 1
2
1
2
- 3
4
0
4
- 5
1
4  
10
- 1
5
0
T   19.  e x - 3y = - 2
(1)
2x - 5y =
5
(2); 
c1
- 3
0
1 `  - 2
9 d
21. •
x - 3y + 4z = 3 112
3x - 5y + 6z = 6 122
- 5x + 3y + 4z = 6 132
; 
C
1
- 3
4
0
4
- 6
0
- 12
24
3  
3
- 3
21
S   23. c
x - 3y + 2z = - 6 112
2x - 5y + 3z = - 4 122
- 3x - 6y + 4z =
6 132
; C
1
- 3
2
0
1
- 1
0
- 15
10
3  
- 6
8
- 12
S
25. c
5x - 3y +
z = - 2 112
2x - 5y + 6z = - 2 122
- 4x +
y + 4z =
6 132
; C
1
7
- 11
2
- 5
6
0
- 9
16
3  
2
- 2
2
S

1126 
Answers  Section 11.2
27. e x = 5
y = - 1
    Consistent; x = 5, y = - 1 or (5, - 1)
29. c
x = 1
y = 2
0 = 3
    Inconsistent
31. c
x + 2z = - 1
y - 4z = - 2
0 =   0
Consistent:
c
x = - 1 - 2z
y = - 2 + 4z
z is any real number or
{(x, y, z)   x = - 1 - 2z, 
y = - 2 + 4z, z is any real 
number}
33. c
x1 = 1
x2 + x4 = 2
x3 + 2x4 = 3
Consistent:
c
x1 = 1, x2 = 2 - x4
x3 = 3 - 2x4
x4 is any real number or
{(x1, x2, x3, x4) x1 = 1,
x2 = 2 - x4, x3 = 3 - 2x4,
x4 is any real number}
35. c
x1 + 4x4 = 2
x2 + x3 + 3x4 = 3
0 = 0
Consistent:
c
x1 = 2 - 4x4
x2 = 3 - x3 - 3x4
x3, x4 are any real numbers or
{(x1, x2, x3, x4)  x1 = 2 - 4x4,
x2 = 3 - x3 - 3x4, x3, x4 are
any real numbers}
37. d
 x1 +   x4 = - 2
x2 + 2x4 =   2
x3 -    x4 =  0
          0 =    0
Consistent:
µ
x1 = - 2 - x4
x2 = 2 - 2x4
x3 = x4
x4 is any real number or
{(x1, x2, x3, x4)  x1 = - 2 - x4,
x2 = 2 - 2x4, x3 = x4, x4 is any
real number}
39. x = 6, y = 2; 16, 22  41. x = 1
2, y = 3
4; a1
2, 3
4 b  43. x = 4 - 2y, y is any real number; 5 1x, y2  x = 4 - 2y, y is any real number6
45. x = 3
2, y = 1; a3
2, 1b  47. x = 4
3, y = 1
5; a4
3, 1
5 b  49. x = 8, y = 2, z = 0; 18, 2, 02  51. x = 2, y = - 1, z = 1; 12, - 1, 12  53. Inconsistent
55. x = 5z - 2, y = 4z - 3, where z is any real number; 5 1x, y, z2  x = 5z - 2, y = 4z - 3, z is any real number6  57. Inconsistent
59. x = 1, y = 3, z = - 2; 11, 3, - 22  61. x = - 3, y = 1
2, z = 1; a - 3, 1
2, 1b  63. x = 1
3, y = 2
3, z = 1; a1
3, 2
3, 1b
65. x = 1, y = 2, z = 0, w = 1; 11, 2, 0, 12  67. y = 0, z = 1 - x, x is any real number; 5 1x, y, z2  y = 0, z = 1 - x, x is any real number6
69. x = 2, y = z - 3, z is any real number; 5 1x, y, z2  x = 2, y = z - 3, z is any real number6  71. x = 13
9 , y = 7
18, z = 19
18 ; a13
9 , 7
18, 19
18 b
73. x = 7
5 - 3
5
 z - 2
5
 w, y = - 8
5 + 7
5
 z + 13
5
 w, where z and w are any real numbers; e 1x, y, z, w2 ` x = 7
5 - 3
5z - 2
5
 w, y = - 8
5 + 7
5z + 13
5 w, 
z and w are any real numbers f
96. {x x is any real nunber}, or (- q, q)  97. 2.42
11.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 775)
1. ad - bc  2. `
5
3
- 3
- 4 `   3. F  4. F  5. F  6. a  7. 22  9. - 2  11. 10  13. - 26  15. x = 6, y = 2; 16, 22  17. x = 3, y = 2; 13, 22
19. x = 8, y = - 4; 18, - 42  21. x = 4, y = - 2; 14, - 22  23. Not applicable  25. x = 1
2, y = 3
4; a1
2, 3
4 b  27. x = 1
10, y = 2
5; a 1
10, 2
5 b
29. x = 3
2, y = 1; a3
2, 1b  31. x = 4
3, y = 1
5; a4
3, 1
5 b  33. x = 1, y = 3, z = - 2; 11, 3, - 22  35. x = - 3, y = 1
2, z = 1; a - 3, 1
2, 1b
37. Not applicable  39. x = 0, y = 0, z = 0; (0, 0, 0)  41. Not applicable  43. - 4  45. 12  47. 8  49. 8  51. - 5  53. 13
11  55. 0 or - 9
61. 50.5 square units
94. {x0 - 1 6 x 6 6}, or (- 1, 6)
95. 
y
y = 2
x = 21
x
6
(1, 0)
(23, 5)
(0, 21)
0
9
26
1       2
2 1
2
,
2
1       2
2 3
5
,
1     2
7
8
3,

Answers  Section 11.4  1127
65. If a = 0, we have
       by = s
 cx + dy = t
Thus, y = s
b and
 x =
t - dy
c
 = tb - ds
bc
Using Cramer’s Rule, we get
 x = sd - tb
- bc
= tb - sd
bc
 y = - sc
- bc = s
b
If b = 0, we have
 ax = s
 cx + dy = t
Since D = ad ≠0, then 
a ≠0 and d ≠0.
Thus, x = s
a and 
 y = t - cx
d
= ta - cs
ad
Using Cramer’s Rule, we get
 x = sd
ad = s
a
 y = ta - cs
ad
If c = 0, we have
 ax + by = s
 dy = t 
Since D = ad ≠0, then
a ≠0 and d ≠0.
Thus, y = t
d and 
x =
s - by
a
= sd - bt
ad
Using Cramer’s Rule, we get
 x = sd - bt
ad
 y = at
ad = t
d
If d = 0, we have
 ax + by = s
 cx = t
Since D = - bc ≠0, then
b ≠0 and c ≠0.
Thus, x = t
c and 
 y = s - ax
b
= sc - at
bc
Using Cramer’s Rule, we get
 x = - tb
- bc = t
c
 y = at - sc
- bc
= sc - at
bc
67.  3
a11
a12
a13
ka21
ka22
ka23
a31
a32
a33
3 = - ka211a12a33 - a32a132 + ka221a11a33 - a31a132 - ka231a11a32 - a31a122
  = k[- a211a12a33 - a32a132 + a221a11a33 - a31a132 - a231a11a32 - a31a122] = k 3
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
3
69.  3
a11 + ka21
a12 + ka22
a13 + ka23
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
3 = 1a11 + ka212 1a22a33 - a32a232 - 1a12 + ka222 1a21a33 - a31a232 + 1a13 + ka232 1a21a32 - a31a222
 = a11a22a33 - a11a32a23 + ka21a22a33 - ka21a32a23 - a12a21a33 + a12a31a23
 
- ka22a21a33 + ka22a31a23 + a13a21a32 - a13a31a22 + ka23a21a32 - ka23a31a22
 = a11a22a33 - a11a32a23 - a12a21a33 + a12a31a23 + a13a21a32 - a13a31a22
 = a111a22a33 - a32a232 - a121a21a33 - a31a232 + a131a21a32 - a31a222
 = 3
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33
3
70. v = 9i -  4j; 297  71. {1
2, {5
2, {1, {2, {5, {10
72.                  73. 0
y
5
x
5
(22, 23)
(21, 24)
(0, 23)
Historical Problems (page 791)
1. (a)  2 - 5i · c2
- 5
5
2 d, 1 + 3i · c
1
3
- 3
1 d   (b)  c2
- 5
5
2 d c
1
3
- 3
1 d = c 17
1
- 1
17 d   (c)  17 + i  (d)  17 + i
2. c
a
b
- b
a d c a
- b
b
a d = ca2+b2
0
0
b2+a2 d ; the product is a real number.
3. (a)   x = k1ar + bs2 + l1cr + ds2 = r1ka + lc2 + s1kb + ld2    (b)  A = c ka + lc
kb + ld
ma + nc
mb + nd d   
        y = m1ar + bs2 + n1cr + ds2 = r1ma + nc2 + s1mb + nd2
11.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 791)
1. square  2. T  3. F  4. inverse  5. T  6. A-1B  7. a  8. d  9. c
4
4
- 5
- 1
5
4 d   11. c0
12
- 20
4
8
24 d   13. c - 8
7
- 15
7
0
22 d
15. c28
- 9
4
23 d   17. C
1
14
- 14
2
22
- 18
3
0
28
S   19. C
15
21
- 16
22
34
- 22
- 11
7
22
S   21. c25
- 9
4
20 d   23. C
- 13
7
- 12
- 18
10
- 14
17
- 7
34
S   25. c - 2
4
2
8
2
1
4
6 d   27. c5
14
9
16 d
29. C
9
2
34
13
47
20
S   31. c
1
- 1
- 1
2 d   33. £
1
- 5
2
- 1
3 §   35. E
1
- 1
a
- 1
2
a
U   37. C
3
- 3
1
- 2
2
- 1
- 4
5
- 2
S   39. F
- 5
7
1
7
3
7
9
7
1
7
- 4
7
3
7
- 2
7
1
7
V

1128 
Answers  Section 11.4
41. x = 3, y = 2; 13, 22  43. x = - 5, y = 10; 1- 5, 102  45. x = 2, y = - 1; 12, - 12  47. x = 1
2, y = 2; a1
2, 2b  49. x = - 2, y = 1; 1- 2, 12
51. x = 2
a, y = 3
a; a2
a, 3
a b  53. x = - 2, y = 3, z = 5; 1- 2, 3, 52  55. x = 1
2, y = - 1
2, z = 1; a1
2, - 1
2, 1b
57. x = - 34
7 , y = 85
7 , z = 12
7 ; a - 34
7 , 85
7 , 12
7 b  59. x = 1
3, y = 1, z = 2
3; a1
3, 1, 2
3 b  61. c4
2
2
1 2  1
0
0
1 d S C
 
 1
1
2
2
1
 3  
1
4
0
0
1
S S D
 
 1
1
2
 
 0
 
 0
 4  
1
4
0
- 1
2
1
T
63. c15
3
10
2 2  1
0
0
1 d S  £ 1
1
5
10
2
 3  
1
15
0
0
1
§ S  D
1
1
5
 
 0
0
 4  
1
15
0
- 2
3
1
T
65. C
- 3
1
- 1
1
- 4
- 7
1
2
5
 3  
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
S S C
1
2
5
1
- 4
- 7
- 3
1
- 1
 3  
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
S  S C
1
2
5
0
- 6
- 12
0
7
14
†  
0
0
1
0
1
- 1
1
0
3
S
    S  F
 
 
1
2
5
 
 0
1
2
 
 
0
1
2
 6  
 
 
0
0
1
0
- 1
6
1
6
1
7
0
3
7
V S  F
 
 
1
2
5
 
 0
1
2
 
 0
0
0
 6  
 
 
0
0
1
0
- 1
6
1
6
1
7
1
6
11
42
V
67. C
0.01
0.05
- 0.01
0.01
- 0.02
0.01
- 0.02
0.01
0.03
S   69. D
0.02
- 0.04
- 0.01
0.01
- 0.02
0.05
0.03
- 0.03
0.02
0.01
- 0.04
0.00
- 0.02
0.06
0.07
0.06
T
71. x = 4.57, y = - 6.44, z = - 24.07; (4.57, - 6.44, - 24.07)  73. x = - 1.19, y = 2.46, z = 8.27; (- 1.19, 2.46, 8.27)
75. x = - 5, y = 7; (- 5, 7)  77. x = - 4, y = 2, z = 5
2; a - 4, 2, 5
2 b
79. Inconsistent; ∅  81. x = - 1
5z + 1
5, y = 1
5z - 6
5 , where z is any real number; e (x, y, z) x = - 1
5z + 1
5, y = 1
5z -  6
5, z is any real number f
89. If D = ad - bc ≠0, then a ≠0 and d ≠0, or b ≠0 and c ≠0. Assuming the former,
ca
b
c
d
2  1
0
0
1 d S  £
1
b
a
c
d
3
 
1
a
0
0
1 § S  D
1
b
a
0
D
a
4  
1
a
0
- c
a
1
T S  D
 
 1
b
a
 
 0
1
 4  
1
a
0
- c
D
a
D
T S  D
 
 
1
 
 
0
 
 0
 
 1
 4  
d
D
- b
D
- c
D
a
D
T
R1 = 1
a
 r1       R2 = - cr1 + r2     R2 = a
D
 r2         R1 = - b
a
 r2 + r1
91. (a)  B3 = A + A2 + A3 = E
2 4 5 2 3
5 3 2 5 4
4 2 2 4 2
2 2 3 2 3
1 3 2 1 2
U ; Yes, all pages can reach every other page within 3 clicks.  (b) Page 3
98.  f (x) = x6 - 4x5 - 3x4 + 18x3  99. v # w = - 5; u = 180°  100.  50, 36  101. 2u2 - 1
 u 
11.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 802)
5. Proper  7. Improper; 1 +
9
x2 - 4
  9. Improper; 5x + 22x - 1
x2 - 4
  11. Improper; 1 +
- 21x - 62
1x + 42 1x - 32   13. - 4
x
+
4
x - 1  15. 1
x +
- x
x2 + 1
17. - 1
x - 1 +
2
x - 2  19. 
1
4
x + 1 +
3
4
x - 1 +
1
2
(x - 1)2  21. 
1
12
x - 2 +
- 1
12(x + 4)
x2 + 2x + 4
  23. 
1
4
x - 1 +
1
4
1x - 122 +
- 1
4
x + 1 +
1
4
1x + 122
25. - 5
x + 2 +
5
x + 1 +
- 4
1x + 122  27. 
1
4
x + 1
x2 +
- 1
4 1x + 4)
x2 + 4
  29. 
2
3
x + 1 +
1
3 1x + 12
x2 + 2x + 4
  31. 
2
7
3x - 2 +
1
7
2x + 1  33. 
3
4
x + 3 +
1
4
x - 1
35. 
1
x2 + 4
+
2x - 1
1x2 + 422  37. - 1
x
+
2
x - 3 +
- 1
x + 1  39. 
4
x - 2 +
- 3
x - 1 +
- 1
1x - 122  41. 
x
1x2 + 1622 +
- 16x
1x2 + 1623
43. 
- 8
7
2x + 1 +
4
7
x - 3  45. 
- 2
9
x
+
- 1
3
x2 +
1
6
x - 3 +
1
18
x + 3  47. x - 2 +
10x - 11
x2 + 3x -  4
 ;  
51
5
x + 4 +
- 1
5
x - 1
 ;  x - 2 +
51
5
x + 4 -  
1
5
x - 1

Answers  Section 11.6  1129
49. x -
x
x2 + 1
  51. x2 - 4x + 7 +
- 11x - 32
x2 + 4x + 4
 ;  - 11
x + 2 +
- 10
1x + 222 ;  x2 - 4x + 7 -
11
x + 2 -
10
1x + 222
53. x + 1 + 2x3 + x2 - x + 1
x4 - 2x2 + 1
 ;  
1
x + 1 +
1
4
1x + 122 +
1
x - 1 +
3
4
1x - 122  ;  x + 1 +
1
x + 1 +
1
4
1x + 122 +
1
x - 1 +
3
4
1x - 122
55. 3.85 years  56. - 2  57. 1
58. ¢ 22
2 , 22
2 ≤;
1         2
5P
4
21,
5P
4
o
Historical Problem (page 808)
x = 6 units, y = 8 units
y
5
x
9
x  y2  2y
(8, 4)
(0, 0)
x  2y
y
5
x
5
xy  4
x2  y2  8
(2, 2)
(2, 2)
11.6 Assess Your Understanding (page 808)
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21. No points of intersection
23.
y
5
x
2.5
(1, 2)
(0, 1)
y  x2  1
y  x  1
y
10
x
10
(4  2, 4  2)
(4  2, 4  2)
y  8  x
y  36  x2
y
5
x
5
y  x
y  2  x
(1, 1)
y
5
x
5
(2, 0)
x2  2x  y2  0
x2  y2  4
y
5
x
5
(1, 2)
x2  y2  5
(2, 1)
y  3x  5
y
5
x
5
x2  y2  4
y2  x  4
(0, 2)
(0, 2)
(1, 3)
(1, 3)
y
10
x
10
x2  y2  4
y  x2  9
y
20
x
10
y  6x  13
y  x2  4
(3, 5)
25. x = 1, y = 4; x = - 1, y = - 4; x = 222, y = 22;  x = - 222, y = - 22 or 11, 42, 1- 1, - 42, (222, 22), (- 222, - 22)
27. x = 0, y = 1; x = - 2
3, y = - 1
3 or 10, 12, a - 2
3, - 1
3 b  29. x = 0, y = - 1; x = 5
2, y = - 7
2 or 10, - 12, a5
2, - 7
2 b
31. x = 2, y = 1
3; x = 1
2, y = 4
3 or a2, 1
3 b, a1
2, 4
3 b  33. x = 3, y = 2; x = 3, y = - 2; x = - 3, y = 2; x = - 3, y = - 2 or 13, 22, 13, - 22, 1- 3, 22,
1- 3, - 22  35. x = 1
2, y = 3
2; x = 1
2, y = - 3
2; x = - 1
2, y = 3
2; x = - 1
2, y = - 3
2 or a1
2, 3
2 b, a1
2, - 3
2 b, a - 1
2, 3
2 b, a - 1
2, - 3
2 b
37. x = 22, y = 222; x = - 22, y = - 222 or (22, 222), (- 22, - 222)  39. No real solution exists.
41. x = 8
3, y = 2210
3
; x = - 8
3, y = 2210
3
; x = 8
3, y = - 2210
3
; x = - 8
3, y = - 2210
3
 or a8
3, 2210
3
b,  a - 8
3, 2210
3
b,  a8
3, - 2210
3
b, a - 8
3,- 2210
3
b
43. x = 1, y = 1
2; x = - 1, y = 1
2; x = 1,  y = -  1
2; x = - 1, y = -  1
2 or a1, 1
2 b, a - 1, 1
2 b, a1, - 1
2 b, a - 1, - 1
2 b  45. No real solution exists.
47. x = 23, y = 23; x = - 23, y = - 23; x = 2, y = 1; x = - 2, y = - 1 or (23, 23), (- 23, - 23), (2, 1), (- 2, - 1)
49. x = 0, y = - 2; x = 0, y = 1;  x = 2, y = - 1 or (0, - 2), (0, 1), (2, - 1)   51. x = 2, y = 8 or (2, 8)   53. x = 81, y = 3 or (81, 3)
55.
57. x = 0.48, y = 0.62  59. x = - 1.65, y = - 0.89
61. x = 0.58, y = 1.86; x = 1.81, y = 1.05; x = 0.58, y = - 1.86; x = 1.81, y = - 1.05
63. x = 2.35, y = 0.85
y
3
x
2
(1, 1)
x2  x  y2  3y  2  0
x  1               0
y2  y
x

1130 
Answers  Section 11.6
101. (a)  4.274 ft by 4.274 ft or 0.093 ft by 0.093 ft
102. - 3 - 265
7
, - 3 + 265
7
  103. y = - 2
5x - 3  104. sin u = - 7
25; cos u = - 24
25; tan u = 7
24; csc u = - 25
7 ; sec u = - 25
24  105. ≈15.8°
11.7 Assess Your Understanding (page 817)
7. dashes; solid  8. half-planes  9. F  10. unbounded
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
35.
37.
39.
41.
27.
29.
31.
33. No solution
43. Bounded
45. Unbounded
47. Bounded
49. Bounded
y
5
x
5
x  4
y
8
x
8
2x  y  6
y
5
x
5
x2  y2  1
y
5
x
5
y  x2  1
y
5
x
5
xy  4
y
5
x
5
2x  y  4
x  y  2
y
5
x
5
2x  y  4
3x  2y  6
y
5
x
5
3x  2y  6
2x  3y  0
y
5
x
6
x  2y  6
2x  4y  0
y
5
x
5
2x  y  2
2x  y  2
y
5
x
5
2x  3y  0
2x  3y  6
y
5
x
5
x  y  3
x2  y2  9
y
5
x
5
y  x2  4
y  x  2
y
5
x
5
x2  y2  16
y  x2  4
y
5
x
5
xy  4
y  x2  1
y
8
x
8
x  2y  6
2x  y  6
(2, 2)
(3, 0)
(0, 0)
(0, 3)
y
5
x
5
2x  y  4
x  y  2
(0, 4)
(2, 0)
y
8
x
8
2x  3y  12
3x  y  12
x  y  2
(0, 4)
(0, 2)
(2, 0)
(4, 0)
12
7
,
24
7
y
5
x
9
2x  y  10
x  y  8
x  y  2
(2, 0)
(5, 0)
(2, 6)
(0, 8)
(0, 2)
y
5
x
5
x  0
51. Bounded
53. d
x … 4
x + y … 6
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
55. e
x … 20
y Ú 15
x + y … 50
x - y … 0
x Ú 0
y
16
x
16
x  2y  1
x  2y  10
(0, 5)
(10, 0)
(1, 0)
0, 1
2
y
5
x
5
(2, 1)  x  2y  0
(x  1)2  (y  1)2  5
, 3
5
6
5

y
5
x
5
(1, 4)
(1, 0)
y2  4y  x  1  0
(x  1)2  (y  2)2  4
(0,     3  2)

(0,      3  2)

y
5
x
8
(1, 2)
(5, 2)
x2  6x  y2  1  0
y   
4
x  3
65. 
67. 
69. 

Answers  Review Exercises  1131
57. (a)  d
x + y … 50,000
x Ú 35,000
y … 10,000
y Ú 0
    (b) 
59. (a)  d
x Ú 0  
y Ú 0  
x + 2y … 300
3x + 2y … 480
    (b) 
61. (a)  d
3x + 2y … 160
2x + 3y … 150
x Ú 0  
y Ú 0  
    (b) 
y
40,000
x
20,000
x  y  50,000
y  10,000
x  35,000
(40,000, 10,000)
(35,000, 10,000)
(35,000, 0)
(50,000, 0)
y
400
x
400
x  2y  300
3x  2y  480
(90, 105)
(160, 0)
(0, 150)
(0, 0)
y
80
x
80 2x  3y  150
3x  2y  160
(0, 0)
(0, 50)
(36, 26)
160
3
0
,
62. 52
63. x2 + ay - 1
6 b
2
= 1
36; 
    circle with radius 1
6 and center a0, 1
6 b;
1
6
1
3
3P
4
U 5
5P
4
U 5
3P
2
U 5
7P
4
U 5
P
2
U 5
P
4
U 5
y
x
U 5 P
U 5 0
64. f1- 12 = - 5;
     f122 = 28
65. e 0, 2p
3 , 4p
3 f
11.8 Assess Your Understanding (page 824)
1. objective function  2. T  3. Maximum value is 11; minimum value is 3.  5. Maximum value is 65; minimum value is 4.
7. Maximum value is 67; minimum value is 20.  9. The maximum value of z is 12, and it occurs at the point (6, 0).
11. The minimum value of z is 4, and it occurs at the point (2, 0).  13. The maximum value of z is 20, and it occurs at the point (0, 4).
15. The minimum value of z is 8, and it occurs at the point (0, 2).  17. The maximum value of z is 50, and it occurs at the point (10, 0).
19. Produce 8 downhill and 24 cross-country; $1760; $1920 which is the profit when producing 16 downhill and 16 cross-country.
21. Rent 15 rectangular tables and 16 round tables for a minimum cost of $1252.  23. (a)  $10,000 in a junk bond and $10,000 in Treasury bills
(b)  $12,000 in a junk bond and $8000 in Treasury bills  25. 100 lb of ground beef should be mixed with 50 lb of pork.
27. Manufacture 10 racing skates and 15 figure skates.  29. Order 2 metal samples and 4 plastic samples; $34
31. (a)  Configure with 10 first class seats and 120 coach seats.  (b)  Configure with 15 first class seats and 120 coach seats.
33. {- 10} 
34. 
    Domain: 5x0 x ≠kp, k is an integer6; range: 1- q,q 2
35. 89.1 years  36. y = 3x + 7
Review Exercises (page 828)
2. x = 2, y = 1
2 or a2, 1
2 b  3. x = 2, y = - 1 or (2, - 1)  5. Inconsistent  6. x = 2, y = 3 or (2, 3)  8. x = - 1, y = 2, z = - 3 or (- 1, 2, - 3)
9. x = 7
4
 z + 39
4 , y = 9
8
 z + 69
8 , where z is any real number, or e (x, y, z) ` x = 7
4 z + 39
4 , y = 9
8 z + 69
8 , z is any real number f  10. Inconsistent
11. e 3x + 2y =   8
x + 4y = - 1
  17. D
1
2
- 1
- 1
6
2
3
T   18. F
- 5
7
9
7
3
7
1
7
1
7
- 2
7
3
7
- 4
7
1
7
V   20. x = 2
5, y = 1
10 or a2
5, 1
10 b  21. x = 9, y = 13
3 , z = 13
3  or a9, 13
3 , 13
3 b
22. Inconsistent  24. z = - 1, x = y + 1, where y is any real number, or 5(x, y, z) 0  x = y + 1, z = - 1, y is any real number6
25. x = 4, y = 2, z = 3, t = - 2 or (4, 2, 3, - 2)  26. 5  28. - 100  29. x = 2, y = - 1 or 12, - 12  30. x = 2, y = 3 or 12, 32
31. x = - 1, y = 2, z = - 3 or 1- 1, 2, - 32  33. - 8  34. 
- 3
2
x
+
3
2
x - 4  35. - 3
x - 1 + 3
x + 4
x2  36. 
- 1
10
x + 1 +
1
10x + 9
10
x2 + 9
y
x
3
P
2P

1132 
Answers  Review Exercises
37. 
x
x2 + 4
+
- 4x
1x2 + 422  38. 
1
2
x2 + 1
+
1
4
x - 1 +
- 1
4
x + 1
40. x = 222, y = 22; x = - 222, y = - 22 or (222, 22), (- 222, - 22)
41. x = 0, y = 0; x = - 3, y = 3;  x = 3, y = 3 or 10, 02, 1- 3, 32, 13, 32
42. x = 22, y = - 22; x = - 22, y = 22; x = 4
3 22, y = - 2
3 22; x = - 4
3 22, y = 2
3 22 or (22, - 22), (- 22, 22), a4
3 22, -  2
3 22b, 
a -  4
3 22, 2
3 22b  43. x = 1, y = - 1 or 11, - 12
44.
45.
46. Unbounded
47. Bounded
48. Bounded
49.
50.
51. The maximum value is 32 when x = 0 and y = 8.  52. The minimum value is 3 when x = 1 and y = 0.
55. y = - 1
3
 x2 - 2
3
 x + 1  56. Mix 70 lb of $6.00 coffee and 30 lb of $9.00 coffee.  57. Buy 1 small, 5 medium, and 2 large.
y
5
x
5
3x  4y  12
y
5
x
5
y  x2
y
5
x
5
x  y  2
2x  y  2
(0, 2)
y
8
x
8
2x  3y  6
x  y  4
(0, 0)
(0, 2)
(3, 0)
y
9
x
9
x  2y  2
2x  y  8
(2, 0)
(4, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 8)
y
5
x
5
x  y  2
x2  y2  16
y
5
x
5
xy  4
y  x2
y
400
x
400
2x 3y  576
4x 3y  960
(240, 0)
(192, 64)
(0, 192)
58. (a)  d
x Ú 0
y Ú 0
4x + 3y … 960
2x + 3y … 576
    (b) 
59. Speedboat: 36.67 km/h; Aguarico River: 3.33 km/h
60. Bruce: 4 h; Bryce: 2 h; Marty: 8 h
61. Produce 35 gasoline engines and 15 diesel engines; the factory is producing 
an excess of 15 gasoline engines and 0 diesel engines.
Chapter Test (page 830)
1. x = 3, y = - 1 or (3, - 1)  2. Inconsistent  3. x = - z + 18
7 , y = z - 17
7 , where z is any real number, or
e (x, y, z) ` x = - z + 18
7 , y = z - 17
7 , z is any real number f  4. x = 1
3, y = - 2, z = 0 or a1
3, - 2, 0b  5. C
4
- 5
1
- 2
- 1
0
1
5
- 5
3  
0
- 25
10
S
23.
24. 
3
x + 3 +
- 2
1x + 322
25. 
- 1
3
x
+
1
3
 x
1x2 + 32
+
5x
1x2 + 322
26. Unbounded
y
15
x
15
4x  3y  0
x2  y2  100
y
9
x
9
2x  3y  2
x  2y  8
(4, 2)
(8, 0)
6. c
3x + 2y + 4z = - 6 
1x + 0y + 8z = 2 
- 2x + 1y + 3z = - 11
or c
3x + 2y + 4z = - 6 
x + 8z = 2 
- 2x + y + 3z = - 11
  7. C
6
4
1
- 11
5
12
S   8. C
- 11
- 19
- 3
5
6
- 22
S   9. C
4
10
26
1
- 11
2
- 1
26
3
S   10. c16
17
3
- 10 d
11. D
2
- 1
- 5
2
3
2
T   12. C
3
3
- 4
- 2
- 2
3
- 4
- 5
7
S   13. x = 1
2, y = 3 or a1
2, 3b  14. x = - 1
4
  y + 7, where y is any real number, or 
e (x, y) ` x = - 1
4
 y + 7, y is any real number f  15. x = 1, y = - 2, z = 0 or (1,- 2, 0)  16. Inconsistent  17. - 29  18. - 12
19. x = - 2, y = - 5 or (- 2, - 5)  20. x = 1, y = - 1, z = 4 or (1, - 1, 4)  21. 11, - 32 and (1, 3)  22. (3, 4) and (1, 2)

Answers  Section 12.1  1133
27. The maximum value of z is 64, and it occurs at the point (0, 8).  28. Flare jeans cost $24.50, camisoles cost $8.50, and T-shirts cost $6.00.
Cumulative Review (page 831)
1. e 0, 1
2 f  2. 556  3. e - 1, - 1
2, 3 f  4. 5 - 26  5. e 5
2 f  6. e 1
ln 3 f  7. Odd; symmetric with respect to the origin
8. Center: 11, - 22; radius = 4
9. Domain: all real numbers
Range: 5y0 y 7 16
Horizontal asymptote: y = 1
10. f -11x2 = 5
x - 2
Domain of f : 5x0 x ≠- 26
Range of f : 5y0 y ≠06
Domain of f -1: 5x0 x ≠06
Range of f -1: 5y0 y ≠- 26
y
3
x
3
y
5
x
5
y  1
(2, 2)
11. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
(j) 
y
8
x
2
(2, 0)
(0, 6)
y
1
x
1
(2, 0)
(0, 2)
(2, 0)
(0, 2)
y
2
x
2
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
y
2
x
2
(1, 1)
(1, 1)
x  0
y  0
y
2
x
2
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
y
2
x
2
(0, 1)
y  0
y
2
x
4
(1, 0)
x  0
y
1
x
1
, 0
2
2
, 0
2
2

5
5
0, 
5
5
0, 
y
1
x
2
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
(2, 1)
(2, 1)
(1, 0)
(2, 1)
3
3
y  
x
3
3
y  
x
y
3
x
7
(3, 1)
(1, 0)
(1, 1)
1
4
2, 
1
4
0, 
10
10
10
10
12. (a)                         ; - 2.28  (b)  Local maximum of 7 at x = - 1;  
local minimum of 3 at x = 1
                                      (c)  1- q, - 12, 11, q 2
Chapter 12  Sequences; Induction; the Binomial Theorem
12.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 840)
3. sequence  4. True  5. True  6. b  7. summation  8. b  9. 3,628,800  11. 504  13. 1260  15. s1 = 1, s2 = 2, s3 = 3,  s4 = 4, s5 = 5
17. a1 = 1
3, a2 = 1
2, a3 = 3
5, a4 = 2
3, a5 = 5
7  19. c1 = 1, c2 = - 4, c3 = 9, c4 = - 16, c5 = 25  21. s1 = 1
2, s2 = 2
5, s3 = 2
7, s4 = 8
41, s5 = 8
61
45. a1 = A, a2 = A + d, a3 = A + 2d, a4 = A + 3d, a5 = A + 4d 
47. a1 = 22, a2 = 32 + 12, a3 = 32 + 22 + 12,  
a4 = 42 + 32 + 22 + 12, 
a5 = 52 + 42 + 32 + 22 + 12 
49. 3 + 4 + g + (n + 2)  51. 1
2 + 2 + 9
2 + g+ n2
2   53. 1 + 1
3 + 1
9 + g+ 1
3n
55. 1
3 + 1
9 + g + 1
3n  57. ln 2 - ln 3 + ln 4 - g + (- 1)n ln n  59. a
20
k=1
k
61. a
13
k=1
 
k
k + 1  63. a
6
k=0
(- 1)ka 1
3k b  65. a
n
k=1
 3k
k   67. a
n
k=0
(a + kd) or a
n+1
k=1
[a + (k - 1)d]  69. 200  71. 820  73. 1110  75. 1560  77. 3570
79. 44,000  89. (a) 3.630170833  (b) 3.669060828  (c) 3.669296668  (d) 12
93. a0 = 2; a5 = 2.236067977; 2.236067977  95. a0 = 4; a5 = 4.582575695; 4.582575695
99. un = 1 + 2 + 3 + g + n = a
n
k=1
k =  
n(n + 1)
2
, and from Problem 98, un+1 =
(n + 1)(n + 2)
2
.
Thus, un+1 + un =
(n + 1)(n + 2)
2
+
n(n + 1)
2
=
(n + 1)[(n + 2) + n]
2
= (n + 1)2
102. $2654.39  103. 22 1cos 225° + i sin 225°2  104. 0  105. 1y - 422 = 161x + 32 
23. t1 = - 1
6, t2 = 1
12, t3 = - 1
20, t4 = 1
30, t5 = - 1
42  25. b1 = 1
e, b2 = 2
e2, b3 = 3
e3, b4 = 4
e4, b5 = 5
e5  27. an =
n
n + 1  29. an =
1
2n-1 
31. an = (- 1)n+1  33. an = (- 1)n+1n  35. a1 = 2, a2 = 5, a3 = 8, a4 = 11, a5 = 14  37. a1 = - 2, a2 = 0, a3 = 3, a4 = 7, a5 = 12 
39. a1 = 5, a2 = 10, a3 = 20, a4 = 40, a5 = 80  41. a1 = 3, a2 = 3
2, a3 = 1
2, a4 = 1
8, a5 = 1
40  43. a1 = 1, a2 = 2, a3 = 2, a4 = 4, a5 = 8 

1134 
Answers  Section 12.2
y
x
4
6
2
6
22
24
26
26 (0, 25)
(22, 0)
(0, Ï21)
(0, 2Ï21)
(0, 5)
(2, 0)
12.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 848)
1. arithmetic  2. F  3. 17  4. T  5. d  6. c  7. sn - sn-1 = (n + 4) - [(n - 1) + 4] = n + 4 - (n + 3) = n + 4 - n - 3 = 1, a constant;
d = 1; s1 = 5, s2 = 6, s3 = 7, s4 = 8 
9. an - an-1 = (2n - 5) - [2(n - 1) - 5] = 2n - 5 - (2n - 2 - 5) = 2n - 5 - (2n - 7) = 2n - 5 - 2n + 7 = 2, a constant; 
d = 2; a1 = - 3, a2 = - 1, a3 = 1, a4 = 3
11. cn - cn-1 = (6 - 2n) - [6 - 2(n - 1)] = 6 - 2n - (6 - 2n + 2) = 6 - 2n - (8 - 2n) = 6 - 2n - 8 + 2n = - 2, a constant; 
d = - 2; c1 = 4, c2 = 2, c3 = 0, c4 = - 2
13. tn - tn-1 = a1
2 - 1
3
 nb - c 1
2 - 1
3
 (n - 1) d = 1
2 - 1
3
 n - a1
2 - 1
3
 n + 1
3 b = 1
2 - 1
3
 n - a5
6 - 1
3
 nb = 1
2 - 1
3
 n - 5
6 + 1
3
 n = - 1
3 , a constant; 
d = - 1
3; t1 = 1
6 , t2 = - 1
6 , t3 = - 1
2 , t4 = - 5
6
15. sn - sn-1 = ln 3n - ln 3n-1 = n ln 3 - (n - 1) ln 3 = n ln 3 - (n ln 3 - ln 3) = n ln 3 - n ln 3 + ln 3 = ln 3, a constant; 
d = ln 3; s1 = ln 3, s2 = 2 ln 3, s3 = 3 ln 3, s4 = 4 ln 3
17. an = 3n - 1; a51 = 152  19. an = 8 - 3n; a51 = - 145  21. an = 1
2
 (n - 1); a51 = 25  23. an = 22n; a51 = 5122  25. 200  27. - 266  29. 83
2
31. a1 = - 13; d = 3; an = an-1 + 3; an = - 16 + 3n  33. a1 = - 53; d = 6; an = an-1 + 6; an = - 59 + 6n
35. a1 = 28; d = - 2; an = an-1 - 2; an = 30 - 2n  37. a1 = 25; d = - 2; an = an-1 - 2; an = 27 - 2n  39. n2  41. n
2
 (9 + 5n)  43. 1260 
45. 324  47. 30,919  49. 10,036  51. 6080  53. - 1925  55. 15,960 
72. 16.42%  73. v = 4i - 6j  74. Ellipse: Center: (0, 0); Vertices: (0, -5), (0, 5); Foci: (0, - 221), (0, 221),  75. ≥
1
2
0
3
2
- 1
¥
Historical Problems (page 857)
1. 1 2
3
 loaves, 10 5
6
 loaves, 20 loaves, 29 1
6
 loaves, 38 1
3
 loaves
2. (a) 1 person  (b) 2401 kittens  (c) 2800 
12.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 858)
3. geometric  4. 
a
1 - r  5. divergent series  6. T  7. F  8. T  9. r = 3; s1 = 3, s2 = 9, s3 = 27, s4 = 81
11. r = 1
2; a1 = - 3
2 , a2 = - 3
4 , a3 = - 3
8 , a4 = - 3
16  13. r = 2; c1 = 1
4 , c2 = 1
2 , c3 = 1, c4 = 2  15. r = 21/3; e1 = 21/3, e2 = 22/3, e3 = 2, e4 = 24/3
47.
49.
51.
17. r = 3
2; t1 = 1
2 , t2 = 3
4 , t3 = 9
8 , t4 = 27
16  19. a5 = 162; an = 2 # 3n-1  21. a5 = 5; an = 5 # (- 1)n-1  23. a5 = 0; an = 0 
25. a5 = 422; an = (22)n  27. a7 = 1
64  29. a9 = 1  31. a8 = 0.00000004  33. an = 7 # 2n - 1  35. an = - 3 # a - 1
3 b
n - 1
= a - 1
3 b
n - 2
37. an = - (- 3)n - 1  39. an = 7
15 (15)n - 1 = 7 # 15n-2  41. - 1
4
 (1 - 2n)  43. 2c1 - a2
3 b
n
d   45. 1 - 2n 
53. Converges; 3
2  55. Converges; 16  57. Converges; 8
5  59. Diverges  61. Converges; 20
3   63. Diverges  65. Converges; 18
5   67. Converges; 6 
69. Arithmetic; d = 1; 1375  71. Neither  73. Arithmetic; d = - 2
3; - 700  75. Neither  77. Geometric; r = 2
3; 2c1 - a2
3 b
50
d  
79. Geometric; r = - 2; -  1
3
 31 - 1- 22504  81. Geometric; r = 31/2; -  23
2
 11 + 232 11 - 3252 
103. Option A results in a higher salary in 5 years ($50,499 versus $49,522); option B results in a higher 5-year total ($225,484 versus $233,602). 
105. Option 2 results in the most: $16,038,304; option 1 results in the least: $14,700,000.
107. Yes. A constant sequence is both arithmetic and geometric. For example, 3, 3, 3, c is an arithmetic sequence with a1 = 3 and d = 0 and is a 
geometric sequence with a = 3 and r = 1.  111. 2.121  112. 8
17
 i - 15
17
 j  113. x2
4 -
y2
12 = 1  114. 54 

Answers  Section 12.4  1135
12.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 864)
1. (I) n = 1: 2(1) = 2 and 1(1 + 1) = 2
(II) If 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2k = k(k + 1), then 2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2k + 2(k + 1) = (2 + 4 + 6 + g + 2k) + 2(k + 1)
= k(k + 1) + 2(k + 1) = k2 + 3k + 2 = (k + 1)(k + 2) = (k + 1)[(k + 1) + 1].
3. (I) n = 1: 1 + 2 = 3 and 1
2
 (1)(1 + 5) = 1
2
 (6) = 3
(II) If 3 + 4 + 5 + g + (k + 2) = 1
2
 k(k + 5), then 3 + 4 + 5 + g + (k + 2) + [(k + 1) + 2]
= [3 + 4 + 5 + g + (k + 2)] + (k + 3) = 1
2
 k(k + 5) + k + 3 = 1
2
 (k2 + 7k + 6) = 1
2
 (k + 1)(k + 6) = 1
2
 (k + 1)[(k + 1) + 5].
5. (I) n = 1: 3(1) - 1 = 2 and 1
2
 (1)[3(1) + 1] = 1
2
 (4) = 2
(II) If 2 + 5 + 8 + g + (3k - 1) = 1
2
 k(3k + 1), then 2 + 5 + 8 + g + (3k - 1) + [3(k + 1) - 1]
= [2 + 5 + 8 + g + (3k - 1)] + (3k + 2) = 1
2
 k(3k + 1) + (3k + 2) = 1
2
 (3k2 + 7k + 4) = 1
2
 (k + 1)(3k + 4)
= 1
2
 (k + 1)[3(k + 1) + 1].
7. (I) n = 1: 21-1 = 1 and 21 - 1 = 1
(II) If 1 + 2 + 22 + g + 2k-1 = 2k - 1, then 1 + 2 + 22 + g + 2k-1 + 2(k+1)-1 = (1 + 2 + 22 + g + 2k-1) + 2k
= 2k - 1 + 2k = 2(2k) - 1 = 2k+1 - 1.
9. (I) n = 1: 41-1 = 1 and 1
3
 (41 - 1) = 1
3
 (3) = 1
(II) If 1 + 4 + 42 + g + 4k-1 = 1
3
 (4k - 1), then 1 + 4 + 42 + g + 4k-1 + 4(k+1)-1 = (1 + 4 + 42 + g + 4k-1) + 4k
= 1
3
 (4k - 1) + 4k = 1
3
 [4k - 1 + 3(4k)] = 1
3
 [4(4k) - 1] = 1
3
 (4k+1 - 1).
11. (I) n = 1: 1
1 # 2 = 1
2 and 
1
1 + 1 = 1
2
(II) If 1
1 # 2 +
1
2 # 3 +
1
3 # 4 + g +
1
k(k + 1) =
k
k + 1 , then 1
1 # 2 +
1
2 # 3 +
1
3 # 4 + g +
1
k(k + 1) +
1
(k + 1)[(k + 1) + 1]
= c 1
1 # 2 +
1
2 # 3 +
1
3 # 4 + g +
1
k(k + 1) d +
1
(k + 1)(k + 2) =
k
k + 1 +
1
(k + 1)(k + 2) =
k(k + 2) + 1
(k + 1)(k + 2)
= k2 + 2k + 1
(k + 1)(k + 2) =
(k + 1)2
(k + 1)(k + 2) = k + 1
k + 2 =
k + 1
(k + 1) + 1 .
13. (I) n = 1: 12 = 1 and 1
6 # 1 # 2 # 3 = 1
(II) If 12 + 22 + 32 + g + k2 = 1
6
 k(k + 1)(2k + 1), then 12 + 22 + 32 + g + k2 + (k + 1)2
= (12 + 22 + 32 + g + k2) + (k + 1)2 = 1
6
 k(k + 1)(2k + 1) + (k + 1)2 = 1
6
 (2k3 + 9k2 + 13k + 6)
= 1
6
 (k + 1)(k + 2)(2k + 3) = 1
6
 (k + 1)[(k + 1) + 1][2(k + 1) + 1].
15. (I) n = 1: 5 - 1 = 4 and 1
2
 (1)(9 - 1) = 1
2 # 8 = 4
(II) If 4 + 3 + 2 + g + (5 - k) = 1
2
 k(9 - k), then 4 + 3 + 2 + g + (5 - k) + [5 - (k + 1)]
= [4 + 3 + 2 + g + (5 - k)] + 4 - k = 1
2
 k(9 - k) + 4 - k = 1
2
 (9k - k2 + 8 - 2k) = 1
2
 (- k2 + 7k + 8)
= 1
2
 (k + 1)(8 - k) = 1
2
 (k + 1)[9 - (k + 1)].
17. (I) n = 1: 1 # (1 + 1) = 2 and 1
3 # 1 # 2 # 3 = 2
(II) If 1 # 2 + 2 # 3 + 3 # 4 + g + k(k + 1) = 1
3
 k(k + 1)(k + 2), then 1 # 2 + 2 # 3 + 3 # 4 + g + k(k + 1)
+ (k + 1)[(k + 1) + 1] = [1 # 2 + 2 # 3 + 3 # 4 + g + k(k + 1)] + (k + 1)(k + 2)
= 1
3
 k(k + 1)(k + 2) + 1
3 # 3(k + 1)(k + 2) = 1
3
 (k + 1)(k + 2)(k + 3) = 1
3
 (k + 1)[(k + 1) + 1][(k + 1) + 2].
19. (I) n = 1: 12 + 1 = 2, which is divisible by 2.
(II) If k2 + k is divisible by 2, then (k + 1)2 + (k + 1) = k2 + 2k + 1 + k + 1 = (k2 + k) + 2k + 2. Since k2 + k is divisible by 2 and 2k + 2 is 
divisible by 2, (k + 1)2 + (k + 1) is divisible by 2.
21. (I) n = 1: 12 - 1 + 2 = 2, which is divisible by 2.
(II) If k2 - k + 2 is divisible by 2, then (k + 1)2 - (k + 1) + 2 = k2 + 2k + 1 - k - 1 + 2 = (k2 - k + 2) + 2k. Since k2 - k + 2 is divisible 
by 2 and 2k is divisible by 2, (k + 1)2 - (k + 1) + 2 is divisible by 2.

1136 
Answers  Section 12.4
12.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 870)
1. Pascal triangle  2. 1; n  3. F  4. Binomial Theorem  5. 10  7. 21  9. 50  11. 1  13. ≈1.8664 * 1015  15. ≈1.4834 * 1013 
17. x5 + 5x4 + 10x3 + 10x2 + 5x + 1  19. x6 - 12x5 + 60x4 - 160x3 + 240x2 - 192x + 64  21. 81x4 + 108x3 + 54x2 + 12x + 1 
23. x10 + 5x8y2 + 10x6y4 + 10x4y6 + 5x2y8 + y10  25. x3 + 622x5/2 + 30x2 + 4022x3/2 + 60x + 2422x1/2 + 8 
27. a5x5 + 5a4bx4y + 10a3b2x3y2 + 10a2b3x2y3 + 5ab4xy4 + b5y5  29. 17,010  31. - 101,376  33. 41,472  35. 2835x3 
37. 314,928x7  39. 495  41. 3360 
45. a
n
n - 1b =
n!
(n - 1)! [n - (n - 1)]! =
n!
(n - 1)! 1! =
n # (n - 1)!
(n - 1)!
= n; an
nb =
n!
n! (n - n)! =
n!
n!0! = n!
n! = 1
47. 2n = (1 + 1)n = an
0b1n + an
1b(1)n-1(1) + g + an
nb1n = an
0b + an
1b + g + an
nb 
51. e
ln 5
ln 6 - ln 5 f ≈{8.827}  52. (a) 0  (b) 90°  (c) Orthogonal  53. x = 1, y = 3, z = - 2;11, 3, - 22
54. Bounded
y
x
(5, 0)
(4, 2)
(0, 0)
(0, 6)
Review Exercises (page 872)
3. a1 = 3, a2 = 2, a3 = 4
3 , a4 = 8
9 , a5 = 16
27  4. a1 = 2, a2 = 0, a3 = 2, a4 = 0, a5 = 2  5. 6 + 10 + 14 + 18 = 48  6. a
13
k=1
(- 1)k+1 1
k 
7. Arithmetic; d = 1; Sn = n
2
 (n + 11)  8. Neither  9. Geometric; r = 8; Sn = 8
7
 (8n - 1)  11. Geometric; r = 1
2; Sn = 6c1 - a1
2 b
n
d   12. Neither
13. 9515  14. −1320  15. 1093
2187 ≈0.49977  16. 682  18. 1
1010  19. 922  20. 5an6 = 55n - 46  22. Converges; 9
2  23. Converges; 4
3  24. Diverges 
25. Converges; 8 
28. (I) n = 1: (3 # 1 - 2)2 = 1 and 1
2 # 1 # [6(1)2 - 3(1) - 1] = 1
(II) If 12 + 42 + 72 + g + (3k - 2)2 = 1
2
 k(6k2 - 3k - 1), then 12 + 42 + 72 + g + (3k - 2)2 + [3(k + 1) - 2]2
= [12 + 42 + 72 + g + (3k - 2)2] + (3k + 1)2 = 1
2
 k(6k2 - 3k - 1) + (3k + 1)2 = 1
2
 (6k3 - 3k2 - k) + (9k2 + 6k + 1)
= 1
2
 (6k3 + 15k2 + 11k + 2) = 1
2
 (k + 1)(6k2 + 9k + 2) = 1
2
 (k + 1)[6(k + 1)2 - 3(k + 1) - 1].
29. 10  33. 84  34. (a) 8 bricks  (b) 1100 bricks  36. (a) 20a3
4 b
3
= 135
16
 ft  (b) 20a3
4 b
n
 ft  (c) 13 times  (d) 140 ft  37. $151,873.77 
Chapter Test (page 874)
1. 0, 3
10 , 8
11 , 5
4 , 24
13  2. 4, 14, 44, 134, 404  3. 2 - 3
4 + 4
9 = 61
36  4. - 1
3 - 14
9 - 73
27 - 308
81 = - 680
81   5. a
10
k=1
(- 1)kak + 1
k + 4 b  6. Neither 
7. Geometric; r = 4; Sn = 2
3
 (1 - 4n)  8. Arithmetic: d = - 8; Sn = n(2 - 4n)  9. Arithmetic; d = - 1
2; Sn = n
4
 (27 - n) 
10. Geometric; r = 2
5 ; Sn = 125
3
 c1 - a2
5 b
n
d   11. Neither  12. Converges; 1024
5
  13. 243m5 + 810m4 + 1080m3 + 720m2 + 240m + 32 
14. First we show that the statement holds for n = 1. a1 + 1
1 b = 1 + 1 = 2. The equality is true for n = 1, so Condition I holds. Next we assume that 
a1 + 1
1 b a1 + 1
2 b a1 + 1
3 bga1 + 1
n b = n + 1 is true for some k, and we determine whether the formula then holds for k + 1. We assume that 
a1 + 1
1 b a1 + 1
2 b a1 + 1
3 bga1 + 1
k b = k + 1. Now we need to show that a1 + 1
1 b a1 + 1
2 b a1 + 1
3 bga1 + 1
k b a1 +
1
k + 1 b 
= (k + 1) + 1 = k + 2. We do this as follows:
a1 + 1
1 b a1 + 1
2 b a1 + 1
3 bga1 + 1
k b a1 +
1
k + 1 b = c a1 + 1
1 b a1 + 1
2 b a1 + 1
3 bga1 + 1
k b d a1 +
1
k + 1 b
= (k + 1)a1 +
1
k + 1 b(induction assumption) = (k + 1) # 1 + (k + 1) #
1
k + 1 = k + 1 + 1 = k + 2
Condition II also holds. Thus, the formula holds true for all natural numbers.
15. After 10 years, the Durango will be worth $6103.11.  16. The weightlifter will have lifted a total of 8000 pounds after 5 sets.
35. {251}  36. Left: 448.3 kg; right: 366.0 kg  37. x = 1
2, y = - 3; a1
2, - 3b  38. c
7
- 3
- 7
8 d

Answers  Section 13.3  1137
Cumulative Review (page 874)
1. 5 - 3, 3, - 3i, 3i6  2. (a) 
(b) e a B
- 1 + 13601
18
, - 1 + 23601
6
b, a - B
- 1 + 13601
18
, - 1 + 23601
6
b f
(c) The circle and the parabola intersect at 
a B
- 1 + 13601
18
, - 1 + 23601
6
b, a - B
- 1 + 13601
18
, - 1 + 23601
6
b.
3. e lna5
2 b f  4. y = 5x - 10  5. 1x + 122 + 1y - 222 = 25  6. (a) 5  (b) 13  (c) 6x + 3
2x - 1  (d) e x ` x ≠1
2 f  (e) 7x - 2
x - 2   (f) 5x x ≠26 
(g) g-1(x) = 1
2
 (x - 1); all reals  (h) f -1(x) =
2x
x - 3; 5x x ≠36  7. x2
7 +
y2
16 = 1  8. 1x + 122 = 41y - 22 
9. r = 8 sin u; x2 + 1y - 422 = 16  10. e 3p
2 f  11. 2p
3   12. (a) - 215
4
  (b) - 215
15   (c) - 215
8
  (d) 7
8  (e) R
1 + 115
4
2
= 24 + 115
212
 
36.                           
37. A ≈41.4°, B ≈41.4°, C ≈97.2°  38. 2, 5, - 2  39. 1
18
13.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 888)
3. permutation  4. combination  5. 
n!
1n - r2!  6. 
n!
1n - r2!r!  7. 30  9. 24  11. 1  13. 1680  15. 28  17. 35  19. 1  21. 10,400,600
67. 10 sq. ft  68. (g ∘f )(x) = 4x2 - 2x - 2  69. sin 75° = 22 + 26
4
; cos 15° = 1
2 22 + 13 or cos 15° = 22 + 26
4
  70. a5 = 80
Historical Problem (page 898)
1. (a)  {AAAA, AAAB, AABA, AABB, ABAA, ABAB, ABBA, ABBB, BAAA, BAAB, BABA, BABB, BBAA, BBAB, BBBA, BBBB}
(b)  P(A wins) =
C(4, 2) + C(4, 3) + C(4, 4)
24
= 6 + 4 + 1
16
= 11
16; P(B wins) =
C(4, 3) + C(4, 4)
24
= 4 + 1
16
= 5
16
13.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 898)
1. equally likely  2. complement  3. F  4. T  5. 0, 0.01, 0.35, 1  7. Probability model  9. Not a probability model
11. S = {HH, HT, TH, TT}; P(HH) = 1
4 , P(HT) = 1
4 , P(TH) = 1
4 , P(TT) = 1
4
13. S = {HH1, HH2, HH3, HH4, HH5, HH6, HT1, HT2, HT3, HT4, HT5, HT6, TH1, TH2, TH3, TH4, TH5, TH6, TT1, TT2, TT3, TT4, TT5, TT6}; 
each outcome has the probability of 1
24 .
15. S = {HHH, HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, TTT}; each outcome has the probability of 1
8 .
17. S = {1 Yellow, 1 Red, 1 Green, 2 Yellow, 2 Red, 2 Green, 3 Yellow, 3 Red, 3 Green, 4 Yellow, 4 Red, 4 Green}; each outcome has the probability 
of 1
12; thus, P12 Red2 + P14 Red2 = 1
12 + 1
12 = 1
6.
19. S =  {1 Yellow Forward, 1 Yellow Backward, 1 Red Forward, 1 Red Backward, 1 Green Forward, 1 Green Backward, 2 Yellow Forward, 2 Yellow 
Backward, 2 Red Forward, 2 Red Backward, 2 Green Forward, 2 Green Backward, 3 Yellow Forward, 3 Yellow Backward, 3 Red Forward, 3 Red 
Backward, 3 Green Forward, 3 Green Backward, 4 Yellow Forward, 4 Yellow Backward, 4 Red Forward, 4 Red Backward, 4 Green Forward, 
4 Green Backward}; each outcome has the probability of 1
24; thus, P11 Red Backward2 + P11 Green Backward2 = 1
24 + 1
24 = 1
12.
Chapter 13  Counting and Probability
13.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 881)
5. subset; ⊆  6. finite  7. n1A2 + n1B2 - n(A xB2  8. T  9. ∅, {a}, {b}, {c}, {d}, {a, b}, {a, c}, {a, d}, {b, c}, {b, d}, {c, d}, {a, b, c}, {b, c, d}, {a, c, d},
{a, b, d}, {a, b, c, d}  11. 25  13. 40  15. 25  17. 37  19. 18  21. 5  29. (a)  15  (b)  15  (c)  15  (d)  25  (e)  40
y
x
6
6
26
26
(x22)2 1 (y11)2 5 9
y
4
x
6

1138 
Answers  Section 13.3
21. S = {11 Red, 11 Yellow, 11 Green, 12 Red, 12 Yellow, 12 Green, 13 Red, 13 Yellow, 13 Green, 14 Red, 14 Yellow, 14 Green, 21 Red, 21 Yellow,  
21 Green, 22 Red, 22 Yellow, 22 Green, 23 Red, 23 Yellow, 23 Green, 24 Red, 24 Yellow, 24 Green, 31 Red, 31 Yellow, 31 Green, 32 Red, 32 Yellow, 
32 Green, 33 Red, 33 Yellow, 33 Green, 34 Red, 34 Yellow, 34 Green, 41 Red, 41 Yellow, 41 Green, 42 Red, 42 Yellow, 42 Green, 43 Red, 43 Yellow, 
43 Green, 44 Red, 44 Yellow, 44 Green}; each outcome has the probability of 1
48; thus, E = {22 Red, 22 Green, 24 Red, 24 Green}; 
P1E2 =
n1E2
n1S2 = 4
48 = 1
12.
23. A, B, C, F  25. B  27. P1H2 = 4
5;  P1T2 = 1
5  29. P112 = P132 = P152 = 2
9;  P122 = P142 = P162 = 1
9  31. 3
10  33. 1
2  35. 1
6  37. 1
8
39. 1
4  41. 1
6  43. 1
18  45. 0.55  47. 0.70  49. 0.30  51. 0.88  53. 0.63  55. 0.936  57. 17
20  59. 11
20  61. 1
2  63. 17
50  65. 12
25
67. (a)  0.57  (b)  0.95  (c)  0.83  (d)  0.38  (e)  0.29  (f)  0.05  (g)  0.78  (h)  0.71
69. (a)  25
33  (b)  25
33  71. 0.167  73. 
1
175,223,510 ≈0.00000000571  74. 2; left; 3; down  75. (- 3, 323)  76. {22}  77. (2, - 3, - 1)
Review Exercises (page 902)
1. ∅, {Dave}, {Joanne}, {Erica}, {Dave, Joanne}, {Dave, Erica}, {Joanne, Erica}, {Dave, Joanne, Erica}  2. 17  3. 24  4. 29  5. 34  6. 7
7. 45  8. 25  9. 7  10. 336  11. 56  13. 128  14. 3024  15. 1680  17. 1,600,000  18. 216,000
19. 256 (allowing numbers with initial zeros, such as 011)  21. (a)  381,024  (b)  1260  22. (a)  8.634628387 * 1045  (b)  0.6531  (c)  0.3469
23. (a)  0.074  (b)  0.926  26. (a)  0.68  (b)  0.58  (c)  0.32
Chapter Test (page 903)
1. 22  2. 3  3. 8  4. 45  5. 5040  6. 151,200  7. 462  8. There are 54,264 ways to choose 6 different colors from the 21 available colors.
9. There are 840 distinct arrangements of the letters in the word REDEEMED.  10. There are 56 different exacta bets for an 8-horse race.
11. There are 155,480,000 possible license plates using the new format.  12. (a)  0.95  (b)  0.30  13. (a)  0.25  (b)  0.55  14. 0.19  15. 0.000033069
16. P1exactly 2 fours2 = 625
3888 ≈0.1608
Cumulative Review (page 904)
1. e 1
3 - 22
3
 i,  1
3 + 22
3
 i f        2.                        3.                          4. 5x 3.99 … x … 4.016 or 33.99, 4.014
y
10
x
10
(2, 9)
(5, 0)
(0, 5)
(1, 0)
x  2
y
5
x
5
(1, 4)
(2, 2)
(0, 2)
y
10
x
5
(1, 6)
y  5
y
3
x
P
5. e - 1
2 + 27
2
 i, - 1
2 - 27
2
 i, - 1
5, 3 f
6.
    Domain: all real numbers
    Range: {y y 7 5}
    Horizontal asymptote: y = 5
7. 2    8. e 8
3 f    9. x = 2, y = - 5, z = 3    10. 125; 700
11.                      12. a ≈ 6.09, B ≈ 31.9°, C ≈ 108.1°; 
area ≈ 14.46 square units
23. 
lim
xS4 f1x2 = 13
25. 
lim
xS2 f1x2 = - 3
27. 
lim
xS-3 f1x2 = 6
29. 
lim
xSp/2 f1x2 = 1
31. 
lim
xS0 f1x2 = 1
y
x
5
15
y
x
5
5
y
x
5
8
y
1.25
x
P
y
x
2.5
2.5
Chapter 14  A Preview of Calculus: The Limit, Derivative, and Integral of a Function
14.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 910)
3. lim
xSc
 f1x2  4. does not exist  5. True  6. False  7. 32  9. 1  11. 4  13. 2  15. 0  17. 3  19. 4  21. Does not exist

Answers  Section 14.4  1139
33. 
lim
xS-1 f1x2 = - 1
35. 
lim
xS0 f1x2 = 0
37. 
lim
xS1 f1x2 does not exist.
39. 
lim
xS0 f1x2 = 0
41. 
lim
xS0 f1x2 =  0
y
x
5
5
y
x
5
5
y
x
5
5
y
x
5
5
y
x
5
5
43. 0.67  45. 1.6  47. 0  49. d = 425; M = (4, - 7)  50. Center: (2, - 1); foci: (2, - 3), (2, 1); vertices: (2, 213 - 1), (2, - 213 - 1)
51. $7288.48  52. ¢4, 2p
3 ≤
14.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 917)
1. product  2. b 
3. c 
4. True  5. False  6. False  7. 5  9. 4  11. - 10  13. 80  15. 8  17. 8  19. - 1  21. 8  23. 3  25. - 1  27. 32  29. 2  31. 7
6
33. 3  35. 0  37. 2
3  39. 8
5  41. 0  43. 5  45. 6  47. 0  49. 0  51. - 1  53. 1  55. 3
4
57.                       58. g -1(x) = 3 - x
x - 2  59. 60° or p
3   60. x4 + 8x3 + 24x2 + 32x + 16
14.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 923)
7. one-sided  8. lim
xSc + f1x2 = R  9. continuous; c 
10. False  11. True  12. True  13. 5x - 8 … x 6 - 6 or - 6 6 x 6 4 or 4 6 x … 66
15. - 8, - 5, - 3  17. f1- 82 = 0; f1- 42 = 2  19. q  21. 2  23. 1  25. Limit exists; 0  27. No  29. Yes  31. No  33. 5  35. 7  37. 1  39. 4  41. - 2
3
43. 3
2  45. Continuous  47. Continuous  49. Not continuous  51. Not continuous  53. Not continuous  55. Continuous  57. Not continuous
59. Continuous  61. Continuous for all real numbers  63. Continuous for all real numbers  65. Continuous for all real numbers
67. Continuous for all real numbers except x = kp
2 , where k is an odd integer  69. Continuous for all real numbers except x = - 2 and x = 2
71. Continuous for all positive real numbers except x = 1
y
x
3
23
12
212
f(x) 5 x31x211
73. Discontinuous at x = - 1 and x = 1; 
lim
xS1R1x2 = 1
2
 : hole at a1, 1
2 b 
lim
xS-1-R1x2 = - q; lim
xS-1 +R1x2 = q;  
vertical asymptote at x = - 1
75. Discontinuous at x = - 1 and x = 1;  
lim
xS-1R1x2 = 1
2
 : hole at a - 1, 1
2 b 
lim
xS1-R1x2 = - q; lim
xS1 +R1x2 = q;  
vertical asymptote at x = 1
y
x
5
5
x  1
y  0
y
x
5
5
x  1
y  1
77. x = - 2
3 2 : asymptote; x = 1: hole          79. x = - 3: asymptote; x = 2: hole          81. x = - 2
3 2 : asymptote; x = - 1: hole
83.                                        85.                                      87. 
3
3
3
5
20
20
20
20
3
3
2
1
91. Vertical: x = 4; horizontal: y = 3  92. 60  93. ln ¢
x5y2
z4 ≤  94. C
3
1
2
1
0
2
0
1
- 3
3
4
5
- 2
S
14.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 931)
3. tangent line  4. derivative  5. velocity  6. True  7. True  8. True
9. mtan = 3
11. mtan = - 2
13. mtan = 12
15. mtan = 5
y
x
5
10
f(x)  3x  5
(1, 8)
y
x
5
10
y  2x  1
f(x)  x2  2
(1, 3)
y
x
5
15
(2, 12)
f(x)  3x2 
y  12x  12
y
x
5
8
(1, 3)
y  5x  2
f(x)  2x2  x

1140 
Answers  Section 14.4
17. mtan = - 4
19. mtan = 13
y
x
5
10
y  4x  2
(1, 6)
f(x)  x2  2x  3
y
x
5
18
f(x)  x3  x
y  13x  16
(2, 10)
21. - 4  23. 0  25. 7  27. 7  29. 3  31. 1  33. 60  35. - 0.8587776956
37. 1.389623659  39. 2.362110222  41. 3.643914112 
49. (a) - 23 1
3
  ft/sec  (b) - 21 ft/sec  (c) - 18 ft/sec
(d) s1t2 = - 2.631t2 - 10.269t + 999.933
(e) Approximately - 15.531 ft/sec
51. Vertex: (1, 3); focus: ¢1, 7
2 ≤  52. (2, 6), (- 1, 3)  53. 10  54. 23.66 sq. units
14.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 938)
  3. 
L
b
a
f1x2 dx  4. 
L
b
a
f1x2 dx  5. 3  7. 56
  9. (a)  
(b) 36  (c) 72
(d) 45  (e) 63  (f) 54
11. (a)  
(b) 18  (c) 9
(d) 63
4   (e) 45
4   (f) 27
2
13. (a)  
(b) 22  (c) 51
2
(d) 
L
4
0
1x2 + 22 dx  (e) 88
3
15. (a)  
(b) 36  (c) 49
(d) 
L
4
0
x3 dx  (e) 64
y
x
8
24
y
x
4
10
y
x
5
20
y
x
5
90
17. (a)  
(b) 25
12  (c) 4609
2520
(d) 
L
5
1
 1
x
 dx  (e) 1.609
19. (a)  
(b) 11.475  (c) 15.197
(d) 
L
3
-1
ex dx  (e) 19.718
21. (a)  
(b) 1.896  (c) 1.974
(d) 
L
p
0
sin x dx  (e) 2
23. (a) Area under the graph of 
f1x2 = 3x + 1 from 0 to 4
(b)  
(c) 28
y
x
5
1.5
y
x
4
20
y
1.2
x
P
y
x
5
16
25. (a) Area under the graph of f1x2 = x2 - 1 
from 2 to 5
(b)  
(c) 36
27. (a) Area under the graph of f1x2 = sin x 
from 0 to p
2
(b)  
(c) 1
29. (a) Area under the graph of f1x2 = ex from 
0 to 2
(b)  
(c) 6.389
y
x
5
30
y
1.5
x
P
y
x
4
8
31. Using left endpoints: n = 2: 0 + 0.5 = 0.5;
n = 4: 0 + 0.125 + 0.25 + 0.375 = 0.75;
n = 10: 0 + 0.02 + 0.04 + 0.06 + g + 0.18 = 10
2
 10 + 0.182 = 0.9;
n = 100: 0 + 0.0002 + 0.0004 + 0.0006 + g + 0.0198
  = 100
2
 10 + 0.01982 = 0.99;
Using right endpoints: 
n = 2: 0.5 + 1 = 1.5; n = 4: 0.125 + 0.25 + 0.375 + 0.5 = 1.25;
n = 10: 0.02 + 0.04 + 0.06 + g + 0.20 = 10
2
 10.02 + 0.202 = 1.1;
n = 100: 0.0002 + 0.0004 + 0.0006 + g + 0.02 
  = 100
2
 10.0002 + 0.022 = 1.01
33.                  34. J19
22
2
43
50
4 R     35. 4x + 2h + 3    36. 
1
x - 2 -
1
x + 2 -
4
(x + 2)2
y
x
8
22
4
24
f(x) 5 log2x
Review Exercises (page 940)
2. 25  5. 64  6. - 1
4  9. 0  13. Not continuous  14. Not continuous  16. 5x - 6 … x 6 2 or 2 6 x 6 5 or 5 6 x … 66  17. All real numbers 
18. 1, 6  19. 4  20. f1- 62 = 2; f1- 42 = 1  21. 4  22. - 2  23. - q  24. q  25. Does not exist  26. No  27. Yes

Answers  Section A.1  1141
28. R is discontinuous at x = - 4 and x = 4.
lim
xS-4R1x2 = - 1
8
 : hole at a - 4, - 1
8 b
lim
xS4-R1x2 = - q; lim
xS4 +R1x2 = q: 
The graph of R has a vertical asymptote at 
x = 4.
29. Undefined at x = 2 and x = 9; R has a hole at x = 2 and a vertical 
asymptote at x = 9.
y
x
5
5
x  4
y  0
30. mtan = 12
31. mtan = 0
32. mtan = 16
y
x
10
21
(1, 10)
y  12x  2
f(x)  2x2  8x
y
x
5
5
(1, 4)
y  4
f(x)  x2  2x  3
y
x
5
21
f(x)  x3  x2
y  16x  20
(2, 12)
40. (a)  
(b) 24  (c) 32
(d) 26  (e) 30  (f) 28
41. (a)  
(b) 10  (c) 77
8
(d) 
L
2
-1
14 - x22 dx  (e) 9
42. (a)  
(b) 49
36 ≈1.36  (c) 1.02
(d) 
L
4
1
 1
x2  dx  (e) 0.75
43. (a) Area under the graph of 
f1x2 = 9 - x2 from - 1 to 3
(b)  
(c) 80
3
y
x
5
14
y
x
3
5
y
x
4
2
y
x
4
10
44. (a) Area under the graph of f1x2 = ex from - 1 to 1    (b)                 (c) 2.35
y
x
2.5
4
Chapter Test (page 942)
1. - 5  2. 1
3  3. 5  4. - 2  5. 135  6. 2
3  7. - 1  8. - 3  9. 5  10. 2  11. Limit exists; 2
12. (a) Yes  (b) No; lim
xS1 f1x2 ≠f112  (c) No; lim
xS3 -  f1x2 ≠f132  (d) Yes  13. x = - 7: asymptote; x = 2: hole
14. (a) 5
(b) y = 5x - 19
(c)  
15. (a)  
(b) 13.359
(c) 4p ≈12.566
y
x
5
30
(2, 9)
y  5x  19
f(x)  4x2  11x  3
y
x
5
5
16. 
L
4
1
1- x2 + 5x + 32 dx  17. 351
3 ft/sec
36. - 158  37. 0.6662517653  38. (a) 7 sec  (b) 6 sec  (c) 64 ft/sec  (d) 1- 32t + 962 ft/sec  (e) 32 ft/sec  (f) At t = 3 sec  (g) - 96 ft/sec 
(h) - 128 ft/sec  39. (a) $61.29/watch  (b) $71.31/watch  (c) $81.40/watch  (d) R1x2 = - 0.25x2 + 100.01x - 1.24  (e) Approximately $87.51/watch
Appendix A  Review
A.1 Assess Your Understanding (page 954)
1. variable  2. origin  3. strict  4. base; exponent or power  5. d  6. b  7. T  8. T  9. F  10. F  11. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} 
13. {4}  15. {1, 3, 4, 6}  17. {0, 2, 6, 7, 8}  19. {0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}  21. {0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}
23.                                                               25. 7   27. 7   29. 7   31. =   33. 6   35. x 7 0  37. x 6 2  39. x … 1 
41.                                                            43.                                                       45. 1  47. 2  49. 6  51. 4  53. - 28  55. 4
5  57. 0  59. 1  61. 5  63. 1
65. 22  67. 2  69. x = 0  71. x = 3  73. None  75. x = 0, x = 1, x = - 1  77. 5x x ≠56  79. 5x x ≠- 46  81. 0°C  83. 25°C  85. 16
87. 1
16  89. 1
9  91. 9  93. 5  95. 4  97. 64x6  99. x4
y2  101. x
y  103. – 8x3z
9y   105. 16x2
9y2   107. - 4  109. 5  111. 4  113. 2  115. 15  117. 1
2  119. 10; 0
121. 81  123. 304,006.671  125. 0.004  127. 481.890  129. 0.000  131. A = lw  133. C = pd  135. A = 13
4 x2  137. V = 4
3pr 3  139. V = x3 
141. (a) $6000  (b) $8000  143.  x -  4 Ú 6  145. (a) 2 … 5  (b) 6 7 5  147. (a) Yes  (b) No  149. No; 1
3 is larger; 0.000333...  151. No
0.25
1
3
4
5
2
2.5
1
0
2
1

1142 
Answers  Section A.2
A.2 Assess Your Understanding (page 963)
1. right; hypotenuse  2. A = 1
2
 bh  3. C = 2pr  4. similar  5. c  6. b  7. T  8. T  9. F  10. T  11. T  12. F  13. 13  15. 26  17. 25 
19. Right triangle; 5  21. Not a right triangle  23. Right triangle; 25  25. Not a right triangle  27. 8 in.2  29. 4 in.2  31. A = 25p m2; C = 10p m 
33. V = 224 ft3; S = 232 ft2  35. V = 256
3
 p cm3; S = 64p cm2  37. V = 648p in.3; S = 306p in.2  39. p square units  41. 2p square units 
43. x = 4 units; A = 90°; B = 60°; C = 30°  45. x = 67.5 units; A = 60°; B = 95°; C = 25°  47. About 16.8 ft  49. 64 ft2 
51. 24 + 2p ≈30.28 ft2; 16 + 2p ≈22.28 ft  53. 160 paces  55. About 5.477 mi  57. From 100 ft: 12.2 mi; From 150 ft: 15.0 mi 
A.3 Assess Your Understanding (page 973)
1. 4; 3  2. x4 - 16  3. x3 - 8  4. F  5. F  6. T  7. F  8. add; 25
4   9. quotient; divisor; remainder  10. a  11. c  12. b  13. d  14. c 
15. Monomial; variable: x; coefficient: 2; degree: 3  17. Not a monomial; the exponent of the variable is not a nonnegative integer 
19. Not a monomial; it has more than one term  21. Not a monomial; the exponent of one of the variables is not a nonnegative integer 
23. Not a monomial; it has more than one term  25. Yes; 2  27. Yes; 0  29. No; the variable of one of the terms is not a nonnegative integer 
31. Yes; 3  33. No; the polynomial of the denominator has a degree greater than 0  35. x2 + 7x + 2  37. x3 - 4x2 + 9x + 7  39. - 2x3 + 18x2 - 18 
41. 15y2 - 27y + 30  43. x3 + x2 - 4x  45. x2 + 6x + 8  47. 2x2 + 9x + 10  49. x2 - 49  51. 4x2 - 9  53. x2 + 8x + 16  55. 4x2 - 12x + 9 
57. x3 - 6x2 + 12x - 8  59. 8x3 + 12x2 + 6x + 1  61. 4x2 - 11x + 23; remainder - 45  63. 4x - 3; remainder x + 1  65. 5x2 - 13; remainder 
x + 27  67. 2x2; remainder - x2 + x + 1  69. x2 - 2x + 1
2; remainder 5
2
 x + 1
2  71. - 4x2 - 3x - 3; remainder - 7  73. x2 - x - 1; remainder 
2x + 2  75. x2 + ax + a2; remainder 0  77. 1x + 62 1x - 62  79. 211 + 2x2 11 - 2x2  81. 1x + 12 1x + 102  83. 1x - 72 1x - 32
85. 41x2 - 2x + 82  87. Prime  89. - 1x - 52 1x + 32  91. 31x + 22 1x - 62  93. y21y + 52 1y + 62  95. 12x + 322  97. 213x + 12 1x + 12
99. 1x - 32 1x + 32 1x2 + 92  101. 1x - 1221x2 + x + 122  103. x51x - 12 1x + 12  105. 14x + 322  107. - 14x - 52 14x + 12
109. 12y - 52 12y - 32  111. - 13x - 12 13x + 12 1x2 + 12  113. 1x + 32 1x - 62  115. 1x + 22 1x - 32  117. 13x - 52 19x2 - 3x + 72
119. 1x + 52 13x + 112  121. 1x - 12 1x + 12 1x + 22  123. 1x - 12 1x + 12 1x2 - x + 12  125. 25; 1x + 522  127. 9; 1y - 322
129. 1
16; ax - 1
4 b
2
  131. 213x + 42 19x + 132  133. 2x13x + 52  135. 51x + 32 1x - 2221x + 12  137. 314x - 32 14x - 12 
139. 613x - 52 12x + 12215x - 42  141. The possibilities are 1x { 12 1x { 42 = x2 { 5x + 4 or 1x { 22 1x { 22 = x2 { 4x + 4, none of 
which equals x2 + 4.
A.4 Assess Your Understanding (page 978)
1. quotient; divisor; remainder  2. - 3)2 0 - 5 1  3. d  4. a  5. T  6. T  7. x2 + x + 4; remainder 12  9. 3x2 + 11x + 32; remainder 99 
11. x4 - 3x3 + 5x2 - 15x + 46; remainder - 138  13. 4x5 + 4x4 + x3 + x2 + 2x + 2; remainder 7  15. 0.1x2 - 0.11x + 0.321; remainder - 0.3531 
17. x4 + x3 + x2 + x + 1; remainder 0  19. No  21. Yes  23. Yes  25. No  27. Yes  29. - 9 
A.5 Assess Your Understanding (page 985)
1. lowest terms  2. least common multiple  3. T  4. F  5. d  6. a  7. 
3
x - 3  9. x
3  11. 
4x
2x - 1  13. 
y + 5
21y + 12   15. 
3
5x1x - 22
17. 
2x(x2 + 4x + 16)
x + 4
  19. 
4
51x - 12   21. -
1x - 422
4x
  23. 
1x - 22 1x + 22
2x - 3
  25. 
21x2 - 22
x1x - 22 1x + 22   27. 
5x
1x - 62 1x - 12 1x + 42  
29. 
212x2 + 5x - 22
1x - 22 1x + 22 1x + 32   31. 
5x + 1
1x - 1221x + 122  33. x + 1
x - 1  35. 
- 2x1x2 - 22
1x + 22 1x2 - x - 32
  37. 
19
13x - 522  39. 
1x + 12 1x -  12
1x2 + 122
 
41. 
x13x + 22
13x + 122  43. -
1x + 32 13x -  12
1x2 + 122
  45. f =
R1 # R2
1n - 12 1R1 + R22; 2
15
 m 
A.6 Assess Your Understanding (page 994)
5. identity  6. F  7. T  8. add; 25
4   9. discriminant; negative  10. F  11. F  12. b  13. b  14. d  15. {7}  17. {–3}  19. {4}  21. e 5
4 f  23. {–1}
25. {–18}  27. {–3}  29. {–16}  31. {0.5}  33. {2}  35. {2}  37. {3}  39. {0, 9}  41. {0, 9}  43. 21  45. {-2, 2}  47. {6}  49. {-3, 3}  51. {-4, 1}  53. e - 1, 3
2 f
55. {- 4, 4}  57. {2}  59. No real solution  61. {- 2, 2}  63. {- 1, 3}  65. {- 2, - 1, 0, 1}  67. {0, 4}  69. {- 6, 2}  71. e -  1
2, 3 f  73. {3, 4}  75. b 3
2 r
77. e -  2
3, 3
2 f  79. e -  3
4, 2 f  81. {- 5, 5}  83. {- 1, 3}  85. {- 3, 0}  87. {- 7, 3}  89. e -  1
4, 3
4 f  91. e - 1 - 17
6
, - 1 + 17
6
f  93. {2 - 12, 2 + 12}
95. e 5 - 129
2
, 5 + 129
2
f  97. e 1, 3
2 f  99. No real solution  101. e - 1 - 15
4
, - 1 + 15
4
f  103. e - 13 - 115
2
, - 13 + 115
2
f 
105. No real solution  107. Repeated real solution  109. Two unequal real solutions  111. x = b + c
a
  113. x =
abc
a + b  115. x = a2
117. R =
R1R2
R1 + R2
  119. R = mv2
F   121. r = S - a
S
  123. - b + 2b2 - 4ac
2a
+ - b - 2b2 - 4ac
2a
= - 2b
2a
= - b
a   125. k = -  1
2 or 1
2 
127. The solutions of ax2 - bx + c = 0 are b + 2b2 - 4ac
2a
 and b - 2b2 - 4ac
2a
.  129. b

Answers  Section A.9  1143
A.7 Assess Your Understanding (page 1004)
1. T  2. 5  3. F  4. real; imaginary; imaginary unit  5. F  6. T  7. F  8. b  9. a  10. c  11. 8 + 5i  13. - 7 + 6i  15. - 6 -  11i  17. 6 -  18i
19. 6 + 4i  21. 10 -  5i  23. 37  25. 6
5 + 8
5
 i  27. 1 -  2i  29. 5
2 - 7
2
 i  31. -  1
2 + 13
2
 i  33. 2i  35. - i  37. i  39. - 6  41. - 10i  43. - 2 + 2i
45. 0  47. 0  49. 2i  51. 5i  53. 5i  55. {- 2i, 2i}  57. {- 4, 4}  59. {3 -  2i, 3 + 2i}  61. {3 -  i, 3 + i}  63. e 1
4 - 1
4i, 1
4 + 1
4i f  65. e 1
5 - 2
5i, 1
5 + 2
5i f
67. e -  1
2 - 13
2
 i, -  1
2 + 13
2
 i f  69. {2, -  1 -  13i, - 1 + 13i}  71. {- 2, 2, - 2i, 2i}  73. {- 3i, - 2i, 2i, 3i}
75. Two complex solutions that are conjugates of each other  77. Two unequal real solutions  79. A repeated real solution
81. 2 -  3i  83. 6  85. 25  87. 2 + 3i ohms  89. z + z = (a + bi) + (a - bi) = 2a; z - z = (a + bi) - (a - bi) = 2bi
91. z + w = (a + bi) + (c + di) = (a + c) + (b + d)i = (a + c) - (b + d)i = (a - bi) + (c - di) = z + w
A.8 Assess Your Understanding (page 1012)
1. mathematical modeling  2. interest  3. uniform motion  4. F  5. T  6. a  7. b  8. c  9. A = pr 2; r = radius, A = area
11. A = s2; A = area, s = length of a side  13. F = ma; F = force, m = mass, a = acceleration  15. W = Fd; W = work, F = force, d = distance
17. C = 150x; C = total variable cost, x = number of dishwashers  19. Invest $31,250 in bonds and $18,750 in CDs.
21. $11,600 was loaned out at 8%.  23. Mix 75 lb of Earl Grey tea with 25 lb of Orange Pekoe tea.  25. Mix 160 lb of cashews with the almonds.
27. The speed of the current is 2.286 mi/h.  29. The speed of the current is 5 mi/h.  31. Karen walked at 4.05 ft/sec.  33. A doubles tennis court is  
78 feet long and 36 feet wide.  35. Working together, it takes 12 min.  37. (a) The dimensions are 10 ft by 5 ft.  (b) The area is 50 sq ft.  (c) The dimensions 
would be 7.5 ft by 7.5 ft.  (d) The area would be 56.25 sq ft.  39. The defensive back catches up to the tight end at the tight end’s 45-yd line.
41. Add 2
3 gal of water.  43. Evaporate 10.67 oz of water.  45. 40 g of 12-karat gold should be mixed with 20 g of pure gold.
47. Mike passes Dan 1
3 mile from the start, 2 min from the time Mike started to run.  49. Start the auxiliary pump at 9:45 am.  51. The tub will fill in 1 hr.
53. Run: 12 miles; bicycle: 75 miles  55. Bolt would beat Burke by 19.25 m.  57. The dimensions should be 4ft by 4ft.
59. Set the original price at $40. At 50% off, there will be no profit.  63. The tail wind was 91.47 knots.
A.9 Assess Your Understanding (page 1022)
5. negative  6. closed interval  7. –5, 5  8. - 5 6 x 6 5  9. T  10. T  11. b  12. c  13. d  14. a  15. [0, 2]; 0 … x … 2  17. [2, q); x Ú 2
19. [0, 3); 0 … x 6 3  21. (a) 6 6 8  (b) - 2 6 0   (c) 9 6 15  (d) - 6 7 - 10  23. (a) 7 7 0  (b) - 1 7 - 8  (c) 12 7 - 9  (d) - 8 6 6 
25. (a) 2x + 4 6 5   (b) 2x - 4 6 - 3   (c) 6x + 3 6 6   (d) - 4x -  2 7 - 4 
27. [0, 4] 
29. [4, 6) 
31. [4, q) 
33. (- q, - 4)
4
0
6
4
4
35. 2 … x … 5 
37. - 3 6 x 6 - 2 
39. x Ú 4 
41. x 6 - 3 
57. {x0 x 6 4} or (- q, 4)
59. {x0 x Ú - 1} or [- 1, q)
61. {x0 x 7 3} or (3, q)
63. {x0 x Ú 2} or [2, q)
65. {x0 x 7 - 7} or (- 7, q)
67. e x ` x … 2
3 f or a- q, 2
3 d
69. {x0 x 6 - 20} or (- q, - 20)
71. e x ` x Ú 4
3 f or c 4
3, q b
73. {x0 3 … x … 5} or [3, 5]
75. e x ` 2
3 … x … 3 f or c 2
3, 3 d
77. e x ` -  11
2 6 x 6 1
2 f or a -  11
2 , 1
2 b   79. {x0 - 6 6 x 6 0} or (- 6, 0)
81. {x0 x 6 - 5} or (- q, - 5)
83. {x0 x Ú - 1} or [- 1, q)
85. e x ` 1
2 … x 6 5
4 f or c 1
2, 5
4 b
87. e x ` x 6 -  1
2 f or a- q, -   1
2 b
43. <  45. >  47. Ú   49. <  51. …   53. >  55. Ú  
5
2
3
2
4
4
1
3
7
2
3
20
5
3
3
2
3
11
2

1
2
5
1
1
2
5
4
4
3
2
4
3
6
0
1–2

1144 
Answers  Section A.9
89. e x ` x 7 10
3 f or a10
3 , q b
91. {x0 x 7 3} or (3, q)
93. {x0 - 4 6 x 6 4}; (- 4, 4)
95. {x0 x 6 - 4 or x 7 4}; (- q, - 4) ∪ (4, q)
97. {x0 0 … x … 1}; [0, 1]
99. {x0 x 6 - 1 or x 7 2}; (- q - 1) ∪ (2, q) 101. {x0 - 1 … x … 1}; [- 1, 1]
103. {x0 x … - 2 or x Ú 2}; (- q, - 2] ∪ [2, q)
10
––3
3
–4
4
–4
4
0
1
–1
2
–1
1
–2
2
105. 0 x - 20 6 1
2; e x ` 3
2 6 x 6 5
2 f  107. 0 x + 30 7 2; {x0 x 6 - 5 or x 7 - 1}  109. {x0 x Ú - 2}  111. 21 6 Age 6 30  113. (a) Male Ú 81.9 years
(b) Female Ú 85.6 years  (c) A female can expect to live 3.7 years longer.  115. The agent’s commission ranges from $45,000 to $95,000, inclusive.  
As a percent of selling price, the commission ranges from 5% to 8.6%, inclusive.  117. The amount withheld varies from $134.50 to $184.50, inclusive.
119. The usage varies from 700 kW # hr to 2700 kW # hr, inclusive.  121. The dealer’s cost varies from $15,254.24 to $16,071.43, inclusive.
123. (a) You need at least a 74 on the fifth test. (b) You need at least a 77 on the fifth test.  125. a + b
2
- a = a + b - 2a
2
= b - a
2
7 0; 
therefore, a 6 a + b
2
.  b - a + b
2
= 2b - a - b
2
= b - a
2
7 0; therefore, b 7 a + b
2
.  127. 11ab22 - a2 = ab - a2 = a1b - a2 7 0; 
thus 11ab22 7 a2 and 1ab 7 a.  b2 - 11ab22 = b2 - ab = b(b - a) > 0; thus b2 7 11ab22 and b 7 1ab.
129. h - a =
2ab
a + b - a = ab - a2
a + b
=
a1b - a2
a + b
7 0; thus h 7 a.  b - h = b -
2ab
a + b = b2 - ab
a + b
=
b1b - a2
a + b
7 0; thus h 6 b.
131. Since 0 6 a 6 b, then a - b 6 0 and a - b
ab
6 0.  So a
ab - b
ab 6 0, or 1
b - 1
a 6 0. Therefore, 1
b 6 1
a. And 0 6 1
b because b 7 0.
A.10 Assess Your Understanding (page 1031)
3. index  4. cube root  5. b  6. d  7. c  8. c  9. T  10. F  11. 3  13. - 2  15. 222  17. - 2x2
3 x  19. x3y2  21. x2y  23. 61x  25. 3x2y32
4 2x
27. 6x1x  29. 152
3 3  31. 1223  33. 722  35. 22  37. 223  39. - 2
3 2  41. x - 21x + 1  43. 12x - 12 2
3 2x  45. 12x - 152 22x
47. - 1x + 5y2 2
3 2xy  49. 22
2   51. - 215
5
  53. 
15 + 222 23
23
  55. 825 - 19
41
  57. 522 + 5  59. 52
3 4
2
  61. 2x + h - 22x2 + xh
h
  63. e 9
2 f
65. {3}  67. 4  69. - 3  71. 64  73. 1
27  75. 2722
32
  77. 2722
32
  79 - 1
10  81. 25
16  83. x7>12  85. xy2  87. x2>3y  89. 8x5>4
y3>4   91. 
3x + 2
11 + x21>2
93. 
x13x2 + 22
1x2 + 121>2  95. 
22x + 5
102x - 524x + 3
  97. 
2 + x
211 + x23>2  99. 
4 - x
1x + 423>2  101. 
1
x21x2 - 121>2  103. 
1 - 3x2
21x11 + x222  105. 1
2
 15x + 22 1x + 121>2 
107. 2x1>213x - 42 1x + 12  109. 1x2 + 421>3111x2 + 122  111. 13x + 521>312x + 321>2117x + 272  113. 
31x + 22
2x1>2
  115. 1.41  117. 1.59
119. 4.89  121. 2.15  123. (a) 15,660.4 gal  (b) 390.7 gal  125. 222p ≈8.89 sec
Appendix B  Graphing Utilities
B.1 Exercises (page 1036)
1. (- 1, 4); II  3. (3, 1); I  5. Xmin = - 6, Xmax = 6, Xscl = 2, Ymin = - 4, Ymax = 4, Yscl = 2
7. Xmin = - 6, Xmax = 6, Xscl = 2, Ymin = - 1, Ymax = 3, Yscl = 1  9. Xmin = 3, Xmax = 9, Xscl = 1, Ymin = 2, Ymax = 10, Yscl = 2
11. Xmin = - 11, Xmax = 5, Xscl = 1, Ymin = - 3, Ymax = 6, Yscl = 1  13. Xmin = - 30, Xmax = 50, Xscl = 10, Ymin = - 90, 
Ymax = 50, Yscl = 10  15. Xmin = - 10, Xmax = 110, Xscl = 10, Ymin = - 10, Ymax = 160, Yscl = 10
B.2 Exercises (page 1038)
4
5
4
5
8
10
8
10
4
5
4
5
8
10
8
10
1. (a)  
(b) 
3. (a)
(b) 
4
5
4
5
8
10
8
10
4
5
4
5
8
10
8
10
5. (a) 
(b) 
7. (a) 
(b) 

Answers  Section B.5  1145
4
5
4
5
8
10
8
10
4
5
4
5
8
10
8
10
9. (a) 
(b) 
11. (a) 
(b) 
13. (a) 
(b) 
15. (a) 
(b) 
17. 
19. 
21. 
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
4
5
4
5
8
10
8
10
4
5
4
5
8
10
8
10
B.3 Exercises (page 1040)
1. - 3.41  3. - 1.71  5. - 0.28  7. 3.00  9. 4.50  11. 1.00, 23.00 
B.5 Exercises (page 1042)
1. Yes  3. Yes  5. No  7. Yes  9. Answers may vary. A possible answer is Ymin = 0, Ymax = 10, and Yscl = 1.

This page intentionally left blank 

Credits
Photos
Front Matter		
Achieve Your Potential (Retain Your Knowledge), Mike Flippo/Shutterstock; 
Resources for Success, Sturti/E+/Getty Images
Chapter 1	
	
Pages 35 and 77, Maxx-Studio/Shutterstock; Page 46, Snapper/Fotolia; Page 
52(L), Stockyimages/Fotolia; Page 52(R), Department of Energy; Page 66, 
Tetra Images/Alamy; Page 73, Tom Donoghue/Polaris/Newscom.
Chapter 2	
	
Pages 78 and 151, Leigh Prather/Shutterstock/Asset Library; Page 92, NASA; 
Page 100, Exactostock/SuperStock; Page 139, Kenzee/Dreamstime.
Chapter 3	
	
Pages 153 and 200, Spaxiax/Shutterstock; Page 189, Geno EJ Sajko  
Photography/Shutterstock.
Chapter 4	
	
Pages 201 and 280, John Foxx Collection/Imagestate/DK images; Page 247, 
Corbis.
Chapter 5	
	
Pages 282 and 383, Rawpixel/Fotolia; Page 338, Hulton Archive/Handout/
Getty Images; Page 347(L), Stockbyte/Getty Images; Page 347(R), Pascal Saez/
Alamy; Page 352, Lacroix Serge/iStock/360/Getty Images; Page 367,  
Jupiterimages/Photos.com/360/Getty Images.
Chapter 6	
	
Pages 385 and 472, NLSA; Page 397, Ryan McVay/Digital Vision/Getty Images; 
Page 445, Srdjan Draskovic/Dreamstime.
Chapter 7	
	
Pages 474 and 543, Sebastian Kaulitzki/Fotolia.
Chapter 8	
	
Pages 544 and 595, Jennifer Thermes/Photodisc/Getty Images; Page 556, Sergey 
Karpov/Shutterstock; Page 579, Alexandre Fagundes De Fagundes/ 
Dreamstime; Page 581, Anton Ignatenco/iStock/360/Getty Images.
Chapter 9	
	
Pages 597 and 671, Aviator70/Fotolia; Page 585, Pearson Education, Inc.; Page 
627, Science & Society Picture Library/Contributor/Getty Images; Page 639, 
Hulton Archive/Stringer/Getty Images.
Chapter 10	
	
Pages 672 and 736, Marcel Clemens/Shutterstock; Page 690, Thomas Barrat/
Shutterstock.
Chapter 11	
	
Pages 737 and 831, Wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock; Page 791, Library of  
Congress Prints and Photographs Division [LC-USZ62-46864].
Chapter 12	
	
Pages 833 and 875, Denis Cristo/Shutterstock; Pages 857 and 870, Pearson 
Education, Inc.
Chapter 13	
	
Pages 876 and 904, Zentilia/Fotolia; Page 897, Georgios Kollidas/Getty Images.
Chapter 14	
	
Pages 906 and 943, Rafael Macia/Science Source.
Appendix A	 	
Page 959, Feraru Nicolae/Shutterstock
Text
TI 84 Plus C screenshots courtesy of Texas Instruments.  Pages  152, 280–281, 384, and 472,  
Screenshots from Microsoft® Excel®. Used by permission of Microsoft Corporation. Chapter 2, 
page 81: Diamond price. Used with permission of Diamonds.com. Copyright © Martin Rapaport. 
All rights reserved. Chapter 5, page 341: Cell Phone Towers by CTIA-The Wireless Association. 
Copyright © 2013 by CTIA-The Wireless Association. Used by permission of CTIA-The  
Wireless Association®. Chapter 7, pages 533 and 537, Product of Inertia and Moment of Intertia 
from Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics by Russell C. Hibbeler. Published by  
Pearson Education, © 2013.
1147

This page intentionally left blank 

Abel, Niels, 266, 870
Abscissa, 36
Absolute maximum and minimum of  
functions, 107–109
Absolute value, 622, 950–951
equations involving, 990–991
inequalities involving, 1022–1023
Absolute value function, 118–119, 120–121
Acute angles, 545–547
complementary, 547
trigonometric functions of, 545–547
Addition, 955. See also Sum
of complex numbers, 999
of rational expressions, 982–983
least common multiple (LCM) method 
for, 983–984
triangular, 869
of vectors, 634–635
geometrically, 631
in space, 653–654
Addition principle of counting, 878–879
Addition property of inequalities, 1019
Adjacency matrix, 794
Aerodynamic forces, 671
Ahmes (Egyptian scribe), 857
Airplane wings, 597
Algebra essentials, 946–959
distance on the real number line, 950–951
domain of variable, 952
evaluating algebraic expressions, 951–952
evaluating exponents, 955
graphing inequalities, 950
Laws of Exponents, 953–954
real number line, 949
sets, 946–949
to simplify trigonometric expressions, 
505–506
to solve geometry problems, 39
square roots, 954–955
Algebraic vector, 632–633
Alpha particles, 705
Altitude of triangle, 960
Ambiguous case, 560
Amount of annuity, 856–857
Amplitude
of simple harmonic motion, 581
of sinusoidal functions, 436–438, 455–458
Analytic trigonometry, 474–543
algebra to simplify trigonometric  
expressions, 505–506
Double-angle Formulas, 524–528
to establish identities, 525–528
to find exact values, 525
Half-angle Formulas, 528–530
to find exact values, 529–530
for tangent, 530
inverse functions. See Inverse functions
Product-to-Sum Formulas, 534–537
Sum and Difference Formulas, 512–524
for cosines, 512–513
defined, 512
to establish identities, 514–517
to find exact values, 513, 515–516
involving inverse trigonometric  
function, 518
for sines, 514–515
for tangents, 517
Sum-to-Product Formulas, 535–536
trigonometric equations, 494–504
calculator for solving, 497
graphing utility to solve, 499
identities to solve, 498–499
involving single trigonometric  
function, 494–497
linear, 495–496
linear in sine and cosine, 519–520
quadratic in from, 497–498
solutions of, defined, 494
trigonometric identities, 504–511
basic, 505
establishing, 506–509, 514–517, 525–528
Even-Odd, 505
Pythagorean, 505
Quotient, 505
Reciprocal, 505
Angle(s), 386–399. See also Trigonometric 
functions
acute, 545–547
complementary, 547
trigonometric functions of. See Right 
triangle trigonometry
central, 389
complementary, 547
defined, 386
of depression, 549–550
direction, 636
of vector, 656
drawing, 387–388
of elevation, 549–550
elongation, 567
Greek letters to denote, 386
of incidence, 503
inclination, 416
initial side of, 386
measurement of, 387–393
arc length, 389–390
degrees, 387–389, 390–393
to find the area of a sector of a  
circle, 393
to find the linear speed of an object 
traveling in circular motion, 394–395
radians, 389, 390–393
negative, 386
optical (scanning), 533
positive, 386
quadrantal, 387
of refraction, 503
of repose, 493
right, 387, 959
in standard position, 386–387
straight, 387
terminal side of, 386
between vectors, 645
in space, 656
viewing, 415–416, 486
Angle–angle case of similar triangle, 963
Angle–side–angle case of congruent  
triangle, 962
Angular (perceived) size, 416
Angular speed, 394
Annuity(ies), 856–857
amount of, 856–857
defined, 856
formula for, 856
ordinary, 856
Aphelion, 692, 719, 736
Apollonius of Perga, 672
Applied (word) problems, 1007–1016
constant rate job problems, 1012–1013
interest problems, 1008–1009
mixture problems, 1009–1010
steps for solving, 1008
translating verbal descriptions into  
mathematical expressions, 1007–1008
uniform motion problems, 1010–1012
Approximate decimals, 948
Approximating area, 934–937
Araybhata the Elder, 411
Arc length, 390–391
Area
definition of, 937
formulas for, 960
under graph of function, 934–937
of parallelogram, 664–665
of sector of circle, 393
of triangle, 575–581, 960
SAS triangles, 575–576
SSS triangles, 576–577
Argument
of complex number, 623
of function, 83
Arithmetic calculator, 955
Arithmetic mean, 1026
Arithmetic sequences, 844–849
common difference in, 844
defined, 844
determining, 844–845
formula for, 845–846
nth term of, 845
recursive formula for, 845–846
sum of, 846–848
Ars Conjectandi (Bernoulli), 898
Ars Magna (Cardano), 266
ASA triangles, 559–560
Associative property
of matrix addition, 780
of matrix multiplication, 785
of vector addition, 631
Asymptote(s), 225–226, 698–700
horizontal, 225–226, 228–230
oblique, 226, 228–230, 236
vertical, 225–226
multiplicity and, 227
Subject Index
1149

Atomic systems, 791
Augmented matrix, 753–764
in row echelon form, 1043–1044
row operations on, 755–756
system of equations written from, 754
Average cost function, 97
Average rate of change, 54
of function, 110
exponential functions, 306–307
finding, 110
linear functions, 154–157, 306–307
secant line and, 110–111
limit of, 917
Axis/axes
of complex plane, 622
of cone, 673
coordinate, 36
of ellipse, 683, 714
of hyperbola
conjugate, 693
transverse, 693, 714
polar, 598
of quadratic function, 174–177
rotation of, 707–711
analyzing equation using, 709–711
formulas for, 708
identifying conic without, 711–712
of symmetry
of parabola, 172, 674
of quadratic function, 174–178
Azimuth, 552
Babylonians, ancient, 857
Back substitution, 741
Barry, Rick, 100
Base of exponent, 953
Basic trigonometric identities, 505
Bearing (direction), 552
Bernoulli, Jakob, 619, 898
Bernoulli, Johann, 728
Bessel, Friedrich, 555
Best fit
cubic function of, 217
line of, 166–167
Beta of a stock, 153
Bezout, Etienne, 808
Binomial(s), 968
cubing, 969
squares of (perfect squares), 969
Binomial coefficient, 867, 868
Binomial Theorem, 865–871
to evaluate a n
j b, 865–871
expanding a binomial, 867–868
historical feature on, 870
proof of, 869
using, 867–869
Bisection method, 265, 269
Blood alcohol concentration (BAC), 327
Bode, Johann, 843
Bode’s Law, 843
Bonds, zero-coupon, 356
Book value, 158
Boole, George, 898
Bounded graphs, 816
Bounding curves, 584
Bounds on zeros, 263–264
Box, volume and surface area of, 961
Brachistochrone, 728
Brancazio, Peter, 100
Branches of hyperbola, 693
Break-even point, 162
Brewster’s Law, 504
Briggs, Henry, 338
Bürgi, Joost, 338
Calculator(s), 955. See also Graphing 
utility(ies)
approximating roots on, 1028
converting between decimals and  
degrees, minutes, seconds on, 388
converting from polar coordinates to 
rectangular coordinates, 601
to evaluate powers of 36, 304
functions on, 84
inverse sine on, 477
kinds of, 955
logarithms on, 337
trigonometric equations solved using, 497
Calculus, 502
approximating ex, 843
area under curve, 487
area under graph, 114
complicated functions in, 90
composite functions in, 287
derivative, 232
difference quotient in, 85, 116, 319, 340, 523
double-angle formulas in, 526
e in, 311, 843
end behavior of graphs, 211
exponential equations in, 344
functions and
exponential, 303, 843
increasing, decreasing, or constant, 105, 
364–365
local maxima and local minima in, 106
graph of polynomial functions in, 203
independent variable in, 432
integral, 528, 938
area under graph, 933–937
graphing utility to approximate, 938
Intermediate Value Theorem, 264
limits, 211, 224
logarithms and, 334, 344
partial fraction decomposition and, 796
polar equations and, 618
projectile motion, 723–725
radians in, 414
secant line and, 110, 116
simplifying expressions with rational 
exponents in, 1031
Simpson’s Rule, 189
Snell’s Law and, 503
tangent line and, 579
trigonometric functions and equations in, 
499, 502, 526, 534
trigonometric identities useful in, 528
turning points and, 209
of variations, 728
Cancellation Property, 980
Carbon dating, 360
Cardano, Girolamo, 266, 627, 897
Cardioid, 612–613, 618
Carlson, Tor, 372
Carrying capacity, 363
Cartesian (rectangular) coordinates, 36
in space, 651–652
Cartesian (rectangular) form of complex 
number, 623–624
Catenary, 682
Cayley, Arthur, 737, 791
Ceilometer, 550
Cell division, 358, 363
Center
of circle, 68
of hyperbolas, 693
of sphere, 660
Central angle, 389
Change-of-Base Formula, 337–338
Chu Shih-chieh, 870
Circle(s), 68–74, 673
arc length of, 390–391
area of, 961
area of sector of, 393
center of, 68
central angle of, 389
circumference of, 961
defined, 68
general form of equation of, 70–71
graphing, 68–70, 617
inscribed, 580
intercepts of, 70
polar equation of, 608, 610–611
radius of, 68
standard form of equation of, 68–69
unit, 69, 400–403
Circular functions, 402
Circular motion, 394–395
simple harmonic motion and, 582
Circumference, 961
Clark, William, 544, 596
Clinton, Bill, 115
Clock, Huygens’s, 728
Closed interval, 1017, 1018
Coefficient, 967, 968
binomial, 867, 868
correlation, 167
damping, 584
of friction, 642
leading, 270, 968
Coefficient matrix, 754
Cofactors, 772
Cofunctions, 547
names of, 412
Coincident lines, 740
Column index, 753, 778
Column vector, 782
Combinations, 885–887
defined, 885
listing, 885–886
of n distinct objects taken r at a time,  
886
Combinatorics, 877
Common difference, 844
Common logarithms (log), 324, 337, 338
Common ratio, 850
Commutative property
of dot products, 644, 655
1150 
Subject Index

Subject Index  1151
of matrix addition, 780–781, 785
of vector addition, 631
Complementary angles, 547
Complementary Angle Theorem, 547
Complement of event, 896
Complement of set, 947
Complement Rule, 896–897
Complete graph, 45
Completing the square, 973–974, 992–993
identifying conics without, 707
Complex number(s), 639, 649, 998–1003
addition, subtraction, and  
multiplication of, 999–1003
argument of, 623
conjugates of, 623, 1000–1001
definition of, 999
De Moivre’s Theorem and, 625–626
equality of, 999
geometric interpretation of, 622
imaginary part of, 999
magnitude (modulus) of, 622
in polar form
converting from rectangular form to, 
623–624
converting to rectangular form, 
623–624
products and quotients of, 624
product of, 624
quotient of, 624
real part of, 999
in standard form, 999
power of, 1003
reciprocal of, 1001
Complex number system, 999
quadratic equations in, 1003–1005
Complex plane, 622–624
defined, 622
imaginary axis of, 622
plotting points in, 622–624
real axis of, 622
Complex polynomial function, 270
Complex rational expressions, 984–986
Complex roots, 626–627
Complex variable, 270
Complex zeros of polynomials, 270, 271, 
273–274
Conjugate Pairs Theorem, 271–272
defined, 270
finding, 273–274
polynomial function with zeros given, 
272–273
Components of vectors, 632, 634
in space, 653
Composite functions, 283–290
calculus application of, 287
components of, 287
defined, 283
domain of, 284–287
equal, 286–287
evaluating, 284
finding, 284–287
forming, 283–284
Compound interest, 348–354
computing, 348–350
continuous, 351
defined, 348
doubling or tripling time for money, 
353–354
effective rates of return, 351–352
formula, 349–350
future value of lump sum of money, 
348–351
present value of lump sum of money, 
352–353
Compound probabilities, 894
Compressions, 131–133, 134
Comps, real estate, 35
Conditional equation, 504
Cone
axis of, 673
generators of, 673
right circular, 673
vertex of, 673
Congruent triangles, 961–963
Conics
defined, 714
degenerate, 673
directrix of, 714
eccentricity of, 692, 714
ellipse, 673, 683–693
with center at (h, k), 687–688
with center at the origin, 683–687
with center not at origin, 688–689
center of, 683
defined, 683, 714
eccentricity of, 693, 715–717
foci of, 683
graphing of, 685–688
length of major axis, 683
major axis of, 683, 714
minor axis of, 683
solving applied problems involving, 
689–690
vertices of, 683
focus of, 714
general form of, 706–707
hyperbolas, 672, 673, 693–705
asymptotes of, 698–700
branches of, 693
with center at (h, k), 700–701
with center at the origin, 693–698
with center not at the origin, 700–701
center of, 693
conjugate, 705
conjugate axis of, 693
defined, 693, 714
eccentricity of, 705, 716
equilateral, 705
foci of, 693
graphing equation of, 695–696
solving applied problems involving, 
701–702
transverse axis of, 693, 714
vertices of, 693
identifying, 706–707
without a rotation of axes, 711–712
names of, 673
parabola, 172–178, 673, 674–682
axis of symmetry of, 172, 674
defined, 674, 714
directrix of, 674
focus of, 674
graphing equation of, 675
solving applied problems involving, 
679–680
with vertex at (h, k), 677–678
with vertex at the origin, 674–677
vertex of, 172, 674
paraboloids of revolution, 672, 679
parametric equations, 720–732
applications to mechanics, 728
for curves defined by rectangular 
equations, 726–728
cycloid, 727–728
defined, 720
describing, 722–723
graphing using graphing utility, 720–721
rectangular equation for curve  
defined parametrically, 721–723
time as parameter in, 723–725
polar equations of, 714–719
analyzing and graphing, 714–717
converting to rectangular equation,  
718
focus at pole; eccentricity e, 715–717
rotation of axes to transform equations 
of, 707–709
analyzing equation using, 709–711
formulas for, 708
Conjugate
of complex number, 1000–1001
of conjugate of complex number, 1002
of product of two complex numbers,  
1002
of real number, 1002
of sum of two complex numbers, 1002
Conjugate axis, 693
Conjugate golden ratio, 842
Conjugate hyperbola, 705
Conjugate of complex numbers, 623
Conjugate Pairs Theorem, 271–272
Connected mode, 121
Consistent systems of equations, 739, 740, 744
Constant(s), 951, 967
limit of, 912
Constant functions, 105–106, 107, 119
Constant linear functions, 157
Constant rate job problems, 1012–1013
Constraints, 820
Consumer Price Index (CPI), 357
Continued fractions, 987
Continuous compounding, 351
Continuous function, 121, 264, 921–922
Continuous graph, 203
Convergent geometric series, 853–855
Cooling, Newton’s Law of, 361–362
Coordinates, 36. See also Rectangular  
(Cartesian) coordinates
of ordered triple, 651
of point on number line, 949
Copernicus, 395
Corner points, 817
Correlation coefficient, 167
Correspondence between two sets, 79
Cosecant
defined, 545
graph of, 451–452
periodic properties of, 420

1152 
Subject Index
Cosecant function, 401
continuous, 922, 923
domain of, 418, 419
inverse, 489–491
approximate value of, 490
calculator to evaluate, 490
definition of, 489
exact value of, 489–490
range of, 418, 419
Cosine(s)
defined, 545
direction, 657–658
exact value of, 513
Law of, 568–571
in applied problems, 570–571
defined, 568
historical feature on, 571
proof of, 569
Pythagorean Theorem as special case 
of, 569
SAS triangles solved using, 569–570
SSS triangles solved using, 570
periodic properties of, 420
Sum and Difference Formula for, 512–513
trigonometric equations linear in, 519–520
Cosine function, 401
continuous, 923
domain of, 418, 419, 435
graphs of, 432–447
amplitude and period, 436–438
equation for, 441–442
key points for, 438–441
hyperbolic, 319
inverse, 479–481
defined, 479
exact value of, 480–481
exact value of expressions involving, 
488–489
implicit form of, 479
properties of, 435
range of, 418, 435
Cost(s)
fixed, 66
marginal, 181
variable, 66
Cotangent
defined, 545
periodic properties of, 420
Cotangent function, 401
continuous, 922, 923
domain of, 418, 419
graph of, 450–451
inverse, 489–491
approximating the value of, 490–491
calculator to evaluate, 490–491
definition of, 489
range of, 419
Counting, 877–882
addition principle of, 878–879
combinations, 885–887
defined, 885
listing, 885–886
of n distinct objects taken r at a time, 886
formula, 878
multiplication principle of, 879–880
number of possible meals, 879–880
permutations, 882–885
computing, 885
defined, 882
distinct objects without repetition, 
883–885
distinct objects with repetition, 883
involving n nondistinct objects, 887–888
Counting numbers (natural numbers), 
861–863, 948
Cramer, Gabriel, 737
Cramer’s Rule, 737, 768
inconsistent or dependent systems, 774
for three equations containing three 
variables, 773–774
for two equations containing two vari-
ables, 769–771
Cross (vector) product, 639, 661–666
defined, 661
determinants to find, 662
to find the area of a parallelogram, 
664–665
to find vector orthogonal to two given 
vectors, 664
properties of, 662–664
algebraic, 663
geometric, 663–664
of two vectors in space, 661–662
Cube(s)
of binomials (perfect cubes), 969
difference of two, 969, 973
sum of two, 969
Cube function, 83, 120
Cube root, 117–118, 120, 1027
complex, 626–627
Cubic function of best fit, 217
Cubic models from data, 216–217
Curve(s)
bounding, 584
defined by rectangular equations, 
726–728
defined parametrically, 721–725
graphing utility to graph parametrically-
defined, 1046
of quickest descent, 728
sawtooth, 589
Curve fitting, 748
sinusoidal, 458–462
hours of daylight, 461–462
sine function of best fit, 462
temperature data, 458–460
Curvilinear motion, 723
Cycle of sinusoidal graph, 433, 437
Cycloid, 727–728
Damped motion, 584–585
Damping factor (damping coefficient), 584
Data
arrangement in matrix, 778–779
cubic models from, 216–217
exponential model from, 369–370
linear models from, 164–170
quadratic models from, 186–187
sinusoidal model from, 458–462
Day length, 201, 385
Decay, Law of, 360–361. See also  
Exponential growth and decay
Decimals, 948
approximate, 948
converting between degrees, minutes, 
seconds and, 388–389
repeating, 948
Declination of the Sun, 486
Decomposition, 646–647
Decreasing functions, 105–106, 107, 109
Decreasing linear functions, 157
Deflection, force of, 597
Degenerate conics, 673
Degree of monomial, 967
Degree of polynomial, 202–206, 968, 972
odd, 262–263, 271
Degree of power function, 203
Degrees, 387–389
converting between decimals and, 
388–389
converting between radians and, 390–393
historical note on, 387
Demand equation, 182
De Moivre, Abraham, 625
De Moivre’s Theorem, 625–626
Denominator, 980
rationalizing the, 1029
Dependent systems of equations, 740
containing three variables, 747–748
containing two variables, 743–744
Cramer’s Rule with, 774
matrices to solve, 760–761
Dependent variable, 83
Depreciation, 282
Depressed equation, 260
Depression, angle of, 549–550
Derivative, 928–929
Descartes, René, 35, 78
Descartes’ Rule of Signs, 258–259
Determinants, 661–662, 737, 768–777
cofactors, 772
Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of three 
equations containing three variables, 
773–774
Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of two 
equations containing two variables, 
769–771
expanding across a row or column, 772
minors of, 771–772
properties of, 774–775
37 by 37, 771–773
36 by 36, 768, 774–775
Diagonal entries, 785–786
Difference(s). See also Subtraction
common, 844
of complex numbers, 999
first, 454
limits of, 913
of logarithms, 335
of two cubes, 969, 973
of two functions, 88–90
of two matrices, 779–781
of two squares, 969, 972, 973
of vectors, 631
Difference quotient, 85–86, 116, 319, 523
definition, 85
Diophantus, 857
Directed line segment, 630

Subject Index  1153
Direction (bearing), 552
Direction angle, 636
Direction angles of vector, 656–658
Direction cosines, 657–658
Direction of vectors, 630, 635–637
Directrix, 714
of parabola, 674
Dirichlet, Lejeune, 78
Discontinuity, 121
Discontinuous function, 921
Discriminant, 994, 1004
Disjoint sets, 948
Distance
mean, 692, 736
Distance formula, 36–39
proof of, 37–38
in space, 652
using, 37–39
Distributive Property
of dot products, 644, 655
of matrix multiplication, 785
of real numbers, 949
Divergent geometric series, 853–855
Dividend, 255, 256, 970
Division, 955. See also Quotient(s)
of complex numbers, 1001–1002
of polynomials, 970–972
algorithm for, 255–256
synthetic, 976–980
of rational expressions, 981–982
of two integers, 970
Divisor, 255, 256, 970
Domain, 79, 86–90
of absolute value function, 120
of composite function, 284–287
of constant function, 119
of cosecant function, 418, 419
of cosine function, 418, 419, 435
of cotangent function, 418, 419
of cube function, 120
of cube root function, 120
defined by an equation, 87
of difference function, 88
of greatest integer function, 121
horizontal shifts and, 130
of identity function, 119
of inverse function, 294
of logarithmic function, 321–322
of logistic models, 363
of one-to-one function, 291
of product function, 88
of quotient function, 89
of rational function, 223–225
of reciprocal function, 120
of relation, 80
of secant function, 418, 419
of sine function, 418, 419, 433
of square function, 119
of square root function, 120
of sum function, 88
of tangent function, 418, 419, 449
of the trigonometric functions, 417–418
unspecified, 90
of variable, 952
Domain-restricted function, 298–299
Doppler, Christian, 246
Doppler effect, 246
Dot mode, 121
Dot product, 639, 644–650
angle between vectors using, 645
to compute work, 648
defined, 644
finding, 644–645
historical feature on, 649
orthogonal vectors and, 646–648
parallel vectors and, 646
properties of, 644, 655
of two vectors, 644–645
in space, 655
Double-angle Formulas, 524–528
to establish identities, 525–528
to find exact values, 525
Double root (root of multiplicity 36),  
991
Drag, 671
Dry adiabatic lapse rate, 849
e, 310–312, 319
defined, 311
Earthquakes
magnitude of, 331
Eccentricity, 692, 714
of ellipse, 693, 715–717
of hyperbola, 705, 716
Eddin, Nasir, 395, 571
Effective rates of return, 351–352
Egyptians, ancient, 857
Elements (Euclid), 571, 857
Elements of sets, 877–879, 946
Elevation, angle of, 549–550
Elimination, Gauss-Jordan, 760
Elimination method, 737, 741–743, 744
systems of nonlinear equations solved 
using, 804–808
Ellipse, 673, 683–693
with center at (h, k), 687–688
with center at the origin, 683–687
major axis along x-axis, 684–685
major axis along y-axis, 686
with center not at origin, 688–689
center of, 683
defined, 683, 714
eccentricity of, 693, 715–717
foci of, 683
graphing of, 685–688
major axis of, 683, 714
length of, 683
minor axis of, 683
solving applied problems involving, 
689–690
vertices of, 683
Ellipsis, 948
Elliptical orbits, 672
Elongation angle, 567
Empty (null) sets, 877, 946
End behavior, 211–213, 226, 227
of rational function, 226
Entries of matrix, 753, 778
diagonal, 785–786
Equality
of complex numbers, 999
of sets, 877, 947
of vectors, 630, 634
in space, 653
Equally likely outcomes, 893–894
Equation(s)
conditional, 504
demand, 182
depressed, 260
domain of a function defined by, 87
equivalent, 988–990, 1037
even and odd functions identified from, 
105
exponential, 312–314, 326, 343–344
quadratic in form, 344
as function, 82
graphing utility to graph, 1037–1038
intercepts from, 46
inverse function defined by, 297–299
linear.  See Linear equation(s)
polar.  See Polar equations
quadratic. See Quadratic equation(s)
satisfying the, 43, 988
second-degree, 991
sides of, 43, 988
solution set of, 988
solving, 988–998
by factoring, 990, 991–992
with graphing calculator, 1040–1041
involving absolute value, 990–991
systems of.  See Systems of equations
in two variables, graphs of, 43–53
intercepts from, 45–46
by plotting points, 43–45
symmetry test using, 46–48
x = y2, 49
y = 1 , x, 50
Equilateral hyperbola, 705
Equilateral triangle, 42
Equilibrium, static, 638–639
Equilibrium price, 159–160
Equilibrium quantity, 159–160
Equilibrium (rest) position, 581
Equivalent equations, 988–990, 1037
Equivalent systems of equations, 741–742
Error triangle, 42
Euclid, 571, 857, 870
Euler, Leonhard, 78, 395, 898
Even functions, 437
determining from graph, 103–104
identifying from equation, 105
Evenness ratio, 330
Even-Odd identity, 505
Even-Odd Properties, 427
Events, 893
complement of, 896–897
mutually exclusive, 895–896
probabilities of union of two, 895–896
Expected profit, 876
Explicit form of function, 85
Exponent(s), 953–954
Laws of, 304, 313, 953–954
logarithms related to, 320
Exponential equations, 312–314
defined, 312
solving, 312–314, 326, 343–344
equations quadratic in form, 344
using graphing utility, 344–345

1154 
Subject Index
Exponential expressions, changing between 
logarithmic expressions and, 
320–321
Exponential functions, 303–319, 923
continuous, 923
defined, 305
e, 310–312, 319
evaluating, 303–307
fitting to data, 369–371
graph of, 307–310
using transformations, 310, 311–312
identifying, 305–307
power function vs., 305
properties of, 308, 310, 314
ratio of consecutive outputs of,  
305–306
Exponential growth and decay, 304–307, 
358–368
law of decay, 360–361
logistic models, 363–365
defined, 363
domain and range of, 363
graph of, 363
properties of, 363
uninhibited growth, 358–360
Exponential law, 358
Extended Principle of Mathematical  
Induction, 864
Extraneous solutions, 1030
Extreme values of functions, 108
Extreme Value Theorem, 108
Factored completely, 972
Factorial symbol, 836–837
Factoring
defined, 972
equations solved by, 990, 991–992
of expression containing rational  
exponents, 1032
over the integers, 972
polynomials, 972–973
by grouping, 973
Factors, 972
linear, 796–800
nonrepeated, 796–797
repeated, 798–799
quadratic, 262, 800–801
synthetic division to verify, 979
Factor Theorem, 255–258
Family
of lines, 67
of parabolas, 140
Feasible point, 820
Fermat, Pierre de, 35, 319, 897
Ferrari, Lodovico, 266
Ferris, George W., 73, 502
Fertility rate, 833
Fibonacci, 857
Fibonacci numbers, 838
Fibonacci sequences, 838, 842
Financial models, 348–357
compound interest, 348–354
doubling time for investment, 353
effective rates of return, 351–352
future value of a lump sum of money, 
348–351
present value of a lump sum of money, 
350, 352–353
tripling time for investment, 354
Finck, Thomas, 395, 411
Finite sets, 877
First-degree equation.  See Linear 
equation(s)
First differences, 454
Fixed costs, 66
Focus/foci, 714
of ellipse, 683
of hyperbola, 693
of parabola, 674
FOIL method, 969
Foot-pounds, 648
Force(s), 581
aerodynamic, 671
of deflection, 597
resultant, 637
Force vector, 636
Formulas, geometry, 960–961
Fractions
continued, 987
partial, 796
Frequency, 445
in simple harmonic motion, 582
Friction, coefficient of, 642
Frobenius, Georg, 791
Function(s), 78–152.  See also Composite 
functions; Exponential  
functions; Inverse functions;  
Linear functions; Polynomial  
functions; Trigonometric functions
absolute value, 118–119, 120–121
area under graph of, 934–937
argument of, 83
average cost, 97
average rate of change of, 110
finding, 110
secant line and, 111
building and analyzing, 140–145
on calculators, 84
circular, 402
constant, 105–106, 107, 119
continuous, 121, 264, 921–923
cube, 83, 120
cube root, 117–118, 120
decreasing, 105–106, 107, 109
defined, 80
derivative of, 928–929
difference of two, 88
difference quotient of, 85–86
discontinuous, 121, 921
domain of, 79, 86–90
unspecified, 90
domain-restricted, 298–299
equation as, 82
even and odd, 437
determining from graph, 103–104
identifying from equation, 105
explicit form of, 85
graph of, 94–103, 127–140
combining procedures, 130–131, 135–136
determining odd and even functions 
from, 103–104
determining properties from, 105–106
identifying, 94–95
information from or about, 95–97
using compressions and stretches, 
131–133, 134
using reflections about the x- axis or 
y- axis, 133–134
using vertical and horizontal shifts, 
128–131, 134
greatest integer, 121
identically equal, 504
identity, 119
implicit form of, 85
important facts about, 85
increasing, 105–106, 107, 109
library of, 117–122
local maxima and local minima of, 106–107
with no limit at 0, 910
nonlinear, 155
objective, 820–824
one-to-one, 291–293
periodic, 420
piecewise-defined, 122–123, 922–923
power, 203–206
graph of, 204–205
of odd degree, 205
properties of, 205
product of two, 88
quotient of two, 89
range of, 79
reciprocal, 120, 451.  See also Cosecant 
function; Secant function
relation as, 79
square, 119
square root, 117, 120
step, 121
sum of two, 88
graph of, 585–587
value (image) of, 80, 82–85
zeros of, bisection method for  
approximating, 269
Function keys, 955
Function notation, 90
Fundamental identities of trigonometric 
functions, 422–424
quotient, 422
reciprocal, 422
Fundamental period, 420
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, 270–271
Conjugate Pairs Theorem and, 271–272
proof of, 271
Future value, 348–351
Galois, Evariste, 266
Gauss, Karl Friedrich, 270, 627, 737
Gauss-Jordan method, 760
General addition principle of counting,  
879
General form
of conics, 706–707
of equation of circle, 70–71
linear equation in, 60–61
General term, 835
Generators of cone, 673
Geometric mean, 1026
Geometric progression.  See Geometric 
sequences

Subject Index  1155
Geometric sequences, 850–853
common ratio of, 850
defined, 850
determining, 850–851
formula for, 851–852
nth term of, 851–852
sum of, 852–853
Geometric series, 853–857
infinite, 853–854
Geometric vectors, 630
Geometry essentials, 959–966
congruent and similar triangles, 961–963
formulas, 960–961
Pythagorean Theorem and its converse, 
959–960
Geometry problems, algebra to solve, 39
Gibbs, Josiah, 639
Golden ratio, 842
conjugate, 842
Grade (incline), 68
Graph(s)/graphing
area under, 934–937
bounded, 816
bounding curves, 584
of circles, 68–70, 617
complete, 45
of cosecant function, 451–452
using transformations, 452
of cotangent function, 450–451
of ellipse, 685–688
of equations in two variables, 43–53
intercepts from, 45–46
by plotting points, 43–45
symmetry test using, 46–48
x = y2, 49
y = 1 , x, 50
y = x3, 49
of exponential functions, 307–310
using transformations, 310, 311–312
of function, 94–103, 128–140
combining procedures, 130–131, 135–136
determining odd and even functions 
from, 103–104
determining properties from, 105–106
identifying, 94–95
information from or about, 95–97
in library of functions, 117–122
using compressions and stretches, 
131–133, 134
using reflections about the x- axis or 
y- axis, 133–134
using vertical and horizontal shifts, 
128–131, 134
of inequalities, 812–816, 950
linear inequalities, 813–814
steps for, 813
of inverse functions, 296
of lines
given a point and the slope, 56–57
using intercepts, 60–61
to locate absolute maximum and absolute 
minimum of function, 107–109
of logarithmic functions, 322–325
base not 44 or e, 338
inverse, 323–325
of logistic models, 363–365
of parabola, 675
of parametric equations, 720–721, 1045–1046
of piecewise-defined functions, 122–123
of polar equations, 607–621
cardioid, 612–613, 618
circles, 617
of conics, 715–717
by converting to rectangular  
coordinates, 608–611
defined, 608
lemniscate, 616, 618
limaçon with inner loop, 614–615, 618
limaçon without inner loop, 613–614, 
618
by plotting points, 612–618
polar grids for, 607
rose, 615–616, 618
sketching, 618–619
spiral, 616–617
using graphing utility, 609, 1045
of polynomial functions, 203–217
analyzing, 214–215
end behavior of, 211–213, 226, 227
smooth and continuous, 203
turning points of, 209–210
using bounds on zeros, 264
using transformations, 206
using x-intercepts, 208–209
writing function from, 213
of polynomial inequalities, 248–249
of quadratic functions
properties of, 174–178
steps for, 178
using its vertex, axis, and intercepts, 
174–178
using transformations, 172–174
of rational functions, 233–248
analyzing, 233–244
constructing rational function from, 
243–244
end behavior of, 226
using transformations, 224–225
of rational inequalities, 250
of secant function, 451–452
using transformations, 452
of sequences, 834–835
of sine and cosine functions, 432–447, 458, 
586–587
amplitude and period, 436–438
equation for, 441–442
key points for, 438–441
to solve systems of equations, 740
of systems of nonlinear inequalities, 
815–816
of vectors, 632
of y = 1
x2, 224
Graphing calculator(s), 955
composite functions on, 284
Graphing utility(ies), 1035–1046
connected mode, 121
coordinates of point shown on, 1036
derivative of function using, 928
dot mode, 121
eVALUEate feature, 257, 1039
to find limit, 910
to find sum of arithmetic sequence, 846
to fit exponential function to data, 369–370
to fit logarithmic function to data, 371
to fit logistic function to data, 372
functions on, 109
geometric sequences using, 852, 853
to graph a circle, 71
to graph equations, 1037–1038
to graph inequalities, 1043
graph of polynomial function analyzed 
with, 215–216
to graph parametric equations, 1045–1046
to graph polar equations, 1045
identity established with, 507
INTERSECT feature, 1040–1041
line of best fit from, 166–167
to locate intercepts and check for  
symmetry, 1039–1040
logarithmic and exponential equations 
solved using, 344–345
matrix operations on, 780
MAXIMUM and MINIMUM features, 109
PARametric mode, 724
polar equations using, 609
reduced row echelon form on, 764
REGression options, 369
row echelon form on, 764
RREF command, 1044
sine function of best fit on, 462
to solve equations, 1040–1041
to solve systems of linear equations, 
1043–1044
square screens, 1042
TABLE feature, 265, 835
tables on, 1038
TRACE feature, 835
trigonometric equations solved using, 499
viewing rectangle, 1035–1037
setting, 1035
ZERO (or ROOT) feature, 185, 1039, 1040
Grassmann, Hermann, 639, 649
Greatest integer function, 121
Greek letters, to denote angles, 386
Greeks, ancient, 395
Grouping, factoring by, 973
Growth, uninhibited, 358–360
Growth factor, 305
Hale–Bopp comet, orbit of, 672, 736
Half-angle Formulas, 529–530
to find exact values, 529–530
for tangent, 530
Half-life, 360
Half-line (ray), 386
Half-open/half-closed intervals, 1017, 1018
Half-planes, 813
Hamilton, William Rowan, 639
Harmonic mean, 1026
Heron of Alexandria, 576, 577, 857
Heron’s Formula, 576
historical feature on, 577
proof of, 576–577
Horizontal asymptote, 225–226
Horizontal component of vector, 634
Horizontal compression or stretches, 133
Horizontal lines, 57–58, 609, 617

1156 
Subject Index
Horizontal-line test, 292–293
Horizontal shifts, 128–131, 134
Huygens, Christiaan, 728, 897
Huygens’s clock, 728
Hyperbolas, 672, 673, 693–705
asymptotes of, 698–700
branches of, 693
with center at (h, k), 700–701
with center at the origin, 693–698
transverse axis along x-axis, 695–696, 
700
transverse axis along y-axis, 696–697, 
700
with center not at the origin, 700–701
center of, 693
conjugate, 705
conjugate axis of, 693
defined, 693, 714
eccentricity of, 705, 716
equilateral, 705
foci of, 693
graphing equation of, 695–696
solving applied problems involving, 
701–702
transverse axis of, 693, 714
vertices of, 693
Hyperbolic cosine function, 319
Hyperbolic sine function, 319
Hyperboloid, 704
Hypocycloid, 731
Hypotenuse, 545, 959
i, 1002–1003
Identically equal functions, 504
Identity(ies), 988
definition of, 504
polarization, 650
Pythagorean, 423, 505
trigonometric, 504–511
basic, 505
establishing, 506–509, 514–517, 525–528
Even-Odd, 505
Pythagorean, 505
Quotient, 505
Reciprocal, 422, 505
trigonometric equations solved  
using, 498–499
Identity function, 119
Identity matrix, 786
Identity Properties, 786
Image (value) of function, 80, 82–85
Imaginary axis of complex plane, 622
Imaginary unit, 999
Implicit form of function, 85
Improper rational expression, 796
Improper rational function, 228
Incidence, angle of, 503
Inclination, 416
Inconsistent systems of equations, 739, 740, 
744, 746
containing three variables, 746–747
containing two variables, 743
Cramer’s Rule with, 774
matrices to solve, 762
Increasing functions, 105–106, 109
Increasing linear functions, 157
Independent systems of equations, 740
Independent variable, 83
in calculus, 432
Index/indices
of radical, 1027
of refraction, 503
row and column, 753, 778
of sum, 838
Induction, mathematical, 861–864
Extended Principle of, 864
principle of, 862, 864
proving statements using, 861–863
Inequality(ies)
combined, 1021–1022
graphing, 812–816
on graphing utility, 1043
linear inequalities, 813–814
steps for, 813
interval notation to write, 1018
involving absolute value, 1022–1023
involving quadratic functions, 192–195
nonstrict, 950
in one variable, 1020
polynomial, 248–250
algebraically and graphically solving, 
248–250, 252
role of multiplicity in solving, 249–250
steps for solving, 249
properties of, 1018–1019, 1022
rational, 250–252
role of multiplicity in solving, 251
steps for solving, 251
satisfying, 812
sides of, 950
solving, 1020–1022
strict, 950
systems of, 812–819
graphing, 813–816
in two variables, 812
Inequality symbols, 949
Inertia
moment of, 537
product of, 533
Infinite geometric series, 853–854
Infinite limit, 212
Infinite sets, 877
Infinity, 1017
limits at, 212
Inflation, 357
Inflection point, 101, 363
Initial point of directed line segment, 630
Initial side of angle, 386
Initial value of exponential function, 305
Input to relation, 79
Inscribed circle, 580
Instantaneous rate of change, 929
Integers, 948
dividing, 970
factoring over the, 972
Integrals, 528, 938
area under graph, 934–937
graphing utility to approximate, 938
Intercept(s)
of circle, 70
from an equation, 46
from a graph, 45
graphing an equation in general form 
using, 60–61
graphing utility to find, 1039–1040
from graph of linear equation, 49
graph of lines using, 60–61
Intercepts
of quadratic function, 174–177
Interest
compound, 348–354
computing, 348–350
continuous, 351
defined, 348
doubling or tripling time for money, 
353–354
effective rates of return, 351–352
formula, 349–350
future value of lump sum of money, 
348–351
present value of lump sum of money, 
352–353
problems involving, 1008–1009
rate of, 348, 1008
effective, 351–352
simple, 348, 1008
Intermediate Value Theorem, 264–265
Internal Revenue Service Restructuring 
and Reform Act (RRA), 115
Intersection of sets, 947
Intervals, 1017–1018
closed, 1017, 1018
endpoints of, 1017
half-open, or half-closed, 1017, 1018
open, 1017, 1018
writing, using inequality notation, 1018
Invariance, 713
Inverse
of matrix, 786–789
finding, 786–789
multiplying matrix by, 786–788
solving system of linear equations 
using, 790
Inverse functions, 293–299, 475–493.  See 
also Logarithmic functions
cosine, 479–481
defined, 479
exact value of, 480–481
exact value of expressions involving, 
488–489
implicit form of, 479
defined by a map or an ordered pair, 
293–294
domain of, 294
of domain-restricted function, 298–299
finding, 293–295, 483–484
defined by an equation, 297–299
graph of, 296
range of, 294
secant, cosecant, and cotangent,  
489–491
approximating the value of, 490–491
calculator to evaluate, 490–491
definition of, 489
sine, 475–479
approximate value of, 477–478
defined, 476
exact value of, 476–477

Subject Index  1157
exact value of expressions involving, 
488–489, 518
implicit form of, 476
properties of, 478–479
solving equations involving, 484
Sum and Difference Formulas  
involving, 518–519
tangent, 481–483
defined, 482
exact value of, 482–483
exact value of expressions involving, 
488–489
implicit form of, 482
verifying, 295
written algebraically, 491
Inverse trigonometric equations, 484
Irrational numbers, 948, 998
decimal representation of, 948
Irreducible quadratic factor, 262, 800–801
Isosceles triangle, 42
Jıba, 411
Jordan, Camille, 737
Joules (newton-meters), 648
Khayyám, Omar, 870
Kirchhoff’s Rules, 751, 767
Kôwa, Takakazu Seki, 737
Latitude, 201
Latus rectum, 675, 676
Law of Cosines, 568–571
in applied problems, 570–571
defined, 568
historical feature on, 571
proof of, 569
Pythagorean Theorem as special case of,  
569
SAS triangles solved using, 569–570
SSS triangles solved using, 570
Law of Decay, 360–361.  See also  
Exponential growth and decay
Law of Sines
in applied problems, 562–564
defined, 558
historical feature on, 571
proof of, 563–564
SAA or ASA triangles solved using, 
559–560
SSA triangles solved using, 559–562
Law of Tangents, 567, 571
Laws of Exponents, 304, 313, 953–954
Leading coefficient, 270, 968
Least common multiple (LCM) to add 
rational expressions, 983–984
Left endpoint of interval, 1017
Left limit, 919, 920
Left stochastic transition matrix, 794
Legs of triangle, 545, 959
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 78, 737
Lemniscate, 616, 618
Length of arc of a circle, 390–391
Lensmaker’s equation, 987
Lewis, Meriwether, 544, 596
Lift, 597, 671
Light detector, 550
Light projector, 550
Like radicals, 1028–1029
Like terms, 967–968
Limaçon
with inner loop, 614–615, 618
without inner loop, 613–614, 618
Limits, 211, 224, 907–925
algebra techniques for finding, 912–918
of average rate of change, 917
of constant, 912
of difference, 913
finding, 907–912
by graphing, 909–910
using a table, 907–909
infinite, 212
at infinity, 212
of monomial, 914
one-sided, 919–920
of polynomial, 914–915
of power or root, 915
of product, 913
of quotient, 916
of sum, 913
of x, 912
Line(s), 53–68
of best fit, 166–167
coincident, 740
equations of. See also Linear equation(s); 
Systems of linear equations
secant, 110–111
family of, 67
graphing
given a point and the slope, 56–57
using intercepts, 60–61
horizontal, 57–58, 609, 617
perpendicular, 62–63
point-slope form of, 57–58
polar equation of, 608–609, 617
slope of, 53–56, 59
containing two points, 54
from linear equation, 59
tangent, 73
vertical, 53, 609, 617
y-intercept of, 59
Linear algebra, 778
Linear equation(s). See also Line(s); Sys-
tems of linear equations
defined, 61
in general form, 60–61
given two points, 58
for horizontal line, 57–58
in one variable, 988
for parallel line, 61–62
for perpendicular line, 62–63
slope from, 59
in slope-intercept form, 58–59
for vertical line, 56–57
Linear factors, 796–800
nonrepeated, 796–797
repeated, 798–799
Linear functions, 154–163
average rate of change of, 154–157
building from data, 164–170
defined, 154
graphing utility to find the line of best fit, 
166–167
graph of, 154
identifying, 305–307
increasing, decreasing, or constant, 157
nonlinear relations vs., 165–166
scatter diagrams, 164–165
Linear models
from data, 164–170
from verbal descriptions, 158–160
Linear programming problems, 737,  
819–824
maximum, 823–824
minimum, 822–823
setting up, 820
solution to, 821–822
location of, 822
solving, 820–824
in two variables, 820
Linear speed, 394–395
Linear trigonometric equation, 495–496
Line segment, 630
midpoint of, 39–40
Local maxima and local minima of  
functions, 106–107
Logarithmic equations, 341–347
defined, 326
solving, 326–327, 341–343
Logarithmic functions, 320–332
changing between logarithmic  
expressions and exponential  
expressions, 320–321
continuous, 923
defined, 320
domain of, 321–322
evaluating, 321
fitting to data, 371
graph of, 322–325
base not 44 or e, 338
properties of, 322, 328
range of, 321
Logarithmic spiral, 617
Logarithms, 332–340
on calculators, 337
common (log), 324, 337, 338
evaluating, with bases other than 44 or e, 
337–338
historical feature on, 338
logarithmic expression as single, 335–336
logarithmic expression as sum or  
difference of, 335
natural (ln), 323, 337, 338
properties of, 332–338
establishing, 333
proofs of, 333–334
summary of, 338
using, with even exponents, 343
relating to exponents, 320
Logistic functions, from data, 371–372
Logistic models, 363–365
defined, 363
domain and range of, 363
graph of, 363
properties of, 363
Lotteries, 876
Loudness, 331
Lowest terms
rational expressions in, 980–981
rational function in, 224, 226

1158 
Subject Index
Magnitude
of earthquake, 331
vector in terms of direction cosines and, 
658
of vectors, 630, 632, 634, 635, 636–637
in space, 653–654
Magnitude (modulus), 622, 623, 624
Major axis, 714
Malthus, Thomas Robert, 906, 943
Mandelbrot sets, 629
Mapping, 79
Marginal cost, 181
Marginal propensity to consume, 860
Markov chains, 831
Mathematical induction, 861–864
Extended Principle of, 864
principle of, 862, 864
proving statements using, 861–863
Mathematical modeling, 1007
Matrix/matrices, 737, 753–767, 778–795
adjacency, 794
arranging data in, 778–779
augmented, 753–764
in row echelon form, 1043–1044
row operations on, 755–756
system of equations written from, 754
coefficient, 754
defined, 753, 778
entries of, 753, 778, 786
equal, 779
examples of, 779
graphing utilities for, 780
historical feature on, 791
identity, 786
inverse of, 786–789
finding, 786–789
multiplying matrix by, 786–788
solving system of linear equations 
using, 790
left stochastic transition, 794
m by n, 779
nonsingular, 786, 788
product of two, 782–786
in reduced row echelon form, 759–764
row and column indices of, 753, 778
in row echelon form, 756–764
row operations on, 755–756
scalar multiples of, 781–782
singular, 786
to solve system of linear equations, 
756–764
square, 779
sum and difference of two, 779–781
transition, 831
zero, 781
Maxima of functions
absolute, 107–109
local, 106–107
Maximum value of a quadratic function, 178
Mean
arithmetic, 1026
geometric, 1026
harmonic, 1026
Mean distance, 692, 736
Mechanics, parametric equations applied 
to, 728
Medians of triangle, 41
Mega Millions, 876
Menelaus of Alexandria, 395
Metrica (Heron), 577
Midpoint formula, 39–40
Mind, mapping of, 474
Mindomo (software), 543
Minima of functions
absolute, 107–109
local, 106–107
Minimum value of a quadratic function, 178
Minors, 771–772
Minutes, 388–389
Mixture problems, 1009–1010
Model(s), 1007
linear
from data, 164–170
from verbal descriptions, 158–160
sinusoidal, 458–462
best-fit, 462
daylight hours, 461–462
temperature data, 458–462
Modulus (magnitude), 622, 623, 624
Mollweide, Karl, 567
Mollweide’s Formula, 567
Moment of inertia, 537
Monomial(s), 967
common factors, 972
degree of, 967
examples of, 967
limit of, 914
recognizing, 967
Monter, 67
Motion
circular, 394–395, 582
curvilinear, 723
damped, 584–585
Newton’s second law of, 631
projectile, 723–725
simple harmonic, 581–583
uniform, 1010–1012
Multiplication, 955. See also Product(s)
of complex numbers, 1000–1001
of rational expressions, 981–982
scalar, 781–782
of vectors, by numbers. See also Dot 
product
of vectors, by numbers geometrically, 
631–632
Multiplication principle of counting, 879–880
Multiplication properties for inequalities, 1019
Multiplicity
role in solving polynomial inequalities, 
249–250
role in solving rational inequalities, 251
vertical asymptotes and, 227
Multiplier, 860
Mutually exclusive events, 895–896
Napier, John, 338
Nappes, 673
Natural logarithms (ln), 323, 337, 338
Natural numbers (counting numbers), 
861–863, 948
Nautical miles, 398
Negative angle, 386
Negative numbers
real, 949
square root of, 954, 1003–1004
Newton-meters (joules), 648
Newton’s Law of Cooling, 361–362, 366
Newton’s Law of Heating, 366
Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation, 254
Newton’s Method, 232
Newton’s Second Law of Motion, 581, 631
Niccolo of Brescia (Tartaglia), 266, 627
Nonlinear equations, systems of, 803–811
elimination method for solving, 804–808
historical feature on, 808
substitution method for solving, 803–804
Nonlinear functions, 155
Nonlinear inequalities, systems of, 815–816
Nonlinear relations, 165–166
Nonnegative property of inequalities, 1018
Nonsingular matrix, 786, 788
Nonstrict inequalities, 950
nth roots, 1027–1028
rationalizing the denominator, 1029
simplifying, 1027
simplifying radicals, 1028–1029
Null (empty) sets, 877, 946
Numbers
Fibonacci, 838
irrational, 948
natural (counting), 861–863, 948
rational, 948
triangular, 843
Numerator, 980
Objective function, 820–824
Oblique asymptote, 226, 228–230, 236
Oblique triangle, 558
Odd functions, 437
determining from graph, 103–104
identifying from equation, 105
One-sided limits, 919–920
One-to-one functions, 291–293
defined, 291
horizontal-line test for, 292–293
Open interval, 1017, 1018
Opens down, 172
Opens up, 172
Optical (scanning) angle, 533
Optimization, quadratic functions and, 182
Orbits
elliptical, 672
planetary, 692
Ordered pair(s), 36
inverse function defined by, 293–294
as relations, 79–80
Ordinary annuity, 856
Ordinary (statute) miles, 398
Ordinate (y-coordinate), 36
Orientation, 720
Origin, 36, 651
distance from point to, 140–141
of real number line, 949
symmetry with respect to, 47–48
Orthogonal vectors, 646–648
Outcome of probability, 891
equally likely, 893–894
Output of relation, 79

Subject Index  1159
Parabola, 172–178, 673, 674–682
axis of symmetry of, 172, 674
defined, 674, 714
directrix of, 674
family of, 140
focus of, 674
graphing equation of, 675
solving applied problems involving, 
679–680
with vertex at (h, k), 677–678
with vertex at the origin, 674–677
finding equation of, 676–677
focus at (a, 0), a 7 0, 675–676
vertex of, 172, 674
Paraboloids of revolution, 672, 679
Parallax, 554–555
Parallel lines, 61–62
Parallelogram, area of, 664–665
Parallel vectors, 646
Parameter, 720
time as, 723–725
Parametric equations, 720–732
for curves defined by rectangular  
equations, 726–728
applications to mechanics, 728
cycloid, 727–728
defined, 720
describing, 722–723
graphing, 720–721
using graphing utility, 1045–1046
rectangular equation for curve defined 
parametrically, 721–723
time as parameter in, 723–725
Partial fraction decomposition, 737, 795–803
defined, 796
where denominator has nonrepeated 
irreducible quadratic factor, 800–801
where denominator has only  
nonrepeated linear factors, 796–797
where denominator has repeated  
irreducible quadratic factors, 801
where denominator has repeated  
linear factors, 798–800
Partial fractions, 796
Participation rate, 93
Partitioning, 934–937
Pascal, Blaise, 728, 867, 897
Pascal triangle, 867, 870
Payment period, 348
Peano, Giuseppe, 898
Pendulum, period of, 1035
Perceived (angular) size, 416
Perfect cubes, 969
Perfect roots, 1027
Perfect squares, 969, 973
Perfect triangle, 580
Perihelion, 692, 719, 736
Perimeter, formulas for, 960
Period
fundamental, 420
of pendulum, 1035
of simple harmonic motion, 581
of sinusoidal functions, 436–438,  
455–458
of trigonometric functions, 419–421
Periodic functions, 420
Permutations, 882–885
computing, 885
defined, 882
distinct objects without repetition, 
883–885
distinct objects with repetition, 883
involving n nondistinct objects, 887–888
Perpendicular lines, equations of,  
62–63
Phase shift, 455–458
to graph y = A sin (vx - f) + B, 
455–458
Physics, vectors in, 630
Piecewise-defined functions, 122–123
continuous, 922–923
Pitch, 68
Pixels, 1035
Plane(s)
complex, 622–624
defined, 622
imaginary axis of, 622
plotting points in, 622–624
real axis of, 622
Plane curve, 720–721
Planets, orbit of, 692
Plotting points, 36, 43–45, 598–600
graph equations by, 43–45
Point(s)
coordinates of
on graphing utility, 1036
on number line, 949
corner, 817
distance between two, 37
distance from the origin to, 140–141
feasible, 820, 821–822
inflection, 101, 363
initial, 630
plotting, 36, 43–45, 598–600
graph equations by, 43–45
polar coordinates of, 599–600
of tangency, 73
terminal, 630
turning, 209–210
Point-slope form of equation of line, 57–58
Polar axis, 598
Polar coordinates, 598–607
conversion from rectangular  
coordinates, 602–603
conversion to rectangular coordinates, 
600–601
defined, 598
plotting points using, 598–600
of a point, 599–600
polar axis of, 598
pole of, 598
rectangular coordinates vs., 598
Polar equations
calculus and, 618
classification of, 617–618
of conics, 714–719
analyzing and graphing, 715–717
converting to rectangular equation, 718
focus at pole; eccentricity e, 715–717
defined, 608
graph of, 607–621
cardioid, 612–613, 618
circles, 617
by converting to rectangular  
coordinates, 608–611
defined, 608
lemniscate, 616, 618
limaçon with inner loop, 614–615, 618
limaçon without inner loop,  
613–614, 618
by plotting points, 612–618
polar grids for, 607
rose, 615–616, 618
sketching, 618–619
spiral, 616
using graphing utility, 609, 1045
historical feature on, 619
identifying, 608–611
testing for symmetry, 611
transforming rectangular form to, 
604–605
transforming to rectangular form, 604
Polar form of complex number,  
623–624
Polar grids, 607
Polarization identity, 650
Pole, 598
Polynomial(s), 967–976
definition of, 968
degree of, 202–206, 968, 972
odd, 262–263, 271
dividing, 255–258, 970–972
synthetic division, 976–980
examples of, 968
factoring, 972–973
by grouping, 973
limit of, 914–915
prime, 972
recognizing, 967–968
solving, 262–263
special products formulas, 969
in standard form, 968
terms of, 968
zero, 968
Polynomial functions, 201–222, 921
complex, 270
complex zeros of, 270, 273–274
Conjugate Pairs Theorem, 271–272
defined, 270
finding, 273–274
polynomial function with zeros given, 
272–273
continuous, 921
cubic models from data, 216–217
defined, 202
end behavior of, 211–213, 226, 227
graph of, 203–217
analyzing, 214–215
end behavior of, 211–213, 226, 227
smooth and continuous, 203
turning points of, 209–210
using bounds on zeros, 264
using transformations, 206
using x-intercepts, 208–209
writing function from, 213
historical feature on, 266
identifying, 202–206
multiplicity of, 207–209

1160 
Subject Index
Polynomial functions (continued)
real zeros (roots) of, 207–209, 255–269
Descartes’ Rule of Signs, 258–259
finding, 260–262
Intermediate Value Theorem, 264–265
number of, 258–259
Rational Zeros Theorem, 259–260, 273
Remainder Theorem and Factor Theo-
rem, 255–258
repeated, 208
theorem for bounds on, 263–264
solving, 260–262
unbounded in the negative direction, 211
Polynomial inequalities, 248–250
algebraically and graphically solving, 
248–250, 252
role of multiplicity in solving, 249–250
steps for solving, 249
Population
increases in, 906, 943
world, 833
Position vector, 632–634
in space, 653
Positive angle, 386
Positive real numbers, 949
Power(s), 445. See also Exponent(s)
of i, 1002–1003
limit of, 915
log of, 334
Powerball, 876
Power functions, 203–206
exponential function vs., 305
graph of, 204–205
of odd degree, 205
properties of, 205
Present value, 350, 352–353
Price, equilibrium, 159–160
Prime polynomials, 972
Principal, 348, 1008
Principal nth root of real number, 1027
Principal square root, 954–955, 1003
Probability(ies), 831, 891–901
Complement Rule to find, 896–897
compound, 894
constructing models, 891–893
defined, 891
of equally likely outcomes, 893
of event, 893
mutually exclusive, 895–896
historical feature on, 897–898
outcome of, 891
sample space, 891
of union of two events, 895–896
Product(s). See also Dot product;  
Multiplication
of complex numbers, 1000–1001
in polar form, 624
of inertia, 533
limits of, 913–914
log of, 334
special, 969
of two functions, 88
of two matrices, 782–786
vector (cross), 639
Product function, 88
Product-to-Sum Formulas, 534–536
Profit, expected, 876
Projectile motion, 723–725
Projection, vector, 646–647
Projection of P on the x- axis, 582
Projection of P on the y- axis, 582
Prolate spheroid, 692
Proper rational expressions, 796
Proper rational function, 228
Proper subsets, 877
Ptolemy, 503, 571
Pure imaginary number, 999
Pythagorean Identities, 423, 505
Pythagorean Theorem, 545, 959–960
applying, 960
converse of, 959–960
as special case of Law of Cosines, 569
Pythagorean triples, 966
Quadrant, angle lying in, 387
Quadrantal angles, 387
trigonometric functions of, 403–405
Quadrants, 36
Quadratic equation(s)
character of the solutions of, 1004
in the complex number system, 1003–1005
definition of, 991
factoring, 991–992
solving
completing the square, 992–993
procedure for, 995
quadratic formula, 993–995, 1004
Square Root Method, 992
in standard form, 991
Quadratic factors, irreducible, 262, 800–801
Quadratic formula, 993–995, 1004
Quadratic functions, 170–182
defined, 171
graph of
properties of, 174–178
steps for, 178
using its vertex, axis, and intercepts, 
174–178
using transformations, 172–174
inequalities involving, 192–195
maximum or minimum value of, 178, 182
optimizations and, 182
vertex and axis of symmetry of, 174–178
Quadratic models, 182–191
from data, 186–187
from verbal descriptions, 182–186
Quantity, equilibrium, 159–160
Quantity demanded, 159–160
Quantity supplied, 159–160
Quaternions, 639
Quotient(s), 255, 256, 970. See also  
Division
of complex numbers
in polar form, 624
difference, 85–86, 116, 319, 523
limit of, 916
log of, 334
synthetic division to find, 978–979
of two functions, 89
Quotient identity(ies), 505
of trigonometric functions, 422
Radians, 389
converting between degrees and, 390–393
Radical equations, 1030
defined, 1030
graphing utility to solve, 1041
solving, 1030
Radicals, 1027
fractional exponents as, 1030–1031
index of, 1027
like, 1028–1029
properties of, 1028
rational exponents defined using, 1030
simplifying, 1028–1029
Radical sign, 954
Radicand, 1027
Radioactive decay, 360–361
Radius, 68
of sphere, 660
Range, 79
of absolute value function, 120
of constant function, 119
of cosecant function, 418, 419
of cosine function, 418, 419, 435
of cotangent function, 419
of cube function, 120
of cube root function, 120
of greatest integer function, 121
of identity function, 119
of inverse function, 294
of logarithmic function, 321
of logistic models, 363
of one-to-one function, 291
of projectile, 528
of reciprocal function, 120
of secant function, 419
of sine function, 419, 433
of square function, 119
of square root function, 120
of tangent function, 419, 449
of the trigonometric functions,  
418–419
Rate of change
average, 54, 110, 154–157
limit of, 917
of linear and exponential functions, 
306–307
instantaneous, 929
Rate of interest, 348, 1008
Rates of return, effective, 351–352
Ratio
common, 850
golden, 842
conjugate, 842
Rational exponents, 1030–1032
Rational expressions, 980–987
adding and subtracting, 982–983
least common multiple (LCM) method 
for, 983–984
complex, 984–986
decomposing. See Partial fraction decom-
position
defined, 980
improper, 796
multiplying and dividing, 981–982
proper, 796
reducing to lowest terms, 980–981

Subject Index  1161
Rational functions, 223–248
applied problems involving, 244
asymptotes of, 225–226
horizontal, 225–226, 228–230
oblique, 228–230
vertical, 225–226
continuous, 921–922
defined, 223
domain of, 223–225
graph of, 233–248
analyzing, 233–244
constructing rational function from, 
243–244
end behavior of, 226
using transformations, 224–225
with a hole, 241–243
improper, 228
in lowest terms, 224, 226
proper, 228
unbounded in positive direction, 224
Rational inequalities, 250–252
role of multiplicity in solving, 251
steps for solving, 251
Rationalizing the denominator, 1029
Rational numbers, 223, 948, 998
Rational Zeros Theorem, 259–260, 273
Rays (half-lines), 386
of central angle, 389
vertex of, 386
Real axis of complex plane, 622
Real number(s), 948–951, 998
approximate decimals, 948
conjugate of, 1002
defined, 948
principal nth root of, 1027
Real number line, 949
Real part of complex numbers, 999
Real zeros (roots) of polynomial  
functions, 255–269
finding, 260–262
Intermediate Value Theorem, 264–265
number of, 258–259
Rational Zeros Theorem, 259–260,  
273
Remainder Theorem and Factor  
Theorem, 255–258
repeated, 208
theorem for bounds on, 263–264
Reciprocal function, 120, 451. See also  
Cosecant function; Secant function
Reciprocal identities, 422, 505
Reciprocal property for inequalities,  
1019, 1022
Rectangle, area and perimeter of,  
960, 961
Rectangular (Cartesian) coordinates
converted to polar coordinates, 602–603
polar coordinates converted to, 600–601
polar coordinates vs., 598
polar equations graphed by converting to, 
608–611
in space, 651–652
Rectangular (Cartesian) coordinate system,  
36
Rectangular (Cartesian) form of complex 
number, 623–624
Rectangular equations
for curve defined parametrically,  
721–723
polar equations converted to, 604, 718
transforming to polar equation, 604–605
Rectangular grid, 607
Recursive formula, 837–838
for arithmetic sequences, 845–846
terms of sequences defined by, 837–838
Reduced row echelon form, 759–764
Reflections about x-axis or y-axis, 133–134
Refraction, 503
Regiomontanus, 395, 571
Relation(s), 79. See also Function(s)
defined, 79
domain of, 80
as function, 79
input to, 79
nonlinear, 165–166
ordered pairs as, 79–80
Relative maxima and minima of  
functions, 106–107
Remainder, 256, 970
synthetic division to find, 978–979
Remainder Theorem, 256–258
Repeated solution, 991
Repeated zeros (solutions), 208
Repeating decimals, 948
Repose, angle of, 493
Rest (equilibrium) position, 581
Resultant force, 637
Review, 946–1035
of algebra, 946–959
distance on the real number line, 
950–951
domain of variable, 952
evaluating algebraic expressions, 
951–952
evaluating exponents, 955
graphing inequalities, 950
Laws of Exponents, 953–954
sets, 946–949
square roots, 954–955
complex numbers, 998–1003
of geometry, 959–966
congruent and similar triangles,  
961–963
formulas, 960–961
Pythagorean theorem and its  
converse, 959–960
inequalities
combined, 1021–1022
properties of, 1018–1019
solving, 1020–1022
interval notation, 1017–1018
of nth roots, 1027
rationalizing the denominator, 1029
simplifying, 1028
simplifying radicals, 1028–1029
of polynomials, 967–976
dividing, 970–972
factoring, 972–973
monomials, 967
recognizing, 967–968
special products formulas, 969
synthetic division of, 976–980
of rational exponents, 1030–1032
of rational expressions, 980–987
adding and subtracting, 982–983
complex, 984–986
multiplying and dividing, 981–982
reducing to lowest terms, 980–981
Revolutions per unit of time, 394
Rhaeticus, 395
Rhind papyrus, 857
Richter scale, 331
Right angle, 387, 959
Right circular cone, 673
Right circular cylinder, volume and  
surface area of, 961
Right endpoint of interval, 1017
Right-hand rule, 651–652
Right limit, 919–920
Right triangles, 545, 547–552, 959
applications of, 548–552
solving, 547–552
Right triangle trigonometry, 545–557
Complementary Angle Theorem, 547
fundamental identities, 422–424
values of trigonometric functions of acute 
angles, 545–547
Rise, 53
Root(s), 988. See also Solution(s); Zeros
complex, 626–627
limit of, 915
of multiplicity 36 (double root),  
991
perfect, 1027
Rose, 615–616, 618
Roster method, 946
Rotation of axes, 707–711
analyzing equation using, 709–711
formulas for, 708
identifying conic without, 711–712
Rounding, 955
Round-off errors, 548
Row echelon form, 756–764
augmented matrix in, 1043–1044
reduced, 759–764
Row index, 753, 778
Row operations, 755–756
Row vector, 782
Ruffini, P., 266
Rule of Signs, Descartes’, 258–259
Rumsey, David, 544
Run, 53–56
Rutherford, Ernest, 705
SAA triangles, 559–560
Sample space, 891
SAS triangles, 558, 569–570, 575–576
Satisfying equations, 43, 988
Satisfying inequalities, 812
Sawtooth curve, 589
Scalar, 631, 781
Scalar multiples of matrix, 781–782
Scalar product. See Dot product
Scale of number line, 949
Scanning (optical) angle, 533
Scatter diagrams, 164–165, 458–459
Schroeder, E., 898
Scientific calculators, 955

1162 
Subject Index
Secant
defined, 545
graph of, 451–452
periodic properties of, 420
Secant function, 401
continuous, 922, 923
domain of, 418, 419
inverse, 489–491
approximating the value of, 490
calculator to evaluate, 490
definition of, 489
range of, 419
Secant line, 110–111
Second-degree equation. See Quadratic 
equation(s)
Seconds, 388–389
 Seed, 629
Sequences, 834–861
annuity problems, 856–857
arithmetic, 844–849
common difference in, 844
defined, 844
determining, 844–845
formula for, 845–846
nth term of, 845
recursive formula for, 845–846
sum of, 846–848
defined, 834
factorial symbol, 836–837
Fibonacci, 838, 842
geometric, 850–853
common ratio of, 850
defined, 850
determining, 850–851
formula for, 851–852
nth term of, 851–852
sum of, 852–853
graph of, 834–835
historical feature on, 857
from a pattern, 836
properties of, 839
summation notation, 838–839
sum of, 839–840
terms of, 834–836
alternating, 836
defined by a recursive formula,  
837–838
general, 835
Set(s), 946–949
complement of, 947
correspondence between two, 79
defined, 877
disjoint, 948
elements of, 877–879, 946
empty (null), 877, 946
equal, 877, 947
finite, 877
infinite, 877
intersection of, 947
Mandelbrot, 629
of numbers, 946–949
subsets of, 877
proper, 877
universal, 878, 947
Set-builder notation, 946–947
Shannon’s diversity index, 330
Shifts, graphing functions using vertical and 
horizontal, 128–131, 134
Side–angle–side case of congruent  
triangle, 962
Side–angle–side case of similar triangle, 
962, 963
Sides
of equation, 43, 988
of inequality, 950
Side–side–side case of similar  
triangle, 963
Similar triangles, 961–963
Simple harmonic motion, 581–583
amplitude of, 581
analyzing, 583
circular motion and, 582
defined, 581
equilibrium (rest) position, 581
frequency of object in, 582
model for, 581–583
period of, 581
Simple interest, 348, 1008
Simplifying
complex rational expressions,  
984–986
expressions with rational exponents, 
1030–1032
nth roots, 1027
radicals, 1028–1029
Simpson’s rule, 189
Sine
defined, 545
historical feature on, 411–412
Law of
in applied problems, 562–564
defined, 558
historical feature on, 571
proof of, 563–564
SAA or ASA triangles solved using, 
559–560
SSA triangles solved using, 559–562
periodic properties of, 420
Sum and Difference Formula for, 514–515
trigonometric equations linear in, 
519–520
Sine function, 401
of best fit, 462
continuous, 923
domain of, 418, 419, 433
graphs of, 432–447
amplitude and period, 436–438
equation for, 441–442
key points for, 438–441
hyperbolic, 319
inverse, 475–479
approximate value of, 477–478
defined, 476
exact value of, 476–477
exact value of expressions involving, 
488–489
implicit form of, 476
properties of, 478
properties of, 433
range of, 419, 433
Singular matrix, 786
Sinusoidal graphs, 432–447, 586–587
amplitude and period, 436–438
equation for, 441–442
key points for, 438–441
steps for, 458
Sinusoidal models, 458–462
best-fit, 462
daylight hours, 461–462
temperature data, 458–460
Six trigonometric functions
exact values of, 411
of u. See also Trigonometric functions
of quadrantal angles, 403–405
of t, 401–402
Slope, 53–56, 59
containing two points, 54
graphing lines given, 56
from linear equation, 59
of secant line, 111
Slope-intercept form of equation of line, 
58–59
Smooth graph, 203
Snell, Willebrord, 503
Snell’s Law of Refraction, 503
Solution(s), 988. See also Zeros
extraneous, 1030
of inequality, 1020
of linear programming problems, 821–822
location of, 822
repeated, 208, 991
of systems of equations, 739, 744–746
of trigonometric equations, 494
Solution set of equation, 988
Special products, 969
Speed
angular, 394
instantaneous, 929–931
linear, 394–395
Sphere, 660
volume and surface area of, 961
Spherical trigonometry, 595
Spheroid, prolate, 692
Spiral, 616–617
Square(s)
of binomials (perfect squares), 969, 973
difference of two, 969, 972, 973
perfect, 969, 973
Square function, 119
Square matrix, 779
Square root(s), 954–955, 1027
complex, 626
of negative number, 954, 1003–1004
principal, 954–955, 1003
Square root function, 117, 120
Square Root Method, 992
SSA triangles, 559–562
SSS triangles, 558, 570, 576–577
Standard deviation, 1026
Standard form
complex number in, 999
power of, 1003
quotient of two, 1001–1002
reciprocal of, 1001
of equation of circle, 68–69
polynomials in, 968
quadratic equation in, 991
Standard position, angle in, 386–387

Subject Index  1163
Static equilibrium, 638–639
Statute (ordinary) miles, 398
Step function, 121
Stirling’s formula, 871
Stock valuation, 153
Straight angle, 387
Stretches, graphing functions using, 
131–133, 134
Strict inequalities, 950
Subscripted letters, 834
Subsets, 877, 947
proper, 877
Substitution method, 737, 740–741
systems of nonlinear equations solved 
using, 803–804
Subtraction, 955. See also Difference(s)
of complex numbers, 999
of rational expressions, 982–983
least common multiple (LCM) method 
for, 983–984
of vectors, 634–635
in space, 653–654
Sum. See also Addition
of arithmetic sequences, 846–848
of geometric sequences, 852–853
index of, 838
of infinite geometric series, 854
limits of, 913
of logarithms, 335
of sequences, 839–840
of two cubes, 969
of two functions, 88
graph of, 585–587
of two matrices, 779–781
Sum and Difference Formulas, 512–524
for cosines, 512–513
defined, 512
to establish identities, 514–517
to find exact values, 513, 515–516
involving inverse trigonometric  
function, 518–519
for sines, 514–515
for tangents, 517
Sum function, 88
Summation notation, 838–839
Sum-to-Product Formulas, 535–536
Sun, declination of, 486
Surface area, formulas for, 961
Sylvester, James J., 791
Symmetry, 46–48
axis of
of parabola, 172
of quadratic function, 174–178
axis of, of parabola, 674
graphing utility to check for, 1039–1040
of polar equations, 611
with respect to origin, 47–48
with respect to the line u = p
2  (y- axis), 
611
with respect to the polar axis (x- axis), 
611
with respect to the pole (origin), 611
with respect to the x-axis, 47, 48
with respect to the y-axis, 47, 48
Synthetic division, 976–980
Systems of equations
consistent, 739, 744
dependent, 740
containing three variables, 747–748
containing two variables,  
743–744
Cramer’s Rule with, 774
equivalent, 741–742
graphing, 740
inconsistent, 739, 744, 746
containing three variables, 746–747
containing two variables, 743
Cramer’s Rule with, 774
independent, 740
solutions of, 739, 744–746
Systems of inequalities, 812–819
graphing, 813–816
bounded and unbounded graphs, 816
vertices or corner points, 817
Systems of linear equations, 738–778
consistent, 740, 744
defined, 739–740
dependent, 740
containing three variables, 747–748
containing two variables, 743–744
matrices to solve, 760–761
determinants, 768–777
cofactors, 772
Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of 
three equations containing three 
variables, 773–774
Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of two 
equations containing two variables, 
769–771
minors of, 771–772
properties of, 774–775
37 by 37, 771–773
36 by 36, 768, 774–775
elimination method of solving, 741–743, 
744
equivalent, 741–742
examples of, 738–739
graphing, 740
inconsistent, 740, 744, 746
containing three variables, 746–747
containing two variables, 743
matrices to solve, 762
independent, 740
matrices. See Matrix/matrices
partial fraction decomposition, 795–803
defined, 796
where denominator has a nonrepeated 
irreducible quadratic factor, 800–801
where denominator has only nonre-
peated linear factors, 796–797
where denominator has repeated  
irreducible quadratic factors, 801
where denominator has repeated 
linear factors, 798–800
solution of, 739, 744–746
solving, 739
with graphing utility, 1043–1044
substitution method of, 740–741
three equations containing three  
variables, 744–746
Systems of nonlinear equations, 803–811
elimination method for solving, 804–808
historical feature on, 808
substitution method for solving, 803–804
Systems of nonlinear inequalities,  
graphing, 815–816
Tables, on graphing utility, 1038
Tangency, point of, 73
Tangent(s)
defined, 545
graph of, 447–450
Half-angle Formulas for, 530
historical feature on, 411–412
Law of, 567, 571
periodic properties of, 420
Sum and Difference Formulas for, 517
Tangent function, 401
continuous, 922, 923
domain of, 418, 419, 449
inverse, 481–483
defined, 482
exact value of, 482–483
exact value of expressions involving, 
488–489
implicit form of, 482
properties of, 449
range of, 419, 449
Tangent line, 73
to the graph of a function, 926–927
Greek method for finding, 73
Tangent problem, 926–927
Tartaglia (Niccolo of Brescia), 266, 627
Tautochrone, 728
Terminal point of directed line segment, 630
Terminal side of angle, 386
Terminating decimals, 948
Terms
like, 967
of polynomial, 968
of sequences, 834–836
alternating, 836
defined by a recursive formula, 
837–838
general, 835
37 by 37 determinants, 661, 771–773
Thrust, 671
TI-118 Plus, 1037, 1043, 1044
Time, as parameter, 723–725
Transformations, 127–140, 677, 688, 700
combining, 130–131, 135–136
compressions and stretches, 131–134
cosecant and secant graphs using, 452
of cosine function, 435–436
defined, 128
graphs using
of exponential functions, 310, 311–312
of polynomial functions, 206
of quadratic functions, 172–174
of rational functions, 224–225
reflections about the x-axis or y-axis, 
133–134
of sine function, 433–434
vertical and horizontal shifts, 128–131, 134
Transition matrix, 831
Transverse axis, 693, 714
Tree diagram, 880

1164 
Subject Index
Triangle(s). See also Law of Sines
area of, 575–581, 960
ASA, 559–560
congruent, 961–963
equilateral, 42
error, 42
isosceles, 42
legs of, 545, 959
medians of, 41
oblique, 558
Pascal, 867, 870
perfect, 580
right, 545, 547–552, 959
applied problems involving, 548–552
solving, 547–552
SAA, 559–560
SAS, 558, 569–570, 575–576
similar, 961–963
SSA, 559–562
SSS, 558, 570, 576–577
Triangular addition, 869
Triangular number, 843
Trigonometric equations, 494–504
calculator for solving, 497
graphing utility to solve, 499
identities to solve, 498–499
involving single trigonometric function, 
494–497
linear, 495–496
linear in sine and cosine, 519–520
quadratic in from, 497–498
solutions of, defined, 494
Trigonometric expressions, written  
algebraically, 491, 518
Trigonometric functions
of acute angles, 545–547
applications of, 544–596
damped motion, 584–585
graphing sum of two functions, 585–587
involving right triangles, 548–552
Law of Cosines, 570–571
Law of Sines, 569
Law of Tangents, 567, 571
simple harmonic motion, 581–583
calculator to approximate values of, 410
circle of radius r to evaluate, 411
cosecant and secant graphs, 451–452
domain and the range of, 417–419
exact value of
of p
4 = 45°, 405–406, 408–409
of p
6 = 30° and p
3 = 60°, 406–410
given one function and the quadrant of 
the angle, 424–427
using even-odd properties, 427
fundamental identities of, 422–424
quotient, 422
reciprocal, 422
of general angles, signs of, in a given 
quadrant, 421–422
historical feature on, 395, 411–412
period of, 419–421
phase shift, 455–458
to graph y = A sin (vx - f) + B, 
455–458
properties of, 417–432
Even-Odd, 427
of quadrantal angles, 403–405
right triangle trigonometry, 545–557
Complementary Angle Theorem, 547
fundamental identities, 422–424
sine and cosine graphs, 432–447
amplitude and period, 436–438, 
455–458
equation for, 441–442
key points for, 438–441
sinusoidal curve fitting, 458–462
of t, 401–402
tangent and cotangent graphs, 447–451
unit circle approach to, 400–417
Trigonometric identities, 504–511
basic, 505
establishing, 506–509
Double-angle Formulas for, 525–528
Sum and Difference Formulas for, 
514–517
Even-Odd, 505
Pythagorean, 505
Quotient, 505
Reciprocal, 505
Trinomials, 968
Truncation, 955
Turning points, 209–210
36 by 36 determinants, 661, 768
proof for, 774–775
Umbra versa, 412
Unbounded graphs, 816
Unbounded in positive direction, 224
Unbounded in the negative direction,  
polynomial functions, 211
Uniform motion, 1010–1012
Uninhibited growth, 358–360
Union of two events, probabilities of, 
895–896
Unit circle, 69, 400–403
Unit vector, 632, 635–636
in space, 654–655
Universal sets, 878, 947
Value (image) of function,  
80, 82–85
Variable(s), 951, 967
complex, 270
dependent, 83
domain of, 952
independent, 83
in calculus, 432
Variable costs, 66
Vector(s), 630–643
adding, 631, 634–635
algebraic, 632–633
angle between, 645
column, 782
components of, 632, 634
horizontal and vertical, 634
decomposing, 646–647
defined, 630
difference of, 631
direction of, 630, 635–637
dot product of two, 644–645
equality of, 630, 634
finding, 636–637
force, 636
geometric, 630
graphing, 632–634
historical feature on, 639
magnitudes of, 630, 632, 635, 636–637
modeling with, 637–639
multiplying by numbers geometrically, 
631–632
objects in static equilibrium, 638–639
orthogonal, 646–648
parallel, 646
in physics, 630
position, 632–634
row, 782
scalar multiples of, 631–632, 635, 644
in space, 651–660
angle between two vectors, 656
cross product of two, 661–662
direction angles, 656–658
distance formula, 652
dot product, 655
operations on, 653–655
orthogonal to two given vectors, 664
position vectors, 653
rectangular coordinates,  
651–652
subtracting, 634–635
unit, 632, 635–636
velocity, 636–638
writing, 637
zero, 630
Vector product. See Cross (vector) product
Vector projection, 646–647
Velocity, instantaneous, 929–931
Velocity vector, 636–638
Venn diagrams, 947
Verbal descriptions
linear models from, 158–160
quadratic models from, 182–186
Vertex/vertices, 817
of cone, 673
of ellipse, 683
of hyperbola, 693
of parabola, 172, 674
of quadratic function, 174–178
of ray, 386
Vertical asymptote, 225–227
multiplicity and, 227
Vertical component of vector, 634
Vertical line, 53, 609, 617
Vertical-line test, 94–95
Vertically compressed or stretched graphs, 
131–134
Vertical shifts, 128–131, 134
Viète, François, 571
Viewing angle, 415–416, 486
Viewing rectangle, 37, 1035–1037
setting, 1035
Volume, formulas for, 961
Wallis, John, 627
Waves, traveling speeds of, 503. See also 
Simple harmonic motion
Weight, 671

Subject Index  1165
Whispering galleries, 689–690
Wings, airplane, 597, 671
Work, 660
dot product to compute, 648
World population, 833, 906, 943
x-axis, 36
projection of P on the, 582
reflections about, 133–134
symmetry with respect to,  
47, 48
x-coordinate, 36
x-intercept, 45
polynomial graphed using, 208–210
of quadratic function, 175
xy-plane, 36, 651–652
xz-plane, 651–652
Yang Hui, 870
y-axis, 36
projection of P on the, 582
reflections about, 133–134
symmetry with respect to, 47, 48
y-coordinate (ordinate), 36
y-intercept, 45, 59
from linear equation, 59
yz-plane, 651
Zero-coupon bonds, 356
Zero-level earthquake, 331
Zero matrix, 781
Zero polynomial, 968
Zero-Product Property, 949
Zeros
bounds on, 263–264
complex, of polynomials, 270, 273–274
Conjugate Pairs Theorem, 271–272
defined, 270
finding, 273–274
polynomial function with zeros given, 
272–273
real, of polynomials, 207–209, 255–269
Descartes’ Rule of Signs, 258–259
finding, 260–262
Intermediate Value Theorem, 264–265
number of, 258–259
Rational Zeros Theorem, 259–260, 273
Remainder Theorem and Factor  
Theorem, 255–258
repeated, 208
theorem for bounds on, 263–264
Zero vector, 630

This page intentionally left blank 

Library of Functions
Identity Function	
Square Function	
Cube Function
f1x2 = x	
f1x2 = x2	
 f1x2 = x3
Square Root Function	
Reciprocal Function	
Cube Root Function
f1x2 = 1x	
f1x2 = 1
x	
f1x2 = 2
3 x
Absolute Value Function	
Exponential Function	
Natural Logarithm Function
f1x2 = 0 x0 	
f1x2 = ex	
f1x2 = ln x
Sine Function	
Cosine Function	
Tangent Function
f1x2 = sin x	
f1x2 = cos x	
f1x2 = tan x
Cosecant Function	
Secant Function	
Cotangent Function
f1x2 = csc x	
f1x2 = sec x	
f1x2 = cot x
3
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(–1, –1)
x
y
3
–3
4
(2, 4)
(–2, 4)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(–1, 1)
x
y
4
–4
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(–1, –1)
x
y
4
–4
–4
4
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(4, 2)
x
y
5
–1
2
(1, 1)
(–1, –1)
x
y
2
2
–2
–2
2,
(
)
1–2
x
y
3
 (1, 1)
 (1, 1)
 (0, 0)
3
3
3
(2,   2 )
3
(  ,  )
1–8
1–2
 (2,   2 )
3
(  ,  )
1–8
1–2
(1, 1)
(–1, 1)
(2, 2)
(–2, 2)
x
y
3
3
–3
(0, 0)
(1, e)
(2, e2)
3
6
(0, 1)
(–1,   )
x
y
3
1–e
x
y
3
3
(1, 0)
(e, 1)
(   , 1)
1–e
–2
–2

3
––2

2 5
––2
1
1
x
y
x
y
–2
–2

3
––2

2 5
––2
1
1

––2



–2
3
––2
5
––2
5
––2
3
––2
1
1
x
y
–2
–2
3
–––
2
3
–––
2
1
1
x
y

––2
–2
3
––2
 3
–––
2
1
1
x
y
–2
–2
3
–––
2
5
–––
2
 3
–––
2
1
1
x
y

Formulas/Equations
Distance Formula	
If P1 = 1x1, y1 2 and P2 = 1x2, y2 2, the distance from P1 to P2 is
	
d(P1, P2) = 3(x2 - x1)2 + (y2 - y1)2
Standard Equation	
The standard equation of a circle of radius r with center at (h, k) is	
 
of a Circle
	
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 =  r 2
Slope Formula	
The slope m of the line containing the points P1 = 1x1, y1 2 and P2 = 1x2, y2 2 is
	
m = y2 - y1
x2 - x1
      if x1 ≠x2 
	
m is undefined    if x1 = x2
Point–Slope	
The equation of a line with slope m containing the point (x1, y1) is	
 
Equation of a Line
	
y - y1 = m(x - x1)
Slope–Intercept	
The equation of a line with slope m and y-intercept b is	
 
Equation of a Line
	
y = mx + b
Quadratic Formula	
The solutions of the equation ax2 + bx + c = 0, a ≠0, are
	
x = -b { 2b2 - 4ac 
2a
	
If b2 - 4ac 7 0, there are two unequal real solutions.
	
If b2 - 4ac = 0, there is a repeated real solution.
	
If b2 - 4ac 6 0, there are two complex solutions that are not real.
Geometry Formulas
Circle	
r = Radius,  A = Area,  C = Circumference
	
A = pr 2     C = 2pr
Triangle	
b = Base,  h = Altitude (Height),  A = Area
	
A = 1
2  bh
Rectangle	
l = Length,  w = Width,  A = Area,  P = Perimeter
	
A = lw  P = 2l + 2w
Rectangular Box	
l = Length,  w = Width,  h = Height,  V = Volume,  S = Surface area
	
V = lwh  S = 2lw + 2lh + 2wh
Sphere	
r = Radius,  V = Volume,  S = Surface area
	
V = 4
3 pr 3   S = 4pr 2
Right Circular Cylinder	
r = Radius,  h = Height,  V = Volume, S = Surface area
	
           V = pr 2h    S = 2pr 2 + 2prh
r
h
b
l
w
(closed)
h
w
l
r
(closed)
h
r

Properties of Logarithms
loga (MN) = loga M + loga N
loga aM
N b = loga M - loga N
logaMr = r logaM
loga M = log M
log a = ln M
ln a
ar = er ln a
Permutations/Combinations
0! = 1    1! = 1
n! = n(n - 1) # c# (3)(2)(1)
P1n, r2 =
n!
1n - r2!
C1n, r2 = an
r b =
n!
1n - r2! r!
Parabola
	
y2 = 4ax	
y2 = -4ax	
x2 = 4ay	
x2 = -4ay
Ellipse
	
x2
a2 + y2
b2 = 1, a 7 b, c2 = a2 - b2	
x2
b2 + y2
a2 = 1, a 7 b, c2 = a2 - b2
Hyperbola
	
x2
a2 - y2
b2 = 1, c2 = a2 + b2	
y2
a2 - x2
b2 = 1, c2 = a2 + b2
	
Asymptotes:  y = b
a x,  y = - b
a x	
Asymptotes:  y = a
b x,  y = - a
b x
Binomial Theorem
(a + b)n = an + an
1bban-1 + an
2bb2an-2
                                           + g + a
n
n - 1bbn-1a + bn
Arithmetic Sequence
a1 + (a1 + d) + (a1 + 2d) + g + [a1 + (n - 1)d]
                               = n
2
 32a1 + 1n - 12d4 = n
2
 3a1 + an4
Geometric Sequence
a1 + a1r + a1r 2 + g + a1r n-1 = a1 # 1 - r n
1 - r
Geometric Series
If 0 r0 6 1,  a1 + a1r + a1r 2 + g = a
q
k=1
 a1r k-1
     
 =
a1
1 - r
Conics
V
D: x = –a
F = (a, 0)
x
y
V
D: x = a
F = (–a, 0)
x
y
V
D: y = –a
F = (0, a)
x
y
x
y
V
F = (0, –a)
D: y = a
(0, b)
(0, –b)
F1 = (–c, 0)
V1 = (–a, 0)
V2 = (a, 0)
F2 = (c, 0)
x
y
F2
 = (0, c)
(b, 0)
(–b, 0)
F1
 = (0, – c)
V2
 = (0, a)
V1
 = (0, –a)
x
y
F2
 = (c, 0)
F1
 = (– c, 0)
V2
 = (a, 0)
V1
 = (–a, 0)
x
y
V1 = (0, –a)
V2 = (0, a)
F2 = (0, c)
F 1 = (0, –c)
x
y

Trigonometric Functions
Let t be a real number and let P = 1x, y2 be the point on the unit 
circle that corresponds to t.
 sin t = y	
 cos t = x	
 tan t = y
x, x ≠0
 csc t = 1
y, y ≠0	  sec t = 1
x, x ≠0	  cot t = x
y, y ≠0
Fundamental Identities
 tan u = sin u
cos u   cot u = cos u
sin u
 csc u =
1
sin u   sec u =
1
cos u  cot u =
1
tan u
sin2 u  + cos2 u = 1
tan2 u + 1 = sec2 u
cot2 u + 1 = csc2 u
Half-Angle Formulas
 sin u
2 = { A
1 - cos u
2
 cos u
2 = { A
1 + cos u
2
 tan u
2 = 1 - cos u
sin u
Double-Angle Formulas
 sin 12u2 = 2 sin u cos u
 cos 12u2 = cos2 u - sin2 u
 cos 12u2 = 2 cos2 u - 1
 cos 12u2 = 1 - 2 sin2 u
 tan 12u2 =
2 tan u
1 - tan2 u
Even-Odd Identities
 sin1 -u2 = -sin u   csc1 -u2 = -csc u
 cos1 -u2 = cos u  
 sec1 -u2 = sec u
 tan1 -u2 = -tan u   cot1 -u2 = -cot u
Product-to-Sum Formulas
 sin a sin b = 1
2 [cos1a - b2 - cos1a + b2]
 cos a cos b = 1
2 [cos1a - b2 + cos1a + b2]
 sin a cos b = 1
2 [sin1a + b2 + sin1a - b2]
Sum and Difference Formulas
 sin1a + b2 = sin a cos b + cos a sin b
 sin1a - b2 = sin a cos b - cos a sin b
 cos1a + b2 = cos a cos b - sin a sin b
 cos1a - b2 = cos a cos b + sin a sin b
 tan1a + b2 =
tan a + tan b
1 - tan a tan b
 tan1a - b2 =
tan a - tan b
1 + tan a tan b
Sum-to-Product Formulas
 sin a + sin b = 2 sin a + b
2
 cos a - b
2
 sin a - sin b = 2 sin a - b
2
 cos a + b
2
 cos a + cos b = 2 cos a + b
2
 cos a - b
2
 cos a - cos b = -2 sin a + b
2
 sin a - b
2
Solving Triangles
	
Law of Sines
	
sin A
a
= sin B
b
= sin C
c
c
a
b
C
B
A
Law of Cosines
a2 = b2 + c2 - 2bc cos A
b2 = a2 + c2 - 2ac cos B
c2 = a2 + b2 - 2ab cos C
y
x
t
0
s 5 t units
t units
u 5 t radians
P 5 (x, y)
x 2 1 y 2 5 1
0
y
x
t
|t | units
s 5 |t | units
P 5 (x, y)
u 5 t radians
x 2 1 y 2 5 1
Trigonometric Identities
x
–4
–3
–6
(1, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 1)
(1, 0)

0, 2
–2
3
––2
7
––4
3
––4
5
––6
7
––6
11
–––
6
4
––3
5
––3
2
––3
5
––4
330
300
240
210
150
30
120
60
90
270
0, 360
180
315
225
135
45
y
1–2
(
)
, 
––2
3
1–2
(
)
,
––2
3
1–2(
)
, ––2
3
1–2(
)
, ––2
3
1–2
(
)
, 

––2
3
1–2
(
)
,

––2
3
(
)
, 
––2
2
––2
2
(
)
,
––2
2
––2
2
1–2 )
, 
––2
3
(
1–2 )
,
––2
3
(
(
)
, 
 ––2
2
––2
2
(
)
,
 ––2
2
––2
2

