A World of Zero Unplanned Downtime
Predictive 
Maintenance
Mike Barlow

Mike Barlow
Predictive Maintenance
A World of Zero Unplanned Downtime

978-1-491-92158-6
[LSI]
Predictive Maintenance
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc.. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editors: Mike Loukides and Brian
Sawyer
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Ellie Volckhausen
February 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-02-17: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781491921586 for release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Predictive Mainte‐
nance, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media,
Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Looking at the Numbers                                                                           2
Preventive Versus Predictive                                                                    4
Follow the Money                                                                                      6
Not All Work Is Created Equal                                                                6
Building a Foundation                                                                              8
It’s Not All About Heavy Machinery                                                       9
The Future of Maintenance                                                                    11
iii


Predictive Maintenance: A World
of Zero Unplanned Downtime
For want of a nail the shoe was lost.
For want of a shoe the horse was lost.
For want of a horse the rider was lost.
For want of a rider the message was lost.
For want of a message the battle was lost.
For want of a battle the kingdom was lost.
And all for the want of a horseshoe nail.
—Traditional rhyme
Nothing grabs the attention of C-suite executives more effectively
than talk of profits, which explains the current buzz around predic‐
tive maintenance.
Geeks and gear heads across the landscape of heavy industry have
been hearing the siren song of predictive maintenance for decades.
The basic idea is simple: with the right blend of math and sensors,
machines are fixed before they break, valuable resources are spared,
and unplanned downtime is rendered obsolete.  But until recently,
the processes that would have made predictive maintenance possible
either didn’t exist or were far too expensive to be considered
practical.
Today, the situation looks very different. The combination of
advanced analytics, low-cost sensors, and the Internet of Things
(IoT) promises to elevate maintenance from a cost center to a profit
center. True believers like Mark Grabb, the technology leader for
analytics at GE Software, see predictive maintenance as a spark with
the power to ignite an economic revolution.
1

1 Operations & Maintenance Best Practices: A Guide to Achieving Operational Efficiency,
U.S. Department of Energy Federal Energy Management Program, August 2010
From his perspective, broader adoption of predictive maintenance
principles will enable companies to provide a far wider range of
products and services than ever before. Early adopters are likely to
be companies in the energy, transportation, manufacturing, and
information technology sectors. As more parts of the economy
become dependent on services and benefits flowing through the IoT,
the appeal of predictive maintenance will spread rapidly.
Looking at the Numbers
A seminal study1 by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Pacific North‐
west National Laboratory claimed that a “functional predictive
maintenance program” can reduce maintenance cost by 30 percent,
reduce downtime by 45 percent, and eliminate breakdowns by as
much as 75 percent.
According to the report:
The advantages of predictive maintenance are many. A well-
orchestrated predictive maintenance program will all but eliminate
catastrophic equipment failures. We will be able to schedule main‐
tenance activities to minimize or delete overtime cost. We will be
able to minimize inventory and order parts, as required, well ahead
of time to support the downstream maintenance needs. We can
optimize the operation of the equipment, saving energy cost and
increasing plant reliability.
If maintenance makes the leap from the garage to the C-suite, it will
follow paths that were pioneered years ago by drab back-office func‐
tions such as accounting, which evolved into finance and is led by
chief financial officers (CFOs); and data processing, which evolved
into IT and is led by chief information officers (CIOs).
Is this the dawning of the Age of Predictive Maintenance? Mike Hit‐
mar, a global product marketing manager at SAS who specializes in
manufacturing, offers a “resounding yes” to that question. “Analytics
are cool now, and people are beginning to develop a better under‐
standing of what analytics can do,” he says. “Analytics are the flipside
of BI (business intelligence). Instead of looking backward at what’s
already happened, you’re looking forward and anticipating what’s
likely to happen.”
2 
| 
Predictive Maintenance: A World of Zero Unplanned Downtime

2 Forecast: The Internet of Things, Worldwide, 2013, Peter Middleton, Peter Kjeldsen, and
Jim Tully, Gartner, Inc., November 2013
The economic potential of predictive maintenance—not wearable
technology or connected refrigerators—will drive steady growth of
the IoT, Hitmar says. Companies like GE, Cisco, IBM, and Intel are
counting on predictive maintenance capabilities enabled by the IoT
to create an additional $100 billion in value for the energy and utilit‐
ies industries by 2020.  According to Gartner,2 the IoT will create
nearly $2 trillion in new value across the global economy during the
next five years and much of the value creation will be spurred by
predictive maintenance.
Ganesh Bell, chief digital officer and general manager at GE Power
& Water, sees three layers of value creation from predictive mainte‐
nance strategies, as outlined in Table 1.
Table 1. Multi-layer approach to predictive maintenance
Organizational Layer
Focus
Goal
C-suite
Market performance
Optimize corporate profitability
VPs
Operational optimization
Increase efficiency; lower overall operating
costs
Managers
Asset performance
Increase asset reliability and availability;
reduce maintenance costs
 
Describing the first layer, he says:
For plant managers and maintenance managers, the primary focus
will be asset performance. Their goal is zero unplanned downtime
for every asset they have. That’s the foundation—increasing the
reliability and availability of assets while lowering maintenance
costs.
Bell adds, “The next layer are the VPs, who are thinking in terms of
optimizing the entire plant operation, not just the physical assets,
but everything, including the supply chain and human resources.” 
The third and highest layer is the C-suite, which focuses on optimiz‐
ing profitability across the enterprise. “In the energy sector, when
we talk about a 1 percent fuel savings, it translates into about $65
billion in value for our customers,” he says. “From our perspective,
we see predictive maintenance having a significant business impact
at all three layers.”
Looking at the Numbers 
| 
3

Each layer has different perspectives and goals. At the bottom layer,
it’s essential for managers and operators to understand the physics
of individual parts and machines. At the next layer, the interplay
between resources, machines, processes, and human behavior is
critical. At the topmost layer, the focus is on making sure that the
efficiencies achieved at the lower layers add up to market advantages
and real profits.
Clearly, predictive maintenance is more than a tool or a solution; it’s
an integrated business strategy, with multiple layers, interconnected
processes, and complex relationships among various stakeholders
across the enterprise and beyond its traditional boundaries.
Bell says he sees similarities between the evolution of predictive
maintenance and the evolution of ERP (enterprise resource plan‐
ning), CRM (customer relationship management), supply chain
management, and other systems that have become indispensable
staples of the corporate IT portfolio. “We’re already seeing CIOs get‐
ting involved in this and partnering with the head of assets or the
head of operations at their companies to build up the IT infrastruc‐
ture necessary to support predictive maintenance,” he says.
It’s important for CIOs to stretch beyond their traditional roles as
“digitizers” when they prepare IT for the shift to predictive mainte‐
nance, he adds. “Predictive maintenance isn’t the same as replacing
atoms with electrons or using software to perform business pro‐
cesses. This is something fundamentally different; it’s about creating
new value and new revenue for the company.”
Preventive Versus Predictive
The difference between preventive maintenance and predictive main‐
tenance is more than merely semantic. Imagine a pyramid with three
levels. At the bottom is reactive maintenance, where the operative
philosophy is “wait until it breaks and then fix it.” The next level up
is preventive maintenance, in which repairs or alterations are made
at scheduled intervals. The goal of preventive maintenance is
extending the useful life of machines and their parts.
At the top of our imaginary pyramid is predictive maintenance,
which seeks to stave off problems before they actually occur. In pre‐
dictive maintenance scenarios, the goal is eliminating unplanned
outages or breakdowns entirely. It’s not hard to see why utility com‐
4 
| 
Predictive Maintenance: A World of Zero Unplanned Downtime

panies are leaders in predictive maintenance: power outages are
expensive to remedy, create a variety of real dangers, and are guar‐
anteed to anger customers. Medical device manufacturers are also at
the vanguard of predictive maintenance, for similar reasons.
Based on information from the DOE, Tables 2 and 3 show key dif‐
ferences between preventive and predictive maintenance.
Table 2. Advantages of preventive maintenance and predictive
maintenance
Preventive Maintenance
Predictive Maintenance
Cost effective in many capital-intensive
processes
Increased component operational life/availability
Flexibility allows for the adjustment of
maintenance periodicity
Allows for preemptive corrective actions
Increased component life cycle
Decrease in equipment or process downtime
Energy savings
Decrease in costs for parts and labor
Reduced equipment or process failure
Better product quality
Estimated 12% to 18% cost savings over
reactive maintenance program
Improved worker and environmental safety
 
Improved worker morale
 
Energy savings
 
Estimated 8% to 12% cost savings over preventive
maintenance program
Table 3. Disadvantages of preventive maintenance and predictive
maintenance
Preventive Maintenance
Predictive Maintenance
Catastrophic failures still likely to occur
Increased investment in diagnostic
equipment
Labor intensive
Increased investment in staff training
Includes performance of unneeded maintenance
Savings potential not readily seen by
management
Potential for incidental damage to components in
conducting unneeded maintenance
 
Preventive Versus Predictive 
| 
5

Follow the Money
Greg Fell is the former CIO of Terex, a heavy equipment manufac‐
turer. Previously, he held technology management roles at Ford
Motor Company. Fell believes the practical and economic argu‐
ments in favor of predictive maintenance have become too powerful
to ignore.
“The best way of thinking about predictive maintenance is by tying
it into a revenue stream,” he says:
When your machines are up and running, you’re making money.
When your machines are down, you’re losing money. A typical
automobile manufacturer can produce a car every 60 seconds. If
retail value of each car is $40,000, your gains or losses add up very
quickly.
While preventive maintenance relies on the straightforward concept
of “mean time between failure” to create practical maintenance
schedules, predictive maintenance is based on a deeper and more
fundamental understanding of the physics underlying the opera‐
tions of machines and their various parts. 
“Instead of just looking at the average time between failures, you’re
looking for subtle clues within the machine itself,” Fell says. “You’re
measuring sound, heat, vibration, tilt, acceleration, compression,
humidity, and checking to see if any of those are out of spec.” Fell
adds:
The basic idea of predictive maintenance isn’t new. What’s changed
is that it’s much less expensive to get data off a machine today than
it was in the past. Twenty years ago, an accelerometer cost thou‐
sands of dollars. Today, every smart phone has one built into it. The
technology required for predictive maintenance has been miniatur‐
ized and the cost has fallen dramatically.
The cost of transmitting data from machines to data repositories has
also fallen. In the past, operational data generated by a machine was
collected manually by a technician on the shop floor. Today, that
data can be send wirelessly to the Internet via Bluetooth or Wi-Fi.
Not All Work Is Created Equal
Another problem facing traditional preventive maintenance scenar‐
ios is the assumption that every machine of a certain type will be
operated under similar conditions or within similar parameters.
6 
| 
Predictive Maintenance: A World of Zero Unplanned Downtime

Clifton Triplett is Managing Partner of SteelePointe Partners, a
management consulting firm. He is also a former CIO at Baker
Hughes, a $20 billion global oil field services business, and manufac‐
turing process executive at General Motors. A West Point graduate,
Triplett knows firsthand that equipment is often operated in situa‐
tions and circumstances that can be unforeseen by the design engi‐
neer or manufacturer. 
“It’s important to remember that not all work is created equal,” Tri‐
plett says. “If you run a tool within its designed operating con‐
straints, it will require a certain level of maintenance. But if you run
it outside, well under or over normal operating specifications, a dif‐
ferent level of service is generally going to be optimal.” 
For example, a truck designed primarily to deliver mineral ore in
Canada will require a different level of service if it’s used to haul ore
up and down mountains, on flat paved roads, or across dirt roads in
a hot, dusty desert.  In the oil and gas business, a drill bit primarily
used in conventional “straight down” drilling operations will require
different reliability parameters and service requirement when com‐
pared to a bit being utilized in more challenging unconventional
horizontal drilling. Reliability is in part defined by design, but reusa‐
ble equipment is highly dependent upon the maintenance services
performed on it.
“In the military, we would run tools and equipment in as many dif‐
ferent scenarios as possible to understand how they would perform
and react to the different environments,” Triplett says:
We would test equipment at various altitudes, temperatures, and
levels of humidity. We would test equipment to see whether fresh‐
water or saltwater would affect its performance. You name it, we
tried it and we assessed how we should adapt our maintenance
schedule to adapt to the conditions we place our equipment.
Companies that emulate the military’s attention to maintenance
issues can charge a premium for their services. For example, as drill‐
ing conditions become more extreme, the value of reliability grows.
If you’re an independent oil driller and you have a great predictive
maintenance program in place (assuming it’s proven by reliability
metrics and performance), it is possible to demand higher service
charges or take on more challenging opportunities.  Non-productive
time (NPT) is the “evil all drilling companies seek to eliminate,” Tri‐
plett says. Service or operating failures are the number one contrib‐
utor to NPT, and trust in the maintenance program of service com‐
Not All Work Is Created Equal 
| 
7

panies builds confidence in the minds of the customers when
awarding work. 
“Oilfield operators are also more likely to let you use existing equip‐
ment longer if they trust your maintenance program, since they will
worry less about it breaking down,” Triplett says. “If you have a poor
maintenance strategy or record, they’re more likely to demand that
you use new equipment every time you start drilling. Being forced
to always use new tooling can be incredibly expensive, and most
likely noncompetitive.” 
Smart operators understand that predictive maintenance translates
into pricing power and now, with more complex drilling techniques,
a large market share opportunity. Halliburton, for example, has
developed a reputation for being able to perform reliably in high
temperature environments longer than its competitors. That reputa‐
tion creates pricing power and generates higher profits. 
Building a Foundation
Daniel Koffler is chief technology officer at Rio Tinto Alcan (RTA),
the global leader in the aluminum business and one of five product
groups operated by Rio Tinto Group, a multinational metals and
mining company. RTA annually produces 31.4 million tons of baux‐
ite, 7 million tons of alumina (aluminum oxide), and 2.2 million
tons of primary aluminum. Koffler is responsible for making sure
that RTA’s machinery keeps running.
“There’s inherent downtime in any sort of run-to-fail scenario. And
you’re forced into keeping extra assets on hand to pick up the slack
when your primary assets fail,” Koffler says. “Either way, you’re los‐
ing production capacity during the repair time, and you’re spending
money on extra assets that are sitting idle.”
Although a scheduled maintenance model allows you to avoid
unplanned downtime, there’s also a good chance you’ll end up
repairing equipment or replacing parts unnecessarily. “With a pre‐
dictive maintenance model, we can keep assets running longer and
we avoid unscheduled downtime,” Koffler says.
According to Koffler, reliable data and a solid computational model
are foundational to predictive maintenance. Additionally, the corpo‐
rate culture must adjust to a process that doesn’t always yield perfect
results.
8 
| 
Predictive Maintenance: A World of Zero Unplanned Downtime

“At the management level, people need to accept that a data model
doesn’t start at 100 percent maturity. It’s a process that takes time.
You’re not going to start at the peak,” Koffler says. “That means you
have to accept additional risk. There may be unexpected failures.
They are part of the process.”
Koffler stresses that predictive maintenance isn’t a magical formula;
it’s an iterative, scientific process that builds slowly to maturity:
You need collaboration between subject matter experts such as
mechanics and data scientists. The mechanic understands how the
machinery works and the data scientist knows how to build a data
model. The mechanic’s knowledge should be codified into the data
model. The mechanic and the data scientist need to communicate
over a period of time to refine the model. There’s no way to do this
without cross-functional collaboration.
Like any process based on statistical analysis, predictive mainte‐
nance is inherently imprecise. The risk posed by predictive strategies
must be “negotiated" and understood by the stakeholders involved,
he says:
You may want to negotiate an ultra-conservative approach where
you’re changing a part earlier, but you’re still maximizing value by
pushing the part closer to its predicted failure. Then it would be a
discussion about risk, not about analytics. Those kinds of discus‐
sion—about cost, productivity, and risk—happen every day in busi‐
ness. It’s the nature of real life.
Koffler isn’t convinced that predictive analytics will become a main‐
stream consumer product in the near future. “You’d have to do the
cost-benefit analysis. Placing sensors, collecting data, analyzing data
—it all costs money,” he says. “Just because you can do something
doesn’t mean you have to do it. Take the belts in the engine of your
car, for instance. You could put sensors on the belts, but it makes
more sense economically to run them until they break, and then
replace them.”
It’s Not All About Heavy Machinery
Not every aspect of predictive maintenance revolves around heavy
machinery and industrial processes. Doug Sauder leads the research
and development team at Precision Planting, a company that makes
technologies that help farmers improve seed spacing, depth, and
root systems in their fields.
It’s Not All About Heavy Machinery 
| 
9

“The agricultural challenges of the future are all about doing more
with less in a sustainable way,” Sauder says. “It’s about meeting the
demands of a growing population and being environmentally
responsible.” From his perspective, predictive analytics play an abso‐
lutely critical role in any reasonable solution.
“We can be smarter about maximizing every square inch of ground,
everything from what kinds of seeds to plant, how many seeds,
planting the seeds properly, watering the seeds, and applying just the
right amount of fertilizer,” Sauder says:
For example, it’s important to model the nitrogen in a field. You
need to model the rainfall and understand how it disperses into the
ground. You need the ability predict where the nitrogen is moving
so you can tell when it’s time to apply more nitrogen to the field.
Sauder and his team not only help farmers understand more about
their fields; they also “train” farm equipment to perform better. “We
call it ‘smart iron’ and it’s essentially technology that allows the
farmer’s equipment to think for itself as its going through a field,” he
says.
From the air, all corn fields look fairly similar. But at the ground
level, every field is unique. When a corn planter travels through a
field, it continually encounters a range of soil conditions. Some soil
is hard; some soil is soft. If the planting pressure on the equipment
is static, some seeds will be deposited deeper than others, resulting
in uneven growth. But the farmer won’t discover the problem until
months later, and by then it will be too late to fix.
Sauder says:
We put sensors on the planters that take hundreds of measurements
per second. We can vary the pressure in real time as the planter
goes through the field to make sure that every seed goes into the
sweet spot. With “smart iron,” we can literally micromanage every
bit of the field and make certain that every seed is dropped into the
right environment.
The ability to “micromanage” a cornfield requires the same blend of
predictive capabilities needed to manage the performance of gas tur‐
bines, jet engines, nuclear generators, diesel locomotives, ore haul‐
ers, and magnetic resonance imaging devices. As Koffler suggests
earlier in this report, predictive maintenance is a multi-disciplinary
science, with roots and branches extending far beyond heavy indus‐
try.
10 
| 
Predictive Maintenance: A World of Zero Unplanned Downtime

The Future of Maintenance
The next steps in the evolution of predictive maintenance are likely
to involve heavier doses of machine learning and closed-loop auto‐
mation technologies.  For the moment, predictive maintenance sys‐
tems are limited to sending up red flags and issuing alerts of imped‐
ing failure. Future versions will undoubtedly include high-level
decisioning tools and recommendation engines. 
Prakash Seshadri, product development head at Mu Sigma, one of
the world’s largest decision sciences and analytics firms, sees predic‐
tive maintenance evolving inevitably into prescriptive maintenance.
In a prescriptive maintenance scenario, the system won’t just tell you
that something bad is about to happen; it will offer helpful recom‐
mendations.
“It will go beyond saying, ‘There’s a likelihood this will break,’”
Seshadri says:
A predictive maintenance system will say, “Based on current and
expected conditions, here’s what you should do” and offer a range
of choices, thereby guiding the human to make better decisions.
But at the same time, if the human decides to override the recom‐
mendations, the system will capture that behavior and evolve
through learning.
Today, predictive maintenance is practiced largely within the IT,
manufacturing, healthcare, and energy sectors. In the near future,
predictive maintenance will become more widely adopted in the
retail, telecom, media, and finance industries. The potential for
cross-pollination seems unlimited.
The Future of Maintenance 
| 
11

About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has represented major organizations in numerous
industries.
Mike is coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media
Strategy (Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO: The Future of IT
Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers (Wiley, 2007). 
He is also the writer of many articles, reports, and white papers on
marketing strategy, marketing automation, customer intelligence,
business performance management, collaborative social networking,
cloud computing, and big data analytics.
Over the course of a long career, Mike was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune,
Miami Herald, Newsday, and other major US dailies.
Mike is a graduate of Hamilton College. He is a licensed private
pilot, an avid reader, and an enthusiastic ice hockey fan. Mike lives
in Fairfield, Connecticut, with his wife and two children.

“The future has a funny way of 
sneaking up on you. You don’t 
notice it until you’re soaking in it. 
That was the feeling  
at O’Reilly’s Solid  
Conference.”
 — Wired
The traditional boundaries between hardware and software are falling. It’s a perfect storm of 
opportunity for a software-enhanced, networked physical world. The new products and services 
created from the melding of software, hardware, and data are built by people who work across 
disciplines and industries. A vibrant new community is emerging, made up of business and  
industry leaders, software developers, hardware engineers, designers, investors, startup founders, 
academics, artists, and policy makers—many of whom have never come together before. They 
gather at Solid to be inspired, to make connections and launch conversations, and to plug into  
the future for a few days. Will you be a part of it?
Find out more at solidcon.com
THE O’REILLY INTERNET OF THINGS CONFERENCE

