
 
PREVENTING GOOD 
PEOPLE FROM DOING 
BAD THINGS 
IMPLEMENTING LEAST PRIVILEGE 
 
 
 
John Mutch 
Brian Anderson 
 
 
 
 


 
Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things: Implementing Least 
Privilege 
Copyright © 2011 by John Mutch, Brian Anderson 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, record-
ing, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of the copyright owner and the publisher. 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-3921-5 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-3922-2 
Trademarked names may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark symbol 
with every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use the names only in an edito-
rial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of in-
fringement of the trademark. 
Lead Editor: Jeffrey Pepper 
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cor-
nell, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Michelle Lowman, James Mark-
ham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pepper, Frank Pohlmann, Doug-
las Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Matt Wade, Tom 
Welsh 
Coordinating Editor: Jennifer L. Blackwell 
Copy Editor: Ralph Moore 
Compositor: Mary Sudul 
Indexer: SPi Global 
Cover Designer: Anna Ishschenko 
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 233 
Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax 201-
348-4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit 
www.springeronline.com.  
For information on translations, please contact us by e-mail at info@apress.com, 
or visit www.apress.com.  
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corpo-
rate, or promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for 
most titles. For more information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Li-
censing web page at www.apress.com/bulk-sales. To place an order, email 
your request to support@apress.com 
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. 
Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither 
the author(s) nor Apress shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect 
to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the 
information contained in this work. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
With gratitude to the BeyondTrust team and  
Brian Anderson for his insightful work on this  
project and with love to my four children  
Natalie, Garrett, Annabelle, and Lauren,  
whose support and love sustain me every day. 
—John 
 
 
For all of those “insider heroes” who fight to  
prevent the misuse of privilege on a daily basis in 
order to help secure precious information assets. 
—Brian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
v 
Contents 
About the Authors ...........................................................................................................vii 
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................. ix 
Introduction........................................................................................................................... x 
Chapter 1: The Only IT Constant Is Change ............................................................... 1 
Chapter 2: Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine..........................23 
Chapter 3: Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need  
Least Privilege ...............................................................................................41 
Chapter 4: Supplementing Group Policy on Windows Desktops.........................61 
Chapter 5: Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and Hackers Alike......79 
Chapter 6: Protecting Virtual Environments from Hypervisor Sabotage ............97 
Chapter 7: Secure Multi-Tenancy for Private, Public, and Hybrid Clouds .......113 
Chapter 8: Applications, Databases, and Desktop Data Need  
Least Privilege, Too...................................................................................127 
Chapter 9: Security Does Not Equal Compliance ..................................................141 
Chapter 10: The Hard and Soft Cost of Apathy........................................................163 
Chapter 11: Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices ...............................177 
Works Cited.......................................................................................................................191 
Index 
........................................................................................................................199 
 
 
 
 
 


 
vii 
About the Authors 
 John Mutch has been an operating execu-
tive and investor in the technology industry 
for over 30 years and has a long, sustained 
track record of creating shareholder value 
through both activities. Since 2008, he has 
served as chief executive officer (CEO) at 
BeyondTrust, the industry leader in mitigating 
insider threats across physical, virtual, and 
cloud information technology.  Prior to join-
ing BeyondTrust, Mutch was a founder and 
managing partner of MV Advisors, LLC, a 
strategic block investment firm that provides focused investment and strate-
gic guidance to small- and mid-cap technology companies. Prior to founding 
MV Advisors, Mutch was appointed by a US bankruptcy court to the board 
of directors of Peregrine Systems in March 2003. He assisted that company 
in a bankruptcy workout proceeding and was named president and CEO in 
July 2003. Mutch ran Peregrine Systems, operating the company under an 
SEC consent decree, restating five years of operating results and successfully 
restructuring the company, culminating in a sale to Hewlett Packard for 
$425 million in December 2005. Prior to running Peregrine, Mutch served 
as president, CEO, and a director of HNC Software, an enterprise analytics 
software provider. Under his leadership, the company nearly doubled reve-
nue and successfully spun out Retek in an IPO that returned more than $2.5 
billion to shareholders. HNC Software was sold to Fair Isaac Corporation in 
August 2002 for $825 million. Prior to HNC Software, Mutch spent seven 
years at Microsoft Corporation in a variety of executive sales and marketing 
positions. He previously served on the boards of Edgar Online (NASDAQ: 
EDGR), Aspyra (Amex: APY), Overland Storage (NASDAQ: OVRL), and 
Brio Software.  
Mutch currently serves on the board of Adaptec, Inc. (Nasdaq: ADPT) as a 
director designee of Steel Partners and the board of Agilysys (Nasdaq: 

 
viii 
AGYS) as a director designee of Ramius Capital. He holds a Master's in 
business administration from the University of Chicago and a Bachelor of 
Science degree from Cornell University, where he serves on the advisory 
board for the undergraduate school of business. 
 
Brian Anderson brings more than 25 years 
of global enterprise software and security 
industry experience to this book. He has a 
track record for award-winning branding and 
product launches, as well as inbound and out-
bound marketing models to low-touch, scal-
able, measureable, and predictable results. 
Anderson is a frequent industry spokesperson 
and a published author.  Since 2009, he has 
served as chief marketing officer at Beyond-
Trust, where he is responsible for all aspects 
of corporate brand development, as well as lead and demand generation to 
increase awareness and interest in all customer and investor segments.  
Prior to BeyondTrust, Anderson served as a serially successful CMO for 
several venture-funded companies and senior executive at publicly traded 
companies. At Siderean Software, his branding efforts garnered rave reviews 
and numerous awards. At Avamar Technologies, his leadership resulted in a 
huge revenue increase and numerous awards. Avamar was subsequently 
acquired by EMC. Prior to Avamar, Anderson was program director of 
marketing for IBM Tivoli Security and Storage, after successfully building 
industry leader Access360’s brand and sales pipeline and positioning for a 
sale to IBM in 2002.  Anderson also served as CMO of HNC Software, and 
for seven years prior to HNC at FileNet Corporation, culminating in his 
role as vice president of worldwide corporate marketing.  He received 
his Bachelor of Science degree in computer science from the University of 
New Orleans. 

 
ix 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to first acknowledge and thank all of the customers, 
analysts, and industry luminaries who contributed their real-world experi-
ences, observations, stories, and words of wisdom: Mark Diodati, Andras 
Cser, Sally Hudson, Derek Melber, Darren Mar-Elia, Ian Short, Jim Jaeger, 
Neil McDonald, Jon Oltsik, Ian Glazer, David Nester, Dale Martinson, Wil-
liam Osler, Keith Lee, Ant Allan, John Sorts, Nicolas Debeffe, Mike Martin, 
Paulo Pina, Isaac Asimov, and Heraclitus.   
We would also like to personally thank Kristen Canady, Nick Kettles, Jim 
Zeirick, and Hugh Burnham for their invaluable assistance in pulling this 
book together.  Finally we would like to thank the Apress team for their 
incredible support, encouragement, and responsiveness: Jeffrey Pepper, Jen-
nifer Blackwell and Ralph Moore. 
 

 
x 
Introduction 
Billions of dollars have been spent over the last few decades on corporate 
information technology (IT) security in order to “keep the bad guys out,” 
but it turns out the bigger threat was and always has been found within the 
network perimeter.  The so called “insider threat,” the trusted employee, 
contractor, or partner, that can cost an organization more on a daily and/or 
per-incident basis than any outside hacker could hope for. 
Whether we like it or not, “good people do bad things” intentionally, 
accidentally, or indirectly. 
In my 30 years in the IT industry, I have observed and experienced first-
hand the impact of major architectural and platform shifts on enterprise 
customers; the mainframe to mid-range to desktop shift that occurred in 
the 70s, 80s, and 90s were just the beginning. The typhoon effect of the 
Web and the impact of major cost reduction through virtualization contin-
ued the drumbeat. Our industry, in which I have been extremely proud to 
participate, is relentless and the changes that are taking place now, through 
mobile computing platforms, cloud computing, and the impact of social net-
working internally and externally to the corporation will continue the march 
forward. 
Each of these successive shifts has been accompanied by two major impacts; 
first, exponential efficiency gains and dramatic improvements in the cost 
economics of IT. We have all seen and experienced the benefits; increased 
productivity of the average worker; increased effectiveness of global enter-
prises to deliver products, goods, and services to their customers; closed-
loop feedback from customers on products, services, and company per-
formance that enable business agility. 
Second and more significantly, these shifts have driven a dramatic explosion 
of customer, product, and market data as well as the creation of informa-
tion-related assets that have become the cornerstone of a corporation’s 
ability to compete and differentiate. This trend will only accelerate. 90 % of 
the data that exists today was created within just the last 2 years.  If the 

 
xi 
volume of knowledge at the dawn of the 20th century could fit into a small 
box, that knowledge today would fill a football stadium 20 times over. 
It is a pattern of growth driven by such rapid and relentless trends as the 
rise of social networks, Internet video, and the Web.   
This set of dynamics set the bar for IT infrastructure professionals and cre-
ate the challenges that we live with every day. The problem has become so 
big and pervasive that IT professionals have begun to refer to this set of is-
sues with one generalized term: “Big Data.” We acknowledge that we are 
faced with an incredibly complex and challenging conundrum and we are not 
sure how to deal with it.  How do we make this data available for corporate 
use, but keep it secure at the same time? 
Virtually every IT infrastructure professional, the BeyondTrust customer, 
lives with one underlying nightmare scenario: 
What happens if somebody gains uncontrolled access to my IT 
infrastructure? This infrastructure includes the network, servers, 
desktops, and databases that house all of my data and informa-
tion assets. God forbid: how will I protect this in the cloud? 
As I meet with CEOs of large corporations, they have one request of our 
company—keep us out of the Wall Street Journal. Don’t let me be the CEO 
who lost all of my customer’s credit card data. 
The richness and sensitivity of this information, much of it personal to the 
consumer, has led to a series of legislative efforts to ensure it is secured. 
The enactment of Sarbanes–Oxley, PCI-DSS, Basel II, and a host of stan-
dards throughout the world have emphasized this importance and indeed 
actually require our customers to secure their assets. 
As IT professionals, we have another issue, our “dirty little secret” that no 
one likes to discuss openly: 
The Most Likely Source of Security Breach Is the Insider Threat 
Consider the following data points: 
 
It is a statistical certainty that your corporate network will be 
breached 
 
71% of all security breaches come from inside the corporation 
with an insider acting maliciously 
 
92% of attacks target servers 
This book addresses these issues head–on: the insider threat and how insid-
ers rationalize their behavior, the techniques they use, and most importantly 

 
xii 
how you can secure them using least privilege technologies. It uses case 
studies from organizations like yours and mine, the expertise of industry 
analysts, business and IT managers, as well as compliance auditors to un-
cover what to look for when trying to mitigate insider threats and the asso-
ciated costs.  We will also share best practices on how not to confuse rank 
with privilege and how to protect against good people doing bad things. We 
will also help facilitate securing the “perimeter within,” the physical, virtual, 
and cloud-based computing platforms used daily by your insiders: employ-
ees, contractors, and partners. 
I hope you enjoy the book and have some fun with it. The problem is grow-
ing and getting more complex. At BeyondTrust, we live every day with a 
focus on how we can prevent these types of attacks from happening. 
John Mutch, CEO BeyondTrust 
 

C H A P T E R 
1 
The Only IT 
Constant Is 
Change 
 
“The only constant is change, continuing change, inevitable change, that 
is the dominant factor in society today. No sensible decision can be 
made any longer without taking into account not only the world as it is, 
but the world as it will be.” 
—Isaac Asimov, Author and Professor  
Best practices in IT corporate security must acknowledge the intersection 
of technology, processes, and people. Yet, all too often, the focus falls to 
the technology and processes, while the people part of the equation is 
overlooked. 
It’s not that companies have always failed to recognize best-of-breed security 
software or developed robust enough policies with which to execute them; 
it’s just that they have often overlooked the weakest link in their implemen-
tation: human nature. This is especially true when it comes to privileged  
accounts on physical and virtual servers, desktops, and cloud environments. 

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
 
2  
We will cover the implications of the misuse of this privilege extensively in 
the next chapter, but one thing we need to recognize first is the elusive nature 
of human nature and the implications of the only true business constant that every-
thing can, and usually does, change. 
 
Why does it seem as if every time one security hole is filled, an-
other shows up?  
 
Why do some audits (and auditors) allow some practices, technol-
ogy, and policy, while others don’t?  
 
Why does it seem like most executives suffer from bipolar disorder 
(e.g., expecting tight security come audit time, but demand relaxed 
enforcement for greater productivity all other times)? 
Internal vs. External Threats 
Security policies are the first line of defense to an IT environment. Without 
them, an enterprise would quickly be at war. Not only would there be bat-
tles between the different support organizations, but administrators could 
also find themselves battling hackers (internally or externally). There would 
be no politics from misuse of privileges—just a raw desire to change, steal, 
or accidentally destroy data.  
So, another significant change facing organizations globally today is the na-
ture of information security threats. Gone are the days where the only con-
cern was keeping the bad guys outside of your firewalls and external threats 
were the primary concern. In those days, the IT security spend was driven 
almost exclusively on how to protect corporate information assets from any 
form of external threat. That landscape has since changed significantly. To-
day, surveys show that compliance and business continuity are the primary 
drivers for IT security spend and the focus has shifted to dealing with the 
potential for an insider breach. Figure 1-1 demonstrates this trend. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
3  
 
Figure 1-1. Main drivers for IT security spending 
Executives often hand off the responsibility for security to systems adminis-
trators without providing adequate resources to deploy the authorization 
controls needed to secure and maintain privileged access. Because of this, a 
class of solution called privileged Identity Management (PIM) has emerged to 
extend the identity and access management (IAM) paradigm. 
Privileged Identity Management 
Demystified 
US government and private sector information, once unreachable or re-
quiring years of expensive technological or human asset preparation to ob-
tain, can now be accessed, inventoried, lost, or stolen with comparative 
ease either by accident or by deliberately using sophisticated privileged 
identity attack tools. 
In an effort to improve business security, compliance, and productivity, 
privilege authorization policies must be redesigned and user permissions 
more granularly managed. Yet IAM solutions have remained largely un-
changed. Traditional solutions account for a significant part of the total cost 
of IAM, a staggering amount when you consider that these solutions: 
 
Fail to enable desktop users to effectively do their job as a standard 
user (80% of employees login with administrator rights). 
 
Fail to control superuser access to critical servers, giving users 
complete and unchecked access (98% of all security breaches are 
committed from servers). 

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
 
4  
 
Force organizations to choose between productivity and security 
when implementing a PIM solution. 
While these challenges may have been historically acceptable, they are no 
longer good enough in a highly complex and collaborative world, where 
WikiLeaks shows that anybody’s business is everybody’s business in seconds. 
Here’s the first human nature insight—when people think no one is going 
to catch them, or the lines between what’s legal or illegal are sufficiently 
blurred, many will opt to please themselves first and ignore the conse-
quences until they are forced to. A correlary here is loopholes in tax law—
every time someone spots one, it gets abused en masse, until legislators 
legislate against it.  
Specific costs have also been attributed to these abuses that we will cover at 
length in Chapter 10, but suffice it to say that these costs can range from 
$120/desktop/year to over $2M per server incident. These are not trivial costs 
by any definition for any size organization and could establish this as an area that 
needs to be addressed immediately, as opposed to an area that should be ad-
dressed when time and resources permit. 
It is time for businesses to expect more from their PIM solution in order to 
improve security, compliance, and overall productivity, which is outlined in 
Figure 1-2. 
 
Figure 1-2. Internal vs. external threat causes 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
5  
Priv·i·leged i·den·ti·ty 
Definition: Any type of user or account that holds special or extra permis-
sions within the enterprise’s systems; also called a superuser. What is a su-
peruser and why should I care?  
Privileged identities are usually categorized into the following types: 
1. Generic/Shared Administrative Accounts: The non-personal accounts 
that exist in virtually every device or software application. These ac-
counts hold “superuser” privileges and are often shared among IT 
staff (i.e., Windows Administrator user, UNIX root user, and Ora-
cle SYS account). 
2. Privileged Personal Accounts: The powerful accounts that are used by 
business users and IT personnel. These accounts have a high level of 
privilege and their use (or misuse) can significantly affect the organi-
zation’s business (i.e., CFO user, DBA user). 
3. Application Accounts: The accounts used by applications to access da-
tabases and other applications. These accounts typically have broad 
access to underlying business information in databases. 
4. Emergency Accounts: Special generic accounts used by the enterprise 
when elevated privileges are required to fix urgent problems, such 
as in cases of business continuity or disaster recovery. Access to 
these accounts frequently requires managerial approval (i.e., fire-call 
IDs, break-glass users, etc.) 
Privileged identities touch upon virtually every commercial sector. This is 
because every enterprise has a critical component in cyberspace that is ac-
cessible by end users, applications, devices, and accounts within this highly 
complex collaborative ecosystem. 
Age of Authorization 
Technology is an ever-changing and evolving aspect of modern business. The 
use of technology is essential to achieving many of the milestones critical to 
business reform. IAM govern three significant areas when ensuring proper 
identity security: access, authentication, and authorization.  
 
Access solutions answer the question “Can I come in?” 
 
Authentication solutions answer the question “Are you who you say 
you are?” 
 
Authorization solutions answer the question “What can you do once 
you are in?” 

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
6  
Access 
Access includes the process of centrally provisioning role-based time-bound
credentials for privileged access to IT assets in order to facilitate administra-
tive tasks. Super user privileged access (SUPM) and share account password
management (SAPM) are two focal points for proper access controls. 
SUPM & SAPM 
Industry analysts have classified this space into SUPM and SAPM. When it
comes to crashing your enterprise systems, destroying data, deleting or cre-
ating accounts, and changing passwords, it’s not just malicious hackers you
need to worry about. Anyone inside your organization with superuser privi-
leges has the potential to cause similar havoc, either through accidental, in-
tentional, or indirect misuse of privileges. 
Superusers may well also have access to confidential information and sensi-
tive personal data they have no business looking at, thus breaching regula-
tory requirements and risking fines. The trouble is that accounts with supe-
ruser privileges, including shared accounts, are necessary: you can’t run a
corporate IT system without granting some people the privileges to do sys-
tem-level tasks. 
Who Has the Keys to Your Enterprise? 
This is where SUPM and SAPM methodologies come into play. So what's the
best way to manage personal and shared accounts with superuser privileges
in a controlled and auditable manner? That was a key question Research Di-
rector Perry Carpenter addressed at the Gartner Information Security
Summit 2010. When it comes to best practices for managing personal ac-
counts with superuser privileges, Carpenter recommended creating three
types of accounts: 
 
Personal accounts with full, permanent superuser privileges  
 
Personal accounts with full (or restricted) temporary superuser
privileges  
 
Personal accounts with limited, temporary superuser privileges 
Carpenter stressed that “superuser activity on any of these accounts
should be monitored, logged, and reconciled.” The first two types are in-
tended for full-time system administrators, and the number of these ac-
counts should be minimized.  

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
7  
“However, there is a balance between having to many of these accounts and 
too few, and it's important not to make the number too small,” Carpenter 
warned; “otherwise there might not be enough people available at a given 
time to take required action when it is needed. It's also prudent to consider 
limiting the scope of the superuser privileges across the organization’s infra-
structure by asking yourself: Does a given administrator need to be a supe-
ruser on all the systems in the organization?” 
“The third type of account, the one with limited, temporary superuser privi-
leges, is intended for application developers and database administrators. 
The superuser privileges of these accounts should be limited to the applica-
tions or other areas that they might reasonably need to access.” Carpenter 
recommended using SUPM tools to control these three account types: 
 
By privilege (e.g., by regulating the commands available)  
 
By scope (by resources or systems, perhaps)  
 
By time (either by providing privileges for a fixed period or by time 
windows) 
Carpenter also noted that using SAPM tools allows an organization to con-
trol accounts: 
 
By privilege (e.g., by regulating the commands available)  
 
By form factors (checksum, license code, IP address)  
 
By scope (by resources or systems, perhaps)  
 
By time (either by providing privileges for a fixed period or by time 
windows) 
Authentication 
Authentication is the process of determining whether someone or some-
thing is, in fact, who or what it is declared to be. In private and public com-
puter networks (including the Internet), authentication is commonly done 
through the use of logon passwords. Knowledge of the password is assumed 
to guarantee that the user is authentic. 
Each user registers initially (or is registered by someone else), using an as-
signed or self-declared password. On each subsequent use, the user must 
know and use the previously declared password. The weakness in this sys-
tem for transactions that are significant (such as the exchange of money) is 
that passwords can often be stolen, accidentally revealed, or forgotten. For 
this reason, Internet business and many other transactions require a more 
stringent authentication process. 

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
 
8  
Authorization 
Authorization management is a significant pillar in identity security, mainly 
due to the fact that industries are moving from paper to electronic records. 
Authorization is the process of giving someone permission to perform cer-
tain tasks, or obtain certain information. 
More formally, “to authorize” is to define permission policies. For example, 
human resources staff is normally authorized to access employee records, 
and this policy is usually formalized as permission brokering rules in a com-
puter system. During operation, the system uses the permission brokering 
rules to decide whether permission requests from (authenticated) users 
shall be granted or rejected. Resources include an individual file, task, or 
item data. 
Insider Breaches in the News 
We all know that “curiosity killed the cat” warns us not to be too curious, 
lest that results in problems unforeseen, and yet few know the second half 
of that phrase, “satisfaction put it back,” means that if we were contented, 
we wouldn’t nose around in the first place. 
Sadly, that can’t be said of three employees at University of Iowa Hospitals 
and Clinics who were fired after a hospital investigation found they inappro-
priately breached electronic medical records of Iowa football players; or the 
four employees who were fired by University Medical Center in Tucson for 
accessing confidential medical records of victims of the tragic shooting in-
volving Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D-Ariz). 
While neither institution is declaring an official motive, it seems likely it was 
simple curiosity in both cases. Even when the policy says “don’t touch,” 
which in both these institutions it clearly did, people sometimes can’t help 
themselves, especially as when it came to two sets of high-profile patients. 
Bottom-line is that while our attention should be on employees with more 
nefarious purposes, data breaches can also happen when people can’t help 
but take a peep where they shouldn’t. 
Either way, the solution is the same: 
 
Businesses don’t need to fire employees who otherwise (bar their 
human tendency to snoop) may be good employees. All they need to 
do is limit their access, through the implementation of a least privi-
lege management solution. Least privilege is simply granting only the 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
9  
authorization (privilege) to IT resources commensurate with an indi-
vidual’s role and responsibility and not over- or under-authorizing 
them on those resources. 
 
As we will reiterate many times, organizations cannot rely on peo-
ple being competent, or saints, all of the time. We are not perfectly 
consistent in our principles personally or professionally. Clear 
boundaries are all that are required for satisfaction to put curiosity 
firmly back where it belongs.  
Reading between the lines in the University of Iowa Hospitals and the Tuc-
son University Medical Center examples cited previously, you can see that 
even when someone has access, authentication, and authorization, they can 
still do bad things—human nature is the weakest link in the interface of 
people, processes, technology, and indeed, the whims of human nature is the 
ultimate driver of change as the only constant.  
Privileged Accounts are Pervasive and 
Problematic 
If someone is walking around your organization with a t-shirt that says “Bow 
before me, for I am root,” then you will have a big problem on your hands 
when the auditors come around or if a hacker decides to target your com-
pany for theft or cyber sabotage. 
How pervasive are privileged accounts in your organization? Just start with an en-
titlements audit. Request that your IT department, or outsourced pro-
vider, generate a report of every user’s access status (i.e., entitlement cre-
dentials) across servers, desktops, network devices, virtual servers, and 
cloud applications. Once you have this, just add up how many times you see 
“root,” “superuser,” “administrator,” “su,” “suid,” or any other credential 
with superuser/administrator-level privileges. If your organization is like most 
others, you will discover there is at least one account that is shared across 
IT admins for each server and network device. You may also discover 
there is one admin to five-ten servers with this level of privilege. If you use 
MS Windows in the standard configuration, then every desktop user will also 
have administrator-level access to their desktop or laptop computer. That’s 
correct; every single Windows desktop comes standard with the user set to 
Administrator level unless someone configures it explicitly upon deployment 
for the user to be “Standard User” or “Protected Admin.” 
Now that’s pervasive! 

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
 
10  
How problematic are privileged accounts in your organization? Just ask any 
hacker what their number-one target is for any attempt at infiltration. The 
answer will come back as “harvesting admin credentials for direct access to 
the resource desired.” Forbes.com published a story in December, 2010 
about two students at the University of Central Missouri who hijacked their 
way into university computers to not only bump up their GPA but also “tap 
into the university back accounts and to harvest information about faculty, 
staff and alumni in order to sell their identities to interested buyers.” 
So, how do you protect privileged accounts in your organization? The short an-
swer is to eliminate all admin rights across servers, desktops, networks de-
vices, virtual servers, and cloud environments. 
People Need Boundaries, Not Walls 
Let’s face it: organizations cannot simply build walls to protect vital informa-
tion anymore. However, with the process of adapting to this new virtual 
collaborative environment comes the enormous challenge of ensuring that 
privileged access to critical information is not misused. Walls that may have 
worked a decade ago are now practically irrelevant as users seek ways 
around, over, or under these obstructions because it interferes with their 
main job duties. As we move forward in this evolving era, it’s important to 
develop an awareness of how to protect our resources, whatever they may 
be, using boundaries to guide us, not walls. 
Recognize that corporations today are largely information eco-systems; fluid 
dynamic points of information exchange versus an information silo to be 
protected like a castle from the middle ages. Then we can observe the 
“boundaries versus walls” metaphor for what it is: 
 
Walls: Are built to keep things inside or outside of a specific perime-
ter. In information security terms, that means setting electronic 
boundaries around IT resources such that only select people may 
access them. 
 
Boundaries: Are built to guide things along a specific path to ensure 
proper use of a specific perimeter. In information security terms, 
that means setting the electronic authorizations such that specific 
people can do specific things under specific circumstances. 
Having well-defined awareness of boundaries enables end users and applica-
tions to communicate freely within an IT environment without worry of in-
tentional, accidental, or indirect misuse of privilege. Boundaries allow a 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
11  
more productive and compliant dialogue to take place between users and 
the IT department and proactively deters attempts of misuse. If boundaries 
are respected, then IT remains in control of security, compliance, and pro-
ductivity, and has the authority to take proactive steps by which to protect 
the enterprise. Figure 1-3 demonstrates this point. 
 
Figure 1-3. Least privilege gives boundaries, not walls. 
Top 10 Reasons to Care About Who Has 
Privileged Access to Your IT  
Taking a more tongue-in-cheek approach to highlighting the types of privi-
leged access that occur daily inside most organizations, we thought that a 
top-ten–list approach might appeal to you as well. How many of these have 
you seen throughout your organization? 
#10: Michelle, the CEO’s Exec Admin, won’t be able to sell elec-
tronic access to company secrets to Julian Assange for his new book 
deal on WikiLeaks. 
#9: Sam, the CSO, can now sleep nights knowing that excess privi-
leges will no longer be responsible for failing a SOX, HIPAA, PCI, 
DSS, GLBA or FDCC, and FISMA audit (even though he isn’t re-
quired to even deal with the last two). 

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
 
12  
#8: Ted in Tech Support won’t be able to reset file and directory 
permissions on any Linux server to which he has admin rights so 
liberally that anyone with a login can access confidential data just 
because it makes his job easier. 
#7: Sid in Development won’t be able to download Apache applica-
tions or any other unauthorized open source “tools” that may po-
tentially inject malware into our corporate network. 
#6: Fiona, the Admin Assistant, won’t damage her PC configuration 
while trying to upgrade an application by accidentally “fat fingering” 
the wrong IP address.  
#5: Bob, the VP of Marketing, won’t crater the nightly backups by 
loading 120GB of music from his iTunes onto his corporate laptop. 
#4: Alice in IT will no longer be responsible for DNS misconfigura-
tion errors, as her role won’t facilitate this level of admin privilege. 
#3: Fred in IT won’t be able to install a trojan on the mission-critical 
server, bringing it down for four hours and costing the company 
over $1M in lost transactions, because he was passed over for a big 
promotion. 
#2: Sarah, the CIO, will no longer have to hide Linux root creden-
tials in a sealed envelope in her office safe and deal with a manual 
check in/check out process. 
#1: Tony, the Palo Alto systems administrator, will no longer be 
able to wear that ratty old T-shirt with the slogan “Bow before me, 
for I am root” any longer. 
Federal Mandates for Least Privilege 
PIM is critical to business systems, and if not managed correctly, can intro-
duce significant compliance risks. Privileged authorization is critical for 
smooth ongoing administration of IT assets and if the risk of insider threats 
wasn’t already clear enough, this can exacerbate a potentially risky situation. 
At the same time, it exposes an organization to security risks, especially in-
sider threats. 
On May 16, 2011, the White House revealed language on new legisla-
tion directing private industry to improve computer security voluntarily and 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
13  
have those standards reviewed by the Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS). By increasing and clarifying the penalties for federal and enterprise 
computer crimes, the administration hopes to temper the perception that 
the consequences for cyber attacks and data theft are comparatively trivial.  
Administration officials admit that they will designate certain privately run 
computer systems as part of a “critical infrastructure” over which the DHS 
can have enhanced authority. The agency will also be tasked with working 
with energy companies, water suppliers, and financial institutions to rank and 
combat the most serious threats. The new law will also require that these 
businesses work with independent commercial auditors to assess their plans, 
and, in the case of financial firms, report those plans to the Security and Ex-
change Commission. The language also includes the simplification and stan-
dardization of the existing 47 state laws regarding national data breach re-
porting, which require businesses that have suffered an intrusion to notify 
consumers if the intruder had access to the consumers’ personal information. 
The result: Many companies will immediately assign added budget and man-
power to the task of barricading against external threats—forgetting that 
these new laws equally mandate the monitoring and auditing 
of internal compromises. 
But in addition to outward-facing barricades, organizations will need to ad-
dress internal access controls, employee IT administrative rights, and user 
privilege delegation solutions. Administrators should be required to view 
how data assets are internally accessed (and by whom), monitor changes to 
application controls that secure and protect the integrity of assets, and even 
proactively assess the impact of IT changes to business and IT security. 
This critical role of IT security is “securing the perimeter within.” We 
strongly counsel that businesses look inward—as well as outward—to 
strengthen security around data assets by better controlling user database 
administration and activities and allowing desktop users to operate using the 
least set of privileges necessary to complete their jobs.  
We also can’t rely on compliance standards for anything more than setting 
the minimum bar to establish our security measures; we are back to having 
to do the difficult trade-off analysis on the real impact of security on pro-
ductivity versus the benefits. And while there is no simple answer on how 
to do that analysis, there may be a different way to frame the problem. For 
example, BGC Partners has adopted a least privilege solution to enforce 
least privilege security and compliance in their global network, encompass-
ing 6,000 desktops in 20 offices worldwide serving over 1,400 brokers and 
approximately 2,400 employees.  

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
 
14  
“Our current environment allows users full administrative privileges on 
their PCs and we have limited control on what the end user can install and 
change on a desktop” said Paulo Pina, global desktop services manager BGC 
Partners. “We have limited awareness of changes being made and in most 
cases it’s too late if a user installs malware and adware, leaving our desktop 
resources left fire-fighting problems.”  
“As the Global Desktop Services Manager at BGC, [our least privilege solu-
tion], gives me the assurance that my environment is more secure from un-
wanted software, while also allowing me to proactively control which appli-
cations or processes users have access to, without giving them full adminis-
trators rights, and the problems that come with allowing such access, yet 
without hampering their day-to-day job function.” Pina added.  
Lack of controlled privileged access to critical IT resources carries security 
risks from the intentional, accidental, or indirect misuse of those privileges, 
while also making compliance objectives difficult to meet.  
Pina said: “[Our least privilege solution] allows changes to be made if re-
quired to a system or application policy quite quickly and effortlessly, and 
most importantly, if we wish, allow us to configure users to run an applica-
tion in ‘logging mode’, which will notify us that an application or system 
process is being used and whether we need to address its privileges.”  
The Yin and Yang of Security 
Sometimes seemingly opposing things actually interact in complementary 
ways. The Chinese concept of Yin-Yang is used to describe how seemingly 
contrary forces are interconnected and interdependent in the natural world, 
and how they give rise to each other in turn. So is there a Yin and Yang of 
security and productivity? Can you implement security in ways that enhance 
productivity? We think you can.  
 
First, minimize the productivity impact of security by making it as trans-
parent as possible to the end user. Ideally, they won’t have to use any ex-
tra commands, no pop-ups, no extra screens to go through in order to 
operate securely. And if the action requested by the user is allowed, just 
let it happen. The Windows User Access Control slider provides a 
great example. If you give users the option, they will turn down the 
security level to avoid having to respond to an extra prompt. So if 
you are going to give them the authority to do certain actions after 
a prompt, why trouble them with the extra steps.  

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
15  
 
Second, while security controls stop people from doing bad things, these 
same controls can enforce best practice. In addition to controlling actions 
because of the security risk, we can stop people from doing things that 
they should not do because of the operational risk presented. And with 
properly implemented controls, we can do better than using ”Are 
you really sure you want to” pop-ups that we just click through 
anyway. Properly designed and implemented controls can enforce a 
desired way of doing things or best practice. 
 
Finally, there is great potential in using data on what people are doing to 
improve productivity. Those detailed compliance logs are gold mines 
of information. You can use them not just to look for patterns that 
indicate a security threat, but those same patterns can show where 
security and other procedures such as improper configurations of 
new systems are hurting productivity. Finding those patterns help 
uncover opportunities to better train, simplify procedures, and un-
cover best practices that not everyone is following. And once those 
best practices are discovered, you could use controls to ensure that 
best practices are being followed. 
What To Expect Next 
The following sections will take a brief look at the remaining chapters in the 
book and give you a feel for what will be covered in each. The book is in-
tended to be read from cover to cover, but each chapter has been written 
independently for those who prefer to skip around. 
Insiders Examined: The Villains 
Chapter 2 is dedicated to these unsung heroes of the enterprise. Amongst 
the usual suspects we will examine include: 
 
Disgruntled Dave: Dave was once a trusted insider with privileged ac-
cess to critical IT infrastructure, but circumstances have changed 
such that he is now unhappy with the status quo to the point where 
he is intentionally doing harm such as stealing, modifying, or deleting 
data and/or planting malware. 
 
Accident Prone Annie: Annie is your typical business user who acci-
dentally may be misusing her privileges to do things that are against 
corporate policy (such as downloading software off the Web or 

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
16  
upgrading applications before IT approves) and wreaking havoc on
the help desk. 
 
Identity Thief Irene: Irene is the worst of them all; she is an outsider
who has hijacked the credentials of an unsuspecting over-privileged 
insider and uses those credentials to steal, modify, or delete data
and/or plant malware. 
Insiders Examined: The Heroes 
Chapter 3 is dedicated to these unsung heroes of the enterprise. Amongst
the usual suspects we will examine include: 
 
Secure Sam: Sam is your typical CSO or IT manager responsible for
the governance, compliance, and security of the information assets 
of your corporation. 
 
Least Privilege Lucy: Lucy is your average network or systems admin-
istrator responsible for administrating systems and/or infrastructure,
be they physical, virtual, or cloud-based systems. 
 
Compliance Carl: Carl is your classic auditor responsible for regula-
tory compliance reporting and the auditing of IT policies for en-
forcement of corporate governance. 
IT Infrastructure Requirements Examined 
Chapters 4 through 8 are dedicated to examining the unique requirements
of physical and virtual platforms, applications, and cloud computing envi-
ronments. Technology platforms we will examine include: 
 
Desktops: A desktop is not a machine required to be in a fixed loca-
tion anymore. With technology what it is, that term is synonymous
with a person (wherever they may be) that has access and is using
Microsoft Windows. People are known to behave differently inside 
and outside of the office, where the culture is different. Lines be-
tween professional and home life become blurred, and people take
the suit off at home, log in in their shorts, but that doesn’t mean
they should take their corporate hat off, as well. But what is the an-
swer? Eliminating administrator rights without allowing for the ele-
vation of certain job-necessary privileges is not the answer. Locking 
down a system is like asking everyone to raise their hand to go to 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
17  
the bathroom; it shows the downside of mistrusting human nature. 
Trust is not a value that can be applied in a fixed dose; it has to be 
measured to meet the needs of the individual’s role. 
 
Servers: Servers are the backbone of every corporate computing en-
vironment. They are the muscle that maintains mission-critical busi-
ness transactions, the storage location for all public and private in-
formation assets, and the foundation that drives user productivity. 
They can range from a simple Linux print server all the way through 
to symmetric multiprocessor-driven UNIX machines executing mil-
lions of transactions a minute on terabytes of information. Because 
of this, they are the single biggest target for insiders and outsiders 
alike, but it’s the insider who knows explicitly where they are and 
how to access them. 
 
Virtual environments: Protecting virtual environments is a difficult and 
tedious task. On one hand, privileges in this setting must be granu-
larly managed to ensure complete security. On the other hand, it 
takes less time and energy to allow users to operate with unman-
aged privileges in virtualized datacenter environments. Fortunately, 
there is an answer to this double-edged question, and it allows for 
the risks in said environment to be mitigated. 
 
Private, public, and hybrid clouds: Operating in the cloud is the latest 
trend in the technology world. Whether it’s the private, public, or 
hybrid clouds, it’s where we are heading. Just because information 
and applications are available in such a convenient way does not 
mean that boundaries should be let down to make all things con-
venient. The principle of least privilege applies here more than ever 
before. 
 
Applications, databases, and desktop data: Legacy apps are required 
for the operation of enterprises everywhere, but the privileges to 
run them leave gaping security holes in enterprises. The answer, ob-
viously, is not to take away those privileges, but to allow users to 
run them based on what is required for their jobs. This relieves 
pressure on IT administrators who think the only way out is to up-
grade or pay for an in-house patch. Least privilege truly is the mar-
riage between security and productivity in this instance. 

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
 
18  
Compliance and Governance 
Requirements Examined 
Chapter 9 is dedicated to examining the governance and regulatory issues 
ever present in today’s enterprise. Specific regulations we will examine  
include: 
 
Government Regulations: Mandates that require greater privilege 
authorization control include but are not limited to SOX, HIPAA, 
GLBA, and PCI DSS. Auditors are well aware of policies that must be 
in place to comply with federal, state, and industry regulations. Non-
compliance can result in fines, severe financial losses, data breaches, 
and damage to a company’s reputation. Sound authorization security 
will help auditors validate corporate compliance. Proper authoriza-
tion detection and audit-friendly logs to track privilege use helps an 
auditor perform the complex duties of this position. 
 
Corporate Governance: Ongoing management of the access, control, 
monitoring, and remediation of all IT infrastructures is the very 
definition of good governance. Without a tight and ever-vigilant 
control on these aspects of policy enforcement, no individual or 
company could ever hope to satisfy the myriad of diverse regula-
tions imposed on them. 
Hard and Soft Costs of Apathy Examined 
Chapter 10 is dedicated to examining the methods for quantification and 
qualification of costs and potential for return. Specific measurements we will 
examine include: 
 
Soft Costs: To understand the cost of apathy in relation to breaches 
and least privilege, we must first understand that how we manage 
risk impacts human behavior. If we box people in by removing all 
privileges, they will feel suffocated and likely rebel or withhold. If we 
give too many privileges, people will either feel scared of screwing 
up and breaking something, or take full advantage of their privileges 
and abuse the system. The key is to give them what they need; they 
will feel safe enough to do their job well. 
 
Hard Costs: In addition to the difficult soft costs, you will find a  
number of very tangible, identifiable, and measurable hard costs  

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
19  
associated with the misuse of privilege. Millions of dollars have been 
assigned to server breaches and hundreds of dollars to desktop 
breaches. Multiply this by the number of servers and desktops in your 
environment and you’ll uncover a very large financial exposure. 
Final Observations and Best Practices 
Examined 
Chapter 11 is dedicated to reviewing final observations and best practices for 
mitigating insider threats, preventing good people from doing bad things, and 
securing the perimeter within. Specific thoughts we will examine include: 
 
Final Observations: There are compliance regulations that are in-
tended to protect companies from data breaches. These regula-
tions mandate that security measures be put into place, but many 
companies, unfortunately, do not meet these standards. Least privi-
lege is the key to helping enterprises becomes compliant based on 
industry standards. 
 
Best Practices: Thousands of companies have already implemented 
least privilege solutions across some part of their IT infrastructure 
and are extending that reach to complete the coverage. By evaluat-
ing what has been done by those companies before you, we can un-
cover best practices to ease the way. 
Weighing-In 
We will close each chapter by weighing in with our “Insider Heroes.” We 
will use their voice to highlight the specific points you should glean from the 
specific chapter based on their view of the situation. 
Change is the reality every organization must live with on a daily basis and 
as such, security practices must adapt accordingly. Gone are the days when 
the “bad guys” were clearly marked as anyone who wasn’t an employee, 
contractor, or trusted partner who could be denied access at the perimeter 
of your IT infrastructure. Even in Hollywood movies, the bad guys are no 
longer the ones wearing the black top hat and sporting a cheesy mustache. 
They look, and in fact are, people you sit across from everyday. In today’s 
security landscape, the focus has shifted from Access (can I come in?) and 
Authentication (are you who you say you are?) to Authorization (what can 
you do once you are in?). 

Chapter 1 | The Only IT Constant Is Change 
 
20  
Secure Sam:  
We just delved deep into ways people and human nature stay the same 
amid the ever-changing information technology world, and this is a point 
that is fundamental as we aim to understand ways to offset the conse-
quences of change. People are volatile creatures, and often their expecta-
tions are as inconsistent as the net worth of a computer. Businessmen, for 
example, are a prime example of this. They expect productivity to stay high, 
and at the same time have zero tolerance of security measures failing. 
Audits need to be passed, federal mandates must be met, but expenses need 
to stay low, and the company must remain efficiently running. While these 
mandates are not individually unrealistic, to expect them all together, with-
out any leeway, historically made daily headaches for any given company’s IT 
department. That was before least privilege was available. With this princi-
ple, an enterprise can be secure, stay productive, pass audits, meet man-
dates, and keep expenses low—all at the same time. Change can be miti-
gated, both financially and strategically, by giving users the least amount of 
rights as possible. 
Least Privilege Lucy:  
It cannot be stressed enough how integral change is to information technol-
ogy. Perhaps even as central as computers themselves, change is innate in the 
very nature of the industry. Ideas and practices are constantly shifting and 
evolving, and this tends to have both positive and negative effects. While 
technology is advancing and improving, it is also opening enterprises to the 
growing threat of data breaches. It’s difficult to stay on top of this changing 
environment, and a large part is the number of user accounts requiring 
admin rights to run. Certain applications need administrative privileges, and 
those applications are usually necessary for job functions. It’s a story heard 
over and over again; least privilege is the answer. Changes will occur in every 
single environment, but when organizations allow users to run with only as 
many rights as are actually required, those changes become manageable. 
Compliance Carl:  
Indeed, change is the only constant, and as the information technology 
world around us continues to evolve, adjustments must be made to ensure 
certain things become a stable baseline in our organizations. The principle of 
least privilege is one that fundamentally makes sense; it is the gold standard 
on which we can base all IT governance. Using this concept as the point of 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
21  
reference, it’s possible to be consistent in determining what practices, poli-
cies, and technologies are acceptable and legal—a consistency that simply 
isn’t achievable without. No longer are auditors able to “play God” with en-
terprises and the way they manage their sensitive data. By using least privi-
lege as a marker, it streamlines what is acceptable and what is not in the 
ever-changing world of IT.


C H A P T E R 
2 
Misuse of  
Privilege Is the 
New Corporate 
Landmine 
 
“Organizations continue to struggle with excessive user privilege as it 
remains the primary attack point for data breaches and unauthorized 
transactions.” 
—Mark Diodati, Gartner, Inc. 
In organizations, it is a sad and harsh reality that trusted individuals are get-
ting away with too many things. For example, at HSBC, a systems adminis-
trator named Falcini had unfettered root access. And what did he do with 
those credentials? He stole thousands of customer files and then tried to 
sell them to banks and tax authorities. This is becoming an increasing trend, 
with more and more breaches coming to light each month.  

Chapter 2 | Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine 
 
24  
There are three fundamental misuses of IT privilege that you need to be 
perpetually on the lookout for: 
 
Intentional harm is the most visible and usually results in significant 
cost to your corporation. This “insider attack” is the result of an 
administrator intentionally deleting or stealing data, or planting some 
malware. To better examine this type of privilege misuse, you will be 
introduced to “Disgruntled Dave,” a fictitious character created out of 
the amalgamation of recently caught and reported insiders responsi-
ble for breaches ranging from the obscure to the profane. 
 
Accidental harm is the most common but is usually not measured in 
direct impact to your corporation. This is the result of someone 
attempting to do a specific action (for example, install or upgrade 
software, go to a specific web site, use a system task) and either 
miss-keys a step or doesn’t follow the directions and a problem 
occurs that requires the Help Desk to step in and fix the mistake. 
To better examine this type of privilege misuse you will be intro-
duced to “Annie,” a fictitious character created out of the amalga-
mation of numerous customer interviews and reported accidental 
insider breaches. 
 
Indirect harm is the most esoteric but in reality another potential for 
significant cost to your corporation. This is when some malware hi-
jacks an administrator’s credentials and causes damage while imper-
sonating that administrator. To better examine this type of privilege 
misuse you will be introduced to “Identity Thief Irene” a fictitious 
character created out of the amalgamation of recently caught and 
reported hackers responsible for breaches by hijacking an over-
privileged insider’s credentials for their own use. 
Each of these steps is iterative, and the whole process uses feedback 
mechanisms to continually improve the overall effectiveness and efficiency of 
the corporation. Let’s consider each of these areas and identify the key ac-
tivities and responsibilities of each one. 
Disgruntled Dave Examined Closer 
Intentional misuse of privilege often stems from insider attacks. An insider 
attack is defined as any malicious attack on a corporate system or network 
where the intruder is someone who has been entrusted with authorized 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
25  
access to the network, and also may have knowledge of the network archi-
tecture. See Figure 2-1. 
A 2010 CSO Cyber Security Watch Survey published findings that demon-
strate the significant risks posed from insider attacks. Cyber criminals now 
operate undetected within the very “walls” erected to keep hackers out. 
Technologies include rogue devices plugged into corporate networks, poly-
morphic malware, and keyloggers that capture credentials and give criminals 
privileged authorization while evading detection. In 2008, the White House is-
sued the Cyber Security Policy Review, which profiled systemic loss of U.S. 
economic value from intellectual property and data theft as high as $1 trillion. 
The Computer Security Institute and FBI report 
states that an insider attack costs an average of 
$2.7 million per attack. CSO magazine cites the 
following points regarding this threat: 
 
Organizations tend to employ security-
based “wall-and-fortress” approaches to 
address the threat of cybercrime, but 
this is not enough to mitigate the risk.  
 
Risk-based approaches hold potentially 
greater value than traditional security-
based “wall-and-fortress” approaches.  
 
Organizations should understand how 
they are viewed by cyber criminals in 
terms of attack vectors, systems of in-
terest, and process vulnerabilities, so 
they can better protect themselves 
from attack.  
 
Economic hardships spawned by the 
2008-2009 recession may generate re-
sentment and financial motivations that 
can drive internal parties or former employees to crime. Interna-
tional consultancy agency, Deloitte, stated the survey conducted by 
CSO magazine reveals a serious lack of awareness and a degree of 
complacency on the part of IT organizations, and perhaps security 
officers. Organizations may focus on unsophisticated attacks from 
hackers or insiders because they are the noisiest and easiest to de-
tect. Yet, that focus can overlook stealthier attacks that can pro-
duce more serious systemic and monetary impacts. 
Figure 2-1. Disgruntled Dave. 

Chapter 2 | Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine 
 
26  
The trial of a former Goldman Sachs programmer accused of stealing source 
code to take to a competitor began in somewhat of a public spectacle. The 
Wall Street Journal unveiled some particularly interesting details. For exam-
ple, the programmer was one of the highest paid in the company with a 
$400,000 annual salary, but competitor Teza Technologies offered him over 
$1 million in total pay, including a $700,000 bonus. 
So how does the highest-paid programmer of one of the largest investment 
banks in the world get a nearly three-fold salary hike by a much smaller 
competitor? We would bet a good chunk of cash that the $1 million pay-
check was the price the company was paying for Goldman’s code. 
Here’s the breakdown. He was offered $300,000 in salary, $700,000 in bo-
nus, and $150,000 in profit-sharing. Here’s my question to you—which por-
tion of his pay do you think was (could be) the bribe and could the pro-
grammer have gotten more? How much is Goldman’s source code worth? 
We think he was drastically underpaid for the value of the code, but a clean 
million is plenty to motivate someone to steal data despite the actual value 
of the stolen property being much higher. Unfortunately, this could be con-
strued as a case of dealing with the symptom instead of the disease. Had a 
least privilege solution been instituted, he wouldn’t have had the ability to 
misuse privilege and accomplish the theft at any price. 
When the trial ended, Sergey Aleynikov was convicted and received a sen-
tence of eight years for stealing proprietary software source code as he 
was leaving the company in order to sell those assets to the competition 
for about $1.2M.  
The only bright spot for Mr. Aleynikov was that the maximum sentence 
possible was ten years, so we can only guess that with those other two 
years, he can figure out even more creative ways to prove insider threats 
are in fact the most costly. 
Employee terminations are, unfortunately, a necessary evil in corporations 
globally today. In a time of recession, layoffs are more copious and often 
leave those affected angry and upset. Albeit in a very small minority of cases, 
some terminated employee backlash has led to disastrous consequences for 
former employers. 
In April 2011, a former network security engineer at Gucci America was 
indicted on charges that he illegally accessed the company’s network and 
deleted documents shortly after he was fired, costing Gucci nearly 
$200,000 in damages. Using an account he secretly created while working 
at the company, the former employee allegedly later accessed Gucci’s net-
work and deleted virtual servers, shut down storage areas, and wiped cor-
porate mailboxes. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
27  
This case and the many others like it call attention to the importance of hav-
ing policies and procedures in place to ensure terminated employees no
longer have access to company information and resources. E-mail, network,
and application accounts must be deactivated swiftly. Employees granted
administrative privileges while at the company could also pose an even
greater threat. Organizations need to take precautions to ensure departing
employees’ privileges are revoked, root access passwords changed, and so
forth. It sounds simple enough, yet it’s surprising how often these necessi-
ties are overlooked. 
Another solution to consider is looking at the amount of information em-
ployees have access to even when they are employed. Are the right limits
currently in place? It’s much easier to control former employees’ ability to
access information when they were never able to access the information in
the first place. 
Accident Prone Annie Examined Closer 
Though difficult for many to admit, humans are fallible. We are not perfectly
consistent in our personal or professional principles. Accidental misuse of
privileges on desktops and servers does happen, and it does have a measur-
able impact on the organization as a whole. For
example, desktop configuration errors cost
companies an average of $120/PC, according to
an IDC report, “The Relationship between IT
Labor Costs and Best Practices for IAM.” 
In September 2004, HFC Bank, one of the
largest banks in the United Kingdom, sent
2,600 customers an e-mail that, due to an in-
ternal operator error, exposed recipients’ e-
mail addresses to everyone on the list. The
problem was compounded when out-of-office
messages—containing home and mobile
phone numbers—automatically responded to
the mailing. 
As one famous hacker said, “The weakest
link in any network is its people.” The most
fortified network is still vulnerable if users
can be tricked into undermining its secu-
rity—for example, by giving away passwords
or other confidential data over the phone, or 
Figure 2-2. Accident Prone
Annie. 

Chapter 2 | Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine 
 
28  
performing some activity that allows malware to hijack admin rights on 
desktops. 
For this reason, user education should be one cornerstone of a corporate 
site security policy, in addition to privilege authorization management. Make 
users aware of potential social engineering attacks, the risks involved, and 
how to respond. Furthermore, encourage them to report suspected viola-
tions immediately. In this era of phishing and identity theft, security is a re-
sponsibility that every employee must share. 
A common fear of all CSOs and CIOs is that their organization winds up 
in the press for some breach of privacy or data theft. So when it happens 
because of an accident and not an intentional attack, the embarrassment is 
compounded.  
Accidents happen. It’s part of the human experience. Unfortunately, there 
are times when some accidents lead to very serious consequences. 
According to a security breach research project done by Data Loss DB in 
April 2011, nearly one-third of the 25 reported serious data breaches oc-
curred due to accidental employee actions or mistakes, which resulted in 
the exposure of Social Security, credit card, bank account, and financial ac-
count numbers. A data loss of this magnitude is devastating to an organiza-
tion on many of levels, yet it’s understandable due to basic human nature. 
Companies that don’t have preventative safeguards in place can therefore be 
in real trouble. 
Although IT managers and compliance professionals are aware of these po-
tential threats, most are still unsure of how to effectively manage and miti-
gate the problem. As most network security experts will agree, a multi-
tiered approach to threat protection, whether coming from inside or out-
side the company, is necessary to minimize the risk of data breaches. Unfor-
tunately, not all managers do this. 
More Insider Breaches in the News 
In August 2010, an Arkansas State University employee mistakenly e-mailed 
personal information belonging to 2,484 full- and part-time members of the 
faculty and staff and some former employees. The personal information was 
stored in a file accessible only by someone with privileged access. Private In-
formation belonging to about 70% of the faculty and staff of Arkansas State 
University was then sent out. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
29  
According to Arkansas Matters, “An employee mistakenly attached a [Privi-
leged] report to a distribution list and that report contained some informa-
tion about current and former employees, said Associate Vice President of 
Information Technology Services Mark Hoeting. We’re working directly 
with each of the individuals who received it to validate that the file has been 
removed, said Hoeting. Even though these steps are being taken, Faculty 
member Jack Zibluk said they are concerned.” 
Based on the Ponemon Institute’s 2009 Annual Study, “Cost of a Data 
Breach Report,” this accidental misuse of privilege will cost ASU approxi-
mately US $149,040.  Has your organization performed an IT security re-
view to help minimize any costs associated with accidental misuse of privi-
leges such as this?  
Identity Thief Irene Examined Closer 
Indirect misuse of privileges is when one or more attack types are launched 
from a third-party computer that has been taken over remotely. A startling 
statistic revealed by Gartner in December 2008 is that 67% of all malware 
detections ever made were detected in 2008. Gartner also estimates man-
aged desktops, or users who run without admin rights, produce on average 
a $1,237 savings per desktop and reduce the amount of IT labor for techni-
cal support by 24%. 
The Georgia Tech Information Security Center 
(GTISC) hosted its annual summit on emerging 
security threats on October 15, 2010, and 
published its annual attack forecast report. Ac-
cording to their research, the electronic do-
main will see greater amounts of malware at-
tacks and various security threats in the com-
ing year. 
Data will continue to be the primary motive 
behind future cybercrime, whether targeting 
traditional fixed computing or mobile applica-
tions. According to security expert George 
Heron, “It’s all about the data,” so he expects 
data to drive cyber-attacks for years to come. 
This motive is woven through all five emerging 
threat categories. 
Figure 2-2. Identity Thief 
Irene. 

Chapter 2 | Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine 
 
30  
As technology continues to develop and expand, it’s an unfortunate reality 
that sensitive information is becoming decreasingly safe. While this isn’t new 
news (data breaches are becoming as common as a morning bowl of Cheer-
ios), for some reason companies aren’t heeding these devastating warning 
signs. At least Barracuda Networks didn’t. 
Here’s what happened: A hacker, dubbed “fdf,” posted screenshots of Bar-
racuda employees, partners, and customer credentials that were obtained 
through an SQL injection of their web page. Chris Wysopal, CTO at Vera-
code, offered more information about it, including that, “Barracuda em-
ployee password hashes were disclosed to the attackers. It is likely that 
many of these will be cracked swiftly and that some of these passwords give 
other access within Barracuda, perhaps through reuse.” 
Let’s take a minute to think about how this happened, or how any security 
breach happens. The simple answer is that someone who should not have 
had access to sensitive information did. Honestly ask yourself these ques-
tions: if this happened in your organization, would you know whom to ques-
tion? Do you know everyone who has admin rights? Or whose passwords 
can grant access to high-level tasks? Do you have a way to monitor who is 
accessing what and when? 
This breach highlights the importance of accountability. In each of our en-
terprises, we must know who operates with privileged user rights and how 
their actions can affect the security of sensitive information. Could you an-
swer all of these questions? Or are there holes in the security of your com-
pany? Addressing the internal misuse of privilege is no longer a nice-to-have; 
it’s a need-to-have. And if it’s not something that’s currently a priority in 
your enterprise, now is the time to make it one. 
The truth is, whether it’s malware, hackers, or a vulnerability, chances are 
it’s very difficult for anyone to deal serious damage without admin rights. So 
when we read the latest vulnerability from Adobe, we were eager to jump 
on the soapbox and scream once more from the hilltops. 
Adobe’s Shockwave had a vulnerability that could allow hackers to inject 
malicious code. Now this is where two common but unpractical and unpro-
ductive thoughts come to mind on the situation as a knee-jerk reaction: 
 
Adobe: You can blame Adobe for the vulnerability and wait for their 
patch, but with dozens of common applications that are full of vul-
nerabilities (some discovered and some not), it’s a pretty mediocre 
(but easy) solution.  

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
31  
 
Hackers: You can blame hackers who take advantage of the vulner-
ability for hacking into your desktops (usually after the fact), but 
just as there will always be software vulnerabilities (and lots of 
them), there will always be hackers. The real question is: how will 
you stop them? 
It’s easy to blame Adobe for having the vulnerability or hackers for using it, 
but the fact is that no organization should be unable to protect themselves 
from the combination of these two very likely foes. 
If desktop users don’t have administrative rights, how much damage could 
someone like Irene using the vulnerability cause? Any code the hacker in-
jects would most likely install malware or keyloggers, or change system set-
tings such as security configurations, but the desktop would be unable to do 
any of that. 
We all need to stop blaming vulnerabilities and hackers like Irene and start 
taking responsibility for restricting desktop users so that the users (and 
anyone else) simply don’t have the privileges to cause so much damage. 
Even the largest of companies are vulnerable. The headline used by WSJ.com 
on Mar 8, 2011, was “Google Takes Heat Over App Security” and reported 
“The company behind the now ubiquitous Android operating system came 
under fire after computer-security experts last week uncovered more than 
50 malicious applications that were uploaded to and distributed from 
Google’s Android Market.” In fact, this is not the first time that Google ex-
perienced this type of intrusion, as was reported back in October 2010 by 
the New York Times, A Google employee in China “inadvertently permitted 
the intruders to gain access to his (or her) personal computer and then to 
the computers of a critical group of software developers at Google’s head-
quarters in Mountain View, Calif. Ultimately, the intruders were able to gain 
control of a software repository used by the development team.” 
But Andrian Kingsley-Hughes over at ZDNet cuts to the heart of the matter 
in his article of March 2, 2011, by saying “To many of its fans, the openness 
and freedoms offered by the Android mobile operating systems is one of its 
main selling points. But that openness comes with a price—it makes it easy 
for nefarious types to sneak malware into apps. And that’s exactly what they 
are doing.” 

Chapter 2 | Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine 
 
32  
What Hackers Don’t Want You To Know 
About User Privileges 
Believe it or not, there are people out there who aspire to be hackers. Not 
just the run-of-the-mill, crack a password or two, but a bona fide “Neo” 
who can play with your secure data like a personal version of “The Matrix.” 
These would-be data pirates and malcontents have web sites that teach them 
their craft and even annual conferences like DEFCON to compare tips, tricks, 
and vulnerabilities. They are more organized than the average business execu-
tive or auditor realizes and they are inspired by nothing short of total access 
to anything and everything on the information super highway, especially what 
is hidden within your servers and on any one of your user’s desktops.  
The recurring theme and core principal is basically to find access to admin 
credentials, and you own the keys to the kingdom. So, when users are 
granted excessive privileges (admin on desktops, root on servers), then you 
have an environment just begging for a hacker to attack. 
Patient to Doctor: “Doctor, doctor, when I do this it hurts” 
Doctor to Patient: “Then don’t do it!” 
Sage advice that hackers don’t want you to know: if you don’t grant admin 
rights, you don’t run the risk of someone stealing them, hijacking them, or even in-
tentionally misusing them from inside. 
Top Five Excuses for Data Breaches and 
What They Really Mean  
In all of our customer interviews and research of actual data breach inci-
dents for this book, we discovered five recurring excuses used to respond 
to said breach: 
 
Data Breach Excuse 1: It’s Too Sensitive to Comment Further, for 
Fear of Risking Security Further. 
When Vodafone terminated several staff in Australia over a breach in 
its customer information database that led to a leak of private data, 
they used this excuse to buy them some time, while they figured out 
what really happened. According to WCJB.co.uk, “The company said 
it continues to investigate the matter and is attempting to determine 
if an employee misused the password or sold it to criminals outside 
3

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
33  
the company. The telecommunications firm said in a statement yes-
terday that a number of staff had been terminated and the informa-
tion had been passed on to the NSW Police.” All bold positive 
statements that expertly relay the concern of Vodafone on the er-
rant behavior of one or more of their employees. And yet, likely to 
be a smokescreen for a company that knows full well what hap-
pened, and fears saying more because it was so neglectful on their 
part that to share the full details would risk incurring serious damage 
to their very trusted brand. 
The bottom line is that it doesn’t matter if their errant employee 
misused the password or sold it to criminals; the employee in ques-
tion was over-privileged, meaning he or she had access to a server 
beyond the remit of his or her work role, or, had legitimate but un-
monitored access. 
Further on, we learn that in fact the CEO has already brought in an 
independent security firm to review the systems, and to preempt any 
further leaks, and that the company is changing the database pass-
word every 24 hours. 
Now if the independent security firm knows their onions from their 
shallots, they will know that by installing an automated privilege ac-
cess management system, it would be possible to change the pass-
word not just every 24 hours, but every time someone needs to ac-
cess the server.  
A password automatically generated, based on the approval of the 
employees, requests to access the server, and against the role defini-
tion of their job. Indeed, protecting the enterprise from those with 
the motive and expertise isn’t just a matter of mission-critical serv-
ers. The mindset that there will be those with access who have IT 
skills should be incorporated into security in everything we do. 
 
Data Breach Excuse 2: Sadly, It’s Not Possible to Trust All People All 
of the Time.  
Amongst many US and UK hospitals and health-care organizations 
who seem to have experienced data breaches in the last year, Flor-
ida Hospital used this excuse when it admitted to a data breach in 
November 2010. Their CEO was at pains to stress: “While it may 
be impossible to absolutely prevent an employee from violating our 
values and policies for personal gain, we are determined to take all 

Chapter 2 | Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine 
 
34  
necessary steps to review and strengthen our administrative proce-
dures to ensure that we are providing the highest level of data secu-
rity possible.”  
We are, of course, happy to point out that with a good privileged 
access management solution in place—and one that helps health-
care organizations comply fully with HIPAA requirements—they 
don’t have to rely on trust alone.  
Accidental, intentional, or indirect, abuse of privileges is mitigated 
because employees, partners, and third parties only get pre-
approved access to the network or servers based on the need their 
job requires, not their position within the organization hierarchy. 
 
Data Breach Excuse 3: Shut the Door After the Horse Has Bolted.  
This excuse allows the breached organization to sound authoritative 
by providing an answer to how the breach could have been pre-
vented to the media and public, even if it is a solution they haven’t 
put into practice yet. Unfortunately, the damage is already done and 
the misuse of privilege has caused significant enough damage to war-
rant the excuse being used in the first place. By providing an exam-
ple of best security practice after the event, the US Government 
took the moral high ground during the WikiLeaks debacle, and di-
verted attention away from its own complacency. 
Their missive to those responsible for handling classified informa-
tion, is revealing: “...create a ‘security assessment team’ to review the 
implementation of procedures to safeguard such information, a review to 
include making sure that no employee has access to information beyond 
what is necessary to do his or her job effectively.” 
 
Data Breach Excuse 4: Don’t Make an Excuse; Blame It on a Third 
Party.  
Yep, that’s what we heard next when data showed up stolen or van-
dalized. McDonald’s adopted the “we’ve been hurt too and are in this 
together” tone when they warned customers to be on guard against 
identity theft, phishing, and other scams thanks to a data breach fol-
lowing the theft of customer data held by a third-party contracted by 
McDonald’s. As PC World rightly pointed out in December 2010, 
the smaller third-party organizations frequently lack the security 
policies and controls of the larger companies, and provide an Achilles 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
35  
heel that hackers can exploit to gain access to the more valuable 
network—often flying undetected under the radar. 
Our view is similar. With so many potential points of entry to sensi-
tive data and so many different attack surfaces from which infection 
can happen, a shift in perspective is required. Companies need to 
think less about building walls and more about establishing clear 
boundaries. An employee at their desk or on the move, subcontrac-
tor, or partner: access to the network should be the same. When 
we talk about privileged access, it’s not who is more privileged than 
who in terms of their relationship to the company; it simply refers to 
who gets access to what as defined by their role definition. As the 
straight lines of traditional security practice get increasingly blurred 
and permeable, privilege access becomes the cornerstone of not just 
good network security, but also good people management.  Using 
open source software to solve this problem can be just as bad. 
 
Data Breach Excuse 5: Apologize and Reassure Customers It was an 
Accident Rather than Intentional Harm.  
You guessed it, that’s what we heard as the last excuse when data 
showed up stolen or vandalized.  The University of Hawaii used this 
“cover-our-butts” excuse recently when they realized a former fac-
ulty member had inadvertently posted the Social Security numbers, 
grades, and other personal information of 40,000 former students 
to an unprotected server. This information has been accessible by a 
simple Google search for the past year. 
“We are troubled (and) determined to notify everyone according to 
law and committed to do everything possible in the future to pre-
vent this from happening.” Their spokesman, Ryan Mielke, also stated 
that there didn’t appear to be misuse of the information. That hardly 
makes it okay, especially when the information was available to all 
and sundry for 11 months, and that the former faculty member 
even had access to the data to conduct their admission research on 
behalf of the university. Monitoring database access is part of the so-
lution, but addressing the misuse of privilege requires going beyond 
that. It is just as essential to continually audit privileges to ensure 
that employees and partners only have access to the minimum 
amount of sensitive data necessary to perform their duties. This re-
quirement for separation of duties is also a cornerstone of virtually 
all compliance regulations. 

Chapter 2 | Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine 
 
36  
HR and IT—How Security Can Make For 
Strange Bedfellows  
Clearly the best group inside your organization to identity the insiders, and 
differentiate their levels—employee, contractor, partner, customer is your 
HR department. This group will have not only their current level of status, 
but their role and authority levels as well. Because of this, the interface 
between the IT department and HR must also be solidified in order to avoid 
the misuse of privilege and prevent the insider breach. Both organizations 
need to come together to understand that “rank” and “privilege” are two 
completely separate concepts: 
 
Rank: In most every organization, there is a boss and a subordinate. 
The bigger the organization, the more layers of management are 
likely to be found. Ranks define the pecking order or hierarchy of 
this reporting and decision-making structure. 
 
Privilege: Authorization, or privilege, on the other hand, is about 
who has access and can do what on a specific system: physical or 
virtual server or desktop, database, application, or cloud. 
All too often, rank is confused with privilege and those higher in the organi-
zation are automatically given more IT privilege; usually an excess amount of 
privilege for their rank because the thought of fine-grained entitlements has 
not been considered. Fine-grained entitlements are simply calibrating the 
levels of authorization for a specific computing environment to a specific 
setting based on policy or role. 
The challenge of managing insiders gets a little difficult when migrating to 
cloud computing. You can control the hiring practices of your own organiza-
tion, but what about those to whom you are outsourcing? What are the IT 
employee hiring protocols or security checks employed by your cloud pro-
vider? The lack of visibility into the hiring standards and practices for cloud 
employees and a general lack of transparency into provider processes and 
procedures, such as how its employees are granted access to physical and 
virtual assets, make preventing data theft a potential nightmare. Depending 
on the level of access granted, a malicious outside-insider may be able to 
harvest your organization’s confidential data or even gain control of the en-
tire infrastructure with little or no risk of detection. 
But we don’t think that security concerns should be an absolute barrier to 
the adoption of cloud computing technologies. What we do think is that or-
ganizations are right to consider the implications of the cloud—and demand 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
37  
visibility into their suppliers’ technology and processes to ensure the appro-
priate level of administrative privileges for better information protection. 
Perhaps It’s Time to “Geek Up” HR  
For example, application and privilege controls can provide HR visibility into
how businesses and individuals access and manage applications. With HR
and IT in concert on privilege user parameters and administrative rights,
policy enforcement can become more distributed and effective. 
Security is an ongoing, collaborative process. Constant review of both policy
and technology is necessary to safeguard corporate networks. And although
you can never eliminate risk completely, when you improve relations be-
tween HR and IT so that policy and technology go hand in hand, an organi-
zation’s security becomes a great deal tighter. 
Top Ten Reasons Good People Do Bad
Things Without Least Privilege 
Taking a more tongue-in-cheek approach to highlighting the types of privi-
lege misuse that occurs daily inside most organizations, we thought that a
top-ten-list approach might appeal to you as well. How many of these have
you seen throughout your organization? 
#10: Michelle, the CEO’s Exec Admin, leaves her current password
list on a yellow sticky note taped to the bottom of her keyboard. 
#9: Fred, the Rochester Linux admin, “loaned” his root credentials
to another admin because he was late for a dentist appointment and
the server needed to be rebooted. 
#8: Ted in Tech Support reset file and directory permissions on a
mission-critical Linux server to make his data migration project go 
smoother but, in the process, also gave access to sensitive data to
the entire company. 
#7: Sid in Development downloaded a couple of neat Apache appli-
cations and a few other unauthorized open source “tools,” injecting
malware into the corporate network. 
#6 :Annie the Secretary completely cratered her PC configuration
while trying to upgrade an application by accidentally “fat fingering” 

Chapter 2 | Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine 
 
38  
the wrong IP address, causing her to lose two days of productivity 
while IT reimaged her machine. 
#5: Bob, the VP of Marketing, now adds 220GB of personal data to 
the nightly backups as his entire iTunes library of 23,000 songs and 
15 movies were put on his corporate laptop. 
#4: Alice in IT seems to bring down the entire network backbone 
every time she has a DNS misconfiguration error that seems to 
happen more often than not. 
#3: Fred in IT installed a Trojan on the mission-critical server, bring-
ing it down for four hours and costing the company over $1M in 
lost transactions, because he was passed over for a big promotion. 
#2: Sarah, the CIO, “hides” all of the Linux root credentials (which 
are changed weekly) in a sealed envelope in the bottom drawer of 
her desk and has to deal with a manual check-in/check-out process, 
but everyone knows where she keeps the list. 
#1: A member of the group known as “anonymous” overheard a 
systems admin bragging over a Palo Alto lunch how no one would 
ever figure out that his password was “talkingninjamonkey2” after 
his favorite video game avatar. 
Weighing In 
It never ceases to amaze us how predictable we are as human beings. 
Whether it’s continuing to repeat our own mistakes or thinking the conse-
quences of others’ actions would never apply to us, it seems we’re far too 
eager to turn a blind eye to reality. Reality, however, has a funny way of 
coming back to haunt us. When it comes to trusting good people not to do 
bad things, IT Admins and the CSOs and CIOs they report to are like a 
whole army of Homer Simpsons continuing to stick their finger into the light 
socket and expecting not to get a jolt.  
We have analyzed numerous examples of intentional, accidental, and indirect 
misuse of privilege and the associated cost of these insider breaches. There 
are several lessons we can take away from these experiences. The first and 
foremost is to have an identity management solution in place within your en-
terprise. Allowing any employee unfettered access to all company assets is 
both unnecessary and dangerous. The second is to regularly monitor privi-
leges as work roles, new employees, and new data emerge and change. Take 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
39  
the steps now to learn from the past, and prevent any insiders from misusing 
their privileges on any level. Let’s hear from our Insider Heroes: 
Secure Sam:  
The misuse of privilege is unfortunately a rising trend amid enterprises. 
There are new data breaches reported daily it seems, and companies and 
consumers alike are losing faith in information security. Far too many of 
these breaches come at the hands of insiders. We can’t understand why 
companies don’t take measures to protect themselves from these kinds of 
attacks! The reality is there are far too many “Disgruntled Daves” out 
there. No matter how large a company is or how much they’re worth, no 
one can afford the risk and the price of a security breach. $2.7 million is a 
lot of money, and the cost of cleaning up these kinds of messes is only going 
to rise. So why do companies continue to push the insider threat aside? 
Maybe it’s not just that they’re ignoring the obvious; maybe it’s that they 
think that their tried-and-true security methods are still working. The unfor-
tunate truth is that putting up a wall doesn’t mitigate the danger anymore—
the misuse of privilege is bigger than a firewall. The only way for enterprises 
and their managing IT personnel to adjust and eliminate these expensive 
risks is to actually manage access. Companies need to step up and take con-
trol of who has access to what, and until this happens, we don’t think we’ll 
see relief from the onslaught of breaches. 
Least Privilege Lucy:  
Privileges are one of the more complicated parts of the IT manager’s job. 
Everyone thinks they need to have power to do everything, but the reality is 
that most of them don’t come close to needing administrator rights, and it’s 
downright dangerous letting them run with them! When users end up with 
more rights than they need, they inevitably download something with a vi-
rus, upgrade software they’re not authorized to upgrade, accidentally mess 
with their settings, and/or just wreak havoc on the fragile network that is so 
vigilantly managed. Having unnecessary administrators running around really 
is like a landmine—you just spend time waiting until another time-
consuming issue has to be dealt with because someone accidentally hit the 
download button or upgraded some software without thinking. “Accident 
Prone Annie” is part of my daily routine, and honestly the bane of my exis-
tence. Managing rights is the answer; taking all users to a least privilege 
model is the way to avoid the ticking time bomb and make enterprises more 
secure. 

Chapter 2 | Misuse of Privilege Is the New Corporate Landmine 
 
40  
Compliance Carl:  
There are always issues that come up with information technology. One of 
the issues that I see all the time is the leaking of that data. Ideally, I see it be-
fore an outsider comes in and spreads it across the Internet to the corners 
of the world, but it’s something that’s prevalent in IT environments across 
almost all industries. It’s also something we’ve all seen lately, as data leaks 
and breaches are becoming more commonplace than ever. What doesn’t 
get reported along with these breaches, however, is the root cause of how 
they happen. Everyone hears that data was leaked, information was hacked 
into, and passwords were stolen. But take a minute and ask yourself how 
that happens in the first place. How can outsiders access these precious en-
terprise tools? “Identity Thief Irene” is the answer to that question. While 
she is fictitious, there are thousands of real-life thieves just like her that do 
the exact same thing: hijack accounts with administrator rights. When a 
company is properly protected against data theft, hackers cannot gain access 
because least privilege is in place. By making admin rights something that 
only those who require them have, information can’t be hijacked with as 
much ease. Least privilege, which is a best practice and a money saver for 
companies, really is the key. 
 

C H A P T E R 
3 
Business  
Executives, 
Technologists, 
and Auditors 
Need Least 
Privilege 
 
“Privileged Identity Management (PIM) is part of the overall identity and 
access management (IAM) family of technologies, which together pro-
vide corporations mechanisms to govern the who, what, where, when 
and why of secure access management and provisioning.” 
—Sally Hudson, International Data Corporation 

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
42  
At first glance, one might think that combining least privilege with business 
executives, IT professionals, and auditors would be impossible given the sig-
nificant differences in points of view and motivations. Upon closer look, 
however, this idea makes perfect sense, because it combines security and 
productivity with rank and privilege.  
Indeed, this is not a compromise between the three segmented players, but 
it makes these forces interdependent and dynamic. In other words, least 
privilege becomes the force by which each employee is empowered to do 
what they need to do, when they need to do it. It ensures that they can’t 
abuse their rank, and do what they shouldn’t be doing, at a time when the 
company least expects it. 
In Chapter 1, we introduced the concept of these three business roles as 
“Insider Heroes:” 
 
Secure Sam—Sam is your typical Chief Security Officer (CSO) or IT 
manager responsible for the governance, compliance, and security of 
the information assets of your corporation. 
 
Least Privilege Lucy—Lucy is your average network or systems ad-
ministrator responsible for administrating systems and/or infrastruc-
ture, be they physical, virtual, or cloud-based systems. 
 
Compliance Carl—Carl is your classic auditor responsible for regula-
tory compliance reporting and auditing of IT policies for enforce-
ment of corporate governance. 
These insider heroes deal with the harsh realities of rank and privilege on a 
daily basis as they set about to accomplish their responsibilities within the 
perimeter of today’s extended enterprise.  They also have to deal with the 
differences between rank and privilege, being careful not to collapse these 
two ideas together.  
Remember that we discussed rank as the role or position one has inside an 
organization, while privilege is the level of authorization that person has to 
specific IT resources under specific circumstances. Trusted insiders tend to 
want to collapse rank and privilege into one concept, which inherently is 
why good people get triggered to do bad things. Perhaps it’s something 
about the hubris of human nature to assume that the higher the rank we 
achieve, the more competent and knowledgeable we are. Indeed, this is ex-
actly where complacency can set in—when we achieve a certain rank, we 
can so often drift into comfort zones that keep us insulated from the need 
to continuously educate ourselves. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
43  
Sam constantly has to deal with everyone demanding administrator access 
rights (privilege) to specific IT resources, especially their desktops. It always 
seems that the higher placed the titles and place in the organization chart 
(rank), the more vigorous the demand. What’s interesting about Sam’s di-
lemma is that the requestor usually doesn’t know why they are asking for 
admin rights. They just believe that since their title is what it is, they should 
have omnipotent access to said resource, in spite of the fact that they might 
not be competent to do so. 
Lucy has to manage the variety of privileges required to deal with IT issues 
across such a diverse set of platforms as Windows desktops, physical serv-
ers (at least four different operating systems and every permutation of ver-
sion and patch), virtual servers (at least three operating systems and every 
permutation of Hypervisor manager), infrastructure (at least four different 
databases, hundreds of legacy applications, and potentially thousands to 
hundreds of thousands of desktop data requirements), and of course the 
new rage of cloud migration (public, private, and hybrid). Her persona re-
quires a fluid level of privilege tied to specific policy and circumstance de-
spite her fixed role (rank) in the enterprise. 
Carl is a unique persona. He usually sees the world in black and white. For 
Carl, access to IT resources (privilege) is to be measured against his inter-
pretation of the germane regulations and therefore will interrogate entitle-
ment reports (rank) accordingly in order to determine compliance or the 
need for remediation. 
Let’s explore each of these insider heroes in more depth using examples 
from the global news and your peer community, to further illustrate how 
confusing rank and privilege can cause Good People to do Bad Things. 
Secure Sam Examined Closer 
Ever see how a duck glides through water? It looks effortless from the sur-
face, but beneath the waterline is a different story. In reality, the poor duck 
is paddling his webbed feet feverishly in order to move about. Now you 
know what it’s like to be a CSO, or IT manager responsible for information 
security, managing today’s enterprise security requirements. One of these, 
or some variation thereof, is ultimately the title Secure Sam holds in your 
organization.  Now you know what his day is like. 
At face value, the successful Secure Sam (Figure 3-1) projects an air of calm, 
cool, and collected control over the enterprise governance, risk, and com-
pliance mitigation requirements. Behind the scenes, he is a whirling dervish 

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
44  
of politician meets technician meets mind reader meets soothsayer all 
served up with one great big stress sandwich. 
The successful Secure Sam  
understands the need for: 
 
Constant diligence against insider 
threats as well as attack from outsiders 
 
Relentless education on new technolo-
gies and techniques to control access 
to all information assets 
 
Ever-present knowledge of industry 
and competitive breaches published in 
the press and on the Internet 
 
Real-time change control for corpo-
rate policy enforcement at every IT 
endpoint 
 
On-demand entitlement and audit ca-
pabilities for when the CEO, CFO, or 
auditor asks for specific reports 
 
A vision of what is possible in his role, 
when all of the above are competently 
handled. 
The common pitfalls a Secure Sam faces can include: 
 
Focuses only on outsider threats and over-spend budgets on pe-
rimeter security 
 
Relies solely on trust and written corporate policies for employee 
use of information technology resources 
 
Assumes that HR is for hiring and firing, and has little to offer him in 
terms of insight about how to manage his network 
 
Remains blissfully ignorant of the impact felt by peer companies and 
competitors when insiders attack 
 
Secretly likes the adrenaline rush of fighting outsiders, to the point 
he hasn’t yet recognized the internal threat 
 
Uses policy changes as job security because his team is the only one 
with the knowledge of what needs to be done 
 
Takes two to four weeks for custom reporting when requested 
Figure 3-1. Secure Sam 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
45  
Secure Sam in the News 
How much press will we have to endure on the significant problems created 
by WikiLeaks and the public lynching of those who perpetrate these leaks 
before we realize that if you give someone an inch (excessive admin rights), 
they will take a mile (misuse that privilege)? 
To use a metaphor: If I sneeze, will you give me a tissue and send me on my 
way? Will you give me cold medicine? How about allergy medicine? Without 
knowing the cause, the disease, then reacting to the sneeze, the symptom, 
will ultimately result in a response that may be over-kill or under-kill. 
Some journalists do get it. Mike Martin at TechNewsWorld published an 
insightful story titled WikiLeaks Wrangling May Be Escalating Into Cyber-
war. He rightly points out “the WikiLeaks controversy could be devolving 
into a wiki-war.” 
So why is it that every journalist seems to be focused on the symptom, the 
leak, instead of the disease, the “intentional misuse of privilege” caused by 
“excess admin rights?”  
An article posted on eWeek.com on January 6, 2011 proclaimed “Now, an-
other train is coming and I’m telling you right now, it’s headed in your direc-
tion. WikiLeaks has brought new meaning to the concept of insider threat 
by providing a convenient vehicle to empower staff to quickly and instantly 
hand over privileged information. 
Acknowledging the WikiLeaks phenomenon, the important lesson is: your 
company could be next. Given the volume of leaks WikiLeaks has on private 
companies, if you work for a Global 2000 corporation, there’s a good 
chance WikiLeaks already has some dirt.” 
Why Sam Should Know Your Business Partner 
Might Be Your Weakest Link 
The drive for greater company-wide efficiencies and overall cost savings has 
made the reality of outsourcing a significant part of 21st century business 
practices. But as Secure Sam has come to learn the hard way, by handing over 
your data and network access to third parties, no matter how trustworthy, 
your enterprise could be at risk of suffering a serious and damaging data leak. 
According to a new study from the Ponemon Institute, 39 percent of data 
breaches involve third-party outsourcers. Many companies experienced this 
problem first-hand when a recent, very highly publicized data breach by  
e-mail marketing service provider, Epsilon, affected some of the nation’s 
largest banks, and technology and retail brands. This specific breach only 

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
46  
involved the release of names and e-mail addresses. However, exposure of 
more confidential information, traced back to outside vendors, is occurring 
on a much more alarmingly frequent basis.  
The lesson we can all learn here is that companies not only have to monitor 
their own security, but also that of their associates and vendors. While it is 
important to provide the information and access necessary for third-party 
resources to do their jobs, at the same time it’s irresponsible to allow ven-
dors free reign over sensitive data or network assets. An all-or-nothing ap-
proach to granting users access doesn’t work here. Effective PIM coupled 
with comprehensive knowledge of your partners’ and vendors’ security 
policies and practices are the best way to safeguard your company’s most 
valued asset. 
Sam Must Arbitrate Tablets at the Office as 
Friend or Foe 
A decision that Secure Sam has to weigh in on now that he wouldn’t have 
had to deal with just two or three years ago is the proliferation of personal 
tablets and mobile computing devices. 
According to Gartner, worldwide media tablet spending is projected to reach 
$29.4 billion in 2011, up from $9.6 billion in 2010. Gartner also predicts that 
by 2013, 80 percent of the workforce will be using tablet devices. Whether 
employees are being issued tablets by their employers, or bringing in their 
personal devices, embracing tablet computers is very attractive for many en-
terprises looking to keep their employees connected, while reducing costs.  
But mobile malware threats are on the rise. According to Andrew Hickey 
at CRN in February 2011, “mobile device platforms have become the latest 
and greatest attack point as mobile device security threats rose to new 
heights in 2010’s fourth quarter and will continue in 2011...” The May 2011 
detection of a Mac OS “crime kit” could also heavily impact iPad users and 
serves as an indicator of what we can potentially see in the future as tablet 
adoption continues to grow. Presently, most tablet end points are relatively 
unsecured, which is cause for concern as these devices connect to the cor-
porate network. Data storage on untrusted end points must therefore be 
heavily weighed and controlled. There should always be a preference for 
enterprise data to remain on corporate assets, with remote access capabili-
ties limited to secure, encrypted VPN connections, else the potential for 
misuse of privilege will occur. 
Adopting smartphone security best practices will help alleviate some of the 
headaches associated with tablets in your network environment. It’s also 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
47  
important to employ stringent access controls and make sure your end us-
ers only have access to what they need to in order to do their jobs. 
Least Privilege Lucy Examined Closer 
Depending on the size of your company, Lucy (Figure 3-2) could be 1 “jack of
all trades” or 1 of 100 specialists each focused on a specific operating system,
platform, geography, or business unit. The unifying characteristics include one
part technical wizard, one part fire fighter, one part customer service repre-
sentative, one part project manager, and one part CSI forensic analyst.  
Least Privilege Lucy is the first person called whenever something technical
needs to be done, from deploying a new desktop, physical server, virtual
server, or application in the cloud, to upgrading software versions and
patches, to rebuilding damaged systems courtesy of the latest malware at-
tack or user “accidentally” doing something inappropriate. And let’s not for-
get that the CEO will also call her instead of picking up an instruction man-
ual every time he hits the wrong key on his BlackBerry. 
The successful Least Privilege Lucy understands the
need for: 
 
Policy creation; monitoring and
management of each role in the or-
ganization to ensure against over-
privileged” or under-privileged users 
 
Real-time brokering of appropriate
privileges across platforms based on
those polices 
 
Tight integration with existing trusted
repositories for policy and credential
management (such as MS Active Di-
rectory, Group Policy, Oracle data-
base, and so forth) 
 
A single privilege identity footprint for
desktop, physical, and virtual servers 
and cloud deployment that can adapt
to situations based on policies evoked 
 
Real-time logging for remediation and
reporting 
Figure 3-2. Least Privilege Lucy

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
48  
 
Insight into what she would do with the cost savings created from 
not having to fight fires caused by over- or under-privileged users 
jamming her phone line all day 
The common pitfalls or traits a Least Privilege Lucy 
might enable: 
 
A one-size-fits-all approach to user authorization levels across all 
platforms accordingly (that is, all desktops use policy one, while all 
virtual servers use policy two) 
 
Require only managers or help desk personal to have admin rights 
to be invoked personally (that is, walk over and type in a password) 
for every request for elevated permissions 
 
Assume they can keep up with the level of change required to 
meet corporate governance and regulatory changes through man-
ual programming 
 
Remain blissfully ignorant of the impact felt by peer companies and 
competitors when insiders attack 
 
Use personal technical expertise as job security because her team is 
the only one with the knowledge of what needs to be done 
 
Addiction to fighting fires, because it gives her a sense of impor-
tance and allows her to be visible in the organization 
 
Taking 2-4 weeks for every request not made by a senior executive 
who will usually get a response within 24 hours 
Least Privilege Lucy Is Disgruntled Dave Before 
He Became Disgruntled 
If you haven’t figured it out yet, yes, Least Privilege Lucy is actually the same 
persona as Disgruntled Dave introduced earlier, but with a significant differ-
ence. Dave has had something that upset him to the point where he has de-
cided to use his technical expertise to intentionally misuse his privilege and 
perpetrate damage (electronically or financially), while Lucy still adheres to 
the values of only doing right by the company. Another aspect of that differ-
ence is intent and action: 
 
Intent—Lucy’s intent is to use authorizations and privileges as befit 
the resource or situation, while Dave’s intent is to misuse his 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
49  
privilege to intentionally steal, modify, or delete data or plant 
malware that will activate at some time after he leaves. 
 
Action—Lucy’s actions establish a pattern of doing what is necessary 
in a given situation, while Dave’s actions exhibit a covert behavior 
that may even go unrecognized until the damage is done and he is 
already in a non-extradition country sipping on a daiquiri and spend-
ing the $100 million he made selling your customer files to the 
competition. 
When Lucy Was In Fact David Not Dave 
In the press, you will find mostly articles about the Disgruntled Dave per-
sona versus Least Privileged Lucy because most news that attracts viewers 
is of the doom, gloom, and tragedy perspective. So looking at a case study, 
we find a great example in David Nester at M.D. Anderson. When David 
came on board as the Unix security architect at M.D. Anderson, he was 
charged with developing Unix and web security for the institution’s massive 
information network. Of particular importance for Nester were access con-
trol, authorization, root delegation, and auditing capabilities of the network. 
“The previous Unix environment was not centralized, and it was difficult to 
understand what activities were being performed at each machine,” says 
Nester. “I was assigned the challenge of placing controls back in to the 
hands of our system administrators.” 
David knew that a strong IT infrastructure was vital to supporting the pa-
tient care services and overall mission of the institution. “The ability of our 
systems to operate effectively can substantially affect the critical medical 
care provided here at M.D. Anderson,” says Nester. “If something were to 
go wrong, we would not have the luxury of time because people’s lives are 
at stake.” So you will find that David is much more of a Least Privilege Lucy 
(in male form) then he is a Disgruntled Dave. 
Lucy’s Worst Nightmare: “Your Password Is 
What?” 
Who’s on first? What’s on second? I don’t know’s on third, and your pass-
word is Password? HUH?!? Yep, it seems like the classic Abbott and Cos-
tello baseball sketch is now Least Privilege Lucy’s worst nightmare when it 
comes to password management. According to a recent Wall Street Journal 
article on The Top 50 Gawker Media Passwords, the average user seems to 
either have a relaxed sense of security, a love for Abbott and Costello-like 

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
50  
humor, or are just lazy when it comes to identity-related security. It’s no 
wonder the average hacker can break into sites with relative ease. 
Now translate that into what happens across your enterprise when just one 
employee uses this protocol for personal passwords on corporate resources, 
which may contain proprietary and/or confidential information worth steal-
ing, selling, or vandalizing. Scared yet? You should be! 
Just implementing password protocols is not enough in today’s ever-
changing environment. The real solution should involve the elimination of 
users owning their own passwords and implement an automated password 
management solution. This allows users to “pull credentials” when required 
from a centralized policy-managed repository, instead of relying on individ-
ual credentials being “pushed” by the user. 
These solutions create, manage, and remove random machine-generated 
passwords. These passwords are then transparently used by the requesting 
resource without the user ever knowing the password or login credential. 
Therefore, the likelihood of someone misplacing, loaning out, or hacking a 
password is greatly diminished. 
Lucy Knows that Sharing Isn’t Always Caring 
In kindergarten, we all learned an important lesson: how to share. Some 
people, as they grew up, seem to have taken this concept a little too far, 
with no real consideration for possible consequences. I’m not trying to un-
dermine the importance of sharing as a general rule, but let’s just take a 
quick look at how sharing has “helped” in the recent past. 
Vodafone. We’ve talked about it before, but it’s the perfect example of how 
sharing isn’t always the way to go. They experienced a breach in early 2011 
that affected private customer data. This information was leaked as a result 
of the misuse of a password. More than likely, the damage that password 
caused was a result of it being sold or given to someone else. The conse-
quences of this breach were severe: fines to be paid, fired employees, and a 
whole unnecessary mess to be cleaned up. All because someone was loose 
with their password. 
Every user in every organization must have their own unique credentials. 
Every time. Sure, it can be easier to let someone use your password. Yes, 
they would probably end up with privileged access if they had called the help 
desk anyway. But at what cost does sharing become acceptable? Organiza-
tions need not risk sensitive information for laziness. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
51  
Companies also need to have the ability to track and log the use of those 
passwords. Granular details about when someone logged in, the keystrokes 
they performed, and the information they accessed is the key to correct 
governance, as well as fast response time if a breach were to occur. Without 
a system in place to ensure the proper people are using their passwords ap-
propriately, all of your efforts will have been for naught. 
We think it’s safe to say that sharing is not always a benefit. Should we take 
it too far and stop teaching children to share? No. Should we stop teaching 
adults with the keys to their enterprises’ kingdom to share? Absolutely. 
Compliance Carl Examined Closer 
This persona is about dualities: part technical 
analyst, part financial analyst. At his best, Carl is 
part Sherlock Holmes and part Judge Judy. At 
his worst, he is part Homer Simpson and part 
Harvey Two-Face. 
Most business and IT executives alike tremble 
when Compliance Carl (Figure 3-3) comes 
around because they know their practices and 
systems will be scrutinized. Part of this general-
ized fear is the black and white nature of a 
compliance audit. At the end, they will either 
pass or fail. A failing mark can mean anything 
from small policy changes required to massive 
financial fines. Because these decisions are al-
most solely at the discretion of the type of 
Compliance Carl you have in your organization, 
the difference between the “Holmes/Judy” ver-
sion can be dramatically different than the 
“Simpson/Two-face” version. 
The successful Compliance Carl understands the 
need for: 
 
Accreditation with certifications such as Certified Information 
Systems Auditor (CISA) or Certified Information Systems Security 
Professional (CISSP) 
 
Ongoing education on best practices for information technology 
audit from such organizations as ISACA 
Figure 3-3. Compliance Carl 

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
52  
 
An objective point of view relying on quantitative and qualify-able 
data directly measured to governance or regulatory standards 
 
Thorough documentation on entitlements (that is, user authoriza-
tions) across all platforms physical, virtual, and cloud 
 
Ongoing education and refreshers on regulatory mandates and how 
they relate to your industry or organization. 
The common pitfalls a Compliance Carl faces can 
include: 
 
A strong IT background doesn’t necessarily make for a strong IT 
auditor as the disciplines are completely different without proper 
training and accreditation 
 
Assuming that compliance is a project and not a process that re-
quires ongoing diligence for meeting governance and regulatory 
requirements 
 
Believing that once a regulation is published, it will not change and 
failing to implement any form of regulatory change communication 
alerting system 
 
Using subjectivity and personal bias or high-level trend data instead 
of detailed reports to determine compliance 
 
Being overwhelmed by techno-jargon to the point of being misled 
from compliance risks 
 
Acting like Harvey Two-Face in Batman, using a coin-flip for every 
decision made 
Compliance Carl in the News 
What is sweet revenge to the business and IT executive is when they read 
about the IT auditor who fell under the scrutiny of the press and questions 
of favoritism arise. In June 2010, CBS News Canada reported that an “Al-
berta IT Auditor Appeared In YouTube Promo.” It went on to report that 
“Patrick Dunnigan, an information technology auditor, is shown in the info-
mercial extolling the virtues of software from New York City company Ap-
plication Security Incorporated (ASI) purchased by the Alberta auditor gen-
eral last year. Dunnigan helped choose the software for the office.”  
The article went on to say “Both the company and the auditor general’s 
office say Dunnigan was not paid to take part in the video nor was the 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
53  
software purchase price reduced in return for his appearance. However, 
assistant auditor general Ed Ryan said the promotion was not authorized 
by anyone in the office and an investigation is now underway to determine 
if Dunnigan broke the code of conduct.” Here is an example where a 
Compliance Carl came under scrutiny for ethics and casts a shadow of 
doubt on credibility. 
This is a real-life example of why Carl is the most tenuous character here. 
His capacity to hit the common pitfalls and be another “good person doing 
a bad thing” or the errant ability to confuse rank and privilege will lead him 
to underestimate insider threats relative to external threats as the weak-
est link. 
Compliance Carl in the Blogosphere 
If you frequent the blogosphere on the Internet, then you can also find lots 
of opinions on IT auditors: the good, the bad, and the ugly. One of the favor-
ite passages we found was on theitauditor.com who, in June 2010, wrote: 
“Another place where blame lies is with audit managers who are 
more concerned with maintaining the contract than providing the 
client with the ability to decide which issues are significant enough 
to worry about. It is my belief that all weaknesses found during an 
audit should be communicated to the client in writing in some form. 
I am not promoting the idea that all findings should make it into the 
final report, or even that all findings are reportable. I am saying that 
in daily interactions, status meetings or briefings the client should be 
presented a list of every single finding that was observed, this pro-
vides legal/regulatory coverage for the auditors, and it allows the 
client to make the decision to address or ignore each issue individu-
ally. The way I see it, my integrity as a professional is more impor-
tant than the contract that I am working under. If my client is in-
timidated by a long list of findings, they can either keep me around 
to help them correct the situation or they can continue to bury 
their head in the sand and either terminate my contract or I may re-
fuse to return upon the end of that contract. Auditors are a re-
source that should be used to help; if we are seen as adversaries to 
the system admins or management our work will not add any value 
to their processes.” 

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
54  
Why McAfee Knows that Carl Still Looks Outside 
the Perimeter Instead of Within 
To add fuel to Compliance Carl’s list of daily action items, you may have al-
ready seen the results of a 1,000+-person survey conducted recently by 
McAfee and wrapped up in a crisp report. They estimate that businesses lost 
more than $1 trillion in 2008 as a result of data leaks. With the help of SAIC 
and international research firm Vanson Bourne, the company has added some 
meaty authority to what would otherwise be seen as a vendor-biased report. 
According to the report, the most popular methods of protecting sensitive 
data are anti-virus, firewalls, and intrusion detection/prevention systems, 
which are implemented by more than four in five organizations, perhaps fol-
lowed by deep packet inspections, which was reported by two-thirds of re-
spondents. It figures that all of these are outward-facing security mecha-
nisms primarily intended to prevent malicious hackers, viruses, and worms. 
Therein lies the problem. 
Surveys from the Computer Security Institute (CSI)/FBI research team also 
show that most organizations believe the majority of their security risks are 
from external threats, yet actual analysis of real breaches shows that inter-
nal threats outweigh external ones. AT the 2011 RSA show we remember 
one of our execs was telling a reporter that people are finally realizing that 
their risks are from within. This was also a big story during the recession, 
where many organizations were bracing themselves for massive layoffs that 
were creating armies of angry, unemployed, ex-employees. Before the re-
cession, reports like those from the CSI were trying to change our minds to 
realize where our focus should be—demonstrating the internal problem. 
Therein lies the value of a least privilege solution to help prevent good peo-
ple (insiders) from doing bad things (steal or harm data). 
And yet, after all that, the industry hasn’t caught on. What else could any-
one possibly do to erase this perspective that the vast majority of risk 
comes from over-glorified hackers? 
Why Carl Just Doesn’t Always Realize the 
Outside Is Also the Inside on the Outside for 
Today’s Mobile Workers 
An auditor’s nightmare is trying to keep track of remote users and how to 
keep track of their potential or capacity for generating compliance or gov-
ernance issues. According to a Runzheimer survey released in April 2011, 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
55  
45 percent of today’s workforce is mobile. For companies, having such an 
extensive number of remote employees can provide a number of great ad-
vantages, but it has plenty of downsides, too. 
Among the top concerns of enterprise executives is being able to effectively 
manage the mobile workforce to ensure maximum productivity and control 
the distribution of data. IT managers have indicated that it is a lot more 
challenging to keep remote employees informed of security policies and ini-
tiatives. On top of that, mobile workers are significantly more likely to ac-
cess dangerous content than those in the office. Additionally, when employ-
ees bring their own personal mobile devices into the office network fray, 
security management can seem like a nightmare. 
But it’s not all bad. By combining the deployment of up-to-date security so-
lutions with instituting best practices and compliance standards, organiza-
tions have a golden opportunity to capitalize on all of the positive aspects of 
a mobile workforce, while minimizing the potential for data losses, breaches, 
or even worse. Part of companies’ mobile security strategy should also in-
clude implementing a least privilege solution, ensuring that remote workers 
can only access the data and perform the computing functions needed to do 
their jobs. Employees can’t lose what they can’t access. 
So, now we have a better idea of the role least privilege can play in the lives 
of the business manager, represented by Sam, the IT admin, represented by 
Lucy, and the compliance auditor, represented by Carl. We’ve illustrated 
how it represents a common thread between their roles despite their rank. 
Let’s now return to our overarching concern in this book—the vagaries of 
human nature—and uncover other areas where this problem occurs. 
The Problem Still Exists Between the 
Keyboard and Chair 
There Is No Patch For Stupidity. No, we’re not talking about a Boy or 
Girl Scout patch (or merit badge) now awarded for making dumb errors 
with information technology at work. We’re referring to the ever-present 
vendor tech support cry of “just install the patch” whenever something 
goes wrong.  
In this case, the patch is a “fix” for the buggy software that invariably caused 
some loss of data and/or productivity. But what happens when the error is 
human error? Unfortunately, there are no “patches” for that, unless you 
count getting rid of said employee and replacing him with someone smarter. 
A common cry of helps desk personnel worldwide is PEBKAC! If you don’t 

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
56  
know what that means, you’re not alone. We had to look up that acronym 
as well to discover it meant “Problem Exists Between Keyboard and Chair.” 
Accidents happen, and if you are still providing excessive privileges to your 
desktop/laptop users or server/network/database/cloud/virtual administra-
tors, then you are at risk of the accidental misuse of privilege. Sometimes, 
these accidents can cause harm that is newsworthy. In this instance, you not 
only have to deal with the problems created, but also the public fallout that 
follows from the press and blogosphere. 
First, you need to eliminate admin rights on Windows desktops and root 
privileges off of servers, then you implement a PIM solution to create a least 
privilege environment such that no one will have enough permission to 
cause harm if they misuse their privileges. In this way, you can mitigate the 
severity of potential user stupidity and not have to deal with the help desk 
crying PEBKAC or fear an unpleasant expose in the Wall Street Journal, lo-
cal paper, wikileaks.com, or the blogosphere. 
The Swiss Cheese Model 
We’ve heard a lot of stories from executives, administrators, and auditors 
alike on how they tried implementing a least privileged model without a PIM 
solution. Some folks used scripts to grant/remove administrator rights to 
the user; others used native settings such as Group Policy Files system and 
Registry ACL policies. We are not speaking badly of these admins and ad-
mittedly, have taken similar steps in the past; and in moderation, these do 
have a place.  
The problem with utilizing this approach to completely address east privi-
lege or least-privileged user accounts (LUA) is that you get into what we re-
fer to as, “The Swiss Cheese Model.” You inherently open up a number of 
security holes in your enterprise, not to mention risk breaking compatibility 
with applications, and create an incredible amount of work to maintain 
these policies and transfer this knowledge to other administrators. Follow-
ing is an excerpt taken from a Microsoft Knowledge Base on this: 
“Extensive permission changes that are propagated throughout the 
registry and file system cannot be undone. New folders, such as 
user profile folders that were not present at the original installation 
of the operating system, may be affected. Therefore, if you remove 
a Group Policy setting that performs ACL changes, or you apply the 
system defaults; you cannot roll back the original ACLs. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
57  
Changes to the ACL in the %SystemDrive% folder may cause the
following scenarios: 
 
The Recycle Bin no longer functions as designed, and files
cannot be recovered. 
 
A reduction of security that lets a non-administrator view
the contents of the administrator’s Recycle Bin. 
 
The failure of user profiles to function as expected. 
 
A reduction of security that provides interactive users with
read access to some or to all user profiles on the system. 
 
Performance problems when many ACL edits are loaded
into a Group Policy object that includes long logon times or 
repeated restarts of the target system. 
 
Performance problems, including system slowdowns, every
16 hours or so as Group Policy settings are reapplied. 
 
Application compatibility problems or application crashes.” 
Establishing a least privilege environment or implementing a PIM solution is
one of the only ways to solve this. Doing that correctly requires Secure
Sam, Least Privilege Lucy, and Compliance Carl to come together. 
Security Is a Team Sport and Least
Privilege Is the Team Motto 
In organizations that aren’t sophisticated with measuring the value of risk,
getting budget for security can be a tough gig. SC Magazine has an entire
blog dedicated to an active running list of publicly known breaches, yet no
matter how many examples you show, sometimes the logic that it will never
be you is just a wishful-thinking phenomenon that can’t be beat. 
This is especially problematic when we talk about the risks of an accident,
which requires systematic oversight to avoid. It would be so much cheaper
and easier to just not make mistakes, right? So just don’t screw up! 
That must have been what the National Guard was thinking when they re-
leased the names, Social Security numbers, pay, and more for the 155th Bri-
gade Combat Team by accident. The data was accidentally posted to an un-
secure SharePoint site. 
Details of the breach are still unknown, but the National Guard believes it
was done inadvertently when uploading files to a new computer system. Let’s 

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
58  
make the leap and say that it had to be someone with administrative privileges 
who uploaded the database somewhere it shouldn’t have been uploaded.  
Who else would have access to 3,000 personal records and be moving that 
data around to support a new system? 
Chances are it was a specific IT administrator that made the mistake, but 
the company did the right thing in not revealing who that person was. 
Hopefully, they took responsibility for systematic shortcomings that would 
allow the mistake of a single individual to cause so much harm. 
It’s a far cry from the case of the University of North Carolina, who at-
tempted to fire their staff member who was responsible for a server that 
got breached by hackers. The organization decided this single individual was 
responsible for the utter and complete lack of security on the server.  
Security is a team sport, but unlike soccer, you can’t let the opposing team 
score a single goal. That means you can’t let a player that trips lose the 
game for you.  
Weighing In 
All too often, the focus of attention can fall to what is going wrong, who 
was responsible, and what it cost, when information technology security is 
being discussed. By recognizing the Sams, Lucys, and Carls in your organiza-
tion, and taking steps to support their activities, you will be investing in a 
secure and compliant future. This can also greatly limit your “misuse of 
privilege” liabilities.  
We have analyzed numerous examples of these key insider hero personas 
along with supporting case studies and industry press. The primary lesson 
learned is understanding the need for separating rank from privilege and the 
value of implementing IT authorizations accordingly. There are several les-
sons we can take away from these experiences, but let’s hear from our in-
sider heroes: 
Secure Sam:  
Being the gateway for all users’ administrator rights is a heavy responsibil-
ity, but one that is necessary in every organization. While not everyone 
needs the keys to the kingdom, everyone seems to think they do. Approv-
ing these privileges to those users who legitimately require them for their 
job functions is such a crucial step to the security of any organization, and 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
59  
not succumbing to political reasoning is equally important. The bottom line 
is this: understand the threats and protect all perimeters from threats. It 
can be so easy to focus on the outsider threat and ignore the very real re-
ality that insider security is just as important. It’s even easier to remain 
blissfully ignorant to attacks around us. It takes constant vigilance to pro-
tect precious company assets from both attackers outside the company 
walls as well as those that exist within the perimeters. It’s vital to have the 
right individual in the role of CSO—one who has a big picture of his role, is 
willing to remain educated on new technologies, and has integrity with re-
gard to his job and the quality of work he performs. Finding the right Secu-
rity Sam for each individual enterprise is such a critical decision. 
Least Privilege Lucy:  
Managing the spectrum of privileges in an equally diverse set of platforms 
requires the juxtaposition of flexibility and rigidness. Whether it’s Windows 
desktops, physical servers, virtual servers, databases, or cloud-based applica-
tions, users need a set of privileges that are specific to their individual jobs. 
While managing these user rights, you must also take certain things into ac-
count. The cost, for example, of IT personnel and the savings that can occur 
when privileges are appropriately delegated. Also, adapting rights and moni-
toring privileges for different network situations. Managing enterprise secu-
rity is not a one-size-fits-all kind of thing, and a thorough analysis of required 
privileges is a vital exercise in ensuring said security. If users don’t need to 
install software as part of their job function, then they don’t need the ad-
ministrative privileges that allow them to do that. Having the focus to create 
policies, then manage and monitor those policies, is critical to ensure against 
the over- and under-privileged user. It’s also critical to understand human 
shortcomings in this process. It’s absolutely not possible to manually pro-
gram and upgrade this level of change while still meeting corporate govern-
ance and regulatory mandates. Knowing the proper tools and techniques 
plays a huge roll in this endeavor. Administration becomes an artifact of 
good decisions, good tools, and IT education. A lot of the time, this admini-
stration also happens in real-time.  
Compliance Carl:  
Being an auditor in today’s ever-changing world of government compliance 
mandates is a role that is clearly outlined, especially when talking about user 
privileges. The way I see it, audits are simple: a company is compliant when 
its users have access to only those IT resources they are required to have 

Chapter 3 | Business Executives, Technologists, and Auditors Need 
Least Privilege 
 
60  
access to. This access is based solely on job descriptions and necessity, and 
is outlined by industry-specific regulations. When analyzing a company for 
compliance, my assessment is predicated on what the entitlement reports 
show and whether the enterprise delegates privileges according to the man-
dates by which they’re governed. Often, the difficulties arising from these 
mandates change and morph over time as the industry and associated regu-
lations also change. Compliance, therefore, is a process and not just an 
event a corporation prepares for once. This applies to me in my role, as 
well, as an on-going education of regulations allows my point of view to re-
main refreshed and relevant. Continual training also allows for more thor-
ough understanding of information technology best practices, as well as pro-
viding enough information for thorough audits to be performed. Knowledge 
is what keeps auditors objective, and it ensures audits rely on data, which is 
ultimately what keeps enterprises safe from both inside and outside attacks. 

C H A P T E R 
4 
Supplementing 
Group Policy 
on Windows 
Desktops 
 
“Another area of concern is that a user with local administrative privi-
leges can install any application they wish on their desktop. This includes 
hack tools, virus-ridden applications, vulnerable applications, and non-
licensed applications.” 
—Derek Melber, MSCE MVP and Author 
In spite of an increasingly mobile workforce working flexible hours, the im-
age of a “desktop” sitting on a Formica, faux cedar wood bureau, or work-
station in a cubicle persists. But as we know full well, a desktop is not a ma-
chine required to be in a fixed location anymore. With technology what it 
is, that term is synonymous for a person (wherever they may be) that has 
access and is using Microsoft Windows.  

Chapter 4 | Supplementing Group Policy on Windows Desktops 
 
62  
Indeed, people are known to behave differently inside and outside of the of-
fice, where the cultures are different. Lines between professional and home 
life become blurred. People take the suit off at home and log in in their 
shorts, but that doesn’t mean they should take their corporate hat off, as 
well. But what is the answer? Eliminating administrator rights without allow-
ing for the elevation of certain job-necessary privileges is not the answer. 
Locking down a system is like asking everyone to raise his or her hand to go 
to the bathroom—it shows the downside of mistrusting human nature.  
Trust is not a value that can be applied in a fixed dose; it has to be meas-
ured to meet the needs of the individual’s role. Trust is a medicine that has 
to be applied carefully in prescribed doses based on role, policy, and cir-
cumstance. Just as you shouldn’t gulp down an entire prescription when 
leaving the pharmacy assuming it will cure the problem in one go, you also 
can’t just apply blanket privileges to users throughout your organization and 
expect that to solve your potential insider breach problem. 
If you’ve read the marketing propaganda delivered by most operating system 
vendors, you have seen that they would like you to believe that their latest 
version will solve every problem known to exist just short of world hunger 
and world peace. It therefore behooves you to be aware of many glaring 
gaps that Windows exposes in privileged identity management (PIM). 
Six Things You Should Know Before 
Migrating to MS Windows 7 
Microsoft has done a great deal of exceptional work in improving Windows 7 
over its predecessor, Windows Vista. Despite this improvement, glaring gaps 
in PIM still abound, requiring the security-conscious enterprise to consider 
Independent Software Vendors (ISVs) to eliminate desktop admin rights. The 
six things you should know before migrating to Windows 7 include: 
1. User Access Control (UAC) Security Vulnerability: This exists when a 
user is logged in as protected administrator, in which case the default 
is to not notify users when changes are made to Windows settings, 
allowing users to “silently” elevate certain actions potentially leading 
to the introduction of malware. 
2.  Registry and File System Virtualization Vulnerability: Applications can 
write data into a virtual store, whereby other applications that need 
to use that data will no longer be able to access it. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
63  
3. Application Compatibility Toolkit (ACT) Limitations: ACT can tell you 
what applications require admin rights, but can do nothing to ele-
vate rights for use of the applications. 
4. Virtualization (Med-V & App-V) Vulnerability: Removing admin rights to 
a user on a PC but allowing them to open a window with admin 
rights to run a specific application for compatibility purposes will re-
sult in opening a security hole on that PC. 
5. AppLocker Limitations: Requires the administrator to explicitly list 
every “legal” application, thus controlling what applications a user 
can use, but still requires admin rights at the user level if that appli-
cation so requires. 
6. RunAs Administrator Vulnerability: Only forces a UAC prompt when an 
application runs but doesn’t elevate the rights for the user. 
Things You Should Know About MS UAC 
Microsoft (UAC) has been touted as the next great thing in desktop secu-
rity, but does it really satisfy all you need in order to ensure security, com-
pliance, and productivity? The things you should know about UAC include: 
 
For standard users, UAC is simply a RunAs operation. When 
prompted with UAC, a standard user is asked for credentials for an 
administrator account. When these credentials are entered, the ap-
plication will run under that account and will no longer be able to 
access remote resources or save data to the correct profile. 
 
Microsoft does not offer logging or reporting for UAC. Auditing the 
use of UAC to discover what a user is doing with elevated privileges 
is a critical part of protecting the computer from unauthorized 
malware and malicious use. 
 
UAC has a security vulnerability in Windows 7 for users who log in 
as protected administrators. This vulnerability can only be mitigated 
if the user changes the UAC setting to its most secure level, which 
is the level used in Windows Vista. Alternatively, the vulnerability 
can be eliminated by removing administrator rights from the user. 
 
UAC dialogs cannot be supplemented with corporate legal text or 
customized warnings. 
UAC has undergone a makeover from its debut in Windows Vista. Micro-
soft has reduced the number of prompts that UAC presents when a user is 

Chapter 4 | Supplementing Group Policy on Windows Desktops 
 
64  
logged in to Windows. Microsoft implemented UAC to help prevent unau-
thorized changes to the operating system. UAC is designed to prompt a 
user when a task is performed in Windows that requires administrative 
privileges. For users who are logged in as a protected administrator, the 
prompt simply asks for consent.  
If the protected administrator selects, yes, then the operation is allowed to 
continue with elevated privileges. The reason the user is called a “protected 
administrator is because he is actually operating with two tokens—one is a 
standard user token, the other is an administrator token. All tasks that the 
user performs are done as a standard user, until the user answers yes to a 
UAC dialog; once this happens, the user switches to an administrator token, 
and the task is elevated to administrator status. 
Microsoft and security experts all agree that users should avoid operating as 
an administrator, with a full administrator token all the time, because it 
leaves the operating system extremely vulnerable to various security prob-
lems, including malware and malicious use. 
With UAC, the user is notified whenever they elevate themselves to admin-
istrator for specific tasks to warn them of the potential for harm. The prob-
lem with this approach in corporate environments is that this strategy 
leaves the security decision up to the end user, which as we have said be-
fore, cannot be expected to be a saint or to be competent all of the time. 
Therefore, it is best to avoid configuring users as protected administrators, 
and make sure they are configured as standard users. Standard users have a 
different experience with UAC—instead of a simple prompt for consent, 
they are asked for a password for an administrative user. 
If the standard user has the password for an administrator account, the 
process or application would run successfully. However, it would be running 
under a different account, without the security context of the actual end 
user. Essentially, this is an enhanced RunAs operation. Further, it only works 
if the user has an administrator password, or if someone else enters the 
administrator password for the user (over-the-shoulder credentials). Giving 
users administrator passwords will just lead to abuse, and over-the-shoulder 
credentials will only increase the load on the help desk. 
Since the introduction of Windows Vista, organizations have been asking 
Microsoft to provide a way to manage a list of applications that would 
automatically elevate themselves and bypass the UAC prompts. Here is Mi-
crosoft’s response to this request. According to Mark Russinovich, Techni-
cal Fellow at Microsoft; Inside Windows 7 User Account Control on tech-
net.microsoft.com: “End users have been asking for Windows to provide a 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
65  
way to add arbitrary applications to the auto-elevate list since the Win-
dows Vista beta... Windows 7, just like Windows Vista, doesn’t provide 
such a capability.” 
Things You Should Know About MS 
AppLocker 
AppLocker is a new and exciting technology in Windows 7 that can drasti-
cally improve desktop security in some organizations. AppLocker allows 
administrators to create a whitelist of all approved applications that are al-
lowed to run on a computer; any other applications or executables would 
not be allowed to run. On the surface, this appears to be the security silver 
bullet; however, there are some things to be aware of when looking to Ap-
pLocker to help improve your security. 
For example, if any of the applications that are on the AppLocker whitelist 
require administrator privileges, the user will need to be configured as a lo-
cal administrator or they will, at the very least, still need an administrator 
password to answer UAC prompts. AppLocker cannot automatically elevate 
applications that are on the whitelist. If the user is configured as a local ad-
ministrator, or has a local administrator password, it is easy to circumvent 
the controls that AppLocker provides. 
The easiest way to circumvent the controls is by booting in Safe Mode and 
disabling the AppID Service. Because the user is an administrator, he would 
have full control to do this. Thus, removing administrator privileges from 
the user is critical in preventing the malicious user from circumventing these 
controls. If the user is not an administrator, AppLocker becomes much 
more effective, but organizations still need to find a way to deal with the 
applications that are on the whitelist that require administrator privileges. 
There is also the question of the management of the whitelist. In smaller or-
ganizations that have relatively static environments, the combination of Ap-
pLocker and eliminating administrative rights is viable. Unfortunately, the 
whitelist scales with the size of the organization. As the company gets big-
ger, the whitelist gets bigger, and can become completely unmanageable 
very quickly. In larger organizations, it becomes nearly impossible to quickly 
react to users who need new applications placed on the whitelist. 
When organizations choose to forgo the implementation of AppLocker 
for whitelisting, removing administrator privileges becomes even more im-
portant. Most applications require administrator privileges to install, and if 

Chapter 4 | Supplementing Group Policy on Windows Desktops 
 
66  
organizations wish to prevent unknown applications from entering the en-
vironment, removing administrator privileges can add significant value. 
Microsoft AppLocker has also been touted as the next best thing in desktop 
security (in addition to UAC), but does it really satisfy all you need in order 
to ensure security, compliance, and productivity? The things you should 
know about AppLocker include: 
 
AppLocker cannot elevate privileges for processes. It is designed to 
block or allow the execution of explicitly listed applications only. 
 
AppLocker does not allow organizations to remove administrator 
privileges. If you have applications that require administrator privi-
leges, and those applications are on the AppLocker whitelist, the 
users will need to be configured as administrators. 
 
In order to make AppLocker secure, you must also remove admin 
rights from end users. If users are administrators, they can easily cir-
cumvent AppLocker policies and even disable the AppLocker service. 
 
AppLocker does not prevent users from accessing protected areas 
of the file system. If a user is an administrator and AppLocker is de-
livering a whitelist to the machine, the user can still modify critical 
areas of the file system. 
 
Managing an AppLocker whitelist can be difficult and cumbersome. 
This may not be suitable for large organizations with thousands of 
line-of-business applications. 
Top Ten Reasons to Implement Least 
Privilege on Windows Desktops 
Taking a more tongue-in-cheek approach to highlighting the types of privi-
lege misuse that occurs daily inside most organizations, we thought that a 
top-ten list approach might appeal to you as well. How many of these have 
you seen throughout your organization? 
#10—Sally in Sales will stop calling the help desk (at $30/call) every 
time she needs to change the system clock because she traveled to 
a different time zone and has standard user privileges. 
#9—Andy the Auditor can get a full report of who has what enti-
tlements instantly to satisfy compliance successfully, instead of tak-
ing weeks of manual effort. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
67  
#8—Ted in Tech Support won’t have to drop everything to add a
print driver to someone’s PC if corporate policy actually permits
them to do it themselves. 
#7—Sid in Development won’t be able to download potentially haz-
ardous software onto his PC that in turn could infect the entire 
corporate network. 
#6—Fiona the Secretary won’t damage her PC configuration while
trying to upgrade an application by accidentally “fat fingering” the
wrong IP address. 
#5—Bob, the VP of Marketing, won’t crater the nightly backups by
loading 120GB of music from his iTunes onto his corporate laptop. 
#4—Alice in Human Resources will no longer be able to copy and
sell private personnel data to supplement her income without the
auditors being aware of her activities. 
#3—Fred in IT won’t be able to install a Trojan on the mission-
critical server, bringing it down for four hours and costing the com-
pany over $1M in lost transactions, because he was passed over for 
a big promotion. 
#2—Jack in Operations will no longer be permitted to download
Active-X controls from online gaming web sites and spend hours of
company time knocking over liquor stores in Grand Theft Auto. 
#1—Charles Xavier III, the CEO, won’t have the ability to screw
up his laptop configuration accidently, indirectly, or even intention-
ally without a full event log being generated for audit, remediation, 
or recovery. 
The “Do-Nothing” Approach 
Daren Mar-Elia, Microsoft Group Policy MVP and founder of gpoguy.com
and sdmsoftware.com, talks about organizations that try to get away with-
out doing anything and hoping the problem never manifests. “I call this the
bury-your-head-in-the-sand strategy. This is clearly one way to address a
problem—by not addressing it. I still see a surprisingly large number of IT
shops that take it for granted that their users run as administrators on their
desktops. If they haven’t yet had problems with malware or users wiping out 

Chapter 4 | Supplementing Group Policy on Windows Desktops 
 
68  
their own systems, they will. Some shops will try to justify it by saying, ‘well 
we have a lot of developers and they need to be administrators’.” 
Developers are indeed a challenge, but we would also argue they are a big 
risk group because they tend to download anything and everything from the 
Internet. Suffice it to say that we do not believe the Do-Nothing approach is 
sustainable in the long run. If Windows 7 and UAC aren’t forcing you to ad-
dress this problem head-on, then sooner or later you will need to confront 
it. If you need business justification to go to management to make the case 
for this, try some of these: 
 
Better security on your desktops and within your organization. If 
your company is even mildly regulated by a government organiza-
tion, I can’t imagine how you can get away with this for long. It’s a 
PR nightmare waiting to happen! 
 
Lower Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) around managing your 
desktops as a result of less user futzing.  
 
More reliable end-user experience since installing untested, non-
standard software and making user-driven tweaks can seriously im-
pact desktop reliability. 
Impact on the Help Desk 
What’s interesting here is that without exception, IT admins and help desk 
personnel, in organizations of all sizes, say they spend more than 1/4 of their 
time fixing problems caused by over-privileged users.  In fact, in our conver-
sations with organizations throughout the world, the average amount of 
time spent fixing these problems was 29% of all activities they are required 
to do. That means almost a third of their time is spent fixing problems, 
whether they be accidental errors (the so-called fat-fingered key stroke) or 
unintended errors, whereby simple actions such as downloading apps from 
the internet leaves the desktop susceptible to malware that can assume the 
user’s administrator rights and use them to access the whole network. 
According the Gartner, Inc.’s report, The Cost of Removing Administrative 
Rights for the Wrong Users (T. Cosgrove/April 2011), the primary difference 
between the two management profiles, “moderately managed” and “locked 
and well-managed,” is user rights. The moderately managed profile assumes 
administrative rights are granted, while the locked and well-managed profile 
has them removed. The cost difference between the two profiles is $653  
annually. Interestingly, 90% of the cost savings associated with the locked-
down user is realized by the user, not IT. The user will spend less time fixing 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
69  
his or her system and doing other administrative tasks, because the PC is 
better managed. 
They’d much prefer to be doing other things. Indeed, an overwhelming 90% 
of all our respondents to a survey of over 200 IT admins said they’d much 
rather automate the process of elevating privileges, and use the money they 
would save on either training staff or upgrading software. In essence, the 
experience of IT administrators and help desk operatives are legion; they 
want to spend more time improving user experience, with better training 
and software, and less time fighting fires (see Figure 4-1).  
 
Figure 4-1. Most effective use of automated elevation of privileges 
Fortunately, the fault is not the legacy applications. Businesses need not give 
up the applications they need to run business as usual. The fault is the lack 
of awareness of just how easy it is to automate the elevation of privilege 
user access at a granular level, based on the role definition of each em-
ployee. But let’s not also forget that Windows itself can be a legacy app—as 
developers will have developed legacy apps based on older versions of Win-
dows—at a time when knowledge of insider threat is great, and also the 
way MS vulnerabilities provide a back-door key to the network.  
Microsoft Published Vulnerabilities 
Microsoft and its partners regularly identify new security vulnerabilities in 
Microsoft software. In 2010, Microsoft published over 100 security bulle-
tins documenting and providing patches for 256 vulnerabilities. In April 
2011, BeyondTrust examined and analyzed all of the published Microsoft 

Chapter 4 | Supplementing Group Policy on Windows Desktops 
 
70  
vulnerabilities in 2010 and all of the published Windows 7 vulnerabilities to 
date, allowing this report to accurately quantify the continued effective-
ness of removing administrator rights at mitigating vulnerabilities in Micro-
soft software.  
Key findings from this report show that removing administrator rights will 
better protect companies against the exploitation of: 
 
75% of critical Windows 7 vulnerabilities reported by Microsoft to 
date 
 
100% of Microsoft Office vulnerabilities reported in 2010 
 
100% of Internet Explorer and IE 8 vulnerabilities reported in 2010 
 
64% of all Microsoft vulnerabilities reported in 2010 
Microsoft is to be lauded for releasing patches to known vulnerabilities each 
month. Vulnerabilities, however, take time to identify. Patches can take even 
longer to apply. During this down period, threats can damage a corporate 
network and gain access to sensitive information. A PIM solution that elimi-
nates administrator rights from desktop users will substantially reduce the 
severity and/or prevent the exploitation of undiscovered or unpatched vul-
nerabilities. Enterprises should ensure that while administrative rights are 
removed to protect desktops from these vulnerabilities, users can also con-
tinue to operate effectively and with access to required applications.  
The Wild West 
Whenever we hear the phrase “Wild West,” the first words that come to 
mind are old, insecure, and vulnerable. Any old western featuring Clint 
Eastwood or John Wayne depicts all of these descriptions. 
And coincidentally, “Wild West” provides the perfect analogy for the way 
an enterprise’s remaining legacy infrastructure interfaces with a Windows 
desktop environment. Though often overlooked, every IT administrator 
must face the challenge of managing legacy applications that simply will not 
run unless individual desktops are configured for administrator access. This 
remains a challenge in an enterprise Windows desktop environment, 
whether a company has 100 or 10,000 seats. 
As we have detailed elsewhere, currently there are two options available to 
administrators: 
 
Option 1: Adopt best practice of removing administrative rights. 
Result: Overwhelms help desk with support calls and hampers 
productivity. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
71  
 
Option 2: Grant users administrative privileges. Result: Can provide 
access points for malware, hackers, insider threats, and the less re-
ported though still equally damaging fat-fingered unintentional error. 
However, what has not been clear until now is that IT administrators and 
help desk operatives who choose Option 2 for the sake of productivity, and 
thus leave their desktop environment unnecessarily exposed, are not being 
cavalier or necessarily neglectful. The fact is they are left with no other 
choice because without their legacy applications running efficiently, produc-
tivity would come to a halt.   
Survey Results Validate Problem 
The conclusions of our recent survey of 185 IT administrators and help 
desk operatives who are collectively responsible for over 250,000 individual 
Windows desktops in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, and North America, 
which BeyondTrust published in May 2011 in a report titled Legacy Applica-
tions and Least Privilege Access Management, validate this problem. The results 
were revealing: 
 
Looking closer at the data, we found that in larger organizations 
with more than 2,500 active desktops, it was in-house custom appli-
cations (51% of respondents) and a range of ‘other legacy apps’ 
(40%) that force IT admins to elevate privileges to administrator or 
super user status. 
 
However, in organizations with fewer than 2,500 active desktops, it 
was the popular payroll software suite, Intuit QuickBooks (33% of 
respondents), and again ‘other legacy apps’ (50%), which most often 
forced IT administrators to elevate network access privileges to the 
more risky administrator or super user status. 
 
Survey respondents were invited to name which legacy app they 
were nominating when selecting Other, resulting in over 50 differ-
ent apps nominated, with a number of respondents citing “too many 
to mention.” 
 
This offers a revealing insight into the state of desktops today; 
namely, they are littered with applications, each requiring different 
configuration settings for different users, making effective access 
management practically impossible. 
What we can conclude from this is that while the legacy apps may be differ-
ent, the experience of all IT administrators and help desk operatives is uni-

Chapter 4 | Supplementing Group Policy on Windows Desktops 
 
72  
form. Legacy applications make their lives difficult and consume a dispropor-
tionate amount of their time, regardless of the size of the organization. 
This points to the ubiquity of Windows and its inherent problems in elevat-
ing privileged access based on company policy rather than the requirements 
of individual applications. 
Perhaps the most revealing insight from our survey was that while we knew 
such legacy apps as Sage and QuickBooks caused problems for IT admins 
with over-privileged users, we hadn’t anticipated just how many others 
there were. The types of legacy applications survey respondents identified 
ranged from the understandable to the completely absurd (company doesn’t 
need it to run its business, and would violate compliance requirements if 
found with it.) and revealed over 50 different applications  
Notable examples include: 
 
Old mainframe applications 
 
Software used for running an office (printer drivers) or the desktop 
itself (defragmenter) 
 
Third-party point-of-sale software provided to retailers 
 
Adobe and Flash software 
 
Technical applications, often used only by a handful of employees in 
oil, automotive, and chemical organizations, that still require the en-
tire desktop to be set to administrator or super user status 
 
Applications downloaded by individual employees from the Web 
to help them do their job better, such as financial trading software, 
for example 
 
Applications downloaded and installed by employees for their own 
entertainment, such as iPhone applications, and in one instance, a 
Golf Course Game Application 
Indeed, this paints a revealing picture of enterprise desktop environments 
today: they are littered with applications, each of which requires different 
configuration settings for different users, and makes effective access man-
agement practically impossible.  
Not surprisingly, many respondents said they had too many legacy applica-
tions to mention. Indeed, is it any wonder that today’s IT admins consider 
desktops the “Wild West,” not just because of the overwhelm of managing 
access to multiple applications, but also because they never know what 
they’re going to encounter on a user’s workstation. One desktop manager 
reported: “We have limited control on what the end user can install and 
change on a desktop, and in many cases we have limited awareness of 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
73  
changes being made. In most cases, it’s too late if a user installs malware and 
adware, leaving our desktop resources left fire-fighting problems.” 
Legacy applications architected before the concept of fine-graned privilege 
access can’t be blamed in a wholesale manner for this problem though. Or-
ganizations need these applications to run business as usual, so implement-
ing a least privilege solution is the best way to stem the requirement to 
completely rearchitect these applications. 
Least Privilege, Architecturally Speaking 
We’ve talked about least privilege throughout this book, but why should a 
desktop user care? Ultimately, a user needs admin rights on the desktop to: 
 
Run system tasks 
 
Install software (even active X controls from the Web) 
 
Run existing applications built to require admin privileges 
An effective least privilege solution implemented for desktops will transpar-
ently plug into Active Directory and Group Policy in order to manage the 
elevation of privileges based on role and policy. This is what is called least 
privilege because you get the minimum amount of privilege in order to do a 
specific task only when it is needed. If the user has no privilege, then every 
attempt to do these tasks will be met with a UAC prompt asking for more 
privilege; if the user already has admin rights, then they are at risk for inten-
tional, accidental, or indirect damage to their data (see Figure 4-2). 
 
Figure 4-2. Architecture of least privilege. 

Chapter 4 | Supplementing Group Policy on Windows Desktops 
 
74  
Putting Least Privilege into Practice 
Sometimes the best way to understand a conept as complex as least privi-
lege for desktops is to examine a couple of real-word examples. Let’s take a 
look at what one healthacare company and one university did to eliminate 
desktop admin rights and implement a least privilege solution. 
Desktop Least Privilege in Production 
Quintiles Transnational is a company that helps improve healthcare world-
wide by providing a broad range of professional services, information, and 
partnering solutions to the pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and healthcare 
industries. Headquartered near Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, and 
with offices in more than 40 countries, Quintiles is a leading global pharma-
ceutical services organization and a member of the Fortune 1000. 
As far as their IT environment goes, Quintiles Transnational manages over 
13,000 end-user computers. The company wanted to remove the local ad-
ministrative privileges from all their end-user accounts and run a least privi-
lege user environment. The goal was to prevent employees from performing 
installations on their own, as well as running whatever software and applica-
tions they wanted. Unfortunately, Quintiles had a difficult time identifying a 
workaround that would allow applications requiring administrator privileges 
to run without the significant workload of writing custom install scripts or 
frequently visiting individual desktops to install software.  
With Windows Active Directory installed and 13,000 computers running 
Windows XP, their least privilege solution was the perfect fit for the issues 
facing Quintiles. Security, compliance, and productivity were at the forefront 
of the company’s needs, and this solution would enable them to create the 
least privilege environment they required while increasing end-user produc-
tivity. Quintiles continues to use it to elevate the permission level for the 
users who need to run authorized third-party applications, in addition to 
homegrown software, that require higher privileges than those to which the 
user is normally entitled. 
Unpredictable Environments 
Ian Short, Applications Infrastructure Manager for the University of Win-
chester, is part of the IT management team responsible for the operation of 
the IT environment across the university campus. The university predomi-
nantly runs a Microsoft site. All of the backend servers run Windows Server 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
75  
2003 and 2008 within an Active Directory domain. Ian’s department also 
supports over 1,500 Windows desktops on campus (all running Windows 
XP) that include over 7,000 user accounts. Many of these desktops include 
laptops used by remote employees in various locations. In addition, Ian and 
his team are responsible for 120+ applications, with a number of extra lo-
cally installed applications.  
The challenge of managing user privileges in an environment full of students 
is complicated enough, but the dilemma only increases when you account 
for required applications. The team universally understood that they needed 
to eliminate administrator rights in order to decrease malware attacks and 
increase security. However, they also knew they couldn’t lock down the en-
tire network because of the 120+ applications they manage.  “It became 
clear that in our environment something needed to be done,” said Ian. “We 
were noticing a worrying growth in security risks and so managing user ac-
cess became a priority.” 
With a least privilege solution, the University of Winchester has completely 
removed administrator rights among their users, while simultaneously pro-
viding adequate rights to perform the tasks that students and staff need. 
Some of the key uses include elevating privileges for 8 multimedia packages 
in their multimedia center, 24 applications on their desktops, and around 
half a dozen Windows functions, significantly decreasing the amount of time 
Ian and his team spend on support issues, which has significantly reduced 
cost as well. 
Weighing In 
Personal computers have proliferated beyond just the desktop, and with 
that has come an incredible management challenge. We’ve seen how too 
much privilege can potentially cause intentional accidental and/or indirect 
harm to the local data and possibly surrounding network. We’ve also dis-
cussed how too little privilege can cause sever help desk costs and declines 
in personal productivity. A least privilege solution is the only way to map 
personal privileges delegated by policy for compliance and governance satis-
faction.  But let’s see what our insider heroes have to say 
Secure Sam:  
Least privilege, as we’ve talked about in this book before, is a simple and in-
nately fundamental concept. It transcends every platform, making IT infra-
structures secure in servers, databases, and desktops alike. In Windows 

Chapter 4 | Supplementing Group Policy on Windows Desktops 
 
76  
desktops, least privilege makes particular sense as so many things can go 
wrong when users run with administrator rights. Too many times, however, 
least privilege is thought to be too complicated, and it gets ignored, brushed 
aside, or justified away. The reality of the situation is that this concept of al-
lowing users to only access the IT resources that they absolutely need is 
worth whatever complications may arise. Especially on Windows desktops. 
Microsoft is constantly on the hunt for vulnerabilities to patch in their soft-
ware, but the fact that there were over 250 in 2010 makes any additional 
security measures worth it in my eyes. When you take into account that 
removing administrator rights (or in other words, taking users to a least 
privilege model) mitigates the majority of Microsoft exploitations, the ques-
tion shifts from “do I have to? It’s so complicated!” to “how long does it 
take to get least privilege implemented.” And rightly so—with 75% of criti-
cal Windows vulnerabilities and 100% of Microsoft Office vulnerabilities 
fixed by running users in standard user mode, IT decision makers are by-
passing a significant amount of potentially devastating exploitations.  
Least Privilege Lucy:  
When weighing in on the principle of least privilege on Windows desktops, I 
can’t help but focus on the impact such an effort has on the help desk. The 
help desk tends, in some cases, to be an expensive fix for problems that 
have no business existing at all. Users that have access to administrator 
privileges are scary because of all the ways those privileges can create gaping 
holes in an enterprises’ security program. Whether it’s if someone hijacks 
those credentials and steals information, or malware is unintentionally 
downloaded onto the desktop, or even if software was accidentally down-
loaded—these things all create messes that require the help desk to amend. 
It’s an expensive way to handle the consequences of letting users run with 
whatever privileges are most convenient.  
Compliance Carl:  
The concept of trust with regard to an IT environment is kind of a strange 
thing. On the one hand, you can’t base administrative rights on trust. On 
the other hand, you have to. While that may seem contradictory, the kind 
of trust I’m talking about is different in both cases. When someone is hired, 
an IT administrator can’t just trust that he deserves a user account with 
admin privileges because HR performed a background check. Yes, he 
passed… but so what? The point is that trust as an emotion is useless in any 
IT environment. The kind of trust that does hold merit in your organization 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
77  
is a different kind of trust entirely… one that is founded in something bigger
than emotion. The kind I was referring to in the second instance is the trust
that comes carefully through policies, roles, and circumstances. It’s the kind
of trust that allows you to have administrator rights because you require
them, not because I think you should have them. With the second kind of
trust also must come follow-up. Monitoring privileges is a necessary part of
trusting employees with them. Everyone must be accountable, and transpar-
ent insights into all activities while using those rights is a way for that trust
to be further solidified. Roles must be continually evaluated, and adjust-
ments must be made in order for least privilege to work on desktops.
z


C H A P T E R 
5 
Servers Are the 
Primary Target 
for Insiders 
and Hackers 
Alike 
 
“As in previous years, nearly all data were breached from servers... This 
continues to be a defining characteristic between data-at-risk incidents 
and those involving actual compromise.” 
—Verizon RISK Team with US Secret Service, 
2010 Data Breach Investigation Report 
x

Chapter 5 | Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and  
Hackers Alike 
 
80  
There is a significant distinction between the data on desktops described in 
the last chapter and the data on the server.  To use another metaphor: if 
misusing desktop privilege can get you into the bank, then misusing server 
privilege is the equivalent of carte-blanche access to the bank vault. Indeed, 
in a secure and compliant server environment, end users are not entitled to 
the root password or even superuser status because organizations can no 
longer tolerate the security risks posed by intentional, accidental, or indirect 
misuse of privileges. However, organizations need to provide the admins of 
the plethora of heterogeneous servers across the enterprise with necessary 
privileges within specified guidelines to do their job safely. 
Without a viable least privilege solution, the most common responses to 
this problem include sharing the root password, manually managing policy 
creation and change across each individual account, or being forced to im-
plement inefficient and insecure alternatives. A server-based least privilege 
solution allows system administrators the ability to delegate privileges and 
authorization without disclosing the root password on Unix, Linux, and Mac 
OS X platforms. Additionally, all privileged access is recorded for audits, in-
cluding keystroke information.  
Servers Store the Good Stuff 
That’s right. Most anything of tangible asset value is most likely stored on a 
server somewhere within the perimeter of the enterprise. In today’s world, 
that could even mean on a cloud platform, but that still constitutes the “en-
terprise perimeter.” You probably have separate servers for e-mail, transac-
tion databases, your financial information, and possibly a contact manage-
ment system—any one of which if compromised could cost your company 
significantly in tangible expense and lost productivity. 
Server Breaches in the News 
If you have 1 of 44,000 inactive Mozilla accounts, you may have received a 
belated Christmas present in December 2010, when the company sent out 
notifications of a potential leak of their account information. In this case, the 
company was able to reassure those users there was virtually no possibility 
of any harm to them. 
However, what’s interesting about the incident is that one can only presume 
it ties back to a very specific administrator who on a very specific day and 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
81  
time made a mistake and put the database on the wrong server. Something 
we see with surprising frequency. 
Now put yourself in Mozilla’s shoes. If this happened to you, would you 
know which IT staff was responsible? What would you tell the CEO? Would 
a witch hunt ensue and how would that impact the department? 
The incident highlights once more that the IT staff can and do make terrible 
mistakes that can cost millions in breaches, notifications, and more. Because 
IT staff has such deep access to the IT systems themselves, a single logistical 
mistake can have deep security implications. 
The incident highlights why organizations need processes and systems in 
place that account for the very real possibility of errors by IT staff. In other 
words, you need to monitor and record the actions of individual administra-
tors and remove blanket root access. 
This not only creates accountability for individual staff to not make a mis-
take in the first place, but avoids the witch hunt when it happens. Employees 
need to know that if they make mistakes, intentionally or accidentally, the 
company will know who it was. This, in and of itself, remains the corner-
stone of deterring good people from doing bad things. If you know your ac-
tions are being recorded, you are more likely to only do what you have 
been asked to do. 
Black Market for Server Data 
The economy of cyber crime is all too real—and too enticing. No longer 
sequestered to dark alleys and seedy bars, data thieves have almost unlim-
ited options to market their ill-gotten wares to potential buyers. What this 
means to employers and organizations: the temptation to access and “ap-
propriate” sensitive data may be too great for some to resist. 
So just how easy is it for cybercriminals to sell data? Shockingly easy. 
Although the sale of stolen information often takes place completely under-
ground in secret, closed to the public credit forums, people who want to 
join these groups can locate them quite easily. Once vetted by forum admin-
istrators to ensure they are not from law enforcement, they are invited into 
the network to market and distribute their wares. According to Sue Walsh 
at AllSpammedUp.com in July 2009: “The personal information of at least 4 
million Britons and a whopping 40 million others, most of whom are Ameri-
cans, is being bought and sold online. This includes usernames and pass-
words, credit card details, bank account numbers and more.” 

Chapter 5 | Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and  
Hackers Alike 
 
82  
And individuals need not even proactively seek out to divest an employer of 
sensitive, valuable data. Today, recruiters actively target individuals with lo-
cal or specific data types, going so far as to even create job postings with 
such criteria as “an established relationship with local banks” as a prerequi-
site for crime family consideration. 
The ease with which individuals can locate black market buyers of data 
should scare every employer who provides mid- to low-level access to any 
type of sensitive information. Like some bizarro-world eBay, many of these 
markets actually have incentive packages. Competing prices, additional serv-
ices, free trials, money-back guarantees, and terms and conditions are all of-
fered. Prices for data are qualified like any other commodity: data is priced 
based on the domain, if the account belongs to a real person, and how 
popular it is. It can depend on the number of followers, how commercial 
the niche is, and if the data is real or bot-generated. Prices for online bank-
ing and payment systems dependent on account verification. 
To make matters worse, the cyber-crime black market, which has tradition-
ally centered on distributing bank and credit-card details stolen from users 
around the world, has diversified its business model since 2010, and now 
sells a much broader range of hacked confidential information, including 
bank credentials, logins, passwords, fake credit cards, and more. 
So, while CSOs struggle to combat an ever-evolving crime organization that 
morphs and changes in a nanosecond, it may be the guy in the cube next to 
you seeking to supplement his bank account who could exact the most 
damage to your database. 
The Architecture of Server Least Privilege 
Implementing a least privilege environment across servers is a bit different 
than that of desktops. Not just because of the operating system requirements, 
but the very nature of server administration. Ultimately, an admin needs least 
privilege instead of full superuser rights on the server or they may: 
 
Share the root password to perform tasks  
 
Manually manage policies across disparate Linux systems (such as 
Red Hat and SuSE)  
 
Store logs insecurely  
 
Transmit data unencrypted 
Least privilege on a server isn’t dissimilar to implementing least privilege on a 
desktop (see Figure 5-1). The fundamentals of a policy engine, an authoriza-

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
83  
tion broker, and a log server still exist. The fundamental difference is that 
servers tend to be more command-line–driven for administration, while 
desktops tend to be GUI–driven. Command requests are therefore submit-
ted in order for the least privilege engine to do its magic. It is also important 
to note that the propensity for error is greater with command-line interfaces 
than with GUIs due to the possibility of missing parameters or mis-typing 
specific command qualifiers. So, the need for policy oversight at a keystroke 
level also becomes a critical success factor when implementing least privilege 
in server environments. Here is a typical flow: 
1. A user submits a request to run a command. 
2. The Master Host validates it against security policy files to either 
approve or reject it. 
3. An accepted request is executed on the Run Host as a privileged 
user. 
4. All activity is logged and recorded by the Log Servers. 
 
Figure 5-1. Architecture of least privilege 
Of WikiLeaks and Servers 
We’re used to the media getting sidetracked by the content of data breach 
stories, rather than how they happened. Not surprisingly, then, the 
WikiLeaks story of early 2011 is no different. With thousands of sensitive 
diplomatic dispatches to wade through, reporters will likely have enough 

Chapter 5 | Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and  
Hackers Alike 
 
84  
information to keep them busy for quite some time. Of course, there is a 
place for this analysis, and yet not for the first time, another opportunity 
has been lost to pinpoint the weakest link in better securing data. 
Although it’s likely the White House attempts to identify the weakest link, 
they also use smokescreens to divert attention from the content of the 
leaks to those responsible for handling classified information in a surprisingly 
effective manner. 
 “...create a ‘security assessment team’ to review the implementation of 
procedures to safeguard such information, a review to include making 
sure that no employee has access to information beyond what is neces-
sary to do his or her job effectively.” 
By pointing to the management of privileges as the cornerstone of best se-
curity practice, they recognize the delicate balance that must be struck be-
tween ensuring productivity on the one hand, and security on the other. 
Bottom line: by leveraging access based on job definition and the privileges 
that job requires, rather than seniority, organizations will ensure no em-
ployee has access to information “beyond what is necessary to do his or her 
job effectively.” It’s worth reiterating that CEOs don’t need access to serv-
ers running the network, while the IT help desk doesn’t need access to the 
CFO’s domain. 
However, what the White House doesn’t say is just how rife access to in-
formation “beyond what is necessary to do his or her job effectively” (over-
privilege access) is.  
According to a multi-industry survey conducted by the Ponemon Institute in 
early 2011, 79% of government IT practitioners admitted to having too 
much access to information resources that aren’t pertinent to their role in 
the organization. 
The report’s authors rightly say this may be because government organiza-
tions cannot keep pace with access change, which happens continuously, and 
indeed, 75% of those surveyed said that they could not respond quickly 
enough to such changes. 60% also do not immediately check user requests 
against security policies before access is approved and assigned. 
This speaks of a world in which access, when it is controlled, is still elevated 
manually by request (or not) from individual users. This leaves network ac-
cess open to abuse, either through error, or, as is the case with WikiLeaks, 
from employees set on making mischief.  

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
85  
Far better government organizations consider some kind of automated 
privilege access lifecycle management, which elevates access, based on the 
pre-prescribed role definition of each employee, and keeps a log to show 
who went where, when, and for how long. 
This doesn’t, by any stretch, prevent data breaches from happening. If 
someone has privilege access, they can still steal or leak sensitive data. As 
suggested at the beginning of the chapter, what good least privilege solu-
tions can do, however, is provide a strong deterrent, because good least 
privilege solution means access is not just leveraged on a “needs must” ba-
sis, it is logged too. 
In organizations where everyone has full administrator access to the network, 
determining who might have leaked data would be like looking for a needle in 
a haystack. For organizations running good least privilege systems, it’s possible 
to narrow down the possibilities of who had access to what and when to 
fewer individuals. With that in mind, employees might think again before 
blowing the whistle. This is especially true for server-based least privilege so-
lutions where keystroke logging will record everything done at a granular 
level, whereas desktop least privilege usually just tracks at an event level. 
WikiLeaks and WikiWar 
How much press will we have to endure on the significant problems created 
by WikiLeaks and the public lynching of those who perpetrate these leaks 
before we realize that if you give someone an inch (excessive admin rights), 
they will take a mile (misuse that privilege)? 
To use a metaphor: if I sneeze, will you give me a tissue and send me on my 
way? Will you give me cold medicine? How about allergy medicine? Without 
knowing the cause, the “disease,” then reacting to the sneeze, “the symp-
tom,” will ultimately result in a response that may be overkill or underkill. 
Some journalists do get it. Mike Martin at TechNewsWorld published an 
insightful story titled WikiLeaks Wrangling May Be Escalating Into Cyberwar. 
He rightly points out that “the WikiLeaks controversy could be devolving 
into a wiki-war.” 
So why is it that every journalist seems to be focused on the symptom (the 
leak), instead of the disease (the intentional misuse of privilege caused by 
excess admin rights)?  
Implementing a privilege identity management (PIM) solution and eliminating 
admin rights from servers, desktops, network devices, virtual servers, and 

Chapter 5 | Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and  
Hackers Alike 
 
86  
cloud environments is a strong move in the right direction to ensure that 
everyone in your organization only has access to what they should have 
based on corporate policy. This ensures governance and regulatory compli-
ance and limits the potential for other leaks from your organization. 
To exacerbate the situation, we’ve seen it described as everything from a 
WikiWar to Wiki Gaga, and yet most writers are still forgoing that if you 
give someone permission to do something, they will inevitably do it. In this 
case, we are once again referring to the IT privileges granted to individuals 
and associated technologies to monitor and control what these people are 
doing. Or the lack thereof. 
By implementing a least privilege solution, you are taking the first step to-
ward better IT management and a method of policing corporate govern-
ance. The root cause (excuse the pun) should ultimately be recognized as 
the misuse of privilege. 
Implementing a PIM solution can allow you to: 
1. Eliminate admin rights across servers, desktops, network devices, 
virtual, and cloud environments to prevent anyone from having om-
nipotent access to those resources. 
2. Control levels of privilege for those resources to ensure the elimi-
nation of the misuse of privilege. 
3. Log all events and administrator activities so that in the event of a 
breach or a misuse of privilege, you can remediate that breach.  
4. As today’s t-shirt points out, you can focus on the variables that 
positively affect your business growth instead of being at war with 
your user community or wind up in the press. 
One solution that seems to be prevalent in some circles to use the open 
source solutions available to implement least privilege. This solution is called 
Sudo and was created by Bob Coggeshall and Cliff Spencer around 1980 at 
the Department of Computer Science at SUNY/Buffalo.  
Why Do You Sudo the Way You Do? 
Sudo has been one of the Unix/Linux administrator and self-designated 
geek’s best friend for the last two decades, but it probably isn’t right for 
your enterprise. For one thing, it’s open source software, which means no 
one company can be held accountable for bug fixes, enhancements, or any 
liability resulting from flaws in design. Of course, being software guys, we 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
87  
naturally lean toward licensed code and cover the subject of licensed code 
versus freeware (see Figure 5-2) a little later in this chapter.  
Indeed, many IT professionals believe that by implementing Sudo across 
their enterprise, they are now protected from the intentional, accidental, 
and indirect misuse of privilege. Unfortunately, that is not the case, as any-
one with a browser and the keywords “Sudo breach,” “Sudo tricks,” or 
“Sudo hack: will learn.  If you have three minutes to spare, there is even a 
YouTube video to show you how in step-by-step instructions for the Guy 
Hawkes Hack. 
In the land of Unix and Linux systems administration, nothing seems to elicit 
such polar love and hate as does the use of Sudo for root rights elevation. 
Pro Sudo: The single biggest cry for support of Sudo tends to be “it’s 
Free!” or “it came with my OS”. Suffice it to say that Sudo has been 
in use since “around 1980”, when it was developed by Bob Cogge-
shall and Cliff Spencer and made available as open source software. 
Currently it is actively developed and maintained by Todd Miller and 
distributed under a BSD style license. The second biggest cry for 
support is “but it passed my last audit.” 
Con Sudo: The amount of effort required to configure and maintain, 
especially since Sudo requires separate Sudoers files on each server 
instead of centralizing policy management and reporting. Nothing is 
truly free when it comes to freeware. Periodic review of Sudoer 
files alone can be so time consuming as to potentially miss an audit 
or inhibit other more pressing priorities. Yes, you can create a 
“Master Sudoers” file, but once it is copied to a server, it could be 
edited independently. It is also very difficult to map master entitle-
ment reports to actual Sudo commands across the extended enter-
prise, especially in a changing environment. And finally, as Google 
just discovered, whenever you have an open source solution, the 
possibility of malware injection escalates significantly. 
Ultimately, you will need to decide whether or not good is good enough 
long-term and uncover what the true cost or “free” is to your organization. 
So, why do you Sudo the way you do? 
One of the problems with Sudo is the ease with which it can be deployed 
haphazardly, without a lot of forethought, to address a particular day’s privi-
lege challenges. Mary needs to manage the office printers. John needs to re-
set passwords for people in the business unit he supports. Janice needs to 

Hackers Alike 
Chapter 5 | Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and  
88  
perform server maintenance. The admin that restricts access to the root
password without a ready alternative will become popular indeed, and not
in a good way.  
Enter Sudo as that ready alternative. Privileges can be granted quickly, inde-
pendently, with minimal effort. But before you know it, one privilege request
processed on top of another leads to a hodgepodge of poorly maintained
Sudoer files, all hosted on local servers with local log files and no audit trail
to speak of. Better than the proliferation of the root password? Sure, but by
how much? Figure 5-2 shows the primary differences between freeware
and/or open source software versus products licensed and supported by
commercial vendors. 
Figure 5-2. Differences between licensed software and freeware. 
Now consider the compliance implications. Many companies have standard
compliance policies for Sudo, most of which require routine inspections of
each Sudoer file to ensure that permissions granted to each user are ap-
propriate. Not an easy task when the server count is in the hundreds or
more. Many organizations find that a spot check of Sudoer files reveals
permissions for users who have long since left the company—a guaranteed
audit violation. 
In reality, there is no substitute to carefully creating a privilege delegation
strategy and designing a rollout plan that ensures security and compliance
while minimizing the impact on users. While you can do this with Sudo just
as you can with commercial tools, the fact is that commercial tools provide 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
89  
better guardrails around deployment and more sophisticated native features, 
such as encrypted logging and centralized policy stores, for enabling security 
protections and ease of maintenance. And the most robust ones provide an 
easy path to proving compliance, a challenge most administrators of Sudo 
deployments find all too formidable. 
Sudo Vulnerabilities 
From 2010 through Q1 2011, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
released ten vulnerability alerts for Sudo with a medium or high severity rat-
ing. DHS’ National Vulnerability Database (NVD) is the US government re-
pository of standards-based vulnerability management data represented us-
ing the Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP). 
Figure 5-3 illustrates the types of vulnerabilities that have appeared since 
2010 on DHS’ NVD, and the number of times these vulnerabilities appeared 
among the ten Sudo alerts. It is important to note that multiple types of vul-
nerabilities have appeared in one alert (that is, Allows Disclosure of Data). 
This data was retrieved from http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/search. 
 
Figure 5-3. Sudo vulnerability alerts 

Chapter 5 | Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and  
Hackers Alike 
 
90  
What’s really interesting about this chart is the subtext that implementing 
Sudo actually introduces some potential for security breach and insider 
threats than not implementing it at all. It also doesn’t make it any less likely 
that good people will do bad things, as it simply exacerbates the compla-
cent approach to PIM inherent in most organizations. It could even be con-
strued as a “sloppy” approach to attempting least privilege given its open 
source nature. 
Top Ten Reasons to Implement Least 
Privilege on UNIX and Linux Servers 
Taking a more tongue-in-cheek approach to highlighting the types of privilege 
misuse that occurs daily on servers inside most organizations, we thought 
that a top-ten list approach might appeal to you as well. How many of these 
have you seen throughout your organization? 
#10—Sam, the CSO, can now sleep nights knowing that excess 
privileges will no longer be responsible for failing a SOX, HIPAA, 
PCI, DSS, GLBA, or FDCC and FISMA audit (even though he isn’t 
required to even deal with the last two). 
#9—Andy the Auditor can get a full report of who has what enti-
tlements instantly to satisfy compliance successfully, instead of tak-
ing weeks of manual effort. 
#8—Ted in Tech Support won’t be able to reset file and directory 
permissions on any Linux server he has admin rights to so liberally 
that anyone with a login can access confidential data just because it 
makes his job easier. 
#7—Sid in Development won’t be able to download Apache appli-
cations or any other unauthorized open source “tools” potentially 
injecting malware into the corporate network. 
#6—Fiona and Felix, our new server administrators, won’t make 
one, or more, of the Ten Mistakes New Linux Administrators Make. 
#5—Vito, the ever-industrious programmer, will no longer be able 
to code suid root binaries into his programs, allowing programmatic 
access beyond what is allowed by corporate policy or regulatory 
requirements. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
91  
#4—Alice in IT will no longer be responsible for DNS misconfigura-
tion errors, as her role won’t facilitate this level of admin privilege. 
#3—Fred in IT won’t be able to install a Trojan on the mission-
critical server, bringing it down for four hours and costing the com-
pany over $1M in lost transactions, because he was passed over for 
a big promotion. 
#2—Sarah, the CIO. will no longer have to hide Unix and Linux 
root credentials in a sealed envelope in her office safe and deal with 
a manual check in/check out process. 
#1—Tony, the Palo Alto Linux administrator. will no longer be able 
to wear that ratty old T-shirt with the slogan “Bow before me, for I 
am root” any longer. 
More Server Breaches in the News 
Health information exchanges (HIEs) is the latest buzz phrase to hit the 
compliance marketplace. In a recent post, blogger phiprivacy.net reported 
on the opinions of top IT experts about the top patient healthcare informa-
tion trends for 2011. 
Among a clear indication of increased breaches, imposition of fines and 
other regulatory action, and the implementation of new laws, the experts 
identified the launch of new HIEs as the main driver of change in enforcing 
increased security and privacy. 
Although HIEs have a noble purpose in making it easier for healthcare pro-
fessionals to access patient information electronically across multiple organi-
zations within a region, community, or hospital system in order to provide 
more efficient and effective care, the risks of increased exposure to data 
breach remain high. 
Not only do the experts point out that many HIEs will be launched by inex-
perienced and understaffed organizations, they will be launched in an indus-
try (healthcare) that has consistently failed to keep pace with data security 
best practices and governance. 
This is clearly a case of healthcare organizations putting the cart before the 
horse. In an ideal world, the horse is an efficient IT system, and the cart is 
the service that system is able to provide to the end user.  

Chapter 5 | Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and  
Hackers Alike 
 
92  
Trying to improve the cart without upgrading the horse from the old nag it 
currently represents is likely to leave healthcare organizations even deeper 
in the mire. Best practice for healthcare data security is no different from 
any other industry.  
Indeed, sensitive user access control, based on least privilege role definition, 
remains the cornerstone of HIPAA compliance and will require the elimina-
tion of admin rights to prevent the misuse of privilege. 
Case Study: Replacing Sudo in a Produc-
tion Environment 
CETREL S.A. (www.cetrel.lu), a leader in advanced electronic payment 
technology, expert in electronic transfers, and a trusted partner for elec-
tronic payment offers, experienced significant compliance and auditing chal-
lenges using Sudo to manage their IT environment. 
Nicolas Debeffe, head of operational security at CETREL, is responsible for 
overseeing CETREL’s security operations, which includes their complex IT 
environment. For the last several years, Mr. Debeffe’s security team had 
been using Sudo to manage their critical Unix/Linux assets and trace any ac-
cess from CETREL’s support teams to applicative or generic users. 
While Sudo initially seemed to manage CETREL’s IT environment, they soon 
discovered that there was an imminent need to find a simpler and more se-
cure method to manage access and accountability to generic users. 
“As we have been continually adding Unix and Linux servers to our envi-
ronment, as required for our operations, it was clear Sudo raised significant 
red flags over the adequate security over our logs required by PCI DSS 
mandates,” said Nicolas Debeffe. 
“Productivity was being hindered, as reviewing Sudo logs required accessing 
every server individually. Furthermore, Sudo logs were alterable by the su-
per user and the Sudo configuration time required by system engineers was 
simply unacceptable,” added Debeffe. 
This example is a very common and real challenge for security managers 
globally, and the faster organizations are cognizant of such red flags, the 
faster they can implement preventative measures from a strategic and com-
pliant perspective. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
93  
Vulnerability Scanning Requires Least 
Privilege 
Many companies still rely heavily on vulnerability scanning to ensure outsid-
ers aren’t getting in. Root-level access for authenticated scanning is an im-
portant part of vulnerability management scanning and required for policy 
compliance scanning. This creates another open doorway for the misuse of 
privilege in your organization. Yep, yet another account that has unlimited 
access to corporate resources under the guise of “being more compliant.” 
The good news is that some industry leaders in vulnerability management 
and policy compliance scanning recognize this and are doing something 
about it. Specifically, they have partnered with least privilege vendors to 
create a more secure scan. 
Most vulnerability scanning vendors use a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) model 
to automate the process of vulnerability management and policy compliance 
via remote authenticated scanning without the use of agents. Using a least 
privilege solution in combination with this enables system administrators to 
delegate privileges and authorization without disclosing root passwords, pre-
venting misuse of privileges on desktops and servers in heterogeneous IT en-
vironments. This integration enables you to use least privilege root delegation 
functionality for authenticated vulnerability and compliance scans on Unix sys-
tems. This allows system administrators to better manage access while scan-
ning their environments as they can delegate privileges and authorization and 
record all interactions, including keystroke information, for auditing purposes. 
Patching Needs Least Privilege 
A report came out in early 2011 highlighting vulnerabilities in NASA’s IT that 
could have impaired critical space missions or leaked sensitive information. 
Using the NASA CIO’s own words, The Network World story by Tim 
Greene points the finger in the same mistaken direction most anyone would 
as a reflexive response: the lack of an ongoing program to identify and patch 
vulnerabilities. But the article itself also presents the very obstacle to that. 
NASA was/is patching software routinely, but there’s just too much to 
patch, too many updates, too often that need to be implemented too 
quickly. Mistakes and overlooked vulnerabilities are bountiful. What about 
vulnerabilities that aren’t discovered yet, were just discovered but not 
patched, or are known but overlooked. Is there no room for error?  

Chapter 5 | Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and  
Hackers Alike 
 
94  
The report states the agency has over 190 IT systems and projects that in-
clude assets that control the Hubble Space Telescope, the Space Shuttle, 
and the International Space Station among others and describes previous 
breaches where extremely sensitive information had been leaked by sophis-
ticated attacks. In one case, malware was allowed to spread and make 3,000 
unauthorized connections to IP addresses all over the globe. The report 
blames “inadequate security configurations.” 
This is another example of the indirect misuse of privilege discussed at 
length in Chapter 2. Anyone who still has admin privileges is susceptible to 
having those credentials hijacked and malware planted.  
What the NASA story is missing in the mainstream media is that running 
around patching vulnerabilities everywhere they can be found is only half the 
solution. It’s like a game of whack-a-mole—you’re never done and you’ll al-
ways be too late to at least one. Companies need to reduce their risk expo-
sure even under the assumption that some vulnerabilities will be lever-
aged—and they will. 
Privilege Identity Management System 
Logs Help Spot Other Security Weaknesses 
Those detailed compliance logs you have been generating are a gold mine of 
information. Analyzing large amounts of data is a growing trend. From Goo-
gle to Walmart, companies are building their strategies on complex models 
and algorithms. 
You can use systems logs not just to look for patterns that indicate a secu-
rity threat, but those same patterns can show where security and other 
procedures such as improper configurations of new systems are hurting 
productivity. Finding those patterns can help uncover opportunities to bet-
ter train, simplify procedures, and uncover best practices that not everyone 
is following. And once those best practices are discovered, you can use con-
trols to ensure that best practices are being followed. 
Realizing that value requires a data analysis strategy and a strategy for how 
to engage the organization in using that analysis. Your data analysis strategy 
needs to consider the roles of monitoring, logging, and reporting, as well as 
when and how to combine data from different sources. Single silos of data 
are simpler to use, but correlating data across silos provides more powerful 
insights. Ultimately, you will need both, but your data analysis strategy needs 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
95  
to focus on providing insights your organization can act on. And that’s 
where you need to consider how to engage your people in using the data. 
Weighing In 
Servers can be the holy grail of targets for insider villains, and as such need 
to be dealt with specifically and diligently. We’ve discussed how they are the 
primary attack point and for good reason: this is where the most valuable 
data is usually stored. We showed how some organizations attempt to im-
plement least privilege using an open source solution that may open other 
vulnerabilities. What we think is most interesting is the magnitude of the 
impact caused by the lack of least privilege implemented in server environ-
ments and the hundred of millions of dollars and potential jail time that can 
be associated with insider breaches.  
Let’s hear from our Insider Heroes: 
Secure Sam:  
One of the responsibilities I have (and candidly, the one that stresses me 
out the most) is making sure people within my organization have the right 
amount of privileges. I’ve seen it all—between the classic accident-prone 
employees who are always downloading malware without knowing it to the 
ones who are a bit too cavalier with passwords—it seems like it’s a battle I 
will always have to fight. The idea of least privilege is crucial in this battle, 
especially on our servers. The information stored on the servers of our 
company hold mission-critical data. It’s not data I can afford to risk because 
of a mistake. My IT staff has such entrenched access to the IT system, one 
mistake can have catastrophic results. Because of this, access to company 
resources and assets are restricted to a need-to-know basis. All users have 
access to only the information they absolutely need to do their job produc-
tively. No one has root access—a mistake at the root level is simply not ac-
ceptable. We also have processes that monitor and log all activity in the 
event that something does happen. Especially with servers, these measures 
must be taken to ensure the highest level of security and compliance.  
Least Privilege Lucy:  
There are a lot of security things that can go wrong, especially in large en-
terprises. Particularly in server environments, it’s paramount that data pro-
tection is taken seriously—in both word and in action. Everyone says 

Chapter 5 | Servers Are the Primary Target for Insiders and  
Hackers Alike 
 
96  
they’re concerned with security and that it’s their top priority, but when I 
go to work and have to put out fire after fire, it becomes very obvious that 
what users say and what they do are on completely different planes. This is 
why least privilege is so important. And not just least privilege, but a solu-
tion that centrally delegates privileges so I don’t have to hassle with Sudo or 
other open source command lines. Here’s an example of how this is effec-
tive. Take my biggest pet peeve: a user with access to the root password 
sharing it with other users who are not cleared to have that information. 
Not only is this a huge breach of security, but it is also not compliant with 
federal regulations to which we are held. With a least privilege solution, no 
users have the root password; therefore, it remains safe from those who 
don’t need it. Instead, those requiring root access for their job functions are 
automatically delegated that privilege by elevating the individual task. With 
so much on the line and with so many data breaches in the media, this is a 
safeguard that is necessary. 
Compliance Carl:  
Compliance on servers is crucial, as that is where the most critical of infor-
mation is stored. There are regulation mandates in place to protect this 
data, and in most companies I visit, it seems like this concept isn’t fully un-
derstood. Yes, IT administrators get that keeping servers secure is para-
mount to the company’s IT health, but if they fully grasped the concept, I 
wouldn’t see open source software ruling the policies and privileges of the 
company’s secure information. Even if the files are regularly inspected 
(which is required by various regulations), there is too much left to human 
error for that to be a viably secure protocol. Several things make this a chal-
lenge, which was talked about before, but as they are real struggles in real 
IT environments, I thought it prudent to reiterate a couple of them here. 
First of all, with open source software like Sudo, each individual server has a 
unique file that must be analyzed and reviewed. This becomes an enormous 
task when there are a lot of servers in an enterprise. Secondly, because the 
command policies are so heavily code-based, it is time-consuming and ex-
pensive to manage privileges in this way. Sudo has its place, but it is defi-
nitely not in large companies. The best option is this: a privilege delegation 
strategy that centrally manages privileges, logs activity, and ensures security 
while saving time and productivity. 
 

C H A P T E R 
6 
Protecting  
Virtual  
Environments 
from Hypervisor 
Sabotage 
 
“Virtualization is not inherently insecure. However, most virtualized 
workloads are being deployed insecurely.” 
—Neil MacDonald, VP and Gartner Fellow, Gartner Inc. 
Organizations moving their physical server infrastructure onto virtual plat-
forms for cost savings are finding their virtual hosts and guests are now open 
to new security and non-compliance risks. Workloads shifted to virtualized 

Chapter 6 | Protecting Virtual Environments from Hypervisor Sabotage 
98  
platforms to realize operational cost efficiencies are done so at potentially
high security costs if proper security policies and tools are not established
prior to implementation. As if we didn’t need to state the obvious, virtualiza-
tion doesn’t make it any less likely that good people will do bad things. 
Administrative access to the server hypervisor/VMM layer and the adminis-
trative tools used to access these layers must be tightly controlled to main-
tain a strong security posture. When multiple resources with many different
levels of privileged access are consolidated onto a single physical server
without sufficient workflow protocol, separation of duties for network and
security controls could be compromised and security policies circumvented. 
A least privilege solution provides granular privilege identity management
(PIM) across guest operating systems as well as hypervisor hosts through a
single centralized management console. Privileged access security risks are
mitigated, compliance requirements met, and organizations can adopt virtual-
ization with confidence. 
A least privilege solution also provides a cost-effective dedicated solution to
centrally address risks from unmanaged administrative privileges in virtual-
ized datacenter environments. In a secure and compliant environment, users
privileged access to virtual resources are managed to give them access to
only what they need to do their job. 
Protecting virtual environments is a difficult and tedious task. On one hand,
privileges in this setting must be granularly managed to ensure complete se-
curity. On the other hand, it takes less time and energy to allow users to
operate with unmanaged privileges in virtualized datacenter environments.
Fortunately, there is an answer to this double-edged question, and it allows
for the risks in said environment to be mitigated. 
Virtual Theft 
A key factor to consider when approaching virtualization security is that the
hypervisor is always going to be a high-value target due to its control over
the entire virtual environment. The misuse of privilege at the hypervisor
level can present the following risks: 
A hypervisor breach would allow “authorized access” to all
hosted/virtualized workloads. Essentially finding the “key to the hypervisor”
gives you the “keys to the kingdom.” While root password access in a
server environment gives you the keys to the vault inside the bank, the hy-
pervisor gives you access to multiple vaults inside the bank. Unmanaged ad-

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
99  
ministrative access to the hypervisor also facilitates two other potentially 
damaging problems: 
 
Incorrect or unauthorized configurations magnify risks 
 
“Virtual sprawl” due to lack of policy enforcement. 
Hypervisors must be considered mission-critical and secured appropriately, 
just like operating systems, and require security because of the risks to the 
system and applications. Typically, users are simply given administrator rights 
to perform configuration or policy changes to the virtual environment. 
Even if mounting disks is to be allowed, there are built-in workflows to cap-
ture policy requests and approvals for that command. Additionally, 
workflows can be set up to alert a manager if the mount command is used. 
Finally, a least privilege solution creates an indelible searchable keystroke 
trail, which would capture all activity that the administrator conducts during 
the mounting. 
Committing virtual theft (Figure 6-1) isn’t a difficult thing to accomplish 
without least privilege management of the hypervisor.  
 
Figure 6-1. Committing virtual theft 
Step 1) Administrator with root credentials on hypervisor has ac-
cess to “Virtual Machine 1” with sensitive data. 
Step 2) Administrator copies virtual machine1 to get an exact replica 
“copy of Virtual Machine 1,” containing sensitive data.  

Chapter 6 | Protecting Virtual Environments from Hypervisor Sabotage 
 
100  
Step 3) Administrator kills “Virtual Machine 1” copy, and mounts 
the disk image. 
Step 4) Administrator is able to navigate to and gain full access to 
sensitive data on the mounted disk image, unnoticed, while “Virtual 
Machine 1” is still running fine. 
A least privilege solution can prevent this scenario by disallowing the admin-
istrator to use the mount command, while allowing her to use other com-
mands required to carry out her job effectively. 
The federal government has even recently taken note of such threats, as 
shown in an October 2010 DarkReading article titled Pentagon’s Insider 
Threat Push Offers Lessons for Enterprises. The research arm of the Pentagon, 
known as the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), put 
out a call last week for better methods of detecting employees just before 
or after they go rogue and misuse their privileges. “Unfortunately, virtual in-
sider threats have been largely identified due only to incompetence on the 
part of the perpetrator or by accident,” says Peiter “Mudge” Zatko, the 
manager in charge of the program at DARPA. 
If you search on “virtual guest vulnerability“ in your favorite search engine 
and filter to video results only, you will find a step-by-step guide demon-
strating how to do this as well as how to protect against this form of virtual 
information theft. 
Desktop Virtualization 
Virtualization has become a hot buzzword over the past several years, and 
for good reason. With the introduction of Virtual PC several years ago, 
and now with Windows XP Mode, Microsoft Enterprise Desktop Virtual-
ization (Med- V) & Application Virtualization (App-V), Microsoft is no 
stranger to virtualization. 
With all these technologies, it is easy to understand that there is significant 
confusion in the market about what virtualization means for privilege man-
agement, specifically the ability for virtualization to help with the removal of 
administrative rights from users. While virtualization can add enormous 
value in many areas, many organizations will rely on virtualization to help 
specifically with application compatibility problems. 
For example, if an organization cannot get an application to run on Win-
dows 7, even after trying to shim the application with the Application 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
101  
Compatibility Toolkit, the ability to virtualize the application with one of 
the technologies listed earlier is available. 
Unfortunately, virtualization does not help with the elimination of adminis-
trative privileges; it simply shifts the problem from a physical world to a vir-
tual world. Some organizations may be comfortable with loosened security 
for their virtual environments, but most will want the same level of security 
in the virtual environment that they have in the physical environments, 
which means enforcing least privilege in the virtual world as well as the 
physical world. 
Removing administrator privileges from accounts on virtual machines is still 
a critical part of an organizations security posture. If organizations wish to 
virtualize applications or desktops, and the users still need to perform ad-
ministrative tasks or run applications that require administrative rights in the 
virtual environment, then the user will need to be logging in as an adminis-
trator. This means that the virtual environment is still the subject of the 
same security issues as when they are logged in to a physical machine. 
Virtualized Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) environments, such as Citrix, re-
quire users to run as administrators to access applications and install associ-
ated DLLs. Malware and hackers can exploit these administrative privileges. 
Additionally, they allow users to: 
 
Change standard desktop configuration settings 
 
Install unlicensed software and disable security settings 
Similarly, in Microsoft or VMware environments, users with administrative 
access often inadvertently delete printers for other users, causing disruption 
in business and creating unnecessary helpdesk overhead. 
According to Gartner, VDI adoption is growing at a rapid rate. By 2013, it is 
expected that more than 40%of the worldwide professional PC market and 
70%of organizations will have adopted PC application virtualization. Because 
of privilege requirements associated with application delivery, customers are 
forced to run their users as administrators in VDI environments. Since the 
desktop application support cost reduction, Forrester estimates of 80% are 
compelling; customers accept the relaxed security posture, opening them-
selves up to risks from accidental, intentional, and indirect misuse of privilege. 
Attaining least privilege user posture in virtualized desktop environments is 
challenging and customers are consistently forced to make compromises on 
security in favor of cost-savings.  

Chapter 6 | Protecting Virtual Environments from Hypervisor Sabotage 
 
102  
Desktop Registry and File System  
Virtualization 
In Windows Vista, Microsoft introduced Registry and File System Virtualiza-
tion to solve some of the problems with application compatibility. Some ap-
plications require full access to certain areas of the operating system that 
are off limits to standard users. These applications might try to write data to 
the “Program Files” directory or the “HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE” hive of 
the registry, for example. Standard users do not have permission to write to 
these areas of the file system and registry, so when a user launches an appli-
cation on Windows XP that needs access to these locations, they would 
eventually see an error when the application tries to access data stored in 
these locations. 
In Windows Vista and Windows 7, Microsoft has redirected the access to 
these locations to a virtual store in an area of the operating system that the 
user has access to. This attempt to solve the problem of application com-
patibility for applications that need rights to areas of the file system or regis-
try that are off limits to a standard user introduces several problems. One 
example is that applications may not be compatible with each other. 
For example, if an application has written data to a virtual store, another 
application that needs access to the data in the virtual store will not be able 
to access it. A similar problem occurs when an application stores data in a 
virtual store and multiple users of the same machine need access to it. A 
simplified example of this would be a game that stores its high score file in 
the “Program Files” directory. With file system virtualization, the high-score 
file would be stored in the user’s profile, instead of Program Files, and thus 
any subsequent player would store a copy of the high score in their profile. 
This means that every user of the machine would have the high score! Imag-
ine how this might impact line-of-business applications that multiple people 
use on the same machine. 
Another issue with registry and file system virtualization is the fact that it 
can cause significant confusion for end users. If an end user has traditionally 
stored files in a directory that will be virtualized in Windows 7, the user will 
not know where to go to get the files if they need to copy, view, or e-mail 
them because the files will no longer be where the end user intended on 
storing them; they will actually be in the virtual store in the user’s profile. 
Reads and writes to the following location:  
C:\Program Files (x86)\My Application A 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
103  
Would be redirected to the virtual store: 
C:\Users\%username%\AppData\Local\VirtualStore\Program Files 
(x86)\My Application A 
All subsequent access for that specific application would be redirected to 
this location as well; however, other applications that need access to this 
data will not know where to go to get it because it has been virtualized. 
The Virtual Shell Game 
Ever have a magician or street performer get you to bet on the shell game? 
You know the game, the one where something is hidden under one of three 
shells and then they move the shells quickly while you try to keep track of 
where you think the object is. You can never win this game because the ob-
ject is never where you think it is courtesy of some incredible sleight of 
hand. Turns out this is the game that can happen when administrators of 
virtualized environments don’t always set the permissions and/or policies 
correctly. As stated previously, you may think that everyone can see (or has 
permission to view/edit) some particular file or application, when in fact 
only the admin or a subset of users can. This challenge gets blown into huge 
proportions courtesy of the ease at which new virtual environments can be 
launched by the administrator with hypervisor access.  
Commonly called “virtual sprawl,” this can become the electronic version of 
the shell game when good people either intentionally want to hide some-
thing or accidently misplace key data or applications. Virtual administrators 
are like the physical server administrators described in the last chapter, but 
with the ability to do things without necessarily needing more hardware, 
greatly reducing the typical lags that may result in better planning. It seems 
that every organization we talk to nowadays is undergoing huge shifts to vir-
tual or cloud-based computing all in the name of green computing, reducing 
IT capital and operational expenses. Unfortunately, this is also giving rise to 
a different type of potential insider threat.  
Controlling Virtual Sprawl with Least 
Privilege 
Virtual sprawl is the new plague of IT (Figure 6-2). You know a problem has 
achieved mainstream status when such headlines as “Virtual Sprawl Hits 
Wall Street” appear.  

Chapter 6 | Protecting Virtual Environments from Hypervisor Sabotage 
 
104  
New applications have made it so easy to create virtualized environments 
on existing platforms that it seems one crops up every time a line of busi-
ness manager requests a new resource. If you thought server sprawl was 
bad, just look at what can happen in a virtualized environment.  
It usually doesn’t matter what the corporate policy, governance, or regula-
tory requirements implications are to the administrator creating that new 
environment; however, the implications to the CSO or anyone looking to 
satisfy audits are potentially huge.  
Without proper controls, administrators with full access to the hypervisor 
can intentionally, accidentally, or indirectly misuse privilege and cause harm. 
So how can an organization protect itself from virtual sprawl? 
The easy answer is don’t allow it. But that is a lot harder to enforce than to 
say. According to David Lynch in the Virtualization Journal, “Virtual Sprawl is 
not the problem. The real solution is to attack the cause as well as the 
symptom.” A key “cause” is the unregulated administration of the hypervi-
sor. Without policy-based controls, an administrator of your virtual envi-
ronment has carte blanche to do as they please. Implementing a PIM solu-
tion will ensure a least privilege environment whereby the admin will only 
be able to do what policy dictates and the embedded logging will facilitate 
any audit and remediation as required. 
In addition to virtual sprawl, a PIM solution correctly implemented can also 
eliminate other potential harms caused by misuse of privilege in virtualized 
environments. 
 
Figure 6-2. Architecture of the cloud 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
105  
Top Ten Reasons to Implement Least 
Privilege for Virtualized Servers 
Taking a more tongue-in-cheek approach to highlighting the types of privi-
lege misuse that occurs daily on virtual servers inside most organizations, 
we thought that a top-ten list approach might appeal to you as well. How 
many of these have you seen throughout your organization? 
#10—Sam, the CSO, can now sleep nights knowing that excess 
privileges in virtualized environments will no longer be responsible 
for failing a SOX, HIPAA, PCI, DSS, GLBA, or FDCC and FISMA 
audit (even though he isn’t required to even deal with the last two). 
#9—Andy the Auditor can get a full report of who has what enti-
tlements, even across virtualized environments, to instantly satisfy 
compliance successfully instead of taking weeks of manual effort. 
#8—Ted in Tech Support won’t be able to reset file and directory 
permissions on any virtual server he has admin rights to so liberally 
that anyone with a login can access confidential data just because it 
makes his job easier. 
#7—Sid in Development won’t be able to download Apache appli-
cations or any other unauthorized open source “tools” and poten-
tially inject malware into our corporate network because he was 
able to commandeer his own virtual server admin credentials. 
#6—Fiona and Felix, our new VMware administrators, won’t keep 
making the same View Composer enablement mistake. 
#5—Vito, the ever-industrious programmer and closet gamer, will 
not be able to run Runescape bots on our corporate virtual servers. 
#4—Alice, our outsourced VM support engineer, will no longer be 
responsible for DNS misconfiguration errors as her role won’t fa-
cilitate this level of admin privilege. 
#3—Fred in IT won’t be able to steal company data from our virtual 
servers like that Goldman programmer and sell it to a competitor 
for $1M. 
#2—Sarah, the CIO, will no longer have to fear that virtual sprawl 
will be the next topic for a board review because policies weren’t 
enforced at the hypervisor admin level. 

Chapter 6 | Protecting Virtual Environments from Hypervisor Sabotage 
 
106  
#1—Tony, the Palo Alto VMware administrator, will no longer be 
able clone virtual servers with sensitive data and then delete and 
remount them to bypass security and steal company secrets. 
Role-Based Access Control 
One of the most challenging problems when managing large networks, vir-
tual or physical, comes from the high costs and complexities of IT security 
administration. To help counteract these threats, the conception of Role-
Based Access Control (RBAC) began focusing around multi-user and multi-
application online systems that were pioneered in the 1970s. The essential 
notion of RBAC is establishing permissions based on the functional roles 
within the enterprise, and then applying a spotlight on aptly assigning users 
to a role or set of roles. 
RBAC has evolved into a dominant blueprint for advanced access control 
mainly because the end goal is to reduce the complexity and cost of secu-
rity administration for large or small networked applications. From theo-
retical inception to the present practical interpretation, most IT vendors 
have incorporated RBAC, in some form or fashion, and technology is find-
ing applications in a broad spectrum of industries, ranging from healthcare 
to defense, in addition to the mainstream commerce systems for which it 
was designed. 
Vendors have incorporated RBAC features into their database, system man-
agement, and operating system products. Ironically, while there has been a 
growing global market for a product solution to infuse an RBAC concept 
into reality, every vendor’s products have been independently developed 
without any attempt at standardizing salient RBAC features. 
As a result, RBAC is seen as an amorphous concept interpreted in different 
ways by various researchers, organizations, and system developers ranging 
from simple to elaborate and sophisticated RBAC models. Without stan-
dardized models that can be applied and understood between organiza-
tions, it becomes more apparent that these products may never provide 
the true reduction in cost and complexity that RBAC was originally in-
tended to solve. 
After acknowledging the problematic circumstances that could be achieved 
due to no RBAC regularity, the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST) produced the NIST RBAC model to provide a blueprint of 
standardization over a core set of RBAC features. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
107  
The benefits of this undertaking include a common set of benchmarks for 
vendors already developing RBAC mechanisms to implement into their en-
terprise operations. It will also give IT consumers, the principal beneficiaries 
of RBAC technology, a basis for creating uniform acquisition specifications.  
Each RBAC implementation varies in its capabilities and method of manage-
ment. In a multi-platform environment, these differences introduce higher 
administration hours and costs because the various RBAC models are not 
consistent in administration and operation methodology. The differences 
among these implementations also increase the potential for misconfigura-
tion and related security issues. Lastly, most vendors’ RBAC solutions are 
to some extent “host-centric.” Meaning maintenance operations may have 
to be performed on each host. 
RBAC Is Not the Same as ACLs 
RBAC differs from access control lists (ACLs) used in traditional discretion-
ary access control systems in that it assigns permissions to specific opera-
tions with meaning in the organization rather than to low-level data objects. 
For example, an ACL could be used to grant or deny “write access” to a par-
ticular system file, but it would not dictate how that file could be changed. 
In an RBAC-based model, an operation might be to create a “credit ac-
count” transaction in a financial application or to populate a “blood-sugar 
level test” record in a medical application. The assignment of specific per-
missions to perform a particular operation is beneficial, because the opera-
tions are granular in meaning within the application. 
RBAC has been shown to be particularly well-suited to separation-of-duties 
requirements, which ensure that two or more people must be involved in 
authorizing critical operations. Necessary and sufficient conditions for safety 
of separation of duties in RBAC have been analyzed. 
An underlying principle of separation of duties is that no individual should be 
able to affect a breach of security through dual privilege. By extension, no 
person may hold a role that exercises audit, control, or review authority 
over another concurrently held role. 
Too Much Trust? 
In a Computerworld article from November 2010, exploring the “scary side 
of virtualization,” the reporter took some time out in a sidebar to offer 
some sage staffing advice. 

Chapter 6 | Protecting Virtual Environments from Hypervisor Sabotage 
108  
His riposte, “Beware the All-Powerful Admin,” made clear the risk of giving
server admins the “keys to the kingdom”—not a good thing, so consultants
and IT execs unanimously agree. 
They might, for example, create virtual FTP servers “or they may inadver-
tently use a virtual-machine migration tool to move a server onto different
hardware for maintenance reasons, without realizing that the new host is on
an untrusted network segment.” 
His sage advice is to establish a clear separation of duties in virtual infra-
structures, and develop a strong change-management process that includes
issuing change-management tickets. 
We naturally would agree, but with one caveat. Businesses don’t rely on
trust alone. We also don’t invite businesses to put their faith in some kind
of metaphysical state that transcends our human frailties, we simply invite
you to recognize that people can and do make mistakes, and when they are
people with the “keys to the kingdom,” these mistakes can be costly. 
Better to trust your people and take out an insurance policy against human
frailties, whether those be fat-fingered mistakes, or willful misuse of respon-
sibility. In any environment, especially the deployment of virtualized envi-
ronments, strong identity management practices, and specifically control
around privileged access, must be put in place. As the number of virtual
hosts increases, there is a natural tendency to create islands of identity that
are difficult to manage. As individual virtual servers are created that serve
the needs of departmental applications, there will typically be a push from
the departments for them to own the access to the server, specifically the
privileged access, in the name of departmental efficiency. As the number of
identity sources increases, the prospect for orphaned or inappropriate privi-
leged access increases. Without a well-orchestrated management scheme
for identity management and privileged access, the company will soon lose
control, compromising security and audit compliance. 
Least Privilege Architecturally Defined for
Virtualized Environments 
It is not enough to implement a least privilege solution to managing the
physical server that houses a virtualized environment; you will also need to
ensure each virtual server is individually protected as well. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
109  
 
Figure 6-3. Virtual platform 
Virtualized Least Privilege Value 
A least privilege solution put in place specifically for virtualized environ-
ments (Figure 6-3) enables organizations that move to virtualized platforms 
to control administrative access to the hypervisor/VMM layer while still re-
alizing all virtualization cost efficiencies. Features include: 
 
Granular delegation of administrative privileges 
 
Detailed and flexible reporting, including keystroke logging of admin 
activities 
 
Two-click entitlement reports  
 
Programmable role-constrain mechanisms for segregation of duties  
 
Secure virtual guest and host hypervisors  
 
Heterogeneous virtualization platforms such as VMware ESX, So-
laris Zones, AIX WPAR, and IBM z/VM 
Weighing-In 
Virtualization has been, and will continue to be, not just a buzzword but a 
very real and viable approach for lowering costs in the IT sector. As tech-
nology advances, more and more companies will move their assets into this 
space. We’ve discussed how important it is to protect assets in the virtual 
world, and we’ve brought to light the reasons this protection is necessary. 

Chapter 6 | Protecting Virtual Environments from Hypervisor Sabotage 
 
110  
The bottom line is this—least privilege is absolutely necessary for all ma-
chines, whether they are physical or virtual. 
Let’s hear thoughts from our Insider Heroes: 
Secure Sam: 
Gone are the days where privileges don’t need to be managed. We live in a 
world where data is being stolen on a daily basis, and it is every company’s 
responsibility to secure their mission-critical information. The last thing I 
want is for a virtual environment within my organization to be out of con-
trol. A lot of things can make virtual assets difficult to manage—poorly dele-
gated hypervisor rights, virtual sprawl as a result of bad planning, and too 
many contributors to guest and host systems. What it comes down to, for 
my company at least, is this—policies. Policies need to be enforced both for 
the hypervisor and at the hypervisor level. Just as with physical resources, 
the virtual ones need to be protected in the same ways. Least privilege is 
necessary for both security and compliance, and it is especially critical for 
those assets housed in the clouds and being accessed on virtual platforms. 
Least Privilege Lucy: 
Managing a network is a challenging task, and one that comes with both high 
risks and significant costs. This becomes especially true in a virtual environ-
ment, where privileges must be administered at the most granular level. In 
this chapter, we discussed RBAC, which sets permissions based on job de-
scriptions within any given company. This concept is the basis of the least 
privilege model, and is paramount in the protection of any resources that 
may have been made virtual. Any desktops, applications, or servers that are 
taken to the cloud versus being physical still need the exact same protec-
tions regular machines do. The most important thing in my mind is to have a 
very distinct and clear separation of duties in virtual infrastructures. It’s so 
important to have these types of policies in place—it makes security a real-
ity in organizations.  
Compliance Carl: 
One of the most interesting statements I hear from various companies I 
audit is that “we went virtual, so we’re compliant.” I think there are a lot 
of misconceptions around virtualization, but one that needs to be cor-
rected immediately is that going virtual takes away non-compliance 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
111  
threats. It absolutely does not. If anything, it adds more risks. As was 
talked about earlier, granular management of privileged users is necessary 
for the security of physical machines, but it’s even more important to the 
protection of virtualized resources. When you think about it, a virtual as-
set is susceptible to far more threats because so many administrative privi-
leges are unmanaged in that environment. A least privilege solution is vital 
in this case—it provides granular identity management on both guest op-
erating systems as well as to hypervisor hosts. Without confining users to 
only that data they need for job function, the virtualized environment will 
not be secure. Granular management of privileges is the only way for 
companies’ sensitive information to remain compliant in the cloud. 
 


C H A P T E R 
7 
Secure Multi-
Tenancy for 
Private, Public, 
and Hybrid 
Clouds 
 
“As organizations adopt cloud services, the human element takes on an 
even more profound importance. It is critical therefore that consumers 
of cloud services understand what providers are doing to detect and de-
fend against the malicious insider threat.” 
—Cloud Security Alliance, Top Threats to Cloud Computing V1.0 

Chapter 7 | Secure Multi-Tenancy for Private, Public, and Hybrid 
Clouds 
 
114  
It seems as if every business and IT executive that we talk to lately literally 
has their “head in the clouds.” Every conversation about current or impend-
ing strategies for information assets almost universally contains some men-
tion of a public, private, or hybrid cloud deployment. A more interesting ob-
servation of these conversations is that the lure of liberating ourselves from 
the burden of managing applications and data shouldn’t mean we stop having 
high expectations about how those applications and data are managed.  
If you want to use the public cloud and need to do it in a secure and com-
pliant way, it’s a matter of shared responsibility. If you want your cloud ven-
dors to be secure enough to protect your corporation’s most sensitive data, 
then you have to insist on it, and communicate your requirements and 
oversee the controls. That leaves the final piece of the cloud security puz-
zle—the often ignored or misunderstood case of the privileged users in the 
cloud. The cloud is no different from any other domain that requires 
authorized access. Where there are privileged users, you also need least 
privilege in order to mitigate the insider threats we have discussed at length 
throughout this book. 
All Clouds Are Not Created Equal 
It goes without saying that operating in the cloud is the latest trend in the 
technology world, and as is the case with every emerging technology, the 
playing field is not yet clearly defined; “cloud computing” can mean different 
things to different people.  
To some, it is a way of describing commercial services available over the In-
ternet in real-time from outsourced storage and computing capacity to 
software as a service (SaaS). To others, it is an architecture and set of 
technologies that facilitate real-time access to information and applications 
from anywhere via the Internet. Cloud deployments can take three primary 
approaches: 
 
Public Cloud: This is a computing model whereby a service provider 
outside of your enterprise will provide the infrastructure and asso-
ciated management of specific IT resources, usually computing and 
storage but can also extend to applications and specific information-
related services. The primary value is one of “pay for usage” and the 
ease of access since everything is available via the Internet. It is 
known and accepted that in most cases, multiple companies are 
sharing the same physical resources owned and managed by the 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
115  
public cloud vendor but are partitioned into logical or virtual serv-
ers for protection across company boundaries. 
 
Private Cloud: Also called corporate cloud or internal cloud, this is 
really just a new name for an architecture and set of solutions that 
have already been deployed throughout your enterprise for years. 
In this computing model, all of the infrastructure and management is 
physically inside your enterprise, but all of the access is in real-time 
via the Internet instead of distributed to local desktops or servers. 
 
Hybrid Cloud: Taking advantage of the best of both the public and 
private cloud architectures is an emerging concept called the hybrid 
cloud. In this model, some of the infrastructure and services are 
provided by outside vendors and are linked to infrastructure and 
services managed inside the physical enterprise, but the ultimate 
user is oblivious to what is going on “behind the curtain” of their 
data and application access. 
Whether it’s the private or public or somewhere in between (hybrid) cloud, 
it’s where we are heading. Just because information and applications are 
available in such a convenient way does not mean that boundaries should be 
let down to make all things convenient. The principle of least privilege ap-
plies here more than ever before. 
The Elusive Unicorn 
The ultimate question of security in the cloud revolves around whether or 
not multiple tenants can coexist without one having any access to the 
other’s data or applications. Truly guaranteed, secure multi-tenancy has 
been labeled as both somewhat unattainable and the basis by which every 
cloud vendor’s security should be measured. What’s interesting about the 
secure multi-tenancy discussion is that it isn’t exclusive to separate compa-
nies sharing the same public cloud infrastructure. It turns out that this is as 
big an issue for private cloud implementations where cross division or de-
partment privacy is required either for governance or compliance reason. 
Why is secure multi-tenancy in the cloud the elusive unicorn? The short an-
swer centers on the observation that the cloud’s greatest strength is also 
potentially its greatest weakness. Sharing under-utilized resources and pay-
ing on a metered or “as-used” basis is a fantastic way to leverage existing in-
vestments, control costs, and handle the natural ebbs and flows in capacity 
planning that usually plagues IT. The challenge comes in when two different 
organizations with different compliance and security policies are sharing the 

Chapter 7 | Secure Multi-Tenancy for Private, Public, and Hybrid 
Clouds 
 
116  
same resource. How does the cloud provider, even internally for private 
clouds, ensure that nothing spills from one virtual environment into the 
other on the physical intersection point, the server?  
The sheen of sophistication, the wow factor of something new, dazzles our 
senses somewhat, and subsequently we invest way too much faith in some-
thing—we not only put the cart before the horse, we turn it into a hand 
cart that we think we can push ourselves. Again we see how human nature 
is the weak link. 
According to Gartner, the private cloud will be introduced primarily as a new 
way to interface with customers (a self-service catalog of standard services), 
and a new way to deliver services (automated, giving the user the choice on 
when to use the service and how much)—it requires a fundamental change in 
the relationship between business and IT, and the way they do business to-
gether. Unlike virtualization, the private cloud must be preceded by changes 
in organization, processes and business models. It starts with a shift in focus 
from technologies (servers, virtual machines [VMs] and storage capacity) to 
services (see “Getting Started With Private Cloud: Services First”).  With all 
these changes, the ultimate question that keeps coming up is “How possible is 
secure multi-tenancy in public and private cloud environments?” 
 
Figure 7-1. Cloud challenges and issues 
While cloud computing removes the traditional application silos within the 
data center and introduces a new level of flexibility and scalability to the IT 
organization, the support for multi-tenancy computing environments also in-
troduces additional security risks, the most insidious of which is data theft. 
1

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
117  
The administrative tools used to access the hypervisor/VMM layer a cloud 
vendor manages must be tightly controlled to maintain a strong security 
posture. Organizations need to carefully analyze business and security re-
quirements, and must evaluate the depth and reliability of security features 
and cloud service levels. A privileged identity management (PIM) solution is 
the only tool that can limit these administrators to specific policy-driven ac-
tions as well as provide the granular audit trail to determine actions if 
remediation is required delivering on the promise of a “more secure” multi-
tenant cloud environment. 
Top Ten Reasons to Implement Least 
Privilege For Private, Public & Hybrid 
Clouds 
Taking a more tongue-in-cheek approach to highlighting the types of privi-
lege misuse that occurs daily in cloud environments, we thought that a top-
ten list approach might appeal to you as well. How many of these have you 
seen throughout your organization? 
#10—Andy, the admin at <insert your public cloud provider name 
here>, won’t be able to use his admin privileges to your instantiation 
of a public cloud for data theft. 
#9—Clara, your server admin, can’t instantiate a new server used 
for private cloud applications that will facilitate one business unit 
admin from poking in on the data from other business units’ instan-
tiation of a cloud app on the same server. 
#8—Sid in development won’t be able to code in a back door for 
privileged access to your hybrid cloud architecture. 
#7—Harry, the industrious business unit admin, won’t be able to 
““tune” your private cloud to what he read was “optimal” on Seth 
Grodin’s latest blog. 
#6—Ted in Tech Support won’t be able to change cloud file per-
missions without the proper policy-driven permissions just because 
it made his job easier today. 
#5—Barney, the new business unit manager, won’t be able to blame 
“mistaken identity” for missing his quarterly goal because he read 
that was something that happens when cloud security goes bad. 

Chapter 7 | Secure Multi-Tenancy for Private, Public, and Hybrid 
Clouds 
 
118  
#4—Sam, the CSO, won’t continue to lose sleep at night fretting 
over who can hijack admin privileges for any public, private, or hy-
brid instantiation of their corporate infrastructure. 
#3—John, the CEO, won’t get called out in the press for a data 
breach after moving all data to what he thought was a secure, 
lower-cost private and hybrid cloud. 
#2—Vito, a member of the hacker’s guild, won’t be able to take ad-
vantage of the cloud streamlining the efficiency of identity theft. 
#1—Bill, the chairman of the board, won’t have to explain why he 
needs to spend $1 million to fix a cloud data breach problem with 
the statement “at least it’s not as much as Sony had to spend for 
its breach.” 
Is the Cloud Inherently Secure or Insecure? 
The report by the Ponemon Institute in March 2011 on the Security of Cloud 
Computing Providers offered what appear to be some surprising results. Ac-
cording to the study, “the majority of cloud computing providers do not 
consider security as one of their most important responsibilities.”  
Given that most studies show security as one of the primary barriers to 
cloud adoption, this is indeed disappointing news and one might conclude 
that it’s going to be a long time until clouds are appropriate for running en-
terprise applications. But let’s look a little deeper into the data.  
The survey was based on responses from 103 providers, so it’s a pretty di-
verse group covering SAAS, PAAS, and IAAS. Many of these cloud providers 
may be targeting such applications as hosting a blog where security isn’t a 
top priority. In fact, the survey showed that providers believe most of their 
customers are looking for reduced cost, faster deployment, and improved 
customer service when they use clouds. 
And the study didn’t say that cloud providers don’t think security is impor-
tant, but that “the respondents overwhelmingly believe it is the responsibil-
ity of the users of cloud computing to ensure the security of the resources 
they provide.” On the other hand, “only 35% of users believe they are most 
responsible for ensuring security.” 
So to get the level of security needed to run enterprise applications, we 
need to clear up the confusion about who should do what.   

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
119  
Who’s in Charge of Cloud Security? 
Usually, the way we define and implement security is driven by compliance.
But despite a wide number of frameworks from the Information Systems
Audit and Control Association‘s (ISACA) Control Objectives for Informa-
tion and related Technology (COBIT) to Payment Card Industry Data Secu-
rity Standards (PCI DSS), those compliance standards aren’t very clear, leav-
ing ample room for every auditor to interpret them differently. 
When you dive deeper into the Ponemon study data, it shows that “cloud
providers are most confident about their ability to ensure recovery from
significant IT failures and ensure the physical location of data assets are in
secure environments.” These are two areas where best practices and the
compliance standards are well-defined. 
On the other hand, cloud providers are “least confident in their ability to
restrict privileged user access to sensitive data.” At least part of that lack of
confidence can surely be attributed to the lack of a clear definition of privi-
leged access and what the appropriate controls are. Since many of the
privileged users of a cloud system are the customer’s employees, it makes
sense that this has got to be an area of shared responsibility between the
cloud vendor and the customer. But who should do what and, ultimately,
who’s in charge?  
To the Cloud, or Not 
While we can debate the relative security of clouds versus most corporate
data centers, there is one area where using a cloud vendor will always rep-
resent greater risk—the threat posed by insiders with administrative privi-
leges. We have to quote the Ponemon Institute study that cloud providers
are “least confident in their ability to restrict privileged user access to sensi-
tive data.”   
Now part of that lack of confidence is because their customers control privi-
leged access to the operating system of whatever is running in a cloud-
computing environment. So as a customer, you need to take control of that
part of the cloud environment and, as many of your peers are doing, use the
same tools they do in their data centers to protect privileged account creden-
tials. An effective least privilege solution can be configured to run in a public
cloud or in a hybrid mode as an extension of the system in your data center. 
That leaves the cloud providers privileged users who administer their hyper-
visor and control plane environments. Encryption of data is a vital protection 

Chapter 7 | Secure Multi-Tenancy for Private, Public, and Hybrid 
Clouds 
 
120  
and can address a number of concerns about malicious insiders particularly 
with unstructured data. Database encryption in the cloud is tricky and re-
quires a well-thought-out architecture and key management system.   
We don’t know of any confirmed breaches by cloud insiders, but that 
doesn’t mean there isn’t risk.  Most customers don’t have deep insight into 
their cloud provider’s technology stacks and operating procedures. So ask 
them! Some recommendations to become better informed and thus better 
protected include: 
 
Review their SAS 70 certifications 
 
Agree on standards and audit them 
 
Go onsite and check their controls and look at their logs 
Once you make your needs known, we think you will quickly see which 
cloud providers understand the enterprise customer and want to deliver 
the security required. In the meantime, caveat emptor. 
Security in Public Clouds 
As stated earlier, you need to take ownership and responsibility for over-
seeing and requiring compliance and security policies of your chosen cloud 
vendors. But, how can you do this effectively? 
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), part of the US 
Department of Commerce, published their Guidelines on Security and Privacy 
in Public Cloud Computing in January 2011. This 60-page report can be best 
summarized by the quote “accountability for security and privacy in public 
clouds remains with the organization,” a blatant statement of the obvious if 
we’ve ever heard one. The report expands on this thought by stating, “as-
sessing and managing risk in cloud computing systems can be a challenge. 
Throughout the system lifecycle, risks that are identified must be carefully 
balanced against the security and privacy controls available and the expected 
benefits from their utilization. Too many controls can be inefficient and inef-
fective, if the benefits outweigh the costs and associated risks.” 
John Storts, a blogger over at IT Business Edge, wrote in January 2011 that 
“cloud service providers, generally, are unaware of the specific security and 
privacy needs of an organization”—Yes! Ding, ding, ding! And this particular 
blog goes on to say “so it’s wise to have these needs explicitly documented 
before engaging with them.” 
We’ve covered how security is the top issue related to the cloud according 
to numerous surveys and reports, yet only 23% of cloud customers require 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
121  
proof of compliance from their cloud vendors and only 20% of organizations 
regularly involve the security team in their cloud choices. With cloud secu-
rity being such an issue, why aren’t we doing more about it? 
Organizations that outsource to a cloud vendor seem to make their choices 
based on price, instead of security. Often this transition involves multiplying 
the number of IT admins with access to the company’s data several-fold and 
without proper admin controls. So ask your cloud vendor! Ask them how 
many admins will have access to your data and what policies are in place to 
protect it. We stated this time and again throughout this book: “trust 
alone” is not a proper security measure. When human nature is involved at 
the intersection of technology, whether it is physical, virtual, or cloud-based, 
you need to take into consideration the obvious uncertainty principle. 
Trusted Digital Identities 
The US Commerce Department, which just launched an initiative to help 
create more trusted digital identities.  Details were in short supply and 
there is lots of skepticism and questions about the role of government in 
any sort of national ID program. 
But what is important is that the Commerce Department initiative em-
braces a model that allows companies to “"pull credentials” when required 
from a centralized policy-managed repository instead of relying on individual 
credentials being “pushed” by the user. According to Bob Blakley, Vice 
President & Distinguished Analyst at Gartner, “we see this public identity in-
frastructure approach as central to a new emerging architecture where 
vendors compete in market for identities that provides high-quality identi-
ties at lower cost and enterprises focus their Identify and Access Manage-
ment efforts on developing governance policies that determine what 
sources of identities are appropriate for their different business processes.” 
 “While Gartner doesn’t see these consumer repositories replacing Active 
Directory anytime soon, and we wouldn’t bet on this or any model until it 
has market traction, in a more diverse world of SaaS, public, private, and 
hybrid clouds, companies need to anticipate the changes this new model will 
require in the identity management infrastructure, policies, and controls,” 
states Blakley. 
Public Clouds Need Least Privilege 
If you want to use the cloud and need to do it in a secure and compliant 
way, you’re going to need to think about who is responsible for what. As 

Chapter 7 | Secure Multi-Tenancy for Private, Public, and Hybrid 
Clouds 
 
122  
numerous studies and articles have highlighted, most cloud vendors today 
don’t provide a platform that’s fully up to enterprise security standards. 
Cloud vendors need to do their part by providing a good foundation of such 
security technologies as firewalls, anti-virus and anti-malware, encryption of 
data in motion, patch management, and log management. Cloud customers 
also need to do their part by using this foundation to secure their opera-
tions and ensure the proper policies and procedures are in place. So that 
leaves the complicated stuff—shared responsibilities and the special case of 
the privileged users in the cloud. 
Vendor priorities will be aligned with those of their customers. Today for 
most cloud users those priorities are reducing cost, workload, and deploy-
ment time while providing new levels of scalability. Some of these priorities 
are at odds with the time and resources required to do proper security. 
However, if customers demand it and show they will pay for it; vendors will 
step up and provide the security that’s needed. As a recent report by the 
Ponemon Institute on the Security of Cloud Computing Providers showed, 
“while security as a true service from the cloud is rarely offered to custom-
ers today, about one-third of cloud providers in our study are considering 
such solutions as a new source of revenue sometime in the next two years.” 
Many cloud vendors have large-scale operations that offer the potential for 
more resources and expertise to protect your data. But that potential will 
only be fully realized if customers provide the oversight, funds, and service-
level requirements to make sound security processes a good business deci-
sion for the vendors. This entails security teams getting more involved, 
companies allowing security to influence buying decisions, and insisting on 
regular reporting on security processes and service-level agreements. 
If you want your cloud vendors to be secure enough to protect your corpo-
ration’s most sensitive data, then you have to insist on it, communicate your 
requirements, oversee the controls, ask for reports, and ultimately take 
shared responsibility for the security of the cloud. If your cloud provider 
doesn’t implement least privilege within their infrastructure, then you can 
still protect yourself by implementing that portion on your premise.  
A Rose by Any Other Name 
When Shakespeare wrote this line in Romeo and Juliet, it set the benchmark 
for quotes representing that what really matters is what something is and 
not what something is called. So, we find it kind of fun when we hear talk 
1

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
123  
of private clouds representing it as a new and bold IT initiative. As stated 
earlier, a private cloud is really just a new marketing label for a set of tech-
nologies and an architecture that was marketed as “network computing“ in 
the 1980s, “portals” in the 1990s, and “intranets/extranets” at the turn of 
the millennium. 
So, even though private clouds are really just a “marketing wash” of existing 
concepts, that doesn’t mean it shouldn’t be any less important to you and 
your strategy for deployment and management of enterprise information as-
sets. Sometimes it takes good marketing to actually get a smart technical 
concept more widely accepted across the enterprise, especially by the usu-
ally technically illiterate business and finance types who can control the ul-
timate success or failure of specific IT solutions. 
Case Study: Secure Multi-Tenancy in a 
Private Cloud 
A very large multinational bank decided strategically to move to a cloud in-
frastructure globally for governance and cost reasons in late 2010. In 
evaluating specific business unit requirements, the lead IT executives dis-
covered concerns regarding confidentiality, security, and the ability to 
prove compliance. 
The complications arose in the uncovering of how difficult it was to segre-
gate the private cloud infrastructure (built on VMware) by business unit 
while ensuring authorization levels across business units were in line with 
specific compliance mandates. Each business unit had specific privacy con-
cerns regarding cross-department information access as well as unique 
compliance reporting requirements. IT needed to manage the authorizations 
based on corporate-level governance mandates and had their own level of 
compliance reporting requirements. 
Ultimately, a decision was made to make a least privilege solution a manda-
tory requirement as part of their private cloud stack. In this way, they were 
able to realize: 
 
Unified protection from host to guest operating systems. 
 
Centrally governed privilege delegation for guest VMs. 
 
Centrally governed privilege delegation for ESX hypervisors. 
 
Discrete business units could produce compliance reports that in-
cluded logging and auditing down to the keystroke level. 

Chapter 7 | Secure Multi-Tenancy for Private, Public, and Hybrid 
Clouds 
 
124  
 
Discrete business units could also interrogate event data for ad-hoc 
drill-down validation of Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX), PCI-DSS, and Fed-
eral Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) compliance. 
Logs in the Cloud 
As you can see from the previous case study, logs are an important part of 
compliance. The heart of the matter really is: are logs in the cloud any dif-
ferent than traditional logs? A matter raised by Misha Govshteyn, co-
founder of Alert Logic and suggested standard for logging that’s specifically 
for the cloud called CloudLog. He discusses how logs in the cloud are the 
same, but also different—an oxymoron we support. 
We’ve covered how cloud security is the top issue in the cloud, yet few or-
ganizations are doing much about it, and how the cloud requires new mod-
els for the same security best practices. 
Nothing’s changed about privileged access, but now you need to extend that 
to the hypervisor; nothing’s changed about setting and enforcing policy, but 
now you need to do that across cloud vendors; nothing’s changed about 
logs, but now we need to do keystroke logging and log privileged activity 
across cloud vendors, hypervisors, and organizations. 
Part of the reason there’s so much insecurity (pardon the pun) about secu-
rity in the cloud is this idea that we need to start over from scratch; that 
security needs to be reinvented for the cloud. But in most cases, we just 
need to extend what was already in place to the cloud and, as much as we 
can, to our cloud vendors. 
So when you start thinking about cloud security and whether the organiza-
tion is doing everything they should be, just start with this: are we doing 
everything we used to but in the cloud? 
Implementing Least Privilege in the Cloud 
Since this architecture contains elements both on-premise and at your cloud 
provider, special attention needs to be made to the intersection points. Fig-
ure 7-2 shows how to implement a least privilege solution where all ele-
ments exist in the hosted environment, while the users on-premise are pro-
tected by the least privilege policies. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
125  
 
Figure 7-2. Architecture of least privilege 
Figure 7-2 shows an example architecture implementing key elements of 
least privilege on–premise, while still accessing a public cloud infrastructure 
and using that infrastructure to host the policy files and logs. In this way, 
you take responsibility for your portion of the security equation. 
Weighing In 
Establishing least privilege for public, private, and hybrid clouds is necessary 
to protect the integrity of sensitive information. If the cloud owners and 
cloud users ensure that PIM solutions are implemented correctly, then the 
first step to truly secure multi-tenancy has been taken. Without it, insiders 
could take advantage of the open nature of these environments and the 
ever-precious data being kept safe could be compromised. Let’s hear what 
our experts have to say. 
Secure Sam:  
One of the strongest arguments for moving data to the cloud is that it re-
duces cost, workload, and deployment time. One of the strongest counter 
arguments is that the time and resources required for properly securing the 
cloud are often more intensive than the benefits that come from using it. As 
more and more technology is pointing toward that platform, however, it’s 
obvious that’s where we’re heading. I think the most important thing to re-
alize when discussing this is that a certain degree of governance needs to be 
in place for an enterprise cloud environment to safely thrive. A lot of that 
comes from first defining appropriate expectations. Not all users should ex-
pect, or be able to access, all information just because it’s based in the 

Chapter 7 | Secure Multi-Tenancy for Private, Public, and Hybrid 
Clouds 
 
126  
cloud. Those who need elevated privileges should be granted them, but only 
if they absolutely need them. The second step is verifying performance. In 
the cloud more than any other arena, those with privileges need to be 
monitored. Logs must be kept and records must be analyzed in order for 
the information in the cloud to be secure. Governance is key. 
Least Privilege Lucy:  
Least privilege is a concept that applies to all aspects of information technol-
ogy. It particularly applies to the cloud, as it’s the platform with the most ac-
cess points. In order for a cloud network to be secure to enterprise stan-
dards, access must only be granted to users who have the need for it. Most of 
the time, the environment in a cloud situation has been established with solid 
technologies—but it’s of the utmost importance that users of the platform 
take responsibility for the information they allow their employees to see. 
There will always be a need for privileged users—certain applications and 
commands will always need elevated rights. On the flip side, the entity that 
houses data for enterprises will always need to be secure. A lot of people get 
nervous about sending sensitive resources to the cloud, but if it’s protected 
the way physical assets are protected, confidential information will remain just 
that: confidential. And the way to do that truly is through least privilege. Even 
if a cloud provider doesn’t buy into the concept, it’s still something that indi-
vidual companies can (and should) do within their infrastructures.  
Compliance Carl:  
As an auditor, I realize most of the security initiatives in organizations are 
driven by the requirement to be compliant with industry mandates. While 
one would hope a company is interested in purely protecting its precious 
assets, compliance does serve as a catalyst for most organizations. And it’s a 
great place to start—there’s a reason for regulatory laws regarding data se-
curity. The bottom line is simple—they’re in place to protect the assets of 
companies. Once a determination is made to take necessary security meas-
ures, that information needs a multi-faceted plan to be successful. Such a 
plan also needs to include the principle of least privilege. When talking 
about protecting these resources in the cloud, it’s important to emphasize 
that each user should only have access to the information they absolutely 
need. In such a public and shared environment, knowing where your data is 
and who has access to it is paramount to the success of your security strat-
egy. The Ponemon study referenced earlier states that cloud providers are 
“least confident in their ability to restrict privileged user access to sensitive 
data.” By appropriately managing access to sensitive information, companies 
can be more confident in the security of their information resources. 

C H A P T E R 
8 
Applications, 
Databases, and 
Desktop Data 
Need Least 
Privilege, Too 
 
“Only 40% of security professionals indicated that existing controls can 
adequately protect all of their organization’s confidential data while the 
remainder of respondents reported numerous data security gaps.” 
—Jon Oltsik, Enterprise Strategy Group  
 

Chapter 8 | Applications, Databases, and Desktop Data Need Least 
Privilege, Too 
 
128  
Physical, virtual, and cloud infrastructure exists for only one purpose: to 
store information assets and run applications that give those assets purpose. 
Since you’ve kept reading this far, you are now aware of the implications of 
unmonitored access to this infrastructure, but what about the core reason 
for buying, implementing and managing all of this in the first place?  
All of your investments in legacy applications were done so for specific pro-
ductivity, profitability, or compete-ability reasons, but the privileges to run 
them leave gaping security holes. Most applications were originally archi-
tected without the concept of granular authorization levels. So how do your 
users run them today? For most organizations, the answer is to continue to 
grant full administrative rights so that they don’t have to incur the costs of 
re-architecting and developing those applications without the admin-level 
requirements. 
A better answer, obviously knowing our thoughts on least privilege by 
now, is not to grant or take away all of those privileges, but to allow users 
to run them based on what is required for their jobs. This relieves pres-
sure on IT administrators who think the only way out is to upgrade or pay 
for an in-house patch. This is especially true for database and database-
based applications. 
Servers Store the Good Stuff…In Databases 
In Chapter 5, we spent time discussing how servers are the primary attack 
point for insider and outside hackers alike. We highlighted that that’s be-
cause the most important information assets tends to be stored on servers, 
but what we must point out is the fact that most of that data is residing 
within a database.  Think of it this way—if applications provide the engine to 
user productivity, the information stored in databases (on servers) and on 
personal desktops provides the fuel.  
So why do databases merit their own chapter? 
Put simply, because database-based applications are often also legacy apps. 
As we have mentioned elsewhere, legacy apps are required for the opera-
tion of enterprises everywhere, but the privileges to run them leave gaping 
security holes in enterprises. The answer, obviously, is not to take away 
those privileges, but to allow users to run them with a least privilege solu-
tion to elevate privileges as required and allowed by policy. This relieves 
pressure on IT administrators who think the only way out is to completely 
rewrite code, upgrade to different applications or pay for an in-house patch.  

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
129  
So why not simply upgrade the legacy apps? 
As you well know, courtesy of Moore’s Law, technology is still getting twice
as fast at half the price every 18 months or so, yet businesses still prefer to
operate under the assumption pervasive in nearly every enterprise, that “if it
isn’t broken, don’t fix it.” 
If you won’t fix it, then at least be aware that your databases are prone to
the same whims of human nature as any other IT environment. 
DBA: The Privileged Database User 
If you haven’t been keeping up with all of the TLA tiles in your organization,
then DBA may be one you’ve missed. DBA stands for database administrator
and this is the primary privileged user designated for your database. Like the
systems administrator, the DBA has omnipotent access to the database.
They can not only monitor and maintain the data, tables, and indexes, but
also can add, delete, and modify all of the above to their heart’s content. 
Similar to your server administrator, the DBA can take on the persona of
insider hero Least Privilege Lucy or insider villain Disgruntled Dave, with the
only difference being scope of influence limited to the database and not the
actual physical or virtual server upon which it resides. 
Database Security Risks 
As you can imagine, databases are in a class of data storage, organization,
and management unto themselves. As such, the inherent security vulnerabili-
ties in which a least privilege solution can help mitigate are also relatively
unique. We’ve uncovered six that should be explored: 
1. Misconfigurations: Database schemas can be very temperamental and
any misconfiguration error can cascade into a huge problem or be so
subtle that it may be difficult to uncover the impact. A frequent chal-
lenge here is the ambitious developer who somehow gets access to
the production system instead of just their development sandbox.  
2. Updates: Out-of-cycle patching can cause major disruption in opera-
tion and potentially lead to lost revenue if done on the primary
transaction database. Here is where the ambitious tech support
technician or developer believes that blindly trusting that your data-
base vendor’s testing capabilities keep current with their latest
patch is a good thing. 

Chapter 8 | Applications, Databases, and Desktop Data Need Least 
Privilege, Too 
 
130  
3. Application Attacks: Sometimes the easiest way to attack your data-
base is to attack the outward-facing applications that are connected 
to that database, especially if those application are web-based. This 
can also come in the form of database access through non-approved 
channels such as open source tools capable of bypassing normal 
admin dashboards.  
4. Transaction Monitoring: Sometimes it’s the smallest of things that can 
trip you up when looking to satisfy compliance or track down data 
theft or damage, so monitoring every transaction can be very im-
portant. However, it can also drown your data stores in amounts of 
information too voluminous to even interrogate. 
5. Data Awareness: What is perceived, or in actuality is, confidential 
data can be subjective in some organizations and very clearly identi-
fied in others. Being aware of what class of data is stored where will 
be another critical success factor. 
6. Privileged Users: Our favorite, of course, is the privileged user. As 
discussed previously, the DBA’s omnipotent access to your data-
base must be managed through a least privilege solution in order to 
ensure your governance and compliance policies are met as well as 
protect against the misuse of that privilege—intentionally, acciden-
tally, or indirectly. 
Legacy Applications Are Still Pervasive 
While databases store most anything of value, it’s the legacy applications 
that sit on top of those databases that provide your business users access. 
Most enterprises have more bespoke legacy applications then they do off-
the-shelf software. These applications were mostly written in-house, by de-
velopers who more were concerned with making their app work (with 
admin rights) but without considering the impact granting those rights 
would have on running other apps. Least privilege is the intersection here 
between database management, legacy applications, and the infrastructure 
on which they run. 
Your DBAs, IT admins, and business users in each division, department, or 
business unit will tend to isolate themselves and consider their silo the most 
important. This again is due to a classic weakness in human nature and the 
inability to communicate and collaborate between each other.  Let’s look at 
the implications of some of these silos. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
131  
Desktops Have Legacy Application 
Challenges as Well 
In an enterprise Windows’ desktop environment, whether a company has 
100 or 10,000 seats, the challenge of managing access is fraught with diffi-
culty. Why? Because every user is going to want to work with their desktop 
computer the way they work on their own personal computer on their per-
sonal time. The proliferation of personal computing has actually made IT’s 
job that much harder as every user considers themselves an expert if 
they’ve “Googled” something on the Internet.  
One way to control these rogue desktop users is to shut down all privilege. 
We discussed that at length back in Chapter 4 on desktop least privilege, but 
then the dreaded UAC pop-up window wreaks havoc with your help desk. 
Even if an IT administrator can work out how to circumnavigate Windows 
User Access Controls or how to set a Group Policy for every application, 
there will invariably still be a legacy application on which the company relies, 
which will only run if every user is given administrator status. 
In effect, one or more legacy applications force the company to leave the 
entire network vulnerable to either intentional or accidental damage from 
giving users a higher level of privileged access than they require. 
These applications will have been written in-house, or by a third party pro-
vider, to meet the bespoke needs of the company—and yet without recog-
nizing the security risks and compliance headache caused by leaving desktop 
access wide open. 
Equally rife is the use of legacy apps such as Sage Instant Accounts and Intuit 
QuickBooks, more associated with the individual user or small company, but 
more often than not used en-masse in larger companies with 100+ desktops. 
The impact of these legacy apps is not just the security risks they pose, but 
also the impact on IT support in fixing the unintentional errors caused by 
over-privileged desktop users. That’s time and money that might be used 
more strategically, rather than on the tactical day-to-day fire-fighting. 
Good role-based user privilege management software can easily circumnavi-
gate the requirement of legacy apps to run desktops on administrator or 
super user status without requiring their modification or removal. 

Chapter 8 | Applications, Databases, and Desktop Data Need Least 
Privilege, Too 
 
132  
Desktop DLP Helps Mitigate Different 
Insider Threats 
It may be appropriate to take a small break from a pure least privilege man-
agement discussion and highlight another technology that supplements our 
solution for the mitigation of insider threats on local data stored or accessi-
ble by local desktops. Endpoint data leak prevention (DLP) is a solution that 
compliments the brokering of privilege authorization and aids in securing 
the perimeter within by dealing with data in use and at rest. DLP leverages a 
policy engine similar to that of least privilege to ensure specific data is dealt 
with according to your governance and compliance requirements. Here, 
specific phrases, paragraphs, or documents can be protected against move-
ment, copy, modification, or deletion.  
Loss of customer account details, exposure of confidential information, and 
theft of sensitive data are typical data leak cases that cost companies up to 
5% of revenue every year. Insiders, employees, and contractors who have 
authorized access to confidential data are liable for 70% of total data leaks. 
Compliance Audit Failures 
If you can’t protect your data in databases, in legacy applications, or on per-
sonal desktops, then ultimately you face a compliance audit failure (see Fig-
ure 8-1), in addition to potential damage, loss, or theft. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
133  
 
Figure 8-1. Reasons for failed audits 
Stolen Fruit 
I’m sure you’ve heard the saying “stolen fruit is the sweetest.” It’s a phrase 
that gets thrown around lightly, but it’s time to take it to heart. In a day 
when information and sensitive data are being stolen, manipulated, and 
blasted for the world to read, this is a saying we all need to look at twice. 
Hackers, inside security leakers, and thieves all agree: that which is stolen is 
the sweetest. You don’t want to find out how sweet the information in your 
enterprise will be to them. Steps should to be taken to secure the sensitive 
information and data in enterprises across the world. 
Who are these people stealing the “fruit?” I think you can probably guess—
hackers, thieves, and those abusing administrator rights. These are the peo-
ple enterprises must protect against. According to a study performed by the 
Professional Association for SQL Server (PASS), 44% of database security 
challenges come in the form of inside hackers and the abuse of privileges. 
Outside hackers and thieves do present a threat to the integrity of our da-
tabases and the information therein, but our attention should first be turned 
to those already in our organizations. Often, these individuals have too 

Chapter 8 | Applications, Databases, and Desktop Data Need Least 
Privilege, Too 
 
134  
much access to information they simply do not need. And why do they steal 
this data? Because your data is truly sweet to them—they see a huge payday 
without the hard, bitter work. If you think this doesn’t apply to you, or that 
none of your employees are capable of such atrocity, let me turn your at-
tention to the Goldman Sachs debacle. I bet they thought their enterprise 
wasn’t in danger either—yet look at what transpired. How much will the 
“sweetest fruit” cost your company? 
If you are concerned about the security of your enterprise (you should be if 
you haven’t already taken measures to keep your sensitive information safe), 
it’s time to implement a privilege management policy and become compliant 
with government mandates. It’s the only way to prevent the fruits of your 
company from becoming sweet and stolen. Don’t let your employees assign 
a price to the sweet information in your enterprise. Set up a protocol that 
allows users just the right amount of access to information. 
Top Ten Reasons to Implement Least 
Privilege for Applications and Databases 
Taking a more tongue-in-cheek approach to highlighting the types of privi-
lege misuse that occurs daily in applications and databases inside most orga-
nizations, we thought that a top-ten list approach might appeal to you as 
well. How may of these have you seen throughout your organization? 
#10—Sam, the CSO, can now sleep nights knowing that inappropri-
ate database activities are not only being monitored but also pre-
vented via policy enforcement at a granular level. 
#9—Fiona, the DBA, won’t be able to modify the production data-
base instead of the test copy in the sandbox accidentally or even ac-
cidentally on purpose. 
#8—Frank, your sole Application Developer, will no longer have to 
rewrite legacy applications in order to strip out any code requiring 
administrative privileges. 
#7—Ted, the overzealous Tech Support Tech, won’t be able to up-
grade your production database to the latest version of Oracle re-
leased today before the IT department has had time to vet the im-
pact on current processes and attached applications. 
#6—Ken, the CSO, can delegate database access based on access 
control policies that leverage external context such as SOX, PCI-
DSS, and FFIEC compliance. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
135  
#5—Carl, the Compliance Executive, can now quickly identify all 
privileged users, review entitlements, and if necessary, de-provision 
obsolete users in order to pass your next enterprise IT audit. 
#4—Francine, the COO, can now easily ensure adherence to 
change control processes across the extended enterprise for all da-
tabases and even reconcile with the change ticketing system. 
#3—Larry, the new DBA, won’t have to call his predecessor, who 
is now serving eight years in the penitentiary for identity theft and 
attempted sale of your entire customer credit card transaction da-
tabase, to learn the new processes for database activity monitor-
ing (DAM). 
#2—Beth in Human Resources won’t be able to forward the entire 
company payroll ledger to WikiLeaks because the CEO didn’t tell 
her how great she looked today. 
#1—The IT department can still have the 35th annual birthday party 
next week for that payroll application that requires desktop admin 
rights, but no one knows where the source code is to make it more 
contemporary instead of replacing it outright. 
In the News 
You probably already saw in December of 2010 that a group called Gnosis 
hacked over one million rows of data from Gawker, claiming the organiza-
tion had some of the worst security they could have imagined. Gnosis 
gained access to their database in one day and even Gawker said in an in-
ternal memo that they were largely caught unprepared. 
Now for your own entertainment, you should see the Wall Street Journal 
blog of December 13, 2010, which shows that over 3,000 Gawker users 
had the password "123456" and 2,000 had the password "password". Eve-
ryone knows users often set poor passwords when left to their own de-
vices, but the chart presented in the Wall Street Journal blog really brings it 
to life. Gawker clearly didn't have adequate requirements for more com-
plex passwords. 
It's unclear how exactly Gnosis gained access to Gawker's database. They 
mention that there were a lot of vulnerabilities in outdated software. How-
ever, what is clear is their motivation: vengeance, and why Gawker was so 
easy to hack: lack of preparation.  

Chapter 8 | Applications, Databases, and Desktop Data Need Least 
Privilege, Too 
 
136  
Vengeance is such a powerful mission that it's created a plethora of music, 
movies, books, and even video games. In the movie Vengeance, a chef seeks 
vengeance for a violent attack on his family that left three dead. In real life, 
vengeance is not always so compelling; Gnosis sought vengeance because 
they were offended. 
Yup, that really is all it takes. Now think back to the last time you fired 
someone, they quit, or maybe you were the one leaving. How often was the 
departing employee bitter about something? 
Vengeance is easily ignited and when you're a member of the IT team with 
privileged access to IT systems and special skills, what else would possibly 
be your weapon of choice? Terry Childs, the former network administrator 
who was arrested on computer crimes in June 2008 for refusing to divulge 
the passwords to San Francisco’s FiberWAN system, is an example of how 
IT staff enacts vengeance. Gnosis is how hackers enact vengeance. IT sabo-
tage and penetration is how computer enthusiasts cause damage to those 
they will it on. 
So prepare for it. 
Why Give a DAM 
The lack of control of privileged database credentials continues to expose 
corporations to significant risk associated with insecurity and inaccuracy of 
the key data assets that drive business activities, decisions, and value. We've 
previously covered the six questions you should ask yourself if you should 
give a DAM, so now it's time to look a little deeper at the implications. 
Specifically, weak control of privilege credentials provides the opportunity 
for the insiders holding those credentials (or hackers who acquire them) to 
misuse their elevated privileges to steal or fraudulently manipulate data or 
simply introduce inaccuracies through human error. The consequences of 
these unauthorized actions can be severe for businesses, especially if the ac-
tivity goes undetected for a prolonged period of time. Secondarily, the 
compliance costs associated with proving to IT audit that adequate database 
controls around these privileged users are in place is high. 
The solutions currently available to corporations today are often times not 
entirely effective, and are expensive to purchase, deploy, and maintain. Cus-
tom-developed solutions that leverage the database’s native security and 
audit features are a common approach. These solutions are expensive to 
design, develop, maintain, and operate. DAM products on the market today 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
137  
are another alternative. These products provide tools to implement detec-
tive and preventative controls for DBAs; however, there are three key 
weaknesses in these products: 
1. The preventative capabilities are driven largely by policies involving 
rudimentary session attributes, access patterns, and activity thresh-
olds. These do not provide the capability to control activity on a 
fine-grained basis based on external context. 
2. The monitoring capability of many of these products does not pro-
vide the level of visibility into what is happening to data assets 
stored within the database, nor does it provide the activity detail 
needed to assess impact of the activity and remediate it if necessary. 
3. The products are expensive and complex to implement. 
DAM Value 
First, securing the database is critical. The database is where the business’ 
valuable data assets live, and is therefore most often the target of attack 
when it comes to frauds and data breaches. Controlling the users that hold 
elevated privileges on the database is critical to any data security effort. A 
complete solution to this problem must include the following: 
 
Effective Credential Management: Identifying privileged accounts 
across database infrastructure. Provisioning access to and privileges 
on those database systems based on business justification, and 
quickly de-provisioning access and privilege when justification no 
longer exists. 
 
Policy-Based Access Control and Privilege Delegation: Control systems 
based on the principal of least privilege. Privileges are delegated 
only when needed and authorized (need and authorization based 
on evaluation of external context such as a change ticketing sys-
tem), only for the duration to execute distinct authorized change 
activities. 
 
Activity Monitoring and Closed-Loop Reconciliation with Change Manage-
ment: Capture, review, and reconcile all activity executed by privi-
leged users against change ticketing to verify that the activity was 
authorized, followed change-management processes, and did not 
impact systems or business objectives negatively. 
 
Data Audit: Maintain a forensic audit repository of changes to key 
data fields, access to key data fields, or change of system configura-
tions and controls that protect those data assets. 

Chapter 8 | Applications, Databases, and Desktop Data Need Least 
Privilege, Too 
 
138  
 
Compliance Reporting: Compliance is a by-product of effective con-
trols. A solution must produce evidence that effective control is be-
ing maintained. 
Implementing Least Privilege for Databases 
Fundamentally, the implementation of least privilege for a database isn’t that 
different than implementing least privilege on a server. The difference is that 
the target is the specific database and associated commands (that is, select, 
view, copy, delete, etc.) executed by privileged users (DBAs) versus the sys-
tems administrator who needs to execute root-level commands.  
So, Figure 8-2 should look very familiar to you by now, as it effectively is the 
same architecture we’ve presented for physical and virtual servers. Now 
you are monitoring the DBAs access, enforcing database-specific access pol-
icy and DAM instead of the least privilege solution monitoring commands 
sent to the operating system, enforcing policies, and either elevating the 
privilege necessary for that command or not along with logging the associ-
ated keystrokes and events,. 
 
Figure 8-2. Architecture for database least privilege 
Controlling Your Privileged Database Users 
Implementing a least privilege solution for your databases will also ultimately 
deliver on the promise of best practices for: 
 
Managing privileged credentials: identifying and managing entitlements 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
139  
 
Enforcing policy: establishing and enforcing governance across the ex-
tended enterprise 
 
Monitoring and reconciling privileged activity: ensuring that no insider
hero turns into an insider villain 
 
Maintain a high-quality audit repository: for business intelligence or
remediation purposes 
 
Automate compliance reporting: for speed, ease, and lower costs when
time for proving compliance 
Weighing In 
Least privilege is a critical part in the security of all of a company’s assets. By
turning first to the insiders with access to databases, applications, and desk-
top data, organizations can make sure those closest to an enterprise’s sensi-
tive information are prevented from leaking or accidentally manipulating it.  
Let’s hear what our Insider Heroes have to say. 
Secure Sam: 
Protecting information from insiders is crucial to the security of an enter-
prise. Obviously, not all insiders are malicious—people make mistakes just
as much as they have intentions of pilfering corporate information from se-
cure databases. It’s crucial to prevent people within your organization from
sabotaging (whether accidentally or on purpose) your sensitive information
and this responsibility lies with you. As someone in a position of authority
over the IT resources in your enterprise, you must be the one to govern
the usage of these assets and the people who access them. Attention should
be focused first on the internal structure of security. A handle must first be
had on what goes on inside the walls of your individual enterprises, espe-
cially since it’s how insiders use their privileges that determines how easy it
is for outsiders to get in. Don’t allow users free access to assets—especially
when it comes to applications, databases, and desktops. You must secure
procedures to govern the usage of resources in your company. There really
is no other way to be compliant and secure. 
Least Privilege Lucy: 
By now you understand the concept of least privilege. You get why it’s im-
portant, and you know it’s an important step in securing your company’s IT
infrastructure. Least privilege helps mitigate so many security vulnerabilities 

Chapter 8 | Applications, Databases, and Desktop Data Need Least 
Privilege, Too 
 
140  
that it’s unwise to ignore it when making your plan for securing sensitive in-
formation. Especially when talking about databases and the data stored 
therein, companies take a huge risk by not monitoring and managing users’ 
access to such information. The chapter spelled out six of the most suscep-
tible vulnerabilities that least privilege can ease, and I whole-heartedly stand 
behind them. Too many times I’ve seen users misconfigure schemas and 
cause horrendous problems. Updates and application attacks are among the 
highest offenders, as well. It is so important for enterprises to be aware of 
the data in their systems, as well as to monitor the usage of said informa-
tion. Without constantly watching what is moving and how it’s moving, 
you’re turning your back on a glaring security problem. The same goes for 
the individuals who have access to your sensitive data. It’s paramount that 
they (along with their privileges) be monitored tightly. 
Compliance Carl: 
Compliance isn’t only beneficial because it helps you avoid hefty fines. It en-
sures security of IT resources and stability in information infrastructures. If 
your company is incapable of protecting its assets, a failed audit is only a 
matter of time. Unfortunately, that failed audit is the driver behind most 
companies’ security efforts. The deeper issue is damage to database infor-
mation, loss of resources, or theft. Insiders are a hugely contributing factor 
to the security of an enterprise’s data. All around are reports of breaches—
the devastating results of insiders whose privileges haven’t been reigned in. 
There are mandates preventing such breaches… a concept I feel most com-
panies forget. Compliance isn’t about paying the government money or hav-
ing to jump through more hoops to make Uncle Sam happy. Quite the op-
posite actually; compliance makes your information safe. It’s as simple as 
that. It’s also very black and white—either you’re following mandates or 
you’re not. One thing I’ve noticed in various companies is that least privilege 
is a common denominator to passing audits and following mandates. It’s a 
principle that helps your company be successful with security. Without fail. 
If a company has implemented a least privilege policy, they will be found 
compliant. Even better, they will be free from the devastating side effects of 
letting insiders run free. 
 

C H A P T E R 
9 
Security Does 
Not Equal 
Compliance 
 
“Expensive episodic compliance exercises are giving way to continuous 
cost-sustainable compliance processes.” 
—Ian Glazer, Gartner Inc. 
Analysts know better than any that compliance is not a checklist of policies 
to create, but instead a benchmark for the better integration of people, 
technology, and processes. Or at least, that’s what compliance rules and 
regulations should impel businesses to create.  The rules and laws of each 
individual company must be strict and consistent to ensure productivity, 
compliance, and security. These rules must be constantly monitored and 
updated by both a human resources (HR) rep that understands rank and 
privilege and IT administrators who can implement privileges based on the 
description given by HR. 
All too often though, management can mistake well-planned and executed in-
formation security architecture with satisfaction of compliance and regulatory 

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
142  
statutes. Unfortunately, nothing could be further from the truth. Great, or 
even good, security practices don’t always mean compliance, and vice versa. 
Satisfying compliance and regulatory mandates to the letter may still leave you 
vulnerable to security breaches, especially the dreaded insider attack that we 
have discussed at length throughout this book.  
This is another area where the intersection of human nature and technology 
becomes important and requires least privilege as a key success factor for es-
tablishing a compliant architecture. The principle of least privilege was devel-
oped more than 30 years ago by the United States Department of Defense 
(DoD). This principle “requires that each subject in a system be granted the 
most restrictive set of privileges needed for the performance of authorized 
tasks. The application of this principle limits the damage that can result from 
accident, error, or unauthorized use.” By eliminating administrator privileges 
from your environment, you are moving that environment toward one that 
fulfills this principle’s goals. You are at the same time going far toward fulfill-
ing the requirements of most of the current regulations, as almost all have 
some form of clause emphasizing fraud control and have identified “privileged 
access” as an area of higher risk by which fraud has been committed. 
GRC Demystified 
Every discussion around security and compliance brings up yet another ac-
ronym that must be dissected, analyzed, and demystified. In this case, the 
acronym is GRC and is the short form for governance, risk, and compliance. 
These three letters seem to have more events, budget dollars, companies, 
real and “marketectured” solutions, publications, bloggers, certifications, 
and water-cooler conversations than any other acronym (with perhaps 
FUD [fear, uncertainty, and doubt] as the exception, but that is the subject 
of another book).   
Let’s look at each of these areas individually for a better understanding of 
how they fit within your strategy. 
Governance 
Corporate governance ensures accountability across the extended enter-
prise. It facilitates staying competitive and satisfying ever-changing govern-
ment regulations while providing mechanisms and controls to reduce the in-
efficiencies that arise when individuals misuse privileges granted to them. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
143  
If You Can’t Change It, You Can’t Govern It 
A key aspect of corporate governance is ensuring that the changes decided 
by management are in fact enforced across every office and IT system de-
spite geographic, network, and operating system differences. This can be es-
pecially difficult for companies that grow through acquisition where newly 
acquired IT assets rarely match current corporate standards. Getting new 
policies rolled out and enforced to new acquisition assets can be extremely 
time consuming and tedious work but very necessary to maintain compli-
ance. Without these types of controls, companies face the dire conse-
quences already seen by the likes of Enron and MCI (formerly WorldCom). 
We have already discussed the intentional, accidental, and indirect misuse of 
privilege at length in all of the previous chapters. 
Implementing a privilege identity management (PIM) solution can significantly 
impact corporate governance accountability and change management in real-
time across the extended enterprise, as well as eliminate the misuse of privi-
lege across heterogeneous systems and virtualized, or even cloud-based, 
administrators. Any change to privileged access can be accomplished from a 
centralized console and pushed to every environment in real-time. All enti-
tlements and audit logs can also be reviewed on-demand and therefore your 
company can ensure governance mandates. 
Steps to Good Governance 
Managing and auditing corporate governance initiatives are an often-
overlooked area for executives and IT professionals. Reading any one of the 
thousands of business books that describe successful companies, you will 
uncover that it was their ability to react and pro-act to market changes at 
an enterprise level that allowed them to exceed market or competitive 
norms. Likewise, in those same books, you will find examples of failed com-
panies whose IT infrastructure actually prevented or inhibited their ability to 
enforce change across all employees.  
Audits for compliance are typically required, but extending this practice to 
real-time governance can be the difference between success and failure for 
companies in today’s ever-changing market climates.  
 
Making changes in who has privilege to do what on specific IT re-
sources (servers, desktops, network devices, virtual & cloud envi-
ronments) should be as simple as making a central policy change and 
having that propagated and enforced in real-time across the ex-
tended enterprise.  

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
144  
 
Implementing a PIM solution is the best first step in establishing this 
real-time corporate governance. 
Risk 
Risk is a very subjective subject. What is an acceptable level to one execu-
tive or company may be considered far too radical for another. We haven’t 
seen anything that can guarantee 100% safety when it comes to IT security, 
but we have seen some architectures that come close. So, at best, you can 
only hope to manage risk and the associated expectation around cost of 
protection versus cost of damage reparation.  
At some point in your life, you have probably heard the story about closing 
the barn doors after the horses have already left the stable and its corollary 
that “an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” The same can be 
said for dealing with insider threats and the types of solutions available today.  
 
Figure 9-1. Levels of insider threat mitigation solution 
Fundamentally, you will find three levels of insider threat mitigation solu-
tions (Figure 9-1) available to you: 
 
Credential Management: Vaulting of passwords and credentials to 
control who has access to what resources under what circum-
stances. On the positive side, you will know who was logged into a 
resource when a breach occurred, but the challenge with this tech-
nology is the lack of visibility into what they did once they were 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
145  
logged in. In this situation, you have eliminated users maintaining 
their own credentials and facilitate the access to IT resources 
through a web-based shared account password management 
(SAPM) solution. When the user desires access, they go to a specific 
web screen that then logs the user into the requested resource 
based on some recognized stored policy. The good news here is 
that in the event someone misuses that resource, you have a record 
of who was using it at the time of the breach. This is the equivalent 
of knowing who did the damage but not what they did. 
 
Session Management: In addition to managing credentials, some solu-
tions can also log everything done by individuals while logged into a 
resource. On the positive side, you will know who was there and 
what they did so that you can possibly remediate the damage, but 
the challenge with this technology is the inability to prevent the 
damage from being done in the first place. In this situation, you are 
building on password management with the addition of automatic 
logging of every event (or keystroke) to another server of what was 
done once someone is granted access to the resource. If harm does 
occur in this situation, then you not only know who did the harm 
but what they did, so you can “unwind” or fix what was done. 
 
Privilege Management: In addition to managing credentials and logging 
activities, this solution can also enforce policy at a fine-grained enti-
tlements level to ensure only those with proper authorization can 
do what they are attempting to do. On the positive side, you not 
only manage credentials and log transactions, you also prevent dam-
age from occurring by limiting the privileges to only those neces-
sary. In this situation, you are delegating privileges (system authori-
zations) to specific users based on defined, centralized corporate 
policy. This builds on session logging and delivers all of the previous 
value, but now limits the damage potentially done as it limits what 
authorizations are available based on policy. In effect, you have pre-
vented harm from being done and have a record of who attempted 
to do harm and what they attempted to do. 
Compliance: The Big C 
In a survey conducted by Unisphere Research, results showed that even 
though many DBAs are willing to assume much-needed security practices in 
their daily duties, there is an overwhelming communication disconnect be-
tween these data managers and the security and executive leadership re-
sponsible for the data security at the end of the day. 

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
146  
The report surveyed 761 members of the Professional Association for SQL 
Server (PASS) in September 2010. Behind human error, the most commonly 
cited challenges to database security are insider hacks and the abuse of 
privileges (44%). 
The key take away from the report is that there is a disconnect between 
what DBAs know needs to be done at the technical level versus the 
amount of support and awareness the executives on the business side actu-
ally give to them. 
Monitoring database access is part of the solution, but addressing the misuse 
of privilege requires going beyond that. It is just as essential to continually 
audit privileges to ensure that employees and partners only have access to 
the minimum amount of sensitive data necessary to perform their duties. 
This requirement for separation of duties is also a cornerstone of virtually 
all compliance regulations. 
One in five respondents “fears that their organization will experience a ma-
jor data breach over the coming months, but few are aware of the poten-
tial costs to their organizations.” Among those respondents that are aware 
of where data breaches have occurred, they cite “a pattern of inside abuse 
and errors.” 
Cloud Compliance Introduces New Issues 
One of greatest challenges for organizations leveraging cloud environments 
is demonstrating policy compliance. For many business functions that com-
monly run in the cloud, such as hosting web sites and wikis, it is often suffi-
cient to have a cloud provider vouch for the security of the underlying infra-
structure. However, for business-critical processes and sensitive data, it is 
absolutely essential for organizations to be able to verify for themselves that 
the underlying cloud infrastructure is secure. 
The use of virtual machines adds further complexity into the mix, since cre-
ating an identity for an individual virtual machine and tracking that virtual 
machine from creation to deletion can be challenging for even the most ma-
ture virtualized environments. Proving that the physical and virtual infra-
structure of the cloud can be trusted becomes even more difficult when 
those infrastructure components are wholly owned and managed by exter-
nal service providers. 
Cloud providers must be able to demonstrate that they have tested and can 
ensure that privileged user access is controlled and monitored. For instance, 
ISO/IEC 27001 requires an organization to create an information security 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
147  
management system (ISMS). This enables an organization to use a risk-based 
approach to identifying and satisfying all compliance requirements, justify the 
selection and implementation of controls, and provide measurable evidence 
that the controls are operating effectively. 
Organizations that claim to have adopted the ISO 27001 standard can 
therefore be formally audited and certified compliant with the standard. It is 
already fairly well known and accepted outside of the US and is slowly gain-
ing awareness and acceptance within the US. ISO 27001 requires that man-
agement: 
1. Systematically examine the organization’s information security risks, 
taking account of the threats, vulnerabilities, and impacts; 
2. Design and implement a coherent and comprehensive suite of in-
formation security controls and/or other forms of risk treatment 
(such as risk avoidance or risk transfer) to address those risks that 
are deemed unacceptable; and 
3. Adopt an overarching management process to ensure that the in-
formation security controls continue to meet the organization’s in-
formation security needs on an ongoing basis. 
When appropriate, organizations should also ask for a commitment from 
providers to meet regulatory standards such as the Payment Card Industry 
(PCI) Data Security Standard (DSS), Health Insurance Portability and Ac-
countability Act (HIPAA) in the US, and the EU Data Protection Directive. 
Alphabet Soup 
In the United States alone, there are over 300 federal agencies that have 
posted tens of thousands of regulations that need to be traversed, under-
stood, and acted upon in order to maintain compliance. The US government 
has a web site, regulations.gov, that not only lists the regulations but has a 
dedicated page to list “Regulations with Comment Periods Coming Soon” 
to make sure you don’t miss any reporting deadlines.  
Unfortunately, there are more acronyms here than permutations available 
for uniqueness. So, you need to be careful when someone talks about an ac-
ronym in a conversation. For example, when talking about PCI, you need to 
determine if they are referring to the Payment Card Industry Data Security 
Standard or Peripheral Component Interconnect standard for hardware ex-
pansion bus communication.  

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
148  
Let’s look a little closer at some of the more visible regulations that are es-
pecially affected by least privilege or the lack thereof. To illustrate, we will 
do a deep dive on HIPAA to show how details of a regulation can some-
times be a bit tricky, then highlight some of the other regulations to point 
you in the right direction. There are many other resources available to take 
you through the details of each and every regulation and we didn’t feel this 
book was the appropriate place for that. 
HIPAA 
In 1996, the Department of Health & Human Services set the rules for pro-
tection of individually identifiable health information under the Health Insur-
ance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).  
The majority of HIPAA’s requirements that relate to IT systems are con-
tained within section 45 CFR 164, commonly known as “the final rule.” This 
final rule outlines HIPAA’s guidance associated with the integrity, availability, 
and privacy of ePHI. It also outlines guidance associated with authentication 
to and access control within systems that contain ePHI data, as well as the 
requirements for auditing such systems. The following list highlights Infor-
mation about that guidance: 
 
Integrity of ePHI Data—45 CFR 164.312(c)(1), (2), & (e)(2)(i): Techni-
cal controls must be implemented that protect ePHI from improper 
alteration or destruction until it is disposed. 
 
Availability of ePHI Data—45 CFR 164.308(a)(7)(ii): Procedures must 
be established and implemented that create and maintain retrievable 
and exact copies of ePHI data. Also, procedures must be established 
and implemented to restore any lost data. 
 
Authentication to ePHI Data Systems—45 CFR 164.312(d): Systems 
and/or procedures must be established that verify the person or en-
tity seeking access to ePHI data is the one claimed. 
 
Access Control in ePHI Data Systems—45 CFR 164.312(a)(1), (2), & (3): 
Systems that contain ePHI data must allow access only to those per-
sons or software programs that have been granted access rights. 
Unique IDs must be assigned for identifying and tracking users. Ses-
sions must be terminated when they have become inactive. 
 
Audit of ePHI Data Systems—45 CFR 164.308(a)(5)(ii)(c) & 164.312(b): 
Technical controls must be implemented that record and examine 
the activity in ePHI data systems as well as procedures that monitor 
logins and report discrepancies. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
149  
The widespread distribution of administrator rights in an organization is at
direct odds with these requirements. Such is the case because administrator
rights enable complete and unrestricted access to an entire system for the
specified user. Additionally, with administrator rights, users can alter system
records and generally subvert the requirements for tracking users who ac-
cess information.  
So, where do HIPAA, admin rights, and least privilege intersect? 
As with other compliance regulations, HIPAA’s guidance revolves around
the protection of personal data through the implementation of technical
controls. The controls also protect that data from corruption or change
through established systems that enforce data integrity. IT organizations are
also charged with implementing a set of “controls” that restrict the actions
of users to just those tasks required by their job roles. Further, when users
actually work with business systems, their activities must be monitored and
logged into a verifiable database. This task would be easy if it were natively
supported by the Windows operating system. Although not explicitly stated,
it is generally accepted that a central goal of HIPAA as well as every other
industry, governmental, and regulatory compliance statute is the implemen-
tation of least privilege.  
We discussed at length how least privilege is more than simply eliminating
administrator rights. Least privilege can more broadly be described as the
intersection of the user’s role in the organization, the overarching corpo-
rate security policy of that organization, and the tasks that are available to
be accomplished within the IT infrastructure. In effect, an environment that
fulfills the requirements of least privilege will be very granularly capable of
providing access to each person based on their needs. 
PCI DSS 
Another key regulation is the Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security
Standard (DSS), which is a set of comprehensive requirements for enhancing
payment account data security in an effort to thwart the theft of sensitive
cardholder information. The core group of requirements is as follows: 

Build and maintain a secure network  

Protect cardholder data  

Maintain a vulnerability management program 

Implement strong access control measures  

Regularly monitor and test networks; 

Maintain an information security policy 

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
150  
On October 28, 2010, the PCI Security Standards Council (SSC) unveiled 
version 2.0 of the PCI DSS. Until then, PCI DSS had not had an update since 
version 1.2 in October 2008. The recent “Summary of Changes” document 
released by the PCI SSC covers the proposed changes in version 2.0, and as 
experts expected, few alterations were made between the summary and the 
final release. 
However, one important area to note in the new version is in the PCI DSS 
Intro and Various Requirements section. In this section, the focus is on vir-
tualization, and though minor, it expands the definition of system compo-
nents to include virtual components. This addition should alert enterprises 
to begin assessing their security policies to virtual servers and desktops in 
their IT environment.  
Organizations moving their physical server infrastructure onto virtual plat-
forms for cost savings are finding their virtual hosts and guests are now 
open to new security and non-compliance risks. Attaining least privilege 
user posture in virtualized desktop and server environments is challenging 
and customers are consistently forced to make compromises on security in 
favor of cost-savings. 
Remember, the PCI DSS has never been a compliance program. It is a stan-
dard baseline for assessing compliance that the five major card brands (Visa, 
MasterCard, American Express, Discover, and JCB) agreed to use as the 
foundation for their actual, individual compliance programs. At the end of 
the day, each of the five major card brands still retains final say on compli-
ance and can implement their own compliance requirements over and above 
the PCI DSS (and Payment Application Data Security Standard [PA DSS]) 
when or if they see fit.  
The Cost of SOX Is Declining? 
No, we’re not talking about socks that protect your feet; we’re talking 
about the government regulation that most of you are worried about. 
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) was enacted in 2002 to counter a number of major 
corporate and accounting scandals and establish a set of public accounting 
reforms and investor protection mandates. 
Protiviti released a new study in the spring of 2011 on the effectiveness and 
costs of SOX compliance with a number of interesting insights for IT man-
agers who are concerned about the effectiveness and costs of their IT con-
trols. The overall results are encouraging.  

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
151  
 According to Protiviti’s 2011 SOX Compliance Survey, the cost of SOX 
compliance is declining and most participants believe the benefits of the con-
trols outweigh the costs. Now we are little skeptical that all of the compa-
nies surveyed are including the full impact of SOX controls on IT costs, es-
pecially since less than 50% track and report the hours and costs of compli-
ance. I suspect some companies have just gotten comfortable that some of 
the activities they added are just part of a new normal. Sort of like the 
metaphor of a slowly boiling frog not jumping out of the pot. 
Nevertheless, the way companies are approaching the continuous improve-
ment in their SOX controls is telling. They are simultaneously reducing costs 
and increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of operations by following a 
number of key strategies: 
 
Using the COSA framework to define best practices. COBIT would 
provide a similar framework for IT. 
 
Increase use of automated controls and continuous monitoring in-
cluding a shift to preventative rather than detective controls. 
 
Use of data mining and analytics to increase understanding of proc-
ess performance. 
 
Consolidating IT processes, platforms, and systems. 
These are all things IT can embrace and as a strategic vendor of compliance 
and security solutions to the enterprise, things we should and can help our 
customers with. Implementing least privilege across physical, virtual, and 
cloud-computing environments can also add to these savings. 
Privilege Security Requirements 
Banks, insurance companies, and other institutions are faced with the 
monumental task of managing authorization to mission-critical systems. 
These organizations have large numbers of internal and external users ac-
cessing an increasing number of applications, with each user requiring a dif-
ferent level of security and control requirements. In addition, these organi-
zations must also address identity management concerns that arise from 
compliance issues related to such regulations as SOX, HIPAA, and PCI DSS. 
High administrative costs due to account maintenance, password resets, 
inconsistent information, inflexible IT environments, silos due to mergers 
and acquisitions, and aging IT infrastructures make this even more chal-
lenging for organizations. Together, these factors are propelling the adop-
tion of least privilege solutions across all industries. A least privilege archi-
tecture framework should consist of four continual stages running under a 
centralized automated platform: access to privileged resources; control of 

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
152  
privileged resources; monitoring of actions taken on privileged resources; 
and remediation to revert changes made on privileged IT resources to a 
known good state:   
 
Access: Access includes the process of centrally provisioning role-
based time-bound credentials for privileged access to IT assets in or-
der to facilitate administrative tasks. The process also includes auto-
mation for approval of access requests and auditing of access logs. 
 
Control: Control includes the process of centrally managing role-
based permissions for tasks that can be conducted by administrators 
once granted access to a privileged IT resource. The process also 
includes automation for approval of permission requests and audit-
ing of administrative actions conducted on the system. 
 
Monitor: Monitor includes audit management of logging, recording, 
and overseeing user activities. This process also includes automated 
workflows for event and I/O log reviews and acknowledgements 
and centralized audit trails for streamlined audit support and height-
ened security awareness. 
 
Remediation: Remediation includes the process of refining previ-
ously assigned permissions for access and/or control to meet secu-
rity or compliance objectives, and the capability to centrally roll 
back system configuration to a previous known acceptable state if 
required. Automation of the privileged access management lifecycle 
includes a central unifying policy platform coupled with an event 
review engine that provides control for and visibility into each 
stage of the lifecycle. See figure 9-2. 
 
Figure 9-2. Risk Lifecycle. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
153  
Case Study: Using Least Privilege to Meet 
Compliance 
DCI (www.datacenterinc.com), headquartered in Hutchinson, Kansas, is a 
premier developer of innovative core bank processing software and related 
technology serving hundreds of banks nationwide. DCI was founded by 
community bankers in 1963, and remains privately owned by several clients, 
with customers serving on their Board of Directors.  
The corporation delivers technology solutions that allow banks to prosper 
and thrive. Because of the nature of the company and the services it pro-
vides, heavy IT support is necessary for the deletion, migration, and back-up 
of large amounts of sensitive data. 
Dale Martinson, manager of systems and security at DCI, is responsible for 
managing the company’s ever-increasing IT demands, including ongoing sup-
port for these procedures. To ensure the ability to support DCI’s long-term 
strategic growth, Martinson and his staff performed a comprehensive evalua-
tion of the IT infrastructure, including its safeguards and security functions. 
The internal audit incorporated access-related areas such as reviewers, us-
ers’ access rights, password rotation policies, and access history. The pri-
mary goals were to assess the situation and implement a solution that could 
be efficient and continue to comply with rigid financial industry regulations 
(such as SOX, PCI DSS, and GLBA). 
“DCI is a very technical business, with many people requiring access to sen-
sitive areas. Additionally, the majority of our 1,300+ users require multiple 
access rules and policies that impact our entire IT environment including, 
what specific areas can be accessed or when, during a specified time of day. 
Managing these policies manually was very time consuming and required 
cumbersome report consolidation. We agreed that we needed a solution to 
securely automate privileged access, reporting, and password management 
lifecycles across multi-platforms,” said Martinson. 
DCI selected a PIM solution following months of extensive review and 
analysis. The company sited regulatory compliance, ease of deployment, and 
scalability and flexibility of solution as the main purchase points. With this 
solution, DCI is able to: 
 
Automate the management of users/applications with authorized 
access to critical data 
 
Automatically purge unused user IDs and access rights from the 
system 

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
154  
 
Generate reports to demonstrate compliance with a wide range of 
federal regulations 
The Demand of Compliance Versus the 
Ease of Open Source 
Ah, open source software! What better way for developers and administra-
tors to reduce costs and speed the deployment of new functionality across 
the extended enterprise? If we are talking about least privilege, then we 
should revisit a subject bought up in Chapter 5 and that is Sudo.  
What better way for IT admins to eliminate the proliferation of the root 
password throughout IT and development organizations? What better alter-
native to using root accounts to perform routine maintenance on UNIX and 
Linux systems? Just grant users the proper permissions in the local Sudoers 
files and you’re in business. Oh, and the utility is free. What’s not to love? 
Now consider the compliance implications. Using Sudo for privilege man-
agement is like using a fish net to protect the fish in your pond from escap-
ing. While it will catch most, there will always be holes big enough for 
something to escape. 
As it turns out, deploying Sudo isn’t as trouble-free as it may seem. Sure, 
Sudo is a far better practice than the rampant use of root, but that’s not ex-
actly the bar against which any security professional should be measuring in-
ternal IT processes. 
One of the problems with Sudo is the ease with which it can be deployed 
haphazardly, without a lot of forethought, to address a particular day’s privi-
lege challenges. Mary needs to manage the office printers. John needs to re-
set passwords for people in the business unit he supports. Janice needs to 
perform server maintenance. The admin that restricts access to the root 
password without a ready alternative will become popular indeed, and not 
in a good way. 
Enter Sudo as that ready alternative. Privileges can be granted quickly, inde-
pendently, and with minimal effort. But before you know it, one privilege 
request processed on top of another leads to a hodgepodge of poorly main-
tained Sudoer files, all hosted on local servers with local log files and no 
audit trail to speak of. Better than the proliferation of the root password? 
Sure, but by how much? 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
155  
Now consider more compliance implications. Many companies have stan-
dard compliance policies for Sudo, most of which require routine inspec-
tions of each Sudoer file to ensure that permissions granted to each user 
are appropriate. Not an easy task when the server count is in the hundreds 
or more. Many organizations find that a spot check of Sudoer files reveals 
permissions for users who have long since left the company—a guaranteed 
audit violation. 
In reality, there is no substitute to carefully creating a privilege delegation 
strategy and designing a rollout plan that ensures security and compliance 
while minimizing the impact on users. While this can be done with Sudo just 
as it can with commercial tools, the fact is that commercial tools provide 
better guardrails around deployment and more sophisticated native features, 
such as encrypted logging and centralized policy stores, for enabling security 
protections and ease of maintenance. And the most robust ones provide an 
easy path to proving compliance, a challenge most administrators of Sudo 
deployments find all too formidable. 
Walk on the Wild Side of a Failed Audit 
We couldn’t resist the homage to classic rock. Hopefully, you are familiar 
with the Lou Reed classic “Walk on the Wild Side” off of his 1972 Trans-
former album.  If not, then check it out if you want a slice of New York in 
the late 1960s and early 1970s. 
The reason we are using it as a metaphor in our chapter on compliance and 
security is because when we were talking with an IT auditor about compli-
ance and failed audits in July 2011, this tune was playing in the background. 
Lou was singing “everybody had to pay and pay; a hustle here and a hustle 
there...hey babe, take a walk on the wild side” while we chatted about the 
right, wrong, and wild side of the dreaded audit. 
 
The Right Side: “You should have seen him go go go”—If you start by 
leveraging the resources available at SANS and ISACA, then you will 
be able to identify specific regulations pertinent to your audit re-
quirements and what is necessary to ensure passing. 
 
The Wrong Side: “Everybody had to pay and pay”—Ignorance is not 
an effective defense of against a failed audit. Failed audits are be-
coming much more commonplace as technology facilitates better 
review of identity and access entitlements as well as user and ad-
ministrator activities.  
 
The Wild Side: “A hustle here and a hustle there”—Now we enter 
the danger zone. Implementing partial solutions or still relying on 

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
156  
“trusted users/administrators” can deliver mixed results when the 
auditors do their thing. Decisions like using open source versus li-
censed software or if logging constitutes protection can have dra-
matic differences from one auditor to the next. 
Ultimately, in a discussion on compliance and security, it is important to 
recognize that at the intersection point is the auditor. Most of your deci-
sions regarding both security and compliance will be predicated to some de-
gree on how you perceive your auditor will react and then consciously 
choose to be on the right, wrong, or wild side.  
Case Study: Satisfying Auditing Challenges 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center was created by the 
Texas Legislature in 1941 as a world-leading institution for cancer treatment 
and care. In 2008 alone, nearly 1,000,000 people turned to MD Anderson 
for cancer care in the form of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and 
immunotherapy. Four out of the past six years, MD Anderson has ranked 
the number one in cancer care in the “America’s Best Hospitals” survey 
published by US News & World Report. 
MD Anderson’s world-famous cancer treatment facilities are backed by a 
powerful and secure UNIX network infrastructure that provides support to a 
faculty and staff of both MDs and PhDs numbering over 20,000. This network, 
which hosts in excess of 500 UNIX servers, houses confidential patient in-
formation and several critical financial and healthcare applications, all key to 
providing the level of service and expertise associated with MD Anderson. 
With the HIPAA requirement deadlines quickly approaching, and critical pa-
tient care dependent on the reliability of network computer systems, the 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, located in Houston, 
needed to find a secure way to manage and protect its IT infrastructure. 
Through a combination of inside systems expertise and outside software 
technology, security was able to not only meet current demands, but also 
prepare for future threats and requirements. 
When David Nester came on board as the UNIX security architect at MD 
Anderson, he was charged with developing UNIX and web security for the 
institution’s massive information network. Of particular importance for 
Nester were access control, authorization, root delegation, and auditing ca-
pabilities of the network. “The previous UNIX environment was not cen-
tralized, and it was difficult to understand what activities were being per-
formed at each machine,” says Nester. “I was assigned the challenge of plac-
ing controls back into the hands of our system administrators.” 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
157  
Nester knew that a strong IT infrastructure was vital to supporting the pa-
tient care services and overall mission of the institution. “The ability of our 
systems to operate effectively can substantially affect the critical medical 
care provided here at MD Anderson,” says Nester. “If something were to 
go wrong, we would not have the luxury of time because people’s lives are 
at stake.” 
MD Anderson selected a least privilege solution to sit on top of their UNIX 
servers and provide security and accountability by enabling systems adminis-
trators to delegate administrative privileges and authorization without dis-
closing the powerful root password. Other administrative tasks such as sys-
tem programs mounting, performing backups, and adding new users can be 
delegated to individuals or groups at a granular level, thus reducing the risk 
of intentional or accidental damage. Additionally, it also grants granular user 
access to files, directories, and third-party applications and accounts (such 
as Oracle, SAP, and so forth). 
Nester admits that he has noticed a significant correlation between the se-
curity enhancements provided by their server least privilege solution and re-
turn on investment in the form of system reliability. “[Our least privilege so-
lution] allows us to tie the uptime of our environment directly to business 
productivity,” says Nester. 
In addition to granting delegated access across their network, it provided 
extensive auditing and logging features. This functionality provides a full 
audit trail of all actions occurring in important accounts such as root. Main-
taining a complete audit trail of administrative actions now provides system 
administrators at MD Anderson with the ability to track exactly which ac-
tions have been undertaken by which users, when, and on which machines. 
Nester was particularly impressed with the off-site logging capabilities of the 
solution as well. Prior to implementing the software, logging and auditing 
capabilities at MD Anderson were maintained on the individual machines for 
which the activity was being recorded. Nester says this was a significant se-
curity risk because it allowed hackers or internal users to manipulate re-
cords or erase evidence of system activity. “No other application allows you 
to have the audit replay ability like PowerBroker for Servers,” says Nester. 
“Now I don’t have to retrieve logs from each individual machine. The cen-
tralization is really powerful and cost effective.” 
Paralleling other healthcare institutions, MD Anderson is also faced with 
the daunting task of ensuring that all critical systems are HIPAA–compliant. 
Enacted by the US Congress in 1996, HIPAA establishes national standards 
intended to ensure privacy in electronic healthcare transactions. Security 

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
158  
architects at MD Anderson have taken the opportunities provided by HI-
PAA to make sure their systems maintain all appropriate levels of security 
and privacy, while balancing security, productivity, and compliance. 
Balancing Security, Productivity, and 
Compliance 
If you regularly incorporate least privilege into your GRC discussions as 
you’ve seen in the MD Anderson case study, you will find that, when it 
comes time for the auditors to do their job, it will go much smoother than 
without. 
As new security breaches continue to come to light almost daily, stricter 
compliance requirements are being put into place. Access control rules are 
being regulated and IT configurations are being mandated. The debate of se-
curity versus usability continues to be a hot topic, and the bottom line is al-
ways at the forefront of every decision. What can an enterprise do to be 
sure a costly audit won’t derail the company? Follow these three steps to 
good IT health: 
1. Start by eliminating administrator rights for all users who don’t need 
them for tasks directly related to their job description thus remov-
ing the ability for inside data breaches (whether intentional, acciden-
tal, or indirect). 
2. Have clear and separate duties for each user. With distinctive objec-
tives about what each employee requires in order to do their re-
spective jobs, the privileges allowed to each person will accurately 
correspond to the amount of privileges they need. 
3. Don’t immediately expect a “pass” on your first audit after imple-
menting a least privilege solution. You cannot implement a least 
privilege policy and assume you’re compliant. You need to continu-
ally audit privileges as work roles, new employees, and new data 
emerge and change. 
Human nature once again is at play, so constant diligence is required across 
the extended enterprise. Implementing some form of identity and access 
management infrastructure isn’t just a “nice to have.” It’s necessary. Once 
we accept this and make a place for it in our enterprises, the result will be a 
healthier, more secure, and more cost-effective IT environment  

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
159  
The Tradeoffs Between Security and
Productivity 
Since it’s hard to analyze the tradeoffs between security and productivity, IT
organizations can fall back on gut feel, rules of thumb, and past practices in
making these decisions. The easiest answer is frequently to just follow the
rules and regulations so you remain in compliance with industry regulations
or current policies. As a result, compliance becomes a substitute for secu-
rity. But are they really equal? Does being in compliance mean you have a
secure IT environment? 
We see a number of major challenges when staying in compliance is substi-
tuted for a well-thought-out IT security strategy. First, compliance-oriented
policies tend to be backward–looking, making sure that past problems don’t
reoccur but do little to help anticipate new threats. Compliance also focuses
on process rather than results, in many cases with a heavy emphasis on re-
cord keeping. And focusing on compliance can stifle innovation because new
security techniques are needed to deal with new technical approaches. 
Now don’t get us wrong. Staying in compliance is a good thing to do. It’s es-
sential in many businesses. And the rigor that comes with staying in compli-
ance is a necessary element of good security strategy. Maintaining SAS 70
Type II compliance, for example, lets everyone in the organization know
that key processes are important and gives everyone an independent per-
spective of whether an organization is doing what they say they are going to
do. And while it’s often joked about, a compliance mandate often pays the
bills for real security. If that’s what it takes to upgrade key infrastructure,
that’s good too. 
But it’s clear that compliance doesn’t equal good security. According to Jim
Jaeger, director of DoD & Commercial Cyber Solutions for General Dy-
namics Advanced Information Systems, “virtually every breach we investi-
gate, that company has been certified as being compliant within the last
year.” And at its worst, Jaeger sees that “these compliance regimes give
people an incredible false sense of security.” 
So while compliance is a great way set a minimum bar for security policies,
you still need to take into account the real value of your data and the
threats that face your industry and particular business. So we are back to
having to do that difficult analysis on the real costs and benefits of security.
And while there is no simple answer, there may be a different way to frame
the problem. Can you implement security in a way that enhances productiv-
ity? Wouldn’t that be great! The good news is that implementing a PIM solu-
tion can mitigate most of these trade-offs.  

Chapter 9 | Security Does Not Equal Compliance 
 
160  
So, be wary of how proud your CEO can be with a bit of paper saying your 
company has met compliance requirements. As we’ve shown repeatedly in 
this chapter, the majority of data breaches were from companies who were 
compliant. Clearly the intersection of productivity, security, and compliance 
is a delicate balance that requires constant diligence, and of course that 
starts with the implementation of least privilege. 
Weighing In 
The balance between governance, compliance, and risk has always been a 
conversation that merits significant attention. In the world of IT security, all 
three of those are topics that must be addressed. Without one, the others 
will ultimately fail; therefore, appropriate time should be spent on the im-
portance of each. The chapter outlined a lot of these, but let’s hear opinions 
from our experts: 
Secure Sam: 
Governance is a crucial part of enterprise security. The rules and mandates 
must be decided on, and each of those must be enforced. This can be a very 
tricky thing—especially when geographical locations and political opinions 
get in the way. Particularly when it comes to least privilege, the concept of 
managing privileged access for people in different areas and with different 
perceptions of what they should be allowed to do can be complicated. Both 
from a logistical standpoint as well as from the stance that you don’t want 
to completely upset all employees, there are definitely things to consider 
when governing least privilege in an organization’s security plan. Being able 
to monitor and manage privileged identities, however, more than makes up 
for the challenges. The key is to follow the steps to good governance out-
lined—specifically the first one listed. It’s vital to make changes in privileged 
access using a central policy change. Changing it centrally and then having it 
propagated and enforced across an extended enterprise solves the problem 
of geographic stipulations.  
Least Privilege Lucy: 
As the chapter pointed out, risk is a very subjective subject. The thing is, 
however, that certain behaviors and patterns always pose a threat and a 
risk to any given enterprise. For example, allowing all users access to sensi-
tive data. This will always put your company at risk for a data breach. If the 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
161  
insider using his credentials to access said information doesn’t manipulate 
or steal data, someone from the outside can easily hijack those credentials 
and take care of the crime instead. Therefore, to reduce the risk of such a 
catastrophic IT event, appropriate credential management is necessary. 
With changing job descriptions, new hires, and employees who either leave 
or are dismissed, functions change frequently. In order to mitigate these 
changes and avoid potential data travesties, managing privileges is crucial.  
Compliance Carl: 
I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again—compliance isn’t just about avoiding 
government fines. It’s about protecting sensitive information and data within 
any given organization. Because different industries have different types of 
information and varying standards of security, there are multiple mandates 
that indicate how compliance is measured. Some of them, such as HIPAA, 
are based on protecting personal data with technical controls. Others, like 
PCI DSS, enhance payment security to help consumers avoid identity theft. 
The important thing to remember with these mandates is that they ulti-
mately make your organization secure. The best way to do this is through a 
least privilege solution. Specifically, limiting access to sensitive IT resources 
while controlling and monitoring the use of data.  


C H A P T E R 
10 
The Hard and 
Soft Cost of 
Apathy 
 
“By far the most dangerous foe we have to fight is apathy—indifference 
from whatever cause, not from a lack of knowledge, but from careless-
ness, from absorption in other pursuits, from a contempt bred of self 
satisfaction.” 
—William Osler, Founding Professor at Johns Hopkins Hospital 
To understand the cost of apathy in relation to breaches and least privilege, 
we must first understand that how we manage risk impacts human behavior. 
If we box people in by removing all privileges, they will feel suffocated and 
likely rebel or withhold. If we give too many privileges, people will either 
feel scared of screwing up and breaking something, or take full advantage of 
their privileges and abuse the system. The key is to give them what they 
need, when they need it, and only then will they will feel safe enough to do 
their job well. 

Chapter 10 | The Hard and Soft Cost of Apathy 
 
164  
The primary theme of “good people can do bad things” cannot be over-
looked here. Every example presented thus far in this book has magnified 
the unpredictable nature of human nature and its impact on your security, 
compliance, and productivity. The representative insider threats introduced 
in Chapter 2 as “Disgruntled Dave,” “Accident Prone Annie,” and “Identity 
Thief Irene” are right now sitting inside the perimeter of your extended en-
terprise. It’s just a matter of time before apathy leads to them causing 
measureable harm. 
So, why does the typical IT admin prefers to duck and cover when auditors 
or business executives come to gripe about why there are no controls on 
who can do what (auditors) or why everything is so locked down that work 
can’t be done at all, let alone efficiently (business executives)? 
Q: Why did the ostrich stick his head in the sand?  
A: To avoid danger (actually lowering its head in high grass instead 
of self burial in sand). 
Just avoiding the inevitable is never a good policy; you may as well just drop 
out, free your mind, and listen to Beatles records all day. For those admins 
looking to achieve the IT equivalent of Karmic Balance, then implementing a 
least privilege solution across desktops, servers, virtual, and cloud environ-
ments should be the next project on your to-do list. By implementing a least 
privilege solution, you will automatically facilitate the elevation (brokering) 
of admin privileges only when they are necessary in an auditable fashion that 
doesn’t require handing out root or admin credentials. 
If you keep up with current events, then you will find numerous examples 
of an over-privileged insider who misused their privilege to cost an organi-
zation millions of dollars—and reveal just how expensive your apathy can 
be/become. 
Lessons from Jérôme Kerviel 
A multi-billion dollar fraud from 2008 re-surfaced in the fall of 2010 in the 
news after a Paris court ordered Jérôme Kerviel, who engaged in over 1,000 
fraudulent transactions, to pay a full $6.7 billion in restitution for his risky 
trades and serve three years in prison.  
Forbes took their shot at what the events could teach us, which raised the 
compelling point that everyone is curious about—why is 100% of the blame 
being put on Jérôme? We don’t know if the bank did indeed support 
Jérôme’s risky trades, which were initially profitable. What we do know is 
that IT professionals have skills that are both useful and dangerous. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
165  
Kerviel came to the Societe Generale as a trader after being an IT worker at 
SocGen. ComputerWorld reports he used these skills to easily bypass the IT 
and process controls the bank put in place to detect fraudulent transactions.  
We do think the single takeaway the news should remind us of are that the 
IT skills that are both dangerous and useful can be found anywhere. Pro-
tecting the enterprise from those with the motive and expertise isn’t just a 
matter of mission-critical servers. The mindset that there will be those with 
access who have IT skills should be incorporated into security in everything 
we do. 
Cyber Crime Can Be Lucrative 
The economy of cyber crime is all too real—and too enticing. No longer 
sequestered to dark alleys and seedy bars, data thieves have almost unlim-
ited options to market their ill-gotten wares to potential buyers. What this 
means to employers and organizations: the temptation to access and “ap-
propriate” sensitive data may be too great for some to resist. 
Q: So just how difficult is it for cyber criminals to sell data? 
A: Shockingly easy. 
Although the sale of stolen information often takes place completely under-
ground in secret, closed to the public credit forums, people who want to 
join these groups can locate them quite easily. Once vetted by forum admin-
istrators to ensure they are not from law enforcement, they are invited into 
the network to market and distribute their wares. 
And individuals need not even proactively seek out to divest an employer of 
sensitive, valuable data. Today, recruiters actively target individuals with lo-
cal or specific data types—going so far as to even create job postings with 
criteria like “an established relationship with local banks” as a prerequisite 
for crime family consideration. 
The ease with which individuals can locate black market buyers of data 
should scare every employer who provides mid- to low-level access to any 
type of sensitive information. Like some bizarro-world eBay, many of these 
markets actually have incentive packages. Competing prices, additional serv-
ices, free trials, money-back guarantees, and terms and conditions are all of-
fered. Prices for data are qualified like any other commodity: data is priced 
based on the domain, if the account belongs to a real person, and how 
popular it is. It can depend on the number of followers, how commercial 

Chapter 10 | The Hard and Soft Cost of Apathy 
 
166  
the niche is, and if the data is real or bot-generated. Prices for online bank-
ing and payment systems depend on account verification. 
To make matters worse, the cyber-crime black market, which has tradition-
ally centered on distributing bank and credit-card details stolen from users 
around the world, has diversified its business model since 2010, and now 
sells a much broader range of hacked confidential information including bank 
credentials, logins, passwords, fake credit cards, and more. 
So, while CSOs struggle to combat an ever-evolving crime organization that 
morphs and changes in a nanosecond, it may be the guy in the cube next to 
you that is seeking to supplement his bank account that could exact the 
most damage to your database. 
How Much Is Your Code Worth? 
In Chapter 2 we discussed the former Goldman Sachs programmer accused 
of stealing source code to take to a competitor for a much higher annual sal-
ary and $700,000 bonus. The ultimate question for you is at what point will 
your trusted employees do the same with your corporate information as-
sets? When evaluating the cost of apathy you need to factor in the potential 
cost impact created when human nature defies legalities in favor of greed.  
Lessons from Matt Miszewski 
Arguably, former Microsoft employee Matt Miszewski is now a respondent in 
a recent motion filed against him for allegedly “retaining” some 600 MBs of 
sensitive and proprietary data. When he left the company to take up a posi-
tion at Microsoft rival Salesforce.com, he was motivated by considerably 
less—at least as far as his personal return was concerned. Obviously, it’s too 
early to pass judgment on such a case, or suggest that “retaining information” 
after leaving a company is just a posh way of saying stealing, but what we can 
do is comment on how Microsoft discovered Matt’s supposed infraction. 
Microsoft only discovered that the information had been taken as a result of 
due process in another, earlier case brought against Matt Miszewski. Mr. 
Miszewski had said he only took personal items with him when he left. Un-
der discovery rules, the document cache stored on his laptop was produced. 
Simply put, this means that if they had not filed suit against Mr. Miszewski, 
they would have been unable to verify the “retention” of the data. 
If we are to take 2011 Symantec/Ponemon Institute research seriously—
which indicates that 59% of employees surveyed who lost or left a job in 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
167  
2008 admitted to stealing confidential company information—then busi-
nesses should heed more attention to how they manage privileged access 
to sensitive data. Otherwise, they could be accused of aiding and abetting 
the theft by relying on trust alone. As our title suggests, he who holds the 
“over-privileged“ ladder is as bad as a thief. 
Whether via the desktop or from mission-critical servers, access to sensi-
tive data needs to be managed on a needs-only basis. Employees get access 
based on the privileges they need to do their job, not how privileged (sen-
ior) they may be within the company. 
One in 14 Can Cost You $129 Without 
Least Privilege 
A May 2011 PC World article about malicious code and downloaded soft-
ware reported “about one out of every 14 programs downloaded by Win-
dows users turns out to be malicious.” This didn’t come from some random 
blogger or disgruntled day trader. It came from Microsoft’s own research 
and, according to the article, “even though Microsoft has a feature in its In-
ternet Explorer browser designed to steer users away from unknown and 
potentially untrustworthy software, about 5 percent of users ignore the 
warnings and download malicious Trojan horse programs anyway.” 
So the bottom line is that people can potentially take advantage of admin 
rights by downloading software and will have a 1 in 14 chance of infecting 
their computer with malicious code. According the Gartner, Inc.’s report, 
The Cost of Removing Administrative Rights for the Wrong Users (T. Cos-
grove/April 2011), the primary difference between the two management 
profiles, “moderately managed” and “locked and well-managed,” is user 
rights. The moderately managed profile assumes administrative rights are 
granted, while the locked and well-managed profile has them removed. The 
cost difference between the two profiles is $653 annually. Interestingly, 90% 
of the cost savings associated with the locked-down user is realized by the 
user, not IT. The user will spend less time fixing his or her system and doing 
other administrative tasks, because the PC is better managed. 
Who’s To Blame? 
As we’ve waded through the hundreds of published insider breaches from 
just the last two years, what was a clear recurring theme was that of the 
vagaries of human nature. Not meaning to wax poetic, but it was always an 

Chapter 10 | The Hard and Soft Cost of Apathy 
 
168  
individual who misused their own, or some other insider’s, privileged ac-
cess authorizations to IT systems to their own devices and/or gains. That 
begs two questions: 
 
What sets these people on their path to misuse of privilege? 
 
Are they personally responsible or is the organization’s lack of con-
trols partially responsible as well? 
As we have pointed out many times—at the intersection of people, proc-
esses, and technology that make up the engine of modern business—it’s hu-
man nature that is the weakest link. And, all too often, it’s the tendency of 
almost the entire IT industry—vendors, analysts, and press—to ignore this. 
Put another way, you can’t rely on everyone being a saint or competent all 
of the time. It’s not just malicious malcontents intent on destroying the sys-
tem who can cause havoc, but also the negligent, misinformed, and down-
right nosey who can compromise sensitive data. In all cases, it’s more often 
than not the case that such people have way too much privilege access—
admin rights on the desktop, root password on the server—for the role 
they are required to play. 
Indeed, when technology is to blame, it’s not always the technology com-
pany’s use; it’s the failure to recognize the importance of technology, such 
as privileged identity management (PIM) systems, which can restrain over-
privileged users without hampering productivity, which is at fault. With in-
creasing costs arising from data breaches, including cleanup costs, as well as 
customer churn due to diminished trust, it makes sense not to rely on trust 
alone when it comes to employee and third-party access to sensitive data. 
Hard Versus Soft Costs 
All costs aren’t completely as obvious as these examples would suggest. Sim-
ply stated, the principle of least privilege means that a user must run with the 
least amount of privilege for the least being performed. And what does this 
mean for you? It means you should look closely at eliminating administrator 
rights from users who don’t absolutely need them, and elevate privileges for 
users who require them. Let’s take a look at a couple of scenarios that will 
better paint this picture and its relevance to hard versus soft costs: 
Scenario A: A user in your company needs to install an application, 
and your IT department is slammed (as usual) and won’t be able to 
help for several hours. Now that user can’t install the application 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
169  
necessary for their job function, which results in loss of work and 
overall production. 
Scenario B: A user in your company is operating with full administra-
tor rights, and is unfortunately a little too cavalier in their download 
habits. Because they are operating with admin rights, malware hi-
jacks their computer and enters your database. Now your IT de-
partment has to get involved to fix and debug your system, which is 
both expensive and time-consuming. 
Both situations color the importance of least privilege and further empha-
size how important it is to find the right amount of privilege for all end us-
ers. Scenario A is of course the soft cost example, while Scenario B is the 
hard cost example. Both can have measureable negative impact to your or-
ganization if you are looking out for signs of these scenarios and imple-
mented vehicles for accurate impact assessment. 
The Soft Cost of Identity Breaches 
Many of you have been a loyal customer of Wells Fargo for over a decade 
for lots of good reasons. But over the long President’s Day weekend in Feb-
ruary 2011, you may have received a call from them saying that one of the 
vendors you’ve paid recently has had a data breach and leaked your credit-
card information.  
They didn’t tell you which vendor it was, but it was pretty easy to figure it 
out based on the fact that they verified every recent purchase up to the one 
you could determine it was. 
This got us thinking about the “soft” costs of data breaches. Whether this 
breach was an insider or hacker, it must have cost a good chunk of cash to 
call thousands of customers and re-issue a card to each one. 
Then, we wonder how/if Wells Fargo punished this particular vendor. For 
some companies, relationships—even more so than data—are the most 
valuable asset they have and data breaches can put a lot of different rela-
tionships at risk. 
Case Study: Saving Help-Desk Costs 
Care New England, located in Providence, Rhode Island, was founded in 
1996 by Butler Hospital, Kent Hospital, and Women & Infants Hospital. Care 
New England is a not-for-profit healthcare system that offers a continuum of 

Chapter 10 | The Hard and Soft Cost of Apathy 
170  
quality care, including two teaching hospitals affiliated with the Warren
Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Butler and Women & Infants; a
community hospital, Kent; a visiting nurse and home care/hospice agency,
Care New England Home Health; and the Care New England Wellness Cen-
ter. Care New England’s strengths are based on complementary programs
and distinctive competencies of their partner hospitals to its partner hospi-
tals and agencies. 
Keith Lee, End User Support Manager for Care New England, manages op-
erations that provide end users with assistance for technical issues, which
include desktop maintenance and administration. Keith’s department sup-
ports over 4,800 desktops and over 10,000 desktop end users, including
over 250 applications such as Horizon. Many of the desktops include laptops
used by nurses in the field. The end users are dispersed all over the New
England community in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. 
The large coverage area needed for support, along with the challenges of
managing Horizon with all the other applications, created many challenges
for Keith Lee’s team. A substantial amount of help-desk calls were focused
around the need to have administrative rights to install applications or run
many applications that required such rights. At the time, the only solutions
available were to either send an IT tech to perform installations in person,
provide admin rights to users who need the privileged access to run appli-
cations, or give a user full administrative rights to perform installs or run
applications. 
“It took no time at all to realize that the options available at that time were
unacceptable,” said Keith. “Costs increased due to the rise in help-desk calls
and tech hours needed to perform simple installs. There were also several
security threats and compliance issues to Care New England.” 
Prior to installation, Keith’s team spent a week building an automated proc-
ess to test and migrate their policies into their selected least privilege solu-
tion. Initial deployment took only two weeks and Keith saw immediate
benefits and the ability to operate transparently to the 10,000+ end users
without pop-ups or consent dialogues. 
Since the installation of a desktop least privilege solution, help-desk calls
have decreased and users have the rights they need to safely install and run
applications necessary to perform their job. The selected least privilege so-
lution gives network administrators the ability to attach permission levels to
Windows applications and processes with ease. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
171  
“I believe that if Care New England had decided to use another solution, we 
would have been forced to increase help-desk personnel, which would re-
sult in higher costs and substantial security concerns,” said Keith.  
Trust Alone Is Not an Option 
At the RSA Conference in San Francisco in early 2011, we conducted a sur-
vey of over 111 IT professionals like you to find out if people trust their 
cloud vendors with their data. The findings were rather interesting: 
 
71% of respondents wouldn’t trust a cloud vendor with highly regulated 
data. Some participants even scoffed at the idea and the few who 
marked “yes” emphasized their wish for a “depends” option. If we 
can’t trust our cloud vendors, how can we get there? What needs 
to happen so we can put sensitive data in the cloud? Let’s keep go-
ing. 
 
60% of respondents don’t know or aren’t sure what their cloud vendors’ 
privileged access policies are. Cloud vendors need to provide this in-
formation to their clients, but they won’t unless customers ask for 
it. This is where customers of cloud vendors need to be more pro-
active. Set requirements for privileged access, ask questions, de-
mand reports, know their policies.  
 
At least 24% of respondents estimate that over 50 administrators have 
privileged access to their cloud-hosted data and 55% have no idea how 
many IT admins have privileged access. This is what makes privileged 
access from cloud vendors even more important—there’s more IT 
staff and they don’t work for your company. Is your cloud vendor 
doing what they can to limit the number of privileged access ac-
counts with access to your particular data? 
 
44% believe IT security has no influence or not enough influence in cloud 
vendor selections. Cloud vendors are in a business and IT security 
costs erode their revenue and force them to charge more. If their 
clients don’t see the value in security enough to make buying deci-
sions based on it, that makes it a good business practice for cloud 
vendors to glaze over security best practices. The best time to in-
vestigate your cloud vendor’s security reporting and practices is BE-
FORE you buy from them. 
 
61% of respondents have over $100 million worth of data on cloud-
hosted servers. No surprise here. Your data is priceless. It’s worth 
the security investment to protect it. One respondent said she 
wished there was an option for “priceless,” because some data is 
worth so much, you just can’t put a price on it. 

Chapter 10 | The Hard and Soft Cost of Apathy 
 
172  
 
36% of respondents have made some kind of efforts specifically for pre-
venting a leak to WikiLeaks at their organization. This is a bit off-topic 
from our cloud-centered survey, but it was interesting to see just 
how many organizations are really making an effort to prevent these 
emerging risks. Since WikiLeaks is primarily a risk only to very large 
organizations and is a reasonably new threat, the survey would indi-
cate that the IT security industry has picked up on it very quickly. 
In another survey that BeyondTrust conducted at the VMware show in San 
Francisco in the fall of 2010, over 55 respondents also had interesting things 
to say about trust in virtualized environments.  
Has your company virtualized mission-critical servers? 
Most of them: 21 (37%) 
Some: 32 (56%) 
None: 4 (7%) 
If one of your colleagues wanted to steal sensitive information from a mis-
sion-critical virtual server in the company, do you think they could? 
Yes: 28 (49%) 
Maybe: 14 (25%) 
No: 15 (26%) 
What do you think your colleagues would be willing to do to get their 
hands on $20 million dollars? 
Kill someone: 10 (17%) 
Chop off their own arm: 9 (15%) 
Jump into a water tank with a shark: 10 (17%) 
Lose their job and leave the country: 20 (35%) 
Leak information to a competitor: 20 (35%) 
Wear a tutu: 23 (40%) 
Steal data: 12 (21%) 
Bottom line observations from this survey include: 
1. Sensitive servers are prevalent in a virtualized environment  
2. Staff WOULD steal data for money and  
3. Staff CAN steal data and the problem is incredibly clear 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
173  
Calculating Your ROI for Least Privilege 
So you’ve decided to implement a PIM solution because you’ve realized that 
a least privilege environment is a perfect way to eliminate the misuse of 
privilege from your corporation, help satisfy ever-changing governance man-
dates, and deliver on-demand entitlement reports and keystroke logs to 
auditors when required.  
You’ve completed a comprehensive technical evaluation and gotten buy-in 
from all of the business stakeholders on cultural fit into the organization. 
Your final hurdle to overcome is a trip to the CFO to get a release on the 
budget required to procure and roll out across the enterprise. The only 
problem is that you know he is only going to respect your decision and ap-
prove the procurement if you can show a hard dollar savings and not just 
perceived soft productivity and compliance gains.  
To quote Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy: “DON’T PANIC!” Many compa-
nies, large and small, have already implemented a least privilege solution 
across servers, desktops, virtualized, and cloud environments. Literally 
thousands of companies like yours have already taken the plunge, eliminated 
admin rights from their IT systems, and have realized significant hard-dollar 
savings across IT administration, help desk, audit, and governance areas.  
Cost-Justifying Least Privilege 
Ultimately, cost-justifying a least privilege solution, or any IT solution for 
that matter, is very specific to the way your company recognizes and 
monetizes specific hard and soft costs. We’ve given you many techniques 
and examples in this chapter that you can model for your individual needs, 
but remember to put values on: 
 
Security: Privileged access is critical for smooth ongoing administra-
tion of IT assets. At the same time, it exposes an organization to se-
curity risks, especially insider threats. 
 
Compliance: Privileged access to critical business systems, if not man-
aged correctly, can introduce significant compliance risks. The ability 
to provide an audit trail across all stages of the least privilege solu-
tion is critical for compliance, and is often difficult to achieve in 
large, complex heterogeneous IT environments. 
 
Reduced Complexity: Effective least privilege solutions in large het-
erogeneous environments with multiple administrators, managers, 
and auditors can be an immensely challenging task. 

Chapter 10 | The Hard and Soft Cost of Apathy 
 
174  
 
Heterogeneous Coverage: An effective least privilege solution sup-
ports across a broad range of platforms, including Windows, UNIX, 
Linux, AS/400, Active Directory, databases, firewalls, and 
routers/switches. 
Weighing In 
As you’ve seen, there is a cost that can be applied to apathy in relation to 
breaches and least privilege. By now, you should understand that managing 
risk can impact human behavior if done incorrectly. Those you set up as 
“under-privileged” will feel suffocated and likely rebel or withhold. Those 
who are “over-privileged” will either feel scared of screwing up and break-
ing something, or take full advantage of their privileges and abuse the sys-
tem. Establishing a least privilege environment means the best of both 
worlds and creates the perfect balance. There are a lot of risks to letting in-
siders run free with mission-critical information. One of those risks is the 
cost it takes to mitigate a breach. It costs a lot of keep sensitive information 
secure, and least privilege is a way to keep those costs in check. Let’s hear 
from our heroes: 
Secure Sam: 
It can be difficult to govern something that is constantly moving. An IT envi-
ronment, as we’ve discussed in detail, is an ever-changing entity. People 
come and go, job descriptions change, and information filters in and out of 
the database. The thing that doesn’t change, however, is the security that 
must accompany it. Another thing that doesn’t change is the cost of keeping 
mission-critical data secure. Part of managing and governing a security plan, 
however, is identifying how to be secure AND cost-effective. Least privilege 
is the way to do that. By eliminating many of the reasons users need the 
help desk, the cost of keeping a company secure and compliant is an easy-
to-fix problem. Least privilege truly mitigates the risk of admin-related tasks 
gone wrong, and as the person in charge of making sure all things IT run 
smoothly, it makes my job a lot easier. 
Least Privilege Lucy: 
Sometimes taking risks can be a good thing. Like building a financial portfolio 
or going whitewater rafting with friends. Risk in your company’s IT envi-
ronment, however, is never a good thing. Putting sensitive information into 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
175  
the hands of accident-prone or malicious insiders is a terrible idea. You can-
not risk mission-critical information and put the security of your company in 
jeopardy. There are countless examples of organizations that have done this 
in the past year, and the results of their failure have been smeared all over 
the media. Because they took a risk and did not secure the inside perimeter 
of their enterprise, data was leaked and stolen. Information was made avail-
able to people with mal-intentions, and cyber criminals are growing all the 
more powerful. Because this is such a reality in the world today, organiza-
tions cannot risk allowing insiders the temptation to steal or manipulate 
sensitive information. That’s where least privilege is an effective solution. By 
giving only those who need admin rights access to information, in addition 
to closely monitoring data and the use of it, companies can mitigate the sig-
nificant risks associated with insiders and sensitive information. 
Compliance Carl: 
The idea of trust in an organization’s IT environment kind of makes me 
laugh. Trust is a great thing, but not plausible whatsoever when talking 
about the security of mission-critical assets. It’s amazing how many times 
trust is given when asked why certain users have advanced administrative 
rights. “They’ve been with the company for so long so I know they’re 
trustworthy” or “I trust them—they would never do anything bad” are just 
a couple of responses I’ve heard many times. That fact is this: even trust-
worthy and well-seasoned employees can have their credential hijacked or 
make mistakes. Sometimes they have malicious intentions that no one is 
aware of. There is really no way to know; therefore, all employees in any 
given company should be treated the same, and in a way that ensures infor-
mation is kept secure. Least privilege is the answer. In order to be com-
pletely compliant, users must only have access to the information they abso-
lutely need. This is especially true in a cloud setting, as there are oft-
uncontrolled variables at work. The bottom line is this: least privilege saves 
money, keeps information secure, and allows your corporation to remain 
compliant.  


C H A P T E R 
11 
Final Thoughts 
for Least  
Privilege Best 
Practices 
 
“Having a central view of all system administration reduces the costs 
of forensic investigation and allows for a faster response to security in-
cidents while improving the company’s ability to answer tough audit 
questions.” 
—Andras Cser, Forrester Research  
You’ve invested in information technology and the associated infrastruc-
ture, applications, databases, and peripherals to assist your company in be-
coming competitive, ease administration, and satisfy reporting and compli-
ance mandates. You’ve made decisions on physical servers and desktops. 

Chapter 11 | Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices 
 
178  
You’ve decided on what to virtualize for cost saving and improved capacity 
planning. You may have moved some of that infrastructure to a public, pri-
vate, or hybrid cloud infrastructure. You’ve hired an incredible team of 
employees and implemented IT security solutions to keep hostile outsiders 
from accessing your mission-critical systems. You’ve passed most, if not all, 
of your IT audits and have certificates to prove regulatory compliance. But, 
are you confident that you’ve avoided the potential of showing up in the 
next Wall St Journal article on insider breaches?  Have you prevented good 
people, trusted employees, from doing bad things, intentionally, acciden-
tally, or indirectly? 
Intent Versus Action 
Insider threats are a global phenomenon. Every company in every part of 
the world is subject to some level of insider threat. And guess what? Insider 
villains are just as unidentifiable in the UK as they are in the US. They ap-
pear just as innocuous in Poughkeepsie as they do in Perth. 
If you have employees with excessive privileges or access to sensitive data, 
then they are at risk of intentionally, accidentally, or indirectly misusing that 
privilege and potentially stealing, deleting, or modifying the data. There is a 
very fine line between intent and action, especially when excessive privileges 
on IT resources are involved. We’ve observed three types of situations 
where intent and action may be in question: 
1. Intentional misuse of privilege: In this circumstance, the over-privileged 
user has both intent and ultimate action to do harm. 
Remember “Disgruntled Dave” from Chapter 2? Now you know 
what to keep an eye out for and how implementing a least privilege 
solution can mitigate this dangerous inside threat. 
2. Accidental misuse of privilege: In this circumstance, the over-privileged 
user has no intent to do harm, but their actions unfortunately result 
in measureable damage. 
Remember “Accident Prone Annie” from Chapter 2? Now you 
know what to keep an eye out for and how implementing a least 
privilege solution can mitigate this expensive inside threat. 
3. Indirect misuse of privilege: In this circumstance, we find both intent 
and action at play with both an insider and a hostile outsider. The 
intent of the insider is to do no harm, but the action of harm is per-
petrated on their behalf because their over-privileged credentials 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
179  
were hijacked by a hostile outsider. The outsider had intent to do 
harm and the harmful action is perpetrated by hijacking an unknow-
ing over-privileged insider.  
Remember “Identity Thief Irene” from Chapter 2? Now you know 
what to keep an eye out for and how implementing a least privilege 
solution can mitigate this hidden inside threat. 
We have reported on several cases already in this book where an insider 
has done everything from almost nuisance-level harm to the very heights of 
catastrophic theft in the hundreds of millions of dollars range. We will also 
analyze more as we delve deeper into the best practices observed. We 
travel frequently to visit resellers, customers, and prospects around the 
globe to discuss least privilege for specific business, geographic, and system 
level requirement (physical, virtual, cloud-based computing platforms). 
What always amazes us on these trips is the general belief that insider 
threats are solely a US-based issue and that employees are completely 
trustworthy everywhere else. 
Nothing could be further from the truth. In January 2011, an article at com-
puting.co.uk reported “ICO fines former Direct Assist employee for illegally 
obtaining NHS data.” We’re not sure if his action was matched to his intent, 
but clearly the results are the same. 
Insider Threats Aren’t Perpetrated By the 
Obvious 
It would be nice if every villain inside your organization walked around 
wearing a big sign that broadcasts “bad guy looking to do bad things,” but 
alas it is only in the cartoons and movies of Hollywood where you can al-
ways find the stereotypical bad guy: black top hat, curled black mustache, 
and sinister grin. 
In real life enterprises, insiders look like you and me; just regular employees 
doing their job and collecting their paycheck. That’s why “securing the pe-
rimeter within” is so important. 
What are the boundaries within your extended enterprise (read: “the pe-
rimeter within”)? 
 
Physical: This seems fairly obvious as the physical server and desktops 
throughout the organization; however, if you dig a little deeper,  
you discover a whole lot more. Mobile devices have infiltrated the 

Chapter 11 | Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices 
 
180  
enterprise as has supporting network devices that require individual 
privileged accounts to exist on the corporate network and a prolif-
eration of databases and directories that also contain sensitive in-
formation. When defining the perimeter within, it is important to 
consider any- and everything that either has privileged account des-
ignations or can contain sensitive information. 
 
Virtual: Nowadays, a server or a desktop isn’t always just a physical 
manifestation of a machine, but can be just one of multiple “virtual 
images” that exist on one physical machine in order to leverage the 
unused computing capacity within the enterprise. Don’t forget to 
monitor the virtual sprawl that also proliferated because of this. 
 
Cloud: The buzz word du jour is cloud. Whether of the public (out-
sourced) or private (internally managed) variety, this is just making 
data and applications available via the Internet. Anyone who has 
been in enterprise computing for longer than three years will rec-
ognize this as better marketing for concepts that have been around 
for decades: SaaS/PaaS/IaaS for public cloud and por-
tal/intranet/extranet for private cloud. Either way, this unique way 
of managing information also brings unique security, identity man-
agement, and regulatory compliance requirements to bear. 
Now that you have a better understanding of what the perimeter within 
looks like, we can move on to talk about the types of things insiders can do 
to threaten your security, compliance, and governance policies. 
Preventing Security Storms 
How many times have you heard the old proverb “after the storm comes 
the calm?” And how many times have you just accepted “storms” as part of 
life? From our point of view, these downpours aren’t actually necessary. 
We also find, from an enterprise point of view, that the best kind of storm 
to steer clear of is the security storm. Do we have to wait for a rough and 
tumble tempest that completely derails everything we’re working toward? 
Absolutely not—we can prevent the loss of secure information and keep 
our businesses calm and running smoothly, thus bypassing the storm and 
going straight for the calm. Let us show you how. 
To prevent a “storm“ in your company, take a good hard look at your enter-
prise. Is there a measure in place to secure your sensitive information from 
being blasted for the world to read? Are your users all operating at the supe-
ruser level? Are you setting yourself up for a problem, or have you taken the 
steps to bypass any damage? The reason for this internal assessment is clear: 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
181  
all around us are unsettling reports of breached databases and purloined
trade secrets. We’re sure you’ve seen these intentional security storms:
whether it’s the Goldman code that was stolen, then sold, or the iTunes ac-
counts that were hacked and up for sale…, both of these incidents point out
how prevalent storms are in today’s information security sector. But what is
at the root of the problem? The answer is shocking. Many think its hackers,
thieves, and malware vulnerabilities. While those can play a role, most
breaches are caused by the abuse of admin rights. 
Preventing security storms in your enterprise is easy. The answer is to take
away the admin rights of all individuals who don’t need them. Don’t let them
abuse their privileges; implement and practice a least privilege management
solution. Give users access to information based on what is essential to
their job. This will stabilize, secure, and streamline your system, thus pre-
venting storms and allowing you to enjoy the calm. 
Every organization has its own quirks. Sometimes leadership isn’t involved
enough for certain projects to be successful. Other times they’re too in-
volved. And sometimes it feels like everything is just too much of a mess.
This is especially true when it comes to IT security and compliance across
physical, virtual, and cloud environments. 
It doesn’t happen often, but when a CEO gets interested in IT security, of-
ten we’re breathless. What do we tell her? What would the CEO ask
about? CIO Update recently wrote on ten security questions your CEO
should ask. So we wanted to put together the five questions you might be
asked about administrative privileges and what your answers should be. 
Q: Do you trust our staff? 
A: Yes, of course! But we don’t rely on trust alone.  
Q: What processes are in place to protect these privileges? 
A: Approvals, mitigated privileges, and keystroke monitoring. 
Q: What are we doing to protect us from honest mistakes made by
our own staff? 
A: Oh dear, we do hope you can say that administrative privileges
have been removed from desktop users! 
Q: What are we doing to protect the cloud? 
A: Enforced SLAs with our cloud vendors to follow the same poli-
cies we use internally. 

Chapter 11 | Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices 
 
182  
Q: What’s next? 
A: Don’t forget to plug the next project for which you need support 
and/or funding. 
Bad Habits to Kick for IT Security 
Isn’t it amazing how easy it is to adopt bad habits? The crazy thing is that no 
one is immune; they plague each and every one of us. Whether we were 
taught incorrect practices or are just looking for shortcuts to make our 
lives/jobs/situations easier, each of us yields to poor patterns at some point 
in our lives. 
It’s when we allow these habits to interfere with the mechanisms keeping 
our enterprises safe that they become a huge problem. Maybe you think 
your actions won’t matter because no one knows about them, or that your 
exploits won’t affect the sensitive information within your company’s data-
base, or maybe it’’ just that you’re not concerned enough to switch to cor-
rect principles. Whatever your reason for allowing bad habits to fester, it’’ 
time for a wake-up call! There’s no room for these patterns in today’s in-
formation security world. With cases like the Goldman Sachs debacle and 
the Vodafone incident showing how prevalent data leaks and cyber crime 
are becoming, it’s time to shape up. But how can you take your bad habits 
and turn them into peace of mind? Start by kicking these four bad behaviors 
and you’ll be well on your way: 
1. Stop allowing your employees access to root. With this type of ac-
cess, your people can access everything, including the privileges re-
quired to manipulate and share data. 
2. Don’t let desktop users run as administrators. When you allow 
your users to run as a local admin, you are opening your enterprise 
to serious security issues. You may think you’re saving money by al-
lowing this instead of multiple calls to the help desk, but in reality 
you’re risking much more than money. 
3. Stop bypassing logging. Without this system of checks and bal-
ances, you won’t be able to granularly control what goes on in 
your company. 
4. Don’t assume that because you’re using UAC, you’re immune to 
data breaches. UAC is a great tool, but doesn’t fully eliminate admin 
rights. It leaves gaping holes in your protection plan. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
183  
If you find yourself on the path to a security breach because you’re choosing 
to maintain bad security habits, make the decision to change today. Kick 
these habits and introduce peace of mind into your security plan. 
Balance Security and Productivity 
Almost everyone has read the children’s tale about the little girl who hap-
pened upon a house in the woods and went about discovering porridge that 
was too hot, too cold, and just right; chairs that were too big, too small, and 
just right; as well as beds that were too hard, too soft, and just right. It 
didn’t end well when the bears came home to discover the intruder, but the 
lesson of extremes was forever implanted in your mind. Unfortunately, this 
lesson hasn’t seemed to stick for most enterprises when it comes to secu-
rity and compliance versus productivity and user friendliness (Figure 11-1). 
 
Figure 11-1. Balanced security 
When it comes to IT security, most organizations that we have interviewed 
fall into one of the two extreme camps of either: 
 
Security Conscientious: These organizations lock down every user 
under every circumstance. Specifically, they set up users without 
any admin rights and require a manager or help-desk technician 
whenever functions requiring privilege dictate. On the positive 
front, this strategy ensures compliance and to a large degree pro-
tects against harm, but may also impede productivity to significantly 
measureable levels. 

Chapter 11 | Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices 
 
184  
 
Productivity Conscientious: These organizations care more about pro-
ductivity than they do security and tend to live by the “that can’t 
happen to me” motto every time a new article shows up in the 
press for another organization’s data loss. In this situation, users 
usually have full admin rights and trust is the only thing that protects 
from misuse of privilege and/or insider breaches. On the positive 
front, this strategy ensures very productive users, but the downside 
is the ever-looming threat of, not if, but when data loss will become 
a measurable impact. 
Since you’ve continued to read this far into the book, we can only assume 
that you desire to achieve, or improve, your ability to satisfy both: 
 
Balance Conscientious: These organizations recognize the delicate bal-
ance of security to productivity as well as compliance to user friend-
liness and have moved to a least privilege environment. Establishing 
a centralized policy engine that can monitor and control privilege 
authorizations at a granular level can deliver the best of both previ-
ous extreme camps just described. 
Delivering balance between security and compliance with productivity and 
ease of governance is a least privilege imperative. Setting privilege authoriza-
tion based on set roles and policies facilitates an environment wherein fine-
grained entitlements can mitigate the majority of privilege misuses discussed 
throughout this book. Let’s take a look at how a specific organization found 
balance through least privilege. 
Case Study: University Finds Balance 
The University of Winchester, located in Winchester, UK, was established 
in 1840. The university combines their strong heritage with innovative learn-
ing and teaching to educate over 5,900 students in 17 different departments 
with over 650 staff members each year. The University of Winchester pro-
motes the importance of intellectual freedom, social justice, diversity, spiri-
tuality, individual importance, and creativity. 
Ian Short, Applications Infrastructure Manager for the University of Win-
chester, is part of the IT management team responsible for the operation of 
the IT environment across the university campus. The university predomi-
nantly runs a Microsoft site. All of the back-end servers run Windows 
Server 2003 and 2008 within an Active Directory domain. Ian’s department 
also supports over 1,500 Windows desktops on campus (all running Win-
dows XP) that includes over 7,000 user accounts. Many of these desktops 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
185  
include laptops used by remote employees in various locations. In addition, 
Ian and his team are responsible for 120+ applications, with a number of ex-
tra locally installed applications. 
The challenge of managing user privileges in an environment full of students 
is complicated enough, but the dilemma only increases when you account 
for required applications. The team universally understood that they needed 
to eliminate administrator rights in order to decrease malware attacks and 
increase security. However, they also knew they couldn’t lock down the en-
tire network because of the 120+ applications they manage. Originally, the 
university used Admin Studio to deal with specific issues, but found this so-
lution to be too time-consuming and unreliable. 
“It became clear that in our environment something needed to be done,” 
said Ian. “We were noticing a worrying growth in security risks and so man-
aging user access became a priority.” 
Implementing a least privilege solution offers a simple, centralized approach, 
which reduces the threat posed by malware and elevates only necessary 
privileges. It satisfies all security protocols to restrict access to privileged 
users to a least privilege model. 
“With this solution, we were able to lock down our users’ access while still 
allowing applications to run where necessary,” Ian explained. “It’s the per-
fect solution for our IT needs. No longer are we required to ‘punch holes’ 
in our security in order to complete certain tasks.” 
With their least privilege solution, the University of Winchester has com-
pletely removed administrator rights among their users, while simultane-
ously providing adequate rights to perform the tasks that students and staff 
need. Some of the key uses include elevating privileges for 8 multimedia 
packages in their multimedia center, 24 applications on their desktops, and 
around half a dozen Windows functions.  It also has significantly decreased 
the amount of time Ian and his team spend on support issues, which has sig-
nificantly reduced cost, as well. 
Passwords Authenticate for Least Privilege 
Most of you already know that getting users to choose effective passwords 
is hard. This is particularly important to those of you looking to implement a 
least privilege solution that functions correctly, as you will need to accu-
rately authenticate a user to know what access privileges to grant them. 

Chapter 11 | Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices 
 
186  
While new technologies for user authentication are on the way, they aren’t 
here just yet. 
There are several options today for improving user passwords, but they all 
have issues. Requiring users to choose strong password often leads to them 
writing theirs down a yellow sticky pad so they can remember it. Password 
rotation is standard defense against password-cracking attacks, but a recent 
Microsoft study suggests password rotation just causes people to choose 
easier-to-remember phrases as passwords. Biometrics are expensive and far 
from foolproof. Two-factor authentication should be the norm, but is per-
ceived as expensive and inconvenient. Even if implemented, it’s still suscepti-
ble to social engineering and phishing attacks. 
So there are no easy answers to ensure a user is who they say they are. As 
with all security decisions, you need to weigh the costs of a solution versus 
the risks, but practically we recommend three things: 
1. Enforce strong passwords, but make it easier for people to create 
them. You can provide guidance about better ways to create strong 
but memorable passwords or suggest the use of passphrases rather 
than passwords. Finally, you could publish links to password 
strength testers like Microsoft’s so people aren’t surprised at the 
moment of truth when asked to input their new strong password. 
2. For more secure situations, like systems administrators who may be 
able to access critical corporate systems, go with two-factor 
authentication; it’s the current gold standard. 
3. Finally, recognize that authentication will never be perfect. So im-
plement least privilege at all levels to limit exposure. Not every user 
needs to be an admin on their desktop and not every system admin 
needs to access all systems with all commands 
Implement Least Privilege Now Not Later 
By now, you’ve seen the value of implementing a least privilege solution to 
establish boundaries instead of creating the proverbial security walls. This 
will facilitate not only a balance between security and productivity, but also 
assist with real-time governance changes across the ever-changing ex-
tended enterprise. Before we close the book, we’d like to offer a few key 
steps to success. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
187  
 
Figure 11-2. Least Privilege in the Enterprise. 
Steps To Success 
1. Set Security as a Corporate Goal: Enterprises may have trouble main-
taining security because everyone is too busy trying to reach other 
goals. If you have problems maintaining security in your company, 
consider adding security as a goal for every level of management. 
2. Provide or Enlist in Training as Required: For security to work, every-
one needs to know the basic rules. Once they know the rules, it 
doesn’t hurt to prompt them to follow those rules. 
3. Ensure All Managers Understand Security: It is especially important that 
all members of management understand the risks associated with 
unsecured systems. Otherwise, management choices may unwit-
tingly jeopardize the company’s reputation, proprietary information, 
and financial results. 
4. Communicate to Management Clearly: Too often, system administra-
tors complain to their terminals instead of their supervisors. Other 
times, system administrators find that complaining to their supervi-
sors is remarkably like complaining to their terminals. 
If you are a manager, make sure that your people have access to your 
time and attention. When security issues come up, it is important to 

Chapter 11 | Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices 
 
188  
pay attention. The first line of defense for your network is strong 
communication with the people behind your machines.  
If you are a system administrator, try to ensure that talking to your 
immediate manager fixes the problems you see from potential or 
realized misuse of privileges. If it doesn’t, you should be confident 
enough to reach higher in the management chain to alert for action. 
5. Delineate Cross-Organizational Security Support: If your company has a 
security group and a system administration group, the organization 
needs to clearly define their roles and responsibilities. For example, 
are the system administrators responsible for configuring the sys-
tems? Is the security group responsible for reporting non-compliance? 
If no one is officially responsible, nothing will get done. And account-
ability for resulting problems will many times be shouldered by the 
non-offending party. 
Weighing In 
By now, you’ve figured out that we believe least privilege is a crucial com-
ponent to IT environment security. Without it, over-privileged users can 
access (and abuse) sensitive resources and mission-critical information. 
Without it, under-privileged users can be so locked down that they are inef-
fective at doing their jobs without some level from the help-desk or man-
agement support to get past admin credential requirements. Protecting your 
data from insiders and their accidental, intentional, or indirect misuse of 
privileges is paramount to the success of your company’s IT strategy. Let’s 
hear what our experts think about that. 
Secure Sam: 
Governing an IT environment takes very granular attention to a lot of mov-
ing parts. It gets complicated, but having a well-defined plan mitigates most of 
the chaos that can come with sensitive data. As you know by now, least 
privilege is a necessity within that security plan. There are benefits that come 
from limiting access to mission-critical resources. We’ve talked about them 
throughout the book, but they’re the driving reason that least privilege is in 
effect. To be able to centrally and efficiently manage a network of desktops, 
servers, and databases is paramount to the security of those devices. It’s 
equally as important to prevent the risk of insiders destroying the delicate 
balance of a secured network, in addition to being compliant to federally 
mandated regulations regarding the protection of sensitive information. All 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
189  
these benefits are the result of least privilege, and are easily obtained by al-
lowing employees access to only those resources they are entitled to based 
on their job descriptions.  
Least Privilege Lucy: 
As humans, it’s very easy to fall into grooves. Some of these are good, and 
some of these are bad, but it’s natural for us to create behavioral patterns. 
This is true in the IT world, as well; however, most of the habits formed 
tend to err on the side of bad. As an IT manager, it’s a huge risk to allow 
people to run free among the resources I am responsible for. Even if people 
are the most trustworthy employees, accidents happen and inadvertent 
things come up. Privileges are misused, whether it’s accidentally or inten-
tionally, on a regular basis, and corporate security is too steep a price to be 
paid. Bad habits should not have a place in an IT environment, and least 
privilege is the way to counteract that. Users that don’t need to run as ad-
ministrators shouldn’t, employees should never have access to the root 
password, and all activity should be closely monitored. The way to keep an 
enterprise secure is through least privilege. 
Compliance Carl: 
The best thing about compliance is this: by implementing it, most security 
infractions are mitigated. Earlier in the chapter, we discussed security 
storms. These can be prevented if compliance is a priority in your enter-
prise. If an organization takes the time to plan and execute a security plan 
that preemptively allows for the avoidance of breaches of secured data, that 
company is in a much better place as far as security tempests go. The best 
way to get compliant fast is to implement a least privilege solution. By now, 
you’re aware of what that is. By now, you understand how crucial it is to 
the protection of your mission-critical information. Letting users have full 
access to data they don’t necessarily need is both irresponsible and in direct 
violation of regulations provided to protect your enterprise’s greatest asset. 
It’s easier than it seems, and such a principle makes logical sense. Give users 
access to information based on what is essential to their job. This will stabi-
lize, secure, and streamline your system, and make your enterprise a com-
pliant environment. 
 


 
Works Cited 
 
Chapter 1 
“BGC Partners Using BeyondTrust Privilege Manager to Secure 6,000 Desk-
tops.” 2010. 
Vijayan, J. “Three Fired for Accessing Records of Tucson Shooting Victims,” 
ComputerWorld (2011). 
Hill, K. “Hacker Fail: Two College Kids Discover Police Are Not as ‘Dumb’ 
As They Thought.” 2010. Forbes.com. 
Carpenter, P. “Net-it-Out” Presentation: Gartner Information Security Summit. 
Gartner, Inc., 2010. n. pag. Print. 
National Security Council, “The Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Ini-
tiative.” 2011. 
Witosky, T. “Iowa Hospital Investigating Possible Breach of Players’ Re-
cords,” USA Today (2011). 
Chapter 2 
Offensive Security , Adobe Shockwave Player rcsL Chunk Memory Corrup-
tion 0day. 2010. 

Chapter 11 | Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices 
192  
Arkansas State University. “Arkansas State University, Privacy Breach Man-
agement.” 2010. 
“HFC Bank in Mass E-mail Blunder.” BBC News, 2004. 
“Computer Crime and Security Survey.” 2011. Print. 
“CyberSpace Policy Review,” 2008. Print. 
DATALOSS DB, Data Loss DB. 2011. 
“Yet Another Security Firm Breached: Employee Email, User Accounts 
Leaked.” Dark Reading (2011). 
Diodatti, M. “Excessive User Privilege.” Gartner, Inc., 2010. N. Pag. Print. 
Al Gillen, Frederick W. Broussard, Seana Dowling. “WHITE P APER Opti-
mizing Infrastructure: The Relationship Between IT Labor Costs and 
Best Practices for Identity and Access Management With Active Direc-
tor Y.” 2006. N. Pag. Print. 
Mah, P. “Disgruntled Ex-Gucci Network Engineer Allegedly Goes on IT 
Rampage,” IT Business Edge (2011). 
“Florida Hospital Admits to Data Breach Affecting 1500 Patients.” 2010. 
Infosecurity.com. 
“Massive Data Breach at University of Hawaii Involves 40,000 Former Stu-
dents,” 2010. 
Bradley, Tony. “McDonald’s Customer Data Compromised Through Con-
tractor,” PC World (2010). 
Ponemon Institute,. “2009 Annual Study: Cost of a Data Breach Report.” 
Methodology. 2010. N. Pag. Print.  
“Security Summit 2010.” 2010. Print. 
US Secret Service. “2010 CyberSecurity Watch Survey—Survey Results 
Conducted by CSO Magazine in Cooperation with the U.S. Secret Serv-
ice, Software Engineering Institute CERT Program at Carnegie Mellon 
University and Deloitte, August 2008.” 2010. n. pag. Print. 
Hunt, P. “Vodafone Terminates Staff over Data Breach” 2011. WCJB.co.uk. 
A. Spencer, A. Efrati. “Google Takes Heat Over App Security”, Wall Street 
Journal Online (2011). 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
193  
S. Craig, K. Scannel. “Goldman Settles Its Battle With SEC,” WallStreet Jour-
nal Online (2010). 
Kingsley-Hughes, A. “Stolen Apps That Root Android, Steal Data and Open 
Backdoors Available for Download from Google Market,” ZDNet 
(2011). 
Chapter 3 
BeyondTrust. “MD Anderson Selects PowerBroker for Servers.” 2010. 
Hickey, A. “Mobile Device Security Threats Attract Cybercriminals.” CRN 
(2011). 
Gartner, Inc. “Gartner Says Media Tablets Help Drive Worldwide IT Spend-
ing Up 5.6 Percent in 2011.” Gartner, 2011. 
Hudson, S. “Security Products: Vendor Profile.” IDC (2010). Print. 
“Mac OS ‘Crime Kit’ Lets Users Make Own Apple Malware.” GMA News, 
2011. 
Ponemon Institute. “Access Governance Trends Survey Sponsored by 
Aveksa.” 2010. Print. 
Martin, M. “Wikileaks Wrangling May Be Escalating Into Cyberwar.” Tech-
NewsWorld (2010). 
“The IT Auditor.” The IT Auditor (2011). 
“Underground Economies.” 2011. 
Baker, W. Et Al. “2010 Data Breach Investigations Report—A Study Con-
ducted by the Verizon RISK Team in Cooperation with the United 
States Secret Service.” Verizon Risk Team. 2010. N. Pag. Print. 
Hunt, P. “Vodafone Terminates Staff over Data Breach.” 2011. WCJB.co.uk. 
Z. Seward, A. Sun. “Wall Street Journal Online, The Top 50 Gawker Media 
Passwords.” Wall Street Journal Online (2010). 
Zierick, Jim. “How to Prevent a WikiLeaks Mega Leak from Your Organiza-
tion.” eWeek (2011). 

Chapter 11 | Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices 
 
194  
Chapter 4 
BeyondTrust. “BeyondTrust 2010 Microsoft Vulnerability Report.” 2011. 
Print. 
“Quintiles Achieves Compliance, Improves Productivity.” Case Study, 2010. 
“The University of Winchester Selects PowerBroker® to Secure Their Win-
dows Desktops.” Case , 2011. 
D. Melber. “Achieving Windows Desktop ‘Least Privilege ’ in the Federal 
Market., BeyondTrust 2010: 1-10. Print. 
Mar-Elia, D. “From Least Privilege to Best Privilege on Your Windows® 
Desktops.” BeyondTrust 2010. Print. 
Cosgrove, T. “The Cost of Removing Administrative Rights for the Wrong 
Users.” Gartner, Inc. 2011. n. pag. Print. 
Chapter 5 
BeyondTrust. “Cetrel S.A. Replaces Sudo with BeyondTrust PowerBroker.” 
Case Study, 2010. 
(Experts Forecast Top Seven Trends in Healthcare Information Privacy for 
2011.” 2011. PHIPrivacy.net. 
Joab, Jackson. “Mozilla Site Exposed Encrypted Passwords.” ComputerWorld 
(2010). 
Martin, Paul K. “Inadequate Security Practices Expose Key Nasa Network to 
Cyber Attack.” 2011. 
National Cyber Security Devision, DHS. “National Vulnerability Database.” 
2010. 
Ponemon Institute. “Security of Cloud Computing Providers Study.” 2011. 
Print. 
Martin, M. “Wikileaks Wrangling May Be Escalating Into Cyberwar.” Tech-
NewsWorld (2010). 
Walsh, Sue. “Info Stolen From Millions of Phishing Victims For Sale.” All 
Spammed Up (2009). 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
195  
Chapter 6 
Forrester, Inc. “Market Overview: Privileged Identity Management.” 2010. 
Print. 
Perkins, E. “A Process View of Identity and Access Management Is Essen-
tial.” Gartner, Inc., 2011. Print. 
MacDonald, N. “Addressing the Most Common Security Risks in Data Cen-
ter Virtualization Projects.” Gartner, Inc., 2009. n. pag. Print. 
Bittman, T. “The Drivers and Challenges of Private Cloud Computing.” 
Gartner, Inc., March 3, 2011. n. pag. Print. 
Lemos, Robert. “Pentagon’s Insider Threat Push Offers Lessons For Enter-
prises.” Dark Reading (2010). 
Lynch, David. “Virtual Sprawl Is Not the Real Problem.” Virtualization Journal 
(2010). 
Mitchell, Robert. “The Scary Side of Virtualization.” ComputerWorld (2010). 
Chapter 7 
Cosgrove, T. “The Cost of Removing Administrative Rights for the Wrong 
Users.” Gartner, Inc., 2011. n. pag. Print. 
Gartner, Inc., B. Blakely, 2011. 
Bittman, T. “The Drivers and Challenges of Private Cloud Computing.” 
Gartner, Inc., March 2011. 
Jansen, Wayne, and Timothy Grance. “Guidelines on Security and Privacy in 
Public Cloud Computing.” 2011. Print. 
Ponemon Institute. “Security of Cloud Computing Providers Study.” 2011. 
Print. 
Storts, John. “Keep Security and Privacy Considerations Top-of-Mind When 
Weighing Cloud Options.”  IT Business Edge (2011). 
Cloud Computing. “Top Threats to Cloud Computing V1.0.” 2010. Print. 

Chapter 11 | Final Thoughts for Least Privilege Best Practices 
 
196  
Chapter 8 
Oltsik, J. “Database Security and Compliance Risks.” ESG (2009). 
Wilson, Thomas J. “Data in the Dark.” 2010. Print. 
Z. Seward, A. Sun. “Wall Street Journal Online, The Top 50 Gawker Media 
Passwords.” Wall Street Journal Online (2010). 
Chapter 9 
BeyondTrust. “DCI Selects PowerBroker Safe to Meet Regulatory Compli-
ance.” 1963. Print. 
“MD Anderson Selects PowerBroker for Servers.” 2008. Print. 
“CSI 2010: Compliance Does Not Equal Security.” 2010. Infosecurity.com. 
I. Glazier, B. Blakley, M. Diodati, K. Kampman, L. Rowland. “Market Profile: 
Identity Management 2010.” Gartner, Inc., 2010. n. pag. Print. 
Protiviti. “2011 SOX Compliance Survey.” 2011. 
“Regulations.gov.” Regulations.gov. 
“Security Standards Council, Media Contacts.” 2011. Print. 
Department of Health and Human Services. “Department of Health and 
Human Health Insurance Reform: Security.” 2003. Print. 
Wilson, Thomas J. “Data in the Dark.” 2010. Print. 
Chapter 10 
BeyondTrust. “BeyondTrust Survey at VMWorld Shows What It Takes to 
Get Attendees in a Tutu.” BeyondTrust Blog (2010). 
“Care New England Selects PowerBroker ® to Secure Their Desktop Infra-
structure.” 2010. 
“RSA Survey: No Trust for Cloud Vendors, Wikileaks.” BeyondTrust Blog 
(2011). 
Cosgrove, T. “The Cost of Removing Administrative Rights for the Wrong 
Users.” Gartner, Inc., 2011. n. pag. Print. 

Preventing Good People from Doing Bad Things 
 
197  
Keizer, Gregg. “Microsoft Accuses Former Manager of Stealing 600MB of 
Confidential Docs.” ComputerWorld (2011). 
McMillan, Robert. “Microsoft: One in 14 Downloads Is Malicious.” PC World 
and Magazine (2011). 
Ponemon Institute. “Security of Cloud Computing Providers Study.” 2011. 
Print. 
S. Craig, K. Scannel. “Goldman Settles Its Battle With SEC.” Wall Street Jour-
nal Online (2010). 
“What Jerome Kerviel’s Sentence Could Teach Us in America.” 2010. 
Forbes.com. 
Chapter 11 
BeyondTrust. “The University of Winchester Selects PowerBroker® to Se-
cure Their Windows Desktops.”2011. 
Cser, A. “PIM Market Overview.” Forrester, Inc., 2010. n. pag. Print. 
Ponemon Institute. “Security of Cloud Computing Providers Study.” 2011. 
Print. 
Sumner, Stuart. “ICO Investigates NHS Loss of 8.63m Patient Records.” 
2011. Computing.co.uk. 
 
 


        
I 
Index
A 
Application attacks, 130 
Application compatibility toolkit 
(ACT) limitations, 63 
AppLocker limitations, 63 
B, C 
Compliance Carl, 42, 59 
Application Security 
Incorporated, 52 
black and white nature, 51 
blogosphere, 53, 54 
common pitfalls, 52 
germane regulations, 43 
“Holmes/Judy” version, 51 
keyboard and chair, 55, 56 
mobile workers, 54, 55 
need for, 51 
rank and privilege, 53 
Compliance process, 141 
administrator privilege, 142 
alphabet soup, 147, 148 
audit failure, wild side, 155 
auditing challenge, 156 
authorized user access, 157 
David Nester's view, 156, 157 
extensive auditing and logging 
features, 157 
IT infrastructure 
security, 156 
MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, 156 
off-site logging capability, 157 
UNIX network security, 156 
Carl's view, 161 
cloud environment 
access control, 146 
ISO 27001 standard, 147 
policy compliance, 146 
virtual machine, 146 
corporate governance, 142 
auditing and 
management, 143 
IT acquisition assets, 143 
PIM solution, 143 
data security, 145 
database access monitoring, 146 
DBAs, 145, 146 
demand of compliance vs. open 
source, 154, 155 
GRC, 142 
HIPAA (see Health Insurance 
Portability and 
Accountability Act) 
least privilege, 153 
least privilege Lucy, 160, 161 
PCI DSS (see Payment Card 
Industry  Data Security 
Standard (PCI DSS)) 

Index 
 
200 
Compliance process (continued) 
privilege resource security 
access, 152 
control, 152 
identity management, 151 
monitoring process, 152 
remediation process, 152 
risk, 144 
credential management, 
144, 145 
levels of insder threat 
mitigation solution, 144 
management, 144 
privilege management, 145 
session management, 145 
rules and regulations, 141 
satisfaction, 141 
secure Sam, 160 
security and productivity 
access control, 158 
good IT health, 158 
tradeoffs analysis, 159, 160 
SOX, 150, 151 
Computer Security Institute (CSI), 54 
Control Objectives for Information 
and related Technology 
(COBIT), 119 
Cost of apathy 
admin privilege elevation, 164 
breaches and least privilege, 163 
breaches identity, 169 
Care New England, manages 
operations 
end-user support manager, 170 
help-desk calls, 170 
least privilege solution, 170 
policy, 170 
cloud vendors 
business and IT security, 171 
cloud-hosted data, 171 
mission-critical virtual server, 172 
cyber crime 
black market buyers data, 165 
CSO struggle, 166 
market option, 165 
stolen information sales, 165 
hard vs. soft, 168, 169 
Jérôme Kerviel, fraudulent 
transaction, 164 
least privilege 
compliance, 173 
heterogeneous coverage, 174 
insider breaches, 167 
malcontents, 168 
malicious code and software 
download, 167 
PIM systems, 168 
reduced complexity, 173 
secure sam, 174 
secutiry, 173 
least privilege 
ROI caluclation, 173 
weighing in, 174 
Matt Miszewski 
over-privileged, 167 
staff information retention, 166 
steal/manipulate sensitive 
information, 175 
theme, 164 
D 
Data awareness, 130 
Data encryption, 119 
Data leak prevention (DLP), 132 
Database encryption, 120 
Database-based applications, 127 
compliance audit failure, 132, 133 
compliance Carl, 140 
DAM 
change management, 137 
compliance reporting, 138 
control of privilege, 136 
control systems, 137 
custom-developed 
solutions, 136 
data auditing, 137 
effective credential 
management, 137 
products, 137 
data security, 133, 139 
DBA, 129 

Index 
 
201 
desktop 
DLP, 132 
enterprise Windows 
environment, 131 
IT administrator status, 131 
IT support impact, 131 
personal computing, 131 
Gawker, 135 
Gnosis Group, 135, 136 
information storage servers, 128 
least privilege 
architecture, 138 
best practices, 138 
data sensitivity, 140 
vulnerability, 139 
legacy applications, 130 
privilege management policy, 134 
security risk, 129, 130 
tongue-in-cheek approach, 
134, 135 
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA), 100 
Desktops, 16 
E, F, G 
Georgia Tech Information Security 
Center (GTISC), 29 
Governance, risk, and compliance 
(GRC), 142 
H 
Health information exchanges 
(HIEs), 91 
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
administrator rights, 149 
ePHI Data Systems, 148 
final rule, 148 
least privilege, 149 
personal data protection, 149 
Hypervisor, 98, 99 
I 
Information Systems Audit and 
Control Association (ISACA), 119 
IT constant change, 1 
adapting process, 10 
best practices, 19 
best-of-breed security software, 1 
boundaries vs. walls, 10, 11 
compliance, Carl, 20, 21 
Corporate Governance, 18 
federal mandates 
BGC Partners, 13 
critical infrastructure, 13 
intrusion detection, 13 
risk compliance, 12 
system/application policy, 14 
villains, 16 
final observations, 19 
government regulations, 18 
hard costs, 18 
heroes, 16 
internal vs. external threats 
information security, 2 
IT security spending, 2, 3 
IT infrastructure requirement, 
16, 17 
least privilege, Lucy, 20 
pervasive and problematic 
information, 9 
PIM (see Privileged identity 
management) 
security, Sam, 20 
soft costs, 18 
top-ten–list approach, 11, 12 
villains, 15 
Yin–Yang security concept, 14, 15 
IT privilege, 23 
Accident Prone Annie, 27 
data loss, 28 
desktop and server misuse, 27 
fortified network 
vulnerability, 27 
insider breaches, 28, 29 
internal operator error, 27 
multi-tiered approach, 28 

Index 
 
202 
IT privilege (continued) 
Accident Prone Annie (continued) 
security breach research 
project, 28 
accidental harm, 24 
data breach 
authorization, 34 
data security, 33, 34 
sensitivity, risk security, 32, 33 
social security, 35 
third-party organization, 34 
Disgruntled Dave 
access information, 27 
Aleynikov, Sergey, 26 
Cyber Security, 25 
cybercrime threat, 25 
Goldman’s source code, 26 
illegal network access, 26 
insider attack, definition, 24 
HR and IT department 
cloud computing, 36 
collaborative process, 37 
fine-grained entitlement, 36 
insiders challenge 
management, 36 
interface, 36 
rank and privilege concept, 36 
indentity management, 38 
indirect harm, 24 
international harm, 24 
rights management, 39 
thief Irene identification, 29 
accountability, 30 
Adobe, 30, 31 
Android mobile operating 
system, 31 
Barracuda employee, 30 
Google's Android Market, 31 
GTISC, annual summit, 29 
hackers, vulnerability, 31 
Heron, George examination, 29 
security configuration, 31 
startling statistic, 29 
tongue-in-cheek approach, 37, 38 
tried-and-true security methods, 39 
user experience, 32 
J, K, L 
Least privilege 
balanced security and 
productivity, 183 
balance conscientious, 184 
productivity conscientious, 184 
security conscientious, 183 
implementation, 186 
communication, 187 
delineate cross-
organization, 188 
ensure managers understand 
security, 187 
provide or enlist in training, 187 
security a corporate goal, 187 
insider threats 
cloud, 180 
physical, 179 
virtual, 180 
intent vs. action 
accidental misuse of 
privilege, 178 
analysis, 179 
indirect misuse of 
privilege, 178 
insider threats, 178 
intentional misuse of 
privilege, 178 
IT security 
bad habits, 182 
kicking bad behaviors, 182 
Lucy, 42, 47, 59 
cloud migration, 43 
common pitfalls, 48 
Disgruntled Dave, 48, 49 
need for, 47 
sharing, 50, 51 
team motto, 57, 58 
worst nightmare, 49 
password authenticaion 
enforce strong passwords, 186 
password rotation, 186 
secure reason, 186 
user password, 185 
security storm prevention 
CEO question/answer, 181, 182 

Index 
203 
company, 180 
management solution, 181 
solution implementation, 185 
user privileges managment, 185 
weighing in, 188 
M 
Misconfiguration error, 129 
Multi-tenancy security 
administrative tools, 117 
CloudLog, 124 
COBIT, 119 
cross division/department 
privacy, 115 
data encryption, 119 
database encryption, 120 
hybrid cloud, 115 
IDC Enterprise Panel survey, 116 
information assets, 114 
ISACA, 119 
IT organization, flexibility and 
scalability, 116 
least privilege policies, 124, 125 
outsourced storage and 
computing capacity, 114 
PCI DSS, 119 
Ponemon Institute report, 118 
private cloud, 115 
ad-hoc drill-down 
validation, 124 
compliance reporting 
requirements, 123 
ESX hypervisors, 123 
guest operating systems, 123 
information assets, 
deployment and 
management, 123 
network computing, 123 
VMware, 123 
privilege misuse types, 117, 118 
privileged account credentials 
protection, 119 
privileged identity 
management, 117 
privileged user access, 119 
public clouds, 114 
admin controls, 121 
assessing and managing risk, 120 
data protection, 122 
NIST, 120 
security and privacy, 
accountability, 120 
security technologies, 122 
service-level agreements, 122 
uncertainty principle, 121 
vendor priorities, 122 
trusted digital identities, 121 
weighing in, 125, 126 
N 
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), 106, 120 
O 
Out-of-cycle patching, 129 
P 
Payment Card Industry Data Security 
Standards (PCI DSS), 119, 149, 150 
Policy life cycle, 4 
Privileged identity management (PIM), 
85, 85, 98, 117 
access control 
IT assests, 6 
SUPM and SAPM, 6 
application account, 5 
asset information, 3 
authentication process, 7 
authorization, 5, 8 
breaches in news, 8, 9 
emergency account, 5 
generic/shared administrative 
accounts, 5 
legal/illegal information, 4 
personal account, 5 
policy life cycle, 4 
solution, 143 
specific costs, 4 

Index 
 
204 
Privileged identity management 
(continued) 
superuser, 5 
system, 168 
traditional solution, 3 
Privileged user, 130 
Q, R 
Registry and file system virtualization 
vulnerability, 62 
Role-based access control (RBAC) 
access control lists, 107 
advanced access control, 106 
cost and complexity, 106 
financial application, 107 
medical application, 107 
multi-user and multi-application 
online systems, 106 
NIST, 106 
RunAs administrator vulnerability, 63 
S 
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX), 150, 151 
Secure Sam, 42, 58 
administrator access rights, 43 
business partner, weakest link, 45 
common pitfalls, 44 
face value projects, 43 
mobile malware threats, 46 
need for, 44 
personal tablets and mobile 
computing devices, 46 
smartphone security, 46, 47 
WikiLeaks, 45 
Server privilege, 79 
architecture, 82, 83 
black market, 81, 82 
breaches, 80 
carte-blanche access, 79 
CETREL’s security operations, 92 
compliance Carl, 96 
HIEs, 91 
least privilege Lucy, 95 
patching, 93, 94 
privilege identity management 
system, 94 
secure Sam, 95 
storage, 80 
Sudo 
compliance implications, 88 
Con Sudo, 87 
licensed code vs. freeware, 
86, 88 
Pro Sudo, 87 
Unix/Linux administrator, 86 
vulnerabilities, 89 
UNIX and Linux servers, least 
privilege implementation, 90 
vulnerability scanning, 92 
WikiLeaks. see WikiLeaks 
Servers, 17 
Share account password management 
(SAPM), 6 
Super user privileged access 
management (SUPM), 6 
Swiss Cheese Model, 56, 57 
T 
Tongue-in-cheek approach, 66, 67 
Transaction monitoring, 130 
U 
User access control (UAC) security 
vulnerability, 62 
V 
Virtual environment, 17 
Virtual environment protection 
change-management process, 108 
desktop registry and file system 
virtualization, 102, 103 
desktop virtualization, 100, 101 
“keys to the kingdom,” 108 
least privilege solution, 108, 109 

Index 
 
205 
PIM, 98 
privilege misuse types, 105, 106 
RBAC (see Role-based access 
control) 
security costs, 98 
virtual shell game, 103 
virtual sprawl, 103, 104 
virtual theft 
DARPA, 100 
hypervisor, 98, 99 
virtual guest vulnerability, 100 
virtual-machine migration tool, 108 
weighing-in, 109, 110, 111 
Virtual shell game, 103 
Virtualization (Med-V & App-V) 
vulnerability, 63 
W, X, Y, Z 
WikiLeaks 
automated privilege access 
lifecycle management, 84 
leveraging access, 84 
multi-industry survey, 84 
“needs must” basis, 85 
White House attempt, 83 
WikiWar 
IT management, 86 
metaphor, 85 
open source solutions, 86 
PIM, 85, 86 
Windows desktops, group policy, 61 
Active Directory, 73 
compliance Carl, 76 
“Do-Nothing” approach, 67, 68 
Help Desk impact, 68, 69 
individual’s role, 62 
 
 
 
 
 
least privilege  
architecture, 73 
implementation, 66, 67 
Lucy, 76 
Microsoft published 
vulnerabilities, 69, 70 
MS AppLocker 
administrator privileges, 65, 66 
desktop security, 66 
local administrator, 65 
Safe Mode boot and AppID 
Service disable, 65 
whitelist creation, 65 
whitelist management, 65 
MS UAC 
administrative privilege, 64 
administrator password, 64 
computer protection, 63 
corporate legal 
text/customized warnings, 63 
security vulnerability, 63 
standard users, 63 
MS Windows 7, 62, 63 
personal productivity, 75 
Quintiles Transnational 
company, 74 
secure Sam, 75 
survey results 
185 IT administrators 
survey, 71 
application types, 72 
configuration setting 
requirements, 72 
fine-graned privilege access, 73 
Legacy Applications and Least 
Privilege Access 
Management, 71 
Sage and QuickBooks, 72 
University of Winchester, 74, 75 
Wild West, 70 

