Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Thirteenth Edition
Ralph M. Stair
Professor Emeritus, Florida State University
George W. Reynolds
Instructor, Strayer University
Principles of 
Information Systems
Australia • Brazil • Mexico • Singapore • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Principles of Information Systems,
Thirteenth Edition
Ralph M. Stair & George W. Reynolds
Vice President, General Manager, Science,
Technology and Math: Balraj Kalsi
Senior Product Director: Kathleen McMahon
Senior Product Team Manager: Joe Sabatino
Product Team Manager: Kristin McNary
Associate Product Manager: Kate Mason
Senior Director, Development: Julia Caballero
Content Development Manager: Leigh Hefferon
Associate Content Developer: Jonathan Gross
Senior Content Developer: Michelle Ruelos
Cannistraci
Art and Cover Direction, Production
Management, and Composition:
Lumina Datamatics, Inc.
Intellectual Property Analyst: Brittani Morgan
Project Manager: Kathy Kucharek
Manufacturing Planner: Ron Montgomery
Cover Image(s): everything possible/
Shutterstock.com
© 2018, 2016 Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, except as
permitted by U.S. copyright law, without the prior written permission of the
copyright owner.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016941569
ISBN: 978-1-305-97177-6
Cengage Learning
20 Channel Center Street
Boston, MA 02210
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions
with employees residing in nearly 40 different countries and sales in
more than 125 countries around the world. Find your local representative at
www.cengage.com
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Cengage Learning Solutions, visit www.cengage.com
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred
online store www.cengagebrain.com
Unless otherwise noted all items © Cengage Learning®
Printed at EPAC, Mexico, 11-16
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

For Lila and Leslie
—RMS
To my grandchildren: Michael, Jacob, Jared, Fievel,
Aubrey, Elijah, Abrielle, Sofia, Elliot, Serena, and Kendall
—GWR
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Brief Contents
PART 1  Information Systems in Perspective
1
Chapter 1
An Introduction to Information Systems
2
Chapter 2
Information Systems in Organizations
44
PART 2  Information Technology Concepts
83
Chapter 3
Hardware and Mobile Devices
84
Chapter 4
Software and Mobile Applications
136
Chapter 5
Database Systems and Big Data
192
Chapter 6
Networks and Cloud Computing
238
PART 3  Business Information Systems
295
Chapter 7
Electronic and Mobile Commerce
296
Chapter 8
Enterprise Systems
344
Chapter 9
Business Intelligence and Analytics
382
Chapter 10
Knowledge Management and Specialized
Information Systems
408
PART 4 
Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
455
Chapter 11
Strategic Planning and Project Management
456
Chapter 12
System Acquisition and Development
502
v
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

PART 5 
Information Systems in Business and Society
559
Chapter 13
Cybercrime and Information System Security
560
Chapter 14
Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information
Systems
598
Glossary
636
Subject Index
647
Company Index
657
vi
BRIEF CONTENTS
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Contents
Preface
xv
PART 1  Information Systems in Perspective
1
1
An Introduction to Information Systems
2
Part 1: Information Systems in Perspective
4
An Introduction to Information Systems
4
Information Systems in Organizations
9
Part 2: Information Technology Concepts
11
Hardware and Mobile Devices
11
Software and Mobile Applications
12
Database Systems and Big Data
13
Networks and Cloud Computing
15
Part 3: Business Information Systems
18
Electronic and Mobile Commerce
20
Enterprise Systems
21
Business Intelligence and Analytics
25
Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems
25
Part 4: Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
26
Strategic Planning and Project Management
27
System Acquisition and Development
28
Part 5: Information Systems in Business and Society
29
Cybercrime and Information System Security
30
Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems
31
CASE ONE: Connecting Patient Monitoring Devices to EHRs
41
CASE TWO: BMW: Automaker Competes on the Digital Front
41
2
Information Systems in Organizations
44
Organizations and Information Systems
46
Virtual Teams and Collaborative Work
50
Change in the Organization
51
Innovation
52
Reengineering and Continuous Improvement
53
Outsourcing, Offshoring, and Downsizing
54
Organizational Culture and Change
56
Lewin’s Change Model
57
Lewin’s Force Field Analysis
57
Leavitt’s Diamond
59
User Satisfaction and Technology Acceptance
60
Diffusion of Innovation Theory
61
vii
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Careers in Information Systems
62
Roles, Functions, and Careers in IS
66
Typical IS Titles and Functions
67
IS-Related Roles outside the IS Organization
70
Certification
71
Other IS Careers
72
Working in Teams
72
Finding a Job in IS
72
CASE ONE: Railroads Struggle to Implement Positive Train Control
79
CASE TWO: Nordstrom’s Innovation Efforts Recognize the Importance
of the Soft Side of Implementing Change
80
PART 2  Information Technology Concepts
83
3
Hardware and Mobile Devices
84
Anatomy of a Computer
86
Processor
87
Memory
91
Secondary Data Storage Devices
93
Enterprise Storage Options
97
Input and Output Devices
100
Output Devices
107
Computer System Types
111
Portable Computers
113
Thin Clients, Desktops, and Workstations
114
Servers, Mainframes, and Supercomputers
116
Server Farms, Data Centers, and Green Computing
119
Server Farms
119
Data Center
120
Green Computing
122
CASE ONE: ARM
130
CASE TWO: Vivobarefoot Upgrades Technology Infrastructure
131
4
Software and Mobile Applications
136
An Overview of Software
138
Software Sphere of Influence
139
Systems Software
141
Operating Systems
141
Utility Programs
155
Middleware
158
Application Software
160
Overview of Application Software
160
Personal Application Software
163
Workgroup Application Software
170
Enterprise Application Software
171
Application Software for Transaction Processing, Business Analytics,
and Competitive Advantage
173
Programming Languages
173
viii
CONTENTS
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Software Issues and Trends
176
Software Bugs
176
Copyrights and Licenses
177
Freeware and Open-Source Software
177
Software Upgrades
180
Global Software Support
180
CASE ONE: Société de transport de Montréal (STM) Implements Innovative Mobile App
187
CASE TWO: FIMC Launches Mobile App to Provide Enhanced Roadside Assistance Services
188
5
Database Systems and Big Data
192
Data Fundamentals
194
Hierarchy of Data
195
Data Entities, Attributes, and Keys
195
The Database Approach
197
Data Modeling and Database Characteristics
199
Data Modeling
199
Relational Database Model
201
Data Cleansing
204
Relational Database Management Systems (DBMSs)
206
SQL Databases
206
Database Activities
207
Database Administration
212
Popular Database Management Systems
213
Using Databases with Other Software
214
Big Data
215
Characteristics of Big Data
216
Sources of Big Data
216
Big Data Uses
217
Challenges of Big Data
218
Data Management
219
Technologies Used to Process Big Data
222
Data Warehouses, Data Marts, and Data Lakes
222
NoSQL Databases
224
Hadoop
226
In-Memory Databases
227
CASE ONE: WholeWorldBand: Digital Recording Studio
234
CASE TWO: Mercy’s Big Data Project Aims to Boost Operations
235
6
Networks and Cloud Computing
238
Network Fundamentals
241
Network Topology
241
Network Types
242
Client/Server Systems
244
Channel Bandwidth
244
Communications Media
245
Communications Hardware
251
Communications Software
251
The Internet and World Wide Web
253
How the Internet Works
255
CONTENTS
ix
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Accessing the Internet
257
How the Web Works
259
Web Programming Languages
261
Web Services
262
Developing Web Content and Applications
262
Internet and Web Applications
263
Intranets and Extranets
274
The Internet of Things
276
Cloud Computing
279
Public Cloud Computing
281
Private Cloud Computing
283
Hybrid Cloud Computing
283
Autonomic Computing
283
CASE ONE: Cloud Helps Fight Cancer
291
CASE TWO: Globacom Invests in Its Mobile Network Infrastructure in Africa
292
PART 3  Business Information Systems
295
7
Electronic and Mobile Commerce
296
An Introduction to Electronic Commerce
298
Business-to-Business E-Commerce
298
Business-to-Consumer E-Commerce
299
Consumer-to-Consumer E-Commerce
302
E-Government
303
Introduction to Mobile Commerce
304
Mobile Commerce in Perspective
305
M-Commerce Web Sites
305
Advantages of Electronic and Mobile Commerce
305
Multistage Model for E-Commerce
307
E-Commerce Challenges
310
Electronic and Mobile Commerce Applications
313
Wholesale e-Commerce
313
Manufacturing
314
Marketing
315
Advertising
316
Bartering
318
Investment and Finance
319
Banking
320
Online Personalized Shopping
321
Strategies for Successful E-Commerce and M-Commerce
322
Defining an Effective E-Commerce Model and Strategy
322
Defining the Functions of a Web Site
322
Establishing a Web Site
323
Building Traffic to Your Web Site
324
Maintaining and Improving Your Web Site
325
Technology Infrastructure Required to Support E-Commerce and M-Commerce
326
Hardware
327
Web Server Software
328
E-Commerce Software
328
x
CONTENTS
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Mobile Commerce Hardware and Software
328
Electronic Payment Systems
329
CASE ONE: Facebook Moves into E-Commerce
339
CASE TWO: MobiKash: Bringing Financial Services to Rural Africa
339
8
Enterprise Systems
344
Transaction Processing Systems
346
Traditional Transaction Processing Methods and Objectives
347
Transaction Processing Systems for Entrepreneurs and Small and
Medium-Sized Enterprises
352
Transaction Processing Activities
352
Enterprise Systems
356
Enterprise Resource Planning
356
Advantages of ERP
357
Leading ERP Systems
359
Supply Chain Management
361
Customer Relationship Management
363
Product Lifecycle Management
367
Overcoming Challenges in Implementing Enterprise Systems
371
Hosted Software Model for Enterprise Software
372
CASE ONE: Dunkin’ Donuts Prepares for Rapid Growth
379
CASE TWO: Kerry Group Is on Your Table
380
9
Business Intelligence and Analytics
382
What Are Analytics and Business Intelligence?
384
Benefits Achieved from BI and Analytics
385
The Role of a Data Scientist
386
Components Required for Effective BI and Analytics
387
Business Intelligence and Analytics Tools
388
Spreadsheets
388
Reporting and Querying Tools
389
Data Visualization Tools
389
Online Analytical Processing
391
Drill-Down Analysis
392
Linear Regression
393
Data Mining
394
Dashboards
395
Self-Service Analytics
397
CASE ONE: Analytics Used to Predict Patients Likely to Be Readmitted
404
CASE TWO: Sunny Delight Improves Profitability with a Self-Service BI Solution
405
10
Knowledge Management and Specialized Information
Systems
408
What Is Knowledge Management?
410
Knowledge Management Applications and Associated Benefits
412
Best Practices for Selling and Implementing a KM Project
413
Technologies That Support KM
415
CONTENTS
xi
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Overview of Artificial Intelligence
421
Artificial Intelligence in Perspective
422
Nature of Intelligence
422
Brain-Computer Interface
424
Expert Systems
424
Robotics
428
Vision Systems
429
Natural Language Processing
429
Learning Systems
430
Neural Networks
430
Other Artificial Intelligence Applications
431
Multimedia and Virtual Reality
432
Overview of Multimedia
433
Overview of Virtual Reality
435
Interface Devices
436
Forms of Virtual Reality
437
Virtual Reality Applications
437
Other Specialized Systems
439
Assistive Technology Systems
439
Game Theory
440
Informatics
441
CASE ONE: The NASA Knowledge Map
449
CASE TWO: Doctor on Demand Enables Physicians to Make House Calls
450
PART 4 
Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
455
11
Strategic Planning and Project Management
456
Strategic Planning
458
Analyze Situation
459
Set Direction
461
Define Strategies
464
Deploy Plan
465
Setting the Information System Organizational Strategy
467
Identifying IS Projects and Initiatives
469
Prioritizing IS Projects and Initiatives
469
Project Management
471
Project Variables
472
What Is Project Management?
475
Project Management Knowledge Areas
475
CASE ONE: UConn’s University Information Technology Services (UITS)
Develops a Five-Year Strategic Plan
497
CASE TWO: Webcor: Building Buy-In in the Brick-and-Mortar Business
498
12
System Acquisition and Development
502
Buy versus Build
504
Waterfall System Development Process
506
System Investigation
507
System Analysis
514
xii
CONTENTS
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

System Design
521
Construction
526
Integration and Testing
529
Implementation
530
System Operation and Maintenance
534
Agile Development
539
Buying Off-the-Shelf Software
542
Package Evaluation Phase
543
Finalize Contract
545
Integration and Testing
546
Implementation
546
CASE ONE: Etsy Uses DevOps for Rapid Deployment
555
CASE TWO: British Telecom Spreading Agile Development across the Globe
556
PART 5 
Information Systems in Business and Society
559
13
Cybercrime and Information System Security
560
The Threat Landscape
562
Why Computer Incidents Are So Prevalent
562
Types of Exploits
565
Federal Laws for Prosecuting Computer Attacks
576
Implementing Secure, Private, Reliable Computing
577
Risk Assessment
577
Establishing a Security Policy
579
Educating Employees and Contract Workers
579
Prevention
580
Detection
583
Response
584
Using a Managed Security Service Provider (MSSP)
586
Computer Forensics
586
CASE ONE: Fairplay Turns to a Managed Security Service Provider
593
CASE TWO: Sony’s Response to North Korea’s Cyberattack
594
14
Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems
598
Computer Waste and Mistakes
600
Computer Waste
600
Computer-Related Mistakes
601
Preventing Computer-Related Waste and Mistakes
603
Privacy Issues
606
Privacy and the Federal Government
606
Privacy at Work
609
Privacy and Email
610
Privacy and Instant Messaging
611
Privacy and Personal Sensing Devices
611
Privacy and the Internet
612
Privacy and Internet Libel Concerns
613
Privacy and Fairness in Information Use
614
Privacy and Filtering and Classifying Internet Content
614
CONTENTS
xiii
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Corporate Privacy Policies
615
Individual Efforts to Protect Privacy
617
Work Environment
618
Health Concerns
619
Avoiding Health and Environmental Problems
619
Ethical Issues in Information Systems
622
What Is Ethics?
622
Codes of Ethics
624
CASE ONE: FBI Orders Apple to Unlock iPhone
631
CASE TWO: Protecting Health Care Privacy
632
Glossary
636
Subject Index
647
Company Index
657
xiv
CONTENTS
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Preface
As organizations and entrepreneurs continue to operate in an increasingly
competitive and global marketplace, workers in all business areas includ-
ing accounting, customer service, distribution, finance, human resources,
information systems, logistics, marketing, manufacturing, research and
development, and sales must be well prepared to make the significant
contributions required for success. Regardless of your future role, even
if you are an entrepreneur, you need to understand what information
systems can and cannot do and be able to use them to help you achieve
personal and organizational goals. You will be expected to discover
opportunities to use information systems and to participate in the design
and implementation of solutions to business problems employing informa-
tion systems. To be successful, you must be able to view information
systems from the perspective of business and organizational needs. For
your solutions to be accepted, you must recognize and address their
impact on coworkers, customers, suppliers, and other key business part-
ners. For these reasons, a course in information systems is essential for
students in today’s high-tech world.
Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth Edition, continues the tradi-
tion and approach of previous editions. Our primary objective is to provide
the best information systems text and accompanying materials for the first
information systems course required for all business students. We want you
to learn to use information systems to ensure your personal success in your
current or future role and to improve the success of your organization.
Through surveys, questionnaires, focus groups, and feedback that we have
received from current and past adopters, as well as others who teach in the
field, we have been able to develop the highest-quality set of teaching materi-
als available to help you achieve these goals.
Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth Edition, stands proudly
at the beginning of the IS curriculum and remains unchallenged in its
position as the only IS principles text offering basic IS concepts that
every business student must learn to be successful. Instructors of the intro-
ductory course faced a dilemma. On one hand, experience in business
organizations allows students to grasp the complexities underlying impor-
tant IS concepts. For this reason, many schools delayed presenting these
concepts until students completed a large portion of their core business
requirements. On the other hand, delaying the presentation of IS concepts
until students have matured within the business curriculum often forces
the one or two required introductory IS courses to focus only on personal
computing software tools and, at best, merely to introduce computer
concepts.
This text has been written specifically for the introductory course in the IS
curriculum. Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth Edition, addresses
the appropriate computer and IS concepts while also providing a strong man-
agerial emphasis on meeting business and organizational needs.
xv
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Approach of This Text
Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth Edition, offers the traditional
coverage of computer concepts, but places the material within the context
of meeting business and organizational needs. Placing information systems
concepts within this context and taking a management perspective has
always set this text apart from other computer texts, thus making it appeal-
ing not only to MIS majors but also to students from other fields of study.
The text is not overly technical, but rather deals with the role that informa-
tion systems play in an organization and the key principles a manager or
technology specialist needs to grasp to be successful. The principles of IS
are brought together and presented in a way that is understandable, rele-
vant, and interesting. In addition, the text offers an overview of the entire IS
discipline, while giving students a solid foundation for further study in more
advanced IS courses such as programming, systems analysis and design,
project management, database management, data communications, Web site
design and development, information system security, big data and analytics,
electronic and mobile commerce, and informatics. As such, it serves the
needs of both general business managers and those who aspire to become
IS professionals.
The overall vision, framework, and pedagogy that made the previous
editions so popular have been retained in the Thirteenth Edition, offering a
number of benefits to students and instructors. While the fundamental vision
of this market-leading text remains unchanged, the Thirteenth Edition more
clearly highlights established principles and draws on new ones that have
emerged as a result of business, organizational, technological, and societal
changes.
IS Principles First, Where They Belong
Exposing students to basic IS principles is an advantage even for those
students who take no IS courses beyond the introductory IS course. Since
most functional areas of the business rely on information systems, an
understanding of IS principles helps students in their other course work.
In addition, introducing students to the principles of information systems
helps future business managers and entrepreneurs employ information
systems successfully and avoid mishaps that often result in unfortunate conse-
quences. Furthermore, presenting IS concepts at the introductory level creates
interest among students who may later choose information systems as their
field of concentration.
Author Team
Ralph Stair and George Reynolds have decades of academic and industrial
experience. Ralph Stair brings years of writing, teaching, and academic
experience to this text. He wrote numerous books and a large number of
articles while at Florida State University. George Reynolds brings a wealth
of information systems and business experience to the project, with more
than 30 years of experience working in government, institutional, and
commercial IS organizations. He has written numerous IS texts and has
taught the introductory IS course at the University of Cincinnati, Mount
St. Joseph University, and Strayer University. The Stair and Reynolds
team presents a solid conceptual foundation and practical IS experience
to students.
xvi
PREFACE
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Goals of This Text
Because Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth Edition, is written for
business majors, we believe that it is important not only to present a realistic
perspective on IS in business but also to provide students with the skills they
can use to be effective business leaders in their organizations. To that end,
Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth Edition, has three main goals:
1.
To provide a set of core IS principles that prepare students to function
more efficiently and effectively as workers, managers, decision makers,
and organizational leaders
2.
To provide insights into the challenging and changing role of the IS pro-
fessional so that students can better appreciate the role of this key
individual
3.
To show the value of the IS discipline as an attractive field of specializa-
tion so that students can evaluate this as a potential career path
IS Principles
Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth Edition, although comprehen-
sive, cannot cover every aspect of the rapidly changing IS discipline. The
authors, having recognized this, provide students with an essential core of
guiding IS principles to use as they strive to use IS systems in their academic
and work environment. Think of principles as basic truths or rules that
remain constant regardless of the situation. As such, they provide strong guid-
ance for tough decision making. A set of IS principles is highlighted at the
beginning of each chapter. The use of these principles to solve real-world
problems is driven home from the opening examples of cutting edge applica-
tions to the dozens of real-world examples of organizations applying these
principles interspersed throughout each chapter to the interesting and
diverse end-of-chapter material. The ultimate goal of Principles of Information
Systems, Thirteenth Edition, is to develop effective, thinking, action-oriented
students by instilling them with principles to help guide their decision making
and actions.
Survey of the IS Discipline
Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth Edition, not only offers the tra-
ditional coverage of computer concepts but also provides a broad framework
to impart students with a solid grounding in the business uses of technology,
the challenges of successful implementation, the necessity for gaining broad
adoption of information systems, and the potential ethical and societal issues
that may arise. In addition to serving general business students, this book
offers an overview of the entire IS discipline and solidly prepares future IS
professionals for advanced IS courses and careers in the rapidly changing IS
discipline.
Changing Role of the IS Professional
As business and the IS discipline have changed, so too has the role of the IS
professional. Once considered a technical specialist, today the IS professional
operates as an internal consultant to all functional areas of the organization,
being knowledgeable about their needs and competent in bringing the power
of information systems to bear throughout the entire organization. The IS pro-
fessional must view issues through a global perspective that encompasses the
entire enterprise and the broader industry and business environment in
which it operates.
PREFACE
xvii
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The scope of responsibilities of an IS professional today is not confined to
just his or her organization but encompasses the entire ecosystem of employ-
ees, contractors, suppliers, customers, competitors, regulatory agencies, and
other entities, no matter where they are located. This broad scope of responsi-
bilities creates a new challenge: how to help an organization survive in our
highly interconnected, highly competitive global environment. In accepting
that challenge, the IS professional plays a pivotal role in shaping the business
itself and ensuring its success. To survive, businesses must strive for the high-
est level of customer satisfaction and loyalty through innovative products and
services, competitive prices, and ever-improving product and service quality.
The IS professional assumes a critical role in determining the organization’s
approach to both overall cost and quality performance and therefore plays an
important role in the ongoing growth of the organization. This new duality in
the role of the IS worker—a professional who exercises a specialist’s skills
with a generalist’s perspective—is reflected throughout Principles of Informa-
tion Systems, Thirteenth Edition.
IS as a Field of Study
Computer science and business were ranked #1 and #4, respectively, in the
2016 Princeton Review list of top 10 college majors based on research covering
job prospects, alumni salaries, and popularity. A 2016 U.S. News & World
Report study placed computer systems analyst, software developer, and Web
developer as three of the top 20 best jobs for 2016 based on hiring demand,
median salary, employment rate, future job prospects, stress level, and work–
life balance. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics identified software developers,
computer systems analysts, and computer support specialists as among the fast-
est growing occupations for the period 2012 and 2022. Clearly, the long-term
job prospects for skilled and business-savvy information systems professionals
is good. Employment of such workers is expected to grow faster than the aver-
age for all occupations through the year 2022. Upon graduation, IS graduates at
many schools are among the highest paid of all business graduates.
A career in IS can be exciting, challenging, and rewarding! Today, per-
haps more than ever before, the IS professional must be able to align IS and
organizational goals and to ensure that IS investments are justified from a
business perspective. The need to draw bright and interested students into
the IS discipline is part of our ongoing responsibility. Throughout this text,
the many challenges and opportunities available to IS professionals are
highlighted and emphasized.
Changes in the Thirteenth Edition
A number of exciting changes have been made to the text based on user feed-
back on how to align the text even more closely with changing IS needs and
capabilities of organizations. Here is a summary of those changes:
●
Did You Know? Each chapter begins with two or three examples of cut-
ting edge applications illustrating the concepts covered in the chapter.
●
Critical Thinking Exercises. Each exercise features a scenario followed
by two review and two critical thinking questions. Placed at the end of
each major section of each chapter, these exercises test the student’s
grasp of the material just read. Students must analyze a real-life scenario
and synthesize the information provided to develop a recommendation of
what needs to be done. The exercises can also be used to stimulate class
discussion or as additional “mini cases” that may be assigned as individual
or team exercises.
xviii
PREFACE
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Updated case studies. Two end-of-chapter case studies for each chapter
provide a wealth of practical information for students and instructors. Each
case explores a chapter concept or problem that a real-world organization
has faced. The cases can be assigned as individual or team homework
exercises or serve as the basis for class discussion.
●
Updated summary linked to objectives. Each chapter includes a
detailed summary, with each section of the summary updated as needed
and tied to an associated information system principle.
●
Updated end-of-the chapter questions and exercises. More than half of
the extensive end-of-chapter exercises (Self-Assessment Test, Review
Questions, Discussion Questions, Problem-Solving Exercises, Team Activi-
ties, Web Exercises, and Career Exercises) are new.
●
New chapters covering the latest IS developments. New chapters
include Database Systems and Big Data, Business Intelligence and
Analytics, Strategic Planning and Project Management, System Acquisition
and Development, and Cybercrime and Information System Security.
These chapters cover important topics such as data governance, Hadoop,
NoSQL databases, Cross-Industry Process for Data Mining, various
business analytics techniques, self-service analytics, SWOT analysis, the
nine project management knowledge areas, project steering team, agile
development, DevOps, extreme programming, Pareto principle, advanced
persistent threat, cyberterrorism, next-generation firewall, risk assessment,
and zero-day attack.
●
Extensive changes and updates in each chapter. The remaining
chapters in the text have all been extensively updated to provide the latest
information available on a wide range of IS-related topics including
hundreds of new and current examples of organizations and individuals
illustrating the principles presented in the text. In addition, a strong effort
was made to update the art work and figures with over 50 new figures
and images.
Online Solutions
MindTap™
MindTap for Stair/Reynolds Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth
Edition, is a truly innovative reading experience with assignments that guide
students to analyze, apply, and improve thinking! Relevant readings, multime-
dia, and activities are designed to move students up the levels of learning, from
basic knowledge and comprehension to application, analysis, synthesis, and
evaluation. Embedded within the eReader, ConceptClips focus on the challenge
of understanding complicated IS terminology and concepts. Student-tested and
approved, the videos are quick, entertaining, and memorable visual and audi-
tory representations of challenging topics. Also embedded within the MindTap
eReader, animated figures and graphs provide a visual and at times interactive
and auditory enhancement to previously static text examples.
MindTap allows instructors to measure skills and outcomes with ease.
Personalized teaching becomes yours through a Learning Path built with key
student objectives and the ability to control what students see and when they
see it. Analytics and reports provide a snapshot of class progress, time in
course, engagement, and completion rates.
ConceptClips
ConceptClip videos help students learn and comprehend intro-level information
systems terminology by introducing new terms in a friendly and memorable
PREFACE
xix
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

way. Sixteen new concept clips have been created for a total of 44 concept
clips.
Adaptive Test Prep
This application allows students to take sample tests designed specifically to
mimic the test bank question instructors use to build real exams. Over 750
questions are included.
Student Resources
Accessible through CengageBrain.com, the student companion Web site contains
the following study tools (and more!) to enhance one’s learning experience:
PowerPoint Slides
Direct access is offered to the book’s PowerPoint presentations that cover the
key points of each chapter.
Classic Cases
A frequent request from adopters is that they’d like a broader selection of
cases to choose from. To meet this need, a set of over 50 cases from the text
are included here. These are the author’s choices of the “best cases” from
these editions and span a broad range of profit, nonprofit, small, medium,
and large organizations in a broad range of industries.
Instructor Resources
Instructor Companion Site
As always, we are committed to providing the best teaching resource
packages available in this market. All instructor materials can be found on the
password-protected Web site at http://login.cengage.com. Here you will find
the following resources:
●
Instructor’s Manual The comprehensive manual provides valuable chap-
ter overviews; highlights key principles and critical concepts; offers sam-
ple syllabi, learning objectives, and discussion topics; and features
possible essay topics, further readings, cases, and solutions to all of the
end-of-chapter questions and problems, as well as suggestions for con-
ducting the team activities. Additional end-of-chapter questions are also
included.
●
Sample Syllabus A sample syllabus for both a quarter and semester-
length course is provided with sample course outlines to make planning
your course that much easier.
●
PowerPoint Presentations A set of impressive Microsoft PowerPoint
slides is available for each chapter. These slides are included to serve as a
teaching aid for classroom presentation, to make available to students on
the network for chapter review, or to be printed for classroom distribu-
tion. The goal of the presentations is to help students focus on the main
topics of each chapter, take better notes, and prepare for examinations.
Instructors can add their own slides for additional topics they introduce to
the class.
●
Figure Files Figure files allow instructors to create their own presentations
using figures taken directly from the text.
xx
PREFACE
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Test Bank and Cengage Learning Testing Powered
by Cognero
Cognero is a full-featured, online-assessment system that allows instructors to
manage test bank content, quickly create multiple test versions, deliver tests
in several forms including from an LMS, and create test banks anywhere with
Internet access!
To access Cognero, log into your Cengage Learning SSO account at http://
login.cengage.com. Add this title to the bookshelf. Once the title is properly
added to the bookshelf, a link to access Cognero will appear alongside
the link to the instructor companion site. Technical questions, guides, and
tutorials are hosted on Cengage Learning Technical Support Web site—http://
support.cengage.com.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Creation of a text of this scope takes a strong team effort. We would like to
thank all of our fellow teammates at Course Technology for their dedication
and hard work. We would like to thank Joe Sabatino, our Product Director,
for his overall leadership and guidance on this effort. Special thanks to
Jonathan Gross Aand Michelle Cannistraci, our Content Developers,... who
shepherded the text through the production process and kept us on track.
We are grateful for the excellent work by Michelle Ruelos Cannistraci in man-
aging the creation of the many supplements to accompany the text. Our
appreciation also goes to Arul Joseph Raj, Joseph Malcolm, Brittani Morgan,
Jennifer Ziegler, Aruna Sekar, Kathy Kucharek, and Mathangi Anantharaman.
We would also like to thank Kristen Maxwell of Evil Cyborg Productions
for creating the ConceptClips videos that so humorously bring many key
terms found in the text to life.
We would especially like to thank Mary Pat Schaffer for her outstanding
work in editing the text and keeping track of the many revisions and changes.
She also did an outstanding job in writing many of the end-of-chapter cases
and creating initial drafts of four of the chapters.
Our Commitment
We are committed to listening to our adopters and readers in order to develop
creative solutions to meet their needs. The field of IS continually evolves, and
we strongly encourage your participation in helping us provide the freshest,
most relevant information possible.
We welcome your input and feedback. If you have any questions or com-
ments regarding Principles of Information Systems, Thirteenth Edition, please
contact us through your local representative.
PREFACE
xxi
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

PART1
Information Systems
in Perspective
Chapter 1
An Introduction to Information
Systems
Chapter 2
Information Systems in Organizations
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock.com
1
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
1
An Introduction to
Information Systems
Syda Productions/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• The number of smartphones sold worldwide in 2015
exceeded 1.4 billion—over twice the combined sales of
desktop, laptop, and tablet computers. The smartphone
is increasingly becoming the device of choice for
accessing the Internet and corporate databases.
• Although the success rate has improved over time with
improved methods, training, and tools, 94 percent of
very large software projects fail or are challenged. For
example, Federal officials badly managed the develop-
ment of a Web site to sell health insurance under the
Affordable Care Act, costing taxpayers hundreds of
millions of dollars in cost overruns.
• Financial losses from cybercrime and the cost of hard-
ware, software, and various countermeasures imple-
mented to fight cybercrime are estimated to be as high
as $400 billion annually worldwide. A data breach at
Target exposed personal information about 110 million
customers, led the CEO to resign, and cost the com-
pany an estimated $148 million.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• The value of information is directly linked to how it
helps decision makers achieve the organization’s
goals.
• Information systems are composed of fundamen-
tal components that must be carefully assembled
and integrated to work well together.
• Managers have an essential role to play in the
successful implementation and use of information
systems—that role changes depending on which
type of IS system is being implemented.
• An organization’s infrastructure technology forms
the foundation upon which its systems and appli-
cations are built.
• Organizations employ a variety of information
systems to improve the way they conduct busi-
ness and make fact-based decisions.
• Many challenges and potential benefits are asso-
ciated with harnessing the rapid growth of data
within organizations.
• Strategic planning and project management are
keys to ensuring that the organization is working
effectively on the right projects.
• Information systems must be applied thoughtfully
and carefully so that society, organizations, and
individuals around the globe can reap their enor-
mous benefits.
• Distinguish data from information and knowl-
edge, and describe the characteristics of
quality data.
• Identify the fundamental components of an
information system and describe their
function.
• Identify the three fundamental information system
types and explain what organizational comple-
ments must be in place to ensure successful
implementation and use of the system.
• Identify and briefly describe the role of each
component of an organization’s technology
infrastructure.
• Identify the basic types of business information
systems, including who uses them, how they are
used, and what kinds of benefits they deliver.
• Describe how organizations are using business
intelligence and business analytics to capitalize
on the vast amount of data becoming available.
• Discuss why it is critical for business objectives
and IS activities to be well aligned through system
planning, development, and acquisition.
• Identify several major IT security threats as well as
some of the legal, social, and ethical issues
associated with information systems.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Information Systems?
We live in an information economy. Information itself has real value, and in order to stay competitive,
organizations require a steady flow of information about their business partners, competitors,
customers, employees, markets, and suppliers. Information systems are increasingly being used to
gather, store, digest, analyze, and make sense out of all this information. Indeed, information systems
are even embedded in and control many of the products we use on a daily basis. Using information
systems, individuals communicate instantaneously with one another; consumers make purchases online
using mobile devices; project members dispersed globally and across multiple organizations collaborate
effectively; financial institutions manage billions of dollars in assets around the world; and
manufacturers partner with suppliers and customers to track inventory, order supplies, and distribute
goods faster than ever before.
Information systems will continue to change businesses and the way we live. Indeed, many
corporate leaders are using technology to rework every aspect of their organization from product and
service creation through production, delivery, and customer service. To prepare to participate in and
lead these innovations, you must be familiar with fundamental information concepts. Regardless of your
college major or chosen career, knowledge of information systems is indispensable in helping you land
your first job. The ability to recognize and capitalize on information system opportunities can make you
an even more valuable member of your organization and will ultimately help advance your career.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• How are organizations using information systems to accomplish their objectives and meet ever-changing
business needs?
• What role might you have in identifying the need for, acquiring, or using such systems?
This chapter presents an overview of the material covered in the text. The
chapter is divided into five major sections corresponding to the five sections
of the text. The chapters included in each section of the text are highlighted
as a subsection and briefly summarized. The essential material will receive
fuller treatment in subsequent chapters.
Part 1: Information Systems in Perspective
We begin by examining the topics covered in “Part 1: Information Systems in
Perspective,” which includes an “An Introduction to Information Systems”
and a discussion of “Information Systems in Organizations.”
An Introduction to Information Systems
Information is a central concept of this book. The term is used in the title of
the book, in this section, and in every chapter. To be an effective manager in
any area of business, you need to understand that information is one of an
organization’s most valuable resources. Information is not the same thing as
data, and knowledge is different from both data and information. These con-
cepts will now be explained.
Data, Information, and Knowledge
Data consists of raw facts, such as an employee number, total hours worked
in a week, an inventory part number, or the number of units produced on a
production line. As shown in Table 1.1, several types of data can represent
these facts. Information is a collection of data organized and processed so
that it has additional value beyond the value of the individual facts. For exam-
ple, a sales manager may want individual sales data summarized so it shows
the total sales for the month. Providing information to customers can also
data: Raw facts such as an employee
number or total hours worked in a
week.
information: A collection of data
organized and processed so that it has
additional value beyond the value of the
individual facts.
4
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

help companies increase revenues and profits. For example, social shopping
Web site Kaboodle brings shoppers and sellers together electronically so they
can share information and make recommendations while shopping online.
The free exchange of information stimulates sales and helps ensure shoppers
find better values.
Another way to appreciate the difference between data and information is
to think of data as the individual items in a grocery list—crackers, bread,
soup, cereal, coffee, dishwashing soap, and so on. The grocery list becomes
much more valuable if the items in the list are arranged in order by the aisle
in which they are found in the store—bread and cereal in aisle 1, crackers
and soup in aisle 2, and so on. Data and information work the same way.
Rules and relationships can be set up to organize data so it becomes useful,
valuable information.
The value of the information created depends on the relationships defined
among existing data. For instance, you could add specific identifiers to the items
in the list to ensure that the shopper brings home the correct item—whole
wheat bread and Kashi cereal in aisle 1, saltine crackers and chicken noodle
soup in aisle 2, and so on. By doing so, you create a more useful grocery list.
Turning data into information is a process, or a set of logically related
tasks performed to achieve a defined outcome. The process of defining rela-
tionships among data to create useful information requires knowledge,
which is the awareness and understanding of a set of information and the
ways in which that information can be made useful to support a specific task
or reach a decision. In other words, information is essentially data made
more useful through the application of knowledge. For instance, there are
many brands and varieties of most items on a typical grocery list. To shop
effectively, the grocery shopper needs to have an understanding of the needs
and desires of those being shopped for so that he knows to purchase one can
of Campbell’s (not the store brand!) low-sodium chicken noodle soup for the
family member who is diabetic along with two cans of Campbell’s regular
chicken noodle soup for everyone else.
In some cases, people organize or process data mentally or manually.
In other cases, they use a computer. This transformation process is shown
in Figure 1.1.
The Value of Information
The value of information is directly linked to how it helps decision makers
achieve their organization’s goals. Valuable information can help people per-
form tasks more efficiently and effectively. Many businesses assume that
reports are based on correct, quality information, but, unfortunately, that is
not always true. For example, Experian (a global information services firm
that provides credit services, marketing services, decision analytics, and con-
sumer services) estimates that on average, 22 percent of an organization’s cus-
tomer contact data is wrong.1 Companies can easily waste over $100 per
inaccurate customer contact data record on things like direct-mail marketing
sent to wrong addresses and the inability to properly track leads. For an
TABLE 1.1 Types of data
Data
Represented By
Alphanumeric data
Numbers, letters, and other characters
Audio data
Sounds, noises, or tones
Image data
Graphic images and pictures
Video data
Moving images or pictures
process: A set of logically related
tasks performed to achieve a defined
outcome.
knowledge: The awareness and
understanding of a set of information
and the ways that information can be
made useful to support a specific task
or reach a decision.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
5
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

organization with 100,000 customers and a 22 percent error rate, that projects
to a loss of $2.2 million.2
Characteristics of Quality Information
Fundamental to the quality of a decision is the quality of the information used
to reach that decision. Any organization that stresses the use of advanced infor-
mation systems and sophisticated data analysis before information quality is
doomed to make many wrong decisions. Table 1.2 lists the characteristics that
determine the quality of information. The importance of each of these charac-
teristics varies depending on the situation and the kind of decision you are try-
ing to make. For example, with market intelligence data, some inaccuracy and
incompleteness is acceptable, but timeliness is essential. Market intelligence
data may alert you that a competitor is about to make a major price cut. The
exact details and timing of the price cut may not be as important as being
warned far enough in advance to plan how to react. On the other hand, accu-
racy and completeness are critical for data used in accounting for the manage-
ment of company assets, such as cash, inventory, and equipment.
What Is an Information System?
Another central concept of this book is that of an information system. People and
organizations use information systems every day. An information system (IS)
is a set of interrelated components that collect, process, store, and disseminate
data and information; an information system provides a feedback mechanism to
monitor and control its operation to make sure it continues to meet its goals and
objectives. The feedback mechanism is critical to helping organizations achieve
their goals, such as increasing profits or improving customer service.
A computer-based information system (CBIS) is a single set of hard-
ware, software, databases, networks, people, and procedures that are config-
ured
to
collect,
manipulate,
store,
and
process
data
into
information.
Increasingly, companies are incorporating computer-based information systems
FIGURE 1.1
Process of transforming data
into information
Transforming data into information
starts by selecting data, then orga-
nizing it, and finally manipulating
the data.
Select data
Organize data
Data (2,1)
Data (3,1)
Data (n,1)
Data (2,2)
Data (3,2)
Manipulate data
Total 1
Total 2
Total 3
Data (2,3)
Data (3,3)
Data (n,2)
Data (n,3)
Data
Data
Data
Data (1,1)
Data (1,2)
Data (1,3)
information system (IS): A set of
interrelated components that collect,
process, store, and disseminate data
and information; an information system
provides a feedback mechanism to
monitor and control its operation to
make sure it continues to meet its goals
and objectives.
computer-based information
system (CBIS): A single set of
hardware, software, databases, net-
works, people, and procedures that are
configured to collect, manipulate, store,
and process data into information.
6
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

into their products and services. Investment companies offer their customers a
wide range of powerful investment tools, including access to extensive online
research. Automobiles are available with advanced navigation systems that not
only guide you to your destination but also incorporate information regarding
the latest weather and traffic conditions to help you avoid congestion and traf-
fic delays. Watches, digital cameras, mobile phones, music players, and other
devices rely on CBIS to bring their users the latest and greatest features.
The components of a CBIS are illustrated in Figure 1.2. An organization’s
technology infrastructure includes all the hardware, software, databases,
networks, people, and procedures that are configured to collect, manipulate,
TABLE 1.2 Characteristics of quality information
Characteristic
Definition
Accessible
Information should be easily accessible by authorized users so
they can obtain it in the right format and at the right time to
meet their needs.
Accurate
Accurate information is error free. In some cases, inaccurate
information is generated because inaccurate data is fed into the
transformation process. This is commonly called garbage in,
garbage out.
Complete
Complete information contains all the important facts. For
example, an investment report that does not include all
important costs is not complete.
Economical
Information should also be relatively economical to produce.
Decision makers must always balance the value of information
with the cost of producing it.
Flexible
Flexible information can be used for a variety of purposes. For
example, information on how much inventory is on hand for a
particular part can be used by a sales representative in closing
a sale, by a production manager to determine whether more
inventory is needed, and by a financial executive to determine
the amount of money the company has invested in inventory.
Relevant
Relevant information is important to the decision maker.
Information showing that lumber prices might drop is proba-
bly not relevant to a computer chip manufacturer.
Reliable
Reliable information can be trusted by users. In many cases,
the reliability of the information depends on the reliability of
the data-collection method. In other instances, reliability
depends on the source of the information. A rumor from an
unknown source that oil prices might go up may not be
reliable.
Secure
Information should be secure from access by unauthorized
users.
Simple
Information should be simple, not complex. Sophisticated and
detailed information might not be needed. In fact, too much
information can cause information overload, whereby a deci-
sion maker has too much information and is unable to deter-
mine what is really important.
Timely
Timely information is delivered when it is needed. Knowing
last week’s weather conditions will not help when trying to
decide what coat to wear today.
Verifiable
Information should be verifiable. This means that you can
check it to make sure it is correct, perhaps by checking many
sources for the same information.
technology infrastructure: All
the hardware, software, databases,
networks, people, and procedures that
are configured to collect, manipulate,
store, and process data into
information.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
7
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

store, and process data into information. The technology infrastructure is a set
of shared IS resources that form the foundation of each computer-based infor-
mation system.
People make the difference between success and failure in all organiza-
tions. Jim Collins, in his book, Good to Great, said, “Those who build great
companies understand that the ultimate throttle on growth for any great com-
pany is not markets, or technology, or competition, or products. It is one
thing above all others: the ability to get and keep enough of the right
people.”3 Thus, it comes as no surprise that people are the most important
element in computer-based information systems.
Good systems can enable people to produce extraordinary results. They
can also boost job satisfaction and worker productivity.4 Information systems
personnel include all the people who manage, run, program, and maintain
the system, including the chief information officer (CIO), who leads the IS
organization. End users are people who work directly with information sys-
tems to get results. They include financial executives, marketing representa-
tives, and manufacturing line operators.
A procedure defines the steps to follow to achieve a specific end result,
such as enter a customer order, pay a supplier invoice, or request a current
inventory report. Good procedures describe how to achieve the desired end
result, who does what and when, and what to do in the event something
goes wrong. When people are well trained and follow effective procedures,
they can get work done faster, cut costs, make better use of resources, and
more easily adapt to change. When procedures are well documented, they
can greatly reduce training costs and shorten the learning curve.
Using a CBIS involves setting and following many procedures, including
those for the operation, maintenance, and security of the system. For
Software
Dukes/Shutterstock.com 
Sashkin/Shutterstock.com
Dusit/Shutterstock.com
NasonovVasiliy/Shutterstock.com
Noolwlee/Shutterstock.com 
Networks
Hardware
Hardware
Andresr/Shutterstock.com
People
Procedures
FIGURE 1.2
Components of a computer-based information system
Hardware, software, networks, people, and procedures are part of a business’s technology infrastructure.
procedure: A set of steps that need
to be followed to achieve a specific end
result, such as enter a customer order,
pay a supplier invoice, or request a
current inventory report.
8
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

example, some procedures describe how to gain access to the system
through the use of some log-on procedure and a password. Others
describe who can access facts in the database or what to do if a disaster,
such as a fire, earthquake, or hurricane, renders the CBIS unusable. Good
procedures can help companies take advantage of new opportunities and
avoid lengthy business disruptions in the event of natural disasters. Poorly
developed and inadequately implemented procedures, however, can cause
people to waste their time on useless rules or result in inadequate
responses to disasters.
Information Systems in Organizations
Most organizations have a number of different information systems. When
considering the role of business managers in working with IS, it is useful to
divide information systems into three types: personal IS, group IS, and enter-
prise IS.
Personal IS includes information systems that improve the productivity
of individual users in performing stand-alone tasks. Examples include per-
sonal productivity software, such as word-processing, presentation, and
spreadsheet software.
In today’s fast-moving, global work environment, success depends on our
ability to communicate and collaborate with others, including colleagues, cli-
ents, and customers. Group IS includes information systems that improve
communications and support collaboration among members of a workgroup.
Examples include Web conferencing software, wikis, and electronic corporate
directories.
Enterprise IS includes information systems that organizations use to
define structured interactions among their own employees and/or with
external customers, suppliers, government agencies, and other business part-
ners. Successful implementation of these systems often requires the radical
redesign of fundamental work processes and the automation of new pro-
cesses. Target processes may include purely internal activities within the
organization (such as payroll) or those that support activities with external
customers and suppliers (order processing and purchasing). Three examples
of enterprise IT are transaction processing, enterprise, and interorganiza-
tional systems.
For each type of IS, certain key organizational complements must be in
place to ensure successful implementation and use of the system. These com-
plements include:
●
Well-trained workers. Employees must be well trained and understand
the need for the new system, what their role is in using or operating the
system, and how to get the results they need from the system.
●
System support. Trained and experienced users who can show others
how to gain value from the system and overcome start-up problems.
●
Better teamwork. Employees must understand and be motivated to work
together to achieve the anticipated benefits of the system.
●
Redesigned processes. New systems often require radical redesign of
existing work processes as well as the automation of new processes.
●
New decision rights. Employees must understand and accept their new
roles and responsibilities including who is responsible for making what
decisions. Roles and responsibilities often change with introduction of a
new system.
Managers have an essential role to play in the successful implementation
and use of information systems. That role changes depending on which type
of IS system is being implemented, as shown in Table 1.3, which also high-
lights other characteristics and provides examples of each type.
personal IS: An information system
that improves the productivity of indi-
vidual users in performing stand-alone
tasks.
group IS: An information system that
improves communications and support
collaboration among members of a
workgroup.
enterprise IS: An information sys-
tem that an organization uses to define
structured interactions among its own
employees and/or with external custo-
mers, suppliers, government agencies,
and other business partners.
organizational complement: A
key component that must be in place to
ensure successful implementation and
use of an information system.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
9
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Kroger’s QueVision System Improves Customer Service
Kroger has annual sales in excess of $100 billion and operates stores across the
United States under various names, including Kroger’s, Ralph’s, and Harris Teeter.
In surveys, Kroger’s customers have consistently rated waiting at the checkout
lane as the worst part of the grocery shopping experience. In response, Kroger
developed its QueVision computer-based information system, which relies on
real-time data feeds from point-of-sale systems as well as infrared sensors over
store doors and cash registers to count customers entering the store and standing
at checkout lanes. The system also uses historical point-of-sale records to forecast
the number of shoppers that can be expected and, therefore, the number of cash-
iers that will be needed. All this was done to achieve the goal of ensuring that
customers never have more than one person ahead of them in the checkout lane.
The system provides feedback by displaying customer checkout time on a screen
that both employees and customers can see—delivering a visible measure of how
well the whole system is working. The system is now deployed at over 2,300
stores in 31 states and has cut the average time a customer must wait to begin
checkout from four minutes to 30 seconds.5
You are a new store manager at a Kroger store where the QueVision system has
been deployed for two years. Unfortunately, since you took charge of this store two
weeks ago, you have received numerous complaints about the system from store cash-
iers and baggers. These employees are requesting that you either turn off the screen
that displays customer checkout time or add more cashiers and baggers to each shift
to reduce checkout times, which are currently averaging over six minutes.
Review Questions
1.
Would you classify the QueVision system as a personal, group, or enterprise
system?
2.
Four key organizational complements must be in place to ensure successful
implementation and use of a new system. Which two of these components
seem to be missing at your store?
TABLE 1.3 Examples and characteristics of each type of information system
Personal IS
Group IS
Enterprise IS
Examples
Personal productivity soft-
ware, decision-support
system
Email, instant messaging,
project management
software
Transaction processing
systems, enterprise sys-
tems, interorganizational
systems
Benefits
Improved productivity
Increased collaboration
Increased standardization
and ability to monitor work
Organizational comple-
ments (including well-
trained workers, better
teamwork, redesigned
processes, and new
decision rights)
●
Does not bring com-
plements with it
●
Partial benefits can be
achieved without all
complements being in
place
●
At least some comple-
ments must be in place
when IS “goes live”
●
Allows users to imple-
ment and modify com-
plements over time
●
Full complements must
be in place when IS
“goes live”
Manager’s role
●
Ensure that employees
understand and con-
nect to the change
●
Encourage use
●
Challenge workers to
find new uses
●
Demonstrate how
technology can be
used
●
Set norms for
participation
●
Identify and put into
place the full set of
organizational comple-
ments prior to adoption
●
Intervene forcefully
and continually to
ensure adoption
10
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Employees are requesting that you turn off the screen that displays customer
checkout time or add more cashiers and baggers to each shift to reduce wait
times. What action would you take to address the concerns of the cashiers
and baggers?
a.
Turn off the QueVision system now.
b.
Add more cashiers and baggers to each shift as soon as possible.
c.
Observe the checkout process and performance of cashiers and baggers
for a few days before taking action.
d.
Tell the cashiers and baggers their performance is unacceptable and to
“step it up.”
2.
Provide a brief rationale for your recommended course of action.
Part 2: Information Technology Concepts
Next, we look at the topics covered in “Part 2: Information Technology Con-
cepts,” including “Hardware and Mobile Devices,” “Software and Mobile
Applications,” “Database Systems and Big Data,” and “Networks and Cloud
Computing.” This discussion will help you understand basic concepts and pre-
pare you for more in-depth coverage in the individual chapters.
Hardware and Mobile Devices
Hardware consists of computer equipment used to perform input, proces-
sing, storage, and output activities. The trend in the computer industry is to
produce smaller, faster, and more mobile hardware, such as smartphones, lap-
tops, and tablet computers. In addition, hardware manufacturers and entre-
preneurs are hard at work developing innovative new hardware devices, such
as the following:
●
Advanced keyboards that turn individual keys on a keyboard into
trackpad-covered buttons where certain dual-purpose keys could be
depressed to multiple levels to complete different tasks; the spacebar, for
example, can serve its usual purpose. But add capacitive touch and it
becomes a cursor; press a little harder to generate a mouse click. (Capaci-
tive touch relies on the electrical properties of the human body to detect
when and where on a display the user touches. Because of this, capacitive
displays can be controlled with very light touches of a finger.)
●
Laptops and displays that connect wirelessly, thus eliminating the need
for expensive HDMI or DisplayPort display cables
●
Computing devices with embedded 3D cameras, which will be able to
recognize objects and even measure distances between things
●
Keyboards that enable users to log in to Web sites via fingerprint authen-
tication so they won’t have to remember dozens of passwords for differ-
ent sites
●
Very-high resolution display devices that will show content in incredible
detail and dramatically improve the viewing experience (think clarity and
resolution way beyond 1080p HD)
●
Computerized event data recorders (EDRs) that, like an airplane’s black
box, record vehicle speed, possible engine problems, driver performance,
and more
While desktop, laptop, and tablet computers continue to be used in a vari-
ety of settings, smartphones have become the primary device used by people
around
the
world
to
communicate,
go
online,
and
access
and
share
hardware: Computer equipment
used to perform input, processing,
storage, and output activities.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
11
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

information. In 2013, the number of smartphone users first exceeded the
number of personal computer users, and the gap keeps growing, with the
number of smartphones sold worldwide far exceeding the combined sale of
desktops, laptops, and tablets as shown in Figure 1.3. This rapid growth has
been spurred by the improving affordability and capability of smartphones,
the increasing speed and coverage of wireless networks, longer battery life,
and the availability of hundreds of thousands of smartphone applications and
games. For many people in developing countries, a smartphone is their first
computer and their only Internet-connected device. For those in developed
countries, it is common for individuals who do have a computer to also have
a smartphone. It is projected that roughly one-third of the world’s population
will own a smartphone by 2018.6
Software and Mobile Applications
Software consists of the computer programs that govern the operation of a
particular computing device, be it desktop computer, laptop, tablet, smart-
phone, or some other device. There are two types of software: system soft-
ware and application software. System software—such as Google’s Android
or Apple’s iOS—oversees basic computer operations such as start-up, controls
access to system resources, and manages memory and files. Application soft-
ware, such as Microsoft Office, allows you to accomplish specific tasks,
including editing text documents, creating graphs, and playing games. Both
system software and application software are needed for all types of compu-
ters, from small handheld devices to large supercomputers. In choosing appli-
cation software, you must choose software that will work with the operating
system installed on your computing device.
As of June 2015, 1.6 million applications were available for devices that
run under the Android operating system and roughly the same (1.5 million)
available for download from Apple’s App Store.8,9 The number of apps for
each operating system is increasing by roughly 25,000 to 50,000 per month.
Business application software can be categorized by whether it is
intended to be used by an individual, a small business, or a large multina-
tional enterprise. For example, Quicken has long been a favorite accounting
application for individuals who need money management and budgeting
tools to help them watch their spending, increase their savings, and avoid
late fees with alerts on upcoming payment due dates. QuickBooks, an
accounting application popular with small businesses, enables users to create
FIGURE 1.3
Millions of computing devices
sold worldwide7
The number of smartphones sold
worldwide far exceeds the combined
number of desktop, laptop, and
tablet computers.
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Year
1800
Millions of units sold
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Smartphone
Desktop
Laptop
Tablet
software: The computer programs
that govern the operation of a particular
computing device, be it desktop, laptop,
tablet, smartphone, or some other
device.
12
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

invoices, track sales and expenses, process credit card payments, run payroll,
and generate financial, tax, and sales reports. SAP ERP Financials is an
accounting application used by many large, multinational organizations to
manage the complexities of global accounting and reporting requirements.
SAP’s software records all financial transactions in a comprehensive general
ledger; supports sophisticated reporting requirements; provides management
accounting tools for orders, projects, cost centers, and profit centers; enables
the speedy and accurate closing of the firm’s books; and helps manage risk
and compliance across accounting and finance.
An important trend in the design of business application software is the
attempt to imitate the look, feel, and intuitive ease of use associated with con-
sumer apps that can be downloaded from the Google Play Store and the
Apple App Store. Indeed, usability and user-interface design are key factors
in delivering apps that business users will actually use. In some organizations,
employees can log on to enterprise app stores to acquire the latest company
software and software upgrades. This trend of consumer technology practices
influencing the way business software is designed and delivered is called the
consumerization of IT.
CDW is a leading provider of integrated information solutions to corpo-
rate customers in small, medium, and large private and public organizations
in the United States and Canada. The firm has established its App Marketplace
Web site (http://appmarketplace.cdw.com) where customers’ employees can
identify leading enterprise mobile app solutions. The Web site is easy to navi-
gate with apps organized by industry and app functions. The apps there have
already been vetted by CDW to perform effectively and reliably. In addition,
for those needing custom mobile apps, the Web site identifies mobile app
partners who have a proven track record of building, deploying, and updating
top enterprise applications.
Database Systems and Big Data
A database is an organized collection of facts and information, typically con-
sisting of two or more related data files. An organization’s database can con-
tain facts and information on customers, employees, inventory, sales, online
purchases, and much more. A database is essential to the operation of a
computer-based information system.
As anyone who works in marketing or sales knows, one of the biggest
challenges that any business faces is the ability to generate new leads in an
effort to locate customers. As businesses have looked for ways to meet this
challenge, numerous vendors have seized the opportunity by offering access
to databases of potential clients in various industries, as shown in Table 1.4.
TABLE 1.4 Sample of marketing databases used to generate sales leads
Industry
Database Vendor
Number of Records (Thousands)
Auto dealers
Oddity Software
110
Barber shops
Usable Databases
53
Dry cleaning/laundry
Oddity Software
42
Gas stations with convenience stores
CHD
56
Healthcare providers and decision
makers
SK & A
2,100
Music retail outlets
Almighty Music Marketing
10
Nursing and retirement homes
MCH
34
Pet shops and pet supply stores
Oddity Software
15
consumerization of IT: The trend
of consumer technology practices
influencing the way business software
is designed and delivered.
database: An organized collection of
facts and information, typically consist-
ing of two or more related data files.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
13
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A data warehouse is a database that stores large amounts of historical
data in a form that readily supports analysis and management decision mak-
ing. In a process called the extract-transform-load (ETL) process, raw data
is extracted from various sources, transformed into a format that will support
the analysis to be performed, and then loaded into the data warehouse. Data
warehouses frequently hold a huge amount of data; they often contain five
years or more of data. Many organizations employ data warehouses to hold
the data they need to make key business decisions:
●
Walmart operates separate data warehouses for Walmart and Sam’s Club.
Through these data warehouses, the company allows suppliers access to
almost any data they could possibly need to determine which of their
products are selling, how fast, and even whether they should redesign
their packaging to fit more product on store shelves.10
●
Harrah’s (part of the Caesar’s Entertainment casino empire) uses a data
warehouse to determine how much money particular gamblers are willing
to lose in a day before they will decide not to come back the next day.11
●
Continental Airlines uses a data warehouse to help it determine who its
most valuable customers are and to find ways to keep them satisfied—for
example, by proactively making alternative travel arrangements for them
if their flights get delayed.12
●
Macy’s uses a terabyte-sized data warehouse to target improvements in
four key areas of its e-commerce business: measuring the profitability and
effectiveness of banner advertising, analyzing customer interactions and
paths through its Web site, improving fulfillment capabilities, and corre-
lating online sales with store sales to cross-sell and upsell customers
across its distribution channels.13
The digital universe (the collection of all data that exists) is doubling in
size every two years as shown in Figure 1.4.14 Organizations are challenged
by this rapid growth and at the same time scrambling to take advantage of
the opportunities provided by this data. Big data is a term used to describe
data collections that are so enormous (think petabytes or larger) and complex
(from sensor data to social media data) that traditional data management soft-
ware, hardware, and analysis processes are incapable of dealing with them.
To gain a perspective on the quantity of data some organizations are strug-
gling to manage, consider that the amount of data traveling over mobile net-
works alone is expected to exceed 10 exabytes per month by 2016.15
Table 1.5 defines the units of measure for data.
FIGURE 1.4
The size of the digital universe
(zettabytes) doubles every two
years
The amount of digital data is
expected to double every two years.
100
80
60
40
20
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
data warehouse: A database that
stores large amounts of historical data
in a form that readily supports analysis
and management decision making.
extract-transform-load (ETL):
The process by which raw data is
extracted from various sources, trans-
formed into a format to support the
analysis to be performed, and loaded
into the data warehouse.
big data: A term used to describe
data collections that are so enormous
(think petabytes or larger) and complex
(from sensor data to social media data)
that traditional data management soft-
ware, hardware, and analysis pro-
cesses are incapable of dealing
with them.
14
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

To avoid being paralyzed by information overload, organizations and
indeed society itself must find a way to deal with this oncoming tsunami of
data. This challenge has several aspects, including how to choose which sub-
set of data to keep, where and how to store the data, how to find the nuggets
of useful data that are relevant to the decision making at hand, and how to
derive real value from the relevant data.
Ideally, the many challenges associated with big data will be conquered,
and more data will lead to more accurate, insightful analyses and better deci-
sion making, which in turn, will result in deliberate actions and improved
business results. For that to happen, society will need to address the many
issues associated with big data, including concerns over invasions of privacy
and the potential for overly intrusive monitoring of individuals by govern-
ments and organizations.
Networks and Cloud Computing
Networks connect computers and equipment in a room, building, campus,
city, across the country, or around the world to enable electronic communica-
tion. Wireless transmission networks enable the use of mobile devices, such
as smartphones and tablets. Telecommunication companies are now working
on fifth-generation wireless communications that will enable transmission
speeds 10 times faster than currently available on wireless networks—with
greater coverage area and lower battery consumption—possibly as soon as
the year 2020. Such technology will be needed to support the increased
demand for faster transfer of data and video.
The Internet is the world’s largest computer network, consisting of thou-
sands of interconnected networks, all freely exchanging information. People
use the Internet to research information, buy and sell products and services,
email and instant message one another, participate in social networks (e.g.,
Facebook and LinkedIn), make travel arrangements, complete banking trans-
actions, make investments, download music and videos, read books, and
watch movies among other activities.
With public cloud computing, a service provider organization owns and
manages the hardware, software, networking, and storage devices, with cloud
user organizations (called tenants) accessing slices of shared resources via the
Internet. The service provider can deliver increasing amounts of computing,
network, and storage capacity on demand and without requiring any capital
investment on the part of the cloud users. Thus, public cloud computing is a
great
solution
for
organizations
whose
computing
needs
vary
greatly
TABLE 1.5 Units of measure for data
Unit of Measure
Size
Equivalent To
Byte
1 byte
One alphanumeric character
Kilobyte
1,000 bytes
The text of a joke or very short story
Megabyte
1,000 kilobytes
800 pages of text
Gigabyte
1,000 megabytes
7 minutes of HD-TV
Terabyte
1,000 gigabytes
The Hubble Space Telescope collected more than 45 terabytes of data in its
first 20 years of observations
Petabyte
1,000 terabytes
50 years’ worth of DVD-quality video
Exabyte
1,000 petabytes
44 billion 25 gigabytes Blu-ray discs
Zettabyte
1,000 exabytes
The amount of text created by every man, woman, and child on earth tweet-
ing continuously for 100 years
Yottabyte
1,000 zettabytes
One thousand times the grains of sand on all of Earth’s beaches
network: A group or system of con-
nected computers and equipment—in a
room, building, campus, city, across the
country, or around the world—that
enables electronic communication.
Internet: The world’s largest com-
puter network, consisting of thousands
of interconnected networks, all freely
exchanging information.
public cloud computing: A means
of providing computing services
wherein a service provider organization
owns and manages the hardware,
software, networking, and storage
devices, with cloud user organizations
(called tenants) accessing slices of
shared resources via the Internet.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
15
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

depending on changes in demand. Amazon, Cisco Systems, IBM, Microsoft, Rack-
space, Verizon Communications Inc., and VMWare are among the largest cloud
computing service providers. These firms typically offer a monthly or annual sub-
scription service model; they may also provide training, support, and data inte-
gration services.16 Online content provider Netflix uses the Amazon Web
Services (AWS) cloud computing service to provide global delivery of some 10
billion hours of content per month. AWS enables Netflix users anywhere in the
world to stream TV shows and movies to computers and mobile devices.17
The World Wide Web (WWW), better known simply as “the Web,” is a
network of links on the Internet to files containing text, graphics, video, and
sound. Information about the documents and access to them are controlled
and provided by tens of thousands of specialized computers called Web ser-
vers. The Web is one of many services available over the Internet, and it pro-
vides access to millions of files. New Internet technologies and increased
Internet communications and collaboration are collectively called Web 2.0.
The technology used to create the Internet is also being applied within
organizations to create intranets, which enable communication, collaboration,
search functions, and information sharing between the members of an organi-
zation’s team using a Web browser. For example, the Swiss Medical Group,
based in Buenos Aires, Argentina, is a network of professionals, clinics, and
laboratories that provide healthcare services and postgraduate medical educa-
tion programs. It employs an intranet to provide its 9,000 employees with
communication tools, company and industry news from various sources,
announcements regarding new assignments for employees, tutorials, an online
phone directory, videos, and document management services.18
An extranet is a network based on Web technologies that allows selected
outsiders, such as business partners and customers, to access authorized
resources of a company’s intranet. Many people use extranets every day without
realizing it—to order products from their suppliers, track shipped goods, or
access customer assistance from other companies. Federal Express (FedEx) was
one of the first large companies to empower customers to serve themselves at
their convenience through the use of a corporate extranet. A fundamental FedEx
belief is that the information it provides customers about its services is more
important than the services themselves. Customers can access the FedEx extranet
to obtain a full range of shipping, billing, and tracking services. See Figure 1.5.
FIGURE 1.5
Extranets
When you sign in to the FedEx site
(www.fedex.com) to check the status
of a package, you are using an
extranet.
Source: www.fedex.com
World Wide Web (WWW): A net-
work of links on the Internet to files
containing text, graphics, video, and
sound.
intranet: A network that enables
communication, collaboration, search
functions, and information sharing
between the members of an organiza-
tion’s team using a Web browser.
extranet: A network based on Web
technologies that allows selected out-
siders, such as business partners and
customers, to access authorized
resources of a company’s intranet.
16
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of physical objects or
“things” embedded with sensors, processors, software, and network connec-
tivity capability to enable them to exchange data with the manufacturer of
the device, device operators, and other connected devices. In theory, the
IoT would enable us to connect almost any device with an on/off switch to a
network—automobiles, appliances, components of an aircraft engine, heart
monitor implants, packing labels, ingestible pills, wearable devices, and
even highway sensors that can warn of traffic and hazardous road condi-
tions. Each thing is uniquely identifiable and capable of interoperating with
other “things” within the existing IoT infrastructure, often by connecting to
a central hub. The IoT also includes cloud services, which enable the collec-
tion and analysis of data so people can process the data and take appropri-
ate action via mobile apps.
Until recently, the IoT has been most closely associated with machine-
to-machine communications, such as that employed in the manufacturing,
gas, oil, and power industries. For example, in oil and gas drilling operations,
remote sensors can measure important parameters such as pressure, flow
rates, temperatures, and fuel levels in on-site equipment. These variables are
transmitted to a computer that automatically adjusts the operation of the
equipment to optimize hydrocarbon production, improve operational safety,
and protect the environment.
The Internet of Everything (IoE) encompasses not only machine-
to-machine but also people-to-people and people-to-machine connections. It
is estimated that the total number of devices supported by the IoE could
reach 50 billion by the end of 202019 See Figure 1.6. This rapid growth is
being fueled by the increasing availability of network access, the creation of
more inexpensive smart devices with sensors and network capabilities built
into them, the rapid growth in smartphone penetration, and the creativity and
innovation of people who are able to see and capitalize on the almost unlim-
ited opportunities.20
General Electric (GE) is making a major strategic investment in the Inter-
net of Things by offering its Predix Cloud service for industrial data and ana-
lytics. Predix will enable GE customers to connect sensors placed on
industrial machinery such as jet engines, wind turbines, and locomotives to
remote computing centers “in the cloud,” where the data from the sensors
can be processed and analyzed to determine settings for optimal operating
efficiencies and to schedule preventative maintenance to avoid unexpected
failures.21
FIGURE 1.6
Growth of the Internet of
Everything (IoE)
The Internet of Everything will con-
nect tens of billions of devices.
1995
2000
2013
2020
50B
“Fixed”computing
(you go to
the device)
Mobility/BYOD
(the device
goes with you)
Internet of things
(age of devices)
Internet of everything
(people, process,
data, things)
200M
10B
Number of connected devices
Internet of Things (IoT): A net-
work of physical objects or “things”
embedded with sensors, processors,
software, and network connectivity
capability to enable them to exchange
data with the manufacturer of the
device, device operators, and other
connected devices.
Internet of Everything: A network
that encompasses not only machine-
to-machine but also people-to-people
and people-to-machine connections.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
17
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
NARCOMS Database to Aid MS Victims
Multiple sclerosis (MS) causes a disruption in the transmission of nerve signals
between the brain, spinal cord, and the rest of the body. Disrupted nerve signals
cause the symptoms of MS, which can vary from one person to another, but often
include difficulty walking, dizziness, fatigue, involuntary muscle spasms, pain,
stiffness, tremors, vision problems, and weakness.
The North American Registry for Care and Research in Multiple Sclerosis
(NARCOMS) is a database created to capture the real-life experiences of people
living with MS. The database contains information about each patient’s symptoms
and their severity over time, medications taken, and courses of treatment. Physi-
cians, scientists, and pharmaceutical companies can use this data to better under-
stand MS by tracking patients’ disease course, comparing results of alternative
courses of treatment, measuring the effectiveness of medications, and identifying
useful indicators of the severity of the disease.22
Anyone with a diagnosis of MS can participate in NARCOMS and contribute to
its research studies. Participants are asked to fill out an initial enrollment ques-
tionnaire and then complete surveys twice a year. Although roughly 400,000 peo-
ple in the United States have been diagnosed with MS, fewer than 40,000 have
elected to participate. More participants are needed in order for the database to
be fully representative of people living with MS.23
Review Questions
1.
Identify the fundamental hardware components that are likely included in the
NARCOMS system.
2.
Assume that a record for each participant in the NARCOMS database contains
between 200 and 500 bytes of data. What is the maximum size of the database
in gigabytes for the total 100,000 target number of participants? Would NAR-
COMS qualify as a big data project?
Critical Thinking Questions
You are a member of a highly successful advertising agency whose CEO suffers
from MS. She has asked you to develop a proposal for the National Multiple Scle-
rosis Society to increase the number of participants in NARCRMS to 100,000 peo-
ple within 12 months. There will be no charge to the society for this work, but
the CEO has set a budget of $2 million. She has asked your full-time effort for the
next year to lead this effort to success.
1.
Identify three strong reasons why some MS victims might elect to participate
in NARCOMS while most do not.
2.
Outline a course of action that you think would successfully increase the num-
ber of NARCOMS participants by 60,000 over the next 12 months.
Part 3: Business Information Systems
Information systems are used in all functional areas of business organizations,
as summarized here:
●
Accounting and finance. Information systems are used to forecast reven-
ues and expenses, determine the best sources and uses of funds, manage
cash and other financial resources, analyze investments, and perform
audits to make sure that the organization is financially sound and that all
financial reports and documents are accurate.
●
Customer service. Information systems are used to capture data about
customers and their interactions with the company to better understand
their needs and issues and enable superior customer service.
18
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Human resources. Information systems help human resource staff screen
job applicants, administer performance tests to employees, monitor
employee productivity, and generate required government reports.
●
Manufacturing. Information systems are used to process customer
orders, develop production schedules, control inventory levels, and moni-
tor product quality.
●
Research and development. Information systems help R&D staff design
products, gather input from customers that leads to new ideas and
improvements, and enable the sharing of information with a worldwide
community of researchers.
●
Sales and marketing. Information systems help sales and marketing per-
sonnel develop new goods and services (product analysis), determine the
best advertising and sales approaches (promotion analysis), and set opti-
mal product prices to get the highest total revenues (price analysis).
Information systems are also used in nearly every industry, as the following
examples show:
●
Agriculture. Farmers attach a yield monitor and a global positioning unit
to their combines to determine how much grain should be harvested in
each field. This data is entered in a system that produces a color-coded
map that predicts the expected yield. From this, farmers can determine
where they should add soil additives or fertilizer, for example, to increase
the yield.
●
Finance. Banks use information systems to help make sound decisions
regarding loans, invest wisely, and provide online services, such as bill
payment and account transfers for account holders.
●
Health care. Healthcare organizations use information systems to diagnose
illnesses, plan medical treatment, track patient records, and bill patients
See Figure 1.7. Health insurance companies and health maintenance orga-
nizations (HMOs) use Web technology to access patients’ insurance eligibil-
ity information, pay medical claims, and analyze data to manage costs.
●
Mining. Companies use global positioning systems to identify and evalu-
ate promising areas for mineral exploration, model mine construction,
and display geochemical and hydrological data. Mining companies also
FIGURE 1.7
Information systems in health
care
Healthcare organizations use infor-
mation systems to diagnose ill-
nesses, plan medical treatment,
track patient records, and bill
patients.
iStockphoto.com/Susan Chiang
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
19
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

use information systems to gather the necessary data when applying for
mining permits, to assess the environmental impacts of a proposed mine,
and to design mine closure and reclamation plans.
●
Professional services. Accounting, tax preparation, and investment firms
use information systems to improve the speed and quality of the services
they provide to customers.
●
Retail. Companies use information systems to help market products and
services, manage inventory levels, control the supply chain, and forecast
demand, as well as take orders directly from customers over the Web.
This part will discuss “Electronic and Mobile Commerce,” “Enterprise
Systems,” “Business Intelligence and Analytics,” and “Knowledge Management
and Specialized Information Systems.”
Electronic and Mobile Commerce
E-commerce involves the exchange of money for goods and services over elec-
tronic networks, and it encompasses many of an organization’s outward-facing
processes—such as sales, marketing, order taking, delivery, procurement of
goods and services, and customer service—that touch customers, suppliers,
and other business partners (Figure 1.8).
E-commerce enables organizations and individuals to build new revenue
streams, to create and enhance relationships with customers and business
partners, and to improve operating efficiencies (see Table 1.6). E-commerce is
critically important to many businesses.
Greyston Bakery is a $12 million company with 130 employees that
makes brownies and cookies for wholesale and retail distribution. Sales to its
largest client Ben & Jerry’s generates more than half its revenues. The busi-
ness was started in the mid-1980s as a means to provide employment for the
FIGURE 1.8
The scope of e-commerce
E-commerce covers a wide range of
business activities.
Marketing
Customers
Suppliers
Business
partners
Order taking
Delivery
Customer
service
Procurement
Sales
e-commerce: Involves the exchange
of money for goods and services over
electronic networks and encompasses
many of an organization’s outward-
facing processes—such as sales, mar-
keting, order taking, delivery, procure-
ment of goods and services, and
customer service—that touch custo-
mers, suppliers, and other business
partners.
20
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

poor and homeless in Yonkers, New York. To meet this goal, Greyston
follows an open-hiring policy, taking people directly off the street without
background or reference checks. The highly successful bakery has expanded
its operation to include sales from its Web site, further boosting its revenues
and enabling it to hire more workers.24
Mobile commerce (m-commerce) is the buying and selling of goods
and/or services using a mobile device, such as a tablet, smartphone, or
other portable device. Mobile commerce can be used to support all forms of
e-commerce—business-to-business
(B2B),
business-to-consumer
(B2C),
consumer-to-consumer (C2C), and government-to-citizen (G2C).
Electronic business (e-business) goes beyond e-commerce by using
information systems and networks to perform business-related tasks and func-
tions, such as:
●
Gathering product demand forecasts directly from the distributors of your
product in order to aggregate them and develop a master production
schedule (rather than internally generating a forecast based on historical
data, with no input from your distributors)
●
Sharing product data (e.g., design specifications and bills of material)
electronically with suppliers and contract manufacturers as your products
evolve through research and development, product design, prototyping,
process design, and manufacturing
Enterprise Systems
Computers have been used to perform common business applications since
the 1950s. These early systems were designed to reduce costs by automating
routine, labor-intensive business transactions. A transaction is any business-
related exchange such as a payment to an employee, a sale to a customer, or
a payment to a supplier. A transaction processing system (TPS) is an orga-
nized collection of people, procedures, software, databases, and devices used
to process and record business transactions.
One of the first business systems to be computerized was the payroll sys-
tem. The primary inputs for a payroll TPS are the number of employee hours
worked during the week and the pay rate. The primary output consists of
paychecks. Early payroll systems produced employee paychecks and related
reports required by state and federal agencies, such as the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS). The cost of these early systems was more than offset by the
reduction in the number of people required to complete payroll processing.
Other high-volume, repetitive processes, such as order processing, customer
billing, and inventory control, were soon computerized as well.
TABLE 1.6 Benefits of e-commerce
Benefit
How Achieved
Build new revenue streams
●
Reach a broader geographic dispersion of
consumers
Create and enhance rela-
tionships with customers
and business partners
●
Increase customer engagement
●
Improve loyalty of customers who initially
buy offline
●
Increase opportunity to build loyalty through
multiple channels
Improve operating
efficiencies
●
Lower customer acquisition cost
●
Lower operating costs per sale
●
Reduce the expense of supporting and ser-
vicing existing customers
mobile commerce
(m-commerce): The buying and
selling of goods and/or services using a
mobile device, such as a tablet, smart-
phone, or other portable device.
electronic business
(e-business): The use of information
systems and networks to perform
business-related tasks and functions
beyond those performed for
e-commerce.
transaction: Any business-related
exchange such as a payment to an
employee, a sale to a customer, or a
payment to a supplier.
transaction processing system
(TPS): An organized collection of
people, procedures, software, data-
bases, and devices used to process
and record business transactions.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
21
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A management information system (MIS) is an organized collection of
people, procedures, software, databases, and devices that provides routine
information to managers and decision makers. MISs were first developed in
the 1960s and were typically used to produce managerial reports. In many
cases,
these
early
reports
were
produced
periodically—daily,
weekly,
monthly, or yearly. Because of their value to managers, MISs proliferated
throughout the management ranks. Manufacturing, marketing, production,
finance, and other functional areas of an organization were often supported
by their own TPS and MIS. An MIS typically provides standard reports gener-
ated using data from a TPS. See Figure 1.9.
The TPS receives input from various sources, which it then edits and pro-
cesses to create various outputs and to update a database of valid transac-
tions. This database can be accessed by an MIS to create various reports,
including periodic reports, exception reports, summary reports, drill-down
reports, and on-demand reports.
Information systems that process business transactions (e.g., sales, ship-
ments, payments) have evolved over the years and offer important solutions
for organizations of all sizes. Traditional transaction processing systems (TPSs)
and management information systems (MIS) are still being used today, but
increasingly, companies are turning to enterprise resource planning systems.
An isolated information system that is not easily capable of exchanging
information with other information systems is called an information silo.
The “silo mentality” is a way of thinking that occurs when groups of people
do not share information, goals, tools, priorities, and processes with other
departments. Such thinking degrades operations, reduces employee produc-
tivity, and can lead to the overall failure of a company or its products and ser-
vices. Unfortunately, this sort of silo mentality was the basis for the design of
many TPS and MIS systems.
In recent years, more organizations have begun implementing enterprise
resource planning (ERP) systems that support their routine business
processes, maintain records about those processes, and provide extensive
reporting and data analysis capabilities. These systems employ a database
of key operational and planning data that can be shared by all employees
across all organizational units and, when appropriate, with customers and
suppliers—eliminating the problems of missing and inconsistent information
caused by multiple transaction processing systems that support only one busi-
ness function or one department in an organization. ERP systems have
expanded in scope so that they now provide support for business analytics
and e-business. Although ERPs were initially thought to be cost effective only
for very large companies, these systems have since been implemented by
many small and midsized companies.
FIGURE 1.9
TPS and MIS
The TPS and MIS work together to
process business transaction and
create standard management
reports.
Various
inputs
Transaction
processing
system
Management
information
system
Database
Management
reports
Reports, checks
purchase orders,
etc.
management information
system: An organized collection of
people, procedures, software, data-
bases, and devices that provides rou-
tine information to managers and
decision makers.
information silo: An isolated infor-
mation system not easily capable of
exchanging information with other
information systems.
enterprise resource planning
(ERP) system: A system that sup-
ports an organization’s routine busi-
ness processes, maintains records
about those processes, and provides
extensive reporting and data analysis
capabilities.
22
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Every industry has its own unique business practices. In order to address
these differences, ERP software vendors offer specially tailored software mod-
ules designed to meet the needs of specific industries, such as consumer-
packaged-goods manufacturing, higher education, utilities, banking, oil and
gas, retail, and the public sector. Most ERP software packages are designed
so that an organization does not have to implement the entire package at
once. Companies can pick and choose which software modules to install
based on their business needs. Many organizations choose to implement
some modules but delay implementing others until the necessary resources
are available. Table 1.7 and Figure 1.10 illustrate and explain the primary
components of an ERP system, and Figure 1.11 offers a look at the user inter-
face for SAP ERP, a popular ERP software.
The primary reasons for implementing an enterprise system include eas-
ing adoption of improved work processes (best practices), increasing access
to timely data for decision making, and eliminating obsolete transaction pro-
cessing systems and associated infrastructure. When implemented effectively,
ERP systems can deliver the following benefits:
●
Provide a global view of operational and planning data, enabling compa-
nies to identify issues and opportunities and to address them proactively
●
Lower the cost of doing business through the elimination of redundant
processes and systems
●
Ensure compliance with various financial and manufacturing standards
●
Automate core business operations—such as lead-to-cash, order-to-
fulfillment, and procure-to-pay processes—using industry best practices
●
Improve customer service by providing one source for billing and rela-
tionship tracking
TABLE 1.7 Primary components of an ERP system for a
manufacturing organization
Module
Business Functions Addressed
Supply chain
management
Manages all activities involved in sourcing and procuring
raw materials, converting raw materials to finished product,
warehousing, and delivering finished product to customers
Customer rela-
tionship
management
Automates and integrates the sales, marketing, and cus-
tomer service functions to capture and store customer and
prospect contact information, account data, and sales
opportunities in one central location
Product lifecycle
management
Manages product information throughout the entire life
cycle of a product from ideation, design and manufacture,
through service and remaining product disposal—across
all departments, contractors, and suppliers
Maintenance,
repair, and
operations
Automates and supports activities involved with the plan-
ning and scheduling of maintenance and repairs for any sort
of mechanical, plumbing, or electrical device, along with the
tracking of inventory and ordering of necessary parts and
supplies
Accounting
Tracks the flow of data related to all the cash flows that
affect an organization; manages functions related to setting
up and maintaining the general ledger, accounts payable,
accounts receivable, and payroll
Human resource
management
Supports activities related to previous, current, and poten-
tial employees of the organization; provides tools for work-
force analysis and planning, hiring, training, job and task
assignment, performance evaluation, salary administration,
managing employee benefits, retirement, and outplacement
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
23
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Reduce time to market by sharing evolving product data across all con-
tractors and suppliers involved in the concept design, detail design, and
production of new products
FIGURE 1.10
ERP components
An ERP system consists of many
components that provide shared
access to a database of business
information.
Supply chain
management
Accounting
Human
resources
Customer
relationship
management
Maintenance, repair,
and overhaul
Business
analytics
E-Commerce
Product lifecycle
management
FIGURE 1.11
Enterprise resource planning
(ERP) software
SAP AG, a German software com-
pany, is one of the leading suppliers
of ERP software. The company
employs more than 50,000 people in
more than 130 countries.
Source: www.sap.com
24
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Many ERP vendors are making their software products and services avail-
able in the cloud. This approach can provide additional benefits, including:
●
Safe access to data in the cloud from virtually anywhere, on any device
●
Reduced infrastructure, hardware, and IS management costs
●
Increased flexibility to scale infrastructure up or down as business needs
dictate
●
Opportunities to redirect IS resources away from managing infrastructure
to working on strategic projects
●
The ability to get up and running in days instead of months
Business Intelligence and Analytics
Things, individuals, and organizations generate massive amounts of data as a
by-product of their activities. In addition, many individuals and organizations
seek out third-party data providers, such as market research firms, govern-
ment agencies, and social network operators, in an attempt to satisfy their
unquenchable thirst for more and more data. To be of any value, all this data
must be stored, analyzed, and reported.
Just as different music and movie stars have been popular over the years,
different terms have been used to describe the technology and processes
used to support management reporting and decision making. Over time, deci-
sion support systems, executive information systems, online analytical proces-
sing, business intelligence, and business analytics have gained in capabilities
and expanded in scope to add new functionality but all have had the goal of
deriving the most value out of the data available.
Business intelligence (BI) includes a wide range of applications, prac-
tices, and technologies for the extraction, transformation, integration, visuali-
zation, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of data to support improved
decision making.
Business analytics can be simply defined as the extensive use of data
and quantitative analysis to support fact-based decision making within organi-
zations. It can be used to gain a better understanding of current business per-
formance, reveal new business patterns and relationships, explain why certain
results occurred, optimize current operations, and forecast future business
results. Business analytics includes software components for accessing, trans-
forming, storing, analyzing, modeling, and tracking information, as well as
components for communicating the results of all that analysis.
A number of components must be in place for an organization to get real
value from its business analytics efforts. Most importantly, an organization
needs creative data scientists—people who understand the business and the
business analytics technology, while also recognizing the limitations of their
data, tools, and techniques. A data scientist puts all of this together to deliver
real improvements in decision making within an organization. To ensure the
success of a business analytics program, the management team within an
organization must have a strong commitment to data-driven decision making.
Organizations that can put the necessary components in place can act quickly
to make superior decisions in uncertain and changing environments to gain a
strong competitive advantage.
Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems
A knowledge management system (KMS) is an organized collection of peo-
ple, procedures, software, databases, and devices that stores and retrieves
knowledge, improves collaboration, locates knowledge sources, captures and
uses knowledge, or in some other way enhances the knowledge management
process. Consulting firms often use a KMS to capture and provide the collec-
tive knowledge of its consultants to one another. This makes each consultant
business intelligence (BI): A
wide range of applications, practices,
and technologies for the extraction,
transformation, integration, visualiza-
tion, analysis, interpretation, and pre-
sentation of data to support improved
decision making.
business analytics: The extensive
use of data and quantitative analysis to
support fact-based decision making
within organizations.
data scientist: A person who
understands the business and the
business analytics technology, while
also recognizing the limitations of their
data, tools, and techniques; a data sci-
entist puts all of this together to deliver
real improvements in decision making
with an organization.
knowledge management sys-
tem (KMS): An organized collection
of people, procedures, software, data-
bases, and devices that stores and
retrieves knowledge, improves collab-
oration, locates knowledge sources,
captures and uses knowledge, or in
some other way enhances the knowl-
edge management process.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
25
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
much more valuable and avoids “re-inventing the wheel” to solve similar pro-
blems for different clients.
The workforce at NASA is aging, and it is essential for the organization’s
future success that critical knowledge not be lost as workers retire. Rather,
their specialized knowledge must be captured and retained for future use.
NASA employs knowledge management to document and integrate lessons
learned from decades of missions to effectively manage the risk involved in
future space exploration and human space flight.25
Specialized information systems include a wide range of artificial intelli-
gence systems (robotics, vision systems, natural language processing and
voice recognition systems, learning systems, and expert systems) that can sim-
ulate human intelligence processes. Multimedia systems, virtual reality sys-
tems, assistive technology systems, and systems based on game theory are
additional types of specialized information systems.
Business Analytics for Gaming Firm
Penn National Gaming, through its subsidiaries, owns and operates more than 25
horseracing and casino gaming facilities throughout the United States and in
Canada. It is the operator of the popular Hollywood Casinos around the country
plus the M Resort Spa Casino and Tropicana Las Vegas. In aggregate, its opera-
tions include some 33,000 gaming machines, 800 table games, 4,500 hotel rooms,
and 10 million square feet of property.26 Millions of patrons visit Penn National
Gaming facilities each year.
The firm is considering developing a large database to capture the data gener-
ated at each property. This will be augmented with data about each patron—their
demographics, purchases, gambling preferences and habits, and the services they
request as a guest. The data will be used by the firm’s management to make
quick, well-informed decisions to maximize Penn National Gaming’s income
while packing more entertainment value into each patron’s visit. The data will
also be used to develop targeted direct mail campaigns, customize offers for spe-
cific customer segments, and adapt programs for individual casinos.
Review Questions
1.
Collecting and analyzing all this data will draw Penn National Gaming in to
the realm of big data and business analytics. How would you define the term
business analytics?
2.
Penn National Gaming will also need to recruit new kinds of human resources
including data scientists. What do data scientists do?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Identify three data sources that might be tapped to obtain the desired data
about its patrons.
2.
What sort of data privacy issues might be associated with the establishment of
its patron database?
Part 4: Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, ser-
vice, or result. A project attempts to achieve specific business objectives and is
subject to certain constraints, such as total cost and completion date. Projects
are the way that much of an organization’s work gets done. For example, a con-
sumer goods company executes a project to launch a new product, an opera-
tions manager leads a project to outsource part of a firm’s operations to a
project: A temporary endeavor
undertaken to create a unique product,
service, or result.
26
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

contract manufacturer, a hospital executes a project to load an app onto physi-
cians’ smartphones that enables them to access patient data anywhere. At any
point in time, an organization may have dozens of ongoing projects, including
multiple information system-related projects. However, since every organization
has a limit to its available resources, it is essential that projects are directed at
supporting key business objectives and goals, as outlined in the firm’s strategic
plan. This part will cover the topics of “Strategic Planning and Project Manage-
ment” and “System Acquisition and Development.”
Strategic Planning and Project Management
Ever since the dawn of the computer age, various surveys of business and IT
executives have stressed the need to use strategic planning to improve align-
ment between the needs of the business and the activities of the information
systems organization. In this context, alignment means that the IS organiza-
tion and its resources are focused on efforts that support the key objectives
defined in the strategic plan of the business. This implies that IS and business
managers have a shared vision of where the organization is headed and agree
on its key strategies. This shared vision will guide the IS organization in hir-
ing the right people with the correct skills and competencies, choosing the
right technologies and vendors to explore and develop, installing the right
systems, and focusing on those projects that are needed to move the organiza-
tion closer to its vision and meeting its mission.
In an organization where the IS and business managers have a shared
vision, the impact of the IS staff on the rest of the organization will be
extremely positive, and the IS group will be viewed as a well-respected busi-
ness partner. An IT organization not aligned with the key objectives of the
business will find it difficult to even gain management support for its pro-
posed efforts. Much of its work will fail to hit the mark and it will not be
well received by the rest of the organization.
The Standish Group has been tracking the success rate of projects for
over 20 years. Although the success rate has improved over time due to
improved methods, training, and tools, 94 percent of very large (multimillion
dollar efforts) software projects still fail or are challenged (i.e., are late, over
budget, or lack required features) as shown in Figure 1.12.27
No matter what the industry and no matter whether the organization is
a for-profit company or a nonprofit organization—large or small, multina-
tional or local—good project management is a positive force that enables
an organization to get results from its efforts. At any point in time, an
FIGURE 1.12
Resolution of very large
software projects 2003–2012
Over 90 percent of large software
projects are challenged or fail.
Challenged
Failed
Successful
6%
42%
52%
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
27
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

organization may have dozens or even hundreds of active projects aimed
at accomplishing a wide range of results. Over the next few years, it
is expected that many organizations will focus on projects that apply ana-
lytics to large amounts of business data, take advantage of cloud comput-
ing,
and
create
more
mobile
applications
for
their
customers
and
employees.
System Acquisition and Development
System acquisition is the process used to obtain the information system
resources needed to provide the services necessary to meet a specific set of
needs. Those needs may be very broad and encompass many users, such as
in the acquisition of a new enterprise resource planning system. Or they may
be very narrow in scope, affecting just a single user, such as in the acquisition
of personal computer software to enable an individual to prepare a federal tax
return. There are two fundamental strategies for system acquisition: buy off-
the-shelf software or build a custom application.
Buying existing software developed by a software manufacturer enables
an organization to test drive and evaluate it before making a major commit-
ment to purchase it and install it. Once purchased, the existing software can
be installed with minimal disruption so that user needs can be quickly met
and the organization can begin reaping the benefits from the information sys-
tem. Buyers of the software do not actually own the software, nor can they
access it to make changes or improvements; they are simply licensed to use
the software on a computer. With no access to the underlying source code,
user organizations must pay maintenance and support costs to the manufac-
turer or to a third party authorized to fix bugs or add new functionality. For
some organizations, these costs can become excessive. As a result, many orga-
nizations are turning to open source software, which is software distributed
for free, with access permitted to the source code so that it can be studied,
changed, and improved by software professionals at the various user
organizations—with no maintenance charges. Indeed, the amount and quality
of support for open source software is dependent on whether or not there
are people, resources, and interest among the user community to develop
updates and fix bugs.
The activity of building information systems to meet users’ needs is called
system development. Systems development projects can range from small to
very large and are conducted in fields as diverse as nuclear science research
and video game development. If an organization elects to build a system, it
can use its own employees (perhaps augmented with contractors) to develop
the system, or it can hire an outside company to manage and/or perform all
of the system development work. The latter approach allows an organization
to focus on what it does best, by delegating software development to compa-
nies that have world-class development capabilities. This can be important
since the system development efforts for even relatively small projects can
require months, with large projects requiring years of effort. Unfortunately, as
already pointed out, in spite of everyone’s best efforts, a significant number of
large system development projects are likely to fail.
By choosing a software service provider, users can gain access to needed
software remotely, as a Web-based service via the cloud. Pricing is based on
a monthly or per user fee and typically results in lower costs than a licensed
application. Because the software is hosted remotely, users do not need to
purchase and install additional hardware to provide increased capacity. Fur-
thermore, the service provider handles necessary software maintenance and
upgrades.
Table 1.8 summarizes the three basic alternatives for obtaining software
to meet users’ needs.
system acquisition: The process
used to obtain the information system
resources needed to provide the ser-
vices necessary to meet a specific set
of needs.
open source software: Software
that is distributed for free, with access
permitted to the source code so that it
can be studied, changed, and improved
by software professionals at the various
user organizations—with no mainte-
nance charges.
system development: The activity
of building information systems to meet
users’ needs.
28
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Strategic Plan Review
You are a member of the finance organization of a midsized manufacturer, with
two years of experience with the firm. Your manager serves as a liaison between
the finance group and the IS organization for budget review. The IS organization
has just completed its annual strategic planning and budgeting process. Their
plans, which include a $25 million budget (a 6 percent increase over last year),
were forwarded to your manager for review. Your manager shared the IS strategic
plan and budget with you a week ago and scheduled a meeting today to get your
input and perspective.
Review Questions
1.
What do you think are the hallmarks of a good strategic plan?
2.
Would you expect to see more funds allocated to system development or to
buying existing software and using software service providers? Why?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Your manager shocks you when she announces that she has recom-
mended you for promotion and that one of your new responsibilities
would be to serve as the new finance liaison with the IS organization.
She asks, “What do you feel needs to be done to help prepare you for
this new responsibility?”
2.
Finally, she asks, “What steps would you take and what resources would you
use to review the current IS strategic plan and budget?”
Part 5: Information Systems in Business and Society
Information systems have been developed to meet the needs of all types of
organizations and people. The speed and widespread use of information sys-
tems, however, opens users to a variety of threats from unethical people.
Computer criminals and terrorists, for example, have used the Internet to
steal millions of dollars and promote terrorism and violence. Computer-
related attacks can come from individuals, groups, companies, and even
TABLE 1.8 Alternatives for meeting users’ information system needs
Strategy
Pros
Cons
Buy off-the-shelf
software
þ A software solution can be acquired and
deployed relatively quickly.
þ An organization can “test drive” software
before acquiring it.
 Unmodified, the software may not be a good
match to an organization’s needs.
 Maintenance and support costs can become
excessive.
Build custom
application
þ Customized software is more likely to be a
good match to an organization’s needs.
þ A custom application provides the potential
to achieve competitive advantage.
 The cost to build a system can be quite
high compared to the cost of purchasing of
off-the-shelf software.
 Customizing software can mean it will be
months or even years before the software
solution is ready to deploy.
Choose a software
service provider
þ Users do not need to purchase and install
additional hardware or software.
þ The service provider handles necessary
hardware and software maintenance and
upgrades.
 Complex pricing arrangements and hidden
costs may reduce expected cost savings.
 Performance issues may cause wide
variations in performance over time.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
29
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

countries; however, some studies have shown that most of corporate security
attacks come from people inside the company.
This part will cover “Cybercrime and Information System Security” and
the “Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems.”
Cybercrime and Information System Security
Information systems provide a highly profitable venue for cybercriminals,
who take advantage of the opportunity to reach millions of potential victims.
Cybercriminals are motivated by the potential for monetary gain; they hack
into computer systems to steal, often by transferring money from one account
to another or by stealing and reselling credit card numbers, personal identi-
ties,
and
financial
account
information.
Financial
losses
related
to
cybercrime—including the cost of the hardware, software, and various coun-
termeasures implemented to fight cybercrime—are estimated to be as high as
$400 billion annually worldwide.28 Figure 1.13 shows some commonly occur-
ring cybercrime incidents.
Cyberterrorism is an increasing concern for organizations and countries
around the globe. Cyberterrorism is the intimidation of a government or a
civilian population by using information technology to disable critical national
infrastructure (e.g., energy, transportation, financial, law enforcement, emer-
gency response) to achieve political, religious, or ideological goals. Cyberter-
rorists try on a daily basis to gain unauthorized access to a number of
important and sensitive sites, such as the computer systems of foreign intelli-
gence agencies and government ministries as well as private companies
around the world. In particular, companies in the oil and gas industry are
seen as high-value targets. Some cyberterrorists are interested in taking con-
trol over the flow of oil and natural gas in computer-controlled refineries and
the movement of oil through pipelines. This could result in devastating
consequences—with oil and gas being cut off from freezing populations in
the dead of winter or skyrocketing prices at the gasoline pumps.
With organizations relying on information systems to accomplish their
mission and remain in operation, the security of information systems and
their data is of utmost importance. Organizations must safeguard their sys-
tems
and
confidential
company
data,
including
private
customer
and
employee information, against malicious acts of theft and disruption. How-
ever, the need for computer security must be balanced against other business
FIGURE 1.13
Commonly occurring
cybercrime incidences
Cybercrime is a serious issue for
organizations.
Malware
infection
Loss of mobile
device
Corporate
espionage
Distributed
denial-of-service
Percent organizations
reporting this incident
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2011
2012
2013
2014
cybercriminal: A computer hacker
who is motivated by the potential for
monetary gain; cybercriminals hack into
computer systems to steal, often by
transferring money from one account to
another or by stealing and reselling
credit card numbers, personal identi-
ties, and financial account information.
cyberterrorism: The intimidation of
a government or a civilian population by
using information technology to disable
critical national infrastructure (e.g.,
energy, transportation, financial, law
enforcement, emergency response) to
achieve political, religious, or ideologi-
cal goals.
30
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

needs. Business managers, IS professionals, and IS users all face a number of
complex trade-offs regarding IS security, such as the following:
●
How much effort and money should be spent to safeguard against com-
puter crime? (In other words, how safe is safe enough?)
●
What should be done if recommended computer security safeguards make
conducting business more difficult for customers and employees, resulting
in lost sales and increased costs?
●
If a firm becomes a victim of a computer crime, should it pursue prosecu-
tion of the criminals at all costs, maintain a low profile to avoid the nega-
tive publicity, inform affected customers, or take some other action?
A strong security program begins by assessing threats to the organization’s
computers and network, identifying actions that address the most serious vul-
nerabilities, and educating end users about the risks involved and the actions
they must take to prevent a security incident. An organization’s IS security
group must lead the effort to prevent security breaches by implementing secu-
rity policies and procedures, as well as effectively employing available hardware
and software tools. However, no security system is perfect, so systems and pro-
cedures must be monitored to detect a possible intrusion. If an intrusion occurs,
there must be a clear reaction plan that addresses notification, evidence protec-
tion, activity log maintenance, containment, eradication, and recovery.
Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems
The use of information systems raises a number of ethical, legal, and social
issues, including job losses caused by increasingly sophisticated, humanlike
systems, invasion of privacy through various data collection programs, free-
dom of expression versus censorship, and the issues caused by unequal
access to computer technology and the Internet.
Many organizations and professional associations have developed codes
of ethics to help guide their members in making difficult decisions, including
those connected to the use of information systems. Ethics is a set of beliefs
about right and wrong behavior. Ethical behavior conforms to generally
accepted social norms—many of which are almost universally accepted. In
many situations, the decision on what course of action to take is further com-
plicated because it involves significant value conflicts among the various sta-
keholders as to what is the fairest option to pursue. Such a decision
represents an ethical dilemma, and all parties involved can benefit when ethi-
cal considerations are introduced into the decision-making process.
The use of information about people (employees, customers, business
partners, etc.) requires balancing the needs of those who want to use the
information against the rights and desires of the people whose information
may be used. On the one hand, information about people is gathered, stored,
analyzed, and reported because organizations can use it to make better deci-
sions (see Figure 1.14). Some of these decisions can affect people’s lives
profoundly—whether or not to extend credit to a new customer, to hire one
job candidate versus another, or to offer a scholarship or not. In addition,
increased competitiveness in the global marketplace has intensified the need
to understand consumers’ purchasing habits and financial condition. Compa-
nies use information they gather about people to target marketing efforts to
consumers who are most likely to buy their products and services. Organiza-
tions also need basic information about existing customers in order to serve
them better. It is hard to imagine an organization having a relationship with
its customers without having data about them. Thus, many organizations
implement customer relationship management (CRM) systems that collect and
store key data from every interaction they have with a customer.
On the other hand, many people object to the data collection policies of gov-
ernment and other organizations because they believe such policies strip people
ethics: A set of beliefs about right and
wrong behavior. Ethical behavior
conforms to generally accepted social
norms—many of which are almost
universally accepted.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
31
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

of the power to control their own personal information. In addition, many peo-
ple are concerned not only about the potential abuse that control of such data
may bring but also about the potential for data breaches, resulting in disclosure
of personal data. A combination of approaches—new laws, technical solutions,
and privacy policies—is required to effectively balance the needs of all sides.
Internet censorship is the control or suppression of the publishing or
accessing of information on the Internet. Censorship can take many forms—
such as limiting access to certain Web sites, allowing access to only some con-
tent or modified content at certain Web sites, rejecting the use of certain key
words in search engine searches, tracking and monitoring the Internet activities
of individuals, and harassing or even jailing individuals for their Internet use.
For those fortunate enough to live in a nonauthoritarian country, it may be dif-
ficult to even imagine that Internet censorship goes on. Yet many authoritarian
regimes rely on a mix of sophisticated technology and old-fashioned intimida-
tion to ensure that dissent and the flow of free information online is repressed.
The digital divide is a term used to describe the gulf between those who
do and those who don’t have access to modern information and communica-
tions technology such as smartphones, personal computers, and the Internet.
Roughly 40 percent of the world’s population or around 3 billion people
have an Internet connection, but the worldwide distribution of Internet users
varies greatly from region to region.
Net neutrality is the principle that Internet service providers (ISPs) should
be required to treat all Internet traffic running over their wired and wireless
broadband networks the same—without favoring content from some sources
and/or blocking or slowing (also known as throttling) content from others. The
debate over net neutrality raises questions about how best to keep the Internet
open and impartial, while still offering ISPs sufficient incentive to expand their
networks to serve more customers and to support new services.
The rapid growth of the Internet of Things is being fueled by the increas-
ing availability of network access, the creation of more inexpensive smart
devices with sensors and network capabilities built into them, the rapid growth
FIGURE 1.14
Much information is being
gathered about people
Personal privacy is difficult to
safeguard.
Web
browsing
behavior
Educational
records
Financial
data
Location
data
Medical
history
Police
record
Work
history
Sexual
orientation
Associates
and
affiliations
Driving
record
Who
are
you?
Internet censorship: The
control or suppression of the publishing
or accessing of information on the
Internet.
digital divide: The gulf between
those who do and those who don’t have
access to modern information and
communications technology such as
smartphones, personal computers, and
the Internet.
net neutrality: The principle that
Internet service providers (ISPs) should
be required to treat all Internet traffic
running over their wired and wireless
broadband networks the same—
without favoring content from some
sources and/or blocking or slowing
(also known as throttling) content from
others.
32
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
in smartphone penetration, and the creativity and innovation of people who are
able to see and capitalize on the almost unlimited opportunities.29 Clearly the
growth of the IoT will present major issues around Internet access.
Robo-Advice for Millennials
Your investment firm has been working hard to develop a robo-adviser service
that uses computer algorithms to provide financial planning for its millennial cli-
ents. There is widespread consensus across the investment community that millen-
nials raised in an environment of video games and social networks are looking for
just this kind of investment robo-advice service.
You are a member of a field test unit for the robo-advice service. Your team of
12 people has trained some 250 people (in the 25 to 35 target age range) in the
basics of investing and how to take best advantage of the robo-advice service. The
trial results have been discouraging. Many of the trial clients ignored the robo-advice
completely and simply turned into hyperactive traders, executing multiple trades per
week. Alarmingly, even those who followed the robo-advice did not fare well, losing
an average of 5 percent on their investments even though the market (as measured
by the S&P 500) increased nearly 4 percent during the six-month trial period.
Review Questions
1.
What other fields besides investing might benefit from the use of a robo-
advice system?
2.
What sort of legal, ethical, and social issues are raised when creating a robo-
advice type of system? Do the builders of such a robo-advice system owe a
special duty or responsibility to its users?
Critical Thinking Questions
The members of the field trial team are gathered to discuss their findings and
develop conclusions in advance of a meeting next week with the firm’s senior man-
agement team. Just 10 minutes into the meeting, it is clear that none of the field
trial team members feels confident that the new service is offering sound advice.
However, some members of the trial team argue that the roll-out of the service
should commence as planned; they maintain that problems can be identified and
fixed as more users come on board and the firm gains more experience working
with investors and the robo-advice system. Their rationale is based at least in part
on self-survival—to recommend against roll-out is probably a career-ending move,
as the firm has already invested so much in the program, which it has already
begun promoting to customers. Others members of the team argue that the product
is simply not ready for large-scale use. They argue that the current system should
be scrapped and the firm should forget about the idea of a robo-advice service.
1.
Are there other alternative strategies for the robo-advice service that make
sense? Which approach would you recommend and why?
2.
How might you present your approach to senior management in such a way
that it has a good chance of being accepted—and that the risk to your future
employment is minimized?
Summary
Principle:
The value of information is directly linked to how it helps decision
makers achieve the organization’s goals.
Data consists of raw facts; information is a collection of data organized and
processed so that it has additional value beyond the value of the individual
facts. The value of information created depends on the relationships defined
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
33
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

among existing data. Turning data into information is a process performed to
achieve a defined outcome. This process requires knowledge, which is the aware-
ness and understanding of a set of information and the ways in which that infor-
mation can be made useful to support a specific task or reach a decision.
Information has many different characteristics. It can be accessible, accu-
rate, complete, economical to produce, flexible, relevant, reliable, secure, sim-
ple to understand, timely, and verifiable. The importance of each of these
characteristics varies depending on the situation and the kind of decision you
are trying to make. The value of information is directly linked to how it helps
people achieve their organizations’ goals.
Principle:
Information systems are composed of fundamental components that must
be carefully assembled and integrated to work well together.
An information system (IS) is a set of interrelated components that collect,
process, store, and disseminate data and information; an information system
provides a feedback mechanism to monitor and control its operation to make
sure it continues to meet its goals and objectives.
A computer-based information system (CBIS) is a single set of hardware,
software, databases, networks, people, and procedures that are configured to
collect, manipulate, store, and process data into information.
An organization’s technology infrastructure includes all the hardware, soft-
ware, databases, networks, people, and procedures that are configured to col-
lect, manipulate, store, and process data into information.
Principle:
Managers have an essential role to play in the successful implementation
and use of information systems—that role changes depending on which
type of IS system is being implemented.
When considering the role of business managers in working with IS, it is
useful to divide information systems into three types: personal IS, group IS, and
enterprise IS.
For each type of IS, certain key organizational complements must be in
place to ensure successful implementation and use of the system. These com-
plements include well-trained workers, better teamwork, redesigned processes,
and new decision rights.
Principle:
An organization’s infrastructure technology forms the foundation upon
which its systems and applications are built.
Hardware consists of computer equipment used to perform input, proces-
sing, storage, and output activities.
Smartphones have become the primary device used by people around the
world to communicate, go online, and access and share information.
Software consists of computer programs that govern the operation of a
particular computing device, be it desktop, laptop, tablet, smartphone, or
some other device.
The trend of consumer technology practices influencing the way business
software is designed and delivered is called the consumerization of IT.
A database is an organized collection of facts and information, typically
consisting of two or more related files.
A data warehouse is a database that stores large amounts of historical data
in a form that readily supports analysis and decision making. An extract-
transform-load process is used to prepare the data for the data warehouse.
34
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Big data is a term used to describe collections of data that are so large and
complex that traditional database management software, hardware, and analy-
sis processes are incapable of dealing with them.
Networks connect computers and equipment in a room, building, campus, city,
across the country, or around the world to enable electronic communications.
With public cloud computing, a service organization owns and manages
the hardware, software, networking, and storage devices, with cloud user orga-
nizations (called tenants) accessing slices of shared resources via the Internet.
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of physical objects or things
embedded with sensors, processors, software, and network connectivity capa-
bility to enable them to exchange data with the manufacturer of the device,
device operators, and other connected devices.
The
Internet
of
Everything
(IoE)
encompasses
not
only
machine-
to-machine but also people-to-people and people-to machine connections. It
is estimated that the total number of devices connected to the Internet of Every-
thing could exceed 50 billion by the end of 2020.
Principle:
Organizations employ a variety of information systems to improve the
way they conduct business and make fact-based decisions.
E-commerce involves the exchange of money for goods and services over
electronic networks, and it encompasses many of an organization’s outward-
facing processes. Electronic business goes beyond e-commerce by using infor-
mation systems and networks to perform business-related tasks and functions.
A transaction processing system (TPS) is an information system used to
process and record business transactions.
A management information system (MIS) is an information system that pro-
vides routine information to managers and decision makers.
Many organizations are replacing their transaction processing systems and
management information systems with enterprise resource planning (ERP) sys-
tems that support their routine business processes, maintain records about
those processes, and provide extensive reporting and even data analysis capa-
bilities. At the core of a modern enterprise resource planning system is the
capability to support e-business and business analytics.
Business analytics is the extensive use of data and quantitative analysis to
support fact-based decision making within organizations.
Data scientists are people who understand the business and the business
analytics technology, while also recognizing the limitations of their data, tools,
and techniques. A data scientist puts all of this together to deliver real improve-
ments in decision making. To ensure the success of a business analytics pro-
gram, the management team within an organization must have a strong
commitment to data-driven decision making. Organizations that can put the
necessary components in place can act quickly to make superior decisions in
uncertain and changing environments to gain a strong competitive advantage.
A knowledge management system is an information system that stores and
retrieves knowledge, improves collaboration, locates knowledge sources, cap-
tures and uses knowledge, or in some other way enhances the knowledge man-
agement process.
Principle:
Strategic planning and project management are keys to ensuring that the
organization is working effectively on the right projects.
Strategic planning is a means to improve alignment between the business
and the information systems organization so that the IS organization and its
resources are focused on efforts that support the key objectives that are
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
35
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

important to the organization. This implies that IS and business managers have
a shared vision of where the organization is headed and agree on its key strat-
egies. This shared vision will guide the IS organization in hiring the right peo-
ple with the correct skills and competencies, choosing the right technologies
and vendors to explore and develop, installing the right systems, and focusing
on those projects that are needed to move the organization closer to its vision
and meeting its mission.
System acquisition is the process used to obtain information system resources
needed to provide the services necessary to meet a specific set of needs.
The three basic alternatives for obtaining software to meet users’ needs are:
buy off-the-shelf software, build a custom application, or choose a software
service provider.
Principle:
Information systems must be applied thoughtfully and carefully so that
society, organizations, and individuals around the globe can reap their
enormous benefits.
Cybercriminals are motivated by the potential for monetary gain. The finan-
cial losses from cybercrime—including the cost of the hardware, software, and
various countermeasures implemented to fight cybercrime—are estimated to be
as high as $400 billion annually worldwide. Cyberterrorism is also an increas-
ing concern for organizations and countries around the globe.
A strong security program begins by assessing threats to the organization’s
computers and network, identifying actions that address the most serious vul-
nerabilities, and educating end users about the risks involved and the actions
they must take to prevent a security incident.
Information systems play a fundamental and ever-expanding role in soci-
ety, business, and industry. But their use also raises a number of serious ethical,
legal, and social issues, including job losses caused by increasingly sophisti-
cated, humanlike systems; invasion of privacy through various data collection
programs; freedom of expression versus censorship; and the issues caused by
unequal access to computer technology and the Internet.
Many organizations and professional associations have developed codes of
ethics to help guide their members in making difficult decisions.
Key Terms
big data
business analytics
business intelligence (BI)
computer-based information system (CBIS)
consumerization of IT
cybercriminal
cyberterrorism
data
data scientist
data warehouse
database
digital divide
e-commerce
electronic business (e-business)
enterprise IS
enterprise resource planning (ERP) system
ethics
extract-transform-load (ETL)
extranet
group IS
hardware
information
information silo
information system (IS)
Internet
Internet censorship
Internet of Everything (IoE)
Internet of Things (IoT)
intranet
knowledge
36
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

knowledge management system (KMS)
management information system (MIS)
mobile commerce (m-commerce)
net neutrality
networks
open source software
organizational complements
personal IS
procedure
process
project
public cloud computing
software
system acquisition
system development
technology infrastructure
transaction
transaction processing system (TPS)
World Wide Web (WWW)
Chapter 1: Self-Assessment Test
The value of information is directly linked to how it
helps decision makers achieve the organization’s
goals.
1.
is a collection of raw facts orga-
nized and processed so that it has additional
value beyond the value of the individual facts.
a. Data
b. Information
c. Knowledge
d. Expertise
2. Turning data into information is a
,
or a set of logically related tasks performed to
achieve a defined outcome.
3. Two quality characteristics that are critical for
data used in accounting for the management of
company assets, such as cash, inventory, and
equipment are
.
a. flexibility and accuracy
b. security and relevancy
c. accuracy and completeness
d. relevancy and economical
Information systems are composed of fundamental
components that must be carefully assembled and
integrated to work well together.
4. Technology infrastructure includes all the hard-
ware, software,
, networks, people,
and procedures that are configured to collect,
manipulate, store, and process data into
information.
5. According to Jim Collins in his book Good to
Great, those who build great companies under-
stand that the ultimate throttle on growth for any
great company is not markets, or technology, or
competition, or products; rather, it is one thing
above all others:
.
a. great customers
b. great systems
c. great leadership
d. great people
Managers have an essential role to play in the suc-
cessful implementation and use of information
systems—the role changes depending on which
type of IS system is being implemented.
6. When considering the role of business managers
in working with IS, it is useful to divide informa-
tion systems into these three types:
.
a. enterprise IS, group IS, and personal IS
b. small and simple, medium and multifaceted,
and large and complex
c. operational, tactical, and strategic
d. management support, operational, and enter-
prise systems
7. Which of the following is not a key organizational
complement that must be in place to ensure suc-
cessful implementation and use of the system?
a. well-trained workers
b. better teamwork
c. the latest technology
d. new decision rights
An organization’s technology infrastructure forms
the foundation upon which its systems and applica-
tions are built.
8.
are the primary device type used
by people around the world to communicate, go
online, and access and share information.
a. Personal computers
b. Laptops
c. Smartphones
d. Tablets
9. The trend of consumer technology practices influ-
encing the way business software is designed and
delivered is called the
.
10.
is a computing environment in
which a service provider organization owns and
manages the hardware, software, networking,
and storage devices, with cloud user organiza-
tions (called tenants) accessing slices of shared
resources via the Internet.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
37
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Organizations employ a variety of information sys-
tems to improve the way they conduct business and
make fact-based decisions.
11.
involves the exchange of money
for goods and services over electronic networks,
and it encompasses many of an organization’s
outward-facing processes—such as sales, mar-
keting, order taking, delivery, procurement of
goods and services, and customer service—that
touch customers, suppliers, and other business
partners.
12. A
is an organized collection of
people, procedures, software, databases, and
devices that provides routine information to
managers and decision makers.
a. transaction processing system (TPS)
b. management information system (MIS)
c. enterprise resource planning (ERP) system
d. supply chain management system
13. Over time, decision support systems, executive
information systems, online analytical processing,
business intelligence, and business analytics have
gained in capabilities and expanded in scope to
add new functionality, but they have all had the
goal of
.
a. processing business transactions as rapidly
and accurately as possible
b. deriving the most value out of the data
available
c. providing routine information to managers
d. enabling the sharing of information across
organizations units
14. An organized collection of people, procedures,
software, databases, and devices that
stores and retrieves knowledge, improves
collaboration, locates knowledge sources,
and captures and uses knowledge is called
a
.
Strategic planning and project management are
keys to ensuring that the organization is working
effectively on the right projects.
15. An IT organization not aligned with the key
objectives of the business will
.
a. be recognized as a technology leader in its
industry
b. find it difficult to even gain management
support for its proposed efforts
c. be positioned to deliver a series of break-
through projects
d. be viewed as a partner with the business
16. The two fundamental strategies for system
acquisition are:
.
a. customize an existing package and acquire
open source software
b. use a standard software package or customize
software
c. build software in-house or contract for
software
d. buy off-the-shelf software or build a custom
application
Information systems must be applied thoughtfully
and carefully so that society, organizations, and
individuals around the globe can reap their enor-
mous benefits.
17. Which of the following statements about com-
puter security is not true?
a. Cyberterrorism is an increasing concern for
organizations and countries around the globe.
b. Information systems provide a new and
highly profitable venue for cybercriminals.
c. The need for computer security must be bal-
anced against other business needs.
d. Educating end users about the risks involved
and the actions they must take to prevent a
security incident is a not key part of any
security program.
18.
is a term used to describe the gulf
between those who do and those who don’t have
access to modern information and communica-
tions technology such as smartphones, personal
computers, and the Internet.
Chapter 1: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. b
2. process
3. c
4. databases
5. d
6. a
7. c
8. c
9. consumerization of IT
10. Cloud computing
11. E-commerce
12. b
13. b
14. knowledge management system
15. b
16. d
17. d
18. Digital divide
38
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Review Questions
1. How is data different from information? How is
information different from knowledge?
2. Identify and briefly define six characteristics that
describe the quality of data.
3. What is an information system? What is the role of
feedback in a system?
4. Identify the six basic components of any
computer-based information system.
5. What is meant by an organization’s technology
infrastructure?
6. When considering the role of business managers
in working with IS, it is useful to divide informa-
tion systems into three types. Name and briefly
describe those three types.
7. Identify and briefly describe the four key organi-
zational complements that must be in place to
ensure successful implementation and use of an
information system.
8. Define the term “software.” What are the two
primary types of software? How are they
different?
9. What is meant by the phrase consumerization of IT?
10. What is the extract-transform-load process?
11. Define the term “big data.”
12. What is cloud computing?
13. What is an extranet and how is one used?
14. How is the Internet of Everything different from
the Internet of Things?
15. How would you distinguish between e-commerce
and e-business?
16. Briefly describe the differences among transac-
tion processing systems, management informa-
tion systems, and enterprise resource planning
systems.
17. What is meant by the term “business analytics”?
What other terms have been used for business
analytics systems?
18. What is knowledge management? How might it
be used?
19. What are the components of a shared vision on
which the business and IS organization must
agree?
20. Identify an advantage and a potential disadvan-
tage of using open source software.
21. What is the difference between a cybercriminal
and a cyberterrorist?
22. Identify three specific social issues associated
with the use of information systems.
Discussion Questions
1. What do you hope to learn from this course that
will make it worthwhile for you? Do you think a
basic understanding of information systems is
important to you? Why or why not?
2. Describe how you might use information systems
in a career area of interest to you.
3. How might completing this course help you in
some of the courses you will take during your
academic career?
4. It has been estimated that the amount of digi-
tal data is doubling every two years. Discuss
some technological and social implications and
issues associated with this rapid growth of
data.
5. What are some of the social implications of the
use of smartphones by an increasing percentage
of the world’s population?
6. Which of your school’s information systems is the
worst or most difficult for you to deal with?
Describe an ideal system that would replace this
one. What role might students play in defining
and building this replacement system?
7. Discuss why it is critical for information systems
to be linked to the business objectives of an
organization.
8. For an industry of your choice, describe how a CBIS
could be used to reduce costs or increase profits.
9. An organization has struggled for over three
years in an attempt to implement and use an
ERP system. It has finally decided to scrap
this system, at great cost, and convert to a
new ERP system from a different vendor.
Identify and discuss actions management
should take to ensure the success of the new
system.
10. Identify specific benefits of the cloud computing
model. Can you identify any potential risks asso-
ciated with using this approach?
11. Describe three exciting new applications that are
becoming feasible as a result of the growth of the
Internet of Everything.
12. Do research to identify a company that has gone
beyond e-commerce to use information systems
and networks to achieve an e-business environ-
ment to perform business-related tasks and func-
tions. Briefly describe the scope of the company’s
e-business functions.
13. Identify a specific company that could benefit
from the use of big data and business analytics.
What sort of data is required? How might this
data be used in decision making?
14. What are the cornerstones to an organization’s
security program?
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
39
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Prepare a data disk and a backup disk (using USB
flash drives) for the problem-solving exercises
and other computer-based assignments you will
complete in this class. Create one folder for each
chapter in the textbook (you will need 14 folders
total). As you complete the problem-solving
exercises and other work for each computer, save
your assignments in the appropriate chapter
folder. Designate one disk as your working copy
and the other as your backup.
2. Create a table that lists 10 or more possible career
areas—including estimated annual salaries and
brief job descriptions. Rate how much you think
you would like each potential career area on a
scale from 1 (“don’t like”) to 10 (“like the most”).
Sort the careers from high to low rating and print
the results. Sort the table according to annual
salaries, from high to low, and then print the
resulting table. Sort the table from the most liked
to least liked, and then print the results.
3. Use presentation software to create a set of three
slides that identifies the top three things you
hope to learn from this course and why each is
important to you. If requested, share your find-
ings with the instructor and/or class.
Team Activities
1. Before you can do a team activity, you need a
team. As a class member, you might create your
own team, or your instructor might assign mem-
bers to groups. After your group has been
formed, meet and introduce yourselves to each
other. Find out the first name and contact infor-
mation for each member. Find out one interesting
fact about each member of your team as well.
Brainstorm a name for your team. Put the infor-
mation on each team member into a database and
print enough copies for each team member and
your instructor.
2. With the other members of your group, use word-
processing or group collaboration software to
write a summary of the members of your team,
the courses each team member has taken, a
summary of employment, and the expected
graduation date of each team member. Send the
report to your instructor via email.
3. With your team, use an Internet search engine
or skim through several business periodicals
(Bloomberg Businessweek, Computerworld,
Forbes, InformationWeek, PC World, Wall
Street Journal, Wired, etc.) to find recent arti-
cles that describe potential social or ethical
issues related to the use of the Internet of
Things. Use word-processing software to write
a one-page report summarizing your findings.
Identify one or two issues that you think are
most significant.
Web Exercises
1. Throughout this book, you will see how the
Internet provides a vast amount of information
to individuals and organizations, and you will
examine the important role the Web plays. Most
large universities and organizations have an
address on the Internet (a Web site or home
page). The address of the Web site for this
publisher is www.cengage.com. You can gain
access to the Internet through a browser, such
as Internet Explorer or Firefox. Using an Inter-
net browser, go to the Web site for this pub-
lisher. What did you find? Try to obtain
information about this book. You might be
asked to develop a report or send an email
message to your instructor about what you
found.
2. Do research on the Web to find information on
Internet censorship. Identify those countries with
the strongest degree of Internet censorship, and
state specific reasons why those countries are so
poorly rated.
3. Go to the Web site for the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, and find information about the occu-
pations with the greatest projected job growth in
terms of the number of people who will be
needed. Use a graphics program to illustrate the
growth of the 10 fastest growing occupations.
Write a brief summary of your findings.
40
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Career Exercises
1. In the Career Exercises section found at the end
of every chapter, you will explore how material
in the chapter can help you excel in your college
major or chosen career. Identify 10 job charac-
teristics that are important to you in selecting
your career (e.g., involves travel to foreign coun-
tries, requires working in a project team). Place
these characteristics in rank order based on their
relative importance to you.
2. Research two or three possible careers that inter-
est you. Create a report describing the job
opportunities, job responsibilities, job character-
istics, and possible starting salaries for each
career area.
Case Studies
Case One
Connecting Patient Monitoring Devices to EHRs
An electronic health record (EHR) is a computer-readable
record of health-related information on an individual. The
compiled data in an EHR can include information about
patient demographics, medical history, family history,
immunization records, laboratory data, ongoing health
problems, progress notes, medications, vital signs, and
radiology reports. Ideally, EHRs incorporate data from all
healthcare facilities a patient uses, making the data easily
accessible to healthcare professionals.
EHRs hold out the promise of improving health care
and reducing costs, but for now, many hospitals are
struggling to automate the capture of raw data from the
various patient monitoring devices—such as vital sign
monitors, ventilators, and electrocardiogram machines—and
pass the data directly into each patient’s EHR. This task is
made more difficult because different devices and/or
vendors often use different standards for communicating
over the network. As a result, specialized software is
required to receive the data and translate it into a form
suitable for updating the EHR. Until communications
standards are implemented across the healthcare industry,
each new piece of monitoring equipment that outputs a
nonstandard signal requires a new interface with the EHR.
So if a promising new vital sign monitoring device is
developed, some hospitals looking to use the device may be
required to create a new software middleware layer to
connect the new device to the EHR. Connecting monitoring
devices and EHRs is expected to become a major business
growth area over the next decade.
Many software vendors and device manufacturers are
moving quickly to capitalize on the opportunities involved
with automating the many clinical-support activities that
involve monitoring devices. The Center for Medical
Interoperability has enlisted many of the nation’s largest
healthcare systems as part of its effort to strongly encourage
device vendors to adopt communications standards that will
ease the problems with interoperability. The Food and Drug
Administration is working to encourage the development of
interoperable devices by defining some 25 device standards.
Solving the interoperability problem will require an
agreement on standards through the cooperation of multiple
stakeholders.
Critical Thinking Questions:
1. What benefits can be achieved through the successful
implementation of EHRs? What additional benefits will
be gained by feeding data directly from patient moni-
toring devices directly into EHRs?
2. Can you identify any legal, ethical or social concerns
with the use EHRs? What additional concerns arise
from connecting patient monitoring devices to the IoT?
3. What actions need to be taken by EHR software ven-
dors, patient monitoring device vendors, government
agencies, and hospital administrators to enable patient
monitoring devices to be safely and reliably connected
to EHRs?
SOURCES: Atherton, Jim, “Development of the Electronic Health
Record,” AMA Journal of Ethics, March 2011, http://journalofethics.ama-
assn.org/2011/03/mhst1-1103.html; Tahir, Dennis, “Getting the Data
Stream Flowing: Hospitals Want Monitoring Devices and EHRs to
Communicate,” Modern Healthcare, May 9, 2015, www.modernhealth
care.com/article/20150509/MAGAZINE/305099980.
Case Two
BMW: Automaker Competes on the Digital Front
One of the biggest trends driving competition in the auto
industry in recent years is the race to offer new and better
“connected-car” technologies—including those that enhance
safety, monitor maintenance requirements, provide Internet
connectivity, and offer seamless integration with
smartphones and wearable devices. A 2015 study of the
worldwide auto industry projected that customer spending
on connected-car technologies will exceed €40 billion ($42
billion) in 2016; that number is expected to more than triple
to €122 billion ($129 billion) by 2021. Tech-savvy consumers
increasingly expect their cars to serve as extensions of their
personal technology, and one company working hard to
exceed those expectations is German automaker Bayerische
Motoren Werke AG—or BMW, as it is more commonly
known.
BMW was founded in 1916 as a manufacturer of aircraft
engines, but the company soon branched out into other
areas. Today, the BMW Group manufactures motorcycles in
addition to its three premium car brands (BMW, MINI, and
Rolls-Royce), and it is now represented in over 140
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
41
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

countries—including 30 production locations in 14 countries.
With close to 2 million cars sold in 2014, BMW is one of the
world’s most-recognized luxury car brands, with a reputation
for consistently delivering high-quality cars built on a
foundation of advanced mechanical engineering. To maintain
its edge, BMW is now expanding its focus to find ways to
improve its cars through cutting-edge technological
innovations.
According to Dieter May, BMW’s digital business models
senior vice president, “Our competitor is not Audi, Jaguar
Land Rover or Mercedes, but the space of consumer
electronics players.” As May sees it, one of the biggest
questions facing BMW—and other auto makers—in the
coming years is “How do we take the connected home,
personal digital assistants, and advanced sensor technology,
and connect all these trends?”
BMW has responded to this question by building an
extensive array of new technologies into its latest models.
Through BMW’s iDrive information and entertainment
system, drivers can access ConnectedDrive, a portal offering
a wide range of location-based services, including concierge
services, real-time traffic information, and access to more
than 12.6 million searchable “points of interest,” ranging
from gas stations to restaurants to tourist attractions. Another
ConnectedDrive feature, the Head-Up Display, projects
important driving information—such as current speed and
warnings from the car’s night vision system—on the
windshield, allowing the driver to keep his or her eyes on the
road. The Speed Limit Info feature uses a car-mounted
camera along with data from the navigation system to keep
drivers informed of current speed limits, including those in
effect due to road construction and weather conditions.
ConnectedDrive, which can be controlled from the driver’s
smartphone, also offers mobile office features, such the
ability to dictate and send messages, and a ConnectedDrive
Store, where users can purchase apps and services directly
through the iDrive interface. And at the high end of BMW’s
model line, the 7 Series full-size sedan, BMW’s flagship
vehicle, is the first model to accept gesture-control
commands for the iDrive display as well as a completely
automated self-park feature that can be operated when the
driver is outside the vehicle.
BMW is also working to ensure that the car-buying
experience is keeping up with customers’ expectations by
encouraging its dealerships to create more digital
showrooms, with flat screen displays and virtual
demonstrations to appeal to the many customers who are
accustomed to the online shopping experience. In addition,
BMW is adding “product geniuses”—like those found in
Apple’s retail stores—to its showrooms. The specialists have
no responsibility to sell; their job is simply to spend
whatever time is necessary to explain and demonstrate each
car’s various technological features to potential BMW
customers.
To continue to develop the complex technological
innovations it needs to maintain its edge over competitors,
BMW has explored possible partnerships with technology
companies such as Apple. Currently, however, the auto
maker is focused on building up its in-house expertise and
speeding up its internal software development cycles. In
2014, BMW spent over €4.5 billion ($4.75 billion) on research
and development, and it spent, on average, more than €6,000
($6,370) per car on connected-car technology. BMW is
making it clear to potential customers and competitors alike
that is committed to competing and winning on the digital
front.
Critical Thinking Questions:
1. Other than selling more cars, what potential benefits
do connected-car technologies offer auto makers such
as BMW in terms of enhancing long-term customer
relationships?
2. What responsibilities does BMW have to its
customers regarding the data it captures via the
various connected car technologies that it builds into
its cars?
3. Of the primary components of an ERP system that
were identified in this chapter, which modules are
likely to be of highest importance to BMW if it con-
tinues to focus on in-house development of new tech-
nological features and services rather than partnering
with an established personal technology company,
such as Google or Apple? Would those tools need to
change if BMW establishes a long-term partnership
with a technology company?
SOURCES: Muller, Joann, “5 Big Trends Driving The Auto Industry in
2015,” Forbes, January 19, 2015, www.forbes.com/sites/joannmuller
/2015/01/05/5-big-trends-driving-the-auto-industry-in-2015; Vierecki,
Richard, Ahlemann, Dietmar, Koster, Alex, and Jursch, Sebastian,
“Connected Car Study 2015: Racing Ahead with Autonomous Cars and
Digital Innovation,” Strategy&, September 15, 2015, www.strategyand.
pwc.com/global/home/what-we-think/reports-white-papers/article-dis
play/connected-car-2015-study; “Annual Report 2014,” BMW Group,
www.bmwgroup.com/e/0_0_www_bmwgroup_com/investor_relations
/finanzberichte/geschaeftsberichte/2014/_pdf/12507_GB_2014_en_Fi
nanzbericht_Online.pdf, accessed November 23, 2015; Murphy, Margi,
“BMW Internalizes IT to Claw Back Customer Data,” ComputerworldUK,
June 24, 2015, www.computerworlduk.com/news/data/bmw-our-compe
titor-is-not-audi-jaguar-land-rover-or-mercedes-but-consumer-electro
nics-players-3616944; Green, Chloe, “Rise of the Intelligent Car,”
InformationAge, July 7, 2015, www.information-age.com/industry/soft
ware/123459790/rise-intelligent-car-how-digital-technologies-are-creat
ing-third-wave-car-makers; “BMW ConnectedDrive,” BMW USA, www
.bmwusa.com/standard/content/innovations/bmwconnecteddrive/con
necteddrive.aspx#home, accessed November 28, 2015; “7 Series,” BMW
USA, www.bmwusa.com/bmw/7series, accessed November 28, 2015;
Taylor, Edward and Love, Julia, “Tim Cook Visited BMW in Germany to
Learn How to Build an Electric Car,” Business Insider, July 31, 2015,
www.businessinsider.com/r-apple-bmw-in-courtship-with-an-eye-on
-car-collaboration-2015-7; “BMW Tosses Salesmen for ‘Geniuses,”
The Wall Street Journal, February 19, 2014, www.wsj.com/articles
/SB10001424052702304450904579364833799765354.
42
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Notes
1. Haselkorn, Erin, “To Be a Marketing Master Mind, You
Need Quality Data,” Experian Marketing Services, April
15, 2014, www.experian.com/blogs/marketing-forward/
2014/04/15/to-be-a-marketing-mastermind-you-need-
quality-data.
2. Shah, Jay, “Calculate the Cost of Bad Data Using This
Easy Equation,” Informed Logix, April 2, 2015, www.
infogix.com/calculate-cost-bad-data-easy-equation.
3. Collins, Jim, Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the
Leap and Others Don’t, New York: Harper Business, 2001.
4. Carroll, Ron, “People Are the Most Important System
Component,” Box Theory, www.boxtheorygold.com/
blog/bid/12164/People-Are-the-Most-Important-System-
Component, accessed June 10, 2015.
5. Laurianne McLaughlin, “Kroger Solves Top Customer
Issue: Long Lines,” InformationWeek, April 2, 2014,
www.informationweek.com/strategic-cio/executive-
insights-and-innovation/kroger-solves-top-customer-
issue-long-lines/d/d-id/1141541.
6. “2 Billion Consumers Worldwide to Get Smart(phones)
by 2015,” eMarketer, December 11, 2014, www.emark
eter.com/Article/2-Billion-Consumers-Worldwide-Smart
phones-by-2016/1011694.
7. “Global Smartphone Shipments Forecast from 2010 to
2019 (in million units),” The Statistics Portal, www.sta
tista.com/statistics/263441/global-smartphone-shipments-
forecast, accessed June 11, 2015 and “Forecast for Global
Shipments of Tablets, Laptops and Desktop PCs from
2010 to 2019 (in million units),” Statistica, www.statista.
com/statistics/272595/global-shipments-forecast-for-
tablets-laptops-and-desktop-pcs, accessed June 10, 2015.
8. “Number of Android Applications,” App Brain Stats, June
11, 2015, www.appbrain.com/stats/number-of-android-
apps.
9. “Number of Apps Available in Leading App Stores as of
May 2015,” The Statistics Portal, www.statista.com/statis
tics/276623/number-of-apps-available-in-leading-app-
stores, accessed June 12, 2015.
10. Harris, Derrick, “Why Apple, eBay, and Walmart Have
Some of the Biggest Data Warehouses You’ve Ever
Seen,” GIGAOM, March 27, 2013, https://gigaom.com/
2013/03/27/why-apple-ebay-and-walmart-have-some-
of-the-biggest-data-warehouses-youve-ever-seen.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. Vowler, Julia, “US Data Warehousing to Make the Most
of Web Data,” ComputerWeekly.com, www.computer
weekly.com/feature/US-data-warehousing-to-make-the-
most-of-Web-data, accessed January 19, 2014.
14. Williams, David, “EMC: World’s Data Doubling Every
Two Years...,” IT Brief, April 15, 2014, http://itbrief.co.
nz/story/emc-worlds-data-doubling-every-two-years.
15. “Big Data: A New World of Opportunities,” NESSI,
December 2012, www.nessi-europe.com/Files/Private/
NESSI_WhitePaper_BigData.pdf.
16. “Cloud Computing Options,” PC Today, June 2014.
17. “AWS Case Study: Netflix,” Amazon Web Services,
https://aws.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies/netflix/?
pg=main-customer-success-page, accessed September
26, 2015.
18. “Implementation of Intranets,” Innovaction Research
Group, www.innovactiongroup.com/Corporate-Intra
nets, accessed June 16, 2015.
19. “Internet of Things: FTC Staff Report and a New Publi-
cation for Businesses,” Federal Trade Commission, Jan-
uary 2015, www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/
federal-trade-commission-staff-report-november-2013-
workshop-entitled-internet-things-privacy/150127iotrpt.
pdf.
20. Bradley, Joseph, Barbier, Joel, and Handler, Doug,
“Embracing the Internet of Everything to Capture Your
Share of $14.4 Trillion,” Cisco White Paper, www.
cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoE_Economy.
pdf.
21. Kuehner-Hebert, Katie, “GE to Launch ‘Internet of
Things’ Service,” CFO, August 5, 2015, http://ww2.cfo.
com/the-cloud/2015/08/ge-launch-internet-things-
service.
22. “NARCOMS MS Research Effort Seeks Participants: MS
Registry Enables Researchers to Find Solutions for Peo-
ple with MS,” National Multiple Sclerosis Society, March
16, 2015, www.nationalmssociety.org/About-the-Society/
News/NARCOMS-MS-Research-Effort-Seeks-Participants-
MS-R.
23. Schwartz, C.E., Bode, R.K., and Vollmer, T, “The Symp-
tom Inventory Disability-Specific Shorts Forms for MS:
Reliability and Factorial Structure,” Archives of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation. March 21, 2012, www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22446293.
24. Buchanan, Leigh, “The New York Bakery That Hires
Everyone, No Questions Asked,” Inc., September 21,
2015, www.inc.com/leigh-buchanan/greyston-bakery-
hires-everyone-no-questions-asked.html.
25. Luttrell, Anne, “NASA’s PMO: Building and Sustaining a
Learning Organization,” Project Management Institute,
www.pmi.org/Learning/articles/nasa.aspx, accessed
June 26, 2015.
26. “About|Penn National Gaming,” www.pngaming.com/
About, accessed November 4, 2015.
27. “Big, Bang Boom,” Huffington Post, http://big.assets.huf
fingtonpost.com/BigBangBoom.pdf, accessed May 30,
2015.
28. Durbin, Steve, “Cyber Crime: Battling a Growth Indus-
try,” The Connected Business, September 5, 2014, www.
ft.com/cms/s/2/34cb2b04-34cf-11e4-ba5d-00144feabdc0.
html#axzz3atmza4RA.
29. Morgan, Jacob, “A Simple Explanation of ‘The Internet of
Things’,” Forbes, May 13, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/
jacobmorgan/2014/05/13/simple-explanation-internet-
things-that-anyone-can-understand.
CHAPTER 1 • An Introduction to Information Systems
43
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
2
Information Systems in
Organizations
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• Outsourcing can be an effective strategy, but it doesn’t
always work. Boeing made a strategic decision to out-
source development of the 787 Dreamliner aircraft with a
goal of reducing costs and cutting development time by
two years. However, complications led to a temporary
worldwide grounding of the aircraft a little more than a
year after its launch, denting the plane’s public reputation.
• Successful companies such as General Electric have
developed strategies for addressing the “soft side of
implementing change.” These strategies are designed
to help employees embrace change and the new way of
working and can mean the difference between success
and failure of change efforts.
• Technology is one of the fastest-growing areas in the
U.S. economy, and information systems professionals
such as software developers, computer systems ana-
lysts, computer support specialists, and data scientists
are in high demand.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• Organizations are open systems that affect and
are affected by their surrounding environment.
• Positive change is a key ingredient for any
successful organization.
• Information systems must be implemented in
such a manner that they are accepted and work
well within the context of an organization and
support its fundamental business goals and
strategies.
• The information system worker functions at the
intersection of business and technology and
designs, builds, and implements solutions
that allow organizations to effectively leverage
information technology systems.
• Sketch a general model of an organization show-
ing how information systems support and work
within the automated portions of an organizational
process.
• Define the term value chain and identify several
examples within a typical manufacturing or ser-
vice organization.
• Define the term innovation and identify two types.
• Define reengineering and continuous improve-
ment and explain how they are different.
• Discuss the pros and cons of outsourcing, off-
shoring, and downsizing.
• Define the term “the soft side of implementing
change,” and explain why it is a critical factor
in the successful adoption of any major change.
• Identify and briefly describe four change models
that can be used to increase the likelihood of
successfully introducing a new information
system into an organization.
• Define the types of roles, functions, and
careers available in the field of information
systems.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Information Systems
in Organizations?
After graduating, a management major might be hired by a transportation company and be assigned to
an information system project designed to improve employee productivity. A marketing major might use
a software application to analyze customer needs in different areas of the country for a national retailer.
An accounting major might work for a consulting firm using an information system to audit a client
company’s financial records. A real estate major might work in a virtual team with clients, builders, and
a legal team whose members are located around the world. A biochemist might conduct research for a
drug company and use a computer model to evaluate the potential of a new cancer treatment. An
entrepreneur might use information systems to advertise and sell products and bill customers.
Although your job might be different from those in the above examples, throughout your career,
you will almost certainly use information systems to help you and your organization become more
efficient, effective, productive, and competitive. However, the implementation of new information
systems has a major impact on an organization, affecting people’s roles and responsibilities, their
day-to-day routines and processes for accomplishing work, who they interact with, what skills and
knowledge they need, and how they are rewarded and compensated. The resulting changes can be
highly disruptive and agonizing to work through, and as a result, the introduction of a new system often
faces considerable resistance. As a manager in an organization undergoing such change, you must
anticipate resistance and work actively to mitigate it. Failure to rise to this challenge can lead to the
failure of a promising information system project.
This chapter provides the information and tools you need to better understand people’s resistance
to change and management’s role in overcoming this resistance.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• Why is there a natural resistance to the implementation of new information systems?
• What must leaders do to prepare their organization for the changes that accompany the successful
adoption of a new information system?
Information systems (IS) continue to have a major impact on the role of
workers and on how organizations as a whole function. While information
systems were once used primarily to automate manual processes, today
they are transforming the nature of work itself and, in many cases, the
nature of the products and services offered. Organizational leaders have an
essential role in preparing the organization to not just accept but to
embrace the changes necessary for success. In this chapter and throughout
the book, you will explore the benefits and issues associated with the use
of information systems in today’s organizations around the globe.
Organizations and Information Systems
An organization is a group of people that is structured and managed to meet
its mission or set of group goals. “Structured” means that there are defined
relationships between members of the organization and their various activi-
ties, and that processes are defined that assign roles, responsibilities, and
authority to complete the various activities. In many cases, the processes are
automated using well-defined information systems. Organizations are consid-
ered to be open systems, meaning that they affect and are affected by their
surrounding environment. See Figure 2.1.
Providing value to a stakeholder—customer, supplier, partner, share-
holder, or employee—is the primary goal of any organization. The value
chain, first described by Michael Porter in a classic 1985 Harvard Business
Review article titled “How Information Gives You Competitive Advantage,”
organization: A group of people that
is structured and managed to meet its
mission or set of group goals.
46
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

reveals how organizations can add value to their products and services.
The value chain is a series (chain) of activities that an organization performs
to transform inputs into outputs in such a way that the value of the input is
increased. An organization may have many value chains, and different organi-
zations in different industries will have different value chains. As an example
of a simple value chain, the gift wrapping department of an upscale retail
store takes packages from customers, covers them with appropriate, decora-
tive wrapping paper, and gives the package back to the customer, thus
increasing the customer’s (and the recipient’s) perceived value of the gift.
In a manufacturing organization, the supply chain is a key value chain
whose primary activities include inbound logistics, operations, outbound
logistics, marketing and sales, and service. See Figure 2.2. These primary
Environment
- Customers
- Suppliers
- Technology
Inputs
- Capital
- Equipment
- Facilities
- Materials
- Supplies
- Labor
- Knowledge
Transformation process
- Alteration
- Manufacture
- Transportation
- Storage
Corrective
actions
Feedback
data
Goods and
services
Corrective
actions
Feedback
data
Monitoring and control
Outputs
- Goods
- Services
- Feedback
- Economy
- Business partners
- Industry
- Competition
- Shareholder
- Governments
FIGURE 2.1
General model of an organization
Information systems support and work within the automated portions of an organizational process.
FIGURE 2.2
Supply chain
The primary and support activities of
the manufacturing supply chain are
concerned with creating or deliver-
ing a product or service.
Suppliers
Raw material
Transportation
Storage
Inbound
logistics
Outbound
logistics
Marketing
and sales
Services
Technology infrastructure, including information systems
Human resource management
Accounting and finance
Procurement
Operations
Customer service
Advertising
Promoting
Selling
Receiving
Storage
Manufacturing
Storage
Shipping
value chain: A series (chain) of
activities that an organization performs
to transform inputs into outputs in such
a way that the value of the input is
increased.
supply chain: A key value chain
whose primary activities include
inbound logistics, operations, outbound
logistics, marketing and sales, and
service.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
47
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

activities are directly concerned with the creation and/or delivery of the prod-
uct or service. The supply chain also includes four main areas of support
activities, including technology infrastructure, human resource management,
accounting and finance, and procurement. (Technology infrastructure includes
not only research and development but also information systems hardware,
software, databases, and networks.)
The concept of value chain is also meaningful to companies that don’t
manufacture products, including tax preparers, restaurants, book publishers,
legal firms, and other service providers. By adding a significant amount of
value to their products and services, companies ensure their success.
Supply
chain
management
(SCM)
encompasses
all
the
activities
required to get the right product into the right consumer’s hands in the
right quantity at the right time and at the right cost—from the identification
of suppliers and the acquisition of raw materials through manufacture and
customer delivery. The organizations that compose the supply chain are
“linked” together through both physical flows and information flows.
Physical flows involve the transformation, movement, and storage of sup-
plies and raw materials. Information flows allow participants in the supply
chain to communicate their plans, coordinate their work, and manage the
efficient flow of goods and material up and down the supply chain. See
Figure 2.3.
Organizations are constantly fine-tuning and adjusting their supply chain.
For example, many companies are increasing their use of free shipping to cus-
tomers in hopes of increasing sales and profits. Amazon is experimenting with
AmazonFresh, a Web site that offers fast, free delivery of groceries on orders
over $35 and other products in the Los Angeles and Seattle areas. Customers
can place an order by 10 am and have it by dinner; orders placed by 10 pm
will be delivered by breakfast time. The e-commerce giant is also experiment-
ing with a new drive-up store concept that will allow consumers to order gro-
cery items online and then schedule a pickup at a dedicated facility. Many
organizations are also outsourcing much of their outbound distribution activi-
ties, including the storage and shipping of finished products to customers
FIGURE 2.3
Ford Motor Company
assembly line
Ford Motor Company’s use of infor-
mation systems is a critical support
activity of its supply chain. The
company gives suppliers access to
its inventory system so that the sup-
pliers can monitor the database and
automatically send another shipment
of parts, such as engine parts or
bumpers, eliminating the need for
purchase orders. This procedure
speeds delivery and assembly time
and lowers Ford’s inventory-carrying
costs.
Nataliya Hora/Shutterstock.com
supply chain management
(SCM): The management of all the
activities required to get the right prod-
uct into the right consumer’s hands in
the right quantity at the right time and at
the right cost—from the identification of
suppliers and the acquisition of raw
materials through manufacture and
customer delivery.
48
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

and the return of items from customers. Amazon, DHL, FedEx, Rakuten, Ship-
wire, UPS, and other companies are highly skilled and efficient at performing
these functions.
What role do information systems play in supply chain management activ-
ities and other organizational activities? A traditional view of information sys-
tems holds that organizations use them to control and monitor processes and
to ensure effectiveness and efficiency. In this view, information systems are
external to the supply chain management process and serve to monitor or
control it.
A more contemporary view, however, holds that information systems are
often so intimately involved that they are part of the process itself. From this
perspective, the information system plays an integral role in the process,
whether providing input, aiding product transformation, or producing output.
Zara and Coles are two examples of organizations that have incorporated
information systems into the supply chain and made them integral parts of
this process.
Zara is a Spanish clothing and accessories retailer with headquarters in
Arteixo, Spain, and 2,000 stores spread across 88 countries.1 Its founder,
Amancio Ortega, had humble origins, but today is the third richest man in
the world. Consumer clothing trends are constantly changing, creating a
highly competitive environment in which companies compete not only on
price but also on their ability to deliver products that are new and stimulat-
ing to their customers. To meet this challenge, Zara has developed an
extremely responsive supply chain that enables it to go from design stage
to sales floor in a maximum of three weeks rather than the six-month indus-
try average. Zara can deliver new products twice a week to its stores
around the world. Mobile computers and point-of-sales systems are used to
capture and review data from stores on an hourly basis to spot new trends
as early as possible. This data includes sales and inventory data and anec-
dotal information gleaned by sales assistants as they chat with customers
and as the sales assistants gather unsold items that customers tried on, but
left in fitting rooms. All this data is sent to Zara’s headquarters where it is
carefully analyzed by design teams who decide what new designs will be
prototyped and produced in small quantities to see what sells. In addition,
inventory optimization models help the company determine the quantities
and sizes of existing items that should be delivered to each store.
Zara’s outstanding supply chain (which includes information systems as an
integral component) has led to improved customer satisfaction, decreased
risks of overstocking the wrong items, reduced total costs, and increased
sales.2
Coles is the second largest supermarket chain in Australia. The company
employs advanced analytics to improve consumer demand forecasts, and it
uses sophisticated customer-loyalty analysis tools to deepen its understanding
of customer buying patterns so it can plan effective marketing programs.
Coles uses a supplier portal that supports effective working relationships
between the chain and its more than 3,000 suppliers, providing better coordi-
nation and communications, which, in turn, help the company reduce costs
and achieve consistent delivery times along the supply chain. The portal also
provides suppliers with information they can use to assess their performance
and identify opportunities of improvement. Coles works closely with suppliers
to take effective measures toward continuous improvement, including frank
discussions about opportunities for improvement.3 All these actions have
gone a long way toward reducing the number 1 complaint from Coles’
customers—item stockouts. They have also paved the way for improved
inventory management and better supplier relationships.4
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
49
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Virtual Teams and Collaborative Work
A virtual team is a group of individuals whose members are distributed geo-
graphically, but who collaborate and complete work through the use of infor-
mation systems. The virtual team may be composed of individuals from a
single organization or from multiple organizations. The team can consist of
just two people up to hundreds of team members. One benefit of virtual
teams is that they enable organizations to enlist the best people in different
geographical regions to solve important organizational problems. Another
benefit is that they provide the ability to staff a team with people who have a
range of experience and knowledge that stems from a variety of professional
experiences and cultural backgrounds.
Often, it is difficult for members of a large virtual organization to meet at
a time that is convenient for everyone on the team due to the time zone dif-
ferences in their various geographic locations. Thus, members of a virtual
team
may
seldom
meet
face
to
face.
However,
quick
communication
exchanges among members can be key to project success. Thus, virtual team
members may need to continually monitor their email, instant messages, and
team Web site and be prepared to participate in an audio or video teleconfer-
ence on short notice. See Figure 2.4. Virtual team members must be prepared
to do work anywhere, anytime. As a result, members of a virtual team may
feel that their work day never ends.
Communications are greatly improved when participants can see one
another and pick up facial expressions and body language. Thus, even with
sophisticated information system tools, virtual teams still benefit from occa-
sional face-to-face meetings. This is particularly true at the beginning of
VGstockstudio/Shutterstock.com
FIGURE 2.4
Group videoconference
A virtual organizational structure allows collaborative work in which managers and employees can effectively
work in groups, even those composed of members from around the world.
virtual team: A group of individuals
whose members are distributed geo-
graphically, but who collaborate and
complete work through the use of
information systems.
50
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
new projects when the team is just forming and defining goals, roles, and
expectations on how its members will work together. Virtual organization
members must also be sensitive to the different cultures and practices of the
various team members to avoid misunderstandings that can destroy team
chemistry. It helps if virtual team members take the time to get to know one
another by sharing experiences and personal background information.
International advertising, marketing, and public relations firm Ogilvy &
Mather maintains offices in 161 cities all over the world and employs some
15,000 workers. The firm promotes the brands of its multinational clients by
combining local market know-how with a worldwide network of resources to
build powerful campaigns that address local market needs while also reinfor-
cing global brand identity. The firm relies on multiple virtual teams across the
organization to implement this strategy.5
Reducing New Product Stockouts at Coles
You have been employed in the supply chain management organization of Coles for
the past two years. You are very excited when you are asked to join a team being
formed to address serious inventory management problems often associated with
the introduction of new products. Too often, customers who make a trip to Coles to
purchase a highly advertised new product are disappointed to find the store is out
of stock of that particular item. Such stockouts result in lost sales for both Coles and
the product supplier and the potential loss of customers as shoppers look elsewhere
to find the new product. The resulting loss of customer goodwill can have a long-
term effect on sales. Solving this problem will require a balancing act; the company
needs to carry sufficient inventory of new products to meet customer demand while
avoiding excessive inventory levels that increase costs.
The team you have joined consists of nine people representing the finance,
marketing, and supply chain management organizations at both Coles and two of
Coles’ largest suppliers. The team is charged with looking at a wide range of solu-
tions, including improved analytics and forecasting systems, customer-loyalty anal-
ysis tools to provide insights into customer buying patterns, and improved
distribution methods to cut costs and delivery times.
Review Questions
1.
Identify some of the advantages of running a virtual team such as this. What
are some of the keys to success when working with a virtual team?
2.
What sort of complications might be expected when forming a multiorganiza-
tional virtual team?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
The leader of the team has asked that each member share a brief personal
background paragraph that outlines the individual’s knowledge and experi-
ence relevant to solving this problem. Create a paragraph for a team member
who is a well-qualified, but relatively inexperienced representative of the
Coles supply chain management organization.
2.
What actions would you recommend to minimize potential start-up issues for
this virtual team?
Change in the Organization
Your organization’s current products, services, and ways of accomplishing
work are doomed to obsolescence. Fail to change and your competition will
take away your customers and your profits. Positive change is a key
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
51
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ingredient for any successful organization. This section will discuss important
topics related to change, including innovation, reengineering, continuous
improvement, outsourcing, offshoring, and downsizing.
Innovation
Innovation is the application of new ideas to the products, processes, and
activities of a firm, leading to increased value. Innovation is the catalyst for
the growth and success of any organization. It can build and sustain profits,
create new challenges for the competition, and provide added value for custo-
mers. Innovation and change are absolutely required in today’s highly com-
petitive global environment; without both, the organization is at risk of losing
its competiveness and becoming obsolete. The following is a list of just a few
of today’s most innovative products:
●
Tile is an innovative new product that helps solve a universal problem
that we all encounter—occasionally misplacing everyday items and wast-
ing time trying to find them. Tile is a smartphone app combined with
small devices (tiles) that consumers can stick on their keys, TV remote
controls, purses, and wallets. A proximity sensor plays a musical sound
through the smartphone app when you come within 100 feet of the tile,
so you can walk around to see if the missing item is hiding nearby.
●
Healthcare technology company iHealth has introduced several different
sensors that can measure and report on a wide array of biometric data,
including steps taken, distance covered, and calories burned; sleep effi-
ciency; blood pressure; glucose level; and blood oxygen saturation level
and pulse rate.
●
Butterfleye offers a new, economical home security product that employs
a megapixel camera smart enough to recognize you, members of your
family, and even your pets. If a stranger is caught inside your home
within view of the camera, Butterfleye uses your home Wi-Fi system to
alert you via an app.
●
NeuroMetrix created Quell, an FDA-approved device that stimulates the
brain to block pain receptors for patients with chronic conditions. The
device is worn around the calf and calibrated to the user’s body to ensure
that it delivers the exact amount of relief needed. Quell performs func-
tions similar to existing devices that today must be surgically implanted at
much higher cost.
Various authors and researchers have identified different ways of classify-
ing innovation. A simple classification developed by Clayton Christensen, a
leading researcher in this field, is to think of two types of innovation—
sustaining and disruptive.6
Sustaining innovation results in enhancements to existing products, ser-
vices, and ways of operating. Such innovations are important because they
enable an organization to continually increase profits, lower costs, and gain
market share. Procter and Gamble has invested hundreds of millions of dol-
lars into making sustaining innovations to its leading laundry detergent, Tide,
which was first introduced in 1946. The innovations include: the reformula-
tion of Tide so it works as well in cold water as it does in hot water; the crea-
tion of concentrated Tide, which reduces packaging and distribution costs;
and the addition of scent, which makes clothes smell fresher. These innova-
tions have allowed Tide to remain one of the leading detergents for several
decades, with around $5 billion in worldwide annual sales.7 The brand cur-
rently holds a 38 percent share of the North American laundry soap business.8
A disruptive innovation is one that initially provides a lower level of per-
formance than the marketplace has grown to accept. Over time, however, the
disruptive innovation is improved to provide new performance characteristics,
innovation: The application of new
ideas to the products, processes, and
activities of a firm, leading to increased
value.
52
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

becoming more attractive to users in a new market. As it continues to improve
and begins to provide a higher level of performance, it eventually displaces
the former product or way of doing things. The cell phone is a good example
of a disruptive innovation. The first commercial handheld cell phone was
invented in 1973. It weighed 2.5 pounds, had a battery life of less than
30 minutes, cost more than $3,000, and had extremely poor sound quality.9
Compare that with today’s ubiquitous cell phones that have one-tenth the
weight, one-fifteenth the cost, and 25 times longer battery life; smartphones
can not only place calls but also serve as a camera, a video recorder, and a
handheld computer that can run applications and access the Internet.
Reengineering and Continuous Improvement
To stay competitive, organizations must occasionally make fundamental
changes in the way they do business. In other words, they must innovate and
change the activities, tasks, or processes they use to achieve their goals.
Reengineering, also called process redesign and business process reengi-
neering (BPR), involves the radical redesign of business processes, organiza-
tional structures, information systems, and values of the organization to
achieve a breakthrough in business results. See Figure 2.5. Successful reengi-
neering can reduce delivery time, increase product and service quality,
enhance customer satisfaction, and increase revenues and profitability.
General Electric employs a strategy it calls GE Advantage to reengineer
business processes to increase its speed to market, improve the quality of its
products and services, reduce costs, and achieve competitive advantage. This
strategy has been applied to its new product introduction process to reduce
the time it takes to bring a new product to market (in some cases by more
than 50 percent), improve the quality of its designs, and lower development
costs.
In contrast to reengineering, the idea of continuous improvement (often
referred to by the Japanese word “Kaizen”) is a form of innovation that con-
stantly seeks ways to improve business processes and add value to products
and services. This continual change will increase customer satisfaction and
loyalty and ensure long-term profitability. Manufacturing companies make
continual product changes and improvements. Service organizations regularly
FIGURE 2.5
Reengineering
Reengineering involves the radical
redesign of business processes,
organizational structure, information
systems, and the values of an
organization to achieve a break-
through in business results.
Reengineering—
Business process
redesign
Changes to
organizational
structure
Changes to
organizational
values
Changes to
information
systems
reengineering (process
redesign/business process
reengineering, BPR): The radical
redesign of business processes,
organizational structures, information
systems, and values of the organization
to achieve a breakthrough in business
results.
continuous improvement:
Constantly seeking ways to improve
business processes and add value
to products and services.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
53
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

find ways to provide faster and more effective assistance to customers. By
doing so, organizations increase customer loyalty, minimize the chance of cus-
tomer dissatisfaction, and diminish the opportunity for competitive inroads.
Boeing has a long tradition and culture supportive of continuous improve-
ment, which has yielded many positive results. For example, the time to assemble
its popular long-range, wide-body, twin-engine 777 jet airliner has been reduced
almost in half through the implementation of many small improvements—from
71 days in 1998 to just 37 days today.10 Table 2.1 compares the strategies of busi-
ness process reengineering and continuous improvement.
Outsourcing, Offshoring, and Downsizing
A significant portion of expenses for most organizations goes toward hiring,
training, and compensating employees. Naturally, organizations try to control
costs by determining the number of employees they need to maintain high-
quality goods and services without being overstaffed. Strategies to contain
these personnel costs include outsourcing, offshoring, and downsizing.
Outsourcing is a long-term business arrangement in which a company
contracts for services with an outside organization that has expertise in pro-
viding a specific function. Organizations often outsource a process so they
can focus more closely on their core business—and target their limited
resources to meet strategic goals. Typically, the outsourcing firm has expertise
and other resources that enable it to perform the service better, faster, and/or
more cheaply. As a result, many companies now outsource jobs such as call
center services, payroll activities, information system operations, computer
support services, and security services.
Offshore outsourcing (also called offshoring) is an outsourcing arrange-
ment in which the organization providing the service is located in a country
different from the firm obtaining the services. Offshoring of tasks that require
significant customer interaction has led to problems due to culture and lan-
guage differences for some companies. As a result, many companies are ree-
valuating their decision to offshore their call center and customer support
services, as well as the outsourcing of other activities.
Deutsche Bank has extended an offshore outsourcing agreement with
Accenture to provide its procurement and accounts payable services. The original
contract was signed in 2004 and was set to expire in 2016. Through its agree-
ment with Accenture, Deutsche Bank was looking to reduce operational costs,
improve spending control, and simplify its sourcing and procurement services.
TABLE 2.1 Comparing business process reengineering with
continuous improvement
Business Process Reengineering
Continuous Improvement
Strong action taken to solve serious
problem
Routine action taken to make minor
improvements
Top-down change driven by senior
executives
Bottom-up change driven by workers
Broad in scope; cuts across
departments
Narrow in scope; focuses on tasks in a
given area
Goal is to achieve a major
breakthrough
Goal is continuous, gradual
improvements
Often led by resources from outside
the company
Usually led by workers close to the
business
Information systems are integral to the
solution
Information systems provide data to
guide the improvement team
outsourcing: A long-term business
arrangement in which a company
contracts for services with an outside
organization that has expertise in
providing a specific function.
offshore outsourcing
(offshoring): An outsourcing
arrangement where the organization
providing the service is located in a
country different from the firm obtaining
the services.
54
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
The arrangement has worked well, and the two organizations recently signed a
new contract to extend the initial agreement through the end of 2021.11
Citizens Bank of Rhode Island signed a five-year agreement with IBM to
outsource its information systems services, with the goal of increasing effi-
ciencies, lowering costs, and improving service. The bank’s information sys-
tems employees are training replacements who work for IBM in India, where
the average salary of IBM workers is about $17,000.12 It is estimated that
some 250 to 350 current employees and existing contractors will lose their
jobs at Citizen Bank as a result of the offshore outsourcing move.13
Companies considering outsourcing need to take into account many factors.
A growing number of organizations are finding that outsourcing does not neces-
sarily lead to reduced costs. One of the primary reasons for cost increases is
poorly written contracts that allow the service provider to tack on unexpected
charges. Other potential drawbacks of outsourcing include loss of control and
flexibility, the potential for data breaches of information stored on the service
provider’s computer hardware, overlooked opportunities to strengthen core com-
petencies of the firm’s own employees, and low employee morale. In addition,
organizations often find that it takes years of ongoing effort and a large up-front
investment to develop a good working relationship with an outsourcing firm.
Finding a reputable outsourcing partner can be especially difficult for a small or
midsized firm that lacks experience in identifying and vetting contractors.
Outsourcing part or all of a business process introduces significant risks
that the service provider will introduce quality problems into the supply
chain. For example, Boeing made a strategic decision to partially outsource
development of the 787 Dreamliner aircraft, with a goal of reducing costs by
$4 billion and cutting development time by two years. However, the develop-
ment effort spiraled out of control—the project was ultimately billions of dol-
lars
over
budget
and
three
years
behind
schedule.
And
outsourcing
complications led to severe quality challenges, including problems with the
aircraft’s lithium ion batteries, which resulted in a worldwide temporary
grounding of the aircraft a little more than a year after its launch.14
Downsizing, a term frequently associated with outsourcing, involves
reducing the number of employees to cut costs. The euphemistic term “right-
sizing” is sometimes also used. When downsizing, companies usually look to
downsize across the entire company, rather than picking a specific business
process to downsize. Downsizing clearly reduces total payroll costs, although
the quality of products and services and employee morale can suffer. Shortly
after Heinz merged with Kraft in March 2015, the food and beverage company
announced that it would downsize its 46,000 employees in the United States
and Canada by 2,500 people to save $1.5 billion in annual costs.15
Outsourcing Accounting Functions
You have been employed for two years in the accounting department of a midsized
multinational consumer products company. Your performance has been outstand-
ing, and it is clear that management feels you have great potential with the firm.
However, you are quite surprised when your manager calls you into her office to
tell you that you have been chosen to lead an effort to identify an outsourcing part-
ner for the payroll, accounts payable, and accounts receivable functions. She
assures you that there will be an excellent assignment for you after the outsourcing
is successfully completed and all is functioning well in one to two years.
Review Questions
1.
What benefits might your organization gain from outsourcing basic accounting
functions?
2.
Identify at least three major organizational challenges associated with transi-
tioning these functions to an outsourcing firm.
downsizing: Reducing the number of
employees to cut costs.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
55
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What concerns do you have about taking on responsibility for outsourcing
these business functions?
2.
What questions about this assignment would you like to have addressed?
Organizational Culture and Change
Culture is a set of major understandings and assumptions shared by a group,
such as within an ethnic group or a country. Organizational culture consists
of the major understandings and assumptions for an organization. The under-
standings, which can include common beliefs, values, and approaches to deci-
sion making, are often not stated or documented as goals or formal policies.
For example, salaried employees might be expected to check their email and
instant messages around the clock and be highly responsive to all such
messages.
Mark Twain said, “It’s not the progress I mind, it’s the change I don’t
like.” Organizational change deals with how organizations successfully plan
for, implement, and handle change. Change can be caused by internal factors,
such as those initiated by employees at all levels, or by external factors, such
as those wrought by competitors, stockholders, federal and state laws, com-
munity regulations, natural disasters, and general economic conditions.
Implementing change, such as a new information system introduces con-
flict, confusion, and disruption. People must stop doing things the way they
are accustomed to and begin doing them differently. Successful implementa-
tion of change only happens when people accept the need for change and
believe that the change will improve their productivity and enable them to
better meet their customers’ needs. The so-called soft side of implementing
change involves work designed to help employees embrace a new informa-
tion system and way of working. This effort represents the biggest challenge
to successful change implementation; yet, it is often overlooked or down-
played, resulting in project failure. Indeed, both the Standish Group and
Gartner, two highly respected organizations that track project implementa-
tions globally, believe that a significant contributor to project failures is over-
looking the need to address employee adoption and resistance jointly.16
Another resource claims that 30 to 70 percent of large information systems
projects fail, at least in part, due to a failure to prepare the business users for
the actual change to come.17
The California Department of Consumer Affairs is made up of more than
40 entities (including multiple boards, bureaus, committees, and one com-
mission) that regulate and license professional and vocational occupations
that serve the people of California. Each year, the department processes
over 350,000 applications for professional licensure along with some 1.2
million license renewals. The BreEZe project was initiated in 2009 to stream-
line the way the department does its business and interacts with its license
applicants and consumers.18 The resulting information system was intended
to eliminate many paper-based processes and speed up the entire licensing
process. Unfortunately, the project team failed to adequately involve the
business users in the definition of the system requirements and instead
made many erroneous decisions about how the system should work. The
initial cost estimate for the system was $28 million; however, as of early
2015, project costs exceeded $37 million and less than half the licensing and
regulatory boards were using the system. It is estimated that it will cost a
total of $96 million to complete the project. Much of the delay and over-
spending could have been avoided had the project team work better with
the business users to understand their needs.19
culture: A set of major understand-
ings and assumptions shared by a
group, such as within an ethnic group
or a country.
organizational culture: The major
understandings and assumptions for a
business, corporation, or other
organization.
organizational change: How for-
profit and nonprofit organizations plan
for, implement, and handle change.
soft side of implementing
change: The work designed to help
employees embrace a new information
system and way of working.
56
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The dynamics of how change is implemented can be viewed in terms of a
change management model. A change management model describes the
phases an individual or organization goes through in making a change and
provides principles for successful implementation of change. A number of
models for dealing with the soft side of implementing change will now be
introduced.
Lewin’s Change Model
Kurt Lewin and Edgar Schein proposed a three-stage approach for change
called Lewin’s change model. See Figure 2.6. The first stage, unfreezing, is
ceasing old habits and creating a climate that is receptive to change. Moving,
the second stage, involves learning new work methods, behaviors, and sys-
tems. The final stage, refreezing, involves reinforcing changes to make the
new process second nature, accepted, and part of the job.
Lewin’s Force Field Analysis
A frequently encountered stumbling block to the successful implementation of
change, including the implementation of a new system, is negative user reac-
tion. People affected by the change may fear that their positions may be elim-
inated or their work altered in a way they do not like. Or they may see the
introduction of a new information system as a threat to their power and influ-
ence. Such fears can lead to resentment, lack of cooperation, or outright resis-
tance. Any of these reactions can doom a change project, no matter how
carefully the rest of the project is planned.
Lewin extended his change model theory to include force field analysis,
which identifies both the driving (positive) and restraining (negative) forces
that influence whether change can occur. The driving forces are beliefs,
expectations, and cultural norms that tend to encourage a change and give it
momentum. Restraining forces are those that make it difficult to accept a
change or to work to implement a change. For a change to occur, the strength
of the driving forces must exceed the strength of the restraining forces.20
FIGURE 2.6
Lewin’s change model
Change involves three stages: unfreezing (preparing for change), moving (making the change), and refreezing (institutionalizing the
change).
Moving
Making the change
Refreezing
Institutionalizing
Unfreezing
Preparing for change
Key Tasks
Monitor progress against
success criteria
Establish processes, systems
to institutionalize change
Establish controls to
ensure change is occurring
Recognize and reward individuals for
exhibiting new behavior
Provide feedback, motivation,
additional training to individuals
not exhibiting new behavior
Key Tasks
Communicate what, why,
when, who, how
Draw on others, and seek
input, ideas
Define objectives, success
criteria, resources, schedule,
budget
Finalize work plans
Assign leaders and
implementation teams
Key Tasks
Motivate individuals
involved or affected
Coach, train, lead, encou-
rage, manage
Provide appropriate
resources
Provide on-going feedback
change management model: A
description of the phases an individual
or organization goes through in making
a change and principles for successful
implementation of change.
Lewin’s change model: A three-
stage approach for implementing
change that involves unfreezing,
moving, and refreezing.
force field analysis: An approach
to identifying both the driving (positive)
and restraining (negative) forces that
influence whether change can occur.
driving forces: The beliefs, expec-
tations, and cultural norms that tend
to encourage a change and give it
momentum.
restraining forces: Forces that
make it difficult to accept a change or
to work to implement a change.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
57
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

This can be done in one of two ways: first, by creating new driving forces or
making existing driving forces stronger and, second, by eliminating or weak-
ening existing restraining forces.20
Figure 2.7 is an example of a force-field analysis of a group of workers
after they first learn that a new information system is to be installed. The
feelings shown on the left side are restraining forces against the change.
The feelings shown on the right side are driving forces that support
the change. The length of the arrow represents the relative strength of
that feeling. In this example, fear of loss of job is the strongest restraining
force.
Negative feelings must be reduced or eliminated in order for a new system
to gain acceptance. The fear of losing one’s job can be eliminated by making it
clear that the individual will remain employed by the company. The fear of
major changes in one’s job can be reduced by allowing the individual to
participate in developing one’s own new job description. If this is not possible,
the person should be thoroughly informed of the new job requirements and
provided any necessary training. The positive impact of the change should be
stressed.
It is not enough to reduce or neutralize negative feelings. Positive feel-
ings must also be created to truly motivate the individual. Managers must
take the time to explain the many tangible and intangible benefits for the
organization as well as for the individual. For instance, in many information
system efforts, the new system may lead to job enrichment by enabling the
individual to take on more responsibility or to work in a new and more
interesting way.
Figure 2.8 is an example of a force field analysis of workers after man-
agers have effectively prepared them to accept the system. At this point, the
workers should recognize several things: (1) their role is essential to the suc-
cess of the system, and they are making an important contribution to the
organization, (2) the development of new skills and knowledge will enhance
their career growth, and (3) each individual has an important responsibility
to perform within the project to secure the potential benefits for both the
individual and the organization.
FIGURE 2.7
Lewin’s force field analysis
before addressing concerns
Many strong restraining forces will
make it difficult to implement this
change.
Driving forces
Restraining forces
Fear of loss of job
Somehow this may be
best for the organization
Uncomfortable with changes in job
Require training
Distrust of project team
58
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Leavitt’s Diamond
Leavitt’s diamond is another organizational change model that is extremely
helpful in successfully implementing change. Leavitt’s diamond proposes that
every organizational system is made up of four main components—people,
tasks, structure, and technology—that all interact; any change in one of these
elements will necessitate a change in the other three elements. Thus, to success-
fully implement a new information system, appropriate changes must be made
to the people, structure, and tasks affected by the new system. See Figure 2.9.
People are the key to the successful implementation of any change. They
must be convinced to adopt a positive attitude about the change and be willing
to exhibit new behaviors consistent with the change. This is likely to require a
FIGURE 2.8
Lewin’s force field analysis
after addressing concerns
Restraining forces have been weak-
ened and driving forces strength-
ened so there is a much likelihood of
successfully implementing this
change.
Driving forces
Restraining forces
Fear of loss of job
Uncomfortable with
changes in job
Require training
Distrust of
project team
Will improve my productivity and
enable me to better serve our
customers
Provides opportunity to perform 
work in a new and interesting way
There are many benefits
for the organization
FIGURE 2.9
Leavitt’s diamond
Any change in technology, people,
task, or structure will necessitate a
change in the other three
components.
People
- Attitudes
- Behavior
- Skills
- Reward system
Information
system
- Hardware
- Software
- Network
Tasks
- Workflow
- Tools
- Standards
- Measures
Structure
- Roles
- Responsibilities
- Authority
Leavitt’s diamond: An organiza-
tional change model that proposes that
every organizational system is made up
of four main components—people,
tasks, structure, and technology—that
all interact; any change in one of these
elements will necessitate a change in
the other three elements.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
59
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

change in the reward system to recognize those who exhibit the desired new
behaviors. Thorough training in any required new skills is also needed.
The organization structure must be modified with appropriate changes in
roles, responsibilities, and lines of authority. Along with these changes are
required changes in communication patterns, relationships, and coordination
among those affected by the change.
The tasks required to complete the work and the flow of work between
tasks also need to be changed. For each task, standards on how the work is
to be performed and measures for the quality of completion need to be estab-
lished. New tools may be required to perform the tasks.
As a result, the major challenges to successful implementation of an infor-
mation system are often more behavioral issues than technical. Successful
introduction of an information system into an organization requires a mix of
both good organizational change skills and technical skills. Strong, effective
leadership is required to overcome the behavioral resistance to change and
achieve a smooth and successful system introduction.
Organizational learning is closely related to organizational change. All
organizations adapt to new conditions or alter their practices over time—
some better than others. Collectively, these adaptations and adjustments
based on experience and ideas are called organizational learning. Hourly
workers, support staff, managers, and executives learn better ways of fulfilling
their role and then incorporate them into their day-to-day activities. In some
cases, the adjustments can require a radical redesign of business processes
(reengineering). In other cases, adjustments can be more incremental (contin-
uous improvement). Both adjustments reflect an organization’s strategy, the
long-term plan of action for achieving its goals.
User Satisfaction and Technology Acceptance
Reengineering and continuous improvement efforts (including implementa-
tion of new information systems) must be adopted and used to achieve the
defined business objectives by targeted users. The technology acceptance
model (TAM) specifies the factors that can lead to better attitudes about the
use of a new information system, along with its higher acceptance and usage.
See Figure 2.10. In this model, “perceived usefulness” is defined as the degree
to which individuals believe that use of the system will improve their perfor-
mance. The “perceived ease of use” is the degree to which individuals believe
that the system will be easy to learn and use. Both the perceived usefulness
and ease of use can be strongly influenced by the expressed opinions of
organizational learning: The
adaptations and adjustments made
within an organization based on
experience and ideas over time.
technology acceptance model
(TAM): A model that specifies the
factors that can lead to better attitudes
about an information system, along with
higher acceptance and usage of it.
External
variables
Perceived
usefulness (U)
Attitude
toward
using (A)
Behavioral
intention to
use (BI)
Actual
system use
Perceived
ease of use (E)
FIGURE 2.10
Technology acceptance model
Perceived usefulness (U) and perceived ease of use (E) strongly influence whether someone will use an informa-
tion system. Management can improve that perception by demonstrating that others have used the system effec-
tively and by providing user training and support.
60
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

others who have used the system and the degree to which the organization
supports use of the system (e.g., providing incentives and offering training
and coaching from key users). Perceived usefulness and ease of use in turn
influence an individual’s attitude toward the system, which affect their behav-
ioral intention to use the system.21
Avon Products is an international manufacturer and direct seller of
beauty, household, and personal care products. Avon products are sold
through six million independent and mostly part-time sales representatives
worldwide who sell direct to family, friends, and personal contacts.22 In
2013, Avon piloted a new sales system in Canada. The system was intended
to streamline the ordering process through the use of iPads, which would
allow the sales rep to display products to customers and then check inven-
tory and place orders online. It was estimated that the project would gener-
ate some $40 million per year in cost savings and increased
sales.
Unfortunately, the system was poorly designed and did not meet the sales
rep’s expectations in terms of ease of use. Sales reps were often unable to
log in to the system, and when they did get logged in, the system frequently
would not accept orders, save orders correctly, or reserve inventory based
on the orders placed. The system was neither useful nor easy to use. As a
result, one Avon executive sales manager estimates that as many as 16,000
Canadian sales reps quit in large part out of frustration with the new system.
The pilot was such a disaster that Avon wrote off the project at a cost of
nearly $125 million.23
Diffusion of Innovation Theory
The diffusion of innovation theory was developed by E.M. Rogers to
explain how a new idea or product gains acceptance and diffuses (or spreads)
through a specific population or subset of an organization. A key point of this
theory is that adoption of any innovation does not happen all at once for all
members of the targeted population; rather, it is a drawn-out process, with
some people quicker to adopt the innovation than others. See Figure 2.11.
Rogers defined five categories of adopters, shown in Table 2.2, each with dif-
ferent attitudes toward innovation. When promoting an innovation to a target
Innovators
2.5%
Early
adopters
13.5%
Early majority
34%
Late majority
34%
Laggards
16%
FIGURE 2.11
Innovation diffusion
Adoption of any innovation does not happen all at once for all members of the targeted population; rather, it
is a drawn-out process, with some people quicker to adopt the innovation than others.
Source: Everett Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations.
diffusion of innovation theory: A
theory developed by E.M. Rogers to
explain how a new idea or product
gains acceptance and diffuses (or
spreads) through a specific population
or subset of an organization.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
61
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
population, it is important to understand the characteristics of the target pop-
ulation that will help or hinder adoption of the innovation and then to apply
the appropriate strategy. This theory can be useful in planning the roll-out of
a new information system.
Change Management for ERP System Project
You
are
a
member
of
the
human
resources
organization
of
a
midsized
manufacturing company that is implementing a new enterprise resource planning
system that will have a major impact on the way some 50 members of the com-
pany perform their jobs. In addition, many other employees will need to be
retrained on how to obtain the management reports and perform the data analysis
they need for decision making.
Review Questions
1.
How could Lewin’s force field analysis be applied to this project?
2.
How might the diffusion of innovation theory be applied to this project?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
You have been asked by the human resources department manager to assess
the project plans to prepare the business users for the major changes to
come. How might you proceed to make this assessment in a manner that will
build rapport and trust with the project manager?
2.
Imagine that your assessment shows that no plans have been developed to
prepare the business users for the major changes to come other than training
them a few weeks before the system is to be implemented. What suggestions
would you make?
Careers in Information Systems
Today, most organizations cannot function or compete effectively without
computer-based information systems. Indeed, organizations often attribute
their productivity improvement, superior customer service, or competitive
advantage in the marketplace to their information systems. The information
system worker functions at the intersection of business and technology and
designs and builds the solutions that allow organizations to effectively lever-
age information technology.
TABLE 2.2 Five categories of innovation adopters
Adopter Category
Characteristics
Strategy to Use
Innovator
Risk takers; always the first to try new
products and ideas
Simply provide them with access to the new
system and get out of their way
Early adopter
Opinion leaders whom others listen to and
follow; aware of the need for change
Provide them assistance getting started
Early majority
Listen to and follow the opinion leaders
Provide them with evidence of the system’s
effectiveness and success stories
Late majority
Skeptical of change and new ideas
Provide them data on how many others have
tried this and have used it successfully
Laggards
Very conservative and highly skeptical of
change
Have their peers demonstrate how this change
has helped them and bring pressure to bear
from other adopters
62
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Successful information system workers must enjoy working in a fast-
paced, dynamic environment where the underlying technology changes all
the time. They must be comfortable with meeting deadlines and solving unex-
pected challenges. They need good communication skills and often serve as
translators between business needs and technology-based solutions. Success-
ful information systems workers must have solid analytical and decision-
making skills and be able to translate ill-defined business problems and
opportunities into effective technology-based solutions. They must develop
effective team and leadership skills and be adept at implementing organiza-
tional change. Last, but not least, they need to be prepared to engage in life-
long learning in a rapidly changing field.
Specific technical skills that some experts believe are important for IS
workers to possess include the following, all of which are discussed in vari-
ous chapters throughout this book:
●
Capability to analyze large amounts of structured and unstructured data
●
Ability to design and build applications for mobile devices
●
Traditional programming and application development skills
●
Technical support expertise
●
Project management skills
●
Knowledge of networking and cloud computing
●
Ability to audit systems and implement necessary security measures
●
Web design and development skills
●
Knowledge of data center operations
Technology is one of the fastest-growing areas of the U.S. economy, and
information systems professionals are in high demand. The U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) forecasts an increase of 1.2 million new computing jobs
in the time period 2012 to 2022, as shown in Table 2.3. This is an average of
124,000 new jobs per year.
TABLE 2.3 BLS projections of computer-related jobs, 2012 to 2022
National Employment Matrix Title
Number
Change
Job Openings due
to Growth and
Replacements
2012
2022
Computer and math occupations (all numbers in thousands)
Computer and information research
scientists
26.7
30.8
4.1
8.3
Computer systems analysts
520.6
648.4
127.8
209.6
Information security analysts
75.1
102.5
27.4
39.2
Computer programmers
343.7
372.1
28.4
118.1
Software developers, applications
613.0
752.9
139.9
218.5
Software developers, system software
405.0
487.8
82.8
134.7
Web developers
141.4
169.9
28.5
50.7
Database administrators
118.7
136.6
17.9
40.3
Network and computer systems
administrators
366.4
409.4
43.0
100.5
Computer network architects
143.4
164.3
20.9
43.5
Computer support specialists
722.3
845.3
123.0
236.5
Computer occupations, all other
205.8
213.6
7.8
40.2
Total
3,682.1
4,333.6
651.5
1,240.1
Yearly average
124.0
Source: “Employment by Detailed Occupation 2012–2022,” Bureau of Labor Statistics, www.bls.gov/emp/ep_table_102.htm, accessed August 13, 2015.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
63
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

While a career in information systems can be challenging, exciting, and
rewarding, there are also some drawbacks to such a career. As reliance on technol-
ogy increases, organizations have increasing expectations of their information sys-
tem workers—so much so that many workers feel constant pressure to increase
productivity, take on new tasks, and work more than 40 hours per week. A high
degree of stress can accompany the responsibility to fix major systems or network
problems that are impacting a large number of users. One must often interact with
end users or customers who are frustrated and not in the best of moods.
Figure 2.12 identifies the occupations that the BLS predicts will be the
fastest-growing IS positions from 2012 to 2022 along with the median salary
for those positions in 2015 (half the people employed in this position make
more than this amount; half make less).
Numerous schools have degree programs with titles such as business
information systems, computer engineering, computer science, and manage-
ment information systems. Figure 2.13 shows an estimate of the annual num-
ber of degrees awarded in computer science, computer engineering, and
information (including information systems, information science, information
technology, and informatics) in the United States and Canada. It appears that
there will be a shortfall of about 33,900 workers per year.
Opportunities in information systems are also available to people from
foreign countries. The U.S. L-1 and H-1B visa programs seek to allow skilled
employees from foreign lands into the United States. Opportunities in these
programs, however, are limited and are usually in high demand. The L-1 visa
$100,000
$90,000
$80,000
$70,000
$60,000
$50,000
$40,000
$30,000
$20,000
$10,000
$0
0.0
50.0
100.0
150.0
200.0
250.0
Expected new job openings 2012–2022
2015 Median salary
Web
developer
Information
security analyst
Database
administrator
Computer
programmer
Application
software
developer
Computer
systems
analyst
Computer
support
specialist
FIGURE 2.12
Occupational outlook for selected information systems positions
This chart shows the IS positions that BLS predicts will be among the fastest growing in the near future, along
with the median salary for those positions in 2015.
64
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

program is often used for intracompany transfers for multinational companies.
The H-1B program can be used for new employees. The United States distri-
butes its annual 85,000 allotment of visas via a lottery system wherein small
tech companies submitting a single H-1B visa application must compete
against large organizations that submit thousands of applications to increase
their odds of winning the lottery.24
As part of the application process to obtain H-1B approval from the Labor
Department, an employer is required to attest that the H-1B workers will not
adversely affect the working conditions of workers similarly employed. However,
in some cases, it appears that companies are hiring lower-paid H-1B workers to
replace existing employees. For instance, in 2015, about 400 information system
workers at Southern California Edison were fired and their work was shifted to H-
1B contractors from Tata and Infosys. Another 100 or so information system work-
ers at Northeast Utilities in Connecticut also lost their jobs to H-1B contractors.25
Proponents of the H-1B program believe that it is invaluable to the U.S.
economy and its competitiveness. Table 2.4 shows the top 15 users of H-1B
FIGURE 2.13
Supply versus demand for
IS workers
The total number of IS-related job
openings is expected to average
about 124,000 per year between
2012 and 2022, while the number of
IS-related graduates is expected to
average about 88,100 per year—for
a shortfall of 35,900 workers.
Source: “Computer Science Job Statistics”,
Exploring Computer Science, www
.exploringcs.org/resources/cs-statistics,
accessed August 19, 2015.
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Associate
Bachelor
Master
PhD
Total
Openings
Thousands of graduates/
new job openings
TABLE 2.4 Top H-1B visa employers in 2013 to 2014
Visas Granted
Rank
Company
Headquarters
2013
2014
Total
1
Tata
India
6,258
7,149
13,407
2
Cognizant
United States
5,186
5,228
10,414
3
Infosys
India
6,298
4,022
10,320
4
Wipro
India
2,644
3,246
5,890
5
Accenture
Ireland
3,346
2,376
5,722
6
Tech Mahindra
India
1,589
1,850
3,439
7
IBM
United States
1,624
1,513
3,137
8
HCL
India
1,766
927
2,693
9
Larsen & Toubro
India
1,580
1,001
2,581
10
Syntel
United States
1,041
1,149
2,190
11
IGATE Technologies
United States
1,157
927
2,084
12
Microsoft
United States
1,048
712
1,760
13
Amazon
United States
881
811
1,692
14
Google
United States
753
696
1,449
15
CapGemini
France
500
699
1,199
Source: Thibodeau, Patrick and Machlis, Sharon, “Despite H-1B Lottery, Offshore Firms Dominate Visa Use,”
Computerworld, July 30, 2015; Machlis, Sharon and Thibodeau, Patrick, “Offshore Firms Took 50% of H-1B Visas
in 2013,” Computerworld, April 1, 2014.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
65
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

visas for computer-related workers in 2013 to 2014. Engineering, medicine,
science, and law are other job categories in which large numbers of H-1B
visas are granted.
Some of the best places to work as an IS professional are listed in
Table 2.5. These organizations rate high for a variety of reasons, including
benefits,
career
development
opportunities,
diversity,
company
facilities
(including, in some cases, an employee gym or swimming pool), training pro-
grams, and the nature of the work. For example, Sharp HealthCare, based in
the San Diego area, offers opportunities to work with cutting-edge technol-
ogy, such as telemedicine, and many formal and informal training classes.
Avanade ensures that employees are kept up-to-date by requiring 80 hours of
training per year; the company also provides a $2,000 annual allowance to
improve its workers’ work–life balance. Serv1Tech offers employees up to
$5,000 per year for tuition or certification, and it makes an annual $5,000 con-
tribution to each employee’s 401(k) fund.26
Roles, Functions, and Careers in IS
IS offers many exciting and rewarding careers. Professionals with careers in
information systems can work in an IS department or outside a traditional IS
department as Web developers, computer programmers, systems analysts, com-
puter operators, and in many other positions. Opportunities for IS professionals
also exist in the public sector. In addition to technical skills, IS professionals
need skills in written and verbal communication, an understanding of organiza-
tions and the way they operate, and the ability to work with people and in
groups. At the end of every chapter in this book, you will find career exercises
that will help you explore careers in IS and career areas that interest you.
Most medium to large organizations manage information system resources
through an IS department. In smaller businesses, one or more people might
manage information resources, with support from outsourced services. (Recall
that outsourcing is also popular with many organizations.) As shown in
Figure 2.14, the typical IS organization is divided into three main functions:
operations, development, and support.
TABLE 2.5 Best places to work as an IS professional
Rank
Small (<1,000 Employees)
Medium (1,001 to 4,999
Employees)
Large (> 5,000 Employees)
1
Noah Consulting
Credit Acceptance
Quicken Loans
2
Sev1Tech
Lafayette General Health
USAA
3
Commonwealth Financial
Network
Avanade
Erickson Living
4
Secure-24
Autodesk
Sharp HealthCare
5
Connectria
Nicklaus Children’s Hospital
Prudential Financial
6
Axxess
Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority
LinkedIn
7
GlobalScape
CHG Health Services
Owens Corning
8
Bounce Exchange
NuStar Energy
DHL Express
9
Liquidnet
Akamai
University of Notre Dame
10
National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association
Halifax Health
Genentech
Source: “2015 100 Best Places to Work in IT,” Computerworld, July 2015.
66
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Typical IS Titles and Functions
The organizational chart shown in Figure 2.14 is a simplified model of an IS
department in a typical medium-sized or large organization. The following
sections provide a brief description of these roles. Smaller firms often com-
bine the roles shown in Figure 2.14 into fewer formal positions.
Chief Information Officer
The role of the chief information officer (CIO) is to employ an IS department’s
equipment and personnel to help the organization attain its goals. CIOs also
understand the importance of finance, accounting, and return on investment.
They can help companies avoid damaging ethical challenges by monitoring
how their firms are complying with a large number of laws and regulations.
A good CIO is typically a visionary who provides leadership and direction to
the IS department to help an organization achieve its goals. CIOs need techni-
cal, business, and personal skills.
Senior IS Managers
A large organization may have several people employed in senior IS manage-
rial levels with job titles such as vice president of information systems, man-
ager of information systems, and chief technology officer (CTO). A central
role of all these people is to communicate with other areas of the organization
to determine changing business needs. Managers outside the IS organization
may be part of an advisory or steering committee that helps the CIO and
other IS managers make decisions about the use of information systems.
Together, they can best decide what information systems will support
Chief information
officer
Chief technology
officer
Operations
Systems analyst
Database
administrator
Help desk
support specialist
Programmer
Web developer
Development
Support
Data center
manager
System operator
Information systems
security analyst
LAN administrator
System developer
FIGURE 2.14
Three primary functions of the information systems organization
Each of these functions—operations, development, and support—encompasses several different
IS roles.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
67
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

corporate goals. The CTO, for example, typically works under a CIO and spe-
cializes in networks and related equipment and technology.
Operations Roles
The operations group is responsible for the day-to-day running of IS hard-
ware to process the organization’s information systems workload. It must also
do capacity planning to expand and upgrade equipment to meet changing
business needs. The operations group is constantly looking for ways to
reduce the overall cost and increase the reliability of the organization’s com-
puting. This group is also responsible for protecting the company’s IS systems
and data from unauthorized access. Professionals in the operations group
include those in the following positions:
●
Data center manager. Data center managers are responsible for the
maintenance and operation of the organization’s computing facilities that
may house a variety of hardware devices—mainframe and or supercom-
puters, large numbers of servers, storage devices, and networking equip-
ment. Data center managers supervise other operations workers to
accomplish the day-to-day work needed to support business operations as
well as complete software and hardware upgrades. They also plan for
capacity changes and develop business contingency plans in the event of
a business disruption due to a fire, power outage, or natural disaster.
●
System operator. System operators run and maintain IS equipment. They
are responsible for efficiently starting, stopping, and correctly operating
mainframe systems, networks, tape drives, disk devices, printers, and so
on. Other operations include scheduling, maintaining hardware, and pre-
paring input and output.
●
Information systems security analyst. IS security analysts are responsi-
ble for maintaining the security and integrity of their organizations’ sys-
tems and data. They analyze the security measures of the organization
and identify and implement changes to make improvement. Security ana-
lysts are responsible for developing and delivering training on proper
security measures. They also are responsible for creating action plans in
the event of a security breach.
●
LAN administrator. Local area network (LAN) administrators set up and
manage network hardware, software, and security processes. They man-
age the addition of new users, software, and devices to the network. They
also isolate and fix operations problems.
Development Roles
The development group is responsible for implementing the new information
systems required to support the organization’s existing and future business
needs. Importantly, they must also modify existing information systems as the
needs of the organization evolve and change. They are constantly on the
watch for new ways to use information systems to improve the competitive-
ness of the firm. Professionals in the development group include those in the
following positions:
●
Software developer. These individuals are involved in writing the soft-
ware that customers and employees use. This includes testing and debug-
ging the software as well as maintaining and upgrading software after it is
released for operation. Software developers frequently collaborate with
management, clients, and others to build a software product from scratch,
according to a customer’s specifications, or to modify existing software to
meet new business needs.
●
Systems analyst. Systems analysts frequently consult with management
and users, and they convey system requirements to software developers
68
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

and network architects. They also assist in choosing and configuring
hardware and software, matching technology to users’ needs, monitoring
and testing the system in operation, and troubleshooting problems after
implementation.
●
Programmer. Programmers convert a program design developed by a
systems analyst or software developer into one of many computer lan-
guages. To do this, they must write, debug, and test the program to
ensure that it will operate in a way that it will meet the users’ needs.
●
Web developers. These professionals design and maintain Web sites,
including site layout and function, to meet the client’s requirements. The
creative side of the job includes creating a user-friendly design, ensuring
easy navigation, organizing content, and integrating graphics and audio
(Figure 2.15). The more technical responsibilities include monitoring Web
site performance and capacity.
Support
The support group provides customer service for the employees, customers,
and business partners who rely on the firm’s information systems and service
to accomplish their work. The support group responds to queries from these
constituents and attempts to be proactive in eliminating problems before they
occur. They often develop and provide training to users to enable them to
better use information systems services and equipment. Professionals in the
support group include those in the following positions:
●
Database administrator. Database administrators (DBAs) design and set
up databases to meet an organization’s needs. DBAs ensure that the data-
bases operate efficiently, and they perform fine-tuning, upgrading, and
Scyther5/Shutterstock.com
FIGURE 2.15
Web developers
Web developers create and maintain company Web sites.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
69
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

testing modifications as needed. They are also responsible for implement-
ing security measures to safeguard the company’s most sensitive data.
●
System support specialist. These skilled specialists respond to telephone
calls, electronic mail, and other inquiries from computer users regarding
hardware, software, networking, or other IS-related problems or needs.
System support specialists diagnose the problem through dialogue with
the user, research solutions, and implement a plan to resolve the problem
or refer the issue to specialized IS staff. Many organizations set up “drop-
in” centers, where users can come to meet face-to-face with the help desk
specialists to get help.
IS-Related Roles outside the IS Organization
In addition to IS workers placed within the IS organization, some companies
have people who take on IS-related roles but reside outside the IS organization.
For example, data scientists, can be found in the marketing, sales, and supply
chain management departments of large organizations. Data scientists are respon-
sible for understanding the business analytics technology as well as the business,
and then putting all of that together to deliver improvements in decision making.
Based on a recent survey of 165 organizations representing over $45 bil-
lion in information technology spending in Europe and the United States,
only about 60 percent of all information technology outlays are controlled by
the information systems department. This means other business units are
responsible for 40 percent of the total information technology costs within an
organization.27 Shadow IT is a term used to describe the information systems
and solutions built and deployed by departments other than the information
systems department. In many cases, the information systems department may
not even be aware of these efforts.
At one time, shadow IT was limited to employee or departmental pur-
chases of nonstandard computing devices and off-the-shelf software from
office supply stores. However, the scope of shadow IT spending has greatly
expanded, largely due to cloud computing and the availability of enterprise
software, file-sharing apps, and collaboration tools as a service. Cloud service
providers can deliver increasing amounts of computing, network, and storage
capacity on demand and without requiring any capital investment on the part
of the cloud users. These cloud providers typically offer a monthly or annual
subscription service model; they may also provide training, support, and data
integration services. All of this makes it easier for department managers to
skirt formal procedures associated with the purchase of large capital expense
items—including scrutiny by the information system department.
Shadow IT enables business managers to quickly create highly innovative
solutions to real business problems and to test out these solutions. Such sys-
tems may serve as prototypes that evolve into future approved IT solutions.
However, shadow IT solutions frequently employ nonapproved vendors, soft-
ware, or hardware and may not meet the IS department standards for control,
documentation, security, support, and reliability. This raises security risks and
issues in regard to compliance with essential government and industry stan-
dards, such as Basel III (international standards for the banking industry),
FISMA (Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002), GAAP (Gener-
ally Accepted Accounting Principles), HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act), IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards), and
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (accounting regulations for publicly traded companies).
Issues often arise when a shadow IT solution “breaks” and questions are
raised about who is responsible for fixing it and supporting the end users.
The IS department may not have developed it, or not even been aware of it,
but business users expect their help in “fixing” it. Table 2.6 presents a sum-
mary of the pros and cons associated with shadow IT.
shadow IT: The information systems
and solutions built and deployed by
departments other than the information
systems department. In many cases,
the information systems department
may not even be aware of these efforts.
70
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The information systems department may become more comfortable with
shadow IT if it sees the IS department’s role as maximizing the effective use
of technology in the company rather than controlling the use of technology.
Also shadow IT provides another source of funds to tackle high-priority
projects.
Certification
Often, the people-filling IS roles have completed some form of certification.
Certification is a process for testing skills and knowledge; successful com-
pletion of a certification exam results in an endorsement by the certifying
authority that an individual is capable of performing particular tasks or
jobs. Certification frequently involves specific, vendor-provided, or vendor-
endorsed coursework. Popular certification programs include Microsoft Cer-
tified Systems Engineer (MCSE), Certified Information Systems Security
Professional (CISSP), Oracle Certified Professional, and Cisco Certified
Security Professional (CCSP). Getting certified from a software, database, or
network company may open the door to new career possibilities or result in
an increase in pay. According to a recent survey, 65 percent of employers
use IT certifications to differentiate between equally qualified candidates,
while 72 percent of employers require some form of IT certification as a
requirement for certain job roles. In some organizations, earning certain
certifications can result in a pay increase or eligibility for a new role. The
following is a list of some of the more in demand certifications.28
●
Citrix Certified Enterprise Engineer
●
Comp TIA Security+
●
GIAC Certified Windows System Administrator
●
Certified Computer Examiner
●
AWS Certified SysOps Administrator-Associate (Cloud)
●
EC-Council Certified Security Analyst
●
Mongo DB Certified DBA
●
Microsoft Certified Solution Developer: Applications Lifecycle
Management
●
Cisco Certified Design Associate
TABLE 2.6 Pros and cons of shadow IT efforts
Pros
Cons
Enables the business to test quick
solutions to business needs without
delays brought on by involvement of
information systems.
The systems and processes developed
may lack necessary levels of security
required to meet compliance
standards.
Can create an innovative, synergistic
partnership between the information
systems department and other business
units.
Can create tension between the CIO
who has responsibility for technology
within the organization and business
managers who want more of a role in
the information system decisions.
Provides the opportunity to evaluate
and test many more information sys-
tem initiatives.
Individual departments may buy ser-
vices, software, and hardware that the
company could get a better deal
through central purchasing.
May be wasteful and duplicate work
already being done by the IS
organization.
Issues can arise over responsibility to
fix “nonapproved” solutions.
certification: A process for testing
skills and knowledge; successful com-
pletion of a certification exam results in
a statement by the certifying authority
that confirms an individual is capable of
performing particular tasks.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
71
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Other IS Careers
In addition to working for an IS department in an organization, IS personnel
can work for large consulting firms, such as Accenture, IBM, and Hewlett-
Packard. Some consulting jobs entail frequent travel because consultants are
assigned to work on various projects, wherever the client is. Such jobs require
excellent project management and people skills in addition to IS technical
skills. Related career opportunities include computer training, computer and
computer-equipment sales, and computer equipment repair and maintenance.
Other IS career opportunities include being employed by technology com-
panies, such as Oracle, IBM, HP, Microsoft, Google, and Dell. Such a career
enables an individual to work on the cutting edge of technology, which can
be challenging and exciting.
As some computer companies cut their services to customers, new compa-
nies are being formed to fill the need. With names such as Speak with a Geek
and Geek Squad, these companies are helping people and organizations with
computer-related problems that computer vendors are no longer solving.
Some people decide to start their own IS businesses rather than continue
to work for someone else. One such entrepreneur, Lavanya Purushothaman,
started ATS Solutions, a UK-based company that offers software development
services and consulting to a wide range of industries and business areas.
Small business owners like Purushothaman often prefer to be their own boss,
with the freedom to think innovatively and take on new challenges.29 Other
people become IS entrepreneurs or freelancers, working from home writing
programs, working on IS projects with larger businesses, or developing new
applications for the iPhone or similar devices. Some Internet sites, such as
www.freelancer.com, post projects online and offer information and advice
for people working on their own. Many freelancers work for small- to
medium-sized enterprises in the U.S. market. People doing freelance or con-
sulting work must be creative in pursuing new business, while also protecting
themselves financially. Freelancers and consultants must aggressively market
their talents, and to ensure they are paid, should insist that some or all of
their fees for a given project are put into an escrow account.
Working in Teams
Most IS careers involve working in project teams that can consist of many of the
positions and roles discussed earlier. Thus, it is always good for IS professionals
to have good communication skills and the ability to work with other people.
Many colleges and universities have courses in information systems and related
areas that require students to work in project teams. At the end of every chapter
in this book are team activities that require teamwork to complete a project. You
may be required to complete one or more of these team-oriented assignments.
Finding a Job in IS
Traditional approaches to finding a job in the information systems area
include attending on-campus visits from recruiters and getting referrals from
professors, friends, and family members. People who have quit jobs or been
laid off often use informal networks of colleagues or business acquaintances
from their previous jobs to help find new jobs.
Many colleges and universities have excellent programs to help students
develop résumés and conduct job interviews. Developing an online résumé
can be critical to finding a good job. Many companies only accept résumés
online and screen job candidates using software to search for key words and
skills. Consequently, mentioning the right key words and skills in your
resume can mean the difference between getting and not getting a job inter-
view. Some corporate recruiters, however, are starting to actively search for
72
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
employees rather than sifting through thousands of online résumés or posting
jobs on their Web sites. Instead, these corporate recruiters do their own Internet
searches and check with professional job sites such as www.branchout.com,
www.indeed.com, www.linkedin.com, and www.ziprecruiter.com to name just a
few. Other companies hire college students to help them market products and
services to other students. In addition to being paid, students can get invaluable
career experience. In some cases, it can help them get jobs after graduation.
Students who use the Internet to access other nontraditional sources to find
IS jobs have more opportunities to land a job. Many Web sites, such as Mon-
ster, Career Builders, Indeed, Simply Hired, Snagged a Job, TheLadders, Linke-
dIn, and ComputerJobs, post job opportunities for information system careers
as well as more traditional careers. Most large companies list job opportunities
on their corporate Web sites. These sites allow prospective job hunters to
browse job opportunities and get information on job location, salary, and bene-
fits. In addition, some sites allow job hunters to post their résumés. Many peo-
ple use social networking sites such as Facebook to help get job leads.
Corporate recruiters also use the Internet and social network sites to gather
information on current job candidates or to locate new job candidates.
Many professional organizations and online user groups can be helpful in
finding a job, staying current once employed, and seeking new career oppor-
tunities. These groups include the Association for Computer Machinery (ACM:
www.acm.org), the Association of Information Technology Professionals
(AITP: www.aitp.org), Apple User Groups (www.apple.com/usergroups), and
Linux user groups based in various countries around the world.
Many companies use Twitter to advertise job openings in industries such
as advertising and public relations, consulting, consumer products, and educa-
tion, among others. Many organizations in the information systems industry,
including Google (@googlejobs), Intel (@jobsatIntel), Microsoft (@Microsoft_-
Jobs), and Yahoo (@EngRecruiter), also use Twitter to advertise job openings.
Students should review and edit what is posted about them on social
media sites, as employers often search the Internet to get information about
potential employees before they make hiring decisions. Over 90 percent of
respondents to a recent survey either use or plan to use some form of social
media—such as Facebook, LinkedIn, or Twitter—in their recruiting.30
Product Supply Turns to Shadow IT
You are a section manager in the product supply department of a midsized
manufacturing firm. The department manager has called a meeting of all section
managers to outline his plan to contract with a cloud service provider to provide
sales forecasting and inventory management software and services. The goal is to
reduce the number of out-of-stock occurrences while maintaining a minimum level
of finished product inventory. The cloud service provider requires detailed order,
shipment, and promotion data for the past three years in addition to ongoing current
data. Members of the product supply department will be able to access the software
to develop sales forecasts and make better manufacturing and inventory decisions.
Review Questions
1.
What are the arguments for and against shadow IT?
2.
What are the possible motivations for your manager to recommend the use of
shadow IT?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What potential issues could arise from this proposed project?
2.
The department manager has just completed his discussion and is asking for
comments and questions. What would you say?
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
73
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Summary
Principle:
Organizations are open systems that affect and are affected by their
surrounding environment.
An organization is a group of people that is structured and managed to
meet its mission or set of group goals. Organizations affect and are affected
by their environment.
The value chain is a series of activities that an organization performs to trans-
form inputs into outputs in such a way that the value of the input is increased.
The supply chain is a key value chain whose primary activities include
inbound logistics, operations, outbound logistics, marketing and sales, and
service. Supply chain management encompasses all the activities required to
get the right product into the right consumer’s hands in the right quantity at
the right time and at the right cost.
Information systems have transformed the nature of work and the shape
of organizations themselves. They are often so intimately involved in the
activities of the value chain that they are a part of the process itself.
A virtual team is a group of individuals whose members are distributed
geographically, but who collaborate and complete work through the use of
information systems.
Principle:
Positive change is a key ingredient for any successful organization.
Innovation is the application of new ideas to the products, processes, and
activities of a firm, leading to increased value. Innovation is the catalyst for
the growth and success of any organization. Innovation may be classified as
sustaining or disruptive.
Business process reengineering is a form of innovation that involves the
radical redesign of business processes, organizational structures, information
systems, and values of the organization to achieve a breakthrough in results.
Continuous improvement is a form of innovation that continually improves
business processes to add value to products and services.
Outsourcing is a long-term business arrangement in which a company con-
tracts for services with an outside organization that has expertise in providing a
specific function. Offshore outsourcing is an outsourcing arrangement in which
the organization providing the service is located in a country different from the
firm obtaining the services. Downsizing involves reducing the number of employ-
ees to cut costs. All these staffing alternatives are an attempt to reduce costs or
improve services. Each approach has its own associated ethical issues and risks.
Principle:
Information systems must be implemented in such a manner that they
are accepted and work well within the context of an organization and
support its fundamental business goals and strategies.
Organizational culture consists of the major understandings and assump-
tions for a business, a corporation, or an organization. According to the con-
cept of organizational learning, organizations adapt to new conditions or alter
practices over time.
Organizational change deals with how organizations successfully plan for,
implement, and handle change. The ability to introduce change effectively is
critical to the success of any information system project.
Several change models can be used to increase the likelihood of success-
fully introducing a new information system into an organization.
74
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Lewin’s three-stage organization change model divides the change imple-
mentation process into three stages: unfreezing, moving, and refreezing. The
model also identifies key tasks that need to be performed during each stage.
Lewin’s force field analysis is an approach to identifying the driving (pos-
itive) and restraining (negative) forces that influence whether change can
occur.
Leavitt’s diamond proposes that every organizational system is made up of
four main components—people, tasks, structure, and technology—that all inter-
act. To successfully implement a new information system, appropriate changes
must be made to the people, structure, and tasks affected by the new system.
The user satisfaction and technology acceptance model specifies the factors
that can lead to better attitudes about the use of a new information system,
along with higher acceptance and use of it.
The diffusion of innovation theory explains how a new idea or product
gains acceptance and diffuses through a specific population or subset of an
organization. A key point of this theory is that adoption of any innovation
does not happen all at once for all people; rather, it is a drawn-out process,
with some people quicker to adopt the innovation than others. The theory
groups adopters into five categories and recommends a different adoption
strategy for each category.
Principle:
The information system worker functions at the intersection of busi-
ness and technology and designs, builds, and implements solutions
that allow organizations to effectively leverage information technology
systems.
Successful information system workers need to have a variety of personal
characteristics and skills, including the ability to work well under pressure, good
communication skills, solid analytical and decision-making skills, effective team
and leadership skills, and adeptness at implementing organizational change.
Technology is one of the fastest-growing areas of the U.S. economy, which
has a strong demand for information system workers.
Opportunities in information systems are available to people from foreign
countries under the H-1B and L-1 visa programs.
The IS organization has three primary functions: operations, development,
and support.
Typical operations roles include data center manager, system operator,
information system security analyst, and LAN administrator.
Typical development roles include software developer, systems analyst,
programmer, and Web developer.
Typical support roles include database administrator and system support
specialist.
Only about 60 percent of all information technology outlays are controlled
by the information systems department. Shadow IT is a term used to describe
the information systems and solutions built and deployed by departments other
than the information systems department. In many cases, the information sys-
tems department may not even be aware of these efforts.
Certification is a process for testing skills and knowledge; successful com-
pletion of a certification exam results in an endorsement by the certifying
authority that an individual is capable of performing particular tasks or jobs.
Certification frequently involves specific, vendor-provided, or vendor-endorsed
coursework.
Besides working for an IS department in an organization, IS personnel can
work for a large consulting firm or a hardware or software manufacturer.
Developing or selling products for a hardware or software vendor is another
IS career opportunity.
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
75
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Key Terms
business process reengineering (BPR)
certification
change management model
continuous improvement
culture
diffusion of innovation theory
downsizing
driving forces
force field analysis
innovation
Leavitt’s diamond
Lewin’s change model
offshore outsourcing
offshoring
organization
organizational change
organizational culture
organizational learning
outsourcing
process redesign
reengineering
restraining forces
shadow IT
soft side of implementing change
supply chain
supply chain management (SCM)
technology acceptance model (TAM)
value chain
virtual team
Chapter 2: Self-Assessment Test
Organizations are open systems that affect and are
affected by their surrounding environment.
1. Organizations are considered to be
systems, meaning that can affect and are affected
by their surrounding environment.
2. The
is a series of activities that an
organization performs to transform inputs into
outputs in such a way that the value of the input
is increased.
a. supply chain
b. inbound logistics
c. value chain
d. manufacturing
3.
encompasses all the activities
required to get the right product into the right
customer’s hands in the right quantity at the right
time and at the right cost.
4. Which of the following is not a true statement
regarding the use of virtual teams?
a. Virtual teams enable the organization to enlist
the best people in different geographical regions
to solve important organizational problems.
b. The use of virtual teams provides the ability to
staff a team with people who have a wide
range of experience and knowledge that
stems from a variety of professional experi-
ences and cultural backgrounds.
c. It is usually easy and convenient for all mem-
bers of a virtual team to meet at the same time
and physical location.
d. Members of a virtual team may feel that their
work day never ends.
Positive change is a key ingredient for any suc-
cessful organization.
5. Continuous enhancement of an existing product
is an example of
innovation.
6. A long-term business arrangement in which a
company contracts for services with an outside
organization located in another country to provide
a specific business function is called
.
a. business process reengineering
b. outsourcing
c. downsizing
d. offshore outsourcing
7.
of large information system projects
fail, at least in part, due to a failure to prepare
business users for the actual change to come.
a. Less than 15 percent
b. Over 80 percent
c. About 48 percent
d. Between 30 and 70 percent
Information systems must be implemented in
such a manner that they are accepted and work
well within the context of an organization and
support its fundamental business goals and
strategies.
8. The three stages of Lewin’s change model include
(1) ceasing old habits and creating a climate that
is receptive to change; (2) learning new work
methods, behaviors, and systems; and
(3)
.
a. reinforcing changes to make the new process
second nature, accepted, and part of the job
76
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

b. fine-tuning existing work processes and sys-
tems so they become more streamlined and
efficient
c. replacing existing users that refuse to accept
the change
d. rewarding those responsible for the change
9. The
change model is helpful in
identifying and addressing negative feelings that
make it difficult for users to accept the move to a
new information system.
a. Leavitt’s diamond
b. Lewin’s force field analysis
c. Diffusion of innovation theory
d. Lewin’s change model
The information system worker functions at the
intersection
of
business
and
technology
and
designs, builds, and implements solutions that allow
organizations to effectively leverage information tech-
nology systems.
10. The Bureau of Labor Statistics forecasts an
increase of
new computing jobs in
the time period 2012 to 2022.
a. .12 million
b. .5 million
c. 1.0 million
d. 1.2 million
11. The typical information systems organization is
typically divided into three functions, including
support, development, and
.
12.
is a process for testing skills and
knowledge; successful completion of a certifica-
tion exam results in an endorsement by the cer-
tifying authority that an individual is capable of
performing particular tasks or jobs.
Chapter 2: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. open
2. c
3. Supply chain management
4. c
5. sustaining
6. d
7. d
8. d
9. b
10. d
11. operations
12. Certification
Review Questions
1. What is the difference between a value chain and
a supply chain?
2. What activities are encompassed by supply chain
management?
3. What are some of the characteristics of a virtual
team?
4. Identify and briefly describe the differences
between the two types of innovation discussed in
the chapter.
5. Briefly define the term “business process
reengineering.”
6. What is meant by continuous improvement?
7. What is outsourcing? How is it different from
offshoring?
8. What is meant by the term “the soft side of
implementing change”?
9. What do the terms “organizational culture” and
“organizational learning” mean?
10. Sketch and briefly describe Leavitt’s diamond.
11. List and describe three popular job-finding Web
sites.
12. Describe the role of a CIO within an organization.
13. What is meant by the term “shadow IT”?
Discussion Questions
1. Discuss a value chain of which you are a
part. What is the purpose of the value chain?
What is your role? How do you interact
with other members of the value chain? How
is the effectiveness of the value chain
measured?
2. Discuss a virtual team of which you are a mem-
ber. What is the role of the team? How were the
members of the team chosen, and what unique
skills and experiences does each member bring to
the team? How does the team communicate and
share information?
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
77
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

3. What things might managers in an organization
do that could unintentionally discourage innova-
tion by their employees? How can innovation be
encouraged?
4. Identify and briefly discuss the similarities and
differences between outsourcing and downsizing.
How might an enlightened management team
deal with the negative impacts of either down-
sizing or outsourcing?
5. Identify several aspects of the culture shared by
members of a group to which you belong. Are
there any aspects of this culture that you think
are negative and detract from what the group is
trying to accomplish?
6. Your manager has asked for your input on ideas for
how to improve the likelihood of successful adop-
tion of a major new information system that will be
used by members of the company’s finance
department. What suggestions would you offer?
7. You have been asked to assess the success of a
recently implemented system that has been
deployed across the entire supply chain of a large
organization. How might you go about trying to
measure the technology diffusion of this system?
How else might you assess the success of this
system?
8. Describe the advantages and disadvantages of
using the Internet to search for a job.
9. Assume you are a member of a committee
responsible for replacing your organization’s
retiring CIO. What characteristics would you
want in a new CIO? How would you go about
identifying qualified candidates?
10. Identify several personal characteristics needed to
be successful in an information system career.
Which of these characteristics do you think you
possess?
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Figure 2.15 presents the occupational outlook
(median salary and number of job openings) for
selected information systems positions. Obtain
data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and
use a spreadsheet program to create a similar
figure for five occupations of your choice.
2. Use graphics software to develop a force field
analysis of the restraining forces and driving
forces that would impact your decision to change
majors or to seek a new job.
3. Do research to learn more about GE’s Change
Acceleration Management process. Prepare a
slide presentation that summarizes the key steps
in the process and outlines the advantages of this
process.
Team Activities
1. With your team, interview a manager in a suc-
cessful organization about that organization’s
culture. Try to identify both positive and negative
aspects of that culture. Discuss whether the
manager employs any organizational change
model when introducing a major change.
2. Develop a set of interview questions and outline
a process that you and your team might follow to
assess the degree of user satisfaction and tech-
nology acceptance of a major new system.
3. Do research to learn about the use of focus
groups to gain insight into how people view a
new product or idea. With your team, design a set
of focus group questions that could be used to
assess a work groups feelings about a new infor-
mation system to be implemented.
Web Exercises
1. Do research online to identify the number of new
H-1B visas granted this year by job category—
administrative specializations, education, engi-
neering, information systems, law, medicine and
health, math and physical science, and other.
2. Identify the three top-ranked places to work as an
IS professional. What makes these places so
attractive? Are these features and benefits of
importance to you?
3. Do research on the Web to learn about how
recruiters use social network data to help
screen job applicants. Does what you learn
raise any concerns about how you could be
viewed?
78
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Career Exercises
1. Do research on an entrepreneur that you admire.
Write a brief description of how the individual
was able to start a business. What challenges had
to be overcome? Did the individual encounter
failure before becoming a success?
2. For you, what would be the most positive aspects
of a career in information systems? What would
be the least positive aspects of such a career?
3. Use presentation software (e.g., Microsoft
PowerPoint) to prepare a brief slide presentation
that describes your idea job in terms of role,
responsibilities, interaction with others, degree of
decision-making authority, and other characteris-
tics important to you.
Case Studies
Case One
Railroads Struggle to Implement Positive
Train Control
Positive train control (PTC) is a complex system designed
to prevent the human errors that cause roughly 40 percent
of train accidents, including train-to-train collisions,
derailments caused by excess speed, train movement
through track switches left in the wrong position, and
unauthorized incursion into work zones. PTC uses wireless
communications to relay visual and audible data to train
crew members regarding when the train needs to be slowed
or stopped. This guidance is based on several factors,
including the train’s location and speed, as determined
by GPS, track geometry, the status and position of
approaching switches, and speed limits at approaching
curves, crossings, and other speed-restriction areas. PTC
communicates with the train’s onboard computer, which
audibly warns the engineer and displays the train’s safe-
braking distance, based on conditions at that time. Should
the engineer fail to respond appropriately, the onboard
computer will activate the brakes and safely slow or stop
the train.
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) has
investigated 145 “PTC-preventable” railroad accidents that
occurred since 1969. The NTSB estimates that some 300
deaths and over 6,700 injuries could have been prevented
had PTC systems been in place. Congress mandated in
the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 2008 that railroads
implement PTC systems on rail lines that (1) carry more
than 5 million tons annually, (2) carry poisonous or toxic
materials, or (3) carry commuter rail passenger service.
The act specified a deadline of December 31, 2015, for
implementation of PTC.
Metrolink is a commuter rail system serving southern
California and the greater Los Angeles area. A 2008 Metrolink
accident that killed 25 and injured 100 is often cited as
the event that drove Congress to pass the Rail Safety
Improvement Act. In that accident, a Metrolink commuter
train collided head-on with a Union Pacific train because
the Metrolink engineer, who had been texting, failed to stop
for a red signal.
An executive of the Association of American
Railroads estimates that PTC has been installed on
8,200 miles out of the 60,000 miles where PTC technology
is mandated. He also believes that, for a number of
reasons, the railroads cannot complete the installation of
PTC until the end of 2018 and that it will take an
additional two years to test that all the system
components work together correctly.
The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) estimates the
cost of the PTC system to be $52,000 per mile of track—for a
total of more than $3 billion for the 60,000 miles of track to
be covered. Meanwhile, the railroads estimate the total
cost will be more than $9 billion and claim they have spent
$5.2 billion on this effort already.
One complicating factor relates to the fact that PTC
systems require access to a wireless frequency in order to
operate. The Federal Communications Commission regulates
the use of radio frequencies and grants exclusive access or
licenses to certain frequencies. This ensures that operators
don’t interfere with one another by broadcasting signals over
the same frequency. Demand for access to frequencies in the
wireless broadband spectrum has soared due to the rapid
growth in use of cell phones, smartphones, and mobile
computing devices. The railroads must acquire a license to
operate their wireless PTC system at a certain frequency, but
another company may already own the rights to that
frequency band in a certain area. In some cases, railroads
have struggled for years to buy the rights to airwaves to
operate their PTC equipment.
Tracks on which multiple carriers operate present
a higher risk of collisions. The continued smooth,
uninterrupted operations of each PTC system as the train
crosses tracks operated by different rail carriers is critical
even when that carrier’s PTC system is built on hardware,
software, and track switches from an entirely different set
of vendors.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Develop a force field analysis that approximates the
strength of the driving and restraining forces for PTC.
2. The high cost of implementing changes to infrastruc-
ture always raises questions about priorities. Should
investments in infrastructure be made to address
high-impact, low-probability events (such as human-
error-caused accidents) or should investments be
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
79
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

focused on low-impact, high-probability events (such
as the need for ongoing cleaning and maintenance of
train stations and installing air conditioning)? Make an
argument in favor of accelerating deployment of PTC
giving three strong reasons supporting this decision.
Now take the other side and present a strong argument
against PTC deployment and offering an alternative
solution.
3. Do research to determine the current status of PTC
deployment. Summarize your findings in a couple
of paragraphs.
SOURCES: “An Introduction to Positive Train Control,”
metrolinktrains.com/agency/page/title/ptc, accessed October 3, 2015;
“Report to Congress on the Status of Positive Train Control Implemen-
tation,” U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Railroad Adminis-
tration, August 7, 2015, www.fra.dot.gov/eLib/details/L16962; Shear,
Michael D. and Mouawad, Jad, “Amtrak Says Shortfalls and Rules
Delayed Its Safety System,” New York Times, May 14, 2015,
nytimes.com/2015/05/15/us/amtrak-says-it-was-just-months-away-
from-installing-safety-system.html?_r=0; “Investigating the Philadelphia
Amtrak Train Derailment,” New York Times, May 12, 2015,
nytimes.com/interactive/2015/05/13/us/investigating-the-philadelphia-
amtrak-train-crash.html; “About Us,” www.metrolinktrains.com/
agency/page/title/member_agencies, accessed October 3, 2015.
Case Two
Nordstrom’s Innovation Efforts Recognize the
Importance of the Soft Side of Implementing
Change
Based in Seattle, Washington, Nordstrom Inc. is an upscale
department store chain that operates more than 300 stores
across the United States and Canada. The company got its
start in 1901 as a small shoe store in downtown Seattle, and it
has since grown into a well-regarded fashion specialty chain
with net sales of more than $13.1 billion in 2014. Nordstrom
has built a loyal customer following through its quality
products and its almost legendary customer service. The
company prides itself on its culture, which supports and
empowers employees, and for the last decade, the company
has consistently been named one of Fortune magazine’s “100
Best Companies to Work For.”
In keeping with its commitment to quality, Nordstrom
has invested heavily in innovation throughout its
organization—by embracing omnichannel retailing strategies
that allow customers to make purchases in the store, online,
and via mobile devices, and through its approach to
developing and supporting the variety of information
systems that fuel the company’s growth.
For instance, Nordstrom looked for innovative solutions
to help it revamp its approach to developing mobile apps
after a detailed analysis of internal processes determined that
its typical development cycle for updating customer mobile
apps was 22 to 28 weeks—far too long to keep the company
competitive in the rapidly changing mobile marketplace. The
project was successful (cutting development cycles down to
30 days or less) because the company took the time to
thoroughly map all of the processes—and then shared that
detail with employees and other stakeholders. Through that
process it became clear to everyone involved how much
change was needed in order for the company to stay
competitive on the digital front. In addition, having every
step mapped out showed each individual team how it needed
to change.
According to Courtney Kissler, Nordstrom’s vice
president of e-commerce and store technologies, the process
analysis work that Nordstrom performed at the start of the
project provided the data that helped build momentum for
change within the organization. Kissler’s advice to other
teams looking to make such a transformation is, “Make the
conversation as much about data as possible and not about
emotion. A lot of the skeptics come around once they see [the
data].”
In another effort to strengthen its innovation practices,
the retailer recently made changes to its “Innovation Lab,”
which it established in 2010 to focus on jumpstarting
technology projects. Over time, the company came to realize
that those efforts needed to be better integrated into the
business groups in order to spur collaboration between the
technology innovators and other Nordstrom employees—and
encourage acceptance of new initiatives. Therefore, the
company moved most of its technologists out of its central
lab and into the different business groups so they could work
more closely with end users, especially those who work
directly with customers. This approach “works better because
we have a broader intake of new ideas from both business
and technology teams,” according to Nordstrom CIO Dan
Little.
These changes in the way Nordstrom is innovating and
providing the information systems that support its core
business mean that Nordstrom employees—both on the
technical and the business side—need to learn new ways of
working with technology and the development process.
However, the changes also mean that new innovations have a
higher chance of adoption and acceptance because end users
are more connected to the innovation process.
Keeping an organization as large as Nordstrom
competitive and innovative requires all employees to
embrace change. And for Nordstrom, its focus on the soft
side of implementing change is paying off. Nordstrom has
been able to build on its organizational culture to encourage
innovation and acceptance of change. As Sam Hogenson, vice
president of technology at Nordstrom, puts it, “If you don’t
pay attention to culture, everything is really hard to do. But if
you do, everything else works.”
Critical Thinking Questions
1. How might Nordstrom’s decision to move many of its
technology innovators out of its central Innovation Lab
and into the business groups allow the retailer to better
focus on the soft side of implementing change?
2. What resistance from the business units might have
inhibited the movement of technology innovators into
business groups? What strategies or actions could
management have taken to reduce this resistance?
3. Nordstrom’s Vice President of E-Commerce and Store
Technologies, Courtney Kissler, is a strong proponent
of innovating through continuous improvement. How
do you think Nordstrom’s organizational culture and
80
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

its focus on the soft side of implementing change could
enhance its continuous improvement initiatives?
SOURCES: “Nordstrom Company History,” Nordstrom, Inc., http://shop
.nordstrom.com/c/company-history?origin=leftnav, accessed December
6, 2015; “The World’s Biggest Public Companies: #864 Nordstrom,”
Forbes, May 2015, www.forbes.com/companies/nordstrom; “100 Best
Companies to Work For: 2015,” Fortune, http://fortune.com/best-compa
nies, accessed December 7, 2015; Murphy, Chris, “Nordstrom VP: Take
Emotion Out of Agile Transformation,” InformationWeek, May 4, 2015,
www.informationweek.com/strategic-cio/digital-business/nordstrom-vp-
take-emotion-out-of-agile-transformation/a/d-id/1320242; “DOES14 -
Courtney Kissler - Nordstrom - Transforming to a Culture of Continuous
Improvement,” DevOps Enterprise Summit 2014, October 29, 2014,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ZAcsrZBSlo; Nash, Kim S., “Nordstrom’s
Innovation Revamp Leads to E-commerce Texting App,” Wall Street
Journal (CIO Journal blog), May 28, 2015, http://blogs.wsj.com/cio/2015
/05/28/nordstroms-innovation-revamp-leads-to-e-commerce-texting
-app; Reed, J. Paul, “DevOps in Practice: Nordstrom,” O’Reilly, www
.oreilly.com/ideas/devops-in-practice/page/2/nordstrom.
Notes
1. “Zara,” Inditex, www.inditex.com/brands/zara, accessed
July 28, 2015.
2. Ruddick, Graham, “How Zara Became the World’s Big-
gest Fashion Retailer,” Telegraph, October 20, 2014,
www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/retailand
consumer/11172562/How-Inditex-became-the-worlds
-biggest-fashion-retailer.html.
3. “Coles Supplier Portal,” Coles, www.supplierportal.coles
.com.au/csp/wps/portal/web/Home, accessed July 28,
2015.
4. Braue, David, “Coles Supply-Chain Revamp Means
Stockouts Are Down (Down, Down,)” ZDNet, August 15,
2013, www.zdnet.com/coles-supply-chain-revamp
-means-stockouts-are-down-down-down-7000019419.
5. “Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide,” Ogilvy & Mather World-
wide, www.wpp.com/wpp/companies/ogilvy-mather
-worldwide, accessed July 28, 2015.
6. Christensen, Clayton, “Disruptive Innovation,” Clayton
Christensen, www.claytonchristensen.com/key-concepts,
accessed July 29, 2015.
7. “P&G,” ad brands.net, www.adbrands.net/us/pg_us
.htm, accessed August 18, 2015.
8. “P&G Boosts Prices to Offset Cheaper Tide,” Cincinnati
Business Enquirer, February 11, 2014, www.bizjournals
.com/cincinnati/morning_call/2014/02/pg-boosts-prices
-to-offset-cheaper-tide.html.
9. Buck, Stephanie, “Cell-ebration! 40 Years of Cellphone
History,” Mashable, April 3, 2013, http://mashable.com
/2013/04/03/anniversary-of-cellphone.
10. Phillips, Abagail, “Continuous Innovation at Boeing
Leads to Success in a Highly Competitive Industry,”
Lean, October 24, 2014, www.manufacturingglobal.
com/lean/199/Continuous-innovation-at-Boeing-leads
-to-success-in-a-highly-competitive-industry.
11. Jain, Rahul, “Deutsche Bank Extends Accenture BPO
Procurement Contract,” The Outsource Blog, July 3,
2015, www.theoutsourceblog.com/2015/07/detusche
-bank-extends-accenture-bpo-procurement-contract.
12. Thibodeau, Patrick, “In a Symbolic Shift, IBM’s India
Workforce Likely Exceeds U.S.,” Computerworld,
November 29, 2012, www.computerworld.com/article
/2493565/it-careers/in-a-symbolic-shift--ibm-s-india
-workforce-likely-exceeds-u-s-.html.
13. Thibodeau, Patrick, “As It Sets IT Layoffs, Citizens Bank
Shifts Work to India by Web,” Computerworld, August
13, 2015, www.computerworld.com/article/2970435
/it-outsourcing/as-it-sets-it-layoffs-citizens-bank-shifts
-work-to-india-via-web.html.
14. Denning, Steve, “What Went Wrong at Boeing?,” Forbes,
January 21, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/stevedenning
/2013/01/21/what-went-wrong-at-boeing.
15. “Kraft Heinz Announces Job Cuts in U.S. and Canada,”
Reuters, August 12, 2015, www.nytimes.com/2015/08
/13/business/kraft-heinz-announces-job-cuts-in-us-and
-canada.html?ref=topics&_r=0.
16. Hornstein, Henry, “The Need to Integrate Project Man-
agement and Organizational Change,” Ivey Business
Journal, March/April 2012, http://iveybusinessjournal
.com/publication/the-need-to-integrate-project-manag
ement-and-organizational-change.
17. Zhu, Pearl, “Five ‘Super Pitfalls’ Why Large IT Projects
Fail, Future CIO, May 2014, http://futureofcio.blogspot
.com/2013/03/five-super-pitfalls-why-large-it.html.
18. “California Department of Consumer Affairs’ BreEZe
System,” California State Auditor, www.auditor.ca.gov
/reports/summary/2014-116, accessed August 11, 2015.
19. Ortiz, Jon, “$96 Million California IT Project Late,
Flawed, Busting Budget,” State Worker, February 12,
2015, www.sacbee.com/news/politics-government/the
-state-worker/article9918857.html.
20. Kaminski, June, “Theory Applied to Informatics—Lewin’s
Change Theory,” Canadian Journal of Nursing, Winter
2011, http://cjni.net/journal/?p=1210.
21. Davis, F. D., “Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of
Use, and User Acceptance of Information Technology,”
MIS Quarterly, Volume 13, Issue 3, pp. 319–339.
22. “Investor Relations,” Avon, http://investor.avoncom
pany.com/CorporateProfile.aspx?iid=3009091, accessed
August 12, 2015.
23. “Avon Products,” Why Projects Fail Blog, January 21,
2014, http://calleam.com/WTPF/?p=6248.
24. Thibodeau, Patrick and Machlis, Sharon, “Despite H-1B
Lottery, Offshore Firms Dominate Visa Use,” Computer-
world, July 30, 2015, www.computerworld.com/article
/2954612/it-outsourcing/despite-h-1b-lottery-offshore
-firms-dominate-visa-use.html.
25. Thibodeau, Patrick, “Southern California Edison IT
Workers ‘Beyond Furious’ over H-1B Replacements,”
Computerworld, February 14, 2015, www.computer-
world.com/article/2879083/southern-california-edison-
it-workers-beyond-furious-over-h-1b-replacements.html.
26. “2015 100 Best Places to Work in IT,” Computerworld,
July 2015.
27. Groenfeldt, Tom, “40 Percent of IT Spending Is outside
CIO Control,” Forbes, December 2, 2013, www.forbes
CHAPTER 2 • Information Systems in Organizations
81
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

.com/sites/tomgroenfeldt/2013/12/02/40-percent-of-it-
spending-is-outside-cio-control/2.
28. Hein, Rich, “IT Certification Hot List 2015: 10 That
Deliver Higher Pay,” CIO, March 3, 2015, www.cio.com
/article/2891552/careers-staffing/it-certification-hot-list
-2015-10-that-deliver-higher-pay.html.
29. “Starting an Information Technology Business,” Female
Entrepreneur Association, August 28, 2014,
femaleentrepreneurassociation.com/2014/08/starting
-an-information-technology-business.
30. Smith, Darrell, “Job Front: Social Media Expected to Play
Bigger Role in Hiring,” Sacramento Bee, February 4,
2013, www.sacbee.com/2013/02/04/5162867/job-front
-social-media-expected.html.
82
PART 1 • Information Systems in Perspective
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

PART 2
Information
Technology
Concepts
Chapter 3
Hardware and Mobile Devices
Chapter 4
Software and Mobile Applications
Chapter 5
Database Systems and Big Data
Chapter 6
Networks and Cloud Computing
Macrovector/Shutterstock.com
83
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
3
Hardware and Mobile Devices
Stephen Coburn/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• The Large Hadron Collider (LHC)—built to gain a
better understanding of what our universe is made of
and how it began—captures about 3 gigabytes of data
per second. One gigabyte can store seven minutes
of HD-TV. The mission of the LHC Computing Grid is to
store and analyze all this data using 132,922 physical
processors, 300 petabytes of online disk storage, and
230 petabytes of magnetic tape storage. For perspec-
tive, one gigabyte can store seven minutes of HD-TV
while one petabyte is equivalent to 13.3 years of HD-
TV.
• Current technology allows chip manufacturers to create
chips with features that measure as small as
14 nanometers (nm) across. For perspective, a mole-
cule of water is around 0.5 nm across. Not only are
chips getting smaller, but they are getting faster and
require less energy. These improved chips will be in
your computing devices, smartphones, and wearable
computers making them more powerful and useful.
• Biomedical engineers are exploring a process called
bioprinting, which uses 3D printers to create living tissue
capable of naturally integrating into the body. This will
eventually enable the construction of fully functional
human organs.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• The computer hardware industry is rapidly
changing and highly competitive, creating an
environment ripe for technological
breakthroughs.
• Computer hardware must be carefully selected to
meet the evolving needs of the organization and
its supporting information systems.
• The computer hardware industry and users are
implementing green computing designs and
products.
• Identify and briefly describe the functions of the
primary components of a computer.
• Give an example of recent innovations in
computer processor chips, memory devices,
and input/output devices.
• Identify the characteristics of various classes of
single-user and multiuser computer systems, and
discuss the usage of each class of system.
• Identify some of the challenges and trade-offs that
must be considered in implementing a data center.
• Define the term "green computing" and identify the
primary goals of this program.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Hardware and Mobile Devices?
Organizations invest in computer hardware to improve worker productivity, increase revenue, reduce costs,
provide better customer service, speed up time to market, and facilitate collaboration among employees.
Organizations that don’t make wise hardware investments are often stuck with outdated equipment that is
unreliable and that cannot take advantage of the latest software advances. Such obsolete hardware can
serve as an anchor to progress and can place an organization at a competitive disadvantage. Managers, no
matter what their career field and educational background, are expected to help define the business needs
that hardware must support. In addition, managers must be able to ask relevant questions and evaluate
options when considering hardware investments for their areas of the business. This need is especially
true in small organizations, which might not employ information system specialists. Managers in
marketing, sales, and human resources often help IS specialists assess opportunities to apply computer
hardware and evaluate the options and features specified for the hardware. Managers in finance and
accounting must keep an eye on the bottom line—guarding against overspending—yet be willing to
invest in computer hardware when and where business conditions warrant it.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• What major competitive advantages can organizations gain from the effective use of computer
hardware and mobile devices?
• What impact do the increasing capabilities and decreasing costs of hardware over time have on
how organizations are using information system hardware?
This chapter focuses on the hardware components of a computer-based infor-
mation system (CBIS). Recall that hardware refers to the physical components
of a computer that perform the input, processing, output, and storage activi-
ties of the computer. When making hardware-purchasing decisions, the over-
riding consideration of a business should be how hardware can support the
objectives of the information system (IS) and the goals of the organization.
Anatomy of a Computer
Computer system hardware components include devices that perform input, pro-
cessing, data storage, and output, as shown in Figure 3.1. These include the proces-
sor, memory, and input/output devices, all of which are discussed in this section.
FIGURE 3.1
Basic anatomy of a computer
Computer hardware components
include the processor (CPU),
memory, address and data bus,
and input/output devices.
CPU
Main
memory
Address bus
Data bus
Input/
output
devices
86
PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Processor
The central processing unit (CPU) or simply processor is the part of a com-
puter that sequences and executes instructions. Memory provides the proces-
sor with a working storage area to hold program instructions and data. It
rapidly provides data and instructions to the processor. Input/output devices
provide data and instructions to the computer and receive results from it. Data
and instructions are routed to and from the various components over the bus,
a set of electronic circuits.
The components of the computer work together to complete the instruc-
tions (e.g., add, multiply, divide, subtract, compare) of a computer program
to accomplish the goals of the user (e.g., send/receive email, develop a profit
forecast, pay an invoice). Completing an instruction involves two phases
(instruction and execution), which are broken down into the following four
steps (see Figure 3.2):
●
Instruction phase:
●
Fetch instruction. The computer reads the next program instruction
to be executed—along with any necessary data—into the processor.
●
Decode instruction. The instruction is decoded and passed to the
appropriate processor execution unit.
●
Execution phase:
●
Execute instruction. The computer executes the instruction by mak-
ing an arithmetic computation, logical comparison, bit shift, or vector
operation.
●
Store results. The results are stored in temporary storage locations
called registers or in memory.
Each processor produces a series of electronic pulses at a predetermined rate,
called the clock speed, which governs the speed at which these steps are com-
pleted. Clock speed is measured in gigahertz (GHz), which is a unit of fre-
quency that is equal to one billion cycles per second. Many of today’s personal
computers operate in the 1 to 4 GHz range. The higher the clock speed, the
shorter the interval between pulses and the faster instructions can be completed.
Unfortunately, the faster the clock speed of the processor, the more heat
the processor generates. This heat must be dissipated to avoid corrupting the
FIGURE 3.2
Execution of an instruction
(1) In the instruction phase, a
program’s instructions and any
necessary data are read into the
processor. (2) The instruction is then
decoded by the control unit of the
CPU so that the central processor
can understand what to do. (3) In the
execution phase, the arithmetic and
logic unit (ALU) component of the
CPU does what it is instructed to do,
making either an arithmetic
computation or a logical
comparison. (4) The results are
then stored in the registers or in
memory. The instruction and
execution phases together make
up one machine cycle.
Processing device
Registers
Control unit
ALU
Memory
(2) Decode
(3) Execute
(1) Fetch
(4) Store
I-Time
E-Time
central processing unit (CPU):
The part of a computer that sequences
and executes instructions.
memory: A component of the com-
puter that provides the processor with a
working storage area to hold program
instructions and data.
input/output device: A computer
component that provides data and
instructions to the computer and
receives results from it.
bus: A set of electronic circuits used to
route data and instructions to and from
the various components of a computer.
clock speed: A series of electronic
pulses produced at a predetermined
rate that affects machine cycle time.
gigahertz (GHz): A unit of frequency
that is equal to one billion cycles per
second; a measure of clock speed.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices
87
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

data and instructions the computer is trying to process. Thus, processors that
run at higher temperatures need bigger heat sinks (a device or substance for
absorbing excessive heat), fans, and other components to eliminate the excess
heat. This increases the size and weight of the computing device.
Processor Families
This section will introduce the concept of instruction set architecture and pro-
cessor family and briefly discuss three of the most commonly used processor
families.
The instruction set architecture (ISA) of a computer defines the basic
set of commands (opcodes) that the processor can execute. Examples of
opcodes include:
●
ADD—Add two numbers together.
●
COMPARE—Compare numbers.
●
IN—Input information from a device (e.g., keyboard).
●
JUMP—Jump to designated memory address.
●
JUMP IF—Conditional statement that jumps to a designated memory
address.
●
LOAD—Load information from memory to the processor.
●
OUT—Output information to device (e.g., monitor).
●
STORE—Store information to memory.
A processor family is a set of processors from the same manufacturer
that have similar features and capabilities. However within each processor
family, multiple processors are developed to meet the many diverse comput-
ing needs of consumers. While the general ISA and feature set within a given
family are identical, certain model specific variations occur. Different proces-
sors can use almost the same instruction set while still having very different
internal design. For example, both the Intel Pentium and AMD Athlon proces-
sors use nearly the same instruction set.
x86 family. Intel, AMD, and VIA Technologies are the largest manufac-
turers of x86 processors. Servers based on the x86 processor dominate data
centers, and it is the world’s predominant personal computer CPU processor.
Intel Atom. This is the brand name for a line of ultra-low-voltage CPUs
from Intel that is designed to generate less heat than the x86 chip. As a result,
it requires less power and fewer additional components to dissipate the
excees heat. As a result, the Intel Atom is used mostly in lightweight portable
computers and mobile Internet devices.
ARM. These processors are used in computers that run Android, iOS, and
other operating systems found in mobile devices such as laptops and smart-
phones. ARM is a designer of computer processors; it licenses its designs to
chip manufacturers to build. ARM created a design for a family of processors
based on Reduced Instruction Set Processing (RISC). RISC processors execute
a small set of simplified instructions more quickly than complex instruction
set computers based on the x86 processor. Because RISC processors require
less power and generate less heat than standard x86 processors, ARM proces-
sors do not require big heat sinks and fans to remove excess heat. This results
in smaller, lighter, more energy-efficient computing devices with longer bat-
tery life—ideal for use in smartphones and tablets.
The toughest challenge in designing a processor for a smartphone or
tablet is balancing performance and power consumption. Many processor
designs rely on a multiple-core configuration ARM calls big.LITTLE that
includes high clock speed along with powerful cores, and slower, more
energy-efficient cores. The powerful cores are used when high performance
is required, such as for gaming computers. The more energy-efficient cores
are used for less taxing tasks, such as Web browsing and email. This
approach provides sufficient computing power to get the job done, but
instruction set architecture
(ISA): A basic set of commands
(opcodes) that the processor can
execute.
processor family: A set of proces-
sors from the same manufacturer that
have similar features and capabilities.
88
PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

reduces heating problems and, consequentially, the drain on the battery to
run a cooling fan. Mobile devices from Samsung and Qualcomm employ the
big.LITTLE design.
Multiprocessing
Multiprocessing involves the simultaneous execution of two or more instruc-
tions at the same time. One form of multiprocessing uses coprocessors.
A coprocessor speeds processing by executing specific types of instructions
while the CPU works on another processing activity. Coprocessors can be
internal or external to the CPU and can have different clock speeds than the
CPU. Each type of coprocessor performs a specific function. For example, a
math coprocessor chip speeds mathematical calculations, while a graphics
coprocessor chip decreases the time it takes to manipulate graphics.
A multicore processor has two or more independent processing units,
called cores, which are capable of sequencing and executing instructions.
The multiple cores can run multiple instructions at the same time, thereby
increasing the amount of processing that can be completed in a given
amount of time.
Parallel Computing
Parallel computing is the simultaneous execution of the same task on multi-
ple processors to obtain results more quickly. Systems with thousands of
such processors are known as massively parallel processing systems, a form
of multiprocessing that speeds processing by linking hundreds or even thou-
sands of processors to operate at the same time, or in parallel, with each pro-
cessor having its own bus, memory, disks, copy of the operating system, and
applications. The processors might communicate with one another to coordi-
nate when executing a computer program, or they might run independently
of one another under the direction of another processor that distributes the
work to the various processors and collects their results.
The most frequent uses for parallel computing include modeling, simulation,
and analyzing large amounts of data. For example, parallel computing is used in
medicine to develop new imaging systems that complete ultrasound scans in less
time and with greater accuracy, enabling doctors to provide better, more timely
diagnoses to patients. Instead of building physical models of new products,
engineers can create virtual models and use parallel computing to test how the
products work and then change design elements and materials as needed.
The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California is home to the
Sequoia supercomputer, an impressive example of a massively parallel pro-
cessing system. Sequoia is consistently ranked as one of the fastest computers
in the world, with over 1.5 million processing cores that allow it to process
over 17 quadrillion computations per second.1 Although utilized primarily for
nuclear weapons simulation, Sequoia was recently used by a group of
researchers to model mantle convection (the process within the Earth’s inte-
rior that is responsible for the movement of the Earth’s tectonic plates and
the earthquakes, volcanoes, and tsunamis that sometimes accompany those
movements). The model could only be simulated on such a powerful com-
puter and is a step toward developing a better understanding and prediction
of natural disasters.2
Grid computing is the use of a collection of computers, often owned by
multiple individuals or organizations, that work in a coordinated manner to
solve a common problem. Grid computing is a low-cost approach to parallel
computing. The grid can include dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of
computers that run collectively to solve extremely large processing problems.
Key to the success of grid computing is a central server that acts as the grid
leader and traffic monitor. This controlling server divides the computing task
into subtasks and assigns the work to computers on the grid that have (at
multiprocessing: The
simultaneous execution of two or
more instructions at the same time.
coprocessor: The part of the
computer that speeds processing by
executing specific types of instructions
while the CPU works on another
processing activity.
multicore processor: A
microprocessor that has two or
more independent processing units,
called cores, which are capable
of sequencing and executing
instructions.
parallel computing: The
simultaneous execution of the
same task on multiple processors
to obtain results faster.
massively parallel processing
system: A system that speeds
processing by linking hundreds or
thousands of processors to operate at
the same time, or in parallel, with each
processor having its own bus, memory,
disks, copy of the operating system,
and applications.
grid computing: The use of a col-
lection of computers, often owned by
multiple individuals or organizations,
that work in a coordinated manner to
solve a common problem.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices
89
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

least temporarily) surplus processing power. The central server also monitors
the processing, and if a member of the grid fails to complete a subtask, the
server restarts or reassigns the task. When all the subtasks are completed, the
controlling server combines the results and advances to the next task until
the whole job is completed.
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) was built to study the behavior of fun-
damental particles to gain a better understanding of what our universe is
made of and how it began. The LHC hurls protons and other particles at each
other at nearly the speed of light and then records what happens when they
smash together. LHC detectors record particle collisions with 100 million
read-out channels taking 14 million pictures per second. This translates to
about 3 gigabytes of data per second or about 25 petabytes (25 million giga-
bytes) of data per year. The Worldwide LHC Computing Grid (WLCG) project
is a global collaboration of more than 170 computing centers in 42 countries,
linking up national and international grid infrastructures. Its mission is to
store and analyze all this data on the LHC Computing Grid, which consists of
132,922 physical CPUs, 300 petabytes of online disk storage, and 230 peta-
bytes of magnetic tape storage.3
Manufacturing Processors
An integrated circuit (IC)—or chip—is a set of electronic circuits on one
small piece of semiconductor material, normally silicon. ICs can be made
extremely small with up to several billion electronic components packed
into an area the size of a fingernail. Processors and memory chips are exam-
ples of integrated circuits. A semiconductor fabrication plant (also called a
fab or foundry) is a factory where integrated circuits are manufactured.
Extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUVL) is a highly complex process used in
manufacturing computer chips with feature sizes that are extremely small—
measured in nanometers (nm) or billionths of a meter. EUVL involves direct-
ing a laser beam at xeon gas to heat it up and eject electrons to etch the tiny
components of the chip. The entire process must occur in a vacuum. Cur-
rent technology allows chip manufacturers to create chips with features that
measure as small as 14 nm across. For perspective, a molecule of water is
about 0.5 nm across. Table 3.1 lists some of the Intel processors and their
characteristics.
Intel, Samsung, and STMicroelectronics design and manufacture their
chips in their own fab plants. Some organizations operate a semiconductor
fab for the purpose of fabricating the designs of other companies. Such orga-
nizations are known as foundry companies. Qualcomm, Nvidia, and AMD are
examples of fabless manufacturers; they outsource their manufacturing to
foundry companies who fabricate the design.
TABLE 3.1 Some members of the Intel family of processors
Chip
Family
Product Name
MaxClock
Speed (GHz)
Number
of Cores
Lithography
(Nanometers)
x86
Xeon
E7-2850
2.0
10
32
x86
Core i7
Extreme Edition
980x
3.3
6
32
x86
Core i5
6600
3.9
4
14
x86
Pentium
4 G4400T
2.9
2
14
Atom
x7
Z8700
2.4
4
14
Atom
x5
Z8500
2.2
4
14
integrated circuit (IC): A set of
electronic circuits on one small piece
of semiconductor material, normally
silicon.
semiconductor fabrication
plant: A factory where integrated
circuits are manufactured; also
called a fab or a foundry.
90
PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Fabs are extremely expensive to set up and require many expensive
devices to function. Intel is investing $6 billion to upgrade its fab plant in
Kiryat Gat,Israel, and will hire 1,000 workers in addition to the 2,500 who
already work there. It is believed that the plant will shift to making chips
employing new 10-nanometer technology, which experts expect to arrive
in 2016.4,5
Memory
Main memory provides the CPU with a working storage area for program
instructions and data. The chief function of memory is to rapidly provide data
and instructions to the CPU. In order for their systems to run efficiently, orga-
nizations must invest in a sufficient amount of main memory. Organizations
also need large amounts of secondary storage to hold the huge quantities of
data that cannot fit within the limits of main memory.
Like the CPU, memory devices contain thousands of circuits imprinted on
silicon chips. Each circuit is either conducting electrical current (on) or not
conducting current (off). Data is stored in memory as a combination of on or
off circuit states. Usually, 8 bits are used to represent a character, such as the
letter A. Eight bits together form a byte (B). In most cases, storage capacity is
measured in bytes, with 1 byte equivalent to one character of data. The con-
tents of the Library of Congress, with over 126 million items and 530 miles of
bookshelves, would require about 20 petabytes of digital storage. It is esti-
mated that all the words ever spoken by humans represented in text form
would equal about 5 exabytes of information.6 Table 3.2 lists units for mea-
suring computer storage.
Types of Memory
Computer memory can take several forms. Instructions or data can be tempo-
rarily stored in and read from random access memory (RAM). As currently
designed, RAM chips are volatile storage devices, meaning they lose their con-
tents if the current is turned off or disrupted, which can be caused by a power
surge, a brownout, or electrical noise generated by lightning or nearby
machines. RAM chips are mounted directly on the computer’s main circuit
board or in other chips mounted on peripheral cards that plug into the main
circuit board. These RAM chips consist of millions of switches that are sensi-
tive to changes in electric current.
RAM comes in many varieties: Static random access memory (SRAM) is
byte-addressable storage used for high-speed registers and caches; dynamic
random access memory (DRAM) is byte-addressable storage used for the
main memory in a computer; and double data rate synchronous dynamic
TABLE 3.2 Computer storage units
Name
Abbreviation
Number of Bytes
Byte
B
1
Kilobyte
KB
1,000
Megabyte
MB
1,0002
Gigabyte
GB
1,0003
Terabyte
TB
1,0004
Petabyte
PB
1,0005
Exabyte
EB
1,0006
Zettabyte
ZB
1,0007
Yottabyte
YB
1,0008
main memory: The component of a
computer that provides the CPU with
a working storage area for program
instructions and data.
byte (B): Eight bits that together
represent a single character of data.
random access memory (RAM):
A form of memory in which instructions
or data can be temporarily stored.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices
91
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

random access memory (DDR SDRAM) is an improved form of DRAM that
effectively doubles the rate at which data can be moved in and out of main
memory. DDR has been superseded by second-, third-, and fourth-generation
DDR called DDR2, DDR3, and DDR4, respectively. DDR3 requires 1.5 volts of
electrical power to operate, while DDR4 needs just 1.2 volts. DDR4 also sup-
ports a deep power-down mode, which allows the host device to go into
standby without needing to refresh its memory—reducing standby power con-
sumption by up to 50 percent. Thus, DDR4 reduces the energy required to run
portable devices and servers. This means longer battery life for portable com-
puter users and lower electric bills for organizations that operate servers
farms.7
Although microprocessor speed has roughly doubled every 24 months
over the past several decades, memory performance has not kept pace. In
effect, memory has become the principal bottleneck to system performance.
Cache memory is a type of high-speed memory that a processor can access
more rapidly than main memory to help ease this bottleneck. See Figure 3.3.
Frequently used data is stored in easily accessible cache memory instead of
slower memory, such as RAM. Because cache memory holds less data, the
CPU can access the desired data and instructions more quickly than when
selecting from the larger set in primary storage. Thus, the CPU can execute
instructions faster, improving the overall performance of the computer sys-
tem. Cache memory is available in three forms. The level 1 (L1) cache is on
the CPU chip. The level 2 (L2) cache memory can be accessed by the CPU
over a high-speed dedicated interface. The latest processors go a step further,
placing the L2 cache directly on the CPU chip itself and providing high-speed
support for a tertiary level 3 (L3) external cache. See Figure 3.4.
FIGURE 3.3
Cache memory
Processors can access this type of
high-speed memory faster than main
memory. Located on or near the CPU
chip, cache memory works with main
memory. A cache controller deter-
mines how often the data is used,
transfers frequently used data to
cache memory, and then deletes the
data when it goes out of use.
CPU
Cache
controller
Memory
(main store)
Cache
memory
Typically
4 MB
Miss
Typically
256 KB
or more
Hit
FIGURE 3.4
Relative speed of various
types of storage
The closer memory is to the CPU, the
faster the CPU can access it.
Faster
DDR4 SDRAM
DDR3 SDRAM
DDR2 SDRAM
DDR SDRAM
Registers
Cache memory
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
cache memory: A type of high-
speed memory that a processor can
access more rapidly than main
memory.
92
PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Read-only memory (ROM), another type of memory, is nonvolatile,
meaning that its contents are not lost if the power is turned off or interrupted.
ROM provides permanent storage for data and instructions that do not
change, such as programs and data from the computer manufacturer, includ-
ing the instructions that tell the computer how to start up when power is
turned on. ROM memory also comes in a couple varieties. Programmable
read-only memory (PROM) is used to hold data and instructions that can
never be changed. Electrically erasable programmable read-only memory
(EEPROM) is user-modifiable read-only memory that can be erased and repro-
grammed repeatedly through the application of higher-than-normal electrical
voltage. EEPROM requires data to be written or erased 1 byte at a time.
Secondary Data Storage Devices
Storing data safely and effectively is critical to an organization’s success.
Driven by many factors—such as needing to retain more data longer to meet
government regulatory concerns, storing new forms of digital data such as
audio and video, and keeping systems running under the onslaught of
increasing volumes of email—the world’s information is more than doubling
every two years. Nearly 6 zettabytes (6 × 1021 bytes) of information was cre-
ated and stored in 2013 alone.8 It is mainly unstructured digital content such
as video, audio, and image objects that is fueling this growth. IBM, which is
investing heavily in technologies (such as Watson, its cognitive computer sys-
tem) that can help organizations manage all that unstructured data, estimates
that more than 80 percent of the 2.5 billion gigabytes of data created every
day comes in the form of unstructured data.9
For most organizations, the best overall data storage solution is likely a
combination of different secondary storage options that can store large
amounts of data, instructions, and information more permanently than allowed
with main memory. Compared with memory, secondary storage offers the
advantages of nonvolatility, greater capacity, and greater economy. On a cost-
per-megabyte basis, secondary storage is considerably less expensive than pri-
mary memory. See Table 3.3. The selection of secondary storage media and
devices requires understanding their primary characteristics: access method,
capacity, and portability.
As with other computer system components, the access methods, storage
capacities, and portability required of secondary storage media are deter-
mined by the business requirements that must be met. An objective of a credit
card company might be to rapidly retrieve stored customer data to approve
consumer purchases. In this case, a fast access method is critical. In other
cases, such as equipping the Coca-Cola field salesforce with smartphones,
TABLE 3.3 Cost comparison for various forms of storage
Data Storage Type
Cost per GB
2009
2011
2013
2015
8 GB flash drive
$2.50
$2.48
$1.25
$.69
25 GB rewritable Blu-ray disc
$.44
$.11
$.30
$.30
72 GB DAT 72 data cartridge
$.21
$.24
$.26
$.21
50 4.7 GB DVD+R disks
$.09
$.31
$.07
$.08
500 GB portable hard drive
$.23
$.15
$.12
$.12
1 TB desktop external hard drive
$.12
$.09
$.10
$.10
Source: Office Depot, www.officedepot.com, December 2009, October 2011, October 2013, and October 2015.
read-only memory (ROM): A non-
volatile form of memory.
secondary storage: A device that
stores large amounts of data, instruc-
tions, and information more perma-
nently than allowed with main memory.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices
93
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

portability and ruggedness might be major considerations in selecting and
using secondary storage media and devices.
In addition to cost, capacity, portability, and ruggedness, organizations
must address security issues so that only authorized people are allowed access
to sensitive data and critical programs. Because the data and programs kept
on secondary storage devices are so critical to most organizations, all of these
issues merit careful consideration.
Secondary data storage is not directly accessible by the CPU. Instead,
computers usually use input/output channels to access secondary storage and
then transfer the desired data to intermediate areas in primary storage. The
most common forms of secondary storage devices are magnetic, optical, and
solid state.
Magnetic Secondary Storage Devices
Magnetic storage uses tape or disk devices covered with a thin magnetic
coating that enables data to be stored as magnetic particles. Magnetic tape
is a type of secondary storage medium, which is frequently used for storing
backups of critical organizational data in the event of a disaster. Examples
of tape storage devices include cassettes and cartridges measuring a few
millimeters in diameter, requiring very little storage space. Magnetic tape
has been used as storage media since the time of the earliest computers,
such as the 1951 Univac computer.10 Continuing advancements have kept
magnetic tape as a viable storage medium. For example, IBM and FUJIFILM
Corporation of Japan recently achieved a recording density of 123 billion
bits per square inch on low-cost magnetic tape. While still in development,
this innovation represents the equivalent of a 220-terabyte tape cartridge
(enough to hold the text of approximately 220 million books) that could fit
into the palm of your hand.11
The High-End Computing Capability (HECC) Project at NASA offers scien-
tists and engineers access to supercomputing systems services that are backed
up by a 132-petabyte tape storage system.12 Many such supercomputers,
including those deployed at the National Center for Atmospheric Research,
use robotic tape backup systems. See Figure 3.5.
A hard disk drive (HDD) is a direct access storage device used to store
and retrieve data from rapidly rotating disks coated with magnetic material.
FIGURE 3.5
Robotic tape backup system
The National Center for Atmospheric
Research uses a robotic tape
backup system to back up a fleet of
supercomputers that solve the
world’s most computationally inten-
sive climate-modeling problems.
magnetic tape: A type of sequential
secondary storage medium, now used
primarily for storing backups of critical
organizational data in the event of a
disaster.
hard disk drive (HDD): A direct
access storage device used to store
and retrieve data from rapidly rotating
disks coated with magnetic material.
Courtesy of Deutsches Klimarechenzentrum GmbH
94
PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A hard disk represents bits of data with small magnetized areas and uses a
read/write head to go directly to the desired piece of data. Because direct
access allows fast data retrieval, this type of storage is used by organizations
that need to respond quickly to customer requests, such as airlines and credit
card firms. For example, information on the credit history of a customer or
the seat availability on a particular flight would likely be stored on a direct-
access hard disk drive so that a customer-service representative or manager
could obtain that data in seconds. Hard disk drives vary widely in capacity
and portability.
Putting an organization’s data online involves a serious business risk—
the loss of critical data can put a corporation out of business. The concern
is that the most critical mechanical components inside a HDD storage
device—the disk drives, the fans, and read/write heads—can fail. Thus,
organizations now require that their data storage devices be fault tolerant,
that is, they can continue with little or no loss of performance if one or
more key components fail. In response, disk manufacturers are continually
developing new technologies that will improve the performance and reliabil-
ity of their hard disk drives. For example, Western Digital’s HGST subsidiary
recently released the world’s first 10-terabyte helium-filled hard drive—the
Ultrastar He10 HDD. By using helium, HGST is able to decrease friction
within its HDDs, allowing them to spin more reliably and consume less
power than conventional designs. And according to HGST, the Ultrastar
He10 has a mean-time-between-failure rating of 2.5 million hours, giving it
the highest reliability rating of any HDD on the market.13,14
A redundant array of independent/inexpensive disks (RAID) is a
method of storing data that generates extra bits of data from existing data,
allowing the system to create a “reconstruction map” so that if a hard drive
fails, it can rebuild lost data. With this approach, data can be split and stored
on different physical disk drives, using a technique called striping that evenly
distributes the data. RAID technology has been applied to storage systems to
improve system performance and reliability.
RAID can be implemented in several ways. RAID 1 subsystems duplicate
data on the hard drives. This process, called “disk mirroring,” provides an
exact copy that protects users fully in the event of data loss. However, to
keep complete duplicates of current backups, organizations need to double
the amount of their storage capacity. Other RAID methods are less expensive
because they duplicate only part of the data, allowing storage managers to
minimize the amount of extra disk space they must purchase to protect data.
The National Foreign Language Center (NFLC) at the University of Mary-
land is a research institute dedicated to improving the nation’s ability to under-
stand and communicate with people around the world. The staff at the NFLC
are involved in a variety of projects that develop and disseminate language
information to policy makers across the United States. These projects generate
large amounts of data that the institute had been storing on a Windows-based
Dell server. However, with data accumulating at a rate of 150 to 200 gigabytes
per month, the NFLC needed to implement a new storage solution. The NFLC
opted for a RAID storage solution, which gave the institute enough storage
space to offload thousands of large audio and video files, freeing up space on
its Dell server. The RAID storage option offered the NFLC the ability to dramat-
ically increase its capacity at a relatively low price per terabyte of storage.15,16
Virtual tape is a storage technology suitable for less frequently needed
data. With virtual tape systems, data appears to be stored entirely on tape car-
tridges, although some parts might actually be located on faster hard disks.
The software associated with a virtual tape system is sometimes called a vir-
tual tape server. Virtual tape can be used with a sophisticated storage-
management system that moves data to slower but less costly forms of storage
media as people use the data less often. Virtual tape technology can decrease
redundant array of indepen-
dent/inexpensive disks (RAID):
A method of storing data that generates
extra bits of data from existing data,
allowing the system to create a
“reconstruction map” so that if a hard
drive fails, the system can rebuild
lost data.
virtual tape: A storage device for
less frequently needed data. With
virtual tape systems, data appears to
be stored entirely on tape cartridges,
although some parts of it might actually
be located on faster hard disks.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices
95
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

data access time, lower the total cost of ownership, and reduce the amount of
floor space consumed by tape operations.
Optical Secondary Storage Devices
An optical storage device uses special lasers to read and write data. The
lasers record data by physically burning pits in the disc. Data is directly
accessed from the disc by an optical disc device, which operates much like a
compact disc player. This optical disc device uses a low-power laser that
measures the difference in reflected light caused by a pit (or lack thereof) on
the disc.
A common optical storage device is the compact disc read-only memory
(CD-ROM), with a storage capacity of 740 megabytes of data. After data is
recorded on a CD-ROM, it cannot be modified—the disc is “read-only.” A CD
burner, the informal name for a CD recorder, is a device that can record data
to a compact disc. CD-recordable (CD-R) and CD-rewritable (CD-RW) are the
two most common types of drives that can write CDs, either once (in the case
of CD-R) or repeatedly (in the case of CD-RW). CD-rewritable (CD-RW) tech-
nology allows PC users to back up data on CDs.
A digital video disc (DVD) looks like a CD, but it can store about 135
minutes of digital video or several gigabytes of data. At a data transfer rate of
1.352 megabytes per second, the access speed of a DVD drive is also faster
than that of the typical CD-ROM drive. Software, video games, and movies
are often stored and distributed on DVDs. See Figure 3.6.
DVDs have replaced recordable and rewritable CD discs (CD-R and
CD-RW) as the preferred physical media for sharing movies and photos.
Whereas a CD can hold about 740 megabytes of data, a single-sided DVD can
hold 4.7 gigabytes, with double-sided DVDs having a capacity of 9.4 giga-
bytes. Several types of recorders and discs are currently in use. Recordings
can be made on record-once discs (DVD-R and DVD+R) or on rewritable discs
(DVD-RW, DVD+RW, and DVD-RAM). Not all types of rewritable DVDs are
compatible with other types.
The Blu-ray high-definition video disc format based on blue laser technol-
ogy stores at least three times as much data as a DVD. The primary use for
this technology is in home entertainment equipment to store high-definition
video, although this format can also store computer data. A dual-layer Blu-ray
disc can store 50 gigabytes of data.17
DVD and Blu-ray discs are commonly used to store data; however, the
discs can become unreliable over time as they are exposed to light, humidity,
and chemical changes inside the disc itself. As a result, the data stored on
such discs can become unreadable over time. Thus, disc manufacturers are
focused on developing longer-lasting DVD and Blu-ray technology.
Scientists are experimenting with an even more advanced storage technolo-
gies, including the use of DNA molecules to store vast amounts of data for long
periods of time. DNA molecules consist of four chemicals connected end-
to-end, similar to the sequences of ones and zeroes that computers use to rep-
resent data. One gram of DNA is capable of holding 455 exabytes (one exabyte
is equivalent to a billion gigabytes).18 In addition, data could be stored in DNA
FIGURE 3.6
Digital video discs and player
DVDs look like CDs but have a
greater storage capacity and can
transfer data at a faster rate.
Plus69/Shutterstock.com
optical storage device: A form of
data storage that uses lasers to read
and write data.
compact disc read-only
memory (CD-ROM): A common
form of optical disc on which data
cannot be modified once it has been
recorded.
digital video disc (DVD): A form of
optical disc storage that looks like a
CD but that can store more data and
access it more quickly.
96
PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

for thousands of years. By comparison, today’s most powerful desktop hard
drives hold around 6 terabytes of data and might last 50 years.19 At this time,
the cost of synthesizing DNA to store data and the cost of decoding the data
stored in DNA are prohibitively expensive, unless the data needs to be archived
for at least 600 years. It will likely be a decade or more before the technology
evolves to the point where DNA data storage is practical.20
Solid State Secondary Storage Devices
A solid state storage device (SSD) stores data in memory chips rather than
on hard disk drives or optical media. These memory chips require less power
and provide much faster data access than magnetic data storage devices. In
addition, SSDs have no moving parts, so they are less fragile than hard disk
drives. All these factors make the SSD a preferred choice over hard disk drives
for portable computers.
A universal serial bus (USB) flash drive is one example of a commonly
used SSD. USB flash drives are external to the computer and are removable
and rewritable. Most weigh less than an ounce and can provide a wide range
of storage capacity. Samsung has developed a 15.36-terabyte solid state stor-
age device based on 48-layer 3D chip technology.21 This technology allows
for vertical stacking of flash cells, thus requiring less space to store data. It
also improves performance and requires less power.
Enterprise Storage Options
Businesses need to store the large amounts of data created throughout an
organization. Such large-scale secondary storage is called enterprise storage
and comes in four forms: attached storage, network-attached storage (NAS),
storage area networks (SANs), and cloud computing storage.
Attached Storage
Attached storage methods include all the options just discussed—tape, hard
disk drives (including RAID devices), virtual tape systems, optical devices,
and solid state secondary storage devices—which are connected directly to a
single computer. Attached storage methods, though simple and cost effective
for single users and small groups, do not allow systems to share storage, and
they make it difficult to back up data.
Because of the limitations of attached storage, firms are turning to
network-attached storage (NAS) and storage area networks (SANs). These
alternatives enable an organization to share data storage resources among a
much larger number of computers and users, resulting in improved storage
efficiency and greater cost effectiveness. In addition, they simplify data
backup and reduce the risk of downtime. Nearly one-third of system down-
time is a direct result of data storage failures, so eliminating storage problems
as a cause of downtime is a major advantage.
Network-Attached Storage
Network-attached storage (NAS) is a hard disk drive storage device that is
set up with its own network address and provides file-based storage services
to other devices on the network. NAS includes software to manage storage
access and file management, relieving the users’ computers of those tasks.
The result is that both application software and files can be served faster
because they are not competing for the same processor resources. Computer
users can share and access the same information, even if they are using differ-
ent types of computers. Common applications for NAS include consolidated
storage, Internet and e-commerce applications, and digital media.
CD-adapco is the world’s largest independent provider of computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) software and services. The company’s products are
Solid state storage device
(SSD): A storage device that stores
data in memory chips rather than on
hard disk drives or optical media.
network-attached storage
(NAS): A hard disk drive storage
device that is set up with its own
network address and provides
file-based storage services to other
devices on the network.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices
97
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

used for complex engineering simulations by over 3,000 different organiza-
tions around the world. CD-adapco has deployed more than one petabyte of
Panasas ActiveStor storage, an advanced NAS solution designed for technical
computing environments. ActiveStor is a scalable, hybrid NAS platform that
utilizes
high-capacity
hard
drives
and
solid
state
drives
in
the
same
system.22,23
Storage Area Networks
A storage area network (SAN) is a high-speed, special-purpose network that
integrates different types of data storage devices (e.g., hard disk drives, mag-
netic tape, solid state secondary storage devices) into a single storage system
and connects that to computing resources across an entire organization. See
Figure 3.7. SANs can provide important capabilities such as disk mirroring,
data backup and restore, data archiving, data migration from one storage
device to another, and the sharing of data among computing devices con-
nected to the network.
Using a SAN, an organization can centralize the people, policies, proce-
dures, and practices for managing storage, and a data storage manager can
apply the data consistently across an enterprise. This centralization eliminates
inconsistent treatment of data by different system administrators and users,
providing efficient and cost-effective data storage practices.
When the city of Riverside, California, created its “Riverside 2.0” strate-
gic plan, it set goals related to cybersecurity, disaster preparedness, and gov-
ernment transparency. To meet those goals, the city needed to upgrade its
data centers to a more flexible and scalable platform. As part of the project,
the city migrated 500 terabytes of data to a new storage infrastructure that
offered enterprise SAN performance—with almost double the previous stor-
age capacity—to support its extensive array of e-government services as
well as mission-critical applications, such as those related to public safety
and utilities.24
A fundamental difference between NAS and SAN is that NAS uses file input/
output, which defines data as complete containers of information, while SAN
deals with block input/output, which is based on subsets of data smaller than a
file. SAN manufacturers include EMC, Hitachi Data Systems Corporation,
NetApp, Xiotech, and IBM.
As organizations set up large-scale SAN systems, they use more computers
and network connections than in a NAS environment, and consequently, the
FIGURE 3.7
Storage area network
A SAN provides high-speed con-
nections among data storage
devices and computers over a
network.
Computer 1
Computer 2
Computer 3
Storage  device 1
Storage  device 2
Storage  device 3
Storage
area
network
storage area network (SAN): A
high-speed, special-purpose network
that integrates different types of data
storage devices (e.g., hard disk drives,
magnetic tape, solid state secondary
storage devices) into a single storage
system and connects that to computing
resources across an entire
organization.
98
PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

network can become difficult to manage. In response, software tools designed
to automate storage using previously defined policies are finding a place in
the enterprise. Known as policy-based storage management, the software
products from industry leaders such as Veritas Software Corporation, Legato
Systems, EMC, and IBM automatically allocate storage space to users, balance
the loads on servers and disks, and reroute network traffic when systems go
down—all based on policies set up by system administrators.
The trend in secondary storage is toward higher capacity, increased porta-
bility, and automated storage management. Organizations should select a type
of storage based on their needs and resources. In general, storing large
amounts of data and information and providing users with quick access make
an organization more efficient.
Storage as a Service
Storage as a service is a data storage model in which a data storage service
provider rents space to people and organizations. Users access their rented
data storage via the Internet. Such a service enables the users to store and
back up their data without requiring a major investment to create and main-
tain their own data storage infrastructure. Businesses can also choose pay-
per-use services, where they rent space on massive storage devices housed
either at a service provider (such as Hewlett-Packard or IBM) or on the custo-
mer’s premises, paying only for the amount of storage they use. This
approach makes sense for many organizations, especially those with wildly
fluctuating storage needs, such as those involved in the testing of new drugs
or in developing software.
Increasingly, individuals and organizations expect to be able to access
data, documents, databases, presentations, and spreadsheets from anywhere,
with any sort of Internet-enabled device, such as a smartphone, tablet, or lap-
top. In response to this need, numerous cloud-based storage services have
emerged, including Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud, Apple iCloud, Dropbox,
Google Drive, Microsoft SkyDrive, and Mozy. These services provide data
storage at a rate of $2 or less per gigabyte a year.
Amazon’s Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) allows subscribers to
upload, store, and download data. Amazon S3 stores subscriber data as
objects within resources it calls “buckets.” Subscribers can store as many
objects as they want within a bucket and can write to, read, and delete objects
in their bucket. Subscribers can choose to label their data private or make it
publicly accessible. Subscribers can also elect to encrypt data prior to storage,
and they can control who can create, delete, and retrieve objects in their
buckets. Subscriber data is stored on redundant servers across multiple data
centers to provide data redundancy and protect against accidental loss of data
or natural disasters.
Social media start-up, Pinterest, operates a photo-sharing Web site where
users create personalized boards with visual bookmarks—called pins—that
link back to the sites they came from. Individuals and businesses use Pinterest
to discover and save creative ideas—or to be discovered by the site’s more
than 100 million active users. The company describes itself as a visual book-
marking tool, but, perhaps more important, it also considers itself to be the
world’s first and biggest discovery engine. And with more than 50 billion
pins created since it launched in 2010, Pinterest is a data-driven company.25
The site’s infrastructure growth is fueled by its user growth, and from the
beginning, Pinterest has used Amazon Web Services, including the Amazon
S3 data storage service, where it now stores over 8 billion objects and more
than 10 petabytes of data. Pinterest logs approximately 14 terabytes of data
each day, and the Amazon S3 service offers the company the scale and flexi-
bility it requires to operate a large and rapidly growing consumer Internet
service.26–28
policy-based storage
management: The automation of
storage using previously defined
policies.
storage as a service: A data stor-
age model where a data storage ser-
vice provider rents space to individuals
and organizations.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices
99
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Input and Output Devices
Input and output devices are the gateways to the computer system—you use
them to provide data and instructions to the computer and receive results
from it. Input and output devices are part of a computer’s user interface,
which includes other hardware devices and software that allow you to interact
with a computer system.
As with other computer system components, an organization should keep
its business goals in mind when selecting input and output devices. For exam-
ple, many restaurant chains use handheld input devices or computerized
terminals that let food servers enter orders and transfer them to the kitchen
efficiently and accurately. These systems have also cut costs by helping restau-
rants track inventory and market to customers.
In general, businesses want input devices that let them accurately and
rapidly enter data into a computer system, and they want output devices that
let them produce timely results. Some organizations have very specific needs
for input and output, requiring devices that perform specific functions. The
more specialized the application, the more specialized the associated system
input and output devices.
Getting data into a computer—input—often requires transferring human-
readable data, such as a sales order, into a computer system. “Human-readable
data” means data that people can read and understand. The temperature regis-
tered on a thermometer is an example of human-readable data. An example of
machine-readable data is the universal bar code on many grocery and retail
items that indicates the stock-keeping identification number for that item. To
the human eye, the universal bar code is unintelligible and looks like a series
of vertical bars of varying thicknesses. Some data, such as magnetic ink on
bank checks, can be read by people and machines. Usually, people begin the
input process by organizing human-readable data and transforming it into
machine-readable data. Every keystroke on a keyboard, for example, turns a
letter symbol of a human language into a digital code that the machine can
manipulate.
Data Entry and Input
Getting data into the computer system is a two-stage process. First, the
human-readable data is converted into a machine-readable form through
data entry. The second stage involves transferring the machine-readable data
into the system. This is data input.
Today, many companies use online data entry and input: They communi-
cate and transfer data to computer devices directly connected to the computer
system. Online data entry and input place data into the computer system in a
matter of seconds. Organizations in many industries require the instantaneous
updating offered by this approach. For example, when ticket agents for a con-
cert venue enter a request for tickets, they can use online data entry and input
to record the request as soon as it is made. Ticket agents at other terminals
can then access this data to make a seating check before they process another
request.
Source Data Automation
Regardless of how data gets into the computer, it should be captured and edi-
ted at its source. Source data automation involves capturing and editing data
where it is originally created and in a form that can be directly entered into a
computer, thus ensuring accuracy and timeliness. For example, using source
data automation, salespeople enter sales orders into the computer at the time
and place they take the orders. Any errors can be detected and corrected
immediately. If an item is temporarily out of stock, the salesperson can dis-
cuss options with the customer. Prior to source data automation, orders were
data entry: Converting human-
readable data into a machine-readable
form.
data input: Transferring machine-
readable data into the system.
source data automation: Captur-
ing and editing data where it is initially
created and in a form that can be
directly entered into a computer, thus
ensuring accuracy and timeliness.
100 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

written on paper and entered into the computer later (usually by a clerk, not
by the person who took the order). Often the handwritten information wasn’t
legible or, worse yet, order forms were lost. If problems occurred during data
entry, the clerk had to contact the salesperson or the customer to “recap-
ture” the data needed for order entry, leading to further delays and customer
dissatisfaction.
Data entry and input devices come in many forms. They range from special-
purpose devices that capture specific types of data to more general-purpose
input devices. Some of the special-purpose data entry and input devices are dis-
cussed later in this chapter. First, we focus on devices used to enter and input
general types of data, including text, audio, images, and video for personal
computers.
Common Personal Computer Input Devices
A keyboard and a computer mouse are common devices used for entry and
input of data, such as characters, text, and basic commands. Some compa-
nies
manufacture
keyboards
that
are
more
comfortable,
more
easily
adjusted, and faster to use than standard keyboards. These ergonomic key-
boards, such as the split keyboard, are designed to help users avoid wrist
and hand injuries caused by hours of typing. Other keyboards include
touch pads, which let you enter sketches on the touch pad while still using
keys to enter text. See Figure 3.8. A mouse is used to point to and click
symbols, icons, menus, and commands on the screen. The computer takes a
number of actions in response, such as entering data into the computer sys-
tem. Wireless mice and keyboards help keep a physical desktop free from
clutter.
Speech-Recognition Technology
Using speech-recognition technology, a computer can interpret human
speech as an alternative means of providing data or instructions. The most
basic systems are designed to support a limited conversation on a fixed topic.
For example, your insurance provider may employ a speech-recognition sys-
tem to support calls to its billing department. The scope of the conversation
is very limited, and the caller is guided to make one of a few possible and
very distinct responses. For example, a typical prompt is “Do you wish to
inquire about your monthly bill or make a payment?” More advanced systems
can recognize continuous speech and convert it to text such as in closed-
caption live TV broadcasts, sometimes with amusing results when key words
are not properly converted to text.
Nurses at the Hudson Valley Heart Center in Poughkeepsie, New York, now
use speech-recognition technology to record all of their patient history and prog-
ress notes, physical exam results, and discharge summaries. The software, which
makes use of natural language-processing technology, automatically updates the
FIGURE 3.8
Drawing pad and integrated
keyboard
A drawing pad and integrated
keyboard can replace a traditional
keyboard and mouse for input.
speech-recognition
technology : Input devices that
recognize human speech.
iStockphoto.com/Fotostorm
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 101
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

hospital’s electronic health record (EHR) system when a nurse adds new informa-
tion for a patient. The hospital expects the new system to cut down on the
amount of time nurses spend on documentation (currently estimated at 19 per-
cent of their day, nationally).29
Motion-Sensing Input Devices
The major video game makers Microsoft, Nintendo, and Sony all have game
controllers based on motion-sensing input devices. Kinect is a motion-sensing
input device that enables the user to control the Microsoft Xbox as well as
computers running the Windows operating system. The sensor is a horizontal
bar positioned above or below the video display. It includes a Webcam-style
device that interprets the user’s hand gestures as instructions to quickly swipe
through home screens and apps. The Wii Remote is the primary controller for
Nintendo’s Wii console. It can sense motion in all three dimensions and has
an optical sensor that enables it to determine where the Wii Remote is point-
ing. This allows the user to interact with and manipulate items on the video
screen via gestures and pointing. PlayStation Move is the motion-sensing
game controller from Sony Computer Entertainment. It employs a handheld
motion controller wand with sensors that detect its motion and a Webcam to
track its position. These manufacturers hope that their motion-sensing input
devices will broaden their user base beyond the typical gamer and increase
their market share. However, such input devices may also prove useful in the
operation of business information systems.
Scanning Devices
Scanning devices capture image and character data. A page scanner is like a
copy machine. You either insert a page into the scanner or place it face down
on the glass plate of the scanner and then scan it. With a handheld scanner,
you manually move or roll the scanning device over the image you want to
scan. Both page and handheld scanners can convert monochrome or color
pictures, forms, text, and other images into machine-readable digits. Consider-
ing that U.S. enterprises generate an estimated 1 billion pieces of paper daily,
many companies are looking to scanning devices to help them manage their
documents and reduce the high cost of using and processing paper.
The NeatReceipt filing system is a compact, portable scanner and associ-
ated software that enable the user to scan business cards and convert them
into digital contacts. NeatReceipt can also scan receipts to convert them into
records of vendors and amounts that can be used for tax preparation.30
Optical Data Readers
Individuals and organizations can also use a special scanning device called an
optical data reader to scan documents. The two categories of optical data
readers are optical mark recognition (OMR) and optical character recognition
(OCR). OMR readers are used for tasks such as grading tests and scanning
forms. With this technology, pencils are used to fill in bubbles or check
boxes on OMR paper, which is also called a “mark sense form.” OMR systems
are used in standardized tests, including the SAT and GMAT tests, and to
record votes in elections.
In contrast, most OCR readers use reflected light to recognize and scan
various machine-generated characters. With special software, OCR readers
can also convert handwritten or typed documents into digital data. After data
is entered, it can be shared, modified, and distributed over computer net-
works to hundreds or thousands of people. Previously, the use of OCR tech-
nology required a special scanner device that creates an image of the
characters to be converted. Expensive OCR software was then required to
convert that image into text. However, it is now possible to complete this pro-
cess using the camera in an Android smartphone or tablet. Once the image is
102 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

stored on the camera or tablet, you use the Google Drive app for Android to
copy the image to Google Drive, where Google’s software and servers will do
the OCR conversion at no cost.
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR) Devices
In the 1950s, the banking industry was becoming swamped with paper
checks, loan applications, bank statements, and so on. The result was the
development of magnetic ink character recognition (MICR), a system for
reading banking data quickly. With MICR, data is placed on the bottom of a
check or other form using a special magnetic ink. Using a special character
set, data printed with this ink is readable by both people and computers.
See Figure 3.9.
Magnetic Stripe Cards
A magnetic stripe card stores a limited amount of data by modifying the
magnetism of tiny iron-based particles contained in a band on the card. The
magnetic stripe is read by physically swiping the card at a terminal. For this
reason, such cards are called contact cards. Magnetic stripes are commonly
used in credit cards, transportation tickets, and driver’s licenses.
Magnetic stripe technology is still in wide use in the U.S. credit card
industry. The data encoded on the magnetic stripe on the back of the card
is read by swiping the card past a magnetic reading head. To protect the
consumer, businesses in the United States have invested in extensive com-
puter networks for verifying and processing this data. Software at the point-
of-sale (POS) terminal automatically dials a stored telephone number to call
an acquirer, an organization that collects credit-authentication requests from
merchants and provides the merchants with a payment guarantee. When the
acquirer company receives the credit-card authentication request, it checks
the transaction for validity by reading the card number, expiration date, and
credit card limit recorded on the magnetic stripe. If everything checks out,
the authorization is granted. Should it later be discovered that the credit
card was stolen or bogus, the merchant and the bank that partnered with
the merchant are liable for the loss. The merchant loses the value of any
goods or services sold plus the transaction fee associated with processing
the sale. If the bank that issued the card does not have a charge-back right
then, the bank bears the loss and the merchant is covered for the cost of the
goods and services.
Unfortunately, the magnetic stripe is not a secure place for sensitive con-
sumer information. The magnetic stripes on traditional credit and debit cards
store contain unchanging data. Whoever accesses that data gains the sensitive
card and cardholder information necessary to make purchases. The data on
the stripe can be lifted from an existing card and copied onto a new card and
used to make fraudulent purchases. Almost half of the world’s credit card
fraud now happens in the United States—even though only a quarter of all
credit card transactions happen here.31
An employee of an Apple store in Queens, New York, was arrested and
charged with using fraudulent credit cards to buy almost $1 million worth of
FIGURE 3.9
MICR device
Magnetic ink character recognition
technology codes data on the bot-
tom of a check or other form using
special magnetic ink, which is read-
able by people and computers.
magnetic stripe card: A type of
card that stores a limited amount of
data by modifying the magnetism of tiny
iron-based particles contained in a
band on the card.
Okili77/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 103
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Apple gift cards. The man sold each $2,000 Apple gift card to a third party for
$200. When he was arrested, the alleged fraudster was in possession of more
than 50 American Express and Visa gift, debit, and prepaid credit cards with
re-encoded magnetic stripes.32
Chip Cards
Credit cards with only magnetic stripes are finally being phased out in the
United States. After October 1, 2015, a liability shift occurred—merchants
who accept payments made via a chip card’s magnetic stripe can continue to
do so, however, they must accept responsibility for any fraudulent purchases.
This provides a strong incentive for merchants to move to new payment term-
inals that accept the chip card.
Credit cards with chips employ the EMV (Europay, Mastercard, Visa)
global standard for enabling chip cards to work at point-of-sale systems and
automated teller machines. Unlike with magnetic stripe cards, every time an
EMV card is used for payment, the card chip creates a unique transaction
code that can never be used again. If a hacker somehow steals the chip infor-
mation from one specific point of sale, typical card duplication will not work
because the stolen transaction number created in that instance is not usable
again and the card would just get denied.
Smart Cards
Most European countries use smart card technology. Smart cards are embed-
ded with computer chips containing key consumer and account data. Smart
card users must either enter their PIN (chip-and-PIN) or sign (chip-and-sign)
for each transaction to be approved. The smart cards require different term-
inals from those used for magnetic stripe cards. All the information needed
for authorization is contained in the chip or is captured at the point-of-sale.
With smart cards, merchants do not need to send data over networks to
obtain authorization.33
Contactless Payment Cards
Contactless payment cards contain an embedded chip and antenna that
enables the consumer to simply hold the card close to a terminal to transfer
the data necessary to make a payment. Typically, no signature or PIN entry
is required for purchases less than $25, making transactions speedier than
payments made by conventional credit or debit card or even cash. Contact-
less payment cards are ideal in situations where the consumer must make a
fast payment, such as when boarding a form of mass transportation; how-
ever, some observers are concerned that it is relatively easy to scan details
from contactless cards. During 2014, in the United Kingdom, where this
form of payment is very popular, some 58 million contactless cards were
used to make 15.8 billion transactions totaling £802 billion ($1.23 trillion),
for an average transaction of £50.75 ($78.16).34 American Express Expres-
sPay, ExonMobile SpeedPass, MasterCard PayPass, and Visa PayWave are
contactless payment cards used in the United States.
Point-of-Sale Devices
Point-of-sale (POS) devices are devices used to capture data. They are fre-
quently used in retail operations to enter sales information into computer
systems. The POS device computes the total charges, including tax. In med-
ical settings, POS devices are often used for remote monitoring in hospitals,
clinics, laboratories, doctors’ offices, and patients’ homes. With network-
enabled POS equipment, medical professionals can instantly get an update
on the patient’s condition from anywhere at any time via a network or the
Internet. POS devices use various types of input and output devices, such
as keyboards, bar-code readers, scanning devices, printers, and screens.
smart card: A credit card
embedded with a computer chip that
contains key consumer and account
data; smart card users must either
enter their PIN (chip-and-PIN) or sign
(chip-and-sign) for each transaction to
be approved.
contactless payment card: A
card with an embedded chip that only
needs to be held close to a terminal to
transfer its data; no PIN number needs
to be entered.
point-of-sale (POS) device:
A device used to enter data into a
computer system.
104 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Much of the money that businesses spend on computer technology involves
POS devices.
Many restaurants, bars, and retail shops are switching from traditional
cash registers and costly credit card terminals to simpler devices that plug
into smartphones and tablets. For example, a device called the Square Stand
includes a built-in card reader that connects to an iPad and a hub device that
connects to accessories, including a cash drawer, receipt printer, and scanner.
With this device, a small retailer can have a cash register that keeps track of
inventory and provides instant sales analysis for the cost of an iPad and $450
for the Square Stand, printer, and cash drawer, plus a per-transaction fee of
2.75 percent. PayPal and Groupon also offer similar devices.35
Automated Teller Machine (ATM) Devices
The automated teller machine (ATM), another type of special-purpose input/
output device, is a terminal that bank customers use to perform transactions
with their bank accounts. Other types of companies also use various ATM
devices, sometimes called kiosks, to support their business processes. Some
can dispense tickets, such as for airlines, concerts, and soccer games. Some
colleges use them to produce transcripts.
Bar-Code Scanners
A bar-code scanner employs a laser scanner to read a bar-coded label and
pass the data to a computer. The bar-code reader may be stationary or hand-
held to support a wide variety of uses. This form of input is used widely in
store checkouts and warehouse inventory control. Bar codes are also used in
hospitals, where a nurse scans a patient’s wristband and then a bar code on
the medication about to be administered to prevent medication errors.
Several companies have created applications that convert a cell phone
camera into a bar-code reader. You can scan a bar code from a print ad, pack-
aging, or label to launch Web sites and buy items with a few clicks.
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Devices
Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a technology that employs a
microchip with an antenna to broadcast its unique identifier and location to
receivers. The purpose of an RFID system is to transmit data by a mobile
device, called a tag (see Figure 3.10), which is read by an RFID reader and
processed according to the needs of a computer program. One popular appli-
cation of RFID is to place microchips on retail items and install in-store read-
ers that track the inventory on the shelves to determine when shelves should
be restocked. The RFID tag chip includes a special form of EPROM memory
that holds data about the item to which the tag is attached. A radio frequency
FIGURE 3.10
RFID tag
An RFID tag is small compared with
current bar-code labels used to
identify items.
radio frequency identification
(RFID): A technology that employs a
microchip with an antenna to broadcast
its unique identifier and location to
receivers.
iStockphoto.com/albln
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 105
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

signal can update this memory as the status of the item changes. The data
transmitted by the tag might provide identification, location information, or
details about the product tagged, such as date of manufacture, retail price,
color, or date of purchase.
Target Corporation is slowly rolling out RFID technology in its stores,
starting with key vendors in high-priority categories, such as women’s and
kids’ apparel and home décor. The retailer will use RFID smart labels
attached to price tags in an effort that is expected to help the company
improve inventory accuracy throughout its supply chain and better fulfill
orders placed on its Web site for store pickup.36,37 In a separate, small-scale
RFID-enabled trial, Target utilized RFID-tag lanyards in its pop-up holiday
store in New York City during the 2015 holiday shopping season. Visitors to
the temporary store were given lanyards outfitted with RFID tags, which
they could scan next to any product they wished to purchase. Shoppers
then checked out using a digital shopping cart and received their product at
the front of the shop. Although this trial was extremely limited (involving
just 16 different products), it allowed Target to begin testing the concept of
cartless shopping, which the retailer sees as a way to generate new sales
and compete with online shopping sites.38
Pen Input Devices
By touching the screen with a pen input device, you can activate a command
or cause the computer to perform a task, enter handwritten notes, and draw
objects and figures. Pen input requires special software and hardware. Hand-
writing recognition software, for example, converts onscreen handwriting
into text. Many tablet computers can transform handwriting into typed text
and store the “digital ink” just the way a person writes it. People can use a
pen to write and send email, add comments to documents, mark up presenta-
tions, and even hand draw charts in a document. The data can then be
moved, highlighted, searched, and converted into text. If perfected, this inter-
face is likely to become widely used. Pen input is especially attractive to peo-
ple who are uncomfortable using a keyboard. The success of pen input
depends on how accurately and at what cost handwriting can be read and
translated into digital form.
Touch Screens
Advances in screen technology allow display screens to function as input as
well as output devices. By touching certain parts of a touch-sensitive screen,
you can start a program or trigger other types of action. Touch screens can
remove the need for a keyboard, which conserves space and increases porta-
bility. Touch screens are frequently used at gas stations to allow customers to
select grades of gas and request a receipt; on photocopy machines for select-
ing options; at fast-food restaurants for entering customer choices; at informa-
tion centers for finding facts about local eating and drinking establishments;
and at amusement parks to provide directions to patrons. They also are used
in kiosks at airports and department stores. Touch screens are also being
used for gathering votes in elections.
As touch screens get smaller, the user’s fingers begin to block the infor-
mation on the display. Nanotouch technology is being explored as a means
of overcoming this problem. With this technology, users control the touch
screen from its backside so that fingers do not block the display. As the
user’s finger moves on the back of the display, a tiny graphical finger is pro-
jected onto the touch screen. Such displays are useful for mobile audio
players that are about the size of a coin.
Application developers are busy trying to find ways to take advantage of
Apple’s 3D Touch feature, which the company introduced in the fall of 2015
with its iPhone 6s smartphone. 3D Touch uses a pressure-sensitive touch
106 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

screen that measures how forcefully you press down on the screen. The new
feature adds “peek” and “pop” gestures to the tap, swipe, and pinch gestures
with which most smartphone users are familiar. 3D Touch is designed to
bring a new dimension of functionality to the iPhone, allowing users to both
see and feel what a press can do.39 OpenTable, an online restaurant-
reservation and review service, has included 3D Touch features in the latest
version of its iPhone apps. Users can 3D Touch the app’s icon to quickly
view favorited restaurants and upcoming reservations. Within the app, users
can “peek” at a restaurant’s details by pressing lightly on the name of the res-
taurant in a list of search results. Swiping up offers the ability to instantly see
available reservation times, and pressing harder on a restaurant name “pops”
a user to the restaurant’s full profile.40
Output Devices
Computer systems provide output to decision makers at all levels of an orga-
nization so they can solve a business problem or capitalize on a competitive
opportunity. In addition, output from one computer system can provide input
into another computer system. The desired form of this output might be
visual, audio, or even digital. Whatever the output’s content or form, output
devices are designed to provide the right information to the right person in
the right format at the right time.
Display Screens
The display screen is a device used to show the output from the computer.
Today a variety of flat-panel display screens are far lighter and thinner than
the traditional cathode-ray tubes (CRTs) associated with early computers.
Table 3.4 compares types of flat-panel display screens.
With today’s wide selection of display screens, price and overall quality
can vary tremendously. The quality of a screen image is largely determined
by the number of horizontal and vertical pixels used to create it. The images
shown on your display device are composed of a million or more pixels. Res-
olution is the total number of pixels contained in the display; the more pixels,
the clearer and sharper the image. A common resolution is 2,040 horizontal
pixels × 1,536 vertical pixels. The size of the display monitor also affects the
quality of the viewing. The same pixel resolution on a small screen is sharper
TABLE 3.4 Various types of flat-panel displays
Type
Description
Noteworthy Feature
Liquid crystal display (LCD)
Uses several layers of charged liquid crys-
tals placed between clear plates that are lit
from behind by a fluorescent light to create
light and images
The viewing angle tends to be worse than
that of plasma displays
Light-emitting diode (LED)
An LCD display that uses light-emitting
diodes (LEDs) as backlight on the screen
rather than a fluorescent lamp
Provides better contrast and lower
energy consumption than LCDs
Organic light-emitting
diode (OLED)
Functions by exciting organic compounds
with electric current to produce bright,
sharp images
Does not employ a backlight, which
enables improved contrast and lower
power consumption than LCD and LED
LCD displays
Plasma
Uses electricity to excite gas atoms to light
up appropriate phosphors on the screen to
emit light and color
Performs well in dark conditions but not
as well in well-lit rooms
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 107
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

than on a larger screen, where the same number of pixels is spread out over a
larger area.
The computer graphics card takes binary data from the CPU and trans-
lates it into an image you see on your display device. It is the computer gra-
phics card that controls the quality of the image and determines how many
display devices can be attached to the computer. The computer graphics card
holds the graphics processing unit (GPU), a powerful processing chip that
renders images on the display screen. After the computer graphics card takes
binary data from the CPU, the GPU decides what to do with each pixel on
the screen to create the image. As the GPU creates images, it uses RAM on
the graphics card (called video RAM or VRAM) to store data about each pixel,
including its color and location on the screen. One measure of a video card’s
performance is how many complete images the card can display per second,
which is called the frame rate. The human eye can process roughly 25 frames
per second; however, many video games require a frame rate of at least 60
frames per second to provide a good user experience.41
Because many users leave their computers on for hours at a time, power
usage is an important factor when deciding which type of display to pur-
chase. Although power usage varies from model to model, OLED displays are
the most energy efficient, with LCD monitors generally consuming between
35 and 50 percent less power than plasma screens.
Aspect ratio and screen size describe the size of the display screen. Aspect
ratio is the ratio of the width of the display to its height. The aspect ratio of
width to height of 4:3 or 5:4 is good for people who use their computer to
view or create Web pages or documents. Widescreen displays typically have
an aspect ratio of 16:10 or 16:9 to allow improved viewing of movies and
video games.
Companies are competing on the innovation frontier to create thinner,
lighter, flexible, and more durable display devices for computers, cell phones,
and other mobile devices. LG Display, a leading manufacturer of LCD and
OLED displays, recently unveiled prototypes for a 55-inch double-sided OLED
display that is just 5.3 mm thick, as well as a flexible 1-mm thick “wallpaper”
OLED display that can be attached to the wall using a magnetic mat. The com-
pany also has working prototypes for a transparent display and one that can
be rolled up like a newspaper. According to LG, its innovative OLED displays
are flexible enough to curve around corners and are almost impossible to
break.42,43 Many of these displays are still in development as LG works
through the complex manufacturing processes involved. In the meantime, the
company is investing over $8 billion to build a new display panel manufactur-
ing facility that is expected to be up and running in 2018.44
Printers and Plotters
One of the most useful and common forms of output is called hard copy,
which is simply paper output from a printer. The two main types of printers
are laser printers and inkjet printers, and they are available with different
speeds, features, and capabilities. Some can be set up to accommodate paper
forms, such as blank check forms and invoice forms. Newer printers allow
businesses to create full-color, customized, and individualized printed output
using standard paper and data input. Ticket-receipt printers, such as those
used in restaurants, ATMs, and point-of-sale systems are in wide-scale use.
The speed of a printer is typically measured by the number of pages
printed per minute (ppm). Similar to a display screen, the quality, or resolu-
tion, of a printer’s output depends on the number of dots printed per inch
(dpi). A 600-dpi printer prints more clearly than a 300-dpi printer. A recurring
cost of using a printer is the inkjet or laser cartridge that must be replaced
periodically—every few thousand pages for laser printers and every 500 to
900 pages for inkjet printers.
computer graphics card: A
component of a computer that takes
binary data from the CPU and
translates it into an image you see
on your display device.
graphics processing unit (GPU):
A powerful processing chip that renders
images on the screen display.
108 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Inkjet printers that can print 10 to 40 ppm for black-and-white output and
5 to 20 ppm for color output are available for less than $175. With an initial
cost much less than color laser printers, inkjet printers can print vivid hues
and can produce high-quality banners, graphics, greeting cards, letters, text,
and photo prints.
Laser printers are generally faster than inkjet printers and can handle a
heavier print load volume. A monochrome laser printer can print 25 to 45
ppm and cost anywhere from $200 to $700. Color laser printers can print
color pages at a rate of 10 to 35 ppm and are available in a wide range of
prices—from $350 to more than $3,500 for a high-quality color laser printer.
A number of manufacturers offer multiple-function printers that can
copy, print (in color or black and white), fax, and scan. Such multifunctional
devices are often used when people need to do a relatively low volume of
copying, printing, faxing, and scanning. Typical prices for multifunction
printers range from $100 to $400, depending on features and capabilities.
Because these devices take the place of more than one piece of equipment,
they are less expensive to acquire and maintain than a stand-alone fax plus a
stand-alone printer, copier, and so on. Also, eliminating equipment that was
once located on a countertop or desktop clears a workspace for other work-
related activities. As a result, such devices are popular in homes and small
office settings.
Mobile print solutions enable users to wirelessly send documents, email
messages and attachments, presentations, and even boarding passes from any
smartphone, tablet, or laptop to any mobile-enabled printer in the world. For
example, PrinterOn Enterprise enables any print requests from any mobile or
fixed device to be routed to any of over 10,000 printers worldwide that are
configured with the PrinterOn Enterprise service. Mobile users who use the
service only need to access a directory of PrinterOn printers and locations
and then send an email with the attachment to be printed to the email address
of the printer. American Airlines Admiral Club, Delta Sky Club, Embassy
Suites, and DoubleTree by Hilton have installed PrinterOn printers at many of
their locations.45
Plotters are a type of hard-copy output device used for general design
work. Businesses typically use plotters to generate paper or acetate blue-
prints, schematics, and drawings of buildings or new products. Standard plot
widths are 24 inches and 36 inches, and the length can be whatever meets the
need—from a few inches to many feet.
3D Printers
3D printers have created a major breakthrough in how many items will be
“manufactured.” See Figure 3.11. 3D printing technology takes a three-
dimensional model of an object stored on a computer and sends it to a 3D
printer to create the object using strands of a plastic filament or synthetic
powder. The filament comes in spools of various colors and is fed through a
heated extruder that moves in several directions to place super thin layers on
top of each other. The stacks are then bonded together, often using ultraviolet
light, to create a 3D object. 3D printers come with a wide range of capabilities
in terms of how fast they can build objects and how large of an object they
can build. 3D printers for home use typically run $1,000 and up, while com-
mercial 3D printers can cost tens of thousands of dollars.46
3D printing is commonly used by aerospace firms, auto manufacturers,
and other design-intensive companies. It is especially valuable during the con-
ceptual stage of engineering design when the exact dimensions and material
strength of the prototype are not critical. Some architectural design firms are
using 3D printers to create full color models of their projects to show clients.
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital uses 3D printing to create models of patients’
hearts so that physicians can plan their surgery.47
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 109
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The automotive, electronics, and toy industries are early adopters of using
3D printing to improve upon traditional manufacturing processes. Ford Motor
Company used 3D printing to design the new engine cover of its next-
generation Mustang. Following traditional methods, an engineer would first
create a computer model and then wait for about four months for a prototype
to be produced, at a cost of $500,000. Using 3D printing, Ford can print the
prototype in just four days at a cost of only $3,000.48 A drag racing enthusiast
created a remote control dragster capable of going 202 mph using 3D
printing.49
3D printing can cut costs and reduce the waste and carbon footprint asso-
ciated with traditional manufacturing. With 3D printing, production and
assembly can be local, with no need to ship products thousands of miles to
their destination. Only the raw materials needed to create the object—be it
carbon fiber, metal powder, plastic filament, or some other substance—are
used. Product parts can be replaced using parts manufactured with 3D print-
ing so the entire product doesn’t have to be disposed of and replaced each
time it malfunctions.50
Biomedical engineers are exploring a process called bioprinting, which
uses 3D printers to build human parts and organs from actual human cells.
For example, bioprinting is being used to create custom breast implants and
grafts for cancer patients using the recipient’s own fat and skin cells.51 Regen-
erative medicine pioneer Organovo is able to build blood vessels and cardiac
tissue via a 3D printer that dispenses cells instead of ink. The firm plans to
begin selling 3D printed liver tissue.52
Digital Audio Players
A digital audio player is a device that can store, organize, and play digital
music files. MP3 (MPEG-1 Audio Layer-3) is a popular format for compressing
a sound sequence into a very small file while preserving the original level of
sound quality when it is played. By compressing the sound file, it requires
less time to download the file and less storage space on a hard drive.
You can use many different music devices smaller than a deck of cards to
download music from the Internet and other sources. These devices have no
moving parts and can store hours of music. Apple first moved into the digital
music market with its iPod MP3 player in 2001. In 2003, it launched its iTunes
Music Store, where users can find music online, preview it, and download it
FIGURE 3.11
3D printer
3D print technology is making it
possible to print objects ranging
from everyday objects to houses.
bioprinting: The use of 3D printers to
build human parts and organs from
actual human cells.
digital audio player: A device that
can store, organize, and play digital
music files.
MP3: A standard format for compres-
sing a sound sequence into a small file.
dreamnikon/iStock/Getty Images
110 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
in a way that is safe, legal, and affordable. Other MP3 manufacturers include
Dell, Sony, Samsung, Iomega, Creative, and Motorola, whose Rokr product
was the first iTunes-compatible phone. Today, you can use your smartphone
to view YouTube videos, buy music online, check email, and more.
E-Book Readers
The digital media equivalent of a conventional printed book is called an
e-book (short for electronic book). The Project Gutenberg Online Book Cata-
log offers over 50,000 free e-books and a total of over 100,000 e-books avail-
able. E-books can be downloaded from many sites, including the Project
Gutenberg site (www.gutenberg.org), onto personal computers or dedicated
hardware devices known as e-book readers. The devices cost anywhere from
around $60 to $350, and users typically pay between $10 and $20 to down-
load electronic versions of the best-selling books. E-book readers usually
have the capacity to store thousands of books. The most current Amazon.com
Kindle, Kobo Aura, Barnes & Noble Nook e-readers have e-paper displays that
look like printed pages. A typical e-reader weighs less than three-quarters of a
pound, is around one-half inch thick, and comes with a display screen rang-
ing from 5 to 8 inches in size. Thus, these readers are more compact than
most paperbacks and can be easily held in one hand. More recent versions of
e-book readers display content in 16 million colors and high resolution. On
many e-readers, the size of the text can be magnified for readers with poor
vision.
Choosing Your Next Computer
You are looking for the latest and greatest portable computer to replace your five-
year old laptop. You will use this computer for both work and personal comput-
ing tasks—everything from creating documents, spreadsheets, and presentations
to surfing the Web and editing videos of your friends and family. You want a
computer that is powerful, lightweight, and comes with a long battery life.
Review Questions
1.
Should you purchase a computer with an x86 processor, an Intel Atom
processor, or an ARM processor? What are the pros and cons of each type of
processor? Will you want a multicore processor? Why or why not?
2.
What sort of main memory and cache memory should you seek?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What sort of secondary storage devices would most economically meet your
needs?
2.
Which input and output devices would be most useful to you?
Computer System Types
In general, computers can be classified as either special purpose or general
purpose. Special-purpose computers are used for limited applications, for
example, by military, government, and scientific research groups such as
the CIA and NASA. Other applications include specialized processors found
in appliances, cars, and other products. For example, automobile repair
shops connect special-purpose computers to your car’s engine to identify
specific performance problems. As another example, IBM is developing a
new generation of computer chips to develop so-called cognitive computers
that are designed to mimic the way the human brain works. Rather than
e-book: The digital media equivalent
of a conventional printed book.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 111
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

being programmed as today’s computers are, cognitive computers, such as
IBM’s Watson computer, are able to learn through experiences and out-
comes and mimic human learning patterns.
General-purpose computers are used for a variety of applications,
including the business applications discussed in this text. General-purpose
computer systems can be divided into two major groups: systems used by
one user at a time and systems used by multiple concurrent users. Table 3.5
shows the general ranges of capabilities for various types of computer
systems.
TABLE 3.5 Types of computer systems
Single-user computer systems can be divided into two groups: portable computers and nonportable computers.
Single-User Computers
Portable Computers
Factor
Smartphone
Laptop
Notebook/Ultrabook
Tablet
Cost
$150–$1,000
$300–$3,000
$300–$800
$75–$1,500
Weight (pounds)
<0.5
<6
<3
<2
Screen size
(inches)
2–5.5
<20
<12
<13
Typical use
Combines a cell
phone with a hand-
held computer; run
apps and text mes-
saging services;
access network and
the Internet
wirelessly
Run worker
productivity
software, access the
Internet, play
games, listen to
music, and watch
videos
Smaller version of a
laptop, with sufficient
processing power to
run nearly every busi-
ness application
Capture data at the
point of contact,
read email, access
the Internet, read
e-books, view
photos, play
games, listen to
music, and watch
videos
Nonportable Computers
Factor
Thin Client
Desktop
Nettop
Workstation
Cost
$200–$500
$500–$3,000
$150–$350
$1,500–$9,500
Weight (pounds)
<3
20–30
<5
<20–35
Typical use
Enter data and
access applications
via the Internet; can
be portable or non-
portable
Run worker pro-
ductivity software,
access the Internet,
play games, listen to
music, and watch
videos
Small, limited capacity
desktop computer;
performs basic tasks
such as Internet surf-
ing, accessing Web-
based applications,
document processing,
and audio/video play-
back[
Powerful desktop
capable of per-
forming engineer-
ing, computer
aided design, and
software develop-
ment functions
Multiple-user computer systems include servers, mainframes, and supercomputers.
Multiple-User Computers
Factor
Server
Mainframe
Supercomputer
Cost
>$500
>$75,000
>$250,000
Weight (pounds)
>25
>100
>100
Typical use
Execute network
and Internet
applications
Execute computing tasks for
large organizations and provide
massive data storage
Run scientific applications; per-
form intensive number crunching
112 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Portable Computers
Many computer manufacturers offer a variety of portable computers, those
that are small enough to carry easily. Portable computers include wearable
computers, smartphones, laptops, notebooks, ultrabooks, and tablets.
Wearable Computers
A wearable computer is an electronic device capable of storing and proces-
sing data that is incorporated into a person’s clothing or personal accesso-
ries. Companies like Apple, FitBit, Google, Huawei, LG, Pebble, Samsung,
Sony, TomTom, Xiaomi, and others offer health-tracking wrist bands or
smart watches that can capture a wide range of data, including distance cov-
ered, elevation climbed, pace, calories burned, continuous heart rate, and
quality of sleep. Most can also display call and text notifications and enable
one to control songs from a mobile playlist. These products cost anywhere
from $75 to $750.
Around one-half to two-thirds of U.S. employers with 15 or more workers
have implemented some sort of employee wellness program. One-half of fit-
ness band sales in the United States are to organizations that pass these
devices along to its employees, often at no charge. Iron Mountain, the records
and data management firm, awards employees points for completing various
health- and wellness-related “challenges” that can later be converted into
cash. One challenge requires employees to connect a wearable device to a
computer portal and walk one million steps in a year.53
Chinese researchers have developed an e-skin that is just a few atoms
thick so it can press close to the skin. The e-skin contains all the sensors
needed to track and broadcast the wearer’s blood pressure, pulse, and other
vital measurements. The developers are hoping the material can be used to
provide instant health assessment and real-time patient diagnoses.54
The Mi.Mu is a high-tech glove designed to ease the creation of music
using computers and other technology through gestures, enabling musicians
to avoid cumbersome dials and computer screens. When wearing the gloves,
an upward movement of the hand raises the pitch, extending an index finger
adds some reverb, and snapping your palm shut silences everything.55 Google
is partnering with Levi Strauss & Co to make conductive yarn that can be
woven into garments to enable touch and gesture interactivity that would
allow wearers to do things like press their sleeve to turn a light on or activate
their smartphone to make a call.56
Smartphones
While features and capabilities vary from model to model and manufacturer to
manufacturer, with most smartphones you can place calls, download and run
apps (e.g., games, a contact list manager, and personal and business finance
managers), send and receive text messages and email, view documents and
files, take and send photos and videos, get driving directions via GPS, browse
Web sites, and create a playlist of digital tunes. Smartphones employ a combi-
nation chipset called a “system on a chip,” which includes processor cores,
RAM and ROM memory, interface controllers and voltage regulators, as
shown in Figure 3.12. With system on a chip, all the critical components of
the smartphone are located in a relatively small area, making the device faster
and more energy efficient and reducing assembly costs.
Mobile Computers
A laptop is a personal computer designed for use by mobile users, being
small and light enough to sit comfortably on a user’s lap. Laptops use a vari-
ety of flat-panel technologies to produce lightweight and thin display screens
with good resolution. In terms of computing power, laptops can match most
portable computer: A computer
small enough to carry easily.
wearable computer: An electronic
device capable of storing and proces-
sing data that is incorporated into a
person’s clothing or personal
accessories.
laptop: A personal computer
designed for use by mobile users,
being small and light enough to sit
comfortably on a user’s lap.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 113
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

desktop computers as they come with powerful CPUs as well as large-capacity
primary memory and disk storage. This type of computer is highly popular
among students and mobile workers who carry their laptops on trips and to
meetings and classes. Most personal computer users now prefer a laptop
over a desktop because of its portability, lower energy usage, and smaller
space requirements.
Numerous portable computers are smaller than the typical laptop and
have various names, including notebook and the even smaller ultrabook. The
newest notebook computers come with a natural user interface, including
both voice-control integration and touch screens; high-quality display screens;
always-on, always-connected capabilities; all-day battery life; and processing
power sufficient to run most business applications and games.
Tablet are portable, lightweight computers that can come with or without
a keyboard and allow you to roam the office, home, or factory floor, carrying
the device like a clipboard. You can enter text with a writing stylus directly on
the screen, thanks to built-in handwriting-recognition software. Other input
methods include an onscreen keyboard and speech recognition. Tablets that
support input only via a writing stylus are called slate computers. The convert-
ible tablet PC comes with a swivel screen and can be used as a traditional note-
book or as a pen-based tablet PC. Most new tablets come with a front-facing
camera for videoconferencing and a second camera for snapshot photos and
video. Tablets are especially popular with students and gamers. They are also
frequently used in the healthcare, retail, insurance, and manufacturing indus-
tries because of their versatility.
The Apple iPad is a tablet capable of running the same software that runs
on the Apple iPhone and iPod touch devices, giving it a library of well over a
million applications. It also runs software developed specifically for the iPad.
The device supports Internet access over both wireless and cellular networks,
and it includes an onscreen keypad, although a physical keyboard can also be
attached. Apple offers a variety of iPad models, ranging from the iPad mini,
which weighs 0.73 pounds and has a 7.9-inch screen, up to the iPad Pro, which
weighs 1.5 pounds and has a 12.9-inch screen.
A number of computer companies offer tablets to compete with Apple’s
iPad, including the Amazon Fire, the Inspiron and Venue by Dell, the Nexus
and Pixel from Google, the Tab 2 and Yoga from Lenovo, the Surface Pro
from Microsoft, the Shield from Nvidia, the Tablet S and Xperia from Sony,
the Encore and Excite by Toshiba, the Galaxy Tab and Galaxy Note from Sam-
sung (see Figure 3.13), and the low-cost (less than $75) Aakash and Ubislate
from the India-based company Quad.
Thin Clients, Desktops, and Workstations
Nonportable single-user computers include thin client computers, desktop
computers, nettop, and workstations.
FIGURE 3.12
Anatomy of a smartphone
Smartphones employ a combination
chipset called a “system on a chip,”
which includes processor cores,
RAM and ROM memory, interface
controllers, and voltage regulators.
Keyboard
Display
Microphone
Speaker
GPS
Camera
System on a chip
Memory
Modem
User Input/Output
tablet: A portable, lightweight com-
puter with no keyboard that allows you
to roam the office, home, or factory floor
carrying the device like a clipboard.
114 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A thin client is a low-cost, centrally managed computer with no internal
or external attached drives for data storage. These computers have limited
capabilities and perform only essential applications, so they remain “thin” in
terms of the client applications they include. As stripped-down computers,
they do not have the storage capacity or computing power of typical desktop
computers, nor do they need it for the role they play. With no hard disk, they
never pick up viruses or suffer a hard disk crash. Unlike personal computers,
thin clients download data and software from a network when needed, mak-
ing support, distribution, and updating of software applications much easier
and less expensive. Thin clients work well in a cloud-computing environment
to enable users to access the computing and data resources available within
the cloud. The Chromebook, which runs the Chrome OS operating system, is
a highly portable device, is widely used in many schools, and is an example
of a thin client.
As patient records within the healthcare industry have gone increasingly
digital, many healthcare providers have struggled to find new ways to ensure
that their staff have ready access to a patient’s pertinent records. Chapters
Health System, which provides post-acute, palliative, and hospice care for
patients across west-central Florida, decided to upgrade to thin client technology
in the form of Samsung Chromebooks for its staff of 140 caregivers, who fre-
quently make rounds to hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and
private home. For Chapters Health, the Chromebooks offer affordable, light-
weight, and secure access to clinical data—along with a nine-hour battery life.57
FIGURE 3.13
Tablet
The Samsung Galaxy Note 10.1
Android tablet has a large touch
screen and a quad-core processor.
thin client: A low-cost, centrally
managed computer with no internal
or external attached drives for data
storage.
iStockphoto.com/Mixmike
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 115
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Desktop computers are single-user computer systems that are highly ver-
satile. Named for their size, desktop computers can provide sufficient comput-
ing power, memory, and storage for most business computing tasks.
The Apple iMac is a family of Macintosh desktop computers first intro-
duced in 1998 in which all the components (including the CPU and the disk
drives) fit behind the display screen. Intel’s Core i7 High-end Desktop Proces-
sor family of computers has eight cores, 20 megabytes of cache memory, and
supports DDR4 memory. The CPU operates at a base clock frequency of
3.0GHz making it a popular choice for gamers.
A nettop computer is a very small, inexpensive desktop computer typi-
cally used for Internet access, email, accessing Web-based applications, docu-
ment
processing,
and
audio/video
playback.
A
key
feature
of
nettop
computers is that they require perhaps one-tenth the amount of power to
operate as a typical desktop computer.
Workstations are more powerful than personal computers but still small
enough to fit on a desktop. They are used to support engineering and techni-
cal users who perform heavy mathematical computing, computer-assisted
design (CAD), video editing, and other applications requiring a high-end pro-
cessor. Such users need very powerful CPUs, large amounts of main memory,
and extremely high-resolution graphic displays. Workstations are typically
more expensive than the average desktop computer. Some computer manu-
facturers are now providing laptop versions of their powerful desktop work-
stations. The Mac Pro is a series of workstation and server computers based
on the high performance Intel Xeon processor.
Larson & Darby Group is an architectural, engineering, interiors, and
technology design firm that uses powerful HP Z workstations to run Autodesk
AutoCAD and related software. Larson & Darby needs high-performance com-
puting to meet the challenging demands of creating 3D models and then ren-
dering those models to put design options in front of clients. If the computer
hardware runs slowly, then designers must wait for drawings to regenerate
when changes are made and this eats into design time. Reliability is also criti-
cal. Rendering can take hours on many projects and a hardware failure can
mean losing a full day’s worth of work.58
Servers, Mainframes, and Supercomputers
Servers, mainframes, and supercomputers are designed to support work-
groups from a small department of two or three workers to large organiza-
tions with tens of thousands of employees and millions of customers.
A server is a computer employed by many users to perform a specific
task, such as running network or Internet applications. While almost any
computer can run server operating system and server applications, a server
computer usually has special features that make it more suitable for operat-
ing in a multiuser environment. These features include greater memory and
storage capacities, faster and more efficient communications abilities, and
reliable backup capabilities. A Web server is one specifically designed to
handle Internet traffic and communications. An enterprise server stores and
provides access to programs that meet the needs of an entire organization.
A file server stores and coordinates program and data files. Server systems
consist of multiuser computers, including supercomputers, mainframes, and
other servers.
Servers offer great scalability, the ability to increase the processing capa-
bility of a computer system so that it can handle more users, more data, or
more transactions in a given period. Scalability is achieved by adding more,
or more powerful, processors. Scaling up adds more powerful processors,
and scaling out adds many processors to increase the total data-processing
capacity. Most new servers include onboard diagnostic capabilities that enable
desktop computer: A nonportable
computer that fits on a desktop and
provides sufficient computing power,
memory, and storage for most business
computing tasks.
nettop: A very small, inexpensive
desktop computer typically used for
Internet access, email, accessing
Web-based applications, document
processing, and audio/video playback.
workstations: A more powerful
personal computer used for mathemat-
ical computing, computer-assisted
design, and other high-end processing
but still small enough to fit on a
desktop.
server: A computer employed by
many users to perform a specific task,
such as running network or Internet
applications.
scalability: The ability to increase
the processing capability of a computer
system so that it can handle more
users, more data, or more transactions
in a given period.
116 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the server to alert the IS operations group to potential problems, a capability
that used to be only available for high-end, mainframe computers.
A mainframe computer is a large, powerful computer shared by dozens or
even hundreds of concurrent users connected to the machine over a network.
Mainframe computers have been the workhorses of corporate computing for
more than 50 years. They can support thousands of users simultaneously and can
handle all of the core functions of a corporation. Mainframe computers provide the
data-processing power and data-storage capacity that enables banks and broker-
age firms to deliver new mobile services, credit card companies to detect identity
theft, and government agencies to better serve citizens. Examples of companies
using mainframe technology include ADP, which processes payroll for millions of
employees at over 610,000 client companies; Mastercard, which manages 2 billion
accounts and tracks $4.1 trillion of spending in 150 different currencies in 210
countries around the world; and UPS, which tracks the route of 18 million
packages and documents each day in 200 countries and territories.59–61
IBM spent $1 billion and five years designing its new z13 mainframe sys-
tem, which is capable of processing 2.5 billion transactions per day. Pricing
for the z13 depends on configuration, but versions of the previous model ran
as high as $1 million.62
Radixx International operates the computerized reservation systems for 40
small and midsize airlines with 90,000 directly connected travel agents. The
reservation systems were running on a collection of 400 servers; however,
Radixx recently switched to running on IBM mainframes, reducing its total
cost of ownership by about 50 percent.63
Supercomputers are the most powerful computers with the fastest proces-
sing speed and highest performance. They are special-purpose machines
designed for applications that require extensive and rapid computational capa-
bilities. Originally, supercomputers were used primarily by government agen-
cies
to
perform
the
high-speed
number
crunching
needed
in
weather
forecasting, earthquake simulations, climate modeling, nuclear research, study
of the origin of matter and the universe, and weapons development and testing.
They are now used more broadly for commercial purposes in the life sciences
and the manufacture of drugs and new materials. For example, Procter & Gam-
ble uses supercomputers in the research and development of many of its leading
commercial brands, such as Tide and Pampers, to help develop detergent with
more soapsuds and improve the quality of its diapers. And supercomputers are
also used to help establish the safety ratings for vehicles sold in the United
States. The ratings are based on sophisticated computer simulations, during
which supercomputers crunch equations involving many different variables.
These computer-generated simulations are combined with data taken from
actual crash tests and analyzed to determine safety ratings that many consumers
use as one factor in determining which car to buy.
Most new supercomputers are based on an architecture that employs gra-
phics processing unit (GPU) chips in addition to traditional central processing
unit (CPU) chips to perform high-speed processing. The speed of supercom-
puters is measured in floating point operations per second (FLOPS). Table 3.6
lists supercomputer processing speeds.
TABLE 3.6 Supercomputer processing speeds
Speed
Meaning
GigaFLOPS
1  109 FLOPS
TeraFLOPS
1  1012 FLOPS
PetaFLOPS
1  1015 FLOPS
ExaFLOPS
1  1018 FLOPS
mainframe computer: A large,
powerful computer often shared by
hundreds of concurrent users con-
nected to the machine over a network.
supercomputers: The most power-
ful computer systems with the fastest
processing speeds.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 117
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
The fastest supercomputer in the world as of November 2015 is the
Tianhe-2 built by the National University of Defense Technology located in
Hunan Province, China. It was built at an estimated cost of about $3 billion
and is expected to be used for simulations, analysis, and government security
applications.64
Table 3.7 lists the five most powerful supercomputers in use as of July
2015.
Upgrading an Organization’s Computers
Your organization earns $50 million in annual sales, has 500 employees, and
plans to acquire 250 new portable computers this year along with another
250 next year. The goal is to issue every employee a company-owned com-
puter, which they can use at work and at home. The computers will be loaded
with antivirus software and productivity software to meet each employee’s busi-
ness needs. Your organization has decided it will purchase the computers
from the same manufacturer to obtain a quantity purchase discount. To the
extent possible, the goal is to have the same hardware and software for every-
one to simplify the troubleshooting and support of the computers. The chief
financial officer has asked you to lead a project team to define users’ computer
hardware needs and recommend the most cost-effective solution for meeting
those needs.
Review Questions
1.
Which classes of portable computers could meet the needs of your organization?
2.
What are the pros and cons of each class of portable computer?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Who else (role, department) and how many people would you select to
be a member of the team? How would your team go about defining users’
needs?
2.
Do you think that only one manufacturer and model of portable computer will
meet everyone’s needs, or should you define multiple portable computers
based on the needs of various classes of end user?
TABLE 3.7 Five most powerful operational supercomputers (July 2015)
Rank
Name
Manufacturer
Research Center
Location
Number of
Cores
Speed
(Petaflops)
1
Tianhe-2
NUDT
National University of Defense
Technology (NUDT)
China
3.1 million
33.9
2
Titan
Cray
Oak Ridge National
Laboratory
United
States
0.56 million
17.6
3
Sequoia
IBM
Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory
United
States
1.5 million
17.2
4
K
Fujitsu
Riken Advanced Institute for
Computational Science
Japan
0.75 million
10.5
5
Mira
IBM
Argonne National Laboratory
United
States
0.8 million
8.6
Source: Lendino, Jamie, “China’s Tianhe-2 Still the Fastest Supercomputer in the World, but the US Is Catching Up,” Extreme Tech, July 13, 2015, www.extreme
tech.com/extreme/209704-chinas-tianhe-2-still-the-fastest-supercomputer-in-the-world-but-the-us-is-catching-up.
118 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Server Farms, Data Centers, and Green Computing
This section will cover three topics that provide a good overview of what the
computer industry and various organizations are doing to meet their comput-
ing needs in a more efficient and environmentally friendly manner.
Server Farms
Often, an organization will house a large number of servers in the same room,
where access to the machines can be controlled and authorized support per-
sonnel can more easily manage and maintain the servers. Such a facility is
called a server farm. Apple, Google, Microsoft, the U.S. government, and
many other organizations have built billion-dollar server farms in small rural
communities where both land and electricity are cheap.
Server manufacturers are competing heavily to reduce the power
required to operate their servers and are making “performance per watt” a
key part of their product differentiation strategy. Low power usage is a
critical factor for organizations that run server farms made up of hundreds
or even thousands of servers. Typical servers draw up to 220 watts,
although new servers based on Intel’s Atom microprocessor draw 8 or
fewer watts. The annual power savings from such low-energy usage servers
can amount to tens of thousands of dollars for operators of a large server
farm. Server farm operators are also looking for low-cost, clean, renewable
energy sources. For example, Apple runs a server farm in Maiden, North
Carolina, on 167 million kilowatt hours of power generated from a 100-acre
solar energy facility. This is enough power to operate 17,600 homes for a
year.65
A virtual server is an approach to improving hardware utilization by log-
ically dividing the resources of a single physical server to create multiple logi-
cal servers, each acting as
its own dedicated
machine,
as shown
in
Figure 3.14. The server on which one or more virtual machines is running is
called the host server. Each virtual server is called a guest server or a virtual
machine, and it includes its own operating system to manage the user inter-
face and control how the virtual machine uses the host server’s hardware.
The use of virtual servers is growing rapidly, with at least 70 percent of x86
server workloads virtualized.66 In a typical data center deployment of several
hundred servers, companies using virtualization can build 12 virtual machines
for every actual server, with a resulting savings in capital and operating
expenses (including energy costs) of millions of dollars per year. The hypervi-
sor is a virtual server program that controls the host processor and resources,
FIGURE 3.14
Virtual server
Virtualization is an approach to
improving hardware utilization by
logically dividing the resources of a
single physical server to create
multiple logical servers.
Physical
server
#1
Virtual
server
#1
Virtual
server
#2
Virtual
server
#3
Physical
server
#2
Physical
server
#3
Hypervisor
Without virtualization -
Three physical servers
each running at low
level of utilization
With virtualization -
Single physical server
running at high
level of utilization
Single physical server
serving as host for 3
virtual servers
server farm: A facility that houses
a large number of servers in the same
room, where access to the machines
can be controlled and authorized sup-
port personnel can more easily manage
and maintain the servers.
virtual server: A method of logically
dividing the resources of a single
physical server to create multiple logi-
cal servers, each acting as its own
dedicated machine.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 119
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

allocates the necessary resources to each virtual system, and ensures that they
do not disrupt each other.
Cognizant, an IT, consulting, and business process outsourcing company
based in New Jersey, is making use of virtual servers in some of its 100 devel-
opment and delivery centers worldwide. At one point, the company had
almost 7,000 physical servers, which became unstainable in terms of cost and
management time. To address this problem, Cognizant utilized virtual server
technology to reduce its number of physical servers by 90 percent. It now
runs 8,000 virtual servers, representing 85 percent of its server capacity.67
Software developers and hardware managers can package applications
and software components into containers that give whatever is inside a well-
defined, compact envelope that can be used to more easily manage it, includ-
ing moving it across various hosts. While virtual machines divide the host
server into multiple operating systems, all containers use the operating system
of their host server. This means containers require less memory to run and are
faster to deploy than virtual machines.
Bank of America, Goldman Sachs, and the International Securities Exchange
are just some of the organizations within the banking and financial services
industries that have been exploring the possibility of using container software
(such as CoreOS and Docker), partly in response to demands from their own
developers who are looking for more efficient ways to deploy their applications.
Like other organizations, banks and other financial institutions like the simplicity
that containers offer; however, some institutions are still only using containers
for in-house applications and for development due to security and regulatory
compliance concerns. Recently, Goldman Sachs became one of the first financial
institutions to launch some applications into production using containers in the
public cloud.68,69
A blade server houses many computer motherboards that include one or
more processors, computer memory, computer storage, and computer net-
work connections. These all share a common power supply and air-cooling
source within a single chassis. By placing many blades into a single chassis,
and then mounting multiple chassis in a single rack, the blade server is more
powerful but less expensive than traditional systems based on mainframes or
server farms of individual computers. In addition, the blade server approach
requires much less physical space than traditional server farms.
Data Center
A data center is a climate-and-access-controlled building or a set of buildings
that houses the computer hardware that delivers an organization’s data and
information services.
The rapid growth in the demand for additional computing capacity is
causing an explosion in the growth of new and existing data centers. Rack-
space is a major cloud-computing service provider that manages over
112,000 servers supporting its more than 300,000 cloud and hosting custo-
mers.70 Apple, Facebook, AT&T, Rackspace, and IT services company Wipro
are among firms that have spent hundreds of millions in a single year on
new data centers. Google spends on the order of $4 billion a year on build-
ing data centers in an attempt to keep up with the burgeoning demand of
its existing and new customers.71 Apple is spending $2 billion to build one
data center in Mesa, Arizona, to serve as a command center for its global
networks.72
The need for additional data storage capacity is another factor driving the
growth in data centers. According to one study, somewhere between one-
third and one-half of all data centers will run out of space in the next several
years. Of those organizations needing more database capacity, about 40 per-
cent indicated that they would build new data centers, about 30 percent said
container: A way for software
developers and hardware managers
to package applications and software
components into a well-defined,
compact envelope that can be used
to more easily manage it, including
moving it across various hosts.
blade server: A server that
houses many individual computer
motherboards that include one or
more processors, computer memory,
computer storage, and computer
network connections.
data center: A climate-
and-access-controlled building or a
set of buildings that houses the
computer hardware that delivers an
organization’s data and information
services.
120 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

they would lease additional space, and the rest indicated that they would
investigate other options, including the use of cloud computing.
A further driving force behind the increased spending on new data cen-
ters is that some organizations are consolidating their data centers from many
locations down to just a few locations. The goal of consolidation is to lower
ongoing operating costs—less spending on utilities, property taxes, and labor.
General Motors consolidated 23 data center locations into just two, reducing
both its operating costs and energy usage.73 The General Accounting Office
reports that the federal government saved $2 billion between 2011 and 2014
from its data center consolidation efforts.74
Traditional data centers consist of warehouse-size buildings filled with
row upon row of server racks and powerful air conditioning systems designed
to remove dust and humidity from the air and offset the heat generated by the
processors. Such data centers can use as much energy as a small city and run
up a power bill of millions of dollars per year. Indeed, energy costs can
amount to 25 percent of the total cost of operating a data center, with hard-
ware expenses and labor costs the other 75 percent.
Businesses and technology vendors are working to develop data centers
that run more efficiently and require less energy for processing and cooling.
For example, Red Cloud, an Australian Web site hosting company, implemen-
ted a range of modular data center solutions from Cannon Technologies to
increase its number of data centers by 11, thus adding 1 million square feet
of available space. The module pods can be assembled in just a few days
using only basic hand tools.75 Google, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft, and
others have adopted similar modular data center approach. See Figure 3.15.
About half the energy usage of a traditional data center goes to operate its
computers. The other half goes to cooling the computers, removing dust and
humidity from the air, and lighting the facility, along with other systems that
sustain the data center. Such a data center has a power usage effectiveness
(PUE) of 2.0. (PUE ¼ total power consumed/power required to run the com-
puters). The ideal goal is a PUE of 1.0, which would indicate that all the
power goes to running the computers. Google has been able to build data
centers that operate with a PUE of 1.14.76
In a further attempt to lower ongoing operating costs, many organizations
are locating their data centers in areas with milder climates and lower energy
rates and land costs. For organizations in the United States, this translates to
FIGURE 3.15
Modular data center
Microsoft employs a state-of-the-art
modular data center.
Source: www.datacenterknowledge.com/
archives/2013/01/31/microsofts-1-billion-roof
less-data-center/
OUTSIDE AIR
TEMP
62
62
50
TEMP
HUMIDITY
SERVER AIR
1
3
4
ON OFF
FAN
ON OFF
EVAP WASHER
100% OPEN
OUTSIDE AIR DAMPER
0% OPEN
MIXING DAMPER
COOLING
HEATING
ECONOMIZER
2
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 121
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

rural locations in the south and the northwest. Apple’s $1 billion data center,
Google’s $600 million data center, and Facebook’s $450 million data center
are all located in rural North Carolina.77
The ability to absorb the impact of a disaster (e.g., hurricane, earthquake,
terrorism attack, or war) and quickly restore services is a critical concern
when it comes to the planning for new data centers. As a result, data centers
of large information systems service organizations are often distributed
among multiple locations in different areas of the country or even different
countries to ensure continuous operations in the event of a disaster. If one
data center in such an arrangement is affected by a disaster, its work load
could be redirected to one or more of the distributed data centers not
affected. IBM offers an extreme example of distributed data centers. Since
2009, IBM has opened nine data centers in Brazil, Mexico, Costa Rica, Chile,
Colombia, Peru, and Uruguay to ensure around-the-clock services to its Latin
American customers. Globally, IBM has more than 400 widely distributed
data centers to meet the needs of its customers.78 In addition to the distribu-
tion strategy, most data centers have implemented some form of backup gen-
erator or uninterruptible power supply in the event that the local power
provider fails.
Green Computing
Electronic devices such as computer hardware and smartphones contain hun-
dreds or even thousands of components. The components, in turn, are com-
posed of many different materials, including some that are known to be
potentially harmful to humans and the environment, such as beryllium, cad-
mium, lead, mercury, brominated flame retardants (BFRs), selenium, and
polyvinyl chloride.79 Electronics manufacturing employees and suppliers at all
steps along the supply chain and manufacturing process are at risk of
unhealthy exposure to these raw materials. Users of these products can also
be exposed to these materials when using poorly designed or improperly
manufactured devices. Care must also be taken when recycling or destroying
these devices to avoid contaminating the environment.
Green computing is concerned with the efficient and environmentally
responsible design, manufacture, operation, and disposal of IS-related pro-
ducts, including all types of computing devices (from smartphones to super-
computers), printers, printer materials such as cartridges and toner, and
storage devices. Many business organizations recognize that going green is in
their best interests in terms of public relations, safety of employees, and the
community at large. They also recognize that green computing presents an
opportunity to substantially reduce total costs over the life cycle of their IS
equipment. Green computing has three goals: reduce the use of hazardous
material, allow companies to lower their power-related costs, and enable the
safe disposal or recycling of computers and computer-related equipment.
It is estimated that 51.9 million computers, 35.8 million monitors, and
33.6 million hard copy devices (printers, faxes, etc.)—representing a total of
1.3 million tons of waste—were disposed of in the United States in 2010
alone.80 Because it is impossible for manufacturers to ensure safe recycling or
disposal, the best practice would be for them to eliminate the use of toxic
substances, particularly since recycling of used computers, monitors, and prin-
ters has raised concerns about toxicity and carcinogenicity of some of the
substances. However, until manufacturers stop using these toxic substances,
safe disposal and reclamation operations must be carried out carefully to
avoid exposure in recycling operations and leaching of materials, such as
heavy metals, from landfills and incinerator ashes. In many cases, recycling
companies export large quantities of used electronics to companies in unde-
veloped countries. Unfortunately, many of these countries do not have strong
green computing: A program
concerned with the efficient and
environmentally responsible design,
manufacture, operation, and disposal
of IS-related products.
122 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
environmental laws, and they sometimes fail to recognize the potential dan-
gers of dealing with hazardous materials. In their defense, these countries
point out that the United States and other first-world countries were allowed
to develop robust economies and rise up out of poverty without the restric-
tions of strict environmental policies.
Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool (EPEAT) is a sys-
tem that enables purchasers of electronic products to evaluate, compare,
and select products based on a set of environmental criteria. EPEAT was
first implemented in 2006 with Computer and Displays (IEEE 1680.1 stan-
dard) and has now expanded to Imaging Equipment, under the IEEE 1680.2
standard from January 2013. Products are ranked in EPEAT according to
three tiers of environmental performance: bronze, silver, and gold. See
Table 3.8.81 Individual purchasers as well as corporate purchasers of compu-
ters, printers, scanners, and multifunction devices can use the EPEAT Web
site (www.epeat.net) to screen manufacturers and models based on environ-
mental attributes.82
Some electronics manufacturers have developed programs to assist their
customers in disposing of old equipment. For example, Dell offers a free
worldwide recycling program for consumers. It also provides no-charge recy-
cling of any brand of used computer or printer with the purchase of a new
Dell computer or printer. This equipment is recycled in an environmentally
responsible manner, using Dell’s stringent and global recycling guidelines.83
HP, which offers a similar program, has recovered 2.8 billion pounds of pro-
ducts since 1987.84
Computer manufacturers such as Apple, Dell, and Hewlett-Packard have
long competed on the basis of price and performance. As the difference
among the manufacturers in these two arenas narrows, support for green
computing is emerging as a new business strategy for these companies to dis-
tinguish themselves from the competition. Apple claims to have the “greenest
lineup of notebooks” and is making progress at removing toxic chemicals
from its manufacturing process. Dell is focused on becoming “the greenest
technology company on Earth.” Hewlett-Packard often highlights its long tra-
dition of environmentalism and is improving its packaging to reduce the use
of materials. It is also urging computer users around the world to shut down
their computers at the end of the day to save energy and reduce carbon
emissions.
Moving to Green Computing
Your organization is a leader in the development of renewable energy sources
based on enhanced geothermal systems and is viewed as a champion in the fight
to reduce carbon emissions. The organization employs over 25,000 people world-
wide and operates three global data centers, one each in the United States, Eur-
ope, and Southeast Asia. The CEO has asked all her C level executives for input
on a proposed strategy to become a leader in green computing.
TABLE 3.8 EPEAT product tiers for computers
Tier
Number of Required Criteria
That Must Be Met
Number of Optional Criteria
That Must Be Met
Bronze
All 23
None
Silver
All 23
At least 50%
Gold
All 23
At least 75%
Electronic Product
Environmental Assessment
Tool (EPEAT): A system that
enables purchasers to evaluate,
compare, and select electronic
products based on a set of
environmental criteria.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 123
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Review Questions
1.
In what ways is a move toward green computing consistent with your organi-
zation’s mission of developing renewable energy sources?
2.
One green computing proposal is to consolidate the three data centers into
one. Discuss the pros and cons of this approach.
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Identify two additional tactics the organization might take to accelerate its
move toward green computing?
2.
Identify the pros and cons or any issues associated with your proposed tactics.
Summary
Principle:
The computer hardware industry is rapidly changing and highly compet-
itive, creating an environment ripe for technological breakthroughs.
Computer hardware should be selected to meet specific user and business
requirements. These requirements can evolve and change over time.
The central processing unit, memory, input/output devices, and the bus
cooperate to execute program instructions following a fetch, decode, execute,
and store process.
Computer system processing speed is affected by clock speed, which is
measured in gigahertz (GHz). As the clock speed of the CPU increases,
more heat is generated, which can corrupt the data and instructions the
computer is trying to process. Bigger heat sinks, fans, and other compo-
nents are required to eliminate the excess heat. Chip designers and manu-
facturers are exploring various means to avoid heat problems in their new
designs.
The Intel x86, Intel Atom, and ARM processors are each based on a differ-
ent instruction set and are designed with different goals in mind.
A multicore processor is one that combines two or more independent pro-
cessors into a single computer so that the independent processors can share
the workload.
Parallel computing is the simultaneous execution of the same task on multi-
ple processors to obtain results more quickly. Massively parallel processing
involves linking many processors to work together to solve complex problems.
Grid computing is the use of a collection of computers, often owned by
multiple individuals or organizations, that work in a coordinated manner to
solve a common problem.
An integrated circuit—such as a processor or memory chip—is a set
of electronic circuits on one small chip of semiconductor material. A fab or
foundry is a factory where integrated circuits are manufactured. Fabless man-
ufacturers outsource their manufacturing to foundry companies who fabricate
the design.
Main memory provides the CPU with working storage for program
instructions and data. The chief function of memory is to rapidly provide data
and instructions to the CPU. Memory storage capacity is measured in bytes.
Random access memory or RAM is volatile; loss of power to the computer
erases its contents. RAM comes in many different varieties, including dynamic
RAM or DRAM (dynamic random access memory) and DDR SDRAM (double
data rate synchronous dynamic random access memory). DDR has been
superseded by DDR2, DDR3, and DDR4.
Cache memory is a type of high-speed memory that CPUs can access
more rapidly than RAM.
124 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Read-only memory (ROM) is nonvolatile and contains permanent pro-
gram instructions for execution by the CPU. Other nonvolatile memory
types include programmable read-only memory (PROM), erasable program-
mable read-only memory (EPROM), electrically erasable PROM (EEPROM),
and flash memory.
Computer systems can store larger amounts of data and instructions in sec-
ondary storage, which is less volatile and has greater capacity than memory.
The primary characteristics of secondary storage media and devices include
access method, capacity, portability, and cost. Common forms of secondary
storage include magnetic storage devices such as tape, hard disk drives, and
virtual tape; optical storage devices such as CD-ROMs and digital video discs
(DVDs); and solid state storage devices (SSDs) such as flash drives.
Redundant array of independent/inexpensive disks (RAID) is a method of
storing data that generates extra bits of data from existing data, allowing the
system to more easily recover data in the event of a hardware failure.
Network-attached storage (NAS) and storage area networks (SAN) are alter-
native forms of data storage that enable an organization to share data storage
resources among a much larger number of computers and users for improved
storage efficiency and greater cost effectiveness.
Storage as a service is a data storage model in which a data storage service
provider rents space to people and organizations.
Input and output devices allow users to provide data and instructions to
the computer for processing and allow subsequent storage and output. These
devices are part of a user interface through which human beings interact with
computer systems.
Data is placed in a computer system in a two-stage process: Data entry
converts human-readable data into machine-readable form; data input then
transfers machine-readable data into the system. Common input devices
include a keyboard, a mouse, speech-recognition technology, motion-sensing
input devices, scanning devices, optical data readers, magnetic ink character
recognition (MICR) devices, magnetic stripe cards, chip cards, smart cards, con-
tactless payment cards, point-of-sale (POS) devices, automated teller machines
(ATMs), bar-code scanners, radio frequency identification (RFID) devices, pen
input devices, and touch-sensitive screens.
There are numerous flat-panel display screens, including liquid crystal dis-
play (LCD), light-emitting diode (LED), organic light-emitting diode (OLED),
and plasma devices. Display screen quality is determined by the computer
graphics card, aspect ratio, size, color, and resolution. Other output devices
include printers, plotters, digital audio players, and e-book readers.
3D printing has created a major breakthrough in how many items will be
manufactured. Biomedical engineers are exploring a process called bioprinting,
which uses 3D printers to build human parts and organs from actual human cells.
Principle:
Computer hardware must be carefully selected to meet the evolving needs
of the organization and its supporting information systems.
Computer systems are generally divided into two categories: single user
and multiple users.
Single-user systems include portable computers, such as wearable compu-
ters, smartphones, laptops, notebooks, and tablets.
Nonportable single-user systems include thin client, desktop, nettop, and
workstation computers. Some thin clients (e.g., the Chromebook) are designed
to be highly portable.
Multiuser
systems
include
servers,
blade
servers,
mainframes,
and
supercomputers.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 125
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Scalability is the ability to increase the processing capability of a computer
system so that it can handle more users, more data, or more transactions in a
given period.
A mainframe computer is a large, powerful computer shared by dozens or
even hundreds of concurrent users connected to the machine over a network.
Supercomputers are the most powerful computers with the fastest proces-
sing speed and highest performance.
Principle:
The computer hardware industry and users are implementing green com-
puting designs and products.
A server farm houses a large number of servers in the same room, where
access to the machines can be controlled and authorized support personnel can
more easily manage and maintain the servers.
A virtual server is an approach to improving hardware utilization by logi-
cally dividing the resources of a single physical server to create multiple logical
servers, each acting as its own dedicated machine.
A data center is a climate-and-access-controlled building or a set of build-
ings that houses the computer hardware that delivers an organization’s data
and information services. The rapid growth in data centers is stimulated by
the increased demand for additional computing and data storage capacity and
by the trend toward consolidating from many data centers down to a few.
Organizations and technology vendors are trying a number of strategies to
lower the ongoing cost of data center operations.
The ability to absorb the impact of a disaster and quickly restore services is
a critical concern when it comes to planning for new data centers.
Green computing is concerned with the efficient and environmentally
responsible design, manufacture, operation, and disposal of IT-related
products.
Many business organizations recognize that going green can reduce costs
and is in their best interests in terms of public relations, safety of employees,
and the community at large.
Three specific goals of green computing are to reduce the use of hazardous
material, lower power-related costs, and enable the safe disposal and/or recy-
cling of IT products.
The Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool can be used by
purchasers of electronic products to evaluate, compare, and select products
based on a set of environmental criteria.
Key Terms
bioprinting
blade server
bus
byte (B)
cache memory
central processing unit (CPU)
clock speed
compact disc read-only memory (CD-ROM)
computer graphics card
contactless payment card
container
coprocessor
data center
data entry
data input
desktop computer
digital audio player
digital video disc (DVD)
e-book
Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool
(EPEAT)
gigahertz (GHz)
graphics processing unit (GPU)
126 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

green computing
grid computing
hard disk drive (HDD)
instruction set architecture (ISA)
input/output device
integrated circuit (IC)
laptop
magnetic stripe card
magnetic tape
main memory
mainframe computer
massively parallel processing system
memory
MP3
multicore processor
multiprocessing
nettop
network-attached storage (NAS)
optical storage device
parallel computing
point-of-sale (POS) device
policy-based storage management
portable computer
processor family
radio frequency identification (RFID)
random access memory (RAM)
read-only memory (ROM)
redundant array of independent/inexpensive
disks (RAID)
scalability
secondary storage
semiconductor fabrication plant
server
server farm
smart card
solid state storage device (SSD)
source data automation
speech-recognition technology
storage area network (SAN)
storage as a service
supercomputer
tablet
thin client
virtual server
virtual tape
wearable computer
workstation
Chapter 3: Self-Assessment Test
The computer hardware industry is rapidly chang-
ing and highly competitive, creating an environ-
ment ripe for technological breakthroughs.
1. The
is the part of the computer that
sequences and executes instructions.
a. CPU
b. memory
c. bus
d. input/output devices
2. Clock speed is measured in GHz or
.
a. millions of instructions per second
b. millions of cycles per second
c. billions of cycles per second
d. millions of floating point instructions per
second
3. A key advantage of ARM processors over the tra-
ditional x86 complex instruction set processors is
that
.
a. ARM processors do not generate as much heat
b. ARM processors are more powerful
c. ARM processors are larger
d. ARM processors have a faster clock speed
4. The use of a collection of computers, often
owned by multiple individuals or organizations,
to work in a coordinated manner to solve a
common problem is called
.
a. parallel computing
b. massively parallel processing
c. multicore processing
d. grid computing
5.
is a highly complex process used in
manufacturing computer chips with feature sizes
that are extremely small.
6. L1 is the fastest type of cache memory built into a
computer, faster even than DDR4 SDRAM mem-
ory. True or False?
7. The optical storage device capable of storing the
most data is the
.
a. DVD
b. Blu-ray disc
c. CD-ROM
d. double-sided DVD
8. A high-speed, special-purpose network that inte-
grates different types of data storage devices into
a single storage system and connects them to
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 127
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

computing resources across an entire organiza-
tion is called a(n)
.
a. network-attached storage
b. storage area network
c. storage as a service
d. enterprise data storage solution
9.
involves capturing and editing data
where it is originally created and in a form that
can be directly entered into a computer to ensure
accuracy and timeliness.
10. After October 1, 2015, merchants who accept
payments made via a chip card’s magnetic stripe
can continue to do so; however, they must accept
responsibility for any fraudulent purchases. True
or False?
11.
is a process that uses 3D printers to
build human body parts and organs from actual
human cells.
Computer hardware must be carefully selected to
meet the evolving needs of the organization and
its supporting information systems.
12. A combination chipset called a
includes processor cores, RAM and ROM mem-
ory, interface controllers, and voltage regulators.
13. A
is a low-cost, centrally managed
computer with no internal or external attached
drives for data storage.
a. tablet
b. thin client
c. nettop computer
d. workstation
14. Servers offer great
, the ability to
increase the processing capability of a computer
system so it can handle more users, more data, or
more transactions in a given period.
The computer industry and users are implementing
green computer designs and products.
15.
is an approach to improving hard-
ware utilization by logically dividing the
resources of a single physical server to create
multiple logical servers each with its own dedi-
cated machine.
a. Server farm
b. Multiprocessing
c. Virtual server
d. Hypervisor
16. Which of the following is not a goal of green
computing?
a. Enable the safe disposal or recycling of com-
puters and computer-related equipment.
b. Allow companies to lower their power-related
costs.
c. Reduce the use of hazardous material.
d. Reduce the cutting down of trees and other
foliage.
17. Green computing is about saving the environ-
ment; there are no real business benefits associ-
ated with this program. True or False?
Chapter 3: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. a
2. c
3. a
4. d
5. Extreme ultraviolet lithography or EUVL
6. True
7. b
8. b
9. Source data automation
10. True
11. Bioprinting
12. system on a chip
13. b
14. scalability
15. c
16. d
17. False
Review Questions
1. Identify four fundamental components of every
computer.
2. What is the purpose of the computer
bus?
3. How does clock speed govern the execution of
instructions by a computer?
4. What is the x86 instruction set?
5. What is a multicore processor?
6. What is the difference between a foundry
company and a fabless manufacturer?
7. How does the role of main memory differ from
the role of secondary storage?
8. Which is the largest amount of memory—a
gigabyte, petabyte, or terabyte?
128 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

9. Identify and briefly discuss the fundamental
characteristic that distinguishes RAM from ROM
memory.
10. What is cache memory and how is it used?
11. What is a solid state storage device?
12. What is RFID technology? Identify three practical
uses for this technology.
13. When speaking of computers, what is meant by
scalability?
14. How is a blade server different from a regular
server?
15. Identify and briefly describe the various classes of
single-user, portable computers.
16. Identify three reasons for increased spending on
data centers.
17. Define the term “green computing,” and state its
primary goals.
18. What is the EPEAT? How is it used?
Discussion Questions
1. Discuss the role a business manager should take
in helping determine the computer hardware to
be used by the organization.
2. Identify the similarities and differences between
massively parallel processing systems and grid
computing.
3. Briefly describe the concept of multiprocessing.
How does parallel processing differ from
multiprocessing?
4. Discuss some of the technical and nontechnical
issues that might come up in trying to establish a
large grid computing project such as the Large
Hadron Collider.
5. What is 3D printing? Discuss what you think the
future is for 3D printing.
6. What is a multicore processor? What advantages
does it offer users over a single-core processor?
Are there any potential disadvantages?
7. Outline how the Electronic Product Environment
Assessment Tool (EPEAT) can be used for rating
computers.
8. Identify and briefly discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of solid state secondary storage
devices compared with magnetic secondary stor-
age devices.
9. Briefly discuss the advantages and disadvantages
of attached storage, network-attached storage,
and storage area networks in meeting enterprise
data storage challenges.
10. If cost were not an issue, describe the
characteristics of your ideal computer. What
would you use it for? Would you choose a
tablet, laptop, desktop, or workstation
computer? Why?
11. Briefly explain the differences between the mag-
netic stripe card, chip card, and the smart card.
Which do you believe is safest for the consumer?
Why?
12. Fully discuss why some organizations are
consolidating many data centers into a few.
Are there any potential drawbacks to this
strategy?
13. Discuss potential issues that can arise if an orga-
nization is not careful in selecting a reputable
service organization to recycle or dispose of its
IS equipment.
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Do research to find the total worldwide sales for
hard disk drives and solid state storage devices
over a five-year or more period. Try to get figures
for the number of units sold as well as total stor-
age capacity in some unit, such as gigabytes. Use
graphing software to develop a chart showing
these sales figures. Write a few paragraphs stating
your conclusions about the future of the hard
disk drive market versus solid state storage.
2. Develop a spreadsheet that compares the fea-
tures, initial purchase price, and a two-year esti-
mate of operating costs (paper, cartridges, and
toner) for three different color laser printers.
Assume that you will print 50 color pages and
100 black-and-white pages each month. Now do
the same comparison for three inkjet printers.
Write a brief memo on which of the six printers
you would choose and why. Develop a second
spreadsheet for the same printers, but this time
assume that you will print 250 color pages and
500 black-and-white pages per month. Now
which of the printers would you buy and why?
3. Use word-processing software to document what
your needs are as a computer user and your jus-
tification for selecting either a desktop or some
form of a portable computer. Find a Web site that
allows you to order and customize a computer
and select those options that will best meet your
needs in a cost-effective manner. Assume that you
have a budget of $850. Enter the computer spe-
cifications you selected along with the associated
costs from the Web site into an Excel spread-
sheet. Insert that spreadsheet into the document
defining your needs.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 129
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Team Activities
1. Have you and your team do research on the Web to
identify three large grid computing projects of
interest to the team. Visit the home page for each of
these projects to learn more about the goals of the
project, results to date, and what is required if you
wish to volunteer to help this project. Choose one of
the projects, and volunteer to have your computer
added to the grid. Write a brief paper summarizing
why your team chose this particular grid computing
project, what was required for your computer to
join the grid, and how being a member of the grid
affected your use of your computer.
2. With one or two of your classmates, visit three
different retail stores or Web sites in search of
your ideal smart watch. Document the costs, fea-
tures, advantages, and disadvantages of three
different watches using a spreadsheet program.
Analyze your data, and write a recommendation
on which one you would buy. Be sure to clearly
explain your decision.
3. With the members of your team, visit a data cen-
ter or server farm, perhaps at your university or a
nearby computer services firm. (Be sure to obtain
permission from the appropriate company
resources prior to your visit). As you tour the
facility, draw a simple diagram showing the
locations of various pieces of hardware equip-
ment. Label each piece of equipment. Document
what has been done in terms of access control,
power backup, surge protection, and HVAC.
Discuss use of virtualization and containers at
the site.
Web Exercises
1. Do research on the Web to find a description of
Moore’s Law. What are the implications of this law?
Are there any practical limitations to Moore’s Law?
2. Do research on the Web to learn more about
bioprinting—both current and potential future
applications.
3. Do research on the Web to learn more about
Apple’s decision to withdraw from the EPEAT
program and why it later reversed that decision.
Write a one-page report summarizing your
findings.
Career Exercises
1. A friend of yours texted you that he is consider-
ing changing his major to computer engineering.
He wants to meet with you and get your input on
this move. Do some research to find out just what
is a computer engineer and what do they do.
What are the career prospects, and what sort of
education and experience is required to become a
computer engineer?
2. How might supercomputers be employed in your
current or future career field?
3. Examine the possibility of a career in computer
hardware sales. Which area of sales do you
believe holds the brightest prospects for young
college graduates—servers, mainframe compu-
ters, supercomputers, or high-volume storage
devices? Why? What would be some of the
advantages and disadvantages of a career in
computer hardware sales?
Case Studies
Case One
ARM
The Acorn Computer Group developed the world’s first
commercial Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC)
processor in the 1980s. The simpler commands employed in
RISC computers enables the computer to operate faster, use
less power, and take up less space—major advances over the
early complex instruction set computer systems (CISC),
which tried to pack as many actions into each command as
possible.ARM was founded in 1990 as a spin-off of Acorn
Computer and Apple after the two companies began
collaborating on the ARM processor for the Newton
computer system—Apple’s ill-fated attempt at a handheld
computer.
The ARM business model involves the design and license
of intellectual property rather than the manufacture and sales
of actual semiconductor chips. ARM licenses the rights to
build chips based on its design to the world’s leading
semiconductor and systems companies. These companies pay
ARM a license fee for the original design along with a royalty
on every chip or wafer produced. ARM has signed over 1,100
130 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

licenses with more than 300 companies. Some companies
elect to license the ARM instruction set to design their own
processors. See Table 3.9.
Over 60 billion ARM chips have been shipped since the
company was founded. Chips based on ARM designs are found
in 99 percent of the world’s smartphones and tablets. In
addition, processors based on designs licensed from ARM
are used in all sorts of computing devices, including
microcontrollers in embedded systems such as antilock
braking systems (ABS) systems for autos, smartTVs, and
smartwatches. The number of ARM-designed chips sold is
estimated to be 25 times that of Intel-designed chips.
Personal computer vendors upgrade their products
every 12 to 18 months. The smartphone industry is
demanding an upgrade every six months to a year. ARM
is constantly striving to keep pace with these demands.
The Cortex-A57 is a processor design by ARM that was
announced in October 2012 and appeared in handsets two
years later. The Cortex-A72, its successor, was announced in
February 2015 and began to appear in mobile devices by
the end of 2015.The Cortex A72 processor represents a
50 times increase in processing power compared with
smartphone chips used just five years ago. Development of
the Cortex A-72 continues the trend of smartphones getting
more and more powerful and becoming our primary
computing device, replacing the personal computer for
many uses.
Meanwhile, Intel is now shipping chips code-named
Sofia for inexpensive smartphones. These chips were made
in conjunction with the Chinese company Rockchip, which
has experience in turning around processor designs in a
matter of months. Intel will soon begin to ship a high-end
Atom chip called Broxton, which has a modular design that
allows Intel to modify the chip and deliver updates at a faster
pace. Broxton supports Intel’s strategy of delivering products
that can be easily customized—similar to the chip designs
of ARM.
China assembles most of the world’s smartphones and
computers, but currently must import most of the technology
that underlies them. Chinese authorities hope to gain a
bigger role in the microchip industry and have made
ownership of semiconductor intellectual property a priority.
The issue of protecting intellectual property rights is a major
concern for ARM and its customers entering or doing
business and China.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. What are some of the challenges and opportunities
facing the processor chip industry in general and ARM
in particular?
2. Some chip industry observers and financial analysts
believe that because of its licensing business model,
ARM missed an opportunity to capture billions of dol-
lars in sales of microprocessor chips it could have
manufacturered. Compare sales, profits, and stock
prices over a three-year period for ARM to two of its
customers who do have fab plants and manufacture
their own chips such as Samsung Electronics and Intel
or AMD, a competitor. Do you believe that the ARM
licensing rather than manufacturing business model
has hurt the firm? Why or why not?
3. Do research to learn more about how China came to be
the lead assembler of the world’s smartphones and
computers. What are some of the pros and cons of
outsoucring this work to China?
SOURCES: “Company Profile,” www.arm.com/about/company-profile/,
accessed July 15, 2015; Vance, Ashlee, “ARM Designs One of the World’s
Most-Used Products. So Where’s the Money?,” Bloomberg Business,
February 4, 2014, http://www.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2014-02-04
/arm-chips-are-the-most-used-consumer-product-dot-where-s-the-
money; Hackman, Mark, “ARM Launches Cortex A-72 Platform,
Powering Flagship Smartphones in 2016,” PC World, February 3, 2015,
www.pcworld.com/article/2879037/arm-launches-cortex-a-72-plat
form-powering-flagship-smartphones-in-2016.html; Hamblen, Matt,
“The Rise of China’s Smartphone Makers,” Computerworld, December
30, 2014, www.computerworld.com/article/2859707/the-rise-of-chinas-
smartphone-makers.html and “Intel Plans to Increase CPU Performance
with New Atom Chips,” Alvareztg Technology Group, www.alvareztg
.com/intel-plans-to-increase-cpu-performance-with-new-atom-chips
.html/, accessed July 16, 2015,
Case Two
Vivobarefoot Upgrades Technology Infrastructure
Vivobarefoot is an innovative shoe company that recently
undertook a major review of its technology infrastructure
to determine what changes needed to be made to support
and accelerate the company’s already rapid growth.
Vivobarefoot’s success is connected to the growing
popularity of barefoot or “miminalist” running. In fact, the
company lays claim to the first minimalist shoe, originally
produced in 2004, offering an ultrathin, puncture-resistant
sole that provides “maximum sensory feedback and
maximum protection.”
The specialist shoe company is headquartered in the
United Kingdom, but also has a team based in China, where
all of its manufacturing takes place. Vivobarefoot sells it
shoes online, through a variety of partnerships around the
world, and in its store in Covent Garden, a popular shopping
district in London. According to founder Galahad Clark, the
company went from selling 30,000 pairs of shoes per month
TABLE 3.9 Partial list of ARM licensees
Companies That
License the ARM Chip
Design to Incorporate
It into Their Own
System on a Chip
Companies That
License The ARM
Instruction Set to
Design Their Own
Processor
ApliedMicro
Apple
Broadcom
Broadcom
HiSilico
Intel
Rockchip
Marvell Technology
Group
Samsung
Microsoft
STMMicroelectronics
Nvdia
Qualcomm
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 131
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

to over 300,000 per month—over the course of just five
years.
As with many companies that experience rapid growth,
over the years, Vivobarefoot had acquired a hodgepodge of
hardware and software that was no longer meeting its needs.
According to Damian Peat, global operations director for the
company, “We were working with some pretty archaic
systems. We had three servers in our basement all running
Windows Server 2003 and backed up to tape, and I would
worry a lot about the chance of something not working.”
Vivobarefoot employees were also using multiple versions
of Microsoft Office, and staff in China were forced to use
personal Gmail accounts because they could not reliably
access the company’s Microsoft Exchange email server in
London.
Managing the variety of hardware and software systems
was becoming time consuming and costly. And, like
thousands of other companies, Vivobarefoot was also faced
with the reality that it would soon be forced to migrate away
from Windows Server 2003, as Microsoft was ending its
support of the outdated server operating system. According
to Peat, “Upcoming end of support for Windows Server
2003 gave us concerns around security patching and
mounting management costs, and we already had significant
risk around data security. …My priority became to get
everything onto one safe, reliable platform as soon as
possible.”
After a review of available technologies, Vivobarefoot
chose to replace Windows Server 2003 with Windows Server
2012 R2 and Hyper-V hypervisor software, giving the
company both physical and virtual server capabilities,
including the capacity the company needs to host file servers
and business-critical applications, such as accounting
software and stock management systems. The company also
migrated to Office 365 in both its London and China offices.
Office 365 had particular appeal for the company because, as
a global cloud service, it is easily accessible in China, where
staff are now more easily able to communicate—using
Vivobarefoot email addresses rather than Gmail accounts.
Vivobarefoot staff are also making use of Microsoft’s
OneDrive for Business, where they can store, share, and sync
files. According to Peat, with these cloud-based upgrades, the
company “can ensure everyone can see the same documents
and access them whenever they need, which is really
beneficial.” As part of a phased process, the company is also
moving many employees to Windows 8.1 laptops and Surface
Pro tablets.
As part of its efforts to streamline its IT infrastructure
at all levels, Vivobarefoot has also moved away from tape
backups to a remote hosted backup service, and the
upgraded server technology means that many other system
management tasks have been simplified, as well. Data
security has been improved, and IT staff have gained the
ability to manage the company’s servers remotely. While
Vivobarefoot still has work to do to migrate all of its
technology to the same platform, the company’s efforts have
gone a long way toward providing the company with an
updated and more rational arrangement of hardware,
software, and cloud computing.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. What are some of the competitive advantages Vivo-
barefoot gained through its infrastructure update?
2. One ongoing concern for Vivobarefoot is the quality
and speed of the Internet service available to its office
in central London. Given that, do you think it made
sense for the company to move more of its IT services
to the cloud? Go online and do some research about
Microsoft’s Office 365 product. What options does it
offer for working offline if Internet service is not
available? Does that change your opinion about Vivo-
barefoot’s shift to the cloud?
3. Estimates for the number of computers still running
Windows Server 2003 range from hundreds of thou-
sands to several million—even though Microsoft has
stopped supporting the product. What are the risks for
companies that continue to use software or hardware
technology after a vendor ends support for it?
SOURCES: “Frequently Asked Questions,” Vivobarefoot, www.vivobare
foot.com/us/customer-services/frequently-asked-questions#FAQST1,
accessed December 11, 2015; Ho, Geoff, “Shoe Manufacturer Vivobare-
foot to Step It Up to Fund Expansion Plans,” Express, May 3, 2015, www
.express.co.uk/finance/city/574639/Shoe-manufacturer-Vivobarefoot
-raise-money-fund-expansion-plans; Worth, Dan, “Windows Server
2003 Migration Helps Shoe Seller Vivobarefoot Put One Foot in the
Cloud,” V3.co.uk, April 17, 2015, www.v3.co.uk/v3-uk/news/2404420
/windows-server-2003-migration-helps-shoe-seller-vivobarefoot-put-one
-foot-in-the-cloud; “Pioneering Footwear Brand Unites Teams for Secure,
Remote Working,” Microsoft, www.microsoft.com/en-gb/smb/customer
-success-stories/vivobarefoot-unites-global-teams, accessed December
11, 2015; Curtis, Joe, “How Vivobarefoot Escaped Windows Server 2003
in IT Upgrade,” IT Pro, July 8, 2015, www.itpro.co.uk/server/24948/how
-vivobarefoot-escaped-windows-server-2003-in-it-upgrade.
Notes
1. “Top 10 Sites for November 2015,” Top500 Project
Committee, www.top500.org/lists/2015/11, accessed
December 11, 2015.
2. “Courant’s Stadler and Colleagues Win 2015 Bell Prize,”
New York University, November 25, 2015, www.nyu
.edu/about/news-publications/news/2015/11/24/cour
ants-stadler-and-colleagues-win-2015-bell-prize-.html.
3. Mearian, Lucas, “CERN’s Data Soars to 530M Gigabytes,”
Computerworld, August 14, 2015, www.computerworld
.com/article/2960642/cloud-storage/cerns-data-stores
-soar-to-530m-gigabytes.html.
4. “Israel Approves Intel’s $6 Billion Investment in Chip
Plant,” Reuters, September 22, 2014, www.reuters.com
/article/2014/09/22/us-israel-intel-plant-idUSKCN0HH1
F720140922.
5. Clark, Don, “IBM Reports Advances in Shrinking Future
Chips, Wall Street Journal, July 9, 2015, www.wsj.com
/articles/ibm-reports-advances-in-shrinking-future-
chips-1436414814.
6. Seubert, Curtis, “How Many Bytes Is an Exabyte,” eHow,
www.ehow.com/about_6370860_many-bytes-exabyte_
.html, accessed August 8, 2013.
132 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

7. Patrizio, Andy, “All about DDR4, the Next-Gen Memory
Coming Soon for PCs and Mobile Devices,” PC World,
June 24, 2014, www.pcworld.com/article/2365823/next
-gen-memory-is-coming-fast-here-s-what-you-need-to
-know-about-ddr4.html.
8. Malle, Jean-Pierre, “Big Data: Farewell to Cartesian
Thinking?” Paris Tech Review, March 15, 2013,
www.paristechreview.com/2013/03/15/big-data-carte
sian-thinking.
9. “Media Alert: New IBM Cloud Service Enables Develo-
pers to Create Apps That Tap into Vast Amounts of
Unstructured Data,” IBM, December 7, 2015,
www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/48257.wss.
10. Mims, Christopher, “And the Longest Running Digital
Storage Medium Is …,” MIT Technology Review, July 13,
2011,www.technologyreview.com/view/424669/and-the
-longest-running-digital-storage-medium-is.
11. “IBM Research Sets New Record for Tape Storage,” IBM,
April 9, 2015, www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/
46554.wss.
12. “High-End Computing Capability: Archival Storage Sys-
tem,” NASA, www.nas.nasa.gov/hecc/resources/storage
_systems.html, accessed December 11, 2015.
13. “HGST Ultrastar HDD Is a 10TB Helium Monster, Aims
to Cope with Data Overload,” TechRadar, December 1,
2015, www.techradar.com/us/news/computing-compo
nents/storage/hgst-ultrastar-hdd-is-a-10tb-helium-mon
ster-aims-to-cope-with-data-overload-1310236.
14. “Western Digital Welcomes Big Data with 10 TB Helium
HDDs,” Infostor, December 2, 2015, www.infostor.com
/storage-management/western-digital-welcomes-big
-data-with-10-tb-helium-hdds.html.
15. “Welcome to the NFLC,” National Foreign Language Cen-
ter, www.nflc.umd.edu, accessed December 12, 2015.
16. “Research Institute at the University of Maryland Off-
loads Large Library of Files to RAID Storage,” RADirect,
www.rad-direct.com/Success_Story_NFLC.htm, accessed
December 12, 2015.
17. Inglis, Blair, “Sony Working on Blue-Ray Successor—Are
PS4 Discs Soon to Be Outdated?” The Six Axis, July 30,
2013, www.thesixthaxis.com/2013/07/30/sony-working
-on-blu-ray-successor-are-ps4-discs-soon-to-be-out-
dated.
18. Shadbolt, Peter, “The Eternity Drive: Why DNA Could Be
the Future of Data Storage,” CNN, February 25, 2015,
www.cnn.com/2015/02/25/tech/make-create-innovate-
fossil-dna-data-storage.
19. MacDonald, Glenn, “DNA Data Storage Lasts Thousands
of Years,” Discovery, August 7, 2015, http://news.discov
ery.com/tech/biotechnology/dna-data-storage-lasts-thou
sands-of-years-150817.htm.
20. Keith, Jonathan, “DNA Data Storage: 100 Million Hours
of HD Video in Every Cup,” Phys.Org, January 25, 2013,
http://phys.org/news/2013-01-dna-storage-million
-hours-hd.html.
21. Mearian, Lucas, “Samsung Unveils 15 TB SSD Based on
Densest Flash Memory,” Computerworld, August 17,
2015, www.computerworld.com/article/2971482/cloud
-security/samsung-unveils-15tb-ssd-based-on-densest
-flash-memory.html.
22. “About,” CD-adapco, www.cd-adapco.com/about#,
accessed December 12, 2015.
23. “Panasas ActiveStor Storage Speeds Modeling
Computation at CD-adapco,” Panasas, November 17,
2015, www.panasas.com/news/press-releases/panasas
-activestor-storage-speeds-modeling-computation-cd
-adapco.
24. “City of Riverside: Building the Connected Community of
the Future,” NetApp, December 2, 2015, www.netapp.
com/us/media/cs-city-of-riverside.pdf.
25. Patel, Raj, “Discover Pinterest: Cloud Engineering,” Pin-
terest, November 20, 2015, https://engineering.pinterest.
com/blog/discover-pinterest-cloud-engineering.
26. Murphy, Margi, “Pinterest Nails down More Users after
Building Apache HBase Analytics Tool,” TechWorld,
April 16, 2015, www.techworld.com/news/big-data/pin
terests-pinalytics-using-hadoop-get-grips-with-its-data
-3608139.
27. Shahangian, Mohammad “Powering Big Data at Pinter-
est,” Pinterest, July 24, 2014, https://engineering.pinter
est.com/blog/powering-big-data-pinterest.
28. “AWS Case Study: Pinterest,” Amazon Web Services,
https://aws.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies/pinterest,
accessed December 13, 2015.
29. Conn, Joseph, “Nurses Turn to Speech-Recognition Soft-
ware to Speed Documentation,” Modern Healthcare,
December 12, 2015, www.modernhealthcare.com/arti
cle/20151212/MAGAZINE/312129980.
30. “Overview,” Neat, www.neat.com, accessed October 16,
2015.
31. “Everything You Need to Know about the Switch to Chip
Cards,” https://squareup.com/townsquare/emv, accessed
October 16, 2015.
32. Vaas, Lisa, “The $1 Million Apple iTunes Gift Card
Scam,” Naked Security, October 23, 2015, https://naked
security.sophos.com/2015/10/23/the-1m-apple-itunes-
gift-card-scam.
33. “US Credit Cards with Smart Chip Technology, The
Points Guy, May 30, 2013, http://thepointsguy.com/2013
/05/us-credit-cards-with-smart-chips.
34. “Summary Figures (2014),” UK Cards Association, www
.theukcardsassociation.org.uk/2014-facts-figures/sum
mary_figures_2014.asp, accessed October 17, 2015.
35. “Square Helps More Sellers Grow Their Business Faster,”
Square, https://squareup.com/?pcrid=3330880435&
pdv=c&pkw=square+stand&pm=true&pmt=e, accessed
October 17, 2015.
36. Gagliordi, Natalie, “Target Will Roll Out RFID Price Tags
to Improve Inventory Management,” ZDNet, May 19,
2015, www.zdnet.com/article/target-will-roll-out-rfid
-price-tags-to-improve-inventory-management.
37. Swedberg, Claire, Target Announces Nationwide RFID
Rollout,” RFID Journal, May 20, 2015, www.rfidjournal.
com/articles/view?13060.
38. Schuman, Evan, “Target Prepping Stores with ‘No Shop-
ping Cart, No Bag’,” Computerworld, www.computer
world.com/article/3013962/retail-it/target-prepping
-stores-with-no-shopping-cart-no-bag.html.
39. “3D Touch,” Apple, www.apple.com/iphone-6s/3d-touch,
accessed December 13, 2015,
40. Andrzejewski, Alexa, “OpenTable for iOS 9: The Shortest
Path between You + Dining,” OpenTable, December 25,
2015, http://blog.opentable.com/2015/opentable-for-ios-
9-the-shortest-path-between-you-dining.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 133
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

41. Tyson, Jeff, Wilson, Terry V., “How Graphics Cards
Work, How Stuff Works,” http://computer.howstuff
works.com/graphics-card.html, accessed October 17,
2015.
42. “LG Unveils Its New Flexible, Paper-Thin TV,” Science
Alert, August 11, 2015, www.sciencealert.com/lg-unveils-
its-new-flexible-paper-thin-tv.
43. Hill, Simon, “LG Display Talks Flexible, Transparent,
Double-Sided OLEDs in IFA Keynote,” Digital Trends,
September 4, 2015, www.digitaltrends.com/home-the
ater/lg-display-envisions-a-future-of-flexible-wafer-thin
-oled-displays.
44. Seppala, Timothy J., “LG’s Spending Billions to Make
More OLED Things,” Engadget, November 26, 2015,
www.engadget.com/2015/11/26/lg-oled-manufacturing-
plant.
45. “PrinterOn”, PrinterOn, www.printeron.com/images
/docs/PrinterOnAirportPrintingSolutions.pdf, accessed
August 19, 2013.
46. Saker, Anne, “Printing a 3D Heart to Save a Heart,”
Cincinnati.com, February 22, 2015, www.cincinnati
.com/story/news/2015/02/21/printing-heart-save-heart
/23825279/.
47. Ibid.
48. “3D Printing in the Automotive Industry,” FunTech, Jan-
uary 7, 2015, http://blog.funtech.com/2015/01/3d-print
ing-in-automotive-industry.html.
49. Sher, Davide, “World’s Fastest RC Car 3D Printed on
Ultimaker 2 Extended,” October 12, 2015, http://3dprin
tingindustry.com/2015/10/12/worlds-fastest-rc-car-3d
-printed-on-ultimaker-2-extended/.
50. Gilpin, Lyndsey, “10 Industries 3D Printing Will Disrupt
or Decimate,” Republic, February 25, 2014, www.techre
public.com/article/10-industries-3d-printing-will-dis
rupt-or-decimate.
51. Benvin, Rich, “Biotech Startup Uses 3D Bioprinting to
Create Custom Breast Implants and Grafts,” Bioprinting
World, July 27, 2015, http://bioprintingworld.com/bio
tech-startup-uses-3d-bioprinting-to-create-custom-
breast-implants-and-grafts.
52. Benvin, Rich, “3D Organ Bioprinting—Who Wants to
Live Forever?,” Bioprinting World, March 24, 2015,
http://bioprintingworld.com/3d-organ-bioprinting-who
-wants-to-live-forever.
53. Hamblen, Matt, “Wearables and Company Wellness Pro-
grams Go Hand-in-Hand,” Computerworld, June 18,
2015, www.computerworld.com/article/2937333/wear
ables/wearables-and-company-wellness-programs-go-
hand-in-hand.html.
54. Fogarty, Kevin, “Card-Sized Diagnostics, e-Skin Are
Future of Wearable Medicine,” Computerworld, May 13,
2015, www.computerworld.com/article/2922118/health
care-it/health-sensing-e-skin-card-sized-diagnostics-are-
future-of-wearable-medicine.html.
55. Broder, Kevin, MD, “Glove from Imogen Heap Will
Change the Way You Make Music,” Wearable Devices,
June 24, 2014, www.wearabledevices.com/2014/06/24/
glove-from-imogen-heap.
56. Arthur, Rachel, “Google and Levi’s Want to Put Compu-
ters in Your Clothing,” Forbes, June 16, 2015, www.for
bes.com/sites/rachelarthur/2015/06/16/google-and-levis-
want-to-put-computers-in-your-clothing.
57. “Chromebooks in Healthcare: Good for Patients and for
Bottom Lines,” Samsung, December 7, 2015, https://
insights.samsung.com/2015/12/07/chromebooks-in
-healthcare-good-for-patients-and-for-bottom-lines-2/.
58. “Case Study: Larson & Darby Group,” HP,
www8.hp.com/us/en/pdf/larson-darby-group-hi-
res_tcm_245_1814936.pdf, accessed November 2, 2015.
59. “About ADP,” ADP, www.adp.com/who-we-are.aspx,
accessed October 18, 2015.
60. “About Mastercard,” Mastercard, www.mastercard.us
/en-us/about-mastercard/what-we-do/payment-proces
sing.html, accessed October 18, 2015.
61. “About UPS,” UPS, www.ups.com/content/us/en/about
/index.html?WT.svl=SubNav, accessed October 18, 2015.
62. Dignan, Larry, “IBM Rolls Out Z13, Repositions Main-
frame for Mobile Transactions,” ZD Net, January 13,
2015, www.zdnet.com/article/ibm-rolls-out-z13-reposi
tions-mainframe-for-mobile-transactions.
63. Green, Timothy, “Here’s Why IBM Is Still Building
Mainframes,” The Motley Fool, accessed October 18,
2015, www.fool.com/investing/general/2015/01/24
/heres-why-ibm-is-still-building-mainframes.aspx.
64. Chen, Stephen, “World’s Fastest Computer, Tianhe-2,
Might Get Very Little Use,” South China Morning Post,
June 20, 2013, www.scmp.com/news/china/article
/1264529/worlds-fastest-computer-tianhe-2-might-get-
very-little-use.
65. “A Rare Look inside Apple’s Maiden, North Carolina Data
Center [Video],” iClarified, posted April 25, 2014, www
.iclarified.com/40226/a-rare-look-inside-apples-maiden-
north-carolina-data-center-video.
66. “Guide to Virtualization Hypervisors,” Network Comput-
ing, February 9, 2015, www.networkcomputing.com
/data-centers/guide-to-virtualization-hypervisors/d/d-id/
1318945.
67. “VMWare Case Study: Cognizant,” VMWare, October 27,
2015, www.vmware.com/files/pdf/customers/vmware
-cognizant-15q1-cs-en.pdf?src=WWW_customers_vm
ware-cognizant-15q1-cs-en.pdf.
68. Crosman, Penny, “Why Tech-Savvy Banks Are Gung Ho
about ‘Container’ Software,” American Banker, Decem-
ber 3, 2015, www.americanbanker.com/news/bank-tech
nology/why-tech-savvy-banks-are-gung-ho-about-con
tainer-software-1078145-1.html.
69. Ovide, Shira, “Software Firms Scramble to Jump into
Containers,” Wall Street Journal, November 4, 2015,
www.wsj.com/articles/software-firms-scramble-to-jump
-into-containers-1415149692.
70. Morgan, Timothy Prickett, “Inside the Rackspace Open-
Power Megaserver,” The Platform, March 23, 2015,
www.theplatform.net/2015/03/23/inside-the-rackspace
-openpower-megaserver.
71. Arthur, Charles, “Technology Firms to Spend $150bn on
Building New Data Centres,” Guardian, August 23,
2013, www.theguardian.com/business/2013/aug/23/
spending-on-data-centres-reaches-150-billion-dollars.
72. Colt, Sam, “Apple is Building a $2 Billion Data Center in
Arizona,” Business Insider, February 2, 2015, www.busi
nessinsider.com/apple-is-building-a-2-billion-data-cen
ter-in-arizona-2015-2.
73. “GM’s Latest Michigan Data Center Gets LEED Gold,”
Data Center Dynamics, September 13, 2013, www.data
134 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

centerdynamics.com/focus/archive/2013/09/gms-latest
-michigan-data-center-gets-leed-gold.
74. Boyd, Aaron, “Data Center Consolidation Biggest
Money Saver among IT Reforms,” Federal Times, Sep-
tember 15, 2015, www.federaltimes.com/story/govern
ment/it/data-center/2015/09/15/data-center-biggest
-saver/72325764.
75. “Modular Data Center Expansion Planned for Red
Cloud,” Wired Real Estate Group, http://wiredre.com
/modular-data-center-expansion-planned-for-red-cloud,
accessed October 18, 2015.
76. Babcock, Charles, “5 Data Center Trends for 2013,”
InformationWeek, January 2, 2013, www.information
week.com/hardware/data-centers/5-data-center-trends-
for-2013/240145349?printer_friendly=this-page.
77. Thibodeau, P., “Rural N.C. Becomes Popular IT Loca-
tion,” Computerworld, June 20, 2011, p. 2.
78. “IBM Opens New Cloud Data Center in Peru to Meet
Demand for Big Data Analytics,” IBM, August 22, 2013,
www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/41809.wss.
79. Wells, Brad, “What Truly Makes a Computer ‘Green’?”
OnEarth (blog), September 8, 2008, www.onearth.org
/node/658.
80. “Electronics Waste Management in the United States
through 2009,” U.S. EPA, May 2011, EPA 530-R-11-002
www.epa.gov/wastes/conserve/materials/ecycling/docs
/fullbaselinereport2011.pdf.
81. “EPEAT Environmental Criteria,” EPEAT, www.epeat.
net/resources/criteria, accessed August 19, 2013.
82. “Electronic Environmental Assessment Tool,” EPEAT,
www.zerowaste.org/epeat_devel/faq.htm, accessed Octo-
ber 18, 2015.
83. “Asset Resale and Recycling,” Dell, www.dell.com/learn
/us/en/uscorp1/services/asset-resale-and-recycling?
c=us&l=en&s=corp&cs=uscorp1, accessed October 18,
2015.
84. “Product Return and Recycling,” www8.hp.com/us/en
/hp-information/environment/product-recycling.html#.
ViOsZo2FP4g, accessed October 18, 2015.
CHAPTER 3 • Hardware and Mobile Devices 135
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
4
Software and Mobile
Applications
Georgejmclittle/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• Know how you’re constantly updating and upgrading
programs on your computer and devices? You can
thank IBM for that. They birthed the software industry in
1969 when they decided to charge customers sepa-
rately for software and services. Although business
computers had been in use since the mid-1950s, hard-
ware manufacturers had bundled software with their
hardware without charging for it.
• If you move to the Microsoft Windows 10 operating
system, you will no longer have to upgrade to a new
operating system every few years. Instead, Microsoft
will be providing continual, incremental updates and
improvements, rolled out automatically, perhaps as
often as monthly for individual consumers. Windows 10
is here to stay!
• As of July 2015, Apple’s App Store had over 1.5 million
apps available for iOS device users, and Android users
could choose from over 1.6 million mobile apps on
Google’s Play Store.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• Software is valuable in helping individuals, work-
groups, and entire enterprises achieve their
goals.
• Identify and briefly describe the functions of two
basic kinds of software.
• Define the term “sphere of influence,” and
describe how it can be used to classify software.
• The operating system is called the “soul of the
computer” because it controls how you enter data
into your computer, perform meaningful work, and
display results.
• Define the basic functions performed by the
operating system.
• Identify current operating systems that are used for
personal, workgroup, and enterprise computing.
• Discuss the role of the operating system in
embedded systems.
• Organizations typically use off-the-shelf applica-
tion software to meet common business needs
and proprietary application software to meet
unique business needs and provide a competitive
advantage.
• Discuss how application software can
support personal, workgroup, and enterprise
business objectives.
• Identify three basic approaches to developing
application software and discuss the pros
and cons of each.
• Identify programming languages commonly in
use today.
• The software industry continues to undergo
constant change; computer users need to be
aware of recent trends and issues in the software
industry to be effective in their business and
personal life.
• Identify several key software issues and trends
that have an impact on organizations and
individuals.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Software and Mobile Applications?
Software is indispensable for any computer system and the people using it. In this chapter, you will
learn about system software—which includes operating systems, utilities, and middleware—and
application software. The operating system is sometimes called the “soul of the computer,” and
without it, you would be unable to enter data into your computer, perform meaningful work, or
display results. You use application software to help you accomplish tasks that enable you to
accomplish tasks efficiently and effectively. Sales representatives use software on their smartphones
and tablet computers to enter sales orders and help their customers get what they want. Stock and
bond traders use software to make split-second decisions involving millions of dollars. Scientists use
software to analyze the threat of climate change. Regardless of your job, you will likely use software
to help you advance in your career and earn higher wages. You can also use software to help you
prepare your personal income taxes, keep a budget, and stay in contact with friends and family
online. Software can truly advance your career and enrich your life. We begin with an overview of
software.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• How is application software tied to or limited by advances in hardware and operating systems?
• How can organizations ensure that their employees use appropriate software to support their work
tasks and meet the goals of the enterprise?
An Overview of Software
Software consists of computer programs that control the workings of computer
hardware. Software can be divided into two types: systems software and
application software. System software includes operating systems, utilities,
and middleware that coordinate the activities and functions of the hardware
and other programs throughout the computer system. Application software
consists of programs that help users solve particular computing problems.
Examples include a spreadsheet program or a program that captures and dis-
plays data that enables monitoring of a manufacturing process.
The effective use of software can have a profound impact on individuals
and organizations. It can make the difference between profits and losses and
between financial health and bankruptcy. As Figure 4.1 shows, companies
recognize this impact; globally, spending on software now exceeds other IT
FIGURE 4.1
Software expenditures exceed
spending on hardware
Since the 1950s, businesses have
substantially increased their expen-
ditures on software compared with
hardware.
Software
Outsourcing
Hardware
Consulting
Communications
equipment
15%
20%
20%
26%
19%
system software: Software that
includes operating systems, utilities,
and middleware that coordinate the
activities and functions of the hardware
and other programs throughout the
computer system.
application software: Programs
that help users solve particular com-
puting problems.
138 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

expenditures, including spending on computer hardware. This is far different
from when computers first were available; software was given away and cus-
tomers paid only for the hardware.1 Indeed, the software industry was born
in 1969 when IBM decided to unbundle—and charge customers separately
for—its software and services. Although business computers had been in use
since the mid-1950s, hardware manufacturers had previously bundled soft-
ware with their hardware without charging separately for it.
Software Sphere of Influence
Every organization relies on the contributions of individuals and groups
across the enterprise to achieve its business objectives. One useful way of
classifying the many potential uses of information systems is to identify the
scope of the problems and opportunities that the software addresses. This
scope is called the sphere of influence. For most companies, the spheres of
influence are personal, workgroup, and enterprise. Table 4.1 shows how
various kinds of software support these three spheres.
Information systems that operate within the personal sphere of influence
serve the needs of individual users. These information systems help users
improve their personal effectiveness, increasing the amount and quality of
work they can do. Such software is often called personal productivity soft-
ware. For example, VIP Organizer is personal productivity software designed
to help users develop to do lists, categorize tasks, keep notes and records in a
single database, report on performance, and set deadlines and priorities.2
When two or more people work together to achieve a common goal, they
form a workgroup. Workgroups include large, formal, permanent organiza-
tional entities, such as sections or departments, as well as temporary groups
formed to complete a specific project. An information system in the work-
group sphere of influence helps workgroup members attain their common
goals. Microsoft Outlook is an example of an application in the workgroup
sphere of influence; see Figure 4.2. IBM Notes, another application in the
workgroup sphere of influence, provides collaboration features such as team
calendars, email, to-do lists, contact management, discussion forums, file shar-
ing, microblogging, instant messaging, blogs, and user directories.3 JGC Cor-
poration is an engineering construction company with operations in more
than 70 different countries. Many of its projects cost over $15 billion, last for
10 years or more, and involve hundreds of partner companies. JGC employs
Lotus Notes to coordinate the work of project teams and relay information
about project status, changes in work plans, and other critical information.4
Information systems that operate within the enterprise sphere of influ-
ence support an organization in its interactions with its environment, includ-
ing customers, suppliers, shareholders, competitors, special-interest groups,
the financial community, and government agencies. The enterprise sphere of
influence for a company might include business partners such as suppliers
that provide raw materials, retail companies that store and sell a company’s
TABLE 4.1 Software supporting individuals, workgroups, and enterprises
Software Type
Personal
Workgroup
Enterprise
Systems software
Smartphone, tablet, personal
computer, and workstation
operating systems
Network operating systems
Server and mainframe
operating systems
Application
software
Word-processing, spreadsheet,
database, and graphics
programs
Email, group-scheduling,
shared-work, and collabo-
ration applications
General-ledger, order-
entry, payroll, and human-
resources applications
sphere of influence: The scope of
the problems and opportunities that the
software addresses.
personal sphere of influence:
The sphere of influence that serves the
needs of an individual user.
personal productivity software:
Software that enables users to
improve their personal effectiveness,
increasing the amount of work and
quality of work they can do.
workgroup: Two or more people who
work together to achieve a common goal.
workgroup sphere of influence:
The sphere of influence that helps
workgroup members attain their
common goals.
enterprise sphere of influence:
The sphere of influence that serves the
needs of an organization in its interac-
tions with its environment.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 139
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
products, and shipping companies that transport raw materials to the plant
and finished goods to retail outlets. Many organizations use SAP enterprise
resource planning software to capture customer orders, manage inventory,
plan and ship customer orders, bill customers, and manage accounts payable
and accounts receivable.
Establishing a Corporate App Store
You are a new hire in the finance organization of a large retail firm. You are
amazed to see the number of different software applications (apps) employed by
your coworkers, who use them for everything from maintaining personal calen-
dars to calculating the rate of return on projects to forecasting sales and financial
data. It seems that everyone has a favorite app for doing each of these tasks. For
example, in the few weeks you have been here, you identified over half a dozen
different apps that are being used to calculate the rate of return on projects and
investments. Your coworkers download these apps from the Internet or build
them using spreadsheet software. You previously worked as an intern at another
large retailer that had established a corporate app store, which employees
accessed to download corporate-approved apps that had been vetted and recom-
mended for use for specific tasks. You wonder if such an approach should be
implemented at your current employer.
Review Questions
1.
Give an example of two tasks that an employee in the finance organization of
this retail firm might perform that would have an impact restricted to their
own personal sphere of influence.
2.
Identify two tasks that an employee might perform that would have an impact
on the workgroup and two that would have an impact on the enterprise
sphere of influence.
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What risks are associated with letting employees use their favorite app to per-
form various tasks? Are these risks associated with tasks in the personal,
workgroup, or enterprise sphere of influence?
FIGURE 4.2
Microsoft Outlook
Outlook is an application that work-
groups can use to schedule meet-
ings and coordinate activities.
Microsoft product screenshots used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
140 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

2.
Can you identify some advantages and disadvantages of establishing a corpo-
rate app store?
We will now discuss systems software including operating systems, utili-
ties, and middleware.
Systems Software
The primary role of system software is to control the operations of computer
hardware. System software also supports the problem-solving capabilities of
application programs. System software can be divided into three types: oper-
ating systems, utility programs, and middleware.
Operating Systems
An operating system (OS) is a set of programs that controls a computer’s
hardware and acts as an interface with application software; see Figure 4.3.
An operating system can control one or more computers, or it can allow mul-
tiple users to interact with one computer. The various combinations of OSs,
computers, and users include the following:
●
Single computer with a single user. This system is commonly used in
personal computers, tablets, and smartphones that support one user at a
time. Examples of OSs for this setup include Microsoft Windows, Mac OS
X, and Google Android.
●
Single computer with multiple simultaneous users. This type of system
is used in larger server or mainframe computers that support hundreds or
thousands of people, all using the computer at the same time. Examples of
OSs that support this kind of system include UNIX, z/OS, and HP-UX.
●
Multiple computers with multiple users. This type of system is used in
computer networks, including home networks with several computers
attached as well as large computer networks with hundreds of computers
attached, supporting many users, who may be located around the world.
Network server OSs include Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server, Windows
Server, and Mac OS X Server.
●
Special-purpose computers. This type of system is typical of a number
of computers with specialized functions, such as those that control
FIGURE 4.3
Role of operating systems
The role of the operating system is to
act as an interface between appli-
cation software and hardware.
User interface
Application program interface
Operating system kernel and utilities
Hardware drivers
Hardware
operating system (OS): A set of
computer programs that controls the
computer hardware and acts as an
interface to application software.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 141
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

sophisticated military aircraft, digital cameras, or home appliances. Exam-
ples of OSs designed for these purposes include Windows Embedded,
Symbian, and some distributions of Linux.
The OS, which plays a central role in the functioning of a computer sys-
tem, is usually stored on a hard drive in general-purpose computers and in
solid state memory on mobile computers such as tablets and smartphones.
After you start, or boot up, a computer system, the kernel of the OS is loaded
into primary storage and remains there for as long as the computer is pow-
ered on. The kernel, as its name suggests, is the heart of the OS and controls
its most critical processes. The kernel ties all of the OS components together
and regulates other programs.
Other portions of the OS are transferred to memory as the system needs
them. OS developers are continually working to shorten the time required to
boot devices after they are shut down and to wake devices from sleep mode.
You can also boot a computer from a CD, a DVD, or even a USB flash
drive. A storage device that contains some or all of the OS is often called a
rescue disk because you can use it to start the computer if you have problems
with the primary hard disk.
Functions Performed by the Operating System
The programs that make up the OS perform a variety of activities, including
the following:
●
Control common computer hardware functions
●
Provide a user interface and manage input/output management
●
Provide a degree of hardware independence
●
Manage system memory
●
Manage processing tasks
●
Provide networking capability
●
Control access to system resources
●
Manage files
Common Hardware Functions
The OS enables applications to perform a variety
of hardware-related tasks, such as the following:
●
Get input from the keyboard or another input device
●
Retrieve data from disks
●
Store data on disks
●
Display information on a monitor or printer
Each of these tasks requires a detailed set of instructions. The OS converts
a basic request into instructions that the hardware can process. In effect, the
OS acts as an intermediary between the application and the hardware. The
OS uses special software (called hardware drivers) provided by device manu-
facturers to communicate with and control a device. Hardware drivers are typ-
ically downloaded from the device manufacturer’s Web site or read from an
installation DVD and installed when the hardware is first connected to the
computer system.
User Interface and Input/Output Management
One of the most important func-
tions of any OS is providing a user interface, which allows people to access
and interact with the computer system. The first user interfaces for mainframe
and personal computer systems were command based. A command-based
user interface requires you to give text commands to the computer to per-
form basic activities. For example, the command ERASE 00TAXRTN would
cause the computer to erase a file named 00TAXRTN. RENAME and COPY are
other examples of commands used to rename files and copy files from one
location to another. Today’s systems engineers and administrators often use a
kernel: The heart of the operating
system that controls the most critical
processes of the OS.
user interface: The element of the
operating system that allows people to
access and interact with the computer
system.
command-based user
interface: A user interface that
requires you to give text commands to
the computer to perform basic
activities.
142 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

command-based user interface to control the low-level functioning of com-
puter systems. Most modern OSs (including those with graphical user inter-
faces, such as Windows) provide a way to interact with the system through a
command line. See Figure 4.4.
A graphical user interface (GUI) displays pictures (called icons) and
menus that people use to send commands to the computer system. GUIs are
more intuitive to use than command-based interfaces because they try to
anticipate the user’s needs and they provide easy-to-recognize options. Micro-
soft Windows is one popular operating system with a GUI. As the name sug-
gests, Windows is based on the use of a window, or a portion of the display
screen dedicated to a specific application. The screen can display several win-
dows at once.
Although GUIs have traditionally been accessed using a keyboard and
mouse, more recent technologies allow people to use touch screens and spoken
commands. Today’s mobile devices and some PCs, for example, use a touch user
interface—also called a natural user interface (NUI) or multitouch interface.
Speech recognition is also available with some operating systems. Microsoft
and other operating system manufacturers have developed voice-command
computer control software. Microsoft employs a special programming language
called Speech Application Program Interface (SAPI) to associate your voice
commands with specific actions performed by the computer. Apple’s OpenEars
makes it simple for you to add speech recognition and text to speech to your
iPhone, iPad, or iPod. Siri, the personal assistant that acts as an app on the
Apple iOS operating system, uses a natural language user interface to answer
questions. Adacel is a company that develops advanced simulation and control
systems for aviation and defense. It is working on a voice-activated control sys-
tem to operate the display system on aircrafts.
Some operating systems provide sight interfaces that enable a computer
to perform different commands or operations depending on where a person
is looking on the screen. Some companies are also experimenting with sen-
sors attached to the human brain (brain interfaces) that can detect brain
waves and control a computer as a result. Sight and brain interfaces can be
very helpful to disabled individuals.
FIGURE 4.4
Command-based and
graphical user interfaces
A Windows file system viewed with a
GUI (a) and from the command
prompt (b).
(a)
(b)
Microsoft product screenshots used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
graphical user interface (GUI):
An interface that displays pictures
(icons) and menus that people use to
send commands to the computer
system.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 143
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Operating system developers must be extremely careful in making
changes to their user interface. The Windows 8 touch interface represented
a major change from its traditional mouse-driven point-and-click user inter-
face. Initial user reaction was lukewarm at best, with many users complain-
ing about the loss of the Start button to display a pop-up menu of
programs, folders, and icons. For Windows 10 (there is no Windows 9),
Microsoft responded to consumers’ feedback by bringing back the tradi-
tional Start screen. Microsoft also tried to appease users accustomed to the
tile-based interface of Windows 8 by adding a few tiles to the right side of
the Start menu.
Hardware Independence
An application programming interface (API) is a
set of programming instructions and standards that enable one software
program to access and use the services of another software program. An API
provides a software-to-software interface, not a user interface. The API also
provides software developers tools that allow them to build application soft-
ware without needing to understand the inner workings of the OS and hard-
ware. Software applications are designed to run on a particular OS by using
the operating system’s application program interface.
APIs also provide a degree of hardware independence so that the under-
lying hardware can change without necessarily requiring a rewrite of the soft-
ware applications. Hardware independence refers to the ability of a software
program to run on any platform, without concern for the specific underlying
hardware. When new hardware technologies are introduced, the operating
system, not the application software, is required to adjust to enable use of
those changes.
A software manufacturing company or service provider will often
release its API to the public so that other software developers can design
products that employ its service. For example, Amazon.com released its
API to other Web site developers so they could use it to access Amazon’s
product information; thus, allowing third-party Web sites to post direct
links to Amazon products with updated prices and a “buy now” option.5
Memory Management
The OS also controls how memory is accessed, maxi-
mizing the use of available memory and storage to provide optimum effi-
ciency. The memory-management feature of many OSs allows the computer
to execute program instructions effectively and to speed processing. One way
to increase the performance of an old computer is to upgrade to a newer OS
and increase the amount of memory.
Most OSs support virtual memory, which allocates space on the hard
disk to supplement the immediate, functional memory capacity of RAM. Vir-
tual memory works by swapping programs or parts of programs between
memory and one or more disk devices—a concept called paging. This proce-
dure reduces CPU idle time and increases the number of jobs that can run in
a given time span.
Processing Tasks
Operating systems use the following five basic approaches
to task management to increase the amount of processing that can be accom-
plished in a given amount of time:
●
Multiuser. Allows two or more users to run programs at the same time
on the same computer. Some operating systems permit hundreds or
even thousands of concurrent users. The ability of the computer to han-
dle an increasing number of concurrent users smoothly is called
scalability.
●
Multiprocessing. Supports running a program on more than one CPU.
●
Multitasking. Allows more than one program to run concurrently.
application programming inter-
face (API): A set of programming
instructions and standards that enables
one software program to access and
use the services of another software
program.
hardware independence: The
ability of a software program to run on
any platform, without concern for the
specific underlying hardware.
144 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Multithreading. Allows different threads of a single program to run
concurrently. A thread is a set of instructions within an application that
is independent of other threads. For example, in a spreadsheet program,
the thread to open the workbook is separate from the thread to sum a
column of figures.
●
Real time. Responds to input instantly. To do this, the operating system
task scheduler can stop any task at any point in its execution if it deter-
mines that another higher priority task needs to run immediately. Real-
time operating systems are used to control the operation of jet engines,
the deployment of air bags, and the operation of antilock braking
systems—among other uses.
Not all operating systems employ all these approaches to task manage-
ment. For example, the general-purpose operating systems with which we are
most familiar (e.g., Windows, Mac OS, and Linux) cannot support real-time
processing.
Networking Capability
Most operating systems include networking capabilities
so that computers can join together in a network to send and receive data
and share computing resources. Operating systems for larger server compu-
ters are designed specifically for computer networking environments.
Access to System Resources and Security
Because computers often handle sensi-
tive data that can be accessed over networks, the OS needs to provide a high
level of security against unauthorized access to the users’ data and programs.
Typically, the OS establishes a logon procedure that requires users to enter an
identification code, such as a user name, and a password. Operating systems
may also control what system resources a user may access. When a user success-
fully logs on to the system, the OS permits access to only the portions of the sys-
tem for which the user has been authorized access. The OS records who is using
the system and for how long, and it reports any attempted breaches of security.
File Management
The OS manages files to ensure that files in secondary stor-
age are available when needed and that they are protected from access by
unauthorized users. Many computers support multiple users who store files
on centrally located disks or tape drives. The OS keeps track of where each
file is stored and who is cleared to access them.
Current Operating Systems
Today’s operating systems incorporate sophisticated features and impressive
graphic effects. Table 4.2 classifies a few current operating systems by sphere
of influence.
TABLE 4.2 Operating systems by sphere of influence
Personal
Workgroup
Enterprise
Microsoft Windows
Microsoft Windows Server
Microsoft Windows
Server
Mac OS X, iOS
Mac OS X Server
Linux
Linux
Linux
Google Android, Chrome
OS
UNIX
UNIX
HP webOS
IBM i and z/OS
IBM i and z/OS
HP-UX
HP-UX
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 145
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

From time to time, software manufacturers drop support for older operating
systems—meaning that although computers and software running under these
operating system will continue to run, the operating system manufacturer will no
longer provide security fixes and updates. Without such patches, the users’ com-
puters are more susceptible to being infected by viruses and other malware. For
example, Google announced that in 2016 it would be ending its support for its
Chrome browser on Windows XP and Vista as well as on Mac OS X 10.6, 10.7,
and 10.8. Google chose to drop support for these operating systems because
they are no longer actively supported by Microsoft and Apple, respectively.6
Discontinuance of support is a strong reason to upgrade to new software.
However, many organizations take the approach that “if it ain’t broke, don’t
fix it.” In their view, other projects take priority over updating software that
is still functioning. However, this approach can lead to interruptions in key
systems. For example, on November 7, 2015, planes were grounded for sev-
eral hours at Paris’ busy Orly airport when a computer that links air traffic
control systems with France’s main weather bureau stopped working. The
computer was running on Windows 3.1, a 23-year-old operating system
dropped from support by Microsoft over a decade ago.7
Personal Computing Operating Systems
This section summarizes information about several operating systems that are
found on personal computers, portable computers, and mobile devices.
Microsoft PC Operating Systems
In 1980, executives from IBM approached
Microsoft’s Bill Gates regarding the creation of an operating system for IBM’s
first personal computer. That operating system, which was ultimately called
Microsoft Disk Operating System (MS-DOS), was based on Microsoft’s pur-
chase of the Quick and Dirty Operating System (QDOS) written by Tim Pater-
son of Seattle Computer Products. Microsoft bought the rights to QDOS for
$50,000. QDOS, in turn, was based on Gary Kildall’s Control Program for
Microcomputers (CP/M). As part of its agreement with Microsoft, IBM allowed
Microsoft to retain the rights to MS-DOS and to market MS-DOS separately
from the IBM personal computer. The rest is history, with Gates and Microsoft
earning a fortune from the licensing of MS-DOS and its descendants.8 MS-
DOS, which had a command-based interface that was difficult to learn and
use, eventually gave way to the more user-friendly Windows operating sys-
tem, which opened the PC market to everyday users. See Figure 4.5.
FIGURE 4.5
Microsoft Windows 10
Windows 10 brings back the familiar
Start menu, replaces the Explorer
browser with the Edge browser, and
provides the Cortana personal
assistant.
omihay/Shutterstock.com
146 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

With its launch of Windows 10, Microsoft announced that it is moving
away from its usual practice of releasing major new versions of its Windows
operating system every few years (see Table 4.3 for an overview of the
current and previous versions of Windows). Instead, the company will be
TABLE 4.3 Summary of Microsoft Windows operating systems
Year
Version
Highlights
1985
Windows 1.0
Ran as a graphical, 16-bit multitasking shell on top of an existing MS-DOS installation,
providing an environment that could run graphical programs designed for Windows
as well as existing MS-DOS software
1987
Windows 2.0
Introduced more sophisticated keyboard shortcuts as well as the ability to minimize
and maximize Windows
1988
Windows 2.03
Allowed application Windows to overlap each other
1990
Windows 3.0
Introduced a multitasking capability with a protected/enhanced mode, which allowed
Windows applications to use more memory; first widely successful version of Windows
1992
Windows 3.1
Introduced improved system stability and expanded support for multimedia, TrueType
fonts, and workgroup networking
1995
Windows 95
Introduced numerous important features and functions, such as the taskbar, the Start
button, and a new approach to user navigation; moved from a 16-bit architecture to a
32-bit architecture
1998
Windows 98
Introduced many features, such as the Quick Launch toolbar, the Active Desktop,
single-click launching, Back and Forward navigation buttons, favorites, and the
address bar in Windows Explorer, and image thumbnails; heavily criticized operating
system, with major compatibility issues
1999
Windows 98 Second
Edition
Included fixes for many Windows 98 problems and replaced Internet Explorer 4.0
with Internet Explorer 5.0; improved audio, modem, and USB support
2000
Windows 2000
An operating system for use on both client and server computers; marketed as the
most secure Windows version ever, but it became the target of a number of high-
profile virus attacks, such as Code Red and Nimda
2000
Windows ME
Rated Microsoft’s worst OS by many industry observers; exhibited stability and com-
patibility issues; included Internet Explorer 5.5, Windows Media Player 7, and Win-
dows Movie Maker software, which provided basic video editing functions that were
designed to be easy for consumers to use
2001
Windows XP
Offered a major advance from the MS-DOS–based versions of Windows in terms of secu-
rity, stability, and efficiency; introduced a significantly redesigned graphical user interface
2007
Windows Vista
Focused primarily on improving security; offered an updated graphical user interface
and visual style dubbed “Aero” and a new search component called Windows Search;
provided redesigned networking, audio, print, and display subsystems, as well as new
multimedia capabilities, including Windows DVD Maker
2009
Windows 7
Provided an incremental upgrade to the operating system; intended to address Win-
dows Vista’s performance issues, while maintaining hardware and software compati-
bility; provided support for touch displays and 64-bit processors
2012
Windows 8
Introduced major changes to the operating system’s platform and user interface to
improve user experience on tablets; included a touch-optimized Windows shell, a Start
screen that displays programs and dynamically updated content on a grid of tiles, the
ability to sync apps and settings between devices, and the Windows Store for down-
loading and purchasing new software
2013
Windows 8.1
Included an improved Start screen, additional bundled apps, tighter OneDrive inte-
gration, Internet Explorer 11, a Bing-powered unified search system, and restoration
of a visible Start button on the taskbar
2015
Windows 10
Brought back the familiar Start menu and desktop; introduced the Edge browser and
the Cortana assistant, which responds to natural language and can perform a variety of
organizational tasks for the end user, including setting reminders, scheduling calendar
events, calculating math problems, and converting measurements and money
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 147
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

providing ongoing, incremental upgrades and improvements, rolled out auto-
matically, perhaps as often as monthly for individual consumers. Organiza-
tions, whose information systems professionals desire minimal change in
order to ensure reliable operations of corporate applications, may elect to opt
out of such frequent updates. Microsoft hopes that the automatic, rapid
update cycle will force users to stay current and discontinue use of older
operating systems. One benefit of this approach is that it will allow Microsoft
to gradually shift some of its resources away from updating and maintaining
earlier versions of Windows. Ideally, those resources will instead be refocused
on efforts to improve Windows 10. Microsoft also plans to make Windows 10
a common platform with a single app store for any machine—smartphone,
laptop, desktop, xBox game station, etc. (with variations to allow for differing
screen sizes and uses).9
Apple Computer Operating Systems
In July 2001, Mac OS X was released as an
entirely new operating system for the Mac. Based on the UNIX operating
system, Mac OS X included a new user interface with luminous and semitrans-
parent elements, such as buttons, scroll bars, and windows along with fluid
animation to enhance the user’s experience.
Since its first release, Apple has upgraded OS X multiple times, as shown
in Table 4.4. The first eight versions of the OS were named after big cats, the
latest are named after places in California. OS X 10.11 El Capitan is Apple’s
latest operating system. See Figure 4.6. It offers enhanced security features as
well as the ability to launch the iBooks app, and books you’ve already down-
loaded to your iPad, iPhone, or iPod Touch will appear in your library. Direc-
tions, bookmarks, and recent searches are automatically passed on to all your
iOS devices, and you can now use natural language when using the Spotlight
search feature (e.g., “spreadsheet I worked on yesterday”). The new Split
View feature automatically positions two app windows side by side in full
screen so you can work with both apps at the same time. Power-saving
technology enables you to browse longer, and upgraded graphics-rendering
technology has improved overall system performance compared to previous
versions.10
Because Mac OS X runs on Intel processors, Mac users can set up their
computers to run both Windows and Mac OS X and select the platform they
want to work with when they boot their computers. Such an arrangement is
called dual booting. While Macs can dual boot into Windows, the opposite is
TABLE 4.4 Summary of recent Mac operating systems
OS X Version
Name
Date Released
10.0
Cheetah
2001
10.1
Puma
2001
10.2
Jaguar
2002
10.3
Panther
2003
10.4
Tiger
2005
10.5
Leopard
2007
10.6
Snow Leopard
2009
10.7
Lion
2011
10.8
Mountain Lion
2012
10.9
Mavericks
2013
10.10
Yosemite
2014
10.11
El Capitan
2015
148 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

not true. OS X cannot be run on any machine other than an Apple device.
However, Windows PCs can dual boot with Linux and other OSs.
Linux
Linux is an OS developed in 1991 by Linus Torvalds as a student in
Finland. The OS is distributed under the GNU General Public License, and its
source code is freely available to everyone. It is, therefore, called an open-
source operating system.
Individuals and organizations can use the open-source Linux code to
create their own distribution (flavor) of Linux. A distribution consists of
the Linux kernel (the core of the operating system)—which controls the
hardware, manages files, separates processes, and performs other basic
functions—along with other software. This other software defines the termi-
nal interface and available commands, produces the graphical user interface,
and provides other useful utility programs. A Linux distributor takes all the
code for these programs and combines it into a single operating system that
can be installed on a computer. The distributor may also add finishing
touches that determine how the desktop looks like, what color schemes and
character sets are displayed, and what browser and other optional software
are included with the operating system. Typically, the distribution is “opti-
mized” to perform in a particular environment, such as for a desktop com-
puter, server, or TV cable box controller.
More than 100 distributions of Linux have been created.11 Many distribu-
tions are available as free downloads. Three of the most widely used distribu-
tions come from software companies Red Hat, SUSE, and Canonical. Although
the Linux kernel is free software, both Red Hat and SUSE produce retail ver-
sions of the operating system that earn them revenues through distribution
and service of the software. openSUSE is the distribution sponsored by SUSE.
See Figure 4.7.
Red Hat, an open-source software developer based in Raleigh, North
Carolina, offers a range of Linux-based solutions. Its Red Hat Enterprise
Linux distribution, first released in 2000, is an enterprise-grade operating
system that can be deployed on desktops as well as servers.12 Cerner Corpo-
ration is a Kansas-based provider of healthcare IT solutions whose software
solutions are in use in over 18,000 healthcare facilities around the world.13
When Cerner was looking to standardize the hosting environment for its
flagship Cerner Millennium application suite, it chose to implement the Red
Hat Enterprise Linux operating system. Millennium applications provide
healthcare providers real-time access to a variety of data, including patient
FIGURE 4.6
Mac OS X El Capitan
El Capitan incorporates many fea-
tures of Apple’s mobile devices into
its desktop operating system.
Source: Apple, Inc.
© Apple, Inc
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 149
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

information, diagnoses, lab results, and medication lists. When deciding on
an operating system for its hosting environment for high-priority applica-
tions, an important consideration for Cerner was the fact that over 70 per-
cent of its Millennium customers opt to host their applications using
Cerner’s hosting services. It was a priority for Cerner and its customers that
the company implement a dependable and scalable solution. With its imple-
mentation of Red Hat’s Linux distribution, Cerner found that it gained per-
formance improvements and a lower total cost of ownership in addition to a
more stable and scalable system.14
Google: Android and Chrome
Over the years, Google has extended its reach
beyond its popular search engine (Google) to offer application software (Goo-
gle Docs), email services (Gmail), a mobile operating system (Android), Web
browser (Chrome), and, more recently, a PC operating system—Chrome OS.
The various releases of the Android operating system have been given tasty
names such as Gingerbread, Jelly Bean, and Ice Cream Sandwich. Android
has surpassed 1 billion users across all devices—with 80 percent of mobile
phones worldwide operating on Android.15
Chrome OS is a Linux-based operating system for notebooks and desktop
PCs primarily used to access Web-based information and services such as
email, Web browsing, social networks, and Google online applications. The
OS is designed to run on inexpensive low-power computers. Chrome OS for
personal computers is designed to start fast and provide quick access to appli-
cations through the Internet. An open-source version of Chrome OS, named
Chromium OS, was made available at the end of 2009. Because it is open-
source software, developers can customize the source code to run on different
platforms, incorporating unique features.
Workgroup Operating Systems
To keep pace with user demands, business technology must be able to sup-
port an environment in which network usage, data storage requirements, and
data-processing speeds are increasing at a dramatic rate. Powerful and sophis-
ticated operating systems are needed to run the servers that meet these
business needs for workgroups.
Windows Server
Microsoft designed Windows Server to perform a host of
tasks that are vital for Web sites and corporate Web applications. For exam-
ple, Microsoft Windows Server can be used to coordinate and manage large
FIGURE 4.7
openSUSE operating system
openSUSE is a distribution of Linux
available as a free download.
Courtesy of openSUSE.org
150 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

data centers. Windows Server delivers benefits such as a powerful Web server
management system, virtualization tools that allow various operating systems
to run on a single server, advanced security features, and robust administra-
tive support. Windows Server 2016 provides further enhancements for
containerization—with individual
containers having
their own Windows
Server kernel that is not shared with the host machine. This ensures that
users can run jobs without worrying that workloads running on one container
will reach outside their bounds and interfere with either the host machine or
other applications running on it. Windows Home Server allows individuals to
connect multiple PCs, storage devices, printers, and other devices into a
home network. Windows Home Servers provides a convenient way for home
users to store and manage photos, video, music, and other digital content. It
also provides backup and data recovery functions.
UNIX
UNIX is a powerful OS originally developed by AT&T for minicomputers—
the predecessors of servers, which were larger than PCs and smaller than main-
frames. UNIX can be used on many computer system types and platforms, includ-
ing workstations, servers, and mainframe computers. UNIX also makes it easy to
move programs and data among computers or to connect mainframes and work-
stations to share resources. There are many variants of UNIX, including HP-UX
from Hewlett-Packard, AIX from IBM, and Solaris from Oracle. The UNIX platform
(a computer capable of running the UNIX operating system plus the operating
system itself) is considered a high-cost platform compared to Linux and Windows
Server.
The Solaris operating system is a UNIX-based operating system originally
developed by Sun Microsystems. Oracle, known primarily as a database man-
agement software firm, acquired Sun in 2010. Sun products included server
hardware, the Solaris operating system, and the Java programming language.
Oracle now offers so-called general-purpose engineered systems that include
a combination of Oracle and Sun software running on powerful Sun servers,
dubbed SPARC.16 Office Depot is one of the largest retail office supply com-
panies in the world, with some 1,400 stores in the United States, Europe, and
the Middle East. The company upgraded the information system infrastructure
used to run its ERP application to SPARC servers and the Solaris operating
system to gain a 20 percent increase in performance.17
Red Hat Linux
Red Hat Software offers Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server, an
operating system that is very efficient at serving Web pages and can manage
a cluster of several servers. Distributions such as Red Hat have proven Linux
to be a very stable and efficient OS. Red Hat Enterprise Virtualization (RHEV)
software provides virtualization capabilities for servers and desktop compu-
ters to enable the hardware to run more than one operating system. See
Figure 4.8.
Casio is a multinational electronics manufacturing company headquar-
tered in Japan. Its products include calculators, mobile phones, cameras,
musical instruments, and watches. Casio migrated to RHEV, and its virtual
servers now use only 60 percent of the resources used by physical servers.
The firm has also been able to ensure that in the event of a server failure,
other servers will have the capacity to pick up the load without a serious
effect on the entire system.18
Mac OS X Server
The Mac OS X Server is the first modern server OS from
Apple Computer, and it is based on the UNIX OS. Designed for OS X and
iOS, OS X Server makes it easy to collaborate, develop software, host Web
sites and wikis, configure Mac and iOS devices, and remotely access a net-
work. Smartphone users running iOS can now open, edit, and save docu-
ments on OS X Server.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 151
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Enterprise Operating Systems
Mainframe computers, often referred to as “Big Iron,” provide the computing
and storage capacity required for massive data-processing environments, and
they provide systems that can support many users while delivering high per-
formance and excellent system availability, strong security, and scalability. A
wide range of application software has been developed to run in the main-
frame environment, making it possible to purchase software to address almost
any business problem. Examples of mainframe OSs include z/OS from IBM,
HP-UX from Hewlett-Packard, and Linux. The z/OS is IBM’s first 64-bit enter-
prise OS and is capable of handling very heavy workloads, including serving
thousands of concurrent users and running an organization’s critical applica-
tions. (The z stands for zero downtime.)
Mobile Operating Systems
Smartphones now employ full-fledged personal computer operating systems
such as the Google Android, Apple iOS, and Microsoft Windows Phone that
determine the functionality of your phone and the applications that you can
run. These operating systems have software development kits that allow devel-
opers to design thousands of apps providing a myriad of mobile services.
Table 4.5 lists the top four mobile operating systems for smartphones
and tablets based on worldwide market share as of the second quarter (2Q)
of 2015. Table 4.6 lists the top tablet operating systems based on sales in
1Q 2015.
FIGURE 4.8
Red Hat Linux
Red Hat Enterprise Virtualization
(RHEV) software provides virtualiza-
tion capabilities for servers and
desktop computers.
Source: www.redhat.com
152 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Embedded Operating Systems
An embedded system is a computer system (including some sort of processor)
that is implanted in and dedicated to the control of another device. Embedded
systems control many devices in common use today, including TV cable boxes,
smartphones, digital watches, digital cameras, MP3 players, calculators, micro-
wave ovens, washing machines, and traffic lights. The typical car contains many
embedded systems, including those that control antilock brakes, air bag deploy-
ment, fuel injection, active suspension devices, transmission control, and cruise
control. A global positioning system (GPS) device uses an embedded system to
help people find their way around town or more remote areas. See Figure 4.9.
TABLE 4.5 Comparison of smartphone operating systems
Smartphone Operating
System
Worldwide Market Share
of Sales during 2Q 2015
Estimated Total Number
of Applications
Estimated Rate of
Increase in Number of
New Applications
Google Android
82.8%
1,824,500 (Nov 2015)
980/day
Apple iPhone OS (iOS)
13.9%
1,500,000 (July 2015)
667/day
Microsoft Windows Mobile
(to be replaced by
Windows 10 Mobile)
2.6%
300,000 (June 2014)
550/day
Blackberry OS
0.3%
Not available
Not available
Sources: “Smartphone OS Market Share, 2015 Q2,” International Data Corporation, August 2015, www.idc.com/prodserv/smartphone-os-market-share.jsp; Costello,
Sam, “How Many Apps Are in the App Store?,” About Tech, September 15, 2015, http://ipod.about.com/od/iphonesoftwareterms/qt/apps-in-app-store.htm; Whitney.
Lance, “Windows Phone Store Hits More than 300,000 Apps,” CNET, August 8, 2015, www.cnet.com/news/windows-phone-store-hits-more-than-300000-apps.
TABLE 4.6 Worldwide market share of tablet computer operating systems
Table Computer Operating System
Worldwide Market Share
Android
67%
iOS
28%
Windows
5%
Source: Shah, Agam, “Windows Forecast to Gradually Grab Tablet Market Share From iOS and Android,”
PCWorld, March 12, 2015, www.pcworld.com/article/2896196/windows-forecast-to-gradually-grab-tablet
-market-share-from-ios-and-android.html.
FIGURE 4.9
GPS devices use embedded
operating systems
A GPS device uses an embedded
system to acquire information from
satellites, display your current loca-
tion on a map, and direct you to your
destination.
iStockphoto.com/Stephen Morris
embedded system: A computer
system (including some sort of proces-
sor) that is implanted in and dedicated
to the control of another device.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 153
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Some embedded systems include specialized operating systems. For exam-
ple, Palm, an early smartphone manufacturer, developed its well-regarded
Palm webOS operating system to run its Pre and Pixi smartphones. Although
webOS was considered innovative, Palm’s smartphones were a market failure,
and in 2010, HP bought the company along with webOS, hoping to use it to
develop its mobile platform. HP’s efforts were also unsuccessful, and in early
2013, LG bought all the assets associated with webOS from HP. LG now uses
the specialized software in its smart TVs to enable users to watch streaming
movies and television shows and YouTube videos, connect to social networks,
play games, get news, and download apps.19
Some of the more popular OSs for embedded systems are described in
the following section.
Windows Embedded
Windows Embedded is a family of Microsoft operating
systems included with or embedded into small computer devices. For exam-
ple, Windows Embedded Compact includes several versions that provide
computing power for TV set-top boxes, automated industrial machines,
media players, medical devices, digital cameras, PDAs, GPS receivers, ATMs,
gaming devices, and business devices such as cash registers. Microsoft Win-
dows Embedded Automotive helps manufacturers provide drivers with
everything they need to stay in touch with others, be entertained, and be
informed. Drivers can also monitor vehicle performance, screen for mainte-
nance issues, and allow remote tracking of the car’s location. Speech recog-
nition, touch interface, and hands-free technologies enable drivers to stay
focused on the road and in control of their surroundings. The Ford Sync sys-
tem uses an in-dashboard display, an industrial-strength operating system
owned by BlackBerry called QNX, and wireless networking technologies to
link automotive systems with smartphones and portable media players. See
Figure 4.10.
Syndicat Mixte Autolib’ is an electric car-sharing program implemented
by the city of Paris and surrounding municipalities. The goals of the pro-
gram are to relieve traffic congestion, reduce noise and air pollution, and
provide people with flexible transit options. Various components of the Win-
dows Embedded operating system provide connectivity between the in-car
system, rental kiosks, charging stations, and a central control system. Syndi-
cat Mixte Autolib’ has reduced carbon dioxide emissions by 1.5 metric tons
annually and replaced 25,000 privately owned gas vehicles. Autolib’ subscri-
bers enjoy additional benefits including GPS navigation and free parking.20
FIGURE 4.10
Ford Sync 3 user interface
The Ford Sync 3 system allows
drivers to wirelessly connect
smartphones and media devices
to automotive systems.
Source: McCracken, Henry, “Why Ford
Dumping Microsoft’s Automotive Software
Was Inevitable—And Probably Long
Overdue,” Fast Company, http://www.fast
company.com/3039760/why-ford-dumping
-microsofts-automotive-software-was
-inevitable-and-probably-long-overdue.
154 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Proprietary
Linux-Based
Systems
Because
embedded
systems
are
usually
designed for a specific purpose in a specific device, they are usually proprie-
tary or custom-created and owned by the manufacturer. Sony’s Wii, for exam-
ple, uses a custom-designed OS based on the Linux kernel. Linux is a popular
choice for embedded systems because it is free and highly configurable. It has
been used in many embedded systems, including e-book readers, ATMs,
smartphones, networking devices, and media players.
Utility Programs
Utility programs perform a variety of tasks typically related to system main-
tenance or problem correction. For example, there are utility programs
designed to merge and sort sets of data, keep track of computer jobs being
run, compress data files before they are stored or transmitted over a network
(thus saving space and time), and perform other important tasks.
Just as your car engine runs best if it has regular tune-ups, computers also
need regular maintenance to ensure optimal performance. Over time, your
computer’s performance can start to diminish as system errors occur, files
clutter your hard drive, and security vulnerabilities materialize. Sysinternals
Suite is a collection of Windows utilities that can be downloaded for free
from the Microsoft Technet Web site. These utilities can be used to boost the
performance of a slow PC, repair errors in the registry and on a hard drive,
remove unnecessary files, improve system security and privacy, and optimize
sluggish system processes as shown in Figure 4.11.21
Although many PC utility programs come installed on computers, you can
also purchase utility programs separately. The following sections examine
some common types of utilities.
Hardware Utilities
Hardware utilities can be used to check the status of all parts of the PC,
including hard disks, memory, modems, speakers, and printers. Disk utilities
check the hard disk’s boot sector, file allocation tables, and directories and
analyze them to ensure that the hard disk is not damaged. Disk utilities can
FIGURE 4.11
Sysinternals Suite
Sysinternals Suite is a collection of
utilities for troubleshooting and
maintaining a Windows system.
utility program: A program that
helps to perform maintenance or cor-
rect problems with a computer system.
Microsoft product screenshots used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 155
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

also optimize the placement of files on a crowded disk. Hardware manufac-
turers often provide utilities that can be used for their specific devices.
Other companies such as Symantec, which produces Norton Utilities, offer
hardware utilities that can be used to repair, maintain, and optimize a range
of system types.
Security Utilities
Computer viruses and malware from the Internet and other sources can be a
nuisance and worse—sometimes completely disabling a computer. Antivirus
and anti-malware utilities can be used to constantly monitor and protect a
computer. If a virus or other malware is found, it can often be removed. Fire-
wall software is another important security utility for protecting a computer
system. Firewall software filters incoming and outgoing packets, making sure
that neither hackers nor their tools are attacking the system. Symantec, McA-
fee, and Microsoft are the most popular providers of security software.
File-Compression Utilities
File-compression programs can reduce the amount of disk space required to
store a file or reduce the time it takes to transfer a file over the Internet. Both
Windows and Mac operating systems let you compress or decompress files and
folders. A Zip file has a .zip extension, and its contents can be easily unzipped
to the original size. MP3 (Motion Pictures Experts Group-Layer 3) is a popular
file-compression format used to store, transfer, and play music and audio files,
such as podcasts—audio programs that can be downloaded from the Internet.
Spam-Filtering Utilities
Receiving unwanted email (spam) can be a frustrating waste of time. Email soft-
ware and services include spam-filtering utilities to assist users with these
annoyances. Email filters identify spam by learning what the user considers
spam and routing it to a junk mail folder. In addition, many security utilities—
such as Symantec’s Norton Security and Kaspersky’s Internet Security—include
spam-filtering utilities. Businesses often invest in additional software to ensure
better protection for enterprise-level email systems where spam containing
viruses is a serious threat. A variety of companies, including Cisco, Barracuda
Networks, and Google, offer spam-filtering software that can intercept danger-
ous spam as it enters the corporate email system.
Being able to block spam efficiently and accurately is a priority for organi-
zations such as the Long Island Rail Road Company (LIRR), a commuter rail
system serving over 300,000 passengers weekly in southeastern New York.22
The LIRR uses enterprise-level messaging security software from GWAVA to
protect more than 2,000 email accounts. Using GWAVA’s software, which is
integrated into the LIRR’s overall communication infrastructure, the railroad’s
IT team is able to block more than 34,000 spam emails each month.23
Network and Internet Utilities
A broad range of network- and systems-management utility software is avail-
able to monitor hardware and network performance and trigger an alert
when a server is crashing or a network problem occurs. IBM’s Tivoli Netcool
Network Management, Hewlett-Packard’s Automated Network Management
Suite, and Paessler’s PRTG Network Monitor can be used to solve computer-
network problems and help save money. As shown in Figure 4.12, PRTG Net-
work Monitor creates a sensor for each network device and then monitors the
device to make sure it is connected and working properly. If a device encoun-
ters a problem, the network manager is alerted via email or text message.
The University of Kentucky community includes more than 26,000 students
and almost 11,000 employees on its campus in Lexington.24 The university’s
computing infrastructure is made up of multiple local area networks (LANs)
156 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

that connect to the school’s wide area network (WAN). One of those LANs
includes over 1,000 desktop computers, 50 switches, 6 servers, and 2 routers.
The university’s network administrators use AdRem’s NetCrunch network moni-
toring software to ensure uninterrupted service on the network, which serves
17 different on-campus labs. NetCrunch allows the school’s IT personnel to
monitor the network and track connectivity problems with minimum human
attention, by providing early warnings regarding failures in device, server, and
desktop performance. In particular, the utility has helped the network team cut
down on connectivity problems related to port settings at switches and routers,
thus improving network performance for the students and faculty who rely on
it for a variety of learning, teaching, and research activities.25
Server and Mainframe Utilities
Some utilities enhance the performance of servers and mainframe computers.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas provides medical, dental, and life insur-
ance coverage to 800,000 customers. As part of its service, it offers online
access to health information stored in an IBM DB2 database running on an
IBM z/OS mainframe. The company employs IBM mainframe utility programs
to manage this operation effectively. The IBM z/OS Data Facility System Man-
aged Storage utility applies the appropriate retention policies to data stored
on direct access storage devices, and the IBM Tivoli Workload Scheduler is
used to preform automated job scheduling to ensure critical jobs are com-
pleted on time.26
The main enabling technology for cloud computing is software that allows
the creation of virtual servers, which separate a physical computing device into
one or more “virtual” servers, each of which can be easily used and managed to
perform computing tasks (see Figure 4.13). A server administrator uses software
to divide one physical server into perhaps as many as a dozen virtual
machines—with each virtual machine capable of processing a set of data for
users from a given organization. In a typical cloud computing data center
FIGURE 4.12
PRTG Network Monitor
PRTG Network Monitor and other
network utility software can help you
to keep track of network compo-
nents, traffic flows, and network
performance.
Source: www.paessler.com/prtg
© Paessler AG
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 157
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

deployment of several hundred servers, companies using virtual servers can save
millions of dollars in capital and operating expenses (including energy costs) per
year by dramatically reducing the number of actual physical servers in use.
Other Utilities
Utility programs are available for almost every conceivable task or function.
Managing the vast array of operating systems for smartphones and mobile
devices, for example, has been difficult for many companies. Many organiza-
tions unwisely allow employees to connect to corporate databases using
smartphones and mobile devices with little or no guidance. Utility programs
called mobile device management (MDM) software can help a company man-
age security, enforce corporate strategies, and control downloads and content
streaming from corporate databases into smartphones and mobile devices.
Columbia Sportswear Company uses VMWare’s AirWatch MDM package to
deliver mobile applications and manage hundreds of mobile devices in its
retail stores and distribution centers. AirWatch allows the retailer’s IT staff to
manage the mobile devices from a central location, ensuring secure and con-
sistent deployment of mobile devices and applications, including those used
for tracking sales and monitoring staff scheduling.27
In addition, a number of companies, such as CNET, offer utilities that can
be downloaded for most popular operating systems. CNET offers hundreds of
utilities for Windows operating systems, including defraggers (fixes the prob-
lem of fragmentation, which occurs when data is broken up into discontinu-
ous pieces that waste space on your hard drive), system cleaners (cleans
tracks on your hard drive, deletes temporary files, and cleans your registry),
uninstallers (safely removes unwanted software), and replacements for Note-
pad and Task Manager.
Middleware
Middleware is software that provides messaging services that allow different
applications to communicate and exchange data. This systematic tying
together of disparate applications, often through the use of middleware, is
known as enterprise application integration (EAI). It is implemented to
address situations in which a company acquires different types of informa-
tion systems—often through mergers, acquisitions, or expansion—that need
FIGURE 4.13
Virtualization
Virtual servers that separate a phys-
ical computing device into one or
more “virtual” servers, each of which
can be easily used and managed to
perform computing tasks.
Application
VMWare Virtualization Layer
Actual hardware
Operating
system
Virtual
hardware
Application
Operating
system
Virtual
hardware
Without virtualization
With virtualization
Application
Operating system
Hardware—CPU,
memory, etc.
middleware: Software that allows
various systems to communicate and
exchange data.
enterprise application integra-
tion (EAI): The systematic tying
together of disparate applications so
that they can communicate.
Julia Ivantsova/Shutterstock.com
158 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
to share data and interact. Middleware can also serve as an interface between
the Internet and private corporate systems. For example, it can be used to
transfer a request for information from a corporate customer on the company
Web site to a traditional database on a mainframe computer and to return the
results of that information request to the customer on the Internet.
The use of middleware to connect disparate systems has evolved into an
approach for developing software and systems called SOA. Service-oriented
architecture (SOA) is a software design approach based on the use of
discrete pieces of software (modules) to provide specific functions (such as
displaying a customer’s bill statement) as services to other applications. Each
module is built in such a way that ensures that the service it provides can
exchange information with any other service without human interaction and
without the need to make changes to the underlying program itself. In this
manner, multiple modules can be combined to provide the complete function-
ality of a large, complex software application. Systems developed with SOA
are highly flexible, as they allow for the addition of new modules that provide
new services required to meet the needs of the business as they evolve and
change over time.
SOA itself has evolved over time. One potential downside to SOA is that
it can lead to expensive and challenging implementations of individual ser-
vices that are too complex. In response, some organizations have shifted
their SOA approach—starting with microservices at the department level,
rather than at the enterprise level, and building from there. Microservices
are designed to quickly solve tactical problems by doing one thing very
well, and they offer organizations the opportunity to implement SOA using
simplified components.28
Netflix, which describes itself as the world’s leading Internet television
network, has 70 million members in 60 countries watching more than 100
million hours of streaming TV shows and movies each day.29 Recently, the
company shifted its development approach to a microservices architecture
approach, with many small engineering teams responsible for the develop-
ment of hundreds of microservices that work together to stream content to
customers. Each microservice represents a single-product feature that can
be updated independently. This architecture, along with Netflix’s continu-
ous delivery approach to development, means that microservices can be
upgraded and debugged on their own schedules, improving performance
and reliability for the company’s millions of customers.30,31
Migration to New Operating System
The information systems support organization of your firm is keen to migrate all
employees from whatever operating system they have now (mostly Windows 8)
to Microsoft Windows 10. Making such a change can be a big deal for employees
and can require them to get comfortable with a new user interface and ways of
accomplishing their work.
Review Questions
1.
What are some of the advantages of such a move?
2.
What are some potential issues that could arise from this change?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What are some of the negative forces that will cause employees to resist this
change?
2.
What are some creative things the IS team could do to overcome these resis-
tance forces?
service-oriented architecture
(SOA): A software design approach
based on the use of discrete pieces of
software (modules) to provide specific
functions as services to other
applications.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 159
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Application Software
The primary function of application software is to apply the power of a com-
puter system to enable people, workgroups, and entire enterprises to solve
problems and perform specific tasks. Millions of software applications have
been created to perform a variety of functions on a wide range of operating
systems and device types. The following are some of the dozens of categories
of applications:
Business
Genealogy
Personal information manager
Communications
Language
Photography
Computer-aided design
Legal
Science
Desktop publishing
Library
Simulation
Educational
Multimedia
Video
Entertainment
Music
Video games
In almost any category of software, you will find many options from
which to choose. For example, Microsoft Edge, Mozilla Firefox, Google
Chrome, Apple Safari, and Opera are all Web browsers that enable users to
surf the Web. The availability of many software options enables users to select
the software that best meets the needs of the individual, workgroup, or enter-
prise. For example, Procter & Gamble Company (P&G), a large, multinational
organization, chose the SAP Enterprise Resource Planning software with its
vast array of options, features, and functionality to meet its complex global
accounting needs. However, a small, neighborhood bakery might decide that
Intuit’s QuickBooks, an accounting software package designed for small busi-
nesses, meets its simple accounting needs.
In most cases, application software resides on the computer’s hard disk
before it is brought into the computer’s memory and then run. Application
software can also be stored on CDs, DVDs, and USB flash drives. An
increasing amount of application software is available on the Web. Some-
times referred to as a rich Internet application (RIA), a Web-delivered
application combines hardware resources of the Web server and the PC to
deliver valuable software services through a browser interface. Before a
person, a group, or an enterprise decides on the best approach for acquir-
ing application software, they should carefully analyze computing goals,
needs, and budget.
Overview of Application Software
Proprietary software and off-the-shelf software are two important types of
application
software.
Proprietary
software
is
one-of-a-kind
software
designed for a specific application and owned by the company, organization,
or person that uses it. Proprietary software can give a company a competitive
advantage by providing services or solving problems in a unique manner—
better than methods used by a competitor. Off-the-shelf software is pro-
duced by software vendors to address needs that are common across busi-
nesses, organizations, or individuals. For example, Amazon.com uses the
same off-the-shelf payroll software as many businesses, but on its Web site,
the company uses custom-designed proprietary software, which allows visi-
tors to more easily find items to purchase. The relative advantages and disad-
vantages of proprietary software and off-the-shelf software are summarized in
Table 4.7.
rich Internet application (RIA):
A Web-delivered application combines
hardware resources of the Web server
and the PC to deliver valuable software
services through a Web browser
interface.
proprietary software: One-
of-a-kind software designed for a spe-
cific application and owned by the
company, organization, or person that
uses it.
off-the-shelf software: Software
produced by software vendors to
address needs that are common across
businesses, organizations, or
individuals.
160 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Many companies use off-the-shelf software to support business processes.
Key questions for selecting off-the-shelf software include the following:
●
Will the software run on the OS and hardware you have selected?
●
Does the software meet the essential business requirements that have
been defined?
●
Is the software manufacturer financially solvent and reliable?
●
Does the total cost of purchasing, installing, and maintaining the software
compare favorably to the expected business benefits?
Founded in 1955, H&R Block is the world’s largest tax services provider, with
80,000 employees in 12,000 offices across the United States. In 2014, more than
24 million tax returns were prepared by H&R Block tax professionals and by cli-
ents using the company’s digital tax solutions.32 H&R Block places a priority on
providing accurate and easily accessible information about the company—as
well as tax preparation information and tips—through its online newsroom.
When the tax preparer was building the newsroom for its corporate Web site, it
opted to use an off-the-shelf software package called PressPage. By using a
proven, off-the-shelf option, H&R Block was able to quickly deploy an online
newsroom that included all of the features it needed, while taking advantage of
PressPage’s best practice expertise. The result was a user-friendly newsroom that
complements the company’s “brand journalism” approach to public relations.33
As mentioned in Chapter 1, workers in many organizations operate in a
cloud-computing environment in which software, data storage, and other ser-
vices are provided by the Internet (“the cloud”); the services are run on another
organization’s computer hardware, and both software and data are easily
accessed. Examples of public cloud service providers, which make their services
available to the general public, include Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2),
IBM’s Blue Cloud, Sun Cloud, Google Cloud Platform, Rackspace’s Managed
TABLE 4.7 Comparison of proprietary and off-the-shelf software
Proprietary Software
Off-the-Shelf Software
Advantages
Disadvantages
Advantages
Disadvantages
You can get exactly what
you need in terms of fea-
tures, reports, and so on.
It can take a long time and
a significant amount of
resources to develop
required features.
The initial cost is lower
because the software firm
can spread the develop-
ment costs across many
customers.
An organization might
have to pay for features
that it does not require
and never uses.
Being involved in the
development offers more
control over the results.
In-house system develop-
ment staff may be hard-
pressed to provide the
required level of ongoing
support and maintenance
because of pressure to
move on to other new
projects.
The software is likely to
meet the basic business
needs. Users have the
opportunity to more fully
analyze existing features
and the performance of the
package before
purchasing.
The software might lack
important features, thus
requiring future modifica-
tion or customization,
which can be very expen-
sive,and because users will
eventually be required to
adopt future releases of the
software, the customiza-
tion work might need to be
repeated.
You can more easily mod-
ify the software and add
features that you might
need to counteract an ini-
tiative by competitors or to
meet new supplier or cus-
tomer demands.
The features and perfor-
mance of the delivered
software may fail to meet
evolving business and end
user needs.
The software is likely to be
of high quality because
many customer firms have
tested the software and
helped identify its bugs.
The software might not
match current work pro-
cesses and data standards.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 161
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Cloud, and Windows Azure Services Platform. Public cloud users can realize a
considerable cost savings because the very high initial hardware, application,
and bandwidth costs are paid for by the service provider and passed along to
users as a relatively small monthly fee or per-use fee. Furthermore, companies
can easily scale up or down the amount of services used, depending on user
demand for services. Cloud computing also provides the benefit of being able to
easily collaborate with others by sharing documents on the Internet.
Cloud services are often given popular acronyms such as SaaS (software as a
service), PaaS (platform as a service), IaaS (infrastructure as a service), and HaaS
(hardware as a service). Software as a service (SaaS) allows organizations to
subscribe to Web-delivered application software. In most cases, the company
pays a monthly service charge or a per-use fee. Many business activities are sup-
ported by SaaS. SaaS vendors include Oracle, SAP, NetSuite, Salesforce, and
Google. Each year, The Container Store sells over $200 million worth of storage
and organization products through its 70 retail stores.34 The retail chain has
grown rapidly, and it is committed to maintaining satisfaction for its 4,000
employees—a goal that was becoming more difficult to achieve given the limited
resources of the company’s IT, benefits, and payroll departments. In order to
free up some of those internal resources, The Container Store migrated its pay-
roll and benefit processes to UltiPro HCM, a SaaS provided by Ultimate Software.
The SaaS solution helped the company streamline its payroll and benefits admin-
istration while increasing employee satisfaction by providing them real-time,
online access to up-to-date salary and benefits information.35
Tableau software allows users to import databases or spreadsheet data
to create powerful visualizations that provide useful information. Figure 4.14
shows a Tableau visualization that tracks the unemployment rate across
the country over time. Orange indicates an unemployment rate exceeding the
national average, whereas blue indicates rates below the national average.
Amazon is considered one of the leading public cloud service providers
because of the variety of services that it provides through its Amazon Web Ser-
vices (AWS) platform. Amazon delivers one of the most reliable public cloud
platforms available, and it is also rapidly adding new services, including tools
for software developers and services to support version control and collabora-
tion.36 Airbnb is an online marketplace that connects travelers and property
owners who are looking to rent out their properties to vacationers. Airbnb sup-
ports its business using cloud-based Web site, storage, and database-hosting
FIGURE 4.14
Tableau software
Tableau is available in desktop and
cloud versions and helps users
visualize data, such as how the
unemployment rate changes over a
20-year period.
© Tableau Software
Software as a Service (SaaS): A
service that allows businesses to sub-
scribe to Web-delivered application
software.
162 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

services from Amazon Web Services. The company chose AWS because it
offered the reliability and flexibility Airbnb requires to continue to grow its
business—at a relatively low cost and with no minimum usage commitments.37
Google’s Chromebook line of personal computers is an example of a
consumer-focused implementation of the SaaS model. Built by Samsung and
Acer, Chromebooks include only an Internet browser—with all software applica-
tions accessed through an Internet connection. Rather than installing, storing,
and running software on the Chromebook, users access software that is stored
on and delivered from a Web server. Typically the data generated by the software
is also stored on the Web server.
While SaaS and cloud computing offer many benefits, these software
delivery models also involve some risks. For example, sensitive information
could be compromised by unauthorized access by employees or computer
hackers. In addition, the company providing the hosting services might not
keep its computers and network up and running as consistently as necessary,
or a disaster could disable the host’s data center, temporarily putting an orga-
nization out of business. Some companies also find it is difficult to integrate
the SaaS approach with some of its existing software.
Personal Application Software
Hundreds of thousands personal software applications are available to meet
the needs of individuals at school, home, and work—with new applications
released on a daily basis. New computer software under development,
along with existing GPS technology, for example, will enable people to see
3D views of where they are, along with directions and 3D maps to where
they would like to go. The features of some popular types of personal
application software are summarized in Table 4.8. In addition to these
general-purpose programs, thousands of other personal computer applica-
tions perform specialized tasks that help users prepare their taxes, get in
shape, lose weight, get medical advice, write wills and other legal docu-
ments, repair their computers, fix their cars, write music, and edit pictures
and videos. This type of software, often called user software or personal
productivity software, includes the general-purpose tools and programs
that support individual needs.
The following sections discuss some of the most popular types of personal
application software currently available.
Word Processing
Word-processing applications are installed on most PCs today. These applica-
tions come with a vast array of features, including those for checking spelling,
creating tables, inserting formulas, and creating graphics. See Figure 4.15.
Much of the work required to create this book involved the use of the popular
word-processing software, Microsoft Word.
A team of people can use a word-processing program to collaborate on a
project. The authors and editors who developed this book, for example, used
the Track Changes and Review features of Microsoft Word to track and make
changes to chapter files. With these features, you can add comments or make
revisions to a document that a coworker can review and either accept or
reject. Some cloud-based word-processing applications, such as Google Docs,
allow multiple authors to collaborate in real time.
Spreadsheet Analysis
Many individuals and organizations use spreadsheet applications that offer
powerful tools for manipulating and analyzing numbers and alphanumeric
data.
Common
spreadsheet
features
include
statistical
analysis
tools,
built-in formulas, chart- and graphics-creation tools, and limited database
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 163
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

capabilities. See Figure 4.16. Business functions include those that calculate
depreciation, present value, internal rate of return, and the monthly pay-
ment on a loan. Optimization is another powerful feature of many spread-
sheet programs that allows the spreadsheet to maximize or minimize a
quantity subject to certain constraints. For example, a small furniture manu-
facturer that produces chairs and tables might want to maximize its profits.
The constraints could be a limited supply of lumber, a limited number of
workers who can assemble the chairs and tables, or a limited amount of
available hardware fasteners. Using an optimization feature, such as Solver
in Microsoft Excel, the spreadsheet can determine the number of chairs and
tables that should be produced—given the labor and material constraints—
to maximize profits.
While the built-in formulas available in many spreadsheet applications
are powerful tools, they are not foolproof, as can be seen in the example of
Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff’s famous 2010 study “Growth in a
TABLE 4.8 Examples of personal application software
Type of Software
Use
Example
Word processing
Create, edit, and print text documents
Apache OpenOffice
Writer
Apple Pages
Corel Write
Google Docs
Microsoft Word
WordPerfect
Spreadsheet
Perform statistical, financial, logical, database, graphics,
and date and time calculations using a wide range of built-
in functions
Apache OpenOffice Calc
Apple Numbers
Google Sheets
IBM Lotus 1-2-3
Microsoft Excel
Database
Store, manipulate, and retrieve data
Apache OpenOffice Base
Microsoft Access
IBM Lotus Approach
Graphics
Develop graphs, illustrations, drawings, and presentations
Adobe FreeHand
Adobe Illustrator
Apache OpenOffice
Impress
Microsoft PowerPoint
Personal information
management
Helps people, groups, and organizations store useful
information, such as a list of tasks to complete or a set of
names and addresses
Google Calendar
Microsoft Calendar
Microsoft Outlook
One Note
Project management
Plan, schedule, allocate, and control people and resources
(money, time, and technology) needed to complete a proj-
ect according to schedule
Microsoft Project
Scitor Project Scheduler
Financial management
Track income and expenses and create reports to create
and monitor budgets (some programs also have investment
portfolio management features)
GnuCash
Intuit Mint
Intuit Quicken
Moneydance
You Need a Budget
(YNAB)
Desktop publishing (DTP)
Use with personal computers and high-resolution printers
to create high-quality printed output, including text and
graphics; various styles of pages can be laid out; art and
text files from other programs can also be integrated into
published pages
Adobe InDesign
Apple Pages
Corel Ventura Publisher
Microsoft Publisher
QuarkXpress
164 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
FIGURE 4.15
Word-processing program
Word-processing applications, such
as Microsoft Word, can be used to
write letters, professional docu-
ments, work reports, and term
papers.
FIGURE 4.16
Spreadsheet program
Consider using a spreadsheet pro-
gram, such as Microsoft Excel, when
calculations are required.
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 165
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Time of Debt,” which concluded that a country’s economic growth is
reduced when its public debt level reaches 90 percent of GDP. In recent
years, this finding has been used as a justification to push countries to
reduce their deficits. However, a more recent study by Thomas Herndon,
Michael Ash, and Robert Pollin uncovered that the original study has three
major flaws. First, it excluded three occurrences of high-debt, high-growth
nations. Second, it made some questionable assumptions about weighting
different historical episodes. Third, it had an error in Excel spreadsheet for-
mulas that excluded Belgium from their analysis. Correcting for these prob-
lem leads to an entirely different conclusion—“The average real GDP
growth rate for countries carrying a public debt-to-GDP ratio of over 90 per-
cent is actually 2.2 percent, not −0.1 percent as published in Reinhart and
Rogoff.”38
Database Applications
Database applications are ideal for storing, organizing, and retrieving data.
These applications are particularly useful when you need to manipulate a large
amount of data and produce reports and documents. Database manipulations
include merging, editing, and sorting data, and database applications can be
used in a variety of ways. You could use a database application to keep track
of a CD collection, the items in your apartment, tax records, and expenses. A
student club could use a database to store names, addresses, phone numbers,
and dues paid. In business, a database application could be used to help pro-
cess sales orders, control inventory, order new supplies, send letters to custo-
mers, and pay employees. Database management systems can be used to track
orders, products, and customers; analyze weather data to make forecasts; and
summarize medical research results. A database can also be a front end to
another application. For example, you can use a database application to enter
and store income tax information and then export the stored results to other
applications, such as a spreadsheet or tax-preparation application.
Presentation Graphics Program
It is often said that a picture is worth a thousand words. With today’s available
graphics programs, it is easy to develop attractive graphs, illustrations, and
drawings that help communicate important information. See Figure 4.17. The
FIGURE 4.17
Presentation graphics
program
Presentation graphics programs,
such as Microsoft PowerPoint, can
help you make a presentation for
school or work.
Microsoft product screenshot used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
166 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

category of presentation graphics applications includes programs that can be
used to perform a variety of tasks, including creating advertising brochures,
event announcements, and full-color presentations; some presentation graphics
programs can also be used to organize and edit photographic images. And if
you need to make a presentation at school or work, you can use a special type
of graphics program called a presentation application—–such as Microsoft
PowerPoint—to develop slides and then display them while you are speaking.
Because of their popularity, many colleges and departments require students to
become proficient at using presentation graphics programs.
Many graphics and presentation programs, including Microsoft PowerPoint,
consist of a series of slides. Each slide can be displayed on a computer screen,
printed as a handout, or (more commonly) projected onto a large viewing screen
for audiences. In PowerPoint, you can select a template designed for a specific
type of presentation, such as recommending a strategy for managers, communicat-
ing news to a salesforce, giving a training presentation, or facilitating a brainstorm-
ing session. PowerPoint includes powerful built-in features that let you create a
presentation step-by-step, including applying color and attractive formatting. You
can also design a custom presentation using the many types of charts, drawings,
and formatting available. Most presentation graphics programs also provide access
to online clip art, such as drawings and photos of people meeting, medical equip-
ment, telecommunications equipment, entertainment, and much more.
Personal Information Managers
Personal information management (PIM) software helps people, groups, and
organizations store useful information, such as a list of tasks to complete or a
set of names and addresses. PIM software usually provides an appointment
calendar, an address book or contacts list, and a place to take notes. In addi-
tion, information in a PIM can typically be linked. For example, you can link
an appointment with a sales manager in the calendar to information on the
sales manager in the address book. When you click the appointment in the
calendar, a window opens displaying information on the sales manager from
the address book. Microsoft Outlook is an example of very popular PIM soft-
ware. Increasingly, PIM software is moving online, where it can be accessed
from any Internet-connected device. See Figure 4.18.
FIGURE 4.18
Personal information
management software
Evernote lets you take notes, sync
files across devices, save Web
pages, and share your ideas with
friends and colleagues. It runs on
computers and on smartphones.
Evernote
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 167
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Some PIMs allow you to schedule and coordinate group meetings. If a
computer or handheld device is connected to a network, you can upload the
PIM data and coordinate it with the calendar and schedule of others who are
using the same PIM software on the network. You can also use some PIMs to
coordinate emails inviting others to meetings. As users receive their invita-
tions, they click a link or button to be automatically added to the guest list.
Software Suites and Integrated Software Packages
A software suite is a collection of programs packaged together and sold in
a bundle. A software suite might include a word processor, a spreadsheet pro-
gram, a database management system, a graphics program, communications
and note-taking tools, and organizers. Some suites support the development
of Web pages, and some offer a speech-recognition feature—so that applica-
tions in the suite can accept voice commands and record dictation. Software
suites offer many advantages. The software programs within a suite have
been designed to work similarly so that after you learn the basics for one
application, the other applications are easy to learn and use. Buying software
in a bundled suite is cost effective; the programs usually sell for a fraction of
what they would cost individually.
Table 4.9 lists several popular general-purpose software suites for per-
sonal computer users. Microsoft Office has the largest market share. Most of
these software suites include a spreadsheet program, a word processor, a
database program, and graphics presentation software. All can exchange
documents, data, and diagrams. In other words, you can create a spreadsheet
and then cut and paste that spreadsheet into a document created using the
word-processing application.
Some companies offer Web-based productivity software suites that do not
require the installation of any software on your device—only a Web browser.
Google, Thinkfree, and Zoho offer free online word processors, spreadsheet
programs, presentation applications, and other software that can be accessed
via the Internet.
After observing this trend, Microsoft responded with an online version of
its popular Office applications. Microsoft Office 365 is available in a range of
configurations designed for home or office use, for a monthly subscription fee.
See Figure 4.19. Depending on the plan purchased, subscribers can access
Microsoft Office applications such as Word, Outlook, Excel, Exchange for mes-
saging, SharePoint for collaboration, and Skype for Business for conferencing.
These cloud-based applications cost on the order of $10 per user per month
depending on the features used. Microsoft offers plans for individuals, small
businesses, enterprises, and education institutions. For example, any institution
worldwide that licenses Office 365 ProPlus or Office Professional Plus for staff
and faculty can provide access to Office 365 ProPlus for students at no
TABLE 4.9 Major components of leading software suites
Personal
Productivity
Function
Microsoft
Office
Corel
WordPerfect
Office
Apache
OpenOffice
Apple iWork
Google Apps
Word processing
Word
WordPerfect
Writer
Pages
Docs
Spreadsheet
Excel
Quattro Pro
Calc
Numbers
Spreadsheet
Presentation
graphics
PowerPoint
Presentations
Impress and
Draw
Keynote
Presentation
Database
Access
Base
software suite: A collection of pro-
grams packaged together and sold in a
bundle.
168 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

additional cost. The online versions of Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and OneNote
are tightly integrated with Microsoft’s desktop Office suite for easy sharing of
documents among computers and collaborators.
The H.J. Heinz Company, now part of Kraft Heinz Company, sells baby
food, frozen entrees, ketchup, mustard, sauces, and other products in more
than 200 countries. The firm wanted to help employees spend less time travel-
ing and make it easier for them to share best practices, solve business pro-
blems, and come up with new ideas, regardless of their geographical
locations. This led Heinz to adopt Microsoft Office 365 for its more than
20,000 employees who will use Exchange Online for email and calendaring,
Sync for Business for conferencing and instant messaging, and Yammer (an
enterprise social network) to share ideas and collaborate on projects. Heinz is
also making the Office desktop suite available to its employees through Office
365 ProPlus.39
Other Personal Application Software
In addition to the software already discussed, many other interesting and
powerful application software tools are available for personal and business
use. In some cases, the features and capabilities of these applications more
than justify the cost of an entire computer system. TurboTax, for example, is
a popular tax-preparation program that annually saves millions of people
many hours and even dollars in preparing their taxes. With just a quick online
search, you can find software for creating Web sites, composing music, and
editing photos and videos. Many people use educational and reference soft-
ware and software for entertainment, games, and leisure activities. Game-
playing software is popular and can be very profitable for companies that
develop games and various game accessories, including virtual avatars such
as colorful animals, fish, and people. Some organizations have launched pro-
grams designed to promote physical activity by incorporating the use of active
video games (e.g., Wii Boxing and DanceDance Revolution) into broader
physical education programs. Retirement communities also use video games
to keep seniors physically active.40 Engineers, architects, and designers often
use computer-assisted design (CAD) software to design and develop build-
ings, electrical systems, plumbing systems, and more. Autosketch, CorelCAD,
FIGURE 4.19
Web-based application suite
Microsoft Office 365 is a Web-based
application suite that offers basic
software suite features over the
Internet using cloud computing.
Microsoft screenshot used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 169
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

and AutoCad are examples of CAD software. Other programs perform a wide
array of statistical tests. Colleges and universities often have a number of
courses in statistics that use this type of application software. Two popular
statistical analytics applications in the social sciences are SPSS and SAS.
Mobile Application Software
The number of applications (apps) for smartphones and other mobile devices
has exploded in recent years. Besides the proprietary apps that come with
these devices, hundreds of thousands of mobile apps have been developed
by third parties. As of July 2015, Apple’s App Store had over 1.5 million apps
available for iOS device users, and Android users could choose from over
1.6 million mobile apps on Google’s Play Store.41 Microsoft and other soft-
ware companies are also investing in mobile applications for devices that run
on their software. For example, SceneTap, an application for iPhones and
Android devices, can determine the number of people at participating bars,
pubs, or similar establishments and the ratio of males to females. The applica-
tion uses video cameras and facial-recognition software to identify males and
females. SocialCamera, an application for Android phones, allows people to
take a picture of someone and then search their Facebook friends for a
match. However, many people consider facial-recognition software a potential
invasion to privacy.
Table 4.10 lists a few mobile application categories. Many apps are free,
whereas others range in price from 99 cents to hundreds of dollars.
Workgroup Application Software
Workgroup application software is designed to support teamwork, whether
team members are in the same location or dispersed around the world. This
support can be accomplished with software known as groupware, which
TABLE 4.10 Categories of mobile applications
Category
Description
Books and reference
Access e-books, subscribe to journals, or look up information on the Merriam-Webster or
Wikipedia Web sites
Business and finance
Track expenses, trade stocks, and access corporate information systems
Entertainment
Access all forms of entertainment, including movies, television programs, music videos, and
information about local night life
Games
Play a variety of games, from 2D games such as Pacman and Tetris to 3D games such as Need
for Speed, Call of Duty, and Minecraft
Health and fitness
Track workout and fitness progress, calculate calories, and even monitor your speed and
progress from your wirelessly connected Nike shoes
Lifestyle
Find good restaurants, make a dinner reservation, select wine for a meal, and more
Music
Find, listen to, and create music
News and weather
Access major news and weather providers, including Reuters, AP, the New York Times, and
the Weather Channel
Photography
Organize, edit, view, and share photos taken on your phone’s camera
Productivity and
utilities
Create grocery lists, practice PowerPoint presentations, work on spreadsheets, synchronize
with PC files, and more
Social networking
Connect with others via major social networks, including Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram
Sports
Keep up with your favorite team or track your own golf scores
Travel and navigation
Use the GPS in your smartphone to get turn-by-turn directions, find interesting places to visit,
access travel itineraries, and more
workgroup application
software: Software that supports
teamwork, whether team members are
in the same location or dispersed
around the world.
170 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

helps groups of people work together effectively. Microsoft Exchange Server,
for example, has groupware and email features. Also called collaborative soft-
ware, workgroup software allows a team to work together remotely, sharing
ideas and work via connected computer systems.
Examples of workgroup software include group-scheduling software,
electronic mail, and other software that enables people to share ideas. IBM
Notes and Domino are examples of workgroup software from IBM. See
Figure 4.20. (Notes runs on the end user’s computing device, while Domino
runs on a server and supports the end user.) Web-based software is ideal for
group use. Because documents are stored on an Internet server, anyone with
an Internet connection can access them easily. Google provides workgroup
options in its online applications, which allow users to share documents,
spreadsheets, presentations, calendars, and notes with other specified users
or everyone on the Web. This sharing makes it convenient for several people
to contribute to a document without concern for software compatibility or
storage. Google also provides a tool for creating Web-based forms and sur-
veys. When invited parties fill out the form, the data is stored in a Google
spreadsheet.
Clark Realty Capital (CRC) is a national real estate firm with nine
offices across the United States. Its agents are constantly on the move, and
in the past, they had difficulty staying connected to the latest version of
important documents. This created problems because the firm’s agents are
constantly working to close deals on tight deadlines, which requires the ability
to frequently and quickly update documents related to a transaction. The firm
began sharing files via Google Drive to provide employees real-time access to
the current version of each document, thus eliminating the need for email
attachments and managing multiple versions of a file. Employees use Google
Apps to create, access, and update these documents.42
Enterprise Application Software
Software
that
benefits
an
entire
organization—enterprise
application
software—can be developed specifically for the business or purchased off the
FIGURE 4.20
IBM Notes Social Edition
IBM Notes Social Edition is a work-
group software.
Courtesy of IBM Corporation
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 171
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

shelf. There are many categories of enterprise software, including the
following:
Accounts payable
Accounts receivable
Airline industry operations
Automatic teller systems
Cash-flow analysis
Check processing
Credit and charge card administration
Distribution control
Fixed asset accounting
General ledger
Human resource management
Inventory control
Invoicing
Manufacturing control
Order entry
Payroll
Receiving
Restaurant management
Retail operations
Sales ordering
Savings and time deposits
Shipping
Stock and bond management
Tax planning and preparation
The total cost, ease of installation, ease of management, and the ability to
integrate the software with other enterprise applications are the major consid-
erations of organizations when selecting enterprise software. The ability to
extend enterprise applications so that they can run on smartphones and other
mobile devices is increasingly becoming a priority for many organizations.
Advantage Sign & Graphic Solutions, based in Grand Rapids, Michigan,
sells equipment and supplies to businesses in the sign and graphics industry.
The company operates 10 regional facilities that allow it to provide next-day
delivery of most supplies to customers around the country.43 In order to
improve its profitability and attract more customers, the company implemen-
ted several NetSuite enterprise applications, including NetSuite ERP, CRM+,
E-commerce, and Advanced Shipping. With the NetSuite software, Advantage
was able to launch a new e-commerce site, reduce order-processing time by
65 percent, and decrease its on-hand inventory by 15 percent. Implementing
an integrated set of enterprise applications simplified the company’s opera-
tions and helped it better connect with customers.44
Enterprise software also helps managers and workers stay connected. At
one time, managers and workers relied on email to stay in touch with each
other, but business collaboration and enterprise social networking tools—
such as Asana, blueKiwi, Yammer, and Jive—are replacing traditional email
and text messaging.
Worldwide spending on enterprise software was estimated to be about
$310 billion in 2015.45 Most software spending goes to application software,
as shown in Figure 4.21.46
FIGURE 4.21
Spending by type of software
Of all software types, businesses
spend the most on application
software.
Application
Custom built
Middleware
Operating systems
26%
43%
24%
7%
172 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Application Software for Transaction Processing, Business
Analytics, and Competitive Advantage
Specialized application software for learning enhancement and manage-
ment, business analytics, information, decision support, and competitive
advantage is available in every industry. For example, many schools and
colleges use Blackboard or other learning management software to organize
class materials and grades. Genetic researchers, as another example,
are using software to visualize and analyze the human genome. Music
executives use business analytics software to help them pick the next hit
song.
Pima County Regional Wastewater Reclamation Department (RWRD) man-
ages and maintains the Arizona county’s sanitary sewer system, which serves
1 million people and treats 60 million gallons of wastewater each day.47 The
department recently implemented Wonderware’s IntelaTrac mobile workforce
and decision support software. The software, which is integrated with the
automated SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition) system that
runs the sewer system, provides plant personnel with a range of reporting
and analytics tools that have helped them to improve efficiency and reduce
costs in RWRD’s two wastewater treatment plants and seven regional sub-
facilities. RWRD has been able to reduce energy consumption by 10 percent
and double its plant capacity, while operating with the same number of
people.48
But how are all these systems actually developed and built? The answer
is through the use of programming languages, some of which are discussed
in the next section.
Programming Languages
Both system and application software are written in coding schemes called
programming languages. The primary function of a programming language
is to provide instructions to the computer system so that it can perform a
processing activity. Information systems professionals work with different
programming languages, which are sets of keywords, commands, symbols,
and rules for constructing statements that people can use to communicate
instructions to a computer. Programming involves translating what a user
wants to accomplish into a code that the computer can understand and exe-
cute. Program code is the set of instructions that signal the CPU to perform
circuit-switching operations. In the simplest coding schemes, a line of code
typically contains a single instruction such as, “Retrieve the data in memory
address X.” The instruction is then decoded during the instruction phase of
the machine cycle.
Like writing a report or a paper in English, writing a computer program
in a programming language requires the programmer to follow a set of
rules. Each programming language uses symbols, keywords, and commands
that have special meanings and usage. Each language also has its own set of
rules, called the syntax of the language. The language syntax dictates how
the symbols, keywords, and commands should be combined into statements
capable of conveying meaningful instructions to the CPU. Rules such as
“statements must terminate with a semicolon,” and “variable names must
begin with a letter,” are examples of a language’s syntax. A variable is a
quantity that can take on different values. Program variable names such as
SALES, PAYRATE, and TOTAL follow the sample rule shown above because
they start with a letter, whereas variables such as %INTEREST, $TOTAL, and
#POUNDS do not.
programming languages: Sets of
keywords, commands, symbols, and
rules for constructing statements by
which humans can communicate
instructions to a computer.
syntax: A set of rules associated with
a programming language.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 173
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

With higher-level programming languages, each statement in the lan-
guage translates into several instructions in machine language. A special soft-
ware program called a compiler translates the programmer’s source code
into the machine-language instructions, which consist of binary digits, as
shown in Figure 4.22. A compiler creates a two-stage process for program
execution. First, the compiler translates the program into a machine language;
second, the CPU executes that program. Another programming approach is to
use an interpreter, which is a language translator that carries out the opera-
tions called for by the source code. An interpreter does not produce a com-
plete machine-language program. After the statement executes, the machine-
language statement is discarded, the process continues for the next statement,
and so on.
The majority of software used today is created using an integrated
development environment. An integrated development environment (IDE)
combines all the tools required for software engineering into one package.
For example, the popular IDE Microsoft Visual Studio includes an editor
that supports several visual programming interfaces and languages (visual
programming uses a graphical or “visual” interface combined with text-
based commands), a compiler and an interpreter, programming automation
tools, a debugger (a tool for finding errors in the code), and other tools
that provide convenience to the developer.
Software development kits (SDKs) often serve the purpose of an IDE for a
particular platform. For example, software developers for Google’s Android
smartphone platform use the Java programming language along with the
Android Studio with built-in Android Developer Tools to streamline their
Android app development. They can also use special code libraries provided
by Google for Android functionality, and they test out their applications in an
Android Emulator.49 See Figure 4.23.
IDEs and SDKs have made software development easier than ever. Many
novice coders, including some who might have never considered developing
software, are publishing applications for popular platforms such as Facebook
and the iPhone.
Table 4.11 lists some of the most commonly used programming languages.
FIGURE 4.22
How a compiler works
A compiler translates a complete
program into a complete set of
binary instructions (Stage 1). After
this is done, the CPU can execute
the converted program in its entirety
(Stage 2).
Stage 1:
Convert program
Stage 2:
Execute program
Program execution
Machine-
language
program
Computer
program
Compiler
Machine-
language
program
compiler: A special software pro-
gram that converts the programmer’s
source code into the machine-language
instructions, which consist of binary
digits.
174 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FIGURE 4.23
Emulator for Android
smartphones
To develop for the Android, you use
an SDK with a mobile device emu-
lator so you can prototype, develop,
and test Android applications with-
out having to transfer them to a
physical device.
Courtesy of Google
TABLE 4.11 Commonly used programming languages for new software development
Language
Description
COBOL
An English language-like programming language designed for business use, COBOL has been in use
since 1959. Billions of lines of COBOL code are still in use in systems around the world, including
credit card systems, ATMs, retail/POS systems, banking and payroll systems, healthcare systems,
government systems, reservation systems, and traffic signal systems. Due to its declining popularity
and the retirement of experienced COBOL programmers, COBOL programs are gradually being
migrated to new platforms, rewritten in modern languages, or replaced with software packages.
C
Developed in the early 1970s, C is the base for other popular languages, such as C#, Java, JavaScript,
and Python. C is mostly used for implementing operating systems and embedded applications.
Because it provides the foundation for many other languages, it is advisable to learn C (and C++)
before moving onto other languages.
C ++
Originally designed to enhance the C language, C++ is used to develop systems software, application
software, high-performance server and client applications, and video games.
Java
Java is a programming language developed by Sun Microsystems in the 1990s, and it is still widely
used in the development of enterprise software, Web-based content, and games. Java is also used for
mobile apps that run on the Android operating system.
JavaScript
A scripting language developed by Netscape, JavaScript derives much of its syntax from C. JavaScript
can be used across multiple Web browsers and is considered essential for developing interactive or
animated Web functions. It is also used in game development and for writing desktop applications.
PHP (Hypertext
Preprocessor)
A popular programming language for Web developers, PHP is used to create dynamic Web sites and to
develop apps. PHP is used in more than 200 million Web sites, including WordPress, Digg, and Facebook.
Python
Python is another scripting language used to develop Web sites and mobile apps. Python is consid-
ered a fairly easy language for beginners to learn due to its readability and compact syntax, and it is
used in Web apps for Google, Instagram, NASA, Pinterest, and Yahoo!
Ruby
Ruby is a scripting language designed to be simple and easy to use for developing Web sites and
mobile apps. It powers the Ruby on Rails (or Rails) framework, which is used on Scribd, GitHub,
Groupon, and Shopify.
SQL
A language for accessing data in relational database management systems, SQL is most commonly
used for its “Query” function, which searches relational databases. SQL was standardized in the
1980s by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO).
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 175
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Walmart’s VMI System
Walmart employs a special kind of enterprise system called an interorganizational
information system it calls vendor-managed inventory (VMI) to improve product
flow and lower its store inventories. Under this program, suppliers are responsi-
ble for managing the inventory of their products in Walmart’s warehouses. Suppli-
ers are granted access to a Walmart database that contains item-level sales and
inventory data for their products only, which help the vendors develop product
demand projections using a collaborative planning, forecasting, replenishment
process. Each link in the supply chain is interconnected using information tech-
nology that includes a central database, store-level-point-of-sale systems, and a
satellite network for fast and reliable communications.
Review Questions
1.
Do you think that the VMI software is off-the-shelf or proprietary software? Why?
2.
Should Walmart allow the suppliers to take a major role in defining and cus-
tomizing the features and capabilities of this system or should they insist on a
“one size fits all” approach?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What special issues and considerations are likely to arise in the operation and
support of an interorganizational system?
2.
Given the business criticality of this system, would it make sense for Walmart
to consider moving this system into a public cloud environment? What would
be the advantages and disadvantage of such a move?
Software Issues and Trends
Because software is such an important part of today’s computer systems, issues
such as software bugs, copyrights and licensing, freeware and open-source soft-
ware, upgrades, and global software support are receiving increased attention.
These topics are covered in the following sections.
Software Bugs
A software bug is a defect in a computer program that keeps it from performing as
its users expect it to perform. While some bugs are subtle—allowing errors to creep
into your work undetected—other bugs are very obvious, causing programs to ter-
minate unexpectedly. For example, not all goes smoothly when users upgrade to a
new operating system. Applications that used to run without a problem under the
old operating system may begin to experience difficulty. Users of Microsoft’s Office
for MAC 2016 who upgraded to Apple’s El Capitan OS initially experienced applica-
tion crashes for Outlook, Excel, PowerPoint, and Word. Although the bugs were
eventually fixed, many users spent weeks dealing with the crashes.50
Most computer and software vendors say that as long as people design
and program hardware and software, bugs are inevitable. The following list
summarizes tips for reducing the impact of software bugs:
●
Register all software so that you receive bug alerts, fixes, and patches.
●
Check the manual or read-me files for solutions to known problems.
●
Access the support area of the manufacturer’s Web site for patches.
●
Install the latest software updates.
●
Before reporting a bug, make sure that you can recreate the circum-
stances under which it occurs.
●
After you can recreate the bug, call the manufacturer’s tech support line.
176 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Consider waiting before buying the latest release of software to give the ven-
dor a chance to discover and remove bugs. Many schools and businesses
don’t purchase software until the first major revision with patches is released.
Copyrights and Licenses
Most companies aggressively guard and protect the source code of their soft-
ware from competitors as well as customers. As a result, most software pro-
ducts are protected by law using copyright or licensing provisions. Those
provisions can vary, however. In some cases, users are given unlimited use
of software on one or two computers. This stipulation is typical for applica-
tions developed for personal computers. In other cases, users pay based on
usage: If you use the software more, you pay more. This approach is becom-
ing popular, with software placed on networks or larger computers. Most of
these protections prevent you from copying software and giving it to others.
Some software now requires that you register or activate it before it can
be fully used. This requirement is another way software companies prevent
illegal distribution of their products.
In a recent survey of 50 companies with more than 10,000 employees,
10 percent of the respondents indicated that their firm had been fined,
assessed additional fees, or required to purchase backdated maintenance as a
result of license compliance issues uncovered in a software audit. The costs
ranged from less than $100,000 to more than $1 million.51
When people purchase software, they don’t actually own the software, but
rather they are licensed to use the software on a computer. This is called a
single-user license. A single-user license permits you to install the software
on one or more computers, used by one person. A single-user license does not
allow you to copy and share the software with others. Table 4.12 describes dif-
ferent types of software licenses.52 Licenses that accommodate multiple users
are usually provided at a discounted price.
Freeware and Open-Source Software
Some software developers are not concerned about profiting from their
intellectual property, which has given rise to alternative copyrights and
licensing agreements. Freeware is software that is made available to the
public for free. Software developers might give away their product for
several reasons. Some want to build customer interest and name recogni-
tion. Others simply don’t need the money and want to make a valuable
donation to society. Still others, such as those associated with the Free Soft-
ware Foundation (www.fsf.org), believe that all software should be free.
Freeware is placed in the public domain where anyone can use the software
free of charge. (All creative works that reach the end of their term of copy-
right revert to the public domain.) Table 4.13 shows some examples of
freeware.
Freeware differs slightly from free software. Freeware simply implies that
the software is distributed for free. The term “free software” was coined by
Richard Stallman and the Free Software Foundation, and it implies that the
software is not only freeware, but also open source. Open-source software is
distributed, typically for free, with the source code also available so that it
can be studied, changed, and improved by its users. Over time, open-source
software evolves in response to the combined contributions of its users. The
Code For America (CFA) organization, for example, used open-source soft-
ware to develop a map-based app for the city of Boston that allows indivi-
duals, small businesses, and community organizations to volunteer to shovel
out specific hydrants that might be completely covered with snow in the win-
ter. After creating the app for Boston, CFA made its efforts available for free
single-user license: A software
license that permits you to install the
software on one or more computers,
used by one person.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 177
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

TABLE 4.13 Examples of freeware
Software
Description
Adobe Reader
Software for viewing Adobe PDF documents
AVG Anti-Virus
Antivirus security software
IrfanView
Photo-editing software
Pidgin
Instant messaging software
Thunderbird
Email, news, and chat software
WinPatrol
Anti-malware software
TABLE 4.12 Software licenses
License
Subtype
Description
Single-user
license
General
This type of license allows the program to be installed and used on one
CPU that is not accessed by other users over a network. The software can
be used only on a single computer, and other users cannot access or run
the software while connected to your computer.
Perpetual license
A perpetual license allows the customer to install and use the software indef-
initely. Technical support is included for a limited term, usually 90 days.
Subscription license
A subscription license allows the user to use the software for a specified
time period. This license usually includes technical support and access to
upgrades and patches released during the term of the subscription. At the
end of the term, the user has several options: (1) renew the subscription,
(2) purchase a perpetual license at a discounted cost, or (3) remove the
software from the computer.
Freeware license
This license type is offered as freeware by the author and does not require
paying any fee for use.
Shareware license
This is a license to use software for a limited trial period. If you want to con-
tinue to use the software after the trial period, you must pay a shareware fee.
Individual/multi-
user licenses
Volume licenses
A volume license allows the licensee to install the software on a certain
number of computers. The licensee has to satisfy a minimum purchase
requirement to receive a reduced price. When purchasing the licenses, the
licensee usually receives one copy of the media and documentation, with
the option of purchasing more.
Site/enterprise
This license provides access to software at a single location. Typically,
these licenses are individually negotiated with the publisher and vary
widely in their provisions.
Network/multi-
user licenses
Per server
(network)
A per server license type requires that you have a single copy of the soft-
ware residing on a file server. With per server licensing, a specified num-
ber of client access licenses (CALs) are associated with a particular server.
The number of devices that can legally access that server simultaneously
is limited to the number of CALs purchased for that particular server.
Per seat (machine)
A per machine/seat license requires that you purchase a license for each
client computer and/or device that needs to access the software. This
license type is typically used in conjunction with a network license.
Per processor
Under the per processor model, you acquire a processor license for each
processor in the server on which the software is running. A processor
license usually includes access for an unlimited number of users to con-
nect. You do not need to purchase additional server licenses, CALs, or
Internet connector licenses.
Source: “Software License Types,” Tulane University, http://tulane.edu/tsweb/software/software-license-types.cfm, accessed November 28, 2015.
178 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

to other cities and municipalities. Table 4.14 provides examples of popular
open-source software applications.
Open-source software is not completely devoid of restrictions. Much of
the popular free software in use today is protected by the GNU General Pub-
lic License (GPL). The GPL grants you the right to do the following:
●
Run the program for any purpose
●
Study how the program works and adapt it to your needs
●
Redistribute copies so you can help others
●
Improve the program and release improvements to the public
Software under the GPL is typically protected by a “copyleft” (a play on
the word “copyright”), which requires that any copies of the work retain the
same license. A copyleft work cannot be owned by any one person, and no
one is allowed to profit from its distribution. The Free Software Directory
(http://directory.fsf.org) lists over 5,000 software titles of application software,
systems software, and programming tools (e.g., compilers).
Why would an organization run its business using software that’s free? Can
something that’s given away over the Internet be stable, reliable, or sufficiently
supported to place at the core of a company’s day-to-day operations? The
answer is surprising—many believe that open-source software is often more
reliable and secure than commercial software. How can this be? First, because
a program’s source code is readily available, users can fix any problems they
discover. A fix is often available within hours of a problem’s discovery. Second,
because the source code for a program is accessible to thousands of people, the
chances of a bug being discovered and fixed before it does any damage are
much greater than with traditional software packages.
However, using open-source software does have some disadvantages.
Although open-source systems can be obtained for next to nothing, the up-front
costs are only a small piece of the total cost of ownership that accrues over
the years that the system is in place. Some claim that open-source systems
contain many hidden costs, particularly in terms for user support and debug-
ging. Licensed software comes with guarantees and support services, whereas
open-source software does not. Still, many businesses appreciate the addi-
tional freedom that open-source software provides. The question of software
support is typically the biggest stumbling block to the acceptance of open-
source software at the corporate level. Getting support for traditional software
packages is easy—you call a company’s toll-free support number or access its
Web site. But how do you get help if an open-source package doesn’t work
as expected? Because the open-source community lives on the Internet, you
look there for help. Through the use of Internet discussion areas, you can
communicate with others who use the same software, and you might even
TABLE 4.14 Examples of open-source software
Software
Category
Drupal
Web publishing
Gimp
Photo editing
Grisbi
Personal accounting
Linux
Operating system
Mozilla Firefox
Internet browser
MySQL
Database software
Apache OpenOffice
Application software
ProjectLibre Open
Project
Project management
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 179
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

reach someone who helped develop it. Ideally, users of popular open-source
packages can get correct answers to their technical questions within a few
hours of asking for help on the appropriate Internet forum. Another approach
is to contact one of the many companies emerging to support and service
such software—for example, Red Hat for Linux and Sendmail, Inc., for Send-
mail. These companies offer high-quality, for-pay technical assistance.
Burton Snowboards was founded in 1977 by Jake Burton, who sold his
first snowboards out of his Vermont barn. Since then, The Burton Corporation
has become one of the world’s leading manufacturers of snowboarding equip-
ment and apparel.53 As part of an upgrade of the company’s existing SAP and
Oracle applications, Burton decided to migrate its operating platform to SUSE
Linux Enterprise Server, an open-source solution. SUSE, which is certified by
both SAP and Oracle, offered the company a highly dependable and flexible
platform for its business-critical systems. With SUSE, Burton is able to quickly
make its own updates to adapt to changing business needs, but it also has
access to ongoing support, including technical information and expert advice
available through the SUSE Web site—all with the lower software cost that an
open-source solution offers.54
Software Upgrades
Software companies revise their programs periodically. Software upgrades, which
are an important source of increased revenue for software manufacturers, vary
widely in the benefits that they provide, and what some people call a benefit,
others might call a drawback. Deciding whether to upgrade to a new version of
software can be a challenge for corporations and people with a large investment
in software. Some users choose not to immediately download the most current
software version or upgrade unless it includes significant improvements or capa-
bilities. Developing an upgrading strategy is important for many businesses.
American Express, for example, has standardized its software upgrade process
around the world to make installing updated software faster and more efficient.
The standardized process also helps the company make sure that updated soft-
ware is more stable, with fewer errors and problems.
Global Software Support
Large global companies have little trouble persuading vendors to sell them soft-
ware licenses for even the most far-flung outposts of their company. But can
those same vendors provide adequate support for their software customers in all
locations? Supporting local operations is one of the biggest challenges IS teams
face when putting together standardized companywide systems. Slower technol-
ogy growth markets, such as Eastern Europe and Latin America, might not have
any official vendor presence. Instead, large vendors such as Sybase, IBM, and
Hewlett-Packard typically contract with local providers to support their software
in such regions.
One approach that has been gaining acceptance in North America is to
outsource global support to one or more third-party distributors. The user
company still negotiates its license with the software vendor directly, but it
then hands the global support contract to a third-party supplier. The supplier
acts as a middleman between the software vendor and user, often providing
distribution, support, and invoicing.
In today’s computer systems, software is an increasingly critical compo-
nent. Whatever approach people and organizations take to acquire software,
everyone must be aware of the current trends in the industry. Informed users
are wise consumers.
180 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Organization Weighs Use of Open Source Software
You began operating a small general electric contracting company two years ago.
Originally, it was just you and your cousin, but it has grown to five licensed elec-
tricians, plus one office manager who takes calls from customers, schedules the
work, and orders parts and supplies. Your company handles a wide range of
work, including installing new circuit breaker panels, rewiring existing electrical
systems for renovations and additions, and installing residential light fixtures,
security lighting systems, swimming pool lighting, and ceiling fans. Business has
really taken off, and your current manual systems and procedures can no longer
keep pace. The office manager has been exploring several options and has identi-
fied three different software packages designed for small contractors. Each one of
the packages includes software designed for managing parts and supplies inven-
tory, scheduling jobs, and invoicing customers. Two of the software packages are
from large, well-known companies, and each has an initial licensing cost of
roughly $550 plus $100 per year for software support. The other software pack-
age is open-source software, with no initial cost and no support cost. The office
manager is unsure how to proceed.
Review Questions
1.
What is the primary difference between purchasing licensed software from a
software manufacturer and using open-source software?
2.
What are the pros and cons of using open-source software?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What risks and start-up issues are associated with the use of any new software
that is designed to replace manual procedures?
2.
What actions can be taken to reduce these risks?
Summary
Principle:
Software is valuable in helping individuals, workgroups, and entire
enterprises achieve their goals.
Software consists of programs that control the workings of the computer
hardware. Software can be divided into two types: systems software, which
consists of operating systems, utilities, and middleware, and application soft-
ware, which consists of programs that help users solve particular computing
problems.
One useful way of classifying the many potential uses of information sys-
tems is to identify the scope of problems and opportunities addressed by a par-
ticular organization or its sphere of influence. For most companies, the spheres
of influence are personal, workgroup, and enterprise.
Principle:
The operating system is called the “soul of the computer” because it con-
trols how you enter data into your computer, perform meaningful work,
and display results.
An operating system is a set of programs that controls a computer’s hard-
ware and acts as an interface with application software.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 181
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

There are various combinations of operating systems and computers, and
users, including single computer with a single user, single computer with mul-
tiple simultaneous users, multiple computers with multiple users, and special-
purpose computers.
The kernel is the heart of the operating system and controls its most critical
processes.
The operating system performs a myriad of functions including controlling
common hardware functions, providing a user interface and input/output man-
agement, providing a degree of hardware independence, managing system
memory, managing processing tasks, providing networking capability, control-
ling access to system resources, and managing files.
Operating systems use multitasking, multiprocessing, and multithreading to
increase the amount of processing that can be accomplished in a given amount
of time. With multitasking, users can run more than one application at a time.
Multiprocessing supports running a program on more than one CPU. Multi-
threading allows different threads of a single program to run concurrently.
The ability of a computer to handle an increasing number of concurrent
users smoothly is called scalability, a feature critical for systems expected to
handle a large number of users.
Software applications access and use the OS and other software applica-
tions by requesting services through a defined application programming inter-
face (API). Programmers can use APIs to create application software without
having to understand the inner workings of the operating system. APIs also
provide a degree of hardware independence so that the underlying hardware
can change without necessarily requiring a rewrite of the software applications.
Over the years, many OSs have been developed for the individual sphere
of influence including Microsoft Windows, the Mac OS X, Linux, and Google
Android and Chrome.
Microsoft Windows Server, UNIX, Red Hat Linux, Mac OS X Server, and
HP-UX are operating systems used for workgroups.
IBM z/os, HP-UX, and Linux are operating systems used in the enterprise
sphere of influence.
Smartphones now employ full-fledged personal computer operating systems
such as the Google Android, Apple iOS, and Microsoft Windows Phone.
An embedded system is a computer system (including some sort of proces-
sor) that is implanted in and dedicated to the control of another device.
Mac iOS, Windows Embedded, Symbian, Android, and variations of Linux
have been developed to support mobile communications and consumer
appliances.
Utility programs can perform many useful tasks, typically related to sys-
tem resource maintenance and management, and often come installed on
computers along with the OS. This type of software is used to merge and
sort sets of data, keep track of computer jobs being run, compress files of
data, protect against harmful computer viruses, monitor hardware and net-
work performance, and perform dozens of other important tasks.
Virtualization software simulates a computer’s hardware architecture in
software so that computer systems can run operating systems and software
designed for other architectures, or run several operating systems simulta-
neously on one system.
Middleware is software that allows different systems to communicate and
transfer data back and forth.
Principle:
Organizations typically use off-the-shelf application software to meet com-
mon business needs and proprietary application software to meet unique
business needs and provide a competitive advantage.
182 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Proprietary software is one-of-a-kind software designed for a specific appli-
cation and owned by the company, organization, or person that uses it.
Off-the-shelf-software is produced by software vendors to address needs
that are common across businesses, organizations, or individuals.
The software as a service (SaaS) model and recent Web-development
technologies have led to a new paradigm in computing called cloud comput-
ing. “Cloud computing” refers to the use of computing resources, including
software and data storage, on the Internet (the cloud), rather than on local
computers. Instead of installing, storing, and running software on your own
computer, with cloud computing, you access software stored on and delivered
from a Web server.
Personal application software includes general-purpose programs that
enable users to improve their personal effectiveness, increasing the quality
and amount of work that can be done. Word-processing, spreadsheet analysis,
database, presentation graphics, and personal information management appli-
cations are examples of this type of software. Sometimes these applications are
bundled together and sold in what is called a software suite.
Apple’s App Store has over 1.5 million apps available for iOS device users,
and Android users can choose from over 1.6 million mobile apps on Google’s
Play Store.
Software that helps groups work together is often called workgroup appli-
cation software. The category of software includes group-scheduling software,
electronic mail, and other software that enables people to share ideas.
Software that benefits an entire organization—enterprise application
software—can be developed specifically for the business or purchased off the
shelf. There are many categories of enterprise software that support common
business activities, such as accounts receivable, accounts payable, inventory
control, and other management activities.
All software applications are written in coding schemes called program-
ming languages, which are sets of keywords, commands, symbols, and rules
for constructing statements to provide instructions to a computer to perform
some processing activity.
Today, many software applications are being written or maintained using
the following programming languages: COBOL, C, C++, Java, Java Script, PHP,
Python, Ruby, and SQL.
Integrated development environments (IDEs) and software development
kits (SDKs) have simplified and streamlined the coding process and have
made it easier for more people to develop software.
Principle:
The software industry continues to undergo constant change; computer
users need to be aware of recent trends and issues in the software indus-
try to be effective in their business and personal life.
Software bugs, software copyrights and licensing, freeware and open-source
software, software upgrades, and global software support are all important soft-
ware issues and trends.
A software bug is a defect in a computer program that keeps it from per-
forming in the manner intended. Software bugs are common, even in key
pieces of business software.
Most companies aggressively guard and protect the source code of their
software from competitors as well as customers. As a result, most software
products are protected by law using copyright or licensing provisions
Freeware is software that is made available to the public for free. Open-
source software is freeware that also has its source code available so that
others may modify it. Open-source software development and maintenance
is a collaborative process, with developers around the world using the
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 183
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Internet to download the software, communicate about it, and submit new
versions of it.
Software upgrades are an important source of increased revenue for soft-
ware manufacturers and can provide useful new functionality and improved
quality for software users.
Global software support is an important consideration for large global
companies putting together standardized companywide systems. A common
solution is to outsource global support to one or more third-party software
distributors.
Key Terms
application programming interface (API)
application software
command-based user interface
compiler
embedded system
enterprise application integration (EAI)
enterprise sphere of influence
graphical user interface (GUI)
hardware independence
kernel
middleware
off-the-shelf software
operating system (OS)
personal productivity software
personal sphere of influence
programming language
proprietary software
rich Internet application (RIA)
service-oriented architecture (SOA)
single-user license
software as a service (SaaS)
software suite
sphere of influence
syntax
system software
user interface
utility program
workgroup
workgroup application software
workgroup sphere of influence
Chapter 4: Self-Assessment Test
Software is valuable in helping individuals, work-
groups, and entire enterprises achieve their goals.
1. The two main categories of software
are
.
a. enterprise and workgroup
b. operating system and application
c. application and system
d. utilities and operating system
2. Application software that enables users to
develop a spreadsheet for tracking their
exercise and eating habits is software for the
workgroup sphere of influence. True or False?
The operating system is called the “soul of the com-
puter” because it controls how you enter data into
your computer, perform meaningful work, and dis-
play results.
3. The heart of the operating system that
controls its most critical processes is called
the
.
4. Software applications use the OS by requesting
services through a(n)
.
a. integrated development environment
b. application program interface
c. utility program
d. software development kit
5.
is an operating system that can run
in all three spheres of influence.
a. IBM z/os
b. Windows 10
c. MAC iOS
d. Linux
6. A(n)
server simulates a compu-
ter’s hardware architecture in software so that
a single server can run operating systems and
software designed for other architectures, or
run several operating systems simultaneously
on one system.
Organizations typically use off-the-shelf applica-
tion software to meet common business needs
184 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

and proprietary application software to meet
unique business needs and provide a competitive
advantage.
7.
software is one-of-a-kind soft-
ware designed for a specific application and
owned by the company, organization, or per-
son that uses it.
8.
computing refers to the use of
computing resources, including software and
data storage, on the Internet, rather than on local
computers.
9. Software that enables users to improve their per-
sonal effectiveness, increasing the amount of
work they can do and its quality, is
called
.
a. workgroup software
b. enterprise software
c. utility software
d. personal application software
10. Each programming language has its own set of
rules, called the
of the language.
The software industry continues to undergo con-
stant change; computer users need to be aware
of recent trends and issues in the software indus-
try to be effective in their business and personal
life.
11.
is software that makes its source
code available so that others may modify it.
a. Freeware
b. Off-the-shelf software
c. Open-source software
d. Software in the public domain
12. Software
are an important
source of increased revenue for software man-
ufacturers and can provide useful new func-
tionality and improved quality for software
users.
a. bugs
b. upgrades
c. open source licenses
d. third-party distributors
Chapter 4: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. c
2. False
3. kernel
4. b
5. d
6. virtual
7. Proprietary
8. Cloud
9. d
10. syntax
11. c
12. b
Review Questions
1. Identify and briefly discuss the three spheres
of influence used to identify the scope of
problems and opportunities that software
addresses.
2. What is the role of the computer operating
system? Identify several activities performed by
this key piece of software.
3. What is an application programming interface
(API)? What purpose does it serve?
4. What is the kernel of the operating
system?
5. Identify and briefly discuss five types of operat-
ing system user interfaces.
6. Identify and briefly describe the five basic
approaches to task management employed in
operating systems.
7. What role does a Linux distributor play?
8. The Mac OS X supports dual booting. What is
this, and what benefits does it provide?
9. What is an embedded system? Give three exam-
ples of such a system.
10. Distinguish between proprietary software and
off-the-shelf software.
11. What is middleware?
12. What is software as a service (SaaS)?
13. What is cloud computing? What are some pros
and cons of cloud computing?
14. What is open-source software? What are the
benefits and drawbacks for a business that
uses open-source software?
15. Briefly discuss the advantages and disadvantages
of frequent software upgrades.
16. What is the difference between freeware and
open-source software?
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 185
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Discussion Questions
1. How does Microsoft envision the future for
Windows 10? Do you support this vision? Why or
why not?
2. Assume that you must take a computer-
programming language course next semester.
How would you decide which language would be
best for you to study? Do you think that a pro-
fessional programmer needs to know more than
one programming language? Why or why not?
3. Assume you are going to buy a personal computer.
What operating system features are important to you?
What operating system would you select and why?
4. You have been asked to develop a user interface for
a person with limited sight—someone without the
ability to recognize letters or shapes on a computer
screen. Describe the user interface you would
recommend.
5. You are using a new release of an application
software package. You think that you have dis-
covered a bug. Outline the approach that you
would take to confirm that it is indeed a bug. What
actions would you take if it truly were a bug?
6. What are some of the advantages and disadvan-
tages of employing software as a service (SaaS)?
What precautions might you take to minimize the
risk of using one?
7. If you were the IS manager for a large
manufacturing company, what concerns might
you have about your organization using open-
source software? What advantages might there be
for use of such software?
8. Identify four types of frequently used software
licenses. Which approach does the best job of
ensuring a steady, predictable stream of revenue
from customers? Which approach is best for a
small company with only a few dozen
employees?
9. How have software development kits (SDKs)
influenced software development?
10. How can virtualization save an organization money?
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Do research to compare the costs and features as
well as the pros and cons of using Microsoft
Office versus Office 365. Summarize your results
using a spreadsheet. Which choice is the best
solution for you? Why? Using presentation soft-
ware, outline your thought process and key
points in three or four slides.
2. Use graphics software to develop a chart showing
the worldwide market share of smartphone
operating systems for Apple iPhone OS and
Google Android over the past five quarters. Now
do the same for just the U.S. market share. What
conclusions do you draw from these charts?
3. Do research to identify the embedded operating
systems used in BMW, Chevrolet, Chrysler, Ford,
Honda, Mercedes Benz, Nissan, and Toyota
automobiles. Create a spreadsheet that displays
the embedded system and make of automobile
along with the auto manufacturer’s name for
system.
Team Activities
1. You and your team must make a recommenda-
tion to the director of information systems on
which is the best cloud computing service for
your school—from the perspective of the student.
Do research on any three of the following, and
then decide which service to recommend: Ama-
zon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2), IBM’s Blue
Cloud, Sun Cloud, Google AppEngine, and Win-
dows Azure Services Platform. What factors
influenced your recommendation?
2. You and your team members should learn how to
use a computer operating system with which you
are unfamiliar. Explore how to launch applica-
tions, minimize and maximize windows, close
applications, save and view files on the system,
and change system settings, such as how quickly
a screen is turned off when not in use. Assess
ease of learning and ease of use for the operating
system. Team members should collaborate on a
report, using the track changes features of Word
or the collaborative features of Google Docs to
summarize the team’s findings and opinions
about three personal computer operating
systems.
186 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

3. “Spreadsheets, even after careful development,
contain errors in 1 percent or more of all formula
cells,” according to Ray Panko, a professor of IT
management at the University of Hawaii and an
authority on bad spreadsheet practices. This
means that in large spreadsheets there could be
dozens of undetected errors.55 Imagine that you
and your team have been hired as consultants to
a large organization. Outline several measures
that the organization should take to ensure the
accuracy of key spreadsheets that are used to
make key business decisions.
Web Exercises
1. The Google Android operating system has
over an 80 percent share of the worldwide
smartphone operating system market. Do
research to find out if industry observers are
concerned that that such a strong position
by one company may stifle competition
and innovation. Write a few paragraphs
summarizing your findings.
2. Do research on the Web to learn which
programming language skills are currently
most in demand in the job market. Write
a brief report discussing the sources of
information you used and summarizing your
findings.
3. Use the Internet to search for information on
real-time operating systems. Identify the key
differences between real-time and non-real-
time operating systems. Identify three situa-
tions in which real-time operating systems are
needed.
Career Exercises
1. Think of your ideal job. Would it help you to
learn a programming language to be effective in
this position? Why or why not?
2. Identify three specific smartphone applications
that would be of significant help to you in your
current or next job. (You can include applications
that already exist as well as ones that you wish
existed.) Describe specific features of each appli-
cation and how you would use them.
3. Think of your ideal job. Identify two existing
software applications for each sphere of influence
that you would likely use in this career.
Case Studies
Case One
Société de transport de Montréal (STM) Implements
Innovative Mobile App
Montreal, in the Canadian province of Quebec, is
considered one of the world’s most livable cities. The
city, whose official language is French, is the culture
capital of Canada with opera, museums of history and fine
art, a symphony orchestra, cathedrals, many fine
restaurants, and international jazz and comedy festivals.
The Société de transport de Montréal (STM) is the bus and
metro public transit system serving roughly 1.4 million
daily passengers in the greater Montreal area. STM riders can
use a rechargeable smart fare card—called Opus—on which
riders can add and maintain a balance to cover their transit
fares.
STM tracks use of the Opus card to capture passenger
riding history. This data has revealed an alarming
problem—STM is losing about 13 percent of its riders
through attrition each year. Analysis shows that this attrition
can be attributed to a variety of causes, including deaths and
moves out of the city. STM also determined that some
amount of attrition is due to university students who, upon
graduation, quit riding the STM and purchase or lease an
auto to commute to their job.
After a year of looking at options, STM decided to
launch a six-month pilot loyalty project to combat this
problem. The scope of the project, which is limited to about
20,000 current riders, will test if the proposed solution
works, identify full implementation costs, and identify any
potential barriers to success as well as unintended
consequences of the program. Results from the pilot will
be used to modify the initial solution and/or rollout plan.
The pilot project must meet certain predefined success
criteria in order to support a recommendation for a full
rollout.
The foundation of the loyalty program is a mobile app
called STM Merci, which presents riders with exclusive,
personalized offers based on their user profiles, travel habits,
and level of ridership: top-tier, mid-tier, and first-tier. For a
particular offer, for example, tickets to the Opera de
Montreal, 100 top-tier riders might receive an offer for free
tickets, while 100 mid-tier riders are offered 50 percent off
tickets and 100 first-tier riders are offered 20 percent off
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 187
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

tickets. STM hopes to recruit a large number of event and
commercial partners willing to participate in the program in
return for the strong geomarketing opportunities created
from having riders view an offer on their mobile phones,
often when they are literally feet from the promoted
commercial location.
The STM Merci app can also communicate useful
information to riders in real time. For example, it can let
riders know that by taking a slightly later car from their usual
station on a given day, they would have a much better chance
of getting a seat. Or it could point out when they were
spending more on single fares than the cost of a monthly
pass (about $77 per month).
The app is carefully designed to allow riders to select
how they want to interact with the STM Merci system.
Riders who enter their Opus card number into the STM
Merci app will receive more targeted and relevant offers
based on the data in their profile. For example, riders
whose profile indicates an interest in painting might
receive an offer for a discount admission to Montreal
Museum of Fine Art. Sushi lovers might get an offer for a
free appetizer at a restaurant within a stop or two of their
current location.
The data needed to support the STM Merci app is
split into two separate databases to protect riders’ right
to privacy. Data deemed critical to running the STM
operation—such as a rider’s email address and ticket
purchase history—are stored in one database under the
rider’s first name. This data is used to notify riders
about delays, closures, and other mission-critical
issues. Noncritical rider profile data, including food
preferences, hobbies, and interests, is stored in a
second database under the rider’s last name. No marketer
can access the two databases and merge them to send
messages to an individual rider. This separation of
databases satisfies Quebec’s strict privacy laws, which
prohibit collecting rider data beyond what is deemed
critical for the organization.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Identify four success criteria for the STM Merci pilot
project that address retention of riders, cost/benefits,
recruitment of STM Merci partners, and usability of the
application. The criteria should specific, quantifiable,
and time constrained to occur within a certain time
period.
2. Do you believe that the database design will safeguard
the privacy of STM riders? Why or why not? If not,
what further changes are needed?
3. How might STM Merci pilot project members identify
additional capabilities or features that could be added
to the STM Merci app to encourage increased
ridership?
SOURCES: Murphy, Ken, “Société de transport de Montréal (STM) Aims
to Boost Ridership by 40% With a Mobile App,” SAP Insider, January 1,
2014, http://sapinsider.wispubs.com/Assets/Case-Studies/2014.Jauuary
/STM; “About the STM,” Société de transport de Montréal, www.stm.info
/en/about/financial_and_corporate_information/about-stm, accessed
November 14, 2015.
Case Two
FIMC Launches Mobile App to Provide Enhanced
Roadside Assistance Services
In any given year, more than 40 million people in the United
States require some form of roadside assistance—whether
it’s to get a battery restarted, a flat tire changed, or a car
towed to a local repair shop. No one wants to be stuck on
the side of the road, so many consumers choose to purchase
a roadside assistance plan that gives them access to help in
the event of an emergency. Consumers have choice when it
comes to purchasing a plan, with options available from
automotive aftermarket retailers and service providers,
employee groups, insurance and financial institutions, and
trade associations.
Since 1974, Financial Insurance Management
Corporation (FIMC), headquartered in Sarasota, Florida,
has been developing, marketing, and implementing
outsourced, membership-based roadside assistance
programs for customers such as AAMCO Transmissions,
Citibank, Precision Tune Auto Care, and Wells Fargo.
Through its customized programs, which also offer
health, home, and travel services and discounts, the
company provides roadside assistance benefits to more
than 2 million members in the United States, Puerto Rico,
and Canada.
When an emergency happens—even if it’s just a set of
keys locked in a car—customers need and expect prompt
service. And while FIMC prided itself on the high-quality
customer service it provided via its call center and Web
site, offering customers access to services via a mobile
app was a logical next step. A primary goal for the
company was developing an app that would deliver
increased value to members by making it easier for them
to access their benefits and take advantage of current
promotions.
After researching alternatives, FIMC opted to go with a
mobile solution developed by PointSource, a local software
development firm, using IBM’s MobileFirst platform. To
ensure that the app was firmly grounded in the company’s
business objectives, FIMC and PointSource staff spent time
translating the business requirements into a mobile strategy
that fit within FIMC’s time and budget constraints. Once the
groundwork was completed, PointSource was able to build a
prototype of the FIMC mobile app in less than four weeks—
deploying the final application just three months after the
project started.
An important project requirement for FIMC was that the
app be integrated with the company’s back-end systems,
which hold membership data and benefits information.
FIMC also needed an app that would be accessible by all of
its members—no matter what type of mobile device they
used. Rather than create multiple apps, PointSource
developed a single, hybrid application that can run on both
Android and Apple iOS devices. The app’s intuitive interface
provides members with one-touch roadside assistance,
personalized discounts and promotions, claim submission
tools, and deductible-management features. The mobile
app’s tools have improved the quality of the company’s
communications with its members. And, because members
188 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

who have easy access to their benefits are more likely to
renew their memberships, the app has helped FIMC
increase its renewal rates. Using the app, customers can
quickly renew their membership from any location,
ensuring continuous service.
Working with PointSource, FIMC plans on launching a
new version of its mobile app every month. The
PointSource development team uses cloud-based
development services that allow it to create work items to
share with FIMC on an ongoing basis. This allows FIMC to
remain involved with the development process and helps
PointSource stay in touch with FIMC’s priorities and
changing business needs.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. How important do you think it is for FIMC and
other companies offering roadside assistance
services to provide customers with access to services
via a mobile app? Do you think a mobile app will
provide FIMC with a competitive advantage, or is
mobile access something that most customers have
come to expect?
2. A recent survey by IBM of 585 mobile application
developers and managers found that only one-third of
mobile development projects successfully met project
criteria in terms of budget, schedule, and project
objectives. Given that, what are some of the
potential risks for companies, such as FIMC, that
develop and deploy a mobile app on such a tight
schedule?
3. When developing the FIMC app, PointSource used
an IBM tool called Rational Test Workbench,
which allowed developers to find and fix many soft-
ware bugs before the app was released. Do research
on the Web to find out more about this tool and how it
might help developers cut down on the number of
software bugs.
SOURCES: “What We Do,” FIMC, www.fimc.com/What-We-Do,
accessed January 12, 2016; “The American Traveler Motor Club &
Home Benefits, Inc.,” FIMC, www.fimc.com/atmc, accessed January 12,
2016; “IBM MobileFirst PointSource FIMC,” IBM, www-01.ibm.com
/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?infotype=SA&subtype=ST&htmlfid=SW
V14013USEN, accessed January 12, 2016; IBM MobileFirst,” IBM, www
.ibm.com/mobilefirst/us/en/, accessed January 13, 2016; “About Us,”
PointSource, www.pointsource.com/aboutus, accessed January 13,
2016; “Rational Test Workbench,” IBM, www-03.ibm.com/software
/products/en/rtw, accessed January 12, 2016; “Star Qualities: What is
Takes for Mobile Development Projects to Succeed”, IBM, www-01.ibm.
com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?subtype=XB&infotype=PM&htmlfid=
BIE12345USEN&attachment=BIE12345USEN.PDF, accessed January 13,
2016.
Notes
1. Devery, Quinn, “2012 Breakdown of Global IT Services,
Software, and Hardware,” August 8, 2013, www.para
net.com/blog/bid/151090/2012-Breakdown-of-Global-
IT-Services-Software-and-Hardware-Spending.
2. “Personal Productivity Software: VIP Organizer Is the
Best Personal Productivity Software,” VIP Quality Soft-
ware, www.vip-qualitysoft.com/products/organizer/per
sonal_productivity_software, accessed November 16,
2015.
3. “IBM Notes and Domino 9 Social Edition,” IBM,
www-03.ibm.com/software/products/en/ibmnotes,
accessed November 16, 2015.
4. “IBM Case Study: JGC Corporation,” IBM,
www-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?subty
pe=AB&infotype=PM&appname=SWGE_LO_LE_U
SEN&htmlfid=LOC14428USEN&attachment=LOC14428U
SEN.PDF, accessed November 16, 2015.
5. Roos, Dave, “How to Leverage an API for Conferencing,”
How Stuff Works, http://money.howstuffworks.com/busi
ness-communications/how-to-leverage-an-api-for-confer
encing1.htm, accessed November 17, 2015.
6. Olenick, Doug, “Google Drops Chrome Support for
Older Microsoft and Apple Operating System,” SC Mag-
azine, November 12, 2015, www.scmagazine.com/goo
gle-drops-chrome-support-for-older-microsoft-and-apple-
operating-system/article/453592.
7. Whittaker, Zack, “A 23-Year-Old Windows 3.1 System
Failure Crashed Paris Airport,” ZD Net, November 16,
2015, www.zdnet.com/article/a-23-year-old-windows-3-
1-system-failure-crashed-paris-airport.
8. Bellis, Mary, “Putting Microsoft on the Map,” About.com,
http://inventors.about.com/od/computersoftware/a/Put
ting-Microsoft-On-The-Map.htm, accessed November 17,
2015.
9. Rash, Wayne, “Microsoft Says Windows 10 Will Be the
Last OS Upgrade You’ll Ever Need,” eWeek, January 21,
2015, www.eweek.com/pc-hardware/microsoft-says-win
dows-10-will-be-the-last-os-upgrade-youll-ever-need.html.
10. “OS X El Capitan Available as a Free Update Tomorrow,”
Apple, September 29, 2015, www.apple.com/pr/library
/2015/09/29OS-X-El-Capitan-Available-as-a-Free-
Update-Tomorrow.html.
11. “Linux Definition,” The Linux Information Project,
linfo.org/linuxdef.html, accessed November 20, 2015.
12. “About Red Hat,” Red Hat, www.redhat.com/en,
accessed January 2, 2016.
13. Cerner to Present at JP Morgan Healthcare Conference,”
Cerner Corporation, www.cerner.com/about/Investor
_Relations, accessed January 2, 2016.
14. “Cerner Boosts Performance and Stability,” Red Hat,
www.redhat.com/en/success-stories/cerner, accessed
January 2, 2016.
15. Taves, Max and Richard Nieva, “Google I/O by the
Numbers: 1B Android Users, 900M on Gmail,” CNET,
May 28, 2015, www.cnet.com/news/google-io-by-the-
numbers-1b-android-users-900m-on-gmail.
16. Furrier, John and Dave Vellante, “Analysis: Is Sun Better
Off after Acquiring Sun?,” Forbes, July 9, 2013, www
.forbes.com/sites/siliconangle/2013/07/09/analysis-is-
oracle-better-off-after-sun-acquisition.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 189
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

17. “How Office Depot Optimizes ERP by 20% With SPARC
and Solaris,” Oracle, https://blogs.oracle.com/hardware
/entry/how_office_depot_optimizes_erp, accessed
November 23, 2015.
18. “Casio Strengthens Its Core IT Infrastructure with Red
Hat Enterprise Virtualization,” Red Hat, www.redhat
.com/en/files/resources/en-rhev-casio-strengthens-its-
core-it-infrastructure-9296587.pdf, accessed November
23, 2015.
19. Carter, Jamie, “4 Best Smart TVs in the World 2015,”
TechRadar, January 14, 2015, www.techradar.com
/news/television/6-best-smart-tv-platforms-in-the-world-
today-1120795.
20. “Syndicat Mixte Autolib’,” Microsoft, www.microsoft.
com/windowsembedded/en-us/customer-stories-details.
aspx?id=34, accessed November 24, 2015.
21. “Using Sysinternals Tools Like a Pro,” How-To Geek
School, www.howtogeek.com/school/sysinternals-pro/les
son1, accessed November 24, 2015.
22. “Long Island Rail Road—General Information,” Metro-
politan Transportation Authority, http://web.mta.info
/lirr/about/GeneralInformation, accessed January 7,
2016.
23. “The Long Island Rail Road Stays on Track with GWAVA
Messaging Security,” GWAVA, www.gwava.com/success-
stories/staying-on-track-success-story, accessed January
7, 2016.
24. “About the University of Kentucky,” University of Ken-
tucky, www.uky.edu/Admission/content/about-univer
sity-kentucky, accessed January 8, 2016.
25. “University of Kentucky,” AdRem Software, www.adrem
soft.com/netcrunch/ss/?page=kentucky, accessed January
8, 2016.
26. “BCBSKS Cuts Mainframe Software Costs with IBM,”
IBM, May 31, 2013, www-01.ibm.com/software/success
/cssdb.nsf/CS/STRD-988E7F.
27. VMWare, “Enhancing the Retail Employee Experience—
Columbia Sportswear Company,” YouTube, October 7,
2015, www.youtube.com/watch?v=aQbTBBHaryY&
index=3&list=PL0Znya5COr_f2j0T8VTwgZPir0365csfI.
28. Bloomberg, Jason, “Service-Oriented Architecture:
Enabler of the Digital World,” Forbes, February 9, 2015,
www.forbes.com/sites/jasonbloomberg/2015/02/09/ser
vice-oriented-architecture-enabler-of-the-digital-world.
29. “About Netflix,” Netflix, https://media.netflix.com/en,
accessed January 9, 2016.
30. Mauro, Tony, “Adopting Microservices at Netflix:
Lessons for Architectural Design,” NGINX (blog),
February 19, 2015, www.nginx.com/blog/microservices-
at-netflix-architectural-best-practices.
31. Mauro, Tony, “Adopting Microservices at Netflix:
Lessons for Team and Process Design,” NGINX
(blog), March 10, 2016, www.nginx.com/blog/adopting-
microservices-at-netflix-lessons-for-team-and-process-
design.
32. “About Us,” H&R Block, http://newsroom.hrblock.com
/about-us, accessed January 8, 2016.
33. “Should You Custom-Build an Online Newsroom? Or
Buy One Off the Shelf?,” PressPage, December 10, 2015,
http://news.presspage.com/should-you-custom-build-an-
online-newsroom-or-buy-one-off-the-shelf.
34. “The Container Store Group, Inc., Announces Fourth
Quarter and Full Fiscal Year 2014 Financial Results,” The
Container Store, April 27, 2015, http://investor.contain
erstore.com/press-releases/press-release-details
/2015/The-Container-Store-GroupInc-Announces-
Fourth-Quarter-and-Full-Fiscal-Year-2014-Financial-
Results/default.aspx.
35. “The Container Store,” Ultimate Software, www.ultimate
software.com/UltiPro-Case-Study-The-Container-Store,
accessed January 8, 2016.
36. “Amazon Web Services Tops List of Most Reliable Public
Clouds,” Gigaom, January 7, 2015, https://gigaom.com
/2015/01/07/amazon-web-services-tops-list-of-most-reli
able-public-clouds.
37. “Airbnb Case Study,” Amazon, https://aws.amazon.com
/solutions/case-studies/airbnb/?pg=main-customer-suc
cess-page, accessed January 8, 2016.
38. Plumer, Brad, “Is the Evidence for Austerity Based on an
Excel Spreadsheet Error?,” Washington Post, April 16,
2013, www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp
/2013/04/16/is-the-best-evidence-for-austerity-based-on-
an-excel-spreadsheet-error.
39. “Heinz—Global Food Leader Savors New Ideas and Cuts
Costs with Office 365,” https://blogs.office.com/2014/05
/08/heinz-cuts-costs-with-office-365, accessed November
25, 2015.
40. “Games: Improving Health,” Entertainment
Software Association, www.theesa.com/games-improv
ing-what-matters/health.asp, accessed October 25,
2013.
41. “Number of Apps Available in Leading App Stores as of
July 2015,” Statista, www.statista.com/statistics/276623
/number-of-apps-available-in-leading-app-stores,
accessed November 16, 2015.
42. “Clark Realty Capital Goes Google,” Dito, www.ditoweb
.com/resources/case-studies/clark-realty-capital-goes
-google, accessed November 25, 2015.
43. “About Advantage Sign and Graphic Solutions,” Advan-
tage Sign and Graphic Solutions, www.advantagesgs
.com/About-Advantage-Sign-and-Graphic-Solutions,
accessed January 10, 2016.
44. “Advantage Sign and Graphic Solutions,” NetSuite, www.
netsuite.com/portal/customer-testimonials/advantage-
sign-supply-wholesale-distribution.shtml, accessed
January 10, 2016.
45. “Gartner Says Worldwide IT Spending to Decline 5.5
Percent in 2015,” Gartner, June 30, 2015, www.gartner
.com/newsroom/id/3084817.
46. Lunden, Ingrid, “Forrester: $2.1 Trillion Will Go into IT
Spend in 2013; Apps and the U.S. Lead the Charge,”
TechCrunch, July 15, 2013, http://techcrunch.com/2013
/07/15/forrester-2-1-trillion-will-go-into-it-spend-in-
2013-apps-and-the-u-s-lead-the-charge.
47. “Wastewater Reclamation,” Pima County, http://webcms.
pima.gov/government/wastewaterreclamation, accessed
January 11, 2016.
48. “Pima County,” Schneider Electric Software, http://soft
ware.schneider-electric.com/about-us/success-stories
/pima-county-implements-situational-awareness-strat
egy-to-improve-operational-effi-ciency-of-wastewater-
facilities, accessed January 10, 2016.
190 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

49. “Android Studio,” Android, http://developer
.android.com/sdk/index.html, accessed November 28,
2015.
50. Keizer, Greg, “Microsoft Gets an Earful as Office for
MAC 2016 Users Amp IRE over Crashes,” Computer-
world, October 8, 2015, www.computerworld.com
/article/2990427/mac-os-x/microsoft-gets-an-earful-as-
office-for-mac-2016-users-amp-ire-over-crashes.html.
51. “CIO Quick Pulse: Putting Software Licenses to Work,”
Aspera, www.aspera.com/en/resources/white-papers/cio-
quickpulse, accessed November 28, 2015.
52. “Software Licenses Types,” Tulane University Technol-
ogy Services, http://tulane.edu/tsweb/software/software-
license-types.cfm, accessed November 3, 2013.
53. “History,” Burton Snowboards, www.burton.com
/default/history, accessed January 11, 2016.
54. “Customer Success: The Burton Corporation,” www.suse
.com/success/stories/burton.html, accessed January 11,
2016.
55. Olshan, Jeremy, “88% of Spreadsheets Have Errors,”
MarketWatch, April 20, 2013, www.marketwatch.com
/story/88-of-spreadsheets-have-errors-2013-04-17.
CHAPTER 4 • Software and Mobile Applications 191
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
5
Database Systems
and Big Data
Rafal Olechowski/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• The amount of data in the digital universe is expected
to increase to 44 zettabytes (44 trillion gigabytes) by
2020. This is 60 times the amount of all the grains of
sand on all the beaches on Earth. The majority of
data generated between now and 2020 will not be
produced by humans, but rather by machines as they
talk to each other over data networks.
• Most major U.S. wireless service providers have
implemented a stolen-phone database to report and
track stolen phones. So if your smartphone or tablet
goes missing, report it to your carrier. If someone else
tries to use it, he or she will be denied service on the
carrier’s network.
• You know those banner and tile ads that pop up on
your browser screen (usually for products and
services you’ve recently viewed)? Criteo, one of
many digital advertising organizations, automates the
recommendation of ads up to 30 billion times each day,
with each recommendation requiring a calculation
involving some 100 variables.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• The database approach to data management has
become broadly accepted.
• Data modeling is a key aspect of organizing data and
information.
• A well-designed and well-managed database is an
extremely valuable tool in supporting decision making.
• We have entered an era where organizations are
grappling with a tremendous growth in the amount of
data available and struggling to understand how to
manage and make use of it.
• A number of available tools and technologies allow
organizations to take advantage of the opportunities
offered by big data.
• Identify and briefly describe the members of the hier-
archy of data.
• Identify the advantages of the database approach to
data management.
• Identify the key factors that must be considered when
designing a database.
• Identify the various types of data models and explain
how they are useful in planning a database.
• Describe the relational database model and its funda-
mental characteristics.
• Define the role of the database schema, data definition
language, and data manipulation language.
• Discuss the role of a database administrator and data
administrator.
• Identify the common functions performed by all data-
base management systems.
• Define the term big data and identify its basic
characteristics.
• Explain why big data represents both a challenge and
an opportunity.
• Define the term data management and state its overall
goal.
• Define the terms data warehouse, data mart, and data
lakes and explain how they are different.
• Outline the extract, transform, load process.
• Explain how a NoSQL database is different from an
SQL database.
• Discuss the whole Hadoop computing environment and
its various components.
• Define the term in-memory database and explain its
advantages in processing big data.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Database Systems and Big Data?
Organizations and individuals capture prodigious amounts of data from a myriad of sources every day.
Where does all this data come from, where does it go, how is it safeguarded, and how can you use it to
your advantage? In this chapter, you will learn about tools and processes that enable users to manage
all this data so that it can be used to uncover new insights and make effective decisions. For example,
if you become a marketing manager, you can access a vast store of data related to the Web-surfing
habits, past purchases, and even social media activity of existing and potential customers. You can use
this information to create highly effective marketing programs that generate consumer interest and
increased sales. If you become a biologist, you may use big data to study the regulation of genes and
the evolution of genomes in an attempt to understand how the genetic makeup of different cancers
influences outcomes for cancer patients. If you become a human resources manager, you will be able
to use data to analyze the impact of raises and changes in employee-benefit packages on employee
retention and long-term costs. Regardless of your field of study in school and your future career, using
database systems and big data will likely be a critical part of your job. As you read this chapter, you will
see how you can use databases and big data to extract and analyze valuable information to help you
succeed. This chapter starts by introducing basic concepts related to databases and data management
systems. Later, the topic of big data will be discussed along with several tools and technologies used
to store and analyze big data.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• Why is it important that the development and adoption of data management, data modeling, and
business information systems be a cross-functional effort involving more than the IS organization?
• How can organizations manage their data so that it is a secure and effective resource?
A database is a well-designed, organized, and carefully managed collection of
data. Like other components of an information system, a database should help
an organization achieve its goals. A database can contribute to organizational
success by providing managers and decision makers with timely, accurate,
and relevant information built on data. Databases also help companies ana-
lyze information to reduce costs, increase profits, add new customers, track
past business activities, and open new market opportunities.
A database management system (DBMS) consists of a group of pro-
grams used to access and manage a database as well as provide an interface
between the database and its users and other application programs. A DBMS
provides a single point of management and control over data resources,
which can be critical to maintaining the integrity and security of the data. A
database, a DBMS, and the application programs that use the data make up a
database environment.
Databases and database management systems are becoming even
more important to organizations as they deal with rapidly increasing
amounts of information. Most organizations have many databases; how-
ever, without good data management, it is nearly impossible for anyone
to find the right and related information for accurate and business-critical
decision making.
Data Fundamentals
Without data and the ability to process it, an organization cannot successfully
complete its business activities. It cannot pay employees, send out bills, order
new inventory, or produce information to assist managers in decision making.
Recall that data consists of raw facts, such as employee numbers and sales fig-
ures. For data to be transformed into useful information, it must first be orga-
nized in a meaningful way.
database: A well-designed,
organized, and carefully managed
collection of data.
database management
system (DBMS): A group of
programs used to access and manage
a database as well as provide an
interface between the database and its
users and other application programs.
194 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Hierarchy of Data
Data is generally organized in a hierarchy that begins with the smallest piece of
data used by computers (a bit), progressing up through the hierarchy to a data-
base. A bit is a binary digit (i.e., 0 or 1) that represents a circuit that is either
on or off. Bits can be organized into units called bytes. A byte is typically eight
bits. Each byte represents a character, which is the basic building block of
most information. A character can be an uppercase letter (A, B, C, …, Z), a low-
ercase letter (a, b, c, …, z), a numeric digit (0, 1, 2, …, 9), or a special symbol
(., !, þ, , /, etc.).
Characters are put together to form a field. A field is typically a name, a
number, or a combination of characters that describes an aspect of a business
object (such as an employee, a location, or a plant) or activity (such as a sale).
In addition to being entered into a database, fields can be computed from
other fields. Computed fields include the total, average, maximum, and mini-
mum value. A collection of data fields all related to one object, activity, or
individual is called a record. By combining descriptions of the characteristics
of an object, activity, or individual, a record can provide a complete descrip-
tion of it. For instance, an employee record is a collection of fields about one
employee. One field includes the employee’s name, another field contains the
address, and still others the phone number, pay rate, earnings made to date,
and so forth. A collection of related records is a file—for example, an
employee file is a collection of all company employee records. Likewise, an
inventory file is a collection of all inventory records for a particular company
or organization.
At the highest level of the data hierarchy is a database, a collection of inte-
grated and related files. Together, bits, characters, fields, records, files, and
databases form the hierarchy of data. See Figure 5.1. Characters are combined
to make a field, fields are combined to make a record, records are combined to
make a file, and files are combined to make a database. A database houses not
only all these levels of data but also the relationships among them.
Data Entities, Attributes, and Keys
Entities, attributes, and keys are important database concepts. An entity is a
person, place, or thing (object) for which data is collected, stored, and main-
tained. Examples of entities include employees, products, and customers.
Most organizations organize and store data as entities.
FIGURE 5.1
Hierarchy of data
Together, bits, characters, fields,
records, files, and databases form
the hierarchy of data.
Database
Hierarchy of data
Example
Files
Files
Files
Records
Records
Records
Records
Records
Fields
Each character is
represented as
8 bits
Personnel file
Department file
Payroll file
(Project database)
(Personnel file)
(Record containing
employee #, last and
first name, hire date)
(Last name field)
098 - 40 - 1370 Fiske, Steven 01-05-2001
Fiske
(Letter F in ASCII)
1000110
098 - 40 - 1370 Fiske, Steven 01-05-2001
549 - 77 - 1001 Buckley, Bill 02-17-1995
005 - 10 - 6321 Johns, Francine 10-07-2013
bit: A binary digit (i.e., 0 or 1) that
represents a circuit that is either on
or off.
character: A basic building block of
most information, consisting of upper-
case letters, lowercase letters, numeric
digits, or special symbols.
field: Typically a name, a number,
or a combination of characters that
describes an aspect of a business
object or activity.
record: A collection of data fields
all related to one object, activity, or
individual.
file: A collection of related records.
hierarchy of data: Bits, characters,
fields, records, files, and databases.
entity: A person, place, or thing for
which data is collected, stored, and
maintained.
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 195
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

An attribute is a characteristic of an entity. For example, employee num-
ber, last name, first name, hire date, and department number are attributes
for an employee. See Figure 5.2. The inventory number, description, number
of units on hand, and location of the inventory item in the warehouse are
attributes for items in inventory. Customer number, name, address, phone
number, credit rating, and contact person are attributes for customers. Attri-
butes are usually selected to reflect the relevant characteristics of entities
such as employees or customers. The specific value of an attribute, called a
data item, can be found in the fields of the record describing an entity.
A data key is a field within a record that is used to identify the record.
Many organizations create databases of attributes and enter data items to
store data needed to run their day-to-day operations. For instance, database
technology is an important weapon in the fight against crime and terrorism, as
discussed in the following examples:
●
The Offshore Leaks Database contains the names of some 100,000
secretive offshore companies, trusts, and funds created in locations
around the world. Although creating offshore accounts is legal in most
countries, offshore accounts are also established to enable individuals and
organizations to evade paying the taxes they would otherwise owe. The
database has been used by law enforcement and tax officials to identify
potential tax evaders.1
●
Major U.S. wireless service providers have implemented a stolen-phone
database to report and track stolen 3G and 4G/LTE phones. The providers
use the database to check whether a consumer’s device was reported lost
or stolen. If a device has been reported lost or stolen, it will be denied
service on the carrier’s network. Once the device is returned to the
rightful owner, it may be reactivated. The next step will be to tie foreign
service providers and countries into the database to diminish the export
of stolen devices to markets outside the United States.2
●
The Global Terrorism Database (GTD) is a database including data on
over 140,000 terrorist events that occurred around the world from 1970
through 2014 (with additional annual updates). For each terrorist event,
information is available regarding the date and location of the event, the
weapons used, the nature of the target, the number of casualties, and,
when identifiable, the group or individual responsible.3
●
Pawnshops are required by law to report their transactions to law
enforcement by providing a description of each item pawned or sold
along with any identifying numbers, such as a serial number. LEADS
Online is a nationwide online database system that can be used to fulfill
this reporting responsibility and enable law enforcement officers to track
merchandise that is sold or pawned in shops throughout the nation. For
FIGURE 5.2
Keys and attributes
The key field is the employee
number. The attributes include last
name, first name, hire date, and
department number.
Employee #
005-10-6321
549-77-1001
098-40-1370
Last name
First name
Hire date
Dept. number
257
632
598
01-05-2001
02-17-1995
10-07-2013
Francine
Bill
Steven
Fiske
Buckley
Johns
ATTRIBUTES (fields)
KEY FIELD
ENTITIES (records)
attribute: A characteristic of an
entity.
data item: The specific value of an
attribute.
196 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

example, if law enforcement has a serial number for a stolen computer,
they can enter this into LEADS Online and determine if it has been sold or
pawned, when and where the theft or transaction occurred and, in the
case of an item that was pawned, who made the transaction.4
As discussed earlier, a collection of fields about a specific object is a record.
A primary key is a field or set of fields that uniquely identifies the record. No
other record can have the same primary key. For an employee record, such as
the one shown in Figure 5.2, the employee number is an example of a primary
key. The primary key is used to distinguish records so that they can be
accessed, organized, and manipulated. Primary keys ensure that each record in
a file is unique. For example, eBay assigns an “Item number” as its primary
key for items to make sure that bids are associated with the correct item. See
Figure 5.3.
In some situations, locating a particular record that meets a specific set of
criteria might be easier and faster using a combination of secondary keys rather
than the primary key. For example, a customer might call a mail-order com-
pany to place an order for clothes. The order clerk can easily access the custo-
mer’s mailing and billing information by entering the primary key—usually a
customer number—but if the customer does not know the correct primary key,
a secondary key such as last name can be used. In this case, the order clerk
enters the last name, such as Adams. If several customers have a last name of
Adams, the clerk can check other fields, such as address and first name, to find
the correct customer record. After locating the correct record, the order can be
completed and the clothing items shipped to the customer.
The Database Approach
At one time, information systems referenced specific files containing relevant
data. For example, a payroll system would use a payroll file. Each distinct
operational system used data files dedicated to that system.
Today, most organizations use the database approach to data manage-
ment, where multiple information systems share a pool of related data.
FIGURE 5.3
Primary key
eBay assigns an Item number as a primary key to keep track of each item in its database.
www.ebay.com
primary key: A field or set of fields
that uniquely identifies the record.
database approach to
data management: An approach
to data management where multiple
information systems share a pool of
related data.
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 197
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
A database offers the ability to share data and information resources. Federal
databases, for example, often include the results of DNA tests as an attribute
for convicted criminals. The information can be shared with law enforcement
officials around the country. Often, distinct yet related databases are linked to
provide enterprise-wide databases. For example, many Walgreens stores
include in-store medical clinics for customers. Walgreens uses an electronic
health records database that stores the information of all patients across all
stores. The database provides information about customers’ interactions with
the clinics and pharmacies.
To use the database approach to data management, additional software—
a database management system (DBMS)—is required. As previously discussed,
a DBMS consists of a group of programs that can be used as an interface
between a database and the user of the database. Typically, this software acts
as a buffer between the application programs and the database itself.
Figure 5.4 illustrates the database approach.
Vehicle Theft Database
You are a participant in an information systems project to design a vehicle
theft database for a state law enforcement agency. The database will provide
information about stolen vehicles (e.g., autos, golf carts, SUVs, and trucks),
with details about the vehicle theft as well as the stolen vehicle itself.
These details will be useful to law enforcement officers investigating the vehicle
theft.
Review Questions
1.
Identify 10 data attributes you would capture for each vehicle theft incident.
How many bytes should you allow for each attribute?
2.
Which attribute would you designate as the primary key?
FIGURE 5.4
Database approach to data
management
In a database approach to data
management, multiple information
systems share a pool of related data.
Database
management
system
Payroll
data
Inventory
data
Invoicing
data
Other
data
Payroll
program
Reports
Inventory
control
program
Management
inquiries
Invoicing
program
Database
Interface
Application
programs
Users
Reports
Reports
Reports
198 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Should the database include data about the status of the theft investigation? If
so, what sort of data needs to be included?
2.
Can you foresee any problems with keeping the data current? Explain.
Data Modeling and Database Characteristics
Because today’s businesses must keep track of and analyze so much
data, they must keep the data well organized so that it can be used
effectively. A database should be designed to store all data relevant to
the business and to provide quick access and easy modification. More-
over, it must reflect the business processes of the organization. When
building a database, an organization must carefully consider the following
questions:
●
Content. What data should be collected and at what cost?
●
Access. What data should be provided to which users and when?
●
Logical structure. How should data be arranged so that it makes sense to
a given user?
●
Physical organization. Where should data be physically located?
●
Archiving. How long must this data be stored?
●
Security. How can this data be protected from unauthorized access?
Data Modeling
When organizing a database, key considerations include determining
what data to collect, what the source of the data will be, who will have
access to it, how one might want to use it, and how to monitor database
performance in terms of response time, availability, and other factors.
AppDynamics offers its i-nexus cloud-based business execution solution
to clients for use in defining the actions and plans needed to achieve
business goals. The service runs on 30 Java virtual machines and eight
database servers that are constantly supervised using database perfor-
mance monitoring software. Use of the software has reduced the mean
time to repair system problems and improved the performance and
responsiveness for all its clients.5
One of the tools database designers use to show the logical relationships
among data is a data model. A data model is a diagram of entities and their
relationships. Data modeling usually involves developing an understanding
of a specific business problem and then analyzing the data and information
needed to deliver a solution. When done at the level of the entire organiza-
tion, this procedure is called enterprise data modeling. Enterprise data
modeling is an approach that starts by investigating the general data and
information needs of the organization at the strategic level and then moves
on to examine more specific data and information needs for the functional
areas and departments within the organization. An enterprise data model
involves analyzing the data and information needs of an entire organization
and provides a roadmap for building database and information systems by
creating a single definition and format for data that can ensure compatibility
and the
ability
to
exchange
and
integrate
data
among
systems.
See
Figure 5.5.
data model: A diagram of data enti-
ties and their relationships.
enterprise data model: A data
model that provides a roadmap for
building database and information
systems by creating a single definition
and format for data that can ensure
data compatibility and the ability to
exchange and integrate data among
systems.
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 199
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The IBM Healthcare Provider Data Model is an enterprise data model
that can be adopted by a healthcare provider organization to organize and
integrate clinical, research, operational, and financial data.6 At one time,
the University of North Carolina Health Care System had a smorgasbord of
information system hardware and software that made it difficult to integrate
data from its existing legacy systems. The organization used the IBM
Healthcare Provider Data Model to guide its efforts to simplify its informa-
tion system environment and improve the integration of its data. As a result,
it was able to eliminate its dependency on outdated technologies, build an
environment that supports efficient data management, and integrate data
from its legacy systems to create a source of data to support future analytics
requirements.7
Various models have been developed to help managers and database
designers analyze data and information needs. One such data model is an
entity-relationship (ER) diagram, which uses basic graphical symbols to
show the organization of and relationships between data. In most cases,
boxes in ER diagrams indicate data items or entities contained in data tables,
and lines show relationships between entities. In other words, ER diagrams
show data items in tables (entities) and the ways they are related.
ER diagrams help ensure that the relationships among the data entities in a
database are correctly structured so that any application programs developed are
consistent with business operations and user needs. In addition, ER diagrams can
serve as reference documents after a database is in use. If changes are made to
the database, ER diagrams help design them. Figure 5.6 shows an ER diagram for
an order database. In this database design, one salesperson serves many custo-
mers. This is an example of a one-to-many relationship, as indicated by the one-
to-many symbol (the “crow’s-foot”) shown in Figure 5.6. The ER diagram also
shows that each customer can place one-to-many orders, that each order includes
one-to-many line items, and that many line items can specify the same product
FIGURE 5.5
Enterprise data model
The enterprise data model provides
a roadmap for building database
and information systems.
Supports
Supports
Systems and data
Enables capture of business opportunities
Increases business effectiveness
Reduces costs 
Enables simpler system interfaces
Reduces data redundancy
Ensures compatible data 
The enterprise 
Data model
entity-relationship
(ER) diagram: A data model that
uses basic graphical symbols to show
the organization of and relationships
between data.
200 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

(a many-to-one relationship). This database can also have one-to-one relation-
ships. For example, one order generates one invoice.
Relational Database Model
The relational database model is a simple but highly useful way to organize data
into collections of two-dimensional tables called relations. Each row in the table
represents an entity, and each column represents an attribute of that entity. See
Figure 5.7.
FIGURE 5.6
Entity-relationship (ER)
diagram for a customer order
database
Development of ER diagrams helps
ensure that the logical structure of
application programs is consistent
with the data relationships in the
database.
Serves
Salesperson
Product
Customer
Orders
Places
Line
items
Includes
Specifies
Invoice
Generates
relational database model:
A simple but highly useful way to
organize data into collections of
two-dimensional tables called
relations.
FIGURE 5.7
Relational database model
In the relational model, data is
placed in two-dimensional tables, or
relations. As long as they share at
least one common attribute, these
relations can be linked to provide
output useful information. In this
example, all three tables include the
Dept. number attribute.
Data Table 1: Project Table
Project
Description
Dept. number
155
Payroll
257
498
Widgets
632
226
Sales manual
598
Data Table 2: Department Table
Dept.
Dept. name
Manager SSN
257
Accounting
005-10-6321
632
Manufacturing
549-77-1001
598
Marketing
098-40-1370
Data Table 3: Manager Table
SSN
Last name
First name
005-10-6321
Johns
Francine
549-77-1001
Buckley
Bill
098-40-1370
Fiske
Steven
Hire date
Dept. number
10-07-2013
257
02-17-1995
632
01-05-2001
598
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 201
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Each attribute can be constrained to a range of allowable values called its
domain. The domain for a particular attribute indicates what values can be
placed in each column of the relational table. For instance, the domain for
an attribute such as type employee could be limited to either H (hourly) or
S (salary). If someone tried to enter a “1” in the type employee field, the data
would not be accepted. The domain for pay rate would not include negative
numbers. In this way, defining a domain can increase data accuracy.
Manipulating Data
After entering data into a relational database, users can make inquiries and
analyze the data. Basic data manipulations include selecting, projecting, and
joining. Selecting involves eliminating rows according to certain criteria. Sup-
pose the department manager of a company wants to use an employee table
that contains the project number, description, and department number for all
projects a company is performing. The department manager might want to
find the department number for Project 226, a sales manual project. Using
selection, the manager can eliminate all rows except the one for Project 226
and see that the department number for the department completing the sales
manual project is 598.
Projecting
involves
eliminating
columns
in
a
table.
For
example,
a department table might contain the department number, department name,
and Social Security number (SSN) of the manager in charge of the project.
A sales manager might want to create a new table that contains only the depart-
ment number and the Social Security number of the manager in charge of the
sales manual project. The sales manager can use projection to eliminate the
department name column and create a new table containing only the depart-
ment number and Social Security number.
Joining involves combining two or more tables. For example, you can
combine the project table and the department table to create a new table with
the project number, project description, department number, department
name, and Social Security number for the manager in charge of the project.
As long as the tables share at least one common data attribute, the tables
in a relational database can be linked to provide useful information and
reports. Linking, the ability to combine two or more tables through common
data attributes to form a new table with only the unique data attributes, is
one of the keys to the flexibility and power of relational databases. Suppose
the president of a company wants to find out the name of the manager of the
sales manual project as well as the length of time the manager has been with
the company. Assume that the company has Manager, Department, and Proj-
ect tables as shown in Figure 5.7. These tables are related as depicted in
Figure 5.8.
domain: The range of allowable
values for a data attribute.
selecting: Manipulating data to
eliminate rows according to certain
criteria.
projecting: Manipulating data to
eliminate columns in a table.
joining: Manipulating data to combine
two or more tables.
linking: The ability to combine two or
more tables through common data
attributes to form a new table with only
the unique data attributes.
FIGURE 5.8
Simplified ER diagram
This diagram shows the relationship
among the Manager, Department,
and Project tables.
Supervises
Manager
Department
Project
Performs
202 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Note the crow’s-foot by the Project table. This symbol indicates that a
department can have many projects. The manager would make the inquiry to
the database, perhaps via a personal computer. The DBMS would start with
the project description and search the Project table to find out the project’s
department number. It would then use the department number to search
the Department table for the manager’s Social Security number. The depart-
ment number is also in the Department table and is the common element that
links the Project table to the Department table. The DBMS uses the manager’s
Social Security number to search the Manager table for the manager’s hire date.
The manager’s Social Security number is the common element between the
Department table and the Manager table. The final result is that the manager’s
name and hire date are presented to the president as a response to the inquiry.
See Figure 5.9.
One of the primary advantages of a relational database is that it allows tables
to be linked, as shown in Figure 5.9. This linkage reduces data redundancy and
allows data to be organized more logically. The ability to link to the manager’s
Social Security number stored once in the Manager table eliminates the need to
store it multiple times in the Project table.
The relational database model is widely used. It is easier to control,
more flexible, and more intuitive than other approaches because it orga-
nizes data in tables. As shown in Figure 5.10, a relational database manage-
ment system, such as Microsoft Access, can be used to store data in rows
and columns. In this figure, hyperlink tools available on the ribbon/toolbar
can be used to create, edit, and manipulate the database. The ability to link
relational tables also allows users to relate data in new ways without having
to redefine complex relationships. Because of the advantages of the rela-
tional model, many companies use it for large corporate databases, such as
those for marketing and accounting.
FIGURE 5.9
Linking data tables to answer
an inquiry
To find the name and hire date of
the manager working on the sales
manual project, the president needs
three tables: Project, Department,
and Manager. The project descrip-
tion (Sales manual) leads to
the department number (598) in the
Project table, which leads to the
manager’s Social Security number
(098-40-1370) in the Department
table, which leads to the manager’s
last name (Fiske) and hire date
(01-05-2001) in the Manager table.
Data Table 1: Project Table
Project number
155
498
226
Description
Payroll
Widgets
Sales manual
Dept. number
257
632
598
Data Table 2: Department Table
Dept. number
257
632
598
Dept. name
Accounting
Manufacturing
Marketing
Manager SSN
005-10-6321
549-77-1001
098-40-1370
Data Table 3: Manager Table
SSN
005-10-6321
549-77-1001
098-40-1370
Last name
Johns
Buckley
Fiske
First name
Francine
Bill
Steven
Hire date
10-07-2013
02-17-1995
01-05-2001
Dept. number
257
632
598
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 203
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Databases based on the relational model include Oracle, IBM DB2, Micro-
soft SQL Server, Microsoft Access, MySQL, Sybase, and others. The relational
database model has been an outstanding success and is dominant in the com-
mercial world today, although many organizations are beginning to use new
nonrelational models to meet some of their business needs.
Data Cleansing
Data used in decision making must be accurate, complete, economical,
flexible, reliable, relevant, simple, timely, verifiable, accessible, and secure.
Data cleansing (data cleaning or data scrubbing) is the process of detect-
ing and then correcting or deleting incomplete, incorrect, inaccurate, or irrele-
vant records that reside in a database. The goal of data cleansing is to
improve the quality of the data used in decision making. The “bad data” may
have been caused by user data-entry errors or by data corruption during data
transmission or storage. Data cleansing is different from data validation,
which involves the identification of “bad data” and its rejection at the time of
data entry.
One data cleansing solution is to identify and correct data by cross-
checking it against a validated data set. For example, street number, street
name, city, state, and zip code entries in an organization’s database may be
cross-checked against the United States Postal Zip Code database. Data
cleansing may also involve standardization of data, such as the conversion
of various possible abbreviations (St., St, st., st) to one standard name
(Street).
Data enhancement augments the data in a database by adding related
information—such as using the zip code information for a given record to
append the county code or census tract code.
The cost of performing data cleansing can be quite high. It is prohibi-
tively expensive to eliminate all “bad data” to achieve 100 percent database
accuracy, as shown in Figure 5.11.
FIGURE 5.10
Building and modifying a relational database
Relational databases provide many tools, tips, and shortcuts to simplify the process of creating and
modifying a database.
Data cleansing (data cleaning
or data scrubbing): The process of
detecting and then correcting or delet-
ing incomplete, incorrect, inaccurate, or
irrelevant records that reside in a
database.
Microsoft product screenshots used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
204 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Banco Popular is the largest bank in Puerto Rico. Some 3,000 bank
employees in 200 branches use a customer database to obtain a complete
view of 5.7 million personal and business accounts. The bank uses a data
cleansing process to eliminate duplicate records and build an accurate and
complete record of each customer, reflecting all of their various accounts
(checking, savings, auto loan, credit card, etc.) with the bank. Part of this pro-
cess includes identifying how many account holders live at the same address
to eliminate duplicate mailings to the same household, thus saving over
$840,000 in mailing expenses each year.8
Cleansing Weather Data
The process of weather forecasting begins with the collection of as much data
as possible about the current state of the atmosphere. Weather data (barometric
pressure, humidity, temperature, and wind direction and speed) is collected
from a variety of sources, including aircraft, automatic weather stations,
weather balloons, buoys, radar, satellites, ships, and trained observers. Due to
the variety of data types taken from multiple data sources, weather data is
captured in a variety of data formats, primarily Binary Universal Form for the
Representation
of
meteorological
data
(BUFR)
and
Institute
of
Electrical
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) binary. These observations are then converted
to a standard format and placed into a gridded 3D model space called the
Global Data Assimilation System (GDAS). Once this process is complete, the
gridded GDAS output data can be used to start the Global Forecast System
(GFS) model.
For purposes of this exercise, imagine that the accuracy of the weather
forecasts has been slipping. In your role as project manager at the National
Center for Environmental Information (NCEI), you have been assigned to lead a
project reviewing the processing of the initial data and placing it into the
GDAS.
Review Questions
1.
NCEI is responsible for hosting and providing access to one of the most signif-
icant archives on Earth, with comprehensive oceanic, atmospheric, and geo-
physical data. Good database design would suggest that an enterprise data
model exists for the NCEI. Why?
FIGURE 5.11
Tradeoff of cost versus
accuracy
The cost of performing data cleans-
ing to achieve 100 percent database
accuracy can be prohibitively
expensive.
100
Cost
80
60
40
20
0
0%
20%
40%
60%
Accuracy
80%
100%
120
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 205
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

2.
Define the domain of acceptable values for barometric pressure, humidity, and
temperature.
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What issues could cause the raw weather data received to be incomplete or
inaccurate?
2.
How might incomplete or inaccurate data be identified and corrected or
deleted
from
the
forecasting
process?
Are
there
risks
in
such
data
cleansing?
Relational Database Management Systems (DBMSs)
Creating and implementing the right database system ensures that the data-
base will support both business activities and goals. But how do we actually
create, implement, use, and update a database? The answer is found in the
database management system (DBMS). As discussed earlier, a DBMS is a
group of programs used as an interface between a database and application
programs or between a database and the user. Database management systems
come in a wide variety of types and capabilities, ranging from small inexpen-
sive software packages to sophisticated systems costing hundreds of thou-
sands of dollars.
SQL Databases
SQL is a special-purpose programming language for accessing and manipulat-
ing data stored in a relational database. SQL was originally defined by Donald
D. Chamberlin and Raymond Boyce of the IBM Research Center and described
in their paper “SEQUEL: A Structured English Query Language,” published in
1974. Their work was based on the relational database model described by
Edgar F. Codd in his groundbreaking paper from 1970, “A Relational Model of
Data for Large Shared Data Banks.”
SQL databases conform to ACID properties (atomicity, consistency, isola-
tion, durability), defined by Jim Gray soon after Codd’s work was published.
These properties guarantee database transactions are processed reliably and
ensure the integrity of data in the database. Basically, these principles mean
that data is broken down to atomic values—that is, values that have no compo-
nent
parts—such
as
employee_ID,
last_name,
first_name,
address_line_1,
address_line_2, and city. The data in these atomic values remains consistent
across the database. The data is isolated from other transactions until the current
transaction is finished, and it is durable in the sense that the data should never
be lost.9
SQL databases rely upon concurrency control by locking database records
to ensure that other transactions do not modify the database until the first
transaction succeeds or fails. As a result, 100 percent ACID-compliant SQL
databases can suffer from slow performance.
In 1986, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) adopted
SQL as the standard query language for relational databases. Since ANSI’s
acceptance of SQL, interest in making SQL an integral part of relational
databases on both mainframe and personal computers has increased. SQL
has many built-in functions, such as average (AVG), the largest value
(MAX), and the smallest value (MIN). Table 5.1 contains examples of SQL
commands.
SQL: A special-purpose
programming language for accessing
and manipulating data stored in a
relational database.
ACID properties: Properties (atom-
icity, consistency, isolation, durability)
that guarantee relational database
transactions are processed reliably and
ensure the integrity of data in the
database.
206 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

SQL allows programmers to learn one powerful query language and use it
on systems ranging from PCs to the largest mainframe computers. See
Figure 5.12. Programmers and database users also find SQL valuable because
SQL statements can be embedded into many programming languages, such as
the widely used C++ and Java. Because SQL uses standardized and simplified
procedures for retrieving, storing, and manipulating data, many programmers
find it easy to understand and use—hence, its popularity.
Database Activities
Databases are used to provide a user view of the database, to add and modify
data, to store and retrieve data, and to manipulate the data and generate
FIGURE 5.12
Structured Query Language (SQL)
SQL has become an integral part of most relational databases, as shown by this example from Microsoft
Access 2013.
TABLE 5.1 Examples of SQL commands
SQL Command
Description
SELECT ClientName,
Debt FROM Client
WHERE Debt > 1000
This query displays clients (ClientName) and the amount they owe the company (Debt) from
a database table called Client; the query would only display clients who owe the company
more than $1,000 (WHERE Debt > 1000).
SELECT ClientName,
ClientNum, OrderNum
FROM Client, Order
WHERE Client.Client-
Num=Order.ClientNum
This command is an example of a join command that combines data from two tables: the
Client table and the Order table (FROM Client, Order). The command creates a new table
with the client name, client number, and order number (SELECT ClientName, ClientNum,
OrderNum). Both tables include the client number, which allows them to be joined.
This ability is indicated in the WHERE clause, which states that the client number in the
Client table is the same as (equal to) the client number in the Order table (WHERE Client.
ClientNum=Order.ClientNum).
GRANT INSERT ON
Client to Guthrie
This command is an example of a security command. It allows Bob Guthrie to insert new
values or rows into the Client table.
Microsoft product screenshots used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 207
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

reports. Each of these activities is discussed in greater detail in the following
sections.
Providing a User View
Because the DBMS is responsible for providing access to a database, one of
the first steps in installing and using a large relational database involves “tell-
ing” the DBMS the logical and physical structure of the data and the relation-
ships among the data for each user. This description is called a schema (as in
a schematic diagram). In a relational database, the schema defines the tables,
the fields in each table, and the relationships between fields and tables. Large
database systems, such as Oracle, typically use schemas to define the tables
and other database features associated with a person or user. The DBMS can
reference a schema to find where to access the requested data in relation to
another piece of data.
Creating and Modifying the Database
Schemas are entered into the DBMS (usually by database personnel) via a data
definition language. A data definition language (DDL) is a collection of
instructions and commands used to define and describe data and relationships
in a specific database. A DDL allows the database’s creator to describe the
data and relationships that are to be contained in the schema. In general, a
DDL describes logical access paths and logical records in the database.
Figure 5.13 shows a simplified example of a DDL used to develop a general
schema. The use of the letter X in Figure 5.13 reveals where specific informa-
tion concerning the database should be entered. File description, area descrip-
tion, record description, and set description are terms the DDL defines and
uses in this example. Other terms and commands can also be used, depend-
ing on the DBMS employed.
Another important step in creating a database is to establish a data dictio-
nary, a detailed description of all data used in the database. Among other things,
the data dictionary contains the following information for each data item:
FIGURE 5.13
Data definition language
(DDL)
A data definition language (DDL) is
used to define a schema.
SCHEMA DESCRIPTION
SCHEMA NAME IS XXXX
AUTHOR
XXXX
DATE
XXXX
FILE DESCRIPTION
FILE NAME IS XXXX
ASSIGN XXXX
FILE NAME IS XXXX
ASSIGN XXXX
AREA DESCRIPTION
AREA NAME IS XXXX
RECORD DESCRIPTION
RECORD NAME IS XXXX
RECORD ID IS XXXX
LOCATION MODE IS XXXX
WITHIN XXXX AREA FROM XXXX THRU XXXX
SET DESCRIPTION
SET NAME IS XXXX
ORDER IS XXXX
MODE IS XXXX
MEMBER IS XXXX
.
.
.
schema: A description that defines
the logical and physical structure of the
database by identifying the tables, the
fields in each table, and the relation-
ships between fields and tables.
data definition language (DDL):
A collection of instructions and com-
mands used to define and describe
data and relationships in a specific
database.
data dictionary: A detailed
description of all the data used in the
database.
208 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Name of the data item
●
Aliases or other names that may be used to describe the item
●
Range of values that can be used
●
Type of data (such as alphanumeric or numeric)
●
Amount of storage needed for the item
●
Notation of the person responsible for updating it and the various users
who can access it
●
List of reports that use the data item
A data dictionary can also include a description of data flows, information
about the way records are organized, and the data-processing requirements.
Figure 5.14 shows a typical data dictionary entry.
Following the example in Figure 5.14, the information in a data dictionary for
the part number of an inventory item can include the following information:
●
Name of the person who made the data dictionary entry (D. Bordwell)
●
Date the entry was made (August 4, 2016)
●
Name of the person who approved the entry (J. Edwards)
●
Approval date (October 13, 2016)
●
Version number (3.1)
●
Number of pages used for the entry (1)
●
Data element name is Part name (PARTNO)
●
A description of the element
●
Other names that might be used (PTNO)
●
Range of values (part numbers can range from 100 to 5000)
●
Type of data (numeric)
●
Storage required (four positions are required for the part number)
A data dictionary is a valuable tool for maintaining an efficient database
that stores reliable information with no redundancy, and it simplifies the pro-
cess of modifying the database when necessary. Data dictionaries also help
computer and system programmers who require a detailed description of data
elements stored in a database to create the code to access the data.
Adherence to the standards defined in the data dictionary also makes it
easy to share data among various organizations. For example, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy (DOE) developed a data dictionary of terms to provide a stan-
dardized approach for the evaluation of energy data. The Building Energy
Data Exchange Specification (BEDES) provides a common language of key
data elements, including data formats, valid ranges, and definitions that are
FIGURE 5.14
Data dictionary entry
A data dictionary provides a detailed
description of all data used in the
database.
NORTHWESTERN MANUFACTURING
PREPARED BY:
D. BORDWELL
DATE:
04 AUGUST 2016
APPROVED BY:
J. EDWARDS
DATE:
13 OCTOBER 2016
VERSION:
3.1
PAGE:
1 OF 1
DATA ELEMENT NAME:
PARTNO
DESCRIPTION:
OTHER NAMES:
PTNO
VALUE RANGE:
100 TO 5000
DATA TYPE:
NUMERIC
POSITIONS:
4 POSITIONS OR COLUMNS
INVENTORY PART NUMBER
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 209
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

designed to improve communications between contractors, software vendors,
finance companies, utilities, and Public Utility Commissions. Adherence to
these data standards allows information to be easily shared and aggregated
without the need for extensive data scrubbing and translation. All stake-
holders can use this standard set of data to answer key questions related to
the energy savings and usage.10
Storing and Retrieving Data
One function of a DBMS is to be an interface between an application program
and the database. When an application program needs data, it requests the
data through the DBMS. Suppose that to calculate the total price of a new
car, a pricing program needs price data on the engine option—for example,
six cylinders instead of the standard four cylinders. The application program
requests this data from the DBMS. In doing so, the application program fol-
lows a logical access path (LAP). Next, the DBMS, working with various sys-
tem programs, accesses a storage device, such as a disk drive or solid state
storage device (SSD), where the data is stored. When the DBMS goes to this
storage device to retrieve the data, it follows a path to the physical location—
physical access path—where the price of this option is stored. In the pricing
example, the DBMS might go to a disk drive to retrieve the price data for six-
cylinder engines. This relationship is shown in Figure 5.15.
This same process is used if a user wants to get information from the
database. First, the user requests the data from the DBMS. For example, a user
might give a command, such as LIST ALL OPTIONS FOR WHICH PRICE IS
GREATER THAN $200. This is the logical access path. Then, the DBMS might go
to the options price section of a disk to get the information for the user. This is
the physical access path.
Two or more people or programs attempting to access the same record at
the same time can cause a problem. For example, an inventory control pro-
gram might attempt to reduce the inventory level for a product by 10 units
because 10 units were just shipped to a customer. At the same time, a pur-
chasing program might attempt to increase the inventory level for the same
product by 200 units because inventory was just received. Without proper
database control, one of the inventory updates might be incorrect, resulting
in an inaccurate inventory level for the product. Concurrency control can be
used to avoid this potential problem. One approach is to lock out all other
FIGURE 5.15
Logical and physical access
paths
When an application requests data
from the DBMS, it follows a logical
access path to the data. When the
DBMS retrieves the data, it follows a
path to the physical access path to
the data.
DBMS
Physical access
path (PAP)
Logical access
path (LAP)
Other
software
Application
programs
Management
inquiries
Data on
storage device
concurrency control: A method of
dealing with a situation in which two or
more users or applications need to
access the same record at the same
time.
210 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

application programs from access to a record if the record is being updated or
used by another program.
Manipulating Data and Generating Reports
After a DBMS has been installed, employees, managers, and other authorized
users can use it to review reports and obtain important information. Using a
DBMS, a company can manage this requirement. Some databases use Query
by Example (QBE), which is a visual approach to developing database queries
or requests. With QBE, you can perform queries and other database tasks by
opening windows and clicking the data or features you want—similar to the
way you work with Windows and other GUI (graphical user interface) operat-
ing systems and applications. See Figure 5.16.
In other cases, database commands can be used in a programming lan-
guage. For example, C++ commands can be used in simple programs that will
access or manipulate certain pieces of data in the database. Here’s another
example of a DBMS query:
SELECT * FROM EMPLOYEE WHERE JOB_CLASSIFICATION=“C2.”
The asterisk (*) tells the program to include all columns from the
EMPLOYEE table. In general, the commands that are used to manipulate the
database are part of the data manipulation language (DML). This specific
language, provided with the DBMS, allows managers and other database
users to access and modify the data, to make queries, and to generate reports.
Again, the application programs go through schemas and the DBMS before
getting to the data stored on a device such as a disk.
After a database has been set up and loaded with data, it can produce
desired reports, documents, and other outputs. See Figure 5.17. These outputs
usually appear in screen displays or on hard copy printouts. The output-
control features of a database program allow a user to select the records and
fields that will appear in a report. Formatting controls and organization
options (such as report headings) help users customize reports and create
flexible, convenient, and powerful information-handling tools.
FIGURE 5.16
Query by Example
Some databases use Query by
Example (QBE) to generate reports
and information.
Microsoft product screenshots used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
data manipulation
language (DML): A specific
language, provided with a DBMS,
which allows users to access and
modify the data, to make queries,
and to generate reports.
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 211
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A DBMS can produce a wide variety of documents, reports, and other out-
put that can help organizations make decisions and achieve their goals. Often,
organizations have standard reports that are run on a regular basis. The most
common reports select and organize data to present summary information
about some aspect of company operations. For example, accounting reports
often summarize financial data such as current and past due accounts. Many
companies base their routine operating decisions on regular status reports
that show the progress of specific orders toward completion and delivery.
Database Administration
Database administrators (DBAs) are skilled and trained IS professionals who
hold discussions with business users to define their data needs; apply database
programming languages to craft a set of databases to meet those needs; test and
evaluate databases; implement changes to improve their performance; and
assure that data is secure from unauthorized access. Database systems require a
skilled database administrator (DBA), who must have a clear understanding of
the fundamental business of the organization, be proficient in the use of
selected database management systems, and stay abreast of emerging technolo-
gies and new design approaches. The role of the DBA is to plan, design, create,
operate, secure, monitor, and maintain databases. Typically, a DBA has a degree
in computer science or management information systems and some on-the-job
training with a particular database product or more extensive experience with a
range of database products. See Figure 5.18.
FIGURE 5.17
Database output
A database application offers
sophisticated formatting and
organization options to produce the
right information in the right format.
FIGURE 5.18
Database administrator
The role of the database
administrator (DBA) is to plan,
design, create, operate, secure,
monitor, and maintain databases.
database administrators
(DBAs): Skilled and trained IS pro-
fessionals who hold discussions with
business users to define their data
needs; apply database programming
languages to craft a set of databases to
meet those needs; test and evaluate
databases; implement changes to
improve the performance of databases;
and assure that data is secure from
unauthorized access.
Clerkenwell_Images/istockphoto.com
Microsoft product screenshots used with permission from Microsoft
Corporation
212 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The DBA works with users to decide the content of the database—to
determine exactly what entities are of interest and what attributes are to
be recorded about those entities. Thus, not only is it important that a
DBA understand the business of an organization, but personnel outside of
IS must also have some idea of what the DBA does and why this
function is important. The DBA can play a crucial role in the development
of effective information systems to benefit the organization, employees, and
managers.
The DBA also works with programmers as they build applications to
ensure that their programs comply with database management system stan-
dards and conventions. After the database has been built and is operating,
the DBA monitors operations logs for security violations. Database perfor-
mance is also monitored to ensure that the system’s response time meets
users’ needs and that it operates efficiently. If there is a problem, the DBA
attempts to correct it before it becomes serious.
An important responsibility of a DBA is to protect the database from
attack or other forms of failure. DBAs use security software, preventive
measures, and redundant systems to keep data safe and accessible. In spite
of the best efforts of DBAs, database security breaches are all too common.
For example, customer records of more than 83 million customers of JPMor-
gan Chase were stolen between June 2014 and August 2014. This represents
the largest theft of consumer data from a U.S. financial institution in
history.11
Some organizations have also created a position called the data
administrator, an individual responsible for defining and implementing
consistent principles for a variety of data issues, including setting data
standards and data definitions that apply across all the databases in an
organization. For example, the data administrator would ensure that a
term such as “customer” is defined and treated consistently in all corpo-
rate databases. The data administrator also works with business managers
to identify who should have read or update access to certain databases
and to selected attributes within those databases. This information is
then communicated to the database administrator for implementation.
The data administrator can be a high-level position reporting to top-level
managers.
Popular Database Management Systems
Many popular database management systems address a wide range of individ-
ual, workgroup, and enterprise needs as shown in Table 5.2. The complete
TABLE 5.2 Popular database management systems
Open-Source
Relational DBMS
Relational DBMS
for Individuals
and Workgroups
Relational DBMS
for Workgroups
and Enterprise
MySQL
Microsoft Access
Oracle
PostgreSQL
IBM Lotus Approach
IBM DB2
MariaDB
Google Base
Sybase Adaptive Server
SQL Lite
OpenOffice Base
Teradata
CouchDB
Microsoft SQL Server
Progress OpenEdge
data administrator: An individual
responsible for defining and imple-
menting consistent principles for a
variety of data issues.
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 213
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

DBMS market encompasses software used by people ranging from nontechni-
cal individuals to highly trained, professional programmers and runs on all
types of computers from tablets to supercomputers. The entire market gener-
ates billions of dollars per year in revenue for companies such as IBM, Oracle,
and Microsoft.
Selecting a DBMS begins by analyzing the information needs of the
organization. Important characteristics of databases include the size of the
database, the number of concurrent users, database performance, the ability
of the DBMS to be integrated with other systems, the features of the DBMS,
the vendor considerations, and the cost of the database management
system.
CouchDB by Couchbase is an open-source database system used by
Zynga, the developer of the popular Internet game FarmVille, to process
250 million visitors a month.
With database as a service (DaaS), the database is stored on a service
provider’s servers and accessed by the service subscriber over the Internet,
with the database administration handled by the service provider. More
than a dozen companies are now offering DaaS services, including Amazon,
Database.com, Google, Heroku, IBM, Intuit, Microsoft, MyOwnDB, Oracle,
and Trackvia. Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS) is a DaaS
that enables organizations to set up and operate their choice of a MySQL,
Microsoft SQL, Oracle, or PostgreSQL relational database in the cloud. The
service automatically backs up the database and stores those backups
based on a user-defined retention period.
TinyCo is a mobile gaming firm whose games Tiny Monsters, Tiny Village,
and Tiny Zoo Friends can be found at the Amazon, Google Play, and iTunes
app stores.12 The company employs Amazon Web Services (AWS) to enable it
to support the rapid growth in the number of its users without having to
devote constant time and effort to organize and configure its information sys-
tems infrastructure. This arrangement has allowed the company to focus its
resources on developing and marketing its new games. TinyCo application
data is stored in the Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS) for
MySQL.13
Using Databases with Other Software
Database management systems are often used with other software and to
interact with users over the Internet. A DBMS can act as a front-end applica-
tion or a back-end application. A front-end application is one that people
interact with directly. Marketing researchers often use a database as a front
end to a statistical analysis program. The researchers enter the results of
market questionnaires or surveys into a database. The data is then trans-
ferred to a statistical analysis program to perform analysis, such as determin-
ing the potential for a new product or the effectiveness of an advertising
campaign. A back-end application interacts with other programs or applica-
tions; it only indirectly interacts with people or users. When people request
information from a Web site, the site can interact with a database (the back
end) that supplies the desired information. For example, you can connect to
a university Web site to find out whether the university’s library has a book
you want to read. The site then interacts with a database that contains a cat-
alog of library books and articles to determine whether the book you want is
available. See Figure 5.19.
database as a service (DaaS):
An arrangement where the database is
stored on a service provider’s servers
and accessed by the service subscriber
over a network, typically the Internet,
with the database administration
handled by the service provider.
214 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Database as a Service
You are the database administrator for the customer database of a medium-sized
manufacturing firm. The database runs on an Oracle database management system
installed on a server owned and managed by your firm’s small IT organization.
Recently you have been receiving a number of complaints from users of the data-
base about extremely slow response time to their queries and report requests.
Management has asked you to prepare a set of proposed solutions.
Review Questions
1.
What advantages might be gained from moving to a database as a service
environment?
2.
Can you think of any possible disadvantages to this approach?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What additional questions need to be answered before you can decide if the
database as a service approach is right for your firm?
2.
How might such a move affect you and your role?
Big Data
Big data is the term used to describe data collections that are so enormous
(terabytes or more) and complex (from sensor data to social media data) that
traditional data management software, hardware, and analysis processes are
incapable of dealing with them.
FIGURE 5.19
Library of Congress Web site
The Library of Congress (LOC) provides a back-end application that allows Web access to its
databases, which include references to books and digital media in the LOC collection.
Source: www.loc.gov
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 215
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Characteristics of Big Data
Computer technology analyst Doug Laney associated the three characteristics
of volume, velocity, and variety with big data14:
●
Volume. In 2014, it was estimated that the volume of data that exists in the
digital universe was 4.4 zettabytes (one zettabyte equals one trillion gigabytes).
The digital universe is expected to grow to an amazing 44 zettabytes by 2020,
with perhaps one-third of that data being of value to organizations.15
●
Velocity. The velocity at which data is currently coming at us exceeds 5
trillion bits per second.16 This rate is accelerating rapidly, and the volume of
digital data is expected to double every two years between now and 2020.17
●
Variety. Data today comes in a variety of formats. Some of the data is
what computer scientists call structured data—its format is known in
advance, and it fits nicely into traditional databases. For example, the data
generated by the well-defined business transactions that are used to
update many corporate databases containing customer, product, inven-
tory, financial, and employee data is generally structured data. However,
most of the data that an organization must deal with is unstructured data,
meaning that it is not organized in any predefined manner.18 Unstruc-
tured data comes from sources such as word-processing documents, social
media, email, photos, surveillance video, and phone messages.
Sources of Big Data
Organizations collect and use data from a variety of sources, including busi-
ness applications, social media, sensors and controllers that are part of the
manufacturing process, systems that manage the physical environment in fac-
tories and offices, media sources (including audio and video broadcasts),
machine logs that record events and customer call data, public sources (such
as government Web sites), and archives of historical records of transactions
and communications. See Figure 5.20. Much of this collected data is unstruc-
tured and does not fit neatly into traditional relational database management
Media
Images, audio, video,
live data feeds, podcasts
Sensor data
Process control devices,
smart electric meters,
packing line counters
Social media
Twitter, Facebook,
LinkedIn, Pinterest
Data from business apps
ERP, CRM, PLM, HR
Documents
eMail, Power Point,
Word, Excel, .PDF, HTML
Archives
Historical records
of communications
and transactions
Public data
Local, state, and federal
government  Web sites
Machine log data
Call detail data event logs,
business process logs,
application logs
An organization’s
collection of useful
data
FIGURE 5.20
Sources of an organization’s useful data
An organization has many sources of useful data.
216 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

systems. Table 5.3 provides a starter list of some of the many Web portals that
provide access to free sources of useful big data sets.
Big Data Uses
Here are just a few examples of how organizations are employing big data to
improve their day-to-day operations, planning, and decision making:
●
Retail organizations monitor social networks such as Facebook, Google,
LinkedIn, Twitter, and Yahoo to engage brand advocates, identify brand
adversaries (and attempt to reverse their negative opinions), and even
enable passionate customers to sell their products.
TABLE 5.3 Portals that provide access to free sources of useful big data
Data Source
Description
URL
Amazon Web Services
(AWS) public data sets
Portal to a huge repository of public data, including
climate data, the million song data set, and data
from the 1000 Genomes project.
http://aws.amazon.com/datasets
Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS)
Provides access to data on inflation and prices,
wages and benefits, employment, spending and
time use, productivity, and workplace injuries
www.bls.gov
CIA World Factbook
Portal to information on the economy, government,
history, infrastructure, military, and population of
267 countries
https://cia.gov/library/publications
/the-world-factbook
Data.gov
Portal providing access to over 186,000 government
data sets, related to topics such as agriculture,
education, health, and public safety
http://data.gov
Facebook Graph
Provides a means to query Facebook profile data
not classified as private
https://developers.facebook.com/docs
/graph-api
FBI Uniform Crime
Reports
Portal to data on Crime in the United States, Law
Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted, and
Hate Crime Statistics
https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr
/ucr/
Justia Federal District
Court Opinions and
Orders database
A free searchable database of full-text opinions and
orders from civil cases heard in U.S. Federal District
Courts
http://law.justia.com/cases/federal
/district-courts/
Gapminder
Portal to data from the World Health Organization
and World Bank on economic, medical, and social
issues
www.gapminder.org/data
Google Finance
Portal to 40 years of stock market data
http://google.com/finance
Healthdata.gov
Portal to 125 years of U.S. healthcare data, including
national healthcare expenditures, claim-level
Medicare data, and data related to healthcare
quality, epidemiology, and population, among
many other topics
www.healthdata.gov
National Centers for
Environmental
Information
Portal for accessing a variety of climate and weather
data sets
www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access
/quick-links#loc-clim
New York Times
Portal that provides users with access to NYT arti-
cles, book and movie reviews, data on political
campaign contributions, and other material
http://developer.nytimes.com/docs
Social Institutions and
Gender Index
Provides access to country profiles and data that
measures the degree of cross-country discrimination
against women in social institutions
http://genderindex.org
U.S. Census Bureau
Portal to a huge variety of government statistics and
data relating to the U.S. economy and its population
www.census.gov/data.html
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 217
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Advertising and marketing agencies track comments on social media to
understand consumers’ responsiveness to ads, campaigns, and
promotions.
●
Hospitals analyze medical data and patient records to try to identify
patients likely to need readmission within a few months of discharge,
with the goal of engaging with those patients in the hope of preventing
another expensive hospital stay.
●
Consumer product companies monitor social networks to gain insight into
customer behavior, likes and dislikes, and product perception to identify
necessary changes to their products, services, and advertising.
●
Financial services organizations use data from customer interactions to
identify customers who are likely to be attracted to increasingly targeted
and sophisticated offers.
●
Manufacturers analyze minute vibration data from their equipment, which
changes slightly as it wears down, to predict the optimal time to perform
maintenance or replace the equipment to avoid expensive repairs or
potentially catastrophic failure.
Challenges of Big Data
Individuals, organizations, and society in general must find a way to deal with
this ever-growing data tsunami to escape the risks of information overload. The
challenge is manifold, with a variety of questions that must be answered, includ-
ing how to choose what subset of data to store, where and how to store the
data, how to find those nuggets of data that are relevant to the decision making
at hand, how to derive value from the relevant data, and how to identify which
data needs to be protected from unauthorized access. With so much data avail-
able, business users can have a hard time finding the information they need to
make decisions, and they may not trust the validity of the data they can access.
Trying to deal with all this data from so many different sources, much
of it from outside the organization, can also increase the risk that the orga-
nization fails to comply with government regulations or internal controls
(see Table 5.4). If measures to ensure compliance are not defined and fol-
lowed, compliance issues can arise. Violation of these regulations can lead
not only to government investigations but also to dramatic drops in stock
prices,
as
when
computer
chipmaker
Marvell
Technologies
alarmed
TABLE 5.4 Partial list of rules, regulations, and standards with which U.S. information system
organizations must comply
Rule, Regulation, or
Standard
Intent
Bank Secrecy Act
Detects and prevents money laundering by requiring financial institutions to report certain
transactions to government agencies and to withhold from clients that such reports were
filed about them
Basel II Accord
Creates international standards that strengthen global capital and liquidity rules, with the
goal of promoting a more resilient banking sector worldwide
California Senate Bill
1386
Protects against identity theft by imposing disclosure requirements for businesses and
government agencies that experience security breaches that might put the personal
information of California residents at risk; the first of many state laws aimed at protecting
consumers from identity theft
European Union Data
Protection Directive
Protects the privacy of European Union citizens’ personal information by placing limitations
on sending such data outside of the European Union to areas that are deemed to have less
than adequate standards for data security
Foreign Account Tax
Compliance Act
Identifies U.S. taxpayers who hold financial assets in non-U.S. financial institutions and
offshore accounts, to ensure that they do not avoid their U.S. tax obligations
218 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

investors by announcing that it had found problems with the way it booked
revenue, resulting in a 16 percent drop in its stock price in just one day.19
Optimists believe that we can conquer these challenges and that more
data will lead to more accurate analyses and better decision making, which in
turn will result in deliberate actions that improve matters.
Not everyone, however, is happy with big data applications. Some people
have privacy concerns about the fact that corporations are harvesting huge
amounts of personal data that can be shared with other organizations. With
all this data, organizations can develop extensive profiles of people without
their knowledge or consent. Big data also introduces security concerns. Are
organizations able to keep big data secure from competitors and malicious
hackers? Some experts believe companies that collect and store big data
could be open to liability suits from individuals and organizations. Even with
these potential disadvantages, many companies are rushing into big data due
to the lure of a potential treasure trove of information and new applications.
Data Management
Data management is an integrated set of functions that defines the processes
by which data is obtained, certified fit for use, stored, secured, and processed
in such a way as to ensure that the accessibility, reliability, and timeliness of
the data meet the needs of the data users within an organization. The Data
Management
Association
(DAMA)
International
is
a
nonprofit,
vendor-
independent, international association whose members promote the under-
standing, development, and practice of managing data as an essential enterprise
asset. This organization has identified 10 major functions of data management,
as shown in Figure 5.21. Data governance is the core component of data man-
agement; it defines the roles, responsibilities, and processes for ensuring that
data can be trusted and used by the entire organization, with people identified
and in place who are responsible for fixing and preventing issues with data.
TABLE 5.4 Partial list of rules, regulations, and standards with which U.S. information system
organizations must comply (continued)
Rule, Regulation, or
Standard
Intent
Foreign Corrupt Practices
Act
Prevents certain classes of persons and entities from making payments to foreign
government officials in an attempt to obtain or retain business
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
Protects the privacy and security of individually identifiable financial information collected
and processed by financial institutions
Health Insurance Porta-
bility and Accountability
Act (HIPAA)
Safeguards protected health information (PHI) and electronic PHI (ePHI) data gathered in
the healthcare process and standardizes certain electronic transactions within the healthcare
industry
Payment Card Industry
(PCI) Data Security
Standard
Protects cardholder data and ensures that merchants and service providers maintain strict
information security standards
Personal Information
Protection and Electronic
Documents Act (Canada)
Governs the collection, use, and disclosure of personally identifiable information in the
course of commercial transactions; created in response to European Union data protection
directives
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Protects the interests of investors and consumers by requiring that the annual reports of
public companies include an evaluation of the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting; requires that the company’s CEO and CFO attest to and report on this
assessment
USA PATRIOT Act
This wide-ranging act has many facets; one portion of the Act relating to information
system compliance is called the Financial Anti-Terrorism Act and is designed to combat the
financing of terrorism through money laundering and other financial crimes
data management: An integrated
set of functions that defines the
processes by which data is obtained,
certified fit for use, stored, secured, and
processed in such a way as to ensure
that the accessibility, reliability, and
timeliness of the data meet the needs of
the data users within an organization.
data governance: The core com-
ponent of data management; it defines
the roles, responsibilities, and pro-
cesses for ensuring that data can be
trusted and used by the entire organi-
zation, with people identified and in
place who are responsible for fixing and
preventing issues with data.
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 219
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The need for data management is driven by a variety of factors, including
the need to meet external regulations designed to manage risk associated with
financial misstatement, the need to avoid the inadvertent release of sensitive
data, or the need to ensure that high data quality is available for key deci-
sions. Haphazard or incomplete business processes and controls simply will
not meet these requirements. Formal management processes are needed to
govern data.
Effective
data
governance
requires
business
leadership
and
active
participation—it cannot be an effort that is led by the information system
organization. The use of a cross-functional team is recommended because
data and information systems are used by many different departments. No
one individual has a complete view of the organization’s data needs.
Employment of a cross-functional team is particularly important for ensuring
that compliance needs are met. The data governance team should be a cross-
functional, multilevel data governance team, consisting of executives, project
managers, line-of-business managers, and data stewards. The data steward
is an individual responsible for the management of critical data elements,
including identifying and acquiring new data sources; creating and maintain-
ing consistent reference data and master data definitions; and analyzing data
for quality and reconciling data issues. Data users consult with a data stew-
ard when they need to know what data to use to answer a business ques-
tion, or to confirm the accuracy, completeness, or soundness of data within
a business context.
The data governance team defines the owners of the data assets in the
enterprise. The team also develops a policy that specifies who is accountable
for various portions or aspects of the data, including its accuracy, accessibility,
consistency, completeness, updating, and archiving. The team defines pro-
cesses for how the data is to be stored, archived, backed up, and protected
FIGURE 5.21
Data management
The Data Management Association
(DAMA) International has identified
10 basic functions associated with
data management.
Source: “Body of Knowledge,” DAMA
International, https://www.dama.org/content
/body-knowledge. Copyright DAMA
International.
Data
Governance
Data
Architecture
Management
Data
Development
Database
Operations
Management
Data
Security
Management
Reference &
Master Data
Management
Data
Warehousing
& Business
Intelligence
Management
Document &
Content
Management
Meta Data
Management
Data
Quality
Management
data steward: An individual
responsible for the management of
critical data elements, including identi-
fying and acquiring new data sources;
creating and maintaining consistent
reference data and master data defini-
tions; and analyzing data for quality and
reconciling data issues.
220 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
from cyberattacks, inadvertent destruction or disclosure, or theft. It also devel-
ops standards and procedures that define who is authorized to update, access,
and use the data. The team also puts in place a set of controls and audit pro-
cedures to ensure ongoing compliance with organizational data policies and
government regulations.
Data lifecycle management (DLM) is a policy-based approach to manag-
ing the flow of an enterprise’s data, from its initial acquisition or creation and
storage to the time when it becomes outdated and is deleted. See Figure 5.22.
Several vendors offer software products to support DLM such as IBM Informa-
tion Lifecycle Governance suite of software products.
Walgreens Data Assimilation
As of this writing, Walgreens is making moves to acquire Rite Aide in a move that
would combine the nation’s second- and third-largest drugstore chains by market
share, behind only fierce rival CVS Health. If this acquisition is approved, Rite
Aide customer data will need to be assimilated into Walgreens’ information sys-
tems. For pharmacy customers, this includes sensitive information, such as per-
sonal data, details of medications prescribed, health insurance identification
codes, and doctors used. Walgreens will need this data to provide smooth and
uninterrupted service to the old Rite Aide customers. In addition, Walgreen has in
place a system that automatically checks each new medication prescribed against
other medications the customer is taking to ensure there will be no adverse drug
interactions. The data must be captured in such a way that ensures its accuracy
and completeness.
FIGURE 5.22
The big data life cycle
A policy-based approach to man-
aging the flow of an enterprise’s
data, from its initial acquisition or
creation and storage to the time
when it becomes outdated and is
deleted.
INFOGRAPHIC
BACKGROUND
Archive
or discard
Deﬁne data
needs
Evaluate alternate
sources
Evaluate
Acquire
data
Store data
Publish data
descriptions
Access
and use
data lifecycle management
(DLM): A policy-based approach to
managing the flow of an enterprise’s
data, from its initial acquisition or
creation and storage to the time when it
becomes outdated and is deleted.
Abert/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 221
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Review Questions
1.
Identify specific federal regulations that apply to the use and management of
Walgreens and Rite Aide data.
2.
Would it make sense for Walgreen to appoint a data governance team to over-
see the Rite Aide data assimilation process? What might the responsibilities of
such a team be?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Do you think that Walgreens should attempt to automate the process of assim-
ilating Rite Aide customer, insurance, and medication data into its systems?
Or, should Walgreens design an efficient manual process for former Rite Aide
customers to provide the necessary data prior to or on their initial visit to a
Walgreens pharmacy? What are the pros and cons of each approach? Which
approach would you recommend?
2.
Identify several potential negative consequences resulting from poor execu-
tion of the data assimilation process.
Technologies Used to Process Big Data
Data Warehouses, Data Marts, and Data Lakes
The raw data necessary to make sound business decisions is typically stored
in a variety of locations and formats. This data is initially captured, stored,
and managed by transaction-processing systems that are designed to support
the day-to-day operations of an organization. For decades, organizations have
collected operational, sales, and financial data with their online transaction
processing (OLTP) systems. These OLTP systems put data into databases very
quickly, reliably, and efficiently, but they do not support the types of big data
analysis that today’s businesses and organizations require. Through the use of
data warehouses and data marts, organizations are now able to access the
data gathered via OLTP system and use it more effectively to support decision
making.
Data Warehouses
A data warehouse is a database that holds business information from many
sources in the enterprise, covering all aspects of the company’s processes,
products, and customers. Data warehouses allow managers to “drill down” to
get greater detail or “roll up” to generate aggregate or summary reports. The
primary purpose is to relate information in innovative ways and help man-
agers and executives make better decisions. A data warehouse stores histori-
cal data that has been extracted from operational systems and external data
sources. See Figure 5.23.
Companies use data warehouses in a variety of ways, as shown in the fol-
lowing examples:
●
Walmart operates separate data warehouses for Walmart and Sam’s Club
and allows suppliers access to almost any data they could possibly need
to determine which of their products are selling, how fast, and even
whether they should redesign their packaging to fit more product on
store shelves.20
●
UPS manages a 16-petabyte data warehouse containing data on some 16.3
million packages it ships per day for 8.8 million customers, who make an
average of 39.5 million tracking requests per day.21
●
Orscheln (a billion dollar retailer that sells farm- and home-related pro-
ducts through its some 150 stores spread across the Midwest)
222 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

implemented an Oracle data warehouse that is used by merchants,
buyers, planners, and store managers to perform analysis on inventory
management, sales performance, pricing and promotions effectiveness,
vendor compliance, and loss prevention.22
●
General Electric uses a data warehouse to hold data from sensors on the
performance of the blades on jet engines it manufactures.23
Because data warehouses are used for decision making, maintaining a
high quality of data is vital so that organizations avoid wrong conclusions.
For instance, duplicated or missing information will produce incorrect or mis-
leading statistics (“garbage in, garbage out”). Due to the wide range of possi-
ble data inconsistencies and the sheer data volume, data quality is considered
one of the biggest issues in data warehousing.
Data warehouses are continuously refreshed with huge amounts of data
from a variety of sources so the probability that some of the sources contain
“dirty data” is high. The ETL (extract, transform, load) process takes data
from a variety of sources, edits and transforms it into the format used in the
data warehouse, and then loads this data into the warehouse, as shown in
Figure 5.23. This process is essential in ensuring the quality of the data in the
data warehouse.
●
Extract. Source data for the data warehouse comes from many sources
and may be represented in a variety of formats. The goal of this process is
to extract the source data from all the various sources and convert it into
a single format suitable for processing. During the extract step, data that
fails to meet expected patterns or values may be rejected from further
processing (e.g., blank or nonnumeric data in net sales field or a product
code outside the defined range of valid codes).
FIGURE 5.23
Elements of a data warehouse
A data warehouse can help
managers and executives relate
information in innovative ways to
make better decisions.
Data
extraction
process
Transform and
load
process
Data
warehouse
Query and
analysis tools
End-user access
Flat
files
Spreadsheets
Relational
databases
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 223
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Transform. During this stage of the ETL process, a series of rules or
algorithms are applied to the extracted data to derive the data that will
be stored in the data warehouse. A common type of transformation is to
convert a customer’s street address, city, state, and zip code to an
organization-assigned sales district or government census tract. Also, data
is often aggregated to reduce the processing time required to create antic-
ipated reports. For example, total sales may be accumulated by store or
sales district.
●
Load. During this stage of the ETL process, the extracted and transformed
data is loaded into the data warehouse. As the data is being loaded into the
data warehouse, new indices are created and the data is checked against
the constraints defined in the database schema to ensure its quality. As a
result, the data load stage for a large data warehouse can take days.
A large number of software tools are available to support these ETL tasks,
including Ab Initio, IBM InfoSphereDatastage, Oracle Data Integrator, and the
SAP Data Integrator. Several open-source ETL tools are also available, includ-
ing Apatar, Clover ETL, Pentaho, and Talend. Unfortunately, much of the ETL
work must be done by low-level proprietary programs that are difficult to
write and maintain.
Data Marts
A data mart is a subset of a data warehouse. Data marts bring the data ware-
house concept—online analysis of sales, inventory, and other vital business
data that have been gathered from transaction processing systems—to small-
and medium-sized businesses and to departments within larger companies.
Rather than store all enterprise data in one monolithic database, data marts
contain a subset of the data for a single aspect of a company’s business—for
example, finance, inventory, or personnel.
Data Lakes
A traditional data warehouse is created by extracting (and discarding some
data in the process), transforming (modifying), and loading incoming data for
predetermined and specific analyses and applications. This process can be
lengthy and computer intensive, taking days to complete. A data lake (also
called an enterprise data hub) takes a “store everything” approach to big
data, saving all the data in its raw and unaltered form. The raw data residing
in a data lake is available when users decide just how they want to use the
data to glean new insights. Only when the data is accessed for a specific anal-
ysis is it extracted from the data lake, classified, organized, edited, or trans-
formed. Thus a data lake serves as the definitive source of data in its original,
unaltered form. Its contents can include business transactions, clickstream
data, sensor data, server logs, social media, videos, and more.
NoSQL Databases
A NoSQL database provides a means to store and retrieve data that is mod-
eled using some means other than the simple two-dimensional tabular rela-
tions used in relational databases. Such databases are being used to deal with
the variety of data found in big data and Web applications. A major advantage
of NoSQL databases is the ability to spread data over multiple servers so that
each server contains only a subset of the total data. This so-called horizontal
scaling capability enables hundreds or even thousands of servers to operate
on the data, providing faster response times for queries and updates. Most
relational database management systems have problems with such horizontal
scaling and instead require large, powerful, and expensive proprietary servers
and large storage systems.
data mart: A subset of a data
warehouse that is used by small- and
medium-sized businesses and
departments within large companies
to support decision making.
data lake (enterprise data hub):
A “store everything” approach to big
data that saves all the data in its raw
and unaltered form.
NoSQL database: A way to store
and retrieve data that is modeled using
some means other than the simple two-
dimensional tabular relations used in
relational databases.
224 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Another advantage of NoSQL databases is that they do not require a
predefined schema; data entities can have attributes edited or assigned to
them at any time. If a new entity or attribute is discovered, it can be added
to the database dynamically, extending what is already modeled in the
database.
Most NoSQL databases do not conform to true ACID properties when pro-
cessing transactions. Instead they provide for “eventual consistency” in which
database changes are propagated to all nodes eventually (typically within
milliseconds), so it is possible that user queries for data might not return the
most current data.
The choice of a relational database management system versus a NoSQL
solution depends on the problem that needs to be addressed. Often, the data
structures used by NoSQL databases are more flexible than relational database
tables and, in many cases, they can provide improved access speed and
redundancy.
The four main categories of NoSQL databases and offerings for each cate-
gory are shown in Table 5.5 and summarized below. Note that some NoSQL
database products can meet the needs of more than one category.
●
Key–value NoSQL databases are similar to SQL databases, but have only
two columns (“key” and “value”), with more complex information some-
times stored within the “value” columns.
●
Document NoSQL databases are used to store, retrieve, and manage
document-oriented information, such as social media posts and multime-
dia, also known as semi-structured data.
●
Graph NoSQL databases are used to understand the relationships among
events, people, transactions, locations, and sensor readings and are well-
suited for analyzing interconnections such as when extracting data from
social media.
●
Column NoSQL databases store data in columns, rather than in rows, and
are able to deliver fast response times for large volumes of data.
Criteo is a digital-advertising organization serving up ads to over one billion
unique Internet users around the world every month. The firm automates the
recommendation of ads and the selection of products from advertiser catalogs
up to 30 billion times each day. A recommendation can require a calculation
involving some 100 variables, and it must be completed quickly—within
100 milliseconds or less. Criteo has deployed a Couchbase Server NoSQL data-
base across 1,000 servers grouped into 24 clusters, providing access to a total of
107 terabytes of database storage to meet these demanding processing
requirements.24
The National Security Agency (NSA), through its controversial PRISM
program, uses NoSQL technology to analyze email messages, phone conver-
sations, video chats, and social media interactions gleaned from the servers
TABLE 5.5 Popular NoSQL database products, by category
Key–Value
Document
Graph
Column
HyperDEX
Lotus Notes
Allegro
Accumulo
Couchbase Server
Couchbase Server
Neo4J
Cassandra
Oracle NoSQL
Database
Oracle NoSQL
Database
InfiniteGraph
Druid
OrientDB
OrientDB
OrientDB
Vertica
MongoDB
Virtuoso
HBase
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 225
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

of major service providers, including Apple, Facebook, Google, Microsoft,
Skype, Yahoo, and YouTube. The Accumulo NoSQL database enables its
users to assign each piece of data a security tag that defines how people can
access that data and who can access that data. This feature makes it possible
for NSA agents to interrogate certain details while blocking access to person-
ally identifiable information.25
Amazon DynamoDB is a NoSQL database that supports both document
and key–value store models. MLB Advanced Media (MLBAM) uses DynamoDB
to power its revolutionary Player Tracking System, which reveals detailed
information about the nuances and athleticism of the game. Fans, broadcas-
ters, and teams are finding this new data entertaining and useful. The system
takes in data from ballparks across North America and provides enough com-
puting power to support real-time analytics and produce results in seconds.26
Hadoop
Hadoop is an open-source software framework that includes several software
modules that provide a means for storing and processing extremely large data
sets, as shown in Figure 5.24. Hadoop has two primary components: a data
processing component (a Java-based system called MapReduce, which is dis-
cussed in the next section) and a distributed file system (Hadoop Distributed
File System, HDFS) for data storage. Hadoop divides data into subsets and
distributes the subsets onto different servers for processing. A Hadoop cluster
may consist of thousands of servers. In a Hadoop cluster, a subset of the data
within the HDFS and the MapReduce system are housed on every server in
the cluster. This places the data processing software on the same servers
where the data is stored, thus speeding up data retrieval. This approach
creates a highly redundant computing environment that allows the application
to keep running even if individual servers fail.
FIGURE 5.24
Hadoop environment
Hadoop can be used as a staging
area for data to be loaded into a data
warehouse or data mart.
Historical data from legacy system
Data from
external source #1
Data from
external source #2
Data from Facebook
Data from ERP system
Data from CRM system
Hadoop cluster running
on 100s of servers
Data mart
Data mart
Data
warehouse
Data from sensors
on production floor
Data from visitors
to organization’s
Web site
Server
#2
Server
#3
Server
#n
Server
#1
Hadoop: An open-source software
framework including several software
modules that provide a means for
storing and processing extremely large
data sets.
Hadoop Distributed
File System (HDFS): A system
used for data storage that divides the
data into subsets and distributes the
subsets onto different servers for
processing.
226 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A MapReduce program is composed of a Map procedure that performs
filtering and sorting (such as sorting customer orders by product ID into queues,
with one queue for each product ID) and a Reduce method that performs a
summary operation (such as counting the number of orders in each queue, thus
determining product ID frequencies). MapReduce employs a JobTracker that
resides on the Hadoop master server as well as TaskTrackers that sit on each
server within the Hadoop cluster of servers. The JobTracker divides the comput-
ing job up into well-defined tasks and moves those tasks out to the individual
TaskTrackers on the servers in the Hadoop cluster where the needed data resides.
These servers operate in parallel to complete the necessary computing. Once their
work is complete, the resulting subset of data is reduced back to the central node
of the Hadoop cluster.
For years, Yahoo! used Hadoop to better personalize the ads and articles
that its visitors see. Now Hadoop is used by many popular Web sites and ser-
vices (such as eBay, Etsy, Twitter, and Yelp). Verizon Wireless uses big data
to perform customer churn analysis to get a better sense of when a customer
becomes dissatisfied. Hadoop allows Verizon to include more detailed data
about each customer, including clickstream data, chats, and even social media
searches, to predict when a customer might switch to a new carrier.
Hadoop has a limitation in that it can only perform batch processing; it
cannot process real-time streaming data such as stock prices as they flow into
the various stock exchanges. However, Apache Storm and Apache Spark are
often integrated with Hadoop to provide real-time data processing. Apache
Storm is a free and open source distributed real-time computation system.
Storm makes it easy to reliably process unbounded streams of data. Apache
Spark is a framework for performing general data analytics in a distributed
computing cluster environment like Hadoop. It provides in memory computa-
tions for increased speed of data processing. Both Storm and Spark run on top
of an existing Hadoop cluster and access data in a Hadoop data store (HDFS).
Medscape MedPulse is a medical news app for iPhone and iPad users that
enables healthcare professionals to stay up-to-date on the latest medical news
and expert perspectives. The app uses Apache Storm to include an automatic
Twitter feed (about 500 million tweets per day are tweeted on Twitter) to
help users stay informed about important medical trends being shared in real
time by physicians and other leading medical commentators.27,28
In-Memory Databases
An in-memory database (IMDB) is a database management system that
stores the entire database in random access memory (RAM). This approach
provides access to data at rates much faster than storing data on some form
of secondary storage (e.g., a hard drive or flash drive) as is done with tradi-
tional database management systems. IMDBs enable the analysis of big data
and other challenging data-processing applications, and they have become
feasible because of the increase in RAM capacities and a corresponding
decrease in RAM costs. In-memory databases perform best on multiple multi-
core CPUs that can process parallel requests to the data, further speeding
access to and processing of large amounts of data.29 Furthermore, the advent
of 64-bit processors enabled the direct addressing of larger amounts of main
memory. Some of the leading providers of IMDBs are shown in Table 5.6.
KDDI Corporation is a Japanese telecommunications company that pro-
vides mobile cellular services for some 40 million customers. The company
consolidated 40 existing servers into a single Oracle SuperCluster running the
Oracle Times Ten in-memory database to make its authentication system that
manages subscriber and connectivity data run faster and more efficiently.
This move reduced its data center footprint by 83 percent and power con-
sumption by 70 percent while improving the overall performance and
MapReduce program: A compos-
ite program that consists of a Map
procedure that performs filtering and
sorting and a Reduce method that
performs a summary operation.
in-memory database (IMDB): A
database management system that
stores the entire database in random
access memory (RAM).
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 227
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
availability of the system. As a result, system costs were reduced and customer
service improved.30
Telefonica Brasil
Telefonica Brasil is one of the largest telecommunications companies in Brazil,
and it provides landline and mobile services under the brand name Vivo for mil-
lions of consumers. The company is considering using big data to perform cus-
tomer churn analysis in order to anticipate when a customer is unhappy and
likely to drop its service for that of a competitor.
Review Questions
1.
What sources of data might Telefonica Brasil use to perform customer churn
analysis?
2.
What database technology options might the firm elect to use?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Why is it unlikely that a traditional SQL database would be able to meet the
firm’s needs?
2.
In addition to a database management system, what other information system
technology and resources are likely needed for this type of project?
Summary
Principle:
The
database
approach
to
data
management
has
become
broadly
accepted.
Data is one of the most valuable resources that a firm possesses. It is orga-
nized into a hierarchy that builds from the smallest element to the largest. The
smallest element is the bit, a binary digit. A byte (a character such as a letter or
numeric digit) is made up of eight bits. A group of characters, such as a name
or number, is called a field (an object). A collection of related fields is a record;
a collection of related records is called a file. The database, at the top of the
hierarchy, is an integrated collection of records and files.
An entity is a generalized class of objects (such as a person, place, or thing)
for which data is collected, stored, and maintained. An attribute is a character-
istic of an entity. Specific values of attributes—called data items—can be found
in the fields of the record describing an entity. A data key is a field within a
record that is used to identify the record. A primary key uniquely identifies a
record, while a secondary key is a field in a record that does not uniquely
identify the record.
TABLE 5.6 IMDB providers
Database Software
Manufacturer
Product Name
Major Customers
Altibase
HDB
E*Trade, China
Telecom
Oracle
Times Ten
Lockheed Martin,
Verizon Wireless
SAP
High-Performance Analytic
Appliance (HANA)
eBay, Colgate
Software AG
Terracotta Big Memory
AdJuggler
228 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Principle:
Data modelling is a key aspect of organizing data and information.
When building a database, an organization must consider content, access,
logical structure, physical organization, archiving, and security of the database.
One of the tools that database designers use to show the logical structure and
relationships among data is a data model. A data model is a map or diagram of
entities and their relationships. Enterprise data modeling involves analyzing the
data and information needs of an entire organization and provides a roadmap
for building database and information systems by creating a single definition
and format for data that can ensure compatibility and the ability to exchange
and integrate data among systems. Entity-relationship (ER) diagrams can be
used to show the relationships among entities in the organization.
The relational database model places data in two-dimensional tables.
Tables can be linked by common data elements, which are used to access
data when the database is queried. Each row in a relational database table
represents a record, and each column represents an attribute (or field). The
allowable values for each attribute are called the attribute’s domain. Basic
data manipulations include selecting, projecting, joining, and linking. The rela-
tional model is easier to control, more flexible, and more intuitive than other
database models because it organizes data in tables.
Data cleansing is the process of detecting and then correcting or deleting
incomplete, incorrect, inaccurate, or irrelevant records that reside in the data-
base. The goal of data cleansing is to improve the quality of the data used in
decision making.
Principle:
A well-designed and well-managed database is an extremely valuable tool
in supporting decision making.
A database management system (DBMS) is a group of programs used as an
interface between a database and its users and between a database and other
application programs. When an application program requests data from the
database, it follows a logical access path. The actual retrieval of the data follows
a physical access path. Records can be considered in the same way: A logical
record is what the record contains; a physical record is where the record is stored
on storage devices. Schemas are used to describe the entire database, its record
types, and its relationships to the DBMS. Schemas are entered into the computer
via a data definition language, which describes the data and relationships in a
specific database. Another tool used in database management is the data dictio-
nary, which contains detailed descriptions of all data in the database.
A DBMS provides four basic functions: offering user views, creating and
modifying the database, storing and retrieving data, and manipulating data
and generating reports. After a DBMS has been installed, the database can be
accessed, modified, and queried via a data manipulation language. A type of
specialized data manipulation language is the query language, the most com-
mon being Structured Query Language (SQL). SQL is used in several popular
database packages today and can be installed in PCs and mainframes.
A database administrator (DBA) plans, designs, creates, operates, secures,
monitors, and maintains databases. A data administrator is a person position
responsible for defining and implementing consistent principles for a variety of
data issues, including setting data standards and data definitions that apply
across all the databases in an organization.
Selecting a DBMS begins by analyzing the information needs of the organi-
zation. Important characteristics of databases include the size of the database,
the number of concurrent users, the performance of the database, the ability of
the DBMS to be integrated with other systems, the features of the DBMS, the
vendor considerations, and the cost of the database management system.
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 229
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

In database as a service (DaaS) arrangement, the database is stored on a
service provider’s servers and accessed by the subscriber over a network, typi-
cally the Internet. In DaaS, database administration is provided by the service
provider.
Principle:
We have entered an era where organizations are grappling with a tremen-
dous growth in the amount of data available and struggling how to man-
age and make use of it.
“Big data” is the term used to describe data collections that are so enor-
mous and complex that traditional data management software, hardware, and
analysis processes are incapable of dealing with them.
There are many challenges associated with big data, including how to
choose what subset of data to store, where and how to store the data, how to
find those nuggets of data that are relevant to the decision making at hand,
how to derive value from the relevant data, and how to identify which data
needs to be protected from unauthorized access.
Data management is an integrated set of 10 functions that defines the pro-
cesses by which data is obtained, certified fit for use, stored, secured, and pro-
cessed in such a way as to ensure that the accessibility, reliability, and
timeliness of the data meet the needs of the data users within an organization.
Data governance is the core component of data management; it defines the
roles, responsibilities, and processes for ensuring that data can be trusted and
used by the entire organization with people identified and in place who are
responsible for fixing and preventing issues with data.
Principle:
A number of available tools and technologies allow organizations to take
advantage of the opportunities offered by big data.
Traditional online transaction processing (OLTP) systems put data into
databases very quickly, reliably, and efficiently, but they do not support the
types of data analysis that today’s businesses and organizations require. To
address this need, organizations are building data warehouses specifically
designed to support management decision making.
An extract, transform, load process takes data from a variety of sources,
edits and transforms it into the format to be used in the data warehouse, and
then loads the data into the warehouse.
Data marts are subdivisions of data warehouses and are commonly devoted
to specific purposes or functional business areas.
A data lake (also called an enterprise data hub) takes a “store everything”
approach to big data, saving all the data in its raw and unaltered form.
A NoSQL database provides a means to store and retrieve data that is mod-
elled using some means other than the simple two-dimensional tabular rela-
tions used in relational databases. There are four types of NoSQL databases—
key-value, document, graph, and column.
Hadoop is an open-source software framework that includes several soft-
ware modules that provide a means for storing and processing extremely large
data sets. Hadoop has two primary components—a data processing component
(MapReduce) and a distributed file system (Hadoop Distributed File System or
HDFS) for data storage. Hadoop divides data into subsets and distributes the
subsets onto different servers for processing. A Hadoop cluster may consist of
thousands of servers. A subset of the data within the HDFS and the MapReduce
system are housed on every server in the cluster.
An in-memory database (IMDB) is a database management system that
stores the entire database in random access memory to improve storage and
retrieval speed.
230 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Key Terms
ACID properties
attribute
bit
character
concurrency control
data administrator
data cleansing (data cleaning or data scrubbing)
data definition language (DDL)
data dictionary
data governance
data item
data lake (enterprise data hub)
data lifecycle management (DLM)
data management
data manipulation language (DML)
data mart
data model
data steward
database
database administrators (DBAs)
database approach to data management
database as a service (DaaS)
database management system (DBMS)
domain
enterprise data model
entity
entity-relationship (ER) diagram
field
file
Hadoop
Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS)
hierarchy of data
in-memory database (IMDB)
joining
linking
MapReduce program
NoSQL database
primary key
projecting
record
relational database model
schema
selecting
SQL
Chapter 5: Self-Assessment Test
The database approach to data management has
become broadly accepted.
1. A field or set of fields that uniquely identifies a
record in a database is called a(n)
.
a. attribute
b. data item
c. record
d. primary key
2. The key concept of the database approach to data
management is that
.
a. all records in the database are stored in a two-
dimensional table
b. multiple information systems share access to a
pool of related data
c. only authorized users can access the data
d. a database administrator “owns” the data
Data modeling is a key aspect of organizing data
and information.
3. A(n)
provides an organizational-
level roadmap for building databases and infor-
mation systems by creating a single definition and
format for data.
a. database
b. enterprise data model
c. entity relationship diagram
d. database management system
4. The
model is a simple but highly
useful way to organize data into collections of
two-dimensional tables called relations.
5. The ability to combine two or more tables
through common data attributes to form a new
table with only the unique data attributes is
called
.
6. SQL databases conform to ACID properties,
which include atomicity, consistency, isolation,
and
.
A well-designed and well-managed database is an
extremely valuable tool in supporting decision
making.
7. The process of detecting and then correcting or
deleting incomplete, incorrect, inaccurate, or
irrelevant records that reside in a database is
called
.
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 231
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

8. Because the DBMS is responsible for providing
access to a database, one of the first steps in
installing and using a relational database involves
“telling” the DBMS the logical and physical
structure of the data and relationships among the
data in the database. This description of an entire
database is called a(n)
.
9. A(n)
is an individual responsible for
the management of critical data elements, includ-
ing identifying and acquiring new data sources;
creating and maintaining consistent reference data
and master data definitions; and analyzing data for
quality and reconciling data issues.
10. Data administrators are skilled and trained IS
professionals who hold discussions with users to
define their data needs; apply database program-
ming languages to craft a set of databases to meet
those needs; and assure that data is secure from
unauthorized access. True or False?
11. With
, the database is stored on a
service provider’s servers and accessed by the
service subscriber over the Internet, with the
database administration handled by the service
provider.
We have entered an era where organizations are
grappling with a tremendous growth in the amount
of data available and struggling to understand how
to manage and make use of it.
12. Three characteristics associated with big data
include volume, velocity, and
.
13. The Data Management Association has defined 10
major functions of data management, with the
core component being
.
a. data quality management
b. data security management
c. data governance
d. data architecture management
A number of available tools and technologies allow
organizations to take advantage of the opportu-
nities offered by big data.
14. A(n)
database provides a means to
store and retrieve data that is modeled using
some means other than simple two-dimensional
relations used in relational databases.
15. Hadoop has two primary components—a data
processing component and a distributed file sys-
tem called
.
a. MapReduce and HDFS
b. TaskTracker and JobTracker
c. Key-value and graph
d. SQL and NoSQL
16. An
is a database management sys-
tem that stores the entire database in random
access memory to provide fast access.
Chapter 5: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. d
2. b
3. b
4. relational database
5. linking
6. durability
7. data cleansing, data cleaning, or data scrubbing
8. schema
9. data steward
10. False
11. database as a service (DaaS)
12. variety
13. c
14. NoSQL
15. a
16. in-memory database
Review Questions
1. How would you define the term “database”? How
would you define the term “database manage-
ment system”?
2. In the hierarchy of data, what is the difference
between a data attribute and a data item? What is
the domain of an attribute?
3. What is meant by the database approach to data
management?
4. What is meant by data archiving? Why is this an
important consideration when operating a
database?
5. What is an entity-relationship diagram, and what
is its purpose?
6. Identify four basic data manipulations performed
on a relational database using SQL.
7. What is data scrubbing?
8. What is database as a service (DaaS)? What are
the advantages and disadvantages of using the
DaaS approach?
9. What is Hadoop? What are its primary compo-
nents, and what does each do?
10. What is a schema, and how is it used?
11. What is concurrency control? Why is it
important?
12. What is in-memory database processing, and
what advantages does it provide?
232 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

13. What is the difference between projecting and
joining?
14. What is big data? Identify three characteristics
associated with big data.
15. What is a data warehouse, and how is it different
from a traditional database used to support OLTP?
16. What is a data lake, and how is it different from a
data warehouse?
17. How does an in-memory database provide fast
access to data?
Discussion Questions
1. What concerns might be raised by performing
data cleansing on a large set of raw data before it
is used for analysis? How might these concerns be
addressed?
2. Outline some specific steps an organization might
take to perform data cleansing to ensure the
accuracy and completeness of its customer data-
base before adding this data to a data warehouse.
How would you decide when the data is accurate
enough?
3. SQL databases conform to ACID properties.
Briefly describe the ACID properties, and state
the purpose of each. How does conformance to
ACID properties affect the performance of SQL
databases?
4. Describe how a NoSQL database differs from a
relational database. Identify and briefly discuss
the four types of NoSQL databases.
5. Review Table 5.4, which provides a list of rules,
regulations, and standards with which U.S. infor-
mation systems organizations must comply.
Which of these standards do you think has the
most impact on safeguarding the security of per-
sonal information? Which of these standards have
minimal impact on you personally?
6. Identify and briefly describe the steps in the ETL
process. What is the goal of the ETL process?
7. Consider three organizations that have databases
that likely store information about you—the Fed-
eral Internal Revenue Service, your state’s Bureau
of Motor Vehicles, and Equifax, the consumer
reporting agency. Go to the home page of each of
these organizations, and find answers to the fol-
lowing questions. How is the data in each data-
base captured? Is it possible for you to request a
printout of the contents of your data record from
each database? Is it possible for you to correct
errors you find in your data record? What data
privacy concerns do you have concerning how
these databases are managed?
8. Identity theft, where people steal personal infor-
mation, continues to be a problem for consumers
and businesses. Assume that you are the database
administrator for a corporation with a large data-
base that is accessible from the Web. What steps
would you implement to prevent people from
stealing personal information from the corporate
database?
9. Read the article “Why ‘Big Data’ Is a Big Deal” by
Jonathan Shaw in the March-April 2014 Harvard
Magazine. What does Shaw think is the revolu-
tion in big data? Which of the many big data
applications that he mentions do you find to be
the most interesting? Why?
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Develop a simple data model for a student data-
base that includes student contact data, student
demographic data, student grades data, and stu-
dent financial data. Determine the data attributes
that should be present in each table, and identify
the primary key for each table. Develop a com-
plete ER diagram that shows how these tables are
related to one another.
2. A company that provides a movie-streaming sub-
scription service uses a relational database to
store information on movies to answer customer
questions. Each entry in the database contains the
following items: Movie ID (the primary key),
movie title, year made, movie type, MPAA rating,
starring actor #1, starring actor #2, starring
actor #3, and director. Movie types are action,
comedy, family, drama, horror, science fiction,
and western. MPAA ratings are G, PG, PG-13, R,
NC-17, and NR (not rated). Using a graphics pro-
gram, develop an entity-relationship diagram for
a database application for this database.
3. Use a database management system to build a
data-entry screen to enter this data. Build a small
database with at least a dozen entries.
4. To improve service to their customers, the
employees of the movie-streaming company have
proposed several changes that are being consid-
ered for the database in the previous exercise.
From this list, choose two database modifications,
and then modify the data-entry screen to capture
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 233
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

and store this new information. The proposed
changes are as follows:
a.
Add the date that the movie was first released
to the theaters.
b. Add the executive producer’s name.
c.
Add a customer rating of one, two, three,
four, or five stars, based on the number of
rentals.
d. Add the number of Academy Award
nominations.
Team Activities
1. Imagine that you and your team have been hired
to develop an improved process for evaluating
which students should be accepted to your col-
lege and, of those, which should be awarded
academic scholarships. What data besides college
entrance scores and high school transcripts might
you consider using to make these determinations?
Where might you get this data? Develop an ER
diagram showing the various tables of data that
might be used.
2. You and your team have been selected to repre-
sent the student body in defining the user
requirements for a new student database for your
school. What actions would you take to ensure
that the student reporting needs and data privacy
concerns of the students are fully identified? What
other resources might you enlist to help you in
defining these requirements?
3. As a team of three or four classmates, interview
managers from three different organizations that
have implemented a customer database. What
data entities and data attributes are contained in
each database? What database management sys-
tem did each company select to implement its
database, and why? How does each organization
access its database to perform analysis? Have the
managers and their staff received training in any
query or reporting tools? What do they like about
their databases, and what could be improved?
Weighing the information obtained, identify
which company has implemented the best cus-
tomer database.
Web Exercises
1. Do research to find out more about the contro-
versial NSA PRISM program. What is the source
of data for this program? What is the purpose of
the program? Are you a supporter of the PRISM
program? Why or why not?
2. Do research to find an example of an organiza-
tion struggling to deal with the rapid growth of
the big data it needs for decision making. What
are the primary issues it is facing? What is the
organization doing to get a good grip on data
management and data governance?
3. Do research to find three different estimates of the
rate at which the amount of data in our digital uni-
verse is growing. Discuss why these estimates differ.
Career Exercises
1. Describe the role of a database administrator.
What skills, training, and experiences are neces-
sary to fulfill this role? How does this differ from
the role of a data administrator? What about the
role of a data steward? Is any one of these roles of
interest to you? Why or why not?
2. How could you use big data to do a better job at
work? Give some specific examples of how you
might use big data to gain valuable new insights.
Case Studies
Case One
WholeWorldBand: Digital Recording Studio
WholeWorldBand is a collaborative online music and video
platform that enables anyone to collaborate with others to
create music videos. The service was founded by Kevin
Godley, a musician and music video director, and is
accessible via a Web-based app available on the iPhone and
iPad and on Windows and MacOS computers. Anyone can
contribute to WholeWorldBand using just the camera and
microphone in their computer or mobile device. The service
enables users—whatever their level of musical ability—to
record and perform with music legends and friends. Using
WholeWorldBand, you can start a video-recording session
that others may join, create your own personal video mix
with up to six performers, and then share the results with
your friends and fans via Facebook, Twitter, or YouTube.
Users can also pay to collaborate with other musicians who
234 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

have posted their own content. Collaborating on a project
might mean providing new audio or video components or
remixing existing ones.
WholeWorldBand uses a sophisticated digital rights
management system to ensure that artists earn revenue for the
work they contribute—if your work gets used, you get paid.
WholeWorldBand provides users the opportunity to perform
and record with popular artists. A number of major recording
artists have already uploaded tracks including The Edge (U2),
Ronnie Wood (Rolling Stones), Taylor Hawkins (Foo Fighters),
Stewart Copeland (The Police), Liam Ó Maonlaí (Hot House
Flowers), Michael Bublé, Phil Manzanera (Roxy Music), Dave
Stewart (Eurythmics), and Danny O’Reilly (The Coronas).
The platform generates revenue from registered users
who purchase subscriptions (or sessions) and from royalties
paid by third parties in situations where users have shared
and distributed content using the app or the Web site. Each
session artist is entitled to receive a share of the revenue
generated when other registered users purchase sessions for
the purpose of creating contributions and/or mixes in
relation to their original track. Keeping track of contributing
artists, royalty payments, and the necessary revenue splits
among artists, third parties, and WholeWorldBand can
become quite detailed and tedious.
Critical Thinking Questions:
1. Identify some of the challenges associated with build-
ing an information system infrastructure to support
this new service. Would cloud computing be an
appropriate solution to address these challenges? Why
or why not?
2. Would WholeWorldBand be likely to employ SQL,
NoSQL, or a mix of both kinds of databases? Explain
your answer.
3. Go to the WholeWorldBand Web site at www.whole
worldband.com/about, and find its Terms of Use.
Summarize the measures outlined to protect the
unauthorized use of copyrighted material. Do you
think these measures are adequate? Why or why not?
SOURCES: “WholeWorldBand” YouTube video, 0:33, www.
youtube.com/user/WholeWorldBand, accessed October 7,
2015; “EnterpriseDB’sPostgres Plus Cloud Database Strikes
a Chord with WholeWorldBand,” EntrepriseDB, www
.enterprisedb.com/success-stories/enterprisedb-s-postgres-
plus-cloud-database-strikes-chord-wholeworldband, accessed
October 7, 2015; John, “WholeWorldBand Wins “Buma Music
Meets Tech” Award at EurosonicNoorsderslag in Holland,”
Irish Tech News, January 18, 2014, http://irishtechnews.net
/ITN3/wholeworldband-wins-buma-music-meets-tech-award
-at-eurosonic-noorsderslag-in-holland; “WholeWorldBand
Terms of Use,” WholeWorldBand, www.wholeworldband
.com/about, accessed October 7, 2015.
Case Two
Mercy’s Big Data Project Aims to Boost Operations
Making the most of the data it collects is a challenge for any
organization, and those in the healthcare industry are no
exception. Based in St. Louis, Missouri, Mercy health system
includes 46 acute care and specialty hospitals, with more
than 700 outpatient facilities and physician practices in
Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma. With more than
40,000 employees, including over 2,000 physicians, Mercy’s
vision is to deliver a “transformative health experience”
through a new model of care. With such ambitious goals,
Mercy has a compelling interest in harnessing the power of
the data it collects. To do so, the health system needed to
overhaul is data-management infrastructure and move into
the world of big data.
To make that move, Mercy partnered with software
provider Hortonworks to create the Mercy Data Library, a
Hadoop-based data lake that contains batch data as well as
real-time data (stored in HBase, a distributed nonrelational
database structure) from sources such as the Mercy’s ERP and
electronic health record (EHR) systems. According to Paul
Boal, director of data engineering and analytics at Mercy,
“The blending of base batch data and real-time updates
happens on demand when a query is run against the system.”
Mercy’s new Hadoop environment, which contains
information on more than 8 million patients, holds over 40
terabytes of data housed on 41 servers spread out over four
clusters.
Outside of improving patient care, a primary motive for
the move to Hadoop was to improve Mercy’s administrative
efficiency, particularly in the areas of medical documentation
and claims generation. Ensuring that physicians, nurses, and
lab staff complete the necessary documentation for a patient
prior to discharge improves the chances that the hospital will
generate an accurate and complete claim-reimbursement
request. Prior to its Hadoop implementation, the health system
had already initiated an automatic-documentation-review
process. Now, Mercy plans to make use of real-time data along
with the power of Hadoop to further improve upon this
process. For instance, documentation specialists can generate
reports that help them follow up with physicians regarding
missing documentation during each morning’s clinical rounds.
The hospital expects the new system will generate more than
$1 million annually in new revenue based on claims that
accurately reflect hospital patients’ diagnoses and treatment.
Mercy is also focusing the power of its new technology
on areas directly related to clinical care. “What we’re building
out is a real-time clinical applications platform, so we’re
looking for other opportunities to turn that into decision
support,” says Boal. One such project involves leveraging the
Hadoop environment to make better use of data generated by
the electronic monitors in the intensive care units (ICUs)
across the health system. Mercy now gathers 900 times
more detailed data from its ICUs than it did before its
implementation of Hadoop. The previous database system
was only capable of pulling vital sign information for Mercy’s
most critically ill patients every 15 minutes; the new system
can do it once every second. The goal is to use the real-time
data for better analysis, such as refining the health system’s
predictive models on the early-warning signs of life-
threatening medical problems in the ICU setting.
Like all healthcare providers, Mercy is required to
maintain an audit trail for its EHR system. The audit trail
keeps track of everyone who accesses any piece of patient
information via the EHR. In addition to satisfying this
regulatory requirement, Mercy expects Hadoop will help it
put that audit trail data to a new use—analyzing staff
behavior patterns and developing a better understanding of
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 235
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

how processes actually get done. And in another Hadoop-
related project, lab staff are now able to quickly search
through terabytes worth of lab notes that were previously
inaccessible.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. One of the advantages of a Hadoop implementation is
that it provides a high level of computing redundancy.
Why is that particularly important in a healthcare
setting?
2. Explain how the three characteristics of big data
(volume, velocity, and variety) apply to the data
being collected by healthcare providers such
as Mercy.
3. How might Mercy benefit from an enterprise data
model? Does Mercy’s move into big data make it more
or less important that it have a clearly developed
model that states the organizations’ data needs and
priorities?
SOURCES: “Transforming the Health of Our Communities,”
Mercy, www.mercy.net/about/transforming-the-health-of
-our-communities, accessed December 16, 2015; “Towards a
Healthcare Data Lake: Hadoop at Mercy,” Hortonworks,
http://hortonworks.com/customers, accessed December 16,
2015; Wilson, Linda, “Mercy’s Big Data Project Aims to Boost
Operations,” Information Management, October 7, 2015,
www.information-management.com/news/big-data-
analytics/mercy-health-big-data-project-aims-to-boost-
operations-10027562-1.html; Perna, Gabriel, “Moving Data
Down I-44 and Making it Actionable,” Healthcare
Informatics, May 13, 2015, www.healthcare-informatics
.com/article/moving-data-down-i-44-and-making-it
-actionable; Henschen, Doug, “Hadoop’s Growing Enterprise
Presence Demonstrated by Three Innovative Use Cases,”
ZDNet, September 10, 2015, www.zdnet.com/article/hadoop
-growing-enterprise-presence-demonstrated-by-three-
innovative-use-cases;“Handling Electronic Health Records
(EHR) Access Logs with Hadoop,” StampedeCon, http://
stampedecon.com/sessions/handling-access-logs-with
-hadoop, accessed December 17, 2015.
Notes
1. Zettel, Jonathan, “Offshore Leaks Database Allows Pub-
lic to Search Offshore Tax Haven Info,” CTV News, June
15, 2013, www.ctvnews.ca/business/offshore-leaks-data
base-allows-public-to-search-offshore-tax-haven-info
-1.1327088.
2. “FAQ on Lost/Stolen Devices,” CTIA Wireless Associa-
tion, www.ctia.org/your-wireless-life/consumer-tips/how
-to-deter-smartphone-thefts-and-protect-your-data/faq
-on-lost-stolen-devices, accessed September 4, 2015.
3. “Overview of the GTD,” Global Terrorism Database,
www.start.umd.edu/gtd/about, accessed September 4,
2015.
4. Hibbard, Katharine, “New Resource Available in Recover-
ing Stolen Property,” Leads Online, August 14, 2015,
www.leadsonline.com/main/news/2015-news-archive
/new-resource-available-in-recovering-stolen-property.php.
5. “I-Nexus Selects AppDynamics to Drive Continuous Perfor-
mance Improvement,”AppDynamics, www.appdynamics
.com/case-study/inexus, accessed September 6, 2015.
6. “IBM Healthcare Provider Data Model,” IBM,
www-03.ibm.com/software/products/en/healthcare-pro
vider-data-model, accessed September 6, 2015.
7. “Complete Data Integration from Legacy Systems and
Epic, In Half the Time,”Perficient, www.perficient.com
/About/Case-Studies/2014/UNC-Health-Care-System-Com
pletes-Data-Integration-from-Legacy-Systems-and-Epic
-In-Half-the-Time, accessed September 6, 2015.
8. “Banco Popular,” Trillium Software, www.trilliumsoft
ware.com/uploadedFiles/Banco_CS_2010_screen.pdf,
accessed September 7, 2015.
9. Proffitt, Brian, “FoundationDB’s NoSQL Breakthrough
Challenges Relational Database Dominance,” Read
Write, March 8, 2013, http://readwrite.com/2013/03/08
/foundationdbs-nosql-breakthrough-challenges-rela
tional-database-dominance#awesm=~oncfIkqw3jiMOJ.
10. Golden, Matt, “New DOE Effort to Standardize the
Energy Efficiency Data Dictionary,” EDF Blogs, August 8,
2013, http://blogs.edf.org/energyexchange/2013/08/08
/new-doe-effort-to-standardize-the-energy-efficiency
-data-dictionary.
11. “Three Charged for Largest-Ever Bank Data Breach,” CBS
News, November 10, 2015, www.cbsnews.com/news/three-
charged-for-jpmorgan-data-breach-the-largest-ever.
12. “About TinyCo,”TinyCo, www.tinyco.com/about-us,
accessed September 8, 2015.
13. “AWS Case Study: TinyCo,” Amazon Web Services, http://
aws.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies/tinyco,
accessed September 8, 2015.
14. Laney, Doug, “3D Data Management: Controlling Data
Volume, Velocity, and Variety,” META Group, February
6, 2001, http://blogs.gartner.com/doug-laney/files/2012
/01/ad949-3D-Data-Management-Controlling-Data-Vol
ume-Velocity-and-Variety.pdf.
15. Turner, Vernon, David Reinsel, John F. Gantz, and Ste-
phen Minton, “The Digital Universe of Opportunities:
Rich Data and the Increasing Value of the Internet of
Things,” EMC2, April 2014, www.emc.com/collateral
/analyst-reports/idc-digital-universe-2014.pdf.
16. “Seminars about Long-Term Thinking,” The Long Now
Foundation, http://longnow.org/seminars/02013/mar
/19/no-time-there-digital-universe-and-why-things
-appear-be-speeding, accessed November 8, 2013.
17. Rosenbaum, Steven, “Is It Possible to Analyze Digital
Data If It’s Growing Exponentially?” Fast Company,
January 13, 2013, www.fastcompany.com/3005128
/it-possible-analyze-digital-data-if-its-growing-
exponentially.
18. Ibid.
19. Krantz, Matt, “Lack of Accuracy Can Wreak Havoc on
Stock Market,” USA Today-The Enquirer, September 12,
2015, p. 6B.
20. Harris, Derrick, “Why Apple, eBay, and Walmart Have
Some of the Biggest Data Warehouses You’ve Ever
Seen,” GIGAOM, March 27, 2013, https://gigaom.com
236 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

/2013/03/27/why-apple-ebay-and-walmart-have-some
-of-the-biggest-data-warehouses-youve-ever-seen/.
21. Davenport, Thomas H. and Jill Dyché, “Big Data in Big
Companies,” International Institute for Analytics, www
.sas.com/reg/gen/corp/2266746, accessed April 1, 2015.
22. “Yormari Customer Success Stories: Orscheln Farm &
Home,”Yomari, www.yomari.com/clients/orscheln-farm
-home-case-study.php, accessed November 12, 2015.
23. Davenport, Thomas H. and Jill Dyché, “Big Data in Big
Companies,” International Institute for Analytics, www.
sas.com/reg/gen/corp/2266746, accessed April 1, 2015.
24. “Customer Story:Criteo Boosts Performance, Scale of
Digital Ad Platform with Couchbase Server,”Couchbase,
www.couchbase.com/case-studies/criteo.html, accessed
September 19, 2015.
25. Henschen, Doug, “Defending NSA Prism’s Big Data
Tools,” InformationWeek, June 11, 2013, www.informa
tionweek.com/big-data/big-data-analytics/defending
-nsa-prisms-big-data-tools/d/d-id/1110318?.
26. “AWS Case Study: MLB Advanced Media,” Amazon Web
Services, aws.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies
/major-league-baseball-mlbam, accessed November 12,
2015.
27. Dvorkin, Eugene, “Scalable Big Data Stream Processing
with Storm and Groovy,” November 4, 2014, www.slide
share.net/SpringCentral/storm-twtterwebmd.
28. “Press Release: WebMD Medscape,” Newswire,
April 24, 2014, www.multivu.com/mnr/7040259-meds
cape-launches-new-medpulse-app-for-iphone-and
-ipad.
29. Brocke, Jan vom, “In-Memory Database Business Value,”
Business Innovation, July 25, 2013. www.business2com
munity.com/business-innovation/in-memory-database
-business-value-0564636.
30. “Oracle Press Release:KDDI Selects Oracle SuperCluster to
Strengthen Authentication System for Mobile Core Net-
work and Support Rapid Data Growth,” Oracle, January
22, 2014, www.oracle.com/us/corporate/press/2111600.
CHAPTER 5 • Database Systems and Big Data 237
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
6
Networks and Cloud Computing
Macrovector/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• Auto insurers are testing usage-based insurance programs
in which premiums are based on data gathered from a
device installed in the insured auto. Instead of setting the
premium based on traditional factors such as the driver’s
age and gender, it is based on miles driven per year, where
and when they drive, and how safely they drive. The goal is
to charge a premium that is commensurate with the risk
associated with auto owner’s driving habits.
• Sensors embedded in General Electric (GE) aircraft
engines collect some 5,000 individual data points per
second. This data is analyzed while the aircraft is in
flight to adjust the way the aircraft performs, thereby
reducing fuel consumption. The data is also used to
plan predictive maintenance on the engines based on
engine component wear and tear. In 2013, this tech-
nology helped GE earn $1 billion in incremental income
by delivering performance improvements, less down-
time, and more flying miles.
• It is estimated that in just one year, mobile operators lost
$23 billion in revenue as teens shifted away from texting
over cellular networks in favor of communicating with their
friends over the Internet using instant messaging apps.1
Principles
Learning Objectives
• A network has many fundamental components,
which—when carefully selected and effectively
integrated—enable people to meet personal and orga-
nizational objectives.
• Identify and briefly describe three network topologies
and four different network types, including the uses and
limitations of each.
• Identify and briefly discuss several types of both
guided and wireless communications.
• Identify several network hardware devices and define
their functions.
• Together, the Internet and the World Wide Web provide
a highly effective infrastructure for delivering and
accessing information and services.
• Briefly describe how the Internet and the Web work,
including various methods for connecting to the
Internet.
• Outline the process and tools used in developing Web
content and applications.
• List and briefly describe several Internet and Web
applications.
• Explain how intranets and extranets use Internet tech-
nologies, and describe how the two differ.
• Organizations are using the Internet of Things (IoT) to
capture and analyze streams of sensor data to detect
patterns and anomalies—not after the fact, but while
they are occurring—in order to have a considerable
impact on the event outcome.
• Define what is meant by the Internet of Things (IoT),
and explain how it works.
• Identify and briefly discuss several practical applica-
tions of the Internet of Things (IoT).
• Categorize and summarize several potential issues and
barriers associated with the expansion of the Internet of
Things (IoT).
• Cloud computing provides access to state-of-the-art
technology at a fraction of the cost of ownership and
without the lengthy delays that can occur when an
organization tries to acquire its own resources.
• Discuss how cloud computing can increase the speed and
reduce the costs of new product and service launches.
• Summarize three common problems organizations
encounter in moving to the cloud.
• Discuss the pros and cons of private and hybrid cloud
computing compared to public cloud computing.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Networks and Cloud Computing?
Today’s decision makers need to access data wherever it resides. They must be able to establish fast,
reliable connections to exchange messages, upload and download data and software, route business
transactions to processors, connect to databases and network services, and send output to wherever
it is needed. Regardless of your chosen major or future career field, you will make use of the
communications capabilities provided by networks, including the Internet, intranets, and extranets.
This is especially true for those whose role is connected to the supply chain and who rely heavily on
networks to support cooperation and communication among workers in inbound logistics, warehouse
and storage, production, finished product storage, outbound logistics, and, most importantly, with
customers, suppliers, and shippers. Many supply chain organizations make use of the Internet to
purchase raw materials, parts, and supplies at competitive prices. All members of the supply chain
must work together effectively to increase the value perceived by the customer, so partners must
communicate well. Other employees in human resources, finance, research and development, marketing,
manufacturing, and sales positions must also use communications technology to communicate with
people inside and outside the organization. To be a successful member of any organization, you must
be able to take advantage of the capabilities that these technologies offer you. This chapter begins by
discussing the importance of effective communications.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• How are organizations using networks to support their business strategies and achieve organizational
objectives?
• What benefits do search engines, social networks, and other Internet services provide to make orga-
nizations successful?
In today’s high-speed global business world, organizations need always-on,
always-connected
computing
for
traveling
employees
and
for
network
connections to their key business partners and customers. Forward-thinking
organizations strive to increase revenue, reduce time to market, and enable
collaboration with their suppliers, customers, and business partners by using
networks. Here are just a few examples of organizations using networks to
move ahead:
•
Many retail organizations are launching their own mobile payment sys-
tem, with the hopes of reducing payments to financial services organiza-
tions while also increasing customer loyalty. Some of these new systems
include Android Pay, Apple Pay, Chase Pay, PayPal, Paydiant, Samsung
Pay, Urban Airship, and Walmart Pay.2
•
Networks make it possible for you to access a wealth of educational
material and earn certifications or an online degree. A wide range of
courses are available online from such leading educational institutions as
Cornell, Carnegie Mellon, Harvard, MIT, and Yale. Many educational orga-
nizations such as Coursera, ed2Go, and Kahn Academy offer continuing
education, certification programs, and professional development courses.
Hundreds of schools such as DeVry, Kaplan University, University of
Phoenix, and Strayer University enable students to earn online degrees.
•
Levi Stadium, home of the San Francisco 49ers, is deploying new wireless
technology to make it easier for fans to use a special stadium navigation
app on their smartphones and other devices. With the app, fans can
watch instant replays and order food directly from their mobile devices.3
•
Telemedicine provides remote access to a physician via a network (typically
via a phone or videoconference) to address a healthcare issue. Its use has
become well established in rural areas for specialty consultations and even
many primary care practices like pediatrics. There are currently about 200
telemedicine networks, with 3,500 service sites in the United States alone.4
240 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Advances in network technology allow us to communicate in real time
with customers, clients, business partners, and coworkers almost anywhere in
the world. Networks also reduce the amount of time required to transmit
information necessary for driving and concluding business transactions.
Network Fundamentals
A computer network consists of communications media, devices, and soft-
ware connecting two or more computer systems or devices. Communications
media are any material substance that carries an electronic signal to support
communications between a sending and a receiving device. The computers
and devices on the networks are also sometimes called network nodes. Orga-
nizations can use networks to share hardware, programs, and databases and
to transmit and receive information, allowing for improved organizational
effectiveness and efficiency. Networks enable geographically separated work-
groups to share documents and opinions, which fosters teamwork, innovative
ideas, and new business strategies. Effective use of networks can help a com-
pany grow into an agile, powerful, and creative organization, giving it a long-
term competitive advantage.
Network Topology
Network topology is the shape or structure of a network, including the
arrangement of the communication links and hardware devices on the net-
work. The transmission rates, distances between devices, signal types, and
physical interconnection may differ between networks, but they may all have
the same topology. The three most common network topologies in use today
are the star, bus, and mesh.
In a star network, all network devices connect to one another through
a single central device called the hub node. See Figure 6.1. Many home
networks employ the star topology. A failure in any link of the star net-
work will isolate only the device connected to that link. However, should
the
hub
fail,
all
devices
on
the
entire
network
will
be
unable
to
communicate.
In a bus network, all network devices are connected to a common
backbone that serves as a shared communications medium. See Figure 6.2.
To communicate with any other device on the network, a device sends a
broadcast message onto the communications medium. All devices on the net-
work can “see” the message, but only the intended recipient actually accepts
and processes the message.
FIGURE 6.1
Star network
In a star network, all network devices
connect to one another through a
single central hub node.
computer network: The communi-
cations media, devices, and software
connecting two or more computer sys-
tems or devices.
communications medium: Any
material substance that carries an
electronic signal to support communi-
cations between a sending and a
receiving device.
network topology: The shape or
structure of a network, including the
arrangement of the communication
links and hardware devices on the
network.
star network: A network in which all
network devices connect to one
another through a single central device
called the hub node.
bus network: A network in which all
network devices are connected to a
common backbone that serves as a
shared communications medium.
Vladru/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 241
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Mesh networks use multiple access points to link a series of devices that
speak to each other to form a network connection across a large area. See
Figure 6.3. Communications are routed among network nodes by allowing for
continuous connections and by bypassing blocked paths by “hopping” from
node to node until a connection can be established. Mesh networks are very
robust: if one node fails, all the other nodes can still communicate with each
other, directly or through one or more intermediate nodes.
Saudi Telecom Company (STC) is the largest communications services
provider in the Middle East and North Africa. STC recently deployed a mesh
network that ensures network survivability even in the case of multiple
outages with restoration of service within 50 milliseconds. The mesh network
offers STC customers faster transmission speeds and improved network
reliability.5
Network Types
A network can be classified as personal area, local area, metropolitan, or wide
area network depending on the physical distance between the nodes on the
network and the communications and services it provides.
FIGURE 6.2
Bus network
In a bus network, all network devices
are connected to a common back-
bone that serves as a shared com-
munications medium.
FIGURE 6.3
Mesh network
Mesh networks use multiple access
points to link a series of devices that
speak to each other to form a net-
work connection across a large area.
mesh network: A network that uses
multiple access points to link a series of
devices that speak to each other to
form a network connection across a
large area.
Mamanamsai/Shutterstock.com
Vladru/Shutterstock.com
242 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Personal Area Networks
A personal area network (PAN) is a wireless network that connects informa-
tion technology devices close to one person. With a PAN, you can connect a
laptop, digital camera, and portable printer without cables. You can download
digital image data from the camera to the laptop and then print it on a high-
quality printer—all wirelessly. A PAN could also be used to enable data cap-
tured by sensors placed on your body to be transmitted to your smartphone
as input to applications that can serve as calorie trackers, heart monitors, glu-
cose monitors, and pedometers.
Local Area Networks
A network that connects computer systems and devices within a small area,
such as an office, home, or several floors in a building is a local area net-
work (LAN). Typically, LANs are wired into office buildings and factories,
as shown in Figure 6.4. Although LANs often use unshielded twisted-pair
copper wire, other media—including fiber-optic cable—is also popular.
Increasingly, LANs use some form of wireless communications. You can
build LANs to connect personal computers, laptop computers, or powerful
mainframe computers.
A basic type of LAN is a simple peer-to-peer network that a small busi-
ness might use to share files and hardware devices, such as printers. In a
peer-to-peer network, you set up each computer as an independent com-
puter, but you let other computers access specific files on its hard drive or
share its printer. These types of networks have no server. Instead, each
computer is connected to the next machine. Examples of peer-to-peer net-
works include ANts, BitTorrent, StealthNet, Tixati, and Windows 10 Home-
group. Performance of the computers on a peer-to-peer network is usually
slower because one computer is actually sharing the resources of another
computer.
Increasingly, home and small business networks are being set up to con-
nect computers, printers, scanners, and other devices. A person working on
one computer on a home network, for example, can use data and programs
stored on another computer’s hard disk. In addition, several computers on
the network can share a single printer.
FIGURE 6.4
Typical LAN
All network users within an office
building can connect to each other’s
devices for rapid communication.
For instance, a user in research and
development could send a docu-
ment from her computer to be
printed at a printer located in the
desktop publishing center. Most
computer labs employ a LAN to
enable the users to share the use of
high-speed and/or color printers and
plotters as well as to download soft-
ware applications and save files.
Executive computers
and devices
Production center
computers and devices
Marketing and
sales computers
and devices
Research and
development
computers and
devices
Finance and
accounting
computers
and devices
Copy center, printing,
and desktop publishing
computers and devices
personal area network (PAN): A
network that supports the interconnec-
tion of information technology devices
close to one person.
local area network (LAN): A net-
work that connects computer systems
and devices within a small area, such
as an office, home, or several floors in a
building.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 243
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Metropolitan Area Networks
A metropolitan area network (MAN) is a network that connects users and
their computers in a geographical area that spans a campus or city. A MAN
might redefine the many networks within a city into a single larger network
or connect several LANs into a single campus MAN. Often, the MAN is owned
either by a consortium of users or by a single network provider who sells the
service to users. PIONIER is a Polish national research and education network
created to provide high-speed Internet access and to conduct network-based
research. The network connects 21 MANs and 5 high-performance computing
centers using 6,467 km of fiber optic transmission media.6
Wide Area Networks
A wide area network (WAN) is a network that connects large geographic
regions. A WAN might be privately owned or rented and includes public
(shared-users) networks. When you make a long-distance phone call or access
the Internet, you are using a WAN. WANs usually consist of computer equip-
ment owned by the user, together with data communications equipment and
network links provided by various carriers and service providers.
WANs often provide communications across national borders, which
involves national and international laws regulating the electronic flow of data
across international boundaries, often called transborder data flow. Some
countries have strict laws limiting the use of networks and databases, making
normal business transactions such as payroll processing costly, slow, or
extremely difficult.
Client/Server Systems
In client/server architecture, multiple computer platforms are dedicated to
special functions, such as database management, printing, communications,
and program execution. These platforms are called servers. Each server is
accessible by all computers on the network. Servers can be computers of all
sizes; they store both application programs and data files and are equipped
with operating system software to manage the activities of the network. The
server distributes programs and data to the other computers (clients) on the
network as they request them. An application server holds the programs and
data files for a particular application, such as an inventory database. The cli-
ent or the server might do the actual data processing.
A client is any computer (often a user’s personal computer) that sends
messages requesting services from the servers on the network. A client can
converse with many servers concurrently. Consider the example of a user at
a personal computer who initiates a request to extract data that resides in a
database somewhere on the network. A data request server intercepts the
request and determines on which database server the data resides. The
server then formats the user’s request into a message that the database
server will understand. When it receives the message, the database server
extracts and formats the requested data and sends the results to the client.
The database server sends only the data that satisfies a specific query—not
the entire file. When the downloaded data is on the user’s machine, it can
then be analyzed, manipulated, formatted, and displayed by a program that
runs on the user’s personal computer.
Channel Bandwidth
Network professionals consider the capacity of the communications path or
channel when they recommend transmission media for a network. Channel
bandwidth refers to the rate at which data is exchanged, usually measured in
bits per second (bps)—the broader the bandwidth, the more information can
metropolitan area network
(MAN): A network that connects users
and their computers in a geographical
area that spans a campus or city.
wide area network (WAN): A
network that connects large geographic
regions.
client/server architecture: An
approach to computing wherein multi-
ple computer platforms are dedicated to
special functions, such as database
management, printing, communica-
tions, and program execution.
channel bandwidth: The rate at
which data is exchanged, usually
measured in bits per second (bps).
244 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

be exchanged at one time. In the context of Internet access, the term broad-
band communications refers to any high-speed Internet access that is always
on and that is faster than traditional dial-up access. Most organizations need
high bandwidth to accommodate the transaction volume and transmission
speed required to carry out their daily functions.
Communications Media
The communications media selected for a network depends on the amount of
information to be exchanged, the speed at which data must be exchanged, the
level of concern about data privacy, whether the users are stationary or
mobile, and a variety of business requirements. Transmission media can be
divided into two broad categories guided (also called wired) transmission
media, in which communications signals are guided along a solid medium,
and wireless, in which the communications signal is broadcast over airwaves
as a form of electromagnetic radiation.
Guided Transmission Media Types
There are many different guided transmission media types. Table 6.1 summarizes
the guided media types by physical media form. The three most common
guided transmission media types are shown in Figure 6.5.
10-Gigabit Ethernet is a standard for transmitting data at the speed of
10 billion bps for limited distances over high-quality twisted-pair wire. The
10-Gigabit Ethernet cable can be used for the high-speed links that connect
groups of computers or to move data stored in large databases on large com-
puters to stand-alone storage devices.
Chi-X Japan provides investors with an alternative venue for trading in
Tokyo-listed stocks. Its goal is to attract new international investors, in turn,
TABLE 6.1 Guided transmission media types
Media Form
Description
Advantages
Disadvantages
Twisted-pair wire
Twisted pairs of copper wire,
shielded or unshielded; used for
telephone service
Widely available
Limitations on
transmission speed
and distance
Coaxial cable
Inner conductor wire surrounded
by insulation
Cleaner and faster data trans-
mission than twisted-pair wire
More expensive
than twisted-pair
wire
Fiber-optic cable
Many extremely thin strands of
glass bound together in a sheath-
ing; uses light beams to transmit
signals
Diameter of cable is much smal-
ler than coaxial cable; less dis-
tortion of signal; capable of high
transmission rates
Expensive to pur-
chase and install
FIGURE 6.5
Types of guided transmission
media
Common guided transmission media
include twisted-pair wire, coaxial
cable, and fiber-optic cable.
Twisted-pair
wire
Coaxial
cable
Fiber-optic
cable
broadband communications:
High-speed Internet access that is
always on and that is faster than tradi-
tional dial-up access.
Krasowit/Shutterstock.com
Flegere/Shutterstock.com
Galushko Sergey/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 245
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

increasing overall Japanese market volumes, reducing transaction costs, and
improving investment performance.7 The firm implemented 10 Gbps Ethernet
network adapters to upgrade its network and ensure customers minimal trans-
action processing delays.
Wireless Technologies
Wireless communications coupled with the Internet are revolutionizing
how and where we gather and share information, collaborate in teams, lis-
ten to music or watch video, and stay in touch with our families and cow-
orkers while on the road. With wireless capability, a coffee shop can
become our living room and the bleachers at a ballpark can become our
office. The many advantages and freedom provided by wireless communi-
cations are causing many organizations to consider moving to an all-
wireless environment.
Wireless communication is the transfer of information between two or
more points that are not connected by an electrical conductor. All wireless
communications signals are sent within a range of frequencies of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum that represents the entire range of light that exists
from long waves to gamma rays as shown in Figure 6.6.
The propagation of light is similar to waves crossing an ocean. Like any
other wave, light has two fundamental properties that describe it. One is its
frequency, measured in hertz (Hz), which counts the number of waves that
pass by a stationary point in one second. The second fundamental property is
wavelength, which is the distance from the peak of one wave to the peak of
the next. These two attributes are inversely related so the higher the
frequency, the shorter the wavelength.
All wireless communication devices operate in a similar way. A trans-
mitter generates a signal, which contains encoded voice, video, or data at
a specific frequency, that is broadcast into the environment by an
antenna. This signal spreads out in the environment, with only a very
small portion being captured by the antenna of the receiving device,
which then decodes the information. Depending on the distance involved,
the frequency of the transmitted signal, and other conditions, the received
signal can be incredibly weak, perhaps one trillionth of the original signal
strength.
The signals used in wireless networks are broadcast in one of three fre-
quency ranges: microwave, radio, and infrared, as shown in Table 6.2.
Because there are so many competing uses for wireless communica-
tion, strict rules are necessary to prevent one type of transmission from
interfering with the next. And because the spectrum is limited—there are
only so many frequency bands—governments must oversee appropriate
licensing of this valuable resource to facilitate use in all bands. In the
United States, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) decides
which frequencies of the communications spectrum can be used for which
purposes. For example, the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum
between 700 MHz and 2.6 GHz has been allocated for use by mobile
phones. Most of the spectrum in this range has already been allocated for
use. This means that when a wireless company wants to add more spec-
trum to its service to boost its capacity, it may have problems obtaining
the necessary licenses because other companies are already using the
available frequencies.
Some of the more widely used wireless communications options are dis-
cussed next.
Near field communication (NFC) is a very short-range wireless connec-
tivity technology that enables two devices placed within a few inches of each
other to exchange data. With NFC, consumers can swipe their credit cards—
or even their smartphones—within a few inches of NFC point-of-sale
wireless communication: The
transfer of information between two or
more points that are not connected by
an electrical conductor.
near field communication
(NFC): A very short-range wireless
connectivity technology that enables
two devices placed within a few inches
of each other to exchange data.
246 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

terminals to pay for purchases. Apple Pay, the mobile payment and digital
wallet service that lets users make payments using an iPhone, an iPad, or an
Apple Watch–compatible device, uses NFC to communicate between the
user’s device and the point-of-sale terminal.
Many retailers—including Target, Macys, and Walgreens—already have
NFC-based contactless pay terminals in place. Shoppers in these stores can
also use their smartphones and NFC to gain access to loyalty programs to
earn points, view marketing information, and share content and interact with
brands via social media.
Bluetooth is a wireless communications specification that describes how
cell phones, computers, printers, and other electronic devices can be intercon-
nected over distances of 10 to 30 feet at a transmission rate of about 2 Mbps.
FIGURE 6.6
The electromagnetic spectrum
The range of all possible frequencies
of electromagnetic radiation.
Source: https//upload.wikimedia.org
/wikipedia/commons/2/25/Electro
magnetic-Spectrum.svg
1019
Frequency (Hz)
Wavelength
Gamma-rays
1018
1017
1016
1015
1014
1013
1012
1011
1000 MHz
UHF
VHF
7-13
VHF
2-6
FM
500 MHz
100 MHz
1010
109
108
107
106
50 MHz
Long-waves
1000 m
100 m
10 m
1 m
10 cm
1 cm
1000 mm
1mm
100 mm
10 mm
1000 nm
1 mm
100 nm
400 nm
500 nm
600 nm
700 nm
10 nm
1 nm
1 Å
0.1 nm
0.1 Å
AM
Far IR
Thermal IR
Infra-red
Near IR
Visible
Ultraviolet
X-rays
Radio, TV
Microwaves
Radar
Bluetooth: A wireless communica-
tions specification that describes how
cell phones, computers, faxes, printers,
and other electronic devices can be
interconnected over distances of 10 to
30 feet at a rate of about 2 Mbps.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 247
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Using Bluetooth technology, users of multifunctional devices can synchronize
data on their device with information stored in a desktop computer, send or
receive faxes, and print. The Bluetooth G-Shock watch enables you to make a
connection between your watch and your smartphone. With a G-shock watch,
you can control your phone’s music player from the watch and the watch’s
timekeeping functions from your phone.
Wi-Fi is a wireless network brand owned by the Wi-Fi Alliance, which
consists of about 300 technology companies, including AT&T, Dell, Microsoft,
Nokia, and Qualcomm. The alliance exists to improve the interoperability of
wireless local area network products based on the IEEE 802.11 series of com-
munications standards. IEEE stands for the Institute of Electrical and Electron-
ics Engineers, a nonprofit organization and one of the leading standards-
setting organizations. Table 6.3 summarizes several variations of the IEEE
802.11 standard.
In a Wi-Fi wireless network, the user’s computer, smartphone, or other
mobile device has a wireless adapter that translates data into a radio signal
and transmits it using an antenna. A wireless access point, which consists of
a transmitter with an antenna, receives the signal and decodes it. The access
point then sends the information to the Internet over a wired connection.
TABLE 6.2 Frequency ranges used for wireless communications
Technology
Description
Advantages
Disadvantages
Radio frequency
range
Operates in the 3 KHz–
300 MHz range
Supports mobile users;
costs are dropping
Signal is highly susceptible to
interception
Microwave—
terrestrial and satel-
lite frequency range
High-frequency radio signal
(300 MHz–300 GHz) sent
through the atmosphere and
space (often involves com-
munications satellites)
Avoids cost and effort to lay
cable or wires; capable of
high-speed transmission
Must have unobstructed line
of sight between sender and
receiver; signal is highly sus-
ceptible to interception
Infrared frequency
range
Signals in the 300 GHz–
400 THz frequency range
Lets you move, remove, and
install devices without
expensive wiring
Must have unobstructed line of
sight between sender and
receiver; transmission is effec-
tive only for short distances
TABLE 6.3 IEEE 802.11 wireless local area networking standards
Wireless
Networking
Protocol
Maximum Data
Rate per Data
Stream
Comments
IEEE 802.11a
54 Mbps
Transmits at 5 GHz, which means it is incompatible with 802.11b
and 802.11g
IEEE 802.11b
11 Mbps
First widely accepted wireless network standard and transmits at
2.4 GHz; equipment using this protocol may occasionally suffer from
interference from microwave ovens, cordless telephones, and Bluetooth
devices
IEEE 802.11g
54 Mbps
Equipment using this protocol transmits at 2.4 GHz and may
occasionally suffer from interference from microwave ovens, cordless
telephones, and Bluetooth devices
IEEE 802.11n
300 Mbps
Employs multiple input, multiple output (MIMO) technology, which
allows multiple data streams to be transmitted over the same channel
using the same bandwidth that is used for only a single data stream in
802.11a/b/g
IEEE 802.11ac
400 Mbps–1.3 Gbps
An 802.11 standard that provides higher data transmission speeds and
more stable connections; it can transmit at either 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz
Wi-Fi: A medium-range wireless com-
munications technology brand owned
by the Wi-Fi Alliance.
248 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

See Figure 6.7. When receiving data, the wireless access point takes the
information from the Internet, translates it into a radio signal, and sends it
to the device’s wireless adapter. These devices typically come with built-in
wireless transmitters and software to enable them to alert the user to the
existence of a Wi-Fi network. The area covered by one or more intercon-
nected wireless access points is called a “hot spot.” Wi-Fi has proven so pop-
ular that hot spots are popping up in places such as airports, coffee shops,
college campuses, libraries, and restaurants. The availability of free Wi-Fi
within a hotel’s premises has become very popular with business travelers.
Meanwhile, hundreds of cities in the United States have implemented munic-
ipal Wi-Fi networks for use by meter readers and other municipal workers
and to provide Internet access to their citizens and visitors.
Microwave Transmission
Microwave is a high-frequency (300 MHz to 300 GHz) signal sent through the
air. Terrestrial (Earth-bound) microwaves are transmitted by line-of-sight
devices, so the line of sight between the transmitter and receiver must be
unobstructed. Typically, microwave stations are placed in a series—one sta-
tion receives a signal, amplifies it, and retransmits it to the next microwave
transmission tower. Such stations can be located roughly 30 miles apart
before the curvature of the Earth makes it impossible for the towers to “see”
one another. Because they are line-of-sight transmission devices, microwave
dishes are frequently placed in relatively high locations, such as mountains,
towers, or tall buildings.
A communications satellite also operates in the microwave frequency
range. See Figure 6.8. The satellite receives the signal from the Earth station,
amplifies the relatively weak signal, and then rebroadcasts it at a different fre-
quency. The advantage of satellite communications is that satellites can
receive and broadcast over large geographic regions. Problems such as the
curvature of the Earth, mountains, and other structures that block the line-
of-sight microwave transmission make satellites an attractive alternative. Geo-
stationary, low earth orbit, and small mobile satellite stations are the most
common forms of satellite communications.
A geostationary satellite orbits the Earth directly over the equator, approx-
imately 22,300 miles above the Earth, so that it appears stationary. The U.S.
FIGURE 6.7
Wi-Fi network
In a Wi-Fi network, the user’s com-
puter, smartphone, or cell phone has
a wireless adapter that translates
data into a radio signal and transmits
it using an antenna.
Existing wired network
Wireless network
Cable modem/router
Wireless access point
Internet
Data transmitted and received
through airwaves
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 249
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

National Weather Service relies on the Geostationary Operational Environ-
mental Satellite program for weather imagery and quantitative data to support
weather forecasting, severe storm tracking, and meteorological research.
A low earth orbit (LEO) satellite system employs many satellites, each in
an orbit at an altitude of less than 1,000 miles. The satellites are spaced so
that, from any point on the Earth at any time, at least one satellite is in a line
of sight. Iridium Communications provides a global communications network
that spans the entire Earth, using 66 satellites in a near-polar orbit at an alti-
tude of 485 miles. Calls are routed among the satellites to create a reliable
connection between call participants that cannot be disrupted by natural dis-
asters such as earthquakes, tsunamis, or hurricanes that may knock out
ground-based wireless towers and wire- or cable-based networks.8 Every day,
thousands of vessels and tankers traveling the world’s seas and oceans use Iri-
dium’s network to establish reliable global communications to optimize their
daily activities.
4G Wireless Communications
Wireless communications has evolved through four generations of technology
and services. The first generation (1G) of wireless communications standards
originated in the 1980s and was based on analog communications. The
second-generation (2G) networks were fully digital, superseding 1G networks
in the early 1990s. With 2G networks, phone conversations were encrypted,
mobile phone usage was expanded, and short message services (SMS)—or
texting—was introduced. 3G wireless communications supports wireless
voice and broadband speed data communications in a mobile environment at
speeds of 2 to 4 Mbps. Additional capabilities include mobile video, mobile
e-commerce, location-based services, mobile gaming, and the downloading
and playing of music.
4G broadband mobile wireless delivers more advanced versions of
enhanced multimedia, smooth streaming video, universal access, and portabil-
ity across all types of devices; eventually 4G will also make possible world-
wide roaming. 4G can deliver 3 to 20 times the speed of 3G networks for
mobile devices such as smartphones, tablets, and laptops.
Each of the four major U.S. wireless network operators (AT&T, Verizon,
Sprint, and T-Mobile) is rapidly expanding its 4G networks based on the Long
Term Evolution (LTE) standard. Long Term Evolution (LTE) is a standard for
wireless communications for mobile phones based on packet switching, which
is an entirely different approach from the circuit-switching approach employed
FIGURE 6.8
Satellite transmission
Communications satellites are relay
stations that receive signals from one
Earth station and rebroadcast them
to another.
Communications
satellite
Microwave
station
Microwave
station
Earth
Approximately
22,300
miles
Long Term Evolution (LTE): A
standard for wireless communications
for mobile phones based on packet
switching.
250 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

in 3G communications networks. To convert to the LTE standard, carriers must
reengineer their voice call networks.
The biggest benefit of LTE is how quickly a mobile device can connect to
the Internet and how much data it can download or upload in a given amount
of time. LTE makes it reasonable to stream video to your phone, using services
such as Amazon Prime Instant Video, Hulu Plus, Netflix, or YouTube. It also
speeds up Web browsing, with most pages loading in seconds. LTE enables
video calling using services such as Skype or Google Hangouts. LTE’s faster
speed also makes sharing photos and videos from your phone quick and easy.
5G Wireless Communications
A new mobile communications generation has come on the scene about every
10 years since the first 1G system. 5G is a term used to identify the next major
phase of mobile communications standards beyond 4G. No 5G mobile stan-
dard has been formally defined yet, but 5G will bring with it higher data
transmission rates, lower power consumption, higher connect reliability with
fewer dropped calls, increased geographic coverage, and lower infrastructure
costs. If 5G networks meet the goal of a 50 times faster data rate than the
most advanced Wi-Fi networks today, they will be able to stream a two-hour
movie in less than three seconds. Verizon plans to start field trials of 5G tech-
nology by late 2016, with some level of commercial deployment to start by
2017—far sooner than the 2020 time frame that many industry observers
anticipate for the initial adoption of 5G technology.9
Communications Hardware
Networks require various communications hardware devices to operate,
including modems, fax modems, multiplexers, private branch exchanges,
front-end processors, switches, bridges, routers, and gateways. These devices
are summarized in Table 6.4.
Communications Software
A network operating system (NOS) is systems software that controls the
computer systems and devices on a network and allows them to communicate
TABLE 6.4 Common communications devices
Device
Function
Modem
Translates data from a digital form (as it is stored in the computer) into an analog signal that can
be transmitted over ordinary telephone lines
Fax modem
Combines a fax with a modem; facsimile devices, commonly called fax devices, allow businesses
to transmit text, graphs, photographs, and other digital files via standard telephone lines
Multiplexer
Allows several communications signals to be transmitted over a single communications medium
at the same time, thus saving expensive long-distance communications costs
PBX (private branch
exchange)
Manages both voice and data transfer within a building and to outside lines; PBXs can be used
to connect hundreds of internal phone lines to a few outside phone company lines
Front-end processor
Manages communications to and from a computer system serving many people
Switch
Uses the physical device address in each incoming message on the network to determine which
output port it should forward the message to reach another device on the same network
Bridge
Connects one LAN to another LAN where both LANs use the same communications protocol
Router
Forwards data packets across two or more distinct networks toward their destinations through a
process known as routing; often, an Internet service provider (ISP) installs a router in a subscri-
ber’s home that connects the ISP’s network to the network within the home
Gateway
Serves as an entrance to another network, such as the Internet
network operating system
(NOS): Systems software that controls
the computer systems and devices on a
network and allows them to communi-
cate with each other.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 251
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

with each other. The NOS performs similar functions for the network as
operating system software does for a computer, such as memory and task
management and coordination of hardware. When network equipment
(such as printers, plotters, and disk drives) is required, the NOS makes
sure that these resources are used correctly. Linux (used on workstations),
OS X (used on Apple MACs), UNIX (used on servers), and Windows
Server (used on workstations and servers) are common network operating
systems.
Because companies use networks to communicate with customers, busi-
ness partners, and employees, network outages or slow performance can
mean a loss of business. Network management includes a wide range of tech-
nologies and processes that monitor the network and help identify and
address problems before they can create a serious impact.
Software tools and utilities are available for managing networks. With
network-management software, a manager on a networked personal com-
puter can monitor the use of individual computers and shared hardware
(such as printers), scan for viruses, and ensure compliance with software
licenses. Network-management software also simplifies the process of updat-
ing files and programs on computers on the network—a manager can make
changes through a communications server instead of having to visit each indi-
vidual computer. In addition, network-management software protects soft-
ware from being copied, modified, or downloaded illegally. It can also locate
communications errors and potential network problems. Some of the many
benefits of network-management software include fewer hours spent on rou-
tine tasks (such as installing new software), faster response to problems, and
greater overall network control.
Banks use a special form of network-management software to monitor
the performance of their automated teller machines (ATMs). Status messages
can be sent over the network to a central monitoring location to inform sup-
port people about situations such as low cash or receipt paper levels, card
reader problems, and printer paper jams. Once a status message is received,
a service provider or branch location employee can be dispatched to fix the
ATM problem.
Today, most IS organizations use network-management software to
ensure that their network remains up and running and that every network
component and application is performing acceptably. The software enables IS
staff to identify and resolve fault and performance issues before they affect
end users. The latest network-management technology even incorporates
automatic fixes: The network-management system identifies a problem, noti-
fies the IS manager, and automatically corrects the problem before anyone
outside the IS department notices it.
The Covell Group is a small IT consulting group in San Diego that pro-
vides server and Web site monitoring for small- and medium-sized companies.
The firm uses network-monitoring software to watch sensors and remote
probes that track CPU, disk space, and Windows services. Constant monitor-
ing enables the firm to detect if a communications line is down or if there is
a power failure overnight so that everything is up and ready by the start of
the next work day.10
Mobile device management (MDM) software manages and trouble-
shoots mobile devices remotely, pushing out applications, data, patches, and
settings. With the software, a central control group can maintain group poli-
cies for security, control system settings, ensure malware protection is in
place for mobile devices used across the network, and make it mandatory to
use passwords to access the network. In addition to smartphones and tablets,
laptops and desktops are sometimes supported using MDM software as mobile
device management becomes more about basic device management and less
about a specific mobile platform.
network-management
software: Software that enables a
manager on a networked desktop to
monitor the use of individual computers
and shared hardware (such as prin-
ters), scan for viruses, and ensure
compliance with software licenses.
mobile device management
(MDM) software: Software that
manages and troubleshoots mobile
devices remotely, pushing out applica-
tions, data, patches, and settings while
enforcing group policies for security.
252 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Software-Defined Networking (SDN)
A typical network is comprised of hundreds or thousands of network devices
that perform such tasks as routing and switching of data through the network,
providing network access and control, and enabling access to a variety of
applications and services. In today’s current network environment, each net-
work device must be configured individually, usually via manual keyboard
input. For a network of any size, this becomes a labor-intensive and error-
prone effort, making it difficult to change the network so it can meet the
changing needs of the organization. Software-defined networking (SDN) is
an emerging approach to networking that allows network administrators to
manage a network via a controller that does not require physical access to all
the network devices. This approach automates tasks such as configuration
and policy management and enables the network to dynamically respond to
application requirements. As a result, new applications can be made available
sooner, the risk of human error (a major contributor to network downtime) is
reduced, and overall network support and operations costs are reduced.
Google is implementing Andromeda, the underlying software-defined net-
working architecture that will enable Google’s cloud computing services to
scale better, more cheaply and more quickly. With software-defined network-
ing, even though many customers are sharing the same network, they can be
configured and managed independently with their own address management,
firewalls, and access control lists. Google competitors in cloud services like
Microsoft and Amazon also employ software-defined networks.11
Network-Management Software for a University
The Ohio State University has over 58,000 undergraduate students spread across
several major campuses and research centers located around Ohio. Its information
system administrators are considering the use of network-management software
and are evaluating the use of mobile device management software from various
vendors.
Review Questions
1.
What features should the administrators look for in choosing its network-
management software?
2.
What specific benefits would be gained by installing network-management
software?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Should a goal of a mobile device management software implementation be to
reduce the number of information systems support staff dedicated to support
the university’s students, administrators, and faculty? Or should any productiv-
ity gains be applied to providing new services and superior support?
2.
Identify common issues that students may have with the use of their devices
that could be addressed through the use of mobile device management
software.
The Internet and World Wide Web
The Internet has grown rapidly (see Figure 6.9) and is truly international in
scope, with users on every continent—including Antarctica. Although the
United States has high Internet penetration among its population, it does
not constitute the majority of people online. As of November 2015, citizens
of Asian countries make up about 48 percent, Europeans about 18 percent,
software-defined networking
(SDN): An emerging approach to net-
working that allows network adminis-
trators to have programmable central
control of the network via a controller
without requiring physical access to all
the network devices.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 253
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Latin America/Caribbean about 10 percent, and North Americans about
9 percent of all Internet users. China is the country with the most Internet
users, with 674 million—which is more users than the next two countries
combined (India 354 million and United States 280 million).12 Being con-
nected to the Internet provides global economic opportunity to individuals,
businesses, and countries.
The Internet and social media Web sites have emerged as important new
channels for learning about world events, protesting the actions of organiza-
tions and governments, and urging others to support one’s favorite causes or
candidates. For example, some believe that Barack Obama’s effective use of
the Internet and social media provided him with a distinct advantage over his
opponents in the presidential elections of 2008 and 2012.13 In another exam-
ple, Syrian rebels used the Internet to communicate about events within the
country and to provide a useful link to others around the world.14
On the other hand, Internet censorship, the control or suppression of the
publishing or accessing of information on the Internet, is a growing problem.
For example, in May 2015, the Chinese-language version of Wikipedia was
blocked in China.15 The organizations Human Rights Watch and Amnesty Inter-
national allege that the Saudi Arabian government uses malicious spyware to
target activists and it hunts down, silences, and flogs bloggers who criticize the
government.16 In Hungary the government employs fines, licensing, and taxes
to coerce critical media, and it directs state advertising to friendly outlets.17
The ancestor of the Internet was the ARPANET, a project started by the
U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) in 1969. The ARPANET was both an
experiment in reliable networking and a means to link DoD and military
research
contractors,
including
many
universities
doing
military-funded
research. (ARPA stands for the Advanced Research Projects Agency, the
branch of the DoD in charge of awarding grant money. The agency is now
known as DARPA—the added D is for Defense.) The ARPANET was highly
successful, and every university in the country wanted to use it. This wildfire
growth made it difficult to manage the ARPANET, particularly the rapidly
growing number of university sites. So, the ARPANET was broken into two
1,200,000,000
1,00,000,000
800,000,000
600,000,000
400,000,000
200,000,000
0
Jan-94
Jul-94
Jan-95
Jul-95
Jan-96
Jul-96
Jan-97
Jul-97
Jan-98
Jul-98
Jan-99
Jul-99
Jan-00
Jul-00
Jan-01
Jul-01
Jan-02
Jul-02
Jan-03
Jul-03
Jan-04
Jul-04
Jan-05
Jul-05
Jan-06
Jul-06
Jan-07
Jul-07
Jan-08
Jul-08
Jul-09
Jan-09
Jul-10
Jan-10
Jul-11
Jan-11
Jul-12
Jan-12
Jul-13
Jan-13
Jul-14
Jan-14
Jul-15
Jan-15
Number of Internet Domain Servers
Date
FIGURE 6.9
Internet growth: Number of Internet hosts
The number of worldwide Internet users is expected to continue growing.
Source: Data from “ISC Domain Survey,” https://www.isc.org/network/survey/.
254 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

networks: MILNET, which included all military sites, and a new, smaller
ARPANET, which included all the nonmilitary sites. The two networks
remained connected, however, through use of the Internet protocol (IP),
which enables traffic to be routed from one network to another as needed.
All the networks connected to the Internet use IP, so they all can exchange
messages.
How the Internet Works
In the early days of the Internet, the major communications companies
around the world agreed to connect their networks so that users on all the
networks could share information over the Internet. These large communica-
tions companies, called network service providers (NSPs), include Verizon,
Sprint, British Telecom, and AT&T. The cables, routers, switching stations,
communication towers, and satellites that make up these networks are the
hardware over which Internet traffic flows. The combined hardware of these
and other NSPs—the fiber-optic cables that span the globe over land and
under sea—make up the Internet backbone.
The Internet transmits data from one computer (called a host) to another.
See Figure 6.10. If the receiving computer is on a network to which the first
computer is directly connected, it can send the message directly. If the receiv-
ing and sending computers are not directly connected to the same network,
the sending computer relays the message to another computer that can for-
ward it. The message is typically sent through one or more routers to reach
its destination. It is not unusual for a message to pass through several routers
on its way from one part of the Internet to another.
The various communications networks that are linked to form the Internet
work much the same way—they pass data around in chunks called packets,
each of which carries the addresses of its sender and receiver along with
other technical information. The set of rules used to pass packets from one
host to another is the IP protocol. Many other communications protocols are
used in connection with IP. The best known is the Transmission Control Pro-
tocol (TCP). Many people use “TCP/IP” as an abbreviation for the combina-
tion of TCP and IP used by most Internet applications. After a network
following these standards links to the Internet’s backbone, it becomes part of
the worldwide Internet community.
Each computer on the Internet has an assigned address, called its IP
address, that identifies it on the Internet. An IP address is a 64-bit number
that identifies a computer on the Internet. The 64-bit number is typically
FIGURE 6.10
Routing messages over the
Internet
Data is transmitted from one host
computer to another on the Internet.
Router/Gateway
Router/Gateway
Router/Gateway
Router/Gateway
Router/Gateway
Host
computer 1
Host
computer 2
Host
computer 3
Host
computer 4
Internet Protocol (IP): A commu-
nication standard that enables compu-
ters to route communications traffic
from one network to another as
needed.
Internet backbone: One of the
Internet’s high-speed, long-distance
communications links.
IP address: A 64-bit number that
identifies a computer on the Internet.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 255
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

divided into four bytes and translated to decimal; for example, 69.32.133.79.
The Internet is migrating to Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6), which uses
128-bit addresses to provide for many more devices; however, this change is
expected to take years.
Because people prefer to work with words rather than numbers, a system
called the Domain Name System (DNS) was created. Domain names such as www.
cengage.com are mapped to IP addresses such as 69.32.133.79 using the DNS. To
make room for more Web addresses, efforts are underway to increase the number
of available domain names.
A Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is a Web address that specifies the
exact location of a Web page using letters and words that map to an IP
address and a location on the host. The URL gives those who provide infor-
mation over the Internet a standard way to designate where Internet resources
such as servers and documents are located. Consider the URL for Cengage
Learning, http://www.cengage.com/us/.
The “http” specifies the access method and tells your software to access a
file using the Hypertext Transport Protocol. This is the primary method for
interacting with the Internet. In many cases, you don’t need to include http://
in a URL because it is the default protocol. The “www” part of the address sig-
nifies that the address is associated with the World Wide Web service. The
URL www.cengage.com is the domain name that identifies the Internet host
site. The part of the address following the domain name—/us—specifies an
exact location on the host site.
Domain names must adhere to strict rules. They always have at least two
parts, with each part separated by a dot (period). For some Internet
addresses, the far right part of the domain name is the country code, such
as au for Australia, ca for Canada, dk for Denmark, fr for France, de
(Deutschland) for Germany, and jp for Japan. Many Internet addresses have
a code denoting affiliation categories, such as com for business sites and
edu for education sites. Table 6.5 contains a few popular domain affiliation
categories. The far left part of the domain name identifies the host network
or host provider, which might be the name of a university or business.
Other countries use different top-level domain affiliations from the U.S.
ones described in the table.
The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) is
responsible for managing IP addresses and Internet domain names. One of
ICANN’s primary concerns is to make sure that each domain name represents
only one individual or entity—the one that legally registers it. For example, if
your teacher wanted to use www.cengage.com for a course Web site, he or
she would discover that domain name has already been registered by Cen-
gage Learning and is not available. ICANN uses companies called accredited
domain name registrars to handle the business of registering domain names.
TABLE 6.5 Number of domains in U.S. top-level domain affiliations—Winter 2015
Affiliation ID
Affiliation
Number of Hosts
Biz
Business sites
2,428,269
Com
All types of entities including nonprofits, schools, and private
individuals
123,743,892
Edu
Post-secondary educational sites
7,446
Gov
Government sites
5,503
Net
Networking sites
15,805,152
Org
Nonprofit organization sites
10,984,293
Source: Domain Count Statistics for TLDs, http//research.domaintools.com/statistics/tld-counts/.
Uniform Resource Locator
(URL): A Web address that specifies
the exact location of a Web page using
letters and words that map to an IP
address and a location on the host.
256 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

For example, you can visit www.namecheap.com, an accredited registrar, to
find out if a particular name has already been registered. If not, you can regis-
ter the name for around $9 per year. Once you do so, ICANN will not allow
anyone else to use that domain name as long as you pay the yearly fee.
Accessing the Internet
You can connect to the Internet in numerous ways. See Figure 6.11. Which
access method you choose is determined by the size and capability of your
organization or system, your budget, and the services available to you.
Connecting via a LAN Server
This approach is used by businesses and organizations that manage a local area
network (LAN). By connecting a server on the LAN to the Internet using a
router, all users on the LAN are provided access to the Internet. Business LAN
servers are typically connected to the Internet at very fast data rates, sometimes
in the hundreds of Mbps.
Connecting via Internet Service Providers
Companies and residences unable to connect directly to the Internet through
a LAN server must access the Internet through an Internet service provider.
An Internet service provider (ISP) is any organization that provides Internet
access to people. Thousands of organizations serve as ISPs, ranging from uni-
versities that make the Internet available to students and faculty to small Inter-
net businesses to major communications giants such as AT&T and Comcast.
To connect to the Internet through an ISP, you must have an account with
the service provider (for which you usually pay) along with software (such as
a browser) and devices (such as a computer or smartphone) that support a
connection via TCP/IP.
Modem
Modem
Cell Tower 
4. Cell Phone
I
n
t
e
r
n
e
t
1. Connect via a
LAN server
Router/Gateway
Router/Gateway
Router/Gateway
Router/Gateway
2. Connect via dial-up
3. Connect via high-speed service
Host computer
for an online
service
LAN
LAN
FIGURE 6.11
Several ways to access the Internet
Users can access the Internet in several ways, including using a LAN server, telephone lines, a high-
speed service, or a wireless network.
Internet service provider (ISP):
Any organization that provides Internet
access to people.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 257
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Perhaps the least expensive but also slowest connection provided by ISPs
is a dial-up connection. A dial-up Internet connection uses a modem and stan-
dard phone line to “dial up” and connect to the ISP server. Dial-up is consid-
ered the slowest of connections. A dial-up connection also ties up the phone
line so that it is unavailable for voice calls. While dial-up was originally the
only way to connect to the Internet from home, it is rapidly becoming
replaced by high-speed services.
Several high-speed Internet services are available for home and business.
They include cable modem connections from cable television companies, DSL
connections from phone companies, and satellite connections from satellite
television companies.
Wireless Connection
In addition to connecting to the Internet through wired systems such as
phone lines and fiber optic cables, wireless Internet service over cellular and
Wi-Fi networks has become common. Thousands of public Wi-Fi services are
available in coffee shops, airports, hotels, and elsewhere, where Internet
access is provided free, for an hourly rate, or for a monthly subscription fee.
Wi-Fi has even made its way into aircraft, allowing business travelers to be
productive during air travel by accessing email and corporate networks.
Cell phone carriers also provide Internet access for smartphones, note-
books, and tablets. The 4G mobile phone services rival wired high-speed
connections enjoyed at home and work. Sprint, Verizon, AT&T, and other
popular carriers are working to bring 4G service to subscribers, beginning in
large metropolitan areas as shown in Figure 6.12.
VERIZON 4G LTE COVERAGE
FIGURE 6.12
Verizon 4G LTE Coverage
While Verizon’s 4G LTE coverage is extensive, there are still vast expanses where there is no coverage.
Source: Verizon 4G LTE Coverage, http://www.bing.com/images/search?q=verizon+4g+coverage+2016&view=detailv2&&id=C8AA6A1F887
C24A96743E0CC64307E5D5E5BF96A&selectedIndex=7&ccid=SAETURq2&simid=608035862426485414&thid=OIP.
M480113511ab6e162480a92e07aeff074o0&ajaxhist=0.
258 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

How the Web Works
The World Wide Web was developed by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN, the Euro-
pean Organization for Nuclear Research in Geneva. He originally conceived
of it as an internal document-management system. From this modest begin-
ning, the Web has grown to become a primary source of news and informa-
tion, an indispensable conduit for commerce, and a popular hub for social
interaction, entertainment, and communication.
While the terms Internet and Web are often used interchangeably, techni-
cally, the two are different technologies. The Internet is the infrastructure on
which the Web exists. The Internet is made up of computers, network hard-
ware such as routers and fiber-optic cables, software, and the TCP/IP proto-
cols. The World Wide Web (Web), on the other hand, consists of server and
client software, the hypertext transfer protocol (http), standards, and markup
languages that combine to deliver information and services over the Internet.
The Web was designed to make information easy to find and organize. It
connects billions of documents, called Web pages, stored on millions of ser-
vers around the world. Web pages are connected to each other using hyper-
links, specially denoted text or graphics on a Web page, that, when clicked,
open a new Web page containing related content. Using hyperlinks, users can
jump between Web pages stored on various Web servers—creating the illu-
sion of interacting with one big computer. Because of the vast amount of
information available on the Web and the wide variety of media, the Web has
become the most popular means of accessing information in the world today.
In short, the Web is a hyperlink-based system that uses the client/server
model. It organizes Internet resources throughout the world into a series of
linked files, called pages, which are accessed and viewed using Web client soft-
ware called a Web browser. Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, Microsoft Edge,
Internet Explorer, Apple Safari, and Opera are popular Web browsers. See
Figure 6.13. A collection of pages on one particular topic, accessed under one
Web domain, is called a Web site. The Web was originally designed to support
formatted text and pictures on a page. It has evolved to support many more
types of information and communication including user interactivity, animation,
and video. Web plug-ins help provide additional features to standard Web sites.
Adobe Flash and Real Player are examples of Web plug-ins.
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) is the standard page description
language for Web pages. HTML is defined by the World Wide Web Consortium
FIGURE 6.13
Google Chrome
Web browsers such as Google
Chrome let you access Internet
resources such as email and other
online applications.
hyperlink: Highlighted text or gra-
phics in a Web document that, when
clicked, opens a new Web page con-
taining related content.
Web browser: Web client software—
such as Chrome, Edge, Firefox, Inter-
net Explorer, and Safari—used to view
Web pages.
Hypertext Markup Language
(HTML): The standard page descrip-
tion language for Web pages.
Courtesy of Google
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 259
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

(referred to as “W3C”) and has developed through numerous revisions. It is
currently in its fifth revision—HTML5. HTML tells the browser how to display
font characteristics, paragraph formatting, page layout, image placement, hyper-
links, and the content of a Web page. HTML uses tags, which are codes that
tell the browser how to format the text or graphics as a heading, list, or body
text, for example. Web site creators “mark up” a page by placing HTML tags
before and after one or more words. For example, to have the browser display
a sentence as a heading, you place the <h1> tag at the start of the sentence
and an </h1> tag at the end of the sentence. When that page is viewed in a
browser, the sentence is displayed as a heading. HTML also provides tags to
import objects stored in files—such as photos, graphics, audio, and movies—into
a Web page. In short, a Web page is made up of three components: text, tags, and
references to files. The text is your Web page content, the tags are codes that
mark the way words will be displayed, and the references to files insert photos
and media into the Web page at specific locations. All HTML tags are enclosed in
a set of angle brackets (< and >), such as <h2>. The closing tag has a forward
slash in it, such as </b> for closing bold. Consider the following text and tags.
Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup language for Web
documents containing structured information, including words and pictures.
XML does not have a predefined tag set. With HTML, for example, the <hl>
tag always means a first-level heading. The content and formatting are con-
tained in the same HTML document. XML Web documents contain the content
of a Web page. The formatting of the content is contained in a style sheet. A
few typical instructions in XML follow:
<book>
<chapter>Hardware</chapter>
<topic>Input Devices</topic>
<topic>Processing and Storage Devices</topic>
<topic>Output Devices</topic>
</book>
A Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) is a file or portion of an HTML file that
defines the visual appearance of content in a Web page. Using CSS is conve-
nient because you only need to define the technical details of the page’s
appearance once, rather than in each HTML tag. CSS uses special HTML tags to
globally define characteristics for a variety of page elements as well as how
those elements are laid out on the Web page. Rather than having to specify a
font for each occurrence of an element throughout a document, formatting can
be specified once and applied to all occurrences. CSS styles are often defined
in a separate file and then can be applied to many pages on a Web site.
For example, the visual appearance of the preceding XML content could
be contained in the following style sheet:
chapter (font-size 18pt; color blue; font-weight bold; display
block; font-family Arial; margin-top 10pt; margin-left 5pt)
topic (font-size 12pt; color red; font-style italic; display
block; font-family Arial; margin-left 12pt)
This style sheet specifies that the chapter title “Hardware” is displayed on
the Web page in a large Arial font (18 points). “Hardware” will also appear in
bold blue text. The “Input Devices” title will appear in a smaller Arial font
(12 points) and italic red text.
XML is extremely useful for organizing Web content and making data
easy to find. Many Web sites use CSS to define the design and layout of Web
pages, XML to define the content, and HTML to join the design (CSS) with
the content (XML). See Figure 6.14. This modular approach to Web design
allows Web site developers to change the visual design without affecting the
content and to change the content without affecting the visual design.
tag: A code that tells the Web browser
how to format text—as a heading, as a
list, or as body text—and whether
images, sound, and other elements
should be inserted.
Extensible Markup Language
(XML): The markup language
designed to transport and store data on
the Web.
Cascading Style Sheet (CSS): A
markup language for defining the visual
design of a Web page or group of
pages.
260 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Web Programming Languages
Many of the services offered on the Web are delivered through the use of pro-
grams and scripts. A Web program may be something as simple as a menu
that expands when you click it or as complicated as a full-blown spreadsheet
application. Web applications may run on a Web server, delivering the results
of the processing to the user, or they may run directly on a client, such as a
user’s PC. These two categories are commonly referred to as server-side and
client-side software.
JavaScript is a popular programming language for client-side applications.
Using JavaScript, you can create interactive Web pages that respond to user
actions. JavaScript can be used to validate data entry in a Web form, to dis-
play photos in a slideshow style, to embed simple computer games in a Web
page, and to provide a currency conversion calculator. Java is a programming
language from Sun Microsystems based on the Cþþ programming language,
which allows small programs, called applets, to be embedded within an
HTML document. When the user clicks the appropriate part of an HTML page
to retrieve an applet from a Web server, the applet is downloaded onto the
client workstation where it begins executing. Unlike other programs, Java
software can run on any type of computer. It can be used to develop client-
side or server-side applications. Programmers use Java to make Web pages
come alive, adding splashy graphics, animation, and real-time updates.
ASP.NET, C, Cþþ, Perl, PHP, and Python are among other widely used
client-side programming languages.
FIGURE 6.14
XML, CSS, and HTML
Today’s Web sites are created using
XML to define content, CSS to define
the visual style, and HTML to put it all
together.
CSS File
-Fonts
-Colors
-Layout
XML File
-Content
HTML  File
CSS+ XML
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 261
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Web Services
Web services consist of standards and tools that streamline and simplify com-
munication among Web sites and make it simpler to develop and use the
Web for business and personal purposes. The key to Web services is XML.
Just as HTML was developed as a standard for formatting Web content into
Web pages, XML is used within a Web page to describe and transfer data
between Web service applications.
Internet companies, including Amazon, eBay, and Google, are now using
Web services.
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is the basic infrastructure that Amazon
employs to make the contents of its huge online catalog available to other
Web sites or software applications. Airbnb is an online marketplace that
enables property owners and travelers to interact for the purpose of renting
distinctive vacation spaces in more than 34,000 cities in 190 countries. Shortly
after Airbnb began operations, it migrated its cloud computing functions
to AWS, which distributes incoming traffic to ensure high availability and
fast response time. AWS also allows Airbnb to store backups and static
files, including 10 TB of user pictures, and to monitor all of its server
resources.18
Developing Web Content and Applications
If you need to create a Web site, you have lots of options. You can hire some-
one to design and build it, or you can do it yourself. If you do it yourself, you
can use an online service to create the Web pages, use a Web page creation
software tool, or use a plain text editor to create the site. The software
includes features that allow the developer to work directly with the HTML
code or to use auto-generated code. Web development software also helps
the designer keep track of all files in a Web site and the hyperlinks that con-
nect them.
Popular tools for creating Web pages and managing Web sites include
Adobe Dreamweaver, RapidWeaver (for Mac developers), and Nvu (pro-
nounced n-view). See Figure 6.15.
FIGURE 6.15
Creating Web pages
Nvu makes Web design nearly as
easy as using a word processor.
Source: Nvu Tutorial: by Tim VanSlyke at
http://faculty.chemeketa.edu/tvanslyk/com
puterskills/tutorials/nvu_tutorial.pdf.
262 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Many products make it easy to develop Web content and interconnect
Web services. Microsoft, for example, provides a development and Web
services platform called .NET, which allows developers to use various pro-
gramming languages to create and run programs, including those for the
Web. The .NET platform also includes a rich library of programming code to
help build XML Web applications. Other popular Web development platforms
include JavaServer Pages, Microsoft ASP.NET, and Adobe ColdFusion.
After you create Web pages, your next step is to place or publish the con-
tent on a Web server. Popular publishing options include using ISPs, free
sites, and Web hosting services. Web hosting services provide space on their
Web servers for people and businesses that don’t have the financial resources,
time, or skills to host their own Web sites. A Web host can charge $15 or
more per month, depending on services. Some Web hosting sites include
domain name registration, Web authoring software, activity reporting, and
Web site monitoring. Some ISPs also provide limited storage space, typically
1 to 6 megabytes, as part of their monthly fee. If more disk space is needed,
additional fees are charged. Free sites offer limited space for a Web site. In
return, free sites often require the user to view advertising or agree to other
terms and conditions.
Some Web developers are creating programs and procedures to combine
two or more Web applications into a new service, called a mashup—named
after the process of mixing two or more hip-hop songs into one song. Map
applications such as Google Maps provide tool kits that allow them to be
combined with other Web applications. For example, Google Maps can be
used with Twitter to display the location where various tweets were posted.
Likewise, Google Maps combined with Flickr can overlay photos of specific
geographic locations.
Internet and Web Applications
The variety of Internet and Web applications available to individuals and
organizations around the world is vast and ever expanding. Using the Inter-
net, entrepreneurs can start online companies and thrive. For example,
Aaron Goldstein and Colin Hill met at the University of Pennsylvania’s Whar-
ton School. At the time, Hill was battling Hodgkin’s lymphoma and undergo-
ing chemotherapy. It was necessary for him to monitor his temperature
constantly to avoid infections while his immune system was weakened.
Although his temperature would be normal when he fell asleep, Hill often
woke up during the night with a high fever and had to be rushed to inten-
sive care. He became exasperated with his inability to track his temperature
continuously and frustrated that his doctor couldn’t monitor him remotely.
So Goldstein and Hill set out to find a solution. After two years and an
investment of a few hundred thousand dollars, they developed Fever Smart,
a small electronic monitor worn under the armpit that sends temperature
readings to a relay device, which forwards the data to Fever Smart’s servers
and, finally, to a smartphone or other device. Using a smartphone or any
Internet-connected device, a Fever Smart user, be it a parent or healthcare
provider, can constantly monitor the patient’s temperature in real time and
even receive alerts when the patient’s temperature begins to rise or reaches
unsafe levels.19
Web 2.0 and the Social Web
Over the years, the Web has evolved from a one-directional resource where
users only obtain information to a two-directional resource where users
obtain and contribute information. Consider Web sites such as YouTube,
Wikipedia, and Facebook as just a few examples. The Web has also grown
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 263
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

in power to support full-blown software applications such as Google Docs
and is becoming a computing platform itself. These two major trends in
how the Web is used and perceived have created dramatic changes in how
people, businesses, and organizations use the Web, creating a paradigm
shift to Web 2.0.
The original Web—Web 1.0—provided a platform for technology-savvy
developers and the businesses and organizations that hired them to publish
information for the general public to view. Web sites such as YouTube and
Flickr allow users to share video and photos with other people, groups, and
the world. Microblogging sites such as Twitter allow people to post thoughts
and ideas throughout the day for friends to read. See Figure 6.16.
Social networking Web sites provide Web-based tools for users to share
information about themselves and to find, meet, and converse with other
members. Instagram is a popular social networking service through which
users can share photos and videos—either publicly or with a set group of
friends. Another social network, LinkedIn, is designed for professional use to
assist its members with creating and maintaining valuable professional con-
nections. Ning provides tools for Web users to create their own social net-
works dedicated to a topic or interest.
Social networks have become very popular for finding old friends,
staying in touch with current friends and family, and making new friends.
Besides their personal value, these networks provide a wealth of consumer
information and opportunities for businesses as well. Some businesses are
including social networking features in their workplaces.
The use of social media in business is called Enterprise 2.0. Enterprise 2.0
applications, such as Salesforce’s Chatter, Jive Software’s Engage Dialog, and
Yammer, enable employees to create business wikis, support social network-
ing, perform blogging, and create social bookmarks to quickly find informa-
tion. Tyco, a fire protection and security company, recently went through a
major restructuring, changing from a conglomerate of holding companies to a
united global enterprise with more than 69,000 employees in 50 countries.
Throughout its transition, Tyco relied on Yammer rather than email to educate
its workforce on the differences between the old Tyco and the new Tyco and
to increase employee engagement across the company.20
Not everyone is happy with social networking sites, however. Employers
might use social networking sites to get personal information about you.
FIGURE 6.16
Flickr
Flickr allows users to share photos
with other people around the world.
Source: www.flickr.com
Web 2.0: The Web as a computing
platform that supports software appli-
cations and the sharing of information
among users.
264 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Some people worry that their privacy will be invaded or their personal infor-
mation used without their knowledge or consent.
News
The Web is a powerful tool for keeping informed about local, state, national,
and global news. It has an abundance of special-interest coverage and pro-
vides the capacity to deliver deeper analysis of the subject matter. Text and
photos are supported by the HTML standard. Video (sometimes called a Web-
cast) and audio are provided in a browser through plug-in technology and in
podcasts.
As traditional news sources migrate to the Web, new sources are emerg-
ing from online companies. News Web sites from Google, Yahoo!, Digg, and
Newsvine provide popular or interesting stories from a variety of news
sources. In a trend some refer to as social journalism or citizen journalism,
ordinary citizens are more involved in reporting the news than ever before.
Although social journalism provides important news not available elsewhere,
its sources may not be as reliable as mainstream media sources. It is also
sometimes difficult to discern news from opinion.
Education and Training
Today, institutions and organizations at all levels provide online education
and training, which can be accessed via PCs, tablets, and smartphones. Kahn
Academy, for example, provides free online training and learning in econom-
ics, math, banking and money, biology, chemistry, history, and many other
subjects.21 NPower helps nonprofit organizations, schools, and individuals
develop information system skills. The nonprofit organization provides train-
ing to hundreds of disadvantaged young adults through a 22-week training
program that can result in certification from companies such as Microsoft and
Cisco.22
High school and college students are using mobile devices to read elec-
tronic textbooks instead of carrying heavy printed textbooks to class. And
educational support products, such as Blackboard, provide an integrated Web
environment that includes virtual chat for class members; a discussion group
for posting questions and comments; access to the class syllabus and agenda,
student grades, and class announcements; and links to class-related material.
Conducting classes over the Web with no physical class meetings is called dis-
tance learning.
Job Information
The Web is also an excellent source of job-related information. People looking
for their first jobs or seeking information about new job opportunities can
find a wealth of information online. Search engines, such as Google or Bing
(discussed next), can be a good starting point for searching for specific com-
panies or industries. You can use a directory on Yahoo’s home page, for
example, to explore industries and careers. Most medium and large compa-
nies have Web sites that list open positions, salaries, benefits, and people to
contact for further information. The IBM Web site, www.ibm.com, has a link
to “Careers.” When you click this link, you can find information on jobs with
IBM around the world. In addition, several sites specialize in helping you
find job information and even apply for jobs online, including www.linkedin
.com (see Figure 6.17), www.monster.com, and www.careerbuilder.com.
Search Engines and Web Research
A search engine is a valuable tool that enables you to find information on the
Web by specifying words or phrases known as keywords, which are related to
a topic of interest. You can also use operators such as AND, OR, and NOT for
more precise search results.
search engine: A valuable tool that
enables you to find information on the
Web by specifying words that are key to
a topic of interest, known as keywords.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 265
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The search engine market is dominated by Google. Other popular search
engines include Yahoo! Search, Bing, Ask, Dogpile, and China’s Baidu.
Google has taken advantage of its market dominance to expand into other
Web-based services, most notably email, scheduling, maps, social networking,
Web-based applications, and mobile device software. Search engines like
Google often have to modify how they display search results, depending on
pending litigation from other Internet companies and government scrutiny,
such as antitrust investigations.
The Bing search engine has attempted to innovate with its design. Bing
refers to itself as a decision engine because it attempts to minimize the
amount of information that it returns in its searches that is not useful or perti-
nent. Bing also includes media—music, videos, and games—in its search
results. See Figure 6.18.
Savvy Web site operators know that the search engine results are tools
that can draw visitors to certain Web sites. Many businesses invest in search
engine optimization (SEO)—a process for driving traffic to a Web site by
using techniques that improve the site’s ranking in search results. Normally,
when a user gets a list of results from a Web search, the links listed highest
on the first page of search results have a far greater chance of being clicked.
SEO professionals, therefore, try to get the Web sites of their businesses
to be listed with as many appropriate keywords as possible. They study the
algorithms that search engines use, and then they alter the contents of their
FIGURE 6.17
LinkedIn jobs listing
LinkedIn and many other Web sites
specialize in helping people get
information about jobs and apply for
jobs online.
Source: LinkedIn
FIGURE 6.18
Microsoft Bing decision
engine
Microsoft calls its search engine a
decision engine to distinguish it from
other search software.
search engine optimization
(SEO): A process for driving traffic to a
Web site by using techniques that
improve the site’s ranking in search
results.
Microsoft product screenshots used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
266 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Web pages to improve the page’s chance of being ranked number one. SEO
professionals use Web analytics software to study detailed statistics about visi-
tors to their sites.
Search engines offer just one option for performing research on the Web.
Libraries typically provide access to online catalogs as well as links to public
and sometimes private research databases on the Web. Online research data-
bases allow visitors to search for information in thousands of journal, magazine,
and newspaper articles. Information database services are valuable because
they offer the best in quality and convenience. They conveniently provide full-
text articles from reputable sources over the Web. College and public libraries
typically subscribe to many databases to support research. One of the most
popular private databases is LexisNexis Academic Universe. See Figure 6.19.
Instant Messaging
Instant messaging is online, real-time communication between two or more
people who are connected via the Internet. With instant messaging, partici-
pants build contact lists of people they want to chat with. Some applications
allow you to see which of your contacts are currently logged on to the Inter-
net and available to chat. If you send messages to one of your contacts, that
message appears within the messaging app on a smartphone or other mobile
device, or, for those working on PCs, the message opens in a small dialog
box on the recipient’s computer. Although chat typically involves exchanging
text messages with one other person, many messaging apps allow for group
chats. And today’s instant messaging software supports not only text messages
but also the sharing of images, videos, files, and voice communications. Popu-
lar instant messaging services include Facebook Messenger, KIK, Instagram,
Skype, Snapchat, WhatsApp, and WeChat. It is estimated that mobile opera-
tors lost $23 billion in 2012 alone as teens shifted away from texting over cel-
lular networks in favor of communicating with their friends over the Internet
using instant messaging apps.23
Instant messaging: The online,
real-time communication between two
or more people who are connected via
the Internet.
FIGURE 6.19
LexisNexis
At LexisNexis Academic Universe,
you can search the news, legal
cases, company information, peo-
ple, or a combination of categories.
Source: www.lexisnexis.com
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 267
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Microblogging, Status Updates, and News Feeds
Referred to as a microblogging service, Twitter is a Web application that
allows users to send short text updates (up to 140 characters) from a smart-
phone or a Web browser to their Twitter followers. While Twitter has been
hugely successful for personal use, many businesses are finding value in the
service as well. Business people use Twitter to stay in touch with associates
by sharing their location and activities throughout the day. Businesses also
find Twitter to be a rich source of consumer sentiment that can be tapped to
improve marketing, customer relations, and product development. Many busi-
nesses have a presence on Twitter, dedicating personnel to communicate with
customers by posting announcements and reaching out to individual users.
Village Books, an independent bookstore in Bellingham, Washington, uses
Twitter to build relationships with its customers and to make them feel part
of their community.
The popularity of Twitter has caused social networks, such as Face-
book, LinkedIn, and Tumblr, to include Twitter-like news or blog post
feeds. Previously referred to as Status Updates, Facebook users share their
thoughts and activities with their friends by posting messages to Face-
book’s News Feed.
Conferencing
Some Internet technologies support real-time online conferencing. Partici-
pants dial into a common phone number to share a multiparty phone conver-
sation and, in many cases, live video of the participants. The Internet has
made it possible for those involved in teleconferences to share computer
desktops. Using services such as WebEx or GoToMeeting, conference partici-
pants log on to common software that allows them to broadcast their com-
puter display to the group. This ability is quite useful for presenting with
PowerPoint, demonstrating software, training, or collaborating on documents.
Participants verbally communicate by phone or PC microphone. Some confer-
encing software uses Webcams to broadcast video of the presenter and group
participants. The Addison Fire Protection District provides professional fire
protection and paramedic services to the 35,000 residents of Addison, Illinois.
The district uses GoToMeeting to enable its employees to attend training and
to support chief-to-chief meetings without requiring personnel to leave their
assigned stations.24
Telepresence takes videoconferencing to the ultimate level. Telepresence
systems, such as those from Cisco and Polycom, use high-resolution video
and audio with high-definition displays to make it appear that conference par-
ticipants are actually sitting around a table. Participants enter a telepresence
studio where they sit at a table facing display screens that show other partici-
pants in other locations. Cameras and microphones collect high-quality video
and audio at all locations and transmit them over high-speed network connec-
tions to provide an environment that replicates actual physical presence. Doc-
ument cameras and computer software are used to share views of computer
screens and documents with all participants.
You don’t need to be a big business to enjoy the benefits of video conver-
sations. Free software is available to make video chat easy to use for anyone
with a computer, a Webcam, and a high-speed Internet connection. Online
applications such as Google Voice support video connections between Web
users. For spontaneous, random video chat with strangers, you can go to the
Chatroulette Web site. Software, such as FaceTime and Skype, provide
computer-to-computer video chat so users can speak to each other face-
to-face. In addition to offering text, audio, and video chat on computers and
mobile devices, Facetime and Skype offer video phone service over Internet-
connected TVs. Recent Internet-connected sets from Panasonic and Samsung
268 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ship with the Skype software preloaded. You attach a Webcam to your TV to
have a video chat from your sofa.
Blogging and Podcasting
A Web log, typically called a blog, is a Web site that people and businesses
use to share their observations, experiences, and opinions on a wide range
of topics. The community of blogs and bloggers is often called the blogo-
sphere. A blogger is a person who creates a blog, whereas blogging refers
to the process of placing entries on a blog site. A blog is like a journal.
When people post information to a blog, it is placed at the top of the blog
page. Blogs can include links to external information and an area for com-
ments submitted by visitors. Many organizations launch blogs as a way to
communicate with customers and generate new business. Video content can
also be placed on the Internet using the same approach as a blog. This is
often called a video log or vlog.
A podcast is an audio broadcast you can listen to over the Internet. The
name podcast originated from Apple’s iPod combined with the word broad-
cast. A podcast is like an audio blog. Using PCs, recording software, and
microphones, you can record podcast programs and place them on the Inter-
net. Apple’s iTunes provides free access to tens of thousands of podcasts,
which are sorted by topic and searchable by key word. See Figure 6.20. After
you find a podcast, you can download it to your PC (Windows or Mac), to an
MP3 player such as an iPod, or to any smartphone or tablet. You can also sub-
scribe to podcasts using RSS software included in iTunes and other digital
audio software.
Online Media and Entertainment
Like news and information, all forms of media and entertainment have fol-
lowed their audiences online. Music, movies, television program episodes,
FIGURE 6.20
Podcasts
iTunes and other sites provide free
access to tens of thousands of
podcasts.
Source: www.learnoutloud.com
Web log (blog): A Web site that
people and businesses use to share
their observations, experiences, and
opinions on a wide range of topics.
podcast: An audio broadcast you can
listen to over the Internet.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 269
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

user-generated videos, e-books, and audio books are all available online to
download and purchase or stream.
Content streaming is a method of transferring large media files over the
Internet so that the data stream of voice and pictures plays more or less con-
tinuously as the file is being downloaded. For example, rather than wait for
an entire 5 MB video clip to download before they can play it, users can
begin viewing a streamed video as it is being received. Content streaming
works best when the transmission of a file can keep up with the playback of
the file.
Music
The Internet and the Web have made music more accessible than
ever, with artists distributing their songs through online radio, subscription
services, and download services. Spotify, Pandora, Napster, and Google Play
Music are just a few examples of Internet music sites. Rhapsody Interna-
tional has more than 3 million subscribers globally for its premium music
services, including Napster, Rhapsody, and its Internet radio service, Rhap-
sody unRadio.25 See Figure 6.21. Internet music has even helped sales of
classical music by Mozart, Beethoven, and others. Internet companies,
including Facebook, are starting to make music, movies, and other digital
content available on their Web sites. Facebook, for example, allows online
music companies, such as Spotify and Rdio, to post music-related news on
its Web site.
Apple’s iTunes was one of the first online music services to find success.
Microsoft, Amazon, Walmart, and other retailers also sell music online. Down-
loaded music may include digital rights management (DRM) technology that
prevents or limits the user’s ability to make copies or to play the music on
multiple players.
Podcasts are yet another way to access music on the Web. Many indepen-
dent artists provide samples of their music through podcasts. Podcast Alley
includes podcasts from unsigned artists.
Movies, Video, and Television
Television and movies are expanding to the
Web in leaps and bounds. Online services such as Amazon Instant Video,
Hulu, and Netflix provide television programming from hundreds of provi-
ders, including most mainstream television networks. Walmart’s acquisition of
Vudu has allowed the big discount retailer to successfully get into the Internet
movie business. Increasingly, TV networks offer apps for streaming TV con-
tent to tablets and other mobile devices. Some TV networks charge viewers to
watch episodes of their favorite shows online. The Roku LT Streaming Media
Box connects wirelessly to your TV and streams TV shows and movies from
FIGURE 6.21
Rhapsody
Rhapsody provides streaming music
by subscription.
Source: rhapsody.com
content streaming: A method for
transferring large media files over the
Internet so that the data stream of voice
and pictures plays more or less contin-
uously as the file is being downloaded.
270 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

online sources such as Amazon Instant, Crackle, Disney, Hulu, Netflix, Pan-
dora, and Xfinity TV.
Popcorn Time is a free program that uses peer-to-peer networking to
download movies and TV programs. However, the software explicitly states
that its users may be violating copyright law in their country. And indeed,
Voltage Pictures has filed mass lawsuits against people who downloaded The
Hurt Locker and Dallas Buyers Club. While these lawsuits aren’t always suc-
cessful, they do create a risk for users who don’t anonymize their activity
through a VPN service.26
No discussion of Internet video would be complete without mentioning
YouTube. YouTube supports the online sharing of user-created videos.
YouTube videos tend to be relatively short and cover a wide range of cate-
gories from the nonsensical to college lectures. See Figure 6.22. It is esti-
mated that 100 hours of video are uploaded to YouTube every minute and
that over 6 billion hours of video are watched each month on YouTube.
YouTube reaches more U.S. adults in the 18 to 34 age category than any
cable network.27 Other video-streaming sites include AOL Video, Metacafe,
and Vimeo. As more companies create and post videos to Web sites like
YouTube, some IS departments are creating a new position—video content
manager.
Online Games and Entertainment
Video games have become a huge industry
with worldwide annual revenue projected to exceed $100 billion by 2017.28
Zynga, a fast-growing Internet company, sells virtual animals and other virtual
items for games, such as FarmVille. The company, for example, sells a clown
pony with colorful clothes for about $5. Zynga has a VIP club for people that
spend a lot on virtual items it offers for sale. Some Internet companies also
sell food for virtual animals. People can feed and breed virtual animals and
sell their offspring. The market for online gaming is very competitive and con-
stantly changing. After Google included online games on its Web site, Face-
book updated its online gaming offerings. Many video games are available
online. They include single-user, multiuser, and massively multiuser games.
The Web offers a multitude of games for all ages, including role-playing
games, strategy games, and simulation games.
FIGURE 6.22
YouTube EDU
YouTube EDU provides thousands of
educational videos from hundreds of
universities.
Source: youtube.com/edu
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 271
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Game consoles such as the PlayStation, Wii, and Xbox provide multi-
player options for online gaming over the Internet. Subscribers can play with
or against other subscribers in 3D virtual environments. They can even talk to
each other using a microphone headset.
Shopping Online
Shopping on the Web can be convenient, easy, and cost effective. You can
buy almost anything online, from books and clothing to cars and sports
equipment. Groupon, for example, offers discounts at restaurants, spas, auto
repair shops, music performances, and almost any other product or service
offered in your area or city. Revenues for Groupon exceeded $3.1 billion in
2015.29
Other online companies offer different services. Dell and many other
computer retailers provide tools that allow shoppers to specify every aspect
and component of a computer system to purchase. ResumePlanet.com would
be happy to create your professional résumé. AmazonFresh, Instacart, and
Peapod are all willing to deliver groceries to your doorstep. Products and ser-
vices abound online.
Many online shopping options are available to Web users. Online versions
of retail stores often provide access to products that may be unavailable in
local stores. JCPenney, Target, Walmart, and many others carry only a per-
centage of their inventory in their retail stores; the other inventory is available
online. To add to their other conveniences, many Web sites offer free
shipping and pickup for returned items that don’t fit or otherwise meet a cus-
tomer’s needs.
Web sites such as www.mySimon.com, www.DealTime.com, www.Price
SCAN.com, www.PriceGrabber.com, and www.NexTag.com provide product
price quotations from numerous online retailers to help you to find the best
deal. Apps such as BuyVia, Purchx, RedLaser, and Shop Savvy enable users
to compare prices at national and local outlets and lets you set up alerts
(including location-based) for products. At a store and unsure if the price on
the shelf is the lowest you can find? Use the UPC barcode scanner to get an
answer on the spot.
Online clearinghouses, Web auctions, and marketplaces offer a platform
for businesses and individuals to sell their products and belongings. Online
clearinghouses, such as www.uBid.com, provide a method for manufacturers
to liquidate stock and for consumers to find a good deal. Outdated or over-
stocked items are put on the virtual auction block and users bid on the items.
The highest bidder when the auction closes gets the merchandise—often for
less than 50 percent of the advertised retail price.
The most popular online auction or marketplace is eBay, shown in
Figure 6.23. The site provides a public platform for global trading where any-
one can buy, sell, or trade practically anything. It offers a wide variety of
FIGURE 6.23
eBay
eBay provides an online market-
place where anyone can buy, sell,
or trade practically anything.
Source: www.ebay.com
272 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

features and services that enable members to buy and sell on the site quickly
and conveniently. Buyers have the option to purchase items at a fixed price
or in an auction-style format, where the highest bid wins the product.
Auction houses such as eBay accept limited liability for problems that
buyers or sellers may experience in their transactions. Transactions that make
use of the PayPal service are protected on eBay. Others, however, may be
more risky. Participants should be aware that auction fraud is the most preva-
lent type of fraud on the Internet.
Craigslist is a network of online communities that provides free online
classified advertisements. It is a popular online marketplace for purchasing
items from local individuals. Many shoppers turn to Craigslist rather than
going to the classifieds in the local paper.
Businesses benefit from shopping online as well. Global supply manage-
ment online services provide methods for businesses to find the best deals on
the global market for raw materials and supplies needed to manufacture their
products. Electronic exchanges provide an industry-specific Web resource cre-
ated to deliver a convenient centralized platform for B2B e-commerce among
manufacturers, suppliers, and customers.
Travel, Geolocation, and Navigation
The Web has had a profound effect on the travel industry and the way people
plan and prepare for trips. From getting assistance with short trips across town to
planning long holidays abroad, travelers are turning to the Web to save time and
money and to overcome much of the risk involved in visiting unknown places.
Travel Web sites such as Travelocity, Expedia, Kayak, and Priceline help
travelers find the best deals on flights, hotels, car rentals, vacation packages,
and cruises. Priceline offers a slightly different approach from the other Web
sites. It allows shoppers to name a price they’re willing to pay for an airline
ticket or a hotel room and then works to find an airline or hotel that can
meet that price.
Mapping and geolocation tools are among the most popular and success-
ful Web applications. MapQuest, Google Maps, and Bing Maps are examples.
See Figure 6.24. By offering free street maps for locations around the world,
FIGURE 6.24
Google Maps
Mapping software, such as Google
Maps, provides streetside views of
Times Square.
Source: Google
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 273
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

these tools help travelers find their way. Provide your departure location and
destination, and these online applications produce a map that displays the
fastest route. Using GPS technologies, these tools can detect your current loca-
tion and provide directions from where you are.
Google Maps also provides extensive location-specific business informa-
tion, satellite imagery, up-to-the-minute traffic reports, and Street View. The
latter is the result of Google employees driving the streets of the world’s cities
in vehicles with high-tech camera gear, taking 360-degree images. These
images are integrated into Google Maps to allow users to get a “street view”
of an area that can be manipulated as if the viewer were actually walking
down the street looking around. Bing Maps and Google Maps both offer
high-resolution aerial photos and street-level 3D photographs.
Geographic information systems (GISs) provide geographic information
layered over a map. For example, Google Earth provides options for viewing
traffic, weather, local photos and videos, underwater features such as ship-
wrecks and marine life, local attractions, businesses, and places of interest.
Software such as Connect, Find My Friends, Phone Tracker, and Tracker
allow you to find your friends on a map—with their permission—and will
automatically notify you if a friend is near.
Geo-tagging is technology that allows for tagging information with an
associated location. For example, Flickr and other photo software and services
allow photos to be tagged with the location they were taken. Once tagged, it
becomes easy to search for photos taken, for example, in Florida. Geo-
tagging also makes it easy to overlay photos on a map, as Google Maps and
Bing Maps have done. Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, Twitter, and many
other social networks have also made it possible for users to geo-tag photos,
comments, tweets, and posts.
Geolocation information does pose a risk to privacy and security. Many
people prefer that their location remain unknown, at least to strangers and
often to acquaintances and even friends. Recently, criminals have made use
of location information to determine when people are away from their resi-
dences so that they can burglarize without fear of interruption.
Intranets and Extranets
An intranet is an internal corporate network built using Internet and World
Wide Web standards and products. Employees of an organization can use an
intranet to gain access to corporate information. After getting their feet wet
with public Web sites that promote company products and services, corpora-
tions are seizing the Web as a swift way to streamline—even transform—
their organizations. These private networks use the infrastructure and stan-
dards of the Internet and the World Wide Web. Using an intranet offers one
considerable advantage: many people are already familiar with Internet tech-
nology, so they need little training to make effective use of their corporate
intranet.
An intranet is an inexpensive yet powerful alternative to other forms of
internal communication, including conventional computer setups. One of an
intranet’s most obvious virtues is its ability to reduce the need for paper.
Because Web browsers run on all types of computers, the same electronic
information can be viewed by any employee. That means that all sorts of
documents (such as internal phone books, procedure manuals, training man-
uals, and requisition forms) can be inexpensively converted to electronic
form, posted online, and easily updated. An intranet provides employees
with an easy and intuitive approach to accessing information that was previ-
ously difficult to obtain. For example, it is an ideal solution to providing
information to a mobile salesforce that needs access to rapidly changing
information.
274 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
A growing number of companies offer limited network access to selected
customers and suppliers. Such networks are referred to as extranets, which
connect people who are external to the company. An extranet is a network
built using Web technologies that links selected resources of the intranet of a
company with its customers, suppliers, or other business partners.
Corporate executives at a well-known global fast food chain wanted to
improve their understanding of what was happening at each restaurant
location and needed to communicate with franchisees to better serve their
customers. The firm implemented an extranet, enabling individual franchi-
sees to fine-tune their location-specific advertising and get it approved
quickly by corporate-level staff. In addition, with the extranet, corporate
employees now have a much better understanding of customers, both by
location and in aggregate, based on information they are receiving from
franchisees.30
Security and performance concerns are different for an extranet than for a
Web site or network-based intranet. User authentication and privacy are criti-
cal on an extranet so that information is protected. Obviously, the network
must also be reliable and provide quick response to customers and suppliers.
Table 6.6 summarizes the differences between users of the Internet, intranets,
and extranets.
Secure intranet and extranet access applications usually require the use of
a virtual private network (VPN), a secure connection between two points on
the Internet. VPNs transfer information by encapsulating traffic in IP packets
and sending the packets over the Internet, a practice called tunneling. Most
VPNs are built and run by ISPs. Companies that use a VPN from an ISP have
essentially outsourced their networks to save money on wide area network
equipment and personnel. To limit access to the VPN to just individuals
authorized to use it, authorized users may be issued a logon ID and a security
token assigned to that logon ID. The security token displays a 10- to 12-digit
password that changes every 30 seconds or so. A user must enter their logon
ID and the security password valid for that logon ID at that moment in time.
Extranet to Support Craft Brewers
There are currently more than 3,000 breweries in the United States, double the
number a decade ago. Much of this growth has come from the popularity of craft
brewers who, by definition, produce no more than 6 million barrels annually—
many produce much less. Within the craft brewing industry, there is a strong trend
toward packaging beer in four packs of 16-ounce cans rather than the six packs of
12-ounce cans, bottles, or jugs associated with the major U.S. brewers. One practi-
cal reason for cans is that glass bottles typically cost more, which can make a big
impact on the bottom line of many small brewers. In addition, craft brewers use
16-ounce cans as a means to set themselves apart from traditional beverage compa-
nies, and many have built their identities around the distinct look of their 16-ounce
can. However, most craft brewers are too small to afford their own canning lines.
Ball, Crown, and Rexam are major can manufacturers who work with many
craft brewers to fill their cans. But these companies recently raised their minimum
can order to the industry-standard truckload, which can range from roughly
TABLE 6.6 Summary of Internet, intranet, and extranet users
Type
User
Need User ID and Password?
Internet
Anyone
No
Intranet
Employees
Yes
Extranet
Business partners
Yes
virtual private network (VPN): A
secure connection between two points
on the Internet; VPNs transfer informa-
tion by encapsulating traffic in IP pack-
ets and sending the packets over the
Internet.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 275
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

155,000 to 200,000, depending on the size of the can. Typically the smaller brewer-
ies and their distributors need only a few thousand cans at a time. The new mini-
mum can orders translate into a lot of cash up front as well as an increased amount
of storage space for breweries. Many small breweries are struggling as a result.
A new type of company, mobile canners, has emerged to address this prob-
lem. These firms haul their equipment to breweries, spend less than a day filling
and labeling a few thousand cans, and then move on to the next customer. Over
the past three years, about two dozen mobile canner companies have started
offering mobile canning across the United States.
You are the owner of one of these mobile canners serving craft breweries
across the Midwest, a very competitive market. One of your employees has
approached you with an idea to set up an extranet that will allow your craft brew-
ery customers to communicate their production schedules to you electronically.
Their individual production schedules would be fed into a master schedule that
would enable you to see and plan three to six months into the future. This way you
could commit the people, equipment, and other resources to ensure that your cus-
tomers’ needs will be met. Running out of cans is catastrophic for the brewers. If
you let down a customer who is depending on you, you’ve lost a customer for life.
Review Questions
1.
What advantages does use of an extranet provide versus more conventional
methods of communication—over the phone, via fax, etc.?
2.
What measures can you take to control access to the master production sched-
ule so that only authorized customers may enter their data?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What potential start-up issues may be involved in preparing your craft brew-
ery customers to use this new system? How will you overcome these issues?
2.
Can you identify any other purposes for the extranet in addition to one-way
communication of production schedules? Briefly elaborate.
The Internet of Things
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of physical objects or “things”
embedded with sensors, processors, software, and network connectivity
capability to enable them to exchange data with the manufacturer of the
device, device operators, and other connected devices. See Figure 6.25.
Sensors are being installed in a variety of machines and products, ranging
from home appliances and parking garages to clothing and grocery products.
A sensor is a device that is capable of sensing something about its surround-
ings such as pressure, temperature, humidity, pH level, motion, vibration, or
level of light. The sensor detects an event or changes in quantity and pro-
duces a corresponding output, usually an electrical or optical signal. To be
truly part of the IoT, these networked devices need IP addresses and a con-
nection to the public Internet. The data is then transmitted over the Internet
to an operational historical database containing data from many sensors. The
database may be on a data storage device in a local control room, in an enter-
prise data center in another state, or hundreds of miles away in the cloud. The
operational data can be accessed via the Internet and analyzed by users with
personal computers or portable devices including smartphones. Updates,
alerts, or even automatic adjustments may be sent to the devices on the IoT
based on this analysis. According to Don DeLoach, CEO and president of
Infobright Inc., “manufacturing has been automated at various levels for
many years, but IoT brings automation to a deep, broad level—one where
276 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

interconnectivity between various elements in manufacturing exists in a way it
did not before.”31
Enlightened organizations apply analytics to these streams of data—even
before the data is stored for post event analysis. This enables workers to
detect patterns and potential problems as they are occurring and to make
appropriate adjustments in the operation of the devices being measured. For
example, sensors embedded in General Electric (GE) aircraft engines collect
some 5,000 individual data points per second. This data is analyzed while the
aircraft is in flight to adjust the way the aircraft performs, thereby reducing
fuel consumption. The data is also used to plan predictive maintenance on
the engines based on engine component wear and tear. In 2013, this technol-
ogy helped GE earn $1 billion in incremental income by delivering perfor-
mance improvements, less downtime, and more flying miles.32
Here are additional examples of organizations using sensors and the IoT
to monitor and control key operational activities:
●
Asset monitoring. Food and drug manufacturers can monitor shipping
containers for changes in temperatures that could affect product quality
and safety using cheap battery-powered sensors and 4G LTE connectivity.
●
Construction. SK Solutions is using IoT technology to prevent cranes
from colliding on a crowded construction site with 37 cranes and
5,000 workers near the world’s tallest building in the United Arab Emi-
rates (UAE) city of Dubai. The Internet-connected system collects data
from sensors mounted to the cranes and other equipment to detect if con-
struction cranes are swinging too close to each other, and, if so, halts
them from moving further.33
●
Agriculture. Farmers are using IoT technology to collect data about water
moisture and nitrogen levels to improve yields while conserving water, a
precious commodity in many places.
●
Manufacturing. IoT enabled sensors on plant-floor equipment, such as a
conveyor line, can alert plant floor personnel to problems in real time.
FIGURE 6.25
The Internet of Things
The IoT is a network of physical
objects or “things” embedded with
sensors, processors, software,
and network connectivity
capability to enable them to
exchange data with the manufac-
turer of the device, device operators,
and other connected devices.
5. Data is analyzed to gain
 
insights Into operation
 
of devices on IoT
1. Sensors gather data
2. Data passes over
 
network
3. Data from across the IoT
 
Is gathered and stored-
 
often in the cloud 
Ruslan Kudrin/Shutterstock.com
Maxx-Studio/Shutterstock.com
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock.com
06photo/Shutterstock.com
robuart/Shutterstock.com
4. Data is combined with 
 
other data from other
 
systems
6. Alerts sent to people,
 
Enterprise systems, or
 
IoT Devices based on
 
these insights
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 277
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The data can also be analyzed to uncover patterns to allow technicians
to predict potential failures or redeploy resources in a more optimal
fashion.
●
Monitoring parking spaces. San Francisco uses connected sensors and
meters to determine the demand for parking on certain streets, periodi-
cally adjusting hourly rates so drivers are more likely to find a space
when they arrive. Rates go up on more-crowded blocks and down on
less-crowded ones. The city has deployed a low-power wide area net-
work similar to a cellular network but designed for low-power IoT
equipment—such as parking meters—to provide a low energy way for
devices that are slower and cheaper than the typical LTE cellular
network.
●
Predictive Maintenance. Sensors are used extensively in the utilities
industry to capture operational data to achieve 24/7 uptime. Sensor data
is carefully analyzed to predict when critical pieces of equipment or
power lines are about to fail so that quick, anticipatory corrective action
can take place before any failure.
●
Retailing. Retailers use in-store sensors to detect in-store behavior and
optimize the shopping experience in order to increase revenue and mar-
ket share. Streaming data from sensors is analyzed, along with other
information (like inventory, social media chatter, and online-shop user
profiles), to send customized and personal offers while the shopper is in
the process of making a purchase decision.
●
Traffic monitoring. The Aegan motorway is the oldest and most impor-
tant motorway of Greece, connecting the country’s largest cities, Athens
and Thessaloniki. More than 5,000 devices are deployed along a 200-km
(124-mile) stretch of the highway to keep drivers safe and the roadway
running efficiently. All these devices must work in a smooth and coordi-
nated fashion to monitor traffic, detect traffic incidents using traffic cam-
eras, warn travelers of road conditions via electronic billboards, and
operate toll booths. The devices are connected to a central control system
using Cisco’s Internet of Everything system to connect data, people, pro-
cesses, and things.34
IoT applications can be classified into one of four types as shown in
Table 6.7.
Unfortunately, there can be many issues with simply receiving and recog-
nizing usable sensor data. Sometimes a faulty sensor or bad network connec-
tion results in missing data or sensor data lacking time stamps indicating
when the reading occurred. As a result, sensor data can be incomplete or con-
tain inconsistent values indicating a potential sensor failure or a drop in a net-
work. Developers of IoT systems must be prepared for and be able to detect
faulty sensor data.
TABLE 6.7 Types of IoT applications
Type of IoT
Application
Degree of Sensing
Degree of Action
Connect and monitor
Individual devices each gathering a small
amount of data
Enables manual monitoring using simple
threshold-based exception alerting
Control and react
Individual devices each gathering a small
amount of data
Automatic monitoring combined with remote
control with trend analysis and reporting
Predict and adapt
External data is used to augment sensor data
Data used to preform predictive analysis and
initiate preemptive action
Transform and
explore
Sensor and external data used to provide new
insights
New business models, products, and services
are created
278 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Security is a very major issue with IoT applications. In today’s manufactur-
ing environment, the factory network is a closed environment designed to com-
municate with plant sensors and devices but not typically with the outside
world. So a key decision organizations must make when considering imple-
mentation of an IoT is as follows: Are the benefits of doing so sufficient to
overcome the risk of making detailed company information accessible through
the Internet and exposing internal systems to hacking, viruses, and destructive
malware? Hackers who gain access to an organization’s IoT can steal data,
transfer money out of accounts, and shut down Web sites, and they can also
wreck physical havoc by tampering with critical infrastructure like air traffic
control systems, healthcare devices, power grids, and supervisory control and
data acquisition (SCADA) systems. One of the first things developers of IoT
application should focus on is building in security from the start. This needs to
include ways of updating the system in a secure manner.
Manufacturer Weighs Converting to Internet of Things
You are a member of the plant information systems group for a small manufac-
turer of all-natural ingredient cosmetics. Your firm promotes itself as adhering to
the highest standards of compliance and quality. Manufacturing is rigorously mon-
itored via sensors and computer controls throughout the entire process, and auto-
mated temperature controls ensure complete stability in the manufacturing
environment. Sensor tracking is performed from the moment that raw materials
enter your facility, throughout the manufacturing process, packaging, and on to
distribution. The sensors and computer controls were installed when the plant
was built in the 1990s and use proprietary communications protocols and are not
Internet enabled. Data from these sensors is monitored by a group of three tech-
nicians in the computer control room. Twelve workers are required to staff the
control room 24/7, including weekends and most holidays.
Your company has just purchased a plant previously owned by one of your
competitors in a nearby state. Your group has been asked to look at the feasibility
of upgrading the sensors used in both plants to Internet-enabled sensors con-
nected to the Internet of Things. This would make it possible for technicians in
one control room to monitor the operation of both plants. Plant staffing could be
reduced by 12 workers saving $1.2 million in labor expenses per year. It is esti-
mated that the cost of replacing the existing sensors and converting to the Inter-
net of Things is in the vicinity of $1.5 million.
Review Questions
1.
Why is it necessary to replace the existing sensors to implement an IoT
network?
2.
What additional benefits may arise from converting the plants to the Internet
of Things?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What new risks are raised by placing the new system of sensors on the Inter-
net of Things?
2.
What actions could be taken to reduce these risks?
Cloud Computing
Cloud computing refers to a computing environment in which software and
storage are provided as an Internet service and accessed by users with their
Web browser. See Figure 6.26. Google and Yahoo!, for example, store the
email of many users, along with calendars, contacts, and to-do lists. Apple
cloud computing: A computing
environment where software and stor-
age are provided as an Internet service
and are accessed with a Web browser.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 279
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

developed its iCloud service to allow people to store their documents, music,
photos, apps, and other content on its servers.35 In addition to its social net-
working features, Facebook offers users the ability to store personal photos
in the cloud—as does Flickr and a dozen other photo sites. Pandora delivers
music, and Hulu and YouTube deliver movies via the cloud. Apache OpenOf-
fice, Google Apps, Microsoft Office 365, Zoho, and others provide Web-
delivered productivity and information management software. Communica-
tions, contacts, photos, documents, music, and media are available to you
from any Internet-connected device with cloud computing.
Cloud computing offers many advantages to businesses. With cloud com-
puting, organizations can avoid large, up-front investments in hardware as
well as the ongoing investment in the resources that would be required to
manage that hardware. Instead, they can provision just the right type and size
of information system resources from their cloud computing provider, pay for
it on an ongoing basis, and let the service provider handle the system support
and maintenance. In most cases, the cloud computing service provider pro-
vides access to state-of-the-art technology at a fraction of the cost of owning
it and without the lengthy delays that can occur when an organizations tries
to acquire its own resources. This can increase the speed and reduce the
costs of new product and service launches. For example, Spotify offers its
users instant access to over 16 million licensed songs. The company faces an
ongoing struggle to keep pace with the rapid release of new music, adding
over 20,000 tracks to its catalog each day. Emil Fredriksson, operations direc-
tor for Spotify, explains why the company employs cloud computing, “Spotify
needed a storage solution that could scale very quickly without incurring long
lead times for upgrades. This led us to cloud storage.” While establishing new
storage previously required several months of preparation, it can now be
obtained instantly through cloud computing.36
Cloud computing can be deployed in several different ways. The methods
discussed thus far in this chapter are considered public cloud services. Public
cloud computing refers to deployments in which service providers offer their
cloud-based services to the general public, whether that is an individual using
Google Calendar or a corporation using the Salesforce.com application. In a
private cloud deployment, cloud technology is used within the confines of a
private network.
Since 1992, The College Network and its partner universities have pro-
vided accessible educational programs for individuals seeking degrees or pro-
fessional certificates, entirely through distance learning. The College Network
FIGURE 6.26
Cloud computing
Cloud computing uses applications
and resources delivered via the
Web.
Helder Almeida/Shutterstock.com
280 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

chose EarthLink to provide a customized private cloud with dedicated servers.
Conversion to the private network reduced the capital required for computer
hardware and software, increased systems availability and avoided outages,
and reallocated its valuable IT resources while EarthLink resources trouble-
shoot any systems issues.37
Many organizations are turning to cloud computing as an approach to
outsource some or all of their IT operations. This section defines cloud com-
puting and its variations and points out some of its advantages as well as
some potential issues, including problems associated with cost, scalability,
security, and regulatory compliance.
Public Cloud Computing
In a public cloud computing environment, a service provider organization
owns and manages the infrastructure (including computing, networking,
and storage devices) with cloud user organizations (called tenants) accessing
slices of shared hardware resources via the Internet. The service provider
can deliver increasing amounts of computing, network, and storage capacity
on demand and without requiring any capital investment on the part of the
cloud users. Thus, public cloud computing is a great solution for organiza-
tions whose computing needs vary greatly depending on changes in
demand. Amazon, Cisco Systems, IBM, Microsoft, Rackspace, Verizon Com-
munications Inc., and VMWare are among the largest cloud computing ser-
vice providers. These firms typically offer a monthly or annual subscription
service model; they may also provide training, support, and data integration
services.38
Public cloud computing can be a faster, cheaper, and more agile approach
to building and managing your own IT infrastructure. However, since cloud
users are using someone else’s data center, potential issues with service levels,
loss of control, disaster recovery, and data security should not be overlooked.
Data security in particular is a key concern because when using a public
cloud computing service, you are relying on someone else to safeguard your
data. In addition, your organization’s data may reside on the same storage
device as another organization’s (perhaps even a competitor’s) data. All of the
potential issues of concern must be investigated fully before entering into a
public cloud computing arrangement. Organizations subject to tight regulation
and complex regulatory requirements (e.g., financial, healthcare, and public
utility organizations) must ensure that their own processes and applications
as well as those of the cloud provider are compliant.
A major start-up issue is the effort of getting your organization’s data
moved to the cloud in the first place. That introduces an issue of vendor lock-
in—meaning once an organization’s servers and data are hosted with one
cloud provider, it is not likely to be willing to go through the time-consuming
migration process a second time to move to a different provider in the future.
So choose your cloud provider wisely, as it is a business relationship that you
and your business will likely need to live with for the foreseeable future.
Cloud computing can be divided into three main types of services (see
Figure 6.27)
●
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS) is an information systems strategy in
which an organization outsources the equipment used to support its data
processing operations, including servers, storage devices, and networking
components. The service provider owns the equipment and is responsible
for housing, running, and maintaining it. The outsourcing organization
may pay on a per-use or monthly basis.
●
Software as a service (SaaS) is a software delivery approach that pro-
vides users with access to software remotely as a Web-based service. SaaS
pricing is based on a monthly fee per user and typically results in lower
infrastructure as a service
(IaaS): An information systems strat-
egy in which an organization out-
sources the equipment used to support
its data processing operations, includ-
ing servers, storage devices, and net-
working components.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 281
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

costs than a licensed application. Another advantage of SaaS is that
because the software is hosted remotely, users do not need to purchase
and install additional hardware to provide increased capacity. Further-
more, the service provider handles necessary software maintenance and
upgrades.
●
Platform as a service (PaaS) provides users with a computing platform,
typically including operating system, programming language execution
environment, database services, and a Web server. The user can create an
application or service using tools and/or libraries from the provider. The
user also controls software deployment and configuration settings. The
PaaS provider provides the networks, servers, storage, and other services
required to host the consumer’s application. PaaS enables application
developers to develop, test, and run their software solutions on a cloud
platform without the cost and complexity of buying and managing the
underlying hardware and software.
Organizations contemplating moving to the cloud are advised to proceed
carefully, as almost one in three organizations encounter major challenges
during the transition. Frequent problems include complex pricing arrange-
ments and hidden costs that reduce expected cost savings, performance issues
that cause wide variations in performance over time, poor user support, and
greater than expected downtime.39
Condé Nast, publisher of Vogue, The New Yorker, and Wired magazines,
among many others, decommissioned its 67,000-square-foot data center and
migrated its data and processing capacity to Amazon Web Services (AWS).
Over a period of just three months in 2014, the firm migrated 500 servers;
1 petabyte of storage; 100 database servers; 100 switches, routers, and fire-
walls; and all of its mission-critical applications to AWS. According to Condé
Nast, operating costs have been cut by 40 percent and performance has
improved by 30 percent to 40 percent since the transition, which created a
dynamic environment that can adjust as the company needs it to. The old
data center facilities were eventually put on the market and sold.40
FIGURE 6.27
The cloud computing
environment
Cloud computing can be divided into
three main types of services: infra-
structure as a service (IaaS), soft-
ware as a service (SaaS), and
platform as a service (PaaS).
Cloud users–
smartphones,
tablets, laptops,
desktops
IaaS–Virtual machines, servers,
storage devices, network devices
SaaS–Customer relationship
Management, email, collaboration
PaaS–Operting system,
programming language, database,
Web server
Helder Almeida/Shutterstock.com
platform as a service (PaaS): An
approach that provides users with a
computing platform, typically including
operating system, programming lan-
guage execution environment, data-
base services, and Web server.
282 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Private Cloud Computing
A private cloud environment is a single tenant cloud. Organizations that
implement a private cloud often do so because they are concerned that their
data will not be secure in a public cloud. Private clouds can be divided into
two distinct types. Some organizations build their own on-premise private
cloud, and others elect to have a service provider build and manage their pri-
vate cloud (sometimes called a virtual private cloud). A general rule of thumb
is that companies that spend $1 million or more per month on outsourced com-
puting are better off implementing an on-premise private cloud.41 Many compli-
cations must be overcome—and deep technical skills and sophisticated
software are needed—to build and manage a successful private cloud. An orga-
nization might establish several private clouds with one for finance, another
one for product development, and a third for sales, for example. Each private
cloud has a defined set of available resources and users, with predefined quotas
that limit how much capacity users of that cloud can consume.
Revlon is a global cosmetics, hair color, fragrance, and skin-care company
with recent annual sales exceeding $1.9 billion.42 The firm implemented an
on-premises private cloud that includes 531 applications and makes up
97 percent of the company’s computing power. The private cloud has helped
reduce application deployment time by 70 percent and, as a result of virtuali-
zation and consolidation, reduced data center power consumption by 72 per-
cent. In addition, the company achieved a net dollar savings of $70 million
over a two-year period.43
Hybrid Cloud Computing
Many IT industry observers believe that the desire for both agility and security
will eventually lead organizations to adopt a hybrid cloud approach.44 A hybrid
cloud is composed of both private and public clouds integrated through net-
working. Organizations typically use the public cloud to run applications with
less sensitive security requirements and highly fluctuating capacity needs, but
run more critical applications, such as those with significant compliance require-
ments, on the private portion of their hybrid cloud. So a hospital may run its Web
conferencing and email applications on a public cloud while running its applica-
tions that access patient records on a private cloud to meet Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and other compliance requirements.
Autonomic Computing
An enabling technology for cloud computing is autonomic computing or the
ability of IT systems to manage themselves and adapt to changes in the com-
puting environment, business policies, and operating objectives. The goal of
autonomic computing is to create complex systems that run themselves, while
keeping the system’s complexity invisible to the end user. Autonomic comput-
ing addresses four key functions: self-configuring, self-healing, self-optimizing,
and self-protecting.45 As cloud computing environments become increasingly
complex, the number of skilled people required to manage these environments
also increases. Software and hardware that implement autonomic computing
are needed to reduce the overall cost of operating and managing complex
cloud computing environments. While this is an emerging area, software
products such as Tivoli from IBM are partially filling the need.
Should Heel Swaps Move to the Cloud?
Heel Swaps is a Chicago-based start-up that sells a stretchable high heel shoe
cover that contains a slip resistant out-sole, comes in a variety of sizes, colors and
patterns, and slips on in seconds. The product enables you to transform your
heels to match different outfits and is sold online at www.heelswaps.com.
private cloud environment: A
single tenant cloud.
hybrid cloud: A cloud computing
environment is composed of both pri-
vate and public clouds integrated
through networking.
autonomic computing: The ability
of IT systems to manage themselves
and adapt to changes in the computing
environment, business policies, and
operating objectives.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 283
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The firm is just three weeks away from debuting its advertising on the popu-
lar Steve Harvey show with some 3 million viewers per episode. Sales and prod-
uct demand are expected to skyrocket. Unfortunately, management at Heel Swaps
has just realized that the firm’s Web site does not have the processing capacity to
serve the expected increase in shoppers. An IT consulting firm was hired to con-
firm the need for additional capacity and to make recommendations on how to
proceed. Their recommendation is that the current Web site platform be moved
to Amazon Web Services (AWS) with elastic load. This service is capable of auto-
matically scaling its request handling capacity to meet the demands of application
traffic.
Review Questions
1.
What advantages will moving the Web site to the cloud provide for Heel
Swaps?
2.
What form of cloud computing is best for Heel Swaps—public, private, or
hybrid? Why?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What common start-up problems should the IT consulting firm advise Heel
Swaps to avoid?
2.
What future changes and developments should be planned for the Heel Swaps
Web site as the volume of business grows?
Summary
Principle:
A network has many fundamental components, which—when carefully
selected and effectively integrated—enable people to meet personal and
organizational objectives.
A computer network consists of communications media, devices, and soft-
ware connecting two or more computer systems or devices. Communications
media are any material substance that carries an electronic signal to support
communications between a sending and a receiving device. The computers
and devices on the networks are also sometimes called network nodes.
The effective use of networks can help a company grow into an agile, pow-
erful, and creative organization, giving it a long-term competitive advantage.
Networks let users share hardware, programs, and databases across the organi-
zation. They can transmit and receive information to improve organizational
effectiveness and efficiency. They enable geographically separated workgroups
to share documents and opinions, which fosters teamwork, innovative ideas,
and new business strategies.
Network topology indicates how the communications links and hardware
devices of the network are arranged. The three most common network topolo-
gies are the star, bus, and mesh.
A network can be classified as personal area, local area, metropolitan, or
wide area network depending on the physical distance between nodes on the
network and the communications and services it provides.
The electronic flow of data across international and global boundaries is
often called transborder data flow.
A client/server system is a network that connects a user’s computer (a cli-
ent) to one or more server computers (servers). A client is often a PC that
requests services from the server, shares processing tasks with the server,
and displays the results.
284 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Channel bandwidth refers to the rate at which data can be exchanged mea-
sured in bits per second.
Communications media can be divided into two broad categories: guided
transmission media, in which a communications signal travels along a solid
medium, and wireless media, in which the communications signal is sent
over airwaves. Guided transmission media include twisted-pair wire cable,
coaxial cable, and fiber-optic cable.
Wireless communication is the transfer of information between two or
more points that are not connected by an electrical conductor. Wireless com-
munications involves the broadcast of communications in one of three fre-
quency ranges: microwave, radio, and infrared. Wireless communications
options include near field communications, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and a variety of
3G and 4G communications options.
Networks require various communications hardware devices to operate,
including modems, fax modems, multiplexers, private branch exchanges,
front-end processors, switches, bridges, routers, and gateways.
Network management includes a wide range of technologies and processes
that monitor the network and help identify and address problems before they
can create a serious impact.
A network operating system (NOS) controls the computer systems and
devices on a network, allowing them to communicate with one another.
Network-management software enables a manager to monitor the use of indi-
vidual computers and shared hardware, scan for viruses, and ensure compli-
ance with software licenses.
Mobile device management (MDM) software manages and troubleshoots
mobile devices remotely, pushing out applications, data, patches, and settings.
Software-defined networking (SDN) is an emerging approach to network-
ing that allows network administrators to manage a network via a controller
that does not require physical access to all the network devices.
Principle:
Together, the Internet and the World Wide Web provide a highly effective
infrastructure for delivering and accessing information and services.
The Internet is truly international in scope, with users on every continent. It
is the world’s largest computer network. Actually, it is a collection of intercon-
nected networks, all freely exchanging information.
The Internet transmits data from one computer (called a host) to another.
The set of conventions used to pass packets from one host to another is known
as the Internet Protocol (IP). Many other protocols are used with IP. The best
known is the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). TCP is so widely used that
many people refer to the Internet protocol as TCP/IP, the combination of TCP
and IP used by most Internet applications.
Each computer on the Internet has an assigned IP address for easy identifi-
cation. A Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is a Web address that specifies the
exact location of a Web page using letters and words that map to an IP address
and a location on the host.
People can connect to the Internet backbone in several ways: via a LAN
whose server is an Internet host, or via a dial-up connection, high-speed ser-
vice, or wireless service. An Internet service provider is any company that pro-
vides access to the Internet. To connect to the Internet through an ISP, you
must have an account with the service provider and software that allows a
direct link via TCP/IP.
The Internet and social media Web sites have emerged as important new
channels for learning about world events, protesting the actions of organiza-
tions and governments, and urging others to support one’s favorite causes or
candidates. On the other hand, Internet censorship, the control or suppression
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 285
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

of the publishing or accessing of information on the Internet, is a growing
problem.
The Web was designed to make information easy to find and organize. It
connects billions of documents, which are now called Web pages, stored on
millions of servers around the world. Web pages are connected to each other
using hyperlinks, specially denoted text or graphics on a Web page, that, when
clicked, open a new Web page containing related content. The pages are
accessed and viewed using Web client software called a Web browser.
Many Web sites use CSS to define the design and layout of Web pages, XML to
define the content, and HTML to join the content (XML) with the design (CSS).
Internet companies, including Amazon, eBay, and Google, use Web ser-
vices to streamline and simplify communication among Web sites.
XML is also used within a Web page to describe and transfer data between
Web service applications.
Today’s Web development applications allow developers to create Web
sites using software that resembles a word processor. The software includes
features that allow the developer to work directly with the HTML code or to use
auto-generated code.
The use of social media in business is called Enterprise 2.0. Enterprise 2.0
applications, such as Salesforce’s Chatter, Jive Software’s Engage Dialog,
and Yammer, enable employees to create business wikis, support social net-
working, perform blogging, and create social bookmarks to quickly find
information.
Social journalism provides important news not available elsewhere; how-
ever, its sources may not be as reliable as mainstream media sources.
Today, schools at all levels provide online education and training. The Web
is also an excellent source of job-related information.
A search engine is a valuable tool that enables you to find information on the
Web by specifying words or phrases known as keywords, which are related to a
topic of interest. Search engine optimization (SEO) is a process for driving traffic
to a Web site by using techniques that improve the site’s ranking in search results.
Instant messaging is online, real-time communication between two or more
people who are connected via the Internet.
Twitter is a Web application that allows users to send short text updates
(up to 140 characters) from a smartphone or a Web browser to their Twitter
followers.
Internet technologies support real-time online conferencing where partici-
pants dial into a common phone number to share a multiparty phone conver-
sation and, in many cases, live video of the participants.
A Web log, typically called a blog, is a Web site that people that people and
businesses use to share their observations, experiences, and opinions on a wide
range of topics.
A podcast is an audio broadcast you can listen to over the Internet.
Content streaming is a method of transferring large media files over the
Internet so that the data stream of voice and pictures plays more or less contin-
uously as the file is being downloaded.
The Internet and the Web have made music more accessible than ever, with
artists distributing their songs through online radio, subscription services, and
download services.
Television and movies are expanding to the Web in leaps and bounds.
Online services such as Amazon Instant Video, Hulu, and Netflix provide tele-
vision programming from hundreds of providers, including most mainstream
television networks.
Video games have become a huge industry with worldwide annual revenue
projected to exceed $100 billion by 2017.
You can buy almost anything via the Web, from books and clothing to cars
and sports equipment.
286 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Travel Web sites help travelers find the best deals on flights, hotels, car
rentals, vacation packages, and cruises. They have profoundly changed the
travel industry and the way people plan trips and vacations.
An intranet is an internal corporate network built using Internet and World
Wide Web standards and products. Employees of an organization can use an
intranet to access corporate information.
A growing number of companies offer limited network access to selected
customers and suppliers. Such networks are referred to as extranets, which
connect people who are external to the company.
Principle:
Organizations are using the Internet of Things (IoT) to capture and ana-
lyze streams of sensor data to detect patterns and anomalies—not after
the fact, but while they are occurring—in order to have a considerable
impact on the event outcome.
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of physical objects or “things”
embedded with sensors, processors, software, and network connectivity capa-
bility to enable them to exchange data with the manufacturer of the device,
device operators, and other connected devices.
There can be many issues with simply receiving and recognizing usable
sensor data resulting in missing data or sensor data lacking time stamps indi-
cating when the reading occurred.
One of the first things developers of IoT applications should focus on is
building in security from the start.
Principle:
Cloud computing provides access to state-of-the-art technology at a frac-
tion of the cost of ownership and without the lengthy delays that can
occur when an organization tries to acquire its own resources.
Cloud computing refers to a computing environment in which software and
storage are provided as an Internet service and can be accessed by users with
their Web browser. Computing activities are increasingly being delivered over
the Internet rather than from installed software on PCs.
Cloud computing offers many advantages to businesses. By outsourcing
business information systems to the cloud, a business saves on system design,
installation, and maintenance. Employees can also access corporate systems
from any Internet-connected computer using a standard Web browser.
Cloud computing can be deployed in several different ways, including pub-
lic cloud computing, private cloud computing, and hybrid cloud computing.
Public cloud computing refers to deployments in which service providers
offer their cloud-based services to the general public, whether that is an individ-
ual using Google Calendar or a corporation using the Salesforce.com application.
In a private cloud deployment, cloud technology is used within the confines of a
private network. Organizations that implement a private cloud often do so
because they are concerned that their data will not be secure in a public cloud.
A hybrid cloud is composed of both private and public clouds integrated
through networking. Organizations typically use the public cloud to run appli-
cations with less sensitive security requirements and highly fluctuating capacity
needs, but run more critical applications, such as those with significant compli-
ance requirements, on the private portion of their hybrid cloud.
Autonomic computing is an enabling technology for cloud computing that
enables systems to manage themselves and adapt to changes in the computing
environment, business policies, and operating objectives.
Cloud computing can be divided into three main types of services: infra-
structure as a service (IaaS), software as a service (SaaS), and platform as a
service (PaaS).
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 287
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Organizations contemplating moving to the cloud are advised to proceed
carefully, as almost one in three organizations encounter major challenges in
their move. Frequent problems include complex pricing arrangements and hid-
den costs that reduce expected cost savings, performance issues that cause
wide variations in performance over time, poor user support, and greater
than expected downtime.
Key Terms
autonomic computing
Bluetooth
broadband communications
bus network
Cascading Style Sheet (CSS)
channel bandwidth
client/server architecture
cloud computing
communications medium
computer network
content streaming
Extensible Markup Language (XML)
hybrid cloud
hyperlink
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)
infrastructure as a service (IaaS)
instant messaging
Internet backbone
Internet Protocol (IP)
Internet service provider (ISP)
IP address
local area network (LAN)
Long Term Evolution (LTE)
mesh network
metropolitan area network (MAN)
mobile device management (MDM) software
near field communication (NFC)
network operating system (NOS)
network topology
network-management software
personal area network (PAN)
platform as a service (PaaS)
podcast
private cloud environment
search engine
search engine optimization (SEO)
software-defined networking (SDN)
star network
tag
Uniform Resource Locator (URL)
virtual private network (VPN)
Web 2.0
Web browser
Web log (blog)
wide area network (WAN)
Wi-Fi
wireless communication
Chapter 6: Self-Assessment Test
A network has many fundamental components—
which,
when
carefully
selected
and
effectively
integrated—enable people to meet personal and
organizational objectives.
1. Communications media can be divided into two
broad categories
.
a. infrared and microwave
b. fiber optic and cable
c. packet switching and circuit switching
d. guided and wireless
2.
refers to the rate at which data can
be exchanged and is measured in bits per second.
a. Communications frequency
b. Channel bandwidth
c. Communications wavelength
d. Broadband
3.
indicates how the communications
links and hardware devices of the network are
arranged.
a. Communications protocol
b. Transmission media
288 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

c. Network topology
d. None of the above
4. Twisted-pair wire, cable, coaxial cable, and fiber
optic cable are all examples of guided communi-
cations media. True/False
5. Systems software that controls the computer
systems and devices on a network and allows
them to communicate with one another is
called
.
a. network operating system
b. mobile device management software
c. network-management software
d. software-defined networking
Together, the Internet and the World Wide Web
provide a highly effective infrastructure for deliver-
ing and accessing information and services.
6. The Internet transmits data in packets from one
computer to another using a set of communica-
tions conventions called the
.
7. Every computer on the Internet has an assigned
IP address for easy identification. True/False
8. A
is a Web address that specifies
the exact location of a Web page using letters and
words that map to an IP address and the location
on the host.
a. Universal Resource Locator
b. Uniform Reference Locator
c. Universal Web address
d. Uniform Resource Locator
9. Many Web sites use CSS to define the design and
layout of Web pages, and XML to define the
content, and HTML to join the content with the
design. True/False
10. The use of social media in business is
called
.
a. social journalism
b. blogging
c. business wikis
d. Enterprise 2.0
11. A(n)
is an internal corporate network
built using Internet and World Wide Web standards
and products.
Organizations are using the Internet of Things
(IoT) to capture and analyze streams of sensor
data to detect patterns and anomalies—not after
the fact, but while they are occurring—in order to
have a considerable impact on the event outcome.
12. There can be many issues with simply receiving
and recognizing usable sensor data resulting in
sensor data lacking time stamps indicating when
the reading occurred or in
data.
13. One of the first things developers of IoT applica-
tions should focus on is building in
from the start.
a. redundancy and backup
b. cost controls
c. security
d. disaster recovery
Cloud
computing
provides
access
to
state-
of-the-art technology at a fraction of the cost of
ownership and without the lengthy delays that
can occur when an organization tries to acquire
its own resources.
14. Cloud computing is a computing environment in
which software and storage are provided as an
Internet service and accessed by users with
their
.
a. Web browser
b. mobile computing device such as a
smartphone or tablet
c. search engine
d. Virtual Private Network (VPN)
15.
is an enabling technology for cloud
computing that enables systems to manage
themselves and adapt to changes in the comput-
ing environment, business policies, and operating
objectives.
Chapter 6: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. d
2. b
3. c
4. True
5. a
6. Internet protocol or TCP/IP
7. True
8. d
9. True
10. d
11. intranet
12. missing
13. c
14. a
15. Autonomic computing
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 289
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Review Questions
1. Define the term “computer network.”
2. Define the term “network topology,” and iden-
tify three common network topologies in use
today.
3. What is meant by client/server architecture?
Describe how this architecture works.
4. Define the term “channel bandwidth.” Why is this
an important characteristic of a communication
channel?
5. Identify the names of the three primary frequency
ranges used for wireless communications.
6. What is Bluetooth wireless communication? Give
an example of the use of this technology.
7. What advantage does a communications satellite
have over a terrestrial microwave system?
8. What role does a network operating system play?
9. What is software-defined networking (SDN), and
what advantages does it offer?
10. What is Internet censorship? Identify some coun-
tries in which this is a major issue.
11. What comprises the Internet backbone?
12. What is an IP address? What is a Uniform
Resource Locator, and how is it used?
13. What is XML, and how is it used?
14. What are CSS, and are how are they used?
15. What are Web services? Give an example of a
Web service.
16. What is Enterprise 2.0 and how is it used?
17. What is the Internet of Things (IoT), and how is it
used?
18. What is cloud computing? Identify three
approaches to deploying cloud computing.
19. What is autonomic computing, and how does it
benefit cloud computing?
Discussion Questions
1. Briefly discuss the differences between the star,
bus, peer-to-peer, and mesh network topologies.
2. Briefly discuss the differences between a per-
sonal area network, a local area network, a met-
ropolitan area network, and a wide area network.
3. Identify and briefly discuss three common guided
transmission media types.
4. Describe how near field communications works,
and give an example of the use of this technology.
5. Describe how a Wi-Fi network works.
6. Describe how a terrestrial microwave system
works.
7. Summarize the differences among 1G, 2G, 3G,
and 4G wireless communications systems.
8. Discuss the role of network-management software—
including mobile device management software.
9. Provide a brief history of the Internet.
10. Briefly describe how the Internet works.
11. Identify and briefly describe five different ways to
access the Internet.
12. Briefly describe how the World Wide Web works.
13. Discuss the role of Hypertext Markup Language
and HTML tags.
14. What is search engine optimization, and how is it
accomplished?
15. Identify some of the issues and concerns associ-
ated with connecting devices to the Internet of
Things (IoT).
16. Identify and briefly discuss four problems fre-
quently encountered by organizations moving to
the cloud.
17. One of the key issues associated with the develop-
ment of a Web site is getting people to visit it. If you
were developing a Web site, how would you inform
others about it and make it interesting enough that
they would return and tell others about it?
18. Keep track of the amount of time you spend on
social networking sites for one week. Do you
think that this is time well spent? Why or why not?
19. Briefly summarize the differences in how the
Internet, a company intranet, and an extranet are
accessed and used.
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Develop a spreadsheet to track the amount of
time you spend each day on Twitter, Instagram,
Facebook, and other social networks. Record
your times on each network for a two-week
period. How much of this time would you con-
sider informative and worthwhile? How much
time is just entertainment?
2. Do research to learn about the Amazon Web Ser-
vices, Google Compute Engine, and Windows
Azure cloud computing services. Write a
paragraph summarizing each service. Prepare a
spreadsheet to compare the three services based on
ease of use, cost, and other key criteria of your
choosing.
290 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

3. Think of a business that you might like to estab-
lish. Use a word processor to define the business
in terms of what product(s) or service(s) it pro-
vides, where it is located, and its name. Go to
www.godaddy.com, and find an appropriate
domain name for your business that is not yet
taken. Shop around online for the best deal on
Web site hosting. Write a paragraph about your
experience finding a name, why you chose the
name that you did, and how much it would cost
you to register the name and host a site.
Team Activities
1. Form a team to identify IoT sensors in high
demand in the medical device/pharma/bio-med
industry. How are these sensors being used?
What companies manufacture them? What do
they cost if purchased in large quantities? Write a
summary of your team’s findings.
2. Plan, set up, and execute a meeting with another
team wherein you meet via the use of a Web
service such as GoToMeeting or WebEx. What are
some of the problems you encountered in setting
up and executing the meeting? How would you
evaluate the effectiveness of the meeting? What
could have been done to make the meeting more
effective?
3. Try using the Chinese search engine Baidu to find
information on several politically sensitive topics
or people. Write a brief summary of your
experience.
Web Exercises
1. Do research on the Web to identify the three to
five countries that exercise the greatest amount of
Internet censorship on its citizens. Briefly docu-
ment each country’s censorship practices.
2. Net neutrality is the principle that Internet service
providers should be required to treat all Internet
traffic running over their wired and wireless net-
works the same—without favoring content from
some sources and/or blocking or slowing (also
known as throttling) content from others. The
debate over net neutrality raises questions about
how best to keep the Internet open and impartial
while still offering Internet service providers suf-
ficient incentive to expand their networks to
serve more customers and to support new ser-
vices. Do research to find out the current status of
net neutrality in the United States. Write a report
summarizing your findings.
3. Do research to identify the top ten social net-
works in terms of number of worldwide active
accounts. Which of these networks appears to be
the fastest growing, slowest growing? Can you
find a reason for the difference in growth rates?
Write a report summarizing what you found.
Career Exercises
1. View the movie The Social Network or read the
book The Boy Billionaire, which offers insights
into Mark Zuckerberg, the founder of Facebook.
How did Zuckerberg recognize the potential of
social networking? How was he able to turn this
basic idea into a billion dollar organization? What
background, education, and experiences did he
have that helped him in this endeavor?
2. Identify a social networking organization that
interests you. Do research to identify current job
openings and the qualifications needed to fill
open positions at the firm. Do any of these posi-
tions appeal to you? Why or why not?
3. Explore LinkedIn, a social media network for
professional networking. Use some of its features
to find former students of your school or cowor-
kers at your place of employment. What are some
of the advantages of using such a Web site? What
are some of the potential problems? Would you
consider joining LinkedIn? Why or why not?
Case Studies
Case One
Cloud Helps Fight Cancer
Each minute one person in the United States dies from
cancer—over half a million deaths per year. Thousands of
scientists and physicians are working around the clock to
fight cancer where it starts—in our DNA.
DNA is a molecule present in our cells that carries most
of the genetic instructions used in the development,
functioning, and reproduction of all known living organisms.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 291
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The information in DNA is stored as a code made up of four
chemical bases adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C), and
thymine (T). Human DNA consists of about 3 billion bases,
and more than 99 percent of those bases are the same in all
people. The complete set of DNA instructions is called your
genome, and it comes packaged into two sets of
chromosomes, one set from your mother and one set from
your father. Sometimes those instructions are miscoded or
misread, which can cause cells to malfunction and grow out
of control—resulting in cancer.
Doctors now routinely use patient genetic data along with
personal data and health factors to design highly personalized
treatments for cancer patients. However, genome sequencing
is a highly complex effort—it takes about 100 gigabytes of
data to represent just a single human genome. Only a few
years ago, it was not even feasible to analyze an entire human
genome. The Human Genome Project (HGP) was the
international, collaborative research program whose goal was
the complete mapping and understanding of all the genes of
human beings. The HGP took over 15 years and cost in the
neighborhood of $3 billion, but the result was the ability to
read the complete genetic blueprint for humans.
It takes a computer with powerful processing power and
prodigious amounts of storage capacity to process all the
patient data required to sequence their genome. Most
researchers simply do not have the in-house computing
facilities equal to the challenge. As a result, they turn to cloud
computing solutions, such as the Amazon Web Services
public cloud system. Thanks to cloud computing and other
technical advances, sequencing of a human genome can now
be done in about 40 hours at a cost of under $5000.
Researchers at Nationwide Children’s Hospital in
Columbus, Ohio invented Churchill, a software application
that analyzes gene sequences very efficiently. Using cloud
computing and this new algorithm, researchers at the
hospital are now able to analyze a thousand individual
genomes over the period of a week. Not only does this
technology enable the hospital to help individual patients, it
also helps large-scale research efforts exploring the genetic
mutations that cause diseases.
Using the cloud also enables doctors and researchers
worldwide to share information and collaborate more easily.
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) is a research program
supported by the National Cancer Institute and the National
Human Genome Research Institute, whose goal is to identify
genomic changes in more than 20 different types of human
cancer. TCGA researchers compare the DNA samples of
normal tissue with cancer tissue taken from the same patient
to identify changes specific to that cancer. The researchers
hope to analyze hundreds of samples for each type of cancer
from many different patients to better understand what makes
one cancer different from another cancer. This is critical
because two patients with the same type of cancer can
experience very different outcomes and respond very
differently to the same treatment. Researchers hope to develop
more effective, individualized treatments for each patient by
connecting specific genomic changes with specific outcomes.
Critical Thinking Questions:
1. What advantages does cloud computing offer physi-
cians and researchers in their fight against cancer?
2. Estimate the amount of data required to analyze the
human genome of 100 patients for each of 20 different
types of cancer.
3. Physicians must abide by HIPAA regulations when
transmitting data back and forth to the cloud. The
penalties for noncompliance are based on the level of
negligence and can range from $100 to $50,000 per
violation (or per record). Violations can also carry
criminal charges, resulting in jail time. What
measures can be taken when using cloud computing
to ensure that patient confidentiality will not be
violated?
SOURCES: Gaudin, Sharon, “How The Cloud Helps Fight Cancer,”
Computerworld, May 20, 2015, www.computerworld.com/article
/2923753/cloud-computing/how-the-cloud-helps-fight-cancer.html;
“Deoxyribonucleic Acid Fact Sheet,” www.genome.gov/25520880,
accessed December 7, 2015; “Cancer Genomics What Does It Mean to
You?,” The Cancer Genome Atlas, http//cancergenome.nih.gov/Publish
edContent/Files/pdfs/1.1.0_CancerGenomics_TCGA-Genomics-Bro
chure-508.pdf; “TCGA on AWS,” http//aws.amazon.com/public-data-
sets/tcga, accessed December 7, 2015; “An Overview of the Human
Genome Project,” National Human Genome Research Institute, www
.genome.gov/12011238, accessed December 10, 2015.
Case Two
Globacom Invests in Its Mobile Network
Infrastructure in Africa
Approximately 46 percent of the world’s population now has
access to the Internet—a key factor in encouraging economic
activity and expanding educational opportunities. However,
Internet access in Africa continues to trail that of the rest of
the world. The continent contains 16 percent of the world’s
population, but represents only about 9.8 percent of the
world’s Internet users. Affordability and logistical barriers
still prevent the vast majority of Africa’s population from
accessing the wealth of information and services available
online.
Increasingly, however, people in Africa—and around the
globe—are breaking down those barriers by using mobile
devices to gain access to the Internet. In 2015, there were an
estimated 7 billion mobile broadband subscriptions
worldwide, and that number is growing by almost 25 percent
each year. As the world’s dependence on mobile
technologies grows, telecommunications companies are
increasing their investment in the networks that support
those technologies.
Globacom Limited is one of the fastest-growing mobile
communications companies in the world, operating mobile
networks in Nigeria and several other West African countries
under the GLO brand. The company is the second largest
mobile network operator in Nigeria, where mobile devices
account for over 76 percent of Web traffic (more than double
the world average of 33 percent).
In order to provide reliable Internet access to its mobile
subscribers, Globacom invests heavily in its network
infrastructure. In 2011, the company became the first to lay a
high-capacity, fiber-optic submarine cable from the United
Kingdom to Nigeria. The large-scale project, which also
connects points in Ghana, Senegal, Mauritania, Morocco,
Portugal, and Spain, cost the company more than $800
million. The underwater cable system allowed Globacom to
292 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

expand its network, boost capacity, and increase Internet
upload and download speeds. For Globacom’s mobile
subscribers in Nigeria, the new cable also represented a
significant jump in international connectivity—considered to
be one of the critical requirements for the development of the
Internet in any country.
Globacom also makes use of big data capabilities to
improve its network performance and enhance the quality of
the customer service it provides its subscribers. The company
recently implemented Oracle’s Big Data Appliance platform,
a hardware and software package that allows the company to
analyze both structured and unstructured data related to
issues such as terminated networks, event times and
durations, event cost, quality of service, and overall network
performance. Globacom’s IT staff uses the Oracle platform to
capture and analyze more than 1 billion call-data records per
day—the equivalent of 5 gigabytes of user-traffic information
per second. According to Jameel Mohammed, Globacom’s
group chief operating officer, the Oracle platform “enables us
to capture, store, and analyze data that we were unable to
access before. We now analyze network events 40 times
faster.”
With a reduction in average query response time for
network events from three minutes to five seconds,
Globacom’s call center agents are better able to provide
subscribers fast and reliable information regarding network
performance. The company has significantly increased its
“first-call resolution rate,” saving the company more than
13 million call center minutes, or the equivalent of 80 full-
time customer service employees, annually.
For subscribers, Globacom’s investment in its network
infrastructure along with its big data initiatives translate into
improved network coverage and reliability, better customer
service, and, perhaps most importantly, easier and more
consistent access to the Internet—including a wide range of
modern communications services, such as online banking
and payment services, teleconferencing, distance learning,
and telemedicine.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. What incentives does a mobile network operator have
to make ongoing, expensive investments in its network
infrastructure? What have been some of the benefits to
Globacom’s subscribers of the company’s investment
in its mobile network?
2. Big data applications and techniques allow network
operators to make use of large quantities of network-
related data, which was previously discarded due to
the time and resources required to effectively ana-
lyze the data. What are some data points that you
think would be most useful for a communications
company to analyze when looking for ways to
improve their network performance? What data
points related to network activity and performance
might be useful from a customer service or market-
ing standpoint?
3. Do research online to learn about some of the other
factors that have impeded Internet access for most of
the population in Africa and other parts of the world.
What factors besides the level of network infrastruc-
ture investment might affect Internet access rates in a
given country?
SOURCES: “Ericsson Mobility Report,” Ericsson, www
.ericsson.com/res/docs/2016/mobility-report/ericsson
-mobility-report-feb-2016-interim.pdf, accessed February 20,
2016; “ICT Facts & Figures: The World in 2015,” International
Telecommunication Union, www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics
/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2015.pdf, May 2015;
“Internet Users in the World by Region, November 2015”
Internet World Stats, www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm,
accessed February 20, 2016; “Internet Goes Mobile: Country
Report Nigeria,” Ericsson www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2015
/consumerlab/ericsson-consumerlab-internet-goes-mobile-
nigeria.pdf, accessed February 21, 2016; “Globacom Saves
Over 35,000 Call-Processing Minutes Daily and Improves
Data for Decision-Making and Customer Service,” Oracle,
www.oracle.com/us/corporate/customers/customersearch
/globacom-1-big-data-ss-2207715.html, accessed February
20, 2016; Banks, Roland, “There Are Now 3 Billion Internet
Users Worldwide in 2015,” Mobile Industry Review, January
26, 2015, www.mobileindustryreview.com/2015 /01/3-
billion-internet-users-2015.html; “Africa’s 50 Richest: #7
Mike Adenuga,” Forbes, accessed February 21, 2016.
Notes
1. Ignatescu, Adrian, “Most Popular Instant Messaging
Apps in 2014-Review & Infographic,” Techchangers
(blog), March 30, 2014, www.techchangers.com
/instant-messaging-apps-review-most-popular-2014
-top10.
2. Claburn, Thomas, “Walmart Jumps into Crowded Mobile
Payment Market,” Information Week, December 10,
2015, www.informationweek.com/mobile/mobile-appli
cations/walmart-jumps-into-crowded-mobile-payment
-market/d/d-id/1323518.
3. Hamblen, Matt, “Levi’s Stadium App Makes Use of Aruba
Beacons to Help 49ers Fans Get Around,” Computer-
world, November 4, 2014, www.computerworld.com
/article/2842829/levis-stadium-app-makes-use-of
-aruba-beacons-to-help-49ers-fans-get-around.html.
4. Wohnoutak, Bill, “Childhood Burn Care: A Telemedicine
Success Story,” Dermatology Times, February 18, 2015,
dermatologytimes.modernmedicine.com/dermatology
-times/news/telemedicines-role-childhood-burn-care?
page=full.
5. “Saudi Telecom Company Deploys High-Capacity
International Mesh Network Powered by Ciena,”
Investors.com, October 21, 2015, news.investors
.com/newsfeed-business-wire/102115-141851937-saudi
-telecom-company-deploys-high-capacity-international
-mesh-network-powered-by-ciena.aspx.
6. “PIONIER-Polish Optical Internet,” PIONIER, http://blog.
pionier.net.pl/sc2013/pionier, accessed January 6, 2014.
7. “About Chi-X Japan,” Chi-X Japan, www.chi-x.jp/ABOUT
US.aspx, accessed February 19, 2016.
CHAPTER 6 • Networks and Cloud Computing 293
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

8. “Iridium Everywhere,” Iridium, www.iridium.com,
accessed December 11, 2015.
9. Cheng, Roger, “Verizon to Be First to Field-Test Crazy-
Fast 5G Wireless,” CNET, September 8, 2015, www.cnet
.com/news/verizon-to-hold-worlds-first-crazy-fast-5g
-wireless-field-tests-next-year.
10. “PRTG Network Monitor Helps Small, Family-Owned IT
Consulting Business Provide World-Class Reliability,”
Paessler, www.paessler.com/company/casestudies/covell_
group_uses_prtg, accessed December 16, 2015.
11. Higginbotham, Stacy, “Google Launches Andromeda, a
Software Defined Network Underlying Its Cloud,”
Gigaom, April 2, 2014, https://gigaom.com/2014/04/02
/google-launches-andromeda-a-software-defined-net
work-underlying-its-cloud.
12. “Internet World Stats,” Internet World Stats, www.internet
worldstats.com/stats.htm, accessed December 13, 2015.
13. Alexandrova, Katerina, “Using New Media Effectively:
An Analysis of Barack Obama’s Election Campaign
Aimed at Young Americans,” Thesis, New York 2010,
www.academia.edu/1526998/Using_New_Media_Effecti
vely_an_Analysis_of_Barack_Obamas_Election_
Campaign_Aimed_at_Young_Americans.
14. “Electronic Weapons: Syria Shows the Way,” Strategy-
Page, January 13, 2014, www.strategypage.com/htmw
/htecm/articles/20140113.aspx.
15. Smith, Charlie, “Jimmy Wales on Censorship in China,”
The WorldPost, September 4, 2015, www.huffingtonpost
.com/charlie-smith/jimmy-wales-on-censor
ship_b_8087400.html.
16. Howard, Alexander, “In Saudi Arabia, Embracing New
‘Freedom’ on Social Media May Come with Serious
Risks,” Huffington Post, May 26, 2015, www.huffington
post.com/2015/05/26/saudi-arabia-social-media_n
_7444742.html.
17. Naím, Moisés and Bennet, Phillip, “The Anti-Information
Age,” The Atlantic, February 16, 2015, www.theatlantic
.com/international/archive/2015/02/government-censor
ship-21st-century-internet/385528.
18. “AWS Case Study: Airbnb,” Amazon Web Services, http://
aws.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies/airbnb,
accessed December 13, 2015.
19. Schnuer, Jenna, “Meet the Winners of Our Entrepreneur
of 2014 Awards,” Entrepreneur, January 20, 2015, www
.entrepreneur.com/slideshow/240844.
20. “Transforming Tyco with Yammer,” Yammer, https://
about.yammer.com/customers/tyco, accessed January 13,
2014.
21. “About Khan Academy,” Khan Academy, www.khana
cademy.org/about, accessed December 13, 2015.
22. “About Us,” NPower, www.npower.org/Our-Purpose
/Our-Purpose.aspx, accessed December 13, 2015.
23. Ignatescu, “Most Popular Instant Messaging Apps in
2014.”
24. “Addison Fire Saves $5K Yearly Using GoToMeeting
with HDFaces Video Conferencing,” Citrix, http://news
.citrixonline.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Addision
-Fire-District_G2M_ss.pdf, accessed January 30, 2014.
25. “Rhapsody Music Service Now Has 3 Million Paying
Subscribers,” Variety, July 22, 2015, http://variety.com
/2015/digital/news/rhapsody-music-service-now-has-3
-million-paying-subscribers-1201545576.
26. Newman, Jared, “Popcorn Time Users Sued again, This
Time for Streaming 2015’s Survivor,” PC World, Sep-
tember 2, 2015, www.pcworld.com/article/2979681/soft
ware-entertainment/popcorn-time-users-sued-again
-this-time-for-streaming-2015s-survivor.html.
27. “YouTube Statistics,” YouTube, www.youtube.com/yt
/press/statistics.html, accessed January 21, 2014.
28. Takahashi, Dean, “Mobile Gaming Could Drive Entire
Video Game Industry to $100 Billion in Revenue by
2017,” Gamesbeat, January 14, 2014, http://venturebeat
.com/2014/01/14/mobile-gaming-could-drive-entire
-game-industry-to-100b-in-revenue-by-2017.
29. “Groupon Announces Fourth Quarter and Fiscal Year
2015 Results,” Groupon, February 11, 2016, http://inves
tor.groupon.com/releasedetail.cfm?releaseid=954580.
30. “4 Real-World Stories about the Interactive Intranet,” Jive
(blog), June 18, 2015, www.jivesoftware.com/blog/real
-world-stories-about-interactive-intranet.
31. Romeo, Jim, et al, “A Practical Guide to the Internet of
Things,” Tech Target, (c) 2015.
32. Kepes, Ben, “The Internet of Things, Coming Soon to an
Airline near You,” Runway Girl Network, March 14,
2015, www.runwaygirlnetwork.com/2015/03/14/the
-internet-of-things-coming-soon-to-an-airline-near-you.
33. van Zyl, Gareth, “Internet of Everything Helps Prevent
Dubai Crane Collisions,” Web Africa, June 4, 2014, www
.itwebafrica.com/cloud/516-africa/233009-internet-of
-everything-helps-prevent-dubai-crane-collisions.
34. “Reducing Costs with a Converged Roadway Network,”
Cisco, www.cisco.com/c/dam/en/us/solutions/collateral
/industry-solutions/Aegean-Motorway-voc-case-study
.pdf, accessed January 4, 2015.
35. “iCloud,” Apple, www.apple.com/icloud, accessed
January 8, 2014.
36. “AWS Case Study: Spotify,” Amazon Web Services,
aws.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies/spotify,
accessed December 17, 2015.
37. “The College Network,” www.slideshare.net/EarthLink
Business/private-cloud-case-study-the-college-network
-earth-link-business, accessed January 9, 2014.
38. “Cloud Computing Options,” PC Today, June 2014.
39. Ramel, David, “New Research Shows ‘Staggering’ Failure
Rates for Cloud Projects,” Enterprise Systems, June 26,
2014, http://esj.com/articles/2014/06/26/cloud-projects
-fail.aspx.
40. Olavsrud, Thor, “Why a Media Giant Sold Its Data Center
and Headed to the Cloud,” CIO, July 15, 2014, www.cio
.com/article/2453894/data-center/why-a-media-giant-
sold-its-data-center-and-headed-to-the-cloud.html.
41. Ovide, Shira and Boulton, Clint, “Flood of Rivals Could
Burst Amazon’s Cloud,” The Wall Street Journal, July 25,
2014, www.wsj.com/articles/storm-clouds-over-amazon
-business-1406328539?mg=id=wsj.
42. “Revlon Fact Sheet,” Revlon, www.revlon.com/about
/fact-sheet, accessed February 21, 2016.
43. “Revlon, Inc. Moves to the Cloud with Juniper Networks
to Increase Global Business Agility,” Juniper Networks,
www.juniper.net/assets/us/en/local/pdf/case-studies
/3520444-en.pdf, accessed October 6, 2014.
44. “Cloud Computing Options,” PC Today, June 2014.
45. “Autonomic Computing,” IBM, www.ibm.com/developer
works/tivoli/autonomic.html, accessed October 7, 2014.
294 PART 2 • Information Technology Concepts
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

PART 3
Business
Information Systems
Chapter 7
Electronic and Mobile Commerce
Chapter 8
Enterprise Systems
Chapter 9
Business Intelligence and Analytics
Chapter 10
Knowledge Management and
Specialized Information Systems
Sergey Nivens/Shutterstock.com
295
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
7
Electronic and Mobile
Commerce
Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• Although the business-to-consumer market grabs more
of the news headlines, the B2B market is considerably
larger and is growing more rapidly. B2B sales within the
United States were estimated to be over $780 billion in
2015, twice the size of B2C commerce.
• Target reported that cyberthieves compromised the
credit card data and personal information including
phone numbers, email and home addresses, credit and
debit card numbers, PINS, expiration dates, and mag-
netic stripe data of as many as 110 million of its custo-
mers. Within two days after the Target data breach was
announced, a class action lawsuit was filed claiming
that Target was negligent in its failure to implement and
maintain reasonable security procedures and practices.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• Electronic and mobile commerce are evolving,
providing new ways of conducting business that
present both potential benefits and problems.
• Describe the current status of various forms of
e-commerce, including B2B, B2C, C2C, and
e-government.
• Outline a multistage purchasing model that
describes how e-commerce works.
• Define m-commerce and identify some of its
unique challenges.
• E-commerce and m-commerce can be used in
many innovative ways to improve the operations
of an organization.
• Identify several e-commerce and m-commerce
applications.
• Identify several advantages associated with the
use of e-commerce and m-commerce.
• E-commerce and m-commerce offer many
advantages yet raise many challenges.
• Identify the many benefits and challenges asso-
ciated with the continued growth of e-commerce
and m-commerce.
• Organizations must define and execute an effec-
tive strategy to be successful in e-commerce and
m-commerce.
• Outline the key components of a successful
e-commerce and m-commerce strategy.
• E-commerce and m-commerce require the careful
planning and integration of a number of technol-
ogy infrastructure components.
• Identify the key components of technology infra-
structure that must be in place for e-commerce
and m-commerce to work.
• Discuss the key features of the electronic pay-
ment systems needed to support e-commerce
and m-commerce.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Electronic and Mobile Commerce?
Electronic and mobile commerce have transformed many areas of our lives and careers. One
fundamental change has been the manner in which companies interact with their suppliers, customers,
government agencies, and other business partners. As a result, most organizations today have set up
business on the Internet or are considering doing so. To be successful, all members of the organization
need to plan and participate in that effort. As a sales or marketing manager, you will be expected to help
define your firm’s e-commerce business model. As a customer service employee, you can expect to
participate in the development and operation of your firm’s Web site. As a human resource or public
relations manager, you will likely be asked to provide Web site content for use by potential employees
and shareholders. As an analyst in finance, you will need to know how to measure the business impact
of your firm’s Web operations and how to compare that to competitors’ efforts. Clearly, as an employee
in today’s organization, you must understand what the potential role of e-commerce is, how to capitalize
on its many opportunities, and how to avoid its pitfalls. The emergence of m-commerce adds an
exciting new dimension to these opportunities and challenges. Many customers, potential employees,
and shareholders will be accessing your firm’s Web site via smartphones, tablets, and laptops. This
chapter begins by providing a brief overview of the dynamic world of e-commerce.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• What are the advantages of e-commerce and m-commerce?
• How do innovations in technology and infrastructure affect regions across the globe?
An Introduction to Electronic Commerce
Electronic commerce (e-commerce) is the conducting of business activities
(e.g., distribution, buying, selling, marketing, and servicing of products or ser-
vices) electronically over computer networks. It includes any business transac-
tion
executed
electronically
between
companies
(business-to-business),
companies and consumers (business-to-consumer), consumers and other con-
sumers (consumer-to-consumer), public sector and business (government-
to-business), public sector to citizens (government-to-citizen), and public
sector to public sector (government-to-government). Business activities that
are strong candidates for conversion to e-commerce are ones that are paper
based, time consuming, and inconvenient for customers.
Business-to-Business E-Commerce
Business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce is a subset of e-commerce in
which all the participants are organizations. B2B e-commerce is a useful tool
for connecting business partners in a virtual supply chain to cut resupply
times and reduce costs. Although the business-to-consumer market grabs
more of the news headlines, the B2B market is considerably larger and is
growing more rapidly. B2B sales within the United States were estimated to
be over $780 billion in 2015, twice the size of B2C commerce.1
A recent survey by Forrester Research and Internet Retailer showed that
30 percent of B2B buyers now make more than half of their purchases online,
and that percentage will likely increase to 56 percent by 2017, with much of
that growth coming from purchases that are researched or completed through
mobile devices.2 Popular B2C Web sites have helped raise expectations as to
how an e-commerce site must operate, and many B2B companies are
responding to those heightened expectations by investing heavily in their
B2B platforms. Spending on e-commerce technologies by large U.S. manufac-
turers, wholesalers, and distributors is expected to top $2 billion in 2019.3
business-to-business (B2B)
e-commerce: A subset of
e-commerce in which all the
participants are organizations.
298 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Moving more customers online is key to B2B commerce success, so in
addition to investing in new technologies, B2B companies are focusing on
new ways of engaging their customer across multiple channels—both online
and offline. Providing customers with a consistent experience regardless of
channel was a top priority for 68 percent of B2B organizations who took part
in another recent survey commissioned by Accenture Interactive and SAP. The
top e-commerce priorities for many B2B buyers include transparent pricing,
easily
accessible
product
details,
purchase
tracking,
and
personalized
recommendations.4
Many organizations use both buy-side e-commerce to purchase goods and
services from their suppliers and sell-side e-commerce to sell products to their
customers. Buy-side e-commerce activities include identifying and comparing
competitive suppliers and products, negotiating and establishing prices and
terms, ordering and tracking shipments, and steering organizational buyers to
preferred suppliers and products. Sell-side e-commerce activities include
enabling the purchase of products online, providing information for custo-
mers to evaluate the organization’s goods and services, encouraging sales and
generating leads from potential customers, providing a portal of information
of interest to the customer, and enabling interactions among a community of
consumers. Thus, buy-side and sell-side e-commerce activities support the
organization’s value chain and help the organization provide lower prices,
better service, higher quality, or uniqueness of product and service.
Grainger is a B2B distributor of products for facilities maintenance, repair,
and operations (a category called MRO) with more than 1.5 million different
items offered online. See Figure 7.1. In 2015, the company’s online sales
exceeded $4 billion or more than 40 percent of the company’s total sales.5 A key
part of Grainger’s e-commerce success is its suite of mobile apps, which make it
possible for customers to access products online and quickly find and order pro-
ducts via a smartphone or other mobile device. Currently, 15 percent of the com-
pany’s e-commerce traffic comes to its Web site through mobile devices.6
Business-to-Consumer E-Commerce
Business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce is a form of e-commerce in which
customers deal directly with an organization and avoid intermediaries. Early
B2C pioneers competed with the traditional “brick-and-mortar” retailers in an
industry, selling their products directly to consumers. For example, in 1995,
FIGURE 7.1
Grainger e-commerce
Grainger offers more than 1.5 million
items online.
Source: grainger.com
business-to-consumer (B2C)
e-commerce: A form of e-commerce
in which customers deal directly with an
organization and avoid intermediaries.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 299
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

upstart Amazon.com challenged well-established booksellers Waldenbooks
and Barnes & Noble. Amazon did not become profitable until 2003; the firm
has grown from selling only books on a U.S.-based Web site to selling a wide
variety of products through international Web sites in Canada, China, France,
Germany, Japan, and the United Kingdom. A recent Forrester Research Inc.
and Internet Retailer survey found that the average B2C order value was
$158.7 As with B2B sales, B2C revenues are increasingly being driven by
customers using mobile devices. In Q3 of 2015, smartphones accounted for
14 percent of all B2C revenue—a 98 percent jump from the previous year.8
By using B2C e-commerce to sell directly to consumers, producers or
providers of consumer products can eliminate the middlemen, or intermediar-
ies, between them and the consumer. In many cases, this squeezes costs and
inefficiencies out of the supply chain and can lead to higher profits for busi-
nesses and lower prices for consumers. The elimination of intermediate orga-
nizations between the producer and the consumer is called disintermediation.
More than just a tool for placing orders, the Internet enables shoppers to
compare prices, features, and value, and to check other customers’ opinions.
Consumers can, for example, easily and quickly compare information about
automobiles, cruises, loans, insurance, and home prices to find better values.
Internet shoppers can unleash shopping bots or access sites such as eBay
Shopping.com, Google Shopping, Shopzilla, PriceGrabber, Yahoo! Shopping,
or Excite to browse the Internet and obtain lists of items, prices, and
merchants.
Worldwide, B2C e-commerce sales continue to grow rapidly, reaching
$1.9 trillion in 2014. The Asia-Pacific region represents the world’s largest and
fastest-growing B2C market; it accounts for almost 40 percent of total world-
wide B2C sales.9 China’s e-commerce sales are now over $670 billion and are
growing at a rate of over 40 percent per year. Other top markets with double-
digit e-commerce sales growth include: United Kingdom ($99.4 billion), Japan
($89.6 billion), and Germany ($61.8 billion).10 Table 7.1 shows the estimated
B2C e-commerce sales by world region from 2012 to 2017 (estimated).
One reason for the steady growth in B2C e-commerce is shoppers find
that many goods and services are cheaper when purchased online, including
stocks, books, newspapers, airline tickets, and hotel rooms.
Another reason for the growth in B2C e-commerce is that online B2C
shoppers have the ability to design a personalized product. Nike, Inc., pro-
vides a successful example of this approach to personalization. The com-
pany’s online NIKEiD service enables purchasers to customize a pair of shoes
by selecting from different material, features, and fit options—including the
TABLE 7.1 Forecasted global B2C e-commerce sales (USD billions)
Region
Sales (billions)
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Asia-Pacific
$301.2
$383.9
$525.2
$681.2
$855.7
$1,052.9
North America
$379.8
$431.0
$482.6
$538.3
$597.9
$660.4
Western Europe
$277.5
$312.0
$347.4
$382.7
$414.2
$445.0
Central and Eastern Europe
$41.5
$49.5
$58.0
$64.4
$68.9
$73.1
Latin America
$37.6
$48.1
$57.7
$64.9
$70.6
$74.6
Middle East and Africa
$20.6
$27.0
$33.8
$39.6
$45.5
$51.4
Worldwide
$1,058.2
$1,251.4
$1,504.6
$1,771.0
$2,052.7
$2,357.4
Source: “Global B2C Ecommerce Sales to Hit $1.5 Trillion This Year Driven by Growth in Emerging Markets,” e-Marketer, February 3, 2014, http://www.emark
eter.com/Article/Global-B2C-Ecommerce-Sales-Hit-15-Trillion-This-Year-Driven-by-Growth-Emerging-Markets/1010575#sthash.ZQGggr6U.dpuf.
300 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

level of insole cushioning, sole material, and the fabric color and design of
everything from the lining of the shoe to the laces. Nike also recently added a
Personalized ID (PiD) service, which allows customers to further individualize
their shoes by adding a personal message to their shoes—whether that be a
personal mantra, a sports team affiliation, or a personal record. According to
Ken Dice, NIKEiD’s vice president and general manager, “The new Personal-
ized iD service is exciting because it gives athletes the opportunity to commu-
nicate inspiration, support, passion and connection to the world around them
in a meaningful and timely way.”11,12
Yet a third reason for the continued growth of B2C e-commerce is the
effective use of social media networks by many companies looking to
reach consumers, promote their products, and generate online sales. Vera
Bradley is a luggage design company that produces a variety of products,
including quilted cotton luggage, handbags, and accessories. The firm has
more than 1.6 million Facebook followers and is one of the most followed
Internet retailers on Pinterest. Indeed, Vera Bradley has been extremely
conscientious in cross-posting items from Facebook, Flickr, and YouTube
to Pinterest. When you visit the Vera Bradley Web site, Pinterest and other
social buttons appear on the product pages so that shoppers can share
their likes with friends. Vera Bradley is an example of a B2C retailer that
makes social media channels work together effectively to reach more
potential customers.
Facebook, Instagram, Pinterest, and Twitter are just a few social network-
ing sites that are continuing to add “paid social” features designed to help
e-commerce companies generate sales by reaching a targeted audience. Pin-
terest is gradually rolling out “Buyable Pins,” starting with large retailers like
Macy’s and Nordstrom, allowing more of the social network’s 100 million
active users to purchase products online without ever leaving the site.13
Many B2C merchants have also added social commerce or social shopping
tools to their own sites. For example, Target’s online Awesome Shop features
user-generated images of Target products from Instagram. Customers have
three options for exploring the online shop: Products, Looks, and Places.
When a shopper clicks on an image in the shop, they can get details on the
products shown, and with another click, they can initiate a purchase of the
item from Target’s Web site.14
Another important trend is that of consumers researching products
online but then purchasing those products at a local brick-and-mortar store.
Sales in local stores that are stimulated through online marketing and
research are called Web-influenced sales. Such sales are estimated to exceed
$1.7 trillion—roughly 40 percent of total retail sales, and in some categories,
such as baby/toddler and home furnishing, Web-influenced sales make up
more than 55 percent of total sales.15
Amazon is the dominant B2C retailer in the United States, as illustrated in
Table 7.2, which lists the country’s five largest B2C retailers.
TABLE 7.2 Largest business-to-consumer retailers in the United States
Rank
Company
Total Web Sales (Billions of Dollars)
1
Amazon
$71.8
2
Walmart
$13.2
3
Apple
$10.7
4
Macy’s
$4.7
5
Home Depot
$4.3
Source: Wahba, Phil, “This Chart Shows Just How Dominant Amazon Is,” Fortune, http://fortune.com/2015/11
/06/amazon-retailers-ecommerce.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 301
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

As a result of a 1992 Supreme Court ruling that says online retailers don’t
have to collect sales taxes in states where they lack a physical presence, mil-
lions of online shoppers do not pay state or local tax on their online pur-
chases. Consumers who live in states with sales tax are supposed to keep
track of their out-of-state purchases and report those “use taxes” on their
state income tax returns. However, few tax filers report such purchases. Thus,
despite having a legal basis to do so, states find it very difficult to collect sales
taxes on Internet purchases. This avoidance of sales tax creates a price advan-
tage for online retailers over brick-and-mortar stores, where sales taxes must
be collected. It also results in the loss of about $23 billion in tax revenue that
could go to state and local governments to provide services for their citizens.
In 2013, and again in 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to get involved
in state efforts to force Web retailers such as Overstock and eBay to collect
sales tax from customers. The court’s failure to act has put pressure on Con-
gress to devise a national solution, as both online and traditional retailers
complain about a patchwork of state laws and conflicting lower-court deci-
sions; however, efforts to revise federal Internet sales tax rules have, so far,
been unsuccessful. Many states are now devising ways to sidestep the
Supreme Court’s rulings or initiate new challenges in the courts. Louisiana,
Nebraska, and Utah are all considering measures that would expand the defi-
nition of “physical presence” to include a company’s use of a third-party ship-
ping company to deliver products to customers’ homes.16 In the meantime,
several other states are simply moving forward with efforts to collect tax
online purchases, and many merchants are already complying. Amazon, for
instance, already collects sales tax on purchases in 24 states.17
Consumer-to-Consumer E-Commerce
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C) e-commerce is a subset of e-commerce that
involves electronic transactions between consumers using a third party to
facilitate the process. eBay is an example of a C2C e-commerce site; customers
buy and sell items to each other through the site. Founded in 1995, eBay has
become one of the most popular Web sites in the world, with 2015 net reve-
nue of $8.5 billion.18
Other popular C2C sites include Bidz.com, Craigslist, eBid, Etsy, Fiverr,
Ibidfree, Kijiji, Ubid, and Taobao. The growth of C2C is responsible for a
drastic reduction in the use of the classified pages of newspapers to advertise
and sell personal items and services, so it has had a negative impact on that
industry. On the other hand, C2C has created an opportunity for many people
to make a living out of selling items on auction Web sites. According to
eBay, the gross merchandise volume for items sold on its site in 2015 was
$82 billion.19
Companies and individuals engaging in e-commerce must be careful that
their sales do not violate the rules of various county, state, or country legal
jurisdictions. More than 4,000 Web sites offer guns for sale and over 20,000
gun ads are posted each week on the Web site Armslist alone. Extending
background checks to the flourishing world of online gun sales has become
a highly controversial issue in the United States. Under current law, the
question of when a background check must occur depends on who is selling
the gun. Federal regulations require licensed dealers to perform checks, but
the legal definition of who must be licensed has not been clear.20 An Execu-
tive Order signed by President Barack Obama on January, 4, 2016, is
designed to extend background check requirements to more types of online
gun sellers, including more private sellers who had previously been
exempted.21
Table 7.3 summarizes the key factors that differentiate B2B, B2C, and C2C
e-commerce.
consumer-to-consumer (C2C)
e-commerce: A subset of
e-commerce that involves electronic
transactions between consumers using
a third party to facilitate the process.
302 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

E-Government
E-government is the use of information and communications technology to
simplify the sharing of information, speed formerly paper-based processes,
and improve the relationship between citizens and government. Government-
to-citizen
(G2C),
government-to-business
(G2B),
and
government-
to-government (G2G) are all forms of e-government, each with different
applications.
Citizens can use G2C applications to submit their state and federal tax
returns online, renew auto licenses, purchase postage, and apply for student
loans. Citizens can purchase items from the U.S. government through its GSA
Auctions Web site, which offers the general public the opportunity to bid
electronically on a wide range of government assets. Healthcare.gov is a
healthcare exchange Web site created by and operated under the U.S. federal
government as specified in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. It
is designed for use by residents in the 36 U.S. states that opted not to create
their own state exchanges. By accessing this Web site, users can view health-
care options, determine if they are eligible for healthcare subsidiaries, and
enroll in a plan.22
G2B applications support the purchase of materials and services from pri-
vate industry by government procurement offices, enable firms to bid on gov-
ernment contracts, and help businesses identify government contracts on
which they may bid. The Web site Business.USA.gov allows businesses to
access information about laws and regulations and to download relevant
forms needed to comply with federal requirements for their businesses. The
http://reverseauctions.gsa.gov/reverseauctions/reverseauctions/ Web site is a
business and auction exchange Web site that helps federal government agen-
cies purchase information system products by using reverse auctions and by
aggregating demand for commonly purchased products. FedBizOpps.gov is a
Web site where government agencies post procurement notices to provide an
easy point of contact for businesses that want to bid on government
contracts.
G2G applications support transactions between government entities, such
as between the federal government and state or local governments. Govern-
ment to Government Services Online (GSO) is a suite of Web applications
that enables government organizations to report information—such as birth
TABLE 7.3 Differences among B2B, B2C, and C2C
Factors
B2B
B2C
C2C
Typical value of sale
Thousands or millions of
dollars
Tens or hundreds of
dollars
Tens of dollars
Length of sales process
Days to months
Days to weeks
Hours to days
Number of decision
makers involved
Several people to a dozen
or more
One or two
One or two
Uniformity of offer
Typically a uniform
product offering
More customized product
offering
Single product offering,
one of a kind
Complexity of buying
process
Extremely complex; much
room for negotiation on
quantity, quality, options
and features, price, pay-
ment, and delivery options
Relatively simple; limited
negotiation on price, pay-
ment, and delivery options
Relatively simple; limited
negotiation on payment
and delivery options;
negotiations focus on price
Motivation for sale
Driven by a business deci-
sion or need
Driven by an individual
consumer’s need or
emotion
Driven by an individual
consumer’s need or
emotion
e-government: The use of informa-
tion and communications technology to
simplify the sharing of information,
speed formerly paper-based pro-
cesses, and improve the relationship
between citizens and government.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 303
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
and death data, arrest warrant information, and information about the amount
of state aid being received—to the administration of Social Security services.
This information can affect the payment of benefits to individuals. Many state
governments provide a range of e-government services to various state and
local agencies. For example, the state of Oregon’s transaction payment engine
(TPE) option enables agencies to use an efficient Internet payment solution
while adhering to statewide policies and procedures. This service is just one
aspect of Oregon’s E-Government Program, whose goals are creating a uni-
form state of Oregon online identity, promoting digital government, and sav-
ing Oregon taxpayers money.23,24
Building a Successful B2B Web Site
Your company operates a single store outside Atlanta, Georgia, that sells nearly
$50 million in maintenance, repair, and operations (MRO) supplies each year.
Any product that is used in the manufacturing process, but that isn’t incorporated
into the product itself, can be classified as MRO including consumables like clean-
ing supplies used to clean production machinery, supplies that are used to sup-
port
operations,
and
office
supplies
and
small
equipment
like
fans
and
compressors. Your customers are mainly professional buyers who work for one
of the many manufacturing companies in the area. They buy items based on
annual purchase contracts negotiated with your company’s sales reps.
Your company is keenly interesting in building a Web site to enable it to
reach customers nationwide. The firm tried entering e-commerce a few years
ago but the venture was a failure. The Web site was poorly designed so that
customers found it difficult to use and the technology selected proved to be
unreliable with the Web site crashing for a few hours every week. A small
group of employees is working with an experienced Web designer to design
the new Web site.
Review Questions
1.
Provide a strong justification for creating a new B2B Web site for your firm.
2.
In what ways would this new B2B Web site differ from a typical B2C
Web site?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
The Web site design team believes that the firm’s Web site should incorporate
a design and features similar to some of the best B2C Web sites. What do you
think this means? Can you offer some specific design ideas and features that
should be included?
2.
What are some potential issues the team faces in implementing and operating
this Web site?
Introduction to Mobile Commerce
Mobile commerce (m-commerce) relies on the use of mobile devices, such as
tablets and smartphones, to place orders and conduct business. Smartphone
manufacturers such as Apple, Huawei, Lenovo, LG, Samsung, and Xiaomi
are working with communications carriers such as AT&T, Sprint/Nextel,
T-Mobile, and Verizon to develop wireless devices, related technology, and
services to support m-commerce. The Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers (ICANN) created a .mobi domain in 2005 to help attract
mobile users to the Web. Afilias administers this domain and helps to ensure
that the .mobi destinations work quickly, efficiently, and effectively with all
mobile devices.
304 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Mobile Commerce in Perspective
Mobile commerce is a rapidly growing segment of e-commerce, with Japan, the
United Kingdom, and South Korea leading the world in m-commerce growth.25
The market for m-commerce in North America is maturing much later than in
other countries for several reasons. In North America, responsibility for net-
work infrastructure is fragmented among many providers and consumer pay-
ments are usually made by credit card. In most Western European countries,
consumers are much more willing to use m-commerce. Japanese consumers
are generally enthusiastic about new technology and therefore have been much
more likely to use mobile technologies to make purchases.
Worldwide, m-commerce accounted for 35 percent of all retail e-commerce
sales in the fourth quarter of 2015. In the United States, the share of
e-commerce transactions completed on a mobile device grew 15 percent from
the prior year, representing 30 percent of all e-commerce transactions.26
The number of mobile Web sites worldwide is growing rapidly because of
advances in wireless broadband technologies, the development of new and use-
ful applications, and the availability of less costly but more powerful smart-
phones. Experts point out that the relative clumsiness of mobile browsers and
security concerns still must be overcome to speed the growth of m-commerce.
M-Commerce Web Sites
A number of retailers have established special Web sites for mobile devices users.
Table 7.4 provides a list of some of the top-ranked mobile Web sites according to
a recent survey of more than 400,000 people by OC&C Strategy Consultants.
Consumers often place high value on different criteria, depending on the
type of mobile site. In the OC&C survey, eBay and Amazon ranked highly
due to their convenience, effective search tools, and transaction speed. The
mobile site for natural cosmetics company Lush was rated highly because it
created a strong emotional connection with consumers.
Advantages of Electronic and Mobile Commerce
Conversion to an e-commerce or m-commerce system enables organizations to
reach new customers, reduce the cost of doing business, speed the flow of
goods and information, increase the accuracy of order processing and order
fulfillment, and improve the level of customer service.
Reach New Customers
The establishment of an e-commerce Web site enables a firm to reach new
customers in new markets. Indeed, this is one of the primary reasons organi-
zations give for establishing a Web site.
TABLE 7.4 Highly rated m-commerce retail Web sites
Rank
Company
1
eBay
2
Amazon
3
Apple
4
Burberry
5
John Lewis
6
Lush
Source: Goldfingle, Gemma, “The Top 10 M-Commerce Sites, according to OC&C’s Proposition Index,” RetailWeek,
January 25, 2016, www.retail-week.com/technology/online-retail/the-top-10-m-commerce-sites-according-to-occs-prop
osition-index/7004140.fullarticle.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 305
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Founded in 1978, Shoe Carnival is a chain of more than 400 footwear stores
located in 33 states.27 Shoe Carnival’s unique concept involves creating a high-
energy atmosphere within each store through features such as a “spinning wheel
of savings” and a team member on a microphone interacting with shoppers.
According to Ken Zimmerman, vice president of e-commerce, the chain’s goal is
“to entertain our customers. We create a fun place with music and excitement.”
Until recently, the Shoe Carnival Web site served only as a source of information
for customers; however, the company has now launched a full e-commerce site—
which includes social shopping tools such as customer-generated reviews of indi-
vidual items—that is allowing the company to expand its reach to customers in
areas where it does not have physical stores. The company’s national advertising
campaign is focused on driving more traffic to the company’s e-commerce site,
and the company’s future online efforts will be focused on re-creating its “surprise
and delight” concept online to differentiate it from other online shoe stores.28
Reduce Costs
By eliminating or reducing time-consuming and labor-intensive steps through-
out the order and delivery process, more sales can be completed in the same
period and with increased accuracy. With increased speed and accuracy of
customer order information, companies can reduce the need for inventory—
from raw materials to safety stocks and finished goods—at all the intermedi-
ate manufacturing, storage, and transportation points.
BloomNation bills itself as a “trusted community marketplace for people
to list, discover, and send unique bouquets handcrafted by local florists across
the country.”29 Launched as a response to the rising commissions being
charged by the dominant floral wire services, including FTD, 1-800-Flowers,
and Teleflora, the BloomNation site offers floral arrangements from over
1,500 florists around the country who take and post their own photos on the
site. The florists are able to take advantage of the increased exposure and sta-
bility that BloomNation’s site offers, without some of the staffing and other
costs associated with processing individual customer orders and payments.
The florists also pay lower per-order fees—just 10 percent per order rather
than 27 percent charged by the large wire services.30
Speed the Flow of Goods and Information
When organizations and their customers are connected via e-commerce, the
flow of information is accelerated because electronic connections and commu-
nications are already established. As a result, information can flow from buyer
to seller easily, directly, and rapidly.
Shutterfly, an online provider of photographic products and services to both
businesses and consumers, generates $1 billion in sales annually. While the vast
majority of Shutterfly’s e-commerce revenue comes from B2C transactions, the com-
pany also offers B2B marketing products and services through its Web site, where
business customers can order customized, four-color marketing materials. The com-
pany’s e-commerce capabilities, automated workflow, and large-scale production
centers allow business customers to quickly customize and place their orders—
cutting the project completion time from weeks to days for many clients.31,32
Increase Accuracy
By enabling buyers to enter their own product specifications and order infor-
mation directly, human data-entry error on the part of the supplier is elimi-
nated. And order accuracy is important—no matter what the product is.
Domino’s, the second-largest pizza chain in the world, was one of the first
chain restaurants to offer an e-commerce site where customers could enter and
pay
for
their
orders.
Half
of
Domino’s
sales
now
comes
through
its
e-commerce site. Using the site’s Easy Order feature, customers can enter their
orders and address information directly—improving order and delivery accu-
racy. And for customers who create a “Pizza Profile” online, ordering can be as
306 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

simple as sending a tweet or a text (customers can initiate an order using just a
pizza emoji) or just clicking a button on the Domino’s smartphone app.33
Improve Customer Service
Increased and more detailed information about delivery dates and current sta-
tus can increase customer loyalty. In addition, the ability to consistently meet
customers’ desired delivery dates with high-quality goods and services elimi-
nates any incentive for customers to seek other sources of supply.
Customers come to Sticker Mule’s e-commerce site to order customized stick-
ers for a wide range of projects, whether that be to market a business, label pro-
ducts, drive traffic to a Web site, or raise money for a crowdfunding project.
When developing its e-commerce site, Sticker Mule placed a high priority on
ease of use. Customers using the site can place their orders within a matter of
minutes, and then view and approve order proofs online, further reducing the
time it takes to complete orders. Sticker Mule’s Web infrastructure allows their
customer service team to consolidate support inquiries from a variety of
channels—including email, Web, and phone—into one place, making it easier
and faster for team members to respond to customer queries. And since customer
service is a top priority for Sticker Mule, their site also includes a sophisticated
help center with more than 200 articles (in multiple languages) that customers
can research on their own. The site also allows customers to post reviews, and
even includes a Marketplace section where customers can sell their stickers.34
Multistage Model for E-Commerce
A successful e-commerce system must address the many stages that consumers
experience in the sales life cycle. At the heart of any e-commerce system is the
user’s ability to search for and identify items for sale; select those items and negoti-
ate prices, terms of payment, and delivery date; send an order to the vendor to
purchase the items; pay for the product or service; obtain product delivery; and
receive after-sales support. Figure 7.2 shows how e-commerce can support each
FIGURE 7.2
Multistage model for
e-commerce (B2B and B2C)
A successful e-commerce system
addresses the stages that consu-
mers experience in the sales life
cycle.
1. Search
and identiﬁcation
Buyer
5. After-sales
service
Electronic
distribution
Traditional
delivery
2. Selection
and negotiation
3. Purchasing
4. Product and
service delivery
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 307
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

of these stages. Product delivery can involve tangible goods delivered in a tradi-
tional form (e.g., clothing delivered via a shipping company) or goods and ser-
vices delivered electronically (e.g., software downloaded over the Internet).
Search and Identification
An employee ordering parts for a storeroom at a manufacturing plant would
follow the steps shown in Figure 7.2. Assume the storeroom stocks a wide
range of office supplies, spare parts, and maintenance supplies. The employee
prepares a list of needed items—for example, fasteners, piping, and plastic
tubing. Typically, for each item carried in the storeroom, a corporate buyer
has already identified a preferred supplier based on the vendor’s price com-
petitiveness, level of service, quality of products, and speed of delivery. The
employee then logs on to the Internet and goes to the Web site of the pre-
ferred supplier.
From the supplier’s home page, the employee can access a product cata-
log and browse until he or she finds the items that meet the storeroom’s spe-
cifications. The employee fills out a request-for-quotation form by entering
the item codes and quantities needed. When the employee completes the quo-
tation form, the supplier’s Web application calculates the total charge of the
order with the most current prices and shows the additional cost for various
forms of delivery—overnight, within two working days, or the next week.
The employee might elect to visit other suppliers’ Web home pages and
repeat this process to search for additional items or obtain competing prices
for the same items.
Select and Negotiate
After price quotations have been received from each supplier, the employee
examines them and indicates by clicking the request-for-quotation form
which items to order from a given supplier. The employee also specifies the
desired delivery date. This data is used as input into the supplier’s order-
processing transaction-processing system (TPS). In addition to price, an item’s
quality and the supplier’s service and speed of delivery can be important in
the selection and negotiation process.
B2B e-commerce systems need to support negotiation between a buyer
and the selected seller over the final price, delivery date, delivery costs, and
any extra charges. However, these features are not fundamental requirements
of most B2C systems, which typically offer their products for sale on a “take-
it-or-leave-it” basis.
Purchase Products and Services Electronically
The employee completes the purchase order specifying the final agreed-upon
terms and prices by sending a completed electronic form to the supplier.
Complications can arise in paying for the products. Typically, a corporate
buyer who makes several purchases from a supplier each year has established
credit with the supplier in advance, and all purchases are billed to a corporate
account. But when individual consumers make their first, and perhaps only,
purchase from the supplier, additional safeguards and measures are required.
Part of the purchase transaction can involve the customer providing a credit
card number. Another approach to paying for goods and services purchased
over the Internet is using electronic money, which can be exchanged for hard
cash, as discussed later in the chapter.
Deliver Products and Services
Electronic distribution can be used to download software, music, pictures,
videos, and written material through the Internet faster and for less expense
than shipping the items via a package delivery service. Most products can-
not be delivered over the Internet, so they are delivered in a variety of
308 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

other ways: overnight carrier, regular mail service, truck, or rail. In some
cases, the customer might elect to drive to the supplier and pick up the
product.
Many manufacturers and retailers have outsourced the physical logistics
of delivering merchandise to other companies that take care of the storing,
packing, shipping, and tracking of products. To provide this service, DHL,
Federal Express, United Parcel Service, and other delivery firms have devel-
oped software tools and interfaces that directly link customer ordering,
manufacturing, and inventory systems with their own systems of highly auto-
mated warehouses, call centers, and worldwide shipping networks. The goal
is to make the transfer of all information and inventory, from the manufac-
turer to the delivery firm to the consumer, fast and simple.
For example, when a customer orders a printer on the Hewlett-Packard
(HP) Web site, that order actually goes to FedEx, which stocks all the pro-
ducts that HP sells online at a dedicated e-distribution facility in Memphis,
Tennessee, a major FedEx shipping hub. FedEx ships the order, which trig-
gers an email notification to the customer that the printer is on its way and
an inventory notice is sent to HP that the FedEx warehouse now has one less
printer in stock. See Figure 7.3.
For product returns, HP enters return information into its own system,
which is linked to FedEx’s systems. This information signals a FedEx courier to
pick up the unwanted item at the customer’s house or business. Customers
don’t need to fill out shipping labels or package the item. Instead, the FedEx
courier uses information transmitted over the Internet to a computer in his
truck to print a label from a portable printer attached to his belt. FedEx has
control of the return, and HP can monitor its progress from start to finish.
After-Sales Service
In addition to the information required to complete an order, comprehensive
customer information is also captured from each order and stored in the sup-
plier’s customer database. This information can include the customer name,
address, telephone numbers, contact person, credit history, and other details.
For example, if a customer later contacts the supplier to complain that not all
items were received, that some arrived damaged, or even that the product
provides unclear instructions, any customer service representative will be able
to retrieve the order information from the database. Many companies also
provide extensive after-sale information on their Web sites, such as how to
maintain a piece of equipment, how to effectively use a product, and how to
receive repairs under warranty.
FIGURE 7.3
Product and information flow
When a customer orders an HP printer
online, the order goes first to FedEx,
which ships the order, triggering an
email notification to the customer and
an inventory notice to HP.
Hewlett-Packard
FedEx distribution
facility
Customer
Shipment
notiﬁcation
Order
Order
Shipment
notiﬁcation
Order
Shipment
notiﬁcation
Product
delivery
Product
delivery
FedEx
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 309
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

E-Commerce Challenges
A company must overcome many challenges to convert its business processes
from the traditional form to e-commerce processes, especially for B2C
e-commerce. As a result, not all e-commerce ventures are successful. For exam-
ple, Borders began an online Web site in the late 1990s, but after three years of
operating in the red, the bookseller outsourced its e-commerce operations to
Amazon in 2001. Borders reversed course and decided to relaunch its own
Borders.com Web site in May 2008, but continued to generate disappointing
sales figures. As a result of the substandard results, many top executives were
replaced, including the CIO and senior vice president of sales. Finally in early
2011, Borders applied for bankruptcy protection and began closing its stores.35
Dealing with Consumer Privacy Concerns
The following are three key challenges to e-commerce: (1) dealing with con-
sumer privacy concerns, (2) overcoming consumers’ lack of trust, and (3) over-
coming global issues. While two-thirds of U.S. Internet users have purchased an
item online and most Internet users say online shopping saves them time, about
one-third of all adult Internet users will not buy anything online primarily
because they have privacy concerns or lack trust in online merchants. In addition
to having an effective e-commerce model and strategy, companies must carefully
address consumer privacy concerns and overcome consumers’ lack of trust.
Following are a few examples of recent security beaches in which per-
sonal data was compromised:
●
Target reported that cyberthieves compromised the credit card data and
personal information of as many as 110 million customers. That data
includes phone numbers, email and home addresses, credit and debit card
numbers, PINs, expiration dates, and magnetic stripe information.36
●
Patreon, a crowdfunding platform that allows users to make ongoing
donations to a Web site, artist, or project sustained a security breach that
resulted in their entire cache of data—including names, email addresses,
and donation records—being published online in 2015.37,38
●
More than one million CareFirst BlueCross Blue Shield patient records
were compromised when hackers accessed a database containing member
names, birth dates, email addresses, and subscriber information. Member
password encryption prevented the hackers from accessing Social Security
numbers, medical claims, and credit card and employment data.39
●
The personal data of 15 million consumers was stolen when cyberthieves
accessed data that mobile provider T-Mobile had shared with Experian for
the purpose of conducting credit checks. The stolen data included names,
addresses, and birthdates—as well as encrypted Social Security numbers,
drivers’ license ID numbers, and passport ID numbers, which may also
have been compromised.40
In some cases, the compromise of personal data can lead to identity theft.
According to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), “Identity theft occurs
when someone steals your personal information and uses it without your
permission.”41 Often stolen personal identification information (PII), such as
your name, Social Security number, or credit card number, is used to commit
fraud or other crimes. Thieves may use a consumer’s credit card numbers to
charge items to that person’s accounts, use identification information to apply
for a new credit card or a loan in a consumer’s name, or use a consumer’s
name and Social Security number to receive government benefits.
Companies must be prepared to make a substantial investment to safeguard
their customers’ privacy or run the risk of losing customers and generating
potential class action lawsuits should the data be compromised. It is not
uncommon for customers to initiate a class action lawsuit for millions of dollars
identity theft: The use of some-
one’s personal identification informa-
tion without his or her permission, often
to commit fraud or other crimes.
310 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

in damages for emotional distress and loss of privacy. In addition to potential
damages, companies must frequently pay for customer credit monitoring and
identity theft insurance to ensure that their customers’ data is secure.
Within two days after the Target data breach was announced, the first law-
suit was filed. The California class action lawsuit claims that Target was negligent
in its failure to implement and maintain reasonable security procedures and prac-
tices. A second lawsuit claims that Target broke Minnesota law by not alerting
customers quickly enough after learning of the security issue. A third lawsuit
was filed in California alleging both negligence and invasion of privacy.42
In order to address customers’ privacy concerns, companies looking to do
business online must invest in the latest security technology and employ
highly trained security experts to protect their consumers’ data. For large
companies, that can mean a sizable in-house staff that monitors security issues
24/7. Smaller companies often rely on security services provided by compa-
nies such as Symantec, whose Norton Secured Seal is intended to provide cus-
tomers with the confidence they need to transact e-commerce business.
Akimbo Financial is a financial services company based in San Antonio, Texas.
Even though Akimbo is a small player in the financial services industry, it is still
obligated to comply with Payment Card Industry (PCI) and other regulations
requiring encryption for online transactions and communication. And because
Akimbo collects social security numbers and other confidential data, it must assure
users that their data is secure. The company employs Symantec’s Secure Site with
EV (Extended Validation) SSL Certificate to secure its site, and it prominently dis-
plays the Norton Secured Seal. The EV certificate presents online visitors with a
green bar in their browser address bar, intended to highlight the secure nature of
the site. According to Akimbo CEO and founder, Houston Frost, “We have to have
the green bar, because it makes people feel warm and fuzzy inside,” which is
important for a start-up financial services firm looking to build its customer base.43
Overcoming Consumers’ Lack of Trust
Lack of trust in online sellers is one of the most frequently cited reasons that
some consumers give to explain why they are unwilling to purchase online.
Can they be sure that the company or person with which they are dealing is
legitimate and will send the item(s) they purchase? What if there is a problem
with the product or service when it is received: for example, if it does not
match the description on the Web site, is the wrong size or wrong color, is
damaged during the delivery process, or does not work as advertised?
Online marketers must create specific trust-building strategies for their
Web sites by analyzing their customers, products, and services. A perception
of trustworthiness can be created by implementing one or more of the follow-
ing strategies:
●
Demonstrate a strong desire to build an ongoing relationship with custo-
mers by giving first-time price incentives, offering loyalty programs, or
eliciting and sharing customer feedback.
●
Demonstrate that the company has been in business for a long time.
●
Make it clear that considerable investment has been made in the Web site.
●
Provide brand endorsements from well-known experts or well-respected
individuals.
●
Demonstrate participation in appropriate regulatory programs or industry
associations.
●
Display Web site accreditation by the Better Business Bureau Online or
TRUSTe programs.
Here are some tips to help online shoppers avoid problems:
●
Only buy from a well-known Web site you trust—one that advertises on
national media, is recommended by a friend, or receives strong ratings in the
media.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 311
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Look for a seal of approval from organizations such as the Better Business
Bureau Online or TRUSTe. See Figure 7.4.
●
Review the Web site’s privacy policy to be sure that you are comfortable
with its conditions before you provide personal information.
●
Determine what the Web site policy is for return of products purchased.
●
Be wary if you must enter any personal information other than what’s
required to complete the purchase (name, credit card number, address,
and telephone number).
●
Do not, under any conditions, ever provide information such as your Social
Security number, bank account numbers, or your mother’s maiden name.
●
When you open the Web page where you enter credit card information or
other personal data, make sure that the Web address begins with “https,”
and check to see if a locked padlock icon appears in the Address bar or
status bar, as shown in Figure 7.5.
●
Consider using virtual credit cards, which expire after one use, when
doing business.
●
Before downloading music, change your browser’s advanced settings to
disable access to all computer areas that contain personal information.
Overcoming Global Issues
E-commerce and m-commerce offer enormous opportunities by allowing manu-
facturers to buy supplies at a low cost worldwide. They also offer enterprises the
chance to sell to a global market right from the start. Moreover, they offer great
promise for developing countries, helping them to enter the prosperous global
marketplace, which can help to reduce the gap between rich and poor countries.
People and companies can get products and services from around the world,
instead of around the corner or across town. These opportunities, however,
come with numerous obstacles and issues associated with all global systems:
●
Cultural challenges. Great care must be taken to ensure that a Web site
is appealing, easy to use, and inoffensive to potential customers around
the world.
●
Language challenges. Language differences can make it difficult to
understand the information and directions posted on a Web site.
●
Time and distance challenges. Significant time differences make it diffi-
cult for some people to be able to speak to customer services representa-
tives or to get technical support during regular waking hours.
●
Infrastructure challenges. The Web site must support access by custo-
mers using a wide variety of hardware and software devices.
FIGURE 7.4
Seals of approval
To avoid problems when shopping
online, look on the Web site for a seal
of approval from organizations such
as the Better Business Bureau
Online or TRUSTe.
FIGURE 7.5
Web site security
Web site that uses “https” in the
address and a secure site lock icon.
https
Courtesy Better Business Bureau and
TRUSTe
Microsoft product
screenshots used with
permission from
Microsoft Corporation
312 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
●
Currency challenges. The Web site must be able to state prices and
accept payment in a variety of currencies.
●
State, regional, and national law challenges. The Web site must
operate in conformance to a wide variety of laws that cover a variety
of issues, including the protection of trademarks and patents, the
sale of copyrighted material, the collection and safeguarding of
personal or financial data, the payment of sales taxes and fees, and
much more.
Extreme Sports Web Site
Extreme sports encompasses certain activities perceived as having a high level of
inherent danger such as BMX racing, skate boarding, mountain biking, ice climb-
ing, and base jumping. You’ve always been a major fan and began selling caps
and t-shirts with extreme sport themes, personalities, and inspirational sayings. As
a result, over the past two years you have enjoyed traveling to many exotic
venues around the world to sell your highly popular products at various events
and competitions. You are thinking of starting a Web site to sell your products to
extreme sports fans around the globe.
Review Questions
1.
What challenges can you expect in trying to set up and run a Web site with
global appeal? How might you address these?
2.
What information do you need to capture from a customer in order to accu-
rately and completely fill an order?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What issues might come up in trying to deliver your product to customers in a
foreign country?
2.
What after sales service issues might arise and how could you handle these?
Electronic and Mobile Commerce Applications
E-commerce and m-commerce are being used in innovative and exciting
ways. This section examines a few of the many B2B, B2C, C2C, and
m-commerce applications in retail and wholesale, manufacturing, market-
ing,
advertising,
bartering,
retargeting,
price
comparison,
couponing,
investment and finance, and banking. As with any new technology,
m-commerce will succeed only if it provides users with real benefits. Com-
panies involved in e-commerce and m-commerce must think through their
strategies carefully and ensure that they provide services that truly meet
customers’ needs.
Wholesale e-Commerce
Wholesale e-commerce spending now represents more than 40 percent of all
wholesale sales revenue, according to a 2015 survey.44 A key sector of whole-
sale e-commerce is spending on manufacturing, repair, and operations (MRO)
goods and services—from simple office supplies to mission-critical equipment,
such
as
the
motors,
pumps,
compressors,
and
instruments
that
keep
manufacturing facilities running smoothly. MRO purchases often approach
40 percent of a manufacturing company’s total revenues, but the purchasing
systems within many companies are haphazard, without automated controls.
Companies
face
significant
internal
costs
resulting
from
outdated
and
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 313
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

cumbersome MRO management processes. For example, studies show that a
high percentage of manufacturing downtime is often caused by not having
the right part at the right time in the right place. The result is lost productivity
and capacity. E-commerce software for plant operations provides powerful
comparative searching capabilities to enable managers to identify functionally
equivalent items, helping them spot opportunities to combine purchases for
cost savings. Comparing various suppliers, coupled with consolidating more
spending with fewer suppliers, leads to decreased costs. In addition, auto-
mated workflows are typically based on industry best practices, which can
streamline processes.
MSC Industrial Supply is a leading North American distributor of MRO
products and services. The company generates $2.8 billion in sales revenue
from more than one million products it offers for sale—including 900,000
items that can be purchased through its Web site. In 2015, for the first time,
e-commerce sales accounted for more than 50 percent of the company’s total
sales.45,46
Manufacturing
One approach taken by many manufacturers to raise profitability and improve
customer service is to move their supply chain operations onto the Internet.
Here, they can form an electronic exchange, an electronic forum where man-
ufacturers, suppliers, and competitors buy and sell goods, trade market infor-
mation, and run back-office operations, such as inventory control, as shown
in Figure 7.6. This approach speeds up the movement of raw materials and
finished products and reduces the amount of inventory that must be main-
tained. It also leads to a much more competitive marketplace and lower
prices.
FIGURE 7.6
Model of an electronic
exchange
An electronic exchange is an elec-
tronic forum where manufacturers,
suppliers, and competitors buy and
sell goods, trade market information,
and run back-office operations.
Electronic
exchange
Manufacturers
Shoppers
Suppliers
Supplier’s bank
Shopper’s  bank
Manufacturer’s  bank
Requests for information,
purchase orders,
payment information
Information about raw material
needs, purchase orders, shipment
notices, payment requests
Manufacturer's orders, information
about raw material needs
Shipment notices for manufacturers,
payment requests
Customer orders, supplier
shipment notices
Payment
request
Payment
approval,
electronic
transfer of funds
Payment approval,
electronic transfer of funds
Payment request
Payment request
Payment approval,
electronic transfer of funds
electronic exchange: An elec-
tronic forum where manufacturers,
suppliers, and competitors buy and sell
goods, trade market information, and
run back-office operations.
314 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Companies can join one of three types of exchanges based on who operates
the exchange. Private exchanges are owned and operated by a single company.
The owner uses the exchange to trade exclusively with established business
partners. Walmart’s Retail Link is such an exchange. Consortium-operated
exchanges are run by a group of traditionally competing companies with com-
mon procurement needs. For example, Covisint was developed as an exchange
to serve the needs of the big three auto makers. Independent exchanges are
open to any set of buyers and sellers within a given market. They provide ser-
vices and a common technology platform to their members and are open, usu-
ally for a fee, to any company that wants to use them. For example, Tinypass is
a flexible e-commerce platform that enables content publishers to choose from a
variety of payment models to sell access to their media. Publishers can offer lim-
ited previews to readers before they subscribe, ask for payment to view each
video or article, or allow the audience to pay what they believe the content is
worth. Content is defined by the publisher and can be any sort of digital media:
an article, a movie, a song, a blog post, a PDF, access to a forum, or access to
an entire Web site. Tinypass exchange members can use the platform to crowd-
fund projects from within their own Web sites, rather than working through
third party sites, such as GoFundMe or KickStarter.47,48
Several strategic and competitive issues are associated with the use of
exchanges. Many companies distrust their corporate rivals and fear they
might lose trade secrets through participation in such exchanges. Suppliers
worry that online marketplaces will drive down the prices of goods and favor
buyers. Suppliers also can spend a great deal of money configuring their sys-
tems and work processes to participate in multiple exchanges. For example,
more than a dozen new exchanges have appeared in the oil industry, and the
printing industry has more than 20 online marketplaces. Until a clear winner
emerges in particular industries, suppliers may feel compelled to sign on to
several or all of them. Yet another issue is potential government scrutiny of
exchange participants: When competitors get together to share information, it
raises questions of collusion or antitrust behavior.
Many companies that already use the Internet for their private exchanges
have no desire to share their expertise with competitors. At Walmart, the
world’s largest retail chain, executives turned down several invitations to join
exchanges in the retail and consumer goods industries before building its own
in-house exchange, Retail Link, which connects the company to 7,000 world-
wide suppliers that sell everything from toothpaste to furniture. Through
Retail Link, Walmart has created a supplier-managed inventory system where
it lets each supplier decide where to put SKUs (stock keeping units) and how
to ship through to stores. It empowers suppliers to make these decisions by
providing them with inventory and sales data by SKU by hour, by store. This
in turn makes Walmart more profitable, because it can hold each supplier
accountable to maximize margin, with the lowest inventory possible, to pro-
duce the greatest return on investment in inventory.49
Marketing
The nature of the Web enables firms to gather more information about customer
behavior and preferences as customers and potential customers gather their own
information and make their purchase decisions. Analysis of this data is compli-
cated because of the Web’s interactivity and because each visitor voluntarily pro-
vides or refuses to provide personal data such as name, address, email address,
telephone number, and demographic data. Internet advertisers use the data to
identify specific markets and target them with tailored advertising messages.
This practice, called market segmentation, divides the pool of potential custo-
mers into subgroups usually defined in terms of demographic characteristics,
such as age, gender, marital status, income level, and geographic location.
market segmentation: The identi-
fication of specific markets to target
them with tailored advertising
messages.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 315
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

In the past, market segmentation has been difficult for B2B marketers
because firmographic data (addresses, financials, number of employees, and
industry classification code) was difficult to obtain. Now, however, eXelate, a
subsidiary of Nielsen, the marketing and media information company, has joined
forces with Dun & Bradstreet to provide data as a service solution that customers
can use to access a database of more than 250 million business records, includ-
ing critical company information such as contact names, job titles and seniority
levels, locations, addresses, number of employees, annual sales, and Standard
Industry Code (SIC) and North America Industry Classification System (NAICS)
classification codes. See Figure 7.7. Using this data, analysts can identify, access,
and segment their potential B2B audience; estimate potential sales for each busi-
ness; and rank the business against other prospects and customers.50
Advertising
Mobile ad networks distribute mobile ads to publishers such as mobile Web
sites, application developers, and mobile operators. Mobile ad impressions
are generally bought at a cost per thousand (CPM), cost per click (CPC), or
cost per action (CPA), in which the advertiser pays only if the customer clicks
through and then buys the product or service. The main measures of success
are the number of users reached, click through rate (CTR), and the number
of actions users take, such as the number of downloads prompted by the ad.
Advertisers are keenly interested in this data to measure the effectiveness of
their advertising spending, and many organizations are willing to pay extra to
purchase the data from a mobile ad network or a third party. Generally, there
are three types of mobile ad networks—blind, premium blind, and premium
networks—though no clear lines separate them. The characteristics of these
mobile advertising networks are summarized in Table 7.5.
FIGURE 7.7
Nielsen marketing company
eXelate, a subsidiary of Nielsen, the marketing and media information company, has joined
forces with Dun & Bradstreet to provide data as a service solution that customers can use to
access a database of more than 250 million business records.
Source: http://info.exelate.com/b2b-audiences_1-sheet
316 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

InMobi is a mobile advertising provider that reaches 1 billion active users
with over 130 billion monthly ad impressions. The company uses a technique it
calls “appographic targeting” to help marketers increase the chance of connect-
ing users to the type of media and apps they are most likely to engage with. By
analyzing the core functional, design, and interactive attributes of more than
10,000 apps, InMobi has divided its audience of active users into 200 “appo-
graphic segments,” based on each user’s existing and previous application down-
loads rather than on more traditional metrics, such as demographics or
geography. Marketers can use the segments to more accurately target app-install
campaigns. For example, a flight-booking app could be promoted to users who
engage with apps that offer hotel-booking services or travel-related reviews.51,52
Because m-commerce devices usually have a single user, they are ideal for
accessing personal information and receiving targeted messages for a particu-
lar consumer. Through m-commerce, companies can reach individual consu-
mers to establish
one-to-one marketing
relationships
and
communicate
whenever it is convenient—in short, anytime and anywhere. See Figure 7.8.
TABLE 7.5 Characteristics of three types of mobile advertising networks
Characteristic
Blind Networks
Premium Blind Networks
Premium Networks
Degree to which
advertisers can
specify where ads
are run
An advertiser can specify
country and content chan-
nel (e.g., news, sports, or
entertainment) on which
the ad will run but not a
specific Web site.
Most advertising is blind,
but for an additional
charge, the advertiser can
buy a specific spot on a Web
site of its choice.
Big brand advertisers can secure
elite locations on top-tier
destinations.
Predominant
pricing model
and typical rate
CPC (e.g., $0.01 per click)
CPM (e.g., $20 per thousand
impressions)
CPM (e.g., $40 per thousand
impressions)
Examples
Admoda/Adultmoda
AdMob
BuzzCity
InMobi
Jumptap
Madhouse
Millennial Media
Quattro Wireless
Advertising.com/AOL
Hands
Microsoft Mobile Advertising
Nokia Interactive Advertising
Pudding Media
YOC Group
FIGURE 7.8
M-commerce is convenient
and personal
Consumers are increasingly using
mobile phones to purchase goods
and perform other transactions
online.
Georgejmclittle/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 317
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Bartering
During the recent economic downturn, many people and businesses turned to
bartering as a means of gaining goods and services. A number of Web sites
have been created to support this activity, as shown in Table 7.6. Some busi-
nesses are willing to barter to reduce excess inventory, gain new customers,
or avoid paying cash for necessary raw materials or services. Cash-strapped
customers may find bartering to be an attractive alternative to paying scarce
dollars. Generally, bartering transactions have tax-reporting, accounting, and
other record-keeping responsibilities associated with them. Indeed, the IRS
hosts a Bartering Tax Center Web site that provides details about the tax laws
and responsibilities for bartering transactions.
Retargeting
An average of 74 percent of all online shopping carts are abandoned, repre-
senting more than $4 trillion worth of merchandise in 2013.53 “Retargeting” is
a technique used by advertisers to recapture these shoppers by using targeted
and personalized ads to direct shoppers back to a retailer’s site. For example,
a visitor who viewed the men’s clothing portion of a retailer’s Web site and
then abandoned the Web site would be targeted with banner ads showing
various men’s clothing items from that retailer. The banner ads might even
display the exact items the visitor viewed, such as men’s casual slacks. The
retargeting could be further enhanced to include comments and recommenda-
tions from other consumers who purchased the same items. Retargeting
ensures that potential consumers see relevant, targeted ads for products
they’ve already expressed interest in.
Price Comparison
An increasing number of companies provide mobile phone apps that enable
shoppers to compare prices and products online. RedLaser enables shoppers
to do a quick price comparison by simply scanning the product’s bar code.
Amazon’s Price Check app also lets you search for pricing by taking a picture
of a book, DVD, CD, or video game cover. The Barcode Scanner app allows
shoppers to scan UPC or Quick Response codes to perform a price compari-
son and read the latest product reviews.54,55
Couponing
During 2015, more than $515 billion in consumer incentives were distributed
via 286 billion free-standing insert (FSI) coupons, with an average face value
of $1.80 per coupon.56 Surprisingly, only 0.95 percent of those coupons were
redeemed even during tough economic times for many people.57
TABLE 7.6 Popular bartering Web sites
Web site
Purpose
Craiglist.org
Includes a section where users can request an item in
exchange for services or exchange services for services
Swapagift.com
Enables users to buy, sell, or swap merchant gift cards
Swapstyle.com
Allows users to swap, sell, or buy direct women’s accessories,
clothes, cosmetics, and shoes
Swaptrees.com
Users trade books, CDs, DVDs, and video games on a one-
for-one basis
TradeAway.com
Enables users to exchange a wide variety of new or used
items, services, or real estate
318 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Many businesses now offer a variety of digital coupons—which tend to be
redeemed at higher rates than FSI coupons—including printable coupons
available on a company’s Web site or delivered to customers via email. Shop-
pers at some retail chains can go to the store’s Web site and load digital cou-
pons onto their store loyalty card. Other retailers have programs that allow a
person to enter their mobile number and a PIN at checkout to redeem cou-
pons they selected online. Many consumer product good manufacturers and
retailers and other businesses now send mobile coupons directly to consu-
mers’ smartphones via SMS technology.
More recently, some larger retailers have been experimenting with “prox-
imity marketing,” using in-store beacons to deliver coupons to customers
who are already in their stores. Beacons, which can be as small as a sticker
that is placed on an item or store shelf, uses Bluetooth low-energy (BLE) wire-
less technology to pinpoint the location of consumers in a store and to deliver
mobile coupons directly to a customer’s smartphone. A recent study estimates
that by 2020 more than 1.5 billion mobile coupons will be delivered using
beacon technology.58,59
The estimated number of mobile coupon redeemers is expected to
increase due to the integration of couponing into social networks, along with
an increase in smartphone and tablet users, new mobile apps, and location-
based deals.60 See Figure 7.9.
Newer online marketplaces, such as Groupon and LivingSocial offer an
updated approach to digital couponing. Discount coupons for consumers are
valid only if a predetermined minimum number of people sign up for them.
Merchants do not pay any money up front to participate in Groupon of
LivingSocial but must pay the companies a fee (up to 50 percent for Groupon)
whenever a customer purchase a coupon.
Investment and Finance
The Internet has revolutionized the world of investment and finance. Perhaps
the changes have been so significant because this industry had so many built-
in inefficiencies and so much opportunity for improvement.
FIGURE 7.9
Growth in U.S. mobile coupon
users
The number of mobile coupon
redeemers is increasing
significantly.
160
140
120
Smartphone users
Tablet users
100
80
60
40
20
Mobile coupon
users - millions
Year
2012
2013
2014
2015
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 319
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The brokerage business adapted to the Internet faster than any other arm
of finance. See Figure 7.10. The allure of online trading that enables investors
to do quick, thorough research and then buy shares in any company in a few
seconds and at a fraction of the cost of a full-commission firm has brought
many investors to the Web. Fidelity offers mobile trading apps for tablets,
smartphones, and even Apple Watch. The apps allow investors a secure plat-
form to monitor their portfolios, view real-time stock quotes, track preferred
stocks, and execute trades.61
Banking
Online banking customers can check balances of their savings, checking,
and loan accounts; transfer money among accounts; and pay bills. These
customers enjoy the convenience of not writing checks by hand, of tracking
their current balances, and of reducing expenditures on envelopes and
stamps. In addition, online banking customers have the satisfaction of
knowing that paying bills online is good for the environment because it
reduces the amount of paper used, thus saving trees and reducing green-
house gases.
All of the major banks and many of the smaller banks in the United States
enable their customers to pay bills online, and most support bill payment via
mobile devices. Banks are eager to gain more customers who pay bills online
because such customers tend to stay with the bank longer, have higher cash
balances, and use more of the bank’s products and services. To encourage
the use of this service, many banks have eliminated all fees associated with
online bill payment.
Consumers who have enrolled in mobile banking and downloaded the
mobile application to their cell phones can check credit card balances before
making major purchases to avoid credit rejections. They can also transfer
funds from savings to checking accounts to avoid an overdraft.
M-Pesa (M for mobile, Pesa for money in Swahili) with some 20 million
users worldwide is considered by many to be the most developed mobile pay-
ment system in the world. The service is operated by Safaricom and Vodacom,
the largest mobile network operators in Kenya and Tanzania. M-Pesa enables
users with a national ID card or passport to deposit, withdraw, and transfer
FIGURE 7.10
Mobile investment and
finance
Investment firms provide mobile
trading apps to support clients on
the go.
iStockphoto.com/arakonyunun
320 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
money easily with a mobile device. Its services have expanded from a basic
mobile money transfer scheme to include loans and savings products, bill
pay, and salary disbursements. In 2013, more than 40 percent of Kenya’s
GDP flowed through M-Pesa.62,63
Online Personalized Shopping
An increasing number of Web sites offer personalized shopping consultations
for shoppers interested in upscale, contemporary clothing—dresses, sports-
wear, denim clothing, handbags, jewelry, shoes, and luxury gifts. Key to the
success of companies such as MyTheresa and Net-a-Porter is a philosophy of
high customer service and strong, personal client relationships. Net-a-Porter
offers same-day delivery in Hong Kong, New York, and London, and a team
of personal shoppers stock the virtual carts of women around the globe who
are looking for high fashion and luxury items.64
Quintessentially Gifts is a luxury gifts and shopping service whose
researchers and editorial stylists can find the rarest and most exquisite gifts
for the affluent shopper. See Figure 7.11. From a McQueen Luxury Dive Toy’s
underwater scooter to a Hermes Birkin handbag sans the usual two-year wait,
the gift team can get it for you.65
Establishing a Consortium
You are a recent business major graduate and a new manager in the supply chain
management organization of Marriott International. The organization is looking to
reduce the amount of money spent each year on basic supplies such as linens and
towels, cleaning supplies, furniture, and appliances. You have been asked to
explore the feasibility of establishing an electronic exchange (consortium) of
other hotel chains and the suppliers of the items in an attempt to lower total
costs.
Review Questions
1.
Explain how such an electronic exchange might operate.
2.
What are some of the pros and cons of participating in an electronic
exchange?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Identify several strategic and competitive issues that may complicate the
formation of such a consortium.
2.
Would you recommend that Marriott continue to explore the feasibility of
setting up a consortium? Why or why not?
FIGURE 7.11
Luxury gifts online
Quintessentially Gifts is an online
shopping service that features
unusual luxury gifts.
Source: www.quintessentiallygifts.com
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 321
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Strategies for Successful E-Commerce and M-Commerce
With all the constraints to e-commerce already discussed in this chapter, it’s
clear that an effective Web site must be one that is easy to use and accom-
plishes the goals of the company yet is safe, secure, and affordable to set up
and maintain. However, before building a Web site, a company must first
define an effective e-commerce model and strategy. The next sections exam-
ine several issues for a successful e-commerce site.
Defining an Effective E-Commerce Model and Strategy
The first major challenge is for the company to decide on the effective
e-commerce model it wants to use and formulate an effective e-commerce
strategy. Although companies can select from a number of approaches, the
most successful e-commerce models include three basic components: commu-
nity, content, and commerce, as shown in Figure 7.12. Discussion forums and
other social shopping tools can build a loyal community of people who are
interested in and enthusiastic about the company and its products and ser-
vices. Providing useful, accurate, and timely content, such as industry and
economic news and stock quotes, is a sound approach to encourage people
to return to your Web site time and again. Commerce involves consumers and
businesses paying to purchase physical goods, information, or services that
are posted or advertised online.
Defining the Functions of a Web Site
When building a Web site, you should first decide which tasks the site must
accomplish. Most people agree that an effective Web site is one that creates
an attractive presence and that meets the needs of its visitors, which might
include the following:
●
Obtaining general information about the organization
●
Obtaining financial information for making an investment decision in the
organization
●
Learning the organization’s position on social issues
●
Learning about the products or services that the organization sells
●
Buying the products or services that the company offers
●
Checking the status of an order
FIGURE 7.12
Content, commerce, and
community
A successful e-commerce model
includes three basic components.
Industry news
Economic news
Stock prices
Content
Consumers and
businesses buying
and selling
Commerce
Community
Discussion forums
Shopping tools
322 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Getting advice or help on effective use of the products
●
Registering a complaint about the organization’s products
●
Registering a complaint concerning the organization’s position on social
issues
●
Providing a product testimonial or an idea for product improvement or a
new product
●
Obtaining information about warranties or service and repair policies for
products
●
Obtaining contact information for a person or department in the
organization
After a company determines which objectives its site should accomplish, it
can move on planning and developing the site, keeping in mind that the pri-
orities and objectives of customers may change over time. As the number of
e-commerce shoppers increases and they become more comfortable—and
more selective—making online purchases, a company might need to redefine
the basic business model of its site to capture new business opportunities.
For example, consider the major travel sites such as Expedia, Travelocity,
CheapTickets, Orbitz, and Priceline. These sites used to specialize in one area
of travel—inexpensive airline tickets. Now they offer a full range of travel
products, including airline tickets, auto rentals, hotel rooms, tours, and last-
minute trip packages. Expedia provides in-depth hotel descriptions to help
comparison shoppers and even offers 360-degree visual tours and expanded
photo displays. It also entices flexible travelers to search for rates, compare
airfares, and configure hotel and air prices at the same time. Expedia has also
developed numerous hotel partnerships to reduce costs and help secure great
values for consumers. Meanwhile, Orbitz has launched a special full-service
program for corporate business travelers.
Establishing a Web Site
Companies large and small can establish Web sites. Some companies elect to
develop their sites in-house, but this decision requires a Web development
staff that is experienced with HTML, Java, and Web design software. Many
firms, especially those with few or no experienced Web developers, have
decided to outsource the building of their Web sites in order to get their sites
up and running faster and cheaper than they could by doing the job them-
selves. Web development firms can provide organizations with prebuilt tem-
plates and Web site builder tools to enable customers to construct their own
Web sites. Businesses can custom design a new Web site or redesign an exist-
ing Web site. Many of these firms have worked with thousands of customers
to help them get their Web sites up and running.
Web site hosting companies such as HostWay and BroadSpire make it
possible to set up a Web page and conduct e-commerce within a matter of
days, with little up-front cost. However, to allow visitors to pay for merchan-
dise with credit cards, a company needs a merchant account with a bank. If
your company doesn’t already have one, it must establish one.
Another model for setting up a Web site is the use of a storefront broker,
a business that serves as an intermediary between your Web site and online mer-
chants who have the actual products and retail expertise. The storefront broker
deals with the details of the transactions, including who gets paid for what, and
is responsible for bringing together merchants and reseller sites. The storefront
broker is similar to a distributor in standard retail operations, but in this case, no
product moves—only electronic data flows back and forth. Products are ordered
by a customer at your site, orders are processed through a user interface pro-
vided by the storefront broker, and the product is shipped by the merchant.
Shopify is a Canadian-based firm that helps retailers create their own
online store without all the technical work involved in developing their own
storefront broker: A company that
acts as an intermediary between your
Web site and online merchants who
have the products and retail expertise.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 323
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Web site or the huge expense of contracting someone else to build it. Clients
can select a stylish e-commerce Web site template, customize it to meet their
unique needs, upload product information, and then start taking orders and
accepting payments. Thousands of online retailers, including General Electric,
CrossFit, Tesla Motors, Red Bull, Foo Fighters, and GitHub built their Web
sites using the Shopify platform. To date, more than 240,000 online stores
have used Shopify to generate more than $14 billion in sales.66
Building Traffic to Your Web Site
The Internet includes hundreds of thousands of e-commerce Web sites. With
all those potential competitors, a company must take strong measures to
ensure that the customers it wants to attract can find its Web site. The first
step is to obtain and register a domain name, which should say something
about your business. For instance, stuff4u might seem to be a good catchall,
but it doesn’t describe the nature of the business—it could be anything. If
you want to sell soccer uniforms and equipment, then you’d try to get a
domain name such as www.soccerstuff4u.com, www.soccerequipment.com, or
www.stuff4soccercoaches.com. The more specific the Web address, the better.
The next step to attracting customers is to make your site search-engine
friendly by improving its rankings. Following are several ideas on how to
accomplish this goal:
●
Include meta tags in your site’s home page. A meta tag is an HTML code,
not visible on the displayed Web page, that contains keywords represent-
ing your site’s content. Search engines use these keywords to build
indexes pointing to your Web site. Keywords are critical to attracting cus-
tomers, so they should be chosen carefully. They should clearly define the
scope of the products or services you offer.
●
Use Web site traffic data analysis software to turn the data captured in the
Web log file into useful information. This data can tell you the URLs from
which your site is being accessed, the search engines and keywords that
find your site, and other useful information. Using this data can help you
identify search engines to which you need to market your Web site,
allowing you to submit your Web pages to them for inclusion in the
search engine’s index.
●
Provide quality, keyword-rich content. Be careful not to use too many
keywords, as search engines often ban sites that do this. Judiciously place
keywords throughout your site, ensuring that the Web content is sensible
and easy to read by humans as well as search engines.
●
Add new content to the Web site on a regular basis. Again, this makes the
site attractive to humans as well as search engines.
●
Acquire links to your site from other reputable Web sites that are popular
and related to your Web site. Avoid the use of low-quality links, as they
can actually hurt your Web site’s rating.
The use of the Internet is growing rapidly in markets throughout Europe,
Asia, and Latin America. Obviously, companies that want to succeed on the
Web cannot ignore this global shift. A company must be aware that consu-
mers outside the United States will access sites with a variety of devices.
A Web site’s design should reflect that diversity if the company wants to be
successful in other markets. In Europe, for example, closed-system iDTVs
(integrated digital televisions) are becoming popular for accessing online con-
tent, with more than 50 percent of the population now using them. Because
such devices have better resolution and more screen space than the PC moni-
tors that many U.S. consumers use to access the Internet, iDTV users expect
more ambitious graphics. Successful global firms operate with a portfolio of
sites designed for each market, with shared sourcing and infrastructure to
meta tag: An HTML code, not visible
on the displayed Web page, that con-
tains keywords representing your site’s
content, which search engines use to
build indexes pointing to your Web site.
324 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

support the network of stores and with local marketing and business develop-
ment teams to take advantage of local opportunities. Service providers con-
tinue to emerge to solve the cross-border logistics, payments, and customer
service needs of these global retailers.
Maintaining and Improving Your Web Site
Web site operators must constantly monitor the traffic to their sites and the
response times experienced by visitors. AMR Research, a Boston-based inde-
pendent research analysis firm, reports that Internet shoppers expect service
to be better than or equal to their in-store experience. Nothing will drive
potential customers away faster than experiencing unreasonable delays while
trying to view or order products or services. To keep pace with technology
and increasing traffic, it might be necessary to modify the software, databases,
or hardware on which a Web site runs to ensure acceptable response times.
Retailing giant Walmart recently invested over $2 billion as part of a mul-
tiyear project designed to improve its Web site and strengthen its e-commerce
infrastructure.
Walmart’s
technology
team
overhauled
the
company’s
e-commerce capabilities from the ground up—with changes to the look of the
Web site, the launch of an improved, proprietary site search engine, and
upgrades to the underlying transaction software and supporting databases
and Web servers. In addition to revamping its Web site to make it easier for
customers to shop, Walmart continues to add to the number of items available
through its e-commerce site, with a recent focus on expanding its online gro-
cery offerings.67,68
Web site operators must also continually be alert to new trends and devel-
opments in the area of e-commerce and be prepared to take advantage of new
opportunities. For example, recent studies show that customers more fre-
quently visit Web sites they can customize. Personalization is the process of
tailoring Web pages to specifically target individual consumers. The goal is to
meet the customer’s needs more effectively, make interactions faster and eas-
ier, and consequently, increase customer satisfaction and the likelihood of
repeat visits. Building a better understanding of customer preferences can
also aid in cross-selling related products and more expensive products. The
most basic form of personalization involves using the consumer’s name in an
email campaign or in a greeting on the Web page. Amazon uses a more
advanced form of personalization in which the Web site greets each repeat
customer by name and recommends a list of new products based on the cus-
tomer’s previous purchases.
Businesses use two types of personalization techniques to capture data
and build customer profiles. Implicit personalization techniques capture data
from actual customer Web sessions—primarily based on which pages were
viewed and which weren’t. Explicit personalization techniques capture user-
provided information, such as information from warranties, surveys, user
registrations, and contest-entry forms completed online. Data can also be
gathered through access to other data sources such as the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles, Bureau of Vital Statistics, and marketing affiliates (firms that share
marketing data). Marketing firms aggregate this information to build data-
bases containing a huge amount of consumer behavioral data. During each
customer interaction, powerful algorithms analyze both types of data in real
time to predict the consumer’s needs and interests. This analysis makes it pos-
sible to deliver new, targeted information before the customer leaves the site.
Because personalization depends on gathering and using personal user infor-
mation, privacy issues are a major concern.
Salesforce Marketing Cloud is a provider of digital marketing automation
and analytics software and services that its customers use to personalize
email marketing, target mobile messaging campaigns, and make personalized,
personalization: The process of
tailoring Web pages to specifically
target individual consumers.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 325
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
predictive
recommendations
to
online
customers.
Room
&
Board,
a
Minnesota-based national furniture chain specializing in modern furniture and
home accessories, uses Salesforce to create a digital experience that reflects
the ways their customers use the Web as well as one that extends the com-
pany’s personalized sales approach to its Web site. The Salesforce system,
which ties into customers’ sales histories as well as years’ worth of data about
what styles and individual pieces of furniture work well together and what
products customers tend to view and purchase in groups, allows the company
to make increasingly effective personal recommendations to its online custo-
mers. Customers who engage with Room & Board’s recommendations place
online orders with 40 percent higher average values than those who don’t.69
The tips and real-world examples presented in this section represent just a
few ideas that can help a company set up and maintain an effective
e-commerce site. With technology and competition changing constantly, man-
agers should read articles in print and online to keep up to date on ever-
evolving issues.
Door-to-Dorm Laundry Service
You have decided to start a door-to-dorm laundry service for the college students
at the local university. Students log on to your Web site and provide specific infor-
mation to create an account including address information needed for pickup and
delivery plus credit, charge, or debit card information for payment. At the time of
the initial pickup, students are given a large plastic bag that they fill with their
laundry. You pick up the laundry and wash, dry, fold, and return it within one
week. Once the student has created an account, they can text, email, or logon on
to the Web site to request future pickups.
Review Questions
1.
Define the basic functions that this Web site must perform in order to meet
the basic needs of the laundry service as well as attract and maintain the inter-
ests of students. What are some things you might do to entice students to
return time and time again to your Web site?
2.
What actions can you take to increase traffic and draw students to your
Web site?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Can you identify additional laundry-related services that might be added to
your basic wash, dry, and fold offering that would be attractive to students?
How could the initial Web site design allow for these potential opportunities?
2.
What steps might you take to personalize the Web site so that the students
feel welcome each time they visit?
Technology Infrastructure Required to Support E-Commerce and M-Commerce
Now that we’ve examined some key factors in establishing an effective
e-commerce initiative, let’s look at some of the technical issues related to
e-commerce systems and the technology that makes it possible. Successful
implementation of e-business requires significant changes to existing business
processes and substantial investment in IS technology. These technology com-
ponents must be chosen carefully and be integrated to support a large volume
of transactions with customers, suppliers, and other business partners world-
wide. In surveys, online consumers frequently note that poor Web site perfor-
mance (e.g., slow response time, inadequate customer support, and lost
326 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

orders) drives them to abandon some e-commerce sites in favor of those with
better, more reliable performance. This section provides a brief overview of
the key technology infrastructure components. See Figure 7.13.
Hardware
A Web server hardware platform complete with the appropriate software is a
key ingredient to e-commerce infrastructure. The amount of storage capacity
and computing power required of the Web server depends primarily on two
things: the software that must run on the server and the volume of
e-commerce
transactions
that
must
be
processed.
The
most
successful
e-commerce solutions are designed to be highly scalable so that they can be
upgraded to meet unexpected user traffic.
Key Web site performance measures include response time, transaction
success rate, and system availability. Table 7.7 shows the values for the key
measures for five popular online retailers for one week.
FIGURE 7.13
Key technology infrastructure
components
E-commerce systems require spe-
cific kinds of hardware and software
to be successful.
High-speed
connection to network
E-commerce
software
Server software
Server operating system
Web server hardware
Network
Internet
Value-added network
Virtual private network
TABLE 7.7 Key performance measures for some popular retail Web
sites
Site
Response Time
(seconds)
Success Rate
Outage Time
During One
Week
Zappos
0.71
100%
0
Apple Store
0.82
100%
0
Costco
1.02
100%
0
Nike
1.60
100%
0
Best Buy
2.00
100%
0
Source: “Performance Index: Top Retailers,” Keynote, February 21, 2016, www.keynote.com/performance
-indexes/retail-us.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 327
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A key decision facing a new e-commerce company is whether to host its
own Web site or to let someone else do it. Many companies decide that using
a third-party Web service provider is the best way to meet initial e-commerce
needs. The third-party company rents space on its computer system and pro-
vides a high-speed connection to the Internet, thus minimizing the initial
out-of-pocket costs for e-commerce start-up. The third party can also provide
personnel trained to operate, troubleshoot, and manage the Web server.
Web Server Software
In addition to the Web server operating system, each e-commerce Web site
must have Web server software to perform fundamental services, including
security and identification, retrieval and sending of Web pages, Web site
tracking, Web site development, and Web page development. The two most
widely used Web server software packages are Apache HTTP Server and
Microsoft Internet Information Services.
E-Commerce Software
After you have located or built a host server, including the hardware, operat-
ing system, and Web server software, you can begin to investigate and install
e-commerce software to support five core tasks: catalog management to create
and update the product catalog, product configuration to help customers
select the necessary components and options, shopping cart facilities to track
the items selected for purchase (see Figure 7.14), e-commerce transaction pro-
cessing, and Web traffic data analysis to provide details to adjust the opera-
tions of the Web site.
Mobile Commerce Hardware and Software
For m-commerce to work effectively, the interface between the mobile device
and its user must improve to the point that it is nearly as easy to purchase an
item on a wireless device as it is to purchase it on a PC. In addition, network
speeds must continue to improve so that users do not become frustrated.
FIGURE 7.14
Electronic shopping cart
An electronic shopping cart allows
online shoppers to view their selec-
tions and add or remove items.
328 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Security is also a major concern, particularly in two areas: the security of the
transmission itself and the trust that the transaction is being made with the
intended party. Encryption can provide secure transmission. Digital certifi-
cates can ensure that transactions are made between the intended parties.
The mobile devices used for m-commerce have several limitations that com-
plicate their use. Their screens are small, perhaps no more than several square
inches, and might be able to display only small portions of a Web site. In addi-
tion, entering data on a mobile device can be tedious and error prone. Mobile
devices also have less processing power and less bandwidth than desktop or
laptop computers, which are usually connected to a high-speed LAN. They also
operate on limited-life batteries. For these reasons, Web developers must often
rewrite Web applications so that users with mobile devices can access them.
Electronic Payment Systems
Electronic payment systems are a key component of the e-commerce infra-
structure. Current e-commerce technology relies on user identification and
encryption to safeguard business transactions. Actual payments are made in a
variety of ways, including electronic cash, electronic wallets, and smart, credit,
charge, and debit cards. Web sites that accept multiple payment types convert
more visitors to purchasing customers than merchants who offer only a single
payment method.
Authentication technologies are used by many organizations to con-
firm the identity of a user requesting access to information or assets. A
digital certificate is an attachment to an email message or data embedded
in a Web site that verifies the identity of a sender or Web site. A certifi-
cate authority (CA) is a trusted third-party organization or company that
issues digital certificates. The CA is responsible for guaranteeing that the
people or organizations granted these unique certificates are in fact who
they claim to be. Digital certificates thus create a trust chain throughout
the transaction, verifying both purchaser and supplier identities.
Many organizations that accept credit cards to pay for items purchased via
e-commerce have adopted the Payment Card Industry (PCI) security standard.
This standard spells out measures and security procedures to safeguard the
card issuer, the cardholder, and the merchant. Some of the measures include
installing and maintaining a firewall configuration to control access to compu-
ters and data, never using software or hardware vendor-supplier defaults for
system passwords, and requiring merchants to protect stored data, encrypt
transmission of cardholder information across public networks, use and regu-
larly update antivirus software, and restrict access to sensitive data on a need-
to-know basis.
Various measures are being implemented to increase the security associ-
ated with the use of credit cards at the time of purchase. The Address Verifi-
cation System is a check built into the payment authorization request that
compares the address on file with the card issuer to the billing address pro-
vided by the cardholder. The Card Verification Number technique is a check
of the additional digits typically printed on the back of the card (or on the
front, in the case of American Express cards). Visa has Advanced Authoriza-
tion, a Visa-patented process that provides an instantaneous rating of that
transaction’s potential for fraud—using factors such as the value of the trans-
action, type of merchant, time of day the purchase is being made, and
whether the site is one where the card owner has previously shopped. The
card issuer can then send an immediate response to the merchant regarding
whether to accept or decline the transaction. The technology is applied to
every Visa credit and check card purchase today, and has contributed to a
two-thirds reduction in system-wide fraud for Visa over the past two decades.
Visa has continued to add other features and data inputs to its fraud-detection
digital certificate: An attachment
to an email message or data embedded
in a Web site that verifies the identity of
a sender or Web site.
certificate authority (CA): A
trusted third-party organization or com-
pany that issues digital certificates.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 329
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

systems, such as extended cardholder transaction data and even mobile loca-
tion confirmation.70
The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council has developed a
set of guidelines called “Authentication in an Internet Banking Environment,”
which recommend two-factor authorization. This approach adds another iden-
tity check along with the password system. A number of multifactor authenti-
cation schemes can be used, such as biometrics, one-time passwords, or
hardware tokens that plug into a USB port on the computer and generate a
password that matches the ones used by a bank’s security system.
The use of biometric technology to secure digital transactions has been
slow to develop due to cost and privacy concerns. However, MasterCard
recently announced it will begin rolling out its new MasterCard Identity
Check service that allows users to take an initial ID photo that will be used to
create a digital map of their face, which will be stored on MasterCard’s ser-
vers. When the user wants to make a payment using their smartphone, the
MasterCard app will capture their image, which, along with a user-entered
password, will be authenticated before the transaction is approved. Master-
Card’s system also offers a fingerprint sensor that can be used to verify pur-
chases.71 Apple’s new ApplePay system makes use of the fingerprint sensors
on newer iPhones. Consumers paying with ApplePay, which is tied to a credit
or debit card, just hold their iPhone close to the contactless reader with their
finger on the Touch ID button. 72
Transport Layer Security
All online shoppers fear the theft of credit card numbers and banking
information. To help prevent this type of identity theft, the Transport
Layer Security communications protocol is used to secure sensitive data.
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a communications protocol or system of
rules that ensures privacy between communicating applications and their users
on the Internet. TLS enables a client (like a Web browser) to initiate a tempo-
rary, private conversation with a server (like a shopping site on the Web or an
online bank). Before the client and server start communicating, they perform
an automated process called a “handshake” where they exchange information
about who they are, and which secret codes and algorithms they’ll use to
encode their messages to each other. Then for the duration of the conversation,
all the data that passes between the client and server is encrypted so that even
if somebody does listen in, they won’t be able to determine what’s being com-
municated. TLS is the successor to the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL).
In addition to TLS handling the encryption part of a secure e-commerce
transaction, a digital certificate is assigned to the Web site to provide positive
server identification so shoppers can be assured of with whom that are
dealing.
Electronic Cash
Electronic cash is an amount of money that is computerized, stored, and used
as cash for e-commerce transactions. Typically, consumers must open an
account with an electronic cash service provider by providing identification
information. When the consumers want to withdraw electronic cash to make a
purchase, they access the service provider via the Internet and present proof of
identity—a digital certificate issued by a certification authority or a username
and password. After verifying a consumer’s identity, the system debits the con-
sumer’s account and credits the seller’s account with the amount of the pur-
chase. ApplePay, PayPal, Square, Stripe, and WePay are leading online
payment service providers that facilitate the use of electronic cash.
PayPal enables any person or business with an email address to securely,
easily, and quickly send and receive payments online. To send money, you
enter the recipient’s email address and the amount you want to send. You
Transport Layer Security (TLS):
A communications protocol or system
of rules that ensures privacy between
communicating applications and their
users on the Internet.
electronic cash: An amount of
money that is computerized, stored,
and used as cash for e-commerce
transactions.
330 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

can pay with a credit card, debit card, or funds from a checking account. The
recipient gets an email message that says, “You’ve Got Cash!” Recipients can
then collect their money by clicking a link in the email message that takes
them to www.paypal.com. To receive the money, the user also must have a
credit card or checking account to accept fund transfers. To request money
for an auction, invoice a customer, or send a personal bill, you enter the reci-
pient’s email address and the amount you are requesting. The recipient gets
an email message and instructions on how to pay you using PayPal. Today
over 179 million Internet users use PayPal to send money in more than
100 currencies and some 90 percent of eBay purchases go through PayPal.73
PayPal is rolling out Beacon, a hardware device for merchants that uses
Bluetooth technology to improve the shopper’s experience. Consumers must
download the PayPal app to their smartphone and opt in to the service to use
Beacon for hands-free check-in and payments. Beacon can communicate with
compatible point-of-sale systems from Erply, Leaf, Leapset, Micros, NCR,
ShopKeep, or Vend. When Beacon consumers walk into a store, Beacon will
trigger a vibration or sound to confirm a successful check-in and their photo
will appear on the screen of the merchant’s point-of-sale system so they can
be identified. Payment requires only a verbal confirmation and a receipt is
emailed to the consumer. Using Beacon, a drugstore could fill your prescrip-
tions or your name could be added to a wait list for tables at a restaurant sim-
ply by walking into the establishment.74
The use of smartphones to make purchases and transfer funds between
consumers and businesses has become commonplace. The goal is to make
the payment process as simple and secure as possible and for it to work on
many
different
phones
and
through
many
different
mobile
network
providers—not simple tasks. Fortunately, the intelligence built into the iPhone
and other smartphones can make this all possible.
You can use several services (e.g., Phone Transact iMerchant Pro, Square,
ROAMPay, and PayWare Mobile) to plug a credit card reader device into the
headphone jack on a cell phone to accept credit card payments. Intuit’s
GoPayment service does not require a credit card reader but provides soft-
ware that lets you enter the credit card number.
With Xipwire, consumers can text someone with a special code to place a
purchase on their monthly phone bill and bypass any credit card system alto-
gether. A free Starbucks mobile app that runs on iPhone and Android smart-
phones enables customers to order and pay for their java using their
smartphones—without ever having to wait in line. App users, whose mobile
purchases are tied to a credit card, can even tip their barista digitally.75
Credit, Charge, Debit, and Smart Cards
Many online shoppers use credit and charge cards for most of their Internet
purchases. A credit card, such as Visa or MasterCard, has a preset spending
limit based on the user’s credit history, and each month the user can pay all
or part of the amount owed. Interest is charged on the unpaid amount. A
charge card, such as American Express, carries no preset spending limit, and
the entire amount charged to the card is due at the end of the billing period.
You can’t carry a balance from month to month with a charge card like you
can with a credit card. Charge cards require customers to pay in full every
month or face a fee. Debit cards look like credit cards, but they operate like
cash or a personal check. The debit card is linked directly to your savings or
checking account. Each time you use the card, money is automatically taken
from your checking or savings account to cover the purchase. Credit, charge,
and debit cards currently store limited information about you on a magnetic
stripe. This information is read each time the card is swiped to make a pur-
chase. All credit card customers are protected by law from paying more than
$50 for fraudulent transactions.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 331
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The smart card is a credit card–sized device with an embedded microchip
to provide electronic memory and processing capability. Smart cards can be
used for a variety of purposes, including storing a user’s financial facts, health
insurance data, credit card numbers, and network identification codes and
passwords. They can also store monetary values for spending.
Smart cards are better protected from misuse than conventional credit,
charge, and debit cards because the smart-card information is encrypted. Con-
ventional credit, charge, and debit cards clearly show your account number
on the face of the card. The card number, along with a forged signature, is all
that a thief needs to purchase items and charge them against your card. A
smart card makes credit theft practically impossible because a key to unlock
the encrypted information is required, and there is no external number that a
thief can identify and no physical signature a thief can forge. Table 7.8 com-
pares various types of payment systems.
Here in the United States, credit cards with only magnetic stripes are
being replaced by cards with chips that employ the EMV (Europay, Master-
card, Visa) global standard for working with point-of-sale systems. Each time
the EMV card is used or inserted into a point-of-sale device for payment, it
creates a unique transaction code that can never be reused. Unlike the Euro-
pean version of the card which requires the user to enter a PIN number to com-
plete the transaction, the U.S. card user simply signs the receipt. While such
cards are nearly impossible to counterfeit, the account number of these cards is
clearly visible and can be used by fraudsters for online purchases.
The United States financial institutions elected to implement the chip-
and-sign EMV card rather than chip-and-PIN card. The later card requires the
user to enter their personal PIN number for each transaction. While the chip
in the EMV cards prevents the use of counterfeit cards, it is expected that
card-present fraud in stores will migrate to card-not-present fraud online and
that total dollar volume of fraud will actually increase. It is projected that
counterfeit card fraud in the U.S. will fall by roughly $1.8 billion between
2015 and 2018 due to EMV chips, however, online card (card-not-present)
fraud will rise $3.1 billion. That’s a projected net card fraud gain of $1.3 bil-
lion during the initial post EMV time period—a very poor financial return on
the $8 billion issuers and merchants are spending to deploy EMV.76
TABLE 7.8 Comparison of payment systems
Payment System
Description
Advantages
Disadvantages
Credit card
Carries preset spending
limit based on the user’s
credit history
Each month the user can
pay all or part of the
amount owed
Unpaid balance accumu-
lates interest charges—
often at a high rate of
interest
Charge card
Looks like a credit card but
carries no preset spending
limit
Does not involve lines of
credit and does not accu-
mulate interest charges
The entire amount charged
to the card is due at the end
of the billing period or the
user must pay a fee
Debit card
Looks like a credit card or
automated teller machine
(ATM) card
Operates like cash or a
personal check
Money is immediately
deducted from user’s
account balance
Smart card
Is a credit card device with
embedded microchip
capable of storing facts
about cardholder
Better protected from mis-
use than conventional
credit, charge, and debit
cards because the smart card
information is encrypted
Slowly becoming more
widely used in the United
States
332 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
P-Card
A p-card (procurement card or purchasing card) is a credit card used to
streamline the traditional purchase order and invoice payment processes. The
p-card is typically issued to selected employees who must follow company
rules and guidelines that may include a single purchase limit, a monthly
spending limit, or merchant category code restrictions. Due to an increased
risk of unauthorized purchases, each p-card holder’s spending activity is
reviewed periodically by someone independent of the cardholder to ensure
adherence to the guidelines. Spending on p-cards is expected to increase
from $245 billion in 2013 to $377 billion in 2018.77
Third Party Operation of Web Site
Your firm has been hosting and operating its own Web site for over five years
now. However, in the face of negative consumer reviews and poor performance,
management is considering having a third-party host and operate the Web site.
Review Questions
1.
What parameters might be used to measure the current performance of the
Web site?
2.
What are the pros and cons of having a third-party host and operate your Web
site?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Management is concerned that the migration to chip-and-sign EMV cards will
increase the level of online consumer fraud. Do you have any ideas to combat
this increase in fraud?
2.
What other potential risks and opportunities lie in the future of B2C e-commerce?
p-card (procurement card or
purchasing card): A credit card
used to streamline the traditional pur-
chase order and invoice payment
processes.
Summary
Principle:
Electronic and mobile commerce are evolving, providing new ways of con-
ducting business that present both potential benefits and problems.
Electronic commerce is the conducting of business activities (e.g., distribu-
tion, buying, selling, marketing, and servicing of products or services) electron-
ically over computer networks. Business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce allows
manufacturers to buy at a low cost worldwide, and offers enterprises the
chance to sell to a global market. Currently, the greatest dollar volume of
e-commerce sales falls under the category of B2B e-commerce. Business-
to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce enables organizations to sell directly to consu-
mers, eliminating intermediaries. In many cases, this practice squeezes costs
and inefficiencies out of the supply chain and can lead to higher profits and
lower
prices
for
consumers.
Consumer-to-consumer
(C2C)
e-commerce
involves consumers selling directly to other consumers. Online auctions
are the chief method by which C2C e-commerce is currently conducted.
E-government involves the use of information and communications technology
to simplify the sharing of information, speed formerly paper-based processes,
and improve the relationship between citizens and government.
Mobile commerce is the use of mobile devices such as tablets and smart-
phones to facilitate the sale of goods or services—anytime and anywhere.
Mobile commerce is a rapidly growing segment of e-commerce, with Japan,
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 333
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the United Kingdom, and South Korea leading the world in m-commerce
growth. The market for m-commerce in North America is maturing much
later than in other countries for several reasons. Numerous retailers have estab-
lished special Web sites for users of mobile devices.
Conversion to an e-commerce or m-commerce system enables organiza-
tions to reach new customers, reduce the cost of doing business, speed the
flow of goods and information, increase the accuracy of order-processing and
order fulfillment, and improve the level of customer service.
A successful e-commerce system must address the many stages consumers
experience in the sales life cycle. At the heart of any e-commerce system is the
ability of the user to search for and identify items for sale; select those items;
negotiate prices, terms of payment, and delivery date; send an order to the
vendor to purchase the items; pay for the product or service; obtain product
delivery; and receive after-sales support.
From the perspective of the provider of goods or services, an effective
e-commerce system must be able to support the activities associated with sup-
ply chain management and customer relationship management.
A firm faces three key challenges when converting its business processes
from the traditional form to e-commerce processes: (1) dealing effectively with
consumer privacy concerns, (2) successfully overcoming consumers’ lack of
trust, and (3) overcoming global issues.
Principle:
E-commerce and m-commerce can be used in many innovative ways to
improve the operations of an organization.
Many manufacturers are joining electronic exchanges, where they can
work with competitors and suppliers to buy and sell goods, trade market infor-
mation, and run back-office operations, such as inventory control. They are
also using e-commerce to improve the efficiency of the selling process by mov-
ing customer queries about product availability and prices online.
The Web allows firms to gather much more information about customer behav-
ior and preferences than they could using other marketing approaches. This new
technology has greatly enhanced the practice of market segmentation and has
enabled many companies to establish closer relationships with their customers.
The Internet has revolutionized the world of investment and finance, espe-
cially online stock trading and online banking. The Internet has also created
many options for electronic auctions, where geographically dispersed buyers
and sellers can come together.
The numerous m-commerce applications include advertising, bartering, retar-
geting, price comparison, couponing, investment and finance, and banking.
Principle:
E-commerce and m-commerce offer many advantages yet raise many
challenges.
Businesses and people use e-commerce and m-commerce to reduce trans-
action costs, speed the flow of goods and information, improve the level of
customer service, and enable the close coordination of actions among manufac-
turers, suppliers, and customers.
E-commerce and m-commerce also enable consumers and companies to
gain access to worldwide markets. They offer great promise for developing
countries, enabling them to enter the prosperous global marketplace and
hence helping to reduce the gap between rich and poor countries.
Because e-commerce and m-commerce are global systems, they face cul-
tural, language, time and distance, infrastructure, currency, product and ser-
vice, and state, regional, and national law challenges.
334 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Principle:
Organizations must define and execute an effective strategy to be success-
ful in e-commerce and m-commerce.
Most people agree that an effective Web site is one that creates an attractive
presence and meets the needs of its visitors. E-commerce start-ups must decide
whether they will build and operate the Web site themselves or outsource this
function. Web site hosting services and storefront brokers provide alternatives
to building your own Web site.
To build traffic to your Web site, you should register a domain name that is
relevant to your business, make your site search-engine friendly by including a
meta tag in your home page, use Web site traffic data analysis software to
attract additional customers, and modify your Web site so that it supports
global commerce. Web site operators must constantly monitor the traffic and
response times associated with their sites and adjust software, databases, and
hardware to ensure that visitors have a good experience when they visit.
Web site operators must also continually be alert to new trends and devel-
opments in the area of e-commerce and be prepared to take advantage of new
opportunities, including personalization—the process of tailoring Web pages to
specifically target individual consumers.
Principle:
E-commerce and m-commerce require the careful planning and integra-
tion of a number of technology infrastructure components.
A number of infrastructure components must be chosen and integrated to
support a large volume of transactions with customers, suppliers, and other
business partners worldwide. These components include hardware, Web server
software, and e-commerce software.
M-commerce
presents
additional
infrastructure
challenges,
including
improving the ease of use of wireless devices, addressing the security of wire-
less transactions, and improving network speed. The Wireless Application Pro-
tocol (WAP) is a standard set of specifications to enable development of
m-commerce software for wireless devices. The development of WAP and its
derivatives addresses many m-commerce issues.
Electronic payment systems are a key component of the e-commerce infra-
structure. A digital certificate is an attachment to an email message or data
embedded in a Web page that verifies the identity of a sender or a Web site.
To help prevent the theft of credit card numbers and banking information, the
Transport layer Security (TLS) communications protocol is used to secure all sen-
sitive data. Several electronic cash alternatives require the purchaser to open an
account with an electronic cash service provider and to present proof of identity
whenever payments are to be made. Payments can also be made by credit,
charge, debit, smart cards, and p-cards. Retail and banking industries are devel-
oping means to enable payments using the cell phone like a credit card.
Key Terms
business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce
business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce
certificate authority (CA)
consumer-to-consumer (C2C) e-commerce
digital certificate
e-government
electronic cash
electronic exchange
identity theft
market segmentation
meta tag
p-card (procurement card or purchasing card)
personalization
storefront broker
Transport Layer Security (TLS)
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 335
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Chapter 7: Self-Assessment Test
Electronic
and
mobile
commerce
are
evolving,
providing new ways of conducting business that
present both potential benefits and problems.
1.
e-commerce activities include identifying
and comparing competitive suppliers and pro-
ducts, negotiating and establishing prices and
terms, ordering and tracking shipments, and
steering organizational buyers to preferred
suppliers and products.
2.
involves conducting business activities
(e.g., distribution, buying, selling, marketing, and
servicing of products or services) electronically
over computer networks.
a. B2B
b. C2C
c. B2C
d. E-commerce
3. Popular B2C Web sites have helped raise
expectations as to how e-commerce must
operate, and many B2B companies are
responding to those heightened expectations
by investing heavily in their B2B platforms.
True or False?
4. The largest B2C retailer in the United States
is
.
a. Amazon
b. Staples
c. Apple
d. Walmart
5. The elimination of intermediate organizations
between the producer and the consumer is
called
.
E-commerce and m-commerce can be used in many
innovative ways to improve the operations of an
organization.
6. B2B is smaller and growing more slowly than
B2C. True or False?
7.
is not a key challenge for e-commerce.
a. Dealing with consumer privacy concerns
b. Training customers on how to access and use
e-commerce Web sites
c. Overcoming consumers’ lack of trust
d. Overcoming global issues
8. The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers (ICANN) created a domain
called
to attract mobile users to the
Web.
E-commerce and m-commerce offer many advantages
yet raise many challenges.
9. The market for m-commerce is North America is
maturing much sooner than in other countries.
True or False?
10. Key components of a multistage model for
e-commerce includes search and identification,
selection and negotiation, purchasing, product
and service delivery and
.
11. Which of the following is NOT considered to be a
key challenge to e-commerce?
a. Dealing with consumer privacy concerns
b. Overcoming consumer’s lack of trust
c. Overcoming global cultural challenges, lan-
guage, time and distance, infrastructure, and
currency challenges
d. Low user interest in access to global markets
and competitive pricing
12. Some businesses are willing to
as a
means to reduce excess inventory, gain new cus-
tomers, or avoid paying cash for necessary raw
materials or services.
13. The
security standard spells out mea-
sures and security procedures to safeguard the
card issuer, the cardholder, and the merchant.
Organizations must define and execute an effective
strategy
to
be
successful
in
e-commerce
and
m-commerce.
14.
divides the pool of potential customers
into subgroups usually defined in terms of
demographic characteristics, such as age, gender,
marital status, income level, and geographic
location.
15. Mobile ad impressions are generally bought at a
cost per thousand (CPM), cost per action (CPA),
or
(CPC).
E-commerce and m-commerce require the careful
planning and integration of a number of technology
infrastructure components.
16. The amount of storage capacity and computing
power required of a Web server depends pri-
marily on
.
a. the geographical location of the server and
number of different products sold
b. the software that must run on the server and
the volume of e-commerce transactions
c. the size of the business organization and the
location of its customers
d. the number of potential customers and aver-
age dollar value of each transaction
17. Key Web site performance measures include
response time, transaction success rate, and sys-
tem availability. True or False?
336 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Chapter 7: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. Buy-side
2. d.
3. True
4. a.
5. disintermediation
6. False
7. b.
8. .mobi
9. False
10. after-sales service
11. d.
12. barter
13. Payment Card Industry or PCI
14. Market segmentation
15. cost per click
16. b.
17. True
Review Questions
1. Briefly define the term electronic commerce,
and identify six forms of electronic commerce
based on the parties involved in the
transactions.
2. What is buy-side e-commerce and how does it
differ from sell-side e-commerce?
3. What is disintermediation?
4. What region of the world represents the world’s
largest and fastest B2C market?
5. What are Web-influenced sales and what is a
reasonable estimate of total Web-influenced
sales?
6. What is the status of background checks on
online gun sales?
7. Identify three forms of e-government
e-commerce.
8. Why is the market for m-commerce in North
America maturing much later than in other
regions of the world?
9. Outline specific actions online shoppers can take
to ensure that they are dealing with a legitimate
and reputable Web site.
10. Identify six global issues associated with
e-commerce.
11. What is an electronic exchange? Provide an
example.
12. What is market segmentation? What is its
purpose?
13. What is the difference between blind, premium
blind, and premium networks for mobile
advertising?
14. What is meant by retargeting? What percent of all
online shopping carts are abandoned?
15. Identify three key Web site performance
measures.
16. What is a digital certificate? What is a certificate
authority? What is the Payment Card Industry
security standard? What is the Transport Security
Layer?
17. Why is it necessary to continue to maintain and
improve an existing Web site?
18. Identify the key elements of the technology
infrastructure required to successfully implement
e-commerce within an organization.
Discussion Questions
1. Identify and briefly discuss three reasons for the
steady growth in B2C e-commerce.
2. Briefly discuss the status of online retailers
collecting sales taxes on online sales.
3. Identify and briefly discuss five advantages of
electronic and mobile commerce.
4. Identify and briefly discuss the five stages con-
sumers experience in the sales life cycle that
must be supported by a successful e-commerce
system.
5. Identify and briefly discuss three key chal-
lenges that an organization faces in creating a
successful e-commerce operation. What steps
can an organization take to overcome these
barriers?
6. Briefly discuss three models for selling mobile ad
impressions. What are the primary measures for
the success of mobile advertising?
7. Discuss how you might go about increasing the
amount of traffic to your Web site.
8. What is personalization of Web pages? How
might one go about doing this?
9. Briefly describe the differences between a credit,
charge, debit and smart card.
10. Identify and briefly describe three m-commerce
applications you have used.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 337
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

11. Discuss the use of e-commerce to control spend-
ing on manufacturing, repair, and operations
(MRO) of goods and services.
12. Outline the key steps in developing a corporate
global e-commerce strategy.
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Do research to learn more about the American
Consumer Satisfaction Index methodology devel-
oped by the University of Michigan. Prepare a
brief slide presentation about the methodology
and how it was used to rate B2C Web sites. Using
this information, develop one final slide provid-
ing at least five recommendations for someone
developing a B2C Web site.
2. Use PowerPoint or some other presentation
preparation software to produce a presentation of
the key steps that an organization must take in
the aftermath of a data breach to calm its custo-
mers and restore their faith in the firm.
3. Your washing machine just gave out and must be
replaced within the week! Use your Web-enabled
smartphone (or borrow a friend’s) to perform a
price and product comparison to identify the
manufacturer and model that best meets your
needs and the retailer with the lowest delivered
cost. Obtain peer input to validate your choice.
Write a brief summary of your experience, and
identify the Web sites you found most useful.
Team Activities
1. As a team, develop a set of criteria that you would
use to evaluate the effectiveness of a mobile
advertising campaign to boost the sales of one of
your firm’s products. Identify the measures you
would use and the data that must be gathered.
2. Imagine that your team has been hired as con-
sultants to a large organization that has just suf-
fered a major public relations setback due to a
large-scale data breach that it handled poorly.
Identify three things that the organization must
do if it wishes to regain consumer confidence.
3. As a team, develop a set of criteria that you would
use to evaluate the effectiveness of a mobile
advertising campaign to boost the popularity of a
candidate for an elected state government posi-
tion. Identify the measures you would use and
the data that must be gathered.
Web Exercises
1. Do research to capture data on the growth of
B2C e-commerce and retail sales over the past
10 years. Use the charting capability of your
spreadsheet software to plot the growth of B2C
e-commerce and retail sales and predict the year
that B2C e-commerce will exceed 10 percent of
retail sales. Document any assumptions you
make.
2. Do research on the Web to find a dozen Web sites
that offer mobile coupons. Separate the sites into
two groups: those that provide coupons for a
single retailer and those that aggregate coupons
for multiple retailers. Produce a table that sum-
marizes your results and shows the approximate
number of coupons available at each site.
Career Exercises
1. Do research and write a brief report on the
impact of mobile advertising on sales and
marketing.
2. Do research to identify three top organizations
that develop and operate e-commerce Web sites
for their clients. Visit their Web sites and identify
current job openings. What sort of responsibili-
ties are associated with these positions? What
experience and education requirements are
needed to fill these positions? Do any of these
positions appeal to you? Why or why not?
3. For your chosen career field, describe how you
might use or be involved with e-commerce. If you
have not chosen a career yet, answer this ques-
tion for someone in marketing, finance, or human
resources.
338 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Case Studies
Case One
Facebook Moves into E-Commerce
On the social networking site Facebook, users create profiles
that allow them to connect with friends, organizations, and
companies through posts and ads that appear in their
personal News Feed as well as through Pages that are
designed to help organizations and companies connect with
interested users. And with more than 1.4 billion active users,
including 900 million who visit the site every day, Facebook
represents a huge potential online marketplace.
Over the years, Facebook has experimented with many
different features designed to help marketers connect with
prospective customers—from banner ads to sponsored links
to highly visual engagement ads that allow advertisers to
show several clickable images or videos within a single News
Feed ad. Although Facebook has incorporated ads for some
time, it is now focusing more intently on tools that make it
easier for customers to purchase something immediately
based on an ad they see—ideally, all while staying within
Facebook’s site. In particular, the company is concentrating
on ways it can streamline mobile purchasing, currently an
often slow and cumbersome process. According to Emma
Rodgers, Facebook’s head of product marketing for
commerce, “We’re looking to give people an easier way to
find products that will be interesting to them on mobile,
make shopping easier and help businesses drive sales.”
For starters, Facebook is testing a new Shopping tool
within the Favorites section that will aggregate a
personalized mix of products users are likely to be interested
in based on their Facebook likes and connections. In
addition, Facebook has begun experimenting with
“conversational commerce,” a highly personalized form of
e-commerce in which consumers and retailers conduct entire
transactions within a messaging application—in this case,
Facebook’s Messenger app.
Facebook has also been rolling out a new mobile ad
feature it calls Canvas, which offers marketers a customizable
space where they can use video, images, text, and “call-
to-action buttons” (such as Book Now, Sign Up, and Shop
Now) to engage with consumers. When Facebook users click
on a Canvas, they will almost instantaneously see a full-
screen ad that lives within Facebook’s infrastructure—rather
than being redirected to an advertiser’s Web site, which may
be slow to load and not always optimized for mobile devices.
Canvas appeals to marketers looking for a new way to
engage customers without losing them as they are being
redirected to an outside Web site, and it offers Facebook the
chance to keep more of a user’s online activity within its site.
Recently, Facebook has been testing a “shop” concept
that goes one step further—allowing companies using
Shopify’s e-commerce platform to build what amounts to a
mini e-commerce site within their Page through the use of a
Buy button. For now, retailers involved in the test can choose
between an option that directs shoppers to their own sites
and one that keeps the entire shopping experience—from
product discovery to checkout—within Facebook.
A recent study found that 13 percent of all the time spent
on mobile apps is spent within Facebook’s apps, and
according to a Facebook survey, nearly half of its users come
to Facebook to actively look for products. Facebook clearly
intends to capitalize on these trends with e-commerce and
m-commerce initiatives that will likely continue to evolve and
expand. And marketers looking for new ways to extend
customer engagement to online purchases will certainly be
paying attention.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. What are some of the privacy concerns that consumers
might have in terms of shopping on a social network
such as Facebook, which already has access to so
much personal information?
2. Are people likely to use Facebook’s current
e-commerce offerings the same way they might shop
on Amazon?
3. Do research online to find out more about some of the
e-commerce initiatives of other social networks, such
as Instagram, Pinterest, and Twitter. What features do
they offer that differentiate them from Facebook? Do
you think any of these sites will ever be a strong com-
petitor to Amazon in terms of total e-commerce sales?
If not, what niche could they succeed at?
SOURCES: “Easy and Effective Facebook Ads,” Facebook, www.face
book.com/business/products/ads, accessed February 29, 2016; “Face-
book Pushes Shopping Features in Move to E-Commerce,” Reuters,
October 12, 2015, http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-facebook-retail
-idUKKCN0S61N720151012; “FB Moves into E-Commerce, Challenges
Amazon with New In-App,” Money Control, October 13, 2015, www
.moneycontrol.com/news/technology/fb-moves-into-e-commerce-chal
lenges-amazonnew-in-app_3559061.html; Stambor, Zak, “Facebook
Makes a Major E-Commerce Move,” Internet Retailer, October 12, 2015,
www.internetretailer.com/2015/10/09/facebook-makes-major-e-com
merce-move; Mac, Ryan, “Facebook Goes All in On E-Commerce by
Bringing Businesses onto Messenger, Forbes, March 25, 2015, www
.forbes.com/sites/ryanmac/2015/03/25/facebook-goes-all-in-on-e-com
merce-by-bringing-businesses-onto-messenger/#132d7acd4747; Plum-
mer, Quinten, “Facebook May Launch Risky Messenger Ad Program,”
E-Commerce Times, February 22, 2016, www.ecommercetimes.com/story
/83139.html; “Introducing Canvas, A Full-Screen Ad Experience Built for
Bringing Brands and Products to Life on Mobile,” Facebook, February
25, 2016, www.facebook.com/business/news/introducing-canvas; Plum-
mer, Quinten, “Facebook Gives Marketers a Blank Canvas,” E-Commerce
Times, February 27, 2016, www.ecommercetimes.com/story/83165.html;
Kantrowitz, Alex, “Facebook Takes Big Step Forward On Commerce,
Builds Shops into Pages,” BuzzFeed, July 15, 2015, www.buzzfeed.com
/alexkantrowitz/facebook-takes-big-step-forward-on-commerce-builds
-shops-int#.kxovdqa3V; Stambor, Zak, “Facebook Launches Another Buy
Button Test,” Internet Retailer, July 17, 2015, www.internetretailer.com
/2015/07/17/facebook-launches-another-buy-button-test.
Case Two
MobiKash: Bringing Financial Services to
Rural Africa
Full participation in the twenty-first century economy
requires access to financial services. However, this access is a
luxury for many citizens of African nations. Due to the long
distances between bank branches and the lack of rapid, cost-
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 339
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

effective transportation to the urban areas in which banks are
typically found, fewer than 10 percent of Africans participate
in formal banking. Those who do often face time-consuming
inefficiencies.
A new company, MobiKash Afrika, hopes to change this
by empowering people in Africa with a secure and
independent mobile commerce system that is easy to use. In
planning its system, MobiKash established several standards:
●
The service must be independent of specific mobile
telephone operators.
●
The service must be independent of specific banks or
financial institutions.
●
The service must work with all bill issuers.
●
The service must not require the use of a smartphone.
MobiKash offers its members five services, all accessible
from a mobile phone: loading money into their MobiKash
account from any bank account, paying bills, sending money
to any other mobile phone user or bank account, managing a
bank or MobiKash account, and obtaining or depositing cash.
Only the last pair of services requires members to visit a
physical location where cash can be handled, but that site
doesn’t have to be a bank. MobiKash agents in market towns,
convenient to rural areas, can handle transactions that
require cash. Approximately 3,000 MobiKash agents operate
in Kenya. Account holders don’t even need to visit a bank to
set up their MobiKash accounts: in fact, anyone with a mobile
phone to whom a MobiKash user sends money becomes a
MobiKash user automatically.
MobiKash charges for some services. Withdrawing cash
costs 25 to 75 Kenya shillings (Kshs) (about U.S. $0.30 to
$0.90), for withdrawals up to Kshs 10,000 (about U.S. $20),
with higher fees for larger withdrawals. Paying bills from a
mobile phone incurs a fixed fee of Kshs 25, no matter how
large the bill is. The largest fee that MobiKash charges is Kshs
350 (about U.S. $4), for cash withdrawals in excess of Kshs
75,000 (about U.S. $900). This fee schedule is consistent with
the financial resources of MobiKash users and the value those
users place on each financial service.
The MobiKash system is based on Sybase 365
mCommerce software. Several factors contributed to this
choice, including the local presence of Sybase in Africa with
experience in similar applications, its understanding of how
to integrate with African financial institutions, and the
system’s ability to work with any mobile telephone. It
operates from an existing Sybase data center in Frankfurt,
Germany.
MobiKash services expects to expand in east, west, and
southern Africa, starting with Zimbabwe. It is working with
Masary, an Egyptian e-wallet firm, to cover northern Africa
as well. Work is also under way to support intercontinental
fund transfers to and from North America, Europe, and the
Middle East. As for the future, CEO Duncan Otieno said,
“We see MobiKash in the next five years playing with the
international or global mobile commerce space in at least
40 countries. The plans for building this network are
already in progress.”
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Firms can base m-commerce systems on commercially
available software, as MobiKash did here. Alterna-
tively, they can write their own software. List three
pros and cons of each approach. Do you think
MobiKash made the right choice?
2. What challenges does a company like MobiKash face
when they try to penetrate different national markets
in developing countries? Why might Kenya be a good
choice for the launch of m-commerce operations in
Africa?
3. Contrast your m-commerce needs with those of a
typical rural African. Would you find the MobiKash
offering attractive in full, in part (which parts?), or not
at all?
SOURCES: Masary, www.e-masary.com, accessed March 1, 2012;
MobiKash Afrika, “The First Intra-region Mobile Network and Bank
Agnostic Mobile Commerce Solution,” Computerworld case study, www
.eiseverywhere.com/file_uploads/e1bfbec2f385506b3890cbd7e
b7e9dd9_MobiKash_Afrika_-_The_First_Intra-region_Mobile_Network_
and_Bank_Agnostic_Mobile_Commerce_Solution.pdf, accessed March 1,
2012; MobiKash Africa Web site, www.mobikash.com, accessed March 1,
2012; “Reaching the Unbanked in a MobiKash World,” interview
with CEO Duncan Otieno, MobileWorld, www.mobileworldmag.com
/reaching-the-unbanked-in-a-mobikash-world/, December 28, 2011;
Sybase, “MobiKash Africa: Customer Case Study,” www.sybase.com/files
/Success_Stories/Mobikash-CS.pdf, accessed March 1, 2012.
Notes
1. Demery, Paul, “B2B E-Commerce Sales Will Top $1.13
Trillion by 2020,” Internet Retailer, April 2, 2015, www
.internetretailer.com/2015/04/02/new-report-predicts
-1-trillion-market-us-b2b-e-commerce.
2. Ibid.
3. Davis, Don, “E-commerce Software Spending Will Nearly
Double in the U.S. by 2019,” February 9, 2015, www
.internetretailer.com/2015/02/09/us-e-commerce-soft
ware-spending-nearly-double-2019.
4. “Mastering Omni-Channel B2B Customer Engagement,”
Accenture, October 2015, www.accenture.com/us-en
/insight-mastering-omni-channel-b2b-customer-engage
ment.aspx.
5. Tepper, Nona, “E-Commerce Accounts for 41% of
Grainger Sales in 2015, B2B E-Commerce World, January
26, 2016, www.b2becommerceworld.com/2016/01/26
/e-commerce-accounts-41-grainger-sales-2015.
6. “Our Strengths at Work: 2015 Fact Book,” Grainger,
http://phx.corporate-ir.net/External.File?item=UG
FyZW50SUQ9Mjc5MDI1fENoaWxk
SUQ9LTF8VHlwZT0z&t=1, accessed February 24, 2016.
7. Linder, Matt, “E-Commerce Revenue for Retailers with
Stores and Websites Grows over 36% in Q3,” Internet
Retailer, October 29, 2015, www.internetretailer.com
/2015/10/29/e-commerce-retailers-stores-and-Websites
-grows-over-36.
8. “Press Release: MarketLive’s Fall Performance Index
Shows Double-Digit Revenue Gains for E-Commerce
Retailers; Smartphones & Direct Traffic Are Major
Trends,” Market Wired, October 8, 2015, www.market
340 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

wired.com/press-release/marketlives-fall-performance
-index-shows-double-digit-revenue-gains-e-commerce
-2067871.htm.
9. “Global E-Commerce Turnover Grew by 24.0% to Reach
$ 1,943BN in 2014,” Ecommerce Europe, September 17.
2015, www.ecommerce-europe.eu/news/2015/global
-e-commerce-turnover-grew-by-24.0-to-reach-1943bn
-in-2014.
10. Linder, Matt, “Global E-Commerce Sales Set to Grow 25%
in 2015, Internet Retailer, www.internetretailer.com
/2015/07/29/global-e-commerce-set-grow-25-2015.
11. “Customize Nike Shoes with NIKEiD,” Nike, http://help
-en-us.nike.com/app/answers/detail/article/nikeid-help
/a_id/3393/kw/nikeid/country/us, accessed February 25,
2016.
12. “Inside New NIKEiD Personalization Program,” Nike,
November 9, 2015, http://news.nike.com/news/pid.
13. Brousell, Lauren, “Why Pinterest’s ‘Buy It’ Button Is Big
for Online Retailers,” CIO, June 10, 2015, www.cio.com
/article/2933381/pinterest/why-pinterests-buy-it-button
-is-big-for-online-retailers.html.
14. “You’ll Love These New Ways Target is Making Mobile
Shopping More Awesome,” Target, November 5, 2015,
https://corporate.target.com/article/2015/11/target
-crush-awesome-shop.
15. “Deloitte Digital Study: Digitally-Influenced Sales in
Retail Brick-And-Mortar Stores to Reach $2.2 Trillion by
Year-End,” Deloitte, May 13, 2015, www2.deloitte
.com/us/en/pages/about-deloitte/articles/press-releases
/retail-digital-divide.html.
16. Reisinger, Don, “Your State May Fight for Internet Sales
Tax,” Fortune, February 24, 2016, http://fortune.com
/2016/02/24/state-internet-sales-tax.
17. Steverman, Ben, “This Supreme Court Justice Wants You
to Pay Your Online Sales Tax, BloombergBusiness,
March 6, 2015, www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015
-03-06/this-supreme-court-justice-wants-you-to-pay-your
-online-sales-tax.
18. “eBay Inc. Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2015
Results,” eBay, January 27, 2016, https://investors
.ebayinc.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=952024.
19. Ibid.
20. Luo, Michael, McIntire, Mike, and Palmer, Griff, “Seeking
Gun or Selling One, Web Is a Land of Few Rules,” The
New York Times, April 17, 2013, www.nytimes.com
/2013/04/17/us/seeking-gun-or-selling-one-Web-is-a
-land-of-few-rules.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.
21. Rose, Joel, “Obama Aims to Expand Background Checks
to Online Gun Sales,” NPR, January 8, 2016, www.npr
.org/2016/01/06/462114352/obama-aims-to-expand
-background-checks-to-online-gun-sales.
22. Nussbaum, Alex, “Accenture Wins U.S. Contract for
Obamacare Enrollment,” Bloomberg, January 12, 2014,
www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-01-12/accenture-wins
-u-s-contract-for-obamacare-enrollment-Website.html.
23. “Oregon E-Government Program,” State of Oregon,
www.oregon.gov/DAS/ETS/EGOV/pages/ecommerce.aspx,
accessed February 27, 2016.
24. “Making the Internet Work for Oregon,” State of Oregon,
www.oregon.gov/DAS/ETS/EGOV/pages/ev_internet
.aspx#Objectives, accessed February 27, 2016.
25. “Press Release: It’s a Cross-Device World: Criteo’s Q4
Mobile Commerce Report Reveals Top Companies Bet Big
on Mobile Consumers,” Criteo, February 17, 2016, www
.prnewswire.com/news-releases/its-a-cross-device-world
-criteos-q4-mobile-commerce-report-reveals-top-compa
nies-bet-big-on-mobile-consumers-300221060.html.
26. Ibid.
27. “About Shoe Carnival,” Shoe Carnival, www.shoecarni
val.com/aboutshoecarnival, www.shoecarnival.com
/aboutshoecarnival, accessed February 27, 2016.
28. “Customer Stories: Shoe Carnival,” Rackspace, http://stor
ies.rackspace.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/CRP
-Shoe-Carnival-Case-Study-Final.pdf, accessed February
27, 2016.
29. “About Us,” BloomNation, htps://www.bloomnation
.com/about-us, accessed February 27, 2016.
30. Cowley, Stacy, “Florist-Friendly Marketplaces Help Local
Flower Shops Hang On,” New York Times, February 10,
2016, www.nytimes.com/2016/02/11/business/smallbusi
ness/florist-friendly-marketplaces-help-local-flower
-shops-hang-on.html?ref=topics.
31. Demery, Paul, “Online Photo Service Shutterfly Posts A
16% Increase in Q2 Sales, Internet Retailer, August 24,
2015, www.internetretailer.com/2015/08/24/online
-photo-service-shutterfly-posts-16-increase-q2-sales.
32. “About Shutterfly,” Shutterfly, http://businesssolutions
.shutterfly.com/Learn, accessed February 27, 2016.
33. Ryssdal, Kai and Tommy Andres, “Domino’s CEO Patrick
Doyle: Tech with a Side of Pizza,” Marketplace, Septem-
ber 24, 2015, www.marketplace.org/2015/09/24/busi
ness/corner-office/dominos-ceo-patrick-doyle-tech-side
-pizza.
34. “About,” Sticker Mule, www.stickermule.com/about,
accessed February 29, 2016.
35. Wahba, Phil, “Borders Files for Bankruptcy, to Close
Stores,” The Huffington Post, February 16, 2011, www
.huffingtonpost.com/2011/02/16/borders-files-for-bank
ruptcy_n_823889.html.
36. Leger, Donna Leinwand, “Target Data Breach under
Close Investigative Scrutiny,” USA Today, January 13,
2014, www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/01
/10/target-data-breach-investigations-continue
/4421345/.
37. “These Companies Lost Your Data in 2015’s Biggest
Hacks, Breaches,” ZDNet, August 14, 2015, www.zdnet
.com/pictures/biggest-hacks-security-data-breaches-2015.
38. Goodin, Dan, “Gigabytes of User Data from Hack of
Patreon Donations Site Dumped Online,” Ars Technica,
October 1, 2015, http://arstechnica.com/security/2015
/10/gigabytes-of-user-data-from-hack-of-patreon-dona
tions-site-dumped-online.
39. “The Top 10 Security Breaches of 2015, Forbes, Decem-
ber 31, 2015, www.forbes.com/sites/quora/2015/12/31
/the-top-10-security-breaches-of-2015/4/#58cc002e15e9.
40. Greenberg, Andy, “Hack Brief: Hackers Steal 15M
T-Mobile Customers’ Data from Experian,” Wired,
October 1, 2015, www.wired.com/2015/10/hack-brief
-hackers-steal-15m-t-mobile-customers-data-experian.
41. “What Is Identity Theft,” Federal Trade Commission,
www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0014-identity-theft
.pdf, accessed February 10, 2014.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 341
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

42. “Target Debit and Credit Card Breach Lawsuit,”
LawyersandSettlements.com, www.lawyersandsettle
ments.com/lawsuit/data-breach.html#.Uvom26-A1Ms,
accessed February 11, 2014.
43. “Akimbo Financial,” Symantec, www.symantec.com/con
tent/en/us/enterprise/customer_successes/b-akimbo
-financial-SuccessStory-en-us.pdf accessed February 11,
2016.
44. Tepper, Nona, “Wholesalers Call E-Commerce Their Top
Sales Channel for 2015,” Internet Retailer, March 2,
2015, www.internetretailer.com/2015/03/02/wholesa
lers-call-e-commerce-their-top-sales-channel-2015.
45. “About MSC,” MSC Industrial Supply Co., www.mscdir
ect.com/corporate/about-msc, accessed February 28,
2016.
46. Tepper, Nona, “E-Commerce Accounts for All the Q2
Sales Growth at MSC Industrial Supply,” Internet
Retailer, April 27, 2015, www.internetretailer.com/2015
/04/27/e-commerce-builds-sales-growth-msc-industrial
-supply.
47. “Tinypass in Ruby,” Tinypass Press Releases, www.tiny
pass.com/blog/category/press-releases/, accessed Febru-
ary 11, 2016.
48. “Crowdfunding…Your Way,” Tinypass, http://publisher.
tinypass.com/archives/howto/crowdfund, accessed Feb-
ruary 27, 2016.
49. Petersen, Chris, “Walmart’s Secret Sauce: How the
Largest Survives and Thrives,” RetailCustomer
Experience.com, March 27, 2013, www.retailcustomerex
perience.com/blog/10111/Walmart-s-secret-sauce-How
-the-largest-survives-and-thrives.
50. “Exelate and Dun & Bradstreet Collaborate to Offer One
of the Most Comprehensive B2B Datasets in Digital
Media,” Nielsen, February 25, 2016, www.nielsen.com
/us/en/press-room/2016/exelate-and-dun-bradstreet-col
laborate-to-offer-one-of-the-most-comprehensive-b2b
-datasets-in-digital-media.html.
51. “InMobi Launches Appographic Targeting—An Industry-
first, App-Interest-Based Audience Targeting Capability,”
InMobi, March 5, 2015, www.inmobi.com/company
/press/inmobi-launches-appographic-targeting-an-indus
try-first-app-interest-based.
52. Jatain, Visheshwar, “Top 8 Best-Paying Mobile Ad Net-
works You Should Try,” AdPushup (blog), May 29, 2015,
www.adpushup.com/blog/top-8-best-paying-mobile-ad
-networks-you-should-try.
53. Smith, Cooper, “Shopping Cart Abandonment: Online
Retailers’ Biggest Headache Is Actually a Huge Oppor-
tunity,” Business Insider, July 23, 2015, www.businessin
sider.com/heres-how-retailers-can-reduce-shopping-cart
-abandonment-and-recoup-billions-of-dollars-in-lost
-sales-2015-7.
54. Steele, Chandra, “The 11 Best Shopping Apps to Com-
pare Prices,” PCMag, November 23, 2015, www.pcmag
.com/slideshow/story/290959/the-11-best-shopping-apps
-to-compare-prices.
55. “Barcode Scanner,” Google Play, https://play.google.com/
store/apps/details?id=com.google.zxing.client.android,
accessed February 28, 2016.
56. Loechner, Jack, “FSI Coupon Incentives Continue to
Grow,” MediaPost, January 21, 2016, www.mediapost
.com/publications/article/266825/fsi-coupon-incentives
-continue-to-grow.html.
57. Dunn, Amy, “Coupon Use Plummets, and Some Wonder
Whether It’s the End of an Era,” NewsObserver.com,
March 9, 2013, www.newsobserver.com/2013/03/09
/2735590/coupon-use-plummets-and-some-wonder
.html#storylink=cpy.
58. Heller, Laura, “Beacons to Push 1.6 Billion Coupons by
2020,” FierceRetail, December 10, 2015, www.fiercere
tail.com/story/beacons-push-16-billion-coupons-2020
/2015-12-10.
59. Maycotte, H.O., “Beacon Technology: The Where, What,
Who, How and Why,” Forbes, September 1, 2015, www
.forbes.co.m/sites/homaycotte/2015/09/01/beacon-tech
nology-the-what-who-how-why-and-where/#b74a5664fc19.
60. Donovan, Fred, “Mobile Couponers to Fuel 11% Growth
in Digital Coupon Use This Year,” FierceMobileIT, Octo-
ber 21, 2013, www.fiercemobileit.Com/Story/Mobile-Cou
poners-Fuel-11ex-Growth-Digital-Coupon-Use-Year
/2013-10-21#Ixzz2teth8gu8.
61. “Fidelity Mobile Apps,” Fidelity, www.fidelity.com
/mobile/overview, accessed February 28, 2016.
62. Perez, Sarah, “How T-Mobile’s New Mobile Banking
Service Compares with Simple and Amex Serve,” Tech
Crunch, January 22, 2014, http://Techcrunch.Com/2014
/01/22/How-T-Mobiles-New-Mobile-Banking-Service-Com
pares-With-Simple-And-Amex-Serve.
63. Runde, Daniel, “M-Pesa and The Rise of the Global
Mobile Money Market,” Forbes, August 12, 2015, www
.forbes.com/sites/danielrunde/2015/08/12/m-pesa-and
-the-rise-of-the-global-mobile-money-market/#7058eca
423f5.
64. Pressler, Jessica, “The World Is Not Enough,” New York,
August 11, 2015, http://nymag.com/thecut/2015/08/net
-a-porter-bigger-better-future.html.
65. “About Us,” Quintessentially Gifts, www.quintessential
lygifts.com/about-us, accessed February 14, 2014.
66. “About Us,” Shopify, www.shopify.com/about, accessed
February 27, 2016.
67. Nash, Kim S., “Wal-Mart, Reporting Slower E-Commerce
Growth, Makes Plans to Expand Number of Products
Available Online,” Wall Street Journal, February 18,
2016, http://blogs.wsj.com/cio/2016/02/18/wal-mart
-reporting-slower-e-commerce-growth-makes-plans-to
-expand-number-of-products-available-online.
68. Nash, Kim S., “Wal-Mart Revamps E-Commerce Tech-
nology as Amazon Applies Pressure,” Wall Street Journal,
November 25, 2015, http://blogs.wsj.com/cio/2015/11
/25/wal-mart-revamps-e-commerce-technology-as-ama
zon-applies-pressure.
69. “Room & Board,” Salesforce, www.salesforce.com/custo
mers/stories/room-and-board.jsp, accessed February 29,
2016.
70. Nelson, Mark, “Outsmarting Fraudsters with Advanced
Analytics,” VISA, https://usa.visa.com/visa-everywhere
/security/outsmarting-fraudsters-with-advanced-analyt
ics.html, accessed February 29, 2016.
71. Pesce, Nicole, “MasterCard Will Launch ‘Selfie Pay’ Tech-
nology This Summer,” Daily News, February 23, 2016,
www.nydailynews.com/life-style/mastercard-launch
-selfie-pay-technology-summer-article-1.2540983.
342 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

72. “Apple Pay,” Apple, www.apple.com/apple-pay, accessed
February 29, 2016.
73. “Who We Are,” PayPal, www.paypal.com/us/Webapps
/mpp/about, accessed February 29, 2016.
74. Rao, Leena, “Paypal Debuts Its Newest Hardware,
Beacon, a Bluetooth LE Enabled Device for Hands-Free
Check Ins and Payments,” Tech Crunch, September 9,
2013, http://Techcrunch.Com/2013/09/09/Paypal
-Debuts-Its-Newest-Hardware-Beacon-A-Bluetooth
-Le-Enabled-Device-For-Hands-Free-Check-Ins-And
-Payments/.
75. “Get the Starbucks App for iPhone and Android,”
Starbucks, www.starbucks.com/coffeehouse/mobile-apps,
accessed February 29, 2016.
76. Wetherington, Lee, “Chip and Quill: How EMV Will
Increase Card Fraud in the U.S.,” Information Week,
November 18, 2014, www.banktech.com/fraud/chip
-and-quill-how-emv-will-increase-card-fraud-in-the-us
/a/d-id/1317543.
77. Morgan, Orson, “Commercial Payments Overview,” VISA,
October 2014, www.des.wa.gov/sitecollectiondocuments
/contractingpurchasing/pcard/visacmrclpymtoview.pptx.
CHAPTER 7 • Electronic and Mobile Commerce 343
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
8
Enterprise Systems
dizain/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• Automatic Data Processing (ADP) is a major provider of
business outsourcing solutions for payroll administration
for 610,000 organizations in more than 125 countries.
It uses a batch processing system to prepare the pay-
checks of one out of six workers in the United States,
as well as 12 million other workers around the world.
• The Red Cross uses a cloud-based CRM platform from
Salesforce so that volunteers and employees can
quickly access the data and services required to get the
organization’s operations up and running during a
disaster. The Red Cross has even integrated social
networking tools into its CRM system, providing the
organization with new channels to connect with volun-
teers and donors as well as new tools for delivering
disaster-relief updates to the public, soliciting financial
and volunteer help, and helping people affected by a
disaster communicate with family and friends.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• An organization must have information systems
that support routine, day-to-day activities and that
help a company add value to its products and
services.
• Identify the basic activities and business objec-
tives common to all transaction processing
systems.
• Describe the transaction processing systems
associated with the order processing, purchas-
ing, and accounting business functions.
• An organization that implements an enterprise
system is creating a highly integrated set of sys-
tems, which can lead to many business benefits.
• Identify the basic functions performed and the
benefits derived from the implementation of an
enterprise resource planning system, customer
resource management, and product lifecycle
management system.
• Describe the hosted software model for enterprise
systems and explain why this approach is so
appealing to SMEs.
• Identify the challenges that organizations face in
planning, building, and operating their enterprise
systems.
• Identify tips for avoiding many of the common
causes for failed enterprise system
implementations.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Enterprise Systems?
Individuals and organizations today are moving from a collection of nonintegrated transaction
processing systems to highly integrated enterprise systems that perform routine business processes and
maintain records about them. These systems support a wide range of business activities associated with
supply chain management, customer relationship management, and product lifecycle management.
Although they were initially thought to be cost effective only for very large companies, even small and
mid-sized companies are now implementing these systems to reduce costs, speed time to market, and
improve service.
In our service-oriented economy, outstanding customer service has become a goal of virtually all
companies. To provide good customer service, employees who work directly with customers—whether
in sales, customer service, or marketing—require high-quality and timely data to make good decisions.
Such workers might use an enterprise system to check the inventory status of ordered items, view the
production-planning schedule to tell a customer when an item will be in stock, or enter data to schedule
a delivery.
No matter what your role, it is very likely that you will provide input to or use the output from your
organization’s enterprise systems. Your effective use of these systems will be essential to raise the
productivity of your firm, improve customer service, and enable better decision making. Thus, it is
important that you understand how these systems work and what their capabilities and limitations are.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• What advantages do integrated enterprise systems offer an organization?
• What factors should organizations consider when adopting enterprise systems to support their
business processes and plan for the future?
This chapter begins with an overview of the individual transaction proces-
sing systems that support the fundamental operations of many organiza-
tions. Their processing methods, objectives, and primary activities are
covered. Then enterprise systems, collections of integrated information sys-
tems that share a common database, are discussed. Enterprise systems
ensure that data can be shared across all business functions and all levels
of management to support the operational and management decision mak-
ing needed to run the organization. The basic functions and benefits of
these systems as well as the challenges of successfully implementing them
are discussed.
Transaction Processing Systems
Many organizations employ transaction processing systems (TPSs), which
capture and process the detailed data necessary to update records about
the fundamental business operations of the organization. These systems
include order entry, inventory control, payroll, accounts payable, accounts
receivable, and the general ledger, to name just a few. The input to these
systems includes basic business transactions, such as customer orders, pur-
chase orders, receipts, time cards, invoices, and customer payments. The
processing activities include data collection, data editing, data correction,
data processing, data storage, and document production. The result of pro-
cessing business transactions is that the organization’s records are updated
to reflect the status of the operation at the time of the last processed
transaction.
A TPS also provides valuable input to management information systems,
decision support systems, and knowledge management systems. Indeed,
transaction processing systems serve as the foundation for these other sys-
tems. See Figure 8.1.
346 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Transaction processing systems support routine operations associated with
business processes, such as customer ordering and billing, shipping, employee
payroll, purchasing, and accounting. TPSs use a large amount of input and output
data to update the official records of the company about orders, sales, customers,
and so on. TPSs, however, don’t provide much support for decision making.
Headquartered in Chicago, Revere Electric Supply is an electrical distribu-
tor with a large customer base it serves from eight locations across the Mid-
west. The company receives orders from its customers through a variety of
channels, including email, fax, phone, EDI (electronic data interchange), and
the company’s e-commerce Web site. Revere’s customer service agents often
spend 20 to 30 minutes entering an order into the company’s ERP system
until the company rolled out an order automation system that cut transaction
processing time by 95 percent, while also improving order accuracy.1
The Helen Ross McNabb Center is a community-based, nonprofit organi-
zation that provides behavioral health services to families in eastern Tennes-
see who are struggling due to the impact of mental illness, addiction, and
other challenges.2 Because the organization is a nonprofit, keeping its operat-
ing costs under control is particularly important. The center implemented a
Web-based human resources platform with payroll and benefits transaction
processing functions that have allowed the organization to add 400 employees
without having to increase their human resource staffing levels.3
Because TPSs often perform activities related to customer contacts—such
as order processing and invoicing—these information systems play a critical
role in providing value to the customer. For example, by capturing and track-
ing the movement of each package, shippers such as FedEx and DHL can pro-
vide timely and accurate data on the exact location of a package. Shippers
and receivers can access an online database and, by providing the tracking
number of a package, find the package’s current location. If the package has
been delivered, they can see who signed for it (a service that is especially use-
ful in large companies where packages can become “lost” in internal distribu-
tion systems and mailrooms). Such a system provides the basis for added
value through improved customer service.
Traditional Transaction Processing Methods and Objectives
With batch processing systems, business transactions are accumulated over
a period of time and prepared for processing as a single unit or batch. See
Figure 8.2a. Transactions are accumulated for as long as necessary to meet
the needs of the users of that system. For example, it might be important to
process invoices and customer payments for the accounts receivable system
daily. On the other hand, the payroll system might process time cards
biweekly to create checks, update employee earnings records, and distribute
labor costs. The essential characteristic of a batch processing system is the
delay between an event and the eventual processing of the related transaction
to update the organization’s records. For many applications, batch processing
is an appropriate and cost effective approach. Payroll transactions and billing
are typically done via batch processing.
FIGURE 8.1
TPS, MIS/DSS, and special
information systems in
perspective
A TPS provides valuable input to
MIS, DSS, and KM systems.
More
Less
Special information
systems and
knowledge
management systems
MIS/DSS
TPS
More
Less
Less
More
More
Less
Less
More
Routine
Decision
support
Input and
output
Sophistication and
complexity
of processing and
analysis
Information
vs. data
batch processing system: A form
of data processing whereby business
transactions are accumulated over a
period of time and prepared for pro-
cessing as a single unit or batch.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 347
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Automatic Data Processing (ADP) is a major provider of business outsour-
cing solutions for payroll administration for 610,000 organizations in more
than 125 countries. It uses a batch processing system to prepare the pay-
checks of one out of six workers in the United States, as well as 12 million
other workers around the world.4
Sumerian is an IT company that specializes in helping organizations plan
and manage their hardware and software infrastructure to avoid processing
backlogs and other system capacity issues. The firm recently worked with a
large brokerage firm that needed to optimize its global trading platform,
which handles over 70 percent of its business transactions. Of particular con-
cern were the brokerage’s overnight batch processing activities, which must
be completed within a five-hour window to ensure the company’s systems
are updated by the time the markets open each morning. Using analytics soft-
ware, Sumerian was able to reduce the brokerage’s overnight batch proces-
sing time by 15 percent, allowing the firm’s systems to handle an increasing
volume of trading transactions while staying within the five-hour processing
window.5
With online transaction processing (OLTP), each transaction is pro-
cessed immediately without the delay of accumulating transactions into a
batch, as shown in Figure 8.2b. Consequently, at any time, the data in an
online system reflects the current status. This type of processing is essential
for businesses that require access to current data such as airlines, ticket agen-
cies, and stock investment firms. Many companies find that OLTP helps them
provide faster, more efficient service—one way to add value to their activities
in the eyes of the customer. See Figure 8.3.
FIGURE 8.2
Batch versus online
transaction processing
(a) Batch processing inputs and
processes data in groups. (b) In
online processing, transactions are
completed as they occur.
Data entry
of accumulated
transactions
Input (batched)
Output
(a) Batch Processing
Terminal
Output
Terminal
Terminal
Terminal
Terminal
Central computer
(processing)
(b) Online Transaction Processing
Immediate
processing
of each
transaction
online transaction processing
(OLTP): A form of data processing
where each transaction is processed
immediately without the delay of
accumulating transactions into a batch.
348 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Online payments giant PayPal Holdings, Inc., employs a massive OLTP
system to process more than 13 million payments each day through its Brain-
tree, PayPal, Venmo, and Xoom products. The payments between merchants
and consumers—as well as between individual users—total more than
$280 billion annually.6
The specific business needs and goals of the organization define the
method of transaction processing best suited for the various applications of
the company. Increasingly, the need for current data for decision making is
driving many organizations to move from batch processing systems to online
transaction processing systems when it is economically feasible. For example,
the State of Wisconsin Department of Health Services (DHS) runs the Women,
Infants, and Children (WIC) program. WIC’s goal is to support and sustain the
health and well-being of nutritionally at-risk pregnant, breastfeeding, and
postpartum women, as well as their infants and children. DHS employed a
batch processing system to manage this program and processed the WIC data
in a batch at the end of the day. This practice created a built-in delay in
obtaining information needed for decision-making and government-reporting
requirements. However, DHS needs up-to-date data to avoid dual participa-
tion incidents, such as a client or caregiver receiving more WIC checks than
allowed for one month or receiving WIC checks and the Commodity Supple-
mental Food Program (CSFP) payments at the same time. DHS moved to an
online transaction processing system to ensure that all data is now available
on a current basis. The system is Web-based and WIC staff needs only a Web
browser and secure Internet access to work with the data.7
Figure 8.4 shows the traditional flow of key pieces of information from
one TPS to another for a typical manufacturing organization. When transac-
tions entered into one system are processed, they create new transactions that
flow into another system.
Because of the importance of transaction processing, organizations expect
their TPSs to accomplish a number of specific objectives, including the
following:
●
Capture, process, and update databases of business data required to sup-
port routine business activities
●
Ensure that the data is processed accurately and completely
FIGURE 8.3
Example of an OLTP system
Hospitality companies such as
ResortCom International can use an
OLTP system to manage timeshare
payments and other financial
transactions.
iStockphoto.com/Courtney K
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 349
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Avoid processing fraudulent transactions
●
Produce timely user responses and reports
●
Reduce clerical and other labor requirements
●
Help improve customer service
●
Achieve competitive advantage
A TPS typically includes the following types of systems:
●
Order processing systems. Running these systems efficiently and reli-
ably is so critical that the order processing system is sometimes referred
to as the lifeblood of the organization. The processing flow begins with
the receipt of a customer order. The finished product inventory is
checked to see if sufficient inventory is on hand to fill the order. If suffi-
cient inventory is available, the customer shipment is planned to meet the
customer’s desired receipt date. A product pick list is printed at the ware-
house from which the order is to be filled on the day the order is to be
shipped. At the warehouse, workers gather the items needed to fill the
order and enter the item identifier and quantity for each item to update
the finished product inventory. When the order is complete and sent on
its way, a customer invoice is created, with a copy included in the cus-
tomer shipment.
●
Accounting systems. The accounting systems must track the flow of data
related to all the cash flows that affect the organization. As mentioned ear-
lier, the order processing system generates an invoice for customer orders
to include with the shipment. This information is also sent to the accounts
receivable system to update the customer’s account. When the customer
pays the invoice, the payment information is also used to update the custo-
mer’s account. The necessary accounting transactions are sent to the gen-
eral ledger system, which tracks amounts owed from customers and
amounts due to vendors. Similarly, as the purchasing systems generate pur-
chase orders and those items are received, information is sent to the
accounts payable system to manage the amounts owed by the company.
FIGURE 8.4
Integration of a firm’s TPS
When transactions entered into one
system are processed, they create
new transactions that flow into
another system.
Amounts paid by customers
Order entry/
order configuration
Employee
Shipment planning
Finished product
inventory
Inventory status
Orders
Raw materials
Packing materials
Spare parts
Inventory
Shipment execution
Pick list
Purchase
order
processing
Purchase
order
request
Inventory status report
Invoicing
Shipped orders
Items and quantities
picked for each order
Customer
Invoice
Accounts
receivable
Amounts owed by customer
Receiving
Purchase
order
Supplier
Materials
and
invoice
Purchase order
Check
General ledger
Amounts owed by customers
Amounts owed by company
Amounts paid by company
Payroll
Labor costs
Employee
Paychecks
Time cards
Budget
Expense
transactions
Products
Payment
Customer order request
Accounts payable
Receiving notice
350 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Data about amounts owed and paid by customers to the company and from
the company to vendors and others are sent to the general ledger system,
which records and reports all financial transactions for the company.
●
Purchasing systems. The traditional transaction processing systems that
support the purchasing business function include inventory control, pur-
chase order processing, receiving, and accounts payable. Employees place
purchase order requests in response to shortages identified in inventory
control reports. Purchase order information flows to the receiving system
and accounts payable systems. A record is created upon receipt of the
items ordered. When the invoice arrives from the supplier, it is matched
to the original order and the receiving report, and a check is generated if
all data is complete and consistent.
In the past, organizations knitted together a hodgepodge of systems to
accomplish the transaction processing activities shown in Figure 8.4. Some of
the
systems
might
have
been
applications
developed
using
in-house
resources, some may have been developed by outside contractors, and others
may have been off-the-shelf software packages. Much customization and mod-
ification of this diverse software was typically necessary for all the applica-
tions to work together efficiently. In some cases, it was necessary to print
data from one system and then manually reenter it into other systems. Of
course, this increased the amount of effort required and increased the likeli-
hood of processing delays and errors.
The approach taken today by many organizations is to implement an inte-
grated set of transaction processing systems—from a single or limited number
of software vendors—that handle most or all of the transaction processing activ-
ities shown in Figure 8.4. The data flows automatically from one application to
another with no delay or need to reenter data. For example, Lukas Nursery, a
fourth-generation family-owned agribusiness in central Florida, recently imple-
mented a suite of software applications that is now integrated into the garden
center’s POS system. The nursery consolidated its systems (including several
manual systems) into an integrated retail business management solution pro-
vided by one vendor, allowing it to update its business practices, optimize sea-
sonal inventory, manage a customer loyalty program, and make more informed
business decisions through the use of the software’s analytics capabilities.8,9
Table 8.1 summarizes some of the ways that companies can use transac-
tion processing systems to achieve competitive advantage.
TABLE 8.1 Examples of TPSs yielding significant benefits
Competitive Advantage
Example
Better relationship with
suppliers
Internet marketplace to allow the company to pur-
chase products from suppliers at discounted prices
Costs dramatically
reduced
Warehouse management system employing RFID
technology to reduce labor hours and improve
inventory accuracy
Customer loyalty
increased
Customer interaction system to monitor and track
each customer interaction with the company
Inventory levels reduced
Collaborative planning, forecasting, and replenish-
ing system to ensure the right amount of inventory
is in stores
Superior information
gathering
Order configuration system to ensure that products
ordered will meet customer’s objectives
Superior service provided
to customers
Tracking systems that customers can access to
determine shipping status
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 351
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Depending on the specific nature and goals of the organization, any of
the objectives in Table 8.1 might be more important than others. By meeting
these objectives, TPSs can support corporate goals such as reducing costs;
increasing productivity, quality, and customer satisfaction; and running more
efficient and effective operations.
Transaction Processing Systems for Entrepreneurs and
Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
Many software packages provide integrated transaction processing system
solutions for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), wherein SME is a
legally independent enterprise with no more than 500 employees. Integrated
transaction processing systems for SMEs are typically easy to install and oper-
ate and usually have a low total cost of ownership, with an initial cost of a
few hundred to a few thousand dollars. Such solutions are highly attractive to
firms that have outgrown their current software but cannot afford a complex,
high-end integrated system solution. Table 8.2 presents some of the dozens
of such software solutions available.
Sage is a provider of accounting, ERP, human resources, payroll, asset man-
agement, and payment systems software. Its Sage 300 Construction and Real
Estate software provides an integrated set of applications specifically designed for
customers in the construction, property management, and real estate industries,
and its Sage Construction Anywhere application offers cloud-based construction
management services that can be incorporated with the Sage 300 software.10
Echo Valley Irrigation is a golf course and sports field irrigation design and
construction company founded in 1986. For years, Echo Valley utilized a patch-
work of processes and technologies to run its business. As the company contin-
ued to grow, however, its systems were not keeping up. Eventually, Echo
Valley implemented the Sage 300 software package, which provides the com-
pany with an accounting platform with a range of automated functions, includ-
ing a tool that allows project managers to perform a job-specific profit-and-loss
analysis when bidding on new projects. The firm also takes advantage of Sage
Construction Anywhere, which enables job foremen to track project status, gen-
erate reports, and approve payroll through Web-based services.11
Transaction Processing Activities
Along with having common characteristics, all TPSs perform a common set of
basic data-processing activities. TPSs capture and process data that describes
TABLE 8.2 Sample of integrated TPS solutions for SMEs
Vendor
Software
Type of TPS Offered
Target Customers
AccuFund
AccuFund
Financial reporting and accounting
Nonprofit, municipal, and government
organizations
OpenPro
OpenPro
Complete ERP solution, including
financials, supply chain management,
e-commerce, customer relationship
management, and retail POS system
Manufacturers, distributors, and
retailers
Intuit
QuickBooks
Financial reporting and accounting
Manufacturers, professional services,
contractors, nonprofits, and retailers
Sage
Sage 300 Construction
and Real Estate
Financial reporting, accounting, and
operations
Contractors, real estate developers,
and residential builders
Redwing
TurningPoint
Financial reporting and accounting
Professional services, banks, and
retailers
352 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

fundamental business transactions. This data is used to update databases and
to produce a variety of reports for people both within and outside the enter-
prise. The business data goes through a transaction processing cycle that
includes data collection, data editing, data correction, data processing, data
storage, and document production. See Figure 8.5.
Data Collection
Capturing and gathering all data necessary to complete the processing of
transactions is called data collection. In some cases, it can be done manually,
such as by collecting handwritten sales orders or inventory update forms. In
other cases, data collection is automated via special input devices such as
scanners, point-of-sale (POS) devices, and terminals.
Data collection begins with a transaction (e.g., taking a customer order)
and results in data that serves as input to the TPS. Data should be captured at
its source and recorded accurately in a timely fashion, with minimal manual
effort and in an electronic or digital form that can be directly entered into the
computer. This approach is called source data automation. An example of
source data automation is an automated device at a retail store that speeds
the checkout process—either UPC codes read by a scanner or RFID signals
picked up when the items approach the checkout stand. Using UPC bar
codes or RFID tags is quicker and more accurate than having a clerk enter
codes manually at the cash register. The product ID for each item is deter-
mined automatically, and its price retrieved from the item database. The
point-of-sale TPS uses the price data to determine the customer’s total. The
store’s inventory and purchase databases record the number of units of an
item purchased, along with the price and the date and time of the purchase.
The inventory database generates a management report notifying the store
FIGURE 8.5
Transaction processing
activities
A transaction processing cycle
includes data collection, data edit-
ing, data correction, data proces-
sing, data storage, and document
production.
Document
production
Data
editing
Data
collection
Data
correction
Data
processing
Data
storage
Original data
Bad
data
Good
data
TPS
reports
transaction processing cycle:
The process of data collection, data
editing, data correction, data proces-
sing, data storage, and document
production.
data collection: Capturing and
gathering all data necessary to com-
plete the processing of transactions.
source data automation: Captur-
ing data at its source and recording it
accurately in a timely fashion, with
minimal manual effort and in an elec-
tronic or digital form so that it can be
directly entered into the computer.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 353
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

manager to reorder items that have fallen below the reorder quantity. The
detailed purchases database can be used by the store or sold to marketing
research firms or manufacturers for detailed sales analysis. See Figure 8.6.
Many grocery stores combine POS scanners and coupon printers. The sys-
tems are programmed so that each time a specific product—for example, a box
of cereal—crosses a checkout scanner, an appropriate coupon, perhaps a milk
coupon, is printed. Companies can pay to be promoted through the system,
which is then programmed to print those companies’ coupons if the customer
buys a competing brand. These TPSs help grocery stores increase profits by
improving their repeat sales and bringing in revenue from other businesses.
Many mobile POS (point of sale) systems operate on iPads, iPhones, and
iPod Touch devices. Some mobile POS systems include marketing tools that
SMEs can use to thank first-time customers and send automated emails to
longtime customers who have not visited recently.
Cloud-based POS systems provide a range of capabilities, including
advanced integration with digital loyalty programs, various accounting tools,
and the ability to generate gift cards and coupons. An SME can implement
such a system for a few thousand dollars compared to more traditional cash
register-based POS systems that can cost tens of thousands.12 The owners of
The Creative Wedge, an artisan market that sells cheese and charcuterie along
with craft beer and local wine, implemented a truly mobile POS system that
allows them to sell product out of their store as well as at various local events,
including farmer’s markets and festivals.13
Data Editing
An important step in processing transaction data is to check data for validity and
completeness to detect any problems, a task called data editing. For example,
quantity and cost data must be numeric, and names must be alphabetic; other-
wise, the data is not valid. Often, the codes associated with an individual transac-
tion are edited against a database containing valid codes. If any code entered (or
scanned) is not present in the database, the transaction is rejected.
Data Correction
It is not enough simply to reject invalid data. The system should also provide
error messages that alert those responsible for editing the data. Error
messages must specify the problem so proper corrections can be made.
FIGURE 8.6
Point-of-sale transaction
processing system
The purchase of items at the check-
out stand updates a store’s inventory
database and its database of
purchases.
MIS/DSS
Management
reports
POS
transaction
processing
system
Scanner
Item
database
UPC
Quantity
Date
Time
Customer’s
receipt
Inventory
database
Purchases
database
MIS/DSS
UPC and quantity
Item, quantity
date, time, price
Management
reports
UPC
Price,
description
MIS/DSS
Management
reports
RFID
A chip sending
out radio waves
data editing: Checking data for
validity and completeness to detect any
problems.
354 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
A data correction involves reentering data that was not typed or scanned
properly. For example, a scanned UPC code must match a code in a master
table of valid UPCs. If the code is misread or does not exist in the table, the
checkout clerk is given an instruction to rescan the item or type the informa-
tion manually.
Data Processing
Another major activity of a TPS is data processing, performing calculations
and other data transformations related to business transactions. Data proces-
sing can include classifying data, sorting data into categories, performing cal-
culations, summarizing results, and storing data in the organization’s database
for further processing. In a payroll TPS, for example, data processing includes
multiplying an employee’s hours worked by the hourly pay rate. Overtime
pay, federal and state tax withholdings, and deductions are also calculated.
Data Storage
Data storage involves updating one or more databases with new transactions.
After being updated, this data can be further processed by other systems so
that it is available for management reporting and decision making. Thus,
although transaction databases can be considered a by-product of transaction
processing, they can significantly affect nearly all other information systems
and decision-making processes within an organization.
Document Production
Document production involves generating output records, documents, and
reports. These can be hard-copy paper reports or displays on computer
screens (sometimes referred to as soft copy). Printed paychecks, for example,
are hard-copy documents produced by a payroll TPS, whereas an outstanding
balance report for invoices might be an electronic report displayed by an
accounts receivable TPS. Often, as shown earlier in Figure 8.6, results from
one TPS flow downstream to become input to other systems, which might
use the results of an inventory database update to create a stock exception
report, a type of management report showing items with inventory levels
below the specified reorder point.
In addition to major documents such as checks and invoices, most TPSs
provide other useful management information, such as printed or on-screen
reports that help managers and employees perform various activities. A report
showing current inventory is one example; another might be a document list-
ing items ordered from a supplier to help a receiving clerk check the order
for completeness when it arrives. A TPS can also produce reports required by
local, state, and federal agencies, such as statements of tax withholding and
quarterly income statements.
TPS Needed to Support Small Business
Cal is setting up a small business to prep, cook, and deliver healthy and nutrition-
ally balanced meals to customers in his local area. Cal meets with prospective cus-
tomers to acquaint them with the program, discuss their eating habits and
nutritional needs, and help them select from one of several menus (vegetarian,
gluten free, low carb but high protein) that meets their needs. Twice a week Cal
and his workers buy food ingredients based on what has been ordered. They
then cook three or four days of meals for each customer and seal them in
airtight bags for reheating. Deliveries are made twice a week. All the customer
has to do is take the bag from the refrigerator and pop it into the microwave for
60 seconds.
Business has really taken off and Cal has had to hire two part-time cooks and
two part-time delivery people. Cal has been so busy lining up new customers,
data correction: Reentering data
that was not typed or scanned properly.
data processing: Performing cal-
culations and other data transforma-
tions related to business transactions.
data storage: Updating one or more
databases with new transactions.
document production: Generating
output records, documents, and
reports.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 355
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

shopping, and cooking that he has not had time to carefully track all his
expenses. He pays his workers in cash, but realizes he will need to set up a for-
mal payroll system and start deducting for taxes, social security, and Medicaid.
Cal also wishes he had some sort of system that could help him better plan the
kinds and amounts of ingredients needed based on customer orders. As it is, he
usually purchases too much of the various ingredients and ends up giving left-
overs away at the free store.
Review Questions
1.
What kind of transaction processing systems does Cal need to manage and
support the basic functions of his business?
2.
Identify six specific tasks that the TPS must perform to meet his needs.
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Should Cal consider developing his own programs using spreadsheet and data-
base software or should he purchase an integrated package to meet his needs?
2.
Business is going so well that Cal is thinking of expanding the scope of his
business to include catering for weddings, parties, and various business func-
tions. As the scope of his business expands, how might this impact the choice
of transaction processing systems?
Enterprise Systems
An enterprise system is central to individuals and organizations of all sizes
and ensures that information can be shared with authorized users across all
business functions and at all levels of management to support the running
and managing of a business. Enterprise systems employ a database of key
operational and planning data that can be shared by all, eliminating the pro-
blems of missing information and inconsistent information caused by multiple
transaction processing systems that each support only one business function
or one department in an organization. Examples of enterprise systems include
enterprise resource planning systems that support supply chain processes,
such as order processing, inventory management, and purchasing, and cus-
tomer relationship management systems that support sales, marketing, and
customer service-related processes.
Businesses rely on enterprise systems to perform many of their daily activities
in areas such as product supply, distribution, sales, marketing, human resources,
manufacturing, accounting, and taxation so that work can be performed quickly
without waste or mistakes. Without such systems, recording and processing busi-
ness transactions would consume huge amounts of an organization’s resources.
This collection of processed transactions also forms a storehouse of data invalu-
able to decision making. The ultimate goal of such systems is to satisfy customers
and provide significant benefits by reducing costs and improving service.
Enterprise Resource Planning
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) is a set of integrated programs that manage
a company’s vital business operations for an entire organization, even a com-
plex, multisite, global organization. Recall that a business process is a set of
coordinated and related activities that takes one or more types of input and cre-
ates an output of value to the customer of that process. The customer might be
a traditional external business customer who buys goods or services from the
firm. An example of such a process is capturing a sales order, which takes cus-
tomer input and generates an order. The customer in a business process might
also be an internal customer, such as an employee in another department of
enterprise system: A system cen-
tral to the organization that ensures
information can be shared with autho-
rized users across all business func-
tions and at all levels of management to
support the running and managing of a
business.
356 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the firm. For example, the shipment process generates the internal documents
workers need in the warehouse and shipping departments to pick, pack, and
ship orders. At the core of the ERP system is a database that is shared by all
users so that all business functions have access to current and consistent data
for operational decision making and planning, as shown in Figure 8.7.
ERP systems evolved from materials requirement planning (MRP) systems
developed in the 1970s. These systems tied together the production planning,
inventory control, and purchasing business functions for manufacturing organiza-
tions. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, many organizations recognized that
their legacy TPSs lacked the integration needed to coordinate activities and share
valuable information across all the business functions of the firm. As a result,
costs were higher and customer service was poorer than desired. Large organiza-
tions, specifically members of the Fortune 1000, were the first to take on the
challenge of implementing ERP. As they did, they uncovered many advantages
as well as some disadvantages, which are summarized in the following sections.
Advantages of ERP
Increased global competition, new needs of executives for control over the
total
cost
and
product
flow
through
their
enterprises,
and
ever-
more-numerous customer interactions drive the demand for enterprise-wide
access to real-time information. ERP offers integrated software from a single
vendor to help meet those needs. The primary benefits of implementing ERP
include improved access to quality data for operational decision making, elim-
ination of costly, inflexible legacy systems, improvement of work processes,
and the opportunity to upgrade and standardize technology infrastructure.
ERP vendors have also developed specialized systems that provide effective
solutions for specific industries and market segments.
Improved Access to Quality Data for Operational Decision Making
ERP systems operate via an integrated database, using one set of data to sup-
port all business functions. For example, the systems can support decisions on
optimal sourcing or cost accounting for the entire enterprise or business units.
With an ERP system, data is integrated from the start, eliminating the need to
gather data from multiple business functions and/or reconcile data from more
than one application. The result is an organization that looks seamless, not
only to the outside world but also to the decision makers who are deploying
resources within the organization. Data is integrated to facilitate operational
decision making and allows companies to provide better customer service and
support, strengthen customer and supplier relationships, and generate new
business opportunities. To ensure that an ERP system contributes to improved
decision making, the data used in an ERP system must be of high quality.
FIGURE 8.7
Enterprise resource planning
system
An ERP integrates business pro-
cesses and the ERP database.
Production and supply
chain management
Customer relationship
management and sales ordering
Financial and
managerial accounting
ERP
database(s)
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 357
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Based in New York, Women’s World Banking is a global nonprofit
focused on providing low-income women access to the financial tools and
resources they need to build secure and prosperous lives. The organization
works through a network of 40 institutions in 29 countries to create new
financial products that must meet the needs of women in each of its markets
while also being sustainable for its partner financial institutions.14 Women’s
World Banking needs access to detailed transaction information so it can
maintain complete transparency into its balances by entity, donor, and
grant—even down to the project level. To accomplish this, the organization
previously utilized two stand-alone systems that often gave front and back
office staff very different views of the organization’s key performance metrics,
resulting in time-consuming data entry and reconciliation between the two
systems. To streamline its operations, Women’s World Banking implemented
an ERP system that provides it with access to the data it needs to apply for
new funding grants, quickly and accurately report on existing grants, and
make decisions regarding investments in new business development opportu-
nities. Since its ERP roll-out, the organization has cut 200 hours of accounts
payable and grant-reporting time annually, reduced data entry by 14 hours
per month, and gained greater visibility into its spending across multiple enti-
ties, grants, donors, and projects.15
Elimination of Costly, Inflexible Legacy Systems
Adoption of an ERP system enables an organization to eliminate dozens or
even hundreds of separate systems and replace them with a single integrated
set of applications for the entire enterprise. In many cases, these systems are
decades old, the original developers are long gone, and the systems are
poorly documented. As a result, the systems are extremely difficult to fix
when they break, and adapting them to meet new business needs takes too
long. They become an anchor around the organization that keeps it from
moving ahead and remaining competitive. An ERP system helps match the
capabilities of an organization’s information systems to its business needs—
even as these needs evolve.
Steinwall Scientific is a Minnesota-based precision thermoplastic injection
molder specializing in manufacturing plastic parts using engineering-grade
resins. The company, which has been in business for more than 45 years,
employs 110 employees and has facilities that encompass more than 100,000
square feet of manufacturing and warehouse space spread across five acres.16
For many years, most aspects of the company’s business were managed using
an outdated proprietary system that had been originally programmed by the
company’s president as a simple inventory management program. In addition
to its internally developed system, Steinwall was also using a separate IBM
accounting software program. However, the company’s two main systems
were unable to communicate with each other, creating ongoing data entry
errors and significant manufacturing bottlenecks as the company worked to
take on new clients. Ultimately, Steinwall made the choice to upgrade its sys-
tem to a single-database manufacturing ERP system. Over the course of six
months, Steinwall gradually moved all of its processing tasks, along with all
of its data, to the new system. Among the many benefits that Steinwall has
experienced after moving all of its business functions to its new ERP system
are improved inventory control, enhanced warehouse management, and a
greater efficiency across all its departments.17
Improvement of Work Processes
Competition requires companies to structure their business processes to be as
effective and customer oriented as possible. To further that goal, ERP vendors
do considerable research to define the best business processes. They gather
requirements of leading organizations within the same industry and combine
358 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

them with findings from research institutions and consultants. The individual
application modules included in the ERP system are then designed to support
these best practices, the most efficient and effective ways to complete a business
process. Thus, implementation of an ERP system ensures work processes will be
based on industry best practices. For example, for managing customer payments,
the ERP system’s finance module can be configured to reflect the most efficient
practices of leading companies in an industry. This increased efficiency ensures
that everyday business operations follow the optimal chain of activities, with all
users supplied the information and tools they need to complete each step.
Prime Meats has been providing high-quality, aged steaks to steakhouses
and other restaurants around the country for more than 20 years. Recently,
the Atlanta-based company also began offering its USDA Prime and Choice
quality steaks directly to consumers through its e-commerce Web site. The
company found success with its new business model, but it also found chal-
lenges as it existing systems were unable to keep up with the company’s
growth. To overcome these challenges, Prime Meats implemented an ERP sys-
tem that offered the company a flexible, fully integrated end-to-end business
and accounting software along with prepackaged industry best practice func-
tionality for handling the specific pricing, packaging, and delivery require-
ments of an online meat business.18,19
Opportunity to Upgrade and Standardize Technology Infrastructure
When implementing an ERP system, an organization has an opportunity to
upgrade the information technology (such as hardware, operating systems,
and databases) that it uses. While centralizing and formalizing these decisions,
the organization can eliminate the hodgepodge of multiple hardware plat-
forms, operating systems, and databases it is currently using—most likely
from a variety of vendors. Standardizing on fewer technologies and vendors
reduces ongoing maintenance and support costs as well as the training load
for those who must support the infrastructure.
Whirlpool is the world’s leading manufacturer of home appliances, with
over 97,000 employees and $20 billion in sales generated from operations in
170 countries.20 While the company has utilized a collection of ERP systems
across its global operations for years, the company recently undertook a com-
plete overhaul of all its ERP infrastructure, with the goal of creating a new
operational backbone that will support the company’s growth for the next
decade. As the company moves forward with its implementation of next-
generation SAP ERP software, the company is also updating its ERP infrastruc-
ture to a hybrid cloud system hosted by IBM. As part of the project, Whirlpool’s
IT team is also spending time cleaning up duplicate and inaccurate data, a
result of years of cumulative and regionalized ERP system customizations.21
Leading ERP Systems
ERP systems are commonly used in manufacturing companies, colleges and
universities, professional service organizations, retailers, and healthcare orga-
nizations. The business needs for each of these types of organizations varies
greatly. In addition, the needs of a large multinational organization are far dif-
ferent from the needs of a small, local organization. Thus, no one ERP soft-
ware solution from a single vendor is “best” for all organizations. To help
simplify comparisons, ERP vendors are classified as Tier I, II, or III according
to the type of customers they target.22
●
Tier I vendors target large multinational firms with multiple geographic
locations and annual revenues in excess of $1 billion. Tier I ERP system
solutions are highly complex and expensive to implement and support.
Implementation across multiple locations can take years. The primary Tier
I vendors are Oracle and SAP.
best practices: The most efficient
and effective ways to complete a
business process.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 359
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Tier II vendors target medium-sized firms with annual revenues in the
$50 million to $1 billion range operating out of one or more locations.
Tier II solutions are much less complex and less expensive to implement
and support. There are two dozen or more Tier II vendors, including
Oracle, SAP, Microsoft, Infor, Epicor, and Lawson.
●
Tier III vendors target smaller firms with annual revenues in the $10 mil-
lion to $50 million range that typically operate out of a single location.
Tier III solutions are comparatively easy and inexpensive to implement and
support. There are dozens of Tier III vendors, including Abas, Bluebee
Software, Cincom Systems, Compiere, ESP Technologies, Frontier Software,
GCS Software, Microsoft, Netsuite, PDS, Plex, and Syspro. Many of the Tier I
and Tier II vendors also offer solutions for smaller firms. See Figure 8.8.
Large organizations were the leaders in adopting ERP systems as only
they could afford the associated large hardware and software costs and dedi-
cate sufficient people resources to the implementation and support of these
systems. Many large company implementations occurred in the 2000s and
involved installing the ERP software on the organizations’ large mainframe
computers. In many cases, this required upgrading the hardware at a cost of
millions of dollars.
Smaller organizations moved to ERP systems about 10 years after larger
organizations did. The smaller firms simply could not afford the investment
required in hardware, software, and people to implement and support ERP.
However, ERP software vendors gradually created new ERP solutions with
much lower start-up costs and faster, easier implementations. Some ERP ven-
dors introduced cloud-based solutions, which further reduced the start-up
costs by avoiding the need to purchase expensive ERP software and make
major hardware upgrades. Instead, with a cloud-based solution, organizations
could rent the software and run it on the vendor’s hardware. Plex and
NetSuite are two of the many cloud-based ERP solutions that enable users to
access an ERP application using a Web browser and avoid paying for and
maintaining expensive hardware.
FIGURE 8.8
ERP software
Microsoft Dynamics is an ERP solu-
tion that is very popular among small
businesses.
Microsoft product screenshots used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
360 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

As an alternative, many organizations elect to implement open-source ERP
systems from vendors such as Compiere. With open-source software, organi-
zations can see and modify the source code to customize it to meet their
needs. Such systems are much less costly to acquire and are relatively easy to
modify to meet business needs.
Organizations frequently need to customize the vendor’s ERP software to
integrate other business systems, to add data fields or change field sizes, or to
meet regulatory requirements. A wide range of software service organizations
can perform the system development and maintenance.
Supply Chain Management
An organization can use an ERP system within a manufacturing organization
to support what is known as supply chain management (SCM), which
includes planning, executing, and controlling all activities involved in raw
material sourcing and procurement, conversion of raw materials to finished
products, and the warehousing and delivery of finished product to custo-
mers. The goal of SCM is to decrease costs and improve customer service,
while at the same time reducing the overall investment in inventory in the
supply chain.
Another way to think about SCM is that it manages materials, informa-
tion, and finances as they move from supplier to manufacturer to wholesaler
to retailer to consumer. The materials flow includes the inbound movement
of raw materials from supplier to manufacturer as well as the outbound
movement of finished product from manufacturer to wholesaler, retailer,
and customer. The information flow involves capturing and transmitting
orders and invoices among suppliers, manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers,
and customers. The financial flow consists of payment transactions among
suppliers, manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, customers, and their finan-
cial institutions.
Newman Technology manufactures exhaust parts and other compo-
nents for automobiles, motorcycles, and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs). Before
switching to a cloud-based SCM system from Plex, the company had been
relying on an outdated and inflexible spreadsheet and paper purchase
order system that made forecasting, managing, and tracking orders chal-
lenging. The updated SCM system has streamlined Newman’s supply chain,
cutting down on manual procedures (and paper), improving inventory and
forecasting accuracy, and freeing up more time for buyers to develop sup-
plier relationships.23
The ERP system for a manufacturing organization typically encompasses
SCM activities and manages the flow of materials, information, and finances.
Manufacturing ERP systems follow a systematic process for developing a pro-
duction plan that draws on the information available in the ERP system
database.
The process starts with sales forecasting to develop an estimate of future
customer demand. This initial forecast is at a fairly high level, with estimates
made by product group rather than by each product item. The sales forecast
extends for months into the future; it might be developed using an ERP soft-
ware module or produced by other means, using specialized software and
techniques. Many organizations are moving to a collaborative process with
major customers to plan future inventory levels and production rather than
relying on an internally generated sales forecast.
The sales and operations plan (S&OP) takes demand and current
inventory levels into account and determines the specific product items
that need to be produced as well as when to meet the forecast future
demand. Production capacity and any seasonal variability in demand must
also be considered.
supply chain management
(SCM): A system that includes
planning, executing, and controlling
all activities involved in raw material
sourcing and procurement, the
conversion of raw materials to finished
products, and the warehousing and
delivery of finished products to
customers.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 361
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Demand management refines the production plan by determining the
amount of weekly or daily production needed to meet the demand for indi-
vidual products. The output of the demand management process is the
master production schedule, which is a production plan for all finished
goods.
Detailed scheduling uses the production plan defined by the demand
management process to develop a detailed production schedule that specifies
production scheduling details such as which item to produce first and when
production should be switched from one item to another. A key decision is
how long to make the production runs for each product. Longer production
runs reduce the number of machine setups required, thus reducing produc-
tion costs. Shorter production runs generate less finished product inventory
and reduce inventory holding costs.
Materials requirement planning (MRP) determines the amount and
timing for placing raw material orders with suppliers. The types and
amounts of raw materials required to support the planned production
schedule are determined by the existing raw material inventory and the
bill of materials (BOM), which serves as a recipe of ingredients needed to
make each item. The quantity of raw materials to order also depends on
the lead time and lot sizing. Lead time is the amount of time it takes from
the placement of a purchase order until the raw materials arrive at the pro-
duction facility. Lot size refers to the discrete quantities that the supplier
will ship, which can result in purchasing complexities if those amounts
don’t line up with quantities that are economical for the manufacturer to
receive or store. For example, a supplier might ship a certain raw material
in units of 80,000-pound rail cars. The producer might need 95,000 pounds
of the raw material. A decision must be made to order one or two rail cars
of the raw material.
Purchasing uses the information from MRP to place purchase orders for
raw materials with qualified suppliers. Typically, purchase orders are released
so that raw materials arrive just in time to be used in production and to mini-
mize warehouse and storage costs. Often, producers will allow suppliers to
tap into data via an extranet that enables them to determine what raw materi-
als the producer needs, minimizing the effort and lead time to place and fill
purchase orders.
Production uses the high-level production schedule to plan the details of
running and staffing the production operation. This more detailed schedule
takes into account employee, equipment, and raw material availability along
with detailed customer demand data.
Sales ordering is the set of activities that must be performed to capture a
customer sales order. Essential sales order steps include recording the items
to be purchased, setting the sales price, recording the order quantity, deter-
mining the total cost of the order including delivery costs, and confirming the
customer’s available credit. If the item(s) the customer wants to order are out
of stock, the sales order process should communicate this fact and suggest
other items to substitute for the customer’s initial choice. Setting sales prices
can be quite complicated and can include quantity discounts, promotions,
and incentives. After the total cost of the order is determined, a company
must check the customer’s available credit to see if this order is within the
credit limit. Figure 8.9 shows a sales order entry window in SAP business
software.
ERP systems do not work directly with manufacturing machines on the
production floor, so they need a way to capture information about what was
produced. This data must be passed to the ERP accounting modules to keep
an accurate count of finished product inventory. Many companies have com-
puters on the production floor, which are used to track the number of cases
of each product item produced, typically by having a worker scan a UPC
362 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

code on the packing cases used to ship the material. Other approaches for
capturing production quantities include using RFID chips and manually enter-
ing the data.
Separately, production quality data can be added based on the results of
quality tests run on a sample of the product for each batch of product pro-
duced. Typically, this data includes the batch identification number, which
identifies the production run and the results of various product quality tests.
Retailers as well as manufacturers use demand forecasting to match pro-
duction to consumer demand and to allocate products to stores. Curry’s Art
Store, which has been supplying arts and crafts materials and framing services
since 1911, has an inventory that includes more than 20,000 SKUs available to
customers in its 10 stores and through its e-commerce Web site. Because
much of Curry’s business is seasonal, with peaks in demand during back-
to-school time and near major holidays, it utilizes a complex supply chain
management system, which provides it with accurate long-range forecasting
tools that help ensure it has the stock it needs to meet demand surges. The
system has the tools the company needs to manage a supply chain that
includes in-store and online retails sales in addition to bulk orders from large
educational institutions, and it also supports Curry’s complicated warehousing
and distribution needs.24
Customer Relationship Management
A customer relationship management (CRM) system helps a company man-
age all aspects of customer encounters, including marketing, sales, distribution,
accounting, and customer service. See Figure 8.10. Think of a CRM system as
an address book with a historical record of all the organization’s interactions
with each customer. The goal of CRM is to understand and anticipate the
needs of current and potential customers to increase customer retention and
loyalty while optimizing the way that products and services are sold. CRM is
used primarily by people in the sales, marketing, distribution, accounting, and
service organizations to capture and view data about customers and to improve
communications. Businesses implementing CRM systems often report benefits
such as improved customer satisfaction, increased customer retention, reduced
operating costs, and the ability to meet customer demand.
FIGURE 8.9
Sales order entry window
Sales ordering is the set of activities
that must be performed to capture a
customer sales order.
Source: SAP AG
customer relationship
management (CRM) system: A
system that helps a company manage
all aspects of customer encounters,
including marketing, sales, distribution,
accounting, and customer service.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 363
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CRM software automates and integrates the functions of sales, marketing,
and service in an organization. The objective is to capture data about every
contact a company has with a customer through every channel and to store it
in the CRM system so that the company can truly understand customer
actions. CRM software helps an organization build a database about its custo-
mers that describes relationships in sufficient detail so that management,
salespeople, customer service providers, and even customers can access infor-
mation to match customer needs with product plans and offerings, remind
them of service requirements, and report on the other products the customers
have purchased.
Small, medium, and large organizations in a wide variety of industries
choose to implement CRM for many reasons, depending on their needs. Con-
sider the following examples:
●
Expensify is a financial services firm that provides online expense-
management services for customers around the world. The company
has grown quickly since it was founded in San Francisco in 2008, and
it recently opened a London office to support its expansion into the
European market. As a start-up, Expensify’s initial attempts at CRM
were built around an Excel spreadsheet. Before long, the company
shifted to Google Apps’ CRM tools, but soon found those could not
handle its increasing volume of customer data. Eventually, the com-
pany implemented a customizable CRM system that provides all the
tools Expensify’s sales and customers service teams require—without
the need to manage and coordinate workflows in other systems.
Expensify’s top priorities for a CRM system included automated and
customizable lead-prioritization tools, the ability to track all sales
communication within one system, and the ability to generate in-depth
FIGURE 8.10
Customer relationship
management system
A CRM system provides a central
repository of customer data used by
the organization.
Social
media
Customer
data
Means of communication
Users and providers of customer data
Text
messages
Email
Distribution
Accounting
Marketing
Customer
service
Sales
Customers
In-person
contacts
Phone
calls
364 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

reports to identify areas of opportunity within a geographic region as
well as for individual salespeople.25
●
TUMI luggage, handbags, and travel accessories are available through a
global network of 100 company-owned stores as well as department and
specialty stores in over 70 countries. Since it started in 1965, TUMI has
placed a priority on offering a wide selection of high-quality business
and travel products. Although TUMI’s culture is focused on providing
world-class service, the company’s outdated systems were getting in the
way of its relationships with both wholesale and retail customers. For
instance, tracking an order or a repair job for a customer typically meant
putting a caller on hold and calling the warehouse for an update. To
address its customer service issues, TUMI chose to implement a CRM
application that was integrated with a comprehensive ERP system
designed to help the company improve its inventory tracking, sales fore-
casting, and financial reporting. Now, TUMI’s customer service team is
able to quickly provide customers with precise real-time information
about order and repair status. And because TUMI tracks individual cus-
tomer purchases using the CRM software, it is better able to keep up
with market trends and respond to customers’ changing needs—all of
which have helped drive a 20 percent increase in sales since the system
was implemented.26
●
The American Red Cross was founded in 1881 by Clara Barton as a non-
profit, humanitarian organization. Today, the organization relies on
35,000 employees and more than 500,000 volunteers to deliver a range
of services across the United States, including providing relief to people
affected by disasters, supporting members of the military and their fami-
lies, and collecting, processing, and distributing blood supplies. The Red
Cross uses a cloud-based CRM platform from Salesforce to manage its
relationships with its large network of financial donors, volunteers,
blood donors, and recipients. Because its CRM system is cloud-based,
Red Cross volunteers and employees can quickly access the data and
services required to get the organization’s operations up and running
during a disaster. The Red Cross integrated social networking tools into
its CRM system, providing the organization with new channels to con-
nect with volunteers and donors as well as new tools for delivering
disaster-relief updates to the public, soliciting financial and volunteer
help, and helping people affected by a disaster communicate with family
and friends.27,28
The key features of a CRM system include the following:
●
Contact management. The ability to track data on individual customers
and sales leads and then access that data from any part of the organiza-
tion. See Figure 8.11, which shows the SAP Contact Manager.
●
Sales management. The ability to organize data about customers and
sales leads and then to prioritize the potential sales opportunities and
identify appropriate next steps.
●
Customer support. The ability to support customer service representa-
tives so that they can quickly, thoroughly, and appropriately address cus-
tomer requests and resolve customer issues while collecting and storing
data about those interactions.
●
Marketing automation. The ability to capture and analyze all customer
interactions, generate appropriate responses, and gather data to create
and build effective and efficient marketing campaigns.
●
Analysis. The ability to analyze customer data to identify ways to increase
revenue and decrease costs, identify the firm’s “best customers,” and
determine how to retain and find more of them.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 365
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Social networking. The ability to create and join sites such as Facebook,
where salespeople can make contacts with potential customers.
●
Access by mobile devices. The ability to access Web-based customer
relationship management software by smartphones, tablets, and other
mobile devices.
●
Import contact data. The ability for users to import contact data from
various data service providers that can be downloaded for free directly
into the CRM application.
The focus of CRM involves much more than installing new software.
Moving from a culture of simply selling products to placing the customer
first is essential to a successful CRM deployment. Before any software is
loaded onto a computer, a company must retrain employees. Who handles
customer issues and when must be clearly defined, and computer systems
need to be integrated so that all pertinent information is available immedi-
ately, whether a customer calls a sales representative or a customer service
representative.
Nu Skin Enterprises is a $2 billion direct sales organization that develops
and distributes nutritional supplements and personal care products through a
network of more than 5,000 independent sales distributors. The company’s
250 call center agents are the key point of contact between the company and
its customers and distributors; however, rapid turnover of call center staff and
three disconnected customer contact tools meant that many customers became
quickly frustrated during their interactions with the company. A solution to
Nu Skin’s customer service challenges came in the form of a CRM system
from SAP, which was integrated with the company’s existing SAP ERP system
to provide agents immediate access to customer sales histories. Nu Skin call
center employees now use the system’s customer interaction center and order
management tools to resolve callers’ queries more quickly, and with frustra-
tion levels down—for both agents and customers—agents have been able to
focus on developing stronger relationship with customers and distributors
and increasing sales.29,30
Table 8.3 lists a few highly rated CRM systems.31
FIGURE 8.11
SAP Contact Manager
Contact management involves
tracking data on individual custo-
mers and sales leads and accessing
that data from any part of the
organization.
Source: SAP AG
366 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Due to the popularity of mobile devices, shoppers can easily compare
products and prices on their mobile phones and instantly tweet their experi-
ences with a brand to dozens of friends. Savvy retailers today use their CRM
systems to stay on top of what these customers are saying on social networks.
For instance, Wells Fargo Bank uses social media to keep track of what its
customers are saying and then responds quickly to their issues and questions
to improve customer satisfaction.32
Most CRM systems can now be accessed via smartphones to gain work
with the most current customer information even while on the move. How-
ever, in a recent survey, just under 25 percent of salespeople who have a
smartphone use it to access their firm’s CRM system. Another 10 percent of
salespeople worked for a company whose CRM system did not allow mobile
access.33
Product Lifecycle Management
Product lifecycle management (PLM) is an enterprise business strategy that
creates a common repository of product information and processes to support
the collaborative creation, management, dissemination, and use of product
and packaging definition information.
Product lifecycle management (PLM) software provides a means for
managing the data and processes associated with the various phases of the
product life cycle, including sales and marketing, research and development,
concept development, product design, prototyping and testing, manufacturing
process design, production and assembly, delivery and product installation, ser-
vice and support, and product retirement and replacement. See Figure 8.12. As
products advance through these stages, product data is generated and distrib-
uted to various groups both within and outside the manufacturing firm. This
data includes design and process documents, bill of material definitions, prod-
uct attributes, product formulations, and documents needed for FDA and envi-
ronmental compliance. PLM software provides support for the key functions of
configuration management, document management, engineering change man-
agement, release management, and collaboration with suppliers and original
equipment manufacturers (OEMs).
The scope of PLM software may include computer-aided design, computer-
aided
engineering,
and
computer-aided
manufacturing.
Computer-aided
design (CAD) is the use of software to assist in the creation, analysis, and
modification of the design of a component or product. Its use can increase the
productivity of the designer, improve the quality of design, and create a data-
base that describes the item. This data can be shared with others or used in
TABLE 8.3 Highly rated CRM systems
Vendor/Product
Select Customers
Pricing Starts At
Infusionsoft CRM
Clean Corp
Swim Fitness
$67 per user/month
OnContact CRM 7
Prudential
Carfax
$50 per user/month
Oracle Marketing Cloud
Bass Pro Shops
Whole Foods
$80 per user/month
Prophet CRM
AT&T
Century 21
$24 per user/month
Sage Software CRM
Panasonic
Lockheed Martin
$39 per user/month
Salesforce Sales Cloud
Dell
Dr. Pepper Snapple
$5 per user/month
product lifecycle management
(PLM): An enterprise business strat-
egy that creates a common repository
of product information and processes to
support the collaborative creation,
management, dissemination, and use
of product and packaging definition
information.
product lifecycle management
(PLM) software: Software that pro-
vides a means for managing the data
and processes associated with the
various phases of the product life cycle,
including sales and marketing,
research and development, concept
development, product design, proto-
typing and testing, process design,
production and assembly, delivery and
product installation, service and sup-
port, and product retirement and
replacement.
computer-aided design (CAD):
The use of software to assist in the
creation, analysis, and modification of
the design of a component or product.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 367
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the machining of the part or in other manufacturing operations. Computer-aided
engineering (CAE) is the use of software to analyze the robustness and perfor-
mance of components and assemblies. CAE software supports the simulation, vali-
dation, and optimization of products and manufacturing tools. CAE is extremely
useful to design teams in evaluating and decision making. Computer-aided
manufacturing (CAM) is the use of software to control machine tools and
related machinery in the manufacture of components and products. The model
generated in CAD and verified in CAE can be input into CAM software, which
then controls the machine tool. See Figure 8.13.
Sales &
marketing
Research &
development
Concept
development
Product
design
Prototype
& test
Process
design
Production
&
assembly
Product delivery
& installation
Service &
support
Retire &
replace
PLM software supports the
product development lifecycle
FIGURE 8.12
Scope of PLM software
Using PLM software, organizations can manage the data and processes associated with the
various phases of the product life cycle.
FIGURE 8.13
CAD, CAE, and CAM software
In manufacturing, the model gener-
ated in CAD and verified in CAE can
be entered into CAM software, which
then controls the machine tool.
CAD
CAE
Create, analyze,
modify design
Simulate, validate
optimize, design
Use digital design to
control machine tools
PLM
CAM
computer-aided engineering
(CAE): The use of software to analyze
the robustness and performance of
components and assemblies.
computer-aided manufacturing
(CAM): The use of software to control
machine tools and related machinery in
the manufacture of components and
products.
368 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Some organizations elect to implement a single, integrated PLM system
that encompasses all the phases of the product life cycle with which it is
most concerned. Other organizations choose to implement multiple, separate
PLM software components from different vendors over time. This piecemeal
approach enables an organization to choose the software that best meets it
needs for a particular phase in the product life cycle. It also allows for incre-
mental investment in the PLM strategy. However, it may be difficult to link all
the various components together in such a manner that a single comprehen-
sive database of product and process data is created.
Use of an effective PLM system enables global organizations to work as a
single team to design, produce, support, and retire products, while capturing
best practices and lessons learned along the way.34 PLM powers innovation
and improves productivity by connecting people across global product devel-
opment and manufacturing organizations with the product and process
knowledge they need to succeed. See Figure 8.14.
PLM software and its data are used by both internal and external users.
Internal users include engineering, operations and manufacturing, procurement
and sourcing, manufacturing, marketing, quality assurance, customer service,
regulatory, and others. External users include the manufacturer’s design part-
ners, packaging suppliers, raw material suppliers, and contract manufacturers.
These users must collaborate to define, maintain, update, and securely share
product information throughout the life cycle of the product. Frequently, these
external users are asked to sign nondisclosure agreements to reduce the risk of
proprietary information being shared with competitors.
Based in Fort Collins, Colorado, Water Pik develops and sells a variety of
personal and oral healthcare products under the Waterpik brand. The com-
pany prides itself on innovation and since its founding in 1962, Water Pik has
acquired over 500 patents. Over time, the company’s approach to managing
its product information through traditional directory structures on file systems
was resulting in an increasing number of inefficiencies in Water Pik’s develop-
ment and manufacturing processes. To better manage its CAD product data,
Water Pik chose to implement SofTech’s ProductCenter PLM software. The
company now uses the software to manage product information—which is
FIGURE 8.14
PLM business strategy
PLM powers innovation and
improves productivity.
Mechanical
engineers
Chemical
engineers
Market
research
analyst
Director of
engineering
Package
designer
Manufacturing
Production
planner
Purchasing
agent
Product
designer
Sales
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 369
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

secured through permissions—for three of its four main product lines. Water
Pik also uses the software to manage all of its business processes, which are
automatically set to expire every two years, triggering a review and update
process that helps the company ensure that its procedures are current and
compliant with various industry standards.35,36
Table 8.4 presents a list of some of the top-rated PLM software products
(in alphabetic order) according to a 2013 report by Business-Software.com.37
PLM software is created for two broad categories of manufacturing: dis-
crete manufacturing and process manufacturing. Discrete manufacturing is
the production of distinct items such as autos, airplanes, furniture, or toys
that
can
be
decomposed
back
into
their
basic
components.
Process
manufacturing is the production of products—such as soda, laundry deter-
gent, gasoline, and pharmaceutical drugs—that are the result of a chemical
process; these products cannot be easily decomposed back into their basic
components. Within these two broad categories, PLM software manufacturers
specialize in specific industries such as aircraft manufacturing, consumer
goods manufacturing, or drug manufacturing.
Table 8.5 outlines the benefits a business can realize when using a PLM
system effectively.
Industrial Control Associates Inc. (ICA) specializes in providing engineer-
ing, design, construction, and start-up support services for programmable
logic control (PLC) systems for government agencies and industrial clients in
the Southeast and abroad. Its diverse client base includes the Department of
TABLE 8.4 Highly rated PLM software products
Organization
Primary PLM Software
Product
Technology Model
Select Customers
Arena
Cloud PLM
Cloud-based solution
SiriusXM, SunLink
Infor
Optiva
On-premise solution
Henkel, Sypris
Integware
Enovia Collaborative PLM
On-premise solution
Cummins, Steelcase
PTC
Windchill
SaaS solution
Medco Equipment, InterComm
SAP
PLM
On-premise solution
Porsche, Anadarko Petroleum
Siemens
Teamcenter
On-premise solution
Procter & Gamble, BAE Systems
SofTech
ProductCenter PLM
SaaS solution
Hayward Tyler Motors, Monarch Hydraulics
Sopheon
Accolade
Cloud-based solution
PepsiCo, ConAgra
TABLE 8.5 Benefits of a PLM system
Benefit
How Achieved
Reduce time to
market
●
By connecting design, research and development, pro-
curement, manufacturing, and customer service seam-
lessly through a flexible collaboration environment
●
By improving collaboration among the organization and
its suppliers, contract manufacturers, and OEMs
Reduce costs
●
By reducing prototyping costs through the use of soft-
ware simulation
●
By reducing scrap and rework through improved processes
●
By reducing the number of product components through
standardization
Ensure regulatory
compliance
●
By providing a secure repository, tracking and audit
trails, change and document management controls,
workflow and communications, and improved security
discrete manufacturing: The
production of distinct items such as
autos, airplanes, furniture, or toys that
can be decomposed into their basic
components.
process manufacturing:
The production of products—such as
soda, laundry detergent, gasoline, and
pharmaceutical drugs—that are the
result of a chemical process; these
products cannot be easily decomposed
into their basic components.
370 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Energy, DuPont Chemical, Procter & Gamble Paper Products, and Tyson
Foods. ICA uses Siemens PLM software—which serves as a repository for all
of the company’s product data—to manage its product design processes,
improve the quality of its drawings and bills of materials (BOMs), and
increase the accuracy of its machine designs. The software also provides
Web-based collaboration tools that make it easy for ICA and its clients to
work together throughout the design process, cutting down on redesign
work and increasing customers’ confidence in ICA’s design process. Since
implementing the Siemens’ software, the company has achieved a 30 percent
reduction in the time it takes to complete a job and has cut its remanufactur-
ing rate from 20 percent down to 2 percent.38,39
Overcoming Challenges in Implementing Enterprise Systems
Implementing an enterprise system, particularly for a large organization, is
extremely challenging and requires tremendous amounts of resources, the best
IS and businesspeople, and plenty of management support. In spite of all this,
many enterprise system implementations fail, and problems with an enterprise
system implementation can require expensive solutions. The following is a sam-
ple of major enterprise system implementation project failures:
●
The state of Michigan sued HP over a $49 million IT project for the Secretary
of State’s office that remains incomplete after 10 years. Michigan is asking for
more than $11 million in damages, and it is looking to reclaim its attorney’s
fee as well as the costs involved with rebidding and re-procuring the
contract. The state is also asking that HP be required to turn over source
code for an online services portal that HP delivered as part of the project.40
●
H.B. Fuller, a large U.S. industrial adhesives and sealants manufacturer,
was awarded $14 million in an arbitration case against consulting agency
Accenture in connection with a failed companywide SAP ERP system
implementation. Problems with the system became apparent almost as
soon as it was implemented, which was behind schedule. In addition
to the $60 million in planned capital expenditures, Fuller spent over
$8 million in the first two months after the system was launched to
address problems related to the implementation.41
●
The Hawaii Department of Transportation (HDOT) sued Ciber, Inc.,
alleging the consulting firm engaged in fraud and other misconduct on an
ERP software implementation project for the state agency. HDOT accuses
Ciber of misrepresenting its capabilities in order to secure the state
contract and submitting erroneous invoices and fictitious project change
orders. Eventually, Ciber was terminated from the project after a series
of missed deadlines and problems with software bugs and missing
functionality. HDOT is seeking tens of millions in damages, including
more than $8 million in fees it paid to Ciber.42
Half of nearly 200 ERP implementations worldwide evaluated by Pano-
rama, an ERP consulting firm, were judged to be failures. Table 8.6 lists and
describes the most significant challenges to successful implementation of an
enterprise system.43
The following list provides tips for avoiding many common causes for
failed enterprise system implementations:
●
Assign a full-time executive to manage the project.
●
Appoint an experienced, independent resource to provide project over-
sight and to verify and validate system performance.
●
Allow sufficient time to transition from the old way of doing things to the
new system and new processes.
●
Allocate sufficient time and money for training staff; many project man-
agers recommend budgeting 30 to 60 days per employee for training.
●
Define metrics to assess project progress and to identify project-related risks.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 371
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Keep the scope of the project well defined and contained to essential
business processes.
●
Be wary of modifying the enterprise system software to conform to your
firm’s business practices.
Hosted Software Model for Enterprise Software
Many business application software vendors are pushing the use of the hosted
software model. The goal is to help customers acquire, use, and benefit from
the new technology while avoiding much of the associated complexity and
high start-up costs. Applicor, Intacct, NetSuite, SAP, and Workday are among
the software vendors who offer hosted versions of their ERP or CRM software
at a cost of $50 to $200 per month per user.
This pay-as-you-go approach is appealing because organizations can exper-
iment with powerful software capabilities without making a major financial
investment. Organizations can then dispose of the software without large
investments if the software fails to provide value or otherwise misses expecta-
tions. Also, using the hosted software model means the business firm does not
need to employ a full-time IT person to maintain key business applications.
The business firm can expect additional savings from reduced hardware costs
and costs associated with maintaining an appropriate computer environment
(such as air conditioning, power, and an uninterruptible power supply).
Table 8.7 lists the advantages and disadvantages of hosted software.
LoneStar Heart is a California company that researches and develops restor-
ative therapies and technologies for patients with advanced heart failure. In its
early years as a start-up company, LoneStar relied on a paper-based approach
to document control that resulted in researchers spending extensive time
searching and managing product documentation—taking them away from their
critical design and development work. To gain efficiencies in its development
processes and free up time for its research and development team, LoneStar
eventually decided to implement a cloud-based PLM that would support
TABLE 8.6 Challenges to successful enterprise system implementation
Challenge
Description
Cost and disruption
of upgrades
Most companies have other systems that must be
integrated with the enterprise system, such as finan-
cial analysis programs, e-commerce operations, and
other applications that communicate with suppliers,
customers, distributors, and other business partners.
Integration of multiple systems adds time and com-
plexity to an ERP implementation.
Cost and long
implementation
lead time
The average ERP implementation cost is $5.5 million
with an average project duration of just over 14 months.
Difficulty in
managing change
Companies often must radically change how they
operate to conform to the enterprise work processes.
These changes can be so drastic to longtime employees
that they depart rather than adapt to the change, leav-
ing the firm short of experienced workers.
Management of software
customization
The base enterprise system may need to be modified
to meet mandatory business requirements. System
customizations can become extremely expensive and
further delay implementation.
User frustration with
the new system
Effective use of an enterprise system requires changes
in work processes and in the details of how work gets
done. Many users initially balk at these changes and
require extensive training and encouragement.
372 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
employees in the company’s facilities as well as those who work remotely. The
PLM system from Omnify Software provides LoneStar with a secure, yet easily
accessible centralized product information database and the tools it requires to
maintain compliant with the extensive set of FDA regulations governing its
work. By using a cloud-based PLM, LoneStar was able to avoid close to
$40,000 in server installation and maintenance costs annually.44,45
Implementing CRM
iProspect is a global digital performance marketing firm. It works to increase Web
site traffic for its clients through services such as search engine optimization, lead
generation, Web site analytics, and Web site conversion enhancement. Its clients
include such firms as Adidas, American Express, Coca-Cola, Ford Motor Company,
General Motors, and Sharp Electronics. The firm needs a formal means of captur-
ing information about its customers and their interactions with the company. It
also hopes to implement a CRM system that will capture its best business practices
to enable it to build on sales and customer satisfaction successes.
Review Questions
1.
What specific tasks must this CRM software perform?
2.
What are the potential benefits that iProspect might capture from use of a
CRM system?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
The CFO has asked you to lead a team to assess the potential benefits associ-
ated with this system. Who would you choose to make up this team (job title
and organization)? How could your team attempt to quantify the potential
benefits of such a system?
2.
What are the pros and cons of choosing a hosted software solution to “test
drive” a potential CRM solution?
TABLE 8.7 Advantages and disadvantages of hosted software model
Advantages
Disadvantages
Decreased total cost of
ownership
Potential availability and reliability issues
Faster system start-up
Potential data security issues
Lower implementation risk
Potential problems integrating the hosted products
of different vendors
Management of systems
outsourced to experts
Savings anticipated from outsourcing may be
offset by increased effort to manage vendor
Summary
Principle:
An organization must have information systems that support routine, day-
to-day activities and that help a company add value to its products and
services.
Transaction processing systems (TPSs) are at the heart of most information
systems in businesses today. A TPS is an organized collection of people, pro-
cedures, software, databases, and devices used to capture fundamental data
about events that affect the organization (transactions) and that use that data
to update the official records of the organization.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 373
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The methods of TPSs include batch and online processing. Batch proces-
sing involves the collection of transactions into batches, which are entered into
the system at regular intervals as a group. Online transaction processing
(OLTP) allows transactions to be processed as they occur.
Organizations expect TPSs to accomplish a number of specific objectives,
including processing data generated by and about transactions, maintaining a
high degree of accuracy and information integrity, compiling accurate and timely
reports and documents, increasing labor efficiency, helping provide increased and
enhanced service, and building and maintaining customer loyalty. In some situa-
tions, an effective TPS can help an organization gain a competitive advantage.
Order processing systems capture and process customer order data—from
the receipt of the order through creation of a customer invoice.
Accounting systems track the flow of data related to all the cash flows that
affect the organization.
Purchasing systems support the inventory control, purchase order proces-
sing, receiving, and accounts payable business functions.
Organizations today, including SMEs, typically implement an integrated set
of TPSs from a single or limited number of software vendors to meet their
transaction processing needs.
All TPSs perform the following basic activities: data collection, which involves
the capture of source data to complete a set of transactions; data editing, which
checks for data validity and completeness; data correction, which involves provid-
ing feedback regarding a potential problem and enabling users to change the
data; data processing, which is the performance of calculations, sorting, categoriz-
ing, summarizing, and storing data for further processing; data storage, which
involves placing transaction data into one or more databases; and document pro-
duction, which involves outputting electronic or hard-copy records and reports.
Principle:
An organization that implements an enterprise system is creating a highly
integrated set of systems, which can lead to many business benefits.
ERP software supports the efficient operation of business processes by
integrating activities throughout a business, including sales, marketing,
manufacturing, logistics, accounting, and staffing.
Implementing an ERP system can provide many advantages, including
allowing access to data for operational decision making; eliminating costly,
inflexible legacy systems; providing improved work processes; and creating
the opportunity to upgrade technology infrastructure.
Some of the disadvantages associated with ERP systems are that they are
time consuming, difficult, and expensive to implement; they can also be diffi-
cult to integrate with other systems.
No one ERP software solution is “best” for all organizations. SAP, Oracle,
Infor, and Microsoft are among the leading ERP suppliers.
Although the scope of ERP implementation can vary, most manufacturing
organizations use ERP to support the supply chain management (SCM) activi-
ties of planning, executing, and controlling all activities involved in raw mate-
rial sourcing and procurement, conversion of raw materials to finished
products, and the warehousing and delivery of finished product to customers.
The production and supply chain management process starts with sales
forecasting to develop an estimate of future customer demand. This initial fore-
cast is at a fairly high level, with estimates made by product group rather than
by individual product item. The sales and operations plan (S&OP) takes
demand and current inventory levels into account and determines the specific
product items that need to be produced as well as when to meet the forecast
future demand. Demand management refines the production plan by determin-
ing the amount of weekly or daily production needed to meet the demand for
individual products. Detailed scheduling uses the production plan defined by
374 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the demand management process to develop a detailed production schedule
that specifies details such as which item to produce first and when production
should be switched from one item to another. Materials requirement planning
determines the amount and timing for placing raw material orders with suppli-
ers. Purchasing uses the information from materials requirement planning to
place purchase orders for raw materials and transmit them to qualified suppli-
ers. Production uses the detailed schedule to plan the logistics of running and
staffing the production operation. Sales ordering is the set of activities that
must be performed to capture a customer sales order. The individual applica-
tion modules included in the ERP system are designed to support best prac-
tices, the most efficient and effective ways to complete a business process.
Organizations are implementing customer relationship management (CRM)
systems to manage all aspects of customer encounters, including marketing, sales,
distribution, accounting, and customer service. The goal of CRM is to understand
and anticipate the needs of current and potential customers to increase customer
retention and loyalty while optimizing the way products and services are sold.
Manufacturing organizations are implementing product lifecycle manage-
ment (PLM) software to manage the data and processes associated with the vari-
ous phases of the product life cycle, including sales and marketing, research and
development, concept development, product design, prototyping and testing,
manufacturing process design, production and assembly, delivery and product
installation, service and support, and product retirement and replacement. These
systems are used by both internal and external users to enable them to collabo-
rate and capture best practices and lessons learned along the way.
The most significant challenges to successful implementation of an enter-
prise system include the cost and disruption of upgrades, the cost and long
implementation lead time, the difficulty in managing change, the management
of software customization, and user frustration with the new system.
Business application software vendors are experimenting with the hosted
software model to see if the approach meets customer needs and is likely to
generate significant revenue. This approach is especially appealing to SMEs
due to the low initial cost, which makes it possible to experiment with power-
ful software capabilities.
Key Terms
batch processing system
best practices
computer-aided design (CAD)
computer-aided engineering (CAE)
computer-aided manufacturing (CAM)
customer relationship management (CRM) system
data collection
data correction
data editing
data processing
data storage
discrete manufacturing
document production
enterprise system
online transaction processing (OLTP)
process manufacturing
product lifecycle management (PLM)
product lifecycle management (PLM) software
source data automation
supply chain management (SCM)
transaction processing cycle
Chapter 8: Self-Assessment Test
An organization must have information systems
that support routine, day-to-day activities and
that help a company add value to its products
and services.
1. Transaction processing systems (TPSs) capture
and process the fundamental data about events
that affect the organization called
that are used to update the official records of the
organization.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 375
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

2. The essential characteristic of a(n)
transaction processing system is that it processes
transactions as they occur.
3. Which of the following is not one of the basic
components of a TPS?
a. Databases
b. Networks
c. Procedures
d. Analytical models
4.
involves providing feedback
regarding a potential data problem and enables
users to change the data.
a. Data collection
b. Data correction
c. Data editing
d. Data processing
5. The specific business needs and goals of
the organization define the method of
transaction processing best suited for the
various application of the company. True or
False?
6. Which of the following is not an objective of an
organization’s batch transaction processing
system?
a. Capture, process, and update databases of
business data required to support routine
business activities
b. Ensure that data is processed immediately
upon occurrence of a business transaction
c. Avoid processing fraudulent transactions
d. Produce timely user responses and reports
7. Business data goes through a cycle that includes
data collection, data
, data correc-
tion, data processing, data storage, and docu-
mentation production.
8. Unfortunately, there are few choices for software
packages that provide integrated transaction
processing system solutions for small and
medium-sized enterprises. True or False?
9. Capturing and gathering all the data necessary to
complete the processing of transactions is
called
.
An organization that implements an enterprise sys-
tem is creating a highly integrated set of systems,
which can lead to many business benefits.
10. Small organizations were slow to adopt ERP sys-
tems because of the relative complexity and cost
of implementing these systems. True or False?
11. The individual application modules included
in an ERP system are designed to support
, the most efficient and effective
ways to complete a business process.
12.
software helps a customer
manage all aspects of customer encounters,
including marketing, sales, distribution,
accounting, and customer service.
13. The hosted software model for enterprise soft-
ware helps customers acquire, use, and benefit
from new technology while avoiding much of
the associated complexity and high start-up
costs. True or False?
14.
is software used to analyze the
robustness and performance of components and
assemblies.
a. PLM
b. CAD
c. CAE
d. CAM
15. Many multinational companies roll out standard
IS applications for all to use. However, standard
applications often don’t account for all the dif-
ferences among business partners and employees
operating in other parts of the world. Which of
the following is a frequent modification that is
needed for standard software?
a. Software might need to be designed with local
language interfaces to ensure the successful
implementation of a new IS.
b. Customization might be needed to handle
date fields correctly.
c. Users might also have to implement manual
processes and overrides to enable systems to
function correctly.
d. All of the above
Chapter 8: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. transactions
2. online
3. d
4. b
5. True
6. b
7. editing
8. False
9. data collection
10. True
11. best practices
12. Customer relationship management (CRM)
13. True
14. c
15. d
376 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Review Questions
1. Identify and briefly describe six basic transaction
processing activities performed by all transaction
processing systems.
2. Provide a data processing example for which the use
of a batch processing system to handle transactions is
appropriate. Provide an example for which the use
of online transaction processing is appropriate.
3. What is an enterprise system? Identify and briefly
discuss the goals of three types of enterprise systems.
4. What are best practices?
5. Define supply chain management (SCM).
6. What is a Tier I ERP software vendor?
7. What are some of the advantages and disadvan-
tages of the hosted software model?
8. How does materials requirement planning support
the purchasing process in an ERP environment?
What are some of the issues and complications
that arise in materials requirement planning?
9. Identify and briefly describe at least four key
business capabilities provided by the use of a
CRM system.
10. Identify the basic business processes included
within the scope of product lifecycle
management.
11. Discuss the difference between discrete and pro-
cess manufacturing.
12. What is source data automation? What benefits
can it be expected to deliver?
Discussion Questions
1. Identify and discuss key benefits that are com-
mon to the use of ERP, CRM, and PLM enterprise
systems, whether it be for a small, medium, or
large organization.
2. Identify and briefly discuss five challenges to the
successful implementation of an enterprise system.
Provide several tips to overcome these challenges.
3. Assume that you are the owner of a small bicycle
sales and repair shop serving hundreds of custo-
mers in your area. Identify the kinds of customer
information you would like your firm’s CRM system
to capture. How might this information be used to
provide better service or increase revenue? Identify
where or how you might capture this data.
4. Why were SMEs slow to adopt ERP software?
What changed to make ERP software more
attractive for SMEs?
5. Briefly describe the hosted software model for
enterprise software and discuss its primary
appeal for business organizations.
6. Explain how CAD, CAE, and CAM software can
work together to support the product develop-
ment life cycle.
7. In what ways is the implementation of a CRM
system simpler and less risky for an SME than for
a large multinational corporation?
8. You are a member of the engineering organiza-
tion for an aircraft parts manufacturer. The firm is
considering the implementation of a PLM system.
Make a convincing argument for selecting a sys-
tem whose scope includes CAD, CAE, and CAM
software.
9. What benefits should the suppliers and customers
of a firm that has successfully implemented an
ERP system expect to see? How might an ERP
implementation affect an organization’s
suppliers?
10. Many organizations are moving to a collabora-
tive process with their major suppliers to get
their input on designing and planning future
product modification or new products. Explain
how a PLM system might enhance such a pro-
cess. What issues and concerns might a manu-
facturer have in terms of sharing product data
with suppliers?
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Develop a list of seven key criteria that a non-
profit charitable organization should consider in
selecting a CRM system. Discuss each criterion
and assign a weight representing the relative
importance of that criterion, Develop a simple
spreadsheet to use in scoring various CRM alter-
natives in terms of how well they meet those cri-
teria on a scale of 1 to 10. Do research on one
CRM package and use your spreadsheet to
develop its score.
2. Imagine that you are a new employee in the
engineering organization of a large camping
equipment and outdoor furniture manufacturing
firm. The company is considering implementing a
PLM system to better manage the design and
manufacture of its products. You have been
invited to a meeting to share your thoughts on
how such a system might be used and what capa-
bilities are most important. How would you pre-
pare for this meeting? What points would you
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 377
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

make? Develop a presentation containing three to
six slides that summarize your thoughts.
3. In a spreadsheet program, enter the ingredients
and quantity required to make your favorite
homemade cookie. This represents a simple bill
of materials (BOM). Add a column to show the
cost for each ingredient. Now “explode” the BOM
to show the quantity and cost of each ingredient
required to make 10,000 cookies.
Team Activities
1. Your team is working with the owner of a small
appliance sales and repair shop serving hundreds of
customers in your area. How might the owner use a
CRM system to capture customer data that could be
used to provide better service and increase revenue?
2. With your team members, meet with several
business managers at a firm that has implemen-
ted an enterprise system. Interview them to doc-
ument the scope, cost, and schedule for the
overall project. Find out why the organization
decided it was time to implement the enterprise
system. Make a list of what the business man-
agers see as the primary benefits of the
implementation. What were the biggest hurdles
they had to overcome? Are there any remaining
issues that must be resolved before the project
can be deemed a success? What are they? With the
benefit of 20–20 hindsight, is there anything they
would have done differently that could made the
project go more smoothly?
3. As a team, do research online to identify three
candidate PLM software packages. Based on
information presented on each company’s Web
site, score each alternative using a set of criteria
your team agrees upon. Which candidate PLM
software does your team select?
Web Exercises
1. Do research online to identify several companies
that have implemented an enterprise system in
the last few years. Classify the implementation as
a success, partial success, or failure. What is your
basis for making this classification?
2. Do research online to find several sources that
discuss the challenges associated with the imple-
mentation of an enterprise system. Is there gen-
eral agreement among the sources as to what the
most significant challenges are? What advice is
offered as to the most effective way to overcome
these challenges? Develop your own list of the
five most significant challenges and five most
effective tactics for overcoming these challenges.
3. Using the Web, identify several software services
firms that offer consulting services to help orga-
nizations implement enterprise systems. Gain an
understanding of what sort of services they offer
and become familiar with several of their success
stories. If you had to choose one of the software
services firms to assist your SME organization,
which one would you choose and why?
Career Exercises
1. Initially thought to be cost-effective for only very
large companies, enterprise systems are now
being implemented in SME’s to reduce costs,
improve service, and increase sales revenue.
A firm’s finance and accounting personnel play a
dual role in the implementation of such a system:
(1) they must ensure a good payback on the
investment in information systems and (2) they
must also ensure that the system meets the needs
of the finance and accounting organization.
Identify three or four tasks that the finance and
accounting people need to perform to ensure that
these two goals are met.
2. Enterprise system software vendors need busi-
ness systems analysts who understand both
information systems and business processes.
Make a list of six or more specific qualifications
needed to be a strong business systems analyst
who supports the implementation and conversion
to an enterprise system within an SME. Are there
additional/different qualifications needed for
someone who is doing similar work but for a
large multinational organization?
3. Imagine that you are a commercial solar heating
salesperson for a manufacturing and installation
firm. You make frequent sales calls on potential
customers in a three-state area. The purpose of
these sales calls is to acquaint the firms with your
company’s products and get them to consider
purchase of your products. Describe the basic
functionality you would want in your organiza-
tion’s CRM system for it to help you identify
potential new customers and to support you in
preparing and making sales presentations.
378 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Case Studies
Case One
Dunkin’ Donuts Prepares for Rapid Growth
Dunkin’ Donuts has a strong following of customers around
the world who rely on the restaurant chain’s coffee, donuts,
and other baked goods to get their day started. Established in
1950, Dunkin’ Donuts still uses the original proprietary
coffee blend recipe created by its founder William
Rosenburg, but what started as a small donut shop in Quincy,
Massachusetts, has grown into a global business generating
more than $800 million in revenue in 2015. And as the
restaurant chain has grown, its business operations have
become increasingly sophisticated.
Today, Dunkin’ Donuts franchises are backed up by a
complex supply chain managed by National DCP (NDCP)—
the exclusive supply chain management cooperative for more
than 8,900 Dunkin’ Donuts stores in the United States and
51 other countries. Founded as a membership cooperative in
2012 with the merger of five regional food and beverage
operating companies, NDCP’s mission is to support the daily
operations of Dunkin’ Donuts franchisees and facilitate their
growth and expansion plans. The company employs 1,700
people and maintains seven regional distribution centers
along with another 32 logistics hubs.
Recently, NDCP began a massive multiyear project,
dubbed “Project Freshstart,” to consolidate and upgrade its
systems and transform its business processes throughout
every area of the company—from accounting to customer
service to warehousing and distribution. The goals of the
project are to improve customer service, lower costs, and
create supply chain efficiencies through inventory- and
order-management improvements. According to Darrell
Riekena, CIO at NDCP, the company began the process by
asking “what capabilities and corresponding systems were
needed to drive business process changes using leading-edge
technologies, without a lot of customization.”
NDCP spent considerable time researching and
evaluating implementation consulting partners and
technology providers before opting to implement SAP’s
Business Suite in partnership with Deloitte Consulting. NDCP
selected the SAP system as the underlying technology for its
business transformation because of SAP’s track record and
experience with wholesale distribution. SAP’s software also
offered NDCP the analytics and reporting tools the company
felt were critical to supporting their plans for growth.
According to Riekena, it was essential for the company to
choose a technology platform that was flexible and could
serve as the foundation for the company’s future expansion.
Deloitte was chosen as NDCP’s implementation partner
because it offered an extensive background in process
redesign and a proven project methodology developed
through years of experience in the wholesale distribution
industry.
One of the first things Deloitte did during the
implementation was to work with NDCP executives to define
a business case for the project, which was used to establish a
set of objectives and success criteria. Then, according to
Deloitte Consulting’s Jerry Hoberman, they defined the scope
of the project to meet those business objectives. Once the
scope was set, the project team members worked together to
set an aggressive but realistic two-year project plan.
According to Riekena, an important contribution from
Deloitte—outside of its technical expertise—was its
framework for change management and communication,
which helped ensure that NDCP was effectively reaching
out to all of its stakeholders throughout the project.
“We recognized right off the bat that effective change
management was critical for the success of the project,”
Riekena says. “Leveraging multiple channels to reach all of
the stakeholders, we took advantage of Dunkin’ Brands
training programs, launched a comprehensive
communications effort, and promoted face-to-face
interactions with franchise store managers and field
operations teams whenever possible.”
Unlike many companies that undertake a major system
upgrade, NDCP was willing to change many of its business
processes in order to truly transform its business, but Deloitte
and NDCP also placed a priority on working within NDCP’s
culture—a balanced approach the recently led to the
successful deployment of the new SAP system in the first of
the company’s four regions. As the system is rolled out across
the remaining regions, more franchisees will see the benefits
of NDCP’s careful planning and implementation efforts—
from better demand forecasting and inventory management
tools to improvements in NDCP’s customer service delivered
by a centralized staff who will have immediate access to
customer histories and will be able to provide real-time
updates on order status and issue resolution.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Because NDCP is a membership cooperative, Dunkin’
Donuts franchisees are both owners and customers.
What might be some advantages to such an ownership
structure in terms of getting the support of all stake-
holders for a massive project like the one NDCP
undertook? What might be some disadvantages?
2. How important do you think the communication and
change management aspects of this project were? Why
do you think so many companies underestimate the
importance of those facets of an enterprise-level project?
3. What are some of the risks for a company that chooses
to make changes to so many parts of its business and
underlying technology at once? What are some of the
things a company could do to mitigate those risks?
SOURCES: “About Us,” Dunkin’ Donuts, news.dunkindonuts.com/about,
accessed March 7, 2016; “Revenue of Dunkin’ Brands Worldwide from
2007 to 2015 (in Million U.S. Dollars),” Statista, ’www.statista.com
/statistics/291392/annual-revenue-dunkin–brands, accessed March 10,
2016; “About Us,” National DCP, http://nationaldcp.com/node/893,
accessed March 8, 2016; Murphy, Ken, “Rise and Shine: “Project
Freshstart” Energizes Distributor,” SAPinsider, April 1, 2015, http://
sapinsider.wispubs.com/Assets/Case-Studies/2015/April/IP-Project-Fresh
start-energizes-National-DCP; “National DCP: Serving Up the Best
Customer Service for Dunkin’ Donuts Franchisees,” SAP video, http://go
.sap.com/assetdetail/2015/11/324168ae-4e7c-0010-82c7-eda71af511fa
.html, accessed March 9, 2016; “Deloitte Global SAP Practice: National
DCP (Dunkin’ Donuts),” ReqCloud video, accessed March 10, 2016.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 379
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Case Two
Kerry Group Is on Your Table
In business, sourcing is the set of activities involved in
finding, evaluating, and then engaging suppliers of goods or
services. Before a business can start to manage its supply
chain, as described in this chapter, it must complete a
sourcing process.
Ireland’s Kerry Group, a supplier of food ingredients and
flavors to the worldwide food industry and of consumer food
products to the British Isles, requires a wide range of raw
materials from many suppliers. With annual revenue of
€5.8 billion (about U.S. $10 billion) in 2013, it needs a lot of
those materials. With plants in 24 countries and 40 percent of
revenue from outside Europe, it is impossible for the people in
one plant to know about all possible suppliers worldwide, but
making local sourcing decisions would reduce economies of
scale. With the thin profit margins of the food industry, good
sourcing decisions are vital to Kerry Group’s profitability.
Software to manage the sourcing process is one way to help
make those decisions.
Kerry Group was already a SAP customer when it chose
SAP Sourcing OnDemand, having used SAP ERP systems
since 2009. The advantage of obtaining a new system from its
existing ERP supplier is assured compatibility with
applications the company already uses. “What we needed
was an intuitive sourcing system that would be completely
integrated with our SAP back-office for an end-to-end
procurement process,” said Peter Fotios, Kerry Group’s
director of e-procurement services.
SAP Sourcing OnDemand uses the cloud computing
concept. As its OnDemand name suggests, customers do not
have to dedicate computing resources to the software. They
use SAP resources on demand as their needs require, paying
on a per-user, per-month subscription basis. Meanwhile, SAP
is responsible for administrative tasks such as data backup
and, if necessary, restoration.
Kerry Group implemented SAP Sourcing OnDemand by
beginning with a pilot plant. “We rolled it out smoothly in
Ireland first, then England and then throughout our global
operations in 23 countries,” explains Fotios. If any problems
appeared in Ireland, the pilot site, Kerry Group could have
focused all its problem-solving resources on that location.
Fortunately, no major issues arose.
Another thing that Kerry Group did right at
implementation time was training. Recognizing that it had
competent in-house trainers and competent technical
professionals, but few if any who were both, the firm
engaged SAP’s Irish training partner Olas to assist with that
end of the project. Olas brought SAP expertise to the training
team, completing the required set of capabilities.
Moving forward, Kerry Group has project plans
extending into 2016 for the full roll-out of all its planned SAP
ERP capabilities. The smoothness of its Sourcing OnDemand
implementation, which took a total of four weeks elapsed
time because the software was already running in the cloud
when they began, is a good indication that the rest of the
project (which is in many ways more complex) will probably
go well. If Kerry Group is to carry out its mission statement,
which includes being “the world leader in food ingredients
and flavors serving the food and beverage industry,” the roll-
out will have to be smooth.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Kerry Group is taking a slow and methodical approach
to implementing the parts of SAP ERP software. What
does the company gain and what does it lose by taking
its time in this way?
2. Why should Kerry Group standardize on one ERP
package? Wouldn’t it be simpler and less expensive to
let each plant and sales operation choose its own soft-
ware, as long as it can report its financial results to
headquarters in a standard form?
3. What are the advantages and disadvantages to
using a third-party vendor like Olas to deploy a
new ERP system? What steps can companies take
to overcome the disadvantages of relying on
third-party vendors when deploying enterprise-wide
systems?
SOURCES: Kerry Group Web site, www.kerrygroup.com, accessed
April 11, 2014; Staff, “Kerry’s SAP Transformation Measures Up to Their
L&D Beliefs,” Olas, www.olas.ie, May 18, 2011; Staff, “Kerry Group
Transforms Its Global Procurement Group in Weeks With SAP Sourcing
OnDemand Solution,” SAP, www.sap.com/news-reader/index.epx?
pressid=18809, May 1, 2012.
Notes
1. “Revere Electric Supply,” Conexiom, https://conexiom
.com/case_studies/revere-electric-supply, accessed March
4, 2016.
2. “About” Helen Ross McNabb Center, www.mcnabbcenter
.org/content/about, accessed March 4, 2016.
3. “Helen Ross McNabb Center,” DATIS, www.datis.com
/why-datis/customer-success-stories/helen-ross-mcnabb
-center-2/, accessed March 4, 2016.
4. “Who We Are ADP,” www.adp.com/about-us.aspx,
accessed March 4, 2016.
5. “Asset Brokerage Firm Reduces Batch Processing Time
by 15%,” Sumerian, www.sumerian.com/resources
/customer-stories/15-batch-time-saved, accessed
March 4, 2016.
6. “Form 10-K: Paypal Holdings, Inc,” Paypal Holdings,
Inc., February 11, 2016, https://investor.paypal-corp
.com/secfiling.cfm?filingID=1633917-16-113&CIK
=1633917.
7. “Ciber Case Study: Wisconsin Department of Health
Services—WIC,” www.ciber.com/tasks/render/file/?white
paper=wisconsin-department-of-health-services-wic
-program&fileID=2BEF3900-A42E-F37F-92DD52E2C5
F22E4A, accessed March 3, 2014.
8. “About Us,” Lukas Nursery, www.lukasnursery.com
/about.php, accessed March 6, 2016.
9. “Lukas Nursery Chooses Epicor Eagle N Series to Refresh
100 Year-Old Business,” Epicor, January 20, 2016, www
.epicor.com/Press-Room/News-Releases/Lukas-Nursery
380 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

-Chooses-Epicor-Eagle-N-Series-to-Refresh-100-Year-Old
-Business.aspx.
10. “Sage 300 Construction and Real Estate,” Sage, www
.sage.com/us/sage-construction-and-real-estate/sage-300
-construction-and-real-estate, accessed March 4, 2016.
11. “Echo Valley Irrigation Automates to Save Time and
Monitor Processes,” Sage, www.sage.com/us/sage
-construction-and-real-estate/sage-300-construction
-and-real-estate#, accessed March 5, 2016.
12. Miles, Stephanie, “7 Cloud-Based POS Systems for SMBs,”
Street Fight, February 4, 2013, http://streetfightmag.com
/2013/02/04/7-cloud-based-pos-systems-for-smbs/.
13. “Creative Wedge Slices Up Ways to Improve Inventory,”
NCS Small Business, http://blog.ncrsilver.com/2014/10
/09/creative-wedge-ways-to-improve-inventory-manage
ment-go-mobile, accessed March 5, 2015.
14. “About Us,” Women’s World Banking, www.womens
worldbanking.org/about-us, accessed March 8, 2016.
15. “Women’s World Banking,” Intacct, http://online.intacct
.com/rs/intacct/images/cs_womensworldbanking.pdf,
accessed March 8, 2016.
16. “About Steinwall Incorporated,” Steinwall, www.steinwall
.com/pages/AboutUs, accessed March 7, 2016.
17. “Steinwall Scientific, Inc.,” IQMS Manufacturing ERP,
www.iqms.com/files/case-studies/Steinwall%
20Scientific_ERP_success.pdf, accessed March 7, 2016.
18. “Beefing Up a Growing Business,” SAP, www.sap.com
/customer-testimonials/retail/prime-meats.html,
accessed March 8, 2016.
19. Trites, David, “How Prime Meats Cuts Through Business
Complexity,” SAP Community Network (blog), July 28,
2015, http://scn.sap.com/community/business-trends
/blog/2015/07/28/how-prime-meats-cuts-through
-business-complexity.
20. “Who We Are,” Whirlpool, www.whirlpoolcorp.com/our
-company, accessed March 8, 2016.
21. Boulton, Clint, “Whirlpool CIO Tackles ERP Overhaul
and IoT-Powered Appliances,” February 20, 2016, www
.cio.com/article/3039093/internet-of-things/whirlpool
-cio-tackles-erp-overhaul-and-iot-powered-appliances
.html.
22. “Top Ten Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) Vendors,”
Compare Business Products, http://resources.idgenter
prise.com/original/AST-0067016_Top_10_ERP_Vendors
.pdf, accessed March 7, 2014.
23. “Newman Technology,” Plex, www.plex.com/customers
/newman-technology.html, accessed March 9, 2016.
24. “Curry’s Art Store Leaps Forward with TECSYS Total
Supply Chain Management,” TECSYS, www.tecsys.com
/customers/success/TECSYS-Currys-Success-Story.pdf,
accessed March 8, 2016.
25. “Expensify: Base Helps Expensify Engage with
Customers,” Base, https://getbase.com/customers
/expensify, accessed March 7, 2016.
26. “The TUMI Difference,” TUMI, www.tumi.com/s/tumi
-difference, accessed March 9, 2016.
27. “A Brief History of the Red Cross,” American Red Cross,
www.redcross.org/about-us/who-we-are/history,
accessed March 9, 2016.
28. “American Red Cross Utilizes Salesforce to Accelerate
Their Mission,” Salesforce, www.salesforce.com/customers
/stories/redcross.jsp, accessed March 9, 2016.
29. “Investors,” Nu Skin Enterprises, http://ir.nuskin.com
/phoenix.zhtml?c=103888&p=irol-irhome, accessed
March 7, 2016.
30. “Customer Journey: Nu Skin Enterprises Inc.,” SAP,
www.sap.com/customer-testimonials/consumer/nu-skin
.html, accessed March 5 2016.
31. “CRM Software Review 2014,” http://crm-software-review
.toptenreviews.com, accessed March 13, 2014, and “2014
Edition Top 40 CRM Software Report,”
Business-Software.com, accessed March 13, 2014.
32. “Wells Fargo Bank,” Salesforce.com Success Story,
www.salesforce.com/customers/stories/wells-fargo.jsp,
accessed March 14, 2014.
33. Chipman, Steve, “2014 Smartphone CRM Access by
Salespeople,” CRM Switch, February 11, 2014, www
.crmswitch.com/mobile-crm/2014-crm-smartphone-sales
person-access/.
34. “What Is PLM Software?” Siemens, www.plm.automa
tion.siemens.com/en_us/plm/, accessed March 1, 2014.
35. “About Water Pik, Inc.,” Water Pik, Inc., www.waterpik
.com/about-us, accessed March 9, 2016.
36. “Water Pik Improves Its Flow with ProductCenter PLM,”
SofTech, www.softech.com/success/customer-success
/Water_Pik_Improves_Its_Flow_with_ProductCenter
_PLM/28.
37. 2013 Edition Top 10 Product Lifecycle Management
(PLM) Software Report, Business-Software.com http://
ptccreo.files.wordpress.com/2013/10/top_10_plm_report
.pdf accessed March 1, 2014.
38. “Case Study: Industrial Control Associates,” Siemens,
www.plm.automation.siemens.com/en_us/about_us/suc
cess/case_study.cfm?Component=83695&Component
Template=1481, accessed March 9, 2016.
39. “About Us,” Industrial Control Associates, Inc., www.i-c-a
-inc.com/about.html, accessed March 9, 2016.
40. Noyes, Katherine, “State Employees Are Stuck Using a
Legacy System from the 1960s; New System from HP
Was Due by 2010,” Computerworld, September 21, 2015,
www.computerworld.com/article/2985070/government
-it/michigan-sues-hp-over-49m-project-thats-5-years-late
.html.
41. Kennedy, Patrick, “H.B. Fuller Wins Case against
Accenture,” Star Tribune, November 13, 2015, www
.startribune.com/h-b-fuller-wins-case-against-accenture
/347256802.
42. “HDOT News Release: HDOT Files Lawsuit against
Ciber, Inc., a Consulting Firm, Alleging Fraud and
Breach of Contract on State Highway Software Upgrade
Project,” Office of the Governor of the State of Hawaii,
September 2, 2015, http://governor.hawaii.gov/news
room/hdot-news-release-hdot-files-lawsuit-against
-ciber-inc-a-consulting-firm-alleging-fraud-and-breach
-of-contract-on-state-highway-software-upgrade-project.
43. Jutras, Cindy, “2011 ERP Solution Study Highlights,”
Epicor, September 2011.
44. “History,” LoneStar Heart, www.lonestarheartinc.com
/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=175&
Itemid=196, accessed March 10, 2016.
45. “LoneStar Heart: Efficiencies in Product Development
Processes Result in Estimated $80,000 in Savings,”
Omnify Software, www.omnifysoft.com/customers
/success.aspx?customer=37, accessed March 10, 2016.
CHAPTER 8 • Enterprise Systems 381
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
9
Business Intelligence
and Analytics
Sergey Nivens/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• MetLife is implementing analytical software to identify
medical provider, attorney, and repair shop fraud to aid
its special investigations unit (SIU).
• Nearly 20 percent of Medicare patients were readmitted
to the hospital within 30 days of their initial discharge,
running up an additional $17 billion in healthcare costs.
Hospitals are now using BI analytics to identify patients
are high risk of readmission—especially now that
Medicare has begun reducing payments to hospitals
with high readmission rates.
• IBM Watson Analytics services, a cloud-based
business analytics tool that offers a variety of tools for
uncovering trends hidden in large sets of data, uses
baseball statistics on every player in Major League
Baseball from AriBall to build predictions of player
performance. You can use this service to gain an
edge over your fantasy baseball league competitors.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• Business intelligence (BI) and analytics are used
to support improved decision making.
• Define the terms business intelligence (BI) and
analytics.
• Provide several real-world examples of BI and
analytics being used to improve decision making.
• Identify the key components that must be in place
for an organization to get real value from its BI and
analytics efforts.
• There are many BI and analytics techniques and
tools that can be used in a wide range of problem-
solving situations.
• Identify several BI techniques and discuss how
they are used.
• Identify several BI tools.
• Define the term self-service analytics and discuss
its pros and cons.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Business Intelligence (BI)
and Analytics?
We are living in the age of big data, with new data flooding us from all directions at the
incomprehensible speed of nearly a zettabyte (1 trillion gigabytes or a 1 followed by 21 zeros) per year.
What is most exciting about this data is not its amount, but rather the fact that we are gaining the tools
and understanding to do something truly meaningful with it. Organizations are learning to analyze
large amounts of data not only to measure past and current performance but also to make predictions
about the future. These forecasts will drive anticipatory actions to improve business strategies,
strengthen business operations, and enrich decision making—enabling the organization to become more
competitive.
A wide range of business users can derive benefits from access to data, but most of them lack
deep information systems or data science skills. Business users need easier and faster ways to discover
relevant patterns and insights into data to better support their decision making and to make their
companies more agile. Companies that have access to the same kind of data as their competitors but
can analyze it sooner to take action faster will outpace their peers. Providing BI tools and making
business analytics more understandable and accessible to these users should be a key strategy of
organizations.
Members of financial services organizations use BI and analytics to better understand their
customers to enhance service, create new and more appealing products, and better manage risk.
Marketing managers analyze data related to the Web-surfing habits, past purchases, and even social
media activity of existing and potential customers to create highly effective marketing programs that
generate consumer interest and increased sales. Health care professionals who are able to improve the
patient experience will reap the benefits of maximized reimbursements, lower costs, and higher market
share, and they will ultimately deliver higher quality care for patients. Physicians use business analytics
to analyze data in an attempt to identify factors that lead to readmission of hospital patients. Human
resources managers use analytics to evaluate job candidates and choose those most likely to be
successful. They also analyze the impact of raises and changes in employee-benefit packages on
employee retention and long-term costs.
Regardless of your field of study in school and your future career, using BI and analytics, will likely
be a significant component of your job. As you read this chapter, pay attention to how different
organizations use business analytics. This chapter starts by introducing basic concepts related to BI and
analytics. Later in the chapter, several BI and analytics tools and strategies are discussed.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• What is business intelligence (BI) and analytics, and how can they be used to improve the operations
and results of an organization?
• What are some business intelligence and analytics techniques and tools, and how can they be used?
This chapter begins with a definition of business intelligence (BI) and busi-
ness analytics and the components necessary for a successful BI and analytics
program. The chapter goes on to describe and provide examples of the use of
several BI techniques and tools. It ends with a discussion of some of the
issues associated with BI and analytics.
What Are Analytics and Business Intelligence?
Business analytics is the extensive use of data and quantitative analysis to sup-
port fact-based decision making within organizations. Business analytics can
be used to gain a better understanding of current business performance,
reveal new business patterns and relationships, explain why certain results
occurred, optimize current operations, and forecast future business results.
384 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Business intelligence (BI) includes a wide range of applications, prac-
tices, and technologies for the extraction, transformation, integration, visuali-
zation, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of data to support improved
decision making. The data used in BI is often pulled from multiple sources
and may come from sources internal or external to the organization. Many
organizations use this data to build large collections of data called data ware-
houses, data marts, and data lakes, for use in BI applications. Users, including
employees, customers, and authorized suppliers and business partners, may
access the data and BI applications via the Web or through organizational
intranets and extranets—often using mobile devices, such as smartphones
and tablets. The goal of business intelligence is to get the most value out of
information and present the results of analysis in an easy to understand man-
ner that the layman can understand.
Often the data used in BI and analytics must be gathered from a variety
of
sources.
Helse
Vest,
a
regional
health
authority
in
Norway,
has
26,500 employees who serve 1 million people in 50 healthcare facilities,
including 10 hospitals. Helse Vest implemented a BI system to meet the
requirements of a government-sponsored national patient safety program. The
system collects, visualizes, and shares medical data used to identify quality
measures and reporting requirements across all care teams and regional hospi-
tals. A major challenge for the project was the need for each of the 10 hospitals
to combine data from all the facilities within its region for analysis by the pro-
gram’s board and hospital managers. Prior to implementing the new system, it
took up to 14 days for employees to produce some reports, making it difficult
for hospital staff to assess and act on performance data because it was not cur-
rent. With the new system, Helse Vest analysts can easily combine data from
different sources and create analytical reports in less than one day. Real-time
data enables Helse Vest to act on information much more quickly, while the
metrics are still valid for the staff, and a quick response to performance data is
more likely to lead to significant improvements in patient safety measures.1
Benefits Achieved from BI and Analytics
BI and analytics are used to achieve a number of benefits as illustrated by the
following examples:
●
Detect fraud. MetLife implemented analytical software to help its special
investigations unit (SIU) identify medical provider, attorney, and repair
shop fraud. Although an accident claim may not have enough data to be
flagged as suspicious when it is first filed, as more claim data is added, a
claim is continually rescored by the software. After the first six months of
using the software, the number of claims under investigation by the SIU
increased 16 percent.2
●
Improve forecasting. Kroger serves customers in 2,422 supermarkets
and 1,950 in-store pharmacies. The company found that by better
predicting pharmacy customer demand, it could reduce the number of
prescriptions that it was unable to fill because a drug is out of stock. To
do so, Kroger developed a sophisticated inventory management system
that could provide employees with a visualization of inventory levels,
adapt to user feedback, and support “what-if” analysis. Out-of-stock pre-
scriptions have been reduced by 1.5 million per year, with a resulting
increase in sales of $80 million per year. In addition, by carrying the right
drugs in the right quantities, Kroger was able to reduce its overall inven-
tory costs by $120 million per year.3
●
Increase Sales. DaimlerChrysler and many other auto manufacturers set
their suggested retail and wholesale prices for the year, then adjust
pricing through seasonal incentives based on the impact of supply and
demand. DaimlerChrysler implemented a price-elasticity model to
business intelligence (BI): A
wide range of applications, practices,
and technologies for the extraction,
transformation, integration, visualiza-
tion, analysis, interpretation, and
presentation of data to support
improved decision making.
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 385
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

optimize the company’s pricing decisions. The system enables managers
to evaluate many potential incentives for each combination of vehicle
model (e.g., Jeep Grand Cherokee), acquisition method (cash, finance,
or lease), and incentive program (cash back, promotional APR, and a
combination of cash back and promotional APR). The firm estimates that
use of the system has generated additional annual sales of $500 million.4
●
Optimize operations. Chevron is one of the world’s leading integrated
energy companies. Its refineries work with crude oil that is used to make
a wide range of oil products, including gasoline, jet fuel, diesel fuel,
lubricants, and specialty products such as additives. With market prices of
crude oil and its various products constantly changing, determining which
products to refine at a given time is quite complex. Chevron uses an
analytical system called Petro to aid analysts in advising the refineries and
oil traders on the mix of products to produce, buy, and sell in order to
maximize profit.5
●
Reduce costs. Coca-Cola Enterprises is the world’s largest bottler and
distributor of Coca Cola products. Its delivery fleet of 54,000 trucks is
second in size to only to the U.S. Postal Service. Using analytics software,
the firm implemented a vehicle-routing optimization system that resulted
in savings of $45 million a year from reduced gas consumption and
reduction in the number of drivers required.6
The Role of a Data Scientist
Data scientists are individuals who combine strong business acumen, a deep
understanding of analytics, and a healthy appreciation of the limitations of
their data, tools, and techniques to deliver real improvements in decision mak-
ing. Data scientists do not simply collect and report on data; they view a situa-
tion from many angles, determine what data and tools can help further an
understanding of the situation, and then apply the appropriate data and tools.
They often work in a team setting with business managers and specialists from
the business area being studied, market research and financial analysts, data
stewards, information system resources, and experts highly knowledgeable
about the company’s competitors, markets, products, and services. The goal of
the data scientist is to uncover valuable insights that will influence organiza-
tional decisions and help the organization to achieve competitive advantage.
Data
scientists
are
highly
inquisitive,
continually
asking
questions,
performing “what-if” analyses, and challenging assumptions and existing
processes. Successful data scientists have an ability to communicate their find-
ings to organizational leaders so convincingly that they are able to strongly
influence how an organization approaches a business opportunity.
The
educational
requirements
for
being
a
data
scientist
are
quite
rigorous—requiring a mastery of statistics, math, and computer programming.
Most data scientist positions require an advanced degree, such as a master’s
degree or a doctorate. Some organizations accept data scientists with under-
graduate degrees in an analytical concentration, such as computer science,
math and statistics, management information systems, economics, and engi-
neering. Colorado Technical University, Syracuse University, and Villanova
University are among the many schools that offer online master degree pro-
grams related to BI and analytics.
Many schools also offer career-focused courses, degrees, and certificates
in analytical-related disciplines such as database management, predictive ana-
lytics, BI, big data analysis, and data mining. Such courses provide a great
way for current business and information systems professionals to learn data
scientist skills. Most data scientists have computer programming skills and are
familiar with languages and tools used to process big data, such as Hadoop,
Hive, SQL, Python, R, and Java.
386 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
The job outlook for data scientists is extremely bright. The McKinsey
Global Institute (the business and economics research arm of the management
consulting firm McKinsey & Co.) predicts that by 2018 the United States may
face a shortage of 140,000 to 190,000 data scientists.7 The recruitment agency
Glassdoor pegs the average salary for a data scientist at $118,709, and highly
talented, educated, and experienced data scientists can earn well over
$250,000 per year.
Components Required for Effective BI and Analytics
A number of components must be in place for an organization to get real
value from its BI and analytics efforts. First and foremost is the existence of a
solid data management program, including data governance. Recall that data
management is an integrated set of functions that defines the processes by
which data is obtained, certified fit for use, stored, secured, and processed in
such a way as to ensure that the accessibility, reliability, and timeliness of the
data meet the needs of the data users within an organization. Data gover-
nance is the core component of data management; it defines the roles, respon-
sibilities, and processes for ensuring that data can be trusted and used by the
entire organization, with people identified and in place who are responsible
for fixing and preventing issues with data.
Another key component that an organization needs is creative data
scientists—people who understand the business as well as the business ana-
lytics technology, while also recognizing the limitations of their data, tools,
and techniques. A data scientist puts all of this together to deliver real
improvements in decision making with an organization.
Finally, to ensure the success of a BI and analytics program, the manage-
ment team within an organization must have a strong commitment to data-
driven decision making. Organizations that can put the necessary components
in place can act quickly to make superior decisions in uncertain and changing
environments to gain a strong competitive advantage.
Argosy Gaming
Argosy Gaming Company is the owner and operator of six riverboat gambling
casinos and hotels in the United States. Argosy has developed a centralized enter-
prise data warehouse to capture the data generated at each property. As part of
this effort, Argosy selected an extract-transform-load (ETL) tool to gather and inte-
grate the data from six different operational databases to create its data ware-
house. The plan is to use the data to help Argosy management make quicker,
well-informed decisions based on patrons’ behaviors, purchases, and preferences.
Argosy hopes to pack more entertainment value into each patron’s visit by better
understanding their gambling preferences and favorite services. The data will also
be used to develop targeted direct mail campaigns, customize offers for specific
customer segments, and adapt programs for individual casinos.8
Review Questions
1.
What are the key components that Argosy must put into place to create an
environment for a successful BI and analytics program?
2.
What complications can arise from gathering data from six different opera-
tional databases covering six riverboat gambling casinos and hotels?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
The Argosy BI and analytics program is aimed at boosting revenue not at
reducing costs. Why do you think this is so?
2.
What specific actions must Argosy take to have a successful program that will
boost revenue and offset some of the increases in costs?
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 387
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Business Intelligence and Analytics Tools
This section introduces and provides examples of many BI and analytics tools,
including spreadsheets, reporting and querying tools, data visualization tools,
online analytical processing (OLAP), drill-down analysis, linear regression,
data mining, and dashboards. It will also cover the strategy of self-service ana-
lytics, presenting its pros and cons.
Spreadsheets
Business managers often import data into a spreadsheet program, such as
Excel, which then can be used to perform operations on the data based on
formulas created by the end user. Spreadsheets are also used to create reports
and graphs based on that data. End users can employ tools such as the Excel
Scenario Manager to perform “what-if” analysis to evaluate various alterna-
tives. The Excel Solver Add-in can be used to find the optimal solution to a
problem with multiple constraints (e.g., determine a production plan that will
maximize profit subject to certain limitations on raw materials).
North Tees and Hartlepool National Health Services Trust provides health-
care services and screenings to a population of 400,000 people in the United
Kingdom. Professor Philip Dean, head of the Department of Pharmacy and
Quality Control Laboratory Services, wanted a way to better understand the
clinical use of drugs, the efficacy of treatment, and the associated costs. Dean
worked with resources from Ascribe, a BI software and consulting firm, to
pilot the use of Microsoft Power BI for Office 365, part of the Microsoft Office
365 cloud-based business productivity suite that works through familiar Excel
spreadsheet software (see Figure 9.1). Ascribe developers took an extract of
North Tees’s data and imported it into a Power BI model. They then incorpo-
rated other data sets of interest to Dean and his colleagues, such as publicly
available data on the activity of general practitioners, weather data, and
Sharepoint
Distribute
and
interact
Power Pivot
Link and calculate
Data sources
Excel
Analyze, design
and present
Power Map
Visualize
Power View 
Visualize
Greatest sales opportunties
Power Query
Extract and transform
Triff/Shutterstock.com
FIGURE 9.1
Components of Microsoft Power BI for Office 365
Microsoft Power BI has been used to better understand the clinical use of drugs, the efficacy of treatment, and the associ-
ated costs.
Source: Access Analytics, Power BI for Business, Power Analytics, http://www.accessanalytic.com.au/Power-BI.html.
388 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

treatment data. With all of this new data integrated in the Power BI model,
Dean was able to create graphs of his findings, visualize data on regional
maps, and even zoom in and around the data to gain various levels of insight.
According to Dean, the ability to link disparate data sets for an integrated
analysis was “one of the ‘wow’ things” that impressed him most in his use of
BI tools. Incorporating additional, external data sets into his analyses comple-
mented and helped explain trends, as well as provided useful benchmarks.
Use of the weather data helped identify the impact of inclement weather on
the frequency of respiratory disease. The treatment data helped Dean and his
team to understand which drugs were being prescribed and how prescription
patterns varied by locality.9
Reporting and Querying Tools
Most organizations have invested in some reporting tools to help their employ-
ees get the data they need to solve a problem or identify an opportunity.
Reporting and querying tools can present that data in an easy-to-understand
fashion—via formatted data, graphs, and charts. Many of the reporting and que-
rying tools enable end users to make their own data requests and format the
results without the need for additional help from the IT organization.
FFF Enterprises is a supplier of critical-care biopharmaceuticals, plasma
products, and vaccines. Its 46,000 customers include over 80 percent of U.S.
hospitals.10 The company employs the QlikView query and reporting tool to
provide employees with real-time access to data that affects its business and
the timely delivery of safe, effective products and services. For example, the
company is the largest flu vaccine distributor in the United States, and accu-
rately tracking its vaccine shipments is critical to avoiding shortages. As part
of those efforts, FFF Enterprises uses QlikView to track and monitor the
volume and value of all product transactions, such as the receipt, internal
movement, and distribution of products.11
Data Visualization Tools
Data visualization is the presentation of data in a pictorial or graphical
format. The human brain works such that most people are better able to see
significant trends, patterns, and relationships in data that is presented in a
graphical format rather than in tabular reports and spreadsheets. As a result,
decision makers welcome data visualization software that presents analytical
results visually. In addition, representing data in visual form is a recognized
technique to bring immediate impact to dull and boring numbers. A wide
array of tools and techniques are available for creating visual representations
that can immediately reveal otherwise difficult-to-perceive patterns or relation-
ships in the underlying data.
Many companies now troll Facebook, Google Plus+, LinkedIn, Pinterest,
Tumblr, Twitter, and other social media feeds to monitor any mention of
their company or product. Data visualization tools can take that raw data and
immediately provide a rich visual that reveals precisely who is talking about
the product and what they are saying. Techniques as simple and intuitive as a
word cloud can provide a surprisingly effective visual summary of conversa-
tions, reviews, and user feedback about a new product. A word cloud is a
visual depiction of a set of words that have been grouped together because
of the frequency of their occurrence. Word clouds are generated from analy-
ses of text documents or a Web page. Using the text from these sources, a
simple count is carried out on the number of times a word or phrase appears.
Words or phrases that have been mentioned more often than other words or
phrases are shown in a larger font size and/or a darker color, as shown in
Figure 9.2. ABCya, Image Chef, TagCloud, ToCloud, and ToCloud, Tagul, and
Wordle are examples of word cloud generator software.
Data visualization: The presenta-
tion of data in a pictorial or graphical
format.
word cloud: A visual depiction of
a set of words that have been grouped
together because of the frequency
of their occurrence.
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 389
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A conversion funnel is a graphical representation that summarizes the
steps a consumer takes in making the decision to buy your product and
become a customer. It provides a visual representation of the conversion data
between each step and enables decision makers to see what steps are causing
customers confusion or trouble. Figure 9.3 shows a conversion funnel for an
online sales organization. It shows where visitors to a Web site are dropping
off the successful sales path.
FIGURE 9.2
Word cloud
This Word cloud shows the topics
covered in this chapter.
FIGURE 9.3
The conversion funnel
The conversion funnel shows the key
steps in converting a consumer to a
buyer.
Web site visits
100%
Visit
Visit
Visit
Visit
Visit
Product views
73%
Cart additions
23%
Checkouts
11%
Purchases
3%
conversion funnel: A graphical
representation that summarizes the
steps a consumer takes in making the
decision to buy your product and
become a customer.
mindscanner/Shutterstock.com
390 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Technologia is a business training firm that has trained over 70,000 clients
in dozens of technical topics, such as project management, SQL, and Microsoft
Windows. One Technologia course can cost $1,000 or more, so most potential
customers do careful detailed research and make multiple visits to the com-
pany’s Web site before enrolling in a course. Technologia used Multi-Channel
Funnels from Google Analytics to determine what factors had the most impact
in influencing students to enroll. For the first time, Technologia learned that
nearly 18 percent of its sales paths included paid advertising—much higher
than previously thought. As a result, it raised its online ad budget by nearly
100 percent, and online conversions shot up 120 percent.12
Dozens of data visualization software products are available for creating
various charts, graphs, infographics, and data maps (see Figure 9.4). Some of
the more commonly products include Google Charts, iCharts, Infogram,
Modest Maps, SAS Visual Statistics, and Tableau. These tools make it easy to
visually explore data on the fly, spot patterns, and quickly gain insights.
Online Analytical Processing
Online analytical processing (OLAP) is a method to analyze multidimen-
sional data from many different perspectives. It enables users to identify
issues and opportunities as well as perform trend analysis. Databases built to
support OLAP processing consist of data cubes that contain numeric facts
called measures, which are categorized by dimensions, such as time and geog-
raphy. A simple example would be a data cube that contains the unit sales of
a specific product as a measure. This value would be displayed along the
metric dimension axis shown in Figure 9.5. The time dimension might be a
specific day (e.g., September 30, 2018), whereas the geography dimension
might define a specific store (e.g., Krogers in the Cincinnati, Ohio community
of Hyde Park).
The key to the quick responsiveness of OLAP processing is the preaggre-
gation of detailed data into useful data summaries in anticipation of questions
that might be raised. For example, data cubes can be built to summarize unit
sales of a specific item on a specific day for a specific store. In addition, the
detailed store-level data may be summarized to create data cubes that show
FIGURE 9.4
Data visualization
This scatter diagram shows the
relationship between MSRP and
horsepower.
Source: “Data Visualization," SAS, http://
www.sas.com/en_us/insights/big-data/data
-visualization.html#m=lightbox5, accessed
April 19, 2016.
online analytical processing
(OLAP): A method to analyze multidi-
mensional data from many different
perspectives, enabling users to identify
issues and opportunities as well as
perform trend analysis.
data cube: A collection of data that
contains numeric facts called mea-
sures, which are categorized by
dimensions, such as time and
geography.
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 391
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

unit sales for a specific item, on a specific day for all stores within each major
market (e.g., Boston, New York, Phoenix), for all stores within the United
States, or for all stores within North America. In a similar fashion, data cubes
can be built in anticipation of queries seeking information on unit sales on a
given day, week, month, or fiscal quarter.
It is important to note that if the data within a data cube has been sum-
marized at a given level, for example, unit sales by day by store, it is not pos-
sible to use that data cube to answer questions at a more detailed level, such
as what were the unit sales of this item by hour on a given day.
Data cubes need not be restricted to just three dimensions. Indeed, most
OLAP systems can build data cubes with many more dimensions. In the busi-
ness world, data cubes are often constructed with many dimensions, but users
typically look at just three at a time. For example, a consumer packaged goods
manufacturer might build a multidimensional data cube with information about
unit sales, shelf space, unit price, promotion price, and level of newspaper
advertising—all for a specific product, on a specific date, in a specific store.
In the retail industry, OLAP is used to help firms to predict better cus-
tomer demand and maximize sales. Starbucks employs some 149,000 workers
in 10,000 retail stores in the United States. The firm built a data warehouse to
hold 70 terabytes of point-of-sale and customer loyalty data. This data is com-
pressed into data cubes of summarized data to enable users to perform OLAP
analysis of store-level sales and operational data.13
Drill-Down Analysis
The small things in plans and schemes that don’t go as expected can frequently
cause serious problems later on—the devil is in the details. Drill-down analysis
is a powerful tool that enables decision makers to gain insight into the details
of business data to better understand why something happened.
Drill-down analysis involves the interactive examination of high-level
summary data in increasing detail to gain insight into certain elements—sort
of like slowly peeling off the layers of an onion. For example, in reviewing
the worldwide sales for the past quarter, the vice president of sales might
want to drill down to view the sales for each country. Further drilling could
be done to view the sales for a specific country (say Germany) for the last
quarter. A third level of drill-down analysis could be done to see the sales for
a specific country for a specific month of the quarter (e.g., Germany for the
month of September). A fourth level of analysis could be accomplished by
drilling down to sales by product line for a particular country by month
(e.g., each product line sold in Germany for the month of September).
FIGURE 9.5
A data cube
The data cube contains numeric
facts that are categorized by
dimensions, such as time and
geography.
Time dimension
Geography dimension
Metric dimension
drill-down analysis: The interactive
examination of high-level summary
data in increasing detail to gain insight
into certain elements—sort of like
slowly peeling off the layers of an
onion.
392 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Brisbane is a city on the east coast of Australia that is subject to frequent
creek flash flooding from the many streams in the area. One year, particularly
heavy rainfall caused many houses to be flooded, brought down power lines,
closed roads, and put the city into a state of emergency. Following this disaster,
the city installed telemetry gauges across Brisbane to obtain real-time measure-
ments of rainfall and water levels. The data is captured and displayed on color-
coded maps, which enable staff to quickly spot areas of concern. They can also
perform a drill-down analysis to see increasing levels of detail within any critical
area. The system enables staff to provide more advanced warnings to the popu-
lation of impending flooding and take action to close roads or clean up debris.14
Linear Regression
Simple linear regression is a mathematical technique for predicting the value
of a dependent variable based on a single independent variable and the linear
relationship between the two. Linear regression consists of finding the best-
fitting straight line through a set of observations of the dependent and indepen-
dent variables. By far, the most commonly used measure for the best-fitting line
is the line that minimizes the sum of the squared errors of prediction. This best-
fitting line is called the regression line (see Figure 9.6). Linear regression does
not mean that one variable causes the other; it simply says that when one
value goes up, the other variable also increases or decreases proportionally.
The regression line can be written as Y ¼ a þ bX þ ".
In this equation, the following are true:
●
X is the value of the independent variable that is observed
●
Y is the value of the dependent variable that is being predicted
●
a is the value of Y when X is zero, or the Y intercept
●
b is the slope of the regression line
●
" is the error in predicting the value of Y, given a value of X
The following key assumptions must be satisfied when using linear
regression on a set of data:
●
A linear relationship between the independent (X) and dependent (Y)
variables must exist.
●
Errors in the prediction of the value of Y are distributed in a manner that
approaches the normal distribution curve.
●
Errors in the prediction of the value of Y are all independent of one
another.
FIGURE 9.6
Simple linear regression
This graph shows a linear regression
that predicts students’ final exam
scores based on their math aptitude
test score.
100
160
140
120
Score on standard achievement test
Score on math aptitude test
100
80
60
40
20
0
80
60
40
20
0
Best ﬁt linear regression line
linear regression: A mathematical
procedure to predict the value of a
dependent variable based on a single
independent variable and the linear
relationship between the two.
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 393
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A number of advanced statistical tests can be used to examine whether or
not these assumptions are true for a given set of data and the resulting linear
regression equation. For example, the coefficient of determination, denoted r²
(and pronounced r squared) is a number that indicates how well data fit a sta-
tistical model—sometimes simply a line or a curve. An r² of 1 indicates that
the regression line perfectly fits the data, whereas an r² of 0 indicates that the
line does not fit the data at all. An r² of 0.92 means that 92 percent of the total
variation in Y can be explained by the linear relationship between X and Y as
described by the regression equation. The other 8 percent of total variation in
Y remains unexplained. A data scientist would always perform several tests to
determine the validity of a linear regression to understand how well the
model matches to actual data.
Data Mining
Data mining is a BI analytics tool used to explore large amounts of data for
hidden patterns to predict future trends and behaviors for use in decision
making. Used appropriately, data mining tools enable organizations to make
predictions about what will happen so that managers can be proactive in
capitalizing on opportunities and avoiding potential problems.
Among the three most commonly used data mining techniques are associ-
ation analysis (a specialized set of algorithms sorts through data and forms
statistical rules about relationships among the items), neural computing
(historical data is examined for patterns that are then used to make predic-
tions), and case-based reasoning (historical if-then-else cases are used to
recognize patterns).
The Cross-Industry Process for Data Mining (CRISP-DM) is a six-phase
structured approach for the planning and execution of a data mining project
(see Figure 9.7). It is a robust and well-proven methodology, and although it
was first conceived in 1999, it remains the most widely used methodology for
data mining projects.15 The goals for each step of the process are summarized
in Table 9.1.
FIGURE 9.7
The Cross-Industry Process for
Data Mining (CRISP-DM)
CRISP-DM provides a structured
approach for planning and execut-
ing a data mining project.
Source: Piatetsky, Gregory, “CRISP-DM, Still
the Top Methodology for Analytics, Data
Mining, or Data Science Projects,” KDNug-
gets, October 28, 2014, www.kdnuggets
.com/2014/10/crisp-dm-top-methodology
-analytics-data-mining-data-science-pro
jects.html.
Data
preparation
Evaluation
Deployment
Database
Modeling
Business
understanding
Data
understanding
data mining: A BI analytics tool used
to explore large amounts of data for
hidden patterns to predict future trends
and behaviors for use in decision
making.
Cross-Industry Process for Data
Mining (CRISP-DM): A six-phase
structured approach for the planning
and execution of a data mining project.
394 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Here are a few examples showing how data mining can be used:
●
Based on past responses to promotional mailings, identify those consu-
mers most likely to take advantage of future mailings.
●
Examine retail sales data to identify seemingly unrelated products that are
frequently purchased together.
●
Monitor credit card transactions to identify likely fraudulent requests for
authorization.
●
Use hotel booking data to adjust room rates so as to maximize revenue.
●
Analyze demographic data and behavior data about potential customers to
identify those who would be the most profitable customers to recruit.
●
Study demographic data and the characteristics of an organization’s most
valuable employees to help focus future recruiting efforts.
●
Recognize how changes in an individual’s DNA sequence affect the risk of
developing common diseases such as Alzheimer’s or cancer.
The average production cost of a Hollywood movie in 2007 was
$106 million, with an additional $36 million spent on marketing of the film.
With that kind of money being spent, potential investors need to have a good
sense of what films will earn a profit and which ones won’t. Researchers from
the University of Iowa took data from two online sources (the Internet Movie
Database and Box Office Mojo) to build a database of over 14,000 films and
4,000 actors and directors from films released between 2000 and 2010. They
calculated return on investment for each film to get an estimate of its profit-
ability. The researchers then used a data mining algorithm to discover pat-
terns that predict movie profitability. Using the algorithm, the researchers
discovered that the factor most strongly correlated with a film’s profitability is
the average gross revenue made by the director’s previous films—directors
who have generated more revenue in the past are correlated with greater
profitability in future. Somewhat surprisingly, while big stars boost box office
receipts, they don’t guarantee a profit, because they cost a lot to hire in the
first place and they are often involved in higher budget films that require
more revenue to generate a profit.16
Dashboards
Measures are metrics that track progress in executing chosen strategies to
attain organizational objectives and goals. These metrics are also called key
performance indicators (KPIs) and consist of a direction, measure, target,
and time frame. To enable comparisons over different time periods, it is also
important to define the KPIs and to use the same definition from year to
TABLE 9.1 Goals for each phase of CRISP-DM
Phase
Goal
Business understanding
●
Clarify the business goals for the data mining project, convert the goals into a predictive
analysis problem, and design a project plan to accomplish these objectives.
Data understanding
●
Gather data to be used (may involve multiple sources), become familiar with the data,
and identify any data quality problems (lack of data, missing data, data needs adjust-
ment, etc.) that must be addressed.
Data preparation
●
Select a subset of data to be used, clean data to address quality issues, and transform data
into form suitable for analysis.
Modeling
●
Apply selected modeling techniques.
Evaluation
●
Assess if the model achieves business goals.
Deployment
●
Deploy the model into the organization’s decision-making process.
Source: Leaper, Nicole, “A Visual Guide to CRISP-DM Methodology,” https://exde.files.wordpress.com/2009/03/crisp_visualguide.pdf, accessed January 20, 2016.
key performance
indicator (KPI): A metric that tracks
progress in executing chosen strate-
gies to attain organizational objectives
and goals and consists of a direction,
measure, target, and time frame.
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 395
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

year. Over time, some existing KPIs may be dropped and new ones added as
the organization changes its objectives and goals. Obviously, just as different
organizations have different goals, various organizations will have different
KPIs. The following are examples of well-defined KPIs:
●
For a university. Increase (direction) the five-year graduation rate for
incoming freshman (measure) to at least 80 percent (target) starting with
the graduating class of 2022 (time frame).
●
For a customer service department. Increase (direction) the number
of customer phone calls answered within the first four rings (measure) to
at least 90 percent (target) within the next three months (time frame).
●
For an HR organization. Reduce (direction) the number of voluntary
resignations and terminations for performance (measure) to 6 percent or
less (target) for the 2018 fiscal year and subsequent years (time frame).
A dashboard presents a set of KPIs about the state of a process at a spe-
cific point in time. Dashboards provide rapid access to information, in an
easy-to-interpret and concise manner, which helps organizations run more
effectively and efficiently.
Options for displaying results in a dashboard can include maps, gauges, bar
charts, trend lines, scatter diagrams, and other representations, as shown in
Figures 9.8 and Figure 9.9. Often items are color coded (e.g., red ¼ problem;
yellow ¼ warning; and green ¼ OK) so that users can see at a glance where
attention is needed. Many dashboards are designed in such a manner that users
can click on a section of the chart displaying data in one format and drill down
into the data to gain insight into more specific areas. For example, Figure 9.9
represents the results of drilling down on the sales region of Figure 9.8.
Dashboards provide users at every level of the organization the informa-
tion they need to make improved decisions. Operational dashboards can
be designed to draw data in real time from various sources, including corpo-
rate databases and spreadsheets, so decision makers can make use of
up-to-the-minute data.
FIGURE 9.8
Category management dashboard for total U.S. region
This dashboard summarizes a number of sales measures.
Source: www.microstrategy.com/us/analytics/technology.
dashboard: A presentation of a set of
KPIs about the state of a process at a
specific point in time.
396 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Widely used BI software comes from many different vendors, including
Hewlett Packard, IBM, Information Builders, Microsoft, Oracle, and SAP, as
shown in Table 9.2. Vendors such as JasperSoft and Pentaho also provide
open-source BI software, which is appealing to some organizations.
Self-Service Analytics
Self-service analytics includes training, techniques, and processes that
empower end users to work independently to access data from approved
sources to perform their own analyses using an endorsed set of tools. In the
past, such data analysis could only be performed by data scientists. Self-
service analytics encourages nontechnical end users to make decisions based
on facts and analyses rather than intuition. Using a self-service analytics appli-
cation, end users can gather insights, analyze trends, uncover opportunities
and issues, and accelerate decision making by rapidly creating reports, charts,
dashboards, and documents from any combination of enterprise information
assets. Self-service analytics eliminates decision-making delays that can arise
if all requests for data analyses must be made through a limited number of
data scientists and/or information system resources. It also frees up these
resources to do higher-level analytics work. Ideally, self-service analytics will
lead to faster and better decision making.
An organization can take several actions to ensure an effective self-service
analytics program. First, to mitigate the risks associated with self-service ana-
lytics, data managers should work with business units to determine key
metrics, an agreed-upon vocabulary, processes for creating and publishing
reports, the privileges required to access confidential data, and how to define
and implement security and privacy policies. The information systems organi-
zation should help users understand what data is available and recommended
for business analytics. One approach to accomplishing this is to provide a
data dictionary for use by end users. Training, on both the data and on the
use of self-service applications, is critical for getting end workers up to speed
FIGURE 9.9
Category management dashboard for Northwest region
This dashboard summarizes a number of revenue measures.
Source: www.microstrategy.com/us/analytics/technology.
self-service analytics: Training,
techniques, and processes that
empower end users to work indepen-
dently to access data from approved
sources to perform their own analyses
using an endorsed set of tools.
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 397
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

on how they can use the information in the BI system. Finally, data privacy
and security measures should be in place to ensure that the use of the data
meets legal, compliance, and regulatory requirements.
A well-managed self-service analytics program allows technology profes-
sionals to retain ultimate data control and governance while limiting informa-
tion systems staff involvement in routine tasks. Modern data management
requires a true balancing act between enabling self-service analysis and pro-
tecting sensitive business information, as shown in Figure 9.10.
Table 9.3 presents the pros and cons associated with self-service BI and
analytics.
For self-service analytics tools to be effective, they must be intuitive and
easy to use. Business users simply don’t have the time to learn how to work
with complex tools or sophisticated interfaces. A self-service analytics applica-
tion will only be embraced by end users if it allows them to easily access their
own customized information, without extensive training. Microstrategy, Power
BI, Qlik, SAS Analytics, Tableau, and TIBCO Software are just a few examples
of the dozens of software options available for self-service analytics.
Expert Storybooks, a cloud-based, self-service analytics service from IBM’s
Watson Analytics line, provides data analysis models that offer connections to
a range of data sources, along with secure connections to corporate data.
Expert Storybooks are tools for creating sophisticated data visualizations to
help users find relevant facts and discover patterns and relationships to make
predictive decisions. There are several Expert Storybooks available, including
TABLE 9.2 Widely used BI software
Vendor
Product
Description
HP
Autonomy IDOL17
Enables organizations to process unstructured as well as structured data; the
software can examine the intricate relationships between data to answer the
crucial question “Why has this happened?”
IBM
Cognos Business
Intelligence18
Turns data into past, present, and future views of an organization’s operations
and performance so decision makers can identify opportunities and minimize
risks; snapshots of business performance are provided in reports and inde-
pendently assembled dashboards.
Information
Builders
WebFOCUS19
Produces dashboards and scorecards to display a high-level view of critical
indicators and metrics; the software enables users to analyze and manipulate
information, with minimal training. It also supports dynamic report distribu-
tion, with real-time alerts, and fully automates the scheduling and delivery of
vital information.
Microsoft
Power BI for
Office 36520
Allows users to model and analyze data and query large data sets with pow-
erful natural-language queries; it also allows users to easily visualize data in
Excel.
Oracle
Business
Intelligence21
Offers a collection of enterprise BI technology and applications; tools includ-
ing an integrated array of query, reporting, analysis, mobile analytics, data
integration and management, desktop integration, and financial performance
management applications; operational BI applications; and data warehousing.
Oracle
Hyperion22
Provides software modules to enable financial management; modules include
those for budgeting, planning, and forecasting; financial reporting; database
management; financial consolidation; treasury management; and analytics.
SAS
Enterprise BI Server23
Provides software modules to support query and analysis, perform OLAP
processing, and create customizable dashboards; the software integrates with
Microsoft Office.
SAP
Business Objects24
Offers a suite of applications that enable users to design and generate reports,
create interactive dashboards that contain charts and graphs for visualizing
data, and create ad hoc queries and analysis of data; also allows users to
search through BI data sources.
398 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
one that uses baseball statistics from AriBall to build predictions of player per-
formance, enabling users to gain an edge over their fantasy baseball competi-
tors. A variety of other Storybooks help end users incorporate weather data
into revenue analysis; analyze social data to measure reputational risk; analyze
marketing campaign data; identify and analyze trends in customer profitability;
analyze market trends for investment strategy; and examine relationships
among pay, performance, and credit risk.25
Fire Department Turns to BI Analytics
New York City has nearly 1 million buildings, and each year, more than 3,000 of
them experience a major fire. The Fire Department of the City of New York
(FDNY) is adding BI analytics to its arsenal of firefighting equipment. It has created
a database of over 60 different factors (e.g., building location, age of the building,
whether it has electrical issues, the number and location of sprinklers) in an
attempt to determine which buildings are more likely to have a fire than others.
The values of these parameters for each building are fed into a BI analytics system
TABLE 9.3 Pros and cons associated with self-service BI and analytics
Pros
Cons
Gets valuable data into the hands of the people who need
it the most—end users.
If not well managed, it can create the risk of erroneous
analysis and reporting, leading to potentially damaging
decisions within an organization.
Encourages nontechnical end users to make decisions
based on facts and analyses rather than intuition.
Different analyses can yield inconsistent conclusions,
resulting in wasted time trying to explain the differences.
Self-service analytics can also result in proliferating “data
islands,” with duplications of time and money spent on
analyses.
Accelerates and improves decision making.
Can lead to over spending on unapproved data sources
and business analytics tools.
Business people can access and use the data they need for
decision making, without having to go to technology
experts each time they have a new question, thus filling
the gap caused by a shortage of trained data scientists.
Can exacerbate problems by removing the checks and
balances on data preparation and use. Without strong data
governance, organizations can end up with lots of silos of
information, bad analysis, and extra costs.
FIGURE 9.10
Importance of data
management
Modern data management requires
a true balancing act between
enabling self-service analysis and
protecting sensitive business
information.
Self-service
analytics
Protecting sensitive
business information
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 399
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

that assigns each of the city’s 330,000 inspectable buildings a risk score. (FDNY
doesn’t inspect single and two-family homes.) Fire inspectors then use these risk
scores to prioritize which buildings to visit on their weekly inspections.26
Review Questions
1.
What kinds of BI analytics tools and techniques is the FDNY likely to use in
sifting through all this data and determining a building’s risk score?
2.
Identify three other parameters that ought to be taken into consideration
when setting priorities for building inspections.
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
While making investments in BI analytics seems like a good idea, FDNY is
strongly challenged in measuring its success. Officials may be able to cite sta-
tistics showing a reduction in the number of fires, but demonstrating that BI
analytics tools were the reason behind that decrease may be difficult because
it involves proving a negative—that something didn’t happen because of its
efforts. Go to the FDNY citywide statistics Web site at www.nyc.gov/html
/fdny/html/stats/citywide.shtml. Use those statistics and a data visualization
tool of your choice to see if you can discern any change in the number of
fires since the BI analytics system was installed in 2014.
2.
Can you identify other approaches that would be effective in demonstrating
the value of BI analytics in reducing the impact of fires in New York City?
Summary
Principle:
The goal of business intelligence (BI) and analytics is to support
improved decision making.
Business intelligence (BI) includes a wide range of applications, practices,
and technologies for the extraction, transformation, integration, visualization,
analysis, and presentation of data to support improved decision making.
Business analytics is the extensive use of data and quantitative analysis to
support fact-based decision making within organizations.
A data scientist is an individual who combines strong business acumen, a
deep understanding of analytics, and a healthy appreciation of the limitations
of their data, tools, and techniques to deliver real improvements in decision
making. The educational requirements for a data scientist are quite rigorous,
and the job outlook for this profession is extremely good.
A number of components must be in place for an organization to get real
value from its BI and analytics efforts: a solid data management program
(including a strong data governance element), creative data scientists, and a
strong organizational commitment to data-driven decision making.
Principle:
There are many BI and analytics techniques and tools that can be used in
a wide range of problem-solving situations.
Spreadsheets, reporting and querying tools, data visualization, online ana-
lytical processing (OLAP), drill-down analysis, linear regression, data mining,
and dashboards are examples of commonly used BI tools.
Business managers and end users often turn to spreadsheets to create use-
ful reports and graphs, as well as to employ “what-if” analyses and find the
optimal solution to a problem with multiple constraints.
400 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Reporting and querying tools can present data in an easy-to-understand
fashion—via formatted data, graphs, and charts. Many of the reporting and
querying tools enable end users to make their own data requests and format
the results without the need for additional help from the IT organization.
Data visualization is the presentation of data in a pictorial or graphical
format. A wide array of tools and techniques are available for creating visual
representations that can immediately reveal otherwise difficult-to-perceive pat-
terns or relationships in the underlying data.
Online analytical processing (OLAP) is a method to analyze multidimen-
sional data (data cubes) from many different perspectives. Databases built to
support OLAP processing consist of data cubes that contain numeric facts
called measures, which are categorized by dimensions, such as time and
geography.
Drill-down analysis involves the interactive examination of high-level sum-
mary data in increasing detail to gain insight into certain elements.
Simple linear regression is a mathematical procedure technique for predict-
ing the value of a dependent variable based on a single independent variable
and the linear relationship between the two.
Data mining is a BI analytics tools used to explore large amounts of data for
hidden patterns to predict future trends and behaviors for use in decision mak-
ing. The Cross-Industry Process for Data Mining (CRISP-DM) is a six-phase
structured approach used for the planning and execution of a data mining
project.
A dashboard presents a set of KPIs about the state of a process at a specific
point in time. Dashboards provide rapid access to information, in an easy-
to-interpret and concise manner, which helps organizations run more effec-
tively and efficiently.
Self-service analytics includes training, techniques, and processes that
empower end users to work independently to access data from approved
sources to perform their own analyses using an endorsed set of tools. Self-
service analytics empowers end users to work independently. A number of
measures must be in place to ensure an effective self-serve analytics program
and to reduce the risk of invalid analyses leading to poor decisions.
Key Terms
business intelligence (BI)
conversion funnel
Cross-Industry Process for Data Mining (CRISP-DM)
dashboard
data cube
data mining
data visualization
drill-down analysis
key performance indicator (KPI)
linear regression
online analytical processing (OLAP)
self-service analytics
word cloud
Chapter 9: Self-Assessment Test
The goal of business intelligence (BI) is to support
improved decision making.
1. Which of the following statements is not true?
a. The data used in BI is often pulled from mul-
tiple sources—both internal and external to
the organization.
b. Users may access the data and BI applications
via the Web or through organizational intra-
nets and extranets—often using mobile
devices, such as smartphones and tablets.
c. The data used in BI applications can come
from data warehouses, data marts, and data
lakes.
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 401
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

d. BI is strictly the realm of data scientists; end
users and business managers should be dis-
couraged from using these tools and
techniques.
2. An individual who combines strong business
acumen, a deep understanding of analytics, and
healthy appreciation of their data, tools, and
techniques to deliver real improvements in deci-
sion making is called a _____________.
a. data steward
b. database administrator
c. data scientist
d. database manager
3. Which of the following is not an essential
component for a highly effective BI program?
a. Creative data scientists
b. Strong data management program
c. Strong management commitment to
data-driven decision making
d. The most current and powerful BI and
analytics tools and software
4. Most data scientists have computer programming
skills and are familiar with languages and tools
used to process big data, such as:
a. Hadoop, Hive, R
b. Python, R, and Assembly
c. Visual Basic, Java, and Cobol
d. PL/1, Hadoop, PHP
Principle: There are many business intelligence
(BI) and analytics techniques and tools that can be
used in a wide range of problem-solving situations.
5. ____________ is a BI analytics tool that involves
the interactive examination of high-level sum-
mary data in increasing detail to gain insight.
a. OLAP
b. Drill-down analysis
c. Linear regression
d. Dashboard
6. A(n) _______________________ is a measure that
tracks progress in executing chosen strategies to
attain organizational objectives and goals.
7. Self-service analytics encourages nontechnical
end users to make decisions based on facts and
analyses rather than intuition. True or False?
8. __________ is a BI analytics tool used to explore
large amounts of data for hidden patterns to pre-
dict future trends and behaviors for use in deci-
sion making.
a. Linear regression
b. Data mining
c. OLAP
d. Data visualization
9. A(n) ________________________ is a graphical
representation that summarizes the steps a con-
sumer takes in making the decision to buy your
product and become a customer.
Chapter 9: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. d
2. c
3. d
4. a
5. b
6. key performance indicator (KPI)
7. True
8. b
9. conversion funnel
Review Questions
1. Provide a definition of business intelligence (BI).
2. Provide a definition of business analytics.
3. Identify and briefly discuss several benefits that
can be gained through the use of BI and
analytics.
4. Describe the role of a data scientist. What educa-
tion and training are required of data scientists?
5. What is online analytical processing (OLAP), and
how is it used?
6. What is a data cube? Define three data dimen-
sions of a data cube that might be used to analyze
sales by product line.
7. What is drill-down analysis and how is it used?
8. What is linear regression? Identify two variables
that have a strong linear relationship.
9. What is r2, and how is it used to evaluate how
well data fits a linear regression model?
10. What is data mining? Identify three commonly
used data mining techniques.
11. What are key performance indicators (KPIs)?
Identify three KPIs that might be used in a doc-
tor’s or dentist’s office to measure the patient
office visit experience.
12. What is meant by self-service analytics? Identify
some of the pros and cons of self-service
analytics.
402 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Discussion Questions
1. Identify and briefly discuss the components that
must be in place for an organization to gain real
value from its BI and analytics efforts.
2. How would you define BI? Identify and briefly
discuss a real-world application of BI that you
recently experienced.
3. Imagine that you are the sales manager of a large
luxury auto dealer. What sort of data would be
useful to you in order to contact potential new car
customers and invite them to visit your dealership?
Where might you get such data? What sort of BI
tools might you need to make sense of this data?
4. You answer your door to find a political activist
who asks you to sign a petition to place a propo-
sition on the ballot that, if approved, would ban
the use of data mining that includes any data about
the citizens of your state. What would you do?
5. What is the difference between OLAP analysis
and drill-down analysis? Provide an example of
the effective use of each technique.
6. Identify at least four well-defined KPIs that could
be used by the general manager at a large, full-
service health club to track the current state of
operations, including availability of trainers; sta-
tus of workout equipment; condition of indoor
and outdoor swimming pools; use of the spa and
salon; utilization of the basketball, handball, and
tennis courts; and condition of the showers and
locker rooms. Sketch what a dashboard display-
ing those KPIs might look like.
7. Your nonprofit organization wishes to increase
the efficiency of its fundraising efforts. What sort
of data might be useful to achieve this goal? How
might BI tools be used to analyze this data?
8. Describe the CRISP-DM model, and explain how
it can be used to plan and execute a data mining
effort.
9. Must you be a trained statistician to draw valid
conclusions from the use of BI tools? Why or why
not?
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. You are the sales manager of a software firm that
provides BI software for reporting, query, and
business data analysis via OLAP and data mining.
Write a few paragraphs and create a 3-5 slide
presentation that your sales reps can use when
calling on potential customers to help them
understand the business benefits of BI.
2. Go to the NASA Goddard Institute for Space
Studies Web site at http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gis
temp and read about the temperature data sets
available. Next, use the NASA Global land-sea
temperature data set for the period 1880 to pres-
ent at http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/tableda
ta_v3/GLB.Ts+dSST.txt and create a linear regres-
sion of annual mean temperature in degrees
Fahrenheit versus year. Be sure to adjust the table
values based on the notes that accompany this
table.
3. Use the Help function of Excel to learn more
about the Excel Scenario Manager and the Excel
Solver Add-in.
Team Activities
1. A large customer call center for a multinational
retailer has been in operation for several months,
but has continually failed to meet both customers’
and senior management’s expectations. Your
team has been called in to develop a dashboard
to help monitor and improve the operations of
the call center. What KPIs would you track?
Sketch a sample dashboard for this application.
2. Your team has decided to enter a Fantasy Base-
ball League. Use IBM’s Watson analytics Story-
books to select the best team in the league.
3. Your team has been hired to reapply the NYCFD
BI analytics system to the NYCPD in order to
prioritize areas of the city for patrol. Describe
what data you might need for such an analysis.
What BI analytics techniques would you use to
become familiar with the data and develop an
algorithm for ranking the various area for
patrol?
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 403
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Web Exercises
1. Do research to learn more about the Goddard
Institute of Space Science Surface Temperature
Analysis (GISTEMP) temperature measurements
used by many scientists to assert that global
warming is occurring. One source of such infor-
mation can be found at http://data.giss.nasa.gov
/gistemp/FAQ.html. Read carefully the sections
that explain why adjusted rather than raw data is
used. Briefly summarize the kinds of adjustments
made to temperature measurements and discuss
how this affects your confidence in the data.
2. Do research on the Web to find business analytics
applications that can run on a smartphone.
Prepare a brief paragraph summarizing the fea-
tures and potential applications of three applica-
tions of most interest to you.
3. Do research on the Web to identify examples of a
social network allowing a large national retailer
to mine its data to learn more about the social
network members and to develop targeted direct
mailings and emails promoting its products. What
are the pros and cons of sharing such data?
How do social network members feel when they
learn that their data is being shared? In your
opinion, under what conditions is this a legiti-
mate use of social network member data?
Career Exercises
1. Do research on CareerBuilder, Indeed, LinkedIn,
or SimplyHired to identify what you think is an
attractive job opening available for a data scien-
tist. What does this role entail, and what respon-
sibilities must the data scientist perform? What
sort of education and experience is required for
this position? Is the role of a data scientist of any
interest to you? Why or why not?
2. What kinds of decisions are critical for success in
a career that interests you? How might you use BI
or analytics to help improve your decision mak-
ing? Can you identify and specific techniques or
tools that you might use?
3. Copy and paste the text describing a job oppor-
tunity in which you are interested into an online
word cloud generator. What insights do you gain
from the resulting word cloud? How might the
results lead you to customize your resume to
respond to this job posting?
Case Studies
Case One
Analytics Used to Predict Patients Likely to Be
Readmitted
Unplanned hospital readmissions are a serious matter for
patients and a quality and cost issue for the healthcare system
of every country. For example, in the United States, during
2011, nearly 19 percent of Medicare patients were readmitted
to the hospital within 30 days of their initial discharge,
running up an additional $26 billion in healthcare costs.
Hospitals are seeking more effective ways to identify patients
at high risk of readmission—especially now that Medicare
has begun reducing payments to hospitals with high
readmission rates.
Identifying patients at high risk for readmission is
important so that hospitals can take a range of preventative
measures, including heightened patient education along with
medication reconciliation on the day of discharge, increased
home services to ensure patient effective at home
convalescence, follow-up appointments scheduled for soon
after discharge, and follow-up phone calls to ensure an
additional level of protection.
Several studies have attempted to identify the key
factors that indicate a high risk for unplanned hospital
readmission. One study was based on the analysis of the
Belgian Hospital Discharge Dataset. This data set contains
patient demographics, data about the hospital stay (date
and type of admission and discharge, referral data,
admitting department, and destination after discharge), and
clinical data (primary and secondary diagnoses). Since 1990,
Belgium has required the collection of this data for all
inpatients in all acute hospitals. The data is managed by a
commission that controls the content and format of patient
registration, the data collecting procedures, and the
completeness, validity, and reliability of the collected data.
In addition, the quality of the data is audited by the
Belgium Ministry of Public Health in two ways. First, a
software program checks the data for missing, illogical, and
outlier values. Second, by regular hospital visits, a random
selection of patient records is reviewed to ensure that data
were recoded correctly.
Key factors for hospital readmission based on analysis of
the Belgian Hospital Discharge Dataset included: (1) chronic
cardiovascular disease, (2) patients with chronic pulmonary
disease, (3) patients who experienced multiple emergency
room visits over the past six months, (4) patients discharged
on a Friday, and (5) patients who had a prolonged length
of hospital stay. The study also found that patients with short
hospital stays were not at high risk for readmission. The
research highlighted the need for healthcare providers to
work with caregivers and primary care physicians to
404 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

coordinate a smoother transition from hospital to home,
especially for patients discharged on Friday, to reduce
unplanned readmissions.
The mission of Penn Medicine Center for Evidence-based
Practice (CEP) is to support healthcare quality and safety at
the University of Pennsylvania Health System (UPHS)
through the practice of evidence-based medicine. Established
in 2006, Penn Medicine’s CEP is staffed by a hospital director,
three research analysts, six physician and nurse liaisons, a
health economist, a biostatistician, administrator, and
librarians. A study conducted by a team at the CEP examined
two years of UPHS discharge data and found that a single
variable—prior admission to the hospital two or more times
within a span of one year—was the best predictor of being
readmitted in the future. This marker was added to UPHS’s
EHR, and patient results were tracked for the next year.
During that time, patients who triggered the readmission
alert were subsequently readmitted 31 percent of the time.
When an alert was not triggered, patients were readmitted
only 11 percent of the time.
A group of physicians conducted yet a third study using
data from a 966-bed, teaching hospital during a five-month
period in 2011. Their objective was to determine the
association between a composite measure of patient
condition at discharge, the Rothman Index (RI), and
unplanned readmission within 30 days of discharge. Software
employing the Rothman Index tracks the overall state of
health of patients by continuously gathering 26 key pieces of
data, including vital signs (temperature, blood pressure,
heart, blood oxygen saturation, and respiratory rate), nursing
assessments, cardiac rhythms, and lab test results from a
patient’s EHR to calculate the Rothman Index, a number
between 1 and 100. A patient’s Rothman Index is updated
continuously throughout the day. A high score indicates a
relatively healthy patient, whereas a low score indicates the
patient warrants close monitoring or immediate assistance. A
physician or nurse can quickly grasp the condition of the
patient based on both current score and the trend in the
score. The software also draws a graph of the patient’s
Rothman Index over time that can be displayed in the
patient’s room, on a central nursing station screen, or on a
care provider’s mobile device. The software can even send
mobile phone alerts to doctors and nurses when a patient’s
condition warrants attention.
The Rothman Index study included clinical data from
the hospital’s EHR system as well as from a patient activity
database for all adult discharges. There was a total of
12,844 such cases. The researchers excluded encounters that
were readmissions within 30 days of a previous discharge
(2,574), patients who were admitted for observation only
(501), patients with length of stay less than 48 hours
(3,243), and patients who died during the hospital stay
(189)—yielding a sample of 6,337 eligible inpatient
discharges. From this sample, 535 additional patients were
eliminated due to missing clinical data, for a sample of
5,802 patients, or 92 percent of all eligible inpatient
discharges. Sixteen percent of the sample patients had an
unplanned readmission within 30 days of discharge. The
risk of readmission for a patient in the highest risk category
(Rothman Index lower than 70) was more than 1 in 5 while
the risk of readmission for patients in the lowest risk
category was about 1 in 10.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Three different analytic studies by three experienced
and highly respected groups of researchers yielded
three similar but somewhat different results. Do you
believe that the results of these studies are consistent?
Why or why not?
2. Do you think the findings of these studies can be
applied broadly to all hospitals and medical centers
across the United States and around the world? Why or
why not?
3. A hospital specializing in the care of patients with
various forms of heart disease is attempting to deter-
mine the cause of readmission of its patients. Should it
rely of the results of general studies such as those
described here or should it gather its own data,
perform an analysis and draw its own conclusions?
Support your recommendation.
SOURCES: Shinkman, Ron, “Readmissions Lead to $41.3B in Additional
Hospital Costs,” FierceHealthFinance, April 20, 2014, www.fiercehealth
finance.com/story/readmissions-lead-413b-additional-hospital-costs
/2014-04-20; Kern, Christine, “5 Risk Factors for Unplanned Read-
missions Identified,” Health IT Outcomes, September 8, 2015, www
.healthitoutcomes.com/doc/risk-factors-for-unplanned-readmissions
-identified-0001; van den Heede, Koen; Sermeus, Walter; Diya, Luwis;
Lesaffre, Emmanuel; and Vleugels, Arthur, “Adverse Outcomes in
Belgian Acute Hospitals: Retrospective Analysis of the National Hospital
Discharge Dataset,” International Journal for Quality in Health Care,
vol. 18, no. 3, 2006, pp. 211–219, Advance Access Publication: 23 March
2006, http://intqhc.oxfordjournals.org/content/intqhc/18/3/211.full.pdf;
“Center for Evidence-Based Practice,” Penn Medicine, www.uphs.upenn
.edu/cep/, accessed January 12, 2015; “ ‘Rothman Index’ May Help to
Lower Repeat Hospitalization Risk,” Medical Press, August 15, 2013,
http://medicalxpress.com/news/2013-08-rothman-index-hospitaliza
tion.html. Bradley, Elizabeth, PhD; Yakusheva, Olga, PhD; Horwitz,
Leora, MD; Sipsma, Heather, PhD; and Fletcher, Jason, PhD, “Identifying
Patients at Increased Risk for Unplanned Readmission,” US National
Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health, September 1, 2014,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3771868/.
Case Two
Sunny Delight Improves Profitability with
a Self-Service BI Solution
When implementing a self-service analytics program,
information systems staff and end users across an
organization often must be willing to give up some control
and autonomy in exchange for a cohesive data management
strategy. Companies that effectively implement self-service
analytics, however, usually find those trade-offs are
outweighed by the competitive advantages gained for the
organization as a whole.
For Sunny Delight Beverages, a Cincinnati-based
producer of juice-based drinks, the payoff from using self-
service analytics software has been significant. The company,
which generates more than $550 million in annual revenue
through sales of its SunnyD, Fruit20, and VeryFine brands,
estimates that its newly implemented, self-service analytics
program has resulted in a $195,000 annual reduction in
staffing costs and a $2 million annual increase in profits.
Getting to these results, however, has not been easy for
Sunny Delight. Like many companies, it had developed a
patchwork of departmental business analytics applications
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 405
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

over the years. Sunny Delight’s infrastructure was particularly
complex as the company has been bought and sold multiple
times since it was founded in 1963. At one point, Sunny
Delight’s 480 employees were working with eight different
legacy BI applications, resulting in some departments
spending up to a week each month producing data that was
often not in agreement with the data generated by other
departments. Reconciling and rolling up the data was time
consuming and left little time for in-depth analysis, much less
strategy development and execution.
The data silos also meant that Sunny Delight had no real
visibility into its business, which lead to revenue
unpredictably, higher-than-necessary inventory levels, and
lower margins. The company’s sales efforts were hampered
because the sales team did not have a true understanding of
the effectiveness and profitability of specific sales
promotions. For example, the sales department was unable to
correlate the impact of a promotional discount with order
volume—a key metric for judging the effectiveness of a
promotional program. The company was also unable to tie
shipping costs directly to specific promotions, which was
significant since the timing of many promotions required
shipping products to stores on weekends, when shipping
and warehouse labor costs were higher.
When the company made the decision to revamp its
analytics efforts, the company’s CIO and CFO pulled together
a cross-functional team of managers from sales, marketing,
logistics, warehousing, and accounting who were responsible
for developing a comprehensive picture of the required BI
functionality—which ranged from simple, canned reports to
complex, ad hoc data analysis tools. Working to understand
each department’s needs built credibility for the project team
and helped them choose the solution that would be most
effective across the company, which they did after evaluating
17 different options.
The team selected Birst, a cloud-based, self-service BI
solution that offers an end to data silos with what it refers to
as “local execution with global governance.” Because the
project team understood that a centrally managed data source
was critical to ensuring consistent user-generated data and
analysis across the company, they also opted to implement a
data warehouse at the same time Birst was rolled out to
employees.
According to John Gordos, Sunny Delight’s associate
director of application development, Birst provides Sunny
Delight with a single, networked source of data, which
employees at all levels can access quickly and easily,
regardless of where they work. Birst’s data governance
features mean that Sunny Delight’s IS team maintains final
control over all data, while the user-friendly interface, which
is the same whether users are accessing data on a PC, laptop,
or smartphone, makes it easy for nontechnical users to access
and customize the system’s departmental dashboards.
With the data from the new system, Sunny Delight was
able to create a more efficient production schedule that
allowed it to cut back on production, decrease inventory
levels, and reduce plant overtime costs by 90 percent—all
without impacting order fulfillment. And with a clearer
picture of overall costs, the sales and distribution teams
worked together to revise shipping schedules, resulting in a
7 percent drop in the transportation costs tied to
promotions.
According to Gordos, “Birst helps [Sunny Delight]
employees to think fast because they no longer have to
worry about building and aggregating the data. They just
get the data, and then they think about it—instead of
accumulating it.”
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Is it surprising to you that a relatively small company
like Sunny Delight could end up with so many differ-
ent analytics tools? How might the fact that Sunny
Delight has changed ownership multiple times have
impacted the number and variety of BI tools being
used?
2. What are some of the trade-offs of a move to an
enterprise-level analytics solution for individual end
users who might have grown accustomed to working
with their own customized solutions for generating
data?
3. According to a recent report by Gartner, most busi-
ness users will have access to some sort of self-
service BI tool within the next few years; however,
Gartner estimates that less than 10 percent of com-
panies will have sufficient data governance practices
in place to prevent data inconsistencies across the
organization. Why do you think so many companies
continue to invest in new analytics tools without
implementing governance programs that ensure data
consistency?
SOURCES: “Sunny Delight Beverages Co,” Sunny Delight Beverages, Co.,
ww2.sunnyd.com/company/overview.shtml, accessed March 16, 2016;
Boulton, Clint, “How Sunny Delight Juices up Sales with Cloud-Based
Analytics,” CIO, September 14, 2015, www.cio.com/article/2983624
/business-analytics/how-sunny-delight-juices-up-sales-with-cloud-based
-analytics.html; “Birst Customer Testimonial: John Gordos - Associate
Director, Application Development,” YouTube video, posted by BirstBI,
August 14, 2014, www.youtube.com/watch?v=d3AjCIzWO5Y; “SunnyD
Case Study,” Birst, February 1, 2016, www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct
=j&q=&esrc=s&source=Web&cd=4&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwi
nieHr78XLAhXFwj4KHa-5CzMQFggtMAM&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww
.birst.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2016%2F02%2FBirst
_CaseStudy_SunnyD_NetworkedBI.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFwbr-mGBWeu5zU
mu_k40JAPOO_Mw&bvm=bv.116954456,d.amc; “Birst Sunny D Testi-
monial,” YouTube video, posted by BirstBI, October 9, 2015, www
.youtube.com/watch?v=tEuHH4IGHLU; Roberts, Shawn, “How Analytics
Saved Sunny Delight $1M,” CIO Insight, October 14, 2015, www
.cioinsight.com/it-strategy/big-data/how-analytics-saved-sunny-delight
-1m.html; “Networked BI,” Birst, www.birst.com/product, accessed
March 16, 2016.
Notes
1. “Helse Vest,” Microsoft, February 6, 2014, https://custo
mers.microsoft.com/Pages/CustomerStory.aspx?
recid=2223.
2. “MetLife Auto & Home Puts Brakes on Fraud with CSC’s
Fraud Evaluator,” CSC, www.csc.com/p_and_c_genera
l_insurance/success_stories/45406-metlife_auto_and_ho
406 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

me_puts_brakes_on_fraud_with_csc_s_fraud_evaluator,
accessed January 8, 2016.
3. “Getting Started with Analytics: Kroger Uses Simulation
Optimization to Improve Pharmacy Inventory Manage-
ment,” INFORMS, www.informs.org/Sites/Getting
-Started-With-Analytics/Analytics-Success-Stories/Case
-Studies/Kroger, accessed January 8, 2016.
4. “Getting Started with Analytics: DaimlerChrysler: Using a
Decision Support System for Promotional Pricing at the
Major Auto Manufacturer, INFORMS, www.informs.org
/Sites/Getting-Started-With-Analytics/Analytics-Success
-Stories/Case-Studies/DaimlerChrysler, accessed January
8, 2016.
5. “Getting Started with Analytics: Optimizing Chevron’s
Refineries,” INFORMS, https://www.informs.org/Sites
/Getting-Started-With-Analytics/Analytics-Success-Stories
/Case-Studies/Chevron, accessed January 8, 2016.
6. “Getting Started with Analytics: Coca-Cola Enterprises:
Optimizing Product Delivery of 42 Billon Soft Drinks a
Year,” INFORMS, www.informs.org/Sites/Getting
-Started-With-Analytics/Analytics-Success-Stories/Case
-Studies/Coca-Cola-Enterprises, accessed January 8,
2016.
7. Violino, Bob, “The Hottest Jobs in IT: Training Tomor-
row’s Data Scientists,” Forbes, June 26, 2014, www.for
bes.com/sites/emc/2014/06/26/the-hottest-jobs-in-it-train
ing-tomorrows-data-scientists/#131733cd4b63.
8. “Argosy Hits the Jackpot with OpenText and Teradata,”
Open Text, http://connectivity.opentext.com/resource
-centre/success-stories/Success_Story_Argosy_Hits_the
_ Jackpot_with_OTIC_and_Teradata.pdf.pdf, accessed
January 19, 2015.
9. “UK Hospital Sees Cloud-Based BI Service as a Tool to
Boost Clinical Outcomes and Efficiency,” Microsoft,
http://blogs.msdn.com/b/powerbi/archive/2014/04/16
/uk-hospital-sees-cloud-based-bi-service-as-a-tool-to
-boost-clinical-outcomes-and-efficiency.aspx, accessed
February 8, 2015.
10. “Who We Are,” FFF Enterprises, www.fffenterprises.com
/company/who-we-are.html, accessed January 20, 2014.
11. “At FFF Enterprises Collaboration Is Key to Success with
QlikView,” Qlik, www.qlik.com/us/explore/customers
/customer-listing/f/fff-enterprises, accessed January 20,
2015.
12. “Adviso and Technologia Use the Power of Multi-
Channel Funnels to Discover the True Paths to Conver-
sion,” Google Analytics, https://static.googleusercontent
.com/media/www.google.com/en/us/analytics/customers
/pdfs/technologia.pdf, accessed January 25, 2016.
13. “Starbucks Coffee Company Delivers Daily, Actionable
Information to Store Managers, Improves Business
Insight with High Performance Data Warehouse,” Ora-
cle, www.oracle.com/us/corporate/customers/customer
search/starbucks-coffee-co-1-exadata-ss-1907993.html,
accessed January 20, 2014.
14. Misson, Chris, “AQUARIUS WebPortal—a Flash Flooding
Emergency Management Success Story,” Hydrology Cor-
ner Blog, October 21, 2014, http://aquaticinformatics
.com/blog/aquarius-webportal-flash-flooding-emergency
-management.
15. Piatetsky, Gregory, “CRISP-DM, Still the Top Methodol-
ogy for Analytics, Data Mining, or Data Science Projects,”
KDNuggets, October 28, 2014, www.kdnuggets.com
/2014/10/crisp-dm-top-methodology-analytics-data-min
ing-data-science-projects.html.
16. “Data Mining Reveals the Surprising Factors behind
Successful Movies,” MIT Technology Review, June 22,
2015, www.technologyreview.com/view/538701/data
-mining-reveals-the-surprising-factors-behind-successful
-movies.
17. McNulty, Eileen, “HP Rolls Out BI and Analytics Soft-
ware Bundle,” dataconomy, June 10, 2014, http://datac
onomy.com/hp-rolls-bi-analytics-software-bundle.
18. “Cognos Business Intelligence: Coming Soon to the
Cloud,” IBM, www-03.ibm.com/software/products/en
/business-intelligence, accessed January 19, 2015.
19. “Business Intelligence for Everyone,” Information
Builders, www.informationbuilders.com/products/webfo
cus, accessed January 19, 2015.
20. Lardinois, Frederic, “Microsoft’s Power BI for Office 365
Comes out of Preview, Simplifies Data Analysis and
Visualizations,” Tech Crunch, February 10, 2014, http://
techcrunch.com/2014/02/10/microsofts-power-bi-for
-office-365-comes-out-of-preview-simplifies-data-analy
sis-and-visualizations.
21. “Oracle Business Intelligence,” Oracle, www.oracle.com
/technetwork/middleware/index-084205.html, accessed
January 19, 2015.
22. Rouse, Margaret, “Oracle Hyperion,” TechTarget, http://
searchfinancialapplications.techtarget.com/definition
/Oracle-Hyperion, accessed January 19, 2015.
23. “SAS Enterprise BI Server,” SAS, www.sas.com/en_us
/software/business-intelligence/enterprise-bi-server.html,
accessed January 30, 2015.
24. Rouse, Margaret, “SAP Business Objects BI,” TechTarget,
http://searchsap.techtarget.com/definition/SAP-Busines
sObjects-BI, accessed January 19, 2015.
25. Ferranti, Marc, “IBM’s Watson Analytics Offers New Data
Discovery Tools for Everyday Business Users,” PC
World, October 13, 2015, www.pcworld.com/article
/2992124/ibms-watson-analytics-offers-new-data-discov
ery-tools-for-everyday-business-users.html.
26. Dwoskin, Elizabeth, “How New York’s Fire Department
Uses Data Mining,” Digits, January 24, 2014, http://blogs
.wsj.com/digits/2014/01/24/how-new-yorks-fire-depart
ment-uses-data-mining.
CHAPTER 9 • Business Intelligence and Analytics 407
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
10
Knowledge Management and
Specialized Information
Systems
docstockmedia/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• Watson, a supercomputer developed by IBM with artifi-
cial intelligence capabilities, was able to soundly defeat
two prior champions of the popular TV game show,
Jeopardy! Now a cloud-based Watson system is being
used by doctors to develop treatment options for a wide
range of diseases.
• Some experts have predicted that every home will have
a robot of some sort by 2025. One area of particular
interest is the use of robots as companions and care-
givers for people who are sick, elderly, or physically
challenged.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• Knowledge management allows organizations to
share knowledge and experience among its
workers.
• Discuss the relationships between data, informa-
tion, and knowledge.
• Identify the benefits associated with a sound
knowledge management program.
• List some of the tools and techniques used in
knowledge management.
• Artificial intelligence systems form a broad and
diverse set of systems that can replicate human
decision making for certain types of well-defined
problems.
• Define the term "artificial intelligence" and state
the objective of developing artificial intelligence
systems.
• List the characteristics of intelligent behavior and
compare the performance of natural and artificial
intelligence systems for each of these
characteristics.
• Identify the major components of the artificial
intelligence field and provide one example of
each type of system.
• Multimedia and virtual reality systems can
reshape the interface between people and infor-
mation technology by offering new ways to com-
municate information, visualize processes, and
express ideas creatively.
• Discuss the use of multimedia in a business
setting.
• Define the terms “virtual reality” and “augmented
reality” and provide three examples of these
applications.
• Specialized systems can help organizations and
individuals achieve their goals.
• Discuss examples of specialized systems for
organizational and individual use.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Knowledge Management and
Specialized Information Systems?
Knowledge management and specialized information systems are used in almost every industry. As a
manager, you might use a knowledge management system to obtain advice on how to approach a
problem that others in your organization have already encountered. As an executive at an automotive
company, you might oversee robots that attach windshields to cars or paint body panels. As a stock
trader, you might use a special system called a neural network to uncover patterns to make investment
decisions. As a new car sales manager you might incorporate virtual reality into a company Web site to
show potential customers the features of your various models. As a member of the military, you might
use computer simulation as a training tool to prepare you for combat. As an employee of a petroleum
company, you might use an expert system to determine where to drill for oil and gas. This chapter
provides many additional examples of these types of specialized information systems. Learning about
these systems will help you discover new ways to use information systems in your day-to-day work.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• What are the many uses of information systems designed to collect knowledge and provide
expertise?
• Can specialized information systems and devices provide expertise superior to that which can be
obtained through human effort?
This chapter identifies the challenges associated with knowledge manage-
ment, provides guidance to overcome these challenges, presents best practices
for selling and implementing a successful knowledge management project,
and outlines various technologies that support knowledge management. We
begin with a definition of knowledge management and identify several
knowledge management applications and their associated benefits.
What Is Knowledge Management?
Knowledge management (KM) comprises a range of practices concerned
with increasing awareness, fostering learning, speeding collaboration and
innovation, and exchanging insights. Knowledge management is used by
organizations to enable individuals, teams, and entire organizations to collec-
tively and systematically create, share, and apply knowledge in order to
achieve their objectives. Globalization, the expansion of the services sector,
and the emergence of new information technologies have caused many orga-
nizations to establish KM programs in their IT or human resource manage-
ment departments. The goal is to improve the creation, retention, sharing,
and reuse of knowledge. As already discussed, a knowledge management sys-
tem is an organized collection of people, procedures, software, databases, and
devices that creates, captures, refines, stores, manages, and disseminates
knowledge, as shown in Figure 10.1.
An organization’s knowledge assets often are classified as either explicit
or tacit (see Table 10.1). Explicit knowledge is knowledge that is documen-
ted, stored, and codified—such as standard procedures, product formulas,
customer contact lists, market research results, and patents. Tacit knowledge
is the know-how that someone has developed as a result of personal experi-
ence; it involves intangible factors such as beliefs, perspective, and a value
system. Examples include how to ride a bike, the decision-making process
used by an experienced coach to make adjustments when her team is down
at halftime of a big game, a physician’s technique for diagnosing a rare illness
and prescribing a course of treatment, and an engineer’s approach to cutting
knowledge management (KM):
A range of practices concerned with
increasing awareness, fostering learn-
ing, speeding collaboration and inno-
vation, and exchanging insights.
explicit knowledge: Knowledge
that is documented, stored, and
codified—such as standard proce-
dures, product formulas, customer
contact lists, market research results,
and patents.
tacit knowledge: The know-how
that someone has developed as a
result of personal experience; it
involves intangible factors such as
beliefs, perspective, and a value
system.
410 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

costs for a project that is over budget. This knowledge cannot be documented
easily; yet, tacit knowledge is key to high performance and competitive
advantage because it’s difficult for others to copy.
Much of the tacit knowledge that people carry with them is extremely
useful but cannot be shared with others easily. This means that new employ-
ees might spend weeks, months, or even years learning things on their own
that more experienced coworkers might have been able to convey to them.
In some cases, these nuggets of valuable knowledge are lost forever when
experienced employees retire, and others never learn them.
A major goal of knowledge management is to somehow capture and doc-
ument the valuable work-related tacit knowledge of others and to turn it into
explicit knowledge that can be shared with others. This is much easier said
than done, however. Over time, experts develop their own processes for their
areas of expertise. Their processes become second nature and are so internal-
ized that they are sometimes unable to write down step-by-step instructions to
document the processes.
Two
processes
are
frequently
used
to
capture
tacit
knowledge—
shadowing and joint problem solving. Shadowing involves a novice observ-
ing an expert executing her job to learn how she performs. This technique is
often used in the medical field to help young interns learn from experienced
physicians. With joint problem solving, the novice and the expert work side
by side to solve a problem so that the expert’s approach is slowly revealed to
the observant novice. Thus a plumber trainee will work with a master
plumber to learn the trade.
FIGURE 10.1
Knowledge management
processes
Knowledge management comprises
a number of practices.
Source: From Reynolds, Information Tech-
nology for Managers, 2E. © 2016 Cengage
Learning.
Create
Disseminate
Refine
Store
Manage
Capture
Knowledge
base
TABLE 10.1 Explicit and tacit knowledge
Asset Type
Description
Examples
Explicit knowledge
Knowledge that is documented,
stored, and codified
Customer lists, product data, price lists, a database
for telemarketing and direct mail, patents, best
practices, standard procedures, and market
research results
Tacit knowledge
Personal knowledge is not
documented but embedded
in individual experience
Expertise and skills unique to individual employ-
ees, such as how to close a sale or troubleshoot a
complex piece of equipment
shadowing: A process used to cap-
ture tacit knowledge that involves a
novice observing an expert executing
her job to learn how she performs.
joint problem solving: A process
used to capture tacit knowledge where
the novice and the expert work side by
side to solve a problem so that the
expert’s approach is slowly revealed to
the observant novice.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 411
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The next section discusses how KM is used in organizations and illustrates
how these applications lead to real business benefits.
Knowledge Management Applications and Associated Benefits
Organizations employ KM to foster innovation, leverage the expertise of people
across the organization, and capture the expertise of key individuals before
they retire. Examples of knowledge management efforts that led to these results
and their associated benefits are discussed in the following sections.
Foster Innovation by Encouraging the Free Flow of Ideas
Organizations must continuously innovate to evolve, grow, and prosper.
Organizations that fail to innovate will soon fall behind their competition.
Many organizations implement knowledge management projects to foster
innovation by encouraging the free flow of ideas among employees, contrac-
tors, suppliers, and other business partners. Such collaboration can lead to
the discovery of a wealth of new opportunities, which, after evaluation and
testing, may lead to an increase in revenue, a decrease in costs, or the crea-
tion of new products and services.
TMW Systems, a provider of logistics operations and fleet management
systems, has experienced rapid growth over the past several years. The com-
pany now has more than 700 employees in its Cleveland headquarters and in
satellite offices across North America.1 As the company grew, it became more
difficult to ensure that all employees had access to the most current knowl-
edge available within the company because most information was shared via
email or shared network drives. To ensure that its base of institutional knowl-
edge was being preserved and to encourage collaboration and innovation
across all of its offices, TMW implemented a knowledge management system
with a strong social learning feature, which places an emphasis on decentra-
lized information sharing. The system, which is part of an intentional cultural
shift at TMW toward a more open and collaborative working environment,
allows employees to easily share new ideas, expertise, and best practices with
other employees no matter where they are based.2
Leverage the Expertise of People across the Organization
It is critical that an organization enables its employees to share and build on
one another’s experience and expertise. In this manner, new employees or
employees moving into new positions are able to get up to speed more
quickly. Workers can share thoughts and experiences about what works well
and what does not, thus preventing new employees from repeating some of
the mistakes of others. Employees facing new (to them) challenges can get
help from coworkers in other parts of the organization whom they have never
even met to avoid a costly and time-consuming “reinvention of the wheel.” All
of this enables employees to deliver valuable results more quickly, improve
their productivity, and get products and new ideas to market faster.
White & Case, an international law firm headquartered in New York City,
represents well-known organizations around the world through its offices in
more than 20 countries in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, the Middle East,
and North America. The firm’s employees have diverse backgrounds and
speak more than 60 different languages.3 One strength of the firm is that the
lawyers truly operate as a team by constantly sharing know-how, experience,
and market and client information. Thus, a client anywhere in the world
receives the full benefit of White & Case’s global knowledge. The firm’s knowl-
edge management system pulls relevant information from the firm’s document
management, CRM, case management, and billing and financial management
systems as well as from lawyers’ work histories to create a context for all this
information. The system enables lawyers to find all relevant knowledge within
412 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the firm about a case or subject, often within a matter of minutes. As a result of
its ability to leverage its global knowledge, White & Case has been able to win
new business, such as that of a major manufacturing company that approached
the firm’s New York office to find out if it had expertise in privatizing an Eastern
European company. Using the enterprise search software, an attorney in New
York quickly determined that the company had experience in this area and that
the best lawyer for the job was working out of the firm’s Germany office.4
Capture the Expertise of Key Individuals before They Retire
In the United States, 3 to 4 million employees will retire each year for the next
20 years or so. Add to that a 5 to 7 percent employee turnover as workers move
to different companies, and it is clear that organizations are facing a tremendous
challenge in trying to avoid the loss of valuable experience and expertise. Many
organizations are using knowledge management to capture this valuable exper-
tise before it simply walks out the door and is lost forever. The permanent loss
of expertise related to the core operations of an organization can result in a sig-
nificant loss of productivity and a decrease in the quality of service over time.
The state of New Hampshire has developed a knowledge management
and transfer model to prevent critical knowledge loss as state employees
retire. The process begins by identifying what critical tasks the individual per-
forms and assessing whether others can perform these tasks. To do this, the
employee is asked to answer questions such as the following:
●
If you left your position today, what wouldn’t get done because no one
else knows how to do it?
●
How important is this work? What is the impact of it not getting done?
●
If this work is important, what resources exist to help others learn this
task?
●
If this work is important, how should we plan to address this knowledge
gap? Who will learn this? How and when?
Following this discussion, the employee and his manager define appropri-
ate methods to transfer any critical knowledge. This could include transferring
the knowledge to others, creating job aids, providing on-the-job training for a
replacement, and so on.5
Best Practices for Selling and Implementing a KM Project
Establishing a successful KM program is challenging, but most of the chal-
lenges involved have nothing to do with the technologies or vendors
employed. Instead they are challenges associated with human nature and the
manner in which people are accustomed to working together. A set of best
practices for selling and implementing a KM project are summarized in
Figure 10.2 and are discussed in the following sections.
Connect KM to
goals and objectives
Start with small
pilot and enthusiastic
participants
Identify valuable
tacit knowledge
Get employee
buy in
FIGURE 10.2
Steps in selling and implementing a knowledge management project
The key challenges have to do with human nature and how people work together.
Source: From Reynolds, Information Technology for Managers, 2E. © 2016 Cengage Learning.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 413
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Connect the KM Effort to Organizational Goals and Objectives
When starting a KM effort, just as with any other project, you must clearly
define how that effort will support specific organizational goals and objec-
tives, such as increasing revenue, reducing costs, improving customer service,
or speeding up the time to bring a product to market. Doing so will help you
sell the project to others and elicit their support and enthusiasm; it will also
help you determine if the project is worthwhile before the organization com-
mits resources to it. Although many people may intuitively believe that shar-
ing knowledge and best practices is a worthy idea, there must be an
underlying business reason to do so. The fundamental business case for
implementing knowledge management must be clearly defined.
Start with a Small Pilot Involving Enthusiasts
Containing the scope of a project to impact only a small part of the organiza-
tion and a few employees is definitely less risky than trying to take on a proj-
ect very large in scope. With a small-scale project, you have more control over
the outcome, and if the outcome is not successful, the organization will not be
seriously impacted. Indeed, failure on a small scale can be considered a learn-
ing experience on which to build future KM efforts. In addition, obtaining the
resources (people, dollars, etc.) for a series of small, successful projects is typ-
ically much easier than getting large amounts of resources for a major
organization-wide project.
Furthermore, defining a pilot project to address the business needs of a
group of people who are somewhat informed about KM and are enthusiastic
about its potential can greatly improve the odds of success. Targeting such a
group of users reduces the problem of trying to overcome skepticism and
unwillingness to change, which have doomed many a project. Also, such a
group of users, once the pilot has demonstrated some degree of success, can
serve as strong advocates who communicate the positive business benefits of
KM to others.
Identify Valuable Tacit Knowledge
Not all tacit knowledge is equally valuable, and priorities must be set in terms
of what knowledge to go after. The intent of a KM program is to identify, cap-
ture, and disseminate knowledge gems from a sea of information. Within the
scope of the initial pilot project, an organization should identify and prioritize
the tacit knowledge it wants to include in its KM system.
As Toyota Financial Services (TFS) was preparing to move its North Amer-
ican headquarters from California to Texas, the company implemented a
cloud-based knowledge management system, with the goal of ensuring that
the important tacit knowledge of its employees was not lost during the transi-
tion. In the two-year lead-up to the move, TFS employees were encouraged to
use the platform to post questions and share expertise, allowing the company
to develop a repository of curated subject matter expertise that the company
will use to train new employees in Texas.6
Get Employees to Buy In
Managers must create a work culture that places a high value on tacit knowl-
edge and that strongly encourages people to share it. In a highly competitive
work environment, it can be especially difficult to get workers to surrender
their knowledge and experience as these traits make the employees more
valuable as individual contributors. For example, it would be extremely diffi-
cult to get a highly successful mutual fund manager to share her stock-
picking technique with other fund managers. Such sharing of information
would tend to put all fund managers on a similar level of performance and
would also tend to level the amount of their annual compensation.
414 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Some organizations believe that the most powerful incentive for experts
to share their knowledge is to receive public recognition from senior man-
agers and their peers. For example, some organizations provide recognition
by mentioning the accomplishments of contributors in a company email or
newsletter, or during a meeting. Other companies identify knowledge sharing
as a key expectation for all employees and even build this expectation into
the employees’ formal job performance reviews. Many organizations provide
incentives in a combination of ways—linking KM directly to job performance,
creating a work environment where sharing knowledge seems like a safe and
natural thing to do, and recognizing people who contribute.
Technologies That Support KM
We are living in a period of unprecedented change where the amount of
available knowledge is expanding rapidly. As a result, there is an increasing
need for knowledge to be quality filtered and distributed to people in a more
specific task relevant and timely manner. Technology is needed to acquire,
produce, store, distribute, integrate, and manage this knowledge. Organiza-
tions interested in piloting KM should be aware of the wide range of technol-
ogies that can support KM efforts. These include communities of practice,
organizational network analysis, a variety of Web 2.0 technologies, business
rules management systems, and enterprise search tools. These technologies
are discussed in the following sections.
Communities of Practice
A community of practice (CoP) is a group whose members share a common
set of goals and interests and regularly engage in sharing and learning as they
strive to meet those goals. A community of practice develops around topics
that are important to its members. Over time, a CoP typically develops
resources such as models, tools, documents, processes, and terminology that
represent the accumulated knowledge of the community. It is not uncommon
for a CoP to include members from many different organizations. CoP has
become associated with knowledge management because participation in a
CoP is one means of developing new knowledge, stimulating innovation, or
sharing existing tacit knowledge within an organization.
The origins and structures of CoPs vary widely. Some may start up and
organize of their own accord; in other cases, there may be some sort of orga-
nizational stimulus that leads to their creation. Members of an informal CoP
typically meet with little advanced planning or formality to discuss problems
of interest, share ideas, and provide advice and counsel to one another. Mem-
bers of a more formal CoP meet on a regularly scheduled basis with a
planned agenda and identified speakers.
The General Services Administration (GSA) was established in 1949 to
streamline the administrative work of the federal government.7 The GSA’s
Office of Citizen Services and Innovative Technologies supports eight differ-
ent communities of practice that focus on topics such as crowdsourcing, citi-
zen science, and mobile government.8 Recently, the agency founded an
interagency CoP focused on improving the delivery of government services.
The Customer Experience Community of Practice (CX-COP), which has close
to 600 members from more than 140 federal, state, and local U.S. government
offices and agencies, provides government customer experience professionals
a hub where they can gather—both online and in person—to ask questions,
share best practices, and collaborate.9,10
Organizational Network Analysis
Organizational network analysis (ONA) is a technique used for document-
ing and measuring flows of information among individuals, workgroups,
community of practice (CoP): A
group whose members share a com-
mon set of goals and interests and
regularly engage in sharing and learn-
ing as they strive to meet those goals.
organizational network analy-
sis (ONA): A technique used for
documenting and measuring flows of
information among individuals, work-
groups, organizations, computers, Web
sites, and other information sources.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 415
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

organizations, computers, Web sites, and other information sources (see
Figure 10.3). Each node in the diagram represents a knowledge source; each
link represents a flow of information between two nodes. Many software
tools support organizational network analysis, including Cytoscape, Gephi,
GraphChi, NetDraw, NetMiner, NetworkX, and UCINET.
In analyzing social media communications from sources such as text, video,
and chat as well as “likes” and “shares,” many experts agree that the most sig-
nificant data isn’t the content itself, but rather the metadata that connects vari-
ous pieces of content to form a complete picture. Metadata is data that
describes other data. For instance, metadata about social media use could relate
to properties of the message (e.g., whether the message is comical, sarcastic,
genuine, or phony) and of the author (e.g., sex, age, interests, political view-
point, ideological beliefs, and degree of influence on the audience). The meta-
data enables analysts to make judgments about how to interpret and value the
content of the message. Without the important metadata, it is not possible to
know the value of the communications and how to take effective action.11
ONA has many knowledge management applications, ranging from map-
ping knowledge flows and identifying knowledge gaps within organizations
to helping establish collaborative networks. ONA provides a clear picture of
how geographically dispersed employees and organizational units collaborate
(or don’t collaborate). Organizations frequently employ ONA as part of a
larger organizational network analysis to identify subject experts and then set
up mechanisms (e.g., communities of practice) to facilitate the passing of
knowledge from those experts to colleagues. Software programs that track
email and other kinds of electronic communications may be used to identify
in-house experts.
Westwood Professional Services, Inc., a Minnesota-based engineering and
survey firm, recently conducted an organizational network analysis of one of
its business units, which had been experiencing extensive change due to
rapid growth. Through the analysis, the company was able to determine
which employees within the business unit were connecting most frequently
and the extent to which members of different subteams were collaborating.
FIGURE 10.3
Organizational network
analysis
Each node in the diagram represents
a knowledge source; each link
represents a flow of information
between two nodes.
Steve 
Alan 
Johnny 
Carson 
Laura 
George 
Carlin 
Rodney 
Bob 
Hope 
Frank 
Jim 
Sara 
Jane 
Stevie 
Emma 
Alice 
Susan 
Aaron 
metadata: Data that describes other
data.
416 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The company used the results of the analysis to develop targeted team-
building initiatives and reevaluate its organizational structures to ensure they
continued to support information sharing and creative problem solving—both
high priorities for the company.12
Web 2.0 Technologies
“Web 2.0” is a term describing changes in technology and Web site design to
enhance information sharing, collaboration, and functionality on the Web.
Major corporations have integrated Web 2.0 technologies such as blogs, for-
ums, podcasts, RSS newsfeeds, and wikis to support knowledge management
to improve collaboration, encourage knowledge sharing, and build a corpo-
rate memory. For example, many organizations are using Web 2.0 technolo-
gies such as podcasts and wikis to capture the knowledge of longtime
employees, provide answers to cover frequently asked questions, and save
time and effort in training new hires.
Business Rules Management Systems
Change is occurring all the time and at a faster and faster pace—changes in
economic conditions, new government and industry rules and regulations,
new competitors, product improvements, new pricing and promotion strate-
gies, and on and on. Organizations must be able to react to these changes
quickly to remain competitive. The decision logic of the operational systems
that support the organization—systems such as order processing, pricing,
inventory control, and customer relationship management (CRM)—must con-
tinually be modified to reflect these business changes. Decision logic, also
called business rules, includes policies, requirements, and conditional state-
ments that govern how the systems work.
The traditional method of modifying the decision logic of information sys-
tems involves heavy interaction between business users and IT analysts work-
ing together over a period of weeks, or even months, to define new systems
requirements and then to design, implement, and test the new decision logic.
Unfortunately, this approach to handling system changes is often too slow,
and in some cases, results in incorrect system changes.
A business rule management system (BRMS) is software used to
define, execute, monitor, and maintain the decision logic that is used by the
operational systems and processes that run the organization. A BRMS enables
business users to define, deploy, monitor, and maintain organizational poli-
cies and the decisions flowing from those policies—such as claim approvals,
credit approvals, cross-sell offer selection, and eligibility determinations—
without requiring involvement from IT resources. This process avoids a
potential
bottleneck
and
lengthy
delays
in
implementing
changes
and
improves the accuracy of the changes.
BRMS components include a business rule engine that determines which
rules need to be executed and in what order. Other BRMS components
include an enterprise rules repository for storing all rules, software to manage
the various versions of rules as they are modified, and additional software for
reporting and multiplatform deployment. Thus, a BRMS can become a reposi-
tory of important knowledge and decision-making processes that includes the
learnings and experiences of experts in the field. The creation and mainte-
nance of a BRMS can become an important part of an organization’s knowl-
edge management program.
BRMS is increasingly used to manage the changes in decision logic in
applications that support credit applications, underwriting, complex order
processing, and difficult scheduling. The use of BRMS leads to faster and
more accurate implementation of necessary changes to organizations’ policies
and procedures. Table 10.2 lists several business rule management software
vendors and their products.
business rule management
system (BRMS): Software used to
define, execute, monitor, and maintain
the decision logic that is used by the
operational systems and processes
that run the organization.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 417
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HanseMerkur Krankenversicherung is a German health insurance com-
pany. The firm developed a BRMS to replace the time-consuming manual pro-
cesses
required
to
confirm
insurance
coverage
with
an
automatic
reconciliation of the information extracted from invoices (contract type, ser-
vice submitted, insured party, billing amount, etc.). Automation of this and
many of its other billing processes enabled HanseMerkur to maintain its level
of service with no increase in staff even though the number of customers tri-
pled from 366,000 to 1.2 million over the course of six years.13
Adobe is a digital marketing and digital media solutions provider whose
products include Adobe Creative Cloud, a cloud-based subscription service;
Adobe Digital Publishing Suite, which enables users to create, distribute, and
optimize content for tablets; Adobe Photoshop for working with digital
images; and Adobe Acrobat, which supports communication and collaboration
on documents and other content both inside and outside an organization.14
Maintaining the rules needed for effective and efficient territory assignment
and sales-lead distribution was a significant challenge for Adobe given its
size, number of customers, personnel turnover, and the geographic distribu-
tion of its sales force and product lines. To enable the company to react
quickly to changes within its sales organization, Adobe implemented a BRMS
system that includes tools that allow for the routine shifting of assignments
due to personnel changes as well as more complex annual go-to-market terri-
tory changes.15
DBS (formerly known as the Development Bank of Singapore) is a lead-
ing financial services group in Asia and a leading consumer bank in Singapore
and Hong Kong. The bank has a growing presence across Asia, and it serves
more than 4 million customers, including 1 million retail customers through
250 branches.16 Assessing the risk and creditworthiness of individuals and
businesses is a critical activity for DBS. However, until recently, this was an
error-prone, labor-intensive process built around the completion of a ques-
tionnaire during an interview between a relationship manager and an appli-
cant. During the interview, applicants could provide any answer they chose
as the process was not linked directly to any data. To revamp its inadequate
credit reporting system, DBS implemented a BRMS that relies on verifiable
customer and credit data rather than on unsubstantiated information supplied
by the applicant. The BRMS supports eight different scoring models, each
with hundreds of rules and hundreds of factors that go into a score. The rules
are derived from a combination of regulatory sources, such as the Monetary
Authority of Singapore, and statistical analysis performed by the bank’s credit
portfolio analytics department. DBS has greatly improved its credit model
with a resulting reduction in risk. As a result, the amount of financial reserves
required to cover unanticipated losses has been reduced. The BRMS also
allows the bank to quickly adapt the rules and factors inherent in its credit
TABLE 10.2 Business rule management software
Software Manufacturer
Product
Appian Corporation
Business Process Management (BPM) Software Suite
Bosch Software Innovations
inubit BPM
CA Aion
Business Rules Expert
IBM
Operational Decision Manager
Open Source
Process Maker BPM
Oracle
Business Rules
Pegasystems
Pega Business Rules Platform
Progress
Corticon
418 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

reporting process to respond to new opportunities and changing business
conditions.17
Enterprise Search Software
Enterprise search is the application of search technology to find information
within an organization. Enterprise search software matches a user’s query to
many sources of information in an attempt to identify the most important con-
tent and the most reliable and relevant source.
Enterprise search software indexes documents from a variety of sources—
such as corporate databases, departmental files, email, corporate wikis, and
document repositories. When a search is executed, the software uses the
index to present a list of relevance-ranked documents from these various
sources. The software must be capable of implementing access controls so
users are restricted to viewing only documents to which they have been
granted access. Enterprise search software may also allow employees to move
selected information to a new storage repository and apply controls to ensure
that the files cannot be changed or deleted. Table 10.3 lists a number of enter-
prise search products.18
Members of IT and human resources organizations may use enterprise
search software to enforce corporate guidelines on the storage of confidential
data on laptops that leave the office, and governance officials may use it to
ensure that all guidelines for the storage of information are being followed.
Founded in the 1890s as a printing press manufacturer, Harris Corpora-
tion now generates $1 billion in annual revenue through the sale of communi-
cation services and systems to clients in a wide range of industries, including
avionics, defense, energy, government, health care, and transportation.19
Harris employs more than 15,000 people across 125 countries, including
3,000
engineers
in
the
Government
Communications
Systems
Division
(GCSD). The engineers in this division work in 12 different offices and need
a more effective way to access existing information assets in a variety of
repositories—all while maintaining very high levels of security. GCSD imple-
mented a unified enterprise search platform that allows engineers to search
various company databases, file shares, SharePoint sites, and the company
intranet using one search engine. Access permissions are granted through the
system on a “need-to-know” basis. The search engine indexes document files
as well as videos, which the company uses extensively to record meetings
and training sessions. The software has cut down on the time engineers
spend looking for relevant information; enabled faster, incremental innovation
that is built on knowledge accrued through previous projects; and increased
collaboration among employees in different offices.20
Enterprise search software can also be used to support Web site visitor
searches. It is critical that such software returns meaningful results to ensure
TABLE 10.3 Enterprise search solutions
Software Manufacturer
Software Product
Attivio
Active Intelligence Engine
BA Insight
Knowledge Integration Platform
Coveo
Enterprise Search & Relevance
Dassault Systemes
Exalead CloudView
Google
Google Search Appliance
HP
HP Autonomy
Mark Logic Corporation
Mark Logic
enterprise search: The application
of search technology to find information
within an organization.
enterprise search software:
Software that matches a user’s query to
many sources of information in an
attempt to identify the most important
content and the most reliable and rele-
vant source.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 419
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
that visitors get search results that meet their needs, thus increasing the rate at
which Web site visitors convert to paying customers and are encouraged to
spend more time at your site.
Electronic discovery is another important application of enterprise search
software. Electronic discovery (e-discovery) refers to any process in which
electronic data is sought, located, secured, and searched with the intent of
using it as evidence in a civil or criminal legal case. The Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure governs the processes and requirements of parties in federal
civil suits and sets the rules regarding e-discovery. These rules compel civil
litigants to both preserve and produce electronic documents and data related
to a case, such as email, voice mail, texts, graphics, photographs, contents of
databases, spreadsheets, Web pages, and so on. “We can’t find it” is no lon-
ger an acceptable excuse for not producing information relevant to a
lawsuit.
Effective e-discovery software solutions preserve and destroy data based
on approved organizational policies through processes that cannot be altered
by unauthorized users. To be useful, this software must also allow users to
locate all of the information pertinent to a lawsuit quickly, with a minimum
amount of manual effort. Furthermore, the solution must work for all data
types across dissimilar data sources and systems and operate at a reasonable
cost. The legal departments of many organizations are collaborating with
their IT organization and technology vendors to identify and implement a
solution that meets these e-discovery requirements.
A recent development in the area of e-discovery is the use of “predictive
coding,” which involves the use of computer algorithms rather than a full
manual review to determine the relevance of electronic documents in a law-
suit. The algorithms are developed by having attorneys and other people
knowledgeable about the case documents review a subset of documents; the
results of that review are used to “teach” the software what to search for.21
Ideally, predictive coding would greatly reduce the costs and time required to
complete e-discovery in large-scale litigations. In practice, however, this pro-
cess can be another area of contention in a lawsuit. In Rio Tinto v. Vale, S.A.
et al., a much-watched case in which predictive coding was used, the parties
to the lawsuit spent months arguing over the protocols being used to develop
the coding algorithms.22
KM Experiment
You are a talent scout for a professional sports team. Over the years, the players
you have recommended have had outstanding performance records for your
team. Indeed, although you are only in your late thirties, you are frequently cited
as one of the top talent recruiters in the league.
You have read and reread the study guide on knowledge management your
general manager provided you two weeks ago. In addition to some basic defini-
tions and discussion of KM, it includes several examples of successful applications
of KM to the selection of top recruits for academic and athletic scholarships. Now
you are sitting in your hotel room staring at the email from the general manager.
He wants you to become the subject of a KM experiment for the team. The goal
is to train the other three talent scouts for the team in your approach.
Review Questions
1.
Do you think that shadowing or joint problem solving would be a more effec-
tive way to share your tacit knowledge with the other scouts? Why?
2.
Would the formation of a community of practice be an effective method for
sharing tacit knowledge among all the scouts? How might such a CoP
operate?
electronic discovery
(e-discovery): Any process in which
electronic data is sought, located,
secured, and searched with the intent
of using it as evidence in a civil or
criminal legal case.
420 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical Thinking Questions
1.
For years, you have competed against the other scouts to sign the most pro-
ductive new talent. How do you feel about being asked to share your insights
and expertise with the other scouts?
2.
What sort of bonus or incentive could management offer to make you strongly
motivated to participate in this experiment and make it a success?
Overview of Artificial Intelligence
At a Dartmouth College conference in 1956, John McCarthy proposed the use
of the term artificial intelligence (AI) to describe computers with the ability
to mimic or duplicate the functions of the human brain. A paper was pre-
sented at the conference proposing a study of AI based on the conjecture that
“every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can in principle
be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it.”23 Many
AI pioneers attended this first conference; a few predicted that computers
would be as “smart” as people by the 1960s. The prediction has not yet been
realized, but many applications of artificial intelligence can be seen today,
and research continues.
Watson is the first commercially available cognitive computing capability,
a computer capable of processing information like a human. As such, Watson
represents a new era in computing. The system, delivered through the cloud,
analyzes large volumes of data, understands complex questions posed in natu-
ral language, and proposes evidence-based answers. Watson continuously
learns, gaining in value and knowledge over time, from previous interactions.
Watson learns in three ways: by being taught by its users, by learning from
prior interactions, and by being presented with new information.24 An early
version of Watson was able to soundly defeat prior champions of the popular
TV game show, Jeopardy! The artificial intelligence computer can process
human speech, search its vast databases for possible responses, and reply in
a human voice. See Figure 10.4.
FIGURE 10.4
IBM Watson
IBM Watson is being used to
develop treatment options for cancer
patients based on the DNA of their
disease
Carolyn Cole/Getty Images
artificial intelligence: The ability
to mimic or duplicate the functions of
the human brain.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 421
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Now a cloud-based Watson system is being used by doctors to develop
treatment options for a wide range of diseases, including glioblastoma, an
aggressive brain cancer that kills over 13,000 people in the United States each
year. Watson will correlate data from the DNA associated with each glioblas-
toma patient’s disease to the latest findings from medical journals, new stud-
ies, medical images, and clinical records to develop a highly personalized
treatment regimen. The goal is for Watson to increase the number of patients
who can benefit from care options uniquely tailored to their disease’s DNA.
Watson will continually learn and improve as it deals with each new patient
scenario and new medical research becomes available.
Artificial Intelligence in Perspective
Computers were originally designed to perform simple mathematical opera-
tions, using fixed programmed rules and eventually operating at millions of
computations per second. When it comes to performing mathematical opera-
tions quickly and accurately, computers beat humans’ hands down. However,
computers still have trouble recognizing patterns, adapting to new situations,
and drawing conclusions when not provided complete information—all activi-
ties that humans can perform quite well. Artificial intelligence systems tackle
these sorts of problems. Artificial intelligence systems include the people,
procedures, hardware, software, data, and knowledge needed to develop
computer systems and machines that can simulate human intelligence pro-
cesses, including learning (the acquisition of information and rules for using
the information), reasoning (using rules to reach conclusions), and self-
correction (using the outcome from one scenario to improve its performance
on future scenarios).
AI is a complex and interdisciplinary field that involves several specialties,
including biology, computer science, linguistics, mathematics, neuroscience,
philosophy, and psychology. The study of AI systems causes one to ponder
philosophical issues such as the nature of the human mind and the ethics of
creating objects gifted with human-like intelligence. Today, artificial intelli-
gence systems are used in many industries and applications. Researchers,
scientists, and experts on how human beings think are often involved in
developing these systems.
Nature of Intelligence
From its earliest stages, the emphasis of much AI research has been on
developing machines with the ability to “learn” from experiences and apply
knowledge acquired from those experiences; to handle complex situations;
to solve problems when important information is missing; to determine
what is important and to react quickly and correctly to a new situation; to
understand visual images, process and manipulate symbols, and be creative
and imaginative; and to use heuristics—all of which together is considered
intelligent behavior.
The Turing Test, designed by Alan Turing, a British mathematician,
attempts to determine whether a computer can successfully impersonate a
human. Human judges are connected to the computer and to another human
via an instant messaging system and the only information flowing between the
contestants is text. The judges pose questions on any topic from the arts to zool-
ogy, even questions about personal history and social relationships. To pass the
test, the computer must communicate via this medium so competently that the
judges cannot tell the difference between the computer’s responses and the
human’s responses.25 No computer has yet passed the Turing Test, although
many computer scientists believe it may happen in the next few years.26 The
Loebner Prize is an annual competition in artificial intelligence that awards
prizes to the computer system designed to simulate an intelligent conversation
artificial intelligence system:
The people, procedures, hardware,
software, data, and knowledge needed
to develop computer systems and
machines that can simulate human
intelligence processes, including learn-
ing (the acquisition of information and
rules for using the information), rea-
soning (using rules to reach conclu-
sions), and self-correction (using the
outcome from one scenario to improve
its performance on future scenarios).
intelligent behavior: The ability to
learn from experiences and apply
knowledge acquired from those experi-
ences; to handle complex situations; to
solve problems when important infor-
mation is missing; to determine what is
important and to react quickly and cor-
rectly to a new situation; to understand
visual images, process and manipulate
symbols, and be creative and imagina-
tive; and to use heuristics.
422 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

that is considered by the judges to be the most humanlike. Although no one
has yet won the $100,000 top prize for passing the Turing Test, each year a
prize of $4,000 and a bronze medal is awarded for the computer that is con-
sidered by the judges to be the most humanlike.27
Some of the specific characteristics of intelligent behavior include the abil-
ity to do the following:
●
Learn from experience and apply the knowledge acquired from expe-
rience. Learning from past situations and events is a key component of
intelligent behavior and is a natural ability of humans, who learn by trial
and error. This ability, however, must be carefully programmed into a
computer system. Today, researchers are developing systems that can
“learn” from experience. The 20 Questions (20Q) Web site, www.20q.net
(see Figure 10.5), is an example of a system that learns.28 The Web site is
an artificial intelligence game that learns as people play.
●
Handle complex situations. In a business setting, top-level managers
and executives must handle a complex market, challenging competitors,
intricate government regulations, and a demanding workforce. Even
human experts make mistakes in dealing with these matters. Very careful
planning and elaborate computer programming are necessary to develop
systems that can handle complex situations.
●
Solve problems when important information is missing. An integral
part of decision making is dealing with uncertainty. Often, decisions must
be made with little or inaccurate information because obtaining complete
information is too costly or impossible. Today, AI systems can make
important calculations, comparisons, and decisions even when informa-
tion is missing.
●
Determine what is important. Knowing what is truly important is the
mark of a good decision maker. Developing programs and approaches to
allow computer systems and machines to identify important information is
not a simple task.
●
React quickly and correctly to a new situation. A small child, for exam-
ple, can look over an edge and know not to venture too close. The child
reacts quickly and correctly to a new situation. On the other hand, with-
out complex programming, computers do not have this ability.
FIGURE 10.5
The 20Q Web site
20Q is a game where users play the
popular game, 20 Questions, against
an artificial intelligence foe.
Source: www.20q.net
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 423
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Understand visual images. Interpreting visual images can be extremely
difficult, even for sophisticated computers. Moving through a room of
chairs, tables, and other objects can be trivial for people but extremely
complex for machines, robots, and computers. Such machines require an
extension of understanding visual images, called a perceptive system.
Having a perceptive system allows a machine to approximate the way a
person sees, hears, and feels objects.
●
Process and manipulate symbols. People see, manipulate, and process
symbols every day. Visual images provide a constant stream of information
to our brains. By contrast, computers have difficulty handling symbolic pro-
cessing and reasoning. Although computers excel at numerical calculations,
they aren’t as good at dealing with symbols and three-dimensional objects.
Recent developments in machine-vision hardware and software, however,
allow some computers to process and manipulate certain symbols.
●
Be creative and imaginative. Throughout history, some people have
turned difficult situations into advantages by being creative and imagina-
tive. For instance, when defective mints with holes in the middle arrived
at a candy factory, an enterprising entrepreneur decided to market these
new mints as LifeSavers instead of returning them to the manufacturer.
Ice cream cones were invented at the St. Louis World’s Fair when an
imaginative store owner decided to wrap ice cream with a waffle from his
grill for portability. Developing new products and services from an exist-
ing (perhaps negative) situation is a human characteristic. While software
has been developed to enable a computer to write short stories, few com-
puters can be imaginative or creative in this way.
●
Use heuristics. For some decisions, people use heuristics (rules of thumb
arising from experience) or even guesses. Some computer systems obtain
good solutions to complex problems (e.g., scheduling the flight crews for a
large airline) based on heuristics rather than trying to search for an optimal
solution, which might be technically difficult or too time consuming.
Brain-Computer Interface
Developing a link between the human brain and the computer is another excit-
ing aspect of artificial intelligence research. The idea behind a brain-computer
interface (BCI) is to directly connect the human brain to a computer so that
human thought can control the activities of the computer. One potential use of
BCI technology would be to give people without the ability to speak or move
(a condition called locked-in syndrome) the capability to communicate, control
a computer, and move artificial limbs. Honda Motors has developed a BCI sys-
tem that allows a person to complete certain operations, such as bending a
leg, with 90 percent accuracy. See Figure 10.6. The new system uses a special
helmet that can measure and transmit brain activity to a computer.
AI is a broad field that includes several specialty areas, such as expert sys-
tems, robotics, vision systems, natural language processing, learning systems,
and neural networks. See Figure 10.7. Many of these areas are related; advances
in one can occur simultaneously with or result in advances in others.
Expert Systems
An expert system consists of hardware and software that stores knowledge
and makes inferences, enabling a novice to perform at the level of an expert.
Like human experts, computerized expert systems use heuristics, or rules of
thumb, to arrive at conclusions or make suggestions. Since expert systems
can be difficult, expensive, and time consuming to develop, they should be
developed when there is a high potential payoff or when they have the poten-
tial to significantly reduce downside risk and the organization wants to cap-
ture and preserve irreplaceable human expertise.
perceptive system: A system that
approximates the way a person sees,
hears, and feels objects.
expert system: A system that con-
sists of hardware and software that
stores knowledge and makes infer-
ences, enabling a novice to perform at
the level of an expert.
424 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Components of Expert Systems
An expert system is made up of a collection of integrated and related compo-
nents, including a knowledge base, an inference engine, an explanation facil-
ity, a knowledge base acquisition facility, and a user interface. A diagram of a
typical expert system is shown in Figure 10.8.
As shown in the figure, the user interacts with the user interface, which
interacts with the inference engine. The inference engine interacts with the
FIGURE 10.6
Brain-machine interface
Honda Motors has developed a
brain-machine interface that mea-
sures electrical current and blood
flow change in the brain and uses
the data to control ASIMO, the
Honda robot.
YOSHIKAZU TSUNO/AFP/Getty Images
Natural language
processing
Neural networks
Vision
systems
Learning
systems
Robotics
Artificial
intelligence
Expert systems
FIGURE 10.7
Conceptual model of artificial intelligence
AI is a broad field that includes several specialty areas.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 425
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

other expert system components to provide expertise. This figure also shows
the inference engine coordinating the flow of knowledge to other components
of the expert system.
Knowledge Base
The knowledge base stores all relevant information, data,
rules, cases, and relationships that the expert system uses. As shown in
Figure 10.9, a knowledge base is a natural extension of a database and an
information and decision support system. A knowledge base must be devel-
oped for each unique expert system supplication. Rules and cases are fre-
quently used to create a knowledge base.
A rule is a conditional statement that links conditions to actions or out-
comes. In many instances, these rules are stored as IF-THEN statements,
which are rules that suggest certain conclusions. The FICO Blaze Advisor sys-
tem is a rules-based platform that allows business users to develop and test
rule-based decision applications used by clients for benefits eligibility determi-
nation, insurance underwriting, regulatory compliance monitoring, and per-
sonal and commercial lending—among other uses.29
A case-based system can also be used to develop a solution to a current
problem or situation. In such a system, each case typically contains a descrip-
tion of the problem, plus a solution and/or the outcome. The case-based solu-
tion process involves (1) finding cases stored in the knowledge base that are
similar to the problem or situation at hand, (2) reusing the case in an attempt
to solve the problem at hand, (3) revising the proposed solution if necessary,
and (4) retaining the new solution as part of a new case. A washing machine
repairman who fixes a washer recalling another washer that presented similar
FIGURE 10.8
Components of an expert
system
An expert system includes a knowl-
edge base, an inference engine, an
explanation facility, a knowledge
base acquisition facility, and a user
interface.
Knowledge
base
Knowledge
base
acquisition
facility
Inference
engine
Explanation
facility
Experts
User
User
interface
FIGURE 10.9
Relationships between data,
information, and knowledge
A knowledge base stores all relevant
information, data, rules, cases, and
relationships that an expert system
uses.
Database
raw
facts
Information and decision support
information
Knowledge base
patterns and
relationships
Increasing understanding
rule: A conditional statement that links
conditions to actions or outcomes.
IF-THEN statement: A rule that
suggests certain conclusions.
426 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

symptoms is using case-based reasoning, so is the lawyer who advocates a
particular outcome in a trial based on legal precedents.
Inference Engine
The main purpose of an inference engine is to seek infor-
mation and relationships from the knowledge base and to provide answers,
predictions, and suggestions similar to the way a human expert would. In
other words, the inference engine is the component that delivers the expert
advice. Consider the expert system that forecasts future sales for a product.
One approach is to start with a fact such as “The demand for the product
last month was 20,000 units.” The expert system searches for rules that con-
tain a reference to product demand. For example, “IF product demand is
over 15,000 units, THEN check the demand for competing products.” As a
result of this process, the expert system might use information on the
demand for competitive products. Next, after searching additional rules, the
expert system might use information on personal income or national infla-
tion rates. This process continues until the expert system can reach a conclu-
sion using the data supplied by the user and the rules that apply in the
knowledge base.
Explanation Facility
An important part of an expert system is the explanation
facility, which allows a user or decision maker to understand how the expert
system arrived at certain conclusions or results. A medical expert system, for
example, might reach the conclusion that a patient has a defective heart valve
given certain symptoms and the results of tests on the patient. The explana-
tion facility allows a doctor to find out the logic or rationale of the diagnosis
made by the expert system. The expert system, using the explanation facility,
can indicate all the facts and rules that were used in reaching the conclusion,
which the doctors can look at to determine whether the expert system is pro-
cessing the data and information correctly and logically.
Knowledge Acquisition Facility
A challenging aspect of developing a useful
expert system is the creation and updating of the knowledge base. In the
past, when more traditional programming languages were used, developing a
knowledge base was tedious and time consuming. Each fact, relationship,
and rule had to be programmed—usually by an experienced programmer.
Today, specialized software allows users and decision makers to create
and modify their own knowledge bases through the knowledge acquisition
facility, using user-friendly menus. The purpose of the knowledge acquisition
facility is to provide a convenient and efficient means of capturing and storing
all components of the knowledge base. The knowledge acquisition facility acts
as an interface between experts and the knowledge base.
User Interface
The main purpose of the user interface is to make an expert
system easier for users and decision makers to develop and use. At one time,
skilled computer personnel created and operated most expert systems; today,
simplified user interfaces permit decision makers to develop and use their
own expert systems.
Participants in Developing and Using Expert Systems
Typically, several people are involved in developing and using an expert sys-
tem. The domain expert is the person or group with the expertise or knowl-
edge the expert system is trying to capture (domain). In most cases, the
domain expert is a group of human experts. A knowledge engineer is a per-
son who has training or experience in the design, development, implementa-
tion, and maintenance of an expert system, including training or experience
with expert system shells. Knowledge engineers can help transfer the knowl-
edge from the expert system to the knowledge user. The knowledge user
inference engine: Part of the expert
system that seeks information and
relationships from the knowledge base
and provides answers, predictions, and
suggestions similar to the way a human
expert would.
explanation facility: Component
of an expert system that allows a user
or decision maker to understand how
the expert system arrived at certain
conclusions or results.
knowledge acquisition facility:
Part of the expert system that provides
a convenient and efficient means of
capturing and storing all the compo-
nents of the knowledge base.
knowledge user: The person or
group who uses and benefits from the
expert system.
knowledge engineer: A person
who has training or experience in the
design, development, implementation,
and maintenance of an expert system.
knowledge user: The person or
group who uses and benefits from the
expert system.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 427
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

is the person or group who uses and benefits from the expert system.
Knowledge users do not need any previous training in computers or expert
systems.
Expert System Shells and Products
An expert system shell is a suite of software that allows construction of a
knowledge base and interaction with this knowledge base through the use of
an inference engine. Expert system shells are available for both personal com-
puters and mainframe systems, with some shells being inexpensive, costing
less than $500. In addition, off-the-shelf expert system shells are complete
and ready to run. The user enters the appropriate data or parameters, and the
expert system provides output to the problem or situation.
Robotics
Robotics is a branch of engineering that involves development and manufac-
ture of mechanical or computer devices that can perform tasks that require a
high degree of precision or are tedious or hazardous for human beings, such
as painting cars or making make precision welds. Karel Capek introduced the
word “robot” in his 1921 play, R.U.R. (an abbreviation of Rostrum’s Universal
Robots). The play was about an island factory that produced artificial people
called “robots” who are consigned to do drudgery work and eventually rebel
and overthrow their creators, causing the extinction of human beings.30 Orga-
nizations today do indeed use robots to perform dull, dirty, and/or dangerous
jobs. They are often used to lift and move heavy pallets in warehouses, per-
form welding operations, and provide a way to view radioactively contami-
nated areas of power plants inaccessible by people.
However, the use of robots has expanded and is likely to continue to
grow. Robots are increasingly being used in surgical procedures ranging from
prostrate removal to open-heart surgery. See Figure 10.10. Robots can provide
doctors with enhanced precision, improved dexterity, and better visualization.
In 2014, the U.S. Navy’s Bluefin 21 robotic submarine made several trips
below the Indian Ocean’s surface to scan the seabed for any trace of the miss-
ing Malaysia Airlines Flight 370. iRobot (www.irobot.com) is a company that
builds a variety of robots, including the Roomba for vacuuming floors, the
FIGURE 10.10
Robotic surgery
The arms of the Da Vinci robot assist
in a kidney transplant. A surgeon
controls the robot remotely from a
corner of the operating room.
Master Video/Shutterstock.com
robotics: A branch of engineering
that involves the development and
manufacture of mechanical or com-
puter devices that can perform tasks
requiring a high degree of precision or
that are tedious or hazardous for
humans.
428 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Looj for cleaning gutters, and the PackBot, an unmanned vehicle used to
assist and protect soldiers.31
Some robots, such as the ER series by Intelitek, can be used for training
or entertainment.32 Wonder Workshop created robots Dash and Dot to help
young children (ages 5+) to learn programming concepts and creative prob-
lem solving.33
Some people fear that robots will increasingly take jobs from human
employees. For example, the use of autonomous vehicles may place millions
of truck drivers, chauffeurs, and cab drivers out of work. Some experts have
predicted that every home will have a robot of some sort by 2025. One area
of particular interest is the use of robots as companions and caregivers for
people who are sick, elderly, or physically challenged.34,35
Vision Systems
Another area of AI involves vision systems, which include hardware and
software that permit computers to capture, store, and process visual images.
3D machine-vision systems are used to increase the accuracy and speed of
industrial inspections of parts. Automated fruit-picking machines use a unique
vacuum gripper combined with a vision system to pick fruit. Facebook is
developing an AI vision system called DeepFace, which creates 3D models of
the faces in photos. The technology represents a vast improvement over cur-
rent facial recognition software. DeepFace can correctly tell if two photos
show the same person with 97.25 percent accuracy. This nearly matches
humans, who are correct 97.53 percent of the time. The technology, which
uses more than 120 million parameters, can also recognize people whose
faces are not showing with 83 percent accuracy, using features such as body
shape, posture, hairstyle, and clothing. 36,37
Natural Language Processing
Natural language processing is an aspect of artificial intelligence that
involves technology that allows computers to understand, analyze, manipu-
late, and/or generate “natural” languages, such as English. Many companies
provide natural language processing help over the phone. When you call a
help phone number, you are typically given a menu of options and asked to
speak your responses. Many people, however, become easily frustrated talk-
ing to a machine instead of a human. The Naturally Speaking application
from Dragon Systems uses continuous voice recognition, or natural speech,
that allows the user to speak to the computer at a normal pace without paus-
ing between words. The spoken words are transcribed immediately onto the
computer screen. See Figure 10.11.
FIGURE 10.11
Voice recognition software
With the NaturallySpeaking applica-
tion from Dragon Systems, computer
users can speak and have their
words transcribed into text for input
to software such as Microsoft Word.
Source: Nuance Communications.
vision system: The hardware and
software that permit computers to cap-
ture, store, and manipulate visual
images.
natural language processing:
An aspect of artificial intelligence that
involves technology that allows com-
puters to understand, analyze, manip-
ulate, and/or generate “natural”
languages, such as English.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 429
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

After converting sounds into words, natural language-processing systems
react to the words or commands by performing a variety of tasks. Brokerage
services are a perfect fit for voice recognition and natural language-processing
technology to replace the existing “press 1 to buy or sell a stock” touchpad tele-
phone menu system. Using voice recognition to convert recordings into text is
also possible. Some companies claim that voice recognition and natural
language-processing software is so good that customers forget they are talking
to a computer and start discussing the weather or sports scores.
Learning Systems
Another aspect of AI deals with learning systems, a combination of software
and hardware that allows a computer to change how it functions or how it
reacts to situations based on feedback it receives. For example, some comput-
erized games have learning abilities. If the computer does not win a game, it
remembers not to make the same moves under the same conditions again.
Some learning systems utilize reinforcement learning, which involves the use
of sequential decisions—with learning taking place between each decision.
Reinforcement learning often involves sophisticated computer programming
and optimization techniques. The computer makes a decision, analyzes the
results, and then makes a better decision based on the analysis. The process,
often called dynamic programming, is repeated until it is impossible to make
improvements in the decision.
Learning systems software requires feedback on the results of actions or
decisions. At a minimum, the feedback needs to indicate whether the results
are desirable (winning a game) or undesirable (losing a game). The feedback
is then used to alter what the system will do in the future.
After Google combined natural language processing with learning systems
in its Android smartphone operating system, it reduced word-recognition
errors by 25 percent.38 With this new technology, the voice assistant is also
able to ask questions to clarify what a user is searching for.
Neural Networks
An increasingly important aspect of AI involves neural networks, also called
neural nets. A neural network is a computer system that can recognize and
act on patterns or trends that it detects in large sets of data. A neural network
employs massively parallel processors in an architecture that is based on the
human brain’s own meshlike structure. As a result, neural networks can pro-
cess many pieces of data at the same time and learn to recognize patterns.
AI Trilogy, available from the Ward Systems Group (www.wardsystems
.com), is a neural network software program that can run on a standard PC.
The software package’s NeuroShell Predictor component can be used to
make predictions, such as agricultural production estimates and call volume
forecasts. The NeuroShell Classifier can be used to aid in classification and
decision-making tasks, such as alarm system malfunction diagnosis and sales
prospect selection. See Figure 10.12. The software package also contains Gen-
eHunter, which uses a special type of algorithm called a genetic algorithm to
get the best result from the neural network system. (Genetic algorithms are
discussed next.) Some pattern recognition software uses neural networks to
make credit lending decisions by predicting the likelihood a new borrower
will pay back a loan. Neural networks are also used to identify bank or credit
card transactions likely to be fraudulent. Large call centers use neural net-
works to create staffing strategies by predicting call volumes.
Dr. José R. Iglesias-Rozas at the Katharinenhospital in Stuttgart, Germany,
is a leader in researching the use of neural networks to diagnose the degree
of malignancy of tumors. In his early research, microscopic sections of 786
different human brain tumors were collected. A neural network tool called
learning system: A combination of
software and hardware that allows a
computer to change how it functions or
how it reacts to situations based on
feedback it receives.
neural network: A computer system
that can recognize and act on patterns
or trends that it detects in large sets of
data.
430 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

NeuralTools was then used to predict the degree of malignancy based on the
presence of 10 histological characteristics. The neural network accurately pre-
dicted over 95 percent of the sample cases. Dr. Iglesias-Rozas plans to expand
his research to analyze over 30 years of data from more than 8,000 patients
with brain tumors.39
Other Artificial Intelligence Applications
Other artificial intelligence applications include genetic algorithms, which solve
problems based on the theory of evolution—using the concept of survival of the
fittest as a problem-solving strategy. The genetic algorithm uses a fitness function
that quantitatively evaluates a set of initial candidate solutions. The highest-
scoring candidate solutions are allowed to “reproduce,” with random changes
introduced to create new candidate solutions. These digital offspring are sub-
jected to a second round of fitness evaluation. Again, the most promising candi-
date solutions are selected and used to create a new generation with random
changes. The process repeats for hundreds or even thousands of rounds. The
expectation is that the average fitness of the population will increase each round
and that eventually very good solutions to the problem will be discovered.
Genetic algorithms have been used to solve large, complex scheduling
problems, such as scheduling airline crews to meet flight requirements while
minimizing total costs and staying within federal guidelines on maximum
crew flight hours and required hours of rest. Genetic algorithms have also
FIGURE 10.12
Neural network software
NeuroShell Predictor uses recognized forecasting methods to look for future trends in data.
Source: Ward Systems Group, Inc.
genetic algorithm: An approach to
solving problems based on the theory
of evolution; uses the concept of sur-
vival of the fittest as a problem-solving
strategy.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 431
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
been used to design mirrors that funnel sunlight to a solar collection and
radio antenna that pick up signals from space.
Another artificial intelligence application, intelligent agent (also called an
intelligent robot or bot), consists of programs and a knowledge base used to
perform a specific task for a person, a process, or another program. Like a
sports agent who searches for the best endorsement deals for a top athlete,
an intelligent agent is often used to search for the best price, schedule, or
solution to a problem. The programs used by an intelligent agent can search
large amounts of data as the knowledge base refines the search or accommo-
dates user preferences. Often used to search the vast resources of the Internet,
intelligent agents can help people find information on any topic, such as the
best price for a new camera or used car.
IBM Watson Offers Advice to Cancer Patients
IBM and the American Cancer Society (ACS) are working in partnership to
develop a Watson-based advisor to support cancer patients. They will create this
robust resource by drawing upon massive sources of data from both organiza-
tions, and then train Watson to use the data to understand and anticipate indivi-
duals’ needs. In addition, the advisor will learn about the patient and that
patient’s planned treatment regimen, allowing it to offer personalized advice that
matches the patient’s individual characteristics, preferences, and treatment plan.40
The goal is for the Watson-based advisor to anticipate the needs of people
with different types of cancers, at different stages of disease, and at various points
in treatment. For example, a person with lung cancer experiencing unusual levels
of pain could ask what might be causing pain. The advisor would be designed to
respond with information on symptoms and self-management options associated
with that persons’ current and future phases of treatment, based on the experi-
ences of people with similar characteristics.
Review Questions
1.
How might visual systems and natural language processing be incorporated
into the Watson cancer adviser system?
2.
What other major branches of artificial intelligence are employed in the
Watson cancer patient adviser?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
One of the challenges of a cognitive computing capability such as the Watson
cancer adviser is keeping the information that Watson draws on as current as
possible. Over time, new approaches, courses of treatment, medicines, and
ideas will be discovered that are improvement over the old way of doing
things. How might the Watson cancer adviser be kept as current as possible?
2.
Cancer patients frequently suffer from depression. Do you think it is possible
for Watson to recognize symptoms of depression and provide encouragement
and advice to the patient? How might this be accomplished?
Multimedia and Virtual Reality
The use of multimedia and virtual reality has helped many companies achieve
a competitive advantage and increase profits. The approach and technology
used in multimedia is often the foundation of virtual reality systems, discussed
later in this section. While these specialized information systems are not used
by all organizations, they can play a key role for many. We begin with a dis-
cussion of multimedia.
intelligent agent: Programs and a
knowledge base used to perform a
specific task for a person, a process, or
another program; also called an intelli-
gent robot or bot.
432 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Overview of Multimedia
Multimedia is content that uses more than one form of communication—such
as text, graphics, video, animation, audio, and other media. Multimedia tools
can be used to help an organization achieve its goals through the production
of compelling brochures, presentations, reports, and documents. Many compa-
nies use multimedia approaches to develop animations and video games to
help advertise products and services. For example, insurance company Geico
uses an animated gecko in some of its TV ads. Animation software, such as
Blender, GoAnimate, and Powtoon, offer tools for individuals and businesses
looking to develop these types of animations. Although not all organizations
use the full capabilities of multimedia, most use text and graphics capabilities.
Text and Graphics
Most organizations use text and graphics to develop reports, financial state-
ments, advertising pieces, and other documents for internal and external use.
Internally, organizations use text and graphics to communicate policies,
guidelines, procedures, and much more to employees. Externally, they use
text and graphics to communicate to suppliers, customers, federal and state
governmental agencies, and a variety of other stakeholders. Different sizes,
fonts, and colors can be used to create different effects with text. Graphics
such as photographs, illustrations, drawings, a variety of charts, and other
still images can be used to create interest and illustrate a message. Some pop-
ular
digital
image
formats
include
EPS
(Encapsulated
PostScript),
GIF
(Graphic Interchange Format), JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group for-
mat), PNG (Portable Network Graphics), TIFF (Tagged Image File Format),
and Raw image files.
While standard word-processing programs are an inexpensive and simple
way to develop documents and reports that require text and graphics, most
organizations use specialized software. Adobe Illustrator, for example, can be
used to create typography and vector graphics, such as illustrations and logos.
Other graphics programs include CorelDraw by Corel Corporation and Serif
DrawPlus. Software products such as Adobe InDesign can be used for page
design, layout, and publishing of digital and print manuals, brochures, and
reports. Adobe Photoshop is a sophisticated and popular software package
that can be used to edit photographs and other visual images. Once created,
these documents and reports can be saved in an Adobe PDF file, which can be
used for printing or for digital delivery. Other photo-editing software includes
Apple’s iPhoto, Corel PaintShop Pro, and Pixelmator—among many others.
Microsoft PowerPoint can be used to develop presentations with sound
and animation that can be displayed on a large viewing screen. Prezi and
Swipe are both Web-based presentation software alternatives to PowerPoint.
Many graphics programs can also create 3D images. Once used primarily
in movies, 3D technology can be employed by companies to design products,
such as motorcycles, jet engines, and bridges. Autodesk, for example, makes
exciting 3D software that companies can use to design everything from flat
fruit-packing machines for Sunkist to large skyscrapers and other buildings
for architectural firms.41 The technology used to produce 3D movies is also
available with some TV programs. Nintendo developed the Nintendo 3DS,
one of the first portable gaming devices that displays images in 3D.
Audio
Audio, which includes music, human voices, recorded sounds, and a variety
of computer-generated sounds, can be stored in a variety of file formats,
including AAC (Advanced Audio Coding), AIFF (Audio Interchange File For-
mat), ALAC (Apple Lossless Audio Codec), FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec),
MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface), MP3 (Motion Picture Experts
multimedia: Content that uses more
than one form of communication—such
as text, graphics, video, animation,
audio, and other media.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 433
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Group Audio Layer 3), and WAV (wave format). The term “streaming audio”
refers to audio files that are played while they are being downloaded from the
Internet.
Input to audio software includes audio recording devices, microphones,
imported music or sound from CDs or audio files, MIDI instruments that can
create music and sounds directly, and other audio sources. Once stored, audio
files can be edited and augmented using audio software, such as Apple Quick-
Time, Microsoft Sound Recorder, Adobe Audition, and SourceForge Audacity.
See Figure 10.13. Once edited, audio files can also be used to enhance presen-
tations, create music, broadcast satellite radio signals, develop audio books,
record podcasts, add realism to movies, and enrich video and animation.
Video and Animation
The moving images of video and animation are typically created by rapidly
displaying one still image after another. Video and animation can be stored in
a variety of file formats, including AVI (Audio Video Interleave), FLV/FV4
(Flash Video), MOV (QuickTime format) files, MPEG (Motion Picture Experts
Group format), QTFF (QuickTime File Format), and WMV (Windows Media
Video). When video files are played while they are being downloaded from
the Internet, it’s called streaming video. For example, Amazon Prime, Hulu,
and Netflix are just three of the many sites through which users can stream
movies and TV programs. On the Internet, Java applets (small downloadable
programs) and animated GIF files can be used to animate or create “moving”
images.
A number of video and animation software products can be used to create
and edit video and animation files. Many video and animation programs can
create realistic 3D moving images. James Cameron’s movie Avatar used
sophisticated computers and 3D imaging to create one of the most profitable
movies in history. Adobe’s Premiere and After Effects and Apple’s Final Cut
Pro can be used to edit video images taken from cameras and other sources.
Final Cut Pro, for example, has been used to edit and produce full-length
motion pictures shown in movie theaters. Adobe Flash and LiveMotion can be
used to add motion and animation to Web pages.
Video and animation have many business uses. Companies that develop
computer-based or Internet training materials often use video and audio soft-
ware. An information kiosk at an airport or shopping mall can use animation
to help customers check in for a flight or get information.
FIGURE 10.13
Audio-editing software
Audacity provides tools for editing
and producing audio files in a variety
of formats.
Source: Audacity.
434 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Visual effects involve the integration of live-action footage and generated
imagery to create settings that look completely lifelike, but would be danger-
ous or extremely expensive to capture on film. RenderMan is Pixar’s technical
specification for a standard communications interface between 3D computer
graphics programs and rendering programs. (Rendering is the final step in
the animation process and provides the final appearance to the animation
with visual effects such as shading, texture mapping, shadows, reflections,
and motion blurs.) RenderMan software is used widely to create outstanding
graphics for feature films and broadcast television. Indeed, it was used on
every Visual Effects Academy Award Winner for 15 straight years.42
File Conversion and Compression
Most multimedia applications are created, edited, and distributed in a digital file
format, such as the ones discussed earlier. Older inputs to these applications,
however, can be in an analog format—from old home movies, magnetic tapes,
vinyl records, or similar sources. In addition, some older digital formats are no
longer popular or used. In order to edit and process analog and older digital
formats using current multimedia software, the content must be converted into
a newer digital format. Files can be converted using software or specialized
hardware. Some of the multimedia software, such as Adobe Premiere, Adobe
Audition, and others, have this analog-to-digital conversion capability. Stand-
alone software and specialized hardware can also be used. Grass Valley, for
example, is a hardware device that can be used to convert analog video to digi-
tal video or digital video to analog video. With this device, you can convert old
VHS tapes to digital video files or digital video files to an analog format.
Because multimedia files can be large, it’s sometimes necessary to com-
press files to make them easier to download from the Internet or send
as email attachments. Many of the multimedia software programs discussed
earlier can be used to compress multimedia files. In addition, standalone file
conversion programs, such as PNGGauntlet, ScriptPNG, WinZip, and Wonder-
share Video Converter Ultimate, can be used to compress many file formats.
Designing a Multimedia Application
Designing multimedia applications requires careful thought and a systematic
approach. Multimedia applications can be printed in brochures, placed into
corporate reports, uploaded to the Internet, or displayed on large screens for
viewing. Because these applications are typically more expensive than prepar-
ing documents and files in a word-processing program, it is important to
spend time designing the best possible multimedia application. Designing a
multimedia application requires that the end use of the document or file be
carefully considered. For example, some text styles and fonts are designed for
Internet display. Because different computers and Web browsers display infor-
mation differently, it is a good idea to select styles, fonts, and presentations
based on computers and browsers that are likely to display the multimedia
application. Because large files can take much longer to load into a Web page,
smaller files are usually preferred for Web-based multimedia applications.
Overview of Virtual Reality
The term “virtual reality” was initially coined in 1989 by Jaron Lanier, founder
of VPL Research. Originally, the term referred to immersive virtual reality in
which the user becomes fully immersed in an artificial, 3D world that is
completely generated by a computer. Through immersion, the user can gain a
deeper understanding of the virtual world’s behavior and functionality.
A virtual reality system enables one or more users to move and react in
a computer-simulated environment. Virtual reality simulations require special
interface devices that transmit the sights, sounds, and sensations of the
virtual reality system: A system
that enables one or more users to move
and react in a computer-simulated
environment.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 435
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

simulated world to the user. These devices can also record and send the
speech and movements of the participants to the simulation program,
enabling users to sense and manipulate virtual objects much as they would
real objects. This natural style of interaction gives the participants the feeling
that they are immersed in the simulated world. For example, an auto manu-
facturer can use virtual reality to simulate and design automobiles and pro-
duction lines in factories.
In justifying Facebook’s $2 billion acquisition of virtual reality company
Oculus VR, Mark Zuckerberg said that “while mobile is the key platform for
today, virtual reality will be one of the major platforms for tomorrow. Imagine
enjoying a courtside seat at a game, studying in a classroom of students and
teachers all over the world or consulting with a doctor face-to-face, just by
putting on goggles in your home.”43 In late 2015, Oculus VR released one of
the first social virtual reality applications—an app that allows users of the
Samsung Gear VR headset to go to a virtual movie theater (in the form of a
selected avatar), watch a movie, and chat with other people who are also in
the theater.44
Interface Devices
To see in a virtual world, the user often wears a head-mounted display (HMD)
with screens directed at each eye. The HMD also contains a position tracker to
monitor the location of the user’s head and the direction in which the user is
looking. Employing this information, a computer generates images of the vir-
tual world—a slightly different view for each eye—to match the direction in
which the user is looking and displays these images on the HMD. In addition
to Oculus VR (Oculus Rift) and Samsung (Gear VR), other big players in the
emerging virtual reality interface industry include Google (Cardboard), HTC
(Vive), Microsoft (Hololens), and Sony (PlayStation VR).
The Electronic Visualization Laboratory (EVL) at the University of Illinois
at Chicago introduced a room constructed of large screens on three walls
and a floor on which the graphics are projected. The CAVE (Cave Automatic
Virtual Environment), as the room is called, provides the illusion of immer-
sion by projecting stereo images on the walls and floor of a room-sized
cube (www.evl.uic.edu). Several people wearing lightweight stereo glasses
can enter and walk freely inside the CAVE. A head-tracking system continu-
ously adjusts the stereo projection to the current position of the leading
viewer. The most recent version of the CAVE is called CAVE2 and features
realistic high-resolution graphics that respond to user interactions. See
Figure 10.14.
FIGURE 10.14
Large-scale virtual reality
environment
The CAVE2 virtual reality system has
72 stereoscopic LCD panels encir-
cling the viewer 320 degrees and
creates a 3D environment that can
simulate the bridge of the Starship
U.S.S. Enterprise, a flyover of the
planet Mars, or a journey through the
blood vessels of the brain.
AP Images/Charles Rex Arbogast
436 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

In a virtual world, users hear sounds through earphones, and informa-
tion reported by the position tracker is used to update audio signals. When
a sound source in virtual space is not directly in front of or behind the
user, the computer transmits sounds to arrive at one ear a little earlier
or later than at the other and to be a little louder or softer and slightly
different in pitch.
The haptic interface, which relays the sense of touch and other physical
sensations in the virtual world, is the least developed and perhaps the most
challenging virtual reality component to create. One virtual reality company
has developed a haptic interface device that can be placed on a person’s fin-
gertips to give an accurate feel for game players, surgeons, and others. With
the use of a glove and position tracker, the computer locates the user’s hand
and measures finger movements. The user can reach into the virtual world
and handle objects; still, it is difficult to generate the sensations of a person
tapping a hard surface, picking up an object, or running a finger across a tex-
tured surface. Touch sensations also have to be synchronized with the sights
and sounds users experience. Today, some virtual reality developers are even
trying to incorporate taste and smell into virtual reality applications.
Forms of Virtual Reality
Aside from immersive virtual reality, virtual reality can also refer to applica-
tions that are not fully immersive, such as mouse-controlled navigation
through a 3D environment on a graphics monitor, stereo viewing from the
monitor via stereo glasses, and stereo projection systems. Augmented reality,
a newer form of virtual reality, has the ability to superimpose digital data
over real photos or images. Augmented reality is being used in a variety of
settings. Some luxury car manufacturers, for example, display dashboard
information, such as speed and remaining fuel, on windshields. The technol-
ogy is also used in some military aircraft and is often called heads-up display.
The use of lines (typically yellow and blue) that are superimposed onto a
football field during broadcasted games to indicate the first down marker and
the line of scrimmage is another example of augmented reality. GPS maps can
be combined with real pictures of stores and streets to help you locate your
position or find your way to a new destination. Using augmented reality, you
could point a smartphone camera at a historic landmark, such as a castle,
museum, or other building, and have information about the landmark appear
on your screen, including a brief description of the landmark, admission
price, and hours of operation. Although still in its early phases of implementa-
tion, augmented reality has the potential to become an important feature of
tomorrow’s smartphones and similar mobile devices.
Virtual Reality Applications
Thousands of applications of virtual reality are available, with more being
developed as the cost of hardware and software declines and as people’s ima-
ginations are opened to the potential of virtual reality. Virtual reality applica-
tions are being used in medicine, education and training, business, and
entertainment, among other fields.
Medicine
Virtual reality has been successful in treating children with autism by helping
them pick up on social cues, refine their motor skills, and acquire real-life
skills, such as looking both ways before crossing the street. Some children
with autism interact well with technology because of its predictability, control-
lability, and incredible patience. Virtual reality has also been used to help
train medical students with simulations for many forms of surgery from brain
surgery to delivery of a baby.45
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 437
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Education and Training
Virtual environments are used in education to bring new resources into the
classroom. Thousands of administrators, faculty, researchers, staff, and stu-
dents are members of the Immersive Education Initiative (IEI), a nonprofit
international partnership of colleges, companies, research institutes, and
universities working together to define and develop open standards, best
practices, platforms, and communities of support for virtual reality and
game-based learning and training systems. The IEI sponsors immersive edu-
cation summits as well as clubs and camps for children, college students,
and corporate professionals.
Google’s Expeditions Pioneer Program is a pilot immersive education ini-
tiative that brings virtual reality kits into the classroom so that students can
take part in expeditions that help them learn about locations around world.
Using cheap cardboard headsets, Android phones, and a teacher-operated tab-
let, Google Expeditions lets students experience 360-degree views of outer
space, the White House, caves in Slovakia, Buckingham Palace, Antarctica,
the Amazon rainforest, the Great Barrier Reef, and 100 other locations.46,47
Virtual technology is also being used to train members of the military. To
help with aircraft maintenance, a virtual reality system has been developed to
simulate an aircraft and give a user a sense of touch, while computer graphics
provide a sense of sight and sound. The user sees, touches, and manipulates
the various parts of the virtual aircraft during training. Also, the Pentagon is
using a virtual reality training lab to prepare for a military crisis. The virtual
reality system simulates various war scenarios.
Business and Commerce
Virtual reality is being used in business for many purposes—to provide virtual
tours of plants and buildings, enable 360-degree viewing of a product or
machine, and train employees. For example, Ford uses virtual reality technol-
ogy to refine its auto designs. Designers and engineers are able to scrutinize
the interior and exterior of a car design. Because the virtual reality technology
is tied directly into Ford’s Autodesk computer aided design (CAD) system,
workers can even inspect a particular component to see exactly how it is
designed.48
Several teams within the National Football League (NFL) have begun
using virtual reality applications to train players. The teams are able to
load all of their offensive and defensive plays into the system, which uses a
360-degree high-definition capture of each position on the football field.
Players training with the system are able to study the plays from a first-
person perspective, rewinding plays as necessary. While the player is training,
coaches can see what the player is seeing and doing, providing ongoing feed-
back. The VR systems are an enhancement to the previous off-field training
programs that focused on players learning plays by reading large playbooks
and watching DVDs of games.49,50
Swedish furniture chain IKEA recently launched a virtual reality app that
allows users to experiment with different kitchen design features, such as cab-
inet configurations, countertop materials, and drawer pulls. The app is
intended to help consumers make design choices and visualize space in three
dimensions by allowing them to quickly make changes and view their cus-
tomized kitchens from different perspectives. The company is using this pilot
program to explore the possibilities of virtual reality technology in terms of
connecting with and empowering its customers.51
Microsoft is developing its Oculus virtual reality headset for enterprise
workers to interact with office productivity software.52 With this headset and
associated software, users can see Microsoft Excel PivotTables that actually
pivot in 3D, send weekly status reports that appear in a fully immersive
438 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
environment, and generate PowerPoint presentations that support full posi-
tional head tracking and provide a 3D stereo sound sensation for the listener.
Virtual reality headsets such as those by Oculus Rift can be used to walk
through the simulated environment.
Launching Google Expeditions
You have been asked to help a local elementary school explore the feasibility of
implementing the Google Expeditions Pioneer Program. This program enables
students to experience over 100 locations around the world using virtual reality.
Review Questions
1.
Do research to find out how the school can sign up for this program and what
hardware and software is required.
2.
What training is necessary for teachers to lead this program?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Prepare a recommendation for the school outlining the steps and resources
necessary to take advantage of this program.
2.
What potential barriers to implementing this program could arise? How might
these be overcome?
Other Specialized Systems
In addition to artificial intelligence, expert systems, and virtual reality, other
interesting specialized systems continue to be developed, including assistive
technology systems, game theory, and informatics.
Assistive Technology Systems
Assistive technology systems includes a wide range of assistive, adaptive,
and rehabilitative devices to help people with disabilities perform tasks
that they were formerly unable to accomplish or had great difficulty
accomplishing.
Many assistive technology products are designed to enhance the human-
computer interface. Electronic pointing devices are available that enable users
to control the pointer on the screen without the use of hands, using ultrasound,
infrared beams, eye movements, and even nerve signals and brain waves. Sip-
and-puff systems are activated by inhaling or exhaling. Braille embossers can
translate text into embossed Braille output. Screen readers can be used to
speak everything displayed on the computer screen, including text, graphics,
control buttons, and menus. Speech recognition software enables users to give
commands and enter data using their voices rather than a mouse or keyboard.
Text-to-speech synthesizers can “speak” all data entered to the computer to
allow users who are visually impaired or who have learning difficulties to hear
what they are typing.53 Stephen Hawking is an English theoretical physicist
and cosmologist considered by many to be the most intelligent man alive today.
Hawking is almost entirely paralyzed and uses assistive technology systems to
communicate his thoughts and to interact with computers. See Figure 10.15.
Personal assistive listening devices help people understand speech in dif-
ficult situations. They separate the speech that a person wants to hear from
background noise by improving what is known as the “speech to noise
ratio.” A personal assistive learning device typically has at least three compo-
nents: a microphone, a transmission technology, and a device for receiving
the signal and bringing the sound to the ear.54
assistive technology system:
An assistive, adaptive, or rehabilitative
device designed to help people with
disabilities perform tasks that they were
formerly unable to accomplish or had
great difficulty accomplishing.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 439
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Personal emergency response systems use electronic sensors connected to
an alarm system to help maintain security, independence, and peace of mind
for anyone who is living alone, at risk for falls, or recuperating from an illness
or surgery. These systems include fall detectors, heart monitors, and unlit gas
sensors. When an alert is triggered, a message is sent to a caregiver or contact
center who can respond appropriately.
Game Theory
Game theory is a mathematical theory for developing strategies that maximize
gains and minimize losses while adhering to a given set of rules and constraints.
Game theory is frequently applied to solve various decision-making problems in
which two or more participants are faced with choices of action, by which each
may gain or lose, depending on what others choose to do or not to do. Thus,
the final outcome of a game is determined jointly by the strategies chosen by all
participants. Such decisions involve a degree of uncertainty because no partici-
pant knows for sure what course of action the other participants will take. In
zero-sum games, the fortunes of the players are inversely related so that one par-
ticipant’s gain is the other participant’s loss. In non-zero-sum games, it is wise for
the participants to cooperate so that the action taken by one participant may ben-
efit both participants. Two-person zero-sum games are used by military strate-
gists. Many-person non-zero-sum games are used in many business decision-
making settings. Game theory Explorer and Gambit are collections of software
tools for building, analyzing, and exploring game models.55
In the TV game show Jeopardy!, contestants typically select a single cate-
gory and progressively move down from the top question (easiest and lowest
dollar value) to the bottom (hardest and highest dollar value). This provides
the contestants and viewers with an easy-to-understand escalation of diffi-
culty. Recently, however, one player used a much different strategy, employ-
ing the fundamentals of game theory. The player sought out the Daily Double
questions, which are usually hidden in one of the three highest-paying and
most difficult questions in the categories. Thus rather than selecting a single
category and increasing the degree of difficulty, he began with the two most
FIGURE 10.15
Stephen Hawking
Stephen Hawking employs a number
of assistive technology systems to
support his activities.
The World in HDR/Shutterstock.com
game theory: A mathematical theory
for developing strategies that maximize
gains and minimize losses while
adhering to a given set of rules and
constraints.
440 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

difficult questions in the category. Once the two most difficult questions were
taken off the board in one category, he skipped to another category in search
of the Daily Doubles. This strategy proved highly successful.56
The U.S. Coast Guard employs a game theory system called PROTECT
(Port Resiliency for Operational/Tactical Enforcement to Combat Terrorism)
to randomize patrols while still achieving a very high level of security that
provides maximum deterrence. There are insufficient resources to provide full
security coverage around the clock at all high-value potential targets in the
361 shipping ports in the United States. This means that enemies can observe
patrol and monitor activities and take actions in an attempt to avoid patrols.
PROTECT generates patrol and monitoring schedules that take into account
the importance of different targets at each port and the enemy’s likely surveil-
lance and anticipated reaction to those patrols.57
Informatics
Informatics is the combination of information technology with traditional dis-
ciplines, such as medicine or science, while considering the impact on indivi-
duals, organizations, and society. Informatics places a strong emphasis on the
interaction between humans and technology—with the goal of engineering
information systems that provide users with the best possible user experience.
Indeed, informatics represents the intersection of people, information, and
technology. See Figure 10.16. The field of informatics has great breadth and
encompasses many individual specializations such as biomedical, health, nurs-
ing, medical, and pharmacy informatics. Those who study informatics learn
how to build new computing tools and applications. They gain an understand-
ing of how people interact with information technology and how information
technology shapes our relationships, our organizations, and our world.
Biomedical informatics (or bioinformatics) develops, studies, and applies
theories, methods, and processes for the generation, storage, retrieval, use,
and sharing of biomedical data, information, and knowledge. Bioinformatics
has been used to help map the human genome and conduct research on bio-
logical organisms. Using sophisticated databases and artificial intelligence,
bioinformatics helps unlock the secrets of the human genome, with the objec-
tive of preventing diseases and saving lives. Many universities have courses
on bioinformatics and offer bioinformatics certification.
Healthcare informatics is the science of how to use data, information, and
technology to improve human health and the delivery of healthcare services.
Healthcare informatics applies principles of computer and information science
to the advancement of patient care, life sciences research, health professional
education, and public health. Journals, such as Healthcare Informatics, report
current research on applying computer systems and technology to increase
efficiency, reduce medical errors, and improve health care.
Boston Medical Center (BMC) has implemented a healthcare informatics
program to develop and measure several key operational metrics to improve
FIGURE 10.16
Informatics
Informatics represents the intersec-
tion of people, information, and
technology.
People
Technology
Informatics
Information
informatics: The combination of
information technology with traditional
disciplines, such as medicine or sci-
ence, while considering the impact on
individuals, organizations, and society.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 441
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
efficiency in its operating room procedures. The system is being used to
optimize surgical schedules, wait times, postsurgical unit availability, and
patient-discharge processes. By optimizing the use of its operating rooms, the
hospital is able to ensure that surgeons are fully utilizing their assigned
operating room time, and—even more important for patient care—reduce the
time it takes for a patient to have surgery after diagnosis.58
Allina Health Employs Healthcare Informatics
Allina Health is a not-for-profit healthcare system that owns or operates 14 hospitals
and over 90 clinics throughout Minnesota and western Wisconsin. The organization
created an enterprise-wide data warehouse of clinical, financial, operational, patient
satisfaction, and other data. The data is used to calculate and track various healthcare
measures that measure performance and can identify opportunities for improvement.
Review Questions
1.
What sort of training and experience is needed by the individuals who built
and operate this system? What about by the individuals who use this system?
2.
Identify several sources from which the data for this system may be obtained.
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Provide several examples of key patient healthcare measures that are tracked
by this system.
2.
Provide an example or two of how this system might be used to identify an
opportunity for improvement in the treatment of patients.
Summary
Principle:
Knowledge management allows organizations to share knowledge and
experience among its workers.
Knowledge management is a range of practices concerned with increasing
awareness, fostering learning, speeding collaboration and innovation, and
exchanging insights. A knowledge management system is an organized collec-
tion of people, procedures, software, databases, and devices used to create,
capture, store, share, and use the organization’s knowledge and experience.
Explicit knowledge is objective and can be measured and documented in
reports, papers, and rules. Tacit knowledge is hard to measure and document
and is typically not objective or formalized.
A major goal of knowledge management is to somehow capture and docu-
ment the valuable work-related tacit knowledge of others and to turn it into
explicit knowledge that can be shared with others.
Two processes are frequently used to capture tacit knowledge—shadowing
and joint problem solving. Shadowing involves a novice observing an expert exe-
cuting her job to learn how she performs. This technique often is used in the medi-
cal field to help young interns learn from experienced physicians. With joint
problem solving, the novice and the expert work side by side to solve a problem
so that the expert’s approach is slowly revealed to the observant novice.
Organizations employ KM to foster innovation, leverage the expertise of
people across the organization, and capture the expertise of key individuals
before they retire.
Some organizations and professions use communities of practice (CoP),
which are groups of people with common interests who come together to cre-
ate, store, and share knowledge on a specific topic.
442 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Obtaining, storing, sharing, and using knowledge is the key to any knowl-
edge management system, which often leads to additional knowledge creation,
storage, sharing, and usage. Many tools and techniques can be used to create,
store, and use knowledge. These tools and techniques are available from IBM,
Microsoft, and other companies and organizations.
Establishing a successful KM program is challenging, but most of the chal-
lenges involved have nothing to do with the technologies or vendors
employed. Instead they are challenges associated with human nature and the
manner in which people are accustomed to working together. Best practices for
selling and implementing a KM project include connecting KM to goals and
objectives, starting with a small pilot and enthusiastic participants, identifying
tacit knowledge, and getting employee buy in.
Organizations interested in piloting KM should be aware of the wide range
of technologies that can support KM efforts. These include communities of
practice, organizational network analysis, a variety of Web 2.0 technologies,
business rules management systems, and enterprise search tools.
Principle:
Artificial intelligence systems form a broad and diverse set of systems that
can replicate human decision making for certain types of well-defined
problems.
The term artificial intelligence (AI) is used to describe computers with the
ability to mimic or duplicate the functions of the human brain. The objective of
building AI systems is not to replace human decision making but to replicate it
for certain types of well-defined problems.
Artificial intelligence systems include the people, procedures, hardware,
software, data, and knowledge needed to develop computer systems and
machines that can simulate human intelligence processes, including learning
(the acquisition of information and rules for using the information), reasoning
(using rules to reach conclusions), and self-correction (using the outcome from
one scenario to improve its performance on future scenarios).
Intelligent behavior encompasses several characteristics, including the abil-
ities to learn from experience and apply this knowledge to new experiences,
handle complex situations and solve problems for which pieces of information
might be missing, determine relevant information in a given situation, think in
a logical and rational manner and give a quick and correct response, and
understand visual images and process symbols. Computers are better than peo-
ple at transferring information, making a series of calculations rapidly and
accurately, and making complex calculations, but human beings are better
than computers at all other attributes of intelligence.
Artificial intelligence is a broad field that includes several key components,
such as expert systems, robotics, vision systems, natural language processing,
learning systems, and neural networks.
An expert system consists of hardware and software that stores knowledge
and makes inferences, enabling a novice to perform at the level of an expert.
An expert system is made up of a collection of integrated and related compo-
nents, including a knowledge base, an inference engine, an explanation facility,
a knowledge acquisition facility, and a user interface.
Robotics is a branch of engineering that involves development and manu-
facture of mechanical or computer devices that can perform tasks that require a
high degree of precision or are tedious or hazardous for human beings, such as
painting cars or making make precision welds.
Vision systems include hardware and software that permit computers to
capture, store, and manipulate images and pictures (e.g., face-recognition
software).
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 443
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Natural language processing allows the computer to understand and react
to statements and commands made in a “natural” language, such as English.
Learning systems use a combination of software and hardware to allow a
computer to change how it functions or reacts to situations based on feedback
it receives (e.g., a computerized chess game).
A neural network is a computer system that can recognize and act on pat-
terns or trends that it detects in large sets of data.
A genetic algorithm is an approach to solving problems based on the the-
ory of evolution and the concept of survival of the fittest. Intelligent agents
consist of programs and a knowledge base used to perform a specific task for
a person, a process, or another program.
Principle:
Multimedia and virtual reality systems can reshape the interface between
people and information technology by offering new ways to communicate
information, visualize processes, and express ideas creatively.
Multimedia is content that uses more than one form of communication—
such as text, graphics, video, animation, audio, and other media that can be
used to help an organization efficiently and effectively achieve its goals. Multi-
media tools can be used to help an organization achieve its goals through the
production of compelling brochures, presentations, reports, and documents.
Although not all organizations use the full capabilities of multimedia, most
use text and graphics capabilities. Presentation software such as Microsoft
PowerPoint, Prezi, and Swipe can be used to develop presentations with
sound and animation that can be displayed on a large screen. Other applica-
tions of multimedia include audio, video, and animation. File compression and
conversion are often needed in multimedia applications to import or export
analog files and to reduce file size when storing multimedia files and sending
them to others. Designing a multimedia application requires careful thought to
get the best results and achieve corporate goals.
A virtual reality system enables one or more users to move and react in a
computer-simulated environment. Virtual reality simulations require special
interface devices that transmit the sights, sounds, and sensations of the simu-
lated world to the user. These devices can also record and send the speech and
movements of the participants to the simulation program. Thus, users can
sense and manipulate virtual objects much as they would real objects. This
natural style of interaction gives the participants the feeling that they are
immersed in the simulated world.
Virtual reality can also refer to applications that are not fully immersive,
such as mouse-controlled navigation through a three-dimensional environment
on a graphics monitor, stereo viewing from the monitor via stereo glasses, and
stereo projection systems. Some virtual reality applications allow views of real
environments with superimposed virtual objects. Augmented reality, a newer
form of virtual reality, can superimpose digital data over real photos or images.
Virtual reality applications are found in medicine, education and training, real
estate and tourism, and entertainment.
Principle:
Specialized systems can help organizations and individuals achieve their
goals.
A number of specialized systems have recently appeared to assist organiza-
tions and individuals in new and exciting ways. Assistive technology systems
include a wide range of assistive, adaptive, and rehabilitative devices to help
people with disabilities perform tasks that they were formerly unable to accom-
plish or had great difficulty accomplishing. Game theory is a mathematical
444 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

theory that helps to develop strategies for maximizing gains and minimizing
losses while adhering to a given set of rules and constraints. Informatics is
the combination of information technology with traditional disciplines such
as medicine or science, while considering the impact on individuals, organiza-
tions, and society. It represents the intersection of people, information, and
technology.
Key Terms
artificial intelligence
artificial intelligence system
assistive technology system
business rule management system (BRMS)
community of practice (CoP)
domain expert
electronic discovery (e-discovery)
enterprise search
enterprise search software
expert system
explanation facility
explicit knowledge
game theory
genetic algorithm
IF-THEN statement
inference engine
informatics
intelligent agent
intelligent behavior
joint problem solving
knowledge acquisition facility
knowledge engineer
knowledge management (KM)
knowledge user
learning systems
metadata
multimedia
natural language processing
neural network
perceptive system
robotics
rule
shadowing
organizational network analysis (ONA)
tacit knowledge
virtual reality system
vision system
Chapter 10: Self-Assessment Test
Knowledge management allows organizations to
share
knowledge
and
experience
among
its
workers.
1.
knowledge is knowledge that is
documented, stored, and codified.
2. Tacit knowledge is extremely useful and can be
easily shared with others. True or False?
3. Which of the following is not a benefit associated
with knowledge management?
a. It helps leverage the expertise of people
across the organization.
b. It helps capture the expertise of key indivi-
duals before they retire.
c. It helps contain the specialized knowledge of
experts to a few people on a need-to-know
basis.
d. It fosters innovation by encouraging the free
flow of ideas.
4. The initial step in selling and implementing a
knowledge management project is
.
a. get employee buy in
b. identify valuable tacit knowledge
c. start with a small pilot project and enthusiastic
participants
d. connect knowledge management to goals and
objectives
Artificial intelligence systems form a broad and
diverse set of systems that can replicate human
decision making for certain types of well-defined
problems.
5. The use of
enables humans and
computers to find a good solution, although not
optimal, to a complex problem.
a. perceptive systems
b. heuristics
c. visual systems
d. robotics
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 445
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

6. The
component of an expert sys-
tem seeks information and relationships to pro-
vide answers, predictions, and suggestions
similar to the way a human expert would.
a. knowledge base
b. explanation facility
c. inference engine
d. user interface
7. Robots are increasingly being used in surgical
procedures including open-heart surgery. True or
False?
8. Facebook’s AI vision system called DeepFace can
correctly tell if two photos show the same person
with
accuracy.
a. less than 50 percent
b. between 50 percent and 75 percent
c. between 75 percent and 95 percent
d. over 95 percent
9.
is a type of artificial system that
enables a computer to change how it functions or
reacts to situations based on feedback it receives.
a. Neural network
b. Voice recognition system
c. Learning system
d. Vision system
10.
is a computer system that can rec-
ognize and act on patterns or trends that it detects
in large sets of data.
a. Neural network
b. Voice recognition system
c. Learning system
d. Vision system
11.
algorithms solve problems using
the concept of survival of the fittest as a problem-
solving strategy.
Multimedia and virtual reality systems can reshape
the
interface
between
people
and
information
technology by offering new ways to communicate
information,
visualize
processes,
and
express
ideas creatively.
12.
are some of the file formats that
can be used to store graphic images.
a. MP3, WAV, and MIDI
b. AVI, MPEG, and MOV
c. DOC and DOCX
d. EPS, GIF, JPEG, PNG, TIFF, and Raw
13. When video files are played while they are being
downloaded from the Internet, it is
called
video.
14.
software is used widely to create
outstanding graphics for feature films and has
been used on every Visual Effects Academy
Award for over 15 years.
a. Apple’s Final Cut Pro
b. Adobe Audition
c. Prezi
d. Pixar’s RenderMan
15.
acquired the virtual reality com-
pany Oculus VR.
a. Apple
b. Microsoft
c. Facebook
d. Google
Specialized systems can help organizations and
individuals achieve their goals.
16.
systems include a wide range of
devices that help people with disabilities to per-
form tasks that they were formerly unable to
accomplish or had great difficulty accomplishing.
17.
involves the use of information
systems to develop competitive strategies for
people, organizations, or even countries.
Chapter 10: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. Explicit
2. False
3. c
4. d
5. b
6. c
7. True
8. d
9. c
10. a
11. Genetic
12. d
13. streaming
14. d
15. c
16. Assistive technology
17. Game theory
Review Questions
1. Identify and briefly discuss the six processes that
comprise knowledge management.
2. Briefly explain the difference between explicit
and tacit knowledge. Give an example of each.
446 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

3. Identify and briefly describe two processes fre-
quently used to capture explicit knowledge.
4. Name four key steps in selling and implementing
a knowledge management project.
5. What is a community of practice (CoP)? Give an
example of a CoP. What are some of the advan-
tages of participating in a CoP?
6. What is organizational network analysis? How is
it used?
7. What is enterprise search software and how is it
used?
8. How would you define artificial intelligence?
9. Identify several specific characteristics of intelli-
gent behavior.
10. Identify six major branches of artificial
intelligence.
11. What are the fundamental components of an
expert system and what function does each
perform?
12. Give several examples of robots being used in the
real world. What advantages do robots provide?
13. What is DeepFace and how is it used?
14. What is natural language processing?
15. What is a learning system? Give an example of a
learning system.
16. What is a neural network? Give an example of a
neural network.
17. What is a genetic algorithm? Give an example of
the use of a genetic algorithm.
18. Identify and briefly describe five forms of media
that can be used to help an organization achieve
its goals. Identify at least two software programs
that are used to work with each of these media
types.
19. What is the difference between file conversion
and file compression?
20. What is a virtual reality system? Identify three
areas of virtual reality application.
21. What is an assistive technology system?
22. What is game theory? Identify two applications of
game theory.
23. What is informatics?
Discussion Questions
1. You are an entry-level manager for the customer
service desk of a telecommunications firm that
provides telephone, Internet access, and cable TV
services. A knowledge management system would
be useful to capture, store, and retrieve much of the
explicit and tacit knowledge needed to provide
excellent service. An expert system would prove
valuable in helping customer service reps to handle
common, reoccurring problems. The organization
only has the time and resources to develop one of
these two systems. What factors must you consider
in making the choice of which system to develop?
2. We are capable of building computers that
exhibit human-level intelligence. Are there cer-
tain areas of application where we should push to
accelerate the building of such computers? Why
these application areas? Are there certain areas of
application we should avoid? Why these applica-
tion areas?
3. Many of us use heuristics each day in completing
ordinary activities—such as planning our meals,
executing our workout routine, or determining
what route to drive to school or work. Imagine
that you are developing a set of heuristics for
deciding which social invitations to accept. What
rules or heuristics would you include?
4. How could you use a community of practice to
help you in your work or studies? How would
you go about identifying who to invite to join the
CoP?
5. A bank is considering implementing a business
rules management system for assessing the risk
and creditworthiness of individuals as part of the
loan approval process. What might be the bene-
fits of such a system? What are some of the factors
that must be weighed in this decision? What
potential legal or ethical issues might arise in the
use of such a system?
6. Describe a situation in which the use of an expert
system would be highly practical as well as very
beneficial.
7. What are some of the routine day-to-day house-
hold tasks that robots are able to accomplish
today? What additional tasks might they be able
to do in the near future? Are there certain limita-
tions that restrict the kind of household chores
robots can do?
8. Describe how a combination expert system and
natural language processing could be used to
provide student counseling for registering for
classes. How successful do you think such a sys-
tem would be? Explain.
9. Discuss the similarities and differences between
learning systems and neural systems. Give an
example of how each technology might be used.
10. What is the differences and similarities between a
database and a knowledge base?
11. Describe how game theory might be used in a
business setting.
12. Describe how augmented reality can be used in a
classroom. How could it be used in a work
setting?
13. Describe how assistive living systems might ben-
efit the residents of a nursing home.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 447
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Problem-Solving Exercises
1. You are investigating the use of automated robots
to replace some of the tasks performed by waiters
and waitresses in your neighborhood restaurant.
The robots are capable of clearing tables and
delivering food to customers. Customer interac-
tions to order food would continue to be done by
humans. You estimate that you could reduce your
staff from 15 workers making $15/hour to around
7 workers. In addition, you are sure that use of
the robots would attract additional customers
perhaps increasing sales by $100,000/year. The
robots cost $75,000 each and you figure you will
need two or three depending on how fast busi-
ness increases. Perform an analysis to determine
if hiring robots and letting humans go makes
good economic sense.
2. Shoot a brief video of you and some friends.
Download the video to a computer in your
school’s computer lab that has video editing
software. Use this software to experiment making
edits to the video. Write a brief report summariz-
ing your experience learning and using this
software.
3. Capture a large text file and use a data compres-
sion program to reduce the size of the file and
email it to a friend. Verify that your friend is able
to open and decompress the file. Repeat this
exercise with a large video file.
Team Activities
1. You and your team are challenged to visit the
local entertainment centers in search of the most
realistic virtual reality game that requires a player
to wear a head-mounted display. What makes this
game so realistic? Is there any way it could be
improved? Talk to the manager and try to identify
the hardware and software employed. Summarize
your findings in a brief report.
2. Work with your team to design an expert system
to predict how many years it will take a typical
student to graduate from your college or univer-
sity. Some factors to consider include the major
the student selects, the student’s SAT score, the
number of courses taken each semester, and the
number of parties or social activities the student
attends each month. Identify six other factors that
should be considered. Develop six IF-THEN rules
or cases to be used in the expert system.
3. Have your team members explore the use of
assistive technology systems by recent combat
veterans. Write a short paper summarizing your
findings and the advantages and disadvantages of
these type systems.
Web Exercises
1. NelNet is one of the nation’s largest student loan
servicing companies. The U.S. Department of
Education contracts with companies like NelNet
to provide servicing options for their student
loans including:
●
Take in and apply payments to student
loans
●
Administer the transfer of student loans
●
Process student loan programs, such as for-
giveness, forbearance, and deferment
●
Report to credit agencies past due payments
●
Seek repayment from defaulted loans
NelNet chose to deploy a knowledge manage-
ment system called OpenText Process Suite. Go
online and investigate the features and
capabilities of this suite of software products.
What functions does OpenText provide that can
augment and assist customer relationship man-
agement (CRM) systems? Research and briefly
document students’ recent experience with
NelNet.
2. Do research to identify instances in which robots
have taken jobs away from human employees.
Do you believe that the increasing use of robots
should be encouraged? Why or why not? Write a
one-page summary of your findings and
opinions.
3. Use the Internet to identify several applications of
neural networks. Write a brief summary of these
applications.
Career Exercises
1. Identify several career fields that are likely to be
negatively impacted by artificial intelligence
applications. Can you identify any career fields
that might be positively impacted?
448 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

2. Do research to explore career opportunities in
healthcare informatics. What sort of training and
experience is necessary for such a career? What
sort of role does this prepare one to fulfill? What
is the forecast for the number of job openings
and starting salaries? Does this career field inter-
est you?
3. Imagine that you are forming a community of
practice to deal with the issues associated with
transitioning to a new career. Identify people
from your experience who you would like to
include as members. Why factors did you con-
sider when you selected these people? Identify
three key topics you would like the community to
address.
Case Studies
Case One
The NASA Knowledge Map
At 11:38 a.m. on January 28, 1986, the space shuttle orbiter
Challenger launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. Less than
a second later, gray smoke streamed out from a hot flare
burning in the rocket motor. The flare ignited liquid
hydrogen and nitrogen inside the fuel tank, which exploded
73 seconds after liftoff. The Challenger was torn apart, and all
seven astronauts were killed.
In the days and weeks following the disaster, it became
clear that two O-ring seals within the rocket booster had
failed. Engineers working for the space agency had warned
of just such a failure. In particular, they had expressed
concerns that the O-ring seals could fail when outside
temperatures dropped below 53 degrees Fahrenheit. On the
morning of January 28, the temperature was 36 degrees. The
launch pad was covered with solid ice.
In response to the Challenger disaster, NASA established
the Program and Project Initiative whose purpose was to
improve individual competency for NASA employees—and to
prevent another catastrophe. The Challenger, however, was
followed by the failure of three expensive Mars missions. The
software system used for the Mars Climate Orbiter mission
erred when one part of the software used pound-force units
to calculate thrust, whereas another part used the newton
metric unit. Less than a month later, the Mars Polar Lander
crashed into the surface of the planet at too high velocity—
triggering the failure of a concurrent mission, the Mars Deep
Space 2 probes. A review of the Deep Space 2 mission
revealed that NASA engineers had decided to skip a complete
system impact test in order to meet the project’s tight
deadline. In the wake of these failures, NASA sought to
improve communication and collaboration among teams. Yet
in 2003, a large piece of insulation foam broke off from the
Columbia space shuttle during launch, creating a hole in its
wing, ultimately causing a catastrophic breach of the shuttle
during reentry; again, all seven astronauts on board were
killed.
These terrible losses brought about a fundamental
change in NASA’s approach to knowledge management. In
1976, NASA had created the Office of the Chief Engineer
(OCE), which was initially staffed by only one employee
whose job was to offer advice and expertise on NASA’s
administration. In response to the Challenger disaster, NASA
established the Academy of Project/Program and Engineering
Leadership (APPEL) as a resource for developing NASA’s
technical staff. In 2004, the agency moved APPEL to the OCE
in order to promote talent development through the analysis
of lessons learned and through knowledge capture—the
codification of knowledge. The purpose was to improve not
only individual but also team performance and to overcome
the disconnect between the different engineering and
decision-making teams across the huge organization. The
overarching goal was to create an organization that learns
from its mistakes. APPEL emphasized not only technical
training curriculum but also the sharing of practitioner
experience, storytelling, and reflective activities. In 2012,
NASA furthered this initiative and established the role of
chief knowledge officer whose mission is to capture implicit
and explicit knowledge. Today, the agency has an extensive
knowledge management system called NASA Knowledge
Map, which is a tool that helps employees navigate the
enormous collection of knowledge within NASA. The map
encompasses six major categories: (1) Case Studies and
Publications, (2) Face-to-Face Knowledge Services, (3) Online
Tools, (4) Knowledge Networks, (5) Lessons Learned and
Knowledge Processes, and (6) Search/Tag/Taxonomy Tools.
Fifteen organizations within NASA contribute to Case
Studies and Publications. The Goddard Space Flight Center,
for example, publishes studies that range from analysis of the
Challenger disaster to an analysis of a protest submitted by a
NASA contractor who lost a follow-up contract. The latter
case may not seem critical, but in one such case, the Office of
Inspector General had to launch a formal investigation that
cost NASA time, money, and energy. This case study was
then integrated into the APPEL curriculum with the goal of
avoiding the mistakes that led to the protest. The Johnson
Space Center issues oral history transcripts, as well as
newsletters, case studies, and reports. The Jet Propulsion
Laboratory publishes conference papers and a Flight
Anatomy wiki that tracks prelaunch and in-flight anomalies.
Face-to-Face Knowledge Services comprise programs
that are conducted in person at many locations, including, for
example, workshops presented by the NASA Engineering
and Safety Center. Within the Online Tools category are
video libraries, portals, document repositories, and
synchronous and asynchronous collaboration and sharing
sites. Some of these tools are quite sophisticated. For
example, Human Exploration and Operations (HEO) deploys
a GroupSystems Think Tank decision support tool to
improve group decision making. The Knowledge Networks
category includes information about formal and informal
communities of practice, mass collaborative activities, and
methods for locating and accessing experts, and group
workspaces for projects such as static code analysis.
Twenty organizations within NASA contribute data to the
Lessons Learned and Knowledge Processes databases, which
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 449
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

capture and store knowledge, lessons learned, and best
practices. These include, for example, HEO’s knowledge-
based risks library with topics covering project management,
design and development, systems engineering, and
integration and testing. HEO also sponsors lessons-learned
workshops and forums on topics such as solar array
deployment, shuttle transition and retirement, system safety,
and risk management.
Finally, the system’s Search/Tag/Taxonomy Tools allow
individuals to access organization-specific sites as well as the
abundance of materials offered through the five other KM
programs. This final category within the KM system may be
the most important, as NASA’s own inspector general issued
a report indicating that the tremendous wealth of KM
resources is still significantly underutilized. For instance,
NASA managers rarely consult the Lessons Learned
Information System (LLIS) despite NASA requirements that
they do so. The Glenn Research Center received $470,000
over two years to support LLIS activities, but contributed only
five reports to the system during that time. Moreover, the
inspector general concluded that inconsistent policy
direction, disparate KM project development, and insufficient
coordination marginalize the system.
NASA is clearly at the bleeding edge of large-scale KM
system development, creating the tools of the future. APPEL
and other NASA teams are able to make use of some amazing
tools that are being developed within the agency. It may be,
however, that NASA’s KM system suffers from the same
disjointed development and communication barriers that led
to the space shuttle disasters and the failures of the Mars
missions. Yet, it is vital that NASA learn to make use of its
state-of-the-art KM system as the success of every NASA
mission requires that thousands of employees are able to
make the most of NASA’s vast collection of knowledge.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. How is the KM system at NASA different from other
KM systems that you have studied within the chapter?
How is it similar?
2. What steps can NASA take to make sure that the KM
system is better utilized by individuals and teams?
3. What can NASA do to ensure that individuals and
teams can find what they need within the mountain of
data residing within the KM system?
4. Is NASA’s KM system, as it exists now, a good way to
combat the type of failures the agency has experienced
in the past? If not, how could the KM system be chan-
ged to support mission success?
5. Are there other measures that NASA should take in
addition to or in conjunction with the development of
its KM system?
SOURCES: Oberg, James, “7 Myths about the Challenger Shuttle
Disaster,” NBC News, January 25, 2011, www.nbcnews.com/id
/11031097/ns/technology_and_science-space/t/myths-about-challenger
-shuttle-disaster/#.U2AsyIFdUrU; Atkinson, Joe, “Engineer Who Opposed
Challenger Launch Offers Personal Look at Tragedy,” NASA Researcher
News, October 5, 2012, www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/researcher
news/rn_Colloquium1012.html; “Challenger Disaster,” History Channel,
www.history.com/topics/challenger-disaster, accessed April 29, 2014;
“Failure as a Design Criteria,” Plymouth University, www.tech.plym.ac
.uk/sme/interactive_resources/tutorials/failurecases/hs1.html, accessed
April 29, 2014; Lipowicz, Alice, “Is NASA’s Knowledge Management
Program Obsolete?,” GCN Technology, Tools and Tactics for Public
Sector IT, March 19, 2012, http://gcn.com/Articles/2012/03/15/NASA
-knowledge-management-IG.aspx; Luttrell, Anne, “NASA’s PMO: Building
and Sustaining a Learning Organization,” Project Management Institute,
www.pmi.org/Learning/articles/nasa.aspx, accessed February 9, 2015;
Hoffman, Edward J. and Boyle, Jon, “Tapping Agency Culture to Advance
Knowledge Services at NASA,” ATD, September 15, 2013, www.td.org
/Publications/Magazines/The-Public-Manager/Archives/2013/Fall/Tap
ping-Agency-Culture-to-Advance-Knowledge-Services-at-NASA;
“Knowledge Map,” NASA, http://km.nasa.gov/knowledge-map/, accessed
February 9, 2015.
Case Two
Doctor on Demand Enables Physicians to Make
House Calls
In addition to cost, provider availability and travel time are
barriers for many Americans seeking access to healthcare
services. In fact, a recent study of 4,000 patients determined
that, on average, patients spend 38 minutes on travel time to
and from outpatient appointments. Improving patient’s
access to care continues to be a priority for healthcare
providers and government agencies across the United States,
and an increasing number of companies have begun offering
telemedicine services, such as video-based doctors’
appointments, as a potential solution.
Founded in 2013, Doctor on Demand, offers the
possibility of increasing access to health care through
video visits with doctors who can diagnose and treat a
range of noncritical symptoms for patients who are unable
or unwilling to visit a clinic. Using the Doctor on Demand
services, patients can connect with one of more than 1,400
licensed physicians through the company’s Web site using
a Chrome, Firefox, or Safari browser or via an Android or
iOS app. In addition to video conferences, the Doctor on
Demand app allows patients to upload high-resolution
images so that doctors can better assess certain
conditions.
The top conditions treated by the service are cold and flu
symptoms, sore throats, urinary tract infections, skin rashes,
diarrhea and vomiting, eye issues, sports injuries, and travel-
related illnesses. The site also offers video visits with board-
certified lactation consultants for women who are
breastfeeding. In addition, patients who need psychological
or psychiatric services can consult with mental health
professionals via the service.
According to Adam Jackson, CEO of Doctor on Demand,
the most frequent users of the company’s services are
working mothers, who often have questions about their
children’s health but aren’t always able (or willing) to take
time off to get every question answered. According to
Jackson, 92 percent of video consultations require no in-
person follow-up.
Although Doctor on Demand suggests that patients have
access to Wi-Fi to ensure the highest quality appointment, the
company promises a smooth experience as long as patients
have a 4G or LTE connection. Patients who have connection
problems can also switch to audio only to complete a visit, if
necessary. The Doctor on Demand network runs on a cloud-
based platform run by Amazon Web Services. Due to the
nature of the communication, the company had to go
through several steps to ensure that all of its infrastructure
450 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

was compliant with HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act) requirements.
Most experts predict a shift to telemedicine, including
video doctors’ visits, will continue. In fact, a report by
analytics company IHS Technology predicts that video
consultations will increase from 2 million in 2015 to 5.4
million by 2020. For some patients, however, technology
limitations will continue to impede their ability to access
health care through telemedicine services. A grainy
connection or one that cuts out in the middle of an
appointment is unlikely to result in a high quality of care.
Other hurdles that will also need to be overcome include
patient’s privacy concerns, patients’ uncertainty about when a
video appointment is appropriate in terms of symptoms, and
patients’ lack of trust that a virtual provider can accurately
diagnose and treat them. That concern was reinforced by a
recent study published in the JAMA Internal Medicine that
found significant variations in the quality of care provided by
different companies offering virtual visits for the diagnosis
and treatment of common acute illnesses.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Would you consider using Doctor on Demand or a
similar service to access treatment for a minor health-
care issue? If not, which aspects of the service are most
concerning to you (privacy, quality of care, security or
other technology issues, etc.)?
2. Do more research online about Doctor on Demand and
two of its competitors (such as Amwell, MDLive, and
Teladoc). What information does each company pro-
vide on its Web site that is designed to ease patients’
concerns about privacy, quality, and technology-
related issues? Which company does the best job of
convincing you that their service is safe and secure?
3. In the study on patient travel time, researchers found
that minority patients and those who were unem-
ployed faced longer travel times when visiting a doc-
tor. Rural Americans also often have more difficulty
accessing health care. Is a video-based telemedicine
app likely to improve access for those populations?
How might this technology be used in a way that
would be more likely to improve healthcare access for
those populations?
SOURCES: Doyle, Kathryn, “Study: How Long You Wait to See a Doctor
Is Linked to Race, Employment,” Huffington Post, October 6, 2015,
www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/study-how-long-you-wait-to-see-a-doc
tor-is-linked-to-race-employment_us_5613b0cbe4b0baa355ad2621;
“Troubleshooting,” Doctor on Demand, https://doctorondemand.zen
desk.com/hc/en-us/sections/200218868-Troubleshooting, accessed April
9, 2016; “Our Mission,” Doctor on Demand, www.doctorondemand.com
/our-mission, April 8, 2016; Lapowsky, Issie, “Video Is about to Become
the Way We All Visit the Doctor,” Wired, www.wired.com/2015/04
/united-healthcare-telemedicine; Van Thoen, Lindsay, “Healthcare IT is
Failing (And It Needs AWS), Logicworks (blog), July 20, 2015, www
.logicworks.net/blog/2015/07/healthcare-cloud-saas-aws; Japsen, Bruce,
“Doctors’ Virtual Consults with Patients to Double by 2020,” Forbes,
August 9, 2015, www.forbes.com/sites/brucejapsen/2015/08/09/as-tele
health-booms-doctor-video-consults-to-double-by-2020/#639cbc4e5d66;
“Press Release: “39% of Tech-Savvy Consumers Have Not Heard of
Telemedicine: HealthMine Survey,” HealthMine, March 27, 2016, www
.prnewswire.com/news-releases/39-of-tech-savvy-consumers-have-not
-heard-of-telemedicine-healthmine-survey-300241737.html#continue
-jump; Schoenfield, Adam J., et al., “Variation in Quality of Urgent Health
Care Provided during Commercial Virtual Visits,” JAMA Internal
Medicine, April 4, 2016, http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?
articleid=2511324.
Notes
1. “About TMW,” TMW, www.tmwsystems.com/about-tmw,
accessed March 22, 2016.
2. “TMW Deploys Bloomfire for Social Learning,” Bloom-
fire (blog), April 16, 2015, https://bloomfire.com
/blog/tmw-deploys-bloomfire-for-social-learning.
3. “About the Firm,” White & Case, www.whitecase.com
/about/, accessed February 5, 2015.
4. Britt, Phil, “Creating a More Knowledgeable, Nimble
Organization,” KM World, January 30, 2015, www
.kmworld.com/Articles/Editorial/Features/Creating-a-
more-knowledgeable-nimble-organization-101536.aspx.
5. “Knowledge Management & Transfer Model {Techniques
and Forms},” Division of Personnel, Department of
Administrative Service, State of New Hampshire, www
.admin.state.nh.us/hr/documents/Workforce_Develop
ment/Knowledge%20Management%20&%20Transfer%
20Model.doc, accessed February 26, 2015.
6. “Kaleo Software Secures $7 Million to Accelerate Inno-
vation and Growth,” Kaleo, October 15, 2015, www
.kaleosoftware.com/press/seriesa.
7. “This is GSA,” U.S. General Services Administration
(GSA), www.gsa.gov/thisisgsa/#/welcome, accessed April
2, 2016.
8. “Communities,” DigitalGov, www.digitalgov.gov/commu
nities, accessed April 3, 2016.
9. “GSA Leads Customer Service Community of Practice,”
FedScoop, October 7, 2015, http://fedscoop.com
/gsa-leads-customer-experience-community-of-practice.
10. “Customer Experience Community,” U.S. General Ser-
vices Administration (GSA), www.digitalgov.gov/commu
nities/customer-experience-community, accessed April 2,
2015.
11. Grimes, Seth, “Metadata, Connection, and the Big Data
Story,” Breakthrough Analysis, April 26, 2014, http://
breakthroughanalysis.com/2014/04/26/metadata-con
nection-and-the-big-data-story/.
12. “Using Organizational Network Analysis to Build a
Better Business,” Society for Human Resource Manage-
ment,” May 2015, www.shrm.org/publications/hrmaga
zine/editorialcontent/2015/0515/pages/05115-organiza
tional-network-analysis.aspx.
13. “HanseMerkur Automates Its Service Billing Processes
Using inubit,” Bosch Financial Software, www.bosch
-si.com/media/en/finance_7/documents_2/brochures_1
/success_stories/insurance_3/hansemerkur.pdf, accessed
February 7, 2015.
14. “Adobe Fast Facts,” Adobe, www.images.adobe.com/con
tent/dam/acom/en/fast-facts/pdfs/fast-facts.pdf, accessed
April 6, 2016.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 451
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

15. “Adobe,” Progress, www.progress.com/customers/adobe,
accessed February 7, 2015.
16. “About Us,” DBS, www.dbs.com/about-us/default.page,
accessed January 29, 2016.
17. “DBS,” Progress, www.progress.com/customers/dbs,
accessed January 29, 2016.
18. Andrews, Whit and Koehler-Kruener, Hanns, “Magic
Quadrant for Enterprise Search,” Gartner, August 19,
2015, www.gartner.com/doc/reprints?id=1
-2LH0EF0&ct=150820&st=sg.
19. “Company Information,” Harris Corporation,” http://har
ris.com/about, accessed April 6, 2017.
20. “Harris Corporation Increases Productivity with Coveo,”
Coveo, www.coveo.com/~/media/Files/CaseStudies/Har
ris_Corporation_Increases_Productivity_with_Coveo
_ for_Advanced_Enterprise_Search.ashx, accessed
April 6, 2016.
21. Deutchman, Leonard, “2015 in Review: What Happened,
Is Happening and Will Happen,” Legal Intelligencer,
January 5, 2016, www.thelegalintelligencer.com/latest
-news/id=1202746177129/2015-in-Review-What-Hap
pened-Is-Happening-aibnd-Will-Happen?mcode
=1395262324557&curindex=918&slreturn=2016
0307160543.
22. Krause, Jason, “The Battle of Rio Tinto–Predictive Cod-
ing Hits Snags in Marquee Case,” Association of Certified
E-Discovery Specialists (blog), July 24, 2015, www.aceds
.org/the-battle-of-rio-tinto-predictive-coding-hits-snags
-in-marquee-case.
23. McCarthy, J., Minsky, M.L., Rochester, N., and Shannon,
C.E., “A Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Research
Project on Artificial Intelligence,” August 31, 1955,
www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/history/dartmouth/dart
mouth.html.
24. “What is Watson,” http://www.ibm.com/smarterplanet
/us/en/ibmwatson/what-is-watson.html, accessed April
26, 2016.
25. “By 2029 No Computer—or ‘Machine Intelligence’—Will
Have Passed the Turing Test,” Long Bets, http://longbets
.org/1/, accessed May 2, 2014.
26. “The Aspen Institute: Google’s Eric Schmidt with Walter
Isaacson on ‘The New Digital Age,’ YouTube video, 1:09,
July 24, 2013, www.youtube.com/watch?
v=3Ox4EMFMy48.
27. Gee, Sue, “Mitsuku Wins Loebner Prize 2013,”
I-Programmer, September 15, 2013, www.i-programmer
.info/news/105-artificial-intelligence/6382-mitsuku-wins
-loebner-prize-2013.html.
28. 20Q Web site, www.20q.net, accessed May 2, 2014.
29. “FICO® Blaze Advisor® Decision Rules Management
System,” FICO, www.fico.com/en/products/fico-blaze
-advisor-decision-rules-management-system#overview,
accessed April 7, 2016.
30. Capek, Karel, “Beyond the Robots,” Legacy.com, www
.legacy.com/news/legends-and-legacies/karel-capek
–beyond-the-robots/302/#sthash.RQyp1B1R, accessed
May 3, 2014.
31. The Web site for iRobot Web page, www.irobot.com,
accessed April 8, 2016.
32. “REC (Robotics Engineering Curriculum),” Intelitek,
www.intelitek.com/engineering/rec_curriculum,
accessed April 8, 2016.
33. “Meet Dash and Dot,” Wonder Workshop, www.make
wonder.com, accessed April 8, 2016
34. Martin, Alexander, “SoftBank, Alibaba Team Up on
Robot,” The Wall Street Journal, June 18, 2015, www.wsj
.com/articles/pepper-softbanks-emotional-robot-goes
-global-1434618111.
35. Smith, Aaron and Janna Anderson, “Predictions for the
State of AI and Robotics in 2025,” PewResearchCenter,
August 6, 2014, www.pewinternet.org/2014/08/06/pre
dictions-for-the-state-of-ai-and-robotics-in-2025.
36. “Facebook’s New Face Recognition Knows You from the
Side,” CNN Money, April 4, 2014, http://money.cnn.com
/2014/04/04/technology/innovation/facebook-facial-rec
ognition/.
37. Elgan, Mike, “Is Facial Recognition a Threat on Facebook
and Google,” June 29, 2015, www.computerworld.com
/article/2941415/data-privacy/is-facial-recognition-a
-threat-on-facebook-and-google.html.
38. D’Orazio, Dante, “Google Now and Speech Recognition
Get Big Updates in Android 4.4 Kitkat,” The Verge,
October 31, 2013, www.theverge.com/2013/10/31
/5051458/android-kit-kat-bring-big-updates-to-google
-now-and-speech-recognition.
39. “Neural Tools Used for Tumor Diagnosis,” Palisade Case
Studies, www.palisade.com/cases/katherinenhospital
.asp?caseNav=byIndustry, accessed May 3, 2014.
40. Taft, Darryl, “IBM Partners with American Cancer Society
on Watson Cancer Advisor,” eWeek, April 12, 2016, http://
www.eweek.com/database/ibm-partners-with-american
-cancer-society-on-watson-cancer-advisor.html.
41. “KEITV Customer Success Stories—Sunkist Growers,”
http://ketiv.com/company/customer-success-stories/sunk
ist, accessed May 6, 2014.
42. Seymour, Mike, “Pixar’s RenderMan Turns 25 (Exclu-
sive),” fx Guide, July 25, 2013, www.fxguide.com/fea
tured/pixars-renderman-turns-25.
43. King, Leo, “Facebook, Oculus, and Businesses’ Thirst for
Virtual Reality,” Forbes, March 30, 2014, www.forbes
.com/sites/leoking/2014/03/30/facebook-oculus-and-busi
nesses-thirst-for-virtual-reality.
44. Elgan, Mike, “Why Virtual Reality Is the Next Social Net-
work,” Computerworld, November 2, 2015, www.compu
terworld.com/article/2999819/social-media/why-virtual
-reality-is-the-next-social-network.html?phint=newt%
3Dcomputerworld_thisweek&phint=idg_eid%
3D144dfe65577ba4663c4cefdafdff5932#tk.
CTWNLE_nlt_thisweek_2015-11-02.
45. Casti, Taylor, “6 Ways Virtual Reality Is Already Chang-
ing the World (No Facebook Required),” Huffington
Post, March 28, 2014, www.huffingtonpost.com/2014
/03/28/virtual-reality-uses-medicine-autism-ptsd-burn
-amputee-victims_n_5045111.html.
46. Lardinois, Frederic, “Google Expands Its VR Program for
Students to More U.S. Schools,” TechCrunch, November
9, 2015, http://techcrunch.com/2015/11/09/google
-expands-its-vr-program-for-students-to-more-u-s-schools.
47. “Introducing the Expeditions Pioneer Program,” Google,
www.google.com/edu/expeditions, accessed April 8, 2016.
48. King, Leo, “Ford, Where Virtual Reality Is Already
Manufacturing Reality,” Forbes, May 3, 2014, www
.forbes.com/sites/leoking/2014/05/03/ford-where-virtual
-reality-is-already-manufacturing-reality.
452 PART 3 • Business Information Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

49. Gaudiosi, John, “Here’s Why NFL Teams Are Training in
Virtual Reality,” Fortune, August 10, 2015, http://fortune
.com/2015/08/10/strivr-virtual-reality-nfl.
50. “The Story,” STRIVR, www.strivrlabs.com/about, accessed
April 9, 2016.
51. “IKEA Launches Pilot Virtual Reality (VR) Kitchen
Experience for HTC Vive on Steam,” IKEA, April 4, 2016,
www.ikea.com/us/en/about_ikea/newsitem/040516
_Virtual-Reality.
52. Hart, Brian, “Microsoft Targets Enterprise Virtual Reality
with Business Oriented VR Headset,” Road to VR, April
1, 2014, www.roadtovr.com/microsoft-enterprise-virtual
-reality-business-vr-headset/.
53. “Microsoft Accessibility—Types of Assistive Technology
Products,” www.microsoft.com/enable/at/types.aspx,
accessed May 12, 2014.
54. “Assistive Listening Systems and Devices,” http://nad
.org/issues/technology/assistive-listening/systems-and
-devices, accessed May 12, 2014.
55. Savani, Rahul and von Stengel, Bernhard, “Game Theory
Explorer—Software for the Applied Game Theorist,”
March 16, 2014, www.maths.lse.ac.uk/Personal/stengel
/TEXTE/largeongte.pdf.
56. Levenson, Eric, “Jeopardy’s New Game-Theory Devotee
Is One to Keep an Eye on,” The Wire, Jan 31, 2014, www
.thewire.com/entertainment/2014/01/jeopardys-newest
-star-proves-optimal-strategy-really-unfriendly/357609.
57. “Port Resilience Operational / Tactical Enforcement to
Combat Terrorism (PROTECT) Model for the United
States Coast Guard,” http://teamcore.usc.edu/projects
/coastguard/, accessed May 13, 2014.
58. Leventhal, Rajiv, “At Boston Medical Center, Using Ana-
lytics to Improve OR Efficiencies,” Healthcare Informat-
ics,” March 24, 2016, www.healthcare-informatics.com
/article/boston-medical-center-using-analytics-improve
-or-efficiencies.
CHAPTER 10 • Knowledge Management and Specialized Information Systems 453
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

PART 4
Planning, Acquiring,
and Building
Systems
Chapter 11
Strategic Planning and Project
Management
Chapter 12
System Acquisition and Development
master_art/Shutterstock.com
455
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
11
Strategic Planning and Project
Management
lenetstan/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• Over 2,000 years ago, the ancient Greek philosopher
and scientist Aristotle identified the essence of good
project management when he said: “First, have a defi-
nite, clear practical ideal: a goal or an objective. Sec-
ond, have the necessary means to achieve your ends:
wisdom, money, materials, and methods. Third, adjust
all your means to that end.”
• A 2015 study of 50,000 projects from around the world,
ranging from small system enhancements to massive
systems reengineering implementations, found that
roughly 71 percent of all information system projects fail
or face major challenges such as lateness, budget
overruns, and lack of required features.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• Organizations that are more advanced in their
planning processes develop multiple-year strate-
gic plans.
• State the benefits of creating a strategic plan.
• Identify and briefly describe the phases of a
goals-based strategic planning process.
• Explain what SWOT analysis is and how it is used.
• Identify and briefly describe the components of a
strategic plan.
• The strategic planning process for the IS organi-
zation and the factors that influence it depend on
how the organization is perceived by the rest of
the organization.
• State the purpose of the IS strategic plan.
• Identify four drivers that set information system
organizational strategy and determine information
system investments.
• Identify three ways the IS organization can be
perceived by the rest of the organization and
discuss how that influences the IS strategy.
• Organizations must always make a clear connec-
tion among business objectives, goals, and pro-
jects. In addition, projects must be consistent with
business strategies.
• Discuss why project management is considered
to be a core competency for many organizations.
• Identify and briefly discuss the five highly interre-
lated parameters that define a project.
• Identify and briefly discuss the nine knowledge
areas associated with the science of project
management.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Strategic Planning and Project
Management?
Ever since the dawn of the computer age, business and IS executives have been working to improve the
alignment between business and IS as a top business priority. In this context, alignment means that the
IS organization and its resources are focused on efforts that support the key objectives defined in the
strategic plan of the business. This implies that IS and business managers have a shared vision of
where the organization is headed and agree on its key strategies. This shared vision will guide the IS
organization in hiring the right people with the correct skills and competencies, choosing the right
technologies and vendors to explore and develop, installing the right systems, and focusing on projects
that will best help the organization meet its mission. Projects are the way that much of an organization’s
work gets done. No matter what the industry and no matter whether the organization is a for-profit
company or a nonprofit organization—large or small, multinational or local—good strategic planning
coupled with good project management are positive forces that enable an organization to get results
from its efforts. Knowing the basics of strategic planning and project management will make you an
extremely valuable resource within any organization.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• What is an effective strategic planning process, who needs to participate in it, and what are the deli-
verables of such a process?
• What is project management, and what are the key elements of an effective project management
process?
This chapter defines strategic planning and outlines an effective process for
accomplishing this critical activity. It also clarifies the importance of project
management and outlines a proven process for successful project manage-
ment. Organizations today need people who can develop strategic plans and
lead projects.
Strategic Planning
Strategic planning is a process that helps managers identify desired out-
comes and formulate feasible plans to achieve their objectives by using avail-
able resources and capabilities. The strategic plan must take into account that
the organization and everything around it is changing: consumers’ likes and
dislikes change; old competitors leave and new ones enter the marketplace;
the costs and availability of raw materials and labor fluctuate, as does the fun-
damental economic environment (interest rates, growth in gross domestic
product, inflation rates); and the degree of industry and government regula-
tion changes.
The following is a set of frequently cited benefits of strategic planning:
●
Provides a framework and a clearly defined direction to guide decision
making at all levels throughout the organization
●
Ensures the most effective use is made of the organization’s resources by
focusing those resources on agreed-on key priorities
●
Enables the organization to be proactive and take advantage of opportu-
nities and trends, rather than passively reacting to them
●
Enables all organizational units to participate and work together toward
accomplishing a common set of goals
strategic planning: A process that
helps managers identify desired out-
comes and formulate feasible plans to
achieve their objectives by using avail-
able resources and capabilities.
458 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Provides a set of measures for judging organizational and personnel
performance
●
Improves communication among management and the board of directors,
shareholders, and other interested parties
In some organizations with immature planning processes, strategic plan-
ning is an annual process timed to yield results used to prepare the annual
expense budget and capital forecast. The process is focused inward, concen-
trating on the individual needs of various departments. Organizations that are
more advanced in their planning processes develop multiple-year plans based
on a situational analysis, competitive assessments, consideration of factors
external to the organization, and an evaluation of strategic options.
The CEO of an organization must make long-term decisions about where
the organization is headed and how it will operate and has ultimate responsi-
bility for strategic planning. Subordinates, lower-level managers, and consul-
tants typically gather useful information, perform much of the underlying
analysis, and provide valuable input. But the CEO must thoroughly under-
stand the analysis and be heavily involved in setting high-level business objec-
tives and defining strategies. The CEO also must be seen as a champion and
supporter of the chosen strategies; otherwise, the rest of the organization is
unlikely to “buy into” those strategies and take the necessary actions to make
it all happen.
There are a variety of strategic planning approaches, including issues
based, organic, and goals based. Issues-based strategic planning begins by
identifying and analyzing key issues that face the organization, setting strate-
gies to address those issues, and identifying projects and initiatives that are
consistent with those strategies. Organic strategic planning defines the orga-
nization’s vision and values and then identifies projects and initiatives to
achieve the vision while adhering to the values.
Goals-based strategic planning is a multiphase strategic planning pro-
cess that begins by performing a situation analysis to identify an organiza-
tion’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. Next, management
sets direction for the organization by defining its mission, vision, values,
objectives, and goals. The results of the situation analysis and direction-
setting phases are used to define strategies to enable the organization to fulfill
its mission. Initiatives, programs, and projects are then identified and exe-
cuted to enable the organization to meet the objectives and goals. These
ongoing efforts are evaluated to ensure that they remain on track toward
achieving the goals of the organization. The major phases in goals-based stra-
tegic planning are (1) analyze situation, (2) set direction, (3) define strategies,
and (4) deploy plan (see Figure 11.1).
Analyze Situation
All levels and business units of an organization must be involved in assessing
its strengths and weaknesses. Preparing a historical perspective that summarizes
FIGURE 11.1
The goals-based strategic
planning process
Goals-based strategic planning is a
multiphase process for strategic
planning.
Where are we
now?
How will we get
there?
How do we
engage others?
Where do we
want to go?
Strengths
Weaknesses
Opportunities
Threats
Mission
Vision
Values
Objectives
Goals
Strategies
Corporate and
business unit:
• Plans
• Initiatives
• Programs
• Projects
Analyze
situation
Set
direction
Define
strategies
Deploy
plan
issues-based strategic
planning: A strategic planning pro-
cess that begins by identifying and
analyzing key issues that face the
organization, setting strategies to
address those issues, and identifying
projects and initiatives that are consis-
tent with those strategies.
organic strategic planning: A
strategic planning process that defines
the organization’s vision and values
and then identifies projects and initia-
tives to achieve the vision while adher-
ing to the values.
goals-based strategic planning:
A multiphase strategic planning
process that begins by performing a
situation analysis to identify an
organization’s strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 459
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the company’s development is an excellent way to begin this strategic plan-
ning step. Next, a multitude of data is gathered about internal processes and
operations, including survey data from customers and suppliers and other
objective assessments of the organization. The collected data is analyzed to
identify and assess how well the firm is meeting current objectives and goals,
and how well its current strategies are working. This process identifies many
of the strengths and weaknesses of the firm.
Strategic planning requires careful study of the external environment sur-
rounding the organization and assessing where the organization fits within it.
This analysis begins with an examination of the industry in which the organi-
zation competes: What is the size of the market? How fast is it growing or
shrinking? What are the significant industry trends?
Next, the organization must collect and analyze facts about its key custo-
mers, competitors, and suppliers. The goal is twofold: capture a clear picture
of the strategically important issues that the organization must address in the
future and reveal the firm’s competitive position against its rivals. During this
step, the organization must get input from customers, suppliers, and industry
experts—all of whom will likely be able to provide more objective viewpoints
than employees. Members of the organization should be prepared to hear
things they do not like, but that may offer tremendous opportunities for
improvement. It is critical that unmet customer needs are identified to form
the basis for future growth.
The most frequently used model for assessing the nature of industry com-
petition is Michael Porter’s Five Forces Model, which identifies the funda-
mental
factors
that
determine
the
level
of
competition
and
long-term
profitability of an industry (see Figure 11.2).
The fundamental factors that determine the level of competition and long-
term profitability of an industry are the following:
1. The threat of new competitors will raise the level of competition. Entry
barriers determine the relative threat of new competitors. These barriers
include the capital required to enter the industry and the cost to custo-
mers to switch to a competitor.
FIGURE 11.2
Michael Porter’s Five Forces
Model
This model can be used to determine
the level of competition and long-
term profitability of an industry.
Rivalry among
existing firms
Industry
competitors
Threat of
new entrants
Bargaining power
of suppliers
Bargaining power
of buyers
Threat of
substitute products
or service
Suppliers
Buyers
Potential
entrants
Substitutes
Michael Porter’s Five Forces
Model: A model that identifies the
fundamental factors that determine the
level of competition and long-term
profitability of an industry.
460 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

2. The threat of substitute products can lower the profitability of industry
competitors. The willingness of buyers to switch products and the relative
cost and performance of substitutes are key factors in this threat.
3. The bargaining power of buyers determines prices and long-term profit-
ability. This bargaining power is stronger when there are relatively few
buyers but many sellers in the industry, or when the products offered are
all essentially the same.
4. The bargaining power of suppliers can significantly affect the industry’s
profitability. Suppliers have strong bargaining power in industries that
have many buyers and only a few dominant suppliers and in industries
that do not represent a key customer group for suppliers.
5. The degree of rivalry between competitors is high in industries with many
equally sized competitors or little differentiation between products.
Many organizations also perform a competitive financial analysis to deter-
mine how their revenue, costs, profits, cash flow, and other key financial
parameters match up against those of their competitors. Most of the informa-
tion needed to prepare such comparisons is readily available from competi-
tors’ annual reports.
The analysis of an organization’s internal assessment and study of its
external environment is summarized into a Strengths, Weaknesses, Oppor-
tunities, Threats (SWOT) matrix, as shown in Table 11.1, which provides a
SWOT matrix for Starbucks.1 The SWOT matrix is a simple way to illustrate
what the company is doing well, where it can improve, what opportunities
are available, and what environmental factors threaten the future of the orga-
nization. Typically, the internal assessment identifies most of the strengths
and weaknesses, while the analysis of the external environment uncovers
most of the opportunities and threats. The technique is based on the assump-
tion that an effective strategy derives from maximizing a firm’s strengths and
opportunities and minimizing its weaknesses and threats.
Set Direction
The direction-setting phase of strategic planning involves defining the mis-
sion, vision, values, objectives, and goals of the organization. Determining
TABLE 11.1 SWOT analysis for Starbucks
Strengths
●
Strong revenue and profit growth
●
Rapid increase in global store count
●
Strong comparable store sales
growth
Weaknesses
●
Uneven international growth
●
Investing lots of money on
expansion
Opportunities
●
Rising incomes in China should fuel
higher demand for “premium”
Western products such as Starbucks
●
Top premium coffee brand in the
K-Cup category, presenting a
growth opportunity
●
Experimenting with various con-
cept stores, including tea bars and
wine bars
Threats
●
Unstable price of coffee beans
●
Rising competition (e.g., Dunkin’
Donuts and Tim Hortons)
Strengths, Weaknesses, Oppor-
tunities, Threats (SWOT)
matrix: A simple way to illustrate what
a company is doing well, where it can
improve, what opportunities are avail-
able, and what environmental factors
threaten the future of the organization.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 461
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

these will enable the organization to identify the proper strategies and pro-
jects, as shown in Figure 11.3.
Vision and Mission
Senior management must create a vision/mission statement that communi-
cates an organization’s overarching aspirations to guide it through changing
objectives, goals, and strategies. The organization’s vision/mission statement
forms a foundation for making decisions and taking action. The most effective
vision/mission statements inspire and require employees to stretch to reach
the organization’s goals. These statements seldom change once they are for-
mulated. An effective statement consists of three components: a mission state-
ment, a vision of a desirable future, and a set of core values.
The mission statement concisely defines the organization’s fundamental
purpose for existing. It usually is stated in a challenging manner to inspire
employees, customers, and shareholders.
The organization’s vision is a concise statement of what the organization
intends to achieve in the future. The following are the earmarks of a good vision:
●
It motivates and inspires.
●
It is easy to communicate, simple to understand, and memorable.
●
It is challenging and yet achievable and moves the organization toward
greatness.
A core value is a widely accepted principle that guides how people
behave and make decisions in the organization.
Table 11.2 provides the mission, vision, and values of Google.2,3
Objectives
The terms “objective” and “goal” are frequently used interchangeably. For this
discussion, we distinguish between the two—defining objective as a state-
ment of a compelling business need that an organization must meet to
achieve its vision and mission.
Each week, Walmart serves close to 260 million customers in its stores
and through its Web sites globally. Recent annual revenue for the company
FIGURE 11.3
The strategic planning
pyramid
The strategic planning pyramid is a
top-down approach to identify initia-
tives, program, and projects.
Mission
Vision
Values
Objectives
Goals
Strategies
Initiatives, programs, and projects
vision/mission statement:
A statement that communicates an
organization’s overarching aspirations
to guide it through changing objectives,
goals, and strategies.
mission statement: A statement
that concisely defines an organization’s
fundamental purpose for existing.
vision: A concise statement of what
an organization intends to achieve in
the future.
core value: A widely accepted prin-
ciple that guides how people behave
and make decisions in the organization.
objective: A statement of a compel-
ling business need that an organization
must meet to achieve its vision and
mission.
462 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

exceeded $485 billion. The organization has defined its mission, vision,
values, and objectives, as shown in Table 11.3.4
Goals
A goal is a specific result that must be achieved to reach an objective. In fact,
several goals may be associated with a single objective. The objective states
what must be accomplished, and the associated goals specify how to determine
whether the objective is being met.
TABLE 11.2 Google’s mission, vision, and values
Mission
To organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful.
Vision
To provide access to the world’s information in one click.
Values
1) We want to work with great people.
2) Technology innovation is our lifeblood.
3) Working at Google is fun.
4) Be actively involved; you are Google.
5) Don’t take success for granted.
6) Do the right thing; don’t be evil.
7) Earn customer and user loyalty and respect every day.
8) Sustainable long-term growth and profitability are key to our success.
9) Google cares about and supports the communities where we work and live.
10) We aspire to improve and change the world.
TABLE 11.3 Walmart’s mission, vision, and values
Mission: We save people money so they can live better.
Vision: If we work together, we’ll lower the cost of living for everyone … we’ll
give the world an opportunity to see what it’s like to save and have a better life.
Core Values:
●
Open door policy. Managers’ doors are open to employees at all levels.
●
Sundown rule. Answer employee, customer, and supplier questions on the
same day the questions are received.
●
Grass roots process. Capture suggestions and ideas from the sales floor and
front lines.
●
Three basic beliefs & values. Respect for the individual; service to our cus-
tomers; and striving for excellence.
●
Ten-foot rule. Make eye contact, greet, and offer help to customers who come
within 10 feet.
●
Servant leadership. Leaders are in service to their team.
Objectives:
●
Give the consumer greater value for each product category.
●
Optimize the products in each of stores by reducing the number of products
and number of suppliers.
●
Improve the customer’s in-store experience and become more efficient in and
out of each store.
goal: A specific result that must be
achieved to reach an objective.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 463
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Goals track progress in meeting an organization’s objectives. They help
managers determine if a specific objective is being achieved. Results, deter-
mined by how well the goals are met, provide a feedback loop. Depending
on the difference between the actual and desired results, adjustments may be
needed in the objectives, goals, and strategies as well as with the actual pro-
jects being worked on.
Some organizations encourage their managers to set Big Hairy Audacious
Goals (BHAGs) that require a breakthrough in the organization’s products or
services to achieve. Such a goal “may be daunting and perhaps risky, but the
challenge of it grabs people in the gut and gets their juices flowing and cre-
ates tremendous forward momentum.”5
In April 2012, Facebook purchased the two-year-old photo-sharing service
Instagram for $1 billion, a move that many industry analysts viewed as impru-
dent investment at the time.6 However, since then, Instagram usage has
grown rapidly with both personal and business users. Achieving the goal of
successfully integrating Instagram with Facebook expanded the company’s
mobile offerings while removing a rival for users’ attention.7
The use of so-called SMART goals has long been advocated by manage-
ment consultants.8 The principal advantages of SMART goals are that they are
easy to understand, are easily tracked, and contribute real value to the organi-
zation. The SMART acronym stands for:
●
Specific. Specific goals have a much greater chance of being understood
and accomplished than vague goals. Specific goals use action verbs and
specify who, what, when, where, and why.
●
Measurable. Goals that are measurable include numeric or descriptive
measures that define criteria such as quantity, quality, and cost so that
progress toward meeting the goal can be determined.
●
Achievable. Goals should be ambitious yet realistic and attainable. Goals
that are either completely out of reach or below standard performance are
worthless and demotivating.
●
Relevant. Goals should strongly contribute to the mission of the depart-
ment, else why expend the effort?
●
Time constrained. A time limit should be set to reach the goal to help
define the priority to assign to meeting the goal.
An example of a SMART goal for a customer service organization of a
large retail store might be: Reduce customer complaints about mispriced mer-
chandise from 9 per day to less than 3 per day by June 30.
Define Strategies
A strategy describes how an organization will achieve its vision, mission,
objectives, and goals. Selecting a specific strategy focuses and coordinates an
organization’s resources and activities from the top down to accomplish its
mission. Indeed, creating a set of strategies that will garner committed sup-
porters across the organization—all aligned on the mission and vision—is key
to organizational success.
Common themes in setting strategies include “increase revenue,” “attract
and retain new customers,” “increase customer loyalty,” and “reduce the time
required to deliver new products to market.” In choosing from alternative
strategies, managers should consider the long-term impact of each strategy on
revenue and profit, the degree of risk involved, the amount and types of
resources that will be required, and the potential competitive reaction. In set-
ting strategies, managers draw on the results of the SWOT analysis and con-
sider the following questions:
●
How can we best capitalize on our strengths and use them to their full
potential?
strategy: A plan that describes how
an organization will achieve its vision,
mission, objectives, and goals.
464 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
How do we reduce or eliminate the negative impact of our weaknesses?
●
Which opportunities represent the best opportunities for our
organization?
●
How can we exploit these opportunities?
●
Will our strengths enable us to make the most of this opportunity?
●
Will our weaknesses undermine our ability to capitalize on this
opportunity?
●
How can we defend against threats to achieve our vision/mission, objec-
tives, and goals?
●
Can we turn this threat into an opportunity?
Amazon has made a strategic decision to explore the possible use of
delivery drones to gain a real competitive advantage over competitors who
rely on less efficient ground transportation. Because a large percentage of
Amazon packages weigh less than 5 pounds, drones could make the ideal
rapid-delivery vehicles. Amazon has detailed plans for this service, however,
the company cannot announce if or when the program will start until regula-
tors set out the rules regarding the commercial use of drones. Such a strategy
has the potential to attract new customers and increase revenue.9
Deploy Plan
The strategic plan defines objectives for an organization, establishes SMART
goals, and sets strategies on how to reach those goals. These objectives,
goals, and strategies are then communicated to the organization’s business
units and functional units so that everyone is “on the same page.” The man-
agers of the various organizational units can then develop more detailed
plans for initiatives, programs, and projects that align with the firm’s objec-
tives, goals, and strategies. Alignment ensures that the efforts will draw on
the strengths of the organization, capitalize on new opportunities, fix organi-
zational weaknesses, and minimize the impact of potential threats.
The extent of strategic planning done at lower levels within the organiza-
tion depends on the amount of autonomy granted those units as well as the
leadership style and capabilities of the managers in charge of each unit. For
these reasons, the amount of effort, the process used, and the level of creativ-
ity that goes into the creation of a business unit strategic plan can vary greatly
across an organization.
Alstom Transport, which develops and markets railway systems, equip-
ment, and services, won a contract to supply Virgin Trains’ West Coast Main-
line operations in the United Kingdom.10 Alstom supplied Virgin Trains 52 of
its high-speed (125 mph) Pendolino trains. However, the train was initially
too unreliable—too many trains were shut down on any given day due to
maintenance issues.11 Only 38 of the 52 trains were available on a given day;
however, 46 trains were needed to meet service-level goals. The situation was
affecting Alstom’s relationship with Virgin Trains, and, if not improved, would
likely affect contract renewal. Alstom Transport executives met and set key
objectives to improve the relationship with Virgin Trains:
●
Meet availability goals and improve reliability.
●
Do not increase costs.
●
Provide greater value to the customer.
Alstom leaders then employed a “catch-ball” process to deploy these
objectives to other workers at the firm. The management team “threw” the
goals back and forth with the entire management chain, including senior man-
agement, operations leaders, and depot and production management. By
means of this process, Alstom identified over 15 potential improvement pro-
jects to support the goals, leading to an increased train availability rate—
72 percent to 90 percent—while headcount and costs were kept flat. Alstom
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 465
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
won renewal of a service maintenance contract with Virgin Trains three years
earlier than expected because of its improved service.12
Strategic Planning at Johns Hopkins Medicine
Johns Hopkins Medicine, with headquarters in Baltimore, Maryland, is a $7.7 billion
global healthcare organization that operates 6 academic and community hospitals,
along with 4 suburban healthcare and surgery centers, and 39 primary and specialty
care outpatient sites. The organization strives to create a culture in which diversity,
inclusion, civility, collegiality, and professionalism are championed through actions,
incentives, and accountability. Johns Hopkins Medicine’s mission, vision, core values,
and objectives are presented in Table 11.4.13
You are a member of a three-person team within the finance organization that
is working under the direction of the CFO to define a set of strategies that will
support Johns Hopkins Medicine’s financial objectives and goals.
Review Questions
The CFO has asked each member of the team to express his or her thoughts on
two topics:
1.
Should any resources from outside the finance organization be recruited to
help identify and evaluate alternative strategies? Why or why not?
2.
How should potential strategies for the finance organization be evaluated?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Develop two hypothetical objectives specific to the finance organization that are
consistent with Johns Hopkins Medicine’s overall vision, mission, and objectives.
2.
For each objective develop one SMART goal.
TABLE 11.4 Johns Hopkins Medicine mission, vision, values, and
objectives
Mission: To improve the health of the community and the world by setting the
standard of excellence in medical education, research, and clinical care.
Vision: Johns Hopkins Medicine pushes the boundaries of discovery, transforms
health care, advances medical education, and creates hope for humanity. Together
we will deliver the promise of medicine.
Core Values:
●
Excellence and discovery
●
Leadership and integrity
●
Diversity and inclusion
●
Respect and collegiality
Objectives:
●
Attract, engage, develop, and retain the world’s best people.
●
Become the exemplar for biomedical research by advancing and integrating
discovery, innovation, translation, and dissemination.
●
Be the national leader in the safety science, teaching, and provision of patient-
and family-centered care.
●
Lead the world in the education and training of physicians and biomedical
scientists.
●
Become the model for an academically based, integrated healthcare delivery
and financing system.
●
Create sustainable financial success and implement continuous performance
improvement.
466 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Setting the Information System Organizational Strategy
The strategic plan of the information system (IS) organization must identify
those technologies, vendors, competencies, people, systems, and projects in
which the organization will invest to support the corporate and business unit
objectives, goals, and strategies. The IS strategic plan is strongly influenced
by new technology innovations (e.g., increasingly more powerful mobile
devices, advanced printers that can generate three-dimensional objects from a
digital file, access to shared computer resources over the Internet, advanced
software that can analyze large amounts of structured and unstructured data)
and innovative thinking by others both inside and outside the organization
(see Figure 11.4).
The strategic planning process for the IS organization and the factors that
influence it depend on how the organization is perceived by the rest of the
organization. An IS organization can be viewed as a cost center/service pro-
vider, a business partner/business peer, or as a game changer (see Table 11.5).
In a recent survey of more than 700 CIOs, 38 percent said that their IS
organization is viewed as a cost center/service provider that is expected to
reduce IS costs and improve IS services.14 The strategic planning process for
such an organization is typically directed inward and focused on determining
how to do what it is currently doing but cheaper, faster, and better.
The IS organization of the state of Delaware is viewed as a cost center/
service provider. One of the organization’s primary strategic initiatives is to
consolidate IS resources and to eliminate redundant functions and resources
within the various state agencies. The goal is to deliver significant improve-
ments in customer service and to reduce costs.15
The majority of CIOs surveyed, about 52 percent, said that their IS organi-
zation is viewed as a business partner/business peer that is expected to con-
trol IS costs and expand IS services in support of business initiatives.16 The
FIGURE 11.4
Drivers that set IS
organizational strategy and
determine information system
investments
Planners must consider many factors
in setting IS organizational strategy.
Corporate
strategy
Business
unit
strategies
IT
organizational
strategies
Technology
innovations
Innovative
thinking
IT investments:
• Technologies
• Vendors
• Competencies
• People
• Systems
• Projects
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 467
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

strategic planning process of these organizations is based on understanding
the collective business plans for the next year and determining what those
mean for the IS organization in terms of new technologies, vendors, compe-
tencies, people, systems, and projects.
The IS organization for the city of Seattle operates under the constraint of
a decreasing budget but is continually striving to expand its services and capi-
talize on the latest technology developments. It employs newer technologies,
such as mobile computing, to improve the interaction of city government
with its constituents and to support city services on the move. The organiza-
tion also seeks opportunities to access shared computer resources through
cloud-based applications to gain advantages and efficiencies where it makes
sense.17
Only 10 percent of surveyed CIOs stated that their IS organization is
viewed by fellow employees as a game-changing organization that is asked to
lead product innovation efforts and open new markets.18 Their strategic plan-
ning process is outwardly focused and involves meeting with customers, sup-
pliers, and leading IS consultants and vendors to answer questions like “What
do we want to be?” and “How can we create competitive advantage?”19 In
such organizations, IS is not only a means for implementing business-defined
objectives but also a catalyst for achieving new business objectives unreach-
able without IS.
GAF is a $3 billion privately held manufacturer of commercial and resi-
dential roofing. GAF’s IS employees regularly collaborate with external custo-
mers to learn from them and to help educate potential customers about why
they should do business with GAF.20 Using these collaboration sessions to
gain a better understanding of its customers’ needs, GAF developed a mobile
app that allows a contractor to take a photo of a prospect’s house and then
use that photo to allow the prospect to preview different GAF shingle styles
and colors on an actual image of their home. The app was a game changer
for the organization as it helps GAF contractors demonstrate the beauty of
GAF shingles and eliminates one of the biggest barriers to closing the sale—
answering the question, “How will it look on my house?”21
No matter how an IS organization is perceived, the odds of achieving
good alignment between the IS strategic plan and the rest of the business are
vastly increased if IS workers have experience in the business and can talk to
business managers in business terms rather than technology terms. IS staff
must be able to recognize and understand business needs and develop effec-
tive solutions. The CIO especially must be able to communicate well and
should be accessible to other corporate executives. However, the entire bur-
den of achieving alignment between the business and IS cannot be placed
solely on the IS organization.
TABLE 11.5 The IS strategic planning spectrum
Cost Center/Service
Provider
Business Partner/
Business Peer
Game Changer
Strategic planning focus
Inward looking
Business focused
Outward looking
IS goals
Reduce IS costs; improve
IS services
Control IS costs; expand IS
services
Make IS investments to
deliver new products and
services
Strategy
React to strategic plans of
business units
Execute IS projects to
support plans of business
Use IS to achieve competi-
tive advantage
Typical projects
Eliminate redundant or
ineffective IS services
Implement corporate
database and/or enterprise
systems
Provide new ways for cus-
tomers to interact with
organization
468 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Identifying IS Projects and Initiatives
In mature planning organizations, IS workers are constantly picking up ideas
for potential projects through their interactions with various business man-
agers and from observing other IS organizations and competitors. They also
keep abreast of new IS developments and consider how innovations and new
technologies might be applied in their firm. As members of the IS organiza-
tion review and consider the corporate objectives, goals, and strategies, they
can generate many ideas for IS projects that support corporate objectives and
goals. They also recognize the need for IS projects that help other corporate
units fulfill their business objectives. Often, experienced IS managers are
assigned to serve as liaisons with the business units in order to gain a deeper
understanding of each business unit and its needs. The IS managers are then
able to help identify and define IS projects needed to meet those needs.
Most organizations find it useful to classify various potential projects by
type. One such classification system is shown in Table 11.6.
Prioritizing IS Projects and Initiatives
Typically, an organization identifies more IS-related projects and initiatives
than it has the people and resources to staff. An iterative process of setting
priorities and determining the resulting budget, staffing, and timing is needed
to define which projects will be initiated and when they will be executed.
Many organizations create an IS investment board of business unit executives
to
review
potential
projects
and
evaluate
them
from
several
different
perspectives:
1. First and foremost, each viable project must relate to a specific organiza-
tional goal. These relationships make it clear that executing each project
will help meet important organizational objectives (see Figure 11.5).
2. Can the organization measure the business value of the initiative? Will
there be tangible benefits, or are the benefits intangible? Tangible bene-
fits can be measured directly and assigned a monetary value. For exam-
ple, the number of staff before and after the completion of an initiative
TABLE 11.6 Project classification example
Project Type
Definition
Risk Factors Associated with Project Type
Breakthrough
Creates a competitive advantage that enables the
organization to earn a greater than normal
return on investment than its competitors
High cost; very high risk of failure and potential
business disruption
Growth
Generates substantial new revenue or profits for
the firm
High cost; high risk of failure and potential
business disruption
Innovation
Explores the use of technology (or a new tech-
nology) in a new way
Risk can be managed by setting cost limits,
establishing an end date, and defining criteria
for success
Enhancement
Upgrades an existing system to provide new
capabilities that meet new business needs
Risk that scope of upgrade may expand, making
it difficult to control cost and schedule
Maintenance
Implements changes to an existing system to
enable operation in a different technology envi-
ronment (e.g., underlying changes in hardware,
operating systems, or database management
systems)
Risk that major rework may be required to make
system work in a new technology environment;
potential for system performance degradation
Mandatory
Needed to meet requirements of a legal entity or
regulatory agency
Risk that mandated completion date is missed;
may be difficult to define tangible benefits; costs
can be skyrocketed
tangible benefit: A benefit that can
be measured directly and assigned a
monetary value.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 469
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
can be measured, and the monetary value is the decrease in staffing costs,
such as salary, benefits, and overhead. Intangible benefits cannot
directly be measured and cannot easily be quantified in monetary terms.
For example, an increase in customer satisfaction due to an initiative is
important but is difficult to measure and cannot easily be converted into a
monetary value.
3. What kinds of costs (hardware, software, personnel, consultants, etc.) are
associated with the project, and what is the likely total cost of the effort
over multiple years? Consider not just the initial development cost but the
total cost of ownership, including operating costs, support costs, and
maintenance fees.
4. Preliminary costs and benefits are weighed to see if the project has an
attractive rate of return. Unfortunately, costs and benefits may not be well
understood at an early phase of the project, and many worthwhile pro-
jects do not have benefits that are easy to quantify.
5. Risk is another factor to consider. Managers must consider the likelihood
that the project will fail to deliver the expected benefits; the actual cost
will be significantly more than expected; the technology will become
obsolete before the project is completed; the technology is too “cutting
edge” and will not deliver what is promised; or the business situation will
change so that the proposed project is no longer necessary.
6. Some projects enable other projects. For example, a new customer data-
base may be required before the order-processing application can be
upgraded. Therefore, some sequencing of projects must be considered.
7. Is the organization capable of taking on this project? Does the IS organi-
zation have the skills and expertise to execute the project successfully? Is
the organization willing and able to make the required changes to receive
their full value?
Business Liaison Role
You have been employed as a systems analyst in the information systems organi-
zation of a medium-sized consumer goods manufacturer for three years. You are
quite surprised when your manager offers you a one-year special assignment as a
manager supervising workers and operations in the large distribution center used
to store your company’s finished products and prepare them for shipment to retail
stores around the country. Your manager explains that the company wishes to
groom you to become the business liaison with the distribution organization and
wants you to become familiar with the entire order-fulfillment process. Based on
its recent growth, the company is planning to open at least two new distribution
centers in different regions of the country over the next two to three years. Man-
agement has chosen you to be a key player in leading a future project to design
FIGURE 11.5
Projects must be related to
goals and objectives
Objectives define goals that in turn
identify projects consistent with
those objectives and goals.
Organizational
objective
Organizational
goal
Potential
IT-related
project
intangible benefit: A benefit that
cannot directly be measured and can-
not easily be quantified in monetary
terms.
470 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

and implement the information systems and automated equipment to support
these new centers.
Review Questions
1.
What is the role of a business liaison person, and what skills and knowledge
do they need?
2.
How would you classify the project to outfit the organization’s new distribu-
tion center?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
For you, personally, what are the pros and cons of accepting this position?
2.
Would you take this assignment? Why or why not?
Project Management
A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, ser-
vice, or result. Each project attempts to achieve specific business objectives and
is subject to certain constraints, such as total cost and completion date. Organiza-
tions must always make clear connections among business objectives, goals, and
projects; also, projects must be consistent with business strategies. For example,
an organization may have a business objective to improve customer service by
offering a consistently high level of service that exceeds customers’ expectations.
Initiating a project to reduce costs in the customer service area by eliminating all
but essential services would be inconsistent with this business objective.
At any point in time, an organization may have dozens or even hundreds of
active projects, aimed at accomplishing a wide range of results. Projects are dif-
ferent from operational activities, which are repetitive activities performed over
and over again. Projects are not repetitive; they come to a definite end once the
project objectives are met or the project is cancelled. Projects come in all sizes
and levels of complexity, as you can see from the following examples:
●
A senior executive led a project to integrate two organizations following a
corporate merger.
●
A consumer goods company executed a project to launch a new product.
●
An operations manager led a project to outsource part of a firm’s opera-
tions to a contract manufacturer.
●
A hospital executed a project to load an app on physicians’ smartphones
that would enable them to access patient data.
●
A computer software manufacturer completed a project to improve the
scheduling of help desk technicians and reduce the time on hold for call-
ers to its telephone support services.
●
A staff assistant led a project to plan the annual sales meeting.
●
A manager completed a project to enter her departmental budget into a
preformatted spreadsheet template.
Unfortunately, IS-related projects are not always successful. The Standish
Group has been tracking the success rate of IS projects for over 20 years, and
although the success rate has improved over time due to improved methods,
training, and tools, roughly 71 percent of all IS projects fail or face major chal-
lenges such as lateness, budget overruns, and lack of required features.22
Researchers Hamel and Prahalad defined the term core competency to
mean something that a firm can do well and that provides customer benefits,
is hard for competitors to imitate, and can be leveraged widely to many pro-
ducts and markets.23 Today, many organizations recognize project manage-
ment as one of their core competencies and see their ability to manage
core competency: Something that
a firm can do well and that provides
customer benefits, is hard for competi-
tors to imitate, and can be leveraged
widely to many products and markets.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 471
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

projects better as a way to achieve an edge over competitors and deliver
greater value to shareholders and customers. As a result, those organizations
spend considerable effort identifying potential project managers and then
training and developing them. For many managers, their ability to manage
projects effectively is a key to their success within an organization.
Project Variables
Five highly interrelated parameters define a project—scope, cost, time, quality,
and user expectations. If any one of these parameters changes for a project,
there must be a corresponding change in one or more of the other parameters.
A brief discussion of these parameters follows.
Scope
Project scope is a definition of which tasks are included and which tasks are
not included in a project. Project scope is a key determinant of the other proj-
ect factors and must carefully be defined to ensure that a project meets its
essential objectives. In general, the larger the scope of the project, the more
difficult it is to meet cost, schedule, quality, and stakeholder expectations.
For example, the California Case Management System was a major IS proj-
ect intended to automate court operations for the state of California with a
common system across the state that would replace 70 different legacy sys-
tems. At the start of the project, planners expected the system to cost $260
million; however, court administrators terminated the project after spending
$500 million on the effort. Today, it is estimated that the project would have
cost nearly $2 billion if it had run to completion. While a variety of factors
contributed to this waste of resources, one primary cause was inadequate con-
trol of the project scope, with some 102 changes in requirements and scope
approved over the life of the project.24
Cost
The cost of a project includes all the capital, expenses, and internal cross-
charges associated with the project’s buildings, operation, maintenance, and
support. Capital is money spent to purchase assets that appear on the organi-
zation’s balance sheet and are depreciated over the life of the asset. Capital
items typically have a useful life of at least several years. A building, office
equipment, computer hardware, and network equipment are examples of cap-
ital assets. Computer software also can be classified as a capital item if it costs
more than $1,000 per unit, has a useful life exceeding one year, and is not
used for research and development.
Expense items are nondepreciable items that are consumed shortly after
they are purchased. Typical expenses associated with an IS-related project
include the use of outside labor or consultants, travel, and training. Software
that does not meet the criteria to be classified as a capital item is classified as
an expense item.
Many organizations use a system of internal cross-charges to account for
the cost of employees assigned to a project. For example, the fully loaded cost
(salary, benefits, and overhead) of a manager might be set at $120,000 per
year. The sponsoring organization’s budget is cross-charged this amount for
each manager who works full time on the project. (The sponsoring business
unit is the business unit most affected by the project and the one whose budget
will cover the project costs.) So, if a manager works at a 75 percent level of effort
on a project for five months, the cross-charge is $120,000  0.75  5/12 ¼
$37,500. The rationale behind cross-charging is to enable sound economic
decisions about whether employees should be assigned to project work or to
operational activities. If employees are assigned to a project, cross-charging
helps organizations determine which project makes the most economic sense.
project scope: A definition of which
tasks are included and which tasks are
not included in a project.
sponsoring business unit: The
business unit most affected by the
project and the one whose budget will
cover the project costs.
472 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Organizations have different processes and mechanisms for budgeting
and controlling each of the three types of costs: capital, expense, and internal
cross-charge. Money from the budget for one type of cost cannot be used to
pay for an item associated with another type of cost. Thus, a project with a
large amount of capital remaining in its budget cannot use the available dol-
lars to pay for an expense item even if the expense budget is overspent.
Table 11.7 summarizes and classifies various types of common costs asso-
ciated with an IS-related project.
Time
The timing of a project is frequently a critical constraint. For example, in most
organizations, projects that involve finance and accounting must be scheduled
to avoid any conflict with operations associated with the closing of end-
of-quarter books. Often, projects must be completed by a certain date to meet
an important business goal or a government mandate.
CGI, a Canadian consulting, systems integration, outsourcing, and solu-
tions company, was awarded a $36 million contract in December 2012 to
build the Vermont Health Connect state health exchange.25 Work on the proj-
ect quickly fell behind schedule—with CGI failing to meet more than half of
Vermont’s 21 performance deadlines—so the state and CGI entered into an
amended $84 million contract in August 2013 to complete the project.26 The
Vermont Health Connect site launched in October 2013 as required to meet
American Affordable Care Act mandates, but with serious deficiencies. Users
were unable to edit their information, and the site did not work for small
businesses. Despite calls to dump CGI after the flawed launch, state officials
decided to continue working with CGI to complete the site. In April 2014, the
state and CGI signed off on yet another agreement that set a new schedule for
delivering missing functionality and included financial penalties for missed
deadlines.27 When CGI failed to meet a May deadline for enabling users to
edit their information, the state extended the deadline again—without asses-
sing any penalties.28 CGI failed to meet the revised deadline, and in August
2014, the state fired CGI and announced it would transition the remaining
work to a new contractor. In the end, Vermont paid CGI $66.7 million for
TABLE 11.7 Typical IS-related project costs
Development Costs
Capital
Internal
Cross-Charge
Expense
Employee-related expenses
●
Employees’ effort
X
●
Travel-related expenses
X
●
Training-related expenses
X
Contractor and consultant charges
X
IS-related capital and expenses
●
Software licenses (software purchases that qualify as a capital expense)
X
●
Software licenses (software that does not qualify as a capital expense)
X
●
Computing hardware devices
X
●
Network hardware devices
X
●
Data capture/data entry equipment
X
Total development costs
X
X
X
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 473
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

completed work on the $84 million contract.29,30 CGI was replaced by Optum,
a healthcare technology company based in Minnesota that is owned by United
Health Group, the nation’s largest health insurer.31
Quality
The quality of a project can be defined as the degree to which the project
meets the needs of its users. The quality of a project that delivers an IS-
related system may be defined in terms of the system’s functionality, features,
system outputs, performance, reliability, and maintainability.
Failure to meet users’ functionality and performance needs detracted from
the initial introduction of the iPhone 6. Apple sold an astounding 10 million
of the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus models in the first few days they were
available. Unfortunately, the new iPhones had both hardware and software
problems that caused the devices to fail to meet users’ functionality and per-
formance expectations. Apple’s new mobile operating system iOS 8 for the
devices came without promised apps that used a health and fitness feature
called HealthKit. In addition, it turned out that the iPhone 6 Plus was too pli-
able, with some users complaining that the phone bent when sitting in their
pockets for extended periods. Then, when Apple released an iOS 8 update
aimed at fixing the HealthKit problem, some users complained the update
had caused their iPhones to lose the ability to make phone calls.32
User Expectations
As a project begins, stakeholders will form expectations—or will already have
expectations—about how the project will be conducted and how it will affect
them. For example, based on previous project experience, the end users of a
new IS system may expect that they will have no involvement with the system
until it is time for them to be trained. However, the project manager may fol-
low a more progressive development process that requires users to help
define system requirements, evaluate system options, try out system proto-
types, develop user documentation, and define and conduct the user accep-
tance test.
As another example, end users may expect to participate in weekly proj-
ect status meetings to hear progress reports firsthand. However, the project
manager may not have considered involving them in the status meetings or
may not even be planning weekly meetings.
Both examples illustrate the huge differences in expectations that can exist
between stakeholders and project members. It is critical to a project’s success
to identify expectations of key stakeholders and team members; any differences
must be resolved to avoid future problems and misunderstandings.
The
five
project
parameters—scope,
cost,
time,
quality,
and
user
expectations—are all closely interrelated, as shown in Figure 11.6. For example,
if the time allowed to complete the project is decreased, it may require an
increase in project costs, a reduction in project quality and scope, and a change
of expectations among the project stakeholders, as shown in Figure 11.7.
FIGURE 11.6
The five parameters that
define a project
The five parameters that define a
project are all highly interrelated.
Time
Cost
Expectations
Quality
Scope
Thorir Aron Stefansson/Shutterstock.com
quality: The degree to which a project
meets the needs of its users.
474 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

What Is Project Management?
Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, and techniques
to project activities to meet project requirements. Project managers must
deliver a solution that meets specific scope, cost, time, and quality goals
while managing the expectations of the project stakeholders—the people
involved in the project or those affected by its outcome.
The essence of artistic activity is that it involves high levels of creativity
and freedom to do whatever the artist feels. Scientific activity, on the other
hand, involves following defined routines and exacting adherence to laws.
Under these definitions, part of project management can be considered an
art, because project managers must apply intuitive skills that vary from project
to project and even from team member to team member. The “art” of project
management also involves salesmanship and psychology in convincing others
of the need to change and that this project is right to do.
Project management is also part science because it uses time-proven,
repeatable processes and techniques to achieve project goals. Thus, one chal-
lenge to successful project management is recognizing when to act as an artist
and rely on one’s own instinct and when to act as a scientist and apply funda-
mental project management principles and practices. The following section
covers the nine areas associated with the science of project management.
Project Management Knowledge Areas
According to the Project Management Institute (PMI), project managers must
coordinate
nine
areas
of
expertise:
scope,
time,
cost,
quality,
human
resources, communications, risk, procurement, and integration as shown in
Figure 11.8.
Scope Management
Scope management includes defining the work that must be done as part of
the project and then controlling the work to stay within the agreed-upon
scope. Key activities include initiation, scope planning, scope definition,
scope verification, and scope change control.
Functional decomposition is a frequently used technique to define the
scope of an information system by identifying the business processes it will
affect. Figure 11.9 shows an example of a functional decomposition chart for
a stock management system. A process is usually initiated in response to a
FIGURE 11.7
Revised project definition
A change in any one of the project
variables (cost, time, scope, or
expectations) can impact the other
variables.
Time
Cost
Expectations
Quality
Scope
Andrey Popov/Shutterstock.com
project management: The appli-
cation of knowledge, skills, and techni-
ques to project activities to meet project
requirements.
project stakeholders: The people
involved in the project or those affected
by its outcome.
scope management: A set of
activities that include defining the work
that must be done as part of a project
and then controlling the work to stay
within the agreed-upon scope.
functional decomposition: A fre-
quently used technique to define the
scope of an information system by
identifying the business processes it
will affect.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 475
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

specific event and requires input, which it processes to create output. Often a
process generates feedback that is used to monitor and refine the process.
To create the functional decomposition chart, begin with the name of the
system and then identify the highest-level processes to be performed. Each
process should be given a two-word “verb-subject” name that clearly defines
the process. Next, break those high-level processes down into lower-level sub-
processes. Typically, two or three levels of decomposition are sufficient to
define the scope of the system.
FIGURE 11.8
The nine project management
knowledge areas
There are nine areas associated with
the science of project management.
Scope
Time
Cost
Quality
Human resources
Communications
Risk
Procurement
Integration
Stock
management
system
Manage
stock
Check
stock
Order
stock
Receive
stock
Store
stock
Add
new
supplier
Update
supplier
data
Delete
supplier
Manage
suppliers
FIGURE 11.9
Functional decomposition of a stock management system project
Functional decomposition is used to define the scope of the system.
476 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

To avoid problems associated with a change in project scope, a formal
scope change process should be defined before the project begins. The proj-
ect manager and key business managers should decide whether they will
allow scope changes at any time during the project, only in the early stages
of the project, or not at all. The trade-off is that the more flexibility you allow
for scope changes, the more likely the project will meet user needs for fea-
tures and performance. However, the project will be more difficult to com-
plete within changing time and budget constraints as it is harder to hit a
moving target.
The change process should capture a clear definition of the change that is
being requested, who is requesting it, and why. If the project team has
decided not to allow any scope changes during the project, then each new
requested scope change is filed with other requested changes. Once the origi-
nal project is complete, the entire set of requested scope changes can be
reviewed and the project team can decide which, if any, of the changes will
be implemented and when. Often, it is cheaper to initiate one project to
implement numerous related changes rather than start several independent
projects. A follow-on project can then be considered to implement the recom-
mended changes. The scope, cost, schedule, and benefits of the project must
be determined to ensure that it is well defined and worth doing.
If the project team has decided to allow scope changes during the project,
then time and effort must be allowed to assess how the scope change will
affect the interrelated project variables of cost, schedule, quality, and expecta-
tions. This impact on the project must be weighed against the benefits of
implementing the scope change, and the team must decide whether to imple-
ment the scope change. Of course, there may be alternatives for implementing
a particular scope change, and the pros and cons must be weighed for each.
The time required just to research scope changes can add considerable cost
and time to the original project. Each scope change should be approved for-
mally or rejected by the project manager and key stakeholders.
Time Management
Time management includes defining an achievable completion date that is
acceptable to the project stakeholders, developing a workable project sched-
ule, and ensuring the timely completion of the project. Successful project time
management requires identifying specific tasks that project team members
and/or other resources must complete; sequencing these tasks, taking into
account any task dependencies or hard deadlines; estimating the amount of
resources required to complete each task, including people, material, and
equipment; estimating the elapsed time to complete each task; analyzing all
this data to create a project schedule; and controlling and managing changes
to the project schedule.
The bigger the project, the more likely that poor planning will lead to sig-
nificant problems. Well-managed projects use effective planning tools and tech-
niques, including schedules, milestones, and deadlines. A project schedule
identifies the project activities that must be completed, the expected start and
end dates, and what resources are assigned to each task. A project schedule is
needed to complete a project by a defined deadline, avoid rework, and ensure
that people know what to do and when to do it. A project milestone is a criti-
cal date for completing a major part of the project, such as program design,
coding, testing, and release (for a programming project). The project deadline
is the date the entire project should be completed and operational—when the
organization can expect to begin to reap the benefits of the project.
In a systems development project, each activity is assigned an earliest start
time and an earliest finish time. Each activity is also allocated slack time,
which is the amount of time an activity can be delayed without delaying the
entire project. The critical path of a project consists of all activities that, if
time management: A set of activi-
ties that includes defining an achiev-
able completion date that is acceptable
to the project stakeholders, developing
a workable project schedule, and
ensuring the timely completion of the
project.
project schedule: A plan that
identifies the project activities that must
be completed, the expected start and
end dates, and what resources are
assigned to each task.
project milestone: A critical date
for completing a major part of the proj-
ect, such as program design, coding,
testing, and release (for a programming
project).
project deadline: The date the
entire project should be completed and
operational—when the organization
can expect to begin to reap the benefits
of the project.
slack time: The amount of time an
activity can be delayed without delaying
the entire project.
critical path: All project activities
that, if delayed, would delay the entire
project.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 477
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

delayed, would delay the entire project. These activities have zero slack time.
Any problems with critical path activities will cause problems for the entire
project. To ensure that critical path activities are completed on time, project
managers use certain approaches and tools such as Microsoft Project to help
compute these critical project attributes.
Although the steps of systems development seem straightforward, larger
projects can become complex, requiring hundreds or thousands of separate
activities. For these systems development efforts, formal project management
methods and tools are essential. Program Evaluation and Review Tech-
nique (PERT) is a formal approach for estimating project duration based on
three time estimates for an activity: the most optimistic time where everything
goes right (TO), the most likely time (TM) given normal problems and oppor-
tunities, and the most pessimistic case where everything goes wrong (TP). A
formula can then be applied to determine the expected time to complete a
task (TE), as shown below:
TE ¼ ðTO þ 4TM þ TPÞ=6
The standard deviation of time required for the task is (TPTO)/6 and is
an indication of the degree of uncertainty in time required to accomplish the
task. The smaller the standard deviation, the less variability in estimates of
the time required to complete the task.
Some project managers insist on three time estimates for each task of the
project. Others develop three time estimates only for those tasks about which
they are most uncertain.
A Gantt chart is a graphical tool used for planning, monitoring, and coor-
dinating projects; it is essentially a grid that lists activities and deadlines. Each
time a task is completed, a marker such as a darkened line is placed in the
proper grid cell to indicate the completion of a task.
The development of a work breakdown structure is a critical activity
needed for effective time management. A work breakdown structure (WBS)
is an outline of the work to be done to complete the project. You start by
breaking the project into various stages or groups of activities that need to be
performed. Then, you identify the tasks associated with each project stage. A
task typically requires a week or less to complete and produces a specific
deliverable—tangible output like a flowchart or end-user training plan. Then
the tasks within each stage are sequenced. Finally, any predecessor tasks are
identified—these are tasks that must be completed before a later task can
begin. For example, the testing of a unit of program code cannot begin until
the program has been coded, compiled, and debugged. Next, you must deter-
mine how long each task in the WBS will take.
Thus, building a WBS allows you to look at a project in great detail to get
a complete picture of all the work that must be performed. Development of a
WBS is another approach to defining the scope of a project—work not
included in the WBS is outside the scope of the project.
Table 11.8 shows a sample WBS for a project whose goal is to establish a
wireless network in a warehouse and install RFID scanning equipment on
forklift trucks for the tracking of inventory. The three phases of the project in
Table 11.8 are “Define warehouse network,” “Configure forklift trucks,” and
“Test warehouse network.” Figure 11.10 shows the associated schedule in the
form of a Gantt chart, with each bar in the chart indicating the start and end
dates of each major activity (heavy black lines) and task (lighter lines).
Cost Management
Cost management includes developing and managing the project budget.
This area involves resource planning, cost estimating, cost budgeting, and
cost control. As previously discussed, a separate budget must be established
Program Evaluation and
Review Technique (PERT): A
formal method for estimating the dura-
tion of a project using three time esti-
mates for an activity: shortest possible
time, most likely time, and longest
possible time; working with those esti-
mates, a formula is used to determine a
single PERT time estimate.
Gantt chart: A graphical tool used
for planning, monitoring, and coordi-
nating projects; it is essentially a grid
that lists activities and deadlines.
work breakdown structure
(WBS): An outline of the work to be
done to complete the project.
predecessor task: A task that must
be completed before a later task can
begin.
cost management: A set of activi-
ties that include the development and
management of the project budget.
478 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

for each of the three types of costs—capital, expense, and internal cross-
charge—and money in one budget cannot be spent to pay for another type of
cost.
One approach to cost estimating uses the WBS to estimate all costs (capi-
tal, expense, and cross-charge) associated with the completion of each task.
This approach can require a fair amount of detail work, such as determining
the hourly rate of each resource assigned to the task and multiplying by the
hours the resource will work on the task, estimating the cost per unit for sup-
plies and multiplying that by the number of units required, and so on. If pos-
sible, the people who will complete the tasks should be allowed to estimate
the time duration and associated costs. This approach helps them to better
understand the tasks they are expected to complete, gives them some degree
of control in defining how the work will be done, and obtains their “buy-in”
to the project schedule and budget. You can develop a project duration based
on the sequence in which the tasks must be performed and the duration of
each task. You can also sum the cost of each task to develop an estimate of
the total project budget. This entire process is outlined in Figure 11.11, and
the resulting budget is depicted in Table 11.9.
As an example, suppose that a company plans to implement a new soft-
ware package for its accounts payable process. The company must spend
TABLE 11.8 Work breakdown structure
Task
Duration (in days)
Start Date
End Date
Predecessor Tasks
1
Implement warehouse network
28
5/06/16
6/14/16
2
Define warehouse network
25
5/06/16
6/09/16
3
Conduct survey
3
5/06/16
5/10/16
4
Order RF equipment
14
5/11/16
5/30/16
3
5
Install RF equipment
6
5/31/16
6/07/16
4
6
Test RF equipment
2
6/06/16
6/08/16
5
7
Configure forklift trucks
19
5/06/16
6/01/16
8
Order RFID scanners for trucks
12
5/06/16
5/23/16
9
Install RFID scanners on trucks
5
5/24/16
5/30/16
8
10
Test RFID scanners
2
5/31/16
6/01/16
9
53
Test warehouse network
28
5/06/16
6/14/16
12
Develop test plan
2
5/06/16
5/09/16
13
Conduct test
3
6/10/16
6/14/16
6, 10, 12
D 
I 
e 
m 
a 
N 
k 
s 
a 
T 
Duration
Start
End
Predecessor
Tasks
1 
k 
r 
o 
w 
t 
e 
N 
e 
s 
u 
o 
h 
e 
r 
a 
W 
t 
n 
e 
m 
e 
l 
p 
m 
I 
28d
5/06/16
6/14/16
2 
k 
r 
o 
w 
t 
e 
N 
e 
s 
u 
o 
h 
e 
r 
a 
W 
e 
n 
i 
f 
e 
D 
25d
 
5/06/16
3 
y 
e 
v 
r 
u 
S 
t 
c 
u 
d 
n 
o 
C 
3d
5/06/16
5/10/16
5/30/16
4 
t 
n 
e 
m 
p 
i 
u 
q 
E 
F 
R 
r 
e 
d 
r 
O 
14d
5/11/16
3 
5 
t 
n 
e 
m 
p 
i 
u 
q 
E 
F 
R 
l l 
a 
t 
s 
n 
I 
6d
5/31/16
5/31/16
6/06/16
6/09/16
5/09/16
6/07/16
6/08/16
4 
6 
t 
n 
e 
m 
p 
i 
u 
q 
E 
F 
R 
t 
s 
e 
T 
2d
5 
7 
s
k
c
u
r
T
tfil
k 
r 
o 
F 
e 
r 
u 
g 
i 
f 
n 
o 
C 
19d
5/06/16
6/01/16
8 
s 
k 
c 
u 
r 
T 
r 
o 
f 
s 
r 
e 
n 
n 
a 
c 
S 
D 
I 
F 
R 
r 
e 
d 
r 
O 
12d
5/06/16
5/23/16
5/30/16
9 
s 
k 
c 
u 
r 
T 
n 
o 
s 
r 
e 
n 
n 
a 
c 
S 
D 
I 
F 
R 
l l 
a 
t 
s 
n 
I 
5d
5/24/16
8 
0 
1 
s 
r 
e 
n 
n 
a 
c 
S 
D 
I 
F 
R 
t 
s 
e 
T 
2d
6/01/16
9 
1 
1 
k 
r 
o 
w 
t 
e 
N 
e 
s 
u 
o 
h 
e 
r 
a 
W 
t 
s 
e 
T 
28d
5/06/16
6/14/16
2 
1 
n 
a 
l 
P 
t 
s 
e 
T 
p 
o 
l 
e 
v 
e 
D 
2d
5/06/16
3 
1 
Conduct test
3d
6/10/16
6/14/16
2 
1 
, 
0 
1 
, 
6 
8 
/ 
5 
2 
1 
/ 
5 
3 
1 
/ 
5 
1 
/ 
6 
2 
/ 
6 
9 
/ 
6 
0 
1 
/ 
6 
1 
1 
/ 
6 
8 
/ 
5 
5 
2 
/ 
5 
6 
2 
/ 
5 
1 
/ 
6 
2 
/ 
6 
3 
/ 
6 
8 
/ 
5 
1 
1 
/ 
5 
2 
1 
/ 
6 
6 
1 
/ 
6 
9 
1 
/ 
4 
6 
2 
/ 
4 
3 
/ 
5 
0 
1 
/ 
5 
7 
1 
/ 
5 
4 
2 
/ 
5 
1 
3 
/ 
5 
7 
/ 
6 
4 
1 
/ 
6 
1 
2 
/ 
6 
May
June
FIGURE 11.10
Gantt chart
A Gantt chart depicts the start and finish dates for project tasks.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 479
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Define goal
Divide project
into stages
Identify tasks
in each stage
Define deliverables
for each task
Assign resources
to tasks
Estimate task duration
Sequence tasks
Budget
Schedule
FIGURE 11.11
Work breakdown structure (WBS)
Development of a WBS leads to definition of a project schedule and budget.
TABLE 11.9 Project budget
Task
Capital
Expense
Cross-
Charges
1
Implement warehouse
network
2
Define warehouse network
3
Conduct survey
$2,400
4
Order RF equipment
$9,000
5
Install RF equipment
$7,800
6
Test RF equipment
$960
7
Configure forklift trucks
8
Order RFID scanners for trucks
$12,500
9
Install RFID scanners on trucks
$2,400
10
Test RFID scanners
$1,200
11
Test warehouse network
$960
12
Develop test plan
13
Conduct test
$1,440
TOTAL costs
$21,500
$10,200
$6,960
480 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

$150,000 on computer hardware (capital) and pay the software vendor
$20,000 for its time and effort to implement the software (expense). The ven-
dor must also be paid $125,000 for the software package license (capital). In
addition, one business manager will spend six months leading the implemen-
tation effort full time. Six months’ worth of the fully loaded cost of the man-
ager (say, $120,000 per year) must be charged to the cross-charge budget of
the accounting organization. The cross-charge is a total of $60,000.
Quality Management
Quality management is a set of activities designed to ensure that a project
will meet the needs for which it was undertaken. This process involves quality
planning, quality assurance, and quality control. Quality planning involves
determining which quality standards are relevant to the project and determin-
ing how they will be met. Quality assurance involves evaluating the progress
of the project on an ongoing basis to ensure that it meets the identified qual-
ity standards. Quality control involves checking project results to ensure that
they meet identified quality standards.
In many IS-related systems development projects, the source of the majority
of defects uncovered in system testing can be traced back to an error in specifying
requirements. Thus, most organizations put a heavy emphasis on accurately cap-
turing and documenting system requirements and carefully managing changes in
user requirements over the course of the project. A useful checklist for assessing
the validity of system requirements includes the following questions:33
●
Does the requirement describe something actually needed by the
customer?
●
Is the requirement correctly defined?
●
Is the requirement consistent with other requirements?
●
Is the requirement defined completely?
●
Is the requirement verifiable (testable)?
●
Is the requirement traceable back to a user need?
Hewlett Packard’s Quality Center, Jama from Jama Software, and Inno-
slate from Systems and Proposal Engineering Company are three examples of
requirements management software.
Human Resource Management
Human resource management are activities designed to make the most
effective use of the people involved with a project. Human resources manage-
ment includes organizational planning, staff acquisition, and team develop-
ment. The project manager must be able to build a project team staffed with
people with the right mix of skills and experience and then train, develop,
coach, and motivate them to perform effectively on the project.
All members of a project team may be assigned, or the project manager
may have the luxury of selecting all or some team members. Ideally, team
members are selected based on their skills in the technology needed for the
project, their understanding of the business area affected by the project, their
expertise in a specific area of the project, and their ability to work well on a
team. Often, compromises must be made. For example, the best available sub-
ject matter expert may not work well with others, which becomes an addi-
tional challenge for the project manager.
Experienced project managers have learned that forming an effective team
to accomplish a difficult goal is a challenge in itself. It takes considerable effort
and a willingness to change on the part of all team members in order for a
team to reach high levels of performance. A useful model to describe how
teams develop and evolve is the forming-storming-norming-performing-
adjourning model, which was first proposed by Bruce Tuckman (see
Figure 11.12).34
quality management: A set of
activities designed to ensure that a
project will meet the needs for which it
was undertaken.
quality planning: The determination
of which quality standards are relevant
to the project and determining how they
will be met.
quality assurance: The evaluation
of the progress of the project on an
ongoing basis to ensure that it meets
the identified quality standards.
quality control: The checking of
project results to ensure that they meet
identified quality standards.
human resource management:
Activities designed to make the most
effective use of the people involved
with a project.
forming-storming-norming-
performing-adjourning model:
A model that describes how teams
develop and evolve.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 481
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

During the forming stage, the team meets to learn about the project,
agrees on basic goals, and begins to work on project tasks. Team members
are on their best behavior and try to be pleasant to one another while avoid-
ing any conflict or disagreement. Team members work independently of one
another and focus on their role or tasks without understanding what others
are attempting to do. In the formation stage, the team’s project manager
tends to be highly directive and tells members what needs to be done. If the
team remains in this stage, it is unlikely to perform well, and it will never
develop breakthrough solutions to problems or effectively solve a conflicting
set of priorities and constraints.
The team has moved into the storming stage when it recognizes that dif-
ferences of opinion exist among team members and allows these ideas to
compete for consideration. Team members will raise such important questions
as “What problems are we really supposed to solve?” “How can we work well
together?” “What sort of project leadership will we accept?” The team might
argue and struggle, so it can be an unpleasant time for everyone. An inexperi-
enced project manager, not recognizing what is happening, may give up, feel-
ing that the team will never work together effectively. The project manager
and team members must be tolerant of one another as they explore their dif-
ferences. The project manager may need to continue to be highly directive.
If the team survives the storming stage, it may enter the norming stage.
During this stage, individual team members give up their preconceived judg-
ments and opinions. Members who felt a need to take control of the team
give up this impulse. Team members adjust their behavior and begin to trust
one another. The team may decide to document a set of team rules or norms
to guide how they will work together. Teamwork actually begins. The project
manager can be less directive and can expect team members to take more
responsibility for decision making.
Some teams advance beyond the norming stage into the performing stage.
At this point, the team is performing at a high level. Team members are com-
petent, highly motivated, and knowledgeable about all aspects of the project.
They have become interdependent on one another and have developed an
effective decision-making process that does not require the project manager.
Dissent is expected, and the team has developed an effective process to
ensure that everyone’s ideas and opinions are heard. Work is done quickly
and with high quality. Problems that once seemed unsolvable now have
“obvious” solutions. The team’s effectiveness is much more than the sum of
FIGURE 11.12
Tuckman’s forming-
storming-norming-
performing-adjourning model
Forming an effective team is a chal-
lenge in itself.
Forming
Adjourning
Performing
Storming
Norming
Project results
482 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the individual members’ contributions. The project manager encourages par-
ticipative decision making, with the team members making most of the
decisions.
Adjourning, the final stage in the model, involves the dissolution of the
team. Ideally, this occurs when the project has been completed successfully
and all team members can move on to new projects or assignments with a
positive sense of accomplishment. From an organizational perspective, it is
important
that
team
members
be
recognized
and
rewarded
for
their
contributions.
No matter what stage a team is operating in, it commonly will revert to less
advanced stages in the model when confronted with major changes in the work
to be done, a change in project leadership, or substantial changes in the team’s
makeup. The project manager and business managers must recognize and con-
sider this important dynamic when contemplating project changes.
Another key aspect of human resource management is getting the project
team and the sponsoring business unit to take equal responsibility for making
the project a success. The project team members must realize that on their
own they cannot possibly make the project a success. They must ensure that
the business managers and end users become deeply involved in the project
and take an active role. The project team must actively involve the end users,
provide information for them to make wise choices, and insist on their partici-
pation in major decisions. The business unit must remain engaged in the proj-
ect, challenge recommendations, ask questions, and weigh options. It cannot
simply sit back and “let the project happen to them.” Key users need to be
identified as part of the project team with responsibility for developing and
reviewing deliverables. Indeed, some organizations require that the project
manager comes from the sponsoring business unit. Other organizations assign
co-project managers to IS-related projects—one from the IS organization and
one from the business unit.
In addition to the development team, each project should have a project
steering team—made up of senior managers representing the business and
IS organizations—to provide guidance and support to the project. The num-
ber of members on the steering team should be limited (three to five) to sim-
plify the decision-making process and ease the effort to schedule a quorum
of these busy executives. The project manager and select members of the
development team should meet with the steering team on an as-needed
basis, typically at the end of each project phase or every few months. The
three key members of the steering team include: (1) the project champion
who is a well-respected manager with a passion to see the project succeed
and who removes barriers to the success of the project, (2) the project spon-
sor who is a senior manager from the business unit most affected by
the project and who ensures the project will indeed meet the needs of his or
her organization, and (3) the IS manager who ensures proper IS staffing
for the project and ensures the project uses approved technology and ven-
dors. These roles are further explained in Figure 11.13 and outlined in
Table 11.10.
Many projects also draw on key resources who are not assigned to the
project team but who provide valuable input and advice. A subject matter
expert is someone who provides knowledge and expertise in a particular
aspect important to the project. For example, an accounting system project
may seek advice from a member of the internal auditing group in defining
the mandatory control features of a new system. A technical resource is
essentially a subject matter expert in an IS topic of value to the project. For
example, the accounting system project may seek advice from a database
management system guru (either inside or outside the company) to minimize
the response time for certain key business transactions.
project steering team: A group of
senior managers representing the
business and IS organizations that
provide guidance and support to a
project.
project champion: A well-
respected manager with a passion to
see a project succeed and who
removes barriers to the success of the
project.
project sponsor: A senior manager
from the business unit most affected by
a project and who ensures the project
will indeed meet the needs of his or her
organization.
subject matter expert: Someone
who provides knowledge and expertise
in a particular aspect important to the
project.
technical resource: A subject
matter expert in an IS topic of value to
the project.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 483
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Communications Management
Communications management involves the generation, collection, dissemi-
nation, and storage of project information in a timely and effective manner. It
includes communications planning, information distribution, performance
reporting, and managing communications to meet the needs of project share-
holders. The key stakeholders include the project steering team, the team
FIGURE 11.13
Project organization
A project steering team is critical to
the success of any project.
Subject
matter
experts
Project
team
members
Technical
resources
Project
manager
Project steering team
Champion
Sponsor
IS manager
TABLE 11.10 Responsibilities of the project steering team
Project Champion
Project Sponsor
IS Manager
Well-respected senior manager with a passion
to see the project succeed
Senior manager of business unit most
affected by the project
Well-respected IS
manager
Assures that project goals and objectives are
aligned with organizational goals and
objectives
Ensures that the business unit’s expectations
and needs are clearly communicated and
understood
Ensures the project is
staffed with appro-
priate IS staff
Convinces other senior managers of the pro-
ject’s merits in order to gain their approval to
fund and staff it
Ensures that the project solution is truly
workable and consistent with business and
end-user requirements
Ensures technology
and vendors sug-
gested for inclusion
in the project are
consistent with IS
strategy
Acts as a vocal and visible champion for the
project to gain the support of others
Works to overcome resistance to change and
prepare the organization to embrace the new
system and way of doing things
Identifies and removes barriers to project
success
Identifies workers from the business unit to
be assigned on a full- or part-time basis to
project
Resolves any issues outside the control of the
project manager
Provides advice and counsel to the project
team
Keeps informed of major project activities
and developments
Has final approval of all requests for changes
in project scope, budget, and schedule
Signs off on approvals to proceed to each
succeeding project phase
communications management:
The generation, collection, dissemina-
tion, and storage of project information
in a timely and effective manner.
484 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

itself, end users, and others who may be affected by the project (potentially
customers or suppliers).
In preparing a communications plan, the project manager should recognize
that the various stakeholders have different information needs in the project.
A useful tool for identifying and documenting these needs is the stakeholder
analysis matrix, shown in Table 11.11. This matrix identifies the interests of the
stakeholders, their information needs, and important facts for managing com-
munications with the champion, sponsor, project team members, and key end
users associated with the project. The project manager should include his or
her manager in this analysis. Based on analysis of this data, the preferred form
and frequency of communication is identified for each stakeholder.
If the project team is unable to recruit either a project champion or spon-
sor, the problem may be that management does not see clearly that the benefits
of the project outweigh its costs, or that the project appears to run counter to
organizational goals and strategies. A potential project without either a cham-
pion or a sponsor is highly unlikely to get the needed resources, and for good
reason. No project should be started without both a champion and a sponsor.
Risk Management
“Things will go wrong, and at the worst possible time,” according to a variation
of Murphy’s Law, a popular adage. Project risk is an uncertain event or condi-
tion that, if it occurs, has a positive or a negative effect on a project objective.
Known risks are risks that can be identified and analyzed. For example, in cre-
ating a new IS-related system that includes the acquisition of new computing
TABLE 11.11 Sample stakeholder analysis matrix
Key Stakeholders
Ray Boaz
Klem Kiddlehopper
John Smith
Forklift Drivers
Organization
Project champion
and VP of supply
chain
Project sponsor and
warehouse manager
Experienced forklift
driver
15 different drivers
Useful facts
●
Very persuasive
●
Trusted by CEO
●
Risk taker, very
aggressive
●
Will push this
through, no
matter what
●
Has driven
forklift truck for
five years
●
Well respected
by peers
●
Not highly
motivated to
make project
a success
Level of interest
High
High
Medium
Low
Level of influence
High
Medium
High
Low
Suggestions on
managing
relationship
●
Demands
respect, some-
what formal
●
Speak in busi-
ness terms,
never get tech-
nical; no
surprises!
●
Poor listener,
forgets details
●
Put it in writing
●
Must keep John
enthusiastic
about project
●
Don’t ignore
●
Attend occa-
sional shift
changeover
meeting
Information needs
●
ROI, budget,
and schedule
●
Schedule and
potential opera-
tional conflicts
●
Schedule, espe-
cially timing
of training
●
Safety and pro-
ductivity issues
●
Schedule, espe-
cially timing
of training
●
Safety issues
Information
medium, format,
and timing
●
Biweekly face-
to-face meeting
●
Newsletter
●
Biweekly face-
to-face
●
Newsletter
●
Catch-as-catch
can
●
Brief updates at
weekly depart-
ment meeting
project risk: An uncertain event or
condition that, if it occurs, has a positive
or a negative effect on a project
objective.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 485
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

and/or networking hardware, a known risk might be that the hardware will
take longer than expected to arrive at the installation site. If the hardware is
delayed by several weeks, it could have a negative effect on the project comple-
tion date. Countermeasures can be defined to avoid some known risks entirely,
and contingency plans can be developed to address unavoidable known risks if
they occur. Of course, some risks simply cannot be anticipated.
A hallmark of experienced project managers is that they follow a deliber-
ate and systematic process of risk management to identify, analyze, and
manage project risks. Having identified potential risks, they can make plans
to avoid them entirely. When an unavoidable risk occurs and becomes an
issue, the project team has already defined an alternative course of action to
minimize the impact on the project. They waste no time executing the backup
plan. Unknown risks cannot be managed directly; however, an experienced
project manager will build some contingency into the project budget and
schedule to allow for their occurrence.
While inexperienced project managers realize that things may go wrong,
they often fail to identify and address known risks and do not build in contin-
gencies for unknown risks. Thus, they are often unsure of what to do, at least
temporarily, when a project setback occurs. In their haste to react to a risk,
they may not implement the best course of action.
The project manager needs to lead a rigorous effort to identify all risks asso-
ciated with the project. The project team, business managers, and end users
should participate in the effort. These resources can include seasoned project
managers and members of the organization’s risk management department. After
each risk is identified and defined, as shown in Table 11.12, the group should
attempt to classify the risk by the probability that it will occur and the impact on
the project if the risk does occur. Both the probability and the impact can be clas-
sified as high, medium, or low, as shown in the example in Table 11.13.
Dark ¼ High risk/high impact; risk management plan is needed
Lightest ¼ Medium or high risk and impact; risk management plan recommended
Lighter ¼ Low or medium risk and impact; risk management plan not needed
TABLE 11.12 Identification of project risks
Risk
Example
R1
The required new servers arrive at the installation site more than two
weeks late.
R2
Business pressures make key end users unavailable to develop the user
acceptance test by the date it is needed.
R3
Business pressures make end users unavailable during the time sched-
uled for training.
R4
One or more end-user computers have insufficient memory or CPU
capacity to run the new software efficiently (or at all).
Rn
….
TABLE 11.13 Example of an assessment of project risks
Impact on Project
Low
Medium
High
High
R10
R2, R3
Probability risk occurs
Medium
R5, R6
Rn
R1
Low
R8, R11
R7, R9
R4
risk management: A deliberate and
systematic process designed to iden-
tify, analyze, and manage project risks.
486 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The project team then needs to consider which risks need to be addressed
in the risk management plan. Generally, the team can ignore risks with a low
probability of occurrence and low potential impact. Risks with a high proba-
bility of occurrence and a high potential impact need to have a risk owner
assigned. The risk owner is responsible for developing a risk management
strategy and monitoring the project to determine if the risk is about to occur
or has occurred. One strategy is to take steps to avoid the risk altogether,
while another is to develop a backup plan. The risk management plan can be
documented as shown in Table 11.14.
One of the biggest risks associated with a project is that considerable
time, energy, and resources might be consumed with little value to show in
return. To avoid this potential risk, an organization must ensure that a strong
rationale exists for completing a project. The project must have a direct link
to an organizational strategy and goal, as shown in Figure 11.14. In this exam-
ple, assume that an organization has been losing sales because of customer
dissatisfaction. It has set an objective of improving customer service, with a
goal of increasing the retention rate of existing customers. The organization
has defined one of its key strategies as improving customer service to world-
class levels. A project that is consistent with this strategy and that can deliver
results
to achieve
this
goal
is
clearly
aligned
with
the
organization’s
objectives.
●
Objective. Improve customer service.
●
Goal. Reduce customer turnover from 25 percent per year to 10 percent
by June 2017 by responding to 95 percent of customers’ inquiries within
90 seconds, with less than 5 percent callbacks about the same problem.
●
Strategy. Improve customer service to world-class levels.
●
Project. Implement a state-of-the-art customer call center with “24/7”
availability and a well-trained staff.
TABLE 11.14 Risk management plan
Risk
Description
Risk Owner
Risk Strategy
Current Status
R2
Business pressures make
key end users unavail-
able to develop the user
acceptance test by the
deadline.
Jon Andersen, man-
ager of end users in
the business area
Try to avoid this problem
by starting development
of the user acceptance
test three weeks earlier
than originally planned.
Monitor progress
carefully.
Key users have been
identified and have
started developing the
test.
R3
Business pressures make
end users unavailable
during the time sched-
uled for training.
Jon Andersen, man-
ager of end users in
the business area
Try to avoid this problem
by hiring and training
four temporary workers
to fill in for end users as
they participate in
training.
Three of four temporary
workers have been hired.
Their training is sched-
uled to begin next week.
R1
The required new servers
arrive at the installation
site more than two
weeks late.
Alice Fields, team
member responsible
for hardware
acquisition
Set a firm delivery dead-
line with the vendor,
with a substantial dollar
penalty for each day that
the equipment is late.
The contract with the
penalty clause has been
signed by the vendor,
who agrees to provide a
shipment status update
each Tuesday and Friday.
risk owner: The individual responsi-
ble for developing a risk management
strategy and monitoring the project to
determine if the risk is about to occur or
has occurred.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 487
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Risk management software—such as Risk Management from Intelex, Full
Monte from Barbecana, and @Risk from Intaver Institute—integrates with
project scheduling software and can reflect the potential impact of various
risks on the project schedule and cost. Use of such software can lead to more
realistic estimates for project milestones and budgets.
Procurement Management
Procurement management are activities related to the acquisition of goods
and/or services for a project from sources outside the performing organiza-
tion. Procurement management is divided into the following processes:
●
Plan purchase and acquisition. This process determines what is needed
and when.
●
Plan contracting. This process documents requirements for products and
services and identifies potential providers.
●
Request seller responses. This process obtains bids, information, propo-
sals, or quotations from potential providers.
●
Select seller. During this process, offers are reviewed, the preferred pro-
vider is identified, and negotiations are started.
●
Contract administration. This process manages all aspects of the con-
tract and the relationship between the buyer and the provider. The pro-
cess includes tracking and documenting the provider’s performance,
managing contract changes, and taking any necessary corrective actions.
●
Contract closure. This process completes and settles the terms of any
contracts, including resolving any open items.
The make-or-buy decision is a key decision made during the plan pur-
chase and acquisition process. The make-or-buy decision involves comparing
the pros and cons of in-house production versus outsourcing of a given prod-
uct or service. In addition to cost, two key factors to consider in this
decision are (1) “Do we have a sufficient number of employees with the
FIGURE 11.14
Projects must be well linked to
an organizational goal and
strategy
Objectives, goals, strategy, and
projects should be aligned.
Objective:
Improve
customer
service
Goal:
Reduce customer
turnover from
25% to 10% by
June 2017
Strategy:
Improve
customer
service to
world-class levels
Project:
Implement
state-of-the-art
customer call
center
procurement management: A
set of activities related to the acquisition
of goods and/or services for the project
from sources outside the performing
organization.
make-or-buy decision: The act of
comparing the pros and cons of in-
house production versus outsourcing of
a given product or service.
488 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

skills and experience required to deliver the product or service at an
acceptable level of quality and within the required deadlines?” and (2) “Are
we willing to invest the management time, energy, and money required to
identify, recruit, train, develop, and manage people with the skills to do this
kind of work?”
A contract is a legally binding agreement that defines the terms and con-
ditions of the buyer-provider relationship, including who is authorized to do
what, who holds what responsibilities, costs and terms of payment, remedies
in case of breach of contract, and the process for revising the contract. Con-
tract types fall into three main categories:
●
Fixed-price contract. With this type of contract, the buyer and provider
agree to a total fixed price for a well-defined product or service. For
example, the purchase of a large number of laptop computers with
specified capabilities and features frequently involves a fixed-price
contract.
●
Cost-reimbursable contract. This type of contract requires the buyer to
pay the provider an amount that covers the provider’s actual costs plus an
additional amount or percentage for profit. Three common types of cost-
reimbursable contracts exist. In a cost-plus-fee or cost-plus-percentage of
cost contract, the provider is reimbursed for all allowable costs and
receives a percentage of the costs as a fee. In a cost-plus-fixed-fee con-
tract, the provider is reimbursed for all allowable costs and receives a
fixed fee. In a cost-plus-incentive-fee contract, the provider is reimbursed
for all allowable costs. In addition, a predetermined fee is paid if the pro-
vider achieves specified performance objectives—for example, the provi-
der’s hardware must be received, installed, and operational by a specific
date. In such contracts, buyers run the risk of paying more for the work
but are rewarded by having their objectives met or exceeded. Providers
run the risk of reduced profits if they fail to deliver, but can be rewarded
for superior performance.
●
Time and material contract. Under this type of contract, the buyer
pays the provider for both the time and materials required to com-
plete the contract. The contract includes an agreed-upon hourly rate
and unit price for the various materials to be used. The exact number
of hours and precise quantity of each material are not known, how-
ever. Thus, the true value of the contract is not defined when the
contract is approved. If not managed carefully, time and material
contracts actually can motivate suppliers to extend projects to
maximize their fees.
Poor procurement management can result in serious project problems and
even a project’s outright cancellation.
Project Integration Management
Project integration management is perhaps the most important knowledge
area because it requires the assimilation of all eight other project management
knowledge areas. Project integration management requires the coordination
of all appropriate people, resources, plans, and efforts to complete a project
successfully. Project integration management comprises seven project man-
agement processes:
1. Developing the project charter that formally recognizes the existence of
the project, outlines the project objectives and how they will be met, lists
key assumptions, and identifies major roles and responsibilities.
fixed-price contract: A contract in
which the buyer and provider agree to a
total fixed price for a well-defined
product or service.
cost-reimbursable contract: A
contract that requires the buyer to pay
the provider an amount that covers the
provider’s actual costs plus an addi-
tional amount or percentage for profit.
time and material contract: A
contract that requires the buyer to pay
the provider for both the time and
materials required to complete the
contract.
project integration
management: The coordination of
all appropriate people, resources,
plans, and efforts to complete a project
successfully.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 489
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
2. Developing a preliminary project scope statement to define and gain con-
sensus about the work to be done; over the life of the project, the scope
statement will become fuller and more detailed.
3. Developing the project management plan that describes the overall scope,
schedule, and budget for the project; this plan coordinates all subsequent
project planning efforts and is used in the execution and control of the
project.
4. Directing and managing project execution by following the project man-
agement plan.
5. Monitoring and controlling the project work to meet the project’s perfor-
mance objectives; this process requires regularly measuring effort and
expenditures against the project tasks, recognizing when significant
deviations occur from the schedule or budget, and taking corrective
action to regain alignment with the plan.
6. Performing integrated change control by managing changes over
the course of the project that can affect its scope, schedule, and/or cost.
7. Closing the project successfully by gaining stakeholder and customer
acceptance of the final product, closing all budgets and purchase
orders after confirming that final disbursements have been made, and
capturing knowledge from the project that may prove useful for future
projects.
As an example of a firm that excels in project integration management,
consider Atos, an international IS services company that employs over
80,000 workers in more than 52 countries, with 2015 annual revenue of
€10.7 billion (U.S. $12.2 billion). The firm successfully delivered the infor-
mation technology systems that enabled the smooth running of the Sochi
2014 Olympic Games in Russia. Atos had the primary responsibility for proj-
ect integration, consulting, systems integration, operations management,
information security, and software applications development for the games.
Through its experience with previous Olympics (Atos has been the world-
wide IS partner for the Olympic Games, both winter and summer, since
Salt Lake City in 2002), Atos has developed an effective project management
process. The firm spent over four years configuring, testing, and retesting
some 10,000 pieces of equipment deployed to 30 different venues. Atos
coordinated the work of hundreds of subcontractors to deliver a reliable IS
infrastructure and IS services in support of one of the world’s widely viewed
sporting events. The Sochi project was coordinated so that custom software,
thousands of workstations and laptops, tens of thousands of phones,
hundreds of servers, and multiple operations centers and data centers all
operated together effectively and efficiently.35
Reluctant Project Sponsor
You are on the phone with the project sponsor of a $2 million project you are
managing. She informs you that she accepted the role reluctantly, and now, one
month into this eight-month project, she is considering withdrawing as project
sponsor. She does not see the need for this role and is extremely busy with her
other responsibilities.
Review Questions
1.
What is the role of the project sponsor?
2.
What might be the impact on the project if you attempt to proceed without a
sponsor? Is it likely that some project tasks would need to be done over if a
new sponsor is appointed?
490 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical Thinking Questions
1.
If you are unable to persuade the sponsor to remain on the project, should
you enlist the help of the project champion? How might you do this in such a
way that you do not appear weak and ineffective and avoid creating hard feel-
ings with the current sponsor?
2.
After speaking to the project champion, you and she both agree that the cur-
rent sponsor should be replaced with someone new. What characteristics,
traits, and experiences would you look for in a new sponsor?
Summary
Principle:
Organizations that are more advanced in their planning processes
develop multiple-year strategic plans.
Strategic planning is a process that helps managers identify desired out-
comes and formulate feasible plans to achieve their objectives using available
resources and capabilities.
Goal-based strategic planning is divided into four phases: analyze situation,
set direction, define strategies, and deploy plan.
The analyze situation phase involves looking internally to identify the orga-
nization’s strengths and weaknesses and looking externally to determine its
opportunities and threats.
An analysis of an organization’s internal assessment and study of its exter-
nal environment are frequently summarized into a Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, Threats (SWOT) matrix.
The set direction phase involves defining the mission, vision, values, objec-
tives, and goals of the organization.
SMART goals are specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time
constrained.
The define strategies phase involves describing how an organization will
achieve its mission, vision, objectives, and goals.
Deploy plan includes communicating the organization’s mission, vision,
values, objectives, goals, and strategies so that everyone can help define the
actions required to meet organizational goals.
Principle:
The strategic planning process for the IS organization and the factors that
influence it depend on how the organization is perceived by the rest of the
organization.
IS strategic planning is influenced by the corporate and business unit
strategic plans as well as technology innovations and innovative thinking.
The IS strategy will set direction for the technologies, vendors, competen-
cies, people, systems, and projects.
Principle:
Organizations must always make a clear connection among business
objectives, goals, and projects. In addition, projects must be consistent
with business strategies.
A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product,
service, or result.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 491
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Roughly 71 percent of all IS projects are challenged, fail, or face major
changes such as lateness, budget overruns, and lack of required features.
Today, many organizations have recognized project management as one of
their core competencies.
Five highly interrelated parameters define a project—scope, cost, time,
quality, and user expectations. If any one of these project parameters is chan-
ged, there must be a corresponding change in one or more of the other
parameters.
Project scope is the definition of which work is included and which work is
not included in a project.
The cost of a project includes all the capital, expenses, and internal cross-
charges associated with the project’s buildings, operation, maintenance, and
support.
The timing of a project is frequently a critical constraint.
Quality of a project can be defined as the degree to which the project meets
the needs of its users.
Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, and techniques
to project activities to meet project requirements. Project managers must
attempt to deliver a solution that meets specific scope, cost, time, and quality
goals while managing the expectations of the project stakeholders—the people
involved in the project or those affected by its outcome.
According to the Project Management Institute (PMI), project managers
must coordinate nine areas of expertise: scope, time, cost, quality, human
resources, communications, risk, procurement, and integration.
Scope management includes defining the work that must be done as part
of the project and then controlling the work to stay within the agreed-upon
scope.
Functional decomposition is a frequently used technique to define the
scope of an information system by identifying the business processes it will
affect.
A process is a set of logically related tasks performed to achieve a defined
outcome.
Time management includes defining an achievable completion date?
that is acceptable to the project stakeholders, developing a workable proj-
ect schedule, and ensuring the timely completion of
the project.
Cost management
includes developing and managing the project
budget.
Quality management is a set of activities designed to ensure that the project
will meet the needs for which it was undertaken.
Human resource management activities are designed to make the most
effective use of the people involved in the project.
The forming-storming-norming-performing-adjourning
model describes
how teams form, evolve, and dissolve.
Each project should have a project steering team—made up of senior man-
agers representing the business and IS organizations—to provide guidance and
support to the project. Three key members of the steering team are the project
champion, project sponsor, and IS manager.
Communications management involves the generation, collection, dissemi-
nation, and storage of project information in a timely and effective manner.
Risk management is a process that attempts to identify, analyze, and
manage project risks. Experienced project managers follow a deliberate and
systematic process of risk management to avoid risks or minimize their nega-
tive impact on a project.
492 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Procurement management is a set of activities related to the acquisition of
goods and/or services for the project from sources outside the organization.
Project integration management is a critical knowledge area of project?
management that involves chartering, scoping, planning, executing, moni-
toring and controlling, change control, and project closing.
Key Terms
communications management
core competency
core value
cost management
cost-reimbursable contract
critical path
fixed-price contract
forming-storming-norming-performing-adjourning
model
functional decomposition
Gantt chart
goal
goals-based strategic planning
human resource management
intangible benefit
issues-based strategic planning
make-or-buy decision
Michael Porter’s Five Forces Model
mission statement
objective
organic strategic planning
predecessor task
procurement management
Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT)
project champion
project deadline
project integration management
project management
project milestone
project risk
project schedule
project scope
project sponsor
project stakeholder
project steering team
quality
quality assurance
quality control
quality management
quality planning
risk management
risk owner
scope management
slack time
sponsoring business unit
strategic planning
strategy
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats
(SWOT) matrix
subject matter expert
tangible benefit
technical resource
time and material contract
time management
vision
vision/mission statement
work breakdown structure (WBS)
Chapter 11: Self-Assessment Test
Organizations that are more advanced in their plan-
ning processes develop multiple-year strategic plans.
1. Goal-based strategic planning is divided into four
phases:
, set direction, define strat-
egies, and deploy plan.
2. Analysis of the internal assessment and external
environment are frequently summarized into a
matrix.
3.
includes communicating the orga-
nization’s mission, vision, values, objectives, goals,
and strategies so that everyone can help define the
actions required to meet organizational goals.
a. Analyze situation
b. Define strategies
c. Set direction
d. Deploy plan
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 493
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

4. Which of the following is an example of a SMART
goal?
a. Achieve 100 percent customer satisfaction
within the next year.
b. Improve customer service by 50 percent.
c. Reduce customer complaints about mispriced
merchandise from 12 per day to less than 3
per day by June 30.
d. The customer is always right.
The strategic planning process for the IS organiza-
tion and the factors that influence it depend on how
the organization is perceived by the rest of the
organization.
5. IS strategic planning is influenced by the cor-
porate and
strategic plans as well
as technology innovations and innovative
thinking.
6. An IS organization can be viewed as either a cost
center/service provider, a business partner/busi-
ness peer, or as a game changer.
True or False?
7. A clear example of a tangible benefit is
.
a. the increase in employee morale from imple-
menting a self-service employee benefits soft-
ware package
b. the reduction in headcount in the accounting
organization resulting from improvements in
the payroll processing system
c. the increase in customer satisfaction from
modifications to the organization’s Web site
d. the value of improved decision making
resulting from self-service analytics tools
Organizations must always make a clear connection
among business objectives, goals, and projects. In
addition, projects must be consistent with business
strategies.
8.
of all IS projects are challenged or
failed.
a. Less than 25 percent
b. Nearly half
c. About 71 percent
d. Over 80 percent
9. A
is a temporary endeavor under-
taken to create a unique product, service, or
result.
10. Five highly interrelated parameters define a
project—scope, cost, time,
, and
user expectations.
11. According to the Project Management Institute
(PMI), project managers must coordi-
nate
areas of expertise.
a. three
b. five
c. seven
d. nine
12. The
model describes how teams
form, evolve, and dissolve.
Chapter 11: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. analyze situation
2. Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats
(SWOT)
3. d
4. c.
5. business unit
6. True
7. b
8. c
9. project
10. quality
11. d
12. forming-storming-norming-performing-adjourning
Review Questions
1. State three benefits that an organization can
achieve through strategic planning.
2. Briefly describe issues-based strategic planning,
organic strategic planning, and goals-based stra-
tegic planning.
3. Outline the four phases of goals-based strategic
planning.
4. State the fundamental factors that determine the
level of competition and long-term profitability of
an industry, and draw a sketch of Michael Porter’s
Five Forces Model.
5. What is included in a SWOT matrix, and how is
one used?
6. What does an organization’s vision/mission
statement communicate?
7. What does the acronym SMART goal stand for?
What is a BHAG?
8. How does a strategy differ from an objective?
494 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

9. Define the term “project.”
10. What is a core competency? Project scope? Project
stakeholder?
11. Identify the five highly interrelated parameters
that define a project. What happens if one of
these parameters is changed?
12. Identify and briefly describe the nine areas of
expertise that a project manager must coordinate.
13. Explain how PERT and Gantt are used to develop
and/or communicate the schedule of a project.
14. What is the difference between quality planning,
quality assurance, and quality control?
15. Briefly describe the stages that a project team
experiences over the course of a successful
project.
16. What is a stakeholder analysis matrix and how is
it used?
17. What is the purpose of risk management? Briefly
outline a recommended risk management process.
18. Identify and briefly describe three types of con-
tracts frequently used in the procurement of
goods and services.
Discussion Questions
1. To what degree do you think an organization’s
strategic plan is influenced by the vision, per-
sonality, and leadership capabilities of the CEO?
Do research to identify an example of a strategic
plan developed by a CEO you consider to be a
strong, charismatic leader. Briefly summarize the
notable aspects of this plan.
2. Identify an event that would trigger a need to
redefine the organization’s vision/mission
statement.
3. What would it imply if, while performing a SWOT
analysis, an organization could not identify any
opportunities? What if it could not identify any
threats?
4. How would you distinguish between an organi-
zational weakness and a threat to the organiza-
tion? How would you distinguish between a
strength and an opportunity?
5. Brainstorm an approach you might use to gather
data to identify the strengths and weaknesses of a
competing organization. Identify resources, spe-
cific tools, or techniques you might apply to gain
useful insights.
6. Would you recommend that an organization set
BHAGs? Why or why not? Identify an example of
a BHAG from a real organization. Was that BHAG
achieved?
7. Distinguish between the role of the project
champion and the role of the project sponsor. Is
one more important to the success of a project
than the other?
8. Describe three specific actions that the ideal
project sponsor would take to ensure the success
of a project.
9. Is there a difference between project time man-
agement and personal time management? Can
someone be “good” at one but not the other?
Explain your answer.
10. Discuss the team dynamics for a highly effective
(or ineffective) team of which you were a member.
Can you explain why the team performed so well
(or poorly) using the forming-storming-norming-
performing-adjourning model?
11. What sort of behaviors would indicate that the
business organization is not fully engaged in a
project and instead is simply replying on the
project team to make the project a success? What
is the danger with this attitude?
12. Identify some of the challenges of performing
project integration management on a project in
which team members are distributed globally and
cannot physically meet in one location. How
might these challenges be overcome?
13. Imagine that you are hiring a firm to complete a
large but undetermined amount of project work
for your firm. Which form of contract would you
prefer and why?
14. How would you respond to a project team mem-
ber who feels that risk management is a waste of
time because the future cannot be predicted?
Instead, this person prefers to react to problems
as they occur.
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Complete this table. Which tasks have the highest
degree of uncertainty in terms of the time
required to complete them?
2. Many free and open source project management
software programs are available online,
including: Asana, BaseCamp, Bitrix24, GanttPro-
ject, MeisterTask, Trello, and Zoho. Choose one
of these programs or use a spreadsheet or
another project management program with which
you are familiar. Create a Gantt chart using the
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 495
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

values from this table. How long will it take to
complete a project consisting of these tasks?
Identify the critical path for this project.
3. Evaluate any three of the many free and open
source project management software programs.
Create a spreadsheet that displays the pros, cons,
and special features of each of the three
programs.
Team Activities
1. Choose a company that interests your team and
do research to document its strategic plan.
Include a SWOT analysis and a statement of the
organization’s vision, mission, objectives, goals,
and strategies. Identify and briefly describe two
IS-related projects that would be consistent
with this plan.
2. Imagine that your team is serving as a facilitator
for a strategic planning session for a new, small
organization that was spun off from a much
larger organization just six months ago. The CEO
and four senior managers involved in the session
seem drained at the close of the first day of a
two-day off-site meeting. As the leadership team
discusses their results, your team is struck by
how conservative and uninspiring their objectives
and goals are. Brainstorm ideas on what your
team can do to help stimulate these managers to
think more creatively and broadly.
3. Your team has been hired as consultants to work
with a large city to implement a program to
place hundreds of high-tech digital cameras in
strategic locations to aid in reducing crime and
speeding help to victims. The cameras are state-
of-the-art with infrared capability for night vision,
high resolution, and rapid zoom in and out
capability. Your city will be the first in the United
States to deploy them. The manufacturer is a rel-
atively newcomer to the digital camera industry.
The program has not yet been fully funded nor
has it been announced to the residents of the city.
The city management and top level officers
within the police department are fully behind the
program, however, lower level officers and cops
on the street have mixed support. Your team
has been asked to perform a risk assessment for
this project. You are to identify various risks
that could occur; assign them a high, medium,
or low level of risk, and assess the potential
impact (high, medium, or low) on the project if
that risk should occur.
Web Exercises
1. Steve Jobs was a strong, charismatic leader who
cofounded Apple and is accredited with much of
the success of the company. Some believe that
Tim Cook, who became CEO in 2011, embraces a
more collaborative leadership style. Do research
to compare and contrast the leadership style of
the two CEOs. (You may wish to view the 2013
movie Jobs, which portrays the story of Steve
Jobs’ ascension from college dropout to Apple
CEO.) Which CEO—Jobs or Cook—do you think
developed and executed the most effective stra-
tegic plan? What evidence can you find to support
your opinion?
Task
TO
TM
TP
T
Standard
Deviation
Predecessor
Task
1
3 days
7 days
14 days
______
______
0
2
16 days
21 days
43 days
______
______
1
3
6 days
8 days
15 days
______
______
2
4
9 days
11 days
19 days
______
______
2
5
18 days
21 days
38 days
______
______
2, 3
6
13 days
18 days
30 days
______
______
5
7
12 days
17 days
27 days
______
______
6
8
7 days
9 days
13 days
______
______
6, 7
496 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

2. Do research online to identify what experts think
are the keys to project success. You will find
many different ideas and suggestions. Consoli-
date these ideas to create a top five list.
3. Do research on the Web to learn the history of
the PERT technique and identify some of the
early projects that used this technique.
Career Exercises
1. Visit the Project Management Institute (PMI) Web
site at www.pmi.org. Do research to learn more
about the value that employers place on project
management certification. What are the certifica-
tions offered by PMI that you may be qualified
to take? Do you think that PMI certification
would enhance your career opportunities? Why
or why not?
2. Can you state the vision and mission of your
organization? Has it documented its core values?
Can you identify any key objectives and
strategies?
3. Talk with your manager and others at work about
the need for good project management in your
organization. Do the people you spoke with see
project management as a core competency? Do
they feel that there is a shortage of good project
managers?
Case Studies
Case One
UConn’s University Information Technology
Services (UITS) Develops a Five-Year Strategic Plan
The University of Connecticut was founded in 1881 under
the name Storrs Agricultural School. As the name implies,
the school was originally focused solely on agricultural
studies. In 1893, the school became part of the national
land-grant college program, which provided land and
funding to one college in each state whose focus was on
teaching practical skills in agriculture, engineering, military
arts, and science.
Over the years, the school’s name changed three more
times—finally becoming the University of Connecticut in
1939—while its programs expanded into areas such as social
work, law, and nursing. Today, UConn, as the school is
commonly called, has more than 18,000 undergraduate
students at its main campus in Storrs, Connecticut, as well as
4,500 students who take classes at five smaller campuses
across the state. Another 8,200 UConn students are pursuing
graduate-level degrees in dentistry, education, law, medicine,
and pharmacy, among others.
The 200 employees who work for the University
Information Technology Services (UITS) division at UConn
are responsible for deploying, managing, and maintaining
IT systems and services—including classroom applications,
data management, desktop and software support, email,
file services, high-performance computing, mobile
applications, and Web services as well as the university’s
entire data network and telecommunications
infrastructure.
The primary mission of UITS is “to facilitate,
coordinate, or implement information technologies that
effectively enable the institutional missions of research,
teaching, learning, and outreach.” In an effort to ensure
that it is fulfilling its mission, UITS recently undertook
an intensive strategic planning process, the end result
of which was a five-year strategic plan that defines the
role UITS will play in fulfilling the university’s larger
mission.
From the start, UITS utilized a collaborative approach
to its strategic planning process, which began with
conversations with key stakeholders, including students,
alumni, faculty, staff, and administrators. The information
gathered during these meetings helped UITS staff assess the
current state of IT services across the university. The
planning process then extended for several more months,
with participation by various college deans and directors,
members of the president’s cabinet, and representatives from
the IT Partners program, which includes three advisory
committees, made up of faculty, administrators, and IT staff,
respectively. At that point, UITS released a draft version of
the plan and then spent more time gathering feedback from
its various constituencies.
The final version of the strategic plan identifies five high-
level objectives (referred to as goals in the plan) that establish
how UITS will support UConn’s institutional mission and the
changing IT needs of the university community:
●
Goal 1: Pursue IT solutions that empower members of
our community to successfully, productively, and
securely engage in all of their institutional roles as
individuals.
●
Goal 2: Pursue IT solutions under the guidance of our
academic partners that facilitate effective research,
enrich teaching and learning, and enhance institutional
competitiveness for extramural funding.
●
Goal 3: Pursue IT solutions in concert with functional
partners that support the business of the university and
increase operational effectiveness.
●
Goal 4: Pursue IT solutions that assist technical
partners at all UConn campuses to successfully
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 497
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

provide for the specific needs of their respective
communities.
●
Goal 5: Pursue IT solutions that can best be provided
centrally and deliver them securely, efficiently, and
robustly at scale.
These goals now guide UITS staff in their efforts to
identify, develop, and implement specific initiatives intended
to support its mission. For example, some of the UITS
initiatives that fall under Goal 1 of the strategic plan relate to
the delivery of mobile device services and collaboration tools
that members of the university community can use no matter
whether they are on or off campus. In addition, UITS has
placed a priority on developing high-performance computing
capabilities and instructional technologies in support of Goal 2.
Initiatives connected to Goal 3 include one intended to
enhance the paperless document-management tools available
to the various administrative and academic departments.
According to UConn’s CIO and Vice Provost for
Information Technology, Michael Mundrane, who led the
strategic planning process, “Our primary goal for the plan
itself was to produce a marketing document that would
explain to the organization and to our community where we
were going and why.” And as Mundrane explains in the plan
document, “The challenge was never to generate a laundry
list of technologies but was always to identify the smallest
practical number of key choices that would have the greatest
impact on the success of the university.”
From Mundrane’s perspective, a strategic plan offers
guidance to help an IT organization ensure that “the
important” is not squeezed out by “the urgent.” As he puts it,
“By focusing on the big picture, you can ensure that your
goals are accomplished and that it is easier to find the
resources needed to tackle unexpected challenges or to
pursue unique and innovative opportunities that appear
throughout the year.”
Critical Thinking Questions
1. How well do the five high-level goals in the UITS stra-
tegic plan support the IT organization’s stated mission?
How well do the goals address the needs of the various
constituencies within the university?
2. UITS’s commitment to collaboration did not end
when the UITS strategic plan was finalized. Michael
Mundrane considers the plan to be a dynamic docu-
ment and has pledged to actively solicit feedback from
the university community every two years to reassess
the plan and its relevance to the changing needs of the
university. Do you think such a strong commitment to
collaborative strategic planning is more or less impor-
tant at a public institution, such as the University of
Connecticut, versus a private company? Is it more or
less difficult to implement?
3. Do you agree with Michael Mundrane’s statement that
a strategic plan should be treated as a marketing doc-
ument? Go to the UITS Strategic Plan Web site (http://
itstrategy.uconn.edu), and click the link to view the
strategic plan. What do you think of the final docu-
ment? Is it effective as both a strategic plan and a
marketing document?
SOURCES: “History,” University of Connecticut, http://uconn.edu/about-
us/history, accessed April 18, 2016; “Transcript of Morrill Act (1862),”
Our Documents Initiative, www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=
true&doc=33&page=transcript, accessed April 17, 2016; “2016 Fact
Sheet,” University of Connecticut, http://uconn.edu/factsheet/latest.pdf,
accessed April 17, 2016; “University Information Technology Services,”
University of Connecticut, http://uits.uconn.edu/services, accessed April
18, 2016; “About UITS,” University of Connecticut, http://uits.uconn.
edu/about-uits, accessed April 17, 2016; “UITS Strategic Plan: Annual
Review and Progress Report,” University of Connecticut University
Information Technology Services, October 2015, http://itstrategy.uconn.
edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/850/2015/10/strategic-plan-progress-
report_2015.pdf; “IT Strategic Plan: 2014–18,” University of Connecticut
University Information Technology Services, accessed April 16, 2016,
http://itstrategy.uconn.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/850/2015/08/UITS-
strategic-plan_2015-8-24.pdf; Mundrane, Michael R., “Why a Strategic IT
Plan Is a CIO’s Best Asset,” The Enterprisers Project,” March 22, 2016,
https://enterprisersproject.com/article/2016/3/why-strategic-it-plan-cios-
best-asset; “IT Strategic Plan: 2014–18,” University of Connecticut
University Information Technology Services, accessed April 16, 2016,
http://itstrategy.uconn.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/850/2015/08/UITS-
strategic-plan_2015-8-24.pdf.
Case Two
Webcor: Building Buy-In in the Brick-and-Mortar
Business
Founded in 1971, Webcor Builders is one of the largest
construction companies in California and one of the
largest green construction companies in the United States.
Committed to innovative practices, Webcor has gained
considerable attention due to its award-winning work,
including interior construction, historic restoration, and
seismic renovation. As Webcor expanded from multifamily
residences to commercial offices, interiors, retail, public
works, parking structures, and federal, education, and
healthcare facilities, the company opened offices first in
San Francisco, and then in San Diego, Los Angeles,
and Alameda. Its merger with the large Japanese
construction firm Obayashi positioned the company to
reach customers along the Pacific Rim, with a new office
in Honolulu.
Along with developing innovations in building materials
and methods, Webcor has leveraged cutting-edge
information technologies—in an industry that is often slow to
consider, accept, and adopt IS advances. As early as 1984,
Webcor integrated the Apple desktop into its work process.
In 2011, Webcor made a significant commitment to virtual
design and construction in its public sector building projects.
Adopting Vico Software’s 5D Virtual Construction application
allowed Webcor to estimate costs, schedule projects, and
manage projects with increased efficiency. With this
software, Webcor can take its customers through a series of
what-if scenarios that enable them to make key design
decisions. Frank Haase, Director of Virtual Building at
498 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Webcor, explains, “We have amassed a knowledge base of
real data—from past projects and from our subcontractors—
that when combined with the integrated 5D approach gives
us an unprecedented planning and management capability
on all projects. The precise information derived from this
approach, both in preconstruction planning and in ongoing
construction operations, helps us to resolve issues early and
to make prompt fact-based decisions.” Using the software,
Webcor can also predict the scheduling and cost impact of
changes that occur throughout building design and
construction.
The big question many observers asked was, “How did
Webcor Building manage to persuade its workforce to adopt
the new technologies?” The decision to adopt the system
involved fairly high risks, given the potential resistance of its
end users. Vince Sarrubi, Webcor CIO, explained the
complexity of the challenge, “Blue collar industries tend to
focus on completing tasks, meeting deadlines, and doing
what they know how to do best to minimize time loss. New
technologies mean changes to physical work practices, which
could mean missing a deadline. These workers live in the
physical world and have been manually practicing their art
for years. There’s a mentality of ‘head down and nose to the
grindstone gets the work done’ and ‘if it ain’t broke, don’t
fix it.’”
So, how did Webcor achieve this success? First, Sarrubi is
not alone in leading the call for innovative IS utilization
within the company. Webcor cites innovation as one of its
strengths, and its top management has been firmly
committed to technological innovation. Company CEO Andy
Ball spearheaded the virtual construction project. He insists,
“Change is never easy, and it has an emotional toll and it has
a financial toll. Initially, it has a reduction in productivity in
order to have a significant gain in productivity. So all of these
things sort of work against change, but if you don’t embrace
it and you don’t move forward, you’re just going to move
backward and fall off the back because it occurs every day.”
The management of Webcor understands the risks and
advantage of innovation and is fully invested in seeing it
through.
With the firm backing of the top management team,
Sarrubi has used two tactics to persuade his blue-collar
workforce to adopt technological innovation. First,
Sarrubi searches for and hires what he calls technology
“cheerleaders,” young college graduates who are more
collaborative and who have embraced technology
from their early years as a means of producing higher
quality work in less time. According to Sarrubi, “Once
older workers see a ‘greenhorn’—a new construction
worker—using technology to manage a job, the older,
senior superintendents begin to see the benefits of the
technology and start to hop on the wagon.” This strategy
successfully persuaded older employees to adopt Box, a
cloud-based storage platform for the company’s
architectural drawings and financial documents. Cloud
technology has facilitated low-cost collaboration and
electronic document management for both Webcor and its
subcontractors. Workers can use the Box application and
an iPad to access drawings and 3D models, report
problems, submit inspections, and notify all stakeholders
of issues or changes.
Sarrubi recalls how Webcor adopted Box technology:
“Our enterprise adoption of Box grew out of a trial at one job
site and just took off, caught fire, adoption-wise…. All of a
sudden, what started as a small group test project grew into
almost one hundred Box users within a few weeks. The
match that lit the Box fuse was word-of-mouth employee
testimonials within the company.”
In addition to his cheerleader approach, Sarrubi also
makes sure that working with the new technology is “as
easy as using Amazon.” Cost, scalability, and return-
on-investment are important factors the company considers
when making IS decisions, but end-user preference is also a
big factor in what technologies the company adopts. When
deciding between different technology solutions, Sarrubi
tells Webcor’s top management to “slip on the user’s boots
and walk a mile.” That he feels will lead to the best IS
choice.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. List the key ideas IS managers can reapply from Web-
cor Builders to improve the successful adoption of new
technologies within their own organization.
2. What additional strategies can you identify to encour-
age the adoption of new technology?
3. Imagine that you are a disgruntled employee and
that you wish to sabotage the implementation of
a new technology project at Webcor, without
drawing too much attention to yourself. What might
you do?
SOURCES: “Built Through Trust,” Webcor Builders, www.webcor.com,
accessed October 5, 2014; “Webcor Builders Standardizes on Vico Office
for Virtual Construction,” Vico Software, June 9, 2011, www.vicosoft
ware.com/0/webcor-builders-standardizes-on-vico-office-for-virtual-con
struction/tabid/250240/Default.aspx; Florentine, Sharon, “Construction
Company CIO Builds a Better Business with the Cloud,” CIO, August 1,
2014, www.cio.com/article/2459507/leadership-management/construc
tion-company-cio-builds-a-better-business-with-the-cloud.html; “Press
Release: Webcor Builders Named as 2014 Contractor of the Year,”
Market Watch, August 6, 2014, www.marketwatch.com/story/webcor-
builders-named-as-2014-contractor-of-the-year-2014-08-06; Geron,
Tomio, “Webcor Moves Construction Industry to the Cloud,” Forbes,
August 21, 2013, www.forbes.com/sites/tomiogeron/2013/08/21/webcor-
moves-construction-industry-to-the-cloud; Green, Laura, “Andy Ball
Leads Webcor Builders into a New Age of Construction,” Smart Business,
September 1, 2011, www.sbnonline.com/article/andy-ball-leads-webcor-
builders-into-a-new-age-of-construction.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 499
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Notes
1. Sun, Leo, “SWOT Analysis of Starbucks Corporation
(SBUX),” Motley Fool, June 19, 2015, www.fool.com
/investing/general/2015/06/19/swot-analysis-of-star
bucks-corporation-sbux.aspx.
2. Thompson, Andrew, “Google’s Vision Statement & Mis-
sion Statement,” Panmore Institute (blog), September
20, 2015, http://panmore.com/google-vision-statement
-mission-statement.
3. Gaddam, Ajit, “List of Google Core Values,” Ask Student,
www.askstudent.com/google/list-of-google-core-values/,
accessed January 31, 2016.
4. Farfan, Barbara, “Wal-Mart Stores’ Mission Statement—
People, Saving Money, Living a Better Life,” November
20, 2015, About.com, http://retailindustry.about.com/od
/retailbestpractices/ig/Company-Mission-Statements
/Wal-Mart-Mission-Statement.htm.
5. Collins, James and Porras, Jerry, Built to Last: Successful
Habits of Visionary Companies, New York: Harper
Collins Publishers, 1994, 1997, p. 9.
6. Raice, Shayndi and Ante, Spencer E., “Insta-Rich: $1 Bil-
lion for Instagram,” The Wall Street Journal, April 10,
2012, http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB1000142405
2702303815404577333840377381670.
7. Kuittinen, Tero, “On Oculus Rift and Facebook’s Grand
Acquisitions,” BGR, March 26, 2014, http://bgr.com
/2014/03/26/facebook-oculus-rift-acquisition-analysis.
8. Doran, George T., Miller, Arthur, and Cunningham,
James, “There’s a S.M.A.R.T. Way to Write Management’s
Goals and Objectives,” Management Review, vol. 70,
no. 11, pp. 35–36, 1981.
9. Utermohlen, Karl, “Amazon Drone Delivery: Details
Finally Revealed!,” Investor Place (blog), January 19,
2016, http://investorplace.com/2016/01/amazon-drone
-delivery-amzn-stock/#.VrJo0432b4g.
10. “About Us,” Alstom Transport, www.alstom.com/micro
sites/transport/about-us, accessed February 3, 2016.
11. “Our Trains,” Virgin Trains, www.virgintrains.co.uk
/trains, accessed February 3, 2016.
12. “‘Unreasonable Ambition’ Puts Alstom on the Fast Track
for Growth,” OpEx Review, December 2012, Issue 5,
www.tbmcg.com/misc_assets/newsletter/opex_1212_cover
_story.pdf.
13. “About Johns Hopkins Medicine,” Johns Hopkins
Medicine, www.hopkinsmedicine.org/about/, accessed
February 2, 2015.
14. Nash, Kim S., “State of the CIO 2014: The Great Schism,”
CIO, January 1, 2014, www.cio.com/article/2380234
/cio-roletate-of-the-cio-2014-the-great-schism/cio-role
/state-of-the-cio-2014-the-great-schism.html.
15. “Statewide Information Technology 2012–2014 Strategic
Plan,” Delaware Department of Technology and Infor-
mation, http://dti.delaware.gov/pdfs/strategicplan/Dela
ware-Statewide-IT-Strategic-Plan.pdf, September 2012.
16. Nash, “The Great Schism.”
17. “City of Seattle Enterprise Information Technology Stra-
tegic Plan 2012–2014,” City of Seattle, www.seattle.gov
/Documents/Departments/InformationTechnology/RFP
/SOHIPRFPAppendixCEnterpriseITStrategic
Plan20122014.pdf, accessed September 16, 2014.
18. Nash, “The Great Schism.”
19. May, Thornton, “A Strategy for Strategy: Figuring Out
How to Figure Out What IT Should Do Next,” Compu-
terworld, September 2, 2014, www.computerworld.com
/article/2600346/it-management/a-strategy-for-strategy
-figuring-out-how-to-figure-out-what-it-should-do-next
.html.
20. Nash, “The Great Schism.”
21. “GAF Creates First Ever Virtual Home Remodeler App
with ‘Instantaneous’ Roof Mapping Feature,” GAF,
www.gaf.com/About_GAF/Press_Room/Press_Releases
/65077248, accessed September 3, 2014.
22. Hastie, Shane and Wojewoda, Stéphane, “Standish
Group 2015 Chaos Report—Q&A with Jennifer Lynch,”
InfoQ (blog), October 24, 2015, www.infoq.com/articles
/standish-chaos-2015.
23. Hamel, Gary and Prahalad, C.K., “The Core Competence
of the Corporation,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 68,
no. 3, pp. 79–93, May–June 1990.
24. Krigsman, Michael, “California Abandons $2 Billion
Court Management System,” ZDNet, April 2, 2012, www
.zdnet.com/blog/projectfailures/california-abandons
-2-billion-court-management-system/15363.
25. Brino, Anthony, “CGI to Build Vermont’s HIX,” Govern-
ment Health IT, December 20, 2012, www.govhealthit
.com/news/vermont-sign-hix-it-contract-cgi.
26. Stein, Andrew, “Builder of State’s Health Care Exchange
Misses Key Deadlines,” VTDigger.org (blog), September
27, 2013, http://vtdigger.org/2013/09/27/builder-states
-health-care-exchange-misses-key-deadliness.
27. Goswami, Neal P., “State, CGI Sign Amended Contract
with New Timetable and Penalties,” Vermont Press
Bureau, April 3, 2014, www.vermontpressbureau.com
/2014/04/03/state-cgi-sign-amended-contract-with-new
-timeline-and-penalties.
28. True, Morgan, “CGI Misses Vermont Health Connect
Deadline Again,” VermontBiz, May 21, 2014, www.ver
montbiz.com/news/may/cgi-misses-vermont-health-con
nect-deadline-again.
29. Remsen, Nancy, “Health Site Contractor Misses Deadline,
Again,” Burlington Free Press, June 10, 2014, www.bur
lingtonfreepress.com/story/news/local/2014/06/06
/health-site-contractor-misses-deadline/10090537.
30. Parker, Bruce, “Vermont Fires Creator of Its ‘Unaccept-
able,’ Glitchy ObamaCare Site,” Fox News, August 5,
2014, www.foxnews.com/politics/2014/08/05/vermont
-fires-creator-its-unacceptable-glitchy-obamacare-site.
31. Browning, Lynnley, “Thanks for Nothing: Obamacare
Website Bunglers Fired,” Newsweek, August 6, 2014,
www.newsweek.com/thanks-nothing-obamacare
-website-bunglers-fired-263205.
32. Fitzpatrick, Alex, “Apple Has an iPhone Headache, But It
Won’t Last Long,” Time, September 24, 2014, http://time
.com/3426561/apple-iphone-6-plus-ios-8-problems.
500 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

33. Brown, James, “6 Things to Remember When Projects
Spiral Out of Control,” SAP Community Network,
September 27, 2013, http://scn.sap.com/community
/it-management/blog/2013/09/27/6-things-to-remember
-when-projects-spiral-out-of-control.
34. Tuckman, Bruce, “Developmental Sequence in Small
Groups,” Psychological Bulletin, Volume 63, pages
384–389, 1965.
35. “Lead Integrator Atos Successfully Completes Delivery of
World’s Biggest IT Sports Contract for Sochi 2014
Games,” Atos, February 24, 2014, http://webcache.goo
gleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:IcukDP1ZdWYJ:
http://atos.net/en-us/home/we-are/news/press-release
/2014/pr-2014_02_24_02.html.
CHAPTER 11 • Strategic Planning and Project Management 501
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
12
System Acquisition
and Development
master_art/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• Amazon is contemplating entering into competition with
FedEx and UPS to deliver products directly to its
customers by creating a global delivery network, with
the goal of dramatically cutting costs and speeding
delivery. Amazon is facing a major development effort to
build the information systems to support this plan.
• The waterfall approach to system development allows
for a high degree of management control. It is for this
reason that this 50-year-old approach is frequently
followed when an organization contracts with another
to build its information system, even though the agile
software development is often faster and can lead to
higher quality results.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• Organizations can obtain software using one of
two basic approaches: buy or build.
• Identify the pros and cons associated with both
buying and building software.
• A system under development following the
waterfall approach moves from one phase to the
next, with a management review at the end of
each phase.
• Identify the advantages and disadvantages of the
waterfall approach to system development.
• Identify and state the goal of each of the six
phases of the waterfall approach.
• Identify and briefly describe the primary tools and
techniques used during system development.
• Define five types of feasibility that must be
assessed.
• Identify the purpose and participants involved in
various types of testing from unit testing to user
acceptance testing.
• Identify three approaches for system cutover.
• Agile development is an iterative system devel-
opment process that develops a system in
“sprint” increments lasting from two weeks to two
months.
• Describe the agile development process.
• Identify the advantages and disadvantages of the
agile system development approach.
• Describe the role of the scrum master and prod-
uct owner in the scrum framework.
• Discuss extreme programming (XP) and DevOps.
• When buying off-the-shelf software, the effort
required to modify the software package as well
as existing software so that they work well
together must be taken into account as a major
factor in selecting the final vendor and software.
• Outline a process for evaluation and selection of a
software package.
• Identify the key factors to be considered in
selecting a software package.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about System Acquisition
and Development?
Throughout this book, you have seen many examples of the use of information systems to support
organizations and people in a variety of careers. But where does an organization start when looking to
acquire or develop these systems? And how can you work with IS personnel, such as system analysts
and computer programmers, to get the information systems that you need to succeed on the job or in
your own business? This chapter provides the answers to these questions along with specific examples
of how new or modified systems are initiated, analyzed, designed, constructed, tested, and implemented
in a number of industries. We start with a discussion of the forces that lead an organization to acquire
new software and then move on to an overview of the two basic approaches to acquiring software.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• What options exist for organizations to acquire or develop an information system?
• What role should end users and other stakeholders play in the acquisition or development of a new
system?
Buy versus Build
Organizations continue to spend considerable time and resources developing
and acquiring software to support a wide range of applications, including
business intelligence and analytics; e-commerce, enterprise level functions,
and mobile apps. Opportunities and problems that frequently trigger the initi-
ation of an information system project include the following:
●
Organizations may pursue opportunities to use information systems to
support a key organization strategy or to seize a significant, and ideally
long-term, competitive advantage. Amazon is evaluating just such a
move—it is contemplating entering into competition with FedEx and UPS
to deliver products directly to its customers. Such an aggressive supply
chain move would create a global delivery network controlling the flow of
goods from factories around the world to customer doorsteps in Boston,
Los Angeles, or anywhere—cutting costs and speeding delivery. Major
changes in information systems and business processes at Amazon will be
necessary to support this plan.1
●
Pressure to increase profitability and improve operational efficiencies often
drives organizations to implement new approaches and technology. NBTY,
Inc., a manufacturer of vitamins and nutritional supplements, has been
conducting a multiyear business transformation focused on achieving oper-
ational efficiency and productivity gains to meet challenging financial tar-
gets mandated by NBTY’s parent Carlyle Group. The company
implemented custom software to enable architects, construction workers,
and contractors to quickly share information and cut the time required to
remodel a Vitamin World store in half. NBTY is reapplying lessons learned
from that experience to automate business processes and boost operational
efficiencies for its Puritan’s Pride and Holland & Barrett brands.2
●
The availability of new technology can create an opportunity to offer new
services or attract new customers. Walgreens was an early adopter of
mobile technology and developed a mobile app that enables customers to
print photos, order prescription refills, and earn points toward future pur-
chases. Walgreens went beyond these basics by allowing more than 240
third-party software providers to integrate with the company’s mobile
application through APIs. Now customers can manage their medication
504 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

schedules from their Apple Watches and earn and redeem points using
Apple Pay.3
Organizations can obtain software using one of two basic approaches: buy
or build. Buying off-the-shelf software is less risky and leads to quicker deploy-
ment; however, maintenance and support costs may become expensive with
this approach, and the software may not be an exact match to the needs and
work processes of the organization. Building custom software can provide a
better match to the current work processes and provide a potential competitive
advantage; however, software development can be extremely costly, and it can
take months or even years to develop custom software. The advantages and
disadvantages of these two approaches are summarized in Table 12.1.
Buying existing software developed by a software manufacturer enables
an organization to test drive and evaluate it before making a major commit-
ment to purchase it and install it. Once purchased, the existing software can
be installed with minimal disruption (ideally) so that user needs can be
quickly met and the organization can begin reaping the benefits from the
information system. Software buyers do not actually own the software, nor
can they access it to make changes or improvements; they are simply licensed
to use the software on a computer. With no access to the underlying source
code, user organizations must pay maintenance and support costs to the man-
ufacturer or to a third party authorized to fix bugs or add new functionality.
For some organizations, these costs can become excessive. As a result, many
organizations are turning to open source software with access to the source
code permitted so that it can be studied, changed, and improved by the orga-
nization’s own software professionals—with no maintenance charges. Indeed,
the amount and quality of support for open source software is dependent on
whether or not there are people, resources, and interest among the organiza-
tions using the software to develop updates and fix bugs.
The set of activities involved in building information systems to meet
users’ needs is called system development. System development projects can
range from small to very large and are conducted in fields as diverse as
nuclear science research and video game development. If an organization
elects to build a system, it can use its own employees (perhaps augmented
with contractors) to develop the system, or it can hire an outside company to
manage and/or perform all of the system development work. The latter
approach allows an organization to focus on what it does best, by delegating
software development to companies that have world-class development capa-
bilities. This can be important since the system development efforts for even
TABLE 12.1 The pros and cons of buying versus building software
Strategy
Pros
Cons
Buy
A software solution can be
acquired and deployed relatively
quickly.
An organization can “test drive”
software before acquiring it.
Unmodified, the software may
not be a good match to an
organization’s needs.
Maintenance and support
costs can become excessive.
Build
Customized software is more
likely to be a good match to an
organization’s needs.
A custom application provides
the potential to achieve com-
petitive advantage.
The cost to build a system can
be quite high compared to the
cost of purchasing off-
the-shelf software.
Customized software can take
months or even years to
deploy.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 505
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

relatively small projects can require months, with large projects requiring
years of effort. Unfortunately, in spite of everyone’s best efforts, a significant
number of large system development projects are likely to fail.
Organizations can use several different approaches when developing their
own software. Two of those—the waterfall and agile software development
processes—are discussed in the next section, followed by a discussion of a
process to follow when purchasing off-the-shelf software.
Waterfall System Development Process
The waterfall system development process is a sequential, multistage system
development process in which work on the next stage cannot begin until the
results of the current stage are reviewed and approved or modified as neces-
sary. It is referred to as a waterfall process because progress is seen as flowing
steadily downward (like a waterfall) through the various phases of develop-
ment. The phases of the waterfall system development process can vary from
one company to the next, but many organizations use an approach with six
phases: investigation, analysis, design, construction, integration and testing,
and implementation. Once the system is built, organizations complete the addi-
tional steps of operation, maintenance, and disposition. See Figure 12.1.
As shown in Figure 12.1, a system under development moves from one
phase of the waterfall process to the next. At the end of each phase, a review is
conducted to ensure that all tasks and deliverables associated with that phase
were produced and that they are of good quality. In addition, at the end of
each phase, the overall project scope, costs, schedule, and benefits associated
Investigation
Analysis
Design
Construction
Integration
& testing
Implementation
FIGURE 12.1
Waterfall system development process
Progress flows steadily downward (like a waterfall) through the various phases of development.
waterfall system development
process: A sequential, multistage
system development process in which
work on the next stage cannot begin
until the results of the current stage are
reviewed and approved or modified as
necessary.
506 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

with the project are reviewed to ensure that the project is on track and worth
completing. As a result, the waterfall approach allows for a high degree of man-
agement control. It is for this reason that this approach is frequently followed
when an organization contracts with another to build its information system.
However, a major problem with this approach is that users do not interact with
the solution until the integration and testing phase when the system is nearly
complete. This can lead to a mismatch between system capabilities, users’
expectations, and organizational needs. Table 12.2 lists additional advantages
and disadvantages of the waterfall system development process.
The Energy Information Administration (EIA) serves as an advisor to the
U.S. Department of Energy and is responsible for collecting energy data, con-
ducting analysis, and making forecasts about future energy inventories,
demand, and prices. Since 2011, EIA has spent close to $20 million on its IT
Transformation Project, a major system development effort designed to
enhance efficiencies within the agency. However, the program has been
mired in poor project management and has failed to produce any significant
results or benefits.4 This project obviously would have benefitted from a
higher degree of management control.
System Investigation
System investigation is the initial phase in the development of a new or
modified business information system whose purpose is to gain a clear under-
standing of the specifics of the problem to solve or the opportunity to address.
What is the scope of the problem? Who is affected and how? How often does
this occur? After gaining a good understanding of the problem, the next ques-
tion is, “Is the problem worth addressing?” Given that organizations have lim-
ited resources—people and money—this question deserves careful attention.
What are the potential costs, both the one-time initial costs and recurring
costs? What risks are associated with the project? If successful, what benefits,
both tangible and intangible, will the system provide? The steps of the investi-
gation phase are outlined next and discussed on the following pages:
1. Review system investigation request.
2. Identify and recruit team leader and team members.
3. Develop budget and schedule for investigation.
4. Perform investigation.
TABLE 12.2 Advantages and disadvantages of waterfall system
development process
Advantages
Disadvantages
Formal review at the end of each phase
allows maximum management control.
Users get a system that meets the needs
as understood by the developers;
however, this might not be what the
users really needed.
This approach requires creation of
considerable system documentation so
that system requirements can be traced
back to stated business needs.
Often, user needs go unstated or are
miscommunicated or misunderstood.
Approach produces many intermediate
products that can be reviewed to mea-
sure progress toward developing the
system.
Users can’t easily review intermediate
products and evaluate whether a par-
ticular product (e.g., a data-flow dia-
gram) will lead to a system that meets
their business requirements.
system investigation: The initial
phase in the development of a new or
modified business information system
whose purpose is to gain a clear
understanding of the specifics of the
problem to solve or the opportunity to
address.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 507
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

5. Perform preliminary feasibility analysis.
6. Prepare draft of investigation report.
7. Review results of investigation with steering team.
Review System Investigation Request
Because system development requests can require considerable time and
effort to investigate, many organizations have adopted a formal procedure for
initiating a system investigation. Ideally, a system investigation request is com-
pleted by members of the organization that will be most affected by the new
or modified system. This request typically includes the following information:
●
A preliminary statement of the problem or opportunity to be addressed
(this will be refined during the course of the investigation)
●
A brief discussion of how this effort aligns with previously defined com-
pany and organization objectives, goals, and strategies
●
Identification of the general areas of the business and business processes
to be included in the scope of the study (e.g., the handling of customer
discounts in the order-processing system)
The information in the system request helps senior management rational-
ize and prioritize the activities of the IS department and decide which investi-
gation projects
should
be staffed.
Based on the overall
IS plan, the
organization’s needs and goals, and the estimated value and priority of the
proposed projects, managers make decisions regarding which system investi-
gation requests will be approved.
Identify and Recruit Team Leader and Team Members
After managers grant approval to initiate a system investigation, the next step
is to identify and recruit a person who will lead the investigation phase, fol-
lowed by the other members of the investigation team. The members of the
investigation team are responsible for gathering and analyzing data, preparing
an investigation phase report, and presenting the results to the project steer-
ing team. The system investigation team can be quite diverse, often with
members located around the world. Business knowledge of the areas under
study, communication, and collaboration are keys to successful investigation
teams. Members of the development team may change as a project moves
through the various development phases, depending on the knowledge, expe-
rience, and skills required during each phase.
Develop Budget and Schedule for Investigation
After the team has been formed, its members work together to develop a list of
specific objectives and activities that must be accomplished during the system
investigation phase along with a schedule for completing the work. The team
establishes major milestones to help monitor progress and determine whether
problems or delays occur in performing system investigation. The group also
prepares a budget to complete the investigation including any travel required
and funds necessary to cover the use of any outside resources or consultants.
Perform Investigation
The major tasks to perform during investigation include refining the initial
problem definition and scope described in the system investigation request,
identifying the high-level business requirements the system must meet, and
identifying any issues or risks associated with the project.
Joint Application Development
Joint application development (JAD) is a
structured meeting process that can accelerate and improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of not only the investigation phase but also the analysis and
joint application development
(JAD): A structured meeting process
that can accelerate and improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of the
investigation, analysis, and design
phases of a system development
project.
508 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

design phases of a system development project. JAD involves carefully
planned and designed meetings in which users, stakeholders, and IS profes-
sionals work together to analyze existing systems, define problems, identify
solution requirements, and propose and evaluate possible solutions including
costs and benefits. See Figure 12.2. The JAD process has proven to be
extremely effective and efficient at accomplishing these tasks. In addition, the
highly participative nature of the sessions goes a long way to helping ensure
stakeholders and users buy into the results. With today’s technology, such as
group decision support systems and video conferencing, it is possible to con-
duct effective live JAD sessions with people located in many different places
without the need for expensive travel.
The success or failure of a JAD session depends on how well the JAD
facilitator plans and manages the session. It is not unusual for the facilitator
to spend three hours planning and preparing for the JAD session for each
hour the JAD session lasts. In addition, the participants of a JAD session must
be carefully chosen to include users of the system as well as people from
other organizations who will likely be affected by, provide input for, or
receive output from the system. Ideally, people from the operational level as
well as the executive level will attend. Table 12.3 identifies the JAD session
participants as well as their role and qualifications.
The consulting firm Liquid Mercury Solutions uses JAD in working with its
clients on a routine basis to define and develop information system solutions.5
Functional Decomposition
Functional decomposition is a technique that involves
breaking down a complex problem or system into smaller parts that are more
manageable and easier to understand. It is frequently used during the investiga-
tion phase to define the business processes included within the scope of the
system. Recall that a process is a set of logically related tasks performed to
achieve a defined outcome. A process is usually initiated in response to a spe-
cific event and requires input that it processes to create output. Often, feedback
is generated that is used to monitor and refine the process.
To create the functional decomposition chart (see Figure 12.3), begin with
the name of the system and then identify the highest-level processes to be per-
formed. Each process should have a two word “verb-subject” name that clearly
FIGURE 12.2
JAD session
JAD can accelerate and improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of the
investigation, analysis, and design
phases of a system development
project.
wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 509
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

defines the process. Next, break those high-level processes down into lower-
level subprocesses. For the system investigation phase, two or three levels of
decomposition are usually sufficient to define the scope of the system.
Perform Preliminary Feasibility Analysis
The technical, economic, legal, operational, and schedule feasibility are
assessed during the feasibility analysis, which is only a preliminary analysis
that will be repeated with more accuracy during the analysis and design
phases, when more details about the system and its requirements are known.
TABLE 12.3 JAD participants and their role
Role
Responsibilities
Qualifications
Facilitator
●
Determines JAD session objectives
●
Plans JAD session to meet objectives
●
Leads JAD session
●
Encourages everyone to participate
●
Excellent meeting facilitator
●
Unbiased and does not take sides
Decision
makers
●
Resolve conflicts
●
Avoid gridlock
●
Stakeholders selected by project
sponsor to make decisions
●
Have the authority and willingness
to make decisions
Users
●
Describe business as it is and as it should be
●
Provide business expertise
●
Define problems, identify potential benefits, analyze
existing system, define requirements of a new system, and
propose and evaluate possible solutions
●
Represent all major areas affected
●
Expert in their area of the business
System
developers
●
Observe carefully
●
Offer technical opinion on cost or feasibility, if requested
●
Gain deep understanding of customers’ needs and desires
●
Member of system development
team
Scribe
●
Participate in discussion to clarify points and capture them
accurately
●
Document key points, issues, next steps, and decisions
throughout the JAD session
●
Publish results of JAD session and solicit feedback
●
Excellent listening skills
●
Experience in using software
engineering tools to document
requirements and create system
models
Stock
management
system
Manage
stock
Check
stock
Order
stock
Receive
stock
Store
stock
Add
new
supplier
Update
supplier
data
Delete
supplier
Manage
suppliers
FIGURE 12.3
Functional decomposition chart
Functional decomposition is used to define the scope of the system.
feasibility analysis: An assess-
ment of the technical, economic, legal,
operational, and schedule feasibility of
a project.
510 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Technical feasibility examines whether a project is feasible within the
current limits of available technology. Determining the technical feasibility
is critical when new technology is first being considered for use within an
organization, prior to its widespread use. A number of companies are cur-
rently participating in a technical feasibility study to determine if advanced
positioning signals transmitted from a GPS satellite can be used to control a
self-steering robotic tractor to within an accuracy of 5 centimeters. Such
accuracy is needed to ensure that the self-steering robotic tractor tires can
be guided to run between rows of planted rice without causing damage to
the crop.6
Economic feasibility determines whether the expected benefits associ-
ated with the project outweigh the expected costs sufficiently to make the
project financially attractive. Cost and benefit estimates should be made for
multiple years to allow for calculation of the internal rate of return or net
present value of the project. It is important to recognize that at this early
stage of the development process, the cost and benefit amounts are rough
estimates and subject to change should the project continue. So, while the
mathematics involved may make it appear that the results are precise, in actu-
ality, the result is no more accurate than cash flow estimates, which are often
no more than refined guesses. Table 12.4 lists some of the typical costs and
benefits that need to be considered.
Organizations must guard against spending more than is appropriate as
the success or failure of a system development effort will, at least to some
degree, be measured against meeting the project budget. The U.K. Ministry of
Defence wasted millions of pounds on a planned £1.3 billion (approximately
$2.2 billion) information system designed to enable the army to recruit online.
A key benefit to be derived from the project was to increase recruitment levels
above historic levels; however, this goal has not been achieved.7
Legal feasibility is the process of determining whether laws or regula-
tions may prevent or limit a system development project. Legal feasibility
involves an analysis of existing and future laws to determine the likelihood of
legal action against the system development project and the possible conse-
quences of such action. For example, nearly every country in Europe and
many in Latin America, Asia, and Africa have implemented data protection
laws that prohibit the disclosure or misuse of information held on private
individuals. These laws make it possible for the human resources departments
of multinational companies to share personal employee data across country
borders only in limited circumstances.
Operational feasibility is the process of determining how a system will
be accepted by people and how well it will meet various system performance
expectations. Assessing the operational feasibility of a project includes taking
into consideration people issues, such as overcoming employee resistance to
change, gaining managerial support for the system, providing sufficient moti-
vation and training, and rationalizing any conflicts with organizational norms
and policies. In other words, if the system is developed, will it be used? Oper-
ational feasibility also takes into account the need to meet certain system per-
formance requirements (e.g., response time for frequent online transactions,
number of concurrent users it must support, reliability, and ease of use) that
are considered important to system users and stakeholders.
Schedule feasibility is the process of determining whether a project can
be completed within a desired time frame. This process involves balancing
the time and resource requirements of the project with other projects. For
example, many projects that involve delivering a new financial information
system have a desired start-up date at the beginning of the organization’s fis-
cal year. Unfortunately, it is not always possible to meet this date, and so a
compromise must be made—deliver part of the system at the start of the fiscal
year or wait another year to deliver the full system.
technical feasibility: The process
of determining whether a project is
feasible within the current limits of
available technology.
economic feasibility: The process
of determining whether the project
makes financial sense and whether
predicted benefits offset the cost and
time needed to obtain them.
legal feasibility: The process of
determining whether laws or regula-
tions may prevent or limit a system
development project.
operational feasibility: The pro-
cess of determining how a system will
be accepted by people and how well it
will meet various system performance
expectations.
schedule feasibility: The process
of determining whether the project can
be completed within a desired time
frame.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 511
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

TABLE 12.4 Cost/benefit table
Costs
Year 1
Year 2
Year …
Year N
Costs to analyze, design, construct, integrate and test, and implement system
Employees
Vendor
Software customization
Travel
Hardware costs
Software tools costs
Other costs
Initial costs to establish system
Software license fees
New hardware costs
Cost to upgrade existing hardware
Cost to upgrade network
User training
Purchase of any necessary data
Cost to migrate existing data to new system
Other costs
Ongoing operations costs
Software lease or rental fees
Hardware lease or rental fees
Network usage fees
System operations and support staff
User training
Increased electric and other utilities
Costs associated with disaster recovery
Other costs
Tangible benefits (can be quantified in dollars)
Reduction in current costs
Reduction in current staff
Reduction in inventory levels
Reduction in computer hardware costs
Reduction in software costs
Other reduced costs
Increase in revenue
Increase in sales from reaching new customers
Increase in sales from charging more
Acceleration in cash flow
Other increases in revenue
Intangible benefits (difficult to quantify in dollars)
Improved customer service
Improved employee morale
512 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Prepare Draft of Investigation Report
The system investigation ends with production of a system investigation
report that summarizes the results of the system investigation and recom-
mends a course of action: continue on to system analysis, modify the project
in some manner and perhaps repeat the system investigation, or drop the
project altogether. See Figure 12.4. A typical table of contents for a system
investigation report is shown in Figure 12.5.
Review Results of Investigation with Steering Team
The system investigation report is reviewed with the steering team to gain
their input and counsel. Typically, the written report is shared in advance and
then the project manager and selected members of the team meet with the
steering team to present their recommendations.
After the project review, the steering team might agree with the recom-
mendations of the system development team or it might suggest a change in
project focus to concentrate more directly on meeting a specific company
objective. Another alternative is that everyone might decide that the project is
FIGURE 12.4
System investigation
recommendation
The system investigation report
summarizes the results of the system
investigation and recommends a
course of action.
Drop project
Continue
Redefine project and
redo investigation
© Stuart Miles/Shutterstock.com
Systems Investigation Report
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
DESCRIPTION OF OPPORTUNITY
PROJECT SCOPE
BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS
ISSUES AND CONSTRAINTS
FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS
RECOMMENDATION
NEXT STEPS
FIGURE 12.5
Table of contents for a system investigation report
A typical system investigation report begins with an executive summary and ends with a list
of next steps.
system investigation report: A
summary of the results of the system
investigation, with a recommendation of
a course of action.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 513
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

not feasible and thus cancel the effort. This input is used to finalize the sys-
tem investigation report.
System Analysis
After a project has completed the investigation phase and been approved for fur-
ther study, the next step is to answer the question, “What must the information
system do to solve the problem or capitalize on the opportunity?” The overall
emphasis of the system analysis is on gathering data on the existing system,
determining the requirements for the new system, considering alternatives within
identified constraints, and investigating the feasibility of alternative solutions. The
primary outcome of system analysis is a prioritized list of system requirements
and a recommendation of how to proceed with the project. The steps in the sys-
tem analysis phase are outlined next and discussed in the following pages. Note
that many of the steps were also performed during system investigation:
1. Identify and recruit team leader and team members.
2. Develop budget and schedule for system analysis activities.
3. Study existing system.
4. Develop prioritized set of requirements.
5. Identify and evaluate alternative solutions.
6. Perform feasibility analysis.
7. Prepare draft of system analysis report.
8. Review results of system analysis with steering team.
The Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) is comprised of over 9,000 offi-
cers and serves 3.9 million residents spread across the 485 square miles of the
city of Los Angeles. LAPD conducted a system analysis to define the require-
ments for a Use of Force System (UOFS) to monitor officer performance and
behavior. The UOFS collects information about each use of force incident
including suspect, officer, and witness data. The application applies a series of
business rules that trigger a review and investigation into the use of force by
appropriate parties, often by multiple levels of LAPD management.8
Identify and Recruit Team Leader and Team Members
In many cases, there is some personnel turnover when a project moves from
the system investigation phase to the system analysis phase. Some players
may no longer be available to participate in the project, and new members
with a different set of skills and knowledge may be required. So, the first
step in system analysis is to identify and recruit the team leader and members.
Ideally, some members of the original investigation team will participate in
the system analysis to provide project continuity.
Develop Budget and Schedule for System Analysis Activities
After the participants in the system analysis phase are determined, the team
develops a list of specific objectives and activities required to complete the
system analysis. The team also establishes a schedule—complete with major
milestones to track project progress. The group also prepares a budget of the
resources required to complete the system analysis, including any required
travel expenses as well as funds to cover the use of outside resources.
Study Existing System
The purpose of studying the existing system is to identify its strengths and
weaknesses and examine current inputs, outputs, processes, security and con-
trols, and system performance. While analysis of the existing system is impor-
tant to understanding the current situation, the study team must recognize
that after a point of diminishing returns, further study of the existing system
will fail to yield additional useful information.
system analysis: The phase of
system development that focuses on
gathering data on the existing system,
determining the requirements for the
new system, considering alternatives
within identified constraints, and
investigating the feasibility of
alternative solutions.
514 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Many useful sources of information about the existing system are avail-
able, as shown in Figure 12.6. JAD sessions, direct observation with one or
more members of the analysis team directly observing the existing system in
action, and surveys are often used to uncover pertinent information from the
various sources.
Develop Prioritized Set of Requirements
The purpose of this step is to determine user, stakeholder, and organizational
needs for the new or modified system. A set of requirements must be deter-
mined for system processes (including inputs, processing, outputs, and feed-
back),
databases,
security
and
controls,
and
system
performance.
See
Figure 12.7. As requirements are identified, an attempt is made to prioritize
each one by using the following categories:
●
Critical. Almost all users agree that the system is simply not acceptable
unless it performs this function or provides this capability. Lack of this
feature or capability would cause users to call a halt to the project.
●
Medium priority. While highly desirable, most users agree that although
their work will be somewhat impaired, the system will still be effective
without this feature or capability. Some users may argue strongly for this
feature or capability but, in the end, would want the project to continue
even without this capability.
●
Low priority. Most users agree that their ability to use the system to
accomplish their work will only be minimally impaired by lack of this
feature or capability, although it would be “nice to have.” Almost no user
argues strongly for this feature or capability.
Identifying, confirming, and prioritizing system requirements is perhaps
the single most critical step in the entire waterfall system development pro-
cess because failure to identify a requirement or an incorrect definition of a
requirement may not be discovered until much later in the project, causing
much rework, additional costs, and delay in the system effort.
The use of JAD sessions with a cross section of users and stakeholders in
the project is an effective way to define system requirements. A technique
often used in a JAD session is to ask managers and decision makers to list only
the factors that are critical to the success of their areas of the organization.
FIGURE 12.6
Internal and external sources
of data for system analysis
JAD sessions, direct observation,
and surveys are often used to
uncover data from the various
sources.
Internal
Sources
Users, stakeholders,
and managers
Organization
charts
Forms and
documents
Procedure manuals
and policies
Financial
reports
IS manuals
Other measures of
business process
External
Sources
Customers
Suppliers
Stockholders
Government
agencies
Competitors
Outside groups
Journals, etc.
Consultants
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 515
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A critical success factor (CSF) for a production manager might be adequate raw
materials from suppliers, while a CSF for a sales representative could be a list
of customers currently buying a certain type of product. Starting from these
CSFs, the processes, databases, security and control, and performance require-
ments associated with each CSF can be identified.
Processes
The functional decomposition performed during the investigation
phase identifies the majority of the processes to be included within the scope
of a new system. Now, the processes must be further defined so that they
will be practical, efficient, economical, accurate, and timely to avoid project
delays. In addition, the individuals or organizations responsible for complet-
ing each step in the process must be identified.
A process requires input that it uses to create output. Often, feedback is
generated. The questions that need to be answered during system analysis
are: what data entities are required, where will this data come from, what
methods will be used to collect and enter the data, who is responsible for
data input, and what edits should be performed on the input data to ensure
that it is accurate and complete? Another important consideration is the crea-
tion of an audit trail that records the source of each data item, when it entered
the system, and who entered it. The audit trail may also need to capture when
the data is accessed or changed and by whom.
Because the success of a new system is highly dependent upon the
acceptability of its output, the identification of common system outputs—such
as printed reports, screens, and files—is critical to developing a complete set
of system requirements.
Data-Flow Diagram
A data-flow diagram (DFD) is a diagram used during
both the analysis and design phases to document the processes of the current
system or to provide a model of a proposed new system. A DFD shows not
only the various processes within the system but also where the data needed
for each process comes from, where the output of each process will be sent,
and what data will be stored and where. The DFD does not provide any infor-
mation about the process timing (e.g., whether the various processes happen
in sequence or are parallel).
DFDs are easy to develop and are easily understood by nontechnical peo-
ple. Data-flow diagrams use four primary symbols:
●
The data-flow line includes arrows that show the direction of data
movement.
FIGURE 12.7
Defining system requirements
System requirements must be
checked for consistency so that they
all fit together.
Processes
Databases
Security and
controls
System
performance
© zentilia/Shutterstock.com
data-flow diagram (DFD): A dia-
gram used during both the analysis and
design phases to document the
processes of the current system or to
provide a model of a proposed new
system.
516 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
The process symbol identifies the function being performed (e.g., check
status, issue status message).
●
The entity symbol shows either the source or destination of the data
(e.g., customer, warehouse).
●
A data store symbol reveals a storage location for data (e.g., pending
orders, accounts receivable).
Figure 12.8 shows a level 1 DFD. Each of the processes shown in this dia-
gram could be documented in more detail to show the subprocesses and cre-
ate a level 2 DFD. Frequently, level 3 DFD diagrams are created and used in
the analysis and design phases.
Databases
Data modeling is the process of defining the databases that a sys-
tem will draw data from as well as any new databases that it will create. The
use of entity-relationship (ER) diagrams is one technique that is frequently
used for this critical step. An ER diagram is used to show logical relationships
among data entities, such as in Figure 12.9. An ER diagram (or any other
modeling tool) cannot by itself fully describe a business problem or solution
CUSTOMER
WAREHOUSE
ACCOUNTING
1.0
In-stock request
Order
Status
message
Status data
Shipping
order
Pending
orders
Payment
Accounting data
Accounts
receivable
Inventory
reports
Accounts receivable data
D2
Invoice
D1
Shipping
confirmation
Order
data
Order data
Order data
Check
status
3.0
Generate
shipping
order
2.0
Issue
status
messages
4.0
Manage
accounts
receivable
5.0
Produce
reports
FIGURE 12.8
Data-flow diagram
A data-flow diagram documents the processes of the current system or provides a model of a
proposed new system.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 517
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

because it lacks descriptions of the related activities. It is, however, a good
place to start because it describes entity types and attributes about which
data might need to be collected for processing.
Security and Control
Security and control considerations need to be an integral
part of the entire system development process. Unfortunately, they are often
treated as an afterthought, after system requirements have been defined and
system design is well underway. This approach usually leads to problems that
become security vulnerabilities, which can cause major security breaches
resulting in significant legal and system modification expenses. A more effec-
tive and less costly approach is to define security and control requirements
when other system requirements are being identified. The following list pro-
vides examples of areas for which security and control requirements might
need to be defined:9
●
Access controls, including controls to authenticate and permit access only
to authorized individuals
●
Encryption of electronic customer information, including while in transit
or in storage on networks or systems to which unauthorized individuals
may have access
●
Dual control procedures, segregation of duties, and employee background
checks for employees with responsibilities for or access to customer,
employee, or organization-sensitive information
●
Monitoring systems and procedures to detect actual and attempted attacks
on or intrusions into information systems
●
Measures to protect against destruction, loss, or damage of customer,
employee, or organization-sensitive data due to potential environmental
hazards, such as fire and water damage, technological failures, or disas-
ters such as hurricanes and terrorism
●
Business resumption procedures to get the system up and running with
no major business disruption and with no loss of data in the event of a
disaster (e.g., fire, hurricane, terrorism)
People with a special interest in security and control include the organiza-
tion’s internal auditors and members of senior management. They should pro-
vide input and advice during the system analysis and design phases.
System security and control requirements need to be defined in the con-
text of the organization’s existing policies, standards, and guidelines. See
FIGURE 12.9
Entity-relationship (ER)
diagram for a customer order
database
Development of ER diagrams helps
ensure that the logical structure of
application programs is consistent
with the data relationships in the
database.
Serves
Salesperson
Product
Customer
Orders
Places
Line
items
Includes
Specifies
Invoice
Generates
518 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Figure 12.10. For example, the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act requires companies
legally defined as financial institutions to ensure the security and confidentiality
of customer information. Thus, financial institutions have established policies,
standards, and guidelines to which any new information system must adhere.
System Performance
How well a system performs can be measured through
its performance requirements. Failure to meet these system performance
requirements results in unproductive workers, dissatisfied customers, and
missed opportunities to deliver outstanding business results. System perfor-
mance is usually determined by factors such as the following:
●
Timeliness of output. Is the system generating output in time to meet
organizational goals and operational objectives? Since GEICO began
advertising that you can save 15 percent on auto insurance in just 15 min-
utes, speed has become a key factor for many consumers in selecting an
insurance company. Nationwide now touts its online tool as the fastest
path to a quick car insurance quote, and The General insurance company
boasts, “Give us two minutes and we’ll give you an auto insurance quote.”
●
Ease of use. Developing applications that managers and employees can
easily learn and use is essential to ensure that people will work with the
applications productively.
●
Scalability. A scalable information system can handle business growth
and increased business volume without a noticeable degradation in
performance.
●
System response time. The average response time for frequent online
transactions is a key factor in determining worker productivity and cus-
tomer service.
●
Availability. Availability measures the hours per month the system is
scheduled to be available for use. Systems typically must be unavailable a
few hours a week to allow for software upgrades and maintenance.
●
Reliability. Reliability measures the hours the system is actually available
for use divided by the hours the system is scheduled to be available and
is expressed as a percentage. Worker productivity decreases and customer
dissatisfaction increases as system reliability decreases.
Identify and Evaluate Alternative Solutions
The analysis team must think creatively and consider several system solution
options. By looking at the problem in new or different ways, questioning cur-
rent assumptions and the way things are done today, and removing current
FIGURE 12.10
Context for new system
security and control
requirements
New system security and control
requirements must be developed
within the organization’s existing
policies, standards, and guidelines.
• Corporate policies that define what
   actions to take and why
• Baseline requirements
   that must be met by
     information systems
• Best practices to
   implement a security
   measure
• Descriptions of new
 security and control
 measures to implement
 for this system
Guidelines
Standards
Policy
New system requirements
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 519
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

constraints and barriers, the team is free to identify highly creative and effec-
tive information system solutions. Such critical analysis requires unbiased and
careful questioning of whether system elements are related in the most effec-
tive ways, considering new or different relationships among system elements,
and possibly introducing new elements into the system. Critical analysis also
involves challenging users about their needs and determining which are truly
critical requirements rather than “nice to have” features.
The Pareto principle (also known as the 80–20 rule) is a rule of thumb
used in business that helps people focus on the vital 20 percent that generate
80 percent of the results. This principle means that 80 percent of the desired
system benefits can be achieved by implementing 20 percent of the system
requirements. An 80–20 option will have a low cost and quick completion
schedule relative to other potential options. However, this option may not be
an ideal solution and may not even be acceptable to the users, stakeholders,
and the steering team who may be expecting more. Additional candidate solu-
tions can be defined that implement all or most of the critical priority system
requirements and team-selected subsets of the medium and low-priority
requirements. Table 12.5 illustrates some of the many potential candidates the
analysis team may want to evaluate.
Perform Feasibility Analysis
At this stage in the system development process, the project team has identified
several promising solutions based on implementing all or most of the critical
requirements and various subsets of the medium and low-priority requirements.
The feasibility analysis conducted during the investigation phase is repeated for
each of the candidate solutions the team wants to consider. At this stage, the
analysis can be more in-depth because more is known about the system and its
requirements as well as the costs and benefits of the various options.
Prepare Draft of System Analysis Report
System analysis concludes with a formal system analysis report summarizing
the findings of this phase of the project. The table of contents for a typical
system analysis report is shown in Figure 12.11. This report is a more com-
plete and detailed version of the system investigation report. At this phase of
the project, the costs and benefits of the project should be fairly accurate, cer-
tainly more accurate than at the end of the investigation phase.
Review Results of System Analysis with Steering Team
The system analysis report is presented to the project steering team with a
recommendation to stop, revise, or go forward with the system development
project. Following the steering team meeting, the project team incorporates
TABLE 12.5 Additional candidates for system analysis
Scope of System
Build System
Customize Software Package
Build system that meets all critical requirements, but no medium
or low-priority requirements
Option #1
Modify package so that it meets all critical requirements, but no
medium or low-priority requirements
Option #2
Build system that meets 20 percent of all requirements that will
provide 80 percent of the system benefits
Option #3
Modify package so that it meets 20 percent of all requirements
that will provide 80 percent of the system benefits
Option #4
Implement software package as is, with no customization to
enable it to meet unique requirements
Option #5
Pareto principle (80–20 rule): An
observation that for many events,
roughly 80 percent of the effects come
from 20 percent of the causes.
520 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the recommendations and suggested changes into the final report. It is not
unusual for changes to the project scope, budget, benefits, or schedule to be
requested based on the findings from the analysis phase. However, the proj-
ect sponsor and the steering team must request and formally approve of any
changes.
System Design
The purpose of system design phase is to answer the question, “How will the
information system solve this problem?” The primary result of the system
design phase is a technical design that details system outputs, inputs, controls,
and user interfaces; specifies hardware, software, databases, telecommunica-
tions, personnel, and procedures; and shows how these components are inter-
related. In other words, system design creates a complete set of technical
specifications that can be used to construct the information system. The steps
in the system design phase are outlined next and discussed in the following
pages. Again, note that many of the steps were performed in the investigation
and system analysis phase but are now repeated with more current and com-
plete information.
1. Identify and recruit team leader and team members.
2. Develop schedule and budget for system design activities.
3. Design user interface.
4. Design system security and controls.
5. Design disaster recovery plan.
6. Design database.
7. Perform feasibility analysis.
8. Prepare draft of system design report.
9. Review results of system design with steering team.
Identify and Recruit Team Leader and Team Members
Because some personnel turnover is likely when moving from the system
analysis phase to the system design phase, the first step in system design is
to identify and recruit the team leader and members. Ideally, some members
of the system analysis team will participate in the system design to ensure
project continuity.
Systems Analysis Report
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
DESCRIPTION OF OPPORTUNITY
PROJECT SCOPE
BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS
ISSUES AND CONSTRAINTS
SUMMARY OF ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED
FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS
RECOMMENDATION
NEXT STEPS
FIGURE 12.11
Typical table of contents for a report on an existing system
The system analysis report is a more complete and detailed version of the system investigation
report.
system design: The stage of system
development that answers the
question, “How will the information
system solve a problem?”
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 521
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Develop Schedule and Budget for System Design Activities
The system design team begins by developing a list of specific objectives and
activities required to complete the system design phase. It also establishes a
schedule complete with major milestones to track project progress. Some
tasks may involve working with the steering team to resolve issues and ques-
tions raised during the review of the system analysis phase. The group also
prepares a budget for completing the system design, including any required
travel costs and funds to cover the use of outside resources.
Design User Interface
How users experience an information system determines whether the system
will be accepted and used. In speaking about the importance of user interface
design for Apple software products, Jef Raskin, an interface expert, once said,
“As far as the customer is concerned, the interface is the product.”10
User interface design integrates concepts and methods from computer sci-
ence, graphics design, and psychology to build interfaces that are accessible,
easy to use, and efficient. Over the years, various authors have identified user
interface design principles, including those listed in Table 12.6.11,12
User interface design must consider a number of components. Most sys-
tems provide a sign-on procedure that requires identification numbers, pass-
words, and other safeguards to improve security and prevent unauthorized
use. With a menu-driven system, users select what they want to do from a list
of alternatives. Most people can easily operate these types of systems. In addi-
tion, many designers incorporate a help feature into the system or program.
When users want to know more about a program or software feature or what
type of response is expected, they can activate the help feature. Systems often
use lookup tables to simplify and shorten data entry. For example, if you are
entering a sales order for a company, you can type its abbreviation, such as
ABCO. The program searches the customer table, and looks up the informa-
tion you need to complete the sales order for the company abbreviated as
ABCO.
Using screen painter software, an analyst can efficiently design the fea-
tures, layout, and format of the user interface screens. See Figure 12.12. Sev-
eral screens can be linked together to simulate how the user can move from
TABLE 12.6 Principles of good user interface design
Principle
How to Apply
Strive for consistency
Consistent sequences of actions should be required in similar situations; identical terminology
should be used in prompts, menus, and help screens; and consistent commands should be
employed throughout.
Offer informative
feedback
For every user action, there should be some system feedback. For frequent and minor actions,
the response can be modest, while for infrequent and major actions, the response should be
more substantial.
Offer simple error
handling
As much as possible, design the system so the user cannot make a serious error. If an error is
made, the system should be able to detect the error and offer simple, comprehensible instruc-
tions for handling the error.
One primary action
per screen
Every screen should support a single action of real value to the user.
Provide progressive
disclosure
Show only what is necessary on each screen. If the user is making a choice, show enough
information to allow the user to choose and then display details on a subsequent screen.
Strive for aesthetic
integrity
The graphic design elements used in an interface should be simple and clean, pleasant to look
at, and easy to understand.
522 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

screen to screen to accomplish tasks. Conducting an interactive screen design
session with a few users at a time is an effective process for defining the
system user interface.
Design System Security and Controls
The system analysis phase identified areas where system security and controls
need to be defined. During the design phase, designers must develop specific
system security and controls for all aspects of the information system, including
hardware, software, database systems, telecommunications, and Internet opera-
tions, as shown in Table 12.7. Security considerations involve error prevention,
detection, and correction; disaster planning and recovery; and systems controls.
The goal is to ensure secure systems without burdening users with too many
identification numbers and passwords for different applications.
After the controls are developed, they should be documented in standards
manuals that indicate how to implement the controls. The controls should
then be implemented and frequently reviewed. It is common practice to mea-
sure how often control techniques are used and to take action if the controls
have not been implemented. Organizations often have compliance depart-
ments to make sure the IS department is adhering to its systems controls
along with all local, state, and federal laws and regulations.
Design Disaster Recovery Plan
A disaster recovery plan is a documented process to recover an organiza-
tion’s business information system assets including hardware, software, data,
networks, and facilities in the event of a disaster. It is a component of the
organization’s overall business continuity plan, which also includes an occu-
pant emergency plan, a continuity of operations plan, and an incident man-
agement plan. A disaster recovery plan focuses on technology recovery and
identifies the people or the teams responsible to take action in the event of a
disaster, what exactly these people will do when a disaster strikes, and the
information system resources required to support critical business processes.
Disasters can be natural or manmade, as shown in Table 12.8. In perform-
ing disaster recovery planning, organizations should think in terms of not
being able to gain access to their normal place of business for an extended
period of time, possibly up to several months.
FIGURE 12.12
User interface design
Analysts can develop screen mock-
ups and simulate how the user
moves from screen to screen.
Pressmaster/Shutterstock.com
disaster recovery plan: A docu-
mented process to recover an organi-
zation’s business information system
assets including hardware, software,
data, networks, and facilities in the
event of a disaster.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 523
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

As part of defining the business continuity plan, organizations conduct a
business impact analysis to identify critical business processes and the
resources that support them. The recovery time for an information system
resource should match the recovery time objective for the most critical busi-
ness processes that depend on that resource. Some business processes are
more pivotal to continued operations and goal attainment than others. These
processes are called mission-critical processes. An order-processing system,
for example, is usually considered mission-critical. Without it, the sales orga-
nization cannot continue its daily activities, which generate the cash flow
needed to keep the business operating.
For some companies, personnel backup can be critical. Without the right
number of trained employees, the business process can’t function. For infor-
mation system hardware, hot and cold sites can be used as backups. A dupli-
cate, operational hardware system that is ready for use (or immediate access
to one through a specialized vendor) is an example of a hot site. If the pri-
mary computer has problems, the hot site can be used immediately as a
backup. However, the hot site must be situated so that it will not be affected
by the same disaster. Another approach is to use a cold site, which is a com-
puter environment that includes rooms, electrical service, network links, data
TABLE 12.7 Using system controls to enhance security
Controls
Description
Input controls
Maintain input integrity and security; their purpose is to reduce errors while protecting the com-
puter system against improper or fraudulent input. Input controls range from using standardized
input forms to eliminating data-entry errors and using tight password and identification controls.
Processing controls
Deal with all aspects of processing and storage; the use of passwords and user authentication
controls, backup copies of data, and storage rooms that have tight security systems are exam-
ples of processing and storage controls.
Output controls
Ensure that output is handled correctly; in many cases, output generated from the computer
system is recorded in a file that indicates the reports and documents that were generated, the
time they were generated, and their final destinations.
Database controls
Deal with ensuring an efficient and effective database system; these controls include the use of
user authentication controls and passwords, without which a user is denied access to certain
data and information. Many of these controls are provided by database management systems.
Telecommunications
controls
Provide accurate and reliable data and information transfer among systems; network controls
include firewalls and encryption to ensure correct communication while eliminating the poten-
tial for fraud and crime.
Personnel controls
Ensure that only authorized personnel have access to certain systems to help prevent
computer-related mistakes and crime; personnel controls can involve the use of user authenti-
cation controls and passwords that allow only certain people access to particular data and
information. ID badges and other security devices (such as smart cards) can prevent unautho-
rized people from entering strategic areas in the information systems facility.
TABLE 12.8 Various disasters can disrupt business operations
Intentional Man-Made Disasters
Accidental Man-Made Disasters
Natural Disasters
Sabotage
Auto accident knocks down power lines to a
data center
Flood
Terrorism
Backhoe digs up a telecommunications line
Tsunami
Civil unrest
Operator error
Hurricane/cyclone
Fire
Earthquake
Volcanic eruption
mission-critical process: A pro-
cess that plays a pivotal role in an
organization’s continued operations
and goal attainment.
hot site: A duplicate, operational
hardware system that is ready for use
(or immediate access to one through a
specialized vendor).
cold site: A computer environment
that includes rooms, electrical service,
telecommunications links, data storage
devices, and the like.
524 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

storage devices, and similar equipment. If a primary computer has a problem,
backup computer hardware is brought into the cold site, and the complete
system is made operational.
Cloud computing has added another dimension to disaster recovery plan-
ning. If your organization is hit by a disaster, information systems that are
running on the cloud are likely to be operational and accessible by workers
from anywhere they can access the Internet. Data is also stored safely and
securely at the site of the cloud-computing service provider, which could be
hundreds of miles from the organization. On the other hand, if the cloud ser-
vice provider is hit by a disaster, it may cause a serious business disruption
for your organization even if it is otherwise unaffected by a distant disaster.
Thus, part of the evaluation of a cloud service provider must include analysis
of the provider’s disaster recovery plans.
Files and databases can be protected by making a copy of all files and
databases changed during the last few days or the last week, a technique
called incremental backup. This approach to backup uses an image log,
which is a separate file that contains only changes to applications or data.
Whenever an application is run, an image log is created that contains all
changes made to all files. If a problem occurs with a database, an old data-
base with the last full backup of the data, along with the image log, can be
used to re-create the current database.
Organizations can also hire outside companies to help them perform
disaster planning and recovery. EMC, for example, offers data backup in its
RecoverPoint product.13 For individuals and some applications, backup copies
of important files can be placed on the Internet. Failover is another approach
to backup. When a server, network, or database fails or is no longer function-
ing, failover automatically switches applications and other programs to a
redundant or replicated server, network, or database to prevent an interrup-
tion of service. SteelEye’s LifeKeeper and Application Continuous Availability
by NeverFail are examples of failover software.14,15 Failover is especially
important for applications that must be operational at all times.
Design Database
The database provides a user view of data and makes it possible to add and
modify data, store and retrieve data, manipulate the data, and generate reports.
One of the steps in designing a database involves “telling” the database man-
agement system (DBMS) the logical and physical structure of the data and the
relationships among the data for each user. Recall that this description is called
a schema, and it is entered into the DBMS using a data definition language. A
data definition language (DDL) is a collection of instructions and commands
that define and describe data and relationships in a specific database.
Another important step in designing the database is to establish a data
dictionary, a detailed description of all data used in the database. A data dic-
tionary is valuable in maintaining an efficient database that stores reliable
information with no redundancy, and it makes it easy to modify the database
when necessary. Data dictionaries also help computer and system program-
mers who require a detailed description of data elements stored in a database
to create the code to access the data. Adhering to the standards defined in the
data dictionary also makes it easy to share data among various organizations
without the need for extensive data scrubbing and translation.
Perform Feasibility Analysis
As a result of the work done during the design phase, the project team has a
much better understanding of what it will take to build the system, how it
will operate, and what benefits it can deliver. It is appropriate to reassess the
technical, economic, legal, operational, and schedule feasibility based on
these new learnings.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 525
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Prepare Draft of System Design Report
System design concludes with a formal system design report summarizing the
findings of this phase of the project. Any changes from the system analysis
findings are highlighted and explained. The table of contents for a typical sys-
tem design report is shown in Figure 12.13. This report is a more complete
and detailed version of the system investigation report.
Review Results of System Design with Steering Team
The system design report is presented to the project steering team with a rec-
ommendation to stop, revise, or go forward with the system development
project. The steering team carefully reviews the recommendations because if
the project is to proceed, considerable human and financial resources will be
committed and legally binding vendor contracts will be signed. Following the
steering team meeting, the project team incorporates the recommendations
and changes suggested into the final report.
At the end of the design phase, organizations employing the waterfall
system development process freeze the scope and the user and business
requirements. Any potential changes that are identified or suggested after
this point must go through a formal scope change process. This process
requires the organization to assess how the proposed changes affect the
project feasibility, cost, and schedule. It may be necessary to rerun cost/ben-
efit analyses to ensure that the project is still financially viable. Next, the
proposed changes are presented to the project steering team along with
their associated costs and schedule impact. The steering team must approve
the changes before the project team can begin work to incorporate them
into the current design. Frequently, the steering team disapproves changes
to ensure that the project is completed without exceeding the current budget
and schedule. If the steering team approves the changes, however, the proj-
ect team might need to repeat portions of the system analysis and design
phases to incorporate the changes.
Construction
The system construction phase follows the completion of the system design
phase when the project steering team approves of proceeding with the
Systems Design Report
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
DESCRIPTION OF OPPORTUNITY
PROJECT SCOPE
BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS
ISSUES AND CONSTRAINTS
SUMMARY OF ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED
ALTERNATIVE RECOMMENDED
FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS
RECOMMENDATION
NEXT STEPS
FIGURE 12.13
Typical table of contents for a system design report
The system design report is a more complete and detailed version of the system investigation
report.
526 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

project. System construction converts the system design into an operational
system by coding and testing software programs, creating and loading data
into databases, and performing initial program testing. These steps are out-
lined next and are discussed in the following sections:
1. Code software components.
2. Create and load data.
3. Perform unit testing.
Code Software Components
Software code must be written according to defined design specifications so
that the system meets user and business needs and operates in the manner the
user expects. Most software development organizations use a variety of soft-
ware tools to generate program source code that conforms to those specifica-
tions. The following list includes a sampling of these types of software tools:
●
Some template-driven code generators can create source code automati-
cally. CodeSmith Generator is an example of a template-driven code
generator that automates the creation of common application source code
for several languages (e.g., C#, Java, VB, PHP, ASP.NET, and SQL). The
templates are designed to create typical types of business programs.
Developers using CodeSmith Generator can modify a template or create
a customized template to generate necessary code.16
●
Screen painter programs are used to design new data-entry screens for
software applications. This easy-to-use software allows developers to
create screens by “painting” them and then use “dialog boxes” to define
the characteristics of the data that goes in each field.
●
Menu-creation software allows users to develop and format menus with
features such as color palettes, graphics characters, automatically gener-
ated boxes, headings, and system variables.
●
Report generator software captures an image of a desired report and
generates the code to produce that report based on the database
and database schema you are using. In many cases, users can design and
code reports with this software.
The Arizona court system, which includes the State Supreme Court,
15 Superior Courts, 85 Municipal, and 76 Limited Jurisdiction courts, decided to
use software code generators to code components for a recent systems overhaul.
All the courts must coordinate scheduling of court dates, keep track of state-
issued citations, and track adults and juveniles on probation. Over time, the
Arizona courts developed a number of systems using various programming lan-
guages, making it difficult to modify programs to keep up with changes in the
law. The court system is now rewriting many of its applications and standardiz-
ing on the Microsoft ASP.NET architecture. The courts are using a software code
generator called Visible Developer to generate 85 to 90 percent of the code.17
An organization also needs useful software documentation to accompany
the software code. Technical documentation includes written details that
computer operators follow to execute the program and that analysts and pro-
grammers use to solve problems or modify the program. Technical documen-
tation explains the purpose of every major piece of computer code. It also
identifies and describes key variables.
User documentation is developed for the people who use the system. In
easy-to-understand language, this type of documentation shows how the pro-
gram can and should be used to perform user tasks. Linx Software produces
LinxCRM, a customer relationship management system. The company imple-
mented special software to help it create high-quality user documentation
including annotated screen shots from the system. Linx also created a video
to help train users.18
system construction: The phase
of system development that converts
the system design into an operational
system by acquiring and installing
hardware and software, coding and
testing software programs, creating and
loading data into databases, and
performing initial program testing.
technical documentation:
Written details used by computer
operators to execute the program and
by analysts and programmers to solve
problems or modify the program.
user documentation: Written
descriptions developed for people who
use a program; in easy-to-understand
language, it shows how the program
can and should be used to meet
the needs of its various users.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 527
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Create and Load Data
This step of the construction phase involves making sure that all files and
databases are populated and ready to be used with the new information sys-
tem. Data for the initial loading of a new database may come from several
sources—the old files or database of the system being replaced, from files of
other systems used in the organization, or from data sources purchased from
an outside organization. In any case, it may be necessary to write at least one
new program to read the old data from these sources, reformat the data into a
format compatible with the database design of the new system, and then
merge these data sources together. Another program may be needed to edit
the merged data for accuracy and completeness and to add new entities, attri-
butes, and/or relationships. For example, if an organization is installing a new
customer relationship management program, a program might need to read
the old customer contact data and convert it to a format that the new system
can use. However, if the old customer contact data does not contain the same
data, such as a separate “bill to” and “ship to” address for existing customers,
this data may need to be added manually. The “bill to” address may be
used to calculate to which of the organization’s sales regions the customer
belongs for sales reporting and accounting purposes. For many projects, con-
siderable time and effort is expended in creating and loading a new database.
See Figure 12.14.
Reformat
data from
source 1
Reformat
data from
source 2
Edit and
correct data
Manual
corrections
Merge
Reformat
data from
source 3
Reformatted
data 1
Data
source 1
Data
source 3
Reformatted
data 2
Merged data
Edited and
corrected
data
Correction
file
Load and
update
database
Database
Reformatted
data 3
Data
source 2
FIGURE 12.14
Database preparation tasks
Creating and loading a new database can take considerable resources.
528 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Perform Unit Testing
With the programs written and the database available, it is now possible for
the developers to do initial testing of code components. This process is called
unit testing, which involves testing individual components of code (subrou-
tines, modules, and programs) to verify that each unit performs as designed.
Unit testing is accomplished by developing test data that ideally will force an
individual component to execute all of its various functions and user features.
In addition, each program is tested with abnormal input to determine how it
will handle erroneous input. As testers find problems, they modify the pro-
grams to work correctly. A good set of unit tests can be saved and rerun each
time any code is changed to quickly detect any new defects.
Integration and Testing
Several types of testing must be conducted before a new or modified informa-
tion system is ready to be put into production. These tests are outlined next
and discussed in the following sections:
1. Integration testing
2. System testing
3. Volume testing
4. User acceptance testing
Integration Testing
Integration testing involves linking individual components together and test-
ing them as a group to uncover any defects in the interface between one com-
ponent and another (e.g., component 1 fails to pass a key parameter to
component 2). Even if unit testing is successful, developers cannot assume that
individual components can be combined into a working system. Unfortunately,
one component that functions incorrectly can affect another component and, if
these problems go undetected, they can cause serious trouble later.
System Testing
System testing involves testing the complete, integrated system (hardware,
software, databases, people, and procedures) to validate that the information
system meets all specified requirements. System testing is often done by inde-
pendent testers who were not involved in developing program code. They
attempt to make the system fail. They frequently employ testing called black
box testing because it requires no specific knowledge of the application’s
code and internal logic. In other words, the system tester is aware of what
the software is supposed to do but is not aware of how it does it.
Volume Testing
Volume testing involves evaluating the performance of the information system
under varying yet realistic work volume and operating conditions (e.g., data-
base size, number of concurrent users, number of transactions, and number of
queries). The goals of volume testing are to determine the work load at which
systems performance begins to degrade and to identify and eliminate any issues
that prevent the system from reaching its required system-level performance.
User Acceptance Testing
During user acceptance testing (UAT), trained users test the information sys-
tem to verify that it can complete required tasks in a real-world operating
environment and perform according to the system design specifications. UAT
is also known as beta testing, application testing, and end-user testing. Unlike
system testing, which ensures that the system itself works, UAT determines
whether the system meets its intended business needs.
unit testing: Testing of individual
components of code (subroutines,
modules, and programs) to verify that
each unit performs as designed.
integration testing: Testing that
involves linking all of the individual
components together and testing them
as a group to uncover any defects in
the interfaces between individual
components.
System testing: Testing the com-
plete, integrated system (hardware,
software, databases, people, and pro-
cedures) to validate that the information
system meets all specified
requirements.
volume testing: Testing to evaluate
the performance of the information
system under varying yet realistic work
volume and operating conditions to
determine the work load at which
system performance begins to degrade
and to identify and eliminate any issues
that prevent the system from reaching
its required service-level performance.
user acceptance testing (UAT):
Testing performed by trained system
users to verify that the system can
complete required tasks in a real-world
operating environment and perform
according to the system design
specifications.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 529
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

UAT is a critical activity that must be completed successfully before newly
developed software can be rolled out to the market. In the case of implement-
ing a software package or software developed by an outside organization, the
customer performs user acceptance testing before accepting transfer of owner-
ship. UAT involves the following steps:
1. The UAT test team is selected from the set of likely users.
2. The UAT test team is trained using the currently available training material.
3. The overall UAT strategy and schedule is defined.
4. The UAT team designs test cases to exercise the functions and features of
the information system.
5. The test cases are documented in a clear and simple step-by-step manner
to make the tests easy to execute.
6. The UAT team executes the defined test cases and documents the results
of each test.
7. The software development team reviews the test results and makes any
required changes to the code so it meets the design specifications.
8. The UAT team retests the information system until all defects have been
fixed or it is agreed that certain defects will not be fixed.
9. The UAT team indicates its acceptance or nonacceptance of the informa-
tion system. If accepted, the information system is ready to be fully
implemented.
10. The UAT team provides feedback on the user training material so it can
be updated and improved.
Prior to releasing a new software package or a major revision of an exist-
ing package, commercial software development organizations conduct alpha
and beta testing. Alpha testing is a limited internal acceptance test where
employees of the software development organization and a limited number of
other “friendlies” use the software and provide feedback. After fixing pro-
blems uncovered in alpha testing, the developer makes a beta test version of
the software available to potential users outside the organization. For exam-
ple, Microsoft might make a free beta test version of software available on
the Internet to increase the amount of feedback.
Most software manufacturers and third-party software developers have
a user acceptance document—a formal agreement the end user organiza-
tion signs stating that a phase of the installation or the complete system is
approved. This is a legal document that usually removes or reduces the IS
vendor’s liability for problems that occur after the user acceptance docu-
ment has been signed. Because this document is so important, many com-
panies get legal assistance before they sign it. Stakeholders can also be
involved in acceptance testing to make sure that their benefits are indeed
realized.
Table 12.9 summarizes five types of testing: unit testing, integration test-
ing, system testing, volume testing, and user acceptance testing.
Implementation
A number of steps are involved in system implementation. These are outlined
next and discussed in the following sections.
1. User preparation
2. Site preparation
3. Installation
4. Cutover
User Preparation
User preparation is the process of readying managers, decision makers,
employees, system users, and stakeholders to accept and use the new system.
user acceptance document: A
formal agreement that the organization
signs stating that a phase of the instal-
lation or the complete system is
approved.
user preparation: The process of
readying managers, decision makers,
employees, other users, and stake-
holders to accept and use the new
system.
530 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Ideally, user preparation begins in the early stages of system investigation and
continues through implementation.
The major challenges to successful implementation of an information sys-
tem are often more behavioral than technical. Successfully introducing an
information system into an organization requires a mix of organizational
change skills and technical skills. Strong, effective leadership is required to
overcome the behavioral resistance to change and achieve a smooth and suc-
cessful system introduction.
The dynamics of how change is implemented can be viewed in terms of
the Lewin and Schein three-stage model for change: (1) ceasing old habits
and creating a climate that is receptive to change; (2) learning new work
methods, behaviors, and systems; and (3) reinforcing changes to make the
new process second nature, accepted, and part of the job.
Leavitt’s Diamond is a change model that proposes that every organiza-
tional system is made up of people, tasks, structure, and technology—any
change in one of these elements will necessitate a change in the other three ele-
ments. Thus, to successfully implement a new information system, appropriate
changes must be made to the people, structure, and tasks affected by the new
system. People must be convinced to take a positive attitude to the change and
be willing to exhibit new behaviors consistent with the change. Management
might need to modify the reward system to recognize those who exhibit the
desired new behaviors. Training in any required new skills is also necessary.
The technology acceptance model (TAM) specifies the factors that can
lead to better attitudes about the use of a new information system, along with
its higher acceptance and usage. Perceived usefulness and perceived ease of
use strongly influence whether someone will use an information system. Man-
agement can improve that perception by demonstrating that others have used
the system effectively and by providing user training and support.
The diffusion of innovation theory cautions that adoption of any innova-
tion does not happen all at once for all members of the targeted population;
TABLE 12.9 Tests conducted on an information system
Form of Test
What Is Tested
Purpose of Test
Who Does It
Unit
Test individual units of the
system.
Verify that each unit performs
as designed.
Software developers
Integration
Test all of the individual units
of the information system
linked together.
Uncover any defects between
individual components of the
information system.
Software developers or inde-
pendent software testers, using
black box testing measures
System
Test the complete, integrated
system (hardware, software,
databases, people, and
procedures).
Validate that the information
system meets all specified
requirements.
Independent test team,
separate from the software
development team
Volume
Evaluate the performance of
the information system under
realistic and varying work
volume and operating
conditions.
Determine the work load at
which system performance
begins to degrade and identify
and eliminate any issues that
prevent the system from
performing at the required
service level.
System development team and
members of the operations
organization
User
acceptance
Test the complete, integrated
system (hardware, software,
databases, people, and
procedures).
Verify the information system
can complete required tasks in
a real-world operating envi-
ronment and do this according
to the system design
specifications.
Trained users of the system
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 531
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

rather, it is a drawn-out process, with some people quicker to adopt the inno-
vation than others. Rogers’ diffusion of innovation theory defined five catego-
ries of adopters, each with different attitudes toward innovation. When
promoting an innovation to a target population, first understand the charac-
teristics of the target population that will help or hinder adoption of the inno-
vation and then apply the appropriate strategy. This theory can be useful in
planning the roll-out of a new information system.
Because user training is so important, some companies employ a variety
of training approaches including in-house, software, video, Internet, among
others. The material used to train the UAT team can serve as a starting point,
with changes based on feedback from the test team.
The eventual success of any system depends not only on how users work
with it, but how well the IS personnel within the organization can operate
and support it. The IS personnel should also attend training sessions similar
to those for the users, although their sessions can provide more technical
details. Effective training will help IS personnel use the new system to per-
form their jobs and support other users in the organization. IBM and many
other companies use online and simulated training programs to cut training
costs and improve effectiveness.
Site Preparation
A location for the hardware associated with the new system needs to be pre-
pared, a process called site preparation. For a small system, site preparation
can be as simple as rearranging the furniture in an office to make room for a
computer. The computer and associated hardware in a larger system might
require special wiring, air conditioning, or construction. A special floor, for
example, might have to be built and cables placed under it to connect the var-
ious computer components, and a new security system might be needed to
protect the equipment. The project team needs to consider the amount of site
preparation that may be necessary and build sufficient lead time into the
schedule to allow for it.
Today, most organizations place a priority on developing IS sites that are
energy efficient and secure. One company, for example, installed special secu-
rity kiosks that let company visitors log on and request a meeting with a com-
pany employee. The employee can see the visitor on his or her computer
screen and accept or reject the visitor. If the visitor is accepted, the kiosk
prints a visitor pass, which allows the person access to the building.
M&T Bank is the largest deposit holder in western New York, with head-
quarters in Buffalo. The bank invested around $60 million in data centers
over a three-year period to meet current business needs and strengthen its
backup systems in case of disasters.19
Installation
Installation is the process of physically placing the computer equipment on
the site and making it operational. Although normally the manufacturer is
responsible for installing computer equipment, someone from the organiza-
tion (usually the IS manager) should oversee the process, making sure that all
equipment specified in the contract is installed at the proper location. After
the system is installed, the manufacturer performs several tests to ensure that
the equipment is operating as it should.
Cutover
Cutover is the process of switching from an old information system to a
replacement system. Cutover is critical to the success of the organization; if
not done properly, the results can be disastrous.
Hershey’s, the largest chocolate manufacturer in North America, provides
a classic example of a failed system cutover. The company planned to
site preparation: Preparation of the
location of a new system.
installation: The process of
physically placing the computer
equipment on the site and making
it operational.
cutover: The process of switching
from an old information system to a
replacement system.
532 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

upgrade a mix of legacy information systems into an integrated environment
of the latest software from leading vendors, including SAP for ERP functional-
ity, Manugistics for supply chain management, and Siebel for customer relation-
ship management. The cutover was targeted for July, one of the company’s
busiest months, when it was shipping orders for Halloween and Christmas.
Unfortunately, Hershey’s was not well prepared, and the cutover was a fiasco.
As a result, Hershey was unable to process over $100 million worth of orders.
The resulting operational paralysis led to nearly a 20 percent drop in quarterly
profits and an 8 percent decline in share price.
Organizations can follow one of several cutover strategies. See Figure 12.15.
Direct conversion (also called plunge or direct cutover) involves stopping
the old system and starting the new system on a given date. Direct conver-
sion is a high-risk approach because of the potential for problems and errors
when the old system is shut off and the new system is turned on at the same
instant.
Shell is one of the largest corporations in the world, with recent annual
revenues exceeding $265 billion.20 One of Shell’s major business units is
called Downstream, an organization that converts crude oil into a range of
refined products, which are moved and marketed around the world for
domestic, industrial, and transport use. 21 The 37,000 workers in 36 countries
in the Downstream business rely on SAP-based software to complete their
FIGURE 12.15
System cutover strategies
Cutover can be through direct
conversion, phase-in approach, pilot
start-up, or parallel start-up.
New system
Direct conversion
Phase-in approach (by component) or pilot start-up (by group)
Parallel start-up
Old system component 1
or group 1
Old system component 2
or group 2
Old system
New system
Old system
Cutover 1
Cutover
Cutover 3
Cutover 2
Old system component 3
or group 3
New system
direct conversion: A cutover strat-
egy that involves stopping the old sys-
tem and starting the new system on a
given date; also called plunge or direct
cutover.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 533
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

work, making it a mission-critical application. A few years ago, Shell decided
to upgrade to a new version of the Downstream software to access new func-
tions and support services. The planning and work involved in completing the
world’s largest SAP upgrade culminated in a direct cutover 18 months after
that project started. Shell had many tasks to accomplish before the cutover,
including updating several databases, installing new application servers, repla-
cing hardware, and expanding storage capacity by 30 percent. Despite its
huge complexity and the high risk associated with such a major cutover, the
upgrade was a success.22
Many organizations follow a phase-in approach, where components of
the new system are slowly phased in while components of the old one are
slowly phased out. When everyone is confident that all components of the
new system are performing as expected, the old system is completely phased
out. This gradual replacement is repeated for each component until the new
system has fully replaced the old system. In some cases, the phase-in
approach, also called a piecemeal approach, can take several months.
Pilot start-up involves running the complete new system for one group
of users rather than for all users. For example, a manufacturing company
with many retail outlets throughout the country could use the pilot start-up
approach and install a new inventory control system at one of its retail outlets.
When the system runs without problems at the pilot location, the new inven-
tory control system can then be implemented at other outlets, one by one.
Parallel start-up involves running both the old and new systems for a
period of time. The performance and output of the new system are compared
closely with the performance and output of the old system, and any differ-
ences are reconciled. When users are comfortable that the new system is
working correctly, the old system is eliminated.
System Operation and Maintenance
The steps involved in system operation and maintenance are outlined next
and discussed in the following sections.
1. Operation
2. Maintenance
3. Disposal
Operation
System operation involves the use of a new or modified system under all
kinds of operating conditions. Getting the most out of a new or modified sys-
tem during its operation is the most important aspect of system operations for
many organizations. To provide adequate user support, many companies
establish a formal help desk for their employees and customers. A help desk
consists of computer systems, manuals, people with technical expertise, and
other resources needed to solve problems and give accurate answers to ques-
tions. End users, who experience problems accessing or using an information
system, can access the help desk’s Web site or request support via a call or
text to the help desk.
Monitoring is the process of measuring system performance by tracking
the number of errors encountered, the amount of memory required, the
amount of processing or CPU time needed, and other performance indicators.
If a particular system is not performing as expected, it should be modified or
a new system should be developed or acquired.
System performance products can measure all components of an informa-
tion system, including hardware, software, database, and network systems.
Microsoft Visual Studio, for example, has features that allow system developers
to monitor and review how applications are running and performing, enabling
phase-in approach: A cutover
strategy that involves slowly replacing
components of the old system with
those of the new one; this process is
repeated for each application until the
new system is running every applica-
tion and performing as expected; also
called a piecemeal approach.
pilot start-up: A cutover strategy
that involves running the complete new
system for one group of users rather
than for all users.
parallel start-up: A cutover strategy
that involves running both the old and
new systems for a period of time and
closely comparing the output of the new
system with the output of the old sys-
tem; any differences are reconciled.
When users are comfortable that the
new system is working correctly, the old
system is eliminated.
system operation: Involves the use
of a new or modified system under all
kinds of operating conditions.
monitoring: The process of measur-
ing system performance by tracking the
number of errors encountered, the
amount of memory required, the
amount of processing or CPU time
needed, and other performance
indicators.
534 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

developers to make changes if needed. IBM Tivoli OMEGAMON XE is a suite of
performance monitors designed for the analysis of IBM mainframe operating
systems—such as z/OS and z/VM—and various subsystems, such as CICS, DB2,
and IMS. Precise Software Solutions has system performance products that pro-
vide around-the-clock performance monitoring for ERP systems, Oracle database
applications, and other programs.23 HP also offers a software tool called Business
Technology Optimization (BTO) to help companies analyze the performance of
their computer systems, diagnose potential problems, and take corrective action
if needed. When properly used, system performance products can quickly and
efficiently locate actual or potential problems.
Allscripts is a $2.6 billion publicly traded company that provides practice
management, electronic healthcare records, and financial software to hun-
dreds of physician practices, hospitals, and other healthcare organizations. Its
customers typically have between 7 and 20 servers running Allscripts applica-
tions at all times, and keeping the software running without interruption is a
major challenge. To solve this problem, Allscripts has its customers install eG
performance monitoring software from Citrix to monitor the network, operat-
ing system, and applications on its servers. This enables Allscripts to quickly
identify and fix system and software problems before they affect users.24
System review is the process of analyzing a system to make sure it is
operating as intended. System review often compares the performance and
benefits of the system as it was designed with the actual performance
and benefits of the system in operation.
U.S. citizens were alarmed and dismayed when an audit of 731 Veterans
Affairs (VA) hospitals and clinics found that some 57,000 veterans nationwide
in need of medical care experienced wait times of 90 days or longer for their
first medical appointments. An additional 64,000 veterans were not even on
the VA electronic
waiting list
for doctor appointments
that they had
requested. Shockingly, 13 percent of VA employees interviewed said they
were told to falsify records so that wait times would appear shorter.25 In a
separate audit of its information systems, the VA inspector reported that the
agency had continuing problems protecting its mission-critical systems. The
audit found that although the VA had made progress developing security poli-
cies and procedures, it still suffered from “significant deficiencies related to
access controls, configuration management controls, continuous monitoring
controls, and service continuity practices designed to protect mission-critical
systems.”26 It is not clear to what degree these system shortcomings contrib-
uted to the incorrect reporting of wait times.
Internal employees, external consultants, or both can perform a system
review. An organization’s billing application, for example, might be reviewed
for errors, inefficiencies, and opportunities to reduce operating costs. In addi-
tion, the billing application might be reviewed if corporations merge, if one or
more new managers require different information or reports, or if federal laws
on bill collecting and privacy change. This is an event-driven approach to
system review.
Maintenance
System maintenance is a stage of system development that involves chang-
ing and enhancing the system to make it more useful in achieving user and
organizational goals. Reasons for program maintenance include the following:
●
Poor system performance, such as slow response time for frequent
transactions
●
Changes in business processes
●
Changes in the needs of system stakeholders, users, and managers
●
Bugs or errors in the program
●
Technical and hardware problems
system review: The process of
analyzing a system to make sure it is
operating as intended.
system maintenance: A stage of
system development that involves
changing and enhancing the system to
make it more useful in achieving user
and organizational goals.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 535
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Corporate mergers and acquisitions
●
Changes in government regulations
●
Changes in the operating system or hardware on which the application
runs
Organizations can perform system maintenance in-house, or they can hire
outside companies to perform maintenance for them. Many companies that
use information systems from Oracle or SAP, for example, hire those compa-
nies to maintain their systems. System maintenance is important for indivi-
duals, groups, and organizations. Individuals looking to system-maintenance
services, for example, can use the Internet, computer vendors, and indepen-
dent maintenance companies, including YourTechOnline.com (www.yourte
chonline.com), Geek Squad (www.geeksquad.com), and PC Pinpoint (www
.pcpinpoint.com). Organizations often have personnel dedicated to system
maintenance. Software maintenance for purchased software can cost 20 per-
cent or more of the purchase price annually.
The maintenance process can be especially difficult for older software.
A legacy system is an old system, which might have cost millions of dollars to
develop, patch, and modify over the years. The maintenance costs for legacy
systems can become quite expensive, and, at some point, it becomes more
cost effective to switch to new programs and applications than to repair and
maintain the legacy system.
Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) and National Westminster Bank (NatWest)
are two of the United Kingdom’s largest and most established banks. How-
ever, some customers of these banks have experienced problems using ATMs
or debit cards due to problems with legacy banking systems. Some of the
banks’ systems are over 30 years old and were originally designed to handle
simple branch banking. Over the years, the banks have had to make changes
to support ATMs, online banking, and mobile banking as well as changes to
accommodate new regulatory requirements. Many of these changes were
implemented by different development teams using different programming
languages running on different computers and operating systems, making it
impossible for one person or team to fully comprehend the entire system.27
The two banks recently announced that they will be spending £1 billion
(approximately $1.7 billion USD) to improve their personal and small busi-
ness banking services to make it easier for customers on the move.28
Four generally accepted categories signify the amount of change involved
in maintenance. A slipstream upgrade is a minor system upgrade—typically
a code adjustment or minor bug fix. Many companies don’t announce to
users that a slipstream upgrade has been made; however, because a slip-
stream upgrade usually requires recompiling all the code, it can create entirely
new bugs. This maintenance practice explains why the same computers some-
times work differently with what is supposedly the same software. A patch is
a minor change to correct a problem or make a small enhancement. The fix is
usually patched into an existing program; that is, the programming code
representing the system enhancement is usually added to the existing code.
Many patches come from off-the-shelf software vendors. Although slipstream
upgrades and patches are minor changes, they can cause users and support
personnel big problems if the programs do not run as before. A new release
is a significant program change that often requires changes in the documenta-
tion of the software. Finally, a new version is a major program change, typi-
cally encompassing many new features. Figure 12.16 shows the relative
amount of change and effort required to test and implement these four cate-
gories of system maintenance.
Because of the amount of effort that can be spent on maintenance, many
organizations require a request for maintenance form to be completed and
approved before authorizing the modification of an information system. This
slipstream upgrade: A minor
system upgrade-typically a code
adjustment or minor bug fix; it usually
requires recompiling all the code, and in
so doing, it can create entirely new
bugs.
patch: A minor system change to
correct a problem or make a small
enhancement; it is usually an addition
to an existing program.
release: A significant program
change that often requires changes in
the documentation of the software.
version: A major program change,
typically encompassing many new
features.
536 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

form is usually signed by a business manager who documents the need for the
change and identifies the priority of the change relative to other work that has
been requested. The IS group reviews the form and identifies the programs
that need to be changed, determines the programmer to assign to the project,
estimates the expected completion date, and develops a technical description
of the change. A cost/benefit analysis might be required if the change requires
substantial resources. The completed change request is then reviewed and pri-
oritized relative to the other change requests that have been made.
Disposal
At some point, an existing information system may become obsolete, uneco-
nomical to operate and/or maintain, or unrepairable. Information systems
typically evolve to this stage in the life cycle because the system can no longer
be modified to keep up with changing user and business requirements, outdated
technology causes the system to run slowly or unreliably, or key vendors are no
longer able or willing to continue to provide necessary service or support.
System disposal is a stage of system development that involves those activ-
ities that ensure the orderly dissolution of the system, including disposing of all
equipment in an environmentally friendly manner, closing out contracts, and
safely migrating information from the system to another system or archiving it
in accordance with applicable records management policies. The steps involved
in system disposal are outlined and discussed in the following sections.
1. Communicate intent.
2. Terminate contracts.
3. Make backups of data.
4. Delete sensitive data.
5. Dispose of hardware.
Communicate Intent
A memo communicating the intent to terminate the infor-
mation system should be distributed to all key stakeholders, months in
advance of the actual shutdown. This ensures that everyone is aware of the
shutdown and allows time for them to convert to the new system or process
replacing the terminated system. For example, the Microsoft Windows XP
operating system was released in 2001. Microsoft announced in September
2007 that it would end support of this popular operating system in April
2014. Despite the end-of-life announcement, an estimated 25 percent of con-
sumers and businesses including 75 percent of ATMs in the United States had
not converted to a replacement operating system by early 2014.29
FIGURE 12.16
System-maintenance efforts
This chart shows the relative amount
of change and effort associated to
test and implement slipstream
upgrades, patches, releases, and
versions.
Patch
Release
Client effort to test and implement change
Slipstream
upgrade
Amount of
change
to system
Version
system disposal: A stage of system
development that involves those
activities that ensure the orderly disso-
lution of the system, including disposing
of all equipment in an environmentally
friendly manner, closing out contracts,
and safely migrating information from
the system to another system or
archiving it in accordance with
applicable records management
policies.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 537
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Terminate Contracts
The various vendors who provide hardware, software, or
services associated with the information system must be notified well in advance
to avoid any penalty fees associated with abrupt termination of a contract.
Make Backups of Data
Prior to deleting files associated with the system,
backup copies of data must be made according to the organization’s records-
management policies.
Delete Sensitive Data
Extreme care must be taken to remove customer,
employee, financial, and company-sensitive data from all computer hardware
and storage devices before disposing of it. Otherwise, an organization’s dis-
carded equipment could become a treasure trove to competitors or identity
thieves. When a file is deleted, the bits and pieces of the file physically stay
on a computer hard drive until they are overwritten, and they can be retrieved
with a data recovery program. To remove data from a hard drive perma-
nently, the hard drive needs to be wiped clean. The program used should
overwrite or wipe the hard drive several times. An alternative is to remove
the hard drive and physically destroy it.
Dispose of Hardware
After backing up and then removing data from drives,
members of the project team can dispose of obsolete or damaged computer
hardware. Governments, environmental agencies, and leading hardware man-
ufacturers are attempting to reduce hazardous materials in electronic pro-
ducts; however, some hardware components still contain materials that are
toxic to the environment. Responsible disposal techniques should be used
regardless of whether the hardware is sold, given away, or discarded. Many
computer hardware manufacturers including Dell and HP have developed
programs to assist their customers in disposing of old equipment.
Now that we have discussed the waterfall system development process,
we turn our attention to discussion of the agile system development process.
User Acceptance Testing for New Accounting System
You are a member of the finance and accounting organization of a midsized
sporting goods retailer. You are knowledgeable of all facets of your firm’s current
accounting systems and have been working in accounts receivable for the past
three years. The firm is implementing a new cloud-based accounting system to han-
dle general ledger, accounts payable, accounts receivable, and payroll tasks. You
have been selected to plan and lead the user acceptance testing for the accounts
receivable portion of the system. This will be a full-time activity for you over the
next two-to-three months, and during that time, other employees will fill in to take
care of most of your day-to-day responsibilities.
Review Questions
1.
Outline the tasks that must be accomplished to successfully complete user
acceptance testing.
2.
Your normal work activities and responsibilities have not allowed you time to
become familiar with this project and the new system and its capabilities.
What actions would you take to get caught up quickly?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
How would you go about selecting and recruiting end users to participate in
the user acceptance testing? How would you determine how many end users
are needed for testing?
2.
What do you think might be the biggest barriers to completion of the user
acceptance testing in a timely manner?
538 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Agile Development
Agile development is an iterative system development process that develops
the system in “sprint” increments lasting from two weeks to two months. Unlike
the waterfall system development process, agile development accepts the fact
that system requirements are evolving and cannot be fully understood or defined
at the start of the project. Agile development concentrates instead on maximizing
the team’s ability to deliver quickly and respond to emerging requirements—
hence the name agile. In an agile development project, the team stops and ree-
valuates the system every two weeks to two months, giving it ample opportunity
to identify and implement new or changed system requirements.30
Scrum is an agile development framework that uses a team-based
approach in order to keep the development effort focused and moving quickly.
Scrum emphasizes individuals and interactions over processes and tools, work-
ing software over comprehensive documentation, customer collaboration over
contract negotiation, and responding to change over following a plan.31
A scrum master is the person who coordinates all scrum activities, and a
scrum team consists of a dozen or fewer people who perform all system
development activities from investigation to testing so there is less personnel
turnover than on the typical waterfall system development project. The scrum
master does not fill the role of a traditional project manager and has no peo-
ple management responsibilities. Instead, the primary responsibility of the
scrum master is to anticipate and remove barriers to the project team produc-
ing its deliverables and meeting the project schedule.32
The product owner is a person who represents the project stakeholders
and is responsible for communicating and aligning project priorities between
the stakeholders and development team. The product owner holds the prod-
uct vision; he or she is responsible for describing what should be built and
why—but now how.33
Using the scrum method, the product owner works with the stakeholders
and team to create a prioritized list of project requirements called a product
backlog. Next, a sprint planning session is held, during which the team selects
the highest priority requirements from the top of the product backlog to cre-
ate the sprint backlog; they then decide how to implement those require-
ments. The team sets a certain amount of time—typically two to eight
weeks—to complete its work. During the sprint, each day at the same time,
the team meets briefly (15 minutes at most) to share information necessary
for coordination. At this meeting, team members describe what they com-
pleted the previous day and identify any obstacles that stand in their way of
completing the day’s activities. The sprint is complete when the team presents
a working system that incorporates the new requirements and that can be
used and evaluated. During the sprint review meeting, the team shares what
it learned from the current sprint iteration so that knowledge can be applied
in the next sprint iteration. See Figure 12.17. Along the way, the scrum master
keeps the team focused on its goals.34
Agile development requires cooperation and frequent face-to-face meet-
ings with all participants, including system developers and users, as they
modify, refine, and test the system’s capabilities and how it meets users’
needs. Organizations are using agile development to a greater extent today to
improve the results of system development, including global projects requir-
ing IS resources distributed in many locations. Agile is often better suited for
developing smaller information systems than larger ones. During an agile
project, the level of participation of stakeholders and users is much higher
than in other approaches. Table 12.10 lists advantages and disadvantages of
agile development.35
agile development: An iterative
system development process that
develops the system in "sprint"
increments lasting from two weeks to
two months.
scrum: An agile development
framework that emphasizes a team-
based approach in order to keep the
development effort focused and moving
quickly.
scrum master: The person who
coordinates all the scrum activities of
a team.
product owner: A person who
represents the project stakeholders and
is responsible for communicating and
aligning project priorities between the
stakeholders and development team.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 539
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Extreme programming (XP) is a form of agile software development
that promotes incremental development of a system using short development
cycles to improve productivity and to accommodate new customer require-
ments. Other essentials of extreme programming include programming in
pairs, performing extensive code review, unit testing of all code, putting off
the programming of system features until they are actually needed, use of a
flat project management structure, simplicity and clarity in code, expecting
changes in system requirements as the project progresses and the desired
solution is better understood, and frequent communication with the customer
and among programmers. These qualities make extreme programming com-
patible with agile software development.36
DevOps is the practice of blending the tasks performed by the develop-
ment staff (who are typically responsible for design, coding, and testing) and
the IT operations groups (who typically handle operational deployment tasks,
such as server provisioning and job scheduling) to enable faster and more
reliable software releases.37 This approach is key to successful agile develop-
ment environments where organizations go live with new software releases
every two to four weeks. And in many organizations, DevOps is being used
as part of a continuous deployment strategy, in which releases are launched
daily—and in some cases, multiple times a day. Many industry experts view
DevOps as an outgrowth of the agile development movement, with an exten-
sion of agile development principles to include systems and operations rather
than just code.
Requirements
refinement
meeting
Sprint
planning
session
Prioritized list of
system requirements
(product backlog)
Requirements
to implement
during this iteration
(sprint backlog)
2–8 week
sprint
Daily scrum
meeting
Sprint
review
meeting
Working
system of
requirements
implemented
so far
FIGURE 12.17
The Scrum agile software development process
The Scrum agile approach develops a system in sprint increments lasting from two weeks to two months.
TABLE 12.10 Advantages and disadvantages of agile development
Advantages
Disadvantages
For appropriate projects, this approach
puts an application into production
sooner than any other approach.
It is an intense process that can burn
out system developers and other
project participants.
Documentation is produced as a
by-product of completing project tasks.
This approach requires system analysts
and users to be skilled in agile system
development tools and agile
techniques.
Agile forces teamwork and lots of
interaction between users and
stakeholders.
Agile requires a larger percentage of
stakeholders’ and users’ time than
other approaches.
extreme programming (XP): A
form of agile software development that
promotes incremental development of a
system using short development cycles
to improve productivity and to accom-
modate new customer requirements.
DevOps: The practice of blending the
tasks performed by the development
and IT operations groups to enable
faster and more reliable software
releases.
540 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Under traditional software development approaches, the application
development team gathers business requirements, writes code, and tests
programs in an isolated development environment. The code is then
released to the IT operations group to deploy in the real-world operational
environment of end users. This involves gluing together all the components
of an application, including databases, messaging infrastructure, external
services, the passing and receiving of data to/from other systems, and
third-party dependencies.
DevOps principles reshape all the move-into-production activities so that
they become automated, collaborative, continuous, incremental, iterative, and
self-service. Responsive teams adopt DevOps practices of self-service configu-
ration, automated provisioning (using predeﬁned procedures that are carried
out electronically without requiring human intervention), continuous build,
continuous integration, continuous delivery, automated release management,
and incremental testing, as shown in Figure 12.18.
Although DevOps can mean slightly different things depending on how it
is deployed at different companies, at its core, DevOps places a priority on
collaboration, with operations staff and development engineers participating
together, over the entire systems life cycle—from design and development
through testing and implementation.38
Starwood Hotels and Resorts Worldwide used the DevOps approach with
good success on a $150 million project aimed at redoing the company’s cen-
tral reservation system. As Starwood has continued to implement DevOps, it
has found the process has led to a more complete description of user require-
ments, a 66 percent reduction in time to deploy systems, and 20 percent
fewer errors in production.39
Table 12.11 compares the key features of the agile and waterfall system
development processes.
FIGURE 12.18
DevOps is part of a continuous
deployment strategy in which
releases can be launched
daily
DevOps blends tasks performed by
development staff and IT operations
groups.
Source: Chris Haddad, “Overcome DevOps
Adoption Barriers to Accelerate Software
Delivery,” Tech Well Insights, May 8, 2015,
www.techwell.com/techwell-insights/2015
/05/overcome-devops-adoption-barriers-
accelerate-software-delivery.
Define
acceptance
criteria
Define
acceptance
criteria
Define
acceptance
criteria
Plan
Plan
Automated
testing
Automated
testing
Build
Build
Release
Release
Deploy
Deploy
Continuous
monitoring
Continuous
monitoring
Operate
Operate
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 541
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Firm’s First Agile Project
You were hired into a new company that was impressed with your two years of
experience as a scrum master on a variety of information systems projects. Your
new firm has a large in-house information system development staff that is trained
and experienced in the use of the waterfall software development process. You
have been assigned responsibility as a scrum master for a key project that will be
the firm’s first agile project. You have also been asked to train the project man-
ager, team, and newly appointed product owner in the agile process and their
associated roles and responsibilities.
Review Questions
1.
As part of the team’s initial project kickoff meeting, you have been asked to
briefly summarize the differences between the waterfall and agile software
development process. What would you say?
2.
Following your discussion, one of the team members asks, “so why are we
changing to a new software development process? We are all comfortable
with the way we do things now.” What do you say?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
There is likely to be some confusion over the role of project manager, scrum
master, and product owner. What can you do to avoid this potential problem?
2.
What other potential problems can you anticipate as the team moves forward
with its first agile project? What can be done to avoid these potential issues?
Buying Off-the-Shelf Software
Today, most organizations purchase or rent the software they need rather
than make it—simply because it costs too much and takes too long to build a
quality information system. Organizations elect to build proprietary systems
only when its information system requirements are unique. This may be
because of the nature of the business or because the organization is attempt-
ing to build an information system that will provide it with a strategic compet-
itive advantage.
A software application can vary from an unmodified, commercial off-
the-shelf (COTS) software package at one extreme to a custom, written-
from-scratch program at the other extreme. Between those two extremes is a
range of options based on the degree of customization. A comparison of the
TABLE 12.11 Comparison of approaches to system development
Characteristic
Software Development Approach
Agile
Waterfall
Description
An iterative process that develops the sys-
tem in sprint increments lasting 2–8 weeks;
each increment focuses on implementing
the highest priority requirements that can
be completed in the allotted time
A sequential multistage process where work
on the next stage cannot begin until the
results of the previous stage are reviewed
and approved or modified as necessary
Basic assumption
System requirements cannot be fully
defined at start of project
All critical system requirements must be
fully defined before any coding begins
How requirements and
design are defined
Users interacting with system analysts and
working software
Users interacting with system analysts and
system documentation and/or models
Associated processes
Scrum
Structured system analysis and design
542 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

two extreme approaches is shown in Table 12.12. One question that must be
answered during system analysis phase is: which solution approach is best
for this particular system? This decision is often called the make-or-buy
decision.
Package Evaluation Phase
As with system development, purchasing off-the-shelf software requires that
an organization go through several steps to ensure that it purchases the soft-
ware that best meets its needs and then implements it effectively. These steps
are part of the package evaluation phase of a project that comes after the sys-
tem analysis phase as shown in Figure 12.19. At this point in the project, the
scope of the system and critical business and user requirements should be
known. There should be a rough budget and schedule as well.
Package Evaluation Phase
1. Identify potential solutions.
2. Select top contenders.
3. Research top contenders.
4. Perform final evaluation of leading solutions.
5. Make selection.
6. Finalize contract.
Identify Potential Solutions
The project team should make a preliminary assessment of the software mar-
ketplace to determine whether existing packages can meet the organization’s
needs. The primary tool for doing this is the request for information (RFI),
a document that outlines an organization’s needs and requests vendors to
respond with information about if and how they can meet those needs and
the time and resources required. See Figure 12.20. The RFI outlines the scope
of the desired system and preliminary system requirements based on the
results so far of the system analysis. Importantly, the RFI should ask each ven-
dor to identify two or three customers who may be contacted as references.
The RFI is typically sent to several vendors who are thought to be capable of
providing the desired software.
TABLE 12.12 Comparison of developed and off-the-shelf software
Factor
Develop (Make)
Off-the-Shelf (Buy)
Cost
The cost to build the system can be difficult to
estimate accurately and is frequently higher
than off-the-shelf
The full cost to implement an off-the-shelf
solution is also difficult to estimate accurately
but is likely to be less than a custom software
solution
Needs
Custom software is more likely to satisfy your
needs
Might not get exactly what you need
Process
improvement
Tend to automate existing business processes
even if they are poor
Adoption of a package may simplify or
streamline a poor existing business process
Quality
Quality can vary depending on the program-
ming team
Can assess the quality before buying
Speed
Can take years to develop
Can acquire it right now
Staffing and support
Requires in-house skilled resources to build
and support a custom-built solution
Requires paying the vendor for support
Competitive
advantage
Can develop a competitive advantage with
good software
Other organizations can have the same
software and same advantage
request for information (RFI):
A document that outlines an organiza-
tion’s hardware or software needs and
requests vendors to provide information
about if and how they can meet those
needs and the time and resources
required.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 543
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Select Top Contenders
The project team will review the information provided by the vendors in
response to the RFI and narrow their choice down to the most promising
alternatives for further evaluation. This may require a visit to a vendor’s place
of business to meet key managers and observe a demo of the vendor’s system.
This selection is made on the basis on how well the vendor’s software
appears to meet the organization’s needs, preliminary cost and timing esti-
mates, information gleaned from references, and how easy the vendor has
been to work with so far.
Research Top Contenders
A final evaluation begins with a detailed investigation of the contenders’ pro-
posals as well as in-depth discussions with two or three customers of each
contender to learn about their experience with the vendor and the software.
FIGURE 12.19
Software package
implementation process
Software package implementation
eliminates several of the phases of
the waterfall approach.
Investigation
Systems
analysis
Package
evaluation
Integration &
testing
Implementation
Request for Information
Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF DESIRED SYSTEM
PRELIMINARY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
INFORMATION REQUESTED
WHO TO CONTACT FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
DATE RESPONSE DESIRED
FIGURE 12.20
Recommended table of contents for a request for information
The RFI outlines the desired system and its requirements, identifying key pieces of data that the soft-
ware vendor must include in the proposal.
544 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

An organization must carefully evaluate each vendor’s software package to
see how well it supports the business processes that are within the scope of
the project. Looking at each business process, the organization should deter-
mine if the package supports the process fully and exactly as it needs to be
performed. If not, must the software be modified to meet the organization’s
requirements, or must the organization modify its business process? If an
organization decides it must modify the software to meet its business require-
ments, it must then determine who will do the necessary modifications, how
long will they take, and how much will they cost.
Often purchased software must integrate with other existing software
(e.g., a new accounts payable and accounts receivable software package must
integrate with the firm’s existing general ledger system). The amount of effort
required to modify the new software and existing software so that they work
well together must be determined and taken into account as a major factor in
selecting the final vendor and software.
For major software purchases, the contenders should be asked to make
a final presentation and to fully demonstrate their solution using a
performance evaluation test conducted in a computing environment (e.g.,
computing hardware, operating system software, database management system)
and with a workload (e.g., number of concurrent users, database size, and
number of transactions) that matches the intended operating conditions. Such a
test can help measure system performance attributes such as ease of use and
response time.
Make Selection
Selecting the best software package solution involves weighing the following
factors:
●
How well the vendor’s solution matches the needs of the users and
business
●
The amount of effort required to integrate the new software with existing
software
●
Results of the performance evaluation test
●
Relative costs (including any software modifications) and benefits
●
The technical, economic, legal, operational, and schedule feasibility
●
Input from legal and purchasing resources on the legal and financial
viability of the contender
●
Feedback from customers on how well the software performs as well as
on the quality of the support provided by the vendor
Finalize Contract
Once a selection is made, a contract with the vendor must be negotiated and
finalized. Although the vendor may insist that everyone signs a standard con-
tract, every contract should be thoroughly reviewed by experienced members
of an organization’s legal and purchasing departments. Recognize that the
standard contract is written from the vendor’s perspective and protects its
interests, not yours. Request a copy of the vendor’s standard contract at the
start of the software package evaluation process and allow at least two
months for review and negotiation of a final contract.
Organizations
that use
the
cloud-computing
or
software-as-a-service
approach need to take special precautions in signing contracts with the ser-
vice provider. The contract should clarify how the provider ensures data pri-
vacy, handles discovery if there is a lawsuit, resolves service-level problems,
and manages disaster recovery; it should also detail where the cloud-
computing servers and computers are located. Organizations should confirm
this information in discussions with other customers of the service provider
and by a visit to the service provider’s facilities.
performance evaluation test:
A comparison of vendor options con-
ducted in a computing environment
(e.g., computing hardware, operating
system software, database manage-
ment system) and with a workload (e.g.,
number of concurrent users, database
size, and number of transactions) that
matches its intended operating
conditions.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 545
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
A contract covering the modification of a software package should have
provisions for monitoring system modification quality and progress, owner-
ship and property rights of the new or modified system, contingency provi-
sions in case something doesn’t work as expected, and dispute resolution if
something goes wrong. Customizing the package actually changes the pack-
age into custom-made software, resulting in the potential loss of support from
the original vendor. This might necessitate third-party support, which should
be factored into the contract negotiations.
Integration and Testing
Several types of testing must be conducted before a software package is ready to
be put into production. This is particularly true if the software package has been
modified to meet the needs of the organization or the software package must inte-
grate with existing information systems (e.g., a new accounts payable system must
integrate with the organization’s existing general ledger system). The following
types of tests, already discussed earlier in the chapter, need to be completed.
1. Integration testing
2. System testing
3. Volume testing
4. User acceptance testing
Implementation
The organization cannot just count on the vendor to execute the implementa-
tion of the package—full and active participation by the project’s stakeholders
and end users is essential to success. Key implementation tasks include:
●
Use data-flow diagrams to map current business processes and require-
ments to the software, and identify any gaps that must be filled by chang-
ing current processes or by modifying the software.
●
Install the software and configure all of its capabilities and options to
meet the project requirements.
●
Customize any aspects of the solution needed for the organization.
●
Integrate existing software with the new software.
●
Train end users.
●
Test the software to ensure that it meets all processes and requirements.
●
Convert historical data from the old software so that it can be used by the
new software.
●
Roll out the new software to users in a live work environment.
●
Provide for ongoing end-user support and training.
Hospital Switches Electronic Health Record Software
Midwest Regional Hospital (fictional) is a 500-bed general medical and surgical
facility with 25,000 admissions and 7,500 annual inpatient and 17,500 outpatient
surgeries annually. Its emergency room has 52,000 visits each year. It is a non-
profit hospital that treats both adult and child patients. Over 1,200 nurses, techni-
cians, doctors, and physicians practice at the hospital.
An electronic health record (EHR) is an electronic version of a patient’s medi-
cal history that is maintained by the provider over time and may include all of the
key administrative clinical data relevant to that person’s care, including demo-
graphics, progress notes, problems, medications, vital signs, past medical history,
immunizations, laboratory data, and radiology reports. The EHR automates access
to this information, and the more sophisticated versions of EHR software can also
produce an online “digital chart” that displays up-to-date patient information in
546 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

real time, complete with decision support tools for physicians and nurses. One of
the key features of an EHR is that health information can be created and managed
by authorized providers in a digital format capable of being shared with other
providers across more than one healthcare organization, including laboratories,
specialists, medical imaging facilities, pharmacies, emergency facilities, and school
and workplace clinics.
Midwest Hospital was an early pioneer in the adoption of EHR software,
implementing the technology in 2004. Unfortunately, the vendor that Midwest
selected has not been able to keep up with evolving regulatory requirements and
the changing needs of its healthcare clients. Its software is fast becoming obsolete,
and it is rumored that the firm will soon eliminate support of its software. You
have been hired as a consultant to lead a project to replace the original software
with software from one of the current leading EHR software providers—
Allscripts, Cerner Corporation, or Epic Systems Corporation.
Review Questions
1.
Is there a need to conduct a preliminary software package evaluation? Why or
why not?
2.
What tasks would you attempt to complete in your first two weeks as a project
leader?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
The hospital administrators have made it clear to you that the software vendor
must be chosen and the software installed as soon as possible. What measures
do you feel comfortable taking to accelerate the process without raising the
risk of choosing the wrong software or having a rough system start-up?
2.
A safety-critical system is one whose failure or misuse may cause human
injury or death. Given that an EHR system can be considered to be such a sys-
tem, which tasks associated with software implementation deserve special
attention?
Summary
Principle:
Organizations can obtain software using one of two basic approaches: buy
or build.
Buying off-the-shelf software is less risky and leads to quicker deployment;
however, maintenance and support costs may become expensive with this
approach, and the software may not be an exact match to the needs and
work processes of the organization.
Building custom software can provide a better match to the current work
processes of the organization and provide a potential competitive advantage;
however, the cost can become extremely high, and it can take months or even
years to develop the software.
Principle:
A system under development following the waterfall approach moves
from one phase to the next, with a management review at the end of
each phase.
The set of activities involved in building information systems to meet users’
needs is called system development.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 547
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

The waterfall system development process cycle is a sequential, multistage
system development process in which work on the next stage cannot begin
until the results of the current stage are reviewed and approved or modified
as necessary. It is referred to as a waterfall process because progress is seen as
flowing steadily downward (like a waterfall) through the various phases of
development.
The phases of the waterfall system development process can vary from one
company to the next, but many organizations use an approach with six phases:
investigation, analysis, design, construction, integration and testing, and imple-
mentation. Once the system is built, organizations complete the additional
steps of operation and maintenance and disposition.
At the end of each phase, a review is conducted to ensure that all tasks
and deliverables associated with that phase were produced and that they are
of good quality. In addition, at the end of each phase, the overall project
scope, costs, schedule, and benefits associated with the project are reviewed
to ensure that the project is on track and worth completing. As a result, the
waterfall system development process allows for a high degree of manage-
ment control.
System investigation is the key initial phase in the development of a new or
modified business information system. The purpose of this phase is to gain a
clear understanding of the specifics of the problem to solve or the opportunity
to address.
Joint application development (JAD) is a structured meeting process that
can accelerate and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of not only the
investigation phase but also the analysis and design phases of a system devel-
opment project.
Functional decomposition is a technique used primarily during the investi-
gation phase to define the business processes included within the scope of the
system.
The technical, economic, legal, operational, and schedule feasibility are
assessed during the feasibility analysis.
After a project has completed the investigation phase and been approved
for further study, the next step is system analysis, which answers the question,
“What must the information system do to solve the problem or capitalize on the
opportunity?”
The overall emphasis of analysis is gathering data on the existing system,
determining the requirements for the new system, considering alternatives
within identified constraints, and investigating the feasibility of alternative
solutions.
Identifying, confirming, and prioritizing system requirements is perhaps
the single most critical step in the entire waterfall system development process
because failure to identify a requirement or an incorrect definition of a require-
ment may not be discovered until much later in the project, causing much
rework, additional costs, and delay in the systems effort.
A data-flow diagram (DFD) is a diagram used during both the analysis and
design phases to document the processes of the current system or to provide a
model of a proposed new system. A DFD shows not only the various processes
within the system but also where the data needed for each process comes from,
where the output of each process will be sent, and what data will be stored and
where.
The purpose of system design phase is to answer the question, “How will
the information system solve this problem?” The primary result of the system
design phase is a technical design that details system outputs, inputs, controls,
and user interfaces; specifies hardware, software, databases, telecommunica-
tions, personnel, and procedures; and shows how these components are
548 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

interrelated. In other words, system design creates a complete set of technical
specifications that can be used to construct the information system.
During the design phase, designers must develop specific system security
and controls for all aspects of the information system, including hardware, soft-
ware, database systems, telecommunications, and Internet operations.
System construction converts the system design into an operational system
by coding and testing software programs, creating and loading data into data-
bases, and performing initial program testing.
Several types of testing must be conducted before a new or modified infor-
mation system is ready to be put into production, including unit testing, inte-
gration testing, system testing, volume testing, and user acceptance testing.
System implementation includes the following activities: user preparation,
site preparation, installation, and cutover.
System operation involves using the new or modified system under all
kinds of operating conditions. Getting the most out of a new or modified
system during its operation is the most important aspect of system operations
for many organizations.
System maintenance involves changing and enhancing the system to make
it more useful in achieving user and organizational goals. There are many reasons
why system maintenance is required.
System disposal involves those activities that ensure the orderly dissolution
of the system, including disposing of all equipment in an environmentally
friendly manner, closing out contracts, and safely migrating information from
the system to another system or archiving it in accordance with applicable
records management policies.
Principle:
Agile development is an iterative system development process that develops
a system in “sprint” increments lasting from two weeks to two months.
Unlike the waterfall system development process, agile development
accepts the fact that system requirements are evolving and cannot be fully
understood or defined at the start of the project. Agile development concen-
trates instead on maximizing the team’s ability to deliver quickly and respond
to emerging requirements—hence the name agile.
Scrum is an agile development framework that uses a team-based approach
in order to keep the development effort focused and moving quickly. Scrum
emphasizes individuals and interactions over processes and tools, working soft-
ware over comprehensive documentation, customer collaboration over contract
negotiation, and responding to change over following a plan.
A scrum master is the person who coordinates all scrum activities, and a
scrum team consists of a dozen or fewer people who perform all system devel-
opment activities from investigation to testing.
The product owner is a person who represents the project stakeholders
and is responsible for communicating and aligning project priorities between
the stakeholders and development team. The product owner holds the product
vision; he or she is responsible for describing what should be built and why—
but now how.
Extreme
programming
(XP)
is
another
agile
software
development
approach that promotes incremental development of a system using short
development cycles to improve productivity and to accommodate new cus-
tomer requirements.
DevOps is the practice of blending the tasks performed by the develop-
ment and IT operations groups to enable faster and more reliable software
releases. This approach is key to successful agile development.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 549
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Principle:
When buying off-the-shelf software, the effort required to modify the soft-
ware package as well as existing software so that they work well together
must be taken into account as a major factor in selecting the final vendor
and software.
Today, most organizations purchase or rent the software they need rather
than build it—simply because it costs too much or takes too long to build a
quality information system.
The analysis team should make a preliminary assessment of the software
marketplace to determine whether existing packages can meet the organiza-
tion’s needs. The primary tool for doing this is the request for information
(RFI), a document that outlines an organization’s hardware or software needs
and requests vendors to respond with information about if and how they can
meet those needs and the time and resources required.
A preliminary evaluation of software packages and vendors began dur-
ing system analysis when the two or three strongest contenders were identi-
fied. The final evaluation begins with a detailed investigation of the
contenders’ proposals as well as discussions with two or three customers
of each vendor.
Key Terms
agile development
cold site
cutover
data-flow diagram (DFD)
DevOps
direct conversion
disaster recovery plan
economic feasibility
extreme programming (XP)
feasibility analysis
hot site
installation
integration testing
joint application development (JAD)
legal feasibility
mission-critical processes
monitoring
operational feasibility
parallel start-up
Pareto principle (80–20 rule)
patch
performance evaluation test
phase-in approach
pilot start-up
product owner
release
request for information (RFI)
schedule feasibility
scrum
scrum master
site preparation
slipstream upgrade
system analysis
system construction
system disposal
system testing
system design
system investigation
system investigation report
system maintenance
system operation
system review
technical documentation
technical feasibility
unit testing
user acceptance document
user acceptance testing (UAT)
user documentation
user preparation
version
volume testing
waterfall system development process
550 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Chapter 12: Self-Assessment Test
Organizations can obtain software using one of
two basic approaches: buy or build.
1.
software is less risky and leads to
quicker deployment; however, maintenance and
support costs may become expensive.
a. Custom
b. Enterprise
c. Off-the-shelf
d. Personal productivity
2.
software can provide a better
match to the current work processes of the orga-
nization and may provide a potential competitive
advantage; however, software development can
be extremely costly, and it can take months or
even years to complete.
a. Custom
b. Enterprise
c. Off-the-shelf
d. Personal productivity
A system under development following the water-
fall approach moves from one phase to the next,
with a management review at the end of each
phase.
3. Many organizations use a waterfall approach with
six phases, including investigation, analysis,
design,
, integration and testing,
and implementation.
4. The waterfall approach allows for a high degree
of management control, but it does not allow for
user interaction with the system until the inte-
gration and testing phase, when the system is
nearly complete. True or False?
5. The purpose of the system investigation phase is
to
.
a. define what the information system must do
to solve the problem or capitalize on the
opportunity
b. gain a clear understanding of the specifics of
the problem to solve or the opportunity to
address
c. gather data on the existing system and
determine the requirements for the new
system
d. identify, confirm, and prioritize system
requirements
6.
is a diagram used to document the
processes of the current system or to provide a
model of a proposed new system.
7. The overall emphasis of the
phase
is on gathering data on the existing system,
determining the requirements of the new system,
considering alternatives within identified con-
straints, and investigating the feasibility of alter-
native solutions.
a. investigation
b. analysis
c. design
d. construction
8. The primary tool for assessing the software mar-
ketplace to determine whether existing packages
can meet the organization’s needs is
the
.
a. system investigation report
b. request for quotation
c. RFI
d. system design report
9. The
phase converts the system
design into an operational system by coding and
testing software programs, creating and loading
data into databases, and performing initial pro-
gram testing.
a. system analysis
b. system construction
c. system implementation
d. system testing and integration
Agile
development
is
an
iterative
system
development process that develops a system in
“sprint” increments lasting from two weeks to two
months.
10.
is an agile development framework
that uses a team-based approach in order to keep
the development effort focused and moving
quickly.
11. In the scrum framework, the
is a
person who represents the project stakeholders
and is responsible for communicating and align-
ing project priorities between stakeholders and
the development team.
a. project manager
b. scrum master
c. product owner
d. project sponsor
12.
is the practice of blending the tasks
performed by the development and IT operations
groups to enable faster and more reliable soft-
ware releases.
a. Scrum
b. Extreme programming
c. JAD
d. DevOps
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 551
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

When
buying
off-the-shelf
software,
the
effort
required to modify the software package as well
as existing software so that they work well together
must be taken into account as a major factor in
selecting the final vendor and software.
13. A preliminary evaluation of software packages
and vendors begins during the
phase when the two or three strongest conten-
ders are identified.
a. system investigation
b. system design
c. system analysis
d. feasibility analysis
Chapter 12: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. c
2. a
3. construction
4. True
5. b
6. Data-flow diagram
7. b
8. c
9. b
10. Scrum
11. c
12. d
13. c
Review Questions
1. What are primary characteristics of the water-
fall system development process? What is the
rationale for using the term “waterfall” to
describe it?
2. Identify and state the purpose of each of the six
phases of the waterfall system development
process.
3. Why do many organizations have a formal pro-
cess for requesting a system investigation?
4. What are the four different kinds of feasibility
that must be assessed? Why is the feasibility of a
system reviewed during the investigation, analy-
sis, and design phases?
5. What is the difference between tangible and
intangible benefits? Identify five tangible benefits
that are frequently associated with an information
system.
6. What are the key elements of a system investiga-
tion report?
7. What is the purpose of studying the existing sys-
tem during the analysis phase?
8. Identify several areas for which system
security and control requirements need to
be defined.
9. Identify and briefly describe six system perfor-
mance factors.
10. What is a business continuity plan? What is a
disaster recovery plan?
11. Identify and briefly describe four types of testing
that are conducted during the integration and
testing phase.
12. Define the terms slipstream upgrade, patch,
release, and version as they relate to system
maintenance.
13. What is the difference between the roles and
responsibilities of a scrum master and product
owner?
14. What is extreme programming (XP)? What is its goal?
15. An organization has selected and is now imple-
menting a software package. Identify three key
factors that will determine the cost and time
required for implementation.
Discussion Questions
1. Provide two examples of opportunities or pro-
blems that are likely to trigger the need for an
information system project.
2. Thoroughly discuss the pros and cons of buying
versus building software.
3. What are the advantages and disadvantages of
following the waterfall system development
process?
4. Outline the steps necessary to conduct an effec-
tive joint application development (JAD) session.
Who should participate in such a session? What is
the role of the JAD facilitator?
5. Once a project has successfully made it through
the system investigation phase, should it ever be
cancelled? Why or why not?
552 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

6. You have been assigned to write a newspaper
report on a major information system project
failure run by your school’s information system
organization. Where would you start, and who
would you speak with?
7. Why is it important for business managers to
have a basic understanding of the system devel-
opment process?
8. Define the Pareto principle, and discuss how it
applies to prioritizing system requirements.
9. Identify and describe how three different
change models that can be applied to improve
the probability of successful system
implementation.
10. Describe and discuss the pros and cons of three
different system cutover strategies.
11. What is the fundamental difference in approach
between waterfall and agile system development?
12. How does DevOps support the agile system
development process?
13. Identify and briefly discuss four key tasks asso-
ciated with the successful implementation of a
software package.
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. You are acquiring a new information system for
The Fitness Center, a company with three fitness
centers in your metropolitan area, with a total of
1,200 members and 20 to 30 full and part-time
employees in each location. Through previous
research efforts, the director of marketing has
determined that your clientele is interested in a
state-of-the-art software system to track all their
fitness and health-related activities. Each piece
of equipment in the gym will be modified to
allow entry of the member’s ID number, record-
ing the date, time of day, weight used, and
number of reps or workout length. Members and
fitness consultants want to be able to log in to
the system from any computer or mobile device
and see displays of various reports (calories
burned, muscle groups worked, blood pressure,
distance run, steps taken, etc.) for a user-
specified time period. Use word-processing
software to identify at least six high-priority
requirements for such a system. Use a
spreadsheet or project management program to
identify and schedule the tasks that must be
performed in order to choose the best software
package and implement it.
2. The preliminary investigation of a software proj-
ect has been completed. Two different project
teams have estimated the costs associated with
the development and maintenance of a new sys-
tem. One team based their estimates on the
assumption that the waterfall system develop-
ment process would be used for the project; the
other team plans to follow the agile approach.
A third option is to purchase off-the-shelf soft-
ware that provides nearly all the benefits of a
custom-built solution. Review the estimates
below, and choose the best approach for the
project: waterfall development, agile develop-
ment, or off-the-shelf software implementation.
Provide a solid rational for your choice. Identify
any assumptions you must make in reaching
your decision.
Waterfall
Agile
Off-the-Shelf Software
Total effort months to complete the system
45
38
6
Cost per effort month
$10k
$10k
$10k
Cost of software package
$350k
Elapsed time until a partial working version is
available (months)
Not applicable
2
Not applicable
Elapsed time until all currently envisioned features
are available (months)
8
5
3
Annual savings generated by the complete system
$180k
$180k
$160k
3. A new sales ordering system needs a relational
database that contains a customer table, a
product inventory table, and an order table.
Use a word-processing, graphics, or spread-
sheet program to draw an entity-relationship
diagram showing the relationships among
these entities. Next, design each of these tables
showing the keys and attributes to be included
in each table. Include five sample records for
each table.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 553
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Team Activities
1. Your team has been hired to define the scope and
feasibility of a project to create a database of job
openings and descriptions for the companies
visiting your campus each term. Students would
be able to log on to the system and request an
appointment with each company’s recruiter.
Recruiters would be granted access to each
student’s summary transcript (courses taken, but
no grades shown) and resume. Describe the tasks
your team would perform to complete the system
investigation phase. Who else needs to be
involved in the system investigation? Develop a
data-flow diagram that defines the scope of this
system.
2. Your team has been selected to monitor the
disposal of your school’s 10-year-old student-
registration system. Develop a list of the activities
that need to be completed to complete this task.
Which activities are of most concern?
3. You and your team have been hired to perform
a system investigation for a fast food restaurant
that wants to implement new tools and
processes to improve its customer service.
Currently, the restaurant has a poor reputation
for not correctly filling customers’ orders and
for taking too long to do it. Perform a functional
decomposition to define the scope and basic
requirements of such a system. Brainstorm
some ideas to improve the situation, and
choose one to pursue based on its technical,
economic, legal, operational, and schedule
feasibility.
Web Exercises
1. Do research on the Web to identify application
development tools that support the rapid devel-
opment of high-quality apps for both iPhone and
Android-based smartphones. Develop a spread-
sheet that summarizes the features and pros and
cons of three of these tools.
2. Do research to identify the three leading elec-
tronic health record (EHR) systems. Go on
social media and find comments from the users
of these systems. If you were leading a
project team to select an EHR system for a
large hospital, which one would you choose?
Why?
3. Do research to determine the current level of
adoption of DevOps around the globe. Which
organizations seem to be leaders in DevOps?
What initiatives are these companies taking that
makes them leaders?
Career Exercises
1. A new advertising and promotion-planning
system is being developed for a major manu-
facturer of consumer products. Management is
seeking candidates to serve as the product
owner on this key $2 million, nine-month proj-
ect. Identify some characteristics and desired
experience that the ideal candidate would
possess.
2. Perform research to learn what is required to
have a successful career as a software developer
for smartphones. What sort of education and
experience is needed? What personal characteris-
tics would be helpful in such a career? How
would one get started in such a career, and what
are starting salaries?
3. Identify an information system frequently
employed by people in a career field you are
interested in. Discuss how you might be involved
as a user in the development or acquisition of
such a system for your future company. Identify
three things that you could do as a project par-
ticipant that would greatly improve the likelihood
of a successful project. Now, identify three things
that you could do (or fail to do) that could greatly
diminish the probability of success of such a
project.
554 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Case Studies
Case One
Etsy Uses DevOps for Rapid Deployment
Looking for a unique gift—such as a personalized, hand-
stamped fishing lure or maybe a vintage gold hairpin or even
a crocheted hat for your cat? If so, you might want to join the
24 million active buyers who turn to the Web site Etsy as
their source for handmade and vintage products—ranging
from art and photography to clothing and jewelry to home
décor and furniture.
Etsy was founded in 2005 in an apartment in Brooklyn,
New York, by a small group of people who saw a need for an
online exchange where crafters and artists could sell their
handmade and vintage goods along with art and craft
supplies. The company, which views itself as a global
community of creative entrepreneurs, shoppers,
manufacturers, and suppliers, now has more than 800
employees and a peer-to-peer e-commerce site that generated
close to $2.4 billion in sales in 2015. Currently, the site has
over 35 million items available for sale from 1.6 million active
sellers around the world.
Early on, Etsy placed a high priority on developing a
sophisticated technology platform to support its business,
with an engineering culture centered around a philosophy
that the company has dubbed “Code as Craft” (the
company even operates an engineering blog under that
name). However, as with many startups, the development
of Etsy’s internal structures was not always carefully
planned. As a result, siloes and other barriers to
collaboration gradually developed across the company,
affecting its ability to keep its software development efforts
on the cutting edge.
Despite those challenges, the company grew rapidly,
and as early as 2008, the company was deploying new
releases to its site twice a week—a pace matched by few
other companies at the time. However, each of those
deployments typically took over four hours to complete, and
according to Michael Rembetsy, vice president of technical
operations at Etsy, “Deploys were very painful. We had a
traditional mindset: developers write the code and ops
deploys it.” That divide often resulted in faulty releases that
shut down the site for prolonged periods, causing real
concern for the users around the world who relied on the site
to make a living.
When Chad Dickerson, who had spent years as CTO at
Yahoo!, joined Etsy as its new CTO, he quickly brought in a
new technical management team, which pushed the
company to adopt a more agile approach to software
development in order to roll out improvements and updates
with greater ease and fewer disruptions. According to Jon
Cowie, an operations engineer at Etsy, “Bringing that group
in is what first planted the seed of DevOps and the move to a
continuous rate of delivery, and it’s all really grown from
there. As the company has grown, this idea that the closer
developers and operations work together and understand
each other’s problems, the more the company can achieve,
has really taken hold.”
Like many companies, Etsy was attracted to DevOps as a
way to create a more responsive software development
process—one that allows for continuous integration and
deployment. However, adopting DevOps practices has also
encouraged a more collaborative approach to development—
a shift that has been both challenging and rewarding for the
company. Notes Cowie, “The hardest part is getting the
business culture right…. You may have to deal with
stakeholders at different levels who may not like this idea of
relinquishing some power or giving people access to systems
they previously haven’t had.”
One of the big rewards for Etsy is that its developers are
now able to push code to a production server up to 60 times
a day. Often, the first release is to a limited audience of
employees or a small, randomly selected group of users. With
testing and feedback, the code can then be pushed to the
entire Etsy community. According to Rembetsy, “We started
to understand that if developers felt the responsibility for
deploying code to the site they would also, by nature, take
responsibility for if the site was up or down, take into
consideration performance, and gain an understanding of the
stress and fear of a deploy.”
As Rembetsy notes, “Mistakes happen, we find them, fix
them, and move on. The important thing is to learn
something from the process, and never make the mistake
again in the future.”
Critical Thinking Questions
1. It is perhaps not surprising that Etsy was an early
adopter of DevOps. It is a relatively small company,
with a start-up culture, and its move to DevOps was
championed by company leaders. Do you think
deploying DevOps practices would be more difficult in
a larger, more established organization? How might a
company begin to make the cultural changes needed to
move to the more collaborative, rapid-deployment
approach that DevOps offers?
2. At Etsy, new developers are expected to begin pushing
code to production on day one. That expectation is one
way Etsy encourages it employees to embrace
change—and a certain degree of risk—instead of fear-
ing it. Would you feel comfortable working as a busi-
ness manager in a company that gives individual
developers so much freedom and responsibility? What
would be some of the advantages to a business man-
ager of such a culture? What might be some of the
disadvantages?
3. What would be some of the criteria you would use to
measure the success of a shift to DevOps practices
within a company?
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 555
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

SOURCES: “About Etsy,” Etsy, www.etsy.com/about/?ref=ftr, April 28,
2016; Dix, John, “How Etsy Makes DevOps Work,” Network World,
February 19, 2015, www.networkworld.com/article/2886672/software
/how-etsy-makes-devops-work.html; Donnelly, Caroline, “Case Study:
What the Enterprise Can Learn from Etsy’s DevOps Strategy,” Compu-
terWeekly, June 9, 2015, www.computerweekly.com/news/4500247782
/Case-study-What-the-enterprise-can-learn-from-Etsys-DevOps-strategy;
Heusser, Matthew, “Continuous Deployment Done in Unique Fashion at
Etsy.com,” CIO, March 12, 2012, www.cio.com/article/2397663/devel
oper/continuous-deployment-done-in-unique-fashion-at-etsy-com.html;
“What Is DevOps,” The Agile Admin, https://theagileadmin.com/what-is
-devops, accessed April 27, 2016.
Case Two
British Telecom Spreading Agile Development
across the Globe
In 2005, British Telecom (BT) took a big risk: the company
dropped its use of the waterfall system development process
and embraced agile development. Previously, BT had
outsourced the gathering of system requirements to a third
company, which would typically take three to nine months to
meet with customers and stakeholders and create a
requirements list. Next, the project would move back to BT
where programmers often struggled to interpret the
requirements and then develop and test the system within
18 months—although some projects needed more time. In
late 2005, however, BT took only 90 days to roll out a new
Web-based system for monitoring phone traffic. The new
system allowed traffic managers to change switches and
other physical devices more quickly in order to handle shifts
in load along BT’s telecommunications network. The success
of this initial project reverberated throughout the IT world,
as BT became the first telecommunications giant to adopt
agile development—sometimes developing products in three
30-day iterative cycles.
The new system development approach had other
advantages, too: programmers and customers
communicated closely and teams from different locations
around the world, initially the United Kingdom and India,
worked together to develop the system. To overcome
customer doubts, BT invited them to development “hot
houses” to see how the agile development process
worked. Many customers became such ardent believers
that they adopted the agile approach themselves. In 2010,
BT used its new system development process to create
the 21st Century Next Generation Access Network
process, which enjoyed an 80 percent return on its
initial investment within its first year. Today, BT deploys
agile development to service its customers across the
globe.
In 2014, for example, BT applied the agile approach
to deploy telepresence solutions for the international
energy and chemical producer Sasol, a company with
over 34,000 employees based in 37 countries. To oversee
its operations and interact with clients, senior Sasol
managers based in South Africa were traveling millions of
miles each year, which was not good for the managers,
the company’s budget, or the planet. As an alternative,
BT installed telepresence suites across South Africa and
in Houston, London, Calgary, and Hamburg. Sasol
achieved a 100 percent usage rate at each of these suites,
and BT secured a five-year contract to provide continued
support.
BT had one major concern about agile development:
previously, the company had conducted 16 or 17 types of
tests before deploying a new system. Many feared that a
shorter life cycle meant compromising on quality
assurance. However, BT now continues testing with
customers after system setup and finds that testing the
product with customer involvement has significant
advantages.
“The main advantage I see is that you spend more time
working on the right [system] features by talking to
customers all the time and working on it,” says Kerry
Buckley, a software developer who worked on the initial
phone-traffic monitoring system. Moreover, software
engineers working at BT are excited about working on
customer-facing live applications. As one engineer notes, “All
your work matters and will be released to the public.” Agile
development at BT has taken system developers out of their
isolated bubble, inspiring them, and proving to the IT world
that agile development can work.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Are there certain personal characteristics one should
look for in candidates who will participate in or lead
agile system projects? If so, what are they, and why are
they important?
2. How might the establishment of telepresence suites
support the use of the agile system development pro-
cess? What do you think are some of the capabilities of
such suites?
3. How might extreme programming and DevOps provide
further improvements in the BT system development
process?
SOURCES: Hoffman, Thomas, “BT: A Case Study in Agile Programming,”
InfoWorld, March 11, 2008, www.infoworld.com/d/developer-world
/bt-case-study-in-agile-programming-112?page=0,0; Grant, Ian, “BT
Switches to Agile Techniques to Create New Products,” ComputerWeekly,
January 29, 2010, www.computerweekly.com/news/1280091969
/BT-switches-to-agile-techniques-to-create-new-products; “About Sasol:
Overview,” Sasol, www.sasol.com/about-sasol/company-profile/over
view; accessed July 8, 2014; “Turning a Far-Flung Organisation into a
Single Community,” BT, July 9, 2014, http://letstalk.globalservices.bt
.com/en; “Software Engineer, IVR at BT (British Telecom),” The
JobCrowd, April 23, 2014, www.thejobcrowd.com/employer/bt-british
-telecom/reviews/software-engineer-ivr-at-bt-british-telecom.
556 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Notes
1. Schuman, Evan, “What Amazon Is Doing with Its Supply
Chain Could Devastate the Competition,” Computer-
world, February 12, 2016, www.computerworld.com
/article/3032656/retail-it/amazons-supply-chain-move
-could-prove-devastating.html
2. Boulton, Clint, “Custom Software Drives Vitamin World
Stores Remodeling,” CIO, Feb 12, 2016, www.cio.com
/article/3033084/software/custom-software-drives
-vitamin-world-stores-remodeling.html.
3. Boulton, Clint, “Walgreens CIO Starts with the Customer
and Works Backward,” CIO, February 9, 2016, www.cio
.com/article/3031054/vertical-industries/walgreens-cio
-starts-with-the-customer-and-works-backward.html.
4. Boyd, Aaron, “Energy IT Project Failing due to Mismanage-
ment, Poor Planning,” Federal Times, November 24, 2015,
www.federaltimes.com/story/government/it/management
/2015/11/24/eia-it-transformation/76307870/.
5. “Joint Application Development,” Liquid Mercury
Solutions, http://liquidmercurysolutions.com/whatwedo
/spdev/Pages/Joint-Application-Development.aspx,
accessed February 21, 2016.
6. “Utilizing a Self-Steering Robotic Tractor in the Devel-
opmental Phases of Rice,” Hitachi, www.hitachi.com.au
/documents/news/150114-Utilizing-a-Self-steering
-Robotic-Tractor-in-the-Developmental-Phases-of-Rice
.pdf, accessed February 21, 2016.
7. “Ministry of Defence ‘Wasted Millions on Failed
Computer System’,” Guardian, January 13, 2014, www
.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jan/14/ministry-of
-defence-failed-computer-system.
8. “LAPD Best Policing Practices through Early Interven-
tion,” Sierra-Cedar, www.sierra-cedar.com/wp-content
/uploads/sites/12/2015/07/CSS-LAPD.pdf, accessed
February 22, 2016.
9. “Interagency Guidelines Establishing Information Secu-
rity Standards,” Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg
/interagencyguidelines.htm, accessed June 9, 2014.
10. Ward, Brian, “The Importance of Good Interface
Design,” heehaw.digital (blog), February 27, 2013,
http://blog.heehaw.co.uk/2013/02/the-importance-of
-good-interface-design.
11. Shneiderman, Ben and Plaisant, Catherine, Designing
the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-
Computer Interaction, 5.ed, 2009, Pearson: New York.
12. Porter, Joshua, “Principles of User Interface Design,”
Bokardo (blog), http://bokardo.com/principles-of-user
-interface-design/, accessed July 3, 2014.
13. “RecoverPoint,” EMC, www.emc.com/storage/recover
point/recoverpoint.htm, accessed June 16, 2014.
14. “SteelEye LifeKeeper,” SteelEye Technology, Inc., www
.ha-cc.org/high_availability/components/application
_availability/cluster/high_availability_cluster/steeleye
_lifekeeper, accessed June 16, 2014.
15. “NeverFail Application Continuous Availability,”
VirtualizationAdmin.com, www.virtualizationadmin
.com/software/High-Availability/Neverfail-for-VMware
-VirtualCenter-.html, accessed June 16, 2014.
16. “CodeSmith Generator,” CodeSmith, www.codesmith
tools.com/product/generator, accessed July 1, 2014.
17. “The Arizona Supreme Court Creates the Ultimate
Outsource and Insource Simultaneously,” Visible, www
.visible.com/News/arizona.htm, accessed July 2, 2014.
18. Dr. Explain Web site, www.drexplain.com/what-do
-users-say, accessed July 14, 2014.
19. Kline, Allissa, “M&T to Invest $20M, Upgrade Data
Center,” Buffalo Business First, March 10, 2014, www
.bizjournals.com/buffalo/news/2014/03/10/m-t-to
-invest-20m-in-data-center-upgrade.html.
20. “Selected Financial Data,” Shell, http://reports.shell.com
/annual-report/2015/strategic-report/selected-financial
-data.php, accessed April 26, 2016.
21. “Shell Businesses in the U.S.,” Shell, www.shell.us
/aboutshell/shell-businesses.html, accessed July 8, 2014.
22. “A Record-Breaking Feat,” T-Systems, February 2013,
www.t-systems.com/umn/global-collaboration-from
-a-private-cloud-shell-pulls-off-the-largest-sap-upgrade
-in-history-/1125808_2/blobBinary/Best-Practice_02
-2013_Shell_EN.pdf?ts_layoutId=1100966.
23. “Precise Application Performance Platform,” Precise,
www.precise.com, accessed July 14, 2014.
24. “Allscripts,” eG Innovations, www.eginnovations.com
/news/Allscripts_Case_study_letter_12914.pdf, accessed
July 14, 2014.
25. Wagner, Dennis, “VA Scandal Audit: 120,000 Veterans
Experience Long Waits for Care,” Azcentral, June 9,
2014, www.azcentral.com/story/news/arizona
/investigations/2014/06/09/va-scandal-audit-veterans
-delayed-care/10234881.
26. Brewin, Bob, “VA Failed to Protect Critical Computer
Systems, Audit Finds,” Nextgov (blog), May 29, 2014,
www.nextgov.com/defense/whats-brewin/2014/05
/va-failed-protect-critical-computer-systems-audit-finds
/85429.
27. Osborne, Hilary, “Why Do Bank IT Systems Keep
Failing?” Guardian, January 27, 2014, www.theguardian
.com/money/2014/jan/27/bank-it-systems-keep-failing-
lloyds-rbs-natwest.
28. “More than £1BN Committed to Improve Banking Ser-
vices,” RBS, June 27, 2014, www.rbs.com/news/2014/06
/more-than-p1bn-committed-to-improve-banking
-services.html.
29. “End of Windows XP Support Will Be Trouble for Busi-
nesses and Consumers,” CBS Evening News, April 8,
2014, www.cbsnews.com/videos/end-of-windows-xp
-support-will-be-trouble-for-businesses-consumers/.
30. “What Is Agile?” Agile Methodology, http://agile
methodology.org, accessed August 3, 2014.
CHAPTER 12 • System Acquisition and Development 557
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

31. “Core Scrum: What is Scrum?,” ScrumAlliance, www
.scrumalliance.org/scrum/media/ScrumAllianceMedia
/Files%20and%20PDFs/Learn%20About%20Scrum
/Core-Scrum.pdf, accessed April 26, 2016.
32. “Learn About Scrum?” Scrum Alliance, www.scrumalliance
.org/why-scrum, accessed April 26, 2016.
33. “Core Scrum: What is Scrum?,” ScrumAlliance.
34. “Scrum Methodology,” My PM Expert, http://scrummethod
ology.com/, accessed August 3, 2014. www.my-project
-management-expert.com/the-advantages-and-disadvan
tages-of-agile-software-development.html, accessed August
3, 2014.
35. De Sousa, Susan, “The Advantages and Disadvantages of
Agile Development,” My PM Expert, www.my-project
-management-expert.com/the-advantages-and
-disadvantages-of-agile-software-development.html,
accessed August 3, 2014.
36. “The Rules of Extreme Programming,” Extreme Pro-
gramming, www.extremeprogramming.org/rules.html,
accessed August 3, 2014.
37. Greene, Daniel, “What Is DevOps,” TechCrunch, May 1,
2015, http://techcrunch.com/2015/05/15/what-is-devops.
38. Barker, Colin, “What Is DevOps and Why Does It Mat-
ter?,” ZDNet, www.zdnet.com/article/what-is-devops
-and-why-does-it-matter.
39. Gates, Robert, “Hotel Hits the Gas Pedal with Souped Up
DevOps Model,” TechTarget, March 7, 2016, http://
searchdatacenter.techtarget.com/news/4500278116
/Hotel-hits-the-gas-pedal-with-souped-up-DevOps-model.
558 PART 4 • Planning, Acquiring, and Building Systems
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

PART 5
Information Systems
in Business and
Society
Chapter 13
Cybercrime and Information
System Security
Chapter 14
Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of
Information Systems
phoenixman/Shutterstock.com
559
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
13
Cybercrime and Information
System Security
igor.stevanovic/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• A zero-day attack is one that takes place before the
security community and/or software developers become
aware of and fix a security vulnerability. While one
would hope that the discoverer of a zero-day vulnera-
bility would immediately inform the original software
manufacturer so that a fix can be created for the
problem, in some cases, this knowledge is sold on the
black market to cyberterrorists, governments, or large
organizations that may then use it to launch their own
cyberattacks. For example, information about one
zero-day vulnerability in Apple’s iOS reportedly sold for
$500,000. Packages of zero-day exploits have been
sold to U.S. government contractors for $2.5 million a
year.
• The volume of global phishing attacks is alarming. It is
estimated that about 156 million phishing emails are
sent each day, with 16 million of those successfully
evading email filters. Of those, roughly 50 percent
(or 8 million) are opened, and 800,000 recipients per
day click on malicious URL links contained in the
emails.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• Computer crime is a serious and rapidly growing
area of concern requiring management attention.
• Explain why computer incidents are so prevalent.
• Identify and briefly describe the types of com-
puter exploits and their impact.
• Organizations must take strong measures to
ensure secure, private, and reliable computing
experiences for their employees, customers, and
business partners.
• Describe the earmarks of a strong security
program.
• Identify specific measures used to prevent com-
puter crime.
• Outline actions that must be taken in the event of
a successful security intrusion.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about Cybercrime and Information
System Security?
The security of data and information systems used in business is of utmost importance. Confidential
business data and private customer and employee information must be safeguarded, and systems must
be protected against malicious acts of theft or disruption. Although the need for security is obvious, it
must often be balanced against other business needs. Business managers, IS professionals, and IS
users all face a number of complex trade-offs regarding IS security, such as the following: How much
effort and money should be spent to safeguard against computer crime? (In other words, how safe is
safe enough?) What should be done if recommended computer security safeguards make conducting
business more difficult for customers and employees, resulting in lost sales and increased costs? If a
firm is a victim of a computer crime, should it pursue prosecution of the criminals at all costs, maintain
a low profile to avoid the negative publicity, inform affected customers, or take some other action?
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• What key trade-offs and ethical issues are associated with the safeguarding of data and information
systems?
• What are the key elements of a multilayer process for managing security vulnerabilities based on the
concept of reasonable assurance?
The Threat Landscape
The number of cybercrimes being committed against individuals, organiza-
tions, and governments continues to increase, and the destructive impact of
these crimes is also intensifying. The brands, reputation, and earnings of
many organizations around the world have been negatively impacted by such
crimes. As a result, organizations are putting in place a range of countermea-
sures to combat cybercrime. For instance, the worldwide financial services
industry spent $27.4 billion on IT security and fraud prevention in 2015.1
And a recent survey of more than 10,000 IT professionals around the world
revealed the following:2
●
58 percent of global companies have an overall security strategy.
●
54 percent have a CISO (chief information security officer) in charge of
security.
●
53 percent have employee security-awareness and training programs.
●
52 percent have security standards for third parties.
●
49 percent conduct threat assessments.
●
48 percent actively monitor and analyze security intelligence.
In spite of all these countermeasures, however, the number of computer
security incidents surged from 2014 to 2015 in the following industries: public
sector organizations; entertainment, media and communications; technology
and telecommunications companies; pharmaceuticals and life sciences; and
power and utilities organizations.3
Why Computer Incidents Are So Prevalent
Increasing
computing
complexity,
higher
computer
user
expectations,
expanding and changing systems, an increase in the prevalence of bring your
own device (BYOD) policies, a growing reliance on software with known vul-
nerabilities, and the increasing sophistication of those who would do harm
have caused a dramatic increase in the number, variety, and severity of secu-
rity incidents are increasing dramatically.
562 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Increasing Complexity Increases Vulnerability
The computing environment has become enormously complex. Cloud com-
puting, networks, computers, mobile devices, virtualization, operating systems
applications, Web sites, switches, routers, and gateways are interconnected
and driven by hundreds of millions of lines of code. This environment con-
tinues to increase in complexity every day. The number of possible entry
points to a network expands continually as more devices are added, increas-
ing the possibility of security breaches.
Higher Computer User Expectations
Today, time means money, and the faster computer users can solve a prob-
lem, the sooner they can be productive. As a result, computer help desks are
under intense pressure to respond very quickly to users’ questions. Under
duress, help desk personnel sometimes forget to verify users’ identities or to
check whether they are authorized to perform a requested action. In addition,
even though most have been warned against doing so, some computer users
share their login ID and password with other coworkers who have forgotten
their own passwords. This can enable workers to gain access to information
systems and data for which they are not authorized.
Expanding and Changing Systems Introduce New Risks
Business has moved from an era of stand-alone computers, in which critical
data was stored on an isolated mainframe computer in a locked room, to an
era in which personal computers and mobile devices connect to networks
with millions of other computers, all capable of sharing information. Busi-
nesses have moved quickly into e-commerce, mobile computing, collaborative
work groups, global business, and interorganizational information systems.
Information technology has become ubiquitous and is a necessary tool for
organizations to achieve their goals. However, it is increasingly difficult for IT
organizations to keep up with the pace of technological change, successfully
perform an ongoing assessment of new security risks, and implement
approaches for dealing with them.
Increased Prevalence of Bring Your Own Device Policies
Bring your own device (BYOD) is a business policy that permits, and in
some cases encourages, employees to use their own mobile devices (smart-
phones, tablets, or laptops) to access company computing resources and
applications, including email, corporate databases, the corporate intranet, and
the Internet. Proponents of BYOD say it improves employee productivity by
allowing workers to use devices with which they are already familiar—while
also helping to create an image of a company as a flexible and progressive
employer. Most companies have found they cannot entirely prevent employ-
ees from using their own devices to perform work functions. However, this
practice raises many potential security issues as it is highly likely that such
devices are also used for nonwork activity (browsing Web sites, blogging,
shopping, visiting social networks, etc.) that exposes them to malware much
more frequently than a device used strictly for business purposes. That mal-
ware may then be spread throughout the company. In addition, BYOD makes
it extremely difficult for IT organizations to adequately safeguard additional
portable devices with various operating systems and a myriad of applications.
Growing Reliance on Commercial Software with
Known Vulnerabilities
In computing, an exploit is an attack on an information system that takes
advantage of a particular system vulnerability. Often this attack is due to poor
system design or implementation. Once the vulnerability is discovered, software
developers create and issue a “fix,” or patch, to eliminate the problem. Users of
bring your own device (BYOD):
A business policy that permits, and in
some cases encourages, employees to
use their own mobile devices (smart-
phones, tablets, or laptops) to access
company computing resources and
applications, including email, corporate
databases, the corporate intranet, and
the Internet.
exploit: An attack on an information
system that takes advantage of a
particular system vulnerability.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 563
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the system or application are responsible for obtaining and installing the patch,
which they can usually download from the Web. (These fixes are in addition to
other maintenance and project work that software developers perform.)
Any delay in installing a patch exposes the user to a potential security
breach. The need to install a fix to prevent a hacker from taking advantage of
a known system vulnerability can create a time-management dilemma for sys-
tem support personnel trying to balance a busy work schedule. Should they
install a patch that, if left uninstalled, could lead to a security breach, or should
they complete assigned project work so that the anticipated project savings and
benefits from the project can begin to accrue on schedule? According to Secu-
nia, a provider of vulnerability intelligence and management tools, the number
of new software vulnerabilities identified in 2014 jumped 18 percent from the
previous year to 15,435—an average of 42 per day—as shown in Table 13.1.4,5
Clearly, it can be difficult to keep up with all the required patches to fix these
vulnerabilities. Of special concern is a zero-day attack, which is an attack that
takes place before the security community and/or software developers become
aware of and fix a security vulnerability. While one would hope that the
discoverer of a zero-day vulnerability would immediately inform the original
software manufacturer so that a fix can be created for the problem, in some cases,
this knowledge is sold on the black market to cyberterrorists, governments, or
large organizations that may then use it to launch their own cyberattacks. For
example, information about one zero-day vulnerability in Apple’s iOS reportedly
sold for $500,000.6 On the other hand, the U.S. government has also chosen to
keep information about vulnerabilities secret in cases in which government
security experts have determined that the hole has “a clear national security or law
enforcement” use. Packages of zero-day exploits have been sold to U.S. govern-
ment contractors for $2.5 million a year.7
A serious zero-day vulnerability was discovered in Apple’s OS X El Capitan
operating system, enabling hackers to circumvent the company’s System Integrity
Protection (SIP), which is designed to prevent malicious code from modifying
protected files and stealing sensitive data. The infection is difficult to detect, and
even if users do discover it, it is impossible for them to remove the infection,
since SIP would work against them, preventing users from reaching or altering
the malware-laced system file. Apple patched the vulnerability in updates for El
Capitan 10.11.4 and iOS 9.3 that were released on March 21, 2016.8
U.S. companies increasingly rely on commercial software with known vul-
nerabilities. Even when vulnerabilities are exposed, many corporate IT organi-
zations prefer to use already installed software as is rather than implement
security fixes that will either make the software harder to use or eliminate
“nice-to-have” features that will help sell the software to end users.
TABLE 13.1 Total number of new software vulnerabilities identified
annually
Year
Number of Software Vulnerabilities Identified
2007
7,540
2008
8,369
2009
7,716
2010
9,747
2011
9,307
2012
9,875
2013
13,075
2014
15,435
zero-day attack: An attack that
takes place before the security
community and/or software developers
become aware of and fix a security
vulnerability.
564 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Increasing Sophistication of Those Who Would Do Harm
Previously, the stereotype of a computer troublemaker was that of an intro-
verted “geek” working on his own and motivated by the desire to gain some
degree of notoriety. This individual was armed with specialized, but limited,
knowledge of computers and networks and used rudimentary tools, perhaps
downloaded from the Internet, to execute his exploits. While such individuals
still exist, it is not this stereotyped individual who is the biggest threat to IT
security. Today’s computer menace is much better organized and may be part
of an organized group (e.g., Anonymous, Chaos Computer Club, Lizard
Squad, TeslaTeam) that has an agenda and targets specific organizations and
Web sites. Some of these groups have ample resources, including money and
sophisticated tools to support their efforts. Today’s computer attacker has
greater depth of knowledge and expertise in getting around computer and
network security safeguards. Table 13.2 summarizes the types of perpetrators
of computer mischief, crime, and damage.
Types of Exploits
There are numerous types of computer attacks, with new varieties being
invented all the time. This section discusses some of the more common
attacks, including ransomware, viruses, worms, Trojan horses, blended threat,
spam, distributed denial-of-service, rootkits, advanced persistent threat, phish-
ing, spear-phishing, smishing and vishing, identity theft, cyberespionage, and
cyberterrorism.
While we usually think of such exploits being aimed at computers, smart-
phones continue to become more computer capable. Increasingly, smart-
phone users store an array of personal identity information on their devices,
including credit card numbers and bank account numbers. Smartphones are
used to surf the Web and transact business electronically. The more people
use their smartphones for these purposes, the more attractive these devices
become as targets for cyberthieves. One form of smartphone malware runs
up charges on users’ accounts by automatically sending messages to numbers
that charge fees upon receipt of a message.
Ransomware
Ransomware is malware that stops you from using your computer or acces-
sing your data until you meet certain demands such as paying a ransom or
sending photos to the attacker. Computers become infected when users open
TABLE 13.2 Classifying perpetrators of computer crime
Type of
Perpetrator
Description
Black hat hacker
Someone who violates computer or Internet security maliciously or for illegal personal gain (in
contrast to a white hat hacker who is someone who has been hired by an organization to test
the security of its information systems)
Cracker
An individual who causes problems, steals data, and corrupts systems
Malicious insider
An employee or contractor who attempts to gain financially and/or disrupt a company’s infor-
mation systems and business operations
Industrial spy
An individual who captures trade secrets and attempts to gain an unfair competitive advantage
Cybercriminal
Someone who attacks a computer system or network for financial gain
Hacktivist
An individual who hacks computers or Web sites in an attempt to promote a political ideology
Cyberterrorist
Someone who attempts to destroy the infrastructure components of governments, financial
institutions, and other corporations, utilities, and emergency response units
ransomware: Malware that stops
you from using your computer or
accessing your data until you meet
certain demands such as paying a
ransom or sending photos to the
attacker.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 565
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

an email attachment containing the malware or are lured to a compromised
Web site by a deceptive email or pop-up window. Ransomware can also be
spread through removable USB drives or Yahoo Messenger, with the payload
disguised as an image.
Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center was forced to shut down its com-
puter network after hackers encrypted some of its data in February, 2016. Ini-
tially, the hospital refused to pay the ransom, and hospital employees were
forced to resort to paper, pencil, phones, and fax machines to carry out many
of their tasks, including accessing patient data. The hospital sought help from
the FBI, the Los Angeles Police Department, and cybersecurity consultants,
but it was never able to access to the data. After a week, the hospital paid the
ransom of $12,000. By February 15, access to the data was fully restored and
there was no evidence that any patient or employee data had been accessed.9
Viruses
Computer virus has become an umbrella term for many types of malicious
code. Technically, a virus is a piece of programming code, usually disguised
as something else, that causes a computer to behave in an unexpected and
usually undesirable manner. For example, the virus may be programmed to
display a certain message on the computer’s display screen, delete or modify
a certain document, or reformat the hard drive. Almost all viruses are attached
to a file, so that only when the infected file is opened, the virus executes.
A virus is spread to other machines when a computer user shares an infected
file or sends an email with a virus-infected attachment. In other words, viruses
spread by the action of the “infected” computer user.
Macro viruses have become a common and easily created form of virus.
Attackers use an application macro language (such as Visual Basic or
VBScript) to create programs that infect documents and templates. After an
infected document is opened, the virus is executed and infects the user’s
application templates. Macros can insert unwanted words, numbers, or
phrases into documents or alter command functions. After a macro virus
infects a user’s application, it can embed itself in all future documents created
with the application. The “WM97/Resume.A” virus is a Word macro virus
spread via an email message with the subject line “Resume - Janet Simons.” If
the email recipient clicks on the attachment, the virus deletes all data in the
user’s computer or mobile device.
Worms
Unlike a computer virus, which requires users to spread infected files to other
users, a worm is a harmful program that resides in the active memory of the
computer and duplicates itself. Worms differ from viruses in that they can
propagate without human intervention, often sending copies of themselves to
other computers by email. A worm is capable of replicating itself on your
computer so that it can potentially send out thousands of copies of itself to
everyone in your email address book, for example.
The negative impact of a worm attack on an organization’s computers can
be considerable—lost data and programs, lost productivity due to workers
being unable to use their computers, additional lost productivity as workers
attempt to recover data and programs, and lots of effort for IT workers to
clean up the mess and restore everything to as close to normal as possible.
The cost to repair the damage done by each of the Code Red, SirCam, and
Melissa worms was estimated to exceed $1 billion, with that of the Conficker,
Storm, and ILOVEYOU worms totaling well over $5 billion.10,11
Trojan Horses
A Trojan horse is a seemingly harmless program in which malicious code is
hidden. A victim on the receiving end of a Trojan horse is usually tricked into
virus: A piece of programming code,
usually disguised as something else,
that causes a computer to behave in an
unexpected and usually undesirable
manner.
worm: A harmful program that resides
in the active memory of the computer
and duplicates itself.
Trojan horse: A seemingly harmless
program in which malicious code is
hidden.
566 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

opening it because it appears to be useful software from a legitimate source,
such as an update for software the user currently has installed on his or her
computer. The program’s harmful payload might be designed to enable the
hacker to destroy hard drives, corrupt files, control the computer remotely,
launch attacks against other computers, steal passwords or spy on users by
recording keystrokes and transmitting them to a server operated by a third
party. A Trojan horse often creates a “backdoor” on a computer that enables
an attacker to gain future access to the system and compromise confidential
or private information.
A Trojan horse can be delivered via an email attachment, downloaded to a
user’s computers when he or she visits a Web site, or contracted via a remov-
able media device, such as a DVD or USB memory stick. Once an unsuspect-
ing user executes the program that hosts the Trojan horse, the malicious
payload is automatically launched as well—with no telltale signs. Common
host programs include screen savers, greeting card systems, and games.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) officials say they have evidence
that harmful Trojan horse malware has been planted in the software that runs
much of the U.S. critical infrastructure, including oil and gas pipelines, power
transmission grids, water distribution and filtration systems, and even nuclear
power generation plants. DHS believes that the malware was planted by the
Russians as early as 2011 as a deterrent to a U.S. cyberattack on Russia. The Tro-
jan horse would allow nonauthorized users to control or shut down key compo-
nents of U.S. infrastructure remotely from their computer or mobile device.12
Another type of Trojan horse is a logic bomb, which executes when it is
triggered by a specific event. For example, logic bombs can be triggered by a
change in a particular file, by typing a specific series of keystrokes, or at a spe-
cific time or date. Malware attacks employing logic bombs compromised some
32,000 Windows, Unix, and Linux systems at half a dozen South Korean organi-
zations, including three major television broadcasters and two large banks. A
component of the attack was “wiper” malware triggered by a logic bomb set to
begin overwriting a computer’s master boot record at a preset time and day.13
Blended Threat
A blended threat is a sophisticated threat that combines the features of a
virus, worm, Trojan horse, and other malicious code into a single payload. A
blended threat attack might use server and Internet vulnerabilities to initiate
and then transmit and spread an attack on an organization’s computing
devices, using multiple modes to transport itself, including email, IRC (Inter-
net Relay Chat), and file-sharing networks. Rather than launching a narrowly
focused attack on specific EXE files, a blended threat might attack multiple
EXE files, HTML files, and registry keys simultaneously.
Spam
Email spam is the use of email systems to send unsolicited email to large num-
bers of people. Most spam is a form of low-cost commercial advertising, some-
times for questionable products such as pornography, phony get-rich-quick
schemes, and worthless stock. Spam is also an extremely inexpensive method
of marketing used by many legitimate organizations. For example, a company
might send email to a broad cross section of potential customers to announce
the release of a new product in an attempt to increase initial sales. However,
spam is also used to deliver harmful worms and other malware.
The cost of creating an email campaign for a product or service is several
hundred to a few thousand dollars, compared to tens of thousands of dollars
for direct-mail campaigns. In addition, email campaigns might take only a
couple of weeks (or less) to develop, compared with three months or more
for direct-mail campaigns, and the turnaround time for feedback averages 48
hours for email as opposed to weeks for direct mail. However, the benefits of
logic bomb: A form of Trojan horse
malware that executes when it is
triggered by a specific event.
blended threat: A sophisticated
threat that combines the features of a
virus, worm, Trojan horse, and other
malicious code into a single payload.
spam: The use of email systems to
send unsolicited email to large numbers
of people.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 567
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

spam to companies may be largely offset by the public’s generally negative
reaction to receiving unsolicited ads.
Spam forces unwanted and often objectionable material into email boxes,
detracts from the ability of recipients to communicate effectively due to full mail-
boxes and relevant emails being hidden among many unsolicited messages, and
costs Internet users and service providers millions of dollars annually. It takes
users time to scan and delete spam email, a cost that can add up if they pay for
Internet connection charges on an hourly basis (such as at an Internet café). It
also costs money for Internet service providers (ISPs) and online services to
transmit spam, which is reflected in the rates charged to all subscribers.
There is an even more sinister side to spam—often it is used to entice
unsuspecting recipients to take actions that will result in malware being
downloaded to their computer. Symantec, a provider of security, storage, and
systems management solutions, began noticing multiple instances of short-
duration, high-volume spam attacks targeting millions of users. The messages
instructed recipients to click on a link to a URL, which, if done, resulted in
the Trojan “Infostealer.Dyranges (Dyre)” being downloaded to their computer.
This Trojan is known to steal financial information.14
The Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and Mar-
keting (CAN-SPAM) Act states that it is legal to spam, provided the messages
meet a few basic requirements—spammers cannot disguise their identity by
using a false return address, the email must include a label specifying that it
is an ad or a solicitation, and the email must include a way for recipients to
indicate that they do not want future mass mailings. Despite CAN-SPAM and
other measures, the percentage of spam in email messages averaged 57 per-
cent in one week in January, 2015, according to Trustwave, an organization
that helps businesses protect data and reduce security risk.15
Many companies—including Google, Microsoft, and Yahoo!—offer free
email services. Spammers often seek to use email accounts from such major,
free, and reputable Web-based email service providers, as their spam can be
sent at no charge and is less likely to be blocked. Spammers can defeat the reg-
istration process of the free email services by launching a coordinated bot attack
that can sign up for thousands of email accounts. These accounts are then used
by the spammers to send thousands of untraceable email messages for free.
A partial solution to this problem is the use of CAPTCHA to ensure that
only humans obtain free accounts. CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Pub-
lic Turing Test to Tell Computers and Humans Apart) software generates
and grades tests that humans can pass and all but the most sophisticated com-
puter programs cannot. For example, humans can read the distorted text in
Figure 13.1, but simple computer programs cannot.
FIGURE 13.1
Example of CAPTCHA
CAPTCHA is used to distinguish
humans from automated bots.
Courtesy of Carnegie Mellon University
Controlling the Assault of
Non-Solicited Pornography
and Marketing (CAN-SPAM) Act:
An act that states that it is legal to
spam, provided the messages meet a
few basic requirements.
CAPTCHA (Completely
Automated Public Turing Test
to Tell Computers and Humans
Apart): Software that generates and
grades tests that humans can pass all
but the most sophisticated computer
programs cannot.
568 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Distributed Denial-of-Service Attacks
A distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack is one in which a malicious
hacker takes over computers via the Internet and causes them to flood a target
site with demands for data and other small tasks. A distributed denial-
of-service attack does not involve infiltration of the targeted system. Instead, it
keeps the target so busy responding to a stream of automated requests that
legitimate users cannot get in—the Internet equivalent of dialing a telephone
number repeatedly so that all other callers hear a busy signal (see Figure 13.2).
The targeted machine essentially holds the line open while waiting for a reply
that never comes; eventually, the requests exhaust all resources of the target.
The software to initiate a denial-of-service attack is simple to use, and
many DDoS tools are readily available at a variety of hacker sites. In a DDoS
attack, a tiny program is downloaded surreptitiously from the attacker’s com-
puter to dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of computers all over the
world. The term botnet is used to describe a large group of such computers,
which are controlled from one or more remote locations by hackers, without
the knowledge or consent of their owners. The collective processing capacity
of some botnets exceeds that of the world’s most powerful supercomputers.
Based on a command by the attacker or at a preset time, the botnet compu-
ters (called zombies) go into action, each sending a simple request for access
to the target site again and again—dozens of times per second. The target
computers become so overwhelmed by requests for service that legitimate
users are unable to get through to the target computer.
Software company Arbor Networks follows DDoS attacks closely and
believes that such attacks are getting more sophisticated and are targeting an
increasing number of organizations. The company estimates that over 200 of
Computer A
Computer B
Computer C
Computer D
Computer E
Request
Response
Request
Response
Request
Response
Request
Response
Request
Response
Server
Waiting for reply from A
Waiting for reply from B
Waiting for reply from C
Waiting for reply from D
Waiting for reply from E
FIGURE 13.2
Distributed denial-of-service attack
A DDoS attack floods a target site with demands for data and other small tasks.
distributed denial-of-service
(DDoS) attack: An attack in which a
malicious hacker takes over computers
via the Internet and causes them to
flood a target site with demands for
data and other small tasks.
botnet: A term used to describe a
large group of computers, that are
controlled from one or more remote
locations by hackers, without the
knowledge or consent of their owners.
zombie: A computer that has been
taken over by a hacker to be used as
part of a botnet.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 569
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

the reported attacks in 2015 generated 100 gigabits per second (Gbps) of traf-
fic, with the largest attack generating traffic at a rate of 500 Gbps—enough to
disrupt the entire network of an Internet service provider.16
Botnets are also frequently used to distribute spam and malicious code.
The Grum botnet was first detected in 2008 and operated until 2012 when it
was brought down by cybercrime fighters. Grum infected several hundred
thousand computers around the world. It generated prodigious amounts of
spam advertising cheap pharmaceutical products. At its peak, Grum is esti-
mated to have been responsible for 35 percent of the world’s spam.17
Rootkit
A rootkit is a set of programs that enables its user to gain administrator-level
access to a computer without the end user’s consent or knowledge. Once
installed, the attacker can gain full control of the system and even obscure the
presence of the rootkit from legitimate system administrators. Attackers can use
the rootkit to execute files, access logs, monitor user activity, and change the
computer’s configuration. Rootkits are one part of a type of blended threat that
consists of a dropper, a loader, and a rootkit. The dropper code gets the rootkit
installation started and can be activated by clicking on a link to a malicious
Web site in an email or opening an infected PDF file. The dropper launches
the loader program and then deletes itself. The loader loads the rootkit into
memory; at that point, the computer has been compromised. Rootkits are
designed so cleverly that it is difficult even to discover if they are installed on a
computer. The fundamental problem with trying to detect a rootkit is that the
operating system currently running cannot be trusted to provide valid test
results. The following are some symptoms of rootkit infections:
●
The computer locks up or fails to respond to input from the keyboard
or mouse.
●
The screen saver changes without any action on the part of the user.
●
The taskbar disappears.
●
Network activities function extremely slowly.
When it is determined that a computer has been infected with a rootkit,
there is little to do but reformat the disk; reinstall the operating system and
all applications; and reconfigure the user’s settings, such as mapped drives.
This can take hours, and the user may be left with a basic working machine,
but all locally held data and settings may be lost.
The “2012 rootkit virus” is a nasty piece of malware that deletes informa-
tion from a computer and makes it impossible to run some applications, such
as Microsoft Word. The longer the rootkit is present, the more damage it
causes. The virus asks users to install what appears to be a legitimate update
to their antivirus software or some other application. By the time the user
sees the prompt to install the software, it is too late, the computer has already
been infected by the rootkit.18
Advanced Persistent Threat
An advanced persistent threat (APT) is a network attack in which an
intruder gains access to a network and stays there—undetected—with the
intention of stealing data over a long period of time. Attackers in an APT
must continuously rewrite code and employ sophisticated evasion techniques
to avoid discovery. APT attacks target organizations with high-value informa-
tion, such as banks and financial institutions, government agencies, and insur-
ance companies with the goal of stealing data rather than disrupting
services.19 An APT attack advances through the following five phases:
1. Reconnaissance—The intruder begins by conducting reconnaissance on
the network to gain useful information about the target (security software
rootkit: A set of programs that
enables its user to gain administrator-
level access to a computer without the
end user’s consent or knowledge.
advanced persistent threat
(APT): A network attack in which an
intruder gains access to a network and
stays there—undetected—with the
intention of stealing data over a long
period of time.
570 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

installed, computing resources connected to the network, number
of users).
2. Incursion—The attacker next gains incursion to the network at a low level
to avoid setting off any alarms or suspicion. Some form of spear-fishing
may be employed in this phase. Once incursion to the target has been
gained, the attacker establishes a back door, or a means of accessing a
computer program that bypasses security mechanisms.
3. Discovery—The intruder now begins a discovery process to gather valid
user credentials (especially administrative ones) and move laterally across
the network, installing more back doors. These back doors enable the
attacker to install bogus utilities for distributing malware that remains
hidden in plain sight.
4. Capture—The attacker is now ready to access unprotected or compro-
mised systems and capture information over a long period of time.
5. Export—Captured data is then exported back to the attacker’s home base
for analysis and/or used to commit fraud and other crimes.20
Although APT attacks are difficult to identify, the theft of data can never
be completely invisible. Detecting anomalies in outbound data is perhaps the
best way for an administrator to discover that the network has been the target
of an APT attack.
The hacker group Carbanak is thought to have stolen over $1 billion from
banks in China, Russia, the Ukraine, and the United States. The group’s modus
operandi includes use of an APT that initially hooks its victims using spear-
fishing emails imitating legitimate banking communications. The gang performs
a reconnaissance phase to gather data about system administrators and uses
this information to navigate through various bank systems, including ATMs,
financial accounts, and money processing services. Once access to these sys-
tems is gained, the hackers steal money by transferring funds to accounts in
China and the United States. They have even programmed ATM machines to
dispense money at specific times for collection by money mules.21
Phishing
Phishing is the act of fraudulently using email to try to get the recipient to
reveal personal data. In a phishing scam, con artists send legitimate-looking
emails urging the recipient to take action to avoid a negative consequence or
to receive a reward. The requested action may involve clicking on a link to a
Web site or opening an email attachment. These emails, such as the one
shown in Figure 13.3, lead consumers to counterfeit Web sites designed to
trick them into divulging personal data or to download malware onto their
computers.
The volume of global phishing attacks is alarming. It is estimated that
about 156 million phishing emails are sent each day, with 16 million of those
successfully evading email filters. Of those, roughly 50 percent (or 8 million)
are opened, and 800,000 recipients per day click on malicious URL links con-
tained in the emails.22
Savvy users often become suspicious and refuse to enter data into the
fake Web sites; however, sometimes just accessing the Web site can trigger
an automatic and unnoticeable download of malicious software to a com-
puter. Indeed, the percentage of malicious URLs in unsolicited emails surged
to an average of 10 per cent in 2014.23 As one might guess, financial institu-
tions such as Bank of America, Citibank, Chase, MasterCard, Visa, and Wells
Fargo are among the Web sites that phishers spoof most frequently.
The University of Connecticut was recently hit by two phishing attacks
over a period on five weeks. The first phishing attack appeared to come from
Support—University Information Technology Services. The subject line was
“email quota,” and the message informed recipients that their email quota
phishing: The act of fraudulently
using email to try to get the recipient to
reveal personal data.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 571
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

had been exceeded and asked them to click on a link to revalidate their email
account.24 The second phishing attack had the subject line “UCONN.EDU
ACCOUNT LOCK WARNING.” The message indicated that the recipient’s
email account was being used to send bulk email by spammers, and it asked
recipients to click on a link to change their password.25 Victims who clicked
on either link were asked to enter their user logon id and password, and if
they did so, they provided the necessary information to compromise their
email account.
Spear-phishing is a variation of phishing in which the phisher sends
fraudulent emails to a certain organization’s employees. It is known as spear-
phishing because the attack is much more precise and narrow, like the tip of
a spear. The phony emails are designed to look like they came from high-
level executives within the organization. Employees are directed to a fake
Web site and then asked to enter personal information, such as name, Social
Security number, and network passwords. Botnets have become the primary
means for distributing phishing scams.
In early 2016, more than three dozen large and small organizations were
victimized by spear-phishing attacks that were designed to obtain data from
employee tax records. Many of these attacks spoofed the email address of the
CEO, CFO, or someone else of authority within the organization, prompting
many employees to comply with the request.26
Smishing and Vishing
Smishing is another variation of phishing that involves the use of texting. In
a smishing scam, people receive a legitimate-looking text message telling
them to call a specific phone number or log on to a Web site. This is often
done under the guise that there is a problem with their bank account or credit
card that requires immediate attention. However, the phone number or Web
site is phony and is used to trick unsuspecting victims into providing personal
information such as a bank account number, personal identification number,
or credit card number, which can then be used to steal money from victims’
FIGURE 13.3
Example of phishing email
Phishing attacks attempt to get the
recipient to reveal personal data.
spear-phishing: A variation of
phishing in which the phisher sends
fraudulent emails to a certain organi-
zation’s employees.
smishing: Another variation of
phishing that involves the use of Short
Message Service (SMS) texting.
572 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

bank accounts, charge purchases on their credit cards, or open new accounts.
In some cases, if victims log on to a Web site, malicious software is down-
loaded onto their smartphones, providing criminals with access to information
stored on the phones. The number of smishing scams typically increases
around the holidays as more people use their smartphones to make online
purchases.
Vishing is similar to smishing except that the victims receive a voice mail
message telling them to call a phone number or access a Web site. One recent
vishing campaign captured the payment card information of an estimated 250
Americans per day. In the attack, users were sent a message that their ATM
card had been deactivated. The users were prompted to call a phone number
to reactivate the card by entering their card number and their PIN—data that,
of course, is recorded and then used by the criminals to withdraw money
from the accounts.27
Financial institutions, credit card companies, and other organizations
whose customers may be targeted by criminals in this manner should be on
the alert for phishing, smishing, and vishing scams. They must be prepared
to act quickly and decisively, without alarming their customers if such a scam
is detected. Recommended action steps for institutions and organizations
include the following:
●
Companies should educate their customers about the dangers of phishing,
smishing, and vishing through letters, recorded messages for those calling
into the company’s call center, and articles on the company’s Web site.
●
Call center service employees should be trained to detect customer
complaints that indicate a scam is being perpetrated. They should attempt
to capture key pieces of information, such as the callback number the
customer was directed to use, details of the phone message or text
message, and the type of information requested.
●
Customers should be notified immediately if a scam occurs. This can be
done via a recorded message for customers phoning the call center,
working with local media to place a news article in papers serving the
area of the attack, placing a banner on the institution’s Web page, and
even displaying posters in bank drive-through and lobby areas.
●
If it is determined that the calls are originating from within the United
States, companies should report the scam to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI).
●
Institutions can also try to notify the telecommunications carrier for the
particular numbers to request that they shut down the phone numbers
victims are requested to call.28
Identity Theft
Identity theft is the theft of personal information, which is then used without
the owner’s permission. Often, stolen personal identification information,
such as a person’s name, Social Security number, or credit card number, is
used to commit fraud or other crimes. Thieves may use a consumer’s credit
card number to charge items to that person’s account, use identification infor-
mation to apply for a new credit card or a loan in a consumer’s name, or use
a consumer’s name and Social Security number to receive government
benefits. Thieves also often sell personal identification information on the
black market.29
A data breach is the unintended release of sensitive data or the access of
sensitive data by unauthorized individuals, often resulting in identify theft.
Table 13.3 lists the five largest U.S. data breaches, all of which involved per-
sonal identification information.30
Some 37 million customer records of Ashley Madison (a Web site for mar-
ried people seeking other married people with whom to have affairs) were
vishing: Similar to smishing except
that the victims receive a voice mail
message telling them to call a phone
number or access a Web site.
identity theft: The theft of personal
information, which is then used without
the owner’s permission, often to
commit fraud or other crimes.
data breach: The unintended
release of sensitive data or the access
of sensitive data by unauthorized
individuals.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 573
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

compromised in an attack in 2015. Names and addresses were posted pub-
licly, resulting in several lawsuits against the company for failing to safeguard
the personal information of the plaintiffs.31
To reduce the potential for online credit card fraud, most e-commerce
Web sites use some form of encryption technology to protect information as
it comes in from the consumer. Some sites also verify the address submitted
online against the one the issuing bank has on file, although the merchant
may inadvertently throw out legitimate orders as a result—for example, a con-
sumer might place a legitimate order but request shipment to a different
address because it is a gift. Another security technique is to ask for a card ver-
ification value (CVV), the three-digit number above the signature panel on the
back of a credit card. This technique makes it impossible to make purchases
with a credit card number stolen online. An additional security option is
transaction-risk scoring software, which keeps track of a customer’s historical
shopping patterns and notes deviations from the norm. For example, say that
you have never been to a casino and your credit card information is being
used at Caesar’s Palace at 2 am. The transaction-risk score would go up dra-
matically, so much so that the transaction would likely be declined.
Cyberespionage
Cyberespionage involves the deployment of malware that secretly steals data
in the computer systems of organizations, such as government agencies, mili-
tary contractors, political organizations, and manufacturing firms. The type of
data most frequently targeted includes data that can provide an unfair com-
petitive advantage to the perpetrator. This data is typically not public knowl-
edge and may even be protected via patent, copyright, or trade secret. High-
value data includes the following:
●
Sales, marketing, and new product development plans, schedules, and
budgets
●
Details about product designs and innovative processes
●
Employee personal information
●
Customer and client data
●
Sensitive information about partners and partner agreements
Tensions have long simmered between the China and the United States
over alleged cyberattacks. United States experts claim cyberespionage has
helped China to accelerate the research and development process and cut
years off the time for that country to acquire new technology in a variety of
industries. Alleged targets have included aluminum and steel producers, a
company that designs nuclear power plants, a solar panel manufacturer, and
an aircraft manufacturer. Meanwhile, China’s Foreign Ministry portrays the
TABLE 13.3 Five largest data breaches in the United States
Organization
Year
Number of Records Compromised
Data Stolen
Heartland Payment
Systems
2008
130 million
Credit and debit card data
Target
2013
110 million
Credit and debit card data
Sony Online Entertain-
ment Systems
2011
102 million
Login credentials, names, addresses,
phone numbers, email addresses
Anthem
2015
80 million
Names, addresses, dates of birth,
Social Security numbers, health
insurance ID numbers
National Archives and
Records Administration
2008
76 million
Names and contact information,
Social Security numbers
cyberespionage: The deployment
of malware that secretly steals data in
the computer systems of organizations,
such as government agencies, military
contractors, political organizations, and
manufacturing firms.
574 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

United States as a hypocrite that engages in cyberespionage by conducting
cybertheft, wiretapping, and surveillance activities against Chinese govern-
ment departments, companies, and universities. After years of discussion and
behind the scenes efforts, President Obama and Chinese President Xi
announced in 2015 that the two nations had agreed to initial norms of cyber-
activities with the two nations pledging each will avoid conducting cybertheft
of intellectual property for commercial gain. It remains to be seen how much
of an impact this agreement will have.32,33
Cyberterrorism
Cyberterrorism is the intimidation of government or civilian population by
using information technology to disable critical national infrastructure (e.g.,
energy, transportation, financial, law enforcement, emergency response) to
achieve political, religious, or ideological goals. Cyberterrorism is an increas-
ing concern for countries and organizations around the globe. Indeed in a
statement released by the White House in early 2015, President Obama said,
“Cyberthreats pose one the gravest national security dangers that the United
States faces.”34
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is a large federal agency
with more than 240,000 employees and a budget of almost $65 billion whose
goal is to provide for a “safer, more secure America, which is resilient against
terrorism and other potential threats.” The agency was formed in 2002 when
22 different federal departments and agencies were combined into a unified,
integrated cabinet agency.35 The agency’s Office of Cybersecurity and Com-
munications resides within the National Protection and Programs Directorate
and is responsible for enhancing the security, resilience, and reliability of U.S.
cyber and communications infrastructure. It works to prevent or minimize dis-
ruptions to critical information infrastructure in order to protect the public,
the economy, and government services.36 The Department of Homeland Secu-
rity Web site (www.dhs.gov) provides a link that enables users to report cyber
incidents. Incident reports go to the US-CERT Incident Reporting System,
which assists analysts at the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team
(US-CERT) (a partnership between the Department of Homeland Security and
the public and private sectors) in providing timely handling of security
incidents as well as in conducting improved analysis of such incidents.37
Established in 2003 to protect the nation’s Internet infrastructure against
cyberattacks, US-CERT serves as a clearinghouse for information on new
viruses, worms, and other computer security topics.
Cyberterrorists try on a daily basis to gain unauthorized access to a num-
ber of important and sensitive sites, such as the computers at the British,
French, Israeli, and U.S. foreign intelligence agencies; North American Aero-
space Defense Command (NORAD); and numerous government ministries
and private companies around the world. In particular, companies in the oil
and gas industry are seen as high-value targets. Some cyberterrorists are inter-
ested in taking control over the flow of oil and natural gas in computer-
controlled refineries and the movement of oil through pipelines. This could
result in devastating consequences—with oil and gas being cut off from freez-
ing populations in the dead of winter or skyrocketing prices at the gasoline
pumps.
In late 2015, Cyberterrorists attacked the two electric utility companies in
western Ukraine, causing a three-hour power outage affecting some 80,000
customers. Not only did the hackers cut the power, they also froze the data
displayed on the screens of plant operators so they could not view the chang-
ing plant conditions; thus, fooling the operators into believing power was still
flowing. To prolong the outage, the attackers also launched a telephone
denial-of-service attack against the utility’s call center to prevent customers
from reporting the outage—the center’s phone system was flooded with
cyberterrorism: The intimidation of
government or civilian population by
using information technology to disable
critical national infrastructure (e.g.,
energy, transportation, financial, law
enforcement, emergency response) to
achieve political, religious, or ideologi-
cal goals.
Department of Homeland
Security (DHS): A large federal
agency with more than 240,000
employees and a budget of almost $65
billion whose goal is to provide for a
“safer, more secure America, which is
resilient against terrorism and other
potential threats.”
U.S. Computer Emergency
Readiness Team (US-CERT): A
partnership between the Department of
Homeland Security and the public and
private sectors; established to provide
timely handling of security incidents as
well as conducting improved analysis of
such incidents.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 575
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
bogus calls to prevent legitimate callers from getting through. Once operators
became aware of the outage, the attackers activated KillDisk malware that
rendered infected servers and systems unusable. The operators’ machines
were completely destroyed by the malware.38
Federal Laws for Prosecuting Computer Attacks
Over the years, several laws have been enacted to help prosecute those
responsible for computer-related crime; these are summarized in Table 13.4.
For example, Section 814 of the USA Patriot Act defines cyberterrorism as any
hacking attempts designed to gain unauthorized access to a protected com-
puter, which, if successful, would cause a person an aggregate loss greater
than $5,000; adversely affect someone’s medical examination, diagnosis, or
treatment; cause a person to be injured; cause a threat to public health or
safety; or cause damage to a governmental computer that is used as a tool to
administer justice, national defense, or national security.39 Those convicted of
cyberterrorism are subject to a prison term of 5 to 20 years. (The $5,000
threshold is quite easy to exceed, and, as a result, many young people who
have been involved in what they consider to be minor computer pranks have
found themselves meeting the criteria to be tried as cyberterrorists.)
Hiring a Black Hat Hacker
You are a member of the Human Resources Department of a software manufac-
turer that has several products and annual revenue in excess of $500 million.
You’re on the phone with the manager of software development who has made a
request to hire a notorious black hat hacker to probe your company’s software
products in an attempt to identify any vulnerabilities. The reasoning is that if any-
one can find a vulnerability in your software, she can. This will give your firm a
head start on developing patches to fix the problems before anyone can exploit
them. You feel uneasy about hiring people with criminal records and connections
to unsavory members of the hacker/cracker community and are unsure if you
should approve the hire.
TABLE 13.4 Federal laws that address computer crime
Federal Law
Subject Area
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (U.S. Code Title 18,
Section 1030)
Addresses fraud and related activities in association with
computers, including the following:
●
Accessing a computer without authorization or
exceeding authorized access
●
Transmitting a program, code, or command that causes
harm to a computer
●
Trafficking of computer passwords
●
Threatening to cause damage to a protected computer
Fraud and Related Activity in Connection with Access
Devices Statute (U.S. Code Title 18, Section 1029)
Covers false claims regarding unauthorized use of credit
cards
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act (U.S. Code
Title 18, Section 1028)
Makes identity theft a federal crime, with penalties of up to
15 years’ of imprisonment and a maximum fine of
$250,000
Stored Wire and Electronic Communications and Transac-
tional Records Access Statutes (U.S. Code Title 18, Chapter
121)
Focuses on unlawful access to stored communications to
obtain, alter, or prevent authorized access to a wire or
electronic communication while it is in electronic storage
USA Patriot Act
Defines cyberterrorism and associated penalties
576 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Review Questions
1.
What is the difference between a black hat hacker and a white hat hacker?
2.
What potential harm could this hacker do to your software products?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Provide three good reasons to hire this individual. Provide three good reasons
not to hire this individual.
2.
How would you respond to this request? Why?
Now that we have discussed various types of computer exploits, the people
who perpetrate these exploits, and the laws under which they can be prose-
cuted, we will discuss how organizations can take steps to implement a trust-
worthy computing environment to defend against such attacks.
Implementing Secure, Private, Reliable Computing
Organizations worldwide are increasingly demanding methods of computing
that deliver secure, private, and reliable computing experiences based on
sound business practices. Software and hardware manufacturers, consultants,
and system designers and developers all understand that this is a priority for
their customers.
A strong security program begins by assessing threats to the organiza-
tion’s computers and network, identifying actions that address the most seri-
ous vulnerabilities, and educating end users about the risks involved and the
actions they must take to prevent a security incident. An organization’s IS
security group must lead the effort to prevent security breaches by imple-
menting security policies and procedures, as well as effectively employing
available hardware and software tools. However, no security system is perfect,
so systems and procedures must be monitored to detect a possible intrusion.
If an intrusion occurs, there must be a clear reaction plan that addresses noti-
fication, evidence protection, activity log maintenance, containment, eradica-
tion, and recovery.
Risk Assessment
Risk assessment is the process of assessing security-related risks to an orga-
nization’s computers and networks from both internal and external threats.
Such threats can prevent an organization from meeting its key business objec-
tives. The goal of risk assessment is to identify which investments of time and
resources will best protect the organization from its most likely and serious
threats. In the context of an IS risk assessment, an asset is any hardware, soft-
ware, information system, network, or database that is used by the organiza-
tion to achieve its business objectives. A loss event is any occurrence that has
a negative impact on an asset, such as a computer contracting a virus or a
Web site undergoing a distributed denial-of-service attack. The steps in a gen-
eral security risk assessment process are as follows:
●
Step 1. Identify the set of IS assets about which the organization is most
concerned. Priority is typically given to those assets that support the
organization’s mission and the meeting of its primary business goals.
●
Step 2. Identify the loss events or the risks or threats that could occur,
such as a distributed denial-of-service attack or insider fraud.
●
Step 3. Assess the frequency of events or the likelihood of each potential
threat; some threats, such as insider fraud, are more likely to occur than
others.
risk assessment: The process of
assessing security-related risks to an
organization’s computers and networks
from both internal and external threats.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 577
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Step 4. Determine the impact of each threat occurring. Would the threat
have a minor impact on the organization, or could it keep the organiza-
tion from carrying out its mission for a lengthy period of time?
●
Step 5. Determine how each threat can be mitigated so that it becomes
much less likely to occur or, if it does occur, has less of an impact on the
organization. For example, installing virus protection on all computers
makes it much less likely for a computer to contract a virus. Due to time
and resource limitations, most organizations choose to focus on just those
threats that have a high (relative to all other threats) probability of occur-
rence and a high (relative to all other threats) impact. In other words, first
address those threats that are likely to occur and that would have a high
negative impact on the organization.
●
Step 6. Assess the feasibility of implementing the mitigation options.
●
Step 7. Perform a cost-benefit analysis to ensure that your efforts will be
cost effective.
No amount of resources can guarantee a perfect security system, so
organizations must balance the risk of a security breach with the cost of
preventing one. The concept of reasonable assurance in connection with
IS security recognizes that managers must use their judgment to ensure
that the cost of control does not exceed the system’s benefits or the risks
involved.
●
Step 8. Make the decision on whether or not to implement a particular
countermeasure. If you decide against implementing a particular counter-
measure, you need to reassess if the threat is truly serious and, if so,
identify a less costly countermeasure.
The general security risk assessment process—and the results of that
process—will vary by organization. Table 13.5 illustrates a risk assessment for
a hypothetical organization.
A completed risk assessment identifies the most dangerous threats to a
company and helps focus security efforts on the areas of highest payoff.
TABLE 13.5 Risk assessment for a hypothetical company
Adverse Event
Business
Objective
Threatened
Threat
(Estimated
Frequency
of Event)
Vulnerability
(Likelihood
of Success of
This Threat)
Estimated
Cost of a
Successful
Attack
Risk ¼
Threat 
Vulnerability
 Estimated
Cost
Relative
Priority
to Be
Fixed
Distributed
denial-of-service
attack
24/7 operation
of a retail Web
site
3 per year
25%
$500,000
$375,000
1
Email attachment
with harmful
worm
Rapid and
reliable
communica-
tions among
employees
and suppliers
1,000 per
year
0.05%
$200,000
$100,000
2
Harmful virus
Employees’
use of per-
sonal produc-
tivity software
2,000 per
year
0.04%
$50,000
$40,000
3
Invoice and
payment fraud
Reliable cash
flow
1 per year
10%
$200,000
$20,000
4
reasonable assurance: The IS
security concept that recognizes that
managers must use their judgment to
ensure that the cost of control does not
exceed the system’s benefits or the
risks involved.
578 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Establishing a Security Policy
A security policy defines an organization’s security requirements, as well as
the controls and sanctions needed to meet those requirements. A good secu-
rity policy delineates responsibilities and the behavior expected of members
of the organization. A security policy outlines what needs to be done but not
how to do it. The details of how to accomplish the goals of the policy are typi-
cally provided in separate documents and procedure guidelines.
The SANS (SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security) Institute’s Web site
(www.sans.org) offers a number of security-related policy templates that can
help an organization to quickly develop effective security policies. The tem-
plates and other security policy information, which can be found at www.
sans.org/security-resources/policies, and provide guidelines for creating vari-
ous policies, including acceptable use policy, email policy, password protec-
tion policy, remote access policy, and software installation policy.
Whenever possible, automated system rules should mirror an organization’s
written policies. Automated system rules can often be put into practice using
the configuration options in a software program. For example, if a written pol-
icy states that passwords must be changed every 30 days, then all systems
should be configured to enforce this policy automatically. However, users will
often attempt to circumvent security policies or simply ignore them altogether.
Many times system administrators believe that the default username and
passwords for specific network devices are generally not known. This is not
true, in fact, there are Web sites that provide the default username and pass-
word combinations for many vendors’ products. Default usernames and pass-
words should always be changed.
A growing area of concern for security experts is the use of wireless
devices to access corporate email; store confidential data; and run critical
applications, such as inventory management and sales force automation.
Mobile devices such as smartphones can be susceptible to viruses and worms.
However, the primary security threat for mobile devices continues to be loss
or theft of the device. Wary companies have begun to include special security
requirements for mobile devices as part of their security policies. In some
cases, users of laptops and mobile devices must use a virtual private network
(a method employing encryption to provide secure access to a remote com-
puter over the Internet) to gain access to their corporate network.
Educating Employees and Contract Workers
Creating and enhancing user awareness of security policies is an ongoing
security priority for companies. Employees and contract workers must be edu-
cated about the importance of security so that they will be motivated to
understand and follow security policies. This can often be accomplished by
discussing recent security incidents that affected the organization. Users must
understand that they are a key part of the security system and that they have
certain responsibilities. For example, users must help protect an organiza-
tion’s information systems and data by doing the following:
●
Guarding their passwords to protect against unauthorized access to their
accounts
●
Prohibiting others from using their passwords
●
Applying strict access controls (file and directory permissions) to protect
data from disclosure or destruction
●
Reporting all unusual activity to the organization’s IT security group
●
Taking care to ensure that portable computing and data storage devices are
protected (hundreds of thousands of laptops are lost or stolen per year)
Table 13.6 provides a simple self-assessment security test that employees
and contractors alike should be asked to complete.
security policy: A statement that
defines an organization’s security
requirements, as well as the controls
and sanctions needed to meet those
requirements.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 579
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Prevention
No organization can ever be completely secure from attack. The key is to
implement a layered security solution to make computer break-ins so difficult
that an attacker eventually gives up. In a layered solution, if an attacker
breaks through one layer of security, another layer must then be overcome.
These layers of protective measures are explained in more detail in the fol-
lowing sections.
Implementing a Corporate Firewall
Installation of a corporate firewall is the most common security precaution
taken by businesses. A firewall is a system of software, hardware, or a combi-
nation of both that stands guard between an organization’s internal network
and the Internet and limits network access based on the organization’s access
policy.
Any Internet traffic that is not explicitly permitted into the internal net-
work is denied entry through a firewall. Similarly, most firewalls can be con-
figured so that internal network users can be blocked from gaining access to
certain Web sites based on content such as sex and violence. Most firewalls
can also be configured to block instant messaging, access to newsgroups, and
other Internet activities.
Software vendors Agnitum, Check Point, Comodo, Kaspersky, and Total
Defense provide some of the top-rated firewall software used to protect per-
sonal computers. Their software provide antivirus, firewall, antispam, parental
control, and phishing protection capabilities and sell for $30 to $80 per single
user license.
A next-generation firewall (NGFW) is a hardware- or software-based
network security system that is able to detect and block sophisticated attacks
TABLE 13.6 Self-assessment security test
Security Assessment Question
Do you have the most current version of your operating system installed?
Do you have the most current version of firewall, antivirus, and malware software installed?
Do you install updates to all your software when you receive notice that a new update is available?
Do you use different, strong passwords for each of your accounts and applications—a minimum of 10 characters with a
mix of capital and lower case letters, numbers, and special characters?
Are you familiar with and do you follow your organization’s policies in regard to accessing corporate Web sites and
applications from your home or remote locations (typically involves use of VPN)?
Have you set the encryption method to WPA2 and changed the default name and password on your home wireless
router?
When using a free, public wireless network, do you avoid checking your email or accessing Web sites requiring a user-
name and password?
Do you refrain from clicking on a URL in an email from someone you do not know?
Do you back up critical files to a separate device at least once a week?
Are you familiar with and do you follow your organization’s policies in regard to storing personal or confidential data on
your device?
Does your device have a security passcode that must be entered before it accepts further input?
Have you installed Locate My Device or similar software in case your device is lost or stolen?
Do you make sure not to leave your device unattended in a public place where it can be easily stolen?
Have you reviewed and do you understand the privacy settings that control who can see or read what you do on Face-
book and other social media sites?
firewall: A system of software,
hardware, or a combination of both that
stands guard between an organiza-
tion’s internal network and the Internet
and limits network access based on the
organization’s access policy.
next-generation firewall
(NGFW): A hardware- or software-
based network security system that is
able to detect and block sophisticated
attacks by filtering network traffic
dependent on the packet contents.
580 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

by filtering network traffic dependent on the packet contents. Compared to
first- and second-generation firewalls, a NGFW goes deeper to inspect the
payload of packets and match sequences of bytes for harmful activities, such
as known vulnerabilities, exploit attacks, viruses, and malware.
Utilizing a Security Dashboard
Many organizations use security dashboard software to provide a comprehen-
sive display of all vital data related to an organization’s security defenses,
including threats, exposures, policy compliance, and incident alerts. The pur-
pose of a security dashboard is to reduce the effort required to monitor and
identify threats in time to take action. Data that appears in a security dash-
board can come from a variety of sources, including security audits, firewalls,
applications, servers, and other hardware and software devices. Figure 13.4 is
a screenshot from ISACA showing an example of a security dashboard.
Algoma Central Corporation is a leading Canadian shipping company,
owning and operating the largest Canadian flag fleet of dry-bulk carriers and
product tankers operating on the Great Lakes—St. Lawrence Seaway system.
The firm recently implemented a security dashboard from Avaap, Inc., to
improve access to security information and alleviate the complexity of manag-
ing security data for its shipping operations.40
Installing Antivirus Software on Personal Computers
Antivirus software should be installed on each user’s personal computer to scan
a computer’s memory and disk drives regularly for viruses. Antivirus software
scans for a specific sequence of bytes, known as a virus signature, that indicates
the presence of a specific virus. If it finds a virus, the antivirus software informs
the user, and it may clean, delete, or quarantine any files, directories, or disks
affected by the malicious code. Good antivirus software checks vital system files
when the system is booted up, monitors the system continuously for virus-like
activity, scans disks, scans memory when a program is run, checks programs
when they are downloaded, and scans email attachments before they are opened.
Two of the most widely used antivirus software products are Norton AntiVirus
from Symantec and Personal Firewall from McAfee.
No
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Number of violations of segregation of duties
Number of users who do not comply with password standards
Percentage of suspected and actual violations
Pecentage of critical assets covered by internal/external penetration tests
Number of computers with patches behind agreed-upon SLA
Number of outdated policies, procedures, standards and guidelines
Number of internal audits scheduled
Number of penetration tests not performed as required for the quarter
Percentage of agents/employees trained on information security policies and
procedures as part of induction
Number of corrective/preventive actions taken based on analysis of logs
Percentage of changes carried out as per change control procedure
0
Max. 2
Max. 5
Min. 95
Max. 2
Max. 4
Min. 2
Max. 1
100
Min. 5
100
3
7
7
98
1
5
2
0
90
10
90
Note: Target and actual amounts are hypothetical figures for the purpose of this example.
 
Categorization into green, amber and red is done on a predefined basis.
Control/KPI
Operation-level Scorecard: KPI
Target
Actual
Status
Remarks
FIGURE 13.4
Security dashboard
A security dashboard provides a comprehensive display of all vital data related to an organization’s security defenses.
Source: ISACA
antivirus software: Software that
scans a computer’s memory, disk
drives, and USB ports regularly for
viruses.
virus signature: A sequence of
bytes that indicates the presence of a
specific virus.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 581
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

According to US-CERT, most of the virus and worm attacks use already
known malware programs. Thus, it is crucial that antivirus software be contin-
ually updated with the latest virus signatures. In most corporations, the net-
work administrator is responsible for monitoring network security Web sites
frequently and downloading updated antivirus software as needed. Many anti-
virus vendors recommend—and provide for—automatic and frequent updates.
Unfortunately, antivirus software is not able to identify and block all viruses.
Implementing Safeguards against Attacks by Malicious Insiders
User accounts that remain active after employees leave a company are another
potential security risk. To reduce the threat of attack by malicious insiders, IS
staff must promptly delete the computer accounts, login IDs, and passwords
of departing employees and contractors.
Organizations also need to define employee roles carefully and separate
key responsibilities properly, so that a single person is not responsible for
accomplishing a task that has high security implications. For example, it
would not make sense to allow an employee to initiate as well as approve
purchase orders. That would allow an employee to input large invoices on
behalf of a dishonest vendor, approve the invoices for payment, and then dis-
appear from the company to split the money with that vendor. In addition to
separating duties, many organizations frequently rotate people in sensitive
positions to prevent potential insider crimes.
Another important safeguard is to create roles and user accounts so that
users have the authority to perform their responsibilities and nothing more.
For example, members of the Finance Department should have different
authorizations from members of the Human Resources Department. An
accountant should not be able to review the pay and attendance records of
an employee, and a member of the Human Resources Department should not
know how much was spent to modernize a piece of equipment. Even within
one department, not all members should be given the same capabilities.
Within the Finance Department, for example, some users may be able to
approve invoices for payment, but others may only be able to enter them. An
effective system administrator will identify the similarities among users and
create profiles associated with these groups.
Addressing the Most Critical Internet Security Threats
The overwhelming majority of successful computer attacks take advantage of
well-known vulnerabilities. Computer attackers know that many organizations
are slow to fix problems, which makes scanning the Internet for vulnerable
systems an effective attack strategy. The rampant and destructive spread of
worms, such as Blaster, Slammer, and Code Red, was made possible by the
exploitation of known but unpatched vulnerabilities. US-CERT regularly
updates a summary of the most frequent, high-impact vulnerabilities being
reported to them. You can read this summary at www.us-cert.gov/current.
The actions required to address these issues include installing a known patch
to the software and keeping applications and operating systems up-to-date.
Those responsible for computer security must make it a priority to prevent
attacks using these vulnerabilities.
Conducting Periodic IT Security Audits
Another important prevention tool is a security audit that evaluates whether
an organization has a well-considered security policy in place and if it is
being followed. For example, if a policy says that all users must change their
passwords every 30 days, the audit must check how well that policy is being
implemented. The audit should also review who has access to particular sys-
tems and data and what level of authority each user has. It is not unusual for
an audit to reveal that too many people have access to critical data and that
security audit: A careful and thor-
ough analysis that evaluates whether
an organization has a well-considered
security policy in place and if it is being
followed.
582 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

many people have capabilities beyond those needed to perform their jobs.
One result of a good audit is a list of items that needs to be addressed in
order to ensure that the security policy is being met.
A thorough security audit should also test system safeguards to ensure
that they are operating as intended. Such tests might include trying the default
system passwords that are active when software is first received from the ven-
dor. The goal of such a test is to ensure that all such known passwords have
been changed.
Some organizations will also perform a penetration test of their defenses.
This entails assigning individuals to try to break through the measures and
identify vulnerabilities that still need to be addressed. The individuals used
for this test are knowledgeable and are likely to take unique approaches in
testing the security measures.
Detection
Even
when
preventive
measures
are
implemented,
no
organization
is
completely secure from a determined attack. Thus, organizations should
implement detection systems to catch intruders in the act. Organizations often
employ an intrusion detection system to minimize the impact of intruders.
An intrusion detection system (IDS) is software and/or hardware that
monitors system and network resources and activities and notifies network
security personnel when it detects network traffic that attempts to circumvent
the
security
measures
of
a
networked
computer
environment
(see
Figure 13.5). Such activities usually signal an attempt to breach the integrity
of the system or to limit the availability of network resources.
Knowledge-based approaches and behavior-based approaches are two
fundamentally different approaches to intrusion detection. Knowledge-based
intrusion detection systems contain information about specific attacks and sys-
tem vulnerabilities and watch for attempts to exploit these vulnerabilities,
such as repeated failed login attempts or recurring attempts to download a
program to a server. When such an attempt is detected, an alarm is triggered.
Messages from IDS routed 
to network security team
Organization’s intrusion 
detection system
Organization’s network
router sends network traffic
to both IDS and firewall
Internet traffic
Organization’s  internal network
Organization’s
firewall
IDS warns firewall of suspicious traffic. Network
security team and logic in firewall decide what action 
to take, such as block all traffic from the source IP 
address of the suspicious traffic.
Internet
Internet
FIGURE 13.5
Intrusion detection system
An IDS notifies network security personnel when it detects network traffic that attempts to circumvent
the security measures of a networked computer environment.
Daniel Korzeniewski/Shutterstock.com
intrusion detection system
(IDS): Software and/or hardware that
monitors system and network
resources and activities and notifies
network security personnel when it
detects network traffic that attempts to
circumvent the security measures of a
networked computer environment.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 583
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A behavior-based intrusion detection system models normal behavior of a
system and its users from reference information collected by various means.
The intrusion detection system compares current activity to this model and
generates an alarm if it finds a deviation. Examples include unusual traffic at
odd hours or a user in the Human Resources Department who accesses an
accounting program that she has never before used.
Response
An organization should be prepared for the worst—a successful attack that
defeats all or some of a system’s defenses and damages data and information
systems. A response plan should be developed well in advance of any inci-
dent and be approved by both the organization’s legal department and senior
management. A well-developed response plan helps keep an incident under
technical and emotional control.
In a security incident, the primary goal must be to regain control and limit
damage, not to attempt to monitor or catch an intruder. Sometimes system
administrators take the discovery of an intruder as a personal challenge
and lose valuable time that should be used to restore data and information
systems to normal.
Incident Notification
A key element of any response plan is to define who to notify and who not to
notify in the event of a computer security incident. Questions to cover include
the following: Within the company, who needs to be notified, and what infor-
mation does each person need to have? Under what conditions should the
company contact major customers and suppliers? How does the company
inform them of a disruption in business without unnecessarily alarming them?
When should local authorities or the FBI be contacted?
Most security experts recommend against giving out specific information
about a compromise in public forums, such as news reports, conferences, pro-
fessional meetings, and online discussion groups. All parties working on the
problem must be kept informed and up-to-date without using systems con-
nected to the compromised system. The intruder may be monitoring these
systems and emails to learn what is known about the security breach.
A critical ethical decision that must be made is what to tell customers and
others whose personal data may have been compromised by a computer inci-
dent. Many organizations are tempted to conceal such information for fear of
bad publicity and loss of customers. Because such inaction is perceived by
many to be unethical and harmful, a number of state and federal laws have
been passed to force organizations to reveal when customer data has been
breached.
Protection of Evidence and Activity Logs
An organization should document all details of a security incident as it works
to resolve the incident. Documentation captures valuable evidence for a future
prosecution and provides data to help during the incident eradication and
follow-up phases. It is especially important to capture all system events, the
specific actions taken (what, when, and who), and all external conversations
(what, when, and who) in a logbook. Because this may become court evi-
dence, an organization should establish a set of document-handling proce-
dures using the legal department as a resource.
Incident Containment
Often, it is necessary to act quickly to contain an attack and to keep a bad sit-
uation from becoming even worse. The incident response plan should clearly
define the process for deciding if an attack is dangerous enough to warrant
584 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

shutting down or disconnecting critical systems from the network. How such
decisions are made, how fast they are made, and who makes them are all
elements of an effective response plan.
Eradication
Before the IT security group begins the eradication effort, it must collect and
log all possible criminal evidence from the system and then verify that all nec-
essary backups are current, complete, and free of any malware. Creating a
forensic disk image of each compromised system on write-only media both
for later study and as evidence can be very useful. After virus eradication, a
new backup must be created. Throughout this process, a log should be kept
of all actions taken. This will prove helpful during the incident follow-up
phase and ensure that the problem does not recur. It is imperative to back up
critical applications and data regularly. Many organizations, however, have
implemented inadequate backup processes and found that they could not
fully restore original data after a security incident. All backups should be cre-
ated with enough frequency to enable a full and quick restoration of data if
an attack destroys the original, and this process must be tested to confirm
that it works.
Incident Follow-Up
Of course, an essential part of follow-up is to determine how the organiza-
tion’s security was compromised so that it does not happen again. Often the
fix is as simple as getting a software patch from a product vendor. However,
it is important to look deeper than the immediate fix to discover why the inci-
dent occurred. If a simple software fix could have prevented the incident,
then why wasn’t the fix installed before the incident occurred?
A review should be conducted after an incident to determine exactly what
happened and to evaluate how the organization responded. One approach is
to write a formal incident report that includes a detailed chronology of events
and the impact of the incident. This report should identify any mistakes so
that they are not repeated in the future. The experience from this incident
should be used to update and revise the security incident response plan. The
key elements of a formal incident report should include the following:
●
IP address and name of host computer(s) involved
●
The data and time when the incident was discovered
●
The length of the incident
●
How the incident was discovered
●
The method used to gain access to the host computer
●
A detailed discussion of vulnerabilities that were exploited
●
A determination of whether or not the host was compromised as a result
of the attack
●
The nature of the data stored on the computer (customer, employee,
financial, etc.)
●
A determination of whether the accessed data is considered personal,
private, or confidential
●
The number of hours the system was down
●
The overall impact on the business
●
An estimate of total monetary damage from the incident
●
A detailed chronology of all events associated with the incident
Creating a detailed chronology of all events will also document the inci-
dent for possible later prosecution. To this end, it is critical to develop an esti-
mate of the monetary damage. Potential costs include loss of revenue, loss in
productivity, and the salaries of people working to address the incident,
along with the cost to replace data, software, and hardware.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 585
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Another important issue is the amount of effort that should be put into
capturing the perpetrator. If a Web site was simply defaced, it is easy to fix
or restore the site’s HTML (Hypertext Markup Language—the code that
describes to your browser how a Web page should look). However, what if
the intruders inflicted more serious damage, such as erasing proprietary pro-
gram source code or the contents of key corporate databases? What if they
stole company trade secrets? Expert crackers can conceal their identity, and
tracking them down can take a long time as well as a tremendous amount of
corporate resources.
The potential for negative publicity must also be considered. Discussing
security attacks through public trials and the associated publicity has not only
enormous potential costs in public relations but real monetary costs as well.
For example, a bank or a brokerage firm might lose customers who learn of
an attack and think their money or records aren’t secure. Even if a company
decides that the negative publicity risk is worth it and goes after the perpetra-
tor, documents containing proprietary information that must be provided to
the court could cause even greater security threats in the future. On the other
hand, an organization must consider whether it has an ethical or a legal duty
to inform customers or clients of a cyberattack that may have put their per-
sonal data or financial resources at risk.
Using a Managed Security Service Provider (MSSP)
Keeping up with computer criminals—and with new laws and regulations—
can be daunting for organizations. Criminal hackers are constantly poking
and prodding, trying to breach the security defenses of organizations. Also,
laws such as HIPAA, Sarbanes-Oxley, and the USA Patriot Act require busi-
nesses to prove that they are securing their data. For most small and midsized
organizations, the level of in-house network security expertise needed to pro-
tect their business operations can be too costly to acquire and maintain. As a
result, many organizations outsource their network security operations to a
managed security service provider (MSSP), which is a company that
monitors, manages, and maintains computer and network security for other
organizations. MSSPs include such companies as AT&T, Computer Sciences
Corporation,
Dell
SecureWorks,
IBM,
Symantec,
and
Verizon.
MSSPs
provide a valuable service for IS departments drowning in reams of alerts
and false alarms coming from virtual private networks (VPNs); antivirus,
firewall, and intrusion detection systems; and other security-monitoring sys-
tems. In addition, some MSSPs provide vulnerability scanning and Web
blocking and filtering capabilities.
Computer Forensics
Computer forensics is a discipline that combines elements of law and com-
puter science to identify, collect, examine, and preserve data from computer
systems, networks, and storage devices in a manner that preserves the integ-
rity of the data gathered so that it is admissible as evidence in a court of law.
A computer forensics investigation may be opened in response to a criminal
investigation or civil litigation. It may also be launched for a variety of other
reasons, for example, to retrace steps taken when data has been lost, assess
damage following a computer incident, investigate the unauthorized disclo-
sure of personal or corporate confidential data, or to confirm or evaluate the
impact of industrial espionage.
Computer forensics investigators work as a team to investigate an incident
and conduct the forensic analysis by using various methodologies and tools to
ensure the computer network system is secure in an organization. For exam-
ple, accounting, tax, and advisory company Grant Thornton International has
a number of IS labs around the world that employ numerous forensic experts
managed security service
provider (MSSP): A company that
monitors, manages, and maintains
computer and network security for
other organizations.
computer forensics: A discipline
that combines elements of law and
computer science to identify, collect,
examine, and preserve data from
computer systems, networks, and
storage devices in a manner that
preserves the integrity of the data
gathered so that it is admissible as
evidence in a court of law.
586 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

who examine digital evidence for use in legal cases. Grant Thornton employs
forensic software called Summation (a Web-based legal document, electronic
data, and transcript review platform that supports litigation teams) and Foren-
sic Toolkit (used to scan a hard drive to find a variety of information, includ-
ing deleted emails and text strings, to crack encryption). The software from
AccessData provides a combination of mobile forensics, computer forensics,
and functions for encoding and reviewing multilingual documents.41
Proper handling of a computer forensics investigation is the key to fight-
ing computer crime successfully in a court of law. In addition, extensive train-
ing and certification increases the stature of a computer forensics investigator
in a court of law. Numerous certifications relate to computer forensics, includ-
ing the CCE (Certified Computer Examiner), CISSP (Certified Information
Systems Security Professional), CSFA (CyberSecurity Forensic Analyst), and
GCFA (Global Information Assurance Certification Certified Forensics Analyst).
The EnCE Certified Examiner program certifies professionals who have mas-
tered computer investigation methods as well as the use of Guidance Soft-
ware’s EnCase computer forensic software. Numerous universities (both
online and traditional) offer degrees specializing in computer forensics. Such
degree programs should include training in accounting, particularly auditing,
as this is very useful in the investigation of cases involving fraud.
Table 13.7 provides a list of questions that should be asked when an
organization is evaluating its readiness for a security incident.
TABLE 13.7 Questions to be considered when evaluating an organization’s readiness for a security
incident
Question
Has a risk assessment been performed to identify investments in time and resources that can protect the organization
from its most likely and most serious threats?
Have senior management and employees involved in implementing security measures been educated about the concept
of reasonable assurance?
Has a security policy been formulated and broadly shared throughout the organization?
Have automated systems policies been implemented that mirror written policies?
Does the security policy address the following:
●
Email with executable file attachments?
●
Wireless networks and devices?
●
Use of smartphones deployed as part of corporate rollouts as well as those purchased by end users?
Is there an effective security education program for employees and contract workers?
Has a layered security solution been implemented to prevent break-ins?
Has a firewall been installed?
Is antivirus software installed on all personal computers?
Is the antivirus software frequently updated?
Have precautions been taken to limit the impact of malicious insiders?
Are the accounts, passwords, and login IDs of former employees promptly deleted?
Are employee responsibilities adequately defined and separated?
Are individual roles defined so that users have authority to perform their responsibilities and nothing more?
Is it a requirement to review at least quarterly the most critical Internet security threats and implement safeguards
against them?
Has it been verified that backup processes for critical software and databases work correctly?
Has an intrusion detection system been implemented to catch intruders in the act—both in the network and on critical
computers on the network?
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 587
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
Spear-Phishing Attack!
It appears that someone is using your firm’s corporate directory—which includes
job titles and email addresses—to contact senior managers and directors via
email. The email requests that the recipient click on a URL, which leads to a Web
site that looks as if it were designed by your Human Resources organization.
Once at this phony Web site, the employees are asked to confirm the bank and
account number to be used for electronic deposit of their annual bonus check.
Review Questions
1.
How is this attack different from an ordinary phishing attack?
2.
Craft a communications that might be sent out to employees to thwart this
attack.
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Should this communications come from Human Resources, the corporate
information systems security organization, or some other entity?
2.
What actions can be taken to lessen the potential impact of future such
attacks?
TABLE 13.7 Questions to be considered when evaluating an organization’s readiness for a security
incident (Continued)
Question
Are periodic IT security audits conducted?
Has a comprehensive incident response plan been developed?
Has the security plan been reviewed and approved by legal and senior management?
Does the plan address all of the following areas:
●
Incident notification?
●
Protection of evidence and activity logs?
●
Incident containment?
●
Eradication?
●
Incident follow-up?
Summary
Principle:
Computer crime is a serious and rapidly growing area of concern requir-
ing management attention.
The number of cybercrimes being committed against individuals, organiza-
tions, and governments continues to increase, and the destructive impact of
these crimes is also intensifying.
The security of data and information systems used in business is of the
utmost importance, but it must be balanced against other business needs.
Increasing computing complexity, higher computer user expectations,
expanding and changing systems, an increase in the prevalence of bring your
own device (BYOD) policies, a growing reliance on software with known vul-
nerabilities, and the increasing sophistication of those who would do harm
have caused a dramatic increase in the number, variety, and severity of security
incidents.
588 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Many different types of people launch computer attacks, including the
hacker, cracker, malicious insider, industrial spy, cybercriminal, hacktivist,
and cyberterrorist. Each type has a different motivation.
Ransomware, viruses, worms, Trojan horses, logic bombs, blended
threats, spam, distributed denial-of-service attacks, rootkits, advanced persis-
tent threats, phishing, spear-phishing, smishing, vishing, identity theft,
cyberespionage, and cyberterrorism are among the most common computer
exploits.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has the responsibility to
provide for a “safer, more secure America, which is resilient against terrorism
and other potential threats.” The agency’s Office of Cybersecurity and Com-
munications is responsible for enhancing the security, resilience, and reliabil-
ity of U.S. cyber and communications infrastructure.
The U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) is a partner-
ship between DHS and the public and private sectors that was established to
protect the nation’s Internet infrastructure against cyberattacks by serving as
a clearinghouse for information on new viruses, worms, and other computer
security topics.
Over the years, several laws have been enacted to prosecute those
responsible for computer-related crime, including the Computer Fraud and
Abuse Act, the Fraud and Related Activity in Connection with Access Devices
Statute, the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act, the Stored Wire
and Electronic Communications and Transactional Records Access Statutes,
and the USA Patriot Act.
Principle:
Organizations must take strong measures to ensure secure, private, and
reliable computing experiences for their employees, customers, and busi-
ness partners.
A strong security program begins by assessing threats to the organiza-
tion’s computers and network, identifying actions that address the most seri-
ous vulnerabilities, and educating users about the risks involved and the
actions they must take to prevent a security incident.
The IS security group must lead the effort to implement security policies
and procedures, as well as effectively employing available hardware and soft-
ware tools to help prevent security breaches.
Risk assessment is the process of assessing security-related risks to an
organization’s computers and networks from both internal and external
threats.
The concept of reasonable assurance in connection with IS security recog-
nizes that managers must use their judgment to ensure that the cost of control
does not exceed the system’s benefits or the risks involved.
No organization can ever be completely secure from attack. The key to
prevention of a computer security incident is to implement a layered security
solution to make computer break-ins so difficult that an attacker eventually
gives up. Protective measures include implementing a corporate firewall,
installing an intrusion detection system, utilizing a security dashboard, instal-
ling antivirus software on personal computers, implementing safeguards
against attacks by malicious insiders, addressing the most critical security
threats, and conducting periodic IT security audits.
No security system is perfect, so systems and procedures must be moni-
tored to detect a possible intrusion.
If an intrusion occurs, there must be a clear reaction plan that addresses
notification, evidence protection, activity log maintenance, containment, eradi-
cation, and follow-up.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 589
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Special measures must be taken to implement safeguards against attacks by
malicious insiders and to defend against cyberterrorism.
Organizations must implement fixes against well-known vulnerabilities and
conduct periodic IT security audits.
Many organizations outsource their network security operations to a man-
aged security service provider (MSSP), which is a company that monitors, man-
ages, and maintains computer and network security for other organizations.
Organizations must be knowledgeable of and have access to trained
experts in computer forensics to identify, collect, examine, and preserve data
from computer systems, networks, and storage devices in a manner that pre-
serves the integrity of the data gathered so that it is admissible as evidence in a
court of law.
Key Terms
advanced persistent threat (APT)
antivirus software
blended threat
botnet
bring your own device (BYOD)
CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing Test
to Tell Computers and Humans Apart)
computer forensics
Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography
and Marketing (CAN-SPAM) Act
cyberespionage
cyberterrorism
data breach
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack
exploit
firewall
identity theft
intrusion detection system (IDS)
logic bomb
managed security service provider (MSSP)
next-generation firewall (NGFW)
phishing
ransomware
reasonable assurance
risk assessment
rootkit
security audit
security policy
smishing
spam
spear-phishing
Trojan horse
U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team
(US-CERT)
virus
virus signature
vishing
worm
zero-day attack
zombie
Chapter 13: Self-Assessment Test
Computer crime is a serious and rapidly growing
area of concern requiring management attention.
1. The number, variety, and severity of
computer security incidents is slowly on
the decline. True or False?
2.
is a business policy that
permits, and in some cases encourages, employ-
ees to use their own mobile devices to access
company computing resources and applications.
3. A(n)
is an attack on an information
system that takes advantage of a particular system
vulnerability.
a. virus
b. worm
c. Trojan horse
d. exploit
4. U.S. organizations increasingly rely on commer-
cial software with known vulnerabilities. True or
False?
590 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

5. A
is someone who attacks a com-
puter system or network for financial gain.
a. hacker
b. cracker
c. malicious insider
d. cybercriminal
6. A
is a form of malware that fools its
victims into thinking that it is useful software
from a legitimate source.
a. virus
b. worm
c. Trojan horse
d. ransomware
7. A
is a set of programs that enables
a user to gain administrative access to the com-
puter without the end user’s consent or
knowledge.
a. zombie
b. rootkit
c. botnet
d. blended threat
8.
is an exploit in which victims
receive a voice mail message telling them to call a
phone number or access a Web site.
9.
involves the deployment of mal-
ware that secretly steals data in the computer
systems of organizations.
a. Cyberterrorism
b. Cyberespionage
c. Data breach
d. Smishing
Organizations must take strong measures to ensure
secure, private, and reliable computing experiences
for
their
employees,
customers,
and
business
partners.
10.
is the process of assessing security-
related risks to an organization’s computers and
networks from both internal and external threats.
11. The concept of
recognizes that
managers must use their judgment to ensure that
the cost of control does not exceed the system’s
benefits or the risks involved.
a. risk assessment
b. reasonable assurance
c. security policy
d. security versus privacy
12. A(n)
stands guard between an
organization’s internal network and the Internet
and it limits network access based on the organi-
zation’s access policy.
a. router
b. worm hole
c. intrusion detection system
d. firewall
13. A(n)
instruction detection system
contains information about specific attacks and
system vulnerabilities and watches for attempts to
exploit these vulnerabilities.
14.
is a discipline that combines ele-
ments of law and computer science to identify,
collect, examine, and preserve data from com-
puter system, networks, and storage devices in a
manner that preserves the integrity of data gath-
ered so that it is admissible as evidence in a court
of law.
Chapter 13: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. False
2. bring your own device (BYOD)
3. d
4. True
5. d
6. c
7. b
8. Vishing
9. b
10. Risk assessment
11. b
12. d
13. knowledge-based
14. Computer forensics
Review Questions
1. Provide six reasons why computer incidents are
so prevalent.
2. What is BYOD? What security issues does it
raise?
3. Discuss the importance of installing computer
patches and fixes.
4. What is a zero-day attack?
5. What is the difference between a black hat hacker
and a cracker?
6. What is the difference between a virus, worm, a
Trojan horse, and a blended threat?
7. What is the CAN-SPAM Act? What is CAPTCHA?
8. Explain how a distributed denial-of-service attack
works.
9. Is a rootkit a blended threat? Explain.
10. What is the difference between phishing, smish-
ing, and vishing?
11. What is the role of the US-CERT organization?
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 591
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

12. Outline the steps necessary to conduct an
effective computer security risk assessment.
13. What is meant by reasonable assurance? Give a
hypothetical example of a security measure that
fails the reasonable assurance test.
14. What is the intent of a security policy? What are
some of the earmarks of a good security policy?
15. What is meant by a layered security solution?
Identify several layers of protective measures
commonly employed in many organizations.
16. What is a managed security service provider
(MSSP)? What sort of services does such an
organization provide?
Discussion Questions
1. A successful distributed denial-of-service attack
requires the downloading of software that turns
unprotected computers into zombies under the
control of the malicious hacker. Should the owners
of the zombie computers be fined or otherwise
punished as a means of encouraging people to
better safeguard their computers? Why or why not?
2. Document a real-world example of a legitimate
organization using spam in an effective and
nonintrusive manner to promote a product or
service.
3. Some IT security personnel believe that their
organizations should employ former computer
criminals who now claim to be white hat hackers
to identify weaknesses in their organizations’
security defenses. Do you agree? Why or why not?
4. You are a computer security trainer for your
firm’s 200 employees and contract workers. What
are the key topics you would cover in your initial
one-hour basic training program on security for
non-IT personnel? What sort of additional
security-related training might be appropriate
once people have the basics covered?
5. Hundreds of a bank’s customers have called the
customer service call center to complain that they
are receiving text messages on their phone telling
them to log on to a Web site and enter personal
information to resolve an issue with their
account. What action should the bank take?
6. How would you distinguish between a hacktivist
and a cyberterrorist? Should the use of hacktivists
by a country against enemy organizations be
considered an act of war? Why or why not? How
about the use of cyberterrorists?
7. What is the difference between a risk assessment
and an IT security audit?
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Identify three commonly used antivirus software
packages. Develop a spreadsheet that compares
the cost and fundamental features of each pack-
age. Which antivirus solution would you choose
and why?
2. Draft a legitimate-looking phishing email that
would strongly tempt its recipients to click
on a link to a Web site or open an email
attachment.
3. Use the data breach statistics found at http://www
.idtheftcenter.org/images/breach/2005to2015mul
tiyear.pdf to develop a bar chart showing the
number of data breaches year-by-year by entity
(business, educational, government/ military,
medical/health, and banking/credit/financial)
from 2005 to 2015. In which entity is the number
of data breaches increasing fastest? What other
conclusions can you draw from your graph?
Team Activities
1. You and your team have been hired to assess the
computer security of a small retailer. Where
would you begin your assessment? What would
you look for?
2. Your team is assigned responsibility to identify an
appropriate MSSP provider for a small, rural
hospital. What criteria will you use to select an
appropriate provider? Do research online to
identify three MSSP providers. Use the criteria to
rate each of the three and choose the one that
would be best for the hospital.
3. Imagine that your team must obtain the email
logon and password to as many email accounts as
possible. Brainstorm ideas that might enable you
to obtain these credentials.
592 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Web Exercises
1. Do research on the effectiveness of the Control-
ling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography
and Marketing (CAN-SPAM) Act. Would you
recommend any changes to this act? If so, what
changes would you like to see implemented and
why?
2. Do research to gain an understanding of why
policies regarding BYOD are necessary for
organizations that must abide by HIPAA
regulations. Do you believe that employees of a
large healthcare provider should be able to bring
their own device to work? Why or why not?
3. Do research to find out more about DEF CON,
one of the world’s largest hacker conventions,
held annually in Las Vegas, Nevada. Who attends
this conference, and what sort of topics are
covered? Is there value in IS security professionals
attending this conference? Why or why not?
Career Exercises
1. Do research to determine typical starting salaries
for someone with a four-year degree in computer
forensics. What is the future demand for indivi-
duals trained in computer forensics? Do further
research to find three universities that offer
four-year degrees specializing in computer foren-
sics. Compare the three programs, and choose the
best one. Why did you choose this university?
2. You are one of the top students in your univer-
sity’s computer science program of 100 students,
and you have agreed to meet with a recruiter
from the Department of Homeland Security. Over
dinner, he talks to you about the increasing threat
of cyberterrorist attacks launched on the United
States by foreign countries and the need to
counter those attacks. The agency has a strong
need for people that can both develop and
defend against zero-day exploits that could be
used to plant malware in the software used by the
government and military computers. At the end
of the dinner, the recruiter turns to you and asks:
“Would such a role be of interest to you?” How do
you respond?
3. Do research to learn more about the role of an
information system security auditor. What is the
role of an auditor, what sort of tasks does one
perform, and what skills and training are
necessary?
Case Studies
Case One
Fairplay Turns to a Managed Security Service
Provider
Fairplay Finer Foods is an independent grocery retailer that
operates in the greater Chicago area. From its beginning,
Fairplay’s mission has been to provide quality foods at an
affordable price along with exceptional customer service.
Starting with a single store in 1975, Fairplay has since grown
to seven locations. The opening of each new store led to
increased sales and attracted new customers; however,
expansion also raised new information system needs as well
as information security risks.
Due to its size, it was not practical for Fairplay to create
and run its own information systems organization, so it
contracted with KCS Computer Technology, Inc., to provide
these services along with the necessary computer hardware
and systems. One of KCS’s key accomplishments for Fairplay
was to implement and manage a corporate network that the
grocery chain uses to run applications and communicate
across all of its stores.
Another important area of focus for KCS involved
helping Fairplay manage issues related to the Payment Card
Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS). Retailers
accepting credit cards and other forms of electronic payment
are required to comply with the PCI DSS. The PCI DSS
standard ensures that businesses follow best practices for
protecting their customers’ payment card information. A
strong desire to ensure compliance with the PCI DSS
standard and concern over potential network security issues
led Fairplay and KCS to seek out a managed security service
provider (MSSP).
After a thorough investigation, Fairplay and KCS selected
ControlScan, an MSSP headquartered in Atlanta, based on its
simple pricing model, stable of certified security experts,
advanced technology, and solid reputation. As part of its
contract with Fairplay, ControlScan agreed to serve as an
extension of KCS, delivering cloud-based security
technologies and related security support services, including:
●
Installing, configuring, and monitoring a system of
next-generation firewalls
●
Investigating, responding to, and reporting on
security-related events
●
Providing network usage reports for insights into
company resource utilization
●
Upgrading the network on an ongoing basis by
implementing the latest security enhancements
●
Providing expertise to reduce network complexity
and contain network-related costs
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 593
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ControlScan’s initial action was to install next-generation
firewall appliances to protect each of Fairplay’s locations.
This work was completed overnight in a single night to
minimize business disruption. ControlScan then conducted a
thorough PCI gap analysis to compare current Fairplay
security controls with those required by the PCI DSS.
ControlScan developed a detailed set of recommendations
and options for eliminating the gaps; thus, giving Fairplay
management a roadmap to achieve full PCI DSS compliance.
Finally, ControlScan did a full review of all of Fairplay’s
existing information systems and security policies, working
with the chain’s IS staff to tweak and customize policies
where necessary.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. What advantages does use of an MSSP offer a small
retailer like Fairplay? Can you think of any potential
drawbacks of this approach? Is there a danger in
placing too much trust in the use of an MSSP? Explain?
2. Data breaches at major retailers, such as Neiman
Marcus, Target, and others, in recent years have shown
that compliance with the Payment Card Industry Data
Security Standard (PCI DSS) is no guarantee against an
intrusion (see Vijayan, Jaikumar, “After Target,
Neiman Marcus Breaches, Does PCI Compliance Mean
Anything?,” ComputerWorld, January 24, 2014). If you
were a member of Fairplay’s management team,
what additional actions would you take to ensure your
customer’s credit card data is not stolen?
3. Do research on the Web to gain insight into the
evolution of the PCI DSS standard. What major
changes were made in moving from PCI 2.0 to
PCI 3.0? What changes are being suggested for future
versions of the PCI standard?
SOURCES: “About Fairplay,” Fairplay, www.fairplayfoods.com/about,
accessed April 12, 2016; “KCS Computer Technology,” KCS Computer
Technology, Inc., www.kcstech.com, accessed March 12, 2016; “Fairplay
Finer Foods Secures Chain Stores with ControlScan Managed Security
Services,” ControlScan, www.controlscan.com/fairplay-finer-foods
-secures-chain-stores-with-controlscan-managed-security-services,
accessed April 12, 2016; “PCI Facts,” PCI Compliance Guide, www
.pcicomplianceguide.org/pci-faqs-2/#1, April 12, 2016.
Case Two
Sony’s Response to North Korea’s Cyberattack
On November 24, 2014, employees of Sony Pictures
Entertainment booted up their computers to find an image of
a skull along with a message from a group calling itself the
Guardians of Peace. The message read: “We’ve already
warned you and this is just the beginning. We’ve obtained all
your internal data including your secrets and top secrets
[which will be released] if you don’t obey us.”
As Sony would eventually discover, the hackers had
stolen reams of sensitive data, including the Social Security
numbers of 47,000 current and former employees, system
passwords, salary lists, contracts, and even copies of some
Sony employees’ passports. The hackers accessed hundreds
of Outlook mailboxes as well as Sony IT audit documents.
They also stole media files and placed pirated copies of five
of Sony’s movies on illegal file-sharing servers. Sony was
forced to completely shut down its information systems in an
attempt to stem the data breach. Ultimately, Sony would
determine that the damage done by the hackers was far more
extensive than it first believed. Not only had data been stolen,
but 75 percent of the company’s servers had been destroyed
and several internal data centers had been wiped clean.
Contacted within hours of the event, the FBI soon
identified the culprit. In June, several months before the
hack, North Korea’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs had declared
that it would take “a decisive and merciless countermeasure”
if the U.S. government did not prevent the planned release of
Sony’s motion picture The Interview, which features two
reporters who venture to North Korea to interview and
assassinate the country’s dictator, Kim Jong-un. In the film,
the main character, initially won over by the dictator’s
apparent kindness, discovers that the tyrant is lying about the
country’s prosperity and freedoms. The plot, along with the
movie’s unflattering portrayal of the dictator as ruthless and
childish, had caught the attention of the North Korean
government.
The U.S. government disclosed that it had proof that the
North Koreans had made good on their threat. The U.S.
National Security Agency (NSA) had reportedly penetrated
the North Korean cyberwarfare unit four years prior to the
attack and had been monitoring its capabilities since then.
After Sony alerted the FBI of the attack, the NSA was able to
trace the attack back to North Korea, using a digital
fingerprint the hackers had left in the malware. Several
weeks after the attack, FBI Director James Comey, revealed
in a speech that the Sony hackers had been sloppy. “We
could see that the IP [Internet protocol] addresses that were
being used to post and to send the emails were coming from
IPs that were exclusively used by the North Koreans.”
The hackers warned Sony not to release The Interview,
and then on December 16, the group issued a message
threatening large terrorist attacks on theaters that showed the
film. The National Organization of Theatre Owners contacted
the Department of Homeland Security for information and
advice. The FBI and NSA released a bulletin explaining that
they had no credible information about a plan to attack
theaters, but they could neither confirm nor deny whether
the hackers had the ability to launch such an attack. Shortly
after the bulletin was released, the four largest U.S. theater
chains withdrew their requests to show the movie—Carmike
Cinemas first, followed by Regal Entertainment, AMC
Entertainment, and Cinemark. Within hours, Sony announced
that it had canceled the film’s release. White House officials,
Hollywood personalities, and the media were aghast.
Comedian Jimmy Kimmel tweeted that the decision by the
major theater chains to refuse to screen The Interview was
“an un-American act of cowardice that validates terrorist
actions and sets a terrifying precedent.”
On December 19, President Obama addressed the issue
publicly: “Sony is a corporation. It suffered significant
damage. There were threats against its employees. I’m
sympathetic to the concerns that they faced. Having said all
that, yes, I think they made a mistake.” Obama explained,
“We cannot have a society in which some dictator in some
place can start imposing censorship in the United States.” The
president’s remarks highlighted the seriousness of the
594 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

incident to the American public, many of whom came to view
the incident as an attack on the freedom of expression.
In response to Obama’s comments, Sony officials
released a statement later the same day: “Let us be clear—the
only decision that we have made with respect to release of
the film was not to release it on Christmas Day in theaters,
after the theater owners declined to show it.... After that
decision, we immediately began actively surveying
alternatives to enable us to release the movie on a different
platform. It is still our hope that anyone who wants to see
this movie will get the opportunity to do so.”
In fact, on Christmas Day, the planned release day in the
theater, The Interview became available through video-
on-demand outlets such as Amazon.com, and within less than
a month, the movie had brought in over $40 million in
revenue. Approximately 6 million viewers had rented or
purchased the movie in this way. Several hundred movie
theaters that opted to screen the movie generated another $6
million. Over the next two months, Sony also released the
movie on Netflix, on DVD and Blu-Ray, and in theaters in
other countries.
Meanwhile, Sony has worked to recover from the
damage done to the company itself by the hack. Sony
Pictures’ parent company, which is based in Japan, asked
regulators there for an extension to file its third-quarter
financial results. It also fired executive Amy Pascal whose
leaked emails contained derogatory remarks about
Hollywood producers and the U.S. president’s movie
preferences. The company also provided one year of free
credit protection services to current and former employees.
In February 2015, President Obama held the first-ever
White House summit on cybersecurity issues in Silicon
Valley. The summit was billed as an attempt to deal with the
increasing vulnerability of U.S. companies to cyberattacks—
including those backed by foreign governments. However,
the chief executives of Microsoft, Google, Facebook, and
Yahoo all refused to attend the summit. Those companies
have long advocated for the government to stop its practice
of collecting and using private data to track terrorist and
criminal activities and have worked to find better ways to
encrypt the data of their customers. However, U.S. security
agencies have continually pressured the IT giants to keep the
data as unencrypted as possible to facilitate the government’s
law enforcement work. Ultimately, both the government and
private businesses will need to find a way to work together to
meet two contradictory needs—the country’s need to make
itself less vulnerable to cyberattacks while at the same time
protecting itself from potential real-world violence.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Do you think that Sony’s response to the attack was
appropriate? Why or why not?
2. What might Sony and the U.S. government done
differently to discourage future such attacks on other
U.S. organizations?
3. Are there measures that organizations and the U.S.
government can take together to prevent both
real-world terrorist violence and cyberattacks?
SOURCES: Barrett, Devlin and Danny Yadron, “Sony, U.S. Agencies
Fumbled After Cyberattack,” Wall Street Journal, February 22, 2015,
www.wsj.com/articles/sony-u-s-agencies-fumbled-after-cyberattack
-1424641424; Mitchell, Andrea, “Sony Hack: N. Korean Intel Gleaned by
NSA during Incursion,” NBC News, January 18, 2015, www.nbcnews.
com/storyline/sony-hack/sony-hack-n-korean-intel-gleaned-nsa-during
-incursion-n288761; Schatz, Amy, “Obama Acknowledges Strains with
SiliconValley,” SFGate, February 14, 2015, http://blog.sfgate.com/tech
chron/2015/02/14/obama-acknowledges-strains-with-silicon-valley/;
Dwyer, Devin and Mary Bruce, “Sony Hacking: President Obama Says
Company Made ?Mistake’ in Canceling ‘The Interview,’” ABC News,
December 19, 2014, http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/obama-sony-made
-mistake-canceling-film-release/story?id=27720800; Pallotta, Frank,
“Sony’s ‘The Interview’ Coming to Netflix,” CNN Money, January 20,
2015, http://money.cnn.com/2015/01/20/media/the-interview-makes
-40-million/; Pepitone, Julianne, “Sony Hack: ‘Critical’ Systems Won’t Be
Back Online until February,” NBC News, January 23, 2015, www.
nbcnews.com/storyline/sony-hack/sony-hack-critical-systems-wont-be
-back-online-until-february-n292126; Cieply, Michael and Brooks
Barnes, “Sony Cyberattack, First a Nuisance, Swiftly Grew into a
Firestorm,” New York Times, December 30, 2014, www.nytimes.com
/2014/12/31/business/media/sony-attack-first-a-nuisance-swiftly-grew
-into-a-firestorm-.html; “The Interview: A Guide to the Cyber Attack on
Hollywood,” BBC, December 29, 2014, www.bbc.com/news/entertain
ment-arts-30512032; Whittaker, Zack, “FBI Says North Korea Is
‘Responsible’ for Sony Hack, as White House Mulls Response,” ZDNet,
December 19, 2014, www.zdnet.com/article/us-government-officially
-blames-north-korea-for-sony-hack/; Osborne, Charlie, “Sony Pictures
Corporate Files Stolen and Released in Cyberattack,” ZDNet, November
28, 2014, www.zdnet.com/article/sony-pictures-corporate-files-stolen
-and-released-in-cyberattack; Osborne, Charlie, “Sony Hack Exposed
Social Security Numbers of Hollywood Celebrities,” ZDNet, December 5,
2015, www.zdnet.com/article/sony-hack-exposed-social-security
-numbers-of-hollywood-celebrities/; Sanger, David E. and Nicole
Perlroth, “Obama Heads to Tech Security Talks amid Tensions,” New
York Times, February 12, 2015, www.nytimes.com/2015/02/13/business
/obama-heads-to-security-talks-amid-tensions.html; Whitney, Lance,
“Sony Seeks to Delay Filing Earnings in Wake of Cyberattack,” CNET,
January 23, 2015, www.cnet.com/news/sony-asks-to-delay-filing-earn
ings-due-to-cyberattack.
Notes
1. “Big Data and Predictive Analytics: On the Cybersecurity
Frontline,” International Data Corporation, February 2015.
2. “The Global State of Information Security Survey 2016,”
PwC, www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/cyber-security/informa
tion-security-survey/industry.html, accessed April 16, 2016.
3. “The Global State of Information Security Survey 2016,”
PwC, www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/cyber-security/informa
tion-security-survey/industry.html, accessed April 16,
2016.
4. “Secunia Vulnerability Review—The Highlights,” Secu-
nia, http://secunia.com/vulnerability-review/vulnerabil
ity_update_all.html, accessed February 14, 2015.
5. “Flexera Software Vulnerability Review 2016,” Flexera,
March 16, 2016, http://learn.flexerasoftware.com/SVM
-WP-Vulnerability-Review-2016.
6. Perlroth, Nicole and Sanger, David E., “Nations Buying
as Hackers Sell Flaws in Computer Code.” July 13, 2013,
New York Times, www.nytimes.com/2013/07/14/world
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 595
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

/europe/nations-buying-as-hackers-sell-computer-flaws.
html?_r=0.
7. Markert, Jennifer, “How Zero-Day Exploits Are Bought
and Sold in a Murky, Unregulated Market,” Curious-
matic, February 23, 2015, https://curiousmatic.com/zero
-day-exploits.
8. Khandelwal, Swati, “MAC OS X Zero-Day Exploit Can
Bypass Apple’s Latest Protection Feature,” Hacker News,
March 24, 2016, http://thehackernews.com/2016/03
/system-integrity-protection.html.
9. Ashford, Warick, “US Hospital Pays •12,000 to Ransom-
ware Attackers,” Computer Weekly, February 18, 2016,
www.computerweekly.com/news/4500273343/US-hospi
tal-pays-12000-to-ransomware-attackers.
10. Danchev, Dancho, “Cornficker’s Estimated Economic
Cost? $9.1 Billion,” ZDNet, April 23, 2009, www.zdnet.
com/blog/security/confickers-estimated-economic-cost
-9-1-billion/3207.
11. Aksoy, Pelin Aksoy and Denardis, Laura, Information
Technology in Theory (Boston: Cengage Learning,
©2007), pp. 299–301.
12. Cloherty, Jack and Thomas, Pierre, “‘Trojan Horse’ Bug
Lurking in Vital US Computers since 2011,” ABC News,
November 6, 2014, http://abcnews.go.com/US/trojan
-horse-bug-lurking-vital-us-computers-2011/story?
id=26737476.
13. Schwartz, Matthew, J., “How South Korean Bank Mal-
ware Spread,” InformationWeek, March 25, 2013, www
.darkreading.com/attacks-and-breaches/how-south-
korean-bank-malware-spread/d/d-id/1109239?.
14. Johnston, Nick, “Short, Sharp Spam Attacks Aiming to
Spread Dyre Financial Malware,” Symantec, January 28,
2015, www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/short-sharp
-spam-attacks-aiming-spread-dyre-financial-malware.
15. “Spam Statistics for the Week Ending January 18, 2015,”
Trustwave, www3.trustwave.com/support/labs/spam
_statistics.asp.
16. Baraniuk, Chris, “DDoS: Website-Crippling Cyber-
Attacks to Rise in 2016,” BBC News, January 27, 2016,
www.bbc.com/news/technology-35376327.
17. Cowly, Stacy, “Grum Takedown: ‘50 Percent of World-
wide Spam Is Gone’,” CNN Money, July 19, 2012, http://
money.cnn.com/2012/07/19/technology/grum-spam-bot
net/index.htm.
18. Kalunian, Kim, “2012 Rootkit Computer Virus ‘Worst in
Years’,” Warwick Beacon, December 20, 2011, www.
warwickonline.com/stories/2012-rootkit-computer-virus
-worst-in-years,65964.
19. Rouse, Margaret, “Advanced Persistent Threat,” Tech-
Target, http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition
/advanced-persistent-threat-APT, accessed February 17,
2015.
20. “Advanced Persistent Threats: How They Work,”
Symantec, www.symantec.com/theme.jsp?themeid=apt-
infographic-1, accessed February 17, 2015.
21. “International Hacking Ring Steal up to $1 Billion from
Banks,” Economic Times, February 16, 2015, http://eco
nomictimes.indiatimes.com/articleshow/46256846.cms?
utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm
_campaign=cppst.
22. “Fraud Alert: New Phishing Tactics—and How They
Impact Your Business,” Thawte, https://community
.thawte.com/system/files/download-attachments/Phish
ing%20WP_D2.pdf, accessed March 11, 2015.
23. Raywood, Dan, “Anthem Breach Victims Hit with Yet
another Phishing Scam,” Security News, February 16,
2015, www.itproportal.com/2015/02/16/anthem-breach
-victims-hit-yet-another-phishing-scam.
24. “3/2/2016 Phishing Attack,” UITS Help Center, March 2,
2016, http://helpcenter.uconn.edu/2016/03/15/322016
-phishing-attack.
25. “4/7/2016 Phishing Attack,” Information Security Office,
University of Connecticut, April 7, 2016, http://security
.uconn.edu/2016/04/07/472016-phishing-attack.
26. Ragan, Steve, “Phishing Attacks Targeting W-2 Data Hit
41 Organizations in Q1 2016,” CSO, March 24, 2016,
www.csoonline.com/article/3048263/security/phishing
-attacks-targeting-w-2-data-hit-41-organizations-in-q1
-2016.html.
27. Brook, Chris, “Vishing Attacks Are Targeting Dozens of
Banks,” Threat Post, April 29, 2014, https://threatpost
.com/vishing-attacks-targeting-dozens-of-banks/105774.
28. McGlasson, Linda, “How to Respond to Vishing Attacks:
Bank, State Associations Share Tips for Incident
Response Plan,” BankInfoSecurity.com, April 26,
2010, www.bankinfosecurity.com/p_print.php?t=a
&id=2457.
29. Greene, Tim, “Anthem Hack: Personal Data Stolen Sells
for 10× Price of Stolen Credit Card Numbers,” Network
World, February 6, 2015, www.networkworld.com/arti
cle/2880366/security0/anthem-hack-personal-data-sto
len-sells-for-10x-price-of-stolen-credit-card-numbers.
html.
30. Palermo, Elizabeth, “10 Worst Data Breaches of All
Time,” Tom’s Guide, February 6, 2015, www.tomsguide.
com/us/biggest-data-breaches,news-19083.html.
31. Greene, Tim, “The Biggest Data Breaches of 2015,” Net-
work World, December 2, 2015, www.networkworld.
com/article/3011103/security/biggest-data-breaches-of
-2015.html.
32. Kan, Michael, “China Counters US Claims with Own
Charges of Cyber-Espionage,” PC World, May 19, 2014,
www.pcworld.com/article/2157080/china-counters-us-
claims-with-own-charges-of-cyberespionage.html.
33. Yan, Sophia, “Chinese Man Admits to Cyber Spying on
Boeing and Other U.S. Firms,” CNN Money, March 24,
2016, http://money.cnn.com/2016/03/24/technology
/china-cyber-espionage-military/index.html.
34. Pellerin, Cheryl, “White House Announces Voluntary
Cybersecurity Framework,” U.S. Department of Defense,
February 13, 2015, http://archive.defense.gov/news/news
article.aspx?id=121660.
35. “About DHS,” Department of Homeland Security, www.
dhs.gov/about-dhs, accessed April 7, 2016.
36. “Office of Cybersecurity and Communications,” Depart-
ment of Homeland Security, http://www.dhs.gov/office
-cybersecurity-and-communications, accessed April 7,
2016.
37. “About DHS,” Department of Homeland Security, www
.dhs.gov/about-dhs, accessed April 8, 2016.
38. Zetter, Kim, “Everything We Know about Ukraine’s
Power Plant Hack,” Wired, January 20, 2016, http://www
.wired.com/2016/01/everything-we-know-about-ukraines
-power-plant-hack.
596 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

39. H. R. 3162, 107th Cong. (2001), www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg
/BILLS-107hr3162enr/pdf/BILLS-107hr3162enr.pdf,
accessed April 8, 2016.
40. “AVAAP Case Studies: Algoma Central Corporation,”
AVAAP, www.avaap.com/case-studies, accessed April
12, 2016.
41. “Case Study: Grant Thornton, Global Accounting, Tax
And Advisory Company Puts Its Trust in AccessData for
Computer Forensics and E-Discovery Solutions,” Access-
Data, http://accessdata.com/resources/digital-forensics
/case-study-grant-thornton-global-accounting-tax
-and-advisory-company-puts-i, accessed April 9, 2016.
CHAPTER 13 • Cybercrime and Information System Security 597
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CHAPTER
14
Ethical, Legal, and Social
Issues of Information Systems
phoenixman/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Know?
Did You
• The Government Accounting Office (GAO) conducted a
check of the three federal departments with the largest
IS budgets—the Defense Department, Department of
Homeland Security, and Department of Health and
Human Services. It uncovered a total of $321 million
spent in the six-year period from 2008 to 2013 on pro-
jects that duplicated other efforts within those same
agencies.
• A study conducted by researchers at the University of
Nevada estimated that wasting time online (or “cyber-
loafing,” as it is sometime called) costs U.S. businesses
more than $85 billion annually.
• Over the course of 12 years, a problem with the soft-
ware used by the Washington State Department of
Corrections to calculate prison sentences caused the
early release of 3,200 inmates—approximately 3 per-
cent of all inmates released during that time period.
• The city of Houston was forced to switch providers for its
online wellness program after many city employees balked
at providing private information to a company whose
authorization form indicated that it might pass the data to
other third-party vendors and that the data might be subject
to “re-disclosure,” could be posted in areas reviewable by
the public, and might no longer protected by privacy law.
Principles
Learning Objectives
• Policies and procedures must be established to
avoid waste and mistakes associated with com-
puter usage.
• Describe some examples of waste and mistakes
in an IS environment, their causes, and possible
solutions.
• Identify policies and procedures useful in elimi-
nating waste and mistakes.
• The use of technology requires balancing the
needs of those who use the information that is
collected against the rights of those whose infor-
mation is being used.
• Discuss the principles and limits of an individual’s
right to privacy.
• Discuss the tradeoffs between security and
privacy.
• Jobs, equipment, and working conditions must be
designed to avoid negative health effects from
computers.
• List the important negative effects of computers
on the work environment.
• Identify specific actions that must be taken to
ensure the health and safety of employees.
• Practitioners in many professions subscribe to a
code of ethics that states the principles and core
values that are essential to their work.
• Outline a process for including ethical considera-
tions in decision making.
• Define the intent and key elements of an effective
code of ethics.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Why Learn about the Personal and Social
Impact of Information Systems?
Both opportunities and threats surround a wide range of nontechnical issues associated with the use of
information systems and the Internet. The issues span the full spectrum—from preventing computer
waste and mistakes and avoiding violations of privacy to complying with laws on collecting data about
customers and monitoring employees. If you become a member of the human resources, information
systems, or legal department within an organization, you will likely be challenged with leading your
organization in dealing with these and other issues covered in this chapter. Also, as a user of
information systems and the Internet, it is in your own self-interest to become well versed on these
issues. Developing a better understanding of the topics covered in this chapter will help you to manage
in an ethical manner and avoid technology-related problems.
As you read this chapter, consider the following:
• How can the use of technology affect you and your organization?
• How can you include ethical factors in your decision making process?
Earlier chapters detailed the significant benefits of computer-based informa-
tion systems in business, including increased profits, superior goods and ser-
vices, and higher quality of work life. Computers have become such valuable
tools that most businesspeople today have difficulty imagining how they
would accomplish their work without them. Yet, the information age has also
brought the potential for cybercrime as well as the following potential pro-
blems for workers, companies, and society in general:
●
Computer waste and mistakes
●
Trade-offs between privacy and security
●
Work environment problems
●
Ethical issues
This chapter discusses these important social and ethical issues, which
underlie the design, building, and use of computer-based information sys-
tems. No business organization, and hence, no information system, operates
in a vacuum. All IS professionals, business managers, and users have a
responsibility to see that the potential consequences of IS use are fully con-
sidered. Even entrepreneurs, especially those who use computers and the
Internet, must be aware of the potential personal and social impact of com-
puters. We’ll begin with a discussion of preventing computer waste and
mistakes.
Computer Waste and Mistakes
Computer-related waste and mistakes are major causes of computer problems,
contributing to unnecessarily high costs and lost profits. Examples of computer-
related waste include organizations operating unintegrated information systems,
acquiring
redundant
systems,
and
wasting
information
system
resources.
Computer-related mistakes refer to errors, failures, and other computer problems
that make computer output incorrect or not useful; most of these are caused by
human error. This section explores the damage that can be done as a result of
computer waste and mistakes.
Computer Waste
Some organizations continue to operate their businesses using unintegrated
information systems, which makes it difficult for decisions makers to
600 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

collaborate and share information. This practice leads to missed opportunities,
increased costs, and lost sales. For example, most local health departments
use a combination of state-provided and locally implemented information sys-
tems for patient data collection, management, and reporting. In a recent study
of the use of such information systems, many public health workers reported
system inefficiencies, difficulties in generating reports, and limited data acces-
sibility, necessitating the need for system workarounds. In addition, the use of
a “shadow system” to maintain a duplicate—and more easily accessible—set
of information is common.1 Such inefficient systems add to the growth in
healthcare costs.
Many organizations unknowingly waste money to acquire systems in dif-
ferent organizational units that perform nearly the same functions. Implemen-
tation of such duplicate systems unnecessarily increases hardware and
software costs. The U.S. government spends billions of dollars on information
systems each year, with almost $90 billion spent in fiscal year 2015 alone.2
Some of this spending goes toward providing information systems that pro-
vide similar functions across the various branches and agencies of the govern-
ment. The Government Accounting Office (GAO) conducted a check of the
three federal departments with the largest IS budgets—the Defense Depart-
ment, Department of Homeland Security, and Department of Health and
Human Services. It uncovered a total of $321 million spent in the six-year
period from 2008 to 2013 on projects that duplicated other efforts within
those same agencies.3 In 2015, the GAO released a follow-up report urging
government agencies to increase the use of strategic sourcing contracts as
one way to cut down on duplicative IS spending. Strategic sourcing is the
structured and collaborative process of analyzing an organization’s spending
patterns to better leverage its purchasing power, eliminate contract duplica-
tion, reduce costs, and improve overall performance.4
A less dramatic, yet still relevant, example of waste is the amount of com-
pany time, money, and IS resources that some employees misuse through text-
ing, sending personal email, playing computer games, surfing the Web,
shopping online, and checking for updates on Instagram or Facebook. In fact,
in a recent survey of more than 2,100 human resource professionals, cell
phones/texting (52 percent) and the Internet (44 percent) were listed as the big-
gest productivity killers in the workplace.5. A study conducted by researchers at
the University of Nevada estimated that wasting time online (or “cyberloafing,”
as it is sometime called) costs U.S. businesses more than $85 billion annually.6
As a result, many companies are exploring new tools to help improve
workers’ productivity, such as using an open space layout instead of cubicles,
banning personal calls/cell phones, monitoring emails and Internet usage, and
blocking certain Internet sites entirely.7 A team of researchers from the Uni-
versity of Arizona has developed software that is designed to reduce cyber-
loafing by dividing the Internet into sites that employees can always visit,
sometimes visit, and never visit (the software completely blocks certain Web
sites, such as pornography sites and video-streaming sites that use up too
much company bandwidth). The software includes on-screen reminders that
alert employees when they are visiting sites that are likely not work-related,
and after a total of 90 minutes spent browsing leisure sites in any given day,
an employee loses access to those sites unless they get approval from their
manager.8
Computer-Related Mistakes
Despite many people’s distrust of them, computers rarely make mistakes. If
users do not follow proper procedures, however, even the most sophisticated
hardware cannot produce meaningful output. Mistakes can be caused by
unclear expectations coupled with inadequate training and a lack of feedback.
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 601
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

A programmer might also develop a program that contains errors, or a data-
entry clerk might enter the wrong data. Unless errors are caught early and
corrected, the speed of computers can intensify mistakes.
Some of the most common computer-related mistakes include the following:
●
Data-entry or data-capture errors
●
Programming errors
●
Errors in handling files, including formatting a disk by mistake, copying
an old file over a newer one, and deleting a file by mistake
●
Mishandling of computer output
●
Inadequate planning for and control of equipment malfunctions
●
Inadequate planning for and control of environmental difficulties (e.g.,
electrical and humidity problems)
●
Inadequate planning for hardware and software upgrades
●
Installing computing capacity inadequate for the level of activity
●
Failure to provide access to the most current information either by not
adding new Web links or not deleting old links
As information technology becomes faster, more complex, and more pow-
erful, organizations and computer users face increased risks of experiencing
the results of computer-related mistakes. Consider these recent examples of
computer-related mistakes:
●
In late 2015, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration
(TIGTA) released an audit showing that due to a programming error, the
IRS issued over $27 million in refunds on more than 13,000 tax returns
that had initially been flagged as potentially fraudulent for the 2013 tax
year. The computer glitch overrode the fraud warning flags, causing the
returns to be processed rather than set aside for review. The inspector
general’s report warned that if the programming error was not fixed, it
could allow the IRS to issue more than $135 million in potentially errone-
ous refunds over the next five years.9
●
Over the course of 12 years, a problem with the software used by the
Washington State Department of Corrections to calculate prison sentences
caused the early release of 3,200 inmates—approximately 3 percent of all
inmates released during that time period. The problem first came to light
when the family of a crime victim was notified of the impending release
of the inmate involved in the crime. After doing its own calculations, the
family contacted the Department of Corrections, pointing out that the
inmate was being released earlier than had been ordered by the court;
however, the department delayed fixing the software for another three
years. During that time, two inmates who were mistakenly released early
were each charged with killing someone in separate incidents.10
●
The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) was forced to cancel all open
orders and suspend trading for almost four hours in July 2015 due to
“technical issues” tied to the phased roll-out of a new software release to
one trading unit. According to the exchange, which handles approxi-
mately 10 percent of all stock trading worldwide, the update caused com-
munications problems between the new software and the exchange’s
gateways, which are the access points used by traders and other
exchanges to connect with the NYSE—ultimately requiring the temporary
shutdown of all trading operations.11,12
●
In April 2016, an error with its payment processing software caused
American Honda Finance Corporation (AHFC) to double-charge many
customers for their monthly vehicle payments, resulting in some custo-
mers also being hit with overdraft fees from their banks. Because of the
number of customers affected, AHFC’s customer service team became
overwhelmed, and customer hold times exceeded 20 to 30 minutes. AHFC
602 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

issued refunds to most customers within two to three days, but the com-
pany’s reputation took a hit as many affected consumers took to social
media to criticize the company’s handling of the software glitch.13,14
Preventing Computer-Related Waste and Mistakes
To remain profitable in a competitive environment, organizations must use
their resources wisely. To employ IS resources efficiently and effectively,
employees and managers alike should strive to minimize waste and mistakes.
This effort involves establishing, implementing, monitoring, and reviewing
effective policies and procedures.
Establishing Policies and Procedures
The first step in preventing computer-related waste and mistakes is to estab-
lish policies and procedures regarding efficient acquisition, use, and disposal
of systems and devices. Computers permeate organizations today, and it is
critical for organizations to ensure that systems are used to their full potential.
As a result, most companies have implemented stringent policies on the
acquisition of computer systems and equipment, including requiring a formal
justification statement before computer equipment is purchased, defining
standard computing platforms (operating system, type of computer chip, min-
imum amount of RAM, etc.), and mandating the use of preferred vendors for
all acquisitions. Most organizations have also established strong policies to
prevent employees from wasting time using computers inappropriately at
work.
Training programs for individuals and work groups as well as manuals
and documents covering the use and maintenance of information systems can
also help prevent computer waste and mistakes. The Error Prevention Insti-
tute offers online training on preventing human errors that explains the
underlying reasons that humans make mistakes and how these mistakes can
be prevented.15 Additional preventive measures include the requirement that
all new applications be approved through an established process before they
are rolled out in order to ensure cost effectiveness and compatibility with
other systems and hardware. Some organizations also require that documenta-
tion and descriptions of certain applications, including all cell formulas for
spreadsheets and a description of all data elements and relationships in a
database system, be filed or submitted to a central office. Such standardization
can ease access and use for all personnel. Examples of other useful policies to
minimize waste and mistakes include the following:
●
Changes to critical tables, HTML, and URLs should be tightly controlled,
with all changes documented and authorized by responsible owners.
●
A user manual should be available covering operating procedures and
documenting the management and control of the application.
●
Each system report should indicate its general content in its title and
specify the time period covered.
●
The system should have controls to prevent invalid and unreasonable data
entry.
●
Controls should exist to ensure that data input, HTML, and URLs are valid,
applicable, and posted in the right time frame.
●
Users should implement proper procedures to ensure correct input data.
After companies plan and develop policies and procedures, they must
consider how best to implement them.
Implementing Policies and Procedures
The process of implementing policies and procedures to minimize waste and
mistakes varies by organization. Most companies develop such policies and
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 603
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

procedures with advice from the firm’s internal auditing group or its external
auditing firm. The policies often focus on the implementation of source data
automation, the use of data editing to ensure data accuracy and completeness,
and the assignment of clear responsibility for data accuracy within each infor-
mation system.
Training and communication are the keys to the successful acceptance
and implementation of policies and procedures. Because more and more peo-
ple use computers in their daily work, they must understand how to use
them. See Figure 14.1. Many users are not properly trained in using applica-
tions, and their mistakes can be very costly. Others do not have a good under-
standing of the policies and procedures they are expected to follow as part of
their job due to inadequate training. Importantly, employees should be edu-
cated on the rationale behind the IS policies and procedures they are
expected to follow, including how the policies and procedures tie into the
organization’s overall strategy.16
Monitoring Policies and Procedures
To ensure that users throughout an organization are following established
procedures, routine practices must be monitored and corrective action must
be taken when necessary. By understanding what is happening in day-to-day
activities, organizations can make adjustments or develop new procedures.
Many organizations perform audits to measure actual results against estab-
lished goals, such as percentage of end-user reports produced on time, per-
centage of data-input errors detected, and number of input transactions
entered per eight-hour shift. Audits can also be used to track the amount of
time employees spend on non-work-related Web sites and to determine if spe-
cific system policies and procedures are being followed consistently.
An audit at the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs found that while the
agency has recently made improvements in its efforts to develop and distrib-
ute policies and procedures related to its information security and risk man-
agement programs, it continues to struggle with the implementation of such
policies and procedures. For example, by monitoring the permissions settings
related to system ID management and access controls, the auditors found mul-
tiple instances of “unnecessary system privileges, excessive and unauthorized
user accounts, accounts without formal access authorizations, and active
FIGURE 14.1
Computer training
Training helps to ensure acceptance
and implementation of policies and
procedures.
Goodluz/Shutterstock.com
604 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
accounts for terminated personnel.” The auditors’ report included recommen-
dations that all VA locations implement periodic access reviews, enable audit
logs, and enforce password policies on all operating systems, databases, appli-
cations, and network devices.17
Reviewing Policies and Procedures
The final step in preventing computer-related waste and mistakes is to review
existing policies and procedures to determine whether they are adequate.
During the review, people should ask the following questions:
●
Do current policies cover existing practices adequately? Were any pro-
blems or opportunities uncovered during monitoring?
●
Does the organization plan any new activities in the future? If so, does it
need new policies or procedures addressing who will handle them and
what must be done?
●
Are contingencies and disasters covered?
This review and planning allows companies to take a proactive approach
to problem solving, which can enhance a company’s performance by increas-
ing such as by increasing productivity and improving customer service. Dur-
ing such a review, companies can take into account upcoming changes in
information systems that could have a profound effect on many business
activities.
The results of failing to review and plan changes in policies and proce-
dures can lead to disastrous consequences. For example, an internal review
at Boston-based State Street Corporation revealed that the financial services
giant had been overcharging its customers for a variety of administrative ser-
vices for more than 18 years—to the tune of $200 million. Although State
Street had assured its clients, who are primarily large institutions, such as
pension funds and mutual funds, that it was only passing along actual costs,
it was in fact significantly overcharging those customers for postage and for
services such as printing and sending secure emails (State Street allegedly
charged $5 per email message, even though the actual cost was only 25
cents). When the company announced its findings, it did not reveal the
cause of the systemic overcharging, indicate how it had been detected, nor
explain why earlier policy and systems reviews did not highlight the
problem—key questions as the Massachusetts Securities Division has since
found evidence that State Street employees were questioning the charges as
far back as 2004. The company is now faced with reimbursing its clients—
with interest—as well as with responding to a civil complaint filed by the
Massachusetts’s Secretary of State, which could result in a censure and
administrative fines.18,19
Information systems professionals and users need to be aware of the mis-
use of resources throughout an organization. Preventing errors and mistakes
is one way to do so.
Cutting Down on Cyberloafing
You are a member of the Human Resources organization of a small tech training
development company with some 50 full and part-time workers. A casual check of
how workers spend their time indicates that there is a large amount of time spent
sending and receiving personal texts and emails, shopping online, and checking of
social media Web sites. Especially alarming is the casual viewing of “soft porn”
which could open the firm to an expensive lawsuit if an employee sees a coworker
viewing porn at work and complains that the company has created a hostile work
environment. While the company has made it clear that it can monitor workers’
use of information system resources, no guidelines have been set that clearly indi-
cate acceptable and unacceptable use of information system resources.
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 605
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Review Questions
1.
What is the harm in nonproductive use of information system resources, isn’t
everybody doing it?
2.
What are the keys to successful acceptance and implementation of new poli-
cies and procedures to reduce cyberloafing?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Do you think that it would help to involve a small group of employees in
defining appropriate use guidelines or should this be done strictly by mem-
bers of the Human Resources organization (you and one other person)? Why
do you feel this way?
2.
Should some sort of penalty be defined for violation of the guidelines or will
this simply come across as “too heavy handed” and cause a worker rebellion?
Privacy Issues
Privacy is an important social issue related to the use of information systems.
In 1890, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis stated that the “right to
be left alone” is one of the most “comprehensive of rights and the most val-
ued by civilized man.” Basically, the issue of privacy deals with this right to
be left alone or to be withdrawn from public view. In terms of information
systems, issues of privacy relate to the collection and use or misuse of data.
Data is constantly being collected and stored on each of us. This data is often
distributed over easily accessed networks and without our knowledge or con-
sent. Concerns of privacy regarding this data raise difficult questions, includ-
ing “Who owns this information and knowledge?” If a public or private
organization spends time and resources to obtain data on you, does the orga-
nization own the data, and should it be allowed to use the data in any way it
desires? To some extent, laws and regulations answer these questions for fed-
eral agencies, but many questions remain unanswered for private organiza-
tions. Today, many businesses rely on collected personal data to enhance
their sales and marketing efforts, and for some organizations, buying and sell-
ing personal data is their business. In addition, businesses are sometimes
required to respond to requests from law enforcement agencies for informa-
tion about its employees, customers, and suppliers. Indeed, some phone and
Internet companies have employees whose full-time role it is to deal with
information requests from local, state, and federal law enforcement agencies.
These and other aspects of privacy create opportunities and challenges for
organizations and individuals.
Privacy and the Federal Government
Over the last several decades, Congress has approved, and the federal govern-
ment has implemented, many laws addressing personal privacy—some of
which have been challenged in court cases that have made their way all the
way up to the Supreme Court. Some of these laws are renewed periodically,
and others have been revised and updated via new legislative action. Some of
the most important federal laws relating to privacy are summarized in
Table 14.1.
A number of recent revelations—many of which came as a result of the
public release of a vast collection of previously classified documents by for-
mer NSA contractor, Edward Snowden—regarding previously clandestine fed-
eral government data-collection programs have raised concerns and debate
between those who favor data collection as a means to increased security and
those who view such programs as a violation of rights guaranteed by the
606 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Constitution and Bill of Rights.20 The following examples highlight details of
just some of the known federal data-collection programs:
●
The NSA began the collection of metadata (the phone numbers of the
parties involved in the call, call duration, call location, time and data of
the call, and other data) from millions of telephone calls soon after the
September 11, 2001, attacks on the United States. The data enables the
TABLE 14.1 Key federal privacy laws and their provisions
Law
Provisions
Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970
(FCRA)
Regulates operations of credit-reporting bureaus, including how they collect, store,
and use credit information
Family Education Privacy Act of
1974
Restricts the collection and use of data by federally funded educational institutions,
including specifications for the type of data collected, access by parents and stu-
dents to the data, and limitations on disclosure
Tax Reform Act of 1976
Restricts collection and use of certain information by the Internal Revenue Service
Right to Financial Privacy Act of
1978
Restricts government access to certain records held by financial institutions
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act of 1978
Defines procedures to request judicial authorization for electronic surveillance of
persons engaged in espionage or international terrorism against the United States
on behalf of a foreign power
Electronic Communications Pri-
vacy Act of 1986
Defines provisions for the access, use, disclosure, interception, and privacy protec-
tions of electronic communications
Computer Matching and Privacy
Act of 1988
Regulates cross-references between federal agencies’ computer files (e.g., to verify
eligibility for federal programs)
Cable Act of 1992
Regulates companies and organizations that provide wireless communications ser-
vices, including cellular phones
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999
Requires all financial institutions to protect and secure customers’ nonpublic data
from unauthorized access or use
USA Patriot Act of 2001
Requires Internet service providers and telephone companies to turn over customer
information, including numbers called, without a court order, if the FBI claims that
the records are relevant to a terrorism investigation; Section 215 allowed for the
bulk collection of domestic telecommunications metadata (phone numbers, time
stamps, call duration, etc.); some provisions of this act were extended by President
Barack Obama in 2011, and some provisions (most significantly, the Section 215
provisions allowing for the bulk collection of metadata) briefly expired in June 2015
before being restored in somewhat modified form under the USA Freedom Act
E-Government Act of 2002
Requires federal agencies to post machine-readable privacy policies on their Web
sites and to perform privacy impact assessments on all new collections of data of 10
or more people
Fair and Accurate Credit
Transactions Act of 2003
Combats the growing crime of identity theft by allowing consumers to get free
credit reports from each of the three major consumer credit-reporting agencies
every 12 months and to place alerts on their credit histories under certain
circumstances
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act (FISA) Amendments Act of
2008
Renews the U.S. government’s authority to monitor electronic communications of
foreigners abroad and authorizes foreign surveillance programs by the NSA, such as
PRISM and some earlier data-collection activities
USA Freedom Act (2015)
Imposes limitations on the bulk collection of the telecommunications metadata of
U.S. citizens; prohibits large-scale indiscriminate data collection (such as all records
from an entire zip code); requires the NSA to obtain permission from the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) to access the metadata records, which are
now held by telecommunication companies rather than by the government; restored
in a modified form some other provisions of the USA Patriot Act that lapsed in June
2015, including authorization for roving wiretaps and for tracking so-called lone-
wolf terrorists; and allows challenges of national security letter gag orders
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 607
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

NSA to create a network of associations for every caller. A provision
known as Section 215 of the Patriot Act provided the legal justification
needed for many proponents of data gathering. That the data was being
used to help the government “connect the dots” between overseas terror-
ists and coconspirators within the United States offered additional justifi-
cation for many. However, in June 2015, the NSA’s authority to collect
bulk data under Section 215 expired.21 Under the USA Freedom Act,
which was passed within days of the expiration of that authority, the NSA
must request permission from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
(FISC) before obtaining records—which are now held by the telecommu-
nications companies rather than by the NSA—pertaining to a specific
phone number.22,23,24 On December 31, 2015, the FISC issued its first
order approving a request from the NSA for access to “the ongoing daily
production of detailed call records relating to an authorized international
terrorism investigation.”25,26 See Figure 14.2.
●
PRISM is a tool used by the NSA and the FBI to collect private electronic
data belonging to users of major Internet services such as AOL, Apple,
Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Skype, Yahoo!, YouTube, and others.
PRISM enables the NSA to access the servers of these organizations to col-
lect material, including search history, the content of email messages,
videos, photos, file transfers, and live chats. Unlike the collection of tele-
phone call records, this surveillance includes the content of communica-
tions and not just the metadata. With PRISM, the NSA can obtain targeted
communications without having to request them from the service provi-
ders and without having to obtain individual court orders. Under the pro-
gram, the NSA is also allowed to share the data with other U.S.
intelligence agencies for the purposes of a domestic criminal
investigation—not just a national security investigation.27,28
●
Another NSA program called MYSTIC has been used to intercept and
record all telephone conversations in certain countries, including Afghani-
stan, the Bahamas, Mexico, Kenya, and the Philippines.29,30 Because there
is no practical way to exclude them, the conversations include those of
Americans who make calls to or from the targeted countries. 31 In 2014,
public revelations about MYSTIC resulted in the government of
Afghanistan shutting down the program in that country.32
FIGURE 14.2
The NSA’s Utah Data Center
This data center, code-named Bum-
blehive, is billed by the NSA as the
first Intelligence Community Com-
prehensive National Cybersecurity
Initiative (IC CNCI) data center
designed to support the intelligence
community’s efforts to monitor,
strengthen, and protect the nation.
The data center was designed to
handle the vast increases in digital
data that have accompanied the rise
of the global network and the NSA
data-collection programs.
AP Images/Rick Bowmer
608 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
In February 2016, the administration of Barack Obama revealed that it was
on the verge of allowing the NSA to provide analysts at other U.S. intelli-
gence agencies direct access to raw data from the NSA’s surveillance pro-
grams, without first applying any privacy protections to the data. Prior to
the rule change, which had been in the works since President George W.
Bush was in office, the NSA filtered the surveillance data, evaluating and
passing along only the portions of email or phone calls it deemed pertinent
to other U.S. intelligence agencies—masking names and any irrelevant
information about innocent American citizens before releasing the data.33
In addition to data-collection activities that are designed to capture a
broad range of potentially useful data, the federal government uses other
techniques to obtain data in relation to specific cases and individual targets;
some of these activities have raised privacy concerns for some Americans.
In a highly publicized case involving the cell phone of one of the alleged
perpetrators of a mass shooting in San Bernardino, California, in December
2015, the FBI used a variety of techniques to access the data on the
phone—including attempting to legally compel the phone’s manufacturer,
Apple, to develop a new version of its OS that would allow the FBI to use a
“brute-force” attack on the phone to break through its password.34 This case
is covered in greater detail in a Case Study at the end of this chapter.
Privacy at Work
The right to privacy at work is also an important issue. Employers are using
technology and corporate policies to manage worker productivity and protect
the use of IS resources. Employers are mostly concerned about inappropriate
Web surfing, with over half of employers monitoring the Web activity of their
employees. Organizations also monitor employees’ email, with more than half
retaining and reviewing messages. Statistics such as these have raised
employee privacy concerns. In many cases, workers claim their right to pri-
vacy trumps their companies’ rights to monitor employee use of IS resources.
However, most employers today have a policy that explicitly eliminates any
expectation of privacy when an employee uses any company-owned com-
puter, server, or email system. The Fourth Amendment protects individuals
against unreasonable searches and seizures and requires that warrants be
issued only upon probable cause and specifying the place to be searched and
the persons or things to be seized. However, the courts have ruled that, with-
out a reasonable expectation of privacy, there is no Fourth Amendment
protection for the employee.
A California appeals court ruled in Holmes v Petrovich Development Com-
pany that emails sent by an employee to her attorney on the employer’s com-
puter were not “confidential communications between a client and lawyer.”
An Ohio federal district court in Moore v University Hospital Cleveland Medi-
cal Center ruled that an employee could be terminated for showing coworkers
sexually explicit photos on his employer’s computer. The court stated that the
employee could have no expectation of privacy when accessing a hospital
computer situated in the middle of a hospital floor within easy view of both
patients and staff.35
The proliferation of health and wellness programs at many U.S. compa-
nies has prompted some privacy advocates to call for updated regulations
regarding the use of data collected in connection with such programs. For
instance, some programs require employees to provide health and medical
details to a third-party provider in return for lower insurance premiums. And
not all programs clearly state what data is protected, what data will be shared
third parties, and what data will be shared with the employer (and whether
that information will include individually identifiable data). Privacy advocates
note that workplace wellness programs offered separately from an employer’s
Fourth Amendment: This amend-
ment to the U.S. constitution protects
individuals against unreasonable
searches and seizures and requires
that warrants be issued only upon
probable cause and specifying the
place to be searched and the persons
or things to be seized.
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 609
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

group health insurance plan are not covered under HIPAA and, so, are not
bound by the same privacy constraints.36
The city of Houston was forced to switch providers for its online wellness
program after many city employees balked at providing private information to
a company whose authorization form indicated that it might pass the data to
other third-party vendors and that the data might be subject to “re-
disclosure,” could be posted in areas reviewable by the public, and might no
longer be protected by privacy law.37
New questions regarding employee data privacy have also arisen as more
employers are encouraging—or requiring—the use of wearable technology
that monitors not only employees’ health but also their locations. As more
companies make use of such technology, experts are encouraging them to
develop and distribute policies that outline the job-related rationale for col-
lecting such data as well as the limits on its use.38,39
The European Union (EU) has developed strict regulations to enforce data
privacy standards across all members of the organization. Under these regula-
tions, personal data can only be gathered legally under strict conditions and
only for reasonable purposes. Furthermore, persons or organizations that col-
lect and manage individuals’ personal information must protect it from misuse
and must respect certain rights of the data owners, which are guaranteed by
EU law. These regulations, which were strengthened by the passage of the
General Data Protection Regulation in 2016, affect virtually any company
doing business in Europe.40
The Safe Harbor Framework is an agreement that had been in place since
2000 between the United States and the European Union (EU), allowing the
transfer of personal data from the EU to the United States, despite the more
limited scope of U.S. data privacy protections. However, in late 2015, the
European Court of Justice found that the Safe Harbor Framework did not ade-
quately protect the personal data of citizens residing in EU countries—a deci-
sion based, in part, on concerns over the data-collection programs of the
NSA.41,42 In early 2016, EU and U.S. negotiators agreed on a revised frame-
work, termed “Privacy Shield” that would allow transborder data transfer to
continue based on written guarantees, which must be renewed annually, that
U.S. intelligence agencies would not have unlimited access to such data.43
The next step for that agreement, which still faces opposition in Europe, is
adoption by the European Commission, the executive body of the EU—an
action that is not guaranteed after an EU data advisory group issued an opin-
ion in April 2016 critical of the agreement.44
Privacy and Email
The use of email also raises some interesting issues about privacy. Sending an
email message is like having an open conversation in a large room—many
people can listen to your messages, especially if they are not encrypted. In
addition, federal law permits employers to monitor email sent and received
by employees. Another important aspect that should be considered when
using email is that even email messages that have been erased from hard
disks can be retrieved; in some cases, such emails must be retrieved as part
of the discovery process in a lawsuit because the laws of discovery demand
that companies produce all relevant business documents. On the other
hand, the use of email among public officials might violate “open meeting”
laws. These laws, which apply to many local, state, and federal agencies, pre-
vent public officials from meeting in private about matters that affect the state
or local area.
In Freeman, Massachusetts, the Board of Selectman, which serves as the
executive branch of the city government, was hit with a $1,000 penalty by
the state’s attorney general’s office in connection with a string of email
610 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

messages between members of the board and the city administrator about the
employment status of a city employee. Massachusetts’ Open Meeting Law lim-
its the content of email to items such as scheduling information or the distri-
bution of a meeting agenda or other documents that are to be discussed at a
public meeting. The law prohibits the expression of any opinions by public
officials via email, as that constitutes an improper deliberation outside of a
public meeting. Some of the emails in question contained opinions about the
board’s impending decision to place the employee on administrative leave.
The Freeman board also violated the law by attempting to use a third party,
city administrator, to relay messages.45,46
Privacy and Instant Messaging
Using texting and instant messaging (IM) apps to send and receive messages,
files, and images introduces the same privacy issues associated with email. As
with email, federal law permits employers to monitor instant messages sent
and received by employees. Employers’ major concern involves text and IMs
sent by employees over their employer’s IM network or using employer-
provided phones. To protect your privacy and your employer’s property, do
not send personal or private messages at work.
Even outside of work, users of texting and instant messaging apps should
be aware of the potential privacy issues associated with such technology. The
following are some tips to keep in mind:
●
Select a texting or instant messaging app that receives high security rat-
ings, and consider using a service that encrypts texts.
●
Disable text previews (which include the name of the sender and a por-
tion of the incoming message) that appear in a pop-up window on the
lock screen by default.
●
Do not open files or click links in messages from people you do not
know.
●
Never send sensitive personal data such as credit card numbers, bank
account numbers, or passwords via text or IM.
●
Choose a nonrevealing, nongender-specific, unprovocative IM screen
name (Sweet Sixteen, 2hot4u, UCLAMBA, all fail this test).
●
Don’t send messages you would be embarrassed to have your family
members, colleagues, or friends read.
Privacy issues have come into play in some recent cases involving
sexting—or the sending of sexually explicit texts and/or photos. Some older
teenagers who have engaged in consensual sexting have found that those
texts are not considered private if the sexting involves someone who is still a
minor. Currently, only 20 states have sexting laws with provisions that pro-
vide for leniency for adolescents in cases where the sexting was consensual.
Statutes in many states can result in teenagers who are prosecuted in cases
involving underage texting being charged with possessing child pornography,
resulting in a mandatory, lifetime sex offender designation.47
Privacy and Personal Sensing Devices
RFID tags, essentially microchips with antenna, are embedded in many of the
products we buy, from medicine containers, clothing, and library books to
computer printers, car keys, and tires. RFID tags generate radio transmissions
that, if appropriate measures are not taken, can lead to potential privacy con-
cerns. Once these tags are associated with the individual who purchased the
item, someone can potentially track individuals by the unique identifier asso-
ciated with the RFID chip.
A handful of states have reacted to the potential for abuse of RFID tags by
passing legislation prohibiting the implantation of RFID chips under people’s
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 611
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

skin without their approval. Still, advocates for RFID chip implantation argue
their potential value in tracking children or criminals and their value in carry-
ing an individual’s medical records.
Mobile crowd sensing (MCS) is a means of acquiring data (i.e., location,
noise level, traffic conditions, and pollution levels) through sensor-enhanced
mobile devices and then sharing this data with individuals, healthcare provi-
ders, utility firms, and local, state, and federal government agencies for deci-
sion making. While such data can be potentially useful in a variety of fields,
the technology carries with it some privacy risks if people are unaware (or
forget) that their personal mobile data is being shared.
Privacy and the Internet
Some people approach the Internet with the assumption that there is no pri-
vacy online and that people who choose to use the Internet do so at their
own risk. Others believe that companies with Web sites should have strict pri-
vacy procedures and be held accountable for privacy invasion. Regardless of
your view, the potential for privacy invasion on the Internet is huge. People
and organizations looking to invade your privacy could be anyone from crimi-
nal hackers to marketing companies to corporate bosses. Your personal and
professional information can be seized on the Internet without your knowl-
edge or consent. Email is a prime target, as discussed previously. When you
visit a Web site on the Internet, information about you and your computer
can be captured. If this information is combined with other personal informa-
tion, companies can find out what you read, where you shop, what products
you buy, and what your interests are.
Most people who buy products on the Web say it’s very important for a
site to have a policy explaining how personal information is used, and that
the policy statement must make people feel comfortable and be extremely
clear about what information is collected and what will and will not be done
with it. However, many Web sites still do not prominently display their pri-
vacy policy or implement practices completely consistent with that policy.
Ultimately, the issue of most concern to many Internet users is what do con-
tent providers want to do with the personal information they gather online? If
a site requests that you provide your name and address, you have every right
to know why and what will be done with it. If you buy something and pro-
vide a shipping address, will it be sold to other retailers? Will your email
address be sold on a list of active Internet shoppers? Consumers have the
right to be taken off any mailing list, whether it is for traditional mail or
email.
The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) was passed by
Congress in October 1998. This act, directed at Web sites catering to children,
requires site owners to post comprehensive privacy policies and to obtain
parental consent before they collect any personal information from children
under 13 years of age. Web site operators who violate the rule could be liable
for civil penalties of up to $11,000 per violation. Web sites and creators of
apps directed at children are also prohibited by COPPA from using “persistent
identifiers,” which are pieces of data tied to a particular user or device, to
serve advertising to children. In December 2015, the Federal Trade Commis-
sion settled cases with two different companies who were accused of allowing
third-party advertisers to collect personal information (in the form of persis-
tent identifiers) from children who used their apps. The FTC issued a total of
$360,000 in fines in connection with these two cases.48
Popular social media apps and sites such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn,
Pinterest, Google Plus, Tumblr, and Instagram—all of which have over 100
million unique monthly visitors—allow users to easily create a user profile
that provides personal details, photos, and even videos that can be viewed by
Children’s Online Privacy Pro-
tection Act (COPPA): An act,
directed at Web sites catering to chil-
dren, that requires site owners to post
comprehensive privacy policies and to
obtain parental consent before they
collect any personal information from
children under 13 years of age.
612 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

other visitors.49 Some of the sites have age restrictions or require that a parent
register his or her preteen by providing a credit card to validate the parent’s
identity. Others simply require users to verify that they are over the site’s age
limit—a restriction that is easily overcome. Once on social media, children
and teens often provide information about where they live, go to school,
their favorite music, and their interests in hopes of meeting new friends.
Unfortunately, they can also meet ill-intentioned strangers at these sites.
There have been documented encounters involving adults masquerading as
teens attempting to meet young people for illicit purposes. Experts advise par-
ents to discuss the potential dangers of social media with their children, check
their children’s profiles, and monitor their social media activities.
Privacy concerns related to the use of social media are not limited to min-
ors. The privacy rights of adults are also often at risk because of their social
media habits. Facebook, in particular, holds a startling amount of information
about its more than 1 billion users.50 In addition to the information they pro-
vide when setting up an account, many Facebook users are not discrete and
reveal such information as their health conditions and treatments; where they
will be on a certain day (helpful to potential burglars); personal details of
members of their family; their sexual, racial, religious, and political affiliations
and preferences; and other personal information about their friends and fam-
ily. Facebook receives a notice every time you visit a Web site with a “Like”
button whether or not you click the “Like” button, log on to Facebook, or are
a Facebook user. Users and observers have raised concerns about how Face-
book treats this sometimes very personal information. For example, if law
enforcement officials filed a subpoena for your Facebook information, they
could obtain all these details as well as records of your postings, photos you
have uploaded, photos in which you have been tagged, and a list of all your
Facebook friends. Many privacy advocates have raised concerns about the
ways in which Facebook provides this information to third parties for market-
ing or other purposes.
Privacy and Internet Libel Concerns
Libel involves publishing an intentionally false written statement that is damag-
ing to a person’s or organization’s reputation. Examples of Internet libel include
an ex-husband posting lies about his former wife on a blog, a disgruntled for-
mer employee posting lies about a company on a message board, and a jilted
girlfriend posting false statements to her former boyfriend’s Facebook account.
In Brooklyn, New York, residents of two co-op apartment buildings have
become entangled in defamation lawsuits that grew out of online comments crit-
icizing co-op board members and building management.51 A Hong Kong court
even ruled that a local billionaire can sue Google for libel over its autocomplete
search results, which suggest that he is connected to organized crime. The
tycoon filed the lawsuit after Google refused to remove autocomplete sugges-
tions, such as “triad” (in China, this is another name for an organized crime
gang), which appear with searches on his name. The billionaire maintains that
his reputation has been “gravely injured” and wants recompense.52
Individuals can post information on the Internet using anonymous email
accounts or screen names. This anonymity makes it more difficult, but not
impossible, to identify the libeler. The offended party can file what is known
as a John Doe lawsuit and use the subpoena power it grants to force the ISP
to provide whatever information it has about the anonymous poster, including
IP address, name, and street address. (Under Section 230 of the Communica-
tions Decency Act, ISPs are not usually held accountable for the bad behavior
of their subscribers.)
Brian Burke, the current general manager (GM) and president of the
National Hockey League’s (NHL) Calgary Flames, and former GM of several
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 613
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

other NHL teams filed a lawsuit in the Supreme Court of British Columbia
against 18 individuals who allegedly made defamatory statements regarding
Burke on various Internet message boards and blogs.53
Privacy and Fairness in Information Use
Selling information to other companies can be so lucrative that many compa-
nies store and sell the data they collect on customers, employees, and others.
When is this information storage and use fair and reasonable to the people
whose data is stored and sold? Do people have a right to know about data
stored about them and to decide what data is stored and used? As shown in
Table 14.2, these questions can be broken down into four issues that should
be addressed: knowledge, control, notice, and consent.
Privacy and Filtering and Classifying Internet Content
To help parents control what their children see on the Internet, some compa-
nies provide filtering software to help screen Internet content. Many of
these screening programs also prevent children from sending personal infor-
mation over email, in chat groups, or through instant messaging apps. These
programs stop children from broadcasting their name, address, phone num-
ber, or other personal information over the Internet. The 2016 top-rated Inter-
net filtering software for both Windows and Mac systems is presented in
Table 14.3.54,55
Organizations also implement filtering software to prevent employees
from visiting Web sites not related to work, particularly those involving gam-
bling and those containing pornographic or other offensive material. Before
an organization implements Web site blocking, it should educate employees
about the company’s Internet policies and why they exist. To increase compli-
ance, it is best if the organization’s Internet users, management, and IS
TABLE 14.2 The right to know and the ability to decide federal privacy laws and regulations
Fairness Issues
Database Storage
Database Usage
The right to know
Knowledge
Notice
The ability to decide
Control
Consent
Knowledge. Should people know what data is stored about them? In some cases, people are informed that information
about them is stored in a corporate database. In others, they are unaware that their personal information is being stored.
Control. Should people be able to correct errors in corporate database systems? This ability is possible with most orga-
nizations, although it can be difficult in some cases.
Notice. Should an organization that uses personal data for a purpose other than the original designated purpose be
required to notify individuals in advance? Most companies don’t do this.
Consent. If information on people is to be used for other purposes, should these people be asked to give their consent
before data on them is used? Many companies do not give people the ability to decide if such information will be sold or
used for other purposes.
TABLE 14.3 Top-rated Internet filtering software
Windows Systems
Mac Systems
NetNanny ($28.99)
Net Nanny ($28.99)
SpyAgent ($69.95)
Safe Eyes ($49.95)
Qustodio ($44.95)
Spector Pro ($99.95)
filtering software: Software used
to help protect personal data and
screen objectionable Internet content.
614 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

organization work together to define the policy to be implemented. The pol-
icy should be clear about the repercussions to employees who attempt to cir-
cumvent the blocking measures.
The U.S. Congress has made several attempts to limit children’s exposure
to online pornography, including the Communications Decency Act (enacted
1996) and the Child Online Protection Act (enacted 1998). Within two years
of being enacted, the U.S. Supreme Court found that both these acts violated
the First Amendment (freedom of speech) and ruled them to be unconstitu-
tional. The Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) was signed into law in
2000 and later upheld by the Supreme Court in 2003. Under CIPA, schools
and libraries subject to CIPA do not receive the discounts offered by the
E-Rate program (provides funding to help pay for the cost of Internet connec-
tions) unless they certify that they have certain Internet safety measures in
place to block or filter “visual depictions that are obscene, child pornography,
or are harmful to minors.” (The E-Rate program provides many schools and
libraries support to purchase Internet access and computers.)
Corporate Privacy Policies
Even though privacy laws for private organizations are not very restrictive,
most organizations are sensitive to privacy issues and fairness. They realize
that invasions of privacy can damage their reputation, turn away customers,
and dramatically reduce revenues and profits. Consider a major international
credit card company. If the company sold confidential financial information
on millions of customers to other companies, the results could be disastrous.
In a matter of days, the firm’s business and revenues could be reduced dra-
matically. Therefore, most organizations maintain privacy policies, even
though they are not required by law to do so. Some companies even have a
privacy bill of rights that specifies how the privacy of employees, clients, and
customers will be protected. Corporate privacy policies should address a cus-
tomer’s knowledge, control, notice, and consent over the storage and use of
information. They can also cover who has access to private data and when it
can be used.
The United States does not have a specific federal regulation requiring
implementation of privacy policies except in specific circumstances, such as:
●
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) privacy rules
require notice in writing of the privacy practices of health care services.
●
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) requires Web sites that
collect information about children under the age of 13 to post a privacy
policy and adhere to certain information-sharing restrictions.
●
Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act requires financial institutions to provide “clear,
conspicuous, and accurate statements” of their information-sharing
practices.
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) enforces federal consumer protec-
tion laws (e.g., Federal Trade Commission Act, Telemarketing Sale Rule, Iden-
tity Theft Act, and Fair Credit Reporting Act) that prevent fraud, deception,
and unfair business practices. This gives it the power to enforce the terms of
privacy policies as promises made to consumers. So it cases where an organi-
zation does not follow the terms of its privacy policy, consumers may file law-
suits which can result in settlements or judgments. However, such lawsuits
are often not an option, due to arbitration clauses in the privacy policies or
other terms of service agreements.
The BBB Code of Business Practices (BBB Accreditation Standards)
requires that BBB-accredited businesses have some sort of privacy notice on
their Web site. See Figure 14.3. BBB recommends that an organization’s pri-
vacy notice include the following elements:56
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 615
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

●
Policy. What personal information is being collected on the site
●
Choice. What options the customer has about how/whether his or her
data is collected and used
●
Access. How a customer can see what data has been collected and
change/correct it if necessary
●
Security. State how any data that is collected is stored/protected
●
Redress. What a customer can do if the privacy policy is not met
●
Updates. How policy changes will be communicated
Multinational companies face an extremely difficult challenge in imple-
menting data collection and dissemination processes and policies because of
the multitude of differing country or regional statutes. For example, Australia
This privacy notice discloses the privacy practices for (Web site address). This privacy notice 
applies solely to information collected by this web site. It will notify you of the following:
        1.  What personally identifiable information is collected from you through the web site,  
            how it is used and with whom it may be shared.       
       2.  What choices are available to you regarding the use of your data. 
       3.  The security procedures in place to protect the misuse of your information. 
       4.  How you can correct any inaccuracies in the information. 
Information Collection, Use, and Sharing
We are the sole owners of the information collected on this site. We only have access 
to/collect information that you voluntarily give us via email or other direct contact from you. 
We will not sell or rent this information to anyone.
 We will use your information to respond to you, regarding the reason you contacted us. We 
will not share your information with any third party outside of our organization, other than as 
necessary to fulfill your request, e.g. to ship an order.
 Unless you ask us not to, we may contact you via email in the future to tell you about specials, 
new products or services, or changes to this privacy policy.
 Your Access to and Control Over Information 
You may opt out of any future contacts from us at any time. You can do the following at any 
time by contacting us via the email address or phone number given on our Web site:
        •   See what data we have about you, if any. 
       •   Change/correct any data we have about you. 
       •   Have us delete any data we have about you. 
       •   Express any concern you have about our use of your data.
 Security 
We take precautions to protect your information. When you submit sensitive information via 
the Web site, your information is protected both online and offline.
 Wherever we collect sensitive information (such as credit card data), that information is 
encrypted and transmitted to us in a secure way. You can verify this by looking for a closed 
lock icon at the bottom of your web browser, or looking for "https" at the beginning of the 
address of the web page.
 While we use encryption to protect sensitive information transmitted online, we also protect 
your information offline. Only employees who need the information to perform a specific job 
(for example, billing or customer service) are granted access to personally identifiable 
information. The computers/servers in which we store personally identifiable information are 
kept in a secure environment.
 If you feel that we are not abiding by this privacy policy, you should contact us immediately 
via telephone at XXX YYY-ZZZZ or via email. 
Privacy Notice
FIGURE 14.3
Sample privacy notice
The BBB provides this sample privacy notice as a guide to businesses to post on their Web
sites.
Source: The Better Business Bureau
616 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

requires companies to destroy customer data (including backup files) or make
it anonymous after it’s no longer needed. As discussed earlier in the chapter,
firms that transfer customer and personnel data out of Europe must comply
with European privacy laws that allow customers and employees to access
data about themselves and determine how that information can be used.
Links
to
some
sample
corporate
privacy
policies
are
provided
in
Table 14.4.
A good database design practice is to assign a single unique identifier to
each customer so each has a single record describing all relationships with
the company across all its business units. That way, the organization can
apply customer privacy preferences consistently throughout all databases.
Failure to do so can expose the organization to legal risks—in addition to
upsetting customers who opted out of some collection practices. The 1999
Gramm–Leach–Bliley Financial Services Modernization Act requires all finan-
cial service institutions to communicate their data privacy rules and honor
customer preferences.
Individual Efforts to Protect Privacy
Although numerous state and federal laws deal with privacy, the laws do not
completely protect individual privacy. In addition, not all companies have pri-
vacy policies. As a result, many people are taking steps to increase their own
privacy protection. Some of the steps that you can take to protect personal
privacy include the following:
●
Find out what is stored about you in existing databases. Call the major
credit bureaus to get a copy of your credit report. You are entitled to a
free credit report every 12 months from each of the three major consumer
reporting agencies (Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion). You can also
obtain a free report if you have been denied credit in the last 60 days.
Note that the only Web site authorized by federal law to provide the free
credit reports is AnnualCreditReport.com. Other Web sites claim to offer
free credit reports but actually charge consumers, sometimes on an ongo-
ing basis, for access to their credit report.57 The major companies are
Equifax (www.equifax.com), TransUnion (www.transunion.com), and
Experian (www.experian.com). You can also submit a Freedom of Infor-
mation Act request to a federal agency that you suspect might have infor-
mation stored on you.
●
Be careful when you share information about yourself. Don’t share
information unless it is absolutely necessary. Every time you give infor-
mation about yourself through an 800, 888, or 900 call, your privacy is at
risk. Be vigilant in insisting that your doctor, bank, or financial institution
not share information about you with others without your written
consent.
TABLE 14.4 Links to sample corporate privacy policies
Company
URL
Intel
www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/privacy/intel-privacy-notice.html
Starwood Hotels & Resorts
www.starwoodhotels.com/corporate/privacy_policy.html
TransUnion
www.transunion.com/corporate/privacyPolicy.page
United Parcel Service
www.ups.com/content/corp/privacy_policy.html
Visa
http://usa.visa.com/legal/privacy-policy/index.jsp
Walt Disney Company
https://disneyprivacycenter.com/
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 617
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
●
Be proactive in protecting your privacy. You can get an unlisted phone
number and ask the phone company to block caller ID systems from
reading your phone number. If you change your address, don’t fill out a
change-of-address form with the U.S. Postal Service; you can notify the
people and companies that you want to have your new address. Destroy
copies of your charge card bills and shred monthly statements before dis-
posing of them in the garbage. Be careful about sending personal email
messages over a corporate email system. You can also cut down on the
junk mail and telemarketing calls you receive by visiting the Direct Mar-
keting Association Web site (www.thedma.org). Go to the site and look
under Consumer Help-Remove Name from Lists.
●
Take extra care when purchasing anything from a Web site. Make sure
that you safeguard your credit card numbers, passwords, and personal
information. Do not do business with a site unless you know that it handles
credit card information securely. (Look for a seal of approval from organiza-
tions such as the Better Business Bureau Online or TRUSTe. When you
open the Web page where you enter credit card information or other per-
sonal data, make sure that the Web address begins with https and check to
see if a locked padlock icon appears in the Address bar or status bar.) Do
not provide personal information without reviewing the site’s data privacy
policy. Many credit card companies will issue single-use credit card numbers
on request. Charges appear on your usual bill, but the number is destroyed
after a single use, eliminating the risk of stolen credit card numbers.
Seeking Greater Customer Acceptance
Your organization has been in business over 10 years selling consumer home pro-
ducts over the Internet. A year ago, the firm gained much negative publicity when
it was uncovered that the personal data it gathered was being sold, unknown to
its customers, to third parties. The result was over a 15 percent drop in sales. At
this time, the firm has no privacy policy and is debating whether to create such a
policy, and if so, what terms it should include.
Review Questions
1.
What is the purpose and intent of a privacy policy?
2.
What are the key elements that need to be included in an effective privacy
policy?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
What obligations and potential issues are raised by creating a privacy policy?
2.
What measures should be taken to avoid potential litigation over any new pri-
vacy policy?
Work Environment
The use of computer-based information systems has changed the makeup of
the workforce. Jobs that require IS literacy have increased, and many less-
skilled positions have been eliminated. Corporate programs, such as those
focused on reengineering and continuous improvement, bring with them the
concern that, as business processes are restructured and information systems
are integrated within them, the people involved in these processes will be
removed. Even the simplest tasks have been aided by computers, making cus-
tomer checkout faster, streamlining order processing, and allowing people
with disabilities to participate more actively in the workforce. As computers
618 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

and other IS components drop in cost and become easier to use, more work-
ers will benefit from the increased productivity and efficiency provided by
computers. Yet, despite these increases in productivity and efficiency, the use
of information systems can raise other concerns.
Health Concerns
Organizations can increase employee productivity by paying attention to the
health concerns in today’s work environment. For some people, working with
computers can cause occupational stress. Anxieties about job insecurity, loss
of control, incompetence, and demotion are just a few of the fears workers
might experience. In some cases, the stress can become so severe that work-
ers avoid taking training to learn how to use new computer systems and
equipment. Monitoring employee stress can alert companies to potential pro-
blems. Training and counseling can often help the employee and deter pro-
blems. Although they can cause negative health consequences, information
systems can also be used to provide a wealth of information on health topics
through the Internet and other sources.
Heavy computer use can affect one’s physical health as well. A job that
requires sitting at a desk and using a computer for many hours a day qualifies
as a sedentary job. Such work can double the risk of seated immobility throm-
boembolism (SIT), the formation of blood clots in the legs or lungs. People
leading a sedentary lifestyle are also likely to experience an undesirable
weight gain, which can lead to increased fatigue and greater risk of type 2
diabetes, heart problems, and other serious ailments.
Repetitive strain injury (RSI) is an injury or disorder of the muscles,
nerves, tendons, ligaments, or joints caused by repetitive motion. RSI is a
very common job-related injury. Tendonitis is inflammation of a tendon due
to repetitive motion on that tendon. Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is an
inflammation of the nerve that connects the forearm to the palm of the wrist.
CTS involves wrist pain, a feeling of tingling and numbness, and difficulty
grasping and holding objects.
Avoiding Health and Environmental Problems
Two primary causes of computer-related health problems are a poorly
designed work environment and failure to take regular breaks to stretch the
muscles and rest the eyes. Computer screens can be hard to read because of
glare and poor contrast. Desks and chairs can also be uncomfortable. Key-
boards and computer screens might be fixed in an awkward position or diffi-
cult to move. The hazardous activities associated with these unfavorable
conditions are collectively referred to as work stressors. Although these pro-
blems might not be of major concern to casual users of computer systems,
continued stressors such as repetitive motion, awkward posture, and eye
strain can cause more serious and long-term injuries. If nothing else, these
problems can severely limit productivity and performance.
The science of designing machines, products, and systems to maximize
the safety, comfort, and efficiency of the people who use them, called ergo-
nomics, has suggested some approaches to reducing these health problems.
Ergonomic experts carefully study the slope of the keyboard, the positioning
and design of display screens, and the placement and design of computer
tables and chairs. Flexibility is a major component of ergonomics and an
important consideration in the design of computer devices. People come in
many sizes, have differing preferences, and require different positioning of
equipment for best results. Some people, for example, want to place the key-
board in their laps; others prefer it on a solid table. Because of these individ-
ual differences, computer designers are attempting to develop systems that
provide a great deal of flexibility. See Figure 14.4.
ergonomics: The science of design-
ing machines, products, and systems to
maximize the safety, comfort, and effi-
ciency of the people who use them.
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 619
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

It is never too soon to stop unhealthy computer work habits. Prolonged
computer use under poor working conditions can lead to carpal tunnel syn-
drome, bursitis, headaches, and permanent eye damage. Strain and poor
office conditions should not be left unchecked. Unfortunately, at times, we
are all distracted by pressing issues such as the organization’s need to raise
productivity, improve quality, meet deadlines, and cut costs. We become com-
placent and fail to pay attention to the importance of healthy working condi-
tions. Table 14.5 lists some common remedies for heavy computer users.
The following is a useful checklist to help you determine if you are prop-
erly seated at a correctly positioned keyboard:58
●
Your elbows are near your body in an open angle to allow circulation to
the lower arms and hands.
FIGURE 14.4
Ergonomics
Developing certain ergonomically
correct habits can reduce the risk of
adverse health effects when using a
computer.
TABLE 14.5 Avoiding common discomforts associated with heavy use of computers
Common Discomforts Associated
with Heavy Use of Computers
Preventative Action
Red, dry, itchy eyes
Change your focus away from the screen every 20 or 30 minutes by looking
into the distance and focusing on an object for 20 to 30 seconds.
Make a conscious effort to blink more often.
Consider the use of artificial tears.
Use an LCD screen, which provides a better viewing experience for your eyes
by eliminating most screen flicker while still being bright without harsh
incandescence.
Neck and shoulder pain
Use proper posture when working at the computer.
Stand up, stretch, and walk around for a few minutes every hour.
Shrug and rotate your shoulders occasionally.
Pain, numbness, or
tingling sensation in hands
Use proper posture when working at the computer.
Do not rest your elbows on hard surfaces.
Place a wrist rest between your computer keyboard and the edge of your desk.
Take an occasional break and spread fingers apart while keeping your wrists
straight.Taken an occasional break with your arms resting at your sides and
gently shake your hands.
Source: Pekker, Michael, “Long Hours at Computer: Health Risks and Prevention Tips,” http://webfreebies4u.blogspot.com/2011/01/long-hours-at-computer-
health-risks-and.html, January 4, 2011.
620 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
●
Your arms are nearly perpendicular to the floor.
●
Your wrists are nearly straight.
●
The height of the surface holding your keyboard and mouse is 1 or 2
inches above your thighs.
●
The keyboard is centered in front of your body.
●
The monitor is about one arm’s length (20 to 26 inches) away.
●
The top of your monitor is at eye level.
●
Your chair has a backrest that supports the curve of your lower (lumbar)
back.
Demanding Role of the Care Manager
You are a member of a healthcare company that offers a variety of services
designed to provide an integrated approach to lifelong well-being. One of the most
effective programs is the case management program where members are assigned a
care manager who supports them by phone. The care manager is an experienced
RN whose goal is to anticipate the member’s needs and problems, encourage pre-
ventive care, and prevent costly interventions. Services frequently include:
●
Facilitating conference calls between the member, the physician, and the care
manager as needed to clarify treatment plans, medication regimens, or other
urgent issues
●
Monitoring medication adherence
●
Assessing the member’s daily living activities and cognitive, behavioral, and
social abilities
●
Assessing the member’s risk for falls and providing fall-prevention education
●
Connecting members and their families with professionals who can help them
address medical, legal, housing, insurance and financial issues facing older
adults
●
Arranging access to transportation
●
Assisting members in obtaining home health and durable medical equipment
●
Referring members to meal-delivery programs and advance directive prepara-
tion services
The role of care manager is a demanding one and, in your company, requires
that the worker be on the phone and in front of a computer 100 percent of their
work day talking with members, other health professionals, and logging key
pieces of information into the computer. The care manager does have the benefits
of being able to work at home with flexible work hours—as long as the care man-
ager interacts with 15 members a day between 8 am and 8 pm. Care givers must
provide their own computer and office equipment but all Internet connection and
phone bills are paid by the company. The turnover rate for care managers is
extremely high with few lasting more than 9 months. Many of the care managers
cite stress and health issues as reasons for quitting.
Review Questions
1.
What sort of health issues would you expect are common among care
managers?
2.
What immediate measures might be taken to relieve the stress and health
issues from which the care managers suffer?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Management is considering fundamental changes to the role of the care man-
agers, their goals, compensation, and their work environment? Should the care
managers be involved in such discussions? What suggestions would you make?
2.
Can you identify other jobs that have similar working conditions and issues?
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 621
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Ethical Issues in Information Systems
Ethical issues deal with what is generally considered right or wrong. People
are continually faced with ethical issues in a wide range of settings, and the
use of information systems brings with it some new and challenging ethical
considerations for end users and for society as a whole. Ethical information
system users define acceptable practices more strictly than just refraining
from committing crimes; they also consider the effects of their IS activities,
including Internet usage, on other people and organizations.
IS professionals are often faced with their own unique set of ethical chal-
lenges in their work developing, implementing, and maintaining information
systems. As a result, some IS professional organizations have developed
codes of ethics to guide people working in IS professions. The next few sec-
tions provide an overview of ethics and ethical decision making before mov-
ing on to a discussion of code of ethics, including a review of a sample code
of ethics.
What Is Ethics?
As previously defined, ethics is a set of beliefs about right and wrong behav-
ior. Ethical behavior conforms to generally accepted social norms—many of
which are almost universally accepted. Doing what is ethical can be difficult
in certain situations. For example, although nearly everyone would agree that
lying and cheating are unethical, some people might consider it acceptable to
tell a lie to protect someone’s feelings or to keep a friend from getting into
trouble.
Morals are one’s personal beliefs about right and wrong, whereas the
term “ethics” describes standards or codes of behavior expected of an individ-
ual by a group (nation, organization, and profession) to which an individual
belongs. For example, the ethics of the law profession demand that defense
attorneys defend an accused client to the best of their ability, even if they
know that the client is guilty of the most heinous and morally objectionable
crime one could imagine.
Law is a system of rules that tells us what we can and cannot do. Laws
are enforced by a set of institutions (the police, courts, law-making bodies).
Legal acts are acts that conform to the law. Moral acts conform to what an
individual believes to be the right thing to do. Laws can proclaim an act as
legal, although some people may consider the act immoral—for example,
abortion.
Including Ethical Considerations in Decision Making
We are all faced with difficult decisions in our work and in our personal life,
and most of us have developed a decision-making process that we execute
almost automatically, without thinking about the steps we go through. For
many of us, the process generally follows these steps: (1) gather information,
(2) develop a problem statement, (3) consult those involved as well as other
appropriate resources, (4) identify options, (5) weigh options, (6) choose an
option, (7) implement a solution, and (8) review results (see Figure 14.5).
Often the decision on what course of action to take in a given situation is
further complicated because it involves significant value conflicts among the
various stakeholders as to what is the fairest option to pursue. Such a deci-
sion represents an ethical dilemma, and all parties involved can benefit when
ethical considerations are introduced into the decision-making process by
answering the questions outlined in Table 14.6. There are many factors to be
considered, and reaching a good, ethical decision can be difficult, as illus-
trated in Figure 14.6.
morals: One’s personal beliefs about
right and wrong.
law: A system of rules that tells us
what we can and cannot do.
622 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FIGURE 14.5
Steps involved in the
decision-making process
Most of us have developed a
decision-making process that we
execute almost automatically, with-
out thinking about the steps we go
through.
Gather
information
Develop
problem
statement
Consult those
involved
and appropriate
resources
Identify
options
Weigh
options
Choose
option
Implement
solution
Review
results
Decision-making
process
TABLE 14.6 Key questions to ask at each step in the decision-making process
Questions to Consider
Step 1: Gather information
●
Have you spoken to everyone directly involved and gathered all the facts necessary to define the problem?
●
Have you avoided assuming facts, motivations, or actions for which there is no evidence?
Step 2: Develop a problem statement
●
Do you know the answers to the following questions:
●
What do people observe that causes them to think there is a problem?
●
Who is directly affected by the problem?
●
Is anyone else affected?
●
How often does the problem occur?
●
What is the impact of the problem?
●
How serious is the problem?
●
What are the ethical issues involved?
●
When is a solution needed?
●
Have you shared the problem statement with the stakeholders, and do they concur?
Step 3: Consult those involved as well as other appropriate resources
●
Have you discussed this issue with your manager?
●
Have you sought input from human resources, legal, or other appropriate subject matter experts?
Step 4: Identify options
●
Have you identified the success criteria for a “good solution”?
●
Have the stakeholders had an opportunity to offer solutions?
Step 5: Weigh options
●
How does each alternative fit with your organization’s code of ethics, policies, regulations, and organizational norms?
●
Is each alternative legal and consistent with industry standards?
●
Does each alternative have possible unintended consequences? If so, how will you deal with those?
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 623
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Codes of Ethics
Laws do not provide a complete guide to ethical behavior. Just because an
activity is defined as legal does not mean that it is ethical (see Figure 14.7).
As a result, practitioners in many professions subscribe to a code of ethics
that states the principles and core values that are essential to their work and,
therefore, govern their behavior. The code can become a reference point for
weighing what is legal and what is ethical. For example, doctors adhere to
varying versions of the 2,000-year-old Hippocratic Oath, which medical
schools offer as an affirmation to their graduating classes.
Some IS professionals believe that their field offers many opportunities
for unethical behavior. They also believe that unethical behavior can be
reduced by top-level managers developing, discussing, and enforcing codes
of ethics. Various IS-related organizations and associations promote ethically
responsible use of information systems and have developed useful codes of
ethics. Founded in 1947, the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) is
TABLE 14.6 Key questions to ask at each step in the decision-making process (continued)
Questions to Consider
Step 6: Choose an option
●
Have you considered how choice of this option might appear to others?
●
Would you be comfortable explaining your decision and describing your decision-making process to others?
●
Is your decision grounded in a basic sense of fairness to all affected parties?
Step 7: Implement a solution
●
Have you provided to all stakeholders answers to the following questions:
●
Why are we doing this?
●
What is wrong with the current way we do things?
●
What are the benefits of the new way for you?
●
Do you have a clear transition plan that explains to people how they will move from the old way of doing things to
the new way?
Step 8: Review results
●
Were the success criteria fully met?
●
Were there any unintended consequences?
●
Is there a need for further refinements?
FIGURE 14.6
There are many factors to
weigh in decision making
Personal beliefs,
values, and morals?
Industry and
corporate standards?
Organizational
code of ethics?
Organizational norms
and reward system?
Laws and
regulations?
Personal goals?
Code of 
professional conduct?
Deamles for Sale/Shutterstoc.com
code of ethics: A code that states
the principles and core values that are
essential to a set of people and that,
therefore, govern these people’s
behavior.
624 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Critical
Thinking 
Exercise
the oldest computing society and boasts more than 100,000 members in
more than 100 countries.59 The ACM has a code of ethics and professional
conduct that includes eight general moral imperatives that can be used to
help guide the actions of IS professionals. These guidelines can also be used
for those who employ or hire IS professionals to monitor and guide their
work. These imperatives are outlined in the following list:60 As an ACM
member I will
1. contribute to society and human well-being.
2. avoid harm to others.
3. be honest and trustworthy.
4. be fair and take action not to discriminate.
5. honor property rights including copyrights and patents.
6. give proper credit for intellectual property.
7. respect the privacy of others.
8. honor confidentiality.
The mishandling of the social issues discussed in this chapter—including
waste and mistakes, crime, privacy, health, and ethics—can devastate an orga-
nization. The prevention of these problems and recovery from them are
important aspects of managing information and information systems as critical
corporate assets. More organizations are recognizing that people are the most
important component of a computer-based information system and that long-
term competitive advantage can be found in a well-trained, motivated, and
knowledgeable workforce that adheres to a set of principles and core values
that help guide that workforce’s actions.
Code of Ethics
You have been asked to lead an effort to develop a code of ethics for a student
professional organization in your career field.
Review Questions
1.
What is a code of ethics and what is its intent?
2.
What are some of the key elements in almost every code of ethics?
Critical Thinking Questions
1.
Are there some unique issues that need to be addressed for people entering
your career?
2.
What sort of process and who would you involve in establishing a code of
ethics for this professional organization?
FIGURE 14.7
Legal versus ethical
Just because an activity is defined
as legal does not mean that it is
ethical.
Ethical
Unethical
Illegal
Legal
Ethical
and
illegal
Unethical
and
illegal
Ethical
and
legal
Unethical
and
legal
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 625
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Summary
Principle:
Policies and procedures must be established to avoid waste and mistakes
associated with computer usage.
Computer-related waste and mistakes are major causes of computer pro-
blems, contributing to unnecessarily high costs and lost profits. Computer
waste is the inappropriate use of computer technology and resources in both
the public and private sectors. Computer mistakes relate to errors, failures, and
other problems that result in output that is incorrect and without value. Waste
often results from poor integration of IS components, leading to duplication of
efforts and overcapacity. Inefficient procedures also waste IS resources, as do
thoughtless disposal of useful resources and misuse of computer time and
resources for personal use. Inappropriate processing instructions, inaccurate
data entry, mishandling of IS output, and poor systems design all cause com-
puter mistakes.
Preventing waste and mistakes involves establishing, implementing, moni-
toring, and reviewing effective policies and procedures. Companies should
develop manuals and training programs to avoid waste and mistakes. Training
programs for individuals and work groups as well as manuals and documents
covering the use and maintenance of computer systems can also help prevent
computer waste and mistakes. Training and communication are also the keys to
the successful acceptance and implementation of policies and procedures
implementation. To ensure that users throughout an organization are following
established procedures, routine practices must be monitored and corrective
action taken when necessary. The final step in preventing computer-related
waste and mistakes is to review existing policies and procedures to determine
whether they are adequate.
Principle:
The use of technology requires balancing the needs of those who use the
information that is collected against the rights of those whose informa-
tion is being used.
Privacy is an important social issue related to the use of information sys-
tems. Balancing the right to privacy versus the need for additional monitoring
to protect against terrorism and cyberattacks is an especially challenging
problem.
Privacy issues are a concern with email, instant messaging, and personal
sensing devices.
The federal government has implemented many laws addressing personal
privacy; however, data-collection programs have raised concerns and debate
between those who favor data collection as a means to increased security and
those who view such programs as a violation of their rights.
Employers use technology and corporate policies to manage worker pro-
ductivity and protect the use of IS resources. This activity includes monitoring
of employees’ Web surfing, email, and instant messaging. Most employers
today have a policy that explicitly eliminates any expectation of privacy when
an employee uses any company-owned computer, server, or email system.
The proliferation of health and wellness programs at many U.S. companies
has prompted some privacy advocates to call for updated regulations regarding
the use of data collected in connection with such programs. New questions
regarding employee data privacy have also arisen as more employers are
encouraging—or requiring—the use of wearable technology that monitors not
only employees’ health but also their locations.
626 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Some people approach the Internet with the assumption that there is
no privacy online and that people who choose to use the Internet do so at
their own risk. Others believe that companies with Web sites should have
strict privacy procedures and be held accountable for privacy invasion.
Regardless of your view, the potential for privacy invasion on the Internet
is huge.
Selling information to other companies can be so lucrative that many com-
panies store and sell the data they collect on customers, employees, and others.
Fairness in information use for privacy rights emphasizes knowledge, control,
notice, and consent for people profiled in databases. People should know
about the data that is stored about them and be able to correct errors in corpo-
rate database systems. If information on people is to be used for other pur-
poses, individuals should be asked to give their consent beforehand. Each
person has the right to know and to decide.
To help parents control what their children see on the Internet, some com-
panies provide filtering software to help screen Internet content.
A business should develop a clear and thorough policy about privacy
rights for customers, including database access. That policy should also
address the rights of employees, including electronic monitoring systems and
email.
Principle:
Jobs, equipment, and working conditions must be designed to avoid neg-
ative health effects from computers.
Jobs that involve heavy use of computers contribute to a sedentary lifestyle,
which increases the risk of health problems.
The study of designing and positioning computer equipment, called
“ergonomics,” has suggested some approaches to reducing these health pro-
blems. Ergonomic design principles help to reduce harmful effects and
increase the efficiency of an information system. RSI (repetitive strain injury)
prevention includes keeping good posture, not ignoring pain or problems,
performing stretching and strengthening exercises, and seeking proper
treatment.
Principle:
Practitioners in many professions subscribe to a code of ethics that states
the principles and core values that are essential to their work.
Ethical issues deal with what is generally considered right or wrong. Ethics
is a set of beliefs about right and wrong behavior.
Ethical computer users define acceptable practices more strictly than just
refraining from committing crimes; they also consider the effects of their IS
activities, including Internet usage, on other people and organizations.
Often the decision on what course of action to take in a given situation is
further complicated because it involves significant value conflicts among the
various stakeholders as to what is the fairest option to pursue. Such a decision
represents an ethical dilemma, and all parties involved can benefit when ethical
considerations are introduced into the decision-making process.
Laws do not provide a complete guide to ethical behavior. Just because an
activity is defined as legal does not mean that it is ethical. As a result, practi-
tioners in many professions subscribe to a code of ethics that states the princi-
ples and core values that are essential to the members of a profession or
organization. The Association for Computing Machinery developed guidelines
and a code of ethics. Many IS professionals join computer-related associations
and agree to abide by detailed ethical codes.
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 627
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Key Terms
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA)
code of ethics
ergonomics
filtering software
Fourth Amendment
law
morals
Chapter 14: Self-Assessment Test
Policies and procedures must be established to
avoid waste and mistakes associated with computer
usage.
1. Wasting time online costs U.S. businesses more
than
annually.
a. $385 billion
b. $285 billion
c. $185 million
d. $85 billion
2. Which of the following is not a common
computer-related mistake?
a. Programming errors
b. Shopping online while at work
c. Data-entry or data-capture errors
d. Errors in handling files
3. The Government Accounting Office uncovered
a total of $321 million spent in the six-year
period 2008 to 2013 on projects that duplicated
other efforts within the Defense Department,
Department of Homeland Security, and the
Department of Health and Human Services.
True or False?
4. Preventing waste and mistakes involves estab-
lishing, implementing, monitoring,
and
policies and procedures.
5. Few companies have found it necessary to limit
employee access to non-work-related Web sites.
True or False?
The use of technology requires balancing the needs
of those who use the information that is collected
against the rights of those whose information is
being used.
6. The United States has implemented few laws
addressing personal privacy. True or False?
7. The
imposes limitations on the
bulk collection of the telecommunications meta-
data of U.S. citizens; prohibits large-scale indis-
criminate data collection (such as all records
from an entire zip code); and requires the NSA
to obtain permission from the Foreign Intelli-
gence Surveillance Court (FISC) to access the
metadata records, which are now held by tele-
communication companies rather than by the
government.
8.
is a tool used by the NSA and FBI
to access the servers of major Internet services
such as Facebook, Google, YouTube, and others
to collect the content of emails, video, photos, file
transfers, and live chats.
9. In 2015, the European Court of Justice found that
the Safe Harbor Framework (an agreement that
had been in place since 2000 between the United
States and the European Union (EU), allowing the
transfer of personal data from the EU to the
United States) did not adequately protect the
personal data of citizens residing in EU countries.
True or False?
10. The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA) was passed by Congress in October
1998. This act, directed at Web sites catering to
children, requires site owners to post compre-
hensive privacy policies and to obtain parental
consent before they collect any personal infor-
mation from children under
years
of age.
a. 10
b. 13
c. 18
d. 21
Jobs, equipment, and working conditions must be
designed to avoid negative health effects from
computers.
11. Heavy computer use can negatively affect one’s
physical health. True or False?
12. Two primary causes of computer-related health
problems are a poorly designed
and failure to take regular breaks to stretch the
muscles and rest the eyes.
13. The study of designing and positioning computer
equipment is called
.
Practitioners in many professions subscribe to a
code of ethics that states the principles and core
values that are essential to their work.
14. Morals are one’s personal beliefs about right and
wrong, whereas the term
describes
standards or codes of behavior expected of an
individual by a group (nation, organization, and
profession) to which an individual belongs.
628 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

15. Just because an activity is defined as legal does
not mean that it is ethical. True or False?
16. Founded in 1977, the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM) is the oldest computing society
and boasts more than 200,000 members in more
than 120 countries. True or False?
Chapter 14: Self-Assessment Test Answers
1. d
2. b
3. True
4. reviewing
5. False
6. False
7. USA Freedom Act (2015)
8. PRISM
9. True
10. b
11. True
12. work environment
13. ergonomics
14. ethics
15. True
16. False
Review Questions
1. What issues and problems are raised by the use of
unintegrated information systems?
2. What is ergonomics? How can it be applied to
office workers?
3. Provide a few examples of actions organizations
are taking to help eliminate workers’ nonpro-
ductive computer-related activity.
4. What is the First Amendment? What is the Fourth
Amendment? What rights do they guarantee?
5. What is meant by “reasonable expectation of pri-
vacy”? How does this impact the application of
the Fourth Amendment?
6. What is the purpose of the Safe Harbor Frame-
work and Privacy Shield?
7. What is sexting? What issues can arise from
sexting?
8. What is mobile crowd sensing? How might it be
used?
9. Provide a brief summary of the various attempts
by Congress to limit children’s exposure to online
pornography,
10. In collecting telephone call data, what is meta-
data? How might it be used?
11. What changes did the USA Freedom Act make in
the collection and viewing of telephone call
data?
12. What is a code of ethics? Give an example.
Discussion Questions
1. Identify recent examples of information system
snafus causing disruptions. Do research to iden-
tify the root cause of the problem.
2. Identify and briefly discuss the most common
examples you observe of coworkers wasting
time in nonproductive use of information
system resources. Do you believe your
organization should take action to limit or end
to these practices? What actions could be
taken?
3. Do you feel that the measures in place to protect
your personal data you provide to health care
organizations are sufficient? Why or why not?
What would you like to see changed?
4. How do you feel about the data you provide your
bank being shared with other financial institutions
who can use that data to tailor special offers and
promotions for you to refinance your home, obtain
an auto loan, buy additional insurance, and so
forth? Should such sharing of data be prohibited or
does it sometimes provide a useful service?
5. What are your feelings about the PRISM tool used
the FBI and NSA to collect private electronic data
belonging to users of major Internet services
without having to request this data from the
service providers and without having to obtain
individual court orders?
6. Imagine that you are starting a dating Web site to
help match compatible couples. What sort of
personal data might you need to gather? What
measures would need to be taken to protect this
sensitive data? What key statements would
potential users likely want to see in the privacy
statement of this Web site?
7. Your 13-year-old nephew shows you a half-dozen
or so innocent photos of himself and a brief
biography, including address and cell phone
number that he plans to post on a social network
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 629
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

for teens. What advice might you offer him about
posting personal information and photos?
8. Identify and briefly discuss a difficult decision
you had to make that had some ethical consid-
erations. How do you feel about your decision-
making process in reaching a decision in this
case? With 20–20 hindsight, is there anything you
would have done differently?
9. Do you think that there is a difference
between acting ethically and acting legally?
Explain.
10. Should employers be able to monitor the email,
text, and phone calls of employees? Is there any
degree of “monitoring” that you find acceptable/
unacceptable?
Problem-Solving Exercises
1. Do research to identify the latest findings on
the negative effects of sitting for long hours
working at a computer. Find recommendations
on how to arrange your desk and computer
to avoid health problems. Prepare a brief pre-
sentation that summarizes your findings and
identifies what can be done to offset these
negative effects.
2. Organizational network analysis is a method for
studying communication among individuals.
Read the article: Making the Invisible Visible:
SNA of the NSA by Joseph A.E. Shaheen at https://
www.josephshaheen.com/nsa-sna-xkeyscore/370.
The NSA uses the techniques described there to
analyze communications among individuals. Use
graphics software to create an organizational
network analysis that depicts your email and text
communications for a week. If someone were to
study this network analysis, what conclusions
might they draw about you?
3. Create an algorithm that rates how well indivi-
duals protect their privacy based on the data they
reveal in their user profile and postings to social
networks. The algorithm should generate a score
of 0 for anyone who is completely oblivious of
the need to protect their privacy and identity and
100 for someone who does an excellent job at
this. Factors to consider include how discrete
they are in revealing personal information such
as sexual orientation, health conditions, addic-
tions, income data, and personal details about
friends. Now test your algorithm using data from
two of your contacts. Based on the results, adjust
the algorithm as you see fit. Now test the revised
algorithm with two other contacts. Summarize
your findings from this exercise.
Team Activities
1. Your team has been asked to develop your
school’s first student code of ethics. How might
you approach this task? Who might you try to
involve? What might be some key tenants of such
a code of ethics?
2. Imagine that your team has been hired to conduct
a review of the information system policies and
procedures employed in the student registration
department at your school or university. Develop
a list of at least 10 specific questions that your
team would use to assess the effectiveness of
these policies and procedures in reducing mis-
takes, waste, and costs.
3. Have each member of your team access six dif-
ferent Web sites and summarize their findings in
terms of the existence of data privacy policy
statements. Did each site have such a policy? Was
it easy to find? Did it seem complete and easy to
understand? Does it adequately cover any con-
cerns you might have as a visitor to that site?
Web Exercises
1. Do research on Edward Snowden the U.S.
computer professional, former Central Intelli-
gence Agency employee, and former contrac-
tor for the United States government who
copied and leaked classified information
from the National Security Agency in 2013
without prior authorization. Do you consider
him to be a traitor, patriot, or something
else? Why?
2. Do research to determine the current status of the
Privacy Shield as a framework for governing
transborder data flow. Write a brief report sum-
marizing your findings.
3. Request a current copy of your free credit report
through the AnnualCreditReport.com Web site.
Review the report carefully for any inaccuracies.
Follow the necessary steps to remove these
inaccuracies.
630 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Career Exercises
1. You have been offered an entry-level manage-
ment position with a military aircraft manufac-
turer. Due to national security concerns, the
organization has very strong policies against the
personal use of computers and smartphones
while you are at ework. They have also made it
clear that all forms of employee communications
are closely monitored to avoid the intentional or
unintentional leak of classified material. How
might these policies affect your decision to accept
a position with this firm?
2. You have been approached by the NSA to work
in an information systems group that will use
high-powered computers and advanced analytic
techniques to study phone call metadata and
other data that has been obtained through For-
eign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) orders
in an attempt to identify terrorists and stop
impending terrorist acts. Obviously, you will not
be able to talk to anyone about your work; how-
ever, your total compensation will be more than
10 percent greater than any position for which
you have applied. Would you accept this posi-
tion? Why or why not?
3. Do research to find any professional organization
or code of ethics associated with your current or
desired future career. What might be the benefits
of joining such a professional organization? How
might a code of ethics help guide you in career-
related decision making?
Case Studies
Case One
FBI Orders Apple to Unlock iPhone
On December 2, 2015, Syed Rizwan Farook and Tashfeen
Malik burst into a holiday gathering of county employees at
the Inland Regional Center in San Bernardino, California, and
began shooting—ultimately killing 14 people and wounding
another 21. In the hours after the attack, the couple became
involved in a shootout with police, and both were killed.
With their deaths, the investigation into the deadliest
terrorist attack in the United States since September 11, 2001,
entered a new phase, as hundreds of FBI agents in California
and around the world began investigating the attackers’
online and offline activities in the hours, weeks, and months
leading up to the shootings. In addition to the stockpile of
weapons and homemade pipe bombs found in the home of
Farook and Malik, investigators found multiple electronic
devices. While attempts had been made by the couple to
delete data and damage some of the devices, FBI Director
James Comey reported two weeks after the attack that
investigators had found private messages between the two
that showed their “joint commitment to jihad and to
martyrdom.” In addition, Malik posted a note on Facebook
shortly after the shootings, pledging the couple’s allegiance
to the leader of ISIS, a terrorist network also known as the
Islamic State.
In order to further investigate possible connections to
extremist groups, the FBI attempted to access the data on an
iPhone used by Farook. The phone, which belonged to
Farook’s employer, the San Bernardino County Health
Department, was locked by a passcode, and neither the
county nor the FBI were able to unlock the phone. The iOS
software installed on Apple’s phones allows only 10
unsuccessful passcode attempts before it wipes the phone’s
memory clean. This security feature prevented the FBI from
attempting a “brute-force” attack, which is essentially a trial-
and-error method in which all possible passcodes are tried
systematically until the correct one is uncovered.
In the weeks following the shootings, Apple
representatives cooperated with the FBI’s investigation,
providing some older data backups from the phone as well as
suggesting possible methods the agency could use to access
the data on the phone itself. The company balked, however,
when the FBI demanded that the company develop new
software that would disable the functionality that wipes the
phone’s memory when too many wrong passcodes are entered
in a row. The FBI also wanted Apple to eliminate the built-in
delay between passcode attempts, which, by Apple’s
estimates, meant that a brute-force attack on a phone with a
six-digit passcode could take more than five years to complete.
The FBI’s demand that Apple develop new software that
would allow it to unlock the phone in this case is an extension
of an ongoing debate about whether tech companies should
be compelled to build a “backdoor” into their software that
would allow the government to access data even when secure
encryption has been used to protect it. Without it, some law
enforcement experts warn, the United States could be faced
with the prospect of what has been dubbed the “Going Dark”
problem, which some experts fear would lead to the inability
of law enforcement to access electronic data even with a
warrant. That concern was heightened for some when Apple
announced in 2014 that it had altered its software so that it
was no longer “technically feasible for us to respond to
government warrants for the extraction of data from devices”
running iOS 8 or later versions of that software.
On February 16, 2016, a U.S. magistrate in California
ordered Apple to assist the government by creating a custom
version of iOS that would run only on the iPhone in question
and that would provide the functionality demanded by the
FBI. In its motion requesting the order, the Department of
Justice cited the All Writs Act, a law signed by President
George Washington, which, among other things, gives
federal judges the power to issue court orders compelling
people to do things within the limits of the law and which
has frequently been used as the basis for court orders
compelling telecommunications companies to install and
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 631
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

operate call-tracking devices. In its filing, the DOJ alleged
that Apple “deliberately raised technological barriers that
now stand between a lawful warrant and an iPhone
containing evidence related to the terrorist mass murder of
14 Americans.”
Apple challenged the judge’s order, arguing that it would
set dangerous legal precedent. The company also issued a
statement on its Web site that said, in part, “The implications
of the government’s demands are chilling. If the government
can use the All Writs Act to make it easier to unlock your
iPhone, it would have the power to reach into anyone’s
device to capture their data. The government could extend
this breach of privacy and demand that Apple build
surveillance software to intercept your messages, access your
health records or financial data, track your location, or even
access your phone’s microphone or camera without your
knowledge.” According to Apple, “Opposing this order is not
something we take lightly. We feel we must speak up in the
face of what we see as an overreach by the U.S. government.”
The case took another turn before the scheduled court
hearing on the issue in March 2016, when the Justice
Department announced that it had successfully accessed the
contents of the phone using a tool provided the government
by an unnamed third party. After its announcement, the
Justice Department withdrew its motion to compel Apple to
develop the requested software; however, according to a
Justice Department spokeswoman, “It remains a priority for
the government to ensure that law enforcement can obtain
crucial digital information to protect national security and
public safety, either with cooperation from relevant parties,
or through the court system when cooperation fails.”
Critical Thinking Questions
1. Why did Apple object to the court order in this case?
What was the government’s rationale for compelling
Apply to comply with the order?
2. Do you think Americans should be willing to surrender
some of their privacy for increased security by allow-
ing backdoors that enable law enforcement access to
smartphones and other devices after a search warrant
has been issued? Why or why not?
3. The FBI and Apple are involved in similar disputes in
other cases, including one in New York involving an
alleged drug conspiracy. Shortly before the govern-
ment dropped its legal action against Apple in the San
Bernardino case, the judge in the New York case ruled
against the government, rejecting the argument that
the All Writs Act gave prosecutors the authority to
compel Apple to bypass the lock on the seized phone.
Do your opinions about the issues involved in the San
Bernardino case change when they arise in connection
with a case that does not have national security impli-
cations? Why or why not?
SOURCES: Almasy, Steve, “FBI Asks for Help Filling in San Bernardino
Terrorist Attack Timeline,” CNN, January 5, 2016, www.cnn.com/2016
/01/05/us/san-bernardino-terrorist-attack; Nelson, Joe, “Investigation
into San Bernardino Mass Shooting Will Be ‘Expansive and Expensive’,”
San Bernardino County Sun, www.sbsun.com/general-news/20151220
/investigation-into-san-bernardino-mass-shooting-will-be-expansive
-and-expensive; Medina, Jennifer, Richard Perez-Pena, Michael S.
Schmidt, and Laurie Goldstein, “San Bernardino Suspects Left Trail of
Clues, but No Clear Motive,” New York Times, December 3, 2015, www
.nytimes.com/2015/12/04/us/san-bernardino-shooting.html?_r=0; Gold-
man, Adam and Mark Berman, “FBI: San Bernardino Attackers Didn’t
Show Public Support for Jihad On Social Media,” Washington Post,
December 16, 2015, www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp
/2015/12/16/fbi-san-bernardino-attackers-didnt-show-public-support
-for-jihad-on-social-media; Green, Chloe, “Brute Force Attacks: How You
Can Stop Hackers Breaking Your Door In,” Information Age, May 11,
2016, www.information-age.com/technology/security/123461414/brute
-force-attacks-how-you-can-stop-hackers-breaking-your-door; “Opera-
tional Technology: Going Dark Issue,” Federal Bureau of Investigation,
www.fbi.gov/about-us/otd/going-dark-issue, accessed May 9, 2016;
Panzarino, Matthew, “No, Apple Has Not Unlocked 70 iPhones for Law
Enforcement,” TechCrunch, February 18, 2016, http://techcrunch.com
/2016/02/18/no-apple-has-not-unlocked-70-iphones-for-law-enforce
ment; Palazzolo, Joe and Devlin Barrett, “Roots of Apple-FBI Standoff
Reach Back to 2008 Case,” Wall Street Journal, www.wsj.com/articles
/roots-of-apple-fbi-standoff-reach-back-to-2008-case-1460052008?
mg=id-wsj; Timberg, Craig, “Apple Will No Longer Unlock Most iPhones,
iPads for Police, Even with Search Warrants,” Washington Post,
September 18, 2014, www.washingtonpost.com/business/technology
/2014/09/17/2612af58-3ed2-11e4-b03f-de718edeb92f_story.html;
Lewis, Danny, “What the All Writs Act of 1789 Has to Do with the
iPhone,” Smithsonian, February 24, 2016, www.smithsonianmag.com
/smart-news/what-all-writs-act-1789-has-do-iphone-180958188/?no-ist;
Hollister, Sean and Connie Guglielmo, “How an iPhone Became the FBI’s
Public Enemy No. 1 (FAQ),” CNET, February 25, 2016, www.cnet.com
/news/apple-versus-the-fbi-why-the-lowest-priced-iphone-has-the-us-in-
a-tizzy-faq; “A Message to Our Customers,” Apple, February 16, 2016,
www.apple.com/customer-letter; Barrett, Devlin, “FBI Paid More than $1
Million to Hack San Bernardino iPhone,” Wall Street Journal, April 21,
2016, www.wsj.com/articles/comey-fbi-paid-more-than-1-million-to
-hack-san-bernardino-iphone-1461266641; Zetter, Kim, “Apple’s FBI
Battle Is Complicated. Here’s What’s Really Going On,” Wired, February
18, 2016, www.wired.com/2016/02/apples-fbi-battle-is-complicated
-heres-whats-really-going-on; Barrett, Devlin, “Judge Sides with Apple in
N.Y. Drug Case Involving Locked Phone,” Wall Street Journal, March 1,
2016, www.wsj.com/articles/judge-sides-with-apple-in-drug-case-invol
ving-locked-phone-1456785910.
Case Two
Protecting Health Care Privacy
The U.S. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA) addresses (among other things) the privacy of
health information. Title 2 of the act regulates the use and
disclosure of protected health information (PHI), such as
billing services, by healthcare providers, insurance carriers,
employers, and business associates.
Email is often the best way for a hospital to communicate
with off-site specialists and insurance carriers about a patient.
Unfortunately, standard email is insecure. It allows
eavesdropping, later retrieval of messages from unprotected
backups, message modification before it is received, potential
invasion of the sender’s privacy by providing access to
information about the identity and location of the sending
computer, and more. Since healthcare provider email often
includes PHI, healthcare facilities must be sure their email
systems meet HIPAA privacy and security requirements.
Children’s National Medical Center (CNMC) of
Washington, D.C., “The Nation’s Children’s Hospital,” is
especially aware of privacy concerns because its patients are
children. CNMC did what many organizations do when faced
with a specialized problem: rather than try to become
specialists or hire specialists for whom the hospital has no
long-term full-time need, it turned to a specialist firm.
632 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CNMC chose Proofpoint of Sunnyvale, California, for its
security as a service (SaaS) email privacy protection service.
Matt Johnston, senior security analyst at CNMC, says that
children are “the highest target for identity theft. A small kid’s
record is worth its weight in gold on the black market. It’s
not the doctor’s job to protect that information. It’s my job.”
Johnston explains that he likes several things about the
Proofpoint service:
●
“I don’t have to worry about backups.” Proofpoint han-
dles those.
●
“I don’t have to worry about if a server goes down. [If it
was a CNMC server, I would have to] get my staff
ramped up and bring up another server. Proofpoint does
that for us. It’s one less headache.”
●
“We had a product in-house before. It required several
servers which took a full FTE [full-time employee] just to
manage this product. It took out too much time.”
●
“Spam has been on the rise. Since Proofpoint came in,
we’ve seen a dramatic decrease in spam. It takes care of
itself. The end user is given a digest daily.”
●
Email can be encrypted or not, according to rules that
the end user need not be personally concerned with.
●
“Their tech support has been great.”
Proofpoint is not the only company that provides
healthcare providers with email security services. LuxSci of
Cambridge, Massachusetts, also offers HIPAA-compliant
email hosting services, as do several other firms. They all
provide the same basic features: user authentication,
transmission security (encryption), logging, and audit.
Software that runs on the provider’s computers can also
deliver media control and backup. Software that runs on a
user organization’s server necessarily relies on that
organization to manage storage; for example, deleting
messages from the server after four weeks as HIPAA
requires.
As people become more aware of the privacy risks
associated with standard email, the use of more secure
solutions such as these will undoubtedly become more
common in the future.
Critical Thinking Questions
1. What requirement does HIPAA institute to safeguard
patient privacy?
2. Universities use email to communicate private
information. For example, an instructor might
send you an email explaining what you must do to
raise your grade. The regulations about protecting
that information under the Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) are not as strict
as those under HIPAA. Do you think they should
be as strict as HIPAA’s requirements? Why or
why not?
3. How does Proofpoint safeguard patient privacy? Could
Proofpoint do the same for university and corporate
emails? Why or why not?
SOURCES: Children’s National Medical Center Web site, www.children
snational.org, accessed August 28, 2014; LuxSci Web site, www.luxsci
.com, accessed August 28, 2014; Proofpoint Web site, www.proofpoint.
com, accessed August 28, 2014; Staff, “HIPAA Email Security Case Study:
Children’s National Medical Center,” Proofpoint, www.youtube.com
/watch?v=RVaBaNvwkQE, accessed August 7, 2014.
Notes
1.
1. Vest, Joshua R., Issel, L. Michele, and Lee, Sean, “Expe-
rience of Using Information Systems in Public Health
Practice: Findings from a Qualitative Study,” February 5,
2014, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC
3959909/.
2. Thibodeau, Patrick, “Government Wants to Increase IT
Spending 1.3% in Proposed Budget,” Computerworld,
February 9, 2016, www.computerworld.com/article
/3031664/it-management/government-wants-to-increase
-it-spending-13-in-proposed-budget.html.
3. Gallagher, Sean, “De-Dupe Time: GAO Finds $321
Million in Redundant Government IT Spending,” Ars
Technica, September 17, 2013, http://arstechnica.com
/information-technology/2013/09/de-dupe-time
-gao-finds-321-million-in-redundant-government-it
-spending.
4. “Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative (FSSI),” General
Services Administration, accessed May 6, 2016, www.gsa
.gov/portal/content/105156.
5. “New CareerBuilder Survey Reveals the Most Common
and Strangest Productivity Killers at Work,” Career-
Builder, June 11, 2015, www.careerbuilder.com/share
/aboutus/pressreleasesdetail.aspx?sd=6%2F11%
2F2015&id=pr898&ed=12%2F31%2F2015.
6. Zakrzewski, Cat, “The Key to Getting Workers to Stop
Wasting Time Online,” Wall Street Journal, March 13,
2016, www.wsj.com/articles/the-key-to-getting-workers
-to-stop-wasting-time-online-1457921545?mg=id-wsj.
7. “New CareerBuilder Survey,” CareerBuilder.
8. Zakrzewski, “Stop Wasting Time Online.”
9. Rein, Lisa,” Watchdog: IRS Sent Out $46M in Tax
Refunds Flagged as Potentially Fraudulent,” Chicago
Tribune, December 23, 2015, www.chicagotribune
.com/news/nationworld/ct-irs-tax-refunds-flagged
-fraudulent-20151223-story.html.
10. Kaste, Martin, “2 Prisoners Mistakenly Released Early
Now Charged in Killings,” NPR, January 1, 2016, www
.npr.org/2016/01/01/461700642/computer-glitch-leads
-to-mistaken-early-release-of-prisoners-in-washington.
11. Lorenzetti, Laura, “NYSE Explains Why It Went Down
Wednesday,” Fortune, July 9, 2015, http://fortune.com
/2015/07/09/nyse-explains-why-it-went-down-
wednesday.
12. Gandel, Stephen, “This Is Why the NYSE Shut Down
Today,” Fortune, July 8, 2015, http://fortune.com/2015
/07/08/nyse-halt.
13. Golson, Jordan, “Honda Accidentally Charges Many
Customers Twice for Single Car Payment,” Verge, April 6,
2016, www.theverge.com/2016/4/6/11380448/honda-
car-payment-overcharge-double-price-error-mistake.
14. Lutz, Hannah, “Honda ’Working Feverishly’ to Fix Cus-
tomer Billing Glitch,” Automotive News, April 6, 2016,
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 633
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

www.autonews.com/article/20160406/OEM/160409849
/honda-working-feverishly-to-fix-customer-billing-glitch.
15. “Corporate E-Learning,” Error Prevention Training Insti-
tute, smartpeopledumbthings.com/e-learning
/corporate-training/, accessed July 21, 2014.
16. McCormick, Jonathan, “How to Manage IT in a Growing
Business: Implementing IT Policies,” NetworkWorld,
April 11, 2016, www.networkworld.com/article
/3054601/careers/how-to-manage-it-in-a-growing
-business-implementing-it-policies.html.
17. Kanowitz, Stephanie, “VA’s Information Security Still
Lacking, Audit Shows,” FierceGovernmentIT, March 17,
2016, www.fiercegovernmentit.com/story/vas-information
-security-still-lacking-audit-shows/2016-03-17.
18. Healy, Beth, “State Street Overbilled Customers $200M
over 18 Years,” Boston Globe, December 17, 2015, www
.bostonglobe.com/business/2015/12/17/state-street-says
-overbilled-customers-million-over-years/eiHpkMswIB9
glkZO9z06VO/story.html.
19. Healy, Beth, “State Street Hit by Galvin for Overbilling
Clients,” Boston Globe, April 20, 1016, www.bostonglobe
.com/business/2016/04/20/state-street-hit-galvin-for
-overbilling-clients/8j3n0XMwUOLddJQcijtMRK/story.html.
20. “Edward Snowden, Whistle-Blower,” New York Times,
January 1, 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/01/02/opinion
/edward-snowden-whistle-blower.html.
21. Diamond, Jeremy, “Thought Bulk Data Collection Was
Gone? Think Again,” CNN, June 2, 2015, www.cnn.com
/2015/06/02/politics/bulk-data-collection-coming-back
-usa-freedom-act.
22. Kelly, Erin, “Senate Approves USA Freedom Act,” USA
Today, June 2, 2015, www.usatoday.com/story/news
/politics/2015/06/02/patriot-act-usa-freedom-act-senate
-vote/28345747.
23. Rampton, Rebecca, “Obama to Propose Ending NSA
Bulk Collection of Phone Records: Official,” Reuters,
March 24, 2014, www.reuters.com/article/2014/03/25
/us-usa-security-obama-nsa-idUSBREA2O03O20140325.
24. Walker, Laura, “NSA to Destroy Data Collected from
Mass Phone Surveillance,” Newsweek, July 27, 2015,
www.newsweek.com/nsa-destroy-data-collected-mass
-phone-surveillance-357500.
25. Sutton, James, “NSA Obtains Permission to Collect
Metadata under New Law,” The Hill Talk, April 24, 2016,
http://thehilltalk.com/2016/04/24/17121.
26. Hosenball, Mark, “Secret U.S. Court Issues First Order
for Phone Data under New Law,” Reuters, April 19, 2016,
www.reuters.com/article/usa-surveillance-court-
idUSL2N17M26C.
27. “NSA Prism Program Taps into User Data of Apple, Goo-
gle and Others,” Guardian, June 6, 2013, www.theguar
dian.com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-giants-nsa-data.
28. Nakashima, Ellen, “Public Advocate: FBI’s Use of PRISM
Surveillance Data Is Unconstitutional,” Washington Post,
April 20, 2016, www.washingtonpost.com/world
/national-security/public-advocate-fbis-use-of-prism
-surveillance-data-is-unconstitutional/2016/04/20
/0282ed52-0693-11e6-b283-e79d81c63c1b_story.html.
29. “NSA Reportedly Recording All Phone Calls in a Foreign
Country,” Associated Press, March 19, 2014, www
.foxnews.com/politics/2014/03/19/nsa-reportedly-recording
-all-phone-calls-in-foreign-country/.
30. Makarechi, Kia, “Julian Assange Goes Where Glenn
Greenwald Wouldn’t,” Vanity Fair, May 19, 2014, www
.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2014/05/julian-assange
-glenn-greenwald-nsa-afghanistan.
31. “NSA Recording All Phone Calls,” Associated Press.
32. Nakashima, Ellen, “Top Spy Bemoans Loss of Key
Information-Gathering Program,” Washington Post,
September 9, 2015, www.washingtonpost.com/world
/national-security/top-spy-bemoans-loss-of-key-intelli
gence-program/2015/09/09/a214bda4-5717-11e5
-abe9-27d53f250b11_story.html.
33. Savage, Charlie, “Obama Administration Set to Expand
Sharing of Data That N.S.A. Intercepts,” New York Times,
www.nytimes.com/2016/02/26/us/politics/obama
-administration-set-to-expand-sharing-of-data-that
-nsa-intercepts.html.
34. Grossman, Lev, “Inside Apple CEO Tim Cook’s Fight
with the FBI,” Time, March 17, 2016, http://time.com
/4262480/tim-cook-apple-fbi-2.
35. Miller, Ron, “Employees Have No Reasonable Expecta-
tion to Privacy for Material Viewed or Stored on
Employer-Owned Computers or Servers,” Wolters
Kluwer, November 24, 2011, www.employmentlawdaily
.com/index.php/2011/11/24/employees-have-no-reason
able-expectation-to-privacy-for-materials-viewed-or
-stored-on-employer-owned-computers-or-servers, access
August 28, 2014.
36. Hancock, Jay and Julie Appleby, “7 Questions to Ask
Your Employer about Wellness Privacy,” Kaiser Health
News, September 30, 2015, http://khn.org/news
/7-questions-to-ask-your-employer-about-wellness-privacy.
37. Hancock. Jay, “Workplace Wellness Programs Put
Employee Privacy at Risk,” CNN, October 2, 2015, www
.cnn.com/2015/09/28/health/workplace-wellness-privacy
-risk-exclusive.
38. Haggin, Patience, “As Wearables in Workplace Spread,
So Do Legal Concerns,” Wall Street Journal, March 13,
2016, www.wsj.com/articles/as-wearables-in-workplace
-spread-so-do-legal-concerns-1457921550.
39. Thiel, Scott, “Wearables at Work: Data Privacy and
Employment Law Implications,” DLA Piper, April 22,
2016, www.dlapiper.com/en/us/insights/publications
/2016/04/wearables-at-work.
40. “Protection of Personal Data,” European Commission,
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection, accessed
August 17, 2014.
41. Meltzer, Joshua, “Examining the EU Safe Harbor Deci-
sion and Impacts for Transatlantic Data Flows,” The
Brookings Institute, November 3, 2015, www.brookings.
edu/research/testimony/2015/11/03-eu-safe-harbor
-decision-transatlantic-data-flows-meltzer.
42. Cline, Jay, “Five Predictions for the EU-U.S. Safe Harbor
Showdown,” Computerworld, October 27, 2015, www
.computerworld.com/article/2997882/data-privacy/five
-predictions-for-the-eu-u-s-safe-harbor-showdown
.html.
43. Scott, Mark, “U.S. and Europe in ‘Safe Harbor’ Data Deal,
but Legal Fight May Await,” New York Times, www.
nytimes.com/2016/02/03/technology/us-europe-safe
-harbor-data-deal.html.
44. Gibbs, Samuel, “Data Regulators Reject EU-US Privacy
Shield Safe Harbour Deal,” Guardian, April 14, 2016,
634 PART 5 • Information Systems in Business and Society
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/14/data
-regulators-reject-eu-us-privacy-shield-safe-harbour-deal.
45. Urbon, Steve, “Freetown Selectmen Hit with $1,000 Civil
Penalty in Open Meeting Law Violation,” SouthCoast
Today, March 10, 2016, www.southcoasttoday.com
/article/20160310/NEWS/160319911.
46. “The Commonwealth of Massachusetts Open Meeting
Law, G.L. c. 30A, §§ 18-25,” Commonwealth of Massa-
chusetts, www.mass.gov/ago/docs/government/oml
/open-meeting-law-gl-c-30a-18-25.pdf, accessed May 9,
2016.
47. Botelho, Greg and Michael Martinez, “DA: No Charges
against Colorado Students in Sexting Scandal,” CNN,
December 9, 2015, www.cnn.com/2015/12/09/us
/colorado-sexting-scandal-canon-city.
48. “Two App Developers Settle FTC Charges They Violated
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act,” Federal Trade
Commission, December 17, 2015, www.ftc.gov/news
-events/press-releases/2015/12/two-app-developers-settle
-ftc-charges-they-violated-childrens.
49. “Top 15 Most Popular Social Networking Sites,” Ebizma,
May 2016,” http://www.ebizmba.com/articles/social
-networking-websites.
50. “Number of Monthly Active Facebook Users Worldwide
as of 1st Quarter 2016 (in Millions),” Statista, http://www
.statista.com/statistics/264810/number-of-monthly
-active-facebook-users-worldwide, accessed May 9, 2016.
51. Kaysen, Ronda, “When Neighbors Tangle Online,” New
York Times, November 6, 2016, www.nytimes.com/2015
/11/08/realestate/when-neighbors-tangle-online.html?_r=0.
52. Worstall, Tim, “Now Google Autocomplete Could Be
Found Guilty of Libel in Hong Kong,” Forbes, August 6,
2014, www.forbes.com/sites/timworstall/2014/08/06
/now-google-autocomplete-could-be-found-guilty-of
-libel-in-hong-kong.
53. Matthew, Lee, “Defamation, Celebrities, and the Inter-
net,” Harvard Journal on Sports and Entertainment
Law, April 17, 2014, http://harvardjsel.com/2014/04
/defamation-internet/.
54. “2016 Best Internet Filter Software Reviews,” TopTen-
Reviews, http://internet-filter-review.toptenreviews.com,
accessed May 9, 2016.
55. “2016 Best Mac Internet Filter Software Reviews,”
http://internet-filter-review.toptenreviews.com/mac
-internet-filter-software, accessed May 10, 2016.
56. “BBB Sample Privacy Policy,” www.bbb.org/dallas
/for-businesses/bbb-sample-privacy-policy1, accessed
August 14, 2014.
57. “Can I Review My Credit Report?,” Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, www.consumerfinance.gov/askcfpb
/5/can-i-review-my-credit-report.html, accessed May 8,
2016.
58. “How to Sit at a Computer,” American Academy of
Orthopedic Surgeons, http://orthoinfo.aaos.org/topic
.cfm?topic=a00261, accessed May 10, 2016.
59. “What Is ACM?” www.acm.org/about, accessed August
14, 2014.
60. “ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct,” www
.acm.org/about/code-of-ethics, accessed August 14, 2014.
CHAPTER 14 • Ethical, Legal, and Social Issues of Information Systems 635
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Glossary
A
ACID properties Properties (atomicity,
consistency, isolation, durability) that guar-
antee relational database transactions are
processed reliably and ensure the integrity
of data in the database.
advanced persistent threat (APT) A net-
work attack in which an intruder gains access
to a network and stays there—undetected—
with the intention of stealing data over a long
period of time.
agile development
An iterative system
development process that develops the
system in “sprint” increments lasting from
two weeks to two months.
antivirus software Software that scans a
computer’s memory, disk drives, and USB
ports regularly for viruses.
application programming interface (API)
A set of programming instructions and
standards that enables one software program
to access and use the services of another
software program.
application software Programs that help
users solve particular computing problems.
artificial intelligence The ability to mimic
or duplicate the functions of the human brain.
artificial intelligence system The people,
procedures, hardware, software, data, and
knowledge needed to develop computer sys-
tems and machines that can simulate human
intelligence processes, including learning (the
acquisition of information and rules for using
the information), reasoning (using rules to
reach conclusions), and self-correction (using
the outcome from one scenario to improve its
performance on future scenarios).
assistive technology system An assistive,
adaptive, or rehabilitative device designed
to help people with disabilities perform
tasks that they were formerly unable to
accomplish or had great difficulty
accomplishing.
attribute A characteristic of an entity.
autonomic computing The ability of IT
systems to manage themselves and adapt to
changes in the computing environment,
business policies, and operating objectives.
B
batch processing system A form of data
processing whereby business transactions
are accumulated over a period of time and
prepared for processing as a single unit or
batch.
best practices The most efficient and
effective ways to complete a business
process.
big data A term used to describe data col-
lections that are so enormous (think petabytes
or larger) and complex (from sensor data to
social media data) that traditional data man-
agement software, hardware, and analysis
processes are incapable of dealing with them.
bioprinting The use of 3D printers to build
human parts and organs from actual human
cells.
bit A binary digit (i.e., 0 or 1) that repre-
sents a circuit that is either on or off.
blade server A server that houses many
individual computer motherboards that
include one or more processors, computer
memory, computer storage, and computer
network connections.
blended threat A sophisticated threat that
combines the features of a virus, worm,
Trojan horse, and other malicious code into
a single payload.
Bluetooth A wireless communications
specification that describes how cell phones,
computers, faxes, printers, and other electronic
devices can be interconnected over distances
of 10 to 30 feet at a rate of about 2 Mbps.
botnet A term used to describe a large
group of computers, which are controlled
from one or more remote locations by
hackers, without the knowledge or consent
of their owners.
bring your own device (BYOD) A busi-
ness policy that permits, and in some cases
encourages, employees to use their own
mobile devices (smartphones, tablets, or
laptops) to access company computing
resources and applications, including email,
corporate databases, the corporate intranet,
and the Internet.
broadband communications High-speed
Internet access that is always on and that is
faster than traditional dial-up access.
bus A set of electronic circuits used to route
data and instructions to and from the various
components of a computer.
bus network A network in which all net-
work devices are connected to a common
backbone that serves as a shared communi-
cations medium.
business analytics The extensive use of
data and quantitative analysis to support
fact-based decision making within
organizations.
business intelligence (BI) A wide range of
applications, practices, and technologies for
the extraction, transformation, integration,
visualization, analysis, interpretation, and
presentation of data to support improved
decision making.
business rule management system
(BRMS) Software used to define, execute,
monitor, and maintain the decision logic
that is used by the operational systems and
processes that run the organization.
business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce
A subset of e-commerce in which all the
participants are organizations.
business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce
A form of e-commerce in which customers
deal directly with an organization and avoid
intermediaries.
byte (B) Eight bits that together represent a
single character of data.
C
CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public
Turing Test to Tell Computers and
Humans Apart) Software that generates
and grades tests that humans can pass all but
the most sophisticated computer programs
cannot.
cache memory A type of high-speed
memory that a processor can access more
rapidly than main memory.
Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) A markup
language for defining the visual design of a
Web page or group of pages.
central processing unit (CPU) The part of
a computer that sequences and executes
instructions.
certificate authority (CA) A trusted third-
party organization or company that issues
digital certificates.
certification A process for testing skills
and knowledge; successful completion of a
certification exam results in a statement
by the certifying authority that confirms
an individual is capable of performing
particular tasks.
636
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

change management model A description
of the phases an individual or organization
goes through in making a change and
principles for successful implementation of
change.
channel bandwidth The rate at which data
is exchanged, usually measured in bits per
second (bps).
character A basic building block of most
information, consisting of uppercase letters,
lowercase letters, numeric digits, or special
symbols.
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA) An act directed at websites
catering to children, requires site owners to
post comprehensive privacy policies and to
obtain parental consent before they collect
any personal information from children
under 13 years of age.
client/server architecture An approach to
computing wherein multiple computer plat-
forms are dedicated to special functions,
such as database management, printing,
communications, and program execution.
clock speed A series of electronic pulses
produced at a predetermined rate that
affects machine cycle time.
cloud computing A computing environ-
ment where software and storage are pro-
vided as an Internet service and are accessed
with a Web browser.
code of ethics
A code that states the prin-
ciples and core values that are essential to a
set of people and that, therefore, govern
these people’s behavior.
cold site A computer environment that
includes rooms, electrical service, telecom-
munications links, data storage devices, and
the like.
command-based user interface A user
interface that requires you to give text com-
mands to the computer to perform basic
activities.
communications management The gen-
eration, collection, dissemination, and stor-
age of project information in a timely and
effective manner.
communications medium Any material
substance that carries an electronic signal to
support communications between a sending
and a receiving device.
community of practice (CoP) A group
whose members share a common set of
goals and interests and regularly engage in
sharing and learning as they strive to meet
those goals.
compact disc read-only memory (CD-ROM)
A common form of optical disc on which
data cannot be modified once it has been
recorded.
compiler A special software program that
converts the programmer’s source code into
the machine-language instructions, which
consist of binary digits.
computer forensics A discipline that com-
bines elements of law and computer science
to identify, collect, examine, and preserve
data from computer systems, networks, and
storage devices in a manner that preserves
the integrity of the data gathered so that it is
admissible as evidence in a court of law.
computer graphics card A component of a
computer that takes binary data from the
CPU and translates it into an image you see
on your display device.
computer network The communications
media, devices, and software connecting
two or more computer systems or devices.
computer-aided design (CAD) The use of
software to assist in the creation, analysis,
and modification of the design of a compo-
nent or product.
computer-aided engineering (CAE) The
use of software to analyze the robustness
and performance of components and
assemblies.
computer-aided manufacturing (CAM)
The use of software to control machine tools
and related machinery in the manufacture of
components and products.
computer-based information system
(CBIS) A single set of hardware, software,
databases, networks, people, and procedures
that are configured to collect, manipulate,
store, and process data into information.
concurrency control A method of dealing
with a situation in which two or more users
or applications need to access the same
record at the same time.
consumerization of IT The trend of
consumer technology practices influencing
the way business software is designed and
delivered.
consumer-to-consumer (C2C) e-commerce
A subset of e-commerce that involves elec-
tronic transactions between consumers
using a third party to facilitate the process.
contactless payment card A card with an
embedded chip that only needs to be held
close to a terminal to transfer its data; no PIN
number needs to be entered.
container A way for software developers
and hardware managers to package appli-
cations and software components into a
well-defined, compact envelope that can be
used to more easily manage it, including
moving it across various hosts.
content streaming A method for transfer-
ring large media files over the Internet so
that the data stream of voice and pictures
plays more or less continuously as the file is
being downloaded.
continuous improvement Constantly
seeking ways to improve business processes
and add value to products and services.
Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited
Pornography and Marketing (CAN-SPAM)
Act An act that states that it is legal to spam,
provided the messages meet a few basic
requirements.
conversion funnel A graphical representa-
tion that summarizes the steps a consumer
takes in making the decision to buy your
product and become a customer.
coprocessor The part of the computer that
speeds processing by executing specific
types of instructions while the CPU works
on another processing activity.
core competency Something that a firm
can do well and that provides customer
benefits, is hard for competitors to imitate,
and can be leveraged widely to many
products and markets.
core value A widely accepted principle
that guides how people behave and make
decisions in the organization.
cost management A set of activities that
include the development and management
of the project budget.
cost-reimbursable contract A contract that
requires the buyer to pay the provider an
amount that covers the provider’s actual
costs plus an additional amount or percent-
age for profit.
critical path All project activities that, if
delayed, would delay the entire project.
Cross-Industry Process for Data Mining
(CRISP-DM) A six-phase structured
approach for the planning and execution of
a data mining project.
culture A set of major understandings and
assumptions shared by a group, such as
within an ethnic group or a country.
customer relationship management
(CRM) system A system that helps a
company manage all aspects of customer
encounters, including marketing, sales, dis-
tribution, accounting, and customer service.
cutover The process of switching from an
old information system to a replacement
system.
cybercriminal A computer hacker who is
motivated by the potential for monetary
gain; cybercriminals hack into computer
systems to steal, often by transferring money
from one account to another or by stealing
and reselling credit card numbers, personal
identities, and financial account information.
cyberespionage The deployment of
malware that secretly steals data in the
computer systems of organizations, such as
government agencies, military contractors,
political organizations, and manufacturing
firms.
cyberterrorism The intimidation of a
government or a civilian population by
using information technology to disable
critical national infrastructure (e.g., energy,
transportation, financial, law enforcement,
emergency response) to achieve political,
religious, or ideological goals.
GLOSSARY 637
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

D
dashboard A presentation of a set of KPIs
about the state of a process at a specific
point in time.
data Raw facts such as an employee num-
ber or total hours worked in a week.
data administrator An individual respon-
sible for defining and implementing consis-
tent principles for a variety of data issues.
data breach The unintended release of
sensitive data or the access of sensitive data
by unauthorized individuals.
data center A climate-and-access-controlled
building or a set of buildings that houses the
computer hardware that delivers an organi-
zation’s data and information services.
Data cleansing (data cleaning/data
scrubbing) The process of detecting and
then correcting or deleting incomplete,
incorrect, inaccurate, or irrelevant records
that reside in a database.
data collection Capturing and gathering all
data necessary to complete the processing of
transactions.
data correction Reentering data that was
not typed or scanned properly.
data cube A collection of data that contains
numeric facts called measures, which are
categorized by dimensions, such as time and
geography.
data definition language (DDL) A collec-
tion of instructions and commands used to
define and describe data and relationships in
a specific database.
data dictionary A detailed description of all
the data used in the database.
data editing Checking data for validity and
completeness to detect any problems.
data entry Converting human-readable data
into a machine-readable form.
data-flow diagram (DFD) A diagram used
during both the analysis and design phases
to document the processes of the current
system or to provide a model of a proposed
new system.
data governance The core component of
data management; it defines the roles,
responsibilities, and processes for ensuring
that data can be trusted and used by the
entire organization, with people identified
and in place who are responsible for fixing
and preventing issues with data.
data input Transferring machine-readable
data into the system.
data item The specific value of an attribute.
data lake (enterprise data hub) A “store
everything” approach to big data that saves
all the data in its raw and unaltered form.
data lifecycle management (DLM) A
policy-based approach to managing the flow
of an enterprise’s data, from its initial
acquisition or creation and storage to the
time when it becomes outdated and is
deleted.
data management An integrated set of
functions that defines the processes by
which data is obtained, certified fit for use,
stored, secured, and processed in such a
way as to ensure that the accessibility,
reliability, and timeliness of the data meet
the needs of the data users within an
organization.
data manipulation language (DML) A
specific language, provided with a DBMS,
which allows users to access and modify
the data, to make queries, and to generate
reports.
data mart A subset of a data warehouse
that is used by small- and medium-sized
businesses and departments within large
companies to support decision making.
data mining A BI analytics tool used to
explore large amounts of data for hidden
patterns to predict future trends and beha-
viors for use in decision making.
data model A diagram of data entities and
their relationships.
data processing Performing calculations
and other data transformations related to
business transactions.
data scientist A person who understands
the business and the business analytics
technology, while also recognizing the
limitations of their data, tools, and techni-
ques; a data scientist puts all of this together
to deliver real improvements in decision
making within an organization.
data steward An individual responsible for
the management of critical data elements,
including identifying and acquiring new
data sources; creating and maintaining
consistent reference data and master data
definitions; and analyzing data for quality
and reconciling data issues.
data storage Updating one or more
databases with new transactions.
data visualization The presentation of data
in a pictorial or graphical format.
data warehouse A database that stores
large amounts of historical data in a form
that readily supports analysis and manage-
ment decision making.
database A well-designed, organized, and
carefully managed collection of data.
database administrators (DBAs) Skilled
and trained IS professionals who hold dis-
cussions with business users to define their
data needs; apply database programming
languages to craft a set of databases to meet
those needs; test and evaluate databases;
implement changes to improve the perfor-
mance of databases; and assure that data is
secure from unauthorized access.
database approach to data management
An approach to data management where
multiple information systems share a pool of
related data.
database as a service (DaaS) An arrange-
ment where the database is stored on a ser-
vice provider’s servers and accessed by the
service subscriber over a network, typically
the Internet, with the database administra-
tion handled by the service provider.
database management system (DBMS) A
group of programs used to access and man-
age a database as well as provide an inter-
face between the database and its users and
other application programs.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
A large federal agency with more than
240,000 employees and a budget of almost
$65 billion whose goal is to provide for a
“safer, more secure America, which is resil-
ient against terrorism and other potential
threats.”
desktop computer A nonportable com-
puter that fits on a desktop and provides
sufficient computing power, memory, and
storage for most business computing tasks.
DevOps The practice of blending the tasks
performed by the development and IT
operations groups to enable faster and more
reliable software releases.
diffusion of innovation theory A theory
developed by E.M. Rogers to explain how a
new idea or product gains acceptance and
diffuses (or spreads) through a specific
population or subset of an organization.
digital audio player A device that can
store, organize, and play digital music files.
digital certificate An attachment to an
email message or data embedded in a Web
site that verifies the identity of a sender or
Web site.
digital divide The gulf between those who
do and those who don’t have access to
modern information and communications
technology such as smartphones, personal
computers, and the Internet.
digital video disc (DVD) A form of optical
disc storage that looks like a CD but that can
store more data and access it more quickly.
direct conversion A cutover strategy that
involves stopping the old system and start-
ing the new system on a given date; also
called plunge or direct cutover.
disaster recovery plan A documented
process to recover an organization’s busi-
ness information system assets including
hardware, software, data, networks, and
facilities in the event of a disaster.
discrete manufacturing The production of
distinct items such as autos, airplanes, fur-
niture, or toys that can be decomposed into
their basic components.
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS)
attack An attack in which a malicious
hacker takes over computers via the Internet
638 GLOSSARY
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

and causes them to flood a target site with
demands for data and other small tasks.
document production Generating output
records, documents, and reports.
domain The range of allowable values for a
data attribute.
domain expert The person or group
with the expertise or knowledge the expert
system is trying to capture (domain).
downsizing Reducing the number of
employees to cut costs.
drill-down analysis The interactive exami-
nation of high-level summary data in
increasing detail to gain insight into certain
elements—sort of like slowly peeling off the
layers of an onion.
driving forces The beliefs, expectations,
and cultural norms that tend to encourage a
change and give it momentum.
e-book The digital media equivalent of a
conventional printed book.
e-commerce Involves the exchange of
money for goods and services over
electronic networks and encompasses many
of an organization’s outward facing
processes—such as sales, marketing, order
taking, delivery, procurement of goods and
services, and customer service—that touch
customers, suppliers, and other business
partners.
E
economic feasibility The process of deter-
mining whether the project makes financial
sense and whether predicted benefits offset
the cost and time needed to obtain them.
e-government
The use of information and
communications technology to simplify the
sharing of information, speed formerly
paper-based processes, and improve the
relationship between citizens and
government.
electronic business (e-business) The use
of information systems and networks to
perform business-related tasks and functions
beyond those performed for e-commerce.
electronic cash An amount of money that
is computerized, stored, and used as cash for
e-commerce transactions.
electronic discovery (e-discovery) Any
process in which electronic data is sought,
located, secured, and searched with the
intent of using it as evidence in a civil or
criminal legal case.
electronic exchange An electronic forum
where manufacturers, suppliers, and com-
petitors buy and sell goods, trade market
information, and run back-office operations.
Electronic Product Environmental
Assessment Tool (EPEAT) A system that
enables purchasers to evaluate, compare,
and select electronic products based on a set
of environmental criteria.
embedded system A computer system
(including some sort of processor) that is
implanted in and dedicated to the control of
another device.
enterprise application integration (EAI)
The systematic tying together of disparate
applications so that they can communicate.
enterprise data model A data model that
provides a roadmap for building database
and information systems by creating a single
definition and format for data that can
ensure data compatibility and the ability to
exchange and integrate data among systems.
enterprise IS An information system that
an organization uses to define structured
interactions among its own employees and/
or with external customers, suppliers,
government agencies, and other business
partners.
enterprise resource planning (ERP)
system A system that supports an organi-
zation’s routine business processes, main-
tains records about those processes, and
provides extensive reporting and data
analysis capabilities.
enterprise search The application of
search technology to find information within
an organization.
enterprise search software Software that
matches a user’s query to many sources of
information in an attempt to identify the
most important content and the most
reliable and relevant source.
enterprise sphere of influence The sphere
of influence that serves the needs of an
organization in its interactions with its
environment.
enterprise system A system central to the
organization that ensures information can be
shared with authorized users across all
business functions and at all levels of man-
agement to support the running and man-
aging of a business.
entity A person, place, or thing for which
data is collected, stored, and maintained.
ergonomics
The science of designing
machines, products, and systems to maxi-
mize the safety, comfort, and efficiency of
the people who use them.
entity-relationship (ER) diagram A data
model that uses basic graphical symbols to
show the organization of and relationships
between data.
ethics A set of beliefs about right and
wrong behavior. Ethical behavior conforms
to generally accepted social norms—many
of which are almost universally accepted.
expert system A system that consists of
hardware and software that stores knowl-
edge and makes inferences, enabling a
novice to perform at the level of an expert.
explanation facility Component of an
expert system that allows a user or decision
maker to understand how the expert system
arrived at certain conclusions or results.
explicit knowledge Knowledge that is
documented, stored, and codified—such as
standard procedures, product formulas,
customer contact lists, market research
results, and patents.
exploit An attack on an information system
that takes advantage of a particular system
vulnerability.
Extensible Markup Language (XML) The
markup language designed to transport and
store data on the Web.
extract-transform-load (ETL) The process
by which raw data is extracted from various
sources, transformed into a format to
support the analysis to be performed, and
loaded into the data warehouse.
extranet A network based on Web tech-
nologies that allows selected outsiders, such
as business partners and customers, to
access authorized resources of a company’s
intranet.
extreme programming (XP) A form of
agile software development that promotes
incremental development of a system using
short development cycles to improve pro-
ductivity and to accommodate new customer
requirements.
F
feasibility analysis An assessment of the
technical, economic, legal, operational, and
schedule feasibility of a project.
field Typically a name, a number, or a
combination of characters that describes an
aspect of a business object or activity.
file A collection of related records.
firewall A system of software, hardware, or
a combination of both that stands guard
between an organization’s internal network
and the Internet and limits network access
based on the organization’s access policy.
fixed-price contract A contract in which
the buyer and provider agree to a total fixed
price for a well-defined product or service.
filtering software
Software used to help
protect personal data and screen objection-
able Internet content.
force field analysis An approach to iden-
tifying both the driving (positive) and
restraining (negative) forces that influence
whether change can occur.
forming-storming-norming-performing-
adjourning model A model that describes
how teams develop and evolve.
Fourth Amendment
This amendment to
the U.S. constitution protects individuals
against unreasonable searches and seizures
and requires that warrants be issued only
upon probable cause and specifying the
place to be searched and the persons or
things to be seized.
GLOSSARY 639
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

functional decomposition A frequently
used technique to define the scope of an
information system by identifying the
business processes it will affect.
G
game theory A mathematical theory for
developing strategies that maximize gains
and minimize losses while adhering to a
given set of rules and constraints.
Gantt chart A graphical tool used for
planning, monitoring, and coordinating
projects; it is essentially a grid that lists
activities and deadlines.
genetic algorithm An approach to solving
problems based on the theory of evolution;
uses the concept of survival of the fittest as a
problem-solving strategy.
gigahertz (GHz) A unit of frequency that is
equal to one billion cycles per second; a
measure of clock speed.
goal A specific result that must be achieved
to reach an objective.
goals-based strategic planning A multi-
phase strategic planning process that begins
by performing a situation analysis to identify
an organization’s strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats.
graphical user interface (GUI) An inter-
face that displays pictures (icons) and menus
that people use to send commands to the
computer system.
graphics processing unit (GPU) A pow-
erful processing chip that renders images on
the screen display.
green computing A program concerned
with the efficient and environmentally
responsible design, manufacture, operation,
and disposal of IS-related products.
grid computing The use of a collection
of computers, often owned by multiple
individuals or organizations, that work in a
coordinated manner to solve a common
problem.
group IS An information system that
improves communications and support col-
laboration among members of a workgroup.
H
Hadoop An open-source software frame-
work including several software modules
that provide a means for storing and pro-
cessing extremely large data sets.
Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS)
A system used for data storage that divides
the data into subsets and distributes the
subsets onto different servers for processing.
hard disk drive (HDD) A direct access
storage device used to store and retrieve
data from rapidly rotating disks coated with
magnetic material.
hardware independence The ability of a
software program to run on any platform,
without concern for the specific underlying
hardware.
hot site A duplicate, operational hardware
system that is ready for use (or immediate
access to one through a specialized vendor).
hierarchy of data Bits, characters, fields,
records, files, and databases.
human resource management Activities
designed to make the most effective use of
the people involved with a project.
hybrid cloud A cloud computing environ-
ment is composed of both private and public
clouds integrated through networking.
hyperlink Highlighted text or graphics in a
Web document that, when clicked, opens a
new Web page containing related content.
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) The
standard page description language for Web
pages.
I
identity theft The theft of personal infor-
mation, which is then used without the
owner’s permission, often to commit fraud
or other crimes.
IF-THEN statement A rule that suggests
certain conclusions
inference engine Part of the expert system
that seeks information and relationships
from the knowledge base and provides
answers, predictions, and suggestions simi-
lar to the way a human expert would.
informatics The combination of informa-
tion technology with traditional disciplines,
such as medicine or science, while consid-
ering the impact on individuals, organiza-
tions, and society.
information A collection of data organized
and processed so that it has additional value
beyond the value of the individual facts.
information silo An isolated information
system not easily capable of exchanging
information with other information systems.
information system (IS) A set of interre-
lated components that collect, process, store,
and disseminate data and information; an
information system provides a feedback
mechanism to monitor and control its oper-
ation to make sure it continues to meet its
goals and objectives.
infrastructure as a service (IaaS) An
information systems strategy in which an
organization outsources the equipment used
to support its data processing operations,
including servers, storage devices, and net-
working components.
in-memory database (IMDB) A database
management system that stores the entire
database in random access memory (RAM).
innovation The application of new ideas to
the products, processes, and activities of a
firm, leading to increased value.
input/output device A computer compo-
nent that provides data and instructions to
the computer and receives results from it.
installation
The process of physically
placing the computer equipment on the site
and making it operational.
instant messaging The online, real-time
communication between two or more peo-
ple who are connected via the Internet.
instruction set architecture (ISA) A basic
set of commands (opcodes) that the proces-
sor can execute.
intangible benefit A benefit that cannot
directly be measured and cannot easily be
quantified in monetary terms.
integrated circuit (IC) A set of electronic
circuits on one small piece of semiconductor
material, normally silicon.
integration testing Testing that involves
linking all of the individual components
together and testing them as a group to
uncover any defects in the interfaces
between individual components.
intelligent agent Programs and a knowl-
edge base used to perform a specific task for
a person, a process, or another program;
also called an intelligent robot or bot.
intelligent behavior The ability to learn
from experiences and apply knowledge
acquired from those experiences; to handle
complex situations; to solve problems when
important information is missing; to deter-
mine what is important and to react quickly
and correctly to a new situation; to under-
stand visual images, process and manipulate
symbols, and be creative and imaginative;
and to use heuristics.
Internet backbone One of the Internet’s
high-speed, long-distance communications
links.
Internet censorship The control or sup-
pression of the publishing or accessing of
information on the Internet.
Internet of Everything A network that
encompasses not only machine-to-machine
but also people-to-people and people-
to-machine connections.
Internet of Things (IoT) A network of
physical objects or “things” embedded with
sensors, processors, software, and network
connectivity capability to enable them to
exchange data with the manufacturer of the
device, device operators, and other con-
nected devices.
Internet Protocol (IP) A communication
standard that enables computers to route
communications traffic from one network to
another as needed.
Internet service provider (ISP) Any
organization that provides Internet access to
people.
Internet The world’s largest computer
network, consisting of thousands of
640 GLOSSARY
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

interconnected networks, all freely
exchanging information.
intranet A network that enables communi-
cation, collaboration, search functions, and
information sharing between the members
of an organization’s team using a Web
browser.
intrusion detection system (IDS) Software
and/or hardware that monitors system and
network resources and activities and notifies
network security personnel when it detects
network traffic that attempts to circumvent
the security measures of a networked com-
puter environment.
IP address A 64-bit number that identifies a
computer on the Internet.
issues-based strategic planning A strate-
gic planning process that begins by identi-
fying and analyzing key issues that face the
organization, setting strategies to address
those issues, and identifying projects and
initiatives that are consistent with those
strategies.
J
joining Manipulating data to combine two
or more tables.
joint application development (JAD) A
structured meeting process that can acceler-
ate and improve the efficiency and effec-
tiveness of the investigation, analysis, and
design phases of a system development
project.
joint problem solving A process used to
capture tacit knowledge where the novice
and the expert work side by side to solve a
problem so that the expert’s approach is
slowly revealed to the observant novice.
K
kernel The heart of the operating system
that controls the most critical processes of
the OS.
key performance indicator (KPI) A metric
that tracks progress in executing chosen
strategies to attain organizational objectives
and goals and consists of a direction, mea-
sure, target, and time frame.
knowledge The awareness and under-
standing of a set of information and the
ways that information can be made useful to
support a specific task or reach a decision.
knowledge acquisition facility Part of the
expert system that provides a convenient
and efficient means of capturing and storing
all the components of the knowledge base.
knowledge engineer A person who has
training or experience in the design, devel-
opment, implementation, and maintenance
of an expert system.
knowledge management (KM) A range of
practices concerned with increasing aware-
ness, fostering learning, speeding
collaboration and innovation, and exchang-
ing insights.
knowledge management system (KMS)
An organized collection of people, proce-
dures, software, databases, and devices that
stores and retrieves knowledge, improves
collaboration, locates knowledge sources,
captures and uses knowledge, or in some
other way enhances the knowledge man-
agement process.
knowledge user The person or group who
uses and benefits from the expert system.
L
laptop A personal computer designed for
use by mobile users, being small and light
enough to sit comfortably on a user’s lap.
law A system of rules that tells us what we
can and cannot do.
legal feasibility The process of determin-
ing whether laws or regulations may prevent
or limit a system development project.
learning system A combination of software
and hardware that allows a computer to
change how it functions or how it reacts to
situations based on feedback it receives.
Leavitt’s diamond An organizational
change model that proposes that every
organizational system is made up of four
main components—people, tasks, structure,
and technology—that all interact; any
change in one of these elements will neces-
sitate a change in the other three elements.
Lewin’s change model A three stage
approach for implementing change that
involves unfreezing, moving, and refreezing.
linear regression A mathematical proce-
dure to predict the value of a dependent
variable based on a single independent
variable and the linear relationship between
the two.
linking The ability to combine two or more
tables through common data attributes to
form a new table with only the unique data
attributes.
local area network (LAN) A network that
connects computer systems and devices
within a small area, such as an office, home,
or several floors in a building.
logic bomb A form of Trojan horse mal-
ware that executes when it is triggered by a
specific event.
Long Term Evolution (LTE) A standard for
wireless communications for mobile phones
based on packet switching.
M
magnetic stripe card A type of card that
stores a limited amount of data by modifying
the magnetism of tiny iron-based particles
contained in a band on the card.
magnetic tape A type of sequential sec-
ondary storage medium, now used primarily
for storing backups of critical organizational
data in the event of a disaster.
main memory The component of a com-
puter that provides the CPU with a working
storage area for program instructions and
data.
mainframe computer A large, powerful
computer often shared by hundreds of
concurrent users connected to the machine
over a network.
make-or-buy decision The act of compar-
ing the pros and cons of in-house produc-
tion versus outsourcing of a given product
or service.
managed security service provider (MSSP)
A company that monitors, manages, and
maintains computer and network security
for other organizations.
management information system An
organized collection of people, procedures,
software, databases, and devices that pro-
vides routine information to managers and
decision makers.
MapReduce program A composite pro-
gram that consists of a Map procedure that
performs filtering and sorting and a Reduce
method that performs a summary operation.
market segmentation The identification of
specific markets to target them with tailored
advertising messages.
massively parallel processing system A
system that speeds processing by linking
hundreds or thousands of processors to
operate at the same time, or in parallel, with
each processor having its own bus, memory,
disks, copy of the operating system, and
applications.
memory A component of the computer that
provides the processor with a working storage
area to hold program instructions and data.
mesh network A network that uses multi-
ple access points to link a series of devices
that communicate with each other to form a
network connection across a large area.
meta tag An HTML code, not visible on the
displayed Web page, that contains keywords
representing your site’s content, which
search engines use to build indexes pointing
to your Web site.
metadata Data that describes other data.
metropolitan area network (MAN) A net-
work that connects users and their compu-
ters in a geographical area that spans a
campus or city.
Michael Porter’s Five Forces Model A
model that identifies the fundamental factors
that determine the level of competition and
long-term profitability of an industry.
middleware Software that allows various
systems to communicate and exchange data.
mission statement A statement that con-
cisely defines an organization’s fundamental
purpose for existing.
GLOSSARY 641
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

mission-critical process A process that
plays a pivotal role in an organization’s
continued operations and goal attainment.
mobile commerce (m-commerce) The
buying and selling of goods and/or services
using a mobile device, such as a tablet,
smartphone, or other portable device.
mobile device management (MDM)
software Software that manages and trou-
bleshoots mobile devices remotely, pushing
out applications, data, patches, and settings
while enforcing group policies for security.
monitoring The process of measuring sys-
tem performance by tracking the number of
errors encountered, the amount of memory
required, the amount of processing or CPU
time needed, and other performance
indicators.
morals One’s personal beliefs about right
and wrong.
MP3 A standard format for compressing a
sound sequence into a small file.
multicore processor A microprocessor that
has two or more independent processing
units, called cores, which are capable of
sequencing and executing instructions.
multimedia Content that uses more than
one form of communication—such as text,
graphics, video, animation, audio, and other
media.
multiprocessing The simultaneous execu-
tion of two or more instructions at the same
time.
N
natural language processing An aspect of
artificial intelligence that involves technol-
ogy that allows computers to understand,
analyze, manipulate, and/or generate “natu-
ral” languages, such as English.
near field communication (NFC) A very
short-range wireless connectivity technology
that enables two devices placed within a few
inches of each other to exchange data.
net neutrality The principle that Internet
service providers (ISPs) should be required
to treat all Internet traffic running over their
wired and wireless broadband networks the
same—without favoring content from some
sources and/or blocking or slowing (also
known as throttling) content from others.
nettop A very small, inexpensive desktop
computer typically used for Internet access,
email, accessing Web-based applications,
document processing, and audio/video
playback.
network A group or system of connected
computers and equipment—in a room,
building, campus, city, across the country, or
around the world—that enables electronic
communication.
network operating system (NOS) Systems
software that controls the computer systems
and devices on a network and allows them
to communicate with each other.
network topology The shape or structure
of a network, including the arrangement of
the communication links and hardware
devices on the network.
network-attached storage (NAS) A hard
disk drive storage device that is set up with
its own network address and provides file-
based storage services to other devices on
the network.
network-management software Software
that enables a manager on a networked
desktop to monitor the use of individual
computers and shared hardware (such as
printers), scan for viruses, and ensure com-
pliance with software licenses.
neural network A computer system that
can recognize and act on patterns or trends
that it detects in large sets of data.
next-generation firewall (NGFW) A
hardware- or software-based network secu-
rity system that is able to detect and block
sophisticated attacks by filtering network
traffic dependent on the packet contents.
NoSQL database A way to store and
retrieve data that is modeled using some
means other than the simple two dimen-
sional tabular relations used in relational
databases.
O
objective A statement of a compelling
business need that an organization must
meet to achieve its vision and mission.
offshore outsourcing (offshoring) An
outsourcing arrangement where the organi-
zation providing the service is located in a
country different from the firm obtaining the
services.
off-the-shelf software Software produced
by software vendors to address needs that
are common across businesses, organiza-
tions, or individuals.
online analytical processing (OLAP) A
method to analyze multidimensional data
from many different perspectives, enabling
users to identify issues and opportunities as
well as perform trend analysis.
online transaction processing (OLTP) A
form of data processing where each trans-
action is processed immediately without the
delay of accumulating transactions into a
batch.
open source software Software that is
distributed for free, with access permitted to
the source code so that it can be studied,
changed, and improved by software profes-
sionals at the various user organizations—
with no maintenance charges.
operating system (OS) A set of computer
programs that controls the computer hard-
ware and acts as an interface to application
software.
operational feasibility The process of
determining how a system will be accepted
by people and how well it will meet various
system performance expectations.
optical storage device A form of data
storage that uses lasers to read and write
data.
organic strategic planning A strategic
planning process that defines the organiza-
tion’s vision and values and then identifies
projects and initiatives to achieve the vision
while adhering to the values.
organization A group of people that is
structured and managed to meet its mission
or set of group goals.
organizational change How forprofit and
nonprofit organizations plan for, implement,
and handle change.
organizational complement A key com-
ponent that must be in place to ensure suc-
cessful implementation and use of an
information system.
organizational culture The major under-
standings and assumptions for a business,
corporation, or other organization.
organizational learning The adaptations
and adjustments made within an organiza-
tion based on experience and ideas over
time.
organizational network analysis (ONA) A
technique used for documenting and mea-
suring flows of information among indivi-
duals, workgroups, organizations,
computers, Web sites, and other information
sources.
outsourcing A long-term business
arrangement in which a company contracts
for services with an outside organization
that has expertise in providing a specific
function.
P
parallel computing The simultaneous
execution of the same task on multiple pro-
cessors to obtain results faster.
parallel start-up A cutover strategy that
involves running both the old and new sys-
tems for a period of time and closely com-
paring the output of the new system with
the output of the old system; any differences
are reconciled. When users are comfortable
that the new system is working correctly, the
old system is eliminated.
Pareto principle (80–20 rule) An obser-
vation that for many events, roughly
80 percent of the effects come from
20 percent of the causes.
patch A minor system change to correct a
problem or make a small enhancement; it is
usually an addition to an existing program.
p-card (procurement card or purchasing
card) A credit card used to streamline the
traditional purchase order and invoice pay-
ment processes.
642 GLOSSARY
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

perceptive system A system that approxi-
mates the way a person sees, hears, and
feels objects.
performance evaluation test A compari-
son of vendor options conducted in a com-
puting environment (e.g., computing
hardware, operating system software, data-
base management system) and with a
workload (e.g., number of concurrent users,
database size, and number of transactions)
that matches its intended operating
conditions.
personal area network (PAN) A network
that supports the interconnection of infor-
mation technology devices close to one
person.
personal IS An information system that
improves the productivity of individual
users in performing stand-alone tasks.
personal productivity software Software
that enables users to improve their personal
effectiveness, increasing the amount of work
and quality of work they can do.
personal sphere of influence The sphere
of influence that serves the needs of an
individual user.
personalization The process of tailoring
Web pages to specifically target individual
consumers.
pilot start-up
A cutover strategy that
involves running the complete new system
for one group of users rather than for all
users.
phase-in approach A cutover strategy that
involves slowly replacing components of the
old system with those of the new one; this
process is repeated for each application until
the new system is running every application
and performing as expected; also called a
piecemeal approach.
phishing The act of fraudulently using
email to try to get the recipient to reveal
personal data.
platform as a service (PaaS) An approach
that provides users with a computing plat-
form, typically including operating system,
programming language execution environ-
ment, database services, and Web server.
podcast An audio broadcast you can listen
to over the Internet.
point-of-sale (POS) device A device used
to enter data into a computer system.
policy-based storage management The
automation of storage using previously
defined policies.
portable computer A computer small
enough to carry easily.
predecessor task A task that must be
completed before a later task can begin.
primary key A field or set of fields that
uniquely identifies the record.
private cloud environment A single tenant
cloud.
procedure A set of steps that need to be
followed to achieve a specific end result, such
as enter a customer order, pay a supplier
invoice, or request a current inventory report.
process A set of logically related tasks
performed to achieve a defined outcome.
process manufacturing The production of
products—such as soda, laundry detergent,
gasoline, and pharmaceutical drugs—that
are the result of a chemical process; these
products cannot be easily decomposed into
their basic components.
processor family A set of processors from
the same manufacturer that have similar
features and capabilities.
procurement management A set of activi-
ties related to the acquisition of goods and/
or services for the project from sources out-
side the performing organization.
product lifecycle management (PLM) An
enterprise business strategy that creates a
common repository of product information
and processes to support the collaborative
creation, management, dissemination, and
use of product and packaging definition
information.
product lifecycle management (PLM)
software Software that provides a means for
managing the data and processes associated
with the various phases of the product life
cycle, including sales and marketing, research
and development, concept development,
product design, prototyping and testing, pro-
cess design, production and assembly, delivery
and product installation, service and support,
and product retirement and replacement.
product owner A person who represents
the project stakeholders and is responsible
for communicating and aligning project pri-
orities between the stakeholders and devel-
opment team.
Program Evaluation and Review Tech-
nique (PERT) A formal method for esti-
mating the duration of a project using three
time estimates for an activity: shortest pos-
sible time, most likely time, and longest
possible time; working with those estimates,
a formula is used to determine a single PERT
time estimate.
programming languages Sets of key-
words, commands, symbols, and rules for
constructing statements by which humans
can communicate instructions to a
computer.
project A temporary endeavor undertaken
to create a unique product, service, or result.
project champion A well respected man-
ager with a passion to see a project succeed
and who removes barriers to the success of
the project.
project deadline The date the entire project
should be completed and operational—
when the organization can expect to begin
to reap the benefits of the project.
project integration management The
coordination of all appropriate people,
resources, plans, and efforts to complete a
project successfully.
project management The application of
knowledge, skills, and techniques to project
activities to meet project requirements.
project milestone A critical date for com-
pleting a major part of the project, such as
program design, coding, testing, and release
(for a programming project).
project risk An uncertain event or condi-
tion that, if it occurs, has a positive or a
negative effect on a project objective.
project schedule A plan that identifies the
project activities that must be completed, the
expected start and end dates, and what
resources are assigned to each task.
project scope A definition of which tasks
are included and which tasks are not
included in a project.
project sponsor A senior manager from the
business unit most affected by a project and
who ensures the project will indeed meet
the needs of his or her organization.
project stakeholders The people involved
in the project or those affected by its
outcome.
project steering team A group of senior
managers representing the business and IS
organizations that provide guidance and
support to a project.
projecting Manipulating data to eliminate
columns in a table.
proprietary software One-of-a-kind soft-
ware designed for a specific application and
owned by the company, organization, or
person that uses it.
public cloud computing A means of pro-
viding computing services wherein a service
provider organization owns and manages
the hardware, software, networking, and
storage devices, with cloud user organiza-
tions (called tenants) accessing slices of
shared resources via the Internet.
Q
quality The degree to which a project meets
the needs of its users.
quality assurance The evaluation of the
progress of the project on an ongoing basis
to ensure that it meets the identified quality
standards.
quality control The checking of project
results to ensure that they meet identified
quality standards.
quality management A set of activities
designed to ensure that a project will meet
the needs for which it was undertaken.
quality planning The determination of
which quality standards are relevant to
the project and determining how they will
be met.
GLOSSARY 643
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

R
radio frequency identification (RFID) A
technology that employs a microchip with
an antenna to broadcast its unique identifier
and location to receivers.
random access memory (RAM) A form of
memory in which instructions or data can be
temporarily stored.
ransomware Malware that stops you from
using your computer or accessing your data
until you meet certain demands such as
paying a ransom or sending photos to the
attacker.
read-only memory (ROM) A nonvolatile
form of memory.
reasonable assurance The IS security
concept that recognizes that managers must
use their judgment to ensure that the cost of
control does not exceed the system’s bene-
fits or the risks involved.
record A collection of data fields all related
to one object, activity, or individual.
redundant array of independent/
inexpensive disks (RAID) A method of
storing data that generates extra bits of data
from existing data, allowing the system to
create a “reconstruction map” so that if a
hard drive fails, the system can rebuild lost
data.
reengineering (process redesign/busi-
ness process reengineering, BPR) The
radical redesign of business processes,
organizational structures, information sys-
tems, and values of the organization to
achieve a breakthrough in business results.
relational database model A simple but
highly useful way to organize data into col-
lections of two-dimensional tables called
relations.
release A significant program change that
often requires changes in the documentation
of the software.
request for information (RFI) A document
that outlines an organization’s hardware or
software needs and requests vendors to
provide information about if and how they
can meet those needs and the time and
resources required.
restraining forces Forces that make it dif-
ficult to accept a change or to work to
implement a change.
rich Internet application (RIA) A Web-
delivered application combines hardware
resources of the Web server and the PC to
deliver valuable software services through a
Web browser interface.
risk assessment The process of assessing
security-related risks to an organization’s
computers and networks from both internal
and external threats.
risk management A deliberate and sys-
tematic process designed to identify, ana-
lyze, and manage project risks.
risk owner The individual responsible for
developing a risk management strategy and
monitoring the project to determine if the
risk is about to occur or has occurred.
robotics A branch of engineering that
involves the development and manufacture
of mechanical or computer devices that can
perform tasks requiring a high degree of
precision or that are tedious or hazardous
for humans.
rootkit A set of programs that enables its
user to gain administrator level access to a
computer without the end user’s consent or
knowledge.
rule A conditional statement that links
conditions to actions or outcomes.
S
scalability The ability to increase the pro-
cessing capability of a computer system so
that it can handle more users, more data, or
more transactions in a given period.
schedule feasibility The process of deter-
mining whether the project can be com-
pleted within a desired time frame.
schema A description that defines the log-
ical and physical structure of the database by
identifying the tables, the fields in each
table, and the relationships between fields
and tables.
scope management A set of activities that
include defining the work that must be
done as part of a project and then control-
ling the work to stay within the agreed-
upon scope.
scrum An agile development framework
that emphasizes a team based approach in
order to keep the development effort
focused and moving quickly.
scrum master The person who coordinates
all the scrum activities of a team.
search engine A valuable tool that enables
you to find information on the Web by
specifying words that are key to a topic of
interest, known as keywords.
search engine optimization (SEO) A pro-
cess for driving traffic to a Web site by using
techniques that improve the site’s ranking in
search results.
secondary storage A device that stores
large amounts of data, instructions, and
information more permanently than allowed
with main memory.
security audit A careful and thorough
analysis that evaluates whether an organi-
zation has a well-considered security policy
in place and if it is being followed.
security policy A statement that defines an
organization’s security requirements, as well
as the controls and sanctions needed to meet
those requirements.
selecting Manipulating data to eliminate
rows according to certain criteria.
self-service analytics Training, techni-
ques, and processes that empower end
users to work independently to access data
from approved sources to perform their
own analyses using an endorsed set of
tools.
semiconductor fabrication plant A factory
where integrated circuits are manufactured;
also called a fab or a foundry.
server A computer employed by many
users to perform a specific task, such as
running network or Internet applications.
server farm A facility that houses a large
number of servers in the same room, where
access to the machines can be controlled and
authorized support personnel can more eas-
ily manage and maintain the servers.
service-oriented architecture (SOA) A
software design approach based on the use
of discrete pieces of software (modules) to
provide specific functions as services to
other applications.
shadow IT The information systems and
solutions built and deployed by departments
other than the information systems depart-
ment. In many cases, the information sys-
tems department may not even be aware of
these efforts.
shadowing A process used to capture tacit
knowledge that involves a novice observing
an expert executing her job to learn how she
performs.
single-user license A software license that
permits you to install the software on one or
more computers, used by one person.
site preparation Preparation of the loca-
tion of a new system.
slack time The amount of time an activity
can be delayed without delaying the entire
project.
slipstream upgrade A minor system
upgrade-typically a code adjustment or
minor bug fix; it usually requires recompil-
ing all the code, and in so doing, it can cre-
ate entirely new bugs.
smart card A credit card embedded with a
computer chip that contains key consumer
and account data; smart card users must either
enter their PIN (chip-and-PIN) or sign (chip-
and-sign) for each transaction to be approved.
smishing Another variation of phishing
that involves the use of Short Message Ser-
vice (SMS) texting.
soft side of implementing change The
work designed to help employees embrace a
new information system and way of working.
software The computer programs that
govern the operation of a particular com-
puting device, be it desktop, laptop, tablet,
smartphone, or some other device.
Software as a Service (SaaS) A service that
allows businesses to subscribe to Web-
delivered application software.
644 GLOSSARY
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

software suite A collection of programs
packaged together and sold in a bundle.
software-defined networking (SDN) An
emerging approach to networking that
allows network administrators to have pro-
grammable central control of the network
via a controller without requiring physical
access to all the network devices.
solid state storage device (SSD) A storage
device that stores data in memory chips
rather than on hard disk drives or optical
media.
source data automation Capturing data
at its source and recording it accurately in
a timely fashion, with minimal manual
effort and in an electronic or digital form
so that it can be directly entered into the
computer thus ensuring accuracy and
timeliness.
spam The use of email systems to send
unsolicited email to large numbers of
people.
spear-phishing A variation of phishing in
which the phisher sends fraudulent emails
to a certain organization’s employees.
speech-recognition technology
Input
devices that recognize human speech.
sphere of influence The scope of the pro-
blems and opportunities that the software
addresses.
sponsoring business unit The business
unit most affected by the project and the one
whose budget will cover the project costs.
SQL A special-purpose programming lan-
guage for accessing and manipulating data
stored in a relational database.
star network A network in which all net-
work devices connect to one another
through a single central device called the
hub node.
storage area network (SAN) A high-speed,
special-purpose network that integrates dif-
ferent types of data storage devices (e.g.,
hard disk drives, magnetic tape, solid state
secondary storage devices) into a single
storage system and connects that to com-
puting resources across an entire
organization.
storage as a service A data storage model
where a data storage service provider rents
space to individuals and organizations.
storefront broker A company that acts as
an intermediary between your Web site and
online merchants who have the products
and retail expertise.
strategic planning A process that helps
managers identify desired outcomes and
formulate feasible plans to achieve their
objectives by using available resources and
capabilities.
strategy A plan that describes how an
organization will achieve its vision, mission,
objectives, and goals.
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities,
Threats (SWOT) matrix A simple way to
illustrate what a company is doing well,
where it can improve, what opportunities
are available, and what environmental fac-
tors threaten the future of the organization.
subject matter expert Someone who pro-
vides knowledge and expertise in a particu-
lar aspect important to the project.
supercomputers The most powerful com-
puter systems with the fastest processing
speeds.
supply chain A key value chain whose
primary activities include inbound logistics,
operations, outbound logistics, marketing
and sales, and service.
supply chain management (SCM) A sys-
tem that includes planning, executing, and
controlling all activities involved in raw
material sourcing and procurement, the
conversion of raw materials to finished pro-
ducts, and the warehousing and delivery of
finished products to customers.
syntax A set of rules associated with a
programming language.
system acquisition The process used to
obtain the information system resources
needed to provide the services necessary to
meet a specific set of needs.
system analysis The phase of system
development that focuses on gathering data
on the existing system, determining the
requirements for the new system, considering
alternatives within identified constraints, and
investigating the feasibility of alternative
solutions.
system construction The phase of system
development that converts the system
design into an operational system by
acquiring and installing hardware and soft-
ware, coding and testing software programs,
creating and loading data into databases,
and performing initial program testing.
system design The stage of system devel-
opment that answers the question, “How will
the information system solve a problem?”
system development The activity of
building information systems to meet users’
needs.
system disposal A stage of system devel-
opment that involves those activities that
ensure the orderly dissolution of the system,
including disposing of all equipment in an
environmentally friendly manner, closing
out contracts, and safely migrating informa-
tion from the system to another system or
archiving it in accordance with applicable
records management policies.
system investigation The initial phase in
the development of a new or modified
business information system whose purpose
is to gain a clear understanding of the spe-
cifics of the problem to solve or the oppor-
tunity to address.
system investigation report A summary of
the results of the system investigation, with a
recommendation of a course of action.
system maintenance A stage of system
development that involves changing and
enhancing the system to make it more useful
in achieving user and organizational goals.
system operation Involves the use of a
new or modified system under all kinds of
operating conditions.
system review The process of analyzing a
system to make sure it is operating as
intended.
system software Software that includes
operating systems, utilities, and middleware
that coordinate the activities and functions
of the hardware and other programs
throughout the computer system.
system testing Testing the complete, inte-
grated system (hardware, software, data-
bases, people, and procedures) to validate
that the information system meets all speci-
fied requirements.
T
tablet A portable, lightweight computer
with no keyboard that allows you to roam
the office, home, or factory floor carrying
the device like a clipboard.
tacit knowledge The know-how that some-
one has developed as a result of personal
experience; it involves intangible factors such
as beliefs, perspective, and a value system.
tag A code that tells the Web browser how
to format text—as a heading, as a list, or as
body text—and whether images, sound, and
other elements should be inserted.
tangible benefit A benefit that can be mea-
sured directly and assigned a monetary value.
technical documentation Written details
used by computer operators to execute the
program and by analysts and programmers
to solve problems or modify the program.
technical feasibility The process of deter-
mining whether a project is feasible within
the current limits of available technology.
technical resource A subject matter expert
in an IS topic of value to the project.
technology acceptance model (TAM) A
model that specifies the factors that can lead to
better attitudes about an information system,
along with higher acceptance and usage of it.
technology infrastructure All the hard-
ware, software, databases, networks, peo-
ple, and procedures that are configured to
collect, manipulate, store, and process data
into information.
thin client A low-cost, centrally managed
computer with no internal or external
attached drives for data storage.
time and material contract A contract that
requires the buyer to pay the provider for
GLOSSARY 645
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

both the time and materials required to
complete the contract.
time management A set of activities that
includes defining an achievable completion
date that is acceptable to the project stake-
holders, developing a workable project
schedule, and ensuring the timely comple-
tion of the project.
transaction Any business-related exchange
such as a payment to an employee, a sale to
a customer, or a payment to a supplier.
transaction processing cycle The process
of data collection, data editing, data correc-
tion, data processing, data storage, and
document production.
transaction processing system (TPS) An
organized collection of people, procedures,
software, databases, and devices used to
process and record business transactions.
Transport Layer Security (TLS) A com-
munications protocol or system of rules that
ensures privacy between communicating
applications and their users on the Internet.
Trojan horse A seemingly harmless pro-
gram in which malicious code is hidden.
U
Uniform Resource Locator (URL) A Web
address that specifies the exact location of a
Web page using letters and words that map
to an IP address and a location on the host.
unit testing
Testing of individual compo-
nents of code (subroutines, modules, and
programs) to verify that each unit performs
as designed.
U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness
Team (US-CERT) A partnership between
the Department of Homeland Security and
the public and private sectors; established to
provide timely handling of security incidents
as well as conducting improved analysis of
such incidents.
user acceptance document
A formal
agreement that the organization signs stat-
ing that a phase of the installation or the
complete system is approved.
user acceptance testing (UAT)
Testing
performed by trained system users to verify
that the system can complete required tasks
in a real-world operating environment and
perform according to the system design
specifications.
user documentation
Written descriptions
developed for people who use a program; in
easy-to-understand language, it shows how
the program can and should be used to meet
the needs of its various users.
user interface The element of the operating
system that allows people to access and
interact with the computer system.
user preparation The process of readying
managers, decision makers, employees,
other users, and stakeholders to accept and
use the new system.
utility program A program that helps to
perform maintenance or correct problems
with a computer system.
V
value chain A series (chain) of activities
that an organization performs to transform
inputs into outputs in such a way that the
value of the input is increased.
version
A major program change, typically
encompassing many new features.
virtual private network (VPN) A secure
connection between two points on the
Internet; VPNs transfer information by
encapsulating traffic in IP packets and
sending the packets over the Internet.
virtual reality system A system that
enables one or more users to move and react
in a computer-simulated environment.
virtual server A method of logically divid-
ing the resources of a single physical server
to create multiple logical servers, each acting
as its own dedicated machine.
virtual tape A storage device for less fre-
quently needed data. With virtual tape sys-
tems, data appears to be stored entirely on
tape cartridges, although some parts of it
might actually be located on faster hard disks.
virtual team A group of individuals whose
members are distributed geographically, but
who collaborate and complete work through
the use of information systems.
virus A piece of programming code, usually
disguised as something else, that causes a
computer to behave in an unexpected and
usually undesirable manner.
virus signature A sequence of bytes that
indicates the presence of a specific virus.
vishing Similar to smishing except that the
victims receive a voice mail message telling
them to call a phone number or access a
Web site.
vision A concise statement of what an
organization intends to achieve in the future.
vision system The hardware and software
that permit computers to capture, store, and
manipulate visual images.
vision/mission statement A statement that
communicates an organization’s overarching
aspirations to guide it through changing
objectives, goals, and strategies.
volume testing
Testing to evaluate the
performance of the information system
under varying yet realistic work volume and
operating conditions to determine the work
load at which systems performance begins
to degrade and to identify and eliminate any
issues that prevent the system from reaching
its required service-level performance.
W
waterfall systems development process
A sequential, multistage systems
development process in which work on the
next stage cannot begin until the results of
the current stage are reviewed and approved
or modified as necessary.
wearable computer An electronic device
capable of storing and processing data that
is incorporated into a person’s clothing or
personal accessories.
Web 2.0 The Web as a computing platform
that supports software applications and the
sharing of information among users.
Web browser Web client software—such
as Chrome, Edge, Firefox, Internet Explorer,
and Safari—used to view Web pages.
Web log (blog) A Web site that people and
businesses use to share their observations,
experiences, and opinions on a wide range
of topics.
wide area network (WAN) A network that
connects large geographic regions.
Wi-Fi A medium-range wireless communi-
cations technology brand owned by the Wi-
Fi Alliance.
wireless communication The transfer of
information between two or more points
that are not connected by an electrical
conductor.
word cloud A visual depiction of a set of
words that have been grouped together
because of the frequency of their
occurrence.
work breakdown structure (WBS) An
outline of the work to be done to complete
the project.
workgroup Two or more people who work
together to achieve a common goal.
workgroup application software Software
that supports teamwork, whether team
members are in the same location or dis-
persed around the world.
workgroup sphere of influence The
sphere of influence that helps workgroup
members attain their common goals.
workstation A more powerful personal
computer used for mathematical computing,
computer-assisted design, and other high-
end processing but still small enough to fit
on a desktop.
World Wide Web (WWW) A network of
links on the Internet to files containing text,
graphics, video, and sound.
worm A harmful program that resides in
the active memory of the computer and
duplicates itself.
zero-day attack An attack that takes place
before the security community and/or soft-
ware developers become aware of and fix a
security vulnerability.
Z
zombie A computer that has been taken
over by a hacker to be used as part of a
botnet.
646 GLOSSARY
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Subject Index
Note: A boldface page number indicates a key term and the location of its definition in the text.
A
ACM (Association for Computing Machinery),
624
ADP (automatic data processing), 348
advanced persistent threat (APT), 570–571
advertising, 316–317
agile development, 539–542
advantages and disadvantages of, 540
firm’s first agile project, 542
Airbnb, 162–163
alpha testing, 530
alphanumeric data, 5
Amazon DynamoDB, 226
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 16, 162–163,
262, 282
analysis, 365
Android Emulator, 175
Android operating system, 150
animation, 434–435
antivirus software, 581–582
API (application programming interface),
144
Apple Computer operating system, 148–149
Application Continuous Availability, 525
application programming interface (API),
144
application software, 138
business analytics, 173
competitive advantage, 173
enterprise, 171–172
overview of, 160–163
personal, 163–170
programming languages, 173–175
transaction processing, 173
workgroup, 170–171
APT (advanced persistent threat), 570–571
ARM, computer processor, 88–89
artificial intelligence (AI), 421
brain-computer interface, 424
conceptual model of, 425
expert system, 424–428
learning system, 430
natural language processing, 429–430
nature of, 422–424
neural network, 430–431
other applications, 431–432
overview of, 421–422
in perspective, 422
robotics, 428–429
vision system, 429
artificial intelligence systems, 422
assistive technology system, 439–440
Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM), 624
atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability
(ACID) properties, 206
attached storage, 97
attribute, 196–197
audio data, 5
audio, multimedia, 433–434
automated teller machine (ATM) devices,
105
automatic data processing (ADP), 348
autonomic computing, 283
AWS (Amazon Web Services), 16, 162–163,
262, 282
B
B (byte), 91
B2B (business-to-business) e-commerce,
298–299, 302
B2C (business-to-consumer) e-commerce,
299–302
banking, 320–321
bar-code scanners, 105
bartering
couponing, 318–319
price comparison, 318
retargeting, 318
Websites, 318
batch processing systems, 347–348
BBB Code of Business Practices, 615
BCI (brain-computer interface), 424
BEDES (Building Energy Data Exchange
Specification), 209
beta testing, 530
BI. See business intelligence
big data, 14
challenges of, 218–219
characteristics of, 216
database systems and, 13–15
free sources of, 217
life cycle, 221
sources of, 216
technologies for, 222–228
uses of, 217–218
variety, 216
velocity, 216
volume, 216
Bill of Rights, 607
Bing search engine, 266
bioinformatics, 441
biomedical informatics, 441
bioprinting, 110
bit, 195
black hat hacker, hiring, 576–577
blade server, 120
blended threat, 567
blog, 269
BLS (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics), 63
Bluetooth, 247–248
botnet, 569
BPR. See business process reengineering
brain-computer interface (BCI), 424
brain-machine interface, 425
bring your own device (BYOD), 563
BRMS (business rules management systems),
417–419
broadband communications, 245
BTO (Business Technology Optimization),
535
Building Energy Data Exchange Specification
(BEDES), 209
Burke, Brian, 613
bus, 87
bus network, 241
business analytics, 25, 384
application software, 173
business intelligence (BI), 25, 385
benefits of, 385–386
components required, 387
business intelligence and analytics tools
dashboards, 395–397, 396
data mining, 394–395
data visualization tools, 389–391
drill-down analysis, 392–393
linear regression, 393–394
online analytical processing, 391–392
querying tools, 389
reporting tools, 389
self-service analytics, 397–399
spreadsheets, 388–389
business process reengineering (BPR), 53
continuous improvement vs., 54
business rules management systems
(BRMS), 417–419
Business Technology Optimization (BTO),
535
businesses
information systems in, 18–20
virtual reality, 438–439
business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce,
298–299, 302
business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce,
299–302
buy versus build, 504–506
buying off-the Shell, 542–547
finalizing contract, 545–546
implementation, 546
integration and testing, 546
software package evaluation phase,
543–545
BYOD (bring your own device), 563
byte (B), 91
C
C2C (consumer-to-consumer) e-commerce,
302
CA (certificate authority), 329
cache memory, 92
CAD (computer-aided design), 367
CAE (computer-aided engineering), 368
647
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CAM (computer-aided manufacturing),
368
CAN-SPAM (Controlling the Assault of
Non-Solicited Pornography and
Marketing) Act, 568
CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public
Turing Test to Tell Computers and
Humans Apart), 568
card verification value (CVV), 574
careers
best places to work, 66
certification, 71
development roles, 68–69
in information systems, 62–73
operations roles, 68
other IS, 72
roles outside IS organization, 70–71
support roles, 69–70
titles in information systems, 67–70
top H-1B visa employers, 65
carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), 619
Cascading Style Sheet (CSS), 260–261
category management dashboard
for Northwest region, 397
for U.S. region, 396
CBIS. See computer-based information
system
CCSP (Cisco Certified Security Professional),
71
CD-ROM (compact disc read-only memory),
96
central processing unit (CPU), 87
certificate authority (CA), 329
certification, 71
Certified Information Systems Security
Professional (CISSP), 71
change management model, 57
channel bandwidth, 244–245
character, 195
charge card, 331–332
chief information officer (CIO), 8, 67
chief technology officer (CTO), 67–68
Child Online Protection Act, 615
Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA),
615
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA), 612
chip card, 104
Chrome operating system, 150
CIO (chief information officer), 8, 67
CIPA (Children’s Internet Protection Act),
615
Cisco Certified Security Professional (CCSP),
71
client/server architecture, 244
clock speed, 87
cloud computing, 279–283
data disaster recovery planning, 525
hybrid, 283
networks and, 15–17
private, 283
public, 281–282
coaxial cable, 248
code of ethics, 624
Code Red worm, 566
cold site, 524
Collins, Jim, 8
command-based user interface, 142–143
commercial off the- shelf (COTS) software,
542
common personal computer input devices,
101
Communications Decency Act, 615
communications devices, 251
communications hardware, 251
communications management, 484–485
communications media, 245–251
4G wireless communications, 250–251
5G wireless communications, 251
guided transmission media types, 245–246
microwave transmission, 249–250
wireless technologies, 246–249
communications medium, 241
communications software
mobile device management, 252
network operating system, 251–252
network-management software, 252
software-defined networking, 253
community of practice (CoP), 415
compact disc read-only memory (CD-ROM),
96
compiler, 174
Completely Automated Public Turing Test to
Tell Computers and Humans Apart
(CAPTCHA), 568
compliance departments, 523
computer(s)
desktop, 116
enterprise storage options, 97–99
input devices, 100–107
mainframe, 117
memory, 91–93
mobile, 113–114
multiple-user, 112
nettop, 116
network, 241
nonportable, 112
operational supercomputers, 118
output devices, 107–111
portable, 113–114
processors, 87–91
secondary data storage devices, 93–97
servers, 116–117
special-purpose, 141–142
storage units, 91
supercomputers, 117–118
thin client, 115
types of, 111–118
wearable, 113
workstation, 116
computer forensics, 586–588
computer graphics card, 108
computer incidents, reasons for, 562–565
expanding and changing systems, 563
growing reliance on software with known
vulnerabilities, 563–564
higher computer user expectations, 563
increase in prevalence of bring your own
device (BYOD) policies, 563
increasing computing complexity, 563
increasing sophistication of those who
would do harm, 565
computer network, 241
computer waste, 600–601
computer-aided design (CAD), 367
computer-aided engineering (CAE), 368
computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), 368
computer-based information system
(CBIS), 6
components, 7–8
databases, 13
hardware, 11
Internet, 15
network, 15
software, 12
computer-related health problems, 619
computer-related jobs, BLS projections, 63
computer-related mistakes, 601–603
concurrency control, 210
conferencing, 268–269
consumerization of IT, 13
consumer-to-consumer (C2C) e-commerce,
302
contact data, importing, 366
contact management, 365
contactless payment card, 104
container, 120
content streaming, 270
continuous improvement, 53
business process reengineering vs., 54
Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited
Pornography and Marketing
(CAN-SPAM) Act, 568
controls
design system, 523
system, 518–519
conversion funnel, 390
CoP (community of practice), 415
COPPA (Children’s Online Privacy Protection
Act), 612
coprocessor, 89
copyright, 177
core competency, 471–472
core value, 462
corporate privacy policy, 615–617
cost management, 478–481
cost-reimbursable contract, 489
COTS (commercial off the- shelf software),
542
couponing, 318–319
CPU (central processing unit), 87
credit card, 331–332
crime risk assessment, 577–578
CRISP-DM (Cross-Industry Process for Data
Mining), 394–395
critical path, 477–478
Cross-Industry Process for Data Mining
(CRISP-DM), 394–395
CSS. See Cascading Style Sheet
CSS (Cascading Style Sheet), 260–261
CTO (chief technology officer), 67–68
CTS (carpal tunnel syndrome), 619
culture, 56
organizational, 56
current operating system, 145–146
Customer Experience Community of
Practice (CX-COP), 415
customer relationship management (CRM)
system, 363–367
highly rated, 367
implementation reasons, 364–365
key features of, 365–366
customer support, 365
cutover, 532–534
CVV (card verification value), 574
CX-COP (Customer Experience Community
of Practice), 415
cybercrimes, 30–31, 562–577
classifying perpetrators of, 565
computer incidents, 562–565
federal laws for, 576–577
648 SUBJECT INDEX
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

cybercriminal, 30
cyberespionage, 574–575
cyberloafing, 605–606
cyberterrorism, 30, 575–576
D
DaaS (database as a service), 214
DAMA (Data Management Association),
219–220
dashboards, 395–397, 396
data, 4
backup, 538
breach, 573–574
cleaning, 204
cleansing, 204–205
creation and loading for system
development, 528
differences from information, 4–5
hierarchy of, 195
organizing/processing, 5–6
relational database manipulation, 202–204
scrubbing, 204
sensitive, deletion, 538
types of, 5
units of measure, 15
data administrator, 213
data breach, 573–574
data center, 120–122
managers, 68
modular, 121
data collection, 353–354
data correction, 354–355
data cube, 391–392
data definition language (DDL), 208, 525
data dictionary, 208, 525
data dictionary entry, 209
data editing, 354
data entry, 100
data governance, 219
data input, 100
data item, 196
data lake, 224
data lifecycle management (DLM), 221
data management, 219–221, 399
Data Management Association (DAMA),
219–220
data manipulation language (DML), 211
data mart, 224
data mining, 394–395
data model, 199
enterprise, 199–200
data modeling, 517
data processing, 355
data scientists, 25, 386–387
data steward, 220
data storage, 355
data store symbol, 517
data visualization, 389
data visualization tools, 389–391
data warehouse, 13–14, 222–224
database(s), 13, 194
activities, 207–212
administration, 212–213
attribute, 196–197
creating, 208–210
data definition language, 208
data dictionary, 208
designing, 525
entities, 195
generating reports, 211–212
manipulating data, 211–212
modifying, 208–210
NoSQL, 224–226
with other software, 214
primary key, 197
Query by Example, 211
retrieving data, 210–211
SQL, 206–207
database administrator (DBA), 69–70,
212
database applications, 166
database approach to data management,
197–198
database as a service (DaaS), 214
database management system (DBMS), 194
creating database, 208–210
generating reports, 211–212
manipulating data, 211–212
modifying database, 208–210
retrieving data, 210–211
storing data, 210–211
user view, 208
database model, relational, 200–204
data-flow diagram (DFD), 516–517
data-flow line, 516
DBA (database administrator), 69–70,
212
DBMS. See database management system
DDL (data definition language), 208, 525
DDoS (distributed denial-of-service) attack,
569–570
debit card, 331–332
decision making, ethical considerations in,
622–625
demand management, 362
desktop computer, 116
detailed scheduling, 362
DevOps, 540–542
DFD (data-flow diagram), 516–517
diffusion of innovation theory, 61
digital audio player, 110
digital certificate, 329
digital divide, 32
digital video disc (DVD), 96
direct conversion, 533
direct cutover, 533
Direct Marketing Association Web site, 618
disaster recovery plan, 523–525
discrete manufacturing, 370
display screen, 107–108
disruptive innovation, 52–53
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack,
569–570
DLM (data lifecycle management), 221
DML (data manipulation language), 211
document production, 355
domain, 202
domain expert, 427
downsizing, 55
drill-down analysis, 392–393
driving forces, 57
DVD (digital video disc), 96
E
EAI (enterprise application integration),
158
eBay, 272
e-book, 111
e-book readers, 111
e-business (electronic business), 21
e-commerce. See electronic commerce
economic feasibility, 511
e-discovery (electronic discovery), 420
education
virtual reality, 438
World Wide Web, 265
e-government, 303–304
EHR (electronic health record) software,
546–547
electronic business (e-business), 21
electronic cash, 330–331
electronic commerce (e-commerce), 20
advantages of, 305–307
advertising, 316–317
after-sales service, 309
banking, 320–321
bartering, 318–319
benefits of, 21
business-to-business, 298–299, 302
business-to-consumer, 299–302
challenges, 310–313
consumer privacy concerns, 310–311
consumer-to-consumer, 302
effective model, 322
e-government, 303–304
finance, 319–320
investment, 319–320
manufacturing, 314–315
marketing, 315–316
multistage model of, 307–309
overcoming consumers’ lack of trust,
311–312
overcoming global issues, 312–313
personalized shopping, 321
products and services delivery, 308–309
scope of, 20
search and identification, 308
selection and negotiation, 308
software, 328
strategies for successful, 322–326
technology infrastructure, 326–333
wholesale, 313–314
electronic discovery (e-discovery), 420
electronic exchange, 314–315
electronic health record (EHR) software,
546–547
electronic payment systems, 329–333
certificate authority, 329
charge card, 331–332
credit card, 331–332
debit card, 331–332
digital certificate, 329
electronic cash, 330–331
p-card, 333
smart card, 331–332
transport layer security, 330
electronic pointing devices, 439
Electronic Product Environmental
Assessment Tool (EPEAT), 123
email, privacy, 610–611
embedded operating system, 153–155
embedded system, 153
enterprise application integration (EAI),
158
enterprise application software, 171–172
enterprise data hub, 224
enterprise data model, 199–200
enterprise information system, 9
enterprise operating system, 152
SUBJECT INDEX 649
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

enterprise resource planning (ERP) system,
22
advantages of, 357–359
benefits, 23–25
best practices, 359
components of, 23–24
decision making, 357–358
legacy systems, 358
software, 24
technology infrastructure upgrades, 359
work processes improvement, 358–359
enterprise search, 419
enterprise search software, 419–420
enterprise search solutions, 419
enterprise sphere of influence, 139
enterprise storage
attached storage, 97
network-attached, 97–98
storage area network, 98–99
storage as a service, 99
enterprise systems, 21–25, 356
customer relationship management,
363–367
enterprise resource planning, 356–361
hosted software model for, 372–373
overcoming challenges in implementing,
371–372
product lifecycle management, 367–371
supply chain management, 361–363
entity, 195
entity symbol, 517
entity-relationship (ER) diagram, 200–201
simplified, 202
entrepreneurs and transaction processing
systems, 352
EPEAT (Electronic Product Environmental
Assessment Tool), 123
ER (entity-relationship) diagrams, 517
eradication effort, 585
ergonomics, 619
ethical issues, 622–625
ethics, 31
ETL (extract, transform, load), 13, 223–224
EU (European Union), 610
European Union (EU), 610
EUVL (extreme ultraviolet lithography), 90
expert system shell, 428
expert systems, 424–428
components of, 425–427
domain expert, 427
explanation facility, 427
inference engine, 427
knowledge acquisition facility, 427
knowledge base, 426–427
knowledge engineer, 427
knowledge user, 427–428
participants in developing and using,
427–428
shells and products, 428
user interface, 427
explanation facility, 427
explicit management, 410–411
exploits, on information system, 563–564
exploits, types of, 565–576
advanced persistent threat (APT),
570–571
blended threat, 567
cyberespionage, 574–575
cyberterrorism, 575–576
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS)
attack, 569–570
identity theft, 573–574
phishing, 571–572
ransomware, 565–566
spam, email, 567–568
Trojan horse, 566–567
virus, 566
worms, 566
Extensible Markup Language (XML),
260–261
extract, transform, load (ETL), 13, 223–224
extranet, 16, 274–275
extreme programming (XP), 540
extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUVL), 90
F
fab/foundry. See semiconductor fabrication
plant
failover, 525
FCC (Federal Communications Commis-
sion), 246
feasibility analysis, 510–512, 520, 525
Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), 246
Federal Financial Institutions Examination
Council, 330
federal government and privacy, 606–609
federal laws for cybercrimes, 576–577
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 310
fiber-optic cable, 248
field, 195
file, 195
file conversion and compression, 435
file management, 145
file-compression utilities, 156
filtering software, 614
finance, 319–320
5G wireless communications, 251
fixed-price contract, 489
Flickr, 264
force field analysis, 57
Ford Sync 3 user interface, 154
forming-storming-norming-performing-
adjourning model, 481–482
4G wireless communications, 250–251
Fourth Amendment, 609
Free Software Foundation, 177
freeware, 177–180
FTC (Federal Trade Commission), 310
functional decomposition, 475–476,
509–510, 516
G
G2B (government-to-business) e-commerce,
303
G2C (government-to-customer) e-commerce,
303
G2G (government-to-government) e-com-
merce, 303–304
game theory, 440–441
Gantt chart, 478–479
General Electric (GE), 17, 54
General Services Administration (GSA),
415
genetic algorithm, 431
geographic information systems (GISs),
274
geolocation, 273–274
Geostationary Operational Environmental
Satellite program, 250
geo-tagging, 274
gigahertz (GHz), 87
GISs (geographic information systems),
274
global positioning system (GPS) device,
153
global software support, 180
Global Terrorism Database (GTD), 196
goal, 463–464
goals-based strategic planning, 459
Good to Great (Collins), 8
Google Chrome, 259
Google Maps, 273–274
government-to-business (G2B) e-commerce,
303
government-to-customer (G2C) e-commerce,
303
government-to-government (G2G)
e-commerce, 303–304
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Financial Services
Modernization Act, 617
graphical user interface (GUI), 143–144
graphics, 433
graphics processing unit (GPU), 108
green computing, 122–123
grid computing, 89
group information system, 9
GSA (General Services Administration),
415
GTD (Global Terrorism Database), 196
GUI (graphical user interface), 143–144
guided transmission media types, 245–246
H
H-1B program, 65
Hadoop, 226–227
Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS),
226–227
hard disk drive (HDD), 94
hardware, 11. See also computer(s)
bus, 87
central processing unit, 87
desktop computer, 116
disposal, 538
mainframe computer, 117
memory, 91–93
mobile commerce, 328–329
mobile devices and, 11–12
nettop, 116
secondary storage devices, 93–97
software expenditures spending on, 138
supercomputers, 117
tablet, 114
utilities, 155–156
workstation, 116
hardware independence, 144
Harvard Business Review, 46
Hawking, Stephen, 440
HDD (hard disk drive), 94
HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System),
226–227
Health Insurance Portability and Account-
ability Act (HIPAA), 283
healthcare informatics, 441
help desk, 534
hierarchy of data, 195
650 SUBJECT INDEX
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act), 283
Holmes v Petrovich Development Company,
609
hosted software model
advantages and disadvantages of, 373
enterprise software, 372–373
hot site, 524
“How Information Gives You Competitive
Advantage,” 46
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language),
259–261
human resource management, 481–484
hybrid cloud, 283
hyperlinks, 259
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML),
259–261
I
IaaS (infrastructure as a service), 281
IBM Healthcare Provider Data Model, 200
IBM Notes Social Edition, 171
IC (integrated circuit), 90
IDE (integrated development environment),
174
identity theft, 310, 573–574
IEEE 802.11 network standard, 248
IF-THEN statements, 426
image data, 5
IMDB (in-memory database), 227–228
implementation tasks, key, 546
incident
containment, 584–585
follow-up, 585–586
notifications, 584
inference engine, 427
informatics, 441–442
information, 4
data and, 4–5
privacy, 614
quality, 6–7
value of, 5–6
information silo, 22
information system (IS), 6
in businesses, 18–20
careers in, 62–73
characteristics of, 10
components of, 7–8
computer-based, 6–7
cybercrime, 30–31
enterprise, 9–10
ethical issues, 622–625
ethical issues of, 31–33
examples of, 10
finding job, 72–73
group, 9–10
legal issues of, 31–33
occupational outlook, 64
organization and, 46–51
in organizations, 9
personal, 9–10
social issues of, 31–33
specialized, 25–26
strategies, 29
supply versus demand, 65
information system strategic planning
identifying projects and initiatives, 469
organizational strategy, 467–468
prioritizing projects and initiatives,
469–470
information systems security analyst, 68
infrastructure as a service (IaaS), 281
in-memory database (IMDB), 227–228
innovation, 52
adopters, 62
diffusion, 61
disruptive, 52–53
products, 52
input devices
automated teller machine devices, 105
bar-code scanners, 105
chip card, 104
common personal computer input
devices, 101
contactless payment cards, 104
data entry, 100
data input, 100
definition, 87
magnetic ink character recognition, 103
magnetic stripe cards, 103–104
motion-sensing input devices, 102
optical data readers, 102–103
pen devices, 106
point-of-sale devices, 104–105
RFID devices, 105–106
scanning devices, 102
smart cards, 104
source data automation, 100–101
speech-recognition technology, 101–102
touch screens, 106–107
installation, 532
instant messaging, 267
and privacy, 611
instruction set architecture (ISA), 88
intangible benefit, 470
integrated circuit (IC), 90
integrated development environment
(IDE), 174
integrated software packages, 168–169
integration testing, 529, 546
Intel Atom processor, 88
intelligent agent, 432
intelligent behavior, 422
interface devices, 436–437
Internet, 15
accessing, 257–258
backbone, 255
intranets, 274–275
IP addresses, 255
libel concerns and privacy, 613–614
online conferencing, 268–269
online media, 269–272
privacy, 612–613
routing messages, 255
shopping, 272–273
Uniform Resource Locator, 256
utilities, 156–157
Web applications and, 263–274
working of, 255–257
World Wide Web, 259–261
Internet censorship, 32
Internet of Everything (IoE), 17
Internet of Things (IoT), 17, 276–279
Internet protocol (IP), 255
Internet service provider (ISP), 257
intranet, 16, 274–275
intrusion detection system, 583–584
investment, 319–320
IoE (Internet of Everything), 17
IoT (Internet of Things), 17, 276–279
IP (Internet protocol), 255
IP addresses, 255
ISA (instruction set architecture), 88
ISP (Internet service provider), 257
issues-based strategic planning, 459
J
JAD (joint application development),
508–509
joining data, 202
joint application development (JAD),
508–509
joint problem solving, 411
K
kernel, 142
key performance indicators (KPIs), 395–396
KM. See knowledge management
KMS (knowledge management system), 25
knowledge, 5
knowledge acquisition facility, 427
knowledge base, 426–427
knowledge engineer, 427
knowledge management (KM), 410
business rules management systems,
417–419
capturing expertise of individuals, 413
community of practice, 415
electronic discovery, 420
employees, 414–415
enterprise search software, 419–420
enthusiasts, 414
free flow of ideas, 412
leveraging expertise of people, 412–413
organizational goals and objectives, 414
organizational network analysis, 415–417
selling and implementing project,
413–415
tacit knowledge, 414
technologies, 415–420
Web 2.0 technologies, 417
knowledge management system (KMS), 25
knowledge user, 427–428
KPIs (key performance indicators), 395–396
L
LAN (local area network), 243
laptop, 113
Large Hadron Collider (LHC), 90
law, 622
lead time, 362
learning system, 430
Leavitt’s diamond, 59–60
legal feasibility, 511
legal versus ethical, 625
Lewin, Kurt, 57
Lewin’s change model, 57
Lewin’s force field analysis, 57–59
LexisNexis, 267
LHC (Large Hadron Collider), 90
Library of Congress (LOC), 215
licenses, 177–178
LifeKeeper, 525
linear regression, 393–394
LinkedIn, 266
linking data, 202
Linux operating system, 149–150
LinxCRM, 527
SUBJECT INDEX 651
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

LOC (Library of Congress), 215
local area network (LAN), 243
administrators, 68
logic bomb, 567
Long Term Evolution (LTE), 250
lot size, 362
low earth orbit (LEO) satellite system, 250
LTE (Long Term Evolution), 250
M
Mac operating systems, 148
Mac OS X Server, 151
macro viruses, 566
magnetic ink character recognition (MICR)
devices, 103
magnetic stripe card, 103
magnetic tape, 94
main memory, 91
mainframe computer, 117
mainframe utilities, 157–158
make-or-buy decision, 488
MAN (metropolitan area network), 244
managed security service provider (MSSP),
586
management information system (MIS), 22
manipulating data, 202–204
manufacturing, electronic commerce,
314–315
manufacturing processors, 90–91
MapReduce program, 227
market segmentation, 315
marketing, 315–316
marketing automation, 365
marketing databases, 13
massively parallel processing system, 89
materials requirement planning (MRP), 362
m-commerce. See mobile commerce
MCS (mobile crowd sensing), 612
MCSE (Microsoft Certified Systems
Engineer), 71
medicine, virtual reality, 437
Melissa worms, 566
memory
cache memory, 92
definition, 87
main memory, 91
random access memory, 91–92
read-only memory, 93
types of, 91–93
memory management, 144
menu-creation software, 527
menu-driven system, 522
mesh network, 242
meta tag, 324
metadata, 416
metropolitan area network (MAN), 244
Michael Porter’s Five Forces Model, 460–461
microblogging, 268
Microsoft Certified Systems Engineer
(MCSE), 71
Microsoft Disk Operating System (MS-DOS),
146
Microsoft Outlook, 140
Microsoft PC operating systems, 146–147
Microsoft Windows 10, 146
Microsoft Windows operating systems, 147
microwave transmission, 249–250
middleware, 158
MIS (management information system), 22
mission statement, 462
mission-critical processes, 524
mobile applications, software, 12–13, 170
mobile commerce (m-commerce), 21
advantages of, 305–307
advertising, 316–317
banking, 320–321
bartering, 318–319
finance, 319–320
improved customer service, 307
increasing accuracy, 306–307
investment, 319–320
manufacturing, 314–315
marketing, 315–316
personalized shopping, 321
in perspectives, 305
reaching new customers, 305–306
reduced costs, 306
strategies for successful, 322–326
technology infrastructure, 326–333
Websites, 305
mobile crowd sensing (MCS), 612
mobile device management (MDM)
software, 158, 252
mobile devices
accessing, 366
hardware and, 11–12
mobile operating system, 152–153
monitoring, 534–535
Moore v University Hospital Cleveland
Medical Center, 609
morals, 622
motion-sensing input devices, 102
MP3 (MPEG-1 Audio Layer-3), 110
MPEG-1 Audio Layer-3 (MP3), 110
M-Pesa, 320–321
MRP (materials requirement planning), 362
MS-DOS (Microsoft Disk Operating System),
146
MSSP (managed security service provider),
586
multicore processor, 89
multimedia, 433
animation, 434–435
audio, 433–434
designing applications, 435
file conversion and compression, 435
overview of, 433–435
text and graphics, 433
video, 434–435
multiprocessing, 89
multithreading, 145
MYSTIC, 608
N
NAS (network-attached storage), 97
National Security Agency (NSA), 225–226
natural language processing, 429–430
navigation, 273–274
near field communication (NFC), 246–247
.NET, 527
net neutrality, 32
nettop, 116
network, 15
client/server architecture, 244
cloud computing, 15–17
communications hardware, 251
communications media, 245–251
communications software, 251–253
computer, 241
Wi-Fi, 248–249
network operating system (NOS), 251–252
network topology, 241–242
bus network, 241
mesh network, 242
star network, 241
network types, 242–244
local area network, 243
metropolitan area network, 244
personal area network, 243
wide area network, 244
network utilities, 156–157
network-attached storage (NAS), 97
network-management software, 252
neural network, 430–431
next-generation firewall (NGFW), 580–581
NFC (near field communication), 246–247
NGFW (next-generation firewall), 580–581
NOS (network operating system), 251–252
NoSQL database, 224–226
NSA (National Security Agency), 225–226
O
objective, 462
OCR (optical character recognition),
102–103
offshore outsourcing, 54
offshoring, 54
off-the-shelf software, 160
OLAP (online analytical processing),
391–392
OLTP (online transaction processing),
348–349
OMR (optical mark recognition), 102
ONA (organizational network analysis),
415–417
online analytical processing (OLAP),
391–392
online transaction processing (OLTP),
348–349
Open Meeting Law, 610
open source software, 28, 177–180
openSUSE operating system, 150
operating system (OS), 141
access to system resources and security,
145
Apple Computer, 148–149
current, 145–146
embedded, 153–155
enterprise, 152
file management, 145
Google, 150
hardware functions, 142
hardware independence, 144
input/output management, 142–144
kernel, 142
Linux, 149–150
memory management, 144
mobile, 152–153
multiple computers with multiple users,
141
networking capability, 145
personal, 146–148
processing tasks, 144–145
role of, 141
single computer with multiple simultaneous
users, 141
single computer with single user, 141
652 SUBJECT INDEX
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

special-purpose computers, 141–142
by sphere of influence, 145
user interface, 142–144
workgroup, 150–151
operational feasibility, 511
operational supercomputers, 118
optical character recognition (OCR),
102–103
optical data readers, 102–103
optical mark recognition (OMR), 102
optical storage device, 96
Oracle Certified Professional, 71
order processing systems, 350
organic strategic planning, 459
organization(s)
business process reengineering, 53
change in, 51–54
definition, 46
downsizing, 55
educating employees and contract
workers, 579–580
general model, 47
implement detection systems, 583–584
information systems and, 46–51
offshore outsourcing, 54
outsourcing, 54
prevention of attacks, 580–583
process redesign, 53
reengineering, 53
response to attacks, 584–586
risk assessment, 577–578
security policy, 579
technology acceptance model, 60
user satisfaction, 60–61
value chain, 47
organizational change, 56
diffusion of innovation theory, 61–62
Leavitt’s diamond, 59–60
Lewin’s change model, 57
Lewin’s force field analysis, 57–59
technology acceptance model, 60–61
user satisfaction, 60–61
organizational complements, 9
organizational culture, 56
organizational learning, 60
organizational network analysis (ONA),
415–417
OS. See operating system
output devices
3D printers, 109–110
definition, 87
digital audio players, 110–111
display screen, 107–108
e-book readers, 111
printers and plotters, 108–109
outsourcing, 54
P
PaaS (platform as a service), 282
PAN (personal area network), 243
parallel computing, 89
parallel start-up, 534
Pareto principle (80–20 rule), 520
patch, 536
p-card, 333
pen input device, 106
perceptive system, 424
performance evaluation test, 545
personal application software
database applications, 166
examples of, 164
integrated software packages, 168–169
mobile application software, 170
other, 169–170
personal information management,
167–168
presentation graphics program, 166–167
software suites, 168–169
spreadsheet analysis, 163–166
word-processing applications, 163
personal area network (PAN), 243
personal assistive listening devices, 439
personal emergency response systems, 440
personal information management (PIM)
software, 167–168
personal information system, 9
personal operating system, 146–148
personal privacy, 617–618
personal productivity software, 139
personal sphere of influence, 139
personalization, 325
PERT (Program Evaluation and Review
Technique), 478
phase-in approach, 534
phishing, 571–572
piecemeal approach, 534
pilot start-up, 534
platform as a service (PaaS), 282
PLM. See product lifecycle management
plotters, 108–109
plunge, 533
podcast, 269
podcasting, 269
point-of-sale (POS) device, 104
policies and procedures
establishing, 603
implementing, 603–604
monitoring, 604–605
reviewing, 605
policy-based storage management, 99
portable computer, 113
Porter, Michael, 46
predecessor task, 478
presentation graphics program, 166–167
prevention of attack
critical internet security threats, 582
installing antivirus software, 581–582
installing corporate firewall, 580–583
safeguard against attacks by malicious
insiders, 582
security audit, 582–583
security dashboard, utilizing, 581
price comparison, 318
primary key, 197
printers, 108–109
PRISM, 608
privacy
corporate policies, 615–617
and email, 610–611
and fairness in information use, 614
and the federal government, 606–609
and filtering and classifying Internet
content, 614–615
individual efforts to protect, 617–618
and instant messaging (IM), 611
Internet, 612–613
and Internet libel concerns, 613–614
issues, 606–618
and personal sensing devices, 611–612
RFID tags, 611
at work, 609–610
private cloud environment, 283
procedure, 8
process, 5
process manufacturing, 370
process redesign, 53
process symbol, 517
processor
families of, 88–89
manufacturing, 90–91
multiprocessing, 89
parallel computing, 89–90
phases of processing, 87–88
processor family, 88
procurement card (p-card), 333
procurement management, 488–489
product lifecycle management (PLM),
367–371
benefits, 370
business strategy, 369
highly rates software products, 370
scope of software, 367–368
product lifecycle management (PLM)
software, 367
product owner, 539
production, 362
products, innovative, 52
Program Evaluation and Review Technique
(PERT), 478
programmers, 69
programming languages, 173, 173–175
project, 26
project budget, 480
project champion, 483
project deadline, 477
project integration management, 489–490
project management, 27–28, 475
complexity levels, 471
core competency, 471–472
variables, 472–474
project management knowledge areas
communications management, 484–485
cost management, 478–481
human resource management, 481–484
procurement management, 488–489
project integration management,
489–490
quality management, 481
risk management, 485–488, 486
scope management, 475–477
time management, 477–478
project milestone, 477
project organization, 484
project risk, 485
assessment of, 486
identification of, 486
project schedule, 477
project scope, 472
project sponsor, 483
project stakeholders, 475
project steering team, 483–484
project variables
costs, 472–473
quality, 474
scope, 472
time, 473–474
user expectations, 474–475
projecting data, 202
proprietary Linux-based systems, 155
proprietary software, 160
PRTG Network Monitor, 156–157
public cloud computing, 15
SUBJECT INDEX 653
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

purchasing card (p-card), 333
purchasing systems, 351, 362
Q
QBE (Query by Example), 211
quality, 474
quality assurance, 481
quality control, 481
quality information characteristics, 7
quality management, 481
quality planning, 481
Query by Example (QBE), 211
querying tools, 389
Quintessentially Gifts, 321
R
radio frequency identification (RFID), 105
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tag,
105, 611
RAID (redundant array of independent/
inexpensive disks), 95
RAM (random access memory), 91
random access memory (RAM), 91
ransomware, 565–566
Raskin, Jef, 522
read-only memory (ROM), 93
reasonable assurance, 578
record, 195
Red Hat Enterprise Virtualization (RHEV),
151–152
Red Hat Linux, 151–152
Reduced Instruction Set Processing (RISC),
88
redundant array of independent/inexpen-
sive disks (RAID), 95
reengineering, 53
relational database model, 200–204
building and modifying, 204
linking data tables, 203
simplified ER diagram, 202
release, software, 536
repetitive strain injury (RSI), 619
report generator software, 527
reporting tools, 389
request for information (RFI), 543
request for maintenance form, 536
response for attacks
eradication efforts, 585
incident containment, 584–585
incident follow-up, 585–586
response to attacks
incident notifications, 584
protection of evidence and activity logs, 584
restraining forces, 57
retail Web sites, 327
retargeting, 318
RFI (request for information), 543
RFID (radio frequency identification), 105
tag, 611
Rhapsody, 270
RHEV (Red Hat Enterprise Virtualization),
151–152
RIA (rich Internet application), 160
rich Internet application (RIA), 160
RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Processing),
88
risk assessment, crime, 577–578
risk management, 485–488, 486
risk management plan, 487
risk owner, 487
robotics, 428–429
ROM (read-only memory), 93
rootkit, 570
RSI (repetitive strain injury), 619
rule, 426
S
SaaS (software as a service), 162, 281–282
sales and operations plan, 361
sales forecasting, 361
sales management, 365
sales order entry window, 363
sales ordering, 362
sample stakeholder analysis matrix, 485
SAN (storage area network), 98
SAP Contact Manager, 366
SAP ERP Financials, 13
scalability, 116
scanning devices, 102
schedule feasibility, 511
Schein, Edgar, 57
schema, 208
SCM (supply chain management), 48,
361–363
scope management, 475–477
screen readers, 439
scrum, 539
scrum master, 539
SDKs (software development kits), 174
SDN (software-defined networking), 253
search engine optimization (SEO), 266
search engines, 265–267
seated immobility thromboembolism
(SIT), 619
secondary storage
cost comparison with forms of storage, 93
definition, 93
devices, 93–97
enterprise storage, 97–99
magnetic, 94–96
optical, 96–97
solid state, 97
Section 814 of the USA Patriot Act, 576
secure, private and reliable computing,
577–588
computer forensics, 586–588
educating employees and contract
workers, 579–580
establishing security policy, 579
implementing detection systems, 583–584
organizations response for attacks,
584–586
prevention of attacks, 580–583
risk assessment, 577–588
using managed security service provider
(MSSP), 586
security
IoT applications, 279
and system requirements, 518–519
systems design, 523
utilities, 156
Websites, 312
security audit, 582–583
security dashboard, utilizing, 581
security policy, organizations, 579
selecting data, 202
self-service analytics, 397–399
semiconductor fabrication plant, 90
senior IS managers, 67–68
SEO (search engine optimization), 266
server, 116
blade, 120
utilities, 157–158
virtual, 119
server farm, 119–120
service-oriented architecture (SOA), 159
shadow IT, 70
pros and cons of, 71
shadow system, 601
shadowing, 411
shopping online, 272–273
sign-on procedure, 522
simple linear regression, 393
simplified entity-relationship (ER) diagram,
202
single-user license, 177
SirCam worms, 566
SIT (seated immobility thromboembolism),
619
site preparation, 532
slack time, 477
slipstream upgrade, 536
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs),
352
smart card, 104, 331–332
SMART goals, 464
smartphone operating systems, 153
SMEs (small and medium-sized enterprises),
352
smishing, 572–573
SOA (service-oriented architecture), 159
social networking, 366
soft side of implementing change, 56
software, 12
application, 138
buying off-the Shell, 542–547
coding for system development, 527
commercial off the- shelf (COTS), 542
copyright, 177
enterprise application, 171–172
freeware, 177–180
global support, 180
licenses, 177–178
menu-creation, 527
mobile applications and, 12–13
mobile commerce, 328–329
off-the-shelf, 160
open-source software, 177–180
proprietary, 160
release, 536
report generator, 527
spending, 138
system, 138
version, 536
workgroup application, 170–171
software as a service (SaaS), 162, 281–282
software bug, 176–177
software codes, 527
software developers, 68
software development kits (SDKs), 174
software package evaluation phase, 543–545
identifying potential solutions, 543–544
making selection, 545
researching top contenders, 544–545
selecting top contenders, 544
software suites, 168–169
654 SUBJECT INDEX
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

software-defined networking (SDN), 253
solid state storage device (SSD), 97
source data automation, 100, 353
spam, email, 567–568
spam-filtering utilities, 156
spear-phishing, 572
spear-phishing attack, 588
specialized information systems, 25–26
special-purpose computers, 141–142
speech recognition software, 439
speech-recognition technology, 100
sphere of influence, 139
sponsoring business unit, 472
spreadsheet analysis, 163–166
spreadsheets, 388–389
SQL (Structured Query Language), 206–207
SQL databases, 206–207
SSD (solid state storage device), 97
star network, 241
steering team, 513–514, 520–521, 526
stock management system project, 475–476
storage area network (SAN), 98
storage as a service, 99
storefront broker, 323
strategic planning, 27–28, 458
benefits, 458–459
defining strategies, 464–465
deploying plan, 465–466
direction-setting phase, 461–464
goals-based, 459
issues-based, 459
organic, 459
situation analysis, 459–462
strategic planning pyramid
core value, 462
goals, 463–464
mission statement, 462
objectives, 462
strategies, 464
vision, 462
vision/mission statement, 462
strategy, 464
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities,
Threats (SWOT) matrix, 461
Structured Query Language (SQL), 206–207
subject matter expert, 483
supercomputers, 117
supply chain, 47
supply chain management (SCM), 48,
361–363
Syndicat Mixte Autolib, 154
syntax, 173
Sysinternals Suite, 155
system acquisition, 28
system analysis, 514–521
budget development, 514
identifying requirements and prioritizing
them, 515–519
study existing system, 514–515
team recruitment, 514
system construction, 526–529, 527
coding software components, 527
creating and loading data, 528
unit testing, 529
system design, 521–526
design database, 525
designing user interface, 522–523
disaster recovery plan, 523–525
draft preparation of, 526
schedule and budget development, 522
security and controls, 523
team recruitment, 521
system development, 28
system disposal, 537–538
communicate intent, 537
data backup, 538
hardware disposal, 538
sensitive data deletion, 538
terminate contracts, 538
system implementation, 530–534
cutover, 532–534
installation, 532
site preparation, 532
user preparation, 530–532
System Integrity Protection (SIP), 564
system operation, 534
system operator, 68
system performance, 519
system review, 535
system software, 138
system support specialist, 70
system testing, 529, 546
systems analysis
additional candidates for, 520
alternative solutions, 519–520
draft report, 520
feasibility analysis, 520
reviewing results, 520–521
systems analyst, 68–69
systems design
report, 526
result review, 526
systems investigation, 507–514
budget development, 508
feasibility analysis, 510–512
functional decomposition, 509–510
joint application development (JAD),
508–509
report, 513
request, 508
result review, 513–514
systems investigation request, 508
tasks during, 508
team recruitment, 508
systems maintenance, 535–537
systems software
current operating system, 145–146
embedded operating system, 153–155
middleware, 158–159
mobile operating system, 152–153
operating system, 141–155
personal operating system, 146–148
utility programs, 155–158
workgroup operating system, 150–151
T
Tableau software, 162
tablet, 114
tablet computer operating systems, 153
tacit management, 410–411, 414
tags, 260
TAM (technology acceptance model), 60,
531
tangible benefit, 469–470
technical documentation, 527
technical feasibility, 511
technical resource, 483
technology acceptance model (TAM), 60,
531
technology infrastructure, 7, 326–333
tendonitis, 619
10-Gigabit Ethernet, 248
testing, 529–530
text-to-speech synthesizers, 439
The New Yorker, 282
thin client, 115
3D printers, 109–110
TIGTA (Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration), 602
time
and material contract, 489
project variables, 473–474
time management, 477–478
Tivoli OMEGAMON XE, 535
TLS (transport layer security), 330
touch screens, 106–107
TPSs. See transaction processing systems
traditional systems development life cycle
coding software components, 527
training
virtual reality, 438
World Wide Web, 265
transaction, 21
transaction processing cycle, 353
transaction processing systems (TPSs), 21
accounting systems, 350–351
activities, 352–355
batch processing systems, 347–348
data collection, 353–354
data correction, 354–355
data editing, 354
data processing, 355
data storage, 355
document production, 355
for entrepreneurs, 352
objectives, 347–352
online transaction processing, 348–349
order processing systems, 350
overview of, 346–347
point-of-sale, 354
purchasing systems, 351
for small and medium-sized enterprises,
352
transport layer security (TLS), 330
travel, 273
Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration (TIGTA), 602
Trojan horse, 566–567
Tumblr, 612
20Q Web site, 423
twisted-pair wire, 248
Twitter, 612
U
UAT (user acceptance testing), 529–530
Uniform Resource Locator (URL), 256
universal serial bus (USB) flash drive, 97
Unix operating system, 151
URL (Uniform Resource Locator), 256
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 63
U.S. Supreme Court, 615
user acceptance document, 530
user acceptance testing (UAT), 529–530
for new accounting system, 538
user documentation, 527
user interface, 142, 427
command-based, 142–143
designing, 522–523
graphical, 143–144
user preparation, 530–532
SUBJECT INDEX 655
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

user satisfaction, 60–61
user testing, 546
utility programs, 155, 155–158
V
value chain, 47
Verizon 4G LTE Coverage, 258
version, software, 536
video data, 5
video, multimedia, 434–435
virtual private network (VPN), 275
virtual reality
applications, 437–439
forms of, 437
interface devices, 436–437
large-scale environment, 436
overview of, 435–436
virtual reality system, 435
virtual server, 119
virtual tape, 95
virtual team, 50
virus, 566
virus signature, 581
vishing, 573
Visible Developer, 527
vision, 462
vision system, 429
vision/mission statement, 462
Vogue, 282
volume testing, 529, 546
VPN (virtual private network), 275
vulnerabilities, software, 563
W
WAN (wide area network), 244
waterfall system development process,
506–538
advantages and disadvantages of, 507
system analysis, 514–521
system construction, 526–529, 527
system design, 521–526
system implementation, 530–534
system integration and testing, 529–530
system investigation, 507–514
system maintenance, 535–538
system operation, 534–535
WBS (work breakdown structure),
478–480
wearable computer, 113
Web 2.0 technologies, 263–265, 264, 417
Web browser, 259
Web developers, 69
Web log, 269
Web server
hardware, 327–328
software, 328
Web services, 262
Web sites
bartering, 318
building traffic, 324–325
establishing, 323–324
functions of, 322–323
improving, 325–326
maintaining, 325–326
measures for retail, 327
mobile commerce, 305
privacy policy, 612–613
security, 312
travel, 273
Web-based application suite, 169
wholesale electronic commerce, 313–314
wide area network (WAN), 244
Wi-Fi network, 248–249
Windows Embedded, 154
Windows Server, 150–151
Windows XP, 537
Wired, 282
wireless communication, 246
frequency ranges, 248
wireless technologies, 246–249
WM97/Resume.A virus, 566
word cloud, 389–390
word-processing applications, 163
work breakdown structure (WBS),
478–480
work environment
environmental problems, 619–621
health concerns, 619
work stressors, 619
workgroup, 139
workgroup application software, 170–171
workgroup operating system, 150–151
workgroup sphere of influence, 139
workstation, 116
World Wide Web (WWW), 16
blogging, 269
Cascading Style Sheet, 260–261
conferencing, 268–269
developing content and applications,
262–263
education, 265
entertainment, 269–272
Extensible Markup Language, 260–261
geolocation, 273–274
Hypertext Markup Language, 259–261
instant messaging, 267
intranets, 274–275
job information, 265
microblogging, 268
navigation, 273–274
online media, 269–272
podcasting, 269
programming languages, 261
search engines, 265–267
shopping online, 272–273
social Web, 263–265
training, 265
travel, 273–274
Web 2.0, 263–265, 264, 417
working of, 259–261
Worldwide LHC Computing Grid (WLCG)
project, 90
worms, 566
WWW. See World Wide Web
X
x86 family processor, 88
XML (Extensible Markup Language),
260–261
XP (extreme programming), 540
Y
YouTube EDU, 271
Z
zero-day attack, 564
zombie, 569
656 SUBJECT INDEX
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Company Index
A
Abas, 360
Accenture, 54, 65, 72, 371
Accenture Interactive, 299
AccessData, 587
Acer, 163
ACM (Association for Computing Machinery),
73, 624–625
Acorn Computer Group, 130
ACS (American Cancer Society), 432
Adidas, 373
Adobe, 418, 434
AdRem, 157
Advantage Sign & Graphic Solutions, 172
Agnitum, 580
AHFC (American Honda Finance Corporation),
602
Airbnb, 163
AITP (Association of Information Technology
Professionals), 73
Akamai, 66
Akimbo Financial, 311
Algoma Central Corporation, 581
Allina Health, 442
Allscripts, 535
Almighty Music Marketing, 13
Alstom Transport, 465
Amazon, 16, 48, 49, 65, 99, 111, 114, 160,
214, 253, 270, 281, 300, 301, 302, 305,
325, 465, 504
AmazonFresh, 48
AMD, 88, 90
American Airlines Admiral Club, 109
American Cancer Society (ACS), 432
American Express, 104, 331, 373
American Honda Finance Corporation
(AHFC), 602
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), 206
American Red Cross, 365
AMR Research, 325
AOL, 608
ApliedMicro, 131
Apple, 12–13, 42, 99, 103, 106, 110, 113,
114, 116, 119, 120, 123, 130, 131, 137,
143, 148, 151, 226, 301, 304, 305, 330,
434, 474, 522, 561, 564, 608, 609
Apple Store, 327
Apple User Groups, 73
Applicor, 372
Arbor Networks, 569
Argonne National Laboratory, 118
Argosy, 387
ARM, 130–131
Ascribe, 388
Ashley Madison, 573
Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM), 73, 624–625
Association of American Railroads, 79
Association of Information Technology
Professionals (AITP), 73
Atos, 490
ATS Solutions, 72
AT&T, 120, 151, 248, 250, 255, 258, 304, 586
Audi, 42
Autodesk, 66
Automatic Data Processing (ADP), 348
Avaap, Inc., 581
Avanade, 66
Avon Products, 61
Axxess, 66
B
Banco Popular, 205
Bank of America, 120, 571
Barbecana, 488
Barnes & Noble, 111, 300
Barracuda Networks, 156
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG, 41–42
Ben & Jerry’s, 20
Best Buy, 327
Bidz.com, 302
BlackBerry, 154
BloomNation, 306
Bluebee Software, 360
Blue Cross and Blue Shield, 157
BMW Group, 41
Boeing, 45, 54, 55
Borders, 310
Boston Medical Center (BMC), 441
Bounce Exchange, 66
British Telecom (BT), 255, 556
Broadcom, 131
BroadSpire, 323
Burberry, 305
Burton Corporation, 180
Burton Snowboards, 180
Butterfleye, 52
C
Caesar’s Palace, 574
Cal, 355–356
California Case Management System, 472
California Department of Consumer
Affairs, 56
Campbell’s, 5
Canonical, 149
CapGemini, 65
Carbanak, 571
Career Builders, 73
CareFirst BlueCross Blue Shield, 310
Casio, 151
CD-adapco, 97–98
CDW, 13
Center for Medical Interoperability, 41
Cerner Corporation, 149–150
CGI, 473–474
Chaos Computer Club, 565
Chapters Health System, 115
Chase, 571
CHD, 13
Check Point, 580
Chevron, 386
CHG Health Services, 66
Ciber, Inc., 371
Cincom Systems, 360
Cisco Systems, 16, 156, 281
Citibank, 571
Citizens Bank, 55
Citrix, 535
Clark Realty Capital (CRC), 171
CNET, 158
Coca-Cola, 93, 373, 386
The Code For America (CFA), 177
Cognizant, 65, 120
Coles, 49, 51
Colorado Technical University, 386
Columbia Sportswear Company, 158
Commonwealth Financial Network, 66
Comodo, 580
Compiere, 360, 361
Computer Sciences Corporation, 586
Connectria, 66
Container Store, 162
Continental Airlines, 14
Costco, 327
Covell Group, 252
Craigslist, 302, 318
Cray, 118
Creative, 111
The Creative Wedge, 354
Credit Acceptance, 66
Criteo, 225
CrossFit, 324
Curry’s Art Store, 363
D
DaimlerChrysler, 385–386
Database.com, 214
Data Management Association (DAMA)
International, 219
DBS (Development Bank of Singapore), 418
Dell, 72, 111, 114, 121, 123, 248, 538
Dell SecureWorks, 586
Delta Sky Club, 109
657
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Deutsche Bank, 54
Development Bank of Singapore
(DBS), 418
DHL Express, 49, 66, 309, 347
DHS, 349
Domino’s, 306
Dun & Bradstreet, 316
Dunkin’ Donuts, 379
DuPont Chemical, 371
E
eBay, 273, 300, 302, 305, 331
eBid, 302
Echo Valley Irrigation, 352
Embassy Suites, 109
EMC, 98, 99, 525
Epicor, 360
Equifax, 617
Erickson Living, 66
Error Prevention Institute, 603
ESP Technologies, 360
Etsy, 302, 555
Excite, 300
eXelate, 316
Expensify, 364
Experian, 5, 617
F
Facebook, 73, 120, 226, 270, 301, 339, 389,
429, 436, 464, 601, 608, 612, 613
FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation), 566,
573, 584, 608, 609
FDA (Food and Drug Administration), 41
FDNY (Fire Department of the City of New
York), 399
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 573,
584
Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), 246
Federal Express (FedEx), 16, 49, 309, 347,
504
Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), 79
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 310,
612
FFF Enterprises, 389
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority,
66
Financial Insurance Management
Corporation (FIMC), 188–189
Fire Department of the City of New York
(FDNY), 399
FitBit, 113
Fiverr, 302
Flickr, 301
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 41
Foo Fighters, 324
Ford Motor Company, 48, 110, 373, 438
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
(FISC), 608
Forrester Research Inc., 300
Free Software Foundation, 177
Frontier Software, 360
FTC (Federal Trade Commission), 612
FUJIFILM Corporation, 94
Fujitsu, 118
G
GAF, 468
Gartner, 56
GCS Software, 360
Geek Squad, 72, 536
GEICO, 519
Geico, 433
Genentech, 66
General Accounting Office, 121
General Electric (GE), 17, 45, 53, 223,
277, 324
General Motors, 121, 373
General Services Administration (GSA), 415
GitHub, 324
Globacom, 292–293
GlobalScape, 66
Goldman Sachs, 120
Google, 12–13, 65, 72, 73, 99, 103, 113, 114,
120, 121, 150, 152, 156, 161, 162, 163,
214, 226, 253, 266, 364, 430, 436, 438,
462, 463, 568, 608, 613
Google Plusþ, 389, 612
Google Shopping, 300
Government Accounting Office (GAO),
599, 601
Grainger, 299
Grant Thornton International, 586, 587
Greyston Bakery, 20–21
Groupon, 105, 319
GSA (General Services Administration), 415
Guidance Software, 587
H
Halifax Health, 66
HanseMerkur Krankenversicherung, 418
Harrah’s, 14
Harris Corporation, 419
Hawaii Department of Transportation
(HDOT), 371
H.B. Fuller, 371
HCL, 65
HDOT (Hawaii Department of Transporta-
tion), 371
Heinz, 55
Helen Ross McNabb Center, 347
Heroku, 214
Hershey’s, 532–533
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 72, 121, 123, 151, 152,
154, 156, 309, 371, 397, 481, 535, 538
Hilton, 109
HiSilico, 131
Hitachi Data Systems Corporation, 98
H.J. Heinz Company, 169
Home Depot, 301
Honda Motors, 424
HostWay, 323
H&R Block, 161
HTC, 436
Huawei, 113, 304
I
Ibidfree, 302
IBM, 16, 55, 65, 72, 94, 98, 99, 111–112, 117,
118, 122, 137, 139, 146, 151, 156, 157,
161, 171, 214, 265, 281, 283, 383, 397,
398, 409, 432, 532, 535, 586
ICA (Industrial Control Associates Inc.),
370–371
IGATE Technologies, 65
iHealth, 52
IKEA, 438
Indeed, 73
Industrial Control Associates Inc. (ICA),
370–371
Infobright Inc., 276
Infor, 360
Information Builders, 397
Infosys, 65
InMobi, 317
Instagram, 301, 601, 612
Intacct, 372
Intaver Institute, 488
Intel, 73, 88, 90, 116, 119, 131
Intelex, 488
Intelitek, 429
International Securities Exchange, 120
Intuit, 160, 214
Iomega, 111
iProspect, 373
iRobot, 428
Iron Mountain, 113
J
Jaguar, 42
Jama Software, 481
JasperSoft, 397
JCPenney, 272
JGC Corporation, 139
John Lewis, 305
Johns Hopkins Medicine, 466
K
Kaboodle, 5
Kaspersky, 156, 580
Katharinenhospital, 430
KDDI Corporation, 227
Kerry Group, 380
Kijiji, 302
Kobo, 111
Kraft, 55
Kraft Heinz Company, 169
Kroger, 10, 385, 391
L
Lafayette General Health, 66
Land Rover, 42
Larsen & Toubro, 65
Larson & Darby Group, 116
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
89, 118
Lawson, 360
Legato Systems, 99
Lenovo, 114, 304
Levi Strauss & Co, 113
LG, 113, 154, 304
LinkedIn, 66, 73, 389, 612
Linux, 567
Liquid Mercury Solutions, 509
658 COMPANY INDEX
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Liquidnet, 66
LivingSocial, 319
Lizard Squad, 565
LoneStar Heart, 372–373
Lukas Nursery, 351
Lush, 305
M
Macy’s, 14, 247, 301
Malaysia Airlines, 428
Manugistics, 533
Marriott International, 321
Marvell Technology Group, 131
MasterCard, 330, 571
McAfee, 581
MCH, 13
McKinsey Global Institute, 387
Mercedes, 42
Mercy’s, 235–236
MetLife, 383, 385
Microsoft, 16, 65, 72, 73, 99, 102, 114, 121,
131, 143, 146, 152, 155, 156, 163, 170,
214, 226, 248, 253, 270, 281, 360, 397,
434, 436, 438, 478, 527, 530, 568, 608
MobiKash, 339–340
Monster, 73
Motorola, 111
M-Pesa, 320
M&T Bank, 532
MyOwnDB, 214
MyTheresa, 321
N
National Center for Atmospheric Research,
94
National Foreign Language Center (NFLC),
95
National Hockey League (NHL), 613–614
National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association, 66
National Security Agency (NSA), 606–607
National Transportation Safety Board
(NTSB), 79
National University of Defense Technology,
118
National Westminster Bank (NatWest), 536
NBTY, Inc., 504
Net-a-Porter, 321
NetApp, 98
Netflix, 16, 159
NetSuite, 162, 360, 372
NeuroMetrix, 52
NeverFail, 525
Newman Technology, 361
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), 602
NHL (National Hockey League), 613–614
Nicklaus Children’s Hospital, 66
Nielsen, 316
Nike, 300–301, 327
Nintendo, 102, 433
Noah Consulting, 66
Nokia, 248
Nordstrom Inc., 80
North American Aerospace Defense
Command (NORAD), 575
North Tees and Hartlepool National Health
Services Trust, 388
NTSB (National Transportation Safety
Board), 79
NUDT, 118
Nu Skin Enterprises, 366
NuStar Energy, 66
Nvidia, 90, 114, 131
O
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 118
Oculus VR, 436
Oddity Software, 13
Office Depot, 151
Ogilvy & Mather, 51
Optum, 474
Oracle, 72, 151, 162, 204, 214, 359,
360, 397
Orscheln, 222
Overstock, 302
Owens Corning, 66
P
Paessler, 156
Palm, 154
Patreon, 310
PayPal, 105, 331
PC Pinpoint, 536
PDS, 360
Pebble, 113
Penn National Gaming, 26
Pentaho, 397
Pinterest, 99, 301, 389, 612
Plex, 360
PMI (Project Management Institute), 475
Presbyterian Medical Center, 566
PriceGrabber, 300
Prime Meats, 359
PrinterOn Enterprise, 109
Procter & Gamble Company (P&G), 52, 117,
160, 371
Project Management Institute (PMI), 475
Prudential Financial, 66
Q
Quad, 114
Qualcomm, 90, 131, 248
Quicken Loans, 66
R
Rackspace, 16, 120, 161, 281
Radixx International, 117
Rakuten, 49
Red Bull, 324
Red Cloud, 121
Red Hat, 141, 149–150, 151, 180
Revere Electric Supply, 347
Riken Advanced Institute for
Computational Science, 118
Rockchip, 131
Room & Board, 326
Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), 536
S
Salesforce, 162, 326
Sam’s Club, 14
Samsung, 90, 97, 111, 113, 114, 115, 131,
163, 304, 436
SAP, 13, 140, 162, 299, 359, 360, 372, 397,
533, 534
Saudi Telecom Company (STC), 242
Seattle Computer Products, 146
Secure-24, 66
Sendmail, Inc., 180
Serv1Tech, 66
Sharp Electronics, 373
Sharp HealthCare, 66
Shell, 533, 534
Shipwire, 49
Shoe Carnival, 306
Shopify, 323–324
Shopping.com, 300
Shopzilla, 300
Shutterfly, 306
Siebel, 533
Simply Hired, 73
SK & A, 13
SK Solutions, 277
Skype, 226, 608
Snagged a Job, 73
Société de transport de Montréal (STM),
187–188
Sony, 111, 113, 114, 155, 436
Sony Computer Entertainment, 102
Southern California Edison, 65
Speak with a Geek, 72
Sprint, 250, 255, 258
Sprint/Nextel, 304
Standish Group, 27, 56, 471
Starwood, 541
State Street Corporation (Boston), 605
SteelEye, 525
Steinwall Scientific, 358
Sticker Mule, 307
St. Lawrence Seaway system, 581
STMicroelectronics, 90, 131
Sumerian, 348
Sun, 161
SUSE, 149
Swapagift.com, 318
Swapstyle.com, 318
Swaptrees.com, 318
Swiss Medical Group, 16
Symantec, 156, 311, 581, 586
Syntel, 65
Syracuse University, 386
Syspro, 360
Systems and Proposal Engineering
Company, 481
T
Taobao, 302
Target Corporation, 3, 106, 247, 272, 301,
310–311
Tata, 65
Tech Mahindra, 65
Telefonica Brasil, 228
Tesla Motors, 324
TeslaTeam, 565
COMPANY INDEX 659
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

TheLadders, 73
TinyCo, 214
Tinypass, 315
T-Mobile, 250, 304, 310
TMW Systems, 412
TomTom, 113
Toshiba, 114
Total Defense, 580
Toyota Financial Services (TFS), 414
Trackvia, 214
TradeAway.com, 318
TransUnion, 617
Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration (TIGTA), 602
Tumblr, 389, 612
TUMI, 365
Twitter, 73, 268, 301, 389, 612
Tyson Foods, 371
U
Ubid, 302
United Parcel Service, 309
University of Arizona, 601
University of Connecticut, 571
University of Illinois, 436
University of Iowa, 395
University of Nevada, 601
University of Notre Dame, 66
UPS, 49, 222, 504
USAA, 66
Usable Databases, 13
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS),
63, 64
U.S. Coast Guard, 441
U.S. Department of Defense (DoD), 601
U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 601
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 567,
601
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 604
U.S. foreign intelligence agencies, 575
U.S. Labor Department, 65
U.S. Postal Service, 386, 618
V
Vera Bradley, 301
Veritas Software Corporation, 99
Verizon, 250, 255, 258, 304, 586
Verizon Communications Inc., 16, 281
VIA Technologies, 88
Villanova University, 386
Virgin Trains, 465
Visa, 104, 329, 571
Vivobarefoot, 131–132
VMWare, 16, 158, 281
W
Waldenbooks, 300
Walgreens, 247
Walmart, 14, 222, 270, 272, 301, 315, 325,
462, 463
Ward Systems Group, 430
Water Pik, 369
Wells Fargo Bank, 367, 571
Western Digital, 95
Westwood Professional Services, Inc.,
416
Whirlpool, 359
White & Case, 412–413
WholeWorldBand, 234–235
Wipro, 65
Women’s World Banking, 358
Workday, 372
X
Xiaomi, 113, 304
Xiotech, 98
Y
Yahoo!, 73, 226, 568, 608
Yahoo Messenger, 566
Yahoo! Shopping, 300
YourTechOnline.com, 536
YouTube, 226, 264, 301, 608
Z
Zappos, 327
Zara, 49
660 COMPANY INDEX
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.
       Important Notice: Media content referenced within the product description or the product 
text may not be available in the eBook version.
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

