
LIBRARY IN A BOOK
PRIVACY IN THE 
INFORMATION AGE
Revised Edition
Harry Henderson 

PRIVACY IN THE INFORMATION AGE, Revised Edition
Copyright © 2006, 1999 by Harry Henderson
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or
by any information storage or retrieval systems, without permission in writing from
the publisher. For information contact:
Facts On File, Inc.
An imprint of Infobase Publishing
132 West 31st Street
New York NY 10001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Henderson, Harry, 1951–
Privacy in the information age / Harry Henderson.—Rev. ed.
p. cm.—(Library in a book)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN: 0-8160-5697-8 (hardcover)
1. Privacy, Right of—United States. 2. Data protection—Law and legislation—
United States. I. Title. II. Series.
KF1263.C65H46 2006
323.44′80973—dc22
2005037387
Facts On File books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk quan-
tities for businesses, associations, institutions, or sales promotions. Please call our
Special Sales Department in New York at (212) 967-8800 or (800) 322-8755.
You can ﬁnd Facts On File on the World Wide Web at http://www.factsonﬁle.com
Text design by Ron Monteleone
Printed in the United States of America
MP Hermitage 10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
This book is printed on acid-free paper.

To my brother, Bruce Henderson, 1953–1997, 
Computer pioneer, techie supreme, 
and all-around family person


PART I
OVERVIEW OF THE TOPIC
Chapter 1
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
3
Chapter 2
The Law of Privacy
52
Chapter 3
Chronology
117
Chapter 4
Biographical Listing
131
Chapter 5
Glossary
138
PART II
GUIDE TO FURTHER RESEARCH
Chapter 6
How to Research Privacy Issues
149
Chapter 7
Annotated Bibliography
162
Chapter 8
Organizations and Agencies
244
CONTENTS

PART III
APPENDICES
Appendix A
Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552), 1966
255
Appendix B
U.S. Supreme Court Ruling: 
Katz v. United States, 1967
266
Appendix C
Privacy Act of 1974
272
Appendix D
Privacy Provisions of the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999
286
Index
298

PART I
OVERVIEW OF THE TOPIC


INTRODUCTION TO PRIVACY
IN THE INFORMATION AGE
Privacy, like most abstractions, can mean different things to different people. It
can mean seclusion—a place where one need not fear prying eyes. But it can also
mean the ability to control access to our personal information. Robert Ellis
Smith, editor of Privacy Journal, combines the two deﬁnitions, speaking of “the
desire by each of us for physical space where we can be free of interruption, in-
trusion, embarrassment, or accountability and the attempt to control the time
and manner of disclosures of personal information about ourselves.”1
In 1928 Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis saw privacy as woven into the
very fabric of our national life:
The makers of our Constitution . . . sought to protect Americans in their beliefs,
their thoughts, their emotions and their sensations. They conferred as against the
Government, the right to be left alone—the most comprehensive of the rights of
man and the right most valued by civilized men.2
However, it must be noted that Justice Brandeis was expressing the minority
opinion of a Supreme Court whose literalistic interpretation of the Fourth
Amendment had found nothing unconstitutional about the police tapping a
phone line without a warrant.
When the Court revisited the issue in Katz v. United States, almost 40 years
had passed—years that had seen the anticommunist crusade of Senator Joseph
McCarthy, the gathering of dossiers on thousands of Americans by FBI chief
J. Edgar Hoover, and the establishment of an elaborate national security appa-
ratus. In a world of hidden microphones and radio transmitters, the Court now
declared that people have a reasonable expectation of privacy at home and with
regard to certain activities. Most Americans agree with this principle, at least in
broad terms. For example, we expect that a letter will get to its destination with-
out being opened and read. Likewise, no one should be able to listen in secretly
on our phone calls without a court order. And if the police suspect someone has
committed a crime, they must go to a judge and obtain a warrant before search-
ing her home.
3
CHAPTER 1

Besides protecting speciﬁc places and activities, privacy can also mean protec-
tion for intimacy and family life, and indeed, the right to make decisions about
whether to have a family, without interference from government.
Legal scholars make a distinction between the “decisional privacy” that was
afﬁrmed in the Supreme Court’s Griswold and Roe v. Wade cases, and “informa-
tional privacy.” The latter, as described by Columbia University law professor
Alan Westin, is “the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions to determine
for themselves when, how, and to what extent information about themselves is
communicated to others.”3
However, as Americans go online in search of shopping, entertainment, and
social contact, that sense of control over information seems to be missing, and
thus privacy seems to be not a ﬁrm guarantee but at best an uncertain promise.
Thus, according to writer Jeffrey Rosen,
. . . as thinking and writing increasingly take place in cyberspace, the part of our
life that can be monitored and searched has vastly expanded. E-mail, even after
it is ostensibly deleted, becomes a permanent record that can be resurrected by em-
ployers or prosecutors at any point in the future. On the Internet, every Web site
we visit, every store we browse in, every magazine we skim, and the amount of
time we spend skimming it, creates electronic footprints that increasingly can be
traced back to us, revealing detailed patterns about our tastes, preferences, and in-
timate thoughts.4
During the past decade or so Internet users have gradually come to realize
that the computer screen is not a sign or a mirror but rather, a window. As the
user searches for information and makes selections, data about that person is
ﬂowing outward, where it is accumulated in databases. These “electronic foot-
prints” make the consumer himself or herself into a product that can be bought
and sold.
While informational rather than decisional privacy is the focus of this book,
there is no absolute distinction between the two types of privacy. In a society
where communications and information technology are central to economic
and even social life, many privacy advocates feel that the right of persons to con-
trol how information about them is obtained and used is deeply intertwined
with the experience of autonomy and liberty. Without control over their per-
sonal information, how can people feel conﬁdent about making important deci-
sions? And in a world where cyberspace so often intersects physical space, how
can one secure life’s private spaces?
PRIVACY ISSUES
As important as the right of privacy is to so many people, it is clearly not the
only consideration in making decisions about how society will be organized.
What makes privacy issues so often contentious and hard to resolve is the in-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
4

evitable conﬂict between privacy and other important goals, such as business ef-
ﬁciency, law enforcement, and, particularly in recent years, ﬁghting terrorism.
Because hardly anyone is against privacy in the abstract, privacy issues generally
involve one side saying that privacy is being threatened and the other side say-
ing that the threat is minimal and is justiﬁed by important social, commercial,
or governmental interests.
Privacy issues are found in virtually every activity and institution of modern
life. Today some of the most prominent ones include
• What should happen to the information consumers provide when they buy
something in a store or online?
• Is it acceptable for web sites to track users if it enables them to provide a more
“personalized” and relevant selection of goods?
• Should companies have to ask permission before they distribute customer in-
formation—or is it up to the customer to say no?
• If information can be collected only if the consumer allows it, will the avail-
ability of credit and other services decline, and costs go up?
• Who should have access to a person’s medical information? Should insurers
be allowed to turn down persons who have genetic risks of disease? What
role, if any, should medical records play in employment decisions?
• Should employee use of e-mail, chat rooms, and web sites be monitored to
avoid potential lawsuits?
• How can children be given access to the rich resources of the Internet with-
out compromising their or their family’s privacy?
• Should all e-mail and other Internet activity be digitally traceable? Would the
ability to ﬁnd and punish spammers, hackers, or online predators outweigh the
loss of anonymity that might protect vulnerable people or whistleblowers?
• Would the use of a universal ID card, biometric passports, airline passenger
screening, and integrated databases make the nation safer from terrorism?
If so, would it be worth the cost in privacy and the ability to move freely
without having to be accountable to a largely unseen and unknown security
apparatus?
• Is it a good idea to have surveillance cameras in major public places? Does it
deter crime but also deter people from associating freely? Should any restric-
tions be placed on the ubiquitous web cams and camera phones that allow
anyone to capture images?
• Are we becoming a “surveillance society”? Should we admit that privacy is a
lost cause, or give people the technical and legal tools to “watch the watchers”?
Before considering these and other conﬂicts over privacy, it is useful to look
more closely at the idea of privacy and how it has emerged in the development
of modern society.
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
5

THE IDEA OF PRIVACY
Throughout history most societies have been organized with an emphasis on
communal living. In medieval Europe, many tribal societies throughout the
world, and even in the America of the ﬁrst colonists, people generally lived to-
gether as extended families under one roof (often in one room). The idea of a
person having a private bedroom was virtually unknown. Under such circum-
stances, there was little that people did not learn about one another.
On the other hand, there was little need to keep track of details about indi-
viduals outside the immediate group. Written records were not generally kept,
except perhaps for the church’s records of birth, marriage, and death, and
records pertaining to the few people who owned land. Rulers generally had lit-
tle interest in the details of the lives of ordinary people.
EMERGENCE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
The Industrial Revolution, which began in the late 18th century, created a tidal
wave of change in living conditions for people in Britain and Western Europe.
It brought thousands of people to work together in factories and ofﬁces in huge,
teeming cities. As increasing numbers of people began to change from a rural,
subsistent, agricultural way of life to urban wage labor, extended families tended
to break into smaller units. A young person who left a rural home in search of
work in the city was likely to ﬁnd a marriage partner there and raise a “nuclear”
family that was likely to be out of touch with the extended family.
This more mobile but in some ways more isolated life created new social
needs. The medieval world had imposed rigid social classes but offered some se-
curity in providing everyone with a well-deﬁned status, a “place in life.” The in-
dustrial world and the growth of the middle class broke down rigid barriers and
offered new opportunities for upward mobility, but it also created insecurity and
tensions as people from different backgrounds and with different customs were
thrown together and had to ﬁnd ways to live comfortably with one another. The
need to enable individuals and families to establish boundaries of personal space
found expression in the idea of a right to privacy. For example, the act of visit-
ing another person’s home became more ritualized, and wealthier people started
to devote a special room in their house for such visits.
The emerging need for privacy also reﬂected cultural and even psychological
changes. According to privacy expert Robert Ellis Smith, from the point of view
of the individual, “The right to privacy includes a sense of autonomy, a right to
develop a unique personality and living space, and a right to distinguish one’s
own persona from everyone else’s.”5 But this is a sentence that would have made
little sense more than a couple of hundred years ago.
Just as lines in a geometric polygon deﬁne an inside and an outside, the ex-
istence of a sense of self is what gives rise to the idea that some things are inte-
rior, personal, and private, while others are public, belonging to the world as a
whole. To modern people, it seems quite obvious that we have an inside and an
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
6

outside—and that protecting and nurturing what’s inside is of special concern.
But when one looks at the literature and art our ancestors have left for us, it
seems that the emergence of a modern sense of self was a gradual process. As lit-
erary scholar Alastair Fowler has noted:
. . . Medieval literature knew almost nothing of individual personality: its intro-
spection proceeded along rigidly casuistic [formally logical] lines. During the Re-
naissance subjectivity began to stir, particularly in dramatic literature, where the
feelings associated with decisions were displayed, and in sonnets, which did much
to explore one range of private emotions. The 17th century epigram did more.
And the inquiries of [Robert] Burton and [Thomas] Browne (in their very dif-
ferent ways) enlarged the possibility of self-consciousness. But it was only in the
18th century that literature made a sustained attempt to express the individual
feelings of those with the leisure to discover themselves.6
As art and literature began to depict the world in more realistic detail, the
textures of individual personalities became a major focus of novels such as
those of Jane Austen. Turning toward the 19th century, the romantic poets,
such as William Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and William Blake,
looked at universal ideas through the bright, sharply focused light of the indi-
vidual imagination.
While few people in the early 1800s had the leisure or talent to become poets
or novelists, the new focus on the self in high culture reached middle-class read-
ers, who could participate through the fashionable new practice of keeping a
diary, a private space in which one could assess one’s daily experience and ex-
press one’s hopes and fears.
A POLITICS OF INDIVIDUALITY
At the same time people were starting to deﬁne new social customs that pro-
tected privacy, the political philosophy of thinkers such as John Locke was start-
ing to emphasize the rights and even the sovereignty of the individual in
interaction with the government. In the medieval world, rights were attached to
social status (most of the rights in the British Magna Carta of 1215, for exam-
ple, referred to the nobility, not the common people). But 18th-century British
statesman William Pitt declared in a speech before Parliament:
The poorest man may, in his cottage, bid deﬁance to all the forces of the Crown.
It may be frail, its roof may shake; the wind may blow through it; the storm may
enter; the rain may enter; but the King of England may not enter; all his force
dares not cross the threshold of the ruined tenement.7
Privacy, like freedom of speech and the press, emerged as rights that could be
asserted against the government. Meanwhile the political reformers of the late
17th and 18th centuries replaced the idea of absolute monarchy with the growing
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
7

power of a Parliament that represented the people (although admittedly only
males with a certain degree of economic status were truly represented).
The colonists who came to America from England shared the regard for pri-
vacy and individual rights of the English political reformers. For example, the
Rhode Island Code of 1647 stated that “a man’s house is to himself, his family
and goods as a castle.” On the eve of the American Revolution, colonist John
Adams told a jury that “An Englishman’s dwelling House is his Castle. The law
has erected a Fortiﬁcation around it.”8 Indeed, one cause of the friction that led
to the American revolt was that ofﬁcers of the Crown frequently broke into
colonists’ homes to seize papers, having only the authority of a vague “general
warrant.”
The U.S. Constitution that came into effect in 1789 was primarily a blue-
print for the organization of government, with Congress, the executive branch,
and the judiciary branch each being given speciﬁed powers. While such a struc-
ture may have implied that rights not given to the federal government remained
with the states or the people themselves, a keen awareness of abuses that had
been suffered under British rule had led to demands for explicit guarantees of
individual rights. The result was the adoption of 10 amendments, called the Bill
of Rights, in 1791.
Several of the amendments have something to say about privacy. In particu-
lar, the Fourth Amendment states:
The rights of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects,
against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants
shall issue, but upon probable cause supported by oath or afﬁrmation, and partic-
ularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
This language gives speciﬁcity to the “your home is your castle” idea, de-
claring a fundamental right of privacy that ofﬁcers of the state can overcome
only by having sufﬁcient reason (“probable cause”) to believe that a crime has
been committed, and that the place to be searched is likely to contain speciﬁed
evidence relating to the crime.
Other amendments of the Bill of Rights also touch upon privacy. The Third
Amendment prevents the government from taking over private homes to house
soldiers during peacetime. Of more relevance today is the Fifth Amendment,
which includes a provision that no person “shall be compelled in a criminal
case to be a witness against himself.” In other words, the information locked
inside a person’s brain is private and cannot be forced out and used against that
person.
PRIVACY IN INDUSTRIALIZED SOCIETY
America at the time of the Constitution’s framers was a primarily agrarian soci-
ety. By the early 19th century, however, an industrial revolution was underway,
reshaping daily life and the land itself, and creating new technologies that had
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
8

unpredictable social impacts. To many artists and literary romantics at the dawn
of this revolution, industrialization and technology threatened to turn emerging
selves into interchangeable parts of some vast and relentless machine.
In America, a land that celebrated both limitless growth and individual free-
dom, transcendentalist philosopher and author of Walden Henry David
Thoreau retreated to the woods, and essayist and philosopher Ralph Waldo
Emerson protested that “Society everywhere is in conspiracy against the man-
hood of every one of its members. . . . The virtue in most request [demand] is
conformity. Self-reliance is its aversion. It loves not realities and creators, but
names and customs.”9 This restated the romantic vision: the creative power of
the individual versus the deadening power of conformity. In America, at least,
the apparent boundlessness of the land could postpone for a time the regimen-
tation that would characterize emerging European states such as Prussia in the
latter part of the 19th century.
Just as industrialization was threatening individuality, so too was an emerg-
ing science challenging the idea of an autonomous self. A Newtonian explana-
tion of the mechanics of the universe had already led to the suggestion that if
the paths of planets could be predicted by exact mathematics, perhaps nature
and human life itself were equally determined by a clockworklike interaction
of forces. If accepted, such a picture of the universe threatened to make privacy
irrelevant. (And thus, the romantic poet William Blake had portrayed Isaac
Newton as a demonic ﬁgure of fearful power.)
At ﬁrst the incredible complexity of biology seemed to resist mechanistic
explanations. Biologist Louis Pasteur demonstrated that even microscopic life
always comes from preceding life, rather than being generated from some mys-
terious “vital force.” In the middle of the 19th century naturalist Charles Dar-
win introduced an elegant, powerful, and controversial explanation of evolution
by natural selection. When Darwin examined the “human animal” and its posi-
tion in the scheme of all things, he concluded that
The great difference in mind between men and higher animals . . . is certainly one
of degree and not of kind. The senses and intuitions, the various emotions and
faculties, such as love, memory, attention, curiosity, imitation, reason, etc., of which
man boasts, may be found in an incipient, or sometimes in a well-developed
condition, in the lower animals.10
Two other great explainers of the 19th-century scientiﬁc revolution were
Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud. Marx attempted to demonstrate that the condi-
tions of human life and culture arise not from the individual will but from inex-
orable economic and historical forces. One might say that at least in the things
that mattered, people did not make history; history made people. In this view,
the inner self was peripheral, not primary.
Freud, on the one hand, actually made the private self more important. He
made dream interpretation, free association, and the systematic examination of
memories and feelings the key to freeing the individual from mental illness. On
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
9

the other hand, Freud, like Darwin and Marx, was a determinist. He said that
human behavior was determined by forces of which the individual was usually
unconscious—forces that acted according to laws not unlike the hydraulic be-
havior of ﬂuids. While exploring the private self was given new importance, its
privacy, its harmful secrecy, would be seen as a barrier to be pierced by the light
of analysis. (Later, 20th-century behavioral psychologists would attempt to dis-
pense with the inner world entirely, working directly on observable behavior
through stimulus, response, and reinforcement.)
The Victorian individual thus lived in a world of rapidly growing complexity.
Science and technology offered explanations and new capabilities—even new
leisure for some people to explore their private selves. But science and technology
also threatened to make the self obsolete or irrelevant—and perhaps to annihilate
privacy. Thus in 1890, in a landmark law journal article on the right of privacy,
Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis noted:
The intensity and complexity of life, attendant upon advancing civilization, have
rendered necessary some retreat from the world . . . so that solitude and privacy
have become more essential to the individual; but modern enterprise and inven-
tion have, through invasions upon his privacy, subjected him to mental pain and
distress. . .11
THE ALL-SEEING EYE
Around the turn of the 19th century, a British social reformer and philosopher
named Jeremy Bentham developed a theory of utilitarianism, which viewed life
as a kind of balance sheet of pleasure and pain. For Bentham, the object of a sci-
entiﬁc, rational society was to maximize the former and minimize the latter,
crafting social policies that would create “the greatest happiness for the greatest
number.”
For the reformation of individuals who broke the laws designed to secure
their happiness, Bentham designed a new kind of prison he called the
“Panopticon.” This circular prison would be carefully arranged so that its in-
mates could be watched everywhere and at every moment by guards, who
themselves could not be seen. It was not that every prisoner would be con-
tinually observed. Rather, Bentham thought that a prisoner who could always
be seen and thus, at any time, might be under observation would have no
choice but to behave “rationally” and gradually be transformed into a pro-
ductive, happy citizen.
No Panopticons as such were ever built, but just as 19th-century science
began to put the self into troubling new perspectives, late 19th- and early 20th-
century technology would change what it would mean to hear and be heard, see
and be seen. The telephone, introduced in 1876, seemed magical at ﬁrst but
soon became indispensable. The ability to talk to people without meeting them
made it possible to sustain a much larger web of business and social relation-
ships at a much faster pace than the daily rounds of the mail carrier.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
10

But besides being disembodied, phone conversations were not necessarily
under the sole control of their participants. Besides the operators needing to
connect early phone calls and the common use of party lines, according to tech-
nology writer Erik Davis, “The mere possibility that unknown and unseen agents
are bugging your line is enough to puncture the psychological intimacy afforded
by a phone call, transforming your humble handset into an insidious tentacle of
unwanted and invisible powers.”12 As early as the late 1870s, telephone inven-
tor Alexander Graham Bell’s assistant, Thomas Watson, was confronted by a
man who was convinced that enemies had connected his brain to a telephone
circuit so they could implant ﬁendish suggestions. (Each new technology seems
to offer an image to be seized by paranoids: Later some would wear tin foil hats
to block mind-control radio waves; in recent times, some have claimed that they
are under the control of implanted computer chips.)
Until the 1930s, though, most people who were not spies or gangsters—or
paranoids—did not spend much time worrying about phone tapping. But the
powerful new totalitarian systems of fascism and communism used the tele-
phone to pierce privacy and coordinate oppression, and used the invention of
radio broadcasting to try to mold opinion on a vast scale. World War II
demonstrated weapons of unparalleled physical destructiveness, but it also sug-
gested the effectiveness of the increasingly sophisticated technology of social
control.
BIG BROTHER
British novelist George Orwell responded to communication and technological
developments by publishing in 1948 his famous novel 1984, which seemed to be
the summation of all that people had learned to fear about the use of technology
to destroy liberty and even individuality itself. In Orwell’s world a still newer tech-
nology, television, would realize the vision of Bentham’s Panopticon. No citizen
would escape the eye of Big Brother. Even the very idea of having a self separate
from Big Brother would become “thoughtcrime.”
Indeed this ultimate dictatorship aimed not merely to punish crime but also
to render it impossible. As 1984’s protagonist Winston Smith is informed, the
media of television and the press would be used to mold minds through a spe-
cially designed language, Newspeak:
Don’t you see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range of thought?
In the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible, because there will be
no words in which to express it. Every concept that can ever be needed, will be ex-
pressed in exactly one word, with its meaning rigidly deﬁned and all its subsidiary
meanings rubbed out and forgotten. . . . The whole climate of thought will be dif-
ferent. In fact there will be not thought, as we understand it now. Orthodoxy
means not thinking—not needing to think. Orthodoxy is unconsciousness.13
In the world of Big Brother, privacy cannot exist because, without con-
sciousness, there is no sense of self.
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
11

LITTLE BROTHERS?
More than half a century after 1948 (and two decades after 1984), Orwell’s vi-
sion of totalitarianism may seem as primitive and simplistic as the huge dams
and power plants beloved by the leaders of the defunct Soviet Union. The “tele-
screen” (an early name for television) indeed became ubiquitous, but in the
1950s it showed not Big Brother but I Love Lucy and the resplendent wonders
of modern kitchen appliances.
Social critics of the 1950s and 1960s began to see the threat to the individ-
ual as coming not from the focused propaganda of a single Big Brother but
from the pressures for conformity in the corporate workplace, in schools, and
in the consumer culture with its relentless display of TV commercials. Now
the self could be eroded by homogenizing the individual, masking the unique
inner self with a bland construct of images and desires. If privacy depends on
identity, loss of any unique identity might make privacy irrelevant.
Popular culture has continued to reﬂect this theme. In Hollywood, for ex-
ample, the 1998 movie Pleasantville used the metaphor of color versus black-
and-white to portray a rebellion against the conformist 1950s world. However,
the ultimate expression of this theme can be seen in the Matrix ﬁlm series,
where what we perceive as reality is actually a virtual-reality construction oper-
ated to serve the needs of hidden conspirators.
“The Big Brother Society that was imagined in 1970,” one critic notes, “de-
pended on coercion and fear. The society we are developing appears to be more
[Aldous] Huxley-like than Orwellian. It is a Brave New World dominated not
so much by tyranny as by a deadening political and cultural phenomenon that
Ralph Nader calls ‘harmony ideology.’”14 Linguist and radical critic Noam
Chomsky refers to this phenomenon as “the manufacture of consent.” In other
words, people are given a superﬁcial individuality (deﬁned mainly by posses-
sions and lifestyle) and an illusion of having an inner self.
As television continued to evolve, it created increasingly immersive substi-
tutes for community, with sitcoms giving way to the oxymoronic “reality TV.”
(The movie The Truman Show takes the trend to its logical conclusion, where a
person’s life is unknowingly a reality-TV broadcast.)
At the same time, the news media invades and feeds on the revelation of the
private life of public people, from football player and actor O. J. Simpson,
Princess Diana, and President Bill Clinton’s sex life in the 1990s to pop singer
Michael Jackson and Terri Schiavo in the ﬁrst years of the new century. Many
lesser celebrities are fed into the maw of trials as entertainment.
Perhaps people who identify with beleaguered celebrities are vicariously
experiencing their own concern about their privacy as they worry about per-
sonal information being stolen by criminals or diverted, sold, or abused by in-
stitutions such as insurance companies, stores, and government agencies. As
the boundary between public and private has become fluid in the media and
the culture as a whole, for many people the fear is that, according to Simson
Garfinkel, “The future we’re rushing toward isn’t one in which our every
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
12

move is watched and recorded by some all-knowing Big Brother. It is instead
a future of a hundred kid brothers who constantly watch and interrupt our
daily lives.”15
THE GROWTH OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Accompanying television as postwar high tech, the mainframe computer was also
seen as an ominous threat to individuality. Science ﬁction writers began to visual-
ize Big Brother in a new guise as the ultimate computer. (As an old joke went:
When the huge room-ﬁlling machine was asked “Is there a God?,” it blinked and
whirred a while and then announced, “There is one now.”)
The ancestor of modern information technology was the card-sorting ma-
chine invented by Hermann Hollerith and ﬁrst used successfully in the 1890
U.S. census—just as Warren and Brandeis were sounding their warning about
new technological threats to privacy. Card tabulators grew increasingly sophis-
ticated through the 1920s and 1930s. World War II brought the ﬁrst electronic
digital computers, giving the capability not only to sort information but also
process it into new information.
Computers of the 1950s and early 1960s had several characteristics that sug-
gested an unsettling threat from these new “electronic brains.” They were large
and complicated-looking, their method of operation was unknown to most peo-
ple, they were tended by a white-garbed “priesthood” of operators, and they
were too expensive for anyone except big corporations and the government.
The punch card soon became a symbol of an individual life reduced to a pattern
of holes. Increasingly, decisions about everyday life seemed to be coming not
from a human clerk one could talk with but from a machine animated by mys-
terious programming.
The three big TV networks and IBM thus became emblems of a power
that dazzled and disturbed, promised and threatened, seeming to point at the
same time to the ultimate in modern lifestyle and an emptying out of the
inner self. TV seemed to replace the stuff of life with manufactured images.
The computer might complete the abolition of privacy by turning the
uniqueness of life into mere data. But the technology would prove to be both
much more fertile and more ambiguous than the doomsayers could have
imagined.
INSIDE THE WEB
Just as the early 19th century had spawned a cultural rebellion against industri-
alization, the new managed society of the 1950s and its information machines
provoked a new ﬂare of romanticism in the 1960s. The counterculture rejected
both the computerized, managerial State and the blandishments of con-
sumerism on TV. But the rebellion did not reject science and technology en-
tirely: Indeed, much of it was fueled by electric guitars, a growing sophistication
in electronic sound and visual effects, and hallucinogenic chemistry.
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
13

At the same time that the 1960s cultural and political movements were get-
ting underway and targeting government institutions and their technological
trappings, one loosely knit group of explorers and activists were seeking not to
destroy the computer but to reinvent it. Their name for themselves, “hackers,”
today has come to mean people who break into computers to destroy them or
to steal valuable information. Originally, though, the hackers were brilliant
though obsessive programmers who took advantage of a new generation of
smaller, transistorized machines called minicomputers. They created the ﬁrst
video games, generated electronic music, and in general stretched the capabili-
ties of the machines to the limit.
By the mid 1970s experimenters had shifted their attention to the micro-
processor, or computer chip. They built primitive desktop computers and
wrote about their revolutionary possibilities. One such visionary, Ted Nelson,
proposed
a screen in your home from which you can see into the world’s hypertext libraries
. . . offer high-performance computer graphics and text services at a price anyone
can afford . . . allow you to send and receive written messages . . . [and] make you
a part of a new electronic literature and art, where you get all your questions an-
swered.16
Today we know this system as the World Wide Web. Even while the personal
computer was being born, the 1970s also saw the creation of what would become
the Internet. In the early 1990s Tim Berners-Lee invented the protocols for link-
ing and transmitting text over the growing networks. By the middle of the decade,
graphical browsing software such as Netscape made it possible for users of ubiq-
uitous personal computers to participate in the Web.
While the economic possibilities of e-commerce took center stage at the end
of the century, the social effects of the Internet have been at least as important.
The primitive bulletin boards and commercial online services of the 1980s gave
way to chat rooms and instant messaging. Millions of young (and not so young)
people began to play in elaborate game worlds where a person’s character or
alter ego could build a house, carry on a profession, and even “marry” and raise
a family. Meanwhile e-mail became ubiquitous at home and in the ofﬁce. In the
online world a person can take on many roles: a character in an elaborate game,
a parent or a child, an employee, a customer, a patient, a citizen. In each of these
roles information is exchanged with others, sometimes explicitly, sometimes im-
plicitly, behind the screen as it were.
Cyberspace is a far cry from the Panopticon or the world of Big Brother’s
dictatorship. Big Brother projects his wishes into minds that have been so
formed that they can hold nothing else. Television has been accused of being an
instrument for imprinting conformity on millions of passive eyeballs. But in
coining the word cyberspace, science ﬁction author William Gibson conveys a
different vision. In the world of his novel Neuromancer: “The sky above the port
was the color of television, tuned to a dead channel.”17
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
14

Cyberspace is “inside” the TV set: There are no watchers, only characters.
The choice of whether to be active or passive lies, as in “real life,” with each in-
dividual. For Gibson and the other authors who created this postmodern sci-
ence ﬁction, cyberspace is an exciting but not necessarily healthful place. In
“cyberpunk” ﬁction, cyberspace is ﬁlled with violent conﬂict, techno gangsters,
and the exploitation of the slow or unlucky by the fast and efﬁcient. The world
of cyberpunk, like the real information society it portrays, is a place where pri-
vacy and identity can be quite precarious.
INFORMATION PRIVACY AND THE DATA EXPLOSION
Back in the present-day world, the gathering, processing, and reuse of informa-
tion continues to grow as the storage and processing capacity of computers and
networks has steadily increased.
Our modern economy depends on massive exchanges of information, such as
the details found in billions of checks and credit card charges. Most people
would probably think that such details should not be accessible to the govern-
ment without a court order. However, in United States v. Miller (1976) the
Supreme Court ruled that checks and bank records were not private because
they ﬂow between banks as a part of commerce, and many people will have le-
gitimate need to see them. The same has been held to be true of phone num-
bers, whose impulses must travel through many parts of the phone network. In
other words, if something has to be seen by a number of people, it cannot really
be private.
At minimum, one is faced with the question of how privacy principles should
be applied to each new technology of communication, information processing,
or surveillance. Constitutional scholar Lawrence Tribe has proposed a constitu-
tional amendment that would read as follows:
This Constitution’s protections for the freedoms of speech, press, petition, and assem-
bly, and its protections against unreasonable search and seizures and the deprivation
of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, shall be construed as fully ap-
plicable without regard to the technological method or medium through which in-
formation content is generated, stored, altered, transmitted, or controlled.18
However, coping with the privacy implications of the “data explosion” is a
formidable challenge. Just as developments in telecommunications and the pro-
cessing of transactions have caused struggles over information privacy, so has
the development of new ways of collecting, analyzing, and integrating data. The
explosive growth of computer databases beginning in the late 1960s has partic-
ularly increased the threat to privacy by creating large amounts of information
about the details of peoples’ lives while providing little control over how this in-
formation might be used.
At first, much of the growth in databases came from government agencies
that both needed and could afford huge mainframe computers for processing
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
15

records for tax, Social Security, and a growing number of welfare programs.
Large banks and insurance companies soon followed suit. Computerization
offered governments the ability to manage an increasingly complex system of
regulations and entitlements, while private business sought cost savings by re-
placing labor-intensive manual record-keeping systems with automated ones.
Public concern about an electronic Big Brother grew during the 1970s. But
while the popular image was of a giant government computer stockpiling every
scrap of data about every person, the real threat was more complex and subtle. In
1977 the U.S. Privacy Protection Study Commission warned that “The real dan-
ger is the gradual erosion of individual liberties through the automation, integra-
tion, and interconnection of many small, separate record-keeping systems, each of
which alone may seem innocuous, even benevolent, and wholly justiﬁable.”19
In other words, the most likely threat was not Big Brother but a swarm of “lit-
tle brothers” who spend 24 hours a day gossiping with one another. The devel-
opment of the personal computer and the Internet would vastly increase the
number of ways in which information could be collected and shared.
In 1972, when the personal computer did not exist and networking was still
conﬁned to a handful of researchers, the Advisory Committee on Automated
Personal Data Systems to the Secretary of the Department of Health, Educa-
tion, and Welfare proposed some basic principles for protecting privacy in the
new Information Age:
1. There must be no personal data record-keeping systems whose very exis-
tence is secret.
2. There must be a way for an individual to ﬁnd out what information about
him/her is on record and how it is used.
3. There must be a way for an individual to correct or amend a record of
identiﬁable information about him/her.
4. There must be a way for an individual to prevent information about
him/her that was obtained for one purpose from being used or made
available for other purposes without his/her consent.
5. Any organization creating, maintaining, using, or disseminating records of
identiﬁable personal data must guarantee the reliability of the data for their
intended use and must take precautions to prevent misuse of the data.
These are still the guiding principles for privacy advocates today, and they have
been embodied in important legislation such as the Privacy Act of 1974, the Elec-
tronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986, and earlier in the Freedom of In-
formation Act of 1966. However, the struggle to get government and business use
of personal data truly to conform to these principles has been long and complex.
PRIVACY IN THE MARKETPLACE
Of all the transactions involving personal identiﬁcation and information, the
vast majority involve individuals in their role as consumer. After all, the average
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
16

person deals only occasionally with a health care provider or a government
agency, but he or she makes dozens of purchases each week. Many small pur-
chases are anonymous, such as putting a quarter into a rack and taking out a
newspaper or buying a quick latté at a local Starbucks. But most purchases in-
volving more than a few dollars are accomplished with a check or, much more
often, a credit card.
Until after World War II, credit cards were issued by a particular business
such as a department store or an oil company, and could be used only for pur-
chases from that vendor. In 1949, however, Diners Club introduced the ﬁrst
general-purpose credit card, which could be conveniently used by travelers at a
variety of restaurants, hotels, and other establishments. By the 1950s the Carte
Blanche and American Express cards had been introduced, and the 1960s
brought Bankamericard (later Visa), and Master Charge (later MasterCard).
With the 1970s came the debit card in the form of the automatic teller machine
(ATM) card and, later, debit cards for use in stores.
Cash purchases require no information except a simple receipt. Checks are
more complex, but essentially the only requirement is a way to verify the iden-
tity of the check writer and, if necessary, the sufﬁciency of the bank balance. Use
of credit cards, however, represents an open-ended series of loans. People who
make loans want to make sure they will be repaid, and that means keeping track
of information such as the following:
1. Identifying information: name and spouse’s name, Social Security number,
address, and telephone number
2. Financial status: amount of income (past and present), employer (present
and past), occupation, sources of income
3. Credit history: previous type, extent, and sources of credit granted
4. Existing lines of credit: payment habits, outstanding obligations and debts,
extent of current lines of credit
5. Public record information: lawsuits, judgments, tax liens, bankruptcies, ar-
rests [in some cases], and convictions
6. Prior requesters: names of subscribers who requested information on the
individual in the past20
Only an extensive computer network has the capacity to track these details
and others for millions of borrowers in almost “real time,” over a telephone or
data network that enables merchants to accept the credit card and receive in-
stant credit veriﬁcation. This is only possible because the network taps into
huge databases maintained by the major credit agencies: Experian (formerly
TRW), Equifax, and Trans Union, which collectively maintain more than half a
billion records on about 200 million people.
There are two significant vulnerabilities to the credit network, however.
The first is that it depends on accurate identification—the person requesting
the credit has to be the actual owner of the account. In recent years identity
theft21 has reached near epidemic proportions. The earliest route to illicit
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
17

credit card use was by stealing mail with Social Security or account numbers
or a dishonest waiter or clerk copying down a card number for later use. How-
ever, starting in the later 1990s, a wide variety of techniques have been used
to find personal information online or to trick users into revealing it to a
fraudulent web site. Some thieves deal not in single accounts but obtain thou-
sands by posing as legitimate users with a need for the information.
The same convenience that allows online purchases using only a card num-
ber (not the card itself) also affords cyber-thieves an easy way to take advantage
of illicitly obtained credit information. The real prize for any data thief is the
Social Security number. Besides retrieving credit records directly, the Social Se-
curity number can also be used to pull together all the records on a given per-
son from a variety of public and private databases, many accessible via the
Internet. (Ironically, Social Security cards, until the 1970s, carried a warning
that read “For Social Security Purposes—Not for Identiﬁcation.”)
Identity theft for ﬁnancial gain is not the only intrusion to which databases
make people vulnerable. The personal information of politicians and celebrities
is fair game for opponents or the tabloid media. When today’s high-tech private
investigators want to track someone down, they use a keyboard or a mouse, not
shoe leather. Carole Lane, the author of a book about ﬁnding personal infor-
mation online, boasts:
In a few hours, sitting at my computer, beginning with no more than your name
and address, I can ﬁnd out what you do for a living, the names and ages of your
spouse and children, what kind of car you drive, the value of your house, and how
much you pay in taxes on it. From what I learn about your job, your house, and
the demographics of your neighborhood, I can make a good guess at your income.
I can uncover that forgotten drug bust in college.22
Even an ordinary person can fall victim to a stalker or abusive spouse who
can use a Social Security number or other identifying information to get the
target’s address—or simply hire an illicit “data broker” or hacker to obtain the
information. There are, of course, legitimate reasons for police and private in-
vestigators to use databases to track down individuals, such as to determine a
person’s assets in a divorce or in some other legal action, or to get someone to
pay child support. The main problem is that there is little to stop the illegiti-
mate user from accessing the same data resources. The sources of data and the
ways to obtain it are many, and the existing regulations and safeguards, al-
though slowly improving, remain far from comprehensive. Data in a net-
worked computer is only as secure as the weakest link in the chain of users, a
fact exploited every day by the creators of computer viruses, deceptive e-mail,
and spyware.
As the world becomes increasingly wireless, new vulnerabilities have
emerged. Cordless telephones are actually low-power radio transmitters, and
calls on them can be picked up several hundred feet away. Cell phone calls can
be picked up by scanners, although digital encryption now offers considerable
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
18

protection. The wireless (Wi-Fi) networks now popular in homes, businesses,
and public places have only limited security, which is often left disabled.
The second vulnerability of the credit system is that like all databases, it is
only as good as the accuracy of the information it contains. Surveys have shown
that about a third of all credit records contain mistakes. Sometimes credit in-
formation for two people with similar names can become intermixed. Errors can
have serious consequences, ranging from failure to obtain a home mortgage to
being turned down by a prospective employer as a “deadbeat.”
Recognizing the seriousness of this problem, federal law as of late 2005 re-
quires that the three major credit reporting agencies provide one free credit re-
port per year. Privacy and consumer advocates urge everyone to check their
record at least this often, both to correct erroneous and potentially harmful in-
formation and to spot signs of possible identity theft. The credit-reporting agen-
cies are also required to accept and verify corrections of erroneous information.
DATA BREACHES
In recent years there have been a number of cases where personal data stored
in the computer systems of ﬁnancial institutions or even universities has been
obtained by hackers or by criminals operating under false pretenses. These
“data breaches” have aroused considerable anxiety and anger on the part of the
public.
For example, in February 2005 ChoicePoint, a company that holds an esti-
mated 19 billion consumer records, revealed that a ring of identity thieves had
bought 144,000 records by posing as legitimate marketers. Apparently, though,
the only reason the breach became public was that one state, California, had re-
cently passed a law requiring disclosure of such incidents.
The records in question included information gleaned from public records
including marriages, property transactions, and arrest records—all organized by
Social Security number. Even ChoicePoint itself declared that it was in favor of
tighter regulations that would balance the commercial value of information
against privacy rights. There are many other stories of lost or stolen data, rang-
ing from the loss by Bank of America of a tape containing account information
for 1.2 million Americans, the loss of more than 300,000 LexisNexis records to
hackers, and even the theft of a laptop containing data about University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley, students. These stories have fueled public anxiety and led to
demands for legislation requiring stricter security practices and prompt disclo-
sure of data breaches.
If it is hard to deal with the consequences of domestic data breaches, some
observers have pointed to the even greater risks when data is processed outside
the jurisdiction of the United States. In recent years many activities such as
billing and customer support have been outsourced to workers in countries such
as India, where well-trained, English-speaking workers are available for much
less cost. Although there is little evidence that personal information is at greater
risk of illicit diversion abroad than it is at home, when a breach of privacy does
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
19

occur, U.S. federal or state regulations cannot be applied. Because of growing
unease and a few well-publicized cases (such as one where a worker in India held
some American records “hostage” in a wage dispute), Congress and more than
40 state legislatures have pending proposals to restrict the outsourcing of per-
sonal data. Some bills would allow consumers to opt out of having their data
sent overseas.
Meanwhile, at home, the “outsourcing” of personal-data processing to a
growing prison industry has also resulted in litigation. When a woman learned
that a stalker who seemingly knew everything about her including her favorite
magazines had received that information while working in prison for the data-
proﬁling company Metromail, she successfully sued Metromail to stop the
practice.
AN APPETITE FOR INFORMATION
Credit records are far from the only personal information generated in the
modern economy. Anyone who belongs to a popular supermarket “savings club”
creates a record of every item purchased, combining the information from the
bar codes on the items scanned with the person’s identifying information in the
store’s computer. The supermarket can use this information to create coupons
instantly to entice someone who likes Kellogg’s corn ﬂakes to try the house
brand instead. The information can also be used to target the customer for
direct-mail campaigns. This same process can occur at a visit to a “big box”
store, an auto dealer, or any time a consumer ﬁlls out a product registration or
warranty card.
Why is so much information collected about everyone’s daily purchases? Be-
cause, as one observer has noted, “Laws on privacy may vary from country to
country, but the laws of economics do not. The laws of economics in the infor-
mation age say that information has value—it is a product that can be sold, just
like socks, cars, and toothpaste.”23
Marketers suggest that by analyzing buying habits and making better ﬁts be-
tween advertisers and consumers, both beneﬁt:
Consumers benefit from receiving information that is targeted to their inter-
ests, as well as from not receiving information that is not of interest to them.
Apartment dwellers don’t want information about aluminum siding, for ex-
ample, and childless couples don’t need to learn about infant formula specials.
Similarly, marketers have an interest in not sending messages to consumers
who aren’t interested.24
In turn, according to correspondent and free-market advocate Declan McCul-
lagh, the market as a whole will become more efﬁcient and productive:
It’s easy to complain about a subjective loss of privacy. It’s more difﬁcult to appre-
ciate how information swapping accelerates economic activity. Like many other
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
20

aspects of modern society, beneﬁts are dispersed, amounting to a penny saved here
or a dollar discounted there. But those sums add up quickly.
Markets function more efficiently when it costs little to identify and deliver
the right product to the right consumer at the right time. Data collection and
information sharing emerged not through chance but because they bring lower
prices and more choices for consumers. The ability to identify customers who
are not likely to pay their bills lets stores offer better deals to those people who
will.25
Just about every shopper likes bargains. Designers of targeted advertising
(starting with the ﬁrst specialized mail-order catalogs) have argued that the
more advertising can appeal to a person’s particular interests, the more enjoy-
able and useful the ads will be. But with that, there is also a growing unease
about loss of privacy.
Privacy concerns are most aroused because the information gathered from
one type of transaction is often sold to other businesses or to agencies that
package it and sell it to other direct-mail marketers. While the compiling and
use of mailing lists is not new, modern database technology makes consumer
information a much more valuable product because it can sort, select, and cus-
tomize it in so many ways. For example, a mail-order catalog company can
target just those women who might be interested in a new line of larger-size
clothes. However, data from supermarket loyalty cards has also occasionally
been sought in criminal or civil cases. An activist group called CASPIAN
(Consumers Against Supermarket Privacy Invasion and Numbering) has
sought to publicize potential abuses and argues that supermarket cards yield
little in the way of real savings for consumers.
The reselling of personal information first came to public attention
through a few high-profile cases in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The Lex-
isNexis database company, for example, admitted that it paid credit bureaus
for Social Security numbers and credit information on millions of Americans,
which they packaged and sold to direct marketers. LexisNexis was sued in a
consumer class action suit and was required to remove the Social Security
numbers, as well as remove anyone from their database on request.
In 1991 software developer Lotus Development Corporation and Equifax, a
major credit bureau, announced plans to market a CD-ROM database called
Households that contained names, addresses, and marketing information on
120 million consumers. But after 30,000 people wrote or called demanding that
their names be removed, the companies abandoned their plans.
The marketing of personal information, however, usually goes on below the
surface. For example, New York State investigators discovered that the credit
bureau TRW had been taking the records it received from American Express
transactions and reselling the information to direct mailers. Such undisclosed
reselling of information has become a major focus for regulatory action and
legislation.
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
21

THE MALL IS WATCHING
Visualize this scene from a not very distant future:
Johnny Q. Consumer walks into a national chain store, picks up diapers, pays in
cash. He does not walk alone. One store camera captures his face, while another
network of cameras traces his stroll through the aisles. The pressure-sensitive ﬂoor
panels note how he lingers and nervously shifts his feet while browsing in the di-
aper section.
At the store’s national headquarters, perhaps a thousand miles away, a ma-
chine quietly notes in Johnny’s ﬁle that he may be a new father. That bit of data
goes into an algorithm that a few days later cross-references birth records and
ﬁnds that, indeed, Johnny has just become the proud father of twins. A card is
sent out and special discounts will be offered the next time he enters the store.26
All the pieces for this scenario are coming into focus: cameras, face-recognition
software, and data-mining algorithms. So far, no store has implemented all
these features, but it may be only a matter of time. In the movie Minority Report,
there is an even more advanced (albeit ﬁctional) version of this system: A shop-
per walks through a mall. He is instantly recognized by the computer system
and advertising holograms appealing to his particular interests are projected
into the air as he passes by.
Meanwhile, radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tags are beginning to be
used to track merchandise in warehouses and during shipping—Wal-Mart
began to use them in April 2004. The tags contain stored information (such as
tracking numbers) that is transmitted when the package is scanned with an ap-
propriate device. That device only needs to be brought within a few feet rather
than requiring a close-up hand scanner as with bar codes.
Besides increasing shipping efﬁciency and reducing theft of goods by employ-
ees, RFID tags may also help stores monitor their displays and perhaps remove ex-
pired or recalled products. Privacy advocates fear that the ability to identify
someone’s possession could easily be abused. For example, private detectives or
government agents might use RFID scanners to learn whether a person has bought
a pornographic book, a radical Islamic text, or a bomb-making manual. Support-
ers of RFID suggest that reliable signals can only be received within a short dis-
tance of the object, reducing the ability of someone to scan surreptitiously.
RFID may be just the beginning of a future world in which all objects have
embedded information and even “intelligence,” communicating with one an-
other over what Internet pundits have called “an Internet of things.” For exam-
ple, futurists point to packages of meat that can alert the refrigerator they have
reached their expiration date—the refrigerator might then dispose of the item
and order a replacement from an online store.
E-COMMERCE AND PRIVACY
In many ways the Internet is a shopper’s dream come true. By surﬁng the Web,
a consumer can obtain detailed information on just about any product or ser-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
22

vice, even using a variety of services that automatically compare prices and iden-
tify the best deals. Items can be ordered with a credit card number and a few
keystrokes. (There is little risk in dealing with a known company that uses a se-
cure web server that encrypts credit card information, but information can be
stolen by bogus sites or when sent by e-mail.)
As the 1990s ended, it seemed that e-commerce would supplant virtually all
existing businesses, even the local grocery store. And although the “dot-com
boom” was followed by a “dot-bust” in 2000–01, online stores and services that
offer real value are here to stay—indeed a survey by market research ﬁrm
Jupiter Research reported that total e-commerce sales during 2004 reached
$66.5 billion, up 26 percent from the preceding year. Although this still repre-
sents only 4 percent of total retail sales, the impact of e-commerce is dispro-
portionately greater because it involves some of the newest, fastest-growing
business models. Further, it was estimated that another $355 billion in retail
sales involved goods purchased in physical stores by customers who had previ-
ously researched their purchase online.
But the Internet and Web also adds another way to scoop up huge amounts
of information from and about consumers. Many web sites store a small identi-
ﬁcation ﬁle called a “cookie” on a user’s hard drive. They can then combine that
information with the web server’s log of all the web pages the user views. The
result is a detailed proﬁle of what the user has bought and is likely to be inter-
ested in. The use of cookies can save the user time (by making it unnecessary to
resubmit credit card and address information for each order) and can also be
used to customize the site with the user’s preferences and to offer shopping sug-
gestions. (Amazon.com, for example, has an elaborate system for offering rec-
ommendations based not only on what books one has bought before but also on
what books have been bought by other people who bought those same books.)
Recently Google, the world’s premier search engine, developed a free e-mail
service called Gmail. The service is free because it is supported by advertising.
To sell that advertising, Google ensures that it is targeted to the interests of each
Gmail user. It does this by a process called “content extraction,” in which the
user’s incoming and outgoing e-mail is scanned for keywords that might indi-
cate an interest in particular types of products or services. The keywords are
then used to generate targeted advertising.
Google has made it clear that no human actually reads the e-mail: The ex-
traction is done completely automatically. However, privacy advocate Chris Jay
Hoofnagel in testimony before Congress pointed out some troubling aspects of
this technology. If the practice is routinely accepted, does it mean that e-mail
users will no longer have an expectation of privacy under the Fourth Amend-
ment? This could make it easier for police to use evidence from e-mail. Hoof-
nagel argues that “if companies can view private messages to pitch advertising,
it is a matter of time before law enforcement will seek access to detect criminal
conspiracies. All too often in Washington, one hears policy wonks asking, ‘If
credit card companies can analyze your data to sell you cereal, why can’t the FBI
mine your data for terrorism?’”27
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
23

REGULATION AND CERTIFICATION
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has been increasingly active in going after
businesses with questionable information practices. The ﬁrst well-publicized case
came in 1998 when the FTC settled a complaint with GeoCities, a popular web-
hosting service that offered free e-mail and web pages to individuals and families.
As part of the settlement, GeoCities agreed to post a clear privacy settlement to
explain its policies, and it also agreed to obtain parental consent before collecting
information from children under 12 years of age.
Reacting to growing calls for explicit regulation, industry groups began to
call for voluntary privacy standards. The best-known organization, TRUSTe,
certiﬁes web sites that provide clear privacy statements that explain what infor-
mation is gathered and what will be done with it, as well as what a consumer can
do if he or she is not satisﬁed.
Unfortunately, surveys have suggested that most Internet users do not under-
stand privacy policies posted on web sites, nor use them effectively. In one survey,
• Fifty-seven percent of U.S. adults who use the Internet at home assumed that
the existence of a privacy policy for a web site automatically meant that it
would not share information with other companies.
• Forty-seven percent of users think privacy policies are “easy to understand,”
but about two-thirds of those users actually misunderstand the meaning of
privacy policies.
• Sixty-four percent have not used the Web to get information about how they
can better protect their privacy.
• Eighty-six percent would like to see regulations that standardize the format
of privacy policies to make them easier to understand.28
Industry advocates have pointed out that the market has responded in some
cases to privacy concerns of consumers by discontinuing unpopular practices.
For example, America Online canceled plans to sell users’ phone numbers to
telemarketers, while Yahoo! removed a reverse-number look-up feature that
could have been used by marketers. Perhaps the best-known case occurred
when Internet advertising company DoubleClick ended its plans to combine in-
formation from web cookies with a large database called Abacus—which would
have, in effect, data-mined Web users.
IS PRIVACY GOOD BUSINESS?
One approach to strengthening privacy is to use regulation (or the threat of reg-
ulation) to get companies to change their practices. But some experts suggest
that protecting privacy can actually bring business advantages to companies that
get out in front on the issue, such as by agreeing to use information only if they
receive permission from the customer. According to Ann Cavoukian and Tyler
J. Hamilton,
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
24

An opt-in marketing strategy does more than simply earn the trust of consumers.
By allowing consumers to control the uses of their personal information, permis-
sion marketing increases the likelihood that the customer data being collected and
used is accurate and up-to-date. Both consumers and businesses suffer when data
is full of errors. When an individual’s personal proﬁle is inaccurate or incomplete,
there is a greater likelihood of that person being judged out of context or treated
unfairly. Meanwhile, there is a high cost to businesses when their customer data-
bases are riddled with errors.29
Libertarian free-market supporters have suggested that the ultimate solution is
for companies and customers to negotiate individual privacy agreements. A free-
market contractual approach would rely on accurate privacy statements to inform
consumers who would then decide whether to do business with a given marketer.
Some marketers might choose to offer a range of “privacy plans,” with consumers
who are willing to let their information be shared receiving lower prices or other
beneﬁts. However, according to legal expert Jerry Kang, the individual
would face substantial research costs to determine what information is being col-
lected and how it is being used. That is because individuals today are largely clue-
less about how personal information is processed through cyberspace. [Companies]
do not generally provide adequate, relevant notice about what information will
be collected and how it will be used. What is worse, consumers’ ignorance is some-
times fostered by deceptive practices.30
Kang proposes that personal information be considered to be property be-
longing to the individual. This would mean that if a company wants the infor-
mation, it must negotiate with the customer, rather than the customer having to
stop unwanted use of information.
Other advocates see privacy as more like the inalienable rights proclaimed in
the Declaration of Independence. According to Katrin Schatz Byford, “since the
[property] model treats privacy as a quasi-material possession external to the indi-
vidual, it cannot take account of privacy’s function as an inalienable precondition
of personal identity and social existence.”31 If privacy is an inalienable right (as life
and liberty are inalienable), it means that no one can negotiate away their privacy.
In practice there is likely to be a mixture of approaches: regulations to pre-
vent abuses that the majority ﬁnd to be unacceptable, industry certiﬁcation, the
use of privacy assurances as a marketing tool, and consumers deciding for them-
selves whether the beneﬁts of a company’s policies outweigh the disadvantages.
PRIVACY AND THE HEALTH 
CARE SYSTEM
In recent years we have learned that privacy problems can be just one more
thing wrong with America’s troubled health care system. Consider these exam-
ples based on actual or potential cases:
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
25

A man goes into the hospital for treatment of prostate cancer. A month later he
receives mail from a drug company touting their cancer treatment drug.
An employer searches employees’ pharmacy records looking for expensive pre-
scriptions that might indicate fraud or drug abuse. He ﬁnds that someone has a
prescription for Retrovir, a drug used only to treat AIDS.
A woman’s genetic testing reveals that she has a gene that indicates a high risk
of her developing breast cancer. What happens if the test results are seen by her
insurer? Her employer?
Employers provide most private health care and thus have a strong incentive to
reduce what seem to be spiraling medical costs. One way is to try to have health-
ier employees in the ﬁrst place. According to a 2004 survey by the American
Medical Association, nearly 63 percent of U.S. companies require medical test-
ing of current employees or new hires. This ﬁgure, however, is down from 70
percent in 2000, which may suggest that regulations and public pressure may be
having an effect.
According to a recent survey reported by the Institute for Health Care Re-
search and Policy’s Health Privacy Project,
• One in every ﬁve people believes their health information has been used or
disclosed inappropriately.
• One in six people tries to protect their privacy in some way, such as paying
out of pocket for health care using multiple providers to try to avoid creating
a single uniﬁed health record.
• Two out of three U.S. adults don’t trust private health plans or government
programs to maintain conﬁdentiality all or most of the time.32
Clearly there is a high level of anxiety and distrust on the part of the public
where privacy and the control of one’s medical decisions is involved.
WHOSE MEDICAL RECORD?
Since ancient times doctors have professed a code of ethics that goes back to the
Hippocratic Oath: “Whatsoever things I see or hear concerning the life of men,
in my attendance on the sick or even apart therefrom, which ought not be
noised abroad, I will keep silence thereon, counting such things to be as sacred
secrets.”33
The doctor-patient relationship is central to this ethic, which assures people
that they can seek medical treatment without having the details of their medical
condition revealed to other parties. Today, however, the doctor is only one of a
large number of people and institutions involved in the delivery of health care.
The tremendous growth in the cost of medical treatment has resulted in third
parties—employer and insurance companies or the government—paying for
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
26

most health care. This in turn means that a bewildering variety of nonmedical
personnel are also involved in viewing or reviewing medical records.
The ﬂow of information is crucial to health care today. Doctors and pharma-
cies believe that access to comprehensive medical records is essential for provid-
ing better care and for protecting patients from taking dangerous combinations of
prescription drugs. The managers of the government-run Medicare program
need to track medical records to ensure quality of care and to prevent fraud. In-
surance companies and health maintenance organizations (HMOs) claim they can
use information systems to improve efﬁciency and hold down costs by eliminat-
ing wasteful and unnecessary treatments.
Further, uniform medical records and integrated databases offer a cornucopia
to medical researchers. Recently the Mayo Clinic and IBM announced a pilot
project combining the clinic’s extensive patient database with IBM’s data-mining
technology to create the Mayo Clinical Life Sciences System. This would allow
researchers to view at a glance every treatment and outcome for a patient in
order to better understand how people with a given condition respond to a spe-
ciﬁc treatment. And when combined with the growing amount of genetic knowl-
edge, Nina Schwenk, a doctor and chair of the clinic’s information technology
committee, notes:
When I see someone with high blood pressure, I have a choice of 20 to 30 drugs
that I can choose from. There is some literature out there that will say, “If you’re
diabetic, this drug is better than that one.” But most of the time, the only way
you can tell for sure is to start the patient on the drug. It’s almost trial and error
to see how well it works for an individual and whether there are side effects. Not
so far in the distant future we’ll know the various types of genetic difference that
cause people to metabolize drugs in different ways. So I know that if you try drug
X, it’s not going to work on you, and drug Y will have a heightened effect, while
drug Z will have side effects. We’ll be able to know all that up front.34
As a result of both payment systems and the needs of medical research and qual-
ity control, so many people have joined the chain along which medical records pass
that one writer suggested revising the Hippocratic Oath to read as follows:
Whatever I see or hear in my attendance on the sick or even apart therefrom will
be divulged to physicians, nurses, aides, surgeons, anesthesiologists, dieticians,
physical therapists, admitting clerks, billing clerks, utilization review personnel,
discharge planners, records coders, medical records ﬁling staff, chaplains, volun-
teers, performance evaluators, insurers, medical transcriptionists, accrediting
agencies, public health ofﬁcials, other government ofﬁcials, social workers, and
employers. AND to whomever else requests them for whatever reason.35
The principal clearinghouse for medical records is the little known Medical
Information Bureau (MIB), which has a role similar to a credit-reporting
agency. The government also runs its own huge database for Medicare patients.
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
27

The Clinton administration proposed a single national databank in which every
person would have a “universal healthcare identiﬁcation number.” But the exis-
tence of a single central database accessible by a single key number would put
all a person’s privacy eggs in a single potentially vulnerable basket. Although
privacy concerns led to the proposal being withdrawn, there is continuing pres-
sure to tie together all medical records and make them electronically accessible.
FROM HIPPOCRATES TO HIPAA
Passed in 1996 but not implemented until 2003, the Health Insurance Porta-
bility and Accountability Act (HIPAA) primarily seeks to make it easier for
workers to retain their insurance when changing jobs. However, the law also
includes some signiﬁcant privacy protections. Most people learned about the
law when they went to their doctor’s ofﬁce for a routine visit and were asked to
sign forms allowing their medical records to be disclosed for certain purposes.
The law also gives patients the right to see their medical records and to submit
corrections.
Free-market critics argue, however, that HIPAA and other regulations
mainly miss the point. They believe that
true health privacy relies on empowered patients choosing among options made
available to them by providers competing to serve them. This happens in hearty
markets, where sellers vie with one another to discover and deliver whatever con-
sumers want. But the American health care system is not well. Concerns about
health privacy are a symptom of a much larger disease.36
Given the complex, highly regulated nature of modern health care, however,
it is not clear how a true free market could develop in which most people have
meaningful choice between competing providers. Most employers offer only a
limited number of options, and choices for the self-employed are even fewer.
Adoption of a single-payer, government-run health care system like that
found in many other industrialized democracies might remove some privacy is-
sues by eliminating the role of private providers and insurers. However, the
government itself would then be both provider and guarantor of privacy.
GENETIC PRIVACY: THE NEW FRONTIER
For many people the deciphering of the human genome announced at the be-
ginning of the 21st century marked a tremendous achievement—the biological
equivalent of NASA’s Apollo project. However, the growing ability to identify
hereditary health problems and risks has lent a new urgency to the struggle for
health privacy.
Nancy Wexler, a leading genetic researcher studying the inherited degener-
ative condition called Huntington’s disease, has warned that “All of us have
something or other in our genes that’s going to get us in trouble. . . . We’ll all
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
28

be uninsurable.”37 What adds to the poignancy of her observation is that
Wexler’s own mother had Huntington’s.
What does genetic testing mean for workers? If everyone has a susceptibility
to some disease or another, one expert asks,
Do we want employers to be able to rely on dicey predictions about future health,
to search for only perfectly healthy employees, and as a by-product keep Ameri-
cans from their rightful place in the workforce? Such is the specter of genetic test-
ing in the workplace—invasions of privacy, discrimination, and unwarranted
control of individual conduct.38
There are two potential sources of legal protection from genetic discrimina-
tion. The Americans with Disability Act (ADA) may apply to otherwise healthy
people who have a genetic background that leads employers to view them as dis-
abled, but the case law is mixed and the Supreme Court has yet to make a direct
ruling. (In February 2001 the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad agreed to
settle a case where they had secretly tested workers for a genetic predisposition
to carpal tunnel syndrome, a repetitive stress injury to the hand and wrist.)
The other possible legal protection comes from HIPAA, which forbids em-
ployer group insurance plans from denying insurance based on preexisting ge-
netic conditions. However, employees or employers who are self-insured are
not covered, and companies are not prevented from charging higher rates on
the basis of genetic information.
Fundamentally, genetic information (together with more sophisticated med-
ical testing) threatens to unravel the system of private medical insurance. Insur-
ers traditionally put people in broad categories such as by age and a few other
factors such as smoking. Rates were based on the overall average risk of medical
problems for the group. However, to the extent an insurance company can learn
about individuals, it has an incentive to “skim the cream” of healthy patients by
offering them lower rates. People at higher risk would be turned down, accepted
at much higher rates, or accepted only with the exclusion of preexisting condi-
tions or risks. Although regulations can help protect against misuse of genetic
information, it may be that only a fundamental restructuring of the health care
system could truly solve the problem. (And, it must also be noted, if the gov-
ernment ran the health care system, the government itself might have an incen-
tive to discover and misuse genetic information.)
PRIVACY AT WORK
After health and family, work is probably the next highest priority for most peo-
ple. In the work force, though, many of the same driving forces—such as cost
reduction and efﬁciency—are driving employers to monitor employees in ways
that raise serious privacy concerns.
Questionable practices often begin before a person even enters the work-
place. Most people would consider it reasonable that claims of education,
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
29

employment history, and references on résumés are subject to verification.
Potential criminal records are also a concern—employers want stable, reli-
able employees and try to weed out potential “problem hires” who might ex-
pose them to legal liability. (For example, a store would not want to hire
security guards who have a record of violent incidents.)
However, other types of inquiry can raise privacy concerns. Should a poten-
tial employee be screened out because civil court records show she has sued a
previous employer for sex discrimination or harassment? (As noted earlier,
screening for actual or potential health conditions is also a concern.)
Psychological tests or “personality inventories” are often given in an attempt to
judge the suitability of an employee to a given position, or to detect proclivities for
dishonesty or violence. But some tests can ask questions about religious beliefs and
sexual practices that have no connection with job duties. (Some of these tests were
attempts to replace the use of polygraphs, or lie detectors, which have been banned
for most kinds of employment.) Psychological tests have generally been upheld in
the courts, although antidiscrimination laws do regulate collection and use of in-
formation relating to protected status such as race, gender, disability, and in some
jurisdictions sexual orientation.
MONITORING E-MAIL AND THE WEB
Once on the job, workers who talk to the public on the phone (such as airline
reservation agents or technical support specialists) often have their calls moni-
tored for “quality control” purposes. Sometimes, however, personal phone calls
are also listened to by supervisors. Video surveillance of employees such as store
clerks is also common.
Most workers today use desktop computers connected to an internal net-
work (LAN) and to the Internet. Some workplaces install software that can
keep track of how fast clerical workers type and how long they let the machine
sit idle. In many ofﬁces software also makes a record of what locations users
visit on the Internet.
Many employers see monitoring as a way to reduce theft, embezzlement, or
sabotage by employees. Indeed, most misappropriation of computer data comes
not from outside hackers but from disgruntled or greedy employees. (Ironically,
laws intended to protect customer privacy and the response to recent data
breaches may add impetus to the use of computer-monitoring systems.) In other
cases employers may simply want to reduce the amount of work time lost to on-
line shopping, chat, and playing of online games.
Most such monitoring is legal, but it may have a negative effect on the
morale of workers who feel they are “living in a ﬁshbowl.” Unions have some-
times made workplace privacy an issue in contract negotiations.
E-mail raises particularly thorny issues. The ubiquitous use of e-mail has re-
placed the telephone for many purposes. Back in the early 1990s, when Epson
employee Alana Shoars discovered printouts of her e-mail on her supervisor’s
desk, she sued Epson America for breach of her and her fellow workers’ privacy.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
30

She argued that she had an “expectation of privacy,” the key test used by courts.
She said that since workers had to use private passwords to access the e-mail sys-
tem, it was reasonable for them to think that their messages would be kept pri-
vate. Epson, on the other hand, argued that its e-mail system was just another
business tool like a phone or a copier. Since it was provided only for business
purposes, workers had no reason to assume they could use it for private personal
messages. In July 1992 the court agreed with Epson’s position and threw out the
lawsuit. This decision was in keeping with the general trend in workplace pri-
vacy issues: Generally, workers do not have an expectation of privacy in the of-
ﬁce, and employers can monitor activities (including e-mail) as long as the
monitoring has a reasonable, business-related purpose.
Many employers point to the legal system itself as the reason they need to
monitor employees’ e-mail and Web usage. Employees have been held liable for
sexual harassment or “creating a hostile workplace environment,” such as when
some employees print out or display pornographic material from the Internet.
Additionally, a harassing e-mail sent by one employee to another might turn into
a million-dollar liability problem for the employer. (Many companies may also be
concerned about revelation of proprietary or “inside” information in e-mail.)
Roger Matus, CEO of Audiotrieve, a company that makes e-mail-ﬁltering
software, reports that his company had studied e-mail retrieved during the Fed-
eral Energy Regulatory Commission’s investigation of Enron Corp. The study
found that “one out of every 25 messages contained offensive or inappropriate
content. Nearly one in ﬁve was personal in nature. I read many of these mes-
sages and a few of them were quite amazing.” Matus further observed that “Al-
ready, 30.7 percent of companies with more than 1,000 employees employ staff
to read and monitor employee e-mail. This is a fascinating area because em-
ployees seem to have no idea that e-mail does not provide any privacy.”39
One possible defense to such suits is to show that the employer has been
duly diligent in discovering potential abuses and correcting them. But the
same practices that may prevent harassment claims may also become the sub-
ject of a lawsuit for invasion of privacy. Employers can make the best of a dif-
ficult decision by making sure their monitoring activities are related to
legitimate business needs, are fully disclosed to employees, and assuring em-
ployees that any information gathered will not be disclosed to other parties.
In turn, employees should make sure they understand their employer’s poli-
cies, ideally refrain from using the employer’s equipment for personal messages,
and, in general, avoid including any information in e-mail that might cause
trouble if disclosed—keeping in mind that “deleted” e-mail is not truly gone
and can be recovered by system administrators or computer forensic specialists.
PRIVACY AND YOUNG PEOPLE
As most parents know, children seem quite comfortable with high tech and the in-
formation society—more so perhaps than most adults. Junior high and older kids
keep in touch with each other with rapid-ﬁre instant messages, download and
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
31

share music ﬁles for their iPods and MP3 players, and conﬁdently search the Web
for information for school assignments when they are not online chatting or play-
ing games. However, like many adults most children give little thought to privacy
or worry about what might be done with the information they disclose online.
MARKETING TO CHILDREN
Although one wouldn’t think children would be a major target of online mar-
keters, older children often have access to the family’s credit card numbers—or
could persuade their parents to buy things for them online. Further, web sites
that collect information from children can sell it to other marketers. In 1999 the
web-hosting service GeoCities was stopped from collecting information from
children without parental consent. Although there was no law against the prac-
tice at the time, the FTC was able to rule that the company was engaging in
“deceptive acts or practices” in violation of federal law.
In 1998 Congress enacted the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA). Since the enabling regulations were enacted in April 2000, web sites
that wish to contact children have had to post a privacy policy that explains how
information will be collected and used, and obtain explicit information from
parents before accepting any information from their children. A year later the
FTC found that most web sites were posting the required privacy policy, but
only about half were properly notifying parents of their right to review, delete,
or refuse the further collection or use of their children’s personal information.
In February 2003 the FTC imposed civil penalties on Mrs. Fields Cookies and
Hershey Foods for failing to obtain parental consent before collecting informa-
tion from children.
LIMITED PRIVACY AT SCHOOL
For at least the ﬁrst 18 years of their lives, children spend a good many of their
days in school, and whether it be middle school or college, educational institu-
tions have their share of privacy issues. These include
• drug testing
• monitoring or ﬁltering Internet use in schools
• administration of possibly intrusive psychological tests or surveys
Drug testing and Internet monitoring or ﬁltering have generally been upheld by
the courts, which have ruled that children have only limited Fourth and First
Amendment rights compared to adults. However, intrusion into family infor-
mation by school personnel has been limited by the Family Education Rights
and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA), which limits schools’ disclosure of student
records outside the educational context (with exceptions such as for subpoenas
from law enforcement agencies). Parents also gained the right to see and cor-
rect their children’s school records.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
32

Since the Columbine High School shootings in 1999, there have been a
number of cases where diaries, e-mail, and web sites created by students have
been identified as containing alleged violent threats. In the aftermath of each
tragedy, it is always asked why school officials had seen no signs of the im-
pending attack. On the other hand, much of the threatening material would
probably be protected under First Amendment free-expression rights if it had
been created by adults, and overreaction is always a danger.
The most intimate and delicate privacy issue comes between parents and
their children, and here laws and public policy can be of little help. Children in-
deed face some serious dangers online, including harassment and even sexual
exploitation. Some parents have installed software to monitor their children’s
Web surﬁng and e-mail. Children who discover the monitoring are likely to
react to it as a betrayal, a lack of trust, and a denial of privacy just at the time
when they are discovering what it means to have a private self. Whatever par-
ents decide, it is best done openly after discussion with the children, with an ex-
planation and agreement on the “ground rules.” As one child psychologist and
media expert suggests:
Somewhere between the two extremes is the prudent parent. For example, a par-
ent shouldn’t go off the deep end if their 15-year-old son visits a porn site. But if
he starts spending hours at porn sites and chat rooms, they need to know about it.40
As young people transition to adulthood, they will ﬁnd that universities are an
Internet-rich environment. Student records, like other personal records, are vul-
nerable to hacker attacks and criminal diversion. An additional issue arises from
the subpoenas requested by the Recording Industry Association of America
(RIAA) in an attempt to identify students who have illegally shared copyrighted
music ﬁles. Some schools such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) have declined to hand over the requested information, citing FERPA.
PRIVACY, LAW ENFORCEMENT, 
AND NATIONAL SECURITY
Some of the most crucial privacy issues arise in connection with the govern-
ment itself—particularly with regard to law enforcement, where liberty and
even life are often at stake. The government is in a paradoxical position with
regard to privacy. On the one hand, legislatures and courts have provided a
growing number of privacy guarantees in some areas. On the other hand, the
government itself is the largest gatherer and user of information about indi-
viduals, and its own practices have long been a concern of privacy advocates. As
the Privacy Protection Study Commission reported back in 1977:
Accumulations of information about individuals tend to enhance authority by
making it easier for authority to reach individuals directly. The voracious appetite
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
33

of investigators for information causes [authorities] to collect and retain virtually
any personal data uncovered unless the collection or retention is clearly illegal.
This attention to avoiding what is improper, rather than accomplishing only what
is necessary and proper, leads investigative agencies into abuses of citizens’
rights.41
As with commercial information gatherers, the threat to privacy does not
come only from isolated abuses but from the pervasiveness of the system as a
whole and the lack of built-in safeguards. Many bureaucrats themselves see
the systems as being unmanageable. The problem of keeping up with the in-
formation needs of government agencies has a tempting solution in the cre-
ation of a giant, centralized database for all information about an individual
that could be constantly updated and placed at the disposal of each govern-
ment agency for its own particular needs. In 1965, still back in the mainframe
era, a limited version of this idea, the federal Data Service Center (also called
National Data Bank), was proposed as a means to correlate all government
data to allow for statistical research.
GOVERNMENT DATABASES AND INVESTIGATIONS
Such proposals have always been met by strong opposition. During the 1960s
and 1970s, the FBI conducted secret but extensive counterintelligence programs
(or COINTELPRO) that spied on Martin Luther King, Jr., and other civil
rights and antiwar leaders. The Watergate scandal revealed that the Nixon
White House was routinely using government agencies ranging from the CIA
to the IRS to spy on or coerce political opponents. Such events made many peo-
ple suspicious of any further centralization of government record keeping.
In 1972 Supreme Court Justice Lewis Powell noted in a ruling:
Security surveillances are especially sensitive because of the inherent vagueness of
the domestic security concept, the necessarily broad and continuing nature of in-
telligence gathering, and the temptation to utilize such surveillances to oversee
political dissent. We recognize, as we have before, the constitutional basis of the
President’s domestic security role, but we think it must be exercised in a matter
compatible with the Fourth Amendment.42
The tendency to “federalize” crimes and social problems nevertheless con-
tinued to lead to expansion of government information systems and thus of
threats to privacy. Examples have included the cross-matching of state and fed-
eral records to ﬁnd persons who have failed to pay child support, veriﬁcation
and investigation of ﬁrearms purchasers, and investigations of Medicare or wel-
fare fraud. In each case proponents have argued either that there was no true
privacy problem or that the goals of the legislation justiﬁed a minimal invasion
of privacy. Privacy advocates, however, remained concerned that the accumula-
tion of seemingly minor intrusions on privacy would reach a point where the in-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
34

dividual would lose conﬁdence in both privacy and the ability to hold the gov-
ernment accountable.
THE PRIVACY ACT OF 1974
The privacy concerns of the Watergate era culminated in the passage of the Pri-
vacy Act of 1974. The act embodied fundamental principles that were intended
to make government agencies disclose their information-gathering and distrib-
ution activities and to give citizens the ability to learn what information had
been collected about them and to correct any errors. But over the past three
decades privacy advocates have pointed to what they consider poor implemen-
tation and enforcement of this law. Since the act did not appropriate any funds
for privacy enforcement, most major government agencies did not at ﬁrst ap-
point anyone to oversee implementation. Without an enforcement mechanism,
agencies were essentially the judges of their own compliance. As ACLU legisla-
tive director John Shattuck remarked during congressional hearings in 1983,
“the rule disclosure of personal information without the subject’s consent has
been all but swallowed up by its exceptions, particularly the broad exception for
‘routine uses.’”43
Nevertheless, the Privacy Act did provide citizens who suspect the govern-
ment has inaccurate or inappropriate information about them with a useful if
cumbersome tool. The citizen can try to determine which agency may have the
information and ﬁle a request for it. Information involving law enforcement or
intelligence activities, however, may be blocked from disclosure.
THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OF 1966
One effective defense against government invasion of privacy is the ability to
ﬁnd out what the government is doing with the information it collects. The
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) of 1966 has allowed intrepid reporters, ac-
tivists, and ordinary citizens to uncover important information about contro-
versial government activities such as medical experiments and the handling of
radioactive waste. The FOIA does allow the government to refuse to release in-
formation related to national security, intelligence activities, criminal cases, and
other areas. As a result documents obtained by FOIA requests sometimes arrive
with many areas blacked out. Critics of the FOIA point to frequent delays in ob-
taining information and the difﬁculty of appealing when requests are refused.
PRIVACY AFTER SEPTEMBER 11, 2001
The devastating terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, brought shock, fear, and
a resolve to uncover what appeared to be an extensive and deadly international
terrorist network. In this atmosphere, at least at ﬁrst, the warning cries of civil lib-
ertarians and privacy advocates seemed to be drowned out. As former FTC com-
missioner Robert Pitofsky noted, the dominant feeling was that “September 11
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
35

changed things. Terrorists swim in a society in which their privacy is protected. If
some invasions of privacy are necessary to bring them out into the open, most
people are going to say, O.K., go ahead.”44
The USA PATRIOT Act was passed by Congress only six weeks after Sep-
tember 11, with little deliberation. A number of its provisions potentially weak-
ened privacy protections. Section 215 allowed for the searching of books,
records, or documents if government agents believed they might be related to an
intelligence investigation. The agents did not have to provide speciﬁc grounds
for their suspicions as with a normal criminal subpoena. Given that the Federal
Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) already established secret courts for grant-
ing such subpoenas, the combination of secrecy and lack of strict standards has
greatly alarmed civil libertarians, privacy advocates, and the library community.
Another USA PATRIOT provision, Section 213, allows for so-called sneak
and peak warrants where the police can conduct a search without notifying the
suspects and giving them a chance to contest the subpoena in court. The only
requirement is that the judge agrees that there is reasonable cause to believe the
secret search is necessary to protect the safety of police or bystanders or “the in-
tegrity of the investigation.”
Generally, advocates of these provisions have argued that they are necessary
because of the particular nature of terrorism investigations where suspects op-
erate in secret and have potentially deadly capabilities. However, civil libertari-
ans have pointed out that these USA PATRIOT provisions are already being
used in some cases for crimes such as money laundering that are not believed to
be linked to terrorism. At the same time, government ofﬁcials have been hard-
pressed to name even a few terrorism suspects who were apprehended using the
more controversial provisions of the new law.
During 2005 a number of key provisions of USA PATRIOT are coming up
for renewal. The administration has tried to minimize fear about abuses. Attor-
ney General Alberto Gonzales has declared: “The department has no intention
of rummaging through the library records or medical records of Americans. We
do have an interest in records that help us catch terrorists.”45
Going on the offensive, Gonzales notes:
Libraries currently are not safe havens for criminals. Neither should they be safe
havens for international terrorists or spies, especially since we know that terror-
ists and spies have used libraries to plan and carry out activities that threaten our
national security.46
Meanwhile, FBI director Robert Mueller has assured Congress that the
agency has not actually searched any libraries. However, many privacy advocates
and perhaps a growing number of people in Congress are not willing to accept
such assurances. The Security and Freedom Enhancement (SAFE) Act has been
introduced as a modiﬁcation to USA PATRIOT. It would require that agencies
provide speciﬁc reasons to justify sneak and peak warrants or to allow searches
of library or bookstore records.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
36

THE NATIONAL ID DEBATE
In many respects the requirement for identiﬁcation has become a normal part
of modern life. Identiﬁcation is needed to cash a check or (in most cases) to
check into a hotel or rent a car. In this country, driver’s licenses already serve as
de facto universal identiﬁers, but their format varies from state to state, and
many are fairly easy to fake.
One of the proposals for ﬁghting terrorism is to develop a secure national
identiﬁcation system that might make it harder for terrorists to penetrate and
move within our society. More than a hundred countries (including most of the
European democracies) already have national identiﬁcation systems. Besides its
potential value against terrorism, a national ID might also help the nation get a
handle on immigration, particularly if the system included a way to regularize
the status of undocumented immigrants.
Culturally, identiﬁcation, however, has long been a symbol of regimentation,
of everything un-American. “Show me your papers” (often in a bad German ac-
cent) is a staple of World War II movies. As one observer notes:
The need to identify oneself may be intrinsically distasteful to some people. For ex-
ample, they may regard it as demeaning, or implicit recognition that the organi-
zation with whom they are dealing exercises power over them. Many people
accept that, at least in particular contexts, an organization with which they are
dealing needs to have their name. Some, however, feel it is an insult to human
dignity to require them to use a number of a code instead of a name. Some feel
demeaned by demands, as part of the identiﬁcation process, that they reveal in-
formation about themselves or their family, or embarrassed at having to memo-
rize a password or PIN.47
Another commentator offers a cultural critique:
For the purposes of a national ID card, identity is a unique, unchanging set of
distinguishing characteristics: the ﬂecks in one’s iris, the ridges of one’s left thumb.
It’s what sets us apart from others and from the mass. As Americans, though, we
have a higher identity: free agent, self-legislator, citizen. It’s a common identity
held individually. It’s what allows us to bond and make a nation or, if necessary,
dissolve our bonds. This identity can’t be captured on a card, but there is a risk it
could be supplanted by one.48
What is the relationship between identiﬁcation and privacy? Two writers
think they are closely intertwined:
There is an inherent tension between authentication and privacy, because the act of
authentication involves some disclosure and conﬁrmation of personal information.
Establishing an identiﬁer or attribute for use within an authentication system, cre-
ating transactional records, and revealing information used in authentication to
others with unrelated interests all have implications for privacy.49
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
37

But when is identiﬁcation truly necessary for security? Recently cyber-activist
John Gilmore has challenged the requirement that airline passengers show ID
before boarding. Although he lost the ﬁrst round of his legal challenge and
seems unlikely to prevail, Gilmore points out that the combination of rather
easy-to-fake IDs and a hidden “terrorist watch list” of dubious accuracy seems
unlikely to be an effective deterrent to terrorists:
There is good reason to believe that any list of “known terrorists” contains “sus-
pected” terrorists, not actual terrorists, and is full of errors besides. Particularly
when the list is secret and neither the press nor the public can examine it for er-
rors or political biases.
“Johnnie Thomas” was on the watch list because a 28-year-old “FBI Most
Wanted” man, Christian Michael Longo, used that name as an alias. But Longo
was arrested two days after joining the “Most Wanted” list for murdering his
family. After he had been in custody for months, 70-year-old black grandma
“Johnnie Thomas” gets stopped every time she tries to ﬂy.50
Nevertheless, few people believe there is something inherently wrong with having
to show ID before entering a sensitive area such as an airport. Ken Scheidegger of
the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation points out that: “The Fourth Amendment
forbids not searches that you don’t like, it forbids unreasonable searches. Nothing
could be more reasonable at this time than to know who you’re ﬂying with.”51
Public support for a national ID peaked shortly after the September 11 attacks,
when a poll by the Pew Research Center showed 70 percent of respondents sup-
porting the idea. Only a few months later, though, a survey by Gartner Inc.
showed only 26 percent in favor. However, support varied with the proposed use
of the ID: A majority supported the use of IDs and databases in airports, but much
fewer supported using the national ID to access routine services such as banking
and health care. This suggested, according to Julia Scheeres, “that people would
only support a national ID for very speciﬁc, very limited purposes and that they’re
suspicious of what government agencies will do with their information,”52
This idea of a universal ID with a carefully limited application may seem
paradoxical. But a closer look might lead to a more ﬂexible system that provides
security with a minimal intrusion on privacy. According to Jim Harper.
We need to take the focus off of identiﬁcation and move it to authorization. Sys-
tems are available that could communicate, “This person is OK to enter your
building” or get on your plane or whatever, without saying “This is Joe Smith.”
Through a diverse array of privately issued cards, people should be able to access
goods, services, and infrastructure that they are qualiﬁed to access without giving
up identifying information.53
DNA Databases
In recent years science and technology have continued to offer new tech-
nologies for identifying people. One of the most familiar today is the use of
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
38

DNA in criminal investigations. While the matching of suspects’ DNA to
that found at a crime scene does not seem to involve widespread privacy con-
cerns, the compilation of DNA databases is more problematic to many pri-
vacy advocates.
The first such efforts are focusing on violent felons (or all felons), sex of-
fenders, drunk drivers, and other persons who have already entered the crim-
inal justice system. In 2004 California passed a ballot proposition allowing
for collecting DNA from arrested felons. However, the law has been chal-
lenged because it lacks a clear procedure by which an arrested person who is
not charged (or is acquitted) can have his or her DNA removed from the
database.
Biometrics: The New Face of ID?
Biometrics is the use of physical characteristics to identify individuals
uniquely. While fingerprints are thus a form of biometrics, most recent atten-
tion has been focused on such technologies as facial scanning and recognition.
Systems using eye (retinal or iris) scanning have also been in use at high-security
installations.
A number of programs in development will bring large numbers of people
in contact with biometric scanning and databases. By 2004 most major coun-
tries had incorporated scannable ﬁngerprints, facial recognition, or other bio-
metric features in their passports in response to pressure from the United
States—although not without some opposition. In turn, the U.S. government
has begun compiling a database of visitors’ ﬁngerprints as part of the US-
VISIT program. By 2005 this program was already in use in 115 airports and
14 seaports in the United States. The program integrates 20 existing databases
into a system that compares entrants’ ﬁngerprints, digital photographs, and
other particulars with stored biometric, biographical, and travel data to deter-
mine who should be allowed to enter the country. Together with the database
screening program being developed for use with domestic airline passengers
(CAPPS II, now called Secure Flight), it is likely that the majority of people
who travel will soon ﬁnd information about them stored in vast government
databases.
Critics of the widespread use of biometric and other data in such screening
databases believe that all such systems must satisfactorily answer the following
questions:
Storage: How is the data stored, centrally or dispersed? How should
scanned data be retained?
Vulnerability: How vulnerable is the data to theft or abuse?
Conﬁdence: How much of an error factor in the technology’s authenti-
cation process is acceptable? What are the implications of false posi-
tives and false negatives created by a machine?
Authenticity: What constitutes authentic information? Can that infor-
mation be tampered with?
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
39

Linking: Will the data gained from scanning be linked with other infor-
mation about spending habits, etc.? What limits should be placed on
the private use (as contrasted to government use) of such technology?
Ubiquity: What are the implications of having an electronic trail of our
every movement if cameras and other devices become commonplace,
used on every street corner and every means of transportation?54
Many critics believe that programs such as Secure Flight fail under a number of
these criteria. Concerns about the quality of the data used were exacerbated for
many civil libertarians when the TSA initially denied that it had quietly ob-
tained passenger data from a number of airlines for test purposes. (It turned out
the agency had obtained at least 12 million records without passengers’ knowl-
edge or permission from six airlines.)
Security expert Bruce Schneier believes the database is likely to generate two
kinds of errors: “the Ted Kennedy problem, [in which] I’m not on the list but
my name is or a name similar to mine is,” and “the Cat Stevens problem, [in
which] I’m on the list, but we have no idea why.”55
The Transportation Security Agency argues it cannot release details about
how the database works because of the fear that terrorists will be able to “game
the system.” However, without assurance that the data is accurate and without
a speciﬁc way for innocent persons to be removed from the list, the ACLU and
a number of critics in Congress continue to oppose the system.
Smart Cards and Chips
Another possibility for identiﬁcation is to carry it in one’s body rather than on
it. For some time one has been able to have an identiﬁcation chip implanted in
one’s pet to aid in its recovery at animal shelters. However, some humans are
also starting to get “chipped.” VeriChip is about the size of a grain of rice and
is implanted in the arm. It is read using a special scanner. Starting in March
2004 a nightclub in Barcelona, Spain, began giving its VIP customers VeriChips
they could use to bypass entry lines and keep track of their bar tabs. Developers
see future uses for VeriChip as a means for making secure credit card and ATM
transactions as well as for entry into airports, government buildings, and other
secure areas.
The concerns about VeriChips are similar to those for “smart cards” and the
previously discussed RFID chips—misuse of the data by its collector or misap-
propriation by other persons.
A SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY?
Most of the systems discussed so far are used (at least ostensibly) for speciﬁc,
well-deﬁned purposes such as commercial transactions, entry into secure areas,
or travel. But another set of privacy concerns arise through the ubiquitous use
of cameras to watch people in public or sometimes private places.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
40

CAMERAS EVERYWHERE
At home, surveillance cameras at entryways and around the perimeter are a pop-
ular option for security-conscious upscale homeowners. Parents concerned that
their child’s sitter is being neglectful (or worse) can install “nannycams.” Their
use seems legal, as with other forms of workplace monitoring. In a 2003 survey
by Parenting magazine, 82 percent of respondents said they would install cam-
eras only if they had reason to suspect their children were being abused.
Out on the street, public surveillance cameras have been used in Great
Britain for a number of years. There is now about one camera for every 14 cit-
izens. The reason given is normally public safety—in particular, reducing crime.
However, most studies have so far failed to show that the cameras are actually
effective in reducing the crime rate. A recent study by the British Home Ofﬁce
of 14 camera systems throughout the country found that only one was associ-
ated with a signiﬁcant fall in the crime rate. Cameras may make people near the
cameras feel safer, though perhaps more self-conscious.
Defenders of camera surveillance such as policy analyst Eugene Volokh sug-
gest that the technology, by removing the human element, might reduce police
harassment of individuals:
The camera . . . saw only what any passerby, and any police ofﬁcer who might
have been at the intersection, could lawfully see. I avoided any possibility of being
pulled out and frisked, or my car being searched. I didn’t have to wonder if I had
been stopped because of my sex or race or age.56
However, Volokh admits that if the cameras are connected to face-recognition
software and the resulting recordings are stored indeﬁnitely in a database, there
would be a potential for abuse.
Critics such as libertarian columnist Jacob Sollum see intangible but signiﬁ-
cant social and psychological costs to the widespread use of camera surveillance:
. . . knowing you are being watched by armed government agents tends to put a
damper on things. You don’t want to offend them or otherwise call attention to
yourself. . . . People may learn to be careful about the books and periodicals they
read in public, avoiding titles that might alarm unseen observers. They may also
put more thought into how they dress, lest they look like terrorists, gang mem-
bers, druggies, or hookers.57
There is an important distinction to be made between camera systems that
work in more-or-less real time, with persons monitoring them and dispatching
police where indicated, and systems that store images for later comparison to
digital photographic or biometric data. The combination of cameras and face
recognition software offers the potential of identifying persons without any co-
operation on their part. An experimental system was ﬁrst used in the 2001
Super Bowl. Such systems raise the question of when the line between crime
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
41

prevention and the possibly chilling surveillance of lawful activities (such as po-
litical protests) might be crossed.
The bomb attacks on the London transit system in July 2005 brought re-
newed attention to the possible value of public surveillance cameras in the ﬁght
against terrorism. Proponents of the cameras pointed out that within days of the
attacks a review of camera footage had identiﬁed the bombing suspects. Critics,
however, have suggested that the cameras would be unlikely to actually deter
such attacks. A would-be suicide bomber, after all, would presumably not care if
he or she might be identiﬁed after the attack. As for non-suicidal terrorists; they
might simply seek other targets that lack camera surveillance.
TURNING THE CAMERAS AROUND
Today one does not have to be a big corporation or a police agency to conduct
video surveillance. Cyberspace pundit Howard Rheingold notes that “You can bug
people the way spy agencies used to do 20 years ago—really cheap now. The Or-
wellian vision was about state-sponsored surveillance. Now it’s not just the state,
it’s your nosy neighbor, your ex-spouse and people who want to spam you.”58
Thousands of webcams in a wide variety of settings now beam their pictures
to web sites. Most ubiquitously, camera-equipped cell phones now provide more
than a way to show one’s friends what one’s doing. They can also be used to sur-
reptitiously capture images, whether to help catch criminals or terrorists or to
further an enterprise such as blackmail. Futurist Paul Saffo notes that:
There are two dangers to being an amateur snoop. The ﬁrst is, you’ll ﬁnd out
something that you really would have been much happier not knowing. The sec-
ond is, what happens when the subject ﬁnds out that you have been snooping? My
advice is: Think twice before you do it. You may really regret it.59
While surveillance technology in citizens’ hands can of course be misused, it
does offer a potential way to hold authorities accountable for abuses such as po-
lice brutality. For example, a camera could be set to capture images continuously
and beam them wirelessly to a secure site on the Internet. In such a case, even
if a criminal (or the police) seizes and destroys the camera, that very act becomes
part of a record of evidence that has been placed out of reach.
WE KNOW WHERE YOU ARE
One of the fastest-growing technologies combines geographic information
systems (GIS) with location systems (Global Positioning System, or GPS).
These technologies are undoubtedly very useful. They make it possible to se-
lect a destination and get a route with just a few clicks, complete with detailed
driving directions. Companies can route their delivery trucks more efficiently
and track the movement of valuable goods from warehouse to destination.
Government agencies can generate maps showing the best disaster response
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
42

and evacuation routes, or use computer models to predict the likely extent of
a toxic spill.
However, when the movement of people rather than that of goods is the ob-
ject of a tracking and monitoring system, how does that effect privacy—or the
sense of privacy? So far the people who have been tracked have been those who
for different reasons are generally viewed as having diminished rights. For ex-
ample, it was proposed that public school children in Sutter, California, wear
RFID tags around their necks, but parents objected—though children in Osaka,
Japan, have had similar tags for some time. However, one does not have to wait
for school: Individual parents can buy GPS/radio “kid trackers” for about $200.
Many people may not realize their location is already being tracked contin-
uously. Originally GPS capability was added to cell phones to make it easier to
ﬁnd people who have made a 911 call, but some companies have required that
their workers carry them. Now the manager can tell at a glance where con-
struction crews are working—and whether a worker has snuck home early. Of
course, there are other uses, as Greg Shields, proprietor of the Spygear Store in
Cincinnati, notes: “I would say that 60 percent of my sales are to women who
say, ‘I think my husband is cheating on me.’”60
Soon new cars may come with built-in trackers and recorders. The National
Transportation Safety Board has proposed that event data recorders (EDRs) be
installed. The devices, much like the “black box” recorders in aircraft, would
maintain a record of a car’s speed and driving characteristics. Stolen cars could
be tracked, as with the already used “Lo-jack” devices. Already services such as
OnStar (now becoming available in midrange cars) feature the ability to call for
help to someone who will be able to tell police or ambulance services exactly
where the driver is located. The car can also be unlocked remotely—a boon to
someone who has lost his or her keys.
Such devices raise privacy concerns. Could law enforcement ofﬁcers or cruis-
ing hackers listen in on a driver’s calls? At any rate there is already a case where
a federal appeals court told authorities they couldn’t install a wiretap in the car
systems of a suspect. However, the judges rejected the request not for privacy
reasons but because of the possibility that the wiretap would prevent the driver
from being able to obtain emergency service.
The growing desire and ability to track peoples’ movements has given rise to
a new term: “locational privacy.” As one policy analyst notes:
While one must expect to surrender some privacy in public spaces, location sur-
veillance and processing technology has the potential to invade an individual’s pri-
vacy to such a degree that even maintaining anonymity becomes impossible. To
attempt to understand what the reasonable expectation of privacy in the case of
location-tracking technology, one can ask these three questions: (1) Would it have
been possible to obtain the same information without using the technology in ques-
tion?: (2) If so, would it have been possible to use the data without additional com-
puter processing?: and (3) If the alternate means of obtaining this information
had been employed, or if the additional data processing had been performed,
would either have constituted unreasonable surveillance?61
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
43

PROSPECTS AND ALTERNATIVES
The growing sophistication and pervasiveness of identiﬁcation, surveillance,
and tracking systems may suggest that the effort to preserve privacy is doomed
to failure in the long run. However, there are a number of tools and technolo-
gies that may prove helpful for privacy protection. But how do Americans feel
about their alternatives?
PRIVACY AND ACCOUNTABILITY
One important strategy to protect privacy is to enhance the ability of people to
know what the government is up to. This means access to the information the
government generates about its own activities. A survey by the American Soci-
ety for Newspaper editors reported in 2001 some relevant public attitudes:
• Six in 10 Americans see public access as “crucial” to good government.
• Sixty-one percent are “very concerned” about personal privacy; 28 percent
“somewhat concerned.”
• Thirty-eight percent very concerned about government secrecy; 34 percent
somewhat concerned.
• Forty-eight percent believe there is too little access to government records;
30 percent “just the right amount.”
The same survey suggests how people might want to balance the right of ac-
cess to government information and the privacy of government ofﬁcials and em-
ployees themselves: 30 percent believe laws guaranteeing public access to
government records should be strengthened, even if it means Americans may
lose some privacy in the process. However, 54 percent believe that laws guaran-
teeing personal privacy should be strengthened, even if it means Americans may
lose public access to some records held by the government. About half of re-
spondents agreed that citizens have “no control” over how personal information
about them is used by the government and that consumers have no control over
how personal information about them is used by private companies.62 These re-
sults suggest an ongoing deep concern with loss of control of personal privacy
but less consensus on what to do about it.
PRIVACY TOOLS: ENCRYPTION AND ANONYMITY
Technology itself offers powerful tools to protect privacy. One important tool is
encryption, which makes information unreadable except by its owner or in-
tended recipient. Until the 1990s, the use of encryption was pretty much re-
stricted to the government and to certain businesses with powerful computers
and special communications systems. A much more user-friendly encryption
system was offered in 1991 by a programmer-activist named Phil Zimmermann.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
44

He released a program called Pretty Good Privacy, or PGP. This program uses
a kind of coding called public key cryptography in which the decoding keys
come in pairs that have a special relationship: Text encoded using one of the
keys can only be read using the other key.
A user can distribute one key in the pair, called the public key. Anyone can use
the public key to encode a message that can be read only by the person holding
the corresponding private key. The private key itself need never be sent any-
where, so it is hard to steal. Further, if one receives a message encoded with a
person’s private key, one can be sure that it was sent by that person. The private
key can thus serve as a “digital signature” that veriﬁes the identity of the sender.
Throughout the 1990s a battle raged between activists such as Zimmermann
and self-proclaimed “cypherpunks” and government agencies who did not want
powerful encryption to get into the hands of foreign nations. Law enforcement
agencies were also faced with a problem: What good was a search or wiretap
warrant if the message seized was encrypted and couldn’t be read?
Federal authorities ﬁrst tried to use export restrictions to prevent the distri-
bution of PGP and similar programs. It soon became clear that nothing could
stop the spreading of computer code through the worldwide Internet. (Later,
another programmer, Daniel Bernstein, would win a court decision overturning
the export regulations concerning computer code.)
The government then suggested a compromise: have all computers and
communications equipment include a device called the Clipper Chip. This de-
vice would provide powerful encryption, but with a catch: The government
would retain a key that it could use to read any message encrypted by the de-
vice, presumably after obtaining a court order. Privacy advocates, however, ar-
gued that there was no independent proof the proposed encryption system was
secure, and no way to make sure the government did not abuse its ability to
read the code. Further, industry observers questioned whether people would
use a government-provided encryption chip in place of software such as PGP.
Eventually, the government dropped the Clipper Chip in favor of a proposal
to allow users to employ the encryption software of their choice provided that
they deposited a copy of the encryption key with a third-party “escrow” agency.
The government, after obtaining a court order, could then obtain the key from
the agency. This proposal, too, failed to win public or industry support.
Today encryption is routinely and seamlessly used for online transactions and
to protect wireless networks (to some extent). Individuals can also use PGP and
other programs to encrypt data on their hard drives.
While encryption hides the data, anonymity conceals the identity of persons
involved in communications or transactions. Anonymity can be harder to ﬁnd
than encryption, because people leave so many “tracks” online that could be
used to identify them. This is particularly true, as we have seen, when “proﬁles”
of individuals are created and databases accumulated. Thus, according to
Catherine Crump,
Data retention aims to change the context of Internet activity. The context
change that data retention renders makes it easier to link acts to actors. Data
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
45

retention “rearchitects” the Internet from a context of relative obscurity to one of
greater transparency. This manipulation of context inﬂuences what values ﬂour-
ish on the Internet. Speciﬁcally, data retention, by making it easier to link acts to
actors, promotes the value of accountability, while diminishing the values of pri-
vacy and anonymity.63
There are some tools that promote anonymity, such as the use of “digital
cash,” services that allow payments to be authenticated without passing identi-
ﬁcation information, and the use of services that allow e-mail to be sent with-
out address information that can identify the sender. However, these tools are
relatively obscure and not widely used.
There is an inherent conflict between anonymity and accountability: If
people can act anonymously, how can they be identified and held responsible
if they do something wrong? Law enforcement agencies want access to the
records of Internet Service Providers in order to be able to investigate online
crime, for example. And some experts suggest that the only way to address the
scourge of spam is to redesign the e-mail system so that each user will be iden-
tified and authenticated before being allowed to send messages. Yet our courts
have recognized a right to anonymous activity that traces its roots in the pam-
phleteers of colonial times. Anonymity can protect the right of the vulnerable
to speak out without repression.
RETHINKING PRIVACY
The struggle between competing interests of privacy, anonymity, security, and
accountability is likely to be with us for the foreseeable future. Perhaps, though,
some new ways of thinking about privacy might allow for better solutions.
Privacy was ﬁrst tied to place (such as one’s home) and then to reasonable and
customary expectations. There has remained a sense, however, of privacy as
being all or nothing: In a given situation one either has it or not. But Justice
Thurgood Marshall, dissenting in U.S. v. Miller, suggested a different approach.
He noted that just because
a phone company monitors a call for internal reasons, it does not follow that they
expected this information to be made available to the public in general or the gov-
ernment in particular. Privacy is not a discrete commodity, possessed absolutely or
not at all.
In this view privacy is a dynamic concept: It requires that one look not simply
at whether one can expect in a given situation never to be observed or to have
one’s information used but also at what happens when that observation or in-
formation is taken out of context and used for another purpose.
Another voice from the legal community urges that the complexity of the in-
formation society requires an equally sophisticated notion of privacy:
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
46

Privacy in the information age is best conceived as the maintenance of metaphor-
ical boundaries that deﬁne the contours of personal identity. Identity is complex;
different circumstances reveal different aspects of our nature. Each of us wears
many masks wherein each mask reﬂects a different aspect of who we really are.
We do not want our entire natures to be judged by any one mask, nor do we want
partial revelations of our activities to deﬁne us in a particular situation as other
than who we want to be. In short, we want to choose the masks that we show to
others; any such loss of choice is painful, amounting almost to a physical violation
of the self. When we are secretly watched, or when information that we choose to
reveal to one audience is instead exposed to another, we lose that sense of choice.64
As difﬁcult as it might be, the protection of privacy seems to require that we de-
velop a way of thinking about social interaction and the use of information that
is at least as sophisticated as the technology we have embraced. This may in-
volve a number of efforts such as:
• using regulation to create “ﬁrewalls” around the most serious forms of mis-
use of private information,
• where people might reasonably choose to trade privacy for convenience or
other values, allowing them to do so by ensuring they have accurate knowl-
edge and can hold businesses accountable to keep their part of the bargain,
• encouraging technologies such as the Platform for Privacy Preferences that
allow users to screen for web sites that meet their privacy expectations,
• trying to ensure that identiﬁcation and database systems used to protect in-
frastructure and national security are used only for those purposes,
• making such systems as transparent and accountable as possible, at minimum
ensuring that Congress has continual, vigorous oversight over them, and
• encouraging a robust, ongoing debate on the privacy implications of new tech-
nologies and programs while there is still time to shape their implementation.
If these and other efforts are pursued, the result might be, paradoxically, a world
in which although we may have to give up more of our abstract privacy because
of the increasing interdependence and fragility of our society, we may have
greater assurance of privacy where it counts. In the words of Travis Charbeneau,
A simultaneously more open and open-minded society [that] enables us to shrink
our respective privacy spheres. A smaller, more manageable privacy sphere, safe-
guarding only those issues that remain genuinely sensitive, [that] means more
certain protection irrespective of technological advance.65
The complexity of privacy issues and the inevitable presence of compelling,
conﬂicting concerns make achieving a comprehensive solution to all privacy
concerns unlikely. However, society may be able to reach a consensus on certain
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
47

principles and create mechanisms to ensure that they be applied as each new
technology emerges.
1 Robert Ellis Smith, Ben Franklin’s Web Site. Providence, R.I.: Privacy Journal,
2000, p. 6.
2 Lewis Brandeis, dissent in Olmstead v. United States (1928).
3 Alan F. Westin, quoted in Fred H. Cate, Privacy in the Information Age. Washing-
ton, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1997, p. 22.
4 Jeffrey Rosen. The Unwanted Gaze: The Destruction of Privacy in America. New
York: Random House, 2000, p. 7.
5 Robert Ellis Smith, quoted in David Brin, The Transparent Society. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1998, p. 77.
6 Alastair Fowler, A History of English Literature. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1987, p. 184.
7 William Pitt, quoted in Philippa Strum, Privacy: The Debate in the United States
Since 1945. Fort Worth, Tex.: Harcourt, 1998, p. 116.
8 John Adams, quoted in Strum, Privacy, p. 116.
9 Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Self-Reliance,” The Works of Ralph Waldo Emerson. Avail-
able online. URL: http://www.rwe.org (link under Complete Works/Essays).
10 Charles Darwin, quoted in Jack Meadows, The Great Scientists. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1987, p. 167.
11 Samuel D. Warren and Louis Brandeis. “The Right to Privacy.” Harvard Law
Review, vol. 4, December 15, 1890, p. 193ff. Also available online. URL: http://
faculty.uml.edu/sgallagher/Brandeisprivacy.htm
12 Erik Davis, Techgnosis: Myth, Magic + Mysticism in the Age of Information. New York:
Harmony Books, 1998, p. 67.
13 George Orwell, 1984, quoted in Harold Bloom, ed., George Orwell. New York:
Chelsea House, 1986, p. 136.
14 Cited in Simon Davies, Big Brother. London: Pan Books, 1996, p. 53.
15 Simson Garﬁnkel, “Privacy and the New Technology: What They Do Know Can
Hurt You,” The Nation, vol. 270, February 28, 2000, p. 11ff.
16 Ted Nelson, quoted in Vince Juliano, “Computer Lib (& Dream Machines) by
Ted Nelson: A Review.” Available online. URL: http://cla.uconn.edu/reviews/
cmptrlib.html. Posted in November 1996.
17 William Gibson, Neuromancer, excerpted in Larry McCaffrey, ed., Storming the
Reality Studio: A Casebook of Cyberpunk and Postmodern Science Fiction. Durham,
N.C.: Duke University Press, 1991.
18 Lawrence H. Tribe, “The Constitution in Cyberspace.” Available online.
URL:.http://www.epic.org/free_speech/tribe.html. Posted in 1991.
19 Quoted in Robert B. Gelman and Stanton McCandlish, Protecting Yourself Online.
San Francisco: Harper/Edge, 1998, p. 35.
20 From the Federal Privacy Commission, quoted in American Civil Liberties Union,
Your Right to Privacy. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1990, p. 119.
21 For extensive coverage of identity theft, online frauds and scams, and other
information-related crime, see the Library in a Book volume Internet Predators,
by Harry Henderson. New York: Facts On File, 2005.
22 Carole A. Lane, Naked in Cyberspace: How to Find Personal Information Online.
Wilton, Conn.: Pemberton Press, 1997, p. 3.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
48

23 William Wresch, Disconnected: Haves and Have-Nots in the Information Age. New
Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1996, p. 93.
24 Paul H. Rubin and Thomas M. Lenard, Privacy and the Commercial Use of Personal
Information. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. Also available online.
URL: http://www.pff.org/issues-pubs/books/010701privacyandpersonalinfo.pdf.
Posted in July 2001.
25 Declan McCullagh, “The Upside of ‘Zero Privacy,’” Reason Online. Available on-
line. URL:http://www.reason.com/0406/fe.dm.database.shtml. Posted in June
2004.
26 Erik Baard, “Smile, You’re On In-Store Camera,” Wired News. Available online.
URL:http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,54078,00.html. Posted on August
8, 2002.
27 Chris Jay Hoofnagel, “Privacy Risks of E-mail Scanning,” Electronic Privacy In-
formation Center. Available online. URL:http://epic.org/privacy/gmail/casjud3.
15.05.html. Posted on March 15, 2005.
28 For more survey material, see Joseph Turow, Americans & Online Privacy: The Sys-
tem Is Broken. University of Minnesota Annenberg Public Policy Center, June
2003. Also available online. URL:http://www.asc.upenn.edu/usr/jturow/internet-
privacy-report/36-page-turow-version-9.pdf. Posted in June 2003.
29 Ann Cavoukian and Tyler J. Hamilton, “Privacy Payoff: Better Customer Data,”
Computerworld, March 15, 2004, n.p. Also available online. URL: http://www.
computerworld.com/printthis/2004/0,4814,90126,00.html.
30 Jerry Kang, “Information Privacy in Cyberspace Transactions.” Stanford Law Re-
view, vol. 50, 1998, p. 1193ff.
31 Katrin Schatz Byford, “Privacy in Cyberspace: Constructing a Model of Privacy
for the Electronic Communications Environment,” Rutgers Computers & Technol-
ogy Law Journal, vol. 24 (1998), p. 1ff.
32 “New Federal Health Privacy Regulation: Questions and Answers.” Available on-
line. URL:http://www.healthprivacy.org/usr_doc/Q&A2000.pdf. Downloaded on
April 4, 2005.
33 Quoted in Electronic Privacy Information Center, “Medical Records.” Available
online. URL:http://www.epic.org/privacy/medical/. Updated on July 8, 2004.
34 Nina Schwenk, quoted in Steven Johnson, “Trading Privacy for Health,” Discover,
vol. 25, December 2004, n.p. Also available online. URL: http://www.discover.
com/issues/dec-04/departments/emerging-technology. Posted in December 2004.
35 Dale Miller, quoted in Beth Givens, “Ten Privacy Principles for Health Care,”
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.
org/ar/privprin.htm. Posted on November 6, 1998.
36 “Health Privacy in the Hands of Government: HIPAA Privacy Regulation—
Troubled Process, Troubling Results,” Privacilla.org. Available online. URL:
http://www.privacilla.org/releases/HIPAA_Report.pdf. Posted in April 2003.
37 Nancy Wexler, quoted in Lauren Picker, “All in the Family,” American Health,
March 1994, p. 24.
38 Christine Godsil Cooper, “Your Genes or Your Job: Genetic Testing in the Work-
place,” Employee Rights Quarterly, vol. 3, Fall 2002, pp. 1ff.
39 Roger Matus, quoted in Andrew E. Taslitz, “The Fourth Amendment in the
Twenty-First Century: Technology, Privacy, and Human Emotions,” Law and
Contemporary Problems, vol. 65, Spring 2002, p. 125ff.
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
49

40 Quoted in Anne Kandra, “Should Parents Become Big Brother? New Software
Allows Parents to Control Virtually Everything Children Do Online,” PC World,
vol. 22, January 2004, p. 59ff.
41 Quoted in Strum, Privacy, p. 148.
42 United States v. United States District Court, 407 U.S. 297, 320 (1972).
43 John Shattuck, quoted in Strum, Privacy, p. 154.
44 Robert Pitofsky, quoted in K. Curran, “War on Terror Worries Privacy Advo-
cates,” NewsMax.com. Available online. URL: http://www.newsmax.com/archives/
articles/2001/10/30/162113.shtml. Posted on October 31, 2001.
45 Alberto Gonzales, quoted in Edward Epstein, “White House Willing to Scale
Back Patriot Act,” San Francisco Chronicle, April 6, 2005, pp. 1, 11.
46 Alberto Gonzales, quoted in Epstein, “White House Willing to Scale Back Pa-
triot Act.”
47 Roger Clarke, “Human Identiﬁcation in Information Systems: Management
Challenges and Public Policy Issues,” Information Tech and People, vol. 7, Decem-
ber 1994, pp. 6–37. Also available online. URL: http://www.anu.edu.au/people/
Roger.Clarke/DV/HumanID.html. Posted in December 1994.
48 Walter Kirn, “The Mother of Reinvention: The Real Reason Americans Detest
the Idea of a National ID Card,” The Atlantic Monthly, vol. 289, May 2002, p. 28ff.
49 Stephen T. Kent and Lynette I. Millett, eds., Who Goes There? Authentication Through
the Lens of Privacy. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2003, p. 6.
50 John Gilmore, “Gilmore v. Ashcroft—FAA ID Challenge FAQ.” Available online.
URL: http://cryptome.org/gilmore-v-usa-faq.htm. Posted on July 20, 2002.
51 Ken Scheidegger, quoted in Richard Willing, “Airline ID Requirement Faces
Legal Challenge,” USA Today.com. Available online. URL: http://www.usatoday.
com/news/nation/2004-10-10-privacy_x.htm. Posted on October 10, 2004.
52 Julia Scheeres, “Support for ID Cards Waning,” Wired News. Available online.
URL:http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,51000,00.html. Posted on March
13, 2002.
53 Jim Harper, “A National ID: Government Initiatives and the Private Sector,”
Privacilla.org. Available online. URL: http://www.privacilla.org/releases/CDIA_
Remarks_01-27-05.html. Posted on January 27, 2005.
54 “Biometric Identiﬁers.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL:http://www.epic.org/privacy/biometrics. Updated on March 30, 2004.
55 Bruce Schneier, quoted in Kim Zettner, “A CAPPS by Any Other Name,” Wired
News. Available online. URL: http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,67015,00.
html. Posted on March 25, 2005.
56 Eugene Volokh, “Big Brother Is Watching—Be Grateful!” Wall Street Journal,
March 26, 2002, p. A2.
57 Jacob Sollum, quoted in Barry Steinhardt, testimony before the Committee on
the Judiciary, Council of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C., December
12, 2002. Available online. URL:http://www.aclu.org/Privacy/Privacy.cfm?ID=
13505&c=130. Posted on December 12, 2002.
58 Howard Rheingold, quoted in Janet Kornblum, “Prying Eyes Are Everywhere,”
USA Today, April 14, 2005, p. 1D.
59 Paul Saffo, quoted in Kornblum, “Prying Eyes Are Everywhere,” p. 10.
60 Greg Shields, quoted in David Colker, “Go Ahead, Just Try to Disappear,” Los
Angeles Times, December 27, 2004, p. A1.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
50

61 James C.White, “People, Not Places: A Policy Framework for Analyzing Loca-
tion Privacy Issues,” Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy, Duke University.
Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/location/jwhitelocationprivacy.
pdf. Posted in Spring 2003.
62 For these and other results of public opinion surveys on private issues, see Elec-
tronic Privacy Information Center, “Public Opinion on Privacy.” Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/survey. Updated on July 15, 2004.
63 Catherine Crump, “Data Retention: Privacy, Anonymity, and Accountability On-
line,” Stanford Law Review, vol. 56, October 2003, p. 191ff.
64 Andrew E. Taslitz, “The Fourth Amendment in the Twenty-ﬁrst Century: Tech-
nology, Privacy, and Human Emotions,” Law and Contemporary Problems, vol. 65,
Spring 2002, p. 125ff.
65 Travis Charbeneau, “The Future of Privacy: Moot?” ItmWeb.com. Available on-
line. URL: http://www.itmweb.com/f010501.htm. Posted on January 5, 2001.
Introduction to Privacy in the Information Age
51

THE LAW OF PRIVACY
A SURVEY OF IMPORTANT 
PRIVACY LEGISLATION
Federal legislation, rather than state or local legislation, is more important for is-
sues involving privacy in computer systems and computer communications, since
electronic data often travels across state lines. State law, however, can both sup-
plement and strengthen federal protections. State law takes over when interstate
commerce and federal constitutional guarantees are not involved. State constitu-
tions can also provide stronger protection than the federal law in some areas.
In the following survey, privacy legislation is categorized by general topic.
Under each topic the federal legislation is summarized ﬁrst, followed by a brief
summary of the general trend in state legislation.
Consumer Privacy
FAIR CREDIT REPORTING ACT (1970)
The Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. § 1681), or FCRA, as amended in
1992, begins with a justiﬁcation for the need for regulating the preparation and
distribution of credit reports:
(1) The banking system is dependent upon fair and accurate credit reporting. In-
accurate credit reports directly undermine the public conﬁdence, which is essential
to the continued functioning of the banking system.
(2) An elaborate mechanism has been developed for investigating and evaluating
the credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity, character, and general rep-
utation of consumers.
(3) Consumer reporting agencies have assumed a vital role in assembling and
evaluating consumer credit and other information on consumers.
(4) There is a need to insure that consumer reporting agencies exercise their
grave responsibilities with fairness, impartiality, and a respect for the consumer’s
right to privacy.
52
CHAPTER 2

The law begins by describing legitimate, permissible uses for credit reports,
such as responding to a court order, providing information directly to the indi-
vidual named in the report, and a variety of “legitimate business needs” such as
a person using a credit card or applying for credit, insurance, or employment.
The law also prohibits “information brokers” from disclosing credit informa-
tion without it falling under one of the legitimate purposes.
Credit bureaus and agencies are required to notify one another when a con-
sumer disputes information in a report. The credit agency must have an effec-
tive procedure for reviewing and correcting information.
FAIR CREDIT BILLING ACT (1975)
The Fair Credit Billing Act (15 U.S.C. § 1666) states that if a consumer tells a
merchant about a problem or dispute concerning a bill, the merchant may not
report the account as delinquent to a credit bureau or other agency. Installment
credit and commercial credit are not covered by this law.
FAIR DEBT COLLECTION PRACTICES ACT (1977)
The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 1692–1692o) addresses
public concern about the often abusive and excessive practices of agencies that
are hired to collect debts owed for consumer purchases, medical care, and other
services. The law prohibits debt collectors contacting consumers at unreason-
able hours (usually before 8:00 A.M. or after 9:00 P.M.) or places, or from com-
ing to the debtor’s place of employment if the collector knows that the employer
disapproves. Debt collectors may not threaten violence or harm against “person,
property, or reputation.” They cannot publish a list of debtors (except to a credit
agency).
Debt collectors cannot misrepresent themselves (such as by claiming to be an
attorney), misrepresent the nature or the amount of the debt, misrepresent the
nature of papers (claiming they are legal forms when they are not, or vice versa),
or threaten that they will take actions that are in fact not legal to take. Various
other similar practices are prohibited.
The debt collector must honor a request by the debtor to stop contacting
him or her, though the collector can notify the debtor of consequences such as
legal action. If the debtor claims the debt is not in fact owed, the collector must
also stop pursuing the claim unless proof of the debt can be supplied.
DEBT COLLECTION ACT OF 1982
The Debt Collection Act of 1982 (public law 97-365, as amended) allows fed-
eral agencies to exchange information about recipients of government loans or
grants, and to give such information to private collection agencies. It also
gives the Internal Revenue Service the ability to obtain records showing the
address of debtors, as well as requiring a Social Security number from every
loan applicant.
The Law of Privacy
53

TELEPHONE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT (1991)
The Telephone Consumer Protection Act (47 U.S.C. § 227) requires that mar-
keters maintain a nation-wide list of consumers who do not wish to receive
sales calls. Before making calls, the company must consult the list. If a person
on the list is called anyway, he or she can receive damages. Recorded messages
cannot be unsolicited (so marketers generally have a live person ask whether it
is OK to play the recording). Sending of unsolicited faxes is also prohibited.
TELEMARKETING AND CONSUMER FRAUD
AND ABUSE PREVENTION ACT (1994)
The Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act (15 U.S.C.
§§ 6101–6108) provides further protections against unwelcome or dishonest
telephone sales pitches. It directs the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to de-
velop regulations that prohibit deceptive telephone advertising offers, calls that
are repeated so that a reasonable person would feel harassed by them, and calls
made at unreasonable hours. Callers must begin by clearly identifying the pur-
pose of the call.
FEDERAL CREDIT REPORTING ACT AMENDMENTS
(2003)
In 2003 the FCRA was amended to require credit bureaus to provide one free
credit report to consumers per year upon request. The requirement will be
phased in regionally, with the entire United States covered by the end of 2005.
Consumers must also be provided access to any credit scores. Some additional
requirements are that consumers must be notiﬁed by retailers before negative
information is reported to credit bureaus. Credit bureaus must also notify con-
sumers via a “fraud alert” if there is evidence of identity theft. While strength-
ening consumer rights, the amendments also potentially weakened protections
for some consumers by preempting similar state laws.
STATE LAWS
Most state laws are similar to the federal statutes in their general principles and
the commercial practices they regulate. Many state laws provide protection
against merchants asking for (or writing down) addresses, phone numbers, or
credit card numbers for the purpose of accepting checks. State laws generally
require that consumers be given accurate copies of their ﬁles. Some state laws
also regulate “credit doctor” services that offer to ﬁx people’s credit problems
(many of these services charge high rates for obtaining information or mak-
ing changes, things the individual has a legal right to do without charge).
The following states have laws relating to credit cards and credit investiga-
tions: Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, District
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
54

of Columbia*, Florida, Georgia, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New
Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Okla-
homa, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia,
Washington, and Wisconsin. Some example provisions include the following:
• California: adds to federal law the right to inspect visually actual ﬁles, and
the right to sue for invasions of privacy by investigative consumer-reporting
agencies.
• Delaware: like a number of other states, prohibits merchants recording credit
card numbers on checks unless the credit card issuer is guaranteeing the check.
• Massachusetts: bans use by credit agencies of arrest records over seven years
old or bankruptcies over 14 years old.
• Montana: ties its consumer credit laws directly to guarding “an individual’s
right to privacy guaranteed in . . . the Montana constitution.” A credit record
is declared to be “a property right with full constitutional protection.”
• Oklahoma: requires that credit agencies preparing a credit report for a mer-
chant ﬁrst provide a copy of the report for the consumer to review.
• Vermont: requires that companies obtain the consent of a consumer before
obtaining a credit report.
Driving Records
DRIVER’S PRIVACY PROTECTION ACT (1994)
The Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (18 U.S.C. § 2721) was passed in response
to the murder of actress Rebecca Schaeffer by a stalker who apparently obtained
her address through the California Department of Motor Vehicles. The law
prohibits state DMVs from releasing personal information about license hold-
ers but makes many exceptions (such as for government agencies, insurance
companies, and private investigators). The law is thus unlikely to prevent any-
one who is willing to pay from obtaining information.
Existing protections seemed to be insufﬁcient to head off abuses. In early
1999, three states—Florida, South Carolina, and Colorado—agreed to sell a
combined total of 22.5 million driver’s license photographs to Image Data LLD,
a private antifraud company in New Hampshire. The company said it would use
the photos to create a photo database that merchants could use to stop use of
fraudulent ID for check cashing. But privacy advocates reacted quickly to the an-
nouncement, pointing out that none of the license holders had given permission
for their photos to be used by a private company, and that the states had no right
to market the pictures. State ofﬁcials soon began to back away from the plan.
The Law of Privacy
55
* For this purpose, the District of Columbia is a “state.”

Financial Privacy
In U.S. v. Miller (1976), the Supreme Court ruled that an individual has no con-
stitutional “legitimate expectation of privacy” in the records of ﬁnancial trans-
actions, such as deposits, withdrawals, checks, and funds transfers. However, in
response, a number of laws have been passed that do provide real, though lim-
ited, privacy protection for ﬁnancial records.
BANK SECRECY ACT (1970)
The Bank Secrecy Act (12 U.S.C. §§ 1951 and 31 U.S.C. §§ 1051) is not, as
the name might suggest, a law requiring banks to keep certain financial infor-
mation confidential. Actually, it requires that banks keep track of a variety of
kinds of transactions and report them to the federal government in an attempt
to stop money laundering, drug-related transactions, or other illegal activities.
For example, transactions involving the movement of funds, currency, or credit
in the amount of more than $10,000 out of the country must be reported, and in-
dividual travelers must report cash transactions of $3,000 to $10,000. (“Unusual”
domestic currency transactions of more than $2,500 must be reported to the In-
ternal Revenue Service.) Banks must also hold records of bank statements, checks
over $100, and other transactions for at least ﬁve years. Banks must obtain Social
Security numbers from customers for identiﬁcation at the time an account is
opened. In 1995, amended regulations (reﬂecting the Anti Money-Laundering
Act of 1992) required additional tracking of wire transfers and other transactions.
Privacy advocates have objected to the widespread tracking of individual ﬁ-
nances mandated by the Bank Secrecy Act. In California Bankers’ Association v.
Schulz (1974), the law was challenged on the constitutional grounds of freedom
of association (First Amendment), unreasonable search and seizure (Fourth
Amendment), and the right against self-incrimination (Fifth Amendment). The
Supreme Court, however, upheld the law’s constitutionality. The Electronic
Funds Transfer Act of 1978 and the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (both
discussed below) in part represented Congress’s attempts to provide some pri-
vacy protection via regulation.
ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER ACT (1978)
The Electronic Funds Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 1693–1693r) regulates the use
of the electronic banking systems that have largely replaced the traditional
tellers and paper checks. Transactions included are those involving an “auto-
mated teller machine (ATM), point-of-sale terminal, automated clearinghouse,
telephone bill-payment system, or home banking program.”
All transaction systems by deﬁnition involve the transfer of information to
parties other than the individual; however, an institution must inform the cus-
tomer about circumstances in which ﬁnancial information will be disclosed to a
third party “in the ordinary course of business.” Institutions are also prohibited
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
56

from issuing unsolicited credit or ATM cards except as replacements or re-
newals for existing cards.
RIGHT TO FINANCIAL PRIVACY ACT OF 1978
Under the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. §§ 3401–) federal
investigators must use proper legal process or “formal written requests” to ob-
tain records of an individual kept by a ﬁnancial institution such as a bank or
credit card company, or ﬁnancial records held by brokers, attorneys, or accoun-
tants. The affected individual must also be given notice in time to challenge the
request for access. The Internal Revenue Service, in particular, is required to give
14 days’ notice for any “administrative summons” to see ﬁnancial records; dur-
ing this time an individual can appeal to a federal judge to deny the summons.
The law also makes it illegal for an unauthorized individual to obtain infor-
mation from a computer belonging to a ﬁnancial institution, credit card com-
pany, or consumer reporting agency.
GRAMM-LEACH-BLILEY ACT (1999)
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA; 15 USC § 6801), also known as the Fi-
nancial Services Modernization Act, was intended primarily to make it easier for
banks, investment brokers, insurance companies, and other ﬁnancial institutions
to merge as desired. But because the sharing of customer information is an in-
evitable consequence of most mergers, the GLBA also provides certain con-
sumer privacy protections.
Financial institutions must securely store and maintain personal financial
information. They must advise consumers on their information-sharing poli-
cies and give consumers the right to opt out of some sharing of personal in-
formation. The information regulated is called “nonpublic personal
information” and includes such items as credit and account applications, ac-
count histories, and identifying information such as addresses and Social Se-
curity numbers.
The law makes a distinction between affiliate companies (those under the
same ownership or control) and unaffiliated third parties. Consumers cannot
prevent information sharing with affiliated companies. On the other hand,
companies cannot transfer their customers’ account numbers or access codes
to unaffiliated parties, except to credit-reporting agencies. Other personal in-
formation can be transferred without customer permission to unaffiliated
third parties if necessary for performing services or for marketing purposes,
but the information cannot be further transferred. (In general, the number
of exceptions and general latitude of these provisions means they are con-
sidered too weak by privacy advocates.) The GLBA also prohibits “pretex-
ting” or the use of false identities or representations in order to obtain
personal information.
The Law of Privacy
57

STATE LAWS
Some states have enacted laws relating to banking privacy, with some stricter
than federal laws. The following is a list of states with laws relating to bank
records: Alabama, Alaska, California, Connecticut, Florida, Idaho (through
court decisions), Illinois, Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, North Carolina (through court decisions), Oklahoma, Ore-
gon, Utah, and Vermont. Some example provisions include the following:
• Alaska: declares bank records to be conﬁdential and not to be revealed except
by court order or under applicable federal or state law, or to the holder of the
negotiable instrument. Following the United States v. Miller decision in 1976,
it added a provision that depositors must be notiﬁed of any request for
records unless made under a search warrant.
• Florida: requires that banks with electronic funds transfer systems inform
consumers about their privacy policies, including “protection against
wrongful or accidental disclosure of confidential information”; prohibits
use of Social Security numbers to identify individuals in electronic banking
systems.
• Maryland: banks may not disclose ﬁnancial records unless customer has au-
thorized disclosure or records are subpoenaed. The subpoena must be given
to the bank and the customer at least 21 days prior to disclosure.
• New Hampshire: requires that state and local investigators seeking ﬁnan-
cial or credit information about a bank customer describe the desired infor-
mation “with particularity and consistent with the scope and requirements of
the investigation.”
Identity Theft
The crime of identity theft represents an extreme case of loss of privacy in per-
sonal information. The great increase in incidence of identity theft, largely fa-
cilitated by the growth of the Internet and e-commerce, has led to new federal
and state legislation in this area.
IDENTITY THEFT AND ASSUMPTION
DETERRENCE ACT (1998)
This law, amending 18 USC § 1028(a), makes it a federal crime when anyone:
“knowingly transfers or uses, without lawful authority, a means of identiﬁcation
of another person with the intent to commit, or to aid or abet, any unlawful ac-
tivity that constitutes a violation of Federal law, or that constitutes a felony
under any applicable State or local law.”
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
58

IDENTITY THEFT PENALTY ENHANCEMENT ACT
(2002)
This amendment to 18 USC § 1028(a) essentially adds an additional sentence of
two years in prison for crimes in which identity theft plays a part. Concern
about identity theft as a tool for terrorists prompted a special higher ﬁve-year
penalty for such cases.
FAIR CREDIT REPORTING ACT AMENDMENTS (2003)
The aforementioned FCRA amendments include a provision that requires that
major credit bureaus issue a “fraud alert” when requested by identity-theft vic-
tims. Credit information resulting from fraudulent activity must be (and re-
main) deleted from a customer’s credit report.
STATE LAWS
All states now have laws relating to identity theft, although they vary in scope.
Some examples follow:
• California: includes a provision requiring a debt collector to stop collection ef-
forts for a debt when the alleged debtor furnishes a police report and other in-
formation indicating identity theft. (California has also passed a separate law
requiring the disclosure of data breaches that might affect personal information.)
• Vermont: requires credit agencies to place a “security freeze” on credit re-
ports when requested by consumers; requires local and state police to accept
complaints about identity theft.
• Washington: requires that an entity disposing of personal records “take all
reasonable steps to destroy, or arrange for the destruction of, personal ﬁnan-
cial and health information and personal identiﬁcation numbers.”
Government Records
PRIVACY ACT OF 1974
Growing concern about the misuse of the burgeoning government databases of
information about individuals led to agreement on some basic principles for pri-
vacy protection. For example, the HEW (Health, Education, Welfare) Advisory
Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems in a July 1972 report sum-
marized these principles as follows:
1. There must be no personal data record-keeping systems whose very existence is
secret.
2. There must be a way for a person to ﬁnd out what information about the per-
son is in a record and how it is used.
The Law of Privacy
59

3. There must be a way for a person to prevent information about the person that
was obtained for one purpose from being used or made available for other pur-
poses without the person’s consent.
4. There must be a way for a person to correct or amend a record of identiﬁable
information about the person.
5. Any organization creating, maintaining, using, or disseminating records of
identiﬁable personal data must assure the reliability of the data for their in-
tended use and must take precautions to prevent misuses of the data.
The Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. § 552a) attempts to implement these princi-
ples. In general it prohibits the release of federal information about an individual,
but has a variety of exceptions including records used in the routine performance of
the duties of an agency, use by the bureau of the census, statistical use when indi-
viduals cannot be identiﬁed from the records, historical records (the National
Archives and Records Administration), and for law enforcement when properly re-
quested. In 1983, the Privacy Act was amended to allow the government to give in-
formation about people who owe money to the government to credit agencies.
The “routine use” exception has been criticized as amounting to a major,
loophole in privacy protection. According to the ACLU, the law suffers from
other defects that make it a weak guardian of privacy and one often ineffective
in restraining the actions of government agencies.
In general, a federal agency must keep accurate track of any authorized dis-
closure of a record, and it must supply an individual upon request with any
records pertaining to that individual, and provide the opportunity to correct er-
roneous information. However, records pertaining to law enforcement or intel-
ligence activities may be withheld. The Freedom of Information Act, however,
provides an alternative way to obtain some records.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
The Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. § 552), or FOIA, was enacted in
1966 and amended in 1974 and 1986. While the Privacy Act focuses on an in-
dividual’s right to obtain records pertaining to him or herself, the FOIA at-
tempts to make information about a wide range of government activities
available to anyone willing to make the effort to request it. (In practice, there is
considerable overlap between the laws, so a person seeking to ﬁnd out what the
government knows about him or her would ordinarily use both.)
Nearly all federal (but not state or local) agencies are subject to the provi-
sions of the FOIA. However, there is no central clearinghouse where one can
search for information; the person making the request has to determine which
agency or agencies is likely to have the desired information, and issue a separate
request for each agency. Agencies are required to respond within ten working
days, indicating whether they will provide the information. In practice there is
often a backlog of requests and thus considerable delay.
The government does not have to provide information if doing so would en-
danger national defense or foreign policy, reveal classiﬁed or conﬁdential infor-
mation, or if releasing the information would harm the privacy of another
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
60

individual. There is a process for appealing a decision not to release all or part
of the information requested; appeals are often necessary.
ELECTRONIC FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT (1986)
The Electronic Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C § 552, amended), or
EFOIA, attempts to update the FOIA by responding to the vast growth in the use
of computer databases and information systems by the federal government since
the FOIA was enacted in 1966. The EFOIA requires that computerized records
be made accessible in a way similar to paper records and that agencies reasonably
accommodate requests to obtain records in computer-readable format.
COMPUTER MATCHING AND PRIVACY
PROTECTION ACT OF 1988
Besides the sheer growth in the size of databases, another concern of privacy ad-
vocates has been the ability to match or correlate records from several agencies
in order to investigate a particular individual in depth. The Computer Match-
ing and Privacy Protection Act of 1988 (5 U.S.C. § 552, amended) requires that
agencies involved in computer record matching programs develop policies and
procedures that must be approved by an Agency Data Integrity Board. If an ad-
verse action is to be taken against an individual, the individual must be notiﬁed
and given the opportunity to correct erroneous information. If government
beneﬁts are to be denied to an individual based on data found in a computer
match, the agency must independently verify the data ﬁrst.
STATE LAWS
Most states have their own versions of the Freedom of Information Act. A sim-
ilar concept is the “sunshine laws” that require many kinds of meetings to be
held in public where people can ﬁnd out how their government makes decisions.
The following is a list of states with laws relating to government use of data-
bases involving personal information: Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky,
Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New York,
North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Utah, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.
Some example provisions include the following:
• Alaska: has a set of protections in keeping with Fair Information Privacy
principles. Each state agency must notify citizens from whom information is
collected or sought: (1) what law allows the government to collect a given set
of information, (2) what happens if the citizen refuses to provide the infor-
mation, (3) what the government expects to do with the information (includ-
ing to whom it may be disclosed), and (4) how the citizen can apply to correct
information believed to be inaccurate.
The Law of Privacy
61

• California: adds the right to sue a person for invasion of privacy if that per-
son intentionally discloses information that he or she should have known
came from a state or federal agency in violation of law.
• Kentucky: requires that any person shall have access to “any public record
relating to him or her” in which he or she is speciﬁcally named.
• Massachusetts: requires that each state agency designate an individual re-
sponsible for its personal data systems and enact regulations involving outside
access to information and the right of the individual to correct errors.
• Minnesota: Its Data Practices Act was the ﬁrst comprehensive state privacy
act. It includes telling individuals the purpose and intended use of informa-
tion collected, the consequences of failing to provide it, and how to make cor-
rections. Individuals must be given an opportunity to challenge information
developed from “computer matching” before any action is taken.
• Utah: includes the federal Fair Information Practices standards in its state law.
Categorizes personal information as public (accessible to anyone), private (in-
volves personal information presumed conﬁdential), conﬁdential (medical and
psychiatric), and protected (trade secrets or proprietary business information).
Medical Records
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY ACT
The Occupational Health and Safety Act (29 U.S.C. § 657), which became law
in 1970 and has subsequently been amended, allows workers to examine their
occupational health records, but also requires that certain records be disclosed
to the federal government when requested. Other laws such as the Rehabilita-
tion Act (29 U.S.C. §§ 793–794) and the Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment
Act (38 U.S.C. § 2012) limit the disclosure of certain employee medical records.
The Privacy Act of 1974, which generally requires disclosure of federal
records about an individual to that individual, includes medical records, but
provides special procedures for releasing records to a physician instead of the
individual in cases where the information may be harmful (such as to an indi-
vidual’s mental health).
Federal agencies, such as the Department of Health and Human Services and
the Public Health Service, as well as federally funded mental and substance
abuse treatment centers, all have strict rules for disclosure of health information
to third parties, with certain exceptions.
HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY
AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1996
Commonly referred to as HIPAA, the Health Insurance Portability and Ac-
countability Act of 1996 (45 U.S.C. §1320d-2(b)) is primarily intended to ensure
that employees can retain medical coverage when changing jobs. However, the
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
62

law also includes some important though limited privacy protections. Patients
must generally give consent before their medical information can be released ex-
cept as necessary for treatment, payment, or health care operations, with certain
other exceptions as provided by law, such as for reporting child or elder abuse.
Patients have the right to examine their medical records. States are allowed to
have more stringent laws if they are compatible with HIPAA regulations.
STATE LAWS
State laws tend to be strict about disclosure of individuals’ medical records with
certain exceptions. Patients generally have the right to examine their records, un-
less doing so might endanger their mental health. Many states provide special pro-
tections for conﬁdentiality involving HIV/AIDS and the results of genetic testing.
The following is a list of states with laws relating to the handling of medical
records: Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Geor-
gia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts,
Minnesota, Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin. Some
example provisions are the following:
• California: full right of individual access to records except where a mental
health professional refuses on grounds disclosure may harm the individual’s
health; in that case, the individual may designate another professional to ex-
amine the records. “No requester shall acquire medical information regard-
ing a patient without ﬁrst obtaining [written] authorization from that
patient.” (There are some exceptions including legal proceedings, law en-
forcement, medical research, and peer review.) AIDS test results are anony-
mous and must not be disclosed, even through subpoena. Employers are
restricted in their use of employees’ medical records.
• Colorado: deﬁnes medical records information as a “thing of value,” and
links it to the law against theft: “Any person who, without proper authoriza-
tion, knowingly obtains a medical record or medical information with the in-
tent to appropriate [it] to his own use or the use of another, who steals or
discloses to an unauthorized person a medical record or medical information,
or who, without authority, makes or causes to be made a copy of a medical
record or medical information commits theft.”
• Florida: health care providers must provide copies of medical records to the
patient upon request, and may not disclose records to others without permis-
sion, except under subpoena.
• Maryland: allows doctors to report medical information to the state motor
vehicle administration if it indicates the individual’s driving may be impaired;
requires that insurance claimants or applicants be given copies of their
records (except those provided by a doctor, which are not available for ﬁve
years, except with the doctor’s consent).
The Law of Privacy
63

• Ohio: makes doctor-patient relationship privileged, but requires disclosure of
child abuse–related information to authorities. Provides that “No person shall
be liable for any harm that results to any other person as a result of failing to
disclose any conﬁdential information about a mental health client, or failing to
otherwise attempt to protect such other person from harm by any client.”
• Tennessee: declares hospital records to be the property of the hospital, but
requires access by the patient upon “good cause.”
• Washington: requires that medical data collected by the state’s health care ﬁ-
nancing system be used only for that purpose; requires that any state health
ID be more secure (unique and accurate) than Social Security numbers.
School Records
FAMILY EDUCATION RIGHTS AND PRIVACY ACT
(1974)
The Family Education Rights and Privacy Act (20 U.S.C. § 1232g) applies to all
school districts and colleges that receive federal funds (which most of them do
receive). It guarantees students 18 years and older (and the parents of younger
students) the right to see their school records. Each school system must have a
procedure for challenging and correcting erroneous records.
The law also restricts the disclosure of school records to persons other than
the parent or student, but there are many exceptions, including normal proce-
dures that reﬂect a “legitimate educational interest.” A 1994 amendment per-
mits disclosure of records to the juvenile justice system; school ofﬁcials are also
by this amendment prohibited from revealing that records have been subpoe-
naed. School records can also be disclosed by the Department of Education to
credit bureaus in cases of default on student loans, and statistical information
can be compiled from student records for reporting crimes on campus.
ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION ACT
OF 1978
Many conservatives have viewed the growing use of psychological testing and psy-
chological exercises in public schools as educationally inappropriate and often as a
form of propagandizing. This opposition led to an amendment in the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act of 1978 that states, among other provisions, that
“No student shall be required, as part of any [federally funded school] program, to
submit to psychiatric . . . or psychological examination, testing, or treatment, in
which the primary purpose is to reveal information concerning political afﬁliations;
mental and psychological problems potentially embarrassing to the student or his
family; sex behavior and attitudes; and illegal, anti-social, self-incriminating and
demeaning behavior . . . without the consent of the student, or in the case of an un-
emancipated minor, without the prior written consent of the parent.”
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
64

STATE LAWS
Schools are largely regulated by states and school boards, not the federal govern-
ment. While the federal constitution does apply to schools, and federal agencies
can use their “power of the purse” to coerce states into following mandates, spe-
ciﬁc policies about the use and disclosure of student information vary considerably.
The following is a list of states with laws relating to school records: Arizona,
California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota,
Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North Car-
olina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.
Some example provisions follow:
• California: extends the state constitutional right of privacy to students in
public institutions of higher education; gives parents an absolute right to ex-
amine their children’s records in both private and public schools.
• Maryland: allows disclosure to the student or education ofﬁcials of informa-
tion concerning a student’s academic achievement, biography, family, physi-
cal or mental ability, or religion.
• Michigan: prohibits disclosure by teachers, counselors, or other school ofﬁ-
cials of pupil information received in conﬁdence, even in legal proceedings.
• Ohio: prohibits release of student ﬁles for any proﬁt-making activity; allows
release of mailing lists of high school students to military recruiters unless a
parent or student objects.
• Rhode Island: makes it a misdemeanor to circulate without ofﬁcial permission
any survey or questionnaire that is “so framed as to ask the pupils of any school
intimate questions about themselves and/or their families, thus trespassing on
the pupils’ constitutional rights and invading the privacy of the home.”
Video Rentals
VIDEO PRIVACY PROTECTION ACT (1988)
Judge Robert Bork’s nomination to the Supreme Court in 1987 became contro-
versial in part because Bork did not believe that the language of the Constitution
implied a right of privacy as declared in cases such as Griswold v. Connecticut and
Roe v. Wade. Ironically, Bork’s own privacy was invaded when a newspaper re-
porter obtained video store records that suggested Bork liked to watch pornog-
raphy. Many members of Congress, while disagreeing over Bork’s ﬁtness for the
Supreme Court, agreed that the titles of videos rented by an individual should be
private information, as with the records of books borrowed at a public library. In
response, they passed the Video Privacy Protection Act (18 U.S.C. § 2710).
The Law of Privacy
65

Under this law, a video store cannot disclose the titles or descriptions of the
videos rented or purchased by a customer. If it does so, the customer can sue.
The store may rent customer lists (without title information) if the customer has
had the opportunity to remove his or her name from the list. Also, lists or com-
pilations of titles or viewing preferences can be created for purposes of market
surveys or other research provided that any information that could be used to
link identiﬁable individuals to the records is removed.
Personal information can be disclosed “if the disclosure is incident to the or-
dinary course of business of the videotape service provider”—this is intended to
allow for normal transaction processing. Personally identiﬁable information,
however, must be destroyed not later than one year after the information is no
longer necessary for the purpose for which it was collected.
Wiretapping, Surveillance, and Encryption
WIRETAP ACT (1968)
The Wiretap Act (Title 3 of the Omnibus Crime Control Bill) codiﬁed the
Supreme Court’s Katz decision by extending the protection of the Fourth
Amendment against unjustiﬁed search and seizure to information traveling on a
telephone line. It established the basic requirements for a search warrant for
government interception of telephone communications. Recording calls by pri-
vate individuals is not allowed unless all parties to the call give their consent.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS PRIVACY ACT
OF 1986
In 1985, the congressional Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment reported that “many
innovations in electronic surveillance technology have outstripped constitutional
and statutory protections, leaving areas in which there is currently no legal pro-
tection against … new surveillance devices.” For example, the original wiretap law
did not cover computer networks or data as opposed to voice communications.
The ECPA (amending various sections of 18 U.S.C.) ﬁlls in this gap, covering
radio-paging devices, electronic mail, cellular telephones, private communication
carriers, and computer data transmissions (but not cordless phones).
Law enforcement agencies in turn became concerned that they would not be
able to intercept computer transmissions using newer technology, particularly
when encryption (coding) made the data unreadable. In 1994, the Clinton ad-
ministration proposed the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement
Act (CALEA), which would require telephone companies to make sure their
hardware would allow federal agents to conveniently tap into transmissions. Al-
though FBI director Louis Freeh insisted that the government would not abuse
this access by increasing the number of taps, that number continues to rise
rapidly and privacy advocates strongly oppose the CALEA and similar proposals.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
66

USA PATRIOT ACT OF 2001
Passed quickly in response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Unit-
ing and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to In-
tercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT) Act of 2001 includes a number
of provisions that expand government powers to investigate terrorism suspects and
to obtain information. Relevant provisions of the law include the following:
• Section 204 allows stored voice mail communications to be obtained through
an ordinary search warrant rather than the more stringent wiretap orders. In-
terestingly, recorded messages on answering machines are not covered by this
provision.
• Section 206 is an important change that expands the Federal Intelligence Sur-
veillance Act’s provisions to allow for “roving wiretaps” that can be applied
without having to specify the particular telephone, computer, or other com-
munications facility to be used. Privacy advocates are concerned that this ex-
panded surveillance power could potentially sweep the communications of
large numbers of innocent persons into the government’s net.
• Section 210 expands the types of information about electronic communica-
tions that can be obtained by subpoena to include, for example, temporary In-
ternet (IP) addresses and the means or source of payment for service.
• Section 213 is another important change: it expands the use of so-called sneak
and peak searches, where the subject of the search is not informed until after
the search has been completed. This means that the subject has no opportu-
nity to contest the search order before it is executed. Law enforcement agents
need only show “reasonable cause to believe that providing immediate noti-
ﬁcation may have an adverse effect.” Previously, this type of search was al-
lowed only in limited circumstances such as electronic surveillance involving
a national security or terrorism investigation. Section 213, however, allows
the searches in any case involving evidence of any federal criminal offense.
• Section 215 allows the FBI to request the production of “any tangible things.”
This provision has aroused considerable controversy because of its applica-
bility to business, educational, medical, and even library records without a
showing of probable cause. An amendment was added before passage that
prohibits the investigation of a U.S. person “solely on the basis of activities
protected by the First Amendment.”
• Section 216 expands the use of trap-and-trace and pen register devices to in-
clude not only telephone numbers but also Internet routing addresses, presum-
ably including e-mail headers. This removes any legal ambiguity in earlier FBI
use of Carnivore and similar technologies for recording e-mail and other In-
ternet addresses. In related provisions, Section 214 removes the requirement
that the target be “an agent of a foreign power” or terrorist, but can simply be
“any investigation to gather foreign intelligence information.” Also sections
216 and 220 allow for nationwide court orders for telephone and Internet traces
(previously court orders were limited to the jurisdiction of the court involved).
The Law of Privacy
67

Many of the above and other provisions were originally scheduled to expire
December 31, 2005. Following temporary extensions, Congress is expected to
renew most provisions, though perhaps with added safeguards.
STATE LAW
State law varies with regard to private parties recording phone calls: 38 states
allow any party to a conversation to record it without the consent of the other
parties; 12 states require that all parties be notiﬁed and must give consent. A
small but growing number of states also prohibit photography or video surveil-
lance in places such as employees’ locker rooms and store dressing rooms.
The following is a list of states* with laws relating to wiretapping or other
forms of electronic surveillance: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California,
Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia,
Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Montana, Ne-
braska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North
Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Is-
land, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Wash-
ington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. Following are some example
provisions:
• Arizona: It is a felony to intercept a wire or other oral communication with-
out consent of one party or a court order based on probable cause.
• California: It is illegal to tap without consent of all parties, except in the case
of telephone companies. A person may tap his or her own phone if a conver-
sation relates to serious criminal activity and can be admitted at trial later. It
is a felony for anyone except the parties involved in a telephone conversation
to disclose it without permission. Cellular telephones and digital pagers are
also covered. A device for “observing, photographing, recording, or amplify-
ing” may not be installed in any place without consent.
• Georgia: It is illegal to “observe, photograph or record the activities of an-
other which occur in any private place and out of public view” without con-
sent of one party.
• Louisiana: Surreptitious videotaping for a lewd purpose is illegal.
• Massachusetts: “No person who owns or operates a retail establishment sell-
ing clothing shall maintain in a dressing room a two-way mirror or electronic
video camera or similar device . . . ”
• Oregon: Tapping by law enforcers without consent of both parties requires a
warrant, which must show probable cause that a crime “directly and immedi-
ately affecting the safety of human life or the national security has been com-
mitted or is about to be committed.”
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
68
* For this purpose, the District of Columbia is a “state.”

Workplace Testing
EMPLOYEE POLYGRAPH PROTECTION ACT (1988)
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act (29 U.S.C. § 2001) prohibits most
polygraph tests by private employers (or imposes conditions that make the tests
generally impracticable). Some exceptions are made for companies in the secu-
rity (guard) business or in businesses involving drug manufacturing or sales.
STATE LAWS
Most states prohibit or heavily restrict the use of polygraphs in employment,
either when applying for a job or later. Most states permit some drug testing
but with restrictions such as notiﬁcation and the provision of treatment for em-
ployees who turn out to have a drug problem. There are generally restrictions
on disclosure of test results outside the company. The following is a list of
states* with laws relating to employment records: Alaska, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa,
Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada, New Hampshire, New
York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Is-
land, South Dakota, Tennessee, Utah, Vermont, Washington, and Wisconsin.
The following is a list of states* with laws relating to polygraphs or other
forms of testing: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois,
Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mis-
sissippi, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York,
North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Is-
land, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington,
West Virginia, and Wisconsin. Some example provisions of these laws are as
follows:
• Connecticut: Employees have the right to inspect their records and either
correct mistakes or ﬁle a rebuttal for disputed information; companies may
give “truthful statements” that discredit an employee, but may not “blacklist”
employees to prevent them from working in their industry. Urine tests for
drugs can be administered only if there is “reasonable suspicion that the em-
ployee is under the inﬂuence of drugs or alcohol, which adversely affects or
could affect such employee’s job performance.” Any positive result must be
conﬁrmed by two tests.
• Louisiana: A polygraph examiner must inform the person being tested that
testing is voluntary and that refusal to take the test may not be grounds for
termination. Examiners who fail to do so can lose their license.
The Law of Privacy
69
* For this purpose, the District of Columbia is a “state.”

• Maryland: Employers must include in application forms a notice that “an em-
ployer may not require or demand any applicant for employment or prospec-
tive employment to submit to or take a polygraph, lie detector, or similar test
or examination as a condition for employment or continued employment.”
• Massachusetts: Psychological “honesty tests” may not be administered in
connection with employment.
• Nevada: Employers may not discriminate because an employee “uses a law-
ful product outside the premises of the employer.” An employee may not be
dismissed based on information provided by a “spotter” without a hearing or
opportunity to confront the spotter.
• North Carolina: An employer may test for AIDS as part of an annual phys-
ical exam, and employees with the HIV/AIDS virus may be ﬁred if there is a
risk to others.
• North Dakota: All testing for HIV/AIDS must be conﬁdential and by consent.
• Rhode Island: Urinalysis and blood testing for alcohol or drugs is permitted
only when there are “reasonable grounds.”
• Tennessee: The law states that “No employer may take any personnel action
based solely upon the results of a polygraph examination.” Questions may not
ask about sexual behavior or orientation unless (a) the question is relevant to
the purpose of the exam, (b) the examinee gives written permission, and (c)
the examinee has the right to explain any problematic results. Exams may not
ask about religious, political, labor, or racial matters or anything that took
place ﬁve or more years earlier, except for felonies and drug violations.
Genetic Discrimination and Testing
The following states prohibit discrimination in employment-related decisions
based on genetic information: Arizona, Arkansas, California, Connecticut,
Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massa-
chusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon,
Rhode Island, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and
Wisconsin. About half of these states go further and prohibit requesting, re-
quiring, or even performing genetic tests.
International Privacy Laws
UNITED NATIONS
The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) is the
philosophical basis for much of modern international law. It has the following
privacy-related provisions:
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
70

Article 3: Everyone has the right to life, liberty, and security of person.
Article 8: Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent na-
tional tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted him by the con-
stitution or by law.
Article 12: No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy,
family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honor or reputation. Every-
one has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.
EUROPEAN UNION
The European Union has emerged with one of the strongest and most com-
prehensive sets of privacy laws. The document has many “whereases” and de-
tails of implementation. The core of the legislation can be found in the
following articles.
Article 6 describes the basic principles to be implemented in the EU’s data
policies:
Member States shall provide that personal data must be:
(a) processed fairly and lawfully;
(b) collected for speciﬁed, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further
processed in a way incompatible with those purposes. Further processing of data
for historical, statistical or scientiﬁc purposes shall not be considered as incompat-
ible provided that Member States provide appropriate safeguards;
(c) adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they
are collected and/or for which they are further processed;
(d) accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date; every reasonable step must be
taken to ensure that data which are inaccurate or incomplete, having regard to
the purposes for which they were collected or for which they are further processed,
are erased or rectiﬁed;
(e) kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer
than is necessary for the purposes for which the data were collected or for which
they are further processed. Member States shall lay down appropriate safe-
guards for personal data stored for longer periods for historical, statistical or sci-
entific use.
Article 7 speciﬁes the requirements for the gathering and processing of per-
sonal data:
Member States shall provide that personal data may be processed only if:
(a) the data subject has given his consent unambiguously; or
(b) processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data sub-
ject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject entering
into a contract; or
(c) processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the con-
troller is subject; or
(d) processing is necessary in order to protect the vital interests of the data subject; or
The Law of Privacy
71

(e) processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public
interest or in the exercise of ofﬁcial authority vested in the controller or in a third
party to whom the data are disclosed; or
(f) processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by
the controller or by the third party or parties to whom the data are disclosed, ex-
cept where such interests are overridden by the interests or fundamental rights
and freedoms of the data subject which require protection under Article 1(1).
Article 10 speciﬁes what must be disclosed to the individual about whom in-
formation is to be gathered:
Member States shall provide that the controller or his representative must pro-
vide a data subject from whom data relating to himself are collected with at least
the following information, except where he already knows:
(a) the identity of the controller and of his representative, if any.
(b) the purposes of the processing for which the data are intended.
(c) any further information such as
— the recipients or categories of recipients of the data;
— whether replies to the questions are obligatory or voluntary, as well as the pos-
sible consequences of the failure to reply;
— the existence of the right of access to and the right to rectify the data concern-
ing him insofar as they are necessary, having regard to the speciﬁc circumstances
in which the data are collected, to guarantee fair processing in respect of the data
subject.
Article 25 deals with the interface between the EU and other countries. Its
main concern is to ensure that data not be shared with countries that do not
have similarly strict protections in place, since doing so could lead to improper
disclosure or other abuses and ultimately defeat the purpose of the legislation:
1. Member States shall provide that the transfer to a third country of personal
data which are undergoing processing or are intended for processing after
transfer may take place only if, without prejudice to compliance with the na-
tional provisions adopted pursuant to the other provisions of this Directive, the
third country in question ensures an adequate level of protection.
2. The adequacy of the level of protection afforded by a third country shall be assessed
in the light of all the circumstances surrounding a data transfer operation or set
of data transfer operations; particular consideration shall be given to the nature
of the data, the purpose and duration of the proposed processing operation or op-
erations, the country of origin and country of ﬁnal destination, the rules of law,
both general and sectoral, in force in the third country in question and the pro-
fessional rules and security measures which are complied with in those countries.
In 2002 the EU promulgated additional regulations with regard to the Inter-
net and other data communications services. Among other things, the regu-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
72

lations deal with the obligation of providers of Internet services to safeguard
the security of their systems and to inform subscribers of any breaches or spe-
cial risks that arise. Data being transmitted should not be stored unnecessar-
ily and should be removed when no longer needed. In general, the use of
personal information in operating communications services should be kept to
a minimum.
CANADA
The British Columbia, Canada Freedom of Information and Privacy Act has
provisions that are similar to a combination of the U.S. Freedom of Informa-
tion Act and the Privacy Act of 1974. Under “Purposes of this Act” it states that:
2. (1) The purposes of this Act are to make public bodies more accountable to the pub-
lic and to protect personal privacy by
(a) giving the public a right of access to records,
(b) giving individuals a right of access to, and a right to request correction of, per-
sonal information about themselves,
(c) specifying limited exceptions to the right of access,
(d) preventing the unauthorized collection, use, or disclosure of personal informa-
tion by public bodies, and
(e) providing for an independent review of decisions made under this Act.
The Act applies to most records compiled by public agencies in the province,
except for court records, records relating to legislative ofﬁces, some educational
materials, and certain other exceptions. The “head of a public body must make
every reasonable effort to assist applicants and to respond without delay to each
applicant openly, accurately, and completely.” It goes on to specify that the pub-
lic body must extract a copy of a computerized record provided it is within nor-
mal technical expertise and not unduly burdensome.
After providing a mechanism for disclosure, the act discusses circumstances
under which the government is not obliged to provide information (or indeed,
is required to keep it conﬁdential). It also discusses the need to give notice to
third parties who may be harmed by a proposed disclosure (such as that of pro-
prietary business information).
In 2000 Canada enacted the Personal Information Protection and Elec-
tronic Documents Act (PIPEDA), which established new privacy standards
for government and commercial entities in their handling of personal infor-
mation. In general the law implements 10 privacy principles, including ac-
countability, statement of purpose, openness, consent, limiting use and
collection, disclosure, retention, individual access, safeguards, accuracy, and
challenging compliance. Standards for processing of electronic transactions
are included.
Other Canadian laws containing information privacy provisions include the
Bank Act, Insurance Act, Trust and Loan Companies Act, and the Telecommu-
nications Act.
The Law of Privacy
73

OTHER COUNTRIES
In general, the EU offers the strongest privacy protection, with countries in the
British Commonwealth (such as Canada and Australia) also having high stan-
dards. These countries have stricter and more uniform regulation of private en-
terprise than the United States, but the greater centralization of government
and weaker constitutional protection for free speech and the press may make it
harder to disclose governmental abuses.
It is hard to compare the United States with other countries because it has
both federal and state laws (and courts) that come into play under various cir-
cumstances. Regulation of the gathering and use of information by private en-
terprise is spotty, especially with regard to emerging Internet commerce.
Because the United States tends to strike a balance toward freedom of speech
and the press and away from government secrecy, governmental abuses can be
more easily brought to light.
It is important to note that the right to privacy, like all rights, is dependent
on a government not only providing constitutional guarantees, but being will-
ing to abide by them. Dictatorships are unlikely to protect the privacy of their
opponents, and parties involved in civil war are unlikely to have a regard for
individual rights. China, the world’s largest country, has little protection for
privacy against the government, and the former U.S.S.R. has not yet replaced
its post-Communist chaos with an effective system of legal guarantees.
COURT CASES
There are many cases in the Supreme Court and lower courts that hinge on
some aspect of privacy. In keeping with the topic of this book, the selection of
cases focuses on those that deal primarily with privacy violations involving the
use (or abuse) of information, surveillance, or monitoring.
The following table indexes the cases by the principal topics involved.
Within each topic, cases are given in chronological order.
Accountability of Records
Arizona v. Evans
Consumer and Personal Privacy
Ram Avrahami v. U.S. News & World Report
U.S. West v. Federal Communications Commission
In Re Toysmart.com, LLC
Individual Reference Services Group v. Federal Trade Commission
Commonwealth v. Source One Associations
Helen Remsburg v. DocuSearch
Decisional or Intimate Privacy
Griswold v. Connecticut
Driver’s License Information
Condon v. Reno
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
74

E-mail and Online Postings
Alana Shoars v. Epson America, Inc.
Timothy R. McVeigh v. William Cohen et al.
Encryption
Daniel Bernstein v. U.S. Department of State
Financial Privacy
United States v. Miller
Identiﬁcation Requirements
Gilmore v. Ashcroft
Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial District Court of Nevada
Medical Privacy
Doe v. Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority
American Council of Life Insurers v. Vermont Department of Banking, Insurance, 
Securities, and Healthcare Administration
Privacy Statements
In Re Toysmart.com, LLC
Social Security Numbers
Beacon Journal Publishing v. City of Akron, Ohio
Doe v. Chao
Student Privacy
New Jersey v. T.L.O.
Surveillance and Searches
California v. Ciraolo
Kyllo v. United States
Wiretapping and Data Interception
Olmstead v. U.S.
Katz v. United States
Steve Jackson Games, Inc. v. United States Secret Service
United States v. Nicodemo S. Scarfo et al.
Workplace Privacy
O’Connor v. Ortega
Alana Shoars v. Epson America, Inc.
Workplace Testing
O’Brien v. Papa Gino’s of America, Inc.
Soroka v. Dayton Hudson Corp.
OLMSTEAD V. U.S., 277 U.S. 438 (1928)
Background
During the Prohibition era of the 1920s, federal agents waged a relentless war
against bootleggers who sold illegal liquor. Agents suspected that Roy Olmstead
was a major bootlegger, so they tapped the phone lines in the basement of a
building where he had an ofﬁce, and also tapped phone lines going into his
home. The agents did not obtain court warrants before installing the taps.
The Law of Privacy
75

Using the taps, the agents gained evidence sufﬁcient to convict him. After ap-
peal, the case eventually reached the Supreme Court.
Legal Issues
Olmstead’s defense claimed that the use of wiretaps violated Olmstead’s constitu-
tional rights under the Fourth Amendment, which states that “The right of the
people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects against unreason-
able searches and seizures shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue but
upon probable cause, supported by oath or afﬁrmation and particularly describing
the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.” According to the
defense, the wiretap was equivalent to a search and seizure of Olmstead’s private
ofﬁce and home, and since it was done without a warrant, it was unconstitutional.
The defense also claimed that the prosecution’s use of Olmstead’s wiretapped
conversations violated the Fifth Amendment, which states (in part) that “No
person . . . shall be compelled, in any criminal case, to be a witness against him-
self.” According to the defense, using the wiretapped conversation forced him
in effect to become an unwilling witness against himself.
Decision
The majority of the Court upheld Olmstead’s conviction and rejected both con-
stitutional challenges. With regard to the Fourth Amendment, the Court noted
that “The Amendment itself shows that the search is to be of material things—
the person, the house, his papers, or his effects. The description of the warrant
necessary to make the proceeding lawful is that it must specify the place to be
searched and the person or things to be seized.” The Court noted that nothing
physical had been seized. It also rejected the attempt to make an analogy be-
tween phone conversations and mail. While the mail is presumed conﬁdential
by the government, “The United States takes no such care of telegraph or tele-
phone messages as of mailed sealed letters. The [Fourth] Amendment does not
forbid what was done here. There was no searching. There was no seizure. The
evidence was secured by the use of the sense of hearing, and that only.”
The Court also insisted that “There was no entry of the houses or ofﬁces of
the defendants. By the invention of the telephone ﬁfty years ago and its appli-
cation for the purpose of extending communications, one can talk with another
at a far distant place. The language of the [Fourth] Amendment cannot be ex-
tended and expanded to include telephone wires reaching to the whole world
from the defendant’s house or ofﬁce. The intervening wires are not part of his
house or ofﬁce any more than are the highways along which they are stretched.”
The Court also rejected the Fifth Amendment challenge because Olmstead
had not been forced or compelled to make the incriminating statements.
Impact
As a result of Olmstead, any protection against federal wiretapping would have to
come through legislation (until the decision was reversed in Katz v. United States.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
76

in 1967). State law, however, could restrict wiretapping by state or local law en-
forcement agencies.
Perhaps the most important impact of Olmstead, however, came from Justice
Louis Brandeis’s dissenting opinion, which thrust the constitutional issue of pri-
vacy into the spotlight. While the Court majority had insisted on a literal inter-
pretation of the Fourth and Fifth Amendments, Brandeis noted that “Since
[McCullough v. Maryland, 17 U.S. 316, 1819], this Court has repeatedly sustained
the exercise of power by Congress, under various clauses of that instrument, over
objects of which the Fathers could not have dreamed.” Brandeis cited examples
of “modern” regulations that would have been considered oppressive or even ab-
surd in earlier times, and insisted that like regulations, protections for rights such
as privacy must also be updated when technology or other conditions change.
Brandeis noted that “When the Fourth and Fifth Amendments were
adopted, ‘the form that evil [of forced self-incrimination] had theretofore taken’
had been necessarily simple. Force and violence were then the only means
known to man by which a Government could directly effect self-incrimination.
It could compel the individual to testify—a compulsion effected, if need be, by
torture. It could secure possession of his papers and other articles incident to his
private life—a seizure effected, if need be, by breaking and entry.”
Brandeis insisted that courts must take changing conditions into account:
“Subtler and more far-reaching means of invading privacy have become avail-
able to the Government. Discovery and invention have made it possible for the
Government, by means far more effective than stretching upon the rack, to ob-
tain disclosure in court of what is whispered in the closet.”
The words of Justice Brandeis would prove to be prophetic as even newer
technologies (such as video cameras, infrared scopes, and sophisticated “bugs”)
would become available to both government and private eavesdroppers, and the
means of communication (and thus of potential self-incrimination) would come
to include the teletype, the fax, and electronic mail.
GRISWOLD V. CONNECTICUT, 381 U.S. 479 (1965)
Background
During the 19th century, “anti-vice” crusaders succeeded in passing laws that
made it illegal in most states to provide information about contraception
(birth control) methods or to provide devices that could be used to prevent
conception. By the 1960s, however, the invention of an effective birth control
pill and freer attitudes about sex were leading to pressure to overturn restric-
tive laws.
Estelle Griswold, the executive director of the Planned Parenthood League
of Connecticut, and the organization’s medical director were convicted of vio-
lating Connecticut’s anti-contraception law by providing birth control informa-
tion and devices to clients. Griswold’s attorneys appealed the conviction to the
state court of appeals and then to the Connecticut Supreme Court, but both up-
held the conviction. The case ﬁnally reached the U.S. Supreme Court.
The Law of Privacy
77

Legal Issues
Griswold’s appeal was based on the argument that the state anti-contraception
law violated the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. In part, this
amendment states: “No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge
the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State
deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor
deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”
This amendment had been passed originally just after the Civil War to ensure
that the former Confederate states gave their black citizens the same “privileges
and immunities” afforded to whites. But the Supreme Court had gradually
broadened its interpretation to ﬁnd that the Fourteenth Amendment “incorpo-
rated” many of the rights in the ﬁrst 10 amendments (the Bill of Rights) and that
the states as well as the federal government were required to respect these rights.
Griswold thus argued that the right of a married couple to make decisions
about birth control was part of that couple’s fundamental privacy: a right just as
basic as freedom of speech or freedom of association, and thus incorporated in
the Fourteenth Amendment. If the Court agreed, this meant that the state birth
control law was unconstitutional and that the conviction would be overturned.
The state of Connecticut argued that the Bill of Rights made no mention of
birth control nor indeed, of any “right to privacy.” Therefore, no such right was
incorporated in the Fourteenth Amendment, and the state was not prevented
from outlawing birth control.
Decision
Justice William O. Douglas, writing for the majority, agreed with Griswold’s ar-
gument. He disposed of the argument that privacy was not mentioned in the Con-
stitution by noting that “The association of people is not mentioned in the
Constitution nor in the Bill of Rights. The right to educate a child in a school of
the parents’ choice—whether public or private or parochial—is also not men-
tioned. Nor is the right to study any particular subject or any foreign language.
Yet the First Amendment has been construed to include certain of those rights.”
He then cited a number of cases in which the Court had established that such
rights existed even though they are not speciﬁcally mentioned in the Constitu-
tion. For example, “In NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 449, 462 we protected the
‘freedom to associate and privacy in one’s associations,’ noting that freedom of
association was a peripheral First Amendment right. Disclosure of membership
lists of a constitutionally valid association, we held, was invalid as entailing the
likelihood of a substantial restraint upon the exercise by petitioner’s members of
their right to freedom of association.”
Douglas went on to conclude that
The foregoing cases suggest that speciﬁc guarantees in the Bill of Rights have
penumbras [shadows], formed by emanations from those guarantees that help give
them life and substance. . . . Various guarantees create zones of privacy. The right
of association contained in the penumbra of the First Amendment is one, as we
have seen. The Third Amendment, in its prohibition against the quartering of sol-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
78

diers “in any house” in time of peace without the consent of the owner, is another
facet of that privacy. The Fourth Amendment explicitly afﬁrms the “right of the
people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreason-
able searches and seizures.” The Fifth Amendment, in its Self-Incrimination
Clause, enables the citizen to create a zone of privacy which government may not
force him to surrender to his detriment.
Douglas noted that the Constitution also says, in the Ninth Amendment,
that “The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be con-
strued to deny or disparage others retained by the people.” This made it im-
permissible to argue, as Connecticut had, that the lack of a speciﬁc “right of
privacy” in the Bill of Rights meant that no such right existed.
Douglas thus replaced narrowly speciﬁc guarantees with “zones of privacy”
that he believed were implied in the guarantees of the Bill of Rights. He insisted
that something as intimate as the marriage relationship must stand at the cen-
ter of the zone of privacy. The decision to use contraception (and thus the right
to obtain information and devices) is thus protected by the Constitution.
Impact
The Griswold decision has had a major impact on how courts think about pri-
vacy. In effect, it elevates a “right of privacy” to as high a status as freedom of
speech, freedom of association, the right against self-incrimination, and other
items speciﬁcally mentioned in the Bill of Rights. The Court would go on to
ﬁnd a right to obtain an abortion (Roe v. Wade, 1973) and to make a decision
about life-saving medical care (Cruzan, 1990). “Strict constructionists” such as
Robert Bork would continue to oppose what they consider to be an illegitimate
and subjective “creation” of rights by courts.
It is important to note, however, what Griswold did not do. While it created a
broad right of privacy regarding personal decisions and intimate relationships, it
refused to extend the right to make decisions or obtain information or devices to
the marketplace or the public square. Indeed, as Douglas noted, “We do not sit as
a super-legislature to determine the wisdom, need, and propriety of laws that
touch economic problems, business affairs, or social conditions.” In other words,
the federal government or the states could still set safety standards for condoms
or determine licensing requirements for birth control counselors.
After its brief moment in the sun, the Ninth Amendment has not often been
used to argue for the existence of other rights that could limit government power.
Instead, it has become part of a political debate over small versus big government.
KATZ V. UNITED STATES, 389 U.S. 347 (1967)
Background
As with Roy Olmstead, federal agents suspected that Charles Katz was engaging
in illegal activity (in this case, conducting a multistate gambling operation by
phone). The agents placed a “bug” on the outside of a phone booth that Katz was
using. They then used the recordings as evidence to convict him for “illegal
The Law of Privacy
79

transmission of wagering information.” The conviction was upheld on appeal,
with the appeals court citing the Olmstead case and noting that the police did not
physically enter the area of the phone booth occupied by Katz.
Legal Issues
As noted in the Supreme Court’s opinion, the petitioner seeking to overturn the
conviction had raised two main issues:
A. Whether a public telephone booth is a constitutionally protected area so that ev-
idence obtained by attaching an electronic listening recording device to the top of
such a booth is obtained in violation of the right to privacy of the user of the booth.
B. Whether physical penetration of a constitutionally protected area is necessary
before a search and seizure can be said to be violative of the Fourth Amendment
to the United States Constitution.
Decision
The Court, however, refused to limit its consideration to the narrow question
of just what part of the phone booth might be constitutionally protected. The
general legal and social climate had changed considerably since Olmstead. Dur-
ing the 1950s and 1960s, the Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren
had become much more willing to interpret broadly constitutional protections
in the light of changing social conditions, whether with regard to civil rights
(Brown v. Board of Education, 1954), privacy (Griswold v. Connecticut, 1965), pro-
tection against overbroad searches (Mapp v. Ohio, 1961), or against compelled
self-incrimination (the famous Miranda v. Arizona, 1966, which led to the fa-
miliar warning heard endlessly on television cop shows). The courts were now
heeding Brandeis’s call for an explicit and robust constitutional right to personal
privacy.
The Court declared that “the Fourth Amendment protects people, not
places. What a person knowingly exposes to the public, even in his own home
or ofﬁce, is not a subject of Fourth Amendment protection. . . . But what he
seeks to preserve as private, even in an area accessible to the public, may be con-
stitutionally protected.”
Looking to a previous Supreme Court decision (Silverman v. United States,
365 U.S. 505, 511), the Court noted: “. . . we have expressly held that the Fourth
Amendment governs not only the seizure of tangible items, but extends as well
to the recording of oral statements, overheard without any technical trespass
under . . . local property law. Once this much is acknowledged, and once it is
recognized that the Fourth Amendment protects people—and not simply
‘areas’—against unreasonable searches and seizures, it becomes clear that the
reach of that Amendment cannot turn upon the presence or absence of a phys-
ical intrusion into any given enclosure.”
The justices had decided that it was not the existence of an enclosed place
that created a right of privacy, but a person’s engaging in an activity that he or
she can reasonably expect to be private:
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
80

No less than an individual in a business ofﬁce, in a friend’s apartment, or in a
taxicab, a person in a telephone booth may rely upon the protection of the Fourth
Amendment. One who occupies [the booth], shuts the door behind him, and pays
the toll that permits him to place a call is surely entitled to assume that the words
he utters into the mouthpiece will not be broadcast to the world. To read the Con-
stitution more narrowly is to ignore the vital role that the public telephone has
come to play in private communication.
The Court therefore concluded that Katz’s rights under the Fourth Amend-
ment had been violated. Although the Court acknowledged that the government
agents had probable cause to suspect a crime and conducted only enough sur-
veillance to gather relevant evidence, it overturned the conviction because the
agents had not obtained a warrant as required under the Fourth Amendment.
Impact
Since Katz, law enforcement ofﬁcials generally have to obtain a warrant before
beginning a wiretap or other surveillance of an individual’s conversations. (In
1972 this requirement was extended by the courts to include even cases where
the government believed there was a threat to “national security.”)
There are some exceptions. In United States v. David Lee Smith (978 F.2d 171,
U.S. App.), 1992, a court of appeals ruled that conversations on cordless tele-
phones (which actually use radio waves to carry conversations) could be tapped
by police without obtaining a search warrant. (Congress then passed a law to ex-
tend the warrant requirement to cover cordless phones, but not cellular ones.)
Changes in technology thus have continued to challenge the boundaries placed
around law enforcement activities by the courts. When the Justice Department
concluded that the Wiretap Act of 1968 did not require a warrant for inter-
cepting e-mail and other computer communications (because they were not
aural or vocal in nature), Congress responded by passing the Electronic Com-
munications Privacy Act of 1986.
There have been a number of cases (ranging from Watergate to the surveil-
lance of left-wing groups and political enemies by the FBI) where the legal sys-
tem seems to have been ineffective in preventing wiretapping abuses. Some
private wiretapping is permissible. Employers generally have the right to monitor
employee conversations on company phones if the monitoring is for a legitimate
business purpose, such as training or evaluation of employees’ performance.
UNITED STATES V. MILLER, 425 U.S. 435 (1976)
Background
In 1970, Congress passed the Bank Secrecy Act, which required banks to report
cash transactions over $10,000 and certain other transactions, and to keep
copies of bank records such as deposit slips and checks for at least ﬁve years. The
justiﬁcation given for the legislation was that it would make it easier for law en-
forcement agencies to keep track of organized criminal activity such as the
“laundering” of drug money.
The Law of Privacy
81

In California Bankers Association (1970), the Supreme Court ruled that the
transaction tracking provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act did not violate Fourth
Amendment privacy rights. In Miller a related issue would be resolved: Were the
act’s provisions making it easy for the government to obtain copies of a sus-
pected person’s bank records also constitutional?
On December 18, 1972, a deputy sheriff in Houston County, Georgia, re-
sponding to a tip, stopped a truck that turned out to contain distillery equip-
ment and raw material for making liquor. About a month later, when a
warehouse caught ﬁre, ﬁreﬁghters and sheriff’s deputies discovered a distillery
and illegal liquor. Agents from the Treasury Department’s Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, and Firearms investigated, and began to suspect a man named Mitch
Miller as being leader of the bootlegging ring. They issued a subpoena to ob-
tain Miller’s records from two banks where he had accounts. The records
showed that Miller had rented the truck, purchased a considerable amount of
pipe (useful for distilling), and other materials. The leads and evidence provided
by the records helped the government convict Miller of violation of liquor laws.
Legal Issues
Miller’s attorneys argued that his bank records required a full-ﬂedged subpoena
similar to that used to get permission to search a person’s home. (Such a sub-
poena would be issued by a judge and would specify what is being sought, and
show probable cause that a crime had been committed and that the suspected
evidence was related to the crime.) The government argued that the Bank Se-
crecy Act authorized a much simpler subpoena issued by the local U.S. Attor-
ney. The basic issue was whether Miller’s bank records were entitled to the full
protection of the Fourth Amendment. If so, the Bank Secrecy Act would be un-
constitutional and Miller’s conviction could be reversed.
Decision
The Fifth District Court of Appeals agreed with Miller and ruled that his rights
had been violated by requiring a third party (the bank) to produce Miller’s pri-
vate papers without due process. The government appealed to the U.S. Supreme
Court, arguing that Miller had no “Fourth Amendment interest” in his bank
records, and that the Bank Secrecy Act did not violate the Constitution.
Justice Lewis F. Powell’s majority opinion upheld the government. The
Fourth Amendment refers to “the right of the people to be secure in their per-
sons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures . . .”
But, Powell writes, “. . . the documents subpoenaed here are not respondent’s
[Miller’s] ‘private papers.’ . . . respondent can assert neither ownership nor pos-
session. Instead, these are the business records of the banks.” Harking back to the
earlier decision in California Bankers Association, Powell notes that the bank is not
“passively” holding records for the depositor, but rather is a party in a business
relationship with the depositor, and the bank records are property of the bank
used to conduct its business with its customers.
Powell then turned to the possibility that the Bank Secrecy Act nevertheless
allowed an impermissible invasion of Miller’s privacy by making it too easy for
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
82

the government to obtain if not papers, the private information contained in
them. Powell notes that “Respondent urges that he has a Fourth Amendment
interest in the records kept by the banks because they are merely copies of per-
sonal records that were made available to the banks for a limited purpose and in
which he has a reasonable expectation of privacy.” Thus the Fourth Amendment
“expectation of privacy” test (from Katz and other cases) comes into play.
Powell rejects this challenge as well:
Even if we direct our attention to the original checks and deposit slips, rather than
to the microﬁlm copies actually viewed and obtained by means of the subpoena, we
perceive no legitimate “expectation of privacy” in their contents. The checks are
not conﬁdential communications but negotiable instruments to be used in com-
mercial transactions. All of the documents obtained, including ﬁnancial state-
ments and deposit slips, contain only information voluntarily conveyed to the
banks and exposed to their employees in the ordinary course of business.
Referring to earlier cases, Powell points out that there is no constitutional pro-
tection against information that was voluntarily revealed to a third party in the or-
dinary course of business being revealed to the government. Nor is their any
protection against that third party being subpoenaed. Therefore, the Court ruled,
Miller had no Fourth Amendment privacy right, and his conviction was upheld.
Impact
The Miller case is an example that shows that the robust privacy right seen em-
anating from the Constitution in Griswold and Roe v. Wade apparently does not
pass from the bedroom to the checkbook. Further, the principle from Katz that
changing technology from letters to telephone requires an expansion of privacy
rights was not applied in Miller, despite the fact that banking might be consid-
ered as much of a necessity of modern life as the telephone.
Additionally, Miller can also be viewed as part of an ongoing seesaw battle be-
tween privacy rights and law enforcement interests. Congress passed the Bank Se-
crecy Act to help law enforcers ﬁght organized crime. Miller upheld the
constitutionality of the law. Yet while people have a strong interest in ﬁghting
crime, they also have shown a growing interest in protecting privacy. Congress, re-
sponding to these conﬂicting interests, passes some laws that limit privacy in favor
of law enforcement and other laws that provide greater protection for privacy. The
result of this conﬂict is that it is far from easy for the average individual to know
what personal records or other information is protected, and from whom.
NEW JERSEY V. T.L.O., 469 U.S. 325 (1985)
Background
A teacher in a New Jersey public school noticed that T.L.O. (a 14-year-old
girl) and another student were smoking in the school lavatory in violation of
school rules. (Since the defendant was a minor, only her initials appear in
The Law of Privacy
83

court documents.) The teacher took her to the assistant vice principal. When
confronted by the latter, T.L.O. insisted that she had not been smoking. He
demanded to see her purse, which turned out to contain both a pack of cig-
arettes and a pack of the kind of cigarette papers commonly used by mari-
juana smokers. Continuing to search the purse, he found a pipe, marijuana,
and a list of students and two letters that suggested that T.L.O. was dealing
in marijuana.
Legal Issues
In juvenile court, T.L.O.’s attorney argued that the search had violated the
Fourth Amendment. The court held that while the Fourth Amendment did
apply to searches in schools, the search of T.L.O.’s purse met the standard of
being “reasonable.” The appeals court upheld the search, but the New Jersey
Supreme Court reversed the decision, calling the search unreasonable. The case
then went to the Supreme Court.
Decision
The Supreme Court noted that while parents are not bound by the Fourth
Amendment, teachers are not just substitutes for parents, but also representa-
tives of the State. As such, they are bound by the restrictions imposed by the
Fourth Amendment.
The Court noted, however, that the need for “striking the balance between
schoolchildren’s legitimate expectations of privacy and the school’s equally le-
gitimate need to maintain an environment in which learning can take place re-
quires some easing of the restrictions to which searches by public authorities are
ordinarily subject.” Thus school ofﬁcials, unlike police, do not have to obtain a
warrant before conducting a search, and do not have to meet the stricter stan-
dard of having “probable cause” to believe that there is criminal activity. Instead,
they need only have “reasonable grounds for suspecting that the search will turn
up evidence that the student has violated or is violating either the law or the
rules of the school. And such a search will be permissible in its scope when the
measures adopted are reasonably related to the objectives of the search, and not
excessively intrusive in light of the student’s age and sex and the nature of the
infraction.”
Impact
New Jersey v. T.L.O. established that on the one hand, students did have some
expectation of privacy, but on the other hand, schools could conduct searches
that were reasonably related to suspected violations of rules. Such practices as
making students walk through a metal detector to prevent them from carrying
weapons into the school have similarly been upheld as reasonably related to the
school’s need to provide a safe educational environment.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
84

CALIFORNIA V. CIRAOLO, 476 U.S. 207 (1986)
Background
After receiving an anonymous tip that respondent Ciraolo was growing mari-
juana, police in Santa Clara, California, tried to look into his backyard. If they
could see the plants, they could get a search warrant. However, the fence around
the yard was too high, so they hired a private plane and ﬂew over the house at
an altitude of 1,000 feet. Being able to conﬁrm the presence of marijuana plants,
they secured a search warrant and then arrested Ciraolo, who pled guilty to cul-
tivation of marijuana. An appeals court, however, ruled that the ﬂyover consti-
tuted an illegal search and reversed Ciraolo’s conviction. The case eventually
reached the U.S. Supreme Court.
Legal Issues
The question posed by the case is whether aerial observation of someone’s prop-
erty without a warrant is allowed by the Fourth Amendment. If so, is there some
altitude at which it becomes unacceptable? More broadly, what types of visual
surveillance of private property are acceptable?
Decision
The majority decision by Justice Warren Burger ruled that the aerial search was
acceptable. He noted that police ofﬁcers have always been able to look into peo-
ple’s homes from the street. He also noted that the police observations were
made “from public navigable airspace” and that “any member of the public ﬂy-
ing in this airspace who glanced down could have seen everything that these of-
ﬁcers observed.”
The dissenting justices, led by Justice Lewis F. Powell, argued that the Court
had previously, in Katz v. United States (1967), established a standard based on
peoples’ reasonable expectation of privacy, not on the technology or means used
for surveillance. Allowing an observation just because someone else might have
seen it seemed to the dissenters to be an unwarranted erosion of Fourth Amend-
ment privacy rights.
Impact
This decision cleared the way for aerial surveillance as a tool in law enforce-
ment. In Florida v. Riley (1989), the Court said it was permissible for author-
ities to search for drugs from planes or helicopters at altitudes as low as 400
feet. Thus far the Supreme Court has not said there is a lower limit of alti-
tude for flyovers. It is also unclear whether searching or surveillance using
cameras or instruments that greatly enhance the visual image would be
acceptable.
The Law of Privacy
85

O’BRIEN V. PAPA GINO’S OF AMERICA, INC. 
80 F.2D 1067, 1072 (1ST CIR. 1986)
Background
A manager at a Papa Gino’s restaurant in New Hampshire confronted an em-
ployee, saying that he had been seen using drugs outside of work. The employee
took a polygraph test in which he was asked drug-related questions. The exam-
iner said that he believed the employee was lying about his drug use, and the lat-
ter was ﬁred. He sued the company.
Legal Issues
O’Brien argued that he had been forced to take the polygraph test or lose his job,
and that the test included questions that were not related to his work. Papa Gino’s
argued that it had a legitimate interest in avoiding the risks caused by an employee
who regularly uses drugs, even if the drugs are used only outside of work.
Decision
The jury found that the test and other investigative techniques used by Papa Gino’s
was “highly offensive to a reasonable person.” It awarded $398,200 to O’Brien.
The verdict was later upheld by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.
Impact
Public concern about the use of polygraphs and other devices that measure
physical stress (such as voice analyzers) led to the passage in 1988 of the Em-
ployee Polygraph Protection Act. This law bans employers from using such de-
vices in most cases.
O’CONNOR V. ORTEGA, 480 U.S. 709 (1987)
Background
Dennis O’Connor, director of Napa State Hospital in California, suspected that
Dr. Magno Ortega, a psychiatrist and manager of a residency program for doc-
tors, had improperly coerced residents into paying for a computer, and was also
concerned that he was involved in sexual harassment. O’Connor instituted a
number of searches of Dr. Ortega’s ofﬁce while the doctor was on administra-
tive leave, seizing items that were later used against Ortega in proceedings be-
fore the California State Personnel Board.
Legal Issues
Dr. Ortega claimed that the search of his ofﬁce violated the Fourth Amendment
protections against improper search and seizure because he had a “reasonable
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
86

expectation of privacy” in his ofﬁce. O’Connor claimed that the search was a
routine inventory checkup needed to secure state property and that it did not vi-
olate Ortega’s privacy.
Decision
The district court upheld O’Connor, agreeing that there was no violation of pri-
vacy. The court of appeals, however, reversed that decision, holding that Ortega
did have a reasonable expectation of privacy and that the “routine inventory”
defense was not applicable because such inventories had previously only been
used for dismissed employees, not employees on leave.
O’Connor appealed the decision to the Supreme Court. In a 5-4 decision,
the Court found that in keeping with “the realities of the workplace” a supervi-
sor should not be expected to follow the same strict standards as a law enforce-
ment ofﬁcer. Work-related searches, the Court found, were “merely incident to
the primary business of the agency.” Requiring that a warrant be obtained for
every search would “seriously disrupt the routine conduct of business.” The
Court held that the employer needed only to meet a standard of “reasonable-
ness” before undertaking a search.
Impact
The O’Connor decision served notice to employees that their privacy rights were
limited and that employers were not bound by the same rules as government of-
ﬁcials or police ofﬁcers. This did not mean, however, that employees had no pri-
vacy in the workplace. As the Court noted,
Not everything that passes through the conﬁnes of the business address can be con-
sidered part of the workplace context, however. An employee may bring closed lug-
gage to the ofﬁce prior to leaving on a trip, or a handbag or briefcase each
workday. While whatever expectation of privacy the employee has in the existence
and the outward appearance of the luggage is affected by its presence in the work-
place, the employee’s expectation of privacy in the contents of the luggage is not
affected in the same way. The appropriate standard for a workplace search does
not necessarily apply to a piece of closed personal luggage, a handbag, or a brief-
case that happens to be within the employer’s business address.
Similarly, the Supreme Court majority agreed with the Appeals Court that
Ortega had a “reasonable expectation of privacy” with regard to his locked desk
and ﬁle cabinet, which he did not share with other employees.
Thus O’Connor did not fully resolve the question of what is private in the
workplace, but it did provide some principles that could be applied to future
cases.
The Law of Privacy
87

ALANA SHOARS V. EPSON AMERICA, INC., 
NO. B 073234, LOS ANGELES SUPERIOR COURT
(1990)
Background
Epson America e-mail administrator Alana Shoars discovered that her supervi-
sor had been retrieving and printing out all the electronic mail sent by employ-
ees at the company’s Torrance, California, ofﬁce. When she told the general
manager about her discovery and demanded that the practice be stopped, her
supervisor ﬁred her. Shoars then sued Epson for wrongful termination. (She
also ﬁled a class action suit for invasion of privacy, on behalf of herself and 77
other Epson employees whose e-mail had been intercepted.)
Legal Issues
Shoars’s attorney argued that Epson had led her to believe that employee e-mail
was considered private, and that the use of secret personal passwords for mail
accounts reinforced that sense of privacy. He also argued that the interception
of e-mail violated anti-wiretapping provisions in the state penal code.
Epson argued that the monitoring of e-mail was only for making sure the
system was working properly. More fundamentally, they also argued that e-mail
in a business was a facility provided solely for business purposes, and that Shoars
and the other employees had no “expectation of privacy.” Finally, they argued
that the California anti-wiretapping laws did not apply to the new technology
of electronic mail.
Decision
The trial court agreed that e-mail was not covered under California’s wiretapping
laws, and that any protection for e-mail would have to be provided by new legis-
lation. The court also threw out the class action suit, agreeing with Epson that
there was “no sufﬁcient legal or factual basis for extending the right to privacy to
cover business-related communications.” The appeals court agreed with the deci-
sion, but allowed Shoars to go ahead to trial on a separate suit for slander.
Impact
Although this was a state court decision rather than a federal one, the Shoars
case follows the general pattern in favor of the employer for most workplace and
e-mail monitoring cases. Activists who want to strengthen workplace privacy
protection must generally direct their efforts not to the courts but to the legis-
lature or to labor negotiations.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
88

SOROKA V. DAYTON HUDSON CORP., 1 CAL. RPTR. 2D
77, 6 IER CASES (BNA) 1491 (APP. 1991)
Background
Sibi Soroka applied for a job as a security supervisor at Target Stores, which is
owned by the Dayton Hudson Corporation. As part of his job interview, Soroka
was given a “psychological inventory”—a written test that asked him about a va-
riety of beliefs, feelings, and situations. As he worked his way through the test,
he encountered questions such as the following:
3. I looked up to my father as an ideal man.
8. I like Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll.
23. When a person “pads” his income tax report so as to get out of some of his
taxes, it is just as bad as stealing money from the government.
73. Maybe some minorities get rough treatment, but it is no business of mine.
368. I have no difﬁculty starting or holding my urine.
466. My sex life is satisfactory.
492. I am very strongly attracted by members of my own sex.
506. I believe in the second coming of Christ.
Soroka became increasingly disturbed as he read. Some of the questions,
such as 23, clearly tested for honesty. Question number 368, however, was
clearly looking for health problems. Questions 466 and 492, inquiring into sex-
ual matters, seemed to be none of the store’s business, as did questions about so-
cial issues (73) or religion (506). Soroka ﬁnished the test because he needed a
job, but he also made a copy of the test and showed it to an attorney. He decided
to sue Target, not for personal damages, but to prevent them from giving any-
one else such tests in the future.
Legal Issues
Soroka argued that the test was overly intrusive in seeking personal, intimate in-
formation, and thus violated the right to privacy in California’s constitution
(one of the strongest state privacy codes).
Target argued that shoplifting was a major problem, and that the store was
trying to hire effective security personnel. On the other hand, the store was con-
cerned about hiring persons to deal with the public in this sensitive job who
were mentally or emotionally unstable or violent. If the store did not take mea-
sures to screen out such persons and one of its guards injured someone, the
store could be sued for “negligent hiring.” The store had adopted the psycho-
logical test (called Psychscreen) because it was part of the screening process
used by many police departments. Finally, the store insisted that the applicant’s
The Law of Privacy
89

privacy was protected because no one at the company ever saw an applicant’s ac-
tual answer sheet, only a numerical score in each of several categories.
Soroka’s lawyer replied that the security job was not all that high level or sen-
sitive, and that there was no proof of the accuracy or reliability of the test. (He
pointed out that police departments, unlike the store, conducted a much more
extensive background investigation and that test was only a small part of their
hiring procedure.)
Decision
Target ﬁled to have the case dismissed, but the California Court of Appeals
ruled that Soroka could take his lawsuit to trial. The court found that questions
about such matters as sex or religion violated privacy, and that for such ques-
tions to be permissible, the store would have to show that it must be justiﬁed by
a “compelling” interest and must serve a job-related purpose. Target had not
met this high standard.
Target appealed to the California Supreme Court. That court agreed to take
the case, and combined it with another case, Hill v. NCAA, which dealt with
drug testing of student athletes. This combination of cases suggested that the
court wanted to make a broader application of the right of privacy in the state
constitution.
Meanwhile, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) had been passed.
Soroka felt that the health-related questions in the test would be illegal under
the ADA. Target’s attorneys also believed that a jury would be offended by some
of the questions on the test. Target therefore agreed to settle the case for the
considerable sum of $1,540,000.
Impact
Soroka caused many California employers to revise their employee screening
procedures. Target, for example, replaced Psychscreen with detailed personal
interviews and more extensive background checks. Meanwhile, the California
Supreme Court ruled in the Hill case that the NCAA (the collegiate athletic as-
sociation) was justiﬁed in requiring drug tests because it had a compelling in-
terest in promoting the health and safety of athletes, and that the athletes had
only a limited expectation of privacy.
In general, the court had determined that someone bringing a claim for in-
vasion of privacy must show that there is a legally recognized privacy interest in-
volved, that the person has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the particular
circumstances, and that the invasion of privacy was sufﬁciently serious. For
some kinds of invasion of privacy (such as intrusion on intimate or family rela-
tionships), the state must show it has a “compelling interest” justifying its ac-
tion. In the case of employees and athletes, however, the privacy interest would
be balanced against the organization’s interests to see if the invasion of privacy
is “reasonable.”
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
90

STEVE JACKSON GAMES, INC. V. UNITED STATES
SECRET SERVICE, 816 F. SUPP. 432 (W.D.TEX. 1993)
Background
During the late 1980s, the term “computer hacker” entered popular vocabulary.
While the term once referred to exceptionally skillful (if rather obsessed) young
programmers, it had come to mean criminals who used their computer skills to
break into computer systems for purposes of disruption or theft of valuable in-
formation such as credit cards or conﬁdential documents.
In 1990, Secret Service agents organized a wide-ranging investigation of a
hacker group called the Legion of Doom. They believed that the group had
stolen a conﬁdential document relating to BellSouth telephone company’s
emergency 911 phone system, which the company valued at almost $80,000. (In
reality, the publication, far from being “conﬁdential,” was available to the pub-
lic for only a few dollars.)
The agents learned that a copy of the BellSouth manual was being stored on
a computer bulletin board called Phoenix. They downloaded a copy from that
board, and then learned that the owner, Lloyd Blankenship, was also an opera-
tor of another bulletin board called Illuminati, which was operated by his em-
ployer, Steve Jackson Games, a company that published and sold role-playing
and board games. Since Blankenship’s board had much hacker-related conver-
sation and material, Secret Service agent Tim Foley assumed that Illuminati was
also a “hacker board.”
On March 1, 1990, the agents raided Steve Jackson Games as part of a mas-
sive effort called Operation Sun Devil in which about 150 agents conﬁscated
thousands of computer disks. They seized all of the computer equipment and
ﬁles used by the company. After examining the contents of the computers, they
discovered what they believed was a “how-to” manual for computer criminals.
In reality, the document was the rule book for a role-playing game being devel-
oped by the company, called “GURPS Cyberpunk,” in which players portrayed
characters in a futuristic high-tech society.
Jackson asked the Secret Service to return his equipment after copying what-
ever ﬁles they needed, but the agency ignored his pleas. As a result of losing its
equipment and having to reconstruct the ﬁles for its game, Steve Jackson Games
was nearly forced into bankruptcy. Jackson sued the Secret Service for damages.
Legal Issues
The Secret Service argued that its agents had acted in good faith and had rea-
sonable cause to suspect that the Illuminati bulletin board had a copy of the
stolen BellSouth document.
Jackson’s attorneys argued, however, that the Secret Service had violated the
Privacy Protection Act of 1980, which states “Notwithstanding any other law, it
shall be unlawful for a government ofﬁcer or employee, in connection with the
investigation . . . of a criminal offense to search for or seize any work product
The Law of Privacy
91

materials possessed by a person reasonably believed to have a purpose to dis-
seminate to the public a newspaper, broadcast, or other similar form of public
communication.” They argued that the game book was a legitimate publication
protected by the Privacy Act. They also accused the Secret Service of violating
a law against the “interception” of private e-mail, which the agency had read
and destroyed rather than allowing it to reach its intended recipients.
Decision
The court found that the Secret Service had violated Jackson’s rights under the
Privacy Act:
The Court does fault Agent Foley and the Secret Service on the failure to make
any investigation of Steve Jackson Games, Inc., prior to March 1, 1990, and to
contact Steve Jackson in an attempt to enlist his cooperation and obtain informa-
tion from him as there was never any basis to suspect Steve Jackson or Steve
Jackson Games, Inc., of any criminal activity, and there could be no questions re-
garding the seizure of computers, disks, and bulletin board and all information
thereon, including all back-up materials would have an adverse effect (including
completely stopping all activities) on the business of Steve Jackson Games, Inc.,
and the users of Illuminati bulletin board.
The judge further noted that “While the content of these publications are
not similar to those of daily newspapers, news magazines, or other publications
usually thought of by this court as disseminating information to the public,
these products come within the literal language of the Privacy Protection Act.”
The court declined, however, to ﬁnd that electronic mail had been “inter-
cepted” in the sense meant by the relevant statute.
Jackson was awarded $50,000 in damages plus $1,000 “statutory” damages
and attorney’s fees. The mail interception issue was appealed by Jackson, but the
appeals court found in favor of the Secret Service, stating that the seizing of
“stored messages” in a computer fell under the part of the law that had already
been dealt with in the preceding case.
Impact
The Steve Jackson case had a profound impact on both law enforcement and on
the growing online community. Law enforcement was placed on notice that the
First Amendment and privacy statutes had to be considered in dealing with
computer communications and that although bulletin boards and e-mail don’t
“look like” traditional newspapers and letter mail, this does not mean they are
not constitutionally protected.
For users of bulletin boards and the emerging Internet, the Steve Jackson case
was a wake-up call about potentially devastating collisions between the seem-
ingly abstract world of cyberspace and the realities of the legal and political sys-
tem. Some users who were particularly affected included activists John Perry
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
92

Barlow and Mitch Kapor, who founded the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a
kind of high-tech ACLU, and attorney-activist Mike Godwin, who became im-
mersed in cyberspace issues and would later play an important part in the strug-
gle to prevent censorship on the Internet.
BEACON JOURNAL PUBLISHING V. CITY OF AKRON, 70
OHIO ST. 3D 605 (OHIO 1994)
Background
An editor working on a story for the Beacon Journal requested the City of Akron,
Ohio, to provide payroll ﬁles for city employees under Ohio’s public records
statute. The city provided the ﬁles, which contained information such as em-
ployees’ names, addresses, phone numbers, education, employment history, and
salaries. However, the city deleted the employees’ Social Security numbers
(SSNs) from the records. The paper then requested the complete records (in-
cluding the SSNs). The city refused, and the Journal ﬁled a complaint saying
they were entitled to the complete records under Ohio law.
Legal Issues
The city argued that the SSNs were not “records” as deﬁned by the Ohio statute
and that providing them would violate the employees’ right to privacy. The ap-
peals court sided with the newspaper, ruling that the SSNs were indeed records
and that their disclosure would not impermissibly infringe on privacy. The case
then went to the Ohio Supreme Court.
Decision
The supreme court agreed that the SSNs were “records” in that they were part of
organized payroll information used by the city. However, the court found that dis-
closing the SSNs would violate the employees’ right of privacy under the federal
constitution and therefore cannot be required under the Ohio law. They reasoned
that the SSNs were personal information with which the employees had a rea-
sonable expectation of privacy. Further, disclosure of the SSNs could cause seri-
ous damage to the persons involved. Quoting a ruling from a similar federal case:
Armed with one’s SSN, an unscrupulous individual could obtain a person’s wel-
fare beneﬁts or Social Security beneﬁts, order new checks at a new address on that
person’s checking account, obtain credit cards, or even obtain the person’s pay-
check. . . . Succinctly stated, the harm that can be inﬂicted from the disclosure of
an SSN to an unscrupulous individual is alarming and potentially ﬁnancially
ruinous.
The court majority found that the high potential for fraud and victimization in
releasing the SSNs outweighed any minimal information about government
The Law of Privacy
93

operations that might be gained by the paper and the public. Two dissenting
justices, however, complained that the majority had elevated its concern about
the effects of disclosure into a legal principle that had no backing in law or
precedence.
Impact
This case is a classic conﬂict between freedom of information and privacy. On
the one hand, information about public employees may be necessary for the
media to investigate the operation of government. However, the SSN would
give investigators a key that could be used to reveal purely personal information
and even cause ﬁnancial ruin.
ARIZONA V. EVANS, 514 U.S. 1 (1995)
Background
Isaac Evans was stopped by Phoenix police because he was driving the wrong
way down a one-way street. When asked for his license, Evans told police it had
been suspended. The police checked records from their patrol car’s computer
and discovered an outstanding misdemeanor arrest warrant. Evans was arrested
and his car was searched, yielding a bag of marijuana, and he was charged with
possession. Later, however, the police discovered that the warrant had been
quashed (dismissed) 17 days earlier, but that the computer record had not been
updated to reﬂect the fact.
Legal Issues
Evans’s attorney claimed that the bag of marijuana could not be used as evidence
because the search had resulted from erroneous computer information. As a
general rule, evidence that results from an improper search cannot be used at
trial. This is called the “exclusionary rule.”
Decision
The trial court agreed with Evans, but the appeals court reinstated the evidence
because the mistake had not been made by the police but by a civilian employee.
The Arizona Supreme Court then threw the evidence out again, because it con-
cluded that the distinction between police and police employees was not signif-
icant, and that one intent of the rule against tainted evidence is to promote
careful record keeping.
The case then went to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court said that re-
gardless of whether the Fourth Amendment might be considered to have been
violated, suppressing the evidence was not required when it resulted from a mis-
take not made by the police itself. The Court did not believe that enforcing the
evidence exclusion rule would have any real effect on the accuracy of civilian
employees.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
94

Impact
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented from the majority opinion, believing that
“Widespread reliance on computers to store and convey information generates,
along with manifold beneﬁts, new possibilities of error, due to both computer
malfunctions and operator mistakes. . . . Computerization greatly ampliﬁes an
error’s effect, and correspondingly intensiﬁes the need for prompt correction; for
inaccurate data can infect not only one agency, but many agencies that share ac-
cess to the database.”
Public concern and pressure for legislation regulating the use of government
records (including the ability to correct them promptly) suggests that the pub-
lic is more in agreement with Ginsburg than with the Court majority.
DOE V. SOUTHEASTERN PENNSYLVANIA
TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY,
72 F.3D 1133 (3D CIR. 1995)
Background
A number of employers provide medical beneﬁts directly rather than through an
insurance company. In an effort to combat fraud and drug abuse and contain costs,
the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) monitored em-
ployees’ drug prescriptions. One employee, known in the case under the anony-
mous name John Doe, had contracted AIDS. Though worried about his condition
being disclosed, he was assured by his supervisor that he could ﬁll his prescription
for Retrovir, a drug used only for AIDS, without fear of revelation. However, when
SEPTA changed pharmacies, it began to receive reports listing employees who had
prescriptions costing more than $100, including the name of the drug involved.
Doe eventually learned that SEPTA ofﬁcials had probably become aware of his
condition as a result. He sued for violation of privacy. The trial jury awarded Doe
$125,000 in damages for his emotional distress. SEPTA appealed.
Legal Issues
The main issue posed in this case is whether a person’s medical record is in-
cluded in the privacy protected by the Constitution. If so, medical privacy must
then be balanced against other important interests.
Decision
The appeals court found (referring to the Supreme Court case Whalen v. Roe)
that persons had a limited right to privacy in their medical records. However,
because of Doe’s original disclosure of his condition to his supervisor (who was
also a doctor), the court held that the fact that Doe’s condition was also deduced
from the report did not amount to an impermissible violation of privacy.
SEPTA had legitimate reasons for monitoring the prescriptions, and they out-
weighed the relatively minimal infringement on Doe’s privacy.
The Law of Privacy
95

Impact
This case shows a balancing test at work. The fact that SEPTA was a self-insurer
gave it a more substantial interest in reviewing the prescription information.
However, privacy advocate Daniel Solove argues that the court should have fo-
cused on emotional injury Doe suffered because of the fact he could no longer
know who was aware of his condition, and the fact that the information was no
longer under anyone’s control.
RAM AVRAHAMI V. U.S. NEWS & WORLD REPORT,
CIRCUIT COURT OF ARLINGTON, VIRGINIA, 
NO. 95–1318 (1996)
Background
A Virginian named Ram Avrahami was receiving a lot of unwanted junk mail.
When he subscribed to U.S. News & World Report, he deliberately misspelled his
name so he could determine if the magazine would distribute his name without
his permission. He then received a mailing from Smithsonian magazine using the
misspelled name. He sued U.S. News & World Report for violation of a Virginia
privacy statute (in the modest amount of $1,100).
Legal Issues
Avrahami’s attorney argued that the magazine had violated the following lan-
guage from the Virginia law:
Any person whose name, portrait, or picture is used without having ﬁrst obtained
the written consent of such person . . . for advertising purposes or for the purposes
of trade, such persons may maintain a suit in equity against the person, ﬁrm or cor-
poration so using such person’s name, portrait, or picture to prevent and restrain
the use thereof; and may also sue and recover damage for any injuries sustained by
reason of such use. And if the defendant shall have knowingly used such person’s
name, portrait or picture in such manner as is forbidden or declared to be unlaw-
ful by this chapter, the jury, in its discretion, may award exemplary damages.
Avrahami’s complaint charged that the selling of his name to marketers without
consent ﬁt directly into this language, which refers to “name” as well as “por-
trait or picture.”
The magazine disagreed, calling the suit frivolous and arguing that the lan-
guage of the statute referred to such things as using a name or picture as adver-
tising or in an endorsement, not the routine use of mailing lists by the direct
mail industry.
Decision
When the case reached the circuit court the judge ruled against Avrahami, say-
ing that selling a name in a mailing list is not the kind of use “for advertising
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
96

purposes or for the purposes of trade” that the 1904 statute had in mind. Be-
sides, it was the list itself, not a single name, that had enough value as a com-
modity for the courts to worry about.
Impact
Direct mailers ridiculed Avrahami’s claims as frivolous. Connie F. Heatley, se-
nior vice president of the Direct Mail Marketing Association, also pointed out
that “There are 98 million Americans who shop [through mail-order cata-
logs]. The fact is that people like Mr. Avrahami who don’t want their names
rented have a way to prevent that.” (This can be done by sending one’s name
to the Direct Mail Preference Service. However, since Avrahami had mis-
spelled his name in order to trace its distribution, the preference service would
have been ineffective. Also, such services are not selective, blocking every-
thing or nothing.)
Avrahami lost in the courts, but the argument over junk mail (and its online
equivalent, “spam”) is far from over. Indeed both Congress and some states have
passed anti-spam laws.
DANIEL BERNSTEIN V. U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE,
922 F. SUPP. 1426, 1428–1430, N.D. CAL. (1996)
Background
Daniel Bernstein was a mathematician who developed Snufﬂe, a new encryption
algorithm—a method for encoding data by computer so it cannot be read with-
out the code key. He wrote an academic paper describing the algorithm and pre-
pared listings of the source code (the statements in computer language
necessary to compile a program that implements the encoding scheme). He
wished to present his paper at conferences, including those attended by foreign
colleagues.
Encryption technology is regulated under the federal International Trafﬁc in
Arms Regulations (ITAR), which regulate the export of “munitions”—weapons
or other military hardware. The federal Ofﬁce of Trade Controls determined
that Bernstein’s paper was a defense item under ITAR and thus required a li-
cense for export. Because the decision seemed vague, Bernstein asked the
agency to specify which part—the paper, the encoding system itself, the in-
struction for use, or the two source code listings—was restricted from export.
The agency determined that all ﬁve components required a license.
Legal Issues
Bernstein was concerned that the mere act of lecturing about Snufﬂe or teach-
ing people how to use it might be considered by the government to be illegal
“exporting” of a munition. He therefore sued the Department of State, with his
main claim being that the application of ITAR to his work violated the First
Amendment of the Constitution because it regulated what he could write or
The Law of Privacy
97

speak about on the basis of its content—something the courts have generally
forbidden the government to do.
The government lawyers moved that Bernstein’s claim be dismissed. They
claimed that Bernstein could not appeal the agency’s decision in court because
under federal law the designation of speciﬁc items as non-exportable under
ITAR was not “justiciable” (subject to court consideration). Bernstein, however,
said that he was not appealing the speciﬁc decision, but challenging the consti-
tutionality of the ITAR statute itself.
Decision
Judge Marilyn Hall Patel agreed that the constitutional challenge should be
heard. Because the federal agency had removed the paper itself from the re-
stricted export list after Bernstein sued, Patel focused on the remaining issue of
the computer source code. Bernstein’s lawyer asserted that the source code is,
like any other medium of writing, protected under the First Amendment, and
that indeed, the fact that computer software can be copyrighted implies that it
is a form of creative expression that is constitutionally protected.
The government’s defense insisted that software was not a form of speech,
because it didn’t convey any human-understandable message but rather just car-
ried out actions in the computer. The government therefore argued that soft-
ware was a form of conduct (like ﬂag burning or nude dancing) that shouldn’t be
protected under the First Amendment—an issue which is itself quite controver-
sial, of course.
The judge noted, however, that in form, source code at least looks like writ-
ing and that considering it to be “conduct” is an uncomfortable stretch. Once it
is decided that source code is a language, the judge believed that
the particular language one chooses [does not] change the nature of language for
First Amendment purposes. This court can ﬁnd no meaningful difference between
computer language, particularly high-level languages as deﬁned above, and Ger-
man or French. All participate in a complex system of understood meanings
within speciﬁc communities. Even object code, which directly instructs the com-
puter, operates as a “language.” When the source code is converted into the object
code “language,” the object program still contains the text of the source program.
The expression of ideas, commands, objectives and other contents of the source pro-
gram are merely translated into machine-readable code.
The judge also agreed that source code was analogous to other expressions of
ideas protected by copyright law.
The judge decided that Bernstein had made “nonfrivolous” constitutional
claims that the ITAR statute was overly broad and involved a “prior restraint”
(preventing someone from speaking about something rather than simply hold-
ing them responsible for any violations of law later).
The government’s motion to dismiss Bernstein’s claims was denied. And on
August 25, 1997, in a ﬁnal ruling, Judge Patel declared the export restrictions to
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
98

be unconstitutional and ordered the government not to enforce them. On May
6, 1999, Judge Betty Fletcher of the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in San Fran-
cisco upheld Patel’s decision. In her ruling, she linked access to encryption tech-
nology directly to the protection of privacy and the protection of speech given
by the First Amendment. However, later in 1999 the court of appeals withdrew
its opinion and remanded the case back to the district court. The government
then claimed that it would not enforce the cryptography restrictions, making
the case against Bernstein moot. However, the original opinion remains inﬂu-
ential, and a similar conclusion in favor of speech rights in computer code was
eventually reached in Junger v. Daley in the 6th Circuit Court of Appeals.
Impact
The Bernstein decision gave important protection to the right of free expression
for computer scientists developing encryption algorithms or other programs
that the government might want to suppress for national security reasons. Thus
far, however, the export of actual products that contain only compiled programs,
not source code, remains a major issue.
Seeing cryptography as an essential tool for privacy and liberty in the infor-
mation age, privacy activists continue to challenge government restrictions on
the distribution and use of powerful encryption programs. Meanwhile, the gov-
ernment attempted a ﬁnal run around the issue by offering to provide an ofﬁ-
cially approved encryption device (the Clipper Chip) that included the
capability for the government to read encrypted messages after obtaining a
court order.
TIMOTHY R. MCVEIGH V. WILLIAM COHEN ET AL.,
CIVIL ACTION 98–116, UNITED STATES DISTRICT
COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (1998)
Background
The Timothy McVeigh in this case is no relation to the convicted Oklahoma
City bomber who shares the same name. He was a highly decorated navy chief
petty ofﬁcer, and the highest-ranking enlisted person aboard the nuclear sub-
marine USS Chicago. On September 2, 1997, however, a civilian naval volunteer
received an America Online e-mail in connection with a toy drive for the sub
crew’s children. She noticed that the message sender’s online “handle” (a nick-
name used by users of many online systems) was “boysrch,” presumably mean-
ing “boy search.” She looked the handle up in the AOL member directory and
discovered that the owner of the account was named “Tim.” Reading his “mem-
ber proﬁle,” she noticed that he had listed favorite activities such as “collecting
pics of other young studs” and “boy watching” and that he had listed his mari-
tal status as “gay.”
At this point the volunteer only knew that someone who had some connection
with the submarine was named Tim and had said that he was gay. She forwarded
The Law of Privacy
99

the mail to her husband, who was also a noncommissioned ofﬁcer aboard the
Chicago. The mail found its way to the boat’s captain, Commander John Mickey,
and a formal investigation began. The investigators suspected that “boysrch” was
Timothy McVeigh, and they instructed a paralegal assistant to contact AOL to get
information about the identity of that account. An AOL representative identiﬁed
the customer as Timothy McVeigh.
McVeigh was then informed that the navy had obtained “some indication
that he made a statement of homosexuality,” which was a violation of the mili-
tary’s new “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, Don’t Pursue” policy. This policy was the re-
sult of a political compromise that allowed gay people to serve in the military as
long as they did not tell people about their sexual preference. In return, the mil-
itary was not supposed to go out of its way to ﬁnd and discharge gay personnel.
The navy conducted an administrative discharge hearing where the e-mail
was the major item of evidence, and ordered that McVeigh be discharged from
the navy on January 16,1998. But the day before his discharge, McVeigh ﬁled
suit to win an injunction, or order from the court, blocking the discharge.
Legal Issues
In seeking the injunction, McVeigh argued that the order should be granted be-
cause discharge would cause him great harm by ending his naval career and los-
ing his pension, and that he had a case that was likely to win in a later lawsuit.
He said that the U.S. Navy had violated its own “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, Don’t
Pursue” policy because McVeigh had not “told” anyone about his sexual prefer-
ence, that the navy should not have launched an investigation on the basis of a
“handle” on an otherwise unidentiﬁed AOL account, and that in doing so, it had
violated McVeigh’s privacy.
Decision
Judge Stanley Sporkin agreed that McVeigh’s anonymous e-mail was not the
kind of revelation that should have triggered an investigation under “Don’t Ask,
Don’t Tell, Don’t Pursue.” Further, he said, the navy had probably violated the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986. As the judge explained, the
ECPA says that the government can obtain information from an online service
provider such as AOL “only if (a) it obtains a warrant issued under the Federal
Rules of Criminal Procedure or state equivalent; or (b) it gives prior notice to
the online subscriber and then issues a subpoena or receives a court order au-
thorizing disclosure of the information in question.” The U.S. Navy had not
complied with either of these procedures.
Judge Sporkin therefore issued the injunction, blocking McVeigh’s dis-
charge. The navy, while not discharging McVeigh, relegated him to clerical du-
ties and refused to allow him to return to his post on the Chicago. Judge Sporkin
then told the navy that it had to restore McVeigh to his prior position (or an
equivalent). The navy at ﬁrst announced it would appeal the decision, but it
then reached a settlement with McVeigh. In May 1998, McVeigh was promoted
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
100

to master chief petty ofﬁcer, gaining increased pension beneﬁts as well as pay-
ment of his legal fees, and then was honorably discharged.
Impact
The McVeigh case did not address the issue of whether the “Don’t Ask, Don’t
Tell, Don’t Pursue” policy is itself constitutional, though it has probably dis-
couraged aggressive pursuit of suspected gays by the military. As a privacy issue,
however, McVeigh afﬁrmed an important privacy right for users of all online sys-
tems under the Electronic Communications Privacy Act.
U.S. WEST V. FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS
COMMISSION (U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, 
10TH DISTRICT, NO. 98-9518 [1999])
Background
This case involves a dispute over regulations developed by the Federal Com-
munications Commission (FCC) to implement privacy provisions of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. Speciﬁcally, the provisions required telecom-
munications providers to “protect the conﬁdentiality of proprietary information
of, and relating to . . . customers.” This information includes the phone num-
bers called by a user, the time a call was placed, and the duration of the call. Ac-
cording to the regulation, such information was generally to be used only when
necessary for providing the phone service itself—such as for billing, or for pur-
poses such as system testing or security.
A provider could use the information for marketing to its existing customers,
as long as the customer already subscribed to the category of service being mar-
keted. (For example: local telephone service, long-distance service, or wire-
less/cellular service.) However, the permissible marketing was narrowly deﬁned:
Phone companies could not use the customer information to market additional
services such as voice mail or Internet access, or to attempt to regain a customer
who had switched to a competing company. Finally, customers had to “opt in,”
or agree to the use of their information for marketing.
The telecommunications company U.S. West challenged these regulations
in court, seeking to be able to use customer information for a much wider array
of marketing efforts and without having to obtain permission ﬁrst.
Legal Issues
U.S. West and other telecommunications providers argued that the FCC regu-
lations violated the First Amendment by restricting its ability to use “commer-
cial speech” in communicating with customers. The providers also argued that
the regulations violated the Fifth Amendment by, in effect, taking away its right
to use its property—the proprietary information it had gathered in the course
of doing business. The government argued that the regulations did not violate
The Law of Privacy
101

any constitutionally protected right. The regulations did not say that U.S. West
could not communicate with its customers; rather, they restricted the use of in-
formation that customers might well consider to be private.
Decision
In its decision, the federal appeals court determined that the marketing efforts
by phone companies are indeed a form of commercial speech entitled to some
protection under the First Amendment if it is not deceptive or misleading. The
court then balanced the right to commercial speech against the government’s
contention that its restrictions on use of telephone customer information were
necessary to protect privacy—another important constitutional value. However,
the court set a high standard for the government to meet:
In the context of a speech restriction imposed to protect privacy by keeping certain
information conﬁdential, the government must show that the dissemination of
the information desired to be kept private would inﬂict speciﬁc and signiﬁcant
harm on individuals, such as undue embarrassment or ridicule, intimidation or
harassment, or misappropriation of sensitive personal information for the pur-
poses of assuming another’s identity. Although we may feel uncomfortable know-
ing that our personal information is circulating in the world, we live in an open
society where information may usually pass freely. A general level of discomfort
from knowing that people can readily access information about us does not neces-
sarily rise to the level of a substantial state interest . . . for it is not based on an
identiﬁed harm.
The court concluded that the government had not shown that the use of
telephone customer information in marketing created “substantial harm” in the
ways described above, nor did it put customers at any special risk of fraud or
other direct harm. Further, regulations like these must be “narrowly tailored” to
accomplish their goals without unnecessarily infringing on protected speech.
The court believed the government had not shown that an “opt out” system
(where customers could say they did not want their information to be used for
marketing services to them) would not adequately protect those customers who
were concerned about their privacy.
Accordingly, the court overturned the FCC regulations for violation of the
First Amendment (the Fifth Amendment “takings” issue, which was pretty
weak, was not discussed). The U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear the case on
appeal.
Impact
This decision suggests that there is a difference between being offered further
products or services from a company with which one has an existing business re-
lationship and being solicited by third parties. Regulations may assume that a
customer does not mind solicitations within an existing relationship, or at least,
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
102

that the company can assume they are acceptable unless the customer opts out.
A complication arises, however, when a company includes many unrelated busi-
nesses or has developed afﬁliations with other companies and wants to provide
customer information to these other businesses.
CONDON V. RENO, 528 U.S. 141 (2000)
Background
In the 1980s and early 1990s, privacy advocates became increasingly alarmed
about the fact that a number of states sold the information on their drivers’ li-
censes to any business that wanted it. Such information included names, ad-
dresses, phone numbers, a photograph, certain information about medical
conditions, and even Social Security numbers. In response, Congress passed the
Driver’s Privacy Protection Act. This law prohibited states (or private parties)
from selling this type of information without the subject’s consent.
The states that had been selling DMV information faced a loss of millions of
dollars in annual revenue. One state, South Carolina, sued to overturn the law.
Legal Issues
South Carolina argued that the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act violated the
Tenth and Eleventh amendments to the U.S. Constitution. The state’s argu-
ment was based on federalism, or the sharing of power between the federal gov-
ernment and the states. In this view the Congress had no right to tell states what
they could do with their own records. The U.S. Attorney General in turn de-
fended the law by saying that the selling of state motor vehicle records neces-
sarily involved interstate commerce (the records could be bought by anyone and
were generally used for marketing goods). Thus the DPPA was a proper exer-
cise of the power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce.
Decision
The federal district court agreed with the state and blocked enforcement of the
DPPA against the state and its agencies. The Court of Appeals for the Fourth
Circuit also agreed with the state’s position. The Justice Department then ap-
pealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
The Court’s opinion, written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, squarely
concluded that state motor vehicle records fell within the power of Congress to
regulate interstate commerce:
The motor vehicle information which the States have historically sold is used by
insurers, manufacturers, direct marketers, and others engaged in interstate com-
merce to contact drivers with customized solicitations. The information is also
used in the stream of interstate commerce by various public and private entities
for matters related to interstate motoring. Because drivers’ information is, in this
The Law of Privacy
103

context, an article of commerce, its sale or release into the interstate stream of
business is sufﬁcient to support congressional regulation.
The Court also rejected the Tenth Amendment challenge, noting that the law
does not require that states enforce the regulations against their citizens.
Rather, it is the states themselves, as owners of the records, that are regulated.
Impact
By upholding the Drivers Privacy Protection Act, the Supreme Court left in
place protections against a person’s motor vehicle or driving information being
sold by states to marketers or others who might use them for solicitation or even
criminal harassment.
IN RE TOYSMART.COM, LLC 
(CASE NO. 00-13995-CJK 
[BANKR. E.D. MASS. JULY 20, 2000])
Background
Toysmart.com, an Internet toy store, was one of many “dot-coms” that went
bankrupt in the 2000–01 period. The bankruptcy court had to decide what to
do with one of Toysmart’s most potentially valuable assets, its list of more than
200,000 customers. The customer information included names, addresses, ages
of children, records of purchases, and a toy wish list.
What complicated matters was that Toysmart had posted a privacy policy
that pledged that any information submitted by customers would only be used
to “personalize” the Web shopping experience. The information would never
be shared with a third party. This privacy policy also allowed Toysmart to dis-
play the TRUSTe seal, a certiﬁcation of privacy practices relied upon by many
online consumers.
Nevertheless, when it entered bankruptcy, Toysmart attempted to sell its cus-
tomer list in order to help pay back creditors. The Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) ﬁled a complaint to try to stop the sale.
Legal Issues
The FTC argued that by promising never to disclose customer information and
then doing so, Toysmart was engaging in a “deceptive practice” in violation of
the FTC Act. Further, Toysmart had, during a “dinosaur trivia” contest, col-
lected information from children under 13 years of age, without providing no-
tice to parents and obtaining their consent. This was a violation of the
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act.
Decision
Toysmart and FTC settled the case. Toysmart agreed that it would sell the cus-
tomer list only to a “qualiﬁed buyer” approved by the bankruptcy court who
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
104

would agree to be bound by the original privacy agreement and be liable for any
subsequent violations. If the buyer wants to change the privacy policy, it must
give notice, and the changes can apply only to customer information provided
after the change in policy, unless the consumer opts in (or afﬁrmatively con-
sents).
One FTC commissioner dissented from the settlement. While he agreed
that binding any new buyer to the privacy agreement was much better than an
unrestricted sale, consumers were entitled to rely on the original promise that
their information would “never” be disclosed to a third party.
Impact
This case puts some enforceable teeth in privacy agreements as contracts be-
tween consumers and retailers. However, one of the biggest online retailers,
Amazon.com, subsequently changed its privacy agreement to allow transfer of
customer information as an “asset” to any company that acquires them in the
future.
INDIVIDUAL REFERENCE SERVICES GROUP V. FEDERAL
TRADE COMMISSION (U.S. DISTRICT COURT DC,
CIVIL ACTION NO.: 00-1828 [ESH], 2001)
Background
TransUnion is a major credit bureau that is also considered to be a “credit re-
porting agency” under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The company collects
transaction information from ﬁnancial institutions, storing the information in
a massive database called CRONUS. The database is used to generate credit
reports that include identifying information (the consumer’s name, address,
Social Security number, and so on) and “tradeline” data containing account de-
tails and payment history for credit cards, car loans, mortgages, and other
forms of credit. (Although details differ, other credit reporting agencies have
similar procedures.)
Credit reporting agencies make the “credit headers” containing identifying
information available to businesses and government agencies that use them for
marketing (targeted mailings or phone calls) and for fraud prevention, and for
such services as searching for potential organ donors. TransUnion and other
companies also offer targeted marketing programs in which they use the header
and credit information to identify persons who might be likely to be interested
in a particular product or service, as well as providing aggregate data for con-
sumer and market research.
A provision of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) of 1999 speciﬁes that ﬁ-
nancial institutions protect certain aspects of the privacy of customer’s personal
information. Individual References Services Group is an industry coalition con-
sisting of the major credit bureaus (TransUnion, Experian, and Equifax) plus data-
base companies such as LEXIS-NEXIS. This group went to court to overturn the
The Law of Privacy
105

privacy regulations, which threatened their ability to create and sell reports on
consumers.
Legal Issues
The Individual Reference Services Group made several arguments against the
regulations the FTC had designed to implement the GLBA. First, the industry
group argued that the regulations covered “nonpublic personal” information
that was not ﬁnancial in nature, even though the GLBA statute said that it was
restricted to ﬁnancial information. They also argued that the regulations should
not have extended to nonﬁnancial institutions and that the GLBA (but not the
regulations) allowed consumer reporting agencies to use account numbers for
marketing purposes.
The industry group also made several constitutional arguments: that the reg-
ulation was overbroad and restricted commercial speech protected by the First
Amendment, and that the lack of due process in adopting the regulations and
their differing treatment of consumer reporting agencies and other types of
companies violated the Fifth Amendment.
Decision
The court noted that in a previous decision, TransUnion v. FTC (2001), it had
ruled that lists of names and addresses of consumers whose tradeline informa-
tion (such as credit limits or types of loans) were selected for marketing pur-
poses qualiﬁed as consumer reports under the Fair Credit Reporting Act.
Meanwhile, the GLBA had been passed and implemented. It was designed pri-
marily to make the ﬁnancial services industry more competitive. However, the
act’s authors, knowing that competitive pressure might also lead to practices
that intrude on consumer privacy, also included provisions requiring that insti-
tutions protect that privacy. The law broadly deﬁned information relating to ﬁ-
nancial transactions.
The court disposed of the argument that the records sold to marketers were
not covered by the GLBA, as well as the argument that credit reporting com-
panies (such as TransUnion) were not “ﬁnancial institutions” subject to the reg-
ulations. The industry’s constitutional arguments were also disposed of as
similar to those rejected in the earlier TransUnion decision. The kind of infor-
mation involved in credit reporting has little to do with speech about public is-
sues envisaged by the First Amendment: It is “commercial speech” that receives
a lesser degree of First Amendment protection.
Because the GLBA speciﬁes its privacy concerns and is narrowly tailored to
protecting them, the provisions restricting selling credit information to mar-
keters are constitutional. (The court observed that TransUnion and other credit
reporting agencies can still distribute information if they obtain the permission
of the affected consumers.) The regulations are not “arbitrary and capricious”
and do not single out credit reporting agencies, since they apply to any company
that obtains and seeks to use consumer credit information.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
106

Impact
This and other decisions such as TransUnion Corp. v. Federal Trade Commission
(2001) establish that credit reporting companies have no inherent right to
repackage and sell the information they gather in the course of the billions of
transactions that take place every year in the marketplace. Whether consumers
must “opt out” or companies are required to ask for explicit permission to use
data is a matter for Congress and the political process.
KYLLO V. UNITED STATES, NO. 99-8508 (2001)
Background
When an agent of the U.S. Department of the Interior suspected that Danny
Kyllo was growing marijuana in his home in Florence, Oregon, he and a col-
league used a thermal imager to scan Kyllo’s home at night. The imager detects
infrared (heat) radiation, giving outlines of areas or sources that are relatively
warmer than their surroundings. The scan showed that the roof over Kyllo’s
garage and one wall of his house were hotter than the rest of the home or neigh-
boring homes. The agent concluded that Kyllo was using halide lights (“grow
lights”) to grow marijuana. Based on the imagery and other evidence, such as
excessive utility bills, the agent obtained a warrant, entered Kyllo’s home, and
discovered more than 100 growing marijuana plants. When Kyllo was indicted
for growing marijuana, he moved to have the evidence seized from his home
suppressed on grounds that it was based on an unlawful search.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ordered the district court to de-
termine whether the device used was “intrusive.” The district court concluded
that because the device showed only a crude image of heat sources and “did not
show any people or activity within the walls of the structure,” use of the device
was not intrusive. The court of appeals eventually afﬁrmed the district court’s
opinion, and Kyllo appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Legal Issues
The issue here is whether use of a “passive” surveillance technology (a thermal
imager in this case) is intrusive enough to amount to a “search” under the
Fourth Amendment. The district court had concluded that the crude and lim-
ited nature of the imagery obtained meant that it did not show the kind of ac-
tivities for which Kyllo had a legitimate expectation of privacy.
Decision
The Supreme Court disagreed with the district court. In an opinion written by
Justice Antonin Scalia, the Court noted that it had previously declared that a
mere visual inspection from outside is not a “search” in the meaning of the
Fourth Amendment. However, in Katz v. United States (1967), the Court ruled
The Law of Privacy
107

that use of a listening device attached to the outside of a phone booth did vio-
late the Fourth Amendment because the user of the booth has a reasonable ex-
pectation of privacy. Similarly, aerial surveillance of a house was not considered
a “search” because a resident has no reasonable expectation that the outside and
surroundings of a house won’t be seen from the air.
Next, the Court considered how much “technological enhancement” of a
search from the outside of a house might be permissible. For example, the
Court reserved the question of whether “enhanced aerial photography” might
be too intrusive, especially when the area searched is directly outside or adjacent
to a house (such as a backyard).
The Court concluded that
obtaining by sense-enhancing technology any information regarding the interior of
the home that could not otherwise have been obtained without physical “intrusion
into a constitutionally protected area” . . . constitutes a search—at least where the
technology in question is not in general public use. This assures preservation of that
degree of privacy against government that existed when the Fourth Amendment
was adopted. On the basis of this criterion the information obtained by the ther-
mal imager in this case was the product of a search.
The majority opinion rejected claims by the government that use of the imager
was permissible because it only detected heat from “off the wall” and did not
penetrate “through the wall.” It also rejected the idea that the limited amount
of information obtained should be a criterion for whether a search violates the
Fourth Amendment. The case was therefore returned to the Circuit Court of
Appeals to determine if evidence other than that obtained from imagery was
sufﬁcient to have obtained a warrant.
Impact
With the ever-growing capability of surveillance technology and the impetus
of the war on drugs (and today, the war on terrorism), the Supreme Court
seems in recent years to be trying to draw some sort of line to protect the pri-
vacy in and around a home that people expect and need. Such an effort would
seem necessary if the Fourth Amendment is to continue to have meaning in the
21st century.
UNITED STATES V. NICODEMO S. SCARFO ET AL.
CRIMINAL ACTION NO. 00-404 (NHP) (2001)
Background
The issue of interest in this case arose during pretrial discovery motions in the
case of Nicodemo S. Scarfo and codefendant Frank Paolercio, who were ac-
cused of conducting illegal gambling and loansharking operations. After an ini-
tial search of their premises, FBI agents discovered a personal computer that
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
108

contained an encrypted ﬁle titled “Factors.” The agents believed that this ﬁle
contained evidence of illegal activity.
Because they were unable to determine the passphrase needed to open the
ﬁle, the agents obtained a warrant to install a “keylogger” on the computer. This
software surreptitiously intercepts and records the user’s keystrokes. It enabled
the agents to capture and use the passphrase to open the Factors ﬁle.
Legal Issues
Scarfo’s attorneys argued that the evidence from the Factors ﬁle should be sup-
pressed because use of the keylogger violated federal wiretapping statutes. This
is because the computer in question had a modem connection and the user had
an America Online account. If the keylogger captured keystrokes while the
computer was online, its use might amount to an illegal interception of wire
communications.
The federal district judge asked the government to provide details on how
the keylogger operated, in order to determine whether use of the device violated
federal law. The government refused to provide these details to the defendant
but offered them to the judge, requesting that they be treated as classiﬁed. After
viewing the classiﬁed material, the judge agreed with the government that the
details of the keylogger could be kept secret. Scarfo’s attorneys were provided
with an unclassiﬁed summary.
Scarfo’s attorneys claimed that the unclassiﬁed summary was inadequate and
did not enable them to effectively challenge the warrant. In addition to claim-
ing that the keylogging amounted to an illegal wiretap, the defense also argued
that by capturing keystrokes other than the needed passphrase, the warrant au-
thorizing the keylogging was an overbroad “general warrant” that violated the
Fourth Amendment.
Decision
The district judge ruled that the search warrant was speciﬁc (in describing the
passphrase) and was supported by probable cause. The fact that additional key-
strokes must necessarily be captured does not turn the search into a general
“ﬁshing expedition” any more than having to go through irrelevant folders in a
ﬁling cabinet would invalidate a more traditional form of search.
The judge ruled that the unclassiﬁed summary provided by the government
was sufﬁcient to allow for an effective defense. Finally, the judge concluded that
a keyboard logging system did not intercept any wire communications—and in
fact, had been conﬁgured by the agents to avoid intercepting keystrokes while
data was being sent through the modem. Scarfo later entered into a plea bar-
gain, and thus the judge’s decision was not appealed.
Impact
The real interest in this case arose from the use of secret surveillance technology
by the government. The government’s insistence that details of the keylogging
The Law of Privacy
109

system be classiﬁed conﬂicted with the defendant’s ability to challenge the war-
rant and, more broadly, the ability of citizens to decide what forms of govern-
ment surveillance are appropriate. This conﬂict has been heightened during the
“war on terrorism” period and is likely to remain vigorous.
COMMONWEALTH V. SOURCE ONE ASSOCIATES, 
436 MASS. 118 (2002)
Background
An investigation company called Source One Associates offered to obtain (for a
fee) ﬁnancial information relating to persons of interest for ﬁnancial institu-
tions, investigators, or other third parties. Source One’s investigators frequently
obtained this information by ﬁrst using credit reports to ﬁnd a person’s bank ac-
counts, and then calling the bank while posing as a bank security ofﬁcial or as
the account holder. This enabled them to obtain the desired information (such
as the amount of the bank balance).
Legal Issues
The state of Massachusetts sued Source One in Superior Court, claiming that
the company obtained information about persons without their consent and
used deceptive practices in violation of state consumer protection laws. Source
One claimed that its use of credit reports was legitimate and that the state had
not proved otherwise.
Decision
The Superior Court judge noted that under the federal Fair Credit Reporting
Act, credit reports could only be obtained with the permission of the person
being reported on, or in connection with certain legitimate transactions such as
credit requests or employment or insurance applications. Source One had not
obtained the reports in order to process a legitimate transaction by the reported
person. Rather, they used the reports in order to obtain information that could
be used for further investigation and creation of a report to sell to a third party.
Further, the judge agreed that Source One must have used deception in order
to obtain ﬁnancial information from banks in violation of state law.
The court ordered Source One to pay $500,000 in damages (plus court fees
and costs) for an estimated 1,000 instances of violating state law. Source One
was also ordered no longer to obtain information without the subject’s permis-
sion and not to use deceptive practices in obtaining information from banks or
other third parties. Source One appealed to the Massachusetts Supreme Court,
but that court afﬁrmed the lower court’s decision.
Impact
The illegitimate use of credit reports by private investigators and data brokers
is a signiﬁcant threat to privacy. Further, impersonation or “pretexting” can
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
110

often be used to obtain information despite whatever privacy safeguards banks
or other institutions might have in place. Decisions like this one give victims
some recourse and may enable states to more effectively prevent such abuses.
HELEN REMSBURG V. DOCUSEARCH, NO. 2002-55,
NEW HAMPSHIRE SUPREME COURT (2003)
Background
On October 15, 1999, cyberstalker Liam Youens fatally shot Amy Boyer outside
her workplace. Youens had learned of Boyer’s place of employment after ob-
taining her Social Security number and other personal information by hiring
DocuSearch, an online “information broker” that had in turn obtained access to
Boyer’s credit records by pretending to be doing a legitimate credit check.
Legal Issues
Boyer’s estate sued DocuSearch, arguing that the agency was liable for subject-
ing Boyer to “an unreasonable risk of harm” in providing information about her
to Youens. Among others, there was also the question of whether DocuSearch
committed an “intrusion against seclusion” against Boyer and whether she had
a reasonable expectation of privacy that was violated by the ﬁrm’s actions.
Decision
The court ruled that an information broker does have a legal duty toward some-
one whose information is being obtained without their consent. A Social Secu-
rity number is something that persons have an expectation will be private, and
an information broker is liable for damages that might be caused by revealing it
without permission.
Impact
Information brokers are largely unregulated and have provided information
useful to cyberstalkers and identity thieves. Holding them legally liable for re-
leasing certain personal information may at least deter legitimate information
brokers and allow for recovery of damages against illegitimate ones.
AMERICAN COUNCIL OF LIFE INSURERS V. VERMONT
DEPARTMENT OF BANKING, INSURANCE, SECURITIES,
AND HEALTHCARE ADMINISTRATION, 
DOCKET NO. 56-1-02 (WASHINGTON SUPERIOR
COURT, FEB. 12, 2004)
Background
The Vermont Department of Banking, Insurance, Securities, and Healthcare
Administration (BISHCA) issued a regulation that required that insurance
The Law of Privacy
111

companies obtain policyholders’ permission before disclosing nonpublic ﬁnan-
cial and health information to unafﬁliated companies. This is called an “opt-
in” system, as opposed to “opt-out,” where the company can reveal
information unless explicitly asked not to. The life insurance association sued,
seeking to overturn the regulation.
Legal Issues
The insurers argued that opt-in was too strict a standard and that most states,
following the lead of the federal Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), had
adopted an opt-out standard. They argued that the state legislature had not del-
egated to the BISHCA the power to adopt such regulations. Further, they ar-
gued that the opt-in requirement violated the insurers’ commercial speech
rights under the First Amendment because it went beyond what was necessary
to further the state’s legitimate interest in protecting privacy.
Decision
The court found that the legislature’s statutory language had delegated sufﬁ-
cient power to the BISHCA. Further, it found that the state’s “substantial inter-
est” in privacy would be equally served by an opt-in or opt-out requirement.
While acknowledging that opt-in is likely to make it harder for the insurance
companies to disclose information, opt-out would leave more consumers not
having consented to have their information shared. Therefore, requiring opt-in
is a “reasonable ﬁt” between the regulation and the state’s interest in protecting
privacy. The regulation was upheld.
Impact
This state court decision obviously does not set a national precedent. However,
the relatively light weight courts often give to commercial speech as against sub-
stantial state interests (such as privacy) may suggest that First Amendment ar-
guments against opt-in requirements will not generally succeed. Business
interests are likely to focus their efforts on enshrining opt-out in federal laws
and then having those laws preempt state legislation.
DOE V. CHAO, U.S. SUPREME COURT, 
NO. 02-1377 (2004)
Background
A group of coal miners ﬁled claims with the Department of Labor for beneﬁts
for “black lung” disease. In the process of investigating the claims, the govern-
ment disclosed the miners’ Social Security numbers (which were used as identi-
ﬁcation numbers) to a variety of interested parties. The numbers also found
their way into legal decisions and research databases. Several miners sued the
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
112

Department of Labor, alleging that disclosure of the SSNs violated the federal
Privacy Act and that they were entitled to statutory damages. Although the
lower court rejected most of the claims, it granted $1,000 damages to com-
plainant Doe (an anonymously named miner), saying he had shown sufﬁciently
that he had suffered “actual damages” as a result of the disclosure of his SSN.
Legal Issues
The other miners appealed, arguing that it is not necessary to prove actual dam-
ages to prevail under the Privacy Act, or at least that emotional damages were
sufﬁcient. The government argued that actual damages means monetary loss,
not emotional harm. The Appeals Court for the Fourth Circuit sided with the
government. The U.S. Supreme Court then agreed to hear the case.
Decision
By a 6-3 majority, the Supreme Court ruled that the plain language of the Pri-
vacy Act requires that actual monetary harm must be suffered before a person
can recover under the Privacy Act for disclosure of a Social Security number.
Impact
Privacy advocates were naturally disappointed by this ruling and have pointed
out that any disclosure of a person’s Social Security number has potentially se-
rious consequences that at minimum are likely to cause emotional distress.
However, they will have to seek a legislative remedy.
GILMORE V. ASHCROFT (DISTRICT COURT
FOR NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA, 
NO. C 02-3444 SI [2004])
Background
In recent years passengers wishing to board airlines within the United States
have generally been required to present an ofﬁcial picture ID such as a driver’s
license or to submit to a physical search. However, it has not always been clear
whether this requirement is a matter of federal directive or airline policy. Civil
liberties activist John Gilmore decided to challenge this requirement, believing
that it violated privacy and the right to travel and did not contribute to security
against terrorism. When Gilmore was refused boarding at the airport on July 4,
2002, he sued the U.S. government and Southwest Airlines.
Legal Issues
Gilmore alleged that the policy violated the U.S. Constitution in several ways.
The requirements (and the authority for them) were not clearly stated, and
The Law of Privacy
113

this vagueness violated due process rights under the Fourteenth Amendment.
The requirement amounted to an unreasonable search and seizure under the
Fourth Amendment (since there was no probable cause), and finally, by pre-
venting Gilmore from traveling by air, the policy violated the First Amend-
ment’s guarantees of freedom of association and the right to petition the
government for redress of grievances. Further, in his brief Gilmore argued
that the government was using the identification requirement in connection
with credit records and other databases “in order to create dossiers on every
traveling citizen.”
The federal government argued that such claims about government surveil-
lance programs were essentially irrelevant and that Gilmore only had standing
to challenge the requirement for identiﬁcation. Further, Gilmore had not suf-
fered any legally recognizable injury.
Decision
The court began by agreeing with the government’s argument about standing,
dismissing all Gilmore’s claims except the challenge to the identiﬁcation re-
quirement itself. The court then said that, assuming identiﬁcation was actually
being required by the government, such an order would have to have come from
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or Transportation Security Admin-
istration (TSA). By statute, any question about the requirement’s vagueness
could be reviewed only by an appeals court, not the district court.
The court dismissed Gilmore’s complaint about unreasonable search and
seizure by noting that this Fourth Amendment requirement applies only to a sit-
uation where someone faces arrest, detention, or some other sanction by the
government. Gilmore faced only the loss of the ability to ﬂy. While signiﬁcant,
this does not create a Fourth Amendment issue.
The court also dismissed Gilmore’s argument about being denied the right
to travel without being given due process. The court explained that the Consti-
tution did not guarantee the right to travel by any particular means of trans-
portation.
Finally, the court rejected the argument that barring Gilmore from the plane
violated his right to free association and to petition the government for redress
of grievances. The judge pointed out that Gilmore had other ways to travel and
that any effect of the identiﬁcation requirement was thus too indirect to amount
to a constitutional violation.
Impact
Even most privacy advocates would probably agree that Gilmore’s challenge to
the identiﬁcation requirement was quixotic and unlikely to succeed. Gilmore
and others have made plausible arguments that identiﬁcation requirements are
not likely to prevent terrorists from getting onto a plane, at least until the ID
cards are backed up by biometrics and the kind of database Gilmore seems to be
objecting to.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
114

The judge’s noting that the right to travel does not imply a right to travel by
a particular means echoes the ruling of the Supreme Court in U.S. v. Miller in
refusing to acknowledge that certain institutions (such as airlines and banks) are
not really optional for participation in modern life. Privacy advocates consider
such reasoning to be narrow and unrealistic.
HIIBEL V. SIXTH JUDICIAL DISTRICT COURT
OF NEVADA, NO. 03-5554 (2004)
Background
Nevada and a number of other states have laws requiring that a person stopped
by police give them his or her name. (The person need not respond to any
other inquiry nor provide an ID card.) Larry Dudley Hiibel was stopped by
Deputy Lee Dove, who was investigating a tip that a man was punching a
woman in his pickup truck. Hiibel was standing next to a pickup truck; his
teenaged daughter was in the cab. In the stop, which was ﬁlmed by a camera
mounted on the police car, Hiibel, possibly intoxicated, repeatedly refused to
tell Dove his name. Dove arrested Hiibel for that refusal. He was convicted and
ﬁned $250. The case was then appealed and eventually reached the U.S.
Supreme Court.
Legal Issues
Hiibel’s attorneys, supported by the ACLU and other civil liberties groups,
argued that the Nevada law violated the Fifth Amendment by effectively
making it a crime to remain silent when questioned by a police officer. They
were joined by homeless advocates who feared that police might harass the
homeless (many of whom may be mentally ill) by demanding they identify
themselves.
Decision
The Supreme Court upheld the Nevada law by a narrow 5-4 majority. Justice
Anthony Kennedy said that asking a person only for a name was not a signiﬁ-
cant intrusion on privacy and did not provide information that could be legally
used against the person. This minimal intrusion did not weigh heavily against
the state’s need to investigate crime and for police ofﬁcers to identify possibly
dangerous persons.
In dissent, Justice John Paul Stevens said that Hiibel’s name could be used to
learn incriminating information about him. Thus, compelling him to give his
name was compelling him to aid in his own incrimination. Several other dis-
senters agreed with a concurring opinion in Terry v. Ohio (1968), which sug-
gested that while police have the right to stop persons when they have a
reasonable suspicion of illegal activity, the person stopped has no obligation to
talk to the police.
The Law of Privacy
115

Impact
Most people would not consider it unreasonable for the police to merely ask
their name. However, the existence of interlinked computer records and a pos-
sibly emerging national database means that a name can potentially give the po-
lice access to a vast amount of information, incriminatory or otherwise. (It
should be noted, however, that the Nevada law did not require that a person
show any form of identiﬁcation. It is unclear whether such a requirement would
be upheld.)
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
116

CHRONOLOGY
This chapter presents a chronology of important events involving privacy issues,
particularly issues related to information privacy.
1690
I John Locke writes Two Treatises on Government, in which he lays the basis that
the government is accountable for protecting the rights of the individual.
1791
I The Bill of Rights to the U.S. Constitution is ratiﬁed, including the Fourth
and Fifth Amendments, which protect citizens against unwarranted violation
of privacy by the government.
1800s
I The Industrial Revolution and urbanization lead to new social rules deﬁning
places and activities that should be considered private.
1861
I The American Civil War begins, and new communications technology plays
a vital role. The Union and Confederacy tap each other’s telegraph lines.
1876
I Alexander Graham Bell introduces the telephone. The invention changes the
nature of conversation and raises the question of whether phone conversa-
tions are presumed to be private.
1890
I Samuel D. Warren and future Supreme Court justice Louis Brandeis write a
groundbreaking legal article titled “The Right of Privacy.” They also warn
that the telephone and other inventions may be threatening that right.
117
CHAPTER 3

I The use of electromechanical punch card machines by the U.S. Census fore-
shadows the later development of computerized databases.
1928
I In Olmstead v. U.S., the Supreme Court refuses to apply the Fourth Amend-
ment to prohibit wiretapping without a warrant.
1939
I World War II begins. Allies use primitive electronic computers to break codes
from Axis cipher machines.
1948
I Claude Shannon of MIT writes a seminal paper on cryptographic theory,
which ties into the growing interest in the ﬁeld by government security agen-
cies.
1952
I As the Cold War deepens, secret government cryptography efforts are as-
signed to the new National Security Agency (NSA).
1965
I In the Griswold case, the Supreme Court declares that the Constitution im-
plies a right of privacy with regard to contraception.
I A proposed central government data bank arouses the concern of privacy
advocates.
1966
I Congress passes the Freedom of Information Act, which provides a way for
citizens to request many kinds of information about the operation of govern-
ment.
1967
I Journalist David Kahn publishes The Codebreakers, arousing public interest in
cryptography.
I The Supreme Court reverses the Olmstead decision, declaring that the gov-
ernment must get a warrant to wiretap a suspect (Katz v. United States).
1968
I Congress passes the Wiretap Act of 1968, codifying the previous year’s
Supreme Court decision in Katz v. United States.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
118

1969
I The ARPANET, funded by the Defense Department, comes online. At ﬁrst
restricted to government agencies and universities, it would eventually evolve
into the Internet.
1970s
I Credit cards begin to come into widespread use. While hailed as a conve-
nience, their use requires the compilation of large databases of information
about cardholders, leading to privacy concerns.
1970
I Congress passes the Fair Credit Reporting Act, giving consumers the right to
request and correct information kept by credit bureaus.
1972
I The Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems to the Sec-
retary of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare states basic prin-
ciples for protecting privacy in the Information Age. These include disclosure
of information-gathering activities, the right of individuals to correct infor-
mation about them, and guarantees for accuracy and control of disclosure of
information.
I The Watergate break-in and cover-up leads to greater public concern about
the misuse of surveillance by the government.
1973
I In Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court limits the ability of the government to
regulate abortion, seeing an expanded area of “decisional” privacy in intimate
and family matters.
1974
I Congress passes the Privacy Act of 1974, implementing fundamental princi-
ples of privacy and access to government records.
I Congress passes the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, which
gives parents or adult students the right to access and correct their school
records, as well as limiting disclosure to third parties.
I The Supreme Court upholds the Bank Secrecy Act, which requires that banks
track many details of transactions in order to ﬁght drugs and money launder-
ing (California Bankers’ Association v. Schulz).
1976
I Whitﬁeld Difﬁe and Martin Hellman publish “New Directions in Cryptog-
raphy,” a paper that creates the basis for public-key cryptography.
Chronology
119

I The Supreme Court declares that individuals have no “expectation of pri-
vacy” in their banking or other ﬁnancial transactions (United States v. Miller).
I Congress passes tax reform legislation that authorizes state agencies to use
Social Security numbers for identiﬁcation purposes. As this practice is taken
up by private companies for identifying ﬁnancial accounts, the numbers will
make people vulnerable to invasion of privacy or identity theft.
1977
I The U.S. Privacy Protection Study Commission warns of the growing threat
to privacy caused by large, increasingly interlinked computer databases.
I Congress passes the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, which prohibits a va-
riety of abusive activities by bill collectors.
1978
I Congress passes two laws to strengthen ﬁnancial privacy: the Electronic
Funds Transfer Act of 1978 and the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978.
I Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Len Adelman at MIT ﬁll in the gaps in the theory
of public-key cryptography and create a cryptosystem that will be called RSA.
1985
I The Supreme Court rules that students are protected by the Fourth Amend-
ment, but that schools can conduct “reasonable” searches without obtaining
a warrant (New Jersey v. T.L.O.).
1986
I Congress passes the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986, which
extends the protections of the Wiretap Act of 1968 to include computer data
transmissions and e-mail.
I Congress passes the Electronic Freedom of Information Act (EFOIA), which
applies freedom of information principles to requests for computerzied gov-
ernment records.
1987
I The Supreme Court rules that employers can conduct “reasonable” searches
in the workplace, but that employees do have an “expectation of privacy” in
some areas (O’Connor v. Ortega).
I During the failed nomination of Robert Bork to the Supreme Court, the
judge’s video rental records are revealed by the press. This leads to the pas-
sage of the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988.
1988
I Congress passes the Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988, which bans
the use of lie detectors and similar devices by employers in most cases.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
120

I Congress passes the Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988,
which provides appeals procedures and other protections for individuals
threatened with loss of beneﬁts based on computer matching of government
databases (such as comparing tax records with welfare rolls).
1990
I A massive anti-hacker sweep by the Secret Service leads to the seizure of com-
puters belonging to Steve Jackson, a game publisher. In 1993, a court rules
the seizure violates protection for publishers under the Privacy Act of 1980
and awards Jackson modest damages.
I A California court rules that employers have the right to monitor workplace
e-mail (Alana Shoars v. Epson America, Inc.).
1991
I In two cases the California Supreme Court balances the “reasonable” inter-
ests of the organization against the individual’s right to privacy (Soroka v. Day-
ton Hudson Corp., Hill v. NCAA).
I Lotus and Equifax plan to offer a CD-ROM database of information on 120
million consumers, but withdraw the plan after public and privacy advocates
object.
I Programmer-activist Philip Zimmermann releases Pretty Good Privacy, an
easy-to-use encryption program. Government security agencies are not
amused.
I The federal government proposes the Clipper Chip, a device that would
provide data encryption but would also allow the government to read en-
crypted data. Privacy advocates and industry groups strongly oppose the
proposal.
I Congress passes the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, which requires
that telemarketers maintain a list of people who do not wish to be called.
1992
I The Justice Department promotes legislation that would force phone com-
panies to add built-in wiretapping facilities to phone systems in order to fa-
cilitate government surveillance efforts. (The legislation failed, but was
revived in 1994 as the Digital Telephony Act.)
I Congress passes the Fair Credit Reporting Act, strengthening protections for
consumers in dealing with credit bureaus and users of credit information.
1993
I The ﬁrst graphical web-browsing software is released. Use of the Internet by
the general public starts to grow rapidly.
I A report by the federal Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment criticizes the lack of
safeguards for patients’ medical information.
Chronology
121

1994
I Congress passes the Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Preven-
tion Act, which regulates deceptive or annoying practices by telemarketers.
I The Clinton administration proposes that telephone companies be required
to build into their systems the capability for the FBI and other law enforce-
ment agencies to tap phone lines automatically. Privacy advocates view the
proposal as an invitation to widespread abuse.
1995
I The Supreme Court rules that computer mistakes made by a civilian em-
ployee do not taint evidence gathered by police relying on that record (Ari-
zona v. Evans).
I The European Union’s Data Protection Directive provides for strong privacy
protection.
I The U.S. Secret Service and the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) obtain
the ﬁrst Internet wiretap to gather evidence on illegal “cloning” of cell phone
service.
I The federal Privacy Working Group issues its Principles for Providing and
Using Personal Information. The principles would inﬂuence many subsequent
privacy regulations and policies.
1996
I “Electronic commerce” (e-commerce) grows, but identity theft becomes a
bigger problem, with cases more than doubling since 1992.
I Ram Avrahami fails in his attempt to sue U.S. News & World Report for selling
his name to marketers without his permission.
1997
I July: The Federal Trade Commission warns marketers not to collect infor-
mation from children online without disclosure and parental permission.
I August 25: A California district court rules that the source code (computer
language) of Daniel Bernstein’s cryptography program is protected by the
First Amendment (Daniel Bernstein v. U.S. Department of State).
I September: An AOL user proﬁle with gay-related sentiments triggers the in-
vestigation of U.S. Navy Chief Petty Ofﬁcer Timothy McVeigh.
1998
I January: McVeigh wins a court order blocking the navy from discharging
him. The order is based in part on the navy’s probable violation of the Elec-
tronic Communications Privacy Act.
I August: The Federal Trade Commission settles a complaint against Geo-
Cities, a major online service provider. The company agrees to explain its pri-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
122

vacy policies and agrees not to collect information from children without
parental consent.
I Fall: American online businesses face being excluded from Europe because
American privacy standards are much weaker than those of Europe. Negoti-
ations continue in an attempt to resolve the issue.
I December: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announces “Know
Your Customer” regulations. The regulations, strongly opposed by bankers
and privacy advocates, would require banks to create “proﬁles” of a customer’s
typical activity and to watch closely for “unusual” transactions. After the Lib-
ertarian Party and other opponents organized a campaign that ﬂooded the
FDIC with e-mail, the proposed regulations were withdrawn March 1999.
1999
I January: The giant computer chip maker Intel arouses the concern of pri-
vacy activists when plans are revealed to include serial numbers in forthcom-
ing Pentium III chips that could be used to track the location of computers.
I February: Faced by strong criticism from privacy groups, the states of
Florida, South Carolina, and Colorado back down from their plans to sell dri-
ver’s license photos to a private company for use in preventing check fraud. 
I February 2: A federal jury brought in a verdict of more than $107 million
against the operators of an anti-abortion web site that had listed the names
and home addresses of abortion providers. The jury concluded the listings
constituted threats that were not protected by freedom of speech. The verdict
is eventually afﬁrmed by the U.S. Supreme Court.
I April: Microsoft Corporation and the Electronic Frontier Foundation
Jointly propose new guidelines for the Privacy Preferences Project, which
would assure online consumers that businesses were adhering to industry pri-
vacy standards.
I The Federal Trade Commission issues regulations implementing legislation
that in most cases requires parental consent for online gathering and distrib-
ution of information from children under 13.
I In response to privacy concerns, the federal Health Care Financing Adminis-
tration scales back its plans to collect personal information from patients re-
ceiving home health care.
I The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) proposes the use of computer-
assisted screening procedures to select passengers for additional searches both
randomly and on those who ﬁt the proﬁle of suspected terrorists. Privacy ad-
vocates argue that such searches are unreasonable and lack probable cause,
thereby violating the Fourth Amendment.
I May: The U.S. Ninth District Court of Appeals afﬁrms an earlier district
court ruling declaring that export restrictions on cryptographic “software and
related devices and technology are in violation of the First Amendment on
the grounds of prior restraint.” The government ﬁles an appeal to the
Supreme Court.
Chronology
123

I May: An e-commerce industry survey reveals that 90 percent of web sites still
do not have comprehensive privacy policies that give customers control over
the use of their information.
I August: The 10th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals rules that telephone com-
panies can share information about subscribers’ calling habits with marketers
without getting permission.
I October: Amy Boyer, a 20-year-old college student, is murdered in a parking
lot. Investigation reveals that she had been stalked online for several years by
Liam Youens, a fellow student. Youens had used the Internet to obtain Boyer’s
personal information and had recounted his obsession with her in an online
diary. It is the ﬁrst known cyberstalking murder.
I November 11: President Clinton signs the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. While
making it easier for ﬁnancial institutions to merge into conglomerates, the
law also imposes some restrictions on sharing of information and allows con-
sumers to deny permission for sharing data with unafﬁliated companies.
2000
I The FBI begins secretly to use a program called Carnivore to sift through
e-mail and other communications. The program is used only in a handful of
investigations.
I In this census year a number of privacy advocates object to questions in the
“long form” version of the census, which includes questions about physical
and mental disabilities and details about housing.
I January: The FTC reaches a settlement with ReverseAuctions.com. The
company had “harvested” information about eBay users without their
permission and then sent them deceptive spam soliciting their business.
ReverseAuctions.com agrees to no longer continue these practices and to de-
stroy information for which it does not have informed consent.
I January 12: The Supreme Court rejects state challenges to a federal law re-
quiring privacy safeguards for motor vehicle records.
I February 8: President Clinton issues an executive order prohibiting the use
of any genetic information in the hiring or promoting of government per-
sonnel. Legislation is also introduced in Congress to extend this prohibition
to the private sector.
I April: Investigators with the European Parliament charge that the United
States may be using its Echelon electronic communications monitoring system
to aid U.S. companies in industrial espionage against European competitors.
I April 4: In Junger v. Daley the Sixth U.S. Circuit Court rules that computer
code used for encryption is “speech” protected by the First Amendment.
I July 5: The European Parliament and the United States agree on “Safe Har-
bor principles” that allow U.S. companies to share data in a way that meets
Europe’s strict privacy requirements.
I July 10: The Federal Trade Commission tries to stop Toysmart, a failed “dot-
com,” from selling its customer lists. The company had previously promised
consumers that their information would not be disclosed to third parties.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
124

I August: A poll by the Pew Internet & American Life Project ﬁnds that most
online users want their privacy protected but don’t know how to protect their
information from abuse. Eighty-six percent of Internet users want informa-
tion not to be shared unless they “opt in.”
I September: A survey by the General Accounting Ofﬁce ﬁnds that 97 percent
of government web sites do not fully comply with the Federal Trade Com-
mission’s “fair information practices,” which require notice, choice, access,
and security.
2001
I January: Canada’s Personal Information Protection and Electronic Docu-
ments Act goes into effect. The comprehensive regulations for the collection,
use, and disclosure of personal data will at ﬁrst only apply to federally regu-
lated industries but will later be extended to cover provincial ones as well.
I January 22: The Federal Trade Commission concludes its investigation of
the Internet advertising company DoubleClick by determining that the ﬁrm
had not used or disclosed personally identifying information in violation of its
privacy policy. Under pressure from state attorneys general and private citi-
zens, DoubleClick had abandoned its plan (announced in 2000) to create con-
sumer profiles by combining web-browsing records with identifying
information.
I April: A study by the American Society of Newspaper Editors and the Free-
dom Forum suggests that Americans are conﬂicted about privacy: a majority
believes that access to government information is vital for good government,
but they are also concerned that governments and private companies not re-
lease information that infringes on individual privacy.
I April: A survey of children’s web sites released by the Federal Trade Com-
mission showed that while most of the sites offered some form of privacy no-
tice, most do not comply with all the provisions of the Children’s Online
Privacy Protection Act (COPPA). The Electronic Privacy Information Cen-
ter and 11 consumer organizations ﬁle suit against Amazon.com and eBay al-
leging COPPA violations.
I May: A report released by the Administrative Ofﬁce of the U.S. federal
courts reveals that 60 percent of “wiretaps” are actually “wireless taps” on cell
phones and pagers. Where encryption was encountered, authorities were able
to obtain the plaintext.
I May: The U.S. Supreme Court in Bartnicki v. Vopper rules that the media
cannot be held liable for revealing illegally intercepted communications re-
ceived from a third party.
I May: The Federal Trade Commission concludes that Amazon.com did not
engage in deceptive behavior by changing its privacy policy to allow it to sell
customer information as an asset in any merger or acquisition.
I May: A Gallup poll reports that two thirds of Internet users want new fed-
eral legislation to protect privacy online. Support for privacy legislation is
highest among the most frequent users of the Internet.
Chronology
125

I June: In Kyllo v. United States the Supreme Court rules that use of an infrared
thermal imaging device to detect heat coming from a person’s home in a search
for marijuana-growing facilities is a violation of the Fourth Amendment.
I September 7: Groups of activists conduct skits in front of public cameras to
protest video surveillance.
I September 11: The devastating terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center
and Pentagon create a political earthquake that shifts the balance for many
Americans from privacy to the need to identify potential terrorists.
I October 25: President George W. Bush signs the USA PATRIOT Act. The
law expands the kinds of personal information that government agencies can
examine and eases restrictions on some forms of wiretapping and data inter-
ception. The law also makes it easier to conduct secret searches.
2002
I January: The Electronic Privacy Information Center ﬁles a suit asking for
disclosure of records relating to the sale of personal information to law en-
forcement agencies. Experian and ChoicePoint have sold information in the
past, but agencies had not responded to requests under the Freedom of In-
formation Act.
I February: A large coalition of civil liberties and privacy groups urges the re-
jection of a plan to create a de facto national ID card through the standard-
ization of driver’s license information.
I February: Cable and Internet provider Comcast agrees to stop tracking the
web-browsing activities of its 1 million broadband Internet subscribers.
I February 21: The Massachusetts Supreme Court rules that an investigation
company called Source One cannot impersonate bank ofﬁcers or account
holders in order to learn the amount of their bank balance.
I April: The Colorado Supreme Court rules that records of book purchases
can be turned over to police only if there is a “compelling interest” that out-
weighs customers’ First Amendment rights.
I April: The Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P) speciﬁcations are released.
The system seeks to match web site privacy policies with users’ privacy settings.
I July: The Federal Communications Commission issues new regulations that
will allow telephone companies to share information about customers’ phone
habits with other companies that sell phone-related services. Companies will
only need to seek permission from customers if the data is going to an unre-
lated company.
I July 4: Activist John Gilmore is turned away at Oakland International Air-
port when he tries to board a plane without showing ID. He ﬁles suit, claim-
ing that the ID requirement for travel is unconstitutional and does not
contribute in any real way to the ﬁght against terrorism.
I October: The Transportation Security Agency ﬁnally acknowledges that it has
been maintaining a secret “No Fly” watch list of individuals considered to be
potential threats. Persons on the list can be prevented from boarding aircraft
or will be subject to intensive scrutiny. Privacy advocates decry the secrecy of
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
126

the criteria used and the inability of innocent persons to get themselves re-
moved from the list.
2003
I January: According to an annual report by the Federal Trade Commission,
consumer fraud has continued to increase rapidly. The leading fraud category
is identity theft, making up 43 percent of complaints. The number of re-
ported identity theft cases has risen sharply from 31,117 in 2000 to 161,819
in 2002.
I January: Gillette Co. and Wal-Mart jointly test “smart shelf” technology
using radio frequency identiﬁcation chips to track the disposition of prod-
ucts. Privacy advocates are concerned that they may someday be used to
track consumers.
I February 18: The New Hampshire Supreme Court rules in Remsberg v.
DocuSearch that information brokers and private investigators can be held liable
for the “foreseeable harms” involved in selling someone’s personal information.
I February 23: The Federal Trade Commission ﬁnes Mrs. Fields Cookies
$100,000 and Hershey Foods $85,000. The two companies had been charged
with violating the federal Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act by col-
lecting information from children under 13 years old without ensuring that
parents had consented.
I March 5: The U.S. Supreme Court upholds state sex offender registration
laws, commonly called “Megan’s Law,” saying that they are not punitive in
nature and can be applied retroactively. Privacy advocates believe that such
laws are often overbroad and can undo the goal of rehabilitation.
I April 14: The federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) goes into effect. For most patients the main effect is having to sign
a new disclosure form at the doctor’s ofﬁce. Smaller health plans are allowed
an additional year before they have to comply with the new rules.
I May: An annual report reveals that secret FISA (Foreign Intelligence Sur-
veillance Act) wiretaps were at an all-time high in 2002. All 1,228 wiretaps ap-
plied for were granted.
I June: The FCC and FTC begin to operate jointly a national telemarketing
“do not call” registry.
I July: Wal-Mart announces that it will begin to use wireless identiﬁcation
(RFID) tags in its warehouses but will not attach the tags to merchandise
being sold in its stores.
I August: Retired Admiral John M. Poindexter resigns as head of the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency’s Information Awareness Ofﬁce. The
Terrorist Information Awareness program has its funding sharply curtailed.
I August: The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
announces guidelines for the gathering of information about homeless people.
Although no national database on homelessness exists, privacy advocates are
concerned that the standardized information could easily be used for such a
project and readily shared with law enforcement agencies.
Chronology
127

I September: A coalition including EPIC, the Health Privacy Project, and 28
health care provider and labor rights advocates urges that the federal govern-
ment issue an explicit requirement that personal health information sent
through the banking network be accessible only to the providers or health
plans for whom it is intended.
I September: Congress kills funding for the controversial Terrorist Informa-
tion Awareness project.
I December: President Bush signs the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions
Act of 2003 into law. It strengthens federal privacy protections and provides
for consumers to obtain free annual credit reports. However, the law may pre-
empt and thus weaken some state privacy laws.
2004
I January: The U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology (US-
VISIT) program is launched. Beginning with 115 airports and 14 seaports,
the program uses ﬁngerprints, biometric data, background data, and itiner-
aries to determine whether persons should be admitted into the United
States.
I February: The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit upholds the Fed-
eral Trade Commission’s Do-Not-Call list, including fees charged to tele-
marketers to operate it.
I February: A group of physicians and hospitals tries to block the Justice De-
partment from obtaining medical records relating to late-term abortions. The
government says it needs the records for its legal defense of Partial Birth
Abortion Act of 2003.
I February: A Vermont state court rules that an opt-in requirement for insur-
ers sharing personal information does not violate First Amendment commer-
cial speech rights.
I February: The Privacy Ofﬁce of the Ofﬁce of Homeland Security criticizes
the Transportation Security Agency for its role in the inappropriate transfer
of passenger data from JetBlue airlines to the Department of Defense for use
by data mining contractors. A number of other airlines will eventually reveal
that they, too, secretly shared passenger records with government agencies.
I March: A Barcelona nightclub becomes one of the ﬁrst businesses to verify
customers using “VeriChip,” a tiny identiﬁcation device implanted under the
skin of patrons’ arms.
I May: A report by the General Accounting Ofﬁce reveals that the federal gov-
ernment has nearly 200 data-mining projects either in operation or in the
planning stage.
I May: A federal court frees Brandon Mayﬁeld, a lawyer and convert to Islam
who had been mistakenly identiﬁed through ﬁngerprints as being involved in
train bombings in Madrid. The mistake may have arisen from a combination
of poor imaging and human error by analysts.
I June 21: The U.S. Supreme Court rules (5-4) that a state can require per-
sons stopped by the police to tell them their names.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
128

I July: Department of Homeland Security head Tom Ridge announces that
CAPPS II, the latest airline-passenger proﬁling system, has been scrapped.
Privacy concerns are credited as a consideration in the decision.
I July: California begins enforcing the toughest state ﬁnancial privacy law in
the United States. It allows consumers to opt out of sharing information with
afﬁliated companies and requires companies to get permission before sharing
data with unrelated companies. Banking groups had challenged the law, but
the court ruled that federal law did not preempt the state provisions.
I July: President George W. Bush signs the Identity Theft Penalty Enhance-
ment Act. The law adds two years to prison sentences for persons convicted
of using a stolen credit card or Social Security numbers to commit crimes.
I November: The Transportation Security Agency requires that 72 airlines turn
over one month’s worth of passenger data for use in developing a new passen-
ger screening program. Privacy advocates strongly protest as airlines continue
to come under pressure to explain previous sharing of data with the TSA.
2005
I January: Police in Truro, Massachusetts, ask 800 male residents to provide
samples to be matched against DNA found in the body of a woman who had
been murdered three years earlier. Although authorities insist that giving a
sample is voluntary, they have also said that persons who do not cooperate
would have to be “looked at.”
I January: Britain’s new freedom of information act goes into effect. An in-
formation commissioner is now empowered to go to court on behalf of citi-
zens seeking information about government operations.
I January 4: The Securely Protect Yourself Against Cyber Trespass Act (SPY
Act) is reintroduced in the Senate. The House had passed the law the previ-
ous year. It would allow for ﬁnes of up to $3 million for makers of software
that obtains personal information from users’ PCs without permission.
I February: ChoicePoint, the nation’s largest data broker, reveals it had sold
personal information on about 145,000 consumers to identity thieves who
had posed as a legitimate business. The company offers to help potential vic-
tims but state and federal legislators soon demand tough new regulations on
selling such information.
I February: A California public elementary school drops plans to require stu-
dents to wear radio frequency ID badges. Privacy advocates had strongly ob-
jected, saying the experimental program would treat students like “inventory
items.”
I February: It is revealed that the attorney general of Kansas has issued sub-
poenas for the complete medical records of women who sought late-term
abortions at two clinics. The records were said to be needed for investigation
of child sexual abuse laws and of laws limiting late-term abortions. The two
clinics have gone to court to try to block the subpoenas.
I February 18: The Senate unanimously passes the Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination Act of 2005. Similar legislation died in the House the
Chronology
129

previous year. The bill would prohibit the use of genetic information in em-
ployment decisions and would also prevent health insurance companies from
denying coverage based on genetic information.
I March 24: The Federal Reserve Board tells banks that they should notify
customers “as soon as possible” if their ﬁnancial information has been stolen
or improperly accessed. Such notiﬁcation may help deal with a growing epi-
demic of identity theft.
I March 25: A report from the inspector’s ofﬁce of the Department of Home-
land Security says that the Transportation Security Administration misled the
public about the use of passenger data in developing its computerized pas-
senger screening system. At least 12 million passenger records were trans-
ferred in 2002 and 2003 without passenger knowledge or permission.
I April: The House begins hearings on the renewal or modiﬁcation of a num-
ber of provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act, including one allowing the
searching of library and bookstore records and another providing for secret
“sneak and peek” warrants.
I April: The Senate Judiciary Committee grills representatives of ChoicePoint
and Lexis/Nexis, data services that have inadvertently sold thousands of con-
sumer data records to cybercriminals.
I July 12: British police announce that they had used footage from ubiquitous
closed-circuit TV public surveillance cameras to identify four suspected
bombers who killed more than 50 people in London on July 7. Suspects from
the unsuccessful July 21 attacks will also be quickly identiﬁed from camera
images.
I November: House and Senate negotiators agree to make most provisions of
the USA PATRIOT Act permanent. However, provisions associated with
searching of library and bookstore records, as well as “sneak and peek”
searches would be renewed for only seven years.
I November 2: The U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit rules
that parents have no right to prevent public schools from asking students “in-
trusive” questions about sex in a classroom survey.
I December: Revelations of secret wiretaps without court authorization pro-
voke widespread controversy. President Bush argues that eavesdroppng on
domestic conversations with suspected foreign terrorists is within his consti-
tutional power and was also authorized by Congress. Many civil libertarians
disagee. 
I December 30: Unable to agree on renewing a number of controversial provi-
sions,  Congress passes a one-month extension of the USA Patriot Act.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
130

BIOGRAPHICAL LISTING
This chapter offers brief biographical entries for a variety of persons who have
played an important role in the development of privacy issues, from the techni-
cal side, through their ﬁction or nonﬁction writing, or in litigation and activism.
Note that these entries include only material relevant to privacy issues; they are
not intended to be complete biographical sketches. See Chapter 7, Annotated
Bibliography, for more information on book titles cited.
John Ashcroft, attorney general of the United States, 2000–04. A former gov-
ernor of Missouri and then senator, Ashcroft’s nomination as attorney general
proved to be the most contentious of George W. Bush’s cabinet picks. After
the attacks of September 11, 2001, Ashcroft, as the nation’s chief law enforcer,
did pledge to uphold civil liberties but also suggested that critics who raised
constitutional issues were aiding terrorism. He espoused stronger powers for
law enforcement (such as those in the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001) with its
expanded surveillance powers and resisted attempts to get information about
the treatment of terrorism suspects and the details of proposed new surveil-
lance programs.
David Banisar, prominent information privacy expert. He is currently a Policy
Fellow in the Open Society Institute and Visiting Research Fellow at the
University of Leeds, England. Previously he was a Research Fellow at the
Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, where he worked
with the Harvard Information Infrastructure Project. Banisar is also Deputy
Director of Privacy International, a U.K.-based privacy advocacy group. Ear-
lier, Banisar was a founder and privacy director of the Electronic Privacy In-
formation Center and has contributed to various EPIC publications, as well
as serving as contributing editor to Privacy Times.
John Perry Barlow, a retired Wyoming cattle rancher and Grateful Dead lyri-
cist. Barlow found himself in the unlikely position of Internet activist and vi-
sionary of virtual communities. In response to the Operation Sundevil Secret
Service raids and the seizing of Steve Jackson’s computers, Barlow cofounded
the Electronic Frontier Foundation, often described as an “ACLU for cyber-
space.”
Daniel Bernstein, mathematician and cryptographer. Bernstein wrote a
cryptography-related paper and computer program and was told by the
131
CHAPTER 4

federal government that it was classified as a “munition” and could not be
exported. Aided by John Gilmore and the Electronic Freedom Foundation,
Bernstein sued and won a decision that declared that computer source code
was a form of speech protected by the First Amendment.
Robert Bork, law professor and former solicitor general and acting attorney
general of the United States during the Nixon administration. As acting at-
torney general he played a controversial role in the Watergate affair. He then
became a judge in the U.S. Court of Appeals. Bork’s nomination to the
Supreme Court was embroiled in controversy, in part because he believed in
a stricter, more literal construction of the Constitution and opposed the ﬁnd-
ing of a broad right of privacy (as had been done in Roe v. Wade). Ironically,
Bork’s own privacy was violated by the publication of his video rental records,
which led to the passage of the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988.
Louis Brandeis, chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, 1916–39. Brandeis
took a liberal position on antitrust issues and the right of the government to
impose regulations such as minimum wage and maximum working hours.
While supporting expanding government powers to control commerce, he
took a libertarian position in favor of the individual in dealing with govern-
ment power. In 1928, Brandeis wrote a dissent to the Olmstead decision in
which he said that the Court must reinterpret the constitutional protection
for privacy to take account of new technologies that threatened it.
David Brin, science-ﬁction author and writer on cyberspace and virtual com-
munities. His book The Transparent Society (1998) promotes an unusual ap-
proach to the privacy issue. Brin argues that creating effective privacy
protections is impossible due to the pervasiveness of new information and
communications technology. Instead, activists should concentrate on putting
individuals, the government, and corporations on a more equal footing by
making sure that the watchers can be watched in turn.
Fred Cate, expert on privacy and information law, including international pri-
vacy. From 1994 to 1996 he chaired the Annenberg Washington Program’s
project on Global Information Privacy. He is the author of the handbook Pri-
vacy in the Information Age.
Simon Gordon Davies, pioneer privacy activist, founder of Privacy Interna-
tional, a London-based worldwide privacy watchdog group. The group high-
lights privacy concerns and campaigns for stronger privacy protections.
Davies is also Visiting Research Fellow at the London School of Economics
and Political Science. Davies received a 1999 Electronic Frontier Foundation
Pioneer Award for his work. He also created the Big Brother Award, a “prize”
granted to organizations that commit particularly flagrant violations of
privacy.
Dorothy Denning, professor of computer science at Georgetown University.
Denning is a widely recognized expert on data security and “information war-
fare.” She was involved in the Clipper Chip debate with cryptography ac-
tivists. Denning is director of the Georgetown Institute for Information
Assurance. She has written numerous publications on data protection, infor-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
132

mation security, computer crime, and cyberterrorism. She has been honored
with a fellowship by the Association for Computing Machinery and is a re-
cipient of the organization’s Augusta Ada Lovelace Award.
Whitﬁeld Difﬁe, cryptographer and developer of public key cryptography
(with Martin Hellman and Ralph Merkle) in 1975. Difﬁe has become an ac-
tivist for widespread use of cryptography to protect privacy, as well as a kind
of elder statesman for the activists known as “cypherpunks.” Difﬁe has been
with Sun Microsystems since 1991 and today is the corporation’s chief secu-
rity ofﬁcer. He is coauthor (with Susan Landau) of Privacy on the Line: The
Politics of Wiretapping and Encryption (1998).
Amitai Etzioni, sociologist and founder of a movement called communitarian-
ism that combines liberal social activism with conservative values of personal
responsibility. In his book The Limits of Privacy, Etzioni criticizes what he sees
as an overemphasis on individual privacy that can prevent society from deal-
ing with problems such as terrorism, crime, and the spread of AIDS. He be-
lieves that government can use databases of personal information responsibly
in carrying out social programs.
Louis J. Freeh, director of the FBI, 1993–2001. Freeh found himself in the
center of major cases such as the Oklahoma City bombing and the 1996 At-
lanta Olympics bombing. Freeh expressed the FBI’s concern that it be given
sufﬁcient means to conduct surveillance and carry out search warrants in the
computer age. This was translated into such proposals as the Clipper Chip
and the key escrow proposals, both vigorously opposed by privacy advocates.
Simson Garfinkel, computer security expert, journalist, and author.
Garfinkel has written articles on computer-related issues for The Boston
Globe, The San Jose Mercury News, and other publications. He was a found-
ing contributor to Wired magazine and continues to be a regular contribu-
tor. Garfinkel has also written many books on computer security and other
technical issues, but he is best known for his 2000 book Database Nation. In
it Garfinkel sounded an alarm about the pervasiveness of information gath-
ering and surveillance technology at the turn of the millennium. (Consumer
advocate and political maverick Ralph Nader praised this book as “a graphic
and blistering indictment.”)
William Gibson, science-ﬁction writer. His novel Neuromancer (1984) de-
scribed a future in which people directly experienced a computer-generated
world called cyberspace. Gibson and other science-ﬁction writers have ex-
plored the implications of such a world for privacy, anonymity, and even
identity.
John Gilmore, cryptographer, activist, and cofounder of the Electronic Fron-
tier Foundation. Gilmore is passionately involved in the development of free
software and the promotion of cryptography to protect ordinary people’s data
from government surveillance. Among his attributed sayings is “the Net
treats censorship as damage and routs around it.” Recently Gilmore under-
took what many view as a quixotic challenge to post–September 11 airport
regulations by trying to ﬂy without showing identiﬁcation. Gilmore argues
Biographical Listing
133

that current identiﬁcation systems provide no real security since they can be
easily fooled by terrorists.
Beth Givens, founder and director of the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse in San
Diego and author of the Privacy Rights Handbook. Her background includes
library and information science, telecommunications policy, and consumer
activism (particularly with regard to utilities).
Mike Godwin, counsel to the Electronic Frontier Foundation. Godwin has
been involved in numerous high-proﬁle online issues including libel, intel-
lectual property, privacy, and freedom of expression. He is best known for
playing a major role in the successful court ﬁght against the Computer De-
cency Act of 1996. He recounts his battles in Cyber Rights: Defending Free
Speech in the Digital Age.
Emmanuel Goldstein, editor of 2600, the “Hacker quarterly.” His name is a
pseudonym taken from the character in George Orwell’s 1984. He has become
a visible spokesperson for the virtues of hacking (in the original sense of cre-
ative exploration of computing) and an advocate for free access to information.
Al Gore, former representative and senator; vice president of the United States
(1993–2000). Gore took a leading role as the Clinton administration’s
spokesperson and advocate for developing the “information superhighway”
and providing widespread access to the Internet. He also promoted the ad-
ministration’s “bill of rights for the Information Age” proposals, including ex-
panded consumer and patient privacy protections.
Johan Helsingus, developer of a controversial anonymous remailing service.
The service, called anon.penet.ﬁ, allowed users to strip the original address
headers from e-mail and send it anonymously. In August 1996, Helsingus
shut down the service rather than comply with a court order to reveal the
identity of a user. Helsingus continued to advocate for the protection of pri-
vacy and anonymity on the Internet.
Chris Jay Hoofnagel, director of the West Coast ofﬁce of the Electronic Pri-
vacy Information Center. In his congressional testimony and writings, Hoof-
nagel has specialized in ﬁnancial services privacy and related issues such as the
misuse of Social Security numbers, identity theft, and abuses by commercial
data brokers.
J. Edgar Hoover, director of the FBI, 1924–72. He largely shaped the prac-
tices of the FBI, taking it from Prohibition to the radical tumult of the
1960s. Along the way, he organized high-profile efforts against gangsters
and Communists, expanded the use of wiretapping, surveillance, and infil-
tration, which he often turned against political enemies, arousing civil lib-
erties concerns.
Steve Jackson, designer and publisher of role-playing and board games. In
1990, his company’s computers were seized by the Secret Service because of
vague connections to a stolen phone-company document. Jackson sued the
government and eventually collected damages.
Mitch Kapor, entrepreneur and founder of Lotus Corporation, which was one
of the early success stories in the personal computer revolution. He has a
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
134

wide background in psychological and spiritual studies as well as computer
science. In 1990, he joined with John Perry Barlow to found the Electronic
Frontier Foundation to defend civil liberties in the Information Age.
John Locke, English philosopher and political scientist, 1643–1704; author of
Two Treatises on Government (1690). Locke’s writings were very inﬂuential in
establishing constitutional government and the protection of individual
rights. Locke believed that government held its power only so long as it ful-
ﬁlled the people’s need for security, and that individuals had inherent rights
(such as the right to property). This creates fertile ground for the develop-
ment of privacy rights.
Timothy McVeigh, chief petty ofﬁcer in the U.S. Navy (not the same man as
the Oklahoma City bomber). His 17-year distinguished naval career was
threatened in September 1997 when the navy obtained information from
America Online that revealed that he was a user who had described gay-related
interests in his user profile. McVeigh sued in 1998, arguing that the navy
had violated the Electronic Communications Privacy Act. He won a court
order blocking the navy from discharging him and eventually retired with a
promotion.
Norman Y. Mineta, former U.S. Secretary of Transportation and current head
of the Transportation Security Agency (2001– ). After the attacks of Septem-
ber 11, 2001, President George W. Bush created the Transportation Security
Agency (TSA) to overhaul airport security in the face of the terrorist threat.
In this challenging post Mineta faced great pressure to install new screening
equipment, train the now federalized airport security personnel, and to pro-
vide additional security for the nation’s seaports, highways, pipelines, and
other connecting infrastructure. However, a number of related initiatives
such as the Computer-Assisted Passenger Pre-Screening System (CAPPS I
and CAPPS II) and the later “Secure Flight” program would raise objections
from privacy advocates.
Kevin Mitnick, convicted hacker turned computer security expert. Mitnick
served nearly ﬁve years in prison for unauthorized computer access, stealing
credit card numbers, and fraud. After his release in 2000, Mitnick began to
speak and write about computer security: His 2002 book, The Art of Deception,
provides a sobering portrait of how hackers routinely trick people into re-
vealing information and providing access to sensitive computer systems.
(Mitnick covered other hacking techniques in a companion book, The Art of
Intrusion, published in 2005.)
Robert S. Mueller, head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (2001– ). In the
ﬁrst half of the year 2001, Mueller served as U.S. deputy attorney general and was
then nominated and conﬁrmed as Director of the FBI, taking ofﬁce only a week
before the September 11 terrorist attacks. Mueller, who already faced the chal-
lenge of reforming an agency that suffered considerable embarrassment, such as
quality control problems in the FBI labs, had to change the priorities of the or-
ganization to deal with the terrorist threat while building coordination with the
CIA and later, with the newly organized Department of Homeland Security. As
Biographical Listing
135

head of the FBI, Mueller continues to deal with both the perceived shortcomings
of the agency in detecting terrorists and accusations that investigative methods
are unfair or poorly targeted, threatening freedom of association and privacy, par-
ticularly of Muslim Americans.
George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Arthur Blair) early 20th-century British
writer. His novel 1984, published in 1948, describes a world in which televi-
sion and other technology is used by a totalitarian government for complete
surveillance and control that extends to the use of language and thinking it-
self. Government thus acts as, what Orwell termed, a “Big Brother” who con-
stantly watches over his younger siblings (the nation’s citizens) making sure
they don’t “misbehave.” Privacy advocates have noted that while a centralized
Big Brother has not emerged (at least in the Western democracies), the abuse
of technology to spy on and control the individual is a very real threat, al-
though decentralized technology, such as the personal computer and the In-
ternet, can also be used to resist totalitarian projects and to create alternative
forms of community and governance.
John M. Poindexter, an admiral who authorized illicit arms-for-hostages deals
in the Iran-contra scandal of the 1980s and who reemerged after 2001 with
controversial ideas for ﬁghting terrorism. He ﬁrst proposed a “terrorism fu-
tures” project in which successful predictions of attacks could be rewarded
using a sort of market mechanism. After quickly backing away under a storm
of criticism, Poindexter then headed the Total Information Awareness (later
Terrorism Information Awareness) research project for the Department of
Defense. This project, which proposed to use massive integration and data-
mining facilities, was strongly criticized by privacy advocates; funding was
stopped by Congress in February 2003.
John Postel, distinguished computer scientist and a major architect of the In-
ternet. His interests ranged from the highly technical (data protocols and
switching systems) to the realm of social communications (e-mail and multi-
media conferencing services). Postel established the Internet Assigned Num-
bers Authority (IANA), which devised the system of address numbers on
which the Internet relies for making connections. As a trustee of the Internet
Society, Postel was involved with privacy concerns and received a posthu-
mous 1999 Electronic Frontier Foundation Pioneer Award.
Marc Rotenberg, director of the Electronic Privacy Information Center and
former head of the Washington ofﬁce of the Computer Professionals for So-
cial Responsibility. Rotenberg teaches information privacy law at George-
town University Law Center. Rotenberg has served on numerous important
panels relating to privacy issues and testiﬁed before the 9-11 Committee on
“Security and Liberty: Protecting Privacy, Preventing Terrorism.” He is chair
of the American Bar Association Committee on Privacy and Information
Protection and has edited The Privacy Law Sourcebook and is coeditor of Infor-
mation Privacy Law.
Susan Scott, technology analyst and publisher; former CEO of Upside Publish-
ing. From 1996 to 1999 Scott was executive director of TRUSTe, an organi-
zation that veriﬁes and guarantees the privacy policies of online businesses.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
136

Robert Ellis Smith, proliﬁc writer on the legal and cultural aspects of privacy.
His latest publication, Ben Franklin’s Web Site, describes the interplay of “pri-
vacy and curiosity from Plymouth Rock to the Internet.” Smith has also been
publisher of Privacy Journal since 1974 and has written compilations of pri-
vacy laws and incidents of invasion of privacy.
Richard Stallman, founder of the Free Software Foundation, which promotes
the cooperative creation and distribution of noncommercial software. This
movement has been inﬂuential in providing alternative operating systems,
promoting free access to technical information, and creating freely distrib-
utable software that is free from corporate or governmental control.
Lawrence Tribe, noted constitutional expert and civil libertarian. In his ad-
dress to the First Conference on Computers, Freedom, and Privacy (March
6, 1991) entitled “The Constitution in Cyberspace: Law and Liberty Beyond
the Electronic Frontier,” Tribe suggested that a new constitutional amend-
ment might make it clear that the fundamental rights of free expression and
privacy will be guaranteed regardless of the type of technology involved.
Earl Warren, chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, 1953–69. Warren played
a major role in the expansion of civil rights and civil liberties, including the
Griswold case, which established a right of personal privacy as implied in the
language of the Constitution.
Liam Youens, the ﬁrst known cyberstalker-murderer. Youens became obsessed
with Amy Boyer, a 20-year-old dental-hygiene student. Besides physically fol-
lowing her, Youens used the Internet to ﬁnd Boyer’s Social Security number
and work address. He also posted a web diary in which he chronicled his
growing obsession, details of the stalking, and eventually his plans to murder
Boyer. Despite the web site being online for at least two years, no one re-
ported it to the police. Boyer eventually carried out his plan, shooting Boyer
as she drove home from work. The murder publicized the growing problem
of cyberstalking and the ease with which stalkers could obtain information via
the Internet.
Philip Zimmermann, software engineer and cryptographer. Zimmermann de-
veloped the Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) program in 1991 and became em-
broiled in legal skirmishes with government agencies that tried to restrict its
export. When the government dropped its legal efforts in 1996, Zimmer-
mann founded a company to develop and market his encryption software.
Biographical Listing
137

GLOSSARY
afﬁliated company
A company that is owned or controlled by a parent com-
pany. Privacy policies and regulations often treat a company’s afﬁliates and
unrelated companies differently.
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)
An organization founded in 1915
to protect the civil liberties asserted in the Bill of Rights. This mission has in-
volved the ACLU in many privacy issues.
anonymity
The online world allows opportunities to interact with people
without identifying oneself. Anonymity is related to privacy in that it protects
personal identity, and it can be a liberating experience. But anonymity creates
the problem of lack of accountability for harmful actions.
Big Brother
A pervasive, all-seeing government surveillance and control sys-
tem; named after a character in George Orwell’s 1984.
Bill of Rights
The ﬁrst 10 amendments to the U.S. Constitution. Of these,
the Fourth, Fifth, and Ninth amendments have particular relevance to the
protection of privacy.
biometrics
Automatic identiﬁcation or matching of persons based upon phys-
ical characteristics such as facial geometry, ﬁngerprints, or retinal patterns.
bulletin board systems (BBS)
Dial-up computers where users can leave
messages or download or upload ﬁles. They became popular in the mid-
1980s but have been largely superseded by the Internet.
Caller ID
Telephone service that allows callers to know the phone number
from which incoming calls originate. Caller ID raises privacy concerns when
callers wish to remain anonymous.
CAPPS (Computer Assisted Passenger Pre-screening System)
A system
in development starting in 2002 to proﬁle or identify potential terrorist
threats by analyzing data gathered by airlines as part of the passenger book-
ing process. CAPPS-2 is an enhanced and expanded version.
Carnivore
A software program used by federal law enforcement agencies in
2000 and 2001. It could identify the sources and destinations of electronic
communications. It was replaced by the use of commercial software.
CCTV
Closed circuit television used for monitoring or surveillance.
ciphertext
In cryptography, text that has been made unreadable by applying
a code key and an encryption method.
138
CHAPTER 5

Clipper Chip
A proposed device that would provide encryption services but
also allow the government to read encrypted messages.
COINTELPRO (Counterintelligence Program)
Widespread FBI surveil-
lance and inﬁltration of dissident groups (such as civil rights and antiwar ac-
tivists) from the 1960s into the 1980s. When revealed, it fueled privacy
concerns.
compelling state interest
The strictest test applied by courts to see whether
an invasion of privacy by the government is justiﬁed. It is applied, for exam-
ple, to matters of contraception or abortion.
computer matching
The comparison of two or more databases to ﬁnd indi-
viduals who should be investigated: for example, matching a database of per-
sons who are delinquent in paying child support with a database of tax refunds.
cookie
A small ﬁle that some web sites write onto the user’s hard drive. It can
be used to recognize that user in subsequent sessions, customize the user in-
terface, or to create a proﬁle of that user that can be sold to marketers. It is
this third use that raises privacy concerns.
credit reporting agency (CRA)
A central clearinghouse for information
about credit purchases and payments; the three major credit bureaus are
TRW, Equifax, and TransUnion.
cryptography
The science of code making (and code breaking).
cryptosystem
A system for encoding text so that it can be read only by some-
one who has the key.
customer proprietary network information
Industry term for records kept
by a telecommunications company that show the time, destination, duration,
and other information about customers’ calls. Recent regulatory decisions
have allowed this information to be shared with related companies without
requiring the customer’s permission.
cyberspace
The imaginary world experienced by online users. It can include
many places such as schools, libraries, stores, game arenas, and private “chat”
rooms that are analogous to their “real-life” counterparts.
cypherpunks
Self-designation of a group of activists who promote the wide-
spread use of cryptography to protect privacy, and who oppose government
controls on the technology.
database
An organized collection of information maintained on a computer
system. It usually consists of a number of related ﬁles containing records that
are further broken down into ﬁelds such as name, address, and Social Secu-
rity number.
data broker (or information broker)
A person or company that collects,
packages, and sells computerized information (such as mailing lists or indi-
vidual proﬁles). Data brokers have little speciﬁc regulation.
data mining
The extraction of data (such as from consumer purchase records)
that can be used or sold to marketers.
Data Protection Directive
The European Union’s comprehensive regula-
tions (announced in 1995) governing the collection, disclosure, distribution,
and access to computerized information.
Glossar y
139

decisional privacy
The right to make decisions in certain matters (such as re-
production or sexual relations) without being subjected to government scrutiny.
DES
A government-approved system for encoding text; comes in different
strengths measured by the number of bits in the code key. First introduced in
1977, DES came under attack as being too weak; the 56-bit DES has already
been “cracked” by teams of programmers.
digital signature
One of various methods of combining an individual’s private
encryption key with a message. Readers can use the individual’s public key to
verify that the message was created by that individual.
direct mailer
An organization that gathers or obtains mailing lists and sends
advertising to everyone on the list.
disclosure
In privacy policies, the requirement that an organization reveal to
affected persons what it intends to do with the information it collects. Also,
the revealing of information collected from an individual to a third party.
“Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, Don’t Pursue”
A controversial policy that allows
gays to serve in the military if they don’t reveal their sexual orientation. Au-
thorities are not supposed to initiate investigations unless there is such a rev-
elation. The policy has aroused privacy concerns, such as in the case of Chief
Petty Ofﬁcer Timothy McVeigh.
eavesdropping
Listening to a conversation without the knowledge or con-
sent of the participants. Wiretapping is eavesdropping on telecommunica-
tions; surveillance is the systematic surreptitious observation of someone or
someplace.
Echelon
A shadowy international communications-monitoring network led
by the United States and believed to be able to scan millions of e-mails, faxes,
phone calls, and other messages for items of interest.
electronic commerce (e-commerce)
The buying and selling of goods and
services online, usually through web sites. It has been rapidly growing since
the mid-1990s.
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986
Federal legislation that
extended the Privacy Act of 1974 to include most forms of telecommunica-
tions and data networks.
Electronic Freedom of Information Act of 1986
The Electronic Freedom
of Information Act of 1986 extended the principles of the 1966 Freedom of
Information Act to computerized records.
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
A civil liberties organization
founded by John Perry Barlow and Mitch Kapor in 1990 in response to gov-
ernment seizure of computers in the Operation Sundevil hacker sweep. It
quickly became involved in other issues, such as privacy and free speech.
Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC)
A public interest research
group founded in 1994, EPIC is concerned with issues of privacy and free
speech in the online world, and includes a legal team as well as educational
outreach.
e-mail (electronic mail)
Messages sent to one or more individuals over a
computer network.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
140

encryption
The process of applying a code key to text in order to create a
message that cannot be read without the proper key.
Event Data Recorder (EDR)
A “black box” device that records data about
the operation of a vehicle, similar to ﬂight data recorders used in aircraft.
Data from an EDR can indicate unsafe driving but raises privacy concerns.
Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1992
Federal legislation that sets basic re-
quirements for the preparation and distribution of credit reports; regulates
purposes for which reports can be disclosed and gives individuals the right to
see and correct their reports.
Fair Information Principles
Basic protections for privacy suggested by ex-
perts and advocates starting in the 1970s. They include disclosure of infor-
mation-gathering activities and the right of an individual to view and correct
records pertaining to him or her. The Privacy Act of 1974 attempted to im-
plement these principles.
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
Government agency that sets many rules
for how goods and services are bought or sold in the marketplace. It has pro-
posed stronger privacy regulations, particularly where children are involved.
Fifth Amendment
Part of the Bill of Rights of the U.S. Constitution. One
clause prevents the government from forcing an accused individual to confess
guilt; it has thus been interpreted as a protection of privacy.
ﬁrewall
A program and/or hardware device that inspects Internet packets and
can block and alert users to possible attacks involving viruses, worms, and
Trojan horse programs. More sophisticated ﬁrewalls also examine outgoing
packets that might contain sensitive information.
Fourth Amendment
Part of the Bill of Rights of the U.S. Constitution. It
protects against law enforcement ofﬁcers searching property or seizing evi-
dence without a warrant.
Freedom of Information Act of 1966
Federal legislation that implements
the principle that citizens have the right to know about government activities
and see government records pertaining to them.
genetic information
Information from tests that reveal genetic (hereditary)
characteristics such as susceptibility to a particular disease.
Geographical Information System (GIS)
A system that draws maps from
computer databases that can include physical data, census data, or other in-
formation. Such systems have the potential for being used to aid intrusive
surveillance or marketing.
GPS (Global Positioning System)
A system in which signals from several
satellites are timed in order to determine the precise location of the receiver
on the Earth’s surface. It can be used to track the location of vehicles, cell
phones, and so on.
hacker
Originally, this term referred to an unusually skilled and often ob-
sessed programmer; in recent years it has come to mean someone who ille-
gally breaks into computer systems to destroy them or to steal information.
health maintenance organizations (HMOs)
Health care providers that offer
a package of health beneﬁts through employers or directly to individuals.
Glossar y
141

Their attempt to reduce high medical costs has led to a number of issues in-
cluding privacy concerns.
Hippocratic Oath
An ancient physician’s oath that, among other things,
promises that a doctor will not divulge information about a patient’s medical
condition to a third party.
home is your castle
The idea enshrined in English law that any person’s
home should be protected against intrusion by the government except
through proper legal process.
honesty test
A psychological test designed to identify persons who have a
tendency to lie, steal, or engage in other dishonest behavior. The tests have
aroused concerns about both their validity and their abuse of privacy.
identity theft
The use of stolen credit information (such as name, Social Se-
curity number, and bank account numbers) to assume another person’s iden-
tity in order to make credit purchases or cash withdrawals.
incorporation doctrine
Developed gradually during the mid-20th century,
the principle that the Fourteenth Amendment guarantees of due process and
equal treatment require the states as well as the federal government to en-
force the guarantees in the Bill of Rights.
information privacy
The aspect of privacy that focuses on the right of the in-
dividual to control how personal information is obtained or used.
International Trafﬁc in Arms Regulations (ITAR)
A regulation that has
been used to restrict the export of encryption software; challenged in U.S.
Department of State v. Bernstein.
Internet
The rapidly growing worldwide interconnection of computers and
networks that communicate using a standard protocol called TCP/IP.
Internet service provider (ISP)
A company that offers connections to the
Internet, usually for a monthly fee.
key
A string of text (or piece of data) that when input into a coding system
with the coded ciphertext, reveals the original message (plaintext).
key escrow
The placing of a copy of a user’s encryption key with a third
party so it can be retrieved by law enforcement ofﬁcials who have obtained
a court order.
keylogger
A program that surreptitiously intercepts information being typed
at the keyboard, such as passwords.
loyalty card
A card used to provide discounts and targeted offers to customers
(such as in supermarkets). Use of the card allows the store to track the cus-
tomer’s buying habits.
Medical Information Bureau
A private database used by life and medical in-
surance companies to share medical information about applicants and to de-
termine whether to offer coverage.
Ninth Amendment
Part of the Bill of Rights. It states that “The enumera-
tion in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or
disparage others retained by the people.” During the 1960s and 1970s, a ma-
jority of Supreme Court justices used the idea of unspeciﬁed rights to ﬁnd
that the Constitution implied a broader individual right of privacy regarding
matters such as contraception, abortion, and reproduction.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
142

online services
Companies that set up computers with services such as mes-
sage forums, chat rooms, and ﬁle libraries. Examples include America Online
and CompuServe. These services were originally stand-alone, but during the
1990s they connected to the Internet and became value-added Internet ser-
vice providers.
opt-in
Requirement that persons speciﬁcally authorize use or sharing of per-
sonal information by a company or institution.
opt-out
System under which a company can share personal information or
market to a consumer unless the consumer speciﬁcally tells them not to do so.
pen register
A device used at the telephone company office to record the
numbers dialed from a person’s phone. Pen registers can be installed by law
enforcement agencies after obtaining a court order, or may be used by
phone companies to investigate both fraudulent use of the service and ha-
rassing calls.
plaintext
The result of decoding an encrypted message into readable text.
Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P)
A software standard developed by
the World Wide Web Consortium allowing users to match their privacy re-
quirements to the privacy policies of web sites.
polygraph
A device used to assess the truthfulness of statements by measur-
ing symptoms of physical stress; commonly called a “lie detector.”
pretexting
The use of impersonation or other forms of deception to obtain
private information without the subject’s consent.
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
A popular software package that lets users en-
crypt their e-mail and other data ﬁles.
Principles for Providing and Using Personal Information
Principles for in-
formation use originating from a committee of U.S. government agencies
and published in 1995. Subjects covered include respect for individual privacy
in collecting and disclosing information, informing affected persons about
their rights and responsibilities, and offering the opportunity to correct in-
correct information.
privacy
The ability of an individual to prevent intrusion or to control the
gathering or use of personal information.
Privacy Act of 1974
Basic federal law that regulates the distribution of infor-
mation by federal agencies and the right of an individual to obtain (and pos-
sibly correct) records pertaining to him or her.
proﬁle
A description of characteristics of a suspect or person of interest that
can be matched against databases.
public-key certiﬁcate
A digital record created by a certiﬁcation agency using
an individual’s private key and other information, and containing the public
key. An individual can verify the certiﬁcate’s integrity and be assured that the
public key belongs to the individual identiﬁed.
public-key cryptography
A system where each user has two related code
keys, one public and one private. The public key can be used by anyone to
send a message, which can be read only by the user with the corresponding
private key. The private key in turn can authenticate the user by creating a
message that can be read by anyone with the public key.
Glossar y
143

reasonable expectation of privacy
A test used by courts in deciding privacy
cases. It describes circumstances (such as making a call in a phone booth)
where a person should be allowed to assume that he or she is engaging in pri-
vate conduct.
reasonable relationship
A less rigorous test applied by courts to determine
whether an invasion of privacy is justiﬁed. Applied, for example, to businesses
monitoring employee performance, to determine if the monitoring has a rea-
sonable relationship to business objectives.
reverse directory
A telephone directory that can be used to look up the ad-
dress corresponding to a phone number. It can be used by telemarketers to
create mailing lists.
RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Device)
A small tag attached to
merchandise that transmits an identiﬁer for inventory management purposes.
Critics suggest that the tags could also be used to track the owners of the
merchandise or compile information about their purchases.
RSA
An algorithm (method) for encoding text by means of public-key cryp-
tography. Named for the last names of its developers at MIT (Rivest, Shamir,
and Adelman). See public-key cryptography.
Secure Server
A web program that can be used by online consumers to place or-
ders safely. Credit card information is encrypted so it cannot be read by hackers.
security-industrial complex
The idea that in the post–September 11 envi-
ronment, law enforcement and intelligence agencies are working closely with
private companies to obtain and use large databases of personal information
in ways that could compromise freedom and privacy.
Smart Card
A small card equipped with a computer processor and memory.
Smart cards can be used for simple identiﬁcation but also for carrying data
such as the level of access, credit balance, or health information.
sneak and peek
A warrant that allows a search without prior notiﬁcation;
contained in a controversial provision of the USA PATRIOT Act.
spam
Unsolicited e-mail sent to a large number of recipients.
spyware
Software that transfers information from a user’s PC without their
knowledge; it is often concealed within attractive downloadable software
packages.
Super Bureau
A company that offers (for a fee) the ability to obtain just about
any sort of information about a person using government, credit, or other
databases. A “bureau” sometimes obtains information under false pretenses.
surveillance technology
General term for devices that allow a person’s activ-
ities or conversations to be observed from a distance, such as through micro-
phones, cameras, or infrared sensors.
telecommunications
General term for electronic transmission of informa-
tion, whether voice (phone), fax, or computer data.
telemarketer
A salesperson who contacts consumers by telephone; often ac-
cused of deceptive or high-pressure tactics.
trap and trace
A device that records the number from which an incoming call
originates. A court order is required except in cases involving harassing calls
or fraudulent use of the telephone service.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
144

TRUSTe
An organization that certiﬁes the privacy practices of online busi-
nesses that follow its guidelines.
Universal ID
Proposed single number that would uniquely identify an indi-
vidual in all government databases. To some extent Social Security numbers
have been used for this purpose. Its proposal arouses concerns because it in
effect puts all a person’s private information in one basket.
US-VISIT (U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology)
A
program begun in 2004 that uses identiﬁcation, background, and travel data
to attempt to detect persons with criminal or terrorist records before they
enter the country.
USA PATRIOT Act
Post–September 11, 2001, law that contains several pro-
visions expanding government search and surveillance powers.
web browser
A program that lets users ﬁnd and navigate through pages of in-
formation, graphics, etc., on the World Wide Web.
webcam
A camera set up by a person to continually broadcast his or her ac-
tivities to the Internet. The opposite of privacy; a form of electronic exhibi-
tionism and perhaps a cultural artifact.
Wiretap Act of 1968
Federal law that extended Fourth Amendment privacy
protections to telecommunications.
wiretapping
The interception of telephone voice or data transmission by
someone other than its intended recipient.
World Wide Web
A system that links pages of text, graphics, sound, and
other resources on the Internet to one another, giving each a unique address.
A web browser can be used to display and navigate the pages.
Glossar y
145


PART II
GUIDE TO FURTHER 
RESEARCH


HOW TO RESEARCH
PRIVACY ISSUES
The tremendous growth in the amount of resources and services available
through the Internet (and particularly, the World Wide Web) is providing pow-
erful new tools for researchers. Mastery of a few basic online techniques enables
today’s researcher to accomplish in a few minutes what used to require hours in
the library poring through card catalogs, bound indexes, and printed or micro-
ﬁlmed periodicals.
Not everything is to be found on the Internet, of course. While a few books
are available in electronic versions, most must still be obtained as printed text.
Some periodical articles, particularly those more than 15 years old, must still be
obtained in “hard copy” form from libraries. Nevertheless, the Internet has now
reached “critical mass” in the scope, variety, and quality of material available.
Thus, it makes sense to make the Net the starting point for most research pro-
jects. This is particularly true regarding privacy issues. Since so many privacy
concerns have arisen in connection with the Internet and other computerized
information systems, many advocates of privacy rights have made the Internet
their home base for organizing and education.
STARTING PLACES ON THE WEB
One basic principle of research is to take advantage of the fact that other peo-
ple may have already found and organized much of the most useful information
about a particular topic. For privacy issues, there are three web sites that can
serve as excellent starting points for research.
The Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) at http://www.epic.
org is, according to its web site, “a public interest research center in Wash-
ington, D.C. It was established in 1994 to focus public attention on emerging
civil liberties issues and to protect privacy, the First Amendment, and consti-
tutional values.” EPIC provides news of current developments (including
149
CHAPTER 6

court cases and pending legislation), as well as an extensive collection of
guides and resources:
• EPIC Alert, an online newsletter, which can also be subscribed to by e-mail
from the web page.
• A bookstore, where EPIC publications and other recommended books can be
ordered.
• An online guide to “practical privacy tools,” including aids for encryption and
anonymity.
• An extensive collection of links to resources, including organizations, publi-
cations, and other web sites.
• A policy archives section, with pages of links for each topic.
Another privacy-related “megasite” is that of the Electronic Frontier Foun-
dation (EFF) at http://www.eff.org. It is described as “a non-proﬁt, non-partisan
organization working in the public interest to protect fundamental civil liber-
ties, including privacy and freedom of expression, in the arena of computers and
the Internet.” The EFF’s home page provides links to the latest privacy-related
news developments. Its information tends to be organized for easy use by ac-
tivists. For example, a story about a privacy abuse or free speech case is often ac-
companied by links that can be used to respond to the situation, such as by
participating in protests or contacting legislators.
Like EPIC, the EFF has extensive archives. (Indeed, the archives on the two
sites are different enough that exploring both is a good way to get a very com-
prehensive survey of privacy-related resources on the Net.) The EFF archive
categories most related to privacy are: anonymity, biometrics, CAPPS II, public
records/FOIA, surveillance, USA PATRIOT Act, and, of course, privacy.
The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse is a third major advocacy resource site. It
provides news links, legislative updates, and reports. Relevant topical links in-
clude Identity Theft, Background Checks & Workplace, Financial Privacy, In-
ternet Privacy, Medical Records, Telephone & Telecommunications, and Public
& Government Records.
Since these sites are oriented toward activism, the researcher should take into
account possible bias in the selection or presentation of materials. For example,
in legal cases or legislative debates, the arguments opposed to the expansion of
privacy rights may not be presented, although they may be available through
some of the many links to other sites.
After delving into the resources offered by EPIC, EFF, and the Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse (either directly or through links), the researcher should note that
many other privacy-related organizations and government agencies have web sites.
OTHER GENERAL INFORMATION RESOURCE SITES
In addition to these major advocacy sites, there are a number of other useful re-
source sites on various aspects of privacy and related issues. One of these is the
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
150

Center for Democracy and Technology’s Headlines at http://www.cdt.org/
headlines/, which includes topical links for data privacy, government surveillance,
cryptography, security, authentication, and the right to know. The Legal Infor-
mation Institute offers a resource page and links under “Right of Privacy” at
http://www.law.cornell.edu/topics/privacy.html. The topic is further divided into
access to personal information, personal autonomy, and the right of publicity.
A number of sites are directed toward consumer protection. Examples include
Consumer Privacy Guide at http://www.consumerprivacyguide.org. One should
also not overlook government sites such as that of the Federal Trade Commis-
sion. Its “Privacy Initiatives” pages at http://www.ftc.gov/privacy/ index.html in-
clude sections on ﬁnancial privacy, credit reporting, and children’s privacy.
The Health Privacy Project web site at http://www.healthprivacy.org pro-
vides links to laws (including HIPAA) as well as an overview of issues and links
to other resources relating to medical privacy. As the name suggests, while Pri-
vacy International at http://www.privacyinternational.org covers all the usual
privacy topics, the site emphasizes news, reports, and links relating to issues in
many different countries.
TECHNICAL RESOURCES
Many issues related to online privacy involve technical matters such as security
and encryption software. General-interest computer magazines and web sites
may prove useful, especially for practical discussions of privacy protection from
a user’s perspective, reviewing the latest products and industry initiatives. Some
examples of these sites include
• ComputerWorld (http://www. computerworld.com)
• InformationWeek (http://www.informationweek.com)
• InfoWorld (http://www.infoworld.com)
• PC Magazine (http://www.pcmag.com)
There are also portals that offer extensive product reviews, free software, or
low-cost shareware. They are a good place to compare and shop for security
products such as spam ﬁlters and antivirus programs. Some examples are
• CNet (http://www.cnet.com)
• Shareware.com (http://www.shareware.com)
• Tucows.com (http://www.tucows.com)
• ZDNet (http://www.zdnet.com)
If one has the technical background to pursue computer science resources, two
very extensive portals can provide access to journals, abstracts, and other re-
sources. These are Association for Computing Machinery (http://www.acm.org)
and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (http://www.ieee.org).
Note that membership is required for some of these technical resources.
How to Research Privacy Issues
151

PERIODICALS
Not surprisingly, a number of journals and newsletters (both print and elec-
tronic) discuss privacy or related issues. These include technical, legal, and gen-
eral news coverage. Some examples are included in the following list, along with
web addresses that link either to the publication’s homepage or to a page further
describing the publication.
• 2600 Magazine (http://www.2600.com)
• Canadian Privacy Law Review (http://www.grantthornton.ca/fais/articles/
Lawyers_Weekly_01-09-04.pdf)
• IEEE Security & Privacy Magazine (http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/periodicals.
jsp; click on link)
• Information & Technology Law (http://www.carswell.com/law/product_samples/
information_tech_law_1.asp)
• International Privacy Bulletin (http://www.privacy.org/pi)
• Journal of Online Law (http://warthog.cc.wm.edu/law/publications/jol)
• Mealey’s Privacy Report (http://bookstore.lexis.com/bookstore/catalog; by search
engine)
• Privacy & American Business Newsletter (http://www.pandab.org/; contains many
links)
• Privacy Journal (http://www.privacyjournal.net)
• Privacy Watch (http://www.cotse.net/privacy/)
• Privacy Times (http://www.privacytimes.com)
• Surveillance & Society (http://www.surveillance-and-society.org)
BIBLIOGRAPHIC RESOURCES
Bibliographic resources is a general term for catalogs, indexes, bibliographies, and
other guides that identify books, periodical articles, and other printed resources
that deal with a particular subject. They are essential tools for the researcher.
LIBRARY CATALOGS
Most public and academic libraries have replaced their card catalogs with online
catalogs, and many institutions now offer remote access to their catalog, either
through dialing a phone number with terminal software or connecting via the
Internet.
Access to the largest library catalog, that of the Library of Congress, is avail-
able at http://catalog.loc.gov. This page explains the different kinds of catalogs
and searching techniques available. 
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
152

Yahoo! offers a categorized listing of libraries at http://dir.yahoo.com/
Reference/ Libraries/. Of course one’s local public library (and for students,
the high school or college library) is also a good source for help in using on-
line catalogs.
With traditional catalogs, lack of knowledge of appropriate subject headings
can make it difﬁcult to make sure the researcher ﬁnds all relevant materials. On-
line catalogs, however, can be searched not only by author, title, and subject, but
also by matching keywords in the title. Thus a title search for “privacy” will re-
trieve all books that have that word somewhere in their title. (Of course a book
about privacy may not have the word “privacy” in the title, so it is still necessary
to use subject headings to get the most comprehensive results.)
The basic subject heading for privacy is “privacy, right of.” The LC Subject
headings ﬁle breaks this heading down into the following subdivisions and
cross-references (some less relevant ones have been omitted):
Privacy, Right of
(TERM MAY BE SUBDIVIDED GEOGRAPHICALLY)*
Used for:
Invasion of privacy
Right of privacy
Narrower terms:
Archives—Access control
Conﬁdential communications—Third parties
Personnel records—Access control
Public health—Statistical services—Access control
Public records—Access control
Records—Access control
Related terms:
Computer crimes
Conﬁdential communications
Data protection—Law and legislation
Secrecy—Law and legislation
Broader terms:
Civil rights
Libel and slander
Personality (Law)
Press Law
Call Number Ranges:
JC596—JC596.2: Political theory
Once the record for a book or other item is found, it is a good idea to see
what additional subject headings and name headings have been assigned. These
in turn can be used for further searching.
How to Research Privacy Issues
153
* [That is, it can be speciﬁed by place, as in “Privacy, Right of—United States.”]

BIBLIOGRAPHIES
Bibliographies in various forms provide a convenient way to ﬁnd books, peri-
odical articles, and other materials. Much of the material related to information
privacy issues is quite recent, however, and the few book-length bibliographies
still in print are pretty much out of date. However, many of the recent books
described in Chapter 7 include extensive bibliographies (some annotated).
EPIC, the EFF, and other web sites also include bibliographies.
BOOKSTORE CATALOGS
Many people have discovered that online bookstores such as Amazon.com
(http://www.amazon.com) and Barnes & Noble (http://www.barnesandnoble.
com) are convenient ways to shop for books. A lesser-known beneﬁt of online
bookstore catalogs is that they often include publisher’s information, book re-
views, and readers’ comments about a given title. They can thus serve as a form
of annotated bibliography.
On the other hand, a visit to one’s local bookstore also has its beneﬁts. While
the selection of titles available is likely to be smaller than that of an online book-
store, the ability to physically browse through books before buying them can be
very useful.
PERIODICAL DATABASES
Most public libraries subscribe to database services such as InfoTrac that index
articles from hundreds of general-interest periodicals (and some moderately
specialized ones). The database can be searched by author or by words in the
title, subject headings, and sometimes words found anywhere in the article text.
Depending on the database used, “hits” in the database can result in just a bib-
liographical description (author, title, pages, periodical name, issue date, etc.), a
description plus an abstract (a paragraph summarizing the contents of the arti-
cle), or the full text of the article itself.
Many libraries provide dial-in, Internet, or telnet access to their periodical
databases as an option in their catalog menu. However, licensing restrictions
usually mean that only researchers who have a library card for that particular li-
brary can access the database (by typing in their name and card number). Check
with local public or school libraries to see what databases are available.
A somewhat more time-consuming alternative is to ﬁnd the web sites for
magazines likely to cover a topic of interest. Some scholarly publications are
putting all or most of their articles online. Popular publications tend to offer
only a limited selection. Some publications of both types offer archives of sev-
eral years’ back issues that can be searched by author or keyword.
NEWS RESOURCES
Turning from Web resource sites to other types of resources, news, both online
and ofﬂine, is always important to researchers. While the more specialized or
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
154

technically oriented sources (such as computer industry magazines and portals)
are more likely to have detailed, accurate information about computer crimes,
general news services offer immediate “breaking” news.
The major broadcast and cable networks, news (wire) services, most newspa-
pers, and many magazines have web sites that include news stories and links to
additional information. For breaking news the following sites are also useful:
• Associated Press (AP) wire: http://wire.ap.org/public_pages/WirePortalpcgi/
us_portal.html
• Cable News Network (CNN): http://www.cnn.com
• New York Times: http://www.nytimes.com
• Reuters: http://www.reuters.com
• Time magazine: http://www.time.com
• Wall Street Journal: http://online.wsj.com/public/us
• Washington Post: http://www.washingtonpost.com/
Also, Yahoo! maintains a large set of links to many newspapers that have web
sites or online editions at http://dir.yahoo.com/News_and_Media/Newspapers/
Web_Directories/.
Another useful site for tracking down recent news stories is Google News at
http://news.google.com. The site assembles news automatically into headlines
and sections.
NETNEWS
Netnews is a decentralized system of thousands of “newsgroups,” or forums or-
ganized by topic. Most web browsers have an option for subscribing to, reading,
and posting messages in newsgroups. The Google Groups site (http://groups.
google.com) also provides free access and an easy-to-use interface to newsgroups.
Some examples of privacy-related newsgroups include:
• alt.privacy
General discussion on privacy issues
• alt.privacy.anon-server
Setups for anonymous Internet use
• alt.privacy.pgp
Pretty Good Privacy (encryption)
• alt.privacy.spyware
Discussion of spyware and other malicious software
• comp.org.eff.talk
Discussion relating to activities of the Electronic Fron-
tier Foundation
• comp.privacy
General privacy discussions
• comp.risks
Discusses computer risks including loss of privacy
• sci.crypt
Focuses on technical aspects of encryption
MAIL LISTS
Mail lists offer another way to keep up with (and discuss) recent developments.
Many organizations such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation maintain such
How to Research Privacy Issues
155

lists, which you can subscribe to through the web site or by sending a specially
formatted e-mail message using the instructions provided. The mailing list soft-
ware automatically collates and distributes the e-mail messages.
Netnews and mail lists are generally most valuable when they have a moder-
ator who keeps discussions focused and discourages “ﬂaming” (the writing of
heated or personally insulting statements).
SEARCHING THE WEB
A researcher can explore an ever-expanding web of information by starting with
a few web sites and following the links they offer to other sites, which in turn
have links to still other sites. But since this is something of a hit-and-miss
proposition, some important sites may be missed if the researcher only “Web
surfs” in this fashion. There are two more focused techniques that can ﬁll in the
information gaps.
WEB INDEXES
A web index is a site that offers a structured, hierarchical outline of different
subject areas. This enables the researcher to zero in on a particular aspect of a
subject and ﬁnd links to web sites for further exploration.
Yahoo!’s directory is perhaps the best-known web index. The main Yahoo!
directory page can be found at http://dir.yahoo.com. From this top level, one
can click on Computers and Internet, then Issues, then Internet Issues, and ﬁ-
nally, Privacy. There one will see a page with further topics, such as Children’s
Internet Privacy, Privacy Organizations, Security and Encryption, Privacy Soft-
ware, and Spyware and Adware. Moving back up to Internet Issues, one can also
explore such topics as Abuse, Computer and Internet Crimes, Cyberstalking,
Encryption, and Law.
In addition to following Yahoo!’s outlinelike structure, there is also a search
box into which the researcher can type one or more keywords and receive a list
of matching categories and sites.
Web indexes such as Yahoo! have two major advantages over undirected surf-
ing. First, the structured hierarchy of topics makes it easy to ﬁnd a particular
topic or subtopic and then explore its links. Second, Yahoo! does not make an
attempt to compile every possible link on the Internet (a task that is virtually im-
possible, given the size of the Web). Rather, sites are evaluated for usefulness
and quality by Yahoo!’s indexers. This means that the researcher has a better
chance of ﬁnding more substantial and accurate information. (This advantage is
also provided by sites like EFF and EPIC, of course.) The disadvantage of web
indexes is the ﬂip side of their selectivity: The researcher is dependent on the
indexer’s judgment for determining what sites are worth exploring.
Two other web indexes are LookSmart (http://www.looksmart.com) and
About.com (http://www.about.com).
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
156

SEARCH ENGINES
Search engines take a very different approach to ﬁnding materials on the Web.
Instead of organizing topically in a “top down” fashion, search engines work
their way “from the bottom up.” Basically, a search engine consists of two pieces
of software. The ﬁrst is a “web crawler” that systematically and automatically
surfs the Net, following links and compiling them into an index with keywords
(drawn either from the text of the sites themselves or from lists of words that
have been ﬂagged in a special way by the site’s creators). The second program
is the search engine’s “front end”: It provides a way to match user-speciﬁed key-
words or phrases with the index and display a list of matching sites. Google
(http://www.google.com) is the largest and best-known search engine, but there
are a number of others, including
• Alta Vista (http://www.altavista.com)
• Excite (http://www.excite.com)
• Hotbot (http://www.hotbot.com)
• Lycos (http://www.lycos.com)
• WebCrawler (http://www.WebCrawler.com)
Search engines are generally easy to use by employing the same sorts of key-
words that work in library catalogs. There are a variety of web-search tutorials
available online (try “web search tutorial” in a search engine). One good one is
published by The Web Tools Company at http://thewebtools.com/tutorial/
tutorial.htm.
Here are a few basic rules for using search engines:
• When looking for something speciﬁc, use the most speciﬁc term or phrase.
For example, when looking for information about the PGP encryption pro-
gram, use “PGP,” not “encryption.”
• When looking for a more general topic, use several descriptive words (nouns
are more reliable than verbs). For example, “privacy medical records.” (Most
engines will automatically put pages that match all three terms ﬁrst on the re-
sults list.)
• Use “wildcards” when a desired word may have more than one ending. For
example, “crypto” matches cryptography, cryptographic, or the slang term
“crypto” used by some people in the ﬁeld.
• If applicable, try to use a commonly accepted phrase that is likely to be asso-
ciated with that topic. For example, if researching the use of the legal princi-
ple of “expectation of privacy,” use that phrase (use quotes, so it will be
matched as a phrase).
• Most search engines support Boolean (and, or, not) operators that can be used
to broaden or narrow a search.
How to Research Privacy Issues
157

• Use AND to narrow a search. For example, “internet AND privacy” will
match only pages that have both terms.
• Use OR to broaden a search: “encryption OR cryptography” will match any
page that has either term.
• Use NOT to exclude unwanted results: “cryptography NOT pgp” ﬁnds
articles about cryptography that do not discuss PGP.
Since each search engine indexes somewhat differently and offers somewhat
different ways of searching, it is a good idea to use several different search en-
gines, especially for a general query. Several “metasearch” programs automate
the process of submitting a query to multiple search engines. These include
Metacrawler at http://www.metacrawler.com and SurfWax at http://www.
surfwax.com.
There are also search utilities that can be run from the researcher’s own PC
rather than through a web site. A good example is Copernic, available at http://
www.copernic.com.
FINDING ORGANIZATIONS AND PEOPLE
Lists of privacy-related organizations can be found on archive sites such as
EPIC and EFF and index sites such as Yahoo! If such sites do not yield the name
of a speciﬁc organization, the name can be given to a search engine. Generally
the best approach is to put the name of the organization in quote marks, such
as “Americans for Computer Privacy.”
Another approach is to take a guess at the organization’s likely web address.
For example, the American Civil Liberties Union is commonly known by the
acronym ACLU, so it is not a surprise that the organization’s web site is at
http://www.aclu.org. (Note that noncommercial organization sites normally use
the .org sufﬁx, government agencies use .gov, educational institutions have .edu,
and businesses use .com.) This technique can save time, but doesn’t always work.
There are several ways to ﬁnd a person on the Internet:
• Put the person’s name (in quotes) in a search engine and possibly ﬁnd that
person’s homepage on the Internet.
• Contact the person’s employer (such as a university for an academic, or a cor-
poration for a technical professional). Most such organizations have web
pages that include a searchable faculty or employee directory.
• Try one of the people-ﬁnder services such as Yahoo! People Search (http://
people.yahoo.com) or BigFoot (http://www.bigfoot.com). This may yield con-
tact information such as e-mail address, regular address, and/or phone number.
LEGAL RESEARCH
As information privacy issues continue to capture the attention of legislators
and the public, a growing body of legislation and court cases has emerged.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
158

Because of the specialized terminology of the law, legal research can be more
difficult to master than bibliographical or general research tools. Fortunately,
the Internet has also come to the rescue in this area, offering a variety of ways
to look up laws and court cases without having to pore through huge bound
volumes in law libraries (which may not be accessible to the general public,
anyway).
FINDING LAWS
When federal legislation passes, it becomes part of the United States Code, a
massive legal compendium. Laws can be referred to either by their popular
name or by a formal citation. For example, the Fair Credit Reporting Act is
cited as 15 U.S.C. §1681, meaning title 15 of the U.S. code, section 1681.
The U.S. Code can be searched online in several locations, but the easiest
site to use is Cornell Law School’s site (a major provider of free online legal ref-
erence material) at http://www4.law.cornell.edu/uscode/.
The fastest way to retrieve a law is by its title and section citation, but phrases
and keywords can also be used.
Federal laws are generally implemented by a designated agency that writes
detailed rules, which become part of the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.).
A regulatory citation looks like a U.S. Code citation and takes the form vol.
C.F.R. sec. number, where vol. is the volume number and number is the section
number.
Regulations can be found at the web site for the relevant government
agency (such as the Federal Trade Commission or Federal Communications
Commission).
Many states also have their codes of laws online. FindLaw has a page of links
to state laws at http://www.ﬁndlaw.com/library/state_laws.html.
KEEPING UP WITH LEGISLATIVE DEVELOPMENTS
The Library of Congress Thomas web site (http://thomas.loc.gov) includes ﬁles
summarizing legislation by the number of the Congress. Each two-year session
of Congress has a consecutive number: For example, the 109th Congress will be
in session in 2005 and 2006. Legislation can be searched for by the name of its
sponsor(s), the bill number, or by topical keywords. Laws that have been passed
can be looked up under their Public Law number.
For example, selecting the 109th Congress and typing in the phrase “ﬁnan-
cial privacy” into the search box will retrieve a number of bills pertaining to that
subject. Clicking on the highlighted bill number brings up a display that in-
cludes the bill’s status and text, as well as further details, including sponsors,
committee action, and amendments.
Privacy advocacy and industry-related sites also keep track of bills that affect
them. For example, EPIC maintains a “Bill-Track” showing pending legislation
(http://www.epic.org/privacy/bill_track.html).
How to Research Privacy Issues
159

FINDING COURT DECISIONS
Like laws, legal decisions are organized using a system of citations. The general
form is: Party 1 v. Party 2, volume reporter, [optional start page] court (year).
Here are some examples from Chapter 2:
Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967)
Here the parties are Katz and the United States government, the case is in vol-
ume 389 of the U.S. Supreme Court Reports, and the case was decided in 1967.
(For the Supreme Court, the name of the court is omitted).
Daniel Bernstein v. U.S. Department of State, 922 F. Supp. 1426,
1428–1430, N.D. Cal. (1996)
Here the parties are Daniel Bernstein and the U.S. Department of State. The
decision is in volume 922 of the Federal Supplement (which reports on cases in
district courts). The court is the North California District Federal Court, and
the case was decided in 1996.
To ﬁnd a federal court decision, ﬁrst ascertain the level of court involved: dis-
trict (the lowest level, where trials are normally held), circuit (the main court of
appeals), or the Supreme Court. The researcher can then go to a number of
places on the Internet to ﬁnd cases by citation and, often, the names of the par-
ties. Some of the most useful sites are:
• The Legal Information Institute (http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/) has all
Supreme Court decisions since 1990 plus 610 of “the most important his-
toric” decisions.
• Washlaw Web (http://www.washlaw.edu/) has a variety of courts (including
states) and legal topics listed, making it a good jumping-off place for many
sorts of legal research.
• EPIC maintains a “Litigation docket” of pending court cases (http://
www.epic.org/privacy/litigation/).
LEXIS AND WESTLAW
Lexis and Westlaw are commercial legal databases that have extensive informa-
tion including an elaborate system of notes, legal subject headings, and ways to
show relationships between cases. Unfortunately, these services are too expen-
sive for use by most individual researchers unless they are available through a
university or corporate library.
MORE HELP ON LEGAL RESEARCH
For more information on conducting legal research, see the “Legal Research
FAQ” at http://www.eff.org/legal/?=law_research.faq.txt. This also explains more
advanced techniques such as “Shepardizing” (referring to Shepard’s Case Citations),
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
160

which is used to ﬁnd how a decision has been cited in subsequent cases and
whether the decision was later overturned.
EVALUATING WEB SOURCES
Thanks to the Web there is more information from more sources available than
ever before. There is also a greater diversity of voices, since any person or group
with a PC and Internet service can put up a web site—in some cases a site that
looks as polished and professional as that of an established group. One beneﬁt
is that dissenting views can be found in abundance. However, as can be seen in
the reports of Internet hoaxes and scams, the Web is also inundated with delib-
erate misinformation and deception as well as hoaxes and urban legends.
Thus the student or researcher must not let the attractions of the Web over-
ride the need for the same kind of critical thinking that would be applied to
printed materials. Further, the nature of the Web means that the researcher
should take extra care to try to verify facts and to understand the possible biases
of each source. Some good questions to ask include
• Who is responsible for this web site?
• What is the background or reputation of the person or group?
• Does the person or group have a stated objective or agenda?
• What biases might this person or group have?
• Do a number of high-quality sites link to this one?
• What is the source given for a particular fact? Does that source actually
say what is quoted? Where did they get that information?
If one uses a good variety of the tools and resources that have been high-
lighted here, that will help ensure that the results of research are balanced and
comprehensive.
How to Research Privacy Issues
161

ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
This chapter provides an extensive annotated bibliography on information pri-
vacy issues. Materials have been selected with a view to providing a diversity of
views and range from popular accounts to legal and technical works. The list-
ings are divided into the following 14 categories:
Reference and Background
Reference Works
General Introductions and Overviews
Perspectives on Privacy
Areas of Privacy
Personal and Consumer Privacy
Privacy and Health Care
Corporate and Workplace Privacy
Privacy and Young People
The Surveillance Society
Privacy Issues
General and International Privacy Law
Privacy, Law Enforcement, and National Security
Identiﬁcation Systems and Biometrics
Surveillance, Screening, and Tracking Systems
Government Accountability and Freedom of Information
Tools and Standards for Privacy and Anonymity
Within each category the listings are divided as applicable into books, arti-
cles and papers, and web documents. Note that although all web addresses
(URLs) have been checked, web pages are often moved or removed. If an ad-
dress is not found, a keyword search using a search engine is recommended.
Note that many newspaper and magazine articles may be available online, either
through online databases or directly from the publication’s web site. See chap-
ter 6 for more information about Internet research and resources.
162
CHAPTER 7

REFERENCE AND BACKGROUND
REFERENCE WORKS
This section includes general and specialized encyclopedias, handbooks, and
bibliographies.
Books
Allen, Anita L., and Richard Turkington. Privacy Law: Cases and Materials. St.
Paul, Minn.: West Group, 2002. An extensive casebook including overviews
and case excerpts. It includes an introduction to the concept of privacy (in-
cluding informational privacy) as well as relevant sections on federal and state
privacy statutes, e-mail and Internet privacy, and privacy torts.
Bloom, Robert M. Searches, Seizures, and Warrants: A Reference Guide to the
United States Constitution. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2003. Describes the
mechanisms by which law enforcement seeks to gain access to private prop-
erty and possessions in order to investigate crime. Bloom explains how the
courts have sought to balance privacy rights as guaranteed by the Fourth
Amendment with the need to protect society from criminal behavior.
Electronic Privacy Information Center. Consumer Law Sourcebook 2000. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Electronic Privacy Information Center, 2000. A useful collec-
tion of legislation and other documents relating to consumer rights (including
privacy) and the responsibility of businesses in electronic commerce.
———. Privacy & Human Rights: An International Survey of Privacy Laws and De-
velopments. Washington, D.C.: Electronic Privacy Information Center and
London: Privacy International, 2004. An annual compilation that includes
background to privacy issues and signiﬁcant developments throughout the
world. The book also includes useful summaries of the privacy laws in force
in each nation and an international list of privacy resources. Updates are
available at http://www.epic.org and http://www.privacyinternational.org.
Isenberg, Doug. Gigalaw Guide to Internet Law. New York: Random House,
2002. A comprehensive guide to laws and legal issues affecting Internet use,
with an emphasis on e-commerce. The book includes discussions of privacy
considerations, including European and Canadian regulations. It can be sup-
plemented by browsing the companion web site http://www.gigalaw.com.
Plunkett, Jack W. Plunkett’s Banking, Mortgages and Credit Industry Almanac
2005: The Only Complete Guide to the Business of Banking, Lending, Mortgages,
and Credit Cards. Houston, Tex.: Plunkett Research, 2004. Provides detailed
background to the corporate players involved in much of the controversy
over the use (or misuse) of consumer data. The almanac includes overviews
and discussion of signiﬁcant industry trends.
Rotenberg, Marc. The Privacy Law Sourcebook 2003: United States Law, Interna-
tional Law, and Recent Developments. Washington, D.C.: Electronic Privacy In-
formation Center, 2003. A comprehensive compendium of United States and
Annotated Bibliography
163

international privacy law. The book includes excerpts from laws, resolutions,
and policies and concludes with a bibliography and list of resources. Readers
should check for the most recent edition.
Smith, Robert Ellis. Compilation of State and Federal Privacy Laws. Updated 2002
edition with 2004 Supplement. Providence, R.I.: Privacy Journal, 2004. This
concise reference organizes state and federal privacy laws by what they regu-
late, from bank and ﬁnancial records and cable television to polygraphs and
Social Security numbers. Legal citations are given for each law.
GENERAL INTRODUCTIONS AND OVERVIEWS
Works in this section provide a general introduction or overview on privacy
issues.
Books
Agre, Philip, and Marc Rotenberg, eds. Technology and Privacy: The New Land-
scape. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997. Experts in computer science, law, poli-
tics, and sociology trace the roots and implications of privacy issues.
Alderman, Ellen, and Caroline Kennedy. The Right to Privacy. New York: Knopf,
1995. Uses a wealth of cases and anecdotes to illustrate privacy issues, in-
cluding law enforcement abuses, privacy for intimate life, and privacy in the
workplace.
Bennett, Colin J., and Rebecca Grant, eds. Visions of Privacy: Policy Choices for the
Digital Age. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2000. Provides a variety of
perspectives and ways to view privacy in the light of a business and social en-
vironment that features pervasive technologies of surveillance and data gath-
ering. Many authors focus on practical solutions for safeguarding privacy
from various threats.
Bennett, John, Jr. The Digital Umbrella: Technology’s Attack on Personal Privacy in
America. Boca Raton, Fla.: BrownWalker Press, 2004. Gives real-world ex-
amples of the policies and technologies by which the federal government,
corporations, employers, and others are obtaining and often misusing infor-
mation that most people would consider to be personal and private.
Bridegam, Martha. The Right to Privacy. Langhome, Penn.: Chelsea House,
2003. This overview for high school or older students provides pro and con
arguments on privacy issues, particularly the conﬂict between privacy and law
enforcement or security in the post–September 11 United States.
Cate, Fred H. Privacy in Perspective, Washington, D.C.: AEI Press, 2001. An
overview of privacy issues, privacy law, and the various tools available for
strengthening privacy. The beneﬁts and costs of privacy legislation are con-
sidered.
Fridell, Ron. Privacy vs. Security: Your Rights in Conﬂict. Berkeley Heights, N.J.:
Enslow Publishers, 2004. Provides a good overview of privacy issues for ju-
nior high and older students. Fridell discusses the development of the con-
cept of privacy, legal issues, and the modern technologies of surveillance.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
164

There is particular emphasis on issues potentially affecting young people,
such as student records, school drug testing, and searches. The concluding
chapter covers privacy threats related to the war on terrorism and govern-
ment programs such as the now discontinued Terrorist Information and Pre-
vention System (TIPS) and Total (or Terrorist) Information Awareness (TIA).
Garrett, Brandon. Right to Privacy. New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 2001.
A well-organized basic introduction to privacy issues for high school stu-
dents. The book includes discussion of constitutional protections, privacy,
search and seizure, and the rights of students.
Gottfried, Ted. Privacy: Individual Right vs. Social Needs. Brookﬁeld, Conn.: Mill-
brook Press, 1994. Introduces the privacy debate to high school–age readers
by discussing court cases and issues involving law enforcement, abortion,
birth control, medical privacy, and misuse of databases.
Ojeda, Auriana, ed. Civil Liberties: Opposing Viewpoints. Farmington Hills, Mich.:
Greenhaven Press, 2004. Presents pro and con articles on a variety of civil
liberties issues, including technological threats to privacy and the effect of the
war on terrorism on civil liberties. The book includes bibliographies.
Smith, Robert Ellis. Ben Franklin’s Web Site: Privacy and Curiosity from Plymouth
Rock to the Internet. Providence, R.I.: Privacy Journal 2000. A marvelous ta-
pestry of observations and quotes on privacy, including the busy-body Puri-
tans, the lack of privacy in 19th-century living, the establishment of privacy
of the mails, technologies from the telegraph and phonograph to miniature
wiretaps, and the development of modern legal doctrines of privacy (includ-
ing behind-the-scenes looks at the Supreme Court).
Spinello, Richard A., and Herman T. Tavani, eds. Readings in CyberEthics. Sud-
bury, Mass.: Jones and Bartlett, 2001 An anthology of essays on the ethics
and governance of cyberspace. Topics include free speech, responsibility for
content, intellectual property, privacy, security, and codes of ethical conduct.
Strum, Philippa. Privacy: The Debate in the United States Since 1945. Fort Worth,
Tex.: Harcourt College Publishers, 1998. Discusses the major aspects of the
privacy issue, including the use of genetic information and Social Security
numbers, access to public records, intrusions by law enforcement, the grow-
ing use of surveillance, and privacy in the workplace.
Wacks, Raymond, ed. Privacy. New York: New York University Press, 1993.
Consists of two volumes of essays, the ﬁrst dealing with the development of
the concept of privacy, and the second discussing legal aspects of privacy.
Articles and Papers
Colin, Thomas J., ed. “Is Privacy Under Attack.” CQ Researcher, vol. 11, June 15,
2001, pp. 507–526. An issue on the theme of privacy where Congressional
Quarterly staff writers provide background on privacy issues, laws, and legis-
lation. The article includes a chronology and recommended readings.
Glancy, Dorothy J. “The Invention of the Right to Privacy.” Arizona Law Review,
vol. 21, 1979, pp. 1–39. Discusses the early development of legal concepts of
privacy in America, particularly the opinions of Justice Louis Brandeis.
Annotated Bibliography
165

Gormley, Ken. “One Hundred Years of Privacy.” Wisconsin Law Review, 1992,
p. 1,335ff. Also available online. URL: http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/privacy/
Gormley—100%20Years%20of%20Privacy.htm. Examines the evolution of
privacy law in the United States in the century following the publication of a
seminal Harvard Law Review article by Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis.
Aspects discussed include tort privacy, Fourth Amendment privacy, First
Amendment privacy, “fundamental-decision privacy,” and state constitutional
privacy.
Karaim, Reed. “The Invasion of Privacy.” Civilization, October/November
1996, n.p. [also reprinted in Winters, Paul A., ed. the Information Revolution:
Opposing Viewpoints. San Diego, Calif.: Greenhaven Press, 1998, pp.
151–158]. An overview of the history and development of the idea of privacy
with examples of how the right to privacy is becoming threatened in the in-
formation age.
Web Documents
“EPIC Online Guide to Privacy Resources.” Electronic Privacy Information
Center. Available online. URL: http://epic.org/privacy/privacy_resources_
faq.html. Updated on May 6, 2002. A basic listing of privacy-related organi-
zations, printed publications, resource web sites, mailing lists, newsletters,
and privacy tools.
Fallows, Deborah. “The Internet and Daily Life: Many Americans Use the In-
ternet in Everyday Activities, but Traditional Ofﬂine Habits Still Dominate.”
Pew Internet & American Life Project. Available online. URL: http://www.
pewinternet.org/PPF/r/131/report_display.asp. Posted on August 11, 2004.
Because Internet use exposes consumers to a variety of threats to their pri-
vacy, this survey of the extent and nature of online activity provides useful
background for assessing privacy issues.
Fox, Susannah. “Trust and Privacy Online: Why Americans Want to Rewrite
the Rules.” Pew Internet and American Life Project. Available online. URL:
http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Trust_Privacy_Report.pdf. Posted on
August 20, 2000. A report on Internet use at the start of the millennium
found that a growing number of Americans were concerned about online pri-
vacy but had little knowledge of speciﬁc threats and did little to counter them.
“Privacy in Cyberspace: Rules of the Road for the Information Superhigh-
way.” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.
privacyrights.org/fs/fs18-cyb.htm. Updated in August 2003. A useful primer
on the privacy implications of various online activities. Most forms of online
communication have little expectation of privacy except for e-mail (outside
of a work setting). The site also explains how one’s online activities can be
monitored by web sites using cookies or other means. It concludes with tips
on how to determine the level of privacy in various online venues.
“Privacy Survival Guide: How to Take Control of Your Personal Information.” Pri-
vacy Rights Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.
org/fs/fs1-surv.htm. Updated in January 2005. Includes discussions of credit
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
166

reports (and how to obtain them for free), opting out of telemarketing and
junk mail, checking medical records, and limiting disclosure of Social Secu-
rity numbers and other sensitive information. The site urges readers to “Be
Aware. Be Assertive. Be an Advocate.”
“Public Opinion on Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available
online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/survey/default.html. Updated on
July 15, 2004. Cites recent polls showing strong public support for privacy
rights and demands for control of personal information and the desire for ac-
countability by providers. Includes a critique of Alan Westin’s characteriza-
tion of privacy “fundamentalists” vs. “pragmatists.”
PERSPECTIVES ON PRIVACY
This section includes works that provide a variety of sociological, cultural, or
philosophical perspectives on privacy issues.
Books
Bailey, Dennis. The Open Society Paradox: Why the 21st Century Calls for More
Openness—Not Less. Washington, D.C.: Brassey’s, 2004. The author takes the
paradoxical—and controversial—position that the security beneﬁts of univer-
sal IDs and pervasive surveillance can be safely secured as long as the institu-
tions of government are themselves open and accountable to the public. He
also suggests that privacy advocates have been too extreme in demanding a
level of privacy that has not been historically sustainable.
Boling, Patricia. Privacy and the Politics of Intimate Life. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1996. Analyzes privacy issues from a feminist and legal the-
ory perspective, exploring the characterization of intimate and public life and
drawing upon the work of Hannah Arendt. One prominent example used is
the process of “outing” of lesbians and gay men and its turning of the private
into the political. The author argues that while the right of privacy can pro-
tect vulnerable people, concepts of privacy can also hide the results of op-
pression and disparities in power.
Branscomb, Ann Wells. Who Owns Information?: From Privacy to Public Access.
New York: Basic Books, 1995. A wide-ranging account that explores the back-
ground and issues of today’s controversies about the misuse of information.
The author suggests that a question that starts with Social Security numbers
and health records has far-reaching legal and philosophical implications.
Brin, David. The Transparent Society: Will Technology Force Us to Choose Between
Privacy and Freedom? Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1998. The author, a
noted science ﬁction writer and futurist, offers a controversial solution to the
problem of privacy. Surveying a variety of viewpoints, Brin suggests that the
only viable option is to promote transparency, where the playing ﬁeld is lev-
eled because everyone has access to the same information.
DeCew, Judith W. In Pursuit of Privacy: Law, Ethics, and the Rise of Technology.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1997. The author reviews the legal
Annotated Bibliography
167

history of the right of privacy and then describes a number of perspectives on
privacy from the point of view of control of information, personal autonomy,
property rights, intimacy, and feminist interpretations. Ultimately these
claims can be seen as aspects of how privacy empowers the self-creation of in-
dividuals by providing a protective sphere against the forces of conformity.
The author concludes with discussion of the balance between privacy and
public safety and of the impact of new technologies.
Ermann, David M., and Michele S. Shauf, eds. Computers, Ethics, and Society. 3d
ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2002. An undergraduate-level intro-
duction to computer-related ethical problems, including privacy issues.
Etzioni, Amitai. The Limits of Privacy. New York: Basic Books, 1999. Commu-
nitarian philosopher Amitai Etzioni argues for social needs trumping pri-
vacy rights when a clear benefit can be seen. For example, he believes the
FBI’s need to crack messages from terrorists justifies some compromise of
e-mail privacy, and he supports a national ID card. Similarly Etzioni sup-
ports medical testing of infants for HIV without parental consent and also
supports Megan’s law to protect society against sex offenders. As a commu-
nitarian he believes in creating a responsible government and giving it
broad powers, but he is much less sanguine about abuses of privacy by com-
mercial interests. This articulate but controversial book provides a good
counterpoint to the much larger number of writers who advocate increased
privacy protections.
Gandy, Oscar H. The Panoptic Sort: A Political Economy of Personal Information.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1993. Describes the pervasive effects of in-
formation as power in both the political and economic realms. Bentham and
Foucault had envisioned the “panoptic prison” of total surveillance, but
Gandy suggests that in the modern world it is the “panoptic sort” of infor-
mation technology that enables the sophisticated classiﬁcation and manage-
ment of individuals.
Garrow, David G. Liberty and Sexuality: The Right to Privacy and the Making of
Roe v. Wade. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998. Exhaustively an-
alyzes the legal reasoning that led to the Roe v. Wade abortion rights decision.
Roe represented an expansion of an assertion of privacy as a constitutional
right in Griswold v. Connecticut and has had an impact on expanding rights to
information privacy.
Gerstein, Robert S., ed. Philosophical Dimensions of Privacy. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1984. Published in a symbolically signiﬁcant year,
this anthology presents a larger variety of perspectives than the title might
suggest. It includes classic legal papers, plus perspectives from anthropology,
economics, and of course philosophy.
Gilliom, John. Overseers of the Poor: Surveillance, Resistance, and the Limits of Pri-
vacy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001. Argues that discussions
about privacy have focused too much on issues faced by middle-class persons.
Welfare clients and other low-income persons are interviewed by the author
for insights into their experience of surveillance and social control. They are
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
168

stripped bare of privacy to a considerable extent, but they also devise ways to
resist the intrusion.
———. Surveillance, Privacy, and the Law. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1994. From a perspective of political theory, the author sees the estab-
lishment of drug testing in many places of employment as the harbinger of a
broader surveillance society and more pervasive social control. Ideologically,
these developments are seen in the context of a triumph of conservatism in
the courts and Congress in the 1990s.
Gurak, Laura J. Persuasion and Privacy in Cyberspace: The Online Protests Over
Lotus Marketplace and the Clipper Chip. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1997. Discusses two deﬁning privacy controversies of the mid-1990s: the re-
action to a Lotus Corporation database marketing proposal, which would
have distributed personal consumer information without consent, and a gov-
ernment proposal for the Clipper Chip, which offered data protection in ex-
change for government access.
Gutwirth, Serge. Privacy and the Information Age. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Lit-
tleﬁeld Publishers, 2002. An interesting perspective on privacy that sees it as
bound up with another fundamental right—liberty. Privacy is required if a
person is to be able to decide who he or she is or does. Yet modern tech-
nologies threaten privacy and liberty in new ways.
Inness, Julie C. Privacy, Intimacy, and Isolation. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1992. Explores the roots of privacy in the need to protect the intimate,
personal sphere of human life.
Jensen, Derrick, and George Draffan. Welcome to the Machine: Science, Surveil-
lance, and the Culture of Control. White River, Vt.: Chelsea Green Publishing,
2004. The authors take a radical approach to understanding the mechanisms
of surveillance and social control. Using the image of the panopticon (the all-
seeing central “eye”), they argue that modern information technology is
being used to dehumanize citizens and consumers in an increasingly dysfunc-
tional capitalist system. At the same time, however, they see hope in the way
hackers, independent developers, and others are using the same technology
to empower individuals.
Kizza, Joseph Migga. Ethical and Social Issues in the Information Age. New
York: Springer Verlag, 2002. The author suggests that rapid technological
change has thrown legal and ethical systems into confusion. Researchers
and policymakers must find new paradigms for looking at issues such as
workplace surveillance, harassment, encryption, and other privacy and civil
liberties issues.
Levin, Thomas Y., Ursula Frohne, and Peter Weibel, eds. CTRL [SPACE]:
Rhetorics of Surveillance from Bentham to Big Brother. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 2002. Describes the development of visual art and photography reﬂect-
ing the perception of the “surveillance society,” from Bentham’s panopticon
prison in the 19th century to today’s electronics. The book includes writings
by postmodern essayists Jean Baudrillard and Michel Foucault as well as the
works of artists including Yoko Ono and Andy Warhol. It was published in
Annotated Bibliography
169

conjunction with an exhibition at the ZKM Center for Art and Media in Karls-
ruhe, Germany.
Lyon, David, ed. Surveillance as Social Sorting: Privacy, Risk and Automated Dis-
crimination. New York: Routledge, 2002. Describes how geographical infor-
mation systems (GIS), “intelligent” transportation systems, biometrics, and
use of genetic data are having the effect of categorizing people into different
social groups. This threatens to reinforce existing social divisions, racism, and
other problems.
Marlin-Bennett, Renée. Knowledge Power: Intellectual Property, Information, and
Privacy. Boulder, Colo.: Lyne Rienner Publishers, 2004. Discusses the shift-
ing boundaries of personal and information privacy for adults, teens, and chil-
dren. Marlin-Bennett emphasizes the need to become aware of how one is
sharing information in business, government, and social transactions and how
the ﬂow of information reﬂects power relationships.
Neill, Elizabeth. Rites of Privacy and the Privacy Trade.: On the Limits of Protection
for the Self. Ithaca, N.Y.: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2001. Focuses on
the need to determine what a right to privacy does or should mean in the con-
text of modern society and changing technology. The author draws on his-
tory, sociology, law, literature, and other ﬁelds to create a contemporary
privacy concept based on natural or inherent rights. However, rather than
proceeding to an expansive application of privacy, she suggests that other
considerations require that it be limited in a number of signiﬁcant ways, such
as with regard to health care.
Peacock, Margaret, ed. The Private I: Privacy in a Public World. St. Paul, Minn.:
Graywolf Press, 2001. A collection of essays exploring the experience of pri-
vacy (and of its violation) and the relationship of privacy to creativity. Venues
range from cyberspace to literature and the media.
Rosen, Jeffrey. The Unwanted Gaze: The Destruction of Privacy in America. New
York: Random House, 2000. According to the author, the Internet and other
technologies have created a society where people are awash in information
that they are largely unable to use effectively and at the same time are unable
to control their self-disclosure through the tracks left by every communica-
tion or transaction. Privacy has thus become crucially important for reclaim-
ing the self.
Rossler, Beate, Mieke Bal, and Hent de Vries, eds. Privacies: Philosophical Evalu-
ations. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2003. A collection of pa-
pers (mainly from a May 1999 conference in Amsterdam) discussing
philosophical and sociological aspects of privacy. Contributors agree that pri-
vacy remains a vital value in modern democratic societies but ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to draw reliable lines between private and public spaces.
Wacks, Raymond. Law, Morality and the Private Domain. Hong Kong: Hong
Kong University Press, 2001. Develops the relationship between the concept
of privacy and its ethical dimensions and the need for the law to deﬁne and
protect a sphere of personal privacy.
Weintraub, Jeff, and Krishan Kumar, eds. Public and Private in Thought and Prac-
tice: Perspectives on a Grand Dichotomy. Chicago: Chicago University Press,
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
170

1997. Contributors provide philosophical analysis of the distinctions between
private and public that underlie much of the current privacy debates. Proper
understanding of the relationship between public and private spheres is
shown to be necessary for dealing with many “hot button” social issues such
as abortion rights and afﬁrmative action.
Articles and Papers
Etzioni, Amitai, and Nadine Strossen. “Should Americans Be Willing to Give
Up Some of Their Privacy to Advance Policies that Are Generally Perceived
to Be in Society’s Best Interest? CQ Researcher, vol. 7, March 21, 1997, p. 257.
Debate between Etzioni, a communitarian philosopher and Strossen, director
of the ACLU, that pits collective good against the individual rights of privacy.
Flood, Barbara. “The Emotionality of Privacy.” Bulletin of the American Society
for Information Science, vol. 123, February–March 1997, p. 7ff. Explores the
importance of privacy to self-image and to the sense of control people have
over their own lives.
Rust, Michael, and Susan Crabtree. “Access, Privacy and Power.” Insight on the
News, vol. 12, August 19, 1996, p. 8ff. Explores the trade-off between the
power and convenience of computer technology and the ability it gives peo-
ple to invade other peoples’ privacy.
Walker, Kent. “The Costs of Privacy.” Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy,
vol. 25, Fall 2001, p. 87ff. Privacy is both an individual and a social good, but
it comes with costs: more paperwork to deal with, higher prices, fewer free
services, less convenience, and (paradoxically) less security. Greater efforts to
protect privacy can also impinge on the right of free expression. Therefore
the beneﬁts and costs of each proposed privacy measure must be carefully
evaluated.
Web Documents
Charbeneau, Travis. “The Future of Privacy: Moot?” ItmWeb.com. Available
online. URL: http://www.itmweb.com/f010501.htm. Posted on January 5,
2001. The author, a futurist, argues that as society becomes more enlightened
and tolerant about sexual and other personal matters, the need to protect per-
sonal privacy will diminish. At the same time, stronger legislation and tools
such as encryption may provide better protection for those matters that still
need to remain private.
Godwin, Mike. “Privacy Please.” Salon.com. Available online. URL: http://
archive.salon.com/tech/books/1999/04/26/privacy/. Posted on April 26, 1999.
Godwin, a civil liberties attorney, reviews The Limits of Privacy by Amitai Et-
zioni, whom he argues uses extreme examples (Megan’s law and HIV testing
of infants) to attack privacy advocates and is generally too supportive and un-
critical of government social goals even when they infringe on privacy.
Johnson, David R. “Barbed Wire Fences in Cyberspace: The Threat Posed by
Calls for Ownership of Transactional Information.” Electronic Frontier
Annotated Bibliography
171

Foundation. Available online. URL: http://www.eff.org/Misc/Publications/
David_Johnson/cyber_barbwire_johnson.article. Posted on April 4, 1994.
Argues that giving individuals property rights in their data may not be an ef-
fective way to protect privacy because people might just trade away their
rights for convenience or other incentives. Johnson suggests strong, fully dis-
closed privacy policies as an alternative.
Obser, Jeffrey. “Privacy Is the Problem, Not the Solution.” Salon.com. Available
online. URL: http://archive.salon.com/june97/21st/privacy970626.html.
Posted on June 26, 1997. Argues that the demand for privacy may be exces-
sive and reﬂect “a fearful reaction to the collapse of trust in our culture” and
that privacy laws may have a downside in protecting the criminal and corrupt
from scrutiny.
Taylor, Humphrey. “Most People Are ‘Privacy Pragmatists’ Who, While Con-
cerned About Privacy, Will Sometimes Trade It Off for Other Beneﬁts.” Har-
ris Poll. Available online. URL: http://www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_
poll/index.asp?PID=365. Posted on March 19, 2003. A survey of attitudes
about privacy threats ﬁnds that about a quarter of the adult population are
“privacy fundamentalists” who believe they have lost much of their privacy
and are highly resistant to further encroachments. About a tenth of the pop-
ulation are basically unconcerned about privacy issues. However, the largest
group, about two thirds of the population, are “privacy pragmatists” who
have strong concerns about privacy but are willing to allow access to their in-
formation when they can see tangible beneﬁts.
AREAS OF PRIVACY
PERSONAL AND CONSUMER PRIVACY
Works in this section focus on the privacy rights and issues arising from mod-
ern commerce, as well as other issues involving the collection and use of per-
sonal identiﬁcation information.
Books
Bahadur, Gary. Privacy Defended: Protecting Yourself Online. Indianapolis, Ind.:
Que, 2002. Gives detailed how-to information for PC users who want to pro-
tect themselves from potential invasions of privacy or other attacks. The book
includes discussions of software (such as antivirus and encryption programs),
privacy laws and legal protections, and online payment systems.
Cady, Glee Harroh, and Pat McGregor. Protect Your Digital Privacy! Survival Skills
for the Information Age. New York: Que, 2001. A guide to online privacy threats
that explains how users can protect their personal information and prevent in-
trusive companies or individuals from learning about one’s online activities.
Cate, Fred H., et al. Financial Privacy, Consumer Privacy, and the Public Good.
Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute Press, 2003. Describes the
emerging issues involving regulation of credit bureaus as parts of the federal
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
172

Fair Credit Reporting Act expire and many states seek tougher restrictions on
dissemination of credit information. The authors argue that a federal stan-
dard is required because conﬂicting state laws would disrupt the system that
now provides consumers with instant credit.
Cavoukian, Ann, and Tyler Hamilton. The Privacy Payoff: How Successful Busi-
nesses Build Customer Trust. New York: McGraw Hill, 2002. Convincingly ar-
gues that privacy policies should not be regarded by business leaders as an
expensive nuisance but as an opportunity to build advantageous relationships
with customers. To do so, companies need to create a culture that fosters pri-
vacy in marketing and in the workplace.
Chesbro, Michael. Privacy Handbook: Proven Countermeasures for Combating
Threats to Privacy, Security, and Personal Freedom. Boulder, Colo.: Paladin
Press, 2002. An uncompromising libertarian takes an “edgy” approach to
protecting privacy. He argues that both government and big corporations
have run amok in their disregard for personal privacy, and he suggests dozens
of privacy-protecting and personal security measures with varying degrees of
practicality.
Frye, Curtis D. Privacy-Enhanced Business: Adapting to the Online Environment.
Westport, Conn.: Quorum Books, 2001. Analyzes the privacy concerns of on-
line users that are leading to a growing regulatory movement in Europe and
the United States. Frye describes a variety of scenarios that show how corpo-
rations can address privacy concerns, particularly in marketing and sales.
Gertler, Eric J. Prying Eyes: Protect Your Privacy from People Who Sell to You, Snoop
on You, and Steal from You. New York: Random House, 2004. The author, for-
mer CEO of a credit protection company, has created a well-organized hand-
book that explains the issues involved with every aspect of personal privacy. It
also provides a variety of steps and tips for securing one’s information and de-
tecting and responding to its misuse.
Givens, Beth. Privacy Rights Handbook: How to Take Control of Your Personal In-
formation. New York: Morrow, 1997. A classic and still useful discussion of the
major threats to personal and consumer privacy and the steps one can take to
protect information and minimize risk.
Ham, Shane, and Robert D. Atkinson. Online Privacy and a Free Internet: Striking
a Balance. Washington, D.C.: Progressive Policy Institute, 2001. Also avail-
able online. URL: http://www.bbbonline.org/UnderstandingPrivacy/library/
whitepapers/E-Privacy2.pdf. Takes a generally pro-industry approach to pri-
vacy, emphasizing the use of clear privacy policies, plus opt-out rather than
opt-in for consumers. The authors believe that particular technologies should
not be mandated because that would impair the ﬂexibility and innovation of
the Internet.
Hendricks, Evan. Credit Scores & Credit Reports: How the System Works: What You
Can Do. Cabin John, Md.: Privacy Times, 2004. The information in con-
sumer credit reports can have a decisive effect on many aspects of daily life,
but the mechanism used for gathering information and assigning credit
scores is obscure. The author (and editor of the newsletter Privacy Times) ex-
plains how the system works and how to deal with problems such as identity
Annotated Bibliography
173

theft, credit repair services, and discriminatory practices in insurance and
other areas.
Jennings, Charles, and Lori Fena. The Hundredth Window: Protecting Your Pri-
vacy and Security in the Age of the Internet. New York: Free Press, 2000. The
metaphor used by the authors is that one open window in a hundred can com-
promise the security of the castle. As people can now look out into the wide
world of the Internet, they are equally vulnerable to people peering in. The
authors (founders of the TRUSTe privacy certiﬁcation service) describe how
many sorts of web sites use various techniques to track users and obtain in-
formation about them.
Kasanoff, Bruce. Making It Personal: How to Proﬁt from Personalization Without
Invading Privacy. Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus, 2001. Gathering knowledge
from the stream of transactions and communications with suppliers, employ-
ees, and customers makes it possible for businesses to be more efﬁcient and
effective. For example analysis of work patterns can improve efﬁciency, while
buying patterns can be analyzed in order to target customers with special of-
fers. However, technologies such as data mining, monitoring, and even bio-
metrics can have many implications in terms of legality, labor relations, and
public attitudes. The author uses many contemporary examples to illustrate
these issues.
Lane, Carole A. Naked in Cyberspace: How to Find Personal Information Online. 2d
ed. Medford, N.J.: CyberAge Publications, 2002. Presents eye-opening
“how-tos” for ﬁnding information about people from online sources—and
for protecting oneself from other peoples’ snooping. The book includes a de-
tailed listing of sources of public records.
Levine, J., R. Everett-Church, and G. Stebben. Internet Privacy for Dummies.
New York: Hungry Minds, 2002. Using the familiar and accessible “for Dum-
mies” format, the authors provide common sense guidance and techniques
for protecting personal information online while using the Internet as an ef-
fective information tool.
Luna, J. J. How to Be Invisible: The Essential Guide to Protecting Your Personal Pri-
vacy, Your Assets, and Your Life. Revised and updated edition. New York:
Thomas Dunne Books, 2004. The author, an experienced security consultant,
has revised this handbook to account for the recent growth in privacy intru-
sion both by the government (post September 11) and through corporate
databases and online predators. Sections describe how to secure personal and
ﬁnancial information, maintain a low proﬁle to avoid snoopers, and obtain
anonymity in transactions and ownership.
Murphy, M. Maureen. “Privacy Protection for Customer Financial Informa-
tion.” Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2003. Also avail-
able online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/glba/RS20185.pdf. Gives
background on ﬁnancial privacy issues, explains privacy provisions of the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, and summarizes industry concerns.
Nott, Loretta. The Role of Information in Lending: The Cost of Privacy Restric-
tions. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2003. Also avail-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
174

able online. URL: http://www.law.umaryland.edu/marshall/crsreports/
crsdocuments/RL31847_05192003.pdf. Argues that overly restrictive regu-
lations on access to data on consumer borrowing behavior would make the
credit market inefficient. Some results could be higher interest rates, less
accessible credit, and lending to persons who are unlikely to manage their
debt.
Privacy Online: Fair Information Practices in the Electronic Marketplace. Washing-
ton, D.C.: Federal Trade Commission, 2000. Also available online. URL:
http://www.ftc.gov/reports/privacy2000/privacy2000.pdf. A key survey of in-
formation-handling practices by commercial web sites. The results showed
that most sites now had privacy policies, but only 20 percent implemented, at
least partially, the four basic fair information practices: notice, choice, access,
and security.
Rubin, Paul H., and Thomas M. Lenard. Privacy and the Commercial Use of Person-
al Information. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. Also available online.
URL: http://www.pff.org/issues-pubs/books/010701privacyandpersonalinfo.
pdf. This report from the pro-business Progress and Freedom Foundation
argues that the costs and other negative effects of increased regulation of
the sale of personal information outweigh any benefits in enhanced privacy
protection. In effect, such policies would make information more expensive,
marketing less efficient, and the consumer experience less satisfying. Be-
sides, the market is capable of responding to consumer demands for greater
privacy protection.
Shaw, Paul. E-Business Privacy and Trust: Planning and Management Strategies.
New York: Wiley, 2001. The author stresses the need for a secure e-commerce
environment and a well-written privacy policy. Failure to address privacy con-
cerns can lead to serious lawsuits, bad publicity, and loss of customer loyalty.
Special legal concerns involving ﬁnancial information, health data, and data
involving children are also covered.
Staten, Michael E., and Fred E. Cate. The Adverse Impact of Opt-In Privacy Rules
on Consumers: A Case Study of Retail Credit. Washington, D.C.: Privacy Lead-
ership Initiative, 2002. This case study based on the operations of MBNA
Corporation concludes that requiring opt-in (explicit consumer consent) for
the collection, transfer, or use of personal information would be costly to
both businesses and consumers. It would also impair access to information
needed for ﬁghting fraud and identity theft.
Turow, Joseph. Americans & Online Privacy: The System is Broken. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Annenberg Public Policy Center, 2003. Also
available online. URL: http://www.asc.upenn.edu/usr/jturow/internet-
privacy-report/36-page-turow-version-9.pdf. This survey has discouraging
news for privacy advocates: It finds that most adults who go online do not
understand the purpose of privacy statements or the implications of their
sharing information with e-commerce companies. Most users also do not
understand how their clicking on web pages can be combined with “cook-
ies” to create profiles.
Annotated Bibliography
175

Articles and Papers
Ambrose, Stephen F., Jr., and Joseph W. Gelb. “Consumer Privacy Regula-
tion and Litigation in the United States.” Business Lawyer, vol. 59, May 2004,
p. 1,251ff. Summarizes recent court decisions and regulatory rulings relating
to ﬁnancial privacy under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and data security is-
sues under the Children’s Online Privacy Act.
Arrison, Sonia. “How You Can Protect Your Privacy.” Consumers’ Research Maga-
zine, vol. 85, February 2002, p. 10ff. Succinctly summarizes privacy-protection
services, privacy policies and “seals,” and tools to protect online privacy. Such
tools include the “Anonymizer,” systems that allow for purchases without giv-
ing credit card numbers to stores, ways to control “cookies,” e-mail protec-
tion, and encryption tools.
Bayne, Kim M. “Privacy Still Burning Web Issue: Marketers Scramble to Come
Up with Self-Regulation Methods.” Advertising Age, vol. 69, June 29, 1998,
p. 37. Describes efforts toward the end of the 1990s to develop industry
guidelines and systems to protect privacy and head off the drive for regula-
tion. Generally privacy advocates have felt that some efforts (such as
TRUSTe) have been modestly successful but insufﬁcient.
Beiser, Vince. “The CyberSnoops: How Internet Gumshoes Breach Personal
Privacy.” Maclean’s, vol. 110, June 23, 1997, p. 42. Describes the “data brokers”
and online investigators who can ﬁnd out nearly everything about a person—
for a price. Most of the information is publicly available and legal to obtain,
but the result of aggregating the information raises privacy issues and has been
the subject of concern by the Federal Trade Commission and legislators.
Brinkley, Joel. “Judge Orders a Credit Bureau to Stop Selling Consumer Lists.”
New York Times, vol. 147, August 27, 1998, p. A2ff. Growing federal concern
about the misuse of consumer information was signaled by a Federal Trade
Commission order forbidding TransUnion Corporation, a major credit-
reporting organization, from selling consumer lists generated from its records.
———. “Web Site Agrees to Safeguards in First On-Line Privacy Deal.” New
York Times, vol. 147, August 14, 1998 p. A15. Gives background on the inﬂu-
ential online privacy case against GeoCities, a web hosting and customization
company. The Federal Trade Commission won a settlement in which the
company agreed to seek customer permission before distributing information
about users’ background, income, and lifestyle.
Buderi, Robert. “E-Commerce Gets Smarter.” Technology Review, April 2005,
n.p. Also available online. URL: http://www.technologyreview.com/articles/
05/04/issue/feature_ecommerce.asp. Describes “multichanneling” technolo-
gies that are being used to integrate marketing between online and store-
front. For example, online retailers are making it easier to review products
online than examine and purchase them in a physical store. The key to mak-
ing it work is an ongoing effort to cultivate and improve relationships with
customers, using data-mining technology and research to determine buying
habits. However, consumers must be convinced they are receiving extra value
through personalization, as well as having their privacy protected.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
176

Burress, Charles. “Cal Issues Alert About Stolen Laptop Computer.” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, March 29, 2005, p. B1. The theft of a laptop computer con-
taining 98,000 Social Security numbers from an unlocked ofﬁce at the
University of California, Berkeley, highlights a troublesome privacy threat—
theft of highly portable computers containing sensitive data. The data had
been downloaded to the laptop but not yet encrypted. Steps are being taken
to make sure all data is encrypted at its source.
Dahl, Darren. “New Liability for Hacked Companies.” Inc, vol. 26, June 2004,
p. 28. Many companies that have discovered their computers have been pen-
etrated and customer information compromised have “stonewalled” and not
told customers about the situation. However, California passed a law in 2003
requiring that such break-ins be fully disclosed, and Senator Diane Feinstein
(D-CA) has introduced similar federal legislation.
“The Data Game: Sophisticated Marketing Wizards Can Track Just About
Everything a Consumer Does.” Maclean’s, vol. 111, August 17, 1998, p. 14.
Describes the data-mining industry that gathers detailed information from
credit cards, supermarket “clubs,” and other sources and sells it to marketers
who want to target certain kinds of customers.
“Database Firms to Curb What They Sell.” San Francisco Chronicle, June 11,
1997, p. B1. Reports the results of a major early online privacy dispute: Lexis-
Nexis and seven other companies making up the Individual Reference Ser-
vices Group (including Experian and ChoicePoint) agreed to release private
information only to “qualiﬁed subscribers” and to limit the scope of the in-
formation provided, such as by not including Social Security numbers. (How-
ever, new problems with misuse of ChoicePoint data would emerge in
2004–05.)
Engario, Pete, Josey Puliyenthuruthel, and Manjeet Kripalani. “Fortress India?
Call Centers and Credit-Card Processors Are Tightening Security to Ease
U.S. and European Fears of Identity Theft.” Business Week, August 30, 2004,
p. 28. Reports that the call centers in India that process so many transactions
for U.S. and European customers are increasingly taking steps to prevent
misuse of personal information. They are responding to the growing pressure
seen in dozens of bills in the U.S. Congress and state legislatures that could
severely limit the outsourcing of data services.
Garﬁnkel, Simson. “Privacy and the New Technology: What They Do Know
Can Hurt You.” The Nation, vol. 270, February 28, 2000, p. 11ff. A compre-
hensive statement of the threat to privacy brought about by the wide accessi-
bility of personal information collected by business and accessible via the
Internet, often for illegitimate purposes. Computer security ﬂaws add to the
risk of harassment, identity theft, or, worse, intrusions. The author argues for
strong federal legislation to restrict the gathering and dissemination of per-
sonal information.
———. “The Pure Software Act of 2006.” Technology Review, April 2004, n.p.
Also available online. URL: http://www.technologyreview.com/articles/04/
04/wo_garﬁnkel040704.asp?p=1. Spyware is software that is loaded under
Annotated Bibliography
177

false pretenses and surreptitiously records and transmits user information.
Spyware is often subtler and harder to ﬁght than viruses and worms. The au-
thor suggests that in addition to using technical means, new laws ﬁght spy-
ware by insisting on “truth in labeling” like that required for food and drugs.
Gillmor, Dan. “Violating Privacy Is Bad Business.” Computerworld, vol. 32,
March 23, 1998, p. 38. Argues that it is shortsighted for companies to gather
unnecessary information about their customers just to resell it. The result can
be lost customers and perhaps onerous regulations.
Hadley, Jane. “‘Loyalty’ Cards Cause Griping Over Swiping.” Seattle Post-
Intelligencer, May 11, 2002, n.p. Also available online. URL: http://seattlepi.
nwsource.com/local/70072_loyal11.asp. Reports on the debate over super-
market loyalty cards. The markets generally say they don’t sell or share the
data but use it only to create special offers and more effectively market prod-
ucts. Some customers like the convenience of the cards, but others object to
the tracking of their shopping habits and worry about the loss of control over
their information. Some consumer groups have concluded that there is no
real long-term savings for consumers who use the cards.
Hagel, J., and J. F. Rayport. “The Coming Battle for Customer Information.” Har-
vard Business Review, January–February 1997, pp. 53–65. Reports on the high
stakes for companies that seek to take advantage of the ﬂood of personal infor-
mation available to be collected online while resisting demands for regulation.
Hulme, George V. “Bills Aim to Block Spyware.” InformationWeek, June 24,
2004, p. 79. Describes pending California and federal legislation that would
require that users give consent before “hidden” programs are installed on
their computers. However, that consent, to be effective, would have to be
clearly visible rather than being buried in a user license agreement. Existing
provisions of the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act also provide ammunition
for going after illegal spyware.
———. “Breach of Trust.” InformationWeek, May 3, 2004, n.p. Also available
online. URL: http://www.informationweek.com/story/showArticle.jhtml?
articleID=19400012. There is a growing number of data breaches where in-
truders gain access to customer data in ﬁnancial institutions. Only a fraction
of these incidents is brought to public attention—enough to cause a possible
consumer backlash. Various security measures, including ﬁrewalls and an-
tivirus software, are discussed. Banks are improving security, but many have
not yet done enough.
Kandra, Anne. “The Great American Privacy Makeover: An Exclusive PC
World Survey Reveals That Even Savvy Web Users Can Do More to Safe-
guard Their Privacy and Data.” PC World, vol. 21, November 2003, p. 144ff.
An in-depth feature article surveys 1,500 web users. Even though most of the
users surveyed had considerable online experience, for many their actual
practices did not match up with their expressed privacy concerns. For exam-
ple, many users employed a relatively easy to guess password for all their ser-
vices and never changed it. The article includes case studies (“makeovers”)
and suggestions for users.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
178

Kelly, Tina. “You Can Search, but Can You Hide? Using the Net, Old Friends,
Old Flames and Old Debts May Find You.” New York Times, vol. 148, No-
vember 26, 1998, p. G1. Discusses the mixed blessings that come from the
ability to ﬁnd almost anyone through information in online databases.
Labaton, Steve. “U.S. Cracking Down on Information Brokers.” New York
Times, April 23, 1999, p. 14. Reports on the Federal Trade Commission’s
crackdown on private investigators who advertise on the Internet that they
can obtain conﬁdential information about individuals’ bank, credit, and other
records. Such investigators often call banks and falsely claim to be the indi-
vidual being investigated or a relative.
Lamb, Gregory M. “ID Stolen? Call a Privacy Gumshoe.” Christian Science
Monitor, March 9, 2005, p. 12. Describes high-tech private eyes who can se-
cure one’s identity and privacy—for a hefty price. The author also summa-
rizes help for ordinary people who face identity theft and online scams.
Lazarus, David. “It’s Impressive, Scary to See What a Zaba Search Can Do.”
San Francisco Chronicle, April 15, 2005, pp. C1, C6. Describes a service from
ZabaSearch.com that can ﬁnd just about anyone’s current address, phone
number, and date of birth. The results even link to a mapping service to pro-
vide an aerial photo of the person’s house and directions for getting there.
The developer argues that the search is just a natural extension of the infor-
mation capabilities of the Internet and the use of the network to bring peo-
ple together. However, critics point out that the tool would seem to be an
ideal aid for stalkers and other criminals.
———. “Postcards with Data Disturbing.” San Francisco Chronicle, April 9, 2005,
pp. C2, C3. Reports that New Jersey–based Automatic Data Processing sent
postcards to more than 1,000 employees of Adecco Employment Services, on
which the employees’ Social Security numbers had been accidentally printed.
The company apologized and provided information resources to the employ-
ees but did not offer to pay for monitoring their credit records for signs of
identity theft.
———. “SBC’s Second Thoughts.” San Francisco Chronicle, December 12, 2004.
p. C1. The giant phone company SBC is reconsidering its plan to charge
higher prices to customers who do not agree to let the company share their
information with up to 50 afﬁliates or subsidiaries. State legislatures are con-
sidering outlawing the practice.
———. “Shifting Sands in Data Leak.” San Francisco Chronicle. February 25,
2005, p. C1. A columnist explains the issues involved in the selling of personal
information records by companies such as Choice Point, which sold 144,000
records to bogus businesses set up by data thieves. Spokespersons from Choi-
cePoint and the Electronic Privacy Information Center give contrasting
views of whether the industry has shown sufﬁcient responsibility.
———. “Who Else Had Your Bank Account Number?” San Francisco Chronicle,
January 5, 2005, p. A1. Dennis Yu was surprised when someone else began
cashing checks on his account. It turned out that the bank had given him an ac-
count number “recycled” from a closed account. Banks claim they are running
Annotated Bibliography
179

out of numbers and that it would be too expensive to accommodate longer
numbers.
Lifsher, Marc. “State Lawmakers Grill ChoicePoint Over Privacy Concerns,
Potential for ID Theft.” Los Angeles Times, March 31, 2005, p. C1. The rev-
elation that thieves posing as legitimate businesses had gained access to thou-
sands of consumer records has prompted California legislators to demand
prompter, fuller disclosure of data breaches. Some have also suggested re-
quiring ChoicePoint to provide consumers with free access to their records.
McCullagh, Dean. “Database Nation: The Upside of ‘Zero Privacy.’” Reason,
June 2004, pp. 26–35. The “assault on privacy” has been highly publicized in
the media, and activists raise continual cries of alarm. However, the author
argues that the information swapping in the “database society” also has many
invisible but important beneﬁts. These include market efﬁciency (and thus
lower prices), enabling consumers to view tailored offerings, and giving bet-
ter terms to ﬁnancially responsible consumers. The focus should instead be
on preventing genuine privacy threats from government while letting the tort
system provide protection against invasions of privacy by businesses and in-
dividuals.
Metzger, Miriam J., and Sharon Docter. “Public Opinion and Policy Initiatives
for Online Privacy Protection.” Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, vol.
47, September 2003, p. 350ff. Surveys studies of popular opinion with regard
to online privacy issues and compares what the public appears to want with
what lawmakers and industry makers may be offering.
Mulligan, Deirdre, and Stephen J. Col. “Should the Federal Government Set
Privacy Standards for the Internet?” CQ Researcher, November 6, 1998, p. 969.
Debates whether a national privacy standard is necessary or if industry can
develop effective disclosure and opt-out policies.
O’Hara, Robert, Jr. “Research Firms Weave a Tangled Web to Net Private In-
formation.” San Francisco Chronicle, June 15, 1998, p. A8. Gives examples of
online research and investigation services that will obtain information about
anyone for a fee by employing both legal sources and questionable methods
such as “pretext calling.”
Postrel, Virginia. “The Politics of Privacy.” Forbes, vol. 161, June 1, 1998, p. S130.
Argues that information arising out of transactions is shared by both par-
ties—such as a consumer and a business—and that regulations that make it
only the property of its originator should not replace the variety of arrange-
ments offered in the marketplace.
Robischon, Noah. “My Week as an Internet Gumshoe.” Time, vol. 149, June 2,
1997, p. 65. Conﬁrms Senator Diane Feinstein’s contention that lots of per-
sonal information is available on the Internet by obtaining Feinstein’s own
family birth dates, legal records, unlisted phone number, and other informa-
tion from a succession of free sources and information brokers.
Roth, Mark S. “Beware of Cookies: Do Marketers that Track a User’s Online
Activities Threaten Privacy?” National Law Journal, vol. 23, August 20, 2001,
p. C1. Although many Web users are concerned about the privacy implica-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
180

tions of using “cookies” to track their browsing activities, litigation has gen-
erally upheld their use. The applicability of statutes such as the Federal Wire-
tap Act, Electronic Communications Privacy Act, and the Computer Fraud
and Abuse Act is discussed.
Rothfelder, Jeffrey. “You Are for Sale.” PC World, vol. 16, September 1998, p. 96.
Gives examples of how marketers gather and cross-reference personal data to
target consumers in ways that can amount to a startling invasion of privacy.
Schwartz, John. “Guarding Privacy vs. Enforcing Copyrights.” New York Times,
September 29, 2003, p. C1. There are fundamental conﬂicts between the de-
sire to protect intellectual property by identifying violators and the privacy
rights of online users who are caught up in subpoenas. Privacy advocates
argue that subpoenas searching for illegal ﬁle-swappers are often overbroad
and violate privacy.
Spinello, Richard A. “The End of Privacy: Companies That Collect Informa-
tion for a Speciﬁc Purpose Can Resell or Reuse It for Other Purposes with
Impunity.” America, vol. 176, January 4, 1997, p. 9ff. Argues that existing laws
are inadequate in protecting consumer, ﬁnancial, and medical privacy. The is-
sues have changed little since the article was written.
Zeller, Tom. “Breach Points Up Flaws in Privacy Laws.” New York Times, Feb-
ruary 24, 2005, p. C1. Recent cases of unauthorized access to consumer data
at ﬁrms such as ChoicePoint have revealed the inadequacy of the current
“patchwork” of federal and state privacy laws. Senator Diane Feinstein DCA
is introducing tough new privacy bills that would require prompt consumer
notiﬁcation of privacy breaches.
Web Documents
“Are You Being Stalked? Tips for Protection.” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse.
Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs14-stk.htm. Up-
dated in June 2001. Stalking is the ultimate violation of personal privacy. This
fact sheet offers an overview of federal and state laws that can be used against
stalkers as well as practical tips for hiding from stalkers—many of which are
also good strategies for protecting one’s general privacy.
Borland, John. “States Join Spyware Battle.” CNet News.com Available online.
URL: http://news.com.com/2100–1024_3–5170263.html. Posted on March
4, 2004. Utah has passed an anti-spyware bill, and legislation has been intro-
duced in Iowa and California. However, industry groups are concerned that
laws that regulate speciﬁc technological speciﬁcs rather than misuse may
hamper the development of legitimate features. There are also different leg-
islative focuses: Utah focuses on “adware,” while proposed bills in Iowa and
California are more concerned with stopping the transmission of user infor-
mation. Privacy and industry groups would both prefer a single federal solu-
tion, though they disagree on speciﬁc provisions.
“California S.B. 27, ‘Shine the Light’ Law.” Electronic Privacy Information
Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/proﬁling/sb27.
html. Updated January 25, 2005. Describes a 2003 California law that many
Annotated Bibliography
181

privacy advocates consider to be a landmark and potential model for the na-
tion. The new law requires that businesses either allow customers to opt out
of information sharing or to make a detailed disclosure of how personal in-
formation is shared for marketing purposes.
“Caller ID and My Privacy: What Do I Need to Know?” Privacy Rights Clear-
inghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs19-cid.
htm. Updated in August 2000. Explains how Caller ID can compromise one’s
privacy and discusses the pros, cons, and options for blocking it. (Some dis-
cussion is speciﬁc to California.)
“The Census and Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available
online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/census/. Updated on May 5, 2003.
Describes privacy risks, legal issues, and cases relating to the U.S. Census.
The site begins with a history of the census, which has steadily expanded the
detailed information sought from citizens every 10 years. Historically, various
countries have used census data to identify dissenters and other target groups;
in the United States, census data helped authorities round up Japanese Amer-
icans at the beginning of World War II. Although personal identiﬁcation in-
formation is stripped out of census records before they are made available to
businesses or the public, certain data can be used to “reidentify” records. The
use of Social Security numbers also raises concerns. The summary includes
links to legal cases and news items.
“Choicepoint.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/choicepoint/default.html. Updated on March
30, 2005. Introduces and summarizes recent developments involving data
breaches and questionable practices of ChoicePoint and other commercial
data brokers. The site includes extensive links to documents from the Federal
Trade Commission and other sources.
“CLUE and You: How Insurers Size You Up.” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse.
Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs26-CLUE.htm.
Updated in October 2003. Explains the use of CLUE (Comprehensive Loss
Underwriting Exchange) reports by insurance companies. Because of this and
another database called A-PLUS, changes in a person’s credit record or
claims or even queries made with one insurance company can affect rates
charged for other types of insurance. These databases are little known but
they are covered by the Fair Credit Reporting Act, so consumers have the
right to access their report and to correct errors.
“Cookies.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/internet/cookies/. Updated on November 5,
2002. Describes the issues in class action lawsuits brought against the Inter-
net ﬁrm DoubleClick alleging misuse of cookies, a common method for
recording the actions of web browsers. The main problem seen is the com-
bining of browsing information from cookies with consumer information
looked up from a commercial database such as Abacus. The article includes
links to other resources relating to cookies.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
182

“CPNI (Customer Proprietary Network Information).” Electronic Privacy In-
formation Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/cpni/.
Updated November 7, 2002. Describes the status of federal requirements
about the sharing of customer information by telephone companies. Cur-
rently companies are free to share telephone-related information with afﬁli-
ated businesses but must seek customer permission if the information is not
related to phone service or is being shared with unafﬁliated companies. The
web page also includes opt-out information and resource links.
“Credit Scoring.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/creditscoring/. Updated on December
11, 2003. Introduces the operation of scoring used by the credit reporting
agencies and its implications for consumers. The article explains the poten-
tial for inaccuracies and abuse, and provides some links to news stories and
other documents.
“Digital Rights Management and Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information
Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/drm/default.
html. Updated on March 29, 2004. Systems that control access to media ﬁles
to prevent unauthorized copying or sharing can also raise privacy problems.
Users may have to reveal their identity without assurance their information
will not be misused. The ability to access potentially controversial content
anonymously is also lost. In addition to raising these issues, there is also dis-
cussion of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and links to ma-
terials from the Electronic Frontier Foundation and other organizations.
“Double Trouble with the DoubleClick/Abacus Merger.” Electronic Privacy
Information Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/
doubletrouble/. Updated on March 21, 2000. An introduction to the issues
raised by the combining of cookie tracking data with a consumer information
database. The site includes materials relating to the Electronic Privacy’s In-
formation Center’s complaint against DoubleClick/Abacus before the Fed-
eral Trade Commission.
“E-Commerce and You: Online Shopping Tips.” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse.
Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs23-shopping.htm.
Updated in September 2002. Introduces the basics of safe online shopping,
including identifying secure web sites, obtaining information about unknown
companies, understanding privacy policies, use of payment methods, and in-
formation that should not be disclosed in web forms.
Edelman, Benjamin. “‘Spyware’: Research, Testing, Legislation, and Suits.”
[Personal web site.] Available online. URL: http://www.benedelman.org/
spyware/. Updated on July 13, 2005. The author, who has researched spyware
issues and served as an expert witness, provides an introduction and links to
current issues, research, legislation, and litigation involving software that sur-
reptitiously obtains and transmits user information.
“The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) and the Privacy of Your Credit Re-
port.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/fcra/. Updated on December 8, 2004. Provides
Annotated Bibliography
183

an introduction, news summary, and links relating to the Fair Credit Report-
ing Act.
Garon, John M. “New Hampshire’s Latest Revolution: Liability for Damage
Caused by Selling Personal Information.” Interface Tech News. Available
online. URL: http://www.interfacenow.com/syndicatepro/displayarticle.asp?
ArticleID=565. Posted in April 2003. Discusses the case of the data broker
Docusearch being held liable for providing personal information about Amy
Boyer to her stalker/killer Liam Youens. The court found that Docusearch
had ignored a serious, foreseeable risk of harm to Boyer. Hopefully the deci-
sion will have a positive impact on other online investigators.
“Gender and Electronic Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Avail-
able online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/gender/. Updated on July 15,
2004. Introduces and provides news on privacy issues that are particularly rel-
evant to women. These include pretexting as a way to gain personal informa-
tion, stalking, and high-tech voyeurism.
“The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Avail-
able online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/glba/. Updated January 21,
2005. Summarizes the provisions and shortcomings of the 1999 Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), which provides limited privacy rights to customers
of ﬁnancial institutions. The article includes links to cases and news stories.
Gross, Grant. “U.S. Lawmakers Push for Data Privacy Legislation: Fallout
from the ChoicePoint and LexisNexis Data Breaches Continues.” IDG.net.
Available online. URL: http://www.computerworld.com/printthis/2005/
0,4814,100405,00.html (or QuickLink 53198). Posted on March 16, 2005.
Reports that Congress has expressed alarm about the compromising of per-
sonal data held by the nation’s major data brokers, and that new regulations
are likely to be passed by the end of the year. Many data brokers support
stronger privacy protections but oppose giving consumers control over the
use of their Social Security numbers, warning that it might hamper fraud in-
vestigations. However, critics say the industry is still “in denial.”
Hachman, Mark. “E-Cyclers Embrace Data Destruction.” eWeek. Available on-
line. URL: http://www.eweek.com/article2/0,1759,1665275,00.asp. Posted on
October 1, 2004. The computer-recycling industry faces a new challenge: Ver-
iﬁably destroy data on computer drives to comply with new legislation such as
HIPAA (the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) and the
Gramm-Leach-Blilely Act.
Hicks, Matt. “Wiretap Ruling Could Signal End of E-Mail Privacy.” eWeek. Avail-
able online. URL: http://www.eweek.com/article2/0,1759,1619520,00.asp.
Posted on July 1, 2004. A federal appeals court has ruled that stored e-mail mes-
sages are not protected under the federal Wiretap Act. Legal experts are quoted
as saying that the decision means that people should not have an expectation of
privacy in e-mail stored on disk, and that it may now be harder to prosecute
computer crimes involving stolen data.
Honan, Matthew. “Don’t Be Afraid of the Big Bad Gmail.” Salon.com. Available
online. URL: http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2004/04/26/gmail/index.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
184

html. Posted on April 26, 2004. The author argues that Google’s web-based
Gmail service does not represent a real privacy threat. E-mail is scanned for
keywords that are matched to provide “targeted” advertisements, but the
company says that the process is automatic and no human gains access to the
users’ e-mail.
Hoofnagel, Chris Jay. “Privacy Risks of E-mail Scanning.” Electronic Privacy
Information Center. Available online. URL: http://epic.org/privacy/gmail/
casjud3.15.05.html. Posted on March 15, 2005. The director of the West
Coast ofﬁce of the Electronic Privacy Information Center testiﬁes before the
Judiciary Committee of the California State Senate. He argues that Google’s
system of scanning users’ e-mail in order to generate targeted advertising vi-
olates the privacy not only of the service’s users but also of senders of mes-
sages who never consented to the e-mail scanning.
Hoofnagel, Chris Jay, and Emily Honig. “Victoria’s Secret and Financial Pri-
vacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/glba/victoriassecret.html. Updated on January
25, 2005. Describes how Congress was spurred into high gear in promoting
the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act when a representative’s bank sold his personal
information to Victoria’s Secret. Representative Joe Barton (R-TX) was dis-
mayed when the company’s catalogs began to arrive at his home and he did
not want his wife to get the idea he was buying lingerie for women in Wash-
ington. A bipartisan coalition overcame the opposition of the banking lobby
and passed the law in 1999.
“How Private Is My Credit Report?” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. Available
online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs6-crdt.htm. Revised in No-
vember 2004. Explains what is in a credit report, the meaning of credit scores,
and how to obtain one’s credit report. The article also describes what infor-
mation should not be included in credit reports, how to correct errors, who
can access credit reports, and limitations on use of credit information for
marketing.
“‘Junk Mail: How Did They Get My Address?” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse.
Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs4-junk.htm. Up-
dated in May 2003. Explains how junk mailers obtain peoples’ addresses and
how to opt out from the national mailing lists through the Mail Preference
Service and Abacus, as well as providing other “mail reduction tips.”
Kawamoto, Dawn. “Firms Seek to Reassure E-Shoppers Over Security.” ZDNet
News.com. Available online. URL: http://news.zdnet.com/2100-
1009_22-5583047.html?tag=nl. Posted on February 18, 2005. A panel of se-
curity experts from the e-commerce industry discusses ways to reassure online
consumers that their security and privacy will be protected. The urgency of
this issue is reﬂected in a survey by RSA Security that found that about one-
fourth of online shoppers have reduced their use of e-commerce sites because
of concerns about identity theft. While services such as eBay are giving con-
sumers more options with escrow and purchase-protection services, the grow-
ing unease with e-mail is threatening the ability of companies to communicate
Annotated Bibliography
185

legitimately with their customers. Finally, “federation” schemes where one
login and password are used by many companies may result in increased vul-
nerability and consumer concern.
Mark, Roy. “Anti-Spyware Bill Clears Committee Hurdle.” Internetnews.com.
Available online. URL: http://www.internetnews.com/security/article.php/
3373041. Posted on June 24, 2004. Reports the continuing progress of anti-
spyware legislation in Congress. The SPY Act would prohibit keystroke log-
ging, computer hijacking, and displaying advertising windows that cannot be
closed. The user must opt in before any information is collected or transmitted.
“My Social Security Number: How Secure Is It?” Privacy Rights Clearing-
house. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs10-ssn.htm.
Updated in June 2004. The Social Security number is a key piece of identiﬁ-
cation that can be used to retrieve a variety of information about a person and
even to assume another’s identity to create fraudulent bank or credit ac-
counts. There is currently only limited legal protection against being com-
pelled to disclose one’s Social Security number to government agencies and
businesses. Individuals should resist such disclosure and consider not doing
business with companies that insist on it.
“New Survey Reveals Trust Gap Between Consumers and Businesses About
Information Exchange.” Harris Interactive. Available online. URL: http://
www.harrisinteractive.com/news/allnewsbydate.asp?NewsID=260. Posted on
April 2, 2001. A survey of consumer attitudes toward online privacy ﬁnds that
most online users are concerned about misuse of their information and want
to see privacy policies and guarantees. About 60 percent do see the “person-
alization” of web sites (usually involving cookies) to be a good thing. Most
consumers are not using privacy protection software.
Olsen, Stefanie. “FTC: All Eyes on Consumer Privacy.” ZDNet News.com.
Available online. URL: http://news.zdnet.com/2100–3513_22–5230750.html
?tag=nl. Posted on June 10, 2004. Reports that the Federal Trade Commis-
sion is gearing up for major privacy enforcement actions involving Internet-
based companies. Targets may include e-mail providers that scan customers’
messages, services that facilitate spam e-mail, and companies whose careless
security exposes consumer data to theft.
“The ‘Other’ Consumer Reports: What You Should Know About ‘Specialty’
Reports.” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.
privacyrights.org/fs/fs6b-SpecReports.htm. Posted in December 2004. While
most consumers know about the importance of credit reports, there are a
number of other reports that can contain erroneous information or represent
a potential for misuse. This fact sheet explains insurance claims reports, med-
ical history reports, residential and tenant reports, check-writing history re-
ports, and employment reports. These reports can be obtained by the
consumer at no charge and should be reviewed under certain circumstances,
such as when seeking insurance coverage or applying for employment.
“Postal Service Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available on-
line. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/postal/. Updated on January 27,
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
186

2005. Gives an overview of privacy issues arising from use of the postal ser-
vice. Topics covered include required information for opening a private mail
box, use of bar codes for sender identiﬁcation and tracking (“intelligent
mail”), and distribution of information from change of address notices. The
site includes news and resource links.
“Privacy and Consumer Proﬁling.” Electronic Privacy Information Center.
Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/proﬁling/#selfdefense.
Updated on October 13, 2004. Provides a comprehensive and rather detailed
account of how companies gather a variety of information from consumers’
transactions and create proﬁles for marketing purposes. Consumers are often
grouped into a variety of social/demographic groups with names such as
“Elite Suburbs” or “Urban Midscale.” There are also huge searchable data-
bases that marketers can query to ﬁnd, for example, subscribers to Newsweek
who are Catholic, ﬁt a particular socioeconomic class, and have a record of
contributing to nonproﬁt organizations. Other topics include medical proﬁl-
ing, the potential use of supermarket “loyalty card” data by law enforcement
agencies, and measures that consumers can take to reduce access to their per-
sonal information.
“Protecting Financial Privacy in the New Millennium: The Burden Is on
You.” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://
www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs24-finpriv.htm. Revised in September 2002.
Describes privacy protections for information about account holders in fi-
nancial institutions. The article explains provisions of the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act (GLBA) that complicate privacy problems by allowing
combinations of companies to more freely exchange customer information,
though some kinds of information cannot be sold to unaffiliated companies.
It also explains privacy notices and opt-out procedures.
“Put the FAIR Back in Fair Credit Reporting.” U.S. Public Interest Research
Group. 
Available 
online. 
URL:http://www.pirg.org/consumer/credit/
fcrafacts2003new.htm. Posted on April 11, 2003. Argues that the preemption
provision of the Fair Credit Reporting Act should expire in order to let
stronger privacy provisions take effect. The PIRG also advocates new laws to
protect Social Security numbers, ban use of credit scoring for insurance, and
provide comprehensive protection against identity theft.
Roberts, Paul. “2004: Good and Bad for Security.” PC World/IDG News
Service. Available online. URL: http://www.pcworld.com/news/article/
0,aid,119031,00.asp. Posted on December 27, 2004. A review of the year
2004 indicates a rough year for computer security and privacy. There were
high-proﬁle data crimes and a considerable increase in online schemes, par-
ticularly “phishing.” Trojans and spyware were also on the rise. On the other
hand, police around the world nabbed some notorious computer criminals,
and security for operating systems and businesses is gradually improving.
Robinson, Teri. “FCC to Let Carriers Share Customer Data.” E-Commerce
Times. Available online. URL: http://www.ecommercetimes.com/story/18634.
html. Posted on July 17, 2002. Reports that the Federal Communications
Annotated Bibliography
187

Commission, promoted by a recent court decision, will now allow telephone
companies to share information about customers with related companies that
sell phone-related services. Customer permission will only be required for
sharing data with unrelated companies or those whose services are not related
to telecommunications.
Rosenberg, Scott. “Defending the Cookie Monster.” Salon.com. Available on-
line. URL: http://dir.salon.com/tech/col/rose/2001/05/07/cookies/index.
html?sid=1028455. Posted on May 7, 2001. Argues that there’s nothing
wrong with those little web-tracking ﬁles in themselves—indeed, they’re
needed if a web site is to keep track of your personal preferences. Users can
easily control which sites are allowed to use cookies and delete any that are
unwanted.
Sharma, Dinesh C. “Study: Cookies in Security Crosshairs.” ZDNet.News.com.
Available online. URL: http://news.zdnet.com/2100–9588_22–5618296.html
?tag=nl.e589. Posted on March 15, 2005. Reports on a study by Jupiter Re-
search that a growing number of Internet users are blocking or deleting
“cookie” ﬁles that are deposited on their personal computers by many web
sites. Thirty-eight percent of the consumers surveyed believe cookies are in-
vasive of their security or privacy. The increasing resistance to cookies may be
threatening the accuracy of data needed to measure the effectiveness of online
marketing or advertising.
Smith, Richard M. “The Web Bug FAQ.” Electronic Frontier Foundation.
Available online. URL: http://www.eff.org/Privacy/Marketing/?f=web_
bug.html. Posted on November 11, 1999. Explains the use of a nearly invisi-
ble image used as a way to record the address of a person browsing the page.
Web bugs can be used legitimately to compile page-usage statistics, but they
can also be used to compile user information in connection with cookies.
Taylor, Humphrey. “Do Not Call Registry Is Working Well.” Harris Poll.
Available online. URL: http://www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/index.
asp?PID=439. Posted on February 13, 2004. Reports the results of a poll
showing that the Federal Trade Commission’s Do Not Call Registry has been
remarkably successful. More than half the nation’s adults have signed up, and
most report they now receive few or no telemarketing calls.
“Telemarketing: How to Have a Quiet Evening at Home.” Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs5-
tmkt.htm. Revised in September 2003. Explains how to use the National Do
Not Call Registry and other agencies to reduce unwanted marketing calls.
The article includes discussion of federal and state laws, legal recourse, and
other resources.
“Top Ten Consumer Privacy Resolutions.” Electronic Privacy Information
Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/2004tips.html.
Updated on December 25, 2004. Offers practical suggestions for protecting
privacy in the form of New Year’s resolutions. Suggestions include minimiz-
ing the disclosure of personal information in transactions, using opt-out and
do-not-call lists, protecting personal computers against viruses and spyware,
and regularly obtaining credit reports.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
188

Vaas, Lisa. “Old PCs Can Come Back to Haunt You.” eWeek. Available online.
URL: http://www.eweek.com/article2/0,1759,1624496,00.asp. Posted on
July 16, 2004. Major computer makers HP and Dell have announced pro-
grams to help users securely dispose of old computers. While the article fo-
cuses on the toxic environmental effects of discarded electronics, the danger
of having one’s personal data “recycled” is also discussed.
Verton, Dan. “Offshore Coding Work Raises Security Concerns.” Computer-
world.com. Available online. URL: http://www.computerworld.com/
managementtopics/outsourcing/story/0,10801,80935, 00.html. Posted on
May 5, 2003. The growing outsourcing of software development to countries
such as India, Pakistan, Russia, and China brings the risk that programmers
may create software with security ﬂaws that compromise assets or privacy.
Often there is little oversight of overseas development efforts.
“The Video Privacy Protection Act (VPPA).” Electronic Privacy Information
Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/vppa/. Updated
August 6, 2002. Describes the legislative history of the VPPA and its speciﬁc
protections, which have been upheld by courts in several cases.
Weiss, Todd R. “New Federal Rules Dictate Bank ID Theft Notiﬁcations: The
Regulations Are Designed to Protect Consumers.” Computerworld.com.
Available online. URL: http://www.computerworld.com/printthis/2005/
0,4814,100614,00.html (QuickLink 53393). Posted on March 24, 2005. Re-
ports that the Federal Reserve Board has issued new rules that require banks
to notify consumers “as soon as possible” if their personal information is
stolen or improperly accessed.
“Wireless Communications: Voice and Data Privacy.” Privacy Rights Clearing-
house. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs2-wire.htm.
Updated in June 2004. Warns about the lack of privacy inherent in cordless
phones, cellular phones, pagers, and wireless data networks. The article of-
fers suggestions for ﬁnding and enabling security features and in preventing
fraud. It includes links to resources.
PRIVACY AND HEALTH CARE
This section has works that focus on the use of personal medical information
(including genetic information) by providers, insurers, researchers, or other
groups involved with the health care system.
Books
Annas, George J. Rights of Patients: The Authoritative ACLU Guide to the Rights
of Patients. 3rd ed. New York: New York University Press, 2004. This com-
prehensive reference includes sections on how patients can make sure their
privacy and the conﬁdentiality of their records is respected.
Chaikind, Hinda R., et al. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA): Overview and Analysis. New York: Nova Science Publishers, 2004.
The authors discuss all major sections of the HIPAA regulations including
privacy rules.
Annotated Bibliography
189

Hubbartt, William S. HIPAA Privacy Source Book: A Collection of Practical Exam-
ples. Alexandria, Va.: Society for Human Resource Management, 2004. Pro-
vides sample policies, procedures, checklists, and other tools for helping
employers or managers understand and comply with the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) privacy rules. If nothing else,
browsing this work indicates just how complex this area of privacy law is.
Jones, Nancy Lee, and Alison M. Smith, eds. Genetic Information: Legal and Law
Enforcement Issues. New York: Novinka Publications, 2004. In the wake of the
completion of the “rough draft” of the human genome in 2000 by the Human
Genome Project, the legal issues surrounding the use of genetic information
have come into sharp relief. The contributors discuss federal and state legis-
lation affecting access to and sharing of genetic information, including the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Amer-
icans with Disabilities Act.
———. Genetic Information: Legal Issues Relating to Discrimination and Privacy.
Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2003. Also available online.
URL: http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/library/downloads/keyWorkplaceDocuments/
CRS/CRSGeneticInformation0701.pdf. Gives background on laws and rul-
ings relevant to the disclosure of genetic information. The book includes dis-
cussion of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, the
Americans with Disabilities Act, state statutes, and legislation in the 106th and
107th Congresses.
Laurie, Graeme. Genetic Privacy: A Challenge to Medico-Legal Norms. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2002. Argues for a comprehensive view of per-
sonal privacy and property rights in one’s genetic information. Going be-
yond existing concepts of conﬁdentiality such a view would lead to stronger
protection for individuals dealing with medical providers, insurers, or the
government.
National Research Council, Board on Biology. Privacy Issues in Biomedical and
Clinical Research. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1998. Pro-
ceedings of a forum; includes an overview of privacy issues, special concerns
involving genetic information, and possible measures to ensure protection of
privacy.
Radetzki, Marcus, Marian Radetzki, and Niklas Juth. Genes and Insurance: Ethi-
cal, Legal and Economic Issues. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
The authors explore the fateful collision between the emergence of detailed
genetic knowledge giving the ability to predict future health and a private
health insurance system that seeks to minimize costs. While genetic privacy
laws may be one way to prevent persons with adverse genetic indications from
becoming uninsured, the authors argue that publicly funded health care of-
fers the only permanent solution.
Rothstein, Mark A., ed. Genetic Secrets: Protecting Privacy and Conﬁdentiality in the
Genetic Era. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997. A collection of essays
by legal and medical experts that explore a variety of issues raised by the ad-
vent of genetic research and diagnostics. Topics include the effect of genetic
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
190

knowledge on the doctor-patient relationship, the rights of nonpatient study
subjects, speciﬁc uses of genetic technology (such as drug research, forensics,
gene data banks, and decision-making by insurance companies and health
providers), as well as the relevant legal frameworks in the United States and
other nations, with recommendations for reform.
Saunders, Janet McGee. Patient Confidentiality. 4th ed. Salt Lake City:
Medicode, Inc., 1998. Presents basic guidelines for health professionals con-
cerning what patient information can be released and to whom; organized al-
phabetically by topic. The book is useful but does not cover recent HIPAA
and other regulations.
Stevens, Gina Marie. “A Brief Summary of the Medical Privacy Rule.” Wash-
ington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service 2003. Also available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/medical/RS20934.pdf. Summarizes the
“Standards for the Privacy of Individually Identiﬁable Health Information”
published in August 2002 by the Department of Health and Human Services.
This includes the implementation of HIPAA and subsequent rulings. Provi-
sions include individual rights to access to health records and privacy policies
as well as the right to ﬁle complaints and request restrictions of disclosure of
information.
Yount, Lisa. Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering. Rev. ed. New York: Facts On
File, 2004. This volume in the “Library in a Book” series includes coverage
of genetic privacy issues, as well as general background on genetic science and
its applications.
———. Patients’ Rights in the Age of Managed Health Care. New York: Facts On
File, 2001. This volume in the Library in a Book series includes coverage of
medical privacy issues.
Articles and Papers
Cooper, Christine Godsil. “Your Genes or Your Job: Genetic Testing in the
Workplace.” Employee Rights Quarterly, vol. 3, Fall 2002, p. 1ff. As the capa-
bilities of genetic testing to predict future medical problems grows, so does
the threat of discrimination or other adverse impacts against employees. Sur-
veying these emerging issues, the author concludes that current legal protec-
tions under varying state laws are insufﬁcient and a new federal statute is
required. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) may offer recourse but
only after actual damages have been suffered and only if they can be proved
to be related to the testing.
Feder, Barnaby J., and Tom Zeller, Jr. “Identity Chip Planted Under Skin Ap-
proved for Use in Health Care.” New York Times, October 14, 2004, p. A1. An
implanted identiﬁcation chip has been approved for medical use. Advocates
suggest the chips may provide life-saving information in emergencies and re-
duce medical errors, but privacy advocates are concerned that it may eventu-
ally become a ubiquitous way to track peoples’ movements . . . or medical
information may be surreptitiously read and misused.
Annotated Bibliography
191

Finkelstein, Katherine Eban. “The Computer Cure: Privacy Isn’t Always the
Best Medicine.” The New Republic, vol. 219, September 14, 1998, p. 28ff. Ar-
gues that a national medical-records database is worth having despite privacy
concerns because it would enable “smart” computer programs to identify
drug interactions and other potentially life-threatening situations.
Freudenheim, Milt. “Medicine at the Click of a Mouse: On-Line Health Files
Are Convenient. Are They Private?” New York Times, August 12, 1998, p.
D1. Both health care providers and insurers are rapidly going online and of-
fering patients access to medical information and lab results. However, this
can expose sensitive information to the privacy and security risks endemic
to the Internet.
Hustead, Joanne L., and Janlori Goldman. “Genetics and Privacy.” American
Journal of Law & Medicine, Summer–Fall 2002, p. 285ff. A detailed overview
of the laws and legal issues relating to genetic testing and the use of genetic
information. The authors argue for a concept of “genetic privacy” that in-
cludes the right against genetic discrimination.
Johnson, Steven. “Trading Privacy for Health.” Discover, vol. 25, December
2004, n.p. Also available online. URL: http://www.discover.com/issues/
dec-04/departments/emerging-technology. Advocates of uniform digital med-
ical records argue that they are far more reliable (and thus safer) than tradi-
tional hand-scrawled doctors’ notes. When combined with data-mining
technology, the records could also be used by the Food and Drug Administra-
tion for early detection of serious problems with new drugs. Researchers could
also ﬁnd correlations suggesting risks or beneﬁts for various treatments. The
author admits there are concerns with potential breaches of privacy and mis-
use of the patient data but suggests that most people would be willing to take
such risks in exchange for the beneﬁts of safer and more effective medical care.
Kingkead, Gwen. “To Study Disease, Britain Plans a Genetic Census.” New York
Times, December 21, 2002, p. F5. While a proposed detailed survey of the
distribution of genes in the British population holds great promise for un-
derstanding patterns of disease, it also raises concerns about the potential
misuse of individuals’ genetic data.
Lebau, Steve, and Richard Neuworth. “Genetic Testing: Balancing Beneﬁts and
Abuses.” USA Today Magazine, vol. 129, July 2000, p. 28. Explains that some
employers might use testing for genetic susceptibilities to assign employees
to safer work areas. However, other employers might use genetic screening
to avoid hiring applicants who have a higher potential for incurring medical
expenses. In some cases genetic susceptibilities correlate with race or ethnic-
ity, opening another potential for discrimination. It is up to Congress to pass
a Genetic Privacy Act that would prevent such abuses.
Lohr, Steve. “Road Map to a Digital System of Health Records.” New York
Times, January 19, 2005, p. C1. Reports on a government advisory study that
urges the creation of a standardized system of digital health records. A com-
mon format would allow records to be transferred between hospitals, labora-
tories, and insurers in the same way that common standards allow for the
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
192

seamless transfer of e-mail between different types of computer systems.
However, privacy would be protected by the lack of a single centralized data-
base and by giving patients control over the use of their records.
MacDonald, Chris, and Bryn Williams Jones. “Ethics and Genetics: Suscepti-
bility Testing in the Workplace.” Journal of Business Ethics, vol. 35, February
2002, p. 235ff. The growing availability of genetic tests that show disease
risks offers both beneﬁts and risks. The author surveys the pros and cons and
offers a set of criteria for voluntary (not mandatory) genetic testing.
Melton, L. Joseph, III. “The Threat to Medical Records Research.” New Eng-
land Journal of Medicine, vol. 337, November 13, 1997, p. 1,466ff. Argues that
the new privacy restrictions being implemented under the federal HIPAA law
can deny key data to medical researchers; proposes use of review boards to
allow access to records while protecting patients’ interests.
Orentlicher, David, and Bob Barr. “Is a ‘Unique Health Identiﬁer’ for Every
American a Good Idea?” Insight on the News, vol. 14, August 24, 1998, p. 24ff.
Debates the proposed use of a universal health ID number. Orentlicher be-
lieves it would improve medical care and even save lives by detecting harmful
drug side effects and interactions; on the other hand, Barr warns of massive in-
vasion of privacy and potential ammunition for government meddlers.
Russell, Sabin. “Dispute on Medical Records Settled.” San Francisco Chronicle,
December 7, 2004, p. B1. The University of California agreed to stop re-
stricting access to records of newly diagnosed cancer patients. The university
had believed it was bound by the federal Health Insurance Portability and Ac-
countability Act, but the ban was threatening to cripple the Cancer Registry
used by many medical researchers.
Smith, Virginia A., and Dawn Fallik. “Doctors, Patients Grapple with Speciﬁcs
of Privacy Rule.” Philadelphia Inquirer, March 8, 2005, p. A01. Two years after
the federal HIPAA medical privacy act took effect, some doctors are ﬁnding
that the complicated rules are making it harder to communicate with pa-
tients. For example, the condition of one family member cannot be discussed
with another unless the appropriate release has been signed. On the other
hand, the use of a single consent form for “routine disclosure” may not be
meaningfully protecting patients’ privacy rights.
Snider, Dixie E. “Patient Consent for Publication and the Health of the Pub-
lic.” Journal of the American Medical Association, vol. 278, August 27, 1997,
p. 624ff. Argues that procedures for removing information about patients’
identities and for obtaining informed consent can be too strict in some cases
and can prevent timely warnings about serious disease outbreaks.
Trippe, Bill. “First, Do No Harm: Can Privacy and Advanced Information
Technology Coexist?” EContent, vol. 26, March 2003, p. 38ff. Argues that in
using the growing capabilities of networking and database technology in
health care, privacy can be protected by designing systems that provide only
the information needed—and no more. Thus a clinician would receive infor-
mation truly relevant to medical decision making but not extraneous personal
information.
Annotated Bibliography
193

Veatch, Robert M. “Consent, Confidentiality, and Research.” New England
Journal of Medicine, vol. 336, March 20, 1997, p. 869ff. Describes a study
that shows that many patients who received genetic testing were not asked
for consent for use of the information in research studies and that doctors
who did the tests may not have been fully aware of the purposes of the
study.
Woodward, Beverly R. “The Computer-Based Patient Record and Conﬁdential-
ity.” New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 333, November 23, 1995, p. 1,419ff.
Introduces the arguments for increased computerization of health records (ef-
ﬁciency, safety, better medical research) and against (misuse of records to dis-
criminate, leading to serious consequences for insurance and employment).
Web Documents
Choy, Angela, et al. “Exposed Online: Why the New Federal Health Privacy
Regulation Doesn’t Offer Much Protection to Internet Users.” Pew Internet
& American Life Health Privacy Project. Available online. URL: http://
www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_HPP_HealthPriv_report.pdf. Posted in No-
vember 2001. Suggests that the new regulations under the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act are insufﬁciently comprehensive and fail
to deal with many online health services. Many web sites don’t ﬁt within the
“covered entities” affected by the law.
“Examples of Privacy Violations.” HIPAAps.com. Available online. URL:
http://er.hipaaps.com/examples.html. Posted in 2002. A compilation of recent
examples of violations of health privacy by providers, insurers, and others.
“Genetic Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/genetic/. Updated on June 23, 2004. Ex-
plains how DNA can be used as a unique identiﬁer, the collection of samples
and data, its use in law enforcement, and the risks of misuse of genetic infor-
mation. Some privacy advocates believe that the unique characteristics of ge-
netic information mean that it deserves special and explicit protection beyond
that applied to all personal medical information. There are no federal laws
explicitly addressing this issue, though laws such as the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) apply in some cases. The article
includes links to news, cases, and other resources.
Givens, Beth. “Ten Privacy Principals [sic] for Health Care.” Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/ar/
privprin.htm. Posted in November 6, 1998. Describes problems that have
rendered the privacy implied in the Hippocratic Oath virtually obsolete.
Givens suggests principles including openness; access (by patients to their
records); accuracy; limiting collection, use, disclosure, and retention; pre-
venting secondary usage without consent; getting informed consent; and pro-
viding for security, compliance, and accountability.
“Health Privacy in the Hands of Government: HIPAA Privacy Regulation—
Troubled Process, Troubling Results.” Privacilla.org. Available online. URL:
http://www.privacilla.org/releases/HIPAA_Report.pdf. Posted in April 2003.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
194

This free market–based critique acknowledges the importance of health pri-
vacy but argues that Congress has turned over its responsibilities to a bu-
reaucracy whose complex regulations have spawned an industry of lawyers
and other experts. The inﬂexible regulations will actually block the develop-
ment of better privacy protections. “True health privacy relies on empowered
patients choosing among options made available to them by providers com-
peting to serve them.”
“HIPAA Basics: Medical Privacy in the Electronic Age.” Privacy Rights Clear-
inghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs8a-hipaa.
htm. Revised in July 2003. An overview of the new federal medical privacy
rules. The article explains what types of records are covered by HIPAA and
how the law will affect the use of medical records by employers, the govern-
ment, credit reporting agencies, and health care providers.
“How Private Is My Medical Information?” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse.
Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs8-med.htm. Re-
vised in February 2004. Explains privacy protections for medical records, in-
cluding the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA), which covers some but not all types of medical records. The article
also explains who has access to medical records and the role of the Medical
Information Bureau (MIB). It includes a variety of resources to consult in var-
ious situations.
“Kansas AG Presses for Women’s Medical Records.” Health Privacy Project.
Available online. URL: http://www.healthprivacy.org/info-url_nocat2303/
info-url_nocat_show.htm?doc_id=263221. Posted in 2005. Reports on de-
mands by the attorney general of Kansas for the medical records of nearly 90
women who sought late-term abortions at two Kansas clinics in 2003. The
AG says the records are needed for an investigation of possible child sexual
abuse (presumably of underaged patients) and of violation of the state’s laws
limiting late-term abortions. Privacy and abortion rights groups have joined
the clinics in ﬁghting the subpoenas in court.
“Medical Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/medical/. Updated on July 8, 2004. Pro-
vides an overview of the principles of medical privacy (starting with the Hip-
pocratic Oath) and surveys federal and state law, health information and
employment decisions, use of health information in marketing, and disclo-
sure of health information to law enforcement ofﬁcers. The overview con-
cludes with advice to consumers about maintaining health privacy and links
to source documents and other resources.
Pritts, Joy, et al. “The State of Health Privacy: An Uneven Terrain: A Compre-
hensive Survey of State Health Privacy Statutes.” Health Privacy Project.
Available online. URL: http://www.georgetown.edu/research/ihcrp/privacy/
statereport.pdf. Posted on August 8, 1999. Reports that states have enacted
a great variety of health privacy regulations at different times and for dif-
ferent purposes, resulting in wide variation in the protections available to
citizens. State statutes are generally not comprehensive and do not take re-
cent developments in information technology into account. Nevertheless,
Annotated Bibliography
195

detailed protections speciﬁed in state laws may be lost if federal law is allowed
to preempt them.
Rosencrance, Linda. “Kaiser Permanente Patient Data Exposed Online: The
Company Is Pointing a Finger at a Former Employee.” Computerworld.
com. Available online. URL: http://www.computerworld.com/printthis/2005/
0,4814,100420,00.html (or QuickLink 53209). Posted on March 16, 2005.
Reports that a former Kaiser employee had posted personal information for
140 Kaiser Permanente patients on her web log. The self-proclaimed “Diva
of Disgruntled” is evidently posting the information as a protest against her
termination, and she also criticizes the company for its sloppy security.
CORPORATE AND WORKPLACE PRIVACY
Issues covered by works in this section include workplace monitoring and em-
ployee privacy, and corporate policies concerning e-mail and other Internet use.
Books
Doubilet, David M., and Vincent I. Polley, eds. Employee Use of the Internet and
E-Mail: A Model Corporate Policy with Commentary on Its Use in the U.S. and
Other Countries. Chicago, Ill.: American Bar Association, 2002. The conﬂict
between the need of employers to protect themselves from legal exposure for
employees’ misuse of e-mail and the Internet and the privacy interests of em-
ployees has created a legal mineﬁeld. Further, what is permissible varies
greatly between the United States and (for example) the European countries.
This model policy attempts to reconcile these conﬂicting interests. Legal ex-
perts from various countries provide their commentary on its provisions.
Hubbartt, William S. New Battle Over Workplace Privacy: Safe Practices to Mini-
mize Conﬂict, Confusion and Litigation. New York: Amacom, 1998. An em-
ployers’ guide intended to help them avoid pitfalls in dealing with issues such
as using health or other records in making employment-related decisions,
workplace monitoring, employee testing, and other concerns. Relevant legal
cases are cited throughout.
Lane, Frederick S., III. The Naked Employee: How Technology Is Compromising
Workplace Privacy. New York: Amacom, 2003. A guide to surveillance and
monitoring in the workplace, including everything from tracking e-mail and
Web use to the development of uniforms that can track employees’ location
and even personal habits. The author suggests ways employees can act to pro-
tect their privacy and to restrain the use of intrusive technologies.
McCloskey, Kevin L. Workplace Drug Testing: A Handbook for Managers and In-
House Counsel. Horsham, Penn.: LRP Publications, 1995. Provides detailed
guidance to managers who want to implement an effective drug-testing pro-
gram in the workplace. The book includes checklists and sample forms and
documents.
Moore, Mark H., Carol V. Petrie, and Anthony A. Braga, eds. The Polygraph and
Lie Detection. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2003. Evaluates
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
196

the usefulness and limitations of so-called lie detectors, which are often
used in screening employees for sensitive positions as well as in law en-
forcement investigations. The general conclusion is that the technology
should not be relied upon too heavily since it can be inaccurate or “spoofed”
by subjects.
Repa, Barbara Kate. Your Rights in the Workplace. Berkeley, Calif.: Nolo, 2005. A
comprehensive guide to legal rights written in lay language. It includes a dis-
cussion of privacy rights and related issues such as disability and health care.
Weckert, John, ed. Electronic Monitoring in the Workplace: Controversies and Solu-
tions. Hershey, Penn.: Idea Group Publishing, 2004. The contributors ad-
dress a variety of topics and perspectives in which the need for creating an
efﬁcient and harassment-free workplace comes into conﬂict with employees’
expectations of privacy and dignity. Topics include employee attitudes toward
workplace surveillance and ways for management and employees to negotiate
surveillance and monitoring policies.
Articles and Papers
Armendariz, Yvette. “PSST!—Your Boss Can See Your E-mail.” Arizona Repub-
lic, March 20, 2005, p. D1. Consequences of an injudicious e-mail can range
from embarrassment to reprimand, ﬁring, or even lawsuits or criminal
charges. By 2004, 60 percent of surveyed companies were monitoring em-
ployees’ e-mail. Some industries such as ﬁnancial services are required to
archive all e-mail, and use of this software has spread to other sectors. Em-
ployees must assume that anything they type may be kept indeﬁnitely.
Burson, Pat. “Is Videotaping the Baby Sitter a Good Idea? And Should You Tell
Her She’s on ‘Candid Camera’?” Fort Worth Star-Telegram, January 4, 2005,
p. 1E. A variety of interested parties and experts are asked where they stand
on the use of cameras (hidden or disclosed) to monitor babysitters. Some see
it as a sensible way to protect one’s children and cite cases where serious abuse
was uncovered. However, most ethicists suggest that monitoring creates a
problematic working relationship and that parents need to do a better job of
ﬁnding a trustworthy nanny in the ﬁrst place. A compromise point of view
suggests using the cameras but giving the nanny fair notice.
Persson, Anders, and Sven Ove Hansson. “Privacy at Work—Ethical Criteria.”
Journal of Business Ethics, vol. 42, January 2003, p. 59ff. Proposes ethical cri-
teria for adopting drug or genetic testing or surveillance programs in the
workplace. Employees have a prima facie right to privacy, but this can be bal-
anced against other interests of the employer, the business’s clientele, or the
employees themselves.
Townsend, Anthony M., and James T. Bennett. “Privacy, Technology, and Con-
ﬂict: Emerging Issues and Action in Workplace Privacy.” Journal of Labor Re-
search, vol. 24, Spring 2003, p. 195ff. Summarizes the current status of
workplace issues and the use of e-mail interception, Web monitoring, cam-
eras, and other technologies. Although the law is generally on the side of the
employer, the author warns that the public climate may be moving toward
Annotated Bibliography
197

more support for worker privacy. Farsighted companies should develop at-
tractive privacy policies.
Web Documents
“2004 Workplace E-Mail and Instant Messaging Summary.” American Man-
agement Association. Available online. URL: http://www.amanet.org/
research/pdfs/IM_2004_Summary.pdf (free registration required). Posted in
2004. Surveys the use of e-mail and instant messaging in corporate America,
including experiences with litigation and elements of existing policies.
“A Checklist of Responsible Information-Handling Practices.” Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs12-ih2.
htm. Updated in May 2002. Gives guidelines for businesses and other orga-
nizations for handling personal information, including case studies illustrat-
ing potential problems. The ﬁrst section focuses on privacy policies for
various modes of communication and data storage. The second part focuses
on policies in relationship to employees’ use of e-mail and voice mail, as well
as electronic monitoring systems.
Dichter, Mark S. “Electronic Interaction in the Workplace: Monitoring, Re-
trieving, and Storing Employee Communications in the Internet Age.” Morgan,
Lewis & Bockius LLP. Available online. URL: http://www.morganlewis.com/
PDFs/A5C845ED-575B-4ADC-8A47F2801DC3594C_PUBLICATION.
PDF. Posted in June 1999. After a brief (and now outdated) introduction, this
report explains the legal basis (upheld in many court cases) for employer mon-
itoring of workplace e-mail and other communications. Cases relating to racial
and sexual harassment and defamation are also noted.
“Employee Background Checks: A Jobseeker’s Guide.” Privacy Rights Clear-
inghouse Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs16-bck.
htm. Updated in June 2004. Explains how background checks for employ-
ment or promotion are conducted, including what is typically included and
what cannot legally be included. The article also discusses the use of credit
and consumer information reports. There are tips for preparing for a back-
ground check by “preemptively” making sure the relevant records are correct.
“Employee Monitoring: Is There Privacy in the Workplace?” Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/
fs7-work.htm. Revised in September 2002. Explains what employers can and
cannot do in terms of surveillance and monitoring, including phone calls,
e-mail, and computer use. The article includes discussion of applicable laws
and possible legal recourse.
“Employment Background Checks: A Guide for Small Business Owners.” Pri-
vacy Rights Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.
org/fs/fs16b-smallbus.htm. Updated in September 2004. Discusses the
process of checking applicant’s backgrounds from the point of view of small
business owners. Acknowledges the difﬁcult position of small businesses that
must face potential legal liability both for negligent hiring and for improper
investigation procedures. The article explains how to use legitimate sources
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
198

of information or screening services while avoiding dubious ones (such as
many Internet-based information brokers).
“Online Job Search Web Sites: Tips to Safeguard Your Privacy.” Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/
fs25-JobSeekerPriv.htm. Updated in November 2003. Many people now use
web-based services to search for jobs or post résumés online. However, the
privacy given to information posted on these sites can vary greatly and pri-
vacy statements must be read carefully. The article also includes discussion of
how to evaluate the practices of résumé writing services. 
“Workplace Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/workplace/. Updated on August 3, 2004.
An overview of workplace privacy issues including applicable principles, the
limited protections afforded by federal and state law, and issues surrounding
speciﬁc types of surveillance and monitoring. The article includes resource
and news links.
PRIVACY AND YOUNG PEOPLE
This section’s works involve the particular privacy needs and vulnerabilities
faced by young people from elementary school through college age, and the re-
sponse of institutions to these concerns.
Books
Bakst, Daren, and Sylvia Burgess, eds. Privacy in the 21st Cenutury. Palm Beach
Gardens, Fla.: Council on Law in Higher Education, 2004. Provides cases and
commentary on legal issues affecting privacy of students and faculty in higher
education.
Durrett, Deanne. Teen Privacy Rights: A Hot Issue. Berkeley Heights, N.J.: Ens-
low, 2001. Written at a junior high school level but also useful for adults, this
account uses vivid anecdotes to illustrate situations where school policies may
conﬂict with rights under the Fourth and Fifth Amendments. There is also a
chapter on how teens can protect their privacy, particularly online.
Federal Trade Commission. Protecting Children’s Privacy Under COPPA: A Sur-
vey on Compliance. Washington, D.C.: Federal Trade Commission, April 2002.
Also available online. URL: http://www.ftc.gov/os/2002/04/coppasurvey.pdf.
Survey results suggest that the passage of federal legislation requiring active
steps for protecting the privacy of children has had a partial effect. Most of
the sites surveyed had privacy notices that explained what information could
be collected from children and how it might be shared with other companies
or used for marketing purposes. However, only about half the sites explained
that parents could review or delete information about their children or refuse
its further use.
Hawke, Constance S. Computer and Internet Use on Campus: A Legal Guide to Is-
sues of Intellectual Property, Free Speech, and Privacy. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass,
2000. A guide to a variety of legal issues raised by the use of computers in uni-
versities. The book includes discussion of relevant cases.
Annotated Bibliography
199

Persico, Deborah A. New Jersey vs. T.L.O.: Drug Searches in Schools. Springﬁeld,
N.J.: Enslow, 1998. Written for high school students, this account explains
the issues in the landmark Supreme Court case that determined that students
had only limited Fourth Amendment rights against searching their posses-
sions for drugs or contraband. The author suggests that the outcome of the
case has disturbing implications for students’ privacy in other areas.
Russo, Charles J., and Ralph D. Mawdsley. Searches, Seizures and Drug Testing
Procedures: Balancing Rights and School Safety. Horsham, Penn.: LRP Publica-
tions, 2004. Written primarily for school administrators, this handbook pro-
vides detailed guidance on how schools can develop procedures for drug
testing and student searches that will withstand constitutional challenges.
Turow, Joseph. Privacy Policies on Children’s Websites: Do They Play by the Rules?
Washington, D.C.: Annenberg Public Policy Center, 2001. Analyzes compli-
ance with the privacy protection rules for children’s web sites announced by the
Federal Trade Commission in 2000. According to the report, the biggest prob-
lem is that although most sites followed rules about the placement of links, the
privacy policies were typically not clear and understandable to parents.
Articles and Papers
Cai, Xiaomei, et al. “Children’s Website Adherence to the FTC’s Online Pri-
vacy Protection Rule.” Journal of Applied Communications Research, vol. 31,
November 2003, p. 346ff. Studies the extent to which online marketers com-
ply with the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA). Only four
of 162 popular children’s web sites analyzed fully complied with the law. Prac-
tical considerations in obtaining parental permission to receive information
about children may be part of the problem.
Carissimo, Karen. “Adoption Law Reform: Finding Jennifer.” San Francisco
Chronicle, January 23, 2005, p. C5. A contributor to a public opinion col-
umn describes the dilemma facing adopted children who want to learn the
identity of their birth parents. She argues that California’s laws that pre-
serve adoption secrecy frustrate adoptee’s attempts to come to terms with
their identity. Legal restrictions can also prevent access to vital medical in-
formation such as a history of mental illness or other possibly hereditary
conditions.
Flynn, Laurie J. “New Efforts Are Being Made to Keep Online Merchants from
Collecting Personal Information from Children.” New York Times, May 12,
2003, p. C4. Describes efforts by advocates of children’s privacy who are not
satisﬁed with existing protections under the federal Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act. For example, Amazon.com has been accused of allowing chil-
dren under 13 to post information in product reviews. Amazon replied that
the information had been removed and that the site was not intended for chil-
dren. (The FTC later ruled in favor of Amazon.)
Jabs, Carolyn. “Why Children Need Privacy.” Working Mother, vol. 20, October
1997, p. 99ff. Describes the psychological importance of providing children
with appropriate privacy.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
200

Kandra, Anne. “Should Parents Become Big Brother? New Software Allows
Parents to Control Virtually Everything Children Do Online.” PC World, vol.
22, January 2004, p. 59ff. Describes software that parents can use to monitor
children’s online activities, including the contents of chat sessions. Some par-
ents used the software to discover evidence of drug and alcohol abuse or in-
appropriate sexual relationships, enabling early intervention. Critics worry
that the monitoring invades the privacy of young people and may well un-
dermine their trust and willingness to cooperate with parents. Some child ex-
perts favor the judicious use of monitoring as part of a clearly articulated
agreement with children.
Merritt, George. “Colleges Easy Prey to Hackers.” Denver Post, November 17,
2004, p. B01. University campuses are a “target rich” environment for hack-
ers, and the ease of use and free communication that foster a rich campus en-
vironment are often at odds with the need for better security. Thousands of
students are vulnerable to having their private information compromised or
used for identity theft.
Nevius, C. W. “New Arsenal for Army Recruiters.” San Francisco Chronicle, Jan-
uary 29, 2005, p. B1. The columnist describes how his son, a high school se-
nior, was phoned by an army recruiter. To the latter’s dismay, the young man’s
main interest was not in joining the military but in ﬁnding out how the army
had gotten his name and phone number. The answer turns out to be in an ob-
scure provision of the No Child Left Behind Act that requires schools to pro-
vide student contact information to the military unless the person speciﬁcally
opts out. With no end in sight in the war in Iraq, the military has stepped up
its advertising and recruiting efforts.
Roberts, Richard L., Larry Rogers, and Sara M. Fier. “Duty-to-Warn: Implica-
tions for School Administrators.” The Clearing House, vol. 71, September–
October 1997, p. 53ff. Describes court cases that explore the legal conﬂict be-
tween school counselors’ and administrators’ duty to warn potential victims
of threatening behavior or deadly diseases like AIDS and their obligation to
protect the conﬁdentiality of their student clients. While court decisions have
often been unclear or contradictory, administrators can take steps to create
better policies.
Salzman, Avi. “On Campus, a Security Card and More.” New York Times, Octo-
ber 5, 2003, Section 14CN, p. 3. Describes a security system installed at
Quinnipiac University in Hamden, Connecticut. It is so comprehensive that
it requires students to swipe ID cards for access to all facilities thus giving
university ofﬁcials access to detailed records of students’ movements. The
card is also used as a debit card.
Schemo, Diana Jean. “A Federal Proposal to Keep Data on All College Students
Raises Questions of Privacy.” New York Times, November 29, 2004, p. 19. Pri-
vacy advocates are alarmed by a proposal to require that information about all
students entering college be stored in a new central database. Previously colleges
have provided only aggregate statistical data, except with regard to ﬁnancial aid.
Teinowitz, Ira. “FTC Proposal on Kids’ Privacy Raises Ire of Watchdog
Groups.” Advertising Age, vol. 76, March 14, 2005, p. 35. Many privacy and
Annotated Bibliography
201

consumer advocates are angry at the decision of the Federal Trade Commis-
sion to allow merchants to use a “sliding scale” of ways to obtain parental per-
mission to receive information from children. The policy is supposed to
match the stringency of the requirements to the sensitivity and risk involved
in the information. However, critics believe the new system may not have ad-
equate safeguards and that it fails to carry out the intent of the federal Chil-
dren’s Online Privacy Protection Act.
Web Documents
“The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA).” Electronic Privacy In-
formation Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/kids/.
Updated April 28, 2003. Introduces the historical background and provisions of
the COPPA legislation, which resulted from increasing concern that children
were being targeted for information and marketing without parental consent. A
number of problematic aspects of the law are also discussed, including the prob-
lem of determining which users of a site are underage and the use of credit card
numbers for age veriﬁcation, which introduces privacy risks of its own. The
Electronic Privacy Information Center and a coalition of 11 consumer organi-
zations has sued Amazon.com, alleging that the giant online bookstore has dis-
closed children’s personal information in violation of the COPPA.
“Children’s Privacy and Safety on the Internet: A Resource Guide for Parents.”
Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL: http://www.
privacyrights.org/fs/fs21-children.htm. Updated in August 2004. Gives tips
for parents on how to protect children from problematic online marketing
practices and objectionable material. Discusses the use, limitation, and legal
issues surrounding the use of web-ﬁltering software. The article also dis-
cusses safe use of chat and instant message services and gives suggestions for
better communication between parents and kids concerning Internet use.
“For Parents: Keeping Kids Privacy-Safe Online.” Consumer PrivacyGuide.org.
Available online. URL: http://www.consumerprivacyguide.org/kids/forparents.
shtml. Downloaded on August 31, 2004. Helps parents understand the danger
of children giving out personal information online and provides tips from the
Federal Trade Commission, including how to identify and parse a web site’s
privacy policy.
Newitz, Annalee. “Don’t Look Now, but the Dean Is Watching.” Salon.com.
Available online. URL: http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2003/11/12/
campus_surveillance/index.html. Posted on November 12, 2003. Reports that
university administrators are increasingly monitoring student e-mail, citing
concerns about terrorism and pressure to crack down on copyright violations.
“Play It Safe.” Bonus.com. Available online. URL: https://www.wiredsafety.org
(click link). Downloaded on August 13, 2004. An interactive game that helps
children recognize when they may be revealing too much personal informa-
tion about themselves or their activities.
“Privacy in Education: A Guide for Parents and Adult-Age Students.” Privacy
Rights Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
202

fs/fs29-education.htm. Posted in October 2004. Explains the rights that par-
ents and adult students have under the Family Educational Rights and Pri-
vacy Act. Parents have the rights to access their children’s student records.
They also have some rights to opt out of disclosure of some student infor-
mation or its use in certain surveys or studies. There is also a discussion of is-
sues speciﬁc to students in colleges and universities.
“Student Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/student/. Updated on June 29, 2005. Pro-
vides introduction and news links relating to privacy issues affecting students.
Describes the provisions of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA), which restricts sharing of student records without parental permis-
sion, subject to a variety of exceptions. There is also discussion of the federal
No Child Left Behind Act, which places some restrictions on surveying and
proﬁling students.
“Tips for Privacy-smart Kids!” Consumer Privacy Guide.org. Available online.
URL: http://www.consumerprivacyguide.org/kids/forkids.shtml. Down-
loaded on August 30, 2004. In kid-friendly language, provides brief tips for
avoiding giving too much information online. It notes that “Just like in the
schoolyard, at the store or on the telephone, kids need to be careful about
who they give information to.”
Vijayan, Jaikumar. “First Online Privacy Law Looms: But Most Companies
Already Follow Requirements of California’s AB 68, Experts Say.” Com-
puterworld.com. Available online. URL: http://www.computerworld.com/
securitytopics/security/privacy/story/0,10801,94061, 00.html. Posted on
June 24, 2004. The California’s Online Privacy Act of 2003 will soon be in ef-
fect. It requires that online sites post privacy policies, explain what informa-
tion is collected and how it will be used, as well as how individuals can correct
errors in their information. Unlike another California law that requires
prompt notiﬁcation of database breaches, the Online Privacy Act’s provisions
are already being met by most companies.
THE SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY
Many observers believe that the many separate privacy issues found today must
be viewed in a larger context of pervasive surveillance and information gather-
ing. Works in this section explore this “big picture,” including the growing use
of cameras and other technology by individuals. For works on speciﬁc monitor-
ing, surveillance, or data-gathering technologies, see the sections on “Identiﬁ-
cation Systems and Biometrics” and “Surveillance, Screening, and Tracking
Systems.”
Books
Garﬁnkel, Samson. Database Nation: The Death of Privacy in the 21st Century. Cam-
bridge, Mass: O’Reilly, 2000. Vividly describes the massive data-gathering and
analysis systems that are now being used by corporations and the government
Annotated Bibliography
203

to sift through personal information for marketing, insurance and employment
decisions, and law enforcement. As consumers and citizens, individuals have ef-
fectively lost control over this information and usually have no idea how it is
being used—and misused.
Hunter, Richard. World Without Secrets: Business, Crime, and Privacy in the Age of
Ubiquitous Computing. New York: Wiley, 2002. A whirlwind tour of the van-
ishing privacy in everyday life. Examples include streets with 24 hour/day
video surveillance, cars that record detailed information about their move-
ments, houses that may be too “smart” for their owners’ good, and software
that quietly collects information from consumers. The last chapter views the
aftermath of September 11 as “a Digital Pearl Harbor” launching a ﬁnal as-
sault on privacy.
Norris, Clive, and Gary Armstrong. The Maximum Surveillance Society: The Rise
of CCTV. New York: Berg, 1999. Describes the use of closed-circuit television
(CCTV) in public places, which grew substantially during the 1990s. The au-
thors’ study of CCTV use in Britain raises questions of whether it has any
real effect on crime and the possibility that the actual motivations behind it
reﬂect class structures and the desire for social control.
O’Harrow, Robert, Jr. No Place to Hide. New York: Free Press, 2005. A vivid and
chilling account of the explosion in database and surveillance technology in
the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. The author focuses on
the emergence of a “security-industrial complex” in which government secu-
rity agencies team up with commercial ﬁrms that have huge databases of per-
sonal information at their disposal. The roles of key individuals are featured
throughout.
Parenti, Christian. The Soft Cage: Surveillance in America. New York: Basic
Books, 2003. Argues that pervasive modern threats of government surveil-
lance and corporate information collection threaten to undermine the free-
dom and self-conﬁdence that citizens must have in an effective democracy.
Stanley, Jay. The Surveillance-Industrial Complex: How the American Government
Is Conscripting Businesses and Individuals in the Construction of a Surveillance So-
ciety. New York: American Civil Liberties Union, 2004. Also available online.
URL: http://www.aclu.org/Files/OpenFile.cfm?id=16225. A critical look at a
number of government efforts that combine resources from government and
business in the name of ﬁghting terrorism. Although such efforts were also
used during the cold war, the scope and variety of current programs is much
greater. It includes “watch” programs, some of which survived the demise of
TIPS (Terrorist Information and Prevention System), as well as new public-
private efforts for data gathering and analysis, proﬁling, and surveillance. The
ACLU describes some litigation areas and urges public vigilance.
Sykes, Charles L. The End of Privacy: Personal Rights in the Surveillance Society.
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1999. The author, a journalist and policy ana-
lyst who has tackled education and legal issues, turns his attention to the
threat to privacy of intrusive government, media, and corporations. He sug-
gests a variety of measures to protect or regain privacy.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
204

Whitaker, Reg. The End of Privacy: How Total Surveillance Is Becoming a Reality.
New York: New Press, 1999. Describes in great detail the systems of surveil-
lance and monitoring that now involve nearly every aspect of Americans’
lives. Whitaker suggests that many people may accept such intrusions as the
price of consumer convenience.
Articles and Papers
Berman, Jerry, and Paula Bruening. “Is Privacy Still Possible in the Twenty-ﬁrst
Century?” Social Research, vol. 68, Spring 2001, pp. 306–317. The authors
argue that while new technologies such as cell phones (with their location in-
formation) and the Internet have shrunk the sphere of personal privacy some-
what, new legislation and technical tools (such as encryption) have
strengthened privacy in other respects.
Clarke, Roger. “While You Were Sleeping . . . Surveillance Technologies
Arrived.” Australian Quarterly, vol. 73, January–February 2001, n.p. Available
online. URL: http://www.anu.edu.au/people/Roger.Clarke/DV/AQ2001.
html. Updated on February 2, 2001. The “surveillance society” is quietly be-
coming a reality as new technologies are developed for digital capture of im-
ages and data (“dataveillance”). Related areas discussed include identiﬁcation
and tracking and the effects of surveillance systems on behavior.
Kornblum, Janet. “Prying Eyes Are Everywhere.” USA Today, April 14, 2005, p.
1D. A variety of pundits and activists view with alarm the growing commer-
cial availability of high-tech spying tools such as unobtrusive cameras, GPS
devices, and software for monitoring computer activity. These devices may be
extending the natural human desire to snoop on one’s neighbors into a dan-
gerous degree of intrusiveness and invasion of privacy.
Napolitano, Jo. “Hold It Right There, and Drop That Camera.” New York
Times, December 11, 2003, p. G1. Ubiquitous camera-equipped phones are
bringing a new threat to privacy in places such as locker rooms, showers, and
restrooms. Chicago is considering a ban on using the phones in places where
an average person would expect a reasonable right to privacy. The phones are
also potential tools for voyeurs and fetishists.
Web Documents
Bentham, Jeremy. “Panopticon: Or the Inspection-House.” Cartome.org. Avail-
able online. URL: http://cartome.org/panopticon2.htm. Posted on June 16,
2001. Transcription of Jeremy Bentham’s writings on the Panopticon surveil-
lance prison, originally written in 1787. Efﬁcient surveillance is seen as an es-
sential ingredient in prisons, reformatories, and all other institutions holding
individuals for “safe custody, conﬁnement, solitude, forced labor, and in-
struction.” In the late 20th century the Panopticon began to be used as a
metaphor for an emerging society of pervasive surveillance.
“Theory of Surveillance: The Panopticon.” Cartome.org. Available online. URL:
http://cartome.org/panopticon1.htm. Posted June 16, 2001. An architectural
Annotated Bibliography
205

plan and description of the Panopticon, a prison designed by Jeremy Ben-
tham in which prisoners are continually subject to being viewed by unseen
observers. The site also includes an interpretation by philosopher Michel
Foucault.
Zettner, Kim. “Brave New Era for Privacy Fight.” Wired News. Available
online. URL: http://www.wired.com/news/privacy/0,1848,66242,00.html.
Posted on January 13, 2005. Looking at the next few years, privacy advocates
(both liberal and conservative) see threats from the continuing expansion of
government power in the “war on terrorism,” in the use of data mining and
other technologies in the private sector, and in a growing convergence of
government programs and commercial databases. Other emerging concerns
include standardized driver’s licenses that amount to a de facto national ID,
DNA databases, and radio frequency (RFID) tags.
PRIVACY ISSUES
Works in this section provide resources or discussion of both legal and techni-
cal aspects of privacy issues and privacy protection.
GENERAL AND INTERNATIONAL PRIVACY LAW
This section includes general resources on privacy law that include more than
one subtopic, as well as background and discussion of international and com-
parative privacy laws and policies.
Books
Bennett, Colin J., and Charles D. Raab. The Governance of Privacy: Policy Instru-
ments in Global Perspective. Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate Publishing, 2000. De-
scribes and analyzes the development of privacy policy in modern industrial
states. In each case the policies reﬂect the interaction of social values and the
perception of the risks and beneﬁts of different forms of commerce. How-
ever, because of the global nature of commerce, the degree of privacy pro-
tection ultimately provided will depend on whether a common regulatory
standard or pervasive deregulation prevails.
Berthold, Mark, and Raymond Wacks. Hong Kong Data Privacy Law: Territorial
Regulation in a Borderless World. 2d ed. Hong Kong: Sweet & Maxwell Asia,
2003. While most students of international privacy law focus on the United
States, Great Britain, and the European Union, one of the most comprehen-
sive and innovative data privacy laws emerged in Hong Kong in the late
1990s. The authors explain how the Personal Data Privacy Ordinance ad-
dresses many of the concerns about data protection and international data
transfer that have vexed experts in Western countries.
Cornelius, Vita, ed. Personal Privacy. New York: Novinka Publications, 2002.
Provides perspectives on the constitutional and legislative protection of pri-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
206

vacy in the United States, including federal legislation and Fourth Amend-
ment cases, with a recent trend that suggests a diminishing sphere of personal
privacy.
Electronic Privacy Information Center. The Public Voice WSIS Sourcebook: Per-
spectives on the World Summit on the Information Society. Washington, D.C.:
Electronic Privacy Information Center, 2004. Describes the upcoming inter-
national conference and includes ofﬁcial documents, regional statements, and
perspectives on various issues.
Herold, Rebecca, ed. The Privacy Papers: Managing Technology, Consumer, Em-
ployee and Legislative Actions. Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC Press, 2001. A collection
of papers discussing privacy issues arising from new technologies and corpo-
rate practices. Topics include employee monitoring, privacy of employee
records, the need to protect consumer information, and threats such as com-
puter break-ins, identity theft, and corporate espionage. The book includes
sample policies.
Imparato, Nicholas, ed. Public Policy and the Internet: Privacy, Taxes, and Contract.
Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press, 2000. The authors discuss three
major areas of legal disputes in the online world: privacy and e-commerce,
taxation of online commerce, and the need for new forms of contracts to deal
with digital goods and services.
Jasper, Margaret C. Privacy and the Internet: Your Expectations and Rights Under
the Law. Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana Publications, 2003. Designed for stu-
dents, this work provides an overview of what the law protects, the role of
federal and state laws and agencies, and practical advice for dealing with
cookies, viruses, identity theft, and other threats. The book includes appen-
dixes summarizing laws and cases as well as suggested readings.
Kahin, Brian, and Charles Nessen, eds. Borders in Cyberspace: Information Policy
and the Global Information Infrastructure. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997. Dis-
cusses how differences in national laws make it difﬁcult to cope with privacy
issues in a network that ignores national boundaries. It includes discussion of
commerce, security, and personal privacy.
Keynes, Edward. Liberty, Property, and Privacy: Toward a Jurisprudence of Sub-
stantive Due Process. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press,
1996. Discusses privacy concepts in relation to assertion of individual rights
in encounters with the power of the state.
Kuner, Christopher. European Data Privacy Law and Online Business. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2003. Written for e-commerce business profession-
als, this guide explains the principles behind European Union data privacy
regulations and applies them to commercial transactions and employee data
both within Europe and between European and outside companies. The
book includes the texts of relevant laws.
Lessig, Lawrence. Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. New York: Basic Books,
1999. An accessible account of the emerging issues in Internet regulation, in-
cluding surveillance, privacy, and ownership of intellectual property. A con-
tinuing theme is the tension between the inherent characteristics of
Annotated Bibliography
207

cyberspace and the attempts of traditional special interests and policymakers
to impose their will on the new medium. The author suggests the ultimate
solutions must be “coded” into the architecture of the net.
Li, Joyce H-S. The Center for Democracy and Technology and Internet Privacy in the
U.S.: Lessons of the Last Five Years. Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press, 2003. De-
scribes the issues that the Center for Democracy and Technology and Privacy
has tackled in recent years, including ownership and access to personal data
such as identifying information.
Loader, Brian D. The Governance of Cyberspace: Politics, Technology and Global Re-
structuring. New York: Routledge, 1997. A variety of contributors tackle the
question of how the Internet can be governed without being stiﬂed. The in-
tersection between law enforcement, marketing, and privacy protection plays
an important part in this debate. Some contributors opt for creating interna-
tional legal structures, while others look primarily to self-regulation and en-
gineering solutions.
Marcella, Albert J., Jr., and Carol Stucki. Privacy Handbook: Guidelines, Exposures,
Policy Implementation, and International Issues. New York: Wiley, 2003. A com-
prehensive and well-organized privacy handbook for businesses, profession-
als, and anyone concerned with the current state of privacy laws, policies, and
issues. The book includes suggested readings and other useful resources.
McCarthy, J. Thomas. The Rights of Publicity and Privacy. 2d ed. St. Paul, Minn.:
West Group, 2000. A systematic analysis of the rights of the individual to
control the commercial or media use of his or her personal identity. Although
not generally applicable to routine use of consumer information, “privacy
torts” can sometimes be brought in certain cases.
Satterwhite, Robert A., et al. Privacy Matters: Leading CTOs and Lawyers on What
Every Business Professional Should Know About Privacy, Technology, and the Inter-
net. Boston, Mass.: Aspatore Books, 2003. A survey of emerging issues in
Internet-related privacy as it affects the employment and marketing practices
of businesses. It focuses on the impact of the changing legal and technologi-
cal environment.
Schachter, Madeleine. Informational and Decisional Privacy. Durham, N.C.: Car-
olina Academic Press, 2003. This handbook provides excerpts and analysis of
legal decisions in the most relevant cases involving both the protection of
personal information and the protection of the right to make personal deci-
sions about matters such as reproduction.
Smith, Marcia S. Internet Privacy: Overview and Pending Legislation. Washington,
D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2004. Also available online. URL:
http://www.usembassy.it/pdf/other/RL31408.pdf. Surveys current issues in-
volving privacy of Internet users, including law enforcement access to online
subscriber records under the USA PATRIOT Act and the growing use of in-
trusive “spyware” and “adware.” The book includes summary of legislation
pending in the 108th Congress.
Smith, Robert Ellis. The Law of Privacy Explained. Providence, R.I.: Privacy
Journal, 1993. Although needing to be supplemented by more recent cases,
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
208

this is a useful overview of the principles of privacy law, including both con-
stitutional law and common law (civil torts).
———. War Stories: Accounts of Persons Victimized by Invasions of Privacy. Provi-
dence, R.I.: Privacy Journal, 2004. Describes actual incidents of invasion of
privacy, including a table of categories (such as bank records and drug test-
ing). Sources and legal citations are included.
Swire, Peter P., and Robert E. Litan. None of Your Business: World Data Flows,
Electronic Commerce, and the European Privacy Directive. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution Press, 1998. Discusses the European Union Directive
on Data Protection of 1998 and its implications, some of which have been ad-
dressed by later “Safe Harbor” provisions.
Articles and Papers
Armstrong, Jonathan. “Privacy in Europe: The New Agenda.” Journal of Inter-
net Law, vol. 8, November 2004, p. 3ff. Surveys the current status of privacy
laws in Europe. There is still considerable variation between countries, partly
because of the addition of more countries to the European Union. Laws
about data transfer and security are also discussed.
Branscomb, Anne Wells. “Public and Private Domains of Information: Deﬁn-
ing the Legal Boundaries.” Bulletin of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence, vol. 21, December–January 1994, p. 14ff. Discusses property rights as
they apply to information, ranging from copyright to privacy law.
Clymer, Adam. “Protection of Privacy by States Is Ranked.” New York Times,
October 20, 2002, p. 31. According to a study by Privacy Journal, Califor-
nia and Minnesota have the best state privacy protections. California has a
special privacy office and its courts have expansively interpreted privacy
rights in the state constitution. Minnesota considers disclosure of private
facts to be a civil tort. Texas is currently in the lowest of the study’s five tiers
but is improving, while the federal government itself would fall into the
fourth tier.
Crump, Catherine. “Data Retention: Privacy, Anonymity, and Accountability
Online.” Stanford Law Review, vol. 56, October 2003, p. 191ff. A systematic
introduction and analysis of how the Fourth Amendment privacy and First
Amendment anonymous speech and association rights are being applied in
court cases involving access to stored data and communications. If the Inter-
net is redesigned to force identity disclosure, then the rights based on
anonymity are lost.
Kuttner, Robert. “The U.S. Could Use a Dose of Europe’s Privacy Medicine.”
Business Week, November 16, 1998, p. 22. Argues that the United States
should adopt tougher privacy and junk e-mail/fax laws similar to those al-
ready in force in Europe.
Lessig, Lawerence. “The Law of the Horse: What Cyberlaw Might Teach.”
Harvard Law Review, vol. 113, December 1999, pp. 501–546. Also available
online. URL: http://www.lessig.org/content/articles/works/ﬁnalhls.pdf. This
Annotated Bibliography
209

paper responds to a challenge from a conference where a judge insisted that
there was no more “a law of cyberspace” than there was “a law of the horse.”
The author replies that while not all special concerns require fundamental re-
thinking of the law, computers and the development of cyberspace do. The
“architecture” of cyberspace interacts with law, customary norms, and other
forces to shape online behavior. For example, the attempts to protect privacy
and regulate obscenity, although very different in objectives, both run up
against the structure of cyberspace. In the long run regulating that structure
itself would be the most effective approach.
Rosen, Jeffrey. “A Watchful State: After a Terrorist Attack in 1993, Britain
Installed Cameras Everywhere.” New York Times Magazine, October 7, 2001,
p. 38. Describes the use of surveillance cameras in London, which were in-
stalled in 1993 and promoted as a tool against IRA terrorists. The cameras’
main success, however, has been against auto thieves and trafﬁc offenders.
———. “Nothing to Hide, Nothing to Fear; Europeans Stand to Lose More of
Their Privacy and Civil Liberties than Americans.” Newsweek International,
March 8, 2004, p. 47. The author of The Naked Crowd says that Europeans
appear even more willing than Americans to trade privacy for security and the
war on terrorism. For example, the British have little objection to the wide-
spread use of public surveillance cameras. Western Europeans are also used
to centralized government databases and the use of ﬁngerprints and biomet-
rics. On the other hand, the Europeans do have protections against commer-
cial use of personal data that are tougher and more comprehensive than those
afforded to Americans.
Swire, Peter P. “Trustwrap: The Importance of Legal Rules to Electronic Com-
merce and Internet Privacy.” Hasting Law Journal, vol. 54 (2003), p. 847ff.
Argues that an effective approach to privacy involves companies using legal
commitments and appropriate transaction procedures to create a “trustwrap”
that builds consumer assurance. The author cites a number of developments
that already embody the trustwrap concept and leverage existing structures
into the e-commerce realm. These include online credit card payments and
PayPal, the development of online extensions of traditional stores, and eBay’s
development of enhanced buyer protections. Recent legislation is discussed in
this context, with the suggestion that with a mature industry, one has time to
craft appropriate legislation.
Web Documents
Cline, Jay. “U.S. Should Welcome EU Drive for Short Privacy Notices.” Com-
puterworld.com. Available online. URL: http://www.computerworld.com/
printthis/2005/0,4814,99941,00.html (or QuickLink 52731). Posted on Feb-
ruary 23, 2005. The author of this opinion piece praises the European initia-
tive that would have businesses use brief privacy notices in plain language that
spells out information policies and consumer rights. There would be three in-
creasingly detailed “layers” with the full policy in the last layer. Two Ameri-
can companies, Expedia and Bank of America, already use similar notices.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
210

Charts summarize the strengths and weaknesses of privacy policies of these
and other companies.
“Data Retention.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/intl/data_retention.html. Updated on March 25,
2004. Notes, documents, and links relating to the provisions of the European
Union’s Directive on Privacy and Electronic Communications that deal with
the storage of data by telecommunications and e-mail providers.
“Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 Oc-
tober 1995 on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of
Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data.” European Union.
Available online. URL: http://aspe.os.dhhs.gov/datacncl/eudirect.htm. Text
of the European Union’s data protection and privacy regulations.
“Fourth Amendment.” ’Lectric Law Library. Available online. URL: http://www.
lectlaw.com/def/f081.htm. Downloaded on April 3, 2005. A succinct summary
of how various types of search and seizure procedures have been interpreted
with regard to the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
“The Privacy Act of 1974.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available
online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/1974act/. Updated on August 26,
2003. An overview of the fundamental law (5 U.S.C. § 552a) that gives citi-
zens the right to examine government records pertaining to them and re-
quires agencies to follow “fair information practices” when gathering and
handling personal data, as well as placing restrictions on data sharing. The
book includes links to news, resources, and cases.
“Privacy Preemption Watch.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available
online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/preemption/. Updated on De-
cember 1, 2004. Gives an overview of the issue of preemption. With regard
to federal privacy laws, preemption generally refers to the question of
whether states or localities are precluded from enacting laws covering the
same subject matter. Preemption can either set a “ﬂoor” that states are free to
exceed, or establish a “ceiling.” Recent developments are discussed and rele-
vant links are provided.
“Right to Financial Privacy Act.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Avail-
able online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/rfpa/. Updated on September
5, 2003. Explains the federal law passed in response to a Supreme Court de-
cision that refused to acknowledge a privacy interest in bank transaction
records. The RFPA generally requires that account holders be notiﬁed and
have the opportunity to contest disclosure of account information to law en-
forcement ofﬁcials. The site includes a discussion of the legislative history,
exceptions speciﬁed in the law, and links to relevant cases and news stories.
“Safe Harbor Overview.” International Trade Administration. Available on-
line. URL: http://www.ita.doc.gov/td/ecom/SafeHarborOverviewAug00.
htm. Posted in August 2000. Summarizes and answers questions about the
agreement on procedures for U.S. ﬁrms for compliance with European pri-
vacy standards. Principles in the Safe Harbor include consumer notice and
choice about information sharing, consumer access to their information, and
the ability to change erroneous information.
Annotated Bibliography
211

PRIVACY, LAW ENFORCEMENT, AND
NATIONAL SECURITY
The wars on crime and terrorism have led to an unprecedented use of surveil-
lance, data-gathering, analysis, and screening tools. Works in this section dis-
cuss these activities and their perceived privacy threats.
Books
Adams, Helen R., et al. Privacy in the 21st Century: Issues for Public, School, and
Academic Libraries. Westport, Conn.: Libraries Unlimited, 2005. Focuses on
privacy issues as they affect libraries and their users, with an emphasis on the
effects of technology. Topics include the USA PATRIOT Act and searches of
library borrowing records and privacy of Internet and online database access.
The book includes sample privacy and conﬁdentiality policies.
Ball, Kirstie, and Frank Webster, eds. Intensiﬁcation of Surveillance: Crime, Ter-
rorism and Warfare in the Information Age. Sterling, Va.: Pluto Press, 2003.
Describes the now pervasive use of surveillance technologies that have ex-
panded greatly since September 11, 2001. The contributors discuss the ad-
vantages of various surveillance tools for ﬁghting crime and terrorism in
relation to their potential costs, including the impact on personal privacy.
The book includes an extensive bibliography.
Bamford, James. Body of Secrets: Anatomy of the Ultra-Secret National Security
Agency: From the Cold War Through the Dawn of a Century. New York: Anchor
Books, 2002. In discussions about government monitoring of communica-
tions, the shadowy presence of the National Security Agency inevitably
looms. While the amount of current information is necessarily limited, this
account vividly portrays the culture and some of the past activities of the spy
agency in this sequel to the earlier book The Puzzle Palace.
Bazan, Elizabeth B. The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. New York:
Novinka Books, 2002. Provides a detailed overview of the controversial law
that has been expanded in the post–September 11 environment to provide
for secret investigations and surveillance. Bazan explores the connection
with detentions and arrests outside the normal legal system, such as with
“enemy combatants.”
Dash, Samuel. The Intruders: Unreasonable Searches and Seizures from King John
to John Ashcroft. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2004. De-
scribes the gradual development of protection from arbitrary government
searches and seizures. The text describes the background in English law
(starting with the Magna Charta), how American revolutionaries added a crit-
ical new component (the prohibition against nonspeciﬁc or “general” war-
rants), and how the courts have elaborated the interpretation of the Fourth
and Fifth amendments in recent years.
Doyle, Charles. Libraries and the USA PATRIOT Act. Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Research Service, 2003. Also available online. URL:
http://www.ala.org/ala/washoff/WOissues/civilliberties/theusapatriotact/
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
212

CRS215LibrariesAnalysis.pdf. A provision of the USA PATRIOT Act would
apparently allow federal authorities to access library borrowing records using
secret FISA subpoenas. While the library community has considerable concern
based on past experience, the FBI has said it has not sought such subpoenas.
Fodor, Margie Druss. Megan’s Law: Protection or Privacy? Berkeley Heights,
N.J.: Enslow Publishers, 2001. Written for junior-high or older students, this
“Issues in Focus” book discusses the development of laws that require the dis-
closure of the presence of registered sex offenders in the community. Partic-
ular activists and cases are proﬁled to give a picture of how the values of safety
and privacy are brought into conﬂict and (sometimes) resolved. Other ways
of keeping children safe from predators are also discussed.
Foerstel, Herbert. Surveillance in the Stacks: The FBI’s Library Awareness Program.
New York: Greenwood Press, 1991. Describes an early (and controversial)
program that enlisted the aid of librarians in identifying suspected terrorists.
Henderson, Harry. The Terrorist Challenge to America. New York: Facts On File,
2003. This volume in the “Library in a Book” series includes considerable
coverage of the civil liberties implications of expanded surveillance powers
under the USA PATRIOT Act, as well as the use of secret warrants.
McWhirter, Darien A. Search, Seizure, and Privacy. Westport, Conn.: Green-
wood Publishing, 1994. Designed for high school students through college
undergraduates, this clearly written and well-organized exposition covers the
principles and case law involving searches and seizures under the Fourth
Amendment. The privacy protection for different locations (home vs. busi-
ness, for example) and circumstances (inside a car or inside baggage) are also
explained and illustrated with examples.
Raul, Alan Charles. Privacy and the Digital State: Balancing Public Information and
Personal Privacy. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. The author, a
scholar with the Progress and Freedom Foundation, begins with the premise
that privacy rights have always been, and must always be, balanced against the
security of society. The events of September 11, 2001, have necessarily made
security the ﬁrst priority, and concepts of privacy will have to be modiﬁed to
allow the government to protect citizens from attack. However, the author
also acknowledges the importance of honoring constitutional guarantees of
privacy, and he shows how court decisions have weighed them against other
considerations such as freedom of the press and also maintained limits on the
intrusive powers of law enforcement.
Rosen, Jeffrey. The Naked Crowd: Reclaiming Security and Freedom in an Anxious
Age. New York: Random House, 2004. The author approaches the tradeoffs
between privacy and security by looking at the ambivalent popular attitudes
toward the many measures and systems adopted since September 11, 2001,
such as the USA PATRIOT Act, the Total Information Awareness program,
the US-VISIT program, and proposals for a national ID card. The challenge
is to allow targeted surveillance for speciﬁc threats (such as weapons or ex-
plosives) without a “coalescing” of data that would strip away virtually all per-
sonal information privacy.
Annotated Bibliography
213

Shane, Peter M., John Podesta, and Richard C. Leone, eds. A Little Knowledge:
Privacy, Security and Public Information after September 11. New York: Century
Foundation Press, 2004. Selected proceedings of the Security, Technology
and Privacy Conference focusing on ways in which new restrictions on access
to scientiﬁc information can be counterproductive, while weak privacy pro-
tections in the United States may promote dubious invasions of privacy.
Smith, Marcia S., et al. The Internet and the USA PATRIOT Act: Potential Impli-
cations for Electronic Privacy, Security, Commerce, and Government. Washington,
D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2002. Also available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/terrorism/usapatriot/RL31289.pdf. Summarizes
the application of the USA PATRIOT Act with regard to electronic com-
merce, security, and privacy.
Articles and Papers
Andrews, Paul. “Keeping Watch Now Goes Both Ways.” Seattle Times, April 14,
2005, n.p. Also available online. URL: http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/
html/businesstechnology/2002240978_spyware14.html. Reports a talk by
Steve Mann at the Computers, Freedom and Privacy conference in which he
suggests ubiquitous cameras in cell phones and even lapel pins might enable
people to protect themselves from law enforcement abuses by recording activ-
ities in real time—a process he calls “sousveillance,” or watching from below.
Cameras could even send their data directly over a wireless link to the Internet
to preserve evidence even if the equipment is conﬁscated or destroyed.
Baard, Erik. “Buying Trouble: Your Grocery List Could Spark a Terror Probe.”
The Village Voice, July 24, 2002, n.p. Also available online. URL: http://
www.villagevoice.com/news/0230,baard,36760,1.html. Describes how an
overzealous marketing ofﬁcial gave authorities supermarket “loyalty card”
records following the September 11 attacks. Although not typical, the inci-
dent may be just the tip of an iceberg of commercial data that is becoming
available to government investigators. Although new data-mining algorithms
for identifying potential terrorists show promise, rash and ill-considered de-
cisions by agents may lead to grief for innocent shoppers.
Egelko, Bob. “Supreme Court Expands Police Search Powers: Drug-Snifﬁng
Dogs Now Have Access to Any Car Stopped.” San Francisco Chronicle, Janu-
ary 23, 2005, p. A4. Reports a Supreme Court decision that allows use of
drug-snifﬁng dogs during any lawful trafﬁc stop. The Court’s two dissenters
and privacy advocates warn that the decision will encourage police to under-
take more stops and “sweeps” in order to search for drugs.
Epstein, Edward. “Left and Right Unite to Challenge Patriot Act Provisions:
Group Wants Limits on Access Allowed Law Enforcement.” San Francisco
Chronicle, March 23, 2005, p. A3. Reports the growing efforts of an unusual
left-right coalition that is seeking to change provisions of the USA PA-
TRIOT Act. The proposed new wording would require that authorities show
a judge speciﬁc evidence of terrorist links before someone’s library, medical,
or ﬁrearms records could be examined.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
214

———. “White House Willing to Scale Back Patriot Act.” San Francisco Chron-
icle, April 6, 2005, pp. 1, 11. As Congress considers whether to renew 16 pro-
visions of the USA PATRIOT Act, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales
expressed his willingness to consider modiﬁcations provided they do not
compromise the ability to ﬁght terrorism. Critics seek to remove provisions
that allow searching of library and bookstore records and that allow for
undisclosed “sneak and peak” warrants. A coalition of liberal and conservative
activists has been promoting a SAFE (Security and Freedom Enhancement)
Act to strengthen protections for civil liberties.
Goo, Sara Kehaulani. “Secret Rule Requiring ID for Flights at Center of Court
Battle.” Washington Post. October 7, 2004, p. A13. This account of John
Gilmore’s challenge to airport ID requirements focuses on the government’s
contention that its rules must be kept secret for security reasons. Media or-
ganizations have also joined the ﬁght to make the documents a part of the
public court record.
Hoffnagel, Chris Jay. “Big Brother’s Little Helpers: How ChoicePoint and
Other Commercial Data Brokers Collect and Package Your Data for Law
Enforcement.” North Carolina Journal of International Law and Commercial
Regulation, vol. 29, Summer 2004, p. 595ff. Also available online. URL: http://
www.epic.org/privacy/choicepoint/cp_article.pdf. ChoicePoint and other
commercial data brokers allow law enforcement agencies to obtain exten-
sive information about suspects. The author used the Freedom of Informa-
tion Act to obtain information about the relationship between data brokers
and government agencies. He concludes that while obtaining information
to aid criminal investigations can be appropriate, there is little regulation of
its use or training of law enforcement officers about privacy issues. As a re-
sult the balance of power between individuals and the government has been
upset.
James, Barry. “Internet Crime-Fighting Plan May Open Door for Snoopers.”
International Herald Tribune, March 23, 2001, p. 25. Describes the controver-
sial Convention on Cybercrime that is being adopted by the European
Union. While proponents see the convention as providing necessary tools for
going after child pornographers and hackers who work across national
boundaries, critics are concerned about the law’s lack of privacy protection
and the outlawing of anonymity, which can help protect political dissidents.
Further, provisions designed to protect copyrights may deprive disadvan-
taged users of access to important information.
Lichtblau, Eric. “U.S. Seeks Access to Bank Records to Deter Terror.” New York
Times, April 10, 2005, p. A1. Reports that the Bush administration is prepar-
ing to create a database containing perhaps hundreds of millions of records
of international banking transactions. Promoted as a way to identify the ﬁ-
nancial activities of terrorist groups as well as criminal money laundering, the
plan is opposed by a banking industry that feels itself already overburdened
by reporting requirements. Meanwhile, there are also questions about how
the privacy of customers will be ensured.
Annotated Bibliography
215

Timberg, Craig. “Virginia Lists Sex Offenders on Internet.” Washington Post,
December 30, 1998, p. A1. A state’s web site listing names and other infor-
mation about convicted sex offenders leads to conﬂict between security and
privacy. Advocates say the list will help parents protect their children from vi-
olent predators, but opponents fear the program may lead to vigilantism and
loss of employment for ex-offenders who may be trying to reform.
Web Documents
“The Attorney General’s Guidelines.” Electronic Privacy Information Center.
Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/fbi/. Updated on March
17, 2003. Describes the guidelines used by the FBI in criminal and antiter-
rorist investigations. The latest guidelines were released in 2002; they have
changed several times since the abuses in the 1960s and congressional inves-
tigations in the 1970s. The site includes links to historical documents relat-
ing to COINTELPRO (domestic counter-dissident activities), as well as to
discussion of the new guidelines.
Borland, John. “A Global Assault on Anonymity.” CNET News.com. Available
online. URL: http://news.com.com/2009–1009_3–5405947.html. Posted on
October 20, 2004. Initiatives such as Total Information Awareness (TIA) and
the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System (CAPPS I and II), as
well as the use of data mining and search tools by government agencies, are
threatening privacy. Resistance to such efforts is seen in the withdrawal of 11
of the original 16 states participating in the Multistate Anti-Terrorism Infor-
mation Exchange (MATRIX) program. However, there seems to be a short-
age of people sincerely seeking to reconcile security and privacy concerns.
“Counter-Terrorism Proposals.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Avail-
able online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/terrorism/. Updated on No-
vember 12, 2002. Provides news and views on the USA PATRIOT Act and
other laws passed in the wake of September 11, 2001 and that threaten pri-
vacy through a substantial loosening of restrictions on surveillance.
“Fear of Online Crime: Americans Support FBI Interception of Criminal Sus-
pects’ Email and New Laws to Protect Online Privacy.” Pew Internet and
American Life. Available online. URL: http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_
Fear_of_crime.pdf. Posted on April 2, 2001. This survey shows a familiar ten-
sion between privacy and security. Large majorities of respondents are deeply
worried about various forms of Internet crime (particularly child pornography)
and 54 percent favor giving law enforcement authorities the right to intercept
criminal suspects’ e-mail and other communications. However, opinion is more
evenly divided about Carnivore, the rather mysterious software used by the FBI
to intercept communications. On the other hand, 62 percent of respondents say
that new laws are needed to protect online privacy.
Hall, Mimi. “Privacy Czar Balances Needs of Nation, Citizens.” USA Today.
Available online. URL: http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2004-
06-13-privacy-czar_x.htm. Updated on July 9, 2004. Nuala O’Connor Kelly,
the ofﬁcial in charge of privacy policies for the Department of Homeland Se-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
216

curity, faces a daunting challenge: to create a system “that allows for people
to pass through their ordinary life in the way they want to but still has some
level of security for all of us.” Civil libertarians say they respect Kelly but that
the jury is still out on whether she can be effective in protecting privacy in the
face of programs such as the CAPPS II airline passenger screening system.
“The USA PATRIOT Act.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available
online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/terrorism/usapatriot/default.html.
Updated on March 21, 2005. Gives an overview of provisions of the USA
PATRIOT Act that raised new privacy issues in the wake of the “war on ter-
rorism.” For example, there are expanded powers to install telephone and data
communications tracing devices. Internet service providers must provide ad-
ditional information about subscribers, and the use of secret warrants is ex-
panded. The web page includes news and resource links.
“Wiretapping/Eavesdropping on Telephone Conversations: Is There Cause for
Concern?” Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://
www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs9-wrtp.htm. Revised in March 2004. Explains
what to do if one thinks one is being illegally wiretapped and explains the cir-
cumstances under which law enforcement agencies or private individuals can
legally monitor phone conversations. The article also explains pen registers,
“trap and trace” devices, and interception of digital or data communications.
IDENTIFICATION SYSTEMS AND BIOMETRICS
Works in this ﬁrst of more technical sections of this bibliography discusses the
use of identiﬁcation cards (including the possibility of a national identiﬁcation
system) as well as “smart cards” and the use of physical (biometric) forms of
identiﬁcation.
Books
Eaton, Joseph W. The Privacy Card: A Low Cost Strategy to Combat Terrorism.
Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld Publishers, 2003. This revision of a
book ﬁrst published in the 1980s suggests that a tamper-proof universal ID
card combining information and biometrics is a necessity in the age of ter-
rorism. The challenge is to implement such a system while protecting privacy
and preventing abuses. A variety of possible implementations are presented,
each with advantages and drawbacks.
Kent, Stephen T., and Lynette I. Millett, eds. Who Goes There? Authentication
Through the Lens of Privacy. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press,
2003. Also available online. URL: http://www.nap.edu/books/0309088968/
html/. A report by the Committee on Authentication Technologies and Their
Privacy Implications of the Research Council of the National Academies.
Smith, Alison M. National Identiﬁcation Cards: Legal Issues. Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Research Service, 2002. Summarizes the legal background and
controversy over the proposed use of some form of uniform national identi-
ﬁcation, perhaps incorporating biometric data.
Annotated Bibliography
217

Smith, Robert Ellis. A National ID Card: A License to Live. Providence, R.I.: Pri-
vacy Journal, 2000. A concise summary of the arguments for and against a
proposed national mandatory identiﬁcation card. Smith opposes national ID
cards, both because of the great potential for abuse and the chilling effect on
peoples’ sense of freedom and autonomy in their daily lives.
———. Social Security Numbers: Uses and Abuses. Providence, R.I.: Privacy Jour-
nal, 2002. Includes a brief history of the use of Social Security numbers since
their inception in the 1930s and discusses court cases involving the compelled
use of the numbers. The book also includes practical advice on how to keep
one’s Social Security number private or to use alternative means of identiﬁ-
cation.
Woodward, John D., Jr. Biometrics: Identity Assurance in the Information Age.
Berkeley, Calif.: McGraw Hill-Osborne, 2003. A guide to the design, selec-
tion, and deployment of biometric identiﬁcation systems. Describes the ac-
curacy, vulnerability, and cost of each major type of system—ﬁngerprints,
hand geometry, facial and voice recognition, and eye structure (iris and reti-
nal scanning). There is a discussion of privacy and legal issues, as well as a va-
riety of case studies of biometric systems in use today.
Articles and Papers
Brill, Steven. “The Biggest Hole in the Net.” Newsweek, December 30, 2002,
p. 48. Proposes a voluntary national ID card for persons who have been pre-
screened against criminal and antiterrorist records. The card would have bio-
metric identiﬁers and would allow screened persons to have quick, easy access
to airports and other public facilities.
Feder, Barnaby J. “Face-Recognition Technology Improves.” New York Times,
March 14, 2003, p. C2. A test of 10 facial recognition systems by four federal
agencies shows that the technology has improved in its ability to match face
scans with stored images in a database. However, performance is still poor in
outdoor settings (about 50 percent accuracy).
Garﬁnkel, Simson. “An RFID Bill of Rights.” Technology Review, October 2002,
n.p. Wireless identiﬁcation tags are soon going to show up on everything.
The author believes that now is the time to establish consumer rights, such
as the right to know whether RFID tags are in use and to have them removed
or deactivated when an item is purchased. Consumers should not be forced
to accept RFID in order to receive services.
Kirn, Walter. “The Mother of Reinvention: The Real Reason Americans De-
test the Idea of a National ID Card.” Atlantic Monthly, vol. 289, May 2002,
p. 28ff. Although many Americans are worried about the potential abuse of
government power, there are also deeply rooted philosophical and psycho-
logical reasons for opposition to a national ID card. Americans cherish their
ability to reinvent themselves, in effect changing their identity. There is also
the American tradition, bolstered somewhat by the Bill of Rights, that says
that people should not have to prove their identity or explain themselves to
authorities.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
218

Leach, Susan Llewelyn. “A Driver’s License as a National ID?” Christian Science
Monitor, January 24, 2005, p. 11. The newly passed National Intelligence Re-
form Act includes a provision for standardized information in driver’s licenses.
The standards are to be developed by federal and state ofﬁcials working to-
gether with technical experts. However, the standards are expected to focus
mainly on tightening and standardizing license applications procedures; the li-
censes themselves will not be required to include electronic or biometric in-
formation. Nevertheless privacy advocates are concerned that standardization
plus a central database will in effect create a national ID system.
Rice-Oxley, Mark. “Britain’s Latest Security Bid: A National ID Card.” Christ-
ian Science Monitor, November 14, 2003, p. 6. Reports that the British gov-
ernment is preparing to issue national identity cards containing personal and
biometric information. While the cards are being touted as an effective new
weapon against terrorism, critics oppose them as expensive, unnecessary, and
as contributing to a “surveillance society.”
Robertson, Jack. “U.S. Transportation Chief Pushes Biometrics Adoption—Re-
port Urges Airports to Install Equipment, Screen Passengers Entering Coun-
try.” EBN, October 15, 2001, p. 1. In a report issued by the transportation
secretary, Norman Mineta, just after the September 11 attacks, airports were
urged to install biometric passenger-screening systems. Such systems, which
have been in limited use by the Immigration and Naturalization Service,
match physical characteristics (such as ﬁngerprints, the retina, or facial fea-
tures) to identiﬁcation information. The system could also be used to check
in “preapproved” passengers who have been investigated and certiﬁed as “safe
ﬂyers.” Such a passenger would carry a card that would be veriﬁed against his
or her physical characteristics.
Willing, Richard. “Airline ID Requirement Faces Legal Challenge.” USA Today,
October 10, 2004, n.p. Also available online. URL: http://www.usatoday.
com/news/nation/2004–10–10-privacy_x.htm. Reports on activist John
Gilmore’s probably doomed efforts to overturn requirements for providing
identiﬁcation before boarding a plane. Gilmore is appealing the dismissal of
his 2002 suit against the federal government. Gilmore does not oppose bag-
gage screening and other measures directed at keeping weapons and bombs off
aircraft.
Web Documents
Agre, Philip E. “Your Face Is Not a Bar Code: Arguments Against Automatic
Face Recognition in Public Places.” University of California, Los Angeles.
Department of Information Studies. Available online. URL: http://polaris.
gseis.ucla.edu/pagre/bar-code.html. Posted on September 10, 2003. The au-
thor argues that face recognition systems have legitimate uses, such as for
providing access to secure areas or matching suspects against a “mug shot”
database. However, using face recognition systems routinely in public places
(such as at the Super Bowl) is likely to result in misuse of the data or at least
an unacceptably high rate of “false positives.”
Annotated Bibliography
219

Biba, Erin. “Biometric Passports Set to Take Flight: Your Next Passport May
Be Electronic, but Will It Be Any More Secure?” PC World.com. Available
online. URL: http://www.pcworld.com/news/article/0,aid,120112,00.asp.
Posted on March 21, 2005. The State Department has announced that it is
ready to start issuing biometric passports containing radio frequency identi-
ﬁcation (RFID) chips. Privacy experts are concerned that because the infor-
mation stored in the new passports is unencrypted, it could be easily read
from 30–65 feet away by anyone who has a suitable scanner.
“Biometric Identiﬁers.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available on-
line. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/biometrics/. Updated on March 18,
2005. Describes the use of devices to scan, store, and identify physical char-
acteristics. The site identiﬁes the major areas of concern: storage, vulnerabil-
ity, conﬁdence/accuracy, authenticity, linking to other information, and
ubiquity. The page also includes links to related news stories.
Clarke, Roger. “Smart Card Technical Issues Starter Kit.” Department of Com-
puter Science, Australian National University. Available online. URL:
http://www.anu.edu.au/people/Roger.Clarke/DV/SCTISK.html. Posted April
8, 1998. Provides background on the use of “smart cards,” originally intended
as a brieﬁng for privacy advocates. Clarke describes the types of cards, authen-
tication, security, cryptography, applications, and related privacy issues.
“Face Recognition.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/facerecognition/. Updated on August 21,
2003. Introduces the use of automatic face-recognition systems (which most
people ﬁrst heard about in the context of the 2001 Super Bowl in Tampa,
Florida). The web page includes news and resource links.
Gilmore, John. “Gilmore v. Ashcroft—FAA ID Challenge FAQ.” Available on-
line. URL: http://cryptome.org/gilmore-v-usa-faq.htm. Posted on July 18,
2002. Gilmore explains the reasons for his 2002 lawsuit demanding the right
to travel without having to provide identiﬁcation. He argues that the focus on
identiﬁcation and proﬁling not only violates fundamental constitutional
rights and involves secret, unaccountable procedures but also diverts re-
sources and attention from measures that might actually enhance security.
Harper, Jim. “A National ID: Government Initiatives and the Private Sector.”
Privacilla.org. Available online. URL: http://www.privacilla.org/releases/
CDIA_Remarks_01-27-05.html. Posted on January 27, 2005. The editor of
the Privacilla.org web site discusses the national ID effort in remarks to the
annual conference of the Consumer Data Industry Association. He argues
that the issue is not whether to have a national ID card. Driver’s licenses are
already going to be turned into the effective equivalent of a national ID. The
focus should be on developing ID systems that authorize access without con-
veying unnecessary information or engaging in pervasive surveillance.
McCullagh, Declan. “Scanning the Future of Privacy.” CNet News.com. Avail-
able online. URL: http://news.com.com/2100-1029-994080.html. Posted on
March 25, 2003. A report from the National Research Council suggests
guidelines for using authentication systems such as passwords, identiﬁcation
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
220

and “smart cards,” and biometrics. The report warns that developers must be
particularly careful about systems that link identiﬁcation and databases that
record personal data and information about activities. There must be strong
regard for constitutional rights of privacy and freedom of association.
“National ID Cards.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/id_cards/. Updated on April 1, 2005.
Gives an overview and links to news and events relating to proposals for a na-
tional ID card.
Scheeres, Julia. “Support for ID Cards Waning.” Wired News. Available online.
URL: http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,51000,00.html. Posted on
March 13, 2002. Reports that recent surveys show a decline in support for
proposed National ID cards. Support had peaked in the wake of the Septem-
ber 11 terrorist attacks at 70 percent according to a Pew Center poll. How-
ever, a Gartner poll showed only 26 percent support, though a majority
supported the use of uniform IDs for speciﬁc purposes, such as tracking air-
line passengers.
Singel, Ryan. “Passport Safety, Privacy Face Off.” Wired News. Available on-
line. 
URL: 
http://www.wired.com/news/privacy/0,1848,62876,00.html.
Posted on March 31, 2004. Reports on new passport standards to be pro-
mulgated by the International Civil Aviation Organization. The standards in-
clude standard face-recognition biometrics, with optional use of ﬁngerprints
or iris scans. An international coalition of privacy groups has asked that the
standards not be ﬁnalized until privacy concerns are fully addressed and strict
standards for the collection and use of data are developed.
“Social Security Numbers.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available
online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/ssn/. Updated September 28, 2004.
Describes the history of the use of Social Security numbers (SSNs) for identi-
ﬁcation, the notiﬁcation requirements in the 1974 Privacy Act, the SSN as a
tool of identity theft, and requirements for legislation that would effectively
prevent misuse of the SSN. The web page includes resource and news links.
“VeriChip.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/rﬁd/verichip.html. Updated October 20, 2004.
Describes the VeriChip, a radio frequency identiﬁcation device implanted
under the skin. The FDA has approved its use as a medical identiﬁcation de-
vice, but it has also been used for tracking purchases in a nightclub. Use as an
access device raises privacy concerns.
“VeriChip Personal Identification System—Frequently Asked Questions.”
Applied Digital Corp. Available online. URL: http://www.adsx.com/faq/
verichipfaq.html. Describes an identiﬁcation chip intended to be inserted just
under a person’s skin, potentially for use in identifying persons for access to
secure environments or for verifying transactions. Users’ data then is stored
in a central database.
Williams, Sam. “The Curse of the Biometric Future.” Salon.com. Available on-
line. URL: http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2004/02/26/biometric/index.
html. Posted on February 26, 2004. Describes the development of facial
Annotated Bibliography
221

biometrics. The author builds on the developer’s characterization of the tech-
nology as being both a blessing and a sort of curse. Although there are concerns
about the misuse of the technology, the author also notes that the accuracy of
the available technology falls well short of popular conceptions fostered by the
media.
Zetter, Kim. “Great Taste, Less Privacy.” Wired News. Available online. URL:
http://www.wired.com/news/privacy/0,1848,62182,00.html. Posted on Feb-
ruary 6, 2004. Bars, stores, and other venues often swipe patron’s driver’s li-
censes in order to verify age and authenticity. However, they can also
combine the information they obtain with commercial databases to ﬁnd out
a lot more than customers might want them to know. An exhibit (now a web
site) called Swipe is helping people learn just what can be learned about them.
SURVEILLANCE, SCREENING, AND TRACKING
SYSTEMS
This section includes works on a variety of systems for surveillance (such as
cameras and face-recognition systems), automatic screening or proﬁling sys-
tems, and technology such as radio frequency ID (RFID) and the use of GPS
devices for monitoring the location of persons or things.
Books
Corwall, Agnes S. Telecommunications Issues in Focus. New York: Nova Science
Publishers, 2002. Describes recent regulatory and technical developments in
telecommunications, including a number of areas relating to surveillance and
privacy, such as unwanted telemarketing calls, digital surveillance, remote
sensing, and encryption.
Krouse, William J. The Multi-State Anti-Terrorism Information Exchange (MATRIX)
Pilot Project. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2004. Also
available online. URL: http://www.mipt.org/pdf/CRS_RL32536. pdf. Provides
an overview of a federal pilot project involving the use of data-mining tech-
niques with public records to help generate leads for antiterrorism investiga-
tions. Many states soon dropped out of the project and privacy concerns
continued.
Monmonier, Mark. Spying with Maps: Surveillance Technologies and the Future of
Privacy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002. The author, a professor
of geography, provides details about surveillance, mapping, and geographic
analysis systems used by the military, law enforcement, and even private busi-
nesses. He believes many of these systems can be useful but can also repre-
sent a new and growing threat to privacy. The concept of privacy may need
to be expanded to include “locational privacy”—the ability to not have peo-
ple track where one is or has been.
Peters, Thomas A. Computerized Monitoring and Online Privacy. Jefferson, N.C.:
McFarland, 1999. While perhaps containing too much detail for many read-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
222

ers, this overview provides a broad perspective on how a variety of types of
software have included functions that monitor and record user interactions.
Much of this functionality may be benign and even useful—for example, in
helping developers to create educational or library software that is easier and
more rewarding to use. Understanding this pervasive feature of software can
be a starting point for identifying potential privacy issues or threats.
Petersen, Julie K. Understanding Surveillance Technologies: Spy Devices, Their Origins
and Applications. Grand Rapids, Mich.: CRC Press, 2000. A well-illustrated
guide to the operation and use of a wide variety of surveillance and monitoring
technologies. These include bugs, hidden cameras, aerial surveillance, radar,
infrared, wiretapping, and electronic eavesdropping techniques. The author
also discusses the many contexts in which such systems may be used, including
the media, employers, law enforcement, and intelligence agencies, as well as
outlining the privacy issues that often arise.
Schneier, Bruce, and David Banisar. The Electronic Privacy Papers: Documents on
the Battle for Privacy in the Age of Surveillance. New York: Wiley, 1997. A col-
lection of documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act. Top-
ics of these previously classiﬁed or restricted documents include proposed
telecommunications surveillance systems, wiretapping, cryptography (includ-
ing the Clipper Chip), and key escrow systems. Each document is annotated
to explain its signiﬁcance.
Stevens, Gina Marie. Privacy: Total Information Awareness Programs and Latest
Developments. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2003. Also
available online. URL: http://www.fas.org/irp/crs/RL31730.pdf. Describes
the controversial Defense Research Projects Agency (DARPA) “Total Infor-
mation Awareness” program. This ﬁve-year project, eventually renamed and
then abandoned, would have used data-mining techniques to analyze a vast
number of personal transactions to uncover patterns that might be associated
with terrorist group activity. The privacy and civil liberties concerns that led
to the curtailment of the program are also explored.
Stevens, Gina Marie, and Charles Doyle. Privacy: Wiretapping and Electronic
Eavesdropping. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 2003.
Also available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/wiretap/98-326.pdf.
Provides an overview of federal law governing wiretapping and electronic
eavesdropping, including the impact of the USA PATRIOT Act and other
post–September 11 developments.
United States Department of Homeland Security. US-VISIT Program, Incre-
ment 1, Privacy Impact Assessment. Washington, D.C.: Department of Home-
land Security, December 18, 2003. Also available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/us-visit/us-visit_pia.pdf. Describes the new pro-
gram for collecting data and biometric scans from non-immigrant visitors to
the United States. The report also describes how information will be used,
shared, and safeguarded.
United States General Accounting Ofﬁce. Data Mining: Federal Efforts Cover a
Wide Range of Uses. Washington, D.C.: GAO, 2004. Also available online.
Annotated Bibliography
223

URL: http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04548.pdf. A survey of federal agen-
cies and departments showed that 52 of 128 are using or are planning to use
data mining. Reasons cited included improving efﬁciency and service, ana-
lyzing intelligence, and detecting waste, fraud, and abuse.
Articles and Papers
Barber, Grayson. “Public Video Surveillance Erodes Our Integrity.” New Jersey
Law Journal, vol. 165, July 30, 2001, p. 23ff. Argues that although anonymity
on the Internet and in the street can make it hard to hold people accountable
for their actions (such as defamation or harassment), it is necessary for the
protection of liberty. The United States has a long history of anonymous po-
litical activity.
Biever, Celeste. “The Phone that Knows You Better Than You Do.” New Scien-
tist, vol. 184, November 27, 2004, p. 21. Describes work toward the develop-
ment of an “assistive cell phone” by MIT researchers. The phone can keep
track of the destination and timing of calls and even map “socialization pat-
terns” through gauging the proximity of other phone users. However, little
concern is expressed about the privacy implications of such technology.
Colker, David. “Go Ahead, Just Try to Disappear.” Los Angeles Times, Decem-
ber 27, 2004, p. A1. Reports the growing use of Global Positioning System
(GPS)–equipped mobile phones and other devices to track children, workers,
even pets. But while knowing the location of one’s children can be comfort-
ing to a parent, workers and travelers may experience an oppressive sense of
always being monitored and tracked.
Cooper, Simon. “Who’s Spying on You?” Popular Mechanics, vol. 182, January 5,
2005, p. 56. Reports several emerging privacy threats. As a result of a federal
mandate, GPS-enabled cell phones can now be used as tracking devices,
sometimes without the consent of the owner. Required event data recorders
in vehicles could be used by insurance companies to deny coverage based on
driving habits. Radio frequency ID devices (including implantable VeriChips)
could allow people themselves to be tracked.
Dobson, Jerome E. “Every Step You Take, Every Move You Make: It’s Time for
an Explicit National Debate on Human-Tracking that Goes Far Beyond Pri-
vacy Issues.” Chicago Tribune, February 25, 2005, p. 21. For $200 plus a small
monthly fee anyone can obtain a device and use it to track a child, a forgetful
parent, or perhaps a spouse suspected to be unfaithful. But while the privacy
issues are obvious, psychological and sociological consequences of pervasive
tracking of people also need to be considered and debated.
Eggen, Dan. “FBI Misused Secret Wiretaps, According to Memo.” Washington
Post, October 10, 2002, p. A14. Reports that an internal memo obtained by a
member of Congress reveals that the FBI had illegally videotaped suspects,
recorded telephone calls, and intercepted e-mails in secret investigations
under the FISA (Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act). Remarkably these
abuses occurred a year and a half before the September 11 attacks. The FBI
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
224

says it has fully investigated the problems and reformed the related proce-
dures, but critics worry about the ongoing lack of accountability.
Eggen, Dan, and Jonathan Krim. “Easier Internet Wiretaps Sought.” Washing-
ton Post, March 13, 2004, p. A1. Reports that the U.S. Justice Department is
seeking to require Internet service providers to be subject to the same wire-
tap access requirements as other telecommunications providers. Ofﬁcials
argue that they must have the capability to decode data packets that represent
voice-over-Internet phone calls. Industry attorneys oppose the request be-
cause of signiﬁcant costs that would be imposed on providers, while some pri-
vacy advocates believe the government would be interfering too much in the
architecture of the Internet.
Farivar, Cyrus. “When Shots Ring Out, a Listening Device Acts as Witness.”
New York Times, December 16, 2004, p. E9. The Center for Neural Engi-
neering at the University of Southern California has developed a system that
combines cameras, microphones, and software to identity gunshots and pin-
point their location. The system uses a neural network that is “trained” to
recognize sounds. The time it takes for the sound to be received at various lo-
cations allows for triangulation and switching to an appropriately placed sur-
veillance camera. (Although most people would consider it desirable to be
able to ﬁnd shooters, use of such a system to identify other types of sounds
might represent a privacy threat.)
Garﬁnkel, Simson. “I See You.” Technology Review, March 5, 2003, n.p. The au-
thor recounts his installation of an inexpensive webcam surveillance system in
his new home. Afterward, he reﬂects that he, like most people, is concerned
with being spied on in public but comfortable with the idea of keeping an eye
on his own property.
Geracimos, Ann. “Walking ‘Signature.’” Washington Times, March 4, 2004, n.p.
Also available online. URL: http://www.washingtontimes.com/functions/
print.php?StoryID=20040303-094727-4753r. Computer scientists are working
on a system that can uniquely identify individuals based on ﬁnding distinctive,
invariant characteristics of gait (the way of walking). Although variations in
lighting, shadows, and terrain complicate the effort, such a system could be
used to help diagnose motion disorders or to gauge the progress of physical
therapy. However, the system could also be used for surveillance, where it
might identify persons whose face is obscured or out of the camera ﬁeld.
Goold, Benjamin J. “Public Area Surveillance and Police Work: The Impact of
CCTV on Police Behaviour and Autonomy.” Surveillance & Society, vol. 1, pp.
191–203. Also available online. URL: http://www.surveillance-and-society.
org/articles1(2)/publicpolice.pdf. The pervasive use of public surveillance
cameras in the United Kingdom may be reducing crime and changing public
behavior. However, it may also be changing the behavior of the police, some
of whom fear that surveillance footage taken out of context might be used to
support complaints against them.
Jackson, William. “To Share Is Human: Anonymous Data-Mining Technology
Protects Privacy.” Government Computer News, vol. 23, December 13, 2004,
Annotated Bibliography
225

p. 21ff. Describes a system where items from different databases can be
“hashed” and compared for matches without revealing the actual informa-
tion. For example, airport ticketing information could be compared against
a “No Fly List.” The advantage is that the privacy of personal information
would not be exposed to the persons doing the matching.
Kandra, Anne. “National Security vs. Online Privacy: The New Antiterrorism
Law Steps Up Electronic Surveillance of the Internet.” PC World, vol. 20,
January 2002, p. 37ff. The author expresses concern about provisions of the
new USA PATRIOT Act as they apply to Internet use. E-mail and Web ac-
tivities of persons unrelated to a particular investigation might be “swept up,”
and the secret technology for Internet surveillance (formerly known as Car-
nivore) remains obscure but troubling.
Lee, Jennifer 8. “Welcome to the Database Lounge.” New York Times, March
21, 2002, p. G1. Recounts how driver’s license scanners now used at some
bars to verify age can also be used to surreptitiously gather personal infor-
mation about customers. As more licenses become machine readable, the pri-
vacy concerns about such scanning are likely to grow.
Markoff, John, and Eric Lichtblau. “Gaps Seen in ‘Virtual Border’ Security Sys-
tem.” New York Times, May 31, 2004, p. C1. The expansion of the US-VISIT
border screening program has been challenged by computer scientists and
engineers. The critics point to a history of government boondoggles in in-
formation technology. They suggest that as with missile defense systems, the
inherent difﬁculty of the task is far greater than usually admitted.
McGee, Jim. “Fighting Terror with Databases; Domestic Intelligence Plans Stir
Concern.” Washington Post, February 16, 2002, p. A27. Federal authorities are
building powerful new investigative tools by linking databases containing in-
formation about, for example, immigrants and resident aliens. Local police
are being given increased access to information from federal agencies, and
often carrying out interviews on their behalf. As a sort of pilot program, 5,000
Middle Eastern men who share some characteristics with the September 11
hijackers have been “voluntarily” interviewed. Some civil libertarians believe
that an open-ended database system may suck in thousands of innocent citi-
zens and subject them to harassment and employment difﬁculties, and serve
to deter legitimate political dissent, as happened in the 1950s and 1970s.
Miller, Leslie. “Air Passenger ID Screening Called Inadequate on Privacy.” San
Francisco Chronicle, March 29, 2005, p. A5. The Government Accountability
Ofﬁce has reported that the Secure Flight passenger-screening program now
in development has failed to meet nine of 10 conditions required for further
funding. Ofﬁcials with the program admit that there have been delays with
implementing privacy protection and notiﬁcation. Further, the program does
not provide any recourse for passengers whose names may have been put on
“no ﬂy” lists erroneously.
“Move Over, Big Brother.” The Economist. vol. 373, December 2, 2004, p. 31. Se-
curity expert Bruce Schneier argues that the widespread availability of inex-
pensive camera phones, webcams, and other devices is enabling ordinary
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
226

people to catch criminals and hold institutions accountable for their actions. A
“photographically armed” society may become more polite, but the ubiquitous
surveillance of all by all could inhibit free expression and nonconformity.
Newitz, Annalee. “They’ve Got Your Number . . .” Wired Magazine, vol. 12,
December 2004, n.p. Also available online. URL: http://www.wired.com/
wired/archive/12.12/phreakers.html. A modern wireless “phone phreaker”
demonstrates how easy it is to intercept cell phone calls with a hidden an-
tenna, a Bluetooth wireless device, and software. Phones can even be manip-
ulated or taken over without the owner’s knowledge. Today’s legions of cell
phone users are shown to be vulnerable to hackers and industrial spies.
O’Harrow, Robert, Jr. “Tiny Sensors that Can Track Anything.” Washington
Post, September 24, 2004, p. E1. Coming soon: tiny networked sensors called
“smart dust” that can be used to monitor environmental conditions and de-
tect problems . . . but that could also track people and their activities.
Schwartz John. “Privacy Fears Erode Support for a Network to Fight Crime.”
New York Times, March 15, 2004, p. C1. Reports that 11 of the 16 states that
had signed up for the Multistate Anti-Terrorism Information Exchange (Ma-
trix) have withdrawn from the project. While most of the states cited ﬁnan-
cial issues, some ofﬁcials have also cited privacy concerns.
———. “Snoop Software Gains Power and Raises Privacy Concerns.” New York
Times, October 10, 2003, p. A1. Describes software designed speciﬁcally for
monitoring or spying on a person’s computer activities, often recording key-
strokes. Some software can even turn on a person’s webcam and transmit pic-
tures of him or her. Mark Rotenberg of the Electronic Privacy Information
Center says that the makers of such software should not be allowed to dis-
claim responsibility for its use.
———. “This Car Can Talk. What It Says May Cause Concern.” New York
Times, December 29, 2003, p. C1. The growing use of systems such as On-
Star that keep track of a car’s location offers motorists effective emergency
help, such as by routing responders to the scene even when the driver does
not know his or her location. However, privacy advocates such as Beth
Givens of the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse worry that law enforcement or
even hackers may use the system to track a target’s location. Data stored in
“black box” recorders that record driving behavior also raises issues.
Taslitz, Andrew E. “The Fourth Amendment in the Twenty-First Century: Tech-
nology, Privacy, and Human Emotions.” Law and Contemporary Problems, vol. 65,
Spring 2002, p. 125ff. The author argues that the traditional standard of a rea-
sonable expectation of privacy should be supplanted by a standard that looks at
the emotional experience of privacy. A review of Supreme Court decisions shows
that the current narrow conception of privacy would allow for a great deal of in-
trusive surveillance and monitoring in public places. Peoples’ need to feel they
have a choice over what they reveal to others and how, and merely being in a
public place, should not mean that one cannot have a sense of privacy.
Van Voris, Bob. “Black Box Car Idea Opens Can of Worms: Litigation Advan-
tages Seen. But Privacy Issues Are Big Worry.” National Law Journal, vol. 21,
Annotated Bibliography
227

June 14, 1999, p. A1. New technology similar to aircraft data recorders can
now track a driver’s speed and even whether the seat belt was fastened. This
data could be important testimony in trafﬁc accident cases, but it has also
raised concerns from privacy advocates.
Verton, Dan. “Postal Service Pursues ‘Intelligent Mail’ Despite Privacy Con-
cerns.” Computerworld, August 11, 2003. n.p. Also available online. URL:
http://www.computerworld.com/securitytopics/security/privacy/story/
0,10801,83866,00.html. An advisory commission has recommended that the
U.S. Postal Service pursue “personalized” mail options that would include
identiﬁcation of the sender of mail. Bar codes would uniquely identify each
mail piece. Originally such systems were developed to make mail processing
more efﬁcient, but now they are being touted as an antiterrorism measure.
However, they threaten the anonymity of the mail, which is linked to a First
Amendment right to speak freely.
Volokh, Eugene. “Big Brother Is Watching—Be Grateful!” Wall Street Journal,
March 26, 2002, p. A2. The author, a First Amendment scholar, argues that
the use of public surveillance cameras can be effective for deterring crime.
Because they are used only in public areas, there is no “expectation of pri-
vacy” and thus no constitutional violation. The risk of abuse of such systems
by law enforcement ofﬁcials can be minimized.
Walker, Leslie. “Balancing Data Needs and Privacy.” Washington Post, May 8,
2003, p. E1. Even as the Defense Department worked on the Total Informa-
tion Awareness program, it also ﬁnanced research to develop a “privacy ap-
pliance.” This software would screen out personal data unrelated to a speciﬁc
query and would also track all requests to prevent unauthorized use of the
system. Similar techniques will be needed if any comprehensive database and
data-mining systems are to be trusted with individuals’ privacy.
Wong, May. “Online Data Conﬂict with Desire for Privacy.” Washington Post,
December 26, 2003, p. A15. The combination of online phone directories
and mapping services has created a new privacy threat: Stalkers cannot only
ﬁnd out where someone lives (without having to know the city), but can also
see how to get there.
Web Documents
“Air Travel Privacy.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/airtravel/. Updated on March 29, 2005.
Discusses recent measures and proposals for analyzing passenger data to pro-
ﬁle or identify potential terrorists. This includes the CAPPS (Computer As-
sisted Passenger Pre-screening System).
Baard, Erik. “Smile, You’re on In-Store Camera.” Wired News. Available on-
line. URL: http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,54078,00.html. Posted
on August 8, 2002. Describes a near-future system that will track the move-
ments of shoppers in a way similar to the way Web users are tracked today. A
camera captures the shopper’s face, then his or her ﬁle is updated with infor-
mation about purchases that can be used later for targeted marketing.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
228

Baard, Mark. “Balancing Utility with Privacy.” Wired News. Available online.
URL: http://www.wired.com/news/technology/0,1282,60871,00.html. Posted
on October 21, 2003. The coming world of “ubiquitous computing” will use
networks of tiny wireless sensors, and “smart” appliances and software to en-
able people to track and control many aspects of their environment. How-
ever, the more the system is “aware” of, the greater the potential loss of
privacy.
Black, Jane. “Roll up Your Sleeve—for a Chip Implant.” BusinessWeek Online.
Available online. URL: http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/
mar2002/nf20020321_1025.htm. Posted on March 21, 2002. Describes a
family that has volunteered to have radio frequency identiﬁcation chips im-
planted in their bodies as part of a trial program. The Jacobs family (dubbed
the “Chipsons”) and chip supporters believe the VeriChip devices can save
lives by giving emergency personnel information about a person’s current
prescriptions and allergies. The chips may also be used for tracking paroled
convicts and even children, but these and other potential privacy issues are
still in the future.
Chakrabarti, Samidh, and Aaron Strauss. “Carnival Booth: An Algorithm for De-
feating the Computer-Assisted Airline Passenger Screening System.” Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology. Available online. URL: http://swissnet.
ai.mit.edu/6805/student-papers/spring02-papers/caps.htm. Posted on May
16, 2002. Uses mathematical models and computer simulation to show that
the Computer-Assisted Airline Passenger Screening System (CAPS) or any
other system that uses proﬁles to select passengers for intensive screening will
be less secure than a system that randomly selects passengers for thorough
screening. The ﬂaw is that once a passenger has received special treatment, he
or she can use the details to deduce the proﬁle being applied in that particular
case and create an “anti-proﬁle,” allowing for subsequent bypassing of the
screening. A terrorist cell could systematically probe the system to ﬁnd out
how to get its operatives onboard. Finally, if the use of proﬁles does not in-
crease security, it cannot be justiﬁed on legal grounds.
“Documents Show Errors in TSA’s ‘No Fly’ Watchlist.” Electronic Privacy In-
formation Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/
airtravel/foia/watchlist_foia_analysis.html. Posted in April 2003. Describes
how Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) litigation by the Electronic Privacy
Information Center revealed heavily edited documents that suggest that the
Transportation Security Agency’s “No-Fly” watch list has many errors and
problems. In addition, it is not clear who is responsible for maintaining the
list and evaluating its accuracy and effectiveness.
Fisher, Dennis. “RSA Seeks to Fix RFID Worries.” eWeek. Available online.
URL: http://www.eweek.com/article2/0,1759,1655594,00.asp. Posted on
August 25, 2003. Researchers at RSA Security Inc. have developed a tech-
nique that uses “blocker tags” to control which reading devices could read
which tags. This could prevent, for example, a department store reader from
identifying personal items being carried by a shopper.
Annotated Bibliography
229

Harper, Jim. “RFID Tags and Privacy: How Bar-Codes-on-Steroids Are Really
a 98-Lb. Weakling.” Competitive Enterprise Institute. Available online.
URL: http://www.cei.org/pdf/4080.pdf. Posted on June 21, 2004. Gives a
good summary of the use and beneﬁts of radio frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) technology with consumer products. Although privacy concerns have
been raised about the surreptitious tracking of consumers and their goods,
the author suggests that privacy will be adequately protected by a combina-
tion of pressure from consumers, existing laws, and technologies that can
block unwanted scanning.
Krazit, Tom. “Intel: Home Sensors Could Monitor Seniors, Aid Diagnosis.”
Computerworld/IDG News Service. Available online. URL: http://www.
computerworld.com/printthis/2005/0,4814,98801,00.html (QuickLink 51815).
Posted January 7, 2005. Intel Corporation is working on a project that would
install a network of home sensors that could help monitor the location and
health of seniors and detect emergency conditions. Integrated communica-
tions could also help people keep in touch with aging parents. Such a prod-
uct may ease the problem of caring for a rapidly growing senior population.
Strict regulations under HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Account-
ability Act) may allay privacy concerns.
Manjoo, Farhad. “Brave New Skies.” Salon.com. Available online. URL:
http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2003/09/04/plane_surveillance/index.
html. Posted on September 4, 2003. Describes the ongoing plans to obtain in-
formation about all passengers before they board airliners. Manjoo discusses
the CAPPS II initiative and the controversial gathering of passenger data from
several cooperating airlines without telling the public. Some conservatives are
joining civil libertarians in sounding the alarm about a system that might be
used for ordinary law enforcement as well as antiterrorism efforts.
———. “Everything Is Watching You.” Salon.com. Available online. URL:
http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2003/07/24/rﬁd/index.html. Posted on
July 24, 2003. Describes the development of radio tracking (RFID) devices
that may soon be embedded in a wide variety of products. The systems are
likely to be used at ﬁrst only for inventory control in warehouses and distri-
butions channels, and critics believe there will be consumer resistance if in-
dividual packages purchased in stores are tracked.
Matthews, William. “FBI to Build Data Warehouse.” FCW.com. Available on-
line. URL: http://www.fcw.com/fcw/articles/2002/0603/news-fbi-06–03–02.asp.
Posted on June 3, 2002. Reports that the FBI made “investigative data ware-
housing” one of its key strategies in the war against terrorism. In addition to
centralizing its major databases and making them available for systematic data
mining and analysis, the effort is part of the agency’s overall push to modernize
its information technology. Most of the software to be employed is already in
commercial use.
“Metropolitan Police: General Order, Draft: Closed-Circuit Television Cam-
eras (CCTV).” DC Watch. Available online. URL: http://www.dcwatch.
com/police/020404.htm. Posted on April 4, 2002. Gives the policy and
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
230

guidelines for use of the Washington, D.C., closed-circuit television surveil-
lance system. Cameras are not to be used in an area where there is a “reason-
able expectation of privacy” and they are to be used only for gathering
information on speciﬁc incidents.
Mieszkowski, Katharine. “The Checkout Line—Or the Check-You-Out Line?”
Salon.com. Available online. URL: http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/
2004/07/26/rﬁd_library/index.html. Posted on July 26, 2004. Describes the
growing use of RFID (radio frequency identiﬁcation) chips in library books.
The system allows people to check their own books out, relieving tight li-
brary labor budgets. Civil libertarians are concerned that hackers or law en-
forcement agents using scanners might be able to read the chips and learn
what books patrons are reading. Librarians, however, say they are protecting
user privacy by using only internal identiﬁcation numbers, not book titles or
ISBNs.
“Protestor Privacy and Free Expression Rights.” Electronic Privacy Informa-
tion Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/protest/.
Updated on October 17, 2004. Links the screening and surveillance of pro-
testors to threats to the rights of assembly and free expression under the First
Amendment. Gives historical and post–September 11 examples of govern-
ment surveillance of protestors. The web page includes news and resource
links.
“Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation: Applications and Implications for Con-
sumers.” Federal Trade Commission. Available online. URL: http://
www.ftc.gov/bcp/workshops/rﬁd/index.htm. Posted June 21, 2004. Provides
the agenda and transcripts from a conference on the implications of emerg-
ing radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) technology for businesses, con-
sumers, and policymakers.
“Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) Systems.” Electronic Privacy Informa-
tion Center. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/rﬁd/. Up-
dated February 18, 2005. Describes the growing use of radio frequency
identiﬁcation (RFID) tags, which are used to remotely and automatically
identify merchandise, pets, and even people. The greatest privacy threat is
the potential ability to link RFID information with a speciﬁc consumer. The
web page includes news and resource links.
“Scientists Can Now Read Your Eyes—Literally!” ExpressIndia. Available online.
URL: http://www.expressindia.com/fullstory.php?newsid=37622#compstory.
Posted on October 25, 2004. Columbia University scientists have developed a
computer system that can capture images mirrored on the surface of a human
eye. This may make it possible for surveillance systems not only to see people
but also to see what those people are seeing, even though it is outside the di-
rect ﬁeld of the camera.
“Secure Flight.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/airtravel/secureﬂight.html. Updated on March
29, 2005. Provides news and links relating to the federal airline passenger
screening program formerly known as CAPPS II.
Annotated Bibliography
231

Steinhardt, Barry. “Testimony by ACLU’s Barry Steinhardt on Surveillance Sys-
tem before DC City Council.” American Civil Liberties Union. Available on-
line. URL: http://www.aclu.org/Privacy/Privacy.cfm?ID=13505&c=130.
Posted on December 12, 2002. The director of the ACLU’s Program on
Technology and Liberty argues that there is no real evidence of the efﬁcacy
of public surveillance cameras for reducing crime, and that such systems
might easily be abused through unauthorized access or even by police agen-
cies that could use them to intimidate political dissidents. On balance the
risks of this technology outweigh any slight beneﬁts.
Tanner, Robert. “Pressure Builds for U.S. More Surveillance Cameras.” Informa-
tion Week (AP article). Available online. URL: http://informationweek.
com/story/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=166402011. Posted on July 25, 2005.
Describes growing advocacy for use of public video surveillance in the aftermath
of the London transit bombings. Advocates include Senator Hillary Clinton, but
critics argue that cameras can only detect attackers afterward, not deter them.
“United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology (US-
VISIT).” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/us-visit/default.html. Updated on March 21,
2005. Describes the ongoing program to scan, collect, and use biometric
identiﬁers and databases to screen persons entering the United States. Ques-
tions remain about completion of privacy assessments and about use of the in-
formation outside the entry process. The web page includes news links.
“Video Surveillance.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/surveillance/. Updated March 15, 2005.
Describes issues raised by the growing use of public surveillance cameras in
Britain and, to a lesser degree, in U.S. cities such as Washington, D.C. Such
surveillance can have a chilling effect on movement, free association, and the
right to protest. Includes news links.
White, James C. “People, Not Places: A Policy Framework for Analyzing
Location Privacy Issues.” Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy, Duke Uni-
versity. Available online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/location/
jwhitelocationprivacy.pdf. Posted in spring 2003. This student “master’s
memo” argues that the use of tracking devices providing “locational informa-
tion” requires a broader look at what expectation of privacy people might
have even in a public place. The combination of locational information with
databases and data mining has the potential of rendering the anonymous ex-
ercise of movement, association, and other rights impossible.
Zetter, Kim. “A CAPPS by Any Other Name.” Wired News. Available online.
URL: http://www.wired.com/news/privacy/0,1848,67015,00.html. Posted
on May 25, 2005. Reports that a group of civil libertarians and security ex-
perts have called on the federal government to delay the planned August
rollout of its Secure Flight program, the latest incarnation of CAPPS (com-
puter-assisted passenger prescreening system). Critics warn that the system
may use commercial databases that often contain incorrect information, and
the system still lacks procedures by which innocent passengers can clear
their names.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
232

GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
Privacy advocates often see the necessity of making government transparent and
accountable as being essential for robust protection of privacy. Works in this
section discuss the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy Act, and the at-
tempt to obtain information about government activities or to review and cor-
rect information about individuals held by government agencies.
Books
Birkinshaw, Patrick. Freedom of Information: The Law, the Practice and the Ideal.
3rd ed. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 2001. Provides politi-
cal, social, and cultural context for the development of British laws regulat-
ing access to information, including the Ofﬁcial Secrets Act, the UK Code of
Practice on Access to Information, and European Union regulations.
Committee on Government Reform, House of Representatives. “A Citizen’s
Guide on Using the Freedom of Information Act and the Privacy Act of
1974 to Request Government Records.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Ofﬁce, 1999. Also available online. URL: http://frwebgate.
access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=106_cong_reports&
docid=f:hr050.106.pdf. Explains the roles of the Freedom of Information
and Privacy acts in making government information available to citizens. It
also explains exemptions and exclusions.
Dickson, Donald T. Conﬁdentiality and Privacy in Social Work: A Guide to the Law
for Practitioners and Students. New York: Free Press, 1998. Describes privacy
issues and procedures social workers should use to comply with relevant laws
and protect both the agency and its clients.
Drapeau, Michel, and Marc-Aurèle Racicot. Federal Access to Information and
Privacy Legislation Annotated 2004. Toronto: Thomson Carswell, 2004. A very
detailed guide and reference to Canadian freedom of information and privacy
protection legislation. The book includes guidelines for citizens and business.
Duncan, George T., Thomas B. Jabine, and Virginia A. de Wolf, eds. Private
Lives and Public Policies: Conﬁdentiality and Accessibility of Government Statistics.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1993. Discusses privacy issues
involving collection of statistical data by government agencies and recom-
mends appropriate practices. The book is useful as an overview and historical
background to the topic.
Duning, Natilee, ed. Freedom of Information in the Digital Age. Nashville, Tenn.:
First Amendment Center and Reston, Va.: ASNE, 2001. Also available online.
URL: http://www.freedomforum.org/publications/ﬁrst/foi/foiinthedigitalage.
pdf. Presents surveys on the American public’s and newspaper editors’ atti-
tudes toward access to government information and urges the newspaper in-
dustry to actively promote freedom of information. Reports that six in 10
Americans see public access as “crucial” to good government. However, the
public is mistrustful of both government and the private sector as stewards of
information and 56 percent support stronger privacy laws.
Annotated Bibliography
233

Foerstel, Herbert N. Freedom of Information and the Right to Know: The Origins and
Applications of the Freedom of Information Act. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood
Publishing, 1999. Describes the development of the idea that freedom of in-
formation is crucially important to a democracy, its embodiment in the federal
Freedom of Information Act, and the continuing conﬂicts between govern-
ment agencies and citizens seeking more information about their operation.
Hammitt, Harry A., ed. Litigation Under the Federal Open Government Laws,
2004. Washington, D.C.: Electronic Privacy Information Center, 2004. A
manual for lawyers, journalists, researchers, and activists. The book provides
full discussion and guidelines for litigation under the federal Freedom of In-
formation Act, Privacy Act, Federal Advisory Committee Act, and Govern-
ment in the Sunshine Act. New editions of the book are issued annually.
Henry, Christopher L. Freedom of Information Act. New York: Novinka Publica-
tions, 2004. Explains the 1996 Freedom of Information Act (U.S. Code Title
5, Section 552), including procedures for requesting information from gov-
ernment agencies and the nine exceptions and three exclusions that can be
used to refuse disclosure of certain types of records.
Hudson, David L., Jr. Open Government: An American Tradition Faces National
Security, Privacy, and Other Challenges. Langhome, Penn.: Chelsea House,
2005. Written for high school students and adults, this overview looks at how
in the post–September 11 world the government is both threatening privacy
and often concealing the nature and extent of its actions. The book includes
discussion questions and suggestions for further reading.
Vaughn, Robert G., ed. Freedom of Information. Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate Pub-
lishing, 2000. Contributors discuss the background and signiﬁcance of the
United States Freedom of Information Act of 1966, the Whistleblower Pro-
tection Act of 1989, and the Electronic Freedom of Information amendments
of 1996 as well as the British Freedom of Information law.
Articles and Papers
Dolan, Maura. “Justices Overturn Privacy Decision: State High Court Rules
that the Media’s Use of Information Taken from Public Records Does Not
Violate 1st Amendment Protections.” Los Angeles Times, December 7, 2004,
p. B1. Reports a California state supreme court decision saying that the media
can disclose any information from public records. In this case a person with
a 12-year-old felony conviction had reformed and was living a quiet, lawful
life. The media’s First Amendment rights were held to outweigh the person’s
privacy interests.
Marquess, Kate. “Open Court?” ABA Journal, April 1, 2001, p. 54. Reports that
though the growing trend to make all court ﬁlings available online is a boon
to researchers and the media, such documents may expose sensitive material
or infringe on privacy rights.
Mendoza, Martha. “Freedom of Information Restrictions Rising.” Los Angeles
Times, March 20, 2005, p. A17. The trend to tighten or resist access to gov-
ernment information began even before September 11, 2001, and security
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
234

concerns are usually the reason given. The Associated Press reviewed statis-
tics on request under the Freedom of Information Act since 1988 and found
that most federal agencies, with the exception of the Social Security and Vet-
erans administations, were fulﬁlling a considerably smaller proportion of
queries. In addition more documents are being classiﬁed and thousands of
previously public documents have been pulled off government web sites.
Richelson, Jeffrey T. “Holding Back: How Agencies Thwart the Freedom of
Information Act.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, vol. 59, December 2003,
pp. 26–32. The Freedom of Information Act has been a considerable success
with thousands of news stories each year being dependent on information
retrieved pursuant to the law. However, varying interpretations by different
agencies have sometimes improperly blocked access to the requested infor-
mation, as shown in several case studies involving access to information
about nuclear activities and historical information from the CIA.
Robertson, Geoffrey. “A Triumph for Sir Humphrey.” New Statesman, vol. 127,
March 6, 1998, p. 24ff. Describes the British lawmaker’s Sir Humphrey Ap-
pleby’s campaign to pass the nation’s ﬁrst real Freedom of Information Act;
criticizes some shortcomings, such as the exceptions given for ﬁles on indi-
viduals from security agencies.
Wilson, Des. “The Fact that Britain Is Finally Getting a Freedom of Informa-
tion Act Is Almost Entirely Due to the Single-Mindedness of One Great Re-
former.” New Statesman, vol. 127, April 24, 1998, p. 19. Describes the efforts
of reformer Maurice Frankel that have contributed to the coming enactment
of Great Britain’s new freedom of information law.
Web Documents
“The Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (DPPA) and the Privacy of Your State
Motor Vehicle Record.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Avail-
able online. URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/drivers/. Updated on Au-
gust 14, 2004. Explains the background and provisions of the 1994 federal
law that prevents state motor vehicles departments from distributing per-
sonal information used in connection with driver’s licenses and related
records without the license holder’s permission.
“From Cradle to Grave: Government Records and Your Privacy.” Privacy
Rights Clearinghouse. Available online. URL: http://www.privacyrights.org/
fs/fs11-pub.htm. Updated in February 2004. Describes the government
records generated by many different activities during a person’s lifetime.
Some records are public (and thus publicly accessible), while others are con-
ﬁdential. A number of federal and state laws restrict the release of certain
kinds of records and information, such as medical information and Social Se-
curity numbers.
Koontz, Linda D. “Internet Privacy: Comparison of Federal Agency Practices
with Fair Information Principles.” General Accounting Ofﬁce. Availabile
online. URL: http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ai00296r.pdf. Posted Septem-
ber 11, 2000. Testimony before the Commerce Committee of the House of
Annotated Bibliography
235

Representatives summarizes a survey of the privacy practices of federal
agency web sites in terms of implementing the Federal Trade Commission’s
four Fair Information Principles. Eighty-ﬁve percent of the sites have posted
privacy notices. The four principles were implemented by the following per-
centages of the sites: Notice (69 percent), Choice (45 percent), Access (17
percent), and Security (23 percent).
Ravnitzky, Michael. “A Selected Bibliography on the Freedom of Information
Act, 1980–2004.” LLRX.com. Available online. URL: http://www.llrx.com/
features/foiabiblio.htm. Posted on March 15, 2004. Presents selected books
and articles on the U.S. Freedom of Information Act and related issues.
TOOLS AND STANDARDS FOR PRIVACY
AND ANONYMITY
This ﬁnal section lists resources that discuss software tools and services that
allow online users to protect their privacy (such as through encryption) or to re-
main anonymous. There are also works discussing the pros and cons of allow-
ing anonymous use of e-mail and web domains. 
Books
Brands, Stefan A. Rethinking Public Key Infrastructures and Digital Certiﬁcates:
Building in Privacy. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000. Although digital cer-
tiﬁcates are already widely used in certain sensitive applications, the au-
thor argues that the development of powerful surveillance tools by
governments and hackers will eventually require that virtually all com-
munications and transactions be protected by building a public key infra-
structure into the Internet. Such a system could verify the validity of the
participants and data in a transaction without leaving information that
can be used by snoopers and proﬁlers. The details, however, will be un-
derstandable only to technical readers. 
Caloyannides, Michael A. Privacy Protection and Computer Forensics. 2d ed.
Boston: Artech House, 2004. Gives detailed how-to guidance on how to
remove or protect sensitive stored information that could be vulnerable
to hackers, spies, or other intruders. The book includes discussion of spy-
ware and other forms of malicious software, as well as the special vulner-
abilities of wireless connections, PDAs, and even cell phones. 
Cannon, J. C. Privacy: What Developers and IT Professionals Should Know.
Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Education, 2004. A guide for infor-
mation industry professionals on how to develop applications and prac-
tices that ensure data privacy. The book includes a CD with sample
source code and additional privacy resources. 
Competitive Enterprise Institute. The Future of Financial Privacy: Private
Choices Versus Political Rules. Washington D.C.: Competitive Enterprise
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
236

Institute, 2000. A variety of experts of generally libertarian inclination
suggest ways in which new technologies might promote privacy while al-
lowing commerce to avoid politically imposed boundaries.
Difﬁe, Whitﬁeld, and Susan Landau. Privacy on the Line: The Politics of Wiretap-
ping and Encryption. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998. Surveys the development
of encryption and wiretapping technologies and explores their impact on
public policy. (Difﬁe is a coinventor of public key cryptography.)
Dingledine, Roger, and Paul Syverson, eds. Privacy-Enhancing Technologies: Third
International Workshop, PET 2003, Dresden, Germany, March 26–28, Revised Pa-
pers. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2003. Latest in an annual series of papers on
technological methods of enhancing anonymity and privacy in Web activities
and transactions. The material is rather technical and best suited for readers
with some background in computer networking and security.
Electronic Privacy Information Center. Cryptography and Liberty: An Interna-
tional Survey of Encryption Policy. Washington, D.C.: Electronic Privacy In-
formation Center, 2004. An annual survey of government policies on
cryptography around the world, including export controls on cryptographic
software. This is of importance because cryptography is a powerful tool for
protecting privacy but can also be viewed as a threat to the ability of law en-
forcement agencies to gather evidence.
Feghhi, Jalal, and Peter Williams. Digital Certiﬁcates: Applied Internet Security.
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1998. Describes the design and implemen-
tation of digital certiﬁcates that use cryptography to authenticate and secure
transactions.
Garﬁnkel, Simson. PGP: Pretty Good Privacy. Sebastapol, Calif.: O’Reilly, 1994.
The classic introduction to the public-domain encryption system that is used by
millions of computer users to keep their data safe from prying eyes. The book
includes a historical account of the development of public key cryptography.
Gilmore, John, ed. Cracking DES: Secrets of Encryption Research, Wiretap Politics
and Chip Design. Sebastapol, Calif.: O’Reilly, 1998. Describes in technical de-
tail how computer code-crackers built a relatively inexpensive computer sys-
tem that “cracked” the government’s supposedly secure 56-bit DES code;
explores the politics of encryption that has tended to prevent the adoption of
stronger legal encryption technologies.
Hoffman, Lance J. Building in Big Brother: The Cryptographic Policy Debate. New
York: Springer-Verlag, 1995. Provides a wide-ranging discussion of the con-
troversy caused in the early 1990s by the federal Clipper Chip proposal,
which pitted privacy against law enforcement and national security interests.
Kahn, David. The Codebreakers: The Comprehensive History of Secret Communica-
tion from Ancient Times to the Internet. Rev. ed. New York: Scribner, 1996. De-
scribes the wide variety of codes, ciphers, and other systems for secret
messages used throughout history; includes coverage of computer cryptogra-
phy and the Internet.
Levy, Steven. Crypto: How the Code Rebels Beat the Government—Saving Privacy in
the Digital Age. New York: Viking, 2001. A fascinating account of how maverick
Annotated Bibliography
237

computer scientists and programmers such as Whitﬁeld Difﬁe and Philip
Zimmerman developed powerful encryption algorithms and software despite
the opposition of government spy agencies. Their work offered the possibility
of creating a bulwark to protect privacy in the digital age.
Loshin, Peter. Personal Encryption Clearly Explained. San Diego, Calif.: AP Pro-
fessional, 1998. Introduces encryption concepts and then explains hands-on
procedures for using encryption for security.
Ludlow, Peter, ed. High Noon on the Electronic Frontier: Conceptual Issues in Cy-
berspace. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996. Contains a variety of writings from
the ﬁrst years of the World Wide Web, ranging from academic papers to
provocative manifestos. The book discusses issues such as privacy, encryption,
copyright, and the development of virtual communities.
Mel, H. X., and Doris Baker. Cryptography Decrypted. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley, 2000. An exceptionally well-presented introduction and tutorial in
public key cryptography that can provide an understanding of its nuances
without the reader knowing advanced mathematics or computer science. The
book thus provides a good grounding for researchers focusing on the public
policy issues surrounding cryptography today.
Neumann, Peter. Computer-Related Risks. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley,
1995. Introduces the study of the risks and unforeseen consequences of com-
plex computer systems, including threats to privacy. (Current examples can
be found in the comp.risks online newsgroup and digest.)
Prins, J. E. J., and M. J. M. Van Dellen. Digital Anonymity and the Law: Tensions
and Dimensions. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003. Anonymity is
often viewed as a way to protect privacy, and the Internet makes anonymous
(or nearly anonymous) interactions quite possible. A legal conﬂict arises be-
tween anonymity and the need of law enforcement and judicial authorities to
ﬁx the identity of persons so as to be able to hold them accountable for their
actions. However, laws that can be used to force persons to reveal their iden-
tity can also be used to invade privacy or chill freedom of expression. Rele-
vant U.S. and European regulations are discussed.
Rahn, Richard W. The End of Money and the Struggle for Financial Privacy. Seat-
tle, Wash.: Discovery Institute, 1999. Argues that money (currency and
checks) is rapidly being replaced by transactions that can be controlled by in-
dividuals largely outside the purview of government authorities. Encryption
and other mechanisms can allow for any desired degree of anonymity. How-
ever, governments will resist this trend, arguing the need to ensure safety and
to ensure tax revenue.
Singh, Simon. The Code Book: The Evolution of Secrecy from Mary Queen of Scots to
Quantum Cryptography. New York: Doubleday, 1999. An accessible account of
the development of secret writing and cryptosystems over the past ﬁve cen-
turies. The book includes good explanations of basic principles as well as of
the modern debate over access to strong cryptography and the potential threat
(or promise) of incredibly powerful quantum computing systems.
Stallings, William. Protect Your Privacy: The PGP User’s Guide. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1995. Probably the best and most accessible technical
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
238

guide to the PGP encryption software. As with the other PGP books, Inter-
net sources should be consulted for updated information.
Van Der Lubbe, Jan C. Basic Methods of Cryptography. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1998. Describes the application of cryptography in a variety
of information systems, including banking, medical, and telecommunications.
Wayner, Peter. Digital Cash: Commerce on the Net. 2nd ed. Boston: AP Profes-
sional, 1997. Provides a detailed overview of various systems for digital pay-
ment that can allow for secure and possibly anonymous online transactions.
Zimmermann, Philip R. The Ofﬁcial PGP User’s Guide. Cambridge: MIT Press,
1995. The developer of Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) explains how to use his
software while recounting his struggles with government authorities who
sought to block its distribution.
Articles and Papers
Armstrong, H. L., and P. J. Forde. “Internet Anonymity Practices in Computer
Crime.” Information Management & Computer Security, vol. 11, October 22,
2003, pp. 209–215. Considers the role that the ability to be anonymous plays
in Internet crimes such as money laundering, drug dealing, hacking, fraud, and
distribution of child pornography. Because anonymity gives criminals a con-
siderable advantage both in cooperating with one another and in committing
crimes, society must determine what restrictions should be placed upon it.
Clarke, Roger. “Introducing PITs and PETs: Technologies Affecting Privacy.”
Privacy Law & Policy Reporter, March 2001, p. 181ff. Also available online.
URL: http://www.anu.edu.au/people/Roger.Clarke/DV/PITsPETs.html. Up-
dated on February 28, 2001. Describes and classiﬁes Privacy-Invasive Tech-
nologies (PITs) and Privacy-Enhancing Technologies (PETs). These include a
variety of devices, software tools, and standards. Some PETs are “gentle” and
allow for pseudonymity rather than total anonymity.
Granger, M., and Elaine Newton. “Protecting Public Anonymity.” Issues in Sci-
ence and Technology, vol. 21, October 2004, p. 83. In addition to legal mea-
sures, attention to design is needed in order to minimize the potential for
privacy abuse in emerging technologies. System design standards should in-
clude a clear understanding of a system’s intended function and only the data
needed for that purpose should be collected. Protection of privacy and
anonymity should be part of “best practices” in industry, and there should be
legal consequences for failure to meet such standards.
Grossman, Wendy M. “Anonymous Trust.” Scientiﬁc American, vol. 291, August
2004, p. 20ff. Describes a proposed computer security scheme called direct
anonymous attestation (DAA). This would allow computers to verify that
software was certiﬁed safe before running it, without allowing the computer
to be identiﬁed or tracked by the certiﬁcation authority. This would provide
security without opening a privacy loophole.
Henderson, Rick. “Clipping Encryption.” Reason, vol. 30, May 1998, p. 7ff. Pre-
sents the libertarian side of the classic debate over the Clipper Chip proposal.
Henderson argues that providing the government with access to decryption
Annotated Bibliography
239

keys would make it too easy for agencies to violate privacy without the nor-
mal requirements for search warrants.
Machrone, Bill. “Trust Me?” PC Magazine, vol. 17, June 9, 1998, p. 85. De-
scribes the TRUSTe privacy policy disclosure program, using the example of
the Land’s End catalog company.
Markoff, John. “A Safer System for Home PC’s Feels Like Jail to Some Critics.”
New York Times, June 30, 2003, p. C1. IBM and Hewlett-Packard are intro-
ducing new personal computers that have integrated hardware and software
designed to protect data privacy as well as prevent the use of the computer to
reproduce copyrighted material illegally. This concept of “trusted comput-
ing” aims to be a way to deal with privacy and security concerns in a way that
is more transparent to the user, but critics argue that the control of such tech-
nology by large companies may stiﬂe innovation and competition.
Matlis, Jan. “P3P: The Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P) Is a Voluntary
Protocol that Sets Standards for Web Providers to Publish Their Privacy Poli-
cies and Allows Web Users to Automatically Match Those Policies to Their
Privacy Preferences.” Computerworld, vol. 36, October 28, 2002, p. 28. Ex-
plains how P3P uses standardized descriptions of elements in privacy policies
combined with web browser plug-in software. The article also lists the basic
questions about a web site that a user should be able to answer using P3P.
Noguchi, Yuki. “Online Search Engines Help Lift Cover of Privacy.” Washing-
ton Post, February 9, 2004, p. A1. Google and other search engines systemat-
ically “crawl” through the Internet, making content searchable and
accessible. Unfortunately some web sites do not properly exclude sensitive
personal information from such automatic indexing. As a result private inves-
tigators or spies can then use Google to retrieve the conﬁdential data. All
webmasters should be warned how to follow the technical procedures needed
to keep their data away from search engines.
Ricadela, Aaron. “Quantum’s Next Leap.” InformationWeek, May 10, 2004,
n.p. Also available online. URL: http://www.informationweek.com/story/
showArticle.jhtml?articleID=20000170. Discusses Defense Department pro-
posals to accelerate the development of quantum computers that can vastly
increase the amount of data that can be processed using the same number of
bits. Although a practical quantum computer probably lies 20 or more years
in the future, such a machine may make present methods of cryptography
useless, exposing information to intruders.
Sanger, David E., and Jeri Clausing. “U.S. Removes More Limits on Encryp-
tion.” New York Times, January 13, 2000, p. 1. The federal government, per-
haps bowing to recent court decisions, has made it possible to sell most
encryption software to foreign countries after submitting the product for a
one-time review. (Countries listed as terrorist-sponsoring states would still be
excluded.) However, some critics complain that the regulations are still too
complicated and don’t protect the rights of U.S. computer scientists to share
ideas with foreign counterparts.
Schwartz, John. “Dispute on Electronic Message Encryption Takes on New Ur-
gency.” New York Times, September 25, 2001, p. C1. The debate over control
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
240

of encryption software took on new urgency after September 11—but Philip
Zimmermann, developer of Pretty Good Privacy, is sticking to his guns. He
believes the availability of encryption is essential for human rights groups.
Other experts believe that with the software widely available and impossible
to uninvent, the time for debate is past.
Thibodeau, Patrick. “P3P Supporters Struggle to Increase Adoption of Data
Privacy Standard; Backers Look for Ways to Overcome Obstacles that Are
Slowing Deployments.” Computerworld, vol. 36, November 18, 2002, p. 20.
Reports that the Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P) is being slowly
adopted by major web sites. The system uses software to match elements of
privacy policies with users’ settings indicating the amount and types of pri-
vacy required. However, technical problems and legal uncertainties are mak-
ing many big ﬁrms reluctant to implement the system.
Turner, Eric C., and Subhasish Dasgupta. “Privacy on the Web: An Examina-
tion of User Concerns, Technology, and Implications for Business Organiza-
tions and Individuals.” Information Systems Management, vol. 20, Winter 2003,
p. 8ff. Individual privacy concerns are an increasingly important factor in
consumers’ willingness to deal with web sites and in their overall satisfaction.
Privacy concerns can be managed systematically using the “information tech-
nology privacy cycle” and by using tools such as the Platform for Privacy
Preferences (P3P).
Web Documents
Bacard, André. “Anonymous Remailer FAQ.” [Author’s web site.] Available on-
line. URL: http://www.andrebacard.com/remail.html. Updated on March 28,
2005. Describes services that provide privacy for e-mail and newsgroup post-
ings by removing information that could be used to identify the sender (some
services provide encryption as well). Bacard distinguishes between pseudony-
mous remailers that require trusting the provider and true anonymous remail-
ers. He also discusses pros and cons of use, acknowledging the tremendous
growth in spam and other abuses since this FAQ was ﬁrst published.
Callas, Jon, and Jim Reavis. “The Dawn of Pervasive Encryption.” SearchSecurity.
com. Available online. URL: http://download.pgp.com/pdfs/whitepapers/
Pervasive_encryption_040214.pdf. Posted in 2004. Argues that encryption (as
embodied in software such as Pretty Good Privacy) is moving from a function
used ad hoc by individuals to an integral part of the network infrastructure. This
movement is being driven by government and regulatory pressures, the contin-
uing growth in computing power, and developments in distributed computing
architecture.
Cisneros, Oscar. “Unmasking the Anonymous Posters.” Wired News. Available
online. URL: http://www.wired.com/news/politics/0,1283,20983,00.html.
Posted on July 29, 1999. Reports suggest that the ability to ﬁle civil lawsuits
and obtain subpoenas against anyone is being used to unmask the identity of
anonymous online posters. Sometimes the service provider (such as Yahoo!)
does not notify the poster, who is then unable to contest the release of his or
Annotated Bibliography
241

her identity. Plaintiffs defend the subpoenas as being necessary to identify
persons involved with defamation and other torts.
Fried, Ina. “Finding a Replacement for Passwords.” CNet News.com. Available
online. URL: http://news.com.com/Finding+a+replacement+for+passwords/
2100-1029_3- 5586249.html. Posted on February 23, 2003. Bill Gates and
other industry leaders are beginning to say that passwords used to access on-
line services are ineffective, vulnerable, and obsolete. However, adopting
hardware authentication devices, biometrics, and other systems could prove
too expensive for most businesses.
Froomkin, A. Michael. “Anonymity and Its Enmities.” Journal of Online Law.
Available online. URL: http://www.wm.edu/law/publications/jol/95_96/
froomkin.html. Posted in June 1995. A classic article describing the mechanics
of anonymous communication on the Internet and exploring the legal doc-
trines applicable to it. Anonymity can facilitate criminal activity and evade ac-
countability, but it can also protect essential freedom of speech and association.
“Internet Anonymity.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online.
URL: http://www.epic.org/privacy/anonymity/. Posted in 2000. Describes
the value of anonymity, particularly for the protection of dissidents and
whistleblowers. The web page includes news and notable cases.
Kanellos, Michael. “Random Answers Retain Privacy.” ZDNet News.com.
Available online. URL: http://news.zdnet.com/2100-1009_22-5469837.html.
Posted on November 29, 2004. Describes an interesting technique being ex-
plored by IBM researchers. Personal customer data such as age would be re-
placed with randomly generated numbers before being stored in the database.
Users of the database could determine the randomization algorithm and re-
cover the pattern or shape of the data but not the exact numbers. The result
might be a way to protect privacy while allowing for proﬁling or data mining.
McCullagh, Declan. “Privacy Reduction’s Next Act.” News.com. Available on-
line. URL: http://news.com.com/2010-1028-5155054.html. Posted on Feb-
ruary 9, 2004. A proposed federal law would add stiff penalties for persons
who put false or misleading information in their Internet domain registration
records (which are accessed by the WHOIS database). The idea is to make it
easier to go after spammers, intellectual property thieves, and other miscre-
ants. However, political dissidents and whistleblowers have a legitimate need
to disguise their identity.
McGuire, David. “Ruling On ‘.us’ Domain Raises Privacy Issues.” Washing-
tonpost.com. Available online. URL: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/
articles/A7251-2005Mar4.html. Posted on March 4, 2005. Reports that the
Commerce Department has ruled that people who own Internet addresses
ending in .us will have to provide their phone numbers and addresses for a
publicly searchable database. Privacy advocates oppose the ruling, arguing
that it prevents the privacy and anonymity of free speech and that the mea-
sure is not necessary, since under the existing “proxy” registration system law
enforcement ofﬁcers can still obtain identifying information through a court
order.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
242

Wagner, Jim. “EFF Throws Support to ‘Anonymous’ Internet Project.” Inter-
net News.com. Available online. URL: http://www.internetnews.com/security/
article.php/3454521. Posted on January 4, 2005. Reports that the Electronic
Frontier Foundation is supporting and distributing open-source software
called Tor that routes Internet trafﬁc through anonymous, encrypted surfers,
preventing tracking of online activity. However, users must still deal with
cookies and avoid indiscreet use of web forms.
“WHOIS.” Electronic Privacy Information Center. Available online. URL:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/whois/. Updated March 31, 2005. Describes
privacy problems raised by the WHOIS database, which contains names and
contact information for owners of Web domains. It is suggested that existing
international privacy guidelines be used and that provisions must be made to
allow for anonymous ownership of domains. The site includes resource and
news links.
Annotated Bibliography
243

244
CHAPTER 8
ORGANIZATIONS AND AGENCIES
There are many organizations that are devoted in whole or in part to privacy is-
sues. The following entries include consumer advocacy and education groups,
trade organizations, professional and technical organizations, and government
agencies.
American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU)
URL: http://www.aclu.org
E-mail: Web form
Phone: (888) 567-ACLU
125 Broad Street, 18th Floor
New York, YN 10004-2400
Originally founded in 1920, the
ACLU conducts extensive litigation
on constitutional issues including
privacy and free speech.
American Health Information
Management Association
(AHIMA)
URL: http://www.ahima.org
E-mail: info@ahima.org
Phone: (800) 335-5535
233 North Michigan Avenue
Suite 2150
Chicago, IL 60681-5800
An industry/professional organiza-
tion; offers “white papers” on patient
privacy.
Association for Computing 
Machinery (ACM)
URL: http://www.acm.org
E-mail: acmhelp@acm.org
Phone: (800) 342-6626
One Astor Plaza
1515 Broadway
New York, NY 10036
Premier organization for computer
scientists and professionals. Has many
educational and technical publications
(some online) including those dealing
with security and privacy issues.
Biometric Consortium
URL: http://www.biometrics.org
E-mail: info@biometrics.org 
(for LISTSERV)
A group of biometrics research and
industry organizations. Provides links
and references on biometric identiﬁ-
cation systems.
Center for Democracy 
and Technology (CDT)
URL: http://www.cdt.org
E-mail: Web form
Phone: (202) 637-9800
1634 Eye Street, W
Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20006

Organizations and Agencies
245
A nonproﬁt public-interest organiza-
tion that promotes technology poli-
cies and legislation that maximize
constitutional principles of free
speech and individual privacy.
Center for Media Literacy (CML)
URL: http://www.medialit.org
E-mail: cml@medialit.org
Phone: (310) 581-0260
3101 Ocean Park Building
Suite 200
Santa Monica, CA 90405
General media and critical-thinking
skills are important tools for helping
children protect their privacy and se-
curity online. This nonproﬁt organi-
zation develops media education
projects and materials and provides
training and resources to teachers
and others.
Computer Emergency Response
Team (CERT)
URL: http://www.cert.org
E-mail: cert@cert.org
Phone: (412) 268-7090
CERT Coordination Center
Software Engineering Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
An organization that attempts to re-
spond quickly to disruptions of com-
puter networks such as those caused
by hacker attacks. Issues technical ad-
visories on newly discovered vulnera-
bilities of computer operating systems.
Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility (CPSR)
URL: http://www.cpsr.org/cpsr
E-mail: cpsr@cpsr.org
Phone: (650) 322-3778
P.O. Box 717
Palo Alto, CA 94302
CPSR sponsors an annual confer-
ence and maintains numerous mail-
ing lists on computer-related issues
and a large Internet site of informa-
tion. It also publishes a journal and a
newsletter. CPSR sponsors working
groups on civil liberties, working in
the computer industry, and other
topics.
Computer Security Institute
URL: http://www.gocsi.com
E-mail: csi@cmp.com
Phone: (415) 947-6320
600 Harrison Street
San Francisco, CA 94107
An organization for training com-
puter security professionals, dealing
with encryption, secure transaction
systems, and other issues.
Computing Technology Industry
Association (CompTIA)
URL: http://www.comptia.org
E-mail: Web form
Phone: (630) 678-8300
1815 S. Meyers Road
Suite 300
Oak brook Terrace, IL 60181-5228
A major computer industry associa-
tion; certiﬁes computer professionals
and becomes involved in policy issues.
Consumer Action
URL: http://www.
consumeraction.org
E-mail: Web forms
Phone: (415) 777-9635
717 Market Street
Suite 310
San Francisco, CA 94103
A nonprofit consumer advocacy
group founded in 1971. Advocates
and lobbies for consumer rights, of-
fers multilingual educational material

Privacy in the Infor mation Age
246
through its National Consumer Re-
sources Center. Its Credit and Finance
Project provides links to agencies that
can resolve personal credit problems.
Consumer Data Industry 
Organization
URL: http://www.cdiaonline.org
E-mail: Web form
1090 Vermont Avenue, NW
Suite 200
Washington, DC 20005-4905
A trade organization representing
companies that work with consumer
information for fraud prevention and
risk management, credit and mort-
gage reports, employment screening,
and other purposes.
Consumer Project on Technology
(CPT)
URL: http://www.cptech.org
Phone: (202) 387-8030
P.O. Box 19367
Washington, DC 20036
CPT was created by Ralph Nader
in spring 1995 to focus on a variety
of issues, including telecommunica-
tions regulation; pricing of ISDN
services; fair use under the copy-
right law; issues relating to the pric-
ing, ownership, and development of
pharmaceutical drugs; and impact
of technology on personal privacy.
Their web site provides links to a
number of e-mail lists.
Consumers Against Supermarket
Privacy Invasion and 
Numbering (CASPIAN)
URL: http://www.nocards.org
E-mail: Web form
Advocacy organization opposing the
use of supermarket discount cards,
RFID chips, and other methods for
tracking and obtaining information
from customers.
Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS)
URL: http://www.dhhs.gov
Phone: (202) 619-0257
200 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20201
Has a number of policies and efforts
relating to patient privacy; see web
site for search forms.
Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS)
URL: http://www.dhs.gov
E-mail: Web form
Washington, DC 20528
The DHS was established in 2002 as
a single, coordinated effort for pro-
tecting the territory of the United
States from terrorists. The new de-
partment has incorporated a number
of existing agencies (such as the Coast
Guard, U.S. Immigration, and the
Secret Service) and new agencies
(such as the Transportation Security
Administration), as well as coordinat-
ing efforts with intelligence agencies
such as the FBI and CIA. Many activ-
ities of component agencies can have
an impact on privacy.
Direct Marketing Association
URL: http://www.the-dma.org
E-mail: customer service@
the-dma.org
Phone: (212) 768-7277
1120 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036-6700
Organization for the promotion of
direct marketing. Also runs the Tele-
phone Preference Service (P.O. Box
9014, Farmingdale, NY 11735-9014)
that consumers can use to prevent

Organizations and Agencies
247
telemarketing calls as well as the Mail
Preference Service.
Electronic Frontier Foundation
(EFF)
URL: http://www.eff.org
E-mail: information@eff.org
Phone: (415) 436-9333
654 Shotwell Street
San Francisco, CA 94110
Organization formed in 1990 to
maintain and enhance intellectual
freedom, privacy, and other values of
civil liberties and democracy in net-
worked communications. Publishes
newsletters, Internet guidebooks, and
other documents; provides mailing
lists and other online forums; and
hosts a large electronic document
archive.
Electronic Privacy Information
Center (EPIC)
URL: http://www.epic.org
E-mail: Web form
Phone: (202) 483-1140
1718 Connecticut Avenue, NW
Suite 200
Washington, DC 20009
EPIC was established in 1994 to
focus public attention on emerging
privacy issues relating to the National
Information Infrastructure, such as
the Clipper Chip, the Digital Tele-
phony proposal, medical records pri-
vacy, and the sale of consumer data.
EPIC conducts litigation, sponsors
conferences, produces reports, pub-
lishes the EPIC Alert, and leads cam-
paigns on privacy issues.
Equifax
URL: http://www.equifax.com/
Phone: 1-800 685-1111 (to order
copy of credit report)
Equifax Credit Information 
Services
P.O. Box 740241
Atlanta, GA 30374-0241
One of the three major credit bu-
reaus. A person can order credit re-
ports at their web site.
Experian
URL: http://www.experian.com/
Phone: (888) 397-3742 
(to order credit report)
175 Anton Building
Costa Mesa, CA 92626
One of three major credit bureaus. A
person can order credit reports at its
web site or remove name from mail-
ing lists.
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI)
URL: http://www.fbi.gov
Phone: (202) 324-5520
FBI
Freedom of Information Privacy 
Section
935 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20535
Citizens can ﬁnd out if the FBI has
records about them by writing to this
address and including their complete
name, address, place of birth, and no-
tarized signature.
Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC)
URL: http://www.fcc.gov
E-mail: fccinfo@fcc.gov
Phone: (888) CALL-FCC (general
info)
445 12th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20554
The principal federal regulatory
agency for all interstate communica-
tions by wire, cable, radio, etc.

Privacy in the Infor mation Age
248
Federal Trade Commission
(FTC)
URL: http://www.ftc.gov
Phone: (202) 326-2222
600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Room 130, FTC
Washington, DC 20580
Federal regulatory agency that regu-
lates many aspects of commerce, in-
cluding regulations dealing with
privacy and information disclosure.
Federation of American Scientists
(FAS)
Project on Government Secrecy
URL: http://www.fas.org/sgp/
E-mail: Web form
Phone: (202) 546-3300
1717 K Street, NW
Suite 209
Washington, DC 2003b
“Works to challenge excessive gov-
ernment secrecy and to promote pub-
lic oversight.”
Global Internet Liberty 
Campaign (GILC)
URL: http://www.gilc.org
E-mail: gilc@gilc.org
International coalition of more than
60 privacy, free speech, and human
rights groups dedicated to ﬁghting
international threats to privacy and to
free speech on the Internet.
Information Systems Security 
Association
URL: http://www.issa.org/
E-mail: Web form
Phone: (800) 370-ISSA
Technical Enterprises, Inc.
7044 South 13th Street
Oak Creek, WI 53154
Trade and professional group in-
volved in computer security and pri-
vacy issues.
Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers (IEEE) Com-
puter Society
URL: http://www.computer.org
E-mail: membership@computer.
org
Phone: (202) 371-0101
1730 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 200369-1992
The IEEE Computer Society is the
largest component of the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
Its conferences, journals, and other
resources are aimed mainly at com-
puter and information professionals
but have considerable impact on pol-
icy debates. Compared to the other
leading computer society (the Asso-
cation for Computing Machinery),
the IEEE is more engineering-
oriented, although there is consider-
able overlap.
International Association 
for Cryptologic Research
URL: http://www.iacr.org
E-mail: webmaster@iacr.org
Santa Rosa Administrative Center
University of California—
Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-6120
International organization to further
the study and development of cryp-
tography. Runs conferences and pub-
lishes a journal.
Internet Society
URL: http://www.isoc.org
E-mail: isoc@isoc.org
Phone: (703) 648-9880
1770 Wiehle Avenue
Suite 102
Reston, VA 20190
A wide-ranging professional organi-
zation devoted to shaping the future
of the Internet. Deals with issues

Organizations and Agencies
249
such as privacy and free expression
that are important to keeping the In-
ternet viable and growing.
Medical Information Bureau (MIB)
URL: http://www.mib.com
E-mail: infoline@mib.com
Phone: (866) 692-6901
MIB, Inc.
P.O. Box 105
Essex Station
Boston, MA 02112
Central clearinghouse for medical
records information; designed primar-
ily to ﬁght insurance fraud. Attempts
to deal with privacy concerns that arise
in its distribution of medical records.
Medical Privacy Coalition
URL: http://www.
medicalprivacycoalition.org
E-mail: Web form
A coalition of groups involved with
medical privacy and other patients’
rights issues. Advocates for stronger
privacy protections.
National Workrights Institute
URL: http://www.workrights.org
E-mail: info@workrights.org
Phone: (609) 683-0313
166 Wall Street
Princeton, NJ 08540
Worker’s rights organization that fo-
cuses on a number of privacy issues,
including drug testing, electronic
monitoring, genetic discrimination,
and medical privacy.
Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development
(OECD)
URL: http://www.oecd.org
E-mail: webmaster@oecd.org
Phone: +33 (0)1.45.24.82.00
2, rue André-Pascal
F-75775 Paris Cedex 16
FRANCE
Organization of 30 nations in Eu-
rope and Asia (and the United States
and Mexico). It promotes develop-
ment of the market economy. In-
cludes policies and proposals relating
to privacy, data security, and elec-
tronic commerce.
PGP Users’ Mailing List
URL: http://cryptorights.org/lists/
pgp-users
To subscribe follow the link to the
Mailman subscribe page. This is an
Internet mailing list covering all as-
pects of using the Pretty Good Pri-
vacy encryption program.
Privacy International
URL: http://www.
privacyinternational.org
E-mail: pi@privacy.org
Phone: +44 7947 778247
6-8 Amwell Street
Clerkenwell London
ECIR 1UQ UK
International organization that mon-
itors both government and private
surveillance and threats to privacy.
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse
URL: http://www.privacyrights.org
E-mail: Web form
Phone: (619) 298-3396
3100 5th Avenue
Suite B
San Diego, CA 92103
Produces useful fact sheets and an an-
nual report, and maintains a tollfree
hotline to provide advice to con-
sumers about their rights.
Private Citizen
URL: http://www.private-citizen.
com

Privacy in the Infor mation Age
250
E-mail: pci@private-citizen.com
Phone: (630) 393-2370
P.O. Box 233
Naperville, IL 60566
Gives consumers help for ﬁghting
junk mail, junk calls, including a Sue a
Telemarketer book.
RISKS Digest
URL: http://catless.ncl.ac.uk/
Risks
To receive current postings, use
web browser or news reader to
access newsgroup: comp.risks
A Usenet newsgroup devoted to ex-
ploring the hidden risks and conse-
quences that can arise from the
computer systems upon which so
much of our society now depends.
Moderated by the ACM Committee
on Computers and Public Policy.
State Public Interest Research
Groups (PIRGs)
URL: http://www.pirg.org
The state PIRGs are nonproﬁt, non-
partisan consumer and environmen-
tal watchdog groups that advocate for
better consumer privacy laws, pre-
venting identity theft, and correcting
credit reports. Fact sheets and reports
available on the Web. Site provides
links to state PIRGs. See also U.S.
Public Interest Group.
TransUnion
URL: http://www.tuc.com
E-mail: Web form
Phone: (800) 916-8800
(Credit questions)
P.O. Box 2000
Chester, PA 19022
One of three major credit bureaus. A
person can order credit reports on
the web site, as well as see informa-
tion about privacy rights and policies
and “opting out” of mailing lists.
Transportation Security 
Administration (TSA)
URL: http://www.tsa.dot.gov
Email: 9-AWA-TELLFAA@
faa.gov
400 Seventh Street, SW
Washington, DC 20590
The TSA has taken over responsi-
bility for airport security from the
Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA). It is also responsible for de-
veloping security programs for
ground transportation.
TRUSTe
URL: http://www.truste.org/
Phone: (415) 520-3400
E-mail: Web form
685 Market Street
Suite 560
San Francisco, CA 94105
Organization seeking to create poli-
cies and mechanisms for safe com-
merce on the Internet, including
protection of privacy. Certiﬁes privacy
policies.
U.S. Public Interest Research
Group (U.S. PIR6)
E-mail: uspirg@pirg.org
URL: http://www.uspirg.org
Phone: (202) 546-9707
218 D Street, SE
Washington, DC 20003-1900
The national public interest group;
watchdog for environment and con-
sumer rights. Has become more in-
volved with privacy interests. See also
State Public Interest Groups.
World Wide Web Consortium
URL: http://www.w3.org

Organizations and Agencies
251
E-mail: Web form
Phone: (617) 253-2613
U.S. Ofﬁce:
Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology
32 Vassal Street
Room 32-G515
Cambridge, MA 02139
International industry consortium for
development of protocols and other
standards to “lead the Web to its full
potential.” Includes a section for pri-
vacy and is developing the Platform
for Privacy Preferences, a way to have
web sites uniformly disclose privacy
practices and to allow users (or their
software) to negotiate with them. See
URL: http://www.w3.org/P3P/.


PART III
APPENDICES


FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
ACT (5 U.S.C. 552), 1966
-CITE-
5 USC Sec. 552
-EXPCITE-
TITLE 5—GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION AND EMPLOYEES
PART I—THE AGENCIES GENERALLY
CHAPTER 5—ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
SUBCHAPTER II—ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
-HEAD-
Sec. 552. Public information; agency rules, opinions, orders, records, and pro-
ceedings
-STATUTE-
(a) Each agency shall make available to the public information as follows:
(1) Each agency shall separately state and currently publish in the Federal
Register for the guidance of the public —
(A) descriptions of its central and ﬁeld organization and the established
places at which, the employees (and in the case of a uniformed service, the
members) from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain in-
formation, make submittals or requests, or obtain decisions;
(B) statements of the general course and method by which its functions
are channeled and determined, including the nature and requirements of all
formal and informal procedures available;
(C) rules of procedure, descriptions of forms available or the places at
which forms may be obtained, and instructions as to the scope and contents
of all papers, reports, or examinations;
(D) substantive rules of general applicability adopted as authorized by law,
and statements of general policy or interpretations of general applicability
formulated and adopted by the agency; and
(E) each amendment, revision, or repeal of the foregoing.
Except to the extent that a person has actual and timely notice of the
terms thereof, a person may not in any manner be required to resort to, or
be adversely affected by, a matter required to be published in the Federal
255
APPENDIX A

Register and not so published. For the purpose of this paragraph, matter rea-
sonably available to the class of persons affected thereby is deemed published
in the Federal Register when incorporated by reference therein with the ap-
proval of the Director of the Federal Register.
(2) Each agency, in accordance with published rules, shall make available for
public inspection and copying —
(A) ﬁnal opinions, including concurring and dissenting opinions, as well
as orders, made in the adjudication of cases;
(B) those statements of policy and interpretations which have been
adopted by the agency and are not published in the Federal Register;
(C) administrative staff manuals and instructions to staff that affect a
member of the public;
(D) copies of all records, regardless of form or format, which have been
released to any person under paragraph (3) and which, because of the nature
of their subject matter, the agency determines have become or are likely to
become the subject of subsequent requests for substantially the same records;
and
(E) a general index of the records referred to under subparagraph (D); un-
less the materials are promptly published and copies offered for sale. For
records created on or after November 1, 1996, within one year after such
date, each agency shall make such records available, including by computer
telecommunications or, if computer telecommunications means have not
been established by the agency, by other electronic means. To the extent re-
quired to prevent a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, an
agency may delete identifying details when it makes available or publishes an
opinion, statement of policy, interpretation, staff manual, instruction, or
copies of records referred to in subparagraph (D). However, in each case the
justiﬁcation for the deletion shall be explained fully in writing, and the extent
of such deletion shall be indicated on the portion of the record which is made
available or published, unless including that indication would harm an inter-
est protected by the exemption in subsection (b) under which the deletion is
made. If technically feasible, the extent of the deletion shall be indicated at
the place in the record where the deletion was made. Each agency shall also
maintain and make available for public inspection and copying current in-
dexes providing identifying information for the public as to any matter is-
sued, adopted, or promulgated after July 4, 1967, and required by this
paragraph to be made available or published. Each agency shall promptly
publish, quarterly or more frequently, and distribute (by sale or otherwise)
copies of each index or supplements thereto unless it determines by order
published in the Federal Register that the publication would be unnecessary
and impracticable, in which case the agency shall nonetheless provide copies
of such index on request at a cost not to exceed the direct cost of duplication.
Each agency shall make the index referred to in subparagraph
(E) available by computer telecommunications by December 31, 1999. A
ﬁnal order, opinion, statement of policy, interpretation, or staff manual or in-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
256

struction that affects a member of the public may be relied on, used, or cited
as precedent by an agency against a party other than an agency only if —
(i) it has been indexed and either made available or published as pro-
vided by this paragraph; or
(ii) the party has actual and timely notice of the terms thereof.
(3) (A) Except with respect to the records made available under paragraphs
(1) and (2) of this subsection, each agency, upon any request for records
which (i) reasonably describes such records and (ii) is made in accordance
with published rules stating the time, place, fees (if any), and procedures to
be followed, shall make the records promptly available to any person.
(B) In making any record available to a person under this paragraph, an
agency shall provide the record in any form or format requested by the per-
son if the record is readily reproducible by the agency in that form or format.
Each agency shall make reasonable efforts to maintain its records in forms or
formats that are reproducible for purposes of this section.
(C) In responding under this paragraph to a request for records, an agency
shall make reasonable efforts to search for the records in electronic form or
format, except when such efforts would signiﬁcantly interfere with the oper-
ation of the agency’s automated information system.
(D) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “search” means to review,
manually or by automated means, agency records for the purpose of locating
those records which are responsive to a request.
(4) (A) (i) In order to carry out the provisions of this section, each agency
shall promulgate regulations, pursuant to notice and receipt of public com-
ment, specifying the schedule of fees applicable to the processing of requests
under this section and establishing procedures and guidelines for determin-
ing when such fees should be waived or reduced. Such schedule shall con-
form to the guidelines which shall be promulgated, pursuant to notice and
receipt of public comment, by the Director of the Ofﬁce of Management
and Budget and which shall provide for a uniform schedule of fees for all
agencies.
(ii) Such agency regulations shall provide that —
(I) fees shall be limited to reasonable standard charges for document
search, duplication, and review, when records are requested for com-
mercial use;
(II) fees shall be limited to reasonable standard charges for docu-
ment duplication when records are not sought for commercial use and
the request is made by an educational or noncommercial scientiﬁc in-
stitution, whose purpose is scholarly or scientiﬁc research; or a repre-
sentative of the news media; and
(III) for any request not described in (I) or (II), fees shall be limited
to reasonable standard charges for document search and duplication.
(iii) Documents shall be furnished without any charge or at a charge re-
duced below the fees established under clause (ii) if disclosure of the infor-
mation is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute signiﬁcantly
Appendix A
257

to public understanding of the operations or activities of the government
and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.
(iv) Fee schedules shall provide for the recovery of only the direct costs
of search, duplication, or review. Review costs shall include only the di-
rect costs incurred during the initial examination of a document for the
purposes of determining whether the documents must be disclosed under
this section and for the purposes of withholding any portions exempt
from disclosure under this section. Review costs may not include any costs
incurred in resolving issues of law or policy that may be raised in the
course of processing a request under this section. No fee may be charged
by any agency under this section —
(I) if the costs of routine collection and processing of the fee are
likely to equal or exceed the amount of the fee; or
(II) for any request described in clause (ii) (II) or (III) of this sub-
paragraph for the ﬁrst two hours of search time or for the ﬁrst one
hundred pages of duplication.
(v) No agency may require advance payment of any fee unless the re-
quester has previously failed to pay fees in a timely fashion, or the agency
has determined that the fee will exceed $250.
(vi) Nothing in this subparagraph shall supersede fees chargeable
under a statute speciﬁcally providing for setting the level of fees for par-
ticular types of records.
(vii) In any action by a requester regarding the waiver of fees under this
section, the court shall determine the matter de novo: Provided, That the
court’s review of the matter shall be limited to the record before the
agency.
(B) On complaint, the district court of the United States in the district in
which the complainant resides, or has his principal place of business, or in
which the agency records are situated, or in the District of Columbia, has ju-
risdiction to enjoin the agency from withholding agency records and to order
the production of any agency records improperly withheld from the com-
plainant. In such a case the court shall determine the matter de novo, and
may examine the contents of such agency records in camera to determine
whether such records or any part thereof shall be withheld under any of the
exemptions set forth in subsection (b) of this section, and the burden is on
the agency to sustain its action. In addition to any other matters to which a
court accords substantial weight, a court shall accord substantial weight to an
afﬁdavit of an agency concerning the agency’s determination as to technical
feasibility under paragraph (2) (C) and subsection (b) and reproducibility
under paragraph (3) (B).
(C) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the defendant shall serve
an answer or otherwise plead to any complaint made under this subsection
within thirty days after service upon the defendant of the pleading in which
such complaint is made, unless the court otherwise directs for good cause
shown.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
258

(D) Repealed. Pub. L. 98-620, title IV, Sec. 402(2), Nov. 8, 1984, 98 Stat.
3357.
(E) The court may assess against the United States reasonable attorney
fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred in any case under this sec-
tion in which the complainant has substantially prevailed.
(F) Whenever the court orders the production of any agency records im-
properly withheld from the complainant and assesses against the United
States reasonable attorney fees and other litigation costs, and the court addi-
tionally issues a written ﬁnding that the circumstances surrounding the with-
holding raise questions whether agency personnel acted arbitrarily or
capriciously with respect to the withholding, the Special Counsel shall
promptly initiate a proceeding to determine whether disciplinary action is
warranted against the ofﬁcer or employee who was primarily responsible for
the withholding. The Special Counsel, after investigation and consideration
of the evidence submitted, shall submit his ﬁndings and recommendations to
the administrative authority of the agency concerned and shall send copies of
the ﬁndings and recommendations to the ofﬁcer or employee or his repre-
sentative. The administrative authority shall take the corrective action that
the Special Counsel recommends.
(G) In the event of noncompliance with the order of the court, the district
court may punish for contempt the responsible employee, and in the case of
a uniformed service, the responsible member.
(5) Each agency having more than one member shall maintain and make
available for public inspection a record of the ﬁnal votes of each member in
every agency proceeding.
(6) (A) Each agency, upon any request for records made under paragraph (1),
(2), or (3) of this subsection, shall —
(i) determine within 20 days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
public holidays) after the receipt of any such request whether to comply with
such request and shall immediately notify the person making such request of
such determination and the reasons therefor, and of the right of such person
to appeal to the head of the agency any adverse determination; and
(ii) make a determination with respect to any appeal within twenty days
(excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal public holidays) after the receipt
of such appeal. If on appeal the denial of the request for records is in
whole or in part upheld, the agency shall notify the person making such
request of the provisions for judicial review of that determination under
paragraph (4) of this subsection.
(B) (i) In unusual circumstances as speciﬁed in this subparagraph, the time
limits prescribed in either clause (i) or clause (ii) of subparagraph (A) may be
extended by written notice to the person making such request setting forth
the unusual circumstances for such extension and the date on which a deter-
mination is expected to be dispatched. No such notice shall specify a date
that would result in an extension for more than ten working days, except as
provided in clause (ii) of this subparagraph.
Appendix A
259

(ii) With respect to a request for which a written notice under clause
(i) extends the time limits prescribed under clause (i) of subparagraph (A),
the agency shall notify the person making the request if the request can-
not be processed within the time limit speciﬁed in that clause and shall
provide the person an opportunity to limit the scope of the request so that
it may be processed within that time limit or an opportunity to arrange
with the agency an alternative time frame for processing the request or a
modiﬁed request. Refusal by the person to reasonably modify the request
or arrange such an alternative time frame shall be considered as a factor
in determining whether exceptional circumstances exist for purposes of
subparagraph (C).
(iii) As used in this subparagraph, “unusual circumstances” means, but
only to the extent reasonably necessary to the proper processing of the
particular requests —
(I) the need to search for and collect the requested records from
ﬁeld facilities or other establishments that are separate from the ofﬁce
processing the request;
(II) the need to search for, collect, and appropriately examine a vo-
luminous amount of separate and distinct records which are demanded
in a single request; or
(III) the need for consultation, which shall be conducted with all
practicable speed, with another agency having a substantial interest in
the determination of the request or among two or more components
of the agency having substantial subject-matter interest therein.
(iv) Each agency may promulgate regulations, pursuant to notice and re-
ceipt of public comment, providing for the aggregation of certain requests
by the same requestor, or by a group of requestors acting in concert, if the
agency reasonably believes that such requests actually constitute a single re-
quest, which would otherwise satisfy the unusual circumstances speciﬁed in
this subparagraph, and the requests involve clearly related matters. Multi-
ple requests involving unrelated matters shall not be aggregated.
(C) (i) Any person making a request to any agency for records under para-
graph (1), (2), or (3) of this subsection shall be deemed to have exhausted his
administrative remedies with respect to such request if the agency fails to
comply with the applicable time limit provisions of this paragraph. If the
Government can show exceptional circumstances exist and that the agency is
exercising due diligence in responding to the request, the court may retain
jurisdiction and allow the agency additional time to complete its review of
the records. Upon any determination by an agency to comply with a request
for records, the records shall be made promptly available to such person
making such request. Any notiﬁcation of denial of any request for records
under this subsection shall set forth the names and titles or positions of each
person responsible for the denial of such request.
(ii) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term “exceptional circum-
stances” does not include a delay that results from a predictable agency
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
260

workload of requests under this section, unless the agency demonstrates
reasonable progress in reducing its backlog of pending requests.
(iii) Refusal by a person to reasonably modify the scope of a request or
arrange an alternative time frame for processing a request (or a modiﬁed
request) under clause (ii) after being given an opportunity to do so by the
agency to whom the person made the request shall be considered as a fac-
tor in determining whether exceptional circumstances exist for purposes
of this subparagraph.
(D) (i) Each agency may promulgate regulations, pursuant to notice and
receipt of public comment, providing for multitrack processing of requests
for records based on the amount of work or time (or both) involved in pro-
cessing requests.
(ii) Regulations under this subparagraph may provide a person making
a request that does not qualify for the fastest multitrack processing an op-
portunity to limit the scope of the request in order to qualify for faster
processing.
(iii) This subparagraph shall not be considered to affect the require-
ment under subparagraph (C) to exercise due diligence.
(E) (i) Each agency shall promulgate regulations, pursuant to notice and
receipt of public comment, providing for expedited processing of requests
for records —
(I) in cases in which the person requesting the records demonstrates
a compelling need; and
(II) in other cases determined by the agency.
(ii) Notwithstanding clause (i), regulations under this subparagraph
must ensure —
(I) that a determination of whether to provide expedited processing
shall be made, and notice of the determination shall be provided to the
person making the request, within 10 days after the date of the request;
and
(II) expeditious consideration of administrative appeals of such de-
terminations of whether to provide expedited processing.
(iii) An agency shall process as soon as practicable any request for
records to which the agency has granted expedited processing under this
subparagraph. Agency action to deny or affirm denial of a request for ex-
pedited processing pursuant to this subparagraph, and failure by an
agency to respond in a timely manner to such a request shall be subject
to judicial review under paragraph (4), except that the judicial review
shall be based on the record before the agency at the time of the deter-
mination.
(iv) A district court of the United States shall not have jurisdiction to
review an agency denial of expedited processing of a request for records
after the agency has provided a complete response to the request.
(v) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term “compelling need”
means —
Appendix A
261

(I) that a failure to obtain requested records on an expedited basis
under this paragraph could reasonably be expected to pose an immi-
nent threat to the life or physical safety of an individual; or
(II) with respect to a request made by a person primarily engaged in
disseminating information, urgency to inform the public concerning ac-
tual or alleged Federal Government activity.
(vi) A demonstration of a compelling need by a person making a re-
quest for expedited processing shall be made by a statement certiﬁed by
such person to be true and correct to the best of such person’s knowledge
and belief.
(F) In denying a request for records, in whole or in part, an agency shall
make a reasonable effort to estimate the volume of any requested matter the
provision of which is denied, and shall provide any such estimate to the per-
son making the request, unless providing such estimate would harm an in-
terest protected by the exemption in subsection (b) pursuant to which the
denial is made.
(b) This section does not apply to matters that are —
(1) (A) speciﬁcally authorized under criteria established by an Executive
order to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or foreign policy
and (B) are in fact properly classiﬁed pursuant to such Executive order;
(2) related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an agency;
(3) speciﬁcally exempted from disclosure by statute (other than section 552b
of this title), provided that such statute (A) requires that the matters be with-
held from the public in such a manner as to leave no discretion on the issue,
or (B) establishes particular criteria for withholding or refers to particular
types of matters to be withheld;
(4) trade secrets and commercial or ﬁnancial information obtained from a
person and privileged or conﬁdential;
(5) inter-agency or intra-agency memorandums or letters which would not
be available by law to a party other than an agency in litigation with the
agency;
(6) personnel and medical ﬁles and similar ﬁles the disclosure of which would
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;
(7) records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes, but only
to the extent that the production of such law enforcement records or infor-
mation (A) could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement pro-
ceedings, (B) would deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or an impartial
adjudication, (C) could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted
invasion of personal privacy, (D) could reasonably be expected to disclose the
identity of a conﬁdential source, including a State, local, or foreign agency or
authority or any private institution which furnished information on a conﬁ-
dential basis, and, in the case of a record or information compiled by crimi-
nal law enforcement authority in the course of a criminal investigation or by
an agency conducting a lawful national security intelligence investigation, in-
formation furnished by a conﬁdential source, (E) would disclose techniques
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
262

and procedures for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions, or would
disclose guidelines for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions if such
disclosure could reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the law, or
(F) could reasonably be expected to endanger the life or physical safety of any
individual;
(8) contained in or related to examination, operating, or condition reports
prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of an agency responsible for the reg-
ulation or supervision of ﬁnancial institutions; or
(9) geological and geophysical information and data, including maps, con-
cerning wells.
Any reasonably segregable portion of a record shall be provided to any person
requesting such record after deletion of the portions which are exempt under
this subsection. The amount of information deleted shall be indicated on the re-
leased portion of the record, unless including that indication would harm an in-
terest protected by the exemption in this subsection under which the deletion is
made. If technically feasible, the amount of the information deleted shall be in-
dicated at the place in the record where such deletion is made.
(c) (1) Whenever a request is made which involves access to records de-
scribed in subsection (b) (7) (A) and —
(A) the investigation or proceeding involves a possible violation of crimi-
nal law; and
(B) there is reason to believe that (i) the subject of the investigation or
proceeding is not aware of its pendency, and (ii) disclosure of the existence of
the records could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement pro-
ceedings, the agency may, during only such time as that circumstance con-
tinues, treat the records as not subject to the requirements of this section.
(2) Whenever informant records maintained by a criminal law enforcement
agency under an informant’s name or personal identiﬁer are requested by a
third party according to the informant’s name or personal identiﬁer, the
agency may treat the records as not subject to the requirements of this sec-
tion unless the informant’s status as an informant has been ofﬁcially con-
ﬁrmed.
(3) Whenever a request is made which involves access to records maintained
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation pertaining to foreign intelligence or
counterintelligence, or international terrorism, and the existence of the
records is classiﬁed information as provided in subsection (b) (1), the Bureau
may, as long as the existence of the records remains classiﬁed information,
treat the records as not subject to the requirements of this section.
(d) This section does not authorize withholding of information or limit
the availability of records to the public, except as speciﬁcally stated in this
section. This section is not authority to withhold information from Con-
gress.
(e) (1) On or before February 1 of each year, each agency shall submit
to the Attorney General of the United States a report which shall cover
the preceding ﬁscal year and which shall include —
Appendix A
263

(A) the number of determinations made by the agency not to comply with
requests for records made to such agency under subsection (a) and the rea-
sons for each such determination;
(B) (i) the number of appeals made by persons under subsection (a) (6), the
result of such appeals, and the reason for the action upon each appeal that re-
sults in a denial of information; and
(ii) a complete list of all statutes that the agency relies upon to autho-
rize the agency to withhold information under subsection (b) (3), to with-
hold information under each such statute, and a concise description a
description of whether a court has upheld the decision of the agency to
withhold information under each such statute, and a concise description
of the scope of any information withheld;
(C) the number of requests for records pending before the agency as of
September 30 of the preceding year, and the median number of days that
such requests had been pending before the agency as of that date;
(D) the number of requests for records received by the agency and the
number of requests which the agency processed;
(E) the median number of days taken by the agency to process different
types of requests;
(F) the total amount of fees collected by the agency for processing re-
quests; and
(G) the number of full-time staff of the agency devoted to processing re-
quests for records under this section, and the total amount expended by the
agency for processing such requests.
(2) Each agency shall make each such report available to the public including
by computer telecommunications, or if computer telecommunications means
have not been established by the agency, by other electronic means.
(3) The Attorney General of the United States shall make each report which
has been made available by electronic means available at a single electronic
access point. The Attorney General of the United States shall notify the
Chairman and ranking minority member of the Committee on Government
Reform and Oversight of the House of Representatives and the Chairman
and ranking minority member of the Committees on Governmental Affairs
and the Judiciary of the Senate, no later than April 1 of the year in which
each such report is issued, that such reports are available by electronic means.
(4) The Attorney General of the United States, in consultation with the Di-
rector of the Ofﬁce of Management and Budget, shall develop reporting and
performance guidelines in connection with reports required by this subsec-
tion by October 1, 1997, and may establish additional requirements for such
reports as the Attorney General determines may be useful.
(5) The Attorney General of the United States shall submit an annual report
on or before April 1 of each calendar year which shall include for the prior
calendar year a listing of the number of cases arising under this section, the
exemption involved in each case, the disposition of such case, and the cost,
fees, and penalties assessed under subparagraphs (E), (F), and (G) of subsec-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
264

tion (a) (4). Such report shall also include a description of the efforts under-
taken by the Department of Justice to encourage agency compliance with
this section.
(f) For purposes of this section, the term —
(1) “agency” as deﬁned in section 551(1) of this title includes any executive
department, military department, Government corporation, Government
controlled corporation, or other establishment in the executive branch of the
Government (including the Executive Ofﬁce of the President), or any inde-
pendent regulatory agency; and
(2) “record” and any other term used in this section in reference to informa-
tion includes any information that would be an agency record subject to the
requirements of this section when maintained by an agency in any format, in-
cluding an electronic format.
(g) The head of each agency shall prepare and make publicly available
upon request, reference material or a guide for requesting records or in-
formation from the agency, subject to the exemptions in subsection (b),
including —
(1) an index of all major information systems of the agency;
(2) a description of major information and record locator systems maintained
by the agency; and
(3) a handbook for obtaining various types and categories of public informa-
tion from the agency pursuant to chapter 35 of title 44, and under this sec-
tion.
-SOURCE-
(Pub. L. 89–554, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 383; Pub. L. 90–23, Sec. 1, June 5,
1967, 81 Stat. 54; Pub. L. 93–502, Sec. 1–3, Nov. 21, 1974, 88 Stat. 1561–1564;
Pub. L. 94–409, Sec. 5(b), Sept. 13, 1976, 90 Stat. 1247; Pub. L. 95–454, title
IX, Sec. 906(a)(10), Oct. 13, 1978, 92 Stat. 1225; Pub. L. 98–620, title IV, Sec.
402(2), Nov. 8, 1984, 98 Stat. 3357; Pub. L. 99–570, title I, Sec. 1802, 1803,
Oct. 27, 1986, 100 Stat. 3207–48, 3207–49; Pub. L. 104–231, Sec. 3–11, Oct. 2,
1996, 110 Stat. 3049–3054.)
Appendix A
265

APPENDIX B
U.S. SUPREME COURT RULING:
KATZ V. UNITED STATES, 1967
KATZ V. UNITED STATES CERTIORARI
TO THE UNITED STATES COURT 
OF APPEALS FOR THE NINTH
CIRCUIT. NO. 35.
Argued October 17, 1967.
Decided December 18, 1967.
Petitioner was convicted under an indictment charging him with transmitting
wagering information by telephone across state lines in violation of 18 U.S.C.
1084. Evidence of petitioner’s end of the conversations, overheard by FBI
agents who had attached an electronic listening and recording device to the out-
side of the telephone booth from which the calls were made, was introduced at
the trial. The Court of Appeals afﬁrmed the conviction, ﬁnding that there was
no Fourth Amendment violation since there was “no physical entrance into the
area occupied by” petitioner. Held:
1. The Government’s eavesdropping activities violated the privacy upon which
petitioner justiﬁably relied while using the telephone booth and thus consti-
tuted a “search and seizure” within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. Pp.
350–353.
(a) The Fourth Amendment governs not only the seizure of tangible items but
extends as well to the recording of oral statements. Silverman v. United States,
365 U.S. 505, 511. P. 353.
(b) Because the Fourth Amendment protects people rather than places, its reach
cannot turn on the presence or absence of a physical intrusion into any given en-
closure. The “trespass” doctrine of Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438, and
Goldman v. United States, 316 U.S. 129, is no longer controlling. Pp. 351, 353.
2. Although the surveillance in this case may have been so narrowly circum-
scribed that it could constitutionally have been authorized in advance, it was
266

not in fact conducted pursuant to the warrant procedure which is a constitu-
tional precondition of such electronic surveillance. Pp. 354–359. 369 F.2d 130,
reversed.
Burton Marks and Harvey A. Schneider argued the cause and ﬁled briefs for pe-
titioner. [389 U.S. 347, 348]
John S. Martin, Jr., argued the cause for the United States. With him on the
brief were Acting Solicitor General Spritzer, Assistant Attorney General Vinson
and Beatrice Rosenberg.
MR. JUSTICE STEWART delivered the opinion of the Court.
The petitioner was convicted in the District Court for the Southern District
of California under an eight-count indictment charging him with transmit-
ting wagering information by telephone from Los Angeles to Miami and
Boston, in violation of a federal statute. At trial the Government was permit-
ted, over the petitioner’s objection, to introduce evidence of the petitioner’s
end of telephone conversations, overheard by FBI agents who had attached
an electronic listening and recording device to the outside of the public tele-
phone booth from which he had placed his calls. In affirming his conviction,
the Court of Appeals rejected the contention that the recordings had been
obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment, [389 U.S. 347, 349] because
“[t]here was no physical entrance into the area occupied by [the petitioner].”
We granted certiorari in order to consider the constitutional questions thus
presented.
The petitioner has phrased those questions as follows:
“A. Whether a public telephone booth is a constitutionally protected area so
that evidence obtained by attaching an electronic listening recording device to
the top of such a booth is obtained in violation of the right to privacy of the user
of the booth. [389 U.S. 347, 350]
“B. Whether physical penetration of a constitutionally protected area is neces-
sary before a search and seizure can be said to be violative of the Fourth Amend-
ment to the United States Constitution.”
We decline to adopt this formulation of the issues. In the ﬁrst place, the correct
solution of Fourth Amendment problems is not necessarily promoted by incan-
tation of the phrase “constitutionally protected area.” Secondly, the Fourth
Amendment cannot be translated into a general constitutional “right to pri-
vacy.” That Amendment protects individual privacy against certain kinds of
governmental intrusion, but its protections go further, and often have nothing
to do with privacy at all. Other provisions of the Constitution protect personal
privacy from other forms of governmental invasion. But the protection of a per-
son’s general right to privacy—his right to be let alone by other people—is, like
the [389 U.S. 347, 351] protection of his property and of his very life, left largely
to the law of the individual States.
Appendix B
267

Because of the misleading way the issues have been formulated, the parties
have attached great signiﬁcance to the characterization of the telephone booth
from which the petitioner placed his calls. The petitioner has strenuously argued
that the booth was a “constitutionally protected area.” The Government has
maintained with equal vigor that it was not. But this effort to decide whether or
not a given “area,” viewed in the abstract, is “constitutionally protected” deﬂects
attention from the problem presented by this case. For the Fourth Amendment
protects people, not places. What a person knowingly exposes to the public, even
in his own home or ofﬁce, is not a subject of Fourth Amendment protection. See
Lewis v. United States, 385 U.S. 206, 210; United States v. Lee, 274 U.S. 559,
563. But what he seeks to preserve as private, even in an area accessible to the
public, may be constitutionally protected. [389 U.S. 347, 352] See Rios v. United
States, 364 U.S. 253; Ex parte Jackson, 96 U.S. 727, 733.
The Government stresses the fact that the telephone booth from which the
petitioner made his calls was constructed partly of glass, so that he was as visi-
ble after he entered it as he would have been if he had remained outside. But
what he sought to exclude when he entered the booth was not the intruding
eye—it was the uninvited ear. He did not shed his right to do so simply because
he made his calls from a place where he might be seen. No less than an individ-
ual in a business ofﬁce, in a friend’s apartment, or in a taxicab, a person in a tele-
phone booth may rely upon the protection of the Fourth Amendment. One who
occupies it, shuts the door behind him, and pays the toll that permits him to
place a call is surely entitled to assume that the words he utters into the mouth-
piece will not be broadcast to the world. To read the Constitution more nar-
rowly is to ignore the vital role that the public telephone has come to play in
private communication.
The Government contends, however, that the activities of its agents in this
case should not be tested by Fourth Amendment requirements, for the surveil-
lance technique they employed involved no physical penetration of the tele-
phone booth from which the petitioner placed his calls. It is true that the
absence of such penetration was at one time thought to foreclose further Fourth
Amendment inquiry, Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438, 457, 464,466;
Goldman v. United States, 316 U.S. 129,134–136, for that Amendment was
thought to limit only searches and seizures of tangible [389 U.S. 347, 353] prop-
erty. But “[t]he premise that property interests control the right of the Govern-
ment to search and seize has been discredited.” Warden v. Hayden, 387 U.S.
294, 304. Thus, although a closely divided Court supposed in Olmstead that
surveillance without any trespass and without the seizure of any material object
fell outside the ambit of the Constitution, we have since departed from the nar-
row view on which that decision rested. Indeed, we have expressly held that the
Fourth Amendment governs not only the seizure of tangible items, but extends
as well to the recording of oral statements, overheard without any “technical
trespass under . . . local property law.” Silverman v. United States, 365 U.S. 505,
511. Once this much is acknowledged, and once it is recognized that the Fourth
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
268

Amendment protects people—and not simply “areas”—against unreasonable
searches and seizures, it becomes clear that the reach of that Amendment can-
not turn upon the presence or absence of a physical intrusion into any given en-
closure.
We conclude that the underpinnings of Olmstead and Goldman have been
so eroded by our subsequent decisions that the “trespass” doctrine there enun-
ciated can no longer be regarded as controlling. The Government’s activities in
electronically listening to and recording the petitioner’s words violated the pri-
vacy upon which he justiﬁably relied while using the telephone booth and thus
constituted a “search and seizure” within the meaning of the Fourth Amend-
ment. The fact that the electronic device employed to achieve that end did not
happen to penetrate the wall of the booth can have no constitutional signiﬁ-
cance. [389 U.S. 347, 354]
The question remaining for decision, then, is whether the search and
seizure conducted in this case complied with constitutional standards. In that
regard, the Government’s position is that its agents acted in an entirely defen-
sible manner: They did not begin their electronic surveillance until investiga-
tion of the petitioner’s activities had established a strong probability that he was
using the telephone in question to transmit gambling information to persons
in other States, in violation of federal law. Moreover, the surveillance was lim-
ited, both in scope and in duration, to the speciﬁc purpose of establishing the
contents of the petitioner’s unlawful telephonic communications. The agents
conﬁned their surveillance to the brief periods during which he used the tele-
phone booth, and they took great care to overhear only the conversations of
the petitioner himself.
Accepting this account of the Government’s actions as accurate, it is clear
that this surveillance was so narrowly circumscribed that a duly authorized mag-
istrate, properly notiﬁed of the need for such investigation, speciﬁcally in-
formed of the basis on which it was to proceed, and clearly apprised of the
precise intrusion it would entail, could constitutionally have authorized, with
appropriate safeguards, the very limited search and seizure that the Government
asserts in fact took place. Only last Term was sustained the validity of [389 U.S.
347, 355] such an authorization, holding that, under sufﬁciently “precise and
discriminate circumstances,” a federal court may empower government agents
to employ a concealed electronic device “for the narrow and particularized pur-
pose of ascertaining the truth of the . . . allegations” of a “detailed factual afﬁ-
davit alleging the commission of a speciﬁc criminal offense.” Osborn v. United
States, 385 U.S. 323, 329–330. Discussing that holding, the Court in Berger v.
New York, 388 U.S. 41, said that “the order authorizing the use of the elec-
tronic device” in Osborn “afforded similar protections to those . . . of conven-
tional warrants authorizing the seizure of tangible evidence.” Through those
protections, “no greater invasion of privacy was permitted than was necessary
under the circumstances.” Id., at 57. Here, too, a similar [389 U.S. 347, 356] ju-
269
Appendix B

dicial order could have accommodated “the legitimate needs of law enforce-
ment” by authorizing the carefully limited use of electronic surveillance.
The Government urges that, because its agents relied upon the decisions in
Olmstead and Goldman, and because they did no more here than they might
properly have done with prior judicial sanction, we should retroactively validate
their conduct. That we cannot do. It is apparent that the agents in this case
acted with restraint. Yet the inescapable fact is that this restraint was imposed by
the agents themselves, not by a judicial ofﬁcer. They were not required, before
commencing the search, to present their estimate of probable cause for de-
tached scrutiny by a neutral magistrate. They were not compelled, during the
conduct of the search itself, to observe precise limits established in advance by
a speciﬁc court order. Nor were they directed, after the search had been com-
pleted, to notify the authorizing magistrate in detail of all that had been seized.
In the absence of such safeguards, this Court has never sustained a search upon
the sole ground that ofﬁcers reasonably expected to ﬁnd evidence of a particu-
lar crime and voluntarily conﬁned their activities to the least intrusive [389 U.S.
347, 357] means consistent with that end. Searches conducted without warrants
have been held unlawful “notwithstanding facts unquestionably showing prob-
able cause,” Agnello v. United States, 269 U.S. 20, 33, for the Constitution re-
quires “that the deliberate, impartial judgment of a judicial ofﬁcer . . . be
interposed between the citizen and the police . . .” Wong Sun v. United States,
371 U.S. 471, 481–482. “Over and again this Court has emphasized that the
mandate of the [Fourth] Amendment requires adherence to judicial processes,”
United States v. Jeffers, 342 U.S. 48, 51, and that searches conducted outside
the judicial process, without prior approval by judge or magistrate, are per se
unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment—subject only to a few speciﬁcally
established and well-delineated exceptions.
It is difﬁcult to imagine how any of those exceptions could ever apply to the
sort of search and seizure involved in this case. Even electronic surveillance sub-
stantially contemporaneous with an individual’s arrest could hardly be deemed
an “incident” of that arrest. [389 U.S. 347, 358] Nor could the use of electronic
surveillance without prior authorization be justiﬁed on grounds of “hot pur-
suit.” And, of course, the very nature of electronic surveillance precludes its use
pursuant to the suspect’s consent.
The Government does not question these basic principles. Rather, it urges
the creation of a new exception to cover this case. It argues that surveillance of
a telephone booth should be exempted from the usual requirement of advance
authorization by a magistrate upon a showing of probable cause. We cannot
agree. Omission of such authorization “bypasses the safeguards provided by an
objective predetermination of probable cause, and substitutes instead the far less
reliable procedure of an after-the-event justiﬁcation for the . . . search, too likely
to be subtly inﬂuenced by the familiar shortcomings of hindsight judgment.”
Beck v. Ohio, 379 U.S. 89, 96.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
270

And bypassing a neutral predetermination of the scope of a search leaves indi-
viduals secure from Fourth Amendment [389 U.S. 347, 359] violations “only in
the discretion of the police.” Id., at 97.
These considerations do not vanish when the search in question is trans-
ferred from the setting of a home, an ofﬁce, or a hotel room to that of a tele-
phone booth. Wherever a man may be, he is entitled to know that he will
remain free from unreasonable searches and seizures. The government agents
here ignored “the procedure of antecedent justiﬁcation . . . that is central to the
Fourth Amendment,” a procedure that we hold to be a constitutional precondi-
tion of the kind of electronic surveillance involved in this case. Because the sur-
veillance here failed to meet that condition, and because it led to the petitioner’s
conviction, the judgment must be reversed. It is so ordered.
MR. JUSTICE MARSHALL took no part in the consideration or decision of
this case.
[All Footnotes and Footnote references have been omitted.]
271
Appendix B

PRIVACY ACT OF 1974
-CITE-
5 USC Sec. 552a
-EXPCITE-
TITLE 5—GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION AND EMPLOYEES
PART I—THE AGENCIES GENERALLY
CHAPTER 5—ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
SUBCHAPTER II—ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
-HEAD-
Sec. 552a. Records maintained on individuals
-STATUTE-
(a) Deﬁnitions.—For purposes of this section —
(1) the term “agency” means agency as deﬁned in section 552(e) (FOOT-
NOTE 1) of this title;
(FOOTNOTE 1) See References in Text note below.
(2) the term “individual” means a citizen of the United States or an alien law-
fully admitted for permanent residence;
(3) the term “maintain” includes maintain, collect, use, or disseminate;
(4) the term “record” means any item, collection, or grouping of information
about an individual that is maintained by an agency, including, but not limited
to, his education, ﬁnancial transactions, medical history, and criminal or em-
ployment history and that contains his name, or the identifying number, sym-
bol, or other identifying particular assigned to the individual, such as a ﬁnger or
voice print or a photograph;
(5) the term “system of records” means a group of any records under the con-
trol of any agency from which information is retrieved by the name of the indi-
vidual or by some identifying number, symbol, or other identifying particular
assigned to the individual;
(6) the term “statistical record” means a record in a system of records main-
tained for statistical research or reporting purposes only and not used in whole
or in part in making any determination about an identiﬁable individual, except
as provided by section 8 of title 13;
(7) the term “routine use” means, with respect to the disclosure of a record,
the use of such record for a purpose which is compatible with the purpose for
which it was collected;
272
APPENDIX C

(8) the term “matching program” —
(A) means any computerized comparison of —
(i) two or more automated systems of records or a system of records
with non-Federal records for the purpose of —
(I) establishing or verifying the eligibility of, or continuing compli-
ance with statutory and regulatory requirements by, applicants for, re-
cipients or beneﬁciaries of, participants in, or providers of services with
respect to, cash or in-kind assistance or payments under Federal bene-
ﬁt programs, or
(II) recouping payments or delinquent debts under such Federal
beneﬁt programs, or
(ii) two or more automated Federal personnel or payroll systems of
records or a system of Federal personnel or payroll records with non-
Federal records,
(B) but does not include —
(i) matches performed to produce aggregate statistical data without any
personal identiﬁers;
(ii) matches performed to support any research or statistical project,
the speciﬁc data of which may not be used to make decisions concerning
the rights, beneﬁts, or privileges of speciﬁc individuals;
(iii) matches performed, by an agency (or component thereof) which
performs as its principal function any activity pertaining to the enforce-
ment of criminal laws, subsequent to the initiation of a speciﬁc criminal
or civil law enforcement investigation of a named person or persons for
the purpose of gathering evidence against such person or persons;
(iv) matches of tax information (I) pursuant to section 6103(d) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, (II) for purposes of tax administration as
deﬁned in section 6103(b)(4) of such Code, (III) for the purpose of inter-
cepting a tax refund due an individual under authority granted by section
404(e), 464, or 1137 of the Social Security Act; or (IV) for the purpose of
intercepting a tax refund due an individual under any other tax refund in-
tercept program authorized by statute which has been determined by the
Director of the Ofﬁce of Management and Budget to contain veriﬁcation,
notice, and hearing requirements that are substantially similar to the pro-
cedures in section 1137 of the Social Security Act;
(v) matches —
(I) using records predominantly relating to Federal personnel, that
are performed for routine administrative purposes (subject to guidance
provided by the Director of the Ofﬁce of Management and Budget
pursuant to subsection (v)); or
(II) conducted by an agency using only records from systems of
records maintained by that agency; if the purpose of the match is not
to take any adverse ﬁnancial, personnel, disciplinary, or other adverse
action against Federal personnel;
(vi) matches performed for foreign counterintelligence purposes or to
produce background checks for security clearances of Federal personnel
or Federal contractor personnel; or
Appendix C
273

(vii) matches performed incident to a levy described in section
6103(k)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
(9) the term “recipient agency” means any agency, or contractor thereof, re-
ceiving records contained in a system of records from a source agency for use in
a matching program;
(10) the term “non-Federal agency” means any State or local government, or
agency thereof, which receives records contained in a system of records from a
source agency for use in a matching program;
(11) the term “source agency” means any agency which discloses records
contained in a system of records to be used in a matching program, or any State
or local government, or agency thereof, which discloses records to be used in a
matching program;
(12) the term “Federal beneﬁt program” means any program administered or
funded by the Federal Government, or by any agent or State on behalf of the
Federal Government, providing cash or in-kind assistance in the form of pay-
ments, grants, loans, or loan guarantees to individuals; and
(13) the term “Federal personnel” means ofﬁcers and employees of the Gov-
ernment of the United States, members of the uniformed services (including
members of the Reserve Components), individuals entitled to receive immedi-
ate or deferred retirement beneﬁts under any retirement program of the Gov-
ernment of the United States (including survivor beneﬁts).
(b) Conditions of Disclosure.—No agency shall disclose any record which is
contained in a system of records by any means of communication to any person,
or to another agency, except pursuant to a written request by, or with the prior
written consent of, the individual to whom the record pertains, unless disclosure
of the record would be —
(1) to those ofﬁcers and employees of the agency which maintains the record
who have a need for the record in the performance of their duties;
(2) required under section 552 of this title;
(3) for a routine use as deﬁned in subsection (a)(7) of this section and de-
scribed under subsection (e)(4)(D) of this section;
(4) to the Bureau of the Census for purposes of planning or carrying out a
census or survey or related activity pursuant to the provisions of title 13;
(5) to a recipient who has provided the agency with advance adequate writ-
ten assurance that the record will be used solely as a statistical research or re-
porting record, and the record is to be transferred in a form that is not
individually identiﬁable;
(6) to the National Archives and Records Administration as a record which has
sufﬁcient historical or other value to warrant its continued preservation by the
United States Government, or for evaluation by the Archivist of the United States
or the designee of the Archivist to determine whether the record has such value;
(7) to another agency or to an instrumentality of any governmental jurisdic-
tion within or under the control of the United States for a civil or criminal law
enforcement activity if the activity is authorized by law, and if the head of the
agency or instrumentality has made a written request to the agency which main-
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
274

tains the record specifying the particular portion desired and the law enforce-
ment activity for which the record is sought;
(8) to a person pursuant to a showing of compelling circumstances affecting
the health or safety of an individual if upon such disclosure notiﬁcation is trans-
mitted to the last known address of such individual;
(9) to either House of Congress, or, to the extent of matter within its juris-
diction, any committee or subcommittee thereof, any joint committee of Con-
gress or subcommittee of any such joint committee;
(10) to the Comptroller General, or any of his authorized representatives,
in the course of the performance of the duties of the General Accounting
Office;
(11) pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or
(12) to a consumer reporting agency in accordance with section 3711(e) of
title 31.
(c) Accounting of Certain Disclosures.—Each agency, with respect to each sys-
tem of records under its control, shall —
(1) except for disclosures made under subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this sec-
tion, keep an accurate accounting of —
(A) the date, nature, and purpose of each disclosure of a record to any per-
son or to another agency made under subsection (b) of this section; and
(B) the name and address of the person or agency to whom the disclosure
is made;
(2) retain the accounting made under paragraph (1) of this subsection for at
least ﬁve years or the life of the record, whichever is longer, after the disclosure
for which the accounting is made;
(3) except for disclosures made under subsection (b)(7) of this section, make
the accounting made under paragraph (1) of this subsection available to the in-
dividual named in the record at his request; and
(4) inform any person or other agency about any correction or notation of
dispute made by the agency in accordance with subsection (d) of this section
of any record that has been disclosed to the person or agency if an accounting
of the disclosure was made.
(d) Access to Records.—Each agency that maintains a system of records shall —
(1) upon request by any individual to gain access to his record or to any in-
formation pertaining to him which is contained in the system, permit him and
upon his request, a person of his own choosing to accompany him, to review the
record and have a copy made of all or any portion thereof in a form compre-
hensible to him, except that the agency may require the individual to furnish a
written statement authorizing discussion of that individual’s record in the ac-
companying person’s presence;
(2) permit the individual to request amendment of a record pertaining to him
and —
(A) not later than 10 days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal public
holidays) after the date of receipt of such request, acknowledge in writing
such receipt; and
Appendix C
275

(B) promptly, either —
(i) make any correction of any portion thereof which the individual be-
lieves is not accurate, relevant, timely, or complete; or
(ii) inform the individual of its refusal to amend the record in accor-
dance with his request, the reason for the refusal, the procedures estab-
lished by the agency for the individual to request a review of that refusal
by the head of the agency or an ofﬁcer designated by the head of the
agency, and the name and business address of that ofﬁcial;
(3) permit the individual who disagrees with the refusal of the agency to amend
his record to request a review of such refusal, and not later than 30 days (exclud-
ing Saturdays, Sundays, and legal public holidays) from the date on which the in-
dividual requests such review, complete such review and make a ﬁnal
determination unless, for good cause shown, the head of the agency extends such
30-day period; and if, after his review, the reviewing ofﬁcial also refuses to amend
the record in accordance with the request, permit the individual to ﬁle with the
agency a concise statement setting forth the reasons for his disagreement with the
refusal of the agency, and notify the individual of the provisions for judicial review
of the reviewing ofﬁcial’s determination under subsection (g)(1)(A) of this section;
(4) in any disclosure, containing information about which the individual has
ﬁled a statement of disagreement, occurring after the ﬁling of the statement
under paragraph (3) of this subsection, clearly note any portion of the record
which is disputed and provide copies of the statement and, if the agency deems
it appropriate, copies of a concise statement of the reasons of the agency for not
making the amendments requested, to persons or other agencies to whom the
disputed record has been disclosed; and
(5) nothing in this section shall allow an individual access to any information
compiled in reasonable anticipation of a civil action or proceeding.
(e) Agency Requirements.—Each agency that maintains a system of records
shall —
(1) maintain in its records only such information about an individual as is rel-
evant and necessary to accomplish a purpose of the agency required to be ac-
complished by statute or by executive order of the President;
(2) collect information to the greatest extent practicable directly from the
subject individual when the information may result in adverse determinations
about an individual’s rights, beneﬁts, and privileges under Federal programs;
(3) inform each individual whom it asks to supply information, on the form
which it uses to collect the information or on a separate form that can be re-
tained by the individual —
(A) the authority (whether granted by statute, or by executive order of the
President) which authorizes the solicitation of the information and whether
disclosure of such information is mandatory or voluntary;
(B) the principal purpose or purposes for which the information is in-
tended to be used;
(C) the routine uses which may be made of the information, as published
pursuant to paragraph (4)(D) of this subsection; and
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
276

(D) the effects on him, if any, of not providing all or any part of the re-
quested information;
(4) subject to the provisions of paragraph (11) of this subsection, publish in
the Federal Register upon establishment or revision a notice of the existence
and character of the system of records, which notice shall include —
(A) the name and location of the system;
(B) the categories of individuals on whom records are maintained in the
system;
(C) the categories of records maintained in the system;
(D) each routine use of the records contained in the system, including the
categories of users and the purpose of such use;
(E) the policies and practices of the agency regarding storage, retrievabil-
ity, access controls, retention, and disposal of the records;
(F) the title and business address of the agency ofﬁcial who is responsible
for the system of records;
(G) the agency procedures whereby an individual can be notiﬁed at his re-
quest if the system of records contains a record pertaining to him;
(H) the agency procedures whereby an individual can be notiﬁed at his re-
quest how he can gain access to any record pertaining to him contained in
the system of records, and how he can contest its content; and
(I) the categories of sources of records in the system;
(5) maintain all records which are used by the agency in making any deter-
mination about any individual with such accuracy, relevance, timeliness, and
completeness as is reasonably necessary to assure fairness to the individual in the
determination;
(6) prior to disseminating any record about an individual to any person other
than an agency, unless the dissemination is made pursuant to subsection (b)(2)
of this section, make reasonable efforts to assure that such records are accurate,
complete, timely, and relevant for agency purposes;
(7) maintain no record describing how any individual exercises rights guar-
anteed by the First Amendment unless expressly authorized by statute or by the
individual about whom the record is maintained or unless pertinent to and
within the scope of an authorized law enforcement activity;
(8) make reasonable efforts to serve notice on an individual when any record
on such individual is made available to any person under compulsory legal
process when such process becomes a matter of public record;
(9) establish rules of conduct for persons involved in the design, develop-
ment, operation, or maintenance of any system of records, or in maintaining any
record, and instruct each such person with respect to such rules and the re-
quirements of this section, including any other rules and procedures adopted
pursuant to this section and the penalties for noncompliance;
(10) establish appropriate administrative, technical, and physical safeguards
to insure the security and conﬁdentiality of records and to protect against any
anticipated threats or hazards to their security or integrity which could result in
substantial harm, embarrassment, inconvenience, or unfairness to any individ-
ual on whom information is maintained;
Appendix C
277

(11) at least 30 days prior to publication of information under paragraph (4)(D)
of this subsection, publish in the Federal Register notice of any new use or in-
tended use of the information in the system, and provide an opportunity for inter-
ested persons to submit written data, views, or arguments to the agency; and
(12) if such agency is a recipient agency or a source agency in a matching
program with a non-Federal agency, with respect to any establishment or revi-
sion of a matching program, at least 30 days prior to conducting such program,
publish in the Federal Register notice of such establishment or revision.
(f) Agency Rules.—In order to carry out the provisions of this section, each
agency that maintains a system of records shall promulgate rules, in accordance
with the requirements (including general notice) of section 553 of this title,
which shall —
(1) establish procedures whereby an individual can be notiﬁed in response to
his request if any system of records named by the individual contains a record
pertaining to him;
(2) deﬁne reasonable times, places, and requirements for identifying an indi-
vidual who requests his record or information pertaining to him before the
agency shall make the record or information available to the individual;
(3) establish procedures for the disclosure to an individual upon his request
of his record or information pertaining to him, including special procedure, if
deemed necessary, for the disclosure to an individual of medical records, in-
cluding psychological records, pertaining to him;
(4) establish procedures for reviewing a request from an individual concern-
ing the amendment of any record or information pertaining to the individual,
for making a determination on the request, for an appeal within the agency of
an initial adverse agency determination, and for whatever additional means may
be necessary for each individual to be able to exercise fully his rights under this
section; and
(5) establish fees to be charged, if any, to any individual for making copies of
his record, excluding the cost of any search for and review of the record.
The Ofﬁce of the Federal Register shall biennially compile and publish the
rules promulgated under this subsection and agency notices published under
subsection (e)(4) of this section in a form available to the public at low cost.
(g) (1) Civil Remedies.—Whenever any agency
(A) makes a determination under subsection (d)(3) of this section not to
amend an individual’s record in accordance with his request, or fails to make
such review in conformity with that subsection;
(B) refuses to comply with an individual request under subsection (d)(1) of
this section;
(C) fails to maintain any record concerning any individual with such ac-
curacy, relevance, timeliness, and completeness as is necessary to assure fair-
ness in any determination relating to the qualiﬁcations, character, rights, or
opportunities of, or beneﬁts to the individual that may be made on the basis
of such record, and consequently a determination is made which is adverse
to the individual; or
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
278

(D) fails to comply with any other provision of this section, or any rule
promulgated thereunder, in such a way as to have an adverse effect on an in-
dividual, the individual may bring a civil action against the agency, and the
district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction in the matters
under the provisions of this subsection.
(2) (A) In any suit brought under the provisions of subsection (g)(1)(A) of this
section, the court may order the agency to amend the individual’s record in ac-
cordance with his request or in such other way as the court may direct. In such
a case the court shall determine the matter de novo.
(B) The court may assess against the United States reasonable attorney
fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred in any case under this
paragraph in which the complainant has substantially prevailed.
(3) (A) In any suit brought under the provisions of subsection (g)(1)(B) of this
section, the court may enjoin the agency from withholding the records and
order the production to the complainant of any agency records improperly
withheld from him. In such a case the court shall determine the matter de novo,
and may examine the contents of any agency records in camera to determine
whether the records or any portion thereof may be withheld under any of the
exemptions set forth in subsection (k) of this section, and the burden is on the
agency to sustain its action.
(B) The court may assess against the United States reasonable attorney
fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred in any case under this
paragraph in which the complainant has substantially prevailed.
(4) In any suit brought under the provisions of subsection (g)(1)(C) or (D) of
this section in which the court determines that the agency acted in a manner
which was intentional or willful, the United States shall be liable to the individ-
ual in an amount equal to the sum of —
(A) actual damages sustained by the individual as a result of the refusal or
failure, but in no case shall a person entitled to recovery receive less than the
sum of $1,000; and
(B) the costs of the action together with reasonable attorney fees as de-
termined by the court.
(5) An action to enforce any liability created under this section may be
brought in the district court of the United States in the district in which the
complainant resides, or has his principal place of business, or in which the
agency records are situated, or in the District of Columbia, without regard to
the amount in controversy, within two years from the date on which the cause
of action arises, except that where an agency has materially and willfully mis-
represented any information required under this section to be disclosed to an
individual and the information so misrepresented is material to establishment of
the liability of the agency to the individual under this section, the action may be
brought at any time within two years after discovery by the individual of the
misrepresentation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize any
civil action by reason of any injury sustained as the result of a disclosure of a
record prior to September 27, 1975.
Appendix C
279

(h) Rights of Legal Guardians.—For the purposes of this section, the parent of
any minor, or the legal guardian of any individual who has been declared to be
incompetent due to physical or mental incapacity or age by a court of compe-
tent jurisdiction, may act on behalf of the individual.
(i) (1) Criminal Penalties.—Any ofﬁcer or employee of an agency, who by virtue
of his employment or ofﬁcial position, has possession of, or access to, agency
records which contain individually identiﬁable information the disclosure of
which is prohibited by this section or by rules or regulations established there-
under, and who knowing that disclosure of the speciﬁc material is so prohibited,
willfully discloses the material in any manner to any person or agency not enti-
tled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and ﬁned not more than
$5,000.
(2) Any ofﬁcer or employee of any agency who willfully maintains a system
of records without meeting the notice requirements of subsection (e)(4) of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and ﬁned not more than $5,000.
(3) Any person who knowingly and willfully requests or obtains any record
concerning an individual from an agency under false pretenses shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and ﬁned not more than $5,000.
(j) General Exemptions.—The head of any agency may promulgate rules, in ac-
cordance with the requirements (including general notice) of sections 553(b)(1),
(2), and (3), (c), and (e) of this title, to exempt any system of records within the
agency from any part of this section except subsections (b), (c)(1) and (2), (e)(4)(A)
through (F), (e)(6), (7), (9), (10), and (11), and (i) if the system of records is —
(1) maintained by the Central Intelligence Agency; or
(2) maintained by an agency or component thereof which performs as its
principal function any activity pertaining to the enforcement of criminal laws,
including police efforts to prevent, control, or reduce crime or to apprehend
criminals, and the activities of prosecutors, courts, correctional, probation, par-
don, or parole authorities, and which consists of (A) information compiled for
the purpose of identifying individual criminal offenders and alleged offenders
and consisting only of identifying data and notations of arrests, the nature and
disposition of criminal charges, sentencing, conﬁnement, release, and parole
and probation status; (B) information compiled for the purpose of a criminal in-
vestigation, including reports of informants and investigators, and associated
with an identiﬁable individual; or (C) reports identiﬁable to an individual com-
piled at any stage of the process of enforcement of the criminal laws from arrest
or indictment through release from supervision.
At the time rules are adopted under this subsection, the agency shall include in
the statement required under section 553(c) of this title, the reasons why the
system of records is to be exempted from a provision of this section.
(k) Speciﬁc Exemptions.—The head of any agency may promulgate rules, in ac-
cordance with the requirements (including general notice) of sections 553(b)(1),
(2), and (3), (c), and (e) of this title, to exempt any system of records within the
agency from subsections (c)(3), (d), (e)(1), (e)(4)(G), (H), and (I) and (f) of this
section if the system of records is —
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
280

(1) subject to the provisions of section 552(b)(1) of this title;
(2) investigatory material compiled for law enforcement purposes, other than
material within the scope of subsection (j)(2) of this section: Provided, however,
That if any individual is denied any right, privilege, or beneﬁt that he would
otherwise be entitled by Federal law, or for which he would otherwise be eligi-
ble, as a result of the maintenance of such material, such material shall be pro-
vided to such individual, except to the extent that the disclosure of such material
would reveal the identity of a source who furnished information to the Govern-
ment under an express promise that the identity of the source would be held in
conﬁdence, or, prior to the effective date of this section, under an implied
promise that the identity of the source would be held in conﬁdence;
(3) maintained in connection with providing protective services to the President
of the United States or other individuals pursuant to section 3056 of title 18;
(4) required by statute to be maintained and used solely as statistical records;
(5) investigatory material compiled solely for the purpose of determining
suitability, eligibility, or qualiﬁcations for Federal civilian employment, military
service, Federal contracts, or access to classiﬁed information, but only to the ex-
tent that the disclosure of such material would reveal the identity of a source
who furnished information to the Government under an express promise that
the identity of the source would be held in conﬁdence, or, prior to the effective
date of this section, under an implied promise that the identity of the source
would be held in conﬁdence;
(6) testing or examination material used solely to determine individual qual-
iﬁcations for appointment or promotion in the Federal service the disclosure of
which would compromise the objectivity or fairness of the testing or examina-
tion process; or
(7) evaluation material used to determine potential for promotion in the
armed services, but only to the extent that the disclosure of such material would
reveal the identity of a source who furnished information to the Government
under an express promise that the identity of the source would be held in con-
ﬁdence, or, prior to the effective date of this section, under an implied promise
that the identity of the source would be held in conﬁdence.
(1) At the time rules are adopted under this subsection, the agency shall in-
clude in the statement required under section 553(c) of this title, the reasons
why the system of records is to be exempted from a provision of this section.
(l) Archival Records.—Each agency record which is accepted by the Archivist of
the United States for storage, processing, and servicing in accordance with sec-
tion 3103 of title 44 shall, for the purposes of this section, be considered to be
maintained by the agency which deposited the record and shall be subject to the
provisions of this section. The Archivist of the United States shall not disclose
the record except to the agency which maintains the record, or under rules es-
tablished by that agency which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
section.
(2) Each agency record pertaining to an identiﬁable individual which was
transferred to the National Archives of the United States as a record which has
Appendix C
281

sufﬁcient historical or other value to warrant its continued preservation by the
United States Government, prior to the effective date of this section, shall, for
the purposes of this section, be considered to be maintained by the National
Archives and shall not be subject to the provisions of this section, except that a
statement generally describing such records (modeled after the requirements
relating to records subject to subsections (e)(4)(A) through (G) of this section)
shall be published in the Federal Register.
(3) Each agency record pertaining to an identiﬁable individual which is trans-
ferred to the National Archives of the United States as a record which has suf-
ﬁcient historical or other value to warrant its continued preservation by the
United States Government, on or after the effective date of this section, shall,
for the purposes of this section, be considered to be maintained by the National
Archives and shall be exempt from the requirements of this section except sub-
sections (e)(4)(A) through (G) and (e)(9) of this section.
(m) (1) Government Contractors.—When an agency provides by a contract for
the operation by or on behalf of the agency of a system of records to accomplish
an agency function, the agency shall, consistent with its authority, cause the re-
quirements of this section to be applied to such system. For purposes of sub-
section (i) of this section any such contractor and any employee of such
contractor, if such contract is agreed to on or after the effective date of this sec-
tion, shall be considered to be an employee of an agency.
(2) A consumer reporting agency to which a record is disclosed under section
3711(e) of title 31 shall not be considered a contractor for the purposes of this
section.
(n) Mailing Lists.—An individual’s name and address may not be sold or rented
by an agency unless such action is speciﬁcally authorized by law. This provision
shall not be construed to require the withholding of names and addresses oth-
erwise permitted to be made public.
(o) Matching Agreements.—(1) No record which is contained in a system of
records may be disclosed to a recipient agency or non-Federal agency for use
in a computer matching program except pursuant to a written agreement be-
tween the source agency and the recipient agency or non-Federal agency
specifying —
(A) the purpose and legal authority for conducting the program;
(B) the justiﬁcation for the program and the anticipated results, including
a speciﬁc estimate of any savings;
(C) a description of the records that will be matched, including each data
element that will be used, the approximate number of records that will be
matched, and the projected starting and completion dates of the matching
program;
(D) procedures for providing individualized notice at the time of applica-
tion, and notice periodically thereafter as directed by the Data Integrity
Board of such agency (subject to guidance provided by the Director of the
Ofﬁce of Management and Budget pursuant to subsection (v)), to —
(i) applicants for and recipients of ﬁnancial assistance or payments
under Federal beneﬁt programs, and
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
282

(ii) applicants for and holders of positions as Federal personnel, that
any information provided by such applicants, recipients, holders, and in-
dividuals may be subject to veriﬁcation through matching programs;
(E) procedures for verifying information produced in such matching pro-
gram as required by subsection (p);
(F) procedures for the retention and timely destruction of identiﬁable
records created by a recipient agency or non-Federal agency in such match-
ing program;
(G) procedures for ensuring the administrative, technical, and physical se-
curity of the records matched and the results of such programs;
(H) prohibitions on duplication and redisclosure of records provided by
the source agency within or outside the recipient agency or the non-Federal
agency, except where required by law or essential to the conduct of the
matching program;
(I) procedures governing the use by a recipient agency or non-Federal
agency of records provided in a matching program by a source agency, in-
cluding procedures governing return of the records to the source agency or
destruction of records used in such program;
(J) information on assessments that have been made on the accuracy of the
records that will be used in such matching program; and
(K) that the Comptroller General may have access to all records of a re-
cipient agency or a non-Federal agency that the Comptroller General deems
necessary in order to monitor or verify compliance with the agreement.
(2) (A) A copy of each agreement entered into pursuant to paragraph (1)
shall —
(i) be transmitted to the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the
Senate and the Committee on Government Operations of the House of
Representatives; and
(ii) be available upon request to the public.
(B) No such agreement shall be effective until 30 days after the date on
which such a copy is transmitted pursuant to subparagraph (A)(i).
(C) Such an agreement shall remain in effect only for such period, not to
exceed 18 months, as the Data Integrity Board of the agency determines is
appropriate in light of the purposes, and length of time necessary for the
conduct, of the matching program.
(D) Within 3 months prior to the expiration of such an agreement pur-
suant to subparagraph (C), the Data Integrity Board of the agency may, with-
out additional review, renew the matching agreement for a current, ongoing
matching program for not more than one additional year if —
(i) such program will be conducted without any change; and
(ii) each party to the agreement certiﬁes to the Board in writing that
the program has been conducted in compliance with the agreement.
(p) Veriﬁcation and Opportunity to Contest Findings.—(1) In order to protect
any individual whose records are used in a matching program, no recipient
agency, non-Federal agency, or source agency may suspend, terminate, reduce, or
make a ﬁnal denial of any ﬁnancial assistance or payment under a Federal beneﬁt
Appendix C
283

program to such individual, or take other adverse action against such individual,
as a result of information produced by such matching program, until —
(A) (i) the agency has independently veriﬁed the information; or
(ii) the Data Integrity Board of the agency, or in the case of a non-Fed-
eral agency the Data Integrity Board of the source agency, determines in
accordance with guidance issued by the Director of the Ofﬁce of Man-
agement and Budget that —
(I) the information is limited to identiﬁcation and amount of bene-
ﬁts paid by the source agency under a Federal beneﬁt program; and
(II) there is a high degree of conﬁdence that the information pro-
vided to the recipient agency is accurate;
(B) the individual receives a notice from the agency containing a state-
ment of its ﬁndings and informing the individual of the opportunity to con-
test such ﬁndings; and
(C) (i) the expiration of any time period established for the program by
statute or regulation for the individual to respond to that notice; or
(ii) in the case of a program for which no such period is established, the
end of the 30-day period beginning on the date on which notice under
subparagraph (B) is mailed or otherwise provided to the individual.
(2) Independent veriﬁcation referred to in paragraph (1) requires investiga-
tion and conﬁrmation of speciﬁc information relating to an individual that is
used as a basis for an adverse action against the individual, including where ap-
plicable investigation and conﬁrmation of —
(A) the amount of any asset or income involved;
(B) whether such individual actually has or had access to such asset or in-
come for such individual’s own use; and
(C) the period or periods when the individual actually had such asset or
income.
(3) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), an agency may take any appropriate ac-
tion otherwise prohibited by such paragraph if the agency determines that the
public health or public safety may be adversely affected or signiﬁcantly threat-
ened during any notice period required by such paragraph.
(q) Sanctions.—(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, no source
agency may disclose any record which is contained in a system of records to a
recipient agency or non-Federal agency for a matching program if such source
agency has reason to believe that the requirements of subsection (p), or any
matching agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (o), or both, are not
being met by such recipient agency.
(2) No source agency may renew a matching agreement unless —
(A) the recipient agency or non-Federal agency has certiﬁed that it has
complied with the provisions of that agreement; and
(B) the source agency has no reason to believe that the certification is
inaccurate.
(r) Report on New Systems and Matching Programs.—Each agency that pro-
poses to establish or make a signiﬁcant change in a system of records or a match-
ing program shall provide adequate advance notice of any such proposal (in
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
284

duplicate) to the Committee on Government Operations of the House of Rep-
resentatives, the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate, and the Of-
ﬁce of Management and Budget in order to permit an evaluation of the probable
or potential effect of such proposal on the privacy or other rights of individuals.
(s) Biennial Report.—The President shall biennially submit to the Speaker of the
House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate a report —
(1) describing the actions of the Director of the Ofﬁce of Management and
Budget pursuant to section 6 of the Privacy Act of 1974 during the preceding 2
years;
(2) describing the exercise of individual rights of access and amendment
under this section during such years;
(3) identifying changes in or additions to systems of records;
(4) containing such other information concerning administration of this sec-
tion as may be necessary or useful to the Congress in reviewing the effectiveness
of this section in carrying out the purposes of the Privacy Act of 1974.
(t) (1) Effect of Other Laws.—No agency shall rely on any exemption contained
in section 552 of this title to withhold from an individual any record which is
otherwise accessible to such individual under the provisions of this section.
(2) No agency shall rely on any exemption in this section to withhold from
an individual any record which is otherwise accessible to such individual under
the provisions of section 552 of this title.
(u) Data Integrity Boards.—(1) Every agency conducting or participating in a
matching program shall establish a Data Integrity Board to oversee and coordi-
nate among the various components of such agency the agency’s implementa-
tion of this section.
[Footnotes omitted]
Appendix C
285

PRIVACY PROVISIONS OF THE
GRAMM-LEACH-BLILEY ACT,
1999
GRAMM-LEACH-BLILEY ACT
15 USC, SUBCHAPTER 1, SEC. 6801–6809
DISCLOSURE OF NONPUBLIC
PERSONAL INFORMATION
SEC. 6801. PROTECTION OF NONPUBLIC PERSONAL
INFORMATION
(a) Privacy obligation policy
It is the policy of the Congress that each ﬁnancial institution has an afﬁrmative
and continuing obligation to respect the privacy of its customers and to protect
the security and conﬁdentiality of those customers’ nonpublic personal infor-
mation.
(b) Financial institutions safeguards
In furtherance of the policy in subsection (a) of this section, each agency or au-
thority described in section 6805(a) of this title shall establish appropriate stan-
dards for the ﬁnancial institutions subject to their jurisdiction relating to
administrative, technical, and physical safeguards —
(1) to insure the security and conﬁdentiality of customer records and information;
(2) to protect against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or in-
tegrity of such records; and
(3) to protect against unauthorized access to or use of such records or information
which could result in substantial harm or inconvenience to any customer. . . .
286
APPENDIX D

SEC. 6802. OBLIGATIONS WITH RESPECT TO
DISCLOSURES OF PERSONAL INFORMATION
(a) Notice requirements
Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, a ﬁnancial institution may not,
directly or through any afﬁliate, disclose to a nonafﬁliated third party any non-
public personal information, unless such ﬁnancial institution provides or has
provided to the consumer a notice that complies with section 6803 of this title.
(b) Opt out
(1) In general
A ﬁnancial institution may not disclose nonpublic personal information to a
nonafﬁliated third party unless —
(A) such ﬁnancial institution clearly and conspicuously discloses to the con-
sumer, in writing or in electronic form or other form permitted by the regula-
tions prescribed under section 6804 of this title, that such information may be
disclosed to such third party;
(B) the consumer is given the opportunity, before the time that such informa-
tion is initially disclosed, to direct that such information not be disclosed to such
third party; and
(C) the consumer is given an explanation of how the consumer can exercise that
nondisclosure option.
(2) Exception
This subsection shall not prevent a ﬁnancial institution from providing non-
public personal information to a nonafﬁliated third party to perform services for
or functions on behalf of the ﬁnancial institution, including marketing of the ﬁ-
nancial institution’s own products or services, or ﬁnancial products or services
offered pursuant to joint agreements between two or more ﬁnancial institutions
that comply with the requirements imposed by the regulations prescribed under
section 6804 of this title, if the ﬁnancial institution fully discloses the providing
of such information and enters into a contractual agreement with the third party
that requires the third party to maintain the conﬁdentiality of such information.
(c) Limits on reuse of information
Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, a nonafﬁliated third party that re-
ceives from a ﬁnancial institution nonpublic personal information under this sec-
tion shall not, directly or through an afﬁliate of such receiving third party, disclose
such information to any other person that is a nonafﬁliated third party of both the
ﬁnancial institution and such receiving third party, unless such disclosure would be
lawful if made directly to such other person by the ﬁnancial institution.
(d) Limitations on the sharing of account number information for marketing
purposes
Appendix D
287

A ﬁnancial institution shall not disclose, other than to a consumer reporting
agency, an account number or similar form of access number or access code for
a credit card account, deposit account, or transaction account of a consumer to
any nonafﬁliated third party for use in telemarketing, direct mail marketing, or
other marketing through electronic mail to the consumer.
(e) General exceptions
Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not prohibit the disclosure of non-
public personal information —
(1) as necessary to effect, administer, or enforce a transaction requested or au-
thorized by the consumer, or in connection with —
(A) servicing or processing a ﬁnancial product or service requested or autho-
rized by the consumer;
(B) maintaining or servicing the consumer’s account with the ﬁnancial institu-
tion, or with another entity as part of a private label credit card program or
other extension of credit on behalf of such entity; or
(C) a proposed or actual securitization, secondary market sale (including sales of
servicing rights), or similar transaction related to a transaction of the consumer;
(2) with the consent or at the direction of the consumer;
(3)(A) to protect the conﬁdentiality or security of the ﬁnancial institution’s
records pertaining to the consumer, the service or product, or the transaction
therein; (B) to protect against or prevent actual or potential fraud, unauthorized
transactions, claims, or other liability; (C) for required institutional risk control,
or for resolving customer disputes or inquiries; (D) to persons holding a legal or
beneﬁcial interest relating to the consumer; or (E) to persons acting in a ﬁdu-
ciary or representative capacity on behalf of the consumer;
(4) to provide information to insurance rate advisory organizations, guaranty
funds or agencies, applicable rating agencies of the ﬁnancial institution, persons
assessing the institution’s compliance with industry standards, and the institu-
tion’s attorneys, accountants, and auditors;
(5) to the extent speciﬁcally permitted or required under other provisions of law
and in accordance with the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C.
3401 et seq.), to law enforcement agencies (including a Federal functional reg-
ulator, the Secretary of the Treasury with respect to subchapter II of chapter 53
of title 31, and chapter 2 of title I of Public Law 91-508 (12 U.S.C. 1951–1959),
a State insurance authority, or the Federal Trade Commission), self-regulatory
organizations, or for an investigation on a matter related to public safety;
(6) (A) to a consumer reporting agency in accordance with the Fair Credit Re-
porting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), or (B) from a consumer report reported by
a consumer reporting agency;
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
288

(7) in connection with a proposed or actual sale, merger, transfer, or exchange
of all or a portion of a business or operating unit if the disclosure of nonpublic
personal information concerns solely consumers of such business or unit; or
(8) to comply with Federal, State, or local laws, rules, and other applicable legal
requirements; to comply with a properly authorized civil, criminal, or regula-
tory investigation or subpoena or summons by Federal, State, or local authori-
ties; or to respond to judicial process or government regulatory authorities
having jurisdiction over the ﬁnancial institution for examination, compliance, or
other purposes as authorized by law. . . .
SEC. 6803. DISCLOSURE OF INSTITUTION PRIVACY
POLICY
(a) Disclosure required
At the time of establishing a customer relationship with a consumer and not less
than annually during the continuation of such relationship, a ﬁnancial institu-
tion shall provide a clear and conspicuous disclosure to such consumer, in writ-
ing or in electronic form or other form permitted by the regulations prescribed
under section 6804 of this title, of such ﬁnancial institution’s policies and prac-
tices with respect to —
(1) disclosing nonpublic personal information to afﬁliates and nonafﬁliated
third parties, consistent with section 6802 of this title, including the categories
of information that may be disclosed;
(2) disclosing nonpublic personal information of persons who have ceased to be
customers of the ﬁnancial institution; and
(3) protecting the nonpublic personal information of consumers.
Such disclosures shall be made in accordance with the regulations prescribed
under section 6804 of this title.
(b) Information to be included
The disclosure required by subsection (a) of this section shall include —
(1) the policies and practices of the institution with respect to disclosing non-
public personal information to nonafﬁliated third parties, other than agents of
the institution, consistent with section 6802 of this title, and including —
(A) the categories of persons to whom the information is or may be disclosed,
other than the persons to whom the information may be provided pursuant to
section 6802(e) of this title; and
(B) the policies and practices of the institution with respect to disclosing of non-
public personal information of persons who have ceased to be customers of the
ﬁnancial institution;
Appendix D
289

(2) the categories of nonpublic personal information that are collected by the ﬁ-
nancial institution;
(3) the policies that the institution maintains to protect the conﬁdentiality and
security of nonpublic personal information in accordance with section 6801 of
this title; and
(4) the disclosures required, if any, under section 1681a(d)(2) (A)(iii) of this
title. . . .
SEC. 6804. RULEMAKING
(a) Regulatory authority
(1) Rulemaking
The Federal banking agencies, the National Credit Union Administration, the
Secretary of the Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the
Federal Trade Commission shall each prescribe, after consultation as appropri-
ate with representatives of State insurance authorities designated by the Na-
tional Association of Insurance Commissioners, such regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter with respect to the ﬁnan-
cial institutions subject to their jurisdiction under section 6805 of this title.
(2) Coordination, consistency, and comparability
Each of the agencies and authorities required under paragraph (1) to prescribe
regulations shall consult and coordinate with the other such agencies and au-
thorities for the purposes of assuring, to the extent possible, that the regulations
prescribed by each such agency and authority are consistent and comparable
with the regulations prescribed by the other such agencies and authorities.
(3) Procedures and deadline
Such regulations shall be prescribed in accordance with applicable requirements
of title 5 and shall be issued in ﬁnal form not later than 6 months after Novem-
ber 12, 1999.
(b) Authority to grant exceptions
The regulations prescribed under subsection (a) of this section may include such
additional exceptions to subsections (a) through (d) of section 6802 of this title
as are deemed consistent with the purposes of this subchapter. . . .
SEC. 6805. ENFORCEMENT
(a) In general
This subchapter and the regulations prescribed thereunder shall be enforced by
the Federal functional regulators, the State insurance authorities, and the Fed-
eral Trade Commission with respect to ﬁnancial institutions and other persons
subject to their jurisdiction under applicable law, as follows:
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
290

(1) Under section 1818 of title 12, in the case of —
(A) national banks, Federal branches and Federal agencies of foreign banks, and
any subsidiaries of such entities (except brokers, dealers, persons providing in-
surance, investment companies, and investment advisers), by the Ofﬁce of the
Comptroller of the Currency;
(B) member banks of the Federal Reserve System (other than national banks),
branches and agencies of foreign banks (other than Federal branches, Federal
agencies, and insured State branches of foreign banks), commercial lending
companies owned or controlled by foreign banks, organizations operating
under section 25 or 25A of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 601 et seq., 611
et seq.), and bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries or afﬁli-
ates (except brokers, dealers, persons providing insurance, investment compa-
nies, and investment advisers), by the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System;
(C) banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (other than
members of the Federal Reserve System), insured State branches of foreign
banks, and any subsidiaries of such entities (except brokers, dealers, persons
providing insurance, investment companies, and investment advisers), by the
Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; and
(D) savings associations the deposits of which are insured by the Federal De-
posit Insurance Corporation, and any subsidiaries of such savings associations
(except brokers, dealers, persons providing insurance, investment companies,
and investment advisers), by the Director of the Ofﬁce of Thrift Supervision.
(2) Under the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.), by the Board
of the National Credit Union Administration with respect to any federally in-
sured credit union, and any subsidiaries of such an entity.
(3) Under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a et seq.), by the
Securities and Exchange Commission with respect to any broker or dealer.
(4) Under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq.), by the
Securities and Exchange Commission with respect to investment companies.
(5) Under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-1 et seq.), by the
Securities and Exchange Commission with respect to investment advisers regis-
tered with the Commission under such Act.
(6) Under State insurance law, in the case of any person engaged in providing
insurance, by the applicable State insurance authority of the State in which the
person is domiciled, subject to section 6701 of this title.
(7) Under the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.), by the
Federal Trade Commission for any other ﬁnancial institution or other person
that is not subject to the jurisdiction of any agency or authority under para-
graphs (1) through (6) of this subsection.
Appendix D
291

(b) Enforcement of section 6801
(1) In general
Except as provided in paragraph (2), the agencies and authorities described in
subsection (a) of this section shall implement the standards prescribed under
section 6801(b) of this title in the same manner, to the extent practicable, as
standards prescribed pursuant to section 1831p-1(a) of title 12 are implemented
pursuant to such section.
(2) Exception
The agencies and authorities described in paragraphs (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7) of
subsection (a) of this section shall implement the standards prescribed under
section 6801(b) of this title by rule with respect to the ﬁnancial institutions and
other persons subject to their respective jurisdictions under subsection (a) of
this section.
(c) Absence of State action
If a State insurance authority fails to adopt regulations to carry out this sub-
chapter, such State shall not be eligible to override, pursuant to section
1831x(g)(2)(B)(iii) of title 12, the insurance customer protection regulations
prescribed by a Federal banking agency under section 1831x(a) of title 12.
(d) Deﬁnitions
The terms used in subsection (a)(1) of this section that are not deﬁned in this
subchapter or otherwise deﬁned in section 1813(s) of title 12 shall have the same
meaning as given in section 3101 of title 12. . . .
SEC. 6806. RELATION TO OTHER PROVISIONS
Except for the amendments made by subsections (a) and (b), nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to modify, limit, or supersede the operation of the
Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), and no inference shall be
drawn on the basis of the provisions of this chapter regarding whether informa-
tion is transaction or experience information under section 603 of such Act (15
U.S.C. 1681a). . . .
SEC. 6807. RELATION TO STATE LAWS
(a) In general
This subchapter and the amendments made by this subchapter shall not be con-
strued as superseding, altering, or affecting any statute, regulation, order, or in-
terpretation in effect in any State, except to the extent that such statute,
regulation, order, or interpretation is inconsistent with the provisions of this
subchapter, and then only to the extent of the inconsistency.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
292

(b) Greater protection under State law
For purposes of this section, a State statute, regulation, order, or interpretation
is not inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter if the protection such
statute, regulation, order, or interpretation affords any person is greater than
the protection provided under this subchapter and the amendments made by
this subchapter, as determined by the Federal Trade Commission, after con-
sultation with the agency or authority with jurisdiction under section 6805(a)
of this title of either the person that initiated the complaint or that is the sub-
ject of the complaint, on its own motion or upon the petition of any interested
party. . . .
SEC. 6808. STUDY OF INFORMATION SHARING
AMONG FINANCIAL AFFILIATES
(a) In general
The Secretary of the Treasury, in conjunction with the Federal functional reg-
ulators and the Federal Trade Commission, shall conduct a study of information
sharing practices among ﬁnancial institutions and their afﬁliates. Such study
shall include —
(1) the purposes for the sharing of conﬁdential customer information with afﬁl-
iates or with nonafﬁliated third parties;
(2) the extent and adequacy of security protections for such information;
(3) the potential risks for customer privacy of such sharing of information;
(4) the potential beneﬁts for ﬁnancial institutions and afﬁliates of such sharing
of information;
(5) the potential beneﬁts for customers of such sharing of information;
(6) the adequacy of existing laws to protect customer privacy;
(7) the adequacy of ﬁnancial institution privacy policy and privacy rights disclo-
sure under existing law;
(8) the feasibility of different approaches, including opt-out and opt-in, to per-
mit customers to direct that conﬁdential information not be shared with afﬁli-
ates and nonafﬁliated third parties; and
(9) the feasibility of restricting sharing of information for speciﬁc uses or of per-
mitting customers to direct the uses for which information may be shared.
(b) Consultation
The Secretary shall consult with representatives of State insurance authorities
designated by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, and also
with ﬁnancial services industry, consumer organizations and privacy groups, and
Appendix D
293

other representatives of the general public, in formulating and conducting the
study required by subsection (a) of this section.
(c) Report
On or before January 1, 2002, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Con-
gress containing the ﬁndings and conclusions of the study required under sub-
section (a) of this section, together with such recommendations for legislative or
administrative action as may be appropriate. . . .
SEC. 6809. DEFINITIONS
As used in this subchapter:
(1) Federal banking agency
The term “Federal banking agency” has the same meaning as given in section
1813 of title 12.
(2) Federal functional regulator
The term “Federal functional regulator” means —
(A) the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System;
(B) the Ofﬁce of the Comptroller of the Currency;
(C) the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;
(D) the Director of the Ofﬁce of Thrift Supervision;
(E) the National Credit Union Administration Board; and
(F) the Securities and Exchange Commission.
(3) Financial institution
(A) In general
The term “ﬁnancial institution” means any institution the business of which is
engaging in ﬁnancial activities as described in section 1843(k) of title 12.
(B) Persons subject to CFTC regulation
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the term “ﬁnancial institution” does not in-
clude any person or entity with respect to any ﬁnancial activity that is subject to
the jurisdiction of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission under the
Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. 1 et seq.).
(C) Farm credit institutions
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the term “ﬁnancial institution” does not in-
clude the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation or any entity chartered
and operating under the Farm Credit Act of 1971 (12 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.).
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
294

(D) Other secondary market institutions
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the term “ﬁnancial institution” does not in-
clude institutions chartered by Congress speciﬁcally to engage in transactions
described in section 6802(e)(1)(C) of this title, as long as such institutions do not
sell or transfer nonpublic personal information to a nonafﬁliated third party.
(4) Nonpublic personal information
(A) The term “nonpublic personal information” means personally identiﬁable
ﬁnancial information —
(i) provided by a consumer to a ﬁnancial institution;
(ii) resulting from any transaction with the consumer or any service performed
for the consumer; or
(iii) otherwise obtained by the ﬁnancial institution.
(B) Such term does not include publicly available information, as such term is
deﬁned by the regulations prescribed under section 6804 of this title.
(C) Notwithstanding subparagraph (B), such term —
(i) shall include any list, description, or other grouping of consumers (and pub-
licly available information pertaining to them) that is derived using any non-
public personal information other than publicly available information; but
(ii) shall not include any list, description, or other grouping of consumers (and
publicly available information pertaining to them) that is derived without using
any nonpublic personal information.
(5) Nonafﬁliated third party
The term “nonafﬁliated third party” means any entity that is not an afﬁliate of,
or related by common ownership or afﬁliated by corporate control with, the ﬁ-
nancial institution, but does not include a joint employee of such institution.
(6) Afﬁliate
The term “afﬁliate” means any company that controls, is controlled by, or is
under common control with another company.
(7) Necessary to effect, administer, or enforce
The term “as necessary to effect, administer, or enforce the transaction” means —
(A) the disclosure is required, or is a usual, appropriate, or acceptable method,
to carry out the transaction or the product or service business of which the
transaction is a part, and record or service or maintain the consumer’s account
in the ordinary course of providing the ﬁnancial service or ﬁnancial product, or
to administer or service beneﬁts or claims relating to the transaction or the
product or service business of which it is a part, and includes —
Appendix D
295

(i) providing the consumer or the consumer’s agent or broker with a conﬁrma-
tion, statement, or other record of the transaction, or information on the status
or value of the ﬁnancial service or ﬁnancial product; and
(ii) the accrual or recognition of incentives or bonuses associated with the trans-
action that are provided by the ﬁnancial institution or any other party;
(B) the disclosure is required, or is one of the lawful or appropriate methods, to
enforce the rights of the ﬁnancial institution or of other persons engaged in car-
rying out the ﬁnancial transaction, or providing the product or service;
(C) the disclosure is required, or is a usual, appropriate, or acceptable method,
for insurance underwriting at the consumer’s request or for reinsurance pur-
poses, or for any of the following purposes as they relate to a consumer’s insur-
ance: Account administration, reporting, investigating, or preventing fraud or
material misrepresentation, processing premium payments, processing insur-
ance claims, administering insurance beneﬁts (including utilization review ac-
tivities), participating in research projects, or as otherwise required or
speciﬁcally permitted by Federal or State law; or
(D) the disclosure is required, or is a usual, appropriate or acceptable method,
in connection with —
(i) the authorization, settlement, billing, processing, clearing, transferring, rec-
onciling, or collection of amounts charged, debited, or otherwise paid using a
debit, credit or other payment card, check, or account number, or by other pay-
ment means;
(ii) the transfer of receivables, accounts or interests therein; or
(iii) the audit of debit, credit or other payment information.
(8) State insurance authority
The term “State insurance authority” means, in the case of any person engaged
in providing insurance, the State insurance authority of the State in which the
person is domiciled.
(9) Consumer
The term “consumer” means an individual who obtains, from a ﬁnancial insti-
tution, ﬁnancial products or services which are to be used primarily for per-
sonal, family, or household purposes, and also means the legal representative of
such an individual.
(10) Joint agreement
The term “joint agreement” means a formal written contract pursuant to which
two or more ﬁnancial institutions jointly offer, endorse, or sponsor a ﬁnancial
product or service, and as may be further deﬁned in the regulations prescribed
under section 6804 of this title.
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
296

(11) Customer relationship
The term “time of establishing a customer relationship” shall be deﬁned by the
regulations prescribed under section 6804 of this title, and shall, in the case of
a ﬁnancial institution engaged in extending credit directly to consumers to ﬁ-
nance purchases of goods or services, mean the time of establishing the credit
relationship with the consumer. . . .
Appendix D
297

298
A
Abacus database  24
abortion  128c, 129c
accountability
anonymity and  46
government  44,
233–236.  See also
freedom of
information
of records  94–95, 120c,
122c.  See also
inaccuracies/errors in
databases
ACLU. See American Civil
Liberties Union
ACM (Association for
Computing Machinery)
244
ADA. See Americans With
Disabilities Act
Adams, John  8
Advisory Committee on
Automated Personal Data
Systems  16, 119c
aerial searches  85
afﬁliated company  138g
Agency Data Integrity
Board  61
AHIMA (American Health
Information Management
Association)  244
AIDS patients  95–96
AIDS testing law  63, 70
airlines
Gilmore v. Ashcroft
113–115, 126c
ID requirements for
passengers  38
Norman Y. Mineta  135
passenger data  40
passenger screening
123c, 129c
Alaska freedom of
information law  61
AMA (American Medical
Association)  26
Amazon.com  23, 105, 125c
American Civil Liberties
Union (ACLU)  40, 60,
115, 138g, 244
American Council of Life
Insurers v. Vermont
Department of Banking,
Insurance, Securities and
Healthcare Administration
111–112, 128c
American Express  17, 21
American Health
Information Management
Association (AHIMA)
244
American Medical
Association (AMA)  26
American Society of
Newspaper Editors  125c
Americans With Disabilities
Act (ADA)  29, 90
America Online (AOL)
McVeigh v. Cohen 99,
100, 122c, 135
telemarketing  24
U.S. v. Scarfo 109
anonymity  44–46, 138g,
236–243
antiabortion activists  123c
antidiscrimination law  30
antiterrorism measures
35–40
airline passenger data  40
airline passenger ID
requirements  38
airline passenger
screening  123c, 129c
Gilmore v. Ashcroft 113,
126c
Identity Theft Penalty
Enhancement Act  59
London transit system
bombing  42
national ID system  37
John M. Poindexter  136
Marc Rotenberg  136
surveillance cameras  42
terrorist lists  38
Total Information
Awareness  127c, 128c
USA PATRIOT Act  36,
67–68, 126c, 130c,
145g
AOL. See America Online
Arizona v. Evans 94–95, 122c
Arizona wiretapping law  68
ARPANET  119c
The Art of Deception (Kevin
Mitnick)  135
Ashcroft, John  131b
Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM)  244
INDEX
Locators in boldface indicate main topics. Locators followed by c indicate chronology entries.
Locators followed by b indicate biographical entries. Locators followed by g indicate 
glossary entries.

ATM. See automatic teller
machine
ATM cards  57
Audiotreve  31
Austen, Jane  7
authorization, identiﬁcation
v.  38
automatic teller machine
(ATM)  17, 56
Avrahami, Ram, v. U.S. News &
World Report 96–97, 122c
B
Banisar, David  131b
banking records  58, 120c,
123c. See also ﬁnancial
privacy
Bank of America  19
Bank Secrecy Act  56,
81–83, 119c
Barcelona, Spain  128c
Barlow, John Perry  92–93,
131b, 135
Bartnicki v. Vopper 125c
BBS. See bulletin board
systems
Beacon Journal Publishing v.
City of Akron 93–94
Bell, Alexander Graham  11,
117c
BellSouth  91
Ben Franklin’s Web Site
(Robert Ellis Smith)  
137
Bentham, Jeremy  10
Berners-Lee, Tim  14
Bernstein, Daniel  97–99,
122c, 131b–132b
Bernstein, Daniel, v. U.S.
Department of State
97–99, 122c
bibliography  162–243
anonymity
tools/standards
236–243
background for privacy
issues  163–172
corporate/workplace
privacy  196–199
freedom of information
233–236
general/international
privacy law  206–211
government
accountability
233–236
health care privacy
issues  189–196
identiﬁcation systems/
biometrics  217–222
law enforcement/
national security
212–217
legal/technical issues
206–243
personal/consumer
privacy  172–189
perspectives on privacy
167–172
screening systems
222–232
surveillance and society
203–206
surveillance systems
222–232
tracking systems
222–232
workplace privacy
196–199
young people’s privacy
199–203
Big Brother  11, 136, 138g
Big Brother Award  132
Bill of Rights  8, 78, 117c,
138g. See also speciﬁc
amendments
Biometric Consortium  244
biometrics  39–40, 138g,
217–222
birth control  77–79
BISHCA. See Vermont
Department of Banking,
Insurance, Securities and
Healthcare Administration
Blake, William  7, 9
Blankenship, Lloyd  91
book purchase records  126c,
130c
Bork, Robert  65, 79, 120c,
132b
Boyer, Amy  111, 124c, 137
Brandeis, Louis
Katz v. United States 3,
80
on necessity of privacy
132b
Olmstead v. U.S. 3, 77
on right of privacy  3,
10, 117c
Brin, David  132b
British Columbia, Canada
Freedom of Information
and Privacy Act  73
British Commonwealth
privacy law  74
British Home Ofﬁce  41
bulletin board systems
(BBS)  91, 92, 138g
Burger, Warren  85
Burlington Santa Fe
Railroad case  29
Bush, George W.
John Ashcroft  131
Fair and Accurate
Credit Transactions
Act of 2003  128c
Identity Theft Penalty
Enhancement Act
129c
Norman Y. Mineta  135
USA PATRIOT Act
126c
business practices, privacy
protection and  24–25
Byford, Katrin Schatz  25
C
CALEA (Communications
Assistance for Law
Enforcement Act)  66
California
AIDS testing law  63
data breach law  19
debt collection law  59
DNA collection law  39
ﬁnancial privacy law
129c
freedom of information
law  62
identity theft law  59
medical record law  63
mental health record
law  63
RFIDs for school
children  43, 129c
school record law  65
wiretapping law  68
California Bankers’ Association
v. Schulz 56, 82, 119c
Index
299

California Supreme Court
89–90, 121c
California v. Ciraolo 85
Caller ID  138g
cameras, surveillance
41–42, 130c
Canadian law  73, 125c
CAPPS (Computer Assisted
Passenger Pre-screening
System)  39, 129c, 135,
138g
card tabulators  13
Carnivore  67, 124c, 138g
Carte Blanche (credit card)
17
cash bank transactions  56
cash purchases  17
CASPIAN. See Consumers
Against Supermarket
Privacy Invasion and
Numbering
Cate, Fred  132b
Cavoukian, Ann  24–25
CCTV (closed circuit
television)  138g
CDT. See Center for
Democracy and
Technology
celebrity  12
cell phones
Electronic
Communications
Privacy Act of 1986
66
equipped with cameras
42
GPS capability  43
information privacy
18–19
wiretaps of  125c
census, U.S.  13, 118c
census, U.S. (2000)  124c
Center for Democracy and
Technology (CDT)
150–151, 244–245
Center for Media Literacy
(CML)  245
Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA)  34
Charbeneau, Travis  47
chat room  14
checks  17
children. See young people
Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act (COPPA)
32, 104, 125c, 127c
China  74
ChoicePoint  19, 126c, 129c,
130c
Chomsky, Noam  12
CIA (Central Intelligence
Agency)  34
cipher machines  118c
ciphertext  138g
civil liberties  137
Civil War, U.S.  117c
Clinton, Bill, and
administration
ban of genetic
information as
employment criterion
124c
GLBA  124c
universal healthcare ID
proposal  28
wiretapping capability
proposal  122c
Clipper Chip  139g
Bernstein v. U.S.
Department of State
99
Dorothy Denning  132
Louis J. Freeh  133
government proposal of
45, 121c
closed circuit television
(CCTV)  138g
CML (Center for Media
Literacy)  245
The Codebreakers (David
Kahn)  118c
COINTELPRO
(Counterintelligence
Program)  34, 139g
cold war  118c
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor  7
colleges, Internet use at  33
colonial America  8
Colorado  63, 123c
Comcast  126c
commerce. See consumer
privacy
commercial speech  102,
106, 112
Commonwealth v. Source One
Associates 110–111, 126c
Communications Assistance
for Law Enforcement Act
(CALEA)  66
compelling state interest
90, 139g
CompTIA (Computing
Technology Industry
Association)  245
Computer Assisted
Passenger Pre-screening
System. See CAPPS
computer chip  14
Computer Decency Act of
1996  134
Computer Emergency
Response Team (CERT)
245
computer games  91
computer matching  139g
Computer Matching and
Privacy Protection Act of
1988  61, 121c
computer network  18, 30
Computer Professionals for
Social Responsibility
(CPSR)  136, 245
computers, ﬁrst introduction
of  13
Computer Security Institute
245
computer software  98
Computing Technology
Industry Association
(CompTIA)  245
Condon v. Reno 103–104
conformity  12
Connecticut workplace
testing law  69
Constitution of the United
States of America  8, 15,
117c. See also Bill of
Rights; specific
amendments
Consumer Action (advocacy
group)  245–246
Consumer Data Industry
Organization  246
consumer fraud  127c
consumer privacy  16–25
Avrahami v. U.S. News
& World Report
96–97, 122c
bibliography  172–189
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
300

Commonwealth v. Source
One Associates
110–111, 126c
data breaches  19–20
e-commerce  22–23,
104–105, 122c–124c,
140g
European restrictions
on U.S. e-commerce
companies  123c
Fair Credit Reporting
Act of 1992  121c
ﬁnancial privacy  
56–58
GeoCities case
122c–123c
GLBA  57
Individual References
Services Group v. FTC
105–107
information gathering
by marketers  20–21
on Internet  4
legislation  52–55
in malls  22
marketing to children
32
privacy as good business
practice  24–25
regulation/certiﬁcation
24
state laws  54–55
In Re Toysmart.com
104–105, 124c
U.S. West v. FCC
101–103
Consumer Privacy Guide
(research resource)  151
consumer proﬁling  23. See
also targeted marketing
Consumer Project on
Technology (CPT)  246
Consumers Against
Supermarket Privacy
Invasion and Numbering
(CASPIAN)  21, 246
content extraction  23
contraception  77–79, 118c
cookie  23, 24, 139g
COPPA. See Children’s
Online Privacy Protection
Act
cordless telephone  18, 81
corporate privacy. See
workplace privacy
counterculture  13–14
counterintelligence  34. See
also COINTELPRO
court cases  74–116, 160. See
also speciﬁc cases, e.g.:
Olmstead v. U.S.
CPSR. See Computer
Professionals for Social
Responsibility
CPT (Consumer Project on
Technology)  246
CRA. See credit reporting
agency
credit cards  17–18, 55, 119c
credit headers  105
credit investigations, state
laws on  55
credit records/credit reports
Commonwealth v. Source
One Associates
110–111
Fair and Accurate
Credit Transactions
Act of 2003  128c
Fair Credit Reporting
Act  52–53
Fair Credit Reporting
Act Amendments
(2003)  54
inaccuracies in  19
credit reporting agency
(CRA)  17, 139g
Commonwealth v. Source
One Associates
110–111
Fair Credit Reporting
Act (1970)  52–53,
119c
Fair Credit Reporting
Act Amendments
(2003)  54, 59
Fair Credit Reporting
Act of 1992  52–53,
121c
inaccuracies in databases
19
Individual References
Services Group v. FTC
105–107
credit score  54
crime, anonymity and  46
crime reduction,
surveillance cameras and
41
criminal investigations
38–39
CRONUS  105
Crump, Catherine  45–46
Cruzan v. Missouri 79
cryptography  139g. See also
encryption
cold war  118c
Whitﬁeld Difﬁe  133
John Gilmore  133
“New Directions in
Cryptography”  119c
World War II  118c
Philip Zimmermann
137
cryptosystem  139g
customer proprietary
network information
139g
cyberpunk ﬁction  15
cyberspace  4, 14–15, 92–93,
139g. See also Internet;
World Wide Web
cyberstalking  111, 124c,
137
cyber-thieves  18
cypherpunks  45, 139g
D
Darwin, Charles  9
Database Nation (Simson
Garﬁnkel)  133
databases  139g
biometric scanning
39–40
credit agencies  17
credit records  119c
Driver’s Privacy
Protection Act  55
government. See
government
records/databases
growth of  15–16
on homeless  127c
identity theft  17–18
security breaches  19–20
U.S. Privacy Protection
Study Commission
120c
data breaches  19–20
Index
301

data broker (information
broker)  139g
Fair Credit Reporting
Act  53
identity theft  18
Remsburg v. DocuSearch
111, 127c
“data explosion”  15–16
data interception
Bartnicki v. Vopper 125c
cell phone “cloning”
case  122c
ECPA  120c
Shoars v. Epson America,
Inc. 30–31, 88, 121c
Steve Jackson Games, Inc.
v. U.S. 91–93
U.S. v. Scarfo 108–110
data mining  139g
by DoubleClick  24,
125c
by federal government
128c
JetBlue/Department of
Defense case  128c
of young people’s
purchasing history  32
Data Practices Act
(Minnesota)  62
data processing  13
Data Protection Directive
122c, 139g
data retention  45–46
Data Service Center  34
data theft  19–20, 30, 57
Davies, Simon Gordon
132b
Davis, Erik  11
Dayton Hudson
Corporation. See Soroka v.
Dayton Hudson Corp.
DEA (Drug Enforcement
Agency)  122c
debit card  17
Debt Collection Act of 1982
53
debt collection law  53, 120c
decisional privacy  140g
Griswold v. Connecticut
77–79, 118c
informational privacy vs.
4
Roe v. Wade 119c
Defense, U.S. Department
of  119c, 128c, 136
Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency  127c
Denning, Dorothy
132b–133b
Department of . . . See
speciﬁc function of
department, e.g. Health
and Human Services, U.S.
Department of
DES  140g
determinism  9, 10
DHHS (U.S. Department of
Health and Human
Services)  246
DHS. See Homeland
Security, U.S. Department
of
dictatorships  74
Difﬁe, Whitﬁeld  119c, 133b
digital signature  45, 140g
Digital Telephony Act  121c
Diners Club card  17
direct mailer/marketer  21,
140g
Direct Marketing
Association  97, 246–247
disclosure  140g
disclosure forms (HIPPA-
mandated)  127c
DNA databases  38–39
DNA evidence  38–39, 129c
doctor-patient relationship
26
DocuSearch. See Remsburg,
Helen, v. DocuSearch
Doe v. Chao 112–113
Doe v. Southeastern
Pennsylvania Transportation
Authority 95–96
“do not call” registry  127c,
128c
“Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,
Don’t Pursue”  100, 101,
140g
DoubleClick  24, 125c
Douglas, William O.  78–79
Dove, Lee  115
driver’s license as universal
ID card  37
driver’s license information
103–104, 123c, 124c
Driver’s Privacy Protection
Act (DPPA)  55, 103, 104
driving record privacy  55
Drug Enforcement Agency
(DEA)  122c
drug searches  85
drug testing  32, 69, 70
drug use  86
E
eavesdropping  140g
eBay  124c, 125c
Echelon  124c, 140g
e-commerce (electronic
commerce)  22–23,
104–105, 122c–124c, 140g.
See also consumer privacy
ECPA. See Electronic
Communications Privacy
Act of 1986
EDR. See Event Data
Recorder
EFF. See Electronic Frontier
Foundation
EFOIA. See Electronic
Freedom of Information
Act of 1986
electronic communications
(USA PATRIOT Act
provisions)  67
Electronic Communications
Privacy Act of 1986
(ECPA)  66, 140g
Katz v. United States 81
Timothy McVeigh  135
McVeigh v. Cohen 100,
101, 122c
passage of  120c
electronic footprint  4
Electronic Freedom
Foundation  132
Electronic Freedom of
Information Act of 1986
(EFOIA)  61, 120c, 140g
Electronic Frontier
Foundation (EFF)  140g,
247
John Perry Barlow  131
John Gilmore  133
Mike Godwin  134
Mitch Kapor  135
Privacy Preferences
Project  123c
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
302

as research resource
150
Steve Jackson Games, Inc.
v. U.S. 93
electronic funds transfer  58
Electronic Funds Transfer
Act  56–57, 120c
Electronic Privacy
Information Center
(EPIC)  140g, 247
David Banisar  131
COPPA compliance suit
125c
freedom of information
suit  126c
Chris Jay Hoofnagel
134
litigation docket
research resource  160
medical privacy
advocacy  128c
as research resource
149–150
Marc Rotenberg  136
Elementary and Secondary
Education Act of 1978  64
Eleventh Amendment  103
e-mail  140g
in 1990s  14
Carnivore  124c
ECPA  66, 120c
Fourth Amendment
issues  23
Johan Helsingus  134
Katz v. United States 81
McVeigh v. Cohen
99–101
school monitoring of
33
Shoars v. Epson America,
Inc. 30–31, 88, 121c
Steve Jackson Games, Inc.
v. U.S. 92
USA PATRIOT Act  67
workplace monitoring
of  30–31
embedded information  22
Emerson, Ralph Waldo  9
Employee Polygraph
Protection Act  69, 86,
120c
employee privacy. See
workplace privacy
employees, medical testing
of  26
encryption  44–45, 141g. See
also cryptography
Bernstein v. U.S.
Department of State
97–99, 122c
cell phone wiretaps  125c
Clipper Chip  121c
DES  140
Electronic
Communications
Privacy Act of 1986
66
export case  123c
and information privacy
18–19
Junger v. Daley 124c
legislation  66–68
PGP  121c
Philip Zimmermann
137
Enron  31
EPIC. See Electronic
Privacy Information
Center
Epson America. See Shoars,
Alana, v. Epson America,
Inc.
Equifax  17, 21, 121c, 247
Etzioni, Amitai  133b
Europe  6, 123c, 124c
European Parliament  124c
European Union  71–73,
122c, 139
Evans, Isaac  94–95
Event Data Recorder (EDR)
43, 141g
evolution  9
exclusionary rule  94
expectation of privacy. See
reasonable expectation of
privacy
Experian  17, 126c, 247
F
FAA (Federal Aviation
Administration)  123c
facial recognition software
41
Fair and Accurate Credit
Transactions Act of 2003
128c
Fair Credit Billing Act  53
Fair Credit Reporting Act
(1970)  52–53, 105, 106,
110, 119c
Fair Credit Reporting Act
Amendments (2003)  54,
59
Fair Credit Reporting Act of
1992  52, 121c, 141g
Fair Debt Collection
Practices Act  53, 120c
Fair Information Principles
119c, 125c, 141g
Family Education Rights
and Privacy Act of 1974
(FERPA)  32, 33, 64, 119c
FAS (Federation of
American Scientists)  248
faxes, unsolicited  54
FBI. See Federal Bureau of
Investigation
FCC. See Federal
Communications
Commission
Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA)
123c
Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI)  247
Carnivore  124c
COINTELPRO  139
Louis J. Freeh  133
J. Edgar Hoover  134
Katz v. United States
266, 267
Robert S. Mueller
135–136
USA PATRIOT Act
67
wiretapping capability
proposal  122c
Federal Communications
Commission (FCC)
101–102, 126c, 127c, 247
Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation  123c
Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission  31
Federal Reserve Board  130c
Federal Trade Commission
(FTC)  141g, 248
Amazon.com privacy
policy suit  125c
Index
303

Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) (continued)
children’s online privacy
issues  32, 122c, 123c
COPPA compliance
study  125c
“do not call” registry
127c, 128c
DoubleClick
investigation  125c
GeoCities case
122c–123c
Hershey Foods suit  127c
identity theft report  127c
Individual References
Services Group v. FTC
106
Mrs. Fields Cookies suit
127c
online collection of
children’s information
123c
prosecution of business
information abuse  24
ReverseAuctions.com
124c
Telemarketing and
Consumer Fraud and
Abuse Prevention Act
54
In Re Toysmart.com 104,
105, 124c
Federation of American
Scientists (FAS)  248
felons, in DNA databases  39
FERPA. See Family
Education Rights and
Privacy Act of 1974
Fifth Amendment  8, 141g
Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial
District Court 115
Individual References
Services Group v. FTC
106
Olmstead v. U.S. 76, 77
ratiﬁcation of  117c
U.S. West v. FCC 101
ﬁle sharing  33
ﬁnancial privacy  56–58
California law  129c
Commonwealth v. Source
One Associates
110–111, 126c
Electronic Funds
Transfer Act  120c
Fair and Accurate
Credit Transactions
Act of 2003  128c
FDIC “Know Your
Customer” program
123c
GLBA  124c
identity theft  130c
Individual References
Services Group v. FTC
106
Right to Financial
Privacy Act of 1978
120c
state laws  58
U.S. v. Miller 15,
81–83, 120c
Financial Services
Modernization Act. See
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
ﬁrewall  141g
First Amendment
American Council of Life
Insurers v. Vermont
Department of Banking
112, 128c
antiabortion web site
case  123c
Bernstein v. U.S.
Department of State
97–99, 122c
book purchase records
126c
encryption export case
123c
Gilmore v. Ashcroft 114
Griswold v. Connecticut
78
Individual References
Services Group v. FTC
106
Junger v. Daley 124c
students’ limited rights
32
U.S. West v. FCC 101,
102
USA PATRIOT Act  67
FISA. See Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance
Act
Fletcher, Betty  99
Florida  63, 123c
Florida v. Riley 85
ﬂyovers (aerial searches)  85
FOIA. See Freedom of
Information Act of 1966
Foley, Tim  91
Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act (FISA)
36, 67, 127c
Fourteenth Amendment  78,
114, 142
Fourth Amendment  8,
141g
Arizona v. Evans 94
California v. Ciraolo 85
computer-aided airline
passenger screening
123c
early application to
wiretapping case  3
e-mail privacy  23
Gilmore v. Ashcroft 114
ID requirements for
airline passengers  38
Katz v. United States 80,
81, 266–268, 270, 271
Kyllo v. United States
107, 108, 126c
New Jersey v. T.L.O. 84,
120c
O’Connor v. Ortega
86–87
Olmstead v. U.S. 76, 77,
118c
ratiﬁcation of  117c
students’ limited rights
32
U.S. v. Miller 82, 83
U.S. v. Scarfo 109
Wiretap Act of 1968
66
Fowler, Alastair  7
“fraud alert”  59
Freedom Forum  125c
freedom of information  44.
See also Electronic
Freedom of Information
Act of 1986
Beacon Journal Publishing
v. Akron 93–94
bibliography  233–236
British law  129c
Canadian law  73
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
304

Freedom of Information Act
of 1966 (FOIA)  35,
60–61, 118c, 126c, 141g,
255–265
Freeh, Louis J.  66, 133b
Free Software Foundation
137
Freud, Sigmund  9–10
FTC. See Federal Trade
Commission
G
Gallup poll  125c
Garﬁnkel, Simson  12–13,
133b
Gartner Inc.  38
General Accounting Ofﬁce
125c, 128c
genetic disorders  28–29
genetic information  124c,
141g
Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination Act of
2005  129c–130c
genetic privacy  28–29, 70,
124c
genetic testing  29, 70
GeoCities  24, 32,
122c–123c
Geographical Information
Systems (GIS)  42, 141g
Georgia surveillance law  68
Gibson, William  14–15,
133b
GILC (Global Internet
Liberty Campaign)  248
Gillette Co.  127c
Gilmore, John  38, 113–115,
126c, 133b–134b
Gilmore v. Ashcroft
113–115, 126c, 133–134
Ginsburg, Ruth Bader  95
GIS. See Geographical
Information Systems
Givens, Beth  134b
GLBA. See Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act
Global Internet Liberty
Campaign (GILC)  248
Global Positioning System
(GPS)  42, 43, 141g
Gmail  23
Godwin, Mike  93, 134b
Goldstein, Emmanuel  134b
Gonzales, Alberto  36
Google  23
Gore, Al  134b
government accountability
44
government loans/grants
53, 60
government
records/databases  34–35
bibliography  233–236
database proposal (1965)
118c
Electronic Freedom of
Information Act of
1986  61
growth of  15–16
Privacy Act of 1974  59
privacy legislation
59–62
state laws  61–62
GPS. See Global Positioning
System
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
(GLBA)  57, 105, 106,
112, 124c, 286–297
Great Britain  41, 129c. See
also London transit system
bombing
Griswold, Estelle  77, 78
Griswold v. Connecticut 4,
65, 77–79, 118c, 137
H
hacker  141g
data breaches  19
early stages of
movement  14
identity theft  18
Kevin Mitnick  135
Steve Jackson Games, Inc.
v. U.S. 91
Hamilton, Tyler J.  24–25
“harmony ideology”  12
Harper, Jim  38
“harvesting” of information
124c
HCFA (Health Care
Financing Administration)
123c
Health, Education, and
Welfare, U.S. Department
of  16, 119c
Health and Human
Services, U.S. Department
of (DHHS)  246
Health Care Financing
Administration (HCFA)
123c
health care reform (Clinton
proposal)  28
health care system. See
medical privacy
health insurance  26–29,
62–63, 130c
Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act
(HIPAA)  28, 62–63, 127c
health maintenance
organizations (HMOs)
27, 141g–142g
Health Privacy Project
(Institute for Health Care
Research and Policy)  26,
128c, 151
Heatley, Connie F.  97
Hellman, Martin  119c, 133
Helsingus, Johan  134b
Hershey Foods  32, 127c
HEW Advisory Committee
on Automated Personal
Data Systems  59–60
Hiibel, Larry Dudley  115
Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial
District Court 115–116,
128c
Hill v. NCAA 90, 121c
HIPAA. See Health
Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act
Hippocratic Oath  26, 27,
142g
HIV/AIDS testing. See
AIDS testing law
HMOs. See health
maintenance organizations
Hollerith, Hermann  13
home is your castle  8, 142g
Homeland Security, U.S.
Department of (DHS)
128c–130c, 246
homelessness  127c
honesty test  142g
Hoofnagel, Chris Jay  23,
134b
Hoover, J. Edgar  3, 134b
Index
305

Households marketing
database  21, 121c
Housing and Urban
Development, U.S.
Department of  127c
human genome  28
human rights  71
I
IANA (Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority)  136
IBM  13, 27
identiﬁcation cards, national
37–38
identiﬁcation requirements
113–116, 126c, 128c
identiﬁcation systems
37–40, 217–222
identity, privacy and  47
identity theft  58–59, 142g
ChoicePoint breach  19,
129c
credit cards  17–18
Fair Credit Reporting
Act Amendments
(2003)  54, 59
Federal Reserve Board
notiﬁcation policy
130c
growth of  122c
rise in  127c
state laws  59
universal healthcare
identiﬁcation number
28
Identity Theft and
Assumption Deterrence
Act  58
Identity Theft Penalty
Enhancement Act  59,
129c
Illuminati bulletin board  91
Image Data LLD  55
immigration  37
inaccuracies/errors in
databases
Arizona v. Evans 94–95,
122c
Computer Matching
and Privacy
Protection Act of
1988  61, 121c
consumer data  25
credit reports  19
Fair Credit Reporting
Act  53
Fair Credit Reporting
Act (1970)  119c
lists of terrorists  38
Privacy Act of 1974  35
student records  32
inaccuracies/errors in
identiﬁcation  128c
inalienable right, privacy as
25
incorporation doctrine  142g
India  19, 20
individual, concept of  6–7,
9
individuality, politics of  7–8
Individual References Services
Group v. Federal Trade
Commission 105–107
industrial espionage  124c
industrialization  8–10
Industrial Revolution  6,
8–9, 117c
information. See data
information (as commodity)
20
information (freedom of).
See freedom of
information
informational privacy,
decisional privacy v.  4
Information Awareness
Ofﬁce (DARPA)  127c
information broker. See data
broker
information harvesting  124c
information privacy  15–16,
17–18, 23, 142g. See also
consumer privacy
information sharing
Condon v. Reno 103–104
European Union law  72
GLBA  57
JetBlue/Department of
Defense case  128c
telephone companies
and marketers  124c,
126c
In Re Toysmart.com 124c
TSA passenger
screening program
129c
Information Systems
Security Association  248
information technology  13
instant messaging  14, 31
Institute for Health Care
Research and Policy  26
Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) Computer Society
248
Intel  123c
Interior, U.S. Department
of  107
Internal Revenue Service
(IRS)  34, 53, 57
International Association
for Cryptologic Research
248
international laws  70–74,
206–211
International Trafﬁc in
Arms Regulations (ITAR)
97, 98, 142g
Internet  142g
ARPANET  119c
European Union law
72–73
Al Gore  134
growth of general use of
121c
identity theft  18
lack of privacy control
on  4
monitoring of workplace
use  30
PGP  45
John Postel  136
social effects  14
Steve Jackson Games, Inc.
v. U.S. 92–93
USA PATRIOT Act
67
Internet Assigned Numbers
Authority (IANA)  136
Internet service provider
(ISP)  46, 142g
Internet Society  248–249
intimate privacy. See
decisional privacy
IRS. See Internal Revenue
Service
ISP. See Internet service
provider
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
306

ITAR. See International
Trafﬁc in Arms
Regulations
J
Jackson, Steve  91–93, 121c,
131, 134b
JetBlue  128c
Junger v. Daley 99, 124c
Jupiter Research  23
juvenile justice system  64
K
Kahn, David  118c
Kang, Jerry  25
Kansas  129c
Kapor, Mitch  93,
134b–135b
Katz, Charles  79–81
Katz v. United States 3,
79–81, 118c, 266–271
California v. Ciraolo and
85
Kyllo v. United States and
107
Olmstead v. U.S. and
76–77
United States v. Miller
and  83
Wiretap Act of 1968  66
Kennedy, Anthony  115
Kentucky freedom of
information law  62
key  142g
key escrow  133, 142g
keylogger  109, 142g
King, Martin Luther, Jr.  34
“Know Your Customer”
123c
Kyllo, Danny  107
Kyllo v. United States
107–108, 126c
L
Labor, U.S. Department of
112, 113
Lane, Carole  18
law enforcement/national
security  33–40
anonymity  46
bibliography  212–217
biometrics  39–40
data mining  23
DNA databases  38–39
encryption  45
Freedom of Information
Act of 1966  35
government
databases/investigatio
ns  34–35
national ID debate
37–40
Privacy Act of 1974  35
privacy after September
11, 2001  35–36
smart card/chip  40
Legal Information Institute
(research resource)  151,
160
legal issues  52–116
bibliography  206–243
international laws
70–74
legislation. See
legislation
privacy of students
32–33
research resources for
158–161
Legion of Doom  91
legislation  52–74. See also
speciﬁc laws, e.g.: Fair
Credit Reporting Act
Canadian law  73
consumer privacy
52–55
credit reporting
regulations  19
European Union laws
71–73
government databases
34–35
on outsourcing of
personal data  20
privacy principles
embodied in  16
research resources
159–160
school records  64–65
state laws. See state
laws
support for among
Internet users  125c
United Nations laws
70–71
video rentals  65–66
wiretapping,
surveillance, and
encryption  66–68
workplace testing
69–70
Lexis  160
LexisNexis  19, 21, 130c
Libertarian Party  123c
liberty, individual  16
library records  36, 130c
The Limits of Privacy (Amitai
Etzioni)  133
literature  7, 9, 15–16, 136
“Little Brothers”  12–13, 16
locational privacy  43, 123c
Locke, John  7, 117c, 135b
London transit system
bombing  42, 130c
Lotus Development
Corporation  21, 121c,
134–135
Louisiana  68, 69
Louisiana state laws  69
loyalty card  142g
M
Magna Carta  7
mailing lists  21, 96–97, 122c
mail-order catalogs  21
mainframe computers
15–16
malls  22
“manufacture of consent”
12
marketplace, privacy in. See
consumer privacy
markets, efﬁciency of  20–21
Marks, Burton  267
Marshall, Thurgood  46
Martin, John S., Jr.  267
Marx, Karl  9
Maryland  65, 70
Maryland state laws  63
Massachusetts
Commonwealth v. Source
One Associates
110–111, 126c
state laws  62, 68, 70
MasterCard  17
The Matrix (ﬁlm)  12
Matus, Roger  31
Mayﬁeld, Brandon  128c
Mayo Clinic  27
Index
307

McCarthy, Joseph  3
McCullagh, Declan  20–21
McCullough v. Maryland 77
McVeigh, Timothy (U.S.
Navy ofﬁcer)  99–101,
122c, 135b
McVeigh, Timothy R., v.
William Cohen 99–101,
122c
Medical Information Bureau
(MIB)  27, 142g, 249
medical insurance. See
health insurance
medical privacy  25–29
American Council of Life
Insurers v. Vermont
Department of Banking
111–112, 128c
bibliography  189–196
consolidation of records
26–28
Doe v. Southeastern
Pennsylvania
Transportation
Authority 95–96
Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination
Act of 2005
129c–130c
genetic privacy  28–29
HCFA home health care
database controversy
123c
HIPPA  28, 127c
Kansas abortion record
subpoenas  129c
legislation  62–64
medical records  26–29
Ofﬁce of Technology
Assessment report
121c
Partial Birth Abortion
Act of 2003  128c
state laws  63–64
medical privacy advocacy
128c
Medical Privacy Coalition
249
medical testing  26, 69–70
Medicare  27
“Megan’s Law”  127c
Merkle, Ralph  133
Metromail  20
MIB. See Medical
Information Bureau
Michigan school record law
65
Mickey, John  100
microprocessor  14
Microsoft Corporation  123c
Middle Ages  6, 7
Miller, Mitch  82–83
Miller, United States v.
81–83, 120c
Alaskan state banking
law  58
ﬁnancial privacy  56
Gilmore v. Ashcroft and
115
information privacy  15
Thurgood Marshall’s
dissent  46
Mineta, Norman Y.  135b
minicomputers  14
Minnesota freedom of
information law  62
Minority Report (ﬁlm)  22
Mitnick, Kevin  135b
money laundering  56, 81
motor vehicle records  124c.
See also driver’s license
information
Mrs. Fields Cookies  32, 127c
Mueller, Robert S.  36,
135b–136b
N
NAACP v. Alabama 78
Nader, Ralph  12
National Data Bank  34
national ID  37–40. See also
universal ID
bibliography  217–222
biometrics  39–40
civil liberties groups’
opposition to  126c
DNA databases  38–39
smart card/chip  40
national security  33–40
after September 11,
2001  35–36
bibliography  212–217
biometrics  39–40
DNA databases  38–39
government databases/
investigations  34–35
legislation  35
national ID  37–40
smart cards/chips  40
National Security Agency
(NSA)  118c
National Transportation
Safety Board (NTSB)  43
National Workrights
Institute  249
natural selection  9
Navy, U.S.  99–101, 122c,
135
Nelson, Ted  14
Netnews  155
network. See computer
network; wireless
networks
Neuromancer (William
Gibson)  14–15, 133
Nevada workplace privacy
law  70
“New Directions in
Cryptography” (Whitﬁeld
Difﬁe and Martin
Hellman)  119c
New Jersey v. T.L.O. 83–84,
120c
news media  12
Newton, Isaac  9
1984 (Orwell)  11, 136
Ninth Amendment  79,
142g
Nixon, Richard, and
administration  34
“No Fly” list  126c–127c
“nonpublic personal
information”  57
North Carolina workplace
testing law  70
North Dakota AIDS testing
law  70
NSA (National Security
Agency)  118c
NTSB (National
Transportation Safety
Board)  43
O
O’Brien v. Papa Gino’s of
America, Inc. 86
Occupational Health and
Safety Act  62
O’Connor, Dennis  86–87
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
308

O’Connor v. Ortega 86–87
OECD (Organization for
Economic Cooperation
and Development)  249
Ofﬁce of Technology
Assessment  66, 121c
Ofﬁce of Trade Controls  97
Ohio state laws  64, 65
Olmstead, Roy  75–76
Olmstead v. U.S. 75–77,
118c, 132, 266, 268–270
online privacy  4
European restrictions
on U.S. e-commerce
companies  123c
GeoCities case
122c–123c
P3P speciﬁcations  126c
Pew Internet &
American Life Project
poll  125c
Privacy Preferences
Project  123c
SPY Act  129c
online services  143g
OnStar  43
Operation Sundevil  91,
131, 140
opt-in  25, 101, 112, 125c,
128c, 143g
opt-out  102, 107, 129c,
143g
Oregon wiretapping law  68
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and
Development (OECD)
249
Ortega, Magno  86–87
Orwell, George  11, 136b
outsourcing, data breaches
and  19–20
P
P3P. See Platform for
Privacy Preferences
Panopticon  10
Paolercio, Frank  108
parent-child relations  33
Parenting magazine  41
Partial Birth Abortion Act
of 2003  128c
passive surveillance  107,
126c
Pasteur, Louis  9
Patel, Marilyn Hall  98–99
PATRIOT Act. See USA
PATRIOT Act of 2001
pen register  67, 143g
Pentium III chip
controversy  123c
personal information
Internet as source of  18
legislation  71–73
Remsburg v. DocuSearch
111, 127c
Personal Information
Protection and Electronic
Documents Act (PIPEDA)
73, 125c
personality inventories  30
personal privacy  111, 127c,
172–189
Pew Internet & American
Life Project  125c
Pew Research Center  38
PGP. See Pretty Good
Privacy
PGP Users’ Mailing List
249
Phoenix bulletin board  91
phone numbers  15
phone taps. See wiretapping
PIPEDA. See Personal
Information Protection
and Electronic
Documents Act
PIRGs (Public Interest
Research Groups)  250
Pitofsky, Robert  35–36
Pitt, William  7
plaintext  125c, 143g
Planned Parenthood League
of Connecticut  77
Platform for Privacy
Preferences (P3P)  126c,
143g
Pleasantville (ﬁlm)  12
Poindexter, John M.  127c,
136b
polygraph tests  69–70, 86,
120c, 143g
pornography  65
Postel, John  136b
Powell, Lewis  34, 82, 85
pretexting  57, 110–111,
126c, 143g
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
44–45, 121c, 137, 143g
Principles for Providing and
Using Personal Information
(Privacy Working Group)
122c, 143g
prior restraint  98
prisoners, data processing by
20
privacy, concept of  6–16
“Big Brother”  11
changing views of
46–48
deﬁnition  3, 143g
early technological
developments  10–11
emergence of the
individual  6–7
general issues  4–5
in industrialized society
8–10
information privacy
15–16
information technology
13
“Little Brothers”  12–13
politics of individuality
7–8
threats in 1950s–1960s
12–13
World Wide Web
13–15
Privacy Act of 1974  35,
59–61, 119c, 143g,
272–285
Doe v. Chao 113
Fair Information
Principles  141
Occupational Health
and Safety Act  62
Privacy International  132,
151, 249
Privacy Journal 3, 137
privacy policies, e-
commerce  124c–126c
Privacy Preferences Project
123c
privacy principles, basic
16
Privacy Protection Act of
1980  91–92, 121c
Privacy Protection Study
Commission  33–34
Index
309

Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse  134, 150,
249
privacy statements  104–105
Privacy Working Group
122c
Private Citizen  249–250
proﬁle  143g
Prohibition  75–77
psychological testing  30,
64, 89–90
Psychscreen  89, 90
public areas, surveillance
cameras in  41–42
Public Interest Research
Groups (PIRGs)  250
public-key certiﬁcate  143g
public-key cryptography  45,
133, 143g
public opinion polls  38, 44,
125c
punch cards  13, 118c
R
Radio Frequency
Identiﬁcation Device. See
RFID
reality TV  12
reasonable expectation of
privacy  144g
Beacon Journal Publishing
v. Akron 93
California v. Ciraolo 85
Katz v. United States
80–81
Kyllo v. United States
107, 108
New Jersey v. T.L.O. 84
O’Connor v. Ortega
86–87, 120c
Remsburg v. DocuSearch
111
Shoars v. Epson America,
Inc. 30–31
Soroka v. Dayton Hudson
Corp. 90
United States v. Miller
83, 120c
reasonable relationship
144g
Recording Industry
Association of America
(RIAA)  33
Rehnquist, William
103–104
religious beliefs  30
Remsburg, Helen, v.
DocuSearch 111, 127c
research resources, on
privacy issues  149–161
bibliographic resources
152–154
bibliographies  154
bookstore catalogs  154
court decisions, ﬁnding
160
legal research  158–161
Lexis  160
library catalogs
152–153
mail lists  155–156
Netnews  155
news resources
154–156
organizations, ﬁnding
158
people, ﬁnding  158
periodical databases
154
web indexes  156
Westlaw  160
World Wide Web:
evaluating sources
161
World Wide Web:
general information
sites  149–152
World Wide Web:
general research
resources  156–158
World Wide Web:
research periodicals
149–152
World Wide Web:
search engines
157–158
World Wide Web:
technical research
resources  151
retail stores  22
ReverseAuctions.com  124c
reverse directory  24, 144g
RFID (Radio Frequency
Identiﬁcation Device)  22,
43, 127c, 129c, 144g
Rheingold, Howard  42
Rhode Island Code of 1647
8
Rhode Island state laws  65,
70
RIAA (Recording Industry
Association of America)
33
Ridge, Tom  129c
“The Right of Privacy”
(Samuel D. Warren and
Louis Brandeis)  117c
Right to Financial Privacy
Act of 1978  57, 120c
right to privacy  7–8, 25
Robert Bork  132
Griswold v. Connecticut
78, 79, 118c
Katz v. U.S. 80, 267
John Locke  135
Ninth Amendment  142
Roe v. Wade 119c
Soroka v. Dayton Hudson
Corp. 90, 121c
RISKS Digest  250
Roe v. Wade 4, 65, 79, 119c
Rosen, Jeffrey  4
Rotenberg, Marc  136b
“roving wiretaps”  67
RSA  144g
Russian republics  74
S
SAFE (Security and
Freedom Enhancement)
Act  36
“Safe Harbor principles”
124c
Saffo, Paul  42
savings clubs  20
Scalia, Antonin  107
Scarfo, Nicodemo S., United
States v. 108–110
Schaeffer, Rebecca  55
Scheeres, Julia  38
Scheidegger, Ken  38
Schneider, Harvey A.  267
Schneier, Bruce  40
school privacy. See student
privacy
school record legislation
64–65
school searches  83–84, 120c
school shootings  33
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
310

Schwenk, Nina  27
science ﬁction  13–16, 132
Scott, Susan  136b
screening systems  130c,
222–232
searches  3
California v. Ciraolo 85
Kyllo v. United States
107–108, 126c
New Jersey v. T.L.O.
83–84, 120c
O’Connor v. Ortega
86–87, 120c
USA PATRIOT Act  67
search warrants  3, 66, 84,
120c
Secret Service  91, 92, 121c,
122c
Secure Flight  39, 40, 135
Securely Protect Yourself
Against Cyber Trespass
Act (SPY Act)  129c
Secure Server  144g
Security and Freedom
Enhancement (SAFE) Act
36
security-industrial complex
144g
self, concept of. See
individual, concept of
Senate Judiciary Committee
130c
SEPTA (Southeastern
Pennsylvania
Transportation Authority).
See Doe v. Southeastern
Pennsylvania Transportation
Authority
September 11, 2001
terrorist attacks  126c
John Ashcroft  131
ID requirements for
airline passengers  38
Norman Y. Mineta  135
Robert S. Mueller  135
privacy after  35–36
USA PATRIOT Act  67
sex offender registration
laws  127c
sexual harassment  31
sexual privacy
classroom survey ruling
130c
“Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,
Don’t Pursue”  140
McVeigh v. Cohen
99–101
Soroka v. Dayton Hudson
Corp. 89, 90
Tennessee state law  70
workplace privacy  30
Shannon, Claude  118c
Shattuck, John  35
Shields, Greg  43
Shoars, Alana  30–31, 88
Shoars, Alana, v. Epson
America, Inc. 30–31, 88,
121c
Silverman v. United States
80
single-payer health care
system  28
Smart Card  40, 144g
smart chip  40
“smart shelf” technology
127c
Smith, David Lee, Unites
States v. 81
Smith, Robert Ellis  3, 6,
137b
sneak and peek  36, 67,
126c, 130c, 144g
Snufﬂe  97
Social Security numbers
Bank Secrecy Act  56
Beacon Journal Publishing
v. Akron 93–94
ChoicePoint data
breach  19
Debt Collection Act of
1982  53
Doe v. Chao 112–113
Florida state banking
law  58
GLBA  57
identity theft  18
Identity Theft Penalty
Enhancement Act
129c
LexisNexis incident  21
Remsburg v. DocuSearch
111
tax reform  120c
Liam Youens  137
society, privacy issues and
4–5
software  98
Sollum, Jacob  41
Solove, Daniel  96
Soroka, Sibi  89, 90
Soroka v. Dayton Hudson
Corp. 89–90, 121c
Source Once Associates. See
Commonwealth v. Source
One Associates
Southeastern Pennsylvania
Transportation Authority
(SEPTA). See Doe v.
Southeastern Pennsylvania
Transportation Authority
Southwest Airlines  113
spam  46, 144g
Sporkin, Stanley  100
SPY (Securely Protect
Yourself Against Cyber
Trespass) Act  129c
spyware  144g
stalking  55, 111, 124c, 137
Stallman, Richard  137b
state laws
consumer privacy
54–55
ﬁnancial privacy  58
genetic
discrimination/testing
70
government
records/freedom of
information  61–62
identity theft  59
medical records  63–64
school records  65
wiretapping/surveillance
68
workplace testing
69–70
State Public Interest
Research Groups (PIRGs)
250
Steve Jackson Games, Inc. v.
United States 91–93, 121c
Stevens, John Paul  115
Stewart, Potter  267
student privacy, limitations
of  32–33, 83–84, 120c
subpoena  82
Super Bureau  144g
supermarkets, information
gathering by  20
Index
311

Supreme Court, U.S.  3
Arizona v. Evans 94–95,
122c
Bank Secrecy Act  56
Bartnicki v. Vopper 125c
Robert Bork
nomination  65, 120c,
132
Louis Brandeis  132
California Bankers’
Association v. Schulz
56, 119c
California v. Ciraolo 85
Condon v. Reno 103–104
court decision research
resources  160
Doe v. Chao 112–113
ﬁnancial privacy  15
Fourth Amendment  3,
118c
Griswold v. Connecticut
77–79, 118c
Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial
District Court
115–116, 128c
Katz v. United States 3,
79–81, 118c, 266–271
Kyllo v. United States
107–108, 126c
motor vehicle record
safeguards  124c
New Jersey v. T.L.O. 84,
120c
O’Connor v. Ortega 87,
120c
Olmstead v. U.S. 75–77,
118c
Roe v. Wade 119c
sex offender registration
laws  127c
United States v. Miller
15, 56, 82–83, 120c
Earl Warren  137
wiretapping  118c
surveillance  40–43
anti-surveillance
activism  126c
John Ashcroft  131
bibliography  203–206,
222–232
California v. Ciraolo 85
cameras  41–42
EDRs  43
Electronic
Communications
Privacy Act of 1986
66
Louis J. Freeh  133
Gilmore v. Ashcroft 114
GIS/GPS  42–43
J. Edgar Hoover  134
Katz v. United States
79–81
Kyllo v. United States
107–108, 126c
legislation  66–68
proposed 1992
wiretapping
legislation  121c
state laws  68
U.S. v. Scarfo 109–110
Watergate  119c
surveillance cameras  130c
surveillance technology
144g
T
targeted marketing  20–21,
105
Target Stores  89, 90
tax reform  120c
technological change
10–16, 117c
telecommunications  144g
Telecommunications Act of
1996  101
telegraph wiretapping  117c
telemarketer/telemarketing
54, 121c, 122c, 127c, 144g
Telemarketing and
Consumer Fraud and
Abuse Prevention Act  54,
122c
telephone. See also
wiretapping
information privacy
18–19
introduction of  10–11
invention of  117c
monitoring of calls in
the workplace  30
Olmstead v. U.S. 76
U.S. West v. FCC
101–103
telephone booth privacy
79–81, 267–269
Telephone Consumer
Protection Act  54, 121c
television  11–13
Tennessee state laws  64, 70
Tenth Amendment  103,
104
terrorism. See anti-terrorism
measures
Terrorist Information
Awareness  127c, 128c
Terry v. Ohio 115
thermal imaging  107, 126c
Third Amendment  8
third-party health care
payers  26–27. See also
health insurance
Thomas web site (research
resource)  159
Thoreau, Henry David  9
Total Information
Awareness  127c, 136
totalitarianism  11, 74
Toysmart.com, In Re
104–105, 124c
tracking systems
(bibliography)  222–232
transcendentalism  9
The Transparent Society
(David Brin)  132
Transportation Security
Administration (TSA)
250
airline passenger data
40
JetBlue data mining case
128c
Norman Y. Mineta  135
“No Fly” list  126c–127c
passenger screening
program  129c
use of passenger data
130c
TransUnion  17, 105, 106,
250
TransUnion v. FTC 106, 107
trap and trace  67, 144g
Tribe, Lawrence  15, 137b
Truro, Massachusetts  129c
TRUSTe  24, 104, 136,
145g, 250
TRW  21
TSA. See Transportation
Security Administration
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
312

2600 (journal)  134
Two Treatises on Government
(John Locke)  117c, 135
U
United Nations Universal
Declaration of Human
Rights  70–71
United States v . . . See name
of opposing party
universal healthcare
identiﬁcation number  28
universal ID  38, 145g. See
also national ID
universities, Internet use at
33
urbanization  6, 117c
U.S. Department of . . . See
speciﬁc function of
Department, e.g. Health
and Human Services, U.S.
Department of
U.S. News & World Report.
See Avrahami, Ram, v.
U.S. News & World Report
U.S. Privacy Protection
Study Commission  16,
120c
U.S. Public Interest
Research Group (U.S.
PIRG)  250
U.S. West v. Federal
Communications
Commission 101–103
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001
36, 67–68, 126c, 130c, 145g
US-VISIT (U.S. Visitor and
Immigrant Status
Indicator Technology)  39,
128c, 145g
Utah freedom of
information law  62
utilitarianism  10
V
VeriChip  40, 128c
Vermont Department of
Banking, Insurance,
Securities and Healthcare
Administration (BISHCA)
111–112, 128c
Vermont identity theft law
59
Victorian era  10
Video Privacy Protection
Act  65–66, 120c, 132
Virginia state law  96–97
Visa  17
voice mail  67
Volokh, Eugene  41
W
Walden (Thoreau)  9
Wal-Mart  22, 127c
Warren, Earl  80, 137b
Warren, Samuel D.  10,
117c
Washington state medical
record law  64
Washlaw Web  160
Watergate  34, 35, 119c, 132
Watson, Thomas  11
web browser  145g
web browser, introduction
of  14, 121c
webcam  42, 145g
web indexes (research
resource)  156
web sites  24, 123c. See also
World Wide Web
Westin, Alan  4
Wexler, Nancy  28–29
wireless (Wi-Fi) networks
19
Wiretap Act of 1968  66,
81, 118c, 120c, 145g
wiretapping  3, 11, 121c,
145g. See also data
interception
court orders  3
under FISA  127c
J. Edgar Hoover  134
Katz v. United States
79–81, 118c, 266–271
legislation  66–68
Olmstead v. U.S. 75–77,
118c
state laws  68
U.S. v. Scarfo 109
USA PATRIOT Act
67–68
workfactor  145g
workplace privacy  29–33
Beacon Journal Publishing
v. Akron 93–94
bibliography  196–199
e-mail/Web monitoring
30–31
Employee Polygraph
Protection Act  120c
Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination
Act of 2005
129c–130c
legislation (medical and
drug tests)  69–70
medical testing of
workers  26
O’Brien v. Papa Gino’s of
America, Inc. 86
Occupational Health
and Safety Act  62
O’Connor v. Ortega
86–87, 120c
psychological testing
30, 89–90, 121c
Shoars v. Epson America,
Inc. 30–31, 88, 121c
Soroka v. Dayton Hudson
Corp. 89–90, 121c
World War II  11, 13, 118c
World Wide Web  13–15,
145g
evaluating research
resources found on
161
general research
information sites
149–152
lack of privacy control
on  4
research periodicals on
152
research resources
available on  
156–158
technical research
resources on  151
use by young people
31–32
workplace monitoring
of use of  30–31
World Wide Web
Consortium  250–251
Y
Yahoo!  24
Youens, Liam  111, 124c,
137b
Index
313

young people
bibliography  199–203
COPPA compliance
study  125c
GeoCities case
122c–123c
limitations of privacy
32–33, 83–84, 120c
marketing to children
32
online collection of
information about
122c, 123c
privacy issues  31–33
RFIDs for California
school children  43,
129c
school privacy  32–33
school record legislation
64–65
school searches  83–84,
120c
school shootings  33
Z
Zimmermann, Philip
44–45, 121c, 137b
“zones of privacy”  79
Privacy in the Infor mation Age
314

